Division     'B  5  4*^1 

13 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR. 
I.  CHRONICLES. 


INVALUABLE  IN  THE  STUDY. 

The  Biblical  Illustrator; 

OR 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  and  Illustrations,  Expository,  Scientific, 
Geographical,  Historical  and  Homileiic. 

Gathered  from  a  wide  range  ot  Home  and  Foreign  Literature^ 
on  the  verses  of  the  Bible,  by  the 

Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 


Royal  Octaro,  Cloth,  each  about  650  pages,  per  Volume,  $2.00. 


"No  matter  how  full  his  library  may  be,  nor  how  empty  his 
pocket-book,  the  minister  who  sges  this  work  will  want  it." — Observer. 

"It  promises  to  be  the  most  useful  cyclopedia  for  ministers  is- 
sued as  yet." — Christian. 

"Every  volume  is  profusely  treated  and  explained  verse  by  verse, 
with  apposite,  varied  and  suggestive  extracts  from  a  vast  number 
of  ancient  and  modern  authors.  The  meaning  of  v/ords,  the  lessons 
deducible  from  the  text,  the  doctrine  it  teaches,  the  duty  it  enjoins, 
pithy  remarks  of  commentators  and  other  writers  upon  it,  and  an- 
ecdotes with  which  to  enforce  its  teachings  follow  each  verse.  .  . 
The  author  has  put  the  condensed  substance  of  many  commentaries 
in  one,  giving  the  results  reached  by  many  learned  experts." — Meth- 
odist Review. 

"There  is  little  or  no  exposition,  properly  so  called,  but  an  abun- 
dant citation  of  the  opinions  of  men  called  forth  by  the  inspired 
writers.    In  this  respect  the  book  is  unique." — Christian  Intelligencer, 

OLD  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 

Genesis,  Vol.  1,  Joshua,  Judges  and  Ruth. 

Genesis,  Vol.  2.  I.  and  II.  Chronicles,  Ezra,  Nb- 
ExoDus.  hemiah  and  Esther. 

Leviticus  and  Numbers.  Proverbs. 

Deuteronomy.  The  Psalms.    Vol.  1:  1-xxvi. 

NEW  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 

St.  Matthew.  Philippians  and  Colossians. 

St.  Mark.  Thessalonians. 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  1.  First  Timothy. 

St.  Luke,  Vol.  2.  Second  Timothy,   Titus,   and 

St.  Luke,    Vol.  3.  Philemon. 

St.  John,    Vol.  1.  Hebrews,  Vol.  1. 

St.  John,    Vol.  2.  Hebrews,  Vol.  2. 

St.  John,    Vol.  3.  James. 

Acts,  Vol.  1.  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  1. 

Acts,  Vol.  2.  First  Corinthians,  Vol.  2. 

Acts,  Vol.  3.  Second  Corinthians. 

Romans,  Vol.  1.  First  and  Second  Peter. 

Romans,  Vol.  2.  First,  Second  and  Third  John, 

Galatians.  and  Jude. 

Ephesians.  Revelation. 

Index  Volume  to  Entire  New  Testament,  $5.00. 

Send  for  our  circular  giving  special  offers. 

Fleming  H.  RcvcII  Company, 

New  York:  Chicaoo:  Toronto: 

158  Fifth  Avenue.       63  Washington  Street.      37  Richmond  St.  W. 

^— M^nrrr      nr  I 


THE 

Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 


Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,     on    the    Verses   of    the     Bible 


Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  A.  M. 


FIRST  CHRONICLES 


New  York  Chicago  Toronto 

Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

Publishers  of  Evangelical  Literature 


INTBODUCTION  TO  THE  TWO  BOOKS  OF  THE 
CHBONICLES. 

Thx  Books  of  Einos  and  thb  Books  of  CHBONiciiXS. — The  Jewish  literature 
contained  two  historical  books  which  virtnally  covered  the  sanae  period.  The  two 
Books  of  Kings,  and  the  two  Books  of  Chronicles  are  in  many  respects  alike,  bat 
the  differences  are  more  evident  than  the  resemblances.  AH  historical  works  that 
cover  extensive  periods  of ttimes  must,  of  necessity,  be  compilations.  The  writer  of 
any  national  history  may  more  precisely  be  designated  an  editor,  or  a  compUer, 
than  an  author,  because  he  does  not  create  any  new  material,  but  puts  into  shape 
and  order  material  that  already  exists,  for  which  he  may  indeed  elaborately  and 
perseveringly  search,  but  which  is  in  no  sense  his  own.  The  ruling  purpose  and 
prevailing  bias  of  a  writer  are  shown  by  what  he  selects  from  the  facts  at  his  com- 
mand, and  by  the  particular  setting  which  he  gives  to  the  facts,  and  his  annotations 
upon  them. 

The  compilers  of  the  Books  of  Kings  and  Books  of  (3hronicles  were  certainly  not 
the  same  person.  Their  points  of  view  and  historical  purpose  were  distinctly 
different.  But  they  had  the  same  literary  materials  at  their  command,  and  we  can 
reasonably  infer  what  those  materials  are  likely  to  have  been.  Every  civilised  and 
organised  nation  is  careful  to  preserve  authentic  and  official  historical  records,  and 
we  may  be  sure  that  the  Jewish  national  records  were  anxiously  preserved  when  the 
people  were  carried  into  captivity.  These  would  be  available  for  the  later  historian. 
It  also  appears  that  the  keeping  of  genealogical  tables  and  family  and  official  lists 
was  the  business  of  that  priestly  class,  which  included  the  scribes.  They  were 
exceedingly  jealous  of  the  safety  and  correctness  of  their  tables.  It  was  their 
special  duty,  because  certain  religious  privileges  and  offices  were  reserved  for  those 
whose  pedigree  could  be  traced. 

And  in  every  nation,  in  every  age,  men  have  been  raised  up  who  were  endowed 
with  the  literary  historical  genius;  and  such  men  will,  in  various  forms,  make 
their  records  of  the  events  of  their  time.  But  all  such  independent  and  unofficial 
work  is  sure  to  be  written  with  a  personal  political  or  religious  bias,  of  which  the 
later  reader,  or  the  later  compiler,  has  to  take  due  account. 

The  later  editor  of  any  extensive  and  varied  series  of  earlier  records,  covering 
long  periods,  has  a  very  anxious  and  difficult  work.  And  it  is  all  the  more 
difficult  if  he  himself  has  a  strong  personal  bias,  from  which  he  can  never  get 
himself  wholly  free.  And  this  appears  to  have  been  the  case  with  the  compiler  of 
the  Books  of  Chronicles.  He  evidently  had  an  ethical,  we  might  have  said,  a 
sectional  purpose,  which  guided  and  determined  his  selections  and  settings. 

HiSTOBICAIi  MaTEBIAIi  AT  THE   COMMAND   OF   THE    CoMPIIiEB. — We  kuOW  SOmO  Oi 

the  public  and  private  historical  materials  which  were  at  the  command  of  this  com< 


Vl     INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  TWO  BOOKS  OF  THE  CHRONICLES. 

piler,  because  he  makes  reference  to  them  in  the  course  of  his  work.  They  were 
the  Books  of  Samuel  and  Kings,  and  the  various  writings  of  the  prophets  Nathan, 
Gad,  Ahijah,  Sheniaiah,  Je-edo,  Iddo,  Isaiah,  Hozai,  &c.  These,  we  may  infer, 
were  partly  of  historical  and  partly  of  prophetical  character. 

Contents  of  the  Books. — Comparing  the  contents  of  the  Books  of  Kings  with 
those  of  the  Books  of  Chronicles,  we  may  notice  that  "  Kings  "  begins  with  the 
accession  of  Solomon  and  ends  with  the  fate  of  the  last  king  of  Judah;  but 
"  Chronicles  "  begins  with  a  genealogy  from  Adam,  and  ends  with  the  decree  of 
Cyrus,  which  was  carried  out  in  the  "  Keturn  "  under  Zerubbabel  and  Joshua.  The 
"  Kings  "  deal  with  the  national  affairs  of  both  the  sections  into  which  the  nation 
of  Israel  was  divided,  but  the  "  Chronicles  "  deal  only  with  the  one  kingdom  of 
Judah,  treating  this  as  the  real  and  all-inclusive  nation  of  Israel,  and  introducing 
the  affairs  of  the  northern  kingdom  only  when  these  bore  direct  relation  to  the 
affairs  of  Judah.  The  "  Kings  "  give  historical  facts  with  a  fair  measure  of  com- 
pleteness, the  compiler  being  concerned  to  secure  historical  accuracy.  But  the 
"  Chronicles  "  are  written  with  a  definite  purpose  in  view,  and  there  is  a  distinct 
reserve,  such  matters  as  the  moral  lapses  of  David  being  purposely  omitted.  From 
the  selected  contents,  the  style,  and  the  tone  of  "  Chronicles  "  we  naturally  infer 
that  its  compiler  must  have  been  either  a  priest  or  one  who  was  very  closely  con- 
nected with  the  priesthood,  and  supremely  interested  in  upholding  the  authority  of 
the  priestly  class,  and  fully  restoring  that  authority  and  the  elaborate  worship  over 
which  they  presided  under  the  new  conditions  of  the  nation. 

Date  and  Authorship  of  the  Books. — ^If  we  would  form  a  sound  opinion  con- 
cerning the  date  of  this  composition  and  concerning  its  compiler  or  author,  we 
should  give  some  heed  to  Jewish  traditions.  There  seems  to  have  been  a  virtually 
unanimous  belief  that  Ezra  was  the  author ;  that  the  two  Books  of  Chronicles  and 
the  Book  of  Ezra  originally  formed  one  historical  work,  compiled  and  arranged  by 
one  author,  and  to  this  work  the  Book  of  Nehemiah  formed  a  supplement,  the  same 
author's  editing  work  being  evident  in  its  arrangement.  The  Talmud  says  that 
Ezra  wrote  both  his  own  book  and  the  Book  of  Chronicles. 

It  appears  to  be  certain  that  the  compilers  of  the  Septuagint  divided  the  book 
into  two  portions,  and  that  Jerome  accepted  the  division  for  the  Vulgate.  The 
ordinary  reader  clearly  recognises  that  the  work  is  made  up  of  separate  sections, 
and  this  would  be  even  more  evident  if  the  unfortunate  cutting  up  into  verses  had 
not  obscured  the  natural  divisions.  The  Jews  called  the  work  "  Diaries,"  or  "  The 
Book  of  the  Events  of  the  Times."  The  Septuagint  authors  or  translators 
regarded  the  entire  work  as  historically  supplementary,  and  caUed  it  "Omitted 
Things."  It  may  be  said  to  be  very  generally  admitted  by  both  older  and  newer 
critics  that  the  Chronicles,  Ezra,  and  Nehemiah  form  one  work,  composed  on  one 
uniform  plan  and  by  one  author.  These  three  works  resemble  each  other  in  the 
manner  in  which  the  original  authorities  are  handled,  and  the  sacred  law  expressly 
cited  ;  in  the  marked  preference  for  general  and  statistical  registers,  descriptions  of 
religious  rites  and  festivals,  detailed  accounts  of  the  sacerdotal  classes  and  their 
various  functions,  the  music  of  the  temple,  and  matters  connected  with  public 
worship. 

There  is  certainly  nothing  in  the  least  nnreasonable  in  claiming  the  authorship 
for  Ezra.  So  far  as  we  know  his  character,  his  prejudices,  his  gifts,  his  mission, 
and  his  circumstances,  we  may  say  that  he  was  the  very  man  to  do  this  work.  His 
genius  for  compiling  and  editing  will  quite  explain  his  inserting  in  their  entirety 
pieces  relating  his  own  doings,  and  pieces  which  Nehemiah  wrote,  giving  an 
account  of  his  doings. 

The  only  difficulty  worth  taking  serious  account  of  is  the  fact  that  the  genealogy 
from  David  is  continued  long  beyond  the  time  of  Ezra,  even  to  what  has  been 
reckoned  the  eleventh  descendant  from  Zerubbabel.  It  is  manifest  that  Ezra 
could  not  have  recorded  a  genealogy  reaching  beyond  his  own  age.  But  it  may  be 
freely  admitted  that  when  the  Old  Testament  Canon  was  settled  the  books  that  were 
admitted  to  it  must  have  been  subjected  to  a  final  revision,  and  this  may  very  well 
have  included  the  completion  of  the  genealogy  up  to  date — more  especially  the 
genealogical  line  in  which  Messiah  was  expected.  Probably  the  literary  work  under- 
taken by  the  Great  Synagogue  needs  to  be  more  fully  studied,  with  a  view  to  dis- 
covering whether  in  that  literary  "  renaissance  "  any  original  works  were  produced 
or  only  re-editing  undertaken. 


INTRODUCTION  TO  TEE  TWO  BOOKS  OF  THE  CHRONICLES,     vii 

It  is  not  altogether  easy  to  recognise  the  conditions  of  society  in  the  later 
Persian  and  early  Grecian  periods,  so  as  to  provide  at  that  time  so  suitable  an 
occasion  for  the  compilation  of  •'  Chronicles  "  as  we  do  find  in  the  age  of  Ezra. 
The  drastic  reformation,  on  the  strictest  legal  line,  which  Ezra  promoted  needed 
just  such  a  background  of  historical  authority  as  Ezra  provides  in  these  Books. 

There  does  not  appear  to  be  sufficient  ground  for  shifting  the  authorship  on  to 
300-250  B.C.,  as  the  modern  critics  propose  to  do.  We  may  confidently  affirm  that 
there  is  reasonable  ground  for  continuing  to  accept  as  altogether  most  probable  the 
authorship  of  Ezra,  the  date  between  459  and  430  B.C.,  and  the  object  as  the 
confirmation  of  the  authority  of  the  Jewish  priesthood  in  demanding  a  national 
reformation. 

The  aim  of  the  work  is  not  history,  but  edification.  It  has  a  distinctly  didactic 
and  hortatory  purpose,  eminently  suitable  in  a  priestly  scribe  or  teacher  such  as 
Ezra  was.    The  strong  "  hierarchical  bias  "  may  be  freely  admitted. 


THE   BIBLICAL   ILLUSTBATOE. 

L  CHRONICLES. 


CHAPTER    L 

Vebs.  1-54.  Adam,  Slietli,  EnoBh. — Israelite  descent : — Israel  was  Jehovah's 
chosen  people,  His  son,  to  whom  special  privileges  were  guaranteed  by  solemn 
covenant.  A  man's  claim  to  share  in  this  covenant  depended  on  his  genuine 
Israelite  descent,  and  the  proof  of  such  descent  was  an  authentic  genealogy.  In 
these  chapters  the  chronicler  has  taken  infinite  pains  to  collect  pedigrees  from  all 
available  sources  and  to  construct  a  complete  set  of  genealogies  exhibiting  the  lines 
of  descent  of  the  families  of  Israel.  These  chapters,  which  seem  to  us  so  dry  and 
useless,  were  probably  regarded  by  the  chronicler's  contemporaries  as  the  most 
important  part  of  his  work.  The  preservation  or  discovery  of  a  genealogy  was 
almost  a  matter  of  life  and  death  (Ezra  ii.  61-63  ;  Neh.  vii.  63-65).  (W.  H. 
Bennett,  M.A.)  Names: — The  first  nine  chapters  contain  the  largest  extant 
collection  of  Hebrew  names.  1.  These  names  have  an  individual  significance.  A 
mere  parish  register  is  not  in  itself  attractive,  but  if  we  consider  even  such  a  list, 
the  very  names  interest  us  and  kindle  our  imaginations.  It  is  almost  impossible  to 
linger  in  a  country  churchyard,  reading  the  half-effaced  inscriptions  upon  the  head- 
stones, without  forming  some  dim  picture  of  the  character  and  history  and  even 
the  outward  semblance  of  the  men  and  women  who  once  bore  the  names.  A  name 
implies  the  existence  of  a  distinct  personality.  In  its  lists  of  what  are  now  mere  names 
the  Bible  seems  to  recognise   the   dignity   and  sacredness  of  bare  human  life. 

2.  These  names  have  also  a  collective  significance.  They  are  typical  and  repre- 
sentative — the  names  of  kings  and  priests  and  captains ;  they  sum  up  the  tribes  of 
Israel,  both  as  a  Church  and  a  nation,  down  all  the  generations  of  its  history. 

3.  The  meanings  of  names  reveal  the  ideas  of  the  people  who  used  them.  "  The 
Hebrew  names  bear  important  testimony  to  the  peculiar  vocation  of  this  nation. 
No  nation  of  antiquity  has  such  a  proportion  of  names  of  religious  import."  The 
Old  Testament  contains  more  than  a  hundred  etymologies  of  personal  names,  most 
of  which  attach  a  religious  meaning  to  the  words  explained.  4.  How  far  do  these 
names  help  us  to  understand  the  spiritual  life  of  ancient  Israel  ?  The  Israelites 
made  constant  use  of  El  and  Jehovah  in  their  names,  and  we  have  no  parallel 
practice.  Were  they  then  so  much  more  religious  than  we  are  ?  Probably  in  a 
sense  they  were.  Modern  Englishmen  have  developed  a  habit  of  almost  complete 
reticence  and  reserve  on  religious  matters,  and  this  habit  is  illustrated  by  our  choice 
of  proper  names.  5.  According  to  the  testimony  of  names,  the  Israelites'  favourite 
ideas  about  God  were  that  He  heard,  and  knew,  and  remembered ;  that  He  was 
gracious,  and  helped  men  and  gave  them  gifts ;  they  loved  best  to  think  of  Him  as 
God  the  Giver.  This  is  a  foreshadowing  of  the  Christian  doctrines  of  grace  and  of 
the  Divine  soveveisnty.  God  hears  and  remembers  and  gives — what  ?  All  that  we 
have  to  say  to  Him  and  all  that  we  are  capable  of  receiving  from  Him.  (Ibid.) 
The  genealogies  indicative  of  universal  brotherhood : — The  existing  races  of  the 
world  are  all  traced  back  through  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japheth  to  Noah,  and  through 
him  to  Adam.  The  Israelites  did  not  claim,  like  certain  Greek  clans,  to  be  the 
descendants  of  a  special  god  of  their  own,  or,  like  the  Athenians,  to  have  sprung 
miraculously  from  sacred  soil.     Their  genealogies  testified  that  not  merely  Israelite 

1 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  i. 

nature,  but  human  nature,  is  moulded  on  a  Divine  pattern.  These  apparently 
barren  lists  of  names  enshrine  the  great  principles  of  the  universal  brotherhood  of 
man  and  the  universal  Fatherhood  of  God.  The  opening  chapters  of  Genesis  and 
Chronicles  are  among  the  foundations  of  the  catholicity  of  the  Church  of  Christ. 
(Ibid.)  The  genealogies  and  heredity  : — Each  nation  rightly  regards  its  religious 
ideas  and  life  and  hterature  as  a  precious  inheritance  peculiarly  its  own  ;  and  it 
should  not  be  too  severely  blamed  for  being  ignorant  that  other  nations  have  their 
inheritance  also.  Such  considerations  largely  justify  the  interest  in  hei-edity  shown 
by  the  chronicler's  genealogies.  On  the  positive  practical  side  religion  is  largely  a 
matter  of  heredity,  and  ought  to  be.  The  Christian  sacrament  of  baptism  is  a 
continued  profession  of  this  truth  :  our  children  are  "  clean  " ;  they  are  within 
the  covenant  of  grace ;  we  claim  for  them  the  privileges  of  the  Church  to  which  we 
belong.  This  was  also  part  of  the  meaning  of  the  genealogies.  (Ibid.)  The 
genealogies  :  what  ive  oive  to  the  past : — We  are  the  creatures  and  debtors  of  the 
past,  though  we  are  slow  to  own  our  obligations.  We  have  nothing  that  we  have 
not  received ;  but  we  are  apt  to  consider  ourselves  self-made  men,  the  architects 
and  builders  of  our  own  fortunes,  who  have  the  right  to  be  self-satisfied,  self- 
assertive,  and  selfish.  The  heir  of  all  the  ages,  in  the  full  vigour  of  youth,  takes 
his  place  in  the  foremost  ranks  of  time,  and  marches  on  in  the  happy  consciousness 
of  profound  and  multifarious  wisdom,  immense  resources,  and  magnificent  oppor- 
tunity. He  forgets,  or  even  despises,  the  generations  of  labour  and  anguish  that 
have  built  up  for  him  his  great  inheritance.  The  genealogies  are  a  silent  protest 
against  such  insolent  ingratitude.  They  remind  us  that  in  bygone  days  a  man 
derived  his  gifts  and  received  his  opportunities  from  his  ancestors  ;  they  show  ua 
men  as  the  links  in  a  chain,  tenants  for  life,  as  it  were,  of  our  estate,  called  upon 
to  pay  back  with  interest  to  the  future  the  debt  which  they  have  incurred  to  the  past. 
(Ibid.)  Genealogies  as  symbols  of  the  solidarity  of  our  race  : — The  genealogies 
that  set  forth  family  histories  are  the  symbols  of  the  brotherhood  or  solidarity  of 
our  race.  The  chart  of  converging  lines  of  ancestors  in  Israel  carried  men's  minds 
back  from  the  separate  families  to  their  common  ancestor.  As  far  as  they  go, 
the  chronicler's  genealogies  form  a  clear  and  instructive  diagram  of  the  mutual 
dependence  of  men  on  men  and  family  on  family.  They  are  in  any  case  a  true 
symbol  of  the  facts  of  family  relations ;  but  they  are  drawn,  so  to  speak,  in  one 
dimension  only,  backwards  and  forwards  in  time.  Yet  the  real  family  life  exists  in 
three  dimensions.  A  man  has  not  merely  his  male  ancestors  in  the  directly 
ascending  line — father,  grandfather,  great-grandfather,  &c. — but  he  has  female 
ancestors  as  well.  By  going  back  three  or  four  generations  a  man  is  connected  with 
an  immense  number  of  cousins;  and  if  the  complete  network  of  ten  or  fifteen 
generations  could  be  worked  out,  it  would  probably  show  some  blood  bond  through- 
out a  whole  nation.  The  further  we  go  back  the  larger  is  the  element  of  ancestry 
common  to  the  different  individuals  of  the  same  community.  The  chronicler's 
genealogies  only  show  us  individuals  as  links  in  a  set  of  chains.  The  more  com- 
plete genealogical  scheme  would  be  better  illustrated  by  the  ganglia  of  the  nervous 
system,  each  of  which  is  connected  by  numerous  fibres  with  the  other  ganglia. 
Patriotism  and  humanity  are  instincts  as  natural  and  as  binding  as  those  of  the 
family  ;  and  the  genealogies  express  or  symbolise  the  wider  family  ties,  that  they 
may  commend  the  virtues  and  enforce  the  duties  that  arise  out  of  these  ties.  (Ibid.) 
The  antiquity  and  unity  of  man : — Other  nations  have  had  more  or  less  imperfect 
visions  of  ancient  history  and  of  the  unity  of  the  race,  but  in  the  Bible  alone  do 
we  find  an  authoritative  declaration  made  concerning  the  antiquity  and  unity  of 
man  and  the  ultimate  destiny  of  the  human  race.  The  Chaldeans  had  a  tradition 
of  ten  antediluvian  patriarchs  or  kings.  They  made  the  duration  of  this  first 
period  of  human  history  four  hundred  and  thirty-two  thousand  years.  All  other 
chronicles  have  been  bewildered  by  their  polytheism,  whereas  in  the  Hebrew  history 
we  have  all  the  sublime  unity  which  would  seem  to  be  necessitated  by  the  mono- 
theism of  the  writers.  They  who  believed  in  one  God  were  likely  to  believe  in  one 
humanity.  Monotheism  accounts  for  the  two  commandments  which  relate  first  to 
God,  and  then  to  man.     (J.  Barker,  D.D.) 

Yer.  19.  Because  In  his  days  the  earth  was  divided. — The  division  of  the  earth : 
— The  chief  value  of  the  genealogical  records  consists — 1.  In  enabling  us  to 
view  the  origin  of  nations  historically.  2.  In  enabling  us  to  trace  out  the  varioua 
tribes  of  the  sons  of  Jacob.  3.  In  enabling  us  to  prove  the  lineal  descent  of  Christ 
to  have  been  of  the  house  and  lineage  of  David  ;  and  that  He  was  the  fulfiUer  of 


<3HAP.  1.]  J.  CHRONICLES.  8 

the  promise  to  Abraham,  "  In  thy  seed  shall  all  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed." 
4.  Independently  of  all  this  we  meet  with  a  sentence  or  a  paragraph  suggestive  of 
the  deepest  thought,  or  illuminating  a  principle  expressed  in  another  part  of  the 
Scriptures  with  light  as  clear  and  bright  as  it  is  beautiful  and  enchanting.  Such 
.an  instance  we  have  in  the  text.  I.  Consider  the  division  of  the  earth  as 
ORDAINED  without  SIN.  Sin  alters  and  affects  everything.  There  is  not  a  duty 
you  perform  or  matter  you  can  engage  in,  in  which  you  do  not  find  sin  exerting  a 
pernicious  influence.  And  here  it  is,  I  think,  that  many  persons  make  great  error 
when  seeking  to  interpret  to  themselves  the  trials  and  calamities  which  come  upon 
them.  "  Providence  ordained  it,"  is  the  common  philosophy  on  the  matter,  when 
I  humbly  think  the  truer  account  of  every  calamity  would  be,  "  Providence  ordained 
and  desired  my  happiness,  but  sin  has  deformed  it,  and  for  a  time  blasted  the 
intended  joys  and  filled  me  with  anxieties."  The  division  which  God  intended 
would  be  but  a  repetition  in  every  case  of  what  He  had  done  at  the  beginning ; 
there  would  have  been  allotted  to  the  sons  of  men  certain  portions  of  this  fair  earth 
to  govern  and  to  till,  and  every  child  of  Adam  would  be  taught,  in  the  beautiful 
homilies  of  nature,  the  first  principles  at  least  of  homage  to  the  Creator,  and  of 
confidence,  and  of  love.  The  division  Jehovah  ordained  was  division  without 
disunion.  Distinction,  but  not  discord.  Partition,  but  still  perfect  peace.  This 
first  inquiry,  then,  is  of  much  value,  and  wiU  prove,  ere  many  years,  of  vast  im- 
portance in  refuting  the  errors  of  the  sceptical  writers  which  abound.  Nor  will  it 
perhaps  be  without  its  use,  to  have  noticed  the  character  of  that  division  which 
God  intended  among  the  sons  of  men,  one  which  should  have  promoted  the  equal 
•comfort  of  all,  amidst  the  blessings  of  universal  peace  and  brotherhood.  It  may  be, 
that  when  grace  shall  have  triumphed  in  our  sin-stained  earth  even  but  a  little 
more,  you  may  see  a  disposition  to  revert  to  these  very  principles  of  division  which 
the  Eternal  desired  to  be  followed,  but  which  (as  we  shall  notice  directly)  have 
been  marvellously  distorted  ever  since  the  day  of  which  it  is  recorded  in  the  text — 
"  Unto  Eber  were  born  two  sons :  the  name  of  the  one  was  Peleg ;  because  in  his  days 
the  earth  was  divided."    II.  Now  let  us  inquire  into  the  division  of  the  earth 

AMONG  nations  AS  IT  DOES  EXIST,  UNDER   THE   INFLUENCE  OF  SIN.       NoW  yOU  HOticC,  by 

referring  to  the  text  (Gen.  x.  25),  that  the  division  took  place  before  the  building  of 
Babel,  and  according  to  some  persons,  some  considerable  period  before  that  epoch. 
At  all  events,  the  narrative  implies  that  this  division  preceded  the  dispersion,  and 
must  therefore  have  occurred  when  all  men  spoke  but  one  language.  Piemember, 
then,  that  God's  will  was  that  men  should  divide  (though  without  discord)  and 
replenish  all  the  earth.  Recollect,  too,  that  from  the  text  we  learn  that  the  first 
step  in  this  had  been  taken,  even  as  Eber  names  his  child  Peleg  (division)  in 
memory  of  the  event.  Observe,  then,  what  we  are  told  immediately  after  the 
■division  in  the  days  of  Peleg.  You  read  in  the  eleventh  chapter  of  Genesis  that 
the  whole  earth  was  of  one  language  and  of  one  speech  ;  but  that  in  their  journey- 
ings  from  the  east,  instead  of  dividing  (as  probably  was  the  intention  when  they 
started),  finding  a  large  and  inviting  plain  in  Shinar,  they  counsel  each  other: 
"  Let  us  build  a  city  and  tower  whose  top  may  reach  to  heaven,  and  let  us  make  us 
a  name  lest "  (mark)  "  we  be  scattered  abroad  on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth."  So 
that  sin  at  once  interrupted  the  beneficent  designs  of  God,  and  interposing  its 
corrupting  leaven,  sought  to  change  His  ordinances  by  promising  greater  benefits 
than  He,  but  which  have  ever  been  found  productive  of  evil.  And  now,  that 
which  was  ordained  for  a  blessing  in  every  age,  forthwith  becomes  a  curse  while  it 
is  yet  obeyed ;  for  God  coming  down,  and  seeing  the  injurious  moral  effect  which 
would  follow  from  this  congregating  together,  disperses  them  by  a  division  wholly 
tmlooked  for.  God  confounded  their  speech,  made  them  talk  in  different  languages, 
and  they  are  obhged  in  consequence  to  disperse,  and  the  division  is  accomplished. 
But  how?  Not  in  peace  and  harmony,  and  with  a  "God  be  with  you."  But 
brother  utters  jargon  to  brother,  and  words  of  blessing  and  adieu  are  impossible, 
and  now  it  is  no  more  division  with  love,  but  confusion,  and  disunion,  and  discord, 
and  ill-will.  For  I  ask  you  what  is  the  history  of  nations,  but  a  continuation  of 
this  story  ?  Nations  for  the  most  part  are  distinguished  fx-om  one  another  by  their 
difference  of  speech.  But  this  is  not  the  only  difference.  Scarcely  a  nation  in  the 
world  but  has  at  one  time  or  another,  been  at  war  with  other  nations,  and  almost 
■every  kingdom  of  importance  has,  in  its  turn,  encountered  the  armies  of  all  other 
kingdoms  in  the  dread  attack  of  war  and  slaughter,  at  some  period  of  their  history. 
And  this  is  the  place  for  observing  another  very  striking  result  of  sin  in  the  division 
ol  the  earth.    God,  we  saw,  intended  it  so  to  be  conducted  as  to  subserve  the 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

advantage  of  all ;  but  man  decreed  in  his  pride  of  intellect  and  reasoning  that  he 
would  live  in  the  dense  vastness  of  a  thickly  populated  city.  And  though  God 
indeed  dispersed  them  from  Babel,  the  tendency  of  our  nature  seems  to  be  far  from 
eradicated.  Still  mankind  crov?d  into  cities,  until  they  are  so  closely  populated, 
that  disease  and  death  are  fearfully  increased.  So  you  may  notice  how  the 
retributive  hand  of  judgment  has  followed  these  transactions.  Man  is  a  social 
being,  and  intended  by  God  to  congregate,  but  intended  not  so  to  congregate  as  we 
find  he  has  done,  and  will  still  persist  in  doing,  until  by  a  strange  anomaly  his  next- 
door  neighbour  is  the  veriest  stranger  to  him.  God  ordered  earth  to  be  divided  ; 
and  the  plan  by  which  thousands  are  huddled  in  close,  dark,  narrow  alleys  and 
areas  is  only  sin's  development  of  its  influences,  as  it  reverses  God's  intended 
method  of  division,  and  says  with  towering  vanity,  "  Go  to,  let  us  build  rather  a 
city  that  we  may  not  be  scattered."  It  is  a  known  fact,  that  there  is  less  religion 
in  large  towns  than  small  ones,  and  far  less  where  the  poor  are  obliged  to  pack 
together  as  I  have  described.  The  reason  is  also  plain.  The  cause  is,  that  since 
the  days  of  Peleg,  the  earth  has  been  divided  according  to  sin,  and  the  dispersion 
of  nations  is  the  result  of  God's  anger,  in  confounding  their  speech.  But  the 
reason  is,  because  the  human  mind,  cut  off  from  the  beauties  of  nature,  and  those 
countless  sources  which  it  possesses  for  preparing  the  mind  for  religion,  becomes 
prejudiced  in  its  fearfully  artificial  state  of  town  life,  and  by  the  evil  customs  and 
habits  which  surround  it,  against  every  sense  of  real  godliness,  which  it  thus  learns 
to  regard  as  belonging  only  to  the  rich.     III.  But  though  tou  see  sin  so  plainly 

OPEKATINO,  TOU  ABE  ASSURED  THAT  ChRIST  WILL  CONQUER,  AND  GRACE  FINALLY  PREVAIL. 

In  the  day  of  glory  which  awaits  you  (described  in  the  last  two  chapters  of  the 
Eevelation),  it  is  very  interesting  to  observe  that  the  city  of  the  new  Jerusalem 
described  there  bears  a  peculiar  likeness  to  those  which  would  have  existed  if  the 
division  of  the  world  had  been  such  as  God  ordained,  and  which  began  in  the  days 
of  Peleg.  In  Christ's  kingdom  there  will  be  division  without  discord,  that  is^ 
every  person  in  his  right  place,  in  perfect  love,  and  unity  with  all  the  rest, 
(G.  Venables.) 

Ver.  44.  Johab  the  son  of  of  Zerah  of  Bozrah  reigned  in  his  stead. — Successors : — 
Never  let  it  be  supposed  that  Providence  is  limited  to  any  one  man  in  the  matter  of 
kingship  and  dominion.  Men  who  are  reigning  should  lay  to  heart  the  reflection 
that  their  reign  is  to  come  to  an  end.  Every  man  is  bound  to  consider  his 
successor ;  it  is  not  enough  to  vacate  office  ;  every  man  should  leave  behind  him  a 
character  worthy  of  imitation,  an  example  that  will  stimulate  in  all  highest  direc- 
tions. Let  every  man  prepare  himself  to  succeed  the  king — in  the  family,  in  the 
state,  in  the  social  circle :  we  should  always  be  preparing  ourselves  for  some  higher 
office,  and  the  best  way  of  so  preparing  is  to  fill  with  faithfuhiess  the  office  which 
we  have  at  present  assigned  to  us.  There  is  only  one  King  who  shall  have  no 
successor,  and  that  King's  name  is  Jesus  Christ.     (J,  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  48.  And  when  Samlah  was  dead,  Shaul  of  Behoboth  by  the  river  reigned 
in  his  stead. — The  race  and  the  individual : — "  The  king  is  dead.  Long  live  the 
king !  "  After  the  Saxon  comes  the  Norman ;  after  George  the  First  George  the 
Second,  and  then  George  the  Third.  So  is  history  written  with  wearying  mono- 
tony. These  chapters  have  their  lessons,  and  not  the  least  significant  is  contained 
in  the  words  "  reigned  in  his  stead."  We  hear  the  tramp  of  many  generations  as  we- 
read  these  verses.  The  march  of  the  human  family  has  been  always  towai'ds  a  grave^ 
That  is  the  end  of  every  life.  "  And  so  death  passed  on  all  men  ;  for  all  have  sinned." 
Who  were  Bela,  and  Jobad,andHusham,  andHadad,  Samlah.,  and  Shaul?  They  were 
kings  once,  but  who  cares  anything  about  them  now  ?  They  are  dead,  and  their  deeds 
are  forgotten.  Another  man  shall  fill  my  pulpit ;  another  man  shall  attend  to  your 
business ;  another  man  shall  sit  in  your  chair.  Our  text  suggests  the  thought  of 
the  death  of  the  individual  and  the  perpetuation  of  the  race.  Instead  of  father 
comes  the  son.  Whether  we  like  it  or  not,  our  children  will  soon  be  pushing  us  out 
of  our  places.  The  world  demands  strong  hands  and  nimble  intellects.  The  cry 
is  for  young  men.  It  is  pathetic,  it  is  sometimes  heart-breaking,  to  see  how  cavalierly 
the  world  treats  the  aged.  With  rude  hands  it  pushes  them  aside  to  make  way  for 
their  successors.  The  moral  suggestiveness  of  the  genealogical  chapters  is  great- 
The  Bible  has  a  wonderful  method  of  epitomising.  It  informs  us  of  the  creation 
of  the  world,  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  earth,  heaven,  and  sea  in  a  single  chapter. 
It  tells  the  whole  story  of  Redemption  in  one  verse  (John  iii.  16).   The  very  brevity 


CHAP.  I.]  I.  CHRONICLES. 


is  significant.    What  importance  we  poor  mortals  attach  to  yerj  trifling  things ! 

Our  pleasures,  our  troubles,  our  work,  our  family,  its  marriages,  its  funerals ;  and 

we  sometimes  feel  aggrieved  that  these  things  have  not  a  deeper  interest  for  others. 

Here  are  many  generations  of  men  all  crammed  into  one  chapter.     "  Behold  God  is 

very  great."    And  so  He  tells  of  many  generations  of  men  in  a  few  verses.     It  is 

such  a  small  thing  to  Him.     The  individual  passes  away,  but  the  race  continues. 

Men  die,  but  man  endures.     "  One  generation  cometh  and  another  goeth."     The 

earth  is  very  beautiful,  but  it  is,  after  all,  one  vast  cemetery,  in  which  repose  the 

ashes  of  our  forefathers.     It  is  a  lovely  garden  full  of  flowers  and  singing  birds,  but 

in  the  garden  there  is  always  a  new  tomb.     The  dead  outnumber  the  living.     We 

pride  ourselves  on  our  possessions.    A  few  years  ago  they  were  not  ours,  they 

belonged  to  the  departed  ;  in  a  few  years  to  come  they  will  not  be  ours,  they  will  be 

held  by  our  successors.     God  lends  us  a  house  to  live  in,  clothes  to  wear,  money  to 

use,  and  we  grow  arrogant,  and  exclaim,  "  See  how  rich  I  am !  "     We  shut  our  fists 

tight  over  our  gold,  and  say,  "  This  is  mine ;  I  will  keep  it.    Nobody  else  shall  have 

it."    And  Death  comes,  and  says,  "  Give  it  up.    Thou  mayest  retain  it  no  longer." 

Twenty — thirty  generations  of  men.    What  solemn  thoughts  the  words  suggest ! 

But  who  could  not  weep  over  this  vast  host  who  have  all  felt  the  joy  and  beauty  of 

life,  but  are  now  dead  ?    Where  are  the  ancient  seers  and  prophets  whose  eagle 

vision  peered  through  the  mists  of  time  and  read  with  unerring  certainty  the  fate  of 

great  nations  and  the  purposes  of  God  ?     Gone !     Prepare  thyself  1     Thou  shalt  die 

and  another  reign  in  thy  stead.     Our  text  suggests  the  solidarity  of  our  race.    We 

are  all  children  of  one  earthly  father,  as  we  are  all  the  children  of  one  Heavenly 

Father.    All  the  fountains  of  history  have  their  rise  in  the  solitary  pair  who  were 

driven  from  the  gates  of  Paradise  by  the  flaming  sword  of  the  angel  sentinel  of 

God.    We  are  all  descendants  of  a  gardener,  and  the  proudest  crest  might  well  have 

upon  it  a  spade.     The  common  brotherhood  of  the  race  is,  I  trust,  soon  to  receive 

practical  recognition  by  statesmen.    Long  enough  have  poets  sung  of  equal  rights 

and  preachers  repeated  stale  platitudes  about  "  all  men  being  as  one  in   God's 

sight  " ;  and  yet  the  nations  have  gone  on  murdering  one  another,  and,  under  the 

plea  of  extending  civilisation,  have  extirpated  many  a  tribe  whose  only  crime  was 

that  they  would  not  give  up  the  land  of  their  fathers  to  satisfy  the  territorial  greed 

of  the  white  man.    Our  text  reminds  us  of  our  indebtedness  to  the  past.    Every 

man  is  an  epitome  of  the  race.     In  him  history  has  its  reflection  and  development. 

He  is  the  incarnation  of  the  past  and  the  prophecy  of  the  future.    No  man  can 

isolate  himself.    Where  did  this  man  get  that  imagination  which  transforms  the 

commonplaces  of  life,  and  gives  to  the  veriest  mudbank  hues  of  iridescent  beauty  ? 

Where  did  that  other  get  his  logical  faculty,  his  mathematical  accuracy,  or  his 

genius  for  construction  ?     You  would  have  to  trace  his  ancestry  back  through 

centuries  to  answer  those  questions.     Some  of  us,  alas !  have  inherited  from  the 

past  other  qualities  which  are  the  bane  and  cross  of  our  life.    But  there  is  another 

way  in  which  we  are  indebted  to  the  past.    We  have  come  into  a  heritage  of  noble 

deeds  and  splendid  thoughts.    We  are  heirs  of  all  the  ages.    For  us  the  thinkers 

of  past  ages  burned  the  midnight  oil,  for  us  the  workers  toiled  when  Nature  bade 

them  sleep.    For  a  shilling  I  can  purchase  the  plays  it  took  Shakespeare  a  lifetime 

to  write.    A  few  coppers  will  make  Milton  my  life  companion.    We  are  indebted  to 

the  nameless  dead,  as  well  as  to  those  favoured  few  who  have  snatched  immortality 

from  the  hand  of  fate.    The  world  is  better  for  their  unrecorded  heroism,  their 

quiet,  patient  suffering,  as  the  atmosphere  is  sweeter  for  the  fragrance  of  the  violet. 

The  civil  liberties  we  enjoy,  the  freedom  to  worship  God  according  to  the  dictates  of 

our  own  conscience,  have  been  bought  for  us  by  the  rich  blood  of  brave  men  and 

women.    Let  us  hand  to  our  sons  unimpaired  the  holy  legacy  of  our  sires.     Our 

text  also  suggests  the  debt  we  owe  to  the  future.    Posterity  has  a  claim  upon  us 

as  well  as  the  past.    Let  it  be  ours  to  make  the  bounds  of  freedom  wider  yet ;  to 

leave  at  least  one  evil  less  than  when  we  were  born.    It  is  glorious,  and  yet  it  is 

awful  to  think  that  in  writing  our  own  history  we  are  also  determining  the  character 

of  generations  to  come.     To  the  young  I  say.  Prepare  yourselves  to  take  our  places. 

We  mean  to  make  it  as  easy  for  you  to  reign  in  our  stead  as  we  can  by  removing 

out  of  the  way  some  of  the  difiBculties  and  dangers  that  have  beset  our  own  lives. 

We  mean  to  make  it  as  hard  for  you  to  succeed  us  as  we  can  by  living  so  well  that  it 

shall  only  be  by  the  most  strenuous  efforts  that  you  shall  surpass  us  in  moral  effort, 

in  high  purpose,  in  brave  deeds,  and  aspiring  thoughts.     Get  ready,  I  say,  for  the 

larger  duties  and  greater  responsibilities  the  future  has  in  store  for  you;     The 

business  of  the  world,  its  philanthropies  and  its  religion,  will  soon  be  in  your  hands. 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n. 

Another  lesson  of  these  chapters  is  that  of  our  own  insignificance.  They  tend  to- 
correct  our  overwhelming  self-esteem.  Men  come  and  pass  away,  but  the  old  world 
goes  on.  There  is  no  place  but  what  can  be  filled  ;  no  man  is  indispensable.  Who 
will  succeed  you  ?  Who  will  lift  the  sword  that  you  lay  down,  who  will  wear  your 
mantle,  who  will  fill  your  office?  Can  anybody  do  it?  Yes;  but  you  have 
nothing  to  do  with  that.  It  is  yours  to  make  it  difficult  for  any  man  to 
succeed  you  by  doing  your  work  so  well  that  it  cannot  be  done  better.  We 
are  all  apt  to  magnify  our  own  importance.  Our  place  may  not  be  so  hard  to  fill 
as  we  imagine.  Some  ruddy  country  lad  may  come  with  his  sling  and  stone,  and 
in  simple  faith  hurl  a  pebble  in  the  name  of  God  at  the  giants  before  whom  we 
have  trembled  and  fled.  At  the  weaver's  loom  may  be  another  David  Livingstone, 
in  the  market  garden  a  Eobert  Moflfat,  at  the  cobbler's  bench  a  William  Carey,  in 
the  school  a  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon.  One  closing  thought  comes  to  us,  and  that 
is,  in  the  common  aspirations,  longings,  and  desires  of  men ;  in  their  common  origin 
and  destiny,  we  find  an  argument  for  a  common  redemption.  '•  As  in  Adam  all  die, 
even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive."  Generation  after  generation  of  men  and 
not  one  absolutely  holy  save  Him  who  bore  all  our  sins  on  the  Cross,  but  had  no  sin 
of  His  own.  In  due  time  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly.  The  cry  of  all  ages  has 
been  a  cry  for  deliverance  from  the  curse  of  sin.  That  cry  found  its  answer  at 
Calvary.  Jesus  is  the  only  King  of  whom  the  text  wiU  never  be  true.  He  sits  on 
an  eternal  throne.  His  crown  will  never  lose  its  lustre.  We  sinners  cannot  do 
without  the  Redeemer.  The  gospel  we  proclaim  is  a  resurrection  gospel.  Because 
He  lives  we  shall  live  also.     {S.  Horton.) 

Ver.  54.  These  are  the  dukes  of  Edom. — A  high  order  of  namet : — The  great 
lesson  teaches  the  transitoriness  of  all  human  dignity  and  glory.  Where  are  the 
dukes  of  Edom  now  ?  Who  knows  the  names  of  Timnah,  Aliah,  Jetheth  ?  How 
far  are  our  own  names  known  ?  What  will  be  thought  of  them  in  the  next 
century?  Men  are  not  to  be  estimated  by  their  renown,  but  by  their  personal 
goodness  and  their  local  influence.  In  the  Christian  Church  we  have  come  to  a 
higher  order  of  names  than  was  ever  known  in  secular  history.  Men  may  now  be 
called  sons  of  God,  saints,  slaves  of  Jesus  Christ,  inheritors  of  the  world  of  light : 
let  us  aspire  after  these  higher  titles,  for  they  never  perish.  The  titles  which  men 
give  soon  expire :  the  titles  which  God  confers  are  vital  with  His  own  Eternity. 
{J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  n. 

Vbb.  7.  Achar,  the  troubler  of  Israel. — The  troubler  of  Israel : — I  have  read  many 
biographies,  but  never  met  with  any  which  hit  off  a  man's  character  in  a  line  as 
this  word  of  inspiration  does.  The  noble  and  the  great  used  frequently  to  suspend 
the  "  achievement "  over  the  tomb  of  their  departed  ancestor  in  memorial  of  his 
renown,  bearing  a  motto,  which  described  the  leading  characteristic  of  the  ancient 
founder  of  the  family.  Here  is  the  tomb  of  Achar,  or  Achan,  and  here  is  the  motto 
for  his  achievement.  The  tomb  consists  of  a  large  heap  of  stones,  which  an  injured 
people  by  God's  command  piled  upon  his  ashes  after  they  had  stoned  him  to 
death,  and  burned  his  dead  body  with  fire.  What  is  the  motto  ?  "  The  troubler  of 
Israel."  What  a  finale  to  a  man's  life !  What  a  record  to  paint  on  his  escutcheon ! 
I.  What  made  Achan  a  troubler  of  Israel  ?  Sin.  All  trouble  may  be  traced  to 
this.  It  led  Achan  to  commit  the  threefold  crime  of  disobedience,  defiance  of 
God's  scrutiny,  and  sacrilege.  His  one  sin  brought  trouble  into  all  the  camp. 
This  is  all  the  more  remarkable  when  you  remember  how  insignificant  his  position 
was  among  the  tribes.  We  die  all  alone,  but  we  cannot  all  sin  alone.  Even 
our  secret  sins  are  public  calamities,  and  no  transgression  is  without  its 
malign  influence  upon  the  common  weal.  11.  The  troubles  Achan  brought 
UPON  HIS  PEOPLB.  1.  Defeat  before  a  less  powerful  foe.  2.  Depression  of 
spirit,  which  unremedied,  would  be  fatal  to  the  very  existence  of  the  nation. 
3.  Anger  from  God,  which  would  not  be  appeased  even  by  the  intercession 
of  Joshua.  4.  The  threat  of  abandonment  by  God  if  they  did  not  root  out 
the  evil  from  among  them.  (George  Venables.)  Achan,  the  troubler  of  Israel: 
— Why  was  the   punishment  of  Achan   so  severe?     1.  His   was  a  terrible  sin; 


CHAP,  in.]  I.  CHRONICLES. 


it  was  a  wilful  disobedience ;  it  was  high  treason  against  God ;  it  was 
sacrilege;  it  was  stealing,  lying,  coveting,  and  practically  murder.  2.  This  sin 
struck  at  the  very  life  of  the  nation.  If  the  people  could  disobey  God  with 
impunity,  the  nation  would  soon  be  ruined,  and  the  hope  of  the  world  be  put  out. 
3.  The  course  Achan  took  would  have  degraded  God  in  the  eyes  of  Israel  and  of 
the  Gentiles.  The  people  and  cities  of  Canaan  were  rich ;  the  Israelites  were  poor. 
Canaan  had  the  resources  of  a  somewhat  high  civilisation — gold,  silver,  vessels  of 
brass  and  of  iron;  goodly  Babylonish  garments.  Now,  suppose  the  Lord  had 
given  them  free  license  to  plunder,  to  steal  and  hide,  and  appropriate  all  they  could 
lay  hands  on  ?  This  movement  for  the  conquest  of  Canaan  would  have  become  a 
savage,  plundering,  marauding  expedition.  4.  These  fascinating  spoils — these 
glittering  prizes  of  gold  and  silver,  and  these  ornaments  of  the  cultured  Canaanites 
— were  linked  in  on  every  hand  with  idolatry.  Art  and  wealth  in  Canaan,  as  in 
every  other  heathen  nation,  lent  their  power  to  augment  the  attractions  towards 
idol-worship.  5.  But  another  consideration  must  have  great  weight.  The 
Israelites  had  before  them  the  task  of  conquering  Palestine,  a  task  which  required 
the  utmost  discipline  in  the  army.  God  was  the  Captain,  directing,  through 
Joshua,  all  the  campaign.  It  was  absolutely  necessary,  in  the  interests  of  military 
disciphne,  to  check  the  first  buddings  of  that  cupidity  which  so  often  characterised 
ancient  warfare.     {Christian  Age.) 

Ver.  34.  Now  Sheshan  had  no  sons,  but  daughters. — Compensations  : — Men 
should  always  put  down  after  a  statement  of  their  deficiencies  a  statement  of  their 
possessions ;  thus :  had  no  money,  but  had  mental  power ;  had  no  external  fame, 
but  had  great  home  repute  ;  had  no  genius,  but  had  great  common  sense  ;  had  no 
high  connections  of  a  social  kind,  but  enjoyed  easy  access  to  heaven  in  prayer  ;  had 
no  earthly  property,  but  was  rich  in  ideas  and  impulses ;  was  not  at  the  head  of  a 
great  circle  of  admirers,  but  was  truly  respected  and  trusted  wherever  known ;  had 
no  health,  but  had  great  cheerfulness.  Thus  we  must  keep  the  two  sides,  so  to  say, 
parallel ;  if  we  have  not  one  thing  we  have  another.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The 
compensations  of  life  : — The  disproportion  in  man's  inheritances  is  far  less  than  we 
are  prone  to  think.  If  one  hand  of  the  Universal  Giver  be  closed,  the  other  is 
expanded  ;  no  one  is  left  without  his  meed  of  compensation  ;  only  in  our  weakness 
and  unthankfulness  we  look  more  at  the  darker  side  of  our  lot,  and  at  what  appears 
to  us  the  brighter  side  of  our  neighbour's.  Epictetus  explains  the  mystery  in  part : 
"  It  is  not  fortune  that  is  blind,  but  ourselves."  Whatever  be  our  lot,  if  man  will 
but  just  concede  that  that  must  be  best  for  him  which  the  Best  of  Beings  has 
ordained,  life  thenceforward  has  a  solace  which  no  fortune  can  wrest  away.  {Leo 
H.  Grindon.) 

Ver.  65.  And  the  families  of  the  Scribes  which  dwelt  at  Jabez. — Scribes : — I.  A 
NOBLE  CALLING.  To  study  and  expound  sacred  books,  inform  society,  and  spread 
the  will  of  God.  11.  A  famtlt  calling.  "  The  families  of  the  scribes."  Here- 
ditary pursuits  in  all  communities.  III.  A  needful  calling.  A  literary  profession 
useful  to  society.    A  learned  ministry  the  want  of  the  times.     {James  TFol/endale.) 


CHAPTER  m. 

Vebb.  1-9.  Now  these  are  the  sons  of  David. — A  family  record : — ^As  we  read 

their  names  they  convey  no  meaning  to  us,  but  as  defined  etymologically  we  may 
get  a  new  aspect  of  part  at  least  of  the  king's  household.  Ibhar  signifies  "  God 
chooseth"  ;  Elishama,  "  God  heareth"  ;  Eliphelet,  "  God  is  deliverance  "  ;  Eliada, 
"  God  knoweth."  Keeping  in  mind  the  well-established  fact  that  in  Oriental 
countries  it  was  customary  to  mark  family  history  by  the  names  of  the  children, 
we  can  but  be  struck  with  the  deep  religiousness  of  the  family  record  now  before 
us.  In  every  child  David  sees  some  new  manifestation  of  God.  Every  son  was  an 
historical  landmark.  Every  life  was  a  new  phase  of  providence.  Blessed  is  the 
man  who  need  not  look  beyond  his  own  house  for  signs  and  proofs  of  the  manifold 
and  never-ceasing  goodness  of  God.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Significance  of  Hebrew 
names  : — A  name  is  to  us  a  matter  of  convenience ;  to  the  Hebrews  it  was  a  solemn 


8  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  ([ohap.it. 

and  saored  thing.  Our  names  are  short  and  simple,  and  generally  meaningless. 
Bible  names  are  thought-fossils,  rich  in  memories  of  the  past.  We  often  designate 
our  streets  by  the  letters  of  the  alphabet,  we  distinguish  our  houses  by  Arabic 
numerals,  and  in  large  bodies  of  men  we  distinguish  one  from  another  by  placing 
numbers  on  their  caps  or  badges.  The  number  on  the  house  has  nothing  to  do 
with  the  size  or  location  of  the  dwelling ;  the  number  on  the  cap  or  badge  tells 
nothing  of  the  brain  or  heart  beneath.  But  the  old  Hebrews  would  have  thought  it 
sacrilegious  to  give  names  in  such  careless  fashion.  Their  names  of  places  were 
often  given  after  solemn  thought  and  prayer.  Historical  records  were  few.  The 
name  must  contain  the  history  of  the  past  and  embody  the  sublimest  hopes  of  the 
future.  The  name  Bethel,  or  "  House  of  God,"  recalled  to  every  Jew  the  night 
when  Jacob  slept  on  his  stony  pillow,  and  the  word  Meribah,  or  "bitterness," 
oommemorated  in  the  mind  of  every  Jewish  boy  the  murmuring  and  rebellion  in 
^e  wilderness.    {W,  F.  Faunce.) 


CHAPTER  IV. 
Ynu.  1-48.  The  sons  of  Jndah. — Survey  of  the  genealogy : — ^I.  How  obeit  tbs 

OBSCXTBITT  OF   MOST   MEN  1      11.   WhAT   FOLLT   TO   SEEK   PLACE   AND   POWER   ONLY   HERE  ! 

III.  How  NEEDFUL  TO  BECUBB  RENOWN  HEREAFTER  1  "  Kejoice  that  youT  names  are 
written  in  heaven,"  said  the  dying  Haller,  when  friends  congratulated  him  on  the 
honoor  of  receiving  a  visit  from  the  Emperor  Joseph  H.    {James  Wolfendale.) 

Yers.  9, 10.  And  Jahez  was  more  honourable  than  his  brethren. — Jahex : — We 
know  nothing  whatsoever  of  the  Jabez  here  commemorated  beyond  what  we  find  in 
these  two  verses.  But  this  is  enough  to  mark  him  out  as  worthy,  in  no  ordinary 
degree,  of  being  admired  and  imitated.  There  is  a  depth  and  a  comprehensive- 
ness in  the  registered  prayer  of  this  unknown  individual — unknown  except  from 
that  prayer — which  should  suffice  to  make  him  a  teacher  of  the  righteous  in  every 
generation.  Let  us  now  take  the  several  parts  of  the  text  in  succession,  commenting 
upon  each  and  searching  out  the  lessons  which  may  be  useful  to  ourselves.  The 
first  verse  contains  a  short  account  of  Jabez  ;  the  second  is  occupied  by  his  prayer. 
Now  there  is  no  denying  that  we  are  short-sighted  beings,  so  little  able  to  look  into 
the  future  that  we  constantly  miscalculate  as  to  what  would  be  for  our  good, 
anticipating  evil  from  what  is  working  for  benefit,  and  reckoning  upon  benefit  from 
that  which  may  prove  fraught  with  nothing  but  evil.  How  frequently  does  that 
which  we  have  baptized  with  our  tears  make  the  countenance  sunny  with  smiles  1 
how  frequently,  again,  does  that  which  we  have  welcomed  with  smiles  wring  from  us 
tears  1  We  do  not  know  the  particular  reasons  which  influenced  the  mother  of 
Jabez  to  call  him  by  that  name,  a  name  which  means  "  sorrowful."  We  are 
merely  told,  "  His  mother  called  his  name  Jabez,  saying.  Because  I  bare  him  with 
sorrow."  Whether  it  were  that  she  brought  forth  this  son  with  more  than  common 
anguish,  or  whether,  as  it  may  have  been,  the  time  of  his  birth  were  the  time  of 
her  widowhood,  the  mother  evidently  felt  but  little  of  a  mother's  joy,  and  looked 
on  her  infant  with  forebodings  and  fears.  Perhaps  it  could  hardly  have  been  her 
own  bodily  suffering  which  made  her  fasten  on  the  boy  a  dark  and  gloomy  appella- 
tion, for,  the  danger  past,  she  would  rather  have  given  a  name  commemorative  of 
deliverance,  remembering  "  no  more  her  anguish  for  joy  that  a  man  was  born  into 
the  world."  Indeed,  when  Baohel  bare  Benjamin  she  called  his  name  Benoni,  that 
is,  "  the  son  of  my  sorrow  "  ;  but  then  it  was  "  as  her  soul  was  in  departing,  for  she 
died. "  We  may  well,  therefore,  suppose  that  the  mother  of  Jabez  had  deeper  and 
more  lasting  sorrows  to  register  in  the  name  of  her  boy  than  those  of  the  giving 
him  birth.  And  whatsoever  may  have  been  the  cause,  whether  domestic  affliction 
or  public  calamity,  we  may  consider  the  woman  as  having  bent  in  bitterness  over 
her  new-bom  child,  having  only  tears  to  give  him  as  his  welcome  to  the  world,  and 
feeling  it  impossible  to  associate  with  him  even  a  hope  of  happiness.  She  had 
probably  looked  with  different  sentiments  on  her  other  children.  She  had  clasped 
them  to  her  breast  with  all  a  mother's  gladness.  But  with  Jabez  it  was  all  gloom  ; 
the  mother  felt  as  if  she  could  never  be  happy  again :  this  boy  brought  nothing  but 
an  accession  of  care.     And  yet  the  history  of  the  family  is  gathered  into  the  brief 


chap.it.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  9 

sentence,  "  Jabez  was  more  honourable  than  his  brethren."  Nothing  is  told  us  of 
his  brethren,  except  that  they  were  less  honourable  than  himself ;  they,  too,  may 
have  been  excellent,  and  perhaps  as  much  is  implied,  but  Jabez  took  the  lead,  and 
whether  or  not  the  youngest  in  years,  surpassed  every  other  in  piety  and  renovm. 
Oh,  if  the  mother  lived  to  see  the  manhood  of  her  sons,  how  strangely  must  the 
name  Jabez,  a  name  probably  given  in  a  moment  of  despondency  and  faithlessness, 
have  fallen  on  her  ear!  She  may  then  have  regretted  the  gloomy  and  ominous 
name,  feeling  as  though  it  reproached  her  for  having  yielded  to  her  grief,  and 
allowed  herself  to  give  way  to  dreary  forebodings.  It  may  have  seemed  to  her  as  a 
standing  memorial  of  her  want  of  confidence  in  God,  and  of  the  falseness  of  human 
calculations.  And  is  not  this  brief  notice  of  the  mother  of  Jabez  full  of  warning 
and  admonition  to  ourselves?  How  ready  are  we  to  give  the  name  Jabez  to 
persons  or  things  which,  could  we  but  look  into  God's  purpose,  or  repose  on  His 
promise,  we  might  regard  as  designed  to  minister  permanently  to  our  security  and 
happiness.  "  AU  these  things,"  said  the  patriarch  Jacob,  "  are  against  me,"  as  one 
trial  after  another  fell  to  his  lot.  And  yet,  as  you  all  know,  it  was  by  and  through 
these  gloomy  dealings  that  a  merciful  God  was  providing  for  the  sustenance  of  the 
patriarch  and  his  household,  for  their  support  and  aggrandisement  in  a  season  of 
extraordinary  pressure.  Thus  it  continually  happens  in  regard  of  ourselves.  We 
give  the  sorrowful  title  to  that  which  is  designed  for  the  beneficent  end.  Judging 
only  by  present  appearances,  allowing  our  fears  and  feelings,  rather  than  our  faith, 
to  take  the  estimate  or  fix  the  character  of  occurrences,  we  look  with  gloom  on  our 
friends  and  with  melancholy  on  our  sources  of  good.  Sickness,  we  call  it  Jabez, 
though  it  may  be  sent  to  minister  to  our  spiritual  health  ;  poverty,  we  call  it  Jabez, 
though  coming  to  help  us  to  the  possession  of  heavenly  riches  ;  bereavement,  we 
call  it  Jabez,  though  designed  to  graft  us  more  closely  into  the  household  of  God. 
Oh  for  a  better  judgment !  or  rather,  oh  for  a  simpler  faith  !  We  cannot,  indeed, 
see  the  end  from  the  beginning,  and  therefore  cannot  be  sure  that  what  rises  in 
cloud  will  set  in  vermilion  and  gold ;  but  we  need  not  take  upon  ourselves  to  give 
the  dark  name,  as  though  we  could  not  be  deceived  in  regard  of  the  nature.  Let  us 
derive  this  lesson  from  the  concise  but  striking  narrative  in  the  first  verse  of  our 
text.  Let  us  neither  look  confidently  on  what  promises  best,  nor  despairingly  on 
what  wears  the  most  threatening  appearance.  God  often  wraps  up  the  withered 
leaf  of  disappointment  in  the  bright  purple  bud,  and  as  often  unfolds  the  golden 
flower  of  enjoyment  in  the  nipped  and  blighted  shoot.  Experience  is  full  of 
evidence  that  there  is  no  depending  on  appearances.  If,  in  a  spirit  of  repining  or 
unbelief,  you  brand  as  Jabez  what  may  be  but  a  blessing  in  disguise,  no  marvel  if 
sometimes,  in  just  anger  and  judgment.  He  allow  the  title  to  prove  correct,  and 
suffer  not  this  Jabez,  this  child  born  in  sorrow,  to  become  to  you  as  otherwise  it 
might,  more  honourable,  more  profitable  than  any  of  its  brethren.  But  let  us  now 
turn  to  the  prayer  of  Jabez.  We  ought  not  to  examine  the  prayer  without  pausing 
to  observe  to  whom  it  is  addressed.  It  is  not  stated  that  Jabez  called  on  God,  but 
on  "  the  God  of  Israel."  There  are  few  things  more  significant  than  the  difference 
in  the  manner  in  which  God  is  addressed  by  saints  under  the  old  and  under  the 
new  dispensation.  Patriarchs  pray  to  God  as  the  God  of  their  fathers ;  apostles 
pray  to  Him  as  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  In  both  forms  of  address 
there  is  an  intimation  of  the  same  fact,  that  we  need  something  to  encourage  us  in 
approaching  unto  God ;  that  exposed  as  we  are  to  His  just  wrath  for  our  sins,  we 
can  have  no  confidence  in  speaking  to  Him  as  to  absolute  Deity.  There  must  be 
something  to  lean  upon,  some  plea  to  urge,  otherwise  we  can  but  shrink  from  the 
presence  of  One  so  awful  in  His  gloriousness.  We  must,  then,  have  some  title  with 
which  to  address  God — some  title  which,  interfering  not  with  His  majesty  or  His 
mysteriousness,  may  yet  place  Him  under  a  character  which  shall  give  hope  to  the 
sinful  as  they  prostrate  themselves  before  Him.  We  need  not  say  that  under  the 
gospel  dispensation  this  title  should  be  that  which  is  used  by  St.  Paul,  "  the  Father 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Having  such  a  Mediator  through  whom  to  approach, 
there  is  no  poor  supplicant  who  may  not  come  with  boldness  to  the  mercy-seat. 
But  under  earUer  dispensations,  when  the  mediatorial  office  was  but  imperfectly 
made  known,  men  had  to  seize  on  other  pleas  and  encouragements ;  and  then  it 
was  a  great  thing  that  they  could  address  God  as  you  continually  find  Him 
addressed,  as  the  God  of  Israel,  the  God  of  their  fathers,  the  God  of  Abraham,  of 
Isaac,  and  of  Jacob.  The  title  assured  them  that  God  was  ready  to  hear  prayer 
and  to  answer  it.  They  went  before  God,  thronged,  as  it  were,  with  remembrances 
of  mercies  bestowed,  deliverances  vouchsafed,  evils  averted :  how  coald  they  fear  that 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

God  was  too  great  to  be  addressed,  too  occupied  to  reply,  or  too  stem  to  show  kind- 
ness, when  they  bore  in  mind  how  He  had  shielded  their  parents,  hearkened  to 
their  cry,  and  proved  Himself  unto  them  "  a  very  present  help  "  in  all  time  of 
trouble  ?  Ah,  and  though,  under  the  new  dispensation,  "  the  Father  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ "  be  the  great  character  under  which  God  should  be  addressed  by  us  in 
prayer,  there  is  no  need  for  our  altogether  dropping  the  title,  the  God  of  our  fathers. 
It  might  often  do  much  to  cheer  a  sorrowful  heart,  and  to  encourage  a  timid,  to 
address  God  as  the  God  of  our  fathers — the  God  in  whom  my  parents  trusted. 
And  what  did  Jabez  pray  for  ?  for  great  things — great,  if  you  suppose  him  to  have 
spoken  only  as  an  heir  of  the  temporal  Canaan,  greater  if  you  ascribe  to  him 
acquaintance  with  the  mercies  of  redemption.  "  Oh  that  Thou  wouldest  bless  me 
indeed."  Lay  the  emphasis  on  that  word  "  indeed."  Many  things  pass  for 
blessings  which  are  not ;  to  as  many  more  we  deny,  though  we  ought  to  give  the 
character.  There  is  a  blessing  in  appearance  which  is  not  also  a  blessing  in 
reality ;  and  conversely,  the  reality  may  exist  where  the  appearance  is  wanting.  The 
man  in  prosperity  appears  to  have,  the  man  in  adversity  to  be  without  a  blessing — 
yet  how  often  does  God  bless  by  withholding  I  And  Jabez  goes  on,  "  That  Thou 
wouldest  enlarge  my  coast. "  He  probably  speaks  as  one  who  had  to  win  from  the 
enemy  his  portion  of  the  promised  land.  He  knew  that,  as  the  Lord  said  to  Joshua, 
"  there  remained  yet  very  much  land  to  be  possessed  "  ;  it  was  not,  then,  necessarily 
as  a  man  desirous  of  securing  to  himself  a  broader  inheritance,  it  may  have  been 
as  one  who  felt  jealous  that  the  idolater  should  still  defile  what  God  had  set  apart 
for  His  people,  that  he  entreated  the  enlargement  of  his  coast.  And  a  Christian 
may  use  the  same  prayer ;  he,  too,  has  to  ask  that  his  coast  may  be  enlarged. 
Who  amongst  us  has  yet  taken  possession  of  one-half  the  territory  assigned  him 
by  God  ?  Our  privileges  as  Christians,  as  members  of  an  apostolical  Church,  as 
heirs  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  how  are  these  practically  under-valued,  how  little 
are  they  realised,  how  sluggishly  appropriated!  What  districts  of  unpossessed 
territory  are  there  in  the  Bible  !  how  much  of  that  blessed  book  has  been  com- 
paratively unexamined  by  us  1  We  have  our  favourite  parts,  and  give  only  an 
occasional  and  cursory  notice  to  the  rest.  How  little  practical  use  do  we  make  of 
God's  promises !  What  need,  then,  for  the  prayer,  "  Oh  that  Thou  wouldest  enlarge 
my  coast "  1  I  would  not  be  circumscribed  in  spiritual  things.  I  would  not  live 
always  within  these  narrow  bounds.  There  are  bright  and  glorious  tracts  beyond. 
It  is  a  righteous  covetousness,  this  for  an  enlargement  of  coast ;  for  he  has  done 
little,  we  might  almost  say  nothing,  in  religion,  who  can  be  content  with  what  he 
has  done.  It  is  a  holy  ambition,  this  which  pants  for  an  ampler  territory.  But  are 
we  only  to  pray  ?  are  we  not  also  to  struggle,  for  the  enlargement  of  our  coasts  ? 
Indeed  we  are :  observe  how  Jabez  proceeds,  "  And  that  Thine  hand  might  be  with 
me."  He  represents  himself  as  arming  for  the  enlargement  of  his  coast,  but  as 
knowing  all  the  while  that  "  the  battle  is  the  Lord's."  There  is  one  more  petition 
in  the  prayer  of  him  who,  named  with  a  dark  and  inauspicious  name,  yet  grew  to 
be  "more  honourable  than  his  brethren":  "That  Thou  wouldest  keep  me  from 
evil,  that  it  may  not  grieve  me."  "  Shall  we  receive  good  at  the  hand  of  God,  and 
shall  we  not  receive  evil  ?  "  Jabez  prayed  not  for  the  being  kept  from  evil,  but 
kept  from  the  being  grieved  by  evil.  And  there  is  a  vast  difference  between  the  being 
visited  by  evil  and  grieved  by  evil.  He  is  grieved  by  evil  who  does  not  receive  it 
meekly  and  submissively,  as  the  chastisement  of  his  heavenly  Father.  He  is 
grieved  by  evil  whom  evil  injures,  in  place  of  benefits — which  latter  is  always  God's 
purpose  in  His  permission  or  appointment.  He  is  grieved  by  evil  whom  it  drives 
into  sin,  and  to  whom,  therefore,  it  furnishes  cause  of  bitter  repentance.  You  see, 
then,  that  Jabez  showed  great  spiritual  discernment  in  casting  his  prayer  into  this 
particular  form.  We,  too,  should  pray,  not  absolutely  that  God  would  keep  us 
from  evil,  but  that  He  would  so  keep  it  from  us,  or  us  from  it,  that  it 
may  not  grieve  us.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  prayer  of  Jabez  :  —  ^la,nj  com- 
parisons have  at  times  been  instituted,  and  I  think  not  altogether  without 
reason,  between  this  book  as  the  work  of  God  and  the  world  as  the  production  of 
God  ;  such,  for  instance,  as  that  what  is  necessary  and  essential  lies  amply  upon 
the  surface  of  both.  Analogies  have  sometimes  been  gathered  from  the  mixture 
that  there  is  in  Scripture  in  the  developments  of  the  character  of  God ;  sometimes 
all  that  is  awful,  and  sometimes  all  that  is  benignant.  So  in  the  material  world 
there  is  the  same  mixture  in  the  development  and  display  of  the  Divine  character 
and  perfections.  Sometimes,  again,  an  analogy,  not  I  think  altogether  fanciful,  has 
been  supposed  to  exist  between  this  book  and  the  world,  in  that  there  are  some 


chap.it.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  11 

parts  of  it  that  seem  luxuriant  and  beautiful — some  parts  of  the  book  in  which 
every  verse  and  every  word  is  like  a  flower  springing  up  under  your  feet,  or  like  the 
shade  of  a  beautiful  vegetation  around  you,  or  like  an  exhibition  of  the  magnifi- 
cence and  loveliness  of  vegetable  nature,  while  other  parts  appjar  sterile  and 
barren,  with  rocks  on  every  side.  When  we  look  at  this  barren  catalogue  of  names, 
when  we  look  at  what  is  here  presented,  we  seem  to  have  got  into  one  of  those  parts 
of  Scripture  in  which  there  is  very  little  to  delight  the  eye  or  to  refresh  the  heart, 
just  as  sometimes  we  may  be  passing  through  some  sterile  part  in  the  scenery  of 
this  world.  What  is  suggested  by  what  we  see  in  some  of  these  barren  spots  of 
nature?  Why,  just  this — that  we  there  get  a  view  of  the  rocks,  of  the  bands  and 
the  pillars  of  our  earth,  that  bind  it  and  keep  it  together,  and  make  it  what  it  is, 
and  which  are  essential  and  necessary  for  the  support  of  all  the  earth,  and  the  soil 
by  which  is  supported  and  displayed  in  other  parts  the  beauty  and  sublimity  of 
vegetation.  So  it  is  here;  these  parts  of  the  Bible  are  just  representations  to  us  of 
some  of  those  barren  rocks,  you  may  say,  but  still  those  rocks  which  run  through- 
out Scripture,  those  genealogies  which  are  connected  with  all  that  is  important  in 
the  history  of  the  Messiah  and  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy.  In  looking  at  the 
passage  we  observe  that  with  respect  to  this  Jabez  we  really  know  nothing  but 
what  is  combined  in  these  two  verses ;  there  is  no  reference  to  him  in  any  other 
part  of  Scripture.  He  was  unquestionably,  I  suppose,  from  the  position  in 
which  he  stands,  of  the  tribe  of  Judah ;  as  this  is  the  genealogy  of  Judah.  We 
know  not  precisely  from  the  passage  who  were  his  parents ;  what  particular  line  in 
Judah  he  belonged  to  ;  nor  can  we  exactly  make  out  the  precise  time  in  which  he 
lived  ;  though  it  appears  to  me  the  passage  gives  us  a  little  light  on  that  subject.  It 
is  said  generally  of  him  that  "he  was  more  honourable  than  his  brethren."  That 
may  or  may  not  imply  censure  against  his  brethren.  He  might  be  honourable 
among  the  honourable ;  he  might  be  great  among  the  great.  The  probability  is, 
however,  that  it  does  rather  convey  the  idea  of  imperfection  and  defect  in  the 
character  of  surrounding  society,  and  hence  it  does  mark  more  prominently  the 
influence  of  principle  and  of  piety  in  him.  But  men  maybe  honourable  on  various 
accounts :  generally  at  the  time  to  which  the  Scripture  refers,  and  now,  men  are 
estimated  honourable  for  valour,  for  wisdom,  and  for  pity.  I  think  it  is  very 
probable  that  all  these  met  in  Jabez.  1.  There  are  traditions  among  the  Jewa 
respecting  him  ;  and  they  make  him  to  have  been  a  man  distinguished  for  wisdom 
as  a  teacher ;  distinguished  as  the  founder  of  a  school,  and  having  around  him  a 
multitude  of  disciples.  This  opinion  has  upon  it,  perhaps,  some  air  of  probability 
from  the  last  verse  of  the  second  chapter  in  this  book,  in  which  it  is  said,  "  And 
the  families  of  the  scribes  which  dwelt  at  Jabez,"  or  "  with  Jabez  "  ;  "  the  Tirathites, 
the  Shimeathites,  and  Suchathites.  These  are  the  Kenites  that  came  of  Hemath, 
the  father  of  the  house  of  Kechab."  Now,  "  the  families  of  the  scribes  which 
dwelt  at  Jabez,"  supposing  it  to  be  the  name  of  a  place,  refers  to  men  who  are 
devoted  to  study ;  if  it  be  the  name  of  the  persons  that  dwelt  with  him,  still  the 
same  idea  seems  suggested.  So  that  I  think  it  very  probable  that  the  idea  of  the 
Jews  is  right.  They  themselves  take  these  words  which  are  here  used,  and  in 
which  these  different  divisions  of  scribes  are  distinguished,  as  being  significant, 
expressing  certain  qualities  of  these  disciples  with  respect  to  the  manner  in  which 
they  received  the  instruction  of  the  master,  and  the  manner  in  which  they  were 
devoted  to  God.  It  is  very  probable,  therefore,  that  he  was  distinguished  and 
honourable  for  his  mental  acquisition  and  his  wisdom.  2.  It  seems  to  me  that  he 
was  honourable  also  for  his  enterprise  and  activity,  and  perhaps  also  for  his  valour, 
because  he  prays  for  the  enlargement  of  his  coast.  Now  it  strikes  me  that  this 
particular  prayer  of  Jabez  about  the  enlargement  of  his  coast,  and  God  being  with 
him,  seems  to  cast  a  little  light  on  the  time  in  which  he  lived.  It  strikes  me  that 
he  lived  soon  after  the  settlement  of  the  people  in  Canaan,  and  before  they  had 
taken  complete  and  full  possession  of  the  different  lots.  And  there  was  among 
many  of  the  people  a  sort  of  reluctance  to  do  this,  a  want  of  vigour  and  enterprise 
of  mind  and  character.  Joshua  really  had  to  reprove  them  for  sitting  down  con- 
tented too  soon,  saying,  "  Why,  a  few  of  you  have  got  possession ;  yet  there 
remains  a  number  of  places  that  are  not  yet  divided  ;  why  sit  you  here?  Arise, 
take  possession."  It  strikes  me,  therefore,  this  prayer  has  relation  to  that,  and 
that  he  was  more  honourable  than  his  brethren  because  he  entered  into  the  mind 
of  God.  3.  Whatever  may  be  thought  of  that,  that  he  was  honourable  for  his 
piety  is,  I  think,  manifest.  "  He  was  more  honourable  than  his  brethren  "  ;  and 
the  sacred  writer,  after  having  stated  that  generally,  in  the  next  verse  develops  the 


12  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

principle  of  this  honourable  character :  "  And  Jabez  called  on  the  God  of  Israel,'* 
(fee.  (1)  On  looking  at  this  prayer  you  observe  the  propriety  of  the  feeling  with 
which  it  is  addressed  to  God.  "  Jabez  called  upon  the  God  of  Israel."  He  was 
neither  lost  in  the  vagueness  of  mere  theism,  nor  led  astray  by  the  grossness  of 
idolatry.  He  understood  and  felt  the  principle  of  the  economy  under  which  he 
lived;  he  rejoiced  in  the  privileges  and  advantages  which  God  in  covenant  had 
conferred  on  the  people,  and  he  rejoiced  to  look  at  God  in  that  aspect,  and 
presented  his  prayer  to  Him  in  that  covenant  relation.  It  is  thus  that  you  and  I 
must  come  to  God  ;  it  is  thus  that  we  must  be  prepared  not  to  lose  ourselves  in  the 
vagueness  of  sentimentalism  and  the  generalities  of  religion,  but  to  feel  that  there 
is  a  way  by  which  we  are  to  come,  a  specific  view  we  are  to  have  of  God.  (2)  Then 
let  us  look  at  the  comprehensiveness  of  the  prayer ;  how  much  it  includes  with 
respect  to  the  life  that  now  is  and  the  life  that  is  to  come.  (3)  Then  I  think  you 
may  observe  the  humility  that  marks  the  prayer  ;  how  completely  he  is  emptied  of 
self,  how  he  goes  out  of  self,  feeUng  that  all  his  resources  must  be  in  God.  There 
is  a  feeling  pervading  every  petition  and  every  expression,  marking  the  conscious- 
ness that  he  had  of  his  own  weakness  and  his  own  danger  :  that  he  needed  to  be 
held  and  sustained  by  God.  (4)  Then  you  may  observe  the  intenseness,  the  fervour, 
and  the  earnestness  which  seem  to  mark  his  supplication :  "  Oh  that  Thou  wouldest 
bless  me  indeed  1  "  (5)  Then  observe  the  fulfilment  of  the  prayer :  "  And  God 
granted  him  that  whicn  he  requested."  Such  is  a  brief  illustration  of  what  is  here 
stated  with  respect  to  this  distinguished  man,  and  the  prayer  that  is  here  recorded 
of  him.  Before  I  pass  on  to  the  more  general  lessons  to  be  drawn  from  this  prayer, 
I  cannot  help  just  observing  how  short  this  prayer  is.  And  this  is  a  characteristic 
of  the  prayers  of  Scripture — the  prayers  of  Scripture  are  almost  all  brief,  many  of 
them  are  very  brief.  But  I  pass  on  to  make  one  or  two  general  observations  arising 
from  the  subject.  1.  I  should  think  it  very  likely  that  Jabez  owed  a  good  deal  of 
his  religion  to  his  mother.  2.  We  learn  also,  that  piety  towards  God,  the  posses- 
sion of  the  principles  and  the  manifestation  of  Scriptural  religion,  is  in  the  sight  of 
God  essential  to  the  possession  of  a  true  and  honourable  character.  The  terms 
"  honourable  "  and  "  honourable  character  "  have  very  different  senses  among  men. 
That  which  is  highly  approved  among  men  in  this  respect  is  often  an  abomination 
in  the  sight  of  God.  There  is  many  a  man  distinguished  by  this  epithet  in  society 
that  is  loathed  in  the  society  of  heaven.  A  merely  honourable  character  in  society 
means  often  nothing  but  a  man  of  integrity.  He  is  honourable  in  the  relations  of 
common  life.  Under  the  influence  of  their  principle  men  are  led  to  pay  debts 
which  they  have  contracted  by  vice,  but  to  starve  and  to  crush  the  honest  trades- 
man, and  neglect  to  pay  other  debts  which  they  have  accumulated  upon  them- 
selves. And  yet  they  are  "  honourable  men  I  "  Such  are  the  perversions  abroad  in 
the  world  and  the  absurdities  in  society.  3.  Another  thought  is  impressed  upon  us 
by  the  passage :  the  importance  that  God  attaches  to  faith  and  piety,  and  the 
character  that  flows  from  it.  The  importance  that  God  attaches  to  it  is  proved  by 
the  very  circumstance  of  there  being  this  abrupt  introduction  of  the  character  of 
Jabez  in  the  midst  of  this  dry  genealogical  detail.  It  reminds  one  of  a  similar 
passage  in  Gen.  v.,  "  Enoch  walked  with  God  " ;  impressing  a  glory  and  distinction 
upon  the  character  of  the  man,  and  making  it  stand  out  prominently  from  the 
midst  of  those  with  which  it  is  connected.  Now  if  your  genealogies  were  made  out 
would  the  scribe  have  to  pause  at  your  name  ?  Is  there  anything  about  you  of  this 
character  and  these  principles  that  in  a  similar  scroll  or  writing  to  this  there  may 
be  this  reason  to  pause  and  to  dwell  upon  you  ?  4.  Another  thing  which  you  may 
draw  from  this  subject  is  the  possibility  of  the  combination  of  secular  enterprise  and 
activity  with  eminent  piety.  I  think  these  seem  to  be  indicated  as  having  met  in 
the  character  of  Jabez.  This  piety  towards  God  ;  his  faith,  his  devotion,  the  time 
that  he  gave  for  prayer,  did  not  render  it  impossible  with  him  to  give  time  to 
active  duty.  Perhaps,  so  to  speak,  he  had  a  sanctified  ambition  to  combine  both 
activity  and  enterprise  with  religion.  And  both  these  may  be  combined — diligence 
in  business  with  fervour  of  spirit,  activity  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  duties  of  every- 
day life,  in  connection  with  the  cultivation  of  those  principles  and  feelings  which 
keep  us  near  to  God,  and  which  sanctify  the  activity  and  direct  it.  Now  I  think  it 
is  likely  that  Jabez  was  a  young  man  when  this  prayer  was  offered  ;  that  there  was 
this  formation  of  his  character  comparatively  early ;  that  he  thus  started  in  life, 
that  he  thus  acted.  5.  Another  remark  we  make  is  this,  that  certainly  one  of  the 
best  ways  to  preserve  your  speculations,  your  pursuits,  your  secular  activity  and 
enterprise  from  being  offensive  to  God  and  injurious  to  yourselves,  is  to  enter  upon 


CHAP,  IT.J  I.  CHRONICLES.  13 

none,  and  to  engage  in  none,  but  such  as  you  can  bring,  like  Jabez,  and  lay  at  the  foot- 
stool of  the  throne  of  God,  and  ask  God  to  bless.  6.  In  the  last  place,  let  us  leam 
from  this  subject  the  gratitude  that  we  ought  to  feel  for  the  clear  discovery  that  we 
have  in  Scripture  of  God's  covenant  relation  to  His  children ;  that  we  can  go  to 
Him,  not  merely  as  the  God  of  Israel,  but  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  in  Him  reconciling  the  world  to  Himself,  not  imputing  to  men  their 
trespasses.  (T.  Binney.)  Jabez: — The  very  situation  of  this  text  is  worth 
remarking.  It  stands  in  the  very  midst  of  genealogies.  Why  those  names  are  so 
particularly  put  upon  record,  or  why  nothing  more  besides  the  names,  is  not  very 
easy  to  discover.  Perhaps  it  was  to  let  us  see  that  multitudes  of  persons  live  upon 
the  earth  of  whom,  when  you  have  told  the  name,  you  have  told  all  that  is  worth 
mentioning.  Great  men  they  might  be  in  their  generations,  men  of  renown  in  an 
earthly  point  of  view,  and  yet,  in  the  sight  of  God,  insignificant  and  worthless. 
But,  however  this  may  be,  here  is  one  person,  at  least,  whom  the  Word  of  God  is 
not  content  with  barely  mentioning.  It  is  said  of  him  that  he  was  "  more  honour- 
able than  his  brethren."  In  whatever  other  points  he  was  so,  in  this  especially, 
that,  whereas  the  Holy  Spirit  barely  runs  over  the  names  of  others,  and  tells  us 
nothing  else  of  them,  when  He  comes  to  Jabez  He  stops  short.  Something  He 
relates  concerning  Jabez  which  He  evidently  holds  forth  to  our  praise  and  imita- 
tion. What  is  the  fact  in  the  history  of  Jabez  which  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  thought 
worthy  of  record  ?  Is  it  any  battle  that  he  fought,  or  any  exploit  he  performed  ?  is 
it  any  proof  he  gave  of  earthly  wisdom  or  of  earthly  policy  ?  No  ;  these  are 
indeed  the  things  which  dazzle  human  eyes  and  which  please  the  pens  of  human 
writers.  But  not  so  the  great  God.  The  events  He  dwells  on  in  the  history  of 
Jabez  is  one  which  many  earthly  penmen  would  have  scorned  to  write  of.  He 
takes  us  to  this  good  man's  closet,  and  tells  us  of  a  prayer  he  offered  there.  Ah ! 
amidst  the  multitude  of  things  which  are  going  on  upon  this  earth,  amidst  the 
manifold  events  which  man  calls  great,  there  is  nothing  in  God's  sight  half  so  con- 
siderable as  the  prayer  of  a  poor  humble  soul  for  mercy  and  acceptance.  The 
prayer  of  a  Paul,  of  a  Cornelius,  of  a  Jabez — "  What  trifling  matters,"  saith  the 
world,  '•  are  these  I  "  But  look  into  God's  Book  and  only  see  the  notice  which  is 
taken  of  these  prayers  by  Him  who  made  us.  Pray  like  Jabez.  Pray,  if  not  in 
his  words,  yet  in  his  spirit,  and  you  shall  speed  like  him.  I.  We  are  to  consider  the 
IMPORT  of  the  prayer — the  nature,  I  mean,  of  the  petition  it  contains.  There  is  no 
doubt  but  that  it  issued  from  the  heart,  and  that  it  was  offered  up  with  holy 
fervency  of  spirit.  "  Jabez  called  upon  the  God  of  Israel,"  such  is  the  expression 
used.  Something  more,  you  see,  he  did  than  merely  say  the  words  of  prayer.  He 
called  or  "  cried  "  unto  his  God.  He  put  his  heart  into  his  words,  as  one  in  deep 
and  holy  earnest.  There  is  a  holy  vehemence,  too,  in  the  very  form  of  his  address. 
"  Oh,"  says  he,  "  that  Thou  wouldest  do  this  thing  !  "  And  this  should  be  your  way 
of  praying.  But  to  come  to  the  language  of  the  prayer.  1.  What  is  the  first 
petition  of  this  earnest  suitor  at  the  throne  of  grace  ?  "  Oh,"  says  he,  "that  Thou 
wouldest  bless  me  indeed  !  "  Now  what  sort  of  blessing  does  he  mean  ?  God  hath 
many  in  His  gift.  Life  itself  is  a  blessing  ;  health  is  a  blessing  ;  and  so  are  food 
and  raiment ;  so  are  the  friends  we  mix  with  and  the  home  which  we  inhabit.  But 
it  is  clearly  something  beyond  these  which  Jabez  asks  for.  His  language  is  emphatic : 
*'  Oh  that  Thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed !  "  As  much  as  to  say,  "  Oh  that  Thou 
wouldest  give  me  Thy  best.  Thy  truest  blessings  !  "  And  what  are  these?  Not  the 
short-lived  blessings  of  the  body,  but  the  eternal  blessings  of  the  soul.  The  man  is 
"  blessed  indeed,"  not  who  sits  down  to  a  full  table  and  wears  his  purple  and  fine 
linen — but  who  can  say  with  a  good  Scripture  warrant,  "  Christ  is  mine  and  I  am 
His."  He  is  "  blessed  indeed"  to  whom  the  God  of  grace  hath  said,  "I  am  thy 
salvation" — with  whose  spirit  "  the  Spirit  itself  beareth  witness  that  he  is  a  child 
of  God" — and  "who  is  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith  unto  salvation 
ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time."  These  are  the  choicest  gifts  of  God.  Other 
things  are  blessings  ;  but  they  are  the  blessings  of  God's  enemies  as  well  as  of  His 
people.  Other  things  are  blessings,  but  they  are  temporal  and  transitory,  and  they 
"  perish  with  the  using."  Grace  to  enjoy  here  and  glory  to  expect  hereafter — let  a 
man  have  these  and  he  hath  all.  Jabez  wanted  Jacob's  blessing  and  not  Esau's — the 
birthright,  not  the  pottage.  Sure  I  am,  such  is  the  choice  of  every  poor  awakened 
sinner.  "  Give  me  Christ  and  His  Cross  rather  than  the  world  and  its  crown !  " 
2.  But  what  is  the  next  thing  in  the  prayer?  what  does  the  holy  man  next  ask  for? 
"  That  Thou  wouldest  enlarge  my  coast,"  says  he.  Perhaps  this  petition  was  of  a 
temporal  nature.  Jabez,  it  is  thought,  was  among  those  Israelites  who  went  in  with 


U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

Joshua  to  the  holy  land  and  had  a  portion  there  assigned  to  him.  If  so,  it  is  not 
unlikely  that  he  was  pressed  and  straitened  by  the  Canaanites  around  him,  and 
that  he  begs  in  this  part  of  his  prayer  that  God  would  clear  the  ground  for  him  and 
give  him  room  enough  to  dwell  iru  "  Oh,  Lord,"  we  may  well  ask,  "  enlarge  the 
coast  of  my  poor  narrow  heart.  Give  to  my  thoughts  and  my  desires  a  wider 
range."  He  grieves  over  the  narrowness,  the  selfishness  of  his  desires.  He  feels 
himself,  as  it  were,  pent  in  and  circumscribed  by  things  of  this  world.  He  is 
sensible  that  there  is  not  room  enough  within  him  for  his  God  and  for  his  brethren. 
He  longs,  therefore,  in  all  these  respects  to  be  enlarged  to  "  reach  forth  unto 
the  things  which  are  before";  to  "comprehend  with  all  saints  what  is  the 
length,  and  breadth,  and  depth,  and  height,  and  to  know  the  love  of  Christ 
which  passeth  knowledge,"  and  to  be  "  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God." 
Again,  here  is  another  point  of  view  in  which  the  Christian  seeks  after  enlargement. 
"  Oh,  Lord,"  he  is  ever  ready  to  exclaim,  "  enlarge  my  usefulness.  Make  me  a  more 
active  member  of  Christ's  body ;  more  abundant  in  the  fruits  of  righteousness ; 
more  devoted  to  Thy  work  and  service ;  more  profitable  to  my  brethren  and  fellow- 
creatures  1  "  3.  But  we  pass  on  to  the  next  petition  in  our  text :  "  Oh,"  says  Jabez, 
"  that  Thine  hand  might  be  with  me  !  "  And  why  does  he  ask  this  ?  Evidently 
because  he  was  thoroughly  persuaded  that  without  the  Lord  he  could  do  nothing. 
How  exactly  in  this  point  do  his  feelings  meet  those  of  all  real  Christians  in  the 
present  day  1  The  worldly  man  goes  out  in  his  own  strength  and  trusts  in  his  own 
arm  to  help  him.  Seldom  does  he  feel  the  need  of  looking  higher  than  his  own 
wisdom  and  sagacity  and  resolution.  Whilst  the  believer  thus  "  goes  forth  in  the 
strength  of  the  Lord  "  he  can  do  wonders ;  but  let  him  at  any  time  forget  thus  to  pray, 
he  is  soon  made  to  feel  that  he  is  a  "  man  who  hath  no  strength."  4.  To  come  now  to 
the  last  petition  of  the  prayer  before  us.  How  does  the  holy  man  conclude?  Just 
as  his  Lord  concludes  in  the  prayer  which  He  hath  taught  us  to  present  to  Him. 
"  Deliver  us  from  evil "  is  our  last  petition  in  that  prayer.  And  what  is  the  last 
request  of  Jabez  ?  "  That  Thou  wouldest  keep  me  from  evil,  that  it  may  not  grieve 
me."  "Except  the  Lord  keep  the  city,  the  watchman  waketh  but  in  vain." 
There  is  safety  neither  for  the  soul  nor  for  the  body  except  under  the  shadow  of  His 
wings.  Apply  this  to  spiritual  evil,  and  it  expresses  what  is  true,  what  is  most 
eminently  true,  of  every  real  servant  of  the  Lord — that  sin  is  a  thing  which  grieves 
him.  Natural  evil  is  painful  and  unwelcome ;  but  the  evil  of  the  soul — the  evil  to 
which  Satan  tempts— this  is  the  thing  of  all  others  which  believers  dread.  A 
great  deal  of  sin  goes  with  the  world  under  the  name  of  "  pleasure."  "  But  all 
this,"  says  the  believer,  "  is  not  pleasure  to  my  soul — it  is  pain  and  grief  to  me." 
II.  The  ANswEB  which  this  prayer  received.  Answered  it  was,  and  answered  to  the 
full.  "  The  Lord  granted  him  that  which  he  requested  "  ;  not  a  part,  you  observe, 
but  the  whole.  "  That  which  he  requested  " — that  is  to  say,  all  that  he  requested 
was  bestowed  upon  him.  Now  do  think  over  his  request.  It  was  a  very  large  one. 
It  comprehended  much.  He  had  not  trespassed  on  the  Divine  bounty  which  says, 
"  Ask,  and  you  shall  have."  Let  us,  then,  admire  the  bountifulness,  the  abundant 
mercy  of  the  God  whom  Jabez  called  upon.  Surely  He  is  a  God  of  faithfulness 
and  truth  and  love.  When  has  any  humble  soul  ever  cried  to  Him  in  vain  ?  When 
hath  He  ever  said  to  the  praying  "  seed  of  Jacob,  Seek  ye  Me  in  vain  "  ?  To  you 
who  are  really  "  caUing  on  the  God  of  Israel  "  my  text  is  surely  a  comfortable  and 
refreshing  one.  It  affords  a  pledge;  it  gives,  as  it  were,  a  promise  and 
assurance — that  you  will  speed  in  your  petitions.  The  God  of  Jabez  is  un- 
changed, unchangeable — "the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever."  {A.  Roberts.) 
Blessing  and  enlargement : — We  come  upon  this  little  history  of  Jabez  with  a  kind 
of  surprise,  as  one  who,  travelling  through  a  rocky  and  mountainous  country, 
comes  all  at  once  upon  some  little  green  dell,  watered  with  streams  and  filled  with 
beauty.  Observe — I.  Jabez  called  upon  the  God  of  Israel.  He  declared  himself 
a  religious  man,  a  worshipper  of  the  true  God.  It  was  the  habit  of  his  life.  He  was 
known  by  this.  This  still  lies  at  the  foundation  of  individual  prosperity  and  good- 
ness of  the  highest  kind — personal  religion,  calling  upon  God.  A  man  whose  soul 
never  "  calls,"  never  cries,  never  looks,  never  waits  upon  God,  is  not  hving  to  the 
end  for  which  a  man  should  live ;  he  is  not  truly  living  at  all.  Man  is  raised  above 
the  brutes,  in  that  he  alone  of  all  the  creatures  is  so  endowed  that  he  stands  con- 
sciously before  the  face  of  the  personal  God,  to  reverence,  serve,  worship,  and  adore 
the  unseen  Being.  II.  Calling,  what  does  Jabez  say  ?  "  Oh  that  Thou  wouldest 
bless  me  indeed."  This  prayer  is  not  very  definite,  but  perhaps  it  is  all  the  better, 
as  expressive  of  many  a  condition  of  life,  and  especially  the  state  of  one  who  is  just 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  16 

beginning  to  pray.  In  conscious  sin  and  guilt,  in  weakness,  confusion,  and  fear, 
a  man  knows  not  what  to  say.  Then,  bethinking  him  that  God  is  greater  than  his 
heart  and  knoweth  all  things,  and  will  therefore  give  interpretation  to  all  the  misery, 
penitence,  longing,  love ;  that  He  will  hear  the  groanings  that  cannot  be  uttered  ; 
that  He  will  take  dim  thought  for  words  ;  the  man  is  content,  and  with  a  cry  of 
relief,  as  well  as  earnestness,  he  says,  "  Oh  that  Thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed !  " 

III.  But  there  is  something  more  definite  immediately,  "  and  enlarge  mt 
COAST."  He  prays  for  more  territory  to  his  people  and  himself,  more  power  :  more 
wealth.  These  are  what  we  should  call  earthly  and  temporal  blessings.  The  best 
men  of  the  Old  Testament  did  not  distinguish  between  temporal  and  spiritual  as  we 
do.  Life  was  a  spiritual  unity  to  these  men.  When  a  man's  sins  are  pardoned, 
and  his  life  rectified,  when  his  soul  is  nourished  by  the  blessing  of  God,  one  cannot 
but  think  the  more  that  man  has  the  better.  Let  him  be  enlarged.  No  doubt  an 
expanding  life  multiplies  dangers,  but  it  also  multiplies  grace  if  it  be  expansion  on 
the  right  principle.  When  a  penurious  man  makes  money,  that  is  not  enlargement 
in  the  grand  sense  at  all.  He  is  building  a  prison,  and  himself  will  be  the  prisoner. 
An  old  man  in  his  last  illness  was  received  at  one  of  the  metropolitan  hospitals. 
He  was  without  relations  or  friends,  and  to  all  appearance  without  resources.  But 
a  bag  of  money  was  found  round  his  neck.  When  death  had  apparently  claimed 
him,  a  nurse  gently  unfastened  the  string  and  removed  the  bag.  At  the  same 
moment  the  old  man  opened  his  eyes  and  felt  instinctively  for  his  treasure,  which 
was  no  longer  in  its  place.  He  uttered  the  word,  "  Gone  1  "  and  died.  The  money 
amounted  to  £174,  the  accumulation,  no  doubt,  of  many  years.  But  was  that  man 
"enlarged"  as  the  process  went  on?  He  was  narrowed  and  crippled.  Every 
golden  piece  he  put  into  that  bag  was  adding  to  the  weight  he  carried,  in  more 
senses  than  one,  until  it  became  a  millstone  about  his  neck  and  drowned  him  in 
death.  From  many  a  death-bed  there  goes  up  that  old  man's  sigh,  '» Gone  I " 
money  "gone;"  houses  " gone " :  broad  acres  "gone";  name  and  fame  "gone." 
All  that  has  been  striven  for  through  a  lifetime  "  gone."  Ah  I  poor  fatal  enlarge- 
ment that  ends  in  such  collapse.  The  true  enlargement  is  such,  that  such  a  catas- 
trophe as  that  is  quite  impossible.  The  man  with  soul  enlarged  never  sighs  in 
life  or  death  "  Gone  ! "    He  has  chosen  the  good  part  that  shall  not  be  taken  away. 

IV.  The  summing  up  of  the  prayer.  "  And  that  Thy  hand  might  be  with  me,  and 
that  Thou  mightest  keep  me  from  evil,  that  it  may  not  grieve  me."  So  let  us  seek 
preservation  from  evil  inward  and  outward,  by  watchfulness,  by  prayer,  by  depen- 
dence on  God,  and  we  need  never  fear  enlargement.  Let  it  go  on  without  limit  and 
without  fear,  if  it  goes  on  thus  banked  in  on  either  hand  by  Divine  blessing  and 
Divine  care.  (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Jabez  : — In  visiting  a  foreign  land,  and  seeing 
nothing  but  strange  forms  and  faces  passing  and  repassing  before  us,  it  affords  most 
exquisite  enjoyment  to  catch  at  the  moment  the  well-known  countenance  of  some 
dear  old  friend  or  acquaintance.  So  it  is  with  us  here  on  wearily  poring  over  these 
chapters  of  names ;  we  feel  as  if  we  were  in  a  wilderness,  at  sea,  on  some  foreign 
strand  ;  and  what  blessed  relief  do  we  experience  as  unawares  we  arrive  at  this  rare 
character  of  Old  Testament  Scripture,  ensconced,  enshrined  in  this  desert  nook  of 
names.  We  realise  with  double  zest  that  proverb  of  Scripture — "  That  as  iron 
sharpeneth  iron,  so  doth  the  countenance  of  a  man  his  friend."  In  considering 
Jabez  let  us  look — I.  To  the  circumstances  cast  around  his  birth.  He  is  here 
brought  before  us  in  connection  with  his  mother.  Mothers  are  often  mentioned  in 
Scripture  as  influencing  their  children  for  either  good  or  evil — the  mothers  of  the 
wicked  kings  of  Israel  on  the  one  hand,  the  mothers  of  Moses,  Samuel,  Joseph, 
Ac,  on  the  other.  The  responsibility  of  mothers.  The  question  was  once  proposed 
to  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  "  How  was  a  better,  a  more  moral  class  of  young  persons 
to  be  obtained  in  the  country  ?  "    His  answer  was,  "  Let  us  have  better  mothers." 

II.    To   THE   character   OF   HIS     LIFE.      IH.    To   HIS    PRAYER  AND  ITS    ANSWER.       (Johtl 

Gardiner.)  The  prayer  of  Jabez  : — I.  Let  us  glance  at  the  parental  anxiety  of  his 
MOTHER.  Her  fears  and  perplexities  were  not  realised.  The  fears  and  dread  of 
many  a  parent  are  never  intended  to  be  realised.  Xhe  delicate  little  child  may  out- 
grow its  frailty,  and  live  to  be  your  comfort  and  hope.  The  wild  and  unruly  boy 
may  become  the  staff  of  your  old  age.  11.  The  character  of  this  prayer.  1. 
There  seems  to  be  a  pious  reference  to  the  prayer  of  Moses  for  the  tribe  to  which 
Jabez  belonged.  Jabez  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  Judah.  2.  It  is  a  prayer  for  spiri- 
tual blessings.  3.  It  is  a  prayer  expressive  of  a  humble  dependence  upon  Divine 
Providence  for  temporal  blessings.  4.  It  is  marked  by  a  singular  and  holy  distrust 
of  himself — "  keep  me  from  evil."     (1)  Trouble  is  an  evil.     (2)  Enemies  are  an  eviL 


le  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i?, 

(3)  Sin  is  the  evil  of  evils.  Application :  1.  God  still  waits  to  hear  our  humble 
prayers,  and  will  grant  all  those  things  which  are  needful  for  us.  2.  It  may  teach 
us  ihe  source  of  some  of  our  misfortunes  and  mistakes ;  we  have  restrained  prayer. 
3.  It  teaches  emphatically  the  value  of  religion.  Godliness  is  profitable  for  the  life 
that  now  is.  (IF.  J.  Barrett.)  Jdbez — an  unexpected  biography  : — As  in  life  we 
are  being  continually  surprised  by  the  unexpected  turn  which  events  often  take,  so 
the  Bible  sometimes  surprises  us  with  unlooked-for  disclosures.  All  of  a  sudden  in 
the  very  midst  of  surrounding  dryness  a  beautiful  biography  appears,  and  in  two 
verses  a  man's  life  is  portrayed,  beginning  with  birth,  and  containing  a  delineation  of 
his  character,  a  full  report  of  one  of  his  prayers,  and  references  to  bin  mother  and 
brothers.  I.  The  significance  of  a  name.  Jabez  was  born  at  a  time  when  "  names 
meant  truths  and  words  were  the  symbols  of  realities."  Jabez  means  sorrow  or 
trouble.  The  mother's  grief,  expressed  in  the  name  of  her  child,  was  probably  the 
ungodliness  of  her  other  children,  and  there  is  no  more  fruitful  source  of  sorrow  to 
mothers  than  this.  11.  The  distinction  or  a  chabacteb.  More  honourable.  He 
had  a  good  reputation.  III.  The  devotion  of  a  life.  "  Jabez  called  on  the  God 
of  Israel."  IV.  The  Divine  becoonition  of  true  prateb.  (Honiilist.)  The 
prayer  of  Jdbez  : — I.  The  pbateb  before  us.  Very  striking  is  the  ardour  of  expres- 
sion contained  in  these  words,  "Bless  me";  "Bless  me";  "Bless  me  indeed"; 
Oh,  that  Thou  wouldest  bless  me";  and  "Oh!  that  Thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed." 
II.  Oub  encoubaoement  to  pbat  the  same.  "  God  granted  Jabez  that  which  he 
requested."  This  shows  us — 1.  That  God  heareth  prayer.  2.  That  God  answereth 
prayer.  3.  That  God  will  grant  us  that  which  we  request  of  Him.  Address  :  1. 
Any  among  you  who  may  live  prayerlessly.  2.  Any  of  you  who  may  pray  formally. 
3.  Any  of  you  who  do  truly  pray.  {W.  Mudge,  B.A.)  Jabez  :  his  life  and  his 
])rayer : — It  is  not  much  that  we  know  of  Jabez,  but  I  think  that  in  this  recorded 
history  of  that  man  there  is  suggested  to  us  something  of  as  solemn  warning  and  of 
as  blessed  consolation  as  you  will  find  within  the  range  of  God's  holy  book.  I. 
The  lesson  or  the  name  given  to  him.  Jabez — "  son-ow."  It  was  to  her  best  and 
worthiest  son  that  the  mother  of  Jabez  gave  the  name  that  implied  how  little  hope 
of  future  happiness  with  him  or  through  him  remained  in  her  weary,  despairing 
heart.  We  can  think  of  a  contrasted  picture  :  you  remember  the  proud  and  hope- 
ful name  which  the  mother  of  our  race  gave  to  her  firstborn  son  ;  you  know  how 
much  of  confident  hope  was  expressed  in  the  name  of  Cain.  "  Possession  "  she  called 
him — a  great  thing  gained  from  God — who  was  yet  so  sorely  to  wring  her  heart. 
Ever  thus  are  human  anticipations,  whether  of  good  or  ill ;  the  first  murderer  wel- 
comed with  the  hopeful  name  of  Cain,  while  this  wise  and  good  and  happy  man 
was  to  bear  the  desponding  name  of  Jabez,  How  often  we  call  by  hard  names  dis- 
pensations of  God's  providence,  which  in  reality  are  to  prove  great  blessings. 
Probably  in  many  cases  those  events  in  our  history,  those  dealings  of  God  with  us, 
which  we  should  call  sorrowful  at  the  time,  stand  us  in  more  real  stead,  and  do 
us  more  real  good,  than  the  brightest  and  happiest  that  ever  come  in  our  way. 
II.  We  shall  next  consider  the  pbateb  which  Jabez  offered  and  which  God 
gbanted  him.  What  a  wise  and  what  a  safe  prayer  I  Send  me  that  which  Thou 
knowest  is  blessing,  though  it  may  not  seem  blessing  to  me ;  and  deny  me  that 
which  Thou  knowest  is  not  blessing,  however  ready  I,  in  my  ignorance,  may  be  to 
think  it  so.  1.  The  spirit  of  this  prayer  is  that  of  confidence  in  God  and  unqualified 
acquiescence  in  His  appointment.  This  is  a  lesson  of  how  we  ought  to  pray.  You 
know,  generally,  the  direction  in  which  to  steer ;  but  you  cannot  say  what 
little  movement  of  the  helm  may  be  expedient  from  time  to  time,  to  suit  each 
passing  gust  of  wind,  or  each  crossing  wave.  And  it  is  just  because  we  do  not  know 
these  things  that  it  is  so  wise  to  leave  the  decision  of  'he  precise  thing  to  be  sent  us, 
as  Jabez  did,  to  God  ;  and  to  pray  with  him  *'';>1  Goa  would  bless  us  "  indeed."  2. 
The  next  two  petitions  imply  a  great  and  sound  principle — the  duty  of  combining 
effort  with  prayer.  When  we  are  desirous  to  compass  any  new  attainment,  when  we 
wish  to  enlarge  our  coast,  as  it  were,  by  taking  in  greater  fields  of  faith,  of  holiness, 
of  patience,  of  humility,  of  all  Christian  grace — in  regard  to  all  which  we  may  well 
take  up  Joshua's  words, "  that  there  remaineth  yet  very  much  land  to  be  possessed," 
let  us  do  like  Jabez  ;  working  like  him  as  if  we  could  do  all,  and  praying  as  if  we 
could  do  nothing.  The  wisdom  of  Jabez  appeared  in  that  he  put  prayer  and  effort 
together.  3.  The  last  petition  is  for  deliverance  from  true  evil — and  from  the  evil 
ellects  and  influences  of  all  evil.  He  does  not  ask  that  evil  may  never  come ;  but 
that  evil  may  not  be  suffered  to  really  harm  when  it  comes.  Evil  coming  and 
trying  us  may  do  us  great  good  ;  but  Jabez  prayed,  and  we  may  pray,  that  evil 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  17 

should  not  grieve  us.  "We  may  pray  that  evil  may  never  be  suffered  to  harden  us ; 
to  stir  us  up  to  wrath  against  God ;  to  make  us  fretful,  rebellious,  impatient ;  to 
tempt  us  to  sin  ;  in  short,  to  do  us  harm  when  God  intends  it  always  to  do  us  good. 
It  was  for  this  that  Jabez  prayed.  {A.  K.  H.  Boyd,  D.D.)  Jabez  : — These  words 
contain  a  life's  history  in  a  sentence.  This  brief  epitome  of  human  life  appeals 
to  universal  experience.      Its  very  brevity  increases  its  suggestiveness.      I.  The 

mother's  faithless  anticipation  BEMINDS    CS    how  the    present  often  COLOtJRS    OUR 

THOUGHTS  OF  THE  FUTURE.  Our  judgments  are  biassed,  often  warped  by  our  circum- 
stances. We  interpret  even  the  past  by  the  present,  and  often  fail  therefore  to  make 
a  just  estimate  of  it.  We  can  only  form  a  right  estimate  of  the  past  by  transporting 
ourselves  back  into  it.  This  is  impossible  with  respect  to  the  future.  We  may 
learn  what  has  been  yesterday,  but  we  know  not  what  shall  be  on  the  morrow. 
Hence  the  especial  danger  of  letting  our  anticipations  be  coloured  by  our  present 
circumstances.  God's  teaching  is  the  very  reverse  of  this.  The  thought  of  the 
future  is  to  colour  the  present.  As  Mr.  Canning,  when  he  announced  in  Parliament 
the  independence  of  South  America,  said  "  that  he  brought  in  the  New  World  to 
redress  the  balance  of  the  Old,"  so  God  gives  us  the  bright  inheritance  of  heaven  as 
a  counterbalance  to  the  cares  and  sorrows  of  earth.  It  is  only  in  the  light  of  the 
future  as  revealed  to  us  by  God,  that  we  can  rightly  estimate  the  present.  When  we 
reverse  God's  teaching  we  unfit  ourselves  for  the  future.  We  go  forth  to  the  duties 
and  burdens  of  the  morrow  weakened  by  apprehension,  instead  of  being  strong  with 
the  courage  of  hope.  11.  The  prayer  of  Jabez  combines  wise  reticence  and 
ORDINARY  ambition.  Thcsc  are  the  elements  of  true  prayer — a  sense  of  dependence, 
the  expression  of  confidence,  and  unrestrained  petition,  pouring  out  the  heart  to 
God,  leaving  to  Him  the  decision  as  to  what  is  blessing  indeed.  HI.  This  prayer 
ALSO  REVEALS  THE  TRUE  SPIRIT  OF  CHRISTIAN  LIFE.  It  is  the  outcome  of  practical 
piety.  Perhaps  like  Caleb  he  had  to  conquer  his  own  inheritance.  His  dependence 
upon  God  did  not  mean  inaction.  He  had  learned  the  gieat  lesson  that  prayer  and 
effort  go  hand  in  hand,  the  one  inspiring  and  sanctifying  the  other.  Our  great  need 
is  to  live  more  nearly  as  we  pray.  We  can  only  ask  that  God's  hand  may  be  with 
lis  when  our  supreme  desire  is  to  do  God's  will.  Such  prayer  is  both  a  test  and  a 
safeguard.  {A.  F.  Joscelyne.)  The  prayer  of  Jabez  : — Remarkable  is  the  honour 
which  God  puts  upon  prayer,  and  numberless  are  the  instances  recorded  of  its 
-eflScacy.  I.  The  import  of  the  prayer  of  Jabez.  II.  Its  excellence.  It  was  so 
both  in  respect  to  sentiment  and  expression.  It  was — 1.  Humble.  2.  Diffusive 
(Phil.  iv.  6).  We  need  to  recite  our  wants  in  order  to  impress  our  own  minds  with  a 
sense  of  our  utter  helplessness  and  unworthiness.  3.  Importunate.  4.  Believing. 
Petitions  offered  in  faith,  have  as  it  were,  the  force  of  commands  (Isa.  xlv.  1). 
Application :  1  Let  all  now  call  to  mind  their  several  wants  and  necessities.  2. 
Let  nothing  be  thought  too  small  or  too  great  to  ask.  3.  Let  the  pressure  of  our 
wants  and  the  richness  of  our  prospects  stimulate  us.  4.  Let  us  expect  the 
accomplishment  of  that  glorious  promise  (John  xiv.  13, 14).  (Skeletons  of  Servions.) 
The  prayer  of  Jabez  : — Like  a  star  set  in  the  darkness  of  midnight,  more  conspicuous 
because  of  the  surrounding  gloom,  is  the  name  of  a  great  man  in  the  chronicles  of 
the  trifling  and  the  insignificant.  How  encouraging  is  the  assurance,  "  If  any  man 
love  God  the  same  is  known  of  Him,"  whoever  he  may  be,  wherever  he  may 
dwell.  The  name  of  Jabez  stands  in  most  emphatic  isolation  upon  the  sacred 
page.  He  is  distinguished  by  his  faith  in  God  from  his  contemporaries,  of  whom 
it  would  seem  that  the  most  important  record  of  their  lives  was  this :  "  These  were 
the  potters,  and  those  that  dwelt  among  plants  and  hedges :  there  they  dwelt  with 
the  king  for  his  work  "  (ver.  23).  They  served  an  earthly  monarch  ;  he  a  heavenly. 
Their  business  was  among  things  frail  and  perishing ;  his  was  with  things  unseen 
and  eternal.  Their  arts  and  manufactures  have  long  since  crumbled  into  dust. 
This  prayer  abides  to  bless  the  Church  of  God  until  the  end  of  time.  I.  A  concise 
MEMOIR — "And  Jabez  was  more  honourable  than  his  brethren,"  &c.  The  Scrip- 
tures are  full  of  these  comprehensive,  brief,  but  weighty  texts  which  Luther  was 
-wont  to  call  "little  Bibles."  "A  man  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 
"  Apelles  approved  in  Christ."  "  He  was  a  burning  and  a  shining  light."  "  Of 
whom  the  world  was  not  worthy."  The  genealogy  in  which  the  name  of  Jabez 
occurs  is  that  of  the  royal  family  of  Judah.  The  compression  of  Scripture  truth 
vrithin  its  limited  area  is  one  of  the  great  miracles  which  belong  to  the  structure  of 
God's  Word.  It  is  said  of  Jabez  that  "  he  was  more  honourable  than  his  brethren," 
though  with  a  less  honourable  name.  His  mother  had  anticipated  the  hour  of 
anguish  with  unusual  sadness,  and  she  called  him  Jabez — that  is  ' '  grief."    "  When 

9 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  iv.. 

thou  wast  born,"  eay  the  Easterns,  "  thou  didst  weep,  and  all  about  thee  did 
rejoice ;  so  live,  that  when  thou  diest  thou  mayest  rejoice,  and  all  about  thee  may 
weep."  We  may  consider  this  epithet  "  honourable  "  as  applied  to  Jabez,  from 
either  a  secular  or  a  spiritual  point  of  view.  In  the  former  case  it  would  mean 
that  integrity  and  uprightness  pervaded  all  his  actions,  that  in  the  business  of  this 
world  no  impeachment  could  lie  against  his  good  name,  that  all  his  undertakings 
would  bear  the  most  rigid  scrutiny.  Nor  is  it  a  matter  of  small  importance  that 
those  who  profess  to  be  the  children  of  God  should  be  recognised  by  the  men  of 
the  world  as  actuated  by  unscrupulous  integrity.  The  children  in  the  market- 
place very  keenly  scrutinise  the  conduct  of  those  who  avow  themselves  to  be 
Christians,  and  they  expect,  and  not  without  reason,  that  our  code  of  morals  should 
be  superior  to  their  own.  But  we  may  consider  this  title  conferred  on  Jabez  as 
issuing  from  the  court  of  heaven,  and  bestowed  upon  him  because  of  his  eminence 
in  the  service  of  God.  11.  A  compbehensivi!  prater.  "  And  Jabez  called  on  the 
God  of  Israel,  saying,  Oh  that  Thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed,  and  enlarge  my 
coast,  and  that  Thine  hand  might  be  with  me,  and  that  Thou  wouldest  keep  me 
from  evil,  that  it  may  not  grieve  me."  He  was  a  true  prince  in  Israel,  having^ 
power  with  God ;  and  yet  it  is  only  one  prayer  of  his  which  has  been  preserved. 
One  prayer,  doubtless  one  of  many,  for  it  reveals  a  mastery  in  the  holy  exercise 
only  attained  by  much  practice.  One  prayer  has  lifted  a  man  out  of  the  lowest 
depression  to  the  loftiest  summits  of  enjoyment.  It  has  expelled  the  dark  tides  of 
Borrow  from  the  soul,  and  brought  in  proofs  of  God's  love  dearer  than  life  itself. 
It  haa  widened  the  channels  of  enjoyment  and  filled  them  with  inexhaustible- 
supplies  of  delight.  1.  He  seeks  the  best  blessings.  "  Oh  that  Thou  wouldest 
bless  me  indeed."  He  "  covets  earnestly  the  best  gifts."  God  Himself  is  the  only- 
fountain  and  source  of  true  blessedness.  We  should  not,  however,  completely 
appreciate  this  prayer  if  we  do  not  notice  that  temporal  things  may  become  bless- 
ings indeed.  If  we  do  not  prefer  the  gift  to  the  giver ;  if  they  are  the  means  of 
drawing  us  nearer  to  Him,  then  "all  things  work  together  for  good."  It  would 
Eeem  to  have  been  the  desire  of  Jabez  to  see  his  Heavenly  Father's  smile 
through  all  earthly  conditions  and  in  all  Divine  bestowments.  And  it  iff 
indeed  a  true  philosophy  which  determines  respecting  life  and  all  its  muta- 
tions that  it  matters  not  so  much  what  we  get  for  our  earthly  lot,  as  how  we 
get  it.  The  things  which  men  most  usually  covet  conspire  to  their  hurt  because 
they  have  not  God's  blessing.  2.  He  prays  for  an  enlarged  territory.  "  That 
Thou  wouldest  enlarge  my  coast."  It  appears  probable  that  this  Jabez  was  a 
younger  son,  and  that  he  was  born  at  a  time  when  the  patrimony  was  well-nigh 
exhausted.  This  would  account  for  the  maternal  solicitude  which  had  conferred 
on  him  so  dolorous  a  name.  An  Israelite  might  indeed  put  up  this  prayer  without 
misgiving,  because  every  inch  of  territory  which  he  gained  would  be  rescued  from 
heathenism,  and  brought  within  the  confines  of  the  Land  of  Promise.  But  w& 
prefer  to  look  at  this  petition  as  a  supplication  for  spiritual  good.  Every  grace- 
taught  man  must  sympathise  with  this  cry  for  room.  Too  often  fettered  and 
environed  by  corruptions,  cares,  and  infirmities,  we  feel  the  need  of  enlarged  desires, 
expanding  affections,  and  uncontracted  views  of  Divine  realities.  "  The  world  of 
the  blind,"  says  Mr.  Prescott,  the  historian,  speaking  from  painful  experience,  "  ia 
bounded  by  the  length  of  the  arm."  A  blind  world  revolves  in  the  narrow  orbit  of 
things  that  can  be  touched.  The  gospel  introduces  its  subjects  into  the  vast 
regions  of  things  unseen  and  eternal,  and  bestows  upon  them  that  "  other  sense  " 
called  faith,  and  confers  the  capacity  of  communion  with  the  Eternal.  When  will 
the  Church  of  Christ  adopt  this  portion  of  the  prayer  of  Jabez?  "  Oh  that  Thou 
wouldest  enlarge  my  coast ! "  Too  often  we  hear  complaints  of  demands  too 
numerous,  and  solicitations  that  are  wearisome.  3.  He  prays  that  the  hand  of 
God  may  be  with  him.  The  hand  that  directs,  supports,  supplies,  and  chastens  us. 
There  can  be  nothing  more  delightful  to  the  child  of  God  than  the  constant  recog- 
nition of  the  fact  that  his  Father's  hand  is  pointing  out  for  him  the  path  of  life. 
4.  He  would  be  kept  from  evil. — "  And  that  Thou  wouldest  keep  me  from  evil,  that 
it  may  not  grieve  me."  Now  we  gain  more  light  on  the  suggestive  name  of  this 
man.  He  was  called  Jabez — "  grief " — and  it  is  evident  that  he  was  one  of 
those  who  grieve  over  sin.  That  is  the.  greatest  trouble  of  all  good  men.  Not 
only  from  the  wiles  of  Satan  and  the  snares  of  the  world,  but  from  our 
very  selves  we  require  the  defence  of  the  Almighty  arm.  UI.  The  complete 
ANSWER.  "  God  granted  him  that  which  he  requested."  Throughout  all  Europe- 
we  have  seen  in  the  Churches  the  votive  garlands  and  offerings  hung  by  the 


CHAP.  IT.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  19 

superstitious  at  the  shrines  from  whose  patrons  their  relief  is  supposed  to  have 
come.  What  a  contrast  between  these  tinselled  trifles  and  the  rich  museum  which 
the  Church  of  God  possesses  of  grateful  recollection  and  adoring  praise  on  the  part 
of  those  who  have  prevailed  at  the  throne  of  grace  1  He  has  a  treasure  of  great 
worth  who  can  rejoice  in  a  distinct  answer  to  prayer.  {W.  G.  Lewis.)  The 
prayer  of  Jabez  : — We  will  without  any  formal  divisions  simply  endeavour  to  travel 
through  the  petitions  offered  up  in  this  prayer  of  Jabez.  First  petition  :  "  Oh  that 
Thou  wouldest  bless  me."  1.  There  are  many  apparent  blessings  that  are  real 
curses.  (1)  Health.  Its  tendency  is  to  remove  far  away  all  thoughts  of  death  and 
eternity  ;  to  make  a  man  more  or  less  satisfied  with  the  things  of  the  present ;  and 
to  draw  comfort  from  the  creature  instead  of  the  Creator.  (2)  Money.  It  shuts 
up  the  heart ;  stiffens  pride  and  becomes  a  temptation  and  a  snare.  (3)  The  good 
opinion  and  praise  of  men.  2.  There  are  apparent  cursM  which  often  are  real 
blessings.  (1)  Ill-health.  (2)  Poverty.  (3)  The  scourge  of  the  tongue.  3.  There 
are  blessings  which  are  both  apparent  and  real.  (1)  The  fear  of  the  Lord.  (2) 
Some  intimation  of  God's  favour.  (3)  The  revelation  of  Christ  to  the  soul. 
(4)  Unreserved  trust  in  God.  (5)  An  appetite  after  God's  Word.  Second  petition  : 
"  And  enlarge  my  coast."  A  coast  means  a  boundary  line,  such  as  divides  one 
territory  from  another,  or  terminates  a  country,  as  the  sea-coast  is  the  boundary 
of  our  island.  Every  quickened  soul  has  a  coast — the  territory  of  inward  experi- 
ence— which  is  limited  and  bounded  by  the  line  that  the  Holy  Spirit  has  drawn  in 
his  conscience.  I.  Some  have  a  narrow  experience,  they  cannot  get  beyond  doubts 
and  fears,  guilt  and  convictions,  with  at  times  earnest  desires  for  mercy  and  par- 
don. 2.  Others  have  their  coast  a  little  more  extended.  They  are  enabled  to  hope 
in  God's  mercy,  and  anchor  in  His  promises.  3.  Others  can  through  faith  rest  in 
Christ's  blood  and  righteousness,  having  received  some  intimation  of  favour,  but 
not  brought  into  the  liberty  of  the  gospel.  4.  Others  are  brought  into  the  life, 
light,  liberty,  joy  and  peace  of  the  gospel.  The  living  soul  cannot  but  earnestly 
desire  to  have  his  coast  enlarged.  More  light,  more  life,  more  liberty,  more  feel- 
ing, more  knowledge  of  God  in  Christ,  more  faith,  hope,  and  love.  To  have  his 
heart  enlarged  in  prayer — meditation — communion,  in  affection  to  the  people  of 
God.  Third  petition  :  "  And  that  Thy  hand  might  be  with  me."  A  living  child 
wants  to  see  and  feel  a  fatherly  hand  with  him  and  over  him,  gomg  before  him 
temporally,  holding  him  up  spiritually,  clearing  his  path,  and  giving  him  testi- 
monies that  what  is  done  in  his  fear  shall  terminate  in  his  approbation.  Fourth 
petition  :  "  And  that  Thou  wouldest  keep  me  from  evil."  It  is  a  base  representa- 
tion of  the  gospel  of  grace  to  say  that  it  leads  to  licentiousness.  Every  child  of 
God  wiU  be  more  or  less  frequently  offering  up  this  prayer.  Shun  as  you  would  a 
pestilence  any  one  who  makes  light  of  sin.  Evil  is  a  grief,  a  burden  to  every  living 
Boul.  [J.  C.  Philpot.)  The  prayer  of  the  warrior  Jew  (Sermon  to  children) : — 
In  speaking  to  you  about  Jabez,  I  would  say  these  four  things  and  ask  you  to 
remember  them.  I.  He  was  a  humblb  man.  It  is  beautiful  to  be  humble.  All 
his  trust  is  in  God,  he  looks  to  Him  alone.  He  reminds  us  of  Jehoshaphat 
(2  Chron.  xx.  12).  II.  He  was  a  obea.t  man.  It  is  well  to  be  great.  III.  He  was 
a  KIND  man.  It  is  better  to  be  kind.  He  was  kind,  I  think,  among  other  things, 
in  that  he  loved  his  mother.  lY.  He  was  a  good  man.  It  is  best  of  all  to  be  good. 
(J.  R.  MacDuff,  D.D.)  The  character  and  prayer  of  Jabez  : — I.  His  character. 
"  More  honourable  than  his  brethren."    He  was  more  pious.    Piety  is  honourable. 

1.  For  by  "  humility  and  the  fear  of  the  Lord  are  riches,  and  honour,  and  life." 

2.  As  it  engages  us  in  the  most  glorious  employments.  3.  As  it  interests  us  in  the 
most  glorious  privileges.  4.  As  it  interests  us  in  the  most  glorious  rewards.  II. 
His  pratter.  Notice — 1.  The  object  of  his  worship — "  the  God  of  Israel."  He 
was  not  an  idolater.  He  was  grateful,  he  remembered  God's  kindness  to  Israel. 
He  confided  in  God's  sufficiency.  2.  The  contents  of  his  prayer,  or  what  he  asked. 
We,  like  Jabez,  ought  to — (1)  Implore  God's  covenant  blessings — the  pardon  of  sin 
and  conformity  of  heart  and  life  to  God's  laws  (Heb.  viii.  10,  12).  These  are  bless- 
ings indeed  (Psa.  xxxii.  1-2,  Ixxxix.  15,  16 ;  James  i.  25).  (2)  Implore  enlarge- 
ment of  heart,  by  the  entire  subjugation  and  utter  destruction  of  every  evil  propen- 
sity (Deut.  xxxiii.  27  ;  Psa.  cxix.  32).  (3)  Implore  God's  hand  with  you,  to  direct 
and  lead  you  in  aU  your  difficulties  (Job  xxvii.  11 ;  Heb.  viii.  9  ;  Psa.  cxxiii.  2) ;  to 
supply  all  your  wants  (Psa.  cxiv.  16) ;  to  support  you  under  all  your  trials  (Psa.  xxxvii. 
23-24) ;  and  to  keep  you  in  all  your  exercises  (Isa.  ili.  10).  (4)  Implore  protec- 
tion from  all  evil  (Matt.  vi.  13;  Psa.  xvii.  7,  cxxi.  7;  Prov.  xix.  23).  (Sketches 
of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.)        Jabez,  the  "  honourable  "  : — Some  analogies  sug- 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  IT. 

jested  by  the  sea-coast  may  teach  the  following  lessons.  I.  An  enlabged  "  coast  " 
8UOOE8T3  AN  EXPANDED  HORIZON.  OuT  Spiritual  relations  determine  whether  soul 
vision  command  outlook  from  a  small  bay,  or  toward  broad  ocean.  II.  Am 
ENLABQED  "  COAST  "  SUGGESTS  A  BEOADEB  SURFACE.  The  glory  of  a  coast  is  Its  wide 
sweep  of  the  ocean.  Such  in  figure  is  the  human  soul  when  possessed  and  en- 
larged by  the  Spirit  of  God.  What  sublime  possibilities  of  Divine  enlargement 
belongs  to  the  heart  of  man  1  III.  An  enlarged  "  coast  "  suggests  a  more 
EXTENDED  PATHWAY.  Somctimcs  a  narrow  strip  of  land  forms  the  only  path  when 
walking  on  the  sea-coast.     The  enlarged  pathway  will  secure — 1.  Safety.    2.  Peace. 

iThe  Study.)         The  prayer  of  Jabez  : — The  text  implies  more  than  it  expresses. 
.  That  there  is  a  great  variety  and  distinction  among  men  ;   some  are  more 
and   some   less   honourable.      II.  The   offspring   of    sorrow   mat   become   the 

PARENT   or   JOT.       III.    ThE    BEST  AND   HIGHEST    HONOUR  ATTACHES    TO    TRUE    RELIGION. 

IV.  Though  Jabez  (sorrow)  is  not  the  direct  name  of  every  one,  yet  sorrow  is 

ASSUREDLY   THE    LOT    OF    ALL.       V.    PrATER    IS   THE    APPOINTMENT    OF    GOD  ;    He    WOUld 

have  ns  pray  always,  and  not  faint.     VI.  A  blessing  indeed  will  be  found  to 

HAVE    THREE   PROPERTIES   WHICH    SERVE    TO   ENHANCE    ITS    VALUE.       1.    It    is     given    In 

covenant  love.  2.  It  is  well  suited.  3.  It  is  abiding.  VII.  Protection  bt  thb 
POWER  of  God  and  preservation  in  His  wat  are  momentous  benefits.  VIH. 
Sin  ever  grieves  the  heart  of  a  good  man.  IX.  In  regard  to  property,  it  is 
LAWFUL  TO  seek  ADDITION  AND  ENLARGEMENT,  If  the  will  and  gloiy  of  God  be  duly 
regarded.  X.  Answers  granted  to  prayer  in  time  past,  should  encourage  us 
TO  renew  our  application  to  the  God  of  our  mercies.     XI.  The  hand  of  God 

WITH  ANY  MAN  IS  A  CERTAIN  PLEDGE  OF  PROSPERITY.  XII.  WhEN  FAITH  AND 
FERVOUR  ACCOMPANY  OUR   PETITIONS,  AN    ANSWER  OF    PEACE    IS   NEAR    AT    HAND.       (TraCt 

Magazine.)  The  lustre  of  a  good  man^i  character  : — The  occurrence  of  this  text 
in  the  Book  of  Chronicles  says  far  more  for  Jabez  than  though  it  had  appeared  in  a  list 
of  biographical  sketches ;  as,  for  instance,  in  Heb.  xi.  We  see  as  it  were  the  ancient 
scribe  penning  down  upon  his  manuscript  one  name  after  another  in  genealogical 
order,  and  with  wonted  precision  ;  but  arriving  at  this  name  he  is  so  deeply  impressed 
by  the  holiness  of  the  man,  and  the  peculiarly  consistent  character  of  his  life,  that 
when  about  to  enrol  his  name  in  the  annals  of  Israel  he  feels  obliged  to  forget  the 
stem  prescriptions  of  form ;  and  flinging  aside  under  inspiration  the  proverbial 
stiffness  of  the  genealogist,  he  becomes  the  recorder  not  merely  of  a  name,  but  of  a 
saintly  character  withal,  and  thus  unwittingly  confirms  the  important  truth  that 
the  good  man  shines  everywhere.  (George  Venables.)  What  is  God's  blessing  ? — 
In  the  midst  of  this  wilderness  of  dry  names,  the  dead  leaves  of  a  long-gone  past, 
we  stumble  by  chance  on  a  beautiful  flower,  lovely  in  form  and  perfumed  with 
precious  and  holy  sentiment,  a  perfectly  glad  surprise  amidst  the  barrenness  of  mere 
enumeration.  1.  How  many  and  various  are  the  meanings  we  attach  to  the  word 
"  bless  " !  In  the  Bible  we  find  God  blessing  men,  and  quite  as  frequently  men  bless- 
ing God ;  God  blessing  man  by  pouring  out  upon  him  physical  happiness  and 
]hvsical  prosperity;  blessing  him  also  by  making  him  righteous  and  cleansing  him 
from  sin.  Man,  on  the  other  hand,  is  spoken  of  as  blessing  God  for  His  bounty  and 
care,  for  His  holy  chastisement,  for  His  merciful  forgiveness.  Again  we  have  men 
blessing  one  another  and  blessing  themselves  in  the  way  of  self -congratulation.  We 
find  the  word  used  likewise  in  a  more  formal  and  superstitious  way  as  though  the 
pronouncing  of  it  would  entail  its  fulfilment  and  become  not  only  a  prophecy  but  a 
pledge.  Leaving  Scripture  we  notice  that  the  term  bless  is  in  common  use  among 
ourselves  in  more  senses  than  one.  We  speak  of  persons  as  blessed  with  high 
talents,  or  with  a  noble  position,  blessed  with  a  large  family  or  with  good  fortune ; 
especially  do  we  regard  health  as  a  blessing  and  in  most  cases  also  long  life.  2. 
The  meaning  of  the  word  "  bless  "  or  "  blessing  "  depends  on  the  person  who  uses 
the  term,  depends  on  his  native  character,  surroundings,  training,  his  self-culture 
or  his  entire  lack  of  it,  his  toilsome  struggle  after  virtue  or  his  shameful  familiarity 
with  vice.  You  may  be  so  debased  as  to  think  that  God's  blessing  consists  in  let- 
ting you  do  exactly  as  you  please,  however  wicked  it  may  be,  without  suffering  the 
final  consequences  of  detection,  or  you  may  have  a  nature  so  lofty  as  to  regard  as 
the  best  of  God's  blessings  "  a  clean  heart  and  a  right  spirit,"  without  which  all  other 
of  His  good  gifts  would  be  but  curses.  3.  The  prayer  for  increased  prosperity  is 
perfectly  justifiable  so  long  as  a  man  cares  most  of  all  to  be  kept  from  evil  and  sin. 
There  is  no  harm  in  praying  for  temporal  prosperity,  if  we  feel  it  to  be  any  real 
relief  to  our  care  and  so  long  as  we  are  ready  to  take  God's  answer  of  "  No  "  at 
wilUngly  as  to  receive  an  answer  of  "  Yes."    Ood's  blessing  indeed  is  to  b«  kept 


CHAP.  IV.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  21 

from  evil.  4.  It  is  a  grand  test,  ever  ready  at  hand  for  deciding  the  most  subtle 
case  of  conscience,  to  look  whether  we  can  deliberately  ask  for  God's  blessing  to 
rest  upon  it.  (Charles  Voy^ey,  B.A.)  Prayer  of  the  son  of  sorrow: — I.  The 
MATTER  OF  IT,  OB  THE  THINGS  ASKED  FOR.  1.  He  begins  by  asking  God  to  bless 
him.  *'  Oh  that  Thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed."  He  would  want  that  blessing 
on  himself  personally,  on  his  house,  and  on  aU  his  avocations.  He  knew  that  the 
blessing  of  God  maketh  rich  ;  and  he  knew  quite  as  well  that  nothing  could  really 
and  permanently  prosper  without  that  blessing.  2.  He  prays  for  enlargement. 
"  And  enlarge  my  coast."  Both  temporal  and  spiritual.  Give  me  a  larger  heart; 
broader  views  of  Thyself,  of  Thy  ways,  and  of  Thy  purposes  ;  and  a  wider  sphere  of 
sympathy,  influence,  and  usefulness.  "  Thou  hast  enlarged  me,"  says  the  Psalmist, 
"  when  I  was  in  distress."  And  Paul,  when  writing  to  the  Corinthians,  as  to  his  chil- 
dren, pleadingly  entreats,  "  Be  ye  also  enlarged."  It  is  neither  pleasant  nor  advan- 
tageous to  be  cooped  up  within  narrow  bounds.  3.  He  seeks  Divine  co-operation. 
"  And  that  Thine  hand  may  be  with  me."  That  Thy  power  may  second  and  give  effect 
to  my  poor  energies.  What  can  my  hand  do  without  Thee  ?  But  Thine  is  the 
hand  that  has  created  and  sustains  the  universe.  4.  He  implores  Divine  protection. 
•'  And  that  Thou  wouldest  keep  me  from  evil,  that  it  may  not  grieve  me."  II.  The 
MANNER  OF  THIS  PRATER.  "  And  Jabez  Called  on  the  God  of  Israel,  saying,"  <fec. 
We  altogether  like  the  tone  and  spirit  of  this  prayer.  1.  There  is  the  devout  rever- 
ence of  it.  "  Oh  that  Thou  wouldest."  The  Divine  name  is  not  so  much  as 
mentioned.  He  knew  he  was  coming  to  the  God  of  Israel,  and  that  He  is  a  great 
and  holy  and  terrible  God.  And  we  can  recognise  the  cry  of  a  heart  too  full  of 
pious  awe  to  allow  His  hallowed  name  to  escape  the  lips  of  the  suppliant.  This 
reverence  should  characterise  all  our  approaches  to  God.  2.  There  is  the  spiritual 
wisdom  of  it.  Jabez  puts  things  in  their  right  places  ;  and  what  was  for  him  the 
most  important  thing,  first.  Nothing  could,  in  his  esteem,  antedate  the  blessing  of 
God ;  hence  he  will  put  that  first.  "  Oh  that  Thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed." 
And  was  he  not  perfectly  right  in  this  ?  Did  it  matter  what  God  gave  him  if  He 
withheld  that  blessing  from  him  ?  3.  There  are  the  speciality  and  comprehensive- 
ness of  it.  It  takes  a  wide  sweep,  and  yet  does  not  lose  sight  of  what  is  most 
specific  and  particular.  4.  At  the  same  time  there  is  the  brevity  of  it.  So  specific, 
so  comprehensive,  and  yet  so  brief.  Assuredly  Jabez  recognised  the  solemn  fact 
that  God  is  in  heaven,  and  man  upon  the  earth,  and  therefore  that  his  words 
should  be  few.  5.  There  is  the  earnestness  of  it.  "  Oh  that,"  Ac.  It  comes  directly 
out  of  his  heart,  and  breathes  the  very  spirit  of  desire.  6.  There  is  the  faith  which 
inspired  it,  and  which  runs  through  it  like  a  living  soul.  This  man  in  coming  to 
God  believes  that  He  is,  and  that  He  is  a  rewarder  of  those  who  diligently  seek 
Him.  in.  The  success  of  this  prater.  "  And  God  granted  him  that  which  he 
requested."  1.  That  he  has  come  to  a  God  who  is  as  ready  to  give  as  He  is  to  ask. 
2.  That  he  has  come  to  a  God  who  is  as  comprehensive  in  His  gifts  as  He  is  in  Hia 
desires.  3.  That  he  has  come  to  a  God  who  never  forgets  His  promises  to  those 
that  seek  Him.  4.  That  he  has  come  to  a  God  who  will  honour  those  with  His 
benefactions  who  honour  Him  with  their  confidence  and  trust.  Allow  me,  then,  to 
propose  Jabez  to  you  as  an  example,  and  Jabez's  prayer  as  a  model  prayer.  You 
have  the  same  God  to  go  to,  and  you  have  far  greater  light  to  guide  you  to  Him 
than  Jabez  had.  You  have  all  gospel  promises  to  encourage  you.  You  have  the 
new  and  living  way  thrown  open  to  you.  You  have  the  Holy  Spirit  to  teach  and 
help  you.    You  have  the  great  Advocate  to  plead  for  you.     [The  Church.) 

Vers.  14,  21,  23.  For  they  were  craftsmen  .  .  .  that  wrought  fine  linen  .  .  . 
those  that  dwelt  among  plants. — Craftsmen,  potters,  (&c.  : — If  all  men  affected  one 
and  the  same  trade  of  life  or  pleasure  or  recreation,  it  were  not  possible  they  could 
live  one  by  another ;  neither  could  there  be  any  use  of  commerce,  whereby  life  is 
maintained.  It  is  good  reason  we  should  make  a  right  use  of  this  gracious  dispen- 
sation of  the  Almighty,  that  we  should  improve  our  several  dispositions  and 
faculties  to  the  advancing  of  the  common  stock,  and  that  we  should  neither 
encroach  upon  each  other's  profession  nor  be  apt  to  censure  each  other's  recreation. 
[Bishop  Hall.)         Origin  and  use  of  arts  and  inventions  : — I.  Useful  arts  emanat« 

FROM  THE  WISDOM   AND   GOODNESS    OF    GOD.       II.    Useful  artS  ABE   BENEFICIAL    IN  THEIR 

tendenot.  III.  Therefore  all  engaged  in  useful  arts  promote  the  wklfabb  or 
BOciBTT.    (James  Wolfendale.) 

Yer.  22.  And  these  are  ancient  things. — Ancient  thing* : — The  ancient  is  no  use 


23  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

except  it  be  also  modern.  This  is  the  true  test  of  antiquity.  Things  are  not 
valuable  simply  because  they  are  ancient;  they  may  be  ancient  and  dead.  We 
have  nothing  to  do  with  that  kind  of  antiquity — it  is  the  antiquity  of  mythology, 
not  of  history.  1.  All  the  greatest  things  are  ancient.  All  you  can  do  is  to 
modernise  their  form.  The  telegraph  is  older  than  the  garden  of  Eden — not  under 
that  name :  nothing  new  has  been  invented,  except  combination,  adaptation ;  all 
the  elements  and  factors  are  as  old  as  —  God.  2.  Where  usefulness  is  proved 
antiquity  becomes  an  argument  and  an  illustration.  This  is  the  true  root  and  the 
true  use  of  history.  Where  usefulness  has  not  been  proved,  to  refer  to  antiquity  is 
to  invoke  the  sophistical  assistance  of  superstition.  We  must  insist  on  living 
usefulness.  We  must  not  prop  up  tottering  walls  because  the  copestones  are 
covered  with  grey  moss.  This  doctrine  of  the  usefulness  of  antiquity  must  be 
applied  ruthlessly :  (1)  To  churches.  (2)  To  men.  Many  men  would  like  to 
live  upon  their  reputation.  It  is  poor  living.  You  cannot  live  upon  your  old 
prayers ;  it  is  the  prayer  of  this  morning  that  fed  your  soul.  Not  the  feast 
you  had  in  childhood,  but  the  bread  you  brake  this  very  dawn  is  sustaining  your 
frame.  (3)  To  the  Bible.  Would  you  burn  the  Bible  ?  Yes,  if  it  has  been  super- 
seded, if  it  has  proved  itself  to  be  useless,  if  it  can  no  longer  direct  men  to  God,  if 
it  has  ceased  to  be  the  messenger  of  salvation ;  but  if  it  contain  the  living  God,  if 
it  reveal  the  living  Saviour  and  breathe  the  eternal  Holy  Ghost,  then  it  is  not 
ancient  in  any  sense  of  obsoleteness,   it  is   ancient    in   the   sense  of  eternity. 

3.  Antiquity  without  Christianity  dies.  Any  civilisation  that  has  not  in  it  the  living 
spirit,  the  living  God,  dies.  What  is  the  proof  ?  History  is  the  elucidation  and 
history  is  the  evidence.  Civilisation  will  be  of  no  use  to  you  when  you  lose  the 
risen  Christ.  Non-spiritual  civilisation  is  useless.  Look  at  China — an  infinite 
death — the  hermit  of  the  globe — a  living  extinction.  China  was  printing  from 
type  five  hundred  years  before  Caxton  was  born ;  she  had  the  mariner's  compass 
before  England  was  a  nation.  There  was  a  time  when  our  forefathers  were  clothed 
in  sheepskins,  when  they  dyed  and  painted  their  whole  bodies ;  and  at  that  time 
the  Chinese  were  blasting  their  rocks  with  gunpowder.  Before  Daniel  saw  his 
visions  China  had  a  constitutional  government.  Then  what  makes  China,  this 
great  cipher  of  the  globe,  a  burden  to  civilisation  ?  Because  its  civilisation  is  only 
ancient ;  she  has  not  the  Cross.  Without  that  all  things  tend  to  decay.  Greeks 
Koman — European  civilisation  have  all  gone  dovm  in  the  proportion  in  which  they 
were  not  vitally  connected  with  the  Cross.     (J.  Parker^  D.I).) 

Ver.  23.  There  they  dwelt  with  the  king  for  hla  work. — With  the  King  for  Hi$ 
work : — (A  motto  for  Sunday  school  teachers.)  Work  done  well,  however  common, 
is  accounted  worthy  of  its  wage,  but  work  done  for  royalty  generally  has  some 
special  attraction  to  commend  it.  Such  a  man  is  privileged  by  appointment  to  be 
purveyor  of  this  or  that  to  her  Majesty  the  Queen ;  and  he  takes  good  care  to  let  us 
know  it.  It  is  published  in  his  shop  window.  It  is  painted  on  his  sign  over  the 
door.  He  is,  "  By  appointment  to  the  Queen."  Royalty  seems  to  dignify  him. 
Looking  at  my  text  I  see  three  or  four  observations  springing  from  it.  I.  Our 
Kino  has  many  kinds  of  seevants.  1.  Soldiers.  It  is  their  duty  to  contend 
earnestly  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints.     2.  Watchmen.     3.  Heralds. 

4.  Scribes.  6.  Musicians.  6.  Potters.  These  may  supply  a  very  good  emblem  of 
Sunday  school  teachers.  The  potters  take  the  clay  while  it  is  pliable  and  soft,  and 
put  it  on  the  wheel  and  make  the  wheel  revolve,  and  then  with  thumb  and  finger 
fashion  the  clay  as  it  revolves  before  them.  If  ever  at  any  time  the  human  mind 
is  plastic  it  is  while  the  child  is  young.  7.  Gardeners.  This  is  just  what  a  Sunday 
school  teacher  should  be.  He  tries  to  get  the  plants  out  from  the  wild  waste  and 
bring  them  into  the  "garden  walled  around."  He  knows  that  the  Church  is  the 
garden  of  the  Lord  and  he  longs  to  plant  many  little  slips  in  it.  II.  All  who  live 
WITH  OUR  King  must  work.  I  have  thought  that  some  of  our  Church  members 
imagined  that  the  cause  of  Christ  was  a  coach,  and  that  they  were  to  ride  on  it,  and 
that  they  would  prefer  the  box-seat,  or  else  a  very  comfortable  seat  in  the  middle 
of  the  coach.  But  all  who  live  with  our  King  must  work.  1.  Because  He  works. 
2.  Because  His  company  always  inspires  us  with  the  desire  to  do  something  for 
Him.  3.  Because  there  is  so  much  to  do  that  you  cannot  help  doing  something. 
III.  Those  that  work  for  our  King  ought  to  live  with  Him.  1.  That  they 
may  gather  strength.  In  the  old  fable,  when  Hercules  fought  with  the  giant  ha 
could  not  kill  him.  He  flung  him  down  with  all  his  might,  but  every  time  the 
giant  got  up  stronger  than  before.     The  old  fable  said  that  the  earUi  was  the 


«HAP.IT.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  23 

giant's  mother,  and  every  time  that  he  fell  he  touched  her  and  got  new  strength 
irom  her.  So  every  time  a  Christian  falls  on  his  knees — draws  near  to  God — he 
gets  new  strength.  2.  To  keep  up  their  enthusiasm.  3.  That  they  may  be 
inspired  with  courage.  4.  If  they  would  cultivate  the  soft  grace  of  patience. 
rV.  That  which  should  reconcile  us  to  ant  work  is,  that  we  are  working  fob 
THE  King.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Certain  members  of  the  royal  household  : — It  is 
a  matter  of  very  common  occurrence  in  this  world,  in  forming  our  estimates  of  men 
and  things,  to  ignore  altogether  the  real  and  constant  contributors  to  success,  and 
to  look  only  at  him  or  them  who  represent  the  success.  The  commander  of  an 
ocean  steamer  is  the  person  whose  name  is  printed,  who  meets  the  public  eye,  and 
possesses  the  public  confidence ;  the  men  who  sweat  and  pant  down  deep  in  the 
ship  before  the  hot  and  roaring  fires,  the  men  who  climb  the  icy  rigging,  who 
with  stiffening  limbs  battle  with  the  frozen  sails,  and  watch  hour  after  hour  amid 
cold  and  darkness  for  danger,  are  never  thought  of.  We  see  the  victorious  leader 
of  armies  surrounded  in  the  hour  of  triumph  by  a  brilliant  staff,  while  multitudes 
shout  and  cheer.  How  few  ever  think  at  such  a  time  of  the  thousands  of  silent 
graves  where  men  lie  who  paid  the  costly  price  of  life  for  this  hour  of  their  leader's 
triumph  1  Because  the  world  judges  usually  in  this  way  the  strong  contrast 
of  the  text  strikes  us.  The  royal  household  is  not  alone  the  king  with  his  victorious 
generals  and  stately  nobles,  but  the  potters  and  the  dwellers  or  workers  among 
plants  and  hedges.     Our  text  teaches  us — I.  That  none  are  ignored,  despised,  ob 

rORGOTTEN  IN  THE  ROYAL  HOUSEHOLD  OF  OUR  KiNG  BECAUSE  OF  THE  APPARENT  INSIG- 
NIFICANCE OF  THE  POSITION  THEY  FILL.  The  work  of  the  Church  analagous  to  that 
of  the  potters  and  hedgers  is  not  in  favour.  Only  a  few  are  willing  to  do  the 
humble  and  necessary  work  of  the  Church.     II.  That  the  recognition  of  the 

VALUE   of   labour   OF   THE   HUMBLE    WORKERS    IS    JUST    A8   SURE,    AND   REWARD   JUST    AS 

CERTAIN,  AS  OF  THAT  WHICH  IS  MOST  PROMINENT.  In  the  scrvice  of  the  King  of  kings 
there  is  no  respecting  of  persons.  It  is  not  the  position  but  the  work  accomplished 
that  obtains  consideration  from  Him.  The  name  of  Luther,  or  even  of  Paul, 
is  of  no  account  before  Him,  nor  the  office  of  reformer  or  apostle,  only  as 
meaning  mighty  labour  accomplished  in  and  for  the  Church.  The  Hudson 
may  be  of  far  more  importance  to  the  country  because  of  its  deeper  channel, 
broader  bosom,  than  a  little  brook  that  meanders  through  the  meadows  of 
some  country  valley.  One  is  a  broad  highway,  bearing  much  of  the  commerce 
of  great  States ;  the  other  gives  grass  to  the  meadows,  drink  to  cattle, 
and  beauty  to  the  landscape  ;  but  surely  the  Hudson  is  entitled  to  no  more  praise 
for  being  what  it  is  than  the  brook  for  being  what  it  is.  No  occupation  that  is 
right,  however  mean,  can  debar  us  from  dwelling  with  our  Lord.  We  see  constantly 
earthern  pots,  of  very  little  value  in  themselves,  crowned  with  the  sweetest,  the  most 
beautiful,  the  rarest  flowers  and  plants.  Cheap  as  the  red  clay  is,  it  is  about  the 
only  material  that  could  be  used.  One  great  value  is  its  cheapness ;  another  is, 
that  plants,  with  a  singular  want  of  taste,  would  refuse  to  flourish  in  pots  of  silver 
or  gold  ;  their  very  density  and  want  of  porosity  render  them  nearly  valueless  for 
this  purpose.  Just  so  the  very  humbleness  of  work  renders  some  peculiarly  fitted 
to  do  it.  Conclusion :  1.  Here  we  have  encouragement  for  all  the  Lord's  workers, 
in  (I)  the  satisfaction  connected  with  the  doing ;  (2)  in  the  present  beneficent  results 
of  the  work  ;  (3)  in  the  certain  future  reward.  2.  Here  we  may  find  reason  for  warm 
sympathy  with  all  the  workers  of  our  King.  {Henry  W.  F.  Jones.)  Working  for 
the  King  : — I.  How  work  links  men  to  kings.  There  are  many  wrong  ideas  in  the 
world  about  labour.  Not  a  few  people  try  to  bring  up  their  children  without  it,  and 
you  will  see  a  man  toil  early  and  late  to  make  money,  getting  no  enjoyment  out  of 
it  himself,  and  when  you  get  at  the  reason  it  is  that  he  may  make  his  son  a  gentle- 
man, which  means,  someone  who  can  live  without  work.  This  is  not  according  to 
the  Divine  idea :  "  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work."  It  was  not  for  nothing 
that  Christ  toiled  at  the  carpenter's  bench.  If  you  were  to  take  out  of  the  Bible  all 
the  stories  of  men  who  worked  for  their  living,  you  would  rob  it  of  its  greatest  beauty. 
The  men  and  women  who  work,  whether  with  brain  or  hand,  or  both,  are  the  people 
who  save  a  nation  from  ruin.  What  is  a  man's  religion  worth  if  it  does  not  teach 
him  to  labour  ?  Are  we  not  to  work  out  our  own  salvation,  and  that  for  the  best  of 
reasons,  "  It  is  God  that  worketh  in  us."  The  sunshine  and  the  rain  are  useless 
to  the  fields  that  have  not  been  tilled.  He  who  has  no  plough  needs  not  to  trouble 
to  sharpen  his  scythe.  Bibles  and  sermons  to  the  idle  are  not,  cannot  be,  appre- 
ciated, and  Sabbaths  are  but  a  weariness  to  the  man  who  does  no  kind  of  Christian 
work.    Do  not  mistake  yourself  for  a  Christian  because  you  like  some  popular 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.t. 

preacher ;  it  is  on  the  same  principle  that  wasps  like  honey,  but  they  will  rather 
starve  than  make  it.  You  would  not  have  heard  of  these  men  if  they  had  not 
worked.  Their  toil  has  bound  up  their  life  with  the  king's  life.  Why  should  yoa 
not  act  so  that  the  story  of  God  cannot  be  fully  told  without  your  name  being 
mentioned  ?  II.  Kings  need  different  kinds  op  workers.  There  is  a  sense  in 
which  God  needs  us  and  cannot  carry  out  His  plans  without  us.  Whatever  your 
talent  there  is  room  for  you.  Not  only  genius,  but  dogged  drudgery.  We  want  the 
artist  to  paint  the  picture,  and  the  workman  to  frame  it ;  the  author  to  write  the 
book,  and  the  printer  to  give  it  to  the  world.  How  true  it  is  that  no  one  man  can 
do  all  that  needs  to  be  done,  even  with  his  own  gifts.  Does  the  gardener  wish  to 
send  in  a  choice  rose  he  has  just  cut  ?  Does  he  wish  his  rose  to  stand  on  the  king's 
table?  Then  he  must  have  the  help  of  the  potter.  He  must  have  one  of  his  vases. 
(Thomat  Cham;pnest.) 


CHAPTER  V. 

Yeb9.  1,  2.  Now  the  sons  of  Reuben,  the  firstbom  of  Israel — ReuhenU  rightt 
transferred  to  Joseph  : — This  incident  is  worth  dwelling  upon,  only  because  it 
elucidates  a  special  phase  of  the  Divine  government.  God  is  not  bound  by 
arbitrary  laws.  Primogeniture  can  be  changed  in  the  court  of  heaven.  Conduct 
is  the  only  absolute  guarantee  of  real  and  enduring  primogeniture.  "  Once  in 
grace,  always  in  grace,"  may  be  a  glorious  truth,  but  everything  depends  upon 
what  is  meant  by  being  "  in  grace."  They  are  not  all  Israel  that  are  called  Israel. 
We  can  only  prove  that  we  were  once  in  grace  by  continually  living  in  grace.  Any 
vital  breach  in  the  continuance  wiU  throw  discredit  upon  the  supposed  reality  of 
the  origin.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  And  of  him  came  the  Chief  Ruler. — The  Chief  Ruler : — I  read  of  "  the 
rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world";  "the  rulers  of  synagogues";  the  rulers 
that  "  set  themselves  against  the  Lord  and  against  His  Anointed  "  ;  but  none  of 
them  are  "  Chief."  Christ  is  the  "  Chief  Ruler."  I.  His  appointment  to  office 
(Prov.  viii.  22-31 ;  Psa.  ii.  6-9).  1.  He  rules  in  the  Church.  2.  He  rules  in  the 
hearts  of  His  people.  II.  His  essential  qdalificatjons  for  that  office. 
1.  Infinite  wisdom.  2.  Invincible  power.  3.  Order.  III.  Thb  mercies  unfolded 
in  it.  1.  By  it  is  maintained  the  truth  of  God.  2.  His  empire  is  secured  through 
it.  He  must  rule  until  every  enemy  submits  (Psa.  Ixxii.  11 ;  Isa.  xi.  7). 
3.  Triumphs  are  secured  to  us  and  repeatedly  realised  by  our  Chief  Ruler.  (1)  Over 
temptations  (1  Cor.  x.  13).  (2)  Over  every  difficulty  in  providence  (Isa.  xlii.  16). 
{Joseph  Irons.) 

Ver.  20.  And  they  were  helped  against  them. — Helped : — We  are  like  William 
of  Orange,  with  a  few  followers  and  an  empty  purse,  making  war  against  the 
master  of  half  the  world  with  the  mines  of  Peru  for  a  treasury.  But  like 
William,  too,  when  questioned  concerning  our  resources,  we  can  reply,  "  Before 
we  took  up  this  cause  we  entered  into  close  alliance  with  the  King  of  kings." 
{Sword  and  Trowel.) 

Ver.  22.  Because  the  war  was  of  God. — God*$  war : — When  a  man  fights  against 
himself,  in  his  lusts,  passions,  and  unauthorised  aspirations,  he  fights  a  war 
approved  of  God,  and  if  he  fights  that  war  in  the  name  of  God  he  shall  be  none 
other  than  a  victor  at  the  close.  When  a  man  fights  for  the  poor,  the  oppressed, 
the  helpless,  he  is  engaged  in  a  battle  over  which  God  holds  the  banner,  and 
the  holding  of  that  banner  is  the  guarantee  of  triumph.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
The  war  is  of  God : — In  speaking  on  temperance  principles  and  trying  to  help  and 
encourage  temperance  workers,  this  story  of  Bible  history  will  well  illustrate  our 
theme.  Consider :  I.  The  warriors.  1.  They  were  courageous  men — "  valiant 
men,"  sons  of  valour  as  the  original  has  it.  2.  They  were  skilful.  3.  They  were 
united.  II.  The  weapons  which  these  warriors  used.  1.  The  buckler.  This 
was  a  weapon  of  defence,  a  small  hand  shield  that  was  fastened  to  the  wrist  or  to 
the  hand  itself,  with  which  the  warriors  parried  the  blows  of  their  enemies. 
"Watch  and  pray,  lest  ye  enter  into  temptation."  2.  The  sword.  If  temperance 
workers  would  take  the  Bible  as  their  sword,  they  would  get  on  better  than  with 


CHAPS.  Ti.,  vn.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  25 

the  wooden  swords  which  so  many  are  inclined  to  use.  3.  Bows  and  arrows.  The 
spiritual  parallel  is  the  "  arrow  of  conviction."  III.  Their  warfabb.  It  was 
distinguished — 1.  By  faith.  (1)  Personal.  They  trusted  in  God;  we  must  also 
have  a  personal  faith  in  Christ  as  our  Saviour.  (2)  Also  in  the  power 
of  the  gospel  to  change  the  hearts  and  lives  of  men.  2.  By  prayer.  "  They 
cried  to  God  in  the  battle."    IV.  The  victory.      (Thomas  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  25.  And  they  transg^ressed  against  the  Qod  of  their  fathers. — The 
transgressions  of  the  people ; — I.  If  we  turn  to  the  Book  of  Kings  we  shall  be 
surprised  to  find  how  the  fatal  sin  of  Israel  was  often  of  an  intellectual 
kind,  as  distinguished  from  the  baser  iniquities  which  corrupt  and  over- 
throw the  soul.  There  were  three  instances  in  which  the  intellectual  sina 
of  the  people  were  conspicuous — 1.  In  the  worship  of  the  holy  places.  2.  In 
adoration  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  3.  In  the  practice  of  magic  and  divina- 
tion. There  we  find  nothing  of  adultery,  drunkenness,  theft,  or  licentious- 
ness of  any  kind.  There  are  sins  and  sins.  One  man  is  simply  a  sinner  of 
the  coarse  type,  a  criminal  seen  and  known  of  all  men  and  cast  out  by  society ; 
another  man  sins  intellectually — that  is  to  say  he  mentally  deposes  God,  and  more 
or  less  secretly  endeavours  to  live  without  Him,  never  breaking  any  of  the  great 
Bocial  commandments,  and  thereby  forfeiting  social  confidence,  yet  all  the  while 
committing  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost.  In  this  way  men  write  their  own 
bibles,  invent  their  own  deities,  banish  from  the  mind  all  the  old  orthodoxies,  and 
in  hidden  vanity  walk  after  the  council  of  their  own  hearts.     {J.  Farker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  VL 

Ykbs.  31,  48.  And  these  are  they  whom  David  set  over  the  service  of  song 
In  the  house  of  the  Lord. — The  ministry  of  song : — I.  Sono  an  element  of  Chris- 
tian WORSHIP,  n.  Song  an  expression  of  human  feeling.  III.  Song  a  poweb 
fob  which  its  possessors  are  responsible.  [J.  Wolfendale.)  Religums  worship  :^ 
I.  Worship  varied  in  its  forms.  II.  Lively  in  its  spntrr.  TTT.  Obdbblx  im 
rrs  hethoo.    IY.  Univebsaii  in  its  participation.    (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  vn. 

Vebs.  1-11.  l?ow  the  Sons  of  Issachar  were,  Tola,  and  Pnah,  Jashnb,  and 
Shimrom,  four. — Statistics  : — 1.  Statistics  play  an  important  part  in  Chronicles 
and  in  the  Old  Testament  generally.     (1)  Genealogies  and  other  lists  of  names. 

(2)  Specifications  of  subscription  lists  for  the  Tabernacle  and  for  Solomon's  temple. 

(3)  Census  returns  and  statements  as  to  the  number  of  armies  and  of  the  divisions 
of  which  they  were  composed.  2.  Biblical  statistics  are  examples  in  accuracy  and 
thoroughness  of  information,  and  recognitions  of  the  more  obscure  and  prosaic 
manifestations  of  the  higher  life.  In  these  and  other  ways  the  Bible  gives  an 
anticipatory  sanction  to  the  exact  sciences.  8.  Statistics  are  the  only  form  in 
which  many  acts  of  service  can  be  recognised  and  recorded.  The  missionary  report 
can  only  tell  the  story  of  a  few  striking  conversions  ;  it  may  give  the  history  of  the 
exceptional  self-denial  in  one  or  two  of  its  subscriptions ;  for  the  rest  we  must 
be  content  with  tables  and  subscription-lists.  4.  Our  chronicler's  interest  in 
statistics  lays  healthy  emphasis  on  the  practical  character  of  religion.  There  is  a 
danger  of  identifying  spiritual  force  with  literary  and  rhetorical  gifts  ;  to  recognise 
the  religious  value  of  statistics  is  the  most  forcible  protest  against  such  identification. 
The  supreme  service  of  the  Church  in  any  age  is  its  influence  on  its  own  generation, 
by  which  it  moulds  the  generation  immediately  following.  That  influence  can  only 
be  estimated  by  a  careful  study  of  all  possible  information  and  especially  of 
statistics.  5.  The  lists  in  Chronicles  are  few  and  meagre  compared  to  the  records 
of  Greenwich  Observatory  or  the  volumes  which  contain  the  data  of  biology  and 
sociology ;  but  the  chronicler  becomes,  in  a  certain  sense,  the  forerunner  of  Darwin^ 
Spencer,  and  Galton.    {W.  H.  Bennett,  M.A.) 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai.  vn. 

Ver.  11.  Fit  to  go  out  for  war  and  battle.— T/ie  need  for  preparation :~"  Fit  to 
go  "  is  an  expression  which  points  to  the  matter  of  qualification.  Mere  age  does 
not  make  a  man  fit  to  sit  in  the  council,  or  to  go  forth  to  battle,  or  to  assume  the 
position  of  dignity.  We  must  undergo  discipline,  instruction,  mortification.  Do 
not  go  out  until  you  are  qualified.  When  you  are  truly  qualified  you  will  know  the 
fact  by  the  using  of  holy  impulses,  by  the  pressure  as  of  an  invisible  hand  urging 
you  on  in  the  right  way,  the  way  of  Divine  decree  and  destiny.  To-day  should 
always  be  a  preparation  for  to-morrow;  everything  we  learn  should  have  in  it 
something  more  than  itself.  When  the  gymnast  undergoes  his  discipline,  it  is  that 
he  may  use  his  acquired  strength  in  other  and  better  directions  than  mere  amuse- 
ment. Let  all  eating  and  drinking,  all  reading  and  study,  all  companionship  and 
travel,  have  before  it  a  high  purpose,  a  purpose  of  preparation  for  battle  and  race, 
for  conflict  and  suffering.  (/.  Parker,  D.D.)  Fit  for  war  : — Genius,  say  some, 
is  but  a  capacity  for  hard  work.  This  is  not  a  whole  truth  ;  there  must  be  work  in 
accordance  with  law.  The  miner  who  digs  for  gold  on  the  seashore  will  never  find 
it,  though  he  dig  ever  so  laboriously  ;  but  if  he  study  gold  and  the  geologic  strata 
in  which  it  lives,  he  has  begun  to  put  himself  in  harmony  with  law.  Mere  work, 
unless  properly  directed,  is  like  riding  a  hobby-horse ;  there  is  energy  and  motion, 
but  no  progress.  .  .  .  For  years  Napoleon  was  living  in  miniature  the  battles  he  was 
to  fight,  analysing  strategic  moves  and  positions,  and  training  his  mind  to  thua 
grasp  a  new  situation  on  the  instant.  Von  Moltke  studied  the  military  topography 
of  all  Europe,  and  with  marvellous  foresight  thought  out  how  to  win.  His  victory 
was  no  triumph  of  mere  fortune  or  special  inspiration.  It  was  but  the  logical  out- 
come of  his  trained  mind,  and  a  trained  mind  ever  lights  the  torch  of  its  own 
inspiration.  Leonardo  da  Vinci  always  carried  in  his  girdle  his  sketch-book  in  hia 
walks  in  Florence,  constantly  looking  for  picturesque  faces.  "  In  the  silence  of  the 
night,"  he  would  counsel  himself,  "  recall  the  ideas  of  the  things  you  have  studied. 
Design  in  your  spirit  the  contours  and  outlines  of  the  figures  you  have  seen  during 
the  day.''    {New  Science  Review.) 

Vers.  21,  22.  Whom  the  men  of  Gath  that  were  bom  In  that  land  slew. — The 

massacre  of  Ephr aim's  children: — In  the  mines  of  Peru,  there  are  veins  of  peculiar 
richness ;  but  the  very  rubbish  is  valuable.  In  the  Bible  there  are  passages  of 
peculiar  importance,  but  there  is  nothing  trifling,  nothing  useless.  To  be  able  to 
extract  from  the  more  barren  portions  of  Scripture  the  instructions  they  were 
intended  to  communicate  is  a  talent  which  every  Christian  should  cultivate.  This 
passage  teaches  us — I.  That  there  is  no  individual  or  society  secure  from 
SUDDEN  AND  SEVERE  MISFORTUNE.  Oh  I  it  is  natural  for  us,  when  we  are  happy,  to 
cherish  the  thought  that  we  shall  continue  to  be  happy.  And  we  may  be  placed  in 
circumstances  in  which  such  an  anticipation  seems  not  only  natural  but  reasonable. 
Our  worldly  substance  may  be  abundant;  our  bodily  constitution  may  be  sound 
and  strong,  promising  us  a  long  and  healthy  life ;  our  children  may  be  growing  up 
around  us,  with  every  appearance  of  being  the  support  and  comfort  of  our  declining 
years.  We  may  enjoy  the  affection  of  our  friends.  Very  few  persons  have  ever 
been  so  prosperous,  or  had  equal  ground  to  presume  on  the  permanence  of  their 
prosperity  as  Ephraim.  We  have  reason  to  hope  that  Ephraim  was  a  good  man. 
He  was  certainly  the  son  of  a  very  good  man.  We  cannot  doubt  that  his  father 
Joseph  gave  him  a  religious  education.  We  know  that  Ephraim  was  a  wealthy 
man.  It  was,  indeed,  his  great  wealth  that  excited  the  cupidity  of  these  Philistine 
robbers.  It  is  obvious  that  he  had  reached  a  good  old  age,  and  he  had  gathered 
around  him  children  and  children's  children,  and  the  children  of  children's 
children.  You  can  easily  suppose  the  good  old  man  retiring  to  rest  happy  in  his 
possessions,  and  happier  still  in  his  anticipations,  for  he  had  reason  to  anticipate 
coming  prosperity.  God  had  spoken  good  of  all  the  descendants  of  Israel,  but  of 
none  had  He  spoken  so  much  good  as  of  Ephraim.  In  his  numerous  descendants 
he  probably  pleased  himself  with  the  thought,  that  he  saw  the  begun  accomplish- 
ment of  the  promise  that  his  seed  should  become  a  multitude  of  nations.  But  what 
a  fearful  and  sudden  reverse  was  he  destined  to  experience  1  This  affecting  incident 
reads  a  lesson  to  us  all.  It  tells  those  who  are  afflicted,  "  in  patience  to  possess 
their  souls";  and  it  bids  those  who  are  happy,  "join  trembling  with  their  mirth." 
It  tells  those  who  are  in  affliction  to  give  God  thanks  that  they  have  not  been 
afflicted  as  Ephi-aim  was.  We  may  have  been  bereaved  of  much,  it  may  be,  but 
where  is  any  of  us  that  can  for  a  moment  compare  his  bereavements  with  those  of 
Ephraim?     11.  That    the    dispensations    of    Divimb    Peovidenci    ark    oftkm 


CHAP.  VII.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  27 

APPAEENTLT  IN     DIRECT    OPPOSITION    TO   THE    DECLARATIONS   OF   THE   DiVINE   PROMISE. 

It  is  difficult  to  conceive  a  more  striking  illustration  of  this  general  principle  than 
that  furnished  by  the  remarkable  incident  recorded  in  the  passage  before  us. 
Ephraim,  as  a  descendant  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  had  an  interest  in  all  the 
promises  made  to  his  illustrious  ancestors.  "  I  wiU  make  thy  seed  as  the  dust  of 
the  earth,"  said  Jehovah  to  Abraham ;  "  as  the  number  of  the  stars,  so  shall  thy 
seed  be."  Ephraim  was  one  of  the  sons  of  Joseph,  and  of  course  Ephraim  had  his 
share  in  the  remarkable  blessing  that  was  pronounced  on  his  father.  "  Joseph  is  a 
fruitful  bough,  even  a  fruitful  bough  by  a  well,  whose  branches  run  over  the  wall." 
Nor  was  this  all ;  Ephraim  had  a  share  in  that  blessing  which  Jacob  pronounced  on 
himself,  and  on  his  brother  Manasseh.  When  Joseph  heard  that  his  father  was 
sick,  apparently  to  death,  he  went  to  visit  him,  and  he  took  along  with  him  his  two 
sons,  Manasseh  and  Ephraim.  Jacob  having  been  told  that  his  son  Joseph  was 
coming  to  see  him,  strengthened  himself,  and  sat  upon  his  bed.  "  And  Jacob  said 
unto  Joseph,  God  Almighty  appeared  unto  me  at  Luz,  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  and 
blessed  me,  and  said  unto  me.  Behold  I  will  make  thee  fruitful,  and  multiply  thee, 
and  I  will  make  of  thee  a  multitude  of  people,"  &c.  There  was  more  even  than  this. 
There  was  a  great  peculiarity  in  the  manner  in  which  Jacob  pronounced  this  bless- 
ing. He  crossed  his  hands,  and  laid  his  right  hand  on  Ephraim,  the  youngest,  and 
his  left  hand  on  Manasseh,  the  eldest ;  and  when  Joseph  attempted  to  alter  the 
position  of  the  old  man's  hands,  he  replied,  "  I  know  it,  my  son,  I  know  it,"  &o. 
Such  was  the  promise ;  and  in  the  narrative  before  us,  you  see  the  providence. 
Can  two  things  be  more  apparently  in  direct  opposition  ?  Here  is  a  promise  that 
Ephraim  shall  be  more  prosperous  than  all  his  brethren  ;  and  here  is  a  providence 
that  deprives  Ephraim  at  once  of  all  his  property,  and,  as  it  would  seem,  of  all  hi3 
children  also.  Nor  is  this  at  all  an  unparalleled  or  even  an  uncommon  case,  so  far 
as  apparent  contrariety  between  the  providence  and  promise  of  God  is  concerned. 
Was  it  like  a  fulfilment  of  a  promise  made  to  Israel  that  Jehovah  would  give  them 
a  good  and  large  land,  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  to  lead  them  directly  into  the 
depths  of  the  Arabian  wilderness  and  keep  them  wandering  there  for  forty  years  ? 
Was  it  like  a  fulfilment  of  the  promise  which  God  had  made  to  David,  that  he 
would  make  him  the  ruler  of  his  people,  when  he  drove  him  from  the  court  of  Saul, 
and  exposed  him  to  imminent  hazard  of  his  life  on  the  mountains  of  Israel  from 
the  persecutions  of  his  infuriated  enemy  ?  I  can  appeal  to  the  experience  of  every 
Christian.  Is  it  not  distinctly  stated  in  God's  Word  that  no  evil  shall  happen  to  the 
righteous  ?  Is  it  not  distinctly  said,  what  is  good  God  will  give  His  people  ?  Now, 
I  put  it  to  every  Christian,  if  he  has  not  in  the  course  of  his  life  met  with  much 
which  at  the  time  he  could  not  help  thinking  evil  for  him  ?  The  reason  of  this 
apparent  inconsistency  of  the  providence  with  the  promises  of  God,  is  by  no  means 
that  there  is  a  real  opposition  between  them.  It  is  the  same  God  who  speaks  in 
His  Word  that  works  in  His  providence — and  He  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and 
for  ever.  His  Word  and  His  work  are  really  perfectly  harmonious ;  and  in  many 
cases  those  dispensations,  which  are-  apparently  frustrating  the  promise  are,  in 
reality,  fulfilling  it.  The  reason  why  the  promise  and  the  providence  of  God  often 
seem  to  us  to  be  at  variance,  is  our  ignorance  of  the  extent  and  of  the  particular 
design  of  the  Divine  dispensations.  If  we  could  see  the  commencement,  and  pro- 
gress, and  issue  of  all  God's  dispensations,  we  would  gladly  say.  He  is  doing  all 
things  well,  as  we  shall  by  and  by  be  constrained  to  say,  He  has  done  all  things  well. 
But  in  the  present  state  this  must  be  a  matter  of  faith,  not  of  sense.  It  is  the 
Divine  appointment,  that  here  we  must  walk  by  faith.  HI.  That  the  dissolution 
OF  those    connections   that   bind  vs   together  in  a  variety   of   relations  in 

HUMAN   LIFE,    OCCASIONS    TO   ALL    RIGHTLY   CONSTITUTED    MINDS    SEVERE    SUFFERING   AND 

PERMANENT  SORROW.  It  would  be  a  miserable  world — at  least  I  am  sure  it  would 
not  be  a  happy  one — if  there  were  no  husbands  and  wives,  parents  and  children, 
and  brothers  and  sisters,  relative  and  friends.  That  man  must  be  deplorably  selfish, 
who,  on  reflecting  on  the  various  sources  of  his  happiness,  does  not  find  social 
relation  and  affection  one  of  the  most  copious.  In  proportion  to  the  happiness 
springing  from  these  relations,  is  the  pain  that  is  occasioned  when  they  are 
dissolved,  especially  when  they  are  unexpectedly  and  violently  dissolved.  Not 
merely  are  our  friends  the  proper  objects  of  a  much  stronger  kind  of  affection  than 
any  other  species  of  property  ;  but  their  loss  is  of  all  other  earthly  losses  the  most 
irreparable.  Our  property,  pur  reputation,  our  health,  may  be  lost  and  regained. 
But  a  friend  whom  we  have  lost  by  death,  we  never  can  bring  back  again  from  the 
grave.    {J.  Brown,  D.D.)        Family  sorrow  : — I.  Thb  cause  of  sorrow.    II.  Thb 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaps,  vm.,  ix. 

SYMPATHY  m  THE  SORROW.      IH.    ThE  REMEMBRANCE  OF  THE  SOBBOW.      1.   Perpetuated 

in  J07.    2.  Perpetuated  in  sorrow.    (J.  Wolfendale.) 


CHAPTEB  vm. 


Vebs.  1-40.  Kaw  Benjamin  begat  Bela  Ms  first-bora — Readings  between  the 
lines  : — I.  That  alliances  often  end  in  entanglements  and  entail  unconsidered 
CONSEQUENCES.  Shaharaim  went  into  Moab  and  there  married  a  Moabitess,  having 
children  of  her  (ver.  8).  The  names  of  his  sons  (ver.  9)  were  Moabitish — Mesha 
(see  2  Kings  iii.  4),  Malcham  (an  idol  of  Moab;  see  1  Kings  xi.  33  and  Jer.  xlix. 
1,  2).  This  fact  points  clearly  to  the  evil  influence  under  which  his  children  cam© 
through  this  matrimonial  alliance.  If  we  "  make  aflSnity  "  with  those  who  are  not 
of  like  mind  and  like  principles  with  ourselves,  we  must  be  prepared  for  serious 
spiritual  consequences.  II.  That  human  activity  mat  have  very  long  results. 
Shamed,  the  son  of  Elpaal,  built  two  cities  ;  one  of  them  was  Lod  (ver.  12).  This 
is  identical  with  the  Lydda  of  our  New  Testament  (Acts  ix.  32),  and  with  the 
modem  Ludd.  Here  we  have  an  instance  of  the  results  of  one  man's  activity  being 
witnessed  more  than  thirty  centuries  after  he  has  been  gathered  to  his  fathers.  Who 
can  say  how  far  down  the  stream  of  time  our  influence  will  go  ?  III.  That  violence 
IS  A  BAD  foundation  OF  REST  AND  POWER.  In  vcr.  13  We  Icarn  that,  by  a  noteworthy 
coincidence,  Beriah  with  Shema  "drove  away  the  inhabitants  of  Gath. ' '  In  the  previous 
chapter  (ver.  21)  we  read  that  the  inhabitants  of  Gath  slew  the  sons  of  Ephraim. 
Truly  "  they  that  take  the  sword  shall  perish  with  the  sword."  Violence  seizes  on 
a  neighbour's  land,  and  by  violence  is  itself  dispossessed.  IV.  That  it  is  wise  to 
STAMP  BAD  things  WITH  AN  EVIL  NAME.  Esh-baal  (ver.  33)  is  the  Ishbosheth  of  2  Sam. 
xi.  21  ;  while  Merib-baal  (ver.  34)  is  the  Mephibosheth  of  2  Sam.  iv.  4.  In  these  two 
cases  Baal  is  turned  into  Bosheth,  which  signifies  shame.  Thus,  by  a  simple  name, 
the  heathen  deity  was  branded  with  public  reprobation.  The  evil  thing  was  made 
to  seem  the  ugly  and  offensive  thing  it  was.  Nothing  can  be  more  perilous  to  the 
community  than  the  wrapping  up  of  a  sin  in  some  pleasant  euphemism  ;  e.g.,  if  a 
daughter  has  been  sinful  she  should  not  be  called  "  unfortunate."  Vice  does  not 
lose  half  its  evil  by  losing  all  its  grossness.  If  we  label  sin  with  a  name  that  passes. 
current  in  society,  we  are  co-workers  with  the  tempter  himself.     V,  That  faithful 

BEMEMBRANCE  IN  THE  DAY  OF  POWEB  IS  AN    EXCELLENT    GRACE.       The  line    of    Jonathan 

is  traced  to  many  generations  (ver.  34,  &c.).  Is  not  the  hand  of  David  here  ?  Is 
this  not  a  sign  that  his  vow  (1  Sam.  xx.  15)  was  honourably  filled  ?  What  we 
promise  as  we  are  rising  we  should  scrupulously  discharge  when  we  have  attained 
the  summit  of  our  desires.  It  is  the  mark  of  a  true  man  to  carry  out  with  generous 
fulness  all  that  he  undertook  when  he  was  a  long  way  from  the  goal  and  the  prize. 
VI.  That  the  thought  of  a  worthy  ancestry  is  an  honourable  inducement  to 
WELL-DOING.  "These  dwelt  in  Jerusalem"  (vers.  28-32).  When  the  captives 
returned  from  Babylon  there  was  a  lack  of  men  to  populate  the  sacred  city.  In  the 
country  were  inviting  fields  waiting  for  cultivation,  while  in  the  city  was  danger  to 
be  dared  and  civic  duty  to  be  discharged.  So  that  "  the  people  blessed  all  the  men 
that  willingly  offered  themselves  to  dwell  at  Jerusalem  "  (Neh.  xi.  2).  The  fact 
that  their  ancestors  dwelt  in  the  city  would  probably  operate  as  a  powerful  induce- 
ment to  lead  many  to  offer  themselves  as  citizens,  and  these  would  thus  be  led  to 
serve  their  country  in  a  very  serious  crisis.  The  knowledge  of  the  honourable 
position  taken  by  our  ancestry  is  a  very  lawful  motive  to  obedience  and  aspiration. 
(W.Clarkson,B.A.) 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Yeb.  18.  Very  able  men  for  the  work  of  tbe  service  of  the  bouse  of  God. — 

Religious  ability  : — We  are  not  called  to  ecclesiastical  statesmanship  in  this  verse; 
we  are  called  to  the  kind  of  work  we  can  do  best.  There  are  very  able  doorkeepers, 
as  well  as  very  able  preachers  ;  there  are  very  able  administrators,  as  well  as  very 


CHAP.  IX.]  I.  CHRONICLES. 


able  expositors :  the  one  cannot  do  without  the  other.  What  we  want  in  the  house 
of  God  is  ability — that  is  to  say,  faculty  that  can  utilise  all  other  men,  penetrate 
into  the  meaning  of  all  passing  events,  and  tell  exactly  when  work  is  to  be  done 
and  when  it  is  not  to  be  attempted.  Many  are  willing  who  are  not  able ;  many  are 
able  in  nine  particulars  but  fail  in  the  tenth.  Sometimes  a  whole  number  of  talents 
is  thrust  away,  because  one  talent — the  talent  of  using  the  others — is  wanting. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Obstructive  forces  : — The  era  to  which  the  statements  of  the 
text  belong  was,  like  every  other  era  of  the  militant  people  of  God,  one  that  required 
men  of  ability — and  it  had  them.  In  close  connection  with  these  statements,  we 
read  of  them  that  they  were  "  men  that  had  understanding  of  the  times,  to  know 
what  Israel  ought  to  do  " ;  that  they  "  could  order  the  battle  array  "  ;  that  they 
were  mighty  men  of  valour,  "  whose  faces  were  like  the  faces  of  lions,  and  were  as 
swift  as  the  roes  upon  the  mountains  "  ;  and  their  deeds  of  personal  prowess  are 
stated  in  detail,  showing  that  they  were  men  of  heroic  blood  and  daring  and 
achievement.  Brawn  and  brain  and  blood  stood  in  good  stead  in  those  ages  of  war 
and  conquest,  when  the  cleavage  of  swords  and  the  thrust  of  spears  and  the  might 
of  muscle  determined  victory.  Yet  more  than  even  this,  does  the  Cause,  in  our  day, 
caU  for.  It  calls,  with  profound  beseeching,  for  the  faith  and  the  devotion  of  the 
majority,  nay,  of  the  whole  body,  of  aU  who  love  it  and  love  its  Lord.  After  the 
battle  of  Solferino,  one  of  the  world's  decisive  conflicts,  when  the  line  of  battle 
extended  for  fifteen  miles,  Victor  Emanuel  concluded  his  "order  of  the  day"  in 
these  words  :  "  Soldiers  1  in  former  battles  I  have  often  had  occasion  to  mention 
the  names  of  many  among  you  in  the  order  of  the  day ;  this  time  I  put  the  whole 
army  on  the  order  of  the  day  !  "  The  personal  daring  and  deeds  of  every  man  made 
that  battle  the  most  memorable  in  modern  warfare.  When  our  Victor  Emanuel 
can  put  the  whole  army  in  the  order  of  the  day  the  staid  and  suffering  kingdom 
will  come  to  victory.  In  our  day  there  are  patent  obstructive  forces  to  this  end. 
I.  In  the  first  place,  we  may  notice  that  there  is  much  tjnconsecratbd  abilitt 
which  is  due  to  Christ,  but  which  is  withheld  from  Him.  His  cause,  as  we  have 
said,  is  committed  to  human  instrumentality.  He  retains  His  own  Divine  efiiciency 
in  it,  but  He  permits  men  to  advance  or  to  hinder  it.  Ordinarily,  the  power  of  the 
Church,  in  a  given  community,  is  in  the  ratio  of  the  human  influence  and  character 
which  are  allied  to  it.  If  the  popular  sentiment  is  decidedly  in  its  favour,  if  the 
men  and  women  who  are  able,  intellectually,  socially,  pecuniarily,  are  unequivocally 
and  spiritually  Christian,  the  Church  is  easily  progressive  and  controlling.  But  if 
the  social  leaders  are  divided  in  sentiment,  and  if  the  two  parties  are  about  equal 
in  standing,  in  intelligence,  in  business  and  professional  ability  and  in  property,  the 
kingdom  is  loaded  with  a  serious  disadvantage.  Men  form  their  opinions  under 
the  lead  of  other  men.  Social  influence  is  powerful.  The  young  look  up  to  their 
seniors,  to  those  who  have  had  experience  in  affairs.  The  multitude  are  not  inde- 
pendent thinkers  and  actors.  And  so,  in  this  state  of  things,  religion  contends 
with  odds  against  it.  But  human  nature  is  not,  of  itself,  in  favour  of  religion. 
Human  nature  is  not  only  unsanctified,  but  it  is  depraved.  Men  run  downward 
naturally.  So  long  as  a  moiety  of  those  who  have  influence  in  the  community  are 
arrayed  against  personal  religion,  are  even  not  practically  and  personally  in  its 
favour,  the  drift  wUl  be  largely  away  from  it.  Religion  needs  the  combined  influ- 
ence and  example  of  all  worthy  people.  Those  who  decline  such  support  oppose  an 
obstructive  force  to  the  progress  and  sway  of  the  kingdom.  H.  Not  only  have  we 
a  great  amount  of  this  concentrated  ability,  but  that  ability  which  is  nominally 
consecrated  to  Christ  is  to  a  large  extent  ikefficient.  If  the  Church,  such  as  it 
is  in  numbers,  in  ability,  in  social  standing,  were  a  compact,  disciplined,  working, 
spiritual  force  ;  if  they  were  individually  and  collectively,  able  men  for  the  service 
of  the  house  of  God,  there  would  be  the  certainty  of  victory.  But  plainly  it  is  not 
so.  The  nominal  body  of  Christ,  taken  as  a  whole,  cannot  be  relied  on.  The 
battle  array  shows  a  long,  thin  line,  and  therefore  a  weak  one.  We  may  take  any 
department  of  our  Christian  work,  and  the  report  will  be  the  same  from  each  and 
all.  Even  public  worship  has  scant  attendance.  If  we  should  take  our  measure  by 
the  systematic  endeavour  of  the  Church  to  evangelise  the  parish,  the  showing, 
in  the  aggregate,  would  be  no  better.  Now  this  inefficiency  of  great  Churches, 
strong  in  numbers  and  character  and  resources,  is  an  obstructive  force  to  the 
progress  and  acceptance  of  real  religion :  it  has  a  depressing  influence  on  the 
Christian  body  and  a  repulsive  effect  on  the  world.  We  can  readily  see  how 
different  the  popular  impression  would  be  were  the  whole  Church  engaged,  with 
interest,  with  devotion,  with  the  fervour  of  a  passion,  In  its  Christian  enterprises. 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

We  are  well  aware  that  there  are  able  and  consecrated  men  and  women  who  are 
faithful.  The  hope  of  the  kingdom  is  in  them :  but  the  burdens  of  the  kingdom 
are  well-nigh  insupportable  by  them.  They  need  support ;  they  need  to-day  the 
eDQcient  aid  of  all  those  who  are  nominally  consecrated  to  Christ.  There  is  still 
another  obstructive  force.  III.  We  have  to  contend  with  misdikected  abilitt.  It 
may  be  consecrated  and  efficient,  but  it  is  unwisely  used.  It  is  of  the  guerilla 
order:  "Self-constituted,  or  constituted  by  the  call  of  a  single  individual;  not 
according  to  the  general  law.  It  consists  in  its  disconnection  with  the  army  ;  it  is 
irregular  as  to  permanence."  The  semi-secular  cause  which  they  have  espoused 
is  made  supreme.  For  that  public  worship  is  abandoned.  The  holy  sacraments 
are  supplanted  by  it.  The  devotional  services  of  the  Church  are  obliged  to  give 
way  before  gatherings  for  it.  Devotion  to  Christ  ranks  lower  than  devotion  to  the 
cause.  Now,  what  the  Church  needs  for  its  efficiency,  and  what  the  world  needs 
for  its  salvation,  is  the  right  use  of  all  the  misdirected  ability  of  the  workers.  They 
should  be  called  in  from  their  petty  guerilla  undertakings  to  co-operation  with  the 
combined  and  disciplined  army.  No  obstructive  force  should  hinder  the  great  work 
or  postpone  its  final  triumph.  The  effort  that  is  now  wasted  is  enough  to  give 
success  to  the  one  cause.  The  zeal  spent  in  predatory  excursions  would  insure 
victory  to  the  Lord's  host.  IV.  Further,  in  obstructive  force  is  the  influence  of 
INCONSISTENCY.  The  Christian  profession  is  of  a  strict  order.  Christian  character 
is  definitely  marked.  Disciples  of  Christ  are  separate  from  sinners.  They  belong 
to  another  kingdom.  They  should  stand  in  their  right  and  righteousness.  They 
should  command  the  respect  and  confidence  of  all  other  men.  They  should  sur- 
round Christ  as  nobles  surround  their  king.     (B,  Hart.) 

Ver.  22.  And  Samuel  the  seer. — Samuel,  the  prophet  of  the  Lord  : — Samuel  was 
the  last  of  the  judges  (1  Sam.  viii.  4,  6).  Samuel  was  the  first  of  the  prophets 
(Acts  iii.  24).  I.  Samuel  in  his  childhood.  He  had  a  praying  mother  (1  Sam.  i. 
26,  27).  He  had  an  early  call  to  serve  God  (1  Sam.  ii.  18).  He  had  a  special 
message  from  the  Lord  (1  Sam.  iii.  8,  9).  U.  Samuel  when  he  became  a  man.  He 
was  the  one  by  whom  God  spake  to  the  people  (1  Sam.  iii.  19-21).  He  was  the  one 
by  whom  God  defended  the  people  (1  Sam.  vii.  12,  13).  He  was  the  one  by  whom 
God  instructed  the  people  (1  Sam.  xii.  23,  24).  He  was  the  one  by  whom  God  gave 
a  king  over  the  people  (1  Sam.  x.  24,  25).  III.  Samuel  when  he  dkew  neak  his 
END.  He  appealed  to  the  people  (1  Sam.  iii.  2,  3).  He  reasoned  with  the  people 
(1  Sam.  iii.  7).  He  died  with  the  respect  of  the  people  (1  Sam.  ixv.  1).  Lessons  : 
Begin  to  serve  the  Lord  early.  Determine  to  follow  the  Lord  fully.  Be  ready 
to  hear  the  Lord  only.  Be  persuaded  to  trust  the  Lord  entirely.  Samuel  as  the 
last  of  the  judges  was  great.  Samuel  as  the  first  of  the  prophets  was  greater.  But 
for  the  greatest  honour  which  Samuel  had,  see  Fsa.  xcix.  6.  {The  Clergyman's 
Magazine.) 

Yet.  27.  And  they  lodged  round  about  the  house  of  God,  because  the  charge  was 
upon  them,  and  the  opening  thereof  every  morning  pertained  to  them. — The 

dominence  of  duty : — I.  As  to  recognising  the  imperativeness  of  duty,  "  The 
charge  was  upon  them."  Duty  was  the  absolute  and  dominant  thing  to  these  gate- 
keepers. So  should  it  b  with  us.  Duty  grows  out  of  the  relations  in  which  we 
are  placed.  1.  Some  of  these  relations  are  toward  God.  God  puts  us  where  we  are. 
2.  Some  of  these  relations,  as  with  the  Levite  gate-keepers,  are  towards  God's 
house.  The  charge  is  upon  us  as  Church-members  to  attend  upon,  give  to,  and 
work  for  the  advancement  of  the  Church  to  which  we  belong.  3.  Some  of  these 
relations  are  toward  our  fellow-men.  Israel  depended  on  these  Levites  for  certain 
service.  Our  family,  Church,  city,  State,  nation — all  have  claims  upon  us  for  duty. 
II.  Concerning  the  importance  of  adjusting  one's  life  so  as  to  be  able  to  do  duty. 
These  Levites  "lodged  round  about  the  house  of  God."  That  is,  they  so  adjusted 
their  arrangements  of  living  that  they  could  do  the  duty  that  devolved  upon  them. 
They  planned  for  it,  provided  for  its  certain  accomplishment.  III.  As  to  some  of 
thb  ways  in  which  duty  is  presented  to  us.  1.  In  ways  of  permanent  obligation. 
In  the  case  of  these  Levites  we  are  told  that  the  work  "pertained  "  to  them.  It  was 
a  permanent  thing,  of  unchanging  obligation.  One  of  the  best  ways  for  us  to 
recognise  the  dominance  of  duty  is  by  faithfulness  in  connection  with  those  possibly 
prosaic,  but  unchanging  and  permanent,  duties  that  "  pertain  "  to  us.  2.  Others 
come  in  the  way  of  regular  recurrence.  "  The  opening  thereof  every  morning 
pertained  to  them."    Most  of  our  duties  are  of  this  everyday,  regular,  recurring 


CHAP.x.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  81 

kind.  3.  Duty  is  presented  to  ns  oftentimes  in  things  apparently  trivial.  Theirs 
was  the  "  opening  and  shutting  of  the  gates."  Not  apparently  a  great  thing  ;  but 
it  had  as  close  and  vital  a  relation  to  character  as  if  it  had  been  great.  As  they  did 
their  work,  lowly  though  it  seemed,  well  or  ill,  they  were  morally  well  or  ill.  To 
most  of  us  the  work  God  gives  does  not  seem  great.  But  little  things  can  be  greatly 
done.  By  doing  little  things  faithfully  many  a  life  has  been  made  great.  (G.  B.  F. 
Hallock,  D.D.) 

Vers.  35-44.  And  in  Gibeon  dwelt  the  father  of  Gltoeon. — Pedigree  of  Saul : — In 
the  choice,  anointing,  and  pedigree  of  Saul,  which  enter  into  the  history  of  Israel, 
notice — 1.  The  condescension  of  God.  2.  The  sovereignty  of  God.  3.  The  provi- 
dence of  God.     (/.  Wolfendale.) 


CHAPTER  X. 

Ver.  3.  And  the  battle  went  sore  against  Sanl. — The  death  of  Saul : — Leam  I. 
That  a  splendid  beginning  mat  have  an  awfui.  ending.  II.  That  Divinb  judg- 
ments OVEBTAKE  MEN'S   SINS.      III.    ThAT   IN   NATIONAL  CALAMITIES   THE   GODLY  SUFFER 

WITH  THE  UNGODLY.  (J.  WolfencLaU.)  The  departure  of  God,  the  departure  of 
strength  : — Why  was  the  battle  sore  against  the  king  of  Israel  ?  Saul  believes  him- 
self to  be  forsaken  of  God,  and  therefore  to  have  become  the  sport  of  man.  Here 
we  are  reminded  of  the  analogy  of  the  vine  and  the  branches.  As  the  branch 
cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself,  except  it  abide  in  the  vine,  no  more  can  the  Church  make 
vital  and  faithful  progress,  except  by  continual  fellowship  with  God.  Saul  was 
muscular  as  ever,  as  ambitious  as  ever,  and  as  energetic  as  ever ;  but  he  had  lost 
the  consciousness  of  the  nearness  of  the  Almighty.  What  are  all  church  buildings, 
formularies,  ceremonies,  pecuniary  resources,  literary  achievements,  when  the  Spirit 
of  God  has  been  grieved  or  quenched  ?  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  An  vnblest  leader  does 
not  necessarily  represent  an  unblest  cause : — ^Although  the  battle  went  sore  against 
Saul,  we  must  not  suppose  that  Saul  represented  an  unblest  cause.  The  reason 
may  be  in  Saul  himself,  rather  than  in  the  cause  for  which  he  fought.  Sometimes 
leaders,  captains,  and  commanders  have  to  be  overborne  or  displaced,  in  order  that 
the  great  cause  which  they  fail  to  grasp,  and  adequately  to  represent,  may  vindicate 
its  own  claim  to  a  position  of  confidence  and  honour.  It  does  not  follow  that  because 
a  man  has  been  once  a  leader,  that  he  must  be  always  at  the  head  of  the  army. 
Sometimes  by  the  infirmity  of  old  age  the  very  princes  of  the  Church  are  displaced 
and  put  behind.  There  are  some  trusts  which  we  only  keep  as  long  as  we  keep  our 
character.     {J.  Wolfendale.) 

Ver.  4.  Draw  thy  sword,  and  thrust  me  through. — Suicide  as  illustrated  by  the 
case  of  Saul : — I.  Causes. — 1.  Not  merely  accumulated  misfortune,  but  long-con- 
tinued wrongdoing.  2.  Cowardly  fear  of  suffering.  8.  Caring  more  for  disgrace 
than  for  sin.  4.  Abandonment  of  trust  of  God  as  to  this  life  and  to  the  future 
life.  II.  Effects. — 1.  Others  led  by  the  example  into  the  same  folly  and  sin. 
2.  Personal  dishonour  not  really  prevented.  3.  A  crowning  and  lasting  reproach 
to  the  man's  memory.     (J.  P.  Lange.) 

Vers.  8-10.  And  It  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow,  when  the  Philistines  came  to 
strip  the  slain,  that  they  found  Saul. — A  good  beginning  with  a  bad  ending  : — Many 
men  begin  with  influential  parentage,  social  station,  ample  education,  pecuniary 
competence,  yet  they  travel  a  downhill  road,  falling  first  into  neglect  and  then  into 
oblivion.  Physical  greatness,  social  security,  public  applause  are  being  con- 
tinually rebuked,  humiliated,  and  put  to  shame.  The  proverb  wisely  says,  "  Call 
no  man  happy  until  he  is  dead."  The  meaning  is  that  at  the  very  best  a  man 
may  make  a  slip  which  will  bring  his  whole  life  into  degradation  in  every  sense  of 
the  term.  There  is  but  a  step  between  man  and  death — not  physical  death  only, 
but  the  death  of  character,  reputation,  and  influence.  It  remains  with  each  man 
to  say  whether  a  good  beginning  shall  have  a  good  ending.  This  is  a  question  of 
personal  discipline,  holy  fellowship  with  God,  and  an  acceptance  of  all  processes 
which  have  been  divinely  established  for  the  training  and  sanctifiication  of  man. 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

The  word  comes  with  special  urgency  to  young  persons,  to  men  of  influence,  to 
successful  men,  and  to  all  who  are  plied  by  the  temptations  incident  to  high 
station  and  wide  influence.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  13, 14.  So  Saul  died  for  liis  transgression  wUch  lie  committed  against 
the  Lord. — The  doom  of  King  Saul :  —We  have  no  right  to  understand  this  account 
of  Saul's  death  as  referring  to  one  act  of  his  life.     It  speaks  as  well  of  his  general 
transgression  against  the  Lord.      Saul  consulted  the  witch  the  night  before  he 
died ;  and  whether  it  was  his  worst  offence  or  no,  it  was  the  immediate  precursor 
of  his  destruction,  the  last  drop  which  made  the  cup  of  vengeance  overflow  :  there 
remained  for  him  no  other  recorded  act  of  sin  before  his  self-murder.     Look  well 
to  the  next  sin  you  are  tempted  to  commit.    It  may  be  your  last  act.     If  indulged 
it  may  prove  a  step  on  the  road  to  destruction  from  which  there  is  no  receding. 
Was  Saul  a  man  who  lived  and  died  without  repentance?     In  one  sense — the 
highest  sense  of  repentance — he  was ;    in  another  he  was  not.     The  repentance 
which   God  acknowledges  is  not  momentary  sorrow  or  good   resolutions,  soon 
repented  of  in  the  wrong  direction  ;   it  is  that  thorough  change  of  heart  which 
works  in  us  the  steadiness  of  real  Christian  principle ;  which  makes  us,  who  have 
been  baptized  and  reared  as  Christians,  to  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  above  all 
things ;  to  hold  His  favour  dearer  than  life  itself ;  and  to  have  no  stronger  desire 
than  that  our  thoughts,  feelings,  life  may  be  conformed  to  His  will.      Such  a 
change  the  history  leads  us  to  believe  King  Saul  never  knew.    After  his  first  inter- 
view with  Samuel,  we  read  that  "  God  gave  him  another  heart."    But  his  after-life 
shows  that  this  change  was  not  an  abiding  change.     Sin  springing  up,  reckless 
self-indulgence,  blighted  and  destroyed  feelings  of  good  which  gave  such  hopeful 
promise  at  first.      The  true  change  of  heart  must  be  abiding.      Look  at  the 
recorded  acts  by  which  Saul  grieved  God's  Spirit.     1.  His  sacrificing  to  the  Lord 
(1  Sam.  xiii.  9).     SeLt-will  was  at  the  root  of  this  act — that  self-will  which  poisoned 
all  Saul's  after-life.     2.  The  rash  vow  by  which  he  forbade  the  people  to  taste  any 
food  (1  Sam.  xiv.  24).     This  showed  the  same  unchecked  impetuosity,  reckless  in 
its  self-willed  way  of  honouring   God.     3.  His  sparing  the  Amalekites  (1  Sam. 
XV.  9).     These  earlier  acts  of  Saul's  rebellion  were  but  the  precursors  of  what  was 
worse.     4.  His  yielding  himself  up  to  the  one  master  passion  of  envy  (1  Sam.  xviii. 
7-9).     The   king  obviously  is  lost  now,  and  there   is  no   compunction,  for  he 
cherishes  his  sin.     5.  The  atrocious  massacre  of  the  priests  (1  Sam.  xxii.  17,  18). 
And  now  his  own  life  hurries  to  its  miserable  close.     He  feels  that  he  is  deserted  of 
God,  and  that  nothing  prospers  with  him.    Forsaken  of  God  ?    Why  ?    Because 
of  unrepented  sin.    No  wonder  that  the  degraded  king  seeks  death  by  his  own 
hand,  when  life  has  become  intolerable.    Kead  here  the  melancholy  end  of  the  self- 
will  and  evil  passions  long  indulged,  till  the  soul  becomes  their  slave,  and  all  hope 
is  gone,  and  God  with  it.     The  reckless  self-willed  life  must  lead  to  a  death  without 
hope.     (Bp.  Archibald  Campbell.)        And  also  for  asking  counsel  of  one  that  had 
a  familiar  spirit. — Saul  inquiring  of  the  enchantress  : — Thus  perished  one   who 
entered  with  fair  promise  on  an  arduous  office,  and  gave  indications  of  capacities 
and  dispositions  which  seemed  to  ensure  a  prosperous  career.    But  "  the  root  of 
the  matter  "  was  not  in  Saul ;  he  had  not  been  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  his  mind, 
and  therefore  was  he  unable  to  bear  himself  meekly  in  greatness,  and  gave  way  to 
an  arrogant  and  impetuous  temper,  forgetting  that  "  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice, 
and  to  hearken  than  the  fat  of  rams."     Thus  was  he  turned  into  a  wild  and 
desperate  man,  sparing  not  in  his  rage  the  priests  of  God,  and  calling  to  his  aid 
enchantments  and  sorcery.     So  that  at  length  it  came  to  pass  that  Saul  died  for 
his  transgressions  against  the  word  of  the  Lord — for  asking  counsel  of  one  who  had 
a  familiar  spirit.     There  are  many  important  lessons  that  might  be  drawn  from  the 
history  thus  briefly  reviewed.      I.  You  are  carefully  to  observe  that  Saul,  who 

HEBE     HAD     RECOURSE     TO     WITCHCRAFT,     HAD     BEFOKB     TAKEN     MEASURES,     VIGOROUS 

MEASURES,  FOR  EXTERMINATING  WITCHCRAFT ;  and  it  was  at  ouce  a  proof  that  he  was 
far  gone  in  iniquity,  and  an  evidence  that  his  ruin  came  on  apace,  when  he  could 
thus  become  the  patron  of  a  sin  of  which  he  had  before  been  the  opponent.  There 
is  no  greater  moral  peril  than  that  which  surrounds  an  individual  who,  after 
he  has  given  up  a  sinful  practice,  again  betakes  himself  to  it.  "  The  last  state  of 
that  man  is  worse  than  the  first."  We  cannot  doubt  of  numbers  amongst  you, 
that  they  have  had,  and  still  have,  their  seasons  of  spiritual  disquietude,  when, 
obeying  a  mighty  impulse,  which  is  not  of  this  earth,  they  break  away  from 
associations  and  customs  which  they  feel  to  be  injurious,  and  become,  ii  not 


OTAP.x.]  I.  CHRONICLES,  33 

altogether,  yet  almost,  Christians.  Now  our  business  with  such  is  to  announce  to 
them  their  immeasurable  peril,  if,  after  being  convinced  of  the  sinfulness  of  a 
practice,  and  proving  their  conviction  by  temporary  abstinence,  they  again  indulge 
in  what  they  profess  to  forsake.  To  resume  a  renounced  habit  is  to  give  tenfold 
energy  to  the  tyranny  from  which  you  broke  loose.  Are  you  then  scared  by  the 
visit  of  Saul  to  the  sorceress?  do  you  marvel  at  the  infatuation  of  the  monarch  as 
you  mark  him,  under  cover  of  the  night,  stealthily  approaching  the  scene  of  foul 
arts  and  unhallowed  incantations?  are  you  ready  with  the  sentence  of  stern 
condemnation,  prepared  to  find  Saul  given  over  to  destruction,  now  that  you 
behold  him  tampering  with  witchcraft,  and  seeking  to  invade  the  repose  of  the 
dead?  But  what,  after  all,  is  the  king  of  Israel  doing,  but  that  with  which 
yourselves  may  be  justly  charged  ?  He  is  only  returning  to  that  which  he  had 
forsaken ;  and  the  worst  feature  in  his  case  (the  worst,  because  it  proves  a  seared 
conscience,  and  the  absence  of  deep-wrought  impressions)  is  just  that  with  which 
your  own  conduct  is  marked — the  seeking  comfort  where  you  had  detected  sin.  If 
&  man  have  felt  the  evil  of  oovetousness,  for  example,  and  if  he  have  set  himself 
vigorously  against  the  love  of  money,  and  if,  after  a  while,  he  yield  himself  once 
more  to  the  passion  for  gold,  what  is  he,  if  he  returns  to  the  dominion  of  avarice, 
but  Saul  hurrying  to  the  cave  of  the  enchantress  ?  He  was  originally  beguiled  by 
the  witchery  of  money,  and  he  escaped  from  the  witchery ;  and  now  he  is  again 
giving  himself  up  to  that  witchery.  If  a  man  have  been  the  slave  of  his  appetites, 
and  if  he  have  felt  the  degradation,  and  acted  on  the  resolve  of  "  keeping  under  the 
body,"  and  if  he  then  plunge  back  into  sensuality,  what  is  he,  if  he  allow  his 
passions  to  re-assume  the  lost  sovereignty,  but  Saul  consorting  with  the  wizard  ? 
He  was  originally  under  the  spell  of  voluptuousness,  and  he  broke  that  speU  ;  and 
now  is  again  weaving  that  spell.  If  a  man  have  lived  in  utter  carelessness  with 
regard  to  another  world,  and  if  he  have  been  stirred  from  his  insensibility,  so  that 
he  have  set  himself  in  good  earnest  to  the  making  provision  for  death  and  for 
judgment ;  and  if,  after  awhile,  he  relapse  into  moral  apathy,  what  is  he,  as  he 
goes  back  to  his  stupor,  but  Saul  seeking  out  a  woman  with  a  familiar  spirit  ? 
Observe,  we  entreat  of  you,  that  it  was  not  until  Saul  had  consulted  God,  and  God 
had  refused  to  answer  him  by  dreams,  or  by  Urim,  or  by  prophets,  that  he  took  the 
iatal  resolve  of  applying  to  the  necromancer.  We  fear  for  those  of  you  on  whose 
minds  some  serious  impressions  may  have  been  wrought,  and  who  have  been  made 
uneasy  as  to  their  spiritual  condition,  lest,  not  finding  much  comfort  in  religion, 
they  should  seek  it  once  more  in  the  world.  Men  are  apt  to  forget,  when  roused  to 
anxiety  as  to  the  soul,  how  long  they  have  made  God  wait  for  them,  and  how 
justly,  therefore,  they  might  expect  that  the  peace  and  happiness  of  the  gospel  will 
not  be  imparted  at  the  first  moment  they  are  sought ;  and  then  there  is  great 
danger  of  their  being  quickly  wearied,  and  turning  to  other  and  worthless  sources 
of  comfort.  They  have  consulted  God,  and  they  have  received  no  answer, 
•'  whether  by  dreams,  or  by  Urim,  or  by  prophets  "  ;  and  therefore  they  seek  peace 
in  earthly  fascinations,  and  strive  to  lull  the  conscience  by  enchantments  of  the 
sorceress.  Oh !  if  there  be  any  amongst  you  who,  in  order  to  get  rid  of  uneasy 
thoughts  about  their  souls,  would  bury  themselves  in  the  occupations  and  pleasures 
of  the  world,  we  stand  here  to  arrest  them  in  their  fatal  determination.    II.  Theke 

IS  SOMETHING  VEEY  TOUCHING  IN    THE   FACT   THAT  IT  WAS  SaMUEL  WHOM  SaTJL  DESIIIED 

THE  WITCH  TO  CALL  UP.  Samuel  had  boldly  reproved  Saul,  and,  as  it  would 
appear,  offended  him  by  his  faithfulness.  And  yet  Saul  said,  "Bring  up  Samuel." 
And  herein  is  an  instance  of  what  frequently  occurs.  How  many  who  have 
despised  the  advice  of  a  father  or  a  mother,  and  grieved  their  parents  by  opposition 
and  disobedience,  long  bitterly  to  bring  them  back,  when  they  have  gone  down  to 
the  grave,  that  they  may  have  the  benefit  of  the  counsel  which  they  once  slighted 
and  scorned  I  If  they  could  go  to  the  necromancer  in  the  hour  of  their  distress,  it 
would  not  be,  "  Bring  me  up  the  companion  who  cheered  me  in  my  gaieties,  who 
•was  with  me  at  the  revel,  and  the  dance,  and  the  public  show,"  but  "  Bring  me 
up  the  father,  with  his  grey  hairs,  who  solemnly  told  me  that  '  the  way  of  trans- 
gressors was  hard  ' ;  or  the  mother  who,  with  weeping  eyes  and  broken  voice, 
admonished  me  against  sinful  indulgences."  Yet  if  you  neglect  the  Lord,  and 
continue  to  resist  the  strivings  of  His  Spirit,  so  that  at  length  He  departs  from  you 
as  He  departed  from  Saul,  what  would  it  avail  that  the  grave  should  give  up  its 
inhabitants — that  the  parent,  or  the  friend,  or  the  minister  should  return  at  your 
bidding  ?  The  father  or  the  mother  could  only  say,  "  Why  hast  thou  disquieted 
(zue  to  bring  me  up  ?   and  wherefore  dost  thou  ask  of  me,  seeing  the  Lord  has 

3 


84  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

departed  from  thee,  and  become  thine  enemy  ?  "  And  thus  also  is  it  with  your 
minister.  He  has  reproved  and  admonished  you  week  by  week,  and  year  after 
year,  and  you  have  been  either  indifferent  to  his  pleadings,  or  offended  at  their 
urgency.  And  then  he  dies  ;  and  you  are,  perhaps,  almost  pleased  to  be  freed  from 
his  pointed  remonstrances.  But  you  may  think  of  him  again  when  you  feel  that 
this  world  is  slipping  from  your  grasp,  and  you  have  not  laid  hold  on  eternal  life. 
You  shall  have  your  wish.  "An  old  man  cometh  up,  and  he  is  covered  with  a 
mantle."  But  what  can  you  expect  to  hear  from  his  lips?  Your  wretchedness  is 
of  your  own  making.  If  you  have  no  hope,  it  is  because  God  hath  called  a 
thousand  times  and  you  would  not  answer.  If  you  are  oppressed  with  terror,  it  ia 
because  Christ  hath  entreated  you  for  many  years  to  receive  pardon  through  His 
blood ;  and  you  have  set  at  nought  the  Mediator.  What  then,  shall  the  minister 
Bay  to  you,  when  you  exclaim  with  Saul,  "  I  am  sore  distressed,  for  the  Philistines 
make  war  against  me,  and  God  is  departed  from  me,  and  answereth  me  no  more, 
neither  by  prophets  nor  by  dreams" ?  what  shall  he  say  to  you  if  not  what  Samuel 
said  to  Saul — "Why  hast  thou  disquieted  me  to  bring  me  up?  Wherefore  dost 
thou  ask  of  me,  seeing  the  Lord  is  departed  from  thee,  and  is  become  thine 
enemy  ?  "    (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  SauVs  declension  : — I.  The  possibilitt  that  a. 

MAN  MAT  FAUj  FBOM  SPIEITUAL  COMMTJNION  WITH  THE  DiVINE  AND  INVISIBLE.  II.  ThB 
RAPIDITY  WITH  WHICH  A  MAN  MAT  TAIiL  FROM  THE  HIGHEST  EMINENCE.  HI.  ThB 
CERTAINTY  THAT   ONE   DAT   THE   IMPENITENT   WILL   WANT   THEIB   OLD  TEACHERS.       {City 

Temple.) 


CHAPTER   XI. 

Ver.  9.  So  David  ■waxed  greater  and  greater ;  for  tlie  Lord  of  hosts  was  with 
him. — David' t  prosperity: — I.  God  is  the  true  source  of  prosperity.     H.  God 

DETERMINES    THE    REAL   NATURE  OF  PROSPEBITT.      HI.    GoD   FIXES   THB    EXACT    TIME    OF 

PROSPERITY.  (J.  Wolfendale.)  Ood's  favour  helpful  to  prosperity : — When  I 
resided  in  a  wooded  part  of  Scotland,  I  used  to  notice  that  the  trees  nearest  tha 
light  at  the  edge  of  a  dense  forest  had  larger  branches  than  those  in  the  interior, 
and  that  the  same  tree  would  throw  out  a  long  branch  towards  the  light  and  a  short 
one  towards  the  dark  recess  of  the  forest.  (J.  Thain  Davidson,  D.D.)  God's 
Messing  i$  necessary  to  prosperity  : — If  we  turn  to  Him,  and  become  recipients  of 
His  grace,  then  will  our  talents  and  faculties  develop,  and  be  used  in  the  right 
direction. 

Vers.  15-19.  Now  three  of  the  thirty  captains  went  down  to  the  rock  to  David. 

— The  water  of  the  xcell  of  Bethlehem : — This  incident,  although  it  rests  upon  a  basis 
of  conspicuous  bravery,  evidently  owes  its  cardinal  importance  to  far  deeper  con- 
siderations. Some  might  be  tempted  to  think  that  David's  conduct  in  pouring  out 
the  water  was  fantastic  and  wasteful — an  ill-timed  intrusion  of  a  poetic  sentiment 
on  the  stern  realities  of  life.  On  the  contrary  his  conduct  is  penetrated  with  the 
sense  of  the  value  of  life,  with  deep  appreciation  of  heroism  and  with  a  high-minded 
shrinking  from  any  mean  appropriation  of  the  unselfish  devotion  of  his  fellow-men. 
Some  lives  there  are  that  whatever  is  done  for  them  are  never  thrilled  by  any  self- 
abasing  surprise  ;  no  sacrifice  is  above  their  merit — their  bottomless  egotism  could 
swallow  worlds.  I.  The  base  acckptance  of  the  incalculable  risks  and  toils  .vnd- 
SORROWS  of  other  MEN  is  to  be  noted  in — 1.  Those  in  whom  is  developed  the  undue 
love  of  command  and  the  imperious  appetite  for  personal  distinction.  The 
monarchs  of  the  older  world  who  remorselessly  sacrificed  blood  and  treasure  to 
build  themselves  impregnable  cities,  or  to  erect  stately  sepulchres.  The  Eastern 
chieftain  who  bade  his  warrior  take  the  needless  death-lenp.  Napoleon  Bonaparte. 
2.  In  those  simply  selfish  ones  who  have  not  yet  risen  high  enough  to  alTord  tliem- 
selves  the  luxury  of  tyranny.  Their  maxim  is  "  Everybody  for  himself."  I  have 
heard  of  a  farmer,  whose  parcel  of  ground  one  might  ride  round  in  a  couple  of 
hours,  express  an  eager  desire  for  a  war  between  two  great  powers,  since  it  would 
probably  enrich  him.  Merchants  and  millowners  have  not  been  free  from  such 
wishes.  All  this  is  to  batten  on  flesh  and  blood.  3.  In  the  indifferent  many  of  U3 
are  like  the  receivers  of  stolen  property,  only  too  satisfied  to  receive  and  to  ask  no 
questions.    We  expect  all  the  machinery  of  our  life  to  work  with  regularity,  but  are 


CHAT.  XI.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  86 

coldly  indifferent  to  the  means.  Let  us  learn  from  David  a  view  of  life  diviner  and 
therefore  more  humane.  II.  Think  or  the  hekoic  water-fetchino  that  lies 
BEHIND  otTB  OWN  LIFE.  1.  Historically.  Whole  civilisations  lie  behind  us;  the 
Egyptian,  Assyrian,  Persian,  Greek,  and  Roman — each  has  contributed  its  quota 
and  we  inherit  the  best  of  each.  Do  we  reflect,  with  sufficient  gratitude  to  God  and 
man,  on  that  costly  part  of  which  we  are — the  result  ?  2.  The  present  day.  Our 
life  is  enriched  by  the  multitudinous  toil  of  those  who  remain  unknown,  and  often 
scantily  rewarded.  David's  words  are  not  without  meaning  to  us  under  existing 
social  conditions.  3.  Let  us  step  on  to  more  personal  ground.  (1)  Some  of  us  are 
where  we  are  through  the  wonderful  devotion  of  our  parents.  (2)  Some  of  us,  later 
on  in  life,  have  been  saved  by  the  generous  resolve  and  clinging  faithfulness  of 
those  whom  it  cost  a  great  effort  to  befriend  us.  III.  What  does  David's  view  lead 
rs  TO  ?  1.  Solemn  thoughtfulness.  What  are  we  that  all  this  should  have  been 
done  for  us  ?  We  ought  to  learn  reverence  for  that  majesty  of  history  which  the 
children  of  the  market-place  deride.  We  ought  to  view  our  privileges  with  a  more 
anxious  sense  of  responsibility.  2.  The  acceptance  of  such  services  as  have  been 
referred  to  is  inevitable,  for  we  cannot  unmake  history  or  sever  ourselves  from  the 
complex  influences  of  the  present  order  of  society.  But  what  does  rest  in  every 
man's  power  is  to  form  his  own  estimate  of  the  value  of  such  services  and  to  decide 
what  use  their  sacred  splendour  or  gentle  unselfishness  urge  him  to  put  them  to. 
S.  The  impulse  to  self-abnegation  which  we  see  in  David.  This  is  the  practical 
tendency  of  all  such  lives  and  deeds.  The  legend  of  Curtius,  self-devoted  that  he 
might  save  the  State,  may  have  been  simply  a  concrete  personification  of  the  general 
patriotism  of  early  Eome  ;  but  it  gave  memorable  impulses  to  later  generations.  It 
was  not  absent  from  the  mind  of  Eegulus  ;  it  helped  to  cheer  the  Roman  legions  in 
Parthia  and  Persia  and  amid  the  German  swamps  and  forests.  God  has  set  our 
lives  in  a  framework  of  noble  and  unceasing  sacrifice.  In  this  old  Jewish  story  we 
have  a  significant  though  undesigned  illustration  of  the  transcendent  sacrifice  of 
Christ.  He  has  brought  us  the  true  "  living  water."  (T.  Rhys  Evans. )  Jashobeam, 
and  courageous  companions  : — It  was  just  like  David  with  his  intense  nature  to  speak 
and  act  in  the  way  recorded  in  these  verses.  Just  as  an  Italian  in  a  northern  region 
longs  for  the  fruits  and  blue  skies  of  his  own  land,  so  David  longed  for  the  water.  We 
have  here — I.  A  manifestation  of  devoted  lotaltt.  What  ought  we  to  venture  for 
our  King  Jesus  ?  II.  High  appreciation  of  service.  David  pours  it  out  before  the 
Lord  as  the  only  One  who  is  worthy  to  receive  so  great  a  sacrifice.  Some  might 
blame  him  for  appearing  to  throw  a  slight  on  the  act  of  the  brave  men — judicious 
waste.  Some  had  indignation  when  the  woman  broke  the  alabaster  box  of  ointment 
over  Christ's  feet ;  but  He  looked  at  it  in  another  light — He  approved  that  loving, 
loyal,  lavish  "  waste."  Only  selfish  souls  could  be  indifferent  to  the  lives  of  others. 
His  act  was  not  like  that  of  the  Pasha  in  the  Russo-Turkish  war  who,  when 
English  doctors  went  to  him  at  a  great  cost,  eager  to  help  the  wounded  Turkish 
soldiers,  repulsed  them  and  firmly  declined  to  receive  their  services.  WTiat  ought 
to  be  our  feeling  towards  our  King  who  has  broken  through  the  ranks  of  evil,  to  gain 
for  us  the  water  of  Life  ?  {F.  Hastings.)  Longing  for  the  associations  of  child- 
hood : — There  are  times  in  life  when  our  childhood  comes  up  with  new  meaning 
and  with  new  appeal.  We  long  for  the  old  homestead,  for  the  mountains  which 
girdled  us  round  in  early  life,  for  the  friends  who  heard  our  first  speech  and 
answered  our  first  desires ;  we  want  to  leave  the  far  country  and  go  home  again, 
and,  forgetting  all  the  burden  of  the  past,  start  life  with  all  that  is  richest  in  experi- 
ence. Any  water  would  have  quenched  David's  thirst,  but  there  are  times  when 
mere  necessaries  are  not  enough ;  we  must  have  the  subtle  touch,  the  mysterious 
association,  the  romantic  impulse,  all  the  poetry  of  life.  In  our  spiritual  life  we 
cannot  be  satisfied  with  great  conceptions,  brilliant  thoughts,  miracles  of  genius, 
words  employed  by  the  tongue  of  the  master ;  we  need  a  tone,  a  look,  a  touch,  a 
peculiar  and  distinctive  something  which  belongs  to  the  very  root  and  core  of  life, 
being  charged  with  a  poetry  and  a  force  all  its  own.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Water 
poured  out  as  a  libation : — Some  years  ago  in  the  State  House  of  Georgia,  at  Atlanta, 
this  scene  occurred  :  A  coloured  minister,  standing  in  the  State  House,  said  he  was 
thirsty,  and  he  was  looking  for  something  to  drink.  A  white  gentleman  standing 
by,  said,  "  I'll  get  you  a  drink,"  and  departed  from  the  room.  As  the  white  gentle- 
man was  coming  back  with  a  glass  of  water  for  this  black  clergyman  some  one  said 
to  the  clergyman,  "  Do  you  know  who  that  is  who  is  bringing  you  a  glass  of  water?  " 
"  No  I  who  is  it  ?  "  "  That  is  Governor  Colquitt."  Then  the  black  man  took  the 
glass  of  water  and  said,  "  Thank  you,  Governor,  but  I  cannot  drink  this  under  such 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

circumstances,"  and  he  poured  it  on  the  floor,  saying:  "  I  pour  this  out  as  a  libation 
on  the  altar  of  Christian  feeling  between  the  two  races."  Dramatic?  Yes,  but 
Christian,  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  A  modem  hero  : — A  window  in  the  chapel 
of  the  Lichfield  Cathedral  has  a  special  meaning.  It  is  one  of  several  windows 
presented  by  the  officers  and  men  who  had  served  in  New  Zealand  during  the 
Maori  War,  in  token  of  their  gratitude  for  Bishop  Selwyn's  attention  to  their  welfare 
in  that  campaign.  It  is  a  medallion  depicting  David  in  the  act  of  pouring  out  the 
longed-for  "  water  of  the  well  of  Bethlehem,"  procured  for  him  by  "  the  three 
mighty  men  "  at  the  risk  of  their  lives.  This  medallion  commemorates  the  similar 
heroic  action  of  a  Christian  Maori  who  had  been  a  pupil  of  Dr.  Selwyn's  when  he 
was  Bishop  of  New  Zealand.  This  Maori,  Henere  Taratoa,  when  the  war  broke 
out,  felt  bound  to  join  his  tribe.  He  was  placed  in  charge  of  a  fortified  vUlage 
known  as  the  formidable  "  Gate  Pa."  The  British  troops  stormed  the  pa,  and  were 
repulsed  with  great  slaughter.  Several  wounded  oiScers  were  left  inside  the  village, 
and  one  of  them  feebly  moaned  for  water.  There  was  no  water  to  be  had,  the 
nearest  being  within  the  British  lines.  At  night  this  young  Christian  Maori  crept 
down,  at  the  risk  of  his  life,  within  the  line  of  English  sentries,  filled  a  vessel  with 
water,  and  carried  it  back  to  the  pa  to  refresh  his  dying  enemy's  lips.  The  next  day 
the  British  again  stormed  the  place,  and  Henere  was  killed.  On  his  person  was  found 
the  text  of  Holy  Scripture  which  had  suggested  the  deed  :  "  If  thine  enemy  thirst, 
give   him    drink  I  "      (Sunday   Companion.)  Self-forgetfulness  : — That  which 

especially  distinguishes  a  high  order  of  man  from  a  low  order  of  man — that  which 
constitutes  human  goodness,  human  nobleness — is  surely  not  the  degree  of 
enlightenment  with  which  men  pursue  their  own  advantage  ;  but  it  is  self-forgetful- 
ness, it  is  self-sacrifice,  it  is  the  disregard  of  personal  pleasure  and  personal  indul- 
gence, personal  advantages  remote  or  present.     (A.  Froude.) 

Ver.  22.  The  son  of  a  valiant  man  of  EabzeeL — Valiant  men: — If  we  are  to 
expect  the  virtues  of  the  fathers  repeated  in  the  sons,  what  wonderful  progress  the 
ages  ought  to  have  seen  ?  It  is  a  marvellous  fact  that  whatever  a  father  may  be  able 
to  bequeath  to  his  children  he  is  unable  to  give  them  the  information  which  he 
himself  has  acquired.  Every  man  must  learn  the  alphabet  for  himself.  Some 
degree  of  mental  force  may  be  traceable  to  heredity,  and  unquestionably  it  is  so  ;  at 
the  same  time  that  mental  force  is  to  be  exercised  by  its  owner  on  quite  independent 
grounds.  We  cannot  live  long  on  the  reputation  of  our  fathers.  A  curious  law  of 
recession  seems  to  operate  on  the  progress  of  mankind.  The  son  of  Aristotle  is  not 
Aristotle  plu£ ;  he  may  indeed  be  Aristotle  minus  in  an  alarming  degree,  quite  an 
indifferent  figure,  an  incapable  person,  a  living  irony  upon  the  greatness  of  the 
father  to  whom  he  belongs ;  yet  in  the  next  generation  there  may  be  a  distinct 
advance,  and  even  the  original  greatness  may  be  transcended.  We  must  never 
forget  the  responsibiUty  of  having  a  great  father.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  23.  And  lie  slew  an  Egyptian. — The  spiritual  slaughter: — We  too  are 
called  upon  to  slay,  to  destroy  and  to  overthrow.  Are  we  anxious  to  slay  a  lion  ? 
1.  There  is  a  lion  to  be  fought  by  every  man — Satan  (1  Pet.  v.  8).  We  are  called 
npon  to  fight  against — 2.  Self-indulgence.  3.  Worldly  fashion.  4.  Worldly  ambi- 
tion. Truly  there  is  battle  enough  now  to  be  done.  Whosoever  will  set  himself 
against  the  customs  of  his  time,  the  popular  policies  of  the  circle  in  which  he 
moves,  the  prejudices  of  the  persons  whose  friendship  he  values,  will  find  that  he 
must  have  a  sword  in  his  right  hand,  and  that  even  whilst  he  sleeps  he  must  have 
his  armour  so  near  that  at  a  moment's  notice  he  can  be  once  more  in  the  fraj. 
(Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  Xn. 


Vkb.  1.  Now  these  are  they  that  came  to  David  to  ZlMa^, — Oood  mm  centres  of 

lawful  activity : — The  good  and  the  great  draw  others  after  them ;  they  lighten 
and  lift  up  aU  who  are  within  reach  of  their  influence.  They  are  so  many  living 
centres  of  beneficent  activity.  Let  a  man  of  energetic  and  upright  character  be 
appointed  to  a  position  of  trust  and  authority,  and  all  who  serve  under  hiin  become, 
as  it  were,  conscious  of  an  increase  of  power.     {S.  Smile$.) 


CHAP.  XII.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  37 

Vers.  8-15.  And  of  the  Gadites  there  separated  themselves  unto  David. — David 
and  his  volunteers  : — David,  compelled  to  flee  from  his  own  country,  and  to  hide 
himself  from  the  malice  of  Saul,  was  eminently  a  type  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
who,  in  the  days  when  He  dwelt  here  among  men,  was  despised  and  rejected  of 
men.  All  who  would  repair  to  Him  must  go  forth  likewise,  bearing  His  reproach. 
These  eleven  Gadites — all  of  them  remarkable  men — espoused  the  cause  of  David 
when  he  was  in  his  very  worst  condition ;  they  left  the  ease  and  comfort,  the 
honours  and  emoluments,  of  their  own  home  to  associate  themselves  with  him 
when  he  was  regarded  as  an  outlaw  under  the  ban  of  society.  And  to  this  day 
every  Christian  who  is  faithful  to  his  profession  must  separate  himself  from  his 
fellow-men  to  be  a  follower  of  the  despised  Jesus.  I.  The  leader,  whom  wb  regard 
AS  A  TYPE  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  was  David,  the  son  of  Jesse  ;  and  in  tracing 
out  some  points  of  analogy  we  begin  by  noticing — 1.  That,  like  David,  our  Lord 
was  anointed  of  God  to  be  the  leader  of  His  people.  It  is  an  honour  to  follow  one 
who  has  the  highest  sanction  of  heaven  in  taking  the  command  and  exercising  the 
authority  that  pertains  to  him.  2.  Jesus  was  like  David,  too,  in  that  He  was 
personally  fit  to  be  a  leader.  David,  alike  by  his  character  and  his  deeds  of 
prowess,  had  become  the  foremost  man  of  his  times.  So  our  blessed  Lord,  as  to 
His  person,  is  just  such  a  King  as  one  might  desire  to  obey;  and,  as  for  His 
achievements,  0  teU  what  His  arm  hath  done — what  spoils  from  death  His  right 
hand  won  I  Let  His  fame  be  spread  over  all  the  earth  !  He  stood  in  the  gap  when 
there  was  none  to  help.  He  vanquished  the  foe  who  threatened  our  destruction. 
3.  But  our  Lord,  though  anointed  of  God  and  meriting  the  distinction  which  He 
gained,  was,  nevertheless,  like  David,  rejected  of  men.  So  the  seed  of  the  serpent 
hates  the  seed  of  the  woman.  But  notwithstanding  the  pains  and  penalties  they 
incurred  in  those  dark  days,  the  really  good  and  pious  people  in  Israel  rallied  to 
the  standard  of  David.  I  know  it  is  said  that  those  who  were  in  debt  and  dis- 
contented came  to  David,  That  is  quite  true ;  and  well  it  typifies  the  abject 
condition  of  those  poor  sinners  who  come  to  Christ  for  refuge  ;  but  many  of  those 
Israelites  were  reduced  in  circumstances  and  brought  into  debt  thi-ough  the  bad 
government  of  Saul.  There  was  with  David,  Abiathar  the  high  priest.  With 
David  likewise  there  was  Gad  the  prophet.  Does  not  the  like  thing  happen  among 
those  who  ally  themselves  with  the  Son  of  David  at  this  day  ?  Although  He  whom 
we  worship  is  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  yet  unto  you  who  believe  He  is  precious. 
We  need  not  be  ashamed  to  side  with  Jesus,  for  we  shall  be  in  good  company.  4. 
Despised  as  David  was  among  men,  yet,  being  anointed  of  Qod,  his  cause  in  the 
end  was  successful.  He  did  come  to  the  throne :  and  so  it  is  with  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  Notwithstanding  all  the  opposition  that  still  rages  against  His  cause,  it 
must  prosper  and  prevail.  11.  Having  thus  drawn  your  attention  to  the  Leader, 
whom  David  the  son  of  Jesse  prefigured,  let  me  turn  now  to  speak  a  little  of  those 

WHO   GATHERED   ROUND   HIM   AND   ENLISTED   IN    HIS    SERVICE.       The    lecruits  who    Came 

to  David  were  eleven  in  number.  The  first  characteristic  we  read  about  them  is 
that  they  were  separated.  "  Of  the  Gadites,  there  separated  themselves  unto 
David  "eleven  persons.  L  They  were  separated.  Observe  that  They  separated 
themselves.  They  seem  to  have  been  captains  of  the  militia  of  their  tribe.  The 
very  least  among  them  was  over  a  hundred,  and  the  greatest  over  a  thousand. 
But  they  separated  themselves  from  their  commands  over  their  tribes — separated 
themselves  from  their  brethren  and  their  kinsfolk.  I  daresay  many  of  their  friends 
Bald  to  them,  "  Why,  what  fools  you  are  !  You  must  be  mad  to  espouse  the  cause 
of  a  fellow  like  David  1 "  and  then  they  would  call  David  all  manner  of  foul, 
opprobrious  names.  In  these  times  it  is  most  important  that  every  one  who  is  a 
Christian  should  understand  that  he  must  separate  himself  from  the  world.  Ye 
cannot  serve  Christ  and  the  world  too.  You  cannot  be  of  the  world  and  of  Christ's 
Church.  It  is  in  his  intercourse  with  the  world  that  the  Christian  shows  the 
moral  force  of  his  character.  There  it  comes  out  because  it  cannot  be  hid.  If  his 
trade  has  become  used  to  tricks  and  stratagems  which  will  not  bear  the  light,  he 
cannot  conform  to  them ;  he  will  shrink  from  them  with  abhorrence :  he  must 
keep  a  clean  conscience.  2.  But  observe  that  these  people  separated  themselves 
unto  David.  You  may  separate  yourself  and  not  separate  yourself  unto  Christ ; 
and  if  not,  you  only  change  from  one  form  of  worldly-mindedness  to  another.  We 
are  not  to  separate  ourselves  unto  self -righteousness,  or  unto  affectation,  or  unto  a 
sect,  but  unto  Christ.  These  people  got  away  from  their  friends  that  they  might 
get  to  David.  We  are  to  get  away  from  the  world  that  we  may  get  closer  to  Christ. 
3.  And  then,  as  you  read  that  they  separated  themselves  unto  David  in  the 


38  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

wilderness,  let  me  entreat  you  to  ask  yourselves  if  you  are  ready  to  take  part  with 
a  rejected,  crucified  Christ.  Tens  of  thousands  would  separate  themselves  to  David 
if  he  were  in  Hebron  on  the  throne  of  Israel.  If  the  truth  should  lead  us  down 
into  the  hovel,  where  we  could  only  associate  with  the  very  lowest  of  the  low,  if 
they  were  the  Lord's  people,  they  should  be  our  delight.  4.  Note,  next,  about 
these  men  that  they  were  men  of  might.  It  is  said  of  them  that  they  were  men  of 
might,  whose  faces  were  like  faces  of  lions,  and  they  were  as  swift  as  the  roes  upon 
the  mountains.  All  that  came  to  David  were  not  like  that.  David  had  soma 
women  and  children  to  protect,  but  he  was  glad  to  receive  others  that  were  men  of 
might.  Now  there  came  to  Jesus,  the  greater  David  in  His  day,  the  weak  ones  of 
the  flock,  and  He  never  rejected  them.  He  was  glad  to  receive  even  the  feeblest ; 
but  there  did  come  to  our  Lord  and  Master  eleven  men  who,  by  His  grace,  were 
like  these  Gadites.  Truly,  I  may  say  of  His  apostles,  after  our  Divine  Lord  had 
filled  them  with  His  Spirit,  that  ithey  had  faces  like  lions  and  feet  like  hinds'  feet, 
so  swift  were  they  for  service  and  so  strong  for  combat.  The  grace  of  God  can 
make  us  brave  as  lions,  so  that  wherever  we  are  we  can  hold  our  own,  or  rather 
can  hold  our  Lord's  truth,  and  never  blush  nor  be  ashamed  to  speak  a  good  word 
for  Him  at  all  times.  5.  But  it  is  worth  noticing  that  they  were  men  of  war, 
inured  to  discipline — men  fit  for  the  battle,  that  could  handle  shield  and  buckler. 
Now  there  are  some  men  of  might  who  do  not  seem  to  be  good  men  of  war,  because 
they  cannot  keep  rank.  What  exploits  they  may  do  they  must  needs  do  alone,  for 
they  cannot  march  with  the  army.  There  are  some  brethren  I  know  who  are  most 
excellent  people  as  individuals,  but  they  seem  never  to  be  meant  to  march  in  the 
ranks;  they  must  every  one  of  them  lead,  they  cannot  be  second  to  anybody; 
neither  can  they  be  under  any  discipline  or  rule.  5.  These  Gadites  likewise  furnish 
us  with  a  noble  example  of  strong  resolution.  When  the  eleven  men  determined 
to  join  David  they  were  living  the  other  side  of  a  deep  river,  which  at  that  season 
of  the  year  had  overflowed  its  banks,  so  that  it  was  extremely  deep  and  broad.  But 
they  were  not  to  be  kept  from  joining  David,  when  he  wanted  them,  by  the  river. 
They  swam  through  the  river  that  they  might  come  to  David.  Do  you  stand  back 
and  shrink  from  avowing  your  attachment  to  the  standard  of  God's  anointed 
because  it  would  involve  loss  of  reputation,  displeasure  of  friends,  the  frowns  of 
your  associates  in  the  world,  or  the  heartbreaks  of  anguish  of  those  you  tenderly 
love?  Know,  then,  that  our  Lord  is  worthy  of  all  the  troubles  you  incur,  and  all 
the  risks  you  run  ;  and  be  assured  that  the  peace  which  a  soul  enjoys  that  once 
joins  Christ  in  the  hold,  and  abides  with  Him  in  the  wilderness,  well  repays  a 
man  for  all  that  he  has  to  part  with  in  getting  to  his  Lord  and  Master.  Now,  it 
would  appear  that  after  they  had  got  across  the  river  they  were  attacked,  but  wa 
are  told  that  they  put  to  flight  all  them  of  the  valleys,  both  toward  the  east  and 
toward  the  west.  0  ye  that  love  the  Lord  and  Master,  I  beseech  you  in  this  evil 
day,  this  day  of  blasphemy  and  rebuke,  stand  not  back  :  be  not  craven.  (C  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Fitnets  for  service : — The  secret  of  success  religiously  is  precisely 
the  same  as  the  secret  of  success  in  ordinary  things.  Look  at  the  splendid  qualities 
that  go  to  the  making  of  a  successful  housebreaker.  Audacity,  resource,  secrecy, 
promptitude,  persistence,  skill  of  hand,  and  a  hundred  others,  are  put  into  play 
before  a  man  can  break  into  your  back  kitchen  and  steal  your  goods.  Look  at  the 
qualities  that  go  to  the  making  of  a  successful  amuser  of  people.  Men  will  spend 
endless  time  and  pains,  and  devote  concentration,  persistence,  self-denial,  diligence 
to  learning  how  to  play  upon  some  instrument,  how  to  swing  upon  a  trapeze,  how 
to  twist  themselves  into  abnormal  contortions.  Jugglers  and  fiddlers,  and  circus- 
riders  and  dancers,  and  people  of  that  sort,  spend  far  more  time  upon  efforts  to 
perfect  themselves  in  their  profession  than  ninety-nine  out  of  every  hundred 
professing  Christians  do  to  make  themselves  true  followers  of  Jesus  Christ.  They 
know  that  nothing  is  to  be  got  without  working  for  it,  and  there  is  nothing  to  be 
got  in  the  Christian  life  without  working  for  it  any  more  than  in  any  other.  (A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Vers.  16,  18.  And  there  came  of  the  children  of  Benjamin  and  Judahto  the  hold 
unto  David. — R'cruitf  for  King  Jesus : — I  want  to  run  a  parallel  between  the  case 
of  David  and  that  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I.  Heiie  is  a  vert  commendable 
EXAMPLE.  Many  of  these  men  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  went  to  join  themselves  to 
David.  1.  Because  they  had  heard  that  he  was  the  Lord's  anointed.  If  Jesus  be 
God's  anointed,  let  Him  be  your  beloved.  2  Because  of  his  personal  excellences. 
8.  Because  he  was  so  misrepresented  and  abused  by  his  enemies.     4.  Because  they 


CHAP.m.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  39 

believed  that  he  had  a  great  future  before  him.  II.  A  cautious  inquirt.  See 
what  David  said  to  them.  1.  He  set  before  them  the  right  way.  He  said,  "  If  ye 
be  come  peaceably  unto  me  to  help  me,  mine  heart  shall  be  knit  unto  you."  Here 
are  three  questions — (1)  Do  you  come  to  Christ  and  accept  Him  ?  (2)  Do  you 
come  with  a  desire  to  maintain  peace  among  your  Christian  brethren  ?  (3)  Do 
you  come  with  the  intent  of  helping  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  spread  abroad  His 
truth  ?  2.  He  set  before  them  the  wrong  way :  "  But  if  ye  be  come  to  betray  me 
to  my  enemies,  seeing  there  is  no  wrong  in  mine  hands,  the  God  of  our  fathers 
look  thereon,  and  rebuke  it."  Some  betray  the  Lord  Christ  to  His  enemies — 1. 
By  giving  up  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel.  2.  By  their  inconsistent  lives.  3.  By 
apostasy.  III.  A  cordial  enlistment.  "Thine  are  we,  David,  and  on  thy  side," 
<fec.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  David  and  his  helpers : — Man  is  not  an  independent 
being.  He  is  dependent  for  his  life,  his  thought,  his  feeling — dependent  upon  God 
his  Creator  and  his  Preserver.  He  is  dependent  for  the  comforts  and  conveniences 
of  life — dependent  upon  his  fellow-men.  And  he  that  seems  perhaps  to  be  the 
most  independent  amongst  us,  is  after  all  the  most  dependent  upon  his  fellows. 
Man  was  never  made  to  be  independent  here.  He  was  never  made  to  be  alone. 
Some  such  circumstances  as  these  gave  rise  to  the  peculiar  position  of  the  son  of 
Jesse,  as  we  read  of  him  in  the  text.  David  was  then  combating  against  a  twofold 
enemy — Saul,  the  king,  his  predecessor  in  office,  and  the  Philistines,  the  hereditary 
foes  of  Israel.  Let  us  mark  the  concurrent  circumstances  of  these  times.  David's 
cause  was  not  the  winning  side  when  these  secessions  broke  off  from  the  strength 
of  Saul  and  attached  themselves  to  the  cause  of  the  son  of  Jesse.  He  was  as  yet 
in  point  of  numbers  and  of  strength  in  a  very  small  minority.  He  was  not  in 
power;  and,  so  far  as  human  appearances  went,  he  was  very  far  from  power. 
Every  appearance  was  against  him.  He  himself,  though  the  captain  of  a  band, 
was  a  fugitive.  And  Saul  was  in  power,  for  Saul  was  king.  David  is  possessed  of 
but  scanty  resources,  but  Saul  can  command  the  ways  and  the  means  and  the 
supplies  of  a  kingdom.  And  yet  these  men  come,  and  they  volunteer  their  services 
to  the  son  of  Jesse.  They  came  not  to  the  throne  of  one  that  rules,  but  they  came 
to  the  cave  of  one  that  hides  himself.  No  marvel  that  David  should  have  suspected 
their  proper  aim,  and  should  have  inquired,  inquisitively,  as  to  the  motive  of  their 
coming,  as  to  the  object  of  their  visit  in  this  the  day  of  his  distress  and  of  his 
darkness.  And  this  accounts  for  his  inquiry  in  the  verse  preceding  my  text.  We 
would  learn  from  this  text  the  value  and  the  estimate  to  be  set  upon  Chris- 
tian co-operation.  The  downcast  and  the  down-trodden  may  be  rallied  by  a 
sympathising  word,  and  may  be  aroused ;  and  thus  arise  to  his  work  and  to  his 
labour  from  the  very  consciousness  that  he  is  not  altogether  alone.  Christian 
co-operation  was  given  to  Elijah.  The  assurance  that  God  one  day  gave  the 
Tishbite,  that  there  were  still  seven  thousand  men  who  had  not  bowed  the  knee  to 
Baal,  mightily  reassured  the  prophet.  And  when  we  come  to  inquire  into  the 
circumstances  of  this  case  a  little  further,  respecting  David,  we  are  enabled  to  find 
out  what  was  the  kind  of  help,  the  quality  of  the  help  that  he  obtained.  This  may 
be  judged  of  by  considering  the  time  in  which  the  help  was  vouchsafed.  As  I  have 
said,  it  was  not  in  the  time  of  his  prosperity,  but  it  was  some  time  anterior  to  that, 
and  in  the  time  of  his  greatest  adversity.  Now,  it  is  a  law,  or  axiom,  a  practical 
law,  that  those  men  are  most  to  be  trusted  in  prosperity  that  have  stood  the  firmest 
in  the  day  of  adversity.  And  verily,  in  practice,  these  men  receive  the  reward  of 
their  fidelity.  These  men  came  and  chose  not  the  winning  side ;  but  there  was  a 
mark  about  even  that  declining  interest — "  Thy  God  helpeth  thee."  That  decided 
the  question.  If  God  be  for  David,  what  can  Saul  do  against  him  ?  "  If  God  be 
for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  "  God  is  not  forgetful  of  your  work  and  labour  of 
love  which  you  have  showed  toward  His  name.  Mark,  for  instance,  His  twelve — 
His  chosen  ones.  They  had  attached  themselves  to  the  person  of  the  lowly  Jesus, 
when  there  was  no  mark  of  distinction,  of  royalty,  of  kingly  power :  at  His  call 
they  obeyed.  Never  were  there  purer  days  in  the  Christian  faith  than  when  the 
Christian  faith  was  persecuted.  Thus  was  it  with  David's  auxiliaries  :  they  looked 
not  to  the  present  adversity,  but  to  the  future  glory.  "  Thy  God  helpeth  thee,"  was 
sufficient  as  an  indication  of  what  would  be.  These  were  powerful  men.  Their 
"  faces  were  like  the  faces  of  lions  "  ;  bold  as  a  lion ;  "  and  they  were  as  swift  aa 
the  roes  upon  the  mountains."  They  were  able  to  ford  the  depths  of  Jordan  at 
its  full,  and  in  its  overflowing,  and  to  rout  their  enemies  to  the  east  and  to  the 
west.  Truly,  with  such  auxiliaries,  David  might  well  thank  God,  and  take  courage. 
Bat  this  was  not  all.    His  hopes  begin  to  brighten,  his  prospects  begin  to  look  up. 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xii. 

Day  after  day  added  its  gradual  increase  to  his  army,  until  by  and  by  it  became  a 
mighty  host  like  unto  "  the  host  of  God."  That  is  what  the  Scripture  says.  Each 
tribe  sent  its  proportion.  Thousands,  tens  of  thousands,  flocked  to  the  standard  of 
D^vid,  and  enlisted  in  defence  of  the  cause  of  the  son  of  Jesse,  until  well-nigh  half 
a  million  of  men  may  be  counted,  from  the  enumeration  of  our  context,  as  having 
resorted  to  his  cause.  This,  from  beginnings  small,  but  good ;  this,  from  incipient 
stages  scanty,  yet  hopeful.  And  all  these  men  are  well  spoken  of.  They  were 
"  mighty  men  of  valour  "  ;  they  were  "  ready  armed  " ;  they  were  "  famous  through- 
out the  house  of  their  fathers  " ;  they  were  no  anonymous  helpers,  but  it  is  said 
they  were  "  expressed  by  name  to  come  and  make  David  king."  And  the  value  of 
that  help  was  great  because  it  was  a  right  hearty  help — such  a  help  as  we  need, 
such  a  help  as  is  indispensable  if  we  are  to  be  helped  at  all.  We  want  no  half- 
hearted men,  but  we  want  men  of  God — they  are  the  best,  they  are  the  surest,  they 
are  the  safest,  they  are  the  most  and  the  longest  to  be  depended  upon.  Our 
experience  of  human  helpers  has  been  a  chequered  experience.  Some  that  began 
with  us  have  not  continued ;  some  from  whom  we  expected  much,  perhaps,  have 
broken  down  midway,  departed  from  us,  and  went  not  with  us  to  the  work ;  some 
that  promised  nothing,  and  from  whom  we  expected  nothing,  have  been  the  most 
ready,  and  have  been  the  foremost  to  come  and  say,  "  Thine  are  we,  David,  and  on 
thy  side,  thou  son  of  Jesse :  peace,  peace  be  unto  thee,  smd  peace  be  to  thine 
helpers."      (R.    Maguire,  M.aJ)         Fitnett  for  the  service  of  the  great  King: — 

1.  Xntellioence  is  required.  II.  GotmAOE  is  required.  III.  Unitz  is  required. 
IV.  Enthusiasm  is  required.     (J.  Wolfendale.) 

Ver.  22.  Until  it  was  a  great  host. — The  aecumulation  of  power : — It  seems  quite 
possible  in  the  presence  of  this  incident  to  find  an  easy  statement  of  the  law  of  the 
accumulation  of  power.  The  law  may  be  stated  thus :  Persistent  action  in  one 
direction  brings,  after  a  time,  surprisingly  added  power  for  further  action  in  that 
direction.  Consider  this — 1.  In  the  accumulation  of  property.  2.  As  to  the 
formation  of  habits.  3.  As  to  increase  in  intellectual  force.  4.  As  to  advancing 
power  in  the  spiritual  life.  Lessons  :  1.  Be  careful  of  the  day.  Day  by  day, 
because  he  day  by  day  had  been  the  man  he  was,  they  gathered  to  David. 
Especially  towards  the  accumulation  of  any  sort  of  power  do  not  lose  time  in  youth. 

2.  Have  courage.  Front  towards  such  right  accumulation  of  power,  and  this  great 
law  of  its  accumulation  is  steadily  working  for  you.  3.  This  great  law  works  as 
steadily  the  other  way  ;  e.g.,  King  Saul,  fronting  and  choosing  wrong,  was  losing 
righteous  power  day  by  day,  until  at  last  he  came  to  the  sad  wreck  he  made. 
(Wayland  Hoyt,  D.D.) 

Yer.  32.  Men  that  had  understanding  of  the  times. — Wantt  of  the  timet : — ^It  is 
an  important  thing  to  understand  the  times  in  which  we  live,  and  to  know  what 
those  times  require  (Esther  i.  13 ;  Matt.  xvi.  3 ;  Luke  xiz.  44).  Next  to  our  Bibles 
and  our  own  hearts  our  Lord  would  have  us  study  our  own  times.    I.  The  iniEB 

REQUIRE  or  us  A  BOLD  AND  UNFLINCHING  MAINTENANCB  OF  THE  ENTIRE  TRUTH  OP 

Christianity,  and  the  Divine  authority  or  the  Bible.  Our  lot  is  cast  in  an 
age  of  abounding  unbelief,  but  when  sceptics  have  said  all  they  can,  there  are  three 
broad  facts  which  they  have  never  explained  away.  1.  Jesus  Christ  Himself. 
How  is  it  that  there  never  has  been  one  like  Him,  neither  before  nor  after,  since 
the  beginning  of  historical  times  ?  2.  The  Bible  itself.  How  is  it  that  this  book 
stands  entirely  alone,  for  high  views  of  God,  true  views  of  man,  solemnity  of 
thought,  grandeur  of  doctrine,  and  purity  of  morality?  8.  The  effect  which 
Christianity  has  produced  on  the  world.  11.  The  times  require  at  our  hands 
distinct  and  decided  views  of  Christian  doctrine.  The  victories  of  Christianity, 
wherever  they  have  been  won,  have  been  won  by  distinct  doctrinal  theology. 
Christianity  without  distinct    doctrine   is   a  powerless    thing.      III.  Thb    times 

REQUIRE    OF   US   AN    AWAKENED   AND  LIVELIER    SENSE    OF    THE    UNSCRIPTOBAL  AND    SOUL- 

ruinino   character   OF   Eomanism.      IV.   The   times   require   of   ub   a   higher 

STANDARD  OF  PERSONAL  HOLINESS,  AND  AN  INCREASED  ATTENTION  TO  FBACTICAIi 
RELIGION  IN  DAILY  LIFE.  V.  ThB  TIMES  REQUIRE  OF  US  MORE  REGULAR  AND 
STEADY   PEH8EVEBANCE    IN    THE  OLD  WAYS  OF  GETTING  GOOD  FOR  OUR  SOULS.       1.  Private 

prayer.  2.  Private  Bible-reading.  3.  Private  meditation  and  communion  with 
Christ.  Conclusion :  Consider  what  the  times  require  in  reference — 1.  To  your 
own  souls.  2.  To  the  souls  of  others.  3.  To  the  Church.  (Bp.  Ryle.)  The 
characteristics  and  duties  of  the  times : — Such  was  the  character  ascribed  to  the 


CHiP.xn.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  41 

children  of  Issachar,  at  a  remarkably  interesting  crisis  in  the  circumstances  of  the 
nation  to  which  they  belonged.  The  period  was  that,  when,  by  the  death  of  Saul 
and  his  more  worthy  son  in  battle,  the  minds  of  the  Jewish  people  were  divided  on 
the  question  whether  the  royalty  was  to  be  continued  in  the  family  of  the  departed 
monarch,  or  was  to  be  transferred  to  the  hands  of  the  anointed  David.  The 
historian  enumerates  the  individuals  and  the  classes  who  were  induced  to  announce 
their  adherence  to  the  latter  ;  and  amongst  them  are  mentioned  the  persons  whose 
names  are  recorded  in  our  text.  It  may  be  considered  as  the  duty  of  men,  as  the 
subjects  of  civil  government,  always  to  cherish  an  accurate  acquaintance  with  the 
characteristics  of  the  times  in  which  they  live,  in  order  accurately  to  fulfil  their 
ordinary  duties,  and  those  duties  of  a  more  peculiar  nature,  which  the  occurrence 
of  seasons  of  exigency  may  sometimes  impose  upon  them.     We  propose — I.  To 

BTATE    SOME    OF   THE    CHARACTERISTICS     BT   WHICH    THE    PEESENT    TIMES    APPEAR   TO   BE 

PBOMiNENTLY  DISTINGUISHED.  1.  Flagrant  indulgence  of  iniquity  on  the  part  of 
ungodly  men.  2.  A  heavy  and  extended  pressure  of  national  distress  and  per- 
plexity. 3.  A  wide  diffusion  of  the  influence  of  knowledge  and  of  freedorg^ 
4.  Extraordinary  and  delightful  facilities  for  the  dissemination  of  the  gospel  of 
Christ.  6.  An  awakened  and  an  increasing  concern  among  the  people  of  tho,. 
Saviour  as  to  the  progress  and  final  triumphs   of   His   cause.     II.  The  DUTiEfj 

WHICH     THE     CHARACTERISTICS     OF     THE     PRESENT     TIMES     IMPOSE     UPON      PROFESSING, 

Christians.  1.  Distinctly  and  always  to  recognise  the  providence  of  God.  2.  Tq. 
compare  all  that  is  apparent  with  the  predictions  of  Divine  truth.  3.  To  cultivate- 
uncompromising  decision  in  the  exemplification  of  personal  religion.  4.  Diligently 
to  labour  in  all  the  spheres  of  exertion  by  which  they  may  advance  the  gospel  of 
Christ.  5.  To  engage  in  fervent  and  continued  prayer  for  the  outpouring  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  (James  Parsons.)  The  men  of  Issachar,  an  example  to  British 
citizens  : — These  were  men  who  knew  what  it  was  best  for  the  nation  to  carry  out 
in  the  great  crisis  which  had  now  arisen.  It  was  important  that  Israel  should 
wisely  decide  what  ruler  to  select ;  it  is  of  equal  importance  that  we  as  a  country 
should  decide  under  what  rule — whether  that  of  strong  drink,  or  that  of  unqualified 
temperance — we  should  abide.  There  are  certain  things  that  are  needful  in  order 
to  a  good  result  in  this  matter.  I.  There  should  be  a  bight  understanding  of 
OUR  OWN  times.     Our  own  times  are — 1.  Times  of  much  evil  from  strong  drink. 

2.  Times  of  much  good.  (1)  A  spirit  of  investigation  has  gone  abroad  and  done 
splendid  service.  We  are  much  indebted  to  physiologists,  moral  philosophers, 
political  economists,  and  statisticians,  for  the  light  they  have  thrown  on  this  subject. 

(21  Our  times  are  times  of  agitation  for  the  application  of  remedial  measures. 
8)  There  has  also  been  a  great  reformation  resulting  from  all  this.  3.  Times  of 
much  hopefulness.  II.  A  right  understanding  of  our  own  times  ought  to  lead 
TO  PROPER  action.  They  understood  the  times,  to  know  what  Israel  ought  to  do. 
Right  action  must — 1.  Be  directed  by  intelligence.  2.  Be  inspired  by  Christian, 
philanthropy.  3.  Be  embodied  in  practical  forms.  4.  Be  animated  by  a  self;- 
denying  enthusiasm.  III.  In  order  that  this  right  action  mat  fully  accomplish 
its  ends  there  are  certain  requirements.  1.  Individualisation.  God  invites  us 
one  by  one,  saying  to  each  of  us,  "Do  the  work  I  give  thee  to  do."  2.  Organisation. 
Combination  multiplies  force.  In  the  moral  world,  one  and  one  make  a  good  deaj. 
more  than  two ;  they  often  make  four,  and  three  and  three  often  make  thirty. 

3.  Consecration.  [Dawson  Burnt,  D.D.)  The  state  of  the  times  and  the 
corresponding  duties  of  the  Church  : — The  peculiar  tribute  which  is  thus  paid  to  the 
tribe  of  Issachar — a  tribute  which  distinguishes  them  most  honourably  from  all  the 
other  classes  of  their  countrymen,  will  appear  the  more  remarkable  when  we  look 
at  the  smallness  of  their  number  and  the  comparative  seclusion  in  which  they 
lived.  In  point  of  numerical  strength  they  were  by  far  the  least  considerable  of  all 
the  tribes  of  Israel.  While  the  rest  could  muster  their  hundreds  of  thousands,  the 
children  of  Issachar,  though  "  all  their  brethren  were  at  their  commandment," 
could  only  furnish  a  body  of  two  hundred  men.  But  their  lack  of  numbers  was 
more  than  counterbalanced  by  their  pre-eminent  zeal,  sagacity,  and  discipline — 
qualities  which  rendered  them  the  ablest  advisers  in  the  council,  as  well  as  the 
best  soldiers  in  the  camp.  But  how,  it  may  be  asked,  did  they  come  to  acquire 
this  superior  wisdom  and  intelligence  ?  Were  they  more  favourably  circumstanced 
for  obtaining  information,  and  for  observing  the  signs  and  duties  of  the  times,  than 
the  general  body  of  their  fellow-subjects  ?  Had  they  access  to  the  private  circles  of 
the  capital,  or  to  the  secret  conferences  of  the  court  ?  On  the  contrary,  they  livr'^. 
remote  from  cities — buried  amid  the  tranquil  retreats  of  the  rural  provinces,  av.-^: . 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

from  the  sordid  cares  and  the  sickening  crowds  and  the  unquiet  rumours  of  the 
metropolis,   breathing  the   air  of  freshness  and  of  freedom  among  their  native 
mountains.     From  their  peaceful  soUtudes  they  looked  forth  with  a  calm  and 
dispassionate  eye  on  the  various  movements  that  took  place ;  and  having  leisure 
to  reflect  on  the  nature  of  these  movements,  to  compare  them  with  the  past  trans- 
actions of  their  history,  and  to  test  them  by  the  principles  of  the  Divine  Word,  they 
were  in  a  better  condition  for  forming  a  sound  judgment  regarding  them  than 
those  who  might  have  an  opportunity  of  seeing  them  through  a  closer,  but,  for  that 
very  reason,  a  more  contracted  and  clouded  medium.    In  this  matter  the  children 
of  Issachar  have  left  an  example  which  is  well  worthy  of  our  thoughtful  regard. 
We  are  required,  by  the  authority  of  our  Lord  Himself,  "  to  mark  the  signs  of  the 
times  " — to  keep  a  wide  and  wakeful  eye  on  the  revolving  events  of  Providence, 
with  the  view  of  discovering  their  bearing  on  the  position  and  prospects  of  the 
Church.     It  is,  no  doubt,  generally  supposed  that  religious  men  are  very  incom^.' 
petent  judges  of  public  affairs.     Like  the  tribe  spoken  of  in  the  text,  they  are,  as  ^ 
distinctive  party,  the  smallest  in  the  state ;  and  like  them,  too,  they  live  in  com- 
parative seclusion  from  the  cabals  and  contentions  of  the  world ;  and  it  is,  therefore, 
presumed  that  they  can  have  but  little  acquaintance  with  the  movements  which  are 
going  on  around  them.     Let  it  be  admitted  that  they  are  not,  as  a  body,  so  con- 
versant with  the  details  of  public  transactions  as  those  who  are  directly  engaged 
about  them,  yet  still  we  hesitate  not  to  say  that  they  may  be,  and  that  they 
generally  are,   even   better   fitted   than  these  for  apprehending  the  great  moraj, 
principles  which  such  transactions  carry  in  their  bosom,  and  the  manner  in  which 
they  are  likely  to  affect  the  welfare  of  the  community.     We  need  not  remind  you 
that  religious  men  are  accustomed  to  view  questions  of  this  kind  in  a  very  different 
light  from  the  men  of  the  world.     The  latter  look  upon  them  as  they  stand  related 
to  the  opinions  and  interests  of  their  fellow-creatures.    It  is  in  this  respect  that 
religious  men— men   of  enlarged  and  enlightened  piety — have  the  advantage  oP 
mere  worldly  politicians.     They  form  their  estimate  of  passing  events  not  as  they 
influence  the  temporary  interests  either  of  one  party  or  another,  nor  as  they  are 
reflected  through  the  fluctuating  medium  of  public  opinion.     They  judge  of  thera- 
by  a  far  higher  and  more  comprehensive  standard.     They  view  them  in  connection 
with  the  great  chain  of  Providence.     They  compare  them  with  the  fixed  purposes 
of  the  Divine  administration,  and  with  the  unalterable  rules  of  the  Divine  Word  ;, 
and,  by  examining  them  in  the  light  of  these  clear  and  all-controlling  principles, 
they  are  enabled  to  group  in  the  disjointed  and  fragmentary  measures  of  public 
men  under  distinct  moral  classifications,  to  analyse  the  impulses  and  the  agencies 
from  whence  they  proceed;  and,  by  means  of  these  testing  and  discriminating 
processes,  they  are  led  to  an  "  understanding  of  the  times  to  know  what  Israel 
ought  to  do."    It  is  important  to  mark  the  connection  between  the  two  separate 
members  of  the  passage  before  us.    It  is  stated,  regarding  the  Children  of  Issachar, 
that  they  had  "understanding  of  the  times."    They  comprehended  the  circum- 
stances in  which  their  country  was  placed  ;  they  marked  the  spirit  which  prevailed 
among  the  people.   It  was  not  from  any  motives  of  mere  curiosity  that  they  studied 
the  movements  of  the  day,  nor  was  it  with  the  view  of  descanting  upon  them  in 
private  meetings  or  in  popular  assemblies;  far  less  was  it  their  object  to  busy  them- 
selves with  public  mattera  for  personal  ends  or  for  party  purposes.     The  welfare  of 
their  country  was  the  subject  of  their  concern  and  the  source  of  their  inquiries. 
For  the  same  reason  it  is  incumbent  upon  us,  not  merely  as  subjects  of  the  State, 
but  as  office-bearers  and  members  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  to  study  the  phenomena 
of  the  age  in  which  we  live — to  watch  the  moral  forces  that  are  operating  upon  the 
mass  of  society,  swaying  the  tide  of  public  opinion,  and  influencing  the  measures 
of  public  men.     I.  The  grand  capital  characteristic  feature  of  these  times  consists 

in  THE  GENERAL   PREVALENCE   OT   NATIONAL    INDIFFERENTI8M    OR   NEQATIVB  INFIDELITY. 

— a  general  want  of  faith  on  all  subjects,  whether  moral,  political,  or  religious. 
n.  The  DUTY  OP  the  Church  requeres — 1.  That  she  should  maintain  a  clear  and 
decided  testimony  on  behalf  of  the  great  fundamental  principles  of  Divine  truth. 
2.  A  determined  effort  to  resuscitate  the  sinking  power  of  principle,  and  also  a 
vigorous  and  combined  movement  to  repel  the  creeping  invasions — the  subtle  but 
forceful  and  successful  encroachments  of  error.  (Walter  HTGilvray.)  Under, 
ttanding  the  times  : — Some  of  the  chapters  of  this  book  look  as  though  they  were  so 
many  of  the  newspapers  of  the  period,  that  had  been  preserved  ;  and  there  would 
be  no  history  like  that  of  a  collection  of  newspapers,  supposing  there  had  been 
such  things,  successively  issued,  day  by  day,  by  different  parties,  affording  a  general 


CHAP,  xn.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  43 

view  of  events  and  transactions.  We  have  here  a  very  minute  account  of  the 
political,  military,  and  religious  position  of  things  at  this  time.  We  find  different 
persons  resorting  to  David,  in  larger  or  lesser  numbers,  and  welcomed  as  they 
came.  And  among  the  rest  there  came  a  number  of  persons  peculiar  and  distinct 
in  character  from  all  others.  Instead  of  being  told  of  their  physical  strength  and 
vigour,  their  prowess  and  skill  in  using  swords  and  spears,  their  incomparableness 
in  war,  we  are  told  that  they  were  "  men  who  had  understanding  of  the  times,  and 
knew  what  Israel  ought  to  do  " — men  of  political  intelligence  and  sagacity,  who 
could  look  about  and  see  into  things,  who  could  interpret  the  prediction  written 
upon  a  circumstance,  who  could  tell  what  was  the  line  marked  out  by  such  and 
such  an  event.  They  were  not  antiquarian  men,  who  could  tell  you  of  the  past ; 
nor  dreaming,  poetical,  prophetic  men,  talking  about  the  future ;  but  men  who 
understood  their  own  times — men  who  felt  the  great  realities  that  were  stirring 
about  them.  It  was  a  great  matter  to  have  this  understanding  ;  for  the  consequence 
of  having  it  was,  they  deduced  "  what  Israel  ought  to  do  " — the  movements  that 
should  be  made,  the  things  that  the  nation  should  determine  upon.  The  accession 
of  these  men  to  David  was,  perhaps,  of  greater  value  than  that  of  the  thousands 
of  fighting  men ;  for  wisdom  and  valour  strengthen  more  than  weapons  of  war. 
The  wise  man  is  strong.  And  these  men,  as  a  consequence  of  their  understanding, 
ruled;  "  their  brethren  were  at  their  commandment";  they  had  influence;  other 
men  and  other  minds  recognised  them  as  regal  men,  for,  after  all,  I  suppose,  in  the 
long  run,  it  wUl  always  come  to  that — those  that  ought  to  rule,  because  they  can  do 
it,  ultimately  wiU  do  it.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  for  a  people,  and  for  the  world,  when 
those  who  rule  understand  things,  and  really  know  what  ought  to  be  done,  and 
ev«ry  other  body  is  at  their  command  ;  for  after  all,  the  world  wants  guiding  and 
ruling,  and  it  is  willing  to  be  guided  when  it  has  confidence  in  the  wisdom  of  those 
who  are  doing  it,  and  knows  it  is  being  governed  well.  Well,  we  live  in  veiy 
stirring  times ;  it  is  a  great  blessing  to  the  world — though  the  world  does  not  think 
of  it  or  believe  it — that  God  has  an  Israel  in  the  world ;  an  Israel  mighty  with  God 
in  prayer.  And  this  Israel  that  is  in  the  world  ought  always  to  remember  that  it  is 
in  the  world ;  that  it  has  not  got  to  heaven  yet.  It  belongs  to  earth,  and  to  the 
movements  of  nations,  political  convulsions,  and  all  things  that  are  going  on 
around  it.  The  Israel  of  God  has  relations  to  them  all,  and  is  to  look  at  them 
through  that  blessed  atmosphere — the  light  of  God's  truth,  and  God's  love — in 
which  it  lives.  Let  us,  then,  endeavour  to  understand  our  times,  that  we  may 
know  "  what  Israel  ought  to  do."  1.  Eeligious  men  naturally  look — 1.  At  the 
religious  movements.  2.  At  the  national  and  political  movements  of  the  times. 
n.  What  Israel  ought  to  do.  1.  It  is  the  privilege  of  the  Church  to  be  making 
intercession  and  prayer,  that  God  may  guide  and  superintend  the  movements  of 
politicians  and  the  masses  of  men.  2.  They  should  observe  the  bearings  upon 
the  Church  of  all  the  movements  of  peoples  and  countries.  3.  They  should 
remember  that  all  times,  of  all  sorts  are  hastening  us  on  to  eternity.  Let  us  not 
forget  that  while  it  is  very  proper  for  us  to  have  certain  relations  to  the  times  that 
are  passing  over  us,  the  great  business  of  all  times  is,  to  save  our  souls,  to  be  at 
peace  with  God  through  Christ,  and  be  prepared  for  the  everlasting  glory  of  heaven. 
(Thromas  Binney.)  The  propriety  of  considering  times  and  circumstances  : — From 
the  character  given  of  the  men  of  Issachar  we  shall  show — I.  That  our  conduct 

MUST     often     be    ATTECTED     BY    TIMES     AND     CIRCUMSTANCES     OF     WHATEVER     NATURE. 

1.  Civil.  2.  Social.  3.  Personal.  II.  How  far  it  mat  be  properly  affected 
BY  THEM  IN  THE  CONCERNS  OF  RELIGION.  1.  That  we  may  attend  to  times,  &c.,  is 
certain  (example  of  Christ  and  apostles).  2.  But  how  far  is  not  easy  to  determine. 
III.  What  there  is  in  the  times,  &c.,  of  the  present  day  to  affect  oub 
CONDUCT.  Application:  1.  Guard  against  yielding  to  any  corrupt  bias.  2.  The 
future  judj^ment  will  be  according  to  motives.  3.  Seek  for  wisdom  that  is  profit- 
able to  direct.  (C  Simeon,  M.A.)  Adaptation  to  conditions: — How  important 
it  is  that  men  should  study  the  times  in  which  they  live,  and  adapt  their  work  to 
the  conditions  which  constitute  their  opportunity.  He  is  the  wise  man  who 
considers  all  the  features  of  a  case  and  adapts  the  treasure  of  which  he  is  possessed 
to  meet  new  desires  and  new  demands.  There  may  be  change  without  change  ;  in 
other  words,  the  change  may  be  but  superficial,  whilst  the  immutable  may  be 
within,  giving  order  and  dignity  and  energy  to  aU  that  is  attempted  from  without. 
Love  is  eternal,  but  its  expression  consists  of  continual  variety.  Prayer  never 
changes  as  to  its  spirit  and  intent,  yet  every  day  may  find  it  laden  with  new 
expressions,  because  human  history  has  revealed  wants  which  had  not  before  been 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

even  suspected.  He  who  understands  every  time  but  his  own,  will  do  no  permanent 
work  for  society.  He  is  like  a  man  who  knows  every  language  but  his  own  native 
tongue,  and  is  therefore  unable  to  speak  to  the  person  standing  at  his  side. 
{J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  33.  Fifty  thousand  which  could   keep  tsloJc— Keeping   rank:— I.   Oub 

GREAT  WANT  18  MORE  MEN  WHO  CAN  KEEP  RANK.  II.  To  KEEP  BANK  IMPLIES 
PRACTICE DISCIPLINE.  III.  To  KEEP  BANK  IN  ACTUAL  CONFLICT  REQUIRES  OLD- 
FASHIONED  VALOUR.  The  great  trouble  in  the  Church  to-day  is  the  cowards.  They 
do  splendidly  on  parade-day,  but  put  them  out  in  the  great  battle  of  life  and  they 
Boon  break  rank.  We  confront  the  enemy,  we  open  the  battle  against  fraud,  and 
lo  1  we  find  on  our  side  a  great  many  people  that  do  not  try  to  pay  their  debts. 
We  open  the  battle  against  intemperance,  and  we  find  on  our  side  a  great  many 
men  who  make  hard  speeches.  Oh  1  for  fifty  thousand  armed  men,  heroic  men, 
self-denying  men,  who  can  go  forth  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  God  Almighty  to 
do  battle,  able  to  keep  rank  I  Men  Mke  Paul,  who  could  say,  "  None  of  these  things 
move  me.  Neither  count  I  my  life  dear  unto  myself,  so  I  may  finish  my  course 
with  joy,  and  the  ministry  I  have  received  of  the  Lord  Jesus  to  testify  of  the  gospel 
of  the  grace  of  God."  Men  Uke  John  Bunyan,  who,  after  lying  years  in  a  loath- 
some prison,  said,  "  I  am  determined,  God  being  my  helper  and  shield,  to  stay 
here  until  the  moss  grows  over  my  eyebrows,  rather  than  surrender  my  faith  and 
my  principles."  Men  like  Thomas  Chalmers,  who,  notwithstanding  aU  the  jeering 
in  high  places  at  his  theory  of  reform  and  elevation  of  the  poor,  went  right  on  to 
do  his  whole  work,  until  Thomas  Carlyle,  then  a  boy,  wrote  of  him :  "  What  a 
glorious  old  man  Thomas  Chalmers  is  1  "    {T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 

Vers.  38-40.  AU  these  men  of  war. — The  joyous  entertainment.— I.  The  cause 
OF  JOY.  1.  United  under  one  king.  2.  A  king  chosen  of  God.  3.  Universal 
loyalty  to  the  chosen  king.  11.  The  manifestation  of  joy.  1.  In  unity  of 
purpose.  2.  In  sincerity  of  feeling.  3.  In  social  fellowship.  HI.  The  extent 
OF  the  jot.  {J.  Wolfendale.)  For  there  was  Joy  in  Israel. — The  manifestation 
of  Christ  a  cause  of  great  joy  : — The  man  who  was  the  darling  of  the  people,  and 
from  whose  administration  they  had  raised  expectations,  being  now,  by  Divine 
appointment,  made  king  over  all  the  tribes,  "  there  was  joy  in  Israel."  There  is 
abundant  reason  for  much  greater  joy  in  the  spiritual  Israel,  on  account  of  David's 
Illustrious  son,  the  King  Messiah,  the  Saviour  of  His  people  (Zech.  ix.  9; 
Isa.  XXV.  9).  I.  The  cause  of  joy  of  Israel,  with  relation  to  the  Kino 
Messiah,  the  Son  of  David,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  1.  This  coming  in  the 
flesh  is  a  matter  of  joy,  as  He  then  appeared  King  of  Israel,  and  the  Saviour  thereof. 
Salvation  is  the  source,  the  foundation  of  spiritual  joy  in  Israel  (1)  This  salvation 
is— (a)  From  sin ;  {b)  From  wrath  to  come ;  (c)  From  eternal  death  ;  (d)  From  every 
spiritual  enemy.  (2)  It  is  to  be  had  freely.  (3)  It  is  a  great  salvation.  (4)  It  is  a 
salvation  in  which  the  glory  of  God  is  greatly  concerned.  2.  The  spiritual  coming 
of  Christ  in  the  hearts  of  His  people  at  conversion  is  another  event  that  causes  joy 
in  Israel.  3.  In  the  latter  day,  when  Christ  will  be  more  manifest,  and,  like  David, 
will  be  King  over  all  the  house  of  Israel,  and  over  the  whole  world,  then  there  will 
be  joy  and  gladness.  II.  Where  and  among  whom  is  this  joy?  Not  only  in 
Israel  but  in  the  whole  world.  Christ  is  not  the  God  of  the  Jews  only.  III.  The 
nature  of  this  jot.  1.  It  is  spiritual.  2.  It  is  the  joy  of  our  Lord.  3.  It  is  the 
joy  of  faith.  4.  It  is  a  joy  that  the  world  knows  nothing  of.  5.  It  is  unspeakable. 
6.  It  is  a  joy  to  be  continually  exercised.  7.  This  joy  will  be  at  last  full  and 
complete.     \J.  Gill,  D.D.)  What  is  essential  to  constitute  a  happy  people  : — 

Professor  Fairbairn  says  you  cannot  have  a  happy  world  without  having  happy 
men ;  you  may  have  good  health,  good  business,  good  children,  good  balance  at  the 
bank,  life  insured.  So  far  so  good,  and  yet  if  the  soul  be  unadjusted  there  is  no 
peace.  You  may  place  an  organ  that  is  out  of  tune  in  a  magnificent  cathedral, 
but  you  have  no  harmony,  and  the  discord  is  the  more  striking  because  of  its  lofty 
nave,  its  painted  windows,  and  chiselled  arches.  But  you  take  that  organ  well 
tuned  and  richly  toned  into  a  plain  Methodist  chapel,  with  its  brick  walls  and  flat 
ceiling,  and  you  shall  have  the  sweetest  harmony.  There  can  be  no  peace  till  the 
Boul  is  brought  in  harmony  by  the  grace  of  God.  Peace  is  the  inner  condition  of 
the  soul  arising  from  reconciliation  to  God.  {O.  Turner.)  The  highest  joy  : — 
"  I  had  lived,"  says  the  Countess  Schimmelmann,  "  as  the  spoiled  child  of  the 
Court;  BO  much  so  that  the  Crown  Prince  (afterwards  the  Emperor)  Frederick 


CHAP.xm.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  45 

introduced  me  to  a  stranger  as  '  the  most  highly  favoured  young  lady  of  Germany, 
and  of  several  other  kingdoms  besides.'  These  worldly  honours  had  never  satisfied 
me,  and  the  longing  for  something  higher  and  better  became  increasingly 
stronger.  My  prayers  at  that  time  always  culminated  in  the  cry,  •  0  God,  give 
me  but  a  drop  of  the  love  of  Christ  and  a  spark  of  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Ghost.' 
A  short  time  after,  in  response  to  my  prayer  that  I  might  love  Jesus  and  Jesus 
only,  I  heard  the  Saviour  say  to  me,  '  My  child,  thy  salvation  does  not  depend 
upon  thy  love  to  Me,  but  upon  My  love  to  thee,  just  as  thou  art.'  Then  broke 
upon  my  heart  a  sun  of  joy,  in  the  beams  of  which  I  Btill  rejoice,  and  whose  light 
will  shine  upon  me  eternally." 


CHAPTER  Xin. 

Yebs.  3-6.  And  let  as  bring  again  the  ark  of  our  God  to  hb. — The  arJc  in  ths 

royal  city  : — A  place  of  honour,  influence,  and  right,  as  : — I.  The  centre  of  unity. 
II.  The  source  of  religious  life.  This  act :  1.  Purified  religious  life.  2.  Unified 
religious  hfe.  3.  Organised  religious  life.  III.  The  sign  of  God's  presence. 
{J.  Wolfendale.)  The  ark's  progress  to  Mount  Zion  : — One  of  the  Psalms  com- 
posed by  David  to  be  sung  on  the  removing  of  the  ark  (Psa.  Ixviii.)  is  quoted  by  Paul 
(Eph.  iv.  7,  8)  as  having  foretold  what  this  procession  itself  foreshadowed,  viz., 
the  ascension  of  Christ,  and  the  blessings  which  should  flow  therefrom  upon  every 
member  of  His  Mystical  Body.  We  see  in  all  this  great  procession  nothing  less 
than  the  Universal  Church  of  Christ,  partaking  with  the  Divine  David  in  the  glory 
of  His  ascension  into  the  Heavenly  Zion.  From  the  narrative  of  which  the  text 
forms  a  part  we  may  learn  : — I.  General  lessons.  1.  That  periods  of  reformation, 
after  past  neglect,  are  those  in  which  we  need  more  than  ordinary  caution,  lest  we 
mar  the  work  which  is  designed  to  promote  God's  glory.  2.  That  all  religious 
reformation  which  is  the  work  of  man  can  scarcely  fail  to  be  blemished  and  dis- 
figured more  or  less  by  human  infirmities.  3.  That  the  effects  of  those  infirmities 
are  not  to  be  acquiesced  in,  but  to  be  confessed  and  corrected,  if  ever  we  would  hope 
to  obtain  the  Divine  approval,  or  even  to  escape  the  Divine  chastisement.  4.  Not 
to  abandon  our  good  intentions  because  we  have  been  checked  and  hindered  in  our 
efforts  after  amendment,  but  still  to  hold  on  and  persevere  in  our  exertions ;  only 
taking  heed  to  profit  by  the  instruction  which  the  experience  of  past  failure  was 
designed  to  give.  5.  "  God  will  be  sanctified  in  all  them  that  come  nigh  Him,"  by 
obedience  to  His  holy  laws  (Lev.  x.  2).  6.  That  ignorance  and  neglect,  even  when 
allowed  to  pass  unchastised  in  others,  may  bring  upon  His  ordained  ministers  the 
severest  punishment.  11.  Particular  lessons.  1.  That  every  Christian  has  his 
place  in  that  great  procession,  which  is  occupied  in  conveying  the  Ark  of  the 
Covenant  (Rev.  xi.  19)  up  to  its  final  resting-place  in  Mount  Zion;  but  every 
Christian  has  not  the  same  place.  2.  That  it  is  not  enough  that  we  do,  whatever 
-we  do,  with  a  good  intention  unless  what  is  done  be  also  good,  good  in  itself,  and 
good  in  us.     {Bishop  Chris,  Wordsworth.) 

Vers.  9-11.  And  when  they  came  unto  the  threshing-floor  of  Ohldon,  ITzza  put 
forth  his  hand  to  hold  the  ark.    Perez-Vzza  : — Learn — I.  If  God  be  absent  from 

A  PEOPLE  AND  THE  ARK  BE  LONG  IN  OBSCURITY,  THAT  PEOPLE  WILL  LOSE  A  SENSE  OF 

reverence.    II.  That  God,  mindful  of  His  honours,  often  singles  out  guilty  men 

TO    BE   monuments    OF    HiS   DISPLEASURE.      IH.    ThAT   BY   SUCH    EXAMPLES  OF  TERROR 

God  WARNS  others.     (J".  Wolfendale.)         Uzza's  transgression  : — Consider — I.  The 

IMPORTANCE  OF   RITUAL  AND   POSITIVE   INSTITUTIONS,  WITH   THE   PUNCTUAL   OBSERVANCE 

which  God  expects  to  them.  Amongst  all  the  trials  which  have  been  made  of 
human  nature,  in  the  way  of  worshipping  a  superior  power,  there  hath  been  no 
instance  of  a  pure  and  holy  worship  without  somewhat  of  institution  to  fix  the 
forms  of  it.  Even  a  state  of  innocence  did  not  subsist  without  a  positive  law  for 
trial  of  our  first  parents'  obedience.  The  first  recorded  act  of  worship  after  the  Fall 
was  apparently  of  a  ritual  and  positive  nature ;  since  human  reason  doth  no  more 
direct  to  those  sacrifices  which  we  find  offered  to  God  by  Cain  and  Abel,  than  it 
directs  us  to  baptism  or  the  celebration  of  the  Holy  Eucharist.  The  gross  super- 
stitions of  the  heathen  world  were  manifestly  owing  to  the  want  of  an  authorised 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

ceremonial  in  their  worship.     II.  The  enclosuke  of  the  sacerdotal  or  priestly 

FUNCTION,  WITH  THE  DANGER  OF  INVADING  OB  THROWING  IT  OPEN.  III.  ThE  RESPECT 
which  18  DDE  TO  A  RELATIVE  HOLINESS.  IV.  ThE  INSUFFICIENCY  OF  A  GOOD  OR 
INNOCENT  INTENTION  TO  WARRANT  AN  IRREGULAR  OB  FORBIDDEN  ACTION.  V.  ThE 
EEVEBENCE  AND  PREPARATION  OF  HEART  WHEREWITH  WE  SHOULD  APPROACH  THE  SOLEMN 
OFFICES  OF  DIVINE  WORSHIP.       VI.    ThE    DANGER  OF   AN    UNAUTHORISED,  OFFICIOUS  ZEAL. 

(N.  Marshall,  D.D.)  Touching  the  ark,  and  touching  the  Saviour  (ver.  10  with 
Matt.  ix.  21) : — How  characteristic  are  these  two  incidents  of  the  two  dispensations 
under  whicn  they  respectively  occurred  ?  What  a  comment  upon  the  declaration, 
"  The  letter  killeth,  the  spirit  giveth  life."  I.  I  observe  that  the  Old  and  New 
Testaments  present  many  such   instructive  contrasts,  serving  to  illustrate  the 

DIFFERENT  SPIRIT  OF   THE  LEGAL   AS    COMPARED   WITH    THE    EVANGELICAL   ECONOMY the 

one  being  mostly  miracles  of  judgment,  the  other  almost  exclusively  miracles  of 
mercy.  For  instance,  there  is  the  confusion  of  tongues  at  Babel — the  gift  of 
tongues  at  Pentecost ;  the  water  turned  into  blood  in  Egypt — the  water  turned  into 
wine  at  Cana ;  the  darkness  of  Egypt  issuing  in  the  death  of  the  first-born — the 
darkness  of  Calvary  bringing  many  sons  to  glory.  And  so  in  the  text :  the  death 
of  Uzza  on  touching  the  ark — the  healing  of  the  sufferer  that  touched  our  Lord. 
It  was  in  either  case  a  touch ;  but  the  one  was  fatal,  the  other  a  cure.  The  one 
was  a  case  of  presumption,  if  not  of  unbelief ;  the  other  a  case  of  humility  and  of 
the  deepest  faith.  The  Lord,  the  heart-searcher,  saw  a  difference  in  the  intrinsic 
similarity  of  the  acts  which  man  saw  not.  It  was  not  altogether  the  difference  in 
the  dispensations,  but  the  difference  in  the  persons.  Uzza  not  only  overlooked  the 
law  that  prescribed  the  Kohathite  as  the  ark-bearer,  but  sacrilegiously  intruded  hia 
band  to  support  an  emblem  which  had  vindicated  the  suflSciency  of  its  self-reliance 
by  its  superhuman  inflictions  in  the  house  of  Dagon,  and  by  its  miraculous  over- 
rulings  of  natural  instincts  in  the  leading  of  the  kine  from  their  calves  when  its 
mystic  pilgrimage  lay  in  an  opposite  direction  ;  whereas  the  woman  in  the  Gospels 
ascribed  merit  and  virtue  even  to  the  hem  of  the  Redeemer's  garment,  and  much 
more  therefore  to  Himself.  Hence  the  two,  Uzza  and  the  woman,  enacted  in  type 
the  Pharisee  and  the  publican,  whereof  the  one  "  went  down  to  her  house  justified 
rather  than  the  other."  Both  intrinsically  were  slight,  inconsiderable  acts  in  them- 
selves— a  mere  touch  externally  in  either  case;  the  one  touching  the  sign,  the  other 
the  thing  signified.  But  the  one  brought  his  support  to  the  covenant  ark,  the  other 
drew  her  support  from  the  Ark ;  the  one  approached  in  self-sufficiency,  and  was 
smitten  for  his  presumption,  the  other  drew  nigh  in  self-abasement,  and  was  healed 
for  her  faith.  Upon  the  one,  therefore,  fell  the  terrible  anathema  of  "  the  letter" 
that  "  killeth "  ;  upon  the  other  descended  as  the  dews  of  heaven  "the  Spirit" 
that  "  giveth  life."  11.  In  their  contrast  is  presented  the  light  and  shade  of  the 
PROFESSION-LIFE  IN  THE  CHUBCH.  It  is  moic  agreeable  to  our  natural  pride  to  feel 
our  personal  hand  to  be  the  stay  of  a  declining  Church,  than  to  creep  with  a  poor, 
dejected  sinner  to  the  hem  of  the  garment,  the  lowest  place,  the  door-keeper's  post 
in  the  house  of  our  God.  The  pride  of  ecclesiastical  office  is  in  various  shapes  and 
degrees  the  besetting  sin  of  clergy  and  laity.  It  leads  the  former  to  rest  upon 
functional  relations,  those  pretensions  and  reliances  due  only  to  the  endowments  of 
grace,  to  the  conscientious  cultivation  of  gifts,  and  to  the  exercise  of  personal 
influence.  It  tempts  the  priest  alike  to  supersede  the  man  and  lose  sight  of  God. 
Alas  I  for  this  thrusting  the  unbidden  hand  of  the  creature  upon  the  ark  of  God  ! 
It  displays  itself  among  the  laity,  too,  in  the  love  of  office  in  the  Church,  for  the 
mere  office  sake,  as  a  platform  for  self-parade.  It  escapes  even  in  the  mode  and 
amount  of  contributions  to  the  Church,  in  laying  them  like  the  corban  on  the  altar, 
not  for  the  glory  of  God,  but  as  the  price  of  redemption  from  some  unpalatable 
duty.  There  are  men  who  can  be  brought  to  church  with  the  idea  of  playing  the 
patron,  to  indulge  the  vanity  of  their  sense  of  being  necessary  to  her  standing  and 
well-doing,  who  thus  lay  unhallowed  hands  on  her  altar,  like  an  Uzza,  but  who 
would  disdain  to  be  indebted  to  that  lowly  touch  of  her  spiritual  garment,  for  the 
feeling  that  it  was  that,  and  not  their  presumptuous  handling  of  the  ark  of  her 
strength,  that  made  them  whole.  III.  The  doctrineof  the  contrast  istwofold — namely, 

THE  PERIL  OF   THE  LEAST  SIN,  AND    THE   PEACE  OF    THE  LEAST  ACT  OF   FAITH.       As  tO  the 

first:  you  are  always  in  danger  so  long  as  you  allow  yourselves  in  any  known  sin 
under  the  plea  of  Lot,  who,  by  the  side  of  the  enormities  of  Sodom,  contended  "  is 
it  not  a  little  one  ?  "  The  effect  of  that  friction  with  the  world  into  which  men's 
eagerness  in  business  or  pursuit  of  pleasure  leads  them,  is  to  rub  off  the  bloom 
from  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  and  to  rub  off,  though  in  minutest  particles,  the  fine 


CHAP.xin.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  47 

gold,  and  turn  it  dim  in  lustre  and  less  in  substance.  The  little  sin,  as  you  imagine 
it,  of  putting  your  hand,  say,  upon  a  portion  of  the  Sabbath,  to  do  something  in 
your  business,  or  to  spend  it  in  recreation,  or  in  reading  the  news,  or  in  secular 
gossiping,  leaving  the  sound  of  the  service  chimes  to  die  away  among  the  graves  of 
the  dead,  who  are  no  more  insensible  to  its  calling  than  yourselves — in  these  sup- 
posed little  sins  begins  the  course,  that  deceiving  and  being  deceived,  waxes  worse 
and  worse,  until  the  man's  life  becomes  at  last  a  mere  chapter  of  practical  Atheism, 
without  prayer,  without  faith,  without  obedience.  Or  suppose  the  httle  sin  take 
another  direction,  confining  its  action  to  within  the  sanctuary,  and  the  moral 
delinquent  lays  his  hand  upon  the  ark  in  another  shape.  Perhaps  he  does  not 
realise  Christ's  sufficiency  as  to  an  atonement  or  a  justifying  righteousness,  and 
must  have  a  hand  in  the  satisfaction  of  the  one,  and  the  completeness  of  the  other, 
and  therefore  looks  to  a  baptism,  or  a  eucharist,  or  to  his  social  charities,  or  moral 
duties,  or  evangelical  sentiments,  or  enthusiastic  feelings  and  sensations,  or  the 
suffrages  of  fellow-sinners,  or  even  fellow-saints,  if  the  phrase  be  more  acceptable. 
If  by  these,  by  all  of  them  or  by  any  of  them,  the  man  looks  to  commend  himself 
in  the  sight  of  God,  and  supplement  that  which  was  lacking,  in  his  theory,  in  the 
finished  work  of  Christ,  his  hand  is  on  the  ark,  and  unless  it  be  removed  betimes, 
the  hand  of  an  indignant  God  wiU  be  upon  him,  and  he  that  "  sinneth  with  a  high 
hand,"  for  whom  neither  law  nor  Gospel  provided  an  atonement,  ♦'  shall  suddenly 
be  cut  off,  and  that  without  remedy."  On  the  other  hand,  the  contrast  exhibits  the 
peace  and  advantage  of  the  least  act  of  faith,  even  if  the  faith  be  so  weak  and  feeble 
as  to  be  likened  to  "a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  which  is  the  least  of  all  seeds." 
Faith  as  little  as  that,  like  the  woman's  touch,  has  strength  to  remove  mountains. 
A  spark  of  Omnipotence  is  struck  oat  of  the  rock  by  its  feeblest  blow.  {Joteph  B. 
Owen,  M.A.) 

Ver.  13.  But  carried  it  aside  into  the  bouse  of  Obed-edom. — TTie  "asides*'  of 

God  : — How  much  we  owe  to  the  "  asides  "  of  God.  Obed-ed^m  owed  the  bene- 
diction which  descended  upon  his  house  to  this  "  aside."  God's  way  through  life 
is  thus  wondrous :  always  indeed  one  great  line  of  progress,  yet  who  can  count  the 
d6tours  which  He  makes,  the  asides,  the  incidental  variations,  the  small  things 
which  men  regarded  as  unworthy  of  notice, — who  can  tell  how  all  these  are  wrought 
up  into  a  comprehensive  revelation  of  wisdom  and  love.  If  we  only  took  the  things 
which  came  to  us  on  the  great  main  thoroughfares  of  life,  some  people  would 
hardly  be  blessed  at  all.  A  study  of  the  "  asides  "  of  life  would  confbrm  us  in  our 
general  Christian  faith.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Yer.  14.  And  the  Lord  blessed  the  house  of  Obed-edom,  and  all  that  be  bad. — TJie 

selection  of  the  houxe  of  Obed-edom  : — Why  was  the  house  of  Obed-edom  selected 
for  the  three  months'  sojourn  of  the  ark  ?  The  choice  of  the  ark's  resting-place 
was  David's  first-fruits  of  repentance.  He  was  terrified  at  the  judgment  upon  their 
act  of  disobedience  to  the  law,  which  enjoined  that  none  but  the  Levites  of  the 
family  of  Kohath  should  bear  it,  and  that  upon  their  shoulders,  too ;  and  they  at 
once  retraced  their  steps,  so  far  as  they  could  by  conveying  the  sacred  emblem  to 
the  house  of  Obed-edom,  the  Gittite,  that  is  of  Gath.  This  city  was  distinguished 
from  several  other  towns  of  the  same  name  by  the  addition  of  Gath-rimmon 
(Josh.  xxiv.  21).  It  was  not  only  one  of  the  cities  of  the  Levites  in  general,  but  of 
the  Kohathites  in  particular,  the  very  family  to  whom  was  specially  assigned  the 
post  of  "  bearing  the  ark  upon  their  shoulders."  From  1  Chron.  xv.  38  we  find 
that  Obed-edom  was  actually  one  of  the  "porters"  employed  to  bear  upon  their 
shoulders,  instead  of  in  a  cart,  after  the  manner  of  the  idolatrous  Philistines,  the 
sacred  symbol  of  the  presence  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  on  the  occasion  of  its  final 
translation  to  Jerusalem.      {Joseph  B.  Owen,  M.A.)        The  house  of  Obed-edom  : — 

1.  The  service  which  obed-edom  rendeked.     II.  The  spirit  in  which  he  peb- 

FOBMED  the  SERVICE.      HI.    ThE  REWARD  WHICH  HE  GAINED.       1.    A  pcrSOUal    blcssiug. 

2.  A  social  blessing.  3.  An  extensive  blessing.  None  suffer  whose  guest  is  the  ark 
of  God.  Piety  is  the  best  friend  to  prosperity.  (J.  Wolfendale.)  Churches  a 
blessing  or  a  curse : — I.  What  was  this  abk  op  God  ?  1.  It  was  a  sign  of  the 
covenant  God  had  made  with  His  people.  2.  It  was  a  record  of  God's  dealings  with 
them  under  all  their  rebellions.  3.  It  was  an  instrument  of  communion  between 
Him  and  them.  II.  How  was  this  abk  to  be  treated,  and  what  was  the 
CONSEQUENCE  OF  ITS  PBESENCB  ?  1.  See  what  it  was  amongst  the  heathen 
(1  Sam.  V.  4,  11).    2.  See  what  it  was  amongst  God's  own  people,  when  they  made 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xir. 

themselves  like  unto  the  Gentiles  and  learned  their  works  (1  Sam.  vi.  19,  vii.  3). 
In  the  sight  of  these  judgments  we  may  plainly  see  that  the  mere  having  among 
them  the  appointed  sign  and  instrument  of  God's  presence  was  no  blessing,  but  the 
having  it  for  a  lawful  use,  and  the  treating  it  after  a  godly  manner.  God's  ark  was 
a  blessing  where  it  was  duly  prized ;  its  presence  was  a  blessing  or  a  curse  according 
to  the  character  of  those  it  visited.    III.  Those  churches  which  adorn  cub  land 

ABE  the  signs  OF  God'S  PRESENCE,  AS  THE  ARZ  WAS  OF  OLD.  WhAT  BLESSES  ANY 
DISTRICT  AS  THUS  BEINGINO   HOME   TO   IT   THE   PRESENCE  OF   GoD  ?      What  is  the  effect 

on  ungodly  and  irreverent  men  of  seeing  and  attending  churches  ?  It  brings  down 
on  them  God's  heavy  judgments.  (Bishop  Samuel  Wilberforce.)  The  blessing  of 
God  upon  those  who  honour  His  institutions : — The  ark  was  a  small  elegant  chest, 
which  contained  the  two  tables  of  the  law — the  Hebrew  Bible — written  by  the  finger 
of  God.  This  was  probably  the  first  alphabetical  writing  in  the  world.  Though  the 
Egyptians  and  other  heathen  nations  used  to  employ  hieroglyphics,  to  record  past 
events,  and  denote  the  actions  and  intellectual  and  moral  qualities  of  men,  yet  they 
were  totally  ignorant  of  letters  which  compose  words  and  sentences  by  their 
particular  sounds.  Obed-edom  knew  that  the  ark  contained  the  written  Word  of 
God,  and  esteemed  it,  as  David  did,  "  better  unto  him  than  thousands  of  gold  and 
silver."  The  subject  is  that  God  will  bless  those  families  who  treat  His  Word  with 
proper  respect.  I  shall  show :  I.  That  they  ought  to  treat  it  with  proper 
BE8PECT.  Observe — 1.  That  every  family  ought  to  have  the  Word  of  God  in  their 
house,  2.  Parents  should  read  it  seriously  every  day  in  their  families.  3.  The 
Bible  ought  to  be  read  in  a  family  with  a  view  to  understand  it.  4.  The  Bible  is  to 
be  read  and  heard  in  a  family  with  a  sincere  desire  and  intention  to  do  whatsoever 
God  has  commanded.  II.  That  if  they  do  read  and  hear  the  Bible  with  such 
PROPER  RESPECT  GoD  WILL  BLESS  THEM.  1.  Bccause  such  pious  families  are  the 
preservers  of  the  Word  of  God.  2.  Because  they  lay  the  greatest  check  and  res- 
traint upon  every  species  of  irreligion  and  impiety.  No  evU  practices  can  be  found 
in  any  family  who  daily  read  and  love  and  obey  the  Bible.  3.  God  will  bless  pious 
families  because  they  are  the  important  instruments  of  promoting  and  transmitting 
pure  religion  from  generation  to  generation.  Improvement.  1.  It  is  the  wisdom 
as  well  as  duty  of  every  family  to  pay  a  cordial  and  sacred  regard  to  the  Bible. 
2.  Those  families  that  neglect  these  duties  have  reason  to  expect  the  frowns  of 
Heaven  upon  them.  3.  If  those  families  only  are  religious  who  pay  proper  respect 
to  the  Word  of  God,  then  there  is  ground  to  conclude  that  there  are  many  families 
in  this  place  who  are  not  religious.  4.  How  important  it  is  that  heads  of  families 
should  be  truly  religious.  5.  The  great  criminality  of  irreligious  children  who 
have  been  religiously  educated.  [N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  The  house  of  Obed-edom  : — 
The  ark  was  the  symbol  of  God's  presence.  Every  truly  Christian  household  now 
has  the  blessing  that  so  enriched  the  home  of  Obed-edom.  The  subject  is — 
Eeligion  in  the  home.  I.  It  is  a  power  of  fulfilment.  Keligion  is  the  sole  power 
of  fulfilment  in  regard  to  the  very  purpose  and  idea  of  home.  A  house  may  be  full 
of  persons  who  are  very  dear  to  each  other,  very  kind  to  each  other  ;  full  of  precious 
things — affections,  hopes,  living  interests  ;  but  if  God  is  not  there  as  the  Euler  and 
Father  of  the  house,  the  original  and  true  idea  of  home  will  not  be  realised  ; 
vacancy  and  need  will  still  be  at  the  heart  of  all.  Good  things  will  grow  feebly  and 
uncertainly,  like  flowers  in  winter,  trying  to  peep  out  into  the  sunsbine,  yet 
shrinking  from  the  blast.  Evil  things  will  grow  with  strange  persistency.  Little 
things  will  produce  great  distresses.  It  will  be  as  when  a  man  of  ingenuity  tries  in 
vain  to  put  together  the  separated  parts  of  a  complicated  piece  of  mechanism.  He 
tries  it  this  way  and  that,  puts  the  pieces  into  every  conceivable  mode  of  arrange- 
ment, then  at  last  stops  and  says,  "  There  must  be  a  piece  wanting."  Home 
without  the  Divine  presence  is  at  best  a  moral  structure  with  the  central  element 
wanting.  II.  It  is  a  principle  of  harmony.  Eeligion  is  the  only  principle  of 
harmony  in  the  endeavour  after  this  highest  and  best  home  life.  It  supplies  the 
missing  element  which  unites  and  quickens  all  the  rest.  It  conducts  its  progress  as 
a  regulative  force.  It  is  not  contended  that  the  principle  bears  all  its  proper  fruits, 
and  that  every  Christian  home  is  a  scene  of  unbroken  harmony.  Some  Christian 
homes  are  very  peaceful.  One  enters  them  with  the  same  kind  of  soothed  and 
comforted  feeling  with  which  a  traveller,  after  a  toilsome  walk  over  the  breezy  hills, 
comes  down  on  a  little  placid  lake,  hardly  rufiled  by  the  breeze,  and  fringed  with 
freshest  green.  Others  again  are  more  troubled.  But  we  must  not  hastily  con- 
clude that  the  uniformly  placid  house  is  really  further  advanced  in  the  harmonies 
of  Christian  living  than  some  others  which  are  less  serene.    It  may  be  so ;  but  it 


CHAP,  xrv.]  I,  CHRONICLES.  49 

may  also  be  quite  the  reverse.  Sometimes  the  jarrings  are  brought  out  just  by  the 
endeavours  after  the  higher  harmonies.  Failures  are  more  apparent  if  the  efforts 
are  high.  The  dearest  harmonies  in  all  the  social  life  of  men  are  sounding  only  in 
the  Christian  home  ;  and  those  imperfections  of  which  some  make  so  much,  and  of 
which  no  one  ought  to  make  too  little,  are,  after  all,  but  like  the  flitting  shadows  of 
a  sunny  day — but  like  the  chafing  of  the  stream  as  it  rushes  against  the  rocky  barrier 
on  its  passage  to  the  peaceful  plains  which  it  will  fertilise,  or  to  the  depths  of  ocean 
where  it  will  rest.  in.  Eeligion  in  the  house  is  a  soukce  or  pkospebitt.  Life  in 
the  present  day  is  more  complex ;  it  has  greater  interests,  heavier  tasks  and  higher 
prizes.  The  Lord  still  blesses  the  house  of  Obed-edom  and  all  that  he  has. 
1.  Character.  2.  Plans  of  usefulness.  3.  Controversies  with  evU  principles  and 
with  evil  men.  4.  Eeverses.  A  thoughtful,  earnest  man  now  feels  himself  con- 
nected with  politics — law  — battles — civilisation — churches — religion — life  in  all  its 
phases.  He  has-some  stake,  some  property  in  all  these  things,  and  in  proportion  to 
the  earnestness  and  greatness  of  his  mind,  he  will  feel  that  these  are  the  real 
interests  of  his  life,  for  which  he  needs  "  blessing  "  from  the  Lord.     IV.  Beligion 

IN  THE  HOUSE    OF   A    GOOD    MAN,  IS   LIKELT    TO   BE    A    LEGACY  TO  HIS    CHILDREN,       In  the 

piety  of  the  living,  and  in  the  laws  of  Christian  family  life,  he  makes  provision  for 
what  we  may  call  the  transmission  of  religion  to  those  who  shall  come  after.  In 
the  rule  of  their  house,  and  in  the  spirit  of  their  life,  godly  parents  are  casting  the 
forms  which  will  be  peopled  and  animated  with  the  future  "  families  of  Israel." 
(A.  Raleigh,  B.D.) 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


Veb8.  1,  2.  NoTT  Hiram  Mnff  of  T3rre  eent  messeng'ers  to  David. — The  building 
of  the  royal  house : — In  Hiram's  conduct  notice — I.  An  instance  or  tbue  fbiend- 
SHiP.  1.  Genuine.  2.  Lasting.  11.  An  illustration  of  human  agency  in  the 
SERVICE  or  God.  III.  A  proof  of  God's  providence.  1.  In  Hiram's  conduct. 
2.  In  David's  accession  to  the  throne.  3.  In  the  honour  and  extension  of  David's 
kingdom.  {J.  Wolfendale.)  Hiram  and  David  : — The  treaty  between  these  two 
kings  illustrates — I.  The  providence  of  God  in  the  exaltation  op  a  good  man. 
II.  The  influence  of  a  good  man  upon  othees  when  thus  exalted.  Men  pay 
homage  to  moral  worth  and  holy  life.  This  power  every  Christian  may  possess 
and  wield.  III.  The  design  for  which  God  exalts  a  good  man  (2  Sam.  v.  12).  Not 
for  themselves,  but  for  others  are  men  enriched  and  honoured.  {Ibid.)  Li/ted 
up : — Man  throws  down.  God  lifts  up  :  1.  Persons.  2.  Societies.  3.  Nations. 
Lifts  up  above :  1.  Distress.     2.  Opposition.    3.  Danger.     (J.  P.  Lange.) 

Ver.  10.  And  David  inquired  of  God. — Inquiring  of  God: — The  Israelites 
usually  asked  counsel  of  God  by  the  ephod,  the  Grecians  by  their  oracles,  the 
Persians  by  their  magi,  the  Egyptians  by  their  hierophantse,  the  Indians  by  their 
gymnosophistBB,  the  ancient  Gauls  and  Britons  by  their  Druids,  the  Eomans  by 
their  augures  or  soothsayers.  It  was  not  lawful  to  propose  any  matter  of  moment 
in  the  senate,  priusquam  de  ccelo  observatum  erat,  before  their  wizards  had  made 
observations  from  the  heaven  or  sky.  That  which  they  did  impiously  and  super- 
stitiously,  we  may,  nay  we  ought  to  do  in  another  sense,  piously,  religiously, 
conscionably,  i.e.,  not  to  embark  ourselves  into  any  action  of  great  importance  and 
consequence,  priusquavi  de  Coelo  observatum  est,  before  we  have  observed  from 
Heaven,  not  the  flight  of  birds,  not  the  houses  of  planets,  or  their  aspects  or 
conjunctions,  but  the  countenance  of  God,  whether  it  shineth  upon  our  enterprises 
or  not,  whether  He  approve  of  our  projects  and  designs  or  not.     (J.  Spencer.) 

Vers.  14-17.  And  it  shall  be,  when  thou  shalt  hear  a  sound  of  going  in  the  tops 
of  the  mulberry  trees. — The  sound  in  the  mulberry  trees  : — What  this  "sound  of 
going "  was  exactly  we  cannot  tell.  It  probably  resembled  the  march  of  an 
army  in  the  air.  A  host  of  unseen  angels  may  have  moved  above  the  mulberry 
groves,  striking  terror  into  the  hearts  of  the  barbarians  and  sending  them  into 
precipitate  retreat.  As  they  retreated,  they  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Israelites 
(who  had  swung  around  to  their  rear),  and  were  routed  with  complete  discomfiture. 
I.  That  God  signals  to  His  people  to  take  certain  steps  at  certain  times 

4 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xir. 

Then  it  is  their  duty  to  bestir  themselves.  "When  the  Deluge  was  about  to  descend 
upon  a  guilty  world,  Noah  was  commanded  to  bestir  himself  and  prepare  an  ark 
for  the  saving  of  his  household.  When  the  fire-shower  was  coming  upon  Sodom, 
Lot  was  laid  hold  of  by  God's  angels  and  urged  to  escape  for  his  Ufe.  When  ths' 
children  of  Israel  were  in  peril  of  being  overwhelmed  by  the  Egyptians,  God 
signalled  to  them  the  order  to  advance,  and  by  a  majestic  pillar  of  cloud  led  them 
through  the  parted  sea.  All  sacred  history  is  studded  with  illustrations  of  this 
truth.  Martin  Luther,  discovering  the  "  open  secret "  in  the  convent  Bible  at 
Erfurth,  and  hammering  his  theses  on  the  church  door  of  Wittemburg  ;  the  young 
Wesleys,  awakened  at  Oxford  and  sent  out  to  awaken  slumbering  Britain,  were- 
simply  God's  agents  bestirring  themselves  at  the  Divine  signal.  11.  God  has  His 
"  BET  TIMES  to  FAVOUR  ZiON."  One  of  these  was  the  memorable  day  of  Pentecost. 
The  faithful  men  and  women  in  the  upper  room  heard  a  sound  as  of  a  mighty 
rushing  wind,  and  the  baptism  of  fire  descended.  God  moved,  and  His  people  were 
on  their  feet  promptly.  Each  man,  each  woman  obeys  the  signal.  The  Word  of 
God  grows  mightily  and  prevails.  The  secret  of  this  marvellous  success  is  that 
Christians  promptly  and  thoroughly  co-operated  with  the  Divine  Spirit.  IH.  A 
PERSONAL  APPLICATION.  There  are  times  when  each  child  of  Jesus  hears  the  "  sound 
of  the  going  in  the  mulberries."  Let  them  be  improved.  Do  not  let  ua  lose 
heaven's  fair  wind.  When  we  get  fresh  insight  into  the  Word,  let  us  open  it  to 
others.  When  our  hearts  are  stirred  with  sympathy  for  sinners,  then  is  the  time 
to  "  pull  them  out  of  the  fire."  If  the  Holy  Spirit  is  striving  with  us,  then  is  the 
time  to  strive  with  Him  to  save  men  from  eternal  death.  As  God  moves  in  us,  let 
us  move  for  the  salvation  of  those  within  our  reach.  IV.  A  time  of  trial  ib  often 
A  time  of  especl^  blessing.  I  have  read  of  a  German  baron  who  stretched 
between  the  towers  of  his  castle  a  set  of  iron  wires.  In  calm  weather  the  wirea 
were  silent.  But  when  the  winds  arose  these  metallic  chords  began  to  play,  and  in 
the  height  of  the  gale  this  hurricane-harp  gave  out  glorious  music.  So  is  it  with  a 
child  of  God.  In  seasons  of  calm  and  quiet  prosperity  he  may  too  often  become 
silent,  inactive,  useless.  But  when  the  storms  of  trial  strike  him  his  soul-harp 
awakes  to  new  melodies  of  love  and  faith,  and  his  life  becomes  as  a  stringed- 
instrument  struck  by  the  hand  of  Jesus.  Open  your  heart  to  the  voice  and  the 
influences  of  the  Divine  and  Loving  Spirit.  Let  the  time  of  trial  be  the  time  for 
doing  God's  wUl,  and  at  least  one  soul  will  taste  the  joys  of  a  true  revival  t 
(Theodore  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.)  The  repeated  qtiestion  : — The  word  "again"  con- 
tains the  kernel  of  the  special  teaching  here.  I.  How  David  acted  here.  1.  A 
wise  self-distrust.  SeU-distrust  may  be  sinful,  as  it  was  in  the  case  of  Moses,  who 
could  not  overcome  his  diffidence  even  when  God  had  given  him  the  greatest 
of  all  encouragements,  saying  "  Certainly  I  will  be  with  thee."  But  there  is  & 
distrust  of  self,  which  is  healthy  and  which  leads  a  man  on  to  be  strong  in  the  Lord 
and  the  power  of  His  might ;  and  that  was  what  David  had  now  and  what  secured 
his  success.  2.  A  full  confidence  in  God.  He  confided  all  the  circumstances  of 
his  case  to  God.  3.  A  spirit  of  obedience.  He  was  ready  to  abide  by  the  Divine 
directions.  4.  A  recognition  of  wisdom  beyond  his  own.  U.  How  David  might 
HAVE  acted.  1.  He  might  have  said  the  means  which  I  had  before  will  be  enough 
now ;  I  have  very  recently  defeated  those  Philistines ;  their  resources  I  know  are 
much  impaired,  mine  are  not ;  I  will  go  out  against  them  at  once.  Such  reasoning- 
would  have  been  wrong.  Means  which  we  have  had  before,  even  though  intact, 
are  not  of  necessity  enough  for  us  in  a  new  emergency.  The  same  circumstances 
seldom  happen  with  every  incident  precisely  alike.  We  may  not  see  where  the 
differences  lie,  but  they  may  exist  nevertheless ;  and  perhaps  it  is  precisely  one  ot 
those  unseen  differences  which  will  defeat  us.  2.  He  might  have  contented 
himself  with  thinking  generally  that  God  would  be  with  him.  For  this  particular 
enterprise  David  asked  specific  advice.  Specific  acts  of  recognition  of  God 
receive  specific  blessings.  Lessons — 1.  The  value  of  all  close  contacts  with  God. 
2.  We  need  not  be  afraid  of  wearying  God  with  our  frequent  comings.  3.  The 
value  of  new  infusions  of  God's  wisdom  and  strength  into  all  old,  well  known,  well 
tried  and  successful  means.  The  means  will  never  be  any  more  to  as  than  what 
God  enables  them  to  be.  4.  Nothing  need  grow  old  with  God  to  keep  it  fresh, 
in.  What  came  of  David's  acting  thus  ?  In  all  probability  escape  from  defeat. 
The  way  which  God  pointed  out  in  answer  to  David's  inquiry,  involved  much  from. 
him.  1.  Apparent  cowardice.  2.  Much  self-restraint ;  but  all  these  were  but  the 
preliminaries  to  triumph — the  short  time  of  waiting  before  God's  plan  was  perfected' 
in  victory.     Let  us  permit  God's  answers  to  work  themselves  out.    They  must 


CHAP.  IT.]  I.   CHRONICLES.  61 

generally  evolve.  We  cannot  consult  God  with  reverence,  obedience  and  love, 
without  His  taking  an  interest  in  whatever  we  bring  before  Him.  (P.  B.  Power, 
M.A.)         The  battle  of  Gibeon  : — I.  A  special  chanoe  of  tactics.     II.  A  special 

BION   BT  WHICH    THESE    TACTICS    ABE     CARRIED     OUT.       1.    A    SUpematUTal    SigH.       2.    A 

disciplinary  sign.  Requiring  an  upward  look,  an  open  eye  to  see,  an  attentive  ear 
to  hear.  3.  A  typical  sign.  In  the  setting  up  of  Christ's  kingdom,  disciples  waited 
to  be  equipped  for  work.  (J.  Wolfendale.)  Signal*  for  duty  : — I.  God's  answer 
TO  man's  prater.  1.  Prayer  for  knowledge  of  duty.  2.  Prayer  for  assurance  of 
success.  IL  God'b  help  in  uan'b  circdmstances.  III.  God's  signal  fob  uan's 
ACTION.  We  need  not  only  to  know,  and  strength  to  obey  Gmd'a  will,  but  the 
signal  to  "  go "  at  the  right  time.  A  detachment  on  one  occasion  waited  for 
orders,  longed  to  join  their  comrades  in  battle,  instead  of  standing  in  silence, 
exposed  to  danger.  At  length  Wellington  gave  the  command,  and  the  attack 
was  successful.  "  They  serve  who  stand  and  wait."  (ibid.)  A  wite 
tarrying : — Xerxes,  monarch  of  Persia,  had  invaded  Greece  with  an  army  and  a 
fleet.  Against  the  latter  the  ships  of  the  Greeks  were  drawn  up,  and  were  ready  to 
sail  down  the  bay  to  attack  the  Persians.  But  Themistocles,  the  commander, 
delayed.  The  men  grew  impatient  and  began  to  fret  at  the  delay.  Still  he  refused 
to  give  the  order  to  advance.  Discontent  now  became  almost  mutiny.  Some  said 
Themistocles  was  a  coward ;  others  declared  that  he  had  sold  out  to  the  enemy. 
But  Themistocles  was  waiting  for  the  land  breeze.  He  knew  that  every  morning, 
about  nine  o'clock,  the  breeze  blew  from  the  land,  and  by  waiting  for  it  to  spring 
up,  it  would  be  possible  to  use  the  sails  and  it  would  be  unnecessary  to  use  the 
oars,  and  so  every  rower  would  become  a  fighter — thus  his  warriors  would  be 
increased  in  numbers.  His  delay  meant  success  and  victory  as  the  sequel  proved. 
In  the  spiritual  work  of  to-day  there  is  a  wise  tarrying  and  a  foolish  haste. 
Oh,  if  we  could  hear  more  said  about  the  spiritual  preparation,  we  are  sure 
more  would  be  accomplished  in  aggressive  inroads  upon  the  enemy !  Let  us 
insist  that  the  Church  be  led  to  look  for  and  expect  the  breath  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  then  every  man  will  be  a  soldier.  Before  thee  : — 1.  A  word  of  con- 
solation in  sore  distress.  2.  A  word  of  encouragement  amid  inward  conflict. 
8.  A  word  of  exhortation  to  unconditional  obedience  of  faith.  4.  A  word 
of  assurance  of  the  victory  which  the  Lord  gives.  (J.  P.  Lange.)  The 
rattling  of  the  Lord's  approaching  help : — 1.  Dost  thou  wait  for  it  at  Hia 
bidding  ?  2.  Dost  thou  hear  it  with  the  right  heed  ?  3.  Dost  thou  understand  it 
in  the  right  sense?  4.  Dost  thou  follow  it  without  delay?  (Ibid.)  Victory 
comet  from  the  Lord : — 1.  When  it  is  beforehand  humbly  asked  for  according  to  the 
Lord's  will  and  word.  2.  When  the  battle  is  undertaken  in  the  Lord's  name  and 
for  His  cause.  3.  When  it  is  fought  with  obedient  observation  of  the  Lord's 
directions  and  guidance.     (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Yebb.  1,  24.  And  David  made  blm  houses  in  the  city  of  David,  and  prepared 
a  place  for  the  ark  of  God. — Removal  of  the  ark,  or  carrying  on  the  work  of 
God : — I.  Preparation  for  God's  work.  1.  By  personal  sanctification.  2.  By 
implicit  obedience  to  God's  command.  II.  Hearty  co-operation  in  God's  work. 
1.  Gained  by  consultation.  Teachers'  Meetings,  Ministers'  Conferences,  National 
Councils  of  great  help  in  effective  work.  2.  Displayed  in  united  ranks. 
3.  Expressed  by  individual  effort.  III.  Success  achieved  in  God's  work. 
[J.  Wolfendale.)  The  call  to  tervice  : — I.  The  call.  1.  Personal.  2.  Pressing. 
8.  Worthy.  II.  The  response.  1.  Ready.  2.  Universal.  3.  Immediate. 
III.  The   directions  to   carry  it  out.      1.  Clear.     2.  Right.     3.  Safe.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  12.  Sanctify  yonrselveB. — Personal  holineti  ettential  to  tacred  ter- 
vice : — I.  Personal  holiness  required  in  those  who  serve.  1.  In  heart.  2.  In 
life.  n.  Personal  holiness  the  pattern  according  to  which  we  bcust  servi 
(Ephea.  ▼.  1).  III.  Personal  holiness  is  the  only  condition  on  which  we  can 
■EBVi.  1.  By  this  we  influence  others.  2.  By  this  we  answer  the  end  of  our 
being.     "  He  hath  not  called  you  to  uncleanness,  but  unto  hohness."     Ibid.) 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  XT. 

Ver.  13.  For  that  ye  sought  Him  not  after  the  due  order. — Seeking  the  Lord  :— 
There  are  historical  details  connected  with  these  words  which  we  wish  you  care- 
fully to  consider.  David  had  prepared  a  place  for  the  ark  of  God,  which  had  been 
retained  by  the  Philistines  from  the  days  of  Eli ;  and  for  a  long  period  had  been 
banished  from  the  congregation  of  Israel.  He  now  determined  to  go  down  to  the 
house  of  Obed-edom,  where  the  ark  was,  and  bring  up  to  Jerusalem  with  all  due 
solemnity  this  precious  emblem  of  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  He  exhorts  the 
priests  and  Levites  to  sanctify  themselves,  to  observe,  that  is,  all  the  prescribed 
ceremonial  purifications,  in  order  that  they  might  be  fitted  to  carry  the  ark.  This 
was  not  the  first  attempt  at  bringing  back  the  ark  of  the  Lord.  The  Philistines, 
finding  that  its  presence  only  brought  down  judgments  upon  their  land,  carried  the 
ark  into  the  country  of  the  Israelites,  where  it  remained  for  many  years  with 
Abinadab,  in  Kirjath-jearim.  But  when  David,  after  the  decease  of  Saul,  had 
placed  himself  on  the  throne,  he  went  down  to  the  house  of  Abinadab,  that  he 
might  bring  up  thence  the  sacred  deposit.  The  ark  of  God,  you  read,  was  put  on 
a  new  cart,  and  Uzza  and  Ahio,  the  sons  of  Abinadab,  drove  the  cart.  After 
proceeding  some  distance  the  oxen  stumbled ;  and  Uzza  put  forth  his  hand  and 
laid  hold  on  the  ark  to  prevent  it  from  falling.  Uzza  was  not  a  priest ;  and  eveiy 
other  was  expressly  forbidden  to  touch  the  ark.  Alarmed  at  so  signal  and  un- 
expected an  interference  of  God,  David  gave  vent  to  his  feelings  in  the  exclamation 
of  our  text :  "  How  shall  I  bring  the  ark  of  God  home  to  me  ?  "  and  determined, 
that  for  the  present  at  least,  he  would  make  no  further  endeavour  to  remove  what 
it  was  so  perilous  to  touch.  In  process,  however,  of  time,  when  he  had  duly 
considered  the  causes  of  his  failure,  he  set  himself  again  to  recovering  the  ark. 
Warned  by  the  fate  of  Uzza  he  was  a  little  more  careful  and  cautious  in  the 
several  arrangements.  David  goes  on  to  address  the  Levites  :  "Because  ye  did  it 
not  at  the  first,  the  Lord  our  God  made  a  breach  upon  us,  for  that  we  sought  Him 
not  after  the  due  order."  We  have  a  great  lesson  to  derive  from  the  facts  thus 
briefly  set  before  you.  The  lesson  is,  that  God  may  be  sought,  and  yet  not  be 
found,  because  the  seeking  is  not  in  the  way  or  "  order  "  which  He  hath  revealed 
as  agreeable  to  Himself.  It  was  not  that  David  and  his  people  were  not  sincere 
and  hearty  in  their  desire  that  the  ark  of  God  might  be  once  more  amongst  them. 
We  are  told  that  while  the  ark  abode  in  Kirjath-jearim,  the  time  was  long,  for  it 
was  twenty  years,  and  all  the  house  of  Israel  lamented  after  the  Lord.  So  that  the 
seeking  was  not  that  of  the  hypocrite.  The  seeking  God  in  a  way  of  their  own 
notion,  and  not  in  that  of  the  Divine  appointment ;  or,  rather,  the  neglecting  to 
observe  rigidly  what  God  had  prescribed  in  respect  of  the  manner  in  which  He 
would  be  sought — this  it  was  which  had  been  offensive  to  the  Lord.  And  if  where 
there  was  sincerity  of  purpose,  there  might  be  this  failure  through  want  of  exact 
conformity  to  the  revealed  will  of  God,  we  are  bound  to  conclude  that  in  our  own 
day  and  generation  it  is  not  the  mere  striving  for  masteries  ;  but,  as  St.  Paul  has 
expressed  it,  the  "  striving  lawfully,"  which  wiU  be  crowned  with  any  measure  of 
success.  Now,  we  need  hardly  observe  to  you,  that  the  right  way  of  seeking  God 
must  be  the  way  that  God  Himself  has  been  pleased  to  reveal.  But  there  is  a 
twofold  revelation — a  revelation  which  God  makes  of  Himself  by  and  through 
conscience,  and  a  revelation  which  is  contained  in  the  Bible.  Let  us  look  at  both 
of  these.  There  may  be  a  "  due  order  "  prescribed  by  the  one,  as  well  as  by  the 
other.  Tou  will  all  be  prepared  to  admit  that  the  first  step  which  conscience 
dictates,  when  it  has  roused  a  man  to  a  sense  of  his  moral  condition  is,  that  he 
break  loose  from  those  habits  of  evil  which  have  been  formed  during  years  of 
carelessness  and  vice.  There  is  a  thorough  harmony  here  between  the  two 
revelations.  But  if  we  would  overcome  a  habit,  we  must  carefully  observe  how 
habits  are  formed.  A  habit  must  be  overcome  through  retracing  step  by  step  that 
very  process  by  which  the  habit  was  formed  ;  so  that  there  is  a  *'  due  order  "  to  be 
observed,  the  neglecting  of  which  will  frustrate  all  our  labours.  A  habit  is  not 
formed  in  a  day,  neither  is  a  habit  to  be  overcome  in  a  day.  Now,  if  this  be  the 
way  in  which  a  habit  is  formed  ;  in  what  way  may  that  habit  be  loosened  and 
destroyed  ?  We  reply  that,  as  it  was  formed  step  by  step,  so  must  it  be  destroyed 
step  by  step.  And  when  you  have  determined  that  a  habit  is  obnoxious,  there  will 
rise  a  desire,  however  faint,  to  pursue  a  course  of  conduct  which  is  opposed  to  this 
habit.  This  desire,  like  the  vicious  one  already  considered,  will  at  first  be  obeyed 
with  difficulty ;  an  effort  will  be  needed,  perhaps  a  painful,  and  in  some  cases  • 
most  intense  effort.  But  this  effort  will  diminish  with  every  instance  of  suocesa. 
This  is  the  "  due  order  "  in  dealing  with  habit,  and  thus  labouring  at  the  reforma- 


CHAP.xy.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  63 

tion  which  conscience  demands.  But  there  may  be  a  neglect  of  this  "  due  order," 
and  then  comes  that  faihire  which  is  our  chief  subject  of  discourse.  If  you  with- 
stand an  evil  habit,  but  take  no  pains  to  cultivate  an  opposite  habit,  you  may 
produce  an  external  reformation,  and  yet  make  no  advance  towards  an  internal 
reformation.  The  drunkard  may  force  himself  into  a  sober  man,  without  under- 
going any  moral  change.  He  may  impose  some  powerful  restraint  upon  the  evil 
passion,  and  thus  produce  a  suspension  of  the  habit;  but  all  the  while  the 
tendency  remains  unsubdued ;  and  if  the  restraint  be  withdrawn,  the  tendency 
will  resume  all  its  power.  The  man  is  just  what  he  was  in  all  but  the  actual 
indulgence.  But  our  chief  attention  should  be  given  to  the  theology  of  the  gospel, 
though  what  we  have  called  the  theology  of  conscience  occupies  a  highly  im- 
portant place  in  reference  to  moral  reformation.  It  is  not  unfrequent  to  find 
repentance  described  as  a  kind  of  condition  to  be  performed  on  man's  part,  in 
order  that  he  may  be  fitted  to  receive  the  blessings  of  the  gospel.  Kepentance  is 
spoken  of  as  a  preliminary  to  be  accomplished  by  ourselves,  so  that  when 
disciplined  and  penitent  we  may  turn  to  Christ  for  forgiveness.  But  this  is  not  the 
doctrine  of  the  gospel.  This  is  rather  the  inversion  of  the  "  due  order"  prescribed 
by  the  gospel.  The  doctrine  of  the  New  Testament  is  not  "  repentance,"  and  then 
appeal  to  Christ.  It  is  appeal  at  once  to  Christ  in  order  that  you  may  repent.  We 
know  that  before  the  blood  of  the  atonement  can  be  applied  to  the  conscience,  and 
a  man  have  reason  to  hope  himself  justified  by  God,  there  must  be  an  earnest  and 
hearty  resolution  to  mortify  those  affections  and  desires  whose  indulgence  has 
heretofore  done  despite  unto  God.  But  then  we  equally  know  that  such  a 
resolution  as  this  is  not  to  be  made  out  of  anything  which  man  finds  in  himself, 
through  the  instrumentality  of  his  unaided  feelings  whether  mental  or  moral. 
We  know  that  a  determination  to  forsake  sin,  if  it  be  anything  better  than  a  feeble 
purpose  which  will  give  way  at  the  first  onset  of  temptation,  must  be  a  deter- 
mination which  is  based  on  hatred  of  sin  as  despite  to  a  Benefactor ;  for  such  is 
the  construction  of  our  minds,  at  least  in  this  the  eclipse  and  degradation  of  man, 
that  we  cannot  long  avoid  through  mere  dread  of  its  consequences  what  commends 
itself  as  desirable  to  the  appetites  of  our  nature.  And  if  it  be  essential  to  the 
resolution  in  question,  that  there  be  hatred  of  sin  as  despite  to  a  Benefactor,  there 
is  little  likelihood  of  its  being  fabricated  and  fastened  on  the  soul,  so  long  as  a 
man  is  at  a  distance  from  Christ.  It  must  be  fabricated  amid  the  scenes  of 
crucifixion  ;  it  must  be  fastened  by  the  agonies  of  the  crucified;  so  that,  we  again 
Bay,  that  applying  to  Christ  is  the  first  step,  and  not  the  second  in  that  '*  due 
order  "  which  is  prescribed  by  the  gospel  plan  for  seeking  the  Lord.  The  ark  of 
the  truth  of  God,  in  which  is  deposited  the  mysteries  and  the  mercies  of  redemp- 
tion— how,  according  to  the  question  of  our  text — how  shall  this  be  brought  into 
the  human  breast  and  shrined  in  the  recesses  of  the  soul  ?  Eepentance  and  faith — 
these,  so  to  speak,  are  the  anointed  priesthood  who  alone  may  handle,  alone  move 
the  hallowed  treasure.  But  if  we  would  substitute  for  that  repentance,  which  is 
the  gift  of  the  interceding  Saviour,  another,  human  in  its  origin,  and  produced  by 
the  workings  of  our  unassisted  feelings,  what  are  we  doing  but  placing  an  Uzza, 
one  not  sprung  of  the  consecrated  line,  to  assist  in  bringing  back  the  sacred  and 
magnificent  treasure?  The  "  due  order"  is  that,  stirred  by  the  remonstrances  of 
conscience,  by  the  pleadings  of  God's  Spirit,  we  flee  straightway  to  Christ,  and 
entreat  of  Him  to  make  us  penitent ;  and  then  to  give  us  pardon.  Let  him  try 
this  method,  and  it  may  not  be  long  ere  the  ark  of  the  living  God,  weighty  with 
the  blessings  of  eternity,  moves  majestically  into  his  soul.  But  we  have  yet  some 
general  remarks  to  advance  upon  what  David  calls  seeking  God  after  the  "  due 
order,"  or  to  speak  more  popularly,  going  the  right  way  to  work  in  the  matter  of 
moral  endeavour.  When  God  has  once  made  known  His  will,  the  question  is  not 
whether  there  be  sincerity  of  purpose,  and  earnestness  of  endeavour,  but  whether 
in  striving  for  masteries  man  strives  lawfully — strives  in  the  way  which  has  been 
revealed.  If  not,  if  there  be  any  swerving  from  this  way,  it  is  not  the  amount  of 
energy  which  he  brings  to  the  effort,  nor  the  devotedness  with  which  he  follows 
out  his  course,  which  shall  procure  him  favour  with  his  Maker.  He  offends  by 
substituting  his  own  way  for  God's  way ;  and,  certainly,  the  zeal  with  which  he 
prosecutes  an  offence  can  in  no  sense  repair  the  offence.  The  decisions  of  the 
intellect  are  mightily  swayed  by  the  dictates  of  the  inclination.  An  investigation 
may  be  carried  on  with  all  candour  and  honesty ;  yet  the  judgment  has  no  fair 
play  if  there  be  a  larking  wish  that  the  verdict  may  confirm  a  preconceived 
theory.    Therefore  do  we  hold  a  man  answerable  for  his  faith,  because  we  hold 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XT. 

him  answerable  for  that  state  of  moral  feeling  which  he  brings  to  the  search  after 
truth.  If  a  man  have  himself  destroyed  or  impaired  the  organ  of  vision,  surely  he 
is  answerable  for  not  seeing  what  God  hath  made  plain.  We  unequivocally 
maintain  that  he  who  has  revelation  in  his  hand,  and  either  rejects,  or  resists  its 
sayings  in  regard  of  the  alone  mode  of  salvation,  has  nothing  to  expect  but  that 
as  it  was  with  David  and  his  people,  the  Lord  God  will  break  in  anger  upon  him, 
because  in  the  matter  of  his  endeavouring  to  "  bring  home  to  him  the  ark  of  the 
Lord,"  he  has  failed  to  proceed  after  the  "  due  order."  If  God  hath  been  pleased 
to  make  known  a  method  in  which  the  ark  of  His  presence  may  be  brought  into 
the  soul,  we  are  answerable  for  conforming  ourselves  to  that  method  with  all 
possible  exactness  and  all  possible  care.  There  can  be  nothing  simpler  than  the 
directions  which  are  given  us  in  Holy  Writ.  We  are  to  set  ourselves  at  once  to 
the  resisting  those  known  sins  which  we  are  sure  must  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit  of 
God.  We  are  to  pray  for  the  influences  of  His  Spirit,  that  we  may  be  led  to 
Christ  for  repentance  and  faith.  Our  whole  dependence  is  to  be  placed  on  the 
sacrifice  and  righteousness  of  the  Mediator.  Many — vast  multitudes — perish  in 
utter  indifference ;  they  make  no  effort  to  be  saved.  Others  make  an  effort,  but 
not  in  the  right  way  ;  not  in  the  way  the  Bible  prescribes  ;  and  they,  too,  perish — 
perish  through  planning  for  themselves,  in  place  of  submitting  meekly  to  the 
revealed  will  of  God.  We  are  all  naturally  in  the  condition  of  Jerusalem  at  the 
time  when  the  solicitudes  of  its  monarch  were  given  to  bringing  the  ark  within  its 
precincts.  Created  in  the  image  of  his  Maker,  the  breast  of  man  was  designed  as 
a  sanctuary  in  which  the  Lord  God  might  tabernacle  ;  but  the  Philistine  came 
down  in  his  strength  ;  the  sanctuary  was  desecrated  ;  and  the  Lord  God  withdrew 
from  the  polluted  abode.  And  now  the  question  which  should  interest  us,  and 
command  our  intense  consideration— it  is,  How  can  the  temple  be  rebuilt  and 
cleansed,  and  habited  again  with  the  indwellings  of  Deity?  The  question  of  our 
text :  "  How  shall  I  bring  the  ark  of  God  home  to  me  ?  "  is  the  question  which 
presses  hardest  on  every  thinking  man,  conscious  of  the  corruption  which  has  been 
woven  into  his  nature,  conscious  of  the  immortality  to  which  that  nature  is  heir. 
We  thank  God  that  we  are  not  abandoned  to  our  own  conjecture  and  our  own 
strivings  I  The  ark  is  yet  in  the  land,  and  though  none  but  a  priest  can  presume 
to  touch  the  mysterious  thing,  we  have  a  High  Priest  whose  intercession  is  so 
rapid  and  so  prevalent,  that  He  can  at  once  purify  the  temple,  and  fill  it  with  the 
long  lost  treasure.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  danger  of  not  waiting  on  God  after 
the  due  order : — God  is  highly  displeased  with  persons  who  perform  duties,  but  are 
careful  not  to  perform  them  in  a  right  manner.     In  discoursing  which,  I  shall 

show 1.  How  IT  COMES  TO  PASS  THAT  MEN  PERFORM  DUTIES,  BUT  ARE  NOT  CARE- 
FUL TO  PERFORM  THEM  IN  A  RIGHT  MANNER.  1.  Becausc  to  perform  duty  is  the 
easiest  part  of  religion,  but  to  do  it  in  a  right  manner  is  very  difficult ;  and  few 
people  have  a  heart  to  manage  the  difficulties  of  religion.  2.  Because  the  bare 
performance  of  duties  is  within  the  reach  of  all,  the  performing  of  them  in  a  right 
manner  is  beyond  the  reach  of  the  most  part.  Natural  abilities  will  serve  for  the 
one,  gracious  abilities  are  necessary  for  the  other  (John  xv.  5 ;  Heb.  xi.  4). 
Nature  cannot  carry  a  man  above  itself,  more  than  the  mouth  of  a  river  can  be 
higher  than  the  spring-head.  3.  By  the  bare  performance  of  duties,  men  attain 
the  base  and  low  ends  which  they  propose  to  themselves  in  the  service  of  God, 
viz.,  (1)  Peace  of  mind,  such  as  it  is.  (2)  It  gains  a  man  credit  in  the  world. 
4.  Because  men  may  get  duties  done  and  keep  their  lusts  too.  To  perform 
duties  in  a  right  manner  is  inconsistent  with  peace  with  our  lusta 
(Psa.  Ixvi.  18).  5.  Because  most  men  have  low  and  mean  thoughts  of  God 
{Mai.  i.  6-8).  II.  How  the  Lord  testifies  His  displeasure  against  such 
PERSONS.  1.  By  withdrawing  from  them  in  religions  services.  Ordinances  are  the 
trysting-places  where  Christ  meets  with  His  people ;  but  if  they  be  not  gone  about 
in  a  right  manner,  they  will  be  but  an  empty  sepulchre.  The  living  God  is  not  to 
be  found  in  a  dead  worship.  2.  By  rejecting  their  services  (Mai.  i.  13 ;  Isa.  i.  11). 
3.  By  spiritual  strokes  upon  their  souls  (Jer.  xlviii.  10;  Mai.  i.  14).  4.  By  strokes 
upon  their  bodies.  III.  Why  is  the  Lord  so  highly  displeased?  1.  Because 
God  commands  His  service  to  be  done  in  a  right  manner,  "  With  a  perfect  heart 
and  a  willing  mind  "  (chap,  xxviii.  9).  2.  Because  the  doing  of  a  duty  in  a  wrong 
manner  alters  the  nature  of  it  and  makes  it  sin.  If  a  house  be  built  of  never  so 
strong  timber,  and  good  stones,  yet  if  it  be  not  well  founded  and  right  built,  the 
inhabitant  may  curse  the  day  he  came  under  the  roof  of  it.  3.  Because  duties  not 
performed  according  to  the  right  order,  are  bat  the  half  of  the  service  we  owe  to 


CHAP.  XVI.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  55 

•God,  and  the  worst  half  too.  The  Jews  had  it  written  about  the  doors  of  their 
synagogues,  "  Prayer  without  intention  is  as  a  body  without  a  soul."  4.  Because 
duties  thus  performed  are  very  dishonourable  to  God.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  Import- 
unce  of  small  things  in  religion  : — You  have  before  you  now  the  picture.  I  shall  want 
you  to  look  at  it — I.  In  detail.  I  observe — 1.  That  God's  judgment  of  sin  must 
differ  exceedingly  from  ours.  2.  That  all  changes  from  the  written  revelation  of  God 
are  wrong.  3.  Whenever  the  practices  of  Christians  differ  from  Scripture  they  are 
sure  to  incur  inconvenience.  4.  One  innovation  upon  Sacred  Writ  leads  to 
another.  5.  A  wrong  thing  done  from  right  motives  is  not  acceptable  with  God. 
II.  As  A  WHOLE.  Here  I  have  two  pictures — 1.  One  for  the  people  of  God.  Let 
us  be  done  with  everything  erroneous.  Then  will  the  ark  be  brought  up  out  of  its 
obscurity  into  the  place  of  glory.  This  is  what  is  necessary  to  bring  the  kingdom 
of  Christ  on  earth.  2.  The  other  for  the  ungodly.  It  was  a  right  thing  for  David 
to  wish  to  bring  up  the  ark,  but  perhaps  he  was  ignorant  of  the  way  to  bring  it, 
and  see  what  inconvenience  he  had  to  suffer.  If  you  are  not  clear  as  to  the  plan 
of  salvation,  you  will  have  many  joltings,  much  shaking,  and  you  will  suffer  much 
inconvenience.    The  plan  of  salvation  is  "  Trust  in  Jesus."    (C.  H.  Sjpurgeon.) 


CHAPTER   XVI. 


Yeb.  8.  And  He  dealt  to  every  one  of  Israel,  both  man  and  woman. — In- 
dividuality : — I.  The  great  event  itself  does  not  absorb  all.  We  can  easily 
understand  how  the  bringing  of  the  ark  to  Jerusalem  would  have  absorbed  aU 
minor  considerations,  but  it  does  not.  Israel  is  not  generalised  into  simply  the 
male  heads  of  the  families ;  the  bread  and  flesh  are  distributed  to  "  both  man  and 
woman."  God  was  being  glorified,  and  simultaneously  the  people  blessed.  Diffu- 
sion is  what  God  delights  in  ;  He  connects  the  blessing  of  many  with  His  own 
glory,  n.  There  was  a  special  provision  here  for  personal  enjotment.  The 
placing  of  the  ark  in  its  tent  of  rest  was  not  to  be  a  mere  historical  fact,  involving 
no  personal  enjoyments.  It  is  not  in  bare  abstractions  that  God  delights,  but  in 
their  bearing  upon  individuals.  Perhaps  one  reason  why  the  future  glory  of  Christ 
is  so  unsubstantial  to  many,  and  operates  so  little  on  their  feelings,  and  raises  so 
few  thoughts  of  joyousness  in  them,  is  the  fact  that  they  see  so  little  of  its  bearing 
upon  themselves.  The  beams  of  this  glory  are  to  light  up  every  individual; 
every  believer  has  actually  a  personal  interest  in  them.  Each  man  has  his  own 
independent  existence  with  its  longings  and  aspirations,  and  no  generality  will 
satisfy  them.  He  must  have  for  his  own  very  self.  This  is  not  selfishness  ;  it  is 
a  law  grounded  on  the  very  constitution  of  our  nature.  No  future  lies  before 
God's  people  in  which  God  Himself  absorbs  everything.  He  will  pervade  all, 
which  is  a  very  different  thing.  HI.  We  are  struck  with  the  distinct 
individuality  or  each.  We  cannot  be  too  particular  in  preserving  our  indi- 
viduality. It  is  the  foundation  of  our  responsibility,  of  His  closest  dealings 
with  us,  of  all  our  capacity  for  happiness  or  sorrow  in  the  time  to  come.  Every 
man  is  to  give  account  of  himself  to  God  ;  every  man  is  to  receive  according  to  his 
works.  IV.  The  consciousness  of  individual  life  is  the  foundation  op 
indtvidual  effort.  Let  us  be  encouraged,  then,  to  have  individual  expectations. 
Let  us  link  ourselves  individually  with  the  great  events  of  God.  Both  man  and 
woman  triumphed  in  the  bringing  up  of  the  ark ;  and  both  had  the  portion  of  bread 
and  flesh  and  wine.     (P.  B.  Power,  M.A.) 

Vers.  4-7.  And  to  record. — The  recorders  : — These  recorders  were  to  take  notes 
of  what  God  had  done ;  they  were  to  be  the  chroniclers  of  the  nation,  and  out  of 
their  chronicles  they  were  to  compose  the  psalms  and  songs.  The  original  of  the 
word  "record"  bears  another  meaning — "to  bring  to  remembrance."  We  gather — 
I.  That  if  recorders  were  appointed,  there  is  some  fault  in  our  memory 
TOWARDS  THE  LoRD.  1.  Memory  has  been  prejudiced  by  the  fall.  2.  Memory 
towards  God's  mercy  has  been  very  much  impaired  by  neglect.  3.  Memory 
touching  God's  mercy  is  often  overloaded  with  other  things.  I  think  Aristotle 
used  to  call  memory  the  stomach  of  the  soul,  in  which  it  retains  and  digests  what 
it  gathers ;  but  men  cram  it  full  of  everything  that  it  does  not  want — upon  which 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  xn. 

the  soul  cannot  feed,  and  thus  they  ruin  it  for  remembering  the  best  things. 
4.  Memory  has   also    suffered    from    its    connection   with    the    other    faculties. 

(1)  Darkened  understandings.  (2)  Perverted  affections.  6.  Our  memory  of  God's 
goodness  is  often  crushed  down  by  a  sense  of  present  pain.  II.  That  we  ought  to 
DO  ALL  WE  CAN  TO  ASSIST  ouE  MEMORIES  T0WABD8  GoD.  1.  It  is  a  good  thing  to  make 
an  actual  record  of  God's  mercy.  2.  Be  sure  to  praise  God  thoroughly  at  the  time 
you  receive  His  goodness.  3.  Set  apart  a  little  time  for  meditation.  4.  Often 
rehearse  His  mercy  in  the  ears  of  others.  6.  Use  everything  about  you  as  a 
memento.  III.  We  have  all  had  mebcies  to  bemembkr.  1.  Common  mercies. 
2.   Special    providence.      3.    The    long-suffering    of    God.      IV.  That   all    oub 

JIEMORIES  should    TEND    TO    MAKE    US   PRAISE  AND  BLESS    GoD.       Bowlaud  Hill  USed  tO 

say  that  worldlings  were  like  the  hogs  under  the  oak,  which  eat  the  acorns,  but  never 
think  of  the  oak  from  which  they  fall,  nor  lift  up  their  heads  to  grunt  out  a  thanks- 
giving. (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  And  Jeiel  with  psalteries  and  with  harps. — The 
meaning  of  song  : — The  meaning  of  song  goes  deep.  Who  is  there  that  in  logical 
words  can  express  the  effect  that  music  has  on  us?  A  kind  of  inarticulate, 
unfathomable  speech,  which  leads  us  to  the  edge  of  the  infinite,  and  lets  us  for 
moments  gaze  into  that.  (T.  Carlyle.)  Musical  talent  dedicated  to  God : — 
Jenny  Lind  believed  that  her  art  was  the  gift  of  God,  and  to  be  dedicated  to  His 
service.  '•  I  have  always  put  Him  first,"  said  she,  in  her  last  illness.  {Church 
Worker.) 

Vers.  7-22.  Then  on  that  day  David  delivered  first  this  psalm. — A  psalm  of 
tJianksgiving : — This,  a  composite  psalm,  represents  a  form  of  service  rather  than 
a  psalm.  The  whole  of  it,  with  slight  variations,  found  in  Psa.  xcvi.,  cv.  1-15, 
cvi.  47, 48.  It  celebrates  redemption  as  unfolded  in  the  history  of  Israel,  proclaimed 
to  the  world,  and  triumphant  in  judgment.  This  part  sets  forth. — I.  An  exhorta- 
tion TO  THE  NOBLEST  woBK — praisiug  God.  In  three  ways,  chiefly,  is  this  duty 
recommended.     1.   In  giving  thanks  to  God.      (1)   By  singing  psalms  (ver.  9). 

(2)  By  social  conversation.  (3)  By  glorying  in  His  name  (ver.  10).  2.  In 
seeking  God.  (1)  Earnestly.  (2)  Joyfully.  (3)  Continually.  3.  In  com- 
memorating God's  works  (ver.  12).  H.  Motives  to  influence  us  in  this  noblest 
WORK.  1.  God's  great  love.  2.  God's  great  manifestations  of  love.  3.  God's 
great  dominion.  4.  God's  great  claims.  5.  God's  vindication  of  these  claims. 
(J.  Wolfendale.)  A  memorable  day : — Let  us  gather  up  a  few  of  the  lessons 
which  Providence  read  out  to  humanity  on  that  day.    I.   That  eeligion  is  a. 

SUBJECT  IN  which  THE  LEADEBS   OF   THE   PEOPLE    SHOULD    ENDEAVOUR  TO  INTEREST  THE 

MASSES.  1.  Eeligion  is  suited  to  the  common  and  primary  instincts  of  human 
nature.     2.  Eeligion  provides  for  the  fallen  condition  of  human  nature.    II.  That 

RELIGION  DEVELOPS  THE  DISTINCTIVE  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  MANKIND.       ThrOUgh  it  "  the 

thoughts  of  many  hearts  are  revealed."  In  the  history  of  this  "  day  "  four  states 
of  mind  are  developed  in  relation  to  the  Divine.  1.  An  enthusiastic  interest  in  the 
Divine.  Such  was  David's  state.  2.  A  stolid  unconsciousness  of  the  Divine.  This 
was  revealed  in  UzzaL  's  conduct.  To  him  the  ark  only  appeared  as  a  common 
chest.  He  was  a  type  of  those  who  engage  in  religious  services  without  the  religious 
spirit.  3.  A  calm  confidence  in  the  Divine.  This  was  revealed  in  the  conduct  of 
Obed-edom.  The  terrible  fate  of  Uzzah  filled  David  with  overwhelming  excite- 
ment. The  people  were  panic-stricken.  But  Obed-edora  was  calm.  He  took  the 
ark  into  his  own  house  for  three  months ;  he  stands  by  a  deserted  cause.  4.  A 
thoughtless  contempt  for  the  Divine.  This  was  developed  in  Michal  (chap.  xv. 
29).  She  is  a  type  of  a  class  who  despise  religious  observances,  religious 
people,  and  leligious  services.  HI.  That  religion  is  always  associated  with  the 
CHEERFUL  AND  THE  GENEROUS.  1.  Here  is  music.  2.  Here  is  hospitality.  True 
religion  is  evermore  the  parent  of  true  philanthropy.     IV.  That  religion  is  the 

PATRON    OF    THE    HIGHEST   ABT   AB  WELL    AS   THE    IN8PIBEB    OF   THB    HOLIEST   TEELINOB 

(chap.  XV.  16-24).     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  9.  Sing  psalms  onto  Him,  talk  ye  of  all  His  wondrotu  works. — Good 
conversation  : — I.  The  subject  hebe  suggested  fob  oub  commonplace  talk  :  "  His 
WONDROUS  woEKS."  We  ought  to  talk  more  about  God's  wondrous  works.  1.  A« 
we  find  them  in  Holy  Scripture.  2.  As  we  find  them  in  the  history  of  our  own 
country.  3.  As  we  find  them  in  our  own  individual  history.  II.  The  excellency 
OF  THIS  SUBJECT  IS  BOTH  NEGATIVE  AND  POSITIVE.  1.  Negative.  Were  we  to  talk  more 
of  Qod's  wondrous  works — (1)  We  should  talk  less  about  oar  own  works.    (2)  W« 


CHAP.  XVI.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  67 

should  be  free  from  talking  of  other  people's  works.  (3)  It  would  keep  us  from  the 
ordinary  frivolities  of  conversation.  2.  Positive.  The  habit  once  acquired  of 
talking  more  of  God's  wondrous  works — (1)  Would  necessitate  stricter  habits  of 
observation  and  of  discrimination  in  watcning  the  providence  of  God ;  (2)  would 
be  very  ennobling ;  (3)  would  cause  our  gratitude  to  glow  and  would  give  an 
impulse  to  our  entire  life.  III.  Let  me  urge  this  talking  obdinaeilt  and 
COMMONLY  ABOUT  God's  WONDROUS  WORKS.  Not  ouly  wiU  it  prevent  much  evil  and 
do  us  much  good,  but  it  will  be  the  means  of  doing  much  good  to  others.     It  will — 

1.  Impress  the  sinner.  2,  Enlighten  the  ignorant.  3.  Comfort  the  desponding, 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  11.  Seek  the  Lord  and  His  strength. — The  seeker  encouraged : — There  are 
three  reasons  for  this.  I.  Because  it  is  an  evidence  of  grace.  II.  Because  their 
SUCCESS  is  sure.  III.  Because,  when  they  have  found,  their  aim  and  wish  in 
BEEKiNQ  ARE  I'ULLY  ANSWERED.  {W.  Jay.)  Threefold  seeking  : — I.  The  Lord  for 
mercy.  II.  His  strength  for  service,  in.  His  face  for  happiness.  {A.  G. 
Brown.) 

Vers.  15-22.  Be  ye  alwayB  mindful  of  His  covenant — The  national  covenant : — 
Learn :  I.  That  God's  method  of  intercourse  with  men  has  ever  been  in  the 
FORM  OF  A  covenant.  Tayler  Lewes  says:  "There  is  no  religion  without  this  idea  of 
covenant  with  a  personal  God,  and  therefore  all  such  views  as  those  of  Comte,  Mill, 
and  Spencer  are,  for  all  moral  and  religious  purposes,  whoUy  atheistical,"  II.  That 
this  covenant  method  of  intercourse  with  men  displays  the  sovereign  will  and 

FBEE  GRACE  OF  GoD  (Eph.  1.  5),       HI.    ThAT    THIS   COVENANT   METHOD  OF  INTERCOURSE 

PUTS  MAN  UNDER  DEEP  OBLIGATION  TO  GoD.     1.  They  are  chosen  to  great  favours, 

2.  They  should  render  thanks  for  these  favours,  IV,  The  obligations  of  men  to 
God  for  His  covenant  mercies  can  never  cease,  1,  It  is  of  Divine  authority, 
2.  It  is  confirmed  from  time  to  time,  3.  It  is  "an  everlasting  covenant  "  (ver,  17), 
*'  made  with  man  as  an  immortal  being,  and  in  itself  an  evidence  of  his  designed 
immortality."     (J.  Wol/endale.) 

Vers.  19-22.  He  suffered  no  man  to  do  them  wrong. — Evil-doing  restrained  : — 

1.  Here  is  the  nearness  and  dearness  op  the  saints  unto  God.  II.  Here  is 
the  great  danger  to  kings  and  states  to  deal  with  His  saints  otherwise  than 
WELL,  in.  Here  is  the  care  and  protection  which  God  had  over  them,  set  and 
amplified.     1,  By  the  number  and  condition  of  the  persons  whom  He  defended, 

2.  By  what  He  did  for  them.  (Thomas  Goodwin.)  Touch  not  Mine  anointed. — 
Touch  not  Mine  anointed : — I.  "The  person  whose  the  speech  is.  "  He  is  the  Lord 
our  God"  (ver.  14),  H,  The  persons  to  whom.  In  general  to  all;  specially  to 
some.  in.  The  persons  concerning  whom.  His  anointed.  1.  The  patriarchs, 
who  were  the  rulers  of  their  people.  The  name  implies  fatherhood  and  govern- 
ment. They  were  anointed  before  there  was  any  material  anointing  at  all.  2.  The 
kings  who  were  the  successors  of  the  patriarchs.  (1)  The  Holy  Ghost  applies  this 
term  to  Saul,  David,  Solomon,  Hezekiah,  Josiah,  Cyrus  (1  Sam.  xii.  3,  4 ;  2  Sam, 
xii.  21;  2  Chron.  vi,  42;  Lam.  iv,  20;  Isa.  xlv.  1).  (2)  This  is  affirmed  by— 
(o)  The  third  general  Council  of  Ephesus.  (6)  The  great  Council  of  Toledo  the 
Fourth,  (c)  The  great  Western  Council  of  Francford.  3.  The  fathers  use  the 
term  in  the  same  way.  4.  After  the  patriarchs,  this  term  is  appropriate  to  kings, 
and  kings  only,  all  the  Bible  through.  It  is  used — (1)  Four  times  by  God,  "  Mine 
anointed."  (2)  Six  times  to  God,  "Thine  anointed."  (3)  Ten  times  of  God,  "His 
anointed."  (4)  Twelve  times  it  is  "God's  anointed,"  In  the  text  and  in  Ps.  cv. 
it  is  applied  to  the  patriarchs ;  all  the  other  instances  refer  either  to  Christ  or  to 
kings,     (Bp,  Andrewet.) 

Vers.  23,  24,  Declare  His  glory  among  the  heathen. — Declaring  God's  glory : — 
I.  Declare  among  the  heathen  the  glory  of  God's  perfections,  that  they  may 
acknowledge  Him  as  the  true  God.  II.  Declare  the  glory  of  His  saltation,  that 
they  may  accept  Him  as  their  only  Redeemer,  III.  Declare  the  glory  of  His  provi- 
dence, that  they  may  confide  in  Him  as  their  faithful  guardian.  IV.  Declare  the 
glory  OF  His  word,  that  they  may  prize  it  as  their  chief  treasure.  V.  Declare  the 
glory  OF  HiB  service,  that  they  may  choose  it  as  their  chief  occupation. 
VI.  Declare  the  glory  of  His  bebidbncb,  that  they  may  seek  it  as  their  best  home. 
(William  Jaekson.) 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xn. 

Ver.  25.  He  also  Is  to  be  feared  above  all  gods. — The  theology  of  the  Old 
Testament : — In  the  perusal  of  the  Old  Testament  few  sentiments  more  frequently 
meet  our  eye  than  comparisons  between  the  great  object  of  worship  among  the 
Jews  and  those  imaginary  deities  to  which  the  Gentiles  in  general  paid  adoration. 
This  contrast  pervades  alike  their  doctrines  of  religion,  their  precepts  of  morality, 
and  their  hymns  of  thanks  and  praise.  To  the  mind  of  a  legislator,  a  judge, 
or  a  prophet  of  Israel,  comparisons  of  this  kind  naturally  and  unavoidably  arose, 
when  he  witnessed  the  ignorance,  the  polytheism,  and  the  superstitions  of  the 
nations  around  him.  As  the  religious  sentiments  of  the  Jews  and  Gentiles 
correspond  with  the  objects  of  their  faith  and  worship  respectively,  a  concise 
comparison  between  the  theology  of  the  Bible  and  that  of  the  heathen  philo- 
sophers cannot  fail  to  be  interesting  and  instructive.  I.  The  Greeks  and  Romans 
undoubtedly  excelled  the  Jews,  if  not  in  the  natural  endowments  of  the  mind,  at 
least  IN  EVERY  ABTiFiciAL  iMPBOVEMENT.  But  In  their  doctrines  respecting  the 
Creator,  and  His  providence  and  His  laws,  they  can  come  in  no  competition  with 
the  nation  whom  they  fancied  they  had  reason  to  despise.  II.  The  writers  of 
Greece  and  Kome  greatly  exceeded  those  of  Judea  in  the  variety  of  theib 
publications:  in  the  variety  of  the  subjects  to  which  their  genius  appears  to  have 
been  adapted.  In  the  authors  of  the  Old  Testament,  when  we  again  advert  to  the 
peculiar  subject  of  their  excellence,  we  find  such  poetical  addresses  of  reverence  or 
supplication  to  the  supreme  Being,  and  such  descriptions  of  His  proceedings  and 
His  providence,  as  the  whole  circle  of  human  literature  cannot  elsewhere  supply. 
in.  Amongst  the  Greeks  and  Romans  the  most  rational  opinions  entertained  on 
these  difficult  and  important  subjects  were  confined  to  a  small  number  or  thb 
superior  classes  of  society.  From  the  unlearned  populace  those  opinions  were, 
for  reasons  of  pride  or  policy,  systematically  and  successfully  concealed.  Amongst 
the  Jews,  on  the  other  hand,  we  find  no  traces  of  one  creed  for  the  learned  and 
another  for  the  ignorant.  IV.  The  philosophers  of  Greece  and  Rome,  if  they  did 
not  themselves  believe,  permitted  or  taught  the  people  in  general  to  believe  that  jl 
different  deity  presided  over  every  separate  nation  and  every  separate  city ; 
over  almost  every  different  profession  among  men,  and  almost  every  different 
object  of  nature  ;  that  these  various  deities  often  disagreed  in  their  interests  and 
opinions,  and  opposed  each  other  in  their  wishes  and  pursuits.  The  Jews  believed 
and  taught  that  there  was  One  mighty  Being,  the  Maker  and  Ruler  of  the  world  ; 
to  whose  authority  every  other  sentient  being  owed  implicit  obedience.  V.  The 
public  worship  of  the  Gentiles  was  addressed  on  various  occasions  to  as  various 
OBJECTS  that  were  NO  GODS ;  and  their  rites  and  ceremonies  were  contaminated 
always  by  superstition,  and  not  seldom  by  impiety.  The  worship  of  the  Jew  was 
addressed  to  one  God,  under  one  uniform  character,  as  the  only  proper  object  of 
adoration ;  whose  perfections  no  image  could  fitly  represent,  and  to  whom  pure 
and  spiritual  worship  was  the  most  acceptable.  To  the  one  the  Sabbath  was  a 
pious  rest  from  his  labours.  With  the  other,  religious  festivals  were  seasons 
of  intemperance,  often  immoral,  and  always  licentious.     (W.  Barrow,  LL.D.) 

Vers.  27,  29.  Glory  and  honour  are  in  His  presence. — The  beautiful  place : — 
Apply  this  to  the  sanctuary.  I.  Beautified  by  God's  presence.  II.  Beautified 
BY  attractive  SERVICES.  1.  Checrful  song.  2.  Freewill  offerings.  3.  Spiritual 
fervour.  III.  Beautified  by  loyal  attendants.  1.  Regular  in  attendance. 
2.  Mindful  of  its  interests.  3.  Obedient  to  its  rules.  {J.  Wolfendale.)  Religious 
worship : — I.  It  is  due  to  God.  1.  It  is  right.  2.  It  is  acceptable.  Though  not 
enriching,  yet  well  pleasing  to  Him.  "Whosoever  offereth  praise  glorifieth  Me." 
II.  It  befits  oub  moral  nature.  1.  It  meets  our  aspirations.  2.  It  satisfies  our 
wants.  3.  It  dignifies  our  character.  It  detaches  from  earth  and  sin,  gives  beauty 
to  contemplate,  strength  to  imitate,  and  fear  to  humble  and  guide.  "  It  is  good  for 
me  to  draw  near  to  God."  (Ibid.)  Strength  and  gladness  are  in  His  place. — 
Abiding  strength  and  gladness : — We  all  need  enthusiasm  and  vigour  in  our  work. 
It  is,  however,  a  rare  thing  to  find  these  as  an  abiding,  continuous  experience. 
Youth,  of  course,  has  freshness  and  freedom.  Its  ardent  hopefulness  covers 
everything,  just  as  we  find  when,  looking  at  distant  objects  through  a  lens  not 
perfectly  achromatic,  we  see  them  fringed  with  prismatic  tints — a  rainbow  bril- 
liancy which  does  not  belong  to  the  objects  themselves.  There  are  objects  in  life 
that  lose  their  illusive  and  enchanting  brightness  when  viewed  in  the  sober 
inspection  of  maturer  age.  Health,  too,  has  its  influence  in  imparting  enthu- 
siasm.    On  a  bright  and  bracing  day  we  walk  the  street  with  resounding  foot. 


CHAP.XTi.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  69 

The  sunlit  skies  and  the  crisp  air  help  to  quicken  and  enliven  our  spirits.  Contact 
with  a  friend  we  love  warms  our  soul  with  new  emotion,  and  pours  the  elixir  of 
life  into  languid  veins.  A  great  thought,  or  the  perusal  of  a  delightful  book,  may 
stir  our  intellect  to  fresh  activity.  A  new  key  to  the  mystery  of  life  is  given  us  by 
momentary  contact  with  an  illuminated  mind.  But  society  is  complex.  Cares 
are  multiplied  and  minute  in  this  our  hurrying  and  exacting  life.  By  no  voluntary 
act  of  ours  can  we  maintain  this  tension,  any  more  than  we  can  stretch  a  wire  a 
hundred  yards  without  a  sag.  With  added  years  and  with  narrowing  friendships 
we  see  less  of  pleasure  ahead  to  anticipate.  We  come  to  feel  the  need  of  some- 
thing to  alleviate  the  weariness  of  life.  Can  we  as  Christian  disciples  find  in  our 
religion  that  ennobling  and  enlivening  element  which  was  found  in  the  Hebrew  ? 
If  not,  ours  is  narrower  and  more  limited  than  the  Hebrew.  Yes,  we  do  not  find 
strength  and  gladness  here.  We  do  not  find  a  transient  glow,  an  occasional 
enthusiasm,  but  an  abiding  joy,  as  we  come  under  the  power  of  the  religion  of 
Christ?      Do  you   ask,  How  this  is  to  be  maintained?    I.  We  find  it  in  the 

ENTIBB  BELIEF  FKOM  SOLITUDE  AS  TO  THE  FUTURE  WHICH  THE  GBACE  OF  ChBIST 
IMPARTS.  II.  We  REALISE  THIS  ABIDING  STRENGTH  AND  GLADNESS  AS  WE  KE- 
MEMBEB  THAT   WE   ABE    WORKING   OUT   God'S   WILL   CONCERNING   US  in  all  that  iS  done 

or  borne  by  us.  III.  We  are  educated  by  what  we  do.  The  thought  of 
developed  character  and  of  virtues  daily  nourished  within  us  is  calculated  to  give 
abiding  joyousness  and  strength  to  life.  IV.  Life  eternal  is  thus  linked  to 
THIS.  A  light  supernal  cheers  and  lifts  up  our  spirits  as  the  swing  of  the  sea  lifts 
and  carries  forward  the  waves  till  they  flood  every  inlet  and  beach  along  the 
winding  shore.  We  are  released  from  apprehension  as  to  the  future.  We  see  all 
things  working  together  for  our  good,  around  us  and  within  us.  We  do  not 
rightly  estimate  the  believer's  privilege.  We  go  moaning  and  whining,  instead  of 
walking  on  the  high  places.  We  go  with  weights,  and  not  with  wings,  over  the 
bleak  and  barren  paths  of  life.  But  if  character  have  this  abiding  strength  and 
gladness,  freshness  and  exuberance ;  if  each  of  us  have  this  shekinah  of  glory  within 
the  soul,  we  shall  show  to  men  of  the  world  that  we  have  what  they  have  not. 
We  have  more  than  a  knowledge  of  the  truth  in  its  verbal  exactness.  We  have 
Christ  in  us  the  hope  of  glory.  We  have  an  enthusiasm  more  continuous  than  the 
ardour  of  youth  or  the  glow  of  health,  or  the  inspiration  of  genius.  This  abiding 
power  is  what  the  world  wants.  Its  fruits,  seen  in  character,  ennoble  society  and 
link  earth  with  heaven.  They  make  earth  bright  and  vocal.  Culture,  art,  science, 
mechanical  skill  cannot  work  this  transformation.  Wealth  is  powerless.  (Richard 
S.  Storrs,  D.D.) 

Vers.  28-29.  Oivo  unto  the  Lord  the  glory  due  unto  His  name. — The  claimt 
of  God  to  the  worship  and  homage  of  His  creatures  : — I.  God  is  entitled  to  and 
CLAIMS  THE  HOMAGE  OF  His  CREATURES.     II.  These  claims  are  made  upon  us.  His 

intelligent  CREATURES.   III.  ThE  WORSHIP  AND  HOMAGE  REQUIRED  ELEVATES  THE 

MAN  WHO  PATS  IT.  {J.  RoMnsoTi.)  The  glory  which  is  due  to  Jehovah : — The 
whole  preceptive  part  of  the  Bible  is  contained  in  this  one  command.  Every  being 
has  a  right  and  may  justly  claim  to  be  regarded  and  treated  by  all  who  know  him 
in  a  manner  suitable  to  the  nature  and  character  which  he  possesses  to  the 
relations  and  offices  which  he  sustains,  and  to  the  works  which  he  performs. 
Consider  what  is  due  to  Jehovah.  I.  An  account  of  His  nature.  He  is  God 
alone.  He  deserves  something  which  is  due  to  no  other  being  in  the  universe — 
religious  worship  and  adoration.  II.  On  account  of  the  character  He  possesses. 
It  is  absolutely  perfect.  There  is  something  in  His  character  suited  to  excite  every 
proper  affection  of  which  the  human  soul  is  capable.  III.  On  account  of  the 
relations  and  offices  which  He  sustains.  1.  Creator.  2.  Preserver.  These 
imply  that  God  must  necessarily  be  the  universal  Teacher,  Master,  Sovereign,  and 
Judge.  IV.  On  account  of  the  works  which  He  has  performed.  Conclusion : 
1.  How  reasonable  are  God's  requisitions  !  He  merely  requires  the  payment  of  a 
great  debt.  2.  How  immeasurably  great,  then,  is  the  debt  which  our  world  has 
contracted,  and  under  the  burden  of  which  it  now  groans.  (E.  Pay  son,  D.D.) 
The  claims  of  the  Supreme  Being  to  the  worship  and  homage  of  His  creatures : — 
These  claims  are  founded — I.  On  oub  relation  to  God  as  His  creatures. 
n.  On  the  manifestations  of  the  Divine  excellence  visible  in  the  universe 
ABOUND  us.  III.  In  the  constitution  and  susceptibiliteeb  of  oub  minds. 
Worship  is  not  only  fit  and  proper  as  an  r  ct  of  the  mind,  but  one  to  which  it  is 
naturally  prone.    IV.  On  a  consideration  of  what  is  most  conducive  to  thb 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

WELL-BEING  OF  MEN.  The  VBTj  act  itself  elevates  the  mind ;  it  reminds  us  of  onr 
true  position  as  the  creatures  and  the  servants  of  God.  Conclusion  :  1.  These  acts 
of  worship  divide  the  world  into  two  great  classes — those  that  fear  God  and  those 
that  fear  Him  not.  2.  That  as  the  public  worship  of  God  is  one  most  important 
means  of  proclaiming  the  great  facts  of  His  existence  and  government,  it  demands 
the  special  and  constant  attention  of  all  that  fear  God.  3.  That  as  worship  and 
homage  are  the  requirements  and  the  just  rights  of  the  Supreme  Being,  and  as 
they  are  intimately  connected  with  our  well-being  in  this  life  and  that  which  is  to 
come,  it  is  a  serious  and  important  inquiry  how  we  may  be  able  to  present  it  most 
acceptably.  {J.  Robinson.)  Bring  an  offering. — Hearing  and  worshipping : — 
I.  What  do  wb  come  to  Church  fob?  Not  merely  to  get  but  to  give.  Not  to 
take  only  but  to  offer.  Not  to  hear  simply,  but  to  worship :  "  bring  an  offering," 
"  worship  the  Lord."  II.  What  is  the  offeeing  the  bringing  of  which 
constitutes  worship?  It  is  the  offering  of  ourselves.  Spirit,  soul,  body,  sub- 
stance. Conclusion :  1.  This  true  explanation  of  the  object  of  our  meeting  in 
God's  house  gives  the  clearest  condemnation  of  those  who  absent  themselves. 
"I  can  read  my  Bible  at  home"  might  be  an  answer  if  we  be  but  "hearers"; 
none  if  we  be  "  worshippers."  2.  How  great  is  the  honour  of  being  allowed  to 
honour  God — as  worshippers  I  3.  Our  direct  worship  shall  be  the  smoke  of  the 
incense ;  but  our  whole  life  shall  be,  as  it  were,  a  compound  of  sweet  spices. 
(17.  R.  Vernon,  M.A.)  The  beauty  of  holiness  : — The  religion  of  the  gospel  of 
Christ  is  "the  beauty  of  holiness,"  as  it  concerns — I.  Its  author.  II.  Its  plan. 
III.  Its  fbuits.     (Legh  Richardson.) 

Yer.  81.  And  let  men  say  among  the  nations,  the  Lord  reigneth. — Pessimism .- — 

L  Now,  WHAT  IS  THE  PREVALENT  TENDENCY  OF  OPINION,  AS  ILLUSTRATED  IN  OUB  DAT, 
IN  SCIENCE,  IN  ART,  IN  JOURNALISM,  IN  LITERATURE,  IN   SOCIAL   SPECULATION  ?      It   may 

certainly  be  summed  up  in  the  one  word  "  pessimism  " — that  is,  unbelief  and 
hopelessness.  The  illustrations  of  the  tendency  are  manifold,  they  come  from 
every  side.  If  we  turn  to  philosophy,  we  find,  as  a  consequence  of  unbelief,  the 
revival  of  the  old  doctrine  that  life  is  not  worth  living,  that  man  is  a  failure,  just 
as  Pyrrho,  the  ancient  sceptic,  compared  mankind  to  swine  pent  up  in  a  foundering, 
wrecked,  and  rudderless  vessel  in  the  midst  of  a  hurricane.  "  Since  the  human 
race,"  says  Schopenhauer,  "  always  tends  from  bad  to  worse,  there  is  no  prospect 
but  ever-deepening  confusion  and  wretchedness."  "  Existence,"  says  Von  Hart- 
mann,  "  is  unspeakably  wretched,  and  society  will  grow  worse  and  worse."  "  More 
dreary,  barren,  base  and  ugly,"  said  Carlyle,  "  seem  to  me  the  aspects  of  this  poor, 
diminished,  quack  world,  doomed  to  speedy  death,"  which  he  can  only  wish  to  be 
speedy.  "  A  wave  of  doubt,  desolation,  and  despondency  has  passed  over  the 
world,"  says  an  English  poet,  Mr.  Alfred  Austin,  in  a  lecture  before  the  Eoyal 
Institution.  "  One  by  one  all  the  fondly  cherished  theories  of  life,  society,  and 
empire  have  been  abandoned  ;  we  no  longer  seem  to  know  whither  we  are  march- 
ing, and  many  appear  to  think  that  we  are  travelling  to  perdition."  This 
pessimistic  spirit,  he  said,  pervades  all  society  and  all  thought.  II.  I  will  speak 
mainly  of  the  supposed  connection  of  science  with  this  pessimistic  tendency. 
To  science  many  attribute  its  growth  and  its  spread.  "Science,"  says  M.Zola, 
the  French  novelist,  in  his  speech,  "  hath  emptied  nations,  and  is  incapable  of  re- 
peopling  them  ;  it  has  ravished  happiness  from  onr  human  souls,  and  is  incapable 
of  restoring  it;  in  proportion  as  science  advances  the  ideal  slips  away."  Now  I 
believe  science  to  be  beneficent,  and  I  believe  pessimism  to  be  destructive,  and, 
desiring  to  combat  the  predominant  pessimism,  I  shall  try  to  prove  to  you  that 
science  gives  no  ground  for  it  at  all.  Science  is  part  of  revelation.  Eeligion  on 
one  side  is  nothing  but  a  knowledge  of  God,  and  science  deepens  our  knowledge  of 
God.  Beligion  on  the  other  side  is  nothing  but  morality.  It  is  a  good  mind  and 
a  good  life.  There  is  not  one  law  of  morality  which  science  does  not  repromulgate 
and  emphasise  in  thunders  louder  than  those  of  Sinai.  Science  is  one  of  the 
Bibles  of  God  by  which,  as  St.  Paul  boldly  says,  the  invisible  things  of  Him  are 
rendered  visible ;  it  is  God's  revelation  to  the  mind  of  man  through  the  works  of 
Nature,  and  whatever  may  be  the  voice  in  which  God  speak  to  us,  it  is  impossible 
for  Him  to  lie.  If  we  are  faithless.  He  abideth  faithful ;  He  is  not  able  to  deny 
Himself.  The  supposed  antagonism  between  science  and  religion  is  merely  due  to 
the  passion  and  ignorance  of  men.  And  science  has  been  to  men  a  boon  un- 
speakable, an  archangel  of  beneficence  as  well  as  an  archangel  of  power.  She  has 
prolonged  life,  she  has  mitigated   disease,  she   has  minimised  torture,  she  has 


CHAP.  XVI.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  61 

exorcised  superstitious  terrors ;  she  has  given  to  feeble  humanity  the  eyes  of  Argus 
and  the  arms  of  Briareus,  she  has  opened  to  men's  thoughts  unimaginable  realma 
of  faerie,  and  has  made  fire,  flood,  and  air  the  vassals  of  His  will.  III.  Does 
SCIENCE  TEND  TO  UNBELIEF?  And  it  IS  not  true  that  science  leads  to  unbelief. 
Whose  name  stands  first  in  the  modern  era  of  science  ?  The  name  of  Sir  Isaac 
Newton.  Was  he  an  unbeliever  ?  He  was  one  of  the  whitest,  purest,  simplest, 
most  believing  souls  that  ever  lived.  Whose  name  stands  first  in  science  in  our 
own  generation  ?  The  name  of  Michael  Faraday.  Was  he  an  atheist?  His  friend 
found  him  one  day  bathed  in  tears,  and  asked  if  he  was  ill.  "  No,"  he  said,  "  it  is 
not  that "  ;  but  pointing  to  his  Bible,  he  said,  "  While  men  have  this  blessed  book 
to  teach  them,  why  will  they  go  astray  ?  "  It  has  been  sometimes  assumed  that 
Charles  Darwin  was  an  unbeliever  ;  yet  he  wrote  in  his  book  on  the  descent  of  man : 
"  The  question  whether  there  is  a  Creator  and  Buler  of  the  Universe  has  been 
answered  in  the  affirmative  by  the  highest  intellects  that  ever  lived."  There  have 
been  scientific  atheists,  but  such  men  have  not  been  atheists  as  a  necessary  con- 
sequence of  their  science,  but  because  they  have  committed  the  very  fault  which 
they  scorn  so  utterly  in  priests :  it  is  because  they  have  tried  to  soar  into  the  secrets 
of  the  Deity  on  the  waxen  wings  of  the  understanding ;  it  is  because  they  have 
pushed  their  science  to  untenable  conclusions  and  mingled  it  with  alien  inquiries. 
If  unbelief  were  a  necessary  result  of  science,  no  benefit  which  science  could 
possibly  bestow  could  equipoise  its  curse,  for  religion  means  that  by  which  the 
spirit  of  man  can  live.  The  destruction  of  religion  would  be  first  the  triumph  of 
despair,  and  next  the  destruction  of  morality.  Once  persuade  man  that  he  is  no 
better  than  the  beasts  that  perish,  and  he  will  live  like  the  beasts  that  perish  ;  ha 
will  cease  to  recognise  the  intangible  grandeur  of  the  moral  law,  and  will  abandon 
himself  to  the  struggles  of  mad  selfishness.  All  religion  is  based  on  three  primary 
convictions,  of  God,  of  righteousness,  and  of  morahty,  and  these  convictions  science 
strengthens  and  does  not  destroy.  {Dean  Farrar.)  God's  rule  the  saint's  comfort : 
— John  Wesley  used  to  say,  "  I  dare  no  more  fret  than  curse  and  swear."  A  friend  of 
his  said,  "  I  never  saw  him  fretful  or  discontented  under  any  of  his  trials,  and  to  be 
in  the  company  of  persons  of  this  spirit  always  occasioned  him  great  trouble.  He 
said  one  day,  '  To  have  persons  around  me  murmuring  and  fretting  at  anything  that 
happens  is  like  having  the  flesh  torn  from  my  bones.  I  know  that  God  sits  upon 
the  throne  ruling  all  things ! '  "     (R.  Newton.) 

Ver.  34.  0  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord. — Thanksgiving  diie  to  Oodfor  His  good- 
ness : — I.  Instances  of  the  loving-kindness  and  mercy  of  God.  1.  The  unfolding 
of  a  plan  of  salvation  for  sinners  through  His  weU-beloved  Son.  2.  The  furnishing 
so  fully  of  the  means  necessary  to  salvation.  (1)  Birth  in  a  Christian  land.  (2)  The 
Bible.  (3)  Preaching  of  the  gospel.  3.  Temporal  blessings.  II.  The  thanks- 
giving THAT  IS  DUE.       III.    ThIS   GOODNESS   OUGHT   TO   LEAD   US   TO   BZPENTANCE.      We 

ought  to  improve  both  the  temporal  and  spiritual  privileges  we  enjoy  to  the  pro- 
motion of  His  glory.     (Alex.  Davidson.) 

Ver.  36.  And  all  the  people  said.  Amen. — The  people's  amen  : — ^I.  Indicatino — 
1.  Attention.  2.  Appreciation.  3.  Interest  in  the  service.  II.  A  solemn  seamno. 
in.  A  KEAL  DUTY.     (J.  WolfendaU.) 

Ver.  37.  As  every  day's  work  reqiilred. — Daily  service: — That  was  the  law. 

Not  as  yesterday's  work  required,  not  as  to-morrow's  work  might  require,  but  as 
evei-y  day's  work  required  within  its  own  twelve  hours  or  twenty-four.  That  was 
order.  The  men  had  been  singing.  A  musical  man  cannot  be  disorderly ;  he 
would  refute  his  own  song,  he  would  annihilate  his  own  music.  "  As  every  day's 
work  required  " — morning  by  morning ;  now  much,  now  more ;  now  not  quite  so 
much ;  now  a  little  variety ;  but  every  day  had  its  duty ;  every  morning  had  its 
opportunity.  That  is  the  secret  of  success.  For  want  of  knowing  such  a  secret 
and  applying  it  many  men  are  without  bread  to-day,  "As  every  day's  work 
required."  There  is  only  one  time — Now.  "  Now  is  the  accepted  time,  now  is  the 
day  of  salvation."  Now  is  God's  great  opportunity  given  to  us  all.  Yesterday  is 
gone,  to-morrow  is  unborn,  to-day  is  now,  and  the  golden  portal  roUs  back  to  let  us 
into  the  larger  liberty.  Things  are  not  to  be  done  at  any  time.  That  is  where  so 
many  people  go  into  confusion.  To  so  many  people  there  is  no  regular  time  ;  that 
is  the  reason  of  failure,  that  is  the  leak.  They  were  going  to  do  this,  but  they 
forgot.    What !  a  man  forgetting  ?    He  was  going  to  do  this  at  ten  o'clock,  but  ha 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iti. 

was  busy  at  that  moment,  and  now  he  will  do  it  in  the  afternoon.  Never  ask  if 
you  can  do  this  to-morrow  ;  no  man  has  a  right  to  promise  you  that  liberty.  The 
great  secret  of  successful  life  is  discipline,  promptitude,  military  obedience — now  1 
altogether !  the  best  I  can ;  as  every  day  requires.  That  was  the  way  that  Jesus 
Christ  lived.  In  that  apparently  coldly  ethical  doctrine  there  is  a  great  evangelical 
gospel ;  the  Son  of  God  is  hidden  in  that  disciplinary  prose :  "  I  must  work  the 
works  of  Him  that  sent  Me  "  :  are  there  not  twelve  hours  in  the  day  ?  I  must  work 
while  the  light  lasts ;  the  night  cometh  wherein  no  man  can  work :  I  must  not 
postpone  Monday's  duties  to  be  done  in  Tuesday's  light."  How  is  it  possible  for  you 
to  do  so  much  ?  we  say  to  this  great  king  of  labour,  and  that  great  leader  of  civilisa- 
tion ;  and  he  makes  answer.  Only  by  doing  the  day's  work  within  the  day.  There 
are  a  great  many  persons  who  have  out-of-the-way  places  in  which  they  store 
things  to  be  attended  to  some  time ;  the  fact  being  that  there  is  no  peace  in  that 
household,  no  music,  no  deep  content ;  there  is  always  something  tugging  at  the 
conscience  and  reminding  the  memory  of  the  arrears.  Never  have  any  arrears. 
What-does  a  well-spent  day  mean  ?  It  means  Sabbath  every  night,  satisfaction; 
it  is  finished,  it  is  enough  ;  I  have  told  my  tale,  I  have  woven  my  thread,  there  is 
nothing  more  to  be  done  to-day;  then  comes  the  sleep  of  the  labouring  man,  and 
that  is  sweet.  The  lazy  man  cannot  sleep,  he  can  only  snore.  Only  he  who  works, 
works  for  God,  with  God,  in  the  spirit  of  Christ,  can  sleep,  and  God  will  make  up 
all  that  is  due  to  him  whilst  he  is  sleeping.  Secondly,  let  us  enlarge  the  meaning 
of  the  word  "  day."  The  term  "  day"  is  one  of  the  most  flexible  terms  in  Holy 
Scripture,  in  poetry,  and  in  general  experience.  "  In  six  days  the  Lord  made 
heaven  and  earth."  I  have  no  doubt  of  it ;  but  I  do  not  know  what  "  day  "  means. 
We  speak  of  "  our  day  "  :  does  it  mean  from  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning  until 
eight  o'clock  in  the  evening?  Is  the  word  " day "  there  a  term  of  clock-time,  or 
does  it  relate  to  centuries,  eras,  epochs  ?  We  say,  "  Our  little  systems  have  their 
day " ;  does  that  mean  a  chronometer  day,  or  a  larger  and  variable  period  ? 
Evidently  it  means  the  latter.  So  the  text  may  be  expanded  without  a  change  of 
word.  "As  every  day's  work  required" — as  the  time  needed,  as  the  exigency 
demanded,  as  the  epoch  called  for,  as  the  century  required.  You  are  fully  aware 
that  every  day,  in  the  larger  sense  of  age,  epoch,  or  era,  has  its  own  peculiar 
revelation  and  its  own  peculiar  truth  and  special  and  even  unique  duty  and 
obligation.  We  cannot  go  back  upon  the  centuries  and  fit  the  expired  aeons  into 
the  framework  of  the  immediate  day  in  which  we  are  breathing.  The  apostle  did 
not  hesitate  to  speak  of  "  the  present  truth,"  the  truth  of  this  particular  day,  with 
all  its  thrill  and  pulse  and  feverishness ;  the  present  truth,  precisely  adapted  and 
suited  to  the  immediate  intellectual  and  spiritual  condition  of  the  times.  We  read 
of  men  who  fell  asleep  after  serving  their  generation — "  and  having  served  his 
generation,  he  fell  on  sleep."  And  he  serves  the  next  generation  best  who  serves 
the  present  generation  well.  Your  influence  will  not  be  cut  off,  it  will  run  on 
when  you  are  no  longer  visible  ;  it  will  be  a  memory,  an  inspiration,  an  enthusiasm, 
an  ever-recurring  poem,  lifting  life's  prose  into  nobler  music.  We  must  catch  the 
very  spirit  and  genius  of  the  time ;  our  question  should  be,  What  will  the  people 
hear  ?  Not  in  any  grovelling  or  degrading  sense,  but,  What  is  the  supreme  necessity 
of  the  human  heart  just  at  this  hot  moment  ?  What  is  it,  then,  that  covers  and 
sanctifies  all  days  ? — the  little  day  of  twenty-four  hours  or  twelve,  and  the  great 
day  of  long  centuries  and  piled  millenniums  ?  That  permanent  and  all-sovereign 
quantity  or  force  is  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  said  of  Him,  He  is  the  same  yesterday, 
to-day,  and  for  ever.  He  describes  Himself  as  He  that  is  and  was  and  is  to  come — 
Alpha,  new  as  the  dawn ;  Omega,  venerable  as  the  sunset  of  millenniums.  He 
abides  in  the  Church,  He  is  ever  on  the  throne.  He  gives  the  order  of  the  day.  He 
has  a  message  for  every  morning.  If  we  could  lay  hold  of  that  great  truth  we 
should  have  a  united  Church  at  once.  So  much  for  working  on  the  broader  scale ; 
60  much  for  working  within  day,  meaning  century,  age,  epoch.  We  are  not  all 
working  in  the  same  way  or  all  doing  precisely  the  same  kind  of  work.  If  the 
Church  would  but  believe  this  she  might  have  summer  all  the  year  round.  We 
will  compare  one  man  with  another  ;  it  would  seem  as  if  there  were  no  escape  from 
this  lunacy.  We  think  that  unless  a  man  shall  begin  where  we  expect  him  to 
begin,  and  continue  as  we  expect  him  to  continue,  and  conclude  as  we  expect  he 
will  conclude,  that  such  man  is  wrong.  Never  forget  that  that  man  could  criticise 
you  if  he  thought  it  worth  while  to  stoop  so  low.  Day — day — day — in  its  usual 
sense  it  means  so  short  a  space  of  time.  Take  short  views  of  life.  Mayhap  I  am 
speaking  to  some  one  who  is  worrying  himself  about  the  day  after  to-morrow. 


OHAP.xn.]  J.  CHRONICLES.  63 

Where  is  that  day  ?  Who  has  seen  it  ?  What  will  it  be  like  ?  Who  told  you  about 
it  ?  What  rights  have  you  in  it  ?  To-day  is  thy  limitation.  He  who  works  well 
to-day  shall  have  holiday  to-morrow — holiday  in  the  sense  of  renewed  strength, 
increased  vigour,  and  power  to  deal  with  the  problems  and  handle  the  difficulties 
of  life.  You  are  wondering  who  will  live  in  your  house  two  years  after  you  are 
dead.  Why  should  you  trouble  yourself  about  two  years  after  ?  You  will  not  be 
there  to  see,  why  trouble  about  it  now  ?  To-morrow  is  with  God ;  to-morrow  is 
lingering  by  the  lakes  of  heaven ;  to-morrow  has  not  yet  left  the  eternal  throne. 
Why  fret  and  worry  and  tear  thyself  about  to-morrow  ?  It  may  be  the  brightest 
day  that  ever  shone  upon  thee  ;  and  if  thou  wouldst  make  it  so,  to-day  be  up  and 
doing,  and  to-morrow  thou  shalt  have  joy  in  thy  Lord.     (/.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  41.  To  give  thanks  to  the  Lord. — Praise  in  song  (for  a  Choir  Service) : — 
King  David  was  the  greatest  innovator  in  worship  of  whom  Scripture  contains  a 
record,  for  he  introduced  instrumental  music  to  guide  popular  singing  in  worship, 
and  he  formed  the  whole  tribe  of  Levi  into  a  guild  of  various  branches,  one  of 
which  was  employed  in  the  musical  services  of  religion.  There  had  always  been 
in  Israel  a  tendency  to  song.  At  the  digging  of  a  well,  at  the  winning  of  a  victory, 
at  the  issue  of  a  great  deliverance  the  people  sang,  not  men  only,  or  priests  only, 
but  men  and  women.  But  music  was  not  in  the  stated  worship  of  God  till  David 
organised  it.  It  was  this  organisation  that  Solomon  found  ready  to  his  hand.  The 
purpose  of  the  music,  the  purport  of  the  song,  was  praise  for  the  mercy  of  the 
Lord:  "to  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord,  because  His  mercy  endureth  forever."  "lam 
burdened  with  the  sense  of  the  mercies  of  God,"  said  the  dying  Norman  Macleod. 
That  was  the  burden  of  Israel  and  Judah  in  the  old  time  (2  Chron.  xx.  21 ;  Ezra 
iii.  11).  That  was  the  National  Anthem  of  Israel.  There  is  none  like  it  yet,  not 
even  Luther's,  though  that  comes  next  to  it.  It  is  a  hymn  we  might  sing  in  eternity. 
There  is  something  to  stir  the  heart  in  the  mercy  of  God.  There  were  many  things 
that  stirred  the  heart  of  Israel,  but  this  one  was  always  the  chief.  We  know  very 
little  about  the  hymns  or  music  of  the  early  Church.  Everything  that  was  sung 
that  was  not  a  psalm  seems  to  have  been  called  a  hymn.  Paul  enjoins  "  psalms, 
hymns,  and  spiritual  songs  "  as  a  means  of  instruction  and  teaching.  Thus  it  was 
at  the  German  Keformation.  Thus  it  was  at  the  Scottish  Reformation,  when 
almost  aU  the  learning  was  of  rhyme ;  psalms,  beatitudes,  creeds,  and  command- 
ments— they  rhymed  and  sang  them  all.  The  Gnostic  heretics  had,  through  their 
hymns,  such  hold  on  the  heart,  that  he  was  the  best  champion  of  orthodoxy  who 
could  write  a  rival  hymn.  The  Arians  also  swayed  the  mobs  of  the  great  cities  of 
the  East  by  their  processions  and  their  songs,  and  their  catches  sung  at  meal  hours, 
so  that  Ambrose  and  Chrysostom  had  to  counteract  them  with  hymns  that  were 
charged  with  the  very  truth  of  God  and  Christ  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  To  you 
members  of  the  choir  I  would  say,  "  You  sing  not  as  pagans  sang  ;  your  music  is 
not  a  refined  amusement,  or  a  toy,  but  a  consecration  to  God  of  a  great  gift  with 
which  the  Lord  of  the  talents  has  entrusted  you.  It  is  given  you  that  by  its  use  you 
may  lead  us  up  to  God.  It  is  not  congregational  worship  if  some  one  sings  in  the 
presence  of  the  congregation.  The  heart  of  the  people  must  go  with  the  singer. 
There  is  not  much  more  worship  in  hearing  some  one  sing  than  there  would  be  in 
seeing  some  one  paint.  But  there  is  a  strange  power  in  music — above 
all  in  the  music  of  the  human  voice — to  awaken  emotion.  Some  of 
the  grandest  preaching  I  have  ever  heard  was  the  singing  of  a  hymn 
with  a  purpose.  It  was  not  worship,  but  it  was  wonderful  teaching,  and  it 
led  to  worship — worship  of  the  highest  kind.  Now  triumph  wiU  be  in  the  music 
that  moves  us  to  no'ile  deeds.  When  one  Greek  orator  spoke,  men  said,  '  What  a 
noble  speech  1 '  but  when  the  other  spoke  men  looked  on  each  other,  grasped  their 
swords  and  said,  *  Let  us  march  on  Macedon.'  And  if  you  use  your  gift  to  the 
highest  purpose  it  will  have  for  its  result  that  we  will  arise  and  go  to  our  Father." 
Basil  said  the  Holy  Ghost  was  the  author  of  Christian  music.  This  lifts  up  the 
central  purpose  beyond  mere  notation  ;  the  Holy  Ghost  takes  of  the  things  of 
Christ  and  shows  them  to  us.     {Prof.  Charteris,  D.D.) 

Ver.  43.  And  all  the  people  departed,  every  man  to  his  house. — On  family 
worship : — Public  exercises  of  religion,  when  properly  conducted,  have  a  happy 
tendency  to  prepare  the  mind  for  those  of  a  more  private  nature.  Our  text  tells 
us  that  David  returned  to  bless  his  house — that  is,  to  present  them  to  God  in 
prayer  and  entreat  His  blessing  upon  them.    This  suggests  the  duty  of  family 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvn. 

prayer.     I.  This  dctt  is  a  practice  by  which  good  men  have  been  distinguished 

IN  EVERT  AGE.        II.  FaMILT  PRATER  IS  A  NATDRAIi  AND  NECESSART  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  OP 

THE  DEPENDENCE  OF  FAMILIES  UPON  GoD,  and  of  the  innumerable  obligations  they 
are  under  to  His  goodness.    III.  This  dutt  is  enforced  bt  its  tendenct,  under  thb 

BLESSING   of    GoD,  TO   FORM   THE   MINDS   OF   CHILDREN  AND  SERVANTS  TO  THE  LOVE  AND 

PRACTICE  OF  RELIGION.    IV.   Family  worship  may  be  expected  to  have  a  most 

beneficial  INFLUENCE  ON  THE  CHARACTER  AND  CONDUCT  OF  THE  HEADS  OF  FAMILIES 
THEMSELVES.       V.    PrOBABLE    PLEAS    WHICH    WILL  BE   URGED  FOR  THE  NEGLECT  OF  THIS 

DUTT.  1.  Want  of  ability.  Answer — (1)  Forms  of  prayer  may  be  used  with 
advantage.  (2)  The  plea  of  mental  inability  will  not  stand  the  test  of  examination, 
unless  it  include  an  incapacity  to  read.  (3)  It  is  more  than  probable  that  those 
who  complain  of  this  inability  have  never  made  the  trial,  and  consequently  never 
can  form  any  accurate  judgment  of  their  qualifications.  2.  Want  of  time.  Con- 
sider on  what  principle  this  plea  depends  :  that  religion  is  not  the  grand  concern ; 
that  there  is  something  more  important  than  the  service  of  God ;  that  the  pleasing 
and  glorifying  our  Maker  is  not  the  great  end  of  human  existence — a  fatal  delusion, 
a  soul-destroying  mistake.  3.  It  has  been  neglected  so  long  that  they  know  not 
how  to  begin.  VI.  Hints  on  the  practice.  1.  Let  it  ever  be  joined  with  reading 
the  Scriptures.  2.  Let  it  be  constant.  3.  Attend  with  a  full  decision  of  mind,  with 
the  utmost  seriousness.  4.  Seek  the  aid  of  the  Spirit.  {Robert  Hall,  M.A.) 
David's  attention  to  his  household  : — I.  The  work  in  which  he  had  been  engaged  : 
the  bringing  up  the  ark  to  Jerusalem.  A  glorious  work — 1.  In  itself.  2.  As  typical 
of  Christ's  ascension  into  heaven  (Psa.  xxiv. ,  xlvii.,  Ixviii.,  cxxxii.).  11.  The  work  to 
WHICH  he  returned:  "  to  bless  his  house."  1.  To  obtain  blessings  for  them  by  hia 
prayers.  2.  To  render  himself  a  blessing  to  them  by  his  conduct.  Learn — 1.  How 
highly  we  are  privileged.  The  ark,  even  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  is  present 
in  the  midst  of  us.  2.  In  what  way  we  should  improve  our  privileges.  We  should 
endeavour  to  communicate  the  benefit  of  them  to  others.  (Skeletons  of  Sermons.) 
Domestic  duties  : — We  cannot  always  live  in  public  ;  it  is  true  that  we  have  tent- 
work  to  do,  temple  work  &c.,  but  when  all  that  is  external  or  public  has  been  done, 
every  man  must  bless  his  own  home,  make  his  own  children  glad,  make  his  own 
hearthstone  as  bright  as  he  possibly  can,  and  fill  his  own  house  with  music  and 
gladness.    {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTEB  XVn. 


Vers.  1-10.  Now  It  came  to  pass,  as  David  sat  In  his  house. — The  king's  pro- 
posal:— I.  David's  proposal.  1.  A  noble  purpose.  2.  A  generous  purpose.  3.  A 
purpose  commended  by  the  prophet.  II.  God's  disapproval  of  David's  proposal. 
1.  God  knows  all  our  purposes.  2.  God  often  hinders  the  accomplishment  of  our 
purposes.  IIL  Beasons  for  God's  disapproval  of  David's  proposal.  1.  It  was 
something  entirely  new.  2.  It  was  untimely  in  its  beginning.  3.  David  was  not 
the  right  man  to  build.  (J.  Wolfendale.)  Our  iiispirations  require  to  be  revised  : 
— There  are  extemporaneous  inspirations  in  life  which  have  to  be  revised,  amended, 
and  in  some  instances  discarded  altogether.  A  judgment  is  not  always  right  simply 
because  it  is  sudden.  There  have  been  days  upon  which  we  have  been  perfectly 
sure  that  our  duty  lay  along  such  and  such  lines ;  everything  concurred  to  prove 
the  providence  of  the  situation;  circumstances  and  impressiors  combined  to  show 
that  a  well-defined  line  of  action  had  been  actually  described  i  y  the  Divine  finger. 
It  is  precisely  where  duty  appears  to  be  so  plain  that  vigilance  should  be  most  on 
the  alert.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  David  forbidden  to  build  the  temple : — Some  men 
are  great  only  in  intentions.  If  words  were  deeds,  and  dreams  realities,  they  would 
be  the  flower  and  crown  of  their  generation.  But  life  slips  by  unutilised.  The 
future  of  hope  never  becomes  the  present  of  fact.  They  are  no  more  than  glorious 
idle  dreamers.  Not  so  with  David.  I.  David's  pious  employment  of  his  leisure. 
He  had  long  been  like  a  pursued  mountain-bird.  And  when  Saul  could  pursue 
him  no  more,  when  he  had  come  to  the  crown  of  Judah,  it  was  an  assailed  crown. 
But  at  last  there  was  rest  for  David.  No  tent  of  the  warrior.  It  is  "  his  house" 
he  is  in,  his  new  mansion,  his  cedar  palace.  Therein  he  "sat."  He  has  leisure. 
How  does  he  use  it  ?     Seeking  some  excitement  of  pleasure  wherein  to  escape  the 


CHAP,  xvn.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  65 

oppression  of  self-consecration ;  the  unwelcome  voice  of  clamorous  duty?  When 
he  went  forth  to  conflict  he  said,  "  The  battle  is  the  Lord's."  And  now  he  felt, 
♦'  My  leisure  is  the  Lord's."  So  as  he  sits  in  his  beautiful  mansion,  the  palace 
which  the  Tyrian  builders  had  built,  he  was  comparing  its  elegance  and  splendour 
with  the  meanness  of  the  tabernacle  in  which  he  had  placed  the  ark.  The  com- 
parison pained  him.  He  will  build  a  temple  for  the  Lord.  With  such  thoughts  &a 
these  he  occupied  his  leisure.  Leisure  !  It  is  the  very  thing  that  some  seem  never 
to  get,  and  others  getting,  seek  to  escape.  With  some  life  is  a  long,  seldom- 
pausing  battle  with  want.  With  others,  when  the  respite  comes,  they  are  eager 
soon,  having  no  mental  or  spiritual  resources,  to  get  back  again  into  the  familiar 
toil  wherein  they  find  the  only  Ufe  they  care  to  live.  Few  and  brief  may  be  our 
opportunities  of  leisure.  All  the  more  reason  that  they  should  be  for  our  highest 
refreshing  and  renewing  by  being  dedicated  to  God.  How  a  man  spends  his  leisure 
will  tell  much  of  the  man.  David's  employment  of  his  speaks  well  for  him. 
H.  God  should  be  honoubed  with  oub  substance.  David  felt  God  to  be  worthy  of 
the  best.  He  desired  to  build  Him  a  house.  The  largest  liberality  would  be  only 
a  poor  acknowledgment,  a  slight  expression  of  his  affection.  David  had  built  a 
palace.  He  was  not  wrong  in  this.  Comely  symbols  these  of  kingly  power.  Let 
the  rich  and  great  dwell  in  stately  houses.  Let  the  owners  of  wealth  possess  what 
only  the  wealthy  can  buy.  As  David  did  more  for  himself,  he  desired  to  do  more 
for  Him  to  whom  he  owed  his  all.  That  should  be  the  rule  of  our  conduct.  Do 
our  riches  increase  ?  There  should  be  a  proportionate  increase  of  what  we  dedicate 
to  God.  A  matter,  this,  little  considered  by  many.  HI.  Good  wishes  ark  never 
losT.  David  told  Nathan  the  prophet  his  desire  to  rear  a  temple  for  the  Lord.  We 
are  not  surprised  to  find  that  the  prophet,  with  prompt  approbation,  encouraged  the 
king  to  the  great  undertaking.  The  work  was  good,  but  was  David  the  man  to 
undertake  it  ?  To  Nathan  at  night  came  a  Divine  intimation  that  he  was  not.  To 
war's  rough,  sad  business  he  was  Divinely  bidden.  But  because  of  its  connection 
with  its  inevitable  horrors  he  was  bidden  back  from  the  pious  enterprise  on  which 
iis  sublime  and  earnest  ambition  was  set.  What  a  verdict  is  thus  passed  upon 
war !  What  then  ?  Does  David's  pious  intention  count  for  nothing  ?  It  counts 
ior  much.  Beside  which  he  had  his  own  important  special  work  to  do,  to  give  his 
people  rest  from  their  foes  and  consolidate  the  kingdom  of  Israel.  His  good  wish 
had  not  been  in  vain.  He  was  forbidden  to  build  the  temple,  but  God  would  build 
him  a  family,  and  the  world's  needed  glorious  Deliverer  was  to  be  the  "  offspring  of 
David."  A  greater  honour  than  he  sought  came  to  him.  God  was  pleased  with 
his  pious  wish,  and  fulfilled  it  in  a  nobler  way.  Think  not  little,  then,  of  good 
intentions  that  are  hmdered  from  becoming-  more  than  intentions.  You  may  have 
desired  to  do  some  larger  work  for  God  ;  you  may  have  intended  to  consecrate  your 
whole  life  to  some  holy  ministry — to  the  ministry  of  the  Gospel  in  this  land  or  far 
hence  among  the  heathen ;  but  you  were  hindered.  In  circumstances  God  said, 
■♦'  No,  not  in  this  way  ;  in  some  other " ;  and,  perhaps,  you  look  back  and  say, 
"  My  life  is  so  unlike  what  I  had  hoped.  I  drew  the  consecrated  plan,  and  God's 
viewless,  but  undeniable,  hand  blotted  it  out.  My  wish  was  all  in  vain."  No,  say 
mot  that.  The  desire  was  good.  It  will  be  fulfilled  ;  if  not  here,  yet  in  higher 
-Service  than  otherwise  had  been  yours  — in  that  bright  and  holy  city  beyond  death. 
Cherish  large  and  holy  desires.  Precious  seeds,  you  may  be  unable  to  sow  them  in 
any  human  heart,  in  any  field  of  earth ;  but  heaven  shall  receive  them.  There 
they  shall  come  to  richest  harvest.  You  shall  find  them  again — not  baffied  and 
scattered,  as  here,  but  in  noblest  service,  in  heaven's  eternal  praise.  David  was  not 
to  build  the  temple.  But  he  knew  it  was  to  be  built.  The  honour  was  reserved  for 
his  son.  "  He,"  said  God,  '♦  shall  build  an  house  for  My  name."  If  hindered  from 
an  undertaking  ourselves  let  us  remember  that  our  prayers  and  effort  may  help 
another  to  do  it.     (G.  T.  Coster.) 

Vers.  7-11.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  I  took  thee  from  the  sheepcote. — God 

in  personal  life  : — I.  God  elevates  men  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest  station 
IN  life.  II.  God  helps  men  to  do  the  work  fob  which  they  are  elevated. 
1.  By  His  constant  presence.     2.  By  continual  victories.     IH.  God  honours  men 

FOR  faithful  PERFOBMANCE  OF  THE  WOEK  TO  WHICH  THEY  ARE  ELEVATED.   1. 

Honoured  in  reputed  life.  2.  Honoured  in  peaceful  death.  {James  Wolfendale.) 
From  the  sheepfold  to  the  throne : — David  is  thus  presented  to  our  thought  as  the 
type  of  youths  rising  from  lowly  to  lofty  positions,  and  rising  by  virtue  of  conditions 
■and  qualities  essentially  the  same.     What  are  these  conditions  and  qualities  ?     To 

i 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvn. 

Bay  that  God  chose  David  and  put  this  high  honour  on  him  does  not  at  all  answer 
the  question.  Why  did  the  Divine  choice  fall  on  him?  God's  choice  of  agents 
and  bestowment  of  honours  are  not  made  capriciously,  without  ground  of  personal 
merit  in  the  subject.  Our  task  is  to  study  the  human  elements,  to  estimate  the 
subjective  factors  in  this  problem  of  growth  and  greatness.  David  was  the  man 
after  "  God's  own  heart,"  not  absolutely,  bat  because  he  was  the  best  of  his  naticn 
and  age  for  the  work  he  was  called  to  do.  I.  There  was  in  David  a  substantial. 
GROUND  OF  personal  WORTH,  of  susceptibiUtics  and  tendencies  upon  which  to  build 
a  life  of  greatness.  II.  His  life  was  swayed  by  a  great  purpose.  III.  He  had 
GREAT  COURAGE.  1.  Physical.  2.  Moral.  IV.  He  exhibited,  through  all  these 
years  of  preparation  and  development,  great  fidelity  to  trusts  imposed.  V.  He 
had  great  faith  in  God.  VI.  All  his  estimable  qualities  were  fed  and  fired  by 
HABITUAL  AND  GENUINE  RELIGIOUS  DEVOTION.  (C.  H.  Payne,  D.D.)  The  remem- 
brance of  our  early  history  should  be  a  stimulus  to  gratitude : — While  many 
Americans  are  looking  up  their  remote  ancestors  to  provide  themselves  with  a  crest 
and  coat  of  arms,  a  few  follow  the  example  of  early  English  families  and  adopt 
some  emblem  which  suggests  a  noteworthy  incident  in  their  own  history.  One 
millionaire,  not  ashamed  of  the  source  of  his  wealth,  has  a  derrick  engraved  on  his 
seal.  Another  family  enriched  by  the  manufacture  of  furniture  has  adopted  a  tree 
as  a  crest.  The  most  interesting  of  these  modern  symbols,  perhaps,  is  found 
engi-aved  on  the  plate  and  books  of  a  family  of  Pennsylvania  Friends,  who  would 
probably  be  unwilling  to  call  it  a  crest.  It  is  a  cat  carrying  a  rabbit  in  its  mouth. 
There  is  a  legend  to  explain  it.  The  first  of  a  family  to  emigrate  to  this  country 
was  the  father  of  eleven  children.  He  sailed  in  the  same  year  as  Penn,  and  died 
on  the  voyage,  leaving  his  wife  to  land  alone  with  her  helpless  flock.  She  had  a 
grant  of  land,  but  no  money.  They  took  refuge,  as  did  many  of  the  first  emigrants 
to  America,  in  a  cave  dug  out  of  the  side  of  a  hill.  Winter  came  on.  Provisiona 
failed.  The  widow  saw  her  children  grow  pale  and  weak  for  want  of  food.  The 
day  arrived  at  last  when  there  was  not  a  grain  of  meal  in  the  barrel.  She  fell  on 
her  knees  and  prayed  in  an  agony  of  supplication.  When  she  arose  she  smiled, 
her  children  said  afterwards,  as  if  she  had  seen  an  angel  coming  with  bread.  Going 
out  she  saw  no  angel,  but  the  cat  with  a  freshly  killed  rabbit  in  its  mouth.  The 
rabbit  made  a  good  meal,  of  which  pussy,  we  may  be  sure,  had  a  full  share.  The 
family,  which  has  been  a  prosperous  and  influential  one,  preserves  this  symbol  of 
their  early  history  to  commemorate  their  gratitude  to  God.     (Daily  Paper.) 

Ver.  14.  But  I  will  settle  him  In  Mine  house  and  in  My  kingdom  for  ever. — The 

everlasting  establishment : — I.  First  of  all,  let  us  offer  a  word  or  two  upon  the 
KINGDOM.  Much  is  Written  in  Scripture  about  kingdoms  and  empires.  1.  That  the 
"house"  or  the  "kingdom"  which  Jehovah  claims  as  His  own  is  a  kingdom 
which  originated  with  the  Lord.  It  rose  not  up  in  the  mind  of  mortals  first.  It 
grew  not  up  of  Nature's  materials.  It  was  not  brought  forth,  and  set  up,  and 
established,  by  the  arm  of  man,  or  by  the  conquests  of  warriors,  as  many  other 
kingdoms  are.  It  originated  in  the  wisdom,  grace,  and  power  of  the  Most  High. 
Moreover,  not  only  does  this  kingdom  originate  with  Him,  but  it  is  so  formed  and 
constituted  as  to  glorify  the  Lord.  "  My  glory,"  saith  Jehovah,  "  will  I  not  give  to 
another,  neither  My  praise  to  graven  images."  In  the  formation  and  constitution 
of  the  kingdom  which  God  calls  His  own — "  Mine  house  and  My  kingdom  " — the 
subjects  are  a  royal  seed  ;  of  royal  blood  ;  of  royal  birth  ;  "  kings  and  priests  unto 
God."  My  hearer,  of  what  kingdom  art  thou?  If  thou  art  not  of  the  kingdom  ol 
God's  grace,  thou  art  of  the  kingdom  of  darkness,  a  slave  of  Satan,  and  on  the  high- 
road to  destruction.  2.  Yet  further  observe,  the  laws  are  immutable.  3.  Then 
further,  I  notice  the  privileges,  the  high  spiritual  privileges  of  the  kingdom.  Pardon, 
peace,  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  II.  I  come  to  the  investiture  of  the  King. — "  I  will 
settle  him  in  Mine  house  and  in  My  kingdom."  Solomon  was  settled  for  a  time, 
and  reigned  long  and  peacefully  over  Israel ;  but  he  is  not  reigning  now.  "  A 
greater  than  Solomon  is  here."  He  is  invested  with  sovereignty,  absolute  and 
universal:  "I  will  settle  Him  in  My  kingdom."  He  is  invested  with  sovereignty, 
absolute  and  universal.  "  I  have  set  My  King  upon  My  holy  hill  of  Zion.  I  will 
declare  the  decree :  the  Lord  has  said  unto  Me,  Thou  art  My  Son,  this  day  have  I 
begotten  Thee.  Ask  of  Me,  and  I  shall  give  Thee  the  heathen  for  Thine  inheritance 
and  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  Thy  possession."  Moreover,  if  we  speak  of 
His  absolute  sovereignty  for  a  moment,  you  know  it  is  written  expressly,  that 
"none  can  stay   His  hand,   or  say  unto  Him,  What   doest  Thou?"     III.    This 


CHAP,  xvra.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  67 

NATIONAL  ESTABLISHMENT ;  fof  there  is  that  word  in  my  text — "  establish."  There  is 
a  great  deal  said  in  Scripture  about  establishment.  Immutable  decrees  are  the 
basis  of  the  establishment.  Oh  1  I  could  bring  out  some  twenty  or  thirty  instances 
under  my  own  notice  in  which  all  the  schemes  and  powers  and  efforts  of  men  have 
passed  by ;  and  God,  in  a  moment  and  by  a  word,  through  some  of  His  sent  servants, 
has  accomplished  it  all.  IV.  The  glokious  perpetuity — "I  will  settle  Him  in 
Mine  house  and  in  My  kingdom  for  ever ;  and  His  throne  shall  be  established  for 
evermore."     (Joseph  IroTis.) 

Ver.  16.  Who  am  I,  0  Lord  God,  and  what  is  mine  house,  that  Thou  hast  brought 

me  hitherto? — The  greatness  of  Divine  favours  : — I,  They  infinitely  sokpass  human 
DESERT,     n.  They  fill  all  times  from  remotest  past  to  distant  future.     IH.  They 

SPRING  FROM  SOVEREIGN  MERCY.      IV.   ThEY    ARE    BEYOND   All  HUMAN  COMPREHENSION. 

{J.  P.  Lavge.) 

Vers.  17-22.  And  yet  this  was  a  small  thing:  ^  thine  eyes,  0  Lord. — A  model  of 
devout  thanksgiving  : — I.  Over  what  he  rejoices.  1.  Over  great  blessings  received. 
2.  Over  yet  greater  blessings  promised.  II.  In  what  spirit  he  regards  these 
favours.  1.  As  utterly  undeserved  by  himself.  2.  As  the  gift  of  God's  sovereign 
grace.  {J.  P.  Lange.)  God's  relation  to  His  people  : — Consider  I. — The  relation 
God  bears  to  His  people.  1.  He  has  chosen  them  out  of  the  world.  2.  He  has 
given  Himself  to  them  in  a  peculiar  way.  3.  He  avows  that  relation  to  them  before 
the  whole  universe.     II.  What  under  that  relation  we  may  expect  at  His  hands. 

1.  The  care  of  His  providence.  3.  The  communications  of  His  grace.  3.  The 
manifestations  of  His  love,  4.  The  possession  of  His  glory.  III.  What  under 
that  relation  He  is  entitled  to  expect  from  us.     1.  That  we  be  a  people  to  Him. 

2.  That  we  give  ourselves  to  Him.     ((7.  Simeon,  M.A.) 

Vers.  28-27.  Therefore  now,  Lord,  let  the  thing  that  Thou  hast  spoken  con- 
cerning Thy  servant. — True  prayer: — It  is — I.  Grounded  on  God's  promise. 
n.  It  regards  God's  honour  solely  (ver.  24).  III.  It  ascribes  ail  to  God's  free 
GRACE.  IV.  It  appeals  to  God's  faithfulness.  V.  It  receives  the  fulness  op 
God's  blessing.  (J.  Wolfendale.)  That  Thou  wilt  build  him  an  house. — Domestic 
piety : — I.  They  who  have  charge  of  families  should  cherish  an  earnest  regard 
FOR  THEIR  WELFARE.  II.  Those  who  havc  the  care  of  families  should  make  it  their 
chief  anxiety  to  impart  to  them  religious  instruction.  Seeking  their  spiritual 
welfare  we  shall — 1.  Strive  to  be  the  means  of  their  conversion  to  God.  2.  This 
we  should  do  because  converted  families  are  scenes  of  harmony  and  love.  3.  This 
only  can  impart  abiding  consolation  under  bereaving  providences.  4.  It  will  be 
thus  we  shall  provide  the  means  in  our  religious  households  of  future  usefulness  to 
the  Church  and  the  world.    {W.  O.  Barrett.) 


CHAPTER  XVni. 


Vers.  1-12.  Kow  after  this  It  came  to  pass  that  David  smote  the  Philistines. — 
Spoils  from  Edom : — If  we  have  conquered  an  enemy  we  must  hold  the  conquest 
as  an  illustration  of  the  power  of  God  rather  than  of  the  skill  of  our  own  might  or 
hand.  The  idols  which  we  bring  away  from  the  lands  of  darkness  are  to  be  set  up 
in  God's  house,  and  are  to  mark  points  in  the  progress  of  Christian  civilisation. 
They  are  to  be  regarded  as  indications  of  a  universal  conquest  which  Christ  has  yet 
to  win  over  the  nations  of  the  whole  world.  If  we  have  brought  back  spoils — such 
as  art,  music,  or  any  form  of  pleasure  by  which  the  popular  mind  can  be  touched 
and  moved  in  an  upward  direction — we  are  to  remember  that  in  all  these  spoils  we 
are  to  see  the  Divine  power,  and  not  proofs  of  our  own  military  genius.  (/. 
Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  So  David  reigned  over  all  Israel,  and  executed  Judgment  and  Justice. — 

I.  The  victories  of  peace  are  nobler  and  more  enduring  than  those  of  wa». 
We  are  very  familiar  with  David  the  warrior.  His  early  triumph  over  Goliath  put 
his  name  into  the  mouth  and  songs  of  Israel.    It  had  been  a  little  thing  if  he 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cwat.  xix. 


had  only  vanqnished  the  enemies  of  Israel.  When  this  was  done  his  truest,  noblest 
works  began.  He  encouraged  the  people  to  careful  cultivation  of  their  fields  by 
carefully  cultivating  his  own.  He  would  have  nothing  lost.  The  waste  land  must 
be  reclaimed.  His  stewards  must  give  exact  account  of  their  stewardship. 
Commerce,  with  its  increase  of  comforts,  is  quickened.  Architecture  is  improved ; 
huts  give  way  to  houses.  Arrangements  are  made  for  due  and  prompt  adminis- 
tration of  justice  in  all  parts  of  the  country.  The  health  and  education  of  the 
people  the  king  remembers  and  provides  for.  These  were  right  royal  undertakings, 
and  "  became  "  David  "  better  than  his  crown."  Wars  fill  a  large  and  loud  place 
in  history.  The  works  of  peace  are  silent,  unobtrusive.  Picturesque  pens  may 
describe  a  battle  in  which  thousands  perish,  but  how  little  can  they  describe  the 
battle  waged  by  sanitary  officers  and  medical  men  against  disease  and  its  causes  by 
which  thousands,  ten  thousands,  are  saved  !  II.  Thk  blessing  of  a  wise  adminib- 
TBATOR  to  a  NATION.  David  was  a  true  ruler  of  men.  Not  only  by  possession  of  a 
personal  charm  which  attached  trusty  friends  to  him,  but  also  by  devising  those 
measures  which  were  for  the  wider  well-being  of  the  people.  He  had  eminently 
the  faculty  of  government  like  many  other  great  men  of  his  nation — Joseph,  Moses, 
Joshua,  Hezekiah,  Daniel.  When  rulers  are  wise,  and,  like  David,  know  "  what 
they  ought  to  do,"  this,  too,  is  one  of  God's  gifts  to  men.  III.  The  importance  of 
PSALMODY  IN  DiviNE  W0B8HIP.  Psalmody,  as  an  institution,  owes  its  origin  to  David. 
In  chap.  xxT.  we  can  see  with  what  care  it  was  instituted.     IV.  The  bkaoh 

or  VBIENDSHIP  IS  SEEN  IN  DaVId's  TEBATMENT  OP  MePHIBOSHKXH. 


OHAPTEE  XIX. 


Vbbb.  1-5.  And  David  sent  messeng'ers  to  comfort  him  concerning'  Ms  fsitber. 
— The  menage  of  condolence: — I.  The  generous  message  of  David.  1.  In  its 
accession.  2.  In  its  form.  II.  The  disgraceful  treatment  of  David's  messengers. 
Shaving  their  beards  and  shortening  their  garments,  a  double  insult  in  the  East, 
•where  long  beards  and  long  garments  are  badges  of  honour.  Many  Orientals 
would  rather  die  than  lose  their  beards  (signs  of  dignity  and  ornaments  of 
freedom),  and  Turks  used  to  regard  beardless  Europeans  as  runaway  slaves. 
in.  The  considerate  kindness  for  the  disgraced  messengers.  (J.  Wolfendale.) 
Thlnkest  thou  that  David  doth  honour  thy  i&fher.—Suspiciom  .-—Don't  be 
suspicious.  Some  people  think  they  are  very  clever  in  finding  out  what  is  wrong 
where  no  one  else  sees  anything  amiss,  and  these  often  make  themselves  very 
ridiculous.  Tennyson,  when  a  young  man,  was  walking  through  Wales,  on  his 
way  back  from  the  Continent,  and  turned  into  a  little  wayside  inn,  where  an  old 
man  sat  by  the  fire,  and  asked  many  questions  in  a  very  suspicious  fashion. 
"Are  you  from  the  army?  Not  from  the  army?  Then  where  do  you  come 
from?"  he  bluntly  asked  at  last.  "I  am  just  come  from  the  Pyrenees,"  said  the 
poet.  "  Ah,  I  knew  there  was  '  a  something  1 '  "  was  the  knowing  clincher  of  the 
old  man.  Could  anything  have  been  more  ridiculous  ?  Don't  be  suspicious ; 
think  the  best,  believe  the  best,  love  the  best ;  remember  that  everybody  finds  just 
what  he  seeks.  You  will  always  find  "a  something"  if  it  is  "a  something"  you 
are  seeking,  but  you  will  also  always  find  what  is  good  and  beautiful  if  you  are  in 
search  of  that.     (J.  Reid  Howatt.) 

Ver.  6-9.  And  when  the  children  of  Ammon.  Avenging  an  insult  .-—I.  Insult 
SPRINGING  FROM  SLIGHT  PROVOCATION.  1.  From  a  suspicious  mind.  2.  From  advice 
of  jealous  princes.  II.  Insult  leading  to  unjust  war.  This  war  might  have  been 
avoided  by  an  honourable  apology  or  better  understanding.  One  evil  leads  to 
another,    in.  Wab  terminating  in  disgraceful  overthrow.     (/.  Wolfendale.) 

Vers.  10-13.  Novr  when  Joab  saw  that  the  battle  was  set  against  bim.— The 
var-cry : — I.  The  purpose  for  which  thet  fought.  II.  The  method  in  which 
THEY  fought.  1.  A  wisc  economy  of  forces.  2.  A  determination  to  render  mutual 
help.  III.  The  spirit  in  which  thet  fought.  1.  Of  exalted  courage.  2.  Of  true 
patriotism.     8.  Of  submission  to  God.     (Ibid.) 


OHAP.XX.J  I.  CHRONICLES.  69 


CHAPTEE  XX. 

Vers.  1-3.  And  It  came  to  pass,  that  after  the  year  was  expired. — The  capture 
of  Rabbah  : — From  its  capture  and  punishment  of  its  people  we  learn — I.  That  in 
8PIBITUAI,  WAKFARE  THERE  MUST  BE  NO  CESSATION.  Rest  gives  advantage  to  the 
enemy,  and  may  delay  or  frustrate  the  end  in  view.  "  Forwards,  children, 
forwards  "  1  urged  Blucher,  in  meeting  Wellington  at  Waterloo.  1.  Make  needful 
preparation.  2.  Be  ready  for  every  advantage.  "  The  time  to  go  oat "  must  be 
discovered  and  seized.  IL  That  in  conducting  spiritual  warfare  opportunitt 
IS  GIVEN  FOR  THE  DISPLAY  OF  VIRTUOUS  QUALITIES  (2  Sam.  xii.  26-29).  We  must 
transfer  the  glory  of  our  conquests  to  our  gracious  "  Commander  and  Leader." 
III.  That  all  things  in  spiritual  warfare  will  be  subdued  under  God's  power. 
(Ibid.)  And  David  took  the  crown  of  their  king  from  off  liis  head. — The 
loss  of  a  crown : — The  loss  of  a  crown  is  much  or  nothing.  The  crown  itself  is 
a  mere  bauble,  but  it  is  full  of  significance  as  a  token.  Every  office  points  in  the 
direction  of  supremacy.  The  doorkeeper  is  on  the  road  to  the  highest  seat.  Do 
not  have  a  crown  that  any  one  can  take  from  you.  Men  may  steal  your  clothes,  but 
they  cannot  steal  your  character.  Start  your  son  with  fifty  thousand  golden 
pounds,  and  he  may  lose  it  all,  and  want  fifty  thousand  more ;  start  him  with  a 
fine  sense  of  honour,  with  a  sound  practical  education,  with  a  love  of  wisdom,  with 
a  knowledge  of  things  real,  simple,  practical,  and  of  daily  occurrence,  and  he  will 
be  rich  all  the  time.  Let  no  man  take  thy  crown.  When  Carlyle  was  so  poor  as 
hardly  to  have  a  loaf,  he  was  walking  by  the  popular  side  of  Hyde  Park,  and 
looking  upon  all  that  gay  tumult  he  said  to  himself,  with  what  in  another  man 
might  have  been  conceit,  but  what  in  him  was  heroic  audacity :  '♦  I  am  doing  what 
none  of  you  could  do  "  ;  that  is  to  say,  he  was  writing  one  of  his  profoundest  and 
most  useful  books.  There  he  was  rich.  Have  ideas,  convictions,  resolutions, 
ideals,  and  be  faithful  as  a  steward  ought  to  be  faithful,  and  it  will  never  be 
written  of  thee  that  any  man  took  thy  crown.  A  man  may  throw  away  such  a 
crown,  a  man  may  play  the  fool  in  old  age ;  but  the  truth  now  to  be  Inculcated  is 
this,  that  no  man,  or  combination  of  men,  can  take  away  the  moral  crown,  the 
spiritual  diadem,  without  the  man's  own  consent.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Yer.  6.  Where  was  a  man  of  great  stature,  whose  fingers  and  toes  were  four  and 
twenty? — Great  giants  and  small: — "A  giant,"  "  the  son  of  a  giant,"  •'  children  of 
the  giant,"  '* a  man  of  great  stature."  There  were  giants  in  those  days;  there  are 
giants  in  our  day.  There  is  nothing  in  all  history  so  great  as  the  history  of  the 
present ;  there  is  no  moment  of  time  so  pregnant  with  the  meaning  of  eternity  as 
the  moment  of  our  present  breathing.  You  tremble  when  you  read  the  names  of 
these  giants.  There  is  no  need  to  tremble ;  a  deadlier  giant  is  aiming  at  your 
heart  to-day.  The  heroics  have  changed  as  to  apparatus  and  nomenclature  and 
environment,  and  all  that  sort  of  vanishing  vapour ;  the  great  fight  goes  on,  the 
tremendous  rush  of  armies,  Philistine  and  Israelite  still  meet  face  to  face.  And' 
they  can  make  no  peace ;  they  represent  different  worlds,  different  ideas,  atmospheres, 
purposes,  and  they  never  can  compromise.  June  cannot  compromise  with  December. 
What  giants  have  you  been  fighting?  You  have  got  through  the  first  crude  lot.  I' 
know  it ;  so  have  we  all.  But  it  was  a  mere  mob  of  blackguards ;  the  hostility 
itself  was  vulgar,  coarse,  contemptible.  The  mischief  is,  lest  having  got  through, 
that  mob  of  scoundrelism  and  villainy  detestable  and  palpable,  we  think  that 
therefore  the  fighting  is  done.  The  fighting  never  ends  until  the  body  is  in  the 
grave  or  is  laid  out  on  its  last  bed.  You  have  killed  the  giant  of  Falsehood,  you 
would  not  for  the  world  be  thought  to  be  a  liar.  Long  ago  you  killed  the  giant 
Untruth,  the  black-faced  giant  Lies.  But  it  does  not  therefore  follow  that  you  are 
now  a  true  man,  that  you  have  escaped  the  lap  and  the  shame  of  another  false- 
hood, deeper,  subtler,  deadlier.  Take  care!  "Thou  shalt  not  steal."  What  is 
stealing  ?  What  is  a  thief  ?  In  the  old  time  the  robber  despised  the  thief.  A 
great  distinction  is  drawn  in  the  New  Testament  between  thieves  and  robbers. 
Thieves  were  little,  contemptible,  mean  apers  of  gigantic,  majestic  robbery.  There 
is  another  set  of  giants  to  be  encountered.  What  about  the  giant  of  Unbelief  ?  But 
we  are  rather  proud  of  fighting  with  the  giant  Unbelief,  and  showing  thus  how 
extremely  intellectual  we  are.  That  we  have  even  known  the  very  existence  of  the 
word  unbelief  may  show  what  marvellous  giants  of  might  we  are.  Not  until  we- 
distinguish  between  crime  and  sin  can  we  make  any  real  progress  in  gospel  studies.. 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  xx. 

Have  yon  fought  down  and  conquered  the  giant  of  Ingratitude  ?  Who  thinks  about 
the  spiritual  sins  ?  Who  is  not  horrified  by  crime  and  draws  its  garments  round  it 
in  attestation  of  its  shocked  refinement?  There  may  be  more  sin  in  ingratitude 
than  in  some  murders.  The  murder  may  have  been  done  in  hot  blood,  in  haste  to 
be  repented  of  evermore,  through  ages  eternal  to  be  regretted  and  deplored  as  a 
lasting  bruise  of  the  soul.  Ingratitude  is  slow,  mean,  deliberate,  calculating,  cruel. 
The  giant  of  Ingratitude  takes  a  great  deal  of  fighting.  Have  you  overthrown  the 
giant  of  your  Ambition  ?  that  sordid,  calculating  ambition  that  always  wishes  to 
shoulder  out  some  other  man  and  get  a  foremost  place  in  the  race  of  life  ?  The 
danger  does  not  lie  always  along  what  may  be  called  the  line  of  giants.  There  are 
more  difficult  forces  to  contend  with  than  the  visibly  and  measurably  gigantic. 
There  is  not  a  giant  to  fight  every  one  of  us,  but  there  is  a  foe  that  every  soul  must 
know  and  confront  and  be  thrown  by  or  must  overthrow.  You  could  shoot  an  evil 
beast,  but  an  army  could  not  overtake  the  Colorado  beetle.  There  would  be  plenty 
of  people  who  at  other  people's  expense  would  go  to  distant  countries  to  shoot  big 
game.  Poor  fools  1  If  they  would  pay  their  own  waybill  I  would  think  a  little 
less  harshly  of  them.  So  many  people  are  prepared  for  giants  who  are  not  prepared 
for  beetles  and  bacilli  and  the  germs  that  sow  the  air  with  death.  Many  people 
would  do  heroic  things  who  are  only  called  upon  to  do  little,  simple,  daily,  domestic 
things.  Are  you  fully  aware  that  there  are  many  assailants  and  enemies  who  are 
not  giants  by  name,  but  are  giants  in  influence,  in  obstinacy  of  purpose,  in  a  cruel 
determination  to  ruin  your  soul  ?  Have  you  calculated  the  force  of  little  things  ? 
Bead  me  the  plagues  of  Egypt,  Lions,  tigers,  elephants — is  that  how  the  story 
runs?  Not  a  word  of  it.  What  were  the  plagues  ?  Hardly  anything  bigger  than 
a  frog ;  the  lice,  the  flies,  the  little  things,  these  excited  the  alarms  of  Egypt,  and 
brought  Egypt  to  her  knees.  You  and  I  are  not  called  upon  to  fight  the  giant  of 
Gath,  or  his  son,  or  the  monster  referred  to  in  the  text,  but  we  are  called  upon  to 
fight  many  insects,  bacilli,  germs  of  poison,  things  that  require  a  microscope  to 
discover,  so  minute  as  to  be  to  the  naked  eye  actually  invisible,  and  yet  on  the  tip 
of  your  finger  you  may  have  as  many  of  them  as  would  people  any  city  in  Europe 
as  to  mere  number.  To  that  fight  we  are  called — the  fight  of  spirit  with  spirit,  soul 
with  influence.  A  tremendous  battle  is  ours !  Do  you  suppose  that  an  eagle  fears 
any  foes  ?  Think  of  those  pinions  of  steel,  those  eyes  of  fire,  that  beak  of  brass. 
And  yet  the  eagle  is  maddened  to  death  by  a  humming-bird  no  bif^ger  than  the 
joint  of  a  finger.  We  have  often  told  of  the  insect  in  certain  countries  that  eata 
away  all  the  woodwork  of  the  door  and  leaves  nothing  but  a  coat  of  paint,  so  that 
going  to  the  door  and  endeavouring  to  open  it,  it  falls  to  pieces  under  the  slightest 
pressure.  That  is  translated  into  the  life  of  to-day  and  into  the  life  of  every  day. 
The  paint  is  right,  the  externalism  is  beyond  criticism,  all  seems  to  be  well ;  but 
take  care,  for  the  white  ant  has  eaten  up  all  the  interior  character,  and  nothing  is 
left  but  some  flake  of  paint.  We  have  to  fight  these  things  in  various  forms,  but 
principally  I  think  to-day  in  the  forms  of  books  and  tracts  and  publications. 
Ibid.)  Hindering  superfluities  : — The  anxieties  and  annoyances  of  those  whose 
estates  have  become  plethoric  can  only  be  told  by  those  who  possess  them.  It 
will  be  a  good  thing  when,  through  your  industry  and  prosperity,  you  can  own 
the  house  in  which  you  live.  But  suppose  you  own  fifty  houses,  and  you  have  all 
those  rents  to  collect,  and  all  those  tenants  to  please.  Suppose  you  have  branched 
out  in  business  successes  until  in  almost  every  direction  you  have  investments. 
The  fire-bell  rings  at  night,  you  rush  upstairs  to  look  out  of  the  window,  to  see  if 
it  is  any  of  your  mills.  Epidemic  of  crime  comes,  and  there  are  embezzlements 
and  abscondings  in  all  directions,  and  you  wonder  whether  any  of  your  book- 
keepers will  prove  recreant.  A  panic  strikes  the  financial  world,  and  you  are  like 
a  hen  under  a  sky  full  of  hawks,  and  trying  with  anxious  cluck  to  get  your  over- 
grown chicken  safely  under  wing.  After  a  certain  stage  of  success  has  been 
reached,  you  have  to  trust  so  many  important  things  to  others  that  you  are  apt  to 
become  the  prey  of  others,  and  you  are  swindled  and  defrauded,  and  the  anxiety 
you  had  on  your  brow  when  you  were  earning  your  first  thousand  dollars  is  not 
equal  to  the  anxiety  on  your  brow  now  that  you  have  won  your  three  hundred 
thousand.  The  trouble  with  such  a  one  is,  he  is  spread  out  like  the  unfortunate 
one  in  my  text.  You  have  more  fingers  and  toes  than  you  know  what  to  do  with. 
Twenty  were  useful,  twenty-four  is  a  hindering  superfluity.  Disraeli  says  that  a 
king  of  Poland  abdicated  his  throne  and  joined  the  people,  and  became  a  porter  to 
carry  burdens.  And  some  one  asked  him  why  he  did  so,  and  he  replied :  Upon 
my  honour,  gentlemen,  the  load  which  I  cast  off  was  by  far  heavier  than  the  one 


CHAP.  XXI.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  71 

you  see  me  carry.  The  weightiest  is  but  a  straw  when  compared  to  that  weight 
under  which  I  laboured.  I  have  slept  more  in  four  niqhts  than  I  have  during  all 
my  reign.  I  begin  to  live  and  to  be  a  king  myself.  Elect  whom  you  choose.  As 
for  me,  I  am  so  well  it  would  be  madness  to  return  to  court.  I  am  anxious  that  all 
who  have  only  ordinary  equipment  be  thankful  for  what  they  have  and  rightly 
employ  it.  I  think  you  all  have  figuratively,  as  well  as  literally,  fingers  enough. 
Do  not  long  for  hindering  superfluities.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  The  hand  : — 
Sir  Charles  Bell  was  so  impressed  with  the  wondrous  construction  of  the  human 
hand  that  when  the  Earl  of  Bridgewater  gave  forty  thousand  dollars  for  essays  on 
the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God,  and  eight  books  were  written,  Sir  Charles  Bell 
wrote  his  entire  book  on  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God  as  displayed  in  the 
human  hand.  The  twenty-seven  bones  in  the  hand  and  wrist  with  cartilages  and 
ligaments  and  phalanges  of  the  fingers  all  made  just  ready  to  knit,  to  sew,  to  build 
up,  to  pull  down,  to  weave,  to  write,  to  plough,  to  pound,  to  wheel,  to  battle,  to 
give  friendly  salutation.  The  tips  of  its  fingers  are  so  many  telegraph  offices  by 
reason  of  their  sensitiveness  of  touch.  The  bridges,  the  tunnels,  the  cities  of  the 
whole  earth  are  the  victories  of  the  hand.  The  hands  are  not  dumb,  but  often 
speak  as  distinctly  as  the  lips.  With  our  hands  we  invite,  we  repel,  we  invoke,  we 
entreat,  we  wring  them  in  grief,  or  clap  them  in  joy,  or  spread  them  abroad  in 
benediction.  The  malformation  of  the  giant's  hand  in  the  text  glorifies  the  usual 
hand.  Fashioned  of  God  more  exquisitely  and  wondrously  than  any  human 
mechanism  that  was  ever  contrived,  I  charge  you  use  it  for  God  and  the 
lifting  of  the  world  out  of  its  moral  predicament.  Employ  it  in  the  sublime 
work  of  gospel  handshaking.  (Ibid.)  The  foot : — Yea  ;  the  malformation  of 
this  fallen  giant's  foot  glorifies  the  ordinary  foot,  for  which  I  fear  you  have 
never  once  thanked  God.  The  twenty-six  bones  of  the  foot  are  the  admiration  of 
the  anatomist.  The  arch  of  the  foot  fashioned  with  a  grace  and  a  poise  that 
Trajan's  arch,  or  Constantino's  arch,  or  any  other  arch  could  not  equal.  Those 
arches  stand  where  they  were  planted,  but  this  arch  of  the  foot  is  an  adjustable 
arch,  a  yielding  arch,  a  flying  arch,  and  ready  for  movements  innumerable.  The 
human  foot  so  fashioned  as  to  enable  man  to  stand  upright  as  no  other  creature, 
and  leave  the  hand  that  would  otherwise  have  to  help  in  balancing  the  body  free 
for  anything  it  chooses.  The  foot  of  the  camel  fashioned  for  the  sand,  the  foot  of 
the  bird  fashioned  for  the  tree-branch,  the  foot  of  the  hind  fashioned  for  the 
slippery  rock,  the  foot  of  the  lion  fashioned  to  rend  its  prey,  the  foot  of  the 
horse  fashioned  for  the  solid  earth,  but  the  foot  of  man  made  to  cross  the 
desert,  or  climb  the  tree,  or  scale  the  clii?,  or  walk  the  earth,  or  go  anywhere 
he  needs  to  go.  With  that  Divine  triumph  of  anatomy  in  your  possession  where 
do  you  walk  ?  In  what  path  of  righteousness  or  what  path  of  sin  have  you  set  it 
down  ?  Where  have  you  left  the  mark  of  your  footsteps  ?  Amid  the  petrifactions 
in  the  rocks  have  been  found  the  mark  of  the  feet  of  birds  and  beasts  of  thousands 
of  years  ago.  And  God  can  trace  out  all  the  footsteps  of  your  lifetime,  and  those 
you  made  fifty  years  ago  are  as  plain  as  those  made  in  the  last  soft  weather,  all  of 
them  petrified  for  the  Judgment  Day.  Oh,  the  foot !  Give  me  the  autobiography 
of  your  foot  from  the  time  you  stepped  out  of  the  cradle  until  to-day,  and  I  will  tell 
your  exact  character  now  and  what  are  your  prospects  for  the  world  to  come. 
(Ibid.)  The  folly  of  underestimating  our  enemies : — An  easy  accommodation  of 
the  text  and  an  allowable  one,  wiU  permit  us  to  see  several  practical  lessons  here. 
Do  not  under-estimate  the  powers  that  are  opposed  to  you ;  count  their  fingers, 
count  their  toes,  measure  their  stature,  take  their  weight,  calculate  them  to  a 
nicety  as  to  what  they  can  possibly  do.  He  is  a  fool  who  calls  a  giant  a  dwarf. 
The  powers  of  this  world  are  not  to  be  sneered  at.  Your  adversary  the  devil  goeth 
about — like  a  cripple  ?  like  a  weakling  ?  like  a  thing  that  may  be  despised  ?  No — 
like  a  roaring  lion ;  and  no  man  has  ever  sneered  at  a  lion.    (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XXI. 


Yebs.  1-30.  And  Satan  stood  np  ag'ainst  Israel  and  provoked  David  to  nnmber 
Israel. —  Under  a  spell  (Compare  2  Peter  i.  21)  : — I.  All  the  wokld  seems  to  bb 
xn^DER  A  BPBLL  OB  CHARM ;  in  Ward  influences  move  men  as  steam  moves  a  ship. 
There  are  three  spells.     1.  One  is  that  of  parentage.     The  spell  of  a  rirtuoua 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

parentage  influences  its  children's  children,  like  a  good  charm,  for  thousands  of 
generations  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  wickedness  of  a  parent  generally  ceases  to 
influence  his  offspring  at,  as  the  Second  Commandment  says,  "the   third   and 
fourth  generation."     2.  Another  spell  is  the  outward  influence  of  our  surroundings. 
Faithful  parents,  wise  teachers,  inspiring  books,  virtuous   companions,  healthy 
atmosphere,  and  suitable  food  will  train  up  a  child  in  the  way  God  and  men  would 
have  him  go ;  but  many  a  bright  apprentice  lad  has  been  cursed  by  bad  example. 
3.  The  third  spell  is  that  of  inward  influences.     One  of  these  is  said  in  the  Bible  to 
be  the  movement  of  the  devil,  and  the  other  that  of  the  holy  God.     4.  What  can  be 
greater  than  the  spell  which  moves  the  human  appetite  to  intoxicating  drink  ?    To 
obtain  drink  people  will  sometimes  descend  to  the  lowest  degradation  of  mearmess. 
Yes ;  the  evil  spell  of  the  appetite  for  drink  upon  its  victims  is  great  and  over- 
powering.    Drink  may  be  no  temptation  to  you  and  me,  but  many  people  find  it  a 
spell  which  moves  them  as  the  tide  and  wind  sometimes  drives  a  feeble  ship  on  the 
rocks.     And  what  stronger  spell  can  there  be  than  the  inclination  to  war  between 
men,  and  churches,  and  nations  ?    5.  Again,  is  there  a  stronger  spell  than  the 
desire  for  money,  the  greed  of  gold  ?     See  how  men  under  the  spell  of  an  insane 
ambition  for  wealth  sometimes  forget  honour,  and  become  actual  thieves  I    II.  Now, 
let  us  consider  thb  good  spell  over  mankind.     One  of  these  is  the  heaven-born 
spell  of  true  love  ;  it  is  a  most  powerful  influence  for  good.     Thus  love  will  reform 
the  prodigal  life.     There  is  no  stronger  spell  than  true  love ;  God  is  love.     It  is 
by  the  wisdom  of  love  that  He  converts  mankind.     God's  object  in  winning  men 
to  love  Him  is  that  they  may  be  prompted  to  self-denial  in  themselves  and  to  do 
good  works  to  others.     (W.  Birch.)        David^s  sin  and  repentance ; — I.  David's  bin. 
1.  Its  occasion  :  pride  and  vainglory — "  that  I  may  know  it."     2.  Its  unseen  but  real 
source  :  Satan  (1  Sam.  xxiv.  1).     11.  The  Lobd's  displeasure  because  of  his  sin 
{vers.  9-17).     III.  The  atonement  for  his  sin,  made  on  the  site  of  the  Lord's  house 
(chap.  XX.  1-2 ;  1  Kings  6-8) ;  as  the  foundation  of  the  spiritual  house  (2  Cor.  vi. 
16-17 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  4-5  ;  Ephes.  ii.  21-22).     The  temple  therefore  rests  as  it  were  on — 
1.  An  atonement  for  sin  (Rom.  v.  11).      2.  Sin  put  away,  ver.  17  (Dan.  ix.  24). 
3.  Wrath  averted  by  sacrifice  (ver.  xvi.  26-27  ;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  16 ;  Isa.  xxxxii.  21 ; 
1  Pet.  i.  18-19;  ii  24;  Col.  i.  20  ;  ii.  14-15).     (Clergymdn^s  Magazine.)        David's 
self-confidence  : — I.  The    sin    of    David    in    numbering    the    people    was    self- 
confidence,  pride    in    his    own    strength,  and    forgetfulness    of   the    source    of 
all  his   strength,   even  of    God.      It  was  the  greater  sin   in   him  because  he 
had    had    such    marvellous,   such    visible,   witnesses  of    God's  love,   and   care, 
and  guidance.     Past  experience  might  and  should  have  taught  him  that  his 
strength  was  not  in  himself,  but  in  his  God.    II.  The  sins  of  pride,  and  self-confi- 
dence, and  forgetfulness  of  God  are  only  too  common  amongst  ourselves.    When 
men  dwell  securely,  in  full  peace  and  health,  they  grow  careless  in  religion.     God 
is  not  much  present  with  them  ;  they  seem  sufficient  of  themselves  to  keep  them- 
selves and  to  make  themselves  happy.     (R.  D.  B.  Rawnsley.)        David  numberiTig 
Israel : — I.  Man,  through  the  devil,  bringing  tremendous  evils  on  the  wobld. 
"  Satan  stood  up,"  &c.     The  existence  and  influence  of  this  grand  chief  of  evil 
agencies  are  here,  and   everywhere  through  the  Bible,  stated  as  facts  too  well 
authenticated  to  require  argument.     He  tempted  the  progenitor  of  the  race ;  he 
assailed  the  Redeemer  of  the  world ;  and  he  leads  humanity  captive  by  his  will. 
He  now  had  access,  by  means  not  stated,  to  the  mind  of  the  monarch  of  Israel. 
One  might  have  thought  that  age,  which  had  cooled  in  him  the  fires  of  life,  would 
also  have  extinguished  all  the  fires  of  worldly  ambition  ;  but  Satan  can  rekindle 
the  smouldering  embers  of  evil  within  us  :  he  did  so  now.     The  ambitious  feeling 
awakened  was  not  one  of  those  passing  waves  of  emotion  that  rise  from  the  depths 
of  the  soul  and  break  upon  the  shore  and  are  no  more  ;  it  took  the  form  of  an 
obstinate  purpose.  1.  That  Satan's  influence  on  man,  however  successful,  interferes 
not  with  man's  personal  responsibility.     David  was  held  responsible  for  the  crime 
which  the  devil  suggested  to  his  mind.     Great  is  the  might  of  Satan,  and  great  are 
the  influences  which  he  can  bring  to  bear  upon  us ;  albeit  he  has  no  power  to  break 
down  our  wills  by  force,  no  power  to  coerce  us  into  the  wrong.    We  feel  we  are  not 
mere  engines  in  what  we  do,  that  our  actions,  good  or  bad,  are  our  own.     2.  That 
one  man's  sins  may  entail  misery  on  thousands.     It  was  ao  now :  David's  sin 
brought  death  on  thousands  and  agony  into  the  heart  of  the  nation.     3.  That  the 
Eternal  has  agents  ever  at  hand  to  execute  His  judgments.     (Homilist.)        Sin- 
ful counting  : — It  is  easy  for  us  to  rise  in  petulant  indignation  against  David,  and 
to  declare  that  he  ought  not  to  have  counted  his  men  ;  but  let  as  beware,  lest  in  so 


CHIP.  XXI.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  73 

doing  we  provoke  the  spirit  of  David  to  retort  that  it  is  possible  for  as  to  count  our 
money  so  as  to  disclose  the  very  motive  and  intention  which  in  him  we  condemn  as 
vicious.  Yes  there  is  an  atheistical  way  of  counting  money.  A  man  may  go  over 
coin  by  coin  of  his  property,  and  look  at  it  in  a  way  which,  being  interpreted,  signifies, 
this  is  my  strength,  this  is  my  confidence ;  so  long  as  I  have  all  these  coins  it  is 
impossible  that  I  can  get  far  wrong,  or  know  much  trouble,  these  will  be  my  answer 
and  defence  in  the  day  of  accusation  and  adversity!  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The 
impotence  of  nuvibers  : — Palestine  fills  a  large  place  in  history,  but  a  very  insignifi- 
cant one  on  the  map.  David's  enemies  were  on  every  side,  and  they  were  all 
mighty  in  war.  He  had  the  sea  to  his  west  but  did  not  command  the  coast.  That 
(with  its  harbours  of  Tyre  and  Sidon)  belonged  to  the  Phoenicians,  who  overlapped 
him  also  on  the  north.  To  the  east  were  the  barriers  of  Moab  ;  to  the  south  the 
plains,  cities,  and  hosts  of  the  Philistines.  We  do  not  wonder  that  he  wished  to 
know  upon  what  swords  he  had  to  depend.  And  yet  we  are  told  that  it  was  an 
ungodly  thing  for  him  to  number  Israel.  I.  What  made  this  deed  ungodly  ?  The 
answer  is  that  it  was  a  departure  from  the  place  he  held  in  the  kingdom  of  God. 
He  was  losing  the  heart  which  could  make  him  say,  "I  am  small  and  of  no 
reputation,  yet  do  I  not  forget  Thy  commandments."  Such  a  mood,  such  a  ranging 
of  himself  with  neighbouring  powers,  was  a  grievous  departure  from  David's 
position  as  king  of  a  chosen  race.  Think  for  a  moment  how  unique  that  race  was. 
Nothing  is  so  wonderful  in  history  as  the  survival  of  the  Jews.  They  were  set  in 
the  midst  of  mighty  nations  which  far  outnumbered  them,  but  which  all  lost  their 
place  and  power  in  the  world  while  the  Jews  remained.  And  yet  in  the  early  days 
of  this  race  they  were  in  danger  of  being  spoilt,  and  really  degraded,  by  an  attempt 
to  set  themselves  on  the  level  of  the  nations  around.  David's  act  was  a  forgetful - 
ness  of,  a  departure  from,  God's  purpose.  In  seeking  to  realise  his  materin.l 
resources,  and  count  the  swords  which  he  could  draw,  he  so  far  gave  up  that 
unseen  vital  force,  which  distinguished  his  people  the  most,  and  descended  to  the 
meaner  level  on  which  those  around  him  took  their  stand.  II.  What  is  thk 
LESSON  TO  BE  LEARNT  FROM  THIS  INCIDENT  ?  That  in  the  conduct  of  socicty  and  of 
our  lives,  dependence  on  mere  numbers  may  prove  disastrous.  1.  In  national 
economy.  The  consent  and  unanimity  of  a  thousand  fools  does  not  render  the 
folly  of  one  man  harmless ;  it  may  arm  it  with  the  power  to  do  a  thousand-fold 
more  harm.  We  should  be  specially  cautious  in  finding  our  course  by  that  weather- 
cock public  opinion.  2.  On  a  small  as  well  as  a  large  social  scale.  A  prominent 
tendency  to-day  is  to  uphold  the  value  of  company  and  co-operation.  In  many 
respects  this  is  well.  Union  is  strength.  But  along  with  this  may  grow  up  a  new 
tyranny.  In  passing  from  a  selfish  individualism  to  the  recognition  of  a  righteous 
socialism,  we  are  in  danger  of  having  our  personal  convictions  overridden.  In 
presence  of  all  the  associations,  societies,  and  committees  in  the  world,  we  must 
not  forget  that  some  of  the  greatest  things  the  world  owns  and  cherishes,  have 
taken  their  beginning  and  drawn  their  power  from  solitary  source,  some  half- 
hidden  spring  which  the  crowd  would  pass  by  or  trample  down.  The  Bible 
would  point  to  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job,  and  above  all  to  the  "  lonely  cross."  3.  In 
the  religious  life.  No  persuasion  may  be  taken  as  true  because  it  is  accepted  even  by 
all.  There  was  a  time  when  the  whole  world  believed  that  the  sun  moved  round 
the  earth.  The  great  convictions  and  changes  in  history  are  irrespective  of 
numbers.  They  come  like  little  seeds  which  spread  until  they  cover  the  land. 
Faith  in  numbers  is  a  slavery  worse  than  Egyptian,  which  shows  itself  in  the 
discharge  of  our  business  and  the  profession  of  our  faith.  It  is  the  deadly 
hindrance  to  which  David  exposed  himself  and  his  people.  It  is  the  temptation 
which  besets  us  in  the  formation  of  our  opinions  and  the  doing  of  our  work.  We 
are  all  tempted  to  number  the  people.  It  is  of  the  first  importance  that  we  should 
be  true  to  the  voice  of  our  Father  in  heaven,  who  never  leaves  His  children  to  walk 
alone  if  they  will  only  take  His  hand.  {Harry  Jones.)  Census  reflections  : — 
I.  Beferences  to  and  reflections  on  two  official  numberinos  of  the  children  op 
Israel  (Numb,  i.,  xxvi.).  II.  Some  general  reflections  on  our  national 
CENSUS.  1.  The  number  of  inhabitants  of  England  and  Wales  at  this 
moment  is  definite.  2.  The  number  of  the  living  inhabitants  at  this  moment  on 
the  earth  is  definite.  3.  The  number  of  individuals  who  compose  the  whole  human 
race  is  definite.  4.  The  number  of  the  elect,  or  of  those  who  shall  ultimately  be 
saved  is  definite.  Application  :  I  would  address — 1.  Those  who  were  numbered  at 
the  last  census.  2.  I  would  call  to  your  remembrance  those  who  have  appeared 
and  again  disappeared  during  this  interval.    3.  The  object  of  numbering  suggest  •.-, 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

consolation.  "The  very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered,"  this  is  one  of  the 
sweetest  pledges  of  our  heavenly  Father's  personal  care  over  us.  4.  It  also  suggests 
warning.  "  Lord,  let  me  know  mine  end  and  the  number  of  my  days."  For  what 
purpose?  "That  I  may  know  how  frail  I  am."  {W.  Bramley  Moore,  M.A.) 
Man,  through  God,  arresting  the  great  evils  that  have  come  upon  the  world  : — 1.  Pro- 
found contrition  for  sin.  "  And  David  said  unto  God,  I  have  sinned  greatly, 
because  I  have  done  this  thing ;  but  now,  I  beseech  Thee,  do  away  with  the  iniquity 
of  Thy  servant,  for  I  have  done  very  foolishly."  In  Samuel  it  is  said,  "  David's 
heart  smote  him."  His  conscience  was  aroused  to  a  sense  of  his  crime  and  became 
his  chastiser.  It  allowed  him  to  make  no  excuse  ;  it  prevented  him  from  charging 
the  crime  even  on  the  devil  who  tempted  him.  "  I  have  sinned  greatly,"  "  I  have 
done  this  thing,"  "Is  it  not  I  that  commanded  the  people  to  be  numbered?" 
"  Even  I  it  is  that  have  sinned  and  done  evil  indeed."  Conscience,  the  deepest 
power  within  us,  ever  vindicates  our  personality,  our  freedom,  our  responsibility. 
An  awakened  conscience  detaches  us  from  the  universe,  from  all,  and  places  us  as 
guilty  personalities  in  conscious  contact  with  Him  who  is  the  Eternal  Judge  of 
right  and  wrong.  The  first  step  to  true  prayer  is  this.  2.  Unbounded  trust  in  God. 
When  Jehovah,  through  Gad,  David's  seer,  proposed  to  the  monarch  the  choice  of 
one  of  three  judgments — famine,  war,  or  pestilence — what  was  David's  reply?  "  I 
am  in  a  great  strait :  let  me  fall  into  the  hand  of  the  Lord  ;  for  very  great  are  His 
mercies  :  but  let  me  not  fall  into  the  hand  of  man,"  His  sin  had  consisted  in  some 
measure  in  placing  trust  in  men  ;  why  else  did  he  require  a  census  ?  Was  it  not 
because  he  thought  that  numbers  were  power  for  defence  and  conquest?  That 
confidence  is  gone  now,  and  God  appears  to  him  as  the  only  object  of  trust. 
Wonderful  trust  is  this.  When  all  things  go  well  and  fortune  smiles,  when  provi- 
dence showers  its  blessings  upon  our  path,  skirting  our  way  with  verdure  and 
flowers,  we  may  feel  some  trust  in  Him;  but  when  all  is  dreary,  dark,  and  tem- 
pestuous, when  we  see,  as  David  saw,  in  the  black  heavens  the  destroying  angel 
with  a  sword  drawn  in  his  hands  about  to  smite  us,  then  to  trust  Him  is  to  have  a 
trust  of  the  highest  sort.  3.  An  atoning  self-sacrificing  benevolence.  (1)  With  a 
generosity  rejoicing  in  sacrifice,  he  rears  an  altar.  He  was  divinely  commanded 
to  rear  an  altar  unto  the  Lord  on  the  threshing-floor  of  Oman  the  Jebusite. 
{2)  With  a  soul  benevolently  oblivious  of  all  personal  interest  he  pleads  with 
heaven.  1.  The  solemnity  of  man's  existence  on  this  earth.  Man  here  is  the 
subject  and  organ  of  spiritual  and  invisible  agents.  The  same  man,  as  in  the  case 
of  David,  might  be  the  organ  of  the  devil  and  the  organ  of  God.  Under  the 
influence  of  the  devil,  David  became  proud  and  rebellious,  incurring  the  displeasure 
of  his  Maker  and  bringing  ruin  on  his  country ;  under  the  influence  of  God,  he 
became  profoundly  contrite,  trustful,  and  most  benevolently  prayerful ;  arresting 
the  progress  of  evil  and  securing  again  for  his  country  the  mercy  of  Heaven,  How 
terribly  solemn  is  our  life !  2.  The  ruinous  and  restorative  dispositions  in  man. 
Selfish  pride  and  self-sacrificing  prayerfulness  are  the  two  grand  dispositions  which 
David  displays  in  this  portion  of  his  history ;  the  former  was  at  once  the  product 
and  instrument  of  the  devil,  bringing  ruin  upon  his  country ;  the  latter  was  the 
product  and  instrument  of  God,  counteracting  the  evils.     {Homilist.) 

Vers.  11-15,  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  choose  thee. — The  awful  judgmenti  : — 
I.  Jddgmentb  entailed  bt  one  man's  sin.  II.  Judgments  easily  prepabed  fob 
EXECUTION.  HI.  Judgments  bent  according  to  human  preference.  IV.  Judg- 
ments ARRESTED  BT  EARNEST  PRAYER.  {J,  WolfeTulale.)  David'S  choice  : — As  THE 
result    of    an    awakened    CONSCIENCE.       11.    As    THE    REVELATION    OF    A    PRINCIPLE  OF 

Christian  life.  He  left  himself  confidently  with  God.  III.  As  a  picture  of 
FUTURE  DOOM  TO  ALL.  {Ibid.)  Davld's  choice  of  chastisements  :  David's  pre- 
ference justified  when  we  consider — 1.  The  harsh  judgments  which  men  pronounce 
on  each  other,  2.  The  harsh  treatment  of  the  guilty  who  are  in  men's  power, 
3.  The  absence  of  sympathetic  kindness  in  human  warfare.  4.  That  when  God 
punishes  He  does  so  in  righteousness.  5.  That  in  the  treatment  of  the  guilty  God 
always  shows  mercy.  Lessons:  1, Submission  to  God,  2.  Hopeful  trust.  (Ibid.) 
God  an  emblem  of  the  true  minister : — Let  us  look  at  God  as  representing  every  true 
minister  of  Jesus  Christ.  I.  God's  message  was  Divine,  The  gospel  is  a  message 
from  God.  This  is  attested--!.  By  the  facts  of  history.  2.  By  its  congruity  with 
the  spiritual  constitution  of  men.  3.  By  the  experience  of  thousands  of  every  age 
who  have  felt  it  to  be  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation.  II.  God's  message  was  an 
appeal  to  choice.     "  Advise  thyself."    Deliberate,  choose  for  thyself.    The  gospel 


CHAP.  XXI.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  75 

message  is  submitted  to  your  choice.  1.  You  can  accept  it.  2.  You  can  reject  it. 
III.  God's  message  was  to  be  accounted  fob.  1.  He  was  responsible  for  its  delivery. 
So  with  every  gospel  minister,  and  woe  be  to  him  if  he  declares  not  the  whole 
counsel  of  God.  2.  David  was  responsible  for  its  results.  So  are  also  the  hearers 
of   the   gospel.      (Homilist.)         Religious  lessons   of  pestilence : — I.    PESTtLENCES 

ARE  STKIKINO  WITNESSES  TO  THE  MAJESTY  OF  God's  LAW.  II.  PESTILENCES  ABE 
STEIKING   ILLUSTEATIONS    OP    THE    MOBAL    CONNECTION    BETWEEN    MEN.       EpidcmicS  TUIl 

rapidly  from  one  to  another.  No  man  can  live  alone  to  himself.  Every  one  who 
comes  near  us  is  the  better  or  the  worse  for  our  influence  upon  them.  III.  Pesti- 
lences MAT  BE  the  agency  FOB  EXECUTING  DiviNE  JUDGMENTS.  Nowadays  men 
hesitate  to  believe  that  there  can  be  any  connection  between  a  nation's  sin 
and  a  nation's  suffering.  With  eye  fixed  upon  the  natural  and  physical  laws 
and  conditions  out  of  which  disease  comes,  men  fail  to  see  Him  who  overrules 
all  physical  conditions,  and  controls  all  laws.  "What,  then,  is  the  attitude  which 
Christians  should  take  in  relation  to  epidemic  disease  ?  (1)  We  ought  to  cherish 
a  reverent  awe  of  God,  the  spirit  that  is  becoming  in  times  of  storm  and  tempest, 
awe  of  Him  who  is  "  Lord  of  the  great  things."  (2)  We  should  seek  by  prayer, 
and  in  the  spirit  of  penitence,  for  the  removal  of  the  chastening  hand.  (3)  We 
should  ask  for  grace  that  we  may  be  brave,  brotherly,  and  self-denying,  should 
disease  come  actually  into  our  spheres.  (4)  We  should,  with  calm  seriousness, 
inquire  whether  we  are  prepared  to  face  the  risks  of  disease,  prepared  to  die,  prepared 
to  "meet  our  God."  {R.  Tuck,  B. A.)  Alternative  judgments : — The  whole  story 
is  mysterious.  We  feel  at  each  step  that  much  is  kept  back  from  us.  1.  The  fault 
of  the  king  is  mysterious.  It  is  not  enough  to  say  that  there  was  pride  and  vain- 
glory in  his  heart.  If  this  were  all,  it  might  have  made  the  act  sinful  in  the  sight 
of  God,  but  it  would  not  account  for  the  view  taken  of  the  act  either  by  the  minister 
or  by  the  historian.  There  are  many  things  in  Scripture,  as  there  are  many  things 
in  life,  which  we  must  leave  in  the  hands  of  God.  2.  The  mode  of  his  punishment 
is  full  of  mystery.  A  choice  of  punishments  is  offered  him  ;  but  the  punishments 
are  all  national.  "  Bulers  sin  and  peoples  suffer  "  has  passed  into  a  proverb. 
Scripture  and  Providence  are  at  one  in  this  matter.  On  a  king's  edict  of  passion 
or  foolishness  may  hang  a  nation's  misery  or  a  nation's  dishonour.  A  king's 
caprice  or  a  king's  miscalculation  may  hand  over  a  nation  to  a  bloody  and  ruinous 
war  of  which  it  may  be  the  occupation  of  a  century  to  bear  or  repair  the  consequences. 

3.  The  peculiarity  of  David's  penalty  is  the  choice  offered  him.  The  day  of  Divine 
alternatives  is  not  ended.  Every  example  of  a  sin  brought  face  to  face  with  its 
suffering  presents  an  aspect  of  choice  as  well  as  of  compulsion.  The  mere 
question  of  confession  or  denial,  with  the  consequences  of  either,  is  such  an  alter- 
native in  the  case  of  individual  wrongdoing.  The  adoption  of  this  expedient 
rather  than  that,  in  the  way  of  avoidance  or  mitigation  of  consequences,  is  an 
alternative.  The  way  of  bearing  punishment,  the  language  of  regret  or  of  hardness, 
the  tone  of  submission  or  of  defiance,  most  of  all  the  spirit  of  repentance  or  of 
impenitence,  is  an  alternative  for  the  individual  transgressor.  The  question  of 
stopping  or  continuing  a  hopeless  struggle,  of  accepting  a  defeat,  of  submitting  to 
abduction,  of  "  desiring  conditions  of  peace,"  or  on  the  contrary,  of  persisting  in 
warfare  for  the  chance  of  a  turn  of  fortune — the  question  of  renewing  a  struggle, 
years  or  generations  afterwards,  on  the  plea  of  a  hereditary  title  or  a  popular 
invitation — is  an  alternative,  real  or  responsible,  on  the  stage  of  kings  and  nations. 

4.  How  shall  we  read  the  words,  "Let  me  now  fall  into  the  hand  of  the  Lord"? 
Is  it  a  choice  made  ?  or  is  it  a  choice  referred  back  to  the  offerer  ?  Is  it,  I  choose 
pestilence  ?  or  is  it,  Let  God  choose  ?  "  So  the  Lord  sent  the  pestilence  upon 
Israel "  indicates  perhaps  on  the  part  of  our  translators  a  preference  of  the 
former.  I  choose  that  punishment  which  has  no  human  inflicter.  But,  whatever 
the  application,  the  principle  stands  steadfast.  In  everything  let  me  be  in  God's 
hands.  Anything  which  God  inflicts  is  preferable  to  any  suffering  which  comes 
through  man.  But  if  this  be  the  force  of  David's  words  considered  as  a  choice, 
there  is  at  least  an  equal  interest  in  them  regarded  as  a  refusal  to  choose.  Yes, 
let  us  love  to  live  these  lives  absolutely  under  God's  direction.  War,  famine, 
pestilence — if  He  sees  any  one  necessary,  leave  Him  to  choose.  Let  as  not  fall  into 
the  hands  of  man — our  own,  or  any  other's.  We  are  ill  judges — worst  of  all  for 
ourselves.  Our  mercies  to  ourselves  are  not  God's  mercies.  We  are  self-sparera 
as  well  as  self-excusers.  If  we  had  our  choice,  no  nerve  would  ever  throb,  no  hair 
would  ever  turn  grey.  We  should  grow  up,  we  should  go  to  the  grave,  we  should 
wake  from  the  dust  of  the  earth  spoUt  children — with  all  the  irregularities,  and  all 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

the  selfishness,  and  all  the  unhappiness,  which  cling  to  and  cluster  round  that 
name.     What  are  we  to  one  another?     How  does  selfishness  warp  our  judgments — 
selfish  love  first,  then  selfish  fear.     {Dean  Vaughan.)         The  choice  of  troubles: 
— Who  is  there  that  has  not  wished  that  God  would  give  him  the  choice  of  the 
evils  which  he  had  to  suffer;  and  who  is  there  that  would  not  have  been  seriously 
embarrassed  if  that  wish  had  been  fulfilled  ?     But,  it  may  be  said,  the  text  does  not 
support  that  view.     Does  it  not  ?     1.  David  was  very  much  troubled  when  the  time 
for  decision  came  :  he  was  "  in  a  great  strait."     2.  His  choice  was  more  devout  in 
form  than  in  substance ;  for,  had  he  chosen  defeat  in  war,  he  would  still  have  been 
"  in  the  hand  of  God."     3.  It  is  highly  probable  that,  after  the  choice  was  made, 
David  was  doubtful  of  its  wisdom.     We  may  consider — I.  The  elicment  of  choice 
IN  THE  EVILS  OF  LIFE. — Two  things  are  open  to  us  here.     1.  One  relates  to  the 
measure  of  trouble  we  experience.     By  healthy  habits,  by  obedience  to  the  laws  of 
our  spiritual  and  our  physical  nature,  by  keeping  within  the  lines  of  wisdom  and 
virtue,  by  commending  ourselves  to  the  approval  of  man  and  also  of  God,  we  may 
materially  reduce  the  measure  of  evil  which  otherwise  we  should  endure.     2.  The 
other  relates  to  the  kind  of  trouble  we  are  called  to  face.     It  is  often  left  to  our 
choice  to  decide  whether  we  will  meet  the  dangers,  the  difficulties,  the  temptations, 
the  trials  of  our  condition  in  life,  or  those  of  the  opposite  condition — whether  those 
of  ignorance  or  of  learning,  of  loneliness  or  of  society,  of  obscurity  or  of  conspicuous- 
ness  and  responsibility.     It  may  be  timidity  or  cowardice  that  inclines  us  to  the 
one,  and  high-minded  courage  that  incites  us  to  the  other ;  or  it  may  be  modesty 
and  wisdom  that  urge  us  to  the  one,  and  nothing  better  than  an  unhallowed 
ambition,  or  even  an  exaggerated  sense  of  importance,  that  allures  to  the  other.     It 
behoves  us,  as  we  stand  in  front  of  the  future,  with  our  path  in  life  before  us,  very 
earnestly  to  seek  the  guidance  of  God,  that  we  may  choose  that  course,  the  perils 
of  which  we  may  face  with  hope,  the  evils  of  which  we  shall  endure  with  calmness 
and  fortitude.     II.  The  working  of  the  Divine  hand  in  them.     The  measure  and 
the  nature  of  our  troubles  is  uncertain.     That  they  will  come  is  as  certain  as  any- 
thing can  be.    No  "  good  fortune,"  no  sagacity,  no  caution  will  exclude  them  from 
the  experience  of  life.     1,  Our  preference  in  regard  to  their  form.     Like  David,  we 
prefer  to  feel  ourselves  in  the  hand  of  God  rather  than  in  the  hand  of  men.     We 
feel  that  our  burden  is  heavier  when  it  is  due  to  human  carelessness,  and  heavier  stiU 
when  due  to  human  heartlessness  and  malignity.      The  severest  aggravation  of 
trouble  is  where  the  evil  that  has  been  wrought  is  the  work  of  some  near  relative  or 
some  familiar  friend,  or  some  old  colleague  from  whom  we  had  a  right  to  expect 
quite  opposite  treatment  (see  Psa.  Iv.  12-14).    We  feel  that  if  we  are  to  have 
suffering  or  sorrow   we  should  much  prefer  the  unaccountable  sickness,  or  the 
unavoidable  loss,  or  the  inevitable  bereavement  which  we  can  refer  at  once  to  the 
ordinary  will  of  God.     2.  The  truth  we  recognise  when  we  consider  it.    As  we 
think  on  this  subject  we  realise  that  all  trouble  is  ultimately  of  God.     (1)  Much  of 
it  is  penal,  the  just  consequence  of  ill-doing,  the  outcome  of  those  laws   which 
originate  in  Divine  holiness.     (2)  Much  of  it  is  disciplinary ;  it  is  the  pruning,  the 
refining  process  of  Him  who  is  seeking  spiritual  fruit ;  it  is  the  ordering  of  the  wise 
and  faithful  Father  of  spirits  (Heb.  xii.  1-12).     (3)  All  of  it  is  permissive.     If  the 
sparrow  does  not  fall  without  the  Divine  permission,  how  much  less  does  the 
obedient  son  or  daughter  suffer  grief  or  pass  through  troublesome  times  or  go  down 
to  death  without  the  sanction  of  the  present  and  watchful  Lord.     So  that,  whatever 
comes  and  whencesoever  it  comes,  we  are  free  to  think  and  say,  "  Thy  will  be  done. 
Lord  "  ;  the  trial  never  comes  to  us  when  we  are  not  "  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord." 
3.  The  attitude  we  should  assume  toward  it.    Even  when  we  have  to  reproach  our- 
selves, or  even  when  we  are  obliged  to  condemn  our  neighbours  or  our  ancestors  as 
the  immediate  authors  of  our  trouble,  we  may  and  we  should  accept  it  as  that 
which  comes  in  the  providence  of  God.     (1)  We  should  bow  submissively  to  His 
will  who  (to  say  the  least)  suffers  us  to  be  tried  as  we  are.     (2)  We  should  seek 
from    Him    the    sustaining    strength    which    will    empower    us    to     bear    all 
things     unrepiningly    and     even     cheerfully.      (3)   We    should    have    an    open 
mind     to     perceive,    and     an    open    heart    to    welcome    the    practical    lessons 
which  our  heavenly  Father  is  desiring  to  teach  us.     (William  Clarkson,  B.A.) 
Let  me  fall  now  into  the  hand  of  the  Lord. — Falling  into  the  hand  of  the  Lord  : — 
The  doctrine  is,  that  as  sinners,  as  sinners  before  God,  and  as  sinners  towards  each 
other,  our  highest  hope  is  not  in  the  incomplete  and  perverted  mercy  of  men,  but  in 
the  infinite  mercy  which  is  founded  upon  the  infinite  righteousness  of  God.     We 
may  perhaps  hmp  ourselTes  to  a  clearer  understanding  of  this  doctrine  by  first 


CHAP.  XXI.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  77 

considering  that  it  is  better  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  highest  class  of  men  than 
into  the  hands  of  the  lowest.  1.  Take  a  legal  case.  In  the  first  instance  it  maj  be 
brought  before  the  local  magistracy ;  but  very  possibly  the  result  may  be  considered 
unsatisfactory  by  one  party  or  the  other,  hence  the  case  may  be  moved  to  the  court 
above  ;  there  again  dissatisfaction  may  be  the  result,  and  an  appeal  may  be  carried 
to  the  highest  court  in  the  land.  The  result  even  then  may  not  be  satisfactory ; 
still  by  so  much  as  the  case  has  been  carried  to  the  highest  tribunal  and  pronounced 
upon  by  the  highest  wisdom,  there  is  strong  ground  to  rest  upon.  Not  only  so,  but 
there  is  a  point  beyond  this  ;  for  by  so  much  as  a  man  wishes  that  there  were  yet 
another  superior  court  to  which  an  appeal  might  be  made  does  he  show  how  deeply 
graven  upon  the  heart  is  the  law  that  it  is  better  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the 
highest  than  into  the  hands  of  the  lowest;  that  it  is  better  to  fall  into  the  hands  of 
God  than  into  the  hands  of  men.  2.  What  is  true  in  the  law  is  equally  true  in  all 
criticism.  3.  Take  the  case  of  the  young  speaker.  It  will  be  for  the  advantage  of 
Buch  a  man  to  be  judged  by  the  greatest  orators  which  the  country  can  supply.  (J. 
Parker,  D.D.)  }Vhy  is  it  better  that  the  sinner  should  fall  into  the  harid  of  God 
rather  than  into  the  hands  of  men  ? — Good  use  might  be  made  of  the  many  pleasing 
considerations  which  arise  in  connection  with  God's  wisdom,  God's  righteousness, 
and  God's  perfect  knowledge  of  facts ;  but  we  shall  include  all  these  in  a  higher 
answer,  viz.,  because  in  His  whole  treatment  of  human  sin  God  is  constantly  seek- 
ing not  the  destruction,  but  the  salvation  of  the  sinner.  (Ibid.)  David  falling 
into  the  hand  of  God : — We  shall  look  at  David's  exclamation  here  in  three  aspects. 

I.    As    INDICATING   WHAT   IS  A   NATURAL    TENDENCY   IN    AIL    SOULS.      There   is    a   StlOUg 

propensity  in  all  men  to  "  fall  into  the  hand  "  of  others,  giving  up  their  judgment, 
freedom,  individuality  to  others.  This  shows  itself  in  the  exercise  of  unbounded 
trust.  Man  is  essentially  dependent.  Hence  his  existence  is  one  of  trust  in  others. 
This  trust  is  the  very  base  and  bond  of  social  life.  Trusting  others  within  certain 
limits  is  right  and  necessary,  but  when  the  principle  carries  us  to  the  entire  sub- 
jection of  ourselves  to  our  fellow-men,  we  have  gone  wrongly  and  ruinously.  II.  As 
EEVEALiNG  THE  TRUE  SPIRIT  OF  LIFE.  David's  tendency  to  trust  took  the  right 
direction.  1.  His  preference  was  right.  (1)  God  is  our  Owner.  (2)  God  is  all- 
powerful  in  His  character.  There  is  everything  in  His  character  to  command  our 
unbounded  trust,  our  entire  surrender.  2.  This  preference  is  expedient.  It  is  far 
better  to  fall  into  the  hand  of  God  than  man.  (1)  Unbounded  trust  in  man  must 
destroy  your  freedom.  Such  trust  in  God  secures  it.  (2)  Unbounded  trust  in  man 
pollutes  and  degrades  the  character.  Such  trust  in  God  purifies  and  elevates  it. 
He  whom  we  most  trust  exerts  the  most  influence  on  our  characters.  (3)  Unbounded 
trust  in  man  must  issue  in  the  utmost  disappointment  and  misery.  Such  trust  in 
God  leads  to  the  highest  blessedness.  III.  As  foeeshadowinq  the  inetitablk 
DOOM  OF  ALL,  In  One  of  two  ways  every  man  must  fall  into  the  hand  of  God. 
1.  Voluntarily,bythe  influence  of  His  grace.  2.  Compulsorily,  by  the  force  of  justice. 
{Homilist.)         The  hand  of  God  and  the  hands  of  men  : — I.  David's  strait.    II.  The 

GROUNDS  OF  HIS  CHOICE.      HI.    DiVINE  PUNISHMENT  AND  HUMAN  PUNISHMENT.      Human 

punishment  is  necessarily  to  a  great  extent  for  self -protection,  and  therefore 
selfish.  When  the  laws  of  society  punish  the  crime  of  murder  or  of  theft,  it  is 
primarily  with  the  object  of  preventing  the  committal  of  more  murders  and  more 
thefts.  God's  laws  have  penalties  attached  to  them,  but  when  God  punishes  He 
seeks  not  the  destruction  of  the  sinner,  but  his  healing  and  reformation.  While 
man's  punishments  are  in  principle  revengeful,  or  at  best  for  the  defence  of  society, 
God's  punishments  are  remedial  and  reformatory  ;  and  therefore  it  is  better  to  fall 
into  the  hand  of  God  than  into  the  hands  of  men.  Application  :  1.  God  in  human 
redemption.  2.  Human  legislation  directed  to  the  repression  of  wrong  incomplete, 
because  it  can  only  reach  the  outward  action.  God's  laws  deal  with  motives,  and 
are  therefore  complete  and  perfect  (1  Sam.  xvi.  7  ;  Heb.  iv.  12).  {Literary  Church- 
man.) Man's  inhumanity  : — There  is  more  mercy  in  the  fang  of  a  rattlesnake  and 
in  the  tooth  of  a  wolf  than  in  the  heart  of  men  and  women  for  a  poor  soul  who 
has  gone  astray ;  and  if  she  try  to  swim  ashore  and  finally  come  up  to  the  rock  and 
get  the  tips  of  her  fingers  on  the  rock  and  try  to  climb  up,  then  you  will  come  out 
and  with  your  hard  heels  smash  the  tips  of  her  fingers  until  she  falls  off.  (H.  W. 
Beecher.) 

Ver.  15.  And  Ood  sent  an  angel  unto  Jerusalem  to  destroy  It. — The  destroying 
angel : — Lessons :  I.  That  idleness  is  the  parent  of  sin.  It  was  when  David  was 
living  as  king  in  ease  at  Jerusalem  that  he  was  tempted  of  Satan.    U.  That  onb  ov 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

THE  BEST  REMEDIES  FOR  WOE  18  WORK.  The  angel  of  destruction  stayed  his  steps  at 
the  threshing-floor  of  Oman,  even  as  the  angel  of  salvation  visited  Gideon  as  he  was 
threshing  wheat.  III.  That  prayer,  even  at  the  eleventh  hour,  may  be  by  God's 
GRACE  efficacious.  When  the  sword  was  actually  drawn  in  the  hand  of  the 
destroyer  it  was  kept  from  further  execution  when  David  and  the  elders  of  Israel, 
who  were  clothed  in  sackcloth,  fell  upon  their  faces.     IV.  That  our  gifts  to  God, 

AS  TO  MEN,  should  BE  BESTOWED  IN  A  GENEROUS  SPIRIT.  V.  ThAT  WE  SHOULD  NOT 
OFFER  TO  God  WHAT  COSTS  US  NOTHING.  VI.  ThAT  GoD  SANCTIFIES  EFFORTS,  HOWEVER 
WEAK  THEY  MAT  BE,  IF  THEY  BE  SINCERELY  MADE  ;  ACCEPTS  GIFTS,  HOWEVER  HUMBLE 
THEY  MAY  BE,  IF  BESTOWED  FROM  THE  HEART,  VII.  ThAT  THE  BEST  PROOF  THAT  WB 
CAN  HAVE  THAT  OUR  OFFERING  IS  ACCEPTED  BY  GOD  IS  NOT  TH.^T  WE  EXPERIENCE  A 
BENSE  OF  INFLATED  IMPORTANCE  OR  SELF-  SATISFACTION,  BUT  THAT  WE  ARE  FILLED 
WITH  AN  ABIDING  SENSE  OF  PEACE.  VIII.  ThAT  THOUGH  WE  MAY  WORSHIP  GoD  ANY- 
WHERE     AND    EVERYWHERE,    YET    THAT    IN    HiS    DULY    CONSECRATED     SANCTUARY,    IT    IB 

FITTEST  TO  DO  HiM  REVERENCE.  {R.  Youug,  M.A.]  Man,  through  the  devil,  bring- 
ing tremendous  evils  on  the  world  : — That  men  suffer  for  the  sins  of  others  is  a  fact 
written  in  every  page  of  history,  obvious  in  every  circle  of  life,  and  recognised  as  a 
principle  in  the  government  of  God.  "  The  fathers  eat  sour  grapes,  and  the 
children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge."  That  this  principle  is  both  just  and  beneficent, 
consider — 1.  That  no  man  is  made  to  suffer  more  than  he  deserves  on  account  of  his 
own  personal  sins.  2.  The  men  of  Israel  now  for  their  own  sins  deserved  this 
stroke  of  justice.  3.  That  the  evil  which  descends  to  us  from  others  is  not  to  be 
compared  to  that  which  we  produce  ourselves.  4.  The  sufferings  that  come  to  us 
from  others  can  give  us  no  remorse,  which  is  the  very  sting  of  the  judgment — our 
own  sins  do  this.  6.  That  the  knowledge  that  we  can  injure  society  by  our 
own  conduct  has  a  strong  tendency  to  restrain  vice  and  stimulate  virtue. 
(Homilist.)  David  and  Israel : — I.  The  progressive  course  of  sin.  1.  Tempta- 
tion. Satan  the  black  fountain  of  all  transgression.  2.  Transgression  (ver.  2).  In 
face  of  warning  (ver.  3).  Its  desperate  folly  seen  by  others  (ver.  6).  The  deadening, 
hardening  power  of  any  lust.  3.  Punishment  (vers.  10-12).  As  soon  will  the  magnet 
escape  the  influence  of  the  pole,  the  sea  the  influence  of  the  moon,  an  atom  the  bind- 
ing force  of  gravitation,  as  the  sinner  escape  punishment.     "  Be  sure  your  sin,"  &c. 

II.  The  progressive  course  of  reconciliation  with  God.  1.  The  messenger,  God's 
afflictive  stroke  (ver.  7).  The  prophet.  Gad  (ver.  9).  Every  person  or  circumstance 
that  reproves  is  God's  messenger.  2.  Conviction  (ver.  8).  The  true  convict  always 
confesses,  never  excuses.  Not  only  owns  the  sin,  but  acknowledges  its  greatness. 
3.  Penitence    (ver.  16).     4.  Acceptance.     6.  Grateful    acknowledgment  (ver.  24). 

III.  Underlying  truths.  1.  Though  man  be  tempted,  sin  is  his  own  act.  2.  Our 
sins  affect  others.  How  many  widows  and  orphans  1  3.  Though  sin  be  pardoned,  it 
leaves  terrible  scars  behind.  In  David's  memory.  Gaps  in  the  families  and  homes 
of  the  people.  Avoidance  of  sin  is  infinitely  better  than  pardon.  Christ  the  only 
sin-healer.  (R.  Berry.)  The  sin  of  one  may  i7ivolve  the  suffering  of  others: — 
When  the  father  of  the  house  goes  down  in  character  he  carries  down  with  him,  to 
a  considerable  extent,  the  character  of  his  innocent  children.  The  bad  man  is  laying 
up  a  bad  fortune  for  those  whom  he  has  brought  into  the  world  ;  long  years  after- 
wards they  may  be  told  how  bad  a  man  their  father  was,  and  because  of  his  iniquity 
they  may  be  made  to  suffer  loss  and  pain.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Suffering  through 
others  : — Our  sin  affects  others  as  well  as  ourselves.  A  man  whose  garden  was 
injured  by  a  troublesome  weed  said  it  was  due  to  a  neighbour's  neglect.  He  had 
let  his  garden  run  wild,  and  when  the  seeds  of  this  particular  weed  were  ripe,  the 
wind  blew  them  over  the  fence.  So  one  sin  may  make  many  innocent  people 
soffer. 

Vers.  22-24.  Then  David  said  to  Oman. — The  cost  and  telf-tacrifice  of  religion  : 
— Contemplate  this  subject — I.  In  reference  to  the  spiritual  expansion  of  thb 
intellectual  powers.  We  may  be  Christians  without  much  knowledge,  but  our 
honour,  glory,  and  felicity  to  abound  in  knowledge — 1.  Of  God.  2.  Of  Christ. 
3.  Of  theology  generally.    The  cost  must  be  paid  in  the  attainment.     II.  Apply 

THB    subject    to    THE    SPIBITUAL     CULTIVATION     OF     THE     MORAL     NATURE.       The     SOOl 

before  conversion  like  a  barren  heath  or  desert.  It  must  be  cultivated.  Much 
labour  needful.     Evil  habits  to  be  abandoned.    Holy  habits  to  be  formed.    IH.  To 

THE  INFLUENCE  OF  SELF-DENIAL  IN  ADORNING  THE  CHRISTIAN    PROFESSION.       Self-denial 

not  merely  the  abandonment  of  sin.  It  involves  the  surrendering  even  of  what 
might  be  lawfully  retained.    Our  will  mast  be  sacrificed,  that  God's  may  be  done. 


CHAP.  XXI.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  79 

rV.    To  THE  IMPORTANCE  OF    USEFULNESS    IN    THE    CAUSE    OF    THE    LoKD   JeSUS    ChEIST. 

1.  The  heart  must  be  given  to  Christ.  2.  Then  life,  talents,  influence,  time, 
wealth.  (1)  This  cost  must  be  paid  in  the  right  spirit.  (2)  This  cost  is  not  equal 
to  the  demands  of  sin.  3.  To  pay  this  cost  grace  is  both  necessary  and  provided. 
(J,  Burns,  D.D.)  A  cheap  religion  no  religion  at  all: — This  incident  teaches 
us — I.  That  tbue  religion  is  spirituality  in  contradistinction  to  formalism. 
The  spirit  of  love  which  now  inspired  David  was  something  distinct  from  all 
outward  service,  something  that  could  not  be  expressed  by  the  most  valuable  of 
offerings  that  cost  him  nothing.  Personal  sacrifice  was  required.  "  The  sacrifices 
of  God  are  a  broken  spirit."  "  Circumcision  or  uncircumcision  availeth  nothing." 
n.  That  true  religion  is  enthusiasm  in  contradistinction  to  prudence.  David 
rejected  the  offer  of  Oman.  He  repudiated  the  securing  of  the  higher  interests  of 
the  soul  without  any  detraction  from  secular  resources.  It  is  ever  so  where  love 
reigns— all  personal  interests  are  in  the  background;  God  is  the  one  all-com- 
manding, all-absorbing  object  of  thought.  III.  That  true  religion  is  nobilitt 
in  contradistinction  to  meanness.  IV.  That  true  religion  is  progress  in 
CONTRADISTINCTION  TO  STATioNARiNESS.  The  man  inspired  with  this  spirit  would 
never  rest  with  present  attainments.  1.  There  will  be  a  delight  in  studying  truth. 
The  creed  of  a  true  religious  man  has  cost  him  something.  2.  There  will  be  a 
delight  in  doing  all  that  is  commanded.  V.  That  true  religion  is  reality  in 
CONTRADISTINCTION  TO  FALSENESS.  That  the  Spirit  of  David  is  the  only  true  spirit 
of  religion  will  appear  if  you  consider — 1.  What  God  is.  2.  Wiiat  He  has  done 
for  us.  3.  That  all  we  have  and  are  are  His.  {Homilist.)  Sin  and  mercy  at 
grounds  of  gratitude : — Observe  the  laudable  strife  of  two  noble  minds.  I.  Obnan's 
CONDUCT.  Oman,  a  Jebusite,  and  so  by  birth  a  heathen,  but  by  choice  a  proselyte 
(see  his  prayer,  2  Sam.  xxiv.  23).  A  pledge  of  the  Gentiles  coming  in:  the  very 
site  of  the  temple  belonged  to  one.  Thankful  for  his  privileges,  and  therefore 
liberal  in  his  gifts.    II.  David's  conduct.     1.  His  sense  of  sin  (1  Tim.  i.  12-15). 

2.  His  sense  of  mercy.  God's  direction  about  the  altar  was  an  indication  of 
forgiveness.  David  looked  beyond  this  to  the  Redeemer.  All  he  had  was  too 
little  to  express  his  gratitude.  "  Much  forgiven,  loving  much."  If  religion  be 
real  it  will  be  self-denying.  Does  your  religion  cost  you  anything  ?  Has  it  led 
you  to  give  up  your  own  will ;  to  sacrifice  your  own  inclinations  ?  to  crucily  the 
flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts  ?  What  do  you  give  to  God  of  your  time,  your 
influence,  your  means?  {W.  Pakenham  Walsh,  D.D.)  The  threshing-floor  of 
Oman: — I.  That  externally  there  is  nothing  in  any  place  why  God  should 
THERE  meet  WITH  MEN.  Why  was  the  thvcshing-floor  of  Oman  to  be  the  meeting- 
place  of  David  with  his  God,  and  the  spot  where  prayer  was  to  be  heard? 
1.  Certainly  it  was  a  very  simple,  unadorned  place.  Yet  when  the  temple,  with 
all  its  glory,  crowned  the  spot,  God  was  never  more  conspicuously  present  than  on 
that  bare,  ungarnished  threshing-floor.  A  tasteful  building  may  be  a  way  of 
showing  your  pious  regard  for  the  Lord,  but  take  care  that  you  do  not  regard  it 
as  essential,  or  even  important,  or  you  will  make  an  idol  of  it.  2.  It  was  a  place 
of  ordinary  toil.  3.  It  was,  also,  in  possession  of  a  Jebusite.  The  Jebusites  were 
among  the  nations  doomed  for  their  iniquities.  Herein  the  Lord  showeth  that  He 
is  no  respecter  of  persons.  The  Jews  wrapped  themselves  up  within  themselves, 
and  said,  "  The  temple  of  the  Lord ;  the  temple  of  the  Lord  are  we  " ;  but  the 
Lord  seemed  to  rebuke  their  national  pride  by  saying,  "And  your  temple  is  built 
upon  the  threshing-floor  of  a  Jebusite."  If  you  happen  to  have  been  born  of 
parents  who  did  not  train  you  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  yet  do  not  despond  ;  but 
Bay  to  thy  soul,  '•  The  Lord  shall  have  a  dwelling  within  my  heart,  Jebusite  though 
I  be."  4.  Before  it  could  be  used  it  had  to  be  bought  with  money.  In 
connection  with  all  true  worship  of  God  in  the  olden  time  there  was  always  the 
offertory.  II.  Spiritually  this  threshing-floob  of  Ornan  was  an  admirablb 
TYPE  of  how  God  meets  with  men.  1.  Its  extreme  simplicity  enters  into  the 
essence  of  the  type.  2.  The  threshing-floor  is  the  exact  type  of  affliction.  The 
temple  of  glory  is  built  on  the  threshing-floor  of  affliction.  3.  This  was  the  place 
where  justice  was  most  clearly  manifest.  Above  this  place,  in  mid-air,  stood  a 
dreadful  apparition.  Conviction  of  sin,  wrought  by  the  Spirit  or  God,  is  more 
powerful  than  argument.  If  some  men  had  more  fully  felt  that  they  were  sinners, 
they  would  have  made  better  saints.  4.  It  was  the  place  where  sin  was  confessed. 
5.  It  was  the  place  where  sacrifice  was  offered  and  accepted.  6.  It  was  where 
David  beheld  the  sign  of  peace.  HI.  I  close  by  heartily  exhorting  you  to  use 
this   place.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.)        The    altar   built    and   the  plague    stayed  : — 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rxn. 

Observe — I.  A  rEAnnjL  etil.  II.  The  Divine  remedy,  m.  A  generous  proposal. 
IV.  A  NOBLE  AND  SELF-SACRIFICING  SPIRIT.  {J.  Burns,  D.D.)  The  propitiation : — 
The  altar  and  sacrifice  as  means  of  propitiation  illustrates  the  atonement  of  Christ. 

I.  The  MORAL  CONDITION  WHICH  IT  IS  DESIGNED  TO  MEET.  II.  ThE  PROVISION  MADB 
POB  THIS  CONDITION.      III.    ThE  RESULTS  WHICH  IT  ACCOUPLISHSD.      (J.  Wo\fendaU.) 


CHAPTER  XXn. 


Veb.  2.  And  DaTld  commanded  to  gather  together  the  strangers. — What  toe 

cannot  destroy  may  be  usefully  employed : — Whom  we  are  not  able  to  destroy  we 
may  be  able  to  employ  in  holy  service,  is  a  doctrine  which  is  not  applicable  to 
persons  only,  but  has  a  distinct  reference  to  emotions,  passions,  impulses,  and 
sympathies.  We  are  to  hold  ourselves  in  bondage,  and  often  we  are  to  drive 
ourselves  to  forced  labour,  and  to  become  hewers  of  wood  and  stone,  bearers  of 
burdens,  and  indeed  slaves  to  our  higher  manhood.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  And  David  prepared  iron  In  abundance. — Builders : — It  sometimes 
becomes  difficult  to  say  who  really  did  build  the  temple,  so  little  was  left  for 
Solomon  to  do.  Is  it  not  so  with  all  the  temples  of  civilisation  ?  Who  built  the 
temple  of  literature  ?  Who  erected  the  temple  of  science  ?  Who  is  the  architect, 
and  who  the  builder  of  the  temple  of  discovery  ?  The  last  man  is  so  immediately 
behind  us,  that  we  dare  not  take  credit  to  ourselves  for  aught  we  do  ;  so  much  has 
been  done  in  preparation  that  when  we  speak  of  the  temple  we  say  it  was  built  by 
the  age,  or  the  generation,  or  the  spirit  of  the  times.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  5.  And  David  said,  Solomon  my  son  is  young. — The  ideal  temple: — 
I.  The  motive  which  set  David  to  work  in  preparing  for  building  the 
TEMPLE.  This  motive  was  thankfulness  for  a  great  mercy — God's  mercy  in 
arresting  the  pestilence.  God  sends  us  deliverances  from  earthly  calamities,  not 
merely,  not  chiefly,  that  we  may  be  delivered,  but  that  our  hearts  may  rise  in 
thankfulness  to  Him.  The  soul  gains  more  by  the  effort  of  thankfulness  than  the 
body  has  gained  by  deliverance  from  the  physical  mischief.  The  deliverance 
without  the  thankfulness  is  a  sheer  failure,  baulking  the  providential  purposes  of 
God.  Life  would  be  brighter  and  stronger  if  each  mercy  were  the  occasion  of  a 
resolution  to  do  some  piece  of  good  work  for  God.  II.  The  high  estimate  David 
HAD  FORMED  OF  WHAT  HE  HAD  BET  HIMSELF  TO  DO:  "Exceeding  magnifical,"  &o. 
He  felt  that  a  great  effort  was  due,  first  of  all  to  God  Himself,  as  being  what  He  is, 
and  next,  for  the  sake  of  those  who  did  not  know  Him — the  surrounding  heathen 
peoples,  who  must  not  think  meanly  of  what  God's  servants  thought  to  be  due  to 
His  service.  If  anything  is  fatal  to  greatness  in  human  endeavour,  in  act,  in 
work,  in  character,  it  is  a  stunted  estimate  of  what  we  have  to  do.  The  artist  who 
has  no  ideal  before  him,  or  only  a  poor  and  meagre  ideal,  cannot  hope  to  succeed. 
It  is  so  with  all  forms  of  external  enterprise.  It  is  so  with  the  formation  of 
character.  If  we  set  out  by  saying  that  it  is  impossible  to  attain  to  anything 
great  or  noble,  most  certainly  we  never  shall  attain  to  it.  We  must  make  up  our 
minds  that  the  house  of  the  Lord,  whether  it  be  material  or  spiritual,  must  be 
exceeding  magnifical.  No  honest  student  of  David's  Psalms  can  maintain  that 
he  was  ignorant  of  the  true  meaning  of  spiritual  worship ;  or  that  he  thought 
more  of  the  things  of  sense  than  of  the  action  of  the  soul  in  its  approach  to  the 
Holy  One;  but  his  spirituality  was  not  of  that  unwise  kind  which  imperils  the 
very  existence  of  religion  among  men  by  doing  away  with  all  the  outward  symbols 
of  its  presence.  Worship  will  not  be  the  less  spiritual  when  man  has  done  his 
very  uttermost  in  his  poor  way  to  express  in  outward  and  material  structure  his 
sense  of  the  unapproachable  magnificence  of  God.  III.  The  great  distinction  op 
David's  work  of  preparation  for  the  temple  is  its  unselfishness.  One  of  the 
sternest  lessons  a  man  learns  with  advancing  life  is  the  disabling  power  of  sin. 
Long  after  we  have  sincerely  repented  of  sin  it  haunts  us  with  its  double  legacy  of 
a  dimmed  moral  eyesight  and  of  an  enfeebled  will ;  and  even  where  these  effects 
do  not  follow,  as  in  David's  case  they  did  not  follow,  sin  remains  with  us  as  a 
memory  which  tells  us  when  we  would  attempt  something  beyond  the  work  of 


CHiP.xxn.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  Rl 

other  men,  something  heroic,  something  sublime,  something  that  belongs  to  the 
career  of  the  saints,  that,  other  matters  apart,  we  are  not  the  men  to  do  it.  The 
discovery  that  he  would  not  be  allowed  to  express  his  devotion  in  one  supremo 
effort  must  have  caused  David  a  shock  which  we  may  not  easily  take  measure  of. 
But  David  did  not  think  of  the  temple  as  having  to  be  built  either  for  his  own 
glory  or  for  Solomon's  glory,  but  for  the  glory  of  God.  And  bo  David  prepared 
for  it  with  all  his  heart.  IV.  David's  preparation  points  to  a  great  truth — the 
PREciousNEBS  OF  WORK  UNRECOGNISED  BY  MAN.  David  docs  the  work,  Solomon  is 
decorated  with  the  reputation.  Almost  every  discovery  in  science  has  been  led  up 
to  by  forgotten  workers.  The  discoverer,  who,  after  all,  has  only  taken  the  last 
step  in  a  long  process,  lives  in  history.  A  minister  rises  in  his  place  in  Parliament 
to  make  a  statement  which  astonishes  us  by  its  familiarity  with  the  details  of 
a  vast  and  intricate  subject ;  but  while  the  country  is  ringing  with  his  praises  the 
fact  is  that  the  knowledge  which  so  astonishes  England  has  been  brought  together 
by  the  patient  toil  of  the  permanent  staff  of  the  department,  the  toil  of  clerks 
whose  names  are,  perhaps,  unknown  beyond  their  own  families.  Much  more  is 
this  the  case  with  the  best  work  in  the  Church  of  Jesus  Christ.  {Canon  Liddoti.) 
The  inspiration  of  a  lofty  ideal : — We  expend  our  strength  according  to  the  ideals 
which  it  is  our  purpose  to  realise.  The  man  who  has  not  a  high  ideal  of  his  work 
will  be  content  with  indifference,  and  with  doing  as  little  as  possible.  How 
profitable  it  would  be  if  every  young  life  could  say  at  the  beginning  of  its  career, 
"  My  life  is  to  be  exceeding  magnifical :  it  is  to  be  a  life  of  intelligence,  purity, 
beneficence,  holy  activity  in  all  blessed  service :  I  will  now  make  preparation  for 
it."  What  school-going  we  should  then  have!  What  attentive  reading  of  initial 
books !  What  an  eager  sympathy  with  the  purpose  of  every  tutor !  How  little  we 
should  then  make  of  difficulties  I  The  work  of  preparation  would  be  done  under 
the  consciousness  that  the  temple  was  already  built.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  David 
and  the  temple  : — A  fine  and  delicate  sense  of  the  becoming  hindered  David  from 
building  the  temple.  A  voice  within  him  had  whispered,  "  No :  however  right 
and  praiseworthy  the  idea,  you  are  hardly  the  man  to  carry  it  out.  Your  hands 
are  too  stained  with  blood."  When  the  Divine  word  came,  simply  interdicting,  it 
awoke  in  him  at  once  a  Divine  perception  of  the  reason  and  reasonableness  of  it ; 
and  the  God-taught,  God-chastened  spirit  within  him  made  him  see  at  once  why 
the  work  of  enshrining  the  ark,  the  ark  of  the  holy  and  awful  presence,  must  not 
te  his.  I.  Consider  the  remarkable  self-restbaint  displated  by  David.  He 
who  had  lived  much  in  camps  and  on  the  battlefield,  whose  will  was  law  through 
the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land — he  could  stay  himself  from  prosecuting  his 
daring  scheme  with  the  thought  of  incongruity.  11.  The  self-restraint  of  David 
REVEALS  the  INTENSE  REALITY  WHICH  GoD  WAS  TO  HIM,  as  Well  as  the  impressiou 
which  he  had  of  the  character  of  God,  How  pure  and  lofty  would  be  his 
conception  of  the  almighty  Kuler  when  it  struck  him  as  altogether  inappropriate 
and  inconsistent  that  a  shrine  should  be  built  for  Him  by  one  who  had  been 
engaged,  however  patriotically  and  for  the  interests  of  his  country,  in  shedding 
much  human  blood.  1.  The  picture  indicates  that,  although  a  man  of  war  from 
his  youth,  David  had  never  been  proud  of  fighting.  He  had  had  dreams  perhaps 
in  his  father's  fields  of  quite  another  sort  of  career  for  himself,  and  could  see 
something  far  more  attractive  and  desirable ;  it  was  not  his  ideal  life ;  but  it  was 
what  his  lot  had  rendered  inevitable  for  him  and  incumbent  on  him  ;  it  was  what 
he  had  to  do,  and  he  did  it.  2.  Then,  once  more,  observe  revealed  here  the 
remarkable  preservation  of  David's  higher  sensibilities.  Neither  the  tumult  and 
strife  of  years  of  warfare,  nor  the  elation  of  successes  gained  by  bow  and  spear, 
had  prevailed  to  coarsen  him,  to  render  him  gross  and  dull  of  soul.  He  emerges 
from  it  all,  on  the  contrary,  sensitive  enough  to  answer  readily  to  the  whispered 
suggestions  of  seemliness,  to  be  restrained  and  turned  back  upon  the  threshold  of 
a  coveted  enterprise  by  a  sense  of  the  becoming.  3.  Although  precluded  from 
-doing  what  he  had  purposed  and  wished  to  do,  he  did  not,  as  is  the  case  with 
many,  make  that  an  excuse  for  doing  nothing;  did  not,  therefore,  sulkily  fold  hia 
hands,  and  decline  to  see  what  there  was  that  he  might  do.  4.  Then  see  how  his 
true  thought  and  noble  aim  survived  him,  and  survived  him  to  be  ultimately 
realised.  The  temple  grew  and  rose  at  last  in  all  its  wonderful  splendour,  though 
Ae  was  not  there  to  behold  it.  {S.  A.  Tipple.)  Working  up  to  death: — We 
should  work  up  to  the  very  moment  of  our  death.  Our  last  breath  should,  if 
possible,  help  some  other  man  to  pray  better,  or  to  work  more,  or  suffer  with  a 
£Tmer  constancy.    Let  no  man  suppose  that  the  world  stands  still  because  he  dies. 

6 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxn, 

God  has  always  a  temple  to  build,  and  He  will  always  raise  up  the  builders  of  it^ 
and  yet  it  pleases  Him  in  His  coudesceusion  to  receive  our  assistance  in 
preparation.    (J.  Parker,  DJ).) 

Vers.  6-19.  Then  he  called  for  Solomon  hifl  son. — Bavtd^s  charge  to  Solomon : — 
I.  A  father's  privilege.  1.  To  cherish  a  lofty  ideal  for  his  son.  This  does  not 
require  that  the  father  should  undertake  to  decide  the  particulars  of  his  son's- 
career.  This  would  involve  the  danger  of  weakening  his  will,  of  lessening  his 
power  of  independent  judgment  and  free  choice.  I  have  seen  an  apricot  tree 
trained  to  a  wall,  trunk  and  branch  fastened  to  it  by  nails  and  bands.  It  made- 
a  vine  of  what  was  meant  to  be  a  tree.  If  it  had  been  taken  from  the  wall  it  would 
have  lain  limp  on  the  ground.  2.  To  make  the  example  of  his  own  daily  living 
one  which  will  help  and  stimulate  his  son.  A  wise  father  wiU  recognise  the  fact 
that  he  commends  to  his  boy,  not  that  which  he  praises,  but  that  which  he  pursues. 
It  is  not  by  telling  our  children  what  we  wish  them  to  become  that  we  mould  them, 
most  effectually ;  it  is  by  the  evidence  which  they  get  from  our  daily  living,  as  to- 
our  main  desire  and  hope  for  them.  The  unintended  influence  of  the  home  is  that, 
which  will  move  them  most.  The  atmospheric  influence  is  more  pervasive  than 
that  which  comes  from  medicine.  3.  He  may  provide  means  by  which  his  son 
may  carry  out  his  purpose  and  friends  to  help  him  in  it.  II.  A  son's  advaktage. 
From  all  that  a  good  father  thus  can  do  a  son  has  no  small  advantage.  1.  By  the- 
law  of  heredity.  2.  By  this  harmonious  environment  a  wise  father  can  largely 
shape  the  influences  under  which  his  son  grows  up.  3.  By  the  improved  oppor- 
tunity which  comes  to  him  as  his  father's  son  and  heir.  Solomon  has  but  to  keeT^' 
with  care  what  David  has  acquired  with  hard  work.  The  son  stands  naturally 
upon  the  platform  to  reach  which  the  father  has  come  by  climbing  the  steep  ladder. 
Many  a  son  to-day  has  grand  opportunity  for  noble  living  which  has  been  gained 
for  him  by  the  toils  of  those  who  have  gone  before  him.  But  only  opportunity. 
There  is  a  sermon  in  the  word  opportunity.  It  is  that  which  is  ob  partus,  over- 
against  the  harbour  ;  but  there  your  fleet  may  rot  at  anchor  as  readily  as  it  may  be 
submerged  at  sea.  The  skilful  master  must  raise  the  anchor,  set  the  sail,  take 
advantage  of  the  favouring  breeze,  steer  his  craft  to  port,  or  all  the  shipbuilder's 
skill  has  been  for  naught.  All  the  advantages  of  the  most  favoured  son  will 
amount  to  nothing  unless  he  will  himself  arise  and  build.  Honour  is  not  in  what 
is  inherited,  but  in  what  is  accomplished.  {Monday  Club  Sermons.)  David's 
charge  to  Solomon  : — Learn — I.  That  some  originate  a  good  work,  but  are  not 

PERMITTED  TO  EXECUTE  IT.  II.  ThAT  OTHERS  MAT  BE  CALLED  TO  EXECUTE  WORK 
WHICH    THEY    NEVER    ORIGINATED.        III.     ThAT    WHEN    CALLED,    THEY    SHOULD    FINISH 

THE  WORK  GIVEN  THEM  TO  DO.  (J.  Wolfendale.)  But  the  word  of  the  Lord  came- 
to  me,  saying. — God's  word  to  David  .-—How  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  David 
we  do  not  know.  In  what  way  soever  the  communication  was  made  to  David,  the 
communication  itself  is  of  singular  moral  value.  1.  Say  that  the  Lord  delivered 
the  message  immediately  in  audible  words,  we  have  then  the  doctrine  that  God 
will  not  permit  men  of  blood  to  end  their  career  as  if  they  had  been  guiltless  of 
blood-shedding.  2.  Say  that  David  uttered  these  words  out  of  the  depths  of  hia 
own  consciousness,  then  we  have  the  doctrine  that  there  is  a  moral  fitness  of  things 
that  hands  stained  with  blood  should  not  be  put  forth  in  the  erection  of  a  house  of 
prayer.  The  house  of  God  is  to  be  a  house  of  peace,  the  sanctuary  of  rest,  a. 
Sabbatic  building,  calm  with  the  tranquillity  of  heaven,  unstained  by  the  vices  and 
attachments  of  earth.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Behold,  a  son  shall  be  bom  to  thee.— 
A  son  predicted : — I.  Son  of  David  ;  so  was  Christ.  II.  A  man  of  best  ;  so  was 
Christ.  III.  The  giver  of  peace  ;  so  was  Christ.  IV.  He  had  a  significant  namb  ; 
so  has  Jesus  Christ.  V.  He  was  a  glorious  king  ;  so  is  Christ.  VI.  His  orbat 
WORK  WAS  THE  BUILDING  OP  THE  TEMPLE  ;  SO  is  the  woik  of  Christ.  {BibUcal 
Museum.)  The  prediction  of  Solomon's  birth  : — This  is  a  forecast  which  is  full 
of  moral  instruction  ;  it  shows  how  God  knows  every  man  who  is  coming  into  the 
world,  what  his  character  will  be,  what  function  he  will  have  to  discharge,  and 
what  will  be  the  effect  of  his  ministry  upon  his  day  and  generation.  The  Christian 
believes  that  every  event  is  ordered  from  above,  that  every  man  is  born  at  the 
right  time,  is  permitted  to  live  for  a  proper  period  if  he  be  obedient  to  providence, 
and  that  the  mission  of  every  man  is  assigned,  limited,  and  accentuated :  all  we- 
have  to  do  is  to  say,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  and  to  obey  what  w«" 
honestlj  believe  to  be  the  yoioe  from  heaven.    (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


CHAP.xxn.]  I.  CHRONICLES,  85 

Vers.  11-13.  Now,  my  son,  the  Lord  be  with  thee.— .4  father^t  prayer  for  his 
ton: — I.  For  the  possession  of  moral  qualities.  1.  Wisdom  and  understanding. 
2.  Strength  and  moral  courage.  11.  For  the  presence  of  God.  III.  For  success- 
ful tTNDERTAKiNO.  {J.  Wolfeiidale.)  Conditions  of  successful  effort : — I.  Personal 
FITNESS.  1.  Wisdom  to  direct.  2.  Strength  to  work.  11.  God's  presence  to 
HELP  in  its  prosecution.  III.  Lotal  obedience  to  God  :  "  keep  the  law  of  the 
Lord."  {Ihid.)  The  qualifications  needed : — I.  The  source  from  whence  they 
come.  II.  The  design  for  which  they  are  given.  {Ibid.)  Keeping  God's 
law : — I.  God's  will  is  a  law.  II.  This  law  should  be  kept.  III.  Obedience 
TO  THIS  LAW  IS  WISDOM.  (Ibid. )  Eight  training  : — We  have  read  that  Solomon 
was  young  and  tender,  young  and  timid ;  it  would  seem  as  if  David,  recognising 
the  timidity  of  his  son,  specially  charged  him  to  cultivate  courage,  bravery, 
fearlessness.  This  was  training  up  a  child  in  the  way  he  should  go.  We  are 
too  fond  of  training  our  strongest  faculties,  and  thus  we  are  tempted  to  neglect  the 
weaker  side  of  our  nature.  Find  out  the  weak  side  of  a  child's  character,  and 
address  yourself  assiduously  to  its  cultivation.  We  should  seek  to  fill  the  empty 
sack,  not  to  overcrowd  the  full  one.  Bring  into  play  the  muscles  that  are  most 
difficult  to  get  at,  and  do  not  overtrain  those  which  afford  the  fairest  prospect  of 
immediate  results.  When  we  complain  of  a  weak  memory,  or  a  hesitant  will,  or 
a  defective  imagination,  we  should  address  ourselves  to  the  cultivation  of  that 
which  is  in  special  need  of  culture.    (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  Kow,  behold,  in  my  trouble  I  have  prepared  for  the  house  of  the 
Lord. — Great  enterprises  for  God : — L  That  great  things  done  for  God  look  poor 

IN  THE  SIGHT  07  THE  NOBLE  SOULS  BY  WHOM   THEY  ARE   DONE.      "  NoW,   bchold   in   OLJ 

trouble,"  or  as  rendered  in  the  margin,  "  in  my  poverty,"  or  as  it  is  given  in  the 
margin  of  the  Revised  Version,  "  in  my  low  estate,"  "  have  I  prepared  for  the  house 
of  the  Lord."  Speaking  after  the  manner  of  men,  David  had  really  made  great 
preparations  for  his  sacred  design.  It  has  been  calculated  that  as  much  gold  was 
used  in  the  building  of  the  temple  as  is  usually  stored  in  the  vaults  of  the  Bank  of 
England,  and  toward  this  lavish  expenditure  David  made  a  large  contribution : 
"  A  thousand  talents  of  silver."  This  is  reckoned  such  an  incredible  quantity  that 
some  scholars  suspect  that  an  error  has  crept  into  the  text.  Brass  and  iron, 
timber  and  stone,  were  also  prepared  in  abundance.  Yet  the  king  does  not  regard 
his  gifts  with  complacency — there  is  no  trace  of  pride  or  boasting ;  on  the  contrary, 
he  feels  that  his  offerings  are  poor  and  inadequate.  It  is  ever  thus  with  noble 
souls ;  however  great  in  the  sight  of  the  multitude  is  their  work  or  sacrifice,  they 
mourn  over  it  as  over  a  mean  and  incommensurable  thing.  If  any  man  thinks 
that  his  sacrifice  for  the  cause  of  God  is  notable  and  adequate,  there  is  something 
wrong  with  the  size  of  that  man's  soul.  1.  Whatever  we  are,  we  are  poor  by  the  side 
of  what  God  is.  The  god  in  many  an  idol  temple  is  a  poor  creature  indeed  when 
compared  with  the  splendid  fabric  in  which  it  is  worshipped ;  it  is  a  shock  to 
turn  from  the  gorgeous  workmanship  of  the  shrine  to  the  stained,  ugly,  contemptible 
idol.  Exactly  the  contrary  of  this  was  true  in  regard  to  Solomon's  temple. 
However  glorious  the  building,  it  was  yet  an  unworthy  footstool  of  the  God  whom 
Israel  knew  and  worshipped.  The  God  of  Israel  was  the  Eternal ;  the  Creator 
of  earth  and  heaven ;  the  only  wise  God  ;  the  God  of  truth  and  without  iniquity, 
just  and  right ;  glorious  in  holiness,  delighting  in  mercy,  doing  wonders.  When 
tempted  to  spiritual  pride  and  vanity  let  us  be  humbled  by  "  the  beauty  of  the 
Lord."  If  you  wish  to  gain  a  true  estimate  of  yourself  do  not  measure  yourself  by 
your  neighbour ;  judge  yourself  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  your  righteousness  shall 
fade  as  a  leaf.  The  sight  of  God  makes  the  millionaire  a  penitent,  and  as 
penitents  we  must  strive  to  build  His  house  again.  2.  Whatever  we  do  is  poor 
by  the  side  of  what  God  does.  We  must  notice  how  both  David  and  Solomon  cast 
side-glances  at  the  vastness  and  magnificence  of  the  temple  built  without  hands. 
*•  But  will  God  in  very  deed  dwell  with  men  on  the  earth  ?  Behold,  heaven  and 
the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain  Thee ;  how  much  less  the  house  which  I  have 
builded."  Whatever  they  might  build  was  narrow  and  mean  in  comparison  with 
heaven  and  the  heaven  of  heavens.  It  is  a  fine  discipline  to  compare  our  best 
workmanship  with  the  work  of  His  fingers.  The  chemist  can  produce  an  artificial 
rainbow,  but  nobody  will  mistake  the  stage  rainbow  for  God  Almighty's  rainbow. 
It  is  well  in  a  generation  of  intellectual  power  and  artistic  skill  to  put  our  creations 
by  the  side  of  God's  marvellous  doings  so  that  we  may  not  forget.  •'  In  my  poverty 
have  I  done  this,"  is  the  confession  of  every  noble  artist  who  criticises  his  work  in 


84  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

the  light  of  nature's  perfections  and  the  glory  of  the  world,  3.  Whatever  we  give 
is  poor  by  the  side  of  what  God  gives.  What  a  magnificent  giver  God  is  !  We  see 
that  in  the  boundless,  infinite  outpouring  of  the  riches  of  nature.  And  we  see  that 
supremely  in  the  redemption  of  the  world  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "  Thanks  be 
unto  God  for  His  unspeakable  gift."  If  we  take  our  richest  gift  and  grandest 
sacrifice  to  Calvary  they  dwindle  into  nothing  in  sight  of  the  Cross.  Then  it  is 
that  we  pour  contempt  on  all  our  pride.  So  in  the  sight  of  God's  personal 
perfection,  and  in  remembrance  of  His  gifts  and  works,  David  felt  his  talents 
of  gold,  his  ingots  of  silver,  his  forests  of  cedar,  his  quarries  of  marble,  his 
abundance  of  iron  and  brass  were  trivial;  they  did  not  pay  his  debt  to  God, 
they  simply  acknowledged  it.  If,  then,  when  at  our  best  we  are  poor,  let  us  not  live 
below  our  best.  David,  at  least,  did  his  best ;  let  us  do  ours.  Let  us  not  mock 
God  by  any  paltriness  of  spirit.  II.  Great  things  must  be  ATXEMrxED  fob  Gob 
IN  THE  FACE  OF  THE  MOST  DiscotiBAOiNo  CONDITIONS.  David  Certainly  proposed  to 
do  great  things  for  God.  He  had  set  his  heart  upon  building  a  house  for  God  that 
should  "  be  exceeding  magnifical,  of  fame  and  of  glory  throughout  all  countries." 
Familiar  as  were  the  nations  round  about  with  wonderful  architecture  and  splendid 
adornments,  David  proposed  to  build  a  sanctuary  for  the  true  God  that  should 
eclipse  them  all.  But  no  sooner  did  he  attempt  to  work  out  his  pious  design  than 
he  became  conscious  of  the  crippling  disabilities  of  human  life,  of  the  narrowness 
and  hostility  of  the  human  environment.  We  have  a  fine  time  of  it  whilst  we 
dream  and  design ;  the  imagination  and  emotions  know  nothing  of  narrowness, 
difficulty,  or  defeat.  I  should  like  to  see  the  temples  you  never  build ;  I  should 
like  you  to  hear  the  sermons  I  never  preach.  But  as  soon  as  we  essay  to  turn 
thought  into  fact  our  troubles  begin.  It  is  always  a  critical  moment  when  we 
proceed  from  idealism  to  action.  It  was  so  with  David.  He  no  sooner  attempted 
to  take  the  temple  out  of  his  heart  and  plant  it  on  Mount  Zion  than  he  became 
conscious  that  he  was  poor,  afflicted,  and  of  low  estate.  But — and  here  is  the 
lesson — all  the  great  work  of  the  world  has  to  be  undertaken  and  carried  out  with 
the  sense  of  disheartening  difliculty  and  discouragement.  Whenever  we  thought- 
fully look  at  the  splendid  achievements  of  industry,  science,  literature,  and  ait  we 
feel  that  an  infinite  pathos  enters  into  the  contemplation.  The  angels  "  who  excel 
in  strength  "  may  do  splendid  things  with  a  touch,  a  breath,  a  look,  but  we  mortals 
in  poverty  and  weakness  and  suffering  have  built  up  the  whole  magnificent  fabric 
of  civilisation.  And  all  the  great  work  of  the  Christian  world  has  been  done  in 
similar  strenuousness  and  sacrifice.  Not  out  of  a  superabundance  of  wealth, 
learning,  leisure,  and  opportunity  has  the  Church  of  Christ  floated  into  power  and 
universality,  but  in  defiance  of  circumstance  does  it  win  its  widening  way.  In  what 
deep  poverty  Christianity  had  its  origin !  Christ  is  the  supreme  example  of  the 
fact  that  glorious  work  must  be  done  in  profound  discouragement.  If  David  built 
his  golden  house  in  poverty,  did  not  his  greater  Son  in  a  far  deeper  poverty  build 
His  Church  which  is  becoming  the  refuge  of  men  of  all  nations,  languages,  and 
tongues  ?  The  Cross  is  the  grand  symbol  of  His  life  and  work  and  mission. 
Indeed,  the  primitive  Church  wrought  out  its  great  task  of  evangelisation  and 
establishment  amid  unparalleled  difficulties  and  a  great  fight  of  afflictions ;  and 
through  successive  generations  the  expansion  of  Christ's  kingdom  has  been  a  series 
of  victories  over  manifold  limitations,  oppositions,  and  persecutions.  If  you  are 
prepared  to  do  anything  for  God  that  is  in  the  least  degree  worthy  of  Him,  gird 
yourself  and  be  ready  to  face  almost  overwhelming  difficulty.  If  you  mean  only 
little  things  for  God,  you  will  have  little  trouble  in  doing  them  ;  and  if  you  mean 
less  things  than  that,  you  will  have  no  trouble  at  all ;  but  if  God  has  put  a  great 
thought  into  your  heart  it  will  mean  a  sacrifice  and  a  battle.  You  never  do  a  really 
large  thing  easily.  The  work  you  passionately  desire  always  looms  impossible. 
Circumstances  fetter  you,  but  you  must  resolutely  work  in  fetters.  Physical 
weakness  must  not  deter  you.  Do  not  excuse  yourself  because  you  have  no 
leisure.  Half  the  work  of  the  world  is  done  by  men  who  have  no  time,  and 
who  therefore  make  it.  Do  not  allow  the  gathering  infirmities  of  age  to  quench 
your  zeal  and  effort.  Put  into  the  narrowing  range  of  work  higher  qualities  of 
faith  and  devotion.  Do  not  even  allow  private  sorrows  to  deny  or  discount  your 
public  service.  When  a  young  Greek  soldier  complained  that  his  sword  was 
short,  a  veteran  instantly  answered  him,  "  Then  add  a  step  to  it."  And  I  say  to 
you  who  find  yourselves  short  of  time,  short  of  money,  short  of  strength,  short  of 
opportunity,  "  Add  a  step " ;  in  other  words,  make  up  for  the  deficiencies  of 
material,  opportunity,  and  instrument  by  an  intenser  resolution,  enthasiasm,  and 


CHAP,  xxn.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  85 

sacrifice.  "  Well,"  you  reply,  "  a  man  can  do  no  more  than  he  can  do  ! "  Now 
that  sounds  like  a  very  deep  philosophical  saying  that  you  must  take  slowly  in,  but 
in  fact  it  means  nothing.  INlen  never  know  what  they  are,  what  they  can  give, 
what  they  can  do,  until  their  soul  awakes.  ♦'  Stir  up  the  gift  that  is  in  thee." 
"  Out  of  my  trouble  have  I  done  this,"  might  have  been  the  confession  of  Tycho 
Brahe,  who  made  his  great  discoveries  without  a  telescope,  showing  that  what  an 
astronomer  chiefly  wants  is  not  a  big  glass  but  a  big  eye.  "  Out  of  my  trouble  have 
I  done  this,"  might  have  been  the  confession  of  Christopher  Columbus,  who  crossed 
the  Atlantic  in  an  old  tub  that  we  should  hardly  use  to-day  for  a  Newcastle  collier. 
"  Out  of  my  poverty  have  I  done  this,"  might  have  been  the  plaint  of  Turner, 
who  painted  some  of  his  masterpieces  with  colours  mixed  in  broken  teacups. 
"  Out  of  my  trouble  have  I  done  this,"  says  John  Milton,  old,  poor,  and  blind,  as 
he  enriches  the  world  with  "  Paradise  Lost."  "  Out  of  my  low  estate  have  I  done 
this,"  says  John  Bunyan,  when  he  gives  you  out  of  Bedford  jail  the  Land  of 
Beulah,  the  Palace  Beautiful,  the  shining  ones,  the  country  that  is  green  the  year 
round,  the  city  of  gold  and  glass,  which  when  we  see  we  wish  that  we  were  there. 
Do  not  wait  until  you  have  "spare  time,"  "spare  cash,"  or  "spare"  anything 
else  ;  do  your  best  with  things  as  they  are,  and  faith,  which  is  the  genius  of  the 
heart,  will  surprise  you  and  the  world.  However  poor  and  inadequate  our  work 
may  seem,  God  will  prosper  and  multiply  it  in  an  extraordinary  degree.  David  felt 
his  poverty,  but  God  brought  the  thought  of  his  heart  to  the  utmost  fruition. 
"  Thus  Solomon  finished  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  the  king's  house ;  and  all  that 
came  into  Solomon's  heart  to  make  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  in  his  own  house 
he  prosperously  effected."      {W.   L.   Watkinson.)  One  worker  preparing  for 

another ; — Let  us  notice — I.  That  David  had  zealously  done  his  part.  1.  He 
had  gathered  the  materials.  Many  a  man  collects  people  together,  and  yet  he  has 
not  the  fashioning  of  them — he  does  not  see  many  conversions.  2.  He  fashioned 
some  of  the  materials.  3.  He  prepared  the  way  for  Solomon's  temple.  4.  He 
found  the  site  for  the  temple.  We  do  not  always  remember  the  men  who  prepare 
the  sites  for  the  Lord's  temples.  Luther  is  remembered,  but  there  were  reformers 
before  Luther.  5.  It  was  David  who  received  the  plans  from  God.  6.  He  gave  a 
solemn  charge  to  othei-s.  7.  Have  you  done  your  part  ?  II.  David  had  done  his 
PART  IN  trouble.  1.  David  thought  little  of  what  he  had  prepared.  It  is  those 
who  do  little  for  the  Lord  who  are  like  a  hen  with  one  chick — they  think  a  great  deal 
of  it.  2.  It  was  a  proof  of  his  sincerity.  David  in  the  day  of  his  trouble,  when  his 
heart  was  ready  to  break,  still  went  on  with  his  great  work  of  providing  for  the 
house  of  the  Lord.  3.  It  was  an  incentive  to  service.  4.  It  must  have  given  an 
elevation  to  David's  whole  life.  III.  David's  work  fits  on  to  the  work  op 
another.  1.  This  is  the  order  of  God's  providence  in  His  Church.  I  am  told  that 
my  venerable  predecessor.  Dr.  Rippon,  used  often,  in  his  pulpit  to  pray  for  some- 
body, of  whom  he  knew  nothing,  who  would  follow  him  in  the  ministry  of  the 
Church,  and  greatly  increase  it.  He  died  and  passed  to  heaven  about  the  time 
I  was  born.  Older  members  of  the  Church  have  told  me  that  they  have  read  the 
answer  to  Dr.  Eippon's  prayers  in  the  blessing  that  has  been  given  to  us  these 
many  years.  2.  But  this  is  a  terrible  blow  at  self.  Self  says,  "  I  like  to  begin 
something  of  my  own,  and  I  like  to  carry  it  out ;  I  do  not  want  any  interference." 
There  are  some  who  do  not  want  any  help  ;  they  are  quite  up  to  the  mark  ;  they 
are  like  a  waggon  and  four  horses,  and  a  dog  under  the  waggon  as  well. 
3.  I  believe  that  it  is  good  for  the  work  to  have  a  change  of  workers.  4.  This 
creates  unity  in  the  Church  of  God.  5.  This  leaves  a  place  for  those  who  come 
after.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  And  thou  mayest  add  thereto. — Limited  liability : — 
So  David  encourages  Solomon  to  arise  and  build  the  temple.  The  king  had  done 
his  best  to  facilitate  the  building,  and  now  he  urges  the  young  prince  to  come  forth 
and  do  his  part.  It  may  be  appropriate  to  reflect  a  httle  upon  the  fellowship  of 
service,  to  remember  our  mutual  limitations  and  responsibilities,  and  to  encourage 
one  another  in  service.  I.  Let  us  observe  the  circumscriptions  of  human  service. 
David  could  not  take  in  hand  the  whole  business,  and  build  the  temple  indepen- 
dently of  Solomon  and  everybody  else.  He  soon  discovered  his  limitations,  and 
knew  that  if  the  great  enterprise  were  to  be  carried  out  he  would  have  to  take 
Solomon  into  partnership,  and  Solomon  would  have  to  take  the  nation  inta 
partnership.  1.  We  are  subject  to  personal,  constitutional  circumscriptions 
from  which  we  cannot  escape.  We  have  a  certain  gift  and  susceptibility,  and 
within  the  Unes  prescribed  by  our  special  endowment  we  can  work  happily  and 
•ffectively,  but  we  make  sorry  work  when  we  attempt  anything  beyond  those  lines. 


86  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.xxh. 

"We  have  all  heard  of  the  mathematician  who,  on  hearing  "  Paradise  Lost "  read, 
wished  to  know  what  it  proved.     Well,  it  proved  that  a  cell  was  wanting  in  his 
brain,  and  that  he  soon  gave  himself  away  when  he  got  off  his  own  proper  ground. 
We  talk  of  "  all-round  "  men,  but  strictly  speaking  such  men  do  not  exist.    AU 
have  the  defects  of  their  qualities  with  strange  work.     We  may  easily  get  into 
a  place  that  we  do  not  fit ;  easily  attempt  work  for  which  we  have  no  faculty. 
2.  We  are  subject  to  circumscriptions  of  circumstance.     We  see  this  in  the  case 
of  David.     He  had  gifts  and  aspirations  which  the  trend  of  events  did  not  permit 
him  to  exercise  and  develop.     The  sword  was  thrust  into  his  hand  when  he  would 
have  preferred  the  hurp  ;  he  was  condemned  to  deal  with  politics  when  he  longed 
to  write  poetry ;  he  was  shut  up  to  empire-building  when  he  felt  the  passion  strong 
to  temple-building.     We  possess  faculties  that  our  life  does  not  permit  us   to 
cultivate,  aspirations  that  we  may  not  gratify.     Some  birds  have  little  or  no 
song  in  the  wild  state,  although  they  have  highly  developed  song  muscles  which 
they  can  turn  to  excellent  account  in  other  and  favourable  circumstances.    Our 
environment  is  often  too  strong  for  us,  and  we  must  coerce  ourselves  into  the 
performance  of  duties  for  which  we  have  little  or  no  inclination.     3.  And  then  we 
all  suffer  from  the  circumscription  of  time.     "  David  prepared  before  his  death." 
We  have  only  life's  little  day  for  our  large,  manifold,  and  strenuous  speculations. 
"  We  are  strangers  and  pilgrims,  as  all  our  fathers  were."    And  this  is  just  as  true 
of  the  higher  service  of  the  race  as  it  is  true  of  intellectual,  political,  and  material 
service.     We  are  restricted  to  narrow  bounds,  and  can  do  only  here  a  little  and 
there  a  little.    II.  Let  us,  however,  observe  to  our  encouragement  the  continuity 
of  human  service.     What  David  could  do  he  did,  and  what  he  could  not  do  he 
passed    on    with  confidence  to   Solomon.      There   is   wonderful   continuity  and 
coherence    in    the    action  of  man.     Leo   Grindon   says :   "  Nothing  so   plainly 
distinguishes  between  man  and  brutes  as  the  absolute  nothingness  of  effect  in 
the  work  of  the  latter.     Unless  the  coral  isles  be  esteemed  an  exception,  of  all 
the  past  labours  of  all  the  animals  that  ever  existed,  there  is  not  a  trace  extant." 
No ;  the  irrational  creatures  have  been  sagacious  in  an  extreme  degree,  they  have 
been  active  and  energetic  from  the  beginning,  powerful,  clever,  but  there  is  no 
conservation  of  their  work,  no  perpetuation,  no  accumulation.     It  ceases  with  the 
life  of  the  individual  or  with  the  existence  of  the  special  community.     Myriads  of 
bees,  birds,  ants,  and  beavers,  curious,  restless   workers,   but  nothing  of  tiieir 
creations   and   fabrications   survive.     But  it   is    strangely    different    with    man. 
Frail  and  fugitive  as  the  individual  may  be,  we  have  the  ability  to  bequeath 
our  small  personal  contribution  to  the  general  and  increasing  wealth  of  the  race. 
There  is  a  physical  law  in  the  animal  world  which  economises  the  experience  of 
the  individual  for  the  benefit  of  the  species,  but  we  have  the  immense  advantage  of  a 
social  law  which  preserves  and  perpetuates  in  an  extraordinary  degree  the  services  and 
sacrifices  of  the  humblest  individual.     We  see  this  in  the  intellectual  world.     Our 
glorious  things  in  literature  and  art  are  the  legacies  of  our  gifted  ancestors.  The  archi- 
tecture of  Assyria,  the  astronomy  of  Chaldea,  the  pottery  of  Etruria,  the  science  of 
Egypt,  the  art  of  Greece,  the  jurisprudence  of  Eome,  the  moral  science  of  Palestine, 
have  come  down  to  us  corrected,  enlarged,  perfected  by  successive  generations.   Bees 
have  been  making  comb  for  ages,  and  yet  there  is  nothing  to  show  for  it  to-day ; 
but  swarms  of  golden  bees  from  Homer  to  Tennyson  have  filled  a  million  cells  in 
the  British  Museum  with  immortal  sweetness.    No  phonograph  has  caught  and 
preserved  the  music  of  the  birds,  although  they  have  piped  from  the  morning  of 
time  ;  but  the  songs  and  symphonies  of  ancient  minstrels  stir  our  souls  with  deep 
thoughts  and  passions.    And  once  again  we  see  this  continuity  of  service  in  the 
national  life.     Our   fathers  bequeathed   us  this  great  empire.    Your  toils   and 
sacrifices  will  be  conserved,  they  will  be  added  to  the  general  stock,  they  will 
survive  for  ages.     Here  is  our  grand  comfort  and  encouragement.     Heal  work  is 
wealth  that  moth  and  rust  do  not  corrupt.     III.  Observe,  lastly,  to  your  encourage- 
ment,  the  C0MPLEMENTARINES8  of  human  service.      What  David  could  not  do 
Solomon  could  do.     What  is  missing  in  one  man  is  found  in  another ;  what  is 
lacking  in  one  man's  service  is  supplied  by  the  service  of  another.    We  see  at 
a  glance  that  men  are  wonderfully  different  from  each  other.     Living  things  and 
creatures  have  always  an  individuality  more  or  less  sharp.     Artificial  things  are 
uniform.     The  roses  on  my  drawing-room  paper  are  surprisingly  alike — exactly 
the  same  size,  the  same  colour,  the  same  number  of  leaves,  the  flowers  grow  at 
precisely  the  same  distance  from  each  other,  grow  at  the  same  angle,  are  identical 
in  form  and  colour  whether  they  grow  at  the  top  of  the  room  or  the  bottom, 


CHAP,  xxn.]  J.  CHRONICLES.  87 

whether  they  get  the  sun  or  the  shade,  and  they  never  vary  with  the  seasons  ;  but 
the  garden  outside  has  no  uniformity.  The  roses  are  all  sizes  and  colours,  grow  at 
all  angles,  and  not  the  roses  only  but  other  flowers  of  a  thousand  shapes  and  dyes 
and  perfumes.  So  in  society.  David  has  a  character  of  his  own,  so  has  Solomon. 
And  this  individuality  becomes  the  sharper  with  education.  Culture  intensifies 
individuality,  civilisation  spells  differentiation,  godliness  means  individual  distinc- 
tion. And  because  we  are  different  we  often  think  severely  of  one  another.  The 
multitude  of  teachers  utterly  unlike  each  other  unconsciously  conspire  to  bring 
out  the  whole  truth.  "  Now  this  I  say,  that  every  one  of  you  saith,  I  am  of  Paul ; 
and  I  of  Apollos ;  and  I  of  Cephas,"  and  yet  the  threefold,  the  thousandfold, 
ministry  is  necessary  to  bring  out  the  infinite  truth.  Amongst  the  great  company 
of  preachers,  each  with  his  singular  appreciation  of  truth  and  righteousness  and 
grace,  the  world  gets  the  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  And  so 
the  multitude  of  workers,  utterly  unlike  each  other,  cover  the  whole  field  of  service. 
As  geologists,  astronomers,  chemists,  and  many  other  workers  in  nature  complete 
the  circle  of  the  sciences,  so  the  various  servants  of  Christ  and  humanity,  guided 
by  the  sovereign,  universal  Spirit,  take  up  all  kinds  of  gracious  work  so  that  all 
needs  may  be  ministered  unto  and  the  whole  race  be  visited  and  blessed.  •'  More- 
over there  are  workmen  with  thee  in  abundance,  hewers  and  workers  of  stone  and 
timber,  and  all  manner  of  cunning  men  for  every  manner  of  work."  *'  Thou 
mayest  add  thereto."  It  is  a  matter  of  obligation.  Are  we  to  receive  all  and  do 
nothing  ?  Some  people  add  very  little  to  anything.  But  we  all  feel  how  ignoble 
are  such  parasitic  souls.  Solomon  felt  that  it  was  an  obligation  to  build,  and  we 
are  awfully  guilty  if  we  shirk  the  work  which  God  has  so  manifestly  committed  to 
us.  "  Thou  mayest  add  thereto."  It  is  a  privilege  to  do  so.  When  God  built  the 
world  He  did  it  altogether  without  our  intervention.  We  were  not  there  when  He 
laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth.  We  had  no  hand  in  piling  the  Alps.  We  did 
not  dig  a  trench  for  the  Atlantic.  We  did  not  adorn  the  firmament  with  golden 
star  and  silver  crescent  and  crimson  cloud.  We  did  not  plant  the  oaks  of  Bashan 
or  the  cedars  of  Lebanon.  The  rainbow  owes  nothing  to  our  paint-pot.  God  did 
it  all.  "  Thou,  Lord,  in  the  beginning  hast  laid  the  foundation  of  the  earth  ;  and 
the  heavens  are  the  works  of  Thine  hands."  But  God  has  granted  to  us  the 
glorious  privilege  of  being  His  fellow-workers  in  building  up  a  regenerated 
humanity.  Our  thoughts,  gifts,  sympathies,  prayers,  tears  may  go  into  this 
new  creation  whose  glory  shall  eclipse  that  of  sun  or  star.  "  See  that  no  man 
take  thy  crown" — that  is,  see  that  no  man  does  thy  work.     (W.  L.  Watkinson.) 

Ver.  16.  Arise  therefore,  and  be  doing',  and  the  Lord  be  with  thee. — David's 
charge  to  Solomon : — This  charge  has  respect  to  and  gathers  force  from — I.  The  past. 
Upon  the  life  and  conscience  of  Solomon  were  concentrated  the  considerations  and 
responsibilities  which  arise  out  of — 1.  The  relations  of  the  family  covenant. 
Solomon  was  a  son  of  promise.  2.  The  influence  of  parental  example.  3.  The 
Divine  faithfulness.  II.  The  present.  From  the  present  several  motives  and 
encouragements  are  drawn.  1.  Problems  have  been  solved,  paths  of  duty  have 
been  made  clear,  and  avenues  of  effort  and  usefulness  have  been  opened  up. 
2.  The  present  was  made  rich  in  material  which  had  been  prepared  and  laid  up  in 
the  past.  3.  These  preparations  brought  within  the  reach  of  Solomon  opportunities 
Buch  as  had  been  enjoyed  by  no  one  before  him.  The  preparation  of  means  and 
material  create  opportunities.  Providence  has  created  for  every  Christian  greater 
spiritual  opportunities  than  Solomon  enjoyed,  and  the  responsibilities  arising  out  of 
these  opportunities  are  solemn  and  urgent.  4.  All  these  motives,  arguments,  and 
considerations,  drawn  from  the  past  and  present,  unite  in  a  resistless  appeal  for 
action :  "  Arise  and  be  doing."  III.  The  chabqe  has  bespect  to  the  futuke. 
1.  Encouragement  in  his  undertaking.  Solomon  had  the  promise  of  the  Divine  pre- 
sence and  blessing.  2.  He  was  also  encouraged  in  his  undertaking  by  the  fact  that 
in  the  accomplishment  of  it  the  desires,  hopes,  and  prayers  of  pious  ancestors  would 
be  fulfilled.  3.  By  thus  fulfilling  the  pious  desires  of  godly  ancestors,  Solomon  set 
in  operation  spiritual  agencies  which  carry  down  to  future  ages  blessings  in  ever 
widening  streams  of  diffusive  beneficence.  Application :  1.  In  our  work  we  use 
materials  and  agencies  which  have  been  prepared  by  kings,  prophets,  apostles,  and 
martyrs.  All  the  achievements  and  improvements  of  modern  science  and  civilisa- 
tion are  available  in  Christian  work.  2.  In  the  kingdom  of  God  there  is  a  place 
and  a  sphere  for  talents  and  service  of  all  kinds.  {S,  J.  Wilson,  D.D.)  Christian 
tictivity  arid  its  reward  : — I.  Eveby  oooo   uan  has  an  impoktani  wobk  to  do  or 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  sm. 

HIS  DAT  AND  OKXFRATioM.  1.  We  have  much  to  do  for  ourselves  in  the  cultivation 
of  oar  own  minds,  the  improvement  of  our  hearts,  and  the  faithful  application  of 
our  various  talents.  2.  We  have  much  to  do  for  the  conversion  of  others.  3.  We 
have  much  to  do  for  God.  II.  It  behoves  us  to  address  ourselves  to  this  wokk 
WITH  ACTIVITY,  ZEAL,  AND  ENERGY.  1.  Reasou  dlctatcs  this.  2.  Gratitude  impels  It. 
3.  The  brevity  of  life  calls  for  this.  4.  The  solemn  account  we  shall  have  to  give 
should  further  stimulate  us  to  zeal,  activity,  and  energy.  5.  The  example  of  Christ 
tells  us  to  "  Arise  and   be  doing."    III.  When   occuptino   our   talents  in  the 

EXERCISE  OF  OUR  BEST  EFFORTS  WE  MAY  CONFIDENTLY  LOOK  FOR  THE  PRF.SENCE  AND 

BLESSING  OF  God.  "  And  the  Lord  be  with  thee."  This  might  be  rendered,  "  The 
Lord  shall  be  with  thee."  1.  There  is  a  general  presence  of  God  with  His  people, 
which  they  enjoy  in  common  with  all  mankind.  2.  There  is  an  especia.1  presence 
of  God  with  His  people,  which  is  the  promise  of  His  covenant.  Reflections :  This 
subject  will — 1.  Reprove  the  idler.  2.  Admonish  those  who  are  attempting  to 
work  without  due  dependence  upon  God.  3.  Heaven  is  a  place  of  ceaseless  activity. 
{George   Clayton.)  A   new  yearns   exhortation: — I.  The    sphere    of    Christian 

service.  II.  The  manner  of  Christian  service.  1.  Be  ready  and  on  the  look-out 
for  something  to  do.  2.  Let  us  find  something  to  do.  3.  When  you've  finished 
one  job,  set  about  another.  "  Be  doing."  III.  The  power  of  Christian  service. 
"  The  Lord  with  thee."  1.  His  presence  will  quicken  our  energy.  2.  Will  lighten 
our  labour.  {R.  S.  Latimer.)  Inactivity  the  "  dry-rot  "  of  young  men  : — In- 
activity is  the  '•  dry-rot "  of  thousands  of  Christian  young  men.  You  will  never 
gain  a  good  appetite  for  God's  Word,  or  a  flush  of  joy  on  your  countenance,  until 
you  lay  hold  of  some  earnest,  self-denying  work  and  keep  at  it.  Nothing  will 
impart  such  a  holy  vehemence  to  your  prayers  as  to  spend  an  hour  by  a  sick-bed, 
or  in  close  labour  with  an  impenitent  heart.  Nothing  will  stiffen  your  muscle  more 
than  tough  up-hill  work  in  behalf  of  some  unpopular  cause  or  moral  reform.  The 
only  cure  for  indolence  is  honest  work ;  the  only  cure  for  selfishness  is  self-sacrifice ; 
the  only  cure  for  timidity  is  to  plunge  into  duty  before  the  shiver  benumbs  you ; 
the  only  cure  for  unbelief  is  to  put  Christ  to  the  test  every  day.  Prayer  must  kill 
unbelief,  or  else  unbelief  will  kill  prayer.  The  Christian  warfare  is  not  a  single 
pitched  battle ;  it  is  a  campaign  for  life.  You  may  often  imagine  that  you  have 
attended  the  funeral  of  some  besetting  sin — and  lo  I  it  is  on  its  feet  again  next 
morning  1  You  won't  fire  the  last  shot  until  the  gates  of  glory  welcome  you  in 
among  the  crowned  conquerors.     (T.  C.  Cuyler.) 

Ver.  19.  Now  set  your  heart  and  your  soul  to  seek  the  Lord  your  Qod. — Seeking 
after  God  • — I.  The  occasion  on  which  this  injunction  was  given.  II.  The 
INJUNCTION  itself.  1.  The  great  object  of  our  life.  2.  In  what  way  we  are  to 
prosecute  it.  (1)  Avail  yourselves  of  the  opportunities  afforded  for  public  useful- 
ness. (2)  Begin  with  the  surrender  of  your  whole  souls  to  God.  (C.  Simeon,  M.A.) 
The  important  search : — I.  The  object  searched.  11.  The  method  of  search. 
1.  Earnestly.  2.  Resolutely.  (J.  Wolfendale.)  Building  the  temple  : — The  great 
aim  of  missionary  work,  at  home  and  abroad,  is  the  same.  This  great  work  may 
be  illustrated  by  the  text.  We  have — I.  The  heart  set  upon  God.  1.  All  work 
for  God  must  begin  with  ourselves  (Acts  xxii.  28;  1  Tim.  iv.  16).  2.  It  must  be 
heart-work,  not  merely  duty,  custom,  or  sympathy.  8.  There  must  be  a  deliberate 
Betting  of  the  heart  and  soul  upon  God  as  our  God,  reconciled  in  Christ,  fixedly 
His  (Psa.  Ivii.  7  ;  Deut.  x.  12).  4.  There  must  be  continued  seeking  God,  in  prayer, 
meditation,  holy  living.  II.  The  buildino-work  going  on.  The  living  Church  is 
God's  sanctuary.  He  dwells  in  the  hearts  of  His  people  (John  xiv.  23  ;  2  Cor.  vi. 
16  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  16).  The  work  of  Christ's  followers  is  to  build  the  sanctuary.  1.  By 
gathering  souls  out  of  the  world  around  to  Christ.  2.  By  gathering  souls  into 
the  Church,  uniting  in  one  body  in  Christ.  III.  The  sanctuary  used  for  God. 
Union  in  the  Church  must  be — 1.  For  consecration.  The  temple  is  not  for  orna- 
ment, nor  for  the  admiration  of  the  world,  but  for  God.  2.  For  worship  :  "  Bring 
the  ark,"  Ac.  The  ark  shadows  forth  the  great  propitiation  (Rom.  iii.  25).  This 
must  hold  the  first  position  in  the  Church,  heart,  ministry  (1  Cor.  ii.  2).  8.  For 
service  :  "  Bring  the  holy  vessels,"  Ac.  Each  vessel  has  its  use.  {J.  E.  Sampton.) 
"  Set  your  heart " : — Let  us  take  this  exhortation — I.  In  itb  reference  to  God's 
OWN  people.  1.  What  are  they  to  seek?  "The  Lord  your  God."  (1)  By 
endeavouring  to  obey  Him  in  everything.  (2)  In  building  up  His  temple.  It 
should  be  the  main  object  of  our  life  to  seek  the  Lord  by  building  up  His  Church. 
(3)  By  doing  everything  to  God's  glory.     2.  How  are  they  to  seek  ?     "  Set  your 


CHAP.xxin.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  89 

heart  and  your  soul  to  seek  the  Lord  your  God."  (1)  With  fixity  of  purpose : 
"  Set."  (2)  Have  an  intense  affection  towards  God's  service  and  glory.  (3)  With 
an  energetic  use  of  the  intellect.  We  ought  as  much  to  speculate  and  scheme  to 
glorify  God  as  we  meditate  how  to  advance  our  business.  (4)  By  the  union  and 
concentration  of  all  our  faculties.  3.  When  are  we  to  seek  the  Lord?  "Now." 
Now  is  the  only  time  worth  having,  because  it  is  indeed  the  only  time  we  have. 
When  did  David  mean  by  his  "  now  "  ?  (1)  Now  that  they  had  an  efificient  leader 
— Solomon.  (2)  When  God  is  with  you.  (3)  When  God  gives  rest.  "  Hath  He 
not  given  you  rest  on  every  side  ?  "  H.  In  its  reference  to  those  who  abe  con- 
verted. 1.  Set  your  heart  on  true  religion,  and  be  not  content  with  the  outward 
form  of  it.  2.  Seek  the  Lord  Himself.  3.  Seek  Him  at  once  with  aU  your  heart. 
(C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Seeking  God  : — In  the  struggle  of  life  many  men  and  women 
are  hampered  and  depressed  by  the  memory  of  past  weaknesses,  errors,  and  sins. 
The  hours  of  their  real  spiritual  prosperity  are  overshadowed  and  embittered  by  the 
recollection  of  their  spiritual  adversities.  It  is  one  of  the  wise  and  helpful  laws  of 
our  nature  that  in  freeing  ourselves  from  weakness  and  sin  we  do  not  free  ourselves 
from  the  memory  of  them.  The  value  of  the  experience  lies  in  the  lesson  we  learn 
from  it,  and  the  truest  repentance  is  often  witnessed  by  the  poignancy  of  the  sorrow, 
and  both  the  lesson  and  the  sorrow  have  their  roots  in  memory.  But,  while  we  are 
not  to  forget  that  we  have  sometimes  fallen,  we  are  not  always  to  carry  the  mud 
with  as ;  the  slough  is  behind,  but  the  clean,  clearly-defined  road  stretches  ahead 
of  us,  skies  are  clear,  and  God  is  beyond.  We  were  made  for  purity,  truth,  and 
fidelity,  and  the  very  abhorrence  of  the  opposites  of  these  qualities,  which  grows 
and  deepens  within  us,  bears  testimony  that  our  aspirations  are  becoming  our 
attainments.  The  really  noble  thing  about  any  man  or  woman  is  not  freedom 
from  all  stains  of  the  lower  life,  but  the  deathless  aspiration  which  for  ever  drives 
us  forward  and  will  not  let  us  rest  in  any  past,  whether  good  or  bad.  That  which 
makes  us  respect  ourselves  is  not  what  men  call  a  blameless  career,  but  the  hunger 
and  thirst  after  God  which  makes  all  our  doing  unsatisfying  and  inadequate  to  us. 
Better  a  thousand  times  the  eager  and  passionate  fleeing  to  God  from  a  past  of 
faults  and  weaknesses,  with  an  irresistible  longing  for  rest  in  the  everlasting  verities, 
than  the  most  respectable  career  which  misses  this  profound  impulse.  The  past 
remains  with  us  to  remind  us  of  our  perils  and  our  constant  need  of  help,  but  it 
ought  not  to  haunt  and  oppress  us.  The  real  life  of  an  aspiring  soul  is  alwaya 
ahead.    We  are  not  fleeing  from  the  devil,  but  seeking  God.    {Lyman  Abbott.) 


CHAPTER  XXnL 


Ybb.  1.  Bo  wben  David  was  old  and  fbll  of  days. — ^I.  Ax  ikstbvotivs  vibw  or 

UTS.        II.   A    TOUCHINO    PICTURE    OP    OLD    AOB.       HI.   A    SOLEMN    WARNING    TO    ALL. 

(J.  Wolfendale.)  How  to  employ  old  age : — The  pathos  of  David's  action  will  be 
more  clearly  recognised  if  we  remember  that  the  literal  translation  is,  "  Now  David 
had  become  satisfied  with  days."  Satisfied  with  days,  but  not  satisfied  with 
labour.  _  David  had  seen  all  the  contents  of  time,  in  poverty,  persecution,  honour, 
and  majesty,  and  yet  he  was  anxious  for  the  consolidation  of  his  empire  and  the 
construction  of  the  temple.  When  the  heathen  poet  described  the  death  of  a 
philosopher  it  was  under  the  image  of  a  guest  who  had  to  the  full  enjoyed  the  feast. 
David  as  a  guest  of  the  Lord  had  himself  sat  long  enough  at  the  table  of  time,  and 
now  he  was  desirous  that  his  son  should  take  up  the  service  and  enjoyment  of  the 
empire,  whilst  he  himself  went  forth  to  the  mysteries  of  another  state.  Old  age  can 
do  for  the  future  what  mere  youth  is  not  permitted  to  attempt.    (J.  Farker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  6.  And  four  thousand  praised  the  Lord  with  the  Instruments  which  I  made. 
— Mmic  and  religion : — I.  The  object  op  music.  "  To  praise  therewith "  well 
expresses  the  attitude  of  the  Bible  towards  music.  Plutarch  says  :  "  The  chief  est 
and  sublimest  end  of  music  is  the  graceful  return  of  our  thanks  to  the  gods."  In 
these  words  the  wisdom  of  the  Bible  representation  is  vindicated.  A  worthy  con- 
ception of  God  is  the  only  thing  which  can  give  the  true  inspiration  of  music,  and 
keep  it  pure  and  noble  through  all  its  strains.  Thus  music  and  religion  ought 
never  to  be  divorced.    II.  Somb  op  ths  fiatubes  of  the  revelation  of  God  which 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxin. 

THE  Bible  gives,  and  see  how  they  agree  with  the  best  featut.es  of  musical  lifb 
AND  Giiov.Tn.  1.  The  Bible  reveals  God  to  man,  and  man  to  himself;  it  opens  up 
depths  of  meaning  which  ordinary  life  cannot  sound  ;  it  calls  man  the  son  of  God  ; 
it  bases  itself  upon  the  love  of  God,  which  passeth  knowledge  ;  it  speaks  of  things 
which  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  hath  it  entered  into  the  heart  of  man 
to  conceive.  If  we  allow  music  any  rights  of  its  own,  they  must  be  based  upon  its 
claim  to  give  expression  which  is  beyond  the  power  of  words,  and  to  utter  con- 
ceptions which  thought  cannot  formulate.  It  has  the  power  to  take  them  out  of  the 
surroundings  even  of  the  deepest  thoughts,  to  lift  their  aspirations  where  nothing 
else  can  go,  to  carry  them  into  the  presence  of  a  power  of  harmony  and  order  more 
fundamental  than  the  skill  of  the  hand  or  the  logic  of  the  mind  can  represent. 
2.  Then  there  is  the  universality  of  religion.  It  is  meant  for  all  men :  there  are 
all  grac'es  and  kinds  of  reception  of  it.  The  gospel  of  Christ  is  for  all  men  ;  it  has 
truths  for  the  simple,  and  doctrines  for  the  wise ;  it  meets  all  nations  of  men,  each 
according  to  its  nature  and  its  needs.  So  music  in  one  way  or  another  affects  the 
simplest  and  the  most  cultured,  appeals  to  the  joyful  and  to  the  sorrowing,  defies 
lines  of  nationality  and  of  language,  and  is  appropriated  by  all  according  to  the 
needs  of  each.  3.  The  object  of  religion  is  harmony — harmony  between  heaven 
and  earth,  between  man  and  man,  harmony  in  the  life  of  the  individual,  with  its 
varying  experiences.  The  power  of  man  to  appreciate  harmony  finds  a  response  in 
the  growing  resources  of  the  musical  art ;  and  the  yearnings  of  man  for  a  better 
existence,  where  life  shall  not  clash  with  death,  joy  with  sorrow,  and  love  with  hate, 
finds  an  answer  in  a  revelation  which  destroys  death,  comforts  sorrow,  and  makes 
love  seen  everywhere.  There  could  be  no  better  expression  for  heaven,  as  the  place 
where  such  a  revelation  finds  its  completion,  than  as  the  place  of  music.  {Arthur 
Brooks,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  Moses  the  man  of  Ood. — The  man  of  Ood  : — 1.  A  beautiful  description  of 
any  man.  2.  A  possible  description  of  every  man.  3.  A  needful  description  of 
each  man  if  he  is  to  abide  in  his  Father's  house  for  ever.  Some  men  have  attained 
eminence  in  godliness.  No  renown  is  to  be  compared  with  this,  no  influence  is 
«qual  to  that  which  arises  from  such  recognition.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  When  is  a 
■man  a  "  man  of  God  "  ? — 1.  When  he  believes  in  God's  existence.  2.  When  he  is 
assured  of  God's  providence.  3.  When  he  has  sunk  his  will  in  the  Divine  purpose. 
4.  When  he  lives  and  moves  and  has  his  being  in  God.    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  25.  For  David  said,  The  Lord  God  of  Israel  hath  gfiven  rest  unto  His  people. — 

The  rest  of  the  people  of  God : — I.  In  the  mystebious  polity  of  the  people  oi" 
Israel  spibittjaIj  and  temporal  blessings  were  so  closely  allied  that  the  samb 

LANGUAGE  MIGHT  NATURALLY  BE  EMPLOYED  TO  SIGNIFY  EITHER.  II.  It  is  DOt  Unwar- 
rantable for  us  to  conjecture  that  in  the  joyous  utterance  contained  in  the  text  David 
insinuated  profounder  truths  than  lie  on  the  surface  of  his  words.  III.  If 
"  there  remaineth  a  rest  to  the  people  of  God,"  it  becomes  us  to  secure  this  great 

BLESSING  AS  THE  SOLE  OB  CHIEF  OBJECT  OF  EXISTENCE.     IV.   ReST  AND  PEACE  MUST  FALL 

UPON  A  Christian  spirit.  1.  From  its  devotion  to  Christ  Himself,  and  its  devoted 
imitation  of  His  pure  and  perfect  example.  2.  By  the  elevating  tendency  of  the 
singleness  of  the  object  of  his  hope.  Those  who  have  many  debts  often  feel  it  a 
relief  to  exchange  them  all  for  a  single  creditor ;  he  whose  whole  heart  is  bent  on 
reaching  a  single  point  leaves  all  around  him  on  his  way  in  equal  and  complete 
indifference.  God  is  one ;  let  our  affections  but  partake  of  the  unity  of  that  object, 
and  we  shall  have  reached  the  pathway  of  real  and  imperishable  rest.  3.  From  the 
very  nature  of  the  Christian  affections.  4.  From  its  hope  being  anchored  in  a 
future  world.  To  support,  still  more  to  exalt  us,  heaven  must  mingle  with  earth. 
To  direct  a  vessel  upon  the  ocean  there  must  be  two  elements  at  work,  the  air  must 
modify  the  agency  of  the  water ;  to  set  a  vessel  at  rest  there  must  be  more  elements 
than  one  employed,  and  the  earth  must  afford  the  means  of  resisting  the  breezes  and 
the  sea.  Such  is  the  position  in  the  voyage  of  this  life.  The  earthly  and  the 
heavenly  elements  must  combina,  or  we  are  powerless.  Confined  to  the  single 
element  of  our  corrupted  nature,  we  are  the  sport  of  every  accident,  we  have  no  rules 
for  our  navigation.  But  they  who  join  to  the  human  nature  the  higher  element, 
they  have  a  power  that  guides  them  to  the  everlasting  haven.  To  have  the  great 
object  of  our  thoughts  placed  beyond  the  chances  of  human  life  is  to  place 
ourselves  beyond  them.     (W.  A.  Butler.) 


CHAPS,  xxry.,  XXT.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  91 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Veb.  2.  But  Kadab  and  Abihu  died  before  their  fatber. — The  death  of  Nadab  and 
Ahihu  : — Learn  :  I.  That  sin  invebts  thb  natural  ordeb  of  thinob.  "  They  died 
before  their  father."  11.  That  sin  deprives  of  blessings  which  God  can  bestow. 
They  "  had  no  children."  III.  That  sin  often  overwhelms  with  fearfxtl  ruin. 
IV.  That  sin  is  often  mentioned  in  histort  to  warn  of  its  consequences. 
(J.  Wolfendale.)  Sad  deaths : — I.  The  sins  which  caused  them.  1.  Dis- 
obedience to  Divine  injunction.  2.  Gross  inconsistency.  3.  Rashness  in  approach- 
ing God.  4.  Presumptuous  in  act.  II.  The  punishment  which  followed  the  sins. 
1.  A  dishonourable   death.     2.  A  sudden  death.     3.  An  OTeiwhelming  death. 


4.  A  retributive  death,    {ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


Vbb.  7.  That  were  Instructed  in  the  songrs  of  the  Lord. — Mu${e  and  worthip ; — 

In  the  services  of  the  Jewish  temple  all  is  devout,  exalted,  appropriate,  devotional, 
impressive,  and  soul-subduing,  because  the  musicians  themselves  are  close  to  the 
heart  of  the  great  Jehovah  ;  the  worshipping  congregation  hears  His  voice  with  awe, 
"  as  the  sound  of  many  waters,"  and  the  priests  of  the  temple  lift  their  reverent 
thoughts  to  the  great  "I  Am,"  with  every  cloud  of  incense  that  floats  above  the 
altar.  I.  The  moral  purpose  op  music.  All  other  aspects  of  music  in  religious 
service,  that  merely  show  off  voices,  and  entertain  the  jaded  senses  of  the  crowd, 
without  a  devotional  spirit  and  moral  purpose  behind  them,  may  be  theatrical  and 
imposing,  and  to  a  certain  extent  moving,  but  they  do  not  rise  higher  than  the 
altitude  of  a  passing  mood.  Musical  effect  is  one  thing — musical  sincerity 
another.  Words  may  be  eloquent ;  they  are  useless  when  they  do  not  touch  the 
soul.  Church  music  may  be  charming ;  it  is  but  an  idle  breath  when  no  message 
of  spiritual  power  goes  from  the  singer  to  him  who  listens.  The  Puritans  and 
Spartans  were  both  agreed  that  luxury  of  sound  was  sometimes  mischievous.  The 
Puritan  said,  "  Sweet  music  at  first  delighteth  the  ears,  but  afterward  corrupteth 
and  depraveth  the  mind."  Timotheus,  the  Milesian,  added  a  twelfth  string  to  his 
harp,  for  which  he  was  severely  punished  by  the  Spartans.  They  feared  this 
luxury  of  sound  would  effeminate  the  people.  Music  is  not  only  closely  related  to 
mind,  but  to  morals  as  well ;  and.  Church- wise,  this  moral  quality  makes  its  swift 
appeal  to  the  emotional  sense ;  the  exact  relation  of  music  to  the  emotions  and  the 
effect  of  melody  upon  the  listener  are  truly  and  eloquently  described  by  Mr.  Haweis : 
"  Like  the  sound  of  bells  at  night  breaking  the  silence,  only  to  lead  the  spirit  into 
deeper  peace ;  like  a  leaden  cloud  at  morn,  rising  in  grey  twilight,  to  hang  as  a 
golden  mist  before  the  furnace  of  the  sun ;  like  the  dull,  deep  pain  of  one  who  sits 
in  an  empty  room  watching  the  shadows  of  the  firelight  full  of  memories ;  like  the 
plaint  of  souls  that  are  wasted  with  sighing ;  like  paeans  of  exalted  praise ;  like 
sudden  songs  from  the  open  gates  of  paradise— is  music.  Like  one  who  stands  in 
the  midst  of  hot  and  terrible  battle,  drunk  with  the  fiery  smoke  and  hearing  the 
roar  of  cannon  in  a  trance ;  like  one  who  finds  himself  in  a  long  cathedral  aisle, 
and  hears  the  pealing  organ,  and  sees  a  kneeling  crowd  smitten  with  fringes  of 
coloured  light;  like  one  who,  from  a  precipice,  leaps  out  upon  the  warm  mid- 
summer air,  toward  the  peaceful  valleys  below,  and  feeling  himself  buoyed  up  with 
wings  that  suddenly  fail  him,  wakens  in  great  despair  from  his  wild  dream— so  is 
he  who  can  listen  and  understand."  Such  is  the  mission  of  music,  which  George 
Eliot  characterises  as  love  in  search  of  a  word.  II.  There  can  be  no  sort  of 
question  that  the  religious  bodies  which  give  the  people  most  to  do  in  thb 

SERVICE,  AND  EXACT  FROM  THE  CHOIR  MUSIC  OF  THE  MOST  DEVOTIONAL  TYPE,  ARE  GAIN- 
ING THE  LARGEST  NUMBER  OF  WORSHIPPERS.  lu  the  first  particular  the  Roman 
Catholic  Church  is  seriously  defective  ;  but  in  the  second  particular  it  must  be  con- 
ceded that  Protestants  have  absolutely  nothing  "  approaching  the  grandeur  of  the 
Roman  Catholic  masses,  where  we  have  a  mind  like  that  of  Mozart  or  Beethoven 
steadily  working  out,  in  strains  of  incomparable  depth  and  pathos,  a  great  con- 
nected series  of  thoughts,  embodying  all  the  varied  phases  of  religious  emotion." 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.       [CHAPS,  xxvi.,  xzm. 

What  man,  capable  of  profoundest  feeling,  has  not  been  thrilled  to  his  heart's  depth 
by  the  great  cathedral  music  of  the  Romish  Church  ?  Presbyterian  and  Con- 
gregational churches  have  been  absolutely  forced  into  warmer,  more  varied,  and 
more  worshipful  forms  of  service  by  the  hunger  of  the  people  and  by  the  pressure 
of  competition  from  without.  On  this  point  allow  me  to  quote  the  strong  language 
of  Professor  Waldo  S.  Pratt,  of  Hartford  Theological  Seminary,  one  of  the  most 
rigid  and  orthodox  of  Congregational  institutions.  He  writes :  "  American  Dissent- 
ing churches  have  begun  to  see  that  in  their  protest  against  the  Episcopacy  of  the 
eighteenth  century  they  went  to  the  extreme  in  many  matters.  They  have  not  only 
fallen  into  bald  and  irregular  habits  of  worship,  but  in  their  exaltation  of  the  teach- 
ing ofi&ce  of  the  pulpit  they  have  almost  forgotten  the  worshipping  office  of  the  pew. 
Accordingly,  throughout  the  land  arises  a  cry  for  the  enrichment  of  public  worship. 
Hence  the  growing  use  of  responsive  reading,  of  formulae  of  prayer  and  confession, 
of  singing  in  which  all  the  people  may  join."  Barren  worship  is  productive  of  no 
such  blessed  inspirations  and  emotions  as  follow  what  is  truly  congregational 
■worship,  ni.  I  am  ready  to  grant  the  existence  of  certain  dangees.  1.  One  is, 
that  the  music  may  be  simply  an  entertainment.  When  Archbishop  Stephens,  of 
New  York,  was  dying,  he  took  the  hand  of  a  friend  and  whispered,  almost  with  his 
last  breath,  •'  Come  to  the  funeral.  The  music  will  be  splendid."  2.  Another 
danger  is  that  the  service,  largely  ritualistic,  may  be  emptied  of  all  feeling  of  true 
devotion.  Dr.  Lyman  Abbott  notes  a  great  absence  of  seriousness  in  the  cathedral 
services  of  Antwerp,  Cologne,  and  Paris.  And  upon  this  phase  of  the  subject  I  will 
only  remark  that  three  principles  must  be  duly  observed  in  the  construction  of  a 
satisfactory  ritual — (1)  The  sentiment  of  reverence  must  be  increased,  and  not 
diminished.  All  tendencies  toward  trivialness  in  the  treatment  of  the  great 
realities  symbolised  by  worship  must  be  sternly  reproved.  (2)  There  should  be 
entire  fitness  of  parts.  Music,  responses,  prayers,  must  not  be  permitted  to  over- 
weight each  other.  Proportion  is  as  necessary  in  service  as  it  is  in  architecture. 
(3)  Concentration  of  effects.  The  aim  of  aU  worship  should  be  to  bring  God 
nearer,  and  to  lift  the  soul  in  adoration.  Whatever  contributes  to  these  results — 
though  it  be  an  innovation — ought  at  least  to  receive  a  respectful  hearing  in  the 
court  of  reason.    {F.  Stanley  Root,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 


Vbr.  6.  For  God  blessed  Mm. — The  bletsing  of  Obed-edom : — Learn — I.  That  God 

WILL   HONODB   SIGNAL   SEBVICE.      II.   ThAT    SIGNAL   SERVICE    THUS    REWARDED    IS   COM- 

UENDED  TO  OUR  NOTICE.  1.  That  WO  may  discern  the  goodness  of  God.  2.  That 
we  may  imitate  the  example.  {J.  Wolfendale.)  The  blessing  of  Obed-edom : — 
I.  What  it  consists  of.  1.  Family  increase.  2.  Family  honour.  3.  Family 
reputation.   II.  How  it  is  oained.    1.  By  a  right  mind.    2.  Bj  right  action.    (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XXVn. 


■Vbbs.  1-34.  Now  the  children  of  laia-eh— Wisdom,  kindneit,  and  folly: — In 
reading  this  chapter  we  are  struck  with  three  features  of  David's  rule.  1.  The 
presence  of  royal  wisdom  in — 1.  Securing  the  safety  of  his  kingdom  by  a  sufficient 
militia  without  sustaining  a  burdensome  standing  army.  One  month's  practice  in 
the  year  would  suffice  to  maintain  their  soldierly  qualities  without  seriously  inter- 
fering with  their  civil  pursuits  (ver.  1).  2.  Adopting  the  system  of  promotion 
by  merit.  In  the  list  of  captains  (vers.  2-15)  we  meet  with  names  of  men  that  had 
distinguished  themselves  by  their  courage  and  capacity,  and  who  had  "  earned  their 
promotion."  Favouritism  is  a  ruinous  policy,  and  fatal  to  kings  and  ministers. 
3.  Limiting  his  own  personal  requirements  to  a  moderate  demand.  David  lived  as 
became  such  a  king  as  he  was,  but  he  did  not  indulge  in  a  costly  and  oppressive 
"  civil  list  "  (see  vers.  25-31).     4.  Choosing  so  sagacious  a  counsellor  as  Ahithophel 


CHAP,  xxvin.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  93 

(2  Sam.  xvii.  1-3,  14),  and  so  true  and  brave  a  friend  as  Hushai  (2  Sam.  xvii.  7-14). 

2.  The  presence  of  personal  kindness.  Although  David  acted,  most  wisely,  on  the 
principle  that  the  highest  posts  should  be  reserved  for  the  most  capable  men  and 
those  who  "  deserved  well  of  their  country,"  yet  he  did  not  neglect  his  own  kindred 
in  the  hour  of  his  opportunity.  We  find,  amongst  others  of  the  foremost  men,  the 
names  of  his  relatives,  Asahel  (ver.  7) ;  Jonathan,  his  uncle  (ver.  82) ;  Joab  (ver,  34). 

3.  The  presence  of  royal  folly.  We  are  reminded  here  of  the  grievous  error,  the 
disastrous  departure  from  rectitude,  when,  notwithstanding  the  wise  counsel  and 
somewhat  strenuous  opposition  of  Joab,  he  insisted  on  numbering  the  people 
(vers.  23,  24).     Regarding  the  folly  of  the  king,  we  learn — I.  That  human  natube, 

EVEN   AT     ITS   BEST,   BEARS    THE     STAIN      OF     IMPERFECTION.        Therefore — 1.   Let      US 

conclude  that  there  is  certain  to  be  something  in  ourselves  which  needs  to  be 
corrected.  2.  Let  us  not  be  hasty  in  estimating  the  character  of  others.  Regarding 
David's  kindness  we  learn — II.  That  we  do  well  to  use  our  own  elevation  to 
SERVE  our  kindred.  Nepotism  is  a  crime  as  well  as  a  sin,  but,  when  other  things 
are  equal,  and  when  opportunity  offers,  we  should  surely  remember  those  whom, 
by  the  ties  of  affinity,  God  commends  to  our  kindness,  and  those  whom,  by 
profession  of  friendship  in  earlier  and  humbler  days,  we  promised  to  assist.  And 
in  Tiew  of  the  king's  wisdom,  we  may  learn — III.  That  goodness  and  wisdom 
together  are  a  source  or  incalculable  benefit.  David  without  his  devoutness 
would  have  been  nothing  to  his  country  or  his  kind  ;  without  his  wisdom  he  would 
have  been  little  more.  Piety  and  prudence  together  are  a  power  lor  God  and 
man.    (IF.  Clarkson,  B.A.) 


CHAPTER  XXVm. 


Vers.  1-8.  And  David  assembled  all  the  princes  of  Israel. — David^s  addres$  to 
the  princes  : — I.  The  attitude  which  David  assumed.  II.  The  spirit  which  David 
manifested.  III.  The  ambition  which  David  cherished.  IV.  The  confession 
which  David  makes.  (J.  Wolfendale.)  The  testimony  of  a  noble  life : — I.  In  his 
choice  to  the  throne  God  displays  His  sovereignty.    II.  In  his  acquisition  of 

THE  KINGDOM  GoD  MANIFESTS  HiS  PROVIDENCE.       III.    In    HIS    SON's    SUCCESSION  TO  THE 

THRONE  GoD  FULFILS  His  PROMISE.  {lUd.)  He  Shall  buUd  My  house. — The 
material  and  the  spiritual  temple  : — I.  The  Jewish  dispensation  mainly  external. 

1.  Sacrifices.  2.  Types.  3.  Observances.  4.  Priestly  caste.  6.  Sacred  buildings. 
II.  Reasons  for  this.     1.  Early  age  of  the  world,  revelation,  and  human  thought. 

2.  Necessity  of  strong  stamps  to  impress  the  nation  in  its  youth,  and  keep  it 
separate  from  heathendom.  8.  Consequent  necessity  of  indulging  it  in  manifold 
visible  symbols.  4.  The  repetition  and  induration  of  signs  prepared  the  way  for 
the  purely  mental  reign  of  the  Messiah.  IH.  Hence  the  function  of  the  taber- 
nacle AND  THE  TEMPLE.  1.  As  the  place  where  God  had  demonstrably  set  His 
name.     2.  Where  the  visible  glory  had  been  and  could  be  seen  at  a  due  crisis. 

3.  Where  the  embodied  signs  of  the  covenant  were  stored.  4.  As  the  house  of 
sacrifice  (2  Chron.  vii.  12).  5.  As  the  house  of  prayer  (Isa.  Ivi.  7).  6.  As  the 
symbol  of  unity  in  worship  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  12).     7.  As  God's  own  dwelling-place 

1   Kings  vi.  12,  18).     IV.  After  its  pollution  and  plllagb.     1.   By   Shishak 

1  Kings  xiv.  25,  26).     2.  Under  Jehoash   (2  Kings  xii.  17).     3.  Under  Ahaz 

2  Kings  xvi.  14).  4.  Under  Hezekiah  (2  Kings  xviii,  13).  Its  sanctity  had  been 
impaired  through  the  detections  of  the  people.  Spiritual  religion  began  afterwards 
to  grow,  so  that  Isaiah  was  able  to  proclaim  before  the  captivity  (Ixvi.  1,  2). 
"Heaven  is  My  throne  .  .  .  what  house  will  ye  buUd  Me?  saith  the  Lord"; 
Malachi  was  able  decisively  to  prophesy  (i.  11),  "  In  every  place  incense  shall  be 
offered  to  My  name."  The  old  worship  was  gradually  ceasing  to  fulfil  its  function; 
the  new  dispensation  of  the  law  of  the  Spirit  and  of  liberty  was  coming  in  ;  and  at 
last  the  Messiah  declared  irrevocably  that  old  things  were  passed  away,  and  that 
the  hour  was  coming  when  neither  in  Gerizim  nor  in  Jerusalem  the  Father  should 
be  worshipped,  no  more  for  ever,  locally  or  visibly,  but  only  truly  with  the  inner 
worship  of  spirit  and  of  truth.  This  was  a  great  point  with  St.  Stephen  (Acts  vii. 
48)  and  St.  Paul  (Acts  xvii.  24).  V.  What  is  the  spiritual  temple  by  which 
Christ   bkplacsd    thb    old    honoured  visible  sign?     1.    The  whole  invisible 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvm. 

company  of  those  who  are  righteous  through  faith  (1  Pet.  ii.  4;  Isa.  Ivii.  15; 
1  Cor.  iiL  16).  2.  The  body  of  every  true  son  of  God  (1  Cor.  vi.  19 ;  John  xiv.  13). 
3.  In  heaven,  the  special  pervading  presence  of  the  Almighty  (Rev.  xxi.  22 ;  Acta 
xvii.  28).  VI.  What,  then,  abe  Christian  places  of  worship  ?  1.  Not  repre- 
sentatives of  the  temple,  but  of  the  synagogue.  2.  In  all  places  where  Christians 
meet  for  meditation  and  prayer  Christ  is  equally  present  (ilatt.  xviii.  20). 
8.  Venerable  and  solemn  merely  from  association,  intention,  and  consent.  4.  All 
adornment  of  them  a  question  of  edification  for  the  congregation.  5.  No  one  part 
of  them  more  holy  than  another  except  by  association.  VII.  Moral  reasons  of 
this  in  the  Christian  economy.  1.  Danger  of  putting  trust  in  anything  short  of 
God  Himself  in  His  own  immediate  moral  relations  to  the  soul.  2.  Temptation 
to  set  our  affection  on  things  below  instead  of  things  above,  and  making  our 
worship  one  of  act  instead  of  disposition  and  the  intelligence.  8.  Tendency  of  all 
religious  bodies  to  idolatrise  their  symbols.  VIII.  Lesson  :  To  avoid  superstition. 
{W.  M.  Sinclair,  M.A.)  And  leave  it  for  an  inheritance. — The  Christian 
inheritance : — Good  and  gieat  men  have  always  been  jealous  for  the  cause  of  God 
in  the  world,  and  when  about  to  die,  that  feeling  has  sometimes  been  intensified. 
Moses,  Eli,  &c.  I.  The  estate  of  Christ's  Church  is  an  inheeitance.  It  consists 
of  the  knowledge  of  the  triune  God,  our  relations  to  Him  and  our  obligations  as 
revealed  to  us  in  His  Word.     II.  This  inheritance  is  tours.     III.  The  FOBCEa 

WHICH   WOULD   BRING  WRECK  AND   EUIN   TO   THIS   INHEBITANCE.      Sacerdotalism  On  tho 

one  hand,  rationalism  on  the  other.     (J5p.  Baker.) 

Vers.  9,  21.  And  then,  Solomon  my  son,  know  thou  the  God  of  thy  father. — 
God's  relation  to  human  life : — Learn — I.  That  our  life  is  exposed  to  God's 
INSPECTION.  II.  That  our  service  to  God  should  spring  from  sincere  motives. 
ni.  That  our  welfare  depends  upon  oub  conduct  towabds  God.  (J.  Wolfendale.) 
The  God  of  thy  father  : — 1.  The  rich  experience  behind  these  words.  2.  The  force 
of  parental  affection  in  giving  that  experience.  3.  The  susceptibility  of  youth  to 
profit  by  the  teaching.  {Ibid.)  Fathers  and  children  : — We  see  here  one  genera- 
tion— 1.  Transmitting  the  knowledge  of  God  to  its  successor.  2.  Enjoining  the 
service  of  God  upon  its  successors.  3.  Indicating  God's  method  of  dealing  with  its 
successsor.  4.  Bequeathing  its  unfulfilled  intentions  to  its  successor.  (M. 
Braithicaite.)  The  knoioledge  of  God  the  first  principle  of  religion  : — I.  What 
the  knowledge  of  God  implies.  1.  A  firm  belief  of  His  existence.  2.  Just  and 
regular  sentiments  concerning  the  perfections  of  His  nature.  Whatever  argues  a 
real  imperfection  or  frailty  in  men  ought  not  in  the  most  distant  resemblance  to 
be  ascribed  to  God.  3.  A  reverent  contemplation  of  Him,  according  to  the 
discoveries  He  hath  been  pleased  to  make  of  His  perfections  in  His  Word,  works, 
and  the  ways  of  providence.  Let  us  frequently  contemplate — (1)  His  almighty 
power.  (2)  His  holiness.  (3)  His  wisdom.  (4)  His  veracity.  (5)  His  infinite 
mercy.  H.  The  efficacy  and  influence  this  knowledge  of  God  ought  to 
HAVE  UPON  us.  The  design  and  end  of  knowledge  is  not  only  to  enlarge  and 
enlighten  the  mind,  but  to  direct  the  practice  and  mend  the  heart.  The  true 
knowledge  of  God  should  produce  in  us — 1.  Reverence.  2.  Holiness.  3.  Depen- 
dence upon  Him  for  wisdom  (Jas.  i.  6).  4.  Confidence  in  His  promises.  5.  Fear. 
6.  Gratitude.  (J.  Mason, M.A.)  Solomon  succeeding  David : — No  better  advice  could 
have  been  given  to  the  young  sovereign  of  Israel.  No  better  advice  can  to-day  be 
given  to  the  young  sovereigns  who  fill  our  churches  and  Sunday-schools.  So  far 
as  Solomon  followed  this  advice  he  was  prosperous  beyond  any  that  went  before 
him ;  as  soon  as  he  forgot  this  advice  the  terrible  warning  with  which  the  verse 
ends  was  fulfilled,  and  the  disappointed  misanthrope  in  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes 
tells  us  of  the  sorrows  of  a  man  whom  God  has  forsaken.  As  God  chose  Solomon, 
BO  does  He  choose  every  young  man  and  woman  for  some  special  work,  which  they 
alone  can  best  accomplish.  There  are  four  things  to  be  noticed  in  this  charge. 
I.  Know  thou  God.  1.  Through  the  Bible.  2.  Providence.  8.  Through  the 
communings  of  our  own  heart.  II.  Know  thou  thy  father's  God.  Every  genera- 
tion need  not  begin  at  the  beginning,  as  though  the  fathers  knew  nothing  about 
God.  There  is  much  foolish  talk  about  thinking  these  great  truths  concerning 
God  and  religion  through  for  ourselves.  That  our  fathers  served  God  is  a  reason 
why  we  should  not  discard  Him.  III.  Serve  Him  with  a  perfect  heart. 
IV.  Serve  Him  with  a  wiluno  hind.  It  is  said  that  when  the  Princess  Victoria 
was  called  to  the  kingdom,  the  messengers,  who  were  the  highest  dignitaries  of 
State,  arrived  at  her  palaoe  from  the  death-bed  of  the  king  very  early  in  the 


CHAP.xxvin.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  95 

morning.    They  had  great  difficulty  in  arousing  any  one;  but  at  length  the 
princess's  maid  appeared,  who  said  that  her  mistress  was  in  such  a  sweet  sleep  that 
it  was  a  pity  to  disturb  her.     •'  Tell  her,"  said  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  "that 
we  have  come  on  business  of  importance  to  the  queen,  and  even  her  slumbers  must 
give  way  to  that."     Very  soon  the  princess  appeared,  and  was  invested  with  royal 
robes  and  preroftatives.    To  every  young  person  comes  the  messenger  of  God  telling 
them  of  their  Father's  good  pleasure  that  they  should  inherit  the  kingdom.     No 
one  can  al'forJ  to  neglect  the  summons.     {F.   E.   Clark.)         David's  charfie   to 
Solomon: — These  words  contain — 1.  Advice  given  to  a  hopeful   son.     2.  By  an 
excellent    father.      3.    Under    most    affecting    circumstances.      I.    The    cotrKSE 
PRESCRIBED.     1.  To  kuow  God.     This  implies— (1)  That  mankind  by  nature  do 
not  know  God.     (a)  They  do  not  understand  God's  relations  to  mankind,  as  their 
rightful  Sovereign;   their  Guide  in  difficulties;   their  Kedeemer  from  evil;  their 
Friend  in  necessities  (Psa.  x.  4).     (b)  They  do  not  acknowledge  God  in  these 
relations,     (c)  They  do  not  enjoy  God  in  these  relations  (Eph.  ii.  12).     (2)  That 
the  knowledge  of  God  must  be  sought  to  be  enjoyed.     2.  To  serve  God  with  a, 
perfect  heart  and  with  a  willing  mind.     (1)  By  preserving  attention  to  His  guidance 
(Acts  iii.  22,23;  Heb.  xii.  25).     (2)  By  habitual  dependence  on  Christ's  media- 
tion (Col.  ii.  6).     (3)  By  steadfastly  resisting  Satan  (1  Pet.  v.  8, 9).     (4)  By  aspiring 
after  spotless  purity  (2  Cor.  vii.  1 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  14).     (5)  By  doing  good  to  mankind 
for  God's  sake  (Gal.  vi.  10;  Eom.  xiv.  17, 18).     (6)  Serve  Him  alone  (Matt.  iv.  10). 
(7)  Seek  to  please  Him  in  all  things  (Matt.  vi.  22 ;  1  Cor.  x.  33).     (8)  Serve  Him 
from  a  principle  of  grateful  affection  (Eom.  xii.  1).     (9)  And  in  cheerful  hope 
(1  Pet.  i.  13).     3.  Thus  to  know  and  serve  God  must  be  justly  denominated  a 
course  of  acceptable  piety.     It  is  acceptable  piety — (1)  In  opposition  to  the  com- 
plimental  piety  of  the  Antinomian ;   for  it  includes  actual  service.     (2)   To  the 
affected  piety  of  the  hypocrite,  for  it  includes  sincerity  of  heart.      (3)    To  the 
erroneous  piety  of  the  superstitious,  for  it  includes  piety  directed  by  the  knowledge 
of  God.    (4)  To  the  servUe  piety  of  the  Pharisee,  for  it  includes  service  cheerfully 
rendered.     (5)  To  the  inconstant  pious  intervals  of  unstable  professors  (Hos.  vi.  4). 
II.  The  arguments  by  which  it  is  urged.     1.  From  the  knowledge  of   God  as 
our  Observer.     2.  From  His  goodness  as  our  Kedeemer.     3.  From  His  just  severity 
as  our  Judge.     (1)  God  cannot  be  imposed  upon  (1  Sam.  ii.  3 ;   Prov.  xvi.  2 ; 
Eccles.  xii.  14).      (2)    Forsaking   God  is  highly  resented  by  Him,  as  implying 
ingratitude,  treachery,  and  folly  (Jer.  ii.  13,  19).     (3)  Apostasy  from  God  is  justly 
punished   with  eternal   banishment  from  Him   (Job.  xxi.    14;    Matt.   xxv.  41). 
Application:  1.  You  must  serve  God  on  earth,  or  you  cannot  live  with  Him  in 
heaven  (Matt.  vii.  21).     2.  That  you  may  serve  God  acceptably  you  must  first 
know  Him  (Exod.  v.  2).     3.  The  knowledge  of  God  should  be  restlessly  and  confi- 
dently sought   (Prov.   ii.  3-5;   Jer.   xxxi.   31-34).     (Sketches  of  Four  Hundred 
Sermons.)        David's  instructioiu  to  Solomon  .-—These  words  were  not  spoken  from 
the  death-bed,  and  yet  behind  them  there  is  the  background  of  death,  judgment, 
and  eternity.     When  dying  men  or  women  are  speaking  to  us  we  know  their  words 
are  few  and  -well  ordered.     Especially  so  are  the  last  utterances  of  parents  to  their 
children,  if  there  is  sufficient  strength  left  of  mind  and  body.     In  this  instruction 
to  Solomon  we  feel  just  as  if  the  Spirit  of  God  gave  David  inspiration.     Just  as  if 
he  looked  into  Solomon  prophetically  and  saw  both  his  weakness  and  his  strength, 
words  shaped  themselves  upon  David's  tongue  that  exactly  fitted  the  best  and 
worst  in  the  youthful  life  that  lay  before  him.     1.  David  felt,  "  I  cannot  offer  the 
chart  of  my  life  to  my  own  son  when  he  is  beginning  his  voyage  and  say,  'Just 
sail  as  I  sailed,'  for  if  so,  he  will  run  on  reefs  that  I  was  nearly  foundering  upon,  he 
will  run  on  the  quic'  sands  that  nearly  ruined  me."    Those  lights  that  lie  around 
our  dangerous  rock-bound  coast  are  all  very  fine,  and  our  lighting  system  is  one  of 
the  glories  of  our  British  commerce.      How  all  our  coasts   are  lighted   up   at 
dangerous  places  at  the  expense  of  millions  of  money  spent  in  building  lighthouses, 
fitting  them  with  the  best  lights,  and  keeping  efficient  men  to  take  charge  of  them ! 
But  take  the  best  of  them,  and  ask  any  sailor,  and  he  will  tell  you  that  five  minutes 
of  the  sun  itself  is  worth  them  all  together.     So  it  is  with  the  best  human  testimony, 
the  best  earthly  wisdom,  and  the  best  human  experience.     What  a  blessing  when 
we  can  lift  our  heads  right  above  it  all  to  the  sun  that  never  fails  us !     "  Know  thou 
the  God  of  thy  father."    2.  See  how  David  recommended  his  God  to  Solomon.     In 
Old  Testament  days  to  name  His  name  apart  from  any  human  qualification  and 
attachment  was  then  something  too  large,  too  vague,  too  profound.     But  when 
Pavid  speaks  of  "  the  God  of  thy  father,"  how  homely  it  makes  God !    3.  After  all, 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxnn. 

grace  is  not  an  heirloom.  It  cannot  be  bequeathed.  Solomon  had  to  know  God 
for  himself.  Of  the  godly  Eli's  family  it  was  said,  "Eli's  sons  were  sons  of  Belial." 
4.  What  wonderful  instruction  in  the  philosophy  of  conduct  is  in  religion,  if  we 
would  only  believe  Him  1  Know  Him,  and  let  your  knowledge  be  of  the  practical 
kind.  I  said  this  to  my  son  the  other  day :  "  My  lad  if  I  were  beginning  just  where 
you  are,  and  only  twelve  years  of  age,  if  I  knew  about  myself  and  about  what  a  fool 
I  am  at  bottom,  about  how  bad  I  am  by  nature,  and  what  sin  and  grace  really 
mean,  what  the  Word  of  God  means,  and  what  Christ  means — oh,  my  lad,  if  I 
were  back  with  you,  I  think  I  would  make  more  of  life  than  I  have  done."  I  think 
David  is  saying  all  that  to  young  Solomon.  "  If  I  could  begin  all  over  again, 
Solomon,  if  I  coald  stand  where  you  are  standing,  I  would  make  life  to  mean  just 
one  thing — God  1  God  I  God  I  God  I  "  {John  McNeill.)  The  duty  and  advan- 
tage of  knowing  and  tcrving  the  God  of  our  fathers  : — I.  The  nature  of  the 
DUTIES  HEBE  SPOKEN  OF.  1.  You  are  to  know  the  God  of  your  fathers.  This 
means  such  a  practical  acknowledgment  of  Him  as  engages  a  religious  regard  to 
Him  as  our  chief  good  and  highest  end,  that  we  may  glorify  Him  here,  and  enjoy 
Him  for  ever,  in  the  way  of  His  own  appointment.  2.  You  are  to  serve  the  God 
of  your  fathers.  His  ordinances  and  institutions  are  to  be  observed  in  all  acts  of 
religious  worship,  and  His  commands  are  to  be  obeyed  in  a  departure  from  all 
iniquity  and  in  a  performance  of  all  moral  duties,  with  a  professed  subjection  to 
the  gospel  of  Christ.  3.  You  are  to  serve  the  God  of  your  fathers  with  a  perfect 
heart  and  with  a  willing  mind.  There  is  a  sort  of  perfection  which  consists  in 
integrity  and  uprightness,  in  opposition  to  prevailing  hypocrisy,  and  which  must 
be  found  in  the  heart  if  ever  we  serve  God  in  an  acceptable  manner  (1  Kings  xv. 
3,  14 ;  'J.  Chron.  xxv.  2).  II.  The  manner  in  which  these  duties  are  recom- 
mended. 1.  This  important  advice  is  directed  to  every  one  of  you,  as  if  you  were 
mentioned  by  name.  2.  It  is  the  God  of  your  fathers  who  is  recommended  to 
you.  8.  It  is  the  God  whom  your  fathers  themselves  have  recommended,  and 
can  recommend  to  you.  4.  It  is  the  God  to  whom  your  fathers  have  devoted 
you,  and  for  whom  they  have  trained  you  up.  5.  It  is  the  God  of  your 
fathers,  who  has  encouraged  you,  by  His  covenant  promise,  to  know  and 
serve  Him.  6.  It  is  the  God  of  your  fathers,  who  has  as  much  right  to 
your  knowing  and  serving  Him  as  to  theirs  (Deut.  xxix.  10-12).  7.  It  is  the 
God  who  will  so  much  the  more  resent  your  disregard  of  Him,  because  He 
was  your  father's  God.  8.  It  is  the  God  before  whom  you  must  appear, 
together  with  your  fathers,  in  judgment  at  the  last  day.  (J.  Guyse.) 
Godly  parents  concerned  for  the  piety  of  their  children  : — I.  What  is  implied  in 
children  recognising  God  as  the  God  of  their  fathers  ?  1.  That  they  stand 
in  a  covenant  relation  to  God  through  His  promise  to  their  fathers  to  be  their  God 
and  the  God  of  their  seed.  2.  When  children  are  required  to  recognise  God  as 
their  father's  God  they  should  recall  to  their  minds  the  pious  instructions  which 
their  parents  have  communicated  to  them.  3.  When  children  are  required  to 
recognise  God  as  their  father's  God,  this  should  remind  them  of  the  many 
instances  of  God's  faithfulness,  and  kindness,  and  mercy  which  their  fathers  have 
experienced  at  God's  hand.     II.  The   earnest   desire   of   godlt   parents    for 

ADVANCING   THE    SPIRITUAL    AND    ETERNAL    INTERESTS    OF    THEIR    CHILDREN.       1.    It   is 

necessary  that  children  should  know  the  God  of  their  fathers.  2.  There  is  nothing 
on  which  the  heart  of  a  pious  parent  is  more  deeply  fixed  than  the  religious 
interests  of  his  children.  III.  The  motives  and  arguments  by  which  this  dutt 
OF  childben  is  enforced.  1.  Youth  is  the  most  advantageous  period  for  entering 
on  a  religious  life.  In  every  science  or  profession  eai-ly  application  is  deemed 
necessary  to  future  excellence.  2.  The  children  of  godly  parents  have  pre-eminent 
advantages  above  other  young  persons  for  entering  on  a  religious  life.  3.  The 
obstinacy  of  young  persons  who  have  been  religiously  educated,  and  after  all 
forsake  the  God  of  their  fathers,  is  especially  criminal,  and  attended  with  great 
aggravation.  4.  That  those  young  persons  who  have  been  religiously  educated, 
and  forsake  the  God  of  their  fathers,  are  in  danger  of  greater  punishment  than 
other  men.  (James  Hay,  D.D.)  Christian  education  .- — I.  Without  sincerity 
and  seriousness,  our  religion  can  be  of  no  value  in  the  bight  of  the  omnis- 
cient God.    II.  It  is  important  in  every  point  of  view  that  young  persons, 

EVEN     FROM    THEIR     EARLIEST   CHILDHOOD,    SHOULD   BS    TAUGHT   THIS    HIGH   AND   HOLY 

LESSON — TO  BE  SINCERE  AND  SERIOUS  IN  THEIR  RELIGION ;  that  is,  in  their  whole 
conduct,  in.  To  *'  serve  God  with  a  perfect  heart  "  is  the  sum  and 
suBSTiNcat  OF  ALL  PRACTICAL  RELIGION.    {Plain  SevmoM  by  Contributors  to  th« 


CHAP.xxvm.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  97 

"  Tracts  for  the  Times")  David's  charge  to  Solomon  : — I.  The  foundations  or  a 
RELIGIOUS  LIFE.  1.  The  knowledge  of  God  (Jer.  ix.  23,  24 ;  John  xvii.  3).  This 
knowledge  is  not  a  mere  abstract  conception  of  God,  but  a  burning  memory  of  the 
Friend  of  the  family.  2.  A  dedication  of  ourselves  to  His  service.  11.  The 
SAFEGUABDS  OF  A  RELIGIOUS  LIFE.  1.  A  consciousness  of  the  Divine  presence  in  the 
heart.  2.  A  consciousness  of  the  Divine  omniscience  prevents  evil  thoughts. 
III.  The  encoubaqement  op  a  belioious  life.  "  If  thou  seek  Him,  He  will  be 
found  of  thee."  1.  In  every  department  of  life  man  is  a  seeker.  2.  In  the 
department  of  spiritual  life  our  gain  is  the  greatest.  IV.  The  warning  of  a 
religious  life.  (Homilist.)  Royal  regard  for  the  right  training  of  children : — 
Eev.  Benjamin  Smith,  in  his  "  Gems  He-set,"  reminds  us  of  an  interesting  circum- 
stance concerning  the  royal  family  of  England.  A  dignitary  of  the  Established 
Church  had  been  examining  some  of  the  royal  children  in  the  Catechism.  The 
divine  was  thoroughly  satisfied  v/ith  the  readiness  and  the  correctness  of  the 
replies.  Doubtless  he  would  be  pleased  to  be  able  with  truthfulaess  to  commend 
the  children  of  the  Queen.  He  manifested  his  good  sense,  however,  by  doing  this 
in  an  indirect  manner,  praising  the  lady  who  was  their  ordinary  instructress.  Ho 
said,  "  Your  governess  deserves  high  commendation  for  teaching  you  the  Catechism 
so  accurately.  lam  delighted  with  your  proficiency."  The  young  folk  replied, 
*♦  Our  governess  does  take  great  pains  with  us  in  our  other  lessons,  but  it  is 
mamma  who  teaches  us  the  Catechism."  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  the 
Queen  of  England  was  deeply  sohcitous  that  her  children  should  from  their 
earliest  years  be  well  acquainted  with  God's  truth.  That  truth  had  been  com- 
mended to  her  when  young  by  her  mother's  tuition  and  example.  In  her  husband, 
Albert  the  Good,  our  Queen  had  one  to  counsel  and  aid  her  in  the  training  of  their 
children.  Thus  the  highest  lady  in  these  realms,  with  cares  of  State  constantly 
pressing  on  her  attention,  and  with  godly  and  learned  men  ever  able  and  willing  to 
impart  Scriptural  instruction  to  the  royal  children,  deemed  it  her  duty  and  privilege 
to  teach  the  Catechism  to  her  loved  ones.  And  serve  Him  with  a  perfect  heart, 
and  with  a  willing  mind. — To  serve  God  the  best  way  to  prosper  in  the  world : — 
I.  What  it  is  to  serve  God.  1.  To  serve  God  is  to  sincerely  practise  all  the 
duties  of  piety.  (1)  We  must  take  heed  to  our  private  devotions — reading, 
meditation,  prayer.  (2)  We  must  discharge  the  duties  of  public  worship.  2.  To 
serve  God  is  to  practise  all  those  duties  which  we  owe  more  immediately  to  our 
fellow-creatures  and  to  ourselves.     II.  What  a  tendency  the   sbrvino  God  in 

THIS    MANNER     HAS     TO     SECURE     HiS    FAVOUR     AND     BLESSING    IN    ALL    OUB     SECULAR 

CONCERNS.  1.  This  is  evident  from  the  promises  God  has  made  in  His  Word 
(1  Tim.  iv.  8 ;  Deut.  viii.  18  ;  Prov.  x.  22 ;  Psa.  ixxiv.  10,  Ixxxiv.  2 ;  Matt.  v.  5 ; 
Bom.  viii.  28;  Eccles.  ii.  26).  2.  This  is  apparent  from  the  very  nature  and 
connection  of  things.  "  Godliness  with  contentment  is  great  gain."  (1)  It  secures 
a  man  the  most  durable  peace,  the  most  valuable  possessions,  and  gives  him  much 
more  satisfaction  and  comfort  in  that  share  of  the  world  which  providence  hath 
allotted  to  him  than  the  most  affluent  fortune  ever  afforded,  which  1  take  to  be  the 
meaning  of  the  promise,  "  Blessed  are  the  meek,  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth." 
(2)  It  preserves  a  man  from  running  into  vicious  habits  and  customs.  (3)  It 
obliges  to  the  practice  of  that  integrity,  wisdom,  and  industry  which  have  a  natural 
tendency  to  improve  our  circumstances.  3.  This  is  confirmed  by  constant  experi- 
ence and  observation.  Conclusion  :  How  greatly  mistaken  are  they  who  think  to 
prosper  in  the  world  by  stepping  aside  out  of  the  path  of  duty,  or  who  dare  to 
violate  the  sacred  obligations  of  virtue  and  religion  for  the  sake  of  a  temporal 
advantage.  (J.  Maion,  M.A.)  In  what  manner  we  are  to  $erve  God: — I.  The 
RULE  OF  WORSHIP  LAID  DOWN  IN  THE  TEXT,  which  wc  should  carcfully  observe  in 
all  our  religious  transactions  with  God.  We  must  worship  God — 1.  With  a  perfect 
lieart.  That  is — (1)  An  upright  heart :  "  in  spirit  and  in  truth "  (John  iv.  24). 
(2)  A  pure  heart.  This  stands  in  opposition  to  all  vile  affections  and  corrupt  ends 
in  worship  (1  Kings  xv.  14;  Psa.  xxvi.  6).  (3)  A  devout  and  engaged  heart.  This 
stands  opposed  to — (a)  Worldly  and  wandering  thoughts ;  (b)  a  dull  and  drowsy 
frame  in  worship,  2.  With  a  willing  mind.  (1)  We  should  always  preserve  an 
habitual  readiness  and  disposition  to  the  service  of  God,  and  oppose  and  break 
through  every  accidental  reluctance  of  the  mind  thereunto,  (2)  Our  minds  should 
be  excited  to  the  service  of  God  from  a  principle  of  gratitude  and  love.  (3)  With 
cheerfulness  of  heart  in  worship.  II.  What  is  essential  and  peculiar  to 
■Christian  worship  ?  It  must  always  be  performed  in  the  name  of  Christ 
«<Coi.  iii.  17 ;  John  xiv.  13,  14,  zvi.  23,  24,  26).      To  serve  God  in  the  name  of 

7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  Txvm. 

Christ  implies — 1.  A  dependence  on  His  mediation  for  the  acceptance  of  our 
services.  2.  A  dependence  on  His  grace  for  onr  assistance  (Phil.  iv.  13).  3.  A 
dependence  on  His  merits  for  the  atonement  of  our  guilt  (Pom.  iii.  24,  25).  4.  A- 
thankful  acknowledgment  of  this  gracious  constitution  of  His,  in  appointing  His- 
Son  to  be  Mediator  between  Him  and  His  apostate  creatures.  Application  :  1.  How 
vain  it  is  to  lay  a  great  stress  upon  any  particular  place,  or  external  forms  and 
modes  of  worship.  2.  This  should  lead  us  to  inquire  in  what  manner  our  worship 
hath  been  performed,  and  what  hath  been  the  ordinary  frame  of  our  mind  therein. 
3.  This  shows  the  need  we  have  to  prepare  our  hearts  to  serve  Him,  and  to  avoid 
everything  that  would  unfit  us  for  this  service.  4.  Hence  likewise  appears  the- 
necessity  of  keeping  the  heart  with  all  diligence  in  the  service  of  God.  {Ibid.} 
Heart  service  ; — That  which  we  do  with  the  heart  is  done  without  grudging,  or 
toil,  or  weariness.  A  willing  heart  goes  all  the  day  on  its  path  of  duty,  an 
unwilling  one  soon  tires.  All  is  nimble  and  cheerful  which  is  done  by  the  heart. 
This  is  the  only  kind  of  service  God  accepts  of  His  creatures.  This  is  the  only 
condition  in  which  men  can  render  true  service  to  Him.  If  the  heart  is  dull,  our 
service  will  be  inapt  and  untoward.  (Homiletic  Review.)  For  the  Lord  searchetli 
all  hearts,  and  understandeth  all  the  imaginations  of  the  thoughts. — God  the 
searcher  of  hearts,  and  found  of  them  that  seek  Him : — 1.  When  God  is  said  to 
search  the  heart,  the  meaning  is  He  perfectly  understands  it.  2.  The  knowledge 
which  God  has  of  the  human  heart  is  universal :  "  Searcheth  all  hearts."  3.  The 
hearts  of  men  and  the  imaginations  of  the  thoughts  are  mentioned  here  as  distinct 
objects  of  the  Divine  knowledge,  and  the  difference  between  them  is — by  the  former 
we  are  to  understand  the  passions  and  purposes  of  the  mind  ;  and  by  the  latter,  the 
paintings  of  fancy,  or  the  mere  casual  rovings  of  thought.  I  proceed  now — 
I.  Briefly  to  pkove  this  proposition,  the  Lord  searcheth  or  knoweth  all  hearts. 

1.  This  is  evident  from  the  reason  of  things.  He  that  gave  to  man  an  under- 
standing heart  must  u|iderstand  the  heart  He  gave  (Psa.  xciv.  9-11).  2.  This 
may  be  further  argued  from  His  omniscience.  3.  This  is  expressly  ascribed  to 
Him  in  the  Scriptures  (Jer.  xvii.  9,  10,  xx.  12  ;  Acts  i.  24).     H.  To  show  how 

FITLY     THIS     CONSIDERATION     IS     URGED    TO     ENFORCE     THE    DUTY     ENJOINED,     Or    hoW 

proper  it  is  to  induce  us  to  guard  and  govern  our  thoughts  at  all  times,  especially 
in  the  service  of  God.  1.  A  total  neglect  of  our  thoughts  and  the  frame  of  our 
spirits  in  the  service  of  God  shows  a  great  contempt  of  His  authority.  2.  God, 
who  knows  our  thoughts  now,  will  call  us  to  an  account  of  them  hereafter.  3.  It 
is  the  turn  and  temper  of  the  heart  which  forms  the  character  of  every  one  in  the 
sight  of  God.  4.  To  keep  a  strict  and  constant  guard  over  our  hearts  at  all  times, 
and  especially  in  His  worship,  is  the  best  evidence  we  can  have  of  our  sincerity. 
III.  Motives  to  attend  to  the  exhortation  given.  •'  If  thou  seek  Him,  He  wUl 
be  found  of  thee,"  cfec.  These  words  contain  the  most  valuable  promise  and  the 
most  awful  threatening  that  are  to  be  found  in  the  whole  book  of  God.  Notice 
particularly  the  promise.  To  seek  the  Lord  is  usually  applied  to  the  duty  of 
prayer,  but  in  the  Bible  it  is  often  put  to  denote  the  whole  of  practical  religion 
(Tsa.  xxxiv.  10  ;  Isa.  xlv.  6,  ix.  13,  vi.  5).  If  we  seek  we  shall  obtain — 
T.  His  favour.  It  is  a  much  easier  thing  to  please  God  than  some  men.  There  is 
no  such  thing  as  pleasing  these  sometimes  without  the  most  servile  compliance 
with  their  caprice,  a  conformity  to  their  manners,  and  a  connivance  at  their 
follies.  2.  His  help  (Luke  xiii.  24;  Hos.  v.  15;  Jer.  ii.  27;  2  Chron.  xxxiii.  11, 
12).  3.  His  direction  (Jas.  i.  5  ;  Prov.  ii.  6,  iii.  5,  6).  4.  His  Holy  Spirit 
(Matt.  vii.  11;  Luke  xi.  13).  The  Holy  Spirit  is  comprehensive  of  all  the  good 
things  we  can  desire.    1.  There  are  His  renewing,  sanctifying,  supporting  influences. 

2.  His  preventing,  quickening,  assisting  grace.  He  is  our  guide,  teacher — earnest 
of  the  heavenly  inheritance.  (/.  il/ason.)  The  moral  discipline  of  the  imagina- 
tion:— The  moral  cultivation  of  the  imagination  is  of  the  first  importance  to 
the  young.  I.  Its  negative  discipline.  The  imagination  must  be  restrained — 
1.  Because  our  lower  nature  will  master  our  higher.  2.  We  inherit  a  sinful 
nature,  prone  to  evil  imaginings  from  our  youth  up.  3.  We  may  sin  in  thought 
as  well  as  in  deed.  This  raises  the  question — (1)  Of  literature.  We  must  give  heed 
to  right  reading.  A  few  moments  of  tainted  literature  may  impart  a  fever  to  the 
imagination  which  will  blight  its  beauty  for  ever.  (2)  Of  art.  There  is  much 
pagan  art  in  Europe.  The  value  of  Ruskin's  art-criticisms  lies  not  in  ita 
infallibility,  but  in  its  moral  elevation.  (3)  Of  pleasure.  II.  Its  positivb 
discipline.  We  must  seek  the  things  which  stimulate  and  refine  the 
imagination.      1.  By    means  of    noble  literature.      2.  By  means  of  Christian 


OHAP.  xxTm.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  99 

conceptions.  A  cultivated  imagination  is  an  aid  to  faith.  Let  it  kindle 
over  Christian  truth,  the  nature  of  God,  the  incarnation,  redemption,  <fec. 
Application  :  1.  Some  think  there  is  no  harm  in  imagining  evil,  if  it  is  not 
committed.  Eead  Sermon  on  Mount.  2.  This  should  convince  the  uncon- 
verted of  sin.  (-S.  E.  Keeble.)  If  thou  seek  Him,  He  will  be  found  of  thee. — 
Seeking  the  Lord : — God  is  to  be  sought  and  found  not  merely  by  the  intellect, 
not  alone  by  processes  of  accurate  logic,  but  by  other  faculties  that  have 
been  bestowed  upon  us  for  this  purpose.  The  moral  sense,  the  consciousness  of 
our  high  obligations,  must  be  carefully  and  scrupulously  nourished  and  cultured 
till  we  acquire  an  appetite  for  the  noblest  virtue — till,  in  fact,  we  hunger  and 
thirst  after  righteousness  and  learn  to  satisfy  our  craving  in  communion  with  God 
and  getting  moral  food  and  strength  from  Him.  There  must  be  a  Divine  discon- 
tent with  our  own  righteousness  in  order  to  drive  us  to  His  footstool  to  ask  for 
more.  We  must  cherish  our  spiritual  affections.  We  must  put  ourselves  in  the 
way  of  loving  God.  We  must  teach  ourselves  to  pray  or  beseech  Him  to  teach  us. 
It  is  contrary  to  all  common  sense  to  expect  feelings  to  arise  in  our  heart  spon- 
taneously while  we  remain  in  conditions  in  which  those  feelings  are  all  but 
impossible,  and  while  we  refuse  to  use  the  faculties  which  were  given  us  for  the 
express  purpose  of  bringing  us  to  love  God.  If  the  soul  will  not  seek  after  God  it 
cannot  find  Him.  God  will  wait  long  enough,  no  one  knows  how  long  or  how 
patiently ;  but  it  must  germinate  for  itself  and  put  forth  its  tender  sprout  and 
green  leaves  above  the  mouldy  ground,  and  thus  ask  for  God's  air  to  breathe  life 
into  it,  and  His  gracious  rain  to  feed  it,  and  His  glorious  sun  to  shine  upon  it,  and 
give  warmth  and  beauty  and  fertility  to  it  in  time  to  come.  Neither  sun  nor  rain 
nor  air  can  do  for  that  hidden  seed  what  it  must  first  do  for  itself.  "  Seek  ye  the 
Lord."  (Charlet  Voysey,  B.A.)  Seeking  God : — I.  The  Duty.  1.  Whom  are 
we  to  seek  ?  God  in  Christ.  2.  How  must  we  seek  Him  ?  (1)  Not  in  our  own 
strength.  (2)  With  an  integrity  of  purpose  and  a  singleness  of  determination. 
(3)  By  forsaking  and  standing  aloof  from  the  world ;  by  putting  down  self  and 
walking  with  a  mortified  spirit.  3.  Where  are  we  to  seek  Christ?  (1)  In  the 
Scriptures.  (2)  In  the  sanctuary.  (3)  At  the  family  altar.  (4)  In  the  secret 
exercises  of  prayer.  4.  When  are  we  to  seek  a  God  in  Christ?  Now.  5.  Why 
are  we  to  seek  Christ?  II.  The  assurance.  (T.  J.  Judkin,  M.A.)  Seeking  the 
Lord  : — I.  You  should  seek  Him.  1.  You  cannot  do  without  Him.  2.  You  have 
everything  when  you  have  found  Him.  The  true  light  (John  i.  9).  The  bread  of 
life  (John  vi.  35).  A  refuge  from  the  storm  (Isa.  xxv.  4).  Your  rock  and  fortress 
(Psa.  xxxi.  3).  A  sure  foundation  (Isa.  xxviii.  16).  An  advocate  (1  John  ii.  1). 
A  surety  (Heb.  vii.  22).  The  truth  (John  xiv.  6).  Wisdom,  righteousness, 
sanctification,  redemption  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  3.  He  has  sought  you,  has  come  from 
heaven  for  you,  is  seeking  you  now.  4,  You  know  you  will  find  Him.  II.  The 
manner  of  seeking.  1.  In  His  Word,  by  obeying  it.  2.  In  thine  heart,  by  con- 
fidently expecting  Him  to  come  and  dwell  in  thee.  When  He  knows  that  thou 
really  desirest  Him,  He  will  be  found.  {The  Study  and  the  Pulpit.)  Decision  in 
religion  recommended  : — I.  The  promise.  We  must  seek  Him — 1.  Scripturally. 
(1)  With  penitence.  (2)  With  faith,  (3)  As  He  is  to  be  found  in  Christ. 
2.  Earnestly.  3.  Early  in  life:  "They  that  seek  Me  early  shall  find  Me." 
II.  The  warning.  Those  who  forsake  God,  who  turn  towards  God  their  back,  and 
not  their  face ;  who  forsake  His  house.  Word,  day,  people.  I  once  visited,  upon 
his  death-bed,  a  professional  man  who  had  evidently  forsaken  God  all  his  life,  and 
whom  God  forsook  in  the  hour  of  death.  He  then  sought  God  earnestly,  but  it 
was  too  late.  He  could  not  find  Him.  When  I  prayed  with  him,  he  tried  to 
follow  my  petitions,  but  his  mind — distracted  and  bewildered — would  not  allow 
him.  He  told  me  over  and  over  again  that  he  sought  to  pray,  but  he  never 
could  find  words.  He  also  told  me  that  he  endeavoured  to  write  his  prayer  upon  a 
slate,  but  that  his  fingers  refused  to  move.  And  in  that  awful  state  of  mind  he 
went  to  his  final  account.  Another  whom  I  visited  seemed  to  be  actually  amid  the 
pains  of  heU,  whilst  his  body  was  still  upon  earth.  As  the  large  drops  of  perspira- 
tion stood  upon  his  agonised  forehead  he  exclaimed,  "  There  is  nothing  you  can 
tell  me.  I  know  it  all.  1  have  heard  these  things  from  you  and  from  others,  and 
that  is  my  misery.  I  am  entering  hell  with  my  eyes  wide  open."  These  are  no 
imaginary  cases.  "  Cast  off  for  ever."  (C  Clayton,  M.A.)  Spiritual  aspects  of 
man: — We  may  look  at  these  words  as  presenting  man  to  us  in  three  solemn 
aspects.  I.  As  inspected  by  the  eye  of  God.  God  knows  each  individual  man 
thoroughly.     He  does  not  overlook  the  units  in  the  miUions.     Thoughts,  purposes, 


iOO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvm. 

feelings  fall  under  His  searching  glance  (Psa.  cxxxix.  4).  This  should  impress 
us — 1.  With  the  importance  of  our  existence.  2.  With  the  solemnity  of  our 
existence.  II.  As  invited  to  the  fkiendship  or  God.  1.  This  is  worth  seeking. 
2.  This  requires  seeking.  III.  As  thkeatened  with  the  displeasure  or 
God.  *'  God,"  says  an  old  author,  "  never  casts  men  off  until  they 
first    cast   Him    off."      (Homilist.)  Genuine    piety     a     search    for    God  : — 

I,  It  IB  A  PEBSONAii  SEABCH  FOB  GoD.  1.  It  is  &  scarch  for  Him,  not 
His.  2.  It  is  a  search  for  Him,  not  His  presence.  All  men  are  in  His 
presence.  To  have  Him  is  to  have  His  heart.  His  sympathies,  His  love.  II.  It  is 
A  voluntary  search  for  God.  All  genuine  religion  is  uncoerced  and  free  :  "  Will 
ye  also  go  away,"  &c.  111.  It  is  a  successful  search  for  God  :  "  He  will  be 
found  of  thee."  This  discovery  is — 1.  Conditional.  2.  Transcendent.  Find  Him. 
5.  Individual :  "  Thee."  The  man  who  has  sought  Him — no  one  else.  (Ibid.) 
But  if  thou  forsake  Him,  He  will  cast  thee  off  for  ever. — Tfu  nature,  cause,  and 
danger  of  tlie  sin  of  apostasy  : — I.  The  sin  against  which  this  threatening  is  pro- 
nounced. 1.  Apostasy  is  a  total  renunciation  of  the  principles,  the  practice,  and 
profession  of  true  religion.  It  is  attended  with  the  greatest  aggravations  of  which 
any  crime  is  capable.  (1)  Other  sins  may  be  committed  through  the  surprise  of 
a  sudden  and  violent  temptation.  This  is  a  determined  and  deliberate  act,  the 
result  of  thought  and  choice ;  and  a  perverted  and  abused  understanding  approves 
the  choice,  so  that  the  apostate  goes  astray  with  the  full  bent  of  his  will.  (2)  It 
always  carries  in  it  a  secret  malignity  against  true  religion.  (3)  Apostasy  hardens 
the  heart,  sears  the  conscience,  and  renders  it  almost  wholly  incapable  of  any 
serious  impressions,  either  from  religion  or  reason.  2.  The  ordinary  ways  by 
which  men  are  drawn  into  it.  (1)  A  great  zeal  for  little  things  is  one  remote 
<;ause.  When  a  man  is  convinced  that  his  zeal  has  abused  his  understanding,  and 
led  him  wrong,  he  is  for  throwing  it  all  off  at  once,  and  apt  to  degenerate  into  a 
total  indifference  about  all  religion.  (2)  A  weak  affectation  of  seeing  further  and 
appearing  wiser  than  other  men.  (3)  Some  secret,  predominant  vice  or  uncon- 
quered  lust  which  men  care  not  to  part  with.  If  a  man's  religion  does  not  make 
him  averse  to  sin,  sin  will  make  him  averse  to  religion.  (4)  An  excessive  love  of 
the  world — the  pleasures,  profits,  or  the  preferments  of  it.  (5)  A  partial  back- 
sliding in  religion.  This  partial  backsliding  generally  begins  with  light  thoughts 
■of  sin,  frequent  neglects  of  duty,  or  a  careless,  irreverent  performance  of  it, 
^6)  Inconsideration,  or  a  thoughtlessness  of  futurity.  (7)  Reading  infidel  or 
profane  books.  (8)  Wicked  company.  Nothing  more  contagious  than  the  breath 
of  a  profane  man.  The  world  is  governed  by  examples.  Bad  examples  are 
commonly  most  attractive,  and  especially  when  set  by  those  whom  in  other 
respects  we  much  esteem.  H.  The  threatening  denounced  against  it.  1.  All 
■obstinate  and  final  apostates  shall  hereafter  be  totally  rejected  of  their  Maker. 
They  shall  never  more  be  received  into  favour.     (J.  Mason.) 

Yer.  11.  Then  David  gave  to  Solomon   his   son  the  pattern  of  the  porch. — 

Patternf : — Some  men  can  only  give  outlines,  hints,  suggestions,  patterns.  These 
men  are  of  great  consequence  and  value  in  the  education  of  the  human  mind.  A 
hint  may  be  a  stimulus.  Let  it  not  be  supposed  that  men  are  doing  nothing  for  the 
race  who  write  its  poems,  outline  its  policies,  or  sketch  new  outlines  of  possible 
service.  The  builders  could  not  proceed  without  the  architect.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Counsels  to  ministers  : — 1.  "  The  pattern  of  the  porch."  Tell  the  sinner  to  come  to 
Christ  just  as  he  is ;  do  not  begin  setting  up  some  fine  porch  of  feelings  or  pre- 
parations. 2.  "And  the  houses  thereof."  Get  a  clear  view  of  the  houses  Christ 
gives  His  people  to  dwell  in ;  how  they  dwell  in  Him,  how  they  abide  in  Him,  and 
go  no  more  out  for  ever.  3.  "  And  the  treasures  thereof."  When  you  preach 
Christ  pray  to  have  written  on  your  heart,  as  well  as  in  this  book,  something  about 
the  treasures  of  God's  house.  Preach  to  others  of  the  treasures  of  the  temple  of 
salvation.  4.  "  And  of  the  upper  chambers  thereof."  In  these  upper  chambers  you 
get  a  view  of  the  glory  yet  to  be  revealed.  5.  "  And  of  the  inner  parlours  thereof." 
There  are  sweet  fellowships,  there  are  communings  which  nobody  knows  but  the 
man  who  has  dwelt  where  Jesus  is,  and  who  continues  to  abide  in  Him.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.) 

Yer.  19.  The  Lord  made  me  understand  in  writing  by  His  hand  upon  me. — Th« 

liberty  of  prophesying  : — David  not  only  made  preparation  for  the  building  of  the 
temple  by  collecting  material,  but  he  gave  to  Solomon  definite  directions  for  oom- 


CHAP,  xxvm.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  lOr 

pleting  the  erection  and  constructing  the  sacred  vessels,  and  in  doing  this  he  i» 
careful  to  say  that  he  did  not  follow  his  own  ideas  or  adopt  arbitrary  plans,  but 
that  he  was  guided  by  Divine  revelation.  Is  not  this  the  essential  thing  with  us  in 
this  ministry — that  we  should  be  authorised,  led,  energised  by  the  self -same  Spirit  ? 
Does  not  the  Church  demand  that  the  preacher  shall  be  an  inspired  man  ?  I.  The 
NATURE  of  this  inspiration.  "  All  this  the  Lord  made  me  to  understand  by  His 
hand  upon  me."  Now,  I  am  sure  you  will  not  at  this  moment  expect  from  me  any 
exact  definition  of  the  term  inspiration.  There  are  some  words  you  cannot  define. 
You  cannot  define  such  words  as  love,  or  life,  or  beauty.  Neither  will  you  expect 
me  to  distinguish  between  the  inspiration  of  Isaiah  and  that  of  Shakespeare,  or 
between  the  inspiration  of  David  building  the  temple  and  that  of  Michael  Angelo 
building  St.  Peter's  ;  the  singularity  of  the  prophet  and  preacher  is  that  they  hav» 
to  do  not  with  the  intellectual  and  material  worlds,  but  with  the  spiritual  universe, 
with  the  relation  of  man  to  the  living  God,  and  to  that  eternal  universe  of  which 
He  is  the  centre.  1.  The  true  preacher  is  a  man  of  faith.  God  revealed  to  David 
the  patterns  of  the  temple  building  and  furniture.  In  vision  he  beheld  the  forma 
that  he  was  to  body  forth  in  silver  and  gold  and  cedar.  He  did  not  follow  his  own 
vagrant  fancy,  but  he  made  all  the  sacred  things  according  to  the  patterns  seen  in 
his  exalted  mood.  There  is  a  faculty  of  sight  which  is  more  profound  and  pene- 
trating than  any  power  of  sense.  This  is  manifest  in  the  intellectual  world.  The- 
poet,  the  painter,  and  the  musician  possess  a  faculty  that  beggars  sense;  they  look 
upon  a  world  that  is  unseen  by  the  natural  eye.  Now,  just  as  these  rare  spirits  of 
the  intellectual  realm  possess  an  imaginative  faculty  that  transcends  the  tangible 
and  technical  world,  a  faculty  that  beggars  sense,  so  the  true  preacher  has  a  faculty 
that  beggars  imagination,  a  faculty  of  faith  that  penetrates  depths  beyond  space 
and  worlds  beyond  reason.  The  true  preacher  possesses  spiritual  imagination  by 
which  he  discerns  everywhere  the  spiritual  fact.  In  man  he  finds  the  image  of  God ; 
behind  this  world  he  discerns  the  eternal  world ;  within  history  he  traces  the 
working  of  a  Divine  plan  and  purpose ;  in  the  Church  he  is  conscious  of  God'3 
presence  and  love ;  and  he  feels  the  power  of  that  immortal  life  of  which  this  life  is 
the  germ,  and  for  which  this  life  is  the  preparation.  This  is  the  grand  gift  of  the 
true  preacher :  in  an  eminent  degree  he  possesses  that  faith  which  is  the  substance 
of  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen,  2.  Again,  the  true  preacher  is 
a  man  of  experience.  David  did  not  proceed  by  simply  reduplicating  the  forma 
and  arrangements  of  the  tabernacle.  God  granted  him  an  inward  revelation,  he 
had  a  vision  that  was  inwrought  into  his  very  soul.  "  The  Lord  made  me  under- 
stand by  His  hand  upon  me,  even  all  the  works  of  this  pattern."  This  means 
something  more  than  a  superficial  knowledge,  than  a  mere  spectacle ;  it  impUes  a 
vivid,  profound,  personal  acquaintance  with  the  things  he  was  called  upon  to 
fashion  and  arrange.  It  means  something  more  than  a  passing  dream ;  the 
objective  became  the  subjective;  David  reaUsed  God's  purpose  as  an  inward  and 
joyful  experience.  His  soul  entered  into  the  vision,  the  vision  entered  into  his  soul. 
And  if  the  preacher  is  to  be  effective,  the  subjects  of  his  preaching  must  be  living 
facts  to  his  own  mind  and  heart.  There  is  a  whole  world  of  difiference  between  the 
mere  intellectual  perception  of  a  doctrine  and  the  realisation  of  that  doctrine  in  our 
own  conscience  and  feeling.  Just  think  of  the  dweller  in  a  city  who  knows  the 
seasons  only  as  they  appear  in  the  almanac  I  Spring  quarter  begins  ;  bits  of 
information  and  hints  about  summer  gardening ;  stray  allusions  to  harvest ;  and 
then  the  record  closes  with  prognostications  of  winter's  storms  and  snows.  The 
almanac  gives  much  information — varied,  exact,  useful  information ;  you  seem, 
indeed,  to  know  all  about  the  thing.  Do  you  ?  Ah !  it  is  a  very  different  matter  to 
know  the  seasons  as  they  actually  unfold  in  nature.  And  so  it  is  one  thing  tO' 
know  religion  formally  in  a  theological  treatise,  and  another  thing  to  know  its  power 
and  sweetness  and  hope  in  your  own  soul.  Notice — II.  The  limits  of  this  inspiration. 
"  The  Lord  made  me  understand  in  writing."  The  question  arises  as  to  what  is 
precisely  to  be  understood  by  this  writing.  Some  think  it  teaches  that  David  simply 
followed  the  law  of  Moses.  Moses,  as  we  learn  in  the  book  of  Exodus,  received  the 
measures  and  plans  of  the  tabernacle  from  God  Himself,  and  all  that  David  did, 
these  commentators  think,  was  to  follow  severely  these  ancient  specifications  in  the 
instructions  which  he  gave  to  Solomon.  David  follows  the  writing  from  Jehovah's 
band  given  to  Moses.  Other  students  think  that  this  explanation  of  the  passage  is 
wholly  mistaken.  They  hold  that  David  affirms  that  he  received  an  altogether 
special  revelation.  Just  as  the  Lord  had  formerly  shown  to  Moses  the  pattern  of  the 
tabernacle,  so  did  the  Lord  also  make  known  by  revelation  to  David  the  pattern  oi 


108  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CBU*.  xxtiiz. 

the  temple  and  its  furniture.  It  seems  to  me  that  neither  interpretation  expresses 
the  real  situation — a  middle  view  seems  the  juster.  The  description  given  in 
Exodus  of  the  sacred  utensils  evidently  furnished  the  groundwork  for  the  workman- 
ship of  David,  but  what  he  teaches  here  is  that  it  was  under  the  guidance  of  the 
Divine  Spirit  that  he  varied  the  sacred  architecture  and  furniture  to  suit  the  changed 
conditions  of  the  new  temple.  He  did  not  work  either  independently  or  arbitrarily, 
but  modified  the  structure  and  the  vessels  by  the  authority  of  the  Spirit  who  first 
instituted  them.  The  grand  teaching  of  the  whole  situation  being  this,  that  in  the 
entire  work  of  the  temple  we  must  be  governed  by  Divine  revelation,  but  that  at  the 
same  time  we  must  be  sensitive  to  the  action  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  so  that  we  may 
interpret  the  Scriptures  and  modify  ecclesiastical  organisations  according  to  the 
changing  needs  of  successive  generations.  Does  not  the  preacher  of  to-day  need  to 
learn  the  lesson  taught  here?  One  of  our  great  dangers  is  a  literalism  which 
denies  all  further  revelation  or  inspiration.  We  must  beware  lest  we  doom  our- 
selves to  a  barren  literalism.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  others  who  assume 
entire  independence  of  revelation.  They  affirm  that  men  are  still  as  fully  inspired 
as  Moses  was,  or  Isaiah,  or  John,  or  Paul,  and  that  it  is  an  injustice  to  ourselves  to 
yield  exclusive  reverence  to  the  sacred  oracles.  What,  then,  is  the  true  path  here? 
We  answer,  the  path  followed  by  the  King  of  Israel  in  our  text.  We  must 
reverentially  accept  the  fully-accredited  revelation  that  God  has  secured  to  us,  and 
under  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  give  that  revelation  new  and  fuller  expression 
as  the  evolution  of  the  race  may  require.  We  must  be  true  to  the  Scriptures,  and 
true  also  to  the  Spirit  that  gives  to  the  written  word  concurrent  adaptation.  Only 
as  we  follow  this  delicate  line  shall  we  be  truly  orthodox  and  yet  remain  full  of 
reality,  power,  and  effectiveness.  A  great  artist  does  not  attempt  to  get  rid  of 
nature ;  if  he  were  to  yield  to  such  licentiousness  his  images  would  become  bizarre, 
his  poetry  unintelligible,  and  his  music  degenerate  into  a  monstrous  melody ;  the 
sincere  artist  is  therefore  profoundly  true  to  the  forms,  the  colours,  and  the 
sequences  of  nature,  he  gives  place  to  no  arbitrary  ideas.  But,  at  the  same  time, 
he  is  not  Mteral,  topographical,  prosaic ;  he  seizes  the  essential  truth  of  the  physical 
universe,  and  gives  it  free  rendering  and  bold  representation.  It  is  much  the  same 
with  the  preacher.  He  is  profoundly  loyal  to  God's  Word,  but  in  the  light  and 
liberty  of  the  Spirit  he  freely  handles  the  eternal  truth,  and  makes  it  speak  to  the 
heart  of  the  congregation.  It  is  God's  message  to  this  generation  that  is  expected 
from  you.  Be  able  to  say,  "  The  Lord  made  me  understand  this  by  His  hand  upon 
me,"  and  your  word  shall  be  in  power  and  blessing.  III.  The  conditions  of  this 
inspiration.  1.  We  must  watch  against  the  temper  of  unbelief.  We  discern  a 
thing  only  when  we  are  in  the  mood  to  see  it,  to  hear  it,  to  know  it.  And  it  is 
entirely  true  that  we  apprehend  the  things  of  the  higher  world  and  the  higher  life 
just  as  we  have  a  certain  affinity  with  them.  I  deny  altogether  that  the  mood  of 
doubt  is  the  becoming  mood  of  a  theologian.  The  mood  of  the  artist  is  the  receptive 
mood.  We  are  sometimes  told  how  some  grand  melody,  picture,  or  poem  originnted 
in  a  most  trivial  incident,  but  this  only  shows  how  exceedingly  delicate  was  the 
susceptibility  of  the  artist ;  he  must  have  possessed  a  peculiar  alertness  and  res- 
ponsiveness of  soul.  A  cold,  critical  temper  would  mean  a  poor  artist.  Did  not 
Columbus  expect  to  see  America?  Is  America,  therefore,  a  baseless  fabric? 
Columbus  saw  America  because  he  was  prepared  to  see  it,  and  the  true  attitude  to 
unknown  worlds  is  the  expectant  attitude  of  the  astronomer  looking  for  a  star 
mathematically  inferred,  but  not  hitherto  seen,  of  the  chemist  searching  for  aa 
element  indicated,  but  not  yet  demonstrated.  We  lose  much  by  cherishing  the 
spirit  of  doubt.  Preachers  are  men  who  ought  to  live  in  the  mood  of  meditation 
and  susceptibility — waiting,  listening,  looking,  hoping ;  and  so  does  God  whisper 
into  their  wakened  ear  great  and  gracious  truths.  2.  We  must  be  on  our  guard 
against  the  spirit  of  worldliness.  It  has  been  noticed  that  the  greatest  naturalists, 
poets,  and  philosophers  are  singularly  unworldly  men.  It  seems  as  if  they  can  see 
the  rarer  beauty  of  the  world,  hear  the  music  of  the  spheres,  catch  the  subtler 
suggestions  of  phenomena  only  as  they  are  free  from  all  secularity  of  spirit.  The 
best  and  the  highest  of  the  things  that  are  seen  are  discerned  and  appreciated  only 
by  men  cleansed  from  the  spirit  of  greed,  and  pride,  and  self.  And  this  in  a  very 
high  degree  is  true  of  the  preacher.  It  is  only  when  the  eye  is  single  that  the 
whole  body  is  full  of  light.  3.  We  must  watch  against  sensuality.  "  Sensual,  not 
having  the  Spirit,"  writes  the  apostle.  Now  sensual  Indulgence  clouds  the  genius 
of  the  artist  and  the  scholar.  Hugh  Miller  tells  us  that  when  he  was  a  young  man 
he  one   day  drank  some   liquor,  and  on  turning  to  read   Milton  found  himself 


OHA».xxnc.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  103 

incapable  of  appreciating  the  great  master.  So  any  form  of  sensuality  renders  the 
spiritual  man  incapable  of  influentially  realising  the  great  discoveries  of  revelation. 
Sensual  thought  makes  the  higher  perceptions  impossible,  the  gross  film  blinds  the 
eye  of  the  soul.  Purity  of  thought  and  feeling  are  essential  to  a  really  great 
preacher.  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  see  the  best  of  everything,  and 
they  possess  a  wonderful  faculty  for  making  other  people  feel  the  power  and  charm 
of  truth  and  goodness.  We  have  spoken  this  morning  of  the  patterns  God  showed 
to  Moses  and  to  David,  but  we  must  remember  that  He  has  shown  to  us  another 
order  of  patterns,  sublimerfar  than  archetypes  of  architecture  and  upholstery.  God 
who  in  times  past  spake  unto  the  fathers  by  the  prophets  hath  in  these  latter  days 
spoken  unto  us  by  His  Son.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  taken  us  into  the  Mount 
and  shown  us  patterns  of  things  in  the  heavens.  Study  the  New  Testament  and 
you  will  find  set  forth  with  clearness  the  ultimate  moral  ideals  after  which  the  ages 
have  blindly  striven.  At  Nazareth  and  Bethany  you  see  the  ideal  home.  You  have 
seen  the  ideal  Church  when  you  have  seen  Christ  dwelling  with  His  disciples.  And, 
more  than  all,  comprehending  all,  you  behold  the  supreme  ideal  of  character,  "  We 
see  Jesus."  All  the  great  ideals  are  in  "  this  writing  by  His  hand,"  not  "  the 
shadow  of  heavenly  things,"  but  "  the  very  substance  of  the  things."  (W.  L.  Wat- 
kinson.)  God's  handwriting  upon  David  : — The  temple  was  to  be  a  type,  an 
eminent  type  of  Christ,  and  also  a  type  of  His  Church.  No  man  knew  what  God 
meant  to  teach  by  that  temple ;  and  consequently  if  it  had  been  left  to  human 
judgment,  it  would  not  have  been  a  true  type ;  for  who  can  make  a  type  if  he 
knows  not  what  it  is  to  typify  ?  God  alone  knew  what  He  intended  to  teach  by 
this  building,  and  so  that  it  might  convey  Divine  teaching,  it  must  be  arranged 
according  to  Divine  command.  I  call  your  attention — I.  To  the  singular 
INSTRUCTIONS  GIVEN  TO  David.  1.  David  did  not  receive  them  by  consultation  with 
others.  2.  David  did  not  slavishly  follow  the  former  model.  3.  God  gave  David 
instructions  about  the  details  of  the  work.  4.  The  directions  given  were  extremely 
minute.  5.  The  innermost  things  were  laid  bare  to  David.  6.  David  not  only 
knew  the  details  ;  but  he  understood  them.  7.  The  writing  was  written  on  David's 
own  mind  by  God  Himself.  II.  The  spiritual  tuition  of  the  saints  in  the  truth 
OF  God.  1.  God  still  writes  upon  the  hearts  of  men.  2.  Let  me  show  you  a  little 
in  detail  how  God  writes  the  great  truths  of  His  Word  on  our  hearts.    III.  The 

DUTY  OF  the  TRANSmSSION  TO  OTHERS  OF  ANYTHING  THAT  GoD  WRITES  ON  TOUR  HEARTS. 

1.  David  told  Solomon  about  it.  2.  We  ought  to  talk  about  Christ  to  chosen  com- 
panions. 8.  David  gathered  all  the  people  together  and  told  them  about  the 
temple.      {C.  H.  Sturgeon.) 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 


Vers.  1-10.  Furthermore  David  the  Idugr  said  unto  all  the  oongregration. — 

Christian  experience  and  Christian  influence : — I.  The  nearer  a  good  man  ap- 
proaches HIS  end,  the  more  spiritually-minded  he  becomes.      II.  The  more 

SPIRITUALLY-MINDED  A  GOOD  MAN  BECOMES,  THE  GREATER  HIS  INFLUENCE  UPON  OTHERS. 
III.  The  GREATER  INFLUENCE  A  GOOD  MAN  HAS  UPON  OTHERS,  THE  MORE  CERTAINLY  WILL 

God's  work  be  accomplished.  {J.  Wolfendale.)  The  principles  of  Christian 
wurk  : — 1.  Personal  consecration  and  example.  2.  Willing  co-operation  by  all. 
3.  Appropriateness  of  service  and  gifts.  4.  Animated  by  a  true  spirit  of  enthu- 
siasm and  joy.  {Ihid.)  A  good  example  and  the  power  of  it : — God  is  calling  His 
people  everywhere  to  undertake  a  work  for  His  glory,  which  in  importance  and 
magnitude  and  grandeur  infinitely  transcends  the  work  He  laid  upon  Solomon — 
the  evangelisation  of  the  entire  world — the  building  of  that  great  spiritual  temple 
which  is  to  fill  the  earth  and  into  which  all  nations  and  peoples  are  to  be  gathered. 
I.  The  Divine  call  to  this  work  is  direct,  impeuative,  and  loud.     II.  It  is 

ATTESTED  BY  SIGNS  AND  WONDERS  AS  MARVELLOUS  AND  IMPRESSIVE  TO  THE  SPIRITUALLY 
discerning  as  THE  MIRACLES  OF  APOSTOLIC  TIMES.  III.  ThE  CALL  IN  THIS  INSTANCE 
IS    TO     THE     BNTIRE     ChURCH     OF     ChRIST,    INDIVIDUALLY      AND     COLLECTIVELY.       The 

command,  the  obligation  is  universal  and  cannot  be  evaded.  If  you  have  not  gold 
and  silver  to  bestow,  give  yourself— heart,  soul,  mind,  prayers,  influence.  If  you 
cannot  go  to  the  heathen,  send  a  substitute,  give  of  your  means,  Ac.    IV.  The 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHi^.xxix. 

TIMES   DEMAKD    LABGB    GIFTS,   PBrNCELT    OFFERINGS.       V.   NeVEB    HAD    THE   POWER    OV 

EXAMPLE  SUCH  POTENCY  AS  NOW.  {J.  M.  Skerwood,  D.D.)  Interest  in  God't 
work : — It  is  always  well  for  us  to  take  a  loving  and  deep  interest  in  the  work  of 
God.  We  may  have  at  heart  some  end  which  we  desire  to  achieve  for  God's 
glory,  and  because  we  know  that  it  springs  from  such  a  motive  may  proceed  to 
carry  it  out  without  questioning  whether  we  are  to  be  the  agents  through  which  it 
is  to  be  accomplished.  But  there  may  be  others  better  fitted  for  the  work  than  we 
are,  whom  God  has  in  reserve.  And  what  matters  it  whether  we  or  others  do  the 
work,  so  long  as  it  is  done  by  men  chosen  of  God?  "  The  work  goes  on,  though 
the  workmen  die,"  are  the  words  which  Dean  Stanley  most  appropriately  had 
inscribed  on  Wesley's  memorial  in  Westminster  Abbey.  Other  men  labour,  and 
we  enter  into  their  labours.  The  work  they  sought  to  accomplish  God  denied  to 
them,  but  lays  upon  us.  [Dr.  Egbert.)  Power  of  example  : — Before  us  was  a 
narrow  bridge,  and  between  us  and  the  bridge  were  several  thousand  sheep.  They 
would  have  taken  a  long  time  going  over,  and  would  effectually  have  checked  our 
entrance  into  the  town,  but  for  a  clever  plan  for  getting  the  sheep  quickly  over. 
A  few  sheep  are  trained  as  a  sort  of  decoy.  They  are  at  first  pet  lambs,  and  then 
in  time  become  pet  sheep.  They  are  kept  by  the  authorities  who  have  control  of 
the  bridge,  and  are  let  to  the  sheep-drovers  for  so  much,  in  order  to  effect  a  speedy 
passage  of  the  bridge.  The  keepers  of  the  pets  go  first,  then  follow  the  three  or 
four  pets,  and  then  away  after  them  the  three  or  four  thousand  of  the  mob,  as  they 
are  called  here.  (H.  T.  Robjohns.)  The  house  of  the  Lord : — I.  The  boildino 
IS  FOR  THE  Lord  God,  because  it  is  for  the  presentation  of  God's  worship.  God 
claims  to  be  worshipped.  He  deserves  to  be  worshipped  for — (1)  What  he  is  in 
Himself.  (2)  What  He  is  to  us.  Worship  takes  the  forms  of  adoration,  thanks- 
giving, confession,  petition,  supplication,  and  intercession.  By  a  very  significant 
expression  the  Jews  used  to  say  when  they  went  up  to  Jerusalem,  that  they  were 
going  "  to  appear  before  the  Lord."  The  chief  attraction  of  every  place  of  worship 
ought  to  be  that  you  are  coming  to  meet  with  God.  n.  The  building  is  fob  thb 
Lord  because  it  is  built  for  the  proclamation  of  God's  truth.  HI.  Thk 
building  is  fob  the  Lord  because  it  is  for  the  promotion  of  God's  purposes. 
God's  purposes  are  that  men  should  be  saved,  sanctified,  enlightened,  comforted, 
strengthened,  stimulated,  and  helped  on  to  glory.  (John  Corbin.)  The  palace 
for  God : — These  words  are  not  to  be  pressed  unduly,  nor  their  spirit  sacrificed  to 
the  letter,  in  forgetfulness  of  the  idiom  of  the  language  in  which  they  are  recorded. 
The  patriotic  king  no  more  forgot  his  nation's  welfare  in  the  sense  of  the  saored- 
ness  of  the  work,  than  the  prophet  who  first  uttered  the  immortal  words,  "  I  love 
mercy  and  not  sacrifice,"  dreamed  of  extinguishing  the  altar  fires  and  abolishing 
the  office  of  the  priesthood  seven  centuries  before  the  "  fulness  of  time."  Their 
principal  meaning  is  obvious.  An  edifice  was  formed,  a  pattern  was  already,  it  is 
written,  present  to  his  mind's  eye.  It  was  to  be  no  regal  palace,  however  stately, 
no  home  for  oriental  splendour  and  magnificence ;  it  was  to  be  consecrated  for 
ever  to  the  Jehovah  to  whom  he  and  his  people  were  bound  by  everlasting 
covenant.  Yet  the  truth  that  no  house  made  with  hands  could  in  any  literal  sense 
hold  Him  whom  the  heaven  of  heavens  could  not  contain,  was  already  deep  in  the 
conscience,  and  finding  expression  in  the  words  of  God's  truest  servant.  He  who 
was  revealed  to  the  Psalmist,  the  Psalmist-king  well  knew,  no  roof  of  cedar,  no 
walls  of  stone,  no  building  however  sacred,  however  sumptuous,  could  be  His  real 
home.  It  could  be  only  so  far  His  dwelling-place,  when  His  unseen  presence 
could  be  found  and  realised  by  those  who  sought  Him — found  best  by  those  who 
could  rise  in  spirit  above  that  imageless  temple,  above  that  altar  smoke,  and  all  the 
machinery  of  ritual,  to  the  Father  of  their  spirits  and  the  God  of  their  salvation. 
There  is  a  sense,  therefore,  in  which  we  may,  without  irreverence,  almost  invert 
the  words,  and  yet  gain,  rather  than  lose,  their  true  significance.  The  palace  is 
not  for  God,  we  might  even  say,  as  a  literal  dwelling-place.  To  Him,  the  marble, 
and  the  cedar,  and  the  palm-tree,  and  the  olive,  and  the  brass,  and  the  gold  are 
as  nothing.  The  palace  in  this  sense  is  not  for  God,  but  it  is  for  man — not  for 
man  as  merely  the  foremost  of  creatures  to  draw  the  breath  of  life  on  the  earth, 
but  for  man  as  the  worshipper,  as  the  servant,  as  the  conscious  and  devout  adorer 
of  Him  who  has  created  him  in  His  own  image ;  for  man  as  the  place  for  worship 
which  may  reclaim,  and  purify,  and  uplift  his  fallen  nature  ;  which  may  bring  him 
into  communion  with  his  Father  and  his  God  ;  a  place  where  all  that  appeals  to 
his  highest  earthly  sense  may  enable  him  to  forget  the  things  of  sense,  and  reach 
out  to   what  eye  hath   not   seen   or  ear  heard.      And  for  so  bold  an  apparent 


CHAP.xxn.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  105 

inversion  of  the  letter,  in  order  to  bring  home  to  our  minds  the  inner  spirit  of  the 
words,  I  may  surely  plead  the  example  of  Him  who  taught  His  people  that  the 
seventh  day,  which  was  proclaimed  at  Sinai  to  be  the  Sabbath  of  the  Lord  our 
God,  was,  for  all  that,  made  for  man,  and  that  the  Son  of  Man  was  Lord  also  of 
the  Sabbath.  {Dean  Bradley.)  The  inqjortance  of  Church  extension  : — To  realise 
the  importance  of  the  work  of  Church  extension,  consider — I.  That  eeligion  is 

ESSENTIAL  TO  THE  WELFARE  OF  A  NATION  (Psa.  XXXiii.  12  ;  Isa.  Ix.  12).  II.  It  IS  A 
WORK    THAT    SHALL    REACH    FORWARD    THROUGH    MANY    GENERATIONS    (chap.    XXViii.    8). 

III.  It  is  YOUR  ArroiNTED  PRIVILEGE  (chap.  xxviii.  10).  IV.  What  is  implied  in 
THE  WORD  SANCTUARY?  (chap.  xxviii.  10).  A  sanctuary  is  a  place  of  refuge  from 
impending  evils.  If  a  man  erect  a  lighthouse,  he  is  honoured  for  preventing  a 
great  loss  of  life.  If  he  build  a  hospital  he  is  revered  as  the  benefactor  of  his  race 
for  the  mitigation  of  pain.  But  he  who  builds  a  church,  or  assists  in  the  work, 
does  more.  Under  the  Divine  blessing  he  is  instrumental  in  enlightening  dark 
minds,  comforting  troubled  consciences,  and  in  saving  immortal  souls.  V.  Thb 
TEMPLE  WAS  A  TYPE  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  Church.  VI.  If  David  and  SolomoH  were 
60  zealous  in  providing  means  for  having  the  type  only,  how  much  more  anxious 

SHOULD  WB  BE  TO  PUT  OURSELVES  AND  OTHERS  IN  POSSESSION  OF  THE  SUBSTANCE? 
Vn.    It    is    SELDOM    THAT    A    GREAT    WORK    CAN    BE    ACCOMPLISHED    BY    AN    INDIVIDUAI, 

(ver.  1).  VIII.  It  is  for  the  glory  of  GoD(ver.  1).  IX.  David's  example  (ver.  2). 
X.  The  affection  vte  ought  to  bear  to  God's  house  (ver.  3).  (H.  Clissold,  M.A.) 
David's  desire  to  build  a  house  for  God : — I.  The  God  whom  David  worshipped. 
He  worshipped  God — 1.  As  the  Supreme  Being  (ver.  11).  2.  As  the  God  of  his 
fathers  (ver.   10).     3.  As  personally  appropriated :"  My  God."     II.  Some  of  thb 

reasons  WHICH  LED  DaVTD   TO    DESIRE    TO    BUILD  A  HOUSE  FOR   HIS    GoD.       1.    JealoUSy 

for  the  honour  of  God.  2.  Love  and  gratitude  to  God.  3.  The  thought  that 
others  besides  himself  should  worship  therein.  {J.  Shillito.)  Attachment  to  the 
sanctxbary : — It  is  of  one  of  the  noble  qualities  of  the  religious  life  of  the  Jews  I 
would  speak — their  love  for  the  house  of  God.  I.  The  house  of  God.  The 
house  of  worship  is  the  house  of  God.  II.  Because  the  ancient  Jews  loved  thb 
Lord's  house  they  made  it  beautiful.  This  was  natural,  lawful,  and  Divinely 
sanctioned.  This  impulse  was  recognised,  called  out,  and  approved  by  God. 
III.  It  was  a  general  affection  exercised  and  expressed  by  all  the  people. 
(Henry  J.  Van  Dyke.)  Godly  giving: — I.  The  object.  "The  work  is  great; 
for  the  palace  is  not  for  man,  but  for  the  Lord  God."  1.  In  respect  of  the  greatness 
of  Him  for  whose  use  the  palace  is  made.  2.  The  value  of  what  is  wrought  there 
to  all  mankind.  3.  The  consequent  expenditure.  II.  The  giving.  Circumstances 
of  David's  great  collection  and  of  ours  are  very  different,  but  the  principles  are  the 
same.  1.  Definitely  to  the  Lord.  The  money  went  into  the  hands  of  treasurers, 
but  it  was  given  to  God.  2.  Voluntary.  "  Who  is  willing  ?  "  "  They  offered 
willingly."  3.  Hearty  and  gladsome.  "  Because  I  have  set  my  affection  to  the 
house  of  my  God,"  is  David's  reason  for  giving  (ver.  8).  And  of  all  the  givers 
it  is  said,  "  The  people  rejoiced  for  that  they  offered  willingly,  because  with  perfect 
heart  they  offered  willingly  to  the  Lord  "  (ver.  9).  4.  With  preparation.  Mistake 
to  give  on  sudden  impulse  only  or  to  imagine  that  forethought,  and  method,  and 
consideration  are  opposed  to  heartiness ;  intelligent.  Christian  love  will  lead  to 
these  in  proportion  as  it  is  fervent.  "  I  have  prepared  with  all  my  might " 
(ver.  2).  5.  With  devout  acknowledgement.  "  Both  riches  and  honour  come  of 
Thee."  "  All  this  store  cometh  of  Thine  hand,  and  is  all  Thine  own  "  (vers.  11-16). 
6.  With  fervent  prayer  (vers.  18,  19).     (Homiletic  Magazine.) 

Ver.  5.  And  who  then  is  willing  to  consecrate  his  service  this  day  unto  the  Lord. 

— Consecration  : — I.  Service.  This  demands — 1.  A  settled  purpose.  2.  An  active 
resolve.  II.  A  willing  service.  1.  A  willing  service  is  the  only  efficient  service. 
2.  The  willingness  of  our  service  is  the  only  part  that  is  absolutely  required.  III.  An 
immediate  service.  1.  Seasons  for  service  are  never  absent.  2.  Efficiency  and 
pleasure  ensue  when  service  is  performed  in  its  own  time.  IV.  The  highest  service. 
The  service  of  the  Lord  implies — 1,  That  the  mind  is  perpetually  under  the 
influence  of  Divine  truth.  2.  That  holy  thoughts  are  actuated  by  the  presence  of 
the  Spirit  in  them.  3.  Entire  consecration.  {Thos.  Davies,  D.D.)  Self-dedica- 
tion : — It  does  the  heart  good  to  read  over  those  closing  chapters  of  this  book  and 
to  note  the  spirit  which  animated  the  generation  for  which  the  first  temple  was 
built.  As  regards  the  cost  and  beauty  of  our  churches  there  is  this  to  be  borne  in 
mind,  that  whatever  our  present  shortcomings  may  be,  there  is  one  great  difference 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

between  ourselves  and  the  ancient  people  of  God — that  whereas  all  their  gifts  were 
offered  for  a  single  building,  we  have  to  maintain  all  the  churches  in  the  kingdom, 
which  in  number  must  be  fast  approaching  twenty  thousand.  But  large  as  are  the 
sums  which  have  been  spent,  and  are  daily  being  spent  on  church  building  and 
church  restoration,  there  is  one  offering  which  God  values  more  than  any  other 
gift,  and  which  each  of  us,  from  highest  to  lowest,  may  offer  if  we  will — a  perfect 
heart.  (F.  E.  Paget.)  Consecration  to  God't  service  : — I.  The  nature  of  thb 
sEBvicE  REQUIRED.  The  seivlce  of  God  is  a  phrase  which  amounts  to  much  the 
same  thing  as  the  worship  of  God.  1.  Servitude  sometimes  arises  from — (1)  Sub- 
jugation or  conquest.  (2)  Hereditary  succession.  Some  men  are  born  servants 
or  slaves.  The  servitude  which  God  requires  is  a  servitude  which  makes  the 
servant  free,  2.  The  service  which  God  requires  involves — (1)  Divine  illumination. 
(2)  Pure  and  ardent  love.     (3)  Continued  and  unceasing  obedience.     II.  Whatabk 

THE    OBLIGATIONS   UNDER   WHICH     WE    ABE    ALL    PLACED    TO    RENDER     SUCH    SEBVICE    TO 

THE  AiMiGHrr  ?  1,  It  is  the  duty  of  man  to  obey  and  serve  Him.  2.  Such  service 
is  very  profitable  and  beneficial  to  man.  3.  It  is  a  refuge  to  its  subject  in  the  day 
of  trouble.  4.  It  is  an  antidote  to  the  fear  of  death.  HI.  That  the  service  or 
God  is  indispensable.  1.  Because  it  is  the  commandment  of  God.  2.  The  grand 
design  of  human  life  is  the  service  of  God.  3.  The  service  of  God  is  the  only 
means  of  salvation.  IV.  I  come  now  to  propose  the  inquibt,  "  Who  then  is 
willing  ?  "  &c.  1.  The  service  of  God  is  a  willing  service.  2.  I  address  myseK — 
(1)  To  the  aged.  (2)  To  those  in  the  prime  and  activity  of  life.  (3)  More  especially 
to  the  young.  Look — (a)  At  the  magnitude  of  the  work,  (b)  Tne  difficulty  with 
which  it  may  afterwards  be  accomplished,  (c)  The  shortness  and  uncertainty  of 
life,  (d)  The  consequences  that  wiU  follow  from  this  early  devotement  of  your- 
selves unto  God.  Objections :  1.  Time  enough  yet.  2.  I  shall  lose  my  friends 
if  I  embrace  in  my  youth  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  was  once  said  by  an 
ancient  philosopher,  "  Caesar  is  my  friend — I  have  nothing  to  fear  "  ;  and  a  greater 
than  Cfesar  is  here.  Jesus  is  "  a  friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother."  3,  To 
embrace  religion  in  youth  will  expose  to  obloquy  and  shame.  Was  it  not  said 
by  one  of  the  ancients  that  where  God  is  there  can  be  no  exile — no  banishment 
from  His  presence  ?  4.  God  is  merciful,  and  we  may  get  religion  when  we  please. 
You  may  reckon  on  mercy  until  you  are  taken  out  of  the  world  without  it ;  and 
there  is  no  mercy  beyond  the  gates  of  death.  (TF.  Toase.)  Who  is  willing  to 
serve  God  ? — I.  The  natube  of  the  sebvice  which  God  demands.  1.  It  is  spiritual. 
It  is  the  homage  and  devotion  of  the  heart.  All  the  intellectual  powers,  the  under- 
standing, will,  affections,  conscience,  memory  are  to  be  dedicated  to  the  worship  of 
God.  Without  this  no  service  can  be  acceptable  to  God  (Isa.  i.  11,  13  ;  Matt.  xv. 
8,  9).  2.  It  is  to  be  constant  and  unremitting  (1  Cor.  x.  31).  3.  It  must  be 
affectionate.  It  is  impossible  for  us  to  offer  any  acceptable  service  to  God  which 
does  not  spring  from  this  love  in  our  heart  (1  John  v.  3).  How  is  this  to  be 
obtained?  The  answer  is  very  plain  (Eph.  iv.  22-24).  Thus  God  will  "  create  a 
clean  heart,  and  renew  a  right  spirit  within  you."  4.  It  must  be  practical 
(Matt.  V.  16;  1  Cor.  ii.  27;  2  Cor.  x.  5).  II.  The  service  which  God  requires 
OF  us  should  be  performed  without  delay.  1.  It  is  enjoined  upon  us  by  the 
Scriptures  (Heb.  iii.  15 ;  Josh.  xxiv.  15 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  2).  You  have  no  certainty 
that  any  further  opportunities  will  be  afforded  in  which  you  may  serve  God 
(Prov.  xxvii.  1 ;  Luke  xiii.  25-27).  3.  The  longer  you  defer  entering  into  the 
service  of  God  the  more  difficulties  and  obstacles  will  be  thrown  in  your  way. 
How  absurd  the  notion  that  futurity  will  present  more  favourable  opportunities  for 
serving  God  than  any  with  which  we  have  yet  been  blessed.  Suppose  a  sick  man 
were  to  say,  "  As  long  as  this  disorder  remains  upon  me,  and  the  more  deeply  my 
constitution  is  affected  by  it,  the  more  certainly  shall  I  receive  a  speedy  cure." 
Would  you  consider  this  person  to  be  perfectly  sane?  Or  should  one  of  your 
debtors  assure  you  that  by  your  increasing  his  obligations  to  you  some  three  or 
four  fold  he  would  be  immediately  able  to  cancel  the  whole,  would  you  believe  him  ? 
The  longer  you  live  In  sin  the  more  grievously  do  you  provoke  God.  You  "  crucify 
to  yourselves  the  Son  of  God  afresh."  It  is  awfully  possible  for  men  to  outlive  the 
day  of  grace  (Ps.  xcv.  11).  4.  Our  services  will  be  more  acceptable  now  than  they 
can  possibly  be  at  any  future  period.  III.  Let  us  now  consider  the  import  of  thb 
question,  "Who  then  is  willing  ?  "  Ac.  1.  It  carries  with  it  the  aisumption  that 
God  is  waiting  to  accept  your  service.  2.  It  implies  also  that  every  one  possesses 
the  ability  to  consecrate  his  service  unto  God.  3.  We  are  taught  by  the  text  that 
there  is  a  disinclination  in  the  heart  of  man  to  submit  himself  to  the  will  of  God. 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  107 

Conclusion:  1.  This  is  the  most  honourable  service  in  which  you  can  engage 
2.  It  is  pleasant  (Prov.  iii.  17;  Isa.  ixxii.  17;  Psa.  xvi,  3;  Isa.  ii.  5).  3.  It  is 
reasonable  (Acts  xvii.  28).  4.  It  is  the  only  service  which  secures  a  vast  reward 
(1  Cor.  ii.  9).  (R.  Treffry.)  Consecration : — The  New  Version  reads,  "Who  then 
offereth  willingly  to  consecrate  himself  this  day  unto  the  Lord."  This  preferable 
reading  suggests  the  theme  of  self  consecration  to  God.  I.  What  this  consecra- 
tion INVOLVES.  A  man  may  consecrate  many  things  to  God  and  yet  not  consecrate 
himself.  God  does  not  value  a  man's  money,  time,  talents,  if  he  withholds  himself. 
Consecration  of  self  involves — 1.  The  heart.  This  is  the  seat  of  our  affections,  the 
love  of  our  nature,  and  the  fountain  from  which  flows  everything  that  constitutes 
the  character.  •'  Give  me  thine  heart."  2.  The  body.  The  body  as  well  as  the 
soul  is  the  temple  of  God  (1  Cor.  vi.  15,  19;  Eph.  v.  30).  Self-conseoration 
covers  our  whole  being — body,  soul,  and  spirit.  It  will  also  embrace  our  time, 
talents,  wealth.  II.  The  claim  which  God  has  to  this  self-consecbation.  His 
claim  results — 1.  From  His  love.  God  loves  us.  The  love  of  a  father  constitutes  a 
claim  to  the  love  of  a  dutiful  son,  how  much  more  to  the  love  of  a  prodigal  son. 
2.  From  the  way  in  which  God  has  consecrated  or  sanctified  Himself  for  us. 
•'  He  gave  Himself  for  me."  3.  He  asks  our  self-consecration  to  His  service  because 
it  is  the  best  thing  we  can  do  for  ourselves.  HI.  This  self-consecration  is  an 
immediate  dutt.  1.  It  is  a  great  mistake  for  any  to  withhold  self -consecration 
because  they  are  too  young.  It  is  easier  to  be  pure,  and  truthful,  and  loving,  and 
diligent  in  the  service  of  God  when  young  than  it  will  be  to  practise  those  virtues 
when  old,  if  you  have  neglected  them  when  young.  The  habits  formed  by  a  life  of 
sin  and  neglect  of  God  are  like  iron  chains  that  you  cannot  easily  break.  Many 
who  once  said  they  were  too  young  are  now  saying  they  are  too  old.  2.  The  sooner 
you  commence  to  serve  God  the  more  you  will  be  able  to  accomplish.  3.  The 
present  may  be  your  only  opportunity.  We  have  been  speaking  specially  to  the 
young ;  but  this  is  also  a  word  for  the  aged.  It  is  a  delightful  thing  to  see  the 
young  decide  for  Christ,  but  it  is  a  sad  thing  to  see  the  parents  left  behind.  I  was 
deeply  impressed  with  this  one  day.  I  was  on  a  visit  close  to  the  east  coast  where 
80  many  wrecks  had  recently  taken  place ;  among  them  was  a  vessel  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Tyne.  It  was  Christmas  day,  and  on  the  pier  among  the  crowd  of  spectators 
stood  the  son  of  the  captain,  watching  and  waiting  for  his  father ;  for  he  was 
expected  to  be  at  home  on  that  festive  day.  Probably  as  they  gazed  at  each  other 
a  violent  sea  struck  the  vessel,  and  it  sunk  with  aU  hands — wrecked  within  sight  of 
port  and  within  sight  of  friends.  Parents,  are  there  none  of  your  children  who 
have  decided  for  Christ,  and  are  standing  on  the  Eock  and  looking  out  and 
expecting  you  home  ?  Shall  they  see  you  wrecked  within  sight  of  port  ?  {Absalom 
Clarke.)  Service  for  God  : — Men  make  a  great  deal  of  to-morrow.  God  always 
and  everywhere  lays  stress  on  to-day.  Day  by  day  God  supplies,  and  day  by  day 
He  asks  us  to  serve.  In  reference  to  this  service  we  want  to  try  and  answer  three 
questions,  I.  Who  is  it  asks  for  it  ?  II.  Why  does  He  want  it  ?  God  wishes 
to  use  men,  because  by  this  means  He  can  bestow  richer  blessing  upon  them  than  He 
could  in  any  other  way.  HI.  How  mat  wb  render  it  ?  1.  By  yielding  your  heart 
to  Him.  2.  By  living  an  upright,  consistent,  unselfish  life.  3.  By  earnest  loving 
effort.  4.  By  helping  and  encouraging  His  people.  (J.  D.  Kilbum.)  Christian 
consecration. — I.  Christian  consecration  is  a  personal  thing :  "  Who?  "  II.  Christian 
consecration  is  a  voluntart  thing :  "  Who  is  willing?  "  IH.  Christian  consecration 
is  an  active  thing:  "His  service."  IV.  Christian  consecration  is  a  reasonablk 
thing:  "Unto  the  Lord."  V.  Christian  consecration  is  a  prompt  thing:  "This 
day."  VI.  Christian  consecration  is  a  stmpathetic  thing:  it  prompts  the  conse- 
crated to  commend  the  grace  of  God  to  others  and  press  the  question,  •'  Who  is 
willing?"  &c.  (Thos.  Kelly,  D.D.)  Consecration: — A  great  disappointment  in 
life  is  often  a  terrible  experience.  A  picturesque  writer  compares  the  setting  of  a 
secret  hope  to  the  setting  of  the  sun.  The  brightness  of  life  seems  gone.  And 
such  might  well  to  some  extent  have  been  the  experience  of  David.  He  had  set  his 
heart  on  erecting  the  temple  on  Mount  Zion.  We  may  judge,  then,  what  a  collapse 
fell  on  his  intensest  interest  and  expectation  when  the  decree  issued  that  the  work 
was  not  to  be  done  by  him.  Instead  of  sinking  into  sullen  apathy,  or  the  inertness 
of  despair,  he  devoted  himself  with  renewed  and  consecrated  energy  to  gather  the 
materials  necessary  for  the  work,  and  in  the  text  he  appeals  to  and  seeks  to  stimulate 
the  people.  The  consecration  here  required — ^I.  Must  have  in  it  thi  element 
OP  SPONTANEITT.  We  must  know  what  love  to  God  really  is,  and  we  must  feel  the 
spell  of  its  sweet  strength.    As  to  the  form  in  which  our  love  is  to  manifest  itself, 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 

that  is  a  question  of  inferior  importance.  We  know  that  our  love  to  our  fellow- 
creatures  is  not  conformed  to  any  common  or  uniform  law  ;  it  is  sometimes  radiant 
in  a  smile,  flippant  on  the  tongue ;  its  speech  bewrayeth  itself ;  it  asserts  itself 
irrepressibly  in  a  thousand  ways.  In  other  cases  it  is  reticent,  it  is  reserved,  it  is 
like  the  image  of  moon  or  star  in  a  mountain  tarn,  it  abideth  alone ;  few  ever  see 
it;  and  yet  in  both  cases  it  is  deep  and  sincere,  strong  even  as  death.  The  great 
question  is  not  as  to  how  our  love  is  to  express  itself,  but  as  to  whether  it  really 
exists  at  all,  the  supreme  power  of  the  soul,  a  living  and  present  reality  within  us. 
One  of  our  poets  represents  a  wretched  slave,  in  reply  to  the  query  of  her  master  in 
respect  to  her  affection  for  himself,  as  replying  with  a  gladness-glamoured,  "  Yes," 
with  her  lips,  when  her  heart,  burned  to  say,  "  No."  The  sad,  pathetic  picture  of  the 
poet  is  the  precise  converse  of  what  we  are  now  insisting  upon,  namely,  that  the 
professed  devotion  of  ourselves  to  God  must  be  the  gift  of  love,  or  can  He  do  else 
than  spurn  the  sacrifice  altogether  ?  II.  Must  be  a  whole-heakted,  undivided 
THING — body  as  well  as  soul.  The  later  representatives  of  the  Gnostics  held  that 
the  body  was  so  wholly  bad  as  to  be  beyond  redemption  ;  that  it  did  not  matter  what 
became  of  it ;  that  it  might  be  plunged  into  the  blackest  depths  of  vicious  excess 
and  that  the  spirit  within  would  contract  no  defilement  and  suffer  no  detriment. 
Accordingly  the  primitive  Christians  were  in  imminent  peril  of  being  seduced  into 
the  immoralities  which  abounded  around  them.  Hence  the  warnings  which  abound 
in  apostolic  Epistles  against  lasciviousness,  revelling,  banquetings,  and  such  like. 
Why  should  we  not  feel  respecting  the  body  that  it  is  as  truly  consecrated  to  God 
in  the  case  of  a  Christian  as  the  soul  can  be  ?  III.  This  consecration  is  no  cheap 
OB  EASY  THING.  We  must  not  offer  unto  God  that  which  costs  us  nothing. 
1.  There  is  the  cost  of  self-discipline.  2.  The  diligent  and  laborious  use  of  the 
means  of  grace.  {Dean  Forrest.)  Consecration : — I  do  not  know  a  question  in 
the  sacred  volume  more  full  of  import,  or  more  adapted  to  press  upon  the  heart. 
I.  We  shall  explain  what  we  begard  as  the  consecration  of  service  to  God. 

1.  There  must  be  correct  views  of  the  Divine  character  and  claims,  as  they  are 
revealed  in  the  record  of  His  Word.  You  must  receive  Him  as  He  there  appears. 
(1)  The  God  of  creation.     (2)  The  God  of  providence.     (3)  The  God  of  redemption. 

2.  A  practical  obedience  to  the  will  of  God,  whether  expressly  declared,  or  whether 
to  be  inferred  from  His  revealed  attributes.  3.  The  use  of  active  exertion  to  promote 
the  Divine  glory  in  the  world.  Keligion  does  not  only  direct  our  attention  to  duties 
which  pertain  exclusively  to  our  own  personal  characters  and  interests ;  it  also 
prompts  a  concern  for  the  improvement  and  welfare  of  our  fellow-men.  It  is  not 
equivocal  testimony  that  your  own  hearts  are  given  to  God  in  faith  and  true 
holiness  when  you  desire  to  be  instrumental  in  restoring  the  authority  of  His  law 
over  the  minds  and  lives  of  others.  11.  We  shall  present  the  considerations 
which  ought  to  urge  to  an  engagement  in  the  service  of  God.  1.  We 
are  placed  under  universal  and  imperative  obligation  to  do  so.  2.  The  influ- 
ence His  service  has  in  preventing  the  degradation  and  promoting  the  dignity 
of  our  nature.  The  habits  of  men  must  always  according  to  their  moral 
nature  tend  to  degrade  or  dignify.  He  who  is  truly  devoted  to  God,  what- 
ever be  his  deficiencies  and  disadvantages  in  other  respects,  is  placed  on 
a  far  higher  eminence  than  can  ever  be  attained  by  the  most  arduous  aspira- 
tions of  the  carnal  mind.  Must  not  that  bestow  transcendent  dignity  which 
writes  the  law  of  Jehovah  on  the  heart,  renders  the  body  a  living  temple  and  an 
habitation  of  God,  places  the  thoughts  and  employments  of  men  in  a  sphere 
where  they  become  associated  with  prophets  and  apostles  and  martyrs  of  the 
Kedeemer  and  the  Redeemer  Himself,  and  where  they  are  blended  with  the  sublime 
realities  of  the  invisible  and  eternal  world  ?  The  service  of  God  ennobles  all  that  it 
comprehends ;  it  is  as  the  rose  which  gave  its  fragrance  to  the  very  clay  ;  it  is  as 
the  sunbeam  which  tints  with  a  fresh  hue  of  beauty  and  splendour  the  forms  of 
earth,  and  causes  them  to  reflect  its  own  glory.  3.  The  true  and  solid  pleasure  His 
service  communicates  to  the  soul.  Here  is — (1)  Peace  with  God.  (2)  Freedom 
from  the  dominion  of  sin.  (3)  Redemption  from  the  terror  of  the  curse.  (4)  The 
confidence  of  rectitude  and  pardon.  (5)  The  inspiration  which  springs  from  & 
participation  in  the  triumphs  of  pure  benevolence  and  love.  (6)  The  possession  of 
privileges  which,  from  the  consolations  of  time,  shall  rise  to  the  happiness  of 
eternity.  4.  The  glorious  recompence  by  which  the  engagements  of  His  service  are 
consummated.  III.  We  shall  impress  the  question  by  which,  to  an  engage- 
ment IN  THE  SKBVICE  OF  GoD,  YOU  ABB  EMPHATICALLY  CHALLENGED.       WhO  is  willing  ? 

What  excuses  can  you  propose  to  justify  a  negative.    You  are  too  young.     "  Suffer 


CHAP,  xxnt.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  109 

little  children  to  come  unto  Me."  Tou  are  too  poor.  The  Saviour  came  to  "  preach 
the  gospel  to  the  poor."  You  are  too  guilty.  "  The  Son  of  Man  came  to  seek  and 
to  save  that  which  was  lost."  You  are  prevented  by  worldly  attachments. 
"  He  that  loveth  father  or  mother  more  than  Me  is  not  worthy  of  Me,"  &c. 
You  are  deterred  by  threatening  of  persecution.  "  Whosoever  will  save  his  life 
shall  lose  it,"  &c.     {James  Parsons.)  The  true  idea  of  the  Christian  life : — 

I.  This  is  God's  appeal  fob  service.  II.  Sebvice  is  the  tbue  idea  of 
THE  Christian  life.  For  religion  is  not  a  mere  viaticum  to  carry  the  soul  to 
glory ;  but  a  power  and  support  required  during  life,  and  not  in  death  only. 
III.  Service  implies  obedience,  self-denial,  and  activity.  Such  a  work  requires 
generosity  and  earnestness,  resembling  the  zeal  of  the  Jews  in  building  their 
temple.  IV.  The  sebvice  of  God  requires  a  voluntary  and  distinct  consecba- 
TiON.  V.  The  service  of  God  is  of  the  most  pbessing  urgency.  It  should  be 
"this  day."  {L.  H.  Byrnes,  B.A.)  The  act  of  the  will: — In  making  our  choice 
there  is  a  determined  act  of  our  own  will.  To  be  willing  is  one  thing  ;  to  will  is 
another  thing.  We  may  be  entirely  willing,  for  instance,  to  go  to  some  other 
country — say  America — and  such  willingness  may  continue  for  years ;  but  unless 
you  will  to  go,  you  will  never  reach  there.  Our  choice  involves  a  definite  act  of  the 
will;  we  may  think  about  religion;  we  may  talk  about  religion  ;  we  may  be  kindly 
affected  towards  religion  ;  but  we  are  called  to  do  more.  We  are  called  to  make  a 
determined  act  of  our  will  and  to  make  our  choice.  You  have  seen  a  grand  vessel 
about  to  be  launched.  Everything  was  ready  for  her  departure  from  dry  land. 
Every  impediment  had  been  removed  but  one,  and  that  was  the  one  which  pre- 
vented her  from  entering  the  element  on  which  she  was  to  sail.  One  single  block 
bound  her  to  earth.  It  was  in  itself  a  mere  trifle.  A  blow  of  the  hammer  wielded 
by  a  vigorous  arm  would  set  her  free ;  but  let  that  block  remain  untouched,  and  no 
onward  movement  would  be  made  by  the  gallant  ship.  The  hammer  swings  in  the 
air  ;  the  blow  is  struck  ;  she  rushes  into  the  great  deep,  where  she  floats  with  ease 
and  grace  as  one  born  to  it  as  her  own  possession.  That  stroke  of  the  hammer 
corresponds  to  the  act  of  the  will — the  deliberate  resolution  taken  and  made  to 
consecrate  oneself  to  Christ  and  to  God.  It  must  be  taken,  or  the  journey  will 
never  be  traversed.  (Cameron  Lees,  D.D.)  Complete  consecration: — "I  give 
Thee  all — I  keep  back  nothing  for  myself."  Such  ^&s  the  motto  engraved  upon 
the  ring  and  seals  of  the  great  Eeformer  Calvin.  The  words  were  deeply  cut  in 
what  was  solid,  whether  of  metal  or  stone.  They  were  ever  carried  about  him, 
ever  present  with  him.  He  meant  them  to  be  unchangeable  by  engraving  them 
where  he  did.  Offered  willingly  : — Eich  men's  presents  are  gold  and  silver,  or 
other  costly  things.  Mine  must  be  recommended  by  the  affectionate  pleasure  with 
which  I  give  them.     (The  Yen.  Bede  when  dying.) 

Vers.  10-20.  Wherefore  David  blessed  the  Lord  before  all  the  congregation. — 

The  last  thanksgiving  : — Every  sentence  weighed  and  measured  for  the  occasion. 

1.  The  infinite  perfections   of    God.      1.  God    in  His   unspeakable  grandeur. 

2.  God  in  His  universal  dominion.  3.  God  in  His  absolute  ownership.  4.  God 
in  His  covenant  relation.  5.  God  in  His  goodness  to  men.  II.  The  peculiar 
relations  of  man  to  the  infinite  God.  1.  Man  is  a  dependent  creature.  "  Who 
am  I  ?  "  (1]  Dependent  for  substance  to  give.  (2)  Dependent  for  the  disposition 
to  give  it.  (3)  Therefore  indebted  to  God  for  all  things.  2.  Man  is  a  short-lived 
creature.  3.  Man's  conduct  is  observed  by  God.  (J.  Wolfendale.)  David^s 
thanksgiving  : — 1.  Its  adoration  of  God.  2.  Its  aclmowledgment  of  dependence 
upon  Him.  3.  Its  recognition  of  the  influence  of  His  grace.  4.  Its  solemn  appeal 
to  conscious  integrity.  5.  Its  earnest  prayer  for  king  and  people.  (Ibid.) 
The  reciprocal  influence  of  mind  upon  mind  in  worship : — In  this  address  of  the 
venerable  King  of  Israel  to  the  Omnipotent  Sovereign  of  the  world,  the  natural 
influence  of  one  mind  upon  another,  the  secret  but  powerful  sympathy  of  similar 
affections  in  the  "  devout  congregation  "  combine  with  his  own  grateful  dispositions 
to  enlarge  his  conceptions  and  to  bring  forth  the  most  affecting  description  of  the 
excellences  of  the  great  object  of  their  common  homage.  You  cannot  but  have 
observed  and  felt  an  influence  of  this  kind,  and  been  moved  by  the  affections  of 
others,  especially  when  they  corresponded  with  the  condition  of  your  own  hearts. 
You  have  felt  anger,  joy,  or  grief  insinuate  themselves  into  your  minds  from  the 
expression  of  them  in  others ;  and  you  have  seen  these  affections  increased  in 
them  by  the  mutual  sympathy  of  your  feelings.  How  often  has  the  rage  of  an 
individual,  expressed  by  the  fiery  glance  of  his  eye,  the  fierceness  of  Ms  ccun- 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 

tenance,  and  the  shrillness  of  his  tones,  with  the  force  and  quickness  of  lightning 
inflamed  a  multitude,  and  exasperated  their  headstrong  passions.  With  what 
glowing  delight  has  an  assembly  been  filled  by  the  joyful  countenance,  the  cheerful 
glance,  the  eloquent  tones  of  a  happy  friend.  How  often  has  the  melancholy, 
downcast  look,  or  the  tender  tear  of  an  interesting  mourner,  covered  the  face  of 
the  beholder  with  like  pensive  sadness,  and  infused  into  your  bosom  sorrows  not 
your  own.  This  reciprocal  impression  of  the  affections  of  the  heart  must  hold 
equally  true  in  the  worship  of  the  Supreme,  as  in  the  intercourse  of  common  life. 
{Anon.)  Thine,  0  Lord,  is  the  greatness  and  the  power. — God's  supreme  dominion 
and  universal  authority : — I.  The  supreme  authority  and  dominion  of  the  eveb- 
BLE88KD  GoD.  God,  undef  every  possible  consideration,  must  be  supreme.  As, 
therefore.  He  must  be  supreme,  so  must  He  reign  over  all  (Rom.  ii.  5).  God  has 
an  absolute  right,  not  only  to  claim  allegiance  from  all,  but  to  dispose  of  all 
according  to  His  own  will  and  pleasure.  Every  part  of  God's  Word  teems  with 
His  glorious  sovereign  authority.  1.  Witness  a  few  confessions.  Text.  Solomon 
(1  Kings  viii.  22-23 ;  2  Chron.  vi.  14) ;  Hezekiah  (2  Kings  xix.  14-19) ;  Jehoshaphat 
(2  Chron.  xx.  3-12);  the  Levites  (Neh.  ix.  4-6);  the  Lord's  Prayer  (Matt. 
▼1.  13) ;  Paul  (Eph.  i.  3-6 ;  1  Tim.  i.  11-17) ;  Jude  (vers.  20-25).  2.  How  the 
Lord  asserts  and  claims  this  glorious  prerogative  as  peculiar  to  Himself 
(Deut.  xxxii.  39-43;  Isa.  xl.  25,  26,  xli.  14-16,  xlii.  5-8,  xliii.  15-17; 
Jer.  V.  20-25;  Dan.  vii.  13-14).  II.  The  natuke  of  this  supreme  dominion  and 
SOVEREIGN  AUTHORITY.  Observo — 1.  Negatively.  It  is  not — (1)  A  deputed  and 
delegated  authority.  (2)  An  assumed  or  usurped  authority.  (3)  An  arbitrary 
authority.  2.  Positively.  (1)  It  is  universal.  (2)  Equitable.  (3)  Irresistible. 
(4)  Everlasting.  III.  The  aspect  in  which  it  is  to  be  viewed  by  us.  1.  As 
a  most  glorious  doctrine.  2.  As  a  most  humiliating  doctrine.  3.  As  a  most 
alarming  doctrine.  4.  As  a  most  encouraging  doctrine.  5.  As  a  most  invigorating 
and  establishing  doctrine.  (JR.  Shittler.)  The  Divine  greatness  and  beneficence  : — 
We  have  in  these  words  a  confession — I.  Of  the  Divine  sovereignty.  II.  Of 
the  Divine  power.  III.  Of  the  Divine  beneficence.  {J.  Johnson  Cart,  M.A.) 
David's  thanksgiving  : — I.  The  occasion.  David,  in  a  general  assembly  of  his 
people,  moves  them  to  contribute  towards  the  building  of  the  temple,  and 
encourages  them  by  his  own  example.  They  contribute  willingly  and  liberally. 
Beckoning  a  talent  of  silver  at  £375,  and  a  talent  of  gold  at  £4,500,  what  they 
offered  amounted  to  above  twenty-six  millions  of  pounds  sterling  (besides  the  ten 
thousand  drams  of  gold,  the  other  metals,  and  precious  stones),  which,  with  what 
David  gave  himself  out  of  his  private  treasury,  being  above  sixteen  millions  more, 
makes  a  vast  sum.  For  this  he  and  the  people  rejoice.  He  blesses  and  praises 
God,  not  because  they  had  so  much,  but  because  they  had  hearts  to  lay  out  so 
much  for  God  and  His  worship.  To  have  much  may  be  a  curse  and  a  snare,  but 
to  have  a  heart  to  employ  it  for  God  is  a  far  more  blessed  thing  than  to  keep  it, 
or  gain  it,  or  any  way  to  receive  it  (Acts  xx.  25).  EL.  The  mode  or  form  of  his 
praising  God.  It  is  an  ascribing  all  excellences  to  Him.  True  praising  or 
blessing  of  Gk)d  consists  in  acknowledging  that  to  be  God's  which  is  His.  When 
Christ  taught  His  disciples  how  to  pray  and  how  to  praise  God,  this  is  the  mode  of 
praising  Him  (Matt.  vii.  18)  :  "  Thine  is,"  Ac.  After  the  same  manner  does 
David  here  praise  Him.  (D.  Clarkson.)  For  all  that  is  in  the  heaven  and  in 
the  earth  Is  Thine. — The  Lord  it  the  owner  of  all  things : — I.  What  evidence 
there  is  in  Scriptukb  fob  the  Lord's  title  to  all  things.  1.  Those  things 
are  His  which  we  have  in  common  with  others.  (1)  The  world  in  general 
(Psa.  1.  12);  (2)  heaven  (Psa.  Ixxiix.  11);  (3)  the  sea  (Psa.  xcv.  6);  (4)  the 
earth  (Exod.  xix.  5) ;  (5)  everything  in  the  earth  (Deut.  x.  14).  2.  Those  things 
are  His  which  we  think  to  be  properly  ours.  We  may  be  proprietors  in  respect  of 
men,  so  far  as  none  of  them  may  be  able  to  produce  any  good  title  or  lay  any  just 
claim  to  what  we  have  ;  but  we  are  no  proprietors  in  reference  to  God.  (1)  Lands 
(Lev.  XXV.  23) ;  (2)  the  fruits  of  the  land  (Hos.  ii.  9) ;  and  cattle  (Psa.  1. 
10,  11);  (3)  money  and  clothes  (Hag.  ii.  8;  1  Chron.  xxix.  14,  16);  (4)  our 
children  (Ezek.  xvi.  20,  21);  (5)  ourselves  (1  Cor.  vi.  19;  Psa.  c.  3);  (6)  our 
bodies  (1  Cor.  vi.  20) ;  (7)  our  souls  (Ezek.  xviii.  4  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20).     U.  What 

IS   THE   foundation   OF  THE   LoRD'S  TITLE   TO   A   PROPRIETY   IN  ALL  THINGS?      He  that 

gave  to  all  their  being  is  clearly  the  owner  of  all  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  11,  12).  1.  He 
made  all  for  Himself,  not  for  the  pleasure  of  another,  as  the  Israelites  wrought 
for  Pharaoh.  2.  He  made  aJl  things  of  nothing.  3.  He  made  all  without  the  help 
or  concarrenoe  of  any  other.    4.  He  upholds  all  things  in  the  same  manner  as  He 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  Ill 

created.  HI.  The  nattjbe  and  quaiiItt  of  this  propkiett.  1.  He  is  the 
primary  and  original  owner  of  all.  His  title  and  propriety  is  underived.  2.  He 
is  the  absolute  owner  of  all,  without  any  condition  or  limitation.  3.  He  is  the 
principal  owner.  All  others  that  have  right  to  anything  have  it  under  Him,  and 
in  subordination  to  Him,  and  are  tied  to  acknowledge  it  by  doing  Him  service  for 
whatever  they  have.  4.  He  is  total  owner  of  all.  When  David  gave  the  possession 
mentioned  (2  Sam.  xix.  29)  between  Ziba  and  Mephibosheth,  they  had  a  joint 
interest  therein,  so  Jehoshaphat  and  Ahaziah  would  have  had  in  the  navy  and 
adventure  if  they  had  joined  their  ships  according  to  the  proposal  (1  King8 
xxii.  49).  But  none  has  a  joint  interest  with  God.  5.  He  is  the  perpetual  owner 
of  all.  6.  He  is  transcendently  the  owner  of  all.  He  has  the  greatest  right  to 
them.  He  has  more  right  to  all  than  we  have  to  anything.  7.  He  is  the  sole 
owner  of  all  things.  Use  1.  Of  information.  (1)  Herein  we  may  discern  the 
greatness  of  the  Lord  whom  we  serve  and  whose  we  are.  (2)  This  may  inform  us 
that  the  Lord  hath  a  right  to  deal  with  us  or  any  creature  as  He  will.  Use  2. 
For  exhortation.  This  truth  suggests  many  duties  of  greatest  moment  and  con- 
sequence. (1)  Thankfulness.  Whatsoever  we  have  that  is  good  is  from  Him,  and 
not  only  the  substance,  but  every  degree  of  it.  (2)  Self-surrender.  (3)  Improving 
all  we  have  for  God.  (4)  Patience.  (5)  Humility.  (6)  Self-denial.  If  God  be  the 
owner  of  all  things,  He  is  the  owner  of  us  ;  if  He  be  the  owner  of  us,  we  are  not  to 
own  ourselves,  and  not  to  own  ourselves  is  to  deny  ourselves.  We  must  deny 
ourselves — (a)  As  to  our  judgments.  We  must  give  up  ourselves  to  the  conduct 
of  that  judgment  which  is  laid  down  in  Scripture,  that  which  is  called  the  mind 
of  the  Lord.  (6)  As  to  our  wills.  The  will  of  the  Lord  must  be  our  wUl.  (c)  As 
to  our  ends.  The  pleasing,  and  honouring,  and  enjoying  God  is  the  only  end  we 
should  propose  to  ourselves,  either  in  holy  duties  or  worldly  business,  (d)  As  to 
our  interests.  If  God  be  our  owner,  we  ought  to  own  and  mind  His  interest  and 
none  else,  (e)  As  to  our  business  and  employments.  The  example  of  Christ 
(Luke  ii.  19 ;  John  iv.  34,  ix.  4).  (/)  As  to  our  possessions.  We  ought  to  look 
upon  all  we  possess  as  the  Lord's  and  not  ours.  Use  3.  For  encouragement. 
1.  This  truth  affords  encouragement  in  those  special  cases  which  are  most  apt  to 
trouble  and  deject  you.  He  can  supply  all  your  need.  (1)  Want  you  wealth,  or 
what  you  judge  to  be  a  competency?  (ver.  12).  All  the  riches  of  the  world  are  in 
His  hands,  and  He  can  dispose  thereof  to  whom  and  in  what  proportion  He  sees 
good  (2  Cor.  ix.  8;  Phil.  iv.  19).  (2)  Want  you  authority  to  countenance  and 
secure  you?  (ver.  11).  He  has  the  disposing  of  it  all.  (3)  Want  you  victory  over 
enemies,  those  that  afiQict  and  oppress  your  souls  ?  The  Lord  can  give  it  you ;  it 
is  His  own.  (4)  Want  you  strength,  outward  or  inward,  to  do,  or  to  suffer,  or  to 
resist  ?  This  He  can  also  give  you,  for  it  is  all  His  own  (ver.  12).  (5)  Want  you 
wisdom?  (Jas.  i.  6).  (6)  Want  you  gifts  or  other  graces,  or  a  greater  measure 
of  them?  (Jas.  i.  17).  (7)  Want  you  comfort?  (2  Cor.  i.  8).  (8)  Want  you 
friends?  All  the  friends  in  the  world  are  but  cyphers  to  Him.  2.  There  is 
encouragement  to  undergo  or  undertake  anything  for  God  which  He  calls  you  to. 
He  is  the  owner  of  all  things,  and  so  has  enough  to  requite  you,  to  reward  you,  if 
all  that  is  in  heaven  and  in  earth  be  enough  to  do  it.  (Ibid.)  Divine  owner- 
ship : — God's  ownership  is — 1.  Universal.  2.  Absolute.  8.  Eternal.  From  this 
ownership  we  infer — I.  The  absolute  stjpbemact  of  God.  He  who  owns  all  has 
a  right — 1.  To  bestow  on  any  creature  whatever  He  pleases.  2.  To  withdraw  from 
any  creature  in  any  way  or  at  any  time  whatever  He  thinks  best.  "  The  Lord 
gave,  the  Lord  hath  taken  away."  II.  The  uobal  obligation  of  man.  What 
is  that?  1.  To  obey  His  will  in  everything.  2.  To  be  animated  by  supreme 
gratitude.  {Homilist.)  TUne  is  the  kingdom,  0  Lord. — Ttu  kingdom  of  God : — 
I.  Thine,  O  Lobd,  is  the  kingdom.  What  kingdom?  1.  The  kingdom  of  nature, 
with  all  its  productions  and  materials.  2.  The  kingdom  of  providence.  As  He 
made  all,  so  His  care  extends  to  all.  3.  The  kingdom  of  grace.  This  is  a  kingdom 
within  the  kingdom  of  nature  and  providence.  It  is  a  mediatorial,  a  spiritual 
empire,  which  is  designed  to  establish  the  peculiar  reign  of  God,  not  only  over  men, 
but  in  them.  n.  The  glory  of  this  kingdom.  This  is  seen — 1.  In  its  Sovereign 
— the  Lord  Jesus.  2.  In  its  universality.  3.  In  its  prospect  (Dan.  ii.  44,  Til. 
13,  14).  4.  In  its  subjects :  "  The  excellent  of  the  earth."  6.  In  its  privileges : 
"Eye  hath  not  seen,"  Ac.  (1)  Peace.  (2)  Liberty:  "The  glorious  liberty  of  the 
sons  of  God."  (3)  Plentitude :  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  makes  unto  all  people  a  feast 
of  fat  things,"  Ac.  "  My  God  shall  supply  all  your  need,"  <fec.  {W.  Jay,  M.A.) 
And  in  Thine  hand  it  i>  to  make  great,  and  to  give  strength  unto  all, — The 


113  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xnx. 

nature  of  true  greatness : — I.  "What  is  the  natube  of  true  greatness  ?  The 
scriptural  idea  of  greatness  is  essentially  different  from  that  which  is  formed  by 
the  world.  1.  To  a  few  names  the  world  has  by  general  consent  appended  the 
title  of  "  the  Great " — Alexander,  Constantine,  Napoleon.  These  were  great  men 
with  little  aims.  Self  was  the  beginning  and  end  of  all  their  plans  and  labours. 
Their  greatness  was  like  a  tree  of  ample  trunk  and  wide-extended  foliage,  not 
spreading  a  beneficent  shade,  but  distilling  a  deadly  poison  on  all  beneath,  and 
thus  killing  its  own  roots  and  insuring  its  own  decay.  2.  A  higher  order  of  worldly 
greatness  is  that  which  consists  purely  in  exalted  genius  and  great  intellectual 
power,  whatever  be  the  form  of  its  manifestation.  This  form  of  greatness  has  been 
generally  beneficent  in  its  influence.  Still  it  is  in  itself  incomplete  and  unfinished. 
3.  The  greatness  of  the  Bible  is  a  holy  greatness.  The  fear  of  God  is  the  source 
of  its  wisdom ;  the  love  of  God  is  the  spring  of  its  activity ;  the  glory  of  God  is  the 
end  of  its  enterprises  and  labours.  11.  This  greatness  is  a  proper  object  of 
aspiration  and  pursuit.  1.  Man  was  made  for  this  greatness.  He  is  born  great. 
Great  powers,  great  duties,  great  expectancies,  a  great  sphere  of  action,  great  hopes 
and  promises,  are  his.  If  he  becomes  little,  it  is  by  his  own  fault  and  sin.  2.  The 
Word  of  God  exhorts  us  to  it,  "calls"  us  to  "glory"  as  well  as  to  "virtue." 
8.  We  are  taught  that  there  will  be  a  distinction  in  the  rewards  of  eternity, 
graduated  to  the  different  degrees  of  merit  and  earnestness  in  the  service  of  God 
in  the  present  life.  4,  The  examples  of  Scripture  are  justifications  of  the  highest 
aim.  All  history  besides  contains  no  such  list  of  heroes  as  Hebrews  xi.  III.  The 
SOURCE  OF  this  GREATNESS.  All  things  are  of  God.  Even  the  world's  heroes  have 
felt  and  acknowledged  this.  If  it  is  in  God's  hands  to  make  great — 1.  Then  He  is 
to  be  acknowledged  and  adored  as  the  author  of  all  the  endowments  of  men. 
2.  What  must  be  the  guilt  of  those  who  have  perverted  and  abused  their  talents  to 
spread  disorder,  pollution,  and  misery  among  His  moral  subjects  1  3.  Their  great- 
ness is  to  be  solicited  and  expected  from  Him.  4.  From  Him  we  must  derive  our 
idea  of  greatness.  This  He  has  revealed  to  us — (1)  In  His  Word.  (2)  In  the  life 
of  Christ.  {John  Proudfit,  D.D.)  The  agency  of  God  in  human  greatness : — 
I.  God  makes  men  great  by  bestowing  upon  them  distinguished  genius  and 
TAiENTS.  Some  of  the  courtiers  of  the  Emperor  Sigismund,  who  had  no  taste  for 
learning,  inquired  why  he  so  honoured  and  respected  men  of  low  birth  on  account 
of  their  science.  The  emperor  replied,  "  In  one  day  I  can  confer  knighthood  or 
nobility  on  many ;  in  many  years  I  cannot  bestow  genius  on  one.  Wise  and 
learned  men  are  created    by  God  only."    II.    God    makes    men   great   by   an 

EDUCATION,  AND   BT   EVENTS   IN   LITE   SUITED   TO   DISCOVER,  TO   EXCITE,    TO   ENCOURAGE, 

TO  IMPROVE,  AND  TO  DIRECT  THEiB  TALENTS.  The  most  luxuriaut  soil,  when 
uncultivated,  often  becomes  wild  and  barren,  while  a  soil  less  favourable  richly 
recompenses  the  seed  sown,  and  the  labours  of  the  husbandman.  1.  Early 
instruction  and  discipline  correct  the  blemishes,  brighten  the  polish,  and  increase 
the  excellences  of  genius.  2.  The  friends  and  companions  of  our  early  youth 
contribute  not  a  little  to  the  strengthening  and  improving  our  natural  talents. 
8.  Favourable  providences  expand  the  faculties,  call  forth  exertions,  and  discover 
the  extent  of  talents,  which  otherwise  might  have  lain  dormant,  or  shone  with  less 
lustre.  Erpinius  the  critic,  was  first  stimulated  to  a  proper  improvement  of  his 
time  and  talents  by  looking  into  Fortius  Eingelbergius's  treatise  on  study; 
Franklin  was  similarly  affected  by  an  essay  of  Dr.  Cotton  Mathers,  on  doing  good. 
Great  occasions  produce  great  talents.  A  Frederic  and  a  Washington  might  have 
lived  obscure,  and  died  forgotten,  had  the  time,  place,  and  circumstances  which 
called  forth  their  abilities  been  different.     III.  It  is   God   who   implants  dis- 

rOSITIONS,  AND  EXCITES  TO  CONDUCT,  WHICH  ENABLB  MEN  TO  IMPROVE  THEIR  NATURAL 
ABILITIES,  AND   PROVIDENTIAL   OPPORTUNITIES    AND    ADVANTAGES    FOR    BECOMING    GREAT. 

Exercise  and  activity  marvellously  improve  and  increase  talents,  comparatively 
small.  God  makes  men  great  by  influencing  their  tempers  and  enabling  them  to 
govern  their  spirits  and  conduct  their  lives  by  the  rules  of  reason  and  religion. 

IV.  God  makes  men  great  by  bringing  them  into  difficult  and  trying  situations, 

WHICH    exercise    AND    MANIFEST    THE    GREATNESS  OF  THEIB    DISPOSITION  AND  TALENTS. 

V.  God  makes  men  great  by  rendering  the  exercise  of  their  talents  acceptable 

AND  USEFUL.  VI.  It  IS  GoD  WHO  ASSIGNS  TO  THE  GREAT  THE  SPHERE  OF  THEJK 
GltEATNESS.      VII.    In    THE     HAND     OF    GOD    IT    IB    TO    LIMIT    THE    DURATION   OF  HUMAN 

GREATNESS.  Conclusion  :  Address— 1.  Those  whom  the  hand  of  God  hath  made 
great.  God  made  you  great  for  the  general  good,  and  not  merely  for  your  own 
pleasure  or  profit.    Distinguished  taleata  were  bestowed  that,  with  success,  you. 


CHAf.  xziz.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  US 

might  guide  others  to  -wisdom,  to  religion,  and  happiness.  2.  Those  whom  a 
scanty  measure  of  natural  talents  or  acquired  accomplishments  confines  to  a  lower 
and  more  ignoble  and  laborious  line  of  life.  Beware  of  envy  and  discontent. 
(/.  Erskine,  D.D.)  All  strength  is  from  God  : — All  Christians,  in  themselves, 
are  but  vessels,  poor  fragile  things,  just  like  earthen  pitchers.  We  should  be 
worthless,  only  God  puts  His  life  into  our  hearts.  And  this  becomes  part  of  the 
good  news  of  Christ.  It  brings  the  happy  assurance  to  every  heart  who  hears  it 
that  even  a  child  may  be  a  vessel  to  carry  the  power  of  God.  Weak  people,  little 
people,  fragile  people,  God  uses  them  all.  God  can  fill  the  weakest  and  most 
fragile  with  strength  for  His  work.  He  asks  also  that  the  heart  may  receive  His 
life.  The  outside  may  be  no  better  than  earthenware,  but  inside  there  will  be  an 
excellent  light  and  power  of  God.    (D.  Macleod.) 

Ver.  14.  But  who  am  I,  and  what  Is  my  people,  that  we  should  be  able  to 
offer  80  willingly  7 — The  impossibility  of  creature-merit : — No  point  in  theology 
requires  to  be  oftener  stated,  or  more  carefully  established,  than  the  impossibili'ty 
that  a  creature  should  merit  at  the  hands  of  the  Creator.  Each  one  of  us,  if  he 
have  ever  probed  his  own  heart,  wiU  confess  himself  prone  to  the  persuasion,  that 
the  creature  can  lay  the  Creator  under  obligation.  If  one  being  merit  of  another, 
it  must  perform  some  action  which  it  was  not  obliged  to  perform,  and  by  which 
that  other  is  advantaged.  If  either  of  these  conditions  fail,  merit  must  vanish. 
I.  We  are,  in  the  first  place,  to  speak  on  the  stated  fact  that  all  things  come  op 
God.  II.  The  rNFERENCE  is — that  we  can  give  to  God  nothing  which  is  not 
ALKEADY  His.  If  oue  Creature  give  a  thing  to  another,  he  ceases  to  have  property 
in  the  gift,  and  cannot  again  claim  it  as  his  own.  If  a  man  make  me  a  present 
he  virtually  cedes  all  title  to  the  thing  given  ;  and  if  I  were  afterwards  to  restore 
him  the  whole,  or  a  part,  it  would  be  of  mine  own  that  I  gave  him.  But  if  I 
were  reduced  to  utter  poverty,  with  no  means  whatsoever  of  earning  a  livelihood, 
and  if  a  generous  individual  came  forward  and  gave  me  capital,  and  set  me  up 
in  trade,  and  if,  in  mine  after  prosperity,  I  should  bring  my  benefactor  some 
offering  expressive  of  gratitude,  it  is  clear  that  I  might,  with  the  strictest  truth 
say,  "  Of  thine  own  do  I  give  thee."  I  should  be  indebted  to  my  benefactor  for 
what  I  was  able  to  give ;  and,  of  course,  that  for  which  I  stood  indebted  to  him 
might  be  declared  to  be  his.  But  even  this  comes  far  short  of  the  Creator  and 
the  creature.  This  wiU  show  that  there  is  no  merit  in  the  commonly-presumed 
instances  of  human  desert.  1.  Repentance,  2.  Faith.  3.  Works.  {H.  Melvill, 
B.D.)  God  acknowledged: — One  of  his  gifts  to  his  native  town  consisted  of 
twenty-four  beautiful  and  commodious  almshouses,  which  were  built  and  endowed 
hy  Sir  Francis,  "  as  a  testimony  of  his  gratitude  to  Almighty  God,  and  with  a 
view  of  benefiting  those  of  his  fellow-townsmen  who  may  be  in  need  of  assist- 
ance." Over  the  second-floor  window  of  the  central  almshouse,  along  with  the 
arms  of  Sir  Francis,  is  the  text,  from  1  Chron.  xxix.  14,  "  Of  Thine  own  have  we 
given  Thee."  Each  of  the  inmates  receives  from  the  endowment  of  the  founder  a 
weekly  allowance  sufficient  to  keep  him  from  want.  (Memoirs  of  Sir  Francis 
Crossley.)  All  belongs  to  God  : — There  is  no  portion  of  time  that  is  our  time, 
and  the  rest  God's  ;  there  is  no  portion  of  money  that  is  our  money,  and  the  rest 
God's  money.  It  is  all  His;  He  owns  it  all,  gives  it  all,  and  He  has  simply 
trusted  it  to  us  for  His  service.  A  servant  has  two  purses,  the  master's  and  his 
own  ;  but  we  have  only  one.  {A.  Monod.)  Our  obligations  to  God  : — A  merchant 
in  America,  whom  the  Lord  had  greatly  prospered,  was  a  member  of  a  Church 
where  the  congregation  was  mainly  composed  of  very  poor  people,  and  therefore 
he  had  the  privilege  of  contributing  very  largely  to  the  upkeep  of  the  Church,  and 
toward  the  minister's  salary.  One  of  the  members  of  the  Church  was  travelling, 
and  in  conversation  with  a  clergyman  whom  he  met,  he  mentioned  the  case  of 

Mr.  D ,  and  extolled  his  great  liberality.     The  minister,  without  denying  the 

praiseworthiness  of  the  action,  said,  "Now,  you  are  a  merchant?"  "Yes." 
"  Well,  I  suppose  you  employ  a  clerk  to  serve  your  goods,  and  a  schoolmaster  to 
educate  your  children.  Now,  suppose  the  fees  due  to  the  schoolmaster  had 
become  due,  and  you  give  your  clerk  instructions  to  pay  these,  what  would  you 
think  if  that  clerk  were  to  receive  great  praise  for  having  disbursed  the  money 
-according  to  your  instructions  ?  "  "I  should  think  it  very  absurd."  "Well,  do 
jou  not  see  that  the  case  of  your  liberal-hearted  friend  and  that  hypothetical 
case  of  mine  are  almost  analagous  ?  God  employs  him  as  His  steward  or  clerk  to 
trade  for  Him ;  and  out  of  the  money  which  God  has  given  him  he  is  commanded 

8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix» 

to  pay  the  schoolmaster  of  God's  children.  The  merchant  is  quite  as  much  under 
obligation  to  trade  for  God  as  is  the  preacher  to  preach  for  God,"  We 
should  remember  that  all  things  should  be  done  to  the  glory  of  God.  [J.  King.y 
Christ,  the  author  of  blessings  ministered  through  His  servants  : — Florence  Nightin- 
gale, having  gone  like  an  angel  of  mercy  among  the  hospitals  in  the  Crimea,  until 
her  name  was  enshrined  in  every  soldier's  heart,  asked  to  be  excused  from  having^ 
her  picture  taken,  as  thousands  begged,  that  she  might  drop  out  and  be  forgotten, 
and  that  Christ  alone  might  be  remembered  as  the  author  of  the  blessings  her  hands 
had  ministered.  That  is  the  true  Christian  spirit.  {J.  R.  Miller,  D.D.)  No- 
room  for  God : — It  is  said  of  Hadrian  VI.  that,  having  built  a  stately  college  ai 
Louvain,  he  set  this  inscription  on  the  front  in  golden  letters :  "  Trajectum  planta- 
vit,  Lovanium  rigavit,  sed  Csesar  dedit  incrementum  "  ("  Utrecht  planted  me, 
Louvain  watered  me,  but  Caesar  gave  the  increase ").  A  passenger,  reproving  his 
folly,  underwrote :  "  Hie  Deus  nihil  fecit  "  ("  Here  was  no  room  for  God  to  do  any- 
thing.") (Parens.)  The  building  of  the  temple  : — I  call  your  attention — I.  To  thk 
HALLOWED  WORK  IN  WHICH  WB  ARE  ENGAGED ;  to  build  the  temple,  the  Church  of 
God,  the  house  of  prayer  for  all  the  people.  1.  The  temple  was  to  be  a  house  for 
the  holy  name  of  God.  2.  The  temple  was  the  place  of  authorised  and  accepted 
sacrifice.  3.  The  temple  was  the  place  of  united  worship  and  of  united  blessing. 
4.  It  was  the  place  of  actual  communion  between  God  and  man.  II.  The  senti- 
ments OF  DEEP  ABASEMENT  WITH  WHICH  THE   CIRCUMSTANCE  OE  BEING  PERMITTED  TO- 

TAKE  A  PART  IN  IT  IMPRESSED  THE  MIND  OF  David.  The  houour  of  being  employed 
in  a  work  of  God  ought  to  be  deeply  abasing  to  man.  "  Who  am  I,  and  what  is  my 
people  ?  "  These  questions  suggest  three  views.  1.  What  are  we  with  reference  to 
our  former  selves  ?  We  are,  at  best,  but  pardoned  criminals  ;  and  have  a  long  and 
sad  retrospect  of  ingratitude  and  disobedience.  2.  What  are  we  in  reference  to  our 
associates  in  this  work  ?  3.  What  are  we  in  reference  to  our  actual  contributiong 
to  this  work  ?  III.  To  a  consideration  calculated  powerfully  to  quicken  ouk 
EXERTIONS  m  EVERT  DEPARTMENT  OF  THE  WORK  OF  GoD,  which  may  by  His  mercy 
be  assigned  to  us.  "  We  are  strangers  before  Thee,"  &c.  This  reminds  us — 1.  Thai 
what  we  do  we  must  do  quickly.  2.  That  what  we  do  for  others  we  must  do- 
quickly.  3.  That  short  and  uncertain  as  life  is,  within  its  narrow  space  works  of 
infinite  importance  may  nevertheless  be  done.  Apply  this — (1)  To  your  own  personal 
conduct.  (2)  To  the  great  work  of  building  the  temple  of  God  in  distant  lands- 
IV.  In  all  works  undertaken  for  God,  we  are  taught  by  the  text  to  bs 
MINDFUL  OF  THE  PRINCIPLE  FROM  WHICH  THEY  FLOW.  "  In  the  Uprightness  of  my 
heart  I  have  willingly  offered  all  these  things."  To  be  upright  in  a  moral  sense 
signifies  to  be  conformable  to  the  will  or  law  of  God.  That  law,  with  reference  to 
the  exercises  of  religious  charity,  has  various  parts,  and  taken  together,  they  con- 
stitute uprightness.  There  is — 1.  The  law  of  sincere  intention.  2.  The  law  of 
grateful  return.  3.  The  law  of  faithfulness.  4.  The  law  of  liberality.  6.  The  law 
of  cheerful  distribution.  6.  The  law  of  perseverance.  V.  The  joyous  and  benevo- 
lent  FEELINGS    OF   THE   AGED   MONARCH    WHEN     HE     SAW    THE     PEOPLE    ASSEMBLED    SO 

WILLINGLY  TO  OFFER  IN  SO  BLESSED  A  WORK.  It  is  a  joyful  night.  1.  As  a  declaration 
of  faith.  2.  As  a  declaration  of  lofty  and  truly  Christian  benevolence.  3.  As  it 
opens  the  gate  of  the  most  splendid  and  delightful  hopes.  (R.  Watson.)  Chris- 
tian liberality  in  God's  cause : — I.  Liberality  m  the  cause  of  God  is  worthy  or 
ALL  MEN.  1.  Our  infinite  obligations  demand  it.  (1)  How  royally  He  gives  to  us — 
(a)  The  protecting  care  of  His  providence ;  (b)  the  blessings  of  life.  (2)  The  earth 
and  all  things  in  it  are  His.  How  He  opens  His  hand  and  satisfies  the  wants  of 
every  living  thing  1  (3)  The  gifts  of  His  grace,  (a)  The  unspeakable  gift  of  His: 
Son ;  (b)  the  promise  of  eternal  glory.  2.  Liberality  in  His  cause  is  only  the 
return  to  Him  of  part  of  that  which  He  has  given  to  us  (ver.  12).  (1)  His  gifts 
are  trusts.  (2)  We  are  stewards,  not  absolute  owners.  (8)  We  are  to  occupy  till 
He  comes.  3.  To  withhold  from  Him  is  to  lose  His  blessing  on  what  we  retain. 
To  give  to  Him  ever  brings  richer  gifts,  if  only  in  the  spiritual  graces  it  calls  forth. 
4.  Liberality  in  the  cause  of  God  is  urged  by  our  interest  in  the  best  welfare  of  our 
fellow-men.  II.  Liberality  is  not  only  a  duty,  but  a  privilege.  1.  It  is  a 
grateful  recognition  of  being  so  blessed  as  to  be  able  to  give.  2.  The  willingness  to 
give  is  a  ground  of  thankfulness.  HI.  The  liberality  of  David  and  his  pkoplb 
A  LESSON.  IV.  Reflections.  1.  We  should  cherish  liberality  for  God,  for  the 
good  it  does  our  own  souls.  The  gratitude,  love,  zeal,  of  which  it  is  the  expression, 
and  which  it  directly  fosters.  2.  For  the  good  it  does  our  fellow-men.  8.  We 
should  measure  our  gifts  by  what  we  retain.     (1)  How  much  do  we  give  to  God  la 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  115 

comparison  with  what  we  give  to  ourselves  ?  (2)  Have  we  ever  made  any  real  sacri- 
fice for  Him  ?  Matthew  and  the  other  apostles.  3.  Have  we  only  given  of  our 
superfluity?  {Cunningham  Geikie,  D.D.)  God  the  bestower  of  aU  good  gifts: 
— I.  The  ABiLrtT  and  the  disposition  to  give  to  God  come  alike  from  Himself. 
II.  Wk  ought  to  be  more  profoundly   thankful   for   the  possession   of   the 

DISPOSITION  THAN  OF  THE  ABILITY  TO  GIVE.  III.  ThE  ABILITY  AND  THE  DISPOSITION 
TO   GIVE   ARE    NEVER     MORE    NOBLY     EMPLOYED     THAN   IN   ERECTING   TEMPLES    FOR   THE 

WORSHIP  OF  God.  (H.  Stowell,  A.M.)  A  voluntary  gift  under  the  law: — I.  The 
NATURE  of  the  GIFT.  I  do  not  dwell  on  the  extent.  I  refer  rather  to  its  essential 
nature.  It  was  a  gift  distinctly  for  the  public  good.  "What  is  called  public  spirit 
is  surely  one  of  the  divinest  things  extant  among  men.  God  keeps  alive  this  will 
to  serve  and  sacrifice  for  the  public  as  the  great  antidote  to  the  innate  selfishness  of 
mankind.  Public  spirit  rises  in  importance  and  dignity  as  man  rises  in  intelli- 
gence, and  is  able  to  take  wise  counsel  about  the  welfare  of  his  fellows.  If  he  is 
able  to  take  heavenly  counsel,  to  know  what  God  is  seeking  for  man  and  to  supply 
it,  there  you  have  in  the  highest  form  the  servant  of  his  generation  according  to 
the  will  of  God.  This  glory  is  theirs  who  take  counsel  and  work  for  the  religious 
culture  and  elevation  of  men.  They  are  the  men  who  key  the  arch  of  progress  and 
make  it  firm  and  sure.  II.  The  source  of  David's  and  the  people's  joy.  1.  Living 
under  the  constraint  of  love  is  the  most  joyful  exercise  of  the  human  powers. 
Man's  selfishness  is  not  native.  It  is  the  devil's  poison  in  his  blood.  Divine  charity 
expels  it.  The  soul  is  conscious  of  health  again,  and  breaks  out  into  praise.  2.  The 
joy  man  takes  in  the  accomplishment  of  a  noble  public  object  is  the  purest  and 
loftiest  of  all  human  joys.  3.  I  suppose  a  vision  passed  before  David's  sight  of 
what  that  work  would  be  to  man,  and  would  do  for  man,  through  ages.  4.  Concord 
in  good  works  realises  perhaps  more  than  anything  in  our  experience  the  angelic 
benediction,  "  Peace  on  earth  and  goodwill  to  men."  III.  The  reason  of  the 
praise.  1.  It  is  God's  inspiration.  Of  Thine  own,  of  the  strength  and  joy  which 
Thine  own  hand  has  inspired,  have  we  given  Thee.  2.  Praise  and  bless  the  Lord 
who  inspires  this  spirit,  for  it  commands  an  abounding  blessing.  {Baldwin  Brown, 
B.A.) 

Vers.  15,   16.    For  we  are  strangers  before  Thee. — Human  frailty  and  it$ 
lettont : — Every   solemn    moment    of   human    life    discovers    more    or    less    its 
vanity.    It  is  not  only  when  we  stand  beside  the  grave  and  mourn  the  wreck 
of    hopes    and    aspirations    buried    out  of    sight.      The   marriage  festival  also 
awakens  a  sense  of   insecurity,   and    the   shadow    of   parting    is    thrown  over 
the  commencing  union.      The  meetings  of  friends   recall  the  thought  of   their 
separation,  and  the  inauguration  of  great  works  of  public  ceremonial  brings  up  the 
image  of  those  changes  which  all  end  in  dissolution.    Thus  was  it  with  David, 
when  on  the  last  public  ceremony  of  his  kingly  life  he  presented  with  his  people 
the  ofiferings  for  the  temple  to  the  God  of  Israel.     It  was  a  turn  of  thought  poetical 
and  yet  natural  to  break  away  from  that  splendid  throng,  laden  with  gold  and 
silver  and  other  offerings  for  the  house  of  God,  and  resonant  with  the  sounds  of 
music  and  the  acclamations  of  joy,  to  dwell  upon  the  shadows  of  vanished  genera- 
tions, and  to  anticipate  the  day  when  the  living  race  should  be  one  shadow  more 
added  to  the  crowd  that  had  passed  away.    I.  First,  then,  what  are  some  of  the 
lessons  of  humiliation  taught  by  the  shadowy  and  vanishing  character  of  human 
existence?     1.  The  insuflSciency  of  man  for  his  own  happiness.     If  he  is  but  a 
"  stranger  and  sojourner  upon  the  earth,"  if  he  is  only  one  of  a  succession  of  vanish- 
ing ciphers,  if  his  days  be  only  as  a  "  shadow  that  declineth,"  and  which  soon 
passes  into  darkness,  is  it  possible  for  such  a  creature,  if  he  have  no  higher  resources, 
to  be  happy?    At  best  we  must  say  that  happiness  is  only  possible  on  one  of  two 
conditions.    Either  the  nature  of  man  must  be  capable  of  being  satisfied  with  this 
transient  existence,  when  it  is  prolonged  to  its  greatest  duration,  or  his  nature  must 
be  capable  of  averting  its  view  from  all  the  risks  and  hazards  which  tend  at  any 
moment  to  bring  it  to  a  close.     Could  the  longest  life  satisfy,  man  might  have  here 
some  measure  of  true  good  ;  or  could  he  forget  the  perils  which  threaten  at  any 
moment  to  shorten  it,  he  might  not  be  altogether  miserable.     But  neither  of  these 
alternatives  is  possible.    Take  the  longest  and  the  most  untroubled  life,  the  most 
filled  with  worldly  advantage  and  prosperity — can  it  satisfy  the  human  soul  upon 
the  supposition  that  this  is  the  whole  of  existence  ?    No.     The  soul  shrinks  from 
annihilation.    Bat  if  it  be  impossible  to  be  happy  even  with  an  untroubled  life  that 
▼anishes  into  nothing,  how  much  less  when  the  shadow  of  death  is  constantly 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xirt, 

invading  us  and  refusing  to  be  put  away  1     To  forget  the  rapid  flight  of  time  and 
the  certain  descent  to  the  grave  is  for  us  impossible.     Our  life  is  strewn  with 
mementos  of  its  speedy  end.     We  have  seen  the  summer  flowers  and  the  winter 
snows  alike  swept  aside  to  prepare  a  grave.     The  insufficiency  of  man  to  be  his  own 
portion  is  thus  only  too  visible.     He  cannot,  because  life  does  not  contain  sufficient 
scope  for  him,  and  because  the  little  that  it  contains  is  checkered  with  the  thread 
of  death  in  all  its  texture.     Man  must  learn  that  he  is  at  best  a  frail  and  dying 
creature,  and  that  if  in  this  life  only  he  have  hope  he  is  of  all  God's  creatures  most 
miserable.     2.  The  blindness  of  human  nature  to  its  own  mortality.     We  cannot 
make  ourselves  happy  either  by  resting  in  life  as  a  whole,  or  by  shutting  out  the 
shadows  of  death  which  cloud  it ;  but  we  are  perpetually  attempting  to  do  so,  and 
thus  are  fighting  against  the  nature  of  things  and  against  God.     What  is  the  whole 
struggle  of  the  ungodly  man  but  an  attempt  to  build  his  all  upon  a  mortal  founda- 
tion ;  to  make  a  pilgrimage  a  home,  a  shadow  a  reality,  the  surface  of  a  river  a 
solid  and  lasting  pavement  ?    3.  The  third  and  last  lesson  of  humiliation  which  I 
notice  is  the  evil  of  sin.     Sin  is  the  parent  of  death,  the  grand  destroyer  of  life's 
joys,  and  the  creator  of  its  gloom,  its  shadow,  and  its  insufliciency.     Sin  mows 
down  all  the  generations  of  mankind  with  relentless  sternness.     The  plague  of  sin 
has  been  in  our  bones,  and  therefore  their  strength  has  perished,  and  the  beauty  of 
man  has  consumed  like  a  moth,  and  he  has  been  altogether  vanity.     II.  Having 
thus  spoken  of  lessons  of  humiliation,  let  me  now  mention  some  lessons  of  consola- 
tion that  may  be  set  over  against  the  brevity  and  uncertainty  of  earthly  existence. 
I  confine  myself  to  two  drawn  from  the  text.     1.  We  have  for  our  consolation  the 
knowledge  of  God's  eternity.     "  We  are,"  says  the  King  of  Israel,  "  strangers  before 
Thee."    This  is  the  first  ray  of  comfort.    It  is  like  a  rock  in  the  midst  of  the  tossing 
ocean.     Take  away  an  everlasting  God,  and  what  an  awful  sadness  covers  all  1     If 
there  be  no  living  personal  Being  before  whom  our  little  life  is  led,  by  whom  its 
moments  are  measured  out  and  its  destinies  fixed ;  if  all  be  under  the  dominion  of 
a  dark,  stern  fate  that  knows  and  feels  nothing,  or  of  a  blind  chance  that  orders 
nothing  ;  if  we  are  tossed  and  driven  upon  a  waste  and  melancholy  ocean,  which 
at  last  engulfs  our  frail  bark  in  its  dull,  unconscious  surge,  with  no  sun  or  star  or 
eternal  eye  looking  down  upon  our  struggles  and  our  extinction — then,  oh  how 
dreary,  how  unrelieved  the  picture  of  utter  hopelessness  and  emptiness,  making  it 
good  for  us  that  we  had  never  been  born !     The  eternity  of  a  living  God  was 
David's  consolation,  and  that  of  all  the  fathers  of  Israel.     It  is  not  less  ours  ;  and 
from  this  high  tower  we  look  down  with  composure  on  all  the  waves  of  trouble,  and 
feel  that  so  long  as  we  are  not  "  without  God"  we  can  never  be  "  without  hope  in 
the  world."    2.  But  we  have  also,  for  our  consolation,  the  knowledge  of  God's 
covenant  love.     David  prays.    The  mutable  and  perishable  addresses  the  Immu- 
table and  the  Imperishable.     He  rests  on  the  basis  of  a  covenant.    He  is  dealing 
with  a  God  who  has  come  near,  who  has  His  tabernacle  with  men,  who  is  pacified 
towards  them  for  their  sins,  who  has  compassion  upon  their  sorrows  and  their 
death,  and  has  delivered  them  from  going  down  to  the  pit,  having  found  a  ransom. 
This  is  the  inspiration  of  David's  prayer.     His  confession  is  not  the  melancholy 
utterance  of  nature's  despondency,  which  gives  up  all  for  lost.     It  is  only  the  voice 
of  pious  humility,  which  renounces  all  creature  trust,  that  it  may  recover  all  in 
God.    We  see  more  clearly  than  did  David  how  God,  the  eternal  Justice,  is  become 
the  dying  sinner's  friend    and  portion ;    how    the  greatness  of  His  attributes 
harmonised  in  Christ,  becomes  the  measure  of  the  greatness  of  our  deliverance ; 
how,  united  to  Him,  our  life  is  no  more  the  shadow,  but  our  death,  and  that  which 
marks  our  true  nature  is  not  the  evanescent,  but  the  abiding  and  the  eternal. 
"  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."     Ohl  be  it  ours  to  lay  hold  of  this  covenant 
of  which  Jesus  is  the  Mediator  ;  and  then,  in  unison  with  the  eternal  God,  we  may 
defy  death  to  leave  on  us  the  print  of  its  corrupting  finger,  and  to  involve  our 
existence  in  one  permanent  shadow,  for  He  whose  life  is  the  light  of  men  shall 
swallow  up  our  death  in  victory,  and  neither  things  present  nor  things  to  come 
shall  part  us  from  His  covenant  love.     IH.  I  now  come,  in  the  third  and  last  place, 
to  mention  some  lessons  of  exhobtation  arising  out  of  our  mortality  and  decay. 
1.  The  first  lesson  of  exhortation  is  to  diligence  in  God's  work.     David  does  not 
reason,  as  some  do,  "  What  can  shadows  like  us  accomplish  in  building  up  the 
temple  of  God?"     This  is  an   unworthy  and  an  un-Christian  despondency.    As 
David  served  his  generation,  in  spite  of  his  keen  perception  of  the  evanescence  of 
human  life  in  general,  so  should  we.     The  Church  of  God  has  been  brought  to  its 
present  state  of  advancement  hj  such  shadows.     Each  generation  has  helped  it 


CHAP,  mx.]  I,  CHRONICLES.  117 

forward,  though  by  small  degrees ;  and  as  the  coral  insects  build  the  islands  of  the 
Pacific  Ocean,  so  have  these  small  and  insignificant  labourers  of  the  human  family, 
whose  "  foundation  is  in  the  dust  and  who  are  crushed  before  the  moth,"  reared 
up  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  and  given  it  its  present  strength  and  beauty  in  the  eyes 
of  all  nations.  Let  us  repel  the  idea  that  our  life  is  of  little  worth  and  value  in 
relation  to  the  advancement  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  treasure  may  be  in 
earthen  vessels,  but  the  excellency  of  the  power  is  all  the  more  seen  to  be  Divine. 
Life  is  ours  as  death  is  theirs ;  and  so  long  as  we  are  in  the  world  let  us  labour 
like  our  blessed  and  Divine  Lord  to  be  the  light  of  the  world.  2.  Our  second  lesson 
of  exhortation  is  to  acquiesce  in  God's  appointments.  David  at  this  time  felt  him- 
self on  the  edge  of  the  grave,  and  was  willing  to  hand  over  to  Solomon  the  prosecu- 
tion of  the  work  on  which  his  heart  had  so  long  been  set.  He  felt  that  it  belonged 
to  God  to  choose  His  own  instruments,  and  from  a  rapidly  vanishing  race  to  select 
such  individuals  for  His  work  as  to  Him  seemed  best.  We  may  apply  this  lesson 
in  the  way  of  teaching  us  to  be  willing  to  depart  and  leave  the  work  of  God  to 
others,  whenever  He  shall  so  ordain.  But  we  may  also  apply  it  in  another  way, 
so  as  to  teach  us  to  be  willing  to  remain,  and  do  the  work  of  God  which  has  fallen 
into  our  hands,  though  others  are  withdrawn.  3.  Our  third  lesson  of  exhortation 
is  to  prepare  for  our  own  departure.  We  must  be  strangely  constituted  if  the 
removal  of  others  awakens  in  us  no  foreboding  of  our  own  end.  Are  we,  then,  pre- 
pared ?  Preparation  is  of  two  kinds.  The  saint  is  prepared  when  he  is  doing  with 
his  might  whatsoever  his  hand  findeth  to  do  ;  when  he  is  steadfast  and  immovable, 
always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord  ;  when  his  eye  is  constantly  directed 
towards  the  Cross  that  so  he  may  wash  away  the  stains  of  daily  sin,  and  not  less 
towards  the  throne  that  he  may  receive  his  daily  instructions  from  his  unseen  Lord, 
and  run  in  the  way  of  His  commandments  with  enlarged  heart.  But  there  is  also 
the  preparation  of  the  sinner,  and  this  must  begin  at  an  earlier  starting-point. 
Years  have  not  repealed  the  law,  "  Ye  must  be  born  again  "  ;  nor  has  the  multitude 
of  feet  smoothed  an  entrance  into  the  Zion  of  God.  (John  Cairns.)  The  grandeur 
of  human  opportunity : — I.  The  shortness  of  lite.  II.  The  qbandeur  op  human 
OPPORTUNITY.  1.  There  is  no  sign  of  sadness  in  the  scene  before  us.  David's  mind 
and  heart  are  filled  with  the  thought  of  God,  and  with  the  things  of  God.  2.  This 
preparation  for  the  building  of  the  temple  was  an  act  of  thanksgiving.  3.  The 
splendour  of  the  preparation  is  an  evidence  of  David's  zeal  for  the  house  of  the 
Lord.  Giving  was  regarded  by  David,  not  as  a  duty,  but  a  privilege — a  grand  oppor- 
tunity of  turning  the  "  mammon  of  unrighteousness  "  to  eternal  account.  This 
zeal  for  the  house  of  God  is  one  of  the  marked  features  of  the  Psalter  (Psa.  xxvi., 
xxvii.,  Ixxxiv.,  cxii.,  &c.).  III.  Lessons.  1.  The  remembrance  of  the  shortness 
of  life  (Psa.  xxxix.  4),  for  the  purpose  of  using  time  aright.  2.  To  take 
the  measure  of  earthly  things  as  we  shall  do  when  we  look  back  over  the 
day  of  life  (Deut.  xxxii.  29).  3.  All  that  is  done  for  the  kingdom  of  God 
remains.  Another  generation  may  have  to  carry  out  what  we  only  begin. 
(The  Thinker.)  The  transitoriness  of  life: — I.  To  illustrate  the  assertion, 
"No  abiding."  This  may  apply  to — 1.  Human  honours.  2.  The  pleasures  of 
sense.  3.  Worldly  profits.  4.  Particularly  to  man's  life.  To  impress  this 
truth,  reflect  —  (1)  That  we  have  sinful  souls,  and  that  therefore  we  must  die. 
"  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  (2)  On  the  frailty  of  our  bodies  and  their  liability  to 
disease.  II.  To  direct  to  a  proper  improvement  of  the  truth.  1.  Immediately 
close  with  Christ  the  Saviour.  2.  Diligently  apply  to  your  proper  work.  (1)  In  rela- 
tion to  God.  ••  This  is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  on  Him  whom  He  hath  sent." 
(2)  In  relation  to  yourselves.  Salvation  is  a  matter  of  the  last  importance.  (3)  In 
relation  to  your  neighbours.  "  As  ye  have  opportunity  do  good  unto  all  men." 
3.  Cleave  not  to  earthly  things.  4.  Murmur  not  under  crosses.  5.  Labour  for  the 
conversion  of  sinners.  Address — 1.  The  aged.  2.  The  young.  (E.  Broicn.) 
Strangers  and  sojourners  : — 1.  How  short  our  stay  is !  The  average  life  is  less  than 
thirty-five  years.  Multitudes  die  in  infancy.  No  man  can  say  that  this  is  his 
home.  He  knows  not  how  long  he  will  remain.  He  is  not  even  sure  that  he  will 
be  here  to-morrow.  He  is  a  "  sojourner."  2.  He  is  a  "stranger."  He  does  not 
have  time  to  become  acquainted.  "  The  proper  study  of  mankind  "  may  be  "man," 
but  life  is  too  short  to  make  much  proficiency  in  it.  The  average  man  has  no  real 
knowledge  of  his  fellow-men.  Of  their  inner  lives  he  knows  nothing.  3.  Nor 
have  we  a  better  knowledge  of  the  world.  Who  knows  the  secrets  of  rocks  and 
hills,  or  the  laws  of  vegetable  life  ?  Who  understands  the  mighty  forces  of  nature, 
or  the  mysteries  of  the  visible  universe  ?    Who  can  interpret  for  me  the  message  of 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 

the  pebble  beneath  my  feet  ?  One  of  the  wisest  of  mankind  likened  himself  to  a 
child  playing  on  the  shores  of  an  unknown  ocean.  Sensible  men  no  longer 
attempt  to  learn  everything.  Realising  the  shortness  of  the  time,  they  select  some 
particular  branch  of  learning  and  count  themselves  fortunate  if  they  succeed  in 
mastering  that  ere  death  comes.  4.  The  brevity  and  uncertainty  of  man's  sojourn 
make  sad  havoo  with  cherished  plans  and  stamp  his  whole  career  with  incomplete- 
ness. Man's  tenure  is  feeble  and  precarious.  5.  This  solemn  undertone  of  life's 
song  is  often  referred  to  in  the  Bible.  6.  Out  of  the  ashes  of  despair  hope  springs. 
The  very  words  "  strangers  and  sojourners  "are  suggestive  of  a  place  where  man 
will  be  at  home.  The  very  brevity  and  incompleteness  of  earthly  life  raise  the 
question  whether  there  is  not  some  complemental  life.  Since  the  powers  are  not 
developed,  the  character  not  matured,  the  plans  not  executed  here,  the  mind 
instinctively  believes  that  there  is  a  place  where  they  will  be.  "  What  a  waste," 
exclaims  Burr,  "  if  death  ends  all !  What  a  host  of  abortive  and  abandoned  under- 
takings !  Whole  cities  of  houses  in  the  first  stages  of  building,  and  lo,  all  work 
finally  suspended  ;  whole  navies  in  the  dockyards  with  great  keels  fairly  laid,  and 
then  left  to  rot  1  Who  does  such  things?  Here  and  there  a  fickle,  foolish,  or 
impoverished  man,  but  certainly  not  the  all- wise  and  all-mighty  and  steadfast 
God."  A  dead  man  is  "  merely  an  evicted  tenant."  He  has  gone  out  of  sight  but 
not  out  of  mind.  7.  The  Word  of  God  sets  this  truth  in  the  white  light  of 
revelation.  Christ  comforts  His  sorrowing  disciples  by  reminding  them  of 
"  the  mansions "  prepared  for  them.  8.  This  thought  lends  inspiration  to 
endeavour  and  affords  comfort  under  the  troubles  of  life.  Conclusion :  1.  Take 
the  right  road.  That  road  begins  and  ends  in  Christ.  2.  Make  spiritual  use 
of  temporal  things.  True  riches  are  spiritual,  and  temporal  riches  are  of 
value  only  as  they  are  used  for  spiritual  ends.  God  will  require  an  account 
of  our  stewardship.  3.  "  Live  by  the  faith  of  the  Son  of  God."  {Arthur 
J.  Brown,  D.D.)        The  real  nature  of  human  life : — I.  As  stkangebs  hebe  wi 

OUGHT    TO    GUARD    AGAINST    AN    EXCRSSIVE     AND     UNBESTEAINED    INDULGENCE    OF    OUB 

APPETITES  AND  PASSIONS.  This  objectiou  will  appear  by  reflecting — 1.  Upon  the 
nature  of  our  present  situation,  and  what  our  proper  employment  ought  to  be 
while  we  sojourn  here.  We  are  placed  here  in  order  to  prepare  for  the  perfection  of 
the  heavenly  state.  Our  course  ought  to  be  a  continued  and  gradual  progress  from 
lesser  to  higher  degrees  of  piety  and  virtue.  Like  a  river  enlarging  as  it  runs, 
these  ought  to  increase,  and  flow  in  a  stream  continually  augmented.  It  is  a  sign 
of  a  base  and  ignoble  spirit  to  linger  on  the  road,  or  set  up  his  rest  in  a  strange 
country,  fond  of  its  foreign  entertainments,  and  neglecting  to  move  towards  his 
home,  where  alone  his  chief  occupation  and  his  chief  happiness  are  to  be  found. 
As  a  man  cannot  easily  travel  who  is  heavily  burdened,  neither  can  any  one  make 
any  progress  in  a  virtuous  course  when  fettered  by  the  pleasures  and  interests  of  this 
world.  2.  Upon  the  nature  of  those  things  which  excite  our  desires  and  solicit  our 
indulgence.  These  are :  wealth,  outward  honours,  fame,  pleasure,  everything  included 
in  the  term  prosperity.  These  are — (1)  Deceitful.  (2)  Unsatisfying.  (3)  Beyond 
our  control.     3.  That  death  will  put  a  final  period  to  them  all.     H.  As  stbanoebs 

HEBE    WE    OUGHT   WITH    FIBMNESS   TO   ENCOUNTEB    AND    WITH    PATIENCE    TO   ENDUBE   ITS 

DIFFICULTIES  AND  DISTRESSES.  This  is  Suggested — 1.  By  the  nature  of  our  journey 
through  this  life.  2.  By  reflecting  on  the  origin  of  our  afflictions  and  for 
what  end  they  are  intended.  They  are  appointed  by  God,  and  are  intended 
to  improve  man  in  virtue  and  happiness.  3.  By  the  fleeting  and  short- 
lived character  of  our  troubles  and  misfortunes.  To  the  present  state  they  are 
confined,  and  with  our  bodies  they  shall  die.  (J.  Drysdale,  D.D.)  Man- 
kind considered  as  strangers  and  sojourners  on  earth : — This  proposition  is 
liable  to  many  mistakes.  It  does  not  mean — 1.  That  we  are  here  in  a  place 
unsuited  to  us,  for  which  we  were  not  designed,  or  to  which  our  Creator  had  either 
exiled  us  as  a  punishment  or  only  placed  us  in  for  a  certain  period  without  having 
any  particular  view  in  so  doing,  till  He  could  assign  to  us  at  some  other  time  a 
different  place  in  the  territory  of  His  dominion.  2.  That  we  must  be  as  indifferent  to 
all  the  objects  around  us  and  take  as  little  interest  in  them  as  travellers  and  strangers 
are  wont  to  do  in  the  several  places  of  their  short  sojourn.  3.  That  we  here  are 
only  obnoxious  to  toils,  troubles,  and  sorrows,  and  incapable  of  real  happiness,  as 
though  all  that  is  so  called  existed  nowhere  but  in  the  imagination,  or  as  though  we 
could  here  enjoy  happiness  merely  in  hope,  in  agreeable  prospects  of  futurity.  How, 
then,  and  in  what  sense  are  we  strangers  and  sojourners  on  earth?    I.  Since  wa 

HAVE   DEBE   no    INHEBITANCE    IN   THE   BTBICTEST   IMPOBT   OF   THE   EXPRESSION,  siuce  W* 


OTAT.  Jncix.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  119 

possess  nothing  on  the  possession  whereof  we  can  rely.  11.  In  that  we  cannot 
HEBK  ATTAIN  THE  WHOLE  OF  OUR  DESTINATION,  ws  Cannot  Sc  ftnd  bccome  all  that  our 
Creator  designs.  We  here  only  begin  to  unfold  our  faculties.  III.  We  cannot 
HERE  FIND  ALL  THAT  WE  WISH  FOB  AND  REQiHRE,  and  what  in  itself  may  be  good 
and  desirable,  but  that  alone  which  is  proper  for  this  station  and  for  our  present 
constitution.  In  the  exercise  of  our  faculties  we  frequently  meet  with  insurmount- 
able obstacles.  Seldom  can  we  do  as  much  good  and  for  so  long  a  time  as  we  could 
wish.  We  cannot  here  find  happiness  that  fuUy  satisfies,  that  is  uninterrupted  in 
its  duration,  and  its  enjoyment  not  subject  to  casualty  or  change.     IV.  We  are  not 

APPOINTED  IN    PERPETUITY    TO    THIS    TERRESTRIAL    LITE.       V.    We    HAVE    A   COUNTRY   TO 

WHICH  WE  ABE  HASTENING,  and  in  which  alone  we  shall  reach  our  destination. 
Improvement :  1.  Seek  nothing  here  that  is  not  here  to  be  found.  2.  Be  not  surprised 
nor  troubled  at  anything  which  is  a  natural  consequence  of  your  present  condition, 
which  is  inseparable  from  the  pilgrim  life  which  you  lead.  3.  Beware  of  rendering 
your  pilgrimage  still  more  laborious  by  avoidable  deviations  and  mistakes.  4.  Eeckon 
your  present  state  always  for  that  which  it  really  is,  and  use  it  always  to  the 
purposes  for  which  it  is  designed.  It  is  not  the  term,  but  the  way  to  the  term.  It 
is  not  the  most  perfect  mode  of  existence  and  of  life  whereof  you  are  capable,  but 
only  the  first,  the  lowest  stage  of  it.  5.  Never  be  unmindful  of  your  better,  celestial 
country.  (Anon.)  Strangers  and  sojourners  : — This  expression  is  remarkable, 
they  are  strangers  "  before  the  Lord."  He  knows  them  to  be  such,  and  it  is  by  His 
wise  and  gracious  appointment  that  they  are  so.      I.  All  true  believers  are 

STRANGERS  AND  SOJOURNERS  UPON  EARTH,  IN  RESPECT  TO  THEIR  ACTUAL  STATE  AND  CON- 
DITION. The  saints  in  this  world  are  like  travellers  in  a  foreign  land,  or  like  a 
merchant  ship  in  a  strange  port ;  the  day  of  return  is  set,  and  it  only  waits  till  the 
freight  is  ready.  H.  With  respect  to  their  temper  and  disposition.  1.  They 
manifest  the  disposition  of  strangers  and  sojourners  by  their  comparative  indiffer- 
ence to  the  things  of  the  present  world.  2.  As  strangers  they  intermeddle  not 
with  things  that  do  not  immediately  concern  them,  and  are  not  busybodies  in  other 
people's  matters.  3.  Strangers  long  to  be  at  home,  are  often  sending  home,  and 
will  be  grieved  if  they  do  not  hear  from  thence.  IH.  Eeal  Christians  are  often 
treated  like  strangers  by  the  men  of  the  world.  The  principles  by  which  they 
are  actuated,  the  inward  conflicts,  joys,  and  consolations  which  they  experience,  the 
hopes  and  prospects  which  they  entertain,  are  all  unknown  to  the  unbelieving 
world,  who  regard  them  only  as  so  many  misguided  enthusiasts.  Men  wonder  at 
their  zeal  and  fervency,  their  mortification  and  self-denial,  their  courage  and  reso- 
lution. They  also  wonder  that  they  do  not  run  with  them  to  the  same  excess  of 
riot  (1  Pet.  iv.  4).  IV.  Christians  are  only  sojourners.  A  sojourner  is  one  who 
dwells  in  a  strange  country,  in  which  he  has  no  possession,  but  takes  up  a  temporary 
residence  (Lev.  xxv.  23 ;  1  Pet.  i.  17).     V.  Our  being  strangers  and  sojourners 

UPON  THE  EARTH  IS  SUFFICIENTLY  ILLUSTRATED  AND  CONFIRMED  BY  OUR  ACTUAL  CON- 
DITION, OR  THE  SHORTNESS  OF  TIME,  AND  THE    MUTABILITY   OF    OUR  STATE.       Inferences  : 

1.  Let  us  learn  to  be  more  indifferent  about  things  present.  2.  The  brevity  of  our 
state  should  teach  us  to  improve  time  while  we  have  it.  3.  Adore  the  mercy  and 
forbearance  which  did  not  cut  us  off  in  our  sins.  4.  Learn  to  live  in  the  constant 
expectation  of  death  and  judgment,  as  if  every  day  were  to  be  the  last.  5.  If  true 
believers  in  every  age  have  been  strangers  and  sojourners  upon  the  earth,  let  us 
carefully  examine  how  far  this  character  belongs  to  us.  6.  If  we  really  bear  the 
character  of  a  pilgrim  in  a  strange  land,  let  us  be  careful  to  act  upon  it.  7.  Let  us 
bear  with  meekness  and  patiehce  the  troubles  we  may  meet  with  by  the  way. 
8.  Let  us  endeavour  to  lead  others  into  the  way  we  are  going  (Num.  x.  29  ;  Jer.  vi. 
16  ;  John  xiv.  6).  9.  Learn  to  be  kind-hearted  to  all  who  are  travelling  Zionward, 
to  love  as  brethren  and  strengthen  each  other's  hands  in  the  Lord.  10.  Consider  what 
a  hearty  welcome  awaits  you  when  you  reach  your  destination.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.) 
Strangers  and  sojourners  : — This  is  the  testimony  of  an  old  man,  a  wise  man,  a  great 
man.  I.  We  have  here  a  description  of  human  life — a  pilgrimage.  Other 
Scriptural  figures — an  arrow  flying  through  the  air ;  a  race ;  a  flower.  No  figure 
more  aptly  describes  human  life  than  that  of  a  journey,  as  it  represents  the  whole 
world  in  aU  its  distinctions,  rich  and  poor,  wise  and  foolish,  young  and  old,  all 
journeying  to  their  everlasting  home.  II.  An  inference  or  Christian  duty. 
{R.  C.  Dillon.)  Earth  not  a  place  of  rest  .—I  have  read  in  classic  literature  of 
men  pursued  oythe  avenging  furies  ;  and  in  American  story  of  certain  Indians  who, 
driven  oat  of  their  hunting-grounds  by  the  pursuing  flames,  ran  on  and  on  until, 
half-dead,  they  came  to  a  noble  river,  and  swiftly  fording  it  sat  round  their  chief  as 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 

he  struck  his  tent-pole  into  the  ground  and  threw  himself  on  the  cool  turf,  crying, 
"Alabama!  Alabama!  here  we  may  rest."  But  no,  before  sleep  had  refreshed 
their  weary  bodies  their  new  home  was  claimed  by  hostile  tribes.  Earth  has  no 
resting-place  for  souls.  {J.  Clifford,  D.D.)  Folly  of  presuming  on  life: — The 
late  Mayor  of  Chicago  uttered  the  following  boast :  "  I  believe  that  I  will  live  to  see 
the  day  when  Chicago  wiU  be  the  biggest  city  in  America.  I  don't  count  the  past. 
I  have  taken  a  new  lease  of  life,  and  I  intend  to  live  more  than  half  a  century ;  and 
at  the  end  of  that  half-century  London  will  be  trembling  lest  Chicago  should 
surpass  her."  Within  eight  hours  the  bullet  of  the  assassin  had  in  ten  brief 
minutes  finished  the  earthly  career  of  the  author  of  the  words  I  have  quoted.  {The 
Christian.)  All  must  be  quitted  : — A  fatal  malady  seized  on  Cardinal  Mazarin, 
whilst  engaged  in  affairs  of  State.  He  consulted  Guenaud,  the  physician,  who  told 
him  he  had  two  months  to  Uve.  Some  days  after,  the  Cardinal  was  seen  in  his  night- 
cap and  dressing-gown  creeping  along  his  picture-gallery  and  exclaiming,"  Must  I  quit 
all  these  ?  "  He  saw  a  friend  and  held  him  :  "  Look  at  that  Correggio  !  this  Venus 
of  Titian  !  that  incomparable  Deluge  of  Caracci  1  Ah  1  my  friend,  I  must  quit  all 
these,    farewell,  dear  pictures,  that  I  love  so  dearly,  and  that  cost  me  so  much  I  " 

Ver.  18.  Keep  this  for  ever  in  the  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  the  heart  of 
Thy  people. — What  must  Christians  do,  that  the  influences  of  the  ordinances  may 
abide  upon  them } — The  course  to  be  taken  for  this  purpose  lies — I.  In  the  pbacticb 
OF  SOME  THINGS.  1.  Get  ucw  hcarts,  and  get  them  daily  more  and  more  renewed. 
A  heart  thoroughly  sanctified  is  to  the  ordinances  like  tinder,  which  soon  takes  fire 
and  is  apt  to  keep  it  till  it  be  forced  out ;  whereas  a  carnal,  unmortified  heart  is  like 
green  wood,  which  is  not  soon  kindled  and  will  soon  go  out,  if  it  be  not  well  looked 
to.  Holiness  makes  the  soul  both  receptive  and  retentive  of  holy  impressions. 
2.  Labour  to  be  much  affected  with  the  ordinances  while  you  are  employed  in  them. 
If  the  ordinances  pierce  no  further  than  the  surface  of  the  soul,  the  efficacy  of 
them  is  not  likely  to  continue.  Prepare  your  hearts  before  you  draw  near  to  God. 
The  heart  is  prepared  when  it  is  made — (a)  Tender  (Jer.  iv.  3  ;  Hos.  i.  12).  That 
which  can  make  no  impression  at  all  upon  a  flint  will  sink  deeply  into  softened  wax. 
(6)  Sensible ;  apprehensive  of  your  spiritual  wants  and  necessities,  (c)  Open.  A 
quick  sense  of  your  spiritual  condition  will  open  your  hearts.  Desire  opens  the 
heart  (Matt.  v.  6 ;  Psa.  cvii.  9).  We  come  to  the  ordinances  too  like  the  Egyptian 
dog,  which  laps  a  little  as  he  runs  by  the  side  of  Nilus,  but  stays  not  to  drink. 
Christ  invites  us  to  eat  and  drink  abundantly  (Cant.  v.  1).  3.  Mind  the  ordinances 
after  you  use  them.  Be  much  in  meditation.  Much  of  heaven  and  holiness  is 
engraved  on  these  ordinances ;  and  the  seal  is,  as  it  were,  set  upon  the  heart,  while 
you  are  under  them  ;  but  after-consideration  lays  more  weight  on  it  and  impresseth 
it  deeper.  The  heart  takes  fire  at  the  mind  (Psa.  xxxix.  3).  4.  Let  the  efficacy  of 
the  ordinances  be  pursued  presently  into  act  (Psa.  cxix.  60).  When  the  blossoms 
of  a  fruit-tree  are  once  knit,  though  the  flourish  thereof  be  gone,  and  you  see 
nothing  but  the  bare  rudiment  of  the  expected  fruit,  yet  you  think  it  more  secured 
from  the  injury  of  frosts  and  winds  than  if  it  were  still  in  the  flower.  Good 
motions,  when  they  are  once  reduced  into  act,  are  thereby,  as  it  were,  knit,  and 
brought  to  more  consistency.  5.  You  must  take  much  pains  with  your  hearts  if  you 
would  have  them  retain  the  virtue  and  efficacy  of  the  ordinances.  "  The  slothful 
man  roasteth  not  that  which  he  took  in  hunting"  (Prov.  xii.  27).  He  loseth  all 
his  former  labour  because  he  will  not  take  a  little  more  pains.  6.  Comply  with  the 
Spirit  of  God.  7.  Be  frequent  in  the  use  of  ordinances.  Good  impressions  do 
most  usually  wear  off  in  the  intervals  of  holy  duties.  It  is  observed  that  places 
under  the  line  are  not  so  hot  as  some  climates  at  a  further  distance  from  it ;  and 
this  reason  is  given  for  it :  Those  under  the  equinoctial,  though  they  have  the  sun 
more  vertical,  and  the  beams,  falling  more  perpendicularly,  cause  a  more  intense 
heat ;  yet  the  nights  being  of  equal  length  with  the  days,  the  coolness  of  those 
long  nights  doth  more  allay  the  heat  than  where  the  nights  are  shorter.  Long 
intermissions  of  holy  duties  are  like  long  nights :  you  may  find  them  by  experience 
to  be  great  coolers.  Elijah  in  the  wilderness  had  to  eat  more  than  once  to  be 
strengthened  for  his  journey  (1  Kings  xix.  6-8).  8.  Look  up  to  God  for  the 
continuance  of  this  influence.  II.  In  the  avoidance  of  other  things.  1.  Take 
heed  that  you  perform  not  your  duties  negligently  (Jer.  xlviii.  10;  Mai.  i.  8,  14  ;  Jer. 
ixx.  21 ;  Deut.  xxxii.  46,  47).  2.  Beware  of  the  world.  Meddle  not  with  it  more 
than  needs  must.  Carry  yourself  amongst  worldly  objects  and  employments  as 
though  you  were  amongst  cheats  and  thieves:  they  have  the  art  to  pick  your 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  I.  CSROmCLES.  121 

hearts  slily.  When  yonr  hearts  are  warmed  with  holy  duties,  you  should  be  as 
cautious  and  wary  how  you  venture  into  the  world  as  you  are  of  going  into  the 
frosty  air  when  you  are  all  in  a  sweat.  What  is  kindled  by  the  Word  or  prayer 
requires  as  much  care  to  keep  it  in  as  to  keep  a  candle  in  when  you  would  carry  it 
through  the  open  air  in  a  rainy,  blustering  night.  The  further  you  are  above  the 
world,  the  longer  may  you  retain  any  spiritual  impressions.  Geographers  write  of 
some  mountains  whose  tops  are  above  the  middle  region  of  the  air ;  and  there  lines 
and  figures  being  drawn  in  the  dust  have  been  found,  say  they,  in  the  same  form 
and  order,  untouched,  undefaced,  a  long  time  after ;  and  the  reason  is  because  they 
are  above  those  winds  and  showers  and  storms,  which  soon  wear  out  and  efface  any 
such  draughts  in  this  lower  region.  The  lower  your  minds  and  hearts  and  con- 
versations are,  the  less  will  anything  that  is  heavenly  and  spiritual  abide  upon  them. 
3.  Take  heed  of  any  inordinacy  in  affection,  inclination,  or  design.  The  ministry 
of  John  the  Baptist  had  some  influence  on  Herod  (Mark  vi.  20) ;  but  sensuality 
being  predominant,  those  better  inclinations  were  quite  overpowered.  4.  Eest  not 
in  the  best  performance  of  any  duty,  nor  in  any  assistances  you  find  therein,  though 
they  be  special  and  more  than  ordinary.  It  is  observed  that  some  professors  have 
had  the  foulest  falls,  after  they  have  been  most  elevated  in  holy  employments. 
We  are  apt  to  take  the  most  dangerous  colds  when  we  are  in  the  greatest  heats. 
5.  Make  not  the  ordinances  your  end,  but  use  them  as  the  means  to  attain  it.  Applica- 
tion :  If  the  efficacy  of  the  ordinances  abide  not  in  you,  you  cannot  be  fruitful  under 
them ;  at  least  you  cannot  "  bring  forth  fruit  to  perfection."   {David  Clarkson,  B.D.) 

Yet.  20.  Now  bless  tlie  Lord  your  God. — National  and  individual  thanksgiving  : — 
I.  The  abundant  encoubaobment  to  pbaise  God  affobded  us  in  the  SgIiiptubes. 
n.  The  most  appbopbiate  themes  of  thanksgiving.  III.  The  best  means  op 
showing  God's  pbaise.  {Richard  Jones,  B.A.)  The  duty  of  praise : — I.  Why  wb 
should  pbaise  God.  1.  It  is  acceptable  to  God  Himself.  2.  It  confers  a  blessing 
on  him  who  renders  it.  3.  It  is  the  joyous  occupation  of  the  saints  before  tha 
throne.  11.  What  should  be  the  subjects  of  oub  pbaise?  His  mercies. 
1.  Creation.  2.  Preservation.  3.  Redemption.  4.  The  means  of  grace.  5.  The 
hope  of  glory.     HI.  In  what  way  God's  people  abe  to  pbaise  and  bless  Him. 

1.  With  our  lips.     2.  In  the  life  and  conversation.     {A.  Roberts,  M.A.) 

Ver.  23.  And  prospered. — A  prosperous  kingdom  : — I.  For  a  king  and  a  people  to 
be  happy,  the  king  must  have  a  bight  to  his  kinqdom.    II.  The  management  of 

THE  SCEPTBE  SHOULD  BE  AS  WISE  AS  THE  TENUBB  IS  JUST  AND  BOTAL.  IH.  ThE  PEOPLE 
MUST    BE   OBEDIENT.       IV.    NATIONAL   FEAB   OF    THE   LoBD   IS  ESSENTIAL    TO   NATIONAL 

BLESSING.     {Bishop  Francis  Turner.) 

Vers.  29,  30.  Now  the  acts  of  David  the  king,  first  and  last,  behold,  they  are 
TTTitten  la  the  book  of  Samuel  the  seer. — A  pastoral  retrospect: — We  are  reminded 
— ^I.  Of  the  supbbme  pbovidence  of  God  obdebing  all  things  afteb  the  counsel 
OF  His  own  will.  Time  passes  over  us  like  a  mighty  current,  but  as  Andrew  Fuller 
observed,  we  are  like  little  fishes  playing  in  the  stream  ;  we  are  borne  along  with 
the  current,  but  we  cannot  control  its  direction  nor  alter  its  course.  This  illustrates 
the  language  of  Scripture  (Acts  xvi.  26).   II.  How  insignificant,  in  one  point  of  view, 

and  how  IMPOETANT  in  ANOTHEB,  is  a  life  OF  OBDINABT  DUEATION.  III.  ThAT  THOUGH 
TIMES  pass  OVEB  US  WITHOUT  BEING  SUBJECT  TO  OUB  CONTEOL,  THOUGH  WE  HAVE  BUT 
LITTLE   INFLUENCE    UPON    THEM,    THEY   HAVE    A   GREAT    INFLUENCE    UPON   US.      By   the 

character  of  the  times  that  pass  over  us  our  moral  condition  is  greatly  affected. 
IV.  That  in  peopobtion  to  the  impobtance  and  the  stieeino  chabactee  of  the 

TIMES  that  have  PASSED  OVEB   US   MUST   BE   OUB  PEBSONAL   BESPONSIBILITY.      {ThomaS 

Toller.)  Life's  vicissitudes: — I.  They  are  numebous.  1.  There  are  personal 
vicissitudes.  (1)  Corporeal.  (2)  Intellectual.  (3)  Moral.  2.  There  are  common 
vicissitudes.  Tne  earth  is  a  theatre  of  perpetual  change.  11.  They  are  memobable. 
The  vicissitudes  of  life  deserve  a  record ;  they  are  things  to  be  remembered  by  man. 
Why  ?     1.  Because  they  serve  to  unfold  the  preparatory  character  of  our  state. 

2.  Because  they  develop  the  agency  of  God.  3.  Because  they  show  the  importance 
of  confiding  in  the  Immutable.  4.  Because  they  tend  to  direct  us  to  the  true  scene 
of  rest.  The  vicissitudes  of  our  history  are  hands  on  the  face  of  life's  chrono- 
meter ;  they  measure  the  hours  in  our  short  days  that  are  gone,  and  intimate  the 
few  that  may  yet  remain.  {Homilist.)  And  the  times  that  went  over  him. — • 
The  waves  of  time : — The  principle  which  dictated  the  selection  by  the  chronicler  of 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  xxix. 

this  somewhat  strange  phrase  is  true  aboat  the  life  of  every  man.  I.  Note  "  thx 
tutes  "  which  make  op  each  life.  By  "  the  times  "  the  writer  does  not  merely  mean 
the  SQCcession  of  moments.  Each  life  is  made  up  of  a  series,  not  merely  of 
successive  moments,  but  of  well-marked  epochs,  each  of  which  has  its  own 
character,  its  own  responsibilities,  its  own  opportunities,  in  each  of  which  there  is 
some  special  work  to  be  done,  some  grace  to  be  cultivated,  some  lesson  to  be 
learned,  some  sacrifice  to  be  made ;  and  if  it  is  let  slip  it  never  comes  back  any 
more.  The  old  alchemists  used  to  believe  that  there  was  what  they  called  the 
"  moment  of  projection  "  when,  into  the  heaving  molten  mass  in  their  crucible,  if 
they  dropped  the  magic  powder,  the  whole  would  turn  into  gold  ;  an  instant  later 
and  there  would  be  explosion  and  death  ;  an  instant  earlier  and  there  would  be  no 
effect.  And  so  God's  moments  come  to  us,  every  one  of  them — a  crisis.  II.  Thk 
powEB  THAT  MOVES  THE  TIMES.  How  dreary  a  thing  it  is  if  all  that  we  have  to  say 
about  life  is,  "  The  times  pass  over  us,"  lie  the  blind  rush  of  the  stream,  or  the 
movement  of  the  sea  around  our  coasts,  eating  away  here,  and  depositing  its  spoils 
there,  sometimes  taking  and  sometimes  giving,  but  all  the  work  of  mere  aimless  and 
purposeless  chance  or  of  natural  causes.  There  is  nothing  more  dismal  or  paralysing 
than  the  contempla*  on  of  the  flow  of  the  times  over  our  heads,  unless  we  see  in 
their  flow  something  fa '  more  than  that.  The  passage  of  our  epochs  over  us  is  not 
merely  the  aimless  i  o  v  of  a  stream  but  the  movement  of  a  current  wbich  God 
directs.  "  My  times  are  in  Thy  hand."  III.  How  kloquentlt  the  text  suooESTa 
THE  TRANSiENCT  OF  ALL  THE  "  TIMES."  They  "  passed  over  him  "  as  the  wind  through 
an  archway,  that  whistles  and  cometh  not  again.  How  blessed  it  is  to  cherish  that 
wholesome  sense  of  the  transiency  of  things  here  below  !  The  times  roll  over  us, 
like  the  seas  that  break  upon  some  isolated  rock,  and  when  the  tide  has  fallen  and  the 
vain  flood  has  subsided  the  rock  is  there.  If  the  world  helps  us  to  God,  we  need  not 
mind  though  it  passes  and  the  fashion  thereof.    lY.  The  tbansitobt  "  times  that 

WENT  OVEB "    IsBAEL'S   KINO    ARE   ALL    BECOBDES    IMPEBI8HABLT    ON    THE   PAGES    HEBE. 

The  record,  though  condensed,  lives  for  ever.  It  takes  a  thousand  rose-trees  to  make  a 
vial  full  of  essence  of  roses.  The  record  and  issues  of  life  will  be  condensed  into 
small  compass,  but  the  essence  of  it  is  eternal.  We  shall  find  it  again,  and  have  to 
drink  as  we  have  brewed,  when  we  get  yonder.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  times 
of  individuals  and  nations  : — The  word  "  times  "  does  not  convey  here  the  idea  of 
duration  merely ;  the  word  in  the  plural  includes  also  the  events  and  circumstances 
which  marked  that  period  of  duration,  and  in  all  their  variety  of  complexion  gave 
to  it  its  distinguishing  character.  The  expression  reminds  us  that  seasons  of 
«ventful  importance  are  often  occurring  to  individuals  and  peoples,  and  of  the 
manner  in  which  these  succeed  each  other  in  frequent  alternations,  both  in  personal 
and  national  life.  I.  In  individual  life.  Each  one  has  his  own  times — his  own 
part  in  the  events  which  transpire  as  the  great  wheel  of  providence  revolves.  How 
varied  a  scene  does  life  for  the  most  part  present.  We  are  like  travellers  who  pass 
now  through  smiling  vales,  and  now  are  shut  in  by  mountains,  and  look  up  on  steep 
cliffs  and  overhanging  crags.  We  are  mariners  around  whom  the  winds  are  ever 
shifting,  and  often  dying  into  calm — now  they  spread  their  sails  to  the  breeze,  now 
again  not  a  breath  is  astir  and  they  can  scarcely  feel  that  they  advance — now  yet 
again  they  have  to  make  way  against  a  head-wind,  and  to  tack  hither  and  thither 
to  make  way  at  all — so  variable  are  the  scenes  of  our  journey  or  of  our  life's 
navigation.  Look  at  David ;  at  Paul.  See  the  great  Tasso,  at  one  time  frequenting 
a  palace,  and  wooing,  as  was  thought,  princesses  with  his  song,  but  ere  long  immured 
in  a  prison.  Think  of  Napoleon  at  Erfurt  when  on  his  way  to  Russia,  with 
attendant  kings  waiting  in  his  ante-chamber,  and  of  the  same  man  a  few  years 
afterwards  at  St.  Helena — his  visions  of  glory  all  gone — thrown  back  wholly  on  the 
memories  of  the  past,  the  caged  conqueror  of  the  nacions  t  These  are  marked  cases 
illustrative  of  "  the  times"  of  human  life.  All  these  things  constitute  an  important 
moral  exercise.  This  discipline  of  life  is  in  wise  and  beneficent  co-operation  with 
the  voice  of  conscience  and  the  calls  of  the  Bible.  It  varies  the  tones  of  the 
appeal  by  which  men  are  summoned  to  duty  and  to  God.  U.  The  national  lite. 
Here  we  find  the  same  variety  in  the  complexion  of  events,  the  same  aspect  of 
vicissitude,  as  in  the  case  of  individuals.  Look,  for  example,  at  Israel,  Babylon, 
Persia,  Greece,  Rome,  Venice,  and  our  own  country.  In  nature  the  wild  play  of  the 
winds,  and  the  drifting  of  the  snow,  and  the  seething  of  the  lightning  is  all  but  part 
of  a  system.  We  might  think  that  these  agencies  were  running  riot,  controlled  by 
no  law,  and  tending  to  no  issue  but  confusion  and  chaos.  But  it  is  not  so.  And  in 
the  timei  that  go  oyer  the  earth  year  by  year,  as  summer  passes  into  autumn,  and  the 


CHIP.  XXIX.]  I.  CHRONICLES.  123 

tetnperatare  declines,  and  the  days  are  shortened,  and  the  trees  are  stripped  of  their 
foliage,  and  the  discolonred  leaves  are  seen  falling  to  the  ground,  and  rotting  there, 
till  there  comes  the  rigour  and  the  frost  of  winter — all,  nevertheless,  is  not  going  to 
desolation.  The  falling  leaves  nourish  the  soil  on  which  they  are  left  to  decaj. 
Wild  winds  and  storms,  shortened  days  and  lengthened  nights,  are  just  the  dis- 
cipline the  earth  needs,  and  winter  becomes  thus  the  necessary  prelude  to  and 
preparation  for  the  opening  buds  of  spring  and  the  fertility  of  summer.  So  it  is  in 
nature,  and  so  it  often  is  in  the  providence  of  God  over  nations  and  the  world. 
(E.  T.  Prust.)  Lifti't  changing  current : — I.  Times  make  a  deep  mark  upon  the 
BODY.  II.  Equally  marked  is  their  effect  as  they  pass  over  us  upon  our  intel- 
LECTUAii  NATUBE.  III.  Not  Icss  Striking  or  important  is  the  stamp  of  time  upon  the 
HISTORY  OF  ouB  SENStBiLiTrES.  lY.  The  most  important  change  is  the  one  that 
refers  to  our  mobaij  and  spiritual  btatx.  Y.  Ottb  social  akd  belativb  condition  is 
SUBJECT  to  the  CONSTANT  VARUTI0N8  OF  TIME.  (S.  T.  Spear.)  Timet : — Amongst 
rational  beings  that  life  is  longest,  whether  brief  or  protracted  its  outward  turn, 
into  which  the  largest  amount  of  mind,  of  mental  and  moral  activity,  is  condensed. 
It  is  possible  for  the  longest  life  to  be  really  briefer  than  the  shortest,  and  the  child 
or  youth  may  die  older,  with  more  of  life  crowded  into  its  brief  existence,  than  he 
whose  doll  and  itagnant  being  drags  on  to  an  inglorioiu  old  age.    (/.  Caird.) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTKATOR. 
II.  CHRONICLES. 


THE 

Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 


Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,     on    the    Verses  of    the    Bible 


Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  A.  M. 


SECOND  CHRONICLES 


New  York  Chicago  Toronto 

Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

Publishers  of  Evangelical  Literature 


II.  CHRONICLES. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Vebs.  1-12.  And  Solomon  the  son  of  David  was  strengtliened  In  Ills  kingdom. 

The  splendid  beginning  : — I.  Solomon's  succession  to  the  throne  was  PBOTiDENTiAiiiiT 
secubed:    "The  Lord   his  God  was   with  him."    II.  Solomon's  claims  to  the 

throne  WEBB  SANCTIONED  BY  A  EEPRESENTATIVE  ASSEMBLY.  III.  SoLOMON's  ACCESSION 
TO   THE    THEONE    WAS    SIGNALISED    BY    SOLEMN    ACTS    OF    WOBSHIP.       1.    In  obedienCC  tO 

Divine  law.  2.  In  appropriate  magnificence.  IV.  Solomon's  accession  to  thb 
THEONE  WAS  IN  A  8PIBIT  OF  DEVOUT  SUPPLICATION.  When  Victoria  learned  that  she 
was  about  to  become  Queen  of  England,  her  first  words  to  the  Archbishop  of 
Canterbury  were,  "  I  beg  your  grace  to  pray  for  me."  Together  they  knelt,  and  the 
new  reign  began  with  prayer.  V.  Solomon's  accession  to  thb  thbone  was  un- 
equalled IN  SPLENDOUB  (ver.  12).  1.  Outward  splendour :  "  Eiches  and  wealth  and 
honour."     2.  Moral  splendour:  "  Wisdom  and  knowledge."     {James  Wolfendale.) 

Vers.  7,  12.  In  that  night  did  God  appear  imto  Solomon,  and  said  nnto  him, 
Aflk  what  I  shall  give  thee. — Solomon's  choice : — I.  The  addeess  which  God  made 
TO  Solomon,  "Ask,"  <fec.,  He  does  in  effect  make  to  each  of  us,  especially  the 
young.     II.  Though  we  need  not  the  qualification  which  Solomon  bequibed  fob 

HIS  KINGLY  office,  YET  WK  ALL  NEED  SPIBITUAL  WISDOM  AND  UNDERSTANDINO,  AND  MAY 
THEREFOEE  IMITATE  HIS  EXAMPLE.       HI.    GoD  IS   PLEASED  WITH   THOSE   WHO   MAKE   THB 

CHOICE  AND  OFFER  UP  THB  PBAYEB  OF  SoLOMON.  Because — 1.  It  Is  the  effect  of  His 
grace.  2.  It  indicates  feelings  and  opinions  similar  to  His  own.  3.  It  indicates 
humility.  4.  It  shows  a  benevolent  concern  for  His  glory  and  for  the  happiness  of 
their  fellow-creatures.     6.  It  actually  tends  to  promote  His  glory.    IV.  All  who 

HAKE  THIS  CHOICE  AND  ADOPT  THIS  PBAYEB  SHALL  CEETAINLY  BE  FAVOUBED  WITH  A  WISH 

AND  UNDEESTANDiNO  HEABT.  {E.  Poyson,  D.D.)  How  to  get  the  best  blessing  : — For 
the  acquiring  the  highest  wealth,  "  asking  " — 1.  Is  the  simplest  method.  2.  The 
Divinely  appointed  method  (Matt.  vii.  7  ;  Mark  xiv.  38).  3.  The  only  method. 
Purchase  is  impossible.  4.  The  certain  method.  5.  Tne  abundantly  enforced 
method.  Enforced  by  the  whole  Bible.  6.  Has  ever  been  the  abundantly  success- 
ful method.  (R.  A.  Griffin.)  Solomon's  opportunity : — We  speak  chidingly  and 
upbraidingly  of  men  who  have  had  what  we  call  their  chance  and  have  not  availed 
themselves  of  it.  Should  a  man  come  to  poverty,  we  review  his  life  and  say,  "  He 
had  no  opportunity  of  doing  better  ;  he  has  made  the  best  of  his  circumstances,  he 
deserves  sympathy  ;  let  us  extend  our  help  to  him."  Or  we  say,  "  He  has  had  his 
chance ;  he  might  have  been  as  high  as  most  of  us  ;  we  remember  the  time  when 
his  life  was  crowned  with  a  gracious  opportunity ;  he  was  slothful,  incapable  ;  he 
was  busy  here  and  there,  and  the  king  passed  by ;  and  now  we  do  not  feel  any 
kindling  of  real  regard  and  interest  in  relation  to  him."  God  gives  every  man  his 
opportunity.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  prayer  for  wisdom  : — The  pious  prayer  of 
the  youthful  Solomon  at  the  beginning  of  his  kingly  life  I  There  is  in  this  narrative 
a  blending  of  the  natural  and  supernatural  which  surpasses  all  power  of  fabrica- 
tion ;  in  itself  the  high  degree  of  fitness  which  marks  the  Divine  manifestation  here 
recorded,  combined  with  its  striking  simplicity,  reveals  to  us  the  personal  interven- 
tion of  Him  "  who  dwelleth  on  high,  who  humbleth  Himself  to  behold  the  things 
that  are  in  heaven  and  in  the  earth."  That  the  highly-lauded  wisdom  of  Solomon 
had  not  originally  the  religious  character  which  is  ascribed  to  it  in  the  text  is 

9 


3  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

indeed  easily  asserted,  but  is  far  from  proved,  and  is  moreover  at  variance  with  a 
multitude  of  facts.     It  may  even  with  reason  be  doubted  whether  a  wisdom  and 
knowledge  such  as  this  King  of  Israel  must  have  possessed  in  his  day  can  be 
explained  upon  purely  natural  grounds ;  assuredly  it  is  somewhat  simpler  to  find, 
with  the  sacred  writer,  in  Solomon's  own  experience  the  ground  of  his  utterance, 
"  The  Lord  giveth  wisdom,  out  of  His  mouth  cometh  knowledge  and  understanding." 
I.  ••  Come  and  see  "  a  youth  who  at  a  critical  moment  is  found  in  pbayer.    It  is 
true  every  moment  of  this  fleeting  life  has  its  own  significance ;  but  yet  there  are 
single  hours  which  more  than  other  cast  a  heavy  weight  into  the  trembling  scale. 
What  a  difference  between  that  which  Solomon  has  hitherto  been  and  that  which 
he  is  henceforth  to  be ;  and  how  much  depends,  even  for  himself,  upon  the  spirit  in 
which  the  first  step  on  the  new  path  is  taken  !    Until  now  child,  boy,  youth  ;  nursed 
indeed  in  the  bosom  of  luxury,  but  with  a  David  as  father,  a  Nathan  as  guide ; 
beloved  and  happy  among  his  brethren,  but  yet  to  a  great  extent  on  an  equality 
with  them.     Now  suddenly  king,  and— free ;  free  from  every  bond.    In  a  simple 
trait  a  whole  difference  of  character  and  principle  is  sometimes  made  manifest. 
Thus  it  is  in  the  conduct  of  Solomon  at  this  hour,  as  compared  with  that  of  his 
brother  Adonijah  but  a  few  short  months  ago.     While  the  latter,  even  during 
David's  lifetime,  grasps  at  the  throne,  he  prepares  only  a  banquet :  as  though  he 
would  at  once  be  able  as  from  the  table  to  ascend  the  princely  throne.     When 
Solomon,  on  the  other  hand,  after  David's  death  assumes  the  reins,  there  is  pre- 
pared almost  as  the  first  act  a  religious  festival  of  homage  and  coronation.    With 
what    hallowed  emotion  this  day  fills  his  heart  will  be  felt  by  every  one  who 
perceives  yet  in  his  prayer  by  night  the  after-vibrating  of  the  finest  chords  of  his 
heart  which  had  been  touched  by  day !    Not  so  attractive  for  him  is  the  cedar  palace 
in  Jerusalem  as  this  simple  hill  without,  where  the  name  of  the  God  of  his  father 
is  called  upon.    It  is  too  little  for  him  that  his  exaltation  bears  the  stamp  of  human 
approval ;  he  must  consult  the  Lord  in  the  palace  of  His  holiness,  and  place  him- 
self with  all  his  future  under  the  gracious  hand  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.     Heart- 
gladdening  sight — a  king  who  feels  himself  God's  subject ;  a  youth  who  feels  that 
his  path  cannot  be  pure  unless  he  directs  it  according  to  Jehovah's  Word  1    Is  it  not 
the  case  that  sincere  piety,  however  often  derided  and  disowned,  is  yet  something 
glorious  and  fair  ;  the  ornament  of  every  condition,  and  most  of  all  of  the  highest ; 
but  especially  amiable  and  august  in  the  young  man  who  with  whole  and  joyful 
heart  has  chosen  the  service  of  God  ?    It  is  true,  when  an  aged  sinner  bows  his 
head  in  penitence  before  God,  Satan  loses  his  prey  ;  but  when  in  a  youthful  heart  a 
voice  is  awakened  which  cries  for  the  living  God,  then  angels  give  thanks  to  God 
around  the  throne  for  their  new-bom  brother  on  earth.     Oh,  they  know  not  what 
they  say  who  assert  that  early  piety  has  about  it  something  unnatural  and  narrow- 
minded.     How  many  a  youth  is  at  this  hour  brought  to  the  decisive  turning-point 
in  his  life,  but  who  begins  his  course  altogether  difYerently,  and  who  therefore  very 
soon  makes  a  progress  entirely  unlike  that  of  Solomon  1     How  many  a  bark,  lightly 
laden  and  fairly  equipped,  leaves  the  secure  haven  and  dances  over  the  rippling 
waves,  and  seems  for  awhile  to  distance  others,  but  anon  with  the  turn  of  fortune 
falls  quickly  behind,  and  entirely  loses  her  course,  until,  become  a  plaything  of  the 
Btorm,  she  is  dashed  on  yonder  rocks  and  disappears  in  the  gloomy  abyss  1     What 
wonder,  the  inexperienced  steersman  had  thought  of  everything  except  the  indis- 
pensable compass ;  had  taken  counsel  with  every  one  except  that  One  who  says, 
••  Mine  is  the  counsel  and  the  strength  "  ;  had  counted  beforehand  on  the  haven, 
but  not  upon  the  storm  and  Him  who  alone  can  quell  the  storm.     There  is  now  a 
fable  going  its  round  in  the  world :  unbelief  has  invented  it,  and  scepticism  now 
whispers  it  from  the  mouth  of  one  schoolboy  into  the  ears  of  others.     It  is  this — 
that  for  the  whole  doctrine  of  childlike  prayer  there  is  no  longer  any  place  within 
the  compass  of  the  modern  view  of  the  world.     Thus  sounds  the  gospel  of  despair, 
hailed  by  many  a  child  of  this  age  as  the  highest  wisdom — a  gospel  before  which 
the  angel  of  prayer  within  flees  from  the  unhallowed  sanctuary  ;  while  in  his  place 
the  genius  of  passive  subjection,  with  rigid  gaze,  takes  his  seat  by  the  grave  of 
departed  hope.    Poor  man,  poor  youth  especially,  who  have  all  that  is  needful  for 
outward  life,  but  have  lost  prayer  I     "  In    all    thy    ways    acknowledge    Him." 
II.  Come  and  see,  in  the  second  place,  a  king's  son  who  prays  exclusively  fob 
WISDOM.     Assuredly,  before  the  presence  of  the  Infinite  One  the  prince  is  no  more 
than  the  beggar ;  but  is  not  the  former  exposed  to  far  greater  temptations  ?    "  Ask 
what  I  shall  give  thee."    What  a  word,  and  how  great  the  concession  contained  in 
that  word  1  All  the  treasure-chambers  of  Gx>d's  infinite  favour  opened  up  before  the 


CHAP.  I.]  11.  CHRONICLES. 


grasp  of  a  single  hand !  "  Ask  of  Me,"  says  the  Possessor  of  all  things,  "  and  choose 
thyself  the  blessing  which  thou  desirest  above  all  others.  ShaU  the  cedars  of 
Lebanon  fall  that  in  thy  capital  there  may  arise  an  edifice  of  unrivalled  splendour  ? 
Shall  the  laurel  adorn  thy  brow,  intertwined  with  the  roses  of  love?  Shall  thy 
name  be  borne  upon  a  thousand  tongues,  even  to  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates  ?  and  a 
patriarchal  age  crown  all  these  blessings  ?  "  Who  does  not  involuntarily  tremble  at 
the  sight  of  the  hand  in  which  such  a  decision  is  placed  ?  "  Give  Thy  servant  an 
understanding  heart "  (1  Kings  iii.  9) ;  and  the  meaning  of  his  prayer  may  be 
easily  conjectured,  especially  when  we  remember  the  sense  in  which  Solomon  in 
the  Book  of  Proverbs  constantly  makes  mention  of  wisdom.  He  means  by  it  no 
mere  learning,  which  may  be  attained  to  in  another  way  ;  and  just  as  little  that 
acuteness,  versatility,  polish,  which  frequently  is  almost  entirely  disconnected  with 
the  first  principles  of  moral  Ufe.  He  desires  on  the  other  hand,  that  practical 
wisdom  which  qualifies  in  every  case  for  the  recognising,  choosing,  and  accomplish- 
ing of  the  right,  the  true,  and  the  good.  If  he  has  only  wisdom,  what  does  he 
need  besides  ?  Happy  Solomon,  who  hast  understood  thy  deepest  need ;  but  who 
at  the  same  time  knowest  where  satisfaction  for  this  need  is  to  be  sought. 
m.  Come  and  see  here  a  httmbls  one,  who  pbays  not  ik  vain.  A  humble  one : 
upon  that  word  I  lay  stress,  because  it  is  the  key  to  the  whole.  How  strikingly 
this  humility  expresses  itself,  especially  in  the  words  of  the  prayer  as  preserved  in 
another  place.  First,  thanksgiving  for  what  is  already  bestowed  or  promised ;  and 
then,  further,  "  And  now,  0  Lord,  my  God  " — the  "  my  "  of  a  humble  faith — "  Thou 
hast  made  Thy  servant  king  instead  of  David  my  father ;  and  I  am  but  a  little  child, 
I  know  not  how  to  go  out  or  come  in,"  as  my  position  requires.  Solomon,  at  least, 
has  certainly  experienced  the  truth  of  his  own  words,  "  With  the  lowly  is  wisdom," 
but  also  at  the  same  time  learnt  that  God  will  give  grace  to  the  humble.  Imme- 
diately he  receives  the  answer,  "  Because  this  was  in  thine  heart  .  .  .  the  wisdom 
and  the  knowledge  is  granted  unto  thee."  "  If  any  of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him 
ask  of  God,  that  giveth  to  all  men  liberally  and  upbraideth  not ;  and  it  shall  be 
given  him.  But" — the  condition  is  equally  simple  as  it  is  reasonable — "let  him 
ask  in  faith,  nothing  doubting."  How  prayer  is  heard  no  one  may  be  able  fully  to 
explain ;  but  that  it  is  heard  is  for  the  thoughtful  faith  raised  above  all  doubt.  "  I 
will  instruct  thee  and  teach  thee  in  the  way  which  thou  shalt  go  ;  I  will  guide  thee 
with  Mine  eye."  Not  that  you  are  to  look  for  inner  light  apart  from  God's  written 
Word,  and  still  less  that  this  heavenly  instruction  is  to  release  from  the  necessity 
for  your  own  labour  and  exertion.  In  the  realm  of  true  wisdom  no  one  is  crowned 
who  has  not  in  childlike  spirit  bowed  before  God.  IV.  Come  and  see  here  a 
FAVOURED  ONE,  WHO  RECErvEs  MUCH  MORE  THAN  HE  ASKS  FOB.  We  have  as  yet  listened 
to  only  half  of  the  heavenly  response :  thus  it  continues,  "  Therefore  will  I  give 
thee  riches,  and  wealth,  and  honour,"  <fec.  No,  He  who  gives  that  which  is  of  the 
first  necessity  also  refuses  not  that  which  is  less  so.  Solomon  had  not  even  thought 
of  temporal  gifts  ;  but  his  God  forgets  nothing  of  all  that  which  may  augment  the 
lustre  of  His  throne.  "  And  Solomon  awoke,  and  behold  it  was  a  dream."  But 
what  a  dream ;  and  what  an  awakening  I  The  morning  hour  of  a  new  life  has 
dawned  upon  him,  and  while  this  master-dreamer  descends  at  once  from  Gibeon's 
crest,  it  is  only  very  soon  to  rise  to  a  more  glorious  height  before  the  eye  of 
his  own  and  neighbouring  nations.  That  which  the  king  has  received  redounds, 
spiritually  and  materially,  to  the  good  of  the  nation,  which  shares  in  the  benefit. 
God  in  answer  to  prayer  usually  gives  the  indispensable  first ;  but  straightway  also 
adds  thereto  the  useful,  the  agreeable,  the  comparatively  superfluous.  The  Lord 
gives  grace,  and  in  that  one  thing  all  things  lie  hid ;  yet  He  adds  to  grace  also 
honour,  and  withholds  no  good  thing  from  them  that  walk  in  uprightness.  "  Happy 
is  the  man  that  findeth  wisdom,  and  the  man  that  getteth  understanding.  .  .  .  She 
is  a  tree  of  life  to  them  that  lay  hold  upon  her,  and  happy  is  every  one  that  holdeth 
her  fast."  V.  An  unhappy  one  who  by  his  own  fault  has  forfeited  the  blessing 
OF  his  pbayeb.  {J.  Van  Oosterzee,  D.D.)  What  shall  I  ask  ?— It  is  an  excellent 
discipline  for  such  as  would  pray  aright  to  begin  by  hearing  God  say  to  them,  "  Ask 
now  what  I  should  give  you."  Think  with  yourself  before  you  kneel  down  to  pray, 
"  What  shall  I  ask ;  what  wish  is  upon  my  heart ;  is  there  anything  distressing, 
vexing,  paining  me  at  this  moment  which  I  can  ask  God  to  alleviate  or  to  remove ; 
is  there  anything  which  I  very  much  desire,  anything  which  I  think  it  would  make 
me  happy  to  have,  anything  which  to  be  denied  would  embitter  or  desolate  my 
life  ?  "  "  Ask  what  I  shall  give  thee,"  God  says,  and  let  Him  not  find  silence,  or 
find  ft  double  tongue  in  him  to  whom  He  says  it.    All  this  points  to  what  Scripture 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

calls  "  the  preparation  of  the  heart  "  for  prayer.  How  different  would  be  the  very 
step  of  the  worshippers  as  they  left  their  homes,  how  different  would  be  the  very 
look  of  the  countenances  as  they  came  within  these  doors  and  took  up  their  places, 
if  each  one  felt  that  God  was  here,  and  that  He  was  saying  to  each  one,  "  What  shall 
I  give  thee  ?  "  There  is  a  moment  in  most  lives  when  the  question  of  the  destination 
of  the  life  is  put  to  them,  and  must  be  answered.  Even  the  destination  of  this  life 
is  very  important.  Often  it  has  the  destination  of  the  other  life  in  it.  To  a  young 
man,  the  question  takes  the  form  of  "What  shall  be  your  profession?"  In  pro- 
portion as  the  field  of  choice  is  wider  and  broader  will  be,  of  course,  the  difficulty 
and  the  gravity  of  the  question,  "  What  shall  I  make  my  life  for  the  service  of  God 
and  of  my  generation  ?  "  This  is  the  most  direct  example  to  be  found  in  our  day, 
perhaps,  of  the  young  king  in  one  of  my  texts.  And  what  shall  be  the  answer? 
Shall  it  be,  "  Give  me  wealth  "  ?  shall  it  be,  "  Give  me  honour  "  ?  shall  it  be,  "  Give 
me  a  front  place  in  the  ranks  of  fame,  or  of  such  repute  and  respectability  as  takes 
the  place  of  fame  among  the  lowly ;  give  me  success,  give  me  applause,  give  me 
rapid  progress  towards  a  satisfactory  position  ;  or,  give  me  a  portion  among  them 
that  know,  that  amass  information,  that  write  or  make  books,  that  are  called  men 
of  literature,  men  of  science,  men  of  culture,  men  of  education  "  ?  or,  shall  it  be, 
•'  Lord,  make  me  useful  in  my  generation  ;  let  it  not  concern  me  whether  I  am  great 
or  small,  may  I  but  help  a  few  others  to  know  Thy  comfort,  may  I  but  bring  peace 
into  a  few  unhappy  souls  or  guide  a  few  stray  lives  into  the  way  of  holiness  "  ?  If 
there  were  such  a  heart  in  us,  how  rich  would  be  the  reward  I  "  The  speech  pleased 
the  Lord  that  Solomon  had  asked  this  thing."  There  are  times  when  the  question, 
"  What  shall  I  do.  Lord  ?  "  comes  very  prominently  into  view.  It  is  so  with  the 
young  Churchman  at  the  season  of  confirmation ;  it  is  so  at  the  first  and  at  each 
successive  communion ;  it  is  so  when  the  hand  of  God  is  laid  heavily  upon  the  life 
in  sorrow ;  it  is  so  when  sickness  comes,  not  unto  death ;  it  is  so  when  the  for- 
mation of  new  ties,  or  providential  disruption  of  old  ones,  compels  a  man  to 
stand  still  and  settle  with  himself — what  shall  the  tenor  of  my  life  be,  what  the 
course,  and  what  the  goal?  Happy  if  he  can  cast  himseK  believingly  on  Him 
who  is  "  a  very  present  help,"  and  say,  "  Give  me  understanding,  give 
me  grace,  give  me  a  useful  course  and  a  blessed  end."  (Dean  Vaughan.) 
Solomon's  choice  : — Nowadays  it  is  impossible  to  say  that  God  never  does  speak  to 
men  in  dreams,  but  it  is  not  often  that  He  does  so.  For  one  good  reason — the 
Bible  is  now  complete,  and  there  His  will  may  be  learned,  and  there  it  is  made 
known.  Yet  there  are  some  dreams  that  certainly  are  remarkable.  I.  First  let  us 
talk  a  little  about  the  permission  :  "  Ask  what  I  shall  give  thee !  "  Suppose  I 
were  to  put  this  question  to  each  one  here  present,  what  a  lot  of  singular  requests 
would  be  heard.  One  old  woman  was  once  heard  praying  thus :  "  0  Lord,  give 
me  plenty  to  eat  and  plenty  to  drink,  and  that's  all  I  want."  God  wished  Solomon 
to  ask  himself,  "  What  do  I  really  need  most  of  all  ?  "  Of  old  the  shopkeepers 
used  to  cry  aloud,  "  What — do  ye  lack  ?  "  This  is  a  good  rule  in  prayer,  to  say, 
"  What  do  I  actually  want  at  this  very  moment  ?  "  If  you  find  out  in  what  you  are 
most  deficient,  you  will  learn  your  true  character.  Look  around,  and  say  now, 
•'  What  do  I  really  need  ?  What  ought  a  boy  or  girl  just  beginning  life  to  possess  ? 
What — do  I  lack  ?  "  Perhaps  you  do  not  know  how  much  you  need  some  things, 
nor  wUl  you  without  inquiring.  Tradesmen  fill  their  shop-windows  with  toys, 
pictures,  books,  and  dresses,  so  that  people  may  feel  inclined  to  want  them,  and 
come  in  and  purchase.  The  Bible  is  full  of  descriptions  of  things  that  every  one 
should  require.  Look  at  what  it  says,  and  you  will  find  out  what  you  want  most, 
and  first  of  aU,  11.  God  asked  this  question  of  Solomon  for  another  reason  ;  He 
desired  to  show  us  the  true  way  to  obtain  what  we  require  ;  that  is,  bt  prayeb 
OB  ASKING.  Solomon  had  received  great  gifts  from  his  father  David  without  asking 
for  them.  God,  too,  had  given  him  many  most  valuable  blessings,  many  of  them 
without  asking.  *'  Now,"  says  God,  "  ask  and  you  shall  have."  You  cannot  pur- 
chase some  things  with  money ;  no  rich  man  has  sufficient  wealth  to  buy  health 
or  happiness.  And  you  cannot  buy  the  blessings  of  the  gospel ;  you  must  receive 
them  as  a  gift  from  the  Lord  Jesus.  (N.  Wiseman.)  The  prayer  of  King 
Solomon  for  wisdom  to  govern  hit  people : — Whatever  in  later  life  may  have  been 
Solomon's  deviations  from  duty  and  from  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  the  early  years  of 
his  reign  evidence  a  mind  keenly  alive  to  all  the  necessities  and  responsibilities  of 
his  station,  and  a  heart  sincere  in  love  and  loyalty  towards  God.  This  prayer  of 
Solomon  displays  the  spirit  proper  for  every  young  man — and  especially  for  every 
Christian  young  man — in  entering  upon  the  responsibilities  of  life.     There  are 


CHAP.  I.]  11.  CHRONICLES. 


three  prominent  characteristics  of  the  temper  of  his  mind  that  are  pre-eminently 
worthy  of  regard.  I.  His  pbefekment  of  the  welfare  op  the  people  over 
WHOM  he  ruled  above  ANT  GRATIFICATION  OR  INTEREST  OF  HIS  OWN.  From  the  manner 
in  which  the  Lord  offered  the  king  any  gift  that  his  heart  might  desire,  it  is  evident 
that  Solomon  was  at  perfect  liberty,  if  such  had  been  his  choice,  to  request  the  fulfil- 
ment of  some  purely  personal  or  private  end.  If  such  an  offer  had  been  made  ta 
any  of  the  mighty  kings  whose  names  are  blazoned  in  history,  what  would  his 
choice  have  been  ?  What  prayer  would  have  expressed  the  heart's  desire  of  Alex- 
ander, of  Hannibal,  of  Csssar,  or  of  Napoleon  ?  Alexander  would  have  asked  for 
another  world  to  conquer ;  Hannibal  would  have  sought  satiety  of  vengeance  in  the 
extermination  of  the  Italian  foes ;  Caesar  would  have  demanded  admittance  among  the 
gods  and  the  perpetual  worship  of  the  citizens  of  Eome  ;  Napoleon  that  his  family 
should  ever  rule  the  destinies  of  France,  and  that  France  of  all  nations  should  ever 
be  foremost  and  supreme.  But  the  spirit  of  which  the  Lord  approved  in  Solomon 
was  free  from  all  taint  of  ambitious  or  selfish  or  merciless  desire.  Would  that  all 
to  whom  the  interests  of  others  are  committed  were  ever  animated  by  the  spirit  of 
Solomon.  11.  The  hearty  conformity  to  the  Divine  will  of  his  wishes  ik 
REGARD  TO  HIS  POSITION.  When  God  promised  any  of  the  kings  of  Israel  or  of 
Judah  the  establishment  of  his  throne  and  aid  against  his  enemies,  it  was  always 
provided  that  that  king  should  diligently  observe  the  statutes  and  commandments  and 
ordinances  of  the  Lord.  When  He  rejected  Saul  from  being  king  over  His  people^ 
it  was  not  because  he  had  proved  himself  unfaithful  to  the  nation's  welfare,  but 
because  he  had  rejected  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  had  not  kept  the  commandments 
which  the  Lord  had  commanded  him.  And  when  David  was  raised  to  the  throne 
of  Israel,  it  was  because  of  this  testimony,  given  him  of  God  :  "  I  have  found  David,, 
the  son  of  Jesse,  a  man  after  Mine  own  heart,  which  shall  fulfil  all  My  will."  Hence 
in  the  lips  of  Solomon  this  prayer  for  wisdom  had  a  most  peculiar  and  comprehen- 
sive significance.  Its  spirit  was  not  ambition  to  be  the  wisest  monarch  of  his  day, 
nor  servile  anxiety  to  secure  the  favour  of  a  powerful  friend  ;  it  was  the  desire  to 
do  the  will  of  his  gracious  Father  in  heaven.  This  same  spirit  of  loving  and  hearty 
conformity  to  the  Divine  wiU  has  controlled  the  prayers  and  the  lives  of  God's  true 
people  in  all  generations — Abram  ;  Moses ;  Joseph  ;  Paul ;  the  Kedeemer  Himself. 
Oh,  what  comfort  in  affliction,  what  support  in  trial,  what  delight  in  duty,  spring 
from  the  thought,  "  It  is  the  will  of  God  "  !     HI.  His  recognition  of  himself  as 

WEAK  AND  LIABLE  TO  ERR,  AND  OF  GoD  AS  THE  GREAT  SOURCE  OF  WISDOM  AND  STRENGTH 

FOB  THE  DISCHARGE  OF  DUTY.  In  the  humility  and  diffidence  of  Solomon,  we  have 
an  example  of  what  seems  to  be  commonly  the  case,  that  men  of  worth  and  of 
ability  are  the  most  deeply  conscious  of  their  deficiencies  and  faults.  Utterly 
different  from  such  a  spirit  was  Kehoboam,  the  son  and  successor  of  Solomon  on 
assuming  the  sceptre.  Solomon  evidenced  his  sense  of  weakness — not  by  shrink- 
ing from  his  duties,  but  by  seeking  God's  help  for  the  performance  of  them. 
EUsha,  trembling  to  think  how  soon  he  should  be  called  upon  to  wear  the  mantle  of 
the  greatest  of  the  prophets,  besought  a  double  portion  of  his  master's  spirit.  In  a 
similar  frame  did  Solomon  pray  for  an  understanding  heart  to  judge  the  people  of 
the  Lord.  (E.  I.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Wisdom  : — Wisdom  consists  chiefly  in  three 
things.  1.  Knowledge  to  discern.  2.  Skill  to  judge.  3.  Activity  to  prosecute. 
(T.  Watson.)  Solomon's  wisdom  : — He  showed  his  wisdom  by  asking  for  wisdom. 
{Dean  Stanley.)  Divine  wisdom  needed  : — Every  man  needs  Divine  wisdom  in 
order  that  he  may  do  well  his  earthly  work.  You  would  light  a  lamp  better  if  you 
first  asked  God  to  show  you  how  to  light  it.  (J".  Parker,  D.D.)  The  responsibility 
of  a  sovereign  : — "  Now  you  are  Queen  of  the  mightiest  land  in  Europe,  in  your 
hand  lies  the  happiness  of  millions,"  said  young  Prince  Albert  to  Victoria  in  his 
letter  of  congratulation.  He  was  going  to  Italy,  in  the  freedom  of  a  life  less 
burdened,  less  full  of  splendid  care  than  hers,  yet  not  without  a  thought  that  his 
very  wanderings  were  some  time  to  be  of  service  to  her.  "  May  Heaven  assist  you," 
he  adds,  "  and  strengthen  with  its  strength  in  that  high  and  difficult  task." 
Solomon's  desire  for  wisdom  and  the  use  he  made  of  it :  —  1.  The  practical 
wisdom  by  which  we  conduct  the  affairs  of  every-day  life  comes  from  God. 
Let  us  seek  it,  then,  from  its  true  source.  If  we  seek  to  be  wise  without  God,  even 
our  worldly  wisdom  will  turn  to  folly.  2.  We  make  a  grand  mistake  in  separating 
religious  and  every-day  affairs.  I  do  not  mean  merely  to  press  the  somewhat  trite' 
lesson  that  the  morality  which  religion  teaches  must  be  practised  in  daily  life. 
There  are  many  who  act  up  to  this,  yet  still  do  not  bring  their  religion  enough  into 
their  daily  work.     Their  trade  or  their  business  occupies  them  during  the  week.    It 


•  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

is  pnt  away  at  stated  intervals,  to  make  room  for  higher  thoughts ;  and  these 
higher  thoughts  again  are  laid  aside  when  they  return  to  business.     They  cannot 
understand  doing  all  things  to  the  glory  of  God.     The  effect  of  this  is  twofold. 
First,  it  makes  religion  very  weak  and  puny;  instead  of  doing  all  things  to  the 
glory  of  God,  we  do  a  few  things  only  to  His  glory.     Secondly,  it  will  mar  our 
work  ;  for  nothing  is  really  well  done  unless  it  is  done  in  a  religious  spirit.     But  if 
Solomon  exercised  his  God-given  wisdom  on  such  matters  as  bringing  up  linen 
yarn  from  Egypt,  why  cannot  we,  too,  understand  that  in  our  commerce,  and  other 
ordinary  business,  we  are  using  God's  gifts,  and  doing  work  which  may  and  should 
be  so  done  as  to  be  to  His  glory  ?    (A.  K.  Ckerrill,  M.A.)         The  best  motives  to  action 
unseljish  : — In  private  life,  and  in  all  life,  the  best  motives  to  action  are  those  which 
lie  outside  of  self  and  its  supposed  interests.     To  build  the  ship  staunch  and  safe 
and  the  house  firm  and  healthful  for  the  sake  of  human  lives  that  will  be  entrusted 
to  them,  to  administer  justice  because  of  its  equity,  to  heal  disease  and  teach  sani- 
tary laws  for  the  sake  of  suffering  humanity,  to  cherish  in  every  employment  some 
glimpse  of,  and  interest  in,  the  good  that  it  is  to  produce  in  the  world,  introduces  a 
finer  element  into  the  labour  and  actually  brings  forth  a  better  quality  of  work  than 
can  be  educed  by  the  mere  hope  of  personal  benefit  to  the  worker.     ( Great  Thoughts.) 
The  folly  of  relying  on  our  own  wisdom  in  the  conduct  of  life  : — A  few  years  ago  a 
most  painful  sensation  was  created  in  the  public  mind  by  the  intelligence  of  a 
distressing  and  fatal  accident  which  had  happened  to  a  distinguished  Archdeacon 
of  the  Established  Church.    This  gentleman,  eminent  alike  for  his  character  and 
his  writings,  was  spending  a  short  time  on  the  continent,  and,  having  with  some 
friends  ascended  a  mountain,  expressed  a  strong  wish  to  return  alone  by  a  new 
route.     His  companions  remonstrated,  pointed  out   the  danger  of  attempting  to 
follow  an  unknown  path,  and  urged  that  at  least  their  friend  would   accept  the 
services  of  a  guide.     Unhappily  he  would  not  be  persuaded,  and  presently  com- 
menced his  perilous  descent.     The  rest  of   the   party   reluctantly   pursued   their 
course,  and  waited  his  arrival  at  the  inn.     As  time  passed  on,  and  the  Archdeacon 
did  not  appear,  their  fears   were   re-awakened,  and   search   was   ordered  to    be 
made.     Soon  they  were  horrified,  yet  not  surprised,  to  hear  that  the  lifeless  body 
of  their  friend  had  been  found  beneath  a  precipice  over  which  he  had  fallen  in 
his   attempt  to   reach   the   inn.     How   striking   an   illustration    does   this   sad 
Incident  afford  of  the  fatal  obstinacy  of  those  who  persist  in  relying  on  their  own 
wisdom  and  strength  of  purpose  in  the  journey  of  life  !     What  can  await  them  but 
destruction  if  they  refuse  to  accept  guidance  ?    Yet  a  guide  is  not  enough  at  all 
times.     Only  recently  a  party  of  travellers  on  Mont  Blanc,  accompanied  by  skilful 
guides,  were  overtaken  by  an  avalanche ;  and  not  only  two  of  their  number  but 
one  of  the  guides  also  perished  in  a  moment.     We  need  an  unerring  guide ;  and 
where  shall  it  be  found  but  in  Him  who  is  infinite  Wisdom  as  well  as  infinite 
Love?      (Experience.)         The  fruits  of  prayer  : — "Do  you  really  think  that  God 
will  hear  your  prayers?"  said  a  sceptic  to  a  poor  Christian  woman.     "Yes,"  she 
replied,  "  you  might  as  well  tell  me  that  that  ship,  just  arrived  from  a  foreign  port, 
was  never  there  at  all  because  I  was  not  there  to  see.     You  believe  it  was  there 
because  of  the  things  it  has  brought,  and  so  I  do  not  think  God  hears  my  prayers, 
I  know  He  both  hears  and  answers  them,  for  I  have  fruits  of  them  in  my  posses- 
sion."    (J.  Nicoll.)    Importance  of  knowledge : — The  following  words  are  from  a 
letter  written  by  Miss  Willard's  mother  to  her  children  when  they  were  quite  small : 
"  The  dearest  wish  of  my  heart,  except  that  my  children  shall  be  Christians,  ia 
that  they  shall  be  well-educated.     A  good  education  will  open  the  world  to  you  as 
a  knife  opens  an  oyster.    Riches  will  not  do  this,  because  riches  have  no  power  to 
brighten  the  intellect.    An  ox  and  a  philosopher  look  out  on  the  same  world,  and 
perhaps  the  ox  has  the  stronger  and  handsomer  eyes  of  the  two,  but  the  difference 
between  the  brains  behind  the  eyes  makes  a  difference  between  the  two  beings  that 
is  wider  than  all  the  seas.     I  want  my  children's  brains  to  be  full  of  the  best 
thoughts  that  great  minds  have  had  in  all  centuries ;  I  want  stored  away  in  your 
little  heads  the  story  of  what  the  world  was  doing  before  you  came — who  were  its 
poets,  its  painters  and  philosophers,  its  inventors  and  law-givers.     I  want  you  to 
know  what  is  in  its  noblest  books,  and  what  its  men  of  science  say  about  their 
study  of  the  earth,  the  ocean,  and  the  stars.     I  want  you  taught  to  bo  careful,  and 
exact  by  your  knowledge  of  figures ;  and,  most  of  all,  I  want  you  to  learn  how  to 
speak  and  write  your  own  noble  English  tongue,  for  without  the  power  of  expres- 
sion you  are  like  an  seolian  harp  when  there  is  no  breeze."        God's  overflowing 
gifts : — When  the  ice  breaks  up  in  Russia,  the  Czar  goes  in  state  to  drink  of  the  river 


CBAP.n.]  II.  CHRONICLES. 


Neva,  and  having  drunk,  it  was  long  the  custom  for  the  Czar  to  return  the  cup  to 
his  attendants  full  of  gold ;  but  year  by  year  it  became  so  much  larger  that  at 
length  a  stipulated  sum  was  paid  instead  of  the  old  penalty.  But,  however  large 
the  vessel  we  bring  to  God,  and  however  much  it  increases  in  capacity  with  the 
discipline  of  years,  God  will  make  it  to  overflow  with  that  peace  and  faith  and  love 
mad  joy  which  is  better  than  much  fine  gold.    {Sunday  Companioti.) 

Vers.  13, 14. — And  Solomon  gathered  chariots. — Solomon*$  wealth : — I.  Wealth 

DEBIVED   FBOM  TBADINO  SPECULATIONS.      II.    WeaLTH  ACQUrRED  IN  OPPOSITION  TO  God'S 

COMMANDS  (Deut.  xvii.  16,  17).  He  must  trust  in  the  Lord  God,  not  in  chariots  and 
horses  (Psa.  xi.  7).  III.  Wealth  thereforb  biskt  is  its  possession.  Prosperity 
of  Solomon  his  great  misfortune.  The  smallest  departure  from  rectitude  may  lead 
to  grievous  errors  and  fearful  miseries.    {J.  Wolfendale.) 

Ver.  16.  The  king's  merchants  received  the  linen  yam  at  a  price. — The  king't 
merchants : — I.  The  advantages  of  commebce.  In  softening  manners  and 
breaking  down  prejudices,  in  helping  industry,  promoting  peace,  and  stimulating 
into  Nature's  resources.    U.  The  blessinos  oi*  the  naiiob  whose  sovsBXiaa  XAXxa 

iS  IMXBBSSI  Qi  COAUISBCB.      (Ibid.) 


CHAPTEB  n. 

VxBS.  1-16.  And  Solomon  determined  to  bnild  an  honse  for  the  nam*  of  the 
Lord. — Solomon't  predestined  work : — Solomon  was  born  to  do  this  work.  There 
is  no  need  for  the  rose  to  say,  "  Now  I  am  going  to  be  beautiful  and  fragrant."  There 
is  no  need  for  the  nightingale  to  say,  "  Now  I  have  fully  made  up  my  mind  to  be 
musical  and  tuneful,  and  to  fill  the  air  with  richest  expressions  and  melody."  The 
flower  was  born  to  bloom,  and  to  throw  all  its  fragrance  away  in  generous  donation; 
the  nightingale  was  made  in  every  bone  and  feather  of  it  for  the  sacred  singing 
throat  to  sing  to  astonish  the  world  with  music.  Solomon  came  into  this  work 
naturally,  as  it  were  by  biith  and  education.    (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  5,  6.  And  this  honse  which  I  build  is  great :  for  great  la  our  God  above  all 
godi. — Tfie  house  of  God : — 1.  The  worship  of  God,  the  creator  and  governor  of 
the  world,  commenced  with  the  creation  of  man ;  but  in  the  patriarchal  ages  it 
partook  not  of  that  formal  and  settled  character  which  it  afterwards,  by  God's 
direction,  assumed.  Nor,  as  far  as  we  can  learn  from  ancient  history,  does  it 
appear  that  there  were  ever  any  regular  buildings  erected  as  temples  before  the 
Jewish  tabernacle  was  set  up.  Noah,  and  the  other  patriarchs,  appear  simply  to 
have  erected  altars  for  their  sacrifices,  and  these  often  only  for  immediate  and 
temporary  use ;  or  to  have  planted  groves,  as  Abraham  did  in  Beersheba,  "  and 
called  there  on  the  name  of  the  Lord,  the  everlasting  God."  But  when  God  had 
chosen  a  people  to  be  called  by  His  name,  and  had  given  them  His  law,  and  taught 
them  to  offer  Him  regular  stated  services,  He  further  commanded  that  there  should 
be  a  particular  building  set  apart  for  the  same.  Now,  the  objects  of  all  such 
buildings  are  twofold.  They  are  to  be  built  to  the  honour  of  Him  who  is  to  be 
worshipped  therein,  and  they  are  to  be  used  by  those  who  are  to  meet  there  for  the 
purpose  of  joining  in  that  worship.  2.  And  this  feeling  which  led  Solomon  to 
build  "  a  great  house  because  God  was  great  above  all  gods  "  has  had  its  proper 
influence  in  all  ages  and  countries,  and  is  based  upon  true  and  proper  principles  of 
religion,  as  weU  under  the  dispensation  of  the  gospel  as  under  that  of  law. 
History,  no  doubt,  tells  us  that  in  the  days  of  persecution  the  faithful  were  wont  to 
meet  for  Divine  worship  amidst  the  tombs  and  burial-places  of  the  dead,  or  in  the 
secret  caves  of  the  earth.  But,  when  persecutions  cease,  and  days  of  prosperity 
come  round,  when,  as  David  says,  they  themselves  begin  to  "  dwell  in  houses  of 
cedar,"  then  surely  it  is  "  no  longer  meet  that  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord 
should  remain  under  curtains."    When  mansions  of  costly  price,  and  embellished 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

within  and  without  with  all  the  skill  of  experienced  artists,  grow  up  on  every  side  — 
when  the  halls  of  justice,  the  palatial  buildings  of  the  money-changers,  the  market- 
places, and  public  works  which  denote  and  advance  the  worldly  gi-eatness  and 
prosperity  of  our  citizens,  are  multiplying  around  us,  then  too,  surely,  it  is  meet 
that  the  house  which  we  build  for  the  service  of  God  should  be  great  and,  as  nearly 
as  we   can  make   it,  the  chief  glory  of   all ;    reminding  us,  by  its   beauty  and 
magnificence,  of  the  greatness  of  our  God,  who  is  above  all  gods.     3.  It  has  been 
too  much  the  custom,  in  the  age  in  which  we  live,  to  endeavour  in  every  way  to 
serve  God  at  as  cheap  a  rate  as  possible,  at  the  same  time  that  men  serve  themselves 
willingly  at  the  costliest  sacrifice.     While  in  your  private  lives  luxury  has  been 
increasing,  any  expenditure  in  connection  with  the  building  of  a  church  or  the 
service  of  God  is  too  often  denounced,  very  much  in  the  spirit  of  Judas,  as  a  waste 
of  that  which  might  have  been  turned  to  better  account  in  some  other  way.     Now, 
for  myself,  I  wish  loudly  to  protest  against  such  a  system.     4.  What  use  are  we 
going  to  make  of  the  house  of  God,  now  that  we  have  built  it?     "If  there  is  one 
thing  more  than  another  for  which  we  have  a  perfect  loathing,"  says  an  able  lay 
member  of  the  Church,  '» it  is  that  most  disgusting  of  all  unrealities  which  attempts 
to  make  things  external  and  earthly  the   substitute  for  what  is  internal  and 
heavenly — which  considers  fine  churches  and  complex  services  a  sufiicient  compen- 
sation for  general  laxity  of  morals — the  formalism  of  lip-worship  an  atonement  for 
deadness  of  hearts  and  unrestrained  luxurious  Uving."     All  the  outward  acts  of  a 
religious  life  may  be  performed,  where  there  is  an  established  character,  and  yet 
every  one  of  them  be  an  offence  to  God.     They  hear  sermons,  join  in  a  litany,  join 
in  Divine  worship,  come  to  the  communion   once   a  month — all  like  a  decent 
garment :  things  outside,  nothing  within.     God  forbid  that  such  should  be  our  case : 
that  we  should  allow  any  self-complacency  on  account  of  this  house  which  God  has 
permitted  us  to  buUd  for  Him,  or  any  admiration  of  the  services  to  be  offered  therein, 
to  blind  us  to  the  depths  of  our  sad  spiritual  necessities,  or  make  us  indifferent 
about  these  necessities  being  supplied.    And  when  we  draw  nigh  to  offer  our  own 
sacrifices,  let  us  ever  bear  fresh  in  our  stricken  hearts  the  recollection  of  that  One 
Great  Sacrifice  once  offered  up  as  a  peace-offering  for  us  all,  and  which  alone  gives 
any  of  us   sinners  the  right  of   access  to    the  throne  of   grace.     (Bp.  Fulford.) 
A  great  house: — "  The  house  is  great,  for  great  is  our  God" — that  is  the  reason. 
That  is  the  key  of  all  Christian  Ufe.     Our  conception  of  God  controls  everything. 
A  little  God  means  a  little  life,  a  little  morality,  a  little  service,  a  little  petty, 
miserable  effort  altogether ;  but  a  great  conception  of  God  is  a  great  life — great 
loving,  great  service  for  others,     I  do  not  fear  about  God  in  the  Church.     God  is 
great.     We  have  dismissed  Him  from  our  thought.     We  are  agnostics  without  the 
courage  of  our  convictions.    We  say  "  God  "  ;  but  do  we  mean  it  in  all  its  light  and 
music  and  beauty  and  moral  necessity  ?    Is  not  the  Word  of  God  a  mere  con- 
venience in  speech  ?    We  must  put  it  in.     Is  it  the  ruling  thought,  the  dominating 
idea,  the  sovereign  force  ?     Christ  never  ignored  God.     Christ  lifted  up  the  Father, 
the  God,  the  Sovereign.     When  you  get  a  real  conception  of  God  you  will  preach 
well.     There  will  be  no  fear  of  man  before  you.    Do  not  sit  back  and  say,  *'  We 
cannot  know  Him."    That  is  intellectually  true;  it  is  sympathetically  false — we 
cannot  know  God  intellectually.     No  man's  eyes  can  accommodate  the  whole  sky, 
but    we    know    God  lovingly,  pityingly,  healingly,  forgivingly;    we  know  Him 
intuitively.     The  sun  rules  all  things.     Haste  thou,  take  heed  of  that,  0  man !     It 
is  the  sun  that  tells  them  what  coat  to  put  on ;  the  sun  tells  them  what  to  eat ;  the 
sun  cures  and  smites,  and  rebukes  thy  poor  botanies  and  minor  sciences,  showing 
them  that  the  Kew  Gardens  of  one  nation  are  the  weeds  of  another.    The  sun  tells 
you  when  to  go  out  and  when  to  hasten  home  again.     And  as  that  teaches  you,  so 
the  great  Teacher  of  the  mind,  the  Spirit  of  God,  will  teach  them,  control  them, 
guide  them  !     We  "  live  and  move  and  have  our  being  "  in  God.     The  house  is 
great,  for  great  is  our  conception  of  God.     God  is  gi-eater  than  our  conception — we 
struggle  towards  Him,  and  our  struggle  is  victory.    A  great  God  means  a  great 
morality.     Shall  I  tell  you  of  the  knaves  that  are  trying  to  carve  morality  for  <he 
people?    They  have  schedules  and  stipulations    and   social  arrangements    and 
indications  and  manifold   endeavour  and  effort  after  something  that  is  to   be 
millennial  and  glorious.     If  that  is  morality,  we  can  make  it,  shape  it,  manufacture 
it,  sell  it,  appreciate  it,  prize  it,  barter  it,  nail  it  to  the  wall  like  a  wooden  idol. 
Talk  they  of  morals?     Oh,  Thou  bleeding  Lamb,  true  morality  is  ijve  of  Thee  I     If 
that  were  morality  which  I  have  just  described  in  my  own  words,  it  would  be 
worthy  of  its  own  little  etymology — an  attitude,  a  manner,  a  posture,  a  trick. 


CHAP,  n.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  9 

Away !  It  is  a  sonl,  an  inspiration,  a  flame,  an  incarnate  holiness.  "  Mr.  So-and- 
Bo  is  a  good  man,  though  he  is  not  a  Christian."  No !  he  is  not  a  good  man. 
"  My  neighbour  is  an  excellent  man,  though  he  does  not  beheve  anything  about 
God."  No  1  he  is  not  an  excellent  man.  There  thou  art  in  the  little  etymological 
morality,  the  manner,  the  attitude,  the  posture.  AU  thou  seest  is  silver,  but  the 
base  metal  is  inside.  To  be  silver-covered  is  not  to  be  silver.  He  only  is  good  who 
is  the  temple  of  God  by  consent,  by  honour,  by  daily  worship,  by  continued  trust  in 
His  name  and  service  in  His  kingdom.  A  great  God  means  a  great  service — not  a 
little  service  written  out  on  the  paper  as  to  what  shall  come  first,  and  next,  and 
last,  but  an  enthusiasm  that  dai^s  the  sea,  the  wilderness,  and  the  place  of  danger, 
the  cannibal,  the  savage,  the  devil.  "  Why,  missionary,  dost  thou  so  go  forth  ? 
Remain  at  home."  "I  cannot."  "Why  not?"  "  God  is  great ;  my  service  for 
Him  must  be  great  also."  Your  house  exists  for  one  thing — you  must  find  out 
what  that  one  thing  is.  You  shut  the  window  for  some  one,  you  keep  up  the  house 
for  some  one.  It  is  always  an  impulse.  We  must  find  the  motive  and  governing 
thought.  Only  let  that  be  worthy,  and  all  the  rest  will  come.  "  Oh,  my  Father, 
the  message  preached  was  poor  and  feeble,  but  Thy  broken-down  old  servant 
could  not  do  better."  He  says,  "  That  was  the  best  discourse  thou  didst  ever 
deliver ;  it  shall  be  made  mightier  than  the  others  on  which  thou  hast  lavished 
thy  poor  vanity.  It  was  the  best  thou  couldst  do,  and  weakness  may  be  strength, 
poverty  may  be  wealth."  Oh,  to  do  the  best  you  can!  that  is  to  do  a  great 
thing  in  the  esteem  of  God.  And  that  mumbling,  stumbling  prayer  of  thine  at 
the  family  altar — only  God  knows  what  that  prayer  cost.  Can  you  tell  me  the 
meaning  of  the  word  "  great "  ?  I  will  ask  my  young  friends  to  tell  me  what  great 
means,  and  to  illustrate  it  in  some  general  way.  I  hear  the  answer  already — the 
mountains  are  great,  the  sky  is  great,  the  sun  is  great !  There  is  the  great 
mountain,  and  here  at  its  base  is  a  little  child  picking  spring's  first  daisy.  Which 
is  great?  The  child  I  And  a  man  standing  on  the  great  mountain  says,  "  That  is 
greatness.  What  am  I,  a  poor  little  creature  compared  with  that  great  rock  ?  " 
Why,  that  great  rock  is  insignificant,  and  thou  art  majestic.  Thou  canst  tunnel  it, 
bore  it,  climb  it — that  is  greatness,  not  magnitude.  Get  the  right  definition  of 
greatness,  and  all  your  troubles  will  subside  and  all  your  love  will  fall  into  its  right 
prospective,  and  you  shall  say  the  Lord  reigneth.  Now  I  wiU  tell  you  where 
greatness  is  to  be  found.  It  is  to  be  found  in  compassion.  You  said  great 
mountain ;  I  say  great  pity — "  And  his  father  saw  him  whilst  he  was  yet  a  great 
way  off,  and  had  compassion,  and  ran  and  fell  on  his  neck  and  kissed  him."  All 
the  consolidated  planets  never  totalled  up  to  that  greatness.  And  thou  canst  be 
great  in  that  way.  I  wiU  tell  you  what  is  great — great  patience,  patience  that  sits 
up  all  night  and  says,  "  He  wiU  be  here  in  the  morning ;  he  has  been  mistaken  as 
to  distance,  but  he  will  be  here  in  the  morning  " — a  patience  that  looks  at  the 
midnight  clock  as  if  by  chance,  as  if  it  did  not  mean  to  look,  but  simply  got  its 
tearful  eye  on  that  significant  dial.  Patience  says,  "  The  child  wiU  do  well  by  and 
by.  He  is  poor  at  his  learning  now,  but  he  is  going  to  be  a  good  scholar  in  a  year 
or  two."  Ay,  that  is  greatness ;  not  the  rocky  mountains  of  the  Alpine  heights — 
not  these,  but  heights  of  patience,  depths  of  love,  rivers  of  tears.  •'  The  house  is 
great,  for  great  is  our  God."  This  house  wiU  be  famous  for  the  deliverance  of 
great  messages.  This  house  has  no  small  message  to  deliver.  The  messages 
delivered  here  will  deal  with  great  subjects,  with  God,  and  blood,  and  sin,  and 
pardon,  and  holiness,  and  destiny — themes  that  cannot  be  discussed  anywhere  else. 
They  would  be  out  of  place  in  the  Lyceum,  in  the  political  hall,  in  the  House  of 
Parliament.  I  speak  of  this  house  not  in  its  locality,  but  in  its  typical  relations. 
This  house  must  be  unique  in  its  messages.  Men  must  hasten  to  God's  house  to 
hear  God's  Word  which  they  can  hear  nowhere  else  in  the  same  sense,  degree,  and 
quality.  My  brother  ministers,  you  are  not  hardly  driven  for  subjects  ;  the  Cross 
still  stands.  You  need  not  look  up  a  paper  to  see  what  is  the  question  of  the  day. 
The  question  of  the  day  is,  "  How  can  a  man  be  forgiven,  how  can  a  broken  heart  be 
healed,  how  can  the  lost  be  brought  home  ?  " — that  is  the  question  of  the  day.  This 
house  will  be  great  in  its  welcomes.  There  will  be  as  it  were  a  genius,  a  spirit  at 
all  the  doors,  saying,  "  Come  and  welcome  ;  0  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to 
the  waters."  Great  welcomes  will  make  the  house  warm — people  love  welcomes. 
Speak  God's  welcomes  to  human  hearts,  and  men  will  bless  thee  and  mothers  say 
there  never  was  such  a  man.  And  this  house  will  be  known  as  great  for  its  great 
remedies — the  house  of  God  treats  nothing  superficially.  There  be  those  in  the 
world  who  cry  "  Peace,  peace  I "  where  there  is  no  peace.    There  be  those  who  say. 


10  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  n. 

"  There,  that  will  do,"  when  thej  have  not  touched  the  heart-sore,  the  devil-spot. 
The  remedy  declared  here  will  be  the  old,  old  remedy  of  blood.  And  this  house, 
though  great,  is  not  final.  Nature  hates  all  buildings.  Nature  hates  everything 
that  does  not  grow.  We  know  Mother  Nature  is  very  gentle  to  a  nettle,  and  gives 
a  nettle  room  and  says,  "  Let  this  nettle  grow  " ;  but  Nature  has  already  begun  to 
take  off  your  roof.  Long  before  you  have  paid  half  of  your  £9,000  you  will  have  a 
bill  sent  in  for  repairs.  Nature  will  not  let  the  place  alone — she  will  take  it  down. 
Build  thou  in  God,  build  thou  the  temple-life.  Every  man  is  the  living  temple  of  God 
that  cannot  be  taken  down — that  is  a  house  not  made  with  hands.  (/.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Sermons  in  stones : — So  far  as  we  are  able  to  discover  from  archseological  research 
and  the  details  in  Scripture,  it  seems  beyond  controversy  that  the  temple  of 
Solomon  was  the  most  splendid  and  magnificent  building  the  world  has  ever  seen. 
There  have  been  larger  buildings,  but  no  building  represented  in  itself  so  much 
splendour.  The  gold  and  silver  and  precious  stones,  besides  the  marble  and  timber 
and  workmanship,  amounted  to  about  £100,000,000  sterling,  equal  to  the  annual 
revenue  of  this  kingdom.  And  so  far  as  we  know,  with  all  this  luxurious  outlay, 
there  was  no  one  in  the  congregation  of  Jerusalem  who  raised  the  Judas  cry:  «'  To 
what  purpose  is  this  waste  ?  "  Solomon  said,  "  The  house  which  I  build  is  great," 
and  he  gave  as  a  reason,  "  because  great  is  our  God  above  all  gods."  What  did 
this  temple  mean  to  Solomon  ?     I.  The  temple  was  great  to  Solomon  because  it 

STOOD    FOB   THE    VISIBLE    SIGN   OF    God'S     PEESENCE     AMONG     THE     PEOPLE.         God   had 

forbidden  the  children  of  Israel  to  make  any  image  representing  Himself.  Yet 
there  is  an  underlying  spirit  of  worship  that  is  inherent  in  all  of  us,  a  longing  for 
some  objective  thing  upon  which  we  can  cast  our  eye.  Out  of  that  desire,  which 
seems  to  be  a  very  part  of  our  nature,  and  not  a  result  of  superstition,  has  grown, 
by  the  misdirection  of  it,  all  idolatry.  God  manifested  Himself  early  in  the  garden 
of  Eden  with  a  flame  of  fire.  When  He  spake  with  Moses  He  appeared  in  a 
burning  bush.  It  was  an  objective  sign  of  His  presence.  Consider  how  natural  it 
is  to  build  such  signs  as  these  in  the  land.  We  have  on  the  Embankment  a  great 
Parliament  House,  a  magnificent  building,  one  of  the  finest  in  the  world.  That 
Parliament  House  is  the  visible  sign  of  the  sovereignty  of  the  people.  In  the  same 
way  Buckingham  Palace  stands  as  the  visible  sign  of  royalty.  The  Courts  of  Justice 
in  the  Strand  are  a  visible  sign  of  the  rights  of  man  and  the  defence  of  man  in  his 
rights.  So  we  might  go  all  through  the  land  and  note  that  the  great  manor  houses 
and  castles  are  the  embodiment  of  that  subtle  thing  which  we  call  nobility.  Every- 
thing in  this  world  has  its  concrete  sign.  We  look  upon  the  things  that  are  seen, 
not  as  being  the  actual  thing,  but  as  the  sign  of  the  thing.  II.  When  Solomon  said, 
*'  The  house  I  build  is  great,"  the  inadequacy  of  his  ability  to  express  his  idea 
WAS  ALSO  PRESENT  WITH  HIM.  How  shall  I  build  a  house  great  enough  for  the  great 
God?  The  only  justification  of  the  Infinite  falling  short  of  any  house  is  that  it 
shall  be  a  place  where  we  shall  come  into  His  presence  and  offer  sacrifices  to  Hia 
great  name.  That  purpose  sanctifies  the  inadequate  efforts  we  make  to  embody 
our  ideal.  God  does  not  receive  thanks  from  us  because  they  are  worthy  of  accept- 
ance, but  because  they  are  responses  to  His  grace.  Little  things  become  big,  and 
sometimes  great  things  become  very  small,  just  as  their  attitude  is  towards  God. 
Bethlehem,  for  instance,  was  the  least  of  all  the  cities,  and  yet  it  became  great 
because  it  was  sanctified  and  glorified  by  the  birth  of  the  Son  of  God.  It  was  not 
the  town,  but  what  was  associated  with  it.  Nazareth  was  a  despised,  contemptible, 
mean  little  village  ;  so  contemptible  that  it  came  to  be  a  byword,  and  yet  Nazareth 
is  one  of  the  famous  towns  in  the  history  of  the  world,  and  always  will  be.  The 
things  we  offer  to  God  are  great,  not  because  of  the  money  they  cost,  not  by  the 
splendour  of  them  that  may  meet  the  eye,  but  because  they  are  given  to  God. 
God  makes  them  great.  III.  The  temple  was  great  because  of  what  it  sym- 
bolised. It  was  the  great  type  of  the  Incarnation.  There  is  instinctively  in  man 
a  spirit  which  craves  for  an  objective  representation  of  God.  But  for  us  Christ  is 
the  real  Incarnation.  Our  churches  stand  as  an  embodiment  of  our  thankful 
recognition  of  promises  fulfilled.  We  meet  for  instruction,  for  prayer,  for  praise, 
for  fellowship  and  goodwill,  and  to  give  forth  our  witness  to  God.  It  would  be  an 
irreparable  loss  to  us  if  Westminster  Abbey  were  rased  to  the  ground  ;  and  so  with 
all  the  old  cathedrals  of  England.  They  are  an  embodiment  of  doctrine  in  a 
sense.  A  true  cathedral  is  laid  out  on  the  plan  of  the  Cross,  the  nave  and  the 
transepts  making  a  cross.  The  spire  tells  of  the  aspirations  of  worship,  and  if  we 
oome  into  the  choir  we  have  an  expression  of  praise.  The  old  mediaeval  idea  was 
to  work  out  in  stone  and  in  building  the  foundations  of  our  faith.    I  would  fill  the 


CHA?.  n.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  11 

land  with  buildings  that  should  be  in  the  highest  sense  great  buildings,  expressing 
the  great  inheritance  which  has  come  to  us  from  God  by  Jesus  Christ.  (G.  F, 
Pentecost,  D.D.)  Solomon's  conception  of  God: — By  the  sentence,  the  heaven 
and  heaven  of  heavens,  that  is  the  heaven  in  its  most  extended  compass,  cannot 
contain  God,  Solomon  strikes  down  all  rationalistic  assertions  that  the  Israelites 
imagined  Jehovah  to  be  only  a  finite  national  God.  The  infinitude  and  super- 
mundane exaltation  of  God  cannot  be  more  clearly  and  strongly  expressed  than 
it  is  in  these  words.  That,  however,  Solomon  was  addicted  to  no  abstract  idealism 
is  sufficiently  apparent  from  this,  that  he  unites  this  consciousness  of  the  infinite 
exaltation  of  God  with  the  firm  belief  of  His  real  presence  in  the  temple.  The 
true  God  is  not  merely  exalted  above  the  world,  has  not  only  His  throne  in  heaven 
(1  Kings  viii.  34,  36,  39  ;  Psa.  ii.  4,  xi.  4,  ciii.  19 ;  Isa.  Ixvi.  1;  Amos,  ix.  6),  He  is 
also  present  on  the  earth  (Deut.  iv.  39),  has  chosen  the  temple  for  the  dwelling-place 
of  His  name  in  Israel,  from  which  He  hears  the  prayers  of  His  people.    (C.  F.  Keil.) 

Vers.  7-16.  Send  me  now  therefore  a  man  cunning  to  work  in  gold.— iTuram 
and  Solomon : — Learn  from  this  intercourse — I.  That  triendship  in  life  is  helpful. 
II.  That  co-operation  among  men  is  desirable.     III.  That  men  may  know  God, 

TET   NOT  SERVE  HiM.       IV.    ThAT    WHEN    God'S   PEOPLE   ARE  CONSISTENT  IN  THEIR  LIFE, 

THEIR  INFLUENCE  UPON  OTHERS  13  FOR  GOOD.  (J.  WolfendaU.)  Co- Operation : — 
No  temple  should  be  built  by  any  one  man.  Blessed  be  God,  everything  that  is 
worth  doing  is  done  by  co-operation,  by  acknowledged  reciprocity  of  labour.  Your 
breakfast-table  was  not  spread  by  yourself,  although  it  could  not  have  been  spread 
without  you.  Sometimes  we  may  almost  bless  God  that  we  cannot  identify  the 
authorship  of  some  books  in  the  Bible.  It  is  better  that  many  hands  should  have 
written  the  book  than  that  some  brilliant  author  should  have  retired  into  immor- 
tality on  the  ground  of  his  being  the  only  genius  that  could  have  written  so 
marvellous  a  volume.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  17,  18.  And  Solomon  numbered  all  the  strangers  that  were  in  the  land  of 
Israel. — Naturalisation  of  foreigners  : — I.  A  good  government  will  tend  to  makb 

A  COUNTRY  ATTRACTIVE  TO  FOREIGNERS.  II.  FOREIGNERS  THUS  ATTRACTED  ARE  AMEN- 
ABLE TO  THE  LAWS  OP  THE  StATE.  III.  ThUS  PROTECTED,  THEY  MAY  CONTRIBUTE 
MATERIALLY     TO     THE     ENRICHMENT     OF     A    StATE    BY     THE     IMPORTATION    OF     FOREIGN 

INDUSTRIES.  Silk-weavers  of  Spitalfields.  V.  Be  kind  to  strangers.  {Biblical 
Museum.)        Strangers  in  the  city : — I.  Strangers  in  a  city  are  in  danger  from 

THE    TEMPTATION    TO    EXPLORE   THE    UNDERGROUND  LIFE  OF  THE   COMMUNITY.       I  belieVO 

that  three-fourths  of  the  young  men  of  our  cities  are  ruined  for  the  simple  reason 
that  they  went  to  look  at  iniquity.  In  1794,  during  the  Keign  of  Terror  in  Paris, 
there  were  people  who,  to  hide  from  their  persecutors,  got  into  the  sewers  under 
the  city,  and  went  on  mile  after  mile  amid  the  stifling  atmosphere,  poisoned  and 
exhausted,  coming  out  after  a  while  at  the  river  Seine,  where  they  washed  and 
breathed  again  the  pure  air.  But,  alas  1  that  so  many  men  who  attempt  to  explore 
underground  New  York  life  never  come  to  a  river  Seine,  where  they  can  wash,  and 
they  die  horribly  in  the  sewers.  I  stand  on  a  mountain  of  Colorado,  six  thousand 
feet  high.  There  is  a  man  standing  beneath  me  who  says,  "  I  see  a  peculiar 
shelving  to  this  rock,"  and  he  bends  towards  it.  I  say,  "  Stop,  you  will  fall." 
He  says,  "  No  danger;  I  have  a  steady  hand  and  foot,  and  see  a  peculiar  kind  of 
moss."  I  say,  "  Stand  back  "  ;  but  he  says,  "  I  am  not  afraid  "  ;  and  he  bends 
farther  and  farther,  and  after  a  while  his  head  whirls  and  his  feet  slip — and  the 
eagles  know  not  that  it  is  the  macerated  flesh  of  a  man  they  are  picking  at,  but  it 
is.  So  I  have  seen  men  come  to  the  very  verge  of  the  life  of  this  city,  and  they 
look  away  down  in  it.  They  say,  "Don't  be  cowardly.  Let  us  go  down."  They 
look  farther  and  farther.  I  warn  them  to  stand  back ;  but  Satan  comes  behind 
them,  and  while  they  are  swinging  over  the  verge,  pushes  them  off.  People  say 
they  were  naturally  bad.  They  were  not?  They  were  engaged  in  exploration. 
No  man  can  afford  to  sail  so  near  the  coast  of  eternal  fire  for  the  purpose  of 
discovering  how  hot  it  is.  Stand  off  from  that  exploration.  If  you  are  a  good 
swimmer,  and  you  see  a  man  drowning,  leap  for  him  and  bring  him  ashore  ;  but 
if  you  are  merely  going  to  jump  in  to  see  him  drown,  stand  back.     II.  Strangers 

IN   A   CITY    ABB    IN    DANGER    FROM     THE     TEMPTATION    TO     DESECRATE    THE     SaBBATH. 

There  is  not  one  in  ten  who  knows  how  to  keep  the  Lord's  day  when  he  is  away 
from  home  and  absent  from  all  Christian  influences.     III.  Stbanoebs  in  a  city 

ABK  HOT  BAnt   WTTHODT   CHRISTIAN   RESTRAINT.       (T.  Dc  Witt  Tolmoge.) 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 


CHAPTER  III. 

Yebs.  1-14.  Then  Solomon  began  to  build  tbe  bouse  of  fhe  Lord  at  Jerusalem. — 

The  surpassing   beauty  of  the   temple : — I.  That  God  did  not  need  this  lavish 

EXPENDITUKE  OF  GOLD  AND  GEMS  AND  KICH  ORNAMENTS.  II.  YeT  DiVINE  CON- 
DESCENSION ACCEPTED  THIS  OFFERING  OF  HUMAN  GRATITUDE.  III.  ThE  BEAUTT  AND 
COSTLINESS  OF  THE  TEMPLE  SERVED  TO  IMPRESS  THE  MIND  OF  SURROUNDING  NATIONS 
WITH  THB  FEELINGS  OF  THE  PEOPLE  OF  ISRAEL  TOWARDS  THEIR  GREAT  GoD. 
IV.    The  ADORNMENT  OF  THE  TEMPLE  A  REBUKE  TO  MERE  UTILITARIAN  VIEWS.      {BihUcol 

Museum.)  And  he  began  to  build  in  the  second  day  of  the  second  month. — 
Memorable  days  ; — Have  we  not  all  had  memorable  days  ?  1.  The  day  when  the 
boy  left  home.  2.  The  day  when  the  young  man  finds  his  first  friend  in  business, 
the  head  that  can  direct  him,  the  hand  strong  enough  to  give  him  assurance  of 
protection,  the  voice  all  strength  and  music  that  charmed  his  fears  away,  and  gave 
him  consciousness  of  latent  possibilities  of  his  own.  3.  The  day  when  the  young 
man  got  his  first  practical  hold  of  life  and  business,  how  much  he  made  in  his  first 
little  profit,  the  very  first  sovereign  he  made  by  his  own  wits  and  energy.  Do  not 
let  all  days  be  alike ;  save  yourselves  from  so  running  one  day  into  another  as  to 
drop  the  dignity,  the  accent,  the  significance  of  special  occasions.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Now  these  are  the  things  wherein  Solomon  was  instructed  for  the  building  of 
the  house  of  God. — Life-building  : — The  building  of  the  temple  is  a  striking 
example  of  life-building.  I.  Solomon  began  with  instruction.  "  Now  these 
are  the  things  wherein  Solomon  was  instructed " :  literally,  "  Now  this  is 
the  ground-plan."  So  many  people  are  building  without  a  ground-plan.  It 
would  seem  as  if  they  were  attempting  to  perform  the  impossibility  of  building 
from  the  top  ;  they  have  no  foundations,  no  great  principles ;  there  is  a  brick  here, 
and  a  stone  there,  and  a  beam  of  wood  yonder,  but  there  is  no  grand  scheme. 
"  Solomon  was  instructed."  Then  Solomon  was  not  a  born  builder,  that  is  to  say, 
a  man  who  needed  no  instruction,  no  hint,  no  apprenticeship,  in  these  things.  He 
was  a  man  who  began  with  instruction.  A  man  is  none  the  worse  for  having  his 
little  book  of  instructions  in  his  pocket  when  he  goes  abroad.  The  book  is  not  a 
large  one  in  mere  superficies,  but  who  can  declare  in  arithmetical  numbers  its 
cubical  contents  ?  Every  line  is  a  volume ;  every  sentence  is  a  time-bill ;  every 
proposition  is  a  philosophy.  Even  Solomon  accepted  instruction.  It  is  never  wise 
to  be  beyond  a  hint,  beyond  the  counsel  of  experience.  II.  Solomon  began  well  : 
WHAT  WONDER  IF  HE  CONTINUE  WELL  ?  He  Said  he  would  start  life  with  the  dowry 
of  wisdom.  No  accidents  could  happen  to  Solomon,  because  he  started  at  the 
right  point ;  accepted  the  true  definition  of  life,  and  walked  in  the  light  of  wisdom. 
If  it  happened  that  Solomon  should  ever  trifle  with  that  light,  conceal  it,  modify  it, 
despise  it,  he  would  go  to  the  devil.  No  matter  if  he  had  built  a  thousand  temples, 
he  would  land  in  perdition  if  he  ceases  to  walk  in  the  ways  of  wisdom.  No  man 
can  build  himself  up  to  heaven,  however  many  temples  he  may  build ;  he  must 
build  up  from  within — in  the  matter  of  conviction,  principles,  life,  character,  he 
must  blossom  into  purity,  he  must  fructify  into  love.  III.  Solomon's  instructions 
WERE  sufficient.  Somctimcs  we  wish  that  we  had  a  rehearsal  of  life,  and  that 
we  might  come  back  and  begin  at  the  beginning,  and  walk  in  the  light  of  experience. 
There  is  something  better  than  experience,  and  that  is  revelation.  The  Christian 
claims  that  the  whole  map  or  chart  of  life  is  to  be  found  in  the  Book  of  God  ; 
and  so  it  is.  So  there  need  be  no  pensive  desire  for  a  trial-trip  in  the  ways  of  life. 
IV.  Solomon  had  a  definite  purpose  in  view:  he  was  building  a  temple. 
Definiteness  of  purpose  economises  time,  enables  strength  to  issue  in  the  noblest 
accomplishments.  A  man  will  have  good  reason  to  know  what  he  is  doing  if  he 
pay  attention  to  Providence.  There  need  not  be  so  much  darkness  in  the  ways  of 
life  as  is  often  supposed.    (Ibid.) 

Yet.  6.  And  he  garnished  the  house  with  precious  stones  for  beauty. — Cost  and 
beauty  in  Christian  worship  : — The  author  of  the  history  of  the  Jewish  Church  uses 
these  words  concerning  the  temple  of  Solomon  :  "  As  in  the  Grecian  tragedies  we  see 
always  in  the  background  the  gate  of  Mycense,  So  in  the  story  of  the  people  of  Israel 
we  have  always  in  view  the  temple  of  Solomon.  There  is  hardly  any  Jewish  reign 
that  is  not  in  some  way  connected  with  its  construction  or  its  changes.  In  front  of 
the  great  Church  of  the  Escuriel  in  Spain — in  the  eyes  of  Spaniards  itself  a  likeness 
of  the  temple — overlooking  the  court  called  by  them  the  Court  of  the  Kings  are  six 


CHAP.  IT.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  18 

colossal  statues  of  the  kings  of  Judah  who  bore  the  chief  part  in  the  temple  of 
Jerusalem — David,  the  proposer  ;  Solomon,  the  founder ;  Jehoshaphat,  Hezekiah, 
Josiah,  Manasseh,  the  successive  purifiers  and  restorers.  The  idea  there  so 
impressively  graven  in  stone  runs  through  all  the  subsequent  history  of  the  chosen 
people.  Why  was  this  temple  built  and  what  was  the  motive,  especially  of  ita 
enormous  costliness  and  its  unrivalled  beauty  ?  Solomon  did  not  build  and 
"  garnish  the  house  with  precious  stones  and  with  gold  of  the  gold  of  Parvaim  " 
because  he  was  ambitious  as  a  king  and  a  conqueror  to  outshine  his  neighbours  or 
to  immortalise  himself,  but  because  he  was  bidden  to  do  so.  The  temple  was  not 
an  exhibition  of  wealth  or  cleverness,  or  superiority  on  the  part  of  man,  its  builder; 
it  was  man's  education  in  cost  and  sacrifice  and  unsparing  labour  on  the  part  of 
God,  its  designer.  There  is  just  one  principle  that  runs  through  all  the  teaching  of 
the  two  Testaments  concerning  what  men  do  for  their  Maker,  and  that  is  that  God 
does  not  want,  and  cannot  otherwise  than  lightly  esteem,  that  which  costs  ua 
nothing,  and  that  the  value  of  any  service  or  sacrifice  which  we  render  for  His  sake 
is  that,  whatever  may  be  its  intrinsic  meanness  or  meagreness,  it  is  as  from  us  our 
very  best.  This  will  let  us  see  the  insufficiency  of  the  average  explanations  that  are 
given  of  the  motives  that  prompt  to  the  enriching  and  beautifying  of  our  sanctuaries 
to-day,  such  as — 1.  Such  things  are  necessitated  by  the  inevitable  rivalries  of  the 
day.  It  would  be  said  that  this  is  a  time,  especially  in  England  and  on  the  conti- 
nent of  Europe,  of  restorations.  And  what  one  Church  has  done,  another  cannot 
afford  to  be  behind  in  doing  also.  The  spirit  of  the  age  is  the  spirit  of  competition, 
and  competition  which  is  the  life  of  trade  is  the  life  of  religion  too.  If  this  is  a 
very  pitiful  motive  to  be  alleged  for  any  such  work,  it  is  not  an  altogether  surprising 
one.  That  competitive  temper  has  so  much  to  do  with  explaining  our  personal  and 
social  expenditures  that  it  is  not  unnatural  to  seek  in  it  the  clue  to  expenditures 
that  are  sacred.  Think  for  a  moment  how  much  money  is  spent  for  dress,  for  the 
furnishing  and  decoration  of  houses.  Now,  then,  what  is  it  that  is  sad  about  all 
this?  its  cost?  No,  but  what  is  too  often  and  too  plainly  its  motive.  If  our 
banquets  were  always  the  symbols  of  our  eagerness  to  please,  of  our  desire  to  give 
of  our  best  to  those  whom  we  love  and  honour,  then  their  cost  and  splendour  would 
only  so  much  the  more  ennoble  them.  But  it  is  because,  too  often,  our  dress,  our 
houses,  our  entertainments,  our  equipages,  are  only  so  many  means  by  which  we 
strive  to  outshine  and  eclipse  our  neighbour  that  such  expenditure  becomes  so 
largely  not  only  the  wasteful,  but  the  truly  contemptible  thing  that  it  is.  And  yet 
it  is  no  wonder  that  so  long  as  we  allow  such  motives  to  influence  us  in  thinga 
secular,  we  should  infer  or  impute  them  concerning  things  that  are  sacred.  2.  When 
changes  are  made  in  our  social  customs,  in  our  habits  of  expenditure,  and  even  in 
our  modes  of  worship,  we  are  often  told  that  they  are  necessitated  because  we  must 
"  keep  up  with  the  times,"  and  those  who  are  wedded  by  very  sacred  associationa 
to  things  ancient,  are  often  wounded  in  their  tenderest  feelings  by  being  told  that 
they  must  give  up  the  old  in  order  not  to  be  behind  the  age.  Well,  the  spirit  of  the 
nineteenth  century,  whatever  else  may  be  said  of  it,  is  not  an  infallible  spirit,  and 
in  many  respects  it  would  be  better  if  some  of  us  were  behind  the  age  rather  than 
80  eagerly  and  unthinkingly  in  accord  with  it.  But  however  this  may  be,  the 
*'  spirit  of  the  age  "  can  never  be  the  guide  for  the  principles  of  worship  or  the  law 
of  sacrifice.  Such  cost  and  beauty  is  helpful  to  the  instinct  of  worship  and 
devotion.  This  motive  is  a  perfectly  valid  and  intelligible  one.  Bat  the  one 
sufficient  motive  for  cost,  and  beauty,  and  even  lavish  outlay  in  the  building  and 
adornment  of  the  house  of  God,  is  the  consecrating  to  Him  the  best  and  costliest 
that  human  hands  can  bring.  This  is  the  very  essence  of  the  Cross  of  Christ.  The 
power  of  the  Cross  over  men  lies  in  this,  that  it  is  the  gift  to  men,  by  God,  ol  His 
Tery  best—"  Hia  well-beloved  Son."    (Bp.  H.  C.  Fotter,) 


CHAPTER  IV. 


Vebs.  1-10.  Moreover  he  made  an  altar  of  brass. — The  furniture  of  t7i*  holy 
sourt  : — 1.  The  altar  of  brass.  Larger  than  that  in  tabernacle.  When  God 
enlarges  our  borders  and  business  we  should  increase  our  gifts.  2.  The  sea  of 
brass.  God  requires  sanctity  in  all  that  approach  Him  (Jas,  iv,  8).  3.  The  ten 
lavera.    Not  only  the  priests,  but  the  sacrifices,  must  be  washed.     We  must  purify 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 


our  persons  and  performances.  Iniquity  cleaves  to  our  holy  things.  4.  The  tea 
golden  candlesticks.  One  in  tabernacle.  Light  increases.  5.  The  ten  tables. 
6.  The  golden  altar.  Christ  makes  atonement  and  intercedes  for  ever  in  virtue  of 
that  atonement.  {/.  Wolfendale.)  Also  lie  made  a  molten  sea  of  ten  cubits.— 
The  molun  sea  : — I.  Its  usk.  Suggests  purification  for  God's  service.  II.  Its  size. 
Suggests  abundant  provision  for  purification.  A  type  of  the  "  fountain  opened." 
III.  Its  constbdction.  1.  The  material  precious  and  durable.  2.  The  oxen, 
sacrifices  of  priests,  emblems  of  strength  and  patience — looking  aU  ways.  _  The 
blessings  procured  by  a  holy  priesthood  would  be  universally  diffused.  {Homiletical 
Commentary.) 

Ver.  22.  And  the  entry  of  the  house. — The  entry  of  the  house  : — This,  central, 
conspicuous,  and  attractive,  suggesting — I.  Access  to  God  in  Christian  worship. 
II.  Access  to  symbolic  BEAtiTT  in  Christian  worship.  1.  Perfection  of  gold,  or 
material  prosperity  given  to  God.  2.  Palms — growth  and  fruitfulness  in  Christian 
life.  3.  Flowers— beauty  and  fragrance  in  Christian  character.  4.  Cherubims — 
alacrity  in  God's  service.  (J.  Wolfendale.)  The  worth  of  grandeur :— A  fine 
house  cannot  make  a  fine  tenant ;  a  first-class  carriage  cannot  make  a  first-class 
traveller  ;  a  man  might  sit  down  on  a  monarch's  throne,  and  not  be  a  sovereign ; 
he  might  even  look  like  a  king,  and  be  only  a  clown.  Decoration  is  useless,  if  it 
does  not  express  something  beyond  itself,  something  spiritual,  ideal,  transcendental. 
The  picture  is  nothing  if  it  does  not  in  reality  speak,  not  indeed  to  the  ear  of  the 
body,  but  to  the  attention  of  the  soul.  It  is  an  amusing  irony  to  see  some  people 
clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  because  there  is  really  no  connection  between  them 
and  their  clothes ;  we  expect  them  to  speak  musically,  and  lo  1  their  tones  fiU  our 
mouths  as  with  gravel-stones.  We  expect  a  man  to  be  at  least  as  elegant  as  his 
clothes,  and  when  he  is  not  we  do  not  blame  the  garments ;  it  is  more  their  mis- 
fortune than  their  fault  that  they  should  be  where  they  are.  So  when  we  read  the 
specification  of  temples  and  palaces  we  say,  "  What  does  it  amount  to  ?  What 
is  this  grandeur  worth  in  helping  and  blessing  the  world  ?  What  is  civilisation  to 
end  in  ?  "    (J.  Farker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTEB  V. 


Veb.  1.  Thufl  all  the  work  that  Solomon  made  for  the  honse  of  the  Lord  was 

flnished. — Dedicated    things  : — I.   David   before   his   death   dedicated   certain 

TREASURES  TO   GOD.        II.  SoLOMON    MOST    SCRUPULOUS  IN    CABRYINO  OUT  HIS  FATHER'S 

WISH.  III.  Solomon's  example  worthy  of  our  imitation.  (J.  Wolfendale.)  The 
joy  of  the  finished  work  : — I.  The  accomplishment  of  finished  work  ia  the  cause  op 
JOT.  II.  The  power  to  accomplish  this  work  should  be  ascribed  to  God.  III. 
Hence  in  every  undertaking  we  should  ask  for  God's  direction.  {Ibid.)  Things 
that  are  never  finished  : — There  are  some  buildings  that  are  never  finished.  We 
never  finish  our  life-building  ;  the  life-temple  goes  up  evermore — let  every  man  take 
heed  how  he  buildeth.  Do  not  suppose  that  you  can  finish  your  education.  In  the 
higher  education  you  only  finish  that  you  may  begin ;  you  close  one  book  as  a 
pledge  of  your  qualification  to  open  another.  How,  as  boys  at  school,  we  used  to 
be  discouraged  by  this  process  of  advancement !  Having  closed  the  arithmetic,  who 
was  willing  with  hia  whole  heart  to  open  hie  algebra  ?  Many  persons  could  have 
comfortably  left  school  without  beginning  it  at  all.  But  there  is  always  a  higher 
aspect  of  things  to  apprehend  and  apply.  The  table  ends  at  twelve  times  twelve, 
but  not  multiplication.  So  we  can  never  finish  reading  the  Word  of  God.  Solomon 
could  finish  hia  temple,  but  he  could  not  finish  the  written  record  ;  it  never  ends,  or 
it  ends  as  the  days  end.  How  do  the  days  close  ?  To  begin  again.  Each  day  the 
sun  says  as  he  westers  in  the  golden  clouds,  not  " Farewell,"  but  only  "  Goodbye: 
we  meet  again  presently  ;  meanwhile,  sleep  well  1  "  So  with  the  Bible  ;  when  we 
have  read  it  we  want  to  read  it.  You  can  never  finish  love.  If  you  can  finish  it, 
you  never  began  it.  Love  grows.  There  are  some  persons  who  have  run  out  of 
that  passion  and  sunk  into  earthliness  and  coldness.  Then  they  never  knew  the 
inspiration  of  love.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  2-10.  To  brln?  up  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord. — The  removal  oj 
the  ark : — I.  The  timb  of  its  removal.      1.  Kemarkable  in  itself.     The  building 


CHAP,  v.]  U.  CHRONICLES.  15 

finished  in  November  was  not  dedicated  until  the  October  of  the  following  year. 
Feast  of  Tabernacles  most  suitable  time  to  dedicate  temple.  2.  Remarkable  in  its 
influence.  ♦'  The  magnitude  of  the  event  is  marked  by  the  fact  that  now  for  the 
first  time  since  the  Exodus  we  have  the  year  and  month  recorded "  (Stanley). 

II.  The  method  of  its  bemoval.  Similar  to  the  ceremony  of  removing  from  the 
house  of  Obed-edom.  III.  The  ceremonies  which  accompanied  its  eemovaju 
IV.  The  solemn  deposit  in  its  besxing-place.      (J.  Wolfendale.) 

Vers.  12,  13.  Also  the  Levites,  whlcli  were  the  sing^ers. — The  temple  ehoir  :— 

1.  Music  and  bevelation  from  God.  "  There  is  no  fuller  revelation  of  God  in 
Nature  than  is  found  in  these  laws  of  sound,  by  which  He  comes  into  the  very  heart 
of  man,  even  to  its  inmost  recesses  of  love  and  adoration;  and  it  requires  only  a 
sensitive,  child-like  heart  to  interpret  this  speechless  music  locked  witliin  Nature  as 
the  voice  of  God  pleading  to  be  let  out  into  music,  and  praise  through  the  heart  of 
man,  for  so  only  can  His  works  praise  Him."    II.  Music  as  a  science  to  cultivate. 

III.  Music  consecrated  to  its  highest  use  in  the  worship  of  God.  {Ibid.) 
Music  in  the  churches  : — I  propose  to  speak  about  sacred  music.  I.  Its  importance. 
This  is  apparent — 1.  From  the  fact  that  God  commanded  it.  Through  Paul  He 
tells  us  to  admonish  one  another  in  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs,  and 
through  David  He  cries  out,  "  Sing  ye  to  God,  all  ye  kingdoms  of  the  earth." 
I  think  there  are  more  commands  in  the  Bible  to  sing  than  there  are  to  pray. 

2.  From  the  impressiveness  of  the  exercise.  You  know  something  of  what  secular 
music  has  achieved.  One  inspiriting  national  air  is  worth  thirty  thousand  men  as 
a  standing  army.  In  the  earlier  part  of  the  late  war  the  Government  proposed  to 
economise  in  bands  of  music,  and  many  of  them  were  sent  home ;  but  the  generals 
in  the  army  sent  word  to  Washington  :  "  You  are  making  a  great  mistake.  We  are 
falling  back  and  falling  back.  We  have  not  enough  music."  Then  the  Govern- 
ment changed  its  mind  :  more  bands  of  music  were  sent  to  the  field,  and  the  day  of 
Bhameful  defeat  terminated.  Many  of  you  are  illustrations  of  what  sacred  song  can 
do.  Through  it  you  were  brought  into  the  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ.  3.  From  its 
power  to  soothe  perturbation.  4.  From  its  power  to  arouse  to  action.  II.  Some  of 
THE  OBSTACLES  IN  THE  WAT  OF  ITS  ADVANCEMENT.  1.  It  has  been  impressed  into  the 
service  of  superstition.  2.  An  inordinate  fear  of  criticism.  3.  There  has  been  so 
much  angry  discussion  on  the  subject.  4.  The  erroneous  notion  that  this  part  of 
the  service  could  be  conducted  by  delegation.  ( T.  De  Witt  Talmage. )  United 
praise  as  a  means  of  grace  : — I.  That  the  globt  of  the  Lord  began  to  appear  when 

THE    assembly    WERE    EMPLOYED    IN    PRAISE    AND    THANKSGIVINO.      PraisC    is    the    mOSt 

acceptable  service  we  can  be  engaged  in:  " Whoso  offereth  praise  glorifieth  Me." 
Prayer  is  an  expression  of  our  indigence  and  weakness.  Thanksgiving  expresseth 
our  relish  of  the  sweetness  of  benefits  received  ;  but  praise  rises  above  all  selfish 
regards,  and  directly  terminates  on  the  greatness  and  amiableness  of  God  Himself. 
The  habitations  of  the  blessed  continually  resound  with  the  high  praises  of  God. 
Did  we  praise  God  more,  He  would  give  us  greater  cause  to  praise  Him,  It  is  sug- 
gestive that  the  Lord's  Prayer  both  begins  and  ends  with  adoration.      II.  The 

SUBJECT  OF  PRAISE,  WHICH  GoD  HONOURED  WITH  THIS  TOKEN  OF   HiS   ACCEPTANCE,  WAS 

His  OWN  GOODNESS  AND  EVERLASTING  MERCY.  God  is  best  pleased  with  our  praises 
when  we  adore  and  celebrate  those  perfections  of  His  nature  which  dispose  Him  to 
pity  the  miserable  and  have  the  kindest  aspect  towards  the  children  of  men. 
in.  The  SERIOUSNESS  and  fervour  or  this  devout  assembly.  They  devoted  their 
whole  strength  and  activity,  as  if  they  were  ambitious  to  spend  themselves  in  this 
heavenly  employment.  The  devotion  of  the  soul  is  the  soul  of  devotion.  IV.  The 
harmony  and  UNANi>nTY  OF  THESE  ANCIENT  WORSHIPPERS.  "  They  Were  all  as  one, 
and  made  one  sound  to  be  heard  in  praising  and  thanking  the  Lord  "  (Acts  ii.  1-2  ; 
Psa.  cxxxiii.;  Matt.  v.  23,  24).  {R.  Walker.)  On  psalmody  .- — I.  Why  or  for 
WHAT  END  MUSIC  IS  USED  IN  RELIGIOUS  WORSHIP.  By  the  Constitution  of  our  nature 
music,  by  a  mysterious  and  potent  agency,  awakens  the  heart,  concentrates  the 
thoughts,  and  elevates  the  soul,  and  the  end  of  music  in  religious  worship  is  to 
assist  our  devotions,  by  an  application  to  our  affections  of  that  which  has  upon  them 
a  powerful  action  to  excite  and  direct  them ;  by  engaging  us  in  an  exercise  in 
which  sympathy  has  large  scope,  and  every  one  acts  upon  the  rest,  to  enable  us  to 
animate  each  other;  to  pour  forth  our  praises  and  adorations  in  a  way  that  is 
■ignificant  and  edifying,  delightsome  and  impressive.  Hence — 1.  The  absurdity  of 
making  music  in  our  religious  services  a  mere  matter  of  entertainment.  2.  All 
JdodB  of  music  which  have  no  tendency  to  aid  and  gratify  devotion  ought  tc  be 


16  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

banished  from  the  house  of  God.  11.  Some  of  the  examples  akd  auiborities  roa 
MAKING  MUSIC  A  HANDMAID  TO  EELiGioN  ( Job.  xxxviii.  7 ;  Gcii.  iv.  21 ;  Exod.  XV.  20 ; 
Psa.  xlvii.  6,  xcviii.  7 ;  Eph.  v.  19  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  30).  III.  After  what  manneb 
THE  FIRST  Christians  performed  this  service.  The  nearer  we  come  to  the 
model  of  the  primitive  Church  in  this,  the  nearer  we  shall  approach  to  perfection. 
The  psalmody  of  the  first  Christians  was  plain,  simple,  and  solemn.  Their  tunes 
were,  probably,  easy  and  few,  and  the  character  of  them  such  as  expressed  humility 
and  love,  and  was  calculated  rather  to  melt  than  to  capture  the  heart.  Afterwards, 
as  piety  declined,  it  became  necessary  to  re-excite  and  re-animate  it  by  more 
striking  music ;  and  the  whole  congregation  was  divided  into  two  parts,  which  sang 
responsive  to  each  other.  IV.  Some  brief  suggestions  how  we  mat  use  this  part 
OF  Divine  service  to  oub  own  benefit  and  the  glory  of  God.  {Bp.  Dehon.) 
Advantages  of  music  in  public  worship  : — I.  "  They  lifted  up  their  voice."  Those 
whom  nature  has  gifted  with  a  voice  ought  to  lift  it  up  not  only  in  making  responses 
but  also  in  singing  the  praises  of  their  Creator  and  Eedeemer.  The  choir  should 
not  be  deputed  by  the  congregation  to  praise  God  in  their  stead.  Its  office  is  rather 
to  lead  their  united  praises.  II.  In  acceptable  worship  the  praise  of  the  heart  must 
ACCOMPANY  THE  PRAISE  OF  THE  LIPS :  "  They  wcrc  as  one  to  make  one  sound  to  be 
heard  in  praising  and  thanking  the  Lord."  Their  hearts  were  all  at  one  "  with  the 
trumpets  and  cymbals  and  instruments  of  music."  Those  who  sing  loudly  the 
praises  of  God  should  let  heart,  lips,  and  life  be  a  well-tuned  instrument  devoted  to 
the  service  of  the  sanctuary.  The  man  who  sings  beautiful  words  with  an  angel's 
tongue,  and  leads  an  unholy  life,  pronounces  his  own  condemnation.     III.  Those 

WHO  ARE  ANXIOUS  THAT  THE  PRAISE  OF  THE  HEART  SHOULD  ACCOMPANY  THE  PRAISE  OF 
THE  LIPS  WILL  FIND    THEMSELVES    GREATLY  AIDED    BY  INSTRUMENTS  OF    MUSIC  :    "  They 

lifted  up  their  voice  with  the  trumpets  and  cymbals  and  instruments  of  music." 
Instrumental  music  unites  voices  which  would  otherwise  be  discordant,  and  removes 
the  diffidence  of  those  who  might  otherwise  be  silent  in  the  service  of  the 
sanctuary.  Instrumental  music  removes  weariness  from  the  mind,  banishes 
wandering  thoughts,  and  enables  us  to  mount  above  the  world  and  the  things  cf  the 
world,  and  to  hold  high  converse  with  the  adorable  Trinity.  It  also  conveys  to  us 
a  lively  image  of  the  worship  and  services  of  the  heavenly  sanctuary  (Eev.  xiv.  2, 3). 
We  must  learn  to  distinguish  between  the  natural  effect  of  music  on  the  senses 
and  the  spiritual  effect  of  Divine  truths  on  the  soul.  IV.  The  subject-matter  of 
praise:  God's  goodness  in  creation  and  redemption.  V.  God's  testimony  of 
approbation:  the  cloud  filled  the  house.  This  was  designed  to  impress  their 
senses  with  an  awful  reverence  of  God.  VI.  The  time  when  God  gave  them 
this  remarkable  token  of  His  approbation:  "When  they  lifted  up  their 
voice."  Conclusion :  "  So  that  the  priests  could  not  stand  to  minister  by  reason 
of  the  cloud."  These  show  that,  when  Christ  should  come,  the  priests  should 
not  minister  in  their  former  manner.  We  are  now  called  upon  to  renounce 
every  altar  but  the  Cross,  and  every  sacrifice  but  the  Victim  which  bled 
on  Calvary.  As  a  spiritual  priesthood  we  have  "  to  present  our  bodies  a  living 
sacrifice."  {Canon  Arthur  R.  Pennington.)  That  then  the  house  was  filled 
with  a  cloud  (with  chap.  vii.  1-3), — Temple  glories : — The  two  passages  of 
Scripture  which  I  have  read  to  you  give  you  two  pictures.  In  the  first  you  have 
the  cloud,  in  the  second  you  have  the  fire ;  and  in  these  two  together  you  have  the 
sacred  mystic  symbols  of  the  presence  of  the  Eternal  God  in  the  midst  of  His  people. 

I.  The  first  of  these  passages  affords  me  the  first  head  of  my  discourse.  Let  us 
note — 1.  The  occupation  in  which  the  people  were  engaged.  They  were  praising 
God— (1)  Unanimously.  (2)  Heartily.  (3)  Scripturally.  They  sung  that  old 
psalm,  "  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever."  2.  While  thus  engaged  the  cloud  filled  the 
sacred  places.  3.  Then  a  solemn  awe  fell  on  all  that  were  gathered  that  day. 
4.  The  suppliants  felt  they  might  pray  more  earnestly  because  they  prayed  surely. 

II.  The  first  text  has  had  reference  to  the  past.  The  next  dwells  specially  upon 
the  future.  After  praise,  joined  with  solemn  prayer  and  sacrifice,  the  fire  came 
down.  1.  How  much  the  preacher  wants  this  firet  Oh!  I  have  heard  a  man 
preach  a  sermon  to  which  an  angel  might  have  listened  for  its  faultless  truthfulness, 
but  it  lacked  fire  ;  but  I  have  known  another  whose  ministry  was  faulty  in  many 
respects,  but  yet  he  spoke  like  a  man  that  meant  what  he  said,  with  his  heart  boiling 
over  at  his  eyes,  and  men  were  moved  and  many  souls  were  saved.  2.  But  we  need 
this  fire  upon  the  hearers  too.  How  well  people  listen  when  they  come  to  hear 
something !  What  a  noble  effect  is  produced  when  once  the  fire  comes  upon  a 
con^jregation  1     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 


CHAP.  VI.J  II.  CHRONICLES.  17 


CHAPTER  VL 

Vebs.  1-10.  Tben  said  Solomon,  The  Lord  hath  said  that  He  would  dwell  in  the 
thick  darkness. — God  dwelling  in  darkness : — His  dwelling  in  darkness  has  a 
symbolical  meaning.  It  tells  us  of  the  darkness  in  which  Divine  and  spiritual 
things  are  enveloped.  It  conveys  to  us  this  truth — that  only  a  certain  portion  of 
light  is  given  us  in  anything,  enough  to  guide  the  conduct  but  not  enough  to  satisfy 
the  reason ;  and  it  suggests,  that  if  we  will  accept  nothing  until  we  satisfy  the 
doubts  that  may  be  raised  concerning  it,  we  shall  end  in  accepting  nothing.    I.  In 

REGARD    TO    GoD    HlMSELF,  ANT   PERFECT    KNOWLEDGE    OF    HiM    IS   IMPOSSIBLE    TO    MAN. 

The  smaller  must  comprehend  the  greater,  before  man  can  comprehend  Deity  as  He 
is  in  His  absolute  nature.  This  secrecy  of  God  is  one  of  the  attributes  and  perfec- 
tions of  the  Almighty.  He  who  sees  all  and  is  Himself  unseen  must  be  the 
Creator.  The  words  of  the  inspired  v^riter  contain  a  literal  truth,  "  It  is  the  glory 
of  God  to  conceal  a  thing."  1.  Under  this  condition  God  has  ever  revealed  Him- 
self:  to  our  first  parents  in  the  garden  of  Eden;  to  Moses  in  the  bush  and  in  the 
clouds  of  Sinai ;  to  Elijah.  He  was  present  in  each  case,  but  could  not  be  traced ; 
revealed,  but  unseen.  The  answer  of  the  old  heathen  philosopher  respecting  Him 
is  the  true  one  :  "  When  I  look  for  Him  I  find  Him  not,  when  I  look  not  for  Him  I 
find  Him  everywhere."  2.  Not  otherwise  was  it  in  the  Incarnation.  Alight  in  a 
dark  place,  and  the  darkness  comprehended  it  not.  •'  There  standeth  One  among 
you  whom  ye  know  not."  3.  It  is  the  same  with  God's  manifestation  through  the 
Holy  Spirit.  He  has  been,  and  is,  a  Presence  and  a  Power  in  the  earth,  working 
wondrously  but  inscrutably.  4.  As  with  the  Person,  so  it  has  been  with  the  Word 
of  God ;  an  obscure  light,  enough  to  try  faith,  not  to  gratify  human  speculation. 
Take,  e.g.,  prophecy.  In  its  broad  features  the  cast  corresponds  with  the  mould. 
But  when  we  enter  into  details,  the  exact  literal  completion  is  difficult  to  trace. 

5.  It  was  the  same  with  the  parables  of  Christ.     They  were  truth  under  a  veil. 

6.  So  it  is  in  numberless  instances  of  the  deeper  truths  revealed  in  Scripture. 
n.  Pass  now  to  the  providence  of  God.  It  is  a  true  idea  that  represents  God  as 
manifest  in  history,  ruling  the  world  in  righteousness  and  justice.  But  imme- 
diately we  leave  this  general  truth  and  examine  the  case  of  particular  nations  or 
particular  periods,  what  perplexity  arises  I  Civilised  nations  falling  back  into  dark- 
ness and  degradation ;  eras  of  barbarism  intervening  ;  wars  springing  up  and  throw- 
ing a  continent  back  fifty  years  in  its  progress ;  evil  of  all  kinds  permitted  ;  wrong 
and  injustice  prevailing.  "His  way  is  in  the  sea,  and  His  paths  in  the  great 
waters."  "  His  footsteps  are  not  known."  It  would  be  easy  to  illustrate  this  in 
numberless  other  instances — in  our  individual  lives  ;  in  moral  science ;  in  physical 
science.  The  lesson  from  all  this  is  that  all  truth  is  beset  with  some  obscurity,  but 
must  not  be  rejected  on  that  account.  *•  In  this  world  there  is  little  to  be  known 
but  much  to  be  done."  It  teaches  us  in  matters  of  right  and  wrong,  in  matters  of 
religion,  to  trust  but  little  to  our  reason,  but  much  to  our  inward  consciousness,  the 
instinct  of  conscience  and  the  aspirations  of  faith.    {ArcMeacon  Grant,  D.C.L.) 

Vers.  4-11.  And  he  said.  Blessed  he  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  who  hath  with  His 
hands  fulfllled  that  which  He  spake. — The  performance  of  God's  ■promise  : — I.  That 
God  deals  with  His  people  in  all  ages  by  wat  of  promise.  Adam,  Abraham,  David. 
II.  That  the  performance  of  this  promise  is  a  source  of  jot  to  them.  1.  In 
revealing  God  to  them.  2.  In  the  actual  bestowment  of  good  to  them.  HI.  That 
there  are  special  seasons  to  testify  to  God's  goodness  in  the  performance  of  Hia 
promise.  1.  Conversion.  2.  Eestoration  from  sickness  and  danger.  3.  Dedica- 
tion of  places  of  worship.     4.  Times  of  special  favour.     (J*.  Wolfendale.) 

Vers.  6-9.  Now  it  was  in  the  heart  of  David  my  father  to  build  an  house  for 
the  name  of  the  Lord  God  of  IsraeL — David's  intention  to  build  the  temple: — 
I.  Man's  purposes  are  sometimes  greateb  than  his  power.  Limitation  of — 
1.  Character.  2.  Body.  3.  Culture.  4.  Circumstances — want  of  means  or 
liberty.  5.  Destiny.  6.  Life.  U.  The  importance  and  value  of  these  GR.icioua 
BUT  unfulfilled  INTENTIONS.  Eamest  purposes,  sincere  desires,  are  facts,  and  as 
facts  will  be  recompensed.  1.  They  are  facts  to  God.  2.  They  are  facts  to  those 
who  cherish  them.  3.  Unfulfilled  intentions  are  not  without  their  practical 
influence  upon  society.  IIL  The  comfort  which  these  considerations  are 
CALCULATED  TO  AFFORD  TO — 1.    The  poor  and  uneducated.     2.    The  suffering 

10 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

3,  Those  who  are  called  to  premature  death.  4.  All  good  men  in  the  presence  of 
their  imperfect  lives.  (W.  L.  Watkinson.)  The  rejected  service,  but  approved 
motive : — I.  A  bejected  service.  Here  is  a  good  man  bent  upon  a  service  which  he 
is  not  permitted  to  perform.  It  is  an  instance  of  a  man's  purposes  outrunning  the 
possibilities  of  his  life.  There  are  many  reasons  why  a  man  should  sometimes  not 
be  allowed  to  accomplish  self-imposed  tasks,  although  they  may  be  the  outcome  of 
very  fine  motives.  There  were  reasons  in  David's  life.  David  had  been  a  man  of 
war,  and  as  such  had  shed  human  blood  (1  Chron.  xxii.  8).  There  was  an  incon- 
gruity which  God  recognised,  which  had  escaped  David's  attention,  between  shed- 
ding blood  and  building  a  sanctuary  for  God.  Then,  again,  there  may  be  some, 
special  hindrance  in  the  age  in  which  a  man  lives,  or  the  circumstances  by  which  he 
is  surrounded,  which  makes  the  postponement  of  the  work  necessary.  A  man  may 
live,  as  we  say,  before  his  age,  he  may  project  great  purposes  into  human  life,  and 
yet  God  may  say  to  him,  "  Stop,  the  motive  is  pure  enough,  and  it  is  accepted  as 
Buch,  but  the  world  is  not  yet  ready ;  My  providence  must  mature  things,  and  we 
must  wait."  Again,  there  may  be  something  in  God's  design — world  ward :  that- 
design  which  includes  time  and  eternity  within  the  scope  of  its  operation — which, 
may  put  a  veto  upon  any  such  scheme,  his  accomplishing  tasks  which  are  in  them- 
selves very  praiseworthy,  and  which  are  prompted  by  pure  and  exalted  motives. 
Now  I  have  said  that  every  man  who  has  lived  to  a  purpose  must  know  some  time 
or  other  what  such  a  disappointment  as  this  means.  Why,  this  book  tells  us  that 
God  has  put  eternity  into  a  man's  heart.  God  has  put  eternity  into  a  man's  heart;, 
therefore  the  impulses  of  eternity,  or  the  aims  and  purposes  which  take  in  eternity, 
are  there.  Man  is  not  a  mere  creature  of  time  :  he  strikes  great  outlines,  not  as  the- 
mere  creature  of  time,  but  as  one  who  is  to  live  for  ever.  Thus,  as  long  as  it  is  true 
that  God  has  put  eternity  into  a  man's  heart,  and  has  only  put  seventy  years,  or  at 
most  eighty  or  ninety  years,  into  his  life,  there  must  be  an  overlapping  of  purposes 
and  designs  in  relation  to  attainments  in  this  life.  It  is  impossible,  therefore,  that 
he  should  fulfil  all  his  designs,  or  fill  up  the  outlines  of  these  plans,  in  a  brief  life. 
David  was  bent  upon  building  a  house  unto  the  Lord  :  he  was  denied  that  privilege : 
but  who  will  say  that  his  life  was  therefore  a  failure  ?  David,  after  all,  was  per- 
mitted to  do  a  nobler  work  than  building  a  sanctuary  for  God,  great  as  that  privilege 
would  have  been.  He  sang  out  the  hymns  which  were  destined  to  become  the 
inspired  psalter  for  all  ages.  Now,  there  are  some  men  who  escape  these  disappoint- 
ments ;  but  at  what  cost  1  The  men  who  never  aim  at  high  things,  who  never 
strike  the  outline  of  any  noble  work ;  men  who  never  allow  the  immortal  spirit  which< 
is  within  them  to  design  immortal  things,  and  therefore  things  which  can  never  be 
accomplished  in  a  mortal  life,  doubtless  escape  these  disappointments,  but  at  the  cost- 
of  degrading  that  which  is  noblest  and  best  in  their  natures.  II.  The  appeoved 
MOTIVE :  •'  Whereas  it  was  in  thine  heart  to  build  an  house  for  My  name,  thou  didst 
well  that  it  was  in  thine  heart."  Many  a  man  would  have  said,  "Ah,  poor  David, 
aU  the  inspiration  of  a  great  purpose,  all  the  patient  planning,  and  all  the  earnest 
endeavour  to  accomplish  the  task  on  his  part,  have  been  useless.  The  Divine  veto 
has  put  an  end  to  all."  Nay,  not  so.  David  does  not  occupy  the  same  position 
Godward  or  manward  which  he  would  have  occupied  if  he  had  never  designed  sa 
devout  and  exalted  a  scheme.  1.  It  was  well  for  David  himseK — well  for  his  own 
soul  that  this  thought  took  possession  of  it.  Remember  the  circumstances.  David 
had  built  for  himself  a  house  with  cedared  roof,  but  was  then  shocked  with  the- 
thou'^ht  of  his  dwelling  in  a  palace  while  his  God  dwelt  in  the  old  tattered  tabernacle 
of  the  wilderness.  Surely  that  recoil  itself  was  ennobling.  2.  It  was  well,  too,  for 
David's  outward,  as  well  as  his  inner,  life.  While  engaged  in  gathering  materials- 
for  the  temple,  he  was  saved  from  doing  things  less  worthy  of  his  calling  and. 
position  as  the  anointed  of  the  Lord.  While  engaged  at  this  work  he  had  less  dis- 
position to  engage  in  conflict  with  his  neighbours.  3.  It  was  also  well  that  this  was 
in  his  heart,  because  by  gathering  the  materials  for  the  building  of  the  temple  be 
had  furthered  the  object  by  preparing  the  way  for  seme  one  else  to  finish  the  task. 

4.  It  was  well,  too,  because,  now  that  he  knew  that  he  himself  would  never  be  per- 
mitted to  build  the  house,  he  would  have  an  opportunity  of  exercising  a  self-denial' 
which  he  would  not  have  done  if  his  had  been  the  privilege  of  completing  the  task. 
Thus  there  was  a  spiritual  blessing,  an  enriching  grace,  an  ennobling  providence  in 
this  denial.  Now,  we  see  this  often  in  life.  It  is  a  law  of  human  life  that  some 
men  originate  a  work,  and  others  accomplish  it.  There  is  nothing  final  aboui- 
man's  work  on  earth  ;  we  pick  up  the  thread  where  other  hands  dropped  it,  and  soon 
will  drop  it  into  younger  hands  than  ours.    God's  designs  cover  millenniums.    Look 


CHAP.  Ti.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  19 

at  daily  life.  There  is  a  man  who  founds  a  house,  or  originates  a  business :  a  man 
who  begins  in  a  small  room,  and  by  dint  of  genius  and  perseverance,  under  God's 
blessing,  so  extends  his  business  that  it  well-nigh  takes  up  one  side  of  a  street.  That 
man  passes  away.  But  he  has  had  dreams  greater  than  his  accomplishment. 
Among  his  later  thoughts  was  that  something  else  might  be  done,  but  he  was  denied 
the  privilege  of  giving  embodiment  to  those  thoughts.  His  son  takes  his  place. 
Ah,  and  when  the  motive  is  never  attained,  still,  if  it  be  noble,  it  is  not  fruitless. 
There  is  that  child  overboard  :  a  man  leaps  after  it,  but  the  storm  rages  and  the 
ocean  heaves  and  lounges  terribly,  so  that  the  man  at  length  fails  to  rescue  the 
child.  Who  shall  say  that  it  was  not  well  that  he  thought  of  it,  and  risked 
his  own  life  in  the  noble  endeavour?  It  is  heaven  that  will  supply  the  final 
solution,  and  it  is  the  future  that  will  crown  the  edifice  of  tasks  unfinished 
in  this  our  mortal  life,  although  they  were  originated  with  high  motives 
and  far-reaching  purposes.  David  entered  eternity,  not  as  a  disappointed  man, 
but  as  one  who  was  inspired  with  an  exalted  aim  that  he  bequeathed  to  a  suc- 
ceeding generation,  whose  noblest  activities  it  set  going.  (D.  Davies.)  Pious 
purposes  frustrated  but  rewarded : — I.  The  Lord  notices  the  pious  purposes 
OF  THE  HEART.  And  here  the  following  points  require  attention.  1.  He  is 
omniscient.  "  All  things  are  naked  and  open  unto  the  eyes  of  Him  with  whom  we 
have  to  do."  "  I  the  Lord  search  the  heart."  We  judge  by  external  manifesta- 
tions, and  know  the  tree  by  its  fruit ;  but  He  understands  our  thought  afar  off. 
2.  The  omniscient  Jehovah  approves  the  godly  purpose.  It  is  acceptable  to  Him 
through  Jesus  Christ,  as  it  springs  from  faith  and  love,  as  it  means  glory  to  God 
and  goodwill  toward  man.  The  Lord  knows  and  approves  your  desire  to  serve 
Him,  whatever  obstacles  may  arise  to  prevent  the  fulfilment.  "  The  desire  of  a 
man  is  his  kindness,"  and  is  accepted  as  such.  3.  He  sees  the  effect  of  His  grace. 
"  From  Him  all  good  things  do  come."  And  where  is  the  believer  who  will  not 
gratefully  own,  "  Thou  hast  wrought  all  our  works  in  us  "  ?  We  have  no  purposes 
which,  in  the  sight  of  God,  are  godly,  until  a  good  work  is  begun  in  us ;  for,  as 
depraved  creatures,  we  are  all  alienated  from  the  life  of  God.  Our  purposes  are 
worldly  and  sinful.    II.  It  may  please  the  Lord,  in  the  exercise  of  infinite 

WISDOM  AND  GOODNESS,  TO  DISAPPOINT  US  WITH  REGARD  TO  THE  ACCOMPLISHMENT  OF  OUB 

PURPOSES  OF  SERVING  HiM.  1.  To  imprcss  US  with  the  conviction  of  His  indepen- 
dence. He  is  the  "  Lord  God  Almighty,"  who  is  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly 
above  all  that  we  ask  or  think.  Such  dispensations  of  Providence  may  be 
appointed  to  teach  the  Church  of  God  that  its  great  Head,  when  He  thinks  proper, 
can  dispense  with  the  instrumentality  we  expected  Him  to  employ.  2.  Another 
reason  for  the  Divine  conduct  in  the  case  in  point  is  to  induce  the  spirit  of  sub- 
mission and  resignation.  And  can  you  say,  "  Thy  will,  my  God,  Thy  will  be  dona  "  ? 
We  naturally  like  our  own  way.  Our  "  purposes  are  broken  off,"  even  "  the 
thoughts  of  our  heart."  God  thwarts  us,  not  to  grieve,  but  to  teach  us  deference  to 
His  will.  3.  We  may  add  another  reason  why  God  takes  away  the  young  and 
nsef  ul,  to  prevent  idolatry.  HI.  If  the  Lord  thus  prevent  the  fulfilment  of  the 
PIOUS  PURPOSE,  He  tenderly  says,  "  Thou  hast  well  done  in  that  it  was  in  thine 
EtEART."  IV.  God  graciously  rewards  the  intention,  even  as  much  as  if  it  had 
BEEN  accomplished.  It  is  our  painful  duty  to  charge  the  sinner  to  remember  that 
God  notices  and  takes  account  of  his  evil  devices.  (S.  Eldridge.)  The  unfulfilled 
ideal: — A  religious  ideal  may  be  defined  as  a  product  of  sanctified  imagination,  and 
sanctified  imagination  may  again  be  described  as  faith  considered  in  its  free,  intel- 
lectual expression.  An  ideal  is  the  outline  picture  of  possible  usefulness  and  success, 
conceived  under  the  incitements  of  faith,  hope,  and  love  inherent  in  the  new  life.  An 
ideal  that  is  born  of  pure  religious  life,  and  not  of  mere  worldly  ambition,  is  a  child 
of  God's  inspiration  in  the  second  degree  of  descent.  Every  Christian  worker  has 
his  ideals.  The  ideals  cherished  by  God's  people  vary  with  the  requirements  of  the 
age.  David's  was  to  build  a  temple  ;  ours  probably  concern  the  building  of  living 
stones  into  that  peerless  temple  in  which  God  shall  be  worshipped  throughout  aU 
ages.  The  value  of  unfulfilled  ideals  is  a  lesson  we  all  need  to  learn.  Only  a  slight 
fraction  of  the  zeal  that  promised  so  much  at  first  ever  seems  to  bear  visible  fruit. 
We  see  the  ideals  of  fellow-labourers  cut  short  by  the  act  of  God,  almost  before  they 
have  touched  their  coveted  tasks.  The  achievements  of  the  best  lives  do  not  equal 
the  measure  of  ardent  aspiration,  and  God  rewards  for  aspiration  as  well  as  for  per- 
fected deed.  There  are  also  ideals  the  secret  of  whose  frustration  is  to  be  found  in 
our  own  hearts.  We  had,  perhaps,  miscalculated  our  strength,  or  pride  mingled 
with  our  ideals,  and  Ck>d  was  holding  as  back  from  their  realisation  till  pride  had 


no  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  vi. 

been  extinguished  and  faith  and  hope  and  humility  had  grown  to  proportions  com- 
mensurate with  the  success  He  was  about  to  give  us.  But  we  do  not  understand  the 
meaning  of  God's  delays,  and  so  our  ideals  of  work  and  obligation  and  evangelistio 
success  have  been  relegated  to  the  lumber-room  and  have  been  lying  there  in  ignoble 
dust  and  dry-rot  for  years.  A  famous  traveller  has  written  a  book  to  tell  us  how 
remunerative  the  abandoned  goldfields  of  Midian  may  yet  become.  Some  of  the 
most  productive  silver  mines  of  South  America  are  mines  that  were  worked  by 
Spanish  conquerors,  forsaken  for  two  and  a  half  centuries,  and  are  now  being 
worked  again.  Boundless  spiritual  wealth  and  possibility  lie  hidden  in  the  half- 
forgotten  ideals  of  our  youth  and  early  manhood.     I.  The  influence  exerted  by 

THE    UNFULFILLED   IDEA    UPON   THE    PEESONAlj    CHARACTER.       It  is  jUSt  COnCCivable  that 

religious  life  may  exist  without  the  help  and  influence  of  ideals,  but  it  will  only  be 
marked  by  feebleness  and  insipidity.  It  will  find  its  appropriate  emblem  in  the 
dead-level  of  the  prairie  rather  than  in  the  towering  majesty  of  the  forest.  The 
moment  you  give  up  your  large  ideals  you  cease  to  feel  the  necessity  for  large 
sacrifice,  large  heroism,  generous  self-forgetting  toil.  An  ideal  occupies  precisely 
the  same  relation  to  religious  growth  and  power  that  the  faculty  of  imagination  in 
the  child  does  to  the  character  and  success  of  the  after-man.  Students  of  social 
science  tell  us  that  the  education  provided  in  the  parish  workhouse  supplies  no 
element  to  stimulate  the  imagination  of  the  child,  and  that  the  little  ones  placed  cnder 
the  regime  grow  up  dull,  sullen,  void  of  interest  in  everything  about  them,  and 
without  a  single  ambition  to  improve  themselves.  In  the  course  of  time,  after  every 
potential  interest  and  aspiration  is  battered  down  and  deadened,  the  child  is  turned 
into  the  world ;  and  it  is  almost  invariably  found,  after  a  few  years  of  indolence, 
stolidity,  and  mild  crime,  the  child  returns  to  the  workhouse  to  shelter  its  incom- 
petency and  approaching  age.  Let  imagination  be  denied  its  proper  function  in  the 
religious  life,  and  the  result  wiU  be  to  limit  that  life  to  a  very  low  and  abject  plane. 
The  professor  of  religion  who  is  without  an  inspiring  ideal  is  spending  the  life  of  a 
creeping,  torpid,  spiritual  pauper.  All  our  religious  virtues  gain  or  lose  as  our 
ideals  of  religious  work  are  grasped  or  abandoned.  There  is  a  logical  impediment 
to  the  growth  of  faith  in  the  heart  of  the  man  who  has  given  up  his  ideals.  All 
faith  is  twofold  in  its  action,  personal  and  vicarious,  and  the  one  type  of  action  can 
no  more  go  on  without  the  other  than  the  systole  can  be  separated  from  diastole  in 
the  action  of  the  heart.  Decay  in  the  faith  you  exercise  on  behalf  of  the  world  will 
bring  decay  in  the  faith  exercised  on  your  own  behalf.  Hence  it  is  that  in  genuine 
revivals  of  religion  the  sanctification  of  believers  and  the  conversion  of  the  ungodly 
always  proceed  by  equal  paces.  An  ideal,  if  deferred  in  its  fulfilment,  or  even 
unfulfilled  in  the  precise  form  in  which  you  first  conceived  it,  will  be  a  perpetual 
fountain  of  health  and  prosperity  to  your  own  soul.  Doubtless  the  whole  character 
of  David  was  raised  and  ennobled  by  the  ideal  he  had  so  long  cherished  within  his 
heart.  If  you  cannot  see  the  worth  of  your  unfulfilled  ideals,  God,  who  traces  their 
influence  upon  character,  can ;  and  if  the  inward  ear  were  not  heavy  with  the 
world's  distracting  babel,  you  would  hear  the  testimony  of  His  favour  and  approval, 
"  Thou  didst  well  that  it  was  in  thine  heart."  Never  weigh  against  your  moral  and 
spiritual  interests  the  temporal  sacrifices  you  make  for  your  ideals.  II.  These 
ideals  move  the  uind  of  Almiohtt  God.  The  ideal  touches  with  some  lasting 
impression  the  unforgetting  God,  and  passes  into  one  of  the  abiding  motive-forces  of 
the  universe  He  governs  to  redeem.  There  is  a  spiritual  doctrine  of  the  conserva- 
tion of  energy  which  is  the  heritage  of  all  the  true  people  of  God.  When  Providence 
puts  its  arrest  upon  the  progress  of  our  ideals,  every  fraction  of  the  force  lives  on. 
Blessed  doctrine  of  the  conservation  of  energy  1  David  held  some  clue  to  it  when 
he  exclaimed,  "  Are  not  my  tears  in  Thy  book  ?  "  Christ  was  recognising  it  when 
He  spoke  the  words  that  immortalised  Mary's  love :  "  Wheresoever  this  gospel  shall 
be  preached,  there  shall  also  this  that  this  woman  hath  done  be  told  for  a  memorial 
of  her."  The  writer  of  the  Hebrews  felt  it  when  he  exclaimed,  "  God  is  not 
unrighteous  to  forget  your  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love  which  ye  have  showed 
toward  His  name."  There  is  a  God-moving  force  in  our  own  keeping.  How  is  this 
power  to  be  brought  out  and  applied  ?  It  must  be  stimulated  and  increased  by 
temporary  delay.  There  is  a  danger  of  one-sidedness  in  the  action  of  our  ideals. 
They  sometimes  stimulate  the  power  of  work  without  stimulating  at  the  same  time 
the  twin  power  of  prayer.  You  thrust  on  this  side,  and  smite  on  that,  and  accom- 
plish nothing.  God  seems  to  confound  you,  and  you  are  ready  to  give  up  all  your 
ideals  in  your  vexation  and  impatience.  God  wants  you  to  drop  the  rude  staff  and 
take  np  the  jewelled  weapon  of  all-prayer.    Again,  when  our  ideals  are  postponed 


CHAP.  VI.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  21; 

in  their  accomplishment  it  is  that  faith  may  be  made  perfect,  and  that  we  may  cast 
ourselves  more  fully  upon  God.  What  frightful  infidels  we  should  become  if  we- 
saw  our  ideals  leap  up  to  immediate  completion  at  our  mere  touch  as  by  a  process 
of  rapid  tropical  growth  !  You  lose  power  over  the  mind  of  God  when  you  begin  to 
throw  away  your  ideals.  III.  Think  of  the  influence  of  David's  ideal  upon  the 
ACTUAL  work  OF  ERECTING  THE  TEMPLE.  David's  ideal  became  the  accomplished  work 
of  his  successor.  Your  towering  ideals  of  to-day,  if  grasped  with  fidelity  and  followed 
up  as  far  as  God  permits,  shall  be  a  secured  platform  for  the  action  of  the  next 
generation.  Conclusion  :  1.  You  should  pitch  your  ideals  high  enough  to  make 
sure  they  will  be  called  extravagant  by  all  those  in  whose  hearts  is  the  love  of  thfr 
world,  and  not  the  love  of  the  Father.  Never  mind  how  daring  they  are,  if  the  pure 
love  of  God  and  men  enters  into  their  deepest  essence.  2.  Above  all  things  try  to 
keep  pride  out  of  them.  3.  Having  once  formed  your  ideals,  hold  them  fast.  Some 
men  sneer  at  the  ideals  of  their  youth,  as  if  they  were  a  species  of  wild  oats  they  had 
been  sowing,  and  not  God-begotten  and  immortal  seed.  Do  not  be  satirist  where 
God  is  admirer,  and  set  your  small,  cynical  sneers  at  yourself  over  against  His 
word  of  approbation.  •'  Thou  didst  well  that  it  was  in  thine  heart."  {Thomas  Q. 
Selby.) 

Vers.  12-15.  And  he  stood  before  tlie  altar  of  the  Lord. — David^t  charge  to 
Solomon  fulfilled: — I.  Solomon's  affectionate  remembrance  of  his  earthlt 
FATHER.  II.  His  reverence  of  his  heavenlt  Father.  What  sublimity  and 
yet  what  humility  is  there  evinced  in  this  prayer  of  the  king !  Had  he  been  an 
outcast  like  Manasseh,  praying  to  God  for  restoration  to  his  lost  throne,  he  could 
not  have  humbled  himself  deeper  in  the  dust.  Listen  to  his  lowly  words  :  "  But 
will  God  in  very  deed  dwell  with  men  on  the  earth  ?  Behold,  heaven  and  the 
heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain  Thee ;  how  much  less  this  house  which  I  have 
built  1 "  &c.  Who  is  this  on  bended  knees  and  with  bended  heart  that  offers  up 
these  lowly  petitions  ?  A  king  ?  Yea,  I  say  unto  you,  and  more  than  a  king.  'Tis 
"  Solomon  in  all  his  glory."  True  greatness  is  ever  founded  on  humility.  As  it  is 
in  the  natural  world,  so  is  it  in  the  moral  world — the  higher  the  structure,  the 
deeper  the  foundation.  The  lofty  Alps,  upon  whose  snowy  head  the  stars  of  heaven 
seem  to  rest,  have  their  foundations  deep  in  the  heart  of  the  earth.  Never  was.. 
Solomon  so  exalted,  never  was  he  nearer  heaven,  than  when  on  bended  knees  we 
behold  him  a  suppliant  at  the  footstool  of  God's  throne.  The  highest  rank,  the 
loftiest  genius,  the  most  splendid  crown,  receive  a  double  splendour  from  the  grace 
of  humility.  (H.  Cay.)  Solomon'' $  prayer: — The  great  proof  of  the  blessing 
given  to  Solomon  is  to  be  found  in  the  prayer  which  he  prayed  at  the  dedication  of 
the  temple.  No  man  could  have  prayed  that  prayer  without  help.  This  we  should 
have  said  about  it  in  all  honesty  if  we  had  found  it  in  Sanscrit ;  if  we  had  exhumed 
it  out  of  Indian  libraries,  it  would  have  been  due  to  the  author  to  have  said,  "  You 
never  dreamed  that  dream ;  it  was  a  vision  of  God."  Probably  there  is  no  such 
prayer  in  all  literary  records.  If  ever  that  prayer  be  excelled,  it  will  be  by  the  Son 
of  God  alone,  and  His  excelling  of  it  will  be  by  contrast  rather  than  by  comparison. 
There  is  not  a  selfish  word  in  it.  It  is  not  a  Jew's  prayer ;  it  is  a  man's  prayer. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  18.  But  will  God  in  very  deed  dwell  with  men  on  the  earth? — The 
condescending  God: — I.  Let  me  call  your  attention  to  the  fact  of  the  Divine 
GREATNESS ;  becausc  it  is  only  in  the  view  of  that  that  we  can  be  prepared  to  appre- 
ciate the  Divine  condescension.  "  Behold,  heaven  and  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot 
contain  Thee  1  "  1.  What  a  view  have  we  here  of  the  immensity  of  God  !  We  our- 
selves are  among  the  stars,  careering  through  space,  myriads  of  miles  distant  now 
from  where  we  were  at  the  beginning  of  the  service,  but  though  perpetually  changing 
our  place  in  the  universe,  ever  surrounded  by  His  presence,  and  enclosed  by  His 
essence.  2.  Equally  awful  is  God's  relation  to  duration,  or  His  eternity.  3.  Here 
is  also  a  recognition  of  God's  infinite  supremacy.  U.  And  will  this  Uncontain- 
ABLE  Being  actually  manifest  Himself  to  man  ?  And  here  be  it  remarked  there 
was  but  one  religion  in  the  ancient  world  that  knew  anything  of  a  condescending 
God — but  one — the  Jewish.  The  so-called  gods  of  Olympus  could  be  mean. 
Intriguing,  self-debasing;  but  they  had  it  not  in  their  power  to  condescend. 
Morally,  they  had  no  height  from  which  they  could  stoop.  But  the  history  of  the 
Divine  conduct,  as  recorded  in  the  Bible,  had  been,  from  the  first,  a  history  of  con- 
descension.   Look  back  to  God's   first  act   of   condescension.     Sin  might  have- 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

produced  eternal  silence.     Yet  it  was  to  man,  the  sinner,  that  He  took  the  first  step 
in  His  career  of  condescension  by  speaking  to  him.     Time  rolled  on  ;  and  though 
the  depravity  and  guilt  of  man  went  on  increasing,  there  comes  before  us  in  the 
text  another  stage  in  the  Divine  regard.    He  appoints  a  place  for  the  symbol  of  His 
presence  to  dwell  in,  and  where  man  might  be  always  welcome  to  approach  and 
commune  with  Him.     This  was  a  vast  advance  in  the  condescension  of  God.    All 
this,  astonishing  as  it  was,  was  only  preliminary.     What  if  He  should  take  our 
nature  and  make  a  temple  of  that !     This,  indeed,  was  an  act  beyond   human 
conception.     What !  will  God  in  very  deed  dwell  with  man — as  man — upon  the 
earth  ?    HI.  Who  does  not  feel  the  wonderfulness  of  the  Divine  condescension  ? 
And  what  part  of  His  conduct  is  not  condescending?   and  what  part  of  His 
condescension  is  not  a  wonder?    Ascend  to  the  first  act — creation — for  here  the 
wonder  begins.     But  all  this,  a  man  might  say — much  as  it  enlarges  my  views  of 
the  Divine  condescension — all  this  I  can  believe.     It  relates  only  to  His  natural 
greatness.    Low  and  limited  as  His  creatures  may  be,  they  are  not  as  yet  supposed 
to  have  revolted,  sinned.     What  might  have  taken  place  we  know  ;  and  it  is  that 
which  makes  what  He  has  done  so  amazing.     Here  the  real  wonder  begins.     That 
He  should  have  stooped  to  ask  for  a  hearing  in  a  world  filled  with  noisy  praises  of 
itself  and  its  idols.     IV.  But  this  wondebfulness  of  the  Divine  condescension 
IS  NO  VALID  objection  TO  ITS  REALITY  AND  TRUTH,     This  is  the  Very  gist  of  the 
text,  that,  amazing  as  the  conception  is,  it  is  yet  a  fact.     1.  Let  us  not  be  told 
by  a  pretended  philosophy  that  such  a  Divine  interposition  is  out  of  all  proportion 
to  man's  importance   in  the  universe.      The  objection  rashly  assumes  that  the 
incarnation  of  the  Son  of   God  can  have  no  relation  to  any  other  part  of  the 
universe  ;  for  if  it  have,  the  objection  fails.    His  relation  to  our  world,  indeed,  will 
always  be  specific  and  unique.     But  we  can  conceive  of  no  world  to  which  His 
incarnation  and  death  for  the  redemption  of  our  fallen  race  can  be  made  known, 
without  having  their  views  of  God  enlarged,  and  their  motives  to  holiness  increased. 
As  an  affair  of  moral  government,  it  is  fraught  with  interest  for  all  the  subjects  of 
God's  universal  empire.  The  planetary  insignificance  of  the  earth,  the  very  circum- 
stance which  man  makes  a  reason  for  disbelieving  it,  may  be  an  element  investing 
it,  in  the  eyes  of  other  worlds,  with  transcendent  interest.     They  may  behold  in  it 
only  a  further  illustration  of   the  principle  on  which   God   uniformly  acts,  of 
"choosing  the  things  which  are  not  to  bring  to  nought  things  that  are."   They  may 
see  in  it  a  designed  intimation  that  there  is  no  world,  however  insignificant — no 
islet  in  space,  however  remote — which  shall  not  be  filled  with  His  glory.    2.  Neither 
let  a  mock  humility  pretend  that  such  condescension  is  too  great  for  man's  belief. 
The  right  point  of  view  is  not  from  the  dust  in  which  man  is  lying,  but  from  the 
throne  on  which  God  is  sitting.     The  reason  of  the  whole  is  in  God.     Do  you  not 
see,  then,  that,  wanting  in  wonderfulness,  the  Divine  manifestation  would  have  been 
wanting  in  analogy  with  creation  and  providence — wanting  in  the  very  means  of 
authentication  as  a  Divine  act?    It  only  stands  in  a  line  with  other  wonders.    But 
the  end  to  be  obtained  by  it  is  incomparably  greater.     Creation  and  providence  are 
but  introductory  and  preparatory  to  it,     3.  Nor  let  the  mere  formalist  hmit  the 
displays  of  Divine  condescension  to  the  past.     The  ordinances  of  religion  are  with 
him  memorials  of  past  rather  than  means  of  present  grace — tombs  rather  than 
temples.     True,  God  has  been  in  the  past,  and  will  be  in  the  future,  as  we  do  not 
look  for  Him  in  the  present.     Looking  back,  Shekinah  and  vision  are  there, 
miracle,  prophecy,  and  inspiration,  an  incarnate  Saviour  and  a  descending  Spirit. 
We  expect  not  now  a  repetition  of  such  scenes.     Looking  forwards,  we  regard  the 
future  as  stored  with  supernatural  events,     "  Wherever  two  or  three  are  gathered 
together  in  My  name,  there  am  I  in  the  midst  of  them."     The  history  and  the 
prophecy  are  only  for  limited  times,  the  promise  is  for  all  time,  large  as  the  heart  of 
God,  and  the  fullest  utterance  of  it.     And  is  not  every  truly  Christian  Church  a 
proof  that  the  manifestation  of   God  is  still  in  process,  and  His  condescension 
unabated  ?    Wonderful  as  that  condescension  is,  they  can  dispense  with  all  formal 
proof  of  it,     V.  What,  then,  are  the  means  of  securing  the  Divine  presence, 
AND  the  emotions  SUITABLE  TO  IT  ?     (J.  HarHs,  D.D.)         The  condescension  of 
God : — The  temple  which  Solomon  built  may  be  viewed  as  a  type  of  the  body 
of  our  Redeemer.     It  pleased  Him  to  tabernacle  amongst  us.     This  is  a  truth 
that  seems  to  enter  into  the  very  rudiments  of  our  religious  knowledge ;  and  we 
are  ready  to  give  immediate  assent  to  the  truth  that  Jesus  took  our  nature  upon 
Him.     The  more  we  dwell  on  this  great  truth,  the  more  inclined  are  we  to  exclaim 
with  something  like  the  astonishment  of  Solomon,  "  Is  this  trae?  Will  God  Indeed 


CHAP.  Ti.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  23 

dwell  with  men  on  the  earth  ?  "  In  order  that  our  examination  may  have  its  full 
weight  on  the  mind,  and  lead  to  profitable  thought  and  action,  I  appeal — I.  To  thb 

ANSWBB  THAT  WOtTLD  BE  PEOMPTED  BY  NATURAL  FEAR.       Think  of  the  majestj  of  God 

think  of  His  holiness !  The  only  thought  which  the  fear  of  man's  natural  heart 
suggests  when  he  hears  of  God  visiting  the  earth  is  the  thought  of  wrath  and 
judgment.  There  can  be  no  breathing  freely  in  the  presence  of  God  when  there  is 
the  sense  of  unpardoned  sin  on  the  conscience.     II.  To  the  answer  brought  to 

THIS  question  BT  THE  GOSPEL  OF  GRACE   AND    SALVATION.       III.    To  THE  EXPERIENCE  OF 

God's  believing  people.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  Him  " 
(Isa.  Ivii.  15-19  ;  Psa.  Ixviii.  18).  IV.  To  the  hopes  of  Christ's  waiting  Church. 
All  that  hath  been  manifested  as  yet  of  the  Divine  condescension  and  glory  is  but 
a  sample  of  the  manifestations  which  this  world  is  destined  to  receive.  V.  Practical 
THOUGHTS  SUGGESTED.  1.  What  would  be  our  deserving  if  God  were  to  visit  us 
according  to  our  iniquities?  2.  Will  you  not  seek  to  experience  the  wondrous 
grace  of  God  our  Saviour  ?     {W.  Cadman,  M.A.)         God  manifest  in  the  flesh  : — 

1.  The  mightiest  monarch  of  his  time  hesitates  not  to  appear  in  the  midst  of  his 
subjects  in  the  attitude  of  supplication,  to  lead  the  devotions  of  his  people  and  to 
put  himself  on  a  level  with  the  humblest  individual  in  the  congregation  of  Israel. 

2.  That  the  exclamation  of  the  text  primarily  referred  to  the  permanent  abode  of 
the  cloud  of  glory  over  the  mercy-seat  in  the  temple  is  evident  from  the  circum- 
stances in  which  it  was  uttered,  but  though  the  words  had  never  been  intended  to 
be  otherwise  applied,  there  was  enough  of  the  Divine  condescension  manifested 
even  in  that  dispensation  to  call  forth  the  tribute  of  admiration  here  offered  by  the 
King  of  Israel.  3.  Of  the  state  of  the  heathen  world,  and  of  the  propensities  of  his 
own  subjects,  Solomon  could  not  be  ignorant ;  and  when  he  reflected  how  little  the 
character  both  of  one  and  the  other  corresponded  with  the  forbearance  which  they 
had  experienced,  and  the  revelations  of  the  Divine  will  by  which  they  might  have 
profited,  he  had  good  reason  to  stand  astonished  at  the  Divine  condescension,  and 
to  say,  "But  will  God  in  very  deed  dwell  with  men  on  the  earth?"  4.  To  what 
extent  the  mind  of  Solomon  was  enabled  to  foresee  or  understand  the  mystery  of 
the  Incarnation  we  do  not  venture  to  determine.  But  Christians  cannot  fail 
to  perceive  that  if  the  whole  scheme  of  redemption  had  been  fully  unfolded  to  him, 
he  could  not  have  more  emphatically  expressed  the  sentiments  which  that  event 
was  fitted  to  awaken  than  in  the  words  which  he  has  here  applied  to  the  appearance 
of  the  Divine  glory  in  the  temple.  5.  Whatever  might  be  the  amount  of  the 
revelation  granted  to  Solomon,  we  can  be  in  no  doubt  about  the  practical  application 
which  it  becomes  us  to  make  of  the  text.  It  was  dictated  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  to 
be  put  on  record  as  a  portion  of  those  Scriptures  that  testify  of  Christ.  I  would 
advert — I.    To  the  simple  fact  that  the  glorious  event  contemplated  in  the  text 

HAS  ACTUALLY  BEEN  REALISED  IN  THE  APPEARANCE   OF   THE    LORD    JeSUS   ChRIST  IN  TH2 

LIKENESS  OF  OUR  SINFUL  FLESH ;  and  that  in  His  person  "  God  has  in  very  deed 
dwelt  with  men  on  the  earth."  The  symbol  by  which  God  gave  intimation  of  His 
presence  in  the  Old  Testament  Church,  though  fitted  to  keep  alive  in  their  minds 
an  habitual  impression  of  His  being  and  supremacy,  and  to  furnish  to  them  a 
permanent  pledge  of  security  and  protection,  so  long  as  they  adhered  steadfastly  to 
His  covenant,  yet  did  not  immediately  address  itself  to  the  sympathies  and  affec- 
tions of  their  nature.  They  were  reminded  in  every  act  of  religious  worship  of  the 
infinite  distance  at  which  they  stood  removed  from  the  High  and  Holy  One  of  Israel. 
But  when  He  condescended  to  appear  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  the  barriers 
which  had  formerly  shut  up  the  way  of  approach  were  broken  down  ;  mankind 
were  permitted  to  hold  intimate  converse  with  Him  in  the  same  way,  and  through 
the  same  medium,  by  which  they  hold  intercourse  with  one  another.     II.  To  thb 

PURPOSE    FOR   which    GoD    WAS    MANIFESTED    IN    THE    FLESH.      It   WaS    not   Only  that, 

through  the  medium  of  human  nature,  He  might  convey  to  mankind  a  more 
distinct  conception,  and  leave  upon  them  a  more  vivid  impression  of  the  Divine 
character;  but  that  He  might  take  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself. 
{R.  Gordon,  D.D.)        Divine  condescension  : — I.  To  the  certainty  and  evidence  of 

THE    FACT    THAT    GOD   HAS   DWELT,  AND    STILL  DWELLS   WITH  MEN   ON   THE  EARTH.        We 

cannot  doubt  the  fact  when  we  reflect — 1.  On  the  essential  omnipresence  and 
universal  agency  of  God.  2.  That  God  has  thus  spiritually  dwelt,  and  still  does 
dwell  with  men  on  the  earth.  II.  To  the  greatness  of  His  condescension  and 
OBACB  IN  THIS  respect.  (D.  DickiTison,  D.D.)  God  dwelling  with  men  (for  the 
opening  of  a  place  of  worship) : — We  should  make  the  erection  of  a  house  for  God's 
worship,  and  our  first  services  therein  to  invite  His  presence,  an  occasion  for 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tx. 

contemplating  the  grandeur  of  His  majesty,  the  wonders  of  His  condescension,  and 
bowing  down  our  souls  in  profound  abasement  before  Him.  I.  The  benevolent 
CONDESCENSION  OF  GoD.  This  Is  illustrated  in  the  text,  which  suggests — 1.  The  type  : 
Solomon's  temple.  2.  The  antitype:  the  body  of  Christ.  3.  The  consequence: 
God  dwelling  in  the  Church.  What  is  a  Church?  •' A  congregation  of  faithful 
men."  As  ii  so  many  temples  were  placed  together,  window  opening  to  window, 
and  door  to  door  ;  light  answering  to  light,  and  warmth  generating  warmth,  and 
the  perfume  of  one  apartment  mingling  with  another,  and  songs  responding  to 
Bongs ;  so  Christians,  dwelling  together,  become  one  great  temple,  which  we  call  a 
Church  of  the  living  God.  Just  as  many  single  drops  run  into  a  mighty  stream,  so 
many  believers,  pardoned  and  regenerated  and  animated  by  the  Spirit  of  God, 
become  one  glorious  Church ;  and  Christ  is  its  Head,  and  He  will  dwell  in  it  even 
while  the  world  stands.  H.  The  pbostration  and  humiliation  of  soul  which  so 
BECOME  us  before  THIS  GLORIOUS  GoD.  When  we  contemplate  the  God  whom  we 
adore,  we  may  justly  ask — 1.  What  can  we  think  of  this  building?  It  is  a  place 
for  prayer,  praise,  and  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  2.  What  of  the  worshippers? 
We  ought  to  have  an  ardent  desire  to  become  more  fit  for  His  abode,  more 
enlarged,  more  heavenly,  more  intellectual,  more  spiritual,  more  fervent, 
more  consecrated  to  Him.  3.  What  of  the  worship?  (James  Bennett,  D.D.) 
God  dwelling  with  men : — The  whole  Jewish  dispensation  was  typical.  Everywhere 
throughout  the  system  things  seen  and  temporal  were  employed  as  premonitory 
emblems  of  things  not  seen  and  eternal.  It  thus  foreshadowed  coming  revelations 
at  once  by  events,  by  offices,  and  by  rites.  The  offices  of  the  high  priest,  prophets, 
judges,  and  kings,  with  the  extraordinary  powers  attached  to  them,  all  foretold  the 
supreme  authority  of  that  Saviour  in  whom  they  terminated.  And,  as  regards, 
finally,  prefigurative  rites,  I  need  point  only  to  the  countless  sacrifices  which 
exhibited,  by  anticipation,  Jesus,  our  passover,  sacrificed  for  us.  I.  Wb  aee  to 
inquire  what  is  IMPLIED  IN  GoD  DWELLING  WITH  MEN.  1.  The  language  is  expressive 
of  loving  fellowship.  When  we  traverse  a  country,  and  amid  the  rivers,  and 
forests,  and  mountains,  of  the  landscape,  descry  a  human  dwelling,  we  spon- 
taneously ascribe  reciprocal  affection  to  its  inmates,  a  harmony  far  more  beautiful 
than  that  of  Nature's  scenery  by  which  it  is  surrounded.  Besides,  though  one  may 
dwell  with  another  whom  he  disregards  or  even  hates,  because  separation  is  not 
practicable  or  not  convenient  in  the  circumstances,  it  cannot  be  so  with  God,  who 
is  infinitely  superior  to  all  such  restraints.  When  He  takes  up  His  abode  with  any, 
it  must  be  in  affection ;  for  in  aU  He  does  He  consults  exclusively  His  own  good 
pleasure.  The  capacity  in  which  He  dwells  with  His  people  is  that  of  a  Father ; 
and  where  He  occupies  this  footing  He  will  entertain  its  sympathies  regarding 
those  with  whom  He  associates  with  more  than  the  tenderness  of  paternal  endear- 
ment, 2.  This  phraseology  is  expressive  of  intimate  fellowship.  Now,  affection 
necessarily  prompts  to  fellowship.  The  objects  of  complacent  regard  engage  the 
outgoings  of  the  loving  mind,  and  heart  unbosoms  itself  to  heart  with  freedom  and 
confidence.  Unless,  then,  God  revealed  Himself  graciously  to  us,  and  heard  our 
supplications  to  Him,  and  all  this  not  coldly  and  formally,  but  kindly  and 
familiarly,  the  language  of  the  text  would  be  inappropriate,  and  He  could  not  be 
said  to  dwell  with  men  on  the  earth.  3.  The  language  is  expressive  of  prolonged 
fellowship.  A  passing  interview  does  not  constitute  dwelling.  The  designation  is 
not  applied  even  to  frequent  visits.  And  so  for  God  to  dwell  with  us  is  to  be  with 
us  not  now  and  then  merely,  but  always — in  the  day  to  direct  our  steps,  in  the  night 
to  guard  our  slumbers,  in  prosperity  to  dispel  forgetfulness,  and  in  distress  to  avert 
despair — when  youth  impels  and  manhood  invigorates  and  age  enfeebles.  II.  Thb 
APPARENT  UNLIKELIHOOD  OF  GoD  THUS  DWELLING  WITH  MEN.  1.  Men  are  insiguificant 
before  God.  Viewed  relatively  to  fellow-creatures,  the  human  race  occupies  an 
elevated  position  in  the  scale  of  being.  But  all  this  elevation  vanishes  when  we 
think  of  God.  If  we  were  to  compare  God  and  men  by  comparing  their  works,  we 
would  not  easily  find  any  accomplishment  more  commendatory  of  human  resources 
than  this  same  temple  of  Solomon,  in  all  its  magnificence  and  splendour.  And 
whence,  then,  were  its  materials  drawn  ?  They  were  brought  from  the  storehouses 
of  Jehovah.  He  furnished  every  stone  and  timber  ;  and  if  He  had  not  they  might 
have  sought  for  them  in  vain.  All  the  elements  of  this  edifice  they  received  from 
God — and  whence  did  He  derive  them?  He  called  them  out  of  nothingness. 
Again,  how  many  were  engaged  in  building  this  temple  ?  We  learn  from  Scripture 
that  there  were  about  a  hundred  and  eighty  three  thousand  six  hundred  men. 
But  where  were  these  when  God  laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth  ?    Once  more, 


CHAP.  VI.]  11.  CHRONICLES.  25 

how  long  was  this  temple  in  being  built  ?  After  every  stone  was  hewn  and  ready 
for  its  place  seven  years  were  stiU  occupied,  as  we  learn  from  Scripture,  in  rearing 
and  finishing  the  sacred  fabric.  The  period  may  have  been  requisite  for  the  per- 
formance in  the  hands  of  feeble  man ;  but,  oh  !  how  different  from  the  achievements 
of  Him  whose  mightiest  deed  follows  instant  on  His  word — "  who  says,  and  it  is 
done — commands,  and  it  stands  fast  "  1  But,  finally,  what  were  the  dimensions  of 
that  erection  on  which  the  skill  and  toil  of  such  vast  multitudes  were  so  long 
expended?  Compared  with  the  neighbouring  dwellings  of  Jacob,  it  would,  doubt- 
less, appear  vast  and  majestic.  But  measure  the  width  of  it,  and  say  if  it  be  as 
broad  as  the  earth  :  stretch  a  line  to  its  loftiest  summit,  and  say  if  it  be  high  as 
heaven.  What  proportion  bears  this  capacious  abode  to  the  temple  of  the  visible 
creation?  As  man  enters  its  gates  he  seems,  beside  its  massive  pillars,  and  under 
its  exalted  canopy,  to  sink  into  less  than  his  usual  littleness.  But  think  of  placing 
God  in  it,  and  how  diminutive  it  appears !  2.  On  the  wickedness  of  men.  And, 
after  all,  shall  He  love  these  persons  ?  What  can  He  love  in  them  ?  III.  That, 
unlikely  as  it  may  seem,  in  some  views,  God  wills  to  dwell  with  men  on  the 
EARTH.  1.  God  has  dwelt  with  men  in  the  person  of  Christ.  2.  God  dwells  with 
men  by  the  mission  of  His  Spirit.  (D.  King.)  The  dwelling-place  of  God  : — The 
temple  of  King  Solomon  has  sown  its  seeds  all  over  the  world ;  has  reproduced 
itself  in  every  latitude  and  zone.  •'  But  will  God  in  every  deed  dwell  with  men 
upon  the  earth  ?  "  Do  we  want  the  temple  now  ?  There  are  many  men  living  to- 
day who  could  with  truth  make  answer,  "  As  far  as  we  ourselves  and  our  spiritual 
life  are  concerned,  "  No !  We  have  outgrown  the  Testament ;  Christ  is  our  temple, 
our  way  to  God.  Through  the  great  mercy  and  grace  of  God,  and  His  perpetual 
help,  we  have  risen  to  that  constancy  and  closeness  of  fellowship  with  Him  that 
every  place  is  holy  ground ;  and  we  often  find,  in  our  solitude,  a  sweetness  and 
depth  of  joyful  communing  that  we  never  find  amid  the  distraction  of  a  public 
assembly."  To  them  God  does  indeed  "  dweU  with  men  upon  the  earth,"  but  not 
in  temples  made  with  hands;  they  walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  live  in  the  Spirit.  But 
was  it  always  so  with  them  ?  Did  they  never  want  the  temple  ?  Was  it  always  as 
easy  to  them  to  find  God  in  the  street  as  it  is  now  ?  Who  of  us,  that  can  rejoice  in 
this  as  his  portion  to-day,  can  tell  how  much  he  owes  of  his  present  realisation  of 
God  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places,  to  those  temple  walls  which  now  have  vanished 
from  his  spiritual  sight  ?  As  in  learning  our  first  lessons,  our  letters,  and  the  like, 
we  are  learning  things  whose  use  we  know  not  yet,  though  by  and  by  the  alphabet 
and  spelling-book  are  laid  aside,  so  in  the  beginning  of  our  spiritual  life  this  temple 
is  our  alphabet  and  primer,  where  we  do  things  that  are  not  always  full  of  our  spirit, 
nor  of  our  intelligence ;  but  in  process  of  time  we  grow  up  to  them ;  we  rise  up  to 
the  spirit  and  comprehension  of  our  own  deed ;  and  by  and  by  the  temple  is  not 
necessary  to  us  for  our  own  sakes,  save  as  the  voice  of  truth  shall  sound  within  its 
walls,  and  we  go  on  learning  the  things  which  are  our  life.  But  are  these  the  men 
who  forsake  the  assembling  of  themselves  together,  •'  as  the  manner  of  some  is  "  ? 
No  !  They  know  that  the  temple  wants  them,  if  they  do  not  want  the  temple ;  that 
they  are  the  spiritual  material  of  which  the  temple  is  composed ;  and  that  their 
presence  and  part  in  its  worship  is  essential  to  the  fulfilment  of  its  end.  Their 
hearts  make  the  atmosphere  that  infects  all  weaker  souls ;  their  songs  are  the  wings 
on  which  the  younger  and  feebler  ones  rise  up  to  God.  They,  with  their  temple  and 
service  of  song,  and  their  lowly  prayers,  are  mighty  antidotes — how  mighty,  God 
only  knows ! — to  that  perilous  movement  of  the  world's  life  that  would  soon  drag 
humanity  down  to  the  level  of  the  dust,  and  blend  our  godless  life  with  that  of  the 
beasts  of  the  earth.  {G.  W.  Conder.)  Will  God  dwell  with  men  ? — The  human 
Boul  in  its  better  moments  longs  for  tne  knowledge  and  the  friendship  of  God  ;  and 
to  many  a  heart  the  question  comes  as  it  did  to  Solomon,  *•  WiU  God  in  very  deed 
dwell  with  men  on  the  earth  ?  "  I  understand  this  question  to  have  its  own  answer, 
and  that  answer  to  be,  "  God  wiU  indeed,  most  assuredly,  dwell  with  men  on  the 
earth."  I.  The  circumstances  under  which  the  words  were  spoken  are  full  of 
interest.  II.  In  the  whole  history  op  revelation  we  have  answers  to  this 
QUESTION.  1.  The  context.  2.  The  Incarnation  of  Christ.  8.  The  effusion  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  III.  How  can  we  know  that  God  dwells 
WITH  MEN?  1.  We  may  know  this,  as  a  matter  of  reason,  by  what  we  perceive  of 
wisdom  and  design  in  the  material  world.  2.  We  may  know  this  from  what  we  find 
in  His  Word,  and  in  the  events  of  history  of  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  showing 
that  a  governor  must  evidently  be  present  carrying  out  His  own  great  plans.  3.  The 
consciousness  of  His  spiritual  presence  with  us  as  individuals.    IV.  God  dwellik» 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cnxr.  n. 

WITH  Tjs  IS  MARKED  IN  VARIOUS  WAYS.  1.  He  who  has  God  dwelling  in  him  will 
manifest  externally  the  Spirit  of  God.  He  that  dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth  in  God 
and  God  in  him.  2.  We  recognise  God  ofttimes  in  what  we  term  special  provi- 
dences— the  special  care  which  He  exercises  over  us.  I  know  when  I  speak  of  a 
special  providence  there  may  be  some  who  at  once  revert  to  the  fact  of  universal 
and  immutable  law,  and  say,  "  May  I  expect  the  laws  of  nature  to  be  changed  for 
me?"  I  do  not  so  understand  the  special  providence  of  God.  There  is  in  this 
immutability  of  natural  law  a  spiritual  influence  that  is  over  and  above  and  beyond 
all  that  law.  The  mountain  may  tremble ;  its  fall  is  not  suspended  because  I  go 
by  ;  but  just  before  I  come  and  the  mountain  is  about  to  fall  I  may  be  led  to  think 
of  gathering  some  beautiful  flower,  or  turning  aside  to  see  some  peculiar  formation 
of  rock,  and  I  stop  to  examine,  and  the  mountain  falls.  No  violation  of  law,  and 
yet  I  am  saved.  I  am  saved  because  God  touches  my  heart,  because  the  Spirit  of 
God  communicates  with  the  heart  of  man.  There  is  no  conflict  here,  there  need  be 
none  thought  of.  God's  hand  guides  me  safely  through,  by  an  influence  simply  on 
this  heart  of  mine.  And  yet  I  may  not  be  conscious  of  this  influence.  He  leads 
me  simply  because  He  has  me  in  His  heart ;  He  is  dwelling  with  me ;  He  knows 
all  things  and  governs  all  things,  and  He  knows  how  to  guide  me  safely.  Man  is 
acted  on  in  every  part  of  his  nature  by  the  unseen.  He  steps  off  the  roof  of  a 
house,  and  he  will  be  dashed  to  pieces.  What  is  it  ?  A  strange  something  you  call 
gravitation,  that  holds  him  to  the  earth.  This  earth,  the  moon,  the  planets,  we 
know,  are  so  held  ;  and  yet  no  man  ever  saw  the  chain  that  binds  the  earth  to  the 
sun.  If  God  binds  every  particle  of  matter  in  my  body  to  the  sun,  the  great  centre 
a  hundred  millions  of  miles  away,  can  He  not  bind  my  spirit  to  Himself  ?  If  the 
sun  attracts  every  particle  of  matter  in  my  frame,  may  not  God  attract  me  ?  Is 
there  anything  unreasonable  here?  Then,  again,  I  go  to  the  sea.  I  put  my  family 
on  board  the  vessel.  I  am  not  at  all  disturbed ;  I  know  there  may  be  storms ;  but 
the  ship  is  staunch,  and  then  the  pilot  knows  where  he  is  going.  He  is  not  going 
on  rocks;  the  ocean  has  been  sounded.  He  is  not  going  to  the  wrong  port; 
there  is  a  needle  in  the  compass  that  guides  him.  And  what  is  that  needle? 
A  little  piece  of  steel,  that  has  no  thought  and  no  power  of  any  kind,  but 
it  has  been  touched  with  a  magnet,  and  now  it  turns  northward.  And  relying 
on  that  which  no  man  has  ever  seen,  it  sends  its  company  safely  across  the  sea. 
What  is  that  power?  It  is  invisible.  And  if  God  can  touch  a  piece  of  steel  that  can 
neither  see  nor  feel  nor  think,  and  it  responds  to  the  influence,  may  He  not  touch 
tny  mind,  my  soul,  my  thought,  by  His  Holy  Spirit,  and  make  it  respond  to  His 
will  ?  Is  there  anything  unreasonable  in  it  ?  V.  What  are  the  effects  that  are 
rro  FOLLOW  from  oub  recoqnisino  God  as  dwelling  with  men?  The  erection  of 
churches.  Public  worship.  Hearts  divinely  prepared  to  hear.  Divinely  inspired 
preachers.     {Bp.  Matthew  Simpson.) 

Vers.  26-31.  When  the  heaven  Is  shut  up,  and  there  Is  no  rain. — Perilt  to 
agriculture : — I.  A  rebuke  to  rationalism  in  natural  evils.  All  meteorological 
phenomena  are  under  God's  control.  In  aU  afflictive  events  God  speaks  to  cities 
and  nations.  II.  A  moral  design  in  the  infliction  of  natural  evils.  1.  To 
requite  justice.  2.  To  lead  to  God.  IH.  A  place  for  prater  in  the  removing 
NATURAL  EVILS.  This  denied  by  many.  Prayer  may  be  necessary  for  man's 
highest  culture.  We  do  not  classify  with  powers  in  physical  nature.  It  is  not  a 
natural  but  a  moral  power.  The  ordination  of  God  leaves  room  for  prayer. 
Prayer  may  be  one  of  the  laws  of  the  universe  as  certain  in  its  sphere  as  the  laws 
of  heat  or  of  gravitation  in  their  peculiar  realms.  Neither  history,  Scripture,  nor 
experience  forbid  us  to  pray  in  times  of  national  distress.  {J.  Wolfendale.) 
Pardon  and  punishment  (chap.  vi.  27,  with  2  Sam.  vii.  14  and  1  Cor.  li.  32) : — I 
take  these  passages  in  a  group  because  they  all  set  forth  a  similar  view  of  a 
great  subject.  They  all  take  a  natural  and  what  we  may  call  an  untechnical  view 
of  the  subject  of  Divine  forgiveness.  The  prophet  Nathan  and  Solomon  and  the 
apostle  Paul  all  saw  that  sin  produced  its  natural  consequences  of  pain  and 
penalty  in  good  men  and  bad  men  alike,  and  though  all  believed  in  the  reality  and 
triumph  of  mercy,  and  were  quite  sure  of  God's  readiness  to  forgive,  yet  they  per- 
ceived that  Divine  forgiveness  did  not  remove  those  consequences,  at  least  in  this 
life.  Pardon  does  not  mean  immunity  from  punishment.  I.  What  is  punish- 
ment? 1.  "  Behold,"  says  the  apostle  Paul,  "  the  goodness  and  severity  of  God." 
That  there  is  an  element  of  righteous  indignation  in  God  the  whole  frame  of 
Nature  testifies ;   the  Scriptures  frequently  declare ;    and  our  own  moral  sense 


CHAP.  VI.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  27 

demands  that  it  should  be  so.  "We  cannot  conceive  of  a  perfect  Being  without  the 
capacity  of  such  indignation.  The  very  methods  of  the  Divine  rule  absolutely 
involve  pain.  But  there  are  things  in  the  world  more  to  be  dreaded  than  pain. 
There  are  evils  so  great — so  great  in  themselves — that  it  is  worth  while  enduring 
all  the  pain  we  can  conceive  in  order  to  get  rid  of  them.  Righteousness  is  the  one 
ruling  principle  of  all  life.  In  the  interests  of  righteousness  the  universe  is 
governed.  Character,  now  and  always,  owes  all  its  moral  worth  to  the  acknowledg- 
ment of  the  supreme  majesty  of  the  law  of  righteousness.  2.  Now  perhaps  we 
can  understand  something  of  the  meaning  of  punishment.  It  is — (1)  The  expres- 
sion of  the  indignation  of  a  perfectly  holy  God.  It  is  not  an  act  of  vengeance,  nor 
anger  which  is  excited  by  the  thwarting  of  the  Divine  will.  To  God  there  is 
nothing  so  dear  as  justice,  truth,  love ;  and  when  men,  from  selfish  love  of 
pleasure,  or  equally  selfish  wilfulness,  violate  these,  and  become  cruel,  unjust, 
false,  the  holy  indignation  of  the  holiest  of  all  beings  springs  forth  in  punishment, 
and  God  becomes  a  "  consuming  fire."  (2)  Punishment  is  the  very  guardian  of 
life.  If  a  man  takes  poison,  or  ii  he  thrusts  his  hand  into  the  fire,  he  suffers  pain. 
Pain  is  not  the  evil  to  be  feared,  but  the  effect  of  the  act  upon  the  whole  frame. 
The  poison  saps  the  life — the  pain  is  the  mere  symptom  of  the  fact.  The  fire  is 
destroying  the  tissues  of  the  body — the  pain  is  the  evidence  of  it.  Pain  is  like  the 
beacon  which  warns  the  mariner  of  the  dangerous  reef  or  the  sunken  rock. 
(3)  Punishment  and  pain  are  the  means  of  healing.  To  any  one  ignorant  of 
medical  science,  a  surgeon  performing  an  operation  would  seem  cruel  and  unfeeling. 
But  he  cuts  down  into  the  living  fiesh  with  his  keen  knife  and  inflicts  the  sharpest 
pain  because  he  knows  that  in  no  other  way  can  the  life  be  saved.  In  the  hands 
of  a  benevolent  God  suffering  is  surgical.     II.  Whzn  wb  havb  sought  pabdon 

AND   FOUND   MERCY  WB   MAT   STILIj   HAVB  TO   SUITEB   THE   CONSEQUEKCES    OP    PAST   SIN. 

Pardon  consists  of  two  parts — 1.  The  cessation  of  resentment.  2.  The  removal  of 
consequences.  These  two  parts  are  not  always  united  in  time.  I  may  cease  from 
anger,  cease  to  feel  resentment  against  my  erring,  disobedient  child  when  he 
repents,  and  yet  may  allow  him  to  suffer  the  natural  consequences  of  his  wrong 
doing.  My  love  may  be  so  deep  and  tender  that  I  suffer  in  his  suffering,  and  even 
more  poignantly  than  he,  but  I  let  it  go  on.  And  God  does  so.  Our  duty  is  to 
bow  submissively,  to  recognise  Divine  love,  and  to  endure  patiently  the  chastise- 
ment that  seeks  to  cure  us  of  our  faults.     (Philip  W.  Darnton,  B.A.) 

Vers.  34,  35.  If  Thy  people  go  out  to  war. — The  lawfulness  of  war : — I  shall 
take  these  words  as  a  political  maxim  and  moral  precept  comprehending  these  two 
propositions.     I.  That  here  is  couched  a  supposition,  that  upon  just  grounds 

AND  LAWFUL  CAUSES  ANT  NATION  MAT  DECLARE   AND   MAKE  WAB   UPON  ANOTHER,  implied 

in  the  expression,  •'  If  they  go  out  to  war  against  their  enemies,  by  the  way  that 
God  should  send  them."  The  just  grounds  of  war  according  to  the  Laws  of 
Nations  and  Arms  are — 1.  Those  that  concern  the  maintaining  the  public  faith. 
2 .  Those  that  respect  the  vindication  of  the  honour  of  the  Crown.  3.  Those  that 
relate  to  the  prevention  of  the  great  and  apparent  dangers  that  threaten  the 
general  peace.    II.  The  positive  dutt  and  obligation  that  all  nations  lie  under, 

in  case  of  the  declaration  of  such  a  WAB,  TO  SEEK  GoD  WITH  A  SOLEMU 
HUMILIATION  AND  REPENTANCE,  FOB   HiS  ASSISTANCE   AND   SUCCOUR  TO   MAINTAIN   THEIB 

CAUSE  OR  RIGHT.  1.  Because  war  is  an  appeal  to  God  for  the  justice  of  a  national 
cause.  2.  Because  of  the  great  dangers  and  uncertainties  that  attend  war.  How 
many  armies  have  their  designs  and  themselves  ruined  by  the  little  advantage  of 
ground,  the  pass  of  a  river,  a  sudden  surprise,  an  undermining  stratagem,  the 
alteration  of  the  weather,  the  fall  of  snow  or  rain,  the  misunderstanding  of  a  word 
given,  the  spreading  a  false  rumour  or  alarm  ;  nay,  the  start  of  a  horse,  the  mere 
error  of  the  eye,  or  the  information  of  a  deserter  I  Which  has  overturned  all 
policy,  made  power  impotent,  and  victory  unexpected.  How  many  fleets  have 
been  dissipated  with  a  mist,  broken  and  sunk  with  a  storm,  and  blown  up  with  a 
spark  of  fire  !  (Eccles.  ix.  11 ;  chap.  xiv.  11 ;  Lev.  xxvi.  8).  3.  Because  it  will 
engage  God  to  be  on  our  side,  and  to  vindicate  our  cause.  4.  Because  this  solemn 
invocation  of  the  Divine  assistance,  joined  with  a  public  humiliation  and  repen- 
tance, will  be  a  means  to  avert  those  judgments  that  were  otherwise  due  to  our 
sins,  and  which  we  should  have  reason  to  fear  might  prevent  the  success  of  our 
arms,  and  provoke  God  to  give  us  up  to  the  will  of  our  enemies.  5.  Because 
prayer  is  an  absolutely  necessary  and  conditional  means  to  success  in  war.  (Henry 
Sacheverell,  D.D.)        The  wise  man's  prayer  for  the  warrior  (preached  on  a  day  of 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  VT. 

general  humiliation  on  account  of  war) : — Under  most  of  the  ordinary  occurrences 
of  life,  there  is  the  strongest  tendency  to  overlook  the  relationship  subsisting 
between  ourselves  as  human  beings  and  the  providence  of  God.  In  many 
instances  it  is  only  on  extraordinary  occasions  that  individuals  are  first  led  to  a 
practical  recognition  of  the  supremacy  of  God.  It  is  when  sickness  produces  its 
enfeebling  eiiects  on  the  frame ;  or  when  the  angel  of  death  gains  admittance  to 
their  dwellings ;  or  when  adversity  demonstrates  to  them  the  vanity  of  centring 
their  affections  on  earthly  treasures ;  or  when  pestilence  extends  its  ravages 
throughout  the  land,  or  when  war,  with  its  horrors,  thins  their  armies  at  home  or 
abroad ;  it  is  often  under  such  circumstances  that  men  are  primarily  led  to 
think  of  their  souls  and  their  Maker.  An  occurrence  which  shall  generate  in  the 
minds  of  any  a  fitting  sense  of  their  dependence  for  succour  on  the  Lord  of  heaven 
and  earth,  in  whatever  way  that  occurrence  may  have  originated,  must  at  least  be 
overruled  by  Providence  for  good.     I.  That  when  a  people  are  engaged  in  the 

CHASTISEMENT  OF  THEIR   ENEMIES    IT  IS  REQUIBED    THAT    THET    SHOULD    HAVE    EECOURSB 

TO  UNITED  SUPPLICATION,  that  their  efforts  might  be  crowned  with  victory.  Men  are 
as  much  bound  as  ever  to  make  national  entreaties  for  the  bestowal  of  national 
mercies,  and  for  the  successful  issue  of  legitimate  national  movements.    II.  Thb 

SPIRIT  IN  which  our   UNITED    SUPPLICATIONS    SHOULD    BE    OFFERED.       Ws    should    pray, 

as  penitents  for  pardon ;  as  sinners  for  salvation ;  as  patriots  for  our  country ; 
and  as  followers  of  Him  who  has  taught  us  to  love  our  enemies,  for  those  enemies 
themselves.    (H.  B.  Moffat,  M.A.) 

Vers.  40,  41.  Now,  my  God,  let,  I  beseech  Thee,  Thine  eyes  toe  open,  and  let 
Thine  ears  he  attent  unto  the  prayer  that  is  made  in  this  place. — The  dedication 
of  the  Temple  (a  dedication  sermon) : — The  text  is  a  prayer  to  God — I.  For  the 
NOTICE  OF  His  eye.  "  Let  Thine  eyes  be  open  towards  this  house."  That  you  may 
worship  under  His  approving  eye.  1.  Your  worship  must  be  spiritual.  2.  Tour 
worship  must  be  that  of  faith.  3.  You  must  come  with  purity.  II.  For  thh 
ATTENTION  OF  His  EAR,  *'  Let  Thiuc  ear  be  attent  unto  the  prayer  that  is  made  in 
this  place."  What  prayers  wUl  be  made  here  ?  1.  Personal  prayers.  2.  Prayers 
lor  ministers.  8.  Prayers  for  the  inhabitants  of  this  town.  4.  Prayers  for  our 
country.  5.  Prayers  for  the  extension  of  Christ's  kingdom.  III.  For  thb 
INSTRUCTIONS  OF  His  WORD.  "  Arisc  Thou  and  the  ark  of  Thy  strength."  "We 
consider  this  part  of  the  text  a  prayer  for  the  administration  of  instruction ; 
because  the  ark  contained  the  tables  of  the  ten  commandments  and  a  copy  of  the 
whole  law,  which  the  priests  were  appointed  to  teach.  IV.  For  a  holy  and 
BUCCESSFUii  PRIESTHOOD.  "  Let  Thy  priests,  0  Lord  God,  be  clothed  with  salvation, 
and  let  Thy  saints  rejoice  in  goodness."  1.  No  minister  can  fully  know  the  truth 
but  by  experience,  and  therefore  cannot  teach  it.  2.  No  minister  can  conduct  his 
office  with  a  proper  feeling,  without  experience,  and  that  experience  constant. 
8.  Success  is  promised  to  no  unconverted  man.  {R.Watson.)  Solomon' s  prayer 
at  the  dedication  of  the  temple : —  There  are  two  things  of  which  we  are  here 
reminded,  I.  Our  own  sanctuary.  "Let  Thine  ears  be  attent  unto  the  prayer 
that  is  made  in  this  place."  We  must  carry  a  home-feeling  with  us  into  the 
sanctuary,  if  we  wish  it  to  be  to  us  the  house  of  God  and  the  gate  of  heaven. 
There  are  some  who  are  utter  strangers  to  this  home-feeling ;  they  have  no  place  of 
worship  which  they  can  call  their  own.  A  wandering  spirit  in  religion  is  destructive 
to  vital  religion  in  the  heart.  II.  Our  earnest  supplication.  "  Arise,  0  Lord 
God,"  (fee.  This  prayer  is  extremely  suitable  in  the  exercises  of  public  worship, 
because  it  includes  aU  that  can  be  included  both  for  minister  and  people.  {R.  G. 
Dillon,  A.M.)  The  dedication  of  the  temple  : — I.  An  unequivocal  recognition 
OF  the  necessity  of  the  Divine  presence  in  order  that  a  Church  may  be  a  sourcb 
of  real  benefit  to  the  people.     II.  The  indispensable  necessity  that  ministers 

SHOULD  have  a  Di  VINE  COMMISSION  AND  SUITABLE  PERSONAL  QUALIFICATIONS.  III.  ThB 
PARAMOUNT  OBJECT  AS  IDENTIFIED  WITH  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD,  WORTHY  OF  THE  MIGHTY 
APPARATUS     PROVIDED     AND     BROUGHT    INTO     ACTION — THE     ETERNAL     BENEFIT     OF     THE 

PEOPLE.     (J.  Davies,  D.D.)  God  in  His  temple  : — I.  A  description  of  God's 

HOUSE.  "  Thy  resting  place."  Eest  is  not  used  here  in  the  sense  of  ceasing  from 
labour,  but  in  the  sense  of  remaining  or  staying.  Here  we  have  the  outward 
building  for  the  worship  of  God  represented.  1.  As  the  heart  of  national  life. 
2.  As  the  special  place  where  God  meets  His  people.  II.  A  prayer  for  Christian 
ministers.  Some  look  upon  a  preacher  as  a  social  reformer.  Some  as  a  lecturer 
on  morality.     Some  as  a  well-directed  pattern  of  propriety  to  keep  up  appearance 


CHAP.  VI.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  29 

and  show.     The  true  light  in  which  to  regard  a  preacher  is  that  of  a  messenger  of 
salvation.     III.    A  petition  for  the  PEOPiiE.     "Let  Thy  saints   rejoice,"  &c. 
1.  An  important  state.    A  condition  of  joy.     2.  A  necessary  condition.     The  only 
true  ground  of  rejoicing  is    goodness.     (Homilist.)        Solomon's  prayer  for  the 
sanctuary : — I.  Explain  Solomon's  views  of  the  sanctuary.    He  here  represents 
it  as  the  i-esting-place  of  God.     Solomon  was  fully  justified  in  this  view  by  Psalm 
cxxxii.,  which  was  supposed  to  have  been  composed  in  reference  to  the  erection  of 
the  temple.     There  his  father  prays,  "  Enter  Thou  into  Thy  rest,"  and  afiirms — 
*♦  For  the  Lord  hath  chosen  Zion,  He  hath  desired  it  for  His  habitation  :  here  will 
I  dwell  for  ever,  for  I  have  desired  it."    And  further  than  this,  the  Divine  presence 
had  dwelt  in  the  cloud  that  overshadowed  the  mercy-seat  in  the  tabernacle.     The 
presence  of  God  was  manifested  in  the  temple,  differently  from  everywhere  beside. 
In  hell,  it  is  displayed  by  His  frown — in  heaven,  by  the  unveiling  of  His  glory — 
throughout  the  earth,  in  the  exuberance  of  His  goodness  ;  but  in  the  sanctuary, 
by  the  manifestation  of  His  grace  and  compassion.     It  is  called  His  "  resting- 
place,"  because  He  regards  it  with  complacency  and  delight.     This  delight,  how- 
ever, did  not  arise  from  the  splendour  with  which  Solomon's  temple  was  adorned, 
for  the  Infinite  Mind,  which  from  its  own  vast  resources  could  call  into  existence 
the  temple  of  the  universe,  must  be  far  superior  to  delight  in  any  mere  material 
edifice.     God  does  not  now  dwell  visibly  in  the  midst  of  His  people,  nor  does  He 
confine  the  manifestation   of  His  presence  to   one  temple,  as  in  the  times  of 
Solomon;   for  the  resting-place  of   God   is   wherever  His  people  meet  together, 
whether  in  the  mountain,  den,  cave,  cottage,  cathedral.     1.  The  sanctuary  is  the 
scene  of  the  manifestation  of  His  character  as  a  God  of  grace.     In  the  temple  this 
was  taught  by  God  appearing  reconciled  by  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  the 
sacrifice  on  the  mercy-seat.     This  appears  more  clearly  in  the  Christian  sanctuary, 
where  God  appears  in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself  by  Jesus  Christ, 
through  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant.     2.  The  sanctuary  is  the  scene  of 
the  worship  of  His  people.     The  temple  of  old  was  thus  distinguished.     3.  The 
sanctuary  is  the  sphere  of  the  accomplishment  of  the  purposes  of  Divine  grace  in 
reference  to  man.     It  was  one  great  means  of  keeping  alive  the  worship  of  the  true 
God,  and  of  preserving  the  existence  of  religion  amongst  them.     Thus,  on  a  limited 
scale,  every  Christian  sanctuary  is  exerting  a  most  salutary  influence  upon  the 
present  and  eternal  destinies  of  the  children  of  men.     These  were  reasons  which 
induced  so  much  delight  in  the  mind  of  God  in  reference  to  the  temple  of  Solomon, 
and  in  the  scene  of  His  people's  assembling  now.     These  are  objects  worthy  of 
affording  delight  even  to  the  mind  of  the  eternal  God.     Is  the   sanctuary  His 
resting-place  ?      We  see  the  propriety  of  our  being  anxious  that  this  house  of 
prayer  should  be  distinguished  by  attention  to  its  external  appearance.    Is  the 
sanctuary  His  resting-place?    It  ought  to  be  the  object  of  our  warm  affection.     Is 
the  sanctuary  His  resting-place  ?    Then  it  ought  to  be  the  scene  of  our  constant 
resort.    II.  Solomon's  desires  on  behalf  of  the  sanctuary.     The  blessings  which 
true  religion  required  in  the  days  of  Solomon  for  its  extension  and  perpetuity  are 
essentially  necessary  at  the  present  time  and  will  be  through  every  age.     1.  Solo- 
mon implores  the  Divine  presence.     He  desires  that  the  ark  should  occupy  its 
appointed  place  in  the  temple.     This  was  the  appointed  medium  of  Divine  mani- 
festation, and  therefore  he  desired  the  entrance  of  the  ark.     But  he  is  also  anxious 
for  the  Divine  presence,  without  which  all  external  symbols  would  be  in  vain.     He 
desires  His  presence  as  a  God  of  mercy,  from  off  the  mercy  seat ;  for  this  only  is 
suitable  to  us  as  fallen  creatures.     A  God  of  pure  justice  and  immaculate  purity 
would  fill  us  with  terror  and  insure  destruction.     Under  the  Gospel,  the  mercy 
seat  is  more  distinctly  revealed  than  under  the  law,  and  the  blood  of  atonement  ia 
more  precious.     The  Divine  presence  as  a  God  of  grace  and  mercy  is  absolutely 
necessary.     The  temple  of  Solomon  would  have  been  as  worthless  as  a  heap  of 
ruins,  as  to  any  moral  power  and  influence,  without  the  Divine  presence.     This  is 
equally  necessary  now ;  for  we  may  have  every  part  of  sanctuary  worship  complete 
— the  ordinances,  the  ministry,  the  assembly — but  without  the  presence  of  God 
totally  inefiicient.     It  is  the  altar,  the  wood,  and  the  sacrifice,  without  the  holy  fire. 
It  is  the  Bethesda,  the  house  of  mercy,  without  the  descending  angel  to  impart 
efficacy  to  the  waters.     While  we  seek  it,  let  us  remember,  that  though  it  is  thug 
essential  to  the  power  and  efficiency  of  ordinances,  it  is  graciously  promised.     He 
says,  "  In  all  places  where  I  record  My  name,  I  will  come  unto  you  and  will  bless 
you."    2.  The  efficiency  of  the  ministry.     3.  The  benefit  of  the  Church  of  God. 
One  of  the  great  designs  of  Christian  ordinances  is  the  advancing  improvement  of 
trae  believers  as  well  as  the  conversion  of  sinners.    In  conclusion — 1.  Let  us  be 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ti. 

thankful  for  the  institution  and  possession  of  Divine  ordinances.  The  wisdom  and 
grace  of  God  has  given  existence  to  these  ordinances,  as  the  channel  of  His  grace 
to  the  souls  of  men.  "  There  is  a  river,  the  streams  whereof  "  &c.  2.  Let  us  learn  our 
dependence  upon  the  Divine  blessing  for  the  efficiency  of  ordinances.  3.  Let  us 
cultivate  a  deep  anxiety  for  the  Divine  blessing.  (C.  Gilbert.)  The  Divine 
presence  entreated ,  for  the  efficiency  of  the  ministry  and  the  prosperity  of  the  people 
of  God  : — Throughout  the  inspired  volume  one  uniform  representation  prevails 
touching  the  dignity,  importance,  and  responsibility  of  the  sacred  ministry;  Moses 
(Exod.  xxxiii.  15) ;  Elijah  (1  Kings  xix.  4-14)  ;  Paul  (2  Cor.  v.  18-20 ;  1  Tim. 
i.  11, 12;  2  Tim.  1.  11) ;  and  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  and  other  "watchmen  of 
Israel "  were  keenly  ahve  to  the  weight  of  the  "  burden  of  the  Lord  "  which  was 
laid  upon  them.  If  we  would  be  upheld  in  our  work,  and  labour  for  the  Divine 
glory  and  the  welfare  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  let  us  enter  into  the  prayer  of 
Solomon  at  the  consecration  of  the  temple.     I.  The  invocation  or  the  Lord's 

PRESENCE  SUGGESTS   HOW  NECESSARY    THAT   PRESENCE    IS    FOR    THE    PROSPERITY   OF    HiS 

Chbrch.  1.  It  was  manifested  in  those  times  by  a  visible  symbol.  2.  If  the  ark 
be  regarded  as  typical  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  undoubtedly  it  is  to  be,  then  we  may 
identify  Christ  with  Jehovah  and  we  may  see  in  the  entrance  of  the  ark  of  God's 
strength  into  the  temple  and  into  its  most  holy  place  a  prefiguration  of  the  abode 
of  Christ  in  His  Church,  and  of  His  entrance  as  our  Great  High  Priest  into  the 
most  holy  place  in  the  heavens,  from  which  He  manifests  Himself  to  His  people  by 
His  Spirit  (Psa.  Ixviii.  18).  3.  This  is  the  presence  of  God  for  which  we  are  to 
look  in  the  present  state  of  the  Church.  All  our  endeavours  will  be  in  vain,  aU  our 
labours  abortive,  unless  attended  by  the  grace  and  influence  of  the  Spirit.  "  It  is 
necessary,"  says  Augustine,  "  that  the  Holy  Spirit  should  work  inwardly,  that  the 
medicine  that  is  applied  from  without  may  take  effect.  Unless  He  be  present  to 
the  heart  of  the  hearer,  the  word  of  the  preacher  is  idle  and  vain."  "  I  once," 
observes  Cecil,  "  said  to  myself,  in  the  foolishness  of  my  heart,  what  sort  of  sermon 
must  that  have  been  which  was  preached  by  Peter  when  three  thousand  souls  were 
converted  at  once  ?  What  sort  of  sermon  ?  Such  as  other  sermons.  There  is 
nothing  to  be  found  in  it  extraordinary.  The  effect  was  not  produced  by  his 
eloquence,  but  by  the  mighty  power  of  God  present  with  His  Word.  II.  In  con- 
nection   WITH    THIS    blessing,    AND     DEPENDENT     UPON     IT,    WE     SHOULD    PRAY    FOB 

MINISTERIAL  QUALIFICATION.  "  Let  Thy  pricsts  be  clothed  with  salvation,"  or 
"  righteousness  "  (Psa.  cxxxii.  9).  1.  The  beautiful  garments  of  the  sanctuary 
would  not  be  sufScient  without  the  inward  endowment  of  truth  and  holiness.  Still 
more  should  the  ministers  of  the  gospel  be  qualified  for  their  office  by  an  experi- 
mental knowledge  of  the  great  salvation  and  the  adornment  of  a  holy  life  (2  Cor. 
vi.  4-7;  1  John  i.  3).  It  is  a  striking  observation  of  Bishop  Bull:  "The  priest 
who  is  not  clothed  with  righteousness,  though  otherwise  richly  adorned  with  all 
the  ornaments  of  human  and  Divine  literature,  and  those  gilded  over  with  the  rays 
of  seraphic  prudence,  is  yet  but  a  naked,  beggarly,  despicable  creature,  of  no 
authority,  no  use,  no  service  in  the  Church  of  God."  "  I  will  be  sure  to  live  well," 
was  the  remark  of  G.  Herbert  when  he  entered  upon  his  living  at  Bemerton, 
"  because  the  virtuous  Hfe  of  a  clergyman  is  the  most  persuasive  eloquence  to 
persuade  all  that  see  it  to  reverence  and  love."  2.  To  be  thus  "  clothed  with  salva- 
tion "  will  most  effectually  fit  the  Christian  minister  for  the  various  departments  of 
labour  and  trial  through  which  he  will  have  to  pass  (2  Cor.  iv.  1,  2,  5-7).  3.  The 
habitual  clothing  of  salvation  and  righteousness,  for  which  we  should  pray,  will 
indeed  conduce  to  ministerial  efficiency.  Putting  on  Christ,  an-ayed  in  the  gar- 
ments of  purity  and  truth,  of  meekness  and  love,  we  shall  best  "  magnify  our 
office."  Cecil  says  :  "  The  zeal  of  some  men  is  of  a  haughty,  unbending,  ferocious 
character.  They  have  the  letter  of  truth,  but  they  mount  the  pulpit  like  prize- 
fighters. It  is  with  them  a  perpetual  scold.  This  spirit  is  a  reproach  to  the 
gospel ;  it  is  not  the  spirit  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  seems  to  have  laboured  to  win 
men.  But  there  is  an  opposite  extreme :  the  love  of  some  men  is  all  milk  and 
mildness ;  there  is  so  much  delicacy  and  so  much  fastidiousness — they  touch  with 
BO  much  tenderness  ;  and,  if  the  patient  shrinks,  they  will  touch  no  more.  The 
times  are  too  flagrant  for  such  a  disposition.  The  gospel  is  sometimes  preached  in 
this  way  till  all  the  people  agree  with  the  preacher :  he  gives  no  offence  ;  he  does  no 
good."  In  •'  speaking  the  truth  "  we  should  do  it  "  in  love,"  yet  always  main- 
taining its  supremacy  and  never  sparing  the  sin  in  our  desire  to  spare  the  sinner. 

III.    T£CB  EFFICIENCY  OF  THE  MINISTRY  WILL  CONDUCE   TO   THB  PBOBPEBITT  AMD  JOX   OT 

THX  Chubch  AMD  PsopiiE  07  GoD.     [J,  T.  Brood,  M.A.) 


SHAP.TH.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  81 


CHAPTER  Vn. 

Yebs.  1-10.  Kow  Trhen  Solomon  bad  mado  an  end  of  praying,  tha  flra  came 
down  from  heaven. — God  among  His  people  : — I.  Prater  tor  God  to  come.  This 
prayer  was  marked — 1.  By  its  publicity.  (1)  Public  prayer,  formally  or  virtually, 
has  been  the  custom  among  all  nations  at  all  times.  (2)  It  is  a  "  reasonable 
service."  (3)  It  is  an  impressive  service.  It  evokes  sympathy.  2.  By  its 
speciality.  3.  By  its  success.  II.  God  among  His  people.  1.  By  symbol. 
2.  Permanently.  3.  A  source  of  blessedness.  If  God  be  among  His  people — 
(1)  He  will  help  His  ministers.  (2)  The  preaching  of  Christ  will  be  a  glory,  a 
blessing,  a  satisfaction,  a  source  of  refreshment  to  the  soul.  3.  His  providence 
will  wear  a  very  different  aspect ;  in  the  darkest  day  we  shall  feel  that  all  is  well. 
4.  The  realisation  of  His  presence  will  give  the  best  idea  of  heaven — fits  them  for 
it  and  makes  them  desire  it.  III.  Praise  to  God.  1.  The  theme  of  their  praise : 
God's  mercy.  2.  Its  timeliness.  3.  Its  acceptableness.  Conclusion :  1.  Learn 
the  value  of  public  worship.  2.  Make  it  a  test  of  your  character.  3.  Learn  the 
privilege  of  true  worshippers.  It  is  a  delightful  employment.  "  Come  thou  with 
us,  and  we  will  do  thee  good,"  &c.  4.  You  may  ask,  "  What  can  we  do  to  benefit 
by  public  worship  ? "  Come  to  meet  with  God.  Come  in  a  prayerful  spirit. 
Come  with  a  thankful  heart.  Take  heed  what  you  hear.  Be  not  forgetful  hearers. 
Follow  all  with  prayer  that  "  the  Word  of  the  Lord  may  have  free  course  and  be 
glorified."  6.  What  can  we  do  to  promote  it?  (1)  Attend  it  regularly,  punctually, 
and  solemnly.  (2)  Give  your  money  abundantly  and  cheerfully  to  support  it. 
(T.  Thoresby.)  A  dedication  service : — The  light  and  fire,  the  *'  glory  of  the 
Lord,"  that  came  down  were  symbols.  I.  Something  supernatoral.  Solomon 
with  all  his  wisdom,  and  Huram's  artisans  with  all  their  skill,  could  not  have 
invented  that.  The  king  was  as  impotent  before  it  as  the  lowest  slave  from  his 
provinces  was  before  him.  So  there  is  an  "  unprogramrned  "  part  of  the  service 
which  is  being  conducted  by  the  powers  of  another  world.  Strange  forces  have 
made  the  edifice  their  dwelling.  II.  That  glory  was  not  merely  a  supernatural 
phenomenon,  something  sent  from  God ;  it  symboled  God  Himself.  Shekinah 
means  dwelling.  When  our  version  reads,  "  I  will  dwell  among  Israel,"  the 
Hebrew  says,  "I  will  shekinah  among  them."  God  is  here.  III.  The  Divine 
presence  came  in  response  to  a  man's  consecration  prayer;  its  great  Amen. 
IV.  The  shekinah  remained  in  the  temple.  Though  the  outer  glow  of  it  was 
withdrawn,  a  gleam  of  it  lingered  within  the  Holy  of  Holies,  illumining  that 
windowless  apartment,  dropping  its  softened  light  upon  the  ark  of  the  covenant, 
with  its  tables  of  the  law,  its  golden  mercy-seat,  and  the  cherubim  of  life.  So 
God  will  remain  with  us ;  and  the  sign  of  His  presence  wiU  be  that  a  light  falls 
upon  the  Bible,  our  ark  of  covenant,  making  its  laws  of  righteousness  gleam  into 
our  consciences,  its  assurance  of  grace  fill  us  with  peace,  and  its  promise  of  life 
glow  in  our  hopes  until  we  enter  that  temple  where  "the  Lamb  is  the  light 
thereof."     {Homiletic  Review.) 

Vers.  12-16.  And  the  Lord  appeared  to  Solomon  by  night,  and  said  unto  him, 
I  have  heard  thy  prayer. — The  answer  of  God  to  the  prayer  of  Solomon  at  the 
dedication  of  the  temple : — 1.  How  strikingly  does  the  answer  meet  the  prayer. 
Solomon  anticipated  days  of  sorrow.  He  asked  of  God,  "  If  we  call  upon  Thee, 
wilt  Thou  hear  us?"  "I  will,"  says  God,  "I  will."  Solomon  asks  that  God's 
eye  and  ear  may  be  open  to  his  house.  God  exceeds  the  prayer  of  the  king.  Not 
only  shall  Mine  eye:i  and  Mine  ears  be  there,  but  My  heart  shall  be  there  also. 
2.  God  not  only  declares  that  He  has  heard  the  prayer  of  Solomon,  He  says  some- 
thing more  encouraging :  "  I  have  chosen  this  house  for  Myself,  for  a  house  of 
sacrifice."  3.  God  affirms  national  judgments  to  be  the  woik  of  His  own  hand. 
"If  I  shut  up  heaven,"  &c.  4.  God  supposes  that  always  in  national  calamity 
the  people  will  come  running  to  Him.  5.  God  regards  His  house  as  pre-eminently 
a  house  of  prayer.  "  Mine  ears  shall  be  attent  unto  the  prayer  that  is  made  in 
this  place."  6.  God  gives  a  promise  of  His  perpetual  presence  in  His  house. 
Conclusion :  What  duty  devolves  upon  us  having  such  abundant  mercies  ? 
1.  Personal  religion.  2.  Family  religion.  3.  Liberal  offering  to  the  Lord.  (T. 
Mortimer,  B.D.)  If  I  shut  up  heaven. — Pestilence  God's  retribution  for  sin  :— 
I.  God  claims  to  Himself  the  authorship  of  the  calamity  for  whose  removal 
WE  entreat.    II.  The  direct  connection  which  is  pointed   out  between  the 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

TISITATIOK  OF  THE  PESTILENCE  AND  A  PEOPLE'S  IMPIETY  A3  THE  PKOVOCATION  WHICH 
HAS   CAUSED   IT.      III.    ThOUOH   PESTILENCE   BE   OF   God'S   SENDING,   TET   WILL   He   BK 

ENTREATED  FOB  ITS  REMOVAL.  (Robert  Bickersteth,  M.A.)  The  cessation  of  the 
cholera : — I.  There  is  no  one  truth  that  is  more  universal  in  its  application,  or 
■which  more  commends  itself  to  every  man's  conscience,  than  that  guilt  is 
FOLLOWED  BY  PUNISHMENT,  most  Certainly  in  the  next  world,  and  most  probably  in 
this.  II.  That  as  true  repentance  wUl  always  be  accepted,  for  Christ's  sake,  for  the 
putting  away  of  sin,  so  will  it  often  avail,  in  the  mercy  of  God,  to  the  removal 
OF  THE  TEMPORAL  CALAMITY  which  may  havB  been  the  consequence  and  punishment 
of  the  sin.     (F.  0.  Morris.)         The  means  and  method  of  healing  in  the  Church  : — 

1.  The  supposition  of  judgments.  1.  Judgments  light  not  on  a  people  casually 
or  by  chance,  but  by  the  overruling  command  and  commission  of  God  (Job  v.  6,  7). 
(1)  Sometimes  by  way  of  dominion  and  absolute  power.  (2)  Sometimes  as  a 
preparation  unto  intended  mercy,  as  men  plough  the  ground  which  they  mean  to 
enrich  with  precious  seed,  and  carve  the  stone  which  they  mean  to  put  in  the  top 
of  the  building.  As  men  put  forth  longest  into  wind  and  sun  that  great  timber 
which  must  bear  the  greatest  burden  and  stress  of  the  building.  (3)  But  most 
usually  in  a  way  of  justice  (Jer.  xxx.  15  ;  Neh.  ix.  33  ;  Ezek.  xiv.  23).  Personal 
chastisements  may  be  for  trial  and  exercise  of  faith  and  patience,  but  general  and 
public  judgments  are  ever  in  wrath  and  displeasure.  Let  us  therefore  labour  to 
find  out  our  sins  by  our  sufferings.  Chastisements  never  mend  us  tiU  they  teach 
us  (Psa.  xciv.  12 ;  Mic.  vi.  9).  2.  The  Lord  hath  variety  of  judgments  whereby 
to  reduce  f reward  and  stubborn  sinners.  God's  method  in  these  various  judgments 
usually  is — (1)  He  begins  at  the  outward  man,  exercising  a  people  many  times 
with  change  of  rods,  which  is  ever  a  sign  of  anger  in  the  father  and  stubbornness 
in  the  son.  (2)  He  proceeds  to  the  soul,  revealing  His  wrath,  causing  guilt  and 
fear  to  gripe  and  seize  on  the  conscience  (Psa.  li.  8;  Job.  vi.  4;  Prov.  xviii.  14). 
(3)  Towards  obdurate  sinners  the  Lord  many  times  deals  in  a  more  fearful  manner, 
sealing  them  up  under  hardness  of  heart,  a  spirit  of  slumber,  a  reprobate  sense,  a 
seared  conscience,  &c.,  till  destruction  unawares  overtake  them  (Matt.  xxiv.  39; 
Ezek.  xxiv.  14;  Hos.  iv.  17;  Eev.  ixii.  11).  11.  A  direction  unto  duties. 
Consider — 1.  The  quality  of  the  persons  who  are  to  perform  them :  "  My  people 
that  are  called  by  My  name."  All  men  are  His  creatures,  only  a  select  and  peculiar 
inheritance  that  bear  His  name  and  are  in  covenant  with  Him  are  called  His 
people  (Ezek.  xvi.  8 ;  Psa.  iv.  3 ;  Isa.  xliii.  21,  Ixiii.  18 ;  Acts  xv.  14).  To 
be  called  by  His  name  noteth  to  be  His  adopted  children.  We  are  God's  people — 
(1)  By  visible  profession  or  sacramental  separation  from  the  world,  as  the  whole 
nation  of  the  Jews  are  called  His  people  (Exod.  xix.  5;  Deut.  iv.  7).  (2)  By 
spiritual  sanctification  and  internal  dispositions  (John  xvii.  6;  Gal.  vi.  16; 
Bom.  ii.  29,  ix.  8,  xi.  5;  Phil.  iii.  3).  2.  The  duties  required  for  tha 
removal  of  judgments.  (1)  Humiliation.  (2)  Prayer.  "Without  this  humilia- 
tion is  but  a  sinking  under  God,  not  a  seeking  unto  Him.  (a)  By  this  we  honour 
God  in  acknowledging  Him  the  fountain  of  all  our  good,  the  inflicter  of  all  evil. 
As  a  diamond  is  cut  only  by  a  diamond,  so  God  is  pacified  only  by  Himself. 
(6)  By  this  we  ease  ourselves.  Prayer  lighteneth  affliction  where  it  doth  not 
remove  it.  The  heart  is  meekened  to  accept  the  punishment  of  sin,  as  wool  or 
mud  deadens  the  force  of  a  bullet.  (3)  Seeking  the  face  of  God.  His  favour  to 
comfort  us,  and  His  counsel  to  direct  us.  (4)  Reformation  of  life.  III.  A 
gracious  promise  of  mercy.  1.  A  promise — (1)  Of  gracious  condescension: 
"from  heaven."     (2)  Of  gracious  audience.     (3)  Of  forgiveness.     (4)  Of  healing. 

2.  Touching  these  promises,  observe — (1)  That  when  God  comes  down  to  deliver, 
and  looks  from  heaven.  He  doth  it  by  no  other  way  than  by  the  Incarnation  of  His 
Son,  the  efficacy  of  His  Spirit,  the  operation  of  His  providence,  or  the  ministry 
of  angels.  (2)  When  He  hears  prayers,  it  is  only  by  the  intercession  and  mediation 
of  Christ.  (3)  When  He  forgives  sins,  it  is  only  by  the  merits  and  righteousness  of 
Christ.  (4)  But  when  He  heals  a  land.  He  often  useth  in  that  work  the  ministry 
of  men.  Magistrates  are  healers  and  repairers  (Isa.  iii.  7).  Ministers  are  healers 
of  the  sick  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  4).  (Edward  Reynolds,  D.D.)  Sin  and  judgments  :— 
1.  The  sins  of  God's  own  people  may  provoke  and  procure  judgments.  2.  Their 
Bins  have  some  aggravations  in  them  that  other  men's  have  not.  They  are  sins 
against— (1)  Special  light  (1  Kings  xi.  9).  (2)  Special  love  and  experiences  of 
Divine  favour  (2  Sam.  iii.  7-9).  (3)  Special  relations  (Isa.  i.  2).  (4)  Special 
grace  and  assistance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Eph.  iv.  30).  (5)  Special  covenants 
and  engagements,  after  avouching  God  for  theirs  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  84).    (6)  Special 


«HAP.  VII.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  83 

deliverances  from  greatest  dangers  (Ezra  ix.  13,  14).  (7)  Special  hopes  and  more 
special  promises  which  should  have  persuaded  them  to  holiness  (2  Cor.  vii.  1 ; 
1  John  iii.  3).  (8)  Special  peace  and  glorious  comforts,  as  David  sinned  against 
the  joy  of  God's  salvation  (Psa.  li.  12).  Peter  denied  Christ  after  he  had  seen  His 
transfiguration.  {Ibid.)  If  My  people,  whlcli  are  called  by  My  name,  shall 
Jiumble  themselves. — Humiliation,  its  obligation  and  nature : — I.  It  is  a.  dutt 

•CALLED    FOR    BY    PROPHETS    AND    APOSTLES    AND    SPECULLT     RESPECTED    BY     GOD     (Mic. 

vi.  8;  Jas.  iv.  10;  1  Pet.  v,  6  ;  2  Kings  xxii.  19;  Lev.  xxvi.  41,  42).  1,  It 
emptieth  the  heart  of  self-confidence  and  is  the  root  of  the  fundamental  duty  of 
self-denial.  2.  It  fits  for  approach  to  God.  3.  It  disposeth  to  a  confession  of  sin 
.(Luke  XV.  17-19,  xviii.  13).  4.  It  prepares  the  heart  for  the  entertainment  of 
mercy.  6.  It  makes  way  for  the  forsaking  of  sin ;  the  more  a  soul  is  humbled 
ior  it,  the  more  it  is  fearful  of  it  and  watchful  against  it.  II.  It  is  twofold  in 
ITS  NATURE.  1.  Passive,  when  God  breaks  the  heart  by  the  hammer  of  His  Word 
(Jer.  xxiii.  29),  or  by  some  sore  affliction.  2.  Active,  when  the  soul  humbleth 
itself  under  sin  and  wrath.  This  may  be — (1)  Legal,  proceeding  from  a  spirit  of 
bondage,  when  the  heart  roars  on  a  rack,  or  melts  in  a  furnace,  is  filled  with 
•consternation  and  anguish  under  the  weight  of  sin  and  wrath,  as  in  the  case  of 
Pharaoh,  Ahab,  Belshazzar,  Felix,  the  jaUor,  and  the  murderers  of  Christ. 
(2)  Evangelical.  When  the  soul  is  not  only  broken  and  battered  with  the  horror  and 
-dread  of  wrath  (this  it  may  be  and  remain  hard,  as  every  piece  of  a  broken  flint  is 
hard  still),  but  when  it  is  kindly  melted  and  softened  with  apprehensions  of  God's 
goodness  and  free-grace.  A  compounded  duty  made  up  of  love  and  sorrow; 
Hezekiah,  Josiah  (Jer.  xxvi.  19 ;  2  Chron.  xxxiv.  27).  III.  This  is  a  perpetual 
DUTY.  As  long  as  sin  remains  there  must  be  a  sense  of  it,  and  sorrow  for  it.  But 
in  some  times  and  cases  it  is  to  be  specially  renewed.  In  times — 1.  Of  extra- 
ordinary sins  and  provocations.  2.  Of  public  dangers  and  distresses.  3.  Of  great 
enterprises  attempted.  4.  Of  successes  and  blessings  desired  (Ezra  viu.  21). 
(Ibid.)  Helps  to  the  performance  of  the  duty  of  humiliation : — I.  Take  a  view 
or  God.  1.  In  Himself.  (1)  His  searching  eye  and  mighty  hand  (Jas.  iv.  10; 
1  Pet.  V.  6).  (2)  His  majesty  and  glory  (Isa.  vi.  2 ;  Psa.  Ixxxix.  6,  7).  (3)  His 
holiness  (Exod.  xv.  11 ;  Josh.  xxiv.  19).  (4)  His  jealousy  and  justice  (Nah. 
i.  2).  (5)  His  mercy  and  goodness  (Hos.  iii.  5;  Eom.  ii.  4).  (6)  His  omniscience. 
Such  considerations  have  humbled  the  holiest  of  men.  Moses  (Exod.  iii.  6) ;  Job 
/Job  xlii.  5) ;  Elijah  (1  Kings  xix.  13) ;  Isaiah  (Isa.  vi.  5) ;  Ezra  (Ezra  ix.  15) ;  Peter 
(Luke  V.  8).  2.  In  His  relations  to  us.  He  is  our  Maker,  King,  Judge,  Father, 
Master.  3.  In  His  dealings  with  us.  (1)  In  His  judgments  and  various  providences. 
^2)  In  His  mercies  which  have  shined  upon  us  through  all  our  clouds.  II.  Take  a 
VIEW  OF  yourselves,  OF  YOUR  OWN  HEARTS  AND  LIVES.  This  is  a  duty  of  Singular 
use  and  benefit.  It  enlargeth  the  heart  in  godly  sorrow  for  sin  past,  upon  the 
-discoveries  which  this  scrutiny  maketh.  {Ibid.)  Fruits  and  evidences  of  humilia- 
tion : — 1.  A  godly  sorrow,  so  called  because  it  sets  the  soul  God-ward.  Cain,  Judas, 
Felix,  all  sorrowed,  but  they  ran  from  God.  As  a  ship  in  a  tempest  ventures  not  to 
any  shore,  but  gets  further  into  the  sea,  so  the  soul,  when  it  is  humbled  by  God, 
betakes  not  itself  unto  any  carnal  shore,  but  still  runs  closer  unto  Him.  2.  A 
justifying  of  God,  ascribing  to  Him  the  glory  of  His  righteousness  if  He  should 
condemn  us ;  and  of  His  mercy,  that  He  absolves  us  (Psa.  li.  4 ;  Dan.  ix.  7-9). 
3.  A  self-judging  and  subscribing  to  our  condemnation  (Deut.  xxvii.  15).  As 
St.  Austin  saith  of  the  poor  publican,  "  He  judged  and  accused  himseK,  that  God 
might  deliver  and  defend  him."  Also  Bernard,  "  This  is  a  good  judgment  indeed 
which  withdraws  and  hides  me  from  the  severe  judgment  of  God."  {Ibid.) 
The  Divine  philosophy  of  revivals  : — This  is  a  revival  text.  It  contains  the  germs 
■of  the  whole  Divine  philosophy  of  revivals.  A  revival  implies  religious  declension, 
and  is  itself  such  a  waking  up  of  the  spiritual  Ufe  of  the  Church  as  leads  to  the 
conversion  of  sinners.  I.  An  explicit  description  of  the  proper  method  for 
PROMOTiNO  A  REVIVAL.  1.  The  first  duty  of  a  people  seeking  a  revival  is  humilia- 
tion before  God.  This  state  of  mind  is  produced  by  our  contemplating  the  purity 
and  perfection  and  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord,  in  contrast  with  our  own  sinfulness, 
onworthiness,  and  ingratitude.  2.  Prayer  is  the  next  divinely  prescribed  means  in 
promoting  a  revival  of  religion.  Prayerfulness  is  one  of  the  main  characteristics 
•of  a  godly  life.  But  our  prayers  are  sometimes  prayerless.  They  are  an  unwritten 
liturgy,  made  up  of  hackneyed  phrases  in  which  there  is  hardly  a  spark  of  vitality. 
They  lack  the  strong  pinions  of  faith  and  ardent  desire  without  which  they  cannot 
■teach  the  third  heaven.    They  lack  the  Divine  electricity.    When  God's  people 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  '[chap.  th. 

beseech  Him,  as  John  Knox  did  when  he  prayed,  "  Lord,  give  me  Scotland,  or  I 
die,"  then  their  prayers  are  effective.  3.  We  must  seek  God's  face.  He  never 
intended  that  His  people  should  pray  to  Him  as  strangers.  He  wants  us  to  draw 
near  to  Him  as  children  go  to  a  loving  father  or  mother.  4.  There  must  be  a 
forsaking  of  sin.  H.  Some  definite  and  good  reasons  which  we  have  fob 
EXPECTING  A  EEVivAL.  1.  God's  intimate  relation  to  the  Church.  (1)  He  claims 
a  special  and  unrivalled  property  in  its  members.  He  calls  them  His  people. 
(2)  He  puts  a  special  honour  upon  them.  He  calls  them  by  His  name.  2.  God's 
explicit  promise.  (1)  He  will  "  hear  from  heaven."  (2)  "  And  will  forgive  their 
Bins."  (3)  And  will  heal  their  land.  {David  Winters.)  The  duty  of  a  people 
under  Divine  chastisements  : — I.  There  are  three  modes  in  which  it  has  pleased- 
Almighty  God  at  different  periods  of  the  world  to  inflict  His  righteous, 
judgments  on  national  delinquency:  by  the  sword  without,  the  famine  and 
pestilence  within.  H.  The  duties  enjoined  upon  a  people  under  the 
afflictive  visitation  of  a  pestilence.  1.  Humiliation.  2.  Prayer.  8.  Ee- 
formation.  III.  The  encouraging  assurance  of  the  God  of  mercy  to  a 
HUMBLED,  PRAYING,  AND  CONVERTED  PEOPLE.  (Jamcs  WHUams,  M.A.)  National 
chastisements: — It  seems  to  have  been  after  an  interval  of  thirteen  years  that 
the  Lord  signified  in  detail  that  He  had  listened  to  the  solemn  prayer  that. 
Solomon  offered  at  the  dedication  of  the  temple.  God  notifies  the  possibility  of 
His  punishments  falling  on  the  land  in  the  event  of  their  sinning  against  Him,  and. 
then  adds,  "  If  the  people  shall  humble  themselves,"  &c.  I.  This  passage  is  only 
one  of  many  which  point  out  how  entirely  Nature  is  ruled  by  God.  Take  such- 
examples  as  these:  the  flood;  the  destruction  of  Sodom;  Elijah  fed  by  ravens;, 
the  destiny  of  Jonah,  &c.  They  all  proclaim  that  the  whole  world  is  under  the 
immediate  control  of  a  personal  God  who  regulates  it  in  reference  to  man. 
II.  National  trouble  should  cause  a  people  to  consider  their  ways,  and  to 
seriously  reflect  upon  their  national  sins.  III.  A  proper  consciousness  of  national 
sins  ought  to  bring  a  people  to  their  knees  in  humble  submission,  and  lead  them 
to  acknowledge  that  national  chastisements  are  of  His  appointment.  In  reply  to 
the  objection  that  might  be  urged  against  this  teaching,  "  Why  ascribe  to  God 
what  may  easily  be  traced  to  natural  causes  ?  "  I  observe,  the  more  science  the 
better.  Trace  out  the  causes  as  best  you  can :  discover  the  laws  of  rain  and 
sunshine,  of  temperature  and  weather.  But,  after  all,  these  are  not  the  first  cause. 
They  are  only  second  in  order.  There  is  still  the  sphere  in  which  God  rules 
supreme.  It  is  only  too  obvious  in  a  case  of  personal  sickness.  A  man  may  be 
laid  upon  a  bed  of  affliction:  the  illness  may  upset  his  plr.ns — deepen  his 
reflections — bring  him  to  a  true  repentance — and,  in  fact,  alter  his  whole  career 
for  the  better ;  in  this  the  first  cause  is  God,  in  His  mercy  and  love  to  a  wayward 
soul ;  the  second  cause  is,  perhaps,  that  one  day  he  caught  a  chilL  But  then  that 
chill  does  not  exclude  God.  It  is  worthy  of  special  remark,  moreover,  that  our 
Lord's  teachings  and  miracles  were  pointedly  in  this  direction.  He  did  not  deny 
that  the  tower  of  Siloam  was  a  judgment,  though  He  repressed  self-righteous 
inferences  on  the  part  of  others.  He  adduced  the  flood  and  the  destruction  of 
Sodom  as  warnings  to  His  own  generation.  IV.  It  may  be  objected  that  betteb 
days  will  come  whether  a  people  will  humble  themselves  and  pray  or  not.  It 
may  be  so.  Just  as  a  sick  man  may  refuse  to  repent,  and  yet  will  in  due  time  get 
well  again.  But  the  moral  loss  is  well-nigh  beyond  recovery.  It  involves  the 
blunting  of  the  moral  sense,  the  deadening  of  conscience,  and  the  loss  of  the 
higher  benefit  which  God  willed  to  bestow.  A  nation  which  cannot  recognise  the 
correcting  hand  of  God  must  be  indeed  estranged  from  Him.  Conclusion :  Our 
personal  duty.  1.  Kepentance.  2.  Intercession.  God  sets  His  mark  of  love 
and  protection  upon  them  who  "  sigh  and  cry  for  all  the  abominations."  No  one 
can  tell  how  much  he  may  do  by  himself  returning  to  God.  (C  A.  Raymond,  M.A.) 
Biblical  anthropomorphism: — In  anthropomorphic  language  "eyes"  are  ascribed 
to  God ;  thus  we  read  "  that  the  eye  of  the  Lord  Is  on  them  that  fear  Him " 
(Psa.  xxxviii.  18).  Thus  again,  "I  will  guide  thee  with  Mine  eye"  {Psa. 
xxxii.  8).  He  is  said  to  be  of  "purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil"  (Heb.  i.  13). 
A  similar  form  of  speech  ascribes  "ears"  to  God.  Thus  we  have  these  words — 
"In  Mine  ears,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts"  (Isa.  v.  9);  "The  cries  of  them  which 
have  reaped  are  entered  into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth"  (Jas.  v.  4.) 
What  does  this  language  mean  ?  Why  are  eyes  and  ears  ascribed  to  a  Spirit  that 
has  no  limits  and  no  form  ?  The  language  is  used  for  two  purposes.  I.  To 
express  His  cognizance  of  man.     Through  the  eye  and  the  ear  we  derive  our 


CBiP.  vm.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  85 

knowledge  of  all  outside  of  us.  1.  He  knows  us  directly.  2.  He  knows  us 
thoroughly.  (1)  He  knows  what  we  are.  (2)  He  knows  what  we  have  been. 
(3)  He  knows  all  that  we  ever  shall  be.  "  To  nim  there  is  nothing  old  appears,  to 
Him  there  is  nothing  new."  A  sense  of  His  knowledge  of  us  should  make  us 
frank,  solemn,  circumspect,  devout.  H.  To  express  His  interest  in  man.  God's 
interest  in  us  is  shown — 1.  In  the  various  capacities  of  enjoyment  with  which  He 
has  endowed  us,  and  the  provisions  He  has  made  for  them.  We  have  capacity  for 
every  species  of  enjoyment — sensuous,  intellectual,  social,  religious.  We  can 
drink  of  all  the  rivers  from  the  eternal  ocean  of  joy.  For  the  sensuous  there  is 
matter,  for  the  intellectual  there  is  truth,  for  the  social  there  is  society,  for  the 
religious  there  is  Himself.  2.  In  the  preservation  of  our  existence,  notwith- 
standing our  sinfulness.  We  have  transgressed  His  precepts,  warred  against  His 
arrangements,  yet  He  preserves  us  year  after  year.  The  patience  of  an  Infinite 
Love  is  here.  3.  In  our  redemption  by  Jesus  Christ.  "  God  so  loved  the  world," 
&c.  "  He  spared  not  His  own  Son,  but  delivered  Him  up,"  &c.  Conclusion : 
"  Thou  God  seest  me,"  we  unite  with  the  blessed  fact,  "  Thou  God  lovest  us."  It 
is  His  interest  in  us  that  prompts  Him  to  watch  our  movements  and  listen  to  our 
words.    {Homilist.) 


CHAPTER  vm. 


Vees.  1-6.  That  the  cities. — Solomon's  military  enterpriser. — Chiefly  in  acquiring 
cities  rebuilt  and  taken  from  the  enemy.  I.  Cities  for  stores  (1  Kings  ix.  19). 
II.  Cities  for  colonisation.  HI.  Cities  for  pleasure.  IV.  Cities  for  defence. 
Lessons :  1.  That  those  who  attend  to  the  spiritual  will  not  neglect  the  temporal 
interests  of  a  nation.  2.  That  amidst  the  temporal  interests  of  a  nation  great 
risks  exist.  Hence — (1)  Lessons  of  prudence.  (2)  The  danger  of  prosperity. 
(<7.  Wolfendale.) 

Ver.  11.  And  Solomon  brought  up  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh. — Solomon  and 
Pharaoh's  daughter : — We  are  to  see  in  Solomon's  action  the  working  of  a  tender 
conscience;  even  though  he  may  be  appeasing  his  conscience  by  some  trick  or 
ceremony,  yet  he  is  showing  us  the  working  of  the  moral  nature  within  the  kingly 
breast.  Yet  there  is  a  point  to  be  noted  here  which  is  common  to  human 
experience  :  why  should  Solomon  have  married  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh  ?  Why 
should  he  have,  in  the  first  instance,  placed  himself  in  so  vital  a  relation  to 
heathenism  ?  Are  there  not  men  who  first  plunge  into  great  mistakes,  and  then 
seek  to  rectify  their  position  by  zealous  care  about  comparatively  trifling  details  ? 
Do  not  men  make  money  by  base  means,  and  then  zealously  betake  themselves  to 
book-keeping,  as  if  they  would  not  spend  money  except  in  approved  directions  ? 
Are  there  not  those  who  have  steeped  their  hearts  in  iniquity,  and  yet  have  washed 
■  their  hands  with  soap  and  nitre  ?  We  are  to  beware  of  the  creation  of  a  false  or  a 
partial  conscience,  that  makes  up  for  sins  of  a  larger  kind  by  ostentatious  devotion 
at  the  altar  of  detail  and  ceremony  and  petty  ritual.  [J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Solomon's  marriage: — Consider  Solomon's  marriage  with  an  Egyptian  princess — 
I.  As  A  matter  of  policy.  It  sprang  from — 1.  A  desire  to  counteract  the  influence 
of  Hadad  (1  Kings  xi.  14-20).  2.  The  wish  to  obtain  support  for  his  new  dynasty 
and  recognition  from  one  of  older  fame  and  greater  power.  3.  Anxiety  to 
strengthen  himself  by  foreign  alliances.  H.  As  a  source  of  moral  perplexity. 
■What  must  be  done  with  her  ?  Solomon  felt  that  a  broad  distinction  must  be 
made  between  the  worship  of  Jehovah  and  idolatry.  III.  As  the  beginnino  op 
trouble.  The  policy  advantageous  at  first,  but  ultimately  proved  hollow  and 
impolitic.  The  reign  which  began  so  gloriously  ended  in  gross  darkness  and 
fetish  worship.     (J.  Wolfendale.) 

Vers.  12,  13.  Then  Solomon  offered  burnt  offerings  unto  the  Lord. — Solomon's 
burnt  offerings  : — Solomon  was  great  in  burnt  offerings.  Do  not  men  sometimes 
make  up  in  burnt  offerings  what  they  lack  in  moral  consistency  ?  Is  not  an 
ostentatious  religion  sometimes  the  best  proof  of  internal  decay  ?  It  ought  not  to 
be  so.  The  outward  and  inward  should  correspond.  The  action  should  be  the 
incarnation  of  the  thought.    It  is  beautiful  to  look  upon  the  Church  engaged  in 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rx. 

ranch  church-building  and  in  strenuous  endeavours  against  public  sin ;  yet  we 
must  never  forget  that  all  this  may  possibly  coexist  with  internal  loss,  decay, 
corruption.  All  action  does  not  spring  from  life.  Sometimes  we  try  to  make  up 
by  complex  mechanism  what  is  wanting  in  real  vitality.  It  is  often  easier  to  offer 
a  burnt  offering  than  to  do  some  deed  of  moral  heroism.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  14.  As  the  duty  of  every  day  required. — Duty  : — To  some  Christians  "  the 
sense  of  duty  "  and  kindred  phrases  sound  unattractive  and  suspicious.  Yet  it  is 
dangerous  even  to  minimise  the  sense  of  duty.  A  man  who  makes  no  terms  with 
conscience,  but  does  what  God  commands,  will  find  his  love  grow  stronger.  A 
Christian's  sense  of  duty  is  not  the  same  as  the  sense  of  duty  of  one  who  has  no 
faith.  Natural  religion  would  teach  a  man  to  be  honest,  sober,  and  industrious, 
but  Christ's  teaching  goes  far  beyond  this.  Religious  duties ;  purity  of  heart ; 
forgiveness  of  others,  <fec.  But  it  is  in  the  realm  of  supernatural  help,  prayer,  and 
the  sacraments  that  the  greatest  divergence  is  seen.  "  As  the  duty  of  every  day 
required."  Words  such  as  these  suggest  that  unless  we  are  living  a  life  of  prayer, 
unless  we  are  partaking  of  the  life  of  Christ  in  the  means  He  left  for  us  to  use,  we 
are  undutiful.  What  we  claim  for  our  religion  is  this — 1.  The  personal  love  of 
Christ  will  make  us  more  severe  with  ourselves  in  performing  "  hard,  unwelcome  " 
duties  of  every  day.  2.  It  will  also  claim  from  us  earnest  prayer,  belief  in  the  grace 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  &o.    {W.  R.  Button,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Vers.  1-12.  And  when  the  Queen  of  Sheba  heard  of  the  ftime  of  Solomon.— 

The  Queen  of  Sheba^s  visit  to  Solomon  : — I.  The  spirit  which  pkompted  the  visit. 

1.  A  spirit  of  curiosity.  2.  A  spirit  of  inquiry.  3.  A  spirit  of  restlessness.  4.  A 
spirit  of  self-sacrifice.  She  undertook  a  long  and  risky  journey.  A  reproof,  says 
Christ,  to  indifference  and  stupidity  concerning  Himself.  II.  The  mutual  inter- 
couESE  DURING  THE  VISIT.  1.  Solomon  ausweied  her  questions.  2.  Received  her 
gifts.  III.  The  impbessions  received  from  the  visit.  1.  She  was  astonished  at 
the  magnificence  of  Solomon.  2.  She  was  surprised  at  the  wisdom  of  Solomon. 
3.  She  was  confirmed  in  her  belief  concerning  Solomon.  Faith  exercised  will  be 
greatly  strengthened.      This  just  the  result — 1.   Of   honest  search   after  truth. 

2.  Of  personal  intercourse  with  Christ.  3.  Of  engagement  in  God's  service. 
{J.  Wolfe7idale.)  Hard  questions  : — This  is  what  the  Bible  itself  asks  for  ;  in 
effect  the  Bible  says,  "  Prove  me,  put  me  to  the  test,  under  all  circumstances  of 
triumph,  joy,  need,  fear,  and  see  if  I  have  not  within  me  a  better  answer  than  can 
be  found  in  any  other  book."  This  is  the  criticism  to  which  Jesus  Christ  is  always 
willing  to  submit  Himself.  It  is  His  complaint  that  we  do  not  ask  Him  questions 
enough,  the  assumption  of  course  being  that  all  inquiries  are  put  in  a  reverent  and 
faithful  spirit.  There  is  a  question-asking  to  which  the  Bible  will  pay  no  heed, 
and  there  is  a  question-asking  which  Christ  wiU  regard  as  impious  and  frivolous. 
Whatever  we  really  want  to  know  with  our  hearts,  whatever  is  necessary  for  us  to 
know,  Jesus  Christ  is  willing  to  answer.  When  we  bring  our  riddles  and  enigmas 
to  Christ,  they  must  be  riddles  and  enigmas  that  express  the  very  agony  of  desire. 
To  our  speculation  or  curiosity  Christ  may  have  nothing  to  say,  or  if  He  condescend 
to  speak  to  us  it  may  be  in  tones  of  rebuke  and  repulse.  Do  not  be  afraid  to  put 
hard  questions  to  Christ.  The  Queen  of  Sheba  did  not  put  any  flippant  questions 
to  Solomon ;  she  rather  sought  out  the  most  difficult  inquiries  which  it  was 
possible  to  propoimd.  The  meaning  of  this  is  that  we  are  to  ask  the  very  hardest 
questions  which  our  soul  wishes  to  have  answered,  always  remembering  that  there 
are  some  questions  which  need  not  be  answered  in  time,  and  which  indeed  could 
not  be  answered  to  our  present  incomplete  or  depraved  capacity  and  power. 
Properly  considered,  it  may  be  impossible  to  put  any  easy  questions  to  Christ 
within  the  range  of  the  scope  which  His  mission  fills.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The 
Queen  of  Sheba's  visit  to  Solomon : — I.  The  meeting  together  of  these  repre- 
sentatives OF  two  different  nations  had  the  happy  effect  of  drawing  closer 

THE  BONDS  of  UNITY.  U.  ThE  BENEFICIAL  EFFECT  WHICH  THE  EXHIBITION  OF  THE 
tores  OF  NATIONAL  INDUSTRT  MAY    HAVE    UPON    THE    THOUGHTFUL   AND    WKLL-GOVERNED 


CHAP.  IX.]  11.  CHRONICLES.  37 

MIND.  The  things  seen  by  the  Queen  of  Shoba  did  much  to  correct  and  enlarge  her 
mind;  far  more  than  all  her  previous  intelligence  and  inquiry.    III.  The  spectacle 

OF  WORKS  OF  ART  AND  MAN's   DEVICE,  VAST,  MULTIFORM,  AND  BEAUTIFUL,  REFLECTS  AS  IN 

A  MIRROR  THE  WONDROUS  POWERS  OF  man's  MIND.  As  wc  turn  from  the  statue  to  the 
mind  that  sketched  and  the  hand  that  chiselled  out  the  wonderful  design,  so  let  us 
turn  from  man  with  all  his  wonderful  skill  and  give  to  God  the  glory.  The  Queen 
of  Sheba  returned  to  her  home  with  higher  thoughts  of  God  than  she  had  before. 
IV.  The  IMPRESSIVE  spectacle  of  Solomon's  devotion.  The  Queen  admired  "  the 
ascent  by  which  he  went  up  into  the  house  of  the  Lord."  Some  understand  these 
words  of  a  magnificent  communication  which  Solomon  had  prepared  between  his 
palace  and  the  courts  of  the  temple ;  while  others  explain  them  of  the  cheerful  and 
fervent  solemnity  with  which  he  worshipped,  showing  that  his  heart  was  deeply 
engaged  in  the  hallowed  and  hallowing  service.  {S.  Bridge,  M.A.)  Heart 
communing : — We  have  in  Christ  one  greater  than   Solomon.     I.  We  ought  to 

COMMUNICATE  WITH  HiM  OF  ALL  THAT  IS  IN    OUR  HEART.       Neglcct    of   luterCOUrse    with 

Jesus — 1.  Is  very  unkind.  2.  Betrays  the  sad  fact  of  something  wrong. 
3.  Shows  a  want  of  confidence  in  His  love,  sympathy,  and  wisdom.  4.  Will  be 
the  cause  of  uneasiness  in  ourselves.  5.  Will  involve  the  loss  of  counsel  and  help. 
6.  Is  greatly  aggravated  by  eagerness  to  tell  our  troubles  to  others.  11.  We  need 
NOT  CEASE  COMMUNING  FOB  WANT  OF  TOPICS.  1.  Our  sorrows.  2.  Our  joys.  3.  Our 
service.  4.  Our  plans.  5.  Our  success  and  failures.  6.  Our  desires.  7.  Our 
fears.  8.  Our  lives.  9.  Our  mysteries.  III.  Nor  shall  we  cease  communing  for 
WANT  OP  reasons.  Intercourse  with  Christ — 1.  Is  ennobling  and  elevating. 
2.  Consoling  and  encouraging.  3.  Sanctifying  and  refining.  4.  Safe  and  healthy. 
5.  Delightful  and  heavenly.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  8.  Therefore  made  he  thee  king  over  them. — The  Divine  appointment  of 
kings: — I.  That  princes  are  of  Divine  appointment,     II.  That  wise  and  good 

BULERS  are  a  SIGNAL  MARK  OP  THE  DlVINE  LOVE  AND  FAVOUR  TO  ANT  NATION.      III.  ThE 

DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  REGAL  OFFICE  AND  DIGNITY,  both  In  lespoct  of  God  and  of  the 
people.  IV.  That  on  the  advancement  of  a  prince  eminently  qualified  to  serve 
God  and  his  country  we  ought  to  bless  God,  that  is,  to  return  the  tribute  of 
praise  due  to  Him.  (Abp.  Potter.)  The  blessing  of  a  Protestant  king  and  royal 
family  to  the  nation: — I.  That  it  is  God  who  maketh  kings,  and  setteth  them  on 
their  thrones  as  His  vicegerents  to  do  justice  and  judgment  upon  earth.     II.  All 

KINGS   SHOULD   REMEMBER  THAT  THEY  SIT  UPON  THE  THRONE  OF  THE    LORD    THEIR    GOD, 

of  whom  the  Psalmist  says,  that  righteousness  and  judgment  are  the  habitation  of 
His  seat.  They  must  therefore  be  good  and  just,  ruling  in  His  fear,  and  after  His 
example.    (John  Donne,  D.D.) 

Ver.  9.  And  of  spices  great  abundance. — The  spicery  of  religion : — Solomon  had 
a  great  reputation  for  the  conundrums  and  riddles  that  he  made  and  guessed.  The 
Solomonic  navy  visited  all  the  world,  and  the  sailors,  of  course,  talked  about  the 
wealth  of  their  king,  and  about  the  riddles  and  enigmas  that  he  made  and  solved  '^ 
and  the  news  spread  until  Queen  Balkis,  away  off  south,  heard  of  it,  and  sent 
messengers  with  a  few  riddles  that  she  would  like  to  have  Solomon  solve,  and  a  few 
puzzles  that  she  would  like  to  have  him  find  out;  Queen  Balkis  was  so  pleased 
with  the  acuteness  of  Solomon,  that  she  said:  "I'll  just  go  and  see  him  for 
myself."  Yonder  it  comes — the  cavalcade — horses  and  dromedaries,  chariots  and 
charioteers,  jingling  harness  and  clattering  hoofs,  and  blazing  shields,  and  flying 
ensigns,  and  clapping  cymbals.  The  place  is  saturated  with  the  perfume.  She 
brings  cinnamon,  and  saffron,  and  calamus,  and  frankincense,  and  all  manner  of 
sweet  spices.  I  shall  take  the  responsibility  of  saying  that  all  the  spikenard  and 
cassia  and  frankincense  which  the  Queen  of  Sheba  brought  to  Solomon  is  mightily 
suggestive  of  the  sweet  spices  of  our  holy  religion.     I.  Men  require  more  of  the 

BPICERY  OF  RELIGION  TO  BRIGHTEN  THEIR  LIFE  AND  SWEETEN  THEIR  DISPOSITION  AMID 
THE  CARES  AND  DUTIES  OP  LIPB.  II.  Wb  NEED  TO  PUT  MORE  SPICE  AND  ENLIVENMENT 
IN  OUR  RELIGIOUS  TEACHING.  III.  We  WANT  MORE  LIFE  AND  SPICE  IN  OUR  CHRISTIAN 
WORK.      IV.  Wb   need   more  spice  and  ENLIVENMENT  IN  OUR  ChURCH  MUSIC.       V.    ThE 

RELIGION  OP  Christ  is  a  present  and  everlasting  redolence  that  counteracts  all 
TROUBLE.  It  lifted  Samuel  Kutherford  mto  a  revelry  of  spiritual  delight  while  he- 
was  in  physical  agonies.  It  helped  Richard  Baxter  until,  in  the  midst  of  such  a 
complication  of  diseases  as  perhaps  no  other  man  ever  suffered,  he  wrote  "  The 
Saint'    Everlasting  Best."    And  it  poured  light  on  John  Bunyan's  dungeon — the 


88  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

light  of  the  shining  gate  of  the  shining  city.  Oh,  you  sin-parched  and  you  trouble- 
pounded,  here  is  comfort,  here  is  satisfaction.  I  cannot  tell  you  what  the  Lord 
offers  you  hereafter  so  well  as  I  can  tell  you  now.  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what 
we  shall  be."  May  God  grant  that  through  your  own  practical  experience  you  may 
find  that  religion's  ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness,  and  that  all  her  paths  are  paths 
of  peace — that  it  is  perfume  now  and  perfume  for  ever.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 
Spiced  work ; — More  than  that,  we  want  more  life  and  spice  in  our  Christian  work. 
The  poor  do  not  want  so  much  to  be  groaned  over  as  sung  to.  With  the  bread,  and 
medicines,  and  the  garments  you  give  them,  let  there  be  an  accompaniment  of 
smiles  and  brisk  encouragement.  Do  not  stand  and  talk  to  them  about  the 
wretchedness  of  their  abode,  and  the  hunger  of  their  looks,  and  the  hardness  of 
their  lot.  Ah  !  they  know  it  better  than  you  can  tell  them.  Show  them  the  bright 
side  of  the  thing,  if  there  be  any  bright  side.  Tell  them  good  times  will  come. 
Tell  them  that  for  the  children  of  God  there  is  immortal  rescue.  Wake  them  up 
out  of  their  stolidity  by  an  inspiring  laugh,  and  while  you  send  in  practical  help, 
like  the  Queen  of  Sheba,  also  send  in  the  spices.  There  are  two  ways  of  meeting 
the  poor.  One  is  to  come  into  their  house  with  a  nose  elevated  in  disgust,  as  much 
as  to  say:  "I  don't  see  how  you  live  here  in  this  neighbourhood.  It  actually 
makes  me  sick.  There  is  that  bundle ;  take  it,  you  poor  miserable  wretch,  and 
make  the  most  of  it."  Another  way  is  to  go  into  the  abode  of  the  poor  in  a  manner 
which  seems  to  say :  *•  The  blessed  Lord  sent  me.  He  was  poor  Himself.  It  is  not 
more  for  the  good  I  am  going  to  try  to  do  you  than  it  is  for  the  good  that  you  can 
do  me."  Coming  in  that  spirit,  the  gift  will  be  as  aromatic  as  the  spikenard  on  the 
feet  of  Christ,  and  all  the  hovels  in  that  alley  will  be  fragrant  with  the  spice. 
(Ibid.)  Spiced  life : — The  fact  is  that  the  duties  and  cares  of  this  life,  coming  to 
us  from  time  to  time,  are  stupid  often,  and  inane  and  intolerable.  Here  are  men 
who  have  been  battering,  climbing,  pounding,  hammering  for  twenty  years,  forty 
years,  fifty  years.  One  great,  long  drudgery  has  their  life  been.  Their  face 
anxious,  their  feelings  benumbed,  their  days  monotonous.  What  is  necessary  to 
brighten  up  that  man's  life,  and  to  sweeten  that  acid  disposition,  and  to  put  sparkle 
into  the  man's  spirits  ?  The  spicery  of  our  holy  religion.  Why,  if  between  the 
losses  of  life  there  dashed  a  gleam  of  an  eternal  gain  ;  if  between  the 
betrayals  of  life  there  came  the  gleam  of  the  undying  friendship  of  Christ ;  if  in 
dull  times  in  business  we  found  ministering  spirits  flying  to  and  fro  in  our  office, 
and  store,  and  shop,  every-day  life,  instead  of  being  a  stupid  monotone,  would  be  a 
glorious  inspiration,  penduluming  between  calm  satisfaction  and  high  rapture. 
How  any  woman  keeps  house  without  the  religion  of  Christ  to  help  her  is  a  mystery 
to  me.  To  have  to  spend  the  greater  part  of  one's  life,  as  many  women  do,  in 
planning  for  the  meals,  and  stitching  garments  that  will  soon  be  rent  again,  and 
deploring  breakages,  and  supervising  tardy  subordinates,  and  driving  off  dust 
that  soon  again  will  settle,  and  doing  the  same  thing  day  in  and  day  out,  and  year 
in  and  year  out,  until  the  hair  silvers,  and  the  back  stoops,  and  the  spectacles 
crawl  to  the  eyes,  and  the  grave  breaks  open  under  the  thin  sole  of  the  shoe — oh,  it 
is  a  long  monotony  1  But  when  Christ  comes  to  the  drawing-room,  and  comes  to 
the  kitchen,  and  comes  to  the  nursery,  and  comes  to  the  dwelling,  then  how  cheery 
become  all  womanly  duties !  She  is  never  alone  now.  Martha  gets  through  fretting 
and  joins  Mary  at  the  feet  of  Jesus.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  21.  And  apes,  and  peacocks. — Apet  and  peacocks  (to  children) : — We  learn 
from  this  passage — I.  That  a  rich  man  can  okt,  as  far  as  worldly  goods  are  con- 
cerned, ALMOST  WHAT  HE  LIKES  IN  THIS  WORLD.  II.  WhAT  EVEN  WISE  MEN  WILL  DO, 
WHEN    THEY    HAVE   MORE    MONEY    THAN   THEY  KNOW  HOW  TO  USE.       Such  WaS  SolomOU'S 

position ;  apes  and  peacocks  were  costly,  and  so  he  had  a  special  desire  to  have  a 
goodly  number  about  him.  (D.  Davies.)  Apet : — I.  The  ape  is  somethino  like  us, 
AND  YET  he  IS  VERY  MUCH  UNLIKE  US.  1.  He  canuot  Speak.  2.  He  cannot  learn. 
3.  He  has  no  foresight  or  forethought.  It  is  wonderful  how  deceptive  appearances 
can  be.     II.  The  ape  is  only  a  caricature  of  a  man,  and  does  not  imitate  him  in  his 

BETTER  MOVEMENTS  OR  HABITS  ;  80  YOU  GENERALLY  FIND    THAT    IF  A  CHILD  OR    MAN    APES 

ANOTHER,  HE  APES  HIM  ONLY  IN  HIS  FALLINGS.  I  saw  a  boy  the  othcr  day,  who  could 
not  have  been  more  than  eleven,  vigorously  puffing  the  end  of  a  cigar  that  he 
had  picked  up  somewhere.  He  evidently  thought  he  looked  like  a  man,  but  I  need 
not  tell  you  how  disgusted  I  felt,  and  wished  that  he  could  imitate  the  man  in  a 
more  manly  way.  He  stupidly  aped  a  gentleman  whose  failing  was  that  he  smoked 
at  all.   Learn  to  be  natural.    Let  the  one  desire  of  your  life  be  to  be  true.    Never  put 


CHAP.x.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  89 

on  a  false  look  or  try  to  live  under  false  pretences.  (Ibid.)  Peacocks  : — The 
peacock  has  a  beautiful  tail,  and  in  this  respect  no  bird  can  match  him.  But  the 
more  you  know  about  him  the  less  you  think  of  his  tail.  He  can  only  screech 
hideously  when  he  tries  to  sing.  He  is  also  a  very  gluttonous  and  a  very  selfish 
and  destructive  character.  The  beautiful  bird  has  nothing  to  commend  it  except  its 
beautiful  feathers.  Its  characteristic  failing  is  vanity.  I.  I  want  you  to  remember 
that  THEKE  AKE  SOME  PEOPLE  IN  THE  WORLD  LIKE  THAT  PEACOCK.  Everything  dcpcnds 
upon  their  dress,  or  their  outward  appearance.  But  if  you  get  to  know  their 
disposition  and  their  conduct,  you  will  very  often  cease  to  be  charmed  with  their 
dress.  II.  I  want  you  to  odabd  toubselves  against  attaching  too  much  im- 
PORTANCB  to  APPEARANCES.  God  does  not.  Leam  that  the  truest  ornament  is  "  a 
meek  and  gentle  spirit,  which  in  the  sight  of  God  is  of  great  price."     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  31.  And  Solomon  slept  wltli  hia  fathers. — The  death  of  Solomon : — Such  is 
the  sole  record  of  the  departure  of  the  most  magnificent  king  of  the  Israelitish 
nation.  1.  Why  is  this  ?  For  it  was  not  so  with  David,  his  father,  whose  last 
days,  and  almost  last  thoughts,  last  prayers  and  exhortations,  are  fully  detailed. 

2.  Nothing  on  the  first  sight,  in  popular  judgment,  appears  more  excellent  and  full 
of  hope  than  that  petition  of  Solomon  when,  just  called  to  the  throne,  he  asked  of 
God  wisdom  and  knowledge,  "that  I  may  go  out  and  come  in  before  this  people." 
God  granted  him  his  request.  His  reign  proved  to  be  one  of  unexampled  splendour. 
Prosperity  almost  to  overflow  poured  in  upon  the  nation.  But  as  the  monarch's 
glory  increased,  his  personal  character  declined.  He  sank  morally  and  religiously. 
He  became  tyrannical  and  despotic,  and  grievously  oppressed  his  subjects.  Then 
intense  sensuality  set  in.  So  deeply  did  he  fall  that  his  name  has  been  connected 
with  the  practice  of  the  magical  arts  and  sorceries  denounced  in  the  law  of  Moses. 

3.  How  shall  we  account  for  this  ?  Was  it  that  from  the  first  his  heart  was  not 
set  upon  God,  but  upon  self  ?  that  when  he  asked  at  first  for  wisdom  to  rule  God'a 
people,  he  only  thought  of  the  honour  he  would  gain  thereby  ?  Or  is  it  that  we  here 
witness  in  an  individual  the  corrupting  influences  of  a  civilisation  not  merely 
luxurious,  but  high  and  cultivated,  when  it  discards  the  faith  in  God  ?  4.  Which- 
ever it  be,  by  both  alternatives  we  are  warned  that  wisdom,  even  high,  intellectual, 
and  varied,  is  not  godliness,  and  cannot  take  its  place ;  that  where  it  is  unsanctified, 
a  worm  lies  at  its  root.  6.  It  is  a  solemn  thought  that  the  temple,  the  culminating 
point  of  Solomon's  glory,  was  the  harbinger,  and  in  a  degree  the  cause,  of  the 
decline  of  his  nation.  The  exactions  and  the  oppressive  burdens  its  extravagant 
cost  entailed  upon  the  people  alienated  them,  made  the  monarchy  hateful,  and 
prepared  the  nation  for  revolt.  6.  Twice  since  has  the  same  thing  been  witnessed. 
The  sale  of  indulgences  to  help  the  building  of  St.  Peter's  led  to  the  disruption  of  a 
large  part  of  Christendom.  So  also  the  gorgeous  palace  of  the  French  monarch, 
the  memorial  of  his  boundless  luxury  and  consequent  oppression,  was  the  prelude 
of  that  great  convulsion  from  which  the  nation  has  never  recovered.  Such  is  the 
logic  of  mere  human  splendour  and  luxury.  7.  What  was  the  end  of  this  renowned 
monarch  ?  What  was  the  final  stamp  set  upon  his  character  ?  Scripture  is  sUent 
on  the  point,  and  Christendom  has  always  been  divided  in  regard  to  it.  Those  who 
have  thought  and  hoped  the  best  of  him  have  rested  their  hopes  chiefly  on  the  tenor 
of  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes.  But  no  tone  of  repentance  pervades  this  solemn 
writing ;  no  utterance  of  contrition  or  even  personal  remorse ;  not  one  such 
anguished  cry  for  forgiveness  as  pervades  several  of  David's  psalms ;  no  humiliation 
appears  in  it,  not  even  such  as  Ahab's;  no  confession,  even  such  as  Saul's. 
Solomon  appears  to  pass  away  and  "  make  no  sign."    (Archdeacon  Grant,  D.CJj.) 


CHAPTER  X. 

Vebs.  1-19.  And  Rehoboam  went  to  Shechem. — Eehoboam : — A  cause  so  stated 
must  succeed.  There  will  be  difiiculty,  but  the  end  is  assured.  The  reasonable 
always  triumphs,  due  time  being  given  for  the  elucidation  of  its  purposes,  and  the 
manifestation  of  its  real  spirit.  Violence  can  have  but  a  short  day ;  the  tempest 
cries  itself  to  rest.  "  Ease  thou  somewhat  the  grievous  servitude  of  thy  father,  and 
his  heavy  yoke  that  he  put  upon  us,  and  we  will  serve  thee."    They  wanted  ease 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

for  service,  for  loyalty.     Where  there  is  no  ease  how  can  there  be  homage,  thank- 
fulness, devotion,  or  any  of  the  high  qualities  of  patriotism  ?     How  tempted  men 
are,  who  are  not  themselves  disquieted,  to  tell  other  people  to  bear  their  burdens 
uncomplainingly !     The  sufferers  should  sometimes  be  admitted  to  the  witness-box. 
There  is  danger  lest  our  personal  comfortableness  should  disqualify  us  from  judging 
the  case  of  downtrodden  men.     Wherever  there  is  weakness  the  Christian  Church 
should  be  found  ;  wherever  there  is  reasonableness  the  Christian  sanctuary  should 
offer  hospitality.     Is  there  anything  more  detestable  than  that  a  man  who  has  his 
own  way  seven  days  a  week,  whose  footsteps  are  marked  by  prosperity,  whose  very 
breathing  is  a  commercial  success,  should  stand  up  and  tell  men  who  are  bleeding 
at  every  pore  to  be  quiet  and  contented,  and  not  create  disturbance  in  the  body 
politic  ?    If  Jeroboam  had  come  with  a  petition  conceived  in  another  tone  it  ought 
to  have  been  rejected;  it  would  have  been  irrational,  violent,  contemptuous;  but 
the  reasonableness  of  the  request  wiU  ensure  its  victory  in  the  long  run.     How  easy 
it  is  to  think  of  Eehoboam  as  the  foolish  son  of  a  wise  father  I    But  are  we  not 
unjust  to  the  son  in  so  regarding  him  ?    Was  Solomon  the  wise  man  he  is  often 
made  out  to  be  ?  The  answer  would  be  "  Yes" — and  "  No."  There  was  no  greater  fool 
than  Solomon  ;  and  he  attained  his  supremacy  in  folly  because  there  was  no  man 
so  wise.     "  If  the  light  that  is  in  thee  be  darkness,  how  great  is  that  darkness  1  " 
•'  How  art  thou  fallen  from  heaven,  0  Lucifer,  son  of  the  morning  I  "    If  he  had 
not  been  son  of  the  morning  some  shallow  pit  might  have  held  him ;  but  being  son 
of  the  morning,  and  detaching  himself  from  the  gravitation  of  God,  the  pit  into 
which  he  falls  is  bottomless.    Pliny  says  no  man  can  be  always  wise.     That  is  true 
philosophically  and  experimentally;  for  all  men  have  vulnerable  heels,  or  are 
exposed  to  temptations  to  lightness  of  mind,  amounting  in  some  instances  almost 
to  frivolity ;  they  are  also  the  subjects  of  a  singular  rebound,  which  makes  them 
appear  the  more  frivolous  because  when  we  last  saw  them  they  were  absorbed  in 
the  solemnity  of  prayer.    Solomon  himself  is  not  wise  in  this  matter  of  government. 
The  history  shows  that  the  people  were  appealing,  not  against  Eehoboam,  who  had 
yet  had  no  opportunity  of  proving  his  quality  as  a  king,  but  against  his  father : 
«♦  Thy  father  made  our  yoke  grievous."    We  are  prone  to  copy  the  defects  of  our 
ancestors  and  their  idols  rather  than  their  excellences.     We  are  tempted  in  wrong 
directions.    Folly  has  often  more  charms  for  us  than  wisdom.    Eehoboam  made  a 
cautious  reply,  and  therein  he  began  well ;  he  said  to  the  petitioners,  "  Come  again 
unto  me  after  three  days."    This  looked  hopeful.     King  Eehoboam  utilised  the 
interval  by  taking  "  counsel  with  the  old  men  that  had  stood  before  Solomon  his 
father  while  he  yet  lived,  saying,  What  counsel  give  ye  me  to  return  answer  to  this 
people  ?    And  they  spake  unto  him,"  as  old  men  ought  to  speak.     Eich  is  the  king 
whose  old  men  talk  in  such  a  strain  I     They  were  patriots  and  philanthropists  and 
philosophers ;  they  were  Christians  before  the  time.     Marvellous  is  the  power  of 
kindness.    They  will  do  most  in  life  who  are  most  considerate.     If  when  the  people 
returned  after  three  days  Eehoboam  had  spoken  so,  the  welkin  would  have  rung 
with  the  resonant  cheers  of  a  delighted,  thankful,  because  emancipated,  people.  We 
have  opportunities  of  this  kind:  let  every  man  know  that  in  proportion  to  his 
kindness  will  be  the  quality  and  the  durableness  of  his  influence.     Kindness  is  not 
weakness.     It  takes  Omnipotence  to  be  merciful,  in  the  largest  degree  and  fullest 
quality  of  the  term.     He  to  whom  power  belongs  holds  in  His  other  hand  the  angel 
whose  name  is  Mercy.     "  But  he  forsook  the  counsel  which  the  old  men  gave  him, 
and  took  counsel  with  the  young  men  that  were  brought  up  with  him,  that  stood 
before  him  "   (ver.  8) — showing  that  he  understood  the  message  of  the  people 
perfectly  ;  he  correctly  represented  the  popular  will,  and  therefore  he  increased  his 
own  responsibility,  because  he  was  not  the  victim  of  ignorance.     "  And  the  young 
men  that  were  brought  up  with  him  spake  unto  him,  saying  "  (vers.  10,  11).     Woe 
to  the  nation  whose  young  men  talk  so  1     A  young  oppressor  is  an  infant  devil. 
Young  men  talking  so  will  ruin  any  occasion.    This  may  appear  to  be  a  very 
advanced  policy,  a  very  spirited  policy,  home  and  foreign.    It  is  a  spirited  policy : 
but  what  is  the  name  of  the  spirit  that  inspires  it  ?    Does  a  controversy  of  this 
kind  begin  in  a  question,  and  end  in  an  answer  ?     Or  is  there  a  reply  ?    Are  there 
such  things  in  history  as  retorts,  reprisals,  rebounds,  consequences?    Let  it  be 
known,  and  laid  down  as  the  basis-principle  of  all  action,  social,  ecclesiastical,  and 
imperial,  that  there  is  no  right   of  tyranny.     Oppression  has  no  veritable  and 
reputable  credentials.     Men  are  not  at  liberty  to  take  counsel  whether  they  shall  be 
gentle  or  ungentle.     The  law  is  unwritten,  because  eternal,  that  even  righteousness 
must  be  administered  in  mercy.    It  might  be  supposed  that  the  king  had  taken  a 


CHAP.x.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  41 

most  patriotic  course  in  consulting  the  old  and  the  young.  He  had  done  nothing 
of  the  kind  :  he  had  omitted  to  consult  Him  who  had  called  his  house  to  the 
royalty.  Kehoboam  should  have  consulted  the  King-maker  whose  throne  is  on  the 
circle  of  the  earth,  and  whose  sceptre  toucheth  the  horizon,  and  whose  will  is  the 
law  of  monarchy  and  commonwealth.  All  human  consultation  is  a  species  of 
under-counsel,  valuable  within  proper  limits,  and  right  as  recognising  the  education, 
the  intelligence,  and  the  political  instinct  of  the  times ;  but  all  consultation,  to  result 
in  profoundest  wisdom,  must  be  intensely,  almost  exclusively,  religious.  Kings 
should  talk  to  their  King.  The  greater  the  man  the  nearer  should  he  stand  to  God. 
The  gospel  never  gives  liberty  to  oppression.  Employers  may  adopt  this  course  if 
they  please,  but  they  will  find  it  end  in  ruin.  We  must  recognise  the  difference 
between  employing  cattle  and  employing  men.  A  parent  may  adopt  this  course  if 
he  pleases,  but  his  children  will  chastise  him,  sting  him,  with  many  a  disappoint- 
ment. The  world  has  been  educated  by  oppression.  The  Lord  Himself  has  used 
it  as  an  instrument  in  His  hands.  A  curious  expression  occurs  to  this  effect  in  the 
fifteenth  verse — "  for  the  cause  was  of  God."  Rehoboam  had  not  taken  Him  into 
account,  but  the  Lord  took  the  matter  into  His  own  hand.  The  ministry  of  the 
universe  is  a  ministry  co-operative,  and  is  not  to  be  understood  in  parts  and 
sections,  but  can  only  be  understood  by  those  who  take  in  the  whole  circumference 
on  which  the  Almighty  operates ;  and  that  cannot  be  done  here  and  now.  The 
Saviour  of  the  world  was  not  murdered  by  the  Jews,  except  in  a  secondary  and 
transient  sense ;  He  was  delivered  up  from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world  that 
He  might  make  on  the  universe  an  infinite  impression  and  reveal  to  the  universe 
the  law  of  life  and  the  law  of  sacrifice.  K  our  movement  is  towards  trust,  liberty, 
leniency,  philanthrophy,  beneficence,  we  are  entitled  to  believe  that  this  is  the  very 
logic  of  love,  the  rigorous  reasoning  of  piety  itself.  This  will  apply  to  nations,  to 
families,  to  employers,  to  all  men  to  whom  is  remitted  the  question.  Shall  the  policy 
be  severe,  or  shall  it  be  clement  and  hopeful  ?  Rehoboam  will  be  punished :  have  no 
fear  of  that.  •'  With  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again." 
You  can  make  your  whips  thongs  of  scorpions,  but  upon  your  own  back  shall  the 
lacerating  lash  be  laid;  you  can  play  the  fantastic  trick  before  high  heaven 
and  make  the  angels  weep,  but  the  bitterness  shall  be  yours :  the  triumphing 
of  such  a  policy  is  short,  the  end  of  it  is  everlasting  punishment.  What 
could  we  do  without  such  laws  as  these?  They  are  the  very  ribs  of  the 
universe,  the  very  security  of  society,  the  corner-stone  on  which  God's  fabric 
rests.  We  are  not  the  subjects  of  accidents,  the  changing  whims  of  statesmen ; 
we  are  not  dependent  upon  general  elections  for  the  grand  issue  of  things :  the 
Lord  reigneth.  Let  us  be  true  and  calm.  Only  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  can 
get  at  the  heart  of  things;  deal  with  causes,  fountains,  origins,  and  purify  the 
spring  of  all  life.  Here  the  Saviour  is  gentle  in  His  might,  mighty  in  His  gentle- 
ness ;  He  says,  "  Marvel  not  that  I  say  unto  you.  Ye  must  be  born  again."  When 
the  soul  is  right  the  hands  will  take  to  the  new  policy  with  skill  that  might  have 
been  learned  in  heaven  and  that  is  inspired  by  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
(tT".  Parker,  D.D.)  A  political  crisis  and  a  fatal  policy: — I.  We  see  here  on  the 
part  of  the  ten  tribes,  the  expression  op  a  reasonable  politicaij  aspiration. 
II.  The  example  of  Rehoboam  teaches  by  contrast  what  our  spirit  and  method,  as 
Christian  men  and  a  Christian  nation,  ought  to  be  at  this  time.  III.  And  that 
A  generous  Christian  policy  only  will  effect  the  pacification  of  a  discon- 
tented people  the  example  of  Rehoboam  proves.  {W.  Bishop.)  A  wise  prince 
will  avoid  overtaxing  his  people : — The  Chinese  Emperor  Tchou  set  out  on  a 
journey  to  visit  the  vast  provinces  of  his  empire,  accompanied  by  his  eldest  son. 
One  day  he  stopped  his  car  in  the  midst  of  some  fields  where  the  people  were  hard  at 
work.  "  I  took  you  with  me,"  said  he  to  his  son,  "  that  you  might  be  an  eye-witness 
of  the  painful  toils  of  the  poor  husbandmen,  and  that  the  feeling  their  laborious 
station  should  excite  in  your  heart  might  prevent  your  burdening  them  with  taxes  1 " 
The  foolish  ruler  and  the  revolting  tribes: — I.  The  grievance  stated.  1.  Reason- 
able demand.  (1)  Heavy  taxes.  (2)  Forced  service.  (3)  Long  endured. 
2.  A  national  demand.  II.  The  consultation  held.  IH.  The  decision  given. 
rV.  The  besults  which  followed.  (J.  Wolfendale.)  Advice  : — Judge  Buller, 
when  in  company  of  a  young  gentleman  of  sixteen,  cautioned  him  against  being 
led  astray  by  the  example  or  persuasion  of  others,  and  said  :  "  If  I  had  listened  to 
the  advice  of  some  of  those  who  called  themselves  my  friends  when  I  was  young, 
instead  of  being  a  judge  of  the  King's  Bench,  I  should  have  died  long  ago  a 
prisoner  at  the  King's  Bench."        The  experience  of  old  men : — I  wonder  why  young 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X. 

people  don't  make  more  use  of  old  people  than  they  do.  I  find  it  fascinating  to 
hear  old  sailors  talk,  and  to  listen  to  their  many  stories  of  hair-breadth  escapes. 
One  of  the  privileges  of  old  age  is  to  be  a  guide  to  the  young.  Young  men  should 
take  warning  and  instruction  from  old  men,  for  they  have  been  over  the  ground 
and  know  all  the  risks  and  dangers  of  life.  (George  Dawson.)  Two  methods  of 
treating  men : — I  propose  to  use  the  incident  to  illustrate  the  two  methods  of 
treating  men — the  conciliatory  and  the  unconciliatory — the  principle  applies  to  all 
men  in  some  of  the  relations  of  life ;  and  the  question  is,  "What  is  the  true,  and 
consequently  the  safe,  basis  of  all  government  ?  1.  Social  positions  are  graduated. 
The  strong  man  will  of  necessity,  sooner  or  later,  go  to  the  front  and  claim  the 
influence  which  belongs  of  right  to  his  powers ;  and  the  weak  man  will  be  left  at 
the  point  that  exhausts  his  strength.  Democracy  does  not  equalise  men.  2.  No 
elevation  of  rank  gives  one  man  the  right  to  tyrannise  over  another.  Tyranny  is 
necessarily  associated  with  littleness  of  nature,  Uttleness  somewhere ;  there  may 
be  many  great  qualities,  but  the  nature  as  a  whole  is  of  a  low  type.  3.  The  whole 
tenor  of  the  gospel  is  in  favour  of  magnanimous  conduct  on  the  part  of  those  who 
hold  any  degree  of  rulership.  This  is  an  incidental  proof  of  the  supernatural  origin 
of  the  gospel,  &c.  4.  Pass  in  review  a  few  of  the  cases  in  which  the  two  methods 
of  treating  men  come  into  operation.  Kings,  employers,  parents,  pastors,  all  have 
their  choice  as  to  which  method  they  will  adopt.  5.  The  maintenance  of  a 
conciliatory  policy  is  quite  consistent  with — (1)  Headship ;  (2)  firmness ; 
(3)  justice.  [Pulpit  Analyst.)  Moderation  in  princes  : — The  advice  of  an  ancient 
Prench  counsellor  to  his  sovereign  at  his  departure  was  good.  Being  wished  to  lay 
down  some  general  rules  for  government,  he  took  a  paper,  and  wrote  on  the  top  of 
it  "  moderation,"  in  the  middle  of  it  "  moderation,"  and  at  the  bottom  *'  modera- 
tion." (J.  Trapp.)  Taking  counsel  of  the  young : — So  did  our  King  Kichard  11., 
to  his  utter  ruin.  So  Xerxes  despised  the  grave  counsel  of  his  uncle  Artabanus, 
and  was  led  wholly  by  the  young  Mardonius  to  the  loss  of  all.  The  like  is  reported 
of  Dionysius,  king  of  Sicily ;  Croesus,  king  of  Lydia ;  Nero,  emperor  of  Eome ; 
James  that  reigned  in  Scotland  in  Edward  IV. 's  time  ;  and  Lantrer,  of  whom  it  i*: 
reported  that  he  lost  the  kingdom  of  Naples  from  the  French  king,  his  master,  and 
all  that  he  had  in  Italy,  because  he  would  not  ask  nor  follow  the  advice  of  those 
who  were  wiser  than  himself.  {Ibid.)  Pampered  in  youth,  ruined  in  prime : — 
Many  a  bright  scriptural  character  is  set  before  us  for  our  example ;  this  man  is 
set  before  us  for  our  warning.  There  were  two  things  that  contributed  to  make  his 
life  a  failure.  I.  He  was  brought  up  in  the  lap  of  luxury.  His  father  lived  in  a 
style  of  magnificence  that  has  never  been  equalled.  In  the  midst  of  this  was 
Kehoboam's  youth  and  boyhood  spent.  Nothing  could  have  been  morally  worse 
for  him  than  that.  I  ask  the  head  of  some  large  academy,  "  What  is  the  chief 
cause  of  the  ruin  of  many  lads  belonging  to  respectable  families?  "  and  he  whispers, 
"  Too  much  money."  The  president  of  one  of  the  largest  educational  institutions 
in  America  stated  that  he  believed  the  surest  protection  to  young  men  against  the 
perils  of  opening  life  was  poverty.  The  being  free  from  the  necessity  of  working 
for  a  living  has  been  the  worst  thing  in  the  lot  of  many  a  young  man.  I  have 
personally  known  youths  who  were  unfortunate  enough  to  start  life  with  a 
patrimony  of  £200  a  year,  and  they  never  came  to  anything.  In  the  life  of  Mr. 
Nasmyth  he  says :  "  I  often  observe  in  shop  windows  every  detail  of  model  ships 
and  model  steam-engines,  supplied  ready-made  for  those  who  are  said  to  be  of  a 
mechanical  turn.  Thus  the  /ital  uses  of  resourcefulness  are  done  away  with  and 
the  sham  exhibition  of  mechanical  genius  is  paraded  before  you  by  the  young 
impostors,  the  result,  for  the  most  part,  of  too  free  a  supply  of  pocket-money.  I 
have  known  too  many  instances  of  parents  being  led,  by  such  false  evidence  of 
constructive  skill,  to  apprentice  their  sons  to  some  engineering  firm  and  after 
paying  vast  sums,  finding  out  that  the  pretender  comes  out  of  the  engineering  shop 
with  no  other  practical  accomplishment  than  that  of  glove-wearing  and  cigar- 
emoking."  The  connection  between  Eehoboam  and  kid  gloves  may  not  at  first  be 
apparent,  and  yet  there  is  a  good  deal  in  it,  for  had  he  been  brought  up  less 
luxuriously,  had  he  known  something  in  his  early  days  of  real  hard  work,  he  might 
have  turned  out  a  more  sensible  and  successful  man.  II.  His  refusal  of  th« 
advicb  of  men  who  were  older  and  wiser  than  himself.  Evil  companionship 
proved  his  destruction.  Well  might  he  have  said,  "Save  me  from  my  friends. " 
Their  advice  may  have  been  meant  for  the  best,  yet  like  the  bear  which  from 
friendly  motives,  tried  his  paw  to  remove  a  fly  from  his  master's  face,  they  did 
more  harm  than  good.    Nothing  tells  upon  our  life  more  distinctly  than  our  early 


OHAP.xi.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  43 

choice  of  companions.  We  take  the  colour  of  the  society  we  keep,  as  the  frogs  of 
Ceylon  do  that  of  the  leaf  on  which  they  sit.  Be  slow  to  form  your  friendships. 
Have  nothing  to  do  with  any  one — no  matter  how  smart  and  plausible  he  be — who 
jests  at  sacred  things.  Be  certain  you  will  get  no  good  from  one  who  wants  to 
shake  you  out  of  what  he  calls  your  old-fashioned  principles.  Never  make  a  friend 
of  one  who  avows  himself  an  unbeliever.  The  fear  of  God  is  the  root  of  all  true 
nobleness  of  character,  said  a  French  monarch,  when  once  asked  to  give  his 
consent  to  a  dishonourable  treaty.  "  The  blood  of  Charlemagne  is  in  my  veins ;  and 
who  dares  to  propose  this  thing  to  me  ?  "  Some  of  you  young  men  have  a  pedigree 
still  more  worthy  to  glory  in.  We  want  no  Rehoboams  amongst  us.  We  want  the 
sons  to  be  better  than  their  fathers.  (J.  T.  Davidson.)  The  folly  of  self-will : — 
Dr.  Anderson,  of  the  American  Board,  told  me  that  a  young  man  once  came  to  the 
mission-house  in  Boston  as  a  candidate  for  the  foreign  mission  field.  Dr.  Anderson 
invited  him  to  spend  the  night  with  him  in  Eoxbury,  and  as  they  were  walking 
together,  the  young  man  suddenly  said,  "  I  prefer  to  walk  on  the  right  side."  Dr. 
Anderson  said  to  him,  "  May  I  ask  why  you  walk  on  the  right  side?  Are  you  deaf 
in  one  ear?  "  "No,"  said  the  young  man,  "  but  I  prefer  to  walk  on  the  right  side, 
and  I  always  will  walk  on  the  right  side."  That  young  man  was  not  sent  abroad. 
It  was  evident  that  a  man  who  was  bent  on  having  his  own  way,  without  giving 
reasons,  would  be  likely  to  make  mischief,  and  his  right  side  would  be  pretty  sure 
to  be  the  wrong  side.     (H.  H.  Jessup.)        The  mystery  of  Divine  working : — 

I.  Events  of  history  controlled  and  directed  to  accomplish  Divine  purposes. 

II.  In  the  accomplishment  of  Divine  purposes  men  act  as  free  agents.  III.  Men 
thus  acting  as  free  agents  are  responsible  for  their  actions.  (J.  Wolfendale.) 
Paroxysms  iii  history  : — Nature  has  her  paroxysms.  Sir  Roderick  Murchison  affinns 
that  by  no  possible  extension  of  gradual  and  insensible  causes  could  huge 
masses  of  Tertiary  rocks  have  been  so  thrown  over  as  to  pass  under  the  older  rocks 
of  the  Alps,  out  of  which  they  were  formed.  That  operation,  he  says,  must  have 
been  paroxysmal,  and  no  slow  process  could  have  accomplished  it.  The  crust  and 
outline  of  ^e  earth  are,  in  short,  full  of  evidences  that  many  of  the  ruptures  and 
overthrows  of  the  strata,  as  well  as  great  denudations,  could  not  even  in  millions 
of  years  have  been  produced  by  agencies  like  those  of  our  times.  (Scientijie 
Illustrations.) 


CHAPTER  XI. 

Vers.  1-4.  Ye  shall  not  go  up,  nor  fight  against  yonr  brethren. — The  restraints 
of  Divine  providence:  — I.  Restraints  made  unmistakably  clear.  II.  Restraints 
MERCIFUL  IN  DESIGN.  III.  Restraints  timely  made.  IV.  Restraints  implicitly 
heeded.  {J.  Wolfendale.)  Uninspired  preparations : — Pity  it  is  that  God  seems 
to  allow  us  to  go  to  such  costs  and  then  stops  us  just  at  the  last  moment.  "  Ye 
shall  not  go  up."  There  is  pity  in  the  arrangement,  but  it  is  not  on  the  side  of 
God.  It  is  a  pity  that  we  did  not  consult  God  before  we  called  the  enemy  together. 
He  will  be  consulted  at  one  end.  He  wishes  to  be  consulted  at  the  beginning,  but 
if  we  will  not  consult  Him  there,  we  must  consult  Him  at  the  end.  Our  prepara- 
tions amount  to  nothing  if  they  are  not  inspired.  All  our  education  comes  to 
smoke  and  wind  if  it  be  not  an  education  derived  from  the  altar  and  enriched  with 
the  wisdom  of  God.  Send  out  a  hundred  and  fourscore  thousand  chosen  men  from 
academy  and  college  and  university,  loaded  with  the  blank  cartridges  of  ten 
thousand  certificates  and  testimonials ;  if  the  Lord  is  not  in  it  He  will  send  them 
aU  back  again  until  He  calls  for  their  aid.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver,  17.  For  three  years  they  wallced  In  the  way  of  David. — Experimental 
goodness : — Three  years  of  experimental  goodness  ought  to  be  three  years  of 
personal  consolidation.  To  get  three  years  ahead  of  the  enemy  ought  to  be  a  great 
advantage.  The  doctors  say  that  it  takes  three  years  to  get  drink  really  out  of  a 
man's  system  and  no  man  is  safe  until  he  has  quite  passed  the  line  of  three  years. 
These  critical  times  in  life  are  the  making  of  life,  when  they  are  really  seized 
aright  as  to  their  spirit  and  highest  significance.     (Ibid.) 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 


CHAPTER    XII. 

Vekb.  1,  2,  He  forsook  the  law  of  tlie  Lord,  and  all  Israel  with  him. — Eehohoariif 
first  king  of  Judah : — Individual  lives   attract  and  reward  attention ;  hence  the 
interest  and  fascination  of  fiction   and  history.     What  others  have  experienced 
and  done  comes  to  us  as  a  revelation  of  a  life  in  which  we  share.     I.  lis  waste 
OF  OPPORTUNITIES  EXCEPTIONALLY  GRAND.     1.  He  was  the  fivst  king  of  Judah.    Unless 
forfeited  by  misconduct,  special  honour  and  grateful  appreciation  are  the  inheritance 
of  the  founders  of  a  dynasty.     Conspicuous  in  time  and  relative  position,  they  have 
an  acknowledged  leadership,  though  dead  for  centuries.     2.  He  inherited  institutions 
and  traditions  of  a  prestige  sacred  and  commanding.    His  was  the  city  of  David, 
with  all  its  history,  radiant  with  the  Divine  presence ;  his  the  temple,  of  which  God 
was  the  architect  and  his  father  the  master  builder  ;  his  the  unbroken  priesthood, 
exalted  to  a  genuine  mediatorship  between  God  and  His  people ;  his  all  the  costly 
and  sacred  relics  upon  which  the  Queen  of  Sheba  looked  with  amazement ;  about 
himself  centred  the  hope  of  a  coming  prophet,  ruler ;  his  the  sole  honour  of  con- 
tinuing the  royal  line.    3.  He  was  of  mature  age  and  superior  abilities.    4.  He  had 
the  best  material  of  all  Israel  as  well.    Jeroboam  and  his  sons  had  cast  off  the 
Levites  from  executing  the  priest's  office  unto  the  Lord,  and  they  emigrated  to 
Jerusalem  in  a  body,  "  and  after  them,  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  such  as  set 
their  hearts  to  seek  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  came  to  Jerusalem,  to  sacrifice  unto  the 
Lord  God  of  their  fathers."    Thus  all  the  land  of  Canaan  was  sifted  for  his  benefit. 
6.  The  very  smallness  of  Judah  was  an  element  of  strength.    He  could  and  did 
intrench  himself  in  his  central  fortress  on  Zion,  and  surround  himself  with  a  chain 
of  fortresses  mutually  supporting  from  their  proximity.     His  people  were  homo- 
geneous, and  not  liable  to  the  jealous  rivalries  which  imperilled  the  ten  divisions  of 
Israel.    But  alas  1  the  example  of  Kehoboam  reveals  the  insufficiency  of  opportunities, 
however  golden,  to  command  a  wise  improvement.    11.  His  inability  to  bear 
PROSPERITY.     When  strengthened  in  his  little  kingdom  of  Judah,  he  at  once  repeated 
the  folly  which  had  only  recently  dispossessed  him  of  the  grand  unbroken  empire  left 
by  Solomon.    Like  multitudes,  before  and  since,  he  was  willing  to  use  God's  help 
when  in  extremity,  but  when  successful,  when  apparently  sailing  in  smooth  waters, 
he  and  aU  Israel  forsook  the  law  of  the  Lord.    How  inexplicable  that  blindness 
which  increases  with  added  light,  that  moral  and  spiritual  weakness  which  grows 
when  supplemented  with  all  Divine  help,  that  confidence  in   self  buUt  out  of 
dependence  and  gracious  gifts  1    Eehoboam  and  his  numberless  imitators  in  all 
time    illustrate  this.    Left  to  himself,  he  mars  and  almost  ruins  the  grandest 
schemes  of  infinite  wisdom,  and  foils  the  gracious  designs  of  a  long-suffering  God 
for  his  own  rescue  and  elevation.    IH.  Chastisement  brought  partial  repentance 
AND  HUMILITY.    There  is  such  a  thing  as  "  final  permanence  of  character,"  upon 
which  all  Divine  warnings  or  dealings  are  unavailing  except  to  harden.     All  moral 
character  is  voluntary,  but  the  absoluteness  of  moral  inability  is  only  the  measure 
and  result  of  obdurate  wilfulness.     We  are  inclined  to  credit  the  humility  of 
Eehoboam,  because  it  vindicated  God  in  the  midst  of  His  judgments.    He  and  hia 
princes  said,  "  The  Lord  is  righteous."    Their  lips,  and  possibly  their  hearts,  may 
have  been  free  from  murmuring  when  city  after  city  crumbled  before  invading  hosts. 
Bepentance  is  safe  to  the  degree  in  which  it  acknowledges  and  enthrones  God.    We 
cannot  omit  passing  mention  of  the  superior  inheritance  of  those  who  submissively 
suffer.    The  tragedy  of  life  comes  from  hopeless,  helpless  opposition  to  the  irresistible. 
IV.  Nevertheless,  religion  was   not  its  controlling   influence.     Though  he 
never  quite  cast  off  God,  he  "  did  evil  because  he  fixed  not  his  heart  to  seek  the 
Lord."    When  the  service  of  God  dominates  affections,  plans,  and  deeds,  then,  and 
not  until  then,  is  true  and  steady  progress  possible.     There  can  be  no  harmony,  no 
worthy  enthusiasm,  nor  any  noble  elevation  to  life  which  enthrones  self.      We  live 
in  a  time  of  special  peril,  because  of  its  wealth  of  opportunity.      Never  were  the 
resources  of  the  world  so  placed  at  man's  disposal.    But  this  wealth  of  opportunity 
brings  a  corresponding  peril.     Nothing  but  a  heart  "fixed  to  seek  the  Lord"  can 
withstand  its  temptations  to  indulgence,  to  pride  of  power,  to  high  looks  and  vain 
imaginations.    V.  A  change  op  masters  for  the  worse.     This  change  of  masters, 
and  opportunity  to  compare  their  respective  service,   which  was  thus  true  of 
Rehoboam,  has  a  perfect  parallel  in  the  lives  of  all  wanderers  from  God.    Man  will 
have  some  master,  and  he  cuts  loose  from  glad  allegiance  to  God — the  only  true 
liberty — only  to  give  servile  obedience  to  a  tyrant.    It  is  one  of  the  reassuring  signs 


CHAP,  xn.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  45 

of  progress  to-day  that  man  as  an  individual — his  rights,  his  essential  worth,  and 
dignity — is  valued  and  talked  about  more  than  the  collective  State  or  nation  ;  but  a 
danger  lurks  in  the  shadow  of  the  gain.  That  individuality  is  in  danger  of  becoming 
overweening  and  imperious.  The  ego  may,  and  sometimes  does,  glory  in  a  self- 
sufiSciency  that  looks  almost  patronisingly  upon  the  Divine  existence,  or  denies  it 
altogether.  Virtue  is  a  queen  whose  subjects  note  her  faintest  wish,  but  their 
service  is  perfect  liberty.  It  springs  from  the  gladness  of  pure  hearts,  and  knows 
no  compulsion  but  sweet  willingness.  (Monday  Club  Sermons.)  Established  in 
life  : — An  accursed  word  is  that  sometimes — "established  "  or  "strengthened,"  or 
prospered,  or  succeeded.  It  was  the  mark  of  the  place  where  we  turned  hell-ward. 
We  prayed  when  we  were  poor.  We  went  to  the  sanctuary  when  we  were  weak.  Who 
can  stand  fatness,  sunshine,  all  the  year  round  ?  Where  are  the  rich  ?  How  delicate 
in  health  they  became  when  their  riches  multiplied  I  How  sensitive  to  cold  when  they 
rolled  round  in  gorgeous  chariot  drawn  by  prancing  and  foaming  steeds  1  How  short- 
tempered  when  they  became  long-pursed !  What  a  change  in  their  public  prayera 
when  they  became  the  victims  of  social  status  and  reputation !  (J.  Farker, 
D.D.)  Because  they  had  transgressed  against  the  Lord. — Transgression  against 
the  Lord : — See  how  religious  the  Bible  is  I  We  should  now  say  that  men  are 
punished  because  they  have  transgressed  the  laws  of  nature ;  men  are  suffering 
because  they  have  transgressed  the  laws  of  health ;  men  are  in  great  weakness 
because  they  have  tempted  debility,  and  brought  it  upon  themselves  by  neglect 
or  by  indulgence.  Even  atheists  have  explanations.  They  cannot  treat  life  as  a 
piece  of  four-square  wood,  the  whole  of  which  can  be  seen  at  once ;  even  they  have 
laws,  ministries,  spectral  actions,  physiological  explanations ;  it  would  seem  as  if 
the  Bible  gathered  up  all  these  and  glorified  them  with  a  Divine  name,  and  said, 
"  This  is  the  Lord's  doing."    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  8.  Nevertheless  they  shall  be  Ma  servants. — Servitude  or  service — which  f 
— I.  That  theke  ake  some  who  have  albeady  chosen  the  sekvice  of  the  kikgdoms 
OF  the  counteies.  Some  have  chosen — 1.  To  be  the  slaves  of  open  sin.  2.  To  be 
the  votaries  of  money-making.  3.  To  be  lovers  of  fashion,  lovers  of  society, 
admirers  of  the  world.  4.  To  become  the  devotees  of  "culture."  6.  To  be  the 
seekers  of  self-righteousness.  II.  Some  seem  to  be  pining  to  give  up  the  servicb 
OF  God,  and  to  go  to  the  service  of  the  kingdoms.  Some  want  to  change — 1.  Out 
of  sheer  love  of  change.  2.  Because  of  the  outward  aspect  of  the  new  thing. 
3.  Because  of  their  loss  of  joy  in  the  service  of  God.  4.  Because  of  the  flagging  of 
others.  6.  Because  religion  now  has  brought  them  to  a  point  where  it  entaik  some 
extra  self-sacrifice.  III.  Theee  is  a  great  contrast  between  the  service  of  God 
and  ant  other  service.  The  service  of  God  is  delightful.  Eemember,  young  man, 
if  you  are  about  to  engage  in  the  service  of  God — 1.  There  is  nothing  demanded  of 
you  that  will  harm  you.  2.  There  is  nothing  denied  you,  in  the  service  of  God, 
that  would  be  a  blessing  to  you.  3.  That  in  the  service  of  God  strength  will  always 
be  given  according  to  your  day.  4.  That  there  is  no  threat  made  to  hang  upon  it. 
6.  All  the  while  that  you  are  a  servant  of  God,  you  have  a  sweet  peace  in  reflecting 
upon  what  you  have  done.  6.  There  is,  above  all  this,  a  hope  of  the  eternal  reward 
which  is  so  soon  to  come.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Comparative  service : — It  is  an  old 
failing  of  human  nature  not  to  know  when  it  is  well  off,  and  the  text  furnishes  an 
illustration  of  that  failing.  There  is  a  great  lesson  here  for  to-day.  Adam  was  dis- 
contented with  Paradise,  Israel  with  Canaan,  and  many  now  are  despising  the  goodly 
inheritance  we  have  in  Christ.  We  are  fond  of  comparing  the  service  of  God  with 
alternative  services,  to  the  disparagement  of  the  former.  I.  Compare  the  faith  of 
Christ  with  the  faith  of  scepticism.  I  say  the  faith  of  scepticism,  for  the  sceptic 
has  a  creed  just  as  truly  as  the  Christian  believer  has.  Many  are  greatly  dissatisfied 
with  the  Christian  revelation ;  they  are  anxious  to  set  it  aside,  to  find  substitutes 
for  it.  The  proverb  says :  "  The  cow  in  the  meadow,  knee-deep  in  clover,  often 
looks  over  the  hedge  and  longs  for  the  common."  So,  many  are  now  looking  over 
the  hedge  of  revelation,  and  longing  for  the  bare  wastes  and  the  wild  growths  of 
infidelity.  1.  If  we  renounce  revelation,  shall  we  be  better  off  intellectually  ?  It 
must  be  remembered  that  if  revelation  is  rejected,  all  the  dark  problems  of  nature, 
all  the  perplexing  enigmas  of  human  life,  wiU  still  be  left.  Bevelation  has  not 
created  the  confusions,  the  cruelties,  the  calamities  of  the  world.  You  will  not  make 
&  black  sky  blue  by  smashing  the  weather-glass ;  you  will  not  turn  cruel  winter  into 
glorious  summer  by  throwing  out  the  thermometer ;  neither  will  you  get  rid  of 
sorrow  and  mystery  and  death  by  rejecting  the  Bible.     Can  you,  having  rejected 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

revelation,  give  that  dark  world  any  clearer  or  happier  intei-pretation  ?  2.  If  w« 
renounce  revelation,  shall  we  be  better  off  as  pertaining  to  the  conscience  ?  Take 
away  the  Bible,  and  conscience  is  left — an  accusing  conscience  is  left.  To  what 
terrible  beliefs  and  deeds  an  accusing  conscience  drives  men  the  history  of  paganism 
clearly  shows.  A  guilty  conscience  built  the  wicker-basket  of  Druidism  ;  it  doomed 
the  children  to  pass  through  the  fire  to  Molech.  "  Yes,"  you  reply,  "  but  it  is 
impossible  for  these  tragedies  of  superstition  to  be  repeated  ;  Druidism,  for  instance, 
can  never  come  back  again."  Who  can  say  what  may,  or  may  not,  come  back 
again  ?  Theosophy  teaches  that  through  endless  reincarnations  we  must  be  purged 
from  our  sins.  Our  sorrows  in  this  life  are  the  results  of  the  sins  and  errors  of  past 
incarnations,  and  before  us  is  a  dreary  vista  of  fresh  incarnations  in  which  we  are 
again  to  sin  and  suffer.  It  is  terrible  to  think  of  the  monstrous  intellectual  and 
religious  systems  which  must  arise  when  men  no  longer  know  the  mercy  of  God  in 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  The  guilty  conscience  will  not  go  to  sleep ;  it  will  have 
blood  and  tears.  3.  If  we  renounce  revelation,  shall  we  be  better  off  touching  cha- 
racter ?  If  unbelief  triumphed,  and  Christ  were  rejected  as  the  pattern  and  perfecter 
of  character,  would  anything  be  gained?  The  whole  world  of  thoughtful  men 
acknowledges  the  marvellous,  the  incomparable  moral  beauty  of  Jesus  Christ. 
II.  Compare  the  doctrine  of  Christ  with  the  doctrine  of  the  world.  Thus 
many  now  are  inclined  to  prefer  the  worldly  life  to  the  Christian  life.  It  seems  so 
much  more  free.  Men  feel  that  the  Christian  law  retards  their  youth,  cramps  and 
foils  their  appetites  and  curiosities.  But  is  this  so  ?  "  The  doctrine  of  Jesus  is 
hard,  men  say.  But  how  much  harder,"  exclaims  Tolstoi,  "  is  the  doctrine  of  the 
world  1 "  Take  its  doctrine  of  glory.  Cruel  doctrine  I  What  blood,  groans,  tears, 
it  implies  I  And  not  only  on  the  battlefield  is  the  doctrine  of  glory  seen  to  be  merci- 
less ;  it  works  woe  in  a  thousand  subtle  ways  in  aff  spheres  of  human  life  and 
action.  Take  its  doctrine  of  gain.  How  that  principle  of  selfishness,  which  is  the 
doctrine  of  the  world,  grinds  men  to  powder  I  Take  its  doctrine  of  fashion.  What 
a  terrible  price  the  world  exacts  for  its  empty  shows,  its  vain  titles,  its  purple  and 
gold  1  Take  its  doctrine  of  pleasure.  Millions  have  been  ruined  by  following  in  its 
paths  of  roses  and  music  and  beauty.  How  cruel !  Ah !  the  world  has  far  more 
martyrs  than  the  Church  has.  And  what  is  the  doctrine  of  Jesus  that  men  call 
hard  ?  Instead  of  the  doctrine  of  glory,  He  teaches  the  doctrine  of  humility  and 
service  ;  for  the  doctrine  of  gain,  the  doctrine  of  equity  and  love ;  for  the  doctrine 
of  fashion,  the  doctrine  of  simplicity  and  truth  ;  for  the  doctrine  of  pleasure,  the 
doctrine  of  purity  and  peace.  Well  may  Jesus  dare  to  say,  "  My  yoke  is  easy,  and 
My  burden  is  light."  III.  Compare  the  law  of  Christ  with  the  service  of  self- 
will.  A  man  says :  "  I  will  not  be  restrained ;  I  will  determine  my  own  path, 
choose  my  own  pleasures,  shape  my  own  character,  be  the  architect  of  my  own 
fortune.  It  shall  throughout  be  according  to  my  own  preferences  and  determina- 
tions." Is,  then,  the  self-willed  man  happy  ?  Is  he  happy  as  he  sets  himself  against 
nature?  You  tell  your  boy  not  to  play  with  fire;  but  he  is  self-willed,  and  takes 
the  opportunity  to  sport  with  matches  and  gunpowder,  and  probably  repents  ever 
after.  It  does  not  pay  to  set  up  our  will  against  the  grand  ordinances  of  nature.  Is 
the  self-willed  man  happy  as  he  opposes  himself  to  the  laws  and  institutions  of 
society  ?  To  outrage  the  judgments,  the  feelings,  the  rights  of  society  is  to  be 
keenly  miserable.  Is  the  self-willed  man  happy  within  himself  ?  You  say  proudly, 
"  I  am  my  own  master."  Could  you  have  a  worse  ?  It  is  a  terrible  thing  to  set  up 
our  will  against  the  Divine  will  as  that  will  is  expressed  in  the  physical  universe,  in 
society,  or  as  it  seeks  to  fulfil  itself  in  our  personal  nature  and  life.  Self-will  is 
captivity  and  ruin :  loving  obedience  to  the  will  of  God  in  Christ,  with  its  self- 
control  and  self-denial,  is  health  and  peace.  To  be  His  slaves  is  to  be  kings.  Sur- 
render yourselves  to  Him,  and  prove  what  is  that  good  and  acceptable  and  perfect 
will  of  God.  "  The  service  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  countries."  The  Jews  often 
heard  delightful  things  about  this  foreign  service.  They  remembered  the  fish  which 
they  did  eat  in  Egypt  freely,  the  cucumbers,  and  the  melons,  and  the  leeks,  and  the 
onions,  and  the  garlic.  Nothing  to  do  in  Egypt  but  to  regale  themselves  with 
piquant  viands,  and  to  stroll  under  the  palms  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile.  They  heard 
of  the  attractions  of  Babylon,  of  its  hanging  gardens,  its  luxuries  and  delights. 
And  the  ambassadors  of  Sennacherib  painted  for  them  in  glowing  colours  the  life  of 
Assyria :  ••  A  land  of  corn  and  wine,  a  land  of  bread  and  vineyards."  No  more 
work,  no  more  worry,  no  more  worship.  Getting  away  from  Jerusalem,  they  were 
to  get  away  from  temple  and  law,  from  priest  and  prophet,  and  to  taste  the  plea- 
lores  of  an  unfettered  life.    But  did  they  find  captivity  so  desirable  ?    You  who  are 


CHAP,  xn,]  II.  CHRONICLES.  47 

tempted  to  despise  God's  "Word,  beware.  Young  men,  weary  of  the  order  and 
restraint  of  a  godly  home,  and  ever  hankering  after  a  looser  life,  be  wise,  and  stay 
thankfully  where  you  are.  Discontented  Englishmen,  ever  protesting  against 
narrowness  and  austerity,  against  Protestantism,  Puritanism,  and  bumbledom,  and 
ever  looking  with  longing  eyes  to  laxer  civilisations,  be  content ;  subdue  your  mur- 
murings  and  wantonness,  lest  God  spoil  you  of  your  rich  inheritance.  Discon- 
tented Christians,  ever  casting  lingering  glances  at  the  life  you  have  left,  be 
content ;  see  to  it  that  there  is  in  you  no  evil  heart  of  unbeUef  in  departing  from  the 
living  God.     {W.  L.  Watkinson.) 

Vers.  9,  10.  Instead  of  which  king  Rehohoam  made  shields  of  brass. — The  down- 
icard  grade : — See  how  deterioration  follows  all  character  that  goes  down  in  its  reli- 
gious aspects.  This  deterioration  marks  the  whole  progress  of  human  development. 
Is  it  not  so  with  regard  to  all  personal  service  ?  How  ardent  we  once  were  1  How 
devoted  to  the  house  of  God,  how  punctual  in  attendance,  how  zealous  in  worship  ! 
How  we  longed  for  the  hour  of  praise  to  double  itself,  that  we  might  have  long 
intercourse  with  the  Father  and  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Ghost  I  Now  how  soon  we 
become  uneasy,  how  we  long  to  be  released,  how  patience  becomes  sensitive,  and 
yields  in  angry  surrender  because  too  much  tried  I  You  never  bring  gold  for  brass 
when  yon  leave  God.  The  prodigal  never  brings  any  treasure  back  with  him. 
When  men  go  away  intellectually  from  the  Bible  they  bring  back  brass  for  gold. 
When  they  leave  the  Bible  morally  they  bring  back  brass  for  gold.  When  they 
leave  sympathetically  they  bring  back  artifice  for  inspiration,  mechanics  for  vital 
communion.    (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  And  when  he  humbled  himself,  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  turned  Trom  him. 
— Prosperity  : — I.  The  place  in  which  there  was  this  prospebitt.  1.  Things  will 
go  on  well  in  our  own  country — (1)  When  the  intelligence  of  its  inhabitants  shall 
keep  pace  with  their  means  of  information.  (2)  When  their  conduct  shall  keep 
pace  with  their  increasing  knowledge.  (3)  When  the  Christian  Church  shall 
employ  all  those  means  for  the  salvation  of  the  world  which  are  placed  within  her 
power.  2.  Things  may  be  said  to  go  on  well  in  a  Church  when  there  is  a  unani- 
mous desire  to — (1)  Understand;  (2)  practise  ;  (3)  and  spread  the  gospel.  H.  Thb 
TIME  WHEN  THERE  WAS  THIS  PROSPERITY  in  Judah.  **  And  whcu  he  humbled  him- 
self," &o.  When  the  Church  shall  humble  herself  for  her  sins,  she  will  realise  an 
amount  of  prosperity  hitherto  unknown.  1,  Some  of  the  sins  which  should  induce 
this  humiliation.  (1)  Ignorance.  (2)  Persecution.  (3)  The  profanation  of  the 
Sabbath.  (4)  Drunkenness.  (5)  Covetousness.  (6)  Infidelity.  2.  The  character  of 
that  repentance  which  is  necessary.  It  must  be — (1)  Deep.  (2)  Universal.  (3)  Daily. 
(Zech.  xii.  10-13).  III.  The  acknowledgment  or  this  prosperity.  Lessons:  We 
may  learn — 1.  That  one  individual  may  be  the  source  of  incalculable  good,  or 
incalculable  evil.  2.  The  importance  of  a  knowledge  of  history,  which  illustrates 
the  dealings  of  God  with  men.  8.  The  gratitude  we  owe  to  God  for  having  given 
UB  the  means  of  prosperity.     {H.  Hollis.) 

Ver.  14.  He  prepared  not  his  heart  to  seek  the  Lord. — Rehohoam  the  unready  :— 
I.  He  did  not  begin  life  with  seeking  the  Lord.  II.  He  showed  no  heart 
IN  seeking  the  Lord  afterwards.  HI.  He  was  not  fixed  and  pebsevebinq  in 
seeking  the  Lord.  IV.  He  had  no  care  to  seek  the  Lord  thoroughly. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Rehohoam  : — I.  Implied  obligation.  To  seek  the  Lord  is  the 
obligation  of  aU.  This  is  suggestive — 1.  Of  the  loss  sustained.  How  is  God  lost 
toman?  He  has  lost — (1)  The  true  knowledge  of  His  character.  (2)  The  conscious 
enjoyment  of  His  favour.  (3)  The  blessedness  of  communion  with  Him.  2.  Of 
its  retrievableness.  For  this  purpose — (1)  God  has  revealed  Himself  to  man  in 
His  own  nature.  (2)  The  redemptive  work  of  Christ  is  made  known.  (3)  The 
Holy  Spirit  performs  His  beneficent  functions.  8.  Of  the  importance  of  its 
recovery.  H.  Mental  conviction.  In  Eehoboam  we  see  mental  conviction 
arising  from  knowledge  of  duty,  promptings  of  conscience,  consciousness  of  guilt. 
This  is  a  mental  state  of  frequent  occurrence.  It  may  be  observed  —  1.  As 
the  effect  of  truth.  The  Word  of  God  is  "a  discoverer  of  the  thoughts  and 
intents  of  the  heart."  Felix.  There  are  many  Felixes.  2.  As  intensified  by 
circumstances.  3.  As  critical  in  its  results.  How  much  depends  on  moments  of 
conviction  I  They  are  often  the  turning-points  of  destiny.  It  does  not  seem  that 
Eehoboam  ever  paused  in  his  downward  career  from  this  time  forward.     IH.  Moral 


48  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

iNFiRMiTT.  There  was  want  of  decision  in  Rehoboam.  He  did  not  prepare  his 
heart  to  seek  the  Lord.  This  may  be  traced — 1.  To  sensual  habits  (chap.  xi. 
18-23 ;  1  Kings  xiv.  21-24).  2.  To  evil  companionship.  3.  To  Satanic  tempta- 
tion. IV.  AccuMTTLATED  GUILT.  "  He  did  cvU  because,"  &c.  This  sin  was  parent 
of  a  host.  He  sinned  in  this  neglect  of  known  duty,  and  in  what  resulted  from  it. 
So  do  all  who  pursue  a  like  course.  They  sin — 1.  In  resisting  their  convictions. 
2.  In  self-depravation.  "  Beware  lest  any  of  you  be  hardened  through  the  deceit- 
fulness  of  sin."  3.  The  depravation  of  others.  Through  his  guilty  conduct  the 
people  were  corrupted.  "One  sinner  destroyeth  much  good."  {S.  A.  Browning.) 
A  heart  not  fixed  : — The  marginal  reading  is,  "  He  fixed  not  his  heart  upon  the 
Lord."  This  was  a  favourite  expression  of  David's.  "  My  heart  is  fixed,  0  God, 
my  heart  is  fixed."  ♦•  His  heart  is  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord."  Perhaps  it  was 
intended  to  draw  a  contrast  between  the  character  of  Eehoboam  and  his  far  worthier 
ancestor.  Eeligion  is  not  a  thing  that  can  be  taken  up  in  a  loose,  careless  manner. 
It  claims  the  whole  purpose  and  energy  of  the  heart.  In  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress," 
Prudence  wished  to  know  from  Christian  how  he  was  enabled  to  overcome  his 
temptations  and  to  persevere  in  the  good  and  holy  way.  Christian's  reply  was, 
♦'  When  I  think  of  what  I  saw  at  the  Cross,  that  will  do  it ;  when  I  look  upon  my 
broidered  coat,  that  will  do  it ;  when  I  look  into  the  roll  that  I  carry  in  my  bosom, 
that  will  do  it ;  and  when  my  thoughts  wax  warm  about  whither  I  am  going,  that 
will  do  it."  I  cannot  do  better  than  follow  in  the  line  of  the  great  dreamer's 
allegory.  I.  The  febst  condition  of  a  fixed  heart  is  a  sight  of  the  Cross. 
The  world's  religion  ends  with  forgiveness ;  God's  religion  begins  with  it.  There 
is  nothing  that  imparts  such  solidity  to  character,  and  such  strength  and  dignity  to 
life,  as  conscious  peace  with  Heaven.  H.  The  next  thing  is  to  look  upon  tour 
"  BROiDEKED  COAT  " — the  rightcousuess  that  is  "  unto  all  and  upon  all  them  that 
believe."  III.  Bunyan's  pilgrim  looked  also  oftentimes  into  the  roll  which  he 
CARRIED  IN  his  BOSOM.  Habitual  study  of  the  Bible  is  indispensable  to  a  healthy 
condition  of  the  soul.  McCheyne  would  not  speak  to  any  one  in  the  morning  till 
he  had  first  of  all  heard  the  voice  of  God.  It  gives  a  tone  to  the  whole  day,  when 
we  begin  the  day  with  Him.     IV.  "  When  his  thoughts  waxed  warm  about  whitheb 

HB   WAS    GOING,"    THAT    GAVE    FIXEDNESS    TO    CHRISTIAN'S    HEART.       YoU    may    bc   HOUe 

the  less  shrewd  as  to  the  interests  of  time  because  you  are  wise  as  to  the  concerns  of 
eternity ;  like  a  trusty  pilot,  who,  though  his  eyes  are  on  the  stars,  keeps  his  hand 
upon  the  helm.  [J.  T.  Davidson,  D.D.)  True  and  false  seeking: — I.  There  is 
what  one  may  call  natural  seeking.  Seeking  is  the  language  of  human  want. 
The  cravings  of  life  will  always  demand  attention.  All  the  industries  of  the  world, 
with  their  ten  thousand  beneficent  developments,  are  the  products  of  human 
wisdom  to  supply  human  wants.  Human  life  is  but  a  seeking  in  so  many  ways, 
from  the  cradle  to  the  grave.  II.  Seeking  the  Lord.  This  is  not  born  of  nature, 
but  of  grace.  Seeking  the  Lord  implies  a  conscious  sense  of  weakness  and 
insufiBciency.  III.  Heart  preparation.  All  true  and  successful  seeking  of  the 
Lord  comes  of  prepared  hearts.  The  heart  is  always  the  part  that  makes  our 
hearing,  believing,  praying,  and  doing  right  or  wrong.  As  soon  as  the  sun  rises  in 
the  morning  the  birds  are  ready  to  go  forth  from  their  nests  to  sing.  So  it  is  with 
all  the  moral  forces  or  faculties  of  the  soul  when  the  heart  is  prepared  to  seek  the 
Lord.  The  heart  is  to  the  whole  man  what  the  main-spring  is  to  the  watch — it 
sets  all  the  other  powers  in  motion.  "But  as  the  bowl,"  says  one,  "runs  as  the 
bias  inclines  it,  and  as  the  ship  moves  as  the  rudder  steers  it,"  so  man  seeks  as  the 
heart  prompts  him.  A  prepared  heart  is  a  loving  heart,  "  believing  true  and  clean." 
It  enters  into  the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High  as  a  loving  child  enters  into  his  father's 
home.  Whence  Cometh  this  preparation?  There  must  be  some  elKcient  cause  to 
account  for  the  differences  we  see  among  men.  The  diiference  between  the  common 
field  and  the  garden  to-day  has  been  brought  about  by  the  application  of  human 
thought  and  manual  skill.  It  is  even  so  with  respect  to  differences  among  men. 
As  the  garden  did  not  enclose  itself,  or  of  itself  become  more  fertile  than  the  field, 
neither  have  men  become  different  among  their  fellows  or  before  God  except  by 
different  resolutions  of  will  and  energy  of  character.  Those  who  exercise  no  fore- 
thought or  natural  sagacity  become  as  the  man  who  built  his  house  upon  the  sand. 
IV.  The  evil  of  neglecting  to  prepare  the  heart.  Men  may  do  evil  by  failing 
to  do  well.  Mere  neglect  is  sufficient  to  ruin  a  man.  A  man  need  not  be  openly 
profane  or  wicked  to  be  excluded  from  God's  presence ;  he  has  but  to  neglect  the 
means  of  grace,  or  to  prepare  his  heart  to  seek  the  Lord  while  He  may  be  found, 
to  call  upon  Him  while  He  is  near.     {John  Kerr  Campbell,  D.D.) 


CHAP.xra.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  49 


CHAPTER  Xin. 

Vers.  4-12.  And  Abijali  stood  up  upon  mount  Zemaralm. — A  great  tpeeeh: — 
Its  claims  concebning  Judah.  God  recognised — 1.  In  the  gift  of  the  kingdom. 
2.  In  the  worship  and  services  of  the  temple.     3.  In  the  warfare  of  life.     II.  In 

ITS  ACCUSATIONS  AGAINST  ISBAEL.   III.  ItS  PASSIONATE  APPEAL  TO  THE  PEOPLE. 

1.  Religion  is  appealed  to.  2.  History  is  appealed  to.  3.  Humanity  is  appealed 
to.  [J.  Wolfendale.)  Abijah's  speech : — Abijah's  speech  is  unique.  There  have 
been  other  instances  where  commanders  have  tried  to  make  oratory  take  the  place 
of  arms.  Sennacherib's  envoys.  When  Octavian  was  at  war  with  his  fellow- 
triumvir  Lepidus  he  made  a  daring  attempt  to  run  over  his  enemy's  army.  Riding 
openly  into  the  hostile  camp,  he  appealed  to  the  soldiers  by  motives  as  lofty  as  those 
urged  by  Abijah,  and  called  upon  them  to  save  their  country  from  civil  war  by 
deserting  Lepidus.  At  the  moment  his  appeal  failed,  and  he  only  escaped  with  a 
wound  in  his  breast ;  but  after  a  while  his  enemy's  soldiers  came  over  to  him  in 
detachments,  and  eventually  Lepidus  was  compelled  to  surrender  to  his  rival. 
Another  instance  of  a  successful  appeal  to  a  hostile  force  is  found  in  the  history  of 
the  first  Napoleon,  when  he  was  marching  on  Paris  after  his  return  from  Elba. 
Near  Grenoble  he  was  met  by  a  body  of  royal  troops.  He  at  once  advanced  to  the 
front,  and,  exposing  his  breast,  exclaimed  to  the  opposing  ranks,  "  Here  is  your 
emperor ;  if  any  one  would  kill  me  let  him  fire."  The  detachment,  which  had 
been  sent  to  arrest  his  progress,  at  once  deserted  to  their  old  commander.  {W.  H. 
Bennett,  M. A.)  The  lessons  of  Abijah's  speech: — These  are  two.  I.  The  import- 
ance OF  AN  OFFICIAL  AND  DULY  ACCREDITED  MINISTRY.  Every  Church  has  In 
practice  some  ofiBcial  ministry,  even  those  Churches  that  profess  to  owe  their 
separate  existence  to  the  necessity  of  protesting  against  an  official  ministry.  Men 
whose  chief  occupation  is  to  denounce  priestcraft  may  themselves  be  saturated 
with  the  sacerdotal  spirit.  II.  The  importance  of  a  suitable  and  authoritative 
aiTUAL.  Every  Church,  too,  has  its  ritual.  The  silence  of  a  Friends'  meeting  is  as 
much  a  rite  as  the  most  elaborate  genuflexion  before  a  highly  ornamented  altar. 
To  regard  either  the  absence  or  presence  of  rites  as  essential  is  equally  ritualistic. 
The  man  who  leaves  his  wonted  place  of  worship  because  "  Amen  "  is  sung  at  the 
end  of  a  hymn  is  as  bigoted  a  ritualist  as  his  brother  who  dare  not  pass  an  altar 
without  crossing  himself.     (Ihid.) 

Vers.  12-17.  And  behold,  God  Himself  la  with  us  for  our  captain. — God  with  us : 
— We  have  here — I.  A  mysterious  doctbine.  II.  A  comfoeting  tbuth.  III.  A 
SOLEMN  fact.  {Bp.  Montugu  Villiers.)  Man's  extremity  and  God's  power  to  help : 
— I.  God's  people  are  often  brought  into  extbemitees.  1.  By  their  own 
foolish  enterprises.  2.  By  the  temptations  of  their  enemies.  3.  By  the  providence 
of  God  leading  them,  to  test  and  train  them.  II.  God's  people  are  delivered  by 
Him  in  extremities.  1.  By  prayer:  "  They  cried  unto  the  Lord."  2.  By  super- 
natural power.  {J.  Wolfendale.)  The  Holy  War : — It  is  not  my  intention 
to  discuss  the  merits  of  the  quarrel  between  Judah  and  Israel.  That  is  in- 
teresting history ;  but  I  am  now  to  speak  to  you  concerning  our  work  and 
warfare  for  Christ  our  King.  That  we  are  engaged  in  a  fierce  struggle,  with 
a  powerful  foe,  must  be  admitted.  Oh,  let  us  understand  at  the  outset  that 
our  warfare  is  real,  earnest,  desperate ;  that  we  are  not  playing  at  soldiering. 
I.  Let  us  reconnoitre  the  enemy.  It  is  a  great  mistake,  all  too  frequently 
made,  to  ignore  the  strength  of  our  opponents,  to  fail  to  investigate  their 
position  and  their  practices.  No  general  would  think  of  conducting  a  campaign 
without  the  due  precaution  of  reconnoitring.  We  shall  do  well  in  our  war  against 
error  and  iniquity,  and  all  that  is  not  of  our  God,  to  make  all  investigations,  to 
send  some  forth  to  spy  out  the  country  to  discover,  if  possible,  what  the  enemy  is 
designing  against  us.  1.  Turning  to  this  chapter  we  shall  find  that  the  enemy  in 
this  case  consisted  of  rebels  against  the  God-appointed  authority.  They  were,  in 
fact,  insurgents,  of  whom  the  children  of  Judah  said  truly,  "  We  keep  the  charge  of 
the  Lord  of  God  ;  but  ye  have  forsaken  Him."  So  the  men  of  Judah  had  this  to 
help  them  in  their  struggle — they  knew  that  their  position  was  one  that  God 
approved.  They  had  not  forsaken  Him  ;  they  were  by  no  means  perfect,  but  they 
still  held  to  David's  throne  and  to  his  rightful  successor.  They  had  the  strength 
that  always  comes  of  the  consciousness  of  right.  "  Eight  is  might,"  though  some 
•will  have  it  that  might  is  right.    No,  no  1    "  He  is  thrice  armed  who  hath  his  quarrel 

12 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

just,"  and  I  want  to  encourage  my  own  heart  and  yours  by  saying :  We  are  by  no 
means  all  we  should  be,  but  by  the  grace  of  God  we  are  what  we  are.  The  enemy 
has  rebelled  against  God.  These  things  with  which  we  do  battle  are  doomed  to 
destruction,  and  we  are  authorised  to  help  to  hasten  the  coming  of  that  doom.  2.  I 
find,  further,  that  these  men  of  Israel  were  idolaters.  They  worshipped  golden 
calves,  and  almost  any  man  who  wished  could  become  a  priest  to  those  that  were 
no  gods.  Our  struggle  also  is  against  idolatry.  I  am  speaking  on  behalf  of  foreign 
missions.  Believe  me,  there  is  idolatry  both  here  and  there.  3.  I  find  here  again, 
that  the  children  of  Israel  are  spoken  of  as  vain  men,  and  children  of  Belial. 
There  had  gathered  in  that  north  country  men  of  no  repute,  ne'er-do-wells,  and 
those  who  had  come  to  grief,  empty-headed  men — for  such  is  the  real  meaning  of 
the  word  "  vain."  The  children  of  Belial  were  utterly  unprincipled,  many  of  them 
were  doubtless  renegades,  the  castaways  of  society.  We  do  not  fight  against  those- 
who  have  lost  their  reputation,  who  have  sinned  against  the  laws  of  our  land,  as 
■well  as  against  high  heaven  ;  we  go  out  to  try  to  save  them,  we  do  battle  against 
unholiness,  uncleanness,  debauchery,  and  insobriety.  4.  Further,  if  you  look  at 
this  chapter,  you  will  notice  that  the  men  of  Israel  were  determined  characters,  of 
whom  it  is  written  that  "  they  strengthened  themselves."  They  were  very 
numerous,  but  they  did  not  trust  to  numbers,  they  took  every  precaution  to  ensure 
success.  We  may  learn  some  lessons  from  our  foes.  How  diligent  they  are,  how 
active,  how  united.  How  earnestly  they  combine  to  defeat,  if  possible,  the  purposes 
of  God,  and  our  attempts  to  do  His  will.  Oh,  that  we  were  as  earnest  as  they  I 
With  a  Master  infinitely  better,  why  should  we  not  serve  Him  with  twice  as  much, 
zeal  as  they  who  serve  the  devil?  5.  The  numbers  of  Israel  were  very  large,  twice 
as  many  as  Judah  possessed ;  and  oh,  how  many  are  the  forces  and  principles  of 
evil  with  which  we  have  to  contend  I  Ah  !  but  let  us  remember  that  numbers  are 
not  everything.  We  shall  have  to  remind  one  another  presently  that  God  is  with 
us.  How  many  count  you  Jehovah  for  ?  Yet  we  must  not  under-estimate  the  foe  ; 
they  are  numberless.  Oh,  that  our  forces  were  increased  !  6.  And,  moreover,  they 
are  wily.  Did  you  notice,  as  we  read,  how  the  king  of  Israel  set  an  ambush  against 
Abijah  and  his  men?  It  was  hardly  a  brave  thing  to  do.  Well,  our  enemy  is  not 
very  particular  how  he  goes  to  work.  The  serpent  is  still  the  most  subtle  of  all  the 
beasts  of  the  field,  but  we  are  not  ignorant  of  his  devices.  II.  What  about  oub  oww 
FORCES  ?  We  must  not  sing  our  own  praises,  but  to  the  glory  of  God,  as  we  review 
our  troops,  we  will  declare,  first,  that  we  are  His.  1.  Moreover,  we  are  well  com- 
manded. Did  you  notice  what  the  king  said  in  the  12th  verse?  "And  behold  God 
Himself  is  with  us  for  our  Captain."  When  Napoleon  went  up  and  down  among 
his  troops  on  the  eve  of  battle,  he  used  to  assure  them  that  he  was  himself  directing 
their  battalions.  That  it  was  which  nerved  them  for  the  fray.  I  think  I  hear  my 
blessed  Master  saying,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  age." 
We  bow  before  Thee,  glorious  Captain  I  Lead  Thou  us  on  1  For  Thou  alone  canst 
lead  to  victory.  2.  Moreover,  the  priestly  service,  with  the  people  of  Judah,  had- 
never  ceased.  Morning  and  evening  the  lamb  was  slain,  and  the  lamp  was  lighted,, 
and  the  incensed  waved.  This  was  a  sign  that  God  was  still  honoured  and  obeyed. 
Ah,  think  of  it  1  We  are  going  forth  to  battle  day  by  day,  but  our  great  High  Priest 
before  the  Throne  still  pleads.  "  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us." 
III.  And  now  about  the  battle.  We  must  not  wonder,  if,  when  beginning  to  fight 
for  God,  we  find  ourselves  in  a  difficulty.  These  men  did.  They  had  not  got  to> 
the  battlefield  before  they  were  caught  in  an  ambushment.  There  were  foes  behind 
them  as  well  as  in  front  of  them.  It  is  not  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world  to  fight 
those  who  attack  us  from  behind.  I  know  some  who  go  out  to  serve  the  Lord, 
either  in  the  home  or  in  the  foreign  field,  who,  as  soon  as  they  find  the  battle  wax 
hot  against  them,  or  discover  themselves  caught  in  a  trap,  begin  to  imagine  that  the 
battle  is  lost  already,  that  they  have  made  a  mistake  in  taking  up  arms  for  God, 
and  are  like  to  turn  tail  forthwith,  only  the  enemy  is  behind  them,  and  they  cannot  1 
Ah  !  what  a  mistake  is  this  1  If  God  brings  us  into  a  crisis,  it  is  that  we  may  trust 
Christ.  What  is  the  best  thing  to  do  when  we  get  into  such  a  state?  Why,  just 
what  these  did.  "  They  cried  unto  the  Lord."  Was  there  time  to  pray,  when  there 
were  enemies  on  either  hand  ?  Yes,  yes,  there  is  always  time  to  pray.  Praying 
time  is  not  lost  time.  Let  us  cry  unto  the  Lord  of  Hosts.  2.  Then  the  priests 
sounded  the  trumpets  to  animate  the  people,  to  call  them  to  their  duty,  to  stir  up' 
within  them  their  slumbering  energies  and  dying  courage.  I  warrant  you  they 
gave  no  uncertain  sound.  Those  silver  trumpets  were  made  all  of  one  piece,  for 
God  will  have  all  His  work  united,  symmetrical,  and  complete.      Those  silver 


CHAP.  XIV.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  61 

trumpets  sounded  out  their  sweetest  and  their  loudest  at  this  critical  juncture.  Be 
it  ours,  leaders  of  the  hosts  of  God,  so  to  sound  forth  the  Word  of  God  that  there 
shall  be  no  mistake  as  to  the  meaning,  and  by  our  brave  demeanour  to  encourage 
all  the  people.  3.  Did  you  notice,  next,  that  the  rank  and  file  commenced  to  shout  ? 
"  The  men  of  Judah  shouted."  No,  no  1  let  us  cry  and  shout,  for  great  is  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel  in  the  midst  of  us.  The  cry  of  prayer  should  be  attended  with  the 
shout  of  faith,  and  if  we  shout  not  audibly  in  our  services  and  meetings,  let  there 
be  shoutings  in  the  soul  which  the  Lord  our  God  can  hear.  The  secret  and  gist  of 
it  all  is  here.  4.  "  They  relied  upon  the  Lord."  There  was  perfect  confidence  in 
heaven.  Even  in  the  midst  of  the  clash  of  arms,  even  when  they  saw  they  had 
apparently  been  bested  by  this  ambushment,  they  still  trusted.  Father,  I  will 
trust  thee,  for  the  work  is  Thine.  5.  "  They  relied  upon  the  Lord  God  of  their 
fathers."  Oh  !  I  like  that  word.  "  The  God  of  Abraham  !  "  The  history  of  the 
patriarch  flashes  through  their  minds  at  the  mention  of  his  name.  •'  The  God  of 
Isaac,  and  of  Jacob,"  and  of  David,  with  whom  He  had  made  a  covenant  of  salt  I 
This  was  the  God  they  relied  on,  and  this  God  is  our  God,  the  God  of  our  fathers. 
Did  He  not  treat  our  fathers  well  ?  Did  He  not  glorify  His  name  through  them  ? 
Did  He  not  make  them  pillars  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  ?  What  God  has  done,  God 
can  do.  Let  us  trust  Him.  6.  As  soon  as  they  fully  trusted  Him,  He  began  to 
work,  and  delivered  Jeroboam  into  the  hand  of  Abijah.  Yes,  the  rule  always  holds 
good,  "Them  that  honour  Me  I  will  honour."  If  you  trust  Him  in  that  little 
work  you  have  in  hand  for  God,  He  will  use  you.  7.  Then  we  must  follow  up  the 
work  that  God  does.  Abijah  and  his  people  slew  their  routed  adversaries.  "  Abijah 
pursued  them."  8.  And  what  about  the  spoils?  When  the  work  is  done  and  the 
victory  won,  what  about  the  booty  ?  Ah  1  it  belongs  to  Him  who  gave  the  power. 
All  must  be  cast  at  Jesus' feet.  Have  we  not  been  often  mistaken  just  here?  We 
asked  Him  for  power  to  serve,  and  thank  God  we  got  it ;  but  when  the  victory  was 
oorg,  we  wanted  to  share  the  honour  with  the  King.    (T.  Spurgeon.) 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


Yebs.  1-4.  And  Asa  did  that  wMcli  was  good  and  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord 
his  God. — Asa  faithful  to  hit  God : — We  have  watched  the  steady  fall  of  the  kingdom 
of  Israel.  Judah  also  began  in  shame  and  ended  in  disaster,  but  its  shame  was  not 
60  unmixed  nor  its  disaster  so  complete.  The  reason  for  this  better  fate  is  sug- 
gested in  our  text :  the  saving  influence  of  good  men  interposed  to  hold  the  people 
to  God  and  prosperity.  Our  lesson  presents  Asa  as  the  righteous  leader  of  his 
people.  1.  Asa  reformed  the  religion  of  Judah.  Like  Gideon,  he  began  his  rule 
with  a  bold  attack  upon  the  popular  idolatry.  The  worship  of  Baal  and  Ashtoreth 
had  clung  to  the  people  ever  since  they  met  it  when  entering  Canaan,  in  spite  of 
God's  warning  that  for  this  very  sin  the  inhabitants  were  cast  out  before  them.  In 
recent  years  Solomon  had  patronised  it,  Eehoboam  encouraged  and  Abijah  con- 
firmed it ;  and  under  these  royal  leaders  Judah  had  become  fascinated  with  its 
worship  and  debauched  with  its  hideous  vice.  But  the  reformer's  axe  went  crashing 
through  the  groves.  He  was  well  named  Asa  {"  Physician,"  "  Cure  "),  for  he  healed 
the  hurt  of  his  people.  We  hear  of  no  resistance  to  his  vigorous  measures.  The 
conscience  of  the  nation  yet  answered  to  the  conscience  of  the  king :  "  the  land  was 
quiet  before  him."  2.  Asa  advanced  the  material  prosperity  of  Judah.  In  the  ten 
years  of  rest  which  God  gave  him  "  he  built  fenced  cities,  with  walls  and  towers, 
gates  and  bars,"  to  protect  them  from  Israel  on  the  north  and  Egypt  on  the  south. 
3.  Passing  now  to  determine  the  nature  and  the  extent  of  Asa's  influence,  we  find 
the  cause  of  his  success  in  his  piety.  He  was  a  sound  reformer,  an  able  king,  and 
a  successful  soldier,  because  he  was  faithful  to  his  God.  "  He  did  that  which  was 
right,  and  commanded  the  people  to  serve  the  Lord."  So,  too,  his  best  work  for  his 
subjects  was  upon  their  characters.  Asa's  influence  was  most  important  and 
enduring.  He  ascended  the  throne  at  a  crisis  in  the  nation's  history.  Israel  was 
already  twenty  years  along  in  its  fatal  transgression,  and  Judah  was  hastening  after 
it.  His  father  and  grandfather  had  forsaken  the  righteousness  of  David  and  per- 
petuated the  iniquity  of  Solomon,  rather  than  his  splendour  or  hia  wisdom.  Had 
the  succeeding  reign  of  forty-one  years  followed  the  same  course,  we  must  believe 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XIT. 

that  the  current  toward  wickedness  would  have  been  set  past  taming.  Had  Asa 
been  like  Jeroboam,  Judah  would  have  gone  down  like  Israel.  Through  Asa's 
faithfulness  the  old  man's  dying  blessing  has  come  to  pass :  "Judah,  thou  art  he 
whom  thy  brethren  shall  praise :  thy  father's  children  shall  bow  down  before  thee, 
and  unto  him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  be."  For  Judah  prevailed  above  his 
brethren,  and  of  him  came  the  chief  ruler.  The  Jewish  monarchy  fell  at  last,  but 
the  real  cause  for  which  Asa  struggled  shall  never  perish.  He  who  reads  the  story 
of  Israel  and  Judah  will  mark  with  wonder  the  controlling  power  exercised  by  the 
king  upon  the  religious  faith  of  the  nation.  If  it  is  written  of  one,  *'  He  did  evil  in 
the  sight  of  the  Lord,"  it  is  always  true  that  "  he  made  Israel  to  sin."  If  he  wor- 
shipped Jehovah,  his  subjects  worshipped  with  him.  The  character  of  the  king 
decided  the  character  of  the  people.  The  saving  influence  of  righteous  leaders. 
The  power  to  lead  others  may  come  either  from  external  circumstances  or  from 
personal  qualities.  1.  The  influence  given  by  external  circumstances.  (1)  Official 
rank  gives  authority.  Asa  did,  as  king,  what  he  could  never  have  accomplished 
as  a  private  citizen.  He  had  direct  control  over  his  dependents.  A  devout  cen- 
turion will  have  a  devout  soldier  to  wait  upon  him.  The  moral  influence  of  those 
in  high  stations  is  wide  and  strong.  Eminence  makes  example  conspicuous. 
(2)  Wealth  brings  influence.     (3)   Employers  have  large   opportunity  for  good. 

2.  Besides  the  control  given  by  external  circumstances,  we  may  notice  the  influence 
of  personal  qualities.  Not  what  the  man  has,  but  what  the  man  is,  makes  him 
a  leader.  Jeroboam  is  an  instance  in  point.  Beginning  life  as  a  common 
labourer,  he  died  king  of  Israel.  How  continually  have  gifted,  accomplished,  and 
learned  men  brought  saving  help  to  the  Church  of  God  throughout  her  history ! 
There  is  a  subtle,  mighty  influence  which  should  always  be  consecrated  to  holy 
uses — popularity,  power  to  win  the  favour  of  others.  Disciplined  character  has  a 
peculiar  mastery  over  others  for  good.  Its  control  is  quieter  and  deeper  than  any 
we  have  marked  ;  it  is  the  atmosphere  of  a  soul  refined  to  its  highest  uses.  "  All 
high  beauty  has  a  moral  element  in  it.  Gross  and  obscure  natures,  however 
decorated,  seem  impure  shambles ;  but  character  gives  splendour  to  youth,  and  awe 
to  wrinkled  skin  and  grey  hairs."  God  has  been  at  great  pains  to  fit  souls  for  this 
service.     {Monday  Club  SerTnons.) 

Yer.  7.  Therefore  said  he  unto  Judah,  Let  us  build  these  cities  .  . .  while  the 
land  Is  yet  before  us. — The  duty  of  improving  present  opportunity  (a  Sunday- 
school  sermon) ; — Consider — I.  The  oppobtdnity  fob  laboue  with  which  wb  ab« 
BLESSED.  "  The  land  is  yet  before  us."  1.  We  have  liberty  to  labour.  2.  The 
facilities  are  great :  multiplication  of  elementary  books,  circulation  of  Bibles,  &c. 

3.  The  encouragements  are  numerous.  The  prejudices  of  society  are  in  our  favour. 
God's  command,  Ac.  II.  The  impobtance  of  laboubino  while  we  have  this 
oppoBTUNiTY.  1.  What  is  the  work  to  which  we  are  called  ?  That  of  teaching  the 
young  the  Word  of  God  (Deut.  vi.  6,  7 ;  Psa.  Ixxviii.  5,  7  ;  Prov.  ixii.  6).  2.  The 
duty  of  improving  existing  opportunities.  Conclusion :  Address  children.  If  you 
had  to  pass  through  a  long  and  dark  passage  where  there  were  many  deep  pits,  how 
anxious,  at  the  beginning,  would  you  feel  for  light.  Such  is  the  Word  of  God  given 
to  you  at  your  entrance  into  life  (Psa.  cxix.  105).     (J.  O.  Breay,  JBw4.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  And  Asa  cried  unto  the  Lord  his  God. — Victoritt  over  guperior 
numberi : — These  victories  over  superior  numbers  may  easily  be  paralleled  or  sur- 
passed by  numerous  striking  examples  from  secular  history.  The  odds  were  greater 
at  Agincourt,  where  at  least  sixty  thousand  French  were  defeated  by  not  more  than 
twenty  thousand  Englishmen ;  at  Marathon  the  Greeks  routed  a  Persian  army  ten 
times  as  numerous  as  their  own  ;  in  India  English  generals  have  defeated  innumer- 
able hordes  of  native  warriors.  For  the  most  part  victorious  generals  have  been 
ready  to  acknowledge  the  succouring  arm  of  the  God  of  battles.  Shakespeare's 
Henry  V.,  after  Agincourt,  speaks  altogether  in  the  spirit  of  Asa's  prayer :  "  O  God, 
Thy  arm  was  here;  and  not  to  us,  but  to  Thy  arm  alone,  ascribe  we  all."  When 
Elizabeth's  fleet  defeated  the  Spanish  Armada,  the  grateful  piety  of  Protestant 
England  felt  that  its  foes  had  been  destroyed  by  the  breath  of  the  Lord  :  "  Afflavit 
Deus  et  dissipantur."  ( W.  H.  Bennett,  M.A.)  The  superiority  of  moral  to 
material  force : — Characteristic  instances  are  to  be  found  in  the  wider  movements  of 
international  politics.  Italy  in  the  eighteenth  century  seemed  as  hopelessly  divided 
as  Israel  under  the  judges,  and  Greece  as  completely  enslaved  to  the  •*  unspeakable 


CHAP.  XIV.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  53 

Turk"  as  the  Jews  to  Nebuchadnezzar  ;  and  yet,  destitute  as  they  were  of  any  ma- 
terial resources,  these  nations  had  at  their  disposal  great  moral  forces  :  the  memory 
of  ancient  greatness  and  the  sentiment  of  nationality  ;  and  to-day  Italy  can  count 
hundreds  of  thousands  like  the  chronicler's  Jewish  kings,  and  Greece  builds  her 
fortresses  by  land  and  her  ironclads  to  command  the  sea.  The  Lord  has  fought  for 
Israel.  But  the  principle  has  a  wider  application.  The  English  and  American 
pioneers  of  the  movements  for  the  abolition  of  slavery  had  to  face  what  seemed  an 
impenetrable  phalanx  of  powerful  interests  and  influences.  It  may  be  objected 
that  if  victory  were  to  be  secured  by  Divine  intervention,  there  was  no  need  to 
muster  five  hundred  and  eighty  thousand  men,  or  indeed  any  army  at  all.  We 
have  no  right  to  look  for  Divine  co-operation  till  we  have  done  our  best ;  we  are  to 
work  out  our  own  salvation,  for  it  is  God  that  worketh  in  us.  {Ibid.)  King  Asa's 
prayer  on  the  eve  of  battle: — I.  Our  text  is  a  prater — the  surest  weapon  in  war 
as  in  all  other  emergencies.  II.  It  is  the  prayer  of  a  king  on  the  eve  of  battle,  and 
therefore  partakes  of  a  national  character.  III.  It  is  a  prayer  of  faith,  exhibit- 
ing RELIANCE  on  THE  DiviNK  ARM  FOR  HELP,  and  therefore  implying  humiliation, 
together  with  a  distinct  conviction  that  no  human  force,  however  vast,  can  prevail, 
except  under  the  recognised  championship  of  the  Almighty.  {Ttie  Penny  Pulpit.) 
The  all-sufficiency  of  God's  help  : — I.  Asa  acted  promptly  and  bnergeticallt  as  the 
OCCASION  REQUIRED.  Only  One  purpose  moved  him,  and  that  was  to  bring  out  all 
the  military  strength  of  his  kingdom,  and  at  once,  with  no  unnecessary  delay,  strike 
the  foe,  every  soldier  realising  that  the  crown  of  victory  was  the  prize  to  be  won  or 
lost,  according  as  he  should  be  faithful  or  unfaithful  in  his  particular  duty.  Having 
acted  thus  promptly  and  energetically,  then — II.  Asa  called  on  God  for  help.  He 
did  not  ask  God  to  work  a  miracle  on  his  behalf.  Whoever  calls  upon  God  for  help 
without  first  helping  himself,  without  first  putting  forth  his  own  efforts  to  secure  that 
for  which  he  invokes  the  Divine  aid,  will  call  upon  God  in  vain.  There  are  other 
elements  of  strength  in  war  besides  those  which  are  merely  physical.  God  is  a  moral 
and  spiritual  force  which  will  make  an  army  of  inferior  numbers  more  than  adequate 
to  encounter  and  overcome  the  mere  physical  force  which  inheres  in  superiority 
of  numbers.  Hence  the  wisdom  and  virtue  of  prayer.  IH.  What  was  the 
ISSUE  ?  "  The  Lord  smote  the  Ethiopians  before  Asa,"  &c.  {W.  T.  Tindley,  D.D.) 
Asa's  prayer : — This  King  Asa,  Eehoboam's  grandson,  had  had  a  long  reign  of 
peace,  which  the  writer  of  the  Book  of  Chronicles  traces  to  the  fact  that  he  had 
rooted  out  idolatry  from  Judah.  "  The  land  had  rest,  and  he  had  no  war  .  .  . 
because  the  Lord  had  given  him  rest."  But  their  came  a  time  when  the  war-cloud 
began  to  roll  threateningly  over  the  land,  and  a  great  army  came  up  against  him. 
Like  a  wise  man  he  made  his  military  dispositions  first,  and  prayed  next.  This 
prayer  contains  the  very  essence  of  what  ought  to  be  the  Christian  attitude  in 
reference  to  all  the  conditions  and  threatening  dangers  and  conflicts  of  life.  I.  The 
WHOLESOME  CONSCIOUSNESS  OF  ouB  OWN  IMPOTENCE.  It  did  not  take  much  to  convince 
Asa  that  he  had  "no  power."  His  army,  according  to  the  numbers  given  of  the 
two  hosts,  was  outnumbered  two  to  one.  If  we  look  fairly  in  the  face  our  duties, 
our  tasks,  our  dangers,  the  possibilities  of  life  and  its  certainties,  the  more  humbly 
we  think  of  our  own  capacity,  the  more  wisely  we  shall  think  about  God,  and  the 
more  truly  we  shall  estimate  ourselves.  The  world  says  "  Self-reliance  is  the 
conquering  virtue."  Jesus  says  to  us,  "  Self-distrust  is  the  condition  of  all 
victory."  And  that  does  not  mean  any  mere  shuffling  off  of  responsibility  from  our 
own  shoulders,  but  it  means  looking  the  facts  of  our  lives,  and  of  our  own  characters, 
in  the  face.  And  if  we  will  do  that,  however  apparently  easy  may  be  our  course, 
and  however  richly  endowed  in  mind,  body,  or  estate  we  may  be,  we  shall  find  that 
we  each  are  like  "  the  man  with  ten  thousand  "  that  has  to  meet  "  the  King  that 
comes  against  him  with  twenty  thousand  "  ;  and  we  shall  not  "  desire  conditions  of 
peace  "  with  our  enemy,  for  that  is  not  what  in  this  case  we  have  to  do,  but  we  shall 
look  about  us,  and  not  keep  our  eyes  on  the  horizon,  and  on  the  levels  of  earth,  but 
look  up  to  see  if  there  is  not  there  an  ally  that  we  can  bring  into  the  field  to  redress 
the  balance,  and  to  make  our  ten  as  strong  as  the  opposing  twenty.  Now  all  that  is 
true  about  the  disproportion  between  the  foes  we  have  to  face  and  fight  and  our  own 
strength.  It  is  eminently  true  about  us  Christian  people,  if  we  are  doing  any  work 
for  our  Master.  You  hear  people  say,  "  Look  at  the  small  number  of  prof essing 
Christians  in  this  country,  as  compared  vnth  the  numbers  on  the  other  side.  What 
is  the  use  of  their  trying  to  convert  the  world?  "  If  the  Christian  Church  had  to 
undertake  the  task  of  Christianising  the  world  with  its  own  strength,  we  might  well 
throw  up  the  sponge  and  stop  altogether.    "  We  have  no  might."    But  we  are  not 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

only  numerically  weak.  A  multitude  of  non-effectives,  mere  camp-followers,  loosely 
attached,  nominal  Christians  have  to  be  deducted  from  the  muster-roll.  So  a  pro- 
found self-distrust  is  our  wisdom.  But  it  is  not  to  paralyse  us,  but  to  lead  to 
something  better,  as  it  led  Asa.  11.  Summoning  God  into  the  world  should 
FOLLOW  wholesome  SELF-DISTRUST.  Asa  uses  a  remarkable  expression,  which  is, 
perhaps,  scarcely  reproduced  adequately  in  another  verse,  "  It  is  nothing  with  Thee 
to  help,  whether  with  many  or  with  them  that  have  no  power."  It  is  a  strange 
phrase,  but  it  seems  most  probable  that  the  suggested  rendering  in  the  Revised 
Version  is  nearer  the  writer's  meaning,  which  says,  "  Lord  1  there  is  none  beside 
Thee  to  help  between  the  mighty  and  them  that  have  no  power,"  which  to  our  ears 
is  a  somewhat  cumbrous  way  of  saying  that  God,  and  God  only,  can  adjust  the 
difference  between  the  mighty  and  the  weak.  Asa  turns  to  God  and  says,  "  Thou 
only  canst  trim  the  scales  and  make  the  heavy  one  the  lighter  of  the  two  by  casting 
Thy  might  into  it.  So  help  us,  0  Lord,  our  God."  One  man  with  God  at  his 
back  is  always  in  the  majority.  There  is  encouragement  for  people  who  have  to 
fight  unpopular  causes  in  the  world.  The  consciousness  of  weakness  may  unnerve 
a  man  ;  and  that  is  why  people  in  the  world  are  always  patting  each  other  on  the 
back  and  saying,  "Be  of  good  cheer,  and  rely  upon  yourself."  But  the  self-distrust 
that  turns  to  God  becomes  the  parent  of  a  far  more  reliable  self-reliance  than  that 
which  trusts  to  men.  My  consciousness  of  need  is  my  opening  the  door  for  God  to 
come  in.  Just  as  you  always  find  the  lakes  in  the  hollows,  so  you  will  always  find 
the  grace  of  God  coming  into  men's  hearts  to  strengthem  them  and  make  them 
victorious,  when  there  has  been  the  preparation  of  the  lowered  estimate  of  one's 
self.  Hollow  out  your  heart  by  self-distrust,  and  God  will  fill  it  with  the  flashing 
waters  of  His  strength  bestowed.  The  way  by  which  we  summon  God  into  the 
field  :  Asa  prays,  "  Help  us,  0  Lord,  our  God,  for  we  rest  on  Thee  "  ;  and  the  word 
that  he  employs  for  "  rest"  is  not  a  very  frequent  one.  It  carries  with  it  a  very 
striking  picture.  It  is  used  in  that  tragical  story  of  the  death  of  Saul,  when  the 
man  that  saw  the  last  of  him  came  to  David  and  drew  in  a  sentence  the  pathetic 
picture  of  the  wearied,  wounded,  broken-hearted,  discrowned,  desperate  monarch 
leaning  on  his  spear.  You  can  understand  how  hard  he  leaned,  with  what  a  grip  he 
held  it,  and  how  heavily  his  whole,  languid,  powerless  weight  pressed  upon  it.  And 
that  is  the  word  that  is  used  here.  "  We  lean  on  Thee  "  as  the  wounded  Saul 
leaned  upon  his  spear.    Is  that  a  picture  of  your  faith  ?    III.  Courageous  advance 

SHOULD    FOLLOW  SELF-DISTRUST  AND    SUMMONING    GoD    BY  FAITH.       It  is  WCll  whcU  Sclf- 

distrust  leads  to  confidence.  But  that  is  not  enough.  It  is  better  when  self-distrust 
and  confidence  in  God  lead  to  courage.  And  as  Asa  goes  on,  "  Help  us,  for  we 
rely  on  Thee,  and  in  Thy  name  we  go  against  this  multitude."  Never  mind  though 
it  is  two  to  one.  What  does  that  matter?  Prudence  and  calculation  are  well 
enough,  but  there  is  a  great  deal  of  very  rank  cowardice  and  want  of  faith  in 
Christian  people,  both  in  regard  to  their  own  lives  and  in  regard  to  Christian  work 
in  the  world,  which  goes  masquerading  under  much  too  respectable  a  name,  and 
calls  itself  "  judicious  caution  "  and  "  prudence."  If  we  have  God  with  us,  let  ua 
be  bold  in  fronting  the  dangers  and  difficulties  that  beset  us,  and  be  sure  that  He 
will  help  us.  IV.  The  all-powerful  plea  which  God  will  answer.  "  Thou  art  my 
God,  let  not  man  prevail  against  Thee."  That  prayer  covers  two  things.  You  may 
be  quite  sure  that  if  God  is  your  God  you  will  not  be  beaten ;  and  you  may  be  quite 
sure  that  if  you  have  made  God's  cause  yours  He  will  make  your  cause  His,  and 
again  you  will  not  be  beaten.  "Thou  art  our  God."  "  It  takes  two  to  make  a 
bargain,"  and  God  and  we  have  both  to  act  before  He  is  truly  ours.  He  gives 
Himself  to  us,  but  there  is  an  act  of  ours  required,  too,  and  you  must  take  the 
God  that  is  given  to  yon,  and  make  Him  yours  because  you  make  yourselves 
His.  And  when  I  have  taken  Him  for  mine,  and  not  unless  I  have,  He  is 
mine,  to  all  intents  of  strength-giving  and  blessedness.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  name  of  God  written  in  life  : — Our  whole  life  ought  to  be  filled  with  His  name. 
You  can  write  it  anywhere.  It  does  not  need  a  gold  plate  to  carve  His  name  upon. 
It  does  not  need  to  be  set  in  jewels  and  diamonds.  The  poorest  scrap  of  brown 
paper,  and  the  bluntest  little  bit  of  pencil,  and  the  shakiest  hand  wiU  do  to  write 
the  name  of  Christ ;  and  all  life,  the  trivialities  as  well  as  the  crises,  may  be  flashing 
and  bright  with  the  sacred  syllables.  Mohammedans  decorate  their  palaces  and 
mosques  with  no  pictures,  but  with  the  name  of  Allah  in  gilded  arabesques. 
Everywhere,  on  walls  and  roof,  and  windows  and  cornices,  and  pillars  and  furniture, 
the  name  is  written.  There  is  no  such  decoration  for  a  life  as  that  Christ's  name 
should  be  inscribed  thereon.     (Ibid.) 


CHAP.  XV.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  65 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Vebs.  1-7.  And  the  Spirit  of  God  came  upon  Azarlah. — Dark  shadows  on  a  bright 
day : — We  have  here  shown  the  necessary  connection  between  God's  service  and 
human  weal.  I.  The  awful  apostasy.  Turning  away.  1.  Practical  atheism. 
"  Without  the  true  God."  2.  Deprived  of  priestly  function.  3.  Prevalence  of 
moral  disorder.  11.  The  terbible  jxtdgments  which  followed  apostasy.  1.  Wide- 
spread anarchy.  2.  Civil  dissensions.  3.  General  calamity.  III.  The  way  of 
ESCAPE  FBOM  THESE  JUDGMENTS.  "  The  Lord  is  with  you  while  ye  be  with  Him,"  &c. 
1.  There  is  a  fact  in  Divine  procedure.  2.  This  is  a  warning  for  the  future.  (J. 
Wolfendale.)  Inspiration  aiid  duty : — I.  An  inspired  man  is  qualified  to  give  a 
MESSAGE.  II.  An  inspired  man  will  give  his  message  fearlessly  and  success- 
fully. III.  Inspired  men,  men  taught  or  God,  not  time-servers,  required  now. 
(Ibid.) 

Vers.  2.  The  Lord  la  with  you,  while  ye  be  with  Him ;  and  if  ye  seek  Him. — 
When  and  how  long  the  Lord  is  with  His  people  : — I.  What  it  is  for  the  Lord  to 
BE  WITH  His  people.  1.  Not  His  general  or  essential  presence.  2.  Nor  His  being 
with  His  creatures  in  a  providential  way  ;  for  so  He  is  with  all  men.  3.  Nor  His 
special  presence  in  a  providential  way  with  His  own  dear  children.  4.  But  it  is 
God's  gracious  presence,  which  Moses  so  earnestly  entreated  :  "If  Thy  presence  go 
not  with  me,  carry  us  not  up  hence  " ;  and  of  which  David  deprecates  the  loss : 
"  Cast  me  not  away  from  Thy  presence."  To  enjoy  His  presence  in  this  sense 
means — (1)  To  have  the  light  of  His  countenance.  (2)  For  God  to  commune  with 
them.  (3)  For  God  to  manifest  His  early  loving-kindness  to  their  souls.  H.  When 
OR  how  long  will  God  be  with  Hia  people  ?  '*  While  ye  be  with  Him."  1.  While 
you  keep  close  to  Him  in  a  way  of  duty  ;  while  you  are  with  Him  in  prayer  parti- 
cularly. 2.  While  we  have  communion  with  them  that  fear  the  Lord.  God  is  with 
them  that  fear  Him  ;  and  those  who  keep  company  with  such  persons  may  expect 
His  presence.  Spiritual  conversation  is  like  putting  fuel  to  fire  ;  and  prayer  is  like 
the  bellows  which  blows  up  the  flame.  3.  While  ye  be  with  Him  in  public  worship 
and  attend  the  ordinances  of  His  house  (Acts  ii.  1-3).  Inferences :  1.  The  presence 
of  God  with  His  people  is  a  most  amazing  instance  of  Divine  goodness.  2.  There 
is  nothing  so  desirable  to  a  gracious  soul  as  the  presence  of  God.  (J.  Gill,  D.D.) 
When  will  the  Lord  be  found  by  His  people  i — I.  God  is  to  be  found  by  His  people — 
1.  In  conversion.  2.  At  the  throne  of  grace.  3.  In  His  public  ordinances. 
n.  When  is  God  to  be  found  by  His  people  thus  ?  When  He  is  sought  through 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  •'  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life,"  (Ibid.)  Being  with  God : 
— To  be  with  God  is — I.  To  preserve  in  our  minds  a  reverent  sense  of  His 

BEING,  PRESENCE,  AND  GOVERNMENT.  II.  To  KEEP  CLOSE  TO  HiS  LAWS.  III.  To  STAND 
ON    His    SIDE    AGAINST    THE    OPPOSITE    POWER  OF    DARKNESS   AND    SIN.       {Abp.     Seckcr.) 

God  with  us  : — I.  What  is  meant  by  God  with  a  Church  ?  Luther  used  to  say  that 
there  was  a  "great  deal  of  divinity  in  prepositions."  This  word  "with"  has 
diversity  as  well  as  divinity  in  its  meaning.  It  means — 1.  To  be  present.  God  present, 
seeing  and  hearing  all  that  is  said  and  done.  2.  Blessing.  A  helping,  gracious 
presence.  "  The  Lord  was  with  Joseph,  and  he  was  a  prosperous  man."  3.  Divine 
protection.  II.  What  is  meant  by  a  Church  with  God  ?  1.  It  is  a  Church  faithful 
and  fearless  in  proclaiming  God's  Word.  "  Strike,  but  hear  I  "  said  a  philosopher 
to  an  angry  disputant.  "  Laugh,  strike,  kill,  but  hear  the  Word  of  God  1  "  is  what 
the  Church  says  to  mockers  and  persecutors.  2.  It  is  a  holy  Church.  The 
Emperor  of  Rome  issued  a  command  that  all  houses,  shops,  and  public  institu- 
tions, ships  or  boats,  named  after  members  of  the  Royal  Family,  should  be  kept 
clean,  or  forego  the  right  to  the  name.  "Be  ye  clean  that  bear  the  vessels  of 
the  Lord."  Let  every  one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity." 
8.  A  Church  with  God  does  God's  work.  A  Church  tries  to  be  to  men  all  that  Christ 
was,  the  earthly  organ  of  His  Spirit,  the  instrument  of  "  the  mind  of  Christ." 
4.  It  means  a  Church  in  which  every  member  lives  in  personal  communion 
with  God.  {J.  M.  Gibbon.)  The  happiness  and  condition  of  the  presence  of 
God : — I.  The  happiness  or  the  Jewish  Church  at  that  time.  "  The  Lord  is 
with  you."  God's  presence  as  applied  to  all  righteous  people  implies — 1.  An 
owning  and  acknowledging  them  to  be  His  own  peculiar  people.  God's  love 
to  His  peculiar  people  includes  in  it  all  relations :  that  of  a — (1)  Father 
(2  Cor.  vi.  18) ;    (2)  husband  (Hos.  ii.    19)  ;    (3)   friend    (John  xv.   15 ;    Jas. 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XT. 

ii.  23).     2.  His  assisting  them  and  prospering  all  the  works  that  they  put  their 
hands  to  (1  Chron.  xi.  9).     3.  His  protection  and  defence  of  them  against  all  their 
enemies  (Gen.  xv.  1 ;    Zech.  ii.  5  ;  Isa.  iv.  5,    xlvi.  7 ;   Num.  xiiii. ;  liom.  viii. 
31).     Inferences:    1.  Let  us  notice  what  are  the  greatest  mischiefs  and  who  are  the 
chief  authors  of  all  the  evils  which  can  possibly  befall  a  kingdom,  even  they  that 
would  rob  us  of  our  God.     2.  From  hence  we  may  learn  the  surest  way  to  have  our 
tranquillity  and  peace  secured  to  us.    3.  If  we  sincerely  serve  God,  we  may  comfort- 
ably and  securely  rest  upon  Him  to  defend  and  protect  us  against  all  dangers 
(Prov.  xvlii.  10;  Matt.  x.  29;  Num.  xiv.  9).     Luther  tells  a  famous  story  of  a 
Bishop  of  Magdeburg,  against  whom  the  Duke  of  Saxony  was  preparing  to  wage 
war  ;  the  bishop,  having  notice  of  it,  betakes  himself  presently  to  his  prayers  and 
the  reforming  of  his  Church ;  and  when  one  told  him  what  mighty  preparations  were 
making  against  him,  he  replied,  "I  will  take  care  of  my  Church,  and  then  God  will 
fight  for  and  take  care  of  me  "  ;  which,  when  the  duke  heard  of,  he  disbanded  his 
forces  and  acknowledged  himself  too  weak  to  deal  with  that  man  who  had  engaged 
God  on  his  side  (Psa.  iii.  6).   U.  The  coNmxioN  upon  which  the  happiness  of  God's 
PRESENCE  IS  TO  BE  ENJOYED,  whilc  we  are  with  Him.    To  be  with  God  is  to  be  a  holy 
people.     Clemens  Alexandrinus  speaks  of  a  temple  upon  which  was  written,  "  No 
unholy  thing  must  come  near  this  place" ;  and  this  is  God's  inscription  (Heb.  i.  13). 
Conclusion  :    'Tis  reported  of  the  Prince  of  Orange  at  the  Battle  of  Newport,  that 
he  said  to  his  soldiers,  when  they  had  the  sea  on  one  side  and  the  Spaniards  on  the 
other,  "You  must  either  eat  up  the  Spaniards  or  drink  up  the  sea"  ;  so  we  must 
either  conquer  our  lusts  or  drink  down  the  devouring  fire  of  God's  wrath.  Let  us  apply 
ourselves  to  the  service  of  God  sincerely,  and  then  the  "  Lord  will  be  with  us."   {E. 
Lake,  D.D.)       God's  presence  with  His  people  the  spring  of  their  prosperity  : — I.  God 
MAT  BE  SAID  TO  BE  WITH  MEN — 1.  In  rcspcct  of  the  omuipresence  of   His  essence 
(1  Kings  viii.  27 ;  Psa.  cixxix.  7-12).     2.  In  respect  of  personal  union.    "  God  was 
with  him  "  (Acts  x.  38).     3.  In  respect  of  the  covenant  of  grace.     4.  In  respect  of 
providential  dispensations.     This  is  twofold.    (1)  General ;   ordering,   disposing, 
guiding,  ruling  all  things,  according  to  His  own  wisdom,  by  His  own  power,  unto 
His  own  glory.    (2)  Special ;  attended  with  peculiar  love,  favour,  goodwill,  special  care 
towards  them  with  whom  He  is  so  present  (Gen.  xii.  22 ;  Josh.  i.  5 ;  Jer.  xv.  20 ; 
Isa.  xliii.  1,  2).     This  is  the  presence  here  intimated.     H.  A  people's  abiding  with 
God    18    twofold.     1.  In    personal    obedience.     2.  In  national   administrations. 
ni.  Observations.     1.  All  outward  flourishing  or  prosperity  of  a  people  doth  not 
always  argue  the  special  presence  of  God  with  them.     The  things  required  to  make 
success  and  prosperity  an  evidence  of  the  presence  of  God  are — (1)  That  the  people 
themselves  prospered  be  His  peculiar  people.    (2)  That  the  whole  work  be  good,  and 
have  a  tendency  to  God's  glory,  wherein  they  are  engaged.     (3)  Made  useful  and 
subservient  to  His  glory.     2.  Even  great  afflictions,  eminent  distresses,  long  per- 
plexities, may  have  a  consistency  with  God's  special  presence.     (J.  Owen,  D.D.) 
The  presence  of  God : — I.  Let  our  first  use  be  to  instruct  xjs  particularly.    1.  What 
this  special  presence  is,  and  wherein  it  doth  consist.    2.  What  it  is  for  us  to  abide 
with  God,  so  as  we  may  enjoy  it.     (1)  We  must  have  peace  with  Him  in  Jesus 
Christ.     (2)  To  have  His  presence  continued  with  us  we  must — (a)  Ask  counsel  at  His 
hand,  look  to  Him  for  direction  in  all  our  affairs;  (b)  trust  in  Him  for  protection; 
(c)  universally  own  God's  concernments  in  the  world.     His  presence  with  us  is  the 
owning  of  our  concernments  ;  and  certainly  He  expects  that  we  abide  with  Him  in 
the  owning  of   His.     "  The  Lord's   portion  is  His  people."     H.  Look   on   this 
PRESENCE  op  God  AS  OUR  MAIN  CONCERNMENT  (Psa.  iv.).     III.  Whilst  WO  havc  any 
pledge  of  the  presence  of  God  with  us,  let  us  not  be  greatly  moved,  nor  troubled 

BY  ANY  difficulties  WE  MAY  MEET  WITH.  IV.  LeT  US  FIX  OUR  THOUGHTS  ON  THE 
THINGS    WHICH     LIE     IN     A     TENDENCY    TOWARDS    THE    CONFIRMING    OF     God's    SPECIAL 

PROVIDENTIAL  PRESENCE  WITH  US.  (Ibid.)  The  Diviue  protection  promised  only  to 
an  obedient  people  : — I.  A  grand  promise.  *'  The  Lord  is  with  you  while  ye  be  with 
Him."  1.  God  is  said  to  be  with  any  people— (1)  When  He  upholds  among  them  His 
true  religion  and  worship.  (2)  When  He  causes  His  Word  to  be  preached  and  His 
will  to  be  declared  to  them.  (3)  When  He  watches  over  them  and  defends  them 
against  their  enemies,  maintaining  in  a  nation  peace  and  prosperity ;  in  short, 
when  He  grants  to  them  all  spiritual  and  temporal  blessings.  2.  A  nation  is  with 
God — (1)  When  true  religion  is  seen  upon  the  throne,  when  God  is  there  served  and 
honoured,  with  a  spiritual  and  reasonable  service.  (2)  When  those  who  are  in 
authority  employ  it  to  enforce  the  observance  of  God's  laws.  (3)  When  they  them- 
selves observe  them.     (4)  When  subjects  obey  the  laws.     (5)  When  each  person  in 


CHAP.  IV.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  57 

his  station  concurs  in  promoting  order,  good  morals,  and  piety.  (6)  When  those 
who  "  minister  at  the  altar  "  preach  by  their  example  ;  joining  pure  manners  with 
sound  doctrine.  (7)  When  union  reigns  among  those  who  are  in  authority,  peace 
in  the  Church,  and  harmony  in  families,  and  when  parents  bestow  their  chief  care 
upon  making  their  children  modest,  humble  lovers  of  truth  and  goodness.  In  short, 
when  each  person  "  sets  God  before  his  eyes,"  and  renders  to  Him,  in  pubUc  and  in 
private,  love  and  obedience.  IL  An  awful  threatening.  1.  There  are  several 
ways  in  which  we  may  forsake  God.  But  that  against  which  it  is  most  necessary  to 
warn  Christians  is  the  forsaking  of  God  by  a  wicked  life,  by  dissolute  manners,  by 
living  as  if  there  were  no  God,  or  as  if  we  were  not  to  stand  before  Him  in  judg- 
ment. 2.  God  forsakes  a  people,  thus  unworthy  of  His  presence,  by  the  calamities 
and  miseries  with  which  He  visits  them.  (S.  Partridge,  M.A^  The  prophet't 
maxim  recommended  and  confirmed  (a  missionary  sermon) : — I.  It  mat  tend  rr. 
RECOMMEND  THIS  DiviNE  MAXIM  IF  WE  CONSIDER — 1.  The  cffcct  it  had  on  him  to  whom 
it  was  addressed.  2.  The  blessing  it  brought  down  on  those  who  regarded  it. 
II.  Let  us  confirm  the  prophet's  axiom.  The  Lord  is  with  them,  and  with  them 
alone,  who  are  with  Him.  Consider — 1.  The  evils  which  would  result  from  the 
blessing  of  God  being  on  our  labours  while  we  are  not  with  Him.  (1)  God's  being 
with  us  is  a  proof  of  His  approbation  of  our  tempers  and  dispositions.  When  we 
are  not  with  God  we  are  not  holy.  If  God  were  to  convert  the  heathen  by  us  while 
we  are  in  such  a  state,  those  who  were  changed  by  our  efforts  would  naturally  infer 
that  the  tempers  they  see  in  us  were  those  that  please  God.  Thus  God  would  be 
made  to  bear  a  false  testimony  to  us.  (2)  Were  God  to  be  with  us  in  this  great 
work  while  we  are  not  with  Him,  it  would  be  to  counteract  His  great  design  in 
calling  us  by  His  grace.  God's  grand  design  is  to  purify  His  people.  (3)  It  would 
be  the  means  of  propagating  a  kind  of  religion  totally  different  from  the  mind  of 
Christ.  The  apostles  illustrated  their  teaching  by  a  holy  life.  (4)  If  God  were  to 
grant  our  missionaries  success  while  they  were  not  walking  with  Him,  they  would 
be  totally  incapable  of  nourishing  up  their  converts  when  they  had  made  them. 

2.  The  pleasing  results  which  would  follow  if  God  were  to  be  with  a  people  for  so 
long  a  period  as  He  was  with  this  people.  (1)  Abundant  means.  (2)  Aid  to  use 
these  means  aright.     (D.  Marshman.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  Now  for  a  long  season. — The  schism  of  the  ten  tribes  .-—These  words — 

1.  Suggest  a  warning.  A  land  "  without  teaching  priests  "  soon  realises  the  rest  of 
the  text  by  becoming  "  without  the  true  God,  and  without  law."  II.  Give 
encouragement  to  send  "  teaching  priests "  on  their  holy  mission  to  bring  the 
people  "  to  the  law  and  to  the  testimony,"  so  that  they  may  hear  "  the  whole  counsel 
of  God."     {Joseph  B.  Owen,  M.A.) 

Ver.  7.  Be  ye  stronir  therefore,  and  let  not  your  hands  be  weak. — Religious 
resolution : — I.  That  resolution  is  necessary  in  promoting  the  cause  of  religion. 
Resolution  is  the  essence  of  that  mental  strength  which  gives  energy  to  all  the 
powers  and  faculties  of  body  and  mind.  It  is  composed  of  love,  zeal,  and  con- 
fidence. Such  resolution  has  always  had  a  principal  influence  in  effecting  all  the 
great  things  which  have  ever  been  effected  by  the  men  of  the  world.  Necessary  in 
religion.  The  Scriptures  inculcate  it  (2  Chron.  xix.  11 ;  Ezra  x.  4).  Examples  of 
resolution :  Moses,  Elijah,  Daniel,  Shadrach,  Meshach,  Abednego,  John  the 
Baptist,  Peter  and  John,  Paul,  Luther,  Calvin,  &c.  H.  That  the  friends  of  God  aAVE 
good  ground  for  such  unshaken  resolution  in  promoting  such  a  great  and  good 
design.  1.  The  friends  of  God  have  often  been  succeeded  in  their  sincere  attempts 
to  promote  His  glory  in  the  salvation  of  sinners.  2.  The  promotion  of  religion  is 
such  a  noble  and  laudable  design  that  it  is  even  glorious  to  fail  in  the  attempt. 

3.  Those  who  espouse  the  cause  of  religion  have  reason  to  expect  the  peculiar 
presence  and  assistance  of  God  in  their  pious  exertions.  4.  They  also  have  the 
approbation  and  prayers  of  all  good  men.  5.  They  are  equally  sure  of  the  esteem 
and  affection  of  all  those  whom  they  shall  be  instrumental  in  converting.  6.  Their 
efforts  shall  finally  meet  a  glorious  recompense  of  reward.  III.  Inferences.  1.  That 
the  friends  of  God  have  been  very  negligent  in  promoting  His  cause  in  the  world. 

2.  That  none  will  ever  do  much  to  forward  the  work  of  spreading  the  gospel  with- 
out a  large  share  of  Christian  zeal  and  resolution.  {N.  Emmons,  D.D.)  Strong 
hands  : — In  the  Bible,  the  human  hand  is  often  used  as  a  figure  to  express  actions 
of  life.  As  a  symbol,  Elisha  poured  water  over  the  hands  of  Elijah  ;  meaning  that 
he  would  henceforth  be  his  servant,  and  minister  unto  him  in  deeds  of  kindness. 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.xt. 

The  reason  why  the  hand  represents  so  many  things  is  because  of  its  manifold  uses. 
What  firmness  in  its  grasp,  and  what  delicacy  in  its  touch  !  It  can  forge  an  anchor 
or  make  a  needle  ;  fell  a  tree  or  feel  to  read  the  Bible  ;  and  do  a  thousand  things 
which  would  seem  very  wonderful  if  they  were  not  so  familiar.  "  Be  ye  strong 
therefore,  and  let  not  your  hands  be  weak."  I.  That  man  will  have  strong  hands 
WHO  BEGULARLY  LIFTS  THEM  UP  IN  PRATER.  If  you  lift  Up  youT  hands  in  prayer  as 
the  apostles  did,  you  shall  have  strength  to  do  great  deeds  for  God.     II.  Let  youb 

HANDS    BE    STRONG    IN    CLEAVING   TO  THE   CrOSS  OF   ChRIST.       {iV.  Birch.)       SuCCUi  the 

certain  fruit  of  faithful  labours  : — Applying  these  words  to  the  work  of  Sabbath 
schools,  consider — I.  The  work.  1.  Its  object  is  the  benefit  of  the  rising  genera- 
tion. 2.  Its  tendencies  as  to  the  interests  of  society  at  large  are  beneficial.  3,  It 
accords  with  the  spirit  of  Christianity  and  the  predictions  of  sacred  writ  (Isa.  xi.  9). 
n.  The  EXHORTATION.  1.  To  faith.  2.  To  union.  3.  To  perseverance.  III.  The 
BEWARD.  This  is  to  be  found — 1.  In  the  satisfaction  of  your  own  minds.  2.  In  the 
success  of  your  efforts.    3.  In  the  approbation  of  your  Lord.    {N.  Hutchingi.) 

Vers.  12-15.  And  they  entered  into  a  covenant  to  seek  the  Lord  Ood  of  their 
flithers. — The  covenant  renewed : — "  Entering  into  a  covenant  "  is  what  we  name 
*'  a  revival  " ;  they  made  it  a  national  act,  we  separate  it  entirely  from  political 
affairs.  I.  The  preparations  for  revival.  1.  The  persons  who  led.  A  faithful 
prophet  and  an  obedient  king.  Of  Azariah  we  know  nothing  beyond  the  short 
record  of  this  chapter.  This  suggests  that  a  man  is  important  to  the  world  only 
for  the  work  he  does.  The  king  was  ready  to  learn  from  this  obscure  prophet  and 
to  lead  the  people  to  consecration.  Happy  the  pastor  who  finds  the  wealth, 
authority,  and  zeal  of  his  Church  willing  to  receive  the  sacred  message  humbly 
from  his  lips  and  faithfully  lead  where  he  points  the  way.  2.  The  truths  they  used. 
The  same  that  inspire  every  true  revival  (ver.  2).  Divine  faithfulness,  human 
responsibility,  mercy  for  the  penitent,  punishment  for  the  hardened.  II.  The 
bevival.  In  this  blessed  work  there  was — 1.  Bepentance.  2.  Atonement  (ver.  11). 
3.  Consecration.  III.  The  jot  of  beconciliation  (ver.  15).  Lessons  :  1.  The 
reformer  must  begin  at  his  own  house.  2.  Service  for  God  may  cost  pain.  3.  The 
true  leader  is  called  of  God.  4.  Every  true  leader  is  a  rallying-point  for  others 
(ver.  9).  (Monday  Club  Sermons.)  A  revival : — I.  We  see  here  that  the  heart  of 
a  revival  lies  in  a  renewal  of  the  covenant  of  the  Chubch  with  God.  An 
awakened  Church  is  the  pioneer  of  an  awakened  world.  II.  A  second  feature  in 
this  ancient  revival  of  religion  was  a  public  proclamation  of  a  revived  faith 
BEFORE  THE  WORLD.  Eeligious  men  are  too  much  in  earnest  to  be  still  about  it. 
They  are  moved  by  a  great  power.  It  will  express  itself  as  becomes  a  great  power. 
It  is  the  instinct  of  religious  faith  to  bear  its  witness  to  the  world.  III.  The  old 
Jewish  revival  was  attended  with  a  great  influx  of  converts  from  without.  So 
commonly  works  a  pure  revival  upon  the  world.  Very  rare  is  the  exception  in 
which  the  heart  of  the  world  does  not  respond  to  the  heart  of  the  Church.  IV.  A 
fourth  feature  of  a  true  revival  of  religion  is  a  thorough  reformation  of  PtniLio 
AND  private  morals.  To  put  away  idolatrous  worship  was  what  we  should  call  a 
reformation  in  morals.  Idolatry  was  immorality  concentrated  in  its  most  hideous 
forms.  No  religious  zeal  could  have  been  genuine  in  a  monarch  which  did  not 
sweep  the  land  clean  of  them.  V.  Such  awakenings  are  often  followed  bt  periods 
OF  TEMPORAL  PROSPERITY.  '*  The  Lord  gave  them  rest  round  about."  No  other 
civilising  power  equals  that  of  true  religion.  It  never  hurts  a  man  for  any  of  the 
right  uses  of  this  world  to  make  a  Christian  of  him.  (A.Phelps.)  A  revival: 
an  imperioiu  necessity  : — The  text  gives  an  account  of  the  ancient  revival  of  religion 
under  King  Asa.  Other  revivals  are  portrayed  by  the  sacred  writers.  From  these 
we  learn — I.  That  revivals  are  by  no  means  new  things.  Nor  are  they  things  of 
modern  invention.  U.  That  the  progress  of  religion  is  not  in  a  uniform  steady 
liiNB.    III.  That  revivals  of  religion  ordinarily  commence  in  humble  and  obscure 

WAYS,  AND  ABE  ORDINARH^Y  HELPED  ON  BY  THE  HUMBLEST  INSTRUMENTALITY.  IV.  ThAT 
they  ARE  ORDINABTLT  ACCOMPANIED  BY  A  GREAT  DEAL  OF  WHAT  PEOPLE  ABE  PLEASED  TO 
TERM  EXCITEMENT.  V.  ThAT  TRUE  REVIVALS  OF  RELIGION  ARE  MARKED  BY  MARVELLOUS 
TRANSFORMATIONS    OF    CHARACTER    AND     REFORMATIONS    IN    THE    LIFE.         (O.    E.    Reed.) 

And  all  Judah  rejoiced    at  the    oath. — Jvdah't    solemn    engagement : — I.    The 

SOLEMN    ENGAGEMENT  INTO  WHICH  THEY    ENTERED,  AND    THE    TESfPER   THEY    MANIFESTED 

THEREIN.  1.  They  bound  themselves  to  nothing  new.  It  was  to  seek  the  Lord 
God  of  their  fathers.  2.  They  swore  to  do  this.  3.  They  entered  into  this 
engagement  with  great  sincerity  and  with   great  cheerfulness.     II.    The  happt 


CHAP.  XT.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  69 

CONSEQUENCE  OF  Judah's  SOLEMN  ENGAGEMENT.  "  The  Lord  was  found  of  them." 
(Job  Orton.)        And  He  was  found  of  them. — The  search  that  always  finds: — 

1.  The  SEEKING.  The  highest  bliss  is  to  find  God,  the  next  highest  is  to 
seek  Him.  1.  Our  text  lays  emphasis  on  the  whole-heartedness  of  the  people's 
seeking  after  God.  One  reason  why  the  great  mass  of  professing  Christians 
make  so  little  of  their  religion  is  because  they  are  only  half-hearted  in  it.  If 
you  divide  a  river  into  two  streams  the  force  of  each  is  less  than  half  the  power  of 
the  original  current ;  and  the  chances  are  that  you  will  make  a  stagnant  marsh 
where  there  used  to  be  a  flowing  stream.  "  All  in  all  or  not  at  all  "  is  the  rule  for 
life  in  all  departments.  2.  "  They  sought  Him  with  all  their  heart."  That  does 
not  mean  that  there  are  to  be  no  other  desires,  for  it  is  a  great  mistake  to  pit 
religion  against  other  things  which  are  meant  to  be  its  instruments  and  its  helps. 
3.  The  one  token  of  seeking  God  is  casting  out  idols.  There  must  be  detachment 
if  there  is  to  be  attachment.  K  some  climbing  plant,  for  instance,  has  twisted 
itself  round  the  unprofitable  thorns  in  the  hedge,  the  gardener,  before  he  can  get  it 
to  go  up  the  support  that  it  is  meant  to  encircle,  has  carefully  to  detach  it  from  the 
stays  to  which  it  has  wantonly  clung,  taking  care  that  in  the  process  he  does  not 
break  its  tendrils  and  destroy  its  power  of  growth.  The  heart  must  be  emptied  of 
base  liquors  if  the  new  wine  of  the  kingdom  is  to  be  poured  into  it.  II.  The 
riNDiNO  WHICH  CROWNS  SUCH  8EEKINO.  1.  Anything  is  possible  rather  than  that  a 
whole-hearted  search  after  God  should  be  a  vain  search.  For  there  are  in  that 
search  two  seekers — God  is  seeking  for  us  more  truly  than  we  are  seeking  for  Him. 

2.  This  is  the  only  direction  for  a  man's  desires  and  aims  in  which  disappointment 
is  an  impossibility.  3.  Our  wisdom  is  to  make  this  search.  What  would  you  think 
of  a  company  of  gold-seekers,  hunting  about  in  some  exhausted  claim  for 
hypothetical  grains — ragged,  starving — and  aU  the  while  in  the  next  gully  were  lying 
lumps  of  gold  for  the  picking  up  ?  And  that  figure  fairly  represents  what  people 
do  and  suffer  who  seek  for  good  and  do  not  seek  after  God.  III.  The  best  which 
ENSUES  ON  FINDING  GoD.  Wc  havc  uo  immunity  from  toil  and  conflict,  but  disturbance 
around  is  a  very  small  matter  if  there  be  a  better  thing — rest  within.  A  vessel  with 
an  outer  casing  and  a  layer  of  air  between  may  be  kept  at  a  temperature  above  that  of 
the  external  atmosphere.  So  we  may  have  conflict  and  strife,  and  yet  a  better  rest  than 
that  of  my  text  maybe  ours.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Happy  earnestness : — This 
verse  represents  well  the  happy  combination  of  sacrament  and  life.  It  brings  before 
as  whole-heartedness  for  God,  with  special  regard  to  two  of  its  features.  I.  Jot. 
"  And  all  Judah  rejoiced  at  the  oath,"  &c.  A  wholeness  of  devotedness  to  God  is 
consistent  with  every  department  of  activity  and  every  form  of  interest  which  ia 
not  in  itself  sinful.  It  is  as  a  soul  to  the  body  of  all  secular  occupation,  however 
absorbing.  The  wide  onward  lift  of  the  tidal  wave  in  mid-ocean  does  not  more 
interfere  with  the  commerce  of  the  countries,  the  heightening  sun  of  the  spring- 
time does  not  more  embarrass  the  progress  of  the  land  over  which  it  smiles,  than 
the  full-hearted  service  of  God  breaks  in  upon  the  lawful  interests  of  a  man  among 
the  engagements  of  his  every-day  existence.  This  joy  implies — 1.  Enthusiasm. 
This  may  be  reckoned  the  atmosphere  which  surrounds  the  joy  of  whole-heartedness 
for  God.  2.  Willingness.  A  wide  compliance  with  a  competent  and  kindly  force 
that  presses  on  us  from  without.  Predominant  willingness  contributes  largely  to  a 
Christian  man's  joy.  3.  Elghtness.  The  approval  of  conscience.  4.  Undivided- 
ness  of  affection.  II.  Prosperousness.  "  And  He  was  found  of  them :  and  Jehovah 
gave  them  rest  round  about."  This  signifies — 1.  That  we  find  what  we  seek.  There 
are  neighbourhoods  where  the  mists  lie  so  often  and  so  long  upon  the  grand  out- 
lines of  the  landscape,  that  a  clear  day  is  in  some  sense  a  day  of  discovery,  of 
*'  finding,"  though  nothing  is  there  then  which  was  not  there  always.  There  have 
been  those  who  for  years  have  looked  through  a  filmy  dimness  of  eyesight  upon 
those  they  loved,  whose  movements  were  to  them  like  the  movements  of  featureless 
shades  ;  when  the  films  were  one  day  purged  from  the  eyes  was  it  not  almost  more 
than  a  figure  of  speech  they  spoke  when  they  said  they  had  "  found  "  those  loved 
faces  and  forms  again  ?  So  this  energising  of  the  heart  for  God  restores  vision,  and 
vision  restores  reality.  God  in  Christ  becomes  near.  2.  That  we  miss  much  that 
we  had  hitherto  found.  Hostile  movements  from  around  are  comparatively  allayed, 
and  the  hush  that  has  fallen  upon  these  reflects  itself  upon  the  soul  in  restfulness. 
{J.  A.  Kerr  Bain,  M.A.) 

Ver.  17.  Nevertheless,  the  heart  of  Asa  was  perfect  all  his  days. — Spiritual 
backsliding : — We  learn  from  the  text  that  we  cannot  always  infer  the  state  of  the 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  XT. 

heart  from  external  symptoms.  I.  You  mat  have  the  appearance  of  somethino 
WBONQ  WHILE  THE  HEART  IS  SOUND.      This  was  Asa's  cass.      II.  Converselj  totj 

MAT  HAVE  THE  HEART  UNSOUND  WHILST  AS  TET  THERE  IS  BUT  LITTLE  TRACE  OF  IT  IN  THE 

HEABT  AND  LIFE.  In  tracing  this  disease,  consider— 1.  Its  working.  (1)  The  heart's 
relapse  towards  positive  evil.  There  is  the  presentation  to  the  mind  of  soiiiething  of 
some  worldly,  fleshly  things  as  pleasant  and  desirable ;  and  then  there  not  having 
been  an  immediate  curbing  of  the  rising  inclination,  the  thoughts  come  to  dwell  with 
more  and  more  complacency  upon  the  object;  and  the  man  begins  to  wish  that  it 
might  be  lawful  to  have  it,  and  to  cast  about  and  contrive  for  the  modes  of  posses- 
sion. And  when  the  inchnation  has  thus  been  formed  and  strengthened,  it  proposes 
to  the  understanding  whether  the  enjoyment  may  not  be  had  without  hazard  to  the 
soul;  and  then  there  will  soon  be  devised  something  plausible  in  the  shape  of  an 
apology  or  warrant,  something  that  shall  serve  to  put  conscience  off  its  guard,  or  even 
make  it  concur  in  the  prosecution  of  the  design.  (2)  The  heart's  decline  from  the  love 
of  godliness  and  of  God.  2.  Its  symptoms.  There  was  a  time  when  you  felt  God  to 
be  your  '*  chief  good  " — do  you  feel  Him  less  so  now  ?  There  was  a  time  when  yoa 
delighted  in  prayer — has  it  become  more  of  a  task  now  ?  Once  you  thought  much 
of  the  work  of  Christ  and  longed  to  be  with  Him  in  heaven — are  you  now  more 
contented  with  earth  and  more  disposed  to  say,  "It  is  good  for  us  to  be  here  "? 
Once  you  found  suflficient  scope  for  fervent  affections  in  secret  communion  with 
God,  in  meditating  on  His  perfections,  and  in  admiring  His  love  in  the  gift  of  His 
Son — now  do  your  affections  seem  stifled  unless  you  have  some  showy  work  on 
which  to  fasten  them,  some  dazzling  novelty  with  which  to  engage  them? 
(H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Caution  in  judging  others  : — How  ready  are  we  to  condemn  and 
find  fault  with  our  neighbour,  if  his  conduct  do  not  seem  in  every  respect  consistent 
with  his  Christian  profession  I  How  soon  we  think  he  may  be  nothing  but  a 
hypocrite  if  we  observe  certain  things  in  which  he  fails  to  carry  out  the  principles 
of  the  gospel,  though  perhaps  we  know  little  or  nothing  of  his  peculiar  circum- 
stances, dangers,  and  temptations  1  It  is  enough  for  us  that  the  "  high  places  "  are 
not  '•  taken  away  "  ;  immediately  we  condemn  Asa,  and  infer  that  his  heart  cannot  be 
right  with  God.  Let  the  text  teach  charity  first ;  and  while  we  are  not  to  shut  our 
eyes  to  what  is  wrong,  or  count  it  matter  of  indifference  whether  or  not  the  "  high 
places  are  removed,"  when  the  removing  is  that  to  which  the  Christian  stands 
pledged,  let  us  be  cautious  of  judging  our  brethren,  and  delivering  a  verdict  against 
them,  when  we  are  told,  though  "  the  high  places  were  not  taken  away  out  of  Israel, 
nevertheless,  the  heart  of  Asa  was  perfect  all  his  days."  (Ibid.)  Perfection 
limited  by  power : — Some  of  you  might,  indeed,  be  ready  to  make  a  wrong  use  of 
our  text.  You  may  say,  "  If  Asa's  heart  was  perfect  with  God,  though  he  did  not 
remove  the  high  places,  so  may  ours  be,  though  you  may  see  things  in  our  conduct 
which  may  not  be  wholly  consistent  with  a  Christian  profession."  Yet,  before  using 
the  case  of  Asa  to  justify  the  assertion  that  your  heart  may  be  right  whilst  your 
conduct  is  wrong,  it  may  be  as  well  to  observe  how  far  Asa  had  gone  in  the 
extermination  of  idols.  The  text  merely  says  that  the  "  high  places  "  were  "  not 
taken  away  out  of  Israel."  Asa  was  king  of  Judah,  but  not  of  Israel ;  though  he 
would  seem  to  have  possessed  much  influence  in  that  kingdom.  There  was  no  reason 
to  doubt  that,  where  his  power  was  clear,  he  had  exerted  it  in  restoring  the  worship 
of  the  true  God ;  if  he  had  not  he  would  not  have  punished  his  nearest  relations.  You 
read  that  he  removed  Maachah,  his  mother,  being  queen,  "  because  she  had  made 
an  idol  in  a  grove :  and  Asa  cut  down  her  idol,  and  stamped  it,  and  burnt  it  at  the 
brook  Kidron."  You  learn,  in  like  manner,  what  was  done  with  the  idol  of  the 
high  priest.  So  that,  if  he  did  not  carry  reform  into  Israel,  he  was  vigorous  in  its 
application  in  his  own  family  and  household.  When  you  can  say  as  much — when 
you  can  say  that,  to  the  utmost  of  your  power,  you  have  laboured  to  serve  God  in 
your  own  family  and  household  and  neighbourhood,  maintaining  His  cause 
among  all  those  who  come  more  immediately  within  the  sphere  of  your  influence — 
then  you  may  hope  that,  as  with  Asa,  the  heart  is  perfect  with  God,  though  there 
are  high  places  yet,  in  far  distant  lands,  whose  overthrow  you  have  not  attempted. 
(Ibid.)  Unsoundness  of  heart  suspected  on  insufficient  grounds  : — And  yet,  in 
speakmg  on  the  case  of  the  backslider  in  heart,  it  becomes  us  to  take  heed  that 
we  make  not  those  sad  who  may  be  disposed,  without  sufficient  cause,  to  write 
bitter  things  against  themselves.  It  is  not  every  person  who  suspects  himself  of 
unsoundness  of  heart  who  is  really  a  backslider.  We  must  declare  there  is  commonly 
much  greater  cause  for  fear  with  your  forward,  confident,  bustling  professors,  who 
would  be  quite  offended  if  suspected  of  spiritual  decline,  than   with  the  timid. 


CHAP.  XVI.]  II.   CHRONICLES.  61 

scrupulous  individual  who  is  always  ready  to  think  worse  of  himself  than  others 
think  of  him.  Tried  by  conscience — alas  !  what  hardens  conscience  like  contact 
with  the  world  ? — it  may  still  make  a  man  accuse  himself  of  backsliding  who 
is  all  the  while  "pressing  toward  the  mark  for  the  prize  of  his  high  calling 
in  Christ."  Bodily  sickness  may  be  regarded  as  the  taking  away  of  the 
quickenings  of  the  Spirit ;  the  clouding  of  the  understanding,  and  the  clogging 
of  the  affections,  will  often  make  a  believer  fearful  of  spiritual  relapse  ;  he  mistakes 
the  infirmity  of  the  body  for  disease  of  the  soul — a  decay  of  memory  for  a  decay  of 
piety ;  as  though  there  must  be  less  of  devotedness,  of  abhorrence  of  sin,  of  meek 
reliance  upon  Christ  in  our  dangers,  our  confusions,  our  difficulties  in  spiritual 
exercises,  because  of  that  unenlightenment  of  mind  which  is  but  the  result, 
or  symptom,  of  declining  strength.  Though  a  person  maybe  quite  correct  in  calling 
himself  a  backslider,  yet  the  probabilities  are  greater  for  him  who  has  no  fears  and 
no  suspicions  that  he  is  really  a  backslider  than  for  another  who  does  not  wait  to 
be  charged,  but  is  painfully  apprehensive  of  being  in  fault.  For  certainly,  as  a 
general  rule  in  religion,  to  advance  is,  in  some  senses,  to  appear  to  go  back.  To 
grow  in  grace  is  to  grow  in  knowledge  of  ourselves ;  and,  alas  !  who  can  know  him- 
self better,  and  not  think  himself  worse  ?  If,  however,  we  would  not  have  the  timid 
unduly  severe  in  accusing  themselves,  we  would  have  all  diligent,  and  birn  «« that 
thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall."    (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


Yebs.  1-10.  Then  Asa  brought  out  silver  and  gold  out  of  the  treasuries  of  the 
house  of  the  Lord. — The  folly  of  bribery  .- — Trust  in  man,  not  in  God — I.  Led  to 
BACKiLEGE  IN  BELiGious  THINGS.  Gifts  bestowcd  01  promised  with  a  view  to  prevent 
judgment  or  corrupt  morals  abominable.  Bribery  a  canker  in  constitutional 
governments,  a  disgrace  in  all  departments  of  life.  II.  Brought  down  Divine 
EEPKOOF.  III.  Defeated  its  own  ends.  1.  Asa  missed  the  opportunity  of  a  double 
victory.  Possible  by  unnecessary  and  improper  alliances  to  hinder  our  good  and 
prevent  God  from  granting  deliverance.  2.  Asa  exposed  himself  to  greater  danger. 
Those  who  bribe  and  those  bribed  not  to  be  depended  upon.  For  gold  men  will  sell 
their  votes,  their  conscience,  and  themselves.  Cato  complained  that  M.  Coelius 
the  Tribune  "might  be  hired  for  a  piece  of  bread  to  speak  or  to  hold  his  peace." 
(J.  Wolferidale.) 

Yer.  7.  Because  thou  hast  relied  on  the  king  of  Syria,  and  not  relied  on  the 
Lord. — Asa's  want  of  faith : — Sin  like  Asa's  has  been  the  supreme  apostasy  of  the 
Church  in  all  her  branches  and  through  all  her  generations :  Christ  has  been 
denied,  not  by  lack  of  devotion,  but  by  want  of  faith.  Champions  of  the  faith, 
reformers  and  guardians  of  the  temple,  like  Asa,  have  been  eager  to  attach  to  their 
holy  cause  the  cruel  prejudices  of  ignorance  and  foUy,  the  greed  and  vindictiveness 
of  selfish  men.  They  have  feared  lest  these  potent  forces  should  be  arrayed 
amongst  the  enemies  of  the  Church  and  her  Master.  It  has  even  been  suggested 
that  national  Churches  and  great  national  vices  were  so  intimately  allied  that  their 
supporters  were  content  that  they  should  stand  or  fall  together.-  On  the  other  hand, 
the  advocates  of  reform  have  not  been  slow  to  appeal  to  popular  jealousy  and  to 
aggravate  the  bitterness  of  social  feuds.     (W.  H.  Beniiett,  M.A.) 

Ver.  9.  For  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  run  to  and  fro  throughout  the  whole  earth. — 

Divine  providence  ; — We  need  not  concern  ourselves  with  the  occasion  on  which 
these  words  were  uttered.  Spoken  by  a  prophet  to  Asa,  king  of  Judah,  they  have 
been  "  recorded  for  our  instruction."  The  representation  sets  forth  Divine  fhings 
under  human  similitudes.  Now  it  can  hardly  be  necessary  that  we  expose  the 
falseness  of  the  opinion  that  having  created  this  world  God  left  it  to  itself,  and 
bestows  no  thought  on  its  Concerns.  But  whilst  there  are  few  who  hold  the  opinion, 
there  are  many  who  would  limit  the  providence  of  God  ;  and  it  is  very  easy  to  put 
forward  descriptions  of  the  magnitude  and  the  power  of  the  Creator,  and  then  to 
set  in  contrast  the  insignificance  of  man,  and  to  argue  from  the  comparison  that  it 
Ib  derogatory  to  the  greatness  of  God  to  suppose  Him  careful  of  what  befalls  a  house- 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

hold  or  happens  to  an  individual.  But  this  is  poor  reasoning ;  it  would  not  hold 
good  if  applied  amongst  ourselves.  If  it  were  possible  that  a  great  statesman  or 
potentate,  whilst  superintending  the  concerns  of  an  empire,  should  yet  find  time  for 
ministering  at  the  bedside  of  sickness,  and  be  active  for  the  widow  and  the  orphan  : 
well,  what  would  you  say — that  it  was  derogatory  to  him  that,  without  neglecting 
momentous  things,  he  showed  himself  capable  of  attending  to  things  comparatively 
petty  ?  Nay,  you  would  admire  and  you  would  venerate  him  all  the  more.  Neither 
is  it  derogatory — nay,  rather,  it  is  essential  to  the  greatness  of  our  God — that  whilst 
He  marshals  the  stars  and  orders  the  motions  of  all  the  worlds  in  immensity,  He 
yet  feedeth  the  young  ravens  that  call  upon  Him,  and  numbereth  the  very  hairs  of 
our  head.  But  now  we  will  bring  this  truth  before  you  in  greater  minuteness,  and 
show  what  is  involved  in  the  saying,  "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  run  to  and  fro  through- 
out the  whole  earth."     I.  We  may  first  affirm  it  evident  that  NoxHrNO  can  happen 

IN    ANY   SPOT    OF    THE     PEOPLED     IMMENSITY    WHICH    18     NOT     KNOWN    TO    HiM    WHO   IS 

EMPHATICALLY  THE  OMNISCIENT — indeed,  it  weiB  to  deny  the  omniscience  of  God  to 
suppose  any  the  most  trivial  incident  not  included  within  His  knowledge.  And  it 
is  far  more  than  the  inspection  of  an  ever-vigilant  observer.  It  is  not  merely  that 
nothing  can  happen  without  the  knowledge  of  our  Maker :  it  is  that  nothing  can 
happen  but  by  His  appointment  or  permission,  for  we  must  ever  remember  that  God 
is  the  first  cause,  and  that  on  the  first  all  secondary  depend.  But  how  beautifully 
simple  does  everything  appear  when  we  trace  one  hand  in  all  that  occurs  1  It  ia 
God  whose  energies  are  extended  throughout  the  earth  and  sea  and  air,  causing 
those  innumerable  and  beneficial  results  which  we  ascribe  to  nature  ;  it  is  God  by 
whom  all  those  contingencies  which  seem  to  us  fortuitous  and  casual  are  ordered, 
so  that  events  brought  round  by  what  men  count  accident  proceed  from  a  Divine 
and  therefore  irreversible  appointment.  It  is  God  by  whom  the  human  will  is 
secretly  inclined  towards  righteousness,  so  that  there  is  not  wrought  upon  earth 
a  single  action  such  as  God  can  approve,  to  whose  performance  God  hath  not 
instigated.  It  is  God  who,  acting  through  the  instrumentality  of  various  and 
apparently  conflicting  causes,  keeps  together  the  discordant  elements  of  society,  and 
prevents  the  whole  framework  of  civil  institutions  from  being  rapidly  dissolved 
and  broken  up  piecemeal.  I  know  that  it  is  not  the  monarch  alone  at  the  head  of 
his  provinces  and  tribes  who  is  observed  by  the  Almighty ;  I  know  that  it  is  not 
only  at  some  great  crisis  in  life  that  an  individual  becomes  the  object  of  the  atten- 
tion of  his  Maker;  rather  do  I  know  that  the  poorest,  the  meanest,  the  most 
despised,  the  very  outcast  of  society,  shares  with  the  monarch  the  notice  of  the 
Universal  Protector.  Yea,  and  that  this  notice  is  so  incessant  and  so  unwearied, 
that  when  he  goes  to  his  daily  toil,  or  his  daily  prayer,  when  he  lies  down  at  night, 
or  rises  in  the  morning,  or  gathers  his  little  ones  to  the  scanty  meal,  the  poor  man 
is  not  unnoticed  by  God  ;  he  cannot  weep  a  tear  God  knows  not,  he  cannot  smile  a 
smile  God  knows  not,  he  cannot  breathe  a  wish  God  knows  not.  But  whilst  the 
universal  providence  of  God  is  to  the  full  as  incomprehensible  as  aught  else  that 
belongs  to  Divinity,  there  is  nothing  in  it  but  what  commends  itself  to  the  very 
warmest  feelings  of  our  nature.  II.  We  come  now  to  the  second  doctrine  laid 
down  in  our  text — that  all  the  motions  of  providence  have  for  their  ultimate 

END   the    good    of   THOSE    WHOSE    HEART   IS   PERFECT   TOWARDS    GOD.        And    yOU     may 

examine  this  doctrine  under  two  points  of  view — as  referring  either  to  the  Church 
at  large,  or  separately  to  the  individuals  of  whom  that  Church  is  composed.  With 
Scripture  for  our  guide,  we  must  see  that  God's  design,  in  all  His  dealings  with  this 
earth,  has  been  the  glorifying  Himself  in  the  redemption  and  final  exaltation  of  a 
vast  number  of  our  apostate  race.  Before  Christ  appeared  amongst  men,  the  whole 
course  of  human  events  was  so  ordered  as  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  promised 
Deliverer.  If  God  sent  His  own  Son  to  deliver  man  from  the  consequences  of 
transgression,  and  to  extirpate  evil  from  the  universe,  we  cannot  doubt  the  objects 
which  engaged  so  stupendous  an  interposition  must  still  be  those  to  whose 
furtherance  the  Divine  dealings  tend.  There  can  be  no  other  objects  commensurate 
in  importance  with  those,  for  no  others  have  required  so  costly  a  process  ;  and  since 
these  as  yet  have  been  only  partially  attained,  we  must  justly  conclude  that  their 
thorough  accomplishment  is  the  proposed  end  of  all  the  dealings  of  providence. 
The  globe  was  partitioned  out  with  a  view  to  the  Church,  this  land  assigned  to  one 
nation  and  that  to  another,  with  the  set  purpose  of  consulting  by  the  distribution 
the  well-being  of  Israel.  It  is  as  though  the  Psalmist  had  said  that  God  directs  all 
the  tumults  and  confusions  of  the  world,  guiding  the  flood  with  holy  and  merciful 
intentions  towards  His  people,  that  the  turbid  waters  may  bring  them  strength  and 


CHAP,  xn.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  63 

perice.  Why  is  it  that  the  Church  has  outlived  so  many  a  fierce  persecution — that 
in  the  place  of  being  vanquished  she  is  only  to  be  invigorated  by  assault  ?  We 
ascribe  nothing  to  the  native  energies  of  the  preachers  or  professors  of  Christianity: 
we  ascribe  everything  to  the  protecting  and  fostering  care  of  Him  who  so  loved  the 
world  as  to  give  His  Son.  And  it  is  not  only  in  reference  to  the  Church  at  large 
that  we  are  warranted  in  thus  speaking  of  God's  providence.  Of  each  member  in 
this  Church  we  may  declare  that  God  watches  sedulously  over  him  with  the  express 
design  of  succouring  him  with  all  needful  assistance.  Yoia  learn  from  various 
portions  of  Holy  Writ  that  God  has  a  great  interest  in  the  righteous,  so  that  the 
Lord's  portion  is  said  to  be  His  people,  and  Jacob  the  lot  of  His  inheritance.  He 
now  calls  His  people  His  jewels,  and  declares  that  whosoever  toucheth  them  toucheth 
the  apple  of  His  eye.  We  know  that  many  things  may  happen  to  the  righteous 
which  seem  against  them,  and  that  it  is  easy  to  find  in  their  disasters  apparent 
exceptions  to  the  truth  affirmed  by  the  text;  yet  who  that  knows  anything  of 
Christian  experience  would  deny  that  the  trials  which  are  permitted  to  overtake  the 
godly  serve  as  means  through  which  their  spiritual  well-being  is  advanced,  and 
afford  occasions  for  such  communications  of  grace  as  prove  that  God's  strength  is 
made  perfect  in  weakness  ?  It  is  no  proof  that  the  eye  of  the  Lord  is  not  on  the 
righteous  that  troubles  may  be  found  in  their  portion.  When  again  this  man  is 
visited  with  calamity,  death  may  make  inroads  in  his  household,  and  disorder  may 
pervade  his  affairs  ;  but  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  incessantly  on  him,  and  if  he  will 
but  seek  his  comfort  in  God,  God  will  show  Himself  strong  by  giving  him  a  peace 
■which  passeth  all  understanding.  And  if  anything  can  encourage  the  righteous 
man,  and  give  him  confidence  amid  the  onsets  of  trial,  it  must  be  the  consideration 
that  the  providence  of  the  Almighty  is  thus  perpetually  vigilant  in  his  behalf. 
(H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  eyes  of  the  Lord : — I.  What  we  are  to  understand 
BY  THE  ETES  OF  THE  LoRD.  This  IB  figurative.  It  designs  His  all-seeing 
providence ;  and  that,  as  concerned  in  a  special  manner  with  His  own  people 
(Zech.  iii.  9,  iv.  10).  The  eyes  of  the  Lord,  as  they  are  set  upon  His  own 
people,  are  like  the  eyes  of  doves— expressive  of  mildness,  gentleness,  tender- 
ness, and  love ;  but  as  they  are  set  upon  wicked  men,  His  eyes  are  as  flames 
of    fire— expressive  of    wrath   and   vengeance   (Amos  ix.    4-8;    Psa.  xxxiv.  15). 

II.    In    WHAT    SENSE     THESE    ARE     SAID    TO    RUN    TO    AND    FRO   THROUGHOUT   THE    WHOLE 

EARTH.  This  is  expressive  of  His  watchfulness  over  His  people  (Jer.  xxxi.  28).  As 
those  who  are  watchful  look  here  and  there,  and  are  very  diligent  in  their  observa- 
tions, so  the  Lord  watches  over  His  people.  1.  To  help  them.  2.  To  counter- work 
the  adversary  (Job  i.  7).  III.  Th^;  end  of  their  running  thus.  To  show  Himself 
strong  on  the  behalf  of  those  whose  heart  is  perfect  toward  Him.  1.  The  descrip- 
tive character  :  "  perfect  toward  Him  "  ;  that  is,  sincere  and  upright.  Where  there 
is  "  love  out  of  a  pure  heart  and  faith  unfeigned  "  (1  Tim.  i.  5)  the  heart  may  be 
said  to  be  perfect.  2.  The  exertion  of  Divine  power  on  their  behalf.  {J.  GUI,  D.D.) 
The  eyes  of  the  Lord  .-—In  Scripture  these  signify — I.  His  knowledge  (Job  xxxiv.  21 ; 
Heb.  iv.  13).  II.  His  providence.  1.  For  good  (1  Kings  vi.  3;  Psa.  xxxii.  8). 
2.  For  evil  (Isa.  iii.  8).  {S.  Chanwck,  B.D.)  God' s providence— a  description, 
and  its  end  : — I.  The  description  of  God's  providence.  1.  Its  immediateness : 
"  His  eyes."  Not  like  princes,  who  see  by  their  servants'  eyes,  more  than  by  their 
own,  what  is  done  in  their  kingdoms ;  His  care  is  immediate.  2.  Its  quickness  and 
speed  :  "  run."  3.  Its  extent :  "  the  whole  earth."  4.  Its  diligence :  "  to  and  fro." 
His  care  is  repeated.  6.  Its  efiicaey.  His  care  doth  engage  His  strength.  _  II.  The 
END  OF  PROVIDENCE,  (ibid.)  The  foundations  of  the  doctrine  of  providence  : — 
I.  God  hath  an  indisputable  and  peculiar  right  to  the  government  of  the 
WORLD.  This  right  is  founded  upon— 1.  That  of  creation.  2.  The  excellency  of 
His  being.  Every  man  hath  a  natural  right  to  rule  another  in  his  own  art  and 
skill  wherein  he  excels  him.  II.  God  only  is  qualified  for  the  UNivERS.Ui 
government  of  the  world.  God  only  is  fit  in  regard  of— 1.  Power.  2.  Holiness 
and  righteousness.  All  disorder  is  the  effect  of  unrighteousness.  3.  Knowledge. 
4.  Patience.     III.  There   can   be   no   reason   rendered    why   God   should   not 

ACTUALLY     GOVERN     THE     WORLD,      SINCE     He     ONLY     HATH     A    RIGHT    AND    A    FITNESS. 

IV.  God  DOTH  actually  preserve  and  govern  the  world.  1.  Nothing  is  acted 
in  the  world  without  God's  knowledge.  The  vision  of  the  wheels  in  Ezekiel 
presents  us  with  an  excellent  portraiture  of  providence  (Ezek.  i.  18).  2.  Nothing 
is  acted  in  the  world  without  the  will  of  God  (Eph.  i.  11 ;  Psa.  cxxxv.  6).  3.  Nothing 
doth  subsist  without  God's  care  and  power.  (Ibid.)  The  universality  of  Gorf's' 
provideiice  :—I.  It   is    over  all  creatures.      1.  The  highest.      (1)  Over   Jesvis 


61  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

Christ,  the  First-born  of  every  creature  (Acts  ii.  23).  (2)  Over  angels  and  men. 
2.  The  meanest.  As  the  sun's  light,  so  God's  providence,  disdains  not  the  meanest 
worms.  II.  It  extends  to  all  the  actions  and  motions  of  the  creature.  1.  To 
natural  actions.  How  do  fish  serve  several  coasts  at  several  seasons?  why  do 
plants  that  grow  between  a  barren  and  a  fruitful  soil  shoot  all  their  roots  towards 
the  moist  and  fruitful  ground,  but  by  a  secret  direction  of  providential  wisdom  ? 
2.  To  civil  actions.  Counsels  of  men  are  ordered  by  Him  to  other  ends  than  what 
they  aim  at,  and  which  their  wisdom  cannot  discover.  3,  To  preternatural  actions. 
God  doth  command  creatures  to  do  those  things  which  are  no  way  suitable  to  their 
inclinations  (1  Kings  xvii.  4  ;  Jonah  ii.  10;  Dan.  iii.).  4.  To  all  supernatural  and 
miraculous  actions  of  the  creatures.  As  when  the  sun  went  backward  in  Hezekiah's 
time,  and  when  it  stood  still  in  the  valley  of  Ajalon.  5.  To  all  fortuitous  actions. 
The  whole  disposing  of  the  lot  which  is  cast  into  the  lap  is  of  the  Lord  (Prov. 
xvi.  33).  6.  To  all  voluntary  actions.  (Ibid.)  The  mysterioiisness  of  God't 
providence  : — I.  His  ways  are  above  human  methods.  Dark  providences  are  often 
the  groundwork  of  some  excellent  piece  He  is  about  to  discover  to  the  world.  Hig 
methods  are  like  a  plaited  picture,  which  on  the  one  side  represents  a  negro  and  the 
other  a  beauty.  II.  His  ends  are  of  a  higher  strain  than  the  aims  of  men.  Who 
would  have  thought  that  the  forces  Cyrus  raised  against  Babylon,  to  satisfy  his  own 
ambition,  should  be  a  means  to  deliver  the  Israelites  and  restore  the  worship  of 
God  in  the  temple  ?  III.  God  hath  several  ends  in  the  same  action.  Jacob  is 
oppressed  with  famine,  Pharaoh  enriched  with  plenty,  but  Joseph's  imprisonment 
is  in  order  to  his  father's  relief  and  Pharaoh's  wealth.  IV.  God  has  more  remote 
ends  than  short-sighted  souls  are  able  to  espy.     {Ibid.)        The  providence  0/ 

Qod : I.  The  wisdom  op  God  would  not  be  so  perspicuous  were  there  not  a 

PROVIDENCE  IN  THE  WORLD.  A  musician  discovers  more  skill  in  the  touching  an 
instrument,  and  ordering  the  strings,  to  sound  what  note  he  pleaseth,  than  he  doth 
in  the  first  framing  and  making  of  it  (Isa.  xxviii.  29).  All  God's  providences  are 
but  His  touch  of  the  strings  of  this  great  instrument  of  the  world.  II.  The  means 
WHEREBY  God's  acts  discover  a  providence.  He  acts — 1.  By  small  means.  (1)  In 
His  ordinary  works.  Great  plants  are  formed  from  small  seeds.  (2)  In  His  extra- 
ordinary works,  (a)  In  the  deliverance  of  a  people  or  person.  A  dream  was  the 
occasion  of  Joseph's  greatness.  He  used  the  cacklings  of  geese  to  save  the  Koman 
Capitol  from  a  surprise  by  the  Gauls,  {b)  In  the  salvation  of  the  soul.  Our 
Saviour  Himself,  though  God,  was  so  mean  in  the  eyes  of  the  world  that  He  calls 
Himself  "  a  worm,  and  no  man  "  (Psa.  xxii.  6).  The  world  is  saved  by  a  crucified 
Christ.  2.  By  contrary  means.  God  makes  contrary  things  contribute  to  His 
glory,  as  contrary  colours  in  a  picture  do  to  the  beauty  of  the  piece.  In  some 
engines  you  shall  see  wheels  have  contrary  motions,  and  yet  all  in  order  to  one  and 
the  same  end.  God  cured  those  by  a  brazen  serpent  which  were  stung  by  the  fiery 
ones,  whereas  brass  (according  to  Grotius)  is  naturally  hurtful  to  those  that  are 
bit  by  serpents.  [Ihid.)  A  supreme  providence  the  only  explanation  of  many 
actions  and  events  in  the  world  .-—This  is  evidenced — I.  By  the  restraints  upon 
THE  passions  OF  MEN.  How  strangely  did  God  qualify  the  hearts  of  the  Egyptians 
willingly  to  submit  to  the  sale  of  their  land,  when  they  might  have  risen  in  a 
tumult,  broke  open  the  granaries,  and  supplied  their  wants  (Gen.  xlvii.  19,  21). 

II.    By   THE    SUDDEN    CHANGES    WHICH   ARE    MADE    UPON   THE    SPIRITS    OF    MEN   FOR    THE 

PRESERVATION  OF  OTHERS  (GcH.  xxxiii.  4 ;  1  Sam.  xxiv.  17,  18 ;  2  Chron.  xviii.  31  ; 
Esther  vi.  1,  2).  III.  In  causing  enemies  to  do  things  for  others  which  are 
CONTRARY  TO  ALL  RULES  OF  POLICY.  The  Jews  in  the  worst  of  their  captivities  were 
often  befriended  by  their  conquerors,  to  rebuild  their  city  and  re-edify  their  temple, 
and  at  the  charge  of  their  conquerors  too  (Ezra  i.  1,  2,  7,  iv.  12,  15,  19,  vi.  4,  5, 
8  9.  11  22 ;  Neh.  ii.  8).  IV.  In  infatuating  the  counsels  of  men 
(isa.  xxxii'i.  11 ;  2  Sam.  xvii.  14).  V.  In  making  the  counsels  of  men  subservient 
TO  the  very  ends  they  design  against  (Gen.  xi.  4,  8;  John  xii.  32).  VI.  In 
making  the  fancies  of  men  subservient  to  their  own  ruin  (2  Kings  iii.  22,  23, 
vii.  6  ;    Judg.  vii.  19-22).     {Ibid.)         The  unequal  distributions  of  providence— a 

question  : If  there  be  a  providence,   how  come  those   unequal   distributions  to 

happen  in  the  world  ?  I.  Answer  in  general.  1.  Is  it  not  a  high  presumption  for 
ignorance  to  judge  God's  proceedings?  2.  God  is  sovereign  of  the  world.  Why 
should  a  finite  understanding  prescribe  measures  and  methods  to  an  infinite 
Majesty?  3.  God  is  wise  and  just,  and  knows  how  to  distribute.  If  we  question 
His  providence,  we  question  His  wisdom.  We  see  the  present  dispensations,  but 
are  we  able  to  understand  the  internal  motives  ?     4.  There  is  a  necessity  for  some 


■CHAP.  XTi.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  65 

seeming  inequality,  at  least,  in  order  to  the  good  government  of  the  world.     The 
afflictions  of  good  men  are  a  foil  to  set  off  the  beauty  of  God's  providence  in  the 
world.     5.  Unequal  distributions  do  not  argue  carelessness.    A  father  may  give  one 
•child  a  gayer  coat  than  he  gives  another,  yet  he  extends  his  fatherly  care  and 
tenderness  over  all.     6.  Upon  due  consideration  the  inequality  will  not  appear  so 
great  as  the  complaint  of  it.     A  running  sore  may  lie  under  a  purple  robe.     As 
some  are  stripped  of  wealth  and  power,  so  they  are  stripped  of  their  incumbrances 
they  bring  with  them.     II.  Answer  moke  pabticulably.     1.  It  is  not  well  with  bad 
men   here.     (1)  They  are  tortured   by  their  own  lusts.     (2)  They  have  a  great 
Account  to  make,  and  know  not  how  to  make  it  (Luke  xvi.  2).     (3)  They  are  worse 
for  what  they  have  (Psa.  Ixix.  22  ;  Prov.  i.  32).     (4)  In  the  midst  of  their  prosperity 
they  are  reserved  for  justice  (Exod.ix.  16  ;  Psa.  xxxvii.  2).    2.  Neither  is  it  bad  here 
with  good  men.     (1)  Adversity  cannot  be  called  absolutely  an  evil.     (2)  God  never 
leaves  good   men  so  bare  but  He  provides  for  their  necessities   (Psa.  xxxvii.  5, 
>lxxxiv.  11).     (3)  The  little  good  men  have  is  better  than  the  highest  enjoyments 
>ot  wicked  men  (Psa.  xxxvii,  16 ;  Prov.  xvi.  8).     (4)  No  righteous  man  would  in  his 
sober  wits  be  willing  to  make  an  exchange  of  his  smartest  afflictions  for  a  wicked 
man's  prosperity,  with  all  the  circumstances  attending  it.     (5)  It  is  not  ill  with  the 
righteous  in  afflictions  because  they  have  high  advantages  by  them,     (a)  Sensible 
'experiments  of  the  tender  providence  of   God  over  them  (Psa.  xxxvii.  19,   39  ; 
2   Tim.   iv.   17;    2  Cor.   1.   5 ;    1   Pet.   iv.    13,   14).     (6)  Inward   improvements, 
'Opportunities  to  manifest  more  love  to  God,  more  dependence  on  Him,  the  perfection 
of  the  soul  (1  Tim.  v.  5  ;  Job  xxii.  10).     (c)  Future  glory,     (d)  Suffering  of  good 
men  for  the  truth  highly  glorifies  the  providence  of  God  (1  Pet.  iv.  16).     (e)  This 
argument  is  stronger  for  a  day  of  reckoning  after  this  Ufe  than  against  providence. 
{Ibid.)         The  unworthiness  and  absurdity  of  denying  providence  : — I.  The  evtl  or 
DENYING  PBOviDENCE.     1.  It  givcs  a  liberty  to  all  sin.     What  may  not  be  done  where 
there  is  no  government  ?    2.  It  destroys  all  religion.     (1)  All  worship.     How  is  it 
■possible  to  persuade  men  to  regard  Him  for  God  who  takes  no  care  of  them  ? 
.(2)  Prayer.     What  favour  can  we  expect  of  Him  who  is  regardless  of  dispensing 
any?      (3)  Praise.      (4)  Dependence,    trust,    and    hope.      3.    It   is   a   high   dis- 
.paragement  of    God.     4.  It    is    clearly    against    natural    light.     Socrates   could 
say,    "Whosoever    denied    providence    was    possessed  with    a    devil."    II.  The 
OBOUNDS  OF  THE  DENIAL  OF  PROVIDENCE.       This    is    foundcd — 1.  Upou   au   over- 
weening  conceit  of  men's  own  worth.     When  men  saw  themselves  frustrated  of 
the  rewards  they  expected,  and  saw  others  that  were  instruments  of  tyranny  and 
dust  graced  with  the  favours  they  thought  due  to  their  own  virtue,  they  ran  into  a 
conceit  that  God  did  not  mind  the  actions  of  men  below.     2.  Upon  pedantical  and 
€ensual  notions  of   Gc/d.    As  though  it  might  detract  from  His  pleasures  and 
delight  to  look  down  upon  this  world,  or  as  though  it  were  a  molestation  of  an 
infinite  power  to  busy  Himself  about  the  cares  of  sublunary  things.      3.  On  a 
flattering  conceit  of  the  majesty  of  God,     4.  On  their  wishes  upon  any  gripes  of 
conscience.     Those  in  Zephaniah  were  first  settled  upon  their  lees,  and  then  to 
drive  away  aU  fears  of  punishment,  deny  God's  government  (Zeph.  i.  12).     Some 
men,  upon  a  sense  of  guilt,  wish,  for  their  own  security,  there  were  no  providential 
eye  to  inspect  them.     III.  The  various  ways  wherein  men  pbactically   dent 
PROVIDENCE,  or  aetjse  IT,  OR  CONTEMN  IT.     1.  When  they  will  walk  on  in  a  con- 
iirary  way  to  checks  of   Providence.     2.  In  omissions  of  prayer   (Psa.   xiv.   2 ; 
'2  Kings  i.  3 ;  Job.  xv.  4).     3.  When  men  will  turn  every  stone  to  gain  the  favourable 
Assistance  of  men  in  their  designs,  and  never  address  to  God  for  His  direction  or 
•blessing   (Job  xxxv.  9,  10 ;  2  Chron.  xvi.  7,  12  ;  Prov.  iii.  5).     4.  When  upon 
receiving  any  good  they  make  more  grateful  acknowledgment  to  the  instruments 
than  to  God,  the  principal  author  of  it  (Isa.  x.  13,  14;  Dan.  v.  23;  Heb.  i.  16). 
•5,  When  we  use  indirect  courses  and  dishonest  ways  to  gain  wealth  or  honour. 
>6.  When  we  distrust  God  when  there  is  no  visible  means  (Isa.  li.  12, 13  ;  Psa.  Iii.  7). 
7.  Stoutness,  under  God's  afflicting  or  merciful  hand,  is  a  denial  or  contempt  of 
providence  (Dan.  v.  23;  Hos.  vii.  9;  Isa.  xxii.  12,  13),     8.  Envy  is  also  a  denial 
■of  providence.     9,  Impatience  under  cross  providence  is  a  denial  and  contempt  of 
God's  government  (Isa.  viii.  21,  22).     10.  In  charging  our  sins  and  miscarriages  by 
them  upon  Providence  (Prov,  xix.  3).     11.  Many  other  ways.     (1)  When  we  do 
>things  with  a  respect  to  the  pleasure  of   men  more  than  of   God.     (2)  In  vain 
boasting  and  vaunting  of  ourselves.     (3)  Oppression  (Psa.  xci v.  6, 7).  (4)    Misinter- 
pretations of  Providence  (Num.  xiv.  3) .     (5)  In  limiting  Providence  (Psa.  Ixxviii .  41) . 
<llbid.)        Belief  in  Providence  a  source  of  comfort : — I.  Man  is  a  special  object 

13 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

OF  Pkovidence  (Gen.  i.  26).  II.  Holt  MEJf  A  more  special  object  op  it 
(Psa.    ixxiii.    18,    xxxvii.    23;    text).      III.  Hexce   it    will    follow    that    the 

BPIKITS   OF    GOOD     IfEN    HAVE     SUFFICIENT     GROUNDS    TO    BEAR    UP    IN     THEIR    INNOCENT 

sufferings   and  storms  in  THE  WORLD   (Hcb.  vi.    10).      IV.  Hence  follows  a 

CERTAIN    BECURITT    AGAINST    A    GOOD    MAN'b    WANT     (Psa.    XXXiv.    10;    1.    Tim.    iv.    8). 

(Ibid.)  Our  duty  in  regard  to  Frovidence : — I.  To  seek  everything  we  need  ai 
THE  HANDS  OF  GoD.    II.   To  TRUST  PROVIDENCE.     1.  In  the  greatest  extremities. 

2.  In  the  way  of  means.  3.  In  the  way  of  precept.  Let  not  any  reliance  upon 
an  ordinary  providence  induce  us  into  any  way  contrary  to  the  command 
(Psa.  xxxvii.  5).  4.  Solely,  without  prescribing  any  methods  to  Him.  HI.  To 
SUBMIT  TO  Providence:  for — 1.  Whatsoever  God  doth.  He  doth  wisely.  2.  God 
discovers  His  mind  to  us  by  prgvidences  (Luke  vii.  22;  Acts.  v.  38,  39).  IV.  To 
MURMUR  NOT  AT  PROVIDENCE.  V.  To  STUDY  PROVIDENCE.  1.  Universally.  (1) 
The  darkest.  (2)  The  terriblest.  (3)  The  smallest.  2.  Eegulavly.  (1)  By  the 
Word:  compare  providence  and  the  promise' together.  (2)  By  faith.  We  many 
times  correct  our  sense  by  reason  ;  why  should  we  not  correct  reason  by  faith  ? 

3.  Entirely.  (1)  View  them  in  their  connection.  The  providences  of  God  bear  » 
just  proportion  to  one  another,  and  are  beautiful  in  their  entire  scheme.  As  in  a 
piece  of  arras  folded  up,  and  afterwards  particularly  opened,  we  see  the  hand  or 
foot  of  a  man,  the  branch  of  a  tree ;  or,  if  we  look  on  the  outside,  we  see  nothing  but 
knots  and  threads  and  uncouth  shapes  that  we  know  not  what  to  make  of ;  but 
when  it  is  fully  opened,  and  we  have  the  whole  web  before  us,  we  see  what 
histories  and  pleasing  characters  are  interwoven  in  it.  (2)  View  them  in  their  end 
(Psa.  Ixxiii.  16,  17).  4.  Calmly.  5.  Seriously.  6.  Holily;  with  a  design  to  that 
duty  Providence  calls  for  (Isa.  xxii.  12).  7.  Ascribe  the  glory  of  every  providence  to 
God.  (Ibid.)  Providence  follows  the  rule  of  Scripture  : — Whatsoever  was  written 
was  written  for  the  Church's  comfort  (Fiom.  xv.  4) ;  whatsoever  is  acted  in  order  to 
anything  written  is  acted  for  the  Church's  good.  All  the  providences  of  God  in 
the  world  are  conformable  to  His  declarations  in  His  Word.  I.  All  good  things 
ARE  FOR  the  GOOD  OF  THE  Church.  1.  The  world.  (1)  The  continuance  of  the 
world  is  for  their  sakes  (Acts  xvii.  30).  (2)  The  course  of  natural  things  is  for  the 
good  of  the  Church  or  particular  members  of  it  (Hos.  ii.  18 ;  Josh.  x.  12,  13). 

(3)  The  interest  of  nations  is  ordered  as  is  most  for  the  Church's  good  (2  Kings 
ix.  6,  7).     2.  The  gifts  and  common  graces   of   men   in   the  world.     3.  Angels. 

(1)  The  highest  orders  among  them  are  not  exempted  from  being  officers  for  the 
Church  (Matt,  xviii.  10;  Heb.  i.  14;  Psa.  xci.  11;  Luke  xvi.  22).  (2)  Armies  of 
them  are  employed  upon  this  occasion  (Gen.  xxxiii.  1,  2).  (3)  Christ  hath  the 
government  of  them  to  this  end  for  His  Church  (Heb.  ii.  7,  8 ;  Eph.  i.  21,  22). 

(4)  The  great  actions  which  have  been  done  in  the  world,  or  shall  be  done  for  the 
Church,  are  performed  by  them  (Deut.  vii.  16,  viii.  16 ;  Eev.  x.  8,  9,  xxii.  8,  9). 

(5)  They  engage  in  this  work  with  delight.  II.  All  bad  things  are  for  their 
GOOD.  1.  Bad  persons.  (1)  The  devil.  The  malice  of  the  devil  against  Job 
hath  rendered  him  a  standing  miracle  of  patience  for  ever.  God  overreaches  the 
devil,  and  makes  him  instrumental  for  good  whore  he  designs  hurt  and  mischief. 

(2)  Wicked  men.  They  exist  in  the  midst  of  the  Church  either  for  the  exercise  of 
their  grace  or  security  of  their  person  or  interest  (Prov.  xvi.  7).  2.  Bad  things. 
(1)  Sin.  (a)  A  man's  own  sin.  Onesimus  runs  from  his  master,  and  finds  a 
spiritual  father.  God  ma]i;es  the  remainder  of  sin  in  a  good  man  an  occasion  to 
exercise  His  grace,  discover  his  strength,  and  show  his  loyalty  to  God.  (b)  Other 
men's  sins.  The  revengeful  threatening  of  Esau  was  the  occasion  of  Jacob's  flight, 
which  saved  him  from  possible  idolatry  (Gen.  xxvii.  43,  46).  (2)  Commotions  in 
the  world  (Psa.  xxix.  10,  11;  Isa.  xliv.  28).  (3)  Destroying  judgments  (Rom.  xi. 
11,  12).  (4)  Divisions  in  the  Church.  (5)  Persecutions.  (Ibid.)  Providence 
glorifies   Ood's  grace  in   Christ : — I.  All   the   providence  of   God  is   for  thb 

GLORIFYING  HlS  GRACE  IN  ChKIST  (Eph.  1.  10,  22,  23).  II.  GoD  HATH  GIVEN  THB 
POWER    OF    PROVIDENTIAL     ADMINISTRATION    OF    THINGS    TO     ChRIST,    FOR     THE     GOOD     OP 

THE  Church.  III.  God  in  the  Church  discovers  the  glory  of  all  His 
ATTRIBUTES.  What  wisdom,  power,  sufficiency,  grace,  and  kindness  He  hath  is 
principally  for  them.  IV.  There  is  a  peculiar  relation  of  God  in  Christ 
TO  THE  Church,  upon  which  account  this  doctrine  must  nekds  be  true. 
God  is  a  father  to  provide  for  them  (Isa.  Ixiv.  8)  ;  a  mother  to  suckle  them 
(Isa.  xlix.  15) ;  Christ  is  a  husband  to  love  and  protect  them  (Eph.  v.  29) ;  a 
brother  to  counsel  them  (John  xx.  17).     V.  The  whole  interest  of  God  in  thh 

WORLD     LIES     IN     HiS    ChUKCH     AND     PEOPLE.        VI.     It    CANNOT     BE     BUT     ALL     THB 


OHAP.xvi.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  67 

PROVIDENCES   OF   GoD   SHAXL   WORK   TO    THE    GOOD    OF    HiS   ChuRCH,   U"   WB    CONSIDER 

THE  AFFECTIONS  OF  GoD.     1.  His  love.     2.  His  delight  (Zeph.  iii.  17).     VII.  The 

PRESENCE    OF    GoD    IN    HiS    ChURCH   WILL   MAKE    ALL   PROVIDENCES    TEND   TO   THE   GOOD 

OF  IT.  VIII.  The  prayers  of  the  Church  have  a  mighty  force  with  God  to 
THIS  end;  because — 1.  God  delights  in  the  prayers  of  His  people.  2.  Prayer  is 
nothing  else  but  a  pleading  of  God's  promises.  3.  They  are  the  united  supplications 
and  pleadings  both  in  heaven  and  earth.  (1)  Christ  intercedes  for  the  Church. 
(2)  Angels  in  all  probability  do  the  same.  (3)  Glorified  saints  are  not  surely 
behind.  Use  I.  For  information.  1.  God  will  always  have  a  Church  in  the 
world.  2.  God  will,  in  the  greatest  exigencies,  find  out  means  for  the  protection  of 
His  Church.  3.  The  Church  shall,  in  the  end,  prove  victorious  against  all  its 
adversaries,  or  Providence  must  miss  its  aim.  4.  The  interest  of  nations  is  to  bear 
a  respect  to  the  Church,  and  countenance  the  worship  of  God  in  it.  5.  We  may 
see  hence  the  ground  of  most  of  the  judgments  in  the  world.  6.  What  esteem, 
then,  should  there  be  of  the  godly  in  the  world  1  7.  It  is,  then,  a  very  foolish 
thing  for  any  to  contend  against  the  welfare  of  God's  people.  Use  II.  For 
comfort.  1.  In  duties  and  special  services.  2.  In  meanness  and  lowness.  3.  In 
the  greatest  judgments  upon  others.  4.  In  His  people's  greatest  extremities 
(Isa.  xliii.  2 ;  Psa.  xci.  4 ;  John  vi.  17,  18).  5.  In  fear  of  wants.  6.  In  the  low 
estate  of  the  Church  at  any  time.  Use  III.  If  the  providence  of  God  is  chiefly 
designed  for  the  good  of  the  Church — 1.  Fear  not  the  enemies  of  the  Church. 
2.  Censure  not  God  in  His  dark  providences.  3.  Inquire  into  providence  and 
interpret  all  public  providences  by  this  rule.  4.  Consider  the  former  providences 
God  hath  wrought  for  the  Church  in  past  ages.  5.  Act  faith  in  God's  providences. 
6.  Wait  upon  God  in  His  providence.  7.  Pray  for  the  Church.  8.  When  you 
receive  any  mercy  for  the  Church  in  answer  to  prayer  give  God  the  glory  of  it. 
9.  Imitate  God  in  His  affection  to  the  Church.  10.  Look  after  sincerity  before 
God.  {Ibid.)  The  look  of  God  : — I.  God  looks  upon  all  things  distinctly.  He 
looks  upon  every  parcel  and  opens  the  whole  pack  of  human  affairs.  IT.  He 
beholds  every  thing  and  person  perfectly,  fuUy,  quite  through.  III.  In  seeing  He 
governs  everything  effectually,  and  works  it  to  His  own  ends.  IV.  He  seeth 
ALL  things  together.  {J.  Caryl.)  God's  loving  providence  over  His  people  : — 
There  is  something  sadly  natural  in  the  conduct  of  Asa  as  described  in  the  context. 
It  is  so  hard  for  us  to  feel  that  our  interests  are  secure  unless  we  are  manipulating 
them  ourselves.  A  soldier  in  the  battle  seizes  yonder  knoll,  driving  off  with  his 
superior  valour  the  enemies  who  were  holding  it.  It  is  nobly  done,  and  it  will  be 
well  if  the  plan  of  his  general  includes  the  capture  of  that  knoll.  But  if  not,  when 
the  tide  of  battle  rolls  off  in  another  direction,  the  valiant  soldier  will  be  left 
unsupported  in  the  midst  of  the  returning  enemies.  How  many  men  have  been 
utterly  undone  by  the  accomplishment  of  their  own  plans,  through  their  own  vast 
industry  and  heroic  enterprise,  simply  because  they  had  not  made  their  plans 
subordinate  to  the  purposes  of  God,  the  supreme  commandant  of  every  life.  Keep 
your  eye  upon  the  pillar  of  fire  and  cloud  which  moves  over  the  desert !  I.  How 
eagerly,  then,  God  consults  the  welfare  of  His  people.  II.  How  minutely 
careful  of  us  is  God.  HI.  How  complete  is  God's  supervision  or  our  welfare. 
{J.  M.  Ludlow,  D.D.)  Divine  Providence: — The  term  "Providence,"  as  now 
commonly  applied  to  God,  does  not  occur  in  Holy  Scripture.  It  occurs  only  in  two 
passages  in  the  Apocrypha,  viz.,  Wisd.  xiv.  3  and  xvii.  3.  It  is,  nevertheless,  a 
term  convenient  and  proper  for  the  statement  of  a  Scriptural  doctrine.  By  those 
of  the  ancient  philosophers  who  admitted  the  existence  of  a  God,  or  of  a  plurality 
of  gods,  terms  of  correspondent  grammatical  import  were  employed,  to  express  that 
Divine  superintendence  by  which  all  things  in  the  material  creation  were  fitted  and 
directed  to  their  proper  ends,  and  by  which  the  universe  was  kept  from  falling 
back  into  that  state  of  chaos  which  was  supposed  to  have  preceded  the  present 
orderly  and  beauteous  frame  of  things.  After  their  example,  we  have  learned  to 
employ  the  term  "  Providence,"  for  the  purpose  of  describing  "  the  conduct  and 
direction  of  the  several  parts  of  the  universe  by  a  superintending  and  intelligent 
Being."  .  My  purpose  is  to  invite  your  attention  to  such  views  of  the  providence  of 
God  as  more  immediately  aiiect  the  higher  interests  of  man.  I.  First,  then,  we 
inquire  into  the  general  proofs  evincing  a  Divine  Providence.  1.  The  first  of 
these  proofs  is  drawn  from  the  moral  fitness  and  necessity  of  such  a  Providence. 
The  Psalmist  teaches  us  he  is  a  "fool  "  who  says  "  There  is  no  God"  ;  and  surely 
he  is  not  less  so  who,  professing  to  believe  in  the  existence  of  such  a  God  as  the 
Jehovah  of  the  Scriptures,  can  say,  "There  is  no  Providence."     Some  writers  on 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHiP.  xvi. 

this  subject  have  gone  so  far  as  to  assert  that,  in  the  abstract,  the  idea  of  a  God 
without  a  providence  involves  a  contradiction.  But  the  truth  of  that  position 
may  be  reasonably  questioned.  If  we  suppose  a  God,  invested  with  no  higher 
attributes  than  those  which  were  applied  to  the  false  deities  of  ancient  heathenism, 
where  is  the  folly  of  farther  supposing  Him  to  dwell  in  a  remote  and  selfish 
seclusion  from  terrestrial  things  ?  In  this  respect,  the  followers  of  Epicurus  gave 
good  proof  of  their  consistency  at  least  when,  believing  only  in  such  gods  as  those 
referred  to,  they  not  only  denied  them  to  be  the  governors,  but  also  the  creators,  of 
the  world  ;  it  being,  as  they  rightly  judged,  but  reasonable  to  conclude  that  such 
gods  had  neither  the  wisdom  nor  the  power  to  create,  or  govern,  such  a  world  aa 
this.  And  they  were  equally  consistent  when,  having  no  distinct  notion  of  any 
intelligent  Being  to  whom  the  lofty  attributes  of  eternal  existence  and  universal 
power  might  be  considered  as  pertaining,  they  attributed  eternity  to  matter,  and 
give  the  empire  of  the  world  to  chance.  Were  there  in  reality  no  higher  object  of 
worship  than  the  daemon-gods  of  Greece  and  Eome,  and  were  there,  consequently, 
no  Providence  but  such  as  these  gods  might  be  supposed  to  be  capable  of  exer- 
cising, it  were  surely  consistent  with  good  reason  and  benevolence  at  least  to  wish 
the  sceptre  of  the  world's  dominion  might  be  wrested  from  their  grasp,  and  that, 
rather  than  be  subject  to  such  rule,  the  course  of  nature  and  of  all  events  might  be 
committed  to  the  sportive  dance  of  atoms  and  the  blind  rush  of  accidental  causes. 
But  if,  as  taught  in  Scripture,  we  acknowledge,  as  the  first  cause  of  all  created 
things,  a  Being  absolutely  perfect,  and  therefore  infinite  in  wisdom,  in  goodness, 
and  in  power,  we  must  at  the  same  time  admit  a  Divine  Providence  as  still 
sustaining  and  governing  the  universe  which  He  has  made  ;  and  especially  we  must 
admit  there  is  a  Providence,  to  administer  and  overrule  the  affairs  and  interests  of 
men.  Much  as  it  has  laboured  on  that  point,  "  the  wisdom  of  this  world  "  presents 
us  with  no  principles  which  can  at  all  sufiice  to  show  how  anything  created  can 
even  continue  to  exist  unless  by  a  perpetual  exertion  of  wisdom  and  power  on  the 
part  of  Him  who  first  called  it  into  being ;  or  how,  upon  the  supposition  that  the 
Divine  guidance  and  support  should  be  withdrawn,  the  world  could  do  otherwise 
than  immediately  sink  back  into  the  nothingness  from  which  it  originally  sprung. 
Even  supposing  the  material  creation,  in  "the  dew"  of  its  "  morning,"  and  in 
"the  beauty"  of  its  primaeval  excellence,  to  have  received  the  impression  of  such 
properties  and  laws  as  would  have  been  sufficient,  but  for  the  positive  intervention 
of  some  disturbing  cause,  to  perpetuate  its  existence  and  its  order,  yet  we  cannot 
contemplate  the  character  and  aspect  of  the  world,  as  it  exists  at  present,  and 
especially  we  cannot  contemplate  its  moral  character  and  aspect,  without  per- 
ceiving the  necessity  of  a  Divine  Providence,  to  counteract  the  evils  which  have 
gained  access  to  it.  That  the  universal  Creator  should  leave,  without  a  providence, 
a  world  like  this,  in  which  evil  of  all  kinds  has  won  so  large  and  terrible  a  sway,  and 
in  which  there  are  so  many  fearful  tendencies  to  universal  mischief  and  confusion, 
would  neither  be  consistent  with  wisdom,  nor  goodness,  nor  justice,  on  any  other 
supposition  than  that  of  man's  having  been  judiciously  abandoned,  without  hope  of 
redemption,  to  reap  the  natural  fruit  of  his  own  evil  and  rebellious  doings.  2.  The 
second  proof  of  a  Divine  Providence  is  found  in  the  positive  and  repeated  testimony 
of  Holy  Writ.  3.  A  third  proof  evincing  a  Divine  Providence  is  found  in  certain 
miraculous  attestations  which  have  occasionally  marked  its  interposition.  We  are 
enabled  to  point  out  numerous  occasions  on  which  God  has  come  forth  from  the 
"  hiding-place  "  in  which  He  usually  dwells  and  carries  on  His  operations  and  has 
"  shown  Himself,"  as  it  is  stated  in  my  text,  by  tokens  which  could  not  but  be  seen, 
and  which  could  not  be  mistaken.  There  is  the  flood  coming  on  "  the  world  of  the 
ungodly,"  whilst  Noah  and  his  family,  being  •'  warned  of  God,"  are  directed  to  the 
means  of  their  exemption  from  the  general  destruction.  We  point  to  "  the  cities 
of  the  plain,  turned  into  ashes  by  fire  and  brimstone,  which  the  Lord  rained  upon 
them  out  of  heaven,"  whilst  righteous  Lot  is  escorted  by  angelic  attendants  to  a 
place  of  safety.  We  will  exhibit  to  him  the  long  roll  of  those  "  mighty  acts  and 
wonders  "  which  are  displayed  in  the  history  of  the  Israelitish  people.  We  con- 
template the  strange  deliverance  of  Daniel  and  his  three  countrymen  from  the 
power  of  savage  beasts  and  from  the  rage  of  the  devouring  flame.  We  will  show  him 
how  Nature  herself — the  imaginary  deity  whom  infidels  pretend  to  worship — has  in 
many  instances  forgotten  her  own  laws,  and  been  arrested,  or  even  turned  back- 
wards, in  her  course ;  and  we  will  challenge  him  to  show  us  how  these  stupendous 
anomalies  are  to  be  accounted  for,  unless  upon  the  supposition  that  in  these 
instances  there  was  the  interposition  of  a  Power  superior  to  anything  that  has 


CHAP.  XVI.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  69 

ever  been  understood  by  the  term  Nature — an  interposition  which  must  necessarily 
lead  us  to  admit  the  providence  for  which  we  are  contending.     II.  The  general 

CHAKACTEEISTICS    OF     THAT    DiVINE    PROVIDENCE    WHICH    IS    DEMONSTRATED    TO    EXIST. 

1.  This  Providence  is  universal,  "  for  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  run  to  and  fro  through- 
out the  whole  earth."  By  a  universal  Providence  we  mean  a  Providence  which  is 
at  the  same  time  general  and  particular.  Indeed  a  Providence  which  is  Divine 
must  necessarily  bear  both  these  characteristics.  No  argument  can  be  adduced  in 
favour  of  the  one  which  is  not  equally  applicable  in  favour  of  the  other ;  and  we 
cannot  exclude  either  of  them  from  our  notion  of  that  Providence  by  which  the 
world  is  governed  without  admitting  into  our  notion  of  the  Deity  by  whom  that 
providence  is  exercised  an  imperfection  of  which  He  is  incapable.  Por,  in  excluding 
either  a  general  or  a  particular  Providence,  we  necessarily  suppose  some  portion  of 
our  world,  of  greater  or  less  extent,  from  which  the  Divine  presence  and  care  are 
totally  excluded.  It  is  true  that  we  are  utterly  confounded  in  every  attempt  we 
make  to  estimate  the  wisdom  and  power  and  condescension  which  are  required  to 
be  in  constant  exercise,  in  order  to  the  maintenance  of  an  inspection  so  vast  in  its 
extent,  and  yet  so  minute  in  its  details.  But  from  this  feeling  of  astonishment  no 
objection  would  arise  against  the  doctrine  either  of  a  general  or  a  particular  Provi- 
dence, were  it  not  for  those  monstrously  absurd  comparisons  which  we  are  wont  to 
institute  between  the  Almighty  and  ourselves,  together  with  our  strange  forgetfulness 
of  the  important  truth  that  God  is  everywhere  present  at  one  and  the  same  time ; 
and  that  to  One  whose  knowledge  and  power  are  subject  to  no  bound  or  imper- 
fection, it  must  be  quite  as  easy  to  attend  to  many  things,  however  numerous  or 
complicated  they  may  be,  as  to  attend  to  only  one.  2.  A  second  characteristic  of 
the  providence  of  God  is  its  beneficence.  In  all  its  operations  it  regards,  as  its 
final  object,  the  welfare  of  mankind  in  general  ;  and  as  far  as  may  be  found 
consistent  with  that  object,  the  welfare  of  individuals  in  particular.  This  general 
purpose  of  beneficence  is  to  a  great  degree  apparent  in  the  general  provision  which 
is  made  for  human  sustenance  and  comfort.  It  is  impossible  to  view  the  astonish- 
ing arrangements  which  everywhere  display  themselves,  'or  the  supply  of  "  food 
convenient  for  us,"  and  for  the  general  preservation  of  our  race,  without  being 
prompted  to  exclaim,  '•  Thou  crownest  the  year  with  Thy  goodness ;  Thy  paths 
drop  fatness."  And  the  moral  ends  contemplated  by  a  Providence  which  is  thus 
mindful  of  our  bodily  necessities,  and  of  our  humblest  natural  infirmities,  must  be, 
in  even  more  than  an  equal  degree,  characterised  by  a  pure  and  infinite  beneficence. 
There  may  at  first,  indeed,  appear  to  be  something  almost  incompatible  with  such  a 
doctrine,  in  the  affliction  and  misery  which  desolate  the  earth.  But  the  difficulty 
arising  on  that  ground  is  easily  resolved  by  such  considerations  as  the  following : 
(1)  In  the  first  place,  much  of  the  natural  evil  which  exists  is  rendered,  in  some 
sort,  necessary  by  the  depravity  of  man.  It  constitutes,  in  fact,  a  part  of  that 
salutary  chastening  by  which,  not  unmindful  even  of  the  prodigal  who  has 
wandered  from  His  household,  and  "  wasted  his  substance  in  riotous  living,"  our 
heavenly  Father  seeks  to  recover  "  the  children  of  disobedience  to  the  wisdom  of 
the  just " ;  or  if  they  are  already  recovered,  opens  to  their  faith  the  means  of 
apprehending  "  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory."  In  vain, 
perhaps,  have  been  the  attempts  of  His  Providence,  by  the  dispensations  of  its 
bounty,  to  win  the  thoughtless  wanderer  to  reflection  and  repentance ;  "  but  in  the 
day  of  his  affliction,"  says  Jehovah,  "  he  will  seek  Me  early."  In  mercy,  therefore, 
to  the  sinner,  rather  than  in  anger,  and  not  with  anything  like  a  vindictive  purpose, 
He  lays  His  chastening  hand  upon  him.  (2)  Even  in  those  cases  where  individuals, 
or  collective  communities  of  men,  derive  themselves  no  moral  benefits  from  the  evils 
which  they  suffer,  yet  very  frequently  there  results  a  moral  benefit  to  others  ;  and 
thus,  under  all  the  circumstances  of  such  cases,  the  infliction  of  those  evils  is 
vindicated,  as  being  consistent  with  the  goodness  and  mercy  of  God,  not  less  than 
with  His  justice.  We  cannot  but  adore,  amidst  the  justice  and  judgment  displayed 
in  their  destruction,  the  goodness  which  was  careful  so  to  order  the  circumstances 
of  their  fate  as  to  render  it  in  the  most  eminent  degree  available  to  the  instruction 
and  benefit  of  all  succeeding  generations.  3.  A  third  characteristic  of  Divine  Pro- 
vidence is  its  mysteriousness.  I  do  not  say  that  there  is  any  mystery  as  to  the 
general  object  which  that  Providence  regards.  We  have  already  "  seen  the  end  of 
the  Lord,  that  He  is  pitiful  and  of  great  mercy."  But  of  the  course  which  He 
pursues  to  the  attairmient  of  that  end,  it  may  frequently  be  said,  that  "  His  path  is 
in  the  whirlwind,  and  His  way  in  the  great  deep,  and  His  footsteps  are  not 
known."     And  sorely  a  Providence  which  is   Divine   must  necessarily,  in  the 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

detail  of  many  of  its  plans  and  operations,  appear  to  be  mysterious  to  creatures  so 
short-sighted  as  we  are.     It  is  certainly  right,  because  perfectly  consistent  with  just 
notions  of  the  God  whom  we  adore,  that  we  should  acknowledge  the  existence  of 
mysteries  in  providence  ;  but  why  should  we  profess  to  wonder  at  such  mysteries, 
while  there  remain  so  many  mysteries  in  Nature  ?    I  have  said  that  the  general 
principles  of  the  Divine  administration  of  the  world  are  clearly  made  known.    But 
I  remember  the  saying  of  a  great  man,  now  no  more,  that  "  things  pertaining  to 
God  may  be  mysterious,  in  proportion  as  they  are  revealed  "  ;  and  I  cannot  but  feel 
the  application  of  that  paradoxical  yet  just  position  to  the  point  which  is  before  us. 
Were  God  a  finite  being,  like  ourselves,  the  revelation  of  the  principles  on  which 
He  acts,  however  vast  and  comprehensive  in  their  range  and  application  those 
principles  might  be,  would  not,  perhaps,  be  such  as  we  should  be  unable  adequately 
to  conceive.    But  principles  which  know  no  limit,  in  themselves  or  in  their  appli- 
cation, save  that  which  is  imposed  by  the  will,  or  by  the  necessity,  of  a  Divine  and 
incomprehensible  nature,  must  necessarily,  in  whatever  degree  they  are  revealed  to 
us,  remain  mysterious  because  of  their  infinity  ;   and  the  more  nearly  we  are 
enabled  to  contemplate  those  principles,  the  more  overpowering — I  had  almost  said, 
the  more  bewildering — will  be  the  effect  of  their  united  splendour,  both  on  our 
mental  and  spiritual  vision.    And  then,  besides  the  physical  reason  to  which  I  have 
referred,   why  the  providence  of   God  should  in  many  of  its  dispensations  be 
mysterious,  there  is  a  moral  reason — a  reason  arising  out  of  the  beneficence  by 
which  the  operations  of  that  providence  are  shaped  to  their  intended  issue.    For 
were  those  operations  free  from  mystery,  then  would  our  faith  want  those  trials 
which  constitute  its  most  important  and  profitable  exercise ;  and  in  wanting  those 
trials,  it  would  want,  at  the  same  time,  the  arena  on  which  it  wins  its  brightest 
victories,  and  becomes  entitled  to  its  richest  and  most  glorious  reward.     Think,  for 
example,  of  the  difference  which  it  might  have  made  to  Abraham  if  in  his  path  to 
the  attainment  and  confirmation  of  the  promise  in  regard  to  his  son  Isaac,  there 
had  been  no  adverse  hope  against  which  he  might  continue  to  "  believe  in  hope," 
and  no  apparent  impossibilities  in  the  midst  of  which  he  might  still  be  "  strong  in 
faith,  giving  glory  to   God."     4.  There  remains  to  be  noticed   yet  one   other 
characteristic  of  the  providence  of  God,  and  that  is,  its  entire  subservience  to  the 
purposes  of  His  redeeming  grace.     Indeed,  it  is  altogether  of  that  grace  that  there 
exists  at  aU  a  Providence  of  such  a  character ;  in  other  words,  had  there  been  no 
redeeming  grace,  then  no  such  Providence  could  have  existed.     No ;  it  is  then 
only  accounted  for  on  principles  justly  claiming  to  be  considered  "rational,"  when 
it  is  set  forth  as  the  result  of  '•  the  redemption  of  the  world  by  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."    On  the  part  of  persons  who  maintain  a  contrary  opinion,  we  sometimes 
hear  the  question,  "  How  can  the  death  of  Christ,  as  an  atoning  sacrifice,  be  made 
to  seem  consistent  either  with  perfect  justice  or  with  perfect  goodness  ?  "     But  we 
may  retort  that  question  with  another,  which  they  will  find  it  much  more  difficult 
to  answer.     Suppose  our  fallen  world  to  have  been  left  without  redemption,  and 
that  no  means  had  been  devised,  in  the  counsels  of  the  Divine  grace  and  wisdom, 
for  the  recovery  of  its  guilty  population  to  "  the  favour  and  the  peace  of  God," 
where  then  would  have  been  the  consistency — nay,  where  the  possibility,  of  a  Pro- 
vidence so  condescending  and  beneficent  as  that  which  now  appears  ?    Or  where 
would  have  been  the  actual  benefit  to  man  of  a  Providence  to  correct  and  modify 
the  course  of  outward  things,  if  he  had  still  been  doomed,  for  want  of  a  Redeemer, 
to  bear  for  ever  the  burden  of  a  guilt  for  which  there  was  no  expiation  ?    But  let  ua 
take  that  doctrine  along  with  us,  and  we  then  discover  an  apt  and  harmonious 
reason  for  such  a  Providence,  by  which  its  utmost  beneficence  is  justified.     And,  as 
that  characteristic  of  the  providence  of  God  which  renders  it  especially  dear  and 
valuable  to  ua  originates  in,  or  operates  at  least  as  the  result  of,  the   "  grace " 
which  "  came  by  Jesus  Christ,"  so,  as  already  stated,  it  is  ever  in  subservience  to 
the  purposes  of  the  same  grace  that  its  operations  are  conducted.     It  is  thus  in 
those  extensive  operations  which  involve  the  character  and  fate  of  nations  and 
empires.    It  were  vain  for  us  to  indulge  in  speculation  ae  to  the  objects  which 
Jehovah  might  contemplate,  on  the  supposition  of  man's  having  continued  in  his 
original  uprightness.     We  have  the  fact  of  his  departure  from  that  character  into  a 
state  of  guilty  estrangement  and  hostility.    And  taking  the  world  in  its  present 
circumstances,  and  seeing  that  "  God  so  loved  that  world,"  fallen  as  it  is,  as  to 
*'  give  His  only  begotten  Son  "  for  its  redemption,  we  may  be  assured  that  there  can 
be  no  object  dearer  to  the  heart  of  God  than  that  His  Son  should  "  see  of  the 
travail  of  His  soul  and  be  satisfied,"  in  the  reception  of  "  the  heathen  for  Hi» 


CHAP.  XVI.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  71 

inheritance,"  and  of  "  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  His  possession."  As  the 
providence  of  God  thus  stands,  and  ever  must  stand,  connected  with  the  purposes  of 
His  redeeming  grace,  so  it  is  in  those  cases  where  the  grace  of  God  specially  pre- 
vails, that  this  Providence  specially  exerts  its  powerful  and  benignant  operation ; 
or,  as  stated  in  the  text,  it  is  "  on  the  behalf  of  them  whose  heart  is  perfect  toward 
Him  "  that  the  Lord  "  shews  Himself  strong,"  and  for  their  sakes  more  especiallj 
His  "  eyes  run  to  and  fro  throughout  the  whole  earth."  In  other  words,  He  la 
eminently  the  God  of  providence  to  those  who  bow  before  Him,  and  rejoice  in  Him, 
as  the  God  of  comforting  and  sanctifying  grace.  Doubtless,  this  was  one  of  the 
great  truths  designed  to  be  set  forth  by  those  numerous  providential  interpositions 
which  shed  so  illustrious  a  light  upon  the  early  history  of  the  Israelitish  people.  On 
this  express  condition,  that  they  should  "  have  no  other  gods  before  Him,"  and 
that  they  should  "  keep  His  statutes  and  His  judgments  diligently,  to  do  them," 
Jehovah  engaged  on  His  part  to  "  shew  himself  strong  "  on  their  behalf,  in  such  a 
manner  as  should  render  them  the  astonishment  and  envy  of  surrounding  nations. 
And,  on  the  other  hand,  the  judgment  so  frequently  inflicted  on  that  people  during 
iheir  journeys  through  the  wilderness,  and  in  the  subsequent  periods  of  their 
liistory,  and  more  especially  their  present  wonderful  dispersion  throughout  other 
nations,  go  to  remind  us,  with  equal  emphasis  and  certainty,  that  it  is  only  in  pro- 
portion as  our  heart  is  **  perfect  toward  Him  "  that  God  can  be  expected  to  "  shew 
Himself  strong  "  on  our  behalf.  We  thus  perceive  that  the  great  lesson  intended 
to  be  taught  by  all  the  mighty  acts  and  wonders  which  God  did  for  Israel  is,  that 
the  same  God  will  ever  in  a  peculiar  manner,  care  for  those  who,  being  Christ's,  are 
therefore  "  Abraham's  seed  and  heirs  according  to  the  promise,"  whilst  those  who 
are  yet  "  aliens,"  or  outcasts  from  His  spiritual  Israel,  though  not  excluded  entirely 
from  His  providential  care,  shall  still  enjoy  that  care  in  an  inferior  degree.  It  is 
on  this  ground  that  we  discover  the  foundation  of  those  promises  which  ensure  to 
all  God's  people,  in  their  individual  as  well  as  their  collective  character,  an  adequate 
supply  of  all  their  bodily  and  temporal  necessities.  For  if,  as  intimated  in  the 
history  of  the  Jewish  people,  the  providence  of  God  is  the  handmaid  of  His  grace, 
and,  as  such,  is  commissioned  with  the  special  care  of  those  "  whose  heart  la 
perfect  toward  Him,"  then,  unless  we  would  again  charge  an  all-perfect  Being 
with  infirmity,  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  the  conclusion,  that  all  those  things  which 
Nature  absolutely  needs,  and  the  providing  of  which  often  brings  so  severe  a  burden 
on  the  mind,  •'  shall  (certainly)  be  added."  Again,  the  principle  that  the  operations 
of  God's  providence  are  subservient  to  the  purposes  of  His  grace  sheds  no  incon- 
siderable light  upon  the  mystery  which  is  supposed  to  be  presented  when,  whilst  the 
ungodly  *'  increase  in  riches,"  and  "  have  more  than  heart  could  wish,"  the  man 
whose  heart,  if  not  absolutely  perfect  toward  God,  is  yet,  in  general,  upright  and 
sincere  before  Him,  is  "plagued  all  the  day  long,  and  chastened  every  morning." 
It  is  not  that  He  who  claims  as  His  own,  "  the  gold  and  the  silver,  and  the  cattle  on 
a  thousand  hills,"  would  merely  •♦  for  His  own  pleasure  "  deny  to  His  people  the 
advantages  of  health  and  riches.  But  He  regards  their  eternal  salvation  as  being 
an  object  infinitely  more  important  than  their  worldly  comfort,  and  to  this  one  great 
object  all  others  must  be  subordinate  and  secondary.  1.  In  the  first  place,  the 
doctrine  of  a  Divine  Providence,  that  Providence  being  beneficent  as  well  aa 
universal,  condemns  that  excessive  anxiety  with  which  we  are  so  prone  to  burden 
and  distress  ourselves.  2.  Secondly,  this  doctrine  inculcates  the  duty,  and  when 
heartily  embraced,  it  will  inspire  the  feeling,  of  a  grateful  acquiescence  in  our  lot, 
however  far  removed  that  lot  may  be  from  the  circumstances  which  we  should  have 
chosen  for  ourselves.  8.  More  especially,  this  subject,  as  connecting  the  operations 
of  God's  providence  with  the  purposes  of  His  grace,  calls  upon  us  to  look  well  to  it, 
that  our  own  "  hearts  are  perfect  towards  Him  "  ;  and  that,  in  order  to  their  being 
so,  they  are  the  subjects  of  that  grace  which  can  alone  destroy  their  deceitfulness 
and  enmity,  and  render  them  a  holy  and  acceptable  sacrifice.  {J.  Crowther.) 
God  the  guardian  of  the  world : — I.  That  God's  guabdianship  of  the  wobld  la 
UNIVERSALLY  iNSPECTivE.  "  The  cycs  of  the  Lord  run  to  and  fro  throughout  the 
whole  earth."  God  sees  the  whole  of  a  thing.  Of  those  objects  with  which 
we  are  most  acquainted,  we  know  but  a  little  of  their  outside ;  the  essence  of 
everything  is  hid  beneath  an  impenetrable  veil  from  us.  Few,  indeed,  are 
the  things  we  are  permitted  to  see  even  the  outside  of.  Space  limits  us.  Our 
widest  horizon  is  not  a  handbreadth  to  the  heavens  as  compared  with  the 
universe.  Duration  limits  us.  Wonderful  things  were  transpiring,  even  on 
this  planet,  ages  ere  we  woke  into  conscious  thought.      But  neither  space  nor 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

duration  limits  the  knowledge  of  God  ;  He  is  in  all  places ;  He  exists  through  all 
times.     Whatever  is,  has  been,  will  be,  or  can  be,  are  in  His  eye.    All  actualities 
and  possibilities  are  there.     "  All  things  are  naked  and  open  to  the  eyes  of  Him  with 
whom  we  have  to  do."     If  the  eye  of  a  child  has  sometimes  been  known  to  paralyse 
the  arm  and  frustrate  the  intentions  of  him  who  has  been  bent  on  some  criminal 
deed,  how   would  not  the  lightning  glance  of    God   check   thee  from  all   evil? 
II.  That  God's  guardianship  of  the  world  is  personally  exercised.     He  does  not 
watch  and  superintend  the  world  through  the  instrumentality  of  others ;  His  eyes, 
His  own  eyes,  are  employed.     He  does  not,  like  human  potentates,  get  a  knowledge 
of  His  empire  by  hearsay  and  report,  but  by  His  own  personal  inspection.     It  is  a 
glorious  truth  that  God  Himself  is  in  our  world.     He  is  not  merely  here  by  repre- 
sentation.    He  does  not  look  after  the  universe  as  parents  after  their  children, 
merchants  after  their  business,  monarchs  after  their  dominions — by  proxy.     He 
employs  others,  it  is  true,  but  He  is  with  them  and  in  them — the  force  of  all  causes, 
the  motive  of  all  motives.     Nor  is  He  here  merely  by  influence,  just  as  the  author 
is  in  the  book,  or  as  the  telegraphic  officer  is  at  the  time  wherever  he  transmits 
his  message.      Those  heavenly  bodies,  which  fill  thoughtful  minds,  as  they  "  gaze 
upon  them  shining,"  with  unutterable  emotions,  and  seem  to  engulf  the  spirit  into 
their  own  immeasurable  vastness,  we  are  told,  radiate  and  revolve  by  law.      Man  is 
born,  sustained,  enjoys,  suffers,  lives,  and  dies,  by  "  laws."    Blessed  thought!  the 
great  Father  of  the  world  is  here,  not  merely  by  representation,  or  influence,  but  in 
person.      The  world  has  not  only  His  agents  and  His  works,  but  His  eyes — His  all- 
seeing  Self  is   here.    III.  That  God's  guardianship  of   the  world  is  mor.vlly 
designed.    Why  does  He  thus  so  sedulously  and  constantly  guard  the  world  ?     "  To 
shew  Himself  strong  in  the  behalf  of  them  whose  heart  is  perfect  toward  Him." 
God  guards  the  universe  for  the  interests  of  the  good.     It  is  not  material  Nature  in 
any  of  its  wondrous  combinations  of  beauty  and  sublimity,  not  blooming  land- 
scapes, mighty  oceans,  starry  spheres,  revolving  worlds,  or  refulgent  systems,  that 
interest  Him  most.    No ;  it  is  His  adopted  ones,  His  loving  children,  though  little 
and  afflicted,  that  engage  His  sympathies.      He  says,  in  effect,  "  I  keep  up  the 
machinery  of  the  universe  only  for  the  good  of  My  children.     I  have  no  affection 
for  it,  '  but  for  the  saints  that   are  in  the  earth,  in  whom  is  all  My  delight ' : 
wherever  they  are,  'Mine  eyes  and  My  heart  shall  be  there  perpetually.'"     This 
subject  teaches — 1.  The  true  spirit  of  life.     If  God  is  the  all-seeing  Guardian  of  the 
world,  whose  eyes  pierce  into  every  avenue  of  existence,  what  should  be  the  spirit  of 
life  ?     Not  the  spirit  of  empty  frivolity  and  childish  trifling,  treating  all  things  as  if 
made  for  foolish  jests  and  giddy  laughter,  but  the  spirit  of  solemnity  clothing  all  objects 
with  a  Divine  significance.     2.  The  true  interests  of  life.    What  are  they?     Secular 
possessions  ?  mental  attainments  ?  social  honours  ?    No,  but  a  perfect  heart.    3.  The 
true  Judge  of  life.      Our  life  has  many  judges,  at  many  tribunals  are  we  tried, 
and  many,  and  often  diverse,  are  the  verdicts  returned.     Some  are  too  favourable, 
and  some  too  adverse.     The  few  instances  of  accuracy  are  random  guesses,  not 
righteous  deductions.     But  there  is  one  true  Judge  ;  it  is  He  whose  "  eyes  run  to  and 
fro  throughout  the  whole  earth."     (Homilvit.)        The  guardianship  of  God : — I.  The 
WORLD  had  a  Guardian.     II.     That  the  guardianship  of  the  world  is  of  the  most 
minute  character.     III.  Th.4t  this  guardianship  of  God  is  of  the  most  lovino 
and  gracious  character.     {W.  G.  Barrett.)        God^s  thoughts  totoard  good  men: — I. 
Why  does  God  exercise  all  His  power  of  observation  and  control  in  this  world  iti 
BEHALF  OF  GOOD  MEN  ?     The  auswcr  is  that  they  of  all  creatures  best  illustrate  His 
character  and  glorify  Him  most.     They  alone — 1.  Were  originally  created  in  the 
Divine  likeness.     2.  Have  been  born  again  into  His  spiritual  image.     3.  Glorify  Him 
in  the  highest  degree  by  holy  lives.     II.  How  have  God's  powers  of  observation 

AND   control    BEEN    EXERCISED    IN     THEIR    BEHALF  ?       1.    The    prOCCSS    of    the    Carth'S 

development  during  the  vast  geologic  periods  of  the  first  five  creative 
days  all  meant  that  man  was  coming,  and  that  God's  eyes  were  running 
forward  to  prepare  him  a  home.  2.  In  connection  with  the  creation  of 
living  creatures,  by  the  aid  of  comparative  anatomy  we  can  see  God's  eyes 
running  forward  through  all  the  orders  of  animate  life  up  to  man.  3.  Having 
given  him  a  body  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made,  He  has  made  abundant  provision 
for  the  supply  of  all  his  wants.  (1)  Physical.  (2)  Intellectual.  (3)  Social. 
(4)  Keligious.  Sanctified  afflictions ;  Bible ;  Christ.  (J.  G.  Jackson.\  No  mist 
before  the  etjes  of  God  : — We  see  a  Divine  purpose  in  the  discovery  of  America,  in 
the  art  of  printing,  in  the  exposure  of  the  Gunpowder  Plot,  in  the  contrivance  of 
the  needle  gun,  in  the  ruin  of  an  Austrian  or  Napoleonic  despotism ;  but  how  hard 


CHAP.xyi.]  n.  CHRONICLES.  73 

it  is  to  see  God  in  the  minnte  personal  affairs  of  onr  lives.  We  think  of  God  as 
making  a  record  of  the  starry  host,  but  cannot  realise  the  Bible  truth  that  He  knows 
how  many  hairs  are  on  our  head.  It  seems  a  grand  thing  that  God  provided  food 
for  thousands  of  Israelites  in  the  desert,  but  not  how  He  feeds  hungry  sparrows. 
We  cannot  understand  how  He  encamps  in  the  crystal  palace  of  a  dew-drop,  or  finds 
room  to  stand,  without  being  crowded,  between  the  alabaster  pillars  of  a  pond-lily. 
Cromwell,  Alexander,  Washington,  or  an  archangel,  is  not  more  under  Divine  in- 
spection than  your  life  or  mine.  Pompey  thought  that  there  must  be  a  mist  over  the 
eyes  of  God  because  he  favoured  CsBsar.  But  there  is  no  such  mist.  {T.  De  Witt 
Talmage.)  To  shew  Himself  strong  in  the  behalf  of  them  whose  heart  is  perfect 
toward  Him. — God  waiting  to  show  Himself  strong  : — I.  God  has  shown  Himself 
STRONG  ON  BEHALF  OF  MEN.  It  is  oftcu  the  knowledge  of  God's  ability  to  help  that 
causes  us  the  greatest  difiBculty,  and  paralyses  our  faith  in  Him.  We  do  not  feel 
able  to  say  quite  as  confidently  as  we  might  that  all  His  promises  are  yea  and  amen, 
or  else  we  limit  theii?  reference,  and  say  that  they  have  only  to  do  with  certain 
orders  of  things.  Now  we  have  this  fact  before  us :  God  is  able,  He  must  be,  to  con- 
trol all  things.  His  knowledge  is  infinite  ;  His  wisdom,  His  strength  eternal.  As 
it  is,  while  we  acknowledge  His  abiUty  we  limit  its  exercise,  and  find  in  this  a 
reason  for  our  independent  action.  We  see,  in  opposition  to  the  limit  which 
we  are  often  ready  to  place  on  God's  interference  on  our  behalf,  the  wonderful 
variety  and  modes  of  the  help  given  to  men  as  recorded  in  the  Scripture. 
There  is  not  a  condition  but  God  has  appeared  in  that,  strong  to  help.  What 
wisdom  and  power  are  here  shown  on  behalf  of  men !  Lost  by  sin,  we  are  re- 
stored by  faith  in  Christ.  U.  God  looks  out  fob  opportunities  of  showing  Himself 
STRONG.  His  eyes  run  to  and  fro  throughout  the  earth.  He  is  thus  represented  as 
watching  men  for  the  purpose  of  revealing  Himself,  so  that  when  He  sees  the 
opportunity  He  is  there  ready  to  do  it.  He  is  not  reluctant  to  give.  III.  Why, 
then,  do  we  not  always  receive  ?  How  is  it  we  make  mistakes,  complain  of  want 
of  life  and  light  and  progress  ?  Here  is  the  reply.  The  opportunity  for  which  He 
waits  is  a  heart  perfect  toward  Him.  This  is  the  fitness  which  is  always  needed 
ere  He  shows  Himself  strong.  "  How  wilt  Thou  manifest  Thyself  to  us  ?  "  (fee. 
"  My  Father  will  love  him,  and  We  will  take  up  our  abode  with  him. "  We  are  not  so 
dependent  on  the  condition  of  our  life  as  we  think.  Let  the  heart  be  right,  and 
everything  else  will  be  transformed.  But  what  fitness  is  here  required?  Asa  did 
not  trust  God,  but  his  own  wisdom  and  gold  and  silver.  Apply  the  general  truth 
of  God  as  for  all,  without  considering  that  God,  though  the  absolute  monarch  of 
all,  does  not  act  arbitrarily  towards  any.  Thus  here  God  does  not  manifest  His 
strength  to  men  always.  Far  from  it.  Asa  found  that  God's  strength  did  not  help 
him ;  he  had  wars  all  the  remainder  of  his  life.  We  are  often  left  in  our  weakness, 
otherwise  there  would  be  no  such  thing  as  failure  in  the  details  of  life.  We  ask 
why  does  not  God  make  bare  His  arm  when  He  sees  the  weak  struggling  against 
greater  forces.  Be  it  nation,  be  it  tribe,  or  people,  or  individual,  He  knows  the 
need,  He  measures  it,  and  at  a  time  and  under  conditions  most  calculated  to  ensure 
the  eternal  and  lasting  good  of  His  creatures.  He  comes  forth  to  help  and  to  save. 
That  this  is  His  way  of  dealing  with  men  may  be  seen  in  the  greatest  and  highest 
gift  He  has  given.  We  gather,  in  conclusion — (1)  God  knows  and  estimates  our 
life  and  needs  from  the  state  of  heart,  our  actual  condition.  His  standard  differs 
greatly  from  ours.  He  withholds  blessings  that  we  may  get  a  more  firm  hold  of 
them  as  we  learn  this.  You  have  not  enjoyment  of  Christ.  You  have  not  forgive- 
ness. You  have  not  strength  to  overcome  sin.  You  have  not  a  perfect  heart 
toward  God.  (2)  This  gives  you  the  real  object  of  life.  {H.  W.  Butcher.)  The 
heartening  certainty  : — Asa  is  in  trouble.  Baasha  has  captured  and  fortified  Ramah 
and  so  hemmed  in  Jerusalem.  Is  not  that  a  frequent  type  of  life  ?  Is  not  every 
man  often  thrust  into  straits  as  Asa  was?  Is  there  not  for  every  man  some 
threatening  Ramah  over  against  his  Jerusalem.  1.  Here  is  a  man  whose  work  in 
life  seems  sometimes  vaster  than  his  energies.  How  can  life's  work  get  done — the 
support  of  a  family,  the  meeting  of  obligations,  &c.  ?  2.  Here  is  a  man  confronted 
with  some  special  obstacle,  e.g.,  unholy  competition  in  business,  <fec.  3.  Here  is  a 
man  under  the  shadow  of  the  Ramah  of  disappointment.  4.  Here  is  another  man 
who  is  dissatisfied  with  his  pernicious  way  of  Ufe.  5.  And  there  is  Doubt,  another 
Ramah  often  built  across  our  way.  Is  there  any  help  for  a  man  in  the  presence  of 
these  Ramahs?  Our  Scripture  is  the  statement  of  the  heartening  certainty. 
"Perfect"  in  our  Scripture  means  pure  intent.  Once  I  was  becahnffl  upon  the  sea. 
I  was  in  a  sailing  ship.     For  some  days  the  wind  died  utterly  away.     There  wa«i. 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xvl 

not  the  curl  of  a  minute  ripple  even  on  the  ocean's  surface.  We  were  drifted  here 
and  there,  now  backward  and  then  forward,  as  the  tides  rose  and  as  they  fell. 
Of  course  we  could  not  get  on  thus.  There  was  no  inherent  power  of  motion  in  the 
vessel.  What  did  the  captain  do  ?  Order  the  sails  furled  ?  Let  the  man  at  the 
helm  sleep  ?  No,  he  did  the  best  he  could.  Every  sail  was  hung  broadly  on  the 
yards.  The  helm  was  firmly  held.  The  vessel  was  kept  pointed  toward  her  port. 
In  a  word,  the  captain  kept  the  vessel  in  pure  intent ;  not  perfect  in  power  ;  she 
had  no  power.  And  when,  at  last,  the  wind  did  come,  the  sails  were  filled,  and  we 
were  wafted  into  harbour.  This  is  the  heartening  certainty.  This  is  the  meaning 
of  our  Scripture.  The  man  who  thus  holds  himself  in  pure  intent,  keeping  his 
sails  spread  and  his  helm  steadily  pointed  toward  the  right,  and  fixed,  and  from 
the  wrong,  that  man  God  shall  see,  and  He  shall  send  upon  him  the  breezes  of  a 
Divine  strength,  and  waft  the  man  on  into  accomplishment,  victory,  heaven. 
(Wayland  Hoyt,  D.D.)  Perfection  discriminated: — We  must  discriminate  be- 
tween purity  of  heart  and  maturity  of  Christian  character.  The  entire  cleansing 
received  by  faith  is  perfect  health  of  soul;  but  it  is  not  perfect  development. 
Perfect  health  is  the  entire  absence  of  disease.  Perfect  holiness  is  the  entire 
absence  of  sin.  Christian  purity  brings  finality  to  nothing  but  inbred  sin.  It  is  the 
field  cleared  of  the  noxious  weeds,  not  the  ripe  waving  harvest.  It  is  the  best 
preparation  for  growth,  not  the  consummation  of  growth.  Sin  in  the  heart  makes 
us  like  a  child  that  is  sickly,  or  a  tree  with  a  worm  at  the  root.  Some  hope  by 
cultivating  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  to  grow  into  purity,  which  is  like  a  man 
cultivating  the  vegetables  in  his  garden  to  grow  the  weeds  out  from  about  the  roots 
of  the  plants.  Common  sense  says,  "  Pluck  up  the  weeds,  and  give  the  plant  a  fair 
chance  for  growth  and  development."  This  is  the  Divine  method.  God  cleanses 
the  heart  from  inbred  sin,  after  which  growth  is  always  more  rapid  and  symmetrical ; 
advancement  in  knowledge,  and  love  of  God,  and  all  spiritual  excellence,  becomes 
possible  then  as  it  never  was  before.  Maturity  is  the  result  of  experiences,  trial, 
conflict,  and  requires  time ;  but  in  purity  we  grasp  by  faith  the  sin-consuming 
power  that  sweeps  the  heart  clean  at  a  stroke.    {Thomas  Cook.) 

Ver.  10.  Then  Asa  was  wroth  with  the  seer. — A  reluctant  conscience : — It  is 
said  that  straw  which  had  been  used  for  the  bedding  of  the  lions  at  Wombwell's 
menagerie  was  sold,  and  placed  in  a  stable  as  bedding  for  some  horses.  No 
sooner  did  the  horses  enter  than  they  began  to  show  signs  of  alarm,  snorting, 
snufiing  the  air,  and  trembling  as  though  conscious  of  a  threatening  presence. 
Horses  in  this  country  have  had  no  experience  of  the  hostility  or  strength  of 
carnivora ;  but  there  is  a  persistency  in  hereditary  powers  which  certain  objects 
can  stimulate  into  activity.  The  conscience  of  man  exhibits  a  similar  persistency 
of  sense,  if  not  by  self-reproach  or  remorse,  at  least  by  a  reluctance  to  enter  on  the 
consideration  of  sin.  It  is  not  too  much  to  infer  that  all  is  not  right,  when  pain, 
alarm,  aversion  are  felt  when  inquiry  ia  suggested.    (Bp.  Boyd  Carpenter.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  And,  behold,  the  acts  of  Asa,  first  and  last,  lo,  they  are  written  In 
the  books  of  the  kings. — Asa ;  or  failure  at  the  last : — Asa's  case  is  a  Scriptural 
declaration,  that  one  who  has  begun  well,  who  has  even  done  much  for  God,  may 
fall  miserably,  may  fail  at  last.  What  were  the  causes  of  his  fall  ?  I.  He  was 
TRIED  BY  GREAT  sticcEss.  Nothing  is  more  liable  than  success  to  produce  self- 
confidence,  and  neglect  of  Him  who  bestoweth  on  the  wise  their  wisdom  and  on 
the  strong  their  strength.  Unless  a  man  watches  himself  very  narrowly,  pride  will 
insinuate  itself  even  into  the  midst  of  his  thanksgivings ;  complacent  thoughts  of 
his  own  foresight  underlie  his  recognition  of  God's  providence;  confessions  of  his 
own  good  desert  qualify  his  confessions  of  sin.  II.  He  was  placed  in  thb 
PERILOUS  POSITION  OF  HAVING  TO  GUIDE  AND  INSTRUCT  OTHERS.  This  is  a  great  snare 
to  any  one.  The  mother  who  teaches  her  child  to  pray  ;  the  father  who  watches 
over  his  son's  moral  progress  ;  the  master  who  is  a  strict  censor  of  the  behaviour 
of  his  servants ;  the  Scripture-reader,  the  district  visitor,  the  nurse  of  the  sick,  the 
almoner  of  the  poor ;  yea,  even  the  minister  of  God  who  has  professionally  to 
bring  before  his  people  the  means  of  grace  and  hope  of  glory ;  these  persons  are 
all  in  danger  of  neglecting  themselves — of  placing  themselves,  as  it  were,  ab  extra, 
to  the  duties  which  they  have  to  inculcate.  They  are  tempted  to  forget  them- 
selves, to  abate  their  self-discipline,  and  when  the  novelty  of  their  employment  has 
passed  away,  to  fall  back  on  other  things ;  it  may  be,  to  end  with  languor,  disgust, 
or  carelessness,  if  not  with  utter  faithlessness  and  sin.     (D.  Hessey.) 


CHAP.  XVI.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  75 

Vers.  12, 13.  And  Asa,  in  the  thirty  and  ninth  year  of  hia  reign  was  diseased  in 
his  feet. — Mind-cure  : — That  sickness  is  twin  born  with  sin  is  the  oldest  tradition 
in  the  world.  Our  maladies  arise  from  something  finer  than  the  germs  any 
microscope  can  detect ;  and  if  all  disease  has  its  origin  in  the  ill-disposed  spirit,  in 
a  different  well-disposed  spirit  it  may  have  its  cure.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  a 
mind  morbid  or  in  health  affects  the  body.  Some  persons,  by  their  presence  and 
air,  make  us  sick  or  well.  Temperance  is  a  virtue  before  it  is  a  bodily  trait.  All 
vice  digs  a  mine  of  ruin  which  no  physician  can  countermine.  What  doctor  can 
prescribe  for  an  inordinate  affection,  from  his  pocket-book  or  medicine-chest?  A 
little  mind-cure  were  better  than  a  complete  apothecary's  shop  ;  and  in  one's  own 
mind,  often  more  than  in  another's,  the  remedy  lies.  Safety  and  peril  reside  in 
the  same  region  of  the  affections,  even  as  the  very  sea  that  tosses  brings  us  to  port. 
Like  cures  like ;  the  hair  of  the  dog  his  own  bite ;  and  herbs,  as  George  Herbert 
says,  the  flesh  they  find  their  acquaintance  in.  There  is  no  malady  which  guilty 
intrigues,  extravagant  passions,  and  corroding  cares  may  not  produce  or  increase  ; 
and  none  which  good  affections  will  not  alleviate  or  remove.  Many  a  heap  of 
flowers  have  I  seen  on  coffins  that  would  not  have  been  made  by  plane  and 
hammer  so  soon  had  a  tithe  of  the  green  leaves,  lilies,  and  roses  been  strewn 
along  the  way.  Christ's  miracles  were  wrought  on  a  promise  of  faith,  for  the 
blind  eye,  for  the  withered  hand,  and  for  the  remorseful  conscience  in  him  whom 
He  assured,  "  Son,  thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee,"  an  insane  compunction  being  in  this 
case  the  evil  root.  Peter  commanded  the  cripple  to  stand  on  his  feet,  perceiving 
that  he  had  faith  to  be  healed.  The  good  Samaritan  poured  out  something  more 
than  oil  and  wine  into  the  robbed  traveller's  wounds.  There  are  in  us  gashes  and 
ghastly  wounds,  perhaps  unknown  to  the  inflictors,  which  no  sword  or  dagger  ever 
made.  A  word  or  a  look  was  enough  to  stab  us  ;  shall  no  words  or  looks  suffice  to 
make  us  whole  ?  No  medicaments,  only  mental  cure,  can  either  probe  them  or 
bind  them  up.  Eight  ordering  of  our  active  powers  is  a  medicine,  as  well  as  that 
merry  heart  of  which  the  Preacher  speaks.  The  steadfast  will  is  a  life-preserver, 
and  buoys  up  against  spiritual  drowning.  Heal  the  mind  tired  and  sore  with 
brooding  on  absent  or  unresponsive  objects :  with  labour  that  eases  it,  while  it 
wearies  the  muscles  and  makes  the  sweat,  according  to  the  old  decree,  run  down 
the  face.  As  the  girders  and  cross-ties  of  the  bridge  distribute  the  pressure  on  it  of 
heavy  loads,  so  various  duty  lightens  by  dividing  every  burden  of  grief  or  pain. 
Such  considerations  may  show  how  far  a  sane  body  is  not  only  inhabited,  but 
made,  by  a  sane  mind.  Let  us  notice  more  particularly  the  connection  between 
sickness  and  sin.     I.  They  have  the  same  origin.     II.  They  have  the  same 

PBOPAGATION  AND  SPREAD.      III.   WhY,  THEN,  SHOULD   NOT  THE   CURE   OF   SICKNESS  RUN 

PARALLEL  WITH  ITS  CONTINUANCE  AND  CAUSE  ?  Disorder  is  inherited.  Ezekiel  pro- 
tests against  the  proverb  that  the  fathers  have  eaten  sour  grapes,  and  the  children's 
teeth  are  set  on  edge.  Nevertheless,  it  is  true.  For  example  of  this  communica- 
tion or  transmission,  take  the  illustration  of  fear.  What  a  leaven  it  is  I  Terror  is 
not  only  a  wretchedness,  but  a  disgrace,  an  exposure  to  harm.  You  will  be  likely 
to  have  what  you  dread.  What  you  rehearse  you  will  enact.  This  is  the  short- 
hand history  of  disease,  misery,  and  crime.  Bonaparte,  in  his  better  days, 
thought  the  bullet  was  not  run  and  moulded  he  should  be  hit  by,  though  cannon- 
balls  ploughed  the  earth  into  powder  at  his  side ;  felt  no  alarm  for  himself  from 
the  plague  in  Egypt,  and  fortified  his  soldiers  against  it,  with  that  brave  deport- 
ment of  his  own.  To  what  but  panic  is  due  the  large  destruction  of  life  in  build- 
ings falling  or  on  fire,  in  battles  like  that  of  Bull  Eun,  and  in  wrecks  at  sea  ?  We 
must  be  of  good  heart  to  be  secure.  How  many  have  been  sick  of  a  thought  or  of 
a  certain  company  or  of  a  single  companion  1  How  many  have  got  well  with 
thoughts  alone  that  could  cure  1  By  one  who  served  in  our  civil  war  I  was  told 
of  sick  soldiers  who,  in  their  despair,  voluntarily  turned  their  faces  to  the  wall  and 
died,  because  they  wanted,  and  had  made  up  their  mind,  to  die.  If  as  they  lay 
moaning  on  their  beds  had  come  some  token  of  affection,  the  step  of  soma 
Florence  Nightingale,  or  any  good  message,  they  would  have  opened  their  eyes, 
stretched  their  limbs,  and  lived  1  A  grain,  a  hair,  the  twentieth  part  of  a  scruple, 
in  delicate  conditions  and  a  tremulous  suspense  determines  the  scale :  and  the 
balance  hangs  for  us  all  to  put  the  atom  into,  so  intimate  is  the  relation  between 
body  and  mind.  We  decide  each  other's  fate  every  day.  Balzac  tells  us  of  a 
mother  who  suddenly  expires  after  one  more  of  her  unnatural  daughter's  hard 
words ;  and  he  adds  that  the  slaughter  by  savages  of  those  too  old  to  continue  on 
the  march  ii  philanthropy  in  the  comparison.     This  is  happening  every  day.    A 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xti. 

gentle  remembrance  from  one — a  note,  a  flower,  a  book,  a  hand-grasp — to  assure  as 
our  days  of  usefulness  are  not  over,  enables  us  to  live  and  labour  still.  The  super- 
natural acts  through  the  natural.  Let  us  make  the  connection  and  be  all  of  ns 
well.  Be  its  fault  or  defect  what  it  may,  I  greet,  therefore,  the  new  departure 
which  lays  the  stress  on  the  mind.     {C.  A.  Bartol,  D.D.)        The  sin  of  Asa: — 

1.  Though  it  is  not  my  purpose  to  dwell  upon  the  general  features  in  this  history, 
I  carmot  help  remarking  how  strongly  one  is  inclined  in  hearing  it  to  exclaim, 
*'  Lord,  what  is  man !  In  his  best  estate,  moral  as  well  as  physical,  he  is 
altogether  vanity."  Here  is  a  person  that  appears  to  have  been  piously  educated, 
that  in  his  youth  was  piously  and  deeply  impressed ;  that  when  clothed  in  royal 
purple  still  remembered  his  responsibility  to  a  higher  power,  and  felt  and  acknow- 
ledged his  dependence  on  it ;  that  in  his  mature  years  departed  not  from  the  way 
in  which  he  had  been  trained  up  ;  and  that  knew  by  a  single  personal  experience 
that  it  is  a  way  of  pleasantness  and  a  path  of  peace ;  in  his  old  age  guilty  of  the 
greatest  inconsistencies,  to  say  the  very  least.  May  we  not  reasonably  suppose 
that,  during  his  long  prosperity,  his  heart  had  become  in  a  measure  hardened  by 
the  deceitfulness  of  sin  ;  that  indolence  had  corrupted,  and  pride,  taking  occasion 
from  the  happy  condition  of  his  people,  of  which  he  had  been  the  instrument,  had 
puffed  him  up  ;  and  that  prayer,  in  consequence,  had  been  restrained  before  God  ? 
Be  sober,  be  vigilant,  be  prayerful,  be  humble,  is  the  moral  of  this  melancholy  tale. 

2.  This  monarch's  history  may  also  teach  us  that,  what  we  deem  our  strongest 
point  of  character  may  in  fact  prove  our  weakest.  Asa's  distrust  in  Divine,  and 
over-trust  in  human  power,  was  the  last  sin,  most  probably,  which  he  thought  would 
ever  beset  him.  "  Though  all  men  forsake  Thee,"  said  St.  Peter,  "  yet  wUl  not  I." 
His  courage  he  was  sure  would  abide,  however  that  of  the  other  disciples  might 
falter.  That  he  felt  was  not  his  weak  point ;  and  probably  it  was  not  naturally. 
When  we  are  conscious  of  weakness,  and  in  consequence  lean  constantly  on  an 
Almighty  arm,  then  our  strength  never  faileth.  How  can  it  ?  In  the  confidence 
of  this  it  was  that  the  apostle  Paul  said,  "I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ 
strengthening  me."  On  the  other  hand,  let  a  man  feel  strong  in  himself,  and  of 
consequence  lean  on  himself,  in  the  things  of  religion,  we  are  told  we  can  do 
nothing.  The  lesson,  then,  to  be  learned  from  the  history  of  Asa,  in  this  view  of  it, 
plainly  is,  to  glory  in  nothing  as  of  ourselves,  to  distrust  ourselves  even  in  our 
strongest  point,  and  to  count  all  our  sufiQciency  as  of  God  through  Christ.  3.  A 
third  particular  in  this  narrative,  well  worth  noticing,  is  the  pertinacity  which  Asa 
exhibited  in  his  sin,  and  how  in  consequence  one  transgression  led  on  to  another. 
David  committed  some  most  fearful  sins,  and  a  prophet  was  sent  to  reprove  and 
warn  him.  His  confession  was,  "I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord."  Not  so  Asa. 
His  crime,  though  indeed  not  so  horrible,  was  equally  certain;  yet  when  the 
prophet  reproves  him,  the  historian  tells  us  "  he  was  in  a  rage  with  him  because  of 
this  thing  "  ;  and  added  to  the  sin,  and  to  a  denial  of  it,  persecution  of  God's 
servant  for  delivering  God's  message.  The  sin  of  Asa,  though  certain  and  heinous, 
as  I  have  said,  was  not  so  palpable  and  overt  as  that  of  David.  It  lay  more 
exclusively  between  God  and  his  own  soul.  It  was  an  offence  which  short- 
sighted men,  who  cannot  read  the  heart,  could  not  with  propriety  charge  him  with. 
The  sins  which  are  known  with  certainty  only  to  Omniscience  are  the  last  which" 
corrupt  human  nature  is  willing  to  acknowledge.  It  hides  itself  from  its  own  guilt 
and  from  its  obligation  to  confess  and  forsake  its  sin,  under  the  cover  of  its  fellow- 
creatures'  ignorance.  From  this  hiding  place,  to  which  Asa  had  manifestly  fled, 
man  could  not  dislodge  him.  God's  resources,  however,  were  not  exhausted. 
When  His  prophet  failed  to  do  it.  He  sent  another  messenger  to  the  king  in  the 
shape  of  a  most  painful  disease  which  finally  proved  mortal.  1.  Health,  it  is 
generally  acknowledged,  is  the  very  greatest  of  all  personal  and  temporal  blessings. 
By  its  influence  on  the  inner  man  it  gives  new  glory  to  objects  already  bright,  and 
pours  light  on  that  which  would  otherwise  be  dark.  It  converts  to  luxuries  the 
plainest  food,  and  adds  a  sweetness  to  a  cup  of  cold  water  which  nectar  in  the 
hand  of  an  invalid  partakes  not  of.  Health  is  valuable  not  only  as  an  exemption 
from  pain  and  anxiety,  but  as  a  positive  good.  It  causes  positive  happiness  to 
spring  up — to  well  up  from  the  depths  of  the  soul,  the  operation  of  which  the  man 
may  be  unable  to  explain,  but  to  the  mysterious  sweetness  of  which  he  is  ready  to 
testify  with  a  rejoicing,  and,  would  that  we  could  say  always,  a  grateful  heart.  I 
do  not  mean  to  say,  however,  that  the  blessing  when  in  possession  is  always 
adequately  realised  and  appreciated.  Like  other  things,  the  loss  of  it,  at  least  for  a 
time,  is  in  many  oases  necessary  to  open  onr  eyes  to  its  value.    The  fact  that  the 


CHAP,  xn.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  77 

nataral  issue  of  sickness  is  death  is,  of  itself,  enough  to  give  health  an  inestimable 
value ;  and  that  fact  is  felt  by  him  who  has  felt  the  gnawings  of  disease ;  and  who 
that  has  reached  even  middle  life  has  not  experienced  them  ?  2.  But  though  it  is 
thus  inevitable,  disease  may  be  mitigated  and  its  fatal  consequences  postponed. 
This  is  efifected  by  one  of  the  greatest  mercies  which  Providence  has  vouchsafed  to 
man :  I  mean  the  healing  art.  It  is  not  common,  perhaps,  to  regard  it  in  this 
light,  but  most  certainly  it  ought  to  be  so  regarded.  This  art  is  one  of  great 
dignity  and  beneficence.  It  is  found  in  every  country,  and  among  the  most 
savage  and  most  cultivated  nations  of  the  earth ;  and  though  it  seems  to  have 
advanced  more  slowly  than  many  other — perhaps  most  other — arts  and  sciences,  yet 
so  early  was  its  commencement,  and  so  universal  has  been  its  cultivation,  it  has 
now  attained  great  perfection.  In  most  departments,  where  once  human  aid  was 
anattempted  or  unavailing  to  the  patient,  it  is  astonishing  what  can  be  done  for  his 
relief,  and  for  his  restoration  to  society  and  the  full  enjoyment  of  it.  This 
blessed  art,  moreover,  is  but  an  imitation  of  a  merciful  provision  of  nature ;  even 
as  when  pursued  and  practised  on  its  proper  principles,  it  consists  in  a  co-operating 
with,  and  taking  advantage  of,  the  powers  of  nature.  With  the  recuperative  and 
healing  properties  of  nature  a  true  practitioner  of  the  healing  art  is  a  co-worker. 
It  is  his  high  calling,  in  a  scientific  manner  to  aid  and  minister  to  and  increase 
this  beneficent  provision.  He  is  not  occupied  in  helping  to  gratify  an  idle  vanity, 
nor  in  pandering  to  luxury  and  over-indulgence.  His  business  is,  in  the  way 
described,  to  relieve  distress,  to  dry  the  tear  of  sorrow,  to  rekindle  the  lamp  of 
hope.  It  has  been  acutely  observed  that  there  is  a  likeness  in  the  practice  of  this 
art,  not  only  to  the  healing  power  of  nature  referred  to,  and  to  the  course  of  that 
Providence  by  which  both  nature  and  art  have  been  ordained,  and  to  the  all- 
merciful  conduct  of  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  while  He  sojourned  on  the  earth, 
but  also  in  the  methods  which  Providence  uses  ordinarily  for  the  attainment  of 
these  benevolent  ends.  "  Both  are  designed  to  restore  what  is  lost,  and  to  repair 
what  is  disordered ;  both  have  the  production  of  ease  and  happiness  for  their 
ultimate  object ;  both  frequently  make  use  of  pains  and  privations  as  the  means  of 
procuring  it,  but  neither  of  them  employs  an  atom  more  of  these  than  is  necessary 
for  that  purpose."  3.  Now  from  aU  this  it  follows  that  though  nothing  is 
expressly  said  in  commendation  of  this  art  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  nor  any  com- 
mand given  to  resort  to  it  for  relief  under  our  bodily  ailments,  yet  the  art  and  the 
use  of  it  are  manifestly  according  to  the  mind  and  will  of  God.  The  mere  fact 
that  God  has  put  healing  virtue  into  the  productions  of  the  animal  and  vegetable 
kingdoms,  and  given  man  the  power  to  discover  its  existence,  is  sufficient  warrant, 
in  the  silence  of  Scripture,  for  the  thankful  use  of  it  wherever  it  may  be  necessary. 
It  has  been  thought  by  some  that  the  sin  here  condemned  was  resorting  not  to 
regular  physicians,  but  to  those  who  attempted  cures  by  charms  and  other 
superstitious  devices.  Such  conduct,  though  not  generally  thought  so  by  those 
who  indulge  in  it,  is  essentially  atheistic.  He  was  seeking  good  from  a  source  not 
sanctioned  by  Heaven.  He  was  in  pursuit  of  health  in  a  quarter  which  God  did 
not  bless.  In  a  word,  he  was  not  seeking  it  of  Him  from  whom  cometh  every  good 
and  perfect  gift.  This  was  atheism.  It  is  not  necessary,  however,  to  suppose  that 
Asa  ran  into  this  sin.  He  was  guilty  enough,  and  furnished  sufiicient  ground  for 
the  censure  in  the  text,  without  going  to  this  extreme.  Let  us  suppose,  what  the 
Scripture  narrative  makes  probable,  that  through  the  influence  of  prosperity  and 
its  attendant  snares  and  temptations,  the  heart  of  Asa  had  waxed  cold ;  that  his 
religious  feelings  had  declined ;  that  whereas  before,  God  was  in  his  thoughts  as 
his  dependence,  his  protection,  his  comfort,  his  consolation,  his  joyful  portion,  now 
he  lives  in  forgetfulness  of  Him,  or,  if  thoughts  of  God  ever  enter  his  mind,  they 
come  but  seldom  and  are  speedily  dismissed.  While  living  habitually  in  this  way, 
sickness  smites  him,  violent  and  severe,  and  very  naturally  alarming.  He  sends 
for  the  physicians — for  many  of  them.  His  dependence  is  on  the  powers  of  nature 
to  the  exclusion  of  the  Divine  Author  of  these  powers.  He  looks  anxiously  to  human 
skill,  but  feels  no  want,  or  offers  no  prayer  for  the  Divine  blessing  on  it.  Asa 
seems  to  have  sought  a  cure,  as  he  would  have  done  had  he  never  heard  of  that 
almighty  Being  in  whose  hand  are  the  issues  of  life  and  death.  We  see  here  that 
the  Lord  is  a  jealous  God,  and  will  not  give  His  glory  to  another,  and  that  His 
glory  and  His  right  as  God  is  to  be  recognised  by  His  intelligent  creatures  every- 
where, in  all  the  exigencies,  duties,  and  privileges  of  life.  In  instituting  the 
present  system  of  means  and  ends,  He  did  not  intend  that  it  should  be  forgotten 
that  He  planned  the  whole ;  and  that  the  whole,  destitute  of  any  self-sustaining 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

power,  is  sustained  only  by  Him.  He  not  only  created  all  things,  but  also  upholds 
all  things  by  the  word  of  His  power.  This  is  a  fact,  and  a  fact  manifestly 
connected  with  His  glory.  He  expects,  therefore,  that  all  intelligent  creatures  feel 
'.t  and  acknowledge  it.  There  are  two  errors — opposite  extremes,  which  He  would 
Have  them  carefully  avoid.  The  first  is  a  reliance  upon  Him  to  the  exclusion  or 
aeglect  of  the  means  which  He  has  commanded  to  be  used.  At  first  view  it  might 
seem  as  if  such  conduct  were  putting  special  honour  upon  Jehovah  ;  but  in  truth  it 
is  open  rebellion  against  His  will.  He  hath  not  commanded  this  at  our  hands. 
It  is  a  strange  offering — an  unclean  sacrifice.  In  His  works  and  in  His  Word,  God 
has  enjoined  the  diligent  use  of  means  ;  it  is  impious  to  turn  away  from  the  com- 
mandment, even  under  the  pretence  of  honouring  Him.  The  other  extreme,  and 
equally  presumptuous,  is  a  reliance  on  the  means  to  the  neglect  of  the  Divine 
agency  and  blessing.  If  the  first  was  an  arrogant  theism,  this  is  a  gross  and 
stupid  atheism.  Paradoxical  as  it  may  sound,  our  duty  and  the  dictate  of  pure 
reason  is,  that  we  use  means  as  diligently  as  if  God's  aid  were  altogether  unneces- 
sary, and  rely  on  God  as  sincerely  as  if  means  were  unavailing.  This  is  Scripture ; 
this  is  the  highest  reason  ;  nay,  this  human  nature  herself  teaches  when  in 
extremity  and  unperverted  by  a  theory.  Who,  when  in  conscious  danger  of  his 
life,  does  not  with  a  convulsive  eagerness  grasp  at  any  and  every  means  of  safety, 
and  at  the  same  time  lift  a  voice  of  agonising  supplication  for  the  Divine  assist- 
ance ?  Our  duty,  then,  plainly  inculcated  by  the  text,  is  to  use  means  and  to  trust 
in  the  Lord,  and  to  do  this  not  of  necessity,  because  death  is  imminent,  but  from  a 
principle  of  obedience  to  His  will,  respect  for  His  honour,  and  love  to  His  name ; 
and  to  do  it  also  not  only  in  extreme  cases,  but  at  all  times.  It  belongs  to  such  a 
spirit,  as  a  matter  of  privilege  as  well  as  duty,  to  seek  to  the  Lord  also,  and  rely 
upon  His  help.  In  conclusion,  I  would  observe  that  the  text  teaches  a  lesson  in 
all  analogous  cases.  For  instance,  if  such  is  the  temper  of  mind  in  which  we 
should  look  for  medicines  to  heal  the  body,  the  same  should  we  have  in  the  use  of 
food  for  the  maintenance  of  life.  A  blessing  asked,  when  we  take  our  meals,  is 
only  in  conformity  with  these  principles.  So  our  Lord  when  on  the  earth  regarded 
it,  for  He  sanctioned  it  by  His  practice.  And  again  it  plainly  says  to  those  whose 
calling  in  life  is  trade,  that  whilst  they  industriously  employ  all  honourable  means 
for  the  maintenance  and  advancement  of  themselves  and  their  families,  they 
should  bear  in  mind  that  there  is  an  overruling  Providence  which  sees  through 
the  complications  of  events  as  man  cannot,  and  can  give  them  such  issue  as 
may  be  pleasing  in  His  sight.  In  short,  the  text  teaches  us  that  we  should 
all,  at  all  times  and  under  all  circumstances,  realise  the  presence  of  God  and  lean 
upon  His  power  and  goodness,  vouchsafed  us  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  ( W. 
Sparrow,  D.D.)        The  disease  of  sin  and  its  true  Physician  : — I.  Sin  is  a  disease 

tINDKR  which  all  MEN  ARE  LAEODRINO.  II.  To  GET  RID  OF  THE  DISEASE  OF  SIN 
MEN  RESORT  TO  FORBIDDEN   AND   UNAUTHORISED  MEANS.       III.    ThEY  OUGHT  TO  DEPEND 

ON  Christ  ab  the  only  effectual  and  infallible  Physician  of  souls.  (Ibid.) 
To  the  medical  profession : — Here  is  King  Asa  with  the  gout.  In  defiance  of  God 
he  sends  for  certain  conjurors  or  quacks.  With  the  result  "  And  Asa  slept  with 
his  fathers."  That  is,  the  doctors  killed  him.  In  this  sharp  and  graphic  way  the 
Bible  sets  forth  the  truth  that  you  have  no  right  to  shut  God  out  from  the  realm 
of  pharmacy  and  therapeutics.  If  Asa  had  said,  "  Oh,  Lord,  I  am  sick  ;  bless  the 
instrumentality  employed  for  my  recovery  I  Now,  servant,  go  and  get  the  best 
doctor  you  can  find,"  he  would  have  recovered.  The  world  wants  Divinely 
directed  physicians.  Men  of  the  medical  profession,  we  often  meet  in  the  home  of 
distress.  We  meet  to-day  by  the  altars  of  God.  As  in  the  nursery  children  some- 
times re-enact  all  the  scenes  of  the  sick-room,  so  to-day  you  play  that  yon  are 
the  patient  and  that  I  am  the  physician,  and  take  my  prescription  just  once. 

I.  In  the  first  place,  I  think  all  the  medical  profession  should  become 
Christians  because  of  the  debt  of  gratitude  they  owe  to  God  for  the 
HONOUB  He  has  pot  upon  their  calling.  Cicero  said :  "  There  is  nothing 
in  which  men  so  approach  the  gods  as  when  they  try  to  give  health  to  other  men." 

II.  The  medical  profession  ought  to  be  Christians,  because  there  are  bo  many 
trials  and  annoyances  in  that  profession  that  need  positive  Christian  solace. 
in.  The  medical  profession  ought  to  be  Christians,  because  there  are  professional 
exigencies  when  they  need  God.  Asa's  destruction  by  unblessed  physicians  was  a 
warning.  There  are  awful  crises  in  every  medical  practice  when  a  doctor  ought  to 
know  how  to  pray.  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  piety  will  make  up  for  medical 
ekill.    A  bangling  doctor,  confounded  with  what  was  not  a  very  bad  case,  went 


CHAP.  XVI.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  79 

into  the  next  room  to  pray.  A  skilled  physician  was  called  in.  He  asked  for  the 
first  practitioner.  "  Oh  !  "  they  said,  "  he's  in  the  next  room  praying."  "Well," 
said  the  skilled  doctor,  "  tell  him  to  come  out  here  and  help,  he  can  pray  and  work 
at  the  same  time."  It  was  all  in  that  sentence.  Do  the  best  we  can  and  ask  God 
to  help  us.     rV.  The  medical  profession  ought  to  be  Christians,  because  therk 

OPENS    BEFORE     THEM     A    GRAND     FIELD     FOR     CHRISTIAN     USEFULNESS.       (T.     Dc     Witt 

Talmage.)        Sickness  : — The  great  truth  taught  us  in  this  verse  is — that  afflic- 
tions,  in  their  measure,   nature,   and  duration,   result  neither  from  chance  nor 
necessity,  nor  second  causes,  but  primarily  from  the  wise,  sovereign,  and  righteous 
appointment  of  the  Eternal.     I.  Asa's  disease.      The  former  part  of  this  verse 
mentions  what  this  disease  was — "  And  Asa  in  the  thirty  and  ninth  year  of  his  reign 
was  diseased  in  his  feet,  until  his  disease  was  exceeding  great."    Commentators 
suppose  that  this  disease  in  his  feet  was  the  gout,  and  that  it  was  a  just  punish- 
ment for  putting  the  prophet's  feet  in  the  stocks.     How  varied  the  disease  to  which 
human  nature  is  liable.    1.  The  person  afflicted — Asa  the  king.     This  circumstance 
teaches  us  that  when  the  Almighty  wills  afflictions,  none  can  escape  them — no,  not 
even  kings.     When  kings  commit  evil  they  must  expect  to  be  punished  as  well  as 
others.     King  Jehoram  sinned  against  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  visited  him  with  a 
disease  in  his  bowels.     King  Uzziah  transgressed  the  Lord's  commandments,  and 
the  Lord  smote  him  with  leprosy :  "  And  Uzziah  the  king  was  a  leper  unto  the  day 
of  his  death,  and  dwelt  in  a  separate  house,  being  a  leper."    Asa  was  diseased  in  his 
feet.     Honours,  riches,  power  shield  us  not  from  disease.     When  God  gives  the 
commission,  afflictions  enter  the  palace  as  well  as  the  meanest  hut.   2.  The  violence 
of  Asa's  disorder.     "  His  disease  was  exceeding  great."     Sometimes  we  think  our 
trials  very  heavy ;  but  when  compared  with  those  of  others  we  find  them  light. 
Hence,  if  your  case  is  very  painful,  it  is  not  singular.     3.  The  period  of  its  con- 
tinuance.    Asa  was  diseased  in  his  feet  two  years.     When  the  Lord  afflicts  us  for 
a  month,  a  week,  yea,  sometimes,  when  we  are  in  pain  only  one  day,  we  think  it  a 
long  time.     But  how  short  the  period  of  our  pains  when  compared  with  others  1  It 
might  have  lasted  for  many  years.     H.  Asa's  dutt.     When  it  is  said  that  Asa 
sought  not  unto  the  Lord,  it  implies  that  he  ought  to  have  done  so.     1.  The 
purposes  for  which  you  should  seek  unto  the  Lord  in  your  afflictions.     The  advice 
which  Eliphaz  gave  to  Job  in  his  affliction  was  most  excellent,  and  is  suitable  to 
us  on  all  occasions :  "  Yet  man  is  born  unto  trouble,  as  the  sparks  fly  upward.    I 
would  seek  unto  God,  and  unto  God  would  commit  my  cause."   The  afflicted  should 
seek  unto  God,  in  disease,  that  they  may  know  its  design.     "  Shew  me,"  prays 
Job,  "wherefore  Thou  contendest  with  me."     The  Lord's  way,  both  in  mercy  and 
in  judgment,  is  in  the  sea,  and  His  footsteps,  oftentimes,  are  not  seen.     Since, 
therefore,  none  can  give  us  the  information  we  need  but  God  Himself,  and  since 
also  it  is  so  important  for  us  to  know  the  design  of  our  trials,  let  us  not  do  as  Asa 
did,  but  as  Eliphaz  recommends — seek  unto  God.     When  diseases  visit  us  we 
should  seek  unto  God,  that  He  would  give  us  grace  to  sustain  them.    None  but  He 
who  lays  these  buTdens   on  our  shoulders  can   sustain   us   under  them.      That 
these  visitations  may  be  duly  improved  is  another  end  we  should  propose  in 
seeking  unto  the  Lord.     God  should  be  sought  unto  in  affliction,  that  He  may 
remove  them.     The  Lord  should  be  sought  unto  in  sickness,  that  His  righteous- 
ness in  afflicting  may  be  devoutly  acknowledged.     2.  The  manner  in  which  God 
should  be  approached  unto  in  these  circumstances.     First,  in  faith — the  Christian 
must  exercise  faith  in  his  heavenly  Father's  providence,  promises,  and  revealed 
character.     Secondly,  in  humility — the  Christian  has  merited  all  he  endures,  and 
has  nothing  of  his  own  to  plead.     Thirdly,  with  resignation.     3.  Some  reasons 
why  the  Lord  should  be  sought  unto  may  be  specified.     (1)  The  manifest  propriety 
of  the  thing  itself.     Unto  whom  should  the  servant  go  in  his  distress  but  unto  the 
master?     (2)   The  absolute    dependence    of    the    creature  on    God    shows    the 
importance  and  reasonableness.     On  God's  will  depends  our  health  and  sickness, 
adversity  and  prosperity,  joys  and   sorrows.      (3)    These    means    are  Divinely 
appointed,  consequently  we  cannot  neglect  them  without  considerable  danger  to 
our  souls i  "For  this  thing  will  I  be  inquired  of  by  the  house  of  Israel,  that  I  may 
do  it  for  them."     (4)  The  example  of  all  good  men — David,  Job,  Paul,  and  others, 
when  in  distress,  sought  unto  the  Lord  in  prayer :  this  was  their  uniform  practice ; 
and,  indeed,  prayer  is  the  best  plaster  for  all  our  wounds.     HI.  Asa's  sik.     Asa's 
sin  is  a  common  sin — the  way  of  the  multitude,    Asa's  sin  was  a  great  sin — he  put 
the  creature  before  the  Creator.    Asa's  sin,  unrepented  of,  is  a  ruinous  sin.    "  Shall 
I  not  visit  for  these  things,  saith  the  Lord  ? "    Asa's  conduct  arises  from  many 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

causes.  1.  Ignorance.  Sin  has  so  darkened  the  mind  that  many  have  no  right 
views  of  their  relation  to  God.  2.  Inattention.  Some  know  these  things,  yet  give 
them  little  or  no  serious  attention.  God  is  neither  in  all  their  ways  nor  in  all  their 
thoughts.  3.  Independence.  Sin  has  made  man  so  proud  that,  if  it  were  possible, 
he  would  do  without  God  altogether.  4.  Presumption.  Many  expect  health,  ease,  and 
success  without  God's  assistance.  5.  Unbelief.  Multitudes  have  no  vital  faith  in 
God,  His  Word,  nor  in  the  necessity,  efficacy,  and  advantages  of  prayer.  Learn 
from  this  subject — 1.  Means  may  be  used,  but  we  mast  be  careful  not  to  abuse 
them.  2.  The  best  of  men  do  not  always  keep  in  the  same  gracious  frame  of  mind. 
Compare  chap.  xiv.  2  with  the  text,  "  Wherefore  let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth 
take  heed  lest  he  fall."  3.  The  same  sins  that  were  prevalent  in  Asa's  day  are 
prevalent  now.  (H.  Hollit.)  Asa  and  the  physiciam  : — I.  It  is  Interesting  to 
notice  who  this  sick  person  was.  It  was  Asa,  one  of  the  kings  of  Judah.  A  king 
has  no  poverty  to  contend  against;  but — alike  with  his  meanest  subjects — he  haa 
sickness.  Sickness  is  impartial,  even  as  death.  No  luxury  can  luateriaUy  soften 
it,  no  precaution  can  keep  it  away,  no  wealth  can  stay  its  course.  What  was  Asa's 
course  ?  He  sought  to  the  physicians.  Surely  he  was,  so  far,  right.  It  is  thought 
that  these  physicians  were  charmers,  bringers  in  of  foreign  superstitions,  singers  of 
useless  incantations,  and  that  herein  lay  Asa's  wrong.  The  question  does  not  relate 
to  the  kind  of  physician  he  went  to,  but  only  to  the  fact  of  his  going.  He  did  no 
wrong  in  seeking  human  help.  We  are  never  to  give  up  at  the  first  approach  of 
sickness  and  wait  for  a  special  wonder  of  cure.  It  is  not  that  he  was  wrong  in 
seeking  to  the  physicians,  but  very  wrong  in  some  other  particulars.  1,  He  did  not 
seek  to  the  Lord,  without  whom  human  physicians  may  vainly  exercise  their  skill 
and  talents.  Neither  will  prayer  dispense  with  medicine  nor  medicine  with  prayer. 
2.  Asa  was  a  king.  The  inconsistency  which,  in  an  unknown  subject,  would 
provoke  but  little  comment,  grows  serious  in  the  life  of  royalty.  We  expect  noble- 
ness, manhness,  and  exemplary  conduct  from  kings.  Asa  seta  bad  example  to  his 
subjects  and  was  false  to  his  royal  order.  Asa  was  also  false  to  God,  for  he  was 
head  of  the  Church  and  yet  dishonoured  prayer.  3.  Asa  suffered  his  disease  to 
make  him  unjust  and  irritable.  He  cast  Hanani  into  prison  for  telling  him  God's 
holy  will.  4.  Asa  belied  a  previous  life  of  piety.  One  of  his  prayers  in  time  of 
health,  when  marching  against  his  numerous  enemies,  had  been  more  inspiring 
than  the  most  stirring  war-cry  or  the  most  martial  summons  to  certain  victory. 
"  Lord !  it  is  nothing  to  Thee  to  help,  whether  with  many  or  with  them  that  have 
no  power.  Help  us,  0  Lord,  our  God  I  for  we  rest  on  Thee,  and  in  Thy  name  we 
go  against  the  multitude.  0  Lord,  Thou  art  our  God;  let  not  man  prevail 
against  Thee !  "  But  now  Asa  was  sick  he  forgot  the  trust  he  had  formerly  placed 
in  the  God  of  Israel.  Sickness,  more  terrible  than  an  army  with  banners,  spoiled 
this  king  of  his  faith.  II.  The  general  lesson  taught  by  sickness.  1.  Health  is 
the  gift  of  God.  Many  who  are  ready  to  acknowledge  recovery  to  be  so,  and  who 
gratefully  thank  God  for  it,  forget  that  good  health  is  a  far  greater  blessing  than 
recovery.  2.  Health  is  a  talent.  What  has  been  done  with  it  ?  3.  Prepare  for 
sickness  by  continuing  mindful  of  its  approach.  4.  As  regards  our  conduct  to 
those  who  are  sick.  Asa  was  wrong,  impatient,  faithless ;  but  the  duty  of  his 
attendants  and  subjcrfs  was  to  bear  with  him.  Sickness  is  trying.  What  seema 
like  impatience  to  lookers-on  would  seem  different  were  the  places  reversed.  5.  The 
great  lesson  of  all — a  lesson  of  avoidance  from  Asa's  fault — is  to  commit  ourselves 
to  the  care  of  God ;  to  seek,  if  able,  to  earthly  physicians ;  but  to  seek  with 
brighter  hopes  and  fuller  certainty  to  the  Great  Healer  Himself.  (S.  B.  James,  M.A.) 
Retribution  :■ — From  the  theological  standpoint  of  the  chronicler's  school,  these 
invidious  records  of  the  sins  of  good  kings  were  necessary  in  order  to  account  for 
their  misfortunes.  That  sin  was  always  punished  by  complete,  immediate,  and 
manifest  retribution  in  this  life,  and  that  conversely  all  misfortune  was  the  punish- 
ment of  sin,  was  probably  the  most  popular  religious  teaching  in  Israel  from  early 
days  till  the  time  of  Christ.  This  doctrine  of  retribution  was  current  among  the 
Greeks.  When  the  Spartan  King  Cleomenes  committed  suicide,  the  public  mind  in 
Greece  at  once  inquired  of  what  particular  sin  he  had  thus  paid  the  penalty. 
When  in  the  course  of  the  Poloponnesian  war  the  ^Eginetans  were  expelled  from 
their  island,  this  calamity  was  regarded  as  a  puni.shment  inflicted  upon  them 
because  fifty  years  before  they  had  dragged  away  and  put  to  death  a  suppliant  who 
had  caught  hold  of  the  handle  of  the  door  of  the  temple  of  Demeter  Theomophorus. 
(IV.  H.  Bennett,  M.A.)  The  moat  serums  punishments  of  sin: — These  are  not 
pain,  ruin,  disgrace.    They  are  the  formation  and  confirmation  of  evil  character. 


CHAP.rvii.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  81 

Herbert  Spencer  says  "  that  motion  once  set  up  along  any  line  becomes  itself  a 
cause  of  subsequent  motion  along  that  line."  This  is  absolutely  true  in  moral  and 
spiritual  dynamics :  every  wrong  thought,  feeling,  word,  or  act,  every  failure  to 
think,  feel,  speak,  or  act  rightly,  at  once  alters  a  man's  character  for  the  worse. 
Henceforth  he  will  find  it  easier  to  sin  and  more  difficult  to  do  right ;  he  has  twisted 
another  strand  into  the  cord  of  habit ;  and  though  each  may  be  as  fine  as  a 
spider's  web,  in  time  there  will  be  cords  strong  enough  to  have  bound  Samson  before 
Dehlah  shaved  off  his  seven  locks.  This  is  the  true  punishment  of  sin  :  to  lose 
the  fine  instincts,  the  generous  impulses,  and  the  nobler  ambitions  of  manhood, 
and  become  every  day  more  of  a  beast  and  a  devil.  (Ibid.)  Our  disinclination 
to  rely  upon  God  only  : — Some  years  ago  my  wife  and  I  were  walking  through  the 
streets  of  Boston,  having  recently  left  our  place  of  residence  and  Hving  in  a  flat. 
My  wife  was  without  a  servant;  the  summer  was  unusually  hot  even  for  our 
country,  and  the  task  of  preparing  the  meals  for  the  family  was  a  grievance.  Like 
a  good  husband,  I  had  great  sympathy  with  my  wife,  and  so  I  rose  in  the  morning 
and  lit  the  fire.  One  day  I  saw  a  device  advertised  for  cooking  by  oil,  and  after  a 
little  while  I  strained  a  large  point,  bought  the  stove,  and  brought  it  home  in 
triumph.  I  said  to  my  wife,  "  You  will  not  have  to  be  roasted  any  more  over  that  old 
kitchen  range  " ;  but  she  was  sceptical,  as  good  wives  are  wont  to  be,  and  when  I 
went  in  to  see  how  the  cooking  was  going  on,  I  found  a  roaring  fire  in  the  old 
range  as  well,  in  case  the  new  one  would  not  work.  I  think  we  all  want  something 
to  fall  back  upon,  and  Uke  to  have  a  roaring  fire  in  the  old  range — to  trust  in  our 
own  efforts  instead  of  relying  on  God.  (G.  F.  Pentecost.)  God  left  out  of  the 
calculation : — I  knew  a  man  who  professed  to  love  the  Lord,  and  who  really  did  so. 
He  got  into  great  difl&culties,  and  racked  his  brain  all  night  without  avail  for  a  way 
out  of  them.  In  the  morning  he  went  to  the  squire  and  the  rector,  and  racked 
their  brains  about  his  troubles,  but  to  no  good  effect.  He  then  came  to  me,  and 
asked  me  to  pray  with  him  about  them,  and  my  reply  was,  "  No,  I  will  not ;  you 
have  racked  your  own,  the  rector's,  and  the  squire's  brain,  and  now  you  wish  to 
make  Jesus  only  the  fourth  instead  of  first.  I  won't  take  any  part  in  doing 
that."  He  fell  on  his  knees  with  such  a  beseeching  look  for  forgiveness,  and  prayed, 
"  Oh,  how  could  I  forget  Thee,  Lord?  Yet  even  now  I  come  and  ask  guidance." 
It  ia  needless  to  say  that  the  Lord  graciously  heard  and  answered,  and  gave  bint  a 
triumphant  issue  out  of  all  his  troubles.     {Christian  Herald.) 


CHAPTER  XVn. 


Vebs.  1-19.  And  Jehoshaphat  his  son  reigned  In  bis  stead. — The  conditions  of 
national  prosperity : — This  chapter  shows — I.  That  true  bbligion  is  the  basis  of 
THE  State  ;  and  that  wherever  it  prospers  there  the  State  prospers.  H.  That  it  is 
THE  WISDOM  OF  KINGS  TO  ENCOURAGE  RELIGION  with  all  their  powcr  and  influence. 
in.  That  a  religious  nation  is  ever  a  great  nation.  IV.  That  a  beligious 
NATION  is  ever  a  PEACEFUL  AND  UNITED  NATION.    {A.  Clarke,  D.D.)      Jehoskaphat : — 

1.  His  policy  as  a  statesman.  1.  It  was  protective  (ver.  1,  2).  2.  It  was  wise. 
3.  It  was  eminently  patriotic.  H.  His  character  as  a  man.  1.  He  was  dis- 
tinguished for  true  piety.  (1)  In  his  every-day  life  (ver.  3).  (2)  In  his  private 
devotions  (vers.  8,  4).  (3)  In  his  obedience  to  God  (ver.  4).  2.  The  inspiration 
of  his  heart  came  from  the  consciousness  of  his  obedience  to  God  (ver.  6). 
III.  His  wisdom  as  a  ruler.     1.  He  removed  temptation  from  his  people  (ver.  6). 

2.  He  provided  for  his  people  the  highest  means  of  good  (vers.  7-9).  {Metropolitan 
Pulpit.)  JehoshaphaVs  prosperity : — I.  Its  measure.  Everything  indicates 
that  it  was  great  and  genuine.  Not  an  element  of  true  prosperity  is  wanting,' 
whether  we  consider  him  individually  or  as  identified  with  the  realm.  It  involved 
— 1.  The  safety  of  the  kingdom.  2.  Wealth.  3.  Honour  from  abroad.  4.  The 
love  and  confidence  of  his  own  people.  II.  Its  origin.  This  was  partly  natural, 
partly  supernatural.  1.  Natural.  (1)  The  roots  of  his  prosperity  lay  largely  in 
himself.  He  was  a  man  of  correct  instincts  and  good  convictions.  A  man  of 
■worth  and  weight  of  character.  By  these  he  won  the  love  and  secured  the 
co-operation  of  his  people.  (2)  He  was  wise  in  management.  2.  Supernatural. 
"  The  Lord  stablished  the  kingdom  in  his  hand."  It  was  a  reward  of  piety.  He 
honoured  God,  and  God  honoured  and  exalted  him.    Lessons:  1.  The  union  of 

14 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  rm, 

prudence  and  piety.  Each  is  helpful  to  the  other ;  neither  is  sufficient  without  the- 
other.  Prudence  gives  tone  and  practicality  to  piety;  piety  gives  sweetness  and 
mellowness  to  prudence.  Piety  alone  tends  to  feebleness  and  inefficiency  ;. 
prudence  alone  inclines  to  coldness  and  covetousness.  United  they  round  out  the- 
character  in  beauty  and  strength.  2.  Reform  through  religion  and  law.  Jehosha- 
phat  united  the  civil  and  religious  power  in  securing  national  reform.  How 
necessary  is  this  union  in  the  great  struggle  with  intemperance  and  other  moral- 
defilements.     (Monday  Club  Sermons.) 

Ver.  2.  And  set  garrisona  In  the  land  of  Judah,  and  In  the  cities  of  Ephraim. — 
Defences : — It  is  concerning  Jehoshaphat,  king  of  Judah,  this  is  said.  He  was  a 
good  king  (see  vers.  1-6).  The  one  kingdom  of  Solomon  was  now  disrupted  into 
two.  The  northern  kingdom,  known  as  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  was  specially  given 
to  idolatry,  to  Baal-worshipping.  Along  the  somewhat  irregular  line  separating  the 
two  kingdoms,  Asa,  the  father  of  Jehoshaphat,  had  set  fortified  cities  to  resist  the 
perpetual  incursions  of  the  Baal-worshipping  northern  kingdom.  On  coming  to  the- 
throne,  Jehoshaphat  immediately  saw  that  these  fenced,  fortified  cities  were  in  good 
repair,  that  their  garrisons  were  strong.  A  young  man  I  knew  had  charge  of  the 
woollen-room  in  a  great  wholesale  house.  His  companion  clerks  were  wild, 
roistering,  dissipated,  profane  fellows.  He  was  of  necessity  in  the  perpetual 
atmosphere  of  bad  speech  and  profanity.  It  seemed  to  him  sometimes  very  hard  to 
withstand  it  all.  What  did  he  do  ?  He  did  spiritually  precisely  what  Jehoshaphat 
did  physically  :  he  stood  his  ground.  He  fortified  and  kept  garrisoned  his  defences. 
Years  afterward  I  saw  that  same  man  in  high  and  prosperous  place.  He  had  won 
the  confidence  of  his  employers.  Take  you  example  of  Jehoshaphat :  place  your 
fenced  cities,  set  your  garrisons.  What  sort  of  fortified  and  garrisoned  cities  ought, 
we  to  set  along  the  frontiers  of  our  lives,  that  we  may  maintain  them  against 
encroaching  evil?  I.I  think  the  fortified  and  garrisoned  city  of  a  distinct  plak- 
JOB  LIFE.  What  do  I  propose  to  do  with  my  life  ?  That  ought  to  be  a  question 
clearly  conceived  and  distinctly  answered  by  every  one  of  us.  I  have  certain 
resources — time,  talent,  education,  moral  consciousness,  &c.  All  sorts  of  sudden 
contingencies  spring  up  in  experience.  All  sorts  of  moral  questions  constantly 
occur.  Shall  I  do  this  or  that  ?  Shall  I  enter  into  this  or  that  business  ?  Shall  I 
allow  myself  in  this  or  that  pleasure,  indulgence?  They  are  at  once  met  and 
decided  by  the  simple  presence  of  the  plan.  This  is  Christ's  suggestion  of  moral 
plan :  •'  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness."  II.  I  think  there 
ought  to  be  such  city,  fortified  and  garrisoned,  of  an  ennoblinq  love.  Jehoshaphat 
loved  Jehovah  better  than  the  Baalim,  therefore  he  could  stand  out  against  the 
Baalim.  A  high,  pure  love  can  always  hold  out  against  lower  ones.  The  highest, 
holiest  love  is  that  for  Christ.  III.  I  think  there  ought  to  be  such  city,  fortified  and 
garrisoned,  of  quick  volition.  Temporising,  to  save  oneself  from  brave  and 
instant  choice  of  the  right,  is  useless.  It  breaks  down  defences,  scatters  garrisonsk 
In  Thomas  Carlyle's  "  Sartor  Eesartus  "  there  is  a  very  wonderful  chapter  on  the 
"  Everlasting  No."  There  is  a  place  where  this  "  everlasting  no  "  ought,  even 
thunderously,  to  be  uttered.  That  place  is  precisely  where  the  tempting,  urgent 
wrong  begins  to  solicit.  IV.  I  think  there  ought  to  be  such  city,  fortified  and 
garrisoned,  of  the  dail-sc  prayeb.     {W.  Hoyt,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  And  the  Lord  was  "with  Jehoshaphat. — The  great  eompantomhip : — 
I.  Jehoshaphat  secured  the  great  companionship  by  tollowing  true  example; 
"  Because  he  walked  in  the  first  ways  of  David  his  father."  Beautiful  tho.?e 
first  ways  of  David.  Turn  to  the  eighteenth  Psalm,  which  David  sang  in  the 
day  that  the  Lord  delivered  him  from  the  hand  of  all  his  enemies,  and  front 
the  hand  of  Saul.  These  first  ways  of  David  were  ways  of  love  to  God  (ver.  1) ;. 
of  trust  in  God  (ver.  2) ;  of  prayer  to  God  (ver.  3) ;  of  strength  in  God  (ver.  29) ;. 
of  thanks  to  God  (vers.  49,  50).  But  the  later  ways  of  David—  the  ways  con- 
cerning Bathsheba,  &c.,  Jclioshaphat  would  not  walk  in.  This  matter  of  true 
example  for  the  ways  of  life  is  a  great  thing.  Such  following  will  surely 
lead  us  into  the  great  companionship  of  God.  II.  The  Lord  was  with  Jehosha- 
phat; he  secured  the  great  companionship  by  standing  out  against  the  evu.. 
spirit  of  his  time.  "  And  sought  not  unto  the  Baalim."  The  Baalim  repre- 
sented the  popular  religious  tendency.  III.  And  the  Lord  was  with  Jehosha- 
phat ;  he  secured  the  great  companionship  by  right  affection.  "  But  sought  to  the- 
God  of  his  father. "    Do  not  imagine  the  set  of  the  supreme  affection  a  light  matter 


CHAP.  XVII.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  83 

And  when  our  heart  supremely  sets  towards  God,  God  answers  with  companionship. 
IV.  And  the  Lord  was  with  Jehoshaphat ;  he  secured  the  great  companionship  bt 
RIGHT  PEACTiCE.  "And  Walked  in  His  commandments,  and  not  after  the  doings  of 
Israel."  Jehoshaphat  did  not  mean  about  it,  and  dream  about  it,  and  think  about 
it ;  he  vigorously  did  it.  Do  not  imagine  that  inward  and  sentimental  intention 
which  never  finds  expression  in  corresponding  action  amounts  to  anything.  What 
vigorous  volition  and  right  practise  sound  in  that  "  walked  "  1  Man  is  three  things 
— intellect,  affection,  will.  Jehoshaphat  turned  these  three  toward  God.  Intel- 
lectually, he  recognised  Jehovah  as  God,  not  the  Baalim  ;  affectionately,  he  sought 
to  God  ;  volitionally,  he  practised  for  God.  What  wonder  he  was  wrapped  about 
with  the  great  companionship?  (Homiletie  Beview.)  Because  he  walked  In 
the  first  ways  of  Ms  father  David. — The  first  ways  of  David  : — 1.  We  have  here 
a  pattern  and  a  warning.  It  is  an  eulogy  heightened  by  a  limitation.  The 
merit  of  the  copy  is  advanced  at  the  expense  of  the  pattern.  It  is  intimated 
that  David's  first  ways  were  his  best  ways.  This  is  in  contradiction  of  the 
true  order  of  the  spiritual  life.  A  retrograde  motion  in  it  is  a  violation  of  its 
nature  and  a  frustration  of  its  intent.  Deterioration  in  goodness  is  a  disease  and 
an  anomaly.  2.  Notice  the  impartiality  and  candour  which  characterise  the 
accounts  of  good  men  in  Scripture.  The  Bible  has  no  human  idols.  Fault  and 
virtue  it  sets  forth  with  equal  distinctness  and  prominence.  Herein  it  shows  itself 
Divine.  The  Bible  in  its  way  of  dealing  with  the  lives  and  characters  of  men, 
almost  as  much  as  in  anything,  bespeaks  itself  the  voice  of  God.  3.  The  change 
in  David's  spiritual  course  was  connected  with  an  equally  marked  change  in  his 
outward  condition.  4.  See  here  the  danger  of  prosperity.  6.  We  infer  that  men 
are  not  to  be  our  patterns,  but  only  "  the  man  Christ  Jesus."  Him  alone  we  can 
look  up  to  with  unqualified  admiration.  6.  Let  us  always  be  looking  out  for  tha 
symptoms  and  beginnings  of  spiritual  decline.     {R.  A.  Hallam,  D.D.) 

Vet,  6.  And  his  heart  waa  lifted  tip  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord. — Encourageinent 
in  the  ways  of  the  Lord : — I.  The  ways  of  the  Lord  are  Divine.  Are  His  ways 
cold  and  unpleasant  ?  If  we  descend  a  deep  coal-pit  and  look  up  the  shaft  into 
the  bright  sky,  we  see  the  stars,  but  the  pit  is  cold  and  dark.  So  men  think 
that  when  they  commune  with  God,  it  is  like  being  in  a  coal-pit  beholding  a  star ; 
it  is  a  beautiful  sight,  but  makes  one  cold  and  unpleasant.  Is  this  the  truth  ? 
No ;  the  Bible  describes  God's  people  as  having  melody  in  their  hearts,  and  one  of 
His  sweetest  names  is  "  The  happy  God."  Some  people  are  afraid  of  becoming 
religious,  lest  they  should  be  miserable  ;  but  they  mistake  the  God  in  whose  breast 
there  is  an  ever-flowing  heaven.  The  man  who  the  most  loves  God  is  the  happiest 
in  disposition  and  the  most  cheerful  as  well  as  the  most  graceful  in  life.  II.  His 
ways  are  also  humane  ;  they  constrain  us  to  love  our  suffering  fellow-man,  when  he 
can  do  us  no  good  but  when  we  can  do  him  good.  (IF.  Birch.)  Jehoshaphat : — 
I.  Some  men  when,  like  Jehoshaphat,  thbt  have  riches  and  honour  in  abundance, 

HAVE  THEIB  hearts  LIFTED   UP,   BUT  NOT   IN   THE   WAYS   OF  THE   LoRD.      The   natural 

tendency  of  such  circumstances  is  to  create  and  foster  a  spirit  of  pride,  of  self- 
BuflBciency,  and  of  independence.  How  necessary  the  warning  (Deut.  viii.  11-14). 
Nebuchadnezzar  is  a  striking  exemplification  of  this.  II.  Some  men  whose  hearts 
ABE  NOT  LIFTED  UP  ARE  IN  THE  WATS  OF  THE  LoRD.  They  are  real  Christians,  but 
doubting,  desponding  Christians.  HI.  Some  men  have  theib  hearts  lifted  up, 
LIKE  Jehoshaphat,  in  the  wats  oi  the  Lobd.  They  "rejoice  in  the  Lord 
alway."     (R.  Harley.) 

Ver.  16.  Who  "willingly  offered  himself  unto  the  Lord. — Wanted,  volunteer*: — 
I.  Amasiah  made  it  his  life-work  to  serve  the  Lord.  This  service  is — 1.  Keason- 
able.  2.  Honourable.  3.  Remunerative.  4,  Safe.  H.  Amasiah  was  a  readt 
volunteer.  1.  He  needed  no  pressing.  2.  He  needed  no  hunting  out.  3.  He 
needed  no  looking  after.  4.  He  needed  no  leader.  III.  Amasiah  offered  himself 
to  the  Lord.  1.  He  made  no  reserve  as  to  what  he  had.  2.  He  made  no  reserve  as 
to  what  he  did.  3.  He  made  no  reserve  as  to  when  it  should  be.  4.  He  made  no 
reserve  as  to  how  that  service  should  be  rendered.  IV.  When  Amasiah  willingly 
offered  himself  unto  the  Lord,  he  did  this  in  a  secular  calling.  1.  He  did  not 
stipulate  to  be  a  prophet.  2.  His  was  a  difficult  calling.  3.  He  rose  to  eminence 
in  it.  4.  He  left  an  honourable  record.  V.  Amasiah  not  only  served  the  Lord 
himself,  but  he  is  an  example  to  others.  1.  To  the  young.  2.  To  men  of  position. 
8.  To  men  who  are  rising  in  the  world.    (C7.  H.  Spurgeon.) 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xym. 

CHAPTEB  XVm. 

Yebs.  4-34.  And  Jehosbaphat  said  unto  tlie  king  of  Israel,  Enqnire,  I  pray  thee, 
at  the  word  of  the  Lord  to-day. — Divine  truth  and  its  typical  reception : — Here  are 
four  types  of  human  conduct  in  relation  to  Divine  truth.  I.  Those  who  seek  the 
TRUTH.  Micaiah  believed  in  its  existence,  prayed  for  its  teaching,  and  determined 
to  follow  its  leading.  II.  Those  who  are  opposed  to  the  tbuth.  The  priests 
assumed  to  be  its  only  depositaries,  denied  the  claims  of  others,  ridiculed  and 
opposed  its  representative.  None  so  slow  to  believe  in  a  Divine  Spirit  as  those 
accustomed  to  speak  Divine  words,  but  in  whose  hearts  is  no  Divine  life.  III. 
Those  who  believe  tet  disobet  the  tbuth.  Jehoshaphat  believed  the  prophet 
Micaiah,  mildly  defended  his  character,  yet  would  not  withdraw  from  Ahab. 
IV.  Those  who  are  alaemed  at  truth.  Ahab  roused  in  conscience,  afraid  of  results, 
and  tried  to  escape  by  stratagem.     (J.  Wolfendale.) 

Vers.  6-7.  There  is  yet  one  man,  by  whom  we  may  enquire  of  the  Lord :  bnt  I 
bate  bim. — Micaiah  the  son  of  Imla : — Jehoshaphat's  is  the  wise  and  reverent  ques- 
tion to  ask,  amid  the  illusions  of  every  fashionable  opinion,  amid  all  smooth  and 
flattering  promises.  It  marks  the  devout  habit  of  looking  behind  the  outward  show 
and  of  searching  every  matter  to  its  depths  in  the  fear  of  God.  Let  us  notice  the 
frame  of  mind  revealed  in  Ahab's  reply.  I.  Note  the  significance  op  that  one 
obdubate  voice,  rising  clearly  above  the  four  hundred  unanimous  in  their  approval. 
1.  That  is  a  voice  which  we  hear  again  and  again  in  our  life ;  we  hear  it  most 
loudly  at  special  crises  of  our  career.  2.  When  one  solitary  voice  flatly  contradicts 
the  voice  of  a  multitude,  and  contradicts  it  on  matters  of  serious  moment — which 
voice  are  we  to  believe?  Sometimes  the  question  is  practically  decided,  as  in  Ahab's 
case,  by  the  mood  with  which  we  come  to  think  of  the  unsilenced  prophet.  "  I  hate 
him."  (1)  That  tribute  of  hatred  sprang  from  Ahab's  conscience.  It  is  the  precise 
method  by  which  weak  and  cruel  men  are  wont  to  confess  that  not  the  man,  but  the 
message  has  found  them  out.  (2)  Notice  also  Ahab's  device  for  suppressing  an 
unwelcome  truth.  II.  This  naeeative  symbolises  man's  pbequent  attitude 
towards  the  truth.  It  is  a  test  case.  1.  Young  men  and  women  starting  in  life 
with  abundant  promise,  amid  the  acclamation  of  hosts  of  friends,  you  may  be  irri- 
tated by  perhaps  one  grim,  dissenting  voice,  critical,  dissatisfied,  implacable,  which 
Badly  challenges  the  place  in  this  universe  to  which  general  opinion  reads  your  title 
clear.  Be  very  careful  how  you  treat  that  voice  1  It  may  be  the  voice  of  an  igno- 
rant, envious,  churlish  man,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  the  voice  of  one  who 
has  pierced  to  the  secret  of  your  inner  life,  and  who,  if  you  would  only  listen,  might 
spare  you  an  idle  journey,  might  rescue  you  from  misery  and  shame.  2.  Again, 
there  are  books  or  teachers  whom  we  have  to  deal  with,  and  who  sadly  irritate  us, 
and  we  say,  like  Marguerite  to  Faust,  but  often,  alas,  without  her  simplicity : 
"  Thou  art  not  a  Christian."  Let  us  patiently  ask  :  are  we  really  angry  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord  of  hosts  ?  or,  are  we  angry  because  these  books  or  voices  spoil  our  own 
theories,  wound  our  prejudices,  smile  at  our  favourite  catch- words,  wither  our  ideas 
of  success,  and  are,  in  the  name  of  the  Truth  of  God,  relentless  amid  our  flatterers? 
Do  they  simply  offend  our  self-love,  and  rebuke  our  calculated  prudence  ?  Let  us 
be  careful.  Tliiese  books  and  voices  may  be  wrong  ;  if  so,  their's  the  loss  and  the 
penalty.  But,  very  often,  conscience  would  tell  us  there  is  a  possibility  that  they 
are  right.  3.  There  is  one  solemn  application  of  this  incident  which  has,  no 
doubt,  occurred  to  us  already.  In  every  human  heart  disobedient  to  Christ, 
impenitent  and  unreconciled,  there  is  a  voice  as  of  Micaiah  the  son  of  Inila  ;  but  it 
is  really  the  voice  of  the  Lord  Himself,  speaking  to  that  heart,  amid  all  its  distrac- 
tions and  its  earthly  pleasures,  the  message  of  evil  and  not  of  good.  And  men  may 
come  to  chafe  so  angrily  under  that  patient,  ever-haunting  warning,  and  appeal, 
that  finally  they  may  cry :  "  I  hate  it,  I  hate  it  I  "  If  that  be  so,  remember  Ahab'a 
doom.  (T.  Rhys  Evans.)  Virtues  necessary  for  religious  workers: — Close  sym- 
pathy with  his  kind,  personal  lowliness,  self-suppression  pushed  even  to  pathetic 
extremes,  unshakable  loyalty  to  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  calm  indif- 
ference to  fashionable  moods  of  flattery  or  disapproval — these  are  virtues  necessary 
to  every  religious  worker.  If  he  deferentially  consults  the  noble  of  this  world  what 
message  he  may  utter ;  if  he  asks  the  man  of  affairs,  whose  diflScult  life  reminds 
him  always,  not  only  of  Jacob's  wrestling,  but  also  of  Jacob's  subtlety,  and  who  is 
fiercely  tempted  to  give  his  vote  for  a  gospel  of  compromise;  if  he  asks  the  poor 
and  becomes  the  spokesman,  not  of  their  wrongs,  but  of  a  maddened  despair  which 


CHAP.xvin.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  86 

does  not  represent  their  truer  self,  he  passes  from  the  side  of  Micaiah  to  that  of  the 
four  hundred.  {Ibid.)  The  faithful  prophet : — I.  The  estimation  in  which  he 
WAS  HELD.  "  I  hate  him."  Hatred,  inveterate  and  strong,  often  the  reward  of 
fidelity,  "  Am  I  then  become  your  enemy  because  I  tell  you  the  truth  ?  "  II.  The 
BTAND  WHICH  HE  TAKES  (ver.  13).  1.  Dependence  upon  God.  2.  Expectation  of 
God's  help  (Matt.  x.  18,  19).  3.  Determination  to  utter  God's  Word.  III.  The 
PLEAS  dkged  to  MOVE  HIM  FROM  THIS  STAND.  1.  The  Opinion  of  the  majority. 
2.  The  difficulty  of  judging  who  is  right.  "  Which  way  went  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
from  me  to  thee?"  3.  The  employment  of  physical  force.  (J.  Wolfeiidale.) 
Hated  for  the  truth's  sake : — I.  What  an  appalling  illustration  is  this  of  the  fact 

that  MEN  LOVE  TO  BE  FLATTERED  AND  ENCOURAGED  EVEN  AT  THE  EXPENSE  OF  EVERY- 
THING HOLT  AND  TRUE.  "  A  wouderf  ul  and  horrible  thing  is  come  to  pass  in  the  land  ; 
the  prophets  prophesy  falsely,  and  the  priests  bear  rule  by  their  means ;  and  My 
people  love  to  have  it  so."  II.  What  a  vivid  illustration  is  this  of  the  sublime 
FUNCTION  OF  AN  INCORRUPTIBLE  TRUTH-TELLER  I  This  is  Dot  Micaiah's  fiist  appear- 
ance before  the  king.  He  had  established  his  reputation  as  a  God-fearing  and 
truth-speaking  man,  and  Ahab's  denunciation  was  in  reality  Micaiah's  highest 
praise.  1.  No  wicked  man  should  be  quite  easy  in  the  sanctuary.  2.  Do  you 
suppose  that  it  is  pleasant  for  a  minister  to  be  always  opposing  any  man  ?  3.  A 
man  is  not  your  enemy  because  he  tells  you  the  truth.  Opposition  will  come.  {J. 
Parker,  D.D.)  Truth  awakens  enmity : — As  the  Turk  taunted  some  Christians  at 
Constantinople,  who  said  that  they  came  thither  to  suffer  for  the  truth,  telling  them 
that  they  needed  not  to  have  come  so  far  for  that ;  for  had  they  but  told  the  truth 
at  home,  they  could  not  have  missed  suffering  for  it.  Telling  truth  needs  not  travel 
far  for  enmity ;  enmity  will  encounter  it  at  home,  wheresoever  it  be.  Hence  is  that 
definition  that  Luther  made  of  preaching,  "Proedicare  nihil  est  quam  derivare  in  se 
furorem,"  &c. — that  to  preach,  and  preach  home,  as  he  did,  was  nothing  else  but  to 
Btir  up  the  furies  of  hell  about  their  ears.  {J.  Spencer. )  Ministers  not  to  accom- 
modate their  message  to  the  likiiigs  of  men : — Suppose  a  number  of  persons  were  to 
call  on  a  minister  on  the  Sabbath-day  morning,  and  being  admitted  into  his  study, 
one  of  them  should  say  to  him,  "I  hope,  sir,  you  do  not  mean  to-day  to  be  severe 
against  avarice,  for  I  love  money,  and  my  heart  goes  after  my  covetousness." 
Suppose  another  should  say,  "  I  trust  you  will  not  be  severe  against  backbiting,  for 
my  tongue  walketh  with  slanderers,  and  I  consider  scandal  to  be  the  seasoning  of  all 
conversation."  Suppose  another  should  say,  "  Do  not  represent  implacability  as 
being  inconsistent  with  Divine  goodness,  for  I  never  did  forgive  such  an  one,  and  I 
never  will."  And  so  of  the  rest.  What  would  this  minister  say  to  these  men  ?  Why, 
if  he  were  in  a  proper  state  of  mind  he  would  say,  "  Oh,  thou  chUd  of  the  devU, 
thou  enemy  of  all  righteousness,  wilt  thou  not  cease  to  pervert  the  right  ways  of  the 
Lord?"     (W.Jay.)  , 

Ver.  16.  Then  he  said,  I  see  all  Israel  scattered. — The  prophetic  visions: — 
Micaiah  declared  the  visions  revealed  to  him  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  I.  Thb 
bhepherdless  people,  n.  The  parabolic  Providence.  1.  A  picture  of  God's 
supremacy.  2.  An  insight  into  supernatural  ministry.  "  All  the  host  of  heaven  " 
ready  to  serve.    3.  An  interpretation  of  the  events  of  history.    (J.  Wolfendale.) 

Vers.  25-27.  Then  the  king  of  Israel  said,  Take  ye  Micaiah. — Ahab  and  Micaiah  ; 
or  the  false  and  true  in  character : — I.  The  power  of  the  popular  voice.  We  see 
the  multitude  accommodating  itself  to  the  wishes  of  the  king.  How  easy  and  how 
congenial  it  is  to  human  nature  to  float  with  the  tide.  As  a  rule  it  pays  best  to 
suffer  yourself  to  be  carried  along  by  the  current.  Light  things  and  feeble  things 
can  travel  this  way  with  small  demand  on  strength  and  skill.  But  dead  things 
and  all  manner  of  refuse  go  this  way,  too.  There  is  something  to  be  feared  in  a 
great  popular  cry.  I  have  heard  men  say  that  they  dreaded  a  crowd  as  much  as 
they  did  a  contagion.  If  men  had  as  wholesome  a  fear  of  going  with  the  stream 
because  it  is  the  stream,  society  would  be  healthier.  "  Everybody  "  is  a  fearful 
tyrant.  II.  Here  is  one  man  opposed  to  the  popular  sentiment.  He  valued 
truth.  Of  Micaiah  it  may  be  said,  as  it  was  of  another  more  illustrious, "  Of  the  people 
there  were  none  with  him."  He  esteemed  truth  to  be  more  precious  than  gold  or 
any  other  earthly  consideration.  He  was  a  hero  of  no  common  mould.  Men  are 
often  misunderstood  by  those  who  should  know  them  best.  III.  Men  of  such 
moral  heroism  have  often  to  suffer  for  their  principles.  Suffering  for 
conscience  sake  is  not  yet  obsolete.    IV.  Such  men  as  Micaiah  are  morally  brave 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTIiATOR.  [chap.  xvra. 

and  heroic  because  tiiet  aee  men  of  pkayeb.  We  are  apt  to  take  low  views  of 
the  nature  of  prayer.  It  is  more  than  simply  an  appointed  means  of  telling  God 
our  wants,  and  of  beseeching  Him  to  supply.  It  is  "  waiting  upon  God  "  as  a 
personal  attendant  waits  upon  his  master  with  whom  he  converses,  and  from  whose 
lips  he  receives  commands  and  instructions.  It  is  more  than  that,  it  is  communion, 
fellowship,  interchange  of  thought  and  sentiment.  We  may  go  a  step  further,  and 
say  it  is  a  union  of  kindred  minds — the  Divine  so  flowing  into  the  human  that  it 
becomes  transformed,  that  God's  will  and  mind  become  its  governing  law.  So  life 
becomes  one  great  connected  prayer.  A  man  who  understands  and  enjoys  this  is 
one  of  the  strongest  and  bravest  of  men.  Stephen  was  such  a  man  of  prayer.  A 
man  of  prayer  is  prepared  to  do  deeds  of  holy  heroism  which  put  to  the  blush  the 
vaunted  deeds  of  chivalry.  V.  A  consciousness  or  mokal  weakness  is  closely 
ALLIED  TO  MOBAL  cowAKDicE.  Without  &  scruple  Ahab  put  the  life  of  Jehoshaphat 
in  jeopardy  to  save  his  own.  "  Conscience  makes  cowards  of  us  all."  What  a 
noble  tribute  was  that  which  was  paid  to  Havelock  and  his  pious  soldiers  more 
than  once  during  the  Indian  Mutiny  !  When  our  army  was  hard  pressed,  or  some 
specially  perilous  work  had  to  be  done,  the  command  was  given, "  Call  out  Havelock 
and  his  praying  men  ;  if  this  work  can  be  done  at  all,  they  are  the  men  to  do  it." 
VI.  Eetribution  SOMETIMES  OVERTAKES  MEN  IN  THIS  LITE.  Ahab  was  left  aloue 
to  pursue  his  course  of  hardened  folly  until  he  was  ripe  for  retribution  ;  then  God 
met  him  and  ignominiously  closed  his  career.     (J.  T.  Higgins.) 

Ver.  33.  And  a  certain  inan  drev  a  bow  at  a  venture. — The  venturous  aim  : — 
Now  I  would  have  you  notice  particularly  the  words  :  "  A  certain  man  drew  a  bow 
at  a  venture."  We  take  it  that  this  was  no  distinguished  warrior  among  the  army 
of  the  Syrians,  but  simply  one  of  the  ordinary  archers.  He  little  thought  that  to 
him  was  the  task  committed  of  slaying  the  enemy  of  God  and  the  king  of  His  own 
nation.  "  At  a  venture  "  he  drew  his  bow,  or,  in  the  words  of  the  Revised  Version, 
as  given  in  the  margin,  "  In  his  simplicity  " — that  is,  never  supposing  at  whom  he 
was  aiming  the  dart.  We  may  be  for  year  after  year  fighting  the  Lord's  battles, 
and  seeking  after  some  offender  above  other  offenders,  some  Ahab  in  disguise  ;  but 
our  efforts  shall  in  the  end  be  rewarded  with  success — we  may  have  mistaken  some 
conspicuous  fault  as  manifest  as  were  the  gorgeous  robes  of  Jehoshaphat  for  the 
sin  that  doth  so  easily  beset,  bringing  a  host  of  others  in  its  train  ;  but  at  length 
God's  Spirit  shall  guide  our  words  to  the  weak  place  in  that  soul's  armour.  Some 
word  spoken  with  no  special  purpose,  perhaps  in  season,  perhaps  out  of  season, 
shall  open  the  wound  that  means  death  to  that  besetting  sin.  But  if  what  we  have 
said  applies  to  the  case  of  those  individual  souls,  the  same  rule  holds  good  also  as 
regards  our  pulpit  ministrations.  When  we  preach  the  Word  we  do  not  know  who 
may  be  present  before  us ;  probably  many  faces  are  familiar  to  us,  but  we  cannot 
see  the  inmost  soul ;  we  know  not  what  has  passed  in  the  life  of  any  single  person 
since  last  we  spoke.  Therefore,  to  a  great  extent,  our  bow  must  be  ever  drawn  at  a 
venture.  {J.  Nepletcn.)  A  bow  dravm  at  a  venture : — Mr.  Spurgeon  was  wont  to 
relate  the  following  striking  cases  of  drawing  the  bow  at  a  venture :  "  I  supposed  the 
case  of  a  young  man  who  had  got  into  fast  company,  and  once  there  meant  to  have 
his  fling  unfettered ;  so  was  on  the  eve  of  starting  to  India,  in  order  to  escape  the 
restraint  of  a  godly,  widowed  mother's  influence.  I  pointed  to  him,  and  pleaded 
with  him  to  retrace  his  steps  ere  yet  he  had  broken  his  praying  mother's  heart.  At 
the  close  of  the  Monday  evening  prayer-meeting  a  young  man  was  shown  into  my 
room  by  William  Olney.  As  soon  as  alone  with  me  he  wished  to  know  who  had 
informed  me  as  to  his  movements.  He  could  scarcely  believe  me  when  I  told  him 
I  had  received  no  information  concerning  him,  and  did  not  even  know  his  name. 
The  same  week,  after  the  Thursday  evening  service,  another  young  man  wished  to 
see  me  alone  ;  wanted  to  know  who  had  been  telling  me  about  him.  I  asked,  What 
about  him  ?  About  his  fast  life,  and  his  intention  to  leave  the  country  and 
escape  his  praying  mother's  influence  ?  He  had  been  very  distressed  ever  since. 
I  pointed  him  out  and  appealed  to  him  on  Sunday  evening ;  he  wished  to  see  me 
about  it,  but  could  not  come  on  Monday  evening  as  he  had  intended.  '  But,'  said 
he,  '  there  is  one  mistake  you  made,  Mr.  Spurgeon  ;  you  told  the  people  I  was 
going  to  India,  and  it  is  China  I  am  booked  for.'  "  Oosipel  archery  : — I.  Thk 
HEABTB  OF  THK  UNSAVED  ABE  ENCASED  IN  HARNESS.  1.  Indifference.  2.  Pleasure. 
8.  Worldliness.  4.  Religious  formality.  II.  Havino  these  hearts  fob  a  mabk, 
THE  GOSPEL  BOW  MUST  BE  DRA\vN.  At  Bomo  must  be  shot  the  arrows  of — 1.  Divine 
goodness.     2.  Divine  threatenings.    3.  Divine  love.     (R.  Berry.) 


>CHAP.  XIX.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  87 


CHAPTEB   XIX. 

Yebs.  1-9.  And  Jebosliapliat  the  king  of  Judah  returned  to  his  house  in  peace 
to  Jerusalem. — Jchoshaphat's  declension  and  recovery  : — I.  God  make3  a  diffekenct: 
BETWEEN  A  BACKSLIDDEN  CHILD  AND  AN  APOSTATE.  1.  He  preserves  the  life  of  the 
child  (ver.  1).  2.  God  reproves  in  grace  His  backslidden  child  (ver.  2,  3).  3.  God 
commends  His  backslidden  child   for  the  good  he  has  done.     II.  Jehoshaphat 

EXEMPLIFIES     THE     TBOB     SPIRIT     IN    WHICH     WE     SHOULD     BECEIYB     DiVINE     EEPROOF. 

1 .  He  received  the  Divine  reproof  without  resentment  and  with  real  contrition  for  his 
sin.  2.  He  sought  to  make  amends  for  past  misconduct  by  greater  personal  efforts 
to  promote  the  spiritual  interests  of  his  people.     III.  Jehoshaphat  lays  down  bules 

FOR    THE   JUDGES    OF    THE    PEOPLE    WHICH   ABE   APPLICABLE    AND   ESSENTIAL   TO  OUB  OWN 

TIMES.     1.  That  a  true  judge  must  have  reference  to  God  in  his  decisions  (ver.  6). 

2.  That  a  true  judge  should  be  a  real  Christian  (ver.  7).  Lessons :  1.  Unholy 
alliances  are  fraught  with  the  greatest  danger  to  every  child  of  God.  2.  In  his 
backslidden  state  the  child  of  God  should  at  once  heed  God's  warning  and  reproof 
through  His  servants.  8.  God  requires  personal  efforts  for  the  promotion  of  His 
cause  from  the  rich  as  well  as  poor ;  from  those  in  the  highest  positions  of  State 
as  well  as  from  the  obscure  and  lowly.  (D.  C.  Hughes.)  Shouldest  thou  help 
the  ungodly,  and  love  them  that  hate  the  Lord  ? — Entangling  alliances  : — I.  The 

FRIENDSHIP   OP   WICKED   MEN    ONE     OF     THE     MOST     DANGEROUS    TEMPTATIONS   TO   WHICH 

Christians  abe  subject.  Modem  life  in  cities  illustrates  this  with  special  force. 
1.  The  wealth  of  the  world  is  largely  in  the  hands  of  men  who  are  not  friends  of 
Christ.  2.  In  many  communities  intelligence  and  culture  are  possessed  mainly  by 
the  irreligious.  3.  Interests  of  business  sometimes  create  similar  peril.  4.  In  a 
higher  circle  of  life  professional  success  often  tempts  young  men  of  aspiring  mind  to 
ally  themselves  with   those  who  love  not  God.     II.  While  Christian  principle 

BEQUIRES  no  NARROW  OB  ASCETIC  SECLUSION  FROM  THE  WORLD,  TET  IT  FORBIDS 
SEEKING  WORLDLY  FRIENDSHIPS  AND  ALLIANCES  FOB  SELFISH  ENDS  AND  TO  THE  PERIL 
OF  RELIGIOUS  USEFULNESS  AND  BELIGI0U3  CHAEACTEE.  III.  ThE  IRRELIGIOUS 
FRIENDSHIPS   OF  EELIGIOUS   MEN   VIOLATE    THE    BULINO     SPIRIT    OF     THE     SCEIPTUEES. 

rV.  Entangling  alliances  with  the  world  often  involve  immense  sacrifice  of 
Christian  usefulness.     V.  Cheistian  alliances  with  the  wicked  do  not  command 

THE  RESPECT  OF  THE  VEST  MAN  FOB  WHOSE  FAVOUR  THEY  ARE  FORMED.  VI.  LoVING 
those   that   HATE    GoD   INFLICTS   A   WOUND   OF   GREAT    SEVERITY   ON   THE    FEELINGS     OF 

Jesus  Christ.  It  is  from  Calvary  that  the  voice  comes  to  each  in  our  solitude, 
"  Shouldest  thou  love  them  that  hate  the  Lord?"  (A.  Phelps.)  Jchoshaphat's 
connection  with  Ahdb  : — I.  What  is  that  intimacy  with  the  ungodly  which  God 
forbids?  1.  An  alliance  with  them.  2.  A  conformity  with  them.  8.  An  un- 
necessary association  with  them.  H.  Why  is  it  so  displeasing  to  God?  1.  On 
account  of  the  state  of  mind  it  implies.     2.  On  account  of  its  pernicious  tendency. 

3.  On  account  of  its  opposition  to  His  revealed  will.  (J.  Chapin.)  Associating 
with  the  ungodly  : — It  is  told  of  a  sweet-voiced  canary  that  it  forgot  how  to  sing  by 
having  its  cage  hung  outside  where  it  was  constantly  surrounded  by  sparrows.  It 
gave  up  its  once  sweet  notes  and  learned  to  chatter  the  meaningless,  tuneless  notes 
of  the  sparrow.  The  constant  association  with  the  Christless  is  apt  to  make  our 
hearts  grow  Christless.  Jehoshaphat ;  or  the  dangers  of  indecision : — I  have  to 
describe  to  you  a  man,  not  lost,  but  continually  in  danger  of  being  lost ;  a  man  not 
wicked,  but  weak ;  a  man  possessing  in  his  character  much  that  was  good,  but 
allowing  his  goodness  to  be  sullied  by  approach  to  evil  and  evil  men.  I  have  to 
show  you  how  one  ill-considered  step,  in  the  earlier  part  of  his  career,  embarrassed 
his  whole  reign.  AflBnity  with  Ahab's  family  affected  more  or  less  the  whole  life 
of  Jehoshaphat.  This  should  make  us  cautious.  I.  In  such  serious  mattees  as 
foemino  family  connections,  oe  paetnebships  in  business,  n.  In  what  appear 
MiNOB  things.  Observe  the  man  who  is  over-persuaded  to  what  he  believes  to  be 
evil ;  the  man  who  consents  to  do  what  is  wrong,  and  justifies  himself  by  saying 
some  good  will  come  of  it ;  the  man  who  frequents  the  society  of  the  vicious,  yet 
believes  that  he  can  escape  corruption  ;  the  man  who  enjoys  the  jest  of  the  profane, 
yet  supposes  that  his  mind  can  retain  its  reverence  for  holy  things  ;  the  man  who 
is  silent  when  he  should  declare  openly  his  disapprobation  of  evil ;  the  man  who 
runs  himself  into  temptation,  yet  trusts  that  God  will  find  him  a  way  out  of  it. 
All  these  persons  do,  in  their  measure  and  degree,  expose  themselves  to  danger — 
commit  acts  of  indecision — take  a  step  which  may  necessitate  others,  against  which 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

they  may  eiert  themselves  in  vain — impress  a  stain  on  their  conscience  which  it 
may  require  years  to  efface — and  plant  on  the  soil  of  their  souls  a  weed  so  vivacious, 
80  self-spreading,  so  absorbent  of  moisture  and  nutriment,  that  by  and  by  it  may 
choke  the  growth  of  all  Christian  graces  and  virtues.  (J.  Hessey.)  Nevertheless 
there  are  good  things  found  In  thee. — The  stiviulut  of  an  encouraging  word : — The 
Lord  will  analyse  a  man's  disposition  and  a  man's  character,  and  will  assign  to  him 
all  that  is  due.  What  man  is  wholly  bad  ?  Surely  in  the  very  worst  of  men  there 
are  excellences,  and  it  ought  to  be  our  delight  to  consider  these,  and  where  possible, 
with  due  regard  to  justice,  to  magnify  them  and  to  call  the  man's  attention  to  them. 
A  man  may  take  heart  when  he  sees  some  of  his  best  points.  Here  is  a  lesson  for 
parents,  magistrates,  and  teachers  and  monitors  of  every  name  and  position.  Tell 
a  boy  that  he  has  done  something  well.  We  are  too  much  afraid  of  what  is  called 
flattery,  forgetting  that  flattery  is  a  lie ;  but  we  are  called  upon  simply  to  state  the 
truth,  and  to  state  it  with  affection  and  emphasis,  that  it  may  become  an  encourage- 
ment to  hearts  that  are  very  easily  cast  down.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Good  and  bad 
things  in  moral  character  : — Is  a  man  whose  character  is  good  to  the  extent  of  six- 
sevenths  to  be  pronounced  a  bad  man  ?  Is  there  not  a  spiritual  arithmetic  which 
looks  into  majorities  and  minorities  of  a  moral  kind?  Will  God,  then,  at  last 
drive  away  from  Him  men  who  have  had  six  good  points  out  of  seven  ?  As  business 
men,  suppose  a  man  be  recommended  to  you  in  these  terms :  This  man  has  seven 
qualities,  and  six  of  them  are  really  admirable  ;  the  only  thing  about  him  is  that 
you  cannot  trust  him  with  money.  Would  you  take  him  ?  Six  points  are  good 
out  of  seven:  will  you  go  by  the  majority  or  by  the  minority?  Another  man  is 
also  good  in  six  points,  admirable ;  the  only  fault  he  has  is  that  you  cannot  believe 
a  word  he  says.  Will  you  take  him  into  your  business  ?  There  is  a  minority 
greater  than  any  majority  can  be.  That  is  the  doctrine  which  we  have  omitted 
when  we  have  been  criticising  eternal  providence  and  wondering  about  the  issues 
of  human  action.  Amongst  ourselves  it  is  right  that  we  should  say  of  one  another, 
"  He  is  a  good  man  take  him  on  the  whole."  But  what  is  the  meaning  of  the 
reservation  ?  Is  it  a  grace,  a  posture  that  may  be  taught  by  a  hired  master  ?  Or 
is  it  a  morality,  the  want  of  which  turns  the  whole  being  into  a  bog  on  which  you 
cannot  rest  with  security?  {Ibid.)  Jehu's  commendation: — We  may  very  well 
admit  that  the  nearer  we  get  to  God  and  to  His  sunlight  the  more  freely  and  fully 
we  shall  admit  that  there  is  no  good  thing  to  be  found  in  us.  But  yet  God  some- 
times allows  His  angels  to  say  of  a  mortal  man,  •'  There  are  good  things  in  him," 
without  any  frown  of  supreme  displeasure.  This  should — 1.  Comfort  us.  Our 
good  deeds  are  not  useless,  not  forgotten.  2.  Encourage  us.  If  God  speak  so  like 
an  indulgent  master  to  a  trying  servant,  then  we  need  not  fear  Him.  We  need 
dread  no  impatient  frowns  upon  our  insufficient  strivings.  3.  Humble  us.  We 
are  perhaps  not  so  good  as  Jehoshaphat.  For  his  one  backsliding  ours,  perhaps, 
are  many.  Lessons :  1.  Mutual  forbearance.  Let  us  not  set  down  any  of  our 
neighbours  as  altogether  bad.  2.  Let  us  see  that  our  good  qualities  are  definite 
and  discoverable.  3.  Let  us  pray  earnestly,  agonisingly,  that  the  good  in  us  may 
overcome  the  evU.  Evil  must  not  for  a  moment  be  tolerated.  Christ  must  reign. 
(S.  B.  James,  M.A.) 

Vers.  6-11.  And  he  set  Judges  In  the  land. — Good  government  should  be  the 
result  of  piety  in  rulers : — Alfred  the  Great  was  a  distinguished  statesman  and 
warrior,  as  well  as  zealous  for  true  religion.  St.  Louis  of  France  exercised  a  wise 
control  over  Church  and  State.  On  the  other  hand,  Charlemagne's  successor,  the 
Emperor  Louis  the  Pious,  and  our  own  Kings  Edward  the  Confessor  and  the  saintly 
Henry  VI.  were  alike  feeble  and  inefficient  ;  the  zeal  of  the  Spanish  kings  and 
their  kinswoman,  Mary  Tudor,  is  chiefly  remembered  for  its  ghastly  cruelty  ;  and 
in  comparatively  modern  times  the  misgovemment  of  the  States  of  the  Church  was 
a  byword  throughout  Europe.  Many  causes  combined  to  produce  this  mingled 
record.  The  one  most  clearly  contrary  to  the  chronicler's  teaching  was  an  immoral 
opinion  that  the  Christian  should  cease  to  be  a  citizen,  and  that  the  saint  has  no 
duties  to  society.  This  view  is  often  considered  to  be  the  special  vice  of  monas- 
ticism,  but  it  reappears  in  one  form  or  another  in  every  generation.  In  our  own 
day  there  are  those  who  think  that  a  newspaper  should  have  no  interest  for  a  really 
earnest  Christian.  According  to  their  ideas,  Jehoshaphat  should  have  divided  his 
time  between  a  private  oratory  in  his  palace  and  the  public  services  of  the  temple, 
and  have  left  his  kingdom  to  the  mercy  of  unjust  judges  at  home  and  heathen 
enemies  abroad,  or  else  have  abdicated  in  favour  of  some  kinsmen  whose  heart  was 


CHAP.  XIX.]  11.  CHRONICLES,  89 

not  so  perfect  with  Jehovah.  (TF.  H.  Bennett,  M.A.)  The  origin  and  right  of 
human  judicature : — The  administration  is  for  the  Lord.    I.  The  power  of  the 

JTTDGMENT    IS     God'S    BIGHT.       II.    ThE    MATTER    OF    THE    JUDGMENT    IS    God's    CAUSE. 

III.  The  issue  of  the  judgment  is  God's  end.  "  Is  with  you  in  the  judgment." 
{Dean  Young.) 

Ver.  7.  Wherefore  now  let  the  fear  of  the  Lord  be  upon  you.  —  Jehoshaphat 
reproved : — I.  His  sin.  This  was — 1.  Helping  in  an  ungodly  enterprise,  against 
■which  the  prophet  had  warned  him.  2.  Forming  an  alliance,  of  which  the 
influence  on  himself,  his  family,  and  people  could  only  be  bad.  It  fills  one  with  a 
kind  of  despair  to  see  how,  among  those  who  profess  to  regard  religion  as  all- 
important,  friendships  and  alliances  discussed  and  fixed  without  this  ever  coming 
into  view.  11.  The  rebuke  which  followed  the  king's  sin.  III.  The  king's 
eepentance.  1.  He  received  reproof  with  meekness.  2.  He  kept  aloof  from 
occasions  of  fresh  sin.  3.  He  did  what  he  could  to  repair  the  wrong  his  example 
had  done.  lY.  What  made  Jehoshaphat  so  prompt  to  return  to  the  right  path 
WHEN  once  he  had  LEFT  IT  ?  His  deep  sense  of  God  and  right  appreciation  of  His 
character.  "Wherefore  now  let  the  fear  of  the  Lord  be  upon  you  ;  take  heed  and 
do  it:  for  there  is  no  iniquity  with  the  Lord,  nor  respect  of  persons,  nor  taking  of 
gifts."  Nothing  so  controllingly  underHes  what  a  man  is  and  does  as  his  cherished 
thoughts  of  God.    (Monday  Club  Sermons.) 

Ver.  11.  Deal   courageously,  and  the  Lord  shall  be  with  the  good.  —  The 

blessedness  of  the  good  : — I.  Who  are  the  good  ?  The  Scripture  points  out  two 
things  on  this  subject.  1.  The  only  way  in  which  men  become  good — by  faith  in 
Christ  and  the  consequent  reception  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  create  us  anew.  2.  The 
principal  ingredients  of  the  goodness  of  the  regenerate.  (1)  Integrity  of  character. 
(2)  Benevolence  of  character.  (3)  Piety  of  character.  II.  The  meaning  of  this 
declaration  and  how  its  truth  is  supported.  "The  Lord  shall  be  with  the  good." 
This  means  that  the  Lord  will  be  with  them  in  the  supply  of  His  Spirit,  in  pro- 
viding for  them  in  providence,  preserving  them  from  trouble,  supporting  them  in  it, 
or  delivering  them  out  of  it,  and  blessing  others  for  their  sakes.  This  truth  is 
justified — 1.  From  the  purposes  of  God  and  the  relation  in  which  His  people  stand 
to  Him.  2.  By  the  promises  of  Scripture.  3.  By  all  experience  and  by  all  history. 
Conclusion  :  1.  He  shall  be  with  the  good  nationally  if  they  act  consistently  and  faith- 
fully. 2.  He  shall  be  with  them  individually.  Fear  not  that  He  will  ever  leave 
His  work  of  grace  unfinished  in  you.  {J.  Leif child.)  A  tonic  promise  : — Explain 
what  is  meant  by  "  good."  The  melancholy  fact  that  aU  men  are  not  good.  The 
promise  of  the  text  justifies  three  inquiries.  1.  Why  should  the  good  be  fearful  ? 
"  They  that  be  with  us,"  &c.  2.  How  can  bad  designs  finally  prevail?  3.  How 
are  men  to  know  that  God  is  surely  with  them  ?  The  answer  involves  character : 
"  the  good."  God  identifies  Himself  with  all  that  is  good  in  thought  as  well  as  in 
act ;  in  purpose  as  well  as  in  service.  Even  when  the  godly  man  ceaseth  God  will 
maintain  the  cause  that  is  "  good."  This  promise,  like  all  the  promises  of  God,  is 
designated  not  as  a  sedative,  but  a  stimulant.  Deal  courageously !  See  how  the 
text  might  have  read :  The  Lord  shall  be  with  the  good,  therefore  sit  still ;  the 
Lord  shall  be  with  the  good,  therefore  let  wickedness  have  its  own  way  in  the 
world ;  the  Lord  shall  be  with  the  good,  therefore  pay  no  attention  to  self -discipline. 
The  text  reads  contrariwise.  The  Lord  is  with  the  good,  therefore  deal 
courageously.  Goodness  is  not  to  be  merely  passive — it  is  to  be  aggressive,  defiant 
of  all  evil.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Courage : — Probably  few  of  us  ever  sufficiently 
consider  the  value  and  need  of  courage  in  order  to  any  high  condition  of 
character.  There  are  to  be  found  in  one  of  the  letters  of  one  of  the  most 
interesting  men  of  modern  times  these  words,  "  How  rare  is  it  to  have  a  friend 

who  will  defend  you  thoroughly  and  boldly !      Mr. missed  an  opportunity 

of  doing  this  for  me,  and  has  not  the  courage  to  do  it  now  as  he  ought  to  do, 
leaving  me  in  consequence  defenceless  against  a  slander,  though  I  put  the 
proof  into  his  hands.  How  indispensable  strength  is  for  high  goodness — 
strength  moral  or  intellectual,  neither  depending  necessarily  on  physical  strength." 
Many  a  man  neglects  to  live  a  Christian  life  not  because  he  lacks  Christian  sympa- 
thies, sentiments,  and  feelings,  not  even  because  he  has  no  Christian  ideas,  but 
simply  for  lack  of  courage  to  put  himself  where  he  properly  belongs.  This  lack  of 
courage  denotes,  of  course,  either  want  of  confidence  in  himself  or  want  of  depth  of 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.xix. 

feeling  as  to  religious  truth,  or  fear  of  some  man  or  men,  which  fear  has  too  much 
influence  over  him  to  allow  him  to  act  conscientiously  and  in  the  line  of  his  best 
sympathies.  1.  In  speaking  of  courage  let  us  recognise  that  there  is  animal 
courage  as  well  as  intellectual  and  moral  courage.  Animal  courage  is  of  the  lowest 
kind.  Oftentimes  it  is  nothing  more  than  bull-dog  ferocity.  It  oftentimes  makes 
men  good  soldiers,  successful  pugilists,  stalwart  seamen — even  daring  adventurers. 
Men  may  have  it  without  any  intellectual  or  moral  courage.  A  little  of  it  is  good. 
An  excess  tends  to  brutality.  This  form  of  courage — the  courage  to  take  physical 
punishment  without  flinching — is  of  a  kind  which  the  most  uncultured  and 
unrefined  can  appreciate.  It  will  always  have  an  attraction  for  the  coarse,  unde- 
veloped, and  unrespectable  classes  of  society.  2.  Intellectual  courage  is  of  another 
order,  and  indicates  a  superior  type  of  man.  It  means  practically  the  ability  to 
think  for  one's  self,  and  to  follow  out  one's  thinkings  to  their  inevitable  conclusions. 
It  is  necessary,  however,  to  guard  this  language.  Taking  opinions  into  one's  mind 
is  not  thinking.  There  is  a  period  in  our  life  when  we  have  more  conceit  than 
wisdom,  and  more  independence  than  politeness.  We  say  to  ourselves  and  others 
that  •'  we  mean  to  do  our  own  thinking,"  which  often  amounts  to  this — that  we 
mean  to  assert  ourselves  as  not  agreeing  with  certain  persons  who  are  said  to  be 
narrow  and  exclusive,  and  agreeing  with  those  who  shake  themselves  free  from 
everybody  else  except  a  few  intellectual  rakes  and  dandies,  Alas,  how  silly  it  all 
seems  when  we  get  a  little  older  1  Then  it  appears  to  us  that  it  was  the  want  of 
ability  to  think  which  made  us  so  impertinent  and  ridiculous.  Of  course  all  young 
birds  have  to  learn  to  do  their  own  flying,  and,  after  rolling  and  tumbling  about  for 
awhile,  they  settle  down  to  do  it  precisely  after  the  fashion  of  the  old  birds.  So, 
also,  with  thinking.  From  the  beginning  even  until  now  it  has  been  done  in  exactly 
the  same  way.  The  process  has  consisted  of  the  discernments  of  comparisons  and 
contrasts,  likenesses  and  unlikenesses,  of  induction,  deduction,  and  inference. 
Every  man  has  to  do  his  own  thinking  to  some  extent,  as  every  man  has  to  do 
his  own  eating  and  his  own  digesting.  There  is  no  possibility  of  any  one  eating  our 
food  for  us,  or  digesting  it  for  us.  And  no  man  can  possibly  begin  at  the  beginning 
of  things,  and  think  out  each  problem  of  life  as  if  no  one  had  been  on  the  earth 
before  him.  The  present  is  so  related  to  the  past,  as  that  the  past  is  in  it  and  the 
future  is  in  it.  Everything  is  in  the  present.  We  inherit  the  earth,  not  as  it  first 
came  out  from  the  hands  of  the  Creator  before  man  was  on  it,  but  as  it  is,  modified 
by  man's  co-operation  with  God.  So  of  everything — that  which  is  moral  and 
Tuental  as  well  as  that  which  is  material.  In  each  department  of  things  there  are 
men  who  have  thinking  power  and  erudition  far,  far  beyond  what  is  possible  to  us. 
In  each  department  they  are  our  helpers,  our  instructors  ;  yes,  our  masters.  That 
independence  which  we  assume  in  youth  is  only  ignorance,  foolishness,  unthinking- 
ness.  The  greatest  men  the  world  has  ever  known  have  been  the  most  receptive 
and  dependent  men ;  the  most  diligent  students,  the  aptest  learners.  If  I  am  to 
learn  painting  it  would  be  folly  indeed  if  I  said,  "  I  am  going  to  be  independent  of 
Murillo  and  Eaphael,  of  Turner  and  Correggio  and  Eubens  and  all  other  artists  who 
have  gone  before  me."  So  in  music  the  man  who  thinks  for  himself  and  never 
appropriates  the  science  of  others  is  idiotic.  So  everywhere  in  all  departments. 
Not  less  so  in  theology,  the  revelation  of  God  and  of  man,  and  of  the  relation  of  the 
human  to  the  Divine.  If  I  set  up  on  my  own  account,  and  did  not  open  my  mind 
to  the  thinkings  of  others,  the  name  of  "  Verdant  Green  "  would  be  the  only  name 
that  could  fit  me.  I  would  have  our  younger  people  distinguish  between  two  ideas 
which  are  very  distinct,  and  yet  are  often  confounded  the  one  with  the  other — viz., 
thinking  for  one's  self  and  cultivating  a  spirit  of  truth.  The  truth  is  that  which 
corresponds  to  the  fact.  As  a  fact  reports  itself  to  your  mind  that  is  the  truth  for 
you.  By  and  by  as  your  mind  grows  it  may  report  itself  somewhat  differently,  then 
there  will  be  something  added  to  the  original  impression,  and  that  will  be  the  truth. 
Now,  intellectual  courage  consists  in  this  perfect  truthfulness — this  faithfulness  to 
report  what  you  see  and  recognise.  It  may  sometimes  put  you  in  seeming  incon- 
sistency with  yourself.  It  may  subject  you  to  being  accused  of  inconsistency.  But 
never  mind.  God  does  not  ask  us  to  be  consistent — on  that  shallow  view  of  con- 
sistency— but  to  be  faithful  and  true.  There  is  a  deeper  consistency — a  nobler 
consistency.  If  I  see  a  thing  very  partially  in  youth,  because  of  the  undeveloped 
condition  of  my  mind,  and  see  it  more  completely  in  manhood,  because  I  have  had 
more  experience  and  more  vision ;  if  I  truly  say  what  I  saw  then  and  truly  say  what 
I  see  now,  though  I  see  now  more  than  I  saw  then,  am  I  not  consistent — more  nobly 
consistent — than  I  should  be  if  I  were  afraid,  under  more  experience,  to  contradict 


CHAP.  XIX.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  91 

my  former  self  ?  What  is  life  for  if  not  to  educate  us  into  deeper  and  larger  views 
of  truth  ?  Only  we  must  take  good  heed  that  they  are  deeper  and  larger.  Many 
people  change,  but  their  change  is  not  growth.  Let  us  recognise  that,  in  order  to  be 
assured  of  the  leading  of  the  Spirit  of  God  into  all  truth,  we  must  have  intellectual 
courage  —the  courage  to  follow  the  truth  wherever  it  leads  and  to  own  up  to  believ- 
ing that  it  is  the  truth.  Often  it  takes  even  sublime  courage  to  do  it.  Every  child 
ought  to  read  the  story  of  the  martyrs  of  old.  It  is  dreadful  to  think  how  little  the 
religion  of  some  of  us  means.  The  loss  of  the  ability  to  grow  deep-rooted  convic- 
tions, and  the  loss  of  courage  to  be  faithful  in  owning  to  them,  is,  wherever  it  occurs, 
a  dreadful  loss.  It  means  the  loss  of  that  nobility  of  soul  the  possession  of  which 
is  one  of  the  surest  marks  of  our  being  children  of  God.  3.  But  of  all  kinds  of 
courage,  moral  courage  is  the  noblest.  Of  course  it  enters  into  intellectual  courage. 
The  two  are  not  distinct,  and  yet  while  intellectual  courage  implies  thinking  power 
and  faithful  following  where  the  light  seems  to  be,  moral  courage  does  not  neces- 
sarily mean  the  courage  of  the  crack  thinker,  but  the  courage  of  character ;  the 
courage  which  acts  conscientiously  in  trying  circumstances.  For  instance,  the  liar 
is  always  the  coward.  A  man  lies  because  he  has  not  the  courage  to  speak  the  truth 
and  take  the  consequences.  There  is  one  exception  to  that  rule.  It  is  conceivable 
that  a  really  truthful  man  might  need  courage  to  tell  a  lie  which  he  thought  would 
shelter  a  friend  from  injury  or  harm.  My  intellect  may  sometimes  stand  in  contra- 
diction to  my  conscience,  "  but  conscience  is  given  me  to  act  by.  In  matters  of 
duty,  therefore,  I  am  bound  to  obey  my  conscience  rather  than  my  intellect." 
Hence  moral  courage  amounts  pretty  much  to  this — the  steady,  persistent  following 
of  the  light  which  is  in  conscience.  It  involves,  of  course,  the  bringing  of  the  con- 
science into  the  light,  where  it  may  be  illuminated,  for  conscience  is  a  light 
receiver,  not  a  light  originator.  Courage,  and  much  of  it,  is  needed  to  act  always 
and  everywhere  conscientiously.  Intelligence  is  needed  to  distinguish  between 
conscience  and  prejudice.  Many  a  man  assumes  to  be  acting  conscientiously 
when  he  is  really  acting  only  from  prejudice  and  feeling.  If  he  quietly  took  himself 
to  task,  he  would  recognise  his  true  motive.  Conscience  represents  God's  judgment 
throne.  The  very  fact  that  a  man  condemns  himself  in  spite  of  his  natural 
unwillingness  to  do  it,  proves  that  the  voice  of  conscience  is  not  his  own  voice. 
4.  But  how  are  we  to  get  the  courage  we  need — intellectual  courage  to  follow  the 
truth  wherever  it  leads,  to  utter  it  always  in  love,  but  to  utter  it ;  and  the  moral 
courage  to  obey  conscience  ?  Where  did  those  apostles  in  the  early  Christian  days 
get  theirs?  Few  of  them  were  more  than  average  men.  At  the  approach  of 
calamity  all  the  disciples  forsook  Jesus  and  fled.  If  there  was  an  exception  it  was 
John.  Peter  disgraced  himself  pitifully.  Yet  within  a  few  weeks  we  find  men  of 
such  sublime  courage  that  we  hardly  recognise  them  as  the  same  men.  Not  Luther 
himself  at  the  Diet  of  Worms,  challenging  the  old  ecclesiastical  order  of  centuries, 
was  braver.  Not  the  Prince  de  Conde  was  braver  as  he  stood  before  the  King  of 
France  when  given  the  choice  of  three  things — first,  to  go  to  Mass ;  second,  to  die ; 
third,  to  be  imprisoned  for  life.  He  replied  with  regard  to  the  first,  "  I  am  fully 
determined  never  to  go  to  Mass ;  as  to  the  other  two  I  am  so  perfectly  indifferent 
that  I  leave  the  choice  to  your  Majesty."  These  are  illustrations  of  the  noble 
courage  of  noble  men.  They  seem  phenomenal  and  unusual.  But  there  may  be 
here  amongst  us  men  and  women,  yes,  and  children,  capable  of  as  determined  a 
courage  if  put  in  similar  circumstances.  None  of  us  can  tell  what  we  should 
do  in  any  condition  till  we  get  there.  It  requires  as  much  courage  to  suffer 
and  be  quiet  and  self-controlled  as  it  does  to  act.  Nothing  is  more  admirable 
than  the  quiet  domestic  courage  which  many  illustrate.  I  am  inclined  to  adopt 
and  endorse  the  words  of  one  who  has  written,  "few  persons  have  courage 
enough  to  appear  as  good  as  they  really  are."  That  is  the  essence  of  moral 
courage.  The  religious  life  of  business  men  is  very  shy  and  timid.  There  are  men 
in  this  and  every  congregation  who  feel  and  believe  more — far  more — than  they  act. 
Sydney  Smith  has  said  that  a  great  deal  of  talent  is  lost  to  the  world  for  the  want 
of  a  Uttle  courage.  With  more  truth  still  we  may  say  that  a  great  deal  of  influence 
is  lost  to  the  Church  for  want  of  a  little  courage.  I  believe  that  few  persons  have  the 
courage  to  appear  as  good  as  they  reaUy  are.  Courage  is  opposed  to  the  spirit  of 
compromise — the  spirit  of  indolence — the  spirit  of  silence  when  silence  will  be 
interpreted  as  consent  on  our  part  to  what  we  do  not  believe.  The  spirit  of  fear,  of 
indolence,  of  compromise,  of  guilty  silence  has  to  be  overcome.  How  ?  The  Spirit 
of  God  is  granted  to  every  seeking  soul  that  the  soul  may  overcome.  (Ueuen 
Thomas,  D.D.) 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 


CHAPTEE  XX. 

Veb.  1.  It  came  to  pass. — It  came  to  pass: — "It  came  to  pass."  The  phrase 
occurs  again  and  again  in  the  Old  Testament.  "  It  came  to  pass  after  four  hundred 
and  thirty  years  that  all  the  hosts  of  the  Lord  went  out  from  the  land  of  Egypt," 
and,  "  It  came  to  pass,  when  the  evil  spirit  from  God  was  upon  Saul,  that  David 
took  the  harp  and  played  with  his  hand,"  and  so  on.  But  has  it  ever  occurred  to 
you  that  the  phrase  is  a  very  suitable  one  as  describing  the  different  events  of 
earthly  history  and  the  varied  phases  of  earthly  experience  ?  It  hints  not  only  that 
they  happen,  but  that  they  are  so  soon  over  ;  they  come,  but  they  "  come  to  pass." 
We  do  not  always  realise  that,  but  it  is  always  true.  We  are  not  conscious  that  the 
earth  is  moving  round  the  sun,  or  that  it  is  revolving  daily  on  its  axis,  yet  it  is  true. 
Summer  and  winter,  day  and  night,  do  not  cease,  there  is  perpetual  movement. 

I.  All  that  comes  to  us  here  "  comes  to  pass,"  nothing  lasts  vert  long,  "  weeping 
may  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy  cometh  in  the  morning."  It  is  true  a  Christian  has 
an  abiding  joy,  it  is  joy  that  springs  from  an  inward  life,  but  joys  that  are  ours 
through  happy  circumstances,  through  successes,  recoveries,  attainments,  meetings, 
of  these  it  is  as  true  as  of  their  opposites  that  give  us  trouble,  they  "  come  to  pass." 
Each  period  of  life  comes  to  pass.  Childhood,  how  swiftly  gone  I  Soon  the  soft 
limbs  grow  robust,  the  hair  loses  its  flaxen  tint ;  and  youth,  with  its  gaiety,  novelty, 
and  romance,  it  comes  so  quickly,  but  it  "  comes  to  pass."  And,  of  course,  this  is 
equally  true  of  all  that  we  mean  by  the  word  "  opportunity."  Thomas  k  Kempis 
says,  "  The  wealth  of  both  Indies  cannot  redeem  one  single  opportunity  which  you 
have  once  let  slip."  Every  day  as  it  passes  takes  with  it  in  its  hand  the  opportuni- 
ties that  we  have  slighted  and  refused  to  take.  The  feeling  of  irritation  that  you 
have  under  trying  circumstances.  Things  have  not  gone  as  you  wish.  Things  do 
go  strangely  sometimes.  So  much  disappointment  and  trouble  are  caused  by  one 
screw  being  loose  somewhere.  Well,  the  thing  has  come,  but  remember,  like  every- 
thing else,  it  has  "  come  to  pass."  Or  it  may  be  something  much  more  serious  than 
that.  A  reversal  of  fortune,  the  failure  or  death  of  one  who,  if  not  the  sharer  in 
your  heart's  affections  was  one  whose  presence  and  favour  were  of  great  value  to 
you.  That  great  crisis  of  yours  came,  but  it  "  came  to  pass."  God  guided  you  into 
the  wilderness  that  He  might  speak  comfortably  to  you.  The  stormy  night  full  of 
terrors  brought  the  vision  and  the  morning.  But  some  may  be  reminding  the 
speaker  in  the  silence  of  their  own  thought,  there  are  sorrows  in  life  that  come  to 
stay.  Yes,  you  may  say,  it  is  the  greater  griefs,  the  darker  dispensations,  that  come 
but  do  not  "  come  to  pass."  In  proportion  to  the  depth  of  the  wound  is  its  per- 
manency. And  yet,  even  in  regard  to  the  greater  sorrows  that  come  to  us  in  life 
there  is  an  example  of  that  which  the  text  expresses.  Wounds  heal,  though  the 
marks  of  them  abide,  and  though  in  some  cases,  like  Jacob  after  the  night  of 
wrestling,  we  halt  upon  our  thigh,  there  is  an  assuaging  influence  in  time ;  the 
intense  grief,  the  sense  of  despair,  the  feeling  that  all  has  gone,  that  life  has  no 
recuperative  power,  and  that  there  is  nothing  worth  living  for — of  these  feelings  it 
is  true  they  come,  but  they  "  come  to  pass."  Is  not  this  equally  true  of  very  oppo- 
site experiences  ?  Though  successes  and  the  honours  of  the  world  may  remain,  yet 
the  first  feeling  of  elation  and  pride  of  attainment,  these  "  come  to  pass."  We  get 
accustomed  to  success,  it  ceases  to  exhilarate,  it  no  longer  gives  us  satisfaction. 

II.  Now  having  given,  I  trust,  suSicient  illustrations  of  this  phase  of  life,  of  the 
constant  flux  of  transitory  things — they  come,  but  they  "  come  to  pass" — let  us 
consider  its  religious  sioNmcANCE.  What  does  it  teach  us,  how  should  it  affect 
us  ?  1.  What  an  emphasis  it  lends  to  the  fact  of  our  own  continuance,  the  con- 
tinuity of  the  personal  life  through  all  the  changes  of  time !  How  much  has  come 
to  pass  I  Youth,  marriage,  parentage,  maturity,  the  successive  seasons  and  steps  in 
life,  have  come  to  pass.  Friends,  and  even  the  nearest  and  dearest  of  all,  have 
come  to  pass.  We  ourselves  have  changed.  There  is  not  a  physical  atom  of  our 
bodies  that  belonged  to  us  ten  years  ago  ;  the  gait,  the  expression,  all  have  changed. 
But  all  that  makes  the  continuity  of  the  I,  the  fundamental  elements  of  our 
humanity,  the  more  striking.  I  am  the  same  being  that  long  years  ago  first  spoke 
God's  name  at  my  mother's  knee ;  the  same  being  as  when  health  gave  vigour  to 
the  limbs  and  youth  fresh  beauty  to  the  cheek  ;  the  same  being  who,  once  a  prodigal 
Bon  far  from  God,  rioting  in  pleasure,  then  miserable  in  the  consciousness  of 
spiritual  pauperism,  came  back  unto  the  Father.  The  essence,  the  very  constitu- 
tion of  man,  is  within,  it  is  hidden,  it  is  that  which  abides.     Surely  then  there  is 


CHAP.  XX.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  93 

nothing  unreasonable  in  the  faith  that  I  may  snrvive  the  last  change  of  all  ?  "  The 
■world  passeth  away  and  the  lust  thereof,  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth 
for  ever."  2.  Then  should  not  the  fact  that  most,  if  not  all,  things  only  "  come  to 
pass  "  have  a  moderating  influence  on  passion  ?  The  things  in  life  which  we  most 
regret  are  moments  when  we  lose  control  of  ourselves.  Said  Johnson  to  Boswell, 
when  something  had  intensely  irritated  that  inimitable  biographer,  "  Consider,  sir, 
how  insignificant  this  will  appear  six  months  hence."  Boswell's  comment  on 
relating  it  is,  "  Were  this  consideration  applied  to  most  of  the  little  vexations  of  life 
by  which  one's  quiet  is  too  often  disturbed,  it  would  prevent  many  painful  sensa- 
tions." Exactly.  There  is  a  great  argument  for  temperance  in  this  text.  "It 
came  to  pass."  3.  Surely,  too,  this  should  affect  our  judgment  as  well  as  our 
feelings.  Permanency  must  be  a  factor  in  judgment.  Should  it  not  guide  us  to 
choose  and  cherish  the  good  that  abides,  the  better  part  that  cannot  be  taken  away 
from  us?  Character  is  an  abiding  thing ;  the  evil  effects  as  well  as  the  good  effects 
are  lasting,  but  the  pleasure  only  comes  to  pass  ;  no  one  can  enjoy  the  pleasures  of 
sin  more  than  for  a  season,  but  "  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever." 
Surely,  too,  this  should  affect  our  judgment  of  movements  of  thought  and  taste, 
schemes  that  men  devise  for  benefiting  the  race,  \.  ill  they  last  ?  Are  they  only  a 
passing  phase,  a  fashionable  craze,  a  novelty,  attractive  because  it  is  new  ?  Here 
they  are,  they  have  come  ;  wait  a  little,  and  you  will  see  that  they  have  only  "  come 
to  pass."  The  Word  of  God  abides,  the  Christ  the  Sun  of  Kighteousness  is  still  the 
sun  of  the  moral  world.  The  Bible  has  been  attacked  ever  since  there  was  a  Bible. 
{R.  Baldwin  Brindley.) 

Ver.  3.  And  proclaimed  a  fast  tlirougliout  all  Judah. — Objections  to  fasting 
answered  (on  the  occasion  of  a  public  fast) : — A  fast  may  be  defined  to  be  a  volun- 
tary abstinence  from  food,  as  a  token  of  our  humiliation  before  God.  Objections — 
1.  There  may  be  this  outward  mark  of  repentance  without  any  real  sorrow  for  sin. 
Answer — The  outward  expression  then  becomes  a  mockery.  2.  A  public  fast  has 
the  appearance  of  ostentation.  Answer — If  you  alone  were  to  keep  the  fast,  it 
might  aver  the  appearance  of  ostentation,  but  in  the  case  of  public  fasting,  it 
becomes  a  duty  not  only  really  to  fast,  but  to  show  openly  your  compliance  with  a 
prescribed  service,  and  gladly  to  embrace  the  opportunity  of  humbling  yourselves 
before  God.  3.  If  we  feel  repentance  in  our  hearts,  God,  who  sees  our  hearts,  does 
not  require  to  be  informed  of  it  by  any  external  expression.  Answer — The  same 
may  be  said  of  prayer  and  also  of  all  the  means  of  grace  which  God  has  appointed. 
4.  Why  should  fasting  in  particular  be  selected  as  an  external  mark  of  humiliation. 
Ajiswer — (1)  Fasting  has  always  been  the  public  token  of  humUity,  and  this  in 
heathen  nations  as  well  as  amongst  Jews  and  Christians.  (2)  It  was  enjoined  of 
God  upon  the  Jews.  (3)  It  was  practised  by  our  Saviour  and  His  disciples ;  and 
recommended  by  them  to  the  world.  (4)  It  has  all  the  qualities  that  might 
reasonably  be  expected  in  an  external  act  of  humiliation,  (a)  It  is  a  duty  easily 
practised.  (6)  Bequiring  no  apparatus,  (c)  Connected  with  no  expense,  (d)  Simple 
in  its  own  nature,  (e)  Equally  adapted  to  all  ranks,  climates,  and  places.  (/)  It 
involves  an  act  of  self-denial,  (g)  It  is  an  act  connected  with  the  mortification  of 
those  very  appetites  whence  many  of  the  sins  for  which  we  thus  humble  ourselves 
proceed.  5.  Fasting  may  disorder  a  person  of  weak  health,  and  thus  indispose 
him  even  for  the  service  of  the  day.  Answer — The  spirit  of  the  Christian  system, 
insists  only  on  the  principle,  and  leaves  the  application  of  it  to  the  case  and  con- 
science of  the  worshipper.  6.  A  public  command  to  fast  is  a  species  of  compulsion, 
and  therefore  inconsistent  with  the  notion  of  a  voluntary  act  of  humiliation. 
Answer — All  that  is  done  by  the  command  of  the  Government  is,  to  render  that 
convenient  which  might  otherwise  be  very  inconvenient,  and  that  practicable 
which  might  be  otherwise  impracticable.  7.  It  is  unreasonable  to  expect 
the  poor  to  give  up  a  day's  labour,  and  to  abridge  their  diet  who  scarcely 
ever  enjoy  a  full  meal.  Answer — It  is  a  voluntary  sacrifice:  God  enjoins  no  man 
to  make  it  who  is  unwilling.  No  man  will  really  be  a  loser  by  serving  God.  {J. 
Venn,  M.A.) 

Vers.  5-13.  And  Jehoshaphat  stood  In  the  congrregation  of  Judah.— Jfan'i 

extremity  is  God's  opportunity : — I.  That  m  the  discipline  of  life  we  should 
EXPECT  DANGERS  AND  EXTREMITIES.  To  kuow  othcr  rcsourccs  we  must  learn  the 
weakness  of  our  own.  II.  That  in  these  dangers  and  extremities  God  has  mant 
WAYS  of  deliverance.     Humau  agency  but  a  small  part  of  holy  ministry.    Birds 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

and  beasts,  insects,  elements  of  Nature,  and  hosts  of  angels  under  His  command. 
Hence  the  folly  of  proscribing,  measuring,  or  limiting  in  God's  work.     III.  That  in 

ALL  DANGERS  AND  EXTBEMITIES  OF  LIFE  WE  SHOULD  LOOK  TO  GoD  FOR  HELP.   (cT". 

Wolfendale.)  If,  when  evil  cometh  upon  us. — The  cause  of  famine  and  our  duty  : 
— I."  What  is  the  cause  of  famine  ?  1.  Dishonour  of  God  (Ezek.  xiv.  13). 
2.  Blasphemy  (Jer.  xxiii.  10).  3.  Sabbath-breaking  (Isa.  Iviii.  13, 14).  4.  Contempt 
of  God's  Word  (Rev.  xxii.  18, 19).  II.  What  should  be  our  duty  when  God  sends 
A  FAMINE  UPON  THE  LAND  ?  1.  Humbling  oursclvcs  before  Him  in  prayer.  2.  Show- 
ing kindness  to  our  neighbours  (Psa.  xli.  1,  2).     {Charles  A.  Maguire,  M.A.) 

Ver.  12.  For  we  have  no  might  against  this  great  company. — Emharrasxment : — 
I.  There  are  embarrassments  concerning  our  country.  II.  Many  good  men  and 
women  are  often  greatly  embarrassed  about  the  Divine  inspiration  of  every 
sentence  in  the  Bible.  III.  Some  of  us  are  at  times  much  embarrassed  by  the 
circumstances  of  LirE.  Like  a  man  who  looks  out  of  a  railway  carriage  at  night 
and  sees  nothing,  so  some  of  us  often  look  towards  to-morrow  and  see  no  light. 
This  fear  of  to-morrow  is  the  wet-blanket  of  the  Christian's  life.  Act  rightly  now ; 
do  your  duty  to-day,  and  never  mind  to-morrow.     (W.  Birch.)        Moral  courage  : — 

1.  There  are  often  terrible  crises  in  men's  lives  when  moral  courage  is  required. 
Most  men  are  brought  at  times  to  a  crisis  when  they  are  ready  to  exclaim,  "  We 
know  not  what  to  do."  1.  In  the  course  of  secular  work.  A  great  company  of 
worldly  anxieties.  2.  In  the  course  of  personal  moral  culture.  Old  habits,  lusts, 
propensities.  3.  In  the  process  of  philanthropic  labour.  II.  The  oni^y  source  of 
true  moral  courage  is  trust  in   God.      To  trust   Him  is    to    trust — 1.  Love. 

2.  Wisdom  equal  to  every  emergency.  3.  Power  that  can  make  the  weakest 
mighty.  {Homilist.)  The  helpless  Church  and  the  might])  God  : — I  want  to  take 
this  as  a  text  to  preach  the  experience  of  the  people  of  God.  I.  An  appropriation 
OF  God.  "  O  our  God."  II.  The  enemy  to  be  judged.  "  Wilt  Thou  not  judge 
them  ?  "  The  Christain  has  many  enemies,  internal,  external,  and  infernal,  but 
self  is  the  greatest  enemy  the  people  of  God  have.  Self  must  be  brought  under 
judgment.  III.  The  sinner's  powerlessness.  "  We  have  no  might."  We  are 
spiritual  insolvents.  Perfect  poverty :  all  true  disciples  of  Christ  must  be  brought 
into  this  state.  Like  Mary,  we  have  nothing  to  pay,  according  to  Christ's  pai-able, 
and  yet  we  are  pardoned.  That  is  the  gospel.  IV.  The  Church's  perplexity. 
"  Neither  know  we  what  to  do."  This  is  often  the  condition  of  the  Church, 
v.  Faith's  invigorating  look.  "But  our  eyes  are  upon  Thee."  {J.  J.  West,  M.A.) 
Jehoshnphat,  face  to  face  with  one  of  life's  great  emergencies,  our  model: — Say  we  not 
well,  that  prayer  is  a  model  for  presidents,  princes,  kings,  and  rulers  for  all  time? 
But  it  has  wider  applications.  The  King  of  Judah  is  confronted  by  a  great  and 
startling  peril ; — what  does  he  do  ?  I.  Let  us  rather  mark  what  he  does  not  do. 
1.  He  does  not  underestimate  his  danger.  There  are  some  men  who  think  it 
wisdom  to  pooh-pooh  a  difficulty.  Jehoshaphat  is  not  one  of  them.  He  is  at  the 
farthest  remove  from  f oolhardiness  or  a  rash  contempt  of  the  impending  peril.  The 
men  who  under-estimate  risks  are  not  the  wise  men  or  the  safe  men,  morally, 
politically,  or  spiritually.  There  are  many  of  this  easy-going — if  you  please,  buoyant 
— disposition  who  decline  to  look  probable  defeat  or  disaster  in  the  face.  They 
deprecate  your  fears,  advise  you  to  trust  to  luck,  to  go  on  and  take  the  chances  with 
a  siout  heart.  They  are  willing  to  do  it  in  politics,  suffering  the  Ship  of  State  to 
take  her  chances  among  the  unknown  shoals  and  rocks  !  They  do  it  in  religion. 
They  discount  heavily  the  Divine  requirements,  the  Divine  warnings,  the  Divine 
hatred  of  sin,  the  tremendous  Divine  penalties  pronounced  upon  it ;  for  them  these 
all  mean  nothing  or  very  little.  2.  So  neither  did  Jehoshaphat  over-estimate  tliera. 
Hks  was  no  panic  fright.  Seen  through  the  atmosphere  of  our  fears,  a  man  may 
become  a  monster.  The  King  of  Judah  certainly  discerned  the  danger  and  appre- 
ciated it  to  the  full,  but  his  brave  and  trustful  spirit  was  as  far  as  possible  removed 
from  panic,  desperation,  or  despair.  Jehoshaphat,  confronted  by  a  danger  which 
seemed  certainly  to  insure  the  ruin  of  his  throne  and  kingdom,  declines  to  regard 
the  case  as  by  any  means  hopeless,  refuses  to  believe  that  the  Lord's  arm  is  shortened 
that  it  cannot  save,  or  His  ear  heavy  that  it  cannot  hear.  Who  says  Moab  and 
Ammon  are  stronger  than  God?  Any  peril  is  over-estimated  of  which  men  cry: 
"  There  is  no  help  for  him  in  his  God  I  "  3.  Again,  if  Jehoshaphat  does  not  under- 
estimate or  over-estimate  his  dangers,  so  neither  does  he  place  any  false  reliance 
upon  human  power — his  resources,  his  aids,  or  himself.  Some  men  trust  God  when 
they  are  bereft  of  every  other  ground  of  confidence,  but  not  till  then.     They  brave 


CHAP.  XX.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  95 

it  out  till  ruin  stares  them  in  the  face,  and  then  run  to  cover.  Not  so  Jehoshaphat. 
The  nation  had  scarcely  known  a  more  prosperous  and  potent  reign  than  his.  He 
had  a  great  army  at  his  command,  and,  it  would  appear  from  the  record  (chap, 
xvii.  12-19),  could  bring  upward  of  a  million  of  men  into  the  field,  a  drilled  and 
organised  militia  capable  of  effective  service  in  emergency.  Many  a  man  in  his  posi- 
tion, and  with  such  military  and  national  resources  behind  him,  would  have  given  God 
altogether  the  go-by,  and  chosen,  like  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  to  trust  in  the  heaviest 
battalions.  II.  Turning  from  this  negative  to  a  positive  view,  we  ask,  then  what  ded  he 
DO  ?  Where  was  his  real  confidence  ?  If  ever  there  was  a  man  who  offered  effective 
and  ample  illustration  of  the  Psalmist's  words — "  Some  trust  in  chariots  and  some 
in  horses,  but  we  will  remember  the  name  of  the  Lord  our  God  " — that  man  was 
Jehoshaphat  of  Judah.  What  then  did  he  do  ?  He  turned  to  God !  And  observe  how 
he  did  this.  1.  It  was  publicly  done.  The  King  of  Judah  made  no  secret  of  his 
dependence  on  the  King  of  kings.  "  He  proclaimed  a  fast  throughout  all  Judah  " — 
"  And  out  of  all  the  cities  of  Judah  they  came  to  seek  the  Lord  " — "  And  all  Judah 
stood  before  the  Lord,  with  their  little  ones,  and  their  wives,  and  their  children." — 
"  And  Jehoshaphat  stood  in  the  congregation  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  and  said.'* 
What  announcement  of  national  and  personal  need  and  reliance  upon  Jehovah 
could  be  more  distinctly  open  and  unreserved  than  this  ?  2.  And  it  was  as  humble 
and  self-renouncing  as  it  was  public  in  its  character.  National  grief  is  an  affecting 
spectacle.  You  have  it  here :  "  All  Judah,  their  little  ones,  their  wives,  their 
children,  stood  before  the  Lord."  While  speaking  in  their  name,  Jehoshaphat 
exclaimed :  "  O  our  God,  we  have  no  might  against  this  great  company,  neither 
know  we  what  to  do."  Lowly-mindedness  and  self-abasement  in  a  whole  people, 
as  certainly  as  in  a  man,  goes  far  to  secure — as  truly  as  it  solicits — the  Divine 
favour.  3.  Jehoshaphat's  plea  for  Judah  was  further  marked  by  an  unreserving 
trust  in  God.  With  Jehoshaphat  Jehovah  is  all  and  enough.  ••  Art  not  Thou  God 
in  heaven,  and  rulest  not  Thou  over  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  heathen?  and  in  Thine 
hand  is  there  not  power  and  might,  so  that  none  is  able  to  withstand  Thee  ?  " 
Never  a  thought  here  of  limitation,  or  weakness  in  Him;  never  a  suspicion  that  He 
is  unable  or  unwilling  to  rescue  those  that  trust  in  Him  to  the  uttermost.  No 
association  of  His  name  with  any  other.  He  is  not  to  be  a  helper,  a  partner,  a 
contributor.  He  is  to  be  all,  to  do  all  I  The  royal,  the  national  reliance  on 
Jehovah  is  entire.  4.  This  brings  us  to  note  fijially  that  Jehoshaphat's  plea  is 
marked  by  the  fullest  recognition  of  the  Divine  Sovereignty  and  Providence.  A 
writer,  quoted  in  one  of  our  leading  weeklies,  says  that,  "No  secular  history 
would  be  read  in  our  schools  to-day  or  in  the  schools  of  any  enlightened  com- 
munity in  which  the  fortunes  of  nations  were  represented  as  controlled  by  special 
Divine  intervention."  The  man  who  wrote  that  sentence  would,  we  fancy,  have 
been  treated  with  rather  scant  courtesy  if  he  had  chanced  in  the  court  of  Jehosha- 
phat. 5.  More  than  this,  the  King  of  Judah  appeals  to  the  Covenant.  Now  God 
loves  to  be  plied  with  His  own  promises  and  reminded  of  the  gracious  relations  He 
occupies  to  us.  The  Psalmist  founded  a  claim  to  Divine  help  and  mercy  upon  the 
ground  of  a  godly  parentage :  "0  Lord,  I  am  the  son  of  Thine  handmaid."  Our 
best  resource,  our  true  "  help,"  is  not  in  alliances,  in  circumstances,  in  capacities,  in 
luck,  in  others,  in  ourselves,  but  ever  and  only  "  in  the  name  of  the  Lord." 
(TF.  T.  Sahine,  D.D.)  Leaving  the  vote  with  God : — Sir  Fowell  Buxton,  who 
shared  with  Wilberforce  the  labours  which  secured  the  emancipation  of  the  slaves 
in  the  West  Indies,  ascribed  their  triumph  directly  to  the  power  of  prayer. 
Writing  to  his  daughter  when  all  was  over,  he  said,  "I  firmly  believe  that  prayer 
was  the  cause  of  that  division"  (vote  in  the  House  of  Commons).  "You  know  how 
we  waited  upon  God  for  guidance,  with  these  words  in  our  hearts,  *  0  our  God,  we 
have  no  might  against  this  great  company  that  cometh  against  us,  neither  know 
we  what  to  do ;  but  our  eyes  are  upon  Thee  ' ;  and  the  answer,  •  Ye  shall  not  need 
to  fight  in  this  battle  ;  stand  still  and  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord.'  You  will  find 
the  whole  story  in  2nd  Chronicles  xx.  Turn  to  my  Bible  ;  it  will  open  of  itself  to 
the  place.  We  had  no  preconceived  plan ;  the  course  we  took  appeared  to  be  the 
right  one,  and  we  followed  it  blindly." 

Ver.  15.  For  the  battle  Is  not  your's,  but  God's. — Victory  the  gift  of  God: — 
I.  Let  us  eemembeb  the  oeeat  tedth  enunciated  heee,  and  let  us  in  all  thank- 
fulness  ADDEESS  OUE  TEIBUTE  OE   PEAISB   TO   GoD  FOB   THE   SUCCESS   WHEEEWITH   He 

HAS  cbowned  oub  exeetions.     II.  Let  us  nevee  foeget  that  wae  must  always 

BE  CONSIDEBED  as  A  JUDGMENT,  HOWEVER  IT   MAT,   IN   ANSWEB   TO   A  NATION'S   PEAYET.S, 


96  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

BE  ACCOMPANIED  WITH  vicTORT.  {J.  Bainhridgc  Smith,  M.A.)  God  in  battle  : — 
This  battle  was — I.  A  committed  thing  to  God.  The  course  of  events  was  committed 
by  a  specific  act  to  God  ;  and  Jehoshaphat  and  Judah  stood  in  expectation  of  what 
He  would  do.  Solemn  acts  of  committal  are  of  great  importance  in  our  spiritual 
life.  If  we  have  a  bad  habit  to  fight  with,  or  a  temper  or  special  temptation  to 
overcome ;  or  if  we  have  to  deal  with  some  wayward  spirit ;  or  if  we  want  to  attain  to 
Bome  grace,  or  even  to  do  something  that  is  too  hard  for  our  own  strength,  but  which 
lies  before  us  in  the  path  of  duty,  let  each  of  these  be  "  committed  things."  II.  An 
ACCEPTED  THING  BY  HiM.  God  espoused  Jehoshaphat's  cause  :  "  The  battle  is  not 
yours."  When  we  commit  matters  to  God  and  He  accepts  them,  we  may  see  them 
in  new  lights  altogether.  We  often  do  so,  and  wonder  that  we  were  so  blind  before. 
But  we  need  not  wonder.  The  light  came  in  with  God.  When  matters  seem  very 
dark  to  us,  let  us  be  fully  assured  that  they  are  capable  of  being  lit  up.  1.  "  Not 
yours  1 "  Why  not  ?  Because  another  interest  had  come  in.  In  one  respect  the 
battle  is  always  ours,  inasmuch  as  we  are  the  persons  to  reap  all  the  substantial 
benefits,  but  in  another  it  is  God's  ;  He  has  interests  as  well  as  we.  In  our  trial 
time,  we  must  view  Him  as  an  interested  God.  2.  How  was  it  not  to  be  theirs  ? 
Just  by  God  acting  in  the  matter  in  His  own  way.  We  seem  at  times  more  a3 
though  we  wished  God  to  follow  our  leadings  than  that  we  should  follow  His. 
God  will  lead  us  by  ways  which  we  know  not.  We  have  to  learn  the  double  lesson 
of  the  insufficiency  of  known  ways  and  the  all-sufficiency  of  unknown.  God  has 
continually  to  teach  us  the  last  through  the  first.  By  taking  the  battle  out  of  their 
hands,  God  severed  Jehoshaphat  and  Judah  from  the  depressing  thoughts  of  the 
results  being  affected  by  their  weakness.  Conclusion :  Consider  Christ,  who 
"  committed  Himself  to  Him  that  judgeth  righteously,"  and  Paul,  who  said,  "I  am 
persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have  committed  unto  Him  against 
that  day."  {P.  B.  Power,  M.A.)  The  Divine  victory  : — I.  These  words  imply 
THAT  THE  CAUSE  IS  THE  CAUSE  OF  GoD.  While  the  Christian  life  is  undoubtedly 
a  personal  matter,  it  is  well  to  look  away  from  our  interest  and  remember  that 
God's  cause  is  chiefly  concerned  in  the  conflict  of  life.  1.  Individually.  The 
Divine  ideal  for  each  man  is  the  perfection  of  each  man's  character,  and  therefore 
he  makes  the  successful  prosecution  of  the  warfare  for  this  end  his  own.  2.  What 
is  true  of  the  individual  is  also  true  of  the  race.  A  redeemed  and  regenerated 
world  is  the  idea  of  God.  Our  conflict,  therefore,  for  these  ends  against  the  evil 
of  sin  and  the  corruption  of  the  world  is  a  battle  of  God.  11.  These  words  imply 
THAT  THE  METHOD  OF  VICTORY  IS  DiviNE.  If  the  causc  is  God's,  the  forces  we  employ 
and  the  mode  of  our  warfare  must  also  be  His.  The  Koran  might  be  accompanied 
with  the  sword,  but  not  the  gospel.  Its  weapon  was  a  Cross,  and  in  that  sign  it 
triumphed.  So  in  all  the  battle  of  life  he  who  would  win  the  victory  for  God  must 
use  the  Divine  armour.  Eloquence,  learning,  wealth,  and  even  physical  force,  have 
contributed  at  times  to  the  success  of  the  Church,  but  quite  as  often  they  have  been 
hindrances.  The  method  of  Jesus  is  meekness  and  truth,  the  Word  ever  spoken, 
the  life  quietly  lived,  and  the  testimony  borne  and  the  faith  kept  clear  and 
strong  in  the  darkest  and  most  distressful  hour.  How  often  in  the  conflict  of  life 
we  try  to  fight  the  battle  in  our  own  way  1  We  seek  to  conquer  indwelling  sin, 
to  overcome  the  attack  of  the  enemy  who  would  destroy  us,  by  some  methods  of 
our  own.  We  always  fail.  III.  If  the  battle  be  God's,  then  we  may  be  confident 
THAT  THE  END  WILL  BE  THE  DiviNE  END.  1.  How  many  good  people  are  greatly 
distressed  about  their  final  salvation.  But  salvation  is  a  condition  of  mind  and 
heart — a  present  trust  and  submission  to  God,  each  moment  assured,  and  therefore 
assurance  for  the  next  moment.  Leave  the  end  with  God.  It  will  be  God'a 
triumph.  2.  In  respect  of  the  final  outcome  of  the  conflict  between  good  and  evil, 
in  the  Church  and  the  world,  let  us  believe  that  God  will  take  care  of  the  issues, 
and  that  all  will  be  well.  Let  us  leave  our  doubts,  and  our  forebodings,  and  our  mis- 
trustings  with  Him.  {Llewelyn  D.  Bevan,  D.D.)  Jehoshaphat  helped  of  God  : — 
I.  Jehoshaphat's  prayer  teaches  us  when  we  may  expect  help  of  God.  1.  In 
matters  which  we  know  God  has  at  heart.  2.  In  matters  for  which  Christ's 
atonement  stands  pledged.  3.  In  matters  for  which  we  have  not  ourselves  to 
blame.  4.  In  matters  wherein  we  are  powerless  to  help  ourselves.  U.  How  wa 
MAY  SECURE  God's  HELP.  1.  We  must  come  into  communion  with  Him.  2.  We 
must  pray  for  God's  help.  3.  We  must  implicitly  follow  God's  guidance.  4.  Faith 
is  an  especial  prerequisite  to  God's  aid.  HI.  How  God's  help  is  given.  1.  Not 
always  or  necessarily  in  the  shape  we  desire  it.  God  makes  spiritual  growth  His 
first  aim  in  all  His  dealings  with  His  people.    2.  But  when  compatible  with  higher 


CHAP.  XX.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  97 

Advantages,  God  aids  us  in  temporal  things.  3.  God  gives  us  blessings  beyond  His 
promise  or  our  asking.  Conclusion  :  1.  In  God's  people  the  Divine  help  awakens 
gratitude.  2.  Those  who  are  not  Christians  are  never  unaffected  when  they  see 
God  help  His  children  :  "  the  fear  of  God  was  on  all  the  kingdoms  of  those  countries 
when  they  heard  that  the  Lord  fought  against  the  enemies  of  Israel."  {Monday 
Club  Sermons.)        The  battle  is  not  yours,  but  God's  : — The  text  addresses  a  word — 

I.  To  all  who  are  bearing  Christian  protest  against  evil.  2.  To  all  who  are 
undergoing  severe  temptation.  3.  To  all  who  are  labouring  for  the  good  of  the 
•world.  4.  To  all  who  are  engaged  in  controversy  on  behalf  of  Christian  doctrine. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D. )  The  Lord's  battle  : — Luther's  strength  lay  in  the  way  in  which 
he  laid  the  burden  of  the  Reformation  upon  the  Lord.  Continually  in  prayer  he 
pleaded,  "  Lord,  this  is  Thy  cause,  not  mine.  Therefore  do  Thine  own  work  ;  for 
If  this  gospel  do  not  prosper,  it  will  not  be  Luther  alone  who  will  be  a  loser,  but 
Thine  own  name  will  be  dishonoured."    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  17.  Ye  shall  not  need  to  fight  in  this  battle. — The  conditions  and  certainty 
of  obtaining  God's  deliverance  : — I.  That  since  our  enemies' designs  are  known  tons, 

WB  OUGHT    TO  SET  OURSELVES,  THAT   IS,  MAKE  WHAT  PEOVISION  WE    CAN    AGAINST   THEM. 

II.  That  having  thus  set  ourselves,  we  must  then  stand  still,  that  is,  do  nothing 

WHICH    18     UJfLAWFUL,    ALTHOUGH     IT    BE    FOB   OUR     OWN     PRESERVATION.       1.    By    dolug 

any  unlawful  action  we  deprive  ourselves  of  God's  care  and  protection.  2.  By 
doing  anything  unlawful  we  bring  a  scandal  upon  our  religion.  3.  To  do  evil, 
although  for  our  own  preservation,  would  be  most  likely  to  unsettle  and  ruin  us. 
When  once  we  break  down  the  fences  of  duty,  who  can  tell  where  we  shall  stop  ? 
If  we  allow  ourselves  the  liberty  of  doing  one  sinful  act,  we  may  easily  be  prompted 
on  to   commit  a  thousand.    III.  Bepentance    and    amendment    of    life  being 

SUPPOSED,  WE  HAVE  ALL  REASON  TO    HOPE    THAT   WB  SHALL   SEE   THE    SALVATION  OF  GoD. 

1.  Whatever  our  danger,  God  hath  sufficient  power  to  save  and  deliver  us.  2.  This 
is  to  be  inferred  from  the  design  of  God's  sending  judgments  upon  any  nation. 
{Jer.  xviii.  7).  {Thomas  Lynford,  A.M.)  For  the  Lord  is  with  you. — The 
jpower  behind  us  : — In  my  firewood  factory  we  use  a  circular  saw  for  cutting  timber. 
Until  recently  this  saw  was  worked  by  a  crank  turned  by  men.  It  was  slow  work, 
and  we  bought  a  gas  engine.  The  saw,  driven  by  this  engine,  does  more  work  and 
At  less  cost.  It  is  the  same  saw,  but  the  difference  lies  in  the  power  that  drives  it. 
It  was  driven  by  hand-power,  now  by  an  equivalent  for  steam,  we  only  need  to  keep 
'the  connecting  band  tight.  It  is  not  a  question  of  our  abilities,  but  of  the  power 
behind  us.    {F.  B.  Meyer.) 

Yer.  20.  Believe  In  the  Lord  your  Ctod. — Salvation  by  faith : — Judah  is  to  be 
*'  saved  by  faith  "  from  Moab  and  Ammon,  as  the  Christian  is  delivered  by  faith 
from  sin  and  its  penalty.  The  incident  might  almost  seem  to  have  been  recorded 
in  order  to  illustrate  the  truth  that  Paul  was  to  teach.  It  is  strange  that  there  is 
no  reference  to  this  chapter  in  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  and  St.  James,  and  that  the 
author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  does  not  remind  us  how  "  by  faith  Jehoshaphat 
was  delivered  from  Moab  and  Ammon."  (W.  H.  Bennett,  M.A.)  God-fearing 
makes  grand  soldiers : — Carlyle  has  taught  the  present  generation  many  lessons, 
and  one  of  these  is  that  "  God-fearing  "  armies  are  the  best  armies.  Before  his 
time  people  laughed  at  Cromwell's  saying,  "  Trust  in  God  and  keep  your  powder 
dry."  But  we  now  know  that  the  trust  was  of  as  much  use  as  the  powder,  if  not  of 
more.  That  high  concentration  of  steady  feeling  makes  men  dare  everything  and 
do  anything.  Those  kinds  of  morals  and  that  kind  of  religion  which  tend  to  make 
the  firmest  and  most  eiiectual  character  are  sure  to  prevail,  all  else  being  the  same ; 
and  creeds  or  systems  that  conduce  to  a  soft  limp  mind  tend  to  perish,  except  some 
hard  extrinsic  force  keep  them  alive.  Strong  beliefs  win  strong  men,  and  then  make 
them  stronger.     {J.  Bagehot.) 

Ver.  21.  And  when  he  had  consulted  with  the  people. — Shouting  before  the 
victory  : — Anybody  can  sing  the  Te  Deum  after  the  battle  is  over.  The  German 
soldiers  shouted  when  they  had  conquered  their  foe  in  the  first  battle  in  the  war 
with  France.  It  did  not  want  much  of  a  spirit  to  do  that.  The  difference  between 
;an  ordinary  man  of  war  and  a  Christian  is  this :  a  Christian  shouts  before  the 
victory,  because  he  knows  it  is  sure  to  come.  You  remember  how  the  people  gave 
A  shout  of  triumph  before  the  wall  of  Jericho  before  it  fell  down.     I.  We  are  here 

15 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xt. 

taught  THE  aREAT  DUTY  OF  PATRIOTISM.  In  a  leading  newspaper  it  was  stated  that  if 
we  were  not  so  good  we  might  do  a  great  many  things  which  would  be  to  our 
worldly  advantage,  that  we  are  cursed  with  a  great  amount  of  scrupulousness  with 
respect  to  our  conduct  in  Ireland,  Egypt,  and  Burmah ;  that  if  we  were  a  little 
more  unscrupulous,  and  did  not  trouble  ourselves  about  the  rights  and  wrongs  of 
men,  we  might  seize  Egypt  and  settle  all  our  differences  in  India.  Yet  all  history- 
proves  to  us  that  this  kind  of  foreign  policy  in  the  long  run  is  an  utter  fallacy.. 
Why  is  it  that  the  great  Empires  of  Egypt,  Assyria,  Babylon,  Persia,  and  Rome 
have  fallen  ?  Why  has  Spain  lost  her  position  and  France  been  humbled  in  our 
own  day  ?  Because  they  yielded  to  the  foul  ungodly  spirit  of  national  self-assertion, 
and  aggression  ;  because  they  did  not  praise  the  beauty  of  holiness.  11.  Our  special 
object  is  to  rLLtrsTRATE  the  history  of  the  Christian  Church.  We  are  engaged 
in  a  holy  war.  The  Bishop  of  Durham  said  the  Churches  of  this  country  were 
indebted  to  the  Salvation  Army,  because  they  had  revived  the  consciousness  of  the 
fact  that  the  Church  of  God  was  an  army,  and  that  our  great  business  as  a  country 
is  war — not  with  one  another,  but  with  all  human  misery.  What  must  we  do  ? 
Praise  the  beauty  of  holiness.  If  we  go  forth  to  war,  we  must  do  as  Jehoshaphat — 
we  must  needs  be  clothed  with  the  Spirit  of  holiness.  The  apostle  John  was  not 
ready  for  the  great  work  he  was  called  to  until  he  had  put  on  the  power  from  on 
high,  which  was  the  Spirit  of  holiness.  What  was  the  practical  result  of  the 
Pentecostal  blessing  ?  They  were  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  What  followed  ? 
They  were  delivered  from — 1.  Cowardice.  2.  Selfishness.  3.  Ignorance.  John 
Wesley  and  those  with  him  at  Oxford  saw,  after  reading  the  Bible,  that  holiness 
comes  by  faith.  Our  great  mission  is  to  spread  Scriptural  holiness.  If  we  march 
forth  to  war  with  confidence  in  the  Spirit  of  holiness,  we  shall  triumph  even  with- 
out fighting.  {Hugh  Price  Hughes,  M.A.)  Enthusiastic  soldiers: — When  the 
Spartans  marched  into  battle,  they  advanced  with  cheerful  songs,  willing  to  fight ; 
but  when  the  Persians  entered  the  conflict,  you  could  hear,  as  the  regiments  came 
on,  the  crack  of  the  whip,  by  which  the  officers  drove  the  cowards  to  the  fray. 
What  wonder  that  the  Spartans  were  like  Uons  in  the  midst  of  sheep  !  Were  we 
enthusiastic  soldiers  of  the  Cross,  through  God's  help,  nothing  would  be  able  to 
stand  against  us.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Praise  : — The  biographer  of  Bishop 
Hannington  says,  "  How  often  had  he  encouraged  his  companions  in  times  of  doubt 
or  difficulty  with  the  words, '  Never  be  disappointed,  only  praise.'  " 

Ver.  23.  Every  one  helped  to  destroy  another. — Muttial  destruction : — As  we  look 
upon  the  world  at  large,  how  do  we  see  men  occupied  but  as  destroying  one 
another  !  This  is  a  marked  character  of  the  lower  and  worse  forms  of  vice,  that 
each  degraded  one  has  a  wretched  pleasure  in  bringing  down  other  souls  to  the 
same  level  of  degi'adation  and  ruin  ;  but  the  same  tendency  to  mutual  destruction 
is  to  be  seen  in  the  first  fallings  away  from  God  through  all  the  subsequent  steps 
in  the  downward  road.  When  young  men  first  lead  one  another  away  from  home 
into  the  strange  ways  and  strange  company  against  which  the  wise  man  has  raised 
his  voice,  what  do  they  but  destroy  one  another  ?  And  in  the  wildness  which  they 
call,  for  a  time,  pleasure — whatever  form  the  self-indulgence,  the  sensuality,  may 
wear — every  one  still  helps  to  destroy  another:  actually,  as  to  the  misused  and 
worn  body,  and  with  not  less  reality  as  to  the  corrupted  and  earth-engrossed  soul. 
In  another  way,  also,  not  less  direct,  not  less  fatal,  though  less  regarded,  each 
wandei-er  from  God  helps  to  destroy  others.  Example  is  sufficient  to  make  danger. 
It  would  be  a  bold  thing,  indeed,  for  any  one  human  being  to  look  back  upon  his 
life,  and  to  say  that  his  example  had  not  been  fatal  to  some  other  soul.  When  the 
Spirit  has  done  His  work  of  converting  the  heart  to  God,  and  the  saved  sinner 
turns  his  eyes  upon  the  sins  which  made  the  Cross  necessary  for  him,  who  will  not 
have  Paul's  remembrance  of  having  given  his  word  for  death  ?  Who  will  not  have 
John  Newton's  memory  of  souls  led  into  wrong,  for  whom  there  remains  no  power 
of  recovery  ?  And  what  is  the  record  of  this  kind  preparing  for  the  unconverted, 
when  a  more  true  and  more  awful  scene  than  the  great  dramatist  has  conceived  of 
the  presence  of  wronged  souls  in  the  visions  of  the  night  shall  be  upon  the  dying 
man,  or,  yet  worse,  upon  the  man  after  death  ;  when  the  memory,  no  longer  clouded 
by  the  flesh,  no  longer  impeded  by  prejudice  or  passion,  shall  recall  the  multitudes 
to  whom  evil  has  been  taught  by  word  or  by  example ;  when  the  immortal  spirit 
shall  have  the  light  of  eternity  poured  upon  the  passed  events  of  life,  and  the  evil 
example  of  one  look  or  one  word  shall  be  traced  through  all  its  train  of  consequences 
up  to  its  final  ruin  of  other  souls  ?    And  this  mutual  destruction,  which  belongs  to 


CHAP.  XX.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  99 

the  very  character  of  the  unregenerate  man,  follows  him  hither  even  into  the  honse 
of  God.  How  is  it  that  the  children  of  our  schools  have  so  little  profit  here  ?  that 
they  know  so  little  of  all  that  passes  here  ?  How  is  it  that  we  so  rarely  find  the 
truth  making  its  way  from  either  desk  or  pulpit  to  the  hearts  of  our  docile  young 
ones  ?  Simply  because  they  are  destroying  one  another  by  combined  inattention. 
The  trifle  which  draws  off  the  mind  from  prayer,  the  whispered  word  which  puts 
some  thought  of  earth  in  the  place  of  the  Bible,  the  merry  smile  which  catches 
another's  ready  eye — these  are  the  means  by  which  every  one  helps  to  destroy 
another ;  so  that  grace  is  provided  and  preached  in  vain.  And  we  can  scarcely 
hope  that  this  will  be  with  children  alone.  In  a  congregation  of  merely  nominal 
Christians,  met  merely  for  the  sake  of  respectability,  the  work  of  mutual  destruc- 
tion would  go  on  in  the  general  support  of  their  common  lukewarmness,  and 
every  one  would  help  to  destroy  another  in  the  subjects  for  conversation  prepared 
in  God's  house,  and  the  discussion  of  them  in  the  homeward  way.  {David 
Laing,  M.A.) 

Ver.  26.  The  valley  of  Berachah. — Bible  valleys .- — The  word  valley  is  a  poem 
in  itself ;  it  is  associated  with  a  great  deal  that  is  beautiful,  comforting,  and  that 
gives  the  soul  a  sense  of  security  and  plentifulness.  The  Bible  is  full  of  valleys, 
as  it  is  full  of  wells.  What  is  this  valley  of  Berachah  ?  In  some  senses  I  do  not  care 
much  for  it ;  I  know  it  means  the  valley  of  blessing,  and  that  the  people,  in  whom 
I  have  not  the  slightest  contidence  at  all,  sang  themselves  hoarse  in  the  valley  of 
Berachah  because  they  were  fed  like  oxen  that  were  to  be  slaughtered.  That  is 
what  the  people  were  doing  in  the  valley  of  Berachah.  To  me  their  blessing  goes 
for  nothing  until  I  have  deeply  inquired  into  the  motive  of  the  hymn,  the  intent 
and  the  genesis  of  the  ringing  psalm.  It  was  all  right  enough  within  given  limits, 
but  the  limits  themselves  were  wrong.  No  doubt  there  had  been  great  victories,  no 
doubt  Jehoshaphat  and  his  people  came  to  take  away  the  spoil  of  them  that  had 
been  overthrown ;  and  they  found  abundance  of  riches.  I  listened  with  reluctance 
to  their  selfish  psalm.  God  might  see  some  good  in  it ;  God  sees  good  wherever 
it  exists,  in  how  poor  soever  a  form.  Sometimes  the  goodness  is  like  a  little 
starveling  thing  that  has  got  no  blood,  no  fire  in  the  eyes,  and  no  real  trust  in  the 
soul — a  kind  of  living,  self-vexing  speculation.  Who  would  not  sing  in  carrying 
off  all  these  precious  jewels  ?  There  is  a  better  time  for  singing  than  the  time  of 
all  this  commercial  aggrandisement  and  secular  comfort.  One  little  song  of  patience 
is  worth  the  whole  of  this  blaring  noise.  There  is  another  valley  mentioned  in 
Numbers  xxxii.  9 — "  the  valley  of  Eshcol."  What  valley  is  that  ?  'Tis  the  valley 
of  grapes  and  summer  fruits,  all  of  which  we  may  pluck,  because  it  is  the  intent 
of  Divine  love  that  we  should  possess  ourselves  of  such  luxuriant  vineyards.  Do 
we  not  suddenly  come  upon  the  grapes  intellectual,  social,  educational,  spiritual? 
Is  not  hunger  itself  often  surprised  by  unexpected  plentifulness?  Yet  sometimes 
men  cannot  believe  even  in  this  uncrushed  wine  of  the  grape ;  they  will  hasten 
home  and  say,  "  Do  not,  we  beseech  thee,  venture  in  that  direction ;  grapes  enough 
there  may  be,  even  to  abundance,  but  we  had  better  remain  where  we  are ;  can  a 
man  live  upon  grapes  ?  We  cannot  tell  what  there  may  be  beyond  the  river  or 
on  the  other  side  of  the  mountain ;  here,  you  see,  we  have  grapes  enough ;  until  we 
have  drunken  of  this  wine  why  should  we  strike  our  tents  and  go  ahead?  "  We 
may  pervert  some  little  mean  proverbs  of  our  own,  and  say,  "Better  bear  the 
ills  we  have  than  fly  to  others  that  we  know  not  of."  We  have  grapes  to-day: 
why  should  we  care  about  to-morrow?  Thus  enthusiasm  is  killed,  and  all  daring, 
high  exploit,  and  noble  endeavour.  Ambition  may  be  perverted,  but  ambition 
may  be  one  of  the  forms  or  aspects  of  inspiration.  It  is  the  future  that  draws  us 
on,  it  is  the  prophetic  assurance  of  some  fiery  man  that  a  mile  further  on  and  we 
shall  have  it  that  keeps  the  world  young  and  keep  the  rust  away.  You  cannot 
silence  the  divinely  inspired  and  most  restless  man.  We  could  rouse  him  and  say. 
Now,  why  not  be  content?  why  not  rest  and  be  thankful?  of  course  there  may 
be  higher  heights  and  wider  landscapes,  let  us  admit  all  that  for  a  moment ;  but 
why  worry  ourselves  about  it  ?  there  may  be  something  beyond  the  grave ;  when 
we  die  we  shall  see  what  there  is.  Perhaps  not ;  there  is  a  right  way  of  dying. 
The  world  has  been  kept  going  by  what  foolish  people  would  call  sensationalism. 
The  very  persons  who  now  wrap  their  rugs  around  them  and  enjoy  the  im- 
mediate comfort  of  the  day  owe  the  very  rugs  in  which  they  wrap  themselves  to 
the  sensationalism  of  a  former  time  that  could  not  be  kept  back  from  the  wilderness 
or  the  jungle  or  the  far-away  land,  no,  not  by  the  roaring  sea  and  the  tempest 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

that  seemed  to  be  an  embodied  destruction.  Do  not  live  yourselves  down  into 
saplessness  and  reluctance  to  move.  And  it  is  easy  for  some  persons  to  come 
and  sanction  such  indolence,  but  we  want  the  true  spies  to  say  to  us,  "  We  have 
seen  a  land  worth  going  to  ;  it  grows  life,  it  is  warm  with  summer,  it  is  boundless 
with  an  illimitable  hospitality."  Young  souls,  do  not  be  frightened  by  the  man 
sitting  next  you,  for  he  is  no  man,  he  is  hardly  a  figure  in  wax.  In  Hosea 
there  is  a  glorious  valley — "the  valley  of  Achor  "  (ii.  15).  What  is  the  meaning 
of  Achor  in  this  connection  ?  what  is  the  broad  spiritual  interpretation  of  Achor^ 
It  may  be  given  in  two  little  words,  each  word  a  syllable,  one  of  the  words  a 
letter:  "a  door  of  hope."  I  have  given  thee  a  new  beginning,  new  chances,  new 
opportunities,  new  mornings  ;  this  is  not  the  end,  this  is  the  beginning  ;  there  is  the 
great  wall,  go  grope  in  blindness,  but  with  finger-tips  that  can  see  ;  thou  wilt  in  that 
great  blank  wall  find  a  door ;  it  is  there,  I  made  it,  I  made  it  for  thee ;  I  know  the 
blankness  of  the  wall,  but  on  my  word  go  thou  forth  and  grope  for  the  door,  the 
Achor  that  will  give  thee  visions  beyond  big  as  horizons,  big  as  firmaments,  big 
as  outlined  heavens ;  go  forth  in  the  spirit  of  hope.  We  are  saved  by  hope.  We 
are  not  saved  by  depression.  There  is  a  new  beginning  for  you  if  you  please  to 
avail  yourself  of  it.  I  have  heard  your  story  about  lost  opportunities  and  a  wasted 
life  and  failure  upon  failure.  That  is  atheistic  controversy ;  you  had  better  know 
it,  it  spoils  your  life.  What  the  preacher  is  set  to  do  is  to  proclaim  the  door  of 
hope  ;  salvation  by  hope,  hope  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  In  the  book  of 
Isaiah  we  have  a  beautiful  valley ;  in  chapter  xxii.  1  we  read  about  "  the  valley 
of  vision."  That  is  a  large  valley,  that  valley  is  worth  living  in.  To  live  with 
people  who  have  always  seen  new  lights,  new  possibilities,  and  new  and  brighter 
interpretations  than  have  ever  been  realised  before ;  that  is  companionship,  that 
is  resurrection.  Who  cares  for  those  dullards  who  never  see  new  lights,  new 
companions,  and  the  outlines  of  new  springs  and  summers  in  the  morning  sky? 
What  a  poor  life  it  is  to  live  without  vision  1  In  Isaiah  xxviii.  1  we  come  into 
"  fat  valleys."  The  poor  drunkards  were  all  lying  down  dead  drunk  and  choked 
and  suffocated  with  their  own  wine  of  fatness.  They  were  pampered  creatures ; 
their  soul  was  subordinated  to  the  body,  they  were  all  flesh  and  next  to  no  spirit. 
There  are  fat  valleys  that  have  no  fatness  of  the  true  sort.  Then  there  are 
valleys  that  are  spiritually  rich  with  all  manner  of  nutritious  food.  There  is  a 
wine  that  has  no  intoxication  in  it,  there  is  a  wine  that  does  not  carry  the  seal 
of  death.  Into  those  fat  valleys,  and  not  into  the  other,  may  God  lead  us.  Can 
Ezekiel  be  alive  and  not  take  his  position  in  this  great  question  of  valleys? 
Ezekiel  saw  a  valley,  it  was  a  valley  of  dry  bones.  Read  chapter  xxxvii.  1 
and  the  context.  It  was  an  awful  valley,  a  valley  of  death.  "  Son  of  man,  can 
these  bones  live?"  And  the  son  of  man  said,  "O  Lord  God,  Thou  knowest." 
The  wisest  answer  to  every  Divine  inquiry  :  refer  the  question  back ;  let  Him  who 
propounds  the  problem  solve  it.  I  wish  we  could  read  all  about  the  valleys. 
There  is  a  beautiful  historical  expression :  "  So  we  abode  in  the  valley."  We 
wanted  to  climb  the  green  banks  and  get  up  to  the  points  and  coigns  that  catch 
the  earliest  kiss  of  the  sun,  but  seeing  that  it  was  better  for  us  to  take  another 
course,  seeing  that  we  had  better  obey  God  than  obey  your  own  fancy  or  whim, 
we  abode  in  the  valley.  Abode  in  a  dark,  cold  place?  No;  you  are  misinter- 
preting the  word  valley  when  you  attach  such  epithets  to  it.  I  read  of  other 
valleys.  The  valleys  are  covered  over  with  corn.  That  is  never  said  about  the 
snow  mountains.  Have  the  valleys  no  compensations  ?  Is  sickness  itself  without 
advantages  ?  When  you  are  weak  are  you  not  sometimes  strong  ?  Where  did 
you  get  the  little  flower  from  ?  I  know  not  that  I  have  seen  aught  sweeter  for 
many  a  day :  what  is  it  ?  The  lily  of  the  valley.  Tell  me  there  is  no  compensation 
in  poverty,  in  sickness,  in  weakness,  and  even  in  failure  and  disappointment?  It 
was  in  the  valley  that  the  lily  grew.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Berachah: — Suppose 
every  place  were  to  receive  its  name  from  what  is  done  in  it  I  How  startling  and 
varied  would  be  some  of  the  names!  Berachah  means  a  valley  of  blessing. 
I.  Afteb  prayer.  Jehoshaphat  pleads  with  God  on  various  grounds.  II.  After 
CONFLICT  in  the  spirit  of  praise.  III.  After  victory.  The  triumph  was  speedy, 
signal,  and  complete.  Let  the  valley  of  our  life  often  be  made  a  Berachah. 
{H.  Gammage.) 

Vers.  30-34.  So  the  lelgn  of  JebOBhaphat  was  quiet — The  character  of  Jehosha- 
phat:— I.  Jehoshaphat  is  not  unlise  Hezekiah  and  Josiab.     II.  His  personal 

CHABACTER  SEEMS  TO  HAVS  HAD  VERY   DISTINCTIVE  FSATDRES   IN  IT.      III.    Hi   WAS   DIB* 


CHAP.  XXI.]  11.  CHRONICLES.  101 

TDJGUISHKD  FOB  HIS  SIMPLE  AND  YET  PROFOUND  RELIANCE  ON  GoD.  IV.  ThE  RELIGION 
OF    MOST     PERSONS     OF     GREAT     POWER     AND      POSITION SUch     ES    thoSC    pOSSeSSed     by 

Jehoshaphat — is  usually  reserved,  and  anything  but  childlike.  Conclusion  : 
The  practical  bearing  of  this  study  is  that  there  are  many  in  whom  the  possession 
and  exercise  of  great  powers,  which  are  usually  called  worldly,  are  not  by  any 
means  inconsistent  with  the  most  humble  and  sincere  piety.     {E.  Monro.) 

Vers.  35-37.  To  make  ships  to  go  to  Tarshish. — The  wrecked  fleet: — I.  The 

DISASTER  TO  JeHOSHAPHAT's  SHIPPING.      11.  ThE  CAUSE  OP  THIS  DISASTER.     A  judgment 

from  Heaven.  If  Jehoshaphat  had  been  a  mere  man  of  the  world  probably  this 
disaster  would  not  have  occurred,  but  God  would  not  allow  one  of  His  own  servants 
to  prosper  in  such  an  undertaking.  III.  The  lesson  which  the  disaster  teaches. 
Do  not  choose  your  associates  amongst  those  who  do  not  fear  God.  Always 
safest  to  keep  under  Christian  influences.  You  wUl  do  well  even  to  sacrifice  a 
measure  of  financial  interest  and  worldly  prospect  rather  than  be  associated  in 
business  with  a  man  who  is  out  of  aU  sympathy  with  you  in  reUgion.  (J.  Thain 
Davidson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  37.  Because  thou  hast  Joined  thyself  with  Ahazlah,  the  Lord  hath  broken 
thy  works. — Evil  compacts : — Some  partnerships  are  inexplicable.  A  Church 
ofi&cer  who  has  led  the  devotions  of  the  Church  has  been  known  to  enter  into 
partnership  with  a  grovelling  man  who  never  hesitated  to  use  profane  language  in 
the  warehouse;  a  generous  supporter  of  good  institutions  has  associated  with  a 
man  who  would  have  sold  his  own  father  if  he  could  have  made  money  by  the 
transaction.  And  men  have  wondered  who  have  not  known  how  two  could  walk 
together  except  they  were  agreed,  and  who  have  gone  upon  the  principle  that  light 
could  have  no  communion  with  darkness.  The  principle  of  ill-associated  partner- 
ships works  in  two  ways  :  the  professing  Christian  finds  it  convenient  to  be  able  to 
remit  all  questionable  work  to  the  man  who  has  made  away  with  his  conscience  and 
honour,  and  the  said  man  finds  it  very  satisfactory  to  point  to  his  professing 
partner  as  a  proof  and  pledge  that  all  is  straightforward  and  upright.  But  is  this 
as  it  ought  to  be  ?  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  An  immoral  fallacy  : — It  will  be  said  that 
business  is  business,  and  religion  is  religion,  that  there  is  a  distinction  between  the- 
merchant  and  the  man.  Let  us  admit  that  there  remains  this  question  :  When  the 
merchant  is  damned  for  his  wicked  deeds  where  wiU  the  man  go  ?  (Ibid.)  Evil 
associations: — The  principle  of  the  text — I.  Supplies  a  lesson  for  the  young. 
What  you  have  to  settle  first  and  foremost  is,  the  moral  basis  on  which  you  are 
proceeding;  you  must  get  the  full  consent  of  your  judgment  and  heart  and  con- 
science before  you  give  yourself  up  to  any  commercial  course.  II.  Is  expansive 
enough  to  include  the  subject  of  marriage.  We  do  not  hesitate  to  lay  down  the 
broad  principle  that  where  there  is  incongruity  of  religious  conviction  between  mart 
and  woman  happiness  of  the  deepest  and  purest  kind  is  entirely  out  of  the  question. 
TTT,.  Will  peroiit  an  earnest  word  about  eviii  coupanionship  oenebaiiLT.    {Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XXL 


Veb.  20.  And  departed  without  being  desired. — The  undestrabtenet$  of  a  vie'ked 
man^s  life : — ^I.  Such  a  lifb  is  not  desirable  on  its  own  account.  Two  facts  will 
show  this.  1.  His  highest  enjoyments  are  unsatisfactory  and  brief.  It  is  im- 
possible for  us  to  be  satisfied  in  any  condition  where  we  have  not  a  consciousness 
of  right,  a  sense  of  Divine  favour,  a  hope  of  a  bright  future,  and  the  pulsation  of 
holy  loves.  Observe — (1)  How  foolish  to  aim  at  such  a  life  as  this.  (2)  How 
foolish  to  envy  such  a  life  as  this.  2.  That  the  longer  it  continues  the  greater 
becomes  his  responsibility.  11.  Such  a  lifb  is  not  desirable  on  account  of  others. 
1.  It  renders  no  real  good  to  others.  2.  It  produces  incalculable  mischief.  In  the 
spiritual,  as  in  the  material,  like  begets  like.  "  One  sinner  destroyeth  much  good." 
(Homilitt.) 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 


CHAPTER  xxn. 

Vebs.  1-9.  And  the  Inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  made  Ahazlah  his  yonngest  son 
king. — Ahaziah'B  wicked  reign: — I.  Its  beginnino  thbouoh  home  influence. 
Here  all  start  life  in  right  or  wrong  direction.  Home  influence  affects  societies, 
Churches,  and  nations.  II.  Its  continuance  by  evil  counsellors  (ver,  4).  A 
nation  with  evil  legislators  like  a  ship  directed  in  the  midst  of  rocks — in  imminent 
peril.     III.  Its  end  in  judgment  which  it  entailed,     {J.  Wolfendale.) 

Ver.  3.  For  his  mother  was  his  counsellor  to  do  wickedly. — A  mother'i 
influence  : — Every  first  thing  continues  for  ever  with  the  child  ;  the  tirst  colour,  the 
first  music,  the  first  flower  paint  the  foreground  of  life.  Every  new  educator  effects 
less  than  his  predecessor,  until  at  last,  If  we  regard  all  life  as  an  educational 
institute,  a  circumnavigator  of  the  world  is  less  influenced  by  all  the  nations  he 
has  seen  than  by  his  nurse.  (W.  Richter.)  A  mother's  influence: — Mothers,  ye 
are  the  sculptors  of  the  souls  of  the  coming  men ;  queens  of  the  cradle,  humble  or 
high,  ye  are  the  queens  of  the  future.  In  your  hands  lie  the  destinies  of  men. 
I  am  not  speaking  poetry,  but  plain  fact,  which  history  proves.  Nero's  mother  was 
a  murderess ;  Nero  was  a  murderer,  on  a  gigantic  scale.  Byron's  mother  was 
proud,  ill-tempered,  and  violent ;  Byron  was  proud,  ill-tempered,  and  violent. 
"Washington's  mother  was  noble  and  pure;  Washington  was  noble  and  pure. 
Scott's  mother  loved  poetry  and  painting;  you  know  what  Walter  Scott 
was.  Carlyle's  mother  was  stern,  and  full  of  reverence;  Carlyle  very  much 
80.  Wesley's  mother  was  a  God-like  woman;  Wesley  was  a  God-like  man. 
The  prison  chaplain  will  tell  you  that  the  last  thing  forgotten,  in  all  the  reck- 
lessness of  dissolute  profligacy,  is  the  prayer  or  hymn  taught  by  a  mother's  lips,  or 
uttered  at  a  father's  knee.  Yes,  when  all  other  roads  are  closed,  there  is  one  road 
open  to  the  heart  of  the  desperate  man — the  memory  of  his  mother.  {Great 
Thoughts.)  An  unnatural  mother : — "  For  his  mother  was  his  counsellor  to  do 
wickedly."  There  must  be  a  mistranslation!  All  nature  is  offended  by  this 
tremendous  affront.  Can  we  not  find  some  other  word  for  "  mother  "  ?  Any  other 
word  will  do  better,  even  "father"  would  not  be  so  objectionable.  The  one  word 
that  cannot  be  tolerated  here  is  the  word  that  is  found,  namely,  "  mother  "  !  We 
might  close  the  Bible  here,  and  say  the  book  that  contains  this  statement  was  never 
inspired.  But  we  cannot  do  so.  Then  the  word  "  counsellor  "  is  so  full  of  plan, 
premeditation,  arrangement ;  the  mother  was  a  schoolmistress,  with  one  pupil,  and 
she  suggested,  invented,  culminated  ends,  whispered,  threw  out  hints,  advised  bad 
policies  ;  told  him  when  he  was  halting  because  the  course  was  evil  to  "  go  on  1  " 
Napoleon  said,  "They  that  rock  the  cradle  rule  the  world."  To  have  a  cradle 
rocked  by  such  a  mother  as  Athaliah  surely  were  enough  to  be  foredoomed  to  end- 
less misery  !  How  sweetly  the  text  would  have  read  had  it  proceeded  on  the  lines 
of  nature! — for  his  mother  was  his  counsellor  to  do  bravely.  Surely  the  word 
"wickedly  "  is  a  misprint,  traceable  to  some  careless  copyist ! — his  mother  was  hia 
counsellor  to  do  wisely,  patiently,  hopefully, — these  would  have  been  womanly 
words,  words  most  motherly,  the  very  words  with  which  we  build  home  and  Church 
and  heaven.  But  the  word  is  "wickedly,"  and  we  must  regard  it  in  its  literal  sig- 
nificance. What  are  mothers  doing  now?  They  could  be  God's  foremost  ministers. 
No  man  can  pray  like  a  woman ;  no  man  has  the  art  of  eloquence  as  a  woman  has 
it;  no  one  can  come  into  life  so  silently,  quietly,  blessingly  as  woman,  mother, 
sister.  If  women  would  preach  surely  the  world  would  listen.  They  ought  to 
preach  ;  they  know  the  secret  of  love,  they  have  the  answer  to  the  Cross,  they  can 
solve  in  some  degree  the  enigma  of  sacrifice.  This  is  the  very  reason  of  the  horrible- 
ness  of  the  text.  If  woman  had  been  otherwise,  then  the  word  "  wickedly  "  would 
not  have  read  with  such  a  sense  of  irony  and  moral  collision  as  it  does  in  this 
instance.  It  is  because  woman  can  be  so  heavenly  that  she  can  be  so  low,  and 
wicked,  and  bad  ;  it  is  because  she  can  be  so  like  a  saviour  that  she  can  be  such  an 
engine  and  agent  of  ruin.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  And  Athaliah  reigned  over  the  land.— r^e  evil  effect*  of  royal 
marriages : — A  distinguished  authority  on  European  history  is  fond  of  pointing  to 
the  evil  effects  of  royal  marriages  as  one  of  the  chief  drawbacks  to  the  monarchical 
system  of  government.  A  crown  may  at  any  time  devolve  upon  a  woman,  and  by 
her  marriage  with  a  powerful  reigning  prince  her  country  may  virtually  be  subjected 


«HAPS.  xxm.,  rriT.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  103 

to  a  foreign  yoke.  If  it  happens  that  the  new  sovereign  professes  a  different  religion 
from  that  of  his  wife's  subjects,  the  evils  arising  from  the  marriage  are  seriously 
aggravated.  Some  such  fate  befell  the  Netherlands  as  the  result  of  the  marriage  of 
Mary  of  Burgundy  with  the  Emperor  Maximilian,  and  England  was  only  saved  from 
the  danger  of  transference  to  Catholic  dominion  by  the  caution  and  patriotism  of 
Queen  Elizabeth.  Athaliah's  usurpation  was  a  bold  attempt  to  reverse  the  usual 
process  and  transfer  the  husband's  dominions  to  the  authority  of  faith  of  the  wife's 
family.  It  is  probable  that  Athaliah's  permanent  success  would  have  led  to  the 
absorption  of  Judah  in  the  northern  kingdom.  Our  own  history  furnishes 
numerous  illustrations  of  the  evil  influences  that  come  in  the  train  of  foreign 
queens.  Edward  II.  suffered  grievously  at  the  hands  of  his  French  queen; 
Henry  VI.'s  wife,  Margaret  of  Anjou,  contributed  considerably  to  the  prolonged 
bitterness  of  the  struggle  between  York  and  Lancaster;  and  to  Henry  VHI.'s 
marriage  with  Catherine  of  Aragon  the  country  owed  the  miseries  and  persecutions 
inflicted  by  Mary  Tudor.  But  no  foreign  queen  of  England  has  had  the  oppor- 
tunities for  mischief  that  were  enjoyed  and  fully  utilised  by  Athaliah.  The  peace 
and  honour  and  prosperity  of  godly  families  in  all  ranks  of  life  have  been  disturbed, 
and  often  destroyed,  by  the  marriage  of  one  of  their  members  with  a  woman  of  alien 
spirit  and  temperament.    {W.  H.  Bennett,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  XXm. 


Veh.  21.  And  tlie  city  was  quiet,  after  that  they  had  slain  Athaliah  with  the 
sword. — A  wicked  woman  : — Is  it  possible  that  a  time  may  come  when  people  will 
rejoice  that  we  are  dead  ?  Will  some  pulpits  be  more  honoured  by  emptiness  than 
by  occupancy?  Will  some  businesses  have  a  chance  to  recover  their  character 
when  the  principals  are  dead,  but  not  so  long  as  those  principals  initiate  and 
conduct  the  policy  of  the  house  ?  Is  it  possible  that  a  throne  may  be  a  fountain  of 
mischief  ?  Questions  such  as  these,  penetrating,  unsparing,  we  should  thrust  into 
ourselves,  that  they  may  work  first  painfully  and  then  curatively.  Is  there  no 
explanation  given  of  all  this  rejoicing  over  the  death  of  Athaliah  ?  The  explanation 
is  given  in  chap.  xxiv.  7 — "  that  wicked  woman."  This  is  an  alliteration  which  the 
grammarian  might  detest,  the  rhetorician  avoid  as  a  vice  in  eloquence,  but  which 
the  moralist  must  look  at  with  a  sense  of  ineffable  shame.  "  Wicked  woman  " — it 
'  is  impossible  1  It  ought  to  be  an  affront  to  the  very  genius  of  creation ;  say  dark 
sun,  say  waterless  sea,  say  flowerless  summer,  and  the  irony  might  be  tolerated,  for 
it  might  be  only  a  discord  in  words  ;  but  "  wicked  woman  "  indicates  a  possibility 
that  makes  all  hell  easy  of  belief.  This  is  the  moral  explanation  of  the  physical 
disaster.  Athaliah  was  slain  with  the  sword — cry.  Murder  then!  Arrest  the 
homicide,  the  regicide  1  But  wait ;  you  know  not  all ;  the  explanatory  word  is 
found  in  the  context — "  that  wicked  woman."    (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


Veb.  2.  And  Joasb  did  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  all  the  days 
of  Jehoiada  the  priest. — Goodness  as  a  morning  cloud  : — There  are  certain  characters 
that  are  great  curiosities.  There  are  also  other  characters  that  are  great  mon- 
strosities. The  case  of  Joash  is  a  very  extraordinary  one.  From  his  history  learn — 
I.  That  it  is  a  obeat  blessing  when  touno  people  yield  to  oodlt  influences. 
1.  The  first  six  years  of  Joash's  life  were  spent  in  the  temple.  2.  He  was  started 
In  life's  business  in  a  very  admirable  way.  3.  He  was  outwardly  obedient  to  the 
law  of  the  Lord  all  the  days  of  Jehoiada.  4.  He  was  zealous  for  the  externals  of 
religion.  5.  He  influenced  others  for  good.  II.  Good  as  all  this  is,  it  is  not  all 
THAT  13  insEDED.  1.  Thisis  Hot  yielding  the  heart  to  God.  2.  All  this  yielding  to 
godly  influences  may  exist  without  any  personal,  vital  godliness  whatever.  3.  An 
externally  pious  character  may  even  prevent  men  from  being  saved  at  all.     It  may 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxir. 

lead  a  man  to  take  for  granted  that  he  is  saved.  4.  To  be  under  godly  influence* 
year  after  year,  without  any  great  trial  or  temptation,  may  leave  the  personal 
character  altogether  undeveloped.  We  must  have  some  kind  of  test,  or  else  we 
cannot  be  sure  of  the  character.  You  cannot  be  sure  about  principle  being  in  any 
young  man  if  he  has  been  kept  under  a  glass  case,  and  if  his  principles  have  never 
been  tried.  The  real  character  of  Joash  had  never  come  out  at  all,  because  Jehoiada, 
as  it  were,  covered  him.  His  own  disposition  was  only  waiting  the  opportunity  of 
developing  itself.  I  have  heard  of  an  officer  in  India  who  had  brought  up  a  young 
leopard.  It  was  apparently  as  tame  as  a  cat.  One  afternoon,  while  asleep  in  his 
chair,  the  leopard  licked  his  hand  in  all  tenderness  as  a  cat  might  have  done ;  but 
after  licking  awhile  it  licked  too  hard  and  a  little  blood  began  to  flow.  It  no  sooner 
tasted  blood  than  the  old  leopard  spirit  was  up,  and  his  master  was  his  master  no 
more.  So  does  it  happen  to  many  that  being  shut  in,  and  tamed,  as  it  were,  but 
not  changed,  subdued  but  not  renewed,  kept  in  check  but  not  converted,  there  has 
come  a  time  afterwards  when  the  taste  of  blood  has  called  out  the  old  nature,  and 
away  the  man  has  gone.  III.  This  yielding  ch.uiacter  may  even  prove  a  source 
OF  mischief.  The  princes  of  Judah  came  and  "  made  obeisance  to  the  king." 
What  followed  ?  1.  Joash  went  off  to  sin.  2.  He  refused  reproof .  3.  He  slew  his 
friend's  son.  4.  Having  no  faith  in  God,  he  robbed  the  temple,  and  gave  all  the 
gold  and  treasures  unto  Hazael  the  Syrian.  (C.  E.  Spurgeon.)  The  goodness  of 
King  Joash : — 1.  The  history  of  Joash  enforces  the  duty  of  training  ourselves,  and 
those  who  are  under  our  guidance,  to  stand  alone,  and  not  to  rest  upon  the  support 
of  others.  2.  Not  that  we  should  make  small  account  of  the  counsel  of  wise  and 
religious  friends.  The  perfect  use  of  a  wise  adviser  is  not  to  determine  for  us  what 
we  shall  do  in  every  particular  case  that  day  by  day  arises  ;  but  to  help  us  to  store 
our  minds  with  sound  principles,  such  as  we  may  call  up  for  our  own  direction 
when  any  emergency  requires  them.  3.  There  is  a  great  difference  in  the  natural 
constitution  of  men's  minds.  Some  are  like  the  creeping  plant  that  grows  up 
rapidly,  but  must  always  hang  for  support  upon  some  external  prop.  Others  are 
like  the  oak,  slowly  developing  itself  from  among  the  meaner  underwood,  until  it 
rears  its  head  alone  above  the  trees  of  the  forest.  When  the  trellis  or  pole  decays, 
the  creeper  must  fall  to  the  ground ;  the  oak  abides  seemingly  unmovable  in  its  own 
strength.  All  the  culture  that  man  could  bestow  would  never  give  to  the  creeper 
the  sturdiness  of  the  oak.  4.  But  though  man  cannot  change  nature  God  can.  He 
can  impart  strength  to  the  weakest  character.  Therefore  the  way  to  be  firm  in  what 
is  good,  is  to  take  God  for  your  guide  and  support,  and  not  man  (Gal.  vi.  4,  5 ; 
Phil.  ii.  12,  13).  5.  There  is  no  contradiction  between  the  duty  of  seeking  and  in 
due  measure  following  the  counsel  of  our  good  instructors  and  the  duty  of  standing 
fast  for  ourselves  in  the  counsel  of  God.  Just  as  the  office  of  the  moon  is  to 
transmit  the  reflected  light  of  the  sun  to  the  dark  side  of  the  earth ;  but  if  the  moon 
comes  between  the  earth  and  the  sun,  it  does  but  darken  the  earth,  by  Intercepting 
from  it  the  rays  that  beam  from  that  great  light  which  is  the  source  of  light  and 
heat  to  both ;  so  the  parent,  the  teacher,  or  the  priest,  is  to  stand  for  God  towards 
the  child,  the  pupil,  or  the  private  Christian,  so  far  as  their  imperfect  knowledge  or 
their  spiritual  needs  require  ;  but  not  so  as  to  eclipse  God,  or  to  make  them  forget  that 
to  God  and  not  to  man  they  are  answerable  in  the  last  resort  for  their  deeds.  {Jamet 
Randall,  M.A.)  Joash  : — Men  may  constrain  us  to  a  temporary  amendment,  but 
God  alone  can  control  us  to  a  lasting  change  of  character  and  heart.  Circumstances 
can  make  any  one  of  you  religious  for  a  time,  and  give  you  feelings  and  habits 
which  will  make  you  appear  religious  to  others,  and  what  is  worse  still,  lead  you  to 
suppose  that  the  outward  appearance  is  the  effect  of  inward  principle.  But  nothing 
but  the  grace  of  God,  and  the  love  of  His  name  and  His  truth,  can  produce  that 
piety  of  heart  which  withstands  temptation,  and  lives  when  all  earthly  agencies  are 
gone  which  nursed  it,  because  it  lives  in  Him  who  was  pleased  to  make  those  earthly 
agencies  the  means  of  grace  to  the  soul.  We  have  in  this  verse  two  characters  for 
contemplation.  I.  Jehoiada,  as  an  example  of  infltjencb  exerted  for  good. 
1.  He  had  three  elements  of  success  with  which  to  work.  (1)  Power,  arising  from 
his  priestly  office  and  his  marriage  relationship.  (2)  Piety,  which  gave  him  the 
principles  on  which  to  discharge  his  mission.  (3)  Courage,  arising  from  his  faith 
in  God.  2.  Note  here  the  relative  influence  of  personal  piety.  "  Joash  did  that 
which  is  right."  The  nation  prospered  in  every  sense  through  the  faithfulness  of 
one  man.  Clear  and  consistent  personal  piety  is  always  a  persuasive  thing.  No 
treatises  upon  religion  can  rival  for  persuasive  power  the  "  living  epistles  known 
and  read  of  all  men."    Our  calling  as  Christians  is  to  win  others,  as  Jehoiada  did, 


CHAP.  xxiT.]  11.  CHRONICLES.  105 

to  do  that  which  is  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  We  have  received  light  that  our 
faces  may  shine  before  men.  The  design  of  God  in  our  salvation  is  not  only  our 
happiness  but  our  usefulness.  II.  Joash  as  an  example  for  our  warning.  The 
religion  which  had  its  life  and  influence  only  from  a  man  was  soon  forgotten  when 
the  source  of  that  influence  had  passed  away.  There  is  a  vital  difference  between 
the  godliness  which  is  the  result  of  external  circumstances  and  that  which  is  the 
product  of  internal  principle.  It  is  the  difference  between  the  galvanised  corpse 
and  the  living  man  ;  the  star  and  the  meteor  ;  the  flash  of  the  lightning  and  the 
action  of  the  sunbeam.  There  is  a  false  godliness  current  among  men.  1.  With 
some  piety  is  dependent  upon  policy.  2.  With  others  it  is  a  matter  of  periods. 
3.  With  others  it  is  a  religion  of  place.  4.  With  others  it  is  dependent  upon  the 
personal  influence  of  some  minister,  or  upon  the  advice  and  counsel  of  a  friend. 
{C.  J.  Phipps  Eyre,  M.A.)  Life  and  character  of  Joash  : — I.  The  instability  of 
HIS  RELIGION.  1.  He  was  zealous  for  God  Under  restraint.  2.  He  degenerated  when 
that  restraint  was  taken  away.  II.  The  honour  and  the  disgrace  of  his  reign. 
1.  Honourable  reforms.  2.  Disgraceful  crimes.  Like  Nero  after  the  death  of  his 
teacher  Seneca,  the  philosopher,  he  was  stained  with  crimes.  III.  The  disastrous 
end  of  his  life.  Conclusion  :  Learn — 1.  The  responsibility  of  those  to  whom  the 
care  of  young  persons  is  entrusted.  2.  Caution  those  yet  under  guardianship  and 
tutors  and  friends.  3.  The  awful  end  of  those  who  turn  aside  from  hopeful 
beginnings.  (<7.  Wolfendale.)  The  Jehoiadas  of  society  : — It  would  seem  to  be 
about  the  last  thing  men  do,  to  estimate  properly  the  value  of  subtle  and  silent 
influences,  the  magic  and  wisardry  of  noble  character.  We  may  even  be  ashamed 
to  do  certain  things  in  the  presence  of  the  Jehoiadas  of  society.  We  are  not 
ashamed  of  the  things  themselves,  nor  are  we  unprepared  to  make  experiments  in 
regard  to  them ;  but  whenever  we  would  put  forth  our  hand  to  begin  the  experi- 
ments we  see  the  observing  Jehoiada,  and  withdraw  from  the  pernicious  attempt. 
So  it  is  that  there  are  trustees  of  commercial  and  social  honour,  men  who  would 
never  do  the  dishonourable  deed,  speak  the  calumnious  word,  or  mislead  the  senti- 
ment of  the  market-place  in  times  of  strong  temptation  and  peril.  We  rely  upon 
them  as  disinfectants,  keeping  the  commercial  atmosphere  pure,  and  discouraging 
in  the  most  positive  and  decisive  manner  the  spirit  and  action  of  men  who  are  low- 
minded  and  selfish.  These  Jehoiadas  deliver  no  lectures  upon  commercial  morality, 
nor  do  they  in  any  manner  that  can  be  charged  with  conceit  display  their  own 
virtues ;  they  simply  go  on  their  straightforward  course,  doing  justice,  loving  mercy, 
and  walking  humbly  with  God,  and  the  result  of  their  presence  and  character  is 
that  even  the  worst  men  are  restrained,  weak  men  are  confirmed  in  good  reso- 
lutions, and  men  whose  character  needs  inspiration  receive  it  from  their  example. 
{J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.   4-14.   That  Joash  was  minded  to  repair   the  house  of  the  Lord. — 

The  temple  repaired: — It  is  worthy  of  note  that  in  the  mere  outline  of  a  reign 
extending  over  twenty  years,  in  very  exciting  times,  space  should  have  been 
taken  to  record  so  minutely  the  repairing  of  the  temple.  No  less  remarkable  is  it 
that  the  initiative  in  this  great  work  was  due  to  Joash  and  not  to  Jehoiada — the 
king,  not  the  priest.  There  was  need  for  some  one  to  lift  the  standard  for  Jehovah 
and  His  worship.  For  since  the  accession  of  Jehoram,  the  wicked  son  of  the  good 
Jehoshaphat,  there  had  been  a  steady  decline  toward  idolatry.  Spurred  on  by  his 
wife,  Athaliah,  the  worthy  daughter  of  the  monster  Jezebel,  Jehoram  allowed  "high 
places  "  to  be  built  to  the  heathen  deities.  Dying  after  less  than  ten  years  of  rule, 
of  an  agonising  internal  disease,  the  crown  descended  to  his  one  surviving  son, 
Ahaziah.  After  a  reign  of  little  more  than  a  year,  during  which  he  was  wholly 
under  the  power  of  his  mother,  Ahaziah  was  slain  by  Jehu  while  on  a  visit  to 
Israel.  Athaliah  seized  the  throne  and  ruled  for  six  years,  fostering  and  encouraging 
heathenism  to  the  utmost.  To  make  her  usurpation  more  secure,  she  had,  at 
the  beginning  of  her  reign,  as  she  supposed,  compassed  the  death  of  all  aspirants  to 
the  crown.  But,  through  the  cunning  and  daring  of  Jehoiada  and  his  wife,  one 
boy,  Joash,  a  son  of  Ahaziah,  was  preserved.  When  the  time  was  ripe  the  priest 
led  a  revolt  against  the  queen,  putting  the  young  Joash,  only  eight  years  of  age, 
upon  the  throne,  and  causing  the  death  of  Athaliah.  A  great  opportunity  opened 
up  for  the  young  prince.  Jehoiada  carefully  instructed  him  during  his  childhood 
in  the  religion  of  Jehovah,  that,  when  he  came  to  the  years  of  responsible  reign,  he 
might  zealously  foster  the  old  faith.  But,  unfortunately,  Joash  was  not  strong 
enough  for  the  task.    As  long  as  he  was  under  the  toition  of  Jehoiada  he  did  fairly 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxit. 

•well,  though  idolatry  was  suffered  to  extend  itself ;  but  after  the  death  of  the  old 
priest  the  pressure  from  heathenism  was  too  great  for  his  weak  nature  to  resist,  and 
Joash  followed  the  path  of  his  immediate  predecessors.     True,  the  third  verse  of 
our  lesson  may  not  indicate  anything  more  than  a  resemblance  to  heathen  customs, 
inasmuch  as  they  may  have  worshipped  Jehovah  in  the  "  high  places  " ;  still,  having 
adopted  that  mode  of  heathen  worship,  it  became  easier  to  introduce  others,  and 
thus  the  way  was  opened  for  that  awful  apostasy  from  God  when  incense  was 
burned  to  strange  gods  "  in  every  single  city  of  Judah."   Nevertheless,  Joash  should 
have  full  credit  for  the  one  luminous  work  of  his  whole  reign — the  repair  of  the 
temple.     We  shall  find  his  plans  of  gathering  and  expending  the  money  worthy  of 
our  careful  study.     I.  The  plans  of  collection.     1.  The  first  one,  undoubtedly 
the  king's,  shows  him  in  a  favourable  light.    He  assumes  no  priestly  prerogative  or 
authority.     He  simply  enjoins  the  priests  to  do  their  legitimate  work — "  go  out  into 
the  cities  of  Judah  and  gather  of  all  Israel  money  to  repair  the  house  of  the  Lord." 
The  parallel  account  in  2  Kings  xii.  4,  gives  the  details  of  the  plan.    Three  methods 
of  collecting  the  money  are  there  described.    First,  "  The  money  of  every  one  that 
passeth  the  account."    Bahr  considers  these  words  an  incorrect  translation  of  the 
original,  preferring  "money  which  passes  over" — that  is,  current  money.    If  he  is 
right,  then  no  separate  method  is  indicated.    But  the  weight  of  authority  is  in  favour 
of  the  old  translation,  and,  following  this,  the  half-shekel  which  was  paid  for  every 
one  that  was  numbered,  from  twenty  years  old  and  upward  (Exod.  xxx.  13,  seq.), 
seems  to  be  meant.     Second,  "  The  money  that  every  man  is  set  at  " — that  is,  the 
amount  prescribed  by  the  priests  for  those  who  made  a  "  singular  vow  "  according 
to  the  law  in  Lev.  xxvii.  1-8.     The  third  was  the  free-will  offering,  and  probably 
more  dependence  was  placed  on  this  than  upon  either  or  both  of  the  other  methods. 
Taken  all  in  all,  this  plan  was  compulsive  and  judicious,  and  deserved  to  succeed. 
But  it  failed,  and  why  ?    There  appears  to  have  been  a  combination  of  reasons. 
The  words,  "  Howbeit  the  Levites  hastened  it  not,"  furnish  a  hint  that  the  appointed 
collectors,  on  whom  the  success  of  the  plan  largely  depended,  did  not  enter  heartily 
into  its  prosecution.     They  were  expected  not  only  to  take  what  the  people  brought 
in  voluntarily,  but  actively  to  solicit  **  every  man  of  his  acquaintance  "  (parallel 
account  in  2  Kings  xii.  6).     Whether  they  did  not  relish  moving,  at  the  orders  of 
the  king,  or  were  too  lazy  to  "go  out  into  the  cities  of  Judah,"  we  can  only  conjec- 
ture.   We  only  know  they  did  not  hasten.     No  doubt,  too,  there  was  much  inertia 
•on  the  part  of  the  people  themselves.     The  general  indifference  to  the  old  system  o£ 
-worship  and  the  inevitable  corruption  which  followed  dabbling  with  heathen  prac- 
tices both  contributed  to  a  lethargy  which  could  only  be  broken  up  by  some  extra- 
ordinary method.    But   the  great  reason  lies   deeper,  much  deepar.     Soften  the 
account  as  we  will,  there  was  wide-spread  dissatisfaction  with  the  course  pursued  by 
the  priests.     Whether  they  had  good  grounds  for  suspicion  or  not,  the   people 
believed  the  collectors  had  misappropriated  the  funds.    And  it  is  hard  to  clear  them 
of  this  charge.     Doubtless  some  money  came  in  from  loyal  souls  who  longed  to  see 
God's  temple  shining  with  the  olden  glory.    Indeed,  we  know  that  some  did,  because 
when  the  king  called  on  the  priests  for  a  report  he  ordered  them  to  "  take  no  more 
money."     Some,  then,  had  been  gathered.     But  what  became  of  it  ?     The  priests 
never  made  any  return  thereof.     True,  it  condones  the  fault  somewhat  to  plead  that 
the  regular  sacerdotal  revenue  had  largely  fallen  off  during  the  prevalence  of 
idolatry,  and  that  the  priests  found  themselves  hard  pushed  for  funds  for  their 
subsistence  and  the  temple-worship,  and  thus  were  forced  to  use  what  came  into 
their  hands  for  immediate  needs.    But  to  divert  money  given  for  a  specific  purpose 
to  other  channels,  however  proper,  is  practical  embezzlement.    And  it  is  easy  to  see 
how  this  course  would  breed  dissatisfaction  and  revolt  among  the  people.     Their 
joyful  acceptance  of  the  second  plan,  and  the  hearty  liberality  exhibited,  show 
conclusively  that  we  have  not  argued  unjustly.    And  the  taking  of  the  whole  matter 
out  of  the  hands  of  the  priests  by  the  king  confirms  our  position.    It  would  appear 
that  Joash  gave  ample  time  for  the  successful  working  of  this  first  plan.     Not  until 
the  twenty-third  year  of  his  reign  did  he  call  the  priests  to  account.    This  does  not 
mean,  of  course,  that  the  collectors  had  been  at  work  twenty-three  years,  for  we  are 
not  told  in  what  year  they  received  their  commission.     It  certainly  could  not  have 
been  in  the  first  years  of  Joash's  reign,  because  he  began  to  rule  at  the  age  of  eight. 
2.  But  having  abandoned  the  first  plan,  the  king  quickly  unfolded  his  second  one. 
This  was  as  simple  as  it  was  effective.    A  box  or  chest,  securely  locked,  with  a  hole 
cut  in  the  lid  to  admit  pieces  of  money,  was  first  prepared.     It  was  placed  at  the 
entrance-gate  to  the  priest's  court  on  the  right.    Eoyal  proclamation  was  then  made 


CHAP.  xxiv.J  II.  CHRONICLES.  107 


of  the  new  plan  throughout  the  land,  and  the  people  exhorted  to  bring  in  their 
contributions  in  accordance  with  the  law  found  in  Exod.  xxx.  12-16,  and  see  their 
money  deposited  in  the  chest.     The  part  of  the  priests  was  the  mere  perfunctory 
duty  of  receiving  the  money  and  putting  it  into  the  receptacle  in  the  presence  of  the 
donors.     And  now  money  fairly  flowed  in.     Nor  was  it  given  grudgingly.     "  All  the 
princes  and  all  the  people  rejoiced."    When  the  chest  was  full  the  priest  sent  his 
scribe  and  the  king  his  secretary,  and  the  two  emptied  it,  weighed  the  money,  bound 
it  up  in  bags  (2  Kings  v,  23),  and  carried  it  back  to  its  place.     The  process  was 
repeated  until  an  abundance  was  gathered  for  the  purpose.     The  plan  was  a  great 
success.    And  why  ?    Doubtless  the  novelty  of  the  plan  accounts  partly  for  it.    The 
curiosity  to  look  upon  the  first  money-chest  of  this  description  would  bring  in  many 
contributions  that  otherwise  would  not  have  been  given.     But,  chiefly,  every  person 
saw  his  gift  deposited  in  the  receptacle  which  was  inaccessible  to  any  but  the 
regularly  appointed  officers,  and  thus  he  could  be  reasonably  sure  that  his  money 
would  be  laid  out  for  the  purpose  he  intended.     Herein  lies  the  chief  cause  of  the 
plan's  success — every  piece  of  money  was  strictly  accounted  for,  and  there  was  no 
possible  chance  for  a  misuse  of  the  funds.   II,  The  expenditure  was  as  notewortht 
AS  THE  GATHERiNQ.     The  Same  clear-headed,  far-seeing  intelligence  was  behind  it. 
Putting  the  two  accounts  together,  it  is  plain  that  overseers  were  appointed  who  had 
general  charge  of  the  repairs.     The  words,  "  such  as  did  the  work  of  the  service  of 
the  house  of  the  Lord,"  in  the  twelfth  verse,  indicate  that  the  overseers  wereLevites. 
They  had  authority  to  employ  artisans  of  different  kinds — masons  and  carpenters 
and  workers  in  brass  and  iron — and  also  to  purchase  the  needed  materials.     Into 
their  hands  went  the  immense  sums  which  had  been  collected,  and  to  them  the 
workmen  looked  for  their  wages.     And  what  seems  strange — almost  incompre- 
hensible— in  view  of  the  careful  scrutiny  exercised  over  the  collections,  their  over- 
seers were  not  required  to  give  account  of  their  stewardship  (2  Kings  xii.  15).    That 
they  were  honest  and  "  dealt  faithfully"  is  apparent  from  the  fact  that,  after  finishing 
their  task  and  paying  all  the  bills,  they  brought  back  a  remainder  to  the  king  and 
Jehoiada.     With  this  unexpended  balance  they  were  enabled  to  furnish  the  temple 
anew  with  the  vessels  necessary  for  the  ritual  service  (1  Kings  vii.  49, 50).     The  old 
ones  had  been  devoted  to  Baalim  (ver.  7).     An  apparent  discrepancy  exists  at  thi» 
point  between  our  account  and  that  in  2  Kings  xii,  13,  where  the  writer  declares 
that  vessels  were  not  made  of  the  "  money  that  was  brought  into  the  house  of  the 
Lord."    Eawlinson  seems  to  explain  the  matter  satisfactorily  by  showing  that  "  all 
that  the  writer  of  Kings  desires  to  impress  on  his  readers  is,  that  the  repairs  were 
not  delayed  by  any  deductions  from  the  money  that  flowed  in  through  the  chest  on 
account  of  vessels  or  ornaments  of  the  house.     What  became  of  the  surplus  in  the 
chest  after  the  last  repairs  were  completed  he  does  not  care  to  tell  us.     But  it  is 
exactly  this,  the  application  of  which  is  mentioned  by  the  writer  of  Chronicles." 
We  may  venture  to  add  our  opinion  that  the  writer  of  Kings,  in  enumerating  the 
special  points  of  the  overseers'  responsibility,  mentions,  casually,  that  they  were 
not  responsible  for  the  furnishing  of  the  temple  with   the  appropriate  vessels. 
Their  special  business  was  to  look  after  the  repairs.     So,  after  many  years  of 
dilapidation,  the  people  saw  their  glorious  sanctuary  shine  in  all  its  former  glory. 
The  smoke  of   sacrifice  again  rose  heavenward,  calling  the  backsliding  children 
of  Israel  to  the  faith  of  their  fathers.     III.  Pbacticai.  words.     1.  One  of  the 
great  problems  which  ever  confront  the  Church  is  the  financial  one.     Doors 
open  on  every  hand,  and  consecrated  workers  wait  to  go  through  them,  but  the 
treasuries  are  empty.     Settle  this  matter  of  finance,  and  the  spiritual  interests  will 
progress  correspondingly.     2.  The  contribution  box  is  not  a  "  Vandal  in  the  house 
of  God."    It  is  the  legitimate  successor  of  Jehoiada's  chest,  and  its  regular  use 
should  be  considered  a  part  of  worship.     3.  The  people  who  give  the  money  have  a 
right  to  know  where  it  goes.    And  if  it  be  diverted  from  its  proper  use,  those  who 
administer  should  not  complain  if  there  follow  a  falling  off  in  contributions.     Men 
will  have  honest  dealing  in  Church  finances.     {H.  H.  French)  The  temple 

repaired  : — The  work  of  Joash  was  to  repair  the  temple  and  restore  the  sacrificial 
worship.  The  bright  side  of  Joash's  rule  divides  itself  into  the  man  and  his 
mission — his  motive  and  his  method.    I,  Joash  had  to  conquer,  SPiRiTUAiiLT,  his 

OWN   HEABT  AS    WELL   AS   THE   HEART   OF   HIS    PEOPLE,        To    knOW    Joash    yOU    mUSt 

understand — 1.  His  lineage.  Heredity  did  little  for,  but  much  against,  the  forma- 
tion in  him  of  a  pare  character.  Athaliah  and  Jezebel  were  his  grandmother  and 
great-grandmother.  2.  His  environment.  This  was  Jehoiada.  (1)  He  was  a 
father  to  Joash.    (2)  He  was  the  impersonation  of  piety.     (3)  His  patriotism  so 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rm. 

blended  with  his  piety  that  though  separable  in  thought,  they  were  scarcely  distin- 
guishable in  action.  (4)  Jehoiada's  philanthropy  is  seen  in  his  self-restraint  in  the 
hour  of  triumph.  Only  two  perished — Athaliah  the  usurper  and  the  idolatrous 
priest.  U.  The  mission  of  Joash  was  to  effect  among  his  people  a  genuine 
BEFORMATioN.  The  reconstruction  of  the  temple  he  viewed  as  the  road  to  religious 
revival  and  reformation.  Destruction  and  reconstruction  are  alternating  or 
synchronous  processes  ever  manifesting  themselves  in  the  efforts  of  God's  people. 
Joash  is  the  resultant  and  embodiment  of  both  these  forces.  Destruction  is  easy, 
and  to  wicked  men  only  too  natural  (ver.  7).  Construction,  and  still  more  recon- 
struction, is  as  difficult  as  destruction  is  easy.  III.  Joash  was  unselfish  in 
HIS  MOTIVE.  1.  The  times  called  loudly  for  reform.  2.  Joash  aimed  at  a  revival 
of  religion.  (1)  Kevivals  take  their  rise  in  the  individual  heart.  (2)  Eevivals  of 
religion,  if  genuine,  are  contagious.  (3)  Eevivals  naturally  induce  co-operation. 
IV.  The  method  of  Joash  for  increasing  men's  interest  in  religion  was  the 
BESTORATioN  OF  THE  Lord's  HOUSE.  A  dilapidated  temple  of  God  is  painfully 
significant.  The  great  collection  under  Joash  for  the  temple  is  a  model  for  Chris- 
tian beneficence.  Dimly  shadowed  in  the  people's  offering  under  Joash,  but 
distinctly  taught  in  the  letters  of  Paul,  are  eight  rules  of  Christian  giving.  We 
should  give — 1.  By  principle  and  habit.  2.  In  the  spirit  of  stewardship.  3.  Accord- 
ing to  ability.  4.  Willingly  and  cheerfully,  5.  Secretly  as  a  general  thing, 
as  unto  the  Lord,  and  not  unto  men.  6.  As  an  act  of  worship.  7.  In  faith, 
venturing  on  God,  as  did  the  widow  with  her  two  mites.  8,  Intelligently,  as  to  the 
object.  Application:  Mankind  is  "the  house  of  the  Lord"  in  ruins.  We  are 
nnder  solemn  obligation  to  reconstruct  this  broken  and  shattered  temple.  {W. 
Landrum,    D.D.)  Joash    repairing    the   temple : — I.   That   the   providences 

OF  God  CONNECTED  with  the  house  op  the  Lord  call  fob  grateful  remem- 
brance. II.  The  moral  value  op  the  house  of  God  to  the  community  and  the 
country  in  which  it  stands  demands  honoured  recognition.  III.  The  SPIRITUAIi 
VALUE  of  sacred  PLACES  SHOULD  BE  FITLY  ACKNOWLEDGED.  I  lately  heard  an 
eminent  business  man  say,  "  Forty-six  years  ago  yesterday  noon  the  Holy  Spirit 
came  into  my  soul.  Yesterday  I  walked  to  the  place  and  adored  the  ground  where 
He  blessed  me,  and  remembered  that  for  forty-six  years  He  had  talked  with  me 
and  kept  me."    IV.  The  house  of    God  can  be   properly  cared   for   only  by 

BEGULAB,    SYSTEMATIC   EFFORT.       V.    GoD   HAS,    TO    A    GREAT    DEGREE,    INTRUSTED    THE 

BEAUTiFYiNo  OP  His  HOUSE  TO  THE  YOUNG.  (Monday  Club  Sermons.)  Repairing 
the  temple : — 1.  To  each  one  among  us  there  is  a  temple  which  should  be  far 
holier  in  his  eyes  than  was  even  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  in  the  eyes  of  the  children 
of  Israel.  2,  This  holiest  of  temples,  a  man's  own  self,  is  exposed  to  injury  and 
decay.  3.  As  year  passes  after  year,  let  us  be  reminded  to  repair  each  one  of 
us  to  that  house  of  God  which  is  built  within  him,  and  which  has  been  dedicated 
to  the  worship  of  God  by  the  Holy  Spirit  which  dwells  in  it.  4.  In  repairing  the 
spiritual  temple,  one  of  our  main  purposes  should  be  to  ascertain  what  in  it  needs 
to  be  stripped  away  and  what  demands  preservation.  5.  The  things  to  be  discarded 
are — (1)  Old  enmities  ;  how  they  interfere  with  the  pure  worship  and  mar  the  quiet 
beauty  of  the  house  1  (2)  Old  weaknesses  and  vanities.  (3)  Old  habits  of  self- 
indulgence  and  self-degradation.  (4)  Old  sins,  presumptuous  sins,  secret  sins. 
6.  The  things  which  must  be  retained  are — (1)  Old  friendships.  (2)  Old  habits  of 
order  and  punctualness,  of  truth,  of  kindness  and  prayer.  3.  Old  virtues.  [F.  W. 
P.  Greenwood,  D.D.)  Howbeit  the  Levites  hastened  not. — Indifference  rehuhed: 
— There  is  a  distinct  tinge  of  suspicion  and  "  whipping  up  "  in  his  injunction  to 
"  hasten  the  matter."  Ilalf-heartedness  always  means  languid  work,  and  that 
always  means  failure.  The  earnest  people  are  fretted  continually  by  the  indifferent. 
Every  good  scheme  is  held  back,  like  a  ship  with  a  foul  bottom,  by  the  barnacles 
that  stick  to  its  keel  and  bring  down  its  speed.  Eager  zeal  has  in  all  ages  to  be 
yoked  to  torpid  indifference,  and  to  drag  its  unwilling  companion  along  like  two 
dogs  in  a  leash.     (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 

Ver.  10.  And  cast  into  the  chest  until  they  had  made  an  end. — Compulsory  and 
free-will  offerings:  —  The  restoration  of  Solomon's  temple  by  Jehoiada  under 
Joash's  authority  is  a  remarkable  instance  of  cheerful  giving,  of  a  truly  voluntary 
offering.  The  money  was  not  raised  by  a  royal  edict  imposing  a  subsidy,  nor  were 
the  workmen  impressed  for  service  for  so  many  months  in  the  year.  By  taxation 
and  by  forced  labour,  or  levies,  had  Solomon's  temple  been  erected.  Such  indeed 
was,  and  is,  the  almost  invariable  custom  of  Eastern  monarchs  in  the  construction 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  109 

of  all  great  works,  whether  religious  or  secular.  Though  the  prince  might  be 
lauded  as  a  patron  of  religion  or  of  art,  a  rankling  sense  of  oppression  and  injustice 
remained  in  the  breasts  of  the  toilers.  This  Eehoboam  had  found  to  his  cost, 
when  his  people  demanded  relief  from  the  burdens  which  the  glories  of  Solomon 
had  entailed  on  them.  We  may  illustrate  this  by  an  interesting  inscription  at 
Abilene.  A  splendid  aqueduct  and  military  road  have  been  engineered  along  the 
face  of  the  lofty  cliff  which  bounds  the  deep  valley.  At  the  commencement  of  the 
aqueduct  is  the  long  inscription  in  honour  of  the  Emperor  Trajan,  for  whom  the 
gratitude  of  posterity  is  claimed  because  of  this  great  achievement.  But  below  the 
inscription  is  chiseled  deep  on  the  face  of  the  rock,  in  letters  of  a  rather  different 
shape,  added,  no  doubt,  after  the  emperor's  departure,  ^'Iinpensis  Abilenorum  " — "At 
the  expense  of  the  people  of  Abilene."     {Canon  Tristram.) 

Vers.  15,  16.  Jehoiada  waxed  old. — A  message  for  the  aged  : — I.  Examine  thk 
NAME  OF  THIS  AGED  psiEST.  "  Jchoiada  " — "  ouc  who  has  knowledge  of  Jehovah." 
1.  He  had  been  experimentally  acquainted  with  Jehovah  in  His  fatherly  and  merci- 
ful character.  2.  He  had  as  priest  special  opportunities  of  gaining  acquaintance 
with  God.  II.  Consider  his  beneficent  influence  in — 1.  Instructing  the  youth- 
ful king.  2.  Acting  as  regent  of  the  kingdom.  3.  Patriotically  serving  his  country 
and  promoting  the  well-being  of  her  people.  4.  Doing  good  to,  and  in  connection 
with,  the  house  of  God.  III.  Contemplate  the  honoured  close  of  a  long  and 
useful  life.  (Fairfax  Goodall,  M.A.)  Religious  instructors  useful  to  civil 
society  : — Some  have  conjectured  that  these  words  were  a  part  of  an  epitaph  put 
upon  Jehoiada's  tomb.  They  express  the  high  sense  which  the  nation  entertained 
of  his  eminent  usefulness  in  his  sacred  profession.  I.  The  common  opinion  op 
mankind  respecting  the  usefulness  of  religious  instructors  in  civil  society. 
The  opinion  of  the  world  upon  this  subject  is  evidenced  by  their  uniform  and 
immemorial  practice.  Jews,  Christians,  and  heathen  have  universally  agreed  to 
support  religious  teachers.  II.  This  common  opinion  of  mankind  respecting 
religious  instructors  is  well  founded.  1.  The  common  opinion  of  the  world 
is  generally  just.  Men  seldom  form  a  wrong  judgment  of  those  things  which  come 
under  thair  own  observation  and  experience.  2.  Another  argument  is  drawn — 
(1)  From  the  duties  which  the  ministers  of  religion  ought  to  teach,  (a)  The  duties 
which  rulers  owe  to  their  subjects,  (b)  The  duties  which  subjects  owe  to  their 
rulers,  (c)  Every  private  as  well  as  public  duty.  (2)  From  the  motives  by  which 
they  ought  to  enforce  all  their  religious  instructions,  (a)  The  being  and  presence 
of  the  all-seeing  and  heart-searching  God.  (b)  The  infinite  authority  of  all  His 
precepts  and  prohibitions,  (c)  The  controlling  influence  of  His  universal  provi- 
dence,    {d)  Future    and    eternal   rewards   and    punishments.     III.  Suggestions. 

I.  Since  men  in  all  ages  have  generally  and  justly  agreed  in  the  opinion  that 
religious  instructors  are  useful  in  civil  society,  it  discovers  no  less  ignorance  than 
presumption  in  those  who  adopt  and  endeavour  to  propagate  the  opposite  senti- 
ment. (1)  It  betrays  want  of  knowledge  in  the  science  of  politics.  (2)  It  betrays 
ignorance  of  the  impotency  of  human  laws.  2.  None  are  fit  for  civil  rulers  who 
would  exclude  religious  instructors  from  civil  society.  3.  A  people  ought  to  con- 
sider the  gift  of  wise  and  faithful  ministers  as  a  great  public  blessing.  4.  It  is  the 
wisdom  and  duty  of  civil  rulers  to  favour  the  cause  of  religion  and  employ  every 
proper  method  to  promote  the  general  diffusion  of  religious  knowledge.  5.  It 
argues  a  great  degree  of  infatuation  in  those  who  govern  to  oppose  or  restrain 
religious  instruction.  6.  It  is  extremely  difficult  for  civil  rulers  to  subvert  a  good 
government  while  religious  teachers  faithfully  discharge  their  duty.  7.  Ministers 
of  the  gospel  ought  to  exert  all  the  power  and  influence  which  their  sacred  office 
gives  them  to  prevent  the  ruin  of  the  nation.  8.  We  have  great  reason  to  fear  the 
displeasure  of  God  for  neglecting  and  abusing  the  ministrations  of  His  Word. 
{N.  Emmons,  D.D.) 

Vers.  19-21.  Tet  He  sent  prophets  to  them,  to  bring  them  again  unto  the 
Lord. — JudaKs    apostasy  : — I.  Prophetic   denunciation    of    apostasy   resented. 

II.  Zechariah's  death  was  parallel  with  that  of  St.  Stephen.  1.  His  offence 
was  the  denunciation  of  the  sin  of  the  leaders  of  Judah  (Acts  vii.  51-63).  2.  Stoned 
as  a  blasphemer,  IH.  Contrast  in  the  spirit  op  Judaism  and  Christianity — 
1.  Zechariah's  last  words  :  "  The  Lord  look  on  it  and  requite  it."  2.  Stephen's: 
•♦  Lord  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge."  IV.  Beflections.  1.  The  value  of  a  wise 
and  true  friend.    Jehoiada's  influence  on  Joash.    2.  The  necessity  of  a  moral  refor- 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

mation  as  well  as  a  political  to  secure  permanent  results  in  religious  changes.  The 
reformation  under  Joashwas  merely  outward  conformity.     V.  The  certainty  that 

A  FAITHFUL  MINISTRY   IMPLIES    THE    UNPOPULARITY  OF    THOSE  WHO  EXERCISE  IT.       1.    All 

the  prophets  suffered  under  Judaism  (Matt,  xxiii.  35  ;  Luke  xi.  51).  2.  Christ,  Stephen, 
the  apostles,  the  early  Christians.  Eeformers  all  through  history.  3.  Human 
nature  always  the  same.    It  hates  those  who  attack  its  sins.     VI.  The  spirit  that 

RESENTS   faithful    REPROOF   ALWAYS   ENTAILS   RETRIBUTION   ON   ITSELF    (ver.     23).       To 

do  wrong  and  refuse  instruction  is  the  greatest  misfortune  a  man  can  suffer. 

Vn.    The    NECESSITY  to  do  right  for  duty's  sake,  WITHOUT  EXPECTING  GRATITUDE  OB 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT.  {J.  C.  Gcikie,  D.D.)  The  goodness  of  King  Joash : — 1.  In  ten 
years  from  the  death  of  Jehoiada,  Joash  was  so  utterly  another  man  that  you  can- 
not recognise  in  him  one  feature  of  that  godly  disposition  which  distinguished  hia 
earlier  years.  He  is  a  sad  illustration  of  the  deceitfulness  of  the  human  heart ;  of 
the  weakness  of  the  natural  man  ;  and  of  the  perishing  nature  of  that  impulsive 
goodness  which  rests  solely  for  its  permanence  upon  the  constraining  influences  of 
others.  2.  Joash  still  represents  a  large  class — persons  of  warm  and  susceptible 
feelings,  acting  habitually  under  impulse,  of  a  temper  of  mind  volatile,  or  pliable, 
or  keenly  sensitive,  upon  which  impressions  are  easily  made  and  as  easily  effaced. 
8.  Speaking  as  I  am  in  a  university  city,  I  am  reminded  that  I  can  point  to  no  spot 
more  suggestive  than  this  of  the  evanescent  quality  of  that  light  of  the  soul  which 
is  simply  reflected,  of  that  transient  goodness  which  walks  by  sight  and  not  by 
faith.  How  many  young  men  have  gathered  here,  filled  with  noble  emulation,  and 
strong  in  their  own  resolution  to  fulfil  the  purpose  of  their  coming  I  And  what  has 
followed  ?  First  the  whisper  of  the  arch-tempter,  '♦  You  are  free ;  eat,  drink,  and 
be  merry."  Then  the  sceptic,  asking  contemptuously,  "  What  is  truth  ?  "  The 
controversial  humourist,  commending  his  ingenious  sophistries  with  insidious 
drollery.  The  listless  idler,  intruding  his  unwelcome  presence  upon  the  conven- 
tional hours  of  study.  The  voluptuary,  putting  his  bottle  to  his  companions,  and 
filling  them  with  shame  for  glory.  The  sinner  in  the  city,  whose  house  is  in  the 
way  to  hell.  The  tradesman  with  his  offer  of  unlimited  credit.  The  sordid  money- 
lender, weaving  his  web  of  usury.  These,  and  such  as  these,  have  "  made  their 
obeisance,"  like  the  princes  of  Judah ;  and  behold,  Jehoiada  is  gone,  and  Joash  haa 
hearkened  to  them  I  He  has  left  the  God  of  his  fathers.  He  cannot  prosper, 
because  God  has  forsaken  him.  4.  Oh,  if  I  am  to  send  my  son  to  fight  the  good 
fight  of  faith,  to  wrestle  against  the  powers  of  darkness,  let  me  stablish  him  with 
this  fact  as  the  counterpoise  and  antidote  to  the  delusions  of  the  world — that  he  ia 
now  a  responsible  being.    {Henry  Drury,  M.A.) 

Ver.  22.  But  slew  hia  son. — Joash  and  Jehoiada  : — The  picture  here  drawn  of  the 
failure  of  the  best  of  tutors  and  governors  ia  unfortunately  only  too  typical.  Julian 
the  Apostate  was  educated  by  a  distinguished  Christian  prelate,  Eusebius  of 
Nicomedia,  and  was  trained  in  a  strict  routine  of  religious  observances ;  yet  he 
repudiated  Christianity  at  the  earliest  safe  opportunity.  His  apostasy,  like  that  of 
Joash,  was  probably  characterised  by  base  ingratitude.  At  Constantino's  death  the 
troops  in  Constantinople  massacred  nearly  all  the  princes  of  the  imperial  family, 
and  Julian,  then  only  six  years  old,  is  said  to  have  been  saved  and  concealed  in  a 
church  by  Mark,  Bishop  of  Arethusa.  When  Julian  became  emperor,  he  repaid 
this  obligation  by  subjecting  his  benefactor  to  cruel  tortures  because  he  had 
destroyed  a  heathen  temple  and  refused  to  make  any  compensation.  (IT.  H, 
BenneU,  M^.) 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


Vers.  2.  And  he  did  that  which  was  right  In  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  but  not 
with  a  perfect  heart. — Half-hearted ,  and  therefore  a  failure  : — It  was  not  because 
Amaziah  was  not  sinless  that  his  life  proved  such  a  failure,  but  because  he  was  not 
'^■-tfeoipugh-going  in  his  principle  and  piety.  English  life  at  present  seems  to  be 
afflicted  with  a  plague  of  levity.  There  is  so  much  hollowness  and  unreality,  so 
much  veneer  in  character  and  work,  that  it  behoves  us  to  preach  aloud  the  gospel 
of  thoroughness.  A  short  time  ago  some  workmen  were  engaged  in  trying  to 
remove  a  piece  of  old  London  wall.     They  tried  with  hammers,  then  with  pick-axes. 


CHAP.  XXV.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  Ill 

but  to  no  purpose,  the  wall  seemed  to  smile  at  all  their  efforts  ;  at  last  they  vrere 
obliged  to  have  recourse  to  boring,  and  blowing  it  up  like  a  piece  of  solid  rock. 
That  is  hardly  the  way  they  build  nowadays,  for  a  man  might  almost  push  over 
some  of  our  brick  walls  with  his  hand.  Now,  this  is  just  an  illustration  of  what  I 
mean,  the  want  of  thoroughness  in  every  branch  of  industry  and  in  every  walk  of 
hfe.  When  a  man's  own  character  is  not  solid,  permeated  through  and  through 
with  Christian  principle,  you  cannot  have  any  guarantee  of  the  genuineness  of  his 
work.     Shams  abound  everywhere.     Gilt  and  paint  carry  the  day.     Ours  is  an  age 

-  of  tinsel.  And  the  worst  of  it  is  that  this  unrealness  characterises  much  of  the 
religion  amongst  us.  I  sometimes  meet  with  a  horrible  form  of .-Antinomianism:, 
which  virtually  says,  "  Anything  will  do  for  me — I  am  a  disciple  of  Christ  "  ;  and 
so  the  work  is  actually  more  slovenly  and  imperfect  because  the  individual  claims  to 
be  "  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace."  Why,  it  is  almost  as  monstrous  as  the 
proposal  a  good  young  man  made  to  his  landlady,  that  his  own  excellent  Christian 
example  should  serve  in  lieu  of  weekly  payment  for  his  lodgings  I     A  man — I  don't 

^care  who  he  is  —dishonours  Christ  when  any  other  person  is  put  to  disadvantage 
by  his  piety.  If  you  imagine  you  are  more  free  to  do  slipshod  work  because  you 
are  a  Christian,  I  say,  it  is  precisely  the  reverse.     It  is  just  because  you  claim  to  be 

(the  Lord's  that  any  sort  of  work  will  not  do.  Bearing  His  name,  you  are  respon- 
sible to  Him  for  every  detail  of  your  daily  life.  If  your  secular  duties  are  more 
imperfectly  discharged  because  you  are  a  believer,  you  do  great  wrong  to  the 
Kedeemer.  If  you  snatch  a  little  of  your  employer's  time  to  scatter  tracts,  or  pre- 
pare for  a  Sabbath  class,  or  even  to  read  your  Bible ;  or  if,  in  business  hours, 
your  thoughts  are  so  given  to  spiritual  themes  that  you  cannot  do  justice  to  your 
work,  in  any  of  these  cases  you  do  real  harm  to  religion.  (J.  T.  Davidson,  D.D. ) 
The  character  of  Amaziah : — This  history  is  adduced  to  lead  to  self-scrutiny. 
I.  The  act  of  assembling  is  in  accordance  with  God's  revealed  wishes;  and 
therefore  the  act  of  assembling  is  a  right  act.  But  am  I  able  to  believe  that 
every  man  and  woman  joins  the  assembly  from  such  motives  as  would  stand  the 
test  of  Heaven  ?  "  Not  with  a  pprfpct  hpa.rt."  II.  Again,  in  the  matter  of  listening 
TO  God's  Word  preached.  Some  listen  from  the  desire  of  passing  away  a  dull  hour 
— as  a  sort  of  religious  entertainment.  Alas  for  the  perfect  heart  I  III.  As  to 
your  conduct  outside  the  walls  of  the  sanctuary.  You  are  upright  and  honour- 
able in  trade.  But  why  ?  It  is  a  sad  thing  when  a  man's  actions  are  right  because 
he  wishes  to  be  aggrandised,  or  because  he  wishes  a  high  place  in  human  estimation, 
and  knows  not  the  only  right  motive — a  desire  to  please  Him  "  who  hath  loved  us, 
and  given  Himself  for  us."  (T.  W.  Thompson,  B.A.)  Not  with  a  perfect 
heart: — Off  Cape  Horn  we  witnessed  a  singular  sight.  For  some  miles  there 
was  a  narrow  strip  of  water,  where  the  great  waves  flew  in  broken  spray  and  dashed 
high  over  the  ship.  On  either  side  the  sea  was  comparatively  calm,  whilst  this 
boiled  with  fury,  rolling  and  surging.  Yet  there  was  no  rock  about  which  the  sea 
surged,  nor  was  there  any  such  fierce  wind  as  to  account  for  it.  Overhead  the  air 
was  thick  with  sea-fowl.  Thousands  of  the  birds  dived  into  this  troubled  water. 
The  smaller  fish  were,  I  suppose,  flung  up  by  the  toss,  and  thus  fell  a  prey  to  the 
birds.  I  asked,  naturally,  what  was  the  reason  of  this  strange  sight,  and  found  it 
was  the  point  at  which  the  tide  met  the  strong  current  of  the  sea,  and  here  they 
raged  together.  Within,  the  tide  only  ran,  and  it  was  calm.  Without,  the  current 
prevailed,  and  there,  too,  was  calm.  On  this  troubled  bit  they  met,  and  neither 
prevailed.  It  is  the  picture  of  those  who  are  at  once  too  religious  to  belong  to  the 
world — too  worldly  to  belong  to  religion  ;  torn  by  both  and  satisfied  by  neither. 
{Mark  Guy  Pearse.)  Whole-hearted  religion  required  : — At  one  of  the  conferences 
between  the  Northern  and  Southern  States  of  America  during  the  war  of  1861-1866 
the  representatives  of  the  Southern  States  stated  what  cession  of  territory  they 
were  prepared  to  make,  provided  that  the  independence  of  the  portion  that  was  not 
ceded  to  the  Federal  Government  was  secured.  More  and  more  attractive  offers 
were  made,  the  portions  to  be  ceded  being  increased,  and  those  to  be  retained  in  a 
state  of  independence  being  proportionately  diminished.  All  the  offers  were  met  by 
a  steadfast  refusal.  At  last  President  Lincoln  placed  his  hand  on  the  map  so  as  to 
cover  all  the  Southern  States,  and  in  these  emphatic  words  delivered  his  ultimatum  : 
"  Gentlemen,  this  Government  must  have  the  whole."  God  cannot  share  us  with 
the  world.    (A.  Plummer,  D.D.) 

Yer.  9.  And  Amazlali  said  to  the  man  of  God,  But  what  shall  we  do  for  the 
hundred  talents  which  I  have  given  to  the  army  of  Israel  7 — Self-made  difficuUiet : — 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

I.  The  path  or  duty  was  put  cleablt  befobe  Amaziah.  "  Send  the  army  of 
Israel  away."  II.  He  hesitated  to  tread  it  because  theee  was  a  belf-madb 
DimcuiiTY  IN  THE  WAT.  So  with  many  to-day.  1.  Worldly  pleasure.  2.  Worldly 
interests.  (1)  A  bad  business,  one  you  cannot  ask  God  to  bless.  (2)  A  legitimate 
business  that  is  not  conducted  on  Christian  principles.  3.  Worldly  companions. 
4.  Bad  habits.  III.  God  becoonises  the  difficulty.  "  The  Lord  is  able  to  give 
thee  much  more  than  this."  When  our  first  missionaries  went  to  India,  Dr.  Cope 
died  on  the  voyage.  Some  letters  of  introduction  to  English  gentlemen  in  India 
had  been  written.  When  his  friends  arrived  they  went  on  shore  and  told  how  Dr. 
Cope  had  died  and  been  buried  in  the  deep  sea.  As  they  knew  nothing  of  the 
language  of  India  they  asked  advice,  and  the  advice  given  was,  "  Take  the  first 
vessel  that  sails  for  England  and  go  home  again."  One  of  the  young  men  of  the 
party  said,  "  That  is  out  of  the  question.  I  came  here  to  preach  the  gospel,  and, 
God  helping  me,  I  mean  to  do  it."  They  said,  "  If  you  bring  God  into  the  matter, 
that  alters  it  altogether."  Bring  God  into  your  pleasure  and  into  your  business,  and 
that  will  alter  them  altogether.  (Charles  Garrett.)  God  able  to  remunerate 
fidelity  : — I  know  a  widow  whose  husband  died  and  left  her  with  a  little  family  to 
struggle  for.  She  opened  a  little  shop  in  the  suburbs  of  the  city,  when  one  of  the 
agents  of  a  wine-merchant  waited  upon  her  to  ask  her  to  be  an  agent  for  the  sale  of 
strong  drink.  She  said,  "  Never  a  drop  shall  enter  my  house."  He  said  "  It  will 
help  you  so  much."  She  said,  "  If  it  helps  me  some,  it  will  harm  me  more.  I  have 
children  around  me,  and  whether  I  prosper  or  not,  I  will  not  gain  anything  to  the 
injury  of  my  feUow-creatures."  She  has  done  wonderfully.  An  intimate  friend  of 
mine  went  to  see  her,  and  said,  "I  cannot  understand  how  you  get  on,  and  why 
80  many  come  to  your  shop,  for  they  pass  a  number  of  good  shops  to  come  to 
yours."  She  said  to  her  boy,  "  George,  you  are  fond  of  ciphering  ;  get  down  your 
slate  and  put  down  how  far  off  a  man  must  live  from  my  shop  that  God  cannot 
bring  him  there."  That  settled  it.  "  God  is  able  to  give  more  than  this."  [Ibid.) 
Rigid  integrity  may  stand  in  the  way  : — There  can  be  no  doubt  that  a  certain 
flexibility  and  elasticity  of  soul  and  conscience  may  make  a  man  get  on,  as  con- 
cerns this  world,  when  rigid  integrity  would  stand  in  his  way.  Nothing  would  be 
easier  than  to  mention  striking  instances  in  which  men  threw  away  their  chance  of 
the  highest  places  by  an  act  of  injudicious  honesty.  A  trader  who  never  puffs  his 
wares  as  better  than  they  really  are  may  not  drive  such  a  business  as  the  brazen 
individual  who  never  spares  the  trumpet.  A  preacher  who  sets  forth  sound 
doctrine  to  people  who  have  not  been  accustomed  to  it,  and  who  do  not  want  it, 
may  make  himself  for  a  time  obnoxious  enough.  But  let  us  speak  the  truth  and 
live  the  truth,  no  matter  what  we  may  lose  by  it.     (Ibid.)  What  shall  we  do 

for  the  hundred  talents  ? — I.  The  command  given.  "  Let  not  the  army  of  Israel 
go  with  thee."  1.  It  shows  us  God's  disapproval  of  union  with  the  enemies  of  the 
truth.  The  children  of  Ephraim  had  depaited  from  the  Lord,  His  favour  was 
withdrawn  from  them :  Judah,  if  he  hope  for  success,  must  send  such  helpers 
away.  Yes,  truly  "the  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  with  God."  To  join 
affinity  with  such,  as  Amaziah  did,  is  to  run  into  temptation  and  a  snare.  2.  But 
the  command  of  God  thus  given  leads  us  to  notice,  further,  that  His  disappoint- 
ment of  our  hopes  is  in  mercy,  not  in  wrath.  Perhaps  to  the  mind  of  Amaziah  this 
only  was  wanting  to  ensure  victory  :  his  army  was  strong,  and  could  he  but  procure 
this  aid  from  Israel  all  would  be  secure ;  and  yet  no  sooner  are  they  come  than  the 
command  is  given.  It  is  often  thus  in  God's  dealings  with  our  souls.  "  Not  by 
might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  "  Could  I  but  be 
placed  in  such  circumstances,"  saith  one,  "  Were  but  this  difficulty  removed."  is  the 
thou^'ht  of  another,  "  then  should  I  grow  in  grace,  and  prosper  in  my  soul."  But  it 
cannot  be,  and  you  are  discouraged.  And  yet  it  is  in  mercy,  not  in  wrath,  that 
your  wishes  are  crossed,  3.  Observe  that  the  command  calls  for  immediate  com- 
pliance. Not  after  aid  received  in  the  battle,  but  now  in  the  face  of  danger, 
at  the  risk  of  injury  from  those  sent  away,  injury,  too,  that  was  not  feared 
without  cause  (ver.  13).  God's  command  will  not  bear  delay.  II.  The 
DIFFICULTY  8TAETED.  "  And  Amaziah  said  to  the  man  of  God,  But  what  shall 
we  do  for  the  hundrea  ^slents  that  I  have  given  to  the  army  of  Israel  ? " 
With  some  awe  upon  his  mind,  ^  conviction  of  the  necessity  of  obedience, 
Amaziah  liked  not  the  cost.  This  is  the  'ifficulty  proposed,  "  What  shall  we  do  for 
be  hundred  talents  ?  "  There  was  the  divided  mind.  On  the  one  side  was  his 
fear  of  the  displeasure  of  the  Lord,  without  whose  help  he  well  knew  he  could  not 
prosper ;  on  the  other  side  the  hundred  talents  weighed  down  his  purpose — he  could 


CHAP.  XXV.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  113 

not  brook  the  loss  of  so  large  a  sum.  Ah  !  who  would  not  obey  God  if  he  might 
do  it  without  cost  ?  Who  would  not  be  the  servant  of  Christ,  if  he  might  be  so 
without  pains  ?  Sin  must  be  parted  with.  "  What  shall  we  do  for  the  hundred 
talents  ?"  We  go  to  the  man  that  has  long  yielded  to  his  evil  habits.  We  teU  him 
of  the  door  of  mercy  yet  open.  The  sigh  breaks  forth  as  we  speak.  He  owns  it 
1 «'  too  true."  He  is  "  almost  persuaded  to  be  a  Christian."  But,  no,  "  What  shall 
;  we  do  for  the  hundred  talents  ?  "  III.  The  unanswerable  kepl-j.  "  And  the  man 
of  God  answered,  The  Lord  is  able  to  give  thee  much  more  than  this."  1.  Observe — 
There  is  no  promise  of  the  restoration  of  the  sum.  The  command  of  God  was  the 
solid  ground  on  which  the  prophet  claimed  obedience  of  the  king.  And  it  is  even 
here  we  too  rest  our  appeal.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord."  In  urging  on  you  to 
"  yield  yourselves  unto  God,"  we  cannot — ^we  may  not — tell  you  that  no  difficulties 
are  in  the  way.  We  have  indeed  that  overwhelming  motive  to  present,  the  safety 
of  the  soul.  2.  Amaziah  is  referred  to  the  almighty  power  of  Him  whose  command 
he  is  called  on  to  obey.  "God  is  able  to  give  thee  much  more  than  this,"  As 
though  the  prophet  had  said,  "  Thou  art  ready  to  sorrow  for  the  hundred  talents 
uselessly  bestowed  if  now  to  be  forfeited,  but  whose  is  the  silver  and  the  gold  ? 
Grudge  not,  then,  this  sum  at  His  word,  who  bids  thee  yield  it  for  thine  own 
welfare."  For  is  it  dignity,  the  estimation  of  others,  that  you  fear  to  give  up  ?  are 
these  " the  hundred  talents  "  you  are  unwilling  to  part  with?  What  dignity  of 
earth  can  be  compared  to  that  high-sounding  and  real — not  empty — title,  "  heirs  of 
God,  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ  "  ? — "  Ye  shall  be  My  sons  and  daughters,  saith  the 
Lord  Almighty,"  Is  it  riches,  or  pleasures,  the  vanity  of  life,  that  seem  not  vain  to 
you  ?  God  is  able  to  give,  yea,  will  give  you  much  more  than  this.  He  will  give 
you  pardon,  that  blessed  gift — pardon  for  all  thy  sins,  thy  multiplied,  aggravated, 
fearful  transgressions — "And  in  the  world  to  come  eternal  life."  (F.  Storr,  M.A.) 
Soul  or  silver  : — Amaziah  seemed  to  be  a  soldier,  and  little  else.  He  was  devoured 
by  military  ambition  and  vainglory.  He  coveted  the  domains  of  his  neighbours. 
He  was  greedy  of  conquest.  He  dared  not  attack  Israel,  but  on  the  other  side  lay 
the  lands  of  the  Edomiies.  He  wanted  to  fight.  There  was  probably  no  reason 
why  he  should,  for  the  children  of  Seir  had  evidently  done  nothing  to  provoke  an 
attack,  or  we  should  have  had  an  account  of  it.  But  Amaziah  must  have  more 
territory,  and  impelled  by  such  noble  patriotism,  he  disciplined  his  people  into  a 
large  army.  Desiring  to  be  on  the  safe  side,  he  bargained  for  one  hundred  thousand 
men  of  Israel,  and,  in  order  to  secure  them,  he  laid  down  a  bounty  of  one  hundred 
talents  of  silver.  With  these  men  of  Ephraim,  hired  with  the  silver  talents,  he 
possessed  an  army  of  about  four  hundred  thousand  men.  All  things  are  in  readi- 
ness, and  he  is  about  to  start  out  on  his  grand  mission  of  punishing  a  people  who 
held  lands  near  him,  when  a  prophet  confronts  him  with  the  intelligence  that  if  he 
takes  the  troops  of  Israel  with  him  he  shall  be  defeated.  Now  comes  a  struggle  in 
the  king's  mind.  He  was  bent  upon  war,  and  could  not  brook  the  idea  of  defeat, 
but  to  insure  victory  he  must  send  the  Ephraimites  home.  Now,  he  had  given 
these  men  a  hundred  talents  of  silver  1  What  about  them  ?  The  command  of 
God  had  touched  his  pocket-nerve,  and  it  had  sent  a  sensitive  thrill  through  his 
whole  being.  Amaziah  is  not  the  only  man  that  has  been  compelled  to  choose 
between  obedience  and  self-denial.  I.  Consider,  then,  the  fact  that  men's  appaeent 
INTEP.EST8  ARE  SOMETIMES  OPPOSED  BY  THE  COMMANDS  OF  GoD.  Very  frequently  men's 
practices  find  such  opposition  ;  and  their  desires  are  fulfilled  very  often  against  the 
clamourings  of  their  consciences.  But  I  have  affirmed  something  beyond  this — 
that  a  man's  wholesome  interests,  as  they  appear  to  his  view,  are  sometimes  in 
direct  opposition  to  God's  commands.  I  do  not  think  that  a  man  will  be  allowed 
to  enter  upon  a  course  inimical  to  God's  will  who  starts  out  by  committing  hia 
way  entirely  to  Divine  guidance.  God  looks  out  for  such  a  man,  and  orders  hia 
ways  so  that  his  interests  and  the  Divine  will  conform.  But  a  great  many  start  out 
in  the  pursuit  of  business  without  any  consideration  of  God.  With  the  majority  of 
men,  when  the  time  comes  to  meet  the  question,  "  What  shall  I  do  ?  "  the  answer 
is  prompted  more  by  expediency  than  by  duty.  One  man  argues,  "  I  can  make 
more  money  in  dry  goods  than  in  groceries,  so  I'll  deal  in  dry  goods.  But  there'a 
more  money  in  whisky,  so  I  think  I'U  open  a  saloon."  He  looks  at  trade  from  his 
own  standpoint.  I  believe  that  some  men  really  think  that  they  are  justified  in 
such  a  course ;  they  think  that  a  man  ought  to  look  after  his  own  interests  ;  that 
that  is  the  first  thing  to  be  consulted ;  and  there  never  was  a  greater  mistake  made 
in  this  selfish  world  1  The  truth  is,  that  when  a  man  deliberately  marks  out  a 
course  in  life,  and  determines  to  pursue  it,  without  any  consideration  of  God  or  his 

16 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiy. 

fellow-men,  he  is  engaged  in  a  very  dangerous  business.  There  are  some  other 
things  to  consider  besides  making  money.  Soul-culture,  helpfulness  of  his  fellows, 
influence  for  Christ,  the  increasing  light  of  a  pious  life  ;  these  things  are  to  be  taken 
into  the  account,  or  he  may  look  for  some  period  of  his  life  when  the  alternative 
will  be  between  obedience  and  self-denial,  or  disobedience  and  defeat.     II.  Wheeb: 

THIS    IS    THE    CASE    APPARENT    INTERESTS    ARE    TO    BE    SACRIFICED.        God    looks    UpOn 

temporal  matters  as  if  they  were  subordinate  to  a  higher  good.  Men  look  upon 
them  as  if  they  were  the  highest  good  attainable.  God  puts  His  service  and  the 
duties  of  religion  above  everything  else.  Men  regard  religion  as  a  secondary 
consideration.  Do  you  never  hear  men  say,  "  I  would  engage  in  religious  matters- 
if  I  had  time  "  ?  You  mark  a  man's  absence  from  the  holy  Sabbath  worship  ;  he 
complains,  "  I  feel  so  tired  when  Sunday  comes,  I  must  rest."  So  you  see  men 
think  more  of  their  hundred  talents  of  silver  than  of  obedience  to  God.  But  they 
have  Amaziah's  protest :  "  What  shall  we  do  for  the  hundred  talents  of  silver  ?  " 
The  answer  is  plain  enough.  Let  them  go.  "  What !  "  cries  the  overworked  business 
man,  "leave  my  store  full  of  customers  just  because  it  is  the  hour  of  prayer  ?"  "  What !"" 
cries  the  professional  man, "  suspend  my  important  studies  for  unprofitable  religious- 
occupation  ?  Not  much  1  "  "  What  1  "  cries  the  mechanic,  "  work  hard  all  week  and 
Sunday  too?  "  "  What  shall  we  do  for  the  hundred  talents  that  are  involved  ?  " 
In  such  embarrassing  situations  the  thing  to  do  is  what  Amaziah  did.  He  sent 
home  the  men  of  Ephraim,  and  he  lost  the  hundred  talents  of  silver.  If  your 
business  stands  between  you  and  God,  let  it  go  1     III.  For  I  beg  you  to  note  that  the 

ALTERNATIVE  LIES  BETWEEN  TOTAL  DEFEAT  AND  INCREASED  GOOD.      Amaziah  WaS  made 

to  select  between  receiving  the  value  of  his  invested  money  and  suffering  disaster  in. 
the  prosecution  of  his  scheme.  He  might  do  as  he  pleased,  but  he  might  know 
what  to  expect.  That  is  the  alternative  placed  before  all  men.  Disobedience  leads- 
to  defeat.  Men  may  discard  the  commands  of  God,  but  not  with  impunity. 
Obedience  to  the  Divine  will  is  the  only  safeguard  against  temporal  and  spiritual 
disaster.  It  is  a  matter  that  enters  into  a  man's  private  life.  It  does  not  concern< 
those  employments  alone  which  are  confessedly  unrighteous.  It  is  a  law  affecting 
the  man  who  persists  in  a  course  when  God  has  called  him  in  another  direction,  as 
well  as  he  who  persists  in  iniquitous  practices.  In  either  case  the  safest  thing  to 
do  is  to  give  up  the  silver,  without  one  hesitating  thought.  (Lansing  Burrows.) 
Consequences  : — The  subject  brought  before  us  in  the  text  is  the  weighing  of 
1  consequences.  1.  In  a  certain  sense  it  is  the  doing  of  a  fool  to  disdain  consequences ;, 
land  it  is  the  glory  of  a  rational  being  that  he  can  calculate,  and  weigh,  and  be 
»  guided  by,  consequences.  2.  And  yet  there  are  cases  in  which  to  resolutely  refuse 
to  take  into  view  what  may  be  the  consequences  of  our  conduct,  is  heroism ;  is 
Christianity  in  its  highest  and  noblest  development.  Such  was  the  case  with  the 
three  Jews  in  Babylon ;  Moses ;  Paul.  3.  Amaziah's  history  will  make  it  plain  to 
us,  when  we  should  weigh  consequences  and  be  guided  by  them  ;  and  when  we 
should  disregard  them,  and  refuse  to  take  them  into  account  at  all.  He  was  not 
wrong  in  naming  the  money  loss  to  the  prophet.  He  was  wrong  in  regarding  this 
difficulty  as  a.  fatal  objection  to  his  obeying  God's  command.  He  not  only  states 
his  difficulty,  but  seems  disposed  to  act  upon  it.  4.  This  brings  us  to  the  great 
principle  which  should  guide  all  wise  Christian  people  in  regard  to  the  consideration 
of  consequences.  Wherever  we  are  sure  that  duty  leads,  wherever  we  are  sure 
IGod  bids  us  go,  then  that  way  we  should  go,  whatever  and  however  painful  the 
'consequences  may  be.  In  all  other  cases  a  prudent  Christian  man  will  weigh  the 
consequences  of  what  he  may  think  of  doing,  and  be  guided  by  the  consideration  of 
them.  5.  To  disdain  consequences  is  not  to  be  done  in  a  boasting,  vainglorious 
spirit.  The  true  proof  of  a  man  disdaining  consequences  is  that  he  should  disdain 
them,  not  when  they  are  in  the  distance,  coming,  but  when  they  are  present 
realities ;  when  they  are  come.  6.  The  prophet's  reply  to  the  king's  difficulty  is 
worthy  of  being  laid  to  heart :  "  The  Lord  is  able  to  give  thee  much  more  than 
this."  This  means  ttaTins^ worth  our  while  to  obey  God's  will;  that  though  at 
first  we  may  lose  by  doing  so,  we  shall  gain  more  than  we  shall  lose.  This  truly 
is  not  a  disdaining  of  consequences ;  it  is  a  fuller  and  truer  weighing  of  them.  It  is 
to  look  further  on:  it  is  to  throw  eternity  into  the  scale  of  duty  and  interest.  (A. 
K.  H.  Boyd.)  God's  power  to  remunerate  : — I.  How  commonly  the  question  la 
OROED,  "What  shall  we  do  for  the  hundred  talents  ?  "  We  are  not  of  those  who 
would  make  light  of  the  sacrifices  which  must  be  made  by  such  as  would  live 
godly  in  Christ  Jesus.  Christ  speaks  of  a  "  yoke,"  of  "  taking  up  the  cross,"  ot 
♦*  forsaking  all,"  of  "  cutting  off  the  right  hand,"  of  "  plucking  out  the  right  eye.'*^ 


CHAP.  XXV.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  115 

So  that  the  parallel  is  most  exact  between  the  circumstances  of  ourselves  and  those 
of  Amaziah.  1.  Consider  the  case  of  the  young  who  are  urged  to  the  remembering 
of  their  Creator  and  the  setting  of  their  affections  on  things  above.  If  by  entreaty 
and  warning  we  prevail  on  them  to  hesitate  ere  they  launch  on  a  course  of 
disobedience  to  God's  commands,  the  thought  of  all  we  ask  them  to  surrender  comes 
upon  them  with  great  power,  and  they  feel  as  though  it  were  unreasonable  to 
summon  them  to  such  a  sacrifice.  And  therefore  their  speech  is  virtually,  "  What 
shall  we  do  for  the  hundred  talents  ?  "    2.  Take  again  the  case  of  the  tradesman 

H  whose  interest  seems  to  demand  the  profanation  of  the  Sabbath.  In  asking  him  to 
close  his  shop  on  the  day  that  perhaps  procures  him  more  profit  than  can  be  wrung 
from  all  the  rest  of  the  week,  you  ask  him  to  make  what  on  mere  human  principles 
is  scarcely  a  credible  sacrifice.  II.  How  sufficient  an  answer  there  is  in  thb 
STATEMENT,  "  The  Lord  is  able  to  give  thee  much  more  than  this."  It  is  the 
apparent  conflict  between  interest  and  duty  which  often  induces  disobedience  to 
God.  Duty  and  interest  can  never  be  really  opposed.  The  righteousness  of  God's 
moral  government  requires  that  whatever  He  has  made  it  our  duty  should  also  be 
our  interest  to  perform.  But  stiU  there  is  an  apparent  conflict.  This  world  would 
cease  to  be  a  place  of  probation  if  it  were  always  manifest  that  duty  and  interest  lie 
in  the  same  direction.  When  tempted  to  do  wrong  for  the  sake  of  present 
,/'    aidvantage,  let  us  magnify  the  remunerating  power  of  God.     If  David  could  say, 

/^^"  Thy  Word  have  I  hid  in  my  heart,  that  I  might  not  sin  against  Thee,"  no  text  can 
/  be  more  suitable  than  this  one  for  the  talisman  of  the  merchant  as  he  prosecutes 
the  enterprises  of  commerce,  "  The  Lord  is  able  to  give  thee  much  more  than  this." 
(Henry  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  claims  of  duty  : — The  claims  of  duty  are  stronger  even 
than  those  of  affection.  The  tenderest  tie  on  earth  should  never  induce  us  to  set 
them  aside.  The  sense  of  duty  which  distinguished  some  of  the  patriots  of  ancient 
Eome  was  extraordinary.     After  the  expulsion  of  King  Tarquin,  a  conspiracy  was 

I        formed  for  the  purpose  of  effecting  his  return.     It  was  found  out  by  the  authorities ; 

\  and  it  was  also  found  that  Titus  and  Tiberius,  the  two  sons  of  Brutus,  the  consul, 
were  the  principal  conspirators.  People  naturally  speculated  as  to  how  the  consul 
would  act  in  the  matter  ;  but  he  put  an  end  to  all  controversy  by  condemning  his 
two  sons  to  death  along  with  the  rest ;  nay,  on  the  day  of  execution,  he  commanded 
the  sentence  of  the  law  to  be  carried  out  on  them  fijst  of  all.  "  But,"  you  may  say, 
"  perhaps  he  did  not  love  his  sons  as  fathers  generally  do."  On  the  contrary,  the 
crowd  who  watched  his  countenance  on  the  occasion  could  perceive  that  there  was 
a  terrible  struggle  within  ;  so  that  they  pitied  the  grief  of  the  father  no  less  than 
they  admired  the  bravery  of  the  patriot.  Here,  then,  was  a  man  who  preferred  duty 
to  affection — the  safety  of  his  country  to  the  life  of  his  sons.     [Ibid, ) 

Yer.  14.  Now  it  came  to  pass,  after  that  Amaziah  was  come  firom  the  slaughter 
of  the  Edomites,  that  he  brought  the  gods  of  the  children  of  Seir. — Amaziah' s 
apostacy : — To  act  like  Amaziah — ^to  go  out  to  battle  in  the  name  of  Jehovah, 
directed  and  encouraged  by  His  prophet,  to  conquer  by  the  grace  of  the  God  of 
Israel,  and  then  to  desert  Jehovah  of  hosts,  the  giver  of  victory,  for  the  paltry  and 
discredited  idols  of  the  conquered  Edomites — this  was  sheer  madness.  And  yet  as 
Greece  enslaved  her  Homan  conquerors,  so  the  victor  has  often  been  won  to  the 
faith  of  the  vanquished.  The  Church  subdued  the  barbarians  who  had  over- 
whelmed the  empire,  and  the  heathen  Saxons  adopted  at  last  the  religion  of  the 
conquered  Britons.     (IF.  H.  Bennett,  M.A.) 

Yer.  18.  The  thistle  that  was  in  Lebanon  sent  to  the  cedar  that  was  in 
Lebanon. — True  and  false  union : — Our  parable  thus  distinguishes  between  true 
and  false  union.  The  true  is  inward  and  real ;  the  false  is  outward  and  superficial. 
The  true  rests  on  the  fitness  of  things  and  on  eternal  laws ;  the  false  relies  on  the 
capriciousness  of  human  nature  and  the  ebb  and  flow  of  circumstances.  The  false 
comes  through  conquest,  coercion,  and  oppression;  the  true  comes  from  God, 
righteousness  and  liberty.  You  will  find  these  two  kinds  of  union  facing  us  in  all 
relations  of  life.  Take  the  history  of  Christianity  in  the  world.  1.  The  aim  of  the 
Roman  Catholic  Church  has  been  to  create  union  among  all  Christians.  But,  while 
the  aim  has  been  good,  the  method  employed  has  been  bad.  The  union  thus 
sought  has  been  a  false  one  because  it  has  tried  to  coerce  and  compel  men  to 
acknowledge  the  Pope  to  be  the  one  earthly  vicar  of  Christ.  2.  A  similar  policy 
has  been  that  of  the  Established  Church  of  England.  As  soon  as  the  prayer-book 
was  compiled  a  series  of  Acts  of  Parliament  were  passed — the  Act  of  Uniformity, 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvi. 


<Sjc. — to  compel  all  British  subjects  to  confoinn  to  its  teaching.  An  effort  was  made 
to  establish  union  by  Acts  of  Parliament.  The  effort  with  a  right  and  noble  aim 
has  failed  because  based  on  false  methods.  3.  Dissenters  have  also  erred  in  like 
manner.  At  the  assembly  of  Westminster  divines  a  number  of  eminent  Christian 
men  drew  up  a  set  of  doctrines,  which  were  to  be  the  infallible  guide  for  a  section 
of  the  followers  of  Christ.  If  a  carpenter  has  a  certain  number  of  boards  to  make 
he  gets  the  wood  that  is  necessary ;  he  takes  his  measurements  ;  he  cuts  and  planes 
each  board  exactly  to  the  size,  and  length,  and  breadth,  and  thickness  that  he 
desires  ;  he  joins  the  boards  together  and  makes  the  box,  or  floor,  or  other  article 
as  the  case  may  be.  All  are  united  to  complete  the  one  object  intended.  But  it  is 
impossible  for  us  to  apply  the  word  "  union  "  in  this  sense  to  intelligent,  thinking 
human  beings.  You  may  cut,  measure  wood  and  inanimate  objects  as  you  plfiase, 
but  here  you  have  to  do  with  "  creatures  "  in  whom  there  is  the  "  Divine  gift  of 
reason  and  free-will."  If  you  wish  to  unite  men  under  any  government,  religious 
or  political,  you  must  first  appeal  to  their  reason,  and  leave  them  free  to  act  as  that 
reason  leads  them.  The  only  true  basis  of  union  among  human  beings  is  the 
"  Presence  of  God  " — in  other  words,  righteousness,  justice,  liberty,  and  truth. 
For  where  righteousness,  justice,  liberty,  and  truth  are,  there  God  is.  The  members 
of  a  family  are  united  not  by  bearing  the  same  name,  resembling  each  other  in 
stature  and  features,  but  by  doing  what  is  right  and  just  to  each  other,  and  by 
loving  one  another.  The  members  of  the  Church  of  Christ  are  not  united  by 
repeating  the  same  creed,  by  meeting  in  the  same  place  of  worship,  by  calling 
themselves  by  the  same  name,  but  by  having  hearts  glowing  with  love  to  one 
Saviour,  and  by  gladly  serving  their  one  Lord.  The  people  of  a  nation  are  united 
together  not  by  national  prejudices  and  oppressive  laws  so  much  as  by  their 
common  loyalty  to  a  righteous  and  just  government.    (/.  Lewis.) 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 


Veb.  6.  And  as  long  as  he  sought  the  Lord,  God  made  Um  to  prosper. — Soul 
prosperity: — I.  The  seekers  of  the  Lord.  1.  Every  real  seeker  of  the  Lord 
must  be  a  heaven-bom  soul  (John  iii.  3).  This  involves  the  bestowment  of  a 
Divine  existence,  the  creating  of  a  new  nature  (2  Pet.  i.  4).  This  is  the  nature  that 
habitually  seeks  after  God.  2.  Seeking  the  Lord  includes— (1)  Worshipping. 
(2)  Wrestling.  (3)  Waiting.  II.  Theib  expebeence  of  PBosPEBrrr.  If  you  ask  a 
worldling  what  constitutes  prosperity  he  will  say,  "  Many  excellent  bargains,  good 
customers,  ready  money,  quick  returns,  the  accumulation  of  property,  health, 
friends,  extended  connections,  and  the  like."  But  what  is  Christian  prosperity? 
1.  Spiritual  growth.  2.  Triumphant  victories.  The  life  of  a  Christian  is  the  life 
of  a  conqueror.  3.  The  taking  of  spoils  from  the  vanquished  foe.  The  most 
valuable  lessons  are  often  learnt  from  the  heaviest  calamities.  III.  The  ixtension 
OF  prosperity  :  *'  As  long  as  he  sought  the  Lord."  (Joseph  Irons.)  The  secret  of 
strength  and  its  perils : — I.  We  have  the  marvellous  help  which  Jehovah 
gives  to  a  bightlt-purposed  man,  and  its  consequences.  No  one  can  suppose 
that  Judah  was  very  prosperous  before  the  accession  of  that  king.  For,  not  only 
had  it  been  humbled  at  the  battle  of  Beth-Shemesh,  but  Jerusalem  itself  had  been 
ravaged  and  partially  dismantled.  And,  considering  the  extreme  youth  of  the 
king,  only  sixteen  years  of  age  when  he  came  to  the  throne,  one  would  naturally 
have  expected  to  read  of  the  gradual  increase  of  the  disorders  of  the  kingdom 
through  the  contests  of  opposing  factions,  and  of  its  gradual  diminution  and 
enthralment  through  the  successes  of  its  enemies.  But,  on  the  contrary,  the  first 
thing  recorded  of  Uzziah  is  that  "  he  built  Eloth  and  restored  it  to  Judah  "  ;  and 
thenceforward,  throughout  the  greater  part  of  his  reign,  the  story  of  no  single 
disaster  or  defeat  interrupts  the  current  of  prosperity.  First  of  all  the  Philistines, 
and  then  the  Arabs,  the  Mehunim,  and  the  Ammonites  were  compelled  to  restore 
to  Judah  the  cities  they  had  before  appropriated,  were,  indeed,  in  sonae  instances 
reduced  to  the  condition  of  tributary  nations.  And  the  internal  administration  of 
the  country  was  not  less  fortunate  than  its  external  relationships.  Jerusalem  was 
refortiHed,  and  for  the  first  time  in  Biblical  history  we  read  of  "engines,  invented 


CHAP.xxTi.]  17.  CHRONICLES.  117 

by  cunning  men,  to  be  on  the  towers  and  upon  the  bulwarks,  to  shoot  arrows  and 
great  stones  withal."  And  "  he  built  towers  in  the  desert,  and  digged  many  wells ; 
for  he  had  much  cattle,  both  in  the  low  country  and  in  the  plains ;  husbandmen 
also  and  vinedressers  in  the  mountains  and  in  Carmel ;  for  he  loved  husbandry." 
Everything  shows  that  the  kingdom  reached  a  condition  of  prosperity  such  as  it 
had  not  known  since  the  days  of  Solomon.  And  the  explanation  of  it  all  is  the 
marvellous  help  of  the  Almighty.  You  may  see  it  in  almost  all  aspects  and 
exigencies  of  life — the  wonderful  help  of  God  making  a  Christian  prosperous  and 
strong.  It  is  quite  true  that  we  sometimes  trouble  ourselves,  as  Uzziah  must  have 
often  in  those  difficult  years  troubled  himself,  with  the  thought  that  we  have  no 
inherent  ability  for  the  work  which  God  gives  us  to  do,  whether  it  be  work  of  service 
or  of  sanctification.  But  in  that  imagination  we  are  altogether  wrong,  and  there- 
fore wrong  in  letting  ourselves  be  depressed  and  unnerved  by  it.  For  the  Scriptural 
doctrine  always  is  that  it  is  the  marvellous  help  of  God  that  makes  a  man  strong, 
that  no  man  is  or  can  become  strong,  in  any  religious  sense  of  that  word,  apart 
from  such  help.  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation,  for  it  is  God  that  worketh  in 
you."  There  can  be  no  other  explanation  of  the  prosperity  of  Uzziah,  his  conquest 
of  difficulties  greater  than  ours,  his  faithfulness  under  burdens  heavier  than  ours, 
than  simply  that  God,  because  of  his  faith  in  God,  helped  him.  And  in  all  times, 
when  duty,  sorrow,  responsibility,  or  doubt  presses  upon  ourselves,  we  can  adopt  a 
course  that  has  never  failed,  and  resolve,  "  I  will  seek  unto  God,  and  unto  God 
will  I  commit  my  cause,  which  doeth  great  things,  and  unsearchable,  marvellous 
things  without  number  ...  to  set  up  on  high  those  that  be  low,  that  those  which 
mourn  may  be  exalted  to  safety,"  II.  The  peril  of  prosperity,  which  was  too 
GREAT  A  PERIL  FOR  UzziAH.  His  Splendid  career  elated  him,  and  "  his  heart  was 
lifted  up  to  his  destruction."  Instead  of  reverent  praise  to  God  for  having  helped  him 
so  marvellously,  he  Began  to  flatter  himself  with  the  thought  that  his  success  had 
been  achieved  by  his  own  wisdom  and  skill,  and  "  he  transgressed  against  the  Lord, 
and  went  into  the  temple  of  the  Lord  to  burn  incense  upon  the  altar  of  incense." 
It  is  easy  to  find  excuses  for  Uzziah,  which  are  sufficient  to  protect  him  from  our 
blame,  but  not  sufficient  to  reduce  the  heinousness  of  his  sin  in  the  sight  of  God. 
It  might,  for  instance,  be  said  that  his  old  godly  counsellor  Zechariah  had  lately 
died.  Or  it  might  be  said  that  he  was  but  imitating  the  conduct  of  his  father,  of 
Jeroboam,  of  the  idolatrous  kings  around  him.  But,  whatever  our  charity  may 
dispose  us  to  urge  in  palliation,  the  fact  remains  that  he  showed  his  gratitude  to 
God  for  the  marvellous  help  he  had  received  by  setting  at  nought  the  express 
commandment  of  God.  For  when  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram  were  destroyed, 
their  brazen  censers  were  made  into  broad  plates  for  a  covering  of  the  altar  "  to  be 
a  memorial  unto  the  children  of  Israel"  (so  runs  the  law)  "  that  no  stranger,  which 
is  not  of  the  seed  of  Aaron,  come  near  to  offer  incense  before  the  Lord."  Nor  can 
Uzziah  have  forgotten  that  law.  It  was,  indeed,  when  he  became  wrath  with  the 
faithful  priests  who  reminded  him  of  it,  and  pressed  forward  with  his  censer,  that 
that  moment  "  the  leprosy  rose  up  to  his  forehead,"  and,  conscience-smitten,  he 
hastened  out  of  the  temple.  Just  think  of  the  contrast  which  that  sin  caused 
between  the  earlier  and  the  later  parts  of  Uzziah's  reign.  There  is  another  place 
in  the  Old  Testament  where  that  warning  is  embedded  in  associations  of  even 
greater  interest  than  these — the  song  of  Moses  in  the  thirty-second  chapter  of 
Deuteronomy.  The  marvellous  works  which  God  had  wrought  for  Israel  are 
enumerated  first.  Then  follow  the  ungrateful  exaltation  of  Israel  in  their  own  eyes, 
their  desertion  of  God,  and  the  wrath  they  thereby  brought  quickly  upon  themselves. 
It  is  just  a  type  of  the  process  that  takes  place  in  many  hearts.  First  of  all,  God 
blesses  us,  enables  us  to  do  what  otherwise  we  could  not  possibly  have  done,  makes 
us  great  in  control  over  ourselves,  and  perhaps,  also,  in  influence  over  others.  We, 
in  some  crisis  of  temptation,  listen  to  the  whisper  that  it  was  our  own  hand  that 
made  us  strong ;  self-complacency  begets  presumption ;  until  at  last  conscience 
smites  us ;  we  know  ourselves  to  be  leprous  in  spirit  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  the 
self-built  fabric  of  prosperity  crumbles  in  a  moment.  Blessed  for  us  if  the  Lord 
gives  us  what  He  gave  Uzziah — seven  quiet  years  for  penitence,  thought,  and 
humbler  service.  It  may  be  well  to  linger  a  little  upon  the  different  stages  of  this 
process,  which  sometimes  leads  a  godly  man  from  strength  to  leprosy.  Obviously 
pride  was  at  the  bottom  of  Uzziah's  sin.  Uzziah  seems  to  have  thought, 
"  Philistines  and  Ammonites,  it's  I  have  defeated  them,  and  my  name  which  they 
applaud  and  fear  even  to  the  entering  in  of  Egypt.  My  father  left  the  kingdom 
circumscribed,  so  reduced  that  he  had  to  give  hostages  to  Joash ;  I  have  made  it  great 


113  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

and  free."  And  still  whenever  by  the  help  of  God  we  have  done  any  useful  work, 
we  are  liable  to  a  similar  temptation,  to  attribute  to  ourselves  the  credit  of  having 
done  it,  and  in  our  self-complacency  to  forget  and  to  dishonour  God.  There  is 
nothing  but  sin,  failure,  and  ruin  to  be  found  in  yielding  to  that  temptation.  For 
the  immediate  and  necessary  consequence  of  pride  is  presumption,  which,  though 
it  may  not  take  the  exact  form  it  took  in  the  case  of  TJzziah,  may  take  an  equally 
sinful  form.  One  form  it  often  assumes  now,  in  the  case  of  men  whose  real  know- 
ledge of  God  is  very  defective,  is  that  of  patronising  the  Gospel.  But  much  as  that 
habit  of  thought  requires  to  be  guarded  against,  it  is  probably  in  other  directions 
that  most  of  us  are  more  apt  to  err.  The  remembrance  of  what  we  have  done  by 
the  help  of  God  prompts  us  to  attempt  what  we  have  to  do  apart  from  His  help, 
with  confidence  in  ourselves  as  sufficient  for  it,  with  a  neglect  of  Divine  aid  as 
more  or  less  unnecessary  and  superfluous.  Any  particle  of  the  pride  which  leads 
us  to  attribute  to  ourselves  the  success  of  the  past,  whatever  the  particular  form  or 
particular  associations  of  that  pride,  is  a  mistake  even  according  to  human 
judgment,  an  element  of  weakness  which  will  grievously  impede  us,  and  a  sin  in 
the  sight  of  God.  And,  whilst  that  principle  teaches  us  what  is  forbidden,  it 
teaches  us  also  what  is  enjoined.  Pride  always  means  folly  and  failure.  And 
therefore  trust  in  God,  the  more  perfect  and  supreme  the  better,  means  wisdom 
and  success.  It  was  whilst  Uzziah  "  looked  unto  God  "  that  he  was  marvellously 
helped  and  made  strong.  And  it  will  be  in  proportion  as  we  trust  in  Jehovah  that 
we  shall  have  vigour  to  finish  and  patience  to  bear  whatever  He  gives  us  to  endure 
or  to  do.  {R,  W,  Moss.)  Destroyed  by  prosperity : — I.  Uzziah's  prosperotjb 
CABEEB.  ♦•  He  was  marvellously  helped  till  he  was  strong."  His  good  fortune,  as 
the  world  would  call  it,  dated  from  his  seventeenth  year.  It  was  a  trying  position 
for  a  mere  boy  to  be  placed  in  ;  for  the  cares  and  responsibilities,  as  well  as  the 
temptations  and  luxuries,  of  a  royal  palace  demand  a  ripe  wisdom  and  strength  of 
moral  purpose  rarely  found  at  so  early  an  age.  But  God's  grace  could  qualify  even 
BO  young  a  man  for  the  task ;  and  I  am  struck  with  the  fact,  that  almost  every  one 
of  the  good  kings  of  Judah  was  quite  a  youth  when  he  succeeded  to  the  throne. 
There  is  no  reason  why  the  season  of  young  manhood  should  be  given  up  to  passion 
and  frivolity.  It  was  a  great  advantage  to  the  young  Uzziah  that  he  had  the 
loyal  attachment  and  confidence  of  his  people.  But  what  mainly  guarded  him 
from  the  dangers  around  him,  and  kept  him  steady  on  his  throne,  was  a  sincere 
piety.  Never  forget  the  quarter  from  whence  all  true  prosperity  must  come. 
Success  does  not  depend  on  yourselves  alone.  Still  less  does  it  come  from  chance. 
Take  God  with  you  into  all  the  affairs  of  life.  Look  to  Him  to  bless  your  business. 
Ask  His  help  in  every  fresh  enterprise  you  undertake.  II.  His  marvellods 
PBESUMPTioN.  "  But  when  he  was  strong,  his  heart  was  lifted  up  to  his  destruction." 
It  requires  special  grace  to  keep  a  man  right  when  he  has  had  a  career  of 
unbroken  prosperity.  One  day,  when  the  celebrated  George  Whitfield  was  about  to 
commence  the  service,  an  intimation  was  read  out  from  the  desk  below :  "  The 
prayers  of  the  congregation  are  desired  for  a  young  man  who  has  become  heir  to 
an  immense  fortune,  and  who  feels  he  has  much  need  of  grace  to  keep  him  humble 
in  the  midst  of  his  riches."  Nothing  tries  a  man  so  much  as  the  favour  of  fortune 
and  the  flattery  of  the  world.  III.  The  note  of  warning.  As  there  are  many 
kinds  of  prosperity,  so  there  are  many  kinds  of  presumption.  A  man  may  be 
"  lifted  up  to  his  destruction,"  for  example — 1.  By  the  pride  of  money.  It  does 
not  take  a  large  fortune  to  make  some  people  "  purse-proud  " — and  very  disagree- 
able people  these  are.  2.  The  pride  of  intellect.  I  wish  to  put  you  on  your  guard 
against  a  current  which  is  running  very  strong  in  our  day.  I  mean  the  tendency 
to  set  up  the  reason  against  religion.  Perhaps  I  might  mention — 3.  Pride  of  wit. 
Now  I  go  in  for  a  sunny,  cheerful  religion.  God  has  put  within  us  a  faculty  of 
mirthfuiness,  which  He  did  not  mean  us  to  suppress.  There  is  no  necessary 
connection  between  dulness  and  piety,  between  a  long  face  and  a  new  heart.  True, 
but  there  are  some  men  who  are  hardly  ever  serious.  (J.  T.  Davidson,  D.D.) 
The  rise  and  the  fall : — To  be  successful  or  prosperous,  to  get  on  in  the  world,  or  to 
be  strong,  is  what  every  one,  be  his  position  what  it  may,  longs  for  and  struggles 
after.  Prosperity  is  a  relative  term.  A  king  is  prosperous  or  strong  when  from 
strength  of  character  and  purity  of  life  he  has  secured  the  confidence  and  love  of 
his  people,  and  the  respect  of  neighbouring  sovereigns  and  nations.  A  merchant 
is  prosperous  when  his  dealings  are  followed  by  remunerative  gains.  A  minister 
of  Jesus  Christ  is  prosperous  when  he  benefits  souls  and  instructs  men's  minds, 
and  leads  them  to  think  of  something  higher  and  more  lasting  than  the  passing 


CHIP.  XXVI.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  119 

show  of  the  world.  To  be  prosperous,  to  be  strong,  is  in  one  word  to  get  on  in 
one's  own  department,  and  at  one's  peculiar  work.  Whatever  success  be  ours  we 
ought  to  acknowledge  that  God  has  been  with  us.  It  is  just  here  that  men  are  so 
often  thoughtless  and  ungrateful,  and  have  their  heart  lifted  up  to  destruction. 
We  see  this  often  in  the  case — 1.  Of  individuals.  2.  Of  families.  3.  Of  Churches. 
4.  Of  nations.  (W,  Mackintosh  Arthur,  M.A.)  Uzziah — his  sin  and  punishment : — 
Bightly  to  apprehend  Uzziah's  sin,  we  must  remember  through  what  barriers  he 
had  to  break  before  he  could  resolve  to  do  this  thing.  He  had  to  disregard  the 
direct  command  of  Jehovah  that  the  priests  alone  should  burn  incense  on  His 
altar.  He  had  to  despise  the  history  of  his  people,  to  reject  the  solemn  lessons 
that  he  had  learned  from  childhood.  He  was  defiling  his  own  sacred  things  ;  the 
Jewish  history  was  the  history  of  his  own  people,  the  charter  of  his  own  blessings  ; 
the  temple  and  the  priesthood  were  the  solemn  ordinances  of  his  own  worship. 
He  was  impiously  defying  the  holy  name  by  which  he  himself  was  called.  I.  Pkos- 
PEKiTY  AND  PRIDE.  "  Uzziah  did  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord, 
according  to  all  that  his  father  Amaziah  did.  And  he  sought  God  in  the  days  of 
Zechariah,  who  had  understanding  in  the  visions  of  God  :  and  as  long  as  he  sought 
the  Lord,  God  made  him  to  prosper."  The  results  of  godly  training  and  holy 
companionship  are  often  seen  in  the  prudence,  and  diligence,  and  sobriety  which 
command  success  and  reputation.  The  modes  of  life  which  the  influence  of  the 
gospel  forms,  which  are  the  tradition  of  Christian  households,  are  just  those  which 
conduce  to  happiness  and  honour.  Mere  worldly  prosperity  is  often  the  prelude  to 
daring  impiety.  It  is  a  perpetual  question  how  to  "  remove  "  the  "  hireling  "  spirit 
out  of  the  Church.  Men  whose  ships  bring  them  wealth,  whose  plans  in  business 
succeed,  come  to  fancy  themselves  fit  for  any  place  of  responsibility  in  the  Church. 
Churches  love  to  pay  honour  to  men  of  wealth  ;  choose  for  places  of  special  service, 
not  those  of  pure  heart,  and  fervent  faith,  and  lowly  self-denial,  but  those  who 
have  succeeded  in  business,  and  whose  plans,  it  is  therefore  thought,  must  needs 
be  followed.  Uzziah  was  a  good  king,  but  he  was  a  bad  priest ;  he  was  not  the 
priest  whom  God  had  chosen.  Men  whose  godliness,  and  integrity,  and  Christian 
conduct  have  won  them  respect  are  most  valuable  helps  in  all  Christian  activities. 
But  mere  worldly  success  is  a  poor  standard  by  which  to  measure  these  things,  and 
ought  never  to  be  allowed  to  secure  to  any  voice  and  direction  in  Church  affairs. 
"It  appertains  not  to  these  to  bum  incense  unto  the  Lord."  It  is  a  matter  of 
personal  experience  how  prosperity  lifts  up  the  heart,  and  lures  us  to  destruction. 
"  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit :  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  U.  Pbidk 
AND  PUNISHMENT.  "  Here  now,"  you  may  be  ready  to  say,  "  is  something  in  the 
Btory  which  is  simply  Jewish,  quite  foreign  to  the  liie  of  to-day.  Do  you  mean  to 
say  that  God  visits  men  with  judgments  now  ?  Is  there  anything  here  to  come 
home  to  the  hearts  of  Englishmen  ?  "  I  do  say  that  God  is  judging  us  ;  the  same 
God  who  judged  His  people  of  old.  There  is  in  this  very  part  of  the  narrative 
something  to  set  us  thinking  on  the  mysteries  of  our  daily  life,  and  to  help  in  their 
interpretation.  Suppose,  now,  a  physician  had  given  us  a  purely  medical  report  of 
this  incident.  Suppose  he  had  told  us  that  there  was  in  Uzziah  an  unsuspected 
taint  of  leprosy :  a  taint  which,  if  he  had  been  careful  of  himself,  especially  avoid- 
ing strong  passionate  excitements,  might  never  have  developed  into  actual 
symptoms  of  disease.  Hereditary  or  constitutional  disease  may  often  lurk  for  a 
lifetime  unsuspected,  till  some  circumstance  favours  its  development,  and  instan- 
taneously it  works  itself  out  in  all  its  power.  Of  all  such  favouring  circumstances, 
strong  passionate  excitement  is  the  surest ;  in  the  heat  of  pride  the  seeds  of  sickness 
are  frequently  quickened.  What  stories  are  more  impressive  or  more  common  than 
those  of  men  suddenly  stricken  down  on  the  eve  of  the  gratification  of  their  pride, 
in  the  first  thrill  of  triumph,  in  the  very  fever  of  unbridled  ambition  ?  A  man  has 
been  all  his  lifetime  amassing  wealth;  satisfied  at  length,  he  builds  himself  a 
lordly  mansion,  that  he  may  rank  with  the  nobles  of  the  land.  He  builds,  but  he 
never  enjoys  it — he  is  found  some  morning  smitten  with  impotence;  and  the 
palsied  speech-muscles  refuse  to  articulate  a  word.  A  statesmen  is  summoned  to 
the  royal  presence-chamber ;  at  the  council-table  the  blood-stain  at  his  lips  declares 
that  honours  and  life  will  soon  be  laid  together  in  the  dust.    A  student  is  called  to 

J  reside  over  some  learned  body  ;  his  brain  gives  way,  and  the  asylum  is  henceforth 
is  home.  Instead  of  leprosy,  read  paralysis  or  haemorrhage,  or  softening  of  the 
brain,  and  it  is  just  a  narrative  from  our  daily  press.  Say  what  we  will,  this  is  true, 
that  pride  and  passion,  unregulated  ambition  and  impious  recklessness,  do  terribly 
punish  those  whom  they  enslave.    The  Jewish  story  interprets  the  English  life. 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvi. 

If  Englishmen  trace  these  things  to  natural  causes,  and  go  no  further,  while  the 
Jew  says,  "  God  has  smitten  him,"  the  Jew  is  right  and  the  Englishman  is  wrong. 
It  is  a  sign  of  unbelief  and  folly  to  refuse  to  trace  God's  hands,  save  in  events 
that  are  utterly  unintelligible.  God's  great  work  is  to  reveal,  not  to  hide  Himself. 
It  is  part  of  His  order  of  nature  that  bodily  pains  should  often  reveal  and  rebuke 
the  workings  of  an  ungodly  soul.  The  hour  of  pride  is  often,  too,  an  hour  of 
terrible  revelation  of  hidden  spiritual  taints ;  which  of  us  has  not  found  secret  sina 
leaping  to  light  in  the  heats  of  unbridled  passion  ?  We  flattered  ourselves  that 
God  made  us  to  prosper  because  we  sought  Him.  Our  seeking  of  Him  became  a 
tradition  of  the  past,  a  memory ;  we  thought  we  had  overcome  our  temptations, 
laid  aside  our  easily  besetting  sin ;  and,  even  while  we  boasted,  we  fell  before  God 
and  men.  We  have  thanked  God  we  were  not  as  other  men ;  suddenly  we  have 
had  to  change  our  boasting,  we  have  known  ourselves  the  chief  of  sinners.  As 
long  as  we  seek  God,  He  wiU  make  us  to  prosper  ;  but  only  so  long.  Keep  we  ever 
near  Him,  ever  following  Him,  ever  obeying  and  trusting  Him,  and  we  shall  be 
"  marvellously  helped  and  be  strong."  III.  Punishment  and  shame.  Hope  con- 
cerning Uzziah  is  given  in  the  record  of  his  hasting  to  go  out  of  the  temple.  His 
proud  heart  was  broken ;  he  was  smitten  with  shame.  There  needed  not  "  the 
priests,  the  valiant  men,"  to  thrust  him  out:  "  Yea,  himself  hasted  also  to  go  out, 
because  the  Lord  had  smitten  him."  It  may  have  been  mere  terror  that  drove  him 
forth,  the  force  of  circumstances,  and  not  a  convicted,  penitent  heart.  His  self- 
abasement  may  have  been  as  godless  as  was  his  exaltation.  It  may  have  been  so ; 
but  it  may  have  been  far  otherwise.  Assuredly  God  intended  it  to  be  otherwise. 
Of  the  seven  years  that  he  spent  in  the  •'  several  house  "  we  know  nothing ;  of  this 
we  may  be  sure,  that  during  all  those  years  God  was  seeking  to  restore  and  save 
his  soul.  In  solitude,  while  his  son  was  over  his  kingdom,  and  regents  were  doing 
the  work  God  had  taken  from  his  hands,  he  might  have  learnt  many  a  lesson  he 
had  not  learnt  upon  the  throne.  The  dignity  and  service  forfeited  through  pride 
may  be  never  regained.  A  stain  may  cling  to  the  name  ;  the  reputation  long  held 
honourable,  and  lost  through  a  shameful  fall,  may  not  even  after  death  bo 
recovered.  Sons  may  blush  more  over  the  dishonourable  grave  and  the  one 
terrible  sin  of  their  fathers  than  they  triumph  in  the  glory  of  a  whole  life.  Impiety 
is  a  fearful  thing,  and  has  a  fearful  curse.     (A.  Mackennal,  B.A.)  The  religious 

element  necessary  in  commonwealths : — We  need  more  than  animals  to  make  a 
commonwealth  worth  preserving ;  we  need  more  than  bodies,  and  more  than  what 
is  usually,  but  too  narrowly,  denominated  practical  substance ;  we  need  the  religious 
element,  the  spiritual  force,  that  marvellous  telescopic  faculty  that  looks  away 
beyond  the  visible  into  that  which  is  unseen.  We  need  to  have  ghostly  men 
among  us ;  men  who  see  the  metaphysical  in  the  literal ;  men  who  know  that 
nothing  is  true  that  is  not  metaphysically  true ;  men  who  insist  that  we  see  nothing 
with  the  naked  eye,  and  that  vision  is  a  heart-gift,  an  inward  faculty,  a  sublime 
treasure  entrusted  to  men  of  God.  Thus  the  Church  will  always  have  an  important 
part  to  play  in  the  upbuilding  of  the  State,  in  the  government  of  kings,  in  the 
direction  of  great  affairs.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  10,  11.  For  he  loved  husbandry. — We  cannot  always  follow  the  pursuits 
we  love  : — Is  there  anything  more  distressing  than  to  be  compelled  to  do  the  thing  we 
have  no  heart  for  ?  Many  a  man  in  the  city  would  leave  his  occupation  to-morrow 
if  he  could  find  bread  in  the  thing  he  really  loves.  And  many  men  are  in  positions 
that  look  lofty,  and  that  are  amply  rewarded,  for  which  they  care  nothing  ;  they  would 
rather  be  at  home  attending  to  the  garden,  watching  the  bees,  reading  noble  books. 
But  we  cannot  do  what  we  would  like  to  do.  Herein  is  part  of  our  discipline, 
which  is  part  of  our  education.  We  must  have  the  will  broken  somewhere.  No  man 
can  reach  the  full  stature  of  his  manhood,  and  realise  all  that  is  sweetest  in  life, 
until  his  wiU  has  been  cut  right  in  two.    {Ibid.) 

Ver.  15.  For  he  was  marvellously  helped  till  he  was  strong. — Marvellously 
helped  till  strong  ; — Two  kinds  of  help,  natural  and  supernatural.  1.  A  time  when 
we  cannot  help  ourselves.  Infancy.  2.  A  time  of  growth,  when  we  can  help 
ourselves.  Youth,  manhood.  3.  When  thus  strong  the  supernatural  help  ceases. 
Not  less  provision  made  on  that  account.  There  is  joy  and  co-operation  with 
God.  As  an  earthly  father  requires  ti  be  obeyed  and  served,  beholds  strength 
and  disposition  to  co-operate,  so  the  heavenly  Father,  &c.  (O.  Matheson.) 
Prosperity : — I.  Uzziah's    pbospeiutt.      1.    The    particulars    of    his    prosperity. 


CHAP,  xxvl]  II.  CHRONICLES.  121 

(1)  He  prospered  in  war.  He  had  an  army  of  307,500  men,  over  whom  were  2,600 
mighty  and  valorous  captains.  All  were  fully  equipped  for  service.  With  these 
soldiers  Uzziah  fought  against  the  Philistines,  the  Arabians  that  dwelt  in  Gur-baal, 
the  Mehuniins  and  the  Amorites,  and  in  each  case  he  was  victorious.  (2)  He 
prospered  in  building.  He  repaired  and  fortified  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  reared 
towers  "  a  hundred  and  fifty  cubits  high  "  (Josephus),  built  walled  towns  in  the 
desert,  and  made  channels  for  the  conveyance  of  water.  (3)  He  prospered  in  agri- 
culture. "  He  planted  it  with  all  sorts  of  plants,  and  sowed  it  with  all  sorts  of 
seeds."  (4)  Uzziah's  prosperity  appears  to  have  been  general.  He  did  not  keep 
up  a  great  military  establishment  at  the  expense  of  other  departments.  His  name 
spread  far  abroad,  and  he  was  acknowledged  to  be  an  illustrious  and  a  highly- 
favoured  prince.  2.  The  author  of  his  prosperity.  This  was  God.  (Uzziah 
signifies  "  strength  from  Jehovah.")  "  He  was  marvellously  helped."  God  helped 
him  against  his  enemies,  and  in  all  he  undertook.  It  might  have  been  otherwise. 
Instead  of  victory  he  might  have  experienced  defeat.  His  building  and  agricultural 
schemes  might  have  proved  unsuccessful.  It  is  always  well  to  set  the  Lord  at  our 
right  hand.  We  may  plough  and  plant,  but  He  only  can  cause  the  seed  to  germi- 
nate, and  grow,  and  fructify.  We  may  contrive  and  work,  but  He  only  can  bless 
our  endeavours.  3.  The  secret  of  Uzziah's  prosperity.  It  is  distinctly  set  forth  in 
the  fifth  verse  of  this  (xxvi.)  chapter,  "  He  sought  God  in  the  days  of  Zechariah, 
who  had  understanding  in  the  visions  of  God  :  and  so  long  as  he  sought  the  Lord 
God  made  him  to  prosper."  What  is  there  that  God  cannot  do  for  a  man  who 
takes  Him  into  his  counsels?  He  can  help  him  "  marvellously."  He  can  exalt 
valleys  and  level  mountains,  make  crooked  places  straight  and  rough  places  plain. 
He  can  bring  clients  into  the  office  and  ready-money  customers  into  the  shop.  He 
has  the  hearts  of  all  men  in  His  hands,  and  aU  the  forces  of  the  universe  ;  and  He 
can  do  whatsoever  He  will.  II.  Uzziah's  pbide.  1.  His  prosperity  made  him 
proud.  "  His  heart  was  lifted  up."  A  great  change  for  the  worse  was  wrought  in 
him.  Whether  it  was  brought  about  suddenly  or  gradually  we  are  not  told.  We 
assume  that  Uzziah  did  not  become  proud  all  at  once.  He  who  had  formerly 
recognised  God  as  the  prime  cause  of  his  splendid  achievements  became  wilfully 
blind,  and  we  shaU  soon  see  what  effect  this  had  upon  his  conduct.  2.  His  pride 
led  him  into  presumption.  The  tendency  of  pride  is  to  make  men  giddy,  and  as 
the  result  their  vision  is  beclouded,  their  judgment  is  perverted.  (1)  The  occasion 
of  his  presumption.  Josephus  teUs  us  that  it  was  *'  a  remarkable  day,  a  general 
festival,"  and  we  are  left  to  supply  the  rest.  (2)  The  nature  of  his  presumption. 
He  usurped  the  ofiSce  of  the  priest.  There  are  hereditary  moral  diseases  as  well  as 
those  which  are  physical  and  mental.  Uzziah's  folly  was  in  some  respects  a 
reproduction  of  the  folly  of  which  Amaziah  his  father  had  been  guilty.  HI. 
Uzziah's  punishment.  1.  He  was  resisted  in  his  attempt  to  do  that  which  was 
unlawful ;  resisted  by  the  proper  guardians  of  the  temple.  Azariah,  the  high 
priest,  seeing  what  he  was  about  to  do,  went  in  after  him,  and  with  him  fourscore 
priests  of  the  Lord,  who  were  valiant  men.  No  time  was  lost  (ver.  18).  2.  He 
was  smitten  with  leprosy.  "  The  leprosy  rose  up  in  his  forehead  before  the  priests 
in  the  house  of  the  Lord."  There  was  the  bright  scaly  spot  which  told  its  own 
terrible  tale — the  mark  of  God's  disapprobation,  and  it  was  on  his  brow,  where  all 
could  see  it.  3.  He  was  thrust  out  of  the  temple  as  unclean.  It  was  not  necessary, 
however,  to  use  force ;  conscious  that  God  had  smitten  him,  he  hurried  out,  self- 
condemned,  probably  shrieking  out  his  woe,  and  cursing  his  folly.  4.  He  was 
separated  from  society  (Lev.  xiii.  46).  6.  He,  being  a  leper,  was  buried  alone. 
Josephus  tells  us  that  he  "  was  buried  by  himself  in  his  own  garden."  In  aU  like- 
lihood his  resting-place  was  a  field  or  garden  adjoining  the  usual  burial-place  of 
the  kings.  Lessons :  1.  God  is  the  giver  of  prosperity.  2.  Prosperous  men  are 
in  danger  of  becoming  proud.  3.  Pride  is  often  followed  by  presumption.  4.  Pre- 
sumption is  sure  of  punishment.     {J.  Baker  Norton.) 

Vers.  17, 18.  It  appertaineth  not  unto  thee,  Uzzlali,  to  bum  incense  unto  the 
Lord. — We  must  abide  within  our  limitation : — The  great  temptation  of  some  natures 
is  to  try  to  do  the  very  things  for  which  they  are  least  qualified.  There  is  a 
marvellous  irony  in  human  genius  in  this  matter.  It  would  seem  to  be  aa 
inscrutable  mystery  that  men  will  persist  in  attempting  to  do  the  thing  which  they 
cannot  do,  and  which  they  were  obviously  never  meant  to  do.  Whenever  a  man  is 
out  of  place  he  is  guilty  of  wasting  strength.  A  man  can  only  work  well  within  his 
own  limit.    No  man  should  strain  himself  at  his  labour,  be  he  poet,  or  musician,  or 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

divine,  be  he  prophet  or  merchantman ;  he  should  keep  easily  within  the  circle  he 

■was  appointed  to  occupy,  for  all  stretching  is  weakening,  all  effort  that  is  above  the 

line  of  nature  tends  to  destruction,  both  to  the  worker  and  of  the  influence  which 

he  ought  to  exert.     Know  your  own  place,  and  keep  it.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.)        The 

folly  of  self-will : — God  has  sacred  places,  God  has  allotted  specific  duties  to  men  ; 

every  man  will  be  wise  in  proportion  as  he  sees  his  own  calling,  and  makes  hia 

calling  and  election  sure.    Beward  lies  along  that  line.     Leave  your  native  heath, 

take  your  life  into  your  own  hands,  say  you  will  create  a  sphere  for  yourself  and 

do  as  you  please,  and  you  shall  be  stung  with  disappointments  as  with  a  cloud  of 

insects.     Say  you  will  insist  upon  having  your  own  way  in  the  world,  and  every 

rock  you  strike  will  but  injure  the  hand  that  smites  it.    But  live  and  move  and 

have  your  being  in  God.    Say,  "  Lord,  not  my  will,  but  Thine  be  done  ;  make  me 

door-keeper,  or  lamp-lighter,  or  hewer  of  wood  or  drawer  of  water,  or  a  Zechariah 

having  learning  in  Thy  visions  and  power  of  reading  all  the  apocalypse  of  Thy 

providence :  what  Thou  wilt,  as  Thou  wilt,  as  long  as  Thou  wilt:  Thy  wiU  is  heaven." 

It  is  towards  this  end  that  all  Christian  education  must  tend.     (Ibid.)         Uzziah's 

pride  punished  : — I.  His  reion  as  kino.     This  was  pre-eminently  successful.     The 

Arab  hordes  on  his  south-east  borders  were  subdued,  and  the  Ammonites  were 

reduced  to  tribute.    He  was  no  less  vigorous  in  defensive  than  offensive  operations. 

He  paid  as  great  attention  to  the  arts  of  peace  as  of  war.    He  was  the  special  patron 

of  agriculture  ;  he  dug  wells,  built  towers  in  the  wilderness  for  the  protection  of  the 

flocks,  and  cultivated  rich  vineyards.     II.  Uzziah's  sin.     Uzziah  was  ambitious; 

he  was  not  willing  that  any  in  his  realm  should  enjoy  prerogatives  denied  to  him. 

III.  Uzziah's  punishment.    Henceforth  the  most  menial  subject  would  not  exchange 

places  with  the  leprous  king.     As  lessons  taught  by  this  narrative  we  learn — 

1.  Prosperity  is  dangerous.    The  record  of  Uzziah  does  not  stand  alone.    Prosperity 

seldom  draws  men  to  God.     Gratitude  does  not  increase  in  proportion  as  God's 

favours  multiply.    A  man's  piety  is  not  usually  increased  by  his  becoming  rich.    It 

is  seldom  men  are  more  religious  in  health  than  in  sickness.    "Before  I  was 

afflicted  I  went  astray ;  but  now  have  I  kept  Thy  Word."    2.  God  is  to  be  approached 

reverently.     Uzziah  seems  to  have  thought  that  by  being  a  king,  successful  and 

famous,  he  had  earned  the  right  to  enter  the  holy  place  and  offer  sacred  incense. 

It  is  often  expected  that  God  wiU  accept  worship  if  the  display  of  wealth  mingle 

-with  it  largely.     Does  not  the  ability  to  offer  such  choice  incense  gain  for  one  the 

right  to  lift  the  sacred  veil  and  stand  where  God  hath  said  His  priests  only  should 

•enter,  and  "  the  stranger  that  cometh  nigh  shall  be  put  to  death"?    Uzziah  thought 

that  God  would  not  exclude  a  favoured  king  from  that  sacred  presence.    Men  often 

think  that  it  is  possible  to  find  some  incense  wafted  from  a  worldly  censer  which 

shall  ascend  as  fragrance  to  the  unseen  holy.    But  what  had  Uzziah's  kingdom  to 

do  toward  fitting  him  to  perform  a  priestly  act?    Man's  approach  to  God  is  through 

Christ.     In  the  Old  Testament  dispensation,  not  even  a  symbol  of  His  person  or 

work  could  be  accepted  or  admitted  into  the  holy  place,  other  than  that  which  God 

had  appointed.     3.  Sin,  though  in  high  places,  must  be  rebuked.    It  seemed  a  bold 

act  for  the  priests  to  say  to  Judah's  king,  "  Go  out  of  the  sanctuary,  for  thou  hast 

trespassed."     They  were  the  humble  ministers  of  religion,  and  he  the  proud  and 

pampered  king  of  a  victorious  people.     He  had  transcended  his  limit,  and  must  be 

rebuked,  though  he  be  a  king.     Such  invasions  of  religion  are  not  rare.     The  world 

is  always  ready  to  take  religious  duties  into  her  own  hands,  to  tell  how  God  is  to  be 

worshipped,  what  doctrines  are  to  be  preached,  what  duties  prescribed,  what  faults 

are  to  be  rebuked,  and  what  allowed.     She  enters  with  a  regal  tread,  and  speaks 

with  imperious  voice.    What  shall  be  done  ?    Does  and  will  the  Church  stand  firm 

in  her  antagonism  to  wrong  and  sin,  though  they  stand  in  kingly  pride  to  offer 

polluted  incense  on  her  sacred  altars  ?    4.  Men  may  be  blinded  to  sin,  till  they  see 

its  consequences.    It  is  not  probable  that  Uzziah  realised  his  guilt  till  the  "  leprosy 

rose  up  in  his  forehead."    Then  he  hasted  to  go  out  of  the  sanctuary.    Perhaps  he 

feared  other  and  severer  judgments  would  follow.     Had  God  stayed  His  retributive 

hand,  and  the  king  been  suffered,  with  no  leprous  spots,  to  leave  the  altar  as  proud 

and  ambitions  as  he  entered,  his  guilt  would  have  been  as  great.    The  smitten 

forehead,  like  a  detective,  laid  the  offender  under  arrest,  and  thus  exposed  him ; 

but  it  did  not  create  or  increase  his  sin.     Many,  guilty  of  the  most  grievous  wrongs, 

think    themselves    respectable,  and    claim  the  confidence  of    others,  till  some 

providence  uncovers  their  evil  deeds.     It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  all  the 

criminals  are  in  prison.    A  bad  man  is  as  bad  on  one  side  of  iron  bars  as  on  the 

other.     (Monday  Club  Sermons.) 


CHAP.xxvn.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  123 

Ver.  19.  Then  Uzzlab  was  ■wroth. — Impatience  of  reproof: — ^How  often  is  the 
sinner  only  provoked  to  greater  wickedness  by  the  obstacles  which  Divine  grace  opposes 
to  his  wrong-doing  I  How  few  men  will  tolerate  the  suggestion  that  their  intentions 
are  cruel,  selfish,  or  dishonourable !  Bemonstrance  is  an  insult,  an  offence  against 
their  personal  dignity  ;  they  feel  that  their  self-respect  demands  that  they  should 
persevere  in  their  purpose,  and  that  they  should  resent  and  punish  any  one  who  has 
tried  to  thwart  them.  The  most  dramatic  feature  of  this  episode,  the  sudden  frost 
of  leprosy  in  the  king's  forehead,  is  not  without  its  spiritual  antitype.  Men's  anger 
at  well-merited  reproof  has  often  blighted  their  lives  once  for  all  with  ineradicable 
moral  leprosy.  In  the  madness  of  passion  they  have  broken  bonds  which  have 
hitherto  restrained  them  and  committed  themselves  beyond  recall  to  evil  pursuits 
and  fatal  friendshipa.    {W.  H.  Bennett,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  XXVn. 


Veb.  8.  JLnd  on  the  wall  of  Ophel  he  built  much. — Building  on  Ophel : — Ophel 
means"  the  moimt."  Where  was  the  mount  ?  On  the  southern  slope.  Why  did  the 
king  build  so  much  on  Ophel  ?  Because  it  was  most  accessible  to  the  enemy.  Like 
a  wise  commander  he  remembered  that  no  man  is  stronger  than  his  weakest  point, 
and  that  no  fortification  is  stronger  than  its  frailest  part ;  so  the  king  built  much 
where  the  wall  was  weakest,  or  where  the  access  of  the  enemy  was  most  open ;  and 
in  doing  so  he  gathered  up  and  represented  the  wisdom  and  experience  of  the  ages, 
and  anticipated  what  we  and  all  the  sons  of  time  ought  to  do.  What  is  your  weakest 
point  in  life  ?    Build  much  there.    {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Yer.  6.  So  Jotham  became  mighty,  becauie  he  prepared  his  ways  before  the  Lord 
his  God. — Jotham' 8  epitaph : — I,  Every  man  is  under  God's  inspection.  How  truly 
did  the  ancients  realise  this  (Psa.  cixxix.  ;  Jer.  xxiii.  23,  24 ;  2  Ghron.  xvi.  9 ; 
Job  xxxiv.  22).  We  little  consider  this  in  the  present  day.  11.  Every  man  should 
LIVE  AS  under  God's  inspection.  A  man's  conduct  will  be  very  different  if  he 
realises  that  God's  eye  is  on  him.  He  will  avoid  sin.  He  will  bear  in  mind  the 
love  of  his  Father  who  is  in  heaven.  He  will  try  to  please  Him  in  thought  as  well 
as  in  deed.  UL  The  recognition  of  God's  presence  is  the  foundation-stone  of 
ALL  prosperity.  It  renders  a  man  great,  for — 1.  It  makes  him  careful  not  to  do 
that  which  will  disgrace  him.  2.  It  entitles  him  to  Divine  protection  and  help. 
3.  It  fills  him  with  a  consciousness  of  rectitude,  which  in  itself  is  a  panoply  of 
defence.  (Homilist.)  Jotham,  king  and  saint : — This  is  the  key-note  of  Jotham's 
biography:  "He  prepared  his  ways  before  the  Lord  his  God."  This  may  be 
applied  like  a  key  put  into  the  lock  of  each  of  these  verses  of  the  record  of  his 
life.  I.  He  went  right  where  his  father  went  wrong  (ver.  2).  Even  on  the 
pinnacle  of  success  and  popularity,  his  head  was  cool,  and  his  heart  was  clear,  and 
his  nerves  were  steady,  for  he  prepared  his  ways  before  the  Lord  his  God.  U.  He 
covered  the  countky  with  fortifications  (vers.  3,  4).  The  man  who  is  spiritual 
to  the  core  will  not  be  a  weakling  in  the  city,  and  he  will  not  be  easily  turned 
aside.  This  disposes  of  the  idea  that  to  be  a  praying  man  and  to  be  a  business  man 
do  not  go  together.  IH.  He  prevailed  against  his  enemies  (ver.  6).  Because, 
before  he  fought  he  prayed.  IV.  His  wealth  increased  (ver.  5).  Prayer  to  God 
brought  him  his  fortune.  V.  His  humility  exalted  him  (ver.  6).  Conclusion : 
What  was  Jotham  after  all  but  a  dim,  distant,  foreshadowing  of  Jesus  Christ  ?  If 
ever  the  text  was  true  of  any  one,  it  was  true  of  Him.  (John  McNeill.)  Godward- 
ness ;  or  the  might  of  an  ancient : — The  Bible  is  the  good  man's  chart :  to  warn 
away  from  danger  it  points  out  the  places  where  some  good  men  have  gone  down  ; 
while  to  encourage,  it  holds  up  to  view  the  principles  as  illustrated  by  the  life  of 
others  who  have  been  successful.  Jotham's  life  teaches — I.  Godwardness  :  the  true 
might  and  majesty  of  kings.  Godwardness  is  the  continuous  shaping  of  our 
thoughts  and  deeds  as  under  the  immediate  inspection  of  God.  Let  God  be  first  in 
every  consideration,  consulted  in  every  transaction,  recognised  and  deferred  to  on 
all  occasions  and  under  all  circumstances.    II.  Godwardness  :  the  true  strength 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxviii. 

OF  EMprRES.  An  empire's  strength  does  not  depend  upon — 1.  Eiches.  Ancient  Tyre 
was  rich.  2.  Political  ability  and  astute  statesmanship.  Sparta.  3.  Learning. 
Greece.  4.  Legions.  Eome.  Napoleon  Bonaparte.  The  strength  of  an  empire  is 
in  God.  Also,  the  true  strength  of  the  soul's  empire — the  Empire  of  Self — is 
Godwardness.  III.  Godwakdness:  the  secret  of  success.  The  true  cause  of 
failure  and  weakness  is  often  moral  delinquency.  "  Jotham  became  mighty  because 
he  prepared  his  ways  before  the  Lord."  {Enoch  Hall.)  Stimulating  effect  of 
God's  presence : — It  is  said  that  the  air  of  a  famous  Kentucky  cave  has  a  peculiar 
power  of  stimulating  the  senses.  After  the  visitor  has  been  in  its  strange  and  silent 
labyrinths  for  an  hour  or  two,  and  comes  back  into  the  open  air,  he  can  discern  the 
very  scents  of  the  flowers,  trees,  and  grasses.  New  perceptions  of  spiritual  things 
wiU  come  to  us  if  we  get  away  into  the  quiet  of  God's  presence,  and  suffer  ourselves 
to  be  absorbed  by  His  Word.     (T.  G.  Selby.) 


CHAPTEE  XXVin. 


Vers.  1-5.  Ahaz  was  twenty  years  old  when  he  began  to  reign. — The  mysterioxu 
in  human  development : — The  growth  of  humanity  is  not  after  a  horticultural 
manner.  We  cannot  say  that  a  good  tree  will  have  good  off-shoots,  if  we  are 
speaking  of  humanity.  The  holiest  father  may  have  a  murderer  for  his  son.  The 
sweetest  mother  may  die  of  a  broken  heart.  Only  a  foolish  criticism  is  reckless  in 
fixing  definite  responsibilities  in  this  matter  of  the  nurture  and  culture  of  children. 
The  Lord  rebukes  us  when  we  say  that  because  the  father  was  good  the  son  must 
be  good  ;  or  because  the  father  was  evil  the  son  must  be  evil.  The  Lord  permits  men 
to  come  in  between  who  are  bad,  or  who  are  good,  that  all  our  little  speculation 
about  heredity,  and  all  our  arrangements  for  moral  progress,  may  be  thrown  back 
and  lost  in  confusion.  Herein  is  the  working  of  that  mysterious  law  which  is  often 
misunderstood  when  denominated  the  law  of  election.  We  cannot  tell  what  God  is 
doing.  Your  son  ought  to  have  been  good,  for  where  is  there  a  braver  soul  than 
yourself  ?  The  boy  ought  to  have  been  chivalrous,  for  he  never  knew  you  do  a 
mean  deed  or  give  lodgment  to  an  ungenerous  thought.  In  a  way,  too,  he  was 
proud  of  his  father ;  yet  there  was  no  devil's  work  he  would  not  stoop  to  do.  He 
did  not  get  the  bad  blood  from  his  mother,  for  gentler,  sweeter  soul  never  sang 
God's  psalms  in  God's  house.  Yet  there  is  the  mystery,  and  it  is  not  for  a  reckless 
criticism  to  define  the  origin  and  the  issue  of  this  mysterious  phenomenon  in  human 
development.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Holy  influences  resisted  produce  increased 
wickedness : — It  is  very  noticeable  that  those  who,  in  their  early  days,  have  resisted 
holy  influences  generally  turn  out  the  most  wicked  of  men.  This,  indeed,  is  a 
fundamental  law  of  character.  Just  as  a  good  man,  who  is  good  notwithstanding 
a  very  bad  up-bringing,  and  despite  the  most  pernicious  examples  around  him,  is 
not  infrequently  one  of  the  best  of  men,  so  a  youth  who  has  come  from  a  godly 
home,  and  turns  out  evil  himself,  is  one  of  the  worst  characters  you  can  meet 
with.  The  bad  son  of  a  good  father : — I.  It  is  a  sorrowful  fact  that  good 
MEN  ARE  sometimes  THE  FATHERS  OF  BAD  SONS.  "  Like  father,  like  son,"  we  have 
often  heard  men  say.  But  this  is  not  always  so.  Alas  1  we  know  but  too  well 
that  piety,  virtue,  goodness  do  not  always  run  in  the  blood.  You  may  pass 
on  the  crown,  the  throne,  the  kingdom,  but  the  high  moral  and  religious  qualities 
which  make  a  man  a  king  among  men  do  not  always  go  with  the  crown  and 
sceptre.  II.  The  bad  sons  or  good  fathers  are  often  ruined  by  the  sins  thet 
ALLOW  TO  DECEIVE  THEM.  Bead  the  twenty-third  verse  of  this  chapter.  It  is  very 
instructive.  Ahaz,  weakened  by  his  questionable  ways,  and  not  supported  by 
the  power  of  the  God  whose  worship  he  had  forsaken,  fell  into  the  hands  of  the 
foreigner.  Conquered  by  the  superior  forces  and  better  trained  men  of  Damascus, 
he  fondly  imagined  that  they  won  because  their  gods,  their  idols,  helped  them  in 
battle.  Deceived,  deluded,  blinded  by  all  this,  he  determined  to  follow  their  bad 
example.  Others  are  involved  in  his  fall.  "  They  were  the  ruin  of  him  and  of  all 
Israel."  It  would  be  sad  enough  if  he  were  the  only  one  blinded  and  deluded  by 
sin.  But  unfortunately  its  victims  are  all  about  us.  III.  This  chapter  teaches 
that  God  often  chastens  the  sons  of  godly  parents  ^v^o  fall  into  sin,  and  seeks 
TO  win  them  back  to  Himself.     God  did  not  leave  Ahaz  without  warning,  reproof. 


CHAP,  xxviii.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  .  125 

and  trouble.  Through  his  long  night  of  sin  God  often  spake  to  him.  God  made 
this  man  understand  that  the  way  of  the  transgressor  is  hard.  It  is  a  mercy  that 
God  does  not  allow  the  sinner  to  go  to  hell  without  warning.  (C.  Leach,  D.D.) 
Entering  on  a  royal  inheritance : — Every  young  man  enters,  like  Ahaz,  upon  a  royal 
inheritance;  character  and  career  are  as  all-important  to  a  pp^^ant  or  a  shopgirl  as 
they  are  to  an  emperor  or  a  queen.  When  a  girl  of  seventeen  ^r  a  youth  of  twenty 
succeeds  to  some  historic  throne  we  are  moved  to  think  of  the  heavy  burden  of 
responsibility  laid  upon  unexperienced  shoulders  and  of  the  grave  issues  that  must  be 
determined  during  the  swiftly  passing  years  of  the  early  manhood  or  womanhood. 
Alas !  this  heavy  burden  and  these  grave  issues  are  but  the  common  lot.  His  lot  is 
only  the  common  lot  set  upon  a  hill,  in  the  full  sunlight,  to  illustrate,  interpret,  and 
influence  lower  and  obscurer  lives.  (IF.  H.  Bennett,  M.A.)  Men  should  be 
educated  to  reign  : — Men  should  all  be  educated  to  reign,  to  respect  themselves 
and  to  appreciate  their  opportunities.  We  do  in  some  measure  adopt  this  principle 
with  promising  lads  and  gifted  girls.  We  need  to  apply  the  principle  more  con- 
sistently and  to  recognise  the  royal  dignity  of  the  average  life  and  of  those  whom 
the  superior  person  is  pleased  to  call  commonplace  people.  It  may  then  be  possible 
to  induce  the  ordinary  young  men  to  take  a  serious  interest  in  his  own  future. 
{Ibid.)  The  kiiid  of  ^^  reign"  a  source  of  anxiety  to  parents  : — The  fortunes  of 
millions  may  depend  upon  the  will  of  some  young  Czar  or  Kaiser ;  the  happiness 
of  a  hundred  tenants  or  of  a  thousand  workmen  may  rest  on  the  disposition  of  the 
youthful  inheritor  of  a  wide  estate  or  a  huge  factory ;  but  none  the  less  in  the 
poorest  cottage  mother  and  father  and  friends  wait  with  trembling  anxiety  to  see 
how  the  boy  or  girl  will  "  turn  out "  when  they  take  their  destinies  into  their  own 
hands  and  begin  to  reign.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  2.  For  he  walked  in  the  ways  of  the  kings  of  Israel — The  ways  of  the  kings 
of  Israel : — Israel  was  for  the  most  part  more  powerful,  wealthy,  and  cultured 
than  Judah.  When  Ahaz  came  to  the  throne  as  a  mere  youth,  Pekah  was  apparently 
in  the  prime  of  life  and  the  zenith  of  power.  He  is  no  inapt  symbol  of  what  the 
modern  tempter  at  any  rate  desires  to  appear  :  the  showy,  pretentious  man  of  the 
world,  who  parades  his  knowledge  of  life,  and  impresses  the  inexperienced  youth 
with  his  shrewdness  and  success,  and  makes  his  victim  eager  to  imitate  him, 
to  walk  in  the  ways  of  the  kings  of  Israel,  (Ibid.)  Molten  images  for 
Baalim. — Molten  images  for  the  Baals  : — The  prospect  of  making  images  for  the 
Baals  is  an  insidious  temptation.  Ahaz  perhaps  had  found  the  decorous  worship 
of  the  one  God  dull  and  monotonous.  Baals  meant  new  gods  and  new  rites,  with 
all  the  excitement  of  novelty  and  variety.  Jotham  may  not  have  realised  that  this 
youth  of  twenty  was  a  man ;  he  may  have  been  treated  as  a  child  and  left  too  much 
to  the  women  of  the  harem.  Eesponsible  activity  might  have  saved  him.  The 
Church  needs  to  recognise  that  healthy,  vigorous  youth  craves  interesting  occupation, 
and  even  excitement.  If  a  father  wishes  to  send  his  son  to  the  devil,  he  cannot  do 
better  than  make  that  son's  life,  both  secular  and  religious,  a  routine  of  monotonous 
drudgery.  Then  any  pinchbeck  king  of  Israel  will  seem  a  marvel  of  wit  and  good 
fellowship,  and  the  making  of  molten  images  a  most  pleasing  diversion.  A  molten 
image  is  something  solid,  permanent,  and  conspicuous,  a  standing  advertise- 
ment of  the  enterprise  and  artistic  taste  of  the  maker ;  he  engraves  his  name 
on  the  pedestal,  and  is  proud  of  the  honourable  distinction.  Many  of  our  modern 
molten  images  are  duly  set  forth  in  popular  works ;  for  instance,  the  reputation  for 
impure  life,  or  hard  drinking,  or  reckless  gambling,  to  achieve  which  some  men 
have  spent  their  time  and  money  and  toil.  Other  molten  images  are  dedicated  to 
another  class  of  Baals :  Mammon  the  respectable  and  Belial  the  polite.    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  9.  A  prophet  of  the  Lord  was  there,  whose  name  was  Oded. — The  story  of 
the  prophet  Oded  : — Probably  few  will  recognise  this  name.  It  is  associated  with 
no  book  of  perpetual  instruction,  with  no  course  of  heroic  action.  No  mighty  deeds 
like  those  of  Elijah  or  Elisha  adorn  his  story;  no  length  of  stately  service  like  that 
of  Daniel  is  rendered  by  him.  He  is  a  man  of  one  achievement ;  his  prophecy  only 
an  argument  to  brotherly  kindness  and  affection,  and  yet  few  men  have  ever 
rendered  a  nobler  service  to  their  fellow  men  than  that  recorded  of  him.  It  exhibits 
the  possibility  of  finest  usefulness  as  lying  more  near  and  within  our  reach  than  we 
had  thought.  The  circumstances  are  soon  told.  Already  the  shadow  of  the  great 
Assyrian  monarchy  had  fallen  on  more  western  lands,  and  Damascus,  Israel,  Judah 
were  threatened  by  it.     Their  policy  would  have  been  union  for  mutual  defence : 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xxvm. 

national  contrition  and  development  of  those  virtues  which  would  have  engaged  the 
approval  of  God.  Unfortunately,  instead  of  uniting  with  each  other,  Damascus, 
Samaria,  Jerusalem  alike  forget  the  impending  danger  which  ultimately  overtakes 
them ;  and,  as  if  there  was  no  foe  to  be  feared,  by  their  conflicts  with  each  other 
destroy  their  power  of  saving  themselves.  One  campaign  had  just  ended.  Israel 
and  Damascus  had  united,  and  between  them  had  inflicted  a  crushing  blow  on 
Judah.  A  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  slain  is  the  enormous  register  of  Judah's 
loss,  and  in  addition  Israel  has  taken  captive  of  women  and  children  two  hundred 
thousand  more.  With  the  bitterness  that  belongs  to  a  feud  between  kinsmen,  no 
compunction  enfeebles  the  elation  of  their  victory.  It  has  not  entered  any  mind 
that  any  other  course  should  be  pursued  but  simply  to  use  or  sell  the  captives  as 
slaves.  They  will  indulge  their  lust,  they  will  increase  their  wealth.  With  such 
purposes  they  bring  all  their  spoil  and  all  their  captives  to  Samaria.  When  as 
they  are  about  to  enter  in  unbr other ly  triumph,  a  prophet  of  the  Lord  went  out  to 
them ;  of  no  great  importance,  as  men  generally  would  have  judged ;  single-handed, 
with  none  to  back  him.  He  goes  forth,  and  addressing  not  the  chiefs  alone  with 
whispers  of  policy,  but  the  host  great  and  smaU,  calls  on  them  to  forego  their 
pleasure  and  their  wealth,  and  as  brethren  to  abstain  from  reducing  to  slavery  their 
brethren  whom  the  fortune  of  war  had  put  into  their  power.  His  argument  ia 
striking.  There  is  no  mention  of  Assyria,  as  there  might  have  been,  and  of  the 
importance  of  a  united  front ;  no  flattery  or  appeal  to  desire  for  generous  fame. 
Solemnly  he  points  out  that  Judah's  defeat  is  the  penalty  of  Judah's  sin.  That  in 
the  slaughter  of  such  multitudes  as  they  put  to  death  they  have  already  committed 
crimes  enough.  That  to  enslave  their  brethren  would  be  to  provoke  the  anger  of 
their  Father  God  still  more,  and  therefore  they  should  liberate  those  whom  they 
intended  to  enslave.  The  single  voice  avails.  Alone  in  making  the  suggestion,  he 
is  not  long  left  alone.  "  Certain  heads  of  the  children  of  Ephraim  "  stand  up 
stoutly  against  the  more  violent  that  oppose  the  prophet's  word.  "  Ye  shall  not 
bring  in  the  captives  hither,"  they  say,  with  the  courage  of  their  nobler  mood. 
When  lo  1  with  that  openness  to  generous  and  noble  appeals  that  sometimes  marks 
a  multitude,  the  whole  host  suddenly  catch  the  glow  of  nobler  feeling,  and  at  once 
the  resolve  to  set  the  captives  free  is  framed  and  put  in  execution.  The  treasure 
of  the  spoil  is  taken  to  relieve  their  wants.  An  incident  of  a  kind  too  rare,  but  one 
which  yet  indicates  to  us  how  much  of  noble  service  might  be  rendered  if  all  did 
their  part  towards  making  the  world  a  little  brighter  and  better  than  it  is.  I.  The 
BESPONsrBiLiTT  OF  LEADERS.  A  prophet  Worthy  of  his  calling,  and  the  chief  men  of 
Israel  having  the  corn-age  of  their  position,  together  sway  the  whole  people  with  a 
generous  impulse.  No  greater  mercy  comes  from  the  Father  of  lights  than  leaders 
whose  worth  adorns  their  eminence.  The  tendencies  to  good  and  evil  hang  on  so 
fine  a  balance,  that  let  the  leaders  appeal  to  the  nobler  part,  and  it  will  respond. 
Let  them  appeal  to  the  baser,  and  it  will  respond,  unchecked  by  any  scruple.  If 
you  are  in  any  position  of  leadership  in  Church,  or  world,  or  lowly  home,  minister 
or  layman,  remember  grand  things  are  possible  if  you  are  faithful.  Do  not  faU 
into  sin  of  rulers,  assuming  a  waywardness  in  the  people  which  you  thenceforth  do 
nothing  to  control.  Give  those  around  you  a  clear  keynote  of  noble  duty  or 
generous  wisdom,  and  you  will  always  find  some  to  back  you,  and  sometimes 
sufficient  backing  to  achieve  a  grand  success.  An  heroic  leader  in  war  will  infuse 
his  courage  into  feeblest  followers.  A  generous  leader  in  peace  may  win  victories 
no  less  noble.  Let  leaders  study  Oded,  till  they  learn,  like  him,  to  forego  all 
flattery  and  all  care  for  popular  acceptance,  and  find  the  stately  courage  which  can 
urge  the  worthy  course  upon  their  fellow  men.  II.  The  importance  of  individuai, 
ACTION.  How  utterly  hopeless  must  it  have  seemed  to  dream  of  turning  the  people 
from  their  purpose.  Their  blood  was  heated  with  their  triumph,  their  passions  all 
inflamed,  their  self-interest  involved.  What  could  one  man  do  to  stem  such 
forces?  But  let  him  stand  alone,  or  find  plentiful  support;  let  his  testimony 
be  resented  with  contempt  or  accepted  with  humility,  Oded  feels  his  business  is  to 
utter  what  seems  to  him  to  be  the  will  of  God.  And  uttering  it,  lo,  he  is  not  long 
alone.  His  generosity  infects  others.  Try  to  count  up  the  service  then  rendered. 
Two  hundred  thousand  captives  set  free,  and  their  dismal  fears  changed  into  rest- 
ful gratitude.  His  nation  saved  from  the  guilt  of  a  great  crime.  His  people 
ennobled  by  a  generous  deed.  One  man  did  this,  or  rather  was  the  occasion  of  its 
being  done.  One  man  set  the  ball  a-rolling.  Learn  hence  that  there  is  no  limit  to 
what,  God  inspiring  and  using  him,  one  man  may  do.  Athanasius,  Augustine, 
Luther,  Knox,  Wesley,  their  lives  are  but  variations  of  this  story.    The  conviction  of 


CHAP,  ixvin.] 


IT.  CHRONICLES.  127 


the  one  to-day  becomes  that  of  the  many  to-morrow.  UI.  The  importance  of  pbesencb 
OF  HEVRT  So  many,  when  the  occasion  of  rendering  great  service  rises  fanding 
themselves  with  confused  feelings,  with  heart  unequal  to  the  demand  made  on  it. 
There  were  other  saints  in  Samaria,  doubtless,  grieved  over  this  civil  war,  and 
shrinking  equally  with  him  from  idea  of  their  brethren  being  made  their  slaves. 
But  Oded  was  not  confused,  perplexed,  overawed  by  concurrence  of  a  vast  multitude 
in  a  great  wrong.  Nor  did  he  need  a  week  to  think  what  it  would  be  best  to  do  or 
sav  There  and  then,  m  all  calmness  and  self-possession,  he  saw  what  it  was  best 
to  do  and  say,  and  he  did  and  said  it.  That  calmness  comes  not  because  the  nerve 
is  cool  •  it  has  a  higher  origin.  It  comes  from  walking  with  God  and  talking  with 
Him  •  the  sight  of  His  throne,  the  knowledge  of  His  providence ;  the  habit  of 
asking  instructions  and  waiting  for  them,  and  acting  when  they  come.  {Richard 
Glover.) 

Ver  10  But  are  there  not  with  you,  even  with  you,  siM  against  the  Lord  your 

Qo&^—A'home  question :— This  question  is  pertinent  to— 1.  Nations.  2.  beets. 
8.  Classes.  4.  Individuals.  I  shall— L  Put  a  home  question  to— 1.  The  moralist. 
2.  The  accuser  of  the  brethren.  3.  The  outwardly  religious.  4  Those  who  make 
no  profession  of  religion.  5.  Other  classes  I  may  have  omitted.  "  Are  there  not 
with  you,  sins  against  the  Lord  your  God?"  H.  Put  a  common-sense  question: 
••Who  are  you  that  you  think  to  escape  the  punishment  of  sm?  IH.  Give  a 
LITTLE  advice.  1.  Lcaveothcr  people  alone  with  regard  to  finding  fault.  2.  Treat 
Yourselves  as  you  have  been  accustomed  to  treat  others.  3.  Look  to  the  eternal 
interests  of  your  own  souls.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Home  sins  ;-Aii  object  may  be 
placed  in  such  close  proximity  to  the  eye  as  to  escape  all  distinct  perception.  It 
may  be  brought  into  such  near  contact  with  the  organs  of  vision  as  to  become 
wholly  invisible.  Analogous  to  this  natural  difficulty  of  a  close  self-inspection  is 
the  general  inability  or  indisposition  of  men  to  form  a  correct  estimate  of  their  own 
moral  and  spiritual  character.    Consider-I.  Some  of  our  msTiNOUisHiNO  privileges 

AND    ADVANTAGES.        II.    ThE     SOLEMN     AND    AWFUL     QUESTION,    AS    IT    BELATE3— 1.    iO 

public,  national,  legalised  transgressions.  (1)  Want  of  deference  to  God  s  supreme 
authority.  (2)  Sabbath  profanation,  its  diversion  from  its  appropriate  objects 
upon  a  gigantic  scale,  as  exemplified  on  our  railways,  in  our  public-houses,  and  in 
various  departments  of  industrial  occupation.  2.  To  social  and  individual  sins. 
(1)  Drunkenness.  (2)  Impurity.  (3)  Blasphemy  and  prof  aneness.  (4)  Coyetousness, 
intense  and  unscrupulous  competition  of  interests.  (5)  Vague  scepticism  and 
decided  infidelity.  (J.  Davies,  D.D.)  A  home  sin  ;~At  a  meeting  of  the  Mission 
to  Foreigners  in  London,  Lord  Shaftesbury  said  he  remembered  taking  tea  witli 
%  notorious  German  Socialist  who  propounded  the  most  destructive  theories  about 
society.  His  lordship  mentioned  to  this  German  a  nobleman  who  was  one  of  the 
richest  men  in  the  world.  The  Socialist  boiled  over  with  indignation,  and  said 
that  the  possession  of  such  wealth  was  a  degradation  and  a  scandalous  robbery. 
Perceiving  that  he  wore  a  briUiant  diamond  breast-pm  in  his  shirt-front  probably 
worth  £50,  his  lordship  said  to  him,  "  You  have  a  diamond,  I  see ;  now  if  you  wiU 
accompany  me  to-night  to  my  ragged  school,  I  wOl  show  y^^?  ^^f^^'l-.f  °^^^J 
children,  and  if  I  were  to  say,  '  Here  is  a  diamond  worth  £50  that  this 
gentleman  wears  in  his  shirt,'  they  too  might  boil  over  with  indignation,  and 
declare  it  was  iniquitous,  scandalous,  and  a  crime."  He  rephed,  Well,  my  lord, 
you  have  me  this  time." 

Ver  19  For  the  Lord  brought  Judah  low  because  of  Ahaz  king  of  Israel.— 
The  sin  of  Ahaz  .—I.  I  would  draw  attention  to  some  speclvl  points  in  the  history 
OF  Ahaz.  1.  The  king  himself  was  peculiarly  the  transgressor.  2.  i  he  people 
also  were  transgressors.  3.  Mark  the  special  sins  enumerated  in  the  histoi-y. 
(1)  There  was  idolatry.  (2)  He  substituted  an  altar  of  a  strange  pattern  for  the 
altar  of  the  Lord  God  of  hosts.  (3)  He  trusted  in  an  arm  of  flesh  (vers.  16  and  21). 
(4)  He  attempted  to  gain  his  object  by  conciliating  the  false  gods  and  disparaging 
the  true  God.  4.  Mark  the  consequences  of  all  this :  national  desolation  and  ruin. 
n    Let  us  see  how  far  our  present  circumstances  as  a  nation  are  par^lel  to 

THOSE    HERE    PRESENTED.      HI.    TwO    PRACTICAL    QUESTIONS.       1.    What     CaU     bC     done 

With  our  rulers  ?    2.  What  can  be  done  with  our  people  ?     {J.  C.  Goodhart,  M.A .) 

Vers  22.  23.  And  in  the  time  of  his  distress  did  he  trespass  yet  more  against 
the  Lord.— When  affliction  may  he  said  to  have  failed  of  its  object ;— I.  I  suppose  that 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xirm. 

you  have  set  your  heart  upon  some  cherished  design — that  you  have  dwelt  upon 
it  to  such  a  degree  as  to  neglect  for  it  many  social  duties  and  all  your  thoughts  of 
God.  You  have  missed  attaining  it,  and  are  deeply  disappointed.  If  you  have 
not  learned  thenceforward  to  strive  more  soberly,  to  plant  and  sow,  and  build  and 
labour,  and  not  look  for  success  without  uttering,  "  Father,  if  it  seem  good  to  Thee, 
nevertheless,  not  as  I  will,  but  as  Thou  wilt  "  ;  if  you  are  still  engaged  in  the  same 
projects  with  the  same  temper,  or  one  even  more  infatuated — then  distress  has  been 
sent  to  you  in  vain :  you  are  sacrificing  to  the  gods  that  smote  you  ;  trespassing  yet 
more  against  the  Lord.  II.  Suppose  that  you  have  been  smitten  with  some  diseasb, 
mental  or  bodily — the  not  unnatural  consequence  of  dissipation  or  thoughtlessness, 
or  perverseness,  or  the  like.  If  you  have  not  learned  from  God's  displeasure  ;  if  you 
have  not  resolved  that  with  renewed  health  you  would  walk  in  newness  of  life ;  if 
you  have  returned  to  your  old  sins  with  new  zest  from  being  for  a  time  debarred 
from  them — then  the  distress  which  God  sent  you  has  hardened  and  not  softened 
you.  You  are  worshipping  the  idols  of  your  own  hearts  with  a  devotion  which  it 
will  be  more  difficult  than  ever  to  displace.  III.  Or,  in  conclusion,  suppose  that 
you  HATE  GIVEN  WAT  TO  ILL-TEMPEB,  and  that  God  has  punished  you  by  alienation 
of  friends,  by  retaliation  on  the  part  of  ill-wishers,  by  distrust  on  the  part  of  all. 
Has  this  set  you  upon  governing  the  impetuousness  of  passion,  or  checking  the 
reproachful  word  ?  Or  have  you  merely  turned  your  spirit  into  some  more  unkindly 
channel — moroseness,  peevishness,  misanthropy?  If  so,  distress  and  chastisement 
have  not  done  their  proper  work  upon  you.  Like  Ahaz  you  are  going  on  to 
trespass  yet  more  against  the  Lord.     (D.  Hesscy.)        Ahaz^s  persistent  wickedness : 

1.    A   CONSPICUOUS   EXAMPLE    OF   PERSISTENT    WICKEDNESS.       He    pUShcd    OH     in     faCO 

of  many  and  powerful  barriers  placed  in  his  way.  1.  He  had  a  godly  ancestry. 
"Oh,  sir,"  said  an  aged  sinner  who  came  to  his  minister  in  great  distress,  "to 
think  of  my  father's  and  mother's  prayers,  and  then  of  the  vile  wretch  that  I  have 
been  1 "  2.  It  would  seem  that  other  like  influences  continued  to  surround  Ahaz  in 
his  own  palace.  The  mother  of  his  son  Hezekiah  was  the  daughter  of  the  wise  and 
good  Zechariah.  3.  God  often  makes  use  of  goodness  to  bring  men  to  repentance. 
He  tried  this  upon  Ahaz.  In  a  time  of  peril  and  alarm  Isaiah  was  commissioned 
to  "  say  unto  him.  Take  heed  and  be  quiet ;  fear  not,  neither  be  faint-hearted." 
4.  When  goodness  fails,  it  is  God's  way  to  try  severity.  II.  What  came  of  all 
THIS  ?  1.  The  king's  life  was  one  of  ill,  not  of  good.  2.  Ahaz  brought  ill  upon 
others:  "He  made  Judah  naked."  "If,"  says  Dr.  South,  "a  man  could  be 
wicked  and  a  villain  to  himself  alone,  the  mischief  would  be  so  much  the 
more  tolerable.  But  the  case  is  much  otherwise.  The  guilt  of  the  crime 
lights  upon  one,  but  the  example  of  it  sways  a  multitude.  Especially  is  this 
true  if  the  criminal  be  one  of  note  or  eminence.  For  the  fall  of  such  an  one 
by  any  temptation  is  like  that  of  a  principal  stone  or  stately  pillar  tumbling 
from  a  lofty  eminence  into  the  deep  mire  of  the  street.  It  does  not  only  plunge 
and  sink  into  the  black  dirt  itself :  it  also  dashes  or  bespatters  all  that  are  about 
it,  or  near  it,  when  it  falls."  3.  In  character  and  influence  Ahaz  went  from 
bad  to  worse.  4.  He  went  to  an  unhonoured  and  hopeless  grave.  (Monday  Club 
Sermons.)  Sinning  under  the  rod: — I.  Ahaz  was  the  son  of  a  pious  kino  of 
JuDAH.  II.  For  his  wickedness  God  visited  him  with  a  series  of  sad  calami- 
ties. III.  We  see  here  the  guilt  and  danger  op  hardening  ourselves  under 
God's  afflicting  hand.     IV.  Those   who   receive   afflictions   may  grow   mobb 

EEBELLIOUS  UNDER  THEM.  V.  ThE  GUILT  OF  ANY  APPROACH  TO  SUCH  A  CONDITION 
MAY   BE    EASILY    SEEN.       VI.    It  BECOMES    US  TO  INQUIRE,  WHAT  HAVE  BEEN  THE  EFFECTS 

OF  God's  chasteninos  upon  ourselves?  (W.  H.  Lewis,  D.D.)  The  use  and 
danger  oj  despising  afflictions. — I.  The  use  or  afflictions.  The  end  of  all  the 
Divine  dispensations  towards  mankind  is  their  eternal  salvation,  in  subserviency  to 
the  honour  of  His  great  name.  This  end  can  only  be  accomplished  in  the  way  of 
repentance,  faith,  and  holiness.  The  aim,  therefore,  of  all  ordinances,  providential 
dispensations,  and  means  of  grace,  is  to  beget  or  strengthen  in  us  these  three 
branches  of  Christianity.  Among  the  various  means  which  the  Lord  makes  use  of 
for  this  end,  affliction  is  one  of  the  chief.  The  right  use  of  afflictions  will  lead  us — 
1.  To  humble  ourselves  beneath  His  mighty  hand.  2.  To  ascribe  righteouiness  to 
Him  by  confessing  our  sins  and  acknowledging  the  justice  of  His  dealings  with  us. 
3.  To  return  to  Him  by  Jesus  Christ.  4.  To  cleave  to  Him  with  full  purpose  of 
heart.  5.  To  submit  to  His  will.  6.  To  depend  upon  His  grace  and  power.  7.  To 
walk  in  His  ways.  II.  The  dreadful  cask  or  those  who  despise  and  abusb 
TiiKM  (Prov.  xxix.  1).    Ahaz  trespassed  more  and  more.    Too  many  are  like  him 


^IHAP.  XXVIII.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  129 

^Eev.  xvi.  10,  11).  (TV.  Richardson.)  Lessons  from  the  life  of  Ahaz  : — I.  That  a 
-couESE  OF  SIN  IS  CONTINUALLY  DOWNWARD.  Sin  propagates  itself,  but  is  not  refor- 
matory, n.  That  God  is  faithful  in  checking  men  in  this  downward  course. 
God  ever  seeks  by  His  providence  and  Spirit  to  turn  men  from  an  evil  course  which 
will  end  in  ruin.  III.  That  if  men  will  not  be  checked  in  an  evil  course,  thet  may 
BECOME  NOTABLE  EXAMPLES  OF  PUNISHMENT.  (James  WolfendaU.)  Evil  habits  : — 
1.  Evil  habits  strengthen  by  indulgence.  2.  The  world  increases  its  power  over 
its  votaries  as  they  advance  in  life.  3.  Sinners  in  mature  years  lose  the  perception 
of  religious  truth.    4.  There  is  a  limit  to  Divine  endurance.     (Biblical  Museum.) 

Ver.  23.  Because  tlie  gods  of  the  kingfa  of  Syria  help  them,  therefore  will  I 
«acrifice  to  them. — Destructive  substitutes  : — We  may  not  try  to  substitute  one  god 
■for  another,  or  to  patch  out  our  tattered  theology  by  borrowing  and  misappropriating 
the  ideas  of  the  enemy.  There  is  one  fountain  at  which  we  may  draw  and  draw 
-evermore,  and  that  is  the  Bible.  We  never  knew  any  man  oppose  the  Bible  who 
had  reaUy  comprehended  its  inner  meaning.  No  man  can  doubt  the  inspiration  of 
the  Bible  who  has  read  it,  not  galloped  through  it.  But  once  lose  the  feeling, 
■"  Surely  God  is  in  this  book :  this  is  none  other  than  the  book  of  God,"  and  we  take 
the  course  of  Ahaz  ;  we  go  down  and  see  what  is  being  done  in  the  world.  One 
man  has  been  delivered  by  wealth,  and  we  begin  to  worship  the  golden  idol ; 
another  has  been  delivered  by  various  factitious  circumstances,  and  we  instantly 
become  artificers  in  life,  and  try  to  mechanise  life  and  set  into  motion  forces  that 
«can  co-operate  with  one  another  and  modify  one  another,  and  issue  in  a  plentiful 
harvest  of  good  fortune  for  ourselves.  And  after  all  this  toil  we  come  home  wasted, 
weakened  in  every  joint,  the  subjects  of  a  complete  and  disastrous  collapse.  (J. 
Parker,  D.D.)  But  they  were  the  ruin  of  him. — Seeking  false  inspirations : — 
How  many  men  have  been  mistaken  in  seeking  false  inspiration  or  in  coveting  false 
'benedictions  ?  The  young  man  says  he  has  a  difficult  task  to-morrow,  he  has  to 
meet  persons  with  whom  he  has  no  sympathy  and  from  whom  he  expects  no  quarter ; 
'Constitutionally  he  is  nervous,  self-distrustful,  somewhat  afraid  of  a  certain  aspect 
of  controversy;  he  therefore  says,  "  I  will  fortify  myself,  I  will  take  wine,  the  wine 
will  quicken  the  flow  of  my  blood,  will  pleasantly  and  usefully  excite  the  nervous 
-centres,  and  I  shall  go  forward  boldly  and  confidently  and  make  the  best  of  myseK  " ; 
— but  it  was  the  ruin  of  him.  There  are  others  who  will  sacrifice  at  the  altar  of 
appearances.  Over  their  poverty  they  will  put  some  borrowed  rag  in  the  hope  that 
observers  will  look  at  the  rag  and  not  at  the  poverty,  and  treat  them  as  occupying 
a  certain  social  position.  False  pride  will  be  the  ruin  of  them.  {Ibid.)  Costly 
■and  fatal  help : — Ahaz  came  to  the  throne  when  a  youth  of  twenty.  From  the 
beginning  he  reversed  ths  policy  of  his  father,  and  threw  himself  into  the  arms 
of  the  heathen  party.  He  did  not  plunge  into  idolatry  for  want  of  good  advice.  The 
■greatest  of  the  prophets  stood  beside  him.  Isaiah  addressed  to  him  remonstrances 
which  might  have  made  the  most  reckless  pause,  and  promises  which  might  have 
kindled  hope  and  courage  in  the  bosom  of  despair.  Hoseain  the  northern  kingdom, 
Micah  in  Judah,  and  other  less  brilliant  names  were  amongst  the  stars  which  shone 
even  in  that  dark  night.  But  their  light  was  all  in  vain.  He  was  ready  to  worship 
anything  that  called  itself  a  god,  always  excepting  Jehovah.  He  welcomed  Baal, 
Moloch,  Eimmon,  and  many  more  with  an  indiscriminate  eap;erness  that  would 
have  been  ludicrous  if  it  had  not  been  tragical.  From  all  sides  the  invaders  came, 
^rom  north,  north-east,  east,  south-east,  south,  they  swarmed  in  upon  him.  They 
tore  away  the  fringes  of  his  kingdom ;  and  hostile  armies  flaunted  their  banners 
beneath  the  very  walls  of  Jerusalem.  And  then,  in  his  despair,  like  a  scorpion  in 
a  circle  of  fire,  he  inflicted  a  deadly  wound  on  himself  by  calling  in  the  fatal  help 
•of  Assyria.  Nothing  loth,  that  warlike  power  responded,  scattered  his  less  formid- 
able foes,  and  then  swallowed  the  prey  which  it  had  dragged  from  between  the 
teeth  of  the  Israelites  and  Syrians.  That  was  what  came  of  forsaking  the  God  of 
ills  fathers.     I.  First  then,  let  me  ask  you  to  notice  how  this  narrative  illustrates 

ior  us  THE  CROWD   OF    VAIN    HELPERS   WHICH  A  MAN  HAS  TO  TAKE  TO  WHEN  HE  TURNS  HIS 

«ACK  UPON  God.  If  we  compare  the  narrative  in  our  chapter  with  the  parallel  in 
the  Second  Book  of  Kings,  we  get  a  very  vivid  picture  of  the  strange  medley  of 
idolatries  which  they  introduced.  This  story  illustrates  for  us  what,  alas !  is  only 
too  true,  both  on  the  broad  scale,  as  to  the  generation  in  which  we  live,  and  on  the 
narrower  field  of  our  own  individual  lives.  Look  at  the  so-called  cultured  classes 
•of  Europe  to-day  ;  turning  away,  as  so  many  of  them  are,  from  the  Lord  God  of 
.their  fathers;  what  sort  of  things  are  they  worshipping  instead?    Scraps  from 

17 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxtiu^ 

Buddhism,  the  Vedas,  any  sacred  books  but  the  Bible ;  quackeries,  and  Charlatanism, 
and  dreams,  and  fragmentary  philosophies  all  pieced  together  to  try  and  make  up 
a  whole,  instead  of  the  old-fashioned  whole  that  they  have  left  behind  them.  But 
look,  further,  how  the  same  thing  is  true  as  to  the  individual  lives  of  godless  men. 
Many  of  us  are  trying  to  make  up  for  not  having  the  One  by  seeking  to  stay  our 
hearts  on  the  many.  But  no  accumulation  of  insufficiencies  will  ever  make  a. 
sufficiency.  You  cannot  make  up  for  God  by  any  extended  series  of  creatures,  any 
more  than  a  row  of  figures  that  stretched  from  here  to  Sirius  and  back  again  would 
approximate  to  infinitude.  The  very  fact  of  the  multitude  of  helpers  is  a  sign 
that  none  of  them  are  sufficient.  There  are  no  end  of  "  cures "  for  toothache,^ 
that  is  to  say,  there  is  none.  Consult  your  own  experience.  What  is  the  meaning 
of  the  unrest  and  distraction  that  marks  the  lives  of  most  of  the  men  in  this 
generation  ?  Why  is  it  that  you  hurry  from  business  to  pleasure,  from  pleasure- 
to  business,  until  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  get  a  quiet  breathing  time  for  thought 
at  all?  Why  is  it  but  because  one  after  another  of  your  gods  have  proved 
insufficient,  and  so  fresh  altars  must  be  built  for  fresh  idolatries,  and  new  experi- 
ments made,  of  which  we  can  safely  prophesy  the  result  will  be  the  old  one.  YoU' 
are  seeking  what  you  will  never  find.  The  many  pearls  that  you  seek  will  never 
be  enough  for  you.  The  true  wealth  is  One,  One  pearl  of  great  price.  II.  So, 
notice  again,  how  this  story  teaches  the  heavy  cost  of  these  helpebs'  help. 
Ahaz  had,  as  he  thought,  two  strings  to  his  bow.  He  had  the  gods  of  Damascus,, 
and  of  other  lands  up  there,  he  had  the  King  of  Assyria  down  here.  They  both  of 
them  exacted  onerous  terms  before  they  would  stir  a  foot  to  his  aid.  As  for  the 
northern  conqueror,  all  the  wealth  of  the  king  and  of  the  princes  and  of  the 
temple  was  sent  to  Assyria  as  the  price  of  his  hurtful  help.  Do  you  buy  this 
world's  help  any  cheaper,  my  brother  ?  You  get  nothing  for  nothing  in  that  market. 
It  is  a  big  price  that  you  have  to  pay  before  these  mercenaries  will  come  to 
fight  on  your  side.  Here  is  a  man  that  "  succeeds  in  life,"  as  we  call  it.  What 
does  it  cost  him  ?  Well  1  It  has  cost  him  the  suppression,  the  atrophy  by  disuse 
of  many  capacities  in  his  soul  which  were  far  higher  and  nobler  than  those  that 
have  been  exercised  in  his  success.  It  has  cost  him  all  his  days ;  it  has  possibly 
cost  him  the  dying  out  of  generous  sympathies  and  the  stimulating  of  unwholesome- 
selfishness.  Ahl  he  has  bought  his  prosperity  very  dear.  There  are  some  of 
you  who  know  how  much  what  you  call  enjoyment  has  cost  you.  Some  of  us  have 
bought  pleasure  at  the  price  of  innocence,  of  moral  dignity,  of  stained  memories, 
of  polluted  imaginations.  The  world  has  a  way  of  getting  more  out  of  you  than  it 
gives  to  you.  At  the  best,  if  you  are  not  Christian  men  and  women,  whether  you 
are  men  of  business,  votaries  of  pleasure,  seekers  after  culture  and  refinement  or 
anything  else,  you  have  given  heaven  to  get  earth.  Is  that  a  good  bargain  ?  la 
it  much  wiser  than  that  of  a  horde  of  naked  savages  that  sell  a  great  tract  of  fair 
country,  with  gold-bearing  reefs  in  it,  for  a  bottle  of  rum  and  a  yard  or  two  of 
calico  ?  III.  Lastly,  we  may  gather  from  this  story  an  illustration  of  the  fatal, 
falsehood  of  the  woMjD's  help.  Ahaz  pauperised  himself  to  buy  the  hireling 
swords  of  Assyria,  and  he  got  them ;  but,  as  it  says  in  the  narrative,  "  The  king 
came  unto  him,  and  distressed  him,  but  strengthened  him  not."  He  helped  Ahaz 
at  first.  He  scattered  the  armies  that  the  King  of  Judah  was  afraid  of  like 
chaff,  with  his  fierce  and  disciplined  onset.  And  then,  having  driven  them  off  the 
bleeding  prey,  he  put  his  own  paw  upon  it,  and  growled  "  Mine  1 "  And  where  he 
struck  his  claws  there  was  little  more  hope  of  life  for  the  prostrate  creature  below 
him.  Ah !  and  that  is  what  this  world  always  does.  A  godless  life  has  at  the 
best  only  partial  satisfaction,  and  that  partial  satisfaction  soon  diminishes.  The 
awful  power  of  habit,  if  there  were  no  other  reason,  takes  the  edge  off  all  gratifica- 
tion except  in  so  far  as  God  is  in  it.  Nothing  fully  retains  its  power  to  satisfy. 
Nothing  has  that  power  absolutely,  at  any  moment:  but  even  what  measure  of 
it  any  of  our  possessions  or  pursuits  may  have  for  a  time,  soon,  or  at  all' 
events  by  degrees,  passes  away.  And  do  not  forget  that,  partial  and  transient 
as  these  satisfactions  are,  they  derive  what  power  of  helping  and  satisfying 
is  in  them  only  from  the  silence  of  our  consciences,  and  our  success  in  being 
able  to  shut  out  realities.  One  word  from  conscience,  one  touch  of  an  awakened 
reflectiveness,  one  glance  at  the  end — the  coffin  and  the  shroud  and  what 
comes  after  these,  slay  your  worldly  satisfactions  as  surely  as  that  falling 
snow  would  crush  some  light-winged  gauzy  butterfly  that  had  been  dancing 
at  the  cliff's  foot.  Your  jewellery  is  all  imitation.  These  fatal  helpers  come  as 
friends  and  allies,  and  they  stop  aa  masters.    Ahaz  and  a  hundred  other  weak 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  13X 

princes  have  tried  the  policy  of  eeading  for  a  strong  foreign  power  to  scatter  their 
enemies,  and  it  has  always  turned  out  one  way.  The  foreigner  has  come  and  he 
has  stopped.  The  auxiliary  has  become  the  lord,  and  he  that  called  him  to  his  aid 
becomes  his  tributary.  Ah !  and  so  it  is  with  all  the  things  of  this  world.  Here  is 
some  pleasant  indulgence  that  I  call  to  my  help  lightly  and  thoughtlessly.  It  is 
very  agreeable  and  does  what  I  wanted,  and  I  try  it  again.  Still  it  answers 
to  my  call.  And  then  after  a  while  I  say,  "  I  am  going  to  give  that  up,"  and  I 
cannot.  I  have  brought  in  a  master  when  I  thought  I  was  only  bringing  in  an 
ally  that  I  could  dismiss  when  I  liked.    {A.  Maclaren,  DJD.) 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 


Vers.  1-11.  HezeWah  began  to  reign. — HezekiaK't  reformation: — ^The  sur- 
roundings of  Hezekiah  in  his  youth  seem,  at  first  view,  to  have  been  unfavourable 
in  the  extreme.  He  was  the  son  of  a  depraved  father.  He  grew  up  at  a  corrupt 
court.  Good  kings  and  bad  follow  one  another  in  very  illogical  succession.  It 
must  be  that  there  is  a  self-acting  power  at  the  centre  of  every  personal  life.  Let 
OS  cling  to  the  belief,  too,  that,  however  vast  the  moral  inequalities  of  human  lives 
may  be,  no  life  is  allowed  by  the  Creator  to  be  altogether  destitute  of  gracious 
influences.  In  Hezekiah's  case,  at  least,  we  can  have  no  doubt  that  such  influences 
were  present.  It  is  not  unnatural  to  believe  that  his  mother,  presumably  the 
daughter  of  Zechariah,  the  faithful  prophet  of  King  Uzziah's  day,  was  a  woman  of 
devout  character.  To  the  loving  nurture  of  a  mother  was  added  the  faithful 
counsel  of  godly  men.  Moral  giants  lived  in  those  days.  Micah  was  prophesying, 
Nahum  was  about  to  begin  his  work.  During  the  entire  lifetime  of  Hezekiah, 
Isaiah  was  fulfilling  his  office  in  Jerusalem.  Tradition  says  that  he  was  Hezekiah's 
tutor ;  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  was  his  faithful  counsellor.  Eepulsed  by  the 
father,  he  would  naturally  turn  with  greater  earnestness  to  the  son.  But  all  this 
touches  only  the  outer  circle  of  the  gracious  influences  by  which  Hezekiah  was 
encompassed.  It  has  been  said,  and  there  is  a  world  of  truth  in  the  saying,  that 
^ore  than  half  of  the  environment  of  any  man  is — God.  The  God  who  is  not  far 
from  every  one  of  us  was  near  to  the  young  prince  in  the  corrupt  capital  of  Judah. 
We  have  good  reason  for  believing  that  Hezekiah  had  not  been  unresponsive  to  his 
heavenly  promptings.  A  work  begun  so  quickly  after  his  accession  to  the  throne 
must  have  been  premeditated.  We  must  suppose  that  Hezekiah  had  lived  a 
thoughtful  life.  The  character  of  the  work  to  which  the  king  addressed  himself  is 
deserving  of  attention.  It  was  a  radical  work.  Great  as  was  the  peril  to  which  the 
kingdom  was  exposed  from  external  attack,  great  as  was  its  moral  unsoundness, 
Hezekiah  saw  that  all  its  trouble  was  rooted  in  ungodliness.  The  king's  initial 
act  in  "  opening  the  doors  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  "  was,  it  is  likely,  more  philoso- 
phical than  he  himself  realised.  Eeverence  for  God  lies  at  the  basis  of  all  that  is 
trustworthy  in  private  character  and  of  all  that  is  enduring  in  public  order. 
Hezekiah's  reform  was  also  positive  in  nature.  It  addressed  itself  not  chiefly  to 
the  extermination  of  idolatry,  but  to  the  development  of  a  genuine  faith.  Of  their 
own  accord  the  people  went  out  to  "  break  in  pieces  "  the  emblems  of  idolatry. 
When  God  wishes  to  regenerate  the  soul  He  does  not  at  the  outset  uproot  sinful 
affections.  He  implants  love  for  Himself.  /Hezekiah's  was  a  thoroughgoing  work. 
The  taunting  charge  of  illiberality  could  not  extort  from  him  the  smallest  con- 
cession to  the  false  religions  of  other  lands.  Not  only  image  and  "  grove  " — the 
sacred  pillar  or  tree  of  Astarte — were  to  be  hewn  down,  but  the  worship  of  the 
"  high  places  "  was  to  be  destroyed.  Of  Asa  and  Jehoshaphat  we  are  told  both 
that  they  did  and  that  they  did  not  interfere  with  this  form  of  worship.  They 
probably  destroyed  such  sanctuaries  as  had  become  openly  idolatrous,  and  allowed 
the  others  to  remain.  But  Hezekiah  adopted  extreme  measures.  The  brazen 
serpent  fashioned  by  Moses  in  the  wilderness,  and  still  preserved,  the  people 
regarded  with  superstitious  veneration.  Hezekiah  declared  that  the  image  was  like 
any  other  "  piece  of  brass,"  and  broke  it  in  pieces.  Hezekiah  would  not  consent 
that  even  the  germs  of  idolatry  should  remain  in  the  land.  How  difficult  was  the 
mission  to  which  Hezekiah  thus  committed  himself  I  In  the  mode  of  procedure 
adopted  by  Hezekiah  in  carrying  through  his  reformation  are  certain  things  worthy 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 


of  notice.  1.  It  is  peculiarly  gratifying  to  observe  that  he  acted  promptly.  The 
die  was  cast.  In  the  first  month  of  his  reign  Hezekiah,  like  Abraham,  who,  when 
bidden  to  offer  Isaac,  "  rose  up  early  in  the  morning,  .  .  .  and  went  to  the  place 
of  which  God  had  told  him,"  was  wise  in  allowing  himself  no  time  for  hesitation. 
Delay  never  softens  the  hard  aspects  of  duty  or  lessens  its  difficulties.  For  com- 
mitting one's  self  to  the  service  of  Christ  no  other  time  is  so  favourable  as  the  first 
year,  the  first  month,  the  first  day,  of  one's  entrance  upon  a  new  sort  or  period  of 
life.  2.  It  is  instructive  to  notice  that  Hezekiah  engaged  personally  in  the  work  of 
reform.  He  did  not  commit  it  all  to  subalterns.  3.  Deserving  of  special  mention 
is  the  fact  that  in  the  prosecution  of  his  policy  Hezekiah  relied  chiefly  upon  moral 
influences.  He  might  have  compelled,  but  he  chose  rather  to  persuade.  In  this  he 
showed  the  utmost  wisdom.  If  the  reform  was  to  be  real,  the  hearts  of  the  people 
must  be  enlisted  in  it.  We  are,  finally,  prepared  to  inquire  what  results  were 
effected  by  the  king's  determined  effort.  The  immediate  outcome  was  most  grati- 
fying and  most  wonderful.  The  officers  of  religion  responded — the  priests  some- 
what slowly,  but  the  Levites  with  all  their  hearts.  The  people  did  the  same.  The 
nation  felt  to  its  utmost  limits  the  electric  thrill  of  a  new  hfe.  The  crusade  against 
idolatry  waxed  strong  throughout  the  kingdom,  and  "  a  burst  of  spring-time,"  as 
Dean  Stanley  beautifully  calls  it,  succeeded.  •'  The  thing  was  done  suddenly,"  the 
record  says.  But  is  not  the  same  true  of  well-nigh  every  successful  reform? 
Those  advocating  a  righteous  cause  have  at  least  two  excellent  reasons  for  viewing 
it  with  larger  hope  than  external  appearances  warrant.  Something  in  every  moral 
being  is  in  secret  alliance  with  truth  and  justice.  The  second  reason  is  stronger 
still ;  it  is  that  by  which  the  sacred  historian  explains  the  success  of  Hezekiah : 
"  The  Lord  had  prepared  the  people."  We  may  reckon  with  confidence  upon  God's 
care  over  any  work  of  His.  To  the  reformatory  work  of  King  Hezekiah  must  be 
attributed  a  result  still  more  imposing,  though  to  be  sure  not  more  important.  It 
delivered  the  southern  kingdom  from  the  fearful  peril  by  which  the  northern 
kingdom  had  been  overwhelmed.  Is  it  not  a  painful  thing  to  have  to  add  that 
even  so  thorough  a  reform  as  this  did  not  prove  lasting  ?  Some  of  the  people 
doubtless  remained  steadfast,  but  the  most  fell  away.  (T.  S.  Barbour.)  Hezekiah, 
the  good  king  .-—I.  Hezekiah's  good  beginning.  1.  Correct  in  life  (ver.  2), 
2.  Prompt  in  action  (ver.  3).  3.  Holy  in  influence  (ver.  5).  II.  Hezekiah's  sad 
CONFESSION.  1.  The  Lord  forsaken  (ver.  6).  2.  The  sanctuary  abandoned 
(ver.  7).  3.  The  penalty  incurred  (ver.  8).  III.  Hezekiah's  wise  appeal.  1.  To 
make  a  covenant  (ver.  10).  2.  To  avert  wrath  (ver.  10).  3.  To  perform  duty 
(ver.  11).  (Sunday  School  Times.)  Hezekiah's  reformation: — The  best  way  to 
settle  a  kingdom  is  to  settle  the  religion  of  it,  to  begin  reigning  with  reforming. 
Hezekiah's  reformation  went  on  in  a  true  step  and  pace,  for  it  began  first  with  the 
temple  and  ministry.  It  is  but  Christian  prudence  to  cleanse  the  spring  if  we 
•would  have  the  stream  clear ;  to  look  to  God's  house,  and  those  that  should 
dispense  His  Word  and  ordinances  if  we  would  have  the  people  brought  into 
conformity  with  Him.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Starting  well:— A  friend,  who  is 
deeply  interested  in  work  for  Christ  among  our  sailors,  told  me  that  at  the  close 
of  a  prayer-meeting  of  which  he  had  been  the  leader,  a  young  seaman,  who  had 
only  a  few  nights  before  been  converted,  came  up  to  him,  and  laying  a  blank  card 
before  him,  requested  him  to  write  a  few  words  upon  it,  because,  as  he  said,  "  You 
will  do  it  more  plainly  than  I  can."  "What  must  I  write?"  said  my  friend. 
" Write  these  words,  sir;  'I  love  Jesus — do  you?'"  After  he  had  written  them, 
my  friend  said,  "  Now  you  must  tell  me  what  you  are  going  to  do  with  the  card." 
He  replied,  "  I  am  going  to  sea  to-morrow,  and  I  am  afraid  if  I  do  not  take  a  stand 
at  once  I  may  begin  to  be  ashamed  of  my  religion,  and  let  myself  be  laughed  out  of 
it  altogether.  Now  as  soon  as  I  go  on  board,  I  shall  walk  straight  to  my  bunk  and 
nail  up  this  card  upon  it,  that  every  one  may  know  that  I  am  a  Christian." 
Hezekiah's  action,  the  result  of  previous  brooding  : — The  statement  in  ver.  3  may 
be  taken  as  a  general  r6sum6  of  what  follows  in  detail,  but  this  vigorous  speech  to 
the  priests  was  clearly  among  the  new  king's  first  acts.  No  doubt  his  purpose  had 
slowly  grown  while  his  father  was  affronting  Heaven  with  his  mania  for  idols. 
Such  decisive,  swift  action  does  not  come  without  protracted,  previous  brooding. 
The  hidden  fires  gather  slowly  in  the  silent  crater,  however  rapidly  they  burst  out 
at  last.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Taking  the  right  stand  at  first:— We  can  never 
begin  good  things  too  early,  and  when  we  come  into  new  positions,  it  is  always 
prudence  as  well  as  bravery  to  show  our  colours  unmistakably  from  the  firtt. 
lltinj  a  young  man,  launched  among  fresh  associations,  has  been  ruined  because 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  133 

of  beginning  with  temporising  timidity.  It  is  easier  to  take  the  right  standing  at 
first  than  to  shift  to  it  afterwards.  Hezekiah  might  have  been  excused  if  he  had 
thought  that  the  wretched  state  of  political  affairs  left  by  Ahaz  needed  his  first 
attention.  Edomites  on  the  east,  Philistines  on  the  west  and  south,  Syrians  and 
Assyrians  on  the  north,  compassed  him  about  like  bees,  and  worldly  prudence 
would  have  said,  Look  after  these  enemies  to-day,  and  the  temple  to-morrow.  He 
was  wiser  than  that,  knowing  that  these  were  effects  of  the  religious  corruption,  and 
so  he  went  at  that  first.  It  is  useless  trying  to  mend  a  nation's  fortunes  unless  you 
mend  its  morals  and  religion.  And  there  are  some  things  which  are  best  dona 
quickly,  both  in  individual  and  national  life.  Leaving  off  bad  habits  by  degrees  is 
not  hopeful.  The  only  thing  to  be  done  is  to  break  with  them  utterly  and  at  once. 
One  strong,  swift  blow,  right  through  the  heart,  kills  the  wild  beast.  SUghter  cuts 
may  make  him  bleed  to  death,  but  he  may  kill  you  first.  The  existing  state  was 
undeniably  sinful.  There  was  no  need  for  deliberation  as  to  that.  Therefore  there 
was  no  reason  for  delay.  Let  us  learn  the  lesson  that,  where  conscience  has  no 
doubts,  we  should  have  no  dawdling.  "  I  made  haste,  and  delayed  not  to  keep  Thy 
commandment."  {Ibid.)  He  brought  in  the  priests  and  the  Levites,  and 
gathered  them  together. — Co-operation  needed : — No  one  is  so  strong  that  he  needs 
no  help  in  carrying  out  his  plans  of  reform.  The  head  of  a  nation  or  of  a  state 
must  have  the  co-operation  of  many,  if  he  would  correct  abuses  and  promote  a 
better  state  of  things  in  the  administration  of  his  government.  A  pastor  must  seek 
the  aid  of  the  leaders  of  his  people  in  trying  to  raise  the  standard  of  his  church, 
A  superintendent  cannot  carry  his  school  to  any  higher  point  than  that  to  which 
he  can  first  bring  his  teachers.  The  head  of  a  business  establishment,  who  neglects 
to  give  wise  counsel  to  those  just  below  him,  finds  the  lack  of  it  in  all  the  depart- 
ments which  they  oversee.  The  true  method  of  uplifting  the  masses  is  by  uplifting 
the  leaders  of  the  masses,     {H.  Clay  Trumbull.) 

Ver.  5.  Sanctify  now  yourselves  and  sanctify  the  house  of  the  Lord  God  of  your 
fathers. — Personal  consecration: — I.  What  is  involved  in  this  personal  dedi- 
cation ?  Thomas  Aquinas  made  three  kinds  of  baptism  :  Sanguinis,  fluminis, 
flaminis — the  blood,  the  flood,  the  fire !  By  repentance  and  faith  in  Christ's  atone- 
ment the  sinner  is  saved,  and  by  water- baptism  received  into  the  visible  Church. 
But,  to  be  wholly  prepared  for  the  Master's  work,  there  must  be  the  baptism  of  tha 
Holy  Ghost  and  of  fire.  The  aim  of  Christianity  is  to  lead  us  from  the  material  tO' 
the  spiritual ;  from  the  instrumental  and  accidental  to  the  absolute  and  eternal. 
This  house  is  an  instrument  in  the  service  of  God.  Its  best  consecration  is  tha 
consecration  of  its  occupants,  and  this  is  accomplished  by  the  radical  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  The  tongue  of  the  preacher,  the  pen  of  the  author,  the  lips  of  tha 
singer,  the  fingers  of  the  musician,  and  the  brush  of  the  painter,  are  servants  of  a 
governing  purpose — channels  through  which  thought  and  feeling,  genius  and 
culture,  express  themselves.  If  the  soul  that  controls  these  instruments  be  conse- 
crated, then  they  are  hallowed.  As  the  wondrous  river  we  read  of  in  ancient  fable 
turned  to  gold  the  very  sand  its  currents  washed,  so  does  the  fountain  of  a  holy 
heart,  pouring  forth  its  enriching  flood  in  speech  and  effort,  dignify  the  humblest 
employment  or  surroundings.  With  this  spirit  of  consecration  enter  and  occupy 
this  sanctuary,  and  you  will  make  the  place,  indeed,  holy.  II.  What  are  thk 
fruits  of  this  radical,  hearty,  and  permanent  consecration  ?  The  people  by  this 
spirit  of  high  consecration,  are  set  free  from  the  bondage  of  low  and  false  views, 
prevalent  in  worldly  circles.  And,  finally,  if  the  pure  and  holy  spirit  of  self- 
dedication,  thus  outlined,  prevails,  genuine  revivals  of  religion  will  surely  follow,  a. 
healthful  growth  in  activity,  love,  and  hberality  will  be  seen,  and  true  Christian 
unity  will  be  fostered  among  all  who  really  love  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  {Prof.  E. 
P.  Thioing.)  Reformation  must  he  thorough : — A  reformation  to  be  worth  much 
must  be  thorough.  Half-way  work  in  this  line  is  of  little  value.  Again  and  again 
the  kings  of  Judah,  when  they  swept  away  all  idol  worship,  left  untouched  the  higb 
places  where  Jehovah  was  sacrificed  to  irregularly  ;  and,  because  of  their  failure  at 
completeness,  their  people  went  quickly  back  to  gross  idolatry.  So  in  aU  partial 
attempts  at  reform.  The  man  who  proposes  to  give  up  drinking,  or  gambling,  or 
profanity,  or  dishonest  courses,  without  surrendering  himself  wholly  to  the  Lord,  is 
not  likely  to  succeed  even,  to  the  extent  of  his  attempts.  And  it  is  with  the  house 
of  the  Lord  as  it  is  with  persons.  Unless  it  is  wholly  the  Lord's,  it  does  littl& 
honour  to  Him.  If  it  is  in  use  for  religious  purposes  on  Sunday,  and  for  concerts 
and  fairs  and  lectures  and  shows  during  the  week ;  or  if  part  of  it  is  for  a  house  of 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  xxix. 

worship,  and  part  for  shops  of  trade — it  is  at  the  best  a  much  abused  sanctuary. 
"  Carry  forth  the  filthiness  out  of  the  holy  place."     {H.  Clay  Trumbull.) 

Yer.  8.  Wherefore  .  .  .  the  Lord  .  .  .  hath  delivered  them  to  be  tossed  to  and 
fro,  to  be  an  astonishment,  and  an  hissing,  as  ye  see  with  your  eyes. — The  results 
of  tinning  : — It  is  easier  to  see  than  to  foresee  the  results  of  sinning.  If  a  young 
man  won't  foresee  the  results  of  an  intemperate  or  a  licentious  life,  those  who 
observe  him  will,  sooner  or  later,  see  with  their  eyes  the  worst  that  he  was  warned 
of.  If  a  business  man  won't  foresee  the  results  of  a  dishonest  course,  others  will 
see  it,  by  and  by,  in  his  character  and  reputation.  The  future  looks  fair  to  most 
evil  doers  at  the  beginning  of  their  career.  It  is  a  pity  that  they  do  not  more 
commonly  consider  at  the  start  what  a  tossing  to  and  fro,  what  an  astonishment, 
what  a  hissing,  they  are  sure  to  be  delivered  to  in  the  sight  of  those  who  watch 
them,  if  they  go  on  in  the  path  which  now  opens  attractively  before  them.     {Ibid.) 

Yer.  10.  Now  it  Is  in  mine  heart  to  make  a  covenant  with  the  Lord  God  of  Israel. — 

The  best  covenant : — I.  What  is  meant  bx  making  "  a  covenant  with  the  Lord  "  ? 
In  our  days  it  means  that  gracious  engagement  on  God's  part  to  bestow  on  man  the 
very  favour  which  he  supremely  needs,  and  on  terms  of  God's  own  ordering  ;  and 
on  the  part  of  man,  his  acceptance  of  these  terms,  according  to  apostolic  exhortation 
— "  Be  ye  reconciled  to  God."  There  is  implied  on  man's  part — 1.  The  conviction 
of  (1)  the  fact,  (2)  the  folly,  and  (3)  the  sin  of  his  being  out  of  covenant  with  God. 
2.  The  willing  and  entire  abandonment  of  every  other  covenant  under  which  the 
soul  has  been  enslaved.  3.  A  hearty  reception  of  the  terms  on  which  a  covenant 
with  God  can  be  made.    11.  What  counsel  and  dibection  can  we  offeb  to  those 

WHO  HAVE  it  in  THEIB  HEABT   TO  MAKE   A  "  COVENANT   WITH   THE   LOBD  "  ?      1.    Be   not 

satisfied  with  only  having  it  in  your  heart  to  do  so.  2.  Let  the  past  mistakes  which 
you  have  made  through  trusting  to  your  own  hearts  set  you  upon  your  guard  against 
trusting  them  in  future.  3.  If  you  make  a  covenant  with  the  Lord,  resolve  that  it 
shall  be  a  perpetual  one.  (John  Lewis.)  The  use  of  covenanting  with  God  : — A 
truly  pious  man  will  not  be  satisfied  with  serving  God  in  his  closet.  He  will  exert 
his  influence  to  bring  others  also  to  a  sense  of  their  duty.  We  have  a  noble  example 
set  before  us  in  the  conduct  of  Hezekiah.  I.  Show  when  we  have  reason  to 
APPREHEND  THAT  God's  anoer  IS  WAXED  HOT  AGAINST  TJS.  1.  When  our  sins  are 
multiplied  against  Him.  2.  When  His  judgments  are  multiplied  upon  us. 
II.  Point  odt  the  best  means  of  averting  His  wrath.  1.  Repentance  and  faith. 
2.  Devoting  ourselves  to  God  in  a  perpetual  covenant.  3.  Under  the  Old  Testament 
dispensation,  covenants  were  judged  acceptable  to  God.  (Asa,  2  Chron.  xv.  12-15 ; 
Josiah,  2  Kings  xxiii.  3.)  4.  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah  speak  of  the  making  of  such 
covenants  as  characteristic  of  the  gospel  times  (Isa  xliv.  5  ;  Jer.  1.  4,  5).  5.  Paul 
commends  the  Macedonians  (2  Cor.  viii.  5) ;  and  recommends  a  similar  practice  to 
all  Christians  (Rom.  xii.  1).  6.  Hezekiah  manifestly  supposed  that  God  would 
accept  him  in  this  duty.  III.  Urge  upon  you  the  adoption  of  them.  1.  There  is 
no  time  for  delay.  2.  If  we  neglect  this  duty  we  cannot  hope  to  escape  the  wrath 
of  God.  3.  If  we  heartily  engage  in  this  duty,  we  have  nothing  to  fear.  {Skeletons 
of  Sermoru.) 

Yer.  11.  For  the  Lord  hath  chosen  you  to  stand  before  Him,  to  serve  Him. — Divine 
$ervice : — ^I.  Some  persons  may  ask,  "  Whv  should  we  serve  God  ?  He  doesn't 
seem  as  if  He  troubled  about  us  ?  "  We  admit  that  so  far  as  outward  appearances 
go,  it  seems  as  if  this  great  universe  was  something  like  a  well-regulated  machine 
with  God  as  the  invisible  engineer.  When  a  human  being,  man,  woman,  or  child, 
goes  against  the  laws  of  this  great  machine,  God  does  not  stop  it,  as  a  human 
mechanic  would  his  engine.  The  Christian  believer  sometimes  wonders  why  God 
does  not  in  some  critical  emergency  interfere ;  but  shall  we  that  are  but  as  the 
creatures  of  a  day  express  any  doubt  of  the  wisdom  of  God  ?  U.  Permit  me  to 
say  A  FEW  WORDS  to  those  who  are  now  serving  God.  1.  Be  cheerful  in  your 
service.  2.  Let  your  service  be  pure  and  unselfish.  One  man  who  had  been 
helping  in  a  good  work  for  a  few  months,  with  a  cry  of  discontent  said,  "  I  shall 
not  come  any  more  because  nobody  ever  thanks  me."  Does  the  violet,  or  the  rose, 
or  the  sun  need  thanks  for  giving  forth  beauty,  and  perfume,  and  light  ?  The  best 
reward  of  good  service  is  in  the  heart  of  the  server.  A  man  who  engages  in  the 
Divine  service  from  selfish  motives  is  like  a  fettered  bird.  The  bird  could  wing 
itself  into  the  vault  of  yonder  blue  sky ;  but  it  has  a  stone  tied  to  its    leg.     Your 


KmiP.xxn.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  135 

selfishness  is  a  stone  which  fetters  your  usefulness.  3.  Let  your  service  b« 
-continual.  III.  Let  me  speak  to  those  who  have  no  hope  of  eveb  becoming  the 
SEBVANT8  OF  GoD.  God  knows  and  cares  for  you.  (W.  Birch.)  Diligence  and 
■exertion  in  the  Christian  ministry : — Let  us  endeavour — I.  To  explain  the  counsel 
OF  Hezekiah  to  the  priests  and  Levties:  "be  not  now  negligent."  This  is 
sometimes  rendered :  "  be  not  now  deceived."  This  conveys  the  idea  that  we  are 
never  more  apt  to  impose  upon  ourselves  than  when  we  are  remiss  in  duty,  for 
we  vainly  imagine  that  God  will  not  be  strict  to  mark  against  us  what  is  so 
natural  and  so  pleasing  to  the  depraved  heart  of  man.  It  implies  a  former 
deficiency  in  the  performance  of  duty.  This  counsel  was — 1.  Most  necessary. 
2.  Highly  important  and  useful.  3.  Peculiarly  reasonable.  II.  To  consider  some 
MOTIVES  TO  ITS  ENFORCEMENT.  1.  If  We  would  act  in  accordauco  with  the  design  of 
God  in  the  appointment  of  the  sacred  oflSce  of  the  ministry,  we  will  use  the  utmost 
diligence  in  His  service.  2.  The  number,  the  variety,  the  difiSculty  and  importance 
of  the  duties  connected  with  the  office  of  the  ministry,  require  diligence.  3.  Con- 
sistency with  your  professed  character.  4.  The  shortness  and  uncertainty  of  the 
time  allotted.  6.  The  sense  of  responsibility.  "Te  serve  the  Lord  Christ." 
{W.  Schaw.)  The  Christian  ministry : — I.  While  all  God's  children  are  called  "  to 
serve  Him,"  there  is  a  special  sense  in  which  the  minister  op  God  is  "  chosen  to 
SERVE  Him."  1.  He  is  outwardly  "  chosen  and  called  to  this  work  by  men  who 
have  public  authority  given  unto  them  "  in  the  church.  2.  He  is  inwardly  brought  to 
it ;  for  he  declares  that  he  "  thinks  in  his  heart  that  he  is  truly  called."     U.  The 

OBJECT  OF  the  ministerial  OFFICE  18  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD  IN  THE  SALVATION  OF  SINNERS. 

III.  The  means  wherebt  this  result  is  to  be  effected  are — 1.  The  preaching  of 
the  Gospel.  (1)  Faithfully.  (2)  Boldly.  (8)  Affectionately.  2.  The  right 
-discharge  of  his  regular  official  duties,  baptism,  marriage,  <&c.  3.  Personal 
intercourse  with  his  flock.      4.    The  minister's  consistency  of  life.      FV.   The 

ATTITUDE    OF   THE   MINISTER  IS   ONE   OF  PECULIAR  DIGNITY  ;   it  iS  tO  "  Stand  bcfoie  the 

Lord."  Exhortation ;  "  be  not  now  negligent."  1.  In  Prayer.  2.  In  study.  It 
is  said  of  the  Venerable  Bede,  that  •'  he  never  knew  what  it  was  to  do  nothing,  and 
always  found  it  sweet  to  be  either  learning,  teaching,  or  writing."  3.  In  labour. 
4.  In  conduct.  (F.  B.  Ashley.)  The  complex  idea  of  worship : — We  make  mistakes 
if  we  suppose  that  worship  is  a  mere  cloud,  a  foam  of  sentiment ;  it  is  work  of  all 
kinds,  door-opening  and  lamp-lighting  and  floor-sweeping,  cleansing,  preparing, 
Tentilating,  expecting  the  people  and  welcoming  them  with  joy  ;  and  then  incense- 
burning,  and  cross-uplifting,  and  cry  of  thunderous  and  mute  eloquence,  and  hymn, 
Bweet,  gentle,  tender,  and  prayer  that  beats  against  heaven  like  artillery — all  these 
things  and  many  more  are  included  in  the  complex  idea  of  worship.  Let  each 
man,  therefore,  do  what  he  can  in  this  matter,  knowing  that  no  one  man  works  the 
whole  ministry  of  worship,  but  that  it  is  an  act  of  co-operation  and  combination, 
one  part  playing  with  another  part,  and  each  interrelating  itself  with  each  other, 
BO  as  to  constitute  a  sum  total  significant  of  unity,  adaptation,  music,  and  homage. 
{J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  Now  they  begran  on  the  first  day  of  the  first  month. — A  new  year  in 
Jerusalem: — Let  us  consider — I.  The  work  done  (vers.  18,  19).  What  a  grand  work 
of  an  analogous  character  is  thereby  suggested — as  a  work  that  may  possibly  be 
accomplished  in  the  beginning  of  this  year  (1  Cor.  iii.  16).  II.  How  it  came  to 
PASS  that  it  was  done,  and  '•  DONE  SUDDENLY."  1.  "  God  had  prepared  the  people" 
^ver.  29).  2.  In  so  doing  He  had  rendered  the  priests  and  Levites  greatly  useful 
(vers.  12-16).  3.  King  Hezekiah  greatly  influenced  the  spirit  of  the  priests,  the 
Levites,  and  the  people,  as  evident  from  the  character  of  his  address  (vers.  5-11) .  But 
"there  is  another  king,  one  Jesus,"  who  builds  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  and  cleanses 
it,  to  whom  we  are  all  invited  to  look,  and  who  "  shall  bear  the  glory."  HI.  Some 
IMMEDIATE  RESULTS.  1.  A  great  impulse  given  to  the  spirit  of  worship  (vers.  28-30). 
2.  Extension  of  a  spirit  of  liberality  in  connection  with  the  worship  and  service  of 
the  Lord  (ver.  35).  3.  Great  joy.  And  that  how  valuable  I  (1)  In  itself .  (2\  In 
relation  to  moral  improvement— for  "  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."  (3)  In 
relation  to  trials  (Heb.  iii.  17, 18).  (4)  In  relation  to  usefulness  (Psa.  li.  12,  13). 
{Jot.  Elliot.) 

Ver.  27.  When  the  burnt  ofTering  began,  then  the  song  of  the  Lord  began  also. — 
Sacrifiee  and  song  : — This  chapter  contains  a  brief,  graphic  account  of  the  great 
reformation  which  Hezekiah  wrought  in  the  beginning  of  his  reign.     The  text  i? 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxix. 

part  of  that  account.  I.  How  often  these  two  things — SACRmcE  and  song — 
SELF-DENI.VL  AND  JOT — ABE  ASSOCIATED.  We  See  the  uniou  everywhere.  1.  In  the 
home.  When  is  the  husband  or  wife  so  supremely  happy  as  when  by  some  deed 
of  self-sacrifice  he  or  she  has  made  the  other  glad  ?  When  does  the  father's  heart 
sing  for  joy?  Not  when  he  has  bent  the  stubborn  will  of  the  child,  but  when, 
by  the  sacrifice  of  some  luxury  he  has  made  the  little  soul  glad  on  its  birthday. 
2.  In  the  best  works  of  fiction,  i.e.,  those  which  are  most  true  to  human  nature 
Who  does  not  remember  the  half-sovereign  which  Tom  Pinch,  the  poor  half- 
starved  clerk,  concealed  in  a  piece  of  paper  and  put  into  the  hand  of  Martin 
Chuzzlewit  at  their  parting?  And  who  has  not  envied  the  feeling  of  happiness 
with  which  he  returned  to  his  bare  home  and  grinding  lot?  3.  In  the  lives  of 
God's  servants.  The  memorials  of  Kobert  and  Mary  Moffat,  show  what  sacrifices 
they  had  to  make  in  carrying  on  their  work  in  Africa.  They  leave  no  doubt  that 
they  found  a  joy  in  them  that  the  selfish  and  luxurious  are  seeking  in  vain.  4.  In 
our  own  lives  we  have  all  experienced  it.  II.  They  aee  indissolubly  associated 
— joined  together  in  the  nature  of  things.  Man  cannot  have  the  one  with- 
out the  other.  Let  there  be  no  sacrifice  and  there  will  be  no  song,  no  self-denial 
and  there  will  ere  long  be  no  joy.  That  is  a  law  written  broadly  over  human 
nature,  attested  by  the  widest  experience,  and  recognised  by  Prov.  xi.  24,  25.  It 
explains  some  of  what  seem  to  be  the  hardest  sayings  and  most  difficult  demands 
of  our  Lord,  as,  e.g.,  Matt.  xvi.  24,  25;  John  xii.  24;  and  His  question  put  to  the 
two  ambitious  disciples  (Mark  x.  37,  38).  The  lesson  is  clear.  We  all  want 
happiness — that  our  joy  may  be  full.  But  we  cannot  have  it  by  aiming  at  it 
directly.  Begin  to  sacrifice,  to  give  to  God  what  you  really  value ;  say,  "  I  will  not 
offer  unto  the  Lord  my  God  that  which  doth  cost  me  nothing."  Give  your  money, 
interest,  time,  effort.  Copy  the  example  of  Him  who  "  went  about  doing  good," 
and  "pleased  not  Himself."  Try  to  make  lives  brighter,  homes  happier,  business 
more  pure.  Take  up  the  cross.  Then  this  bit  of  old-world  history  shall  record 
your  experience :  "  When  the  burnt  offering  began,  then  the  song  of  the  Lord 
began  also  " — a  song  which  grew  louder  and  mightier  as  the  sacrifice  went  on,  and 
never  ended  until  the  sacrifice  itself  came  to  an  end.    {J.  Ogle.) 

Ver.  31.  Now  ye  have  consecrated  yourselves  unto  the  Lord. — Consecration : — 
The  reign  of  Hezekiah  was  like  the  spasmodic  brightness  of  a  candle  about  to  go 
out  for  ever.  The  root  principle  in  consecrating  anything  is  the  recognition  of 
God's  exclusive  ownership.  I,  A  real  consecration  is  an  act  of  free  will.  II. 
Consecration  means  a  giving  to  God  Himself.  III.  Nor  vfill  such  consecration 
be  complete  without  a  personal  consecration.  {Bishop  Charles  E.  Cheney.) 
Worship  and  thankofferings  : — I.  The  occasion  referred  to  :  it  was  the  opening  of 
the  house  of  God.  1.  This  house  was  a  sacred  edifice,  consecrated  to  God  and 
typical  of  the  body  of  Christ.  2.  In  the  house  they  opened  for  God,  they  recognised 
a  place  of  meeting  between  God  and  souls.  3.  In  the  house  that  was  opened  for 
the  worship  of  God,  ihere  was  an  inner  court.  Into  this  inner  court  we  have  now 
•'  access  by  the  Spirit  unto  the  Father."  11.  The  nature  of  their  worship.  By 
sacrifice.  There  is  no  acceptable  worship  of  God  without  sacrifice.  HI.  Thb 
expressions  of  thankfulness  among  the  people.  They  were  happy — 1.  In  the 
knowledge  of  their  acceptance  with  God.  2.  In  the  extension  of  the  life  of  God  in 
their  souls.  3.  In  the  revival  of  the  worship  of  God  among  them  publicly.  4.  In 
the  expression  of  their  ardent  concern  to  rival  one  another  in  the  service  of  God — 
for  they  all  brought  their  thankofferings.     (Joseph  Irons.) 

Ver.  36.  For  the  thing  was  done  suddenly. — Quickly  done  : — I.  That  God  vert 
often  appeaes  to  work  with  a  suddenness  that  is  startling.  1.  In  the  realm  of 
nature.  (1)  Storms.  (2)  Earthquakes.  (3)  The  transition  of  the  seasons.  2.  In 
the  realm  of  providence.  (1)  Israel's  deliverance  at  the  Ked  Sea.  (2)  The  elevation 
of  Saul  to  the  throne  of  Israel.  (3)  Nebuchadnezzar's  humiliation.  3.  In  the 
realm  of  grace.  (1)  The  conversion  of  Manasseh,  of  Saul  the  persecutor, 
(2)  Revivals  in  churches.     II.  The  fact  that  although  God's  works  may  appear  to 

BE    marvellously    SUDDEN,  YET   AT   THE    SAME    TIME,  THEY    HAVE   BEEN    PRECEDED    BY  A 

PREPARATION  THAT  HAS  PERHAPS  LASTED  FOR  YEARS.  It  was  SO  in  this  particular  caso. 
Hezekiah  thanked  God  for  having  prepared  the  people.  Do  you  ask  me  how  they 
were  prepared  ?  I  think  I  could  venture  to  answer  that  question  by  saying  they 
were  prepared  by  the  very  openness  of  the  sin  of  the  previous  monarch.  Ahaz  had 
gone  to  such  a  tremendous  length  in  iniquity  that  his  very  excesses  of  crime  had 


CHAP.  XXX.]  IL  CHRONICLES.  137 

awoke  a  counter-feeling  amongst  the  people.  So  is  it  in  everything.  First  in  the 
realm  of  nature.  The  storm  that  comes  with  racehorse  speed  across  the  sky  might 
doubtless  be  traced  back  to  atmospheric  agencies  far,  far  remote.  The  storm  is  only 
a  climax.  As  in  the  realm  of  nature,  so  in  the  realm  of  providence.  The  deliverance 
at  the  Bed  Sea— it  appeared  sudden — it  was  not.  It  was  only  one  link  in  a  long 
chain.  From  the  very  beginning  God  had  determined  how  He  would  deUver  His 
people.  Is  not  it  specially  so  in  the  realm  of  grace  ?  Look  at  Manasseh,  whom 
we  have  used  as  an  example  of  sudden  conversion.  If  at  your  leisure  you 
refer  to  his  history,  you  will  find  in  the  thirty-third  chapter,  eleventh  and  twelfth 
verses,  the  account  of  God's  preparation.  "  And  Manasseh  was  caught  in  the 
thorns,  and  was  taken  a  captive  to  Babylon;  and  in  his  distress  he  sought  the 
Lord."  Take  the  case  of  Pentecost.  If  you  read  the  second  chapter  of  the  Acts 
attentively,  you  will  see  that  God  had  brought  together  at  Jerusalem  at  one  time 
an  immense  number  of  people  out  of  every  country,  and  I  read  they  were  "  devout 
men  " ;  that  is,  they  were  inquirers  after  the  truth.  God  had  heaped  together 
prepared  fuel,  then  He  made  Peter  strike  the  spark  which  resulted  in  the  grand 
Pentecostal  blaze.  So  is  it  in  revivals.  A  revival  appears  sudden,  and  yet  it 
is  only  the  result  of  previous  preparation.  You  are  revived  and  you  say  that 
you  are  revived  suddenly.  Let  me  ask  you  a  question  or  two,  and  I  think  you  will 
see  there  has  been  prior  working.  Did  you  have  any  troubles  in  your  business  ? 
Did  you  lose  a  child?  Were  you  sick?  What  an  encouraging  thought  it  is  to 
every  worker  for  God  that  mighty  things  can  thus  be  accomplished  in  a  moment. 
{A.  G.  Brown.)  "  Suddenly  " : — Observe  the  conjunction  of  words :  "  prepared — 
suddenly."  That  is  the  true  order  of  progress  —  preparation  as  to  process, 
suddenness  as  to  revelation.  As  the  volcano,  it  is  always  gathering  its  heat,  the 
moment  of  explosion  is  sudden ;  it  always  comes  unexpectedly ;  it  is  like  death  itself, 
for  though  we  have  reckoned  about  the  time  death  will  come,  when  he  does  come 
his  white  ghastliness  makes  us  forget  our  preparation  and  say.  It  was  so  sudden  at 
the  last  1  Have  some  of  us  not  had  preparation  enough  ?  Is  it  not  time  now  for 
enthusiasm  ?  We  have  heard  thousands  of  discourses ;  we  have  attended  thousands 
of  reUgious  services  ;  we  have  even  gone  so  far  as  to  criticise  the  services  we  have 
attended.  Has  there  not  been  preparation  enough?  Is  it  not  time  for  a  little 
suddenness,  outburst,  genuine  enthusiasm  ?  "  The  Lord  shall  suddenly  come  to  His 
temple."  "  Suddenly  there  was  with  the  angel  a  multitude  of  the  heavenly  host  " ; 
and  yet  all  the  ages  had  been  preparing  for  that  one  moment.  Eternity  had  been 
waiting  for  that  crisis,  and  yet  even  then  it  was  said,  "  And  suddenly."  ••  And 
Budde^y  there  came  a  sound  from  heaven,  a  sound  as  of  a  rushing,  mighty 
wind."  .  .  .  Yet,  though  apparently  so  unexpected,  ••this  la  that  which  was  spoken 
by  the  prophet  Joel."    {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XXX. 


Vbbs.  7,  8.  That  the  fierceness  of  His  wrath  may  turn  away. — Merey  turned  to 
penalty : — The  fire  that  cheers,  refines,  and  purifies,  also  burns  and  tortures.  It  all 
depends  on  our  relation  to  the  fire,  whether  it  be  our  friend  or  foe.  In  Eetsch's 
illustration  of  Goethe's  "Faust,"  there  is  one  plate  where  angels  are  seen  dropping 
roses  upon  the  demons  who  are  contending  for  the  soul  of  Faust.  But  every  rose 
falls  like  molten  metal  wherever  it  touches.  God  rains  roses  down,  but  our  sinful 
hearts  meeting  Divine  love  with  wilful  disobedience  turn  His  love  into  wrath. 
(Christian  Age.)  The  duty  of  yielding  ourselves  to  the  Lord: — I.  A  blessed 
SEASON  OF  GEACB  MASKED  FOB  AiiL  IsBAEL.  Now  were  the  doors  of  the  house  of  the 
Lord  opened  (chap.  xxix.  3).  II.  Theib  duty  in  that  blessed  season  of  grace. 
1.  Negative.  "  Be  not  stiff-necked."  It  is  a  metaphor  taken  from  bullocks 
unaccustomed  to  the  yoke,  who  make  great  difficulty  and  resistance  about  taking  it 
on.  2.  Positive.  (1)  Yielding  themselves  to  the  Lord.  Hebrew,  give  ye  the  hand 
to  the  Lord.  (2)  Entering  into  His  sanctuary.  (3)  Serving  Him.  (a)  In  His 
ordinances,  (b)  In  their  daily  walk.  (T.'Boston,  D.D.)  A  season  of  grace : — 
In  a  season  of  grace,  in  which  God  is  offering  to  lay  His  yoke  on  sinners,  they 
should  beware  of  being  stiff-necked,  or  refusing  to  take  it  on.  I.  What  is  that 
TOKB  WHICH  THE  LoBD  IS  OFFEEiNO  TO  LAY  ON  SINNERS.    It  is  the  Boft  and  easy  yoke 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

for  the  salvation  and  welfare  of  penitent  sinners.  "  Take  My  yoke  upon  you, 
saith  Jesus,  and  learn  of  Me :  For  My  yoke  is  easy."  This  is  the  yoke  of 
kindly  willing  subjection  to  God  in  Christ.  1.  The  yoke  of  subjection  to  the  will  of 
His  commandments.  2.  The  yoke  of  His  providential  will.  He  claims  to  dispose 
of  you,  as  seems  good  to  Him.  II.  This  obedience  of  the  sinneb  to  God  is  called 
A  TOKE,  because — 1.  Coming  under  it,  we  are  in  a  state  of  subjection  as  those  under 
a  yoke.  2.  It  is  laid  on  us  for  labour  or  work.  3.  By  it  we  are  not  only  kept 
at  work,  but  kept  in  order  at  our  work.  They  who  truly  bear  the  yoke,  are  uniform 
and  orderly  in  their  obedience.  "  They  have  respect  unto  all  God's  command- 
ments." 4.  Of  its  uneasiness  to  the  flesh.  5.  It  fixes  subjection  upon  us.  The 
bonds  of  obligation  are  sweet  and  agreeable  to  His  willing  people.     III.  Motives. 

1.  God  is  the  party  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  2.  There  will  be  nothing  gained  by 
Btiff-neckedness  to  the  yoke  of  God.  3.  God  has  waited  long  on  you,  but  wiU  not 
wait  always  (Prov.  xxix.  1).  Now,  while  a  season  of  grace  is  afforded  to  sinners,  it 
is  their  duty  to  fall  in  with  it  speedily,  to  give  the  hand  and  yield  themselves  to  the 
Lord.  Here  we  shall — I.  Show  how  sinners  have  a  season  of  grace  afforded 
THEM.  1.  By  their  being  continued  in  life.  2.  By  the  call  of  the  Gospel  so 
directed  to  them.  "  Behold  now  is  the  accepted  time ;  behold  now  is  the  day  of 
salvation."  3.  By  solemn  sacramental  occasions  afforded  to  a  people.  This  is  the 
case  in  the  text.  These  make  a  precious  "now"  not  to  be  slighted.  At  ordinary 
occasions  of  the  gospel,  the  blessed  bargain  is  offered ;  but  now  the  seal  of  heaven 
is  ready  to  confirm  it.  4.  By  some  inward  motions  felt  within  one's  own  soul, 
pressing  them  to  comply  and  yield  at  length.  H.  Inquire  what  is  supposed  in  this 
gracious  call  to  sinners.  It  supposes — 1.  That  sinners  are  naturally  in  a  state  of 
rebellion  against  the  Lord.  2.  That  though  the  Lord  can  break  the  sinner  in  pieces 
for  his  rebellion,  yet  He  would  rather  that  the  sinner  yield  ^Eze.  xxxiii.  11). 
3.  That  God's  hand  is  stretched  out  to  receive  the  sinner  yielding  nimself  (Isa.  Ixv. 
2).  4.  That  forced  work  will  not  be  acceptable  here.  6.  That  the  sinner  willingly 
yielding  shall  be  kindly  received  and  accepted.  HI.  Show  what  it  is  to  give  thb 
HAND  OR  YIELD  OURSELVES  TO  THE  LoRD.  1.  In  general,  it  comprehends — (1)  The 
work  of  conviction.  (2)  The  work  of  illumination  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  in 
receiving  the  discovery  of  a  Saviour.  (3)  The  work  of  humiliation,  in  becoming 
pliable  to  the  Divine  proposal  in  the  Gospel ;  leading  them  to  say,  "  Lord,  what  wilt 
Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  The  iron  sinew  in  the  sinner's  neck  is  broken.  The  outer 
door  of  the  mind,  and  the  inner  door  of  the  will,  are  both  cast  open  to  the  Lord 
Christ,  (4)  The  work  of  faith  in  the  sinner's  beUeving  on,  and  so  closing  with 
Christ,  as  his  Saviour  from  sin  and  wrath,  renouncing  aU  others.  (5)  The  work  of 
repentance  from  dead  works,  in  putting  off  the  body  of  the  sins  of  the  flesh  (Col.  11. 
11).  Faith  and  repentance  are  inseparable.  That  faith  which  produceth  not 
evangelical  repentance,  is  but  dead  faith.     (6)  The  work  of  entire  resignation. 

2.  In  particular.  (1)  Yielding  the  soul,  or  inner  man — mind — conscience — will — 
to  the  Lord.  (2)  Yielding  the  body  or  outward  man  to  the  Lord.  (3)  Yielding  up  all 
lusts  and  idols  to  Him  as  traitors  which  you  can  no  more  harbour.  (4)  Yielding 
all  lawful  enjoyments  to  Him,  so  as  to  be  at  His  disposal,  and  never  to  break  with 
Him  for  any  of  them.  (5)  Yielding  your  lot  and  your  all  to  Him ;  saying,  "  He  shall 
choose  our  inheritance  for  us. "  Improvement.  Use  1 :  Of  conviction  and  humiliation, 
in  respect  of  the  sad  bias  which  man's  nature  has  got.    Use  2 :  Of  exhortation. 

(1)  You  must  yield  yourselves  to  one  or  other,  for  you  are  not  self-sufiBcient. 

(2)  The  Lord  hath  the  best  right  to  you.  (3)  Consider  what  the  Lord  has  yielded 
for  you  (Rom.  viii.  32;  Bom.  v.  8).  (4)  The  Saviour  is  very  desirous  of  your 
yielding.  (5)  He  is  not  seeking  your  yielding  yourselves  for  nothing  (Hosea  iii.  3). 
(6)  You  must  yield  or  die,  bow  or  break.  (7)  Yield  and  all  your  former  rebelUona 
shall  be  forgiven.  (8)  Yield  or  the  Lord  will  have  war  with  you  for  ever.  How 
will  you  bear  His  coming  ?  (2  Thess.  i.  7,  9).  {Ibid.)  The  manner  in  which  the 
ioul  should  yield  itself  to  the  Lord : — I.  As  tN  a  harruos  covbnant  (Hosea  ii.  19). 
1.  Wholly.  2.  For  ever.  II.  As  to  a  conqueror.  III.  As  to  tour  King  and 
Sovereign  Lord.  At  discretion  and  not  by  capitulation.  IV.  Aa  filial  sebtants 
<co  A  Fathxblt  Master.    {Ibid.) 

Vers.  17-20.  For  there  were  many  in  the  congregation  that  were  not  Bancti- 
lled. — Unfitness  for  the  Communion: — I.  There  abb  seasons  when  we  feel  unfit 
roR  the  sacred  ordinance  of  the  Lobd's  house.  Let  us  think  of  the  ways  in 
which  the  Israelites  were  rendered  unfit  for  the  Passover  and  see  how  far  they  tally 
with  our  unfitness  for  the  Supper.      1.  Some  were  kept  away  by  defilement 


CHAP.  XXX.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  139 

(1)  The  dead  in  sin  lie  all  around  us ;  contact  with  their  ways  and  motives,  unless 
we  are  continually  cleansed  by  Divine  grace,  is  defiling  in  many  ways.  (2)  The 
mass  of  sin  within  our  own  selves  is  a  constant  source  of  defilement.  2.  When  a 
man  was  on  a  journey  he  could  not  keep  the  Passover.  The  heart's  blood  of  the 
Eucharist,  is  nearness  to  God ;  and  when  we  are  afar  off,  it  is  a  poor  dead 
ceremony.  3.  You  may  have  been  in  an  evil  case  from  unknown  causes.  You 
feel  it  is  not  with  you  as  in  days  past.  Marring  influences  not  mentioned  in  the 
Book  of  Numbers  may  have  been  preventing  you  from  eating  the  spiritual  Passover 
to  your  heart's  content.  Among  these  causes  are — (1)  Little  faith.  (2)  The 
absence  of  overflowing  joy.  (3)  Spiritual  weakness  at  aU  points.  (4)  A  feehng  of 
uselessness.  Whatever  your  disquahfications,  bring  them  and  turn  them  into  con- 
fessions of  sin.  II.  Though  we  feel  and  lament  our  want  of  preparation  we  mat 
STILL  COME  TO  THE  FEAST.  Let  US  to  some  extcut  follow  in  the  track  of  the  men  in 
Hezekiah's  time.     1.  They  forgot  their  differences.     2.  They  removed  the  idols. 

3.  They  endeavoured  to  prepare  their  hearts.  4.  They  made  open  and  explicit 
confession  unto  God.  5.  Confession  made,  let  prayer  ascend  to  heaven.  III.  In 
so  COMING  WB  MAT  EXPECT  A  BLESSING.  At  the  Passover  in  Hezekiah's  days  there 
was — 1.  Great  gladness.     2.  Great  praise  to  God.     3.  Great  communion  with  God. 

4.  A  great  enthusiasm.  6.  Great  liberaUty.  6.  Another  great  breaking  of  idols. 
(C  H.  Spurgeon.)        Personal  sanctification  requisite  for  acceptable  worship: — 

1.  The  principle  which  is  essential  to  acceptable  worship. — Sanctification  (Heb. 
X.  22).  Sanctification  of  heart  is  necessary  if  you  consider — 1.  The  character 
of  God  who  is  worshipped  (Isa.  vi.  1-5).  2.  The  nature  of  the  worship  required. 
3.  The  design  of  all  religious  worship.  (1)  To  glorify  God.  (2)  To  promote  our 
increasing  likeness  to  God.  11.  The  assertion  that  in  m.vnt  this  principle  was 
wanting.  This  charge  is — 1.  Comprehensive.  2.  Tremendously  awful.  Connect 
it  with  the  declaration  of  the  Saviour,  "  If  I  wash  thee  not  thou  hast  no  part  with 
Me."  {Essex  Congregational  Remembrancer)  The  people's  state  and  condition  : — 
This  text,  though  it  epeaketh  of  the  celebration  of  the  Passover,  yet  will  well  enough 
befit  the  solemnity  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  I.  The  indisposition  or  unpreparedness 
OF  THE  PEOPLE.  "  A  multitude  of  the  people  had  not  cleansed  themselves."  1.  In 
these  times  in  which  there  is  much  care  had  about  the  right  celebration  of  a  sacra- 
ment, there  are  many  yet  that  are  unworthy.  (1)  Because  there  is  a  great  deal  of 
laziness  in  people,  and  an  unwillingness  against  such  a  soul-searching  ordinance  as 
the  sacrament.  (2)  There  is  a  great  deal  of  hypocrisy  in  many  men,  and  it  is 
possible  that  they  may  carry  their  naughtiness  so  secretly  that  they  may  hide  it  from 
the  most  discerning  eye.  2.  If  when  much  care  is  taken  about  the  ordinances, 
many  are  unworthy  to  come,  it  serveth,  (1)  To  show  what  need  we  in  this  land 
have  to  humble  ourselves,  as  for  other  sins,  so  especially  for  our  sacramental  sins. 

(2)  For  a  double  exhortation :  (o)  To  pastors,  that  they  should  use  all  diligent  care 
to  prevent  this  unworthiness,  by  instructing  the  people  in  the  nature  of  the 
ordinances,  and  by  admonishing  them  of  the  danger  of  their  unprepared  coming. 
(6)  To  the  people.  To  stir  them  up  every  one  to  look  unto  himself  whether  he  be 
not  one  of  the  number.  A  gracious  heart  is  apt  to  suspect  itself  (Matt.  xxvi.  22). 
The  unprepared,  unworthy  receiver  is  he  that  doth  not  come  with  answerable  meet 
affections,  and  so  holy  and  reverent  a  frame  of  spirit  as  God  requires  we  should 
bring  into  His  presence.  They  are — AH  ignorant  persons  that  cannot  discern  the 
Lord's  body.  Those  that  do  not  judge  and  condemn  themselves  (1  Cor.  xi.  31,  32). 
A  gracious  prepared  heart  is  a  self -judging  heart:  a  wicked  heart  is  loth  to  come  to 
trial.  Those  that  come  in  uncharitableness  and  malice.  3.  There  is  no  cause 
why  men  should  abstain  from  the  use  of  ordinances,  for  fear  of  communicating 
with  wicked  and  profane  men.  II.  Their  practice,  notwithstanding.  "  Yet  they 
did  eat  the  Passover  otherwise  than  was  written."  Many  rush  on  ordinances 
notwithstanding  their  unpreparedness.  The  reasons  are — 1.  The  remissness,  or 
abuse  of  the  censures,  of  the  Church,  that  do  not  restrain  such  persons  from  coming. 

2.  It  proceedeth  from  ourselves,  because — (1)  There  is  a  great  deal  of  ignorance  and 
unbelief  in  the  hearts  of  most  men.  (2)  Custom  prevaUeth  with  most  rather  than 
conscience.  Custom  usually  eateth  out  the  strength  of  any  performance,  and 
dissolves  it  into  a  mere  formality.  III.  The  fault  of  their  practice.  They  ate 
otherwise  than  was  written.  God's  service  is  a  written  service.  We  offend  in  our 
duties  when  we  do  otherwise  than  is  written.  We  do  this — 1.  When  we  do  too 
much.  1.  The  essentials  of  a  sacrament  are  set  down  in  the  institution ;  there  lit 
the  rale.  If  we  seek  to  patch  it  up  with  some  zealous  additions  and  pieces  of  our 
own,  we  go  beyond  the  rule.    2.  In  the  outward  part  of  duty,  in  corporal  service, 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rm. 

and  in  the  pomp  and  solemnity  of  his  worship,  there  we  may  do  too  much — more 
than  we  need  to  have  done.  It  is  easy  to  be  too  pompous  in  a  sacrament,  and  to 
sin  against  the  plainness  of  the  ordinance.  Duties  are  like  your  coats  of  arms,  best 
when  they  are  plainest,  and  not  overcharged  with  too  many  fillings  ;  or  like  wine, 
then  most  generous  and  sprightly,  when  it  is  pure  and  uncompounded.  The  sacra- 
ments were  to  feed  men's  hearts,  not  to  please  their  eyes,  or  tickle  their  ears. 
Ordinances  nourish  best  when  they  come  nearest  their  primitive  institution.  We 
may,  then,  do  too  much  here.  A  sense-pleasing  religion  is  dangerous,  it  is  too 
much  suitable  to  our  natural  inclinations ;  and  that  is  the  reason  why  country 
people  are  so  much  taken  with  these  shows ;  they  do  not  love  the  native  beauty  that 
is  in  duties  half  so  well  as  they  do  the  painting  of  them.  It  is  a  miserable  thing 
when  you  will  place  religion  in  that  for  which  you  have  no  ground  nor  warrant. 
If  you  will  find  yourselves  work,  and  not  take  that  which  is  cut  out  for  you,  you 
know  who  must  pay  you  your  wages.  Mark  the  question  of  the  Saviour  (Matt. 
XV.  3).  2.  When  we  do  too  little.  When  we  come  not  up  to  the  spiritual  part  of 
the  commandment.  Consider  what  is  required  about  duty — (1)  Something  about 
the  heart  before  duty.  Preparation  (ver.  19).  We  must  come  with  faith  and 
repentance  and  other  qualifications  ;  we  must  come  with  a  desire  to  find  the  Lord 
(Psa.  xciii.  1).  (2)  Something  about  the  heart  in  duty.  Stirring  it  up.  A  duty 
done  without  life  and  efficacy  is  as  a  duty  not  done  at  aU.  We  come  short  of  the 
rule  if  we  come  not  with  holy  life  and  activity,  with  a  working  waiting  spirit  that 
will  warm  our  hearts  within  us,  and  make  them  burn  under  the  ordinances.  See 
what  a  qualification  James  requireth  in  prayer  (James  v.  16).  There  is  an  expres- 
sion (Acts  xxvii.  7).  "  Instantly  serving  God  day  and  night,"  which  means  in  the 
original,  with  the  forcible  putting  to  of  aU  their  might  and  strength,  with  their 
stretched-out  strength.  There  can  never  be  too  much  done  in  respect  of  the 
spiritual  part  of  the  commandment.  3.  Something  to  be  done  after  duty.  Recol- 
lecting and  running  over  all  the  carriage  of  the  heart  towards  God  in  the  duty,  and 
the  gracious  intercourse  that  the  soul  had  with  God.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Heze- 
kiah^s  prayer  for  the  Israelites : — I.  Thb  irreoulakity  which  some  of  the  people 

WERE   OUIIiTY    OF.       II.   HeZEKIAH'S   PRATER    FOB   THEM.        III.    ThE   SUCCESS   OF   THIS 

PRAYER.  Application  :  1.  Let  this  history  engage  us  to  seek  the  God  of  our  fathers, 
by  observing  all  His  ordinances.  2.  Let  this  subject  make  us  solicitous  to  prepare 
our  hearts  for  every  religious  solemnity.  3.  Let  this  subject  encourage  those  whose 
hearts  are  prepared  to  seek  God.  4.  Let  this  subject  excite  those  who  have  the  care 
of  others  to  watch  over  (hem  and  pray  for  them.    {J.  Ortan.) 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 


Veb.  1.  Until  they  bad  utterly  destroyed  them  aU. — Utterly : — Mark  the  word 
♦•  utterly."  It  is  for  want  of  that  word  that  so  many  men  have  failed.  Many  men 
have  cut  ofiE  the  beads  of  weeds.  Any  man  can  do  that.  The  weed  is  in  the  root, 
and  the  root  is  not  straight  down  in  the  earth,  so  that  it  can  be  taken  out  easily ; 
after  a  certain  depth  it  ramifies,  and  care  must  be  taken  that  we  get  out  every  fibre 
and  filament,  and  having  got  it  out,  turn  it  upside  down,  and  let  the  sun  do  the 
rest.  A  man  has  undertaken  to  abstain  from  some  evil  pursuit  for  a  month  :  he  haa 
clipped  off  the  top  of  the  weed  and  looks  just  as  well  as  anybody  else,  but  he  is  not ; 
he  has  still  the  root  in  him,  and  that  must  be  taken  out,  though  he  be  half  mur- 
dered in  the  process.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Reformmu&t  lead  to  regeneration  : — To 
utterly  destroy  an  idol  first,  even  were  it  possible,  would  not  be  lasting.  What  must 
come  first  in  the  order  of  time  ?  Religious  enthusiasm,  religious  conviction ;  deep, 
intense  spiritual  fellowship  with  God ;  a  look  into  heaven ;  vital  sympathy  with 
the  Cross  ;  a  purification  of  hand  and  life  and  tongue,  and  body,  soul,  and  spirit, 
by  the  Passover  rightly  eaten ;  and  then  what  giants  will  go  forth  with  axes  of 
lightning  to  smite  pillar  and  asherah  and  idol  and  every  vain  thing.  Men  cannot 
strike  finally  if  they  act  only  as  reformers.  Reform  is  an  active  word,  and  is  to  be 
regarded  with  great  favour,  and  is  the  only  word  that  is  permissible  under  some 
circumstances ;  but  the  greater  word  is  regeneration.  Reform  that  does  not  point  to 
regeneration  is  a  waxen  flower  that  will  melt  when  the  sun  is  well  up  in  the 
heavens.     {Ibid.)        Reform : — There    are  three  effects  which    ought  always  to 


CHAP.  XXXI.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  141 

follow  our  solemn  assembly  on  the  Lord's  day.  We  should  go  home  and — I.  Break 
IN  PIECES  ALL  ooB  IMAGES.  1.  Sclf-righteousness.  2.  Bacchus.  3.  Lust.  4.  Busi- 
ness ;  false  measures  and  false  weights.  5.  Pride.  II.  Cut  down  the  gboves. 
Groves  are  the  places  where  the  images  have  been  set  up.  There  was  nothing 
mark  you,  positively  sinful  in  the  grove;  but  they  have  been  used  for  sinful 
purposes,  and  therefore  down  they  must  come.  We  would  specify — 1.  The  theatre. 
2.  The  tavern.  3.  So-called  recreation,  dancing,  &o.  4.  Evil  books.  Light  litera- 
ture, the  moral  of  which  is  anything  but  that  of  piety  and  goodness.  III.  Throw 
DOWN  THE  HIGH  PLACES  AND  ALTARS,  ETC.  God  had  sald  that  He  would  have  but  one 
altar,  namely,  at  Jerusalem.  There  should  be  a  casting  down  of  everything  in 
connection  with  the  true  worship  that  is  not  according  to  the  law  of  God  and  the 
word  of  God.  (C7.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Then  all  the  children  of  Israel  returned, 
every  man  to  his  possession,  unto  their  own  cities. — Home  missionary  zeal : — In 
evangelising  our  own  countrymen  we   must   proceed — I.  In  the  employment  of 

THOSE    MEANS   WHICH    ABE    CONGENIAL  WITH    THE    SPIRIT    OP    THE    DISPENSATION    UNDER 

WHICH  WE  LIVE.  The  men  of  Israel  were  fully  justified  in  doing  as  described  in  the 
text.  They  lived  under  a  Theocracy,  and  idolatry  was  high  treason.  We  live 
under  a  different  dispensation.  "  The  weapons  of  our  warfare  are  not  carnal."  To 
destroy  the  idolatry  which  still  reigns  in  our  land  we  must  go  forth  and  preach  the 
gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  Hezekiah's  proclamation  of  the  Passover  and  its  conse- 
quences as  described  in  the  preceding  chapter  suggests  how  this  has  to  be  done. 
1.  Distinctly  (ver.  1).  2.  Boldly.  In  spite  of  ridicule  (ver.  10).  3.  Affectionately 
(ver.  6-9).    4.  Prayerfully  (ver.  18).    II.  Bt  ourselves  living  consistently  with 

THE  profession  WE  MAKE,  AND  THE  GREAT  CAUSE  WE  HAVE   ESPOUSED.      Our  llVCS  mUSt 

be  characterised — 1.  By  sincerity  and  uprightness  (2  Chron.  xxxi.  20,  21).  2.  By 
joy  and  praise  (2  Chron.  xxx.  21).  3.  By  self-denial  and  sacrifice  (2  Chron.  xxx.  24). 
III.  With  a  determination  to  take  no  rest  till  the  object  we  have  in  view  la 
ruLLT  accomplished.     "  Until  they  had  utterly  destroyed  them  all."    {H.  Townley.) 

Ver.  20,  21.  And  thus  did  Hezekiah  throughout  all  Judah,  and  wrought  that 
which  was  good. — Hezekiah — an  example  for  young  men : — I.  Hezekiah's  religion. 
1.  It  was  expensive.  He  set  about  reforming  the  national  religion.  The  spirit  of 
Buch  a  life  should  be,  must  be,  respected  in  every  one  of  us  if  the  religion  we  possess 
is  to  be  worth  anything.  The  young  man  whose  mind  is  that  of  Jesus  Christ  has 
learned  to  live,  not  for  himself,  but  for  others.  Harlan  Page  was  a  house  joiner  at 
Coventry,  in  America.  His  social  position  gave  him  but  little  influence,  but  what 
he  had  he  gave  to  God.  He  was  the  living  missionary  wherever  he  went.  See  how 
God's  grace  brought  him  out  of  self.  He  wrote :  "  When  I  first  obtained  a  hope  I 
felt  that  I  must  labour  for  souls.  I  prayed,  year  after  year,  that  God  would  make 
me  the  means  of  saving  souls."  Is  your  position  that  of  a  clerk  ?  Imitate  David 
Nasmith,  who  without  talent  or  money  sanctified  the  desk  by  working  for  Christ 
and  perishing  souls.  He  was  the  founder  of  City  Missions,  and  the  home  heathen 
owe  more  to  the  Glasgow  clerk  than  to  any  man  who  ever  lived.  Is  your  position 
that  of  a  military  officer  ?  Imitate  Hedley  Vicars.  The  soldier  of  the  Queen  be- 
came the  soldier  of  Christ.  He  had  hard  work  to  stand  his  ground  at  mess,  but  he 
did  stand  it ;  and  one  of  the  soldiers  said,  "  Since  Mr.  Vicars  became  so  good  he 
has  steadied  about  four  hundred  men  in  the  regiment. "  Is  your  position  that  of  a 
merchant  ?  Imitate  George  Moore,  who  rose  to  his  partnership  by  sterling  integrity, 
high  principle,  and  hard  work.  He  had  no  idea  of  growing  rich  and  forgetting 
those  by  whose  labours  he  accumulated  his  wealth.  Every  clerk  and  servant  in  his 
employment  knew,  in  a  very  tangible  way,  that  a  good  year's  business  had  been 
done.  In  a  word,  young  men,  whatever  you  may  be,  peer  or  peasant,  professional 
man  or  tradesman,  merchant  or  mechanic — come  out  in  God's  strength  as  a  religious 
man,  and  live  for  others.  Let  your  sympathies  embrace  suffering  bodies  and 
perishing  souls.  Never  mind  being  poor.  Much  of  God's  work  in  this  world  has 
been  done  by  men  of  little  education,  slender  means,  and  few  advantages.  Do  your 
duty  for  Christ  and  your  influence  will  reach  further  than  you  think.  "  Thus  did 
Hezekiah  throughout  all  Judah."  2.  It  was  sound.  He  "  wrought  that  which  was 
good  and  right,  and  truth  before  the  Lord  his  God."  A  young  man's  religion,  to  be 
worth  anything,  must  be  sound.  If  he  is  to  do  anything  which  is  "  good  and  right 
and  truth,"  he  must — (1)  Be  able  to  give  some  account  of  the  hope  which  is  in  him ; 
he  must  get  out  of  the  company  of  those  who  "  understand  neither  what  they  say, 
nor  what  they  affirm."  (2)  Base  his  religion  on  a  personal  study  of  the  Bible. 
(3)  Support  his  religion  by  the  plain  lessons  of  history  :  the  religious  history  of  out 


14Q  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxi. 

own  country.  (4)  Continually  submit  to  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (5)  Above 
all,  his  religion  must  be  centred  in  a  personal  Saviour.     3.  It  was  whole-hearted. 

II.  Hezekiah's  reward.  "  And  prospered."  1.  His  reward  was  of  God.  2.  He 
had  his  reward  in  his  country.  What  a  benefactor  he  must  have  appeared  in  the 
eyes  of  his  subjects.  3.  He  had  his  reward  in  himself.  (John  Burbidge.)  Life 
in  earnest : — I.  The  sphere  which  Christian  earnestness  occupies  in  the  Divinb 
LIFE.  1.  It  will  make  a  man  think  very  earnestly  for  his  Lord  and  Master.  In  the 
diary  of  Jonathan  Edwards  we  find  the  following  account  of  his  feelings  towards 
the  Lord's  work  :  "  I  had  great  longing  for  the  advancement  of  Christ's  kingdom  in 
the  world  ;  my  secret  prayer  used  to  be  in  great  part  taken  up  in  praying  for  it.  If 
I  heard  the  least  hint  of  anything  that  had  happened  in  any  part  of  the  world 
which  appeared  to  me  in  some  respect  or  other  to  have  favourable  aspect  on  the 
interest  of  Christ's  kingdom,  my  soul  eagerly  caught  at  it,  and  it  would  much 
animate  and  refresh  me.  I  used  to  read  public  news  letters,  mainly  to  see  if  I  could 
find  some  news  favourable  to  the  interest  of  religion  in  the  world."  When  we  are 
full  of  zeal  for  God  it  is  the  same  with  us.  2.  It  will  make  a  man  plan  and  purpose 
for  the  cause  of  Christ.  3.  It  will  show  itself  in  perseverance.  4.  It  will  show  its 
zeal  in  an  entire  dependence  upon  God,  and  in  intensely  fervent  prayer  for  God's 
help  and  for  God's  blessing.    II.  Arguments  which  provoke  to  this  earnestness. 

1.  The  greatness  of  the  work  we  have  to  deal  with.  2.  The  earnestness  of  Satan. 
3.  The  responsibilities  which  lie  upon  us  as  a  Church.  4.  The  onflowing  of  the 
stream  of  death.    6.  The  love  which  we  have  received  of  Jesus.     III.  May  God 

GIVE  ME  fresh  GRACE  WHILE  I  UNDERTAKE  THE  SOLEMN  WORK  OF  DEALING  WITH  CARE- 
LESS AND  UNCONVERTED  SOULS.  [C.  H.  Spurgcon.)  The  character  of  Hezekiah  : — 
Every  man  who  wishes  to  do  good  in  his  generation,  who  would  bless  others  and  be 
blessed  himself,  must  cultivate  the  same  principle  of  goodness  that  Hezekiah  did. 
In  every  work  that  he  began,  "he  did  it  with  all  his  heart."    I.  Inducements 

WHICH  SHOULD  LEAD  US  TO    ADOPT   THIS   PRUDENT   AND   DECISIVE   CONDUCT.       1.    It  SaveS 

time ;  or  at  least  it  leads  us  to  apply  every  part  of  it  to  the  best  advantage.  It 
prevents  our  life  being  abridged  by  years  of  irresolution  and  delay.  It  gives  us  the 
assurance  that  we  are  husbanding  our  talent  well.  2.  It  secures  our  continual 
happiness.  3.  Its  beneficial  effects  on  society  are  incalculable.  II.  Examples  of 
THIS  principle  ARE  TO  BE  FOUND — 1.  In  the  Bible.     Moses,  Ezra,  Nehemiah,  &c. 

2.  In  general  history.  The  origin  and  progress  of  almost  everything  great  and  good 
in  society  has  been  achieved  by  the  zeal  and  active  virtues  of  a  few  individuals. 
The  advancement  of  the  arts  and  sciences ;  the  extension  of  commerce ;  the 
blessings  and  security  of  a  legal  government ;  the  inestimable  value  of  a  pure  and 
reformed  religion,  &c.  {J.  Hewlett,  B.D.)  Hezekiah' $  good  reign  : — A  beautiful 
lily  laid  in  your  hand  would  show  you  nothing  of  the  mud  and  slime  of  the  river 
bed  from  which  it  sprung.  Like  such  a  lily  is  Hezekiah,  the  flower  of  kings.  Some 
natures  seem  to  grow  strong  in  virtue,  by  contact  with  its  opposite.  Joseph,  Moses, 
and  Daniel  ripened  in  strange  gardens,  and  Hezekiah  must  have  sucked  honey  out 
of  thistles.  Consider — I.  His  reverence.  Victor  Hugo  affirms  that  neither 
Wellington  nor  Blucher  won  the  battle  of  Waterloo.  Napoleon  conquered  himself. 
His  own  excessive  weight  destroyed  the  equilibrium.  "  He  vexed  God "  by  his 
importance,  and  so  his  fall  was  decreed.  Hezekiah  began  his  reign  by  exalting  God 
and  humbliiig  himself.  II.  His  religious  zeal.  HI.  His  public  spirit.  IV.  His 
EiNCERiTY  OF  HEART.  (Mouday  Club  Semions.)  How  to  succeed  in  life : — There 
are  three  lessons  we  may  learn  from  Hezekiah.  I.  He  was  not  afraid  of  work.. 
He  did  not  seek  success  without  toil.  "  Depend  upon  it,"  said  Sir  Walter  Scott^ 
"  there  is  nothing  to  be  had  without  labour."  Horace  Greely  said  to  the  youth  of: 
America,  "  The  darkest  day  in  any  man's  earthly  career  is  that  wherein  he  fir^t 
fancies  that  there  is  some  easier  way  of  gaining  a  dollar  than  by  squarely  earning; 
it."  '*  When  I  was  a  telegraph  operator  in  Pittsburgh,"  said  Andrew  Carnegie,  "I 
knew  all  the  men  who  speculated.  I  have  lived  to  see  all  of  them  ruined — bankrupt 
in  money  and  bankrupt  in  character.  There  is  scarcely  an  instance  of  a  man  whO' 
has  made  a  fortune  by  speculation  and  kept  it."  II.  Hezekiah  concentrated  his 
EFFORT.  What  he  did,  he  did  "  with  all  his  heart."  "  The  one  prudence  in  life  is 
concentration,"  says  Emerson,  "  the  one  evil  is  dissipation."  There  is  a  proverb 
which  says,  "  A  canoe  is  paddled  on  both  sides,"  which  means  that  to  succeed  yon 
must  do  one  thing  at  a  time,  and  do  it  with  all  your  heart  and  all  your  powers. 

III.  Hezekuh  aimed  at  THOROUGHNESS  TO  HIS  WORK.  {A.  F.  Forre$t.)  Hezekiah' t 
thorcnighnett  in  God't  service : — I.  We  learn  from  Hezekiah  a  lesson  of  concentra- 
tion op  energy.    II.  Method  and  punctuality,  too,  seem  to  be  hinted  at  in  tha 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  143 

text,  and  they  are  almost  indispensable  to  prosperity.  III.  The  great  lesson  is  the 
VALUE  OF  THOROUGHNESS  in  doing  whatever  we  undertake,  and  doing  it  well.  Do 
nothing  as  if  it  were  trifling.  IV.  Emulate  Hezekiah's  abdent  and  consistent 
PIETY.  He  stands  in  the  front  rank  among  the  saints  of  Scripture  as  a  man  of 
prayer.  {J.  Thain  Davidson.)  Concentration: — A  number  of  tiny  brooklets  will 
turn  no  mill,  and  will  probably  dry  up  when  the  sun  is  hot,  but  all  the  water  turned 
into  one  channel  will  move  the  wheel  to  grind  the  corn  which  may  supply  a  town 
■with  bread.  All  apostles  of  progress  in  religion,  or  science,  or  philosophy,  have 
been  men  whose  aims  have  all  converged  to  one  great  centre,  and  whose  forces  have 
been  thrown  upon  one  sublime  purpose.  (Handbook  of  Illustration.)  The 
objective  point : — In  military  operations  there  is  always  what  is  called  the  objective 
point.  The  objective  point  is  the  point  to  be  made,  the  thing  to  be  done ;  all  the 
forces  in  the  army  are  concentrated  on  the  making  of  that  point,  and  when  that  is 
made,  success  follows.  In  one  sense  life  is  a  warfare,  and  every  one  should  have 
his  objective  point,  a  clearly  defined  purpose,  and  work  up  to  it  with  undeviating 
persistency.  This  is  the  only  way  he  can  succeed.  Enthusiastic  service  : — A 
dealer  in  pictures  who  makes  it  his  business  to  find  as  many  new  painters  as  possible, 
both  in  this  country  and  abroad,  was  asked  recently  in  regard  to  his  methods  of 
selecting  pictures  to  buy.  He  was  very  frank  in  his  talk,  and  one  thing  which  he 
said  is  shrewd  enough  to  be  worth  quoting.  "  Of  course,"  he  said,  "  with  my 
experience  I  am  able  to  judge  whether  there  is  promise  in  a  painter's  work,  but  I 
never  buy  with  any  idea  of  putting  the  painter  on  my  list  until  I  have  seen  the  man 
and  talked  with  him  myself.  I  always  watch  him  closely,  and  I  never  buy  his 
pictures  unless  his  eye  lights  up  when  I  talk  to  him  about  his  work  and  about  his 
profession."  The  artist  whose  heart  was  really  in  his  work  could  not  discuss  it 
without  kindling,  and  the  man  who  did  not  paint  from  the  heart  was  not  the  one 
whose  pictures  the  dealer  vvaated.  The  remark  was  not  only  one  which  showed 
insight  and  shrewdness  on  the  part  of  the  dealer,  but  it  is  one  of  a  good  deal  of 
significance  in  regard  to  all  work.  The  man  who  does  anything  worth  doing  is  the 
man  who  cannot  talk  about  what  he  has  accomplished  or  what  he  hopes  to  accom- 
plish  without  enthusiasm,  no  matter  how  far  short  of  his  ideals  what  he  has  actually 
done  may  seem  to  him  to  fall.  National  righteousness  : — From  Hezekiah's  con- 
duct, and  from  God's  approval  of  it,  we  learn— I.  That  to  establish  religion  ra 

A  LAND  IS  THE  DUTY  OF  EVERY  RIGHTEOUS  GOVERNMENT.  11.  ThAT  TO  EMPLOY  THE 
POWER  AND  APPLIANCES  OF  THE  StATE  IN  ORDER  TO  EXTEND  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GoD,  IS 
BENEFICIAL  BOTH  TO  THE  INDIVIDUAL  AND  TO  THE  NATION  AT  LARGE.   (Louis 

Stenham,  M.A.)  Impassioned  men  : — It  is  the  impassioned  men  that  have  made 
history  always,  religious  and  secular  both.  They  are  the  torch  to  the  heaped -up 
combustibles ;  they  are  the  pulse  to  the  general  body  that  is  listless  and  \yaiting. 
No  man  has  moved  the  world  like  Jesus  Christ,  because  no  man  besides  Him  has 
embodied  so  wide,  so  profound,  and  so  Divine  enthusiasm.  People  are  passionate 
in  everything  but  their  passion  for  men;  and  that  is  the  one  Christian  passion. 
(C.  H.  Parkhurst.) 


CHAPTEB  XXXn. 


Veb,  4,  Why  should  the  kin^s  of  Assyria  come,  and  find  mnch  water  T—  Stopping 
the  fountains : — Nothing  was  more  thought  of  in  ancient  times  in  order  to  add  to 
the  greatness  of  a  city  than  an  abundant  water  supply.  It  was  one  of  the  greatest 
glories  of  old  Rome  that  it  had  never-faiUng  aqueducts,  and  the  same  thing  was 
true  of  Jerusalem  in  still  earlier  times.  In  all  the  hard  sieges  the  city  endured 
there  never  was  any  failure  of  the  water  supply.  The  Jews  had  chiefly  to  thank 
Hezekiah  for  this.  He  was  both  most  brave  and  wise— this  old-time  Judean  king. 
He  turned  his  attention  first  of  all  to  the  water  supply  of  the  country  north  of 
Jerusalem,  by  the  route  along  which  the  invading  hosts  must  come.  There  was 
the  upper  watercourse  of  Gihon,  not  far  from  the  holy  city.  The  springs  were 
abundant  there  and  their  fresh  waters  united  to  form  a  brook  which  ran  strongly 
down  the  valley.  Hezekiah's  engineers  saw  what  was  to  be  done,  at  once  to  cripple 
the  enemy  and  greatly  to  benefit  the  Jews.  The  springs  should  be  drawn  from 
their  natural  outlet  to  pour  their  waters  into  a  capacious  subterranean  aqueduct 
built  strongly  and  leading  the  current  into  vast  reservoirs  in  Jerusalem  out  in  the 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rxxn. 

rock  far  below  the  foundations  of  the  temple,  between  the  walls  of  Jerusalem 
proper  and  the  city  of  David.  So  it  is  said  by  the  inspired  chronicler  that 
Hezekiah  stopped  the  fountains,  that  is,  he  covered  them  up  after  diverting  the 
water,  so  that  the  Assyrians  might  not  find  them,  and  he  brought  the  stream  by 
aqueduct  straight  down  to  the  west  side  of  the  city  of  David.  For  why  should  the 
kings  of  Assyria  come  and  find  much  water?    I.  We  are  justified  in  thinking 

OF  OURSELVES  IN  OUB  CHABACTEB  AS  THE  8EEVANT8  OP  GOD  IN  THE  CHRISTIAN  LITE, 
AS  TYPIFIED  BT  THE  PEOPLE  OF  GoD  IN  OLDEN  TIME,  THE  JEWS  ;  AND  THE  KING  0» 
ASSYRIA  FOB   VB  IS   THE   EVIL   ONE   HIMSELF   WITH   ALL    HIS   HATEFUL   HOSTS.       He   haS 

ever  desired  to  avail  himself  of  the  springs  of  our  human  life,  to  sustain  and  aid 
him  in  his  assaults  upon  our  souls.  The  springs  of  human  life  are  many  and 
various.  1.  There  are  our  intellectual  faculties,  the  mind  with  all  its  marvellous 
power  of  imagination  and  memory,  the  intelligence  which  reasons  out  things,  and 
by  sheer  force  of  resistless  logic  discerns  the  true  from  the  false.  2.  There  is  the 
will,  that  strange  forceful  energy  which  drives  our  powers  and  faculties  in  this  way 
or  in  that,  compelling  them  to  work  its  bidding,  a  will  so  often,  alas  I  set  against 
the  Divine  will  and  purpose  which  called  us  into  being.  3.  There  are  our  affec- 
tions, the  emotional  side  of  our  nature,  working  sometimes  quite  independently  of 
reason,  persuading  us  to  this  or  that  course  of  action  because  the  present  inclination 
outweighs  every  other  consideration.    II.  These  springs  of  our  human  life  abb 

FULL   OF   VIGOUB  AITO   SEND    FOETH   A   FULL    STBEAM    OF    EFFECTIVE    ENERGY.      It   iS   HO 

wonder  that  the  enemy  of  souls  desires  to  appropriate  them  to  his  own  purpose. 

1.  He  would  use  the  mind  to  set  reason  against  faith,  to  be  wise  in  its  own  conceits, 
to  refuse  to  accept  anything  that  is  not  made  plain  to  it.  2.  He  would  use  our 
wills  to  perform  his  own  purposes  against  the  Most  High.  He  says  to  us,  '*  You 
are  free  agents,  to  do  as  you  please.  You  shall  not  surely  die  if  you  eat  of  the 
forbidden  fruit."  3.  Once  more  there  is  the  emotional  side  of  our  nature,  our 
affections.  We  feel  that  these  have  relation  especially  to  the  pleasures  of  life,  the 
happiness  of  love  and  of  self-indulgence  in  natural  desires  of  many  sorts.  The 
devil  would  use  these  for  his  own  purposes,  as  of  old  the  kings  of  Assyria  would 
eagerly  have  used  the  springs  of  Gihon.  Cunningly  does  he  urge  it  on  the  human 
soul,  "  Why  has  God  given  you  passions  and  natural  desires  of  all  sorts  if  you  are 
not  meant  to  gratify  them  ?  "  III.  Now  that  wise  king  Hezekiah  in  the  olden 
time,  when  he  perceived  that  the  abundant  springs  of  Gihon  were  likely  to  help  his 
enemy  to  the  grievous  discomfiture  of  the  people  of  God,  set  to  work  at  once  to 

COVER   THE    springs,    HAVING    DIVERTED    THE    CHANNEL   THAT    THE   WATER    MIGHT    FLOW 

BY  suBTEBRANEAN  CONDUITS  INTO  THE  HOLY  CITY.  The  first  great  thought  he  had 
was  to  hinder  the  Assyrian  from  availing  himself  of  those  precious  springs.  And 
that  may  well  read  to  us  a  lesson  of  the  exceeding  profitableness  of  covering  our 
minds  and  wills  and  affections  from  the  evil  one.  1.  Our  intellectual  powers 
should  be  covered  that  the  enemy  of  souls  may  not  use  them  to  our  discomfiture. 

2.  The  will  is  likewise  one  of  those  springs  of  life  which  Satan  especially  seeks  to 
find  and  to  avail  himself  of.  We  cover  it  from  him  by  subjecting  ourselves  to  a 
higher  wiU  through  the  principle  of  obedience.  3.  Then  there  are  those  choice 
springs  of  life  which  we  call  the  affections.  We  must  set  restraint  upon  our 
natural  desires  in  aU  sorts  of  ways,  by  remembering  that  our  nature  has  been 
perverted  by  original  sin;  its  lusts  and  appetites  are  in  rebellion  against  their 
lawful  master  the  wiU,  and  they  are  sure  to  lead  us  into  mischief  unless  strongly 
repressed  by  loyalty  to  the  teachings  of  God.  IV,  Hezekiah  was  not  content  to 
stop  the  fountains  of  Gihon  that  his  enemy  might  not  find  abundant  water  in  that 
dry  and  dusty  country;  with  a  master  stroke  of  policy  he  built  a  great  subterranean 

conduit,  AND  CARRIED  ATT.  THE  FRESH  SWEET  WATER  FROM  ITS  SOURCE  IN  THE  VALLEY 
TO    ENORMOUS    ROCK-HEWN    RESERVOIRS    WHICH    HE    CONSTRUCTED    IN    JERUSALEM.       One 

who  did  not  know  what  the  king  had  done  might  come  to  that  place  where  once 
the  waters  of  Gihon  had  flowed  so  freely,  and  lament  the  dry  wady  and  filled-up 
wells.  And  so  the  world  often  looks  upon  the  lives  of  earnest  Christians,  thinking 
how  much  they  are  losing  through  their  scruples ;  the  intellectual  powers  restrained 
within  the  dull  limits  of  orthodoxy,  the  will  subjected  to  what  seems  like  a  servile 
obedience  to  old-time  traditions,  the  affections  not  allowed  any  strong  vigorous 
license  to  brighten  the  sadness  of  this  present  world.  It  is  only  those  who  do  not 
comprehend  the  real  truth  who  can  talk  so  however.  1.  The  mental  powers  which 
here  would  not  be  prostituted  to  taking  interest  in  those  subjects  of  human 
research  which  blasphemed  God's  truth,  and  ridiculed  the  faith  of  the  ages; 
subjects  which  under  the  specious  disguise  of  realism  delved  onblushingly  into 


«HAP.xxxn.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  145 

vice  and  shameful  immoralities,  and  declared  it  was  the  part  of  true  wisdom  to 
know  the  evil  as  well  as  the  good — these  shall  find  splendid  exercise  and  joyous 
•development  ever  more  and  more  in  the  eternal  truths  of  the  universe,  in  the 
mysteries  of  the  Divine  Being,  in  the  secrets  of  Divine  love  which  are  inexhaustible, 
and  which  overflow  with  supremest  delights.  2.  The  will  which  here  refused  to 
assert  its  independence  of  the  known  laws  of  the  Creator,  shall  in  the  holy  city 
find  full  range  for  all  its  craving  after  freedom.  3.  The  affections  which  here 
resisted  the  drawings  of  sensuality  and  of  worldliness,  being  wiUing  to  surrender 
the  loves  of  this  present  world  for  the  love  of  God,  shall  in  the  city  which  is  on 
high  find  the  rapture  of  heart  joy,  the  bliss  of  satisfied  affection  surging  back  upon 
the  soul  from  the  very  being  of  God  Himself.     (Arthur  Ritchie.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  Witli  him  is  an  arm  of  flesh ;  but  with  us  is  the  Lord  our  God. — 

Eezekiah  and  the  Assyrians  : — The  story  of  Hezekiah  and  his  preservation  is  one  of 
the  most  vivid  and  thrilling.  Rightly  interpreted,  it  echoes  the  words  of  our  text  to 
all  time.  The  king  of  Assyria  is  a  representative  character.  The  powers  of  this  world 
are  joined  against  the  children  of  God,  and  they  are  variously  commanded.  Some 
Sennacherib  rises  from  hour  to  hour  and  threatens,  often  with  formidable  front 
a.nd  fell  purpose.  But  God's  people  may  always  say,  "  There  be  more  with  us  than 
with  him,"  &c.  (Monday  Club  Sermons.)  We  look  too  much  to  men : — Oliver 
Cromwell  was  but  a  gentleman  farmer,  but  the  exigency  of  his  time  was  such  that 
he  took  up  arms  on  behalf  of  his  country.  He  was  a  man  of  prayer,  and  went 
to  the  battlefield  from  the  prayer  meeting.  After  one  great  victory,  he  writes  to 
Parliament,  "  God  brought  them  into  our  hands.  .  .  .  God  is  not  enough  owned. 
We  look  too  much  to  men  and  to  visible  helps.  This  hinders  our  success."  The 
■arm  offiesh: — I.  The  chabacter  of  oxm  enemies  described  by  an  arm  of  flesh. 
II.  The  source  of  our  support,  and  cause  of  victory.  "  But  with  us  is  the 
Lord  our  God,  to  help  us,  and  to  fight  our  battles."  This  denotes — 1.  Possession. 
:2.  Presence.  3.  Support.  4.  Victory.  5.  The  Father  is  with  us.  C.  The  Son  is 
with  us.  7.  And  the  Holy  Ghost  is  with  us.  III.  The  result  of  God's  mani- 
fested presence.  "  And  the  people  rested  themselves  upon  the  words  of  Hezekiah, 
king  of  Judah."  (T.  B.  Baker.)  Conditions  of  victory : — I.  At  the  negative 
fiiDE.  1.  Numbers  are  no  surety.  Gideon's  army  had  to  be  reduced  before  it  could 
■conquer  the  Amalekites.  2.  Worldly  wisdom,  policy,  shrewdness,  enterprise,  will 
not  ensure  success.  3.  Unlimited  creature  resources  of  every  kind  are  insufficient. 
4.  The  most  seemingly  favourable  outward  circumstances,  as  to  time,  place, 
auspices,  expectations,  combinations,  oftentimes  but  deceive  into  carnal  security 
and  insure  the  worst  kind  of  defeat.  11.  At  the  positive  sr»E — the  assured,  unfail- 
ing conditions  of  victory  in  the  sense  of  Righteousness  and  Godliness.  1.  We  must 
have  God  on  our  side.  There  must  be  no  doubt  on  this  point.  2.  We  must  be 
careful  to  be  on  God's  side.  3.  This  brings  out  the  point  which  the  Apostle  John 
emphasises  so  strongly  (1  John  v.  4,  5).  (J.  M.  Sherwood.)  And  the  people 
rested  themselves  upon  the  words  of  Hezekiah,  king  of  Judah. — Words  to  rest  on : — 
I.  The  kind  of  man  whose  words  are  likely  to  be  rested  on.  He  must  be — 1.  A 
great  man.  2.  A  good  man.  3.  A  courageous  man.  4.  A  hearty  man.  5.  In 
such  a  case  God  will  add  His  sanction  by  granting  success  and  he  will  be  a  pros- 
perous man.  6.  A  man  who  has  respect  for  God's  word.  II.  In  the  second  place 
let  U3  turn  the  other  way  and  look  at  the  kind  of  people  who  rest  on  such 
A  man's  word.  1.  Children  do  so  with  their  parents.  2.  Illiterate  people  who 
cannot  read.  3.  Unconverted  persons  who  have  no  spiritual  discernment.  4.  Per- 
sons who  naturally  run  in  a  groove.  Having  attended  at  such  a  place  of  worship, 
and  having  been  brought  up  in  the  midst  of  a  certain  set  of  godly  people,  they 
scarcely  deviate  one  jot  from  the  teaching  that  they  have  received.  Almost  by  the 
necessity  of  their  nature  they  rest  on  what  they  hear.  5.  Persons  who  profess 
always  to  do  their  own  thinking.  If  you  will  trace  them  home,  they  are  in  nine 
cases  out  of  ten  the  veriest  slaves  that  ever  lived.  They  are  the  bondservants  of 
some  heretic  or  other  who  has  put  it  into  their  heads  that  in  following  him  they 
become  free  men.  III.  The  kind  of  words  you  may  rest  on.  You  may  safely 
rest  on — 1.  Words  which  urge  you  to  faith  in  God.  2.  Words  which  are  the  words 
of  God  Himself.  3.  Words  which  are  sealed  by  the  Lord  Jesus.  4.  Words  which 
have  been  blessed  to  other  men.  5.  Words  which  breathe  a  sense  of  rest  into  the 
.BouL     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  20.  Frayed  and  cried  to  heaven. — Trtie  prayer : — True  prayer  is  not  pester- 

18 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxn. 

ing  the  Throne  with  passionate  entreaties  that  a  certain  method  of  deliverance 
which  seems  best  to  us,  should  be  forthwith  effected ;  but  is  a  calm  utterance  of  need, 
and  a  patient,  submissive  expectance  of  fitting  help,  of  which  we  dare  not  define- 
the  manner  or  the  time.  They  are  wisest,  most  trustful  and  reverent,  who  do  not 
seek  to  impose  their  notions  or  wills  on  the  clearer  wisdom  and  deeper  love  to 
which  they  betake  themselves,  but  are  satisfied  with  leaving  all  to  His  arbitrament. 
True  prayer  is  the  bending  of  our  own  wills  to  the  Divine,  not  the  urging  of  ours  on 
it.  When  Hezekiah  received  the  insolent  letter  from  the  invader,  he  took  it  and 
"  spread  it  before  the  Lord,"  asking  God  to  read  it,  leaving  all  else  to  Him  to  deter- 
mine: as  if  ho  had  said,  "  Behold,  Lord,  this  boastful  page.  I  bring  it  to  Thee,, 
and  now  it  is  Thine  affair  more  than  mine."  The  burden  which  we  roll  on  God 
lies  lightly  on  our  own  shoulders  ;  and  if  we  do  roll  it  thither,  we  need  not  trouble 
ourselves  with  the  question  of  how  He  will  deal  with  it.  (Alex.  Maclaren,  D.D.}- 
"  Fire  upwardx  " ; — A  story  of  the  wars  of  the  first  Napoleon  has  often  come  back 
to  me.  He  was  trying  in  a  winter  campaign  to  cut  off  the  march  of  the  enemy 
across  a  frozen  lake.  The  gunners  were  told  to  fire  on  the  ice  and  break  it,  but  the 
cannon  balls  glanced  harmlessly  along  the  surface.  With  one  of  the  sudden  flashes 
of  genius  he  gave  the  word,  "  Fire  upwards  !  "  and  the  balls  crashed  dovm  full 
weight,  shattering  the  whole  sheet  into  fragments,  and  the  day  was  won.  You  caa 
fire  upwards  in  this  battle  even  if  you  are  shut  out  from  fighting  it  face  tO' 
face.  You  can  do  your  share  witban  the  four  walls  of  your  room.  (Mis$- 
Trotter.) 

Vers.  24,  25.  In  those  days  Hezekiah  was  siclc  to  the  death. — HezekiaVt  tick- 
nest  and  recovery : — I.  The  great  contrasts  in  the  events  op  liiTE.    II.  Thb 

SUDDENNESS  WITH  WHICH  THESE  EVENTS  HAPPEN.  III.  ThE  DISTRESS  WITH  WHICa 
THET    ARE    OFTEN    ATTENDED.      IV.    ThE    WONDERFUL    DELIVERANCB    WHICH    GOD   CAN 

GRANT.  [Jamet  Wolfendale.)  But  Hezekiah  rendered  not  again  according:  to  the 
beneat  done  unto  Mm. — A  ruler^a  sin ; — I.  An  undoubted  truth  ;  that  the  binb 

OF  the  rulers  and  the  PEOPLE  RULED,  ARE  SO  INTIMATELY  CONNECTED,  THAT  ONE  IN- 
VARIABLY  INVOLVES    THE    OTHER   (Zcch.    X.    3).      II.    ThE   INTELLiaiBLE    MOTIVE.       God 

gives  us  in  the  present  order  of  things  a  large  share  in  one  another's  punishments, 
that  He  may  make  us  take  a  deeper  interest  in  one  another's  duties.  All  are  deeply 
interested  in  all.  The  government  of  every  Christian  country  is  intimately  con- 
nected with  the  transgressions  of  the  people ;  and  the  governed  are  closely  involved 
in  the  sins  of  the  government ;  so  that  each  has  an  important  duty  to  perform  to- 
the  other.  The  government,  apart  from  all  political  considerations,  to  curb  and 
repress  the  immoralities  and  the  wickedness  of  the  people  ;  and  the  people,  firmly 
though  mildly,  to  warn  and  caution  and  speak  plainly  to  the  government,  lest  by 
partaking  silently  and  voluntarily  of  other  men's  sins,  they  become  partakers  in. 
other  men's  pains.  (H.  Blunt.)  Hezekiah  deserted : — I.  The  person  herb 
SPOKEN  OF.  1.  His  personal  character.  2.  His  pecuhar  necessities.  II.  The  dis- 
pensation herb  DESCRIBED.  1.  The  suspension  of  grace.  2.  The  withdrawment  o£ 
comfort.  III.  The  purpose  of  that  dispensation.  1.  To  discover  sin,  with  a. 
view  to  its  cure.  2.  To  conduct  to  greater  happiness  and  honour.  IV.  The  issue 
OF  THE  TRIAL — he  slnncd.  1.  Wherein  was  the  sin?  He  neglected  an  oppor- 
tunity of  proclaiming  the  true  God,  and  indulged  in  a  vain  self-seeking.  2.  How 
small  in  comparison  with  the  sins  of  others — of  ourselves.  3.  How  soon  repented 
of.  4.  How  severely  visited.  {J.  C.  Gray.)  Ingratitude  to  God  an  heinous  but 
general  iniquity  : — Among  the  many  vices  tnat  are  at  once  universally  decried  and 
universally  practised  in  the  world,  there  is  none  more  base  or  more  common  than 
ingratitude ;  ingratitude  is  the  sin  of  individuals,  of  families,  of  Churches,  of  king- 
doms. None  of  us  can  flatter  ourselves  that  we  are  in  little  or  no  danger  of  this 
sin  when  even  so  good  and  great  a  man  as  Hezekiah  did  not  escape  the  infection. 
In  order  to  make  you  the  more  sensible  of  your  ingratitude  towards  your  Divine- 
Benefactor,  I  shall — I.  Give  a  brief  view  of  His  mercies  towards  you.  II.  Ex- 
pose THE  aggravated    BASENESS  OF    INGRATITUDE    UNDER    THE    RECEPTION   OF   SO   MANX 

MERCIES.     (S.  Davies,  M.A.)        A  rendering  for  mercies: — I.  That  those  that 

HAVE   RECEIVED   MERCIES   MUST  BB   CAREFUL  TO   GIVE   IN    ANSWERABLE   RETURNS   OR   TO 

BENDER  ACCORDING  TO  WHAT  THEY  HAVE  RECEIVED.  1.  There  must  be  a  rendering. 
There  is  a  reflection  upon  God  from  all  His  works.  Hell-fire  casts  back  the  reflec- 
tion of  the  lustre  of  His  justice  and  the  power  of  His  wrath.  The  world  is  round, 
and  the  motion  of  all  things  circular ;  they  begin  in  God,  and  end  in  God  (Rom. 
xi.  36).     (1)  We  must  be  effected  with  the  mercies.    (2)  Solemnly  praise  God  for 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  147 

them.  (3)  Renew  the  remembrance  of  them  (Psa.  cii.  4).  (4)  Improve  them  to 
Bome  good  use.  We  must  improve  them  to — (o)  Greater  trust  in  God.  (b)  Greater 
love  to  Him  (Psa.  cxvi.  1,  2).  (c)  Fearing  Him  more,  lest  we  should  offend  so  good 
a  God  (Hosea  iii.  5).  {d)  More  complete  obedience.  2.  This  rendering  must  be 
proportionate.  (1)  Real  mercies  require  real  acknowledgments.  (2)  The  acknow- 
ledgment must  answer  the  proportion  of  the  mercy,  (a)  If  the  acknowledgment  be 
in  word,  it  must  be  taken  notice  of  in  a  more  than  ordinary  manner  (Psa.  cl.  2). 

(b)  If  in  deed,  some  notable  thing  must  be  done  for  God  (Esther  vi.  3 ;  2  Sam.  vii.  2). 
3.  This  reproves — (1)  Those  that  instead  of  rendering  according,  render  the  quite 
contrary ;  who  the  more  God  hath  blessed  them,  grow  unthankful,  proud,  sensual, 
dead  formal  in  prayer,  less  in  communion  with  God,  more  licentious  in  their  actions. 
They  are  like  tops  never  well  but  when  they  are  scourged ;  abuse  their  mercies  to 
the  contempt  of  God,  as  the  Israelites  took  the  earrings  of  gold  and  silver,  which 
were  the  spoils  of  the  Egyptians,  and  made  a  golden  calf  of  them.  As  the  sea 
tnrneth  all  the  sweet  dews  and  influences  of  heaven  into  salt  water,  so  they  turn 
aU  their  mercies  into  occasions  of  sin.  (2)  Those  that  do  not  render  ought  at  all. 
There  was  a  law  in  (Ezekiel  xlvi.  9).  He  that  went  in  at  one  gate  was  not  to  go 
oat  at  the  same  gate,  but  an  opposite ;  some  say,  lest  he  should  turn  his  back  upon 
the  mercy-seat.  (3)  Those  that  render  something  but  not  suitable,  (a)  We  must 
be  first  reconciled  to  God  before  we  can  do  anything  acceptable,  (b)  Awaken  the 
heart  to  the  work,  (c)  Search  out  the  works  of  God  (Psa.  cxi.  2).  (d)  Consider 
what  the  world  gaineth  by  every  discovery  of  God.  (e)  Desire  God  to  give  you  the 
heart  to  render  (Psa.  11.  15).  (/)  Reason  and  argue  from  your  experiences  to  your 
duty   (Ezra  ix.  13).    EL.  That  it  is  a  sion  wb  abb  unthankful  under  MERciEa 

WHBN  THE  HEART  IS  LIFTED  UP  UPON  THE  ENJOYMENT  OF   THEM.      1.   BccaUSe   God  Can 

never  be  rightly  praised  or  exalted  while  the  heart  is  proud  (Isa.  ii.  17).  God  is 
exalted  in  the  creature's  self-abasement.  2.  A  proud  heart  cannot  be  rightly  con- 
versant about  blessings.  It  doth  not  give  them  their — (1)  Due  rise,  as  David 
(2  Sam.  vii.  18).  (2)  Due  value  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  20  ;  Esther  v.  13 ;  Mai.  i.  2).  (3)  Due 
ends.  3.  How  shall  we  know  when  the  heart  is  lifted  up  ?  It  is  mainly  shown^ 
(1)  In  security.  Men  live  as  if  they  were  above  changes.  God  is  neglected,  or  but 
coldly  owned,  as  if  we  now  had  no  more  need  of  Him  (Lam.  i.  9).  (2)  In  insolency. 
This  is  manifested — (a)  By  contention.  When  we  are  delivered,  then  we  revive 
old  quarrels ;  as  timber  warpeth  in  the  sunshine.     (&)  By  insultation  over  enemies. 

(c)  By  oppression  and  violence.  4.  Use.  (1)  Take  heed  of  secret  thoughts  of 
merit  (Deut.  ix.  4).  (2)  Take  heed  of  ascribing  to  your  wisdom,  power,  and  con- 
duct (Heb.  i.  16 ;  Deut.  viii.  14,  17).  3.  Take  heed  of  the  pride  of  self-dependence. 
Conclusion :  1.  A  special  recognition  and  recalling  of  sins  is  not  unseasonable 
(Ezek.  xxxvi.  30,  31).  2.  Meditate  upon  the  changes  of  providence  (Psa.  xxxix.  5). 
Belisarius,  a  famous  general  to-day,  and  within  a  little  while  forced  to  beg  for  a 
halfpenny.  Things  and  persons  are  as  the  spokes  of  a  wheel,  sometimes  in  the 
dirt  and  sometimes  out.    (S.  Manton,  D.D.) 

Ver.  26.  Notwithstandlngr,  Hezekiah  humbled  himself  for  the  pride  of  his  heart. 

— Eezekiah's  $in  and  humiliation : — I.  Show  the  nature  and  grounds  of  Hezekiah's 
HUMILIATION.  His  sin  does  not  seem  great  in  human  estimation ;  but  it  was  ex- 
ceeding sinful  in  God's  sight.  1.  He  sought  his  own  glory.  He  wished  to  show 
what  a  great  man  he  was,  in  order  that  his  alliance  might  be  courted  and  his  power 
feared.  2.  He  sought  his  own  glory  in  preference  to  God's  honour.  He  had  now  a 
happy  opportunity  of  magnifying  the  God  of  Israel.  He  might  have  (1)  recounted 
God's  past  dealings  with  His  people  ;  (2)  commended  Jehovah  as  an  answerer  of 
prayer.  3.  He  sought  his  own  glory  before  the  good  of  his  friends.  He  should 
have  recompensed  the  great  kindness  of  the  ambassadors  by  instructing  them  in  the 
knowledge  of  the  God  of  Israel.  II.  Enquire  whether  wb  also  have  not  similab 
grounds  fob  humiliation.  1.  Pride  is  deeply  rooted  in  the  heart  of  fallen  nian. 
We  are  vain  (1)  of  any  natural  endowments  of  body  or  mind.  (2)  Of  any  acquired 
distinctions.  (3)  Even  the  gifts  of  grace  become  occasions  of  pride.  2.  We  indulge 
this  disposition  to  the  neglect  of  God's  honour  and  of  the  eternal  welfare  of  those 
around  us.  (1)  We  have  many  opportunities  of  speaking  for  God.  (2)  But  how 
rarely  is  our  intercourse  with  each  other  made  subservient  to  His  glory.  IIL 
Inferences.  1.  What  dreadful  evils  arise  from  small  beginnings.  Hezekiah  at  first 
probably  intended  only  to  show  civility  to  his  friends.  2.  How  great  is  the  efficacy 
of  fervent  prayer  and  intercession.  God  deferred  the  evil  threatened  till  the  next 
generation.    {Skeletons  qf  Sermom.) 


143  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOn.  [chap.  txto. 

Yer.  31.  God  left  Mm  to  try  him,  that  he  might  know  all  that  was  In  his  heart. 

Hezekiah's  fall  considered  and  applied : — I.  Hezekiah's  sin.  1.  Its  nature.  (1) 
All  sin  originates  in  the  heart.  Hezekiah's  sin  did  not,  like  that  of  David,  breaK 
forth  into  gross  and  external  violations  of  the  Divine  law,  but  it  betrayed  itself  in  the 
indulgence  of  secret  pride,  in  the  gratification  of  a  vainglorious  spirit,  in  an  idolatrous 
exaltation  of  the  creature  above  the  Creator.  His  heart  was  lifted  up.  (2)  The 
particular  nature  of  his  sin  will  be  more  clearly  discerned,  if  we  advert  to  the 
occasion  of  his  fall  (2  Kings  xx.  13).  (a)  He  was  actuated  by  a  wrong  spirit,  (b)  His 
action  had  a  wrong  tendency.  It  was  calculated  to  erase  every  serious  impression 
which  a  recital  of  the  wonder  done  in  the  land  might  have  made  on  these  heathen 
strangers.  It  was  also  calculated  to  confirm  them  in  the  conviction  that  the  kings 
of  Judah,  notwithstanding  their  superior  pretensions  to  the  knowledge  and  favour  of 
the  true  God,  in  reality  neither  possessed  nor  avowed  any  better  source  of  pro- 
tection and  prosperity  than  the  kings  of  other  nations  enjoyed.  2.  Its  aggravations. 
(1)  His  whole  life  had  been  an  uninterrupted  succession  of  great  distinguished 
mercies.  (2)  He  had  lately  experienced  a  most  remarkable  proof  of  the  Divine 
interposition  in  his  favour.  II.  The  pabticulab  view  of  this  tbansaction  ex- 
hibited IN  THE  TEXT.  1.  It  unfolds  the  cause  of  Hezekiah's  fall.  "  God  left  him." 
What  a  striking  illustration  is  thus  incidentally  presented  to  us  of  man's  depravity 
and  weakness.  No  sooner  was  the  barrier  removed  than  the  stream  rushed  with 
impetuosity  into  the  channel  of  sin.  To  guard  us  against  presumption  the  Scriptures 
present  to  us  the  examples  of  some  of  the  most  eminent  servants  of  God,  not  all 
falling  whenever  they  were  left  to  themselves,  but  falling  in  those  very  points  where 
we  should  conceive  them  to  have  been  most  firmly  established  ;  Abraham,  Moses, 
&o.  What  need  for  us  to  pray,  "  Take  not  Thy  Holy  Spirit  from  us."  2.  It  dis- 
closes to  us  the  secret  reasons  of  the  Divine  conduct  in  thus  permitting  him  for  a 
season  to  be  overcome.  God  left  him  *'  to  try  him,"  that  Hezekiah  himself  might 
know  all  that  was  in  his  heart.  (1)  Nothing  but  a  deep  sense  of  our  natural 
depravity  can  effectually  destroy  our  vain  self-confidence,  and  can  excite  us  to  a 
diligent  use  of  those  means  which  are  essential  to  our  growth  in  grace,  and  to  our 
perseverance  in  well-doing.  We  shall  (a)  Eegard  our  heart  with  a  holy  jealousy. 
{b)  Studiously  examine  the  secret  motives  of  our  conduct,  (c)  Sedulously  avoid 
those  places  and  practices  which  are  most  likely  to  prove  a  snare  to  us.  (d)  Be 
instant  in  prayer  for  a  supply  of  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ,  (e)  Fear  to  resist  and 
grieve  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  (2)  In  exact  proportion  to  our  views  of  the  depravity 
of  our  heart  will  be  the  degree  of  our  self-condemnation  and  humiliation  before 
God.  Hence,  how  highly  should  we  value  self-knowledge,  and  how  anxiously  should 
we  labour  to  acquire  it.  Address — 1.  Those  who  studiously  close  their  eyes 
and  shut  their  ears  against  every  discovery  of  the  sin  which  dwelleth  in  them. 
2.  Those  who  having  in  vain  endeavoured  to  stifle  their  convictions  of  sin,  are  filled 
with  consternation  and  terror  at  the  extent  of  their  depravity.  {E.  Cooper.) 
Hezekiah's  trespass  with  the  ambassadors  from  Babylon: — 1.  Nations  professing 
God's  holy  name  must  beware  of  sinful  compromises  with  those  by  whom  His  truth 
is  corrupted.  The  chief  fault  for  which  judgment  befel  Hezekiah  was  Ustening  to 
the  proposal  to  become  the  ally  of  a  heathen  prince.  2.  It  is  an  imperative  duty 
which  rests  upon  Christians  to  do  somewhat  for  the  spiritual  welfare  of  foreigners 
who  visit  them.  3.  The  necessity  for  recognising  every  moment  our  need  of  Divine 
help.  (iJ.  Bickersteth,  M.A.)  Hezekiah's  sin : — A  fragment  of  the  history  of  the 
Assyrian  writer  Berosus  tells  us  that  at  this  time  Babylon  had  shaken  off  for  a 
season  the  supremacy  of  Assyria,  and,  under  Berodach  Baladan,  was  strengthening 
herself  as  a  rival  sovereignty.  The  fame  of  the  discomfiture  of  Sennacherib  before 
Jerusalem  had  reached  his  ears,  and  it  might  well  seem  to  him  that  an  alliance 
with  Hezekiah  would  be  useful  against  a  common  danger.  The  recovery  of 
Hezekiah  and  the  miraculous  sign  furnished  a  suitable  occasion  for  an  embassy 
which  was  sent  ostensibly  to  congratulate  the  king  and  "  inquire  of  the  wonder  done 
in  the  land."  There  was  no  sin  in  Hezekiah  showing  the  embassy  what  was  costly, 
useful,  beautiful,  but  in  the  vanity  which  gave  these  things  chief  prominence. 
I.  Here  is  a  lesson  fob  ds  as  a  nation.  Let  us  also  show  strangers  whatever  we 
have  of  interest ;  but  let  us  not  keep  in  the  background  what  should  be  chief  of  all, 
and  let  them  go  away  thinking  that  what  we  most  value  is  wealth,  power,  pleasure. 
It  is  the  duty  of  the  Christian  pulpit  at  such  a  time  to  ask  the  people,  *'  What  have 
you  shown  ?  What  is  in  your  heart  ?  "  Has  God  the  chief  place  ?  Is  righteous- 
ness more  to  us  than  riches,  and  principle  than  policy  ?  Are  we  more  desirous  to 
live  in  the  fear  of  God  than  to  keep  in  awe  other  nations  ?    If  we  pompously  display 


CHAP.xxxn.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  149 

our  treasures,  may  we  not  some  day  be  ignominiously  despoiled  ?  If  in  any  form 
we  embrace  Babylon,  may  not  our  nation  some  day  be  crushed  by  Babylon? 
Whatever  our  princes  and  statesmen  may  do,  let  the  people,  who,  more  and  more, 
are  the  nation  and  responsible  for  its  character  and  conduct,  let  the  people  cherish 
and  make  manifest  the  conviction  that  worth  is  more  than  wealth,  and  piety  than 
power,  and  righteousness  than  rank,  and  purity  than  pleasure,  and  God  than  gold. 
"  In  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  strong  confidence  "  ;  "  The  throne  is  established  by 
righteousness  "  ;  "  Bighteousness  exalteth  a  nation  " ;  "  Seek,  first,  the  Kingdom  of 
God  and  His  righteousness,  and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you."  II.  The 
LESSON  IS  APPLICABLE  TO  THE  Chubch  as  Well  as  to  the  Nation.  What  is  our  idea  of 
the  chief  excellence  and  stability  of  any  Church  ?  Is  it  the  support  of  Law,  the 
patronage  of  princes,  a  grand  hierarchy,  rich  endowments  ?  Is  it  noble  buildings, 
imposing  ritual,  inspiring  music  ?  Is  it  learning  and  eloquence  in  the  pulpit,  with 
congregations  numerous,  or  cultured,  or  wealthy  ?  These  features  have  their  value 
more  or  less,  and  these  can  be  shown,  displayed,  gloried  in.  But  the  chief  treasures 
of  the  Church  cannot  thus  be  exhibited.  Alas  for  the  Church  that  prides  itself 
chiefly  in  the  outward  and  visible.  Do  we  desire  for  our  church  such  things  chiefly 
and  regard  them  most  worth  seeking,  prizing,  extolling  ?  Or  are  we  cultivating, 
praying  for,  and  valuing  far  more — Penitence,  Faith,  Love,  Zeal,  HoUness,  Useful- 
ness? What  is  in  our  heart?  III.  We  mat  apply  the  lesson  to  individiials. 
What  do  we  ourselves  regard  as  our  chief  treasure  ?  This  may  be  developed  by 
circumstances.  It  has  been  said  that  after  the  massacre  at  CuUoden  certain  flowers 
bloomed  where  blood  had  been  copiously  shed,  unknown  before.  The  seeds  were 
dormant,  till  favourable  conditions  brought  them  forth.  Hezekiah  was  a  good 
man,  but  in  his  heart  were  latent  weaknesses,  which  it  was  well  for  him  to  know 
before  it  was  too  late.  Better  that  they  should  be  revealed  and  cured  than  be 
hidden,  unchecked,  and  with  worse  and  more  lasting  fruits.  Crises  in  the  life  of 
nations  and  individuals  have  developed  unsuspected  capacities,  both  for  good  and 
evil.  For  both  in  the  case  of  David  and  Peter.  For  the  commission  of  the  worst  of 
crimes  in  the  case  of  Judas.  If  occasion  occurred  of  displaying  our  most  valued 
possession,  what  would  we  select  ?  We  may  reasonably  show  what  is  showable — 
house,  garden,  books,  pictures,  children ;  if  gratefully  to  the  Giver,  and  not  in 
vanity.  But  are  these  our  chief  treasures  ?  If  angels  came  to  us  from  their  far 
country,  what  would  they  see  we  prize  most  ?  Were  some  such  unexpected  visitor 
to  enter  our  abode  to  interview  us,  would  he  find  family  reUgion — the  gathered 
household  at  the  domestic  altar,  private  prayer,  personal  godliness?  Is  the 
maturity  of  Christian  character  sought  more  than  the  prosperity  of  business  and  the 
increase  of  wealth  ?  Do  we  regard  the  favour  of  God  more  than  the  praise  of  men ; 
communion  with  heaven  more  than  intimacy  with  the  great  ones  of  the  earth ; 
a  good  conscience  more  than  stores  of  silver  and  gold  ?  Temptation  may  come  to 
try  what  is  in  our  heart.  By  some  departure  from  strict  integrity  business  may  be 
promoted  and  wealth  increased.  If  we  yield  it  is  evident  that  we  regard  money  as 
more  worth  having  than  a  good  conscience.  If  some  gratification  is  indulged  at  the 
cost  of  sobriety  and  virtue,  we  show  that  pleasure  is  more  to  us  than  purity.  On 
what  do  our  thoughts  chiefly  dwell?  "  As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart  so  is  he." 
On  what  do  we  chiefly  set  our  affections  and  direct  our  energies  ?  "  Where  a  man's 
treasure  is  there  will  his  heart  be  also."  Hezekiah's  wealth  went  to  the  Babylon  he 
courted.  If  we  choose  the  world  we  perish  with  it.  Jerusalem  in  ruins  is  an  emblem 
of  a  soul  without  God.  {Newman  Hall,  LL.B.)  Danger  of  prosperity  : — The 
naturalists  observe  well,  that  the  north  wind  is  more  healthful,  though  the  south  be 
more  pleasant ;  the  south  with  his  warmth  raiseth  vapours,  which  breed  putre- 
faction, and  cause  diseases ;  the  north  with  his  cold  drieth  those  vapours  up,  purging 
the  blood,  and  quickening  the  spirits.  Thus  adversity  is  unpleasant,  but  it  keepeth 
ns  watchful  against  sin,  and  careful  to  do  our  duties ;  whereas  prosperity  doth 
flatteringly  lull  us  asleep.  It  never  goes  worse  with  men  spiritually  than  when  they 
find  themselves  corporeally  best  at  ease ;  Hezekiah  was  better  upon  his  sick-bed  than 
when  he  was  showing  off  his  treasures  to  the  ambassadors  of  the  King  of  Babylon. 
{J.  Spencer.)  The  danger  of  being  left  to  oneself : — One  day  I  went  out  with  my 
little  girl,  I  said  to  her,  "  Emma,  you  had  better  let  me  take  hold  of  your  hand." 
She  said,  "  No  ;  I  had  rather  keep  my  hands  in  my  muff,"  and  she  walked  off  very 
proudly.  Presently  she  came  to  some  ice,  and  down  she  went,  and  was  hurt  a  little. 
I  said, "  You  had  better  let  me  hold  on  to  your  hand."  She  said,  "  No  ;  but  let  me 
hold  on  to  your  finger."  Presently  she  came  to  some  more  ice ;  she  could  not  hold 
on  to  my  finger,  and  down  she  went,  and  hurt  herself  still  more.      Then  she  said. 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  mm. 

"  Papa,  I  wish  you  would  hold  on  to  my  hand."  So  I  took  her  wrist  in  my  hand, 
and  she  couldn't  falL     (D.  L.  Moody.) 

Vers.  32,  33.  Now  the  rest  of  the  acts  of  Hezekiah,  and  his  goodness. — 

nezekiah's  goodness  : — I.  The  genuine  goodness  shall  not  want  appbopblatb 
KECOBD  AND  REMEMBRANCE.  1.  God,  the  inspipcr  of  goodness  in  the  hearts  of  men, 
will  not  forget  it.  2.  The  beneficiaries  of  goodness  will  not  be  unmindful  of  their 
benefactors.  3.  Sympathetic  imitators  will  mirror  forth  their  goodness,  from  whom 
they  have  derived  its  idea  and  impulse.  Christian  philanthropists  Uke  John  Howard 
and  Elizabeth  Fry  are  living  over  again  in  their  practical  admirers  and  copyists, 
n.  The  seasons  selected  by  God  for  such  recognition  are  often  sober  and 
80RR0WFUL.  1.  PubUc  Calamity.  Sennacherib's  invasion.  2.  Personal  affliction. 
Hezekiah's  sickness.  3.  Death,  Hezekiah's  burial.  "Blessed  are  the  dead."  (J. 
Spencer  Hill.)  Goodness  of  heart : — The  wind  is  unseen,  but  it  cools  the  brow 
of  the  fevered  one,  sweetens  the  summer  atmosphere,  and  ripples  the  surface  of 
the  lake  into  silver  spangles  of  beauty.  So  goodness  of  heart,  though  invisible 
to  the  material  eye,  makes  its  presence  felt ;  and  from  its  effects  upon  surrounding 
things  we  are  assured  of  its  existence.  And  they  burled  him  in  the  chiefest  of 
the  sepulchres  of  the  sons  of  David. — The  life  and  character  of  Hezekiah: — 
A  very  wise  and  salutary  custom  prevailed  among  the  ancient  Egyptians  ;  that  of 
sitting  in  judgment  upon  the  life  and  character  of  a  man  after  his  death,  that, 
according  as  he  had  been  deserving  or  undeserving,  honourable  burial  might  be 
granted  to  him  or  denied.  The  Jews  appear  to  have  brought  something  like  the 
same  custom  out  of  Egypt,  and  to  have  acted  upon  it  in  the  case  of  their  wicked 
kings  (1  Kings  xiv.  13 ;  2  Kings  ix.  10 ;  Jer.  xxii.  18  ;  Isa.  xiv.  19).  Hence  a  burial 
specially  mentioned  in  the  Scriptures  signifies  honour,  approbation,  and  affectionate 
remembrance,  more  distinctly  than  among  us.  The  funeral  of  Hezekiah  is  the 
proper  place  for  a  review  of  his  life  and  character.     Consider — I.  His  ptjblio 

ZEAL  FOR  THE  WORSHIP  OF  GoD  AND  THE  GOOD  OF  Hl8  PEOPLE.  II.  ThB  PECULIAB 
troubles  with  which  he  was  EXERCISED.  HI.  ThE  REMARKABLE  DELIVERANCES 
WHICH  HE  EXPERIENCED.  IV.  ThE  SINGULAR  CIRCUMSTANCES  UNDER  WHICH  HE  PASSED 
BIS    CLOSING  TSARS.      Y.    ThE  EXCELLSMCSS  AMD  DBFXOTS  07  HIS  BSLiaiOUS  CHASACTEB 

AND  CONDUCT.    (Daniel  Kattemt.) 


CHAPTER  XXXm. 


Ykr.  1.  Uanasseh  was  twelve  years  old. — Manasseh ;  or,  the  material  and  the 
moral  in  human  life : — There  are  two  great  mistakes  prevalent  amongst  men,  one  is 
an  over-estimation  of  the  secular,  the  other  a  depreciation  of  the  spiritual.  Man 
is  one,  and  all  his  duties  and  interests  are  concurrent  and  harmonious  ;  the  end  of 
Christianity  is  to  make  men  happy  body  and  soul,  here  and  hereafter.     I.  The 

ELEVATION    OP    THE    SECULAR    AND    THE     DEGRADATION    OF   THB    SPIRITUAL.       Here    Is    A 

man  at  the  height  of  secular  elevation.  He  is  raised  to  a  throne,  called  to  sway 
his  sceptre  over  a  people  the  most  enlightened,  and  in  a  country  the  most  fertile 
and  lovely  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  In  the  person  of  this  Manasseh,  you  have 
secular  greatness  in  its  highest  altitude  and  most  attractive  position.  But  in  con- 
nection with  this  you  have  spiritual  degradation.  Penetrate  the  gaudy  trappings 
of  royalty,  look  within,  and  what  see  you  ?  A  low,  wretched,  infamous  spirit,  a 
spirit  debased  almost  to  the  lowest  point  in  morals.  1.  Look  at  him  socially.  How 
acted  he  as  a  son?  His  father,  Hezekiah,  was  a  man  of  undoubted  piety — a 
monarch  of  distinguished  worth.  His  sire  was  scarcely  cold  in  his  grave,  before 
the  son  commenced  undoing  in  the  kingdom  all  that  his  pious  father  had  for  years 
endeavoured  to  accomplish.  "  He  built  up  again  the  high  place  which  Hezekiah 
his  father  had  destroyed,"  <fec.  How  did  he  act  as  a  parent  ?  Was  he  anxious  for 
the  virtue  and  happiness  of  his  children  ?  No,  •'  he  caused  his  children  to  pass 
through  the  fire  of  the  son  of  Hinnom."  2.  Look  at  him  religiously — dupe  of  the 
most  stupid  imposture.  "  He  observed  times  and  used  enchantments,  and  used 
witchcraft,  and  dealt  with  a  familiar  spirit,  and  with  wizards."  S.  Look  at  him 
politically  ruining  his  country,  provoking  the  indignation  of  heaven  "  So  Manasseh 
made  Judah  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  to  err,  and  to  do  worse  than  the 


<jHAP.XEun.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  151 

heathen,  •whom  the  Lord  had  destroyed  before  the  children  of  Israel. "  This  elevation 
of  the  secular,  and  the  degradation  of  the  spiritual,  so  manifest  in  the  life  of  this 
monarch,  and  so  manifest,  alas,  in  all  times  and  lands,  is  not  destitute  of  many 
grave  and  starthng  suggestions.  First :  It  shows  the  moral  disorganisation  of  the 
human  world.  This  state  of  things  can  never  be,  according  to  the  original  plan  of 
the  creation.  A  terrible  convulsion  has  happened  to  the  human  world  ;  a  convulsion 
that  has  thrown  every  part  in  disorder.  "  All  the  foundations  of  the  earth  are  out 
of  course."  The  social  world  is  in  a  moral  chaos.  The  Bible  traces  the  cause,  and 
propounds  the  remedy  of  this  terrible  disorganisation.  Secondly :  It  shows  the 
perverting  capability  of  the  soul.  The  greater  the  amount  of  worldly  good  a  man 
possesses,  the  stronger  is  the  appeal  of  the  Creator  for  his  gratitude  and  devotion. 
Moreover,  the  larger  the  amount  of  worldly  wealth  and  power,  the  greater  the 
facilities  as  well  as  the  obligations  to  a  life  of  spiritual  intelligence,  holiness,  and 
piety.  The  perverting  capability  of  the  soul  within  us,  may  well  fill  us  with 
amazement  and  alarm.  Thirdly :  It  shows  the  high  probability  of  a  judgment. 
Under  the  government  of  a  righteous  monarch,  will  vice  always  have  its  banquets, 
its  purple,  and  its  crown  ?  WUl  the  great  Lord  allow  His  stewards  to  misappropriate 
His  substance,  and  never  call  them  to  account?  H.  The  degkadation  or  the 
SKCULAB,  AND  THE  ELEVATION  OF  THE  spiKiTOAii.  The  judgment  of  God,  which 
must  ever  follow  sin,  at  length  overtook  the  wicked  monarch.  The  Assyrian  army, 
under  the  direction  of  Esarhaddon,  invaded  the  country,  and  carried  all  before  it. 
The  miserable  monarch  quits  his  palace  and  his  throne,  flies  in  terror  of  his  life, 
and  conceals  himself  in  a  thorn  brake.  Here  he  is  discovered.  He  is  bound  in 
chains,  transported  to  Babylon,  and  there  cast  into  prison.  Here  is  secular 
degradation.  First:  That  man's  circumstances  are  no  necessary  hindrances 
to  conversion.  If  the  question  were  asked,  What  circumstances  are  the  most 
inimical  to  the  cultivation  of  piety  ?  I  should  unhesitatingly  answer — Adversily. 
I  am  well  aware  indeed  that  adversity,  as  in  the  case  before  us,  often  succeeds  in 
inducing  religious  thoughtfulness  and  penitence  when  prosperity  has  failed.  But, 
notwithstanding  this,  I  cannot  regard  adversity  itself  as  the  most  suited  to  the 
cultivation  of  the  religious  character.  Sufferings  are  inimical  to  that  grateful 
feeling  and  spiritual  effort  which  religious  culture  requires.  It  is  when  the  system 
bounds  with  health,  when  Providence  smiles  on  the  path,  that  men  are  in  the 
best  position  to  discipline  themselves  into  a  godly  life.  But  here  we  find  a  man  in 
the  most  unfavourable  circumstances — away  from  religious  institutions,  and  friends, 
and  books,  an  ironbound  exile  in  a  pagan  land — beginning  to  think  of  his  ways, 
and  directing  his  feet  into  the  paths  of  holiness.  Such  a  case  as  this  meets  all  the 
excuses  which  men  offer  for  their  want  of  religion.  It  is  often  said,  "  Were  we  in 
Buch  and  such  circumstances,  we  would  be  religious."  The  rich  man  says,  "Were 
I  in  humble  life,  more  free  from  the  anxieties,  cares,  responsibilities,  and  associations 
of  my  position,  I  would  live  a  godly  life  " ;  whilst  the  poor,  on  the  other  hand, 
Bays,  with  far  more  reason,  "  Were  my  spirit  not  pressed  down  by  the  crushing 
forces  of  poverty ;  had  I  sufficient  of  worldly  goods  to  remove  me  from  all  necessary 
anxiety,  I  would  give  my  mind  to  religion,  and  serve  my  God."  The  man  in 
the  midst  of  excitement  and  bustle  of  commercial  life,  says,  "Were  I  in  a 
more  retired  situation,  in  some  moral  region  away  from  the  eternal  din 
of  business — away  in  quiet  fields,  and  under  clear  skies,  amidst  the  music  of 
birds  and  brooks,  I  woiid  serve  my  Maker."  The  fact,  after  all,  is  that  circum- 
stances are  no  necessary  hindrances  or  helps  to  a  religious  life.  Secondly :  That 
heaven's  mercy  is  greater  than  man's  iniquities.  HI.  The  concubrent  elevation 
BOTH  of  the  spiritual  AND  THE  SECULAR.  The  Almighty  hears  his  prayer.  He  is 
emancipated  from  his  bondage,  brought  back  to  his  own  country,  and  restored  to  the 
throne  of  Israel.  There  he  is  now  with  a  true  heart,  in  a  noble  position — a  real 
great  man  occupying  a  great  office.  This  is  a  rare  scene  ;  and  yet  the  only  scene 
in  accordance  with  the  real  constitution  of  things  and  the  will  of  God.  It  seems 
to  me  that  if  man  had  remained  in  innocence,  his  outward  position  would 
always  have  been  the  product  and  type  of  his  inner  soul.  Manasseh's  restoration 
to  the  throne,  and  the  work  of  reformation  to  which  he  sets  himself,  suggests 
two  subjects  for  thought.  First:  The  tendency  of  godliness  to  promote  man's 
secular  elevation.  The  monarch  comes  back  in  spirit  to  God,  and  God  brings 
him  back  to  his  throne.  As  the  material  condition  of  men  depends  upon  their 
moral,  improve  the  latter,  and  you  improve  the  former.  As  the  world  gets  spiritually 
holier,  it  will  get  secularly  happier.  Secondly :  The  tendency  of  penitence  to 
•make  restitution.     Concerning  Manasseh  it  is  thus  written:  "Now,  after  this  he 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxm. 

built  a  wall  without  the  city  of  David,  on  the  west  side  of  Gihon,  in  the  valley, 
even  to  the  entering  in  at  the  fish-gate,"  &c.  Here  is  restitution,  and  an  earnest 
endeavour  to  undo  the  mischief  which  he  had  wrought.  Thus  Zaccheus  acted, 
and  thus  all  true  penitents  have  ever  acted  and  will  ever  act.  True  penitence 
has  a  restitutionary  instinct.  But  how  little,  alas  1  of  the  mischief  done  can  be 
undone  1    (Homilist.) 

Vers.  10,  11.  And  bound  him  with  fetters. — Divine  discipline: — The  proper 
way  for  a  sinner  to  be  brought  to  God  is  for  God  to  speak  to  him,  and  for 
him  to  hear.  Manasseh  would  not  come  that  way,  so  God  fetched  him  back 
by  a  rougher  road.  I.  The  Lord  often  allows  temporal  tkials  to  take  men 
CAPTIVE.  1.  Business  disasters.  2.  Want  of  employment.  3.  Extraordinary 
troubles.  4.  Bodily  affliction.  5.  The  loss  of  dear  friends.  11.  The  Lord  some- 
times allows  men  to  be  bound  by  mental  trials  ;  "  bound  with  fetters."  Such 
as — 1.  When  sin  ceases  to  afiford  pleasure.  The  very  things  that  once  made  him 
all  aglow  with  delight  do  not  affect  him  now,  nor  cast  a  single  ray  of  light  on  his 
path.  2.  The  daily  avocation  becomes  distasteful.  3.  There  is  great  inability  in 
prayer.  4.  Your  old  sins  come  out  of  their  hiding-places.  5.  A  great  want  of 
power  to  grasp  the  promises.  5.  A  fear  of  death  and  dread  of  judgment.  Con- 
clusion :  In  order  to  your  comfort  and  peace — 1.  Know  that  the  Lord  is  God. 
2.  Humble  yourself  before  Him.  3.  Begin  to  pray.  4.  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.    {G.  H.  Spurgeon. 

Vers.  12,  13.  And  when  he  was  In  affliction,  he  besought  the  Lord  his  God. — 

ManasseWs  wickedness  and  penitence : — I.  Manasseh's  career  in  crime.    II.  Hi8 

RETURN   TO   AND   ACCEPTANCE    OF  GOD.      III.    ThE  GRACIOUS  RESULTS  OF  HIS  PENITENCB. 

Improvement.  1.  The  lamentable  wickedness  and  duplicity  of  the  human  heart. 
2.  The  freeness,  fulness,  and  efficacy  of  Divine  grace.  3.  The  consequences  of 
salvation  are  reformation  and  obedience.  (T.  B.  Baker.)  Manasseh  : — Manasseh 
is  an  eminent  instance  of  the  power,  richness,  and  freeness  of  the  Divine  mercy. 
Observe — I.  The  sins  which  he  committed.  1.  Their  contributory  cause.  His 
early  freedom  from  restraint,  his  coming  to  supreme  power  when  only  twelve 
years  of  age.  2.  Their  special  nature.  The  catalogue  is  appalling.  3.  Their 
aggravated  nature.  (1)  They  were  committed  in  defiance  of  religious  education, 
and  of  the  admonitions  and  example  of  his  father.  (2)  They  were  of  more  than 
common  enormity.  (3)  They  were  productive  of  more  than  ordinary  evil  to  others. 
(4)  They  were  in  defiance  of  the  expostulations  of  the  prophets  (ver.  10).  H.  Thb 
REPENTANCE  WHICH  HE  EXERCISED.  1.  Its  causo.  (1)  Its  morc  rcmote  cause  was 
probably  his  religious  education.  The  case  of  Manasseh  is  not  discouraging  to 
training  children  in  the  way  they  should  go.  (2)  The  immediate  cause  was  afflic- 
tion. 2.  Its  nature.  (1)  Deep  conviction  of  sin.  (2)  Deep  contrition.  (3)  Earnest 
prayer.     (4)  Reformation  of  life.      III.  The  mercies  which  Manasseh  received. 

1.  Temporal  nature.  2.  SpirituaL  He  was  brought  to  the  spiritual  knowledge  of 
the  God  of  his  salvation.  "  Then  Manasseh  knew  that  the  Lord  He  was  God." 
This  knowledge  led  him  to  fear,  trust,  love,  and  obey.  This  obedience  was  accom- 
panied by  the  deepest  self-renunciation  and  abasement  to  the  end  of  his  life. 
Lessons.  1.  To  those  who  are  insensible  of  their  sinfulness.  2.  To  those  who  are 
ready  to  sink  into  despair  under  the  weight  of  their  sinfulness.  3.  To  those  who 
are  disposed  to  presume  on  the  mercy  of  God.  Manasseh's  son  Amon  was  quickly 
cut  off  in  the  midst  of  his  sins  (vers.  21-23).  He  seems  to  be  a  beacon  set  up  close 
by  the  side  of  his  penitent  and  accepted  father,  to  warn  all  persons  against  pre- 
suming on  the  mercy  manifested  to  Manasseh.  (Homilist.)  Manasseh^t 
repentance : — I.    His  character  as   a  sinner.      1.   He  was  a  notorious   sinner. 

2.  He  was  not  a  hopeless  sinner.  II.  Hrs  conduct  as  a  penitent.  1.  The  period 
of  his  repentance  is  specified.  "When  he  was  in  affliction."  2.  The  nature  of 
his  repentance  is  described.  (1)  Deep  humility.  (2)  Fervent  prayer.  These 
invariably  distinguish  the  conduct  of  every  true  penitent  (Jer.  xxxi.  18,  19  ;  Luke 
xviii.  13 ;  Acts  ix.  11).  III.  His  salvation  as  a  believer.  1.  He  obtained  the 
pardoning  mercy  of  God.  2.  He  received  a  saving  knowledge  of  God.  (Sketches  of 
Four  Hundred  Sermons.)  Manasseh  humbled  : — I.  The  benefit  op  afflictions 
IN  bbinoing  the  sinner  to  a  true  sense  of  his  condition  and  converting  him  to 
God.  II.  The  merct  of  God  in  so  bringing  and  recefvinq  him.  III.  Thb 
remaining  and  lasting  portion  of  the  evil  op  sin,  even  after  the  individual  is 
PARDONED.     In  the  Second  Book  of  Kings  it  is  repeatedly  declared  that  Judah  was 


CHiP.ixxm.]  11.  CHRONICLES.  153 

destroyed  on  account  of  the  sons  of  Manasseh.  1.  A  man  looks  back  with  sorrow 
and  contrite  concern  upon  the  follies  and  sins  of  his  youth ;  but  what  of  his  com- 
panions in  guilt?  Some,  perhaps,  whom  he  seduced  into  sin,  and  many  whom  he 
encouraged  and  confirmed  in  sin.  2.  Some  writers  have  employed  their  pens  in  the 
odious  cause  of  immorality  and  irreligion.  Such  persons  have  lamented  their 
errors  ;  but  the  publication  has  done  its  work ;  the  poison  has  been  circulated,  and 
the  corruption  is  incurable.     (J.  Slade,  M.A.)  The  conversion  of  Manasseh: — 

I.  That  eablt  advantages  mat  be  succeeded  by  complicated  sin.     II.  That  sin  is 

FBEQUENTLT  THE  CAUSE  OF  SEVERE  ATFLICTION.  III.  ThAT  AFFLICTION,  WHEN  SANCTI- 
FIED, EXALTS  TO  PKATEB,  AND  PROMOTES  HUMILIATION.  IV.  ThAT  PRAIEB  AND 
HUMILIATION    ABB   ALWAYS    ATTENDED   WITH    DISTINGUISHED    BLESSINGS,    AND   PRODUCE 

VALUABLE  EFFECTS.  V.  From  THE  WHOLE.  1.  The  paticuce  of  God.  2.  The 
sovereignty  of  God.  3.  The  wisdom  of  God  in  adapting  means  to  the  conversion  of 
men.  4.  The  mercy  of  God  in  saving  the  chief  of  sinners.  {S.  Kidd.)  The 
repentance  of  Manasseh : — We  will  connect  the  important  change  which  took 
place  in  the  mind  of  Manasseh — I.  With  his  early  advantages.  John  Newton 
states  somewhere,  "  When  I  was  in  the  deepest  misery,  and  when  I  was  committing 
the  most  atrocious  sin,  I  always  seemed  to  feel  the  hand  of  my  sainted  mother 
pressing  my  head."  II.  With  the  afflictions  by  which  it  was  produced.  III. 
With  the  effects  which  it  unfolded.  IV.  With  the  sovereignty  of  Divine 
grace.  {A.  E.  Farrar.)  Manasseh  brought  to  repentance  : — I.  His  life  op  sin. 
1.  It  was  in  direct  contrast  to  the  good  reign  of  his  father.  2.  His  sin  involved 
many  in  guilt.  He  "  made  Judah  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  to  err."  3.  He 
was  not  moved  by  the  sight  of  the  same  wickedness  in  those  whom  he  despised 
(2  Kings  xxi.  9).  4.  His  sin  was  not  checked  by  God's  punishment  of  others. 
The  heathen  had  been  driven  out  from  the  land  because  of  their  wickedness.  Judah 
occupied  their  place  and  adopted  their  vice.  H.  The  life  of  Manasseh  under 
God's  chastisement.  We  learn  from  recently  discovered  Assyrian  inscriptions 
what  is  meant  by  "  among  the  thorns."  The  word  thus  translated  means  a  hook, 
which  was  put  through  the  under  lips  of  captives.  The  depths  of  Manasseh's 
degradation  may  be  imagined.  Yet  it  was  sent  in  mercy  to  turn  him  to  God.  III. 
His  repentance  and  restoration.  IV.  His  re-establishment  of  the  worship  op 
God.  Lessons.  1.  Never  to  be  ashamed  of  repentance.  2.  We  see  the  meaning 
of  God's  chastisements.  3.  The  power  of  a  single  man  when  he  has  turned  from 
sin  to  God.  4.  The  necessity  of  solitary  communion  with  God.  5.  The  patient 
love  of  God.  {Monday  Club  Sermons.)  The  conversion  of  an  aged  transgressor : — 
I.  Let  us  attend  to  the  circumstances  which  by  the  grace  of  God  led  to  thb 
CONVERSION  OF  Manasseh.  1.  AflQictioH.  2.  Solitary  reflection.  3.  Prayer.  H. 
Consider  next  how  the  grace  of  God  operated  in  Manasseh.  1.  He  humbled 
himself  greatly  before  the  God  of  his  fathers.  2.  He  was  made  to  know  that  the 
Lord  was  God.  3.  He  brought  forth  fruits  meet  for  repentance.  III.  The  circum- 
stances which  made  his  conversion  peculiarly  striking.  1.  It  was  the  conversion 
of  an  atrocious  sinner.  2.  Of  an  aged  sinner.  3.  It  took  place  at  a  distance  from 
the  ordinary  means  of  grace.  (H.  Belfrage,  D.D.)  Manasseh : — God  contents  not 
Himself  to  have  left  on  record  in  His  word  declarations  and  promises  of  grace  as 
beacons  of  hope  to  the  sinner.  We  have  examples  also  of  His  acts  of  grace. 
Abounding  iniquity,  and  more  abounding  grace,  are  the  special  features  presented 
to  us  in  this  history  of  Manasseh.  I.  Abounding  iniquity  marked  Manasseh's 
course.  1.  He  was  the  son  of  Hezekiah  the  servant  of  the  Lord.  We  place  this 
foremost  as  an  aggravation  of  his  sin,  that  in  spite  of  a  father's  example  he  cast  off 
the  fear  of  the  Lord  and  sinned  with  a  high  hand  against  his  God.  That  father, 
indeed,  was  early  taken  from  him,  for  Manasseh  was  but  twelve  years  old  when  he 
began  to  reign  ;  still,  the  memory  of  Hezekiah's  piety  could  not  have  been  utterly 
forgotten.  Too  marked  had  been  the  interposition  of  Jehovah  in  that  father's 
deliverance  from  Assyria  and  in  his  recovery  from  sickness  for  the  report  to  have 
passed  away.  But  Manasseh  heeded  not  these  things ;  "  he  wrought  much  wicked- 
ness in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  to  provoke  Him  to  anger."  2.  Manasseh  added  to  his 
disregard  of  a  godly  parent  this  iniquity  also,  that  be  led  his  children  unto  sin,  "  he 
caused  his  children  to  pass  through  the  fire  in  the  valley  of  the  son  of  Hinnom."  .  .  . 
Some  godless  parents  have  shown  a  happy  inconsistency,  in  that  whilst  pursuing 
themselves  that  path  "  whose  end  is  destruction,"  they  have  desired  for  their 
offspring  that  they  should  seek  the  Lord.  The  force  of  example,  indeed,  meeting  as 
it  does  with  "  the  evil  that  is  bound  up  in  the  heart  of  a  child,"  will  in  such  cases 
often  prove  too  powerful  to  be  withstood.    But  Manasseh  took  no  such  course,  but 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ixxni. 

dedicated  his  children  as  well  as  himself  to  the  service  of  the  false  gods.  Alas,  the 
reproducing  power  of  evil !  Thou  that  art  a  citizen  of  the  world,  intent  on  gain  or 
pleasure,  can  it  be  expected  but  that  thy  children  should  walk  after  thee  in  the 
same  destructive  road  ?  3.  Manasseh  bade  defiance  to  Jehovah  in  His  own 
sanctuary.  Not  only  did  he  build  again  the  high  places  which  Hezekiah  his  father 
had  destroyed,  but  "  he  set  a  carved  image,"  the  idol  which  he  had  made,  "  in  the 
house  of  God."  It  was  not  enough  that  he  himself  should  bow  down  to  idols,  and 
that  his  chOdren  should  also  do  them  homage,  but  with  yet  more  presumptuous  sin 
he  declared  himself,  in  the  face  of  all  Israel,  an  idolater,  and  desecrated  to  this  base 
end  the  very  temple,  of  which  the  Lord  had  said,  "  My  Name  shall  be  there."  It  is 
the  very  character  of  Jehovah  that  He  is  "  a  jealous  God,"  "  His  glory  will  He  not 
give  to  another."  4.  But  further,  Manasseh  "  shed  innocent  blood  very  much,  till 
he  had  filled  Jerusalem  from  one  end  to  another."  The  faithful  who  warned  him 
were  doubtless  the  ones  especially  sacrificed  to  his  vengeance,  and  it  is  supposed 
that  Isaiah  suffered  death  under  this  fearful  persecutor  of  the  Church  of  God.  For 
the  wickedness  of  Manasseh  could  not  plead  this  even  in  palliation  that  he  was 
unrebuked :  *'  The  Lord  spoke  to  Manasseh  and  to  his  people,  but  they  would  not 
hearken."  What  depth  of  malignity  is  there  in  the  unchanged  soul  1  what  pollu- 
tions !  what  ingratitude  1  what  rebellion  !  Were  it  not  for  the  restraining  grace  of 
God,  what  a  scene  of  bloodshed  and  of  all  enormity  would  this  earth  be  1  II.  Mobe 
ABOUNDING  STILL  THE  GRACE  OF  GoD.  1.  In  chastisemcnt  the  first  faint  streak  of 
mercy  manifested  itself.  The  voice  of  plenty  had  spoken  to  him  in  vain,  the  voice 
of  warning  had  been  treated  with  neglect,  but  now  the  voice  of  correction  speaks  in 
tones  not  to  be  gainsaid.  The  alarm  of  war  is  heard  in  that  guilty  court.  2.  Hia 
deep  penitence  bore  witness  to  the  workings  of  grace.  He  humbled  himself  greatly 
before  the  God  of  his  fathers.  That  word  "  greatly  "  speaks  much,  as  recorded  by 
the  Spirit  of  truth.  As  with  the  gospel  itself,  so  with  the  chastenings  of  the  Lord, 
they  are  either  "  a  savour  of  life  unto  life,  or  of  death  unto  death."  3.  The  voice 
of  prayer  went  up  from  that  prison-house,  "  He  besought  the  Lord  .  .  .  and  prayed 
unto  Him."  Tears,  many  it  may  be,  fell  before  one  prayer  was  uttered.  4.  Abounding 
grace  shone  forth,  too,  in  the  answer  granted  to  prayer.  "  God  was  intreated  of 
him."  He  heard  his  cry,  and  hope  sprung  up  in  his  downcast  soul.  6.  The  work- 
ings of  God's  grace  were  further  evidenced  by  the  fruits  of  faith  in  life  according  to 
godliness.  Manasseh  restored  to  his  kingdom,  has  now  but  one  object  in  view,  the 
glory  of  God,  and  that  object  he  consistently  pursued.  The  idol  is  cast  out  from 
the  temple,  and  the  altars  of  the  false  gods  out  of  the  city,  and  the  people  are 
commanded  "  to  serve  the  Lord  God  of  Israel."  He  turned  not  aside  from  his 
purpose  to  bring  back  to  Jehovah  those  whom  formerly  he  had  led  away  to  sin  ;  and 
this  godly  course  he  pursued  unto  the  end.  Lessons.  1.  The  first  is,  that  there  is 
a  fulness  of  grace  in  God  as  our  reconciled  Father  in  Christ  Jesus  beyond  the  power 
of  heart  to  conceive,  or  of  tongue  to  utter.  2.  But  this  history  also  reminds  us  of 
the  dreadful  nature  of  sin.  Deep  are  its  furrows,  lasting  its  effects.  Manasseh  is 
pardoned,  but  could  he  repair  the  evil  he  had  done  ?  {F.  Storr,  M.A.)  Manasseh : — 
We  shall  consider  Manasseh— I.  As  a  sinner.  1.  He  sinned  against  light,  against 
a  pious  education  and  early  training.  It  is  a  notorious  fact  that  when  men  do  go 
wrong  after  a  good  training  they  are  the  worst  men  in  the  world.  The  murder  of 
John  Williams  at  Erromanga  was  brought  about  by  the  evil  doings  of  a  trader  who 
had  gone  to  the  island,  and  who  was  also  the  son  of  a  missionary.  He  had  become 
reckless  in  his  habits,  and  treated  the  islanders  with  such  barbarity  and  cruelty  that 
they  revenged  his  conduct  upon  the  next  white  man  who  pat  his  foot  upon  their 
shore.  2.  He  was  a  very  bold  sinner.  3.  He  had  the  power  of  leading  others  to  a 
very  large  extent  astray.  II.  As  an  unbelievee.  He  did  not  believe  that  Jehovah 
was  God  alone.  1.  The  unlimited  power  that  Manasseh  possessed  had  a  great 
tendency  to  make  him  a  disbeliever.  2.  His  pride  was  another  cause.  8.  Another 
cause  was  his  love  for  sin.  III.  As  a  convert.  He  believed  in  God — 1.  Because 
God  had  answered  his  prayer.  2.  Because  He  had  forgiven  his  sin.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Manasseh' s  repentance  : — Manasseh  is  unique  alike  in  extreme 
wickedness,  sincere  penitence,  and  thorough  reformation.  The  reformation  of 
Julius  CoBsar  or  of  our  own  Henry  V. ,  or  to  take  a  different  class  of  instance,  the 
conversion  of  Paul,  was  nothing  compared  to  the  conversion  of  Manasseh.  It  was 
as  though  Herod  the  Great  or  Caesar  Borgia  had  been  checked  midway  in  a  career 
of  cruelty  and  vice,  and  had  thenceforward  lived  pure  and  holy  lives,  glorifying  God 
by  ministering  to  their  fellow-men.  {W.  H.  Bennett,  M.A.)  He  was  Intreated 
of  ^im. — Pardon  for  the  greatest  guilt : — The  story  of  Manasseh  is  a  very  valu- 


CHAP.xxxin.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  155 

able  one.  I  feel  sure  of  this,  because  you  meet  with  it  twice  in  the  Word  of 
God.  God  would  have  us  again  and  again  dwell  upon  such  wonders  of  sovereign 
grace   as  Manasseh   presents  to  us.     I.  Let   ub  examine  the  case  before  us. 

I.  Manasseh  was  the  son  of  a  good  father.  2.  He  undid  all  his  father's  actions. 
3.  He  served  false  gods.  4.  He  desecrated  the  Lord's  courts.  There  are  some 
to-day  who  do  this ;  for  they  make  even  their  attendance  at  the  house  of 
God  to  be  an  occasion  for  evil.  5.  He  dedicated  his  children  to  the  devil. 
Nobody  here  will  dedicate  his  children  to  the  devil,  surely  ;  yet  many  do.  Have  I 
not  seen  a  father  dedicate  his  boy  to  the  devil,  as  he  has  encouraged  him  to  drink? 
And  do  not  many  in  this  great  city,  dedicate  their  children  to  the  devil  by 
allowing  them  to  go  into  all  kinds  of  licentiousness,  until  they  become  the  victims 
of  vice  ?  6.  He  fraternised  with  the  devil,  by  seeking  after  all  kinds  of  super- 
natural witcheries  and  wizardries.  7.  He  led  others  astray.  8.  He  persecuted 
the  people  of  God.  It  is  said, — we  do  not  know  whether  it  was  so  or  not, — but  it  !■ 
highly  probable,  that  he  caused  Isaiah  to  be  cut  asunder  with  a  wooden  saw.  9.  In 
short,  Manasseh  was  a  compound  of  every  sort  of  wickedness.  10.  Notwithstanding 
all  this  Manasseh  was  pardoned.  How  it  came  about?  (1)  Being  in  great  trouble, 
he  turned  to  Jehovah  his  God.     (2)  He  humbled  himself  greatly,     (3)  He  prayed. 

II.  Let  us  consideb  why  there  should  be  others  like  Manasseh.  Judging 
from  many  probabilities,  that  Qoi  will  save  other  great  sinners  as  He  saved 
Manasseh.  1.  Because  He  speaks  to  such  great  sinners  and  commands  them  to 
repent  (Isa.  i.  16-18).  Because  of  the  great  promises  God  has  given  to  great 
sinners.  3.  Because  of  the  nature  of  God.  4.  From  what  I  know  of  the  value  of 
the  blood  of  Jesus.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Then  Manasseli  knew  that  the  Lord 
He  was  God. — Forgiveness  and  the  knowledge  of  God : — Men  first  begin  to  know 
God  when  they  are  forgiven.  What  did  the  prodigal  know  about  his  father  when 
he  asked  for  the  portion  of  goods  that  fell  to  him,  or  while  he  was  wasting  his 
substance  in  riotous  living  ?  Because  love  and  forgiveness  are  more  strange  and 
unearthly  than  rebuke  and  chastisement,  the  sinner  is  humbled  by  pardon  far 
more  than  by  punishment ;  and  his  trembling  submission  to  the  righteous  Judge 
deepens  into  profounder  reverence  and  awe  for  the  God  who  can  forgive,  who  is 
superior  to  all  vindictiveness,  whose  infinite  resources  enable  Him  to  blot  out  the 
guilt,  to  cancel  the  penalty,  and  annul  the  consequences  of  sin.   (W.  H.  Bennett,  M.A,) 

Yer.  23.  But  Amon  transgressed  more  and  more. — Consolidation  in  the  force* 
of  evil : — It  is  wonderful  what  evil  can  be  done  with  a  profession  of  religion.  Amon 
was  sacrificing  unto  all  the  carved  images ;  he  was  so  religious  as  to  be  irreligious ; 
he  reached  the  point  of  exaggeration,  and  that  point  is  blasphemy.  When  there  is 
mere  ignorance,  God  in  His  lovingkindness  and  tender  mercy  often  closes  His 
eyes  as  if  He  could  not  see  what  is  being  done :  but  when  it  is  not  ignorance  but 
violence,  determination,  real  obstinacy  in  the  way  of  evil,  and  utter  recklessness  as 
to  what  it  may  cost — what  if  God  should  be  compelled  to  open  His  eyes,  and  look 
the  evil  man  full  in  the  face,  and  condemn  him  by  silent  observation  ?  It  is 
wonderful,  too,  how  much  evil  can  be  done  in  a  little  time.  Nothing  is  so  easy  as 
evil.  A  man  could  almost  fell  a  forest  before  he  could  grow  one  tree.  Every  blow 
tells :  every  bad  word  becomes  a  great  blot :  there  is  an  infinite  contagion  in  evil ; 
it  affects  every  one,  it  poisons  quickly,  it  makes  a  harvest  in  the  night-time.  To 
do  good  how  much  time  is  required  I  How  few  people  will  believe  that  we  are 
doing  good  1  We  have  to  encounter  suspicion,  criticism,  distrust ;  men  say, 
*'  We  must  wait  to  see  the  end ;  we  cannot  believe  in  the  possibility  of  all  this 
earnestness  and  sacrifice " ;  they  ask  questions  about  its  possible  permanence ; 
even  good  men  are  apt  to  hinder  other  good  men  in  endeavouring  to  do  good. 
But  evil  has  no  such  disadvantages  to  contend  with.  There  is  a  consolidation  in 
the  forces  of  evil  that  is  not  known  among  the  forces  of  good.  It  would  seem  as  if 
the  poet's  description  were  right — "  Devil  with  devil  damned,  firm  concord  holds." 
It  may  be  that  in  that  energetic  expression  Milton  has  stated  the  reality  of  the  case. 
{J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  25.  JoBiab  Ms  son  "king  In  his  stead. — Far-reaehing  heredity: — Josiah 
was  the  son  of  Amon — which  is  equal  to  saying  that  the  greatest  sinner  of  his 
day  was  the  progenitor  of  one  of  the  finest  saints  that  ever  prayed.  If  that  is  not 
a  miracle,  what  is  meant  by  the  term  miracle?  Kead  the  account  and  say  if  it  be 
not  the  reading  of  music : — "  And  he  did  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord,  and  walked  in  the  ways  of  David  his  father"  (xxxiv.  2)  "and  declined 


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxnv. 

neither  to  the  right  hand,  nor  to  the  left."  Then  he  had  more  fathers  than  one. 
That  is  the  explanation.  You  are  not  the  son  of  the  man  that  went  immediately 
before  you  ;  you  are  only  his  son  in  a  very  incidental  manner.  Josiah  was  the  son 
of  "David  his  father" — the  larger  father,  the  deeper  root,  the  elect  of  God;  a 
Bun  fouled  by  many  a  black  spot,  but  a  shining  orb  notwithstanding.  We  must 
enlarge  our  view  if  we  would  come  to  right  conclusions  regarding  many  mysteries. 
Amon  was  but  a  link  in  the  chain.  The  bad  man  here,  or  the  good  man  there, 
taken  in  his  solitariness,  is  but  a  comparatively  trivial  incident  in  life's  tragedy. 
Heredity  is  not  from  one  to  two ;  it  is  from  one  to  the  last ;  from  the  beginning  to 
the  ending.  In  every  man  there  lives  all  the  humanity  that  ever  lived.  We  are 
fearfully  and  wonderfully  made — not  physically  only,  but  morally,  religiously, 
temperamentally.  All  the  kings  live  in  the  last  king  or  the  reigning  monarch. 
We  are  one  humanity.  Solidarity  has  its  lessons  as  well  as  individuality.  We 
know  not  which  of  our  ancestors  comes  up  in  us  at  this  moment  or  that — now  the 
tiger,  now  the  eagle ;  now  the  praying  mother,  now  the  daring  sire ;  now  some 
mean  soul  that  got  into  the  current  by  a  mystery  never  to  be  explained ;  now  the 
cunning,  watchful,  patient  deceiver,  who  can  wait  for  nights  at  a  time  and  never 
complain  of  the  dark  or  the  cold,  and  now  the  hero  that  never  had  a  fear,  the 
philanthropist  that  loved  the  world,  the  mother  that  never  looked  otherwise  than 
God  Himself  would  have  her  look.  We  can  never  tell  which  of  our  ancestors  is 
really  thinking  in  us,  speaking  through  us ;  we  cannot  tell  the  accent  of  the 
immediate  consciousness; — these  are  mysteries,  and  when  the  judgment  comes 
it  will  be  based  upon  all  the  ground,  and  not  upon  incidental  points  here  and 
there.    (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER   XXXIV. 


Vebs.  1-8.  Josiali  was  eight  years  old  when  he  beg^an  to  reign. — Jotiah's  early 
piety : — I.  The  possibilitt  of  youthful  responsibility.  Other  children  besides 
Josiah  have  been  called  to  the  cares  of  a  kingdom.  Manasseh  commenced  to  reign 
at  twelve,  Joash  was  seven,  Uzziah  sixteen;  Henry  HI.  and  Edward  VI.  of 
England  were  both  nine;  four  of  the  Scottish  kings,  James  H.,  HI.,  IV.,  and  V., 
ascended  the  throne  when  children.  Of  the  French  kings,  Louis  I.  began  to  reign 
at  sixteen,  Louis  IX.  at  eleven,  Louis  XHI.  at  nine,  Charles  VI.  at  eleven,  Charles 
IX.  at  ten ;  Louis  XIV.,  inheriting  the  kingdom  at  five,  assumed  full  control  by  his 
own  force  of  character  at  thirteen.  Charles  I.  of  Spain,  better  known  as  Charles 
V.  of  Germany,  became  king  at  sixteen ;  Charles  II.  at  fourteen,  seizing  the 
kingdom  from  an  ill-governing  regency  which  had  existed  since  his  fourth  year. 

II.  Early  piety  is  possible  and  desirable.  When  does  the  period  of  moral 
accountability  begin?  We  cannot  fix  it  definitely.  But  this  much  is  certain: 
whenever  the  child  can  intelligently  choose  this  or  that  because  it  is  right  or 
wrong,  then  has  moral  accountability  commenced,  and  the  child  can  be  a  Christian. 

III.  The  influence  of  good  advisers.  Josiah  was  but  a  boy,  and  yet  around  him 
were  spiritual   Titans — Habakkuk,   Zephaniah,  Jeremiah.     IV.   The  energy  of 

YOUTHFUL   piety.        V.    ThE    INFLUENCE   OF    THE    SURROUNDING    ATMOSPHERE    ON    PIETY. 

We  must  be  watchful  against  irreligious  influences.  (Monday  Club  Sermons.} 
Importance  of  early  piety  : — Ancient  nations  would  not  receive  old  men  into  their 
armies,  as  being  unfit  for  service.  Let  us  not  wait  until  we  can  only  offer  unto 
"Him  who  hath  loved  us"  dry  and  worthless  bones.  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
The  example  of  Josiah : — There  is  at  the  top  of  the  Queen's  staircase  in  Windsor 
Castle  a  statue  from  the  studio  of  Baron  Triqueti,  of  Edward  VI.,  marking  with 
his  sceptre  a  passage  in  the  Bible,  which  he  holds  in  his  left  hand,  and  upon 
which  he  earnestly  looks.  The  passage  is  this  concerning  Josiah:  "Josiah  was 
eight  years  old  when  he  began  to  reign,  and  he  reigned  thirty  and  one  years  in 
Jerusalem.  And  he  did  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  walked 
in  all  the  way  of  David,  his  father,  and  turned  not  aside  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the 
left."  The  statue  was  erected  by  the  will  of  the  late  Prince  Consort,  who  intended 
it  to  convey  to  his  son  the  Divine  principles  by  which  the  future  governor  of 
England  should  mould  his  life  and  reign  on  the  throne  of  Great  Britain.  (T. 
Hiifihes.)  Early  piety  : — I  was  admitted  into  the  Church  at  the  early  age  of 
eight.    I  don't  remember  that  I  experienced  at  the  time  any  extraordinary  work 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  157 


of  God  on  my  soul.     I  loved  Christ,  and  felt  a  strong  desire  to  be  identified  with 
His  people.     When  I  mentioned  the  fact  to  some  of  the  deacons  some  of  them 
looked  askance,  and  expressed  grave  doubts  as  to  the  propriety  of  allowing  one  so 
young  to  sit  at  the  Lord's  table.     Among  them,  however,  there  were  wiser  men. 
Their  counsels  prevailed,  and  after  some  months  of  probation  I  was  admitted! 
From  that  day  until  now  I  have  never  ceased  to  thank  God  that  I  was  induced  to 
take  the  important  step  at  the  time  I  did.     Had  I  not  done  so  I  doubt  whether  I 
should  have  been  a  missionary— if  a  member  of  the  Christian  Church  at  all. 
{Griffith  Johnt.)    ^    Josiah  the  old-fashioned  young  man : — As  the  sensitive  plate 
in  the  photographic  camera,  when  the  person  who  sits  for  a  likeness  is  placed  in 
a  powerful  light,  takes  an   impression  of  him  in  which  every  line  upon   the 
countenance  and  every  furrow  upon  the  brow  are  exaggerated,  so  that  the  artist 
has  to  touch  the  negative  in  order  to  do  him  simple  justice,  so,  when  a  man  sits  in 
the  fierce  glare  of  public  light,  his  failings  are  so  prominently  recorded,  and  his 
defects  so  clearly  brought  out,  that  it  is  necessary  for  us  in  fairness  to  touch  the 
negative  with  the  pencil  of  charity,  and  thus  soften  down  the  defects.     Eemem- 
bering  this,  this  description   of  Josiah  fills  us  with  wonder.     Consider — I.  His 
DISADVANTAGES.     1.  His  extreme  youth.     2.  The   degeneracy  of  the  times.    He 
ascended  the  throne  in  a  dark  age.     3.  He  was  the  son  of  a  bad  father.     II.  What 
IS  THE  EXPLANATION  OF  HIS  PIETY  ?    It  may  havc  been  largely  due  to  the  quiet  but 
all-powerful  influence  of  a  good  mother.    But  there  are  wonders  of  grace  often 
wrought  in  the  lives  of  the  children  of  wicked  men  which  you  cannot  explain. 
in.  The  manifestation  of  his  piety.     He  "walked  in  the  ways   of  David  his 
father."    Four  hundred  years  separated  Josiah  from  David.     Thank  God,  there 
are  seasons,  even  in  degenerate  times,  when  the  old  purity  of  things  is  restored, 
when  the  grand  old  faith  is  received  and  lived  over  again,  and  when  the  heroism 
of  those  who  are  gone  comes  back  like  a  new  inspiration  to  young  lives.     "  Ah !  he 
is  an  old-fashioned  young  man :  he  lives  behind  the  age ;  he  ought  to  have  been 
living  in  the  time  of  David,  for  he  has  quite  adopted  his  ancient  ways,"  exclaimed 
some  young  men  of  the  period.    All  the  conceited  striplings  of  the  day  would  join 
in  the  chorus,  "  Poor  Josiah,  he  does  not  move  with  the  age.     He  is  an  eccentric 
young  fellow,  very  puritanic  in  his  notions,  and  sings  psalms  as  if  he  lived  in  the 
days  of  old  King  David."     My  young  friends,  a  true  man  likes  to  be  old-fashioned 
sometimes.     It  is  noble  to  move  with  the  age  when  the  age  is  going  forward ;  but 
it  is  grand  to  remain  with  the  past  when  the  age  in  which  we  live  retrogrades  from 
ancient  purity  and  ancient  faith.     When  there  is  no  spiritual  vigour  or  moral  fibre 
in  our  day,  it  is  well  to  stick  to  the  old  days  when  there  were  strength  and  fibre  in 
religion  and  morals.     Do  not  be  afraid  of  the  charge  of  being  old-fashioned.     It  is 
cheaply  made,  and  is  often  meaningless,  save  as  it  is  the  highest  possible  com- 
pliment.    Be  in  the  company  of  the  world's  best  and  noblest  men:  never  mind 
whether  they  live  to-day,  or  whether  they  lived  eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  or 
even  more.     (D.  Davies.) 

Ver.  3.  For  in  the  eighth  year  of  his  reign,  while  he  wai  yet  young,  he  began  to 
seek  after  the  God  of  DaYiO.— Seeking  after  God  .—I.  Why  we  should  seek  afteb 
God.  1.  We  are  by  nature  without  God.  2.  To  be  without  God  is  certain  misery. 
3.  In  God  alone  we  can  obtain  peace  and  rest.    U.  How  we  are  to  seek  after  God. 

1.  With  respect  to  God  Himself.  Josiah  sought— not  the  God  of  nature  ;  not  the 
God  of  Providence ;  but  "  the  God  of  David  his  father."  And  why  ?  David  was  a 
type  of  Christ ;  the  covenant  made  with  David  a  type  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  and 
"  the  sure  mercies  of  David,"  symbols  of  the  better  blessings  of  the  New  Covenant. 

2.  With  respect  to  ourselves.    By  repentance,  faith,  and  obedience.     HI.  When  wb 

ARE  to  seek  after  God.     (Robert  Stevenson.)    Early  piety  and  its  advantages : I. 

Enlightened  piety  consists  in  seeking  God.  1.  Earnestly.  2.  Promptly.  3.  Per! 
Beveringly.  II.  Seeking  God  early  will  conduce  to  honour.  1.  It  keeps  aUve 
religious  susceptibilities.  2.  It  saves  from  snares.  3.  It  brings  eminent  usefulness 
in  Ufe.  4.  It  prepares  for  happy  death.  (J.  Wolfendale.)  Youth  the  best  time  to 
serve  God :— Let  us  think  of  some  reasons  why  we  should  seek  God  in  childhood. 
1.  The  first  reason  is  because  youth  is  the  best  time.  2.  Another  reason  is  because 
youth  is  the  most  important  time.  «'  Satisfy  us  early  with  Thy  goodness,  that  we 
may  be  glad  and  rejoice  all  our  days."  What  seems  a  slight  mistake  at  the  begin- 
ning may  make  a  terrible  difference  at  the  end.  3.  Another  reason  for  seeking  God 
in  early  life  is  because  it  is  noblest  to  do  right  now,  not  to  wait  until  we  have  spent 
most  of  our  life  domg  wrong.    {Christian  Age.)        Well  started ;— I.  That  any  sodi. 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiv. 

SHOULD  BEGIN  EAKLT  TO  SEEK  THE  LORD,  IS  AN  EVENT  THAT  WOULD  BE  THOUGHT  UNIK- 
PORTANT  BY  SOME,  BUT  IT  IS  CHRONICLED  IN  HEAVEN.  II.  EvERY  MAN  MUST  SEARCH 
CAREFULLY  HIS  OWN  HEART,  AND  DETERMINE  WHETHER  THE  DEFINITE  DESIRE  AFTER  GOD 

IS  THERE  OR  NOT.  The  desirc  is  equivalent  to  spiritual  sight.  To  help  to  build  up 
righteousness  is  serving  God.  III.  Some  will  say:  "But  I  have  no  such  opportu- 
nities AS  JosiAH."  Have  you  sought  them  ?  Is  not  influence  on  relatives,  friends, 
comrades,  fellow-workers  an  opportunity  ?  Can  you  never  seize  suitable  occasions 
for  uttering  a  Christian  sentence  or  scowling  on  a  social  sin  ?  IV.  A  further  ob- 
jection IS  "  But  I  HAVE  so  many  difficulties  in  my  way,  that  I  CAN  DO  nothing 
USEFUL."  Think  of  those  Josiah  must  have  met  with.  V.  Others  say:  "But  I 
NEVER  had  any  SPECIAL  CALL  TO  SERVE  GoD. "  What  if  parents,  or  brothers,  or  sisters, 
or  friend  never  mentioned  it  ?  Have  you  never  heard  it  in  your  heart,  and  cannot 
you  hear  it  now  ?  The  very  passage  of  time  calls  you  to  serve  God.  VI.  Those 
WHO  BEGIN  LIFE  WITH  Christ  as  Saviour,  Guide,  Helper,  Eternal  Friend,  and  who 
are  honestly  trying  to  serve  Him,  may  be  sure  that  He  will  rejoice  over  them, 

AND  remember  THEM,  EVEN  THOUGH  THEIR  NAMES  MAY  NOT  BE  EMBLAZONED  ON  ANY 
GREAT  WORLD-ROLL  OF  HONOUR.      VH.    SoME  ARE  CONSCIOUS  THAT  THEY  ARK  NOT  MAKING 

A  GOOD  BEGINNING  OF  LIFE.  They  are  drifting  onwards  and  towards  dangerous 
rapids  and  a  deathly  abyss.  Christ  comes  to  save  and  to  give  a  fresh  start.  This 
is  an  opportunity  which  is  worth  seizing.  (F.  Hastings.)  Early  piety  : — I.  What 
Josiah  turned  from.  1.  From  what  is  familiarly  called  "the  way  of  the  world." 
2.  From  the  carnal  appetites  of  youth,  which  craved  to  be  pampered  by  their  grati- 
fication.  3.  From  aU  vanities  of  the  imagination.  4.  From  the  exercise  of  power, 
before  weighing  its  responsibilities.  5.  From  false  friends  and  evil  counsellors. 
6.  From  the  delusions  of  the  gaudy  appendages  of  a  worldly  Court.  II.  What 
Josiah  turned  to.  He  fixed  his  heart  and  the  faith  of  his  soul  upon  God,  as  his— 
1.  Friend.  2.  Father.  3.  Guide.  III.  He  was  faithful  and  pious  from  his 
EARLIEST  DAYS.     (A.  Gatty,  M.A.)        Early  piety: — I.  Nothing  is  more  amiablb 

IN  ITSELF,  or  more  PLEASING  TO  GOD,  THAN  EARLY  PIETY.  H.  YoUTH  IS  A  SEASON 
IN  WHICH  YOU  HAVE  THE  GREATEST  ADVANTAGES  FOR  CULTIVATING  THE  PRINCIPLES 
OF  PIETY,  AND  THE  GREATEST  NEED  OF  RELIGION,  AS  A  DEFENCE  FROM  TEMPTATION  AND 
DANGERS.  III.  By  EARLY  PIETY  YOU  WILL  PREPARE  TRANQUILITY  AND  JOY  FOR  OLD  AGE, 
WHILST  BY  AN  OPPOSITE  CONDUCT  YOU  WILL  FILL  IT  WITH  REMORSE  AND  FEARS.  IV.  A 
REGARD  TO  THE  FEELINGS  OF  ALL  PIOUS  PERSONS  IN  THE  CHURCH  UNIVERSAL,  A  RESPECI 
TO  THE  HAPPINESS  OF  YOUR  PARENTS,  SHOULD   INDUCE  YOU  EARLY  TO  DEVOTE  YOURSELVES 

TO  God.  v.  On  your  conduct  in  youth,  your  salvation  or  perdition  almost  in- 
fallibly DEPEND.  (H.  Kollock,  D.D.)       Early  piety  : — I.  We  shall  briefly  notice  thb 

STRIKING    EXAMPLE    OF    YOUTHFUL   PIETY    HERE    PRESENTED    TO    OUR    VIEW.       1.    He  Wa3 

a  decidedly  religious  character.  2.  His  genuine  religion  commenced  at  an  early 
period.  3.  An  exemplary  life  and  conversation  abundantly  proved  the  sincerity  and 
ardour  of  his  piety.  4.  Josiah's  early  piety  is  adduced  as  the  pledge  if  not  the  basis 
of  his  future  eminence  in  religion.  5.  Josiah  and  his  country  reaped  great  advan- 
tages from  his  early  devotedness  to  God.    U.  We  shall  produce  arguments  urgino 

UPON  ALL  OUR  YOUNG  PEOPLE  THE    EXEMPLIFICATION    OF   SIMILAR   DECIDED  PIETY.       1.    A 

due  regard  to  your  personal  welfare.  2.  The  plea  of  relative  usefulness — (1)  In  the 
family.  (2)  The  social  circle.  (3)  The  Church.  3.  Many  whom  you  dearly  love 
feel  deeply  Interested  in  your  spiritual  welfare.  (1)  Parents.  (2)  Ministers.  4. 
The  compassionate  Saviour  not  only  claims  but  kindly  encourages  youthful  piety. 
{Essex  Congregational  Remembrancer.)  Early  piety  exemplified  in  Josiah : — 
I.  Josiah  imitated  David.  1.  God  was  David's  teacher.  2.  God  was  David's  com- 
fort. 3.  God  was  David's  delight.  4.  God  was  David's  defence.  II.  The  manner 
how  he  sought  after  God,  He  sought  God — 1.  From  a  deep  conviction  that  his 
conduct  and  the  conduct  of  Israel  generally  was  highly  offensive  to  God,  and  that 
they  were  exposed  to  imminent  peril.  2.  In  deep  self-abasement  of  soul.  3.  By 
destroying  the  idols  out  of  the  land.  4.  By  restoring  God's  true  worship  and  fre- 
quenting it.  5.  With  all  his  heart  (2  Kings  xxiii.  25).  III.  Thb  period  op 
life  when  he  did  it.  {Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons. )  Josiah  : — Josiah 
was — I.  An  early  seeker.  Our  Queen  wears  a  velvet  cap  under  her  crown  lest  it 
should  hurt  her  head :  this  eight-year-old  king  had  more  need  of  such  a  covering. 
The  crown  is  a  heavy  burden  for  young  soldiers.  Yet  there  have  been  younger 
kings  than  Josiah.  An  old  Norse  king  was  called  Olaf  Lapking  because  he  was  a 
king  while  on  his  mother's  lap.  Royal  boyhood  is  often  poisoned  boyhood.  The 
people  of  Israel  around  little  Josiah  were  doing  worse  than  the  heathen.  The  sina 
and  sorrows  of  that  time  are  described  in  the  Lamentations  of  Jeremiah,  whose 


CHAP,  ixxrr.]  U.  CHRONICLES.  159 

heart  they  had  broken,  Yet  Josiah  at  the  age  of  eight  did  that  which  was  right  in 
the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and  at  sixteen  began  to  seek  the  God  of  his  father  David  with 
more  earnestness  than  ever.  God  calls  us  to  seek  Him  earlier.  In  our  Latin  exer- 
cises there  was  a  story  about  a  simpleton  sitting  one  evening  at  the  river's  brink.  A 
traveller  coming  up  wished  his  company  in  crossing.  "No,"  he  replied,  "I  am 
waiting  till  the  river  flows  past."  The  tiny  stream  of  difficulties  between  you  and 
Christ  won't  flow  past,  but  will  flow  on,  and  broaden  and  deepen,  till  it  grows  like  an 
angry  torrent,  swollen  with  winter  floods,  that  threatens  to  sweep  down  the  old  man 
who  would  ford  it.  II.  Josiah  was  also  a  heaktt  hater  of  evil.  He  did  not  hate 
in  others  the  sins  he  practised  himself.  He  was  not  like  the  Czar  of  Eussia  who 
used  to  say,  '•  I  reform  my  country,  and  am  not  able  to  reform  myself."  Dr.  Arnold 
used  to  say,  "  Commend  me  to  boys  who  love  God  and  hate  evil."  Love  without 
hate  makes  a  mere  milksop,  and  Christ's  disciples  are  to  be  the  salt,  and  not  the 
sugar  of  society.  We  need  boys  who  will  hate  all  evil  as  young  Hannibal  hated  Rome. 
The  young  Christian  ought  to  be  the  sworn  foe  of  the  kingdom  of  darkness.  III. 
Josiah  was  a  real  hero.  A  hero  is  one  who,  in  doing  duty,  scorns  great  dangers. 
He  had  the  spirit  of  Chrysostom,  who  replied  to  the  threats  of  the  Empress  Eudoxia, 
"  I  fear  nothing  but  sin."  Josiah's  love  for  the  Bible  would  open  his  soul  to  all  the 
best  influences  from  the  heroic  Uves  of  Noah,  Abraham,  Joseph,  Moses,  Samuel  and 
Gideon.  Thus  was  developed  in  him  what  Dr.  Chalmers  calls  "  the  expulsive  power 
of  a  new  affection."  IV.  Josiah  was  missed  and  mourned  when  he  died.  There  is 
a  night  in  Spain  called  "  the  sad  night "  :  and  so  in  the  history  of  Judah,  the  death 
of  Josiah  was  '•  the  sad  day."  The  Rabbis  say  that  "  the  memory  of  him  was  like 
costly  incense,  and  aweet  as  honey  in  the  mouths  of  all."    [James  Wells,  M.A.) 

Vers.  14-33.  And  when  they  brought  out  the  money  that  was  brought  Into  the 
house  of  the  Lord. — Restoring  God's  house  : — I.  Spihitual  desolation.  1.  The 
negligent  priesthood  (ver.  5).  2.  The  dilapidated  temple  (ver.  7).  3.  The  perverted 
utensils  (ver.  7).  II.  Abundant  offerings.  1.  Opportunity  to  give  (ver.  8). 
2.  Called  to  give  (ver.  9).  3.  Giving  cheerfully  (ver.  10).  III.  Effective  work. 
1.  Skilled  workmen  (ver.  12).  2.  Diligent  service  (ver.  13).  3.  Renewed  devotion 
(ver.  14).  (Sunday  School  Times.)  The  book  of  the  law  found: — 1.  We  to-day 
are  in  some  danger  of  losing  the  Scriptures.  Not  as  a  volume  of  literature.  (1)  It 
is  possible  for  the  Word  of  God  to  sink  out  of  our  consciousness  through  our  in- 
difference. (2)  We  may  also  make  so  much  of  prayer-books  and  creeds,  of  systems 
of  doctrine  and  religious  treatises,  that  the  Scriptures  themselves  are  seen  only  by 
a  reflected  Ught.  (3)  Because  we  have  been  acquainted  with  the  Scriptures  from 
childhood,  as  we  grow  older  we  may  fancy  that  we  know  what  they  contain,  and 
leave  them  unstudied  and  unread.  (4)  It  is  not  unusual  in  public  worship  for  the 
devotional  services  and  the  sermon  to  come  between  the  soul  and  God's  Word. 
(5)  It  is  not  unusual  to  find  men  so  wedded  to  traditional  interpretations,  having 
origin  in  some  theological  theory,  that  when  they  read  the  Bible  they  are  like  one 
looking  upon  a  landscape  through  coloured  spectacles.  When  this  tendency  rules 
we  are  in  danger  of  losing  the  Bible.  2.  The  discovery  of  "  the  book  of  the  law  " 
gave  Josiah  a  new  basis  for  faith.  He  must  have  felt  when  he  read  it,  that  he 
was  supernaturally  strengthened  in  his  great  task  of  reformation.  There  are  few 
of  us  who  do  not  desire  to  have  our  various  undertakings  approved  by  those  in 
whose  sagacity  and  moral  discernment  we  trust.  Josiah  undertook  his  work  with 
a  new  heart,  for  he  felt  that  the  Lord  was  with  him.  3.  We  have  here  suggested 
the  broad  distinction  between  our  certainty  of  what  seems  to  be  true  and  our 
certainty  of  what  is  vouched  for  as  true  by  the  Word  of  God.  4.  This  discovery 
of  the  law  enlarged  Josiah's  conception  of  duty.  The  knowledge  that  came  to  him 
and  to  the  nation,  through  this  book,  was  what  a  flash  of  light  is  to  a  ship  on 
a  dangerous  coast ;  the  light  reveals  the  rocks  upon  which  she  nearly  struck ;  it 
also  reveals  the  safe  channel  and  the  course  to  the  harbour.  The  Bible  performs 
this  double  office  for  all  to  whom  it  comes.  It  reveals  sin  ;  and  it  discloses  the 
path  to  a  better  life.  God's  prohibitions  are  not  restrictions  upon  life,  but  protec- 
tions to  it.  God's  caUs  to  men  are  caUs  to  blessedness.  5.  This  narrative 
illustrates  the  way  truth  enters  a  human  life  and  recreates  it.  6.  Two  reflections. 
^1)  The  large  importance  to  each  one  of  us  of  our  finding  the  truth  of  God*. 
(2)  The  chief  blessing  we  can  confer  on  others  is  to  give  them  the  truth  God  has 
given  us.  The  men  who  went  to  the  temple  treasury  came  back  with  more  than 
money.  (G.  E.  Horr.)  The  book  of  the  law  found  : — I.  The  results  of  Losixa 
THE  LAW.     1.  Knowledge  of  the  truth  was  lost.    2.  True  religion  passed  away. 


ICO  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxir. 

3.  The  services  of  the  temple  ceased.  4.  The  sanotuary  was  polluted.  5.  False 
religion  "came  in  like  a  flood."  "The  land  was  fuU  of  idols."  6.  "Crimea 
of  violence  and  deeds  of  oppression  abounded  everywhere."  When  man  ceases  to 
fear  God  he  begins  to  hate  his  fellow-man.  7.  "  Immorality  was  rampant." 
Morality  does  not  live  without  religion.  8.  Misery  and  final  destruction  followed. 
II.  The  besults  of  findinq  the  law.  1.  False  religion  was  put  away.  2.  The 
people  repented  and  turned  to  God.  3.  The  truth  was  learned.  4.  The  temple 
was  beautified  and  opened  for  services.  6.  A  measure  of  mercy  was  found. 
6.  The  truth  was  handed  down  to  other  ages.  Miscellaneous  lessons  :  1.  Temple 
and  services  are  vain  without  the  truth.  2.  Those  who  seek  to  serve  God  discover 
his  will.  3.  When  men  desire  to  do  wrong  they  hate  the  Word  of  God.  4.  The 
Bible  will  survive  all  efforts  of  man  to  destroy  it.  5.  Where  leaders  set  an  example 
of  piety  the  people  follow.  6.  Sin,  vice,  misery,  and  destruction  come  where  the 
truth  is  not  possessed.  7.  If  the  times  are  bad  we  should  hold  up  the  law  of  God. 
8.  The  Bible  is  a  lost  book  to  those  who  (a)  neglect  it ;  (b)  disbelieve  it ;  (c)  dis- 
obey it.  9.  Every  child  should  own,  read,  and  love  the  Bible.  10.  One  can  be 
loyal  to  God  amid  the  most  opposing  surroundings.  11.  One's  course  in  childhood 
generally  determines  what  the  youth  and  manhood  will  be.  12.  The  world  greatly 
needs  the  services  of  children  and  men  and  women  of  righteousness.  (J.  E. 
Jacklin.)  Josiah  and  the  newly -found  law: — I.  The  discovert  of  the  book  of 
THE  LAW.  We  see  here — 1.  A  striking  instance  of  the  indestructibleness  of  God's 
Word.  It  has  a  charmed  life.  2.  That  honest  efforts  after  reformation  are 
usually  rewarded  by  clearer  knowledge  of  God's  will.  If  Hilkiah  had  not  been 
busy  in  setting  wrong  things  right,  he  would  not  have  found  the  book  in  its  dark 
hiding-place.  We  are  told  that  the  coincidence  of  the  discovery  at  the  nick  of  time 
is  suspicious.  So  it  is,  if  you  do  not  believe  in  Providence.  If  you  do,  the 
coincidence  is  but  one  instance  of  his  sending  gifts  of  the  right  sort  at  the  right 
moment.  3.  That  the  true  basis  of  all  religious  reform  is  the  Word  of  God.  The 
nearest  parallel  is  Luther's  finding  the  dusty  Latin  Bible  among  the  neglected 
convent  books.  Faded  flowers  wUl  lift  up  their  heads  when  plunged  into  water. 
The  old  Bible,  discovered  and  applied  anew,  must  underlie  all  real  renovation  of 
dead  or  moribund  Christianity.  11.  The  effect  of  the  bediscovebed  law.  If  a 
man  will  give  God's  Word  a  fair  hearing,  and  be  honest  with  himself,  it  will  bring 
him  to  his  knees.  No  man  rightly  uses  God's  law  who  is  not  convinced  by  it  of  his 
sin,  and  impelled  to  that  self-abased  sorrow  of  which  the  rent  royal  robes  were  the 
passionate  expression.  The  first  function  of  the  law  is  to  arouse  the  knowledge  of 
sin,  as  Paul  profoundly  teaches.  Without  that  penitential  knowledge  religion  is 
superficial,  and  reformation  merely  external.  III.  The  double-eyed  message  or 
THE  prophetess.  Josiah  does  not  seem  to  have  told  his  messengers  where  to  go ; 
but  they  knew,  and  went  to  a  very  unlikely  person,  the  wife  of  an  obscure  man, 
only  known  as  his  father's  son.  Where  was  Jeremiah  of  Anathoth  ?  Perhaps  not 
in  the  city  at  the  time.  This  embassy  to  Huldah  is  in  full  accord  with  the  high 
position  which  women  held  in  that  state,  of  which  the  framework  was  shaped  by 
God  Himself.  In  Christ  Jesus  "  there  is  neither  male  nor  female,"  and  Judaism 
approximated  much  more  closely  to  that  ideal  than  other  lands  did.  Huldah'a 
message  has  two  parts.     1.  The  confirmation  of  the  threatenings  of  the  law. 

2.  The  assurance  to  Josiah  of  the  acceptance  of  his  repentance  and  gracious 
promise  of  escape  from  the  coming  storm.  These  two  are  precisely  equivalent  to 
the  double  aspect  of  the  gospel,  which  completes  the  law,  endorsing  its  sentence 
and  pointing  the  way  of  escape.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  Scriptures  found  and 
searched : — I.  The  Bible  lost.  1.  It  is  lost  to  nations.  Sometimes  kings  and 
governments  forbid  its  circulation.  2.  In  communities  where  it  freely  circulates  in 
the  vernacular  of  the  people — by  misconstruction,  false  teaching  and  disregard. 

3.  It  is  lost  to  individuals  by  the  way  they  treat  it.  How  many  a  man  suffers  the 
Bible  to  lie  in  his  home  unused,  dust-covered,  like  the  sacred  roll  in  the  Temple, 
until  it  be  almost  forgotten  I  How  many  cast  it  away  because  it  reproves  them  as 
it  reproved  the  wicked  kings  of  Judah  1  II.  Deoeneracy  inevitable  withottt  it. 
The  Word  of  God  is  the  great  source  and  conservator  of  moral  life  and  health. 
It  is  sunlight  to  the  moral  world.  It  is  the  invigorating  element  in  the  moral 
atmosphere.  No  more  surely  do  plants  grow  pale  without  sunlight,  or  animal  lif« 
grow  feeble  without  oxygen,  than  all  that  makes  a  worthy  life  in  man,  individual 
or  collective,  wanes  and  fails  when  deprived  of  the  Word  of  God.  How  true  was 
this  of  Judah  I  When  the  Word  of  God  was  lost,  the  nation  sunk  rapidly  into 
wickedness  and  consequent  weakness.     False  religion  ran  riot.     The  smoke  of 


CHAP.  xxxiT.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  161 

incense  to  heathen  gods  filled  the  land.  The  consciences  of  the  people  were 
debauched.  And  whenever  the  Word  of  God  has  been  lost  by  prohibition  or 
neglect,  the  downward  tendency  of  national  life  has  been  marked.  Other 
elements  of  strength  may  have  withstood  it,  and,  for  a  time,  upheld  with  seeming 
success  the  fabric  of  state.  But,  the  best  elements  being  wanting,  degeneracy  and 
feebleness  sooner  or  later  inevitably  appear.  But  illustrations  of  the  matter  under 
consideration  are  more  open  to  observation  in  regard  to  communities.  Whenever 
the  Word  of  God  is  not  set  on  high,  and  honoured  as  the  arbiter  in  morals,  the 
teacher  in  religion,  and  the  guide  in  life,  there  wickedness  and  vice  will  prevail. 
But  individual  life  furnishes  the  best  illustration.  Without  the  word  of  God 
abiding  in  the  mind  and  regnant  in  the  life,  deterioration  in  all  things  good 
certainly  supervenes.  Take  out  of  a  man's  life  the  distinctive  truths  of  the 
Divine  revelation,  and  he  is  utterly  exposed.  Every  avenue  of  his  being  is  open 
to  temptation.  He  will  surely  run  down,  sink  to  a  lower  plane,  and  ordinarily  to 
A  plane  lower  and  lower  the  longer  he  lives.  How  many  parents  weep  over  sons 
And  daughters  tarnished,  degraded,  lost,  because  they  would  not  heed  the  voice  of 
Godl  ni.  Its  effect  when  found.  1.  In  the  case  of  Josiah,  it  was  astonish- 
ment. That  such  a  book  should  have  existed,  stating  so  clearly  the  Divine  will,  so 
full  of  denunciations  against  the  sins  of  the  land,  filled  him  with  amazement. 
This  is  natural  and  legitimate.  Only  let  men  to  whom  the  Bible  has  been  lost 
wake  to  the  solemn  reality  that  its  statements  are  everlasting  truth,  and  that  they 
will  hold  with  unrelaxing  energy  in  life,  in  death,  and  in  eternity,  and  amazement 
must  overwhelm  them.  "  Is  it  possible  that  these  things  are  true  and  I  have  not 
realised  them  ?  "  2.  Another  effect  was  to  set  him  to  earnest  study.  God  was 
speaking.  It  was  necessary  for  him  to  know  what  was  said  that  he  might  order  his 
conduct  accordingly.  Investigation  of  the  Bible  follows  naturally  a  realisation  of 
its  nature.  3.  Another  result  was  to  awaken  anxiety.  Study  of  the  "  book 
of  the  law"  revealed  his  true  condition.  And  so  it  is  always.  The  Bible 
does  not  create  the  facts  of  our  existence,  but  it  does  reveal  them.  In  it  we  see 
■our  necessities  and  our  danger.  The  past  is  marked  with  sin,  the  present  full 
of  corruption  ;  the  future  forbidding,  through  fear  of  coming  doom.  4.  Again,  the 
Bible  found  leads  to  repentance  and  reformation.  How  thorough  was  it  in  the  case 
-of  Josiah  !  How  deeply  he  deplored  the  sins  of  the  land,  how  strenuously  put  them 
Jiway  I  So  it  is  always.  It  shows  men  what  they  are,  and  what  they  have  done. 
It  reveals  the  intensity  of  their  sinfulness  and  the  multitude  of  their  sins.  New 
thoughts,  new  desires,  new  affections,  new  purposes  dwell  within ;  new  conduct, 
new  habits  mark  the  external  life.  And  the  same  thing  occurs  in  a  wider  field. 
■Communities  are  waked  to  newness  of  life  by  finding  the  Bible.  All  this  is  true  of 
tribes  and  nations.  Many  are  the  nations  which  have  been  revolutionised  by  it  in 
the  past,  and  it  is  doing  the  same  to-day.  Freedom  of  conscience  attends  the  Bible, 
and  civil  liberty  follows  close  behind.  The  Bible  is  the  charter  of  the  world's  hope 
and  the  mainspring  of  its  reformation.  How  sad  is  the  thought  that  to  so  many  of 
our  race  there  is  no  Bible  1  (Monday  Club  Sermons.)  Finding  the  book  of  the 
daw : — 1.  Many  precious  things  are  found  when  we  set  to  work  at  repairs.  Try 
to  remove  the  dust  from  old  sanctuaries  of  life  and  memory,  and  see  what  you 
will  light  upon.  2.  How  one  good  thing  leads  to  another.  First  "  walking  in  the 
way  of  the  Lord  "  ;  then  interest  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  ;  then  the  book  found. 
3.  The  connection  between  pecuniary  integrity  and  the  Divine  blessing.  When 
they  brought  the  money  they  found  the  book.  4.  How  many  old  things  are  new 
to  us  when  we  are  in  trouble  and  distress  of  mind.  6.  The  age  of  sixteen  is  a  time 
>of  his  life  which  no  man  ever  forgets.  6.  Devotedness  to  God  at  sixteen  is  so  great  a 
step  in  the  life  of  a  youth  that  it  cannot  be  alone  ;  you  must  make  another  onward 
into  the  sphere  of  spirit  and  of  lite.  7.  God  always  finds  some  work  to  do  for  those 
who  are  His.  8.  There  is  no  deeper  distress  possible  to  us  than  that  which  pierces 
us  in  the  discovery  of  our  enmity  to  God.  [B.  Kent,  M.A.)  The  loss  of  the 
.Scriptures : — Consider  what  we  should  lose  if  we  were  to  part  with  the  Christian 
Scriptures,  and  with  all  the  institutions  and  blessings  for  which  we  are  Indebted  to 
ihem.  I.  We  should  lose  the  knowledge  of  the  tbue  God.  Mankind  needs  a 
book  to  keep  alive  in  the  earth  the  knowledge  of  a  spiritual  and  personal  God. 
n.  We  should  lose  sooner  or  later  oub  institutions  of  benevolence.  III.  We 
should  lose  oub  institutions  fob  populab  education.  Popular  education  is  of 
Bible  origin.  Other  than  Christian  religions  build  themselves  on  the  ignorance  of 
ihe  masses.  IV.  We  should  lose  sooner  or  later  oub  institutions  of  civil  libbett. 
history  shows  that  the  great  charter  of  freedom  in  the  world  is  the  Word  of  God. 

19 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xhit. 

The  great  free  nations  of  the  earth  are  the  great  Christian  nations.  (A, 
Phelps.) 

Ver.  27.  Because  thine  heart  was  tender. — The  tender  heart : — ^We  see  that 
waters  of  the  same  colour  have  not  the  same  nature  and  effect,  for  hot  waters  are 
of  the  same  colour  with  plain  ordinary  waters,  yet  more  effectual ;  so  the  words  of 
man  coming  from  a  man  may  seem  at  first  to  be  the  same  with  others,  yet  notwith- 
standing, the  words  of  God  coming  from  the  Spirit  of  God  carry  a  more  wonderful 
excellency  in  them  even  to  hearts  of  kings.  Therefore  Huldah  speaks  to  the  king, 
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord,"  &c.  Josiah  in  uprightness  sends  to  inquire,  and  the  Lord 
returns  him  a  full  and  upright  answer.     Whence  we  may  learn — I.  That  God 

DOTH  GRACIOUSLY   FIT    PROPHETS    FOR   PERSONS,  AND    HiS  WORD   TO    A  PEOPLE  THAT    ARE 

UPRIGHT  IN  THEIR  HEARTS.  Where  there  is  a  true  desire  to  know  the  will  of  God, 
there  God  will  give  men  sincere  prophets  that  shall  answer  them  exactly.  But 
those  that  are  false-hearted  shall  have  suitable  teachers,  who  shall  instruct  them 
according  to  their  lusts.  If  they  be  like  Ahab,  they  shall  have  four  hundred  false 
prophets  to  teach  falsehood  to  please  their  lusts  (1  Kings  xxii.  6)  ;  but  if  they  be 
Davids  they  shall  have  Nathans.  If  they  be  Josiahs  they  shall  have  Huldahs  and 
Jeremiahs.  God  commended  Josiah  because  his  heart  was  tender.  A  tender  heart 
is — 1.   Sensitive.      2.  Pliable.      3.   Yielding.      II.    That    it  is    a  supernatural 

DISPOSITION  OF  A  TRUE  CHILD  OF  GOD    TO    HAVE  A  TENDER,  SOFT,  AND  A  MELTING  HEART. 

All  by  nature  have  stony  hearts  in  respect  of  spiritual  goodness.  Say  what  you 
will  to  a  hard  heart,  it  will  never  yield.  A  hammer  will  do  no  good  to  a  stone.  It 
may  break  it  in  pieces,  but  not  draw  it  to  any  form.  So  to  a  stony  heart  all  the 
threatenings  in  the  world  will  do  no  good.  You  may  break  it  in  pieces  but  never 
work  upon  it.  It  must  be  the  Almighty  power  of  God.  All  that  are  gracious  must 
of  necessity  have  soft  hearts.  III.  Therefore  I  will  show — 1.  How  a  tender  heart 
is  wrought.  It  is  made  tender  by  Him  who  made  it  (Ezek.  xi.  19).  1.  God 
through  the  use  of  means  softens  it  by  His  Word,  in  producing  apprehension  of 
judgment.  2.  It  is  wrought  by  an  apprehension  of  tenderness  and  love  in  Christ. 
Many  say  that  an  adamant  cannot  be  melted  with  fire,  but  by  blood.  I  cannot  tell 
whether  this  be  true  or  no  ;  but  I  am  sure  nothing  will  melt  the  hard  heart  of  man 
but  the  blood  of  Christ.  3.  When  the  heart  is  made  tender  by  the  Spirit,  many 
things  will  work  tenderness.  (1)  The  works  of  God.  (2)  His  judgments.  (3)  The 
Word  and  sacraments.  (4)  God's  promises.  2.  How  it  may  be  preserved  and 
maintained.  (1)  Keep  under  the  means  whereby  God's  Spirit  will  work.  (2)  Seek 
to  realise  the  forlorn  state  of  the  Church  abroad.  (3)  Labour  for  a  legal  and 
evangelical  faith.  (4)  Associate  with  those  who  are  tender-hearted.  (5)  Take 
heed  of  the  least  sin  against  conscience.  As  water,  when  it  begins  to  freeze,  will 
not  endure  anything,  not  so  much  as  the  weight  of  a  pin  upon  it,  but  after  a  while 
will  bear  the  weight  of  a  cart ;  even  so  at  the  beginning,  the  heart  being  tender, 
trembles  at  the  least  sin,  and  will  not  bear  with  any  one ;  but  when  it  once  gives 
way  to  sins  against  conscience,  it  becomes  so  frozen  that  it  can  endure  any  sin,  and 
so  becomes  more  and  more  hard.  (6)  Take  heed  of  spiritual  drunkenness ;  that 
is,  be  not  drunk  with  an  immoderate  use  of  the  creatures  (Hos.  iv.  11).  (7)  Take 
heed  of  hypocrisy.  (8)  Take  heed  of  great  sins.  (9)  Consider  the  miserable  estate 
of  hardness  of  heart.  3.  How  it  may  be  discerned  from  the  contrary.  By 
applying  of  the  soul  unto  objects — (1)  To  God.  As  it  is  tender  from  God,  so  it  is 
tender  for  God.  He  that  hath  a  tender  heart  cannot  endure  to  dishonour  God 
himself,  or  to  hear  others  dishonour  Him.  (2)  To  His  Word.  A  tender  heart  is 
sensitive  to — (a)  Its  threatening  (Isa.  Ixvi.  2 ;  2  Cor.  v.  11 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  11) ;  its 
promises,  its  directions  (Isa.  vi.  8 ;  Psa.  xxvii.  8).  (3)  To  the  works  of  God.  A 
tender  heart  quakes  when  it  sees  the  judgments  of  God  upon  others.  (4)  To  our 
regard  of  the  estate  of  others,  whether  they  be  good  or  bad  (Psa.  cxix.  136 ;  Phil, 
ili.  18  ;  Matt,  xxiii.  37 ;  Matt.  xi.  25).  Conclusion  :  1.  What  an  excellent  thing  a 
tender  heart  is  (Isa.  Ivii.  15).  2.  It  fits  a  man  for  the  end  for  which  he  was 
created.  The  service  of  God.  3.  It  is  fit  for  any  blessedness.  It  is  capable  of 
any  beatitude.  4.  Consider  the  wretched  state  of  a  heart  that  is  not  tender,  and 
will  not  yield.  (R.  Sibbes.)  A  temler  heart : — I.  Give  a  general  account  of  a 
TENDER  heart.  It  implies — 1.  A  quick  and  ready  sense  and  feeling  in  spiritual 
things.  (1)  Quickness  of  apprehension.  (2)  Ready  reflections  of  conscience. 
(3)  A  disposition  to  be  easily  affected.  2.  A  pliable  disposition  to  yield  to  Divine 
influences.  II.  Describe  the  way  in  which  such  a  temper  should  express  itself. 
1.  In  relation  to  the  Word  of  God.     A  man  of  religious  tenderness  of  spirit  will — 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  163 

(1)  Make  it  his  business  to  acquaint  himself  with  the  mind  of  God.  (2)  Pay  a 
ready  subjection  to  the  authority  sf  God  in  His  Word.  (3)  Be  afraid  to  do  any- 
thing which  he  doubts  to  be  disagreeable  to  God's  Word.  (4)  Will  frequently 
compare  his  heart  and  life  with  God's  Word.  2.  In  relation  to  sin.  3.  In  relation 
to  providential  events.  4.  In  relation  to  the  honour  of  God.  III.  What  foundation 
IS  LAID  FOB  SUCH  A  TEMPEB  IN  CHRISTIANITY.  1.  The  rule  of  our  faith  and  practice 
is  more  complete.  2.  The  recompenses  of  the  life  to  come  are  more  fully  revealed 
to  us.  3.  Richer  discoveries  of  grace  are  made  to  us.  4.  Ceremonials  have  given 
way  to  substantials  of  religion.  5.  The  softening  spirit  is  more  plentifully  com- 
municated. IV.  Inferences.  1.  Discern  the  differences  between  a  truly  Christian 
temper  and  some  things  mistaken  for  it.  It  is  not — (1)  Natural  easiness  of 
disposition — (2)  Occasional.  2.  Let  us  all  seek  after  and  cultivate  this  tenderness 
of  spirit.  3.  If  conscious  of  its  possession,  take  the  comfort  of  it  as  good  evidence 
of  a  renewed  and  Christian  state.  (J.  Evans,  D.D.)  And  thou  didst  humble 
thyselfl — Self-humbling  : — I.  The  acceptable  act.  1.  It  was  a  real  and  personal  act. 
2.  It  was  voluntary.  "  Thou  didst  humble  thyself ."  3.  It  was  a  sincerely  devout  act. 
4.  It  was  a  very  deep  and  thorough  one.  II.  Reasons  for  imitating  it.  1.  A  deep 
sense  of  sin,  its  heinousness  and  the  punishment  it  deserves.  2.  Our  origin  and 
our  end.  3.  The  sovereign  grace  which  has  made  us  to  differ.  4.  The  greatness 
of  God.  5.  The  life  and  death  of  Christ.  III.  The  encouragino  results  which 
FOLLOWED.  1.  Humiliation  will  often  avert  judgment.  2.  It  always  brings  a 
positive  blessing  with  it.  3.  It  will  improve  our  spiritual  health,  4.  It  promotes 
our  usefulness.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  art  of  self-humbling  : — I.  That  it  is  a 
disposition  not  unbefitting  kings  to  humble  themselves  BEFORE  GoD.  n.  That 
THE  ACTIONS  OF  GRACE  ARE  REFLECTED  ACTIONS.  They  begin  f  rom  a  man's  self,  and  end 
in  a  man's  self.  Yet  we  must  not  exclude  the  Spirit.  For  the  further  expression  of 
this  humbling  of  ourselves  before  God,  we  will  consider — 1.  The  kinds  and  degrees 
of  it.  (1)  Inward,  (a)  Humiliation  in  the  mind  in  regard  of  judgment  and  know- 
ledge, when  our  understandings  are  convinced,  that  we  are  as  we  are.  (b)  Affec- 
tions of  humiliation,  shame,  sorrow,  fear,  (2)  Outward.  As  manifested  in  words 
and  in  outward  behaviour  and  carriage.  2.  Some  directions  how  we  may  humble 
ourselves.  (1)  Get  poor  spirits,  that  is  spirits  to  see  the  wants  in  ourselves  and  in 
the  creature ;  the  emptiness  of  all  earthly  things  without  God's  favour ;  the 
insufficiency  of  ourselves  and  of  the  creature  at  the  day  of  judgment.  (2)  Let  us 
bring  ourselves  into  the  presence  of  the  Great  God  and  consider  His  attributes,  His 
works  of  justice  abroad  in  the  world,  and  upon  ourselves  in  particular  (Job  xlii.  6  ; 
John  i.  27  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  9;  Matt.  viii.  8  ;  Gen.  xxxii.  10).  (3)  Let  us  be  content  to 
hear  of  our  sins  and  baseness  by  others.  (4)  Look  to  the  time  to  come,  what  we 
shall  be  ere  long,  earth  and  dust ;  and  at  the  day  of  judgment  we  must  be  stripped 
of  all.  (5)  Let  us  set  before  us  the  example  of  our  blessed  Saviour.  (6)  Let  us 
work  upon  our  own  souls  by  reasoning,  discoursing,  and  speaking  to  our  own  hearts. 
8.  The  motives  to  move  us  to  get  this  humiliation.  (1)  Consider  the  promises  that 
are  made  to  this  disposition  (Isa.  Ivii.  15  ;  James  iv.  10).  As  examples  we  have 
Peter,  David,  Manasseh,  Josiah.  Every  branch  of  humiliation  hath  a  promise.  A 
humble  heart  is  a  vessel  of  all  graces.  Humility  emptieth  the  heart  for  God  to  fill 
it.  God  hath  but  two  heavens  to  dwell  in  ;  the  heaven  of  heavens  and  the  heart  of 
a  poor  humble  man.  When  a  man  is  humbled  he  is  fit  for  all  good.  As  all  the 
water  that  is  upon  the  hills  runs  into  the  valleys,  so  all  grace  goes  to  the  humble. 
(2)  All  outward  actions  benefit  other  men ;  but  this  inward  action  of  humbling  a 
man's  self  makes  the  soul  itself  good.  (3)  A  humble  soul  is  a  secure  and  safe  soul. 
4.  The  notes  whereby  it  may  be  known.  (1)  Holy  humiliation  is  voluntary. 
(2)  It  is  ever  joined  with  reformation.  (3)  Sin  must  appear  bitter  to  the  soul. 
There  is  in  every  renewed  soul  a  secret  loathing  and  hatred  of  evil,  and  is  expressed 
— (a)  In  a  serious  purpose  and  resolution  not  to  offend  God  in  the  least  kind. 
(6)  There  must  be  a  constant  endeavour  to  avoid  the  occasions  and  allurements  of 
Bin.     (c)  There  must  be  a  hatred  and  loathing  of  sin  in  our  confessions  (Psa.  li.  4). 

(4)  True  humiliation  proceeds  from  faith.  It  quakes  at  the  foresight  of  judgment, 
but   the   wicked   never   humble  themselves  but  when  judgment   is   upon  them. 

(5)  With  true  humiliation  is  joined  hope.  (6)  Hypocrites  are  sorrowful  for  the 
judgment  that  is  upon  them,  but  not  for  that  which  is  the  cause  of  judgment,  but 
the  child  of  God  is  humbled  for  sin.  (7)  True  humiliation  is  a  thorough  humilia- 
tion. It  is  not  like  Ephraim's  morning  dew,  quickly  gone.  {R.  Sibbex.)  The 
art  of  mourning : — "  Rending  of  clothes  "  was  a  thing  frequently  used  in  old  times, 
»ud  it  was  a  visible  representation  of  the  inward  sorrow  of  the  heart  (Job  i.  20; 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxsv. 

Job  ii.  12 ;  Acts  xiv.  14 ;  Mark  xiv.  63 ;  Isa.  xixvii.  1).  It  was  frequently  used 
among  the  heathen  also.  Observe — I.  That  the  boot  and  soul  must  join  tooetheb 
IN  the  action  of  humiliation.  II.  That  when  God  will  afflict  or  humble  a  man, 
IT  is  not  a  kingdom  that  will  save  him.     III.  That  tears  and  mourning  for  sm, 

WHEN  it  comes  FROM  INWARD  GRIEF,  IS  A  TEMPER  WELL  BEFITTING  ANT  MAN.  IV.  ThAT 
IT  CONCERNS  MAGISTRATES  ABOVE  ALL  OTHERS,  TO  TAKE  TO  HEART  ANT  DANGER  WHATSO- 
EVER THAT  IS  UPON  THEIR  PEOPLE.  V.  ThAT  IT  IS  THE  DUTT  OF  EVERT  CHRISTIAN  TO 
TAKE  TO  HEART  THE  THREATENING  OF    GoD  AGAINST   THE    PLACE    AND    PEOPLE  WHERE  HE 

DOTH  LIVE.  VI.  That  God  takes  a  particular  notice  and  understands  the 
PRATERS  WE  MAKE  UNTO  HiM.  God  hears  our  prayers,  because — 1.  He  is  gracious 
and  merciful.  2.  He  is  our  Father.  3.  He  has  promised  to  do  so  (Psa.  1.  15). 
4.  They  are  the  motions  of  His  own  Spirit  (Rom.  viii.  26,  27).  5.  They  are  offered 
up  in  the  name  of  a  Mediator.  6.  They  are  made  according  to  His  will.  Con- 
clusion :  If  we  would  have  God  hear  us,  then — 1.  Let  us  hear  God  as  Josiah  did. 
2.  Our  prayers  must  proceed  from  a  broken  heart.  3.  We  must  add  to  them  the 
wings  of  love,  faith,  hope  and  earnestness,  as  Josiah  did  here.  4.  Let  as  have 
such  a  resolution  and  purpose  of  reformation  like  Josiah's.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  28.  Behold,  I  will  gather  thee  to  thy  fathers. — The  tainVt  refreshing  :— 
I.  That  God  takes  notice  of  evert  good  thing  His  children  do  and  BEWARoa 

THEM   FOR   IT  EVEN    IN   THIS  LIFE,       II.    HoW  THE    SpIRIT  OF    GoD   IN  COMMON    MATTERS 

doth  raise  up  the  SOUL  TO  THINK  HiGHLT  OF  THEM.  It  swectens  death  with  the 
phrase  of  "  gathering."     IH.  That  death  is  nothing  but  a  gathering.     IV.  That 

THE  changes  of  God's  CHILDREN  ARE  FOR  THE  BETTER.  V.  ThAT  BURIAL  IS  A  COMELT 
AND  HONOURABLE  THING.  VI.  ThAT  DEATH  IS  LESS  MISERABLE  THAN  THE  ILL  WHICH  A 
MAN    MAT    LIVE    TO    SEE    IN    THIS   LIFE.       VII.    ThAT   OUR   TIMES    ABE    IN    God's   HANDS. 

VIII.  That  it  is  the  sight  of  misert  which  works  the   deepest  impression. 

IX.  That  those  which  be  dead  in  the  Lord  are  freed  from  seeing  of  ant  evil 
or  misert.  X.  Another  conclusion,  that  takes  awat  their  invocation  of  saints. 
XI.  That  the  lives  of  God's  children  do  keep  back  judgment  and  evil  from  the 
place  where  thet  live,  and  their  death  is  a  forerunner  of  judgment.  Because — 
1.  Gracious  men  do  make  the  times  and  the  places  good  where  they  live.  2.  Gracious 
men  do  bind  God  by  their  prayers.     XII.  That  the  evils  which  we  suffer  are 

FROM  THE   EVIL   OF  SIN.       XIII.    ThAT    GoD    WILL   GIVE    GOOD   MEN    FAITHFUL    SERVANTS 

that  SHALL  DEAL  FAiTHFULLT  WITH  THEM.  The  messeugers  dealt  faithfully  with 
Josiah.    XIV.  That  the  care  of  the  commonwealth  and  of  the  church  is  a  dutt 

BELONOINO  UNTO  THE  KINO.      {Ibid.) 


CHAPTER   XXXV. 


Veb.  2.  And  encoTiraged  them. — Cheer  up,  my  comrades  I — The  first  thing  is  to 
get  every  man  into  his  proper  place;  the  next  thing  is  for  every  man  to  have 
a  good  spirit  in  his  present  place  so  as  to  occupy  it  worthily.  At  this  time  it  shall 
not  be  my  business  to  arrange  you,  but  assuming  that  it  is  well  for  you  to  keep 
where  you  are,  my  object  shall  be  to  encourage  you  to  do  your  work  for  the  Lord 
without  being  cast  down.     I  will  speak — I.  To  those  who  think  thet  can  do 

NOTHING.  II.  To  workers  WHO  ARE  LAID  ASIDE.  HI.  To  THOSE  WHO  ARE  MUCH  DIS- 
COURAGED BECAUSE  THET  HAVE  BUT  SMALL  TALENT.  IV.  To  WORKERS  WHO  ARE  UNDER 
GREAT  DIFFICULTIES.  V.  To  THOSE  WHO  ARE  NOT  APPRECIATED.  VI.  To  THOSE  WHO 
ARE    DISCOURAGED   BECAUSE    THET    HAVE    HAD    SO    LITTLE    SUCCESS.       (C    H.  SpUrgCOTl.) 

Encouragement : — "  I  never  should  have  reached  success,"  Lord  Beaconsfield  once 
wrote,  "  had  it  not  been  for  one  woman  who,  in  the  darkest  hour,  believed  I  could 
win,  and  cheered  me  on." 

Ver.  21.  For  Ood  commanded  me  to  make  haste. — Spiritual  haste : — Haste  is 
not  hurry.     Hurry  implies  confusion  and  disorder.    It  is  not  the  same  with  speed. 

1.  What  it  refers  to.  We  should  not  err  were  we  to  apply  it  to  the  duties  of 
relative  and  secular  life.    It  applies  particularly — 1.  To  the  salvation  of  the  souL 

2.  To  a  course  of  godliness.  3.  To  labour  for  the  welfare  of  others  (Prov.  iii.  27, 28). 
II.  On  what  it  is  founded.  1.  The  importance  of  the  thing  itself.  2.  The 
limitation  of  our  opportunities.    8.  This  only  season  is  short.     {W.  Jay.) 


CHAP,  xxxvi.]  II.  CHRONICLES.  165 

Vers.  24,  25.  His  servants  therefore  took  him  out  of  that  chariot. — The  lamenta- 
tion for  Josiah  : — I.  The  nature  and  qu.u-ity  of  the  lamentation.  1.  Extensively. 
All  Judah  and  Jerusalem.  2.  Intensively.  Bitter  lamentation.  3.  Protensively. 
Of  long  duration,  "  an  ordinance  in  Israel."  II.  The  cause  and  ground  of  it.  The 
loss  of  a  good  leader  whose  life  had  been  useful.  III.  Doctrine.  That  faithful, 
active,  and  public-spirited  men  in  the  Church  of  God  should  not  be  laid  in  their 
graves  without  great  lamentations.  In  replication  I  will  show — 1.  Negatively.  On 
what  account  the  death  of  good  men  is  not  to  be  lamented.  2.  Positively.  The 
true  grounds  and  causes  of  such  lamentation.  (1)  Because  so  much  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  as  dwelt  in  them,  when  amongst  us,  is  now  recalled  and  gathered  up  from 
this  lower  world.  As  it  is  a  real  loss  to  a  company  when  any  merchant  withdraws 
a  great  stock  he  had  running  in  trade,  out  of  the  bank  ;  so  certainly  it  is  a  great 
loss  to  the  Church  of  God,  when  the  precious  gifts  and  graces  of  the  Spirit,  dwelling 
in  the  saints,  are  drawn  out  by  death.  (2)  Because  thereby  a  breach  is  made  to  let 
in  the  judgments  of  God  upon  the  remnant  that  is  left,  (3)  The  beauty  and 
ornaments  of  the  places  they  lived  in  are  defaced  and  removed  by  their  death. 
(4)  Because  the  propagation  of  religion  is  obstructed  in  the  places  from  whence 
they  are  removed.  (5)  The  consideration  of  the  time  in  which  good  men  die 
aggravates  the  loss,  if  it  falls  out — (a)  In  a  declining  state  of  religion,  (b)  When 
the  numbers  of  the  godly  are  thinned  and  lessened,  (c)  When  the  spring  and 
succession  of  good  men  is  obstructed.  (6)  When  we  consider  what  influence  our 
sins  and  provocations  have  had  upon  those  judgments  and  calamities.  I  look  upon 
every  good  man,  as  a  good  book,  lent  by  its  owners  for  another  to  read,  and 
transcribe  the  excellent  notions  and  golden  passages  that  are  in  it  for  his  ovra 
benefit,  that  they  may  return  with  him  when  the  owner  shall  call  for  his  book 
again.  But  in  case  this  excellent  book  shall  be  thrown  into  a  corner,  and  no  use 
made  of  it,  it  justly  provokes  the  owner  to  take  it  away  in  displeasure.  Application. 
This  reproves — 1.  The  worst  of  men,  such  as  secretly  rejoice  at  the  removal  of 
such  men.  2.  The  insensibleness  of  good  men,  who  are  apt  too  slightly  to  pass 
over  such  tremendous  strokes  of  God  (Isa.  Ivii,  1).  3.  The  very  best  of  men,  who 
though  they  do  bewaU  and  lament  the  loss  of  such  men,  yet  they  do  not  lament  it 
in  the  due  manner.  {John  Flavel.)  The  death  and  burial  of  Josiah : — 1.  That 
the  best  of  men  may  err  in  judgment  and  in  act.  2.  The  danger  of  undertaking 
any  work  without  asking  counsel  of  the  Lord,  3,  How  universal  is  the  reign  of 
death.  4.  That  we  should  be  cautious  how  we  attribute  sudden  and  violent  death 
to  the  vengeance  of  the  Most  High.  5.  That  it  is  not  wrong  to  mourn  for  the  dead. 
(J.  S.  Wilkins,  B.A.)  The  death  of  Josiah: — I.  What  the  people  of  God  did 
UPON  the  death  of  Josiah.  1.  There  was  a  general  mourning  for  him.  2.  The 
prophet  Jeremiah  made  a  particular  office  for  it.  3.  This  office  was  used  among 
others  upon  the  day  of  lamentation.  4.  This  use  was  established  by  a  law  upon 
Israel,  which  was  observed  till  the  end  of  the  Babylonian  Captivity.  II.  The 
reasons  of  their  doing  it.  1.  Because  it  was  caused  by  their  sins.  2  Because  it 
was  a  punishment  for  their  sins.  {Bishop  W.  Lloyd.)  A  nation's  tears  : — Why 
does  the  Jewish  nation  now  weep  over  Josiah  ?  The  reasons  are :  I.  The  great 
national  loss  which  the  event  involved.  Josiah  was  a  prince — 1.  Of  a  reflective 
nature.  His  mind  was  in  the  quest  of  the  highest  truth.  2.  Of  a  tender  spirit. 
8.  Of  reformative  disposition.  II.  The  sad  memory  of  the  moral  cause  of  the 
CALAMITY.  III.  The  terribly  distressing  mystery  associated  with  the  dispensa- 
tion. Josiah  was  the  most  useful  man  of  his  age ;  yet  he  dies  at  thirty-nine. 
Mystery  though  it  be,  it  teaches  us — 1.  That  Heaven's  government  is  no  respecter 
of  persons.  2.  The  irresistibility  of  death.  3.  That  there  is  nothing  on  this 
fleeting  earth  on  which  we  should  set  our  hearts.  4.  That  there  must  be  an  after 
life.    (Hoviilist.) 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 


Vers.  15-17.  And  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers  sent  to  them  by  His  messengers, 
rising  up  betimes. — Presumptuous  rebellion  : — I.  We  see  here  continued  rebellion, 
which  suggests— 1.  That  habits  are  easily  commenced.  There  is  little  difficulty  in 
forming  habits.  They  are  not  acquired  by  one  mighty  bound,  but  by  a  series  of 
almost  imperceptible  steps.     2.  That  habits  are  readily  strengthened.     Every  step 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxn. 

that  is  taken  is  planted  with  firmer  grip.  With  every  ripple  that  flows  the  stream 
becomes  wider  and  swifter,  fed  as  it  were  with  other  streamlets  on  the  way.  Every 
time  an  action  is  repeated  the  easier  it  becomes,  and  the  more  deeply  rooted  in  the 
soul.  3.  That  habits  are  seldom  eradicated.  Can  the  Ethiopian  change  his  skin  ? 
Yea,  easier  than  a  man  unassisted  by  Divine  help  can  break  away  from  evil  habits. 
They  become  part  of  the  nature  of  the  man  himself.  II.  We  see  the  presumption 
OP  continued  rebellion.  We  are  constantly  reminded  of  the  fact  that  God  is 
merciful.  But  there  ia  a  limit  to  the  mercy  and  forbearance  even  of  God.  Thig 
is  evident — 1.  From  the  fact  that  it  is  impossible  always  to  continue  His  warning 
and  judgments  on  the  impenitent.  If  the  obstinacy  of  one  person  cannot  be  over- 
come it  were  unjust  on  that  account  to  remove  the  chance  of  salvation  from  others. 
2.  From  the  inevitable  progress  of  temporal  affairs.  Death  comes  on  with  his  rapid 
step  and  cuts  short  the  life  and  with  it  the  opportunities  of  repentance  from  the 
obdurate  spirit.  Then  the  door  of  mercy  must  be  shut  for  ever.  3.  From  the  very 
nature  of  the  refusal.  Is  it  likely  that  He,  the  Lord  of  all,  will  continue  offering 
heavenly  treasures  to  human  swine  who  only  trample  His  gifts  in  the  mire  ?  Oh, 
it  is  a  sad  and  an  awful  truth  that  man  may  presume  too  far  even  on  infinite  love  I 
III.  We  bee  the  awful  end  of  presumptuous  sin.  The  consequences  are  at  the 
last  utter  destruction  and  irretrievable  loss.  This  stands  to  reason  if  we  remember 
— 1.  That  God  must  vindicate  His  character.  2.  That  an  example  must  be  set  to 
the  world  at  large.  3.  That  the  sinful  must  be  removed  out  of  the  way.  (Homilist.) 
Unheeded  warning  : — The  island  of  Ischia  was  a  favourite  summer  resort  of 
Italians.  In  1883  the  sinking  of  water  in  wells,  mutterings  and  rumblings  under- 
ground, distinctly  foretold  a  coming  earthquake ;  these  signs  were  noticed  and 
understood,  but  through  fear  of  frightening  visitors,  and  so  losing  custom,  hotel- 
keepers  and  others  refrained  from  making  public  these  warnings.  Kuin  and  death 
ensued,  involving  those  who  knew  and  heeded  not,  and  those  who,  through  lack  of 
warning,  had  unwittingly  exposed  themselves  to  peril.  Till  there  was  no  remedy. 
— No  remedy  : — These  words  contain  three  facts  of  great  importance.  1.  That  , 
there  was,  at  least  at  one  time,  a  remedy.  2.  That  the  remedy  went  on,  and  might 
have  been  used,  for  a  very  long  period.  3.  That  there  came  a  time  when  the 
remedy  ceased.  I.  All  life  is  a  remedt.  The  conditions  of  things  require  it. 
Life  a  great  restorative  process.  1.  Comes  that  marvellous  provision  of  God  in 
Jesus  Christ.  2.  All  providences  have  a  curative  character.  3.  Every  one  carries 
within  himself  an  antidote  to  evil.  Conscience,  till  silenced,  a  sure  antidote  to  evil. 
II.  Notice  the  word  "  till."  It  shows  how  slow  God  is  to  take  away  the  remedy. 
We  may  sin  ourselves  into  a  state,  not  in  which  there  is  no  forgiveness,  but  no 
thought  or  desire  to  seek  forgiveness.  "  No  remedy,"  not  on  God's  account,  but 
your  own  ;  not  in  God's  want  of  will  to  save  yoa,  but  in  your  own  incapacity  to  will 
your  own  salvation.     {J,  Vaughan,  M.A.) 

Vers.  22,  23.  Now,  in  the  first  year  of  Cyma,  king  of  Persia. — Cyrut :  the  divinely- 
directed  deliverer : — I.  God  stirred  up  Cyrus  to  do  a  oreat  and  necessary  work. 
II.  Cyrus  was  a  fitting  instrument  for  the  great  work.     III.  God  has  various 

MEANS  whereby  TO  INCITE  TO  ACTION.  IV.  ThE  DiVINE  INCITEMENT  TO  THE  NECESSABT 
WORK  WAS  AT  A  MOST  OPPORTUNE  TIME.  V.  GoD  TEACHES  HiS  INSTRUMENTS  HOW  AM 
WELL  AS  WHEN  TO   ACT.      VI.   As   THE  LORD   STIRRED  UP  THE  SPIRIT  OP   CyRUS,  SO  HB 

CAN  STIR  MEN  NOW.  {F.  Hastings.)  He  made  a  proclamation. — The  decree  of 
Cyrus ;  or,  all  things  for  the  Church : — I.  God  uses  kings  and  rulers  for  His 
Church.  That  the  Lord  raises  up  men  within  the  Church  to  be  leaders  and 
mighty  workers  in  her  behalf  is  a  fact  which  the  Bible  and  all  history  fully 
prove.  Such  men  were  Noah,  Abraham,  Joseph,  Moses,  David,  Paul,  Augustine, 
Luther,  Calvin,  Wesley.  But  He  calls  men  from  without  also  to  work  for  her. 
Conspicuous  among  this  number  is  Cyrus,  the  Persian  king.  Though  Cyrus  be 
a  marked  illustration  of  the  matter  under  discussion,  especially  so  because  of  the 
clear  declarations  of  prophecy  on  his  behalf,  still  he  is  by  no  means  the  only  one. 
Through  the  intervention  of  Joseph,  God  made  Pharaoh  the  preserver  of  His 
people.  The  immediate  successors  of  Cyrus  on  the  Persian  throne  followed  his 
example.  Through  the  influence  of  Esther  and  Mordecai,  Ahasuerus,  in  a 
most  critical  time,  became  the  saviour  of  the  Jews.  Later,  in  the  time  of 
Darius,  the  interrupted  work  upon  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  was  renewed  and 
pushed  forward.  Still  later,  in  the  days  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah,  Artaxenes  expended 
his  royal  treasure  in  establishing  the  remnant  of  the  Jews  in  their  ancient  land. 
Alexander  the  Great,  marching  upon  Jerusalem  with  a  bitter  purpose  in  his  heart, 


CHAP.  xxxTi.]  U.  CHRONICLES.  167 

ia  suddenly  changed  from  foe  to  friend.  Like  Cyrus,  he  too  douhtless  was  shown 
the  sacred  books  of  the  Jews,  and  in  the  prophecy  of  Daniel  saw  himself  described 
and  his  career  delineated.  The  general  policy  of  the  Roman  government  was  severe, 
but  many  of  the  emperors,  moved  by  kindness  of  disposition  or  considerations  of 
State,  were  lenient  towards  the  Christians.  Ere  long  the  government  itself  became 
Christian,  and  throughout  the  Middle  Ages,  power  was  on  the  side  of  the  Church. 
At  the  Beformation,  whenever  and  wherever  needed,  men  were  raised  up  among  the 
rulers  of  the  world  to  be  abettors  of  the  new  faith  and  breakwaters  against  the 
floods  of  persecution.  Such  were  the  elector  of  Saxony  in  the  days  of  Luther,  and 
measurably  so  Henry  VIII.  of  England.  Such  were  the  Syndics  who  stood  around 
Calvin  at  Geneva.  Such  Elizabeth,  Gustavus  Adolphus,  Cromwell.  And  the  same 
thing  is  transpiring  in  our  own  days.  II,  God  handles  thk  nations  fob  the  good 
OP  THE  Chubch.  We  know  that  the  nations  round  about  the  Hebrews  in  all  their 
history  were  instruments  in  God's  hands  for  disciplining  them  and  fashioning  them 
to  His  will.  To  this  end  He  ordered  their  affairs.  And  the  same  thing  is  apparent 
in  these  modem  ages.  Was  it  fortuitous  that  England  early  became  Protestant  and 
the  champion  of  the  new  faith?  Was  it  a  thing  of  chance  that  Saxony,  the 
Netherlands,  Switzerland,  Sweden,  resisted  the  tyranny  of  the  Pope?  Did  it  merely 
happen  that  this  broad  land  of  ours  was  sealed  against  the  efforts  of  Rome  to  possess 
it,  and  was  preserved  as  virgin  soil  for  a  pure  faith  and  a  free  government  ?  Is  not 
God's  hand  in  England's  occupancy  of  India,  and  can  we  not  see  that  thereby  that 
land  is  bespoken  for  Christ  ?  Is  Italy's  emancipation  from  the  Pope  wholly  of  man? 
Is  Germany's  attitude  to  Rome  of  Bismarck  as  much  as  it  is  of  God  ?  Blind  is  he 
who  cannot  see  God's  use  of  the  nations  in  these  modem  times  I  UI.  God  uses  the 
world's  uatebial  besoubces  and  eobces  fob  the  Chubch.  God  has  always  put  the 
world's  wealth  under  tribute  as  He  has  needed  it,  from  the  day  when  Israel  went 
out  of  Egypt  to  the  present  time.  And  the  tribute  increases  as  the  Church  increases. 
More  of  the  world's  wealth  is  flowing  into  the  channels  of  the  Church  now  than  ever 
before.  But  not  merely  wealth — money  expression  of  value — but  every  good  and 
uplifting  force  at  work  among  men  God  uses  for  the  development  of  His  plan. 
Discovery,  invention,  progress  in  economical  and  industrial  arts,  natural  science — 
all  these  things,  which  are  represented  in  the  complicated  civilisation  of  our  day, 
are  likewise  represented  in  the  Christianity  of  the  times.  Providence  takes  them  up 
and  utilises  them  as  they  appear ;  nay,  more,  orders  the  time  and  the  manner  of 
their  appearance.  How  true  of  the  art  of  printing !  The  first  book  printed  was  the 
Bible,  and  from  that  day  forward  God  has  been  presiding  at  the  printing  press  and 
scattering  its  leaves  for  the  healing  of  the  nations.  The  fleets  of  commerce  bear  the 
gospel  to  the  comers  of  the  world.  Discovery  in  geography,  ethnology,  philology 
adds  new  buttresses  to  Christianity.  All  these  and  the  like,  though  material  and 
natural  forces,  yet  work  spiritual  results.  1.  By  all  these  means  God  fulfils  Hia 
prophecies  and  accomplishes  His  purposes.  Kone  can  hinder,  none  compel.  On 
the  trains  of  providence  there  are  neither  accidents  nor  delays.  2.  Herein  we  see 
the  undying  nature  of  the  Church.  Great  has  been  the  heat  of  her  affliction,  but 
by  it  have  her  enemies  been  consumed.  3.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  abroad  in  the 
world,  preparing  the  way  for  the  coming  of  Christ's  kingdom.  How  should  the 
servants  of  the  Lord  be  encouraged  in  labour  and  in  prayer  by  the  Spirit's  antecedent 
work  in  every  heart  I  4.  In  all  these  things  we  have  the  assurance  of  the  triumph 
of  God's  kingdom.    (H.  S.  KeUey.) 


THE   BIBLICAL   ILLUSTRATOE. 
EZRA. 


THE 

Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 


Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,     on    the    Verses   of    the    Bible 


Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  A.  M. 


EZRA 


New  York 


Chicago 


Toronto 


Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

Publishers  of  Evangelical  Literature 


INTBODUCTION  TO   THE  BOOK   OF  EZBA. 

Teat  the  Book  of  Ezra  is  a  continuation  of  the  Books  of  Chronicles  is  evident 
from  the  fact  that  the  last  verses  of  "  Chronicles  "  are  repeated  as  the  first  verses  of 
Ezra.    There  is  also  the  most  marked  similarity  in  the  literary  style  and  method. 

The  Authoeship  of  the  Book. — There  is  no  reasonable  ground  for  denying 
that  Ezra  was  the  author  of  the  book  that  now  bears  his  name.  But  the  admission 
must  be  made  that  the  present  form  of  the  work  may  be  due  to  the  editorial  labours 
of  the  Great  Synagogue  in  the  early  days  of  the  Grecian  ascendancy.  It  is  quite 
possible  that  Ezra  was  rather  a  collector  than  an  organiser,  and  that  what  he  left 
at  his  death  was  rather  a  mass  of  material  than  a  completely  edited  history.  These 
materials  may  have  come  into  the  hands  of  a  later  editor,  who  had  the  historical 
genius,  and  he  has  put  them  into  the  shape  with  which  we  are  familiar,  making 
necessary  editorial  corrections  and  editions. 

Date  of  the  Book. — There  seems  to  be  some  uncertainty  as  to  whether  the 
Jewish  literary  "  renaissance  "  is  to  be  dated  the  time  of  Ezra  or  between  one  and 
two  centuries  later,  when  the  nation  felt  the  inspiration  of  contact  with  Greek 
culture.  We  should  have  no  doubt  about  its  identification  with  the  later  period, 
but  we  must  be  willing  to  admit  that  the  revived  literary  interest,  and  the  new 
standards,  must  have  materially  influenced  the  re-editing  of  the  ancient  Scripture 
records. 

An  Unfinished  Fragment. — The  Book  of  Ezra,  as  it  stands,  is  an  evidently 
unfinished  fragment ;  and  some  would  find  the  natural  continuation  in  Nehemiah, 
chap.  viii.  The  object  of  the  compiler  is  evidently  the  same  as  that  which  gives 
character  and  tone  to  the  Books  of  Chronicles.  The  mission  upon  which  Ezra's 
whole  heart  was  set  was  the  full  re-establishment  of  the  old  Mosaic  ritual ;  the 
reassertion  of  the  old  Mosaic  social  laws ;  and  the  revival  of  religion  of  that  formal 
type  which  is  always  dear  to  the  heart  of  the  priest. 

The  Pebsonalitt  op  Ezba. — ^It  may  greatly  help  to  a  right  understanding  of  the 
Book  of  Ezra  if  some  effort  is  made  to  form  a  fair  estimate  of  the  personality  of 
this  scribe,  and  to  notice  how  the  circumstances  of  his  age  found  a  fitting  sphere 
for  the  intense  expression  of  his  personality. 

Ezra  was  a  priest,  with  an  unusually  valuable  pedigree,  of  which  he  would  be 
sure  to  think  much,  and  to  make  much.  He  was  descended  from  Hilkiah,  and 
traced  his  line  back  to  Aaron.  And  he  "  magnified  his  office."  How  he  had  gained 
his  position  of  influence  at  the  Persian  Court  we  do  not  know,  but  we  may  be  sure 
that  his  residence  at  Babylon  made  him  familiar  with  the  Chaldee  language,  which 
he  introduces  in  some  portions  of  his  work  (see  chaps,  iv.  8 ;  vi.  18 ;  vii.  12-26). 
In  the  seventh  year  of  the  reign  of  Artaxerxes  Longimanus,  Ezra  was  granted  a 
commission  to  lead  a  second  body  of  Jews  back  to  Jerusalem,  to  take  upon  himself 
the  administration  of  public  affairs,  and  to  correct  those  social  abuses  which 
had  arisen  among  the  returned  exiles,  and  of  which  serious  news  had  reached 
Babylon.  This  commission  Ezra  carried  out,  but  in  the  spirit  of  the  priest  rather 
than  in  the  spirit  of  the  statesman.  He  showed  himself  to  be  a  ruler  with  a  very 
narrow,  one-sided,  and  exaggerated  point  of  view.  The  reformation  that  he  effected 
proved  to  be  the  beginning  of  mischiefs  as  serious  as  the  evils  which  he  so  violently 

V 


INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA. 


rooted  out.  The  healthy  and  lasting  reformation  always  has  its  basis  in  some 
spiritual  truth,  either  freshly  revealed  or  quickened  to  the  view  of  men  by  the 
vivid  apprehension  of  some  reformer.  Ezra  was  strong  on  duty,  but  he  had  no 
revelation  or  inspiration  of  truth  at  the  back  of  the  demands  he  made.  He  forced 
men  to  do  what  he  thought  right,  and  men  only  await  the  relief  of  the  "  force"  to 
turn  back  to  their  wrong  again. 

Ezra's  first  visit  to  Jerusalem  was  not  prolonged.  He  returned  a  second  time, 
apparently  a  short  time  after  Nehemiah's  appointment  as  governor,  and  he  was 
able  to  render  to  him  valuable  assistance.  Ezra's  life-work  appears  to  cover  a 
period  of  about  eighty  years ;  but  no  account  of  the  place  or  date  of  his  death  is  given 
in  Scripture.  It  is  generally  assigned  to  432  or  431  b.c,  but  as  Josephus  says  that 
he  died  a  very  old  man,  Eawlinson  prefers  the  date  420-410  b.c.  Traditions  assign 
him  a  grave  near  Samara,  after  his  return  to  dwell  in  Persia  ;  and  is  said  to  have 
lived  to  be  120  years  old. 

G.  Eawlinson  says  of  Ezra  :  "He  comes  before  us  in  so  many  capacities,  and  is 
revealed  to  us  in  such  brief  and  hurried  flashes,  that  we  can  with  difficulty  form 
any  distinct  conception  of  his  personality.  He  was  student,  critic,  linguist, 
antiquary,  historian,  teacher  and  preacher,  judge,  governor,  reformer  of  a  religious 
system,  second  founder  of  a  political  community.  We  cannot  call  him  a  person  of 
brilliant  genius,  or  of  great  originality  ;  but  yet  we  have  to  acknowledge  in  him  one 
of  the  born  leaders  of  men,  one  of  those  who  have  exercised  on  the  world  a  vast 
influence,  and  an  influence  almost  entirely  good.  ...  It  may  be  true  that  his 
aims  were  '  narrow,'  and  his  methods  '  rigid.'  But  he  achieved  a  great  success.  In 
temperament  Ezra  was  passionate  and  emotional." 

Dr.  Geikie  says  :  "Intensely  earnest,  he  had  the  absolute  confidence  of  a  zealot 
in  his  own  definitions  of  the  requirements  of  the  law.  To  enforce  the  Levitical 
holiness  of  Israel  had  become  his  one  idea,  and  no  Puritan  was  ever  more  energetic 
or  stern  in  pressing  his  will  on  others  as  that  of  God." 

Dr.  W.  B.  Pope  says  :  "  There  is  no  character  in  the  Old  Testament  more  perfect 
and  complete  than  that  of  Ezra.  We  see  him  as  a  servant  and  as  a  master  ;  as  a 
student  of  the  law,  and  as  its  administrator,  as  supreme  in  authority  and  aa 
subordinate,  in  public  and  in  private,  uniformly  and  always  the  same  devout, 
disinterested,  patriotic  lover  of  his  people,  and  friend  of  God." 

Dean  Stanley  says  :  "  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  (for  in  some  respects  they  are  insepar- 
able) are  the  very  impersonations  of  the  impenetrable  toughness  and  persistency 
which  constituted  them  the  reformers  of  their  people.  Eeformers  in  the  noblest 
sense  of  that  word  they  were  not." 

As  TO  THB  Contents  of  the  Book  of  Ezba,  it  may  be  noted  that  they  are 
divided  into  two  periods  (a  third  period  is  treated  by  Nehemiah).  The  first  period 
is  anterior  to  the  time  of  Ezra,  and  extends  over  twenty-three  years,  from  the  first 
return  of  the  exiles  in  538  b.c,  up  to  the  completion  of  the  temple,  in  the  sixth 
year  of  the  reign  of  Darius,  515  B.C.  The  books  of  the  prophets  Haggai  and 
Zechariah  shed  light  on  this  period.  The  second  period  begins  with  the  eighth 
chapter  of  Ezra,  and  extends  to  the  close  of  the  book. 

One  of  the  difficulties  felt  in  dealing  with  the  work  of  Ezra  arises  from  the  fact 
that  some  sections  are  written  in  the  first  person,  and  some  in  the  third  person. 
The  most  simple  and  natural  explanation  of  this  peculiarity  may  be  found  in  the 
habit  of  Ezra,  in  inserting  his  extracts  bodily,  just  as  he  found  them. 

Eegarding  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  as  one  book.  Dean  Stanley  writes  :  "  In  this  one 
book  is  discoverable  the  agglomeration  of  four  distinct  elements ;  which  is  instruc- 
tive as  an  undoubted  instance  of  the  composite  structure  shared  by  other  books  of 
the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  where  it  is  not  so  distinctly  traceable.  These 
component  parts  are  as  follows :  a.  The  portions  written  by  the  chronicler — the 
same  as  the  compiler  of  the  Book  of  Chronicles  (comp.  Ezra  i.  1,  2 ;  2  Chron.  xxxvi. 
22,  23) — Ezra  i.,  iii.-vi. ;  Neh.  xiii.  1-20.     b.  Ezra's  own  narrative,  Ezra  vii.-x. 

c.  Nehemiah's    own    narrative,     Neh.     i.-vii.  5;    viii.-xi.  2;    lii.    27-xiii.     31. 

d.  Archives ;  Ezra  ii. ;  Neh.  vii.  6-73  ;  xi.  3-36.  In  the  divisions  a.,  b.,  c.  it  may  be 
questioned  whether  Ezra  vii.  1-26  ;  x.  1-44 ;  Neh.  viii.  i.-ii.  2  ;  vii.  27-xiii.  3  (in 
which  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  are  described  in  the  third  person)  belong  to  another 
narrative  interwoven  by  the  chronicler  who  compiled  the  whole  book." 

As  a  general  conclusion,  it  may  be  said  that  there  is  no  sufficient  reason  for 
distrusting  the  uniform  tradition  that  the  materials  of  the  book  were  provided  by 
Ezra. 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE. 

EZRA. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Yebs.  1-11.  Now  In  the  first  year  of  Csnras  king  of  Persia,  that  the  word  of  the 
Lord. — The  discipline  of  the  captivity  : — The  captivity  is  clearly  represented  as  God's 
judgment  upon  His  people  for  their  sins,  but  it  was  a  judgment  so  tempered  with 
mercy  that  it  brought  them  much  of  blessing  in  the  way  of  spiritual  development. 
Their  trials  became  a  means,  in  various  ways,  of  spiritual  discipline.  Losing  the 
temple  with  its  solemn  ritual  they  found  that  God  was  a  spirit  and  could  be 
worshipped  anywhere ;  at  Jerusalem  they  had  been  able  to  hear  His  voice  in  the  holy 
ordinances,  but  now  they  were  dependent  upon  the  revealed  Word  ;  hence  diligent 
attention  was  paid  to  the  preservation  and  transcription  of  the  sacred  writings,  a 
service  which  prepared  the  way  for  the  arrangement,  not  long  after,  by  Ezra  of  the 
Old  Testament  canon.  All  such  good  impulses  helped  to  work  out  a  gradual  but 
sure  deliverance  from  their  old  sin  of  idolatry.  In  Judea  the  service  of  idols 
had  become  strangely  confused  with  the  service  of  Jehovah.  It  was  thought  by 
many  not  so  very  wrong  to  worship  images  if  at  the  same  time  they  worshipped 
God.  The  evils  which  assail  us  now  are  different  in  form,  but  are  working  along 
the  same  line ;  we  have  other  idols,  but  the  same  snare.  Natural  history  has  an 
interesting  chapter  called  "  Mimicries  of  Nature,"  the  description  of  certain 
creatures  which  have,  in  a  wonderful  degree,  the  appearance  of  vegetable  life  and 
are  able  thereby  to  seize  more  surely  upon  their  unsuspecting  prey.  It  illustrates 
the  peril  that  surrounds  us  on  many  sides  in  the  moral  world  ;  evil  takes  the  shape 
of  good  ;  pleasures  that  seem  harmless  hide  the  sting  of  death,  <fec.  Through  such 
subtle  temptations  among  the  Jews  idolatry  became  almost  universal.  But  when 
they  came  to  Chaldea  they  saw  idolatry  in  all  its  naked  deformity ;  it  was  not  con- 
fused with  true  worship,  it  stood  alone.  They  saw  how  it  denied  and  despised 
Jehovah,  and  it  filled  them  with  horror.  If  idolatry  bore  such  fruit  their  course 
was  clear ;  they  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.  Not  likely  there  were  some 
whose  religion  in  Judea  had  not  been  very  pronounced  who  in  Chaldea  were  among 
the  foremost  champions  of  Jehovah.  In  any  Christian  community  there  aire  good 
citizens  who  take  no  sides  in  the  conflict  between  Christianity  and  unbelief.  But 
imagine  one  of  them  suddenly  removed  to  a  community  where  infidelity  prevails, 
where  Christian  worship  is  prohibited,  where  the  Bible  is  dishonoured,  where  the 
prevailing  sentiment  is  that  of  defiant  atheism — how  long  would  it  be  before  he 
would  be  found  standing  out  resolutely  among  the  friends  of  Christ  ?  In  a  recent 
revival  multitudes  signed  this  simple  covenant:  "I  am  trying  to  live  a  Christiaa 
life,  and  am  willing  to  be  counted  on  that  side."  An  impulse  like  this  must  have 
come  to  many  of  the  Jews  in  Babylon.  The  contempt  heaped  upon  their  religion, 
strengthened  their  constancy,  and  they  refused  to  "  sing  the  Lord's  song  in  a  strange 
land."  It  is  not  meant  that  their  harps  were  kept  silent  through  all  those  years ; 
but  they  would  never  sing  the  songs  of  Zion  for  anybody's  sport ;  they  would  die 
first.  Their  spirit  recalls  the  drummer-boy  in  the  Irish  Rebellion  of  1798  who, 
being  ordered  by  some  rebels  who  had  captured  him  to  play  for  their  entertainment, 
laid  his  instrument  on  the  ground  and  leaped  into  it,  tearing  the  parchment  to 
shreds,  and  exclaiming,  "  God  forbid  that  the  king's  drum  should  be  beaten  for 

7 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 


rebels  1 "  whereupon  they  spiked  him   to  death.      (Sermons  by  Monday   Club.) 
Returning  from  the  captivity : — God  rules.    His  throne  is  the  centre  of  history.     His 
sovereignty  is  the  key  of  all  the  mysteries  in  providence  and  grace.    We  look  behind 
and  speak  of  history ;  before  and  speak  of  prophecy ;  but  He  looks  neither  behind 
nor  before.    Yesterday  and  to-morrow  are  alike  to  Him.     One  glance  sweeps  the 
whole  horizon.    Does  it  seem  wonderful  that  Cyrus  should  have  been  called  and 
commissioned  two  centuries  before  his  birth?    We  forget  that  telling  and  fore- 
telling are  the  same  with  God.    The  map  of  eternity  and  the  universe  has  always 
been  spread  out  before  Him.     I.  The  captivitt.    It  was  in  the  year  604  B.C.  that 
Nebuchadnezzar  reduced  Jerusalem  and  returned  with  his  first  deportation  of 
captives.     The  date  is  important  because  it  furnishes  the  prime  factor  in  all  calcu- 
lations respecting  the  deliverance  from  Babylon.    The  captivity  was  for  an  appointed 
time,  seventy  years.     There  was  a  special  reason  why  it  should  be  precisely  seventy 
years.     The  Lord  had  required  of  Israel  the  observance  of  every  seventh  year  as  a 
season  of  Sabbatic  rest ;  for  a  period  of  four  hundred  and  ninety  years  this  injunc- 
tion had  been  practically  ignored.     Seventy  Sabbatic  years  have  been  desecrated, 
seventy  years  of  Babylonish  chastisement  shall  expiate  the  sin.     So  true  is  retribu- 
tion.    "  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth  that  shaU  he  also  reap."    But  the  captivity  was 
not  mere  retribution,  it  was  discipline.    Its  purpose  was  not  so  much  to  punish  as 
to  reform.    Bearing  a  filial  relation  to  God,  the  chosen  people  experienced  the 
children's  portion  of  chastisement  (Heb.  xii.  6-11).     The  Jews  had  a  mission. 
God  had  called  them  from  among  the  nations  to  take  charge   of   His  oracles. 
Monotheism  must  be  kept  until  Christ.    For  this  Abram  was  chosen  out  of  Ur  of 
the  Chaldees.    However  superior  to  other  tribes  and  nations  in  many  particulars, 
they  had  not  been  loyal  to  their  trust.    They  needed  chastening.     God  had  no 
alternative  but  to  inflict  it.     Hence  the  captivity.     Nor  was  the  discipline  vain.    It 
will  be  profitable  to  note  some  of  the  lessons  which  they  learned  in  captivity. 
1.  They  were  cured  of  idolatry.     They  had  previously  been  unable  to  resist  the 
Imposing  rites  and  ceremonies  of  their  pagan  neighbours.     Familiarity  with  the 
abominations  of  the  Babylonish  gods  nauseated  them.     They  longed  for  the  living 
God,  saying,  "  When  shall  we  return  and  appear  before  God?"    2.  They  con- 
ceived a  new  devotion  to  the  Lord's  sanctuary.    Its  holy  ordinances  had  once  been 
a  weariness ;  but  now  they  were  homesick  for  Zion.     The  institution  of  the  syna- 
gogue is  traced  to  this  period.     3.   They  learned  the  value  of  the   Scriptures 
(Neh.  viii.)     4.  The  stock  of  Israel  was  culled  and  improved.     Only  the  choicest 
and  best  joined  the  restoration.    5.  They  were  greatly  knit  together  during  the 
captivity.     "  One  touch  of  nature  make  the  whole  world  kin."    A  common  sorrow 
will  erase  the  enmity  of  years.    Pain  is  a  mighty  solvent.    The  Jews  of  to-day 
scattered  abroad  over  the  earth  are  a  living  witness  to  the  unifying  power  of 
adversity.    6.  The  heart  and  intellect  of  the  nation  were  broadened.   This  widening 
of  vision  is  manifest  in  all  their  subsequent  history.     Thus  it  appears  that  the 
captivity  was  an  essential  part  of  the  Divine  plan.   II.  The  pboclamation  op  Cyrus. 
This  also  was  in  pursuance  of  the  Divine  plan.    The  clock  struck  at  precisely  the 
right  moment.    Jerusalem  was  taken  by  Nebuchadnezzar  in  604  b.c.    The  procla- 
mation was  issued  536  B.C.,  leaving  time  for  the  beginning  of  the  second  temple  in 
May  of    the  year  534  B.C.      The    intervening    period  was  just  seventy  years. 
••  Jehovah  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Cyprus."    How?     1.  By  the  voice  of  His  Spirit 
in  the  inner  man.     2,  Probably  Daniel  brought  the  matter  to  his  attention.     He 
may  have  read  to  him  the  prophecy  of  Jeremiah  (Jer.  xxix.  10)  and  the  prophecies 
of  Isaiah  (Isa.  xliv.  94-28,  xlv.  1-4).     8.  It  may  have  shaped  itself  in  his  mind  as 
a  suggestion  of  policy.     4.  Or  possibly  there  was  a  religious  motive.     He  was  a 
monotheist.    He  may  have  received  the  message  and  commission  from  Jehovah 
as  from  his  own  Ormuzd.     III.  The  return  to  Jerusalem.    It  was  a  voluntary 
movement.    None  were  compelled  to  go.      All  were  encouraged.     They  set  forth 
prayerful  and  hopeful.     In  the  126th  Psalm  we  have  one  of  the  songs  of  this 
pilgrimage.     {D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.)         The  exile  ended  : — We  may  safely  conclude 
from  the  events  stated  in  this  and  the  following  chapters — I.  That  the  lonq  exile 
OF  THE  Jews  had  done  its  appointed  work.     God  sent  them  into  captivity  partly  to 
punish  and  partly  to  purify  them.     They  had  now  been  sufficiently  chastened  and 
they  had  been  cleansed  from  their  iniquity.     1.  We  may  argue  from  the  fact  of  the 
Jews  commending  themselves  so  much  as  they  did  to  Cyrus  that  their  lives  were 
estimable  and  honourable.     2.  We  know  that  after  the  captivity  in  Babylon  they 
left  idolatry  behind  them  for  ever.     Trouble  will  sometimes  teach  us  what  nothing 
«lse  will.     The  Church  and  the  school  may  have  failed  to  lead  us  into  the  kingdom 


«HAP.  I.]  EZRA.  9 

of  Christ,  but  the  sadness  of  orphanage  or  the  loneliness  of  the  first  absence  from 
home  may  lead  us  to  find  a  refuge  in  "  the  God  of  all  comfort,"  in  the  unfailing 
Friend  of  the  human  heart.  II.  That  God  acts  with  gentlb  power  on  the 
MINDS  OF  MEN.  1.  On  those  of  His  own  people.  He  ♦'  raised  the  spirit "  of  many 
ot  the  Jews  (ver.  6).  He  caused  them  to  feel  deeply  how  excellent  a  thing  it  would 
be  to  repeople  the  city  of  Jerusalem  and  to  rebuild  the  temple  of  God.  He  kindled 
in  their  hearts  the  fires  of  patriotism  and  of  piety.  He  lifted  them  up  above 
unworthy  and  unmanly  fears.  He  made  them  brave  and  strong.  2.  On  those 
outside  the  Church.  He  girded  Cyrus  though  that  king  knew  Him  not  (Isa.  Ixv.  5). 
It  was  by  His  all-wise  direction  that  Greece  prepared  her  thought  and  her  language, 
and  Rome  her  highways  for  the  gospel  in  "the  fulness  of  time."  Therefore — 
il)  Let  us  ask  of  God  that  He  will  inspire  us  in  our  time  of  need.  We  may  have 
before  us  some  difficult  task  at  school,  some  trying  ordeal  to  pass  through,  some 
new  sphere  to  enter  upon,  and  we  may  shrink  from  going  forward,  but  if  we  ask  of 
God  He  will  "  raise  our  spirit "  and  make  us  equal  to  the  effort.  (2)  Let  us  intercede 
with  God  for  others ;  they  may  appear  to  be  quite  outside  all  holy  influences,  but 
they  are  not  without  the  reach  of  that  mighty  Hand  that  can  enlighten  the  darkest 
mind  and  soften  the  hardest  heart  and  renew  the  most  obdurate  and  stubborn  will. 
in.  That  at  the  call  of  God  we  should  be  beady  to  undertake  arduous 
OB  dangerous  work.  It  was  a  long  journey  and  a  perilous  one  to  Jerusalem. 
1.  It  was  uncertain  what  they  would  find  when  they  reached  the  city  of  their 
lathers ;  no  such  tidings  came  to  them  as  now  come  daily  to  our  countrymen 
in  England  who  are  emigrating  to  America ;  they  went  forth  not  knowing 
what  would  await  them.  Moreover,  they  left  behind  them  some  home,  kindred, 
occupation,  property.  Where  God  clearly  calls  us  we  need  not  be  daunted 
by  danger  or  by  difficulty.  He  who  summons  us  will  clear  the  way,  and  will 
«ustain  us  under  every  trial.  IV.  That  those  who  cannot  bender  the  greater 
are  welcome  to  offer  the  smaller  service.  Of  those  who  declined  to  return 
there  would  be  some  who  might  have  gone  but  would  not,  either  because  they  were 
too  timid  or  because  they  had  attachments  which  they  were  unwilling  to  break 
away  from.  Others  there  were  that  would  have  gone  but  could  not,  either  because 
they  were  too  aged  or  infirm,  or  because  they  had  ties  which  they  felt  it  would  be 
wrong  to  sunder.  Of  the  latter  there  were  many  who,  as  they  could  not  do  the 
best  possible,  did  the  best  practical  thing.  They  could  not  swell  the  number  of  the 
returning,  but  they  could  strengthen  the  hand  of  those  who  went  (ver.  6).  We  may 
be  unable  to  serve  Christ  by  missionary  or  ministerial  or  evangelistic  labours,  but 
we  can  strengthen  the  hands  and  cheer  the  hearts  of  those  who  can.  We  can 
give  them  gold  or  silver  or  pence.  We  can  speak  the  inspiring  word.  We  can 
pray  for  them  and  let  them  know  that  we  are  praying.  We  can  write  to  those 
who  are  absent  or  send  them  that  which  others  have  written.  V.  That  whek  we 
obey  the  voice  of  our  Master  we  do  more  than  we  know.  The  Jews  who  returned 
from  Babylon  no  doubt  believed  that  they  were  acting  as  patriots  and  were  serving 
their  country ;  but  they  could  have  had  no  conception  of  all  that  would  grow  out  of 
their  courageous  conduct.  We  never  know  what  wiU  be  the  long  and  large  result 
of  a  true  and  brave  course.  Carey  did  not  foresee  the  fruits  of  his  self-denying 
zeal,  nor  Wesley  of  his  "  more  abundant  labours,"  nor  Livingstone  of  his  travels 
and  his  lonely  death.  It  is  a  cheering  and  inspiring  thought  that  our  present  faith- 
fulness may  be  a  living  seed  from  which  a  large  harvest  of  blessing  may  spring. 
VI.  That  there  is  a  better  bestobation  than  that  of  precious  vessels  to  the  house 
of  God.  It  was  a  kindly  act  of  Cyrus  (see  vers.  7-11),  and  the  Jews  rejoiced 
greatly  when  they  saw  those  ancient  and  hallowed  vessels  beneath  the  roof  of  the 
new  temple  which  they  built.  But  there  is  a  deeper  joy  in  heaven,  and  there  weU 
may  be  on  earth,  when  a  human  heart  that  has  been  taken  away  from  the  service 
of  Christ  is  brought  back  again  and  is  included  among  the  spiritual  treasures  of 
the  kingdom  of  God.  {W.  Clarhson,  B.A.)  The  captivity  of  evil : — Sin  may  be 
conceived  of  as  an  object,  but  also  as  a  power — as  something  to  which  our  actions 
are  directed,  but  also  as  something  from  which  our  actions  proceed.  Sin  is  an 
internal  principle,  and  he  who  "  commits  sin,"  who  lives  in  it,  obeys  it  in  this  sense 
— obeys  it  as  a  force.  The  whole  and  constant  tendency  and  bias  of  the  soul  is  a 
despotic  rule.  It  is  more  than  an  external  authority  or  verbal  law.  It  has  a  more 
vigorous  and  relentless  rule.  It  is  more  besetting ;  has  a  more  constant  presence 
and  constraining  power ;  it  acts  directly  on  the  wiU ;  it  controls  and  stimulates 
volition.  That  is  a  great  bondage  that  overbears  the  will,  which  brings  it  against 
itself  into  subjection,  which  ignores  and  defies  its  active  choice,  but  that  is  a  greater 

20 


10  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

far  which  corrupts  and  perverts  it.     There  is  no  slavery  like  that  in  which  the  very 
seat  and  soarce  of  freedom  is  held  captive.     It  is  the  salt  losing  its  savour ;  it  is  the 
light  leading  astray;  it  is  the  king  and  leader  falling  in  battle.     {A.  J.  Morris.} 
The  return  from  the  captivity — an  argument  for  Daniels  history  of  the  Jews  in 
Chaldea  being  true  : — The  return  of  the  Jews  from  the  captivity  of  Babylon  is  not 
only  a  proof  of  the  Divine  authority  of  the  Scriptures,  considered  as  the  accom- 
plishment of  a  prophecy,  but  it  is  an  additional  proof  of  it  in  this  light,  that  it 
affords  a  strong  internal  presumption  that  the  history  which  Daniel  gives  of  the 
manifestations  of  Divine  power  in  Chaldea,  during  the  residence  of  the  Jews  in 
that  country,  were  true.     That  we  may  place  this  argument  in  a  stronger  light,  let 
us  consider  the  full  importance  of  the  measure  which  Cyrus  now  adopted,  and  of 
the  benefit  which  he  conferred  upon  the  Jews.     The  practice  of  slavery  among  the 
ancient  nations  is  well  known.     The  slaves  were,  in  that  period,  one  great  branch 
of  property.     The  slaves  cultivated  the  land,  did  the  household  business,  exercised 
the  necessary  trades,  and,  in  general,  performed  all  that  labour  in  which  the  mass 
of  the  people  are  now  employed.     The  slaves,  therefore,  formed  one  great  portion 
of  private  property,  and  of  the  national  stock.     The  slaves  arose  chiefly,  among^ 
ancient  nations,  from  the  captives  taken  in  war.     This  was  the  great  fund  from 
which  they  were  supplied,  and  constituted  a  very  considerable  branch  of  the  profits 
which  accrued  to  the  conquerors  in  the  ancient  wars.     They  estimated  the  profits 
of  the  war,  not  more  by  the  extent  of  territory  which  they  gained  than  by  the 
number  of  slaves  whom  they  captured.     From  this  view  we  will  be  enabled  to  con- 
ceive how  very  difficult  it  must  have  been  in  ancient  times  for  men  who  were  once 
reduced  to  slavery  to  regain  their  liberty.     The  interests  of  the  State,  as  well  as  the 
rights  and  properties  of  individuals,  were  all  against  them.     Where  there  were  sa 
many  interests  to  be  consulted,  so  many  properties  to  be  separated,  and  so  many 
private  rights  to  be  resumed,  we  may  conclude  that  the  liberating  of  the  slaves, 
among  the  ancient  nations,  must  have  been  a  very  arduous  State  measure.     This 
accounts  perfectly  for  the  difficulty  which  the  Jewish  nation  found  in  their  attempt 
to  emigrate  from  Egypt.     Private  persons  have  sometimes  given  a  slave  his  liberty 
as  a  reward  for  some  distinguished  service ;  but  it  was  impossible,  under  the  ancient 
manners,  for  any  considerable  body  of  men  to  be  set  free  without  some  cause  which 
was  very  extraordinary.     In  the  edict  of  Cyrus,  then,  and  the  return  of  the  Jews 
from  Babylon,  we  have  a  very  uncommon  piece  of  history  presented  to  us.     That 
conqueror,  among  the  other  valuable  property  of  the  vanquished  empire,  found  a 
whole  nation  of  slaves.     This,  according  to  the   ideas  of  these  times,   was  an 
immense  acquisition.     It  was,  in  fact,  an  immense  property,  the  value  of  which,  to 
a  political  prince  like  Cyrus,  must  have  been  fully  known.     Yet  we  find  this  politic 
and  wise  prince  giving  liberty  at  once  to  this  whole  nation,  and  sending  them  back, 
after  seventy   years'  captivity,  into  their  own  country.     It   is  this  extraordinary 
circumstance  which  Isaiah  describes,  and  of  the  value  of  which  he  appears  fully 
sensible,  when  he  says,  in  his  prophecy  of  Cyrus,  "  He  shall  build  My  city,  and  he 
shall  let  go  My  captives,  not  for  price  nor  reward,"    Nor  was  this  a  sudden  resolu- 
tion.     It  was  not  adopted   in   the  moment  of  victory,  nor  meant  to  exhibit   a 
momentary  triumph  over  the  vanquished.     The  Jews  remained  in  the  same  state 
in  which  they  had  lived  under  the  Chaldeans  during  one  entire  reign  of  the  new 
empire.     I  say,  then,  that  this  transaction  affords  a  strong  proof  of  the  credit  in 
which  the  Jewish  nation  then  were  in  Babylon,  and  that  the  history  which  Danie! 
gives  of  the  manifestations  of  Divine  power  which  were  made,  during  that  period, 
and  by  the  agency  of  that  nation,  in  the  province  of  Chaldea,  were  true.     The 
transaction  proves  itself.     There  are  no  data  here  necessary,  but  to  believe  that  the 
nation  of  the  Jews  were  in  Babylon,  and  that  they  returned  from  it.     Their  return 
proves  the  history.      It  supposes  all   that   is   related,  and   cannot  otherwise   be 
accounted  for.     It  is  affirmed  that,  in  this  period,  the  God  of  the  Hebrews  was- 
acknowledged  throughout  the  extensive  provinces  of  Chaldea  and  Persia.     At  last 
the  body  of  the  Jews,  whom  the  people  they  lived  with  regarded  as  a  sacred  nation, 
obtain  their  liberty,  and  are  restored  to  their  country.     This  is  the  history  which  is 
presented  to  us  by  their  own  writers  ;  and  the  actual  return  of  the  Jews  from  their 
captivity,    and    resettlement   in  their   own   country,   in   opposition   to  so  many 
complicated  rights,  in  opposition  to   so  many  great  interests,  and  in  opposition' 
to   the   universal   practice   of    mankind    in    that    period,   suppose    this    history, 
and  are  a  full  proof  of  its  authenticity.     (J.  Mackenzie,  D.D.)         The  first  year 
of  Cyrus  :—Aiter  making  himself  master  of  Persia  and  building  up  an  empire- 
in  Asia  Minor  and  the  north,  Cyrus  swept  down  on  the  plains  of  Chaldea  and  cap- 


CHAP.  I.]  EZRA.  11 

tured  Babylon  in  the  year  b.  c.  538.  To  the  Jews  this  would  be  the  first  year  of 
bis  reign,  because  it  was  the  first  year  of  his  rule  over  them,  just  as  the  year 
A.D.  1603  is  reckoned  by  Englishmen  as  the  first  year  of  James  I.,  because  the  king 
of  Scotland  then  inherited  the  English  throne.  Walter  F.  Adeney,  M.A.)  Cyrus : — 
The  valley  of  the  Euphrates  was  the  centre  of  three  out  of  the  five  great  empires  of 
antiquity — the  Assyrian,  Babylonian,  Persian.  In  the  eighth  and  seventh  centuries 
before  Christ  the  first  of  these  was  in  its  strength,  and  from  its  capital,  Nineveh, 
dominated  peoples  and  lands  from  the  Persian  Gulf  on  the  south  to  the  Euxine  Sea 
on  the  north ;  from  Palestine  on  the  west  to  the  Caspian  on  the  east.  But  among 
the  many  subject  cities  and  tribes  there  was  one  city  and  there  was  one  tribe  which 
with  special  impatience  bore  the  yoke  and  with  special  vehemence  sought  to  cast  it 
off.  The  rival  city  was  Babylon,  some  three  hundred  miles  further  south,  situated  on 
and  watered  by  the  Euphrates,  as  Nineveh  was  by  the  Tigris.  In  the  province  of 
Babylonia  one  caste  or  tribe,  the  Chaldeans,  became  distinguished  for  its  energy  and 
enterprise  and  gradually  imprinted  its  character  and  its  name  upon  the  people  of 
the  whole  province.  But  despite  all  efforts  to  throw  oft  the  yoke,  the  Assyrian  grip 
held  fast.  Nineveh  ruled  Babylon ;  the  Assyrian  dominated  the  Chaldean.  The 
rival  tribe  was  that  of  the  Medes,  to  the  east  and  north  of  the  province  of  which 
Nineveh  was  the  centre.  Closely  allied  with  and  kindred  to  the  Medes  was  another 
tribe,  destined  through  Cyrus  to  give  a  famous  name  to  history — the  Persians.  As 
yet  the  more  civilised  Medes  have  the  mastery,  and  the  hardier  warriors  follow  the 
standard  of  the  Median  king  ;  but  both  perforce  acknowledge  the  supremacy  of  the 
lord  of  Nineveh.  Thus  it  was  tiU  nigh  the  close  of  the  seventh  century  b.c.  A 
common  policy  and  hatred  and  the  presence  of  two  able  leaders  then  brought 
Babylonians  and  Medes  into  a  temporary  alliance.  The  city  of  the  south  and  the 
tribes  of  the  east  joined  hands  and  forces.  Nineveh  was  besieged  and  taken,  and 
the  Assyrian  empire  ended.  Babylon  now  entered  upon  a  brief  but  brilliant  career. 
Hers  is  the  "  Golden  Empire  "  of  antiquity.  Under  Nebuchadnezzar  she  mounted 
to  the  very  zenith  of  her  greatness.  Meanwhile  the  Median  kingdom  became 
consolidated ;  and  BtUl  the  Median  supremacy  over  the  Persians  is  unchallenged. 
But  about  560  b.c.  a  youthful  hero-prince  named  Cyrus  summoned  the  archer 
horsemen  of  the  clans  to  arms.  A  long  and  bloody  struggle  ensued ;  in  the  end,  by 
the  aid  of  the  young  commander's  genius,  the  conquerors  were  conquered  and  the 
foundations  laid  of  the  mighty  Persian  Empire.  Cyrus  is  one  of  the  most  benign 
figures  of  history.  His  name  (from  the  sun,  "  the  sunny  one  ")  indicates  his  nature. 
When  Xenophon  sought  a  sovereign  of  sagacity  and  piety  to  sit  as  a  model  for  his 
*'  ideal  king  "  he  found  what  he  sought  in  Cyrus.  On  the  downfall  of  the  Medes, 
he  conciliated  the  good- will  of  the  vanquished  by  permitting  one  of  their  own  race  to 
be  titular  king,  whilst  the  real  power  of  both  nations  resided  in  himself.  The 
nominal  king  reigns  but  Cyrus  rules  at  Ecbatana.  Powerful  as  he  is,  his  position 
is  one  of  even  greater  danger  than  power.  An  alliance  of  three  out  of  the  four  Great 
Powers  of  the  day  is  formed  against  him.  The  young  lion  awaits  not  the  huntsman 
bat  prepares  to  spring.  He  selects  as  his  first  foe  Croesus,  the  king  of  Lydia.  He 
surprises  and  storms  the  city  of  Sardis,  Croesus  is  taken  prisoner,  and  the  Lydian 
dominion  is  ended.  The  Greek  cities  that  fringe  the  coast  of  Asia  Minor  next  feel 
his  power  and  acknowledge  his  sway.  Then  he  turned  his  attention  to  the  east,  and 
compelled  the  Bactrian  and  Parthian  warriors  to  own  him  as  their  master.  Cyrus 
is  now  free  for  the  great  enterprise  of  his  career,  the  struggle  which  is  to  decide 
whether  the  Persian  or  the  Chaldean  is  to  rule  in  Babylon,  the  seat  of  the  world's 
empire.  He  is  now  brought  within  the  sweep  of  the  Bibhcal  record.  There  is  an 
ethnological  as  well  as  a  religious  interest  attached  to  this  Persian  advance  upon 
Babylon.  It  is  the  first  great  collision  on  which  clear  light  of  history  falls  between 
two  great  families  of  nations,  the  final  result  of  which  was  to  push  back  the  Semitic 
races  from  the  front  rank  of  humanity  and  to  place  in  their  stead  the  Aryan  nations 
who  were  henceforth  to  occupy  the  high  places  of  the  field.  Aryan  and  Semitic 
thus  meet  in  arms  before  the  walls  of  Babylon.  It  is  most  fitting  that  the  advent  of 
the  leader  of  a  movement  which  had  such  far-reaching  results  should  be  inaugurated 
with  so  sublime  an  expectation  as  that  with  which  Cyrus  is  hailed  by  Isaiah.  He 
was  the  Morning  Star  of  the  Aryan  races.  Persia  made  way  for  Greece,  and  Greece 
prepared  for  Rome,  and  out  of  Eome  has  sprung  the  modern  world,  and  in  the 
modern  world  the  most  vigorous  branch  of  the  Aryan  stock  more  and  more 
unmistakably  rules.  On  the  downfall  of  Babylon,  Cyrus  does  not  immediately  take 
possession  of  the  position  he  has  won.  With  the  same  politic  end  in  view  as  had 
previously  caused  him  to  make  a  Median  Prince  precede  him  at  Ecbatana.  he  now 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

places  another  of  the  same  nationality  upon  the  vacant  throne  of  Babylon.  Fof 
two  years  Darius  reigns,  then  dies ;  and  Cyrus  quietly  takes  possession  as  the  sole 
ruler  of  the  territories  he  had  inherited  and  conquered.  Henceforth  the  Persian 
■who  rules  from  Babylon  is  "  The  Great  King."  The  edict  for  the  return  of  the  exiles 
and  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  was  issued  536  b.c.  It  was  the  Declaration  of  the 
Imperial  Policy,  and  the  basis  of  all  that  came  after.  It  announced  by  implication 
friendship  between  the  empire  and  the  Jews — a  friendship  to  which  the  Jews 
remained  faithful  tiU,  two  hundred  years  afterwards,  Alexander  the  Great  erected 
the  Brazen  Empire  upon  the  ruins  of  that  of  Silver.  Cyrus  was  a  man  of  war  to 
the  close,  and  died  in  battle,  disastrous  according  to  one  account,  victorious  according 
to  another.  (G.  M.  Grant,  B.D.)  That  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  mouth  of 
Jeremiah  might  be  fulfllled. — The  fulfilment  of  the  word  of  the  Lord : — Here  are 
four  things  which  claim  our  attention,  I.  The  regabd  of  God  for  His  word. 
"  Now  in  the  first  year  of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia,  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the 
mouth  of  Jeremiah  might  be  fulfilled,"  &c.  (Jer.  xxix.  10 ;  Num.  xxiii.  19).  "  Heaven 
and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  My  words  shall  not  pass  away."  "  The  Word  of  the 
Lord  endureth  for  ever."  "  He  abideth  faithful ;  He  cannot  deny  Himself."  We 
have  in  this — 1.  An  assurance  that  the  prophecies  and  promises  of  His  Word  will  be 
fulfilled.  "  As  the  architect  progressively  executes  every  part  of  the  plan  which  he 
has  delineated,  till  the  whole  design  is  completed,  so  God  in  His  providence  performs 
in  due  order  all  the  prophecies  of  His  Word :  a  great  proportion  of  His  great  scheme 
has  already  been  accomplished,  and  revolving  ages  will  hasten  the  performance  of 
all  the  rest  in  the  appointed  periods."  2.  An  encouragement  to  trust  in  Him. 
"  Whoso  putteth  his  trust  in  the  Lord  shall  be  set  on  high  "  (Psa.  ixii.  4,  5  ;  xviii.  2). 
II.  The  mercy  of  God  to  His  people.  This  mercy  is  seen — 1.  In  the  design  and 
effect  of  the  captivity.  "  Thus  the  Divine  word  of  chastisement,"  says  Schultz, 
*'  ever  goes  hand  in  hand  with  His  word  of  salvation."  2.  In  the  release  from 
captivity.  (1)  As  to  its  time.  (2)  As  to  its  meaning.  It  was  an  assurance  of  the 
Divine  forgiveness  of  their  sins.  Their  release  was  also  the  commencement  of  many 
and  great  blessings.  "  What  a  fulness  of  salvation  after  the  night  of  misfortune — 
the  entire  extent  of  Messianic  redemption."  III.  The  influence  of  God  upon  thb 
SPIRIT  of  man.  "  The  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia."  1.  The 
nature  of  this  influence.  "  This  does  not  mean,"  says  Schultz,  "  that  Cyrus  was 
influenced  in  the  same  way  as  were  the  prophets,  upon  whom,  with  their  greater 
susceptibility,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came ;  but  yet  an  influence  in  consequence  of 
which  Cyrus  made  the  will  of  God  his  own  wiU,  and  executed  it  in  the  things  under 
consideration.  God  gave  him  the  resolution  and  the  desire  to  execute  His  intention." 
All  the  good  in  human  life  is  the  result  of  Divine  influence.  2.  The  subject  of 
this  influence :  Cyrus  king  of  Persia.  "  The  king's  heart  is  in  the  hand  of  the 
Lord,  as  the  rivers  of  water;  He  turneth  it  whithersoever  He  will."  He  is  now 
nsing  the  powers  of  the  world  to  promote  the  interests  of  His  cause.  3.  The 
design  of  this  influence.  "  The  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus,  that  he 
made  a  proclamation,"  &q.  In  all  the  inspirations  and  impressions  He  imparts 
to  man.  His  aim  is  to  save  and  bless  him,  and  to  make  him  an  agent  in 
blessing  others.  IV.  The  suitable  response  of  man  to  the  influence  of  God. 
•'  Cyrus  made  a  proclamation  throughout  all  his  kingdom,"  <fec.  {W.  Jones.) 
The  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus. — Inspiration  tested : — The  soul  of  man  is 
the  great  arbiter.  We  need  not,  therefore,  bow  down  before  every  man  or  woman 
who  claims  inspiration.  We  listen  respectfully  to  the  claim,  and  say,  "  What 
does  it  amount  to  ?  what  end  would  you  accomplish  ?  to  what  purpose  does  this 
inspiration  you  claim  point?"  and  if  in  answer  there  should  come  replies  indica- 
tive of  reform,  progress,  purification,  liberation,  enlargement,  beneficence,  verily 
the  answer  will  prove  the  inspiration  that  is  claimed.  No  man  is  inspired  who 
wishes  to  do  evil.  Disclaim  and  repudiate,  not  with  sorrow,  but  with  indignation, 
the  inspiration  that  would  seek  to  curtail  liberty,  arrest  progress,  hinder  the 
mission  of  philanthropy — that  would  overload  the  weak,  still  further  impoverish 
the  poor,  and  shut  off  from  the  meanest  dwelling  any  beam  of  daylight. 
{J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Divine  communications  : — Last  week  I  was  in  the  oflBce  of  one 
of  our  great  Glasgow  merchants,  and,  while  we  were  conversing  together,  he 
suddenly  asked  to  be  excused  for  a  moment,  as  there  was  a  summons  to  speak 
with  another  Glasgow  firm.  Without  moving  from  his  seat,  without  being  put 
about  in  the  slightest,  or  even  turning  his  head,  he  lifted  from  before  him  the 
telephone  connection.  A  few  minutes  passed  :  not  a  word  did  I  hear  of  that 
conversation  except  "  Goodbye."      That  was  all  I  heard;  but  I  knew  that  the  man 


CHAP.  I.]  EZRA.  13 

to  whom  I  was  talking  had  been  put  in  possession  of  a  fact  which  I  knew  nothing 
about,  and  yet  all  the  while  I  had  been  in  his  presence.  He  had  heard,  through 
the  special  connection  that  he  had,  the  business  and  the  object  of  the  firm  with 
which  he  was  in  communication.  Ah  me !  Sometimes  at  your  side  a  man  gets  a 
communication  from  Almighty  God  that  you  know  nothing  about,  and  that  is  the 
reason  of  his  activity,  and  that  is  the  programme  that  he  resolves  to  carry  out  at 
all  hazards.  He  has  heard  from  God  ;  he  has  been  in  communication  with  the 
Almighty.  {John  Eobertson.)  Cyrus  selected  : — It  seems  strange  at  first  that 
this  man  should  have  been  chosen  for  such  commission.  God  might  have 
employed  some  one  of  His  own  people,  Ezekiel,  for  instance,  investing  him  with 
supernatural  power,  as  Moses  was  invested  when  he  delivered  the  nation  from  its 
first  captivity  in  Egypt.  But  no  ;  He  selected  rather  a  pagan  king,  whose  appoint- 
ment had  been  foretold  by  Isaiah  more  than  a  hundred  years  before.  Often  since 
then  God  has  pursued  a  like  course,  employing  for  His  purposes  those  who  were 
not  His  professed  servants — men  of  wealth,  of  learning,  of  position,  of  power. 
He  does  not  count  their  service  as  excuse  for  withholding  from  Him  the  trust  and 
obedience  which  are  His  due ;  He  does  not  condone  their  idolatry ;  but  He  permits 
them  to  be  His  helpers,  sometimes,  it  would  seem,  in  order  that,  brought  thus  in 
line  with  His  beneficent  designs,  they  may  be  persuaded  to  come  heartily  into  His 
kingdom.  {T.  J.  Holmes.)  Divine  stirrings  in  the  human  soul: — It  is  taught 
that,  besides  the  general  moral  influences,  unconscious  and  diffused — as  it  were 
distilled,  like  the  dew,  in  silence  and  darkness — there  is  an  active  energy,  arousing, 
filling,  impelling  the  souls  of  men.  It  is  said  that  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came 
upon  judges,  that  it  came  upon  kings,  upon  prophets,  upon  apostles — came 
mightily  and  stirred  them  all  up.  As  sudden  and  mighty  winds  make  trees  rock, 
and  wrench  them,  and  even  overturn  them,  so,  as  by  a  mighty  rushing  wind,  the 
Spirit  of  God  has  descended  on  men — on  Samuel,  on  David,  on  Isaiah,  on  Paul.  It 
is  taught  likewise  that,  while  this  energy  of  the  Divine  mind  prepared  certain  men 
for  emergencies,  and  prepared  them  to  act  official  parts,  all  true  Christians,  aU 
godly  souls,  are  opening  to  a  quickening  influence,  if  not  so  mighty,  yet  of  the 
same  general  kind — an  influence  which  stimulates,  assists,  ripens,  and  so  finally 
sanctifies.  Revivals  : — There  have  been  great  awakenings  in  literature.  Sud- 
denly a  nation  has,  so  to  say,  sprung  to  its  feet  and  said,  "Let  us  read! "  That  is 
a  mere  matter  of  what  is  called  profane  history.  Ages  have  passed  in  which  men 
cared  not  to  read,  or  write,  or  think ;  if  there  were  any  books  to  be  opened,  as  a 
rule  they  lay  untouched ;  but  quite  suddenly  there  has  been  what  is  termed 
a  literary  revival.  Is  such  a  thing  possible  ?  If  it  is  possible  to  have  a  literary 
revival — that  is,  a  revival  of  the  love  of  learning,  the  love  of  reading,  the  love  of 
writing — why  may  there  not  be  such  a  thing  as  a  religious  revival,  in  which  men 
shall  say  suddenly,  but  unanimously,  "  Let  us  pray  "  ?  And  when  men  so  moved  to 
pray  they  shorten  the  distance  between  earth  and  heaven.  It  would  be  perhaps 
most  difficult  to  believe  in  a  religious  revival  if  there  had  not  been  analogous 
revivals — revivals  of  learning,  revivals  of  art.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  That  lie 
made  a  proclamation  throughout  all  his  kingdom. — The  edict  of  Cyrus : — 
I.  The  devout  acknowledgment  of  God's  sovereignty.  1.  In  the  bestowment 
of  His  favours.  2.  In  the  authority  of  His  commands.  11.  The  magnanimous 
EMANCIPATION  OF  God's  PEOPLE.  1.  The  Spirit  in  which  this  emancipation  was 
made.  (1)  It  was  generous.  (2)  It  was  pious.  2.  The  purpose  for  which  the 
emancipation  was  made.  III.  The  geneeous  exhortation  to  assist  God's 
PEOPLE.  1.  Its  purport.  2.  The  persons  to  whom  it  was  addressed.  3.  The 
pattern  by  which  it  was  enforced.  Kawlinson  regards  "  the  free-will  offering  for 
the  house  of  God  "  as  the  gift  of  Cyrus  himself.  He  not  only  wished  them  well,  but 
helped  them  to  realise  his  wishes.  Lessons :  1.  Be  prepared  to  acknowledge  and 
appreciate  moral  excellence  outside  of  the  visible  Church  of  God  (Luke  vii.  1-10  ; 
Acts  X.  22).  2.  Imitate  Cyi'us  in  his  practical  acknowledgment  of  the  sovereignty 
of  God.  3.  When  we  cannot  offer  our  labours  in  good  enterprises,  let  us  cheer- 
fully offer  our  gifts.  {William  Jones.)  The  proclamation  of  Cyrus: — View  it — 
I.  In  a  way  of  literal  interpretation.  1.  The  person  by  whom  this  proclama- 
tion was  issued.  2.  The  proclamation  itself.  II.  In  a  way  of  spiritual  improve- 
ment. 1.  What  a  sad  state  the  men  of  the  world  at  large  are  in.  They  are  slaves, 
being  in  bondage  to  their  lusts,  to  the  world,  to  Satan,  and  to  the  grave  (Eom. 
vi.  12,  viii.  21 ;  Eph.  ii.  2  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  26 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  19  ;  1  John  v.  19.)  2.  What 
an  invaluable  blessing  the  gospel  is.  8.  What  wiU  be  necessary  to  obtain  what  it 
offers  ?     4.  What  is  our  bounden  duty  when  it  has  become  effectual  for  our  good  ? 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

God  is  said  to  "raise  the  spirits"  of  such  as  are  ambitious  for  liberty;  and  it 
need  not  be  said  to  whom  we  are  indebted  if  we  differ  from  others  (1  Cor.  iv.  7, 
XV.  10  ;  Jas.  i.  17).  {William  Sleigh.)  The  proclamation  of  Cyrus  and  the  pro- 
clamation of  the  gospel  viiriister  compared  : — The  text  suggests  to  us  a  resemblance 
between  the  proclamation  of  Cyrus  and  that  of  a  gospel  preacher.  I.  The 
proclamation  of  both  is  merciful.     The  proclamation  of  Cyrus  meant  restoration. 

1.  Restoration  of  lost  liberty ;  and — 2.  Of  lost  religious  privileges.  Thegospel  preacher 
has  to  preach  deliverance  to  the  captives  and  set  men  to  rebuild  the  temple  of  the 
soul  that  has  fallen  into  ruins  by  reason  of  sin.  II.  The  proclamation  of  both  is 
Divine.  The  God  of  heaven  gave  Cyrus  this  commission — it  did  not  spring  out 
of  his  own  policy  or  philanthropy ;  it  had  its  origin  in  God.  "  The  Lord  stirred 
up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus."  The  true  gospel  minister  is  a  messenger  of  heaven.  He 
has  not  to  proclaim  his  own  theories,  but  the  Word  of  God.  No  man  is  a  true 
gospel  preacher  whose  spirit  has  not  been  "  stirred  up  "  by  the  Lord,  and  who 
does  not  feel  that  necessity  has  been  laid  upon  him.  How  does  God  stir  up  a  man 
to  preach  now  ?  1.  By  a  powerful  revelation  to  his  soul  of  the  miserable  moral 
condition  of  humanity.     He  is  made  to  see  all  men   in  bondage   and  in  ruin. 

2.  By  firing  him  with  the  spirit  of  Christly  philanthropy.  The  love  of  Christ  is 
made  to  constrain  him,  &c.  HI.  The  proclamation  of  both  is  universal.  The 
proclamation  of  Cyrus  was  to  every  Jew.  Not  one  excluded.  It  is  so  with  the 
gospel  minister:  his  message  is  to  all.  "Go  ye  into  all  the  world."  He  calls  upon 
every  man  to  repent,  to  believe ;  he  invites  every  man  to  liberty  and  peace. 
IV.  The  proclamation  of  both  is  practicable.  Cyrus  laid  down  no  terms  difficult 
to  fulfil.  1.  The  power  to  return  every  Jew  possessed.  All  necessary  helps  were 
promised.  2.  Cyrus  furnished  them  liberally  with  the  means  to  rebuild  their  own 
temple  (vers.  7-11),  so  every  man  is  enabled  to  obey  the  gospel.  V.  The  proclama- 
tion of  both  is  extensively  disobeyed.  (Homilist.)  To  build  Him  an  house  at 
Jerusalem. — God  is  calling  men  to  build : — God  is  calling  men  to  build — not 
necessarily  in  wood  and  stone  and  iron,  but  to  build  character,  life,  utility.  And 
this  can  be  done  everywhere.  Not  to  public  building  are  all  men  called.  What 
Bweet  homes  some  men  have  built  I  Tlae  moment  you  pass  within  the  door  you 
feel  the  genius  of  home  welcoming  and  blessing  you ;  the  traveller  says,  "  I  must 
tarry  here  "  ;  the  hungry  man  says,  "  There  is  bread  within  these  walls ;  I  know  it 
though  I  do  not  see  it."  What  businesses  some  men  are  building,  marked  by  high 
policy,  reputable  for  known  morality,  uprightness,  straightforwardness — compli- 
cated businesses,  yet  every  line  palpitating  with  conscience.  This  kind  of  building 
is  not  always  recognised  as  it  ought  to  be ;  but  it  ought  to  be  pointed  out  as  a 
possibility  to  every  man.  We  cannot  all  build  upon  the  mountain-top  or  in  the 
great  thoroughfares  of  the  city,  but  we  can  build  privately,  quietly,  secretly :  we 
can  build  up  broken  hearts,  we  can  be  confirming  feeble  knees,  we  can  be  towers  of 
strength  to  men  who  are  enfeebled  and  impoverished.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  God's 
house  built  for  the  sake  of  man: — What  need  had  God  for  a  house?  He  made 
the  stars ;  He  wears  the  constellations  as  a  garment ;  the  heaven  and  the  heaven 
of  heavens  cannot  contain  him :  what  does  He  want  with  a  house  ?  Nothing ; 
but  He  knows  that  we  do  ;  He  knows  that  the  building  of  the  house  is  necessary 
for  our  education.  What  need  has  He  of  our  prayer  ?  None.  Can  we  tell  Him 
anything  ?  No.  Does  He  not  know  what  things  we  have  need  of  before  we  ask 
Him  ?  Yes.  Why,  then,  should  He  call  upon  us  to  tell  Him  what  He  knows,  to 
ask  Him  for  what  He  well  understands  we  need?  Why  should  there  be  any 
throne  of  grace  or  altar  of  prayer  ?  For  our  sakes.  This  is  a  means  of  education. 
We  learn  things  by  doing  them.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  3.  Let  him  go  up  to  Jerusalem. — The  release  of  the  Jews  from  Babylon  an 
illustration  of  the  redemption  of  man  from  sin  : — We  discover  an  analogy  in  these 
two  things  as  regards — I.  The  subjects.  The  Jews  were  exiles  and  captives  in 
Babylon.  "  Whosoever  committeth  sin  is  the  slave  of  sin  "  (John  viii.  34).  In  his 
sinful  state  man  is  an  exile  from  his  true  condition  and  place,  and  the  bondsman  of 
evil  powers.  II.  The  agents.  Cyrus  and  Jesus  Christ.  The  analogy  between 
them  is  at  least  twofold.  1.  Both  were  called  of  God  to  this  work.  Ages  before  his 
birth  Cyrus  was  prenominated  for  this  work  (Isa.  xliv.  24,  xlv.  6).  And  Jesus  Christ 
is  pi-e-eminently  the  Servant,  the  Anointed,  the  Sent  of  God  (Isa.  xlii.  1,  Ixi.  1-3 ; 
Luke  iv.  18,  19  ;  John  iii.  16,  17 ;  Gal.  iv.  4,  5  ;  1  John  iv.  9).  2.  Both  effected 
this  work  by  battling  with  and  overcoming  the  oppressors.  Cyrus  had  to  conquer 
the  Babylonian  Empire  before  he  could  release  the  captive  Jews.      And  our  Lord 


CHAP.  I.]  EZRA.  15 

and  Saviour,  as  the  Son  of  Man,  encountered  sin  and  mastered  it.  III.  The  source. 
In  both  cases  the  blessing  flowed  from  the  free  and  unmerited  grace  of  God.  The 
Jews  had  no  claim  upon  Him  against  whom  they  had  so  persistently  rebelled. 
"  God  commendeth  His  love  toward  us,  in  that  while  we  were  yet  sinners  Christ 
died  for  us."  IV.  The  extent.  1.  It  is  offered  to  all.  2.  It  is  accepted  only  by 
some.  Great  numbers  preferred  to  remain  in  Babylon.  (1)  Many  did  not  feel  any 
deprivation  or  degradation  in  their  exile  and  subjection.  (2)  Many  had  attach- 
ments and  interests  in  Babylon  which  they  could  not  or  would  not  leave.  V.  "Go 
UP  TO  BUELD  the  HOUSE  OF  THE  LoKD  WHICH  IS  IN  JERUSALEM."  A  Striking  illustration 
of  the  grand  end   of  redemption.      (IF.  Jones.)         Our  choice  of  the  true  life : — 

1.  Cyrus  presented  these  exiled  Jews  with  the  chance  of  a  free  choice.  Cyrus 
did  not  compel.  These  Jews  might,  or  they  might  not,  go  to  Jerusalem.  It  was  for 
each  one  of  them  to  choose.  So  Christ,  in  His  call  to  the  true  life  and  heaven,  puts 
before  men  the  chance  of  an  utterly  free  choice.  "  Ye  will  not  come  unto  Me  that 
ye  might  have  life."  II.  This  choice  which  Cyrus  presented  to  these  exiled  Jews 
was  a  choice  of  exclusions.  If  they  chose  to  go  to  Palestine  they  must  yield  what 
things  would  keep  them  in  Babylon.  They  might  carry  with  them  many  things 
(vers.  7-11).  But  their  houses  and  lands,  every  detaining  thing,  must  be  sur- 
rendered. So  this  choice  which  Christ  presents  to  men  is  necessarily  a  choice  of 
exclusions.  Christianity  is  not  narrowness.  Bead  the  charter  of  a  Christian 
liberty  in  1  Cor.  iii.  21-23.  But  Christ  comes  to  save  a  man  from  sin.  What 
Babylonish  and  preventing  sins  you  cleave  to  must  be  yielded.  III.  It  was  a  choice 
toward  nobleness  which  Cyrus  gave  these  exiled  Jews.  Surely  it  was  better,  nobler 
to  go  to  Jerusalem  and  rebuild  God's  temple  than  to  dwell  in  exiled  ease  in 
Babylon.  IV.  This  choice  which  Cyrus  opened  for  these  exiled  Jews  was  a  choice 
necessitating  faith.  Between  Babylon  and  Palestine  stretched  vast  wide  sandy 
plains.  But  for  the  heartening  of  the  Jews  choosing  the  nobler  destiny  there  was 
the  Divine  promise.  So  for  the  Christian,  the  man  who  accepts  Christ's  call  to  the 
nobler  life,  there  are  Divine  promises,  V,  This  necessity  of  choice.  For  every  one 
of  us,  in  high  spiritual  way,  this  choice  confronts  Babylon  or  Jerusalem.  (Homiletic 
Review.)  His  God  be  with  him. — God  with  us: — Notice — I.  The  devout  wish 
expressed:  "  His  God  be  with  him."  It  is  equivalent  to  our  "  goodbye,"  which  is 
an  abbreviation  of  "  God  be  with  you."  The  wish  comprises  two  things.  1.  Personal 
relation  to  God :  •'  His  God."  This  expression  may  be  viewed  in  two  aspects. 
(1)  "  His  God,"  as  opposed  to  the  gods  of  the  heathen.  (2)  "  His  God,"  as  engaged 
to  him  in  covenant  relation.  Thusour  Lord  speaks,  "  My  Father,  and  your  Fathei  "; 
"  My  God,  and  your  God  "  (John  xx.  17).  Martin  Luther  said  that  the  sweetness  of 
the  gospel  consisted  chiefly  in  its  pronouns,  such  as  me,  my,  thy,  &c.  "  My  Lord 
and  my  God  "  (John  xx.  28).  "  Who  loved  me  and  gave  Himself  for  me  "  (Gal.  ii. 
20).  "  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord  "  (Phil.  iii.  8).  2.  Realisation  of  the  presence  of 
God :  "  His  God  be  with  him."  His  presence  is  a  guarantee  of  all  the  help  and 
blessing  which  we  need.  But  in  uttering  this  wish  in  respect  to  the  Jews,  Cyrus 
probably  had  an  eye  to  two  things  which  the  presence  of  God  would  secure  to  them  : 
(1)  Guidance  and  guardianship  on  their  long  journey.  (2)  Success  in  their  great 
undertaking.  II.  The  kind  expression  of  this  wish.  The  expression  of  this  wish 
indicates  on  the  part  of  Cyrus — 1.  Reverence  towards  God.  He  does  not  utter  these 
words  thoughtlessly,  but  seriously.  2.  Kindness  towards  the  captives.  He  wished 
them  well,  and  proved  the  sincerity  of  his  wishes  by  practically  helping  them  in 
their  best  interests.     Conclusion  :  1.  Do  we  sustain  this  personal  relation  to  God  ? 

2.  Do  we  realise  the  blessed  presence  of  God  ?  3.  Do  we  desire  that  others  also  may 
rea'.ise  His  gracious  presence  ?  (William  Jones.)  Our  God  : — As  He  is  not  a  God 
without  infinite  wisdom,  and  infinite  power,  and  infinite  goodness,  and  infinite 
blessedness,  &c.,  so  He  passes  over  in  this  covenant  all  that  which  presents  Him  as  the 
most  adorable  Being  to  His  creatures.  He  will  be  to  them  as  great,  as  wise,  as 
powerful,  as  good  as  He  is  in  Himself  ;  and  the  assuring  us  in  this  covenant  to  be 
our  God  imports  also  that  He  will  do  as  much  for  us,  as  we  would  do  for  ourselves 
were  we  furnished  with  the  same  goodness,  power,  and  wisdom.  In  being  our  God 
He  testifies  that  it  is  all  one,  as  if  we  had  the  same  perfections  in  our  own  power  to 
employ  for  our  use  ;  for  He  being  possessed  with  them,  it  is  as  much  as  if  we  our- 
selves were  possessed  with  them  for  our  own  advantage,  according  to  the  rules  of 
wisdom  and  the  several  conditions  we  pass  through  for  His  glory.  (Stephen 
Charnocke,  B.D.) 

Yet.  4.  Let  the  men  of  the  place  help  him  with  silver. — Spontaneous  offering:-' 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

"  Not  many  years  since,"  writes  a  clergyman,  "  I  had  occasion  to  solicit  funds  to  aiJ 
in  the  prosecution  of  a  work  of  benevolence.  I  stepped  into  the  office  of  a  Christian 
friend,  with  whom  I  had  a  partial  acquaintance,  and  incidentally  mentioned  the 
unpleasant  business  before  me,  and  inquired  of  him  for  the  residence  of  a  certain 
benevolent  individual,  and  added  that  I  hoped  to  get  one  dollar  of  him.  After 
receiving  directions,  I  turned  to  go  out.  '  But  stop,'  said  this  brother,  '  suppose  you 
let  me  have  the  privilege  of  contributing  a  little  of  the  money  which  the  Lord  hat 
lent  me  to  this  cause.  Put  down  £20  for  me.'  I  expressed  my  surprise  that  he 
should  contribute  so  liberally,  and  remarked  that  I  should  feel  myself  in  duty 
bound  not  to  call  on  him  very  soon  on  a  similar  errand.  ♦  Well,  then,'  said  he,  '  my 
brother,  I  think  you  will  very  much  mistake  your  duty.  If  you  knew  how  much 
pleasure  it  gave  me  to  contribute  of  my  substance  to  the  Lord,  you  would  feel  no 
reluctance  in  calling  again.  And  now  let  me  charge  you,  when  engaged  in  similar 
business,  never  to  pass  me  by.  Call,  and  I  think  I  shall  be  able  to  do  something ;  and 
if  not,  my  prayers  shall  go  with  you.' "  (Signal.)  A  stimulus  to  generous  offering: — 
Two  weeks  ago  I  told  you  that  three  thousand  dollars  had  got  to  be  raised  to  pay  for 
the  repairs  of  this  house.  The  plates  were  sent  round,  and  about  six  hundred  dollars 
were  raised.  I  was  heartily  ashamed,  and  have  not  got  over  it  yet.  Last  week  the 
trustees  came,  and  asked  me  if  I  would  name  the  matter  again,  and  I  said,  "  No,  I 
will  not."  But  this  week,  upon  their  renewed  application,  I  have  consented  to 
speak  once  more.  If  this  don't  do,  you  may  pay  your  debt  how  you  can,  for  I  will 
never  mention  it  again.  I'm  not  going  to  be  a  pump  to  be  thrust  into  men's 
pockets  to  force  up  what  ought  to  come  up  freely.  When  the  surgeon  comes  to  a  place 
where  he  must  cut,  he  had  better  cut.  For  more  than  a  year  I've  seen  that  our 
plate  collections  grew  meaner  and  meaner.  I  didn't  want  to  face  you  with  such, 
things  as  I've  got  to  say  to-day,  and  I  put  it  off  as  long  as  I  could.  Now  I  shall  speak 
plainly  once  for  all,  not  having  the  face  to  bring  the  matter  up  again.  This  debt 
has  got  to  be  paid,  and  will  you  meet  it  honourably,  and  pay  it  like  men,  or  will  yo\i 
let  it  drip,  drip,  drip  out  of  you  reluctantly,  a  few  dollars  at  a  time?  You  can  take 
your  choice.  I'm  not  going  to  try  to  drill  money  out  of  you  as  I  would  drill  stones. 
The  amount  of  meanness  among  respectable  people  is  appalling.  One  needs  to  take 
a  solar  microscope  in  order  to  see  some  men.     (H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Vers.  7-11.  Also  Cjtxib  the  Mng  brought  forth  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  the 
Lord. — The  restoration  of  the  sacred  vessels  : — I.  The  preservation  of  the  sacred 
VESSELS  (vers.  7,  8).  These  are  the  vessels  which  are  mentioned  in  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  7 
and  Dan.  i.  2.  In  the  providence  of  God  most  of  these  vessels  were  remarkably 
preserved,  to  be  in  due  time  restored  to  their  original  place  and  uses.  Learn  :  Since 
God  is  so  careful  of  the  mere  vessels  consecrated  to  His  service,  may  we  not  rest 
assured  that  He  will  much  more  preserve  His  consecrated  people  ?  II.  The  numera- 
tion OF  THE  sacred  VESSELS.  This  numbering  indicates — 1.  The  reverent  care 
of  Cyrus  for  these  sacred  vessels.  2.  The  grave  responsibility  of  Sheshbazzar  for 
these  sacred  vessels.  Learn  :  That  persons,  places,  and  things  which  are  devoted  to 
religious  uses  should  be  reverently  regarded  by  us.  III.  The  restoration  of  thb 
SACRED  vessels  (vcr.  11).  1.  This  was  a  fulfilment  of  prophecy  (Jer.  xxvii.  22). 
2.  This  is  an  illustration  of  the  restoration  of  perverted  things  to  their  true  uses. 
The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  great  restorer  of  the  violated  order  and  the  broken 
harmony  of  the  universe  of  God.  {William  Jones.)  The  restitution  of  the  stolen 
vessels  : — This  appears  to  be  more  than  an  act  of  generosity  or  justice.  A  certain 
religious  import  belongs  to  it.  It  put  an  end  to  an  ancient  insult  offered  by  Babylon 
to  the  God  of  Israel,  and  it  might  be  taken  as  an  act  of  homage  offered  to  Jehovah  by 
Cyrus.  Yet  it  was  only  a  restitution,  a  return  of  what  was  God's  before,  and  so  a 
type  of  every  gift  man  makes  to  God.  (Walter  F.  Adeney,  MA.)  Mithrcdath  : — 
It  is  not  without  significance  that  the  treasurer  who  handed  over  their  temple- 
prosperity  to  the  Jews  was  named  "Mithredath" — a  word  that  means  "given  by 
Mithra,"  or  "devoted  to  Mithra."  This  suggests  that  the  Persian  sun-god  was 
honoured  among  the  servants  of  Cyrus,  and  yet  that  one  who  by  name  at  least  was 
especially  associated  with  this  divinity  was  constrained  to  honour  the  God  of  Israel. 
Next  to  Judaism  and  Christianity,  the  worship  of  Mithra  showed  the  greatest  vitality 
of  all  religions  in  Western  Asia,  and  later  even  in  Europe.  So  vigorous  was  it  as 
recently  as  the  commencement  of  the  Christian  era,  that  M.  Kenan  has  remarked 
that  if  the  Koman  world  had  not  become  Christian  it  would  have  become  Mithrastic. 
In  the  homage  paid  by  Mithredath  to  the  God  of  Israel  may  we  not  see  an  image  of 
the  recognition  of  the  claims  of  the  Supreme  by  our  priests  of  the  sun — Kepler, 


CHAP.  11.]  EZRA.  17 

Newton,  Faraday?  {Ibid.)  A  restoration  of  misappropriated  property  : — There 
was  a  great  restoration  of  misappropriated  property.  What  a  restoration  there  will 
one  day  be.  What  have  men  taken  away  from  God's  Church  ?  Nearly  everything 
they  could  lay  hands  on.  They  have  taken  away  gold,  art,  music,  miracles, 
inspiration,  rationalism,  morality,  science,  and  they  have  left  God  a  very  bare 
house.  When  the  period  of  spiritual  revival  has  come,  and  the  holy  issue  is  wrought 
out  in  all  its  meaning,  all  these  things  will  be  brought  back  again.  Art  will  come 
with  her  brush  and  pencil,  and  say,  "  I  will  beautify  the  house  of  God's  revelation." 
Music  will  bring  back  her  harp  and  her  instrument  of  ten  strings,  and  her  cymbals 
and  organs,  and  say,  "  Make  me  a  handmaid  in  God's  house,  for  all  I  have  and  am 
must  belong  to  Him  " ;  and  Keason — exiled,  expatriated  Keason  shall  return,  saying 
"  They  have  kept  me  in  vile  servitude  ;  admit  me  to  my  Father's  house."  And  Science 
will  come  and  pray ;  and  Morality  will  say,  "  They  have  been  trying  to  divorce  me 
from  theology,  from  right  religious  motive  and  impulse,  and  I  have  died  like  a 
flower  that  has  been  plucked ;  restore  me  to  my  vital  relations,  and  I  will  once  more 
bloom  in  the  house  of  God."    {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  n. 


Vers.  1,  2.  Now  these  are  the  chUdren  of  the  province  that  'w^ent  np  out  of  the 
captivity. — Going  up  out  of  captivity : — I.  The  deliveeance  from  captivitt. 
1.  This  captivity  had  been — (1)  A  degradation ;  (2)  a  subjection ;  (3)  a  transfor- 
mation ;  (4)  a  retribution.  The  most  deplorable  degradation  and  the  most  real 
and  terrible  subjection  are  those  of  sin.  2.  This  deliverance — (1)  Originated  in  the 
favour  of  God ;  (2)  was  effected  by  an  unlikely  agent ;  (3)  was  permissive  and 
not  compulsory.  Salvation  from  the  bondage  of  sin  is  freely  offered  in  the  gospel, 
but  no  one  is  compelled  to  accept  the  offer.  II.  The  journey  home.  This  journey 
was — 1.  A  restoration.  2.  A  restoration  to  their  own  home.  3.  A  restoration  to 
religions  privileges.  The  salvation  of  Jesus  Christ  restores  man  to  his  true  con- 
dition and  to  his  forfeited  inheritance.  III.  The  subordination  to  leaders. 
Society  could  not  exist  without  leaders  and  rulers.  They  are  necessary — 1.  For 
the  maintenance  of  order.  2.  For  insuring  progress.  3.  Because  of  the  differences 
in  the  characters  and  abilities  of  men.  ( William  Jones.)  Emancipation  : — The 
Bev.  J.  Jackson  Fuller,  of  the  Cameroons,  a  coloured  missionary,  said  at  the 
Young  People's  Meeting  of  the  Baptist  Centenary:  "  Although  our  fathers  in  my 
country  were  born  under  the  British  flag,  yet  we  were  nothing  more  and  nothing 
else  than  the  chattels  of  the  Englishman.  We  were  British  slaves,  and  it  was 
partly  by  the  missionaries  going  to  our  country — the  island  of  Jamaica — and 
telling  us  of  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ  that  their  vivid  description  of  our  oppressed 
condition  aroused  the  English  nation,  and  in  the  year  1834,  after  paying  twenty 
millions  of  money,  you  set  us  all  free.  The  very  day  you  passed  the  Emancipation 
Act  in  England,  I  was  made  free.  You  young  people  would  have  been  glad,  or 
your  fathers  before  you  would  have  been  glad,  had  they  the  opportunity  of  seeing 
that  morning  in  the  year  1834  when  thousands  of  children  and  their  fathers  and 
mothers  gathered  together  during  the  evening,  waiting  for  that  morning  of  the  31st 
of  July  to  dawn.  At  eleven  o'clock  at  night  they  gathered  in  mass  and  waited  for 
the  hour  to  pass  when  the  clock  should  strike  twelve.  And  then  you  would  have 
been  glad  to  see  that  mighty  mass  of  human  beings  rise  on  their  feet  and  sing  the 
Doxology — '  Praise  God,  from  whom  all  blessings  flow.'  I  was  among  that  number 
that  gathered  that  night.  I  heard  the  Doxology  sung.  I  am  one  of  the  boys  that 
were  rescued  when  you  paid  twenty  millions  of  money  and  set  our  fathers  free." 

Vers.  2-64.  The  number  of  the  men  of  the  people  of  Israel — A  suggestive 
record  : — Consider — I.  The  significance  of  the  fact  of  the  record.  1.  It  was 
an  honour  to  the  pious  and  patriotic  ones  who  returned.  2.  It  is  an  illustration  of 
the  Divine  record  of  God's  spiritual  Israel  (Luke  x.  20).  8.  It  suggests  that  every 
one  of  His  people  is  precious  in  the  sight  of  God  (Isa.  xlix.  16).  II.  The  signifi- 
cance OF  THE  CONTENTS  OF  THE  RECORD.  We  have  in  this  list — 1.  Significant 
persons.  (1)  Zerubbabel,  an  ancestor  of  the  Messiah  (Matt.  i.  12).  (2)  Jeshua, 
who  was  a  distinguished  type  of  Jesus  Christ  (Zech.  iii.,  vi.  11-13).    2.  A  signi 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.h. 

ficant  place:  Bethlehem  (ver.  21).  3,  Significant  numbers.  {William.  Jones) 
Religiout  service : — It  is  here  suggested — I.  That  thekk  abe  vabious  spheres  or 

BKRVICB  IN  THE  ChUBCH  OF  GOD  (Eph.  It.  11,  12).  11.  ThAT  THE  HtJMBLEST  SPHERB 
OF  SERVICE  IN  THE  ChURCH  OF  GoD  IS  A  PLACE  OF  PBITILEOE  AND  HONOUR.  III.  Th« 
PRIVILXOE  OF  SEBTICE  IK  THE  ChITRCH  OF  GOD  IS  NOT  UMTTED  TO  ANT  PARTICULAB 
BACES   OB   CLASSES   OF   UEN.       {Ibid.) 

Ver.  62,  Thege  souglit  fheir  register. — The  importance  of  a  clear  tjnritual 
pedigree  : — I.  The  doubtful  pedigree  amomqst  the  people  is  an  illustration  of 
UNCERTAINTY  AS  TO  OUR  SPIRITUAL  STATE.  1.  This  Uncertainty  may  consist  with 
association  with  the  people  of  God  (vers.  59,  60).  2.  This  uncertainty  must 
involve  spiritual  loss.  (1)  Of  spiritual  joy,  (2)  Of  spiritual  usefulness.  Lacking 
Christian  assurance  our  testimony  for  Christ  would  be  likely  to  be  deficient  in 
clearness  and  attractiveness,  in  fervour  and  f«rce ;  it  would  especially  fail  to  set 
forth  the  joyful  character  of  true  religion.    II.  The  doubtfitl  pedigree  amongst 

the    priests  is   an    ILLUSTRATION    OF   UNCERTAINTY    AS    TO    OUR    MINISTERIAL    CALLINO 

AND  CONDITION.  1,  A  ministerial  pedigree  may  be  lost  by  reason  of  worldliness, 
2.  The  loss  of  ministerial  pedigree  involves  a  corresponding  loss  of  ministerial 
power  and  reward.  3,  The  final  decision  as  to  the  standing  of  a  minister  of  un- 
certain pedigree  must  be  given  by  God  Himself  (ver.  63).  {Ibid.)  Melancholy 
record*  : — Here  is  the  picture  of  men  seeking  a  register,  and  finding  nothing  in  it ; 
looking  up  old  family  papers,  and  their  names  are  not  found  in  the  tender  record. 
A  man  not  known  at  home !  He  may  have  been  born  there,  and  have  lived  a  good 
many  years  of  his  early  life  there;  but  to-day  he  has  no  record  on  the  hearthstone, 
no  place  at  the  table,  no  portion  in  the  family  memory :  it  would  be  a  breach  of 
courtesy  to  name  his  name.  Something  must  have  happened.  There  is  an 
ineffable  sadness  about  this :  all  nature  seems  to  be  violated ;  instincts  have 
been  rooted  out ;  natural  affection  seems  to  have  been  burned  down  and  utterly 
destroyed.  Consider  the  tremendous  possibility  of  outliving  one's  natural  rights,  or 
forfeiting  birthright,  inheritance,  paternal  blessing,  all  the  wealth  of  home's  true 
love.  Talk  of  falling  from  grace  I  What  is  this  but  an  apostasy  from  the  best 
grace — a  fall  from  childhood's  trust,  the  wilful  obliteration  of  the  name  from  the 
scroll  whose  meaning  is  nothing  but  love  ?  Here  is  a  child  who  is  not  named  in 
the  will.  Consider  what  you  have  done.  How  infinite  in  detestation  must  have 
been  the  character  which  resulted  in  this  issue !  Take  more  general  ground,  and 
the  principle  still  applies.  Here  is  a  man  who  is  unknown  in  the  community  ;  his 
name  may  be  written  upon  certain  official  papers,  but  it  is  not  inscribed  on  the 
scroll  of  the  heart,  on  the  memory  of  gratitude ;  it  is  not  to  be  found  anywhere  put 
up  as  a  thing  most  prized  and  loved.  He  is  but  a  figure  in  the  community,  but  a 
tax-payer,  but  an  occupier  of  a  house ;  he  is  not  a  living  presence  in  any  sense  of 
beneficence.  When  he  is  buried  no  one  will  miss  him  in  the  heart.  His  name  ia 
not  written  upon  the  register  of  trust,  affection,  or  benevolent  interest.  Seeing  that 
all  these  things  are  possible,  there  must  be  a  reason  for  them :  what  is  it  ?  It  is 
always  a  moral  reason,  where  it  touches  any  conception  of  general  justice.  At  the 
last  shall  we  go  to  the  book  of  life  and  not  find  our  names  there  ?  The  answer  ia 
in  our  own  lives.  Sad  to  turn  away  from  the  record,  saying,  "  My  name  is  not 
there  I  "  But,  blessed  be  God,  the  humblest,  least,  vilest  may,  through  the  blood  of 
the  everlasting  covenant,  the  whole  mystery  of  the  priesthood  of  Christ,  have  their 
names  written  in  heaven,     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  65-70.  And  some  of  the  chief  of  the  fathers,  when  they  came  to  the  hoasd 
of  the  Lord  which  is  at  Jerusalem,  ofifered  freely, — Possessions  and  offerings : — 
I.  The  COMPLETION  OF  THEIR  JOURNEY.  "  They  came  to  the  house  of  the  Lord  at 
Jerusalem."  II.  The  extent  of  their  possessions  (vers.  65-67).  HI.  The  pre- 
sentation OF  their  offerings.  1.  The  object  of  their  offerings.  2.  The  spirit  of 
their  offerings.  (1)  They  offered  promptly,  without  delay.  (2)  They  offered 
spontaneously,  without  constraint.  3.  The  measure  of  their  offerings.  (1)  Pro- 
portionately. (2)  Liberally.  IV.  The  settlement  in  their  cities.  This 
suggests — 1.  Home  after  exile.  2.  Best  after  a  long  and  tedious  journey. 
{William  Jones.)  Offering  freely  : — As  I  was  reading  my  Greek  Testament  the 
other  day,  I  was  delighted  with  a  discovery  concerning  the  well-known  text: 
"  God  loveth  a  cheerful  giver."  The  word  •'  cheerful  "  is  our  word  for  "  hilarious." 
And  I  began  to  imagine  what  would  happen  if  the  meaning  of  the  word  was  put 
into  action.     "  Will  you  give  five  pounds  to  missions  ?  "    "  Will  you  contribute  a 


CBkP.  n.]  EZRA.  19 

hundred  pounds  towards  our  evangelistic  work  this  winter?"  "Ha,  ha,  ha!  I 
am  only  too  glad  for  the  opportunity  to  give,  since  I  have  so  abundantly  received." 
And  the  hilarious  giver  writes  out  a  cheque  on  the  spot.  How  much  better  that 
sounds  than  the  doleful,  "  Oh,  dear !  I  am  tired  with  the  never-ending  calls  for 
money,  money,  money."  But  this  "  hilarious  "  giving  is  not  possible  except  the 
Spirit  is  dwelling  richly  within.  For  only  the  Spirit  shows  the  greatness  of  that 
salvation  which  we  received  through  Christ,  and  the  greatness  of  our  consequent 
obligation.  (A.  J.  Gordon.)  The  Church  the  rallying  point  of  nations: — The 
temple  and  its  worship  marked  the  last  days  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Jews  anterior 
to  their  captivity,  and  formed  the  point  around  which  the  returning  wanderers 
gathered  at  their  restoration  to  the  home  of  their  fathers.  So  around  the  Church, 
the  events  of  all  successive  empires  have  gathered  since  the  day  of  Pentecost. 
I.  EvEET  STATE  OP  IMPORTANCB,  alike  In  ancient,  mediaeval,  or  modem  history  has 

GATHERED    BOUND    THE    ChUBCH,    AND    HAS    BECEIVED    ITS    SHAPE    AND    DEFINITENES8 

FROM  HEB.  Egypt,  Assyria,  Persia,  Greece,  and  Home  each  became  important  in 
their  different  times  in  proportion  as  they  were  able  to  bless  or  to  chasten  the 
Church  of  God.  The  long  dynasties  that  ruled  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile;  the 
invasion  of  the  Hyksos ;  the  vast  undertakings  of  Bameses  or  Amasis ;  the  gigantio 
records  of  antiquity  which  rise  in  such  sepulchral  magnificence  in  Egypt  from 
amidst  her  waste  of  sand ;  the  high  philosophy  of  one  Ptolemy  and  the  literary 
research  of  another,  proclaim  one  after  the  other  in  successive  generations  the 
splendour  of  an  empire  whose  principal  end  of  existence  was  to  aid  in  the  throes  of 
the  early  Church ;  to  give  a  home  to  the  famine-stricken  patriarchs ;  to  be  a  scourge 
in  the  successive  invasions  of  Shishak,  Pharaoh  Hophra,  and  Pharaoh  Necho,  and 
to  be  the  probation  of  the  Jews  when  God  ordained  the  Chaldean  captivity.  All 
these  seem  to  have  been  the  main  objects  for  which  Egypt  existed  as  a  nation.  So 
in  each  snccessive  period  in  after-history  the  Church  became  more  and  more  the 
central  body  which  gave  shape  to  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  alike  in  medieeval  as 
in  modem  history.  The  vast  multitudes  from  the  north-east  of  Europe  which 
swept  like  a  bankless  flood  over  the  fertile  plains  of  Italy,  arrested  by  the  walls  of 
Constantinople  or  of  Borne,  or  diverted  by  the  intercession  of  Ambrose  or  Gregory, 
became  at  length  themselves  children  of  the  Church  whom  they  had  persecuted ; 
and  the  imaginative  genius  of  the  Goth  lent  mellowness,  sublimity,  and  tone  to  the 
architecture  and  service  of  the  Church.  Men  who  came  to  persecute  remained  to 
pray,  and  the  Gothic  invasion  formed  an  era  in  ecclesiastical  history.  The  kingdom 
of  France  beheld  a  repetition  of  the  acts  of  Constantine  in  the  conversion  of  Clovis; 
and  Clotilda  and  her  husband  resembled  in  the  story  of  their  conversion  Ethelbert, 
king  of  Kent,  and  Bertha  his  wife.  Charlemagne  followed  in  the  passage  of  years, 
in  family  as  well  as  name  mixed  np  with  those  who  were  giving  protection  to  while 
they  received  their  own  definiteness  from  the  Church  of  Christ.  And  the  gifts  of 
Pepin  became  a  record  to  a  long  after-day  of  the  power  which  the  Church  had  to 
give  shape  to  the  early  civilisation  of  Europe.  From  the  death  of  Charlemagne 
throughout  eight  following  centuries,  the  interests  of  Europe  became  synonymous 
with  those  of  France  or  Germany,  while  they  oscillated  in  alternating  supremacy, 
each  of  them  seeking  the  recognition  of  the  Church  for  their  claims.  The  Great 
Eeformation  which  broke  out  over  Northern  and  Western  Europe  bore  upon  the 
billows  of  its  tempestuous  sea  the  vessels  that  carried  the  destinies  of  Spain  and 
Austria,  France  and  England,  and  many  of  the  minor  states  of  Germany ;  while 
religious  questions  became  the  direct  causes  which  shook  the  dynasty  of  the 
Stuarts,  and  agitated  France  through  the  illustrious  periods  of  Catharine  de  Medici 
and  Henry  the  Great  and  the  imbecile  reign  of  Louis  XHI ;  while  the  names  that 
have  rendered  so  many  pages  of  French  history  interesting — the  Hugonot  and 
Coligni,  Cond6  and  Turenne — were  immediately  brought  out  by  questions  connected 
with  the  doctrine  and  discipline  of  the  Church  in  defence  of  which  each  one  of  them 
was  brought  before  the  notice  of  history.    11.  The  Chctbch  has  in  heb  that  pbincipls 

OF  VITALITY  WHICH  GIVES  HEB  THE  POWEB  TO  BEKINDLE  LIFE  WHEBB  IT  HAS  BEEN 
EXTINCT,    AND    TO    BECONBTBUCT    THE    8HATTEBED    PORTIONS   OF    FABRICS   WHICH   HAVB 

FALLEN  TO  DECAT.  The  children  of  Israel,  leaving  their  patriarchal  government  at 
Goshen  to  enter  upon  that  developed  state  of  their  history  which  was  to  issue  ia 
the  kingly  line  of  David,  preserved  their  nationality  and  drew  together  their  other- 
wise scattered  forces  around  the  tabernacle,  the  priesthood,  and  the  lawgiver ;  and 
the  Church  of  God  became  in  the  wilderness  of  Sinai  the  source  and  fountain  of 
national  life  and  existence  to  the  tribes  reseeking  their  home.  A  second  time  the 
chosen  people  were  called  upon  to  bewail  their  sins  in  a  long  captivity ;  a  second 


20  TKE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

time  their  national  distinctiveness  bid  fair  to  be  lost,  but  the  voices  of  Daniel  and 
Ezekiel  sounded  loudly  to  penitence  and  prayer  by  the  Chebar  and  in  Babylon. 
These  were  the  voices  of  the  Church  of  God — these  represented  that  eternal 
principle  around  which  national  and  individual  existence  might  coil  and  find 
compactness.  These  were  the  forces  from  within  which  kept  together  the  people 
of  the  captivity,  and  were  the  means  of  restoring  them  in  their  national  integrity 
to  their  homes.  Forlorn  and  orphaned  indeed  must  the  returning  tribes  have  felt ; 
like  men  who  in  the  chill  of  the  morning  wander  amid  the  fading  flowers  of  the 
banquet  of  yesterday.  At  that  moment  the  Church  again  became  the  centre  of 
their  national  revival  and  around  the  foundation  stones  of  the  temple  the 
scattered  people  again  became  a  nation.    {E.  Monro.) 


CHAPTER  m. 


Vers.  1-13.  And  when  the  seventh  month  was  come. — Rebuilding  the  temple  .• — 
I.  They  beoan  by  kk-establishino  the  worship  and  sebvice  of  the  holy  place. 
They  set  np  an  altar,  and  offered  the  daily  sacrifice.  A  wise  beginning.  Their 
task  was  hard,  and  they  did  well  to  begin  with  God.  They  made  the  right  use  of 
fear.  It  stirred  them  up  to  religious  duty.  11.  Befobe  setting  themselves  to 
THEiB  tasks  they  KEPT  THE  FEAST  OF  TABEBNACLE8.  The  fuU  repression  of  our 
religious  joy,  even  though  it  be  prolonged,  will  not  delay  the  performance  of  life's 
severer  tasks.     It  is  a  suitable  preparation  for  them.      III.    They   used   theib 

TBEASUBES  IN  SECUBINO  THE  BEST  MATERIALS  AND  THE  MOST  SKILLED  LABOUR.       IV.  ThE 

FOUNDATIONS  WERE  LAID  AMIDST  ACCLAMATIONS  OP  JOY.  Many  of  the  psalms  which 
fill  the  Psalter  with  joyous  strains  were  doubtless  sung  or  composed  on  this 
occasion.  V.  It  was,  however,  a  joy  mingled  with  sorrow.  (Willard  G.  Sperry.} 
Rebuilding  the  temple : — I.  The  first  thing  they  did  was  to  rebuild  the  altar. 
This  was  a  right  beginning.  The  altar  of  sacrifice  was  the  centre  of  the  Jewish 
reUgion  ;  just  as  its  antitype,  the  Cross,  is  the  centre  of  Christianity.  The  Cross 
is  our  altar  ;  it  stands  at  the  centre  of  our  religion.  1.  The  altar  of  burnt-offering 
in  this  instance  was  intended  as  a  safeguard.  There  is  no  security  like  that  which 
a  timid  soul  finds  under  the  shadow  of  the  altar  (Psa.  Ixxxiv.  3).  A  man  is  never 
BO  safe  from  adverse  influences  as  when  upon  his  knees.  2.  This  altar  was  "  set 
upon  its  bases  " — that  is,  it  was  restored  upon  its  former  foundations.  There  is 
virtue  in  observing  old  landmarks.  Some  things  never  grow  obsolete.  Air  and 
water  and  sunlight  are  just  what  they  always  were,  nor  is  human  ingenuity  likely 
to  improve  them  in  any  way.  There  are  some  truths  which  bear  to  our  spiritual 
constitution  the  same  relation  that  light  does  to  the  eyes  and  water  to  the  lungs. 
Nothing  can  amend  or  improve  them.  There  may  be  new  formulations,  new  modes 
of  presentation  ;  but  the  altar  of  the  Christian  religion  will  stand  on  its  old  bases 
as  long  as  time  endures.  3.  The  ceremonies  of  this  restored  altar  were  conducted 
after  the  prescribed  form.  11.  They  next  prepared  for  the  rebuilding  of  their 
TEMPLE.  1.  The  altar  meanwhile  was  kept  in  constant  use.  Its  fires  never  went 
out.  There  was  no  lack  of  offerings  upon  it.  The  people  had  learned  by  sad 
experience  their  dependence  upon  God.  2.  There  was  little  difiBculty  in  collecting 
the  necessary  funds.  3.  The  workmen  were  secured  by  generous  outlay  and  paid 
promptly  when  the  wages  fell  due.  4.  The  materials  for  the  temple  were  collected 
from  every  quarter.  Tyre  and  Sidon  and  the  forests  of  Lebanon  were  put  under 
contribution.  Thus  God  ever  utilises  the  nations.  The  Caesars  built  highways  for  the 
propagation  of  the  gospel.  Soulless  corporations  in  our  time  are  binding  the  far 
corners  of  the  earth  together  with  iron  bands  and  cables,  not  knowing  nor  caring 
that  God's  kingdom  is  thus  being  ushered  in.  (D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  Rebuilding 
the  temple  ;— I.  Religion  is,  or  should  be,  a  uniting  force.   II.  We  need  not,  and 

SHOULD  NOT,  WAIT  BEFORE  WE  WORSHIP  GOD.  III.  ThEBE  SHOULD  BE  SOME  REGULARITY 
IN  OUR  DEVOTION.  IV.  OUB  OFFERING  MUST  COME  FROM  THE  HEART  AS  WELL  AS  FROM 
THE  HAND.       V.    ThE   CAUSE  OF  ChRIST  MUST    HAVE  THE  BEST    SERVICE    WE  CAN  SECURE. 

VI.  Some  take  a  higher,  some  a  humbler  post  in  the  service  of  God.     VII.  We 

DO  WELL  to  rejoice  WHEN  WE  LAY  THE  FOUNDATION  OP  A  USEFUL  WORK.  VIII.  JoY  IS  SAFE 
AND  WISE  WHEN  IT  PASSES  INTO  PRAISE.       IX.    SORROW  AND  JOY  BLEND  STRANGELY  IN  THK 

EVENTS  OF  LIFE.     {}V.  Clarkson,  B.A.)        The  benefits  of  the  captivity  : — Notice — 


CHAP,  m.]  EZRA.  21 

I.  The  people  abe  agaik  heabtily  united  in  action.  They  "gathered  themselves 
together  as  one  man  to  Jerusalem."  These  cheering  words  soand  like  a  remini- 
scence of  the  best  days  of  David,  Hezekiah,  and  Josiah.  A  revival  of  union  waa 
sorely  needed.  The  last  three  reigns  before  the  captivity  had  been  marked  by 
unnatural  discords.  The  providential  cure  of  this  evil  was  captivity.  Two  genera- 
tions at  least  must  pass  away,  and  their  feuds  be  buried  with  them  ;  the  worth  of 
a  temple  and  the  blessing  of  a  pure  worship  must  be  learned  by  their  loss.  This 
method  of  cementing  nations  was  not  new,  and  it  has  been  exemplified  since  in 
almost  countless  instances.  Every  forward  movement  in  society  seems  to  be 
preceded  by  seasons  of  trial,  whose  hot  fires  are  needed  to  fuse  the  heart  and  wUl 
of  the  people  into  one.  II.  They  made  a  eight  beginninq  of  their  woek.  They 
began  with  an  altar.  Can  this  be  the  same  people  whose  closing  record  seventy 
years  before  had  been  that  " they  polluted  the  house  of  the  Lord"?  Reverence 
as  well  as  union  had  been  developed  by  captivity.  They  might  have  begun  by 
clearing  away  the  ruins,  but  that  would  have  been  a  second  step  before  the  first ; 
not  even  the  rubbish  of  an  unhallowed  past  may  be  touched  without  the  blessing 
of  God ;  they  might  have  held  a  council  to  determine  what  they  would  do,  but  this 
would  have  been  taking  their  own  advice  first  and  afterwards  seeking  the  endorse- 
ment of  Jehovah  ;  they  might  have  raised  the  walls  around  the  spot  before  building 
the  altar  upon  it,  but  that  would  have  been  asking  God  to  own  what  He  had  been 
allowed  no  share  in  directing.  On  the  contrary,  with  a  reverence  chastened  by 
long  exile  they  began  with  the  altar  itself.  Where  else  would  they  have  begun  and 
not  blundered  ?  This  order  of  building  has  always  prospered.  Ambitions,  plans, 
hopes  even,  waited  upon  praise  and  supplication,  and  more  than  half  the  first  year 
was  devoted  to  continuous  sacrifice  and  petition.  What  years  of  bitter  deprival  had 
taught  them  this  dependence  !  But  bitter  sweetness  let  it  be  called,  blessed  bondage, 
to  produce  this  wholesome  fruit  of  reverence.  III.  In  the  fobm  of  theib  worship  they 
ketubned  scbupuloxjsly  to  the  patteen  on  the  Mount.  They  not  only  offered 
burnt-offerings,  but  they  offered  them  "  as  it  is  written."  They  kept  feasts  by 
name  not  only,  but  in  the  way  prescribed  by  the  law  of  Moses.  Their  new  moons 
and  free-will  offerings  were  those  only  that  the  Lord  had  consecrated  in  days  past. 
This  exact  respect  for  the  letter  of  the  law  shows  how  truly  they  appreciated  the 
real  cause  of  the  national  calamities.  Every  disaster  since  the  days  of  Josiah  had 
come  from  departing  from  the  way  of  the  Lord.  A  careless  liberalism  in  worship 
had  begotten  a  wicked  license  in  the  court  and  home  life.  It  is  one  sign,  therefore, 
that  Judah's  captivity  was  not  in  vain,  that  the  first  inquiry  of  the  people  after 
setting  up  the  new  altar  was  this,  "  How  is  it  written  to  worship  ?  "  and  a  better 
sign,  that  they  conformed  to  the  Divine  pattern  as  scrupulously  as  if  it  had  come 
but  yesterday  from  the  flaming  Mount.  Many  are  the  evils  suspected  of  a  too 
rigid  adherence  to  the  Divine  command.  But  where  has  a  nation  or  an  individual 
been  ruined  by  a  too  scrupulous  obedience  ?  Not  too  much  conscience,  but  too  little ; 
not  strictness,  but  license  is  the  national  danger.  Hence  great  reforms  sweeping  over 
the  land  always  drive  the  people  back  to  the  simpler  hving,  the  holier  thinking,  and 
the  minuter  obedience  of  the  fathers.  The  despised  writing  of  the  past  is  reopened, 
the  neglected  pattern  of  the  Mount  is  clothed  with  a  new  authority,  and  so  men 
returning  unto  God  find  God  returned  to  them.  IV.  The  worship  of  the  people 
WAS  ACCOMPANIED  WITH  THEIB  GIFTS.  "  They  gavc  mouey  also  unto  the  masons  and 
to  the  carpenters,"  and  their  meat  and  drink  and  oil  they  exchanged  for  the  sacred 
cedars  of  Lebanon.  Surely,  if  any  people  might  have  found  excuse  for  building 
on  credit,  they  were  these  poor  colonists,  who  had  their  burned  cities  to  revive. 
They  were  building,  too,  for  the  future.  Why  should  not  the  future  share  the  cost  ? 
But  these  modern  apologies  for  debt  were  then  unknown.  They  remembered  the 
story  of  the  first  tabernacle,  the  free-will  offerings  of  their  fathers  and  mothers. 
Something  richer  than  cedar  and  brick  must  compose  every  true  temple  of  worship. 
If  the  heart  of  the  people,  their  love  and  devotion,  are  not  built  into  the  rising  walls, 
they  go  up  in  vain  ;  captivities  are  not  in  vain  which  thus  revive  the  grace  of  self- 
sacrifice.  V.  The  holy  joy  with  which  they  finally  lay  the  first  stone.  With 
that  stone  an  undisciplined  people  would  have  gone  months  before,  but  not  these 
children  of  the  captivity.  There  are  spiritual  foundations  lower  than  the  corner- 
stone of  any  temple,  and  these  we  have  seen  the  people  had  been  seven  months  in 
laying  and  seventy  years  in  learning  to  lay — unity,  reverence,  obedience,  and  self- 
sacrifice.  With  a  just  and  well-earned  joy,  therefore,  they  might  lay  on  these 
settled  foundations  their  first  visible  stone.  It  was  not  the  joy  of  pride,  for  to 
themselves  they  took  no  praise.    It  was  a  tuneful  joy,  for  they  sang  together  by 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

course  in  praising  and  giving  thanks  to  God.  It  was  a  hearty  joy,  for  all  the  people 
shouted  with  a  great  shout.  This  holy  jubilee  marked  the  break  of  a  new  day  in 
the  history  of  Israel.  Weeping  had  endured  for  a  long  night  of  seventy  years. 
This  was  the  joy  of  the  morning,  and  the  happy  dawn  was  all  the  brighter  for  the 
shadows  that  lay  behind  it.  The  joy  that  follows  discipline  and  is  earned  by 
repentance  and  obedience  is  perhaps  the  sweetest  joy  known  to  men  in  this  world. 
VI.  The  healthful  sorrow  and  regrets  that  tempered  these  octbdrsts  of  joy. 
Undisciplined  joy  is  sure  to  be  giddy,  but  the  joy  of  these  returning  exiles  has  in 
its  sweet  a  dash  of  bitter,  which  saves  it  from  hurtful  excess.  Many  of  the  old 
men  of  the  nation  had  seen  the  first  house.  They  could  not  forget  its  glory.  They 
remembered  also,  it  may  be,  the  impiety  of  their  own  days,  and  possibly  of  their 
own  hearts,  which  hastened  the  nation's  shame.  Something  of  self-reproach  must 
mingle  with  that  regret.  The  new  house  bids  fair  to  stand,  for  it  is  founded  for 
use.  No  foolish  display  taints  the  plan.  A  mighty  hunger  after  Jehovah  impels 
them  to  make  Him  a  dwelling-place  in  their  midst.  A  Church  thus  rooted  in  real 
spiritual  want  comes  near  indeed  to  the  true  ideal  of  a  spiritual  home.  Every 
attitude  of  the  builders  also  is  a  propitiation  of  Jehovah.  He  wiU  certainly  accept 
their  work,  for  their  union  is  perfect ;  their  reverence  is  simple,  sincere ;  their 
obedience  unforced ;  their  self-sacrifice  ungrudging.  Here  are  the  materials  of 
all  acceptable  sacrifice.  An  altar  built  in  this  spirit  wiU  never  want  fixe.  {Monday 
Club  Sermons.)  A  working  Church: — 1.  All  at  work:  "The  people  gathered 
themselves  together."  2.  All  working  in  unison :  "  As  one  man."  A  massed 
force  is  a  winning  force.  3.  AH  working  obediently  :  "  As  it  is  written  in  the  law." 
Christian  activity  not  a  sentiment  but  a  duty.  "  To  the  law  and  the  testimony." 
4.  AU  working  unceasingly :  "  As  the  duty  of  every  day  required."  The  daily  per- 
formance of  Christian  duty  leaves  no  arrears.  {Willis  S.  Hinman.)  And  they  set 
the  altar  upon  his  bases. — I'he  altar  set  up  : — I.  In  a  new  home  the  first  thino 

THEY  SHOULD  DO  WHO  FEAR  GOD  IS  TO  SET  UP  AN  ALTAR  THERE.  H.  ThE  SERVICE  OF 
THOSE    WHO    ARE    OF    ONE    HEART    IS   WHAT   He    TAKES    PLEASURE    IN    (ActS  11.   1,  iv.  32). 

ni.  The  best  of  defences  is  the  favour  of  God,  and  so  an  altar  mat  be  a  stronger 
BULWARK  THAN  A  FORTRESS.  {E.  Day.)  The  rebuilding  of  the  altar :  exemplary 
features  of  Divine  worsldp  : — I.  Unanimity  and  zeal  m  Divine  worship.  II.  Sacri- 
piCE  IN  Divine  worship.  This  suggests — 1.  Man's  need  of  atonement  with  God. 
2.  Man's  duty  of  consecration  to  God.  HI.  Respect  for  precedent  in  Divinb 
WORSHIP.  There  are  memories  and  associations  clinging  around  certain  ancient 
forms  and  places  hallowed  by  holy  uses  which  greatly  stimulate  and  enrich  the 
devout  heart.  IV.  Conformity  to  Scripture  in  Divine  worship.  V.  Fear  op 
ENEMIES  IN  Divine  worship.  1.  The  fear  of  enemies  should  not  intimidate  us  from 
the  worship  of  God.  2.  The  fear  of  enemies  should  impel  us  to  worship  God. 
VI.  Regularity  in  Divine  worship.  The  offering  of  the  daily  sacrifice  suggests — 
1.  Our  daily  need  of  atonement  with  God.  2.  Our  daily  need  of  renewed  con- 
secration. 3.  Our  daily  need  of  renewed  blessings.  {William  Jones.)  Sacred  to 
Jehovah: — ^When  a  British  vessel  comes  to  an  uninhabited  country,  or  one  inhabited 
only  by  savages,  the  captain  goes  on  shore  with  a  boat's  crew,  and,  after  landing, 
he  unfurls  the  Union  Jack  and  takes  possession  of  the  whole  country  in  the  name 
of  Queen  Victoria  and  his  native  land.  He  plants  the  flagstaff,  and  no  foreign 
nation  dare  come  and  knock  it  down,  or  puU  down  the  ensign  of  the  power  of 
Britain.  So  the  priest  built  first  the  altar  of  sacrifice  to  show  that  the  place  was 
sacred  to  Jehovah,  and  that  they  and  all  the  people  were  His  servants.  {Sunday 
School.)  They  kept  also  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  as  it  is  written. — Preparation* 
for  building : — I.  It  is  only  ignorant,  self-sufficient  people  who  despise  the 
experience  of  the  past  treasured  up  in  history,  n.  If  we  cannot  have  for 
God's  worship  *t.t.  the  external  proprieties  we  desire,  we  are  not  to  wait  till  wb 

CAN  GET  THEM.  HI.  ThE  EXTERNALS  OP  WORSHIP  ARE  NOTHING  TO  GOD,  EXCEPT  BO  FAR 
AS   THEY   INFLUENCE    US   OB   ARE   EXPRESSIVE    OF   SOMETHING  IN  US.       (E.  Day.)  The 

celebration  of  the  sacred  festivals  resumed : — I.  The  commemoration  in  Divine 
WORSHIP  of  national  EXPERIENCES  AND  BLESSINGS.  1.  It  was  a  memorial  of  the 
emancipation  of  Israel  from  Egypt,  teaching  us  that  we  should  cherish  the 
memory  of  former  mercies  (Lev.  xxiii.  43).  2.  It  was  a  memorial  of  their  life  in 
the  wilderness,  reminding  us  that  our  present  condition  is  that  of  strangers  and 
pilgrims  (Lev.  xxiii.  40-43  ;  Heb.  xiii.  14).  3.  It  was  a  thanksgiving  for  rest  and 
ft  settled  abode  in  the  promised  land,  suggesting  the  certainty  and  blessedness 
of  the  rest  which  remains  for  the  people  of  God  (Lev.  xxiii.  40 ;  Rev.  vii.  9).  4.  It 
was  a  thanksgiving  for  the  completed  harvest,  teaching  us  to  receive  the  precious 


CHAP,  m.]  EZRA.  23 

fruits  of  the  earth  as  the  kind  gifts  of  a  bountiful  Providence  (Exod.  xxiii.  16 ; 
Lev.  xxiii.  39 ;  Deut.  xvi.  13-15).  IL  The  celebration  ik  beligiotts  worship  or 
THE  NATURAL  DIVISIONS  OP  TIME.  "  And  of  the  nsw  moons."  What  was  the  design 
of  this  religious  celebration  of  "the  beginning  of  their  months " ?  1.  To  impress 
them  with  the  value  of  time.  2.  To  assist  them  to  form  a  correct  estimate  of  their 
life  upon  earth.  3.  To  arouse  them  to  make  a  wise  use  of  the  time  which  remained 
to  them.  in.  The  presentation  in  Divine  worship  oi  personal  voluntabt 
OFFERiNGB.     (William  Jones.) 

Ver.  4.  As  the  duty  of  every  day  required. — The  work  of  the  day  in  the  day  .- — 
Time  in  the  hands  of  many — I  use  the  words  of  Solomon—  is  "  a  price  in  the  hand 
of  fools."  They  know  not  its  value.  It  is  in  the  margin,  •'  the  matter  of  the  day 
in  his  day."  This  has  grown  into  a  proverbial  saying  among  those  who  love 
Scripture  phraseology ;  and  teaches  us  that  we  should  do  the  work  of  the  day  in 
the  day.  I.  We  may  apply  this  to  liee  in  general.  "  To-day  if  ye  will  hear  His 
voice  harden  not  your  heart."  "  Behold  now  is  the  day  of  salvation."  "  I  must 
work  the  works  of  Him  that  sent  Me  while  it  is  day ;  the  night  cometh  wherein  no 
man  can  work."  II.  It  will  apply  to  prosperity.  This  is  called  a  day,  and 
Solomon  tells  us  the  duty  of  it,  "  In  the  day  of  prosperity  be  joyful."  He  cannot, 
we  may  be  assured,  intend  to  countenance  extravagance  or  excess.  Those  men  are 
to  be  pitied  who  possess  much  and  enjoy  little ;  who  have  the  blessings  of  life  in 
abundance  but  no  heart  to  use  them.  These  generally  promise  themselves  great 
enjoyment  hereafter  when  they  have  obtained  so  much.  We  should  never  sacrifice 
present  happiness  to  future  imaginations.  God,  like  a  generous  friend,  is  pleased 
to  see  His  presents  enjoyed — "to  enjoy  is  to  obey."  Another  thing  that  the  duty 
of  this  day  requires  is  gratitude.  The  more  you  have  received  from  God,  the 
greater  is  your  obligation  to  Him.  And  surely  the  duty  of  this  day  requires 
liberality.  He  had  others  in  view  as  well  as  yourselves  in  all  that  He  has  done  for 
you.  rn.  It  will  apply  to  adversity.  This  also  is  called  a  day,  and  it  is  said, 
"  In  the  day  of  adversity  consider."  You  are  to  consider  the  alleviations  of  your 
suffering;  how  much  worse  it  might  have  been;  and  to  compare  your  resources 
with  your  difficulties.  Another  part  of  the  duty  of  this  day  is  submission.  The 
duty  of  this  day  also  requires  prayer.  "  CaU  upon  Me  in  the  day  of  trouble." 
IV.  We  may  apply  it  to  the  sabbath.  This  is  called  "the  Lord's  day,"  because 
it  is  consecrated  to  the  memory  of  His  resurrection,  and  is  employed  in  His 
service.  But  as  to  advantage  it  is  our  day.  It  "was  made  for  man."  Such  a 
season  has  peculiar  claims  upon  us,  and  we  are  commanded  "  to  sanctify  it,  calling 
the  Sabbath  a  delight,  the  holy  of  the  Lord  honourable ;  not  doing  our  own  ways, 
nor  finding  our  own  pleasure,  nor  speaking  our  own  words."  Can  this  be  doing 
all  the  duty  of  the  day  ?  When  once  a  regard  for  the  Sabbath  is  gone  everything 
serious  goes  with  it.  Have  we  to  learn  this  ?  V.  It  will  apply  to  every  day.  No 
day  comes  without  its  appropriate  duty.  We  are  to  be  diligent  in  our  respective 
callings.  And  not  only  so — but  we  are  to  do  everything  in  its  season ;  to  do  the 
work  of  the  day  in  the  day,  and  not  leave  it  till  to-morrow.  1.  Because  we  may 
not  live  till  to-morrow.  "  We  know  not  what  a  day  may  bring  forth."  2.  Each 
day  will  have  its  own  engagements  ;  and  it  is  wrong  to  surcharge  one  period  with 
the  additional  work  of  another.  3.  Because  by  this  temporary  negligence  we  have 
nothing  to  do,  or  too  much ;  whereas  by  doing  the  work  of  the  day  in  the  day  we 
are  never  unoccupied,  never  oppressed;  we  keep  our  affairs  under  easy  manage- 
ment, and  never  suffer  them  to  accumulate  into  a  discouraging  mass.  4.  Because 
by  this  means  the  mind  is  kept  cool,  and  tranquil,  and  cheerful;  and  we  shall 
know  nothing  of  the  perplexities  and  iU-temper  of  those  who  are  always  in  con- 
fusion and  haste.  To  verify  this  important  maxim  let  me  lay  down  three  rules. 
Rise  early.  Grasp  not  so  much  business  as  to  "  entangle  yourselves  in  the  affairs 
of  this  life."  If  you  look  abroad  into  the  world  you  may  be  satisfied,  at  the  first 
glance,  that  a  vicious  and  infidel  life  is  always  a  life  of  confusion.  Thence  it  is 
natural  to  infer  that  order  is  friendly  to  religion.  (IF.  Jay.)  The  day's  duty  ;— 
That  every  day  is  enough  for  its  own  evil  was  a  word  of  Jesus  Christ.  And  there 
is  another  word  that  may  be  grafted  on  this.  It  is,  that  every  day  is  enough  for 
its  own  duty.  It  is  suited  to  vrithdraw  the  thoughts  from  a  vague  futurity  and 
collect  them  upon  a  space  that  can  easily  be  surveyed,  judged  of,  commanded.  A 
day  is  one  of  the  small  circles  of  time.  We  can  lay  out  its  work  though  we  cannot 
predict  its  fortunes.  We  can  remember  how  it  has  been  spent,  whatever  may  have 
come  to  pass  in  it.    It  is  capable  of  holding  as  much  duty  as  our  minds  can 


94  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

well  compass.  He  who  fills  each  of  them  well  as  they  pass  and  aie  recorded,  is 
wanting  in  nothing.  We  hear  it  often  said  that  life  is  but  a  day.  It  is  said  to 
express  the  shortness  of  our  stay  upon  the  earth.  It  is  said,  for  the  most  part, 
sorrowfully.  Let  us  reverse  it  and  say,  with  more  striking  truth,  that  each  day  is  a 
life.  Every  day  is  a  life  fresh  with  reinstated  power,  setting  out  on  its  allotted 
labour  and  limited  path.  Its  morning  resembles  a  whole  youth.  Its  eventide  its 
sobering  into  age.  It  is  rounded  at  either  end  by  a  sleep,  unconsciousness  at  the 
outset  and  oblivion  at  the  close.  We  are  born  again  every  time  that  the  sun  rises, 
and  lights  up  the  world  for  man  to  do  his  part  in  it.  A  day  is  a  complete  whole 
then  ;  a  finished  piece.  It  had  its  tasks  and  toils,  and  they  have  been  more  or  less 
faithfully  gone  through  with.  Or  if  they  have  been  neglected  quite  it  is  too  late  to 
fulfil  them  now,  for  the  opportunity  has  passed  away.  You  may  say,  however,  that 
it  is  by  no  means  so  entire,  so  much  a  thing  by  itself,  as  has  now  been  represented. 
A  day  falls  in  among  the  accounts  of  time  not  as  one  of  its  separated  fragments, 
but  as  strongly  connected  with  portions  of  it  that  went  before  and  are  to  follow. 
It  is  bound  to  the  past  which  it  continues.  It  is  full  of  unfinished  performances 
and  projects  that  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  going  down  of  the  sun  or  the  hour 
for  the  night's  rest.  All  this  is  true  of  it.  But  is  it  not  true  also  of  life  itself  ? 
A  day  is  a  life.  It  has  all  the  elements  in  it  of  an  entire  being.  It  may  be  fair  or 
foul.  It  may  find  us  sick  or  well.  But  the  soul  is  there  that  must  create  its  own 
atmosphere,  and  that  is  often  the  healthiest  when  the  pulses  beat  languidly  and 
the  fiesh  is  in  pain.  The  faculties  are  there  that  are  to  be  exercised,  and  the 
affections  that  are  to  be  kept  in  play.  There  an  inward  action  is  going  on  with  all 
its  responsibility.  Again,  a  day  is  a  life.  We  do  not  consider  how  much  is  con- 
tained within  its  rapid  round.  In  describing  its  importance  moralists  and  divines 
are  apt  to  dwell  principally  on  the  uncertainty  whether  it  may  not  be  our  last. 
And  yet  it  would  grow  into  great  consequence  in  our  eyes  if  we  supposed  that  it 
was  absolutely  the  whole.  Eeflect  for  an  instant  upon  these  two  assertions.  The 
narrow  space  that  intervenes  between  your  rising  and  your  lying  down  does  in  the 
first  place  present  the  total  sum,  the  full  result  of  aU  your  preceding  experience. 
It  is  just  what  time  and  you  have  made  it.  Whatever  you  have  observed,  felt, 
done,  there  goes  to  the  making  up  of  what  you  are.  The  habits  that  you  have 
been  contracting,  there  reveal  their  strength.  The  dispositions  that  you  cherish, 
there  spread  their  thicknesses  of  deepening  colour.  A  long  action  of  forgotten 
days  has  been  busy  in  forming  to  what  it  is  the  single  day  that  has  been  rolling 
over  you.  You  are  prepared,  then,  to  make  a  right  estimate  of  the  moral  length  of 
a  day  when  you  see  it  reaching  back  to  infancy,  and  gathering  upon  itself  the 
influences  of  a  thousand  facts  of  your  history  and  emotions  of  your  hearts,  and 
reflecting  a  universe  of  truth  and  glory.  And  then  consider  further  that  it  not 
only  deserves  so  much  from  what  is  gone,  but  it  extends  itself  forward  also.  It 
contains  the  germ  of  what  is  to  be  unfolded  into  far  distant  consequences.  While 
it  shows  what  the  man  has  gradually  become,  it  indicates  with  a  warning  finger 
what  it  is  likely  that  he  will  be.  Whatever  one  day  is  permitted  to  do  with  him, 
will  probably  continue  to  be  done ;  if  for  good,  going  up  to  better :  if  for  bad,  going 
down  to  worse.  The  principles  it  exemplifies,  the  temper  it  displays,  the  bent  of 
mind  that  traverses  it,  are  not  confined  to  its  compass,  and  do  not  pass  off  with  its 
date.  Read  that  little  leaf  which  is  turned  over  so  soon,  and  you  may  perceive 
that  it  is  the  book  of  your  fate.  We  are  thus  brought  to  the  practical  application 
of  the  sentiment  to  which  your  attention  has  been  directed.  If  a  day  is  a  life,  let 
its  work  be  done  as  its  hours  are  passing.  Let  it  have  something  of  completeness 
in  it.  Men  err  in  "  despising  those  little  ones."  They  love  to  send  their  thoughts 
over  years  and  ages.  They  defer  their  good  intentions  to  further  periods.  But 
these  little  ones  are  the  chief  of  all  if  we  will  look  at  them  as  they  are,  and  if  we 
will  make  them  what  they  should  be.  Think  of  what  you  have  gained  or  lost  in 
the  account  that  all  must  render  in  at  the  last  day.  Remember  how  you  have 
comported  yourself  towards  those  who  love  you  and  towards  those  who  love  you 
not  Remember  what  the  currents  of  your  inclination  have  been.  Reflect  whether 
the  will  has  gone  right,  and  the  heart  has  been  a  true  one,  whatever  else  may  have 
proved  adverse  or  unjust.  {N.  L.  Frothingham.)  A  day : — As  the  circuits  of  the 
earth  round  the  sun  give  s  the  year  and  the  seasons,  and  the  revolutions  of  the 
moon  round  the  earth  our  months,  so  the  revolving  of  our  earth  on  its  axis  marks 
out  as  the  condition  of  human  life  that  it  should  be  divided  into  days  and  nights, 
and  these  are  constituted  al  ernate  seasons  of  labour  and  repose.  So  life  as  a  time 
for  work  resolves  itself  into  a  thing  of  days  (Psa.  civ.  23).    I.  Lifb  bkihq  maok  up 


■CHAP,  in.]  EZRA.  25 

OF  DATS,  THE  CHARACTEB  AND  COMPLEXION  OF  LIFE  WILL  DEPEND  ON  THE  IMPEOVE- 

MBNT  or  DATS  AS  THEY  SUCCESSIVELY  PASS  BY.  It  is  more  easj  to  feel  the  im- 
portance of  life  as  a  whole,  than  to  be  duly  impressed  with  the  value  of  its  smaller 
divisions.  If  the  mind  be  set  on  improving  life,  its  distribution  into  days  offers  to 
•us  many  advantages  for  attaining  this  end.  1.  A  day  is  more  easily  brought  within 
the  grasp  of  the  mind  and  planned  for.  2.  There  is  less  difficulty  in  reviewing 
it  and  judging  of  its  character.  3.  Every  day  a  new  beginning  is  made  and 
opportunity  afforded  for  correcting  to-day  by  the  experience  of  yesterday,  4.  Who 
can  calculate  the  advantage  of  the  freshness  derived  from  sleep  and  the  new  vigour 
thus  imported  into  life?  (1)  Physically.  (2)  Mentally.  (3)  Morally.  The  will 
is  endued  with  new   vigour  as  a  man  rises  to  a  new  day  of  life  and  activity. 

II.  The  duty  which  every  day  requires.  Every  day  has  its  appropriate  duty. 
1.  Some  duties  daily  should  terminate  directly  upon  God.  Such  are  prayer  and 
praise.  Who  can  tell  what  our  needs  may  be,  what  accidents  may  happen,  what 
decisions  we  may  be  called  to  take  and  what  moral  risks  may  be  encountered? 
Daily  petitions  should  therefore  be  offered.  And  how  meet  it  is  to  mingle  with 
daily  petitioning  thanksgiving  for  f'aily  mercies.  "  Blessed  be  the  Lord  who  daily 
loadeth  us  with  benefits."  2.  There  is  all  the  life-work.  (1)  The  culture  of  the 
mind.  (2)  The  business  of  each  one's  station.  (3)  Some  direct  service  for  the 
kingdom  of  Christ.  This  serves  to  hallow  the  day  and  to  connect  time  the  more 
distinctly  with  eternity.     3.  Then  there  is  the  bearing  of  the  burdens  of  the  day. 

III.  The  work  of  each  day  is  to  be  done,  with  onlt  a  moderate  thoughtfulness, 

YET     WITHOUT    PRESUMPTION    AS    TO    THE     MORROW    AND     DAYS    TO    COME.       Chlist    dis- 

«ountenanced  anxious  forecasting  as  to  the  possibilities  of  the  future.  God  is  to 
be  trusted  to  lay  upon  us  burdens  as  He  sees  that  we  have  strength,  or  as  He  will 
•give  strength  to  sustain  them.  Still  less  should  there  be  presumption  as  to  the 
future.  Act  as  "  in  the  living  present,"  "  as  the  matter  of  every  day  requires." 
"To-morrow,"  exclaimed  a  powerful  French  preacher  once,  "is  the  devil's  word; 
God's  word  is  to-day."  "  To-day,  if  ye  wiU  hear  His  voice,  harden  not  your 
hearts."     {E.  T.  Prust.) 

Vers.  6-13.  From  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  month  began  they  to  oflTer  bumt- 
•oflEerings  unto  the  Lord. — The  full  establishment  of  religious  services  precedes  the 
building  of  the  temple  : — A  weighty  truth  is  enshrined  in  this  apparently  incongruous 
fact.  The  worship  itself  is  felt  to  be  more  important  than  the  house  in  which  it  is 
to  be  celebrated  (John  iv.  21-24).  How  vain  is  it,  then,  to  treat  the  erection  of 
•churches  as  though  it  were  a  revival  of  religion  1  As  surely  as  the  empty  seashell 
can  never  secrete  a  living  organism  to  inherit  it,  a  mere  building — whether  it  be 
the  most  gorgeous  cathedral  or  the  plainest  village  meeting-house — will  never 
induce  a  living  spirit  of  worship  to  dwell  in  its  cold  desolation.  Every  true  re- 
vival of  religion  begins  in  the  spiritual  sphere.  [Walter  F.  Adeney,  31. A.)  They 
gave  money  also  unto  the  carpenters.  —  The  preparations  for  rebuilding  the 
temple : — I.  The  great  work  tet  to  be  accomplished.  This  illustrates — 1.  The 
incompleteness  of  human  joys.  2.  The  incompleteness  of  human  works.  The 
Altar  was  built,  but  the  temple  was  not  begun.  The  work  of  the  earnest  man 
is  never  accomplished.  Even  when  death  approaches,  most  men  have  much  which 
they  desire  to  accomplish.  This  incompleteness  of  our  human  works  is  also 
ordered  wisely  and  well.  It  tends  to  prevent  stagnation ;  to  rouse  to  earnest 
activities,  &c.  3.  The  obligation  of  the  Church  of  God.  The  Jews  at  Jerusalem 
felt  themselves  bound  not  to  rest  content  with  the  joys  and  blessings  of  the  altar, 
hut  to  proceed  to  the  more  arduous  task  of  rebuilding  the  temple.  II.  The  prompt 
preparations  for  the  accomplishment  of  this  work.  Two  points  claim  attention 
— 1.  The  variety  of  service  and  the  unity  of  design.  2.  The  co-operation  of  Jews 
and  Gentiles.  Conclusion — 1.  Are  we  "  as  hving  stones  built  up  "  in  the  spiritual 
temple  of  God?  (1  Pet.  ii.  4-6).  2.  Are  we  also  assisting  to  build  this  glorious 
temple?  (1  Cor.  iii.  10-15).  [William  Jones.)  The  building  of  the  temple: — 
I.  That  difficulties  ought  not  to  discourage  us  in  the  Lord's  work.  Paucity 
of  numbers  and  feebleness  of  resources.  Enemies.  11.  The  readiness  of  the 
PEOPLE  TO  give  OF  THEIR  MEANS  UNTO  THE  LoRD  (Ezia  11.  68,  69).  Their  first  care 
■was  the  house  of  God.  Without  homes  of  their  own,  their  cities  in  ruins,  with  a 
thousand  demands  pressing  upon  them,  they  nevertheless  provided  first  of  all  for 
the  worship  of  the  temple.  How  needful  the  lesson !  God's  house  before  our  own. 
Ood  first  and  afterward  self.  This  work  first,  and  then  our  own.  1.  They  offered 
willingly.    It  was  not  the  tithe  which  they  were  required  by  law  to  give.    It  was  a 

21 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  m. 

free-will  offering  to  God,  and  hence  all  the  more  acceptable  (2  Cor.  ix.  7).  2.  They 
gave  according  to  their  ability.  Proportionate  giving  as  God  has  prospered  us  is- 
one  of  the  most  pressing  needs  of  the  Church  to-day.  It  is  a  duty  as  plainly 
enjoined  as  prayer  and  praise  (Deut.  ivi.  17;  1  Cor.  xvi.  2).  III.  The  people 
WEBE  READY  TO  woBK  AS  WELL  AS  GIVE.  The  Church  Hccds  willing  workers  even 
more  than  generous  givers.  Hearts  and  hands  are  always  worth  more  than  gold 
and  silver.  1.  They  worked  unitedly.  The  people  laboured  "as  one"  (margin). 
Their  counsels  were  not  divided.  There  were  no  jealousies,  no  personal  ambitions 
to  hinder  the  progress  of  the  undertaking.  2.  The  work  was  systematically  prose- 
cuted. Zeal  and  energy  were  displayed,  but  without  making  them  substitutes  for 
intelligence  and  adaptation.  One  of  the  great  needs  of  God's  people  is  appreciation 
of  the  advantages  of  systematic  work.  IV.  Thankful  joy  in  the  Loed's  bebvice. 
The  ancient  men  wept  with  a  loud  voice  as  they  saw  the  foundation  of  the  new 
house  laid.  Yet,  after  all,  their  weeping  may  have  had  nothing  in  it  of  the  spirit  of 
murmuring.    Tears  are  ofttimes  expressive  of  the  deepest  joy. 

"  There's  not  a  string  attuned  to  mirth 
But  has  its  chord  in  melancholy." 

The  joy  that  is  touched  with  pain  is  the  noblest  of  joys.    The  sweetest  music  i» 
written  in  the  minor  key.     Possibly  the  noise  of  their  weeping  was  more  grateful  to 
God  than  the  shouts  of  their  younger  companions.     (Rufus  S.  Green,  D.D.)         Th* 
second  temple : — I.  The  building  of  this  temple  was  a  visible  and  abiding  testi- 
mony TO  man's  fibm  faith  in  the  existence  and  poweb  of  the  God  of  heaven. 
"The  mystery  of  holy  shrines,"  says  Kinglake,  "lies   deep   in  human  nature. 
However  the  more  spiritual  minds  may  be  able  to  rise  and  soar,  the  commoa 
man,  during  his  mortal  career,  is  tethered  to  the  globe  that  is  his  appointed 
dwelling-place;  and  the  more  his  affections  are  pure  and  holy,  the  more  they 
seem  to  blend  with  some  sacred  spot,  that  belongs  to  the  outward  and  visible 
world."    Temples  tell  us  of  one  who  is  invisible.     As  Jacob  set  up  an  altar  in  the 
place  where  God  talked  with  him  and  called  the  name  of  the  place  Bethel,  so  always 
men  have  erected  memorial  stones  to  commemorate  their  faith  in  God.    II.  The 
temples  and  altabs  which  man  builds  signify  a  desibe  on  his  pabt  fob  neakeb  and 
MOBE  CONSTANT  COMMUNION  WITH  GoD.     From  the  first  God  had  revealed  Himself  as 
One  who  was  ready  to  meet  with  His  people,  to  draw  aside  the  veil,  at  least  in  part, 
and  commune  with  them  from  off  the  holy  place.     Outside  the  walls  of  Eden  He 
appeared  above  the  altar  of  Abel.     Whenever,  in  later  times,  the  patriarchs  set  up 
an  altar  and  called  on  the  name  of  the  Lord,  they  expected  that  He  would  come 
and  sanctify  the  spot  by  His  presence.     They  were  not  disappointed.     Enoch 
walked  with  Him ;   Noah  built  an  ark  under  His  direction ;   Abraham  saw  His 
day ;  to  Jacob  He  appeared  again  and  again ;  He  talked  with  Moses  and  showed 
His  glory  to  Isaiah  ;  Elijah's  altar  was  touched  with  fire ;  to  the  whole  people  He 
showed  a  pillar  of  cloud  and  flame,  and  commanded  them,  saying,  "  Let  them 
make  Me  a  sanctuary,  that  I  may  dwell  among  them,"  and  when  it  was  finished,  the 
shekinah  appeared,  God  dwelt  in  the  Holy  of  holies,  and  from  off  the  fiery  seat 
talked  with  His  prophets  and  priests.    Although  under  the  Christian  dispensation 
the  idea  of  communion  with  God  is  ennobled,  and  the  fellowship  made  more 
exalted  and  spiritual,  so  that  Jesus  Christ  is  now  our  true  sanctuary  and  passover, 
still  the  old  conception  is  not  altogether  abandoned.     While  the  veil  of  the  temple 
is  rent  in  twain  and  every  common  bush  is  aflame  with  God,  still  there  is  a  special 
blessing  for  those  who  meet  together  in  the  sanctuary.     The  place  of  worship  is 
correctly  spoken  of  as  the  "  meeting-house,"  the  meeting-house  where  man  comes 
to  meet  his  God.     HI.  The  conduct  of  these  temple  builders  indicates  determi- 
nation AND  self-sacrifice.     {Sermons  by  Monday  Club.) 

Vers.  11-13.  And  they  sang  together  by  course. — Religioxu  feeling  prompts  to 
praise : — During  the  persecution  in  Madagascar,  a  number  of  native  Christians 
would  assemble  at  midnight  in  the  house  of  the  missionary  for  religious  instruction. 
On  one  occasion  they  said,  "  Mr.  Ellis,  we  must  sing."  "  No,"  said  he,  "  it  is  as 
much  as  your  lives  are  worth  to  be  heard."  They  continued  to  talk  about  the  love 
of  Christ,  and  then  exclaimed  again,  "  Sing  we  must."  He  cautioned  them,  and 
they  added,  "  We  will  sing  in  a  whisper."  So  on  their  bended  knees  they  quietly 
sang  a  hymn.  "But  I  could  only  weep,"  said  the  missionary,  who  knew  their 
peril.     (Sunday  Companion.)        Building  for  God's  praise  : — During  the  monthiJ 


f 

CHAP,  m.]  EZRA.  27 

that  St.  Francis  went  up  and  down  the  streets  of  Assisi,  carrying  in  his  delicate 
hands  the  stones  for  rebuilding  the  St.  Damiano  Chapel,  he  was  continually  singing 
psalms,  brealiing  forth  into  ejaculations  of  gratitude,  his  face  beaming  as  one  who 
saw  visions  of  unspeakable  delight.  When  questioned  why  he  sang  he  replied,  "  I 
build  for  God's  praise,  and  desire  that  every  stone  should  be  laid  with  joy." 
(H.  0.  Mackey.)  Who  had  seen  the  first  house. — Declensions  in  religion  observed 
and  lamented : — The  first  and  second  temple  may  be  considered  as  expressive  of  the 
state  of  real  and  substantial  godliness  in  our  own  land,  in  two  ages  not  much  more 
distant  from  each  other  than  those  were  in  which  these  two  temples  stood.  What 
I  purpose  is  to  point  out  some  of  those  articles  respecting  the  first  and  second  com- 
pared, which  seem  most  applicable  to  the  end  I  have  in  view.    I.  That  the  fikst 

AND  SECOND  TEMPLES  WERE  BUILT  IN  THE  SAME  PLACE,  HAD  NEAELY  THE  SAME  FOUNDA- 
TION, AND  WEEE  BOTH  RAISED  WITH  THE  SAME  DESIGN.  The  temple  which  wc  raisc  and 
that  which  our  forefathers  saw,  are  built  on  "  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and 
prophets;  Jesus  Christ  Himself  being  the  chief  corner-stone. "  We  have  the  same 
Gospel,  the  same  Saviour,  and  the  same  precious  Agent  is  employed  for  conversion, 
edification,  support  and  comfort.     II.  That  the  first  house  surpassed  the  second, 

AS  IT  WAS  MADE  OF  MORE  OOODLY  MATERIALS  AND  WAS  BUILT  ON  A  NOBLER  PLAN.      Whilst 

we  are  built  on  the  same  foundation  as  our  fathers  we  are  less  perfect  in  the  eyes  of 
God  than  they — we  have  less  dignity  of  character  in  the  various  relations  of  life — 
we  are  less  fit  to  become  the  habitation  of  God.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  we  have 
less  divine  knowledge  than  those  in  the  past ;  that  the  ways,  works,  and  word  of 
God  are  less  studied  with  a  design  to  amend  and  purify  the  heart,  and  that  those 
ordinances  are  more  neglected  now  than  they  once  were  which  have  the  most 
apparent  tendency  to  carry  on  a  work  of  grace  and  piety.  Our  graces  are  defective. 
We  are  too  apt  to  rest  in  present  attainments.  Our  fathers  seem  to  have  excelled 
us  in  a  determined  opposition  to  sin — in  a  weanedness  from  this  world — and  in  a 
spiritual,  holy,  heavenly  walk.  We  seem  less  in  earnest  than  they  in  the  cultiva- 
tion of  those  things  that  improve,  enlarge,  and  ennoble  the  soul,  and  that  stamp  a 
dignity  on  human  nature.  III.  That  the  first  house  exceeded  the  second,  in 
the  manner  of  its  dedication.  The  temple  we  raise  is  dedicated  to  God.  How 
far  this  dedication  falls  short  of  that  which  our  fathers  made  is  not  easy  to  say. 
There  seems  to  have  been  no  sacrifice  which  the  apostles  and  martyrs  were  not 
willing  to  make ;  and  they  seemed  to  conceive  of  themselves  as  sacred  to  God.  We 
are  sprung  from  those  who  in  their  day  were  examples  of  devotedness  to  God,  and 
who  carried  with  them  this  persuasion  that  the  temple  of  God  should  be  holy, 
whose  temple  they  were.  Ancient  men  remember  the  dedication  they  made,  the 
correspondence  there  was  between  their  lives  and  that  dedication,  and  the  degree 
in  which  "holiness  to  the  Lord"  was  inscribed  upon  them.  We  of  the  present 
generation  seem  to  be  making  a  more  partial  dedication  to  Him  than  our  fathers 
made.  Multitudes  among  us  seem  to  be  trying  to  "  serve  two  masters."  It  is 
alas  1  too  apparent  from  the  thoughts  with  which  we  begin  and  close  the  day — from 
the  desires  and  passions  that  possess  our  minds  through  the  hours  of  it — and  from 
the  nature  of  objects  which  we  eagerly  pursue,  that  we  are  not  so  exemplary  in 
devotedness  to  God  as  many  in  past  ages  have  been.  The  progress  of  a  worldly 
spirit  is  visible  among  us ;  the  great  objects  of  religion  are  not  habitually  thought 
so  amiable,  important,  and  venerable  by  us  as  by  the  last  generation  of  the  people 
of  God ;  nor  is  our  regard  to  God,  to  Christ,  and  eternity  so  commanding  a  prin- 
ciple as  it  appears  formerly  to  have  been.  Knowledge  cannot  so  easily  be  taken  of 
us  that  we  have  been  with  Jesus ;  nor  can  I  think  that  we  stand  among  men,  like 
temples  built  for  God  and  consecrated  to  Him  as  they  did.    IV.  That  the  first 

TEMPLE    SURPASSED    THE    SECOND,    ON    ACCOUNT    OF    THAT    HOLT    FIRE    BURNING    WITHIN, 

WHICH  PROCEEDED  FROM  GoD.  They  from  whom  we  are  descended  were  eminently 
devout,  the  holy  fire,  the  fervour  of  devotion  which  attended  their  offerings  and 
sacrifices  rendered  them  through  Christ  highly  acceptable  to  God.  They  were 
mighty  in  prayer.  Those  who  never  prayed  themselves  remarked  their  devotion. 
Their  closets,  their  families,  some  social  band  and  the  house  of  God  could  witness 
their  communion  with  the  Father  and  His  Son  Jesus  Christ ;  their  pious  breathings 
of  soul — the  holy  ardour  of  their  spirit — and  that  pleasure,  that  improvement  and 
lustre  they  derived  from  thence.  The  friends  of  the  Church  and  their  country 
sought  an  interest  in  their  prayers.  I  dare  not  say  that  the  devout  among  us  are 
as  numerous  as  they  have  ever  been,  or  that  the  sacred  fire  of  devotion  burns  now 
as  bright  and  strong  in  the  breasts  of  professors  as  it  hath  ever  done.  Ancient  men 
may  remember  when  there  was  more  apparent  devotion  in  our  public  assemblies — 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

when  more  preparation  was  made  for  a  profitable  attendance  there — when  family 
worship,  reading  the  Scriptures,  and  praying  was  more  general  among  professors — 
when  private  derotion  was  made  a  more  serious  business,  and  when  more  schemes 
were  entered  upon  and  vigorously  pursued  to  maintain  and  transmit  a  spirit  of  piety 
and  devotion  in  societies  and  the  world.  Some  professors  content  themselves  with 
praying  in  their  families  once  a  day,  others  once  in  the  week,  and  many  without 
praying  at  all.  Devotion  is  one  grand  instrument  in  the  increase  of  faith ;  in 
strengthening  the  hand  and  encouraging  the  heart  in  the  service  of  God  and  our 
generation  ;  in  lightening  all  the  burdens  and  afflictions  of  life,  in  forming 
the  inhabitants  of  earth  to  a  resemblance  of  those  in  heaven,  and  in  drawing 
down  the  blessings  of  God.  V.  That  the  nRST  temple  exceeded  the  second 
IN  the  cloud  of  qlokt,  that  amazing  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence.  God 
is  present  with  His  Church  in  every  age ;  but  in  different  ages,  and  in  the 
same  age  in  different  places,  His  presence  and  glory  have  been  manifested 
in  different  degrees.  Where  there  is  a  spirit  of  prayer  and  supplication  poured 
forth ;  where  the  house  and  ordinances  of  God  are  frequented  with  a  high  relish 
and  growing  profit ;  and  where  benevolent  and  pious  sentiments,  affections,  and 
passions  are  alive  in  the  soul ;  there  God  is  in  an  eminent  degree.  That  the 
presence  and  glory  of  God  are  not  seen  in  our  temple  as  in  that  which  ancient 
men  and  chief  of  the  fathers  remember,  is,  I  fear,  but  too  true.  With  respect  to 
some  places,  it  can  only  be  said,  "Here  God  once  dwelt";  and  in  some  others 
that  are  still  frequented,  a  certain  languor  and  coldness  attend  the  worship  which 
the  manifestation  of  the  presence  and  glory  of  God  would  have  removed.  (N.  Hill.) 
Wept  with  a  loud  voice;  and  many  shouted  aloud  for  Joy. — The  same  events  may 
be  a  cause  for  joy  and  a  cause  for  sorrow  : — The  name  of  Ezra,  which  signifies  a 
helper,  is  strikingly  illustrated  in  the  character  which  this  excellent  man  sustained. 
He  was  pre-eminently  so  to  the  Jews  just  about  the  period  of  their  return  from  the 
Chaldean  captivity.  He  stirred  up  the  spirits  of  many  to  engage  with  him  in  this 
sacred  employment ;  he  devoted  much  of  his  talents,  of  his  time,  of  his  substance, 
and  of  his  labours  to  the  work ;  he  occupied  himself  in  rectifying  and  reforming 
many  of  the  civil,  political,  and  ecclesiastical  abuses.  Ask  yourselves  whether  you 
sustain  that  character  in  a  religious  sense  which  Ezra  so  admirably  bore  ?  Have 
none  of  you  proved  hindrances  instead  of  helpers  in  the  work  of  God  ?  Have  none 
of  you  endeavoured  to  impede  the  religious  procedures  of  those  by  whom  you  are 
surrounded — in  your  families,  or  in  the  circle  in  which  you  move,  or  in  your 
neighbourhood,  or  in  the  Church,  or  in  the  world  ?  The  immediate  reference  in 
the  language  is,  the  set  time  which  God  had  appointed  to  favour  Zion  had  come. 
Israel  had  now  to  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  beneath  which  it  had  for  many 
years  languished.  The  circumstance  which  is  stated  here  is  very  remarkable.  It 
seems  that  when  the  foundations  of  the  house  were  laid  the  younger  persons  in  the 
congregation  of  the  people  shouted  aloud  for  joy ;  on  the  other  hand,  there  were 
certain  hoary-headed  men,  called  here  "  the  ancient  men,"  who  wept  aloud  upon 
the  occasion.  There  is  no  censure  here  implied ;  I  should  rather  commend  them 
for  their  tears.  And  I  purpose  to  show  you  that  there  often  exists  in  connection 
with  the  very  same  events  cause  for  joy  and  cause  for  sorrow.    I.  First  in  reference 

to  THE    FACT    WHICH  IS  HERE    STATED    CONCERNING-  THE    JeWS.      We    aiC    told    that   the 

younger  persons  shouted  for  joy  when  the  foundations  of  the  house  of  God  were 
laid,  and  the  elder  among  them  wept  for  sorrow.  Jeremiah  predicted  that  this 
would  be  actually  the  case  (Jer.  xxxiii.  10,  11).  What  was  there  in  this  event  to 
inspire  joy  ?  I  answer  four  things.  1.  First  of  all,  the  rise  of  this  temple  was  a 
proof  in  itself  that  the  fierceness  of  God's  anger  had  been  turned  away,  and  that 
He  was  now  about  to  show  mercy  to  His  people.  For  a  long  time  they  had  been 
deprived  of  their  temple,  of  their  altar,  and  of  the  institution  of  the  most  high  God. 
They  languished  beneath  His  frown,  but  although  He  had  punished  them  for  their 
backslidings  He  had  not  utterly  cast  away  the  people  whom  He  foreknew.  2.  In 
the  second  place,  now  they  had  a  prospect  of  enjoying  an  opportunity  of  attending 
on  the  public  ordinances  of  God's  house.  For  a  long  time  they  had  been  scat- 
tered ;  the  truly  penitent  among  them  had  their  private  devotions  by  the  banks  of 
Kebar,  and  by  the  Euphrates  they  had  wept  when  they  remembered  Zion,  but  they 
bad  no  opportunity  to  convene  themselves  together  to  celebrate  the  ordinances  to 
which  they  had  been  previously  accustomed.  3.  There  was  a  third  reason,  too, 
and  that  respected  the  display  of  the  power  and  of  the  truth  of  God.  Here  was  a 
display  of  His  truth  in  the  actual  fulfilment  of  the  prediction  of  His  word,  and 
here  was  likewise  an  exhibition  of  His  almighty  power  which  had  surmounted  a 


CHAP,  m.]  EZRA.  29 

Tariety  of  obstacles  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  important  work.  4.  Lastly,  joy 
was  natural  on  the  present  occasion  because  of  the  happy  influence  which  this 
event  would  have  on  the  interests  of  religion  at  large.  What  evidence  was  here 
given  of  the  accomplishment  of  the  promise  of  God  illustrating  His  veracity  and 
other  of  His  perfections  !  What  new  facilities  were  now  opened  for  the  instruction 
of  the  ignorant,  for  the  conversion  of  the  souls  of  sinners  to  God  1  What  a  favour- 
able opinion  was  likely  to  be  produced  on  the  minds  of  the  heathen  themselves  when 
they  saw  the  wonders  which  God  had  wrought  for  His  chosen  people  (Ezek.  xxxvii. 
24  ;  Jer.  xxxiii.  9).  Now  what  was  there  in  association  with  this  procedure  that  was 
likely  to  awaken  sorrow  ?  There  was  much  which  justified  the  feelings  of  those 
excellent  men  who  wept  so  that  the  noise  of  the  weeping  was  heard  afar  off.  For 
they  could  not  but  remember  that  it  was  in  consequence  of  their  backsliding  from 
God  that  they  had  been  so  long  suffering  under  religious  deprivations ;  and  there  is 
something  in  the  reminiscences  of  sin  which  will  always  produce  some  bitterness 
of  feeling.  Moreover  they  recollected  the  magnificence  of  the  former  temple ;  they 
could  not  but  mourn  when  they  contrasted  the  two  structures.  Venerable  men, 
there  was  much  worthy  of  their  tears  1  There  is  a  justifiable  difference  between 
the  pleasurable  joys  of  youth  and  age ;  in  youth  the  passions  are  warm,  health  is 
usually  vigorous,  life  is  clothed  in  all  its  scenes  which  are  yet  to  open  with  the 
freshness  and  beauty  of  novelty.  Inexperience,  too,  disqualifies  for  a  due  conside- 
ration of  those  alloys  which  are  always  the  companions  of  terrestrial  delights.  On 
the  contrary,  the  ancient  man  is  sobered  by  time,  his  feelings  are  mellowed  by 
experience  and  observation.  He  is  aware  of  much  that  will  infallibly  arise  in  a 
world  of  infirmity  and  imperfection  like  this  to  embitter  the  choicest  pleasures,  and 
consequently  there  is  more  of  seriousness  in  the  old  man's  joy  and  less  of  ecstasy. 
We  therefore  eulogise  those  old  men  for  their  religious  tears.  They  had  no  inten- 
tion of  damping  the  joys  of  those  around  them  ;  they  had  no  intention  of  diverting 
the  ardent  zeal  of  those  who  shouted  for  joy  when  the  foundations  of  God's  temple 
•were  laid.     II.  I  illustkate  the  histobt  and  the  sentiment  which  I  derive  from 

IT  IN  connection  WITH  A  VAKIETT  OF  FACTS  WHICH  WILL  BE  FOUND  EXISTING  IN  OUB 
CHUECHES,  in  OUB  FAMILIES,  IN  OUR  CIRCLES,  AND  LIKEWISE  IN  THE  WORLD  AT  LARGE, 
POINTINQ   OUR   REMARKS    CHIEFLY   AT   PERSONAL   EXPERIENCE.       1.    FirSt    of    all   WC  may 

apply  the  statement  before  us  to  the  diffusion  of  the  truths  of  revelation  and  of 
Christianity  throughout  the  world  in  which  we  live.  Unquestionably  we  have 
cause  for  gratitude  when  we  reflect  upon  what  has  been  accomplished  by  British 
Christians  within  the  last  forty  years.  We  are  building  a  temple  which  shall 
gradually  rise  to  a  holy  building  in  the  Lord,  and  the  top  of  which,  the  pinnacle, 
shall  pierce  the  very  heavens.  But  when  we  compare  all  these  diversified  exertions 
with  the  immense  population  of  the  world  who  are  still  destitute  of  the  privileges 
of  Christianity,  the  contrast  abates  our  pleasures,  for  it  is  no  more  than  the  small 
drop  of  the  bucket  compared  to  the  ocean,  than  a  spark  of  fire  or  the  kindling 
lamp  to  the  sun  which  shines  in  the  firmament.  2.  However,  the  principles  we 
have  drawn  from  this  passage  may  be  applied  to  the  various  exertions  of  zeal  in 
the  days  in  which  we  live.  We  cannot  but  mourn  over  the  lamentable  apathy  in 
reference  to  public  religious  interests  which  a  considerable  number  of  our  forefathers 
and  of  our  ancestors  displayed.  But  what  a  change  has  taken  place — for  one 
institution  that  was  established  then  for  the  benefit  of  the  various  classes  of  man- 
kind, there  are  actually  hundreds  existing  in  our  land.  Surely,  then,  it  behoves  us 
to  exclaim,  "  Come,  magnify  the  Lord,  and  let  us  exalt  His  name  together."  But 
honesty  and  fidelity  must  compel  us  to  say  also  that  there  are  abatements  of  our 
pleasures  even  in  connection  with  this  delightful  subject.  For  I  ask  whether  we 
are  not  sometimes  driving  ourselves  into  the  opposite  extreme  which  draws  us 
away  from  our  family  altars  and  closet  religion,  or  at  least  subjects  them  to  much 
hurry  and  confusion  ?  I  ask,  too,  whether  there  are  not  some  things  in  connection 
with  our  religious  procedures  which  should  be  carefully  avoided — pomp,  and  vanity, 
and  ostentation,  and  display  ?  I  ask  whether  there  are  not  passing  even  at  the 
present  hour,  lamentable  contentions  and  strifes  in  connection  with  some  of  our 
noblest  Christian  institutions  ?  3.  The  principle  before  us  would  apply  likewise  to 
the  religious  aspect  of  things  in  your  family  and  in  your  circle.  Well  may  you 
exclaim,  "  We  have  no  greater  joy  than  to  see  our  children  walking  in  the  truth." 
But  oh,  is  there  no  abatement  to  this  pleasure  ?  Is  there  no  daughter  who  by  her 
irreligion,  her  levity,  and  her  foUy,  is  the  grief  of  her  father  and  of  her  mother  who 
bore  her  ?  Christian  masters  and  mistresses,  it  may  be  that  you  have  taught  your 
Bervants  and  inmates  to  know  the  way  of  God,  and  there  are  some  of  them  walking 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

in  His  eommandments  and  in  His  ordinances  blameless  ;  there  are  others  who  are 
eyidently  irreligious  and  living  without  God  in  the  world.  IH.  Once  more,  how- 
ever, and  to  bring  our  remarks  to  personal  experience,  the  principle  ob  sentiment 

WE   HAVE   DaAWM    FBOM   THIS    PASBAOB    MAT   BE     FOUND     APPLICABLE     TO     THE    STATE    OP 

BSLiQioN  IN  TotTB  OWN  SOULS.  My  Christian  friends,  compare  your  former  and 
your  latter  state.  Time  was  when  you  were  all  darkness.  But  one  thing  you 
know,  that  whereas  you  were  once  blind,  now  you  see — see  the  evil  of  sin,  see  the 
excellence  of  the  Saviour.  And  does  not  all  this  demand  a  song  and  an  ascription 
of  praise  ?  Is  not  this  event  the  result  of  the  mercy  of  Qod  which  endureth  for 
ever  ?  And  yet  I  make  another  appeal  to  you,  whether  even  amidst  all  the  joys 
there  is  much  which  should  make  you  walk  humbly  before  God,  much  which  not 
nnfrequently  extorts  from  you  the  cry,  "  Oh,  wretched  man  that  I  am,  who  shall 
deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death?"  Does  not  all  this  awaken  painful 
regrets  ?  Now  let  me  say  that  this  combination  of  joy  and  sorrow  in  the  bosom  of 
a  believer  is  perfectly  congenial  and  compatible.  Professed  humility,  the  habitual 
exercise  of  penitence  for  sin,  and  a  joy  unutterable  and  full  of  glory,  may  exist 
together  in  the  bosom  of  those  who  are  converted  and  sanctified  by  the  grace  of 
God.  You  have  much  to  deplore,  much  that  is  to  be  removed,  much  that  is  to  be 
accomplished  ;  yet  we  would  prevent  you  from  indulging  too  much  depression,  we 
would  tell  you  that  the  little  leaven  shall  leaven  the  whole  lump.  Oh,  yes !  He 
that  has  begun  the  good  work  in  you  shall  perform  it  till  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ ; 
and  though  powerful  obstructions  may  again  rise  up  to  hinder  the  erection  of  this 
building  which  you  are  rearing,  the  top  stone  shall  at  last  be  brought  forth  with 
shoutings  of  grace,  grace  unto  it.  And  soon  the  conflict  shall  be  over,  the  enter- 
prise shall  be  complete,  and  you,  like  the  returned  children  of  the  captivity,  shall 
settle  down  in  a  better  country,  even  the  heavenly,  which  shall  be  your  permanent 
abode,  where  there  shall  be  no  admixture  of  pain.  (J.  Clayton.)  The  shoutt 
and  weeping  of  a  day  of  jubilee : — It  is  worth  while  noticing  that  while  the  old 
men's  grateful  tears  honoured  their  God  as  really  as  the  young  men's  shouts  of 
praise,  yet  that  these  last  were  after  all  the  truest  to  the  fact,  for  that  whilst  to  the 
eyes  of  those  who  had  seen  the  house  in  her  past  glory  this  house  was  in  com- 
parison as  nothing,  yet  that  to  the  opened  glance  of  God's  prophet  it  was  even  now 
revealed  that  "  the  glory  of  this  latter  house  should  be  greater  than  that  of  the 
former."  At  such  a  time  pure  exultation  and  absolute  dejection  are  alike  out  of 
place.  Shouts  of  joy  which  pass  into  sobs  and  tears,  which  tell  of  humbled  but 
grateful  recollection,  are  the  meetest  temper  in  which  we  can  present  before  our 
God  our  best  offerings.  If,  then,  this  be  the  right  temper  for  our  minds,  it  must  be 
a  proper  time  for  us  to  mark  some  of  the  chief  imperfections  which  have  hindered 
our  service,  as  well  as  some  of  those  brighter  features  which  may  at  once  fill  our 
hearts  with  hope  and  help  to  direct  us  in  our  further  course.  I.  First,  then,  for 
SOME  OP  THE  LEADING  IMPERFECTIONS  OF  ouB  WORK.  1,  Now  in  entering  upon  this 
subject  of  the  imperfections  of  our  services,  I  may  say  at  once,  in  the  first  place, 
that  a  work  which  is  eo  much  as  this  is,  the  coming  forth  of  the  Church's  inner 
spiritual  life,  must,  by  the  inevitable  laws  of  the  kingdom  of  grace,  bear  about  it 
marks  of  the  sins  and  infirmities  which  at  the  time  weaken  the  spiritual  life  of  the 
Church.  We  shall  therefore  surely  find  repeated  in  this  our  work  the  transcript 
of  our  own  besetting  sins  ;  our  secularity,  our  love  of  ease,  our  want  of  self-denial, 
our  low  estimate  or  unbelief  of  the  spiritual  character  and  power  of  Christ's  Church, 
our  indistinct  apprehensions  of  her  distinctive  doctrines,  our  low  sense  of  the 
power  of  the  Cross  of  Christ  and  of  the  indwelling  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost  in  His 
regenerate  people,  our  want  of  love  to  Christ,  our  weak  faith,  our  fainting  love  to 
our  brethren.  But  to  use  this  truth  most  practically  let  us  endeavour  to  see  in 
detail  some  of  the  special  forms  of  weakness  in  which  our  own  spiritual  evils  have 
in  fact  made  themselves  manifest.  And  first  among  these,  how  scanty  has  our 
work  been  when  weighed  against  our  opportunities.  Where  are  nations  born 
through  us  into  the  faith?  Where  is  there  not  the  same  sight? — a  little  work 
done,  feeble  and  divided  efforts  blest  far  above  their  deserving,  but  still  effecting 
little  against  the  mass  of  evil.  Next,  how  late  was  our  service  !  And  then  to  note 
but  one  more  mark  of  imperfection  and  instrument  of  weakness,  how  have  our 
services  lacked,  alas  I  how  do  they  still  lack,  that  grace  of  unity,  with  which  more 
perhaps  than  with  any  other  condition,  both  in  the  Word  of  God  and  in  the 
experience  of  the  Church,  any  great  success  in  the  evangelisation  of  the  world  has 
always  been  connected  I  Who  can  estimate  the  measure  in  which  these,  our  sinful 
strifes,  banish  from  us  the  indwelling  strength  of  the  ever-blessed  Spirit  of  unity  ? 


CHAP.  IT.]  EZRA.  81 

Who  can  limit  the  success  which  might  accompany  His  working,  even  by  our  feeble 
hands,  if  there  were  but  restored  to  us  the  gift  of  a  true  brotherly  union  and  con- 
cord? II.  And  tkt  with  that  bound  or  weeping  should  there  not  be  fob  ds 
ALSO  T0ICE8  OF  MEN  THAT  SHOUT  FOR  JOT?  For  too  scauty  as  our  work  is,  com- 
pared with  what  it  should  be,  yet  is  it  in  itself  great,  real,  and  increasing.  Late  as 
we  began  it,  yet  for  three  half  centuries  has  God  received  from  us  its  thankful 
offering.  It  is  no  little  thing  to  have  been  enabled  to  plant  the  Church  of  Christ 
throughout  North  America.  It  is  no  light  blessing  to  have  been  permitted  to 
accompany  everywhere  throughout  the  world  England's  too  irreligious  colonisation 
with  the  blessed  seed  of  the  Church's  life,  so  that  even  for  the  extent  of  our  work 
with  aU  its  scantiness  we  may  indeed  bless  God.  And  for  our  last  and  greatest 
imperfection,  for  our  own  separations,  many  as  are  still,  alas  1  our  divisions,  yet 
are  marks  of  unity  appearing  and  increasing  with  us.  How  fuU  of  hope  and 
humble  joy  is  this  day's  new  and  glorious  sight  ?  Surely  it  is  written  for  us  to-day, 
"  Rejoice,  thou  barren,  that  bearest  not ;  break  forth  and  cry,  thou  that  travaUest 
not :  for  the  desolate  hath  many  more  children  than  she  which  hath  an  husband." 
But  then  once  more  there  is  here  matter  for  our  future  guidance,  as  well  as  for 
our  present  joy.  Such  gifts  of  God  as  those  which  are  this  day  poured  out  upon  us 
must  not  only  be  received  with  thankfulness,  they  must  also  be  used  with  dihgence. 
They  are  cheering  mercies,  but  they  are  also  stirring  calls  to  duty.  (£p.  Samutl 
WUber/orce.) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Vebs.  1-3.  New  when  the  adrersailes  of  Jadah  and  Benjamin  heard. — The  prO' 
potal  of  the  Samaritans  to  the  Jews : — L  The  proposal  made  by  the  Samaritans. 
1.  Plausible  in  its  form.  2.  But  evil  in  itself.  (1)  They  were  not  Israelites. 
(2)  They  did  not  worship  Jehovah  as  the  true  God.  To  have  received  such  a 
people  into  community  and  co-operation  with  the  true  people  of  God  would  have 
been  an  act  of  utter  unfaithfulness  and  disloyalty  to  Him.  (3)  Their  design  in 
making  this  proposal  was  an  unworthy  one.  (4)  The  acceptance  of  their  proposal 
would  have  been  perilous  to  the  Jews.  II.  The  proposal  rejected  by  the  Jews. 
1.  An  exclusive  obligation  in  relation  to  the  work  is  asserted.  The  alleged 
similarity  of  worship  is  indirectly  denied.  3.  The  command  of  Cyrus  is  adduced 
in  support  of  this  rejection.  This  was  prudent.  "  Be  ye  wise  as  serpents,"  &c. 
4.  The  rejection  of  the  proposal  was  unanimous.  5.  The  rejection  of  the  proposal 
was  prompt  and  decided.  {JVilliam  Jones.)  The  proposals  of  the  wicked  and  how 
to  treat  them : — I.  That  the  wicked  often  propose  to  enter  into  alioance  with 
the  good.  These  alliances  are  of  different  kinds.  1.  Commercial.  2.  Social 
3.  Matrimonial.    4.  Religious.    II.  That    the    proposals    of    the    wicked    fob 

ALLIANCE  with  THE  GOOD  ABE  OFTEN  SUPPORTED  BY  PLAUSIBLE  REASONS.  UI.  ThAT 
THE    ALLIANCES    PROPOSED    BY    THE    WICKED     ARE     ALWAYS     PERILOUS     TO     THE     GOOD. 

rv.  That  the  proposals  of  the  wicked  for  alliance  with  the  good  should 
ALWAYS  BE  FIRMLY  REJECTED.  (Ibid.)  The  uses  of  an  enemy  : — 1.  The  having 
one  is  proof  that  you  are  somebody.  Wishy-washy,  empty,  worthless  people,  never 
have  enemies.  Men  who  never  move,  never  run  against  anything;  and  when  a 
man  is  thoroughly  dead  and  utterly  buried,  nothing  ever  runs  against  him.  To  be 
run  against,  is  proof  of  existence  and  position ;  to  run  against  something,  is  proof 
of  motion.  2.  An  enemy  is,  to  say  the  least,  not  partial  to  you.  He  will  not 
flatter.  He  will  not  exaggerate  your  virtues.  It  is  very  probable  that  he  will 
slightly  magnify  your  faults.  The  benefit  of  that  is  twofold.  It  permits  you  to 
know  that  you  have  faults ;  it  makes  them  visible  and  so  manageable.  Your  enemy 
does  for  you  this  valuable  work.  3.  In  addition,  your  enemy  keeps  you  wide  awake. 
He  does  not  let  you  sleep  at  your  post.  There  are  two  that  always  keep  watch 
— namely,  the  lover  and  the  hater.  Your  lover  watches  that  you  may  sleep.  He 
keeps  off  noises,  excludes  light,  adjusts  surroundings,  that  nothing  may  disturb  you. 
Your  hater  watches  that  you  may  not  sleep.  He  stirs  you  up  when  you  are  napping. 
He  keeps  your  faculties  on  the  alert.  4.  He  is  a  detective  among  your  friends. 
You  need  to  know  who  your  friends  are,  and  who  are  not,  and  who  are  your  enemies. 
The  last  of  these  three  will  discriminate  the  other  two.  When  your  enemy  goes  to 
one  who  is  neither  friend  nor  enemy,  and  assails  you,  the  indifferent  one  will  hav« 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

nothing  to  say  or  chime  in,  not  because  he  is  your  enemy,  but  because  it  is  so  much 
easier  to  assent  than  to  oppose,  and  especially  than  to  refute.  But  your  friend 
will  take  up  cudgels  for  you  on  the  instant.  He  will  deny  everything  and  insist  on 
proof,  and  proving  is  very  hard  work.  Follow  your  enemy  and  you  will  find  your 
friends,  for  he  will  have  developed  them  so  that  they  cannot  be  mistaken.  The 
next  best  thing  to  having  a  hundred  real  friends,  is  to  have  one  open  enemy. 
{G.  F.  Deems,  D.D.)  The  adversary  an  abiding  qxmntity  in  life  : — The  adversary 
is  a  man  who  seeks  to  discover  flaws,  disadvantages,  mistakes ;  a  man  who 
magnifies  all  that  is  unworthy  until  he  makes  a  great  sore  and  wound  of  it,  so  as  to 
offend  as  many  as  possible ;  he  knows  how  the  work  could  have  been  better  done ; 
he  sees  where  every  mistake  has  been  committed  ;  and  under  his  breath,  or  above 
it,  as  circumstances  may  suggest,  he  curses  the  builders  and  their  building,  and 
thinks  that  such  an  edifice  built  by  such  men  is  but  an  incubus  which  the  earth  is 
doomed  to  bear.  Eegard  the  criticism  of  adversaries  as  inevitable.  If  we  think  of 
it  only  as  incidental,  occasional,  characteristic  of  a  moment's  experience,  we  shall 
treat  it  too  lightly ;  the  adversary  is  an  abiding  quantity  in  life.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Let  ua  build  with  you, — Beware  of  your  associates  : — Beware  of  your  associates. 
With  some  men  we  ought  not  to  build  even  God's  house.  We  may  spoil  the  sacred 
edifice  by  taking  money  made  by  the  ruin  of  men.  The  Samaritans  who  thus  spoke 
to  Zerubbabel  and  to  the  chief  of  the  fathers  were  not  telling  an  absolute  lie.  No 
absolute  lie  can  ever  do  much  in  the  world  ;  its  very  nakedness  would  cause  it  to  be 
driven  out  of  society;  it  must  wear  some  rag  of  truth.  The  Samaritans  in  the 
ancient  time  did  worship  God  after  their  fashion,  but  they  did  not  give  up  a  single 
idolatrous  practice ;  they  wanted  to  have  two  religions — ^to  serve  in  some  sort  all 
the  gods  there  were,  and  then  when  one  failed  they  could  flee  to  another ;  so  they 
would  build  any  wall,  any  altar,  any  city,  any  sanctuary  ;  they  wanted  to  be  at 
peace  with  all  the  gods,  then  they  would  know  what  to  do  in  the  day  of  adversity. 
We  have  spoken  of  the  Samaritans  of  the  ancient  time :  why  not  speak  of  the 
Samaritans  of  the  present  day  who  wish  to  do  this  very  thing — men  who  can  bow 
their  heads  in  prayer,  and  drink  toasts  to  the  devil?  "  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and 
Mammon."  (Ibid.)  Simulated  unselfishness  : — How  oftentimes  are  people  over- 
come by  manner,  by  persuasiveness  of  tone,  by  assumed  gentleness  of  spirit  1  The 
young  creature  is  often  so  overcome ;  she  says  she  knows  he  who  has  spoken  to  her 
is  not  a  bad  man ;  whatever  he  be  he  has  a  guileless  tongue ;  his  words  are  well 
chosen ;  he  speaks  them  as  a  man  might  speak  them  who  knows  the  gentleness  of 
pity,  all  the  sympathy  of  love;  it  is  impossible  that  he  can  be  simulating  such 
tenderness ;  it  is  impossible  that  he  can  for  selfish  reasons  be  putting  himself  to 
such  inconvenience  and  sacrifice.  It  is  to-morrow  that  she  finds  out  that  beneath 
the  velvet  there  lay  the  claw  of  the  tiger.  Nothing  stands  but  character — real, 
simple,  transparent,  solid  character.  That  will  bear  a  thousand  blasts  of  opposition 
and  hostility,  and  at  the  end  will  seem  the  richer,  the  chaster,  for  the  rude 
discipline  through  which  it  has  passed.  (Ibid.)  The  true  builders  of  the  spiritual 
temple  of  God  : — That  Christian  work  should  be  done  only  by  Christians  may  be 
supported   by  the  following  reasons.    I.   They  alonb   will  build  ok  thb  true 

FOUNDATION.  II.  ThET  ALONE  WILL  BUILD  WITH  THE  TRUE  MATERIALS.  III.  ThEY 
alone   will    build   in    ACCORDANCE    WITH    THE    TRUE    PLAN.      IV.   ThEY    ALONE    WILL 

BUILD  WITH  THE  TRUE  AIM.  This  is  the  glory  of  God.  V.  They  alone  will 
BUILD  in  the  true  SPIRIT.  That  of — 1.  Obedience.  2.  Humility.  3.  Patience. 
4.  Trust  in  God.  6.  Self -consecration.  {William  Jones.)  Compromising  help 
refused  : — How  strangely  history  repeats  itself.  In  this  early  struggle  between  the 
Jews  and  the  Samaritans  we  have  a  foreshadow  of  many  a  struggle  in  the  Christian 
Church.  When  Paul  and  the  other  apostles  went  forth  preaching  the  Gospel,  the 
Greeks  and  the  Komans  would  willingly  enough  have  tolerated  Christianity  if 
Christianity  would  but  tolerate  their  idolatrous  systems.  They  would  even  have 
patronised  the  new  religion,  and  would  have  offered  no  opposition  to  the  erection  of 
an  image  of  Jesus  amongst  the  images  of  other  gods.  But,  when  they  saw  that 
Christianity  demanded  the  renouncing  of  idolatry  and  the  exclusive  worship  of  the 
one  living  and  true  God,  at  once  priests,  rulers,  and  people  rose  in  arms  against  the 
preachers.  Every  obstacle  was  placed  in  the  way  of  the  spread  of  Christianity. 
But  in  spite  of  aU  persecution  the  Church  prospered.  Idolatry  fought  for  its  life 
and  gradually  lost  every  battle,  until,  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries,  the  Gospel 
had  conquered  the  Roman  Empire,  and  Christianity  became  the  nominal  religion 
of  all  her  people.  This  is  the  battle,  too,  that  the  Church  has  to  fight  to-day.  We 
can  and  we  ought  to  be  Uberal  in  many  things,  but  th«  fnlhyvoma  •£  Jumb  dare  not 


CHIP.  IV,]  EZRA.  33 

be  so  liberal  as  to  allow  men  of  the  world  and  men  of  sin  to  engage  hand  in  hand 
with  them  in  the  Master's  work.  The  Church  ought,  and  she  does,  invite  into  her 
fellowship  all  classes.  However  fallen  and  bad  men  may  be  they  are  welcome  to 
enter  the  Church.  But  they  must  leave  the  world  and  their  sins  behind  them. 
There  cannot  be  two  masters.  Christ  must  have  the  whole  heart,  the  whole 
strength,  and  the  entire  devotion,  (J.  Menzies.)  Qiiestioruible  money  help  should 
be  refused : — The  Church  will  take  money  from  anybody ;  the  whole  Christian 
Church  in  all  her  ramifications  and  communions  cheats  herself  into  the  persuasion 
that  she  can  take  the  money  of  bad  men  and  turn  it  to  good  uses.  Grander  would 
be  the  Church,  more  virgin  in  her  beauty  and  loveliness,  more  snow-like  in  her 
incorruptibleness,  if  she  could  say  to  every  bad  man  who  offers  her  assistance,  Ye 
have  nothing  to  do  with  us  in  building  the  house  of  our  God :  the  windows  shall 
remain  unglazed,  and  the  roof-beams  unslated,  before  we  will  touch  money  made 
by  the  sale  of  poison  or  by  practices  that  are  marked  by  the  utmost  corruption  and 
evil.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Doubtful  men  a  source  of  weakness  to  a  church  : — Thus 
we  can  learn  from  the  Old  Testament  a  good  deal  that  would  bear  immediate 
modem  application.  This  is  the  right  answer  to  all  doubtful  Christians  as  well  as 
to  all  unbelievers.  We  should  say  to  them,  So  long  as  you  are  doubtful  you  are  not 
helpful :  your  character  is  gone  on  one  side,  and  therefore  it  is  ineffective  on  the 
other.  But  would  not  this  class  of  discipline  and  scope  of  criticism  shear  down  the 
congregations  ?  Certainly,  Would  God  they  were  shorn  down  I  Every  doubtful 
man  amongst  us  is  a  loss,  a  source  of  weakness,  a  point  of  perplexity  and  vexation. 
We  are  only  unanimous  when  we  are  one  in  moral  faith  and  consent.  The  critic 
will  do  us  no  good ;  the  clever  man  who  sees  our  metaphysical  error  wiU  keep  us 
back  :  only  the  soul  that  has  given  itself  to  Christ,  out-and-out,  in  an  unbargaining 
surrender,  can  really  stand  fire  in  the  great  war,  and  build  through  all  weathers, 
and  hope  even  in  the  midst  of  darkness.  We  may  have  too  many  people  round 
about  us  ;  we  may  be  overburdened  and  obstructed  by  numbers.  The  Church  owes 
not  a  little  of  its  strength  to  the  purity  of  its  discipline.  {Ibid.)  Mental  penetra- 
tion in  leaders : — Leaders  must  be  critical.  The  man  who  has  little  responsibility 
can  soon  achieve  a  reputation  for  energy.  Leaders  must  halt,  hesitate,  balance, 
and  compare  things,  and  come  to  conclusions  supported  by  the  largest  inferences. 
There  are  men  who  would  take  a  short  and  ready  method  in  accomplishing  their 
purpose :  there  are  men  of  rude  strength,  of  undisciplined  and  unsanctified  force. 
But  Zerubbabel  and  Jeshua  must  look  at  all  the  offers  of  assistance,  and  ask  what 
their  real  value  is  ;  they  must  go  into  the  sanctuary  of  motive,  into  the  arcana  of 
purpose  and  under-meanings.  Zerubbabel  and  Jeshua — men  who  could  undertake 
to  build  a  city — were  men  who  had  mental  penetration ;  they  could  see  into  other 
men.  They  saw  into  the  Samaritan  adversaries,  and  said,  "  Ye  have  nothing  to  do 
with  us  to  build  an  house  unto  oar  God."     (ibid.) 

Vers.  4-24.  Then  the  people  of  the  land  weakened  the  hands  of  the  people  of 
Judah. — The  hostility  of  the  Samaritans  to  the  Jews : — ^I.  The  tactics  of  the 
WICKED.  If  they  cannot  bend  the  good  to  their  wishes  and  aims  by  plausible 
pretences,  they  alter  their  tactics  and  betake  themselves  to  unscrupulous  opposition 
in  various  forms.  II,  The  venality  of  the  wicked.  The  Samaritans  "hired 
counsellors  against  them,  to  frustrate  their  purposes."  It  is  reasonable  to  infer 
that  these  counsellors  were  men  of  some  skill  and  resource  and  power  of  persuasion 
who  deliberately  exercised  their  abilities  in  an  evil  cause  for  gain.  III.  The 
temporary  triumph  of  the  wicked,  IV.  The  freedom  allowed  by  God  to  the 
wicked.  (William  Jones.)  The  antagonism  of  the  world  to  the  Church: — This 
antagonism  as  here  illustrated  is — I.  Persistent.  II.  Authoritative,  in.  Com- 
bined, IV,  Unscrupuloos,  V.  Plausible.  1.  In  their  profession  of  loyalty  to 
the  king.     2.  In  their  presentation  of  proof  of  their  assertions.    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  14.  Now  because  we  have  maintenance  from  the  king's  palace. — Good 
cause  for  great  zeal : — I.  We  acknowledge  a  very  gracious  fact.  1.  We  have 
been  maintained  from  the  King's  palace — (1)  In  things  temporal.  (2)  In  things 
spiritual.  2.  Our  maintenance  from  the  King's  palace  has  cost  His  Majesty  dear. 
He  spared  not  His  own  Son.  8.  We  have  had  a  bountiful  supply.  4.  We  have 
had  an  unfailing  portion.  5.  The  supply  has  ennobled  us.  6.  How  cheering  it  is 
to  have  such  a  soul-satisfying  portion  in  God.  II.  Here  is  a  duty  recognised.  By 
every  sense  of  propriety  we  i3,re  bound  not  to  see  God  dishonoured — 1.  By  ourselves. 
2.  By  those  who  dwell  under  our  roof.    3.  By  those  with  whom  we  have  influence ; 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

particularly  those  who  desire  to  unite  with  us  in  Church  fellowship.  We  must 
not  receive  into  our  membership  persons  of  unhallowed  life — those  who  know  not 
the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  4.  Bj  the  mutilation  and  misrepresentation  of  His 
Word.  5.  By  a  neglect  of  His  ordinances.  6.  By  a  general  decline  of  His  Church. 
7.  By  so  many  rejecting  His  gospel.  We  cannot  prevent  their  doing  so,  but  we 
can  weep  for  them,  pray  for  them,  &c.  IK.  A  couese  of  action  pursued.  "  Certi- 
fied the  king."  It  is  a  holy  exercise  of  the  saints  to  report  to  the  Lord  the  sins  and 
the  sorrows  they  observe  among  the  people  and  to  plead  for  their  removal.  {C.  H. 
Sturgeon.) 

Ver.  15.  That  search  may  be  made  In  the  book  of  the  records  of  thy  fathers. 

Church  registers  : — In  a  general  view,  all  human  records  are  interesting,  if  they 
are  scarcely  more  than  registers  of  names.  Those  names  are  always  appended  to 
some  act  or  event,  however  concisely  stated,  and  thus  these  mere  catalogues  serve 
to  show  us  how  they  who  have  gone  before  us  have  been  occupied,  and  are  the 
founts  and  rills  which  flow  into  the  great  stream  of  human  history  ;  or,  rather 
perhaps,  to  change  the  metaphor,  are  among  the  foundation-stones  on  which  the 
fabric  of  human  history  is  reared ;  they  are  low  and  concealed  from  observation, 
but  are  nevertheless  essential  to  the  building.  Nothing  can  be  apparently  more 
devoid  of  interest  than  the  pages  of  a  church  register ;  and  yet,  let  us  look  at  it 
nearly  and  intently,  and  with  a  reference  to  the  principle  just  intimated,  and 
interest  will  be  found  in  every  column,  in  every  name.  Consider — I.  The  register 
of  BAPTISMS.  II.  The  register  of  marbiages.  IH.  The  register  of  deaths.  {F.  W. 
P.  Greenwood.) 

Vers.  17-24. — ^Then  sent  the  king  an  answer. — The  temporary  triumph  of  the 
wicked  : — I.  Examine  the  letter  of  the  kino.  This  letter  suggests — 1.  That 
the  subtlety  of  the  wicked  frequently  obtains  a  temporary  triumph  over  the  good. 
2.  That  one  generation  frequently  suffers  through  the  sins  of  another  and  earlier 
one.  The  Jews  smarted  for  their  sins  of  Jehoiakim  and  Zedekiah.  3.  That  the 
cause  of  God  is  frequently  reproached  and  hindered  by  the  evil  conduct  Of  some  of 
its  adherents.  The  rebellions  of  Jehoiakim  and  Zedekiah  were  now  made  use  of  to 
asperse  the  Jews  and  to  stop  the  work  of  God.  All  who  love  the  gospel  should 
theretore  walk  circumspectly.  II.  The  action  of  the  Samaritans.  "  Now  when 
the  copy  of  king  Artaxerxes'  letter  was  read,"  &c.  Their  action  was — 1.  Prompt. 
2.  Personal.  3.  Powerful.  Learn :  1.  That  the  temporary  triumph  of  a  cause  or 
&  party  is  not  a  proof  of  its  righteousness.  The  death  and  burial  of  Christ. 
2.  That  we  are  not  competent  to  judge  the  relation  of  the  present  events  to  the 
purpose  and  providence  of  the  great  God.  (^William  Jones.)  Unto  the  rest 
beyond  the  river,  Peace. — Peace  beyond  the  river : — I.  The  advent  message  of  the 
Church  to  sinners  is,  "Beyond  the  river,  Peace!,"  She  tells  of  a  promised  land 
and  arouses  the  slaves  of  sin.  II.  Christ  is  come  and  with  Him  peace,  but 
WB  must  go  to  meet  Him.  III.  The  road  thither  is  hard — we  must  cross  the 
river  of  self-denial.  A  legend  says  that  once  a  wanderer  went  to  a  city,  and  the 
first  man  he  met  said  to  him,  "  Of  course  you  come  to  see  our  famous  statue  ?  " 
and  each  one  he  met  in  that  town  told  him  of  the  famous  statue  ;  and,  moreover, 
each  one  prided  himself  in  having  something  to  do  with  it :  this  one  to  guard  it ; 
that  one  to  keep  it  clean,  and  so  forth.  As  the  traveller  stood  before  it  he  asked, 
"Who  is  this?"  "Ohl  we've  forgotten  his  name,"  was  the  reply,  "but  that's 
no  matter,  it  is  a  splendid  statue,  and  the  glory  of  our  town."  Sadly  the  wanderer 
turned  away,  and  do  you  know,  dear  people,  as  he  went  out  of  the  gate  some 
little  children  cried,  "Why,  that  is  the  man  our  famous  statue  was  put  up  tol  " 
Is  it  not  still  possible  for  men  and  women  to  be  church-goers  and  church-workers, 
to  be  proud  of  their  Church,  and  yet  the  Living  Christ  passes  by  unknown  ?  (The 
Literary  Churchvian.) 


CHAPTER  V. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Then  the  prophets,  Haggal. — The  great  VDorTt  returned : — The  best 
commentary  on  these  verses  is  the  first  chapter  of  Haggai.  I.  The  inciters  to 
the  work.  1.  Want  of  interest  in  the  work  is  implied.  2.  Obligation  to  perform 
the  work  is  implied.     3.  Exhortations  to  resume  the  work  were  given.     II.  Thb 


CHAP,  v.]  EZRA.  35 

LEADEBS  IN  THE  WORK.  "  Then  Tosc  up  Zerubbabel,"  &c.  1.  They  resumed  the 
work  readily.  2.  They  led  the  work  appropriately.  "  Those  that  are  in  places  of 
dignity  and  power,  ought  with  their  dignity  to  put  honour  upon  and  with  their 
power  to  put  life  into  every  good  work."  3.  They  led  work  influentially.  The 
example  of  those  who  occupy  high  stations  is — (1)  Most  conspicuous.  (2)  Most 
attractive.  III.  The  helpers  in  the  work.  "  The  prophets."  They  assisted  by  their 
— 1.  Exhortations  to  vigorous  prosecution  of  the  work.  2.  Assurances  of  the 
presence  of  God  with  them.  3.  Promises  of  future  blessings  from  God  to  them. 
IV.  The  great  First  Cause  of  the  work.  "  The  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of 
Zerubbabel,"  &c.  "All  holy  desires,  all  good  counsels,  and  all  just  works  do 
proceed  "  from  Him.  "  I  will  build  My  Church,"  said  our  Lord  to  Peter.  All  the 
inspiration,  wisdom,  <fec.,  of  the  under-builders  come  from  him.  Learn — 1.  The 
insidious  nature  of  worldliness.  2.  The  value  of  faithful  ministers.  3.  The 
solemn  obligation  of  men  in  eminent  stations.  {William  Jones.)  Hebrew 
prophets  in  unfavourable  times  : — The  Hebrew  prophets  came  when  the  circum- 
stances of  society  were  least  favourable.  Like  painters  arising  to  adorn  a  dingy 
city,  like  poets  singing  of  summer  in  the  winter  of  discontent,  like  flowers  in  the 
wilderness,  like  wells  in  the  desert,  they  brought  life  and  strength  and  gladness  to 
the  helpless  and  despondent,  because  they  came  from  God.  The  literary  form  of 
their  work  reflected  the  civilisation  of  their  day,  but  there  was  on  it  a  light  that 
never  shone  on  sea  or  shore,  and  this  they  knew  to  be  the  light  of  God.  We 
never  find  a  true  religious  revival  springing  from  the  spirit  of  the  age.  Such  a 
revival  always  begins  in  one  or  two  choice  souls — in  a  Moses,  a  Samuel,  a  John 
the  Baptist,  a  St  Bernard,  a  Jonathan-Edwards,  a  Wesley,  a  Newman.  (W. 
F.  Adeney,  3I.A.) 

Vers.  3-5.  At  the  same  time  came  to  them  Tatnla. — The  great  work  investigated 
and  continued : — The  sacred  work  investigated  bt  the  sectilar  authorities. 
1.  The  nature  of  the  investigation.  2.  The  spirit  of  the  investigation.  The  eye 
of  the  world  is  upon  the  work  of  the  Church  to-day.  Let  the  members  see  to  it 
that  it  shall  be  apparent  to  all  unprejudiced  persons  that  their  work  tends  to 
promote  truth  and  righteousness,  purity  and  peace,  piety  and  patriotism.  II.  The 
sacred  work  carried  on  through  the  Divine  blessing.  "  But  the  eye  of  their 
God  was  upon  the  elders  of  the  Jews,"  &c.  This  suggests — 1.  The  Divine  interest 
in  the  work.  2.  The  Divine  oversight  of  the  work.  3.  The  Divine  inspiration  of 
the  workers.    4.  The  Divine  protection  of  the  workers.     (William  Jones.) 

Vers.  6-17.  The  copy  of  the  letter  that  Tatnai. — The  letter  of  the  king  con- 
cerning the  work : — This  letter  has  three  chief  divisions.  I.  The  inquisition  op 
the  Persian  authorities.  II.  The  reply  of  the  Jewish  leaders.  It  presents  the 
following  aspects  of  the  work.  That  it  was — 1.  Not  a  mere  human  enterprise,  but 
a  Divine  commission.  2.  Not  an  innovation,  but  a  restoration.  3.  Not  in  a  spirit 
of  presumption  and  pride,  but  of  obedience  and  humility,  4.  Not  in  opposition  to, 
but  in  conformity  with,  royal  authority.  5.  Not  political,  but  religious  in  its 
character.  III.  The  appeal  of  the  Persian  authorities  to  the  king.  Con- 
clusion :  Two  things  we  may  well  admire  and  imitate.  1.  The  fairness  of  the 
Persian  officials.  2,  The  faithfulness  of  the  Jewish  leaders.  (Ibid.)  We 
are  the  servants  of  the  God  of  heaven  and  earth. — The  supremacy  of  God : — 
Consider :  I.  The  universal  supremacy  of  God.  1.  Its  ground.  (1)  The  per- 
fections of  His  being.  (2)  All  things  were  created  by  Him.  (3)  All  things  are 
sustained  by  Him.  (4)  The  benefits  He  bestows  upon  us  and  especially  our  re- 
demption by  Christ.  2.  Its  extent.  (1)  Throughout  heaven.  (2)  Throughout 
earth.  (3)  Throughout  heU  (2  Pet,  ii.  4).  II.  The  great  obligation  op  men. 
To  obey  Him.  Our  obedience  should  be — 1.  Complete.  2.  Perpetual.  3.  Hearty. 
4.  Joyous,  in.  The  exalted  privilege  of  men.  When  the  service  of  God  is 
rightly  estimated,  it  is  regarded  as  a  glory  and  rejoiced  in  as  a  privilege.  (Ibid.) 
But  after  that  our  fathers  had  provoked  the  God  of  hea,yen.— Arguments  against 
sinning : — In  this  verse  we  have  three  weighty  reasons  against  abstaining  from 
sin.  I.  It  provokes  God.  This  will  be  more  impressively  realised  if  we  reflect 
that  He  is  a  being  of — 1.  Infinite  purity.     2.  Infinite  patience.     H.  It  deprives  the 

BINNER    OF   his   PROTECTION.       III.    It   STRIPS    THE    SINNER   OF    POWER    TO    BATTLE   WITH 

His  FOES.  Guilt  robs  a  man  of  courage.  The  consciousness  of  right  action  in  a 
righteous  cause  is  the  mightiest  inspiration  in  conflict  and  the  surest  defence  in 
peril.     (Ibid.) 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.ti. 


CHAPTER   VI. 

Vebs.  1-6.  And  searcli  was  made  in  the  house  of  the  rolls. — The  tearch  for  the 
decree  of  Cyrus : — Learn — 1.  Honest  and  thorough  investigation  promotes  the 
interests  of  religion  and  of  the  Church  of  God.  2.  The  advantage  of  written 
history.  3.  How  great  should  be  our  gratitude  for  the  sacred  writings.  [William 
Janet.)  "  The  house  of  hooks  "  ; — One  of  Mr.  Layard's  most  valuable  discoveries 
was  that  of  a  set  of  chambers  in  a  palace  at  Koyunjili,  the  whole  of  the  floor  of 
which  was  covered  more  than  a  foot  deep  with  terra-cotta  tablets  inscribed  with 
public  records.  A  similar  collection  has  been  recently  found  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Babylon.  In  some  such  record-house  the  search  for  the  edict  of  Cyrus  was  made. 
{W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.)  A  record  thus  written. — Record  of  tlie  year : — The  record 
here  referred  to  was  of  what  had  been  done  for  the  house  and  service  of  God.  It 
was  a  religious  record  such  as  I  propose  we  should  now  read  of  the  past  year. 
Records  are  made  of  changes  of  what  is  altering  from  day  to  day  in  that  great 
empire  of  change  of  which  we  are  all  subjects.  This  law  of  change  is  often  spoken 
of  as  a  melancholy  law.  It  is  better  to  regard  it  as  the  decree  of  growth  and 
progress.  It  is  the  ordinance  of  escape  from  old  limitations,  and  the  impulse  of 
rising  to  new  stages  of  life  to  gain  fresh  energy  of  thought  and  will.  A  state  of 
sameness  or  immobility  would  be  in  truth  a  wretched  doom.  The  record  of  any 
year  is  not  a  record  of  sadness  or  decay  alone,  even  as  respects  this  world,  but  very 
much  of  delight  and  advancement.  I.  The  fikst  chapteb  is  that  of  new  beino, 
BIRTH  AND  GROWTH.  Many  houses  have  been  made  the  scenes  of  holy  gladness  by 
the  gifts  of  God's  creative  and  inspiring  power.  What  trust  so  great  as  that  of  a 
living  spirit,  with  its  own  individual  nature  and  with  capacities  for  a  peculiar 
development  of  intellectual  and  moral  strength  ?  With  what  reverent,  trembling 
sense  of  responsibility  it  should  be  received  !  What  office  so  high  in  rank,  so  great 
in  opportunity,  so  large  in  patronage  or  susceptible  of  good,  with  such  hope  and 
fear  vrrapped  ap  in  it,  as  the  parental  office  ?  What  expanding  of  outward  naiure  or 
unfolding  of  earthly  ambition  is  really  so  grand  and  affecting  as  that  of  an  undying 
Boul  ?  No  changes  of  material  growth,  of  splendid  seasons  and  solemn  spectacles 
can  equal  this.  It  makes  the  purest  inspiration  of  love,  it  turns  self-sacrifice  into  a 
pleasure ;  it  plies  the  inventive  faculties  with  all  knowledge  and  wisdom  to  provide 
for  the  beloved  object ;  it  draws  the  mind  into  long  foresight  of  its  benefit  and 
improvement;  and  by  the  force  of  mingling  filial  and  parental  communications 
exalts  the  soul  to  a  perception  of  the  relation  of  all  to  Him  who  is  the  common 
Father.  Life's  record,  then,  is  not  all  of  gloomy  change  and  irreparable  privation, 
but  of  strength  enhancing,  existence  renovating,  and  of  new  possession.     II.  But  I 

MUST   TURN   THIS   ILLUMINATED    LEAF    OP    THE    RECORD    TO   A     PAGE    VEILED    IN    SHADES. 

It  is  the  record  of  sickness  and  decline.  And  what  shall  we  say  of  this  change  ? 
We  cannot  make  our  record  all  pleasant  and  cheerful  if  we  would.  The  skeleton 
that  the  Egyptians  carried  to  their  banquets  will  intrude  upon  every  feast  of  our 
earthly  joy  and  fling  its  ghastly  shadow  both  across  the  avenues  of  our  immediate 
thought  and  along  the  vistas  of  our  farthest  recollection.  But  although  sickness 
comes  with  very  sharp  instrumentalities,  yet  she  comes  with  a  bright  retinue. 
Patience,  resignation,  spiritual  thoughts  of  God  and  of  futurity  come  with  her.  As 
the  most  blazing  effulgence  of  heaven  sleeps  within  the  black  cloud,  so  in  the 
lowering  darkness  and  eclipse  of  bodily  suffering  often  lies  the  very  brilliance  of  a 
spiritual  and  Divine  glory.  HI.  We  now  turn  the  last  leaf  of  our  record.  It 
ends,  like  all  earthly  records,  with  death.  God  by  His  Son  Jesus  Christ  lifts  up  the 
burden  of  sadness  that  settles  down  on  a  record  like  this.  Being  dead  in  the  body, 
our  departed  friends  yet  speak  for  truth  and  goodness  more  loudly  and  more 
persuasively  than  when  their  words  fell  on  our  outward  hearing.  They  have  gone 
that  they  might  awaken  our  virtue,  and  that  they  might  chill  and  discourage  our 
worldly  lusts.  Like  the  stars,  though  with  a  warmer  attraction,  they  lift  and 
beckon  us  up.  The  light  burns  on,  the  fountain  flows,  the  music  sounds  for  us. 
Neither  is  this  final  change  and  record  in  the  providence  of  God  a  ground  for 
lamentation.  It  is  rather  a  declaration  of  our  native  dignity  as  His  children.  It  is 
the  announcement  of  our  glorious  destiny.  It  is  a  summons  to  us  to  gird  up  our 
loins,  trim  our  lamps,  watch  and  be  ready.     (C.  A.  Bartol.) 

Ver.  4.  And  let  the  expenses  be  given  out  of  the  Idngr's  house.— ^4  believcr't 
expentes  : — I.  What  are  our  expenses?     The  expenses  referred  to  in  the  text  are 


CHAP.  VI.]  EZRA.  87 

those  connected  with  the  return  of  the  Jewa  to  their  own  land,  the  rebuilding  of  the 
temple  and  its  continual  sacrifices.  1.  Our  release  from  the  thraldom  of  sin 
involved  enormous  expenditure  (1  Pet.  i.  18,  19).  2.  The  important  steps  of  public 
profession  of  faith  in  Christ,  and  of  union  with  His  Church,  need  peculiar  supplies 
of  grace.  3.  There  is  much  new  material  to  be  built  up  in  our  habits  and  life. 
4.  Our  bodies  being  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  every  physical  power  and  every 
mental  faculty  should  be  "a  vessel  unto  honour,  sanctified  and  meet  for  the  Master's 
use."  5.  Our  hearts  are  altars  whereon  should  be  oifered  the  sacrifices  of  worship 
and  praise.  11.  Where  shall  we  fikd  means  to  meet  these  expenses  ?  1.  The 
Word  of  God's  truth.  2.  The  throne  of  His  grace.  3.  The  fellowship  of  His  people. 
4.  The  dispensation  of  His  providence.  5.  The  opposition  of  His  foes.  The 
Persian  monarch  was  naturally  Israel's  enemy,  yet  God  arranges  that  he  shall  pay 
Israel's  expenses.  Even  the  lions  we  may  meet  shall  supply  sweet  honey  for  our 
nourishment  and  refreshment.  6.  The  work  of  Christ  (Phil.  iv.  19).  III.  How 
SHALL  WE  ACT  IN  THE  PKESENCB  OF  SUCH  ABUNDANCE  ?  1.  We  need  Hot  be  afraid  of 
exhausting  Heaven's  treasures.  2.  We  dare  not  be  slow  in  availing  ourselves  of 
these  supplies.  3.  We  cannot  help  wondering  at  the  goodness  of  the  King.  4.  We 
will  not  forget  to  express  our  gratitude  to  the  King.  5.  We  must  not  be  so  selfish 
as  to  hide  these  glad  tidings.     {R.  S.  Latimer.) 

Vers.  8-11.  Moreover  I  make  a  decree  what  ye  shall  do  to  the  elders  of  these 
Jews. — The  Scriptural  warrant  for  an  established  Church : — Look  at  this  history, 
and  consider  candidly  the  great  principles  involved  in  these  facts.  Consider — 
I.  Who  these  men  were  who  issued  these  decrees  concerning  the  building,  and 
CONCERNING  THE  SUPPLIES  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  GoD  AT  JERUSALEM.  They  Were  Gentile 
kings.  II.  What  it  was  that  these  kings  ordered.  They  ordered — 1.  The  building 
of  the  house,  and  that  the  expenses  incurred  thereby  should  be  taken  from  the  king's 
treasury.  2.  The  supply  of  the  house,  with  every  item  of  all  the  details  necessary  for 
carrying  out  the  worship  of  God — rams,  and  lambs,  and  buUocks,  and  wheat,  and 
wine,  and  oil,  and  salt,  acco  ding  to  the  appointment  of  the  priests.  3.  They 
assigned  certain  reasons  why  this  should  be  done.  (1)  That  sacrifices  of  sweet 
savour  might  be  offered  to  the  God  of  Heaven.  (2)  That  prayer  might  be  made  for 
the  life  of  the  king  and  his  sons.  (3)  That  wrath  might  not  come  upon  the  king's 
realm,  implying  that,  if  they  did  not  do  this,  the  realm  incurred  the  wrath  of  God. 
4.  They  insisted  upon  all  this  by  imposing  a  heavy  penalty  upon  any  recusant 
subject.  The  penalty  in  the  decree  of  Darius  was  death  ;  the  penalty  in  the  decree 
of  Artaxerxes  was  varying,  according  to  the  discretion  of  the  executive  magistracy, 
"  whether  unto  death,  or  to  banishment,  or  to  confiscation  of  goods,  or  to  imprison- 
ment "  ;  but  in  each  case,  there  was  a  penalty  for  non-payment.     III.  The  parties 

ADDRESSED  IN   THE    DECREE,  AND   INCLUDED   AMONGST   THE   CONTRIBUTORS.       ThcSe  Were 

not  the  people  only  who  approved  of,  and  could  enjoy  the  worship  of  the  house,  but 
they  included  also  the  adversaries,  who  did  not  approve  of — who  could  not  enjoy — 
and  who  would  not  join  in  the  worship  of  the  house;  yet,  although  they  did  not 
approve,  although  they  would  not  join  in  the  worship  of  that  house,  they  were  com- 
pelled by  the  king's  decree  to  contribute  to  the  expense  of  building,  and  to  the 
continued  supply  of  the  materials  of  that  worship.  And  remember  all  this  was  done 
by  those  kings,  according  to  the  commandment  and  in  harmony  with  the  revealed 
will  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel.     (H.  M'Neile,  M.A.) 

Vers.  9,  10.  That  they  may  offer  sacrifices  of  sweet  savours  unto  the  God  of 
heaven. — Sacrifice  as  a  rule  of  supplication  unto  God  : — I  have  made  choice  of  this 
passage  to  show  that  sacrifice  was  a  rite  of  supplication  to  God,  wherein  the  supplicant 
came  not  with  his  naked  prayer,  but  presented  something  unto  God  whereby  to  find 
favour  in  His  sight.  The  thing  presented  was  a  federal  gift,  consisting  of  meat  and 
drink,  in  the  tender  whereof  as  a  sinner  he  recognised  himself  to  be  his  God's  vassal 
and  servant,  so  by  acceptance  of  the  same  he  was  reconciled  and  restored  to  His 
covenant  by  the  atonement  and  forgiveness  of  his  sins.  For  as  according  to  the 
custom  of  mankind,  to  receive  meat  and  drink  from  the  hand  of  another  was  a  sign 
of  amity  and  friendship,  much  more  to  make  another  partaker  of  his  table,  as  the 
sinner  was  here  of  God's,  by  eating  of  His  oblation  :  hence  those  who  came  to  make 
Bupplication  of  the  Divine  Majesty  whom  they  had  offended  were  wont  by  this  rite 
to  make  way  for  their  suit  by  removing  the  obstacle  of  His  offence.  1.  It  is  often 
said  of  Abraham  and  Isaac  that  where  they  pitched  their  tents  they  also  built  an 
altar,  and  "  there  called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  "  ;  but  an  altar  is  a  place  lot 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Ti. 

sacrifice ;  therefore  sacrifice  must  be  a  rite  whereby  they  called  upon  the  name  of 
God.  2.  The  same  appears  by  the  speech  of  Saul  (1  Sam.  xiii.  12),  which  shows 
that  to  offer  a  burnt-offering  was  to  make  supplication  (1  Sam.  vii.  8,  9).  3.  This 
is  further  proved  by  Psa.  cxvi.  13  :  "I  will  take  the  cup  of  salvation  "  (or  drink 
offering)  "  and  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord."  4.  The  same  is  implied  in  Micah  vi.  6 
and  also  in  Prov.  xv.  1,  where  sacrifice  and  prayer  are  taken  the  one  for  the  other. 
6.  The  like  may  be  inferred  out  of  Solomon's  prayer  at  the  dedication  of  the  temple 
and  the  Lord's  answer  thereto.  In  the  prayer  no  mention  is  made  of  sacrifice  to  be 
there  offered,  but  only  that  God  would  be  pleased  to  hear  the  prayers  that  should  be 
made  in  that  place  or  towards  it.  Nevertheless,  when  God  appeared  to  Solomon  in 
the  night.  He  said  unto  him,  "  I  have  heard  thy  prayer,  and  have  chosen  this 
place  to  Myself  for  a  house  of  sacrifice  "  (2  Chron.  vii.  12).  From  what  has  been  said 
we  can  understand  in  what  sense  the  ancient  Church  called  the  Eucharist  a  sacrifice, 
and  how  harmless  that  notion  was,  viz.,  they  took  this  sacrament  to  have  been 
ordained  by  Christ  to  succeed  the  bloody  sacrifices  of  the  law,  and  to  be  a  means 
of  supplication  and  address  to  God,  in  the  New  Testament  as  they  were  in  the  Old, 
by  representing  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  unto  His  Father,  according  to  His 
appointment.     (J.  Mede,  B.D.) 

Vers.  14-22.  And  they  prospered  through  the  prophesying^  of  Haggai. — The  frus 
ptilpit  the  best  promoter  of  honest  industry : — It — I.  Quickens  the  poweb  of  thought. 
He  quickens  public  thought  most  who  presents  the  most  startling  subjects  with  the 
highest  enthusiasm.  The  true  pulpit  does  this.  The  subjects  it  presents  are  the 
most  vital  to  man's  interests,  the  most  stimulating  to  his  inquiry.  They  involve 
the  Bublimest  facts  of  nature  and  the  grandest  truths  of  inspiration,  the  highest 
interests  of  man  now  and  for  ever.  Hence  there  is  no  power  equal  to  the  power  of 
the  true  pulpit  to  break  the  monotony  of  mind  and  set  the  wheels  of  intellect  agoing. 
This  being  so,  the  attendant  on  a  true  ministry  will  be — 1.  The  more  qualified  to 
form  a  good  plan  of  action.  2.  The  more  practical  sagacity  he  will  have  to  adapt 
means  to  ends.  3.  The  more  solicitous  he  will  be  to  execute  his  plan.  H.  Supplies 
the  timid  with  motive  for  action.  The  man  who  has  been  made  thoughtful  by 
the  power  of  the  pulpit  is  made  to  feel  that  the  more  successful  he  is  in  his 
business — 1.  The  more  useful  he  is  as  a  citizen.  2.  The  more  useful  as  a 
religionist.  (Homilist.)  Prophets  and  builders  : — The  prophet  and  the  builder 
must  always  go  hand  in  hand.  It  is  noticeable  that  the  builder  seldom  or  never 
goes  first,  but  invariably  succeeds  the  intelligent  and  ardent  speaker.  This  is  only 
another  way  of  saying  that  thought  precedes  action.  When  men  think  deeply  they 
are  preparing  the  way  for  laying  massive  foundations  by  persons  who  could  not 
themselves  have  entered  into  such  intellectual  strife.  The  one  must  not  despise 
the  other.  Haggai  built  nothing,  nor  did  Zechariah  probably  lay  stone  upon  stone ; 
on  the  other  hand,  Zerubbabel  may  not  have  been  a  man  of  active  thought,  and 
Jeshua  may  not  have  been  gifted  with  eloquence  ;  but  they  all  worked  together — 
the  first  man,  seeing  the  truth  of  God  and  feeling  the  burden  of  the  zeal  of  heaven, 
excited  the  sentiment  of  the  two,  that  they  might  proceed  to  give  practical  and 
visible  effect  to  the  noble  prophecies  dictated  by  the  Spirit.  It  is  in  vain  for  hearers 
to  complain  of  preachers  when  they  themselves  are  not  prepared  to  carry  out  the 
word  of  the  Lord,  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  God  requires  men  to  work  : — God  puts  the 
oak  in  the  forest,  and  the  pine  on  its  sand  and  rock,  and  s^ys  to  men,  "  There  are 
vour  houses,  go  hew,  saw,  frame,  build,  make."  God  builds  the  trees ;  men  must 
build  the  house.  God  supplies  the  timber ;  men  must  construct  the  ship.  God 
buries  the  iron  in  the  heart  of  the  earth ;  men  must  dig  it,  and  smelt  it,  and 
fashion  it.  Clay  and  rock  are  given  us,  not  brick  and  square  stones.  What  is 
useful  for  the  body,  and,  still  more,  what  is  useful  for  the  mind,  is  to  be  had  only 
by  exertion — exertion  that  will  work  men  more  than  iron  is  wrought,  and  will  shape 
men  more  than  timber  is  shaped.  Again,  in  the  spiritual  world  God  requires  men 
to  work.  He  gives  them  certain  things,  and  then  says,  "  Go,  work."  He  requires 
them  to  work  in  building  up  His  spiritual  temple  as  much  as  He  required  the  Jews, 
in  days  of  old,  to  work  in  building  up  His  earthly  temple.  The  building  of  God's 
temple : — Men  are  like  workmen  set  each  by  the  architect  upon  some  single  bit  of 
carving.  One  has  given  him  to  fashion  a  fragment  where  incompleteness  breaks 
a  promise  of  beauty.  Another  has  set  him  only  level  lines  and  surfaces  of  blank 
monotony.  To  one  it  falls  to  carve  a  head  without  a  body  ;  to  another,  a  lovely 
face  ;  to  many,  patterns  seemingly  of  little  grace  or  meaning.  But  the  task  of  each 
demands  long  labour  and  utmost  care.    At  last  the  various  blocks  are  put  together, 


CHAP.  VI.]  EZRA.  S9 

and,  lo !  there  rises  a  glorious  cathedral,  filling  eye  and  heart  with  its  majesty  and 
loveliness,  destined  to  draw  to  it  and  shelter  within  itself  one  generation  after 
another  of  devout  worshippers.  So,  the  temple  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly 
Jerusalem,  is  building  through  the  ages.  Whoever,  in  high  place  or  in  low,  is 
living  the  life  of  fidelity  and  love,  is  carving  a  stone  for  the  fabric.  {George  S. 
Merrian.)  The  erection  of  churches : — There  is  no  book  that  throws  more  light 
upon  the  obligation  of  building  temples  for  God,  and  the  spirit  that  should  ever 
inspire  it,  than  that  of  Ezra.  I.  In  buildino  a  Christiak  temple  we  express  our 
FELT  connection  WITH  THE  SPIRITUAL  WORLD.  All  building  may  be  regarded  as  the 
expression  of  some  sentiment,  instinct,  or  wish  of  human  nature.  Markets,  senate- 
houses,  theatres,  hotels,  have  all  risen  as  the  effects,  embodiments,  and  realisations 
of  some  principle  in  our  common  nature.  But  these  are  all  for  our  material  wants 
and  interests.  In  building  a  house  for  God  we  declare  that  we  have  other  relations 
than  those  that  connect  us  with  this  material  system,  other  wants  than  those  of 
the  body,  other  interests  than  the  secular  and  the  physical.  We  thus  attest  our 
connection  with  the  spiritual  universe,  our  relation  to  eternity,  our  moral  obligation 
to  the  Infinite,  our  desire  for  communion  with  God.    II.  In  building  a  Christian 

TEMPLE  WE  EXPRESS  THE  IDEA  THAT  WE  REQUIRE  SPECIAL  MANIFESTATIONS   OF    GOD.       In 

the  temple  of  nature  God  is  portrayed  in  every  object  and  proclaimed  in  every 
sound.  But  we  feel  that  some  other  manifestation  is  required.  In  nature  we  can 
only  see  Him  as  the  Almighty  Creator  and  Absolute  Sovereign ;  we  want  Him  to 
appear  in  another  relationship,  one  more  suited  to  our  fallen  condition ;  we  want 
Him  to  appear  to  us  a  redeeming  God — one  mighty  to  save.  Had  we  not  sinned 
we  should  need  no  such  manifestations  of  God  as  we  seek  in  the  erection  of  temples. 
The  temple  of  nature  would  suffice.  There  is  no  temple  in  heaven ;  God  is  seen  in 
all,  loved  in  all,  worshipped  in  all.  III.  In  building  a  Christian  temple  we  attest 
OUR  faith  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  1.  As  a  revelation  from  God  intended 
and  adapted  to  meet  the  condition  of  sinners.  2.  As  necessary  to  all  men,  through 
all  times.  We  feel  that  while  coming  generations  may  not  require  our  systems  of 
philosophy,  our  ecclesiastical  polities,  our  schemes  of  government,  our  codes  of 
laws,  they  will  require  the  gospel ;  and  hence  we  rear  a  temple  for  its  proclamation. 
lY.  In  building  a  Christian  temple  we  express  our  philanthropv.  We  are  not 
building  merely  for  ourselves,  but  for  others ;  not  even  for  our  contemporaries,  but 
for  posterity.  A  Christian  temple  true  to  its  mission  is  the  greatest  blessing  to 
society.  There  the  most  soul-elevating  ideas  are  proclaimed.  Of  all  ideas  to 
which  men  are  subject  none  are  so  important  as  the  religious.  Other  ideas  will 
arouse  certain  faculties — some  the  intellect,  some  the  imagination,  some  the 
emotions — but  this  the  entire  man.  Other  ideas  act  upon  human  nature  as  the 
rays  of  winter  upon  the  soil ;  under  its  influence  only  a  few  germs  will  be  evolved 
and  a  few  plants  will  grow ;  but  this,  Uke  the  glowing  beams  of  the  vernal  sun, 
will  penetrate  the  deepest  depths  with  its  quickening  energy,  cause  every  seed-bud 
to  burst  into  life  and  expand  into  fruitfulness.  The  mystic  rod  of  Moses  was  not 
so  mighty  as  the  instrument  the  religious  teacher  wields.  He  lives  nearest  the 
heart  of  the  world  ;  he  is  up  at  the  head  springs,  out  of  which  proceed  the  issues 
of  life.  True  religious  ideas  wherever  proclaimed  are  the  chief  blessings  of  the 
world.  In  Christian  temples  such  ideas  are  brought  to  bear  with  all  their  force 
upon  the  human  mind ;  by  them  men  are  made  to  feel  their  obligations  to  be 
truthful,  virtuous,  benevolent,  and  Godlike ;  evil  is  subdued,  hearts  are  changed, 
and  souls  are  saved  by  these  ideas.  Christian  temples  are  to  society  what  tides 
are  to  the  ocean,  what  the  winds  are  to  the  atmosphere ;  they  stir  the  mass  and 
keep  it  pure.  V.  In  building  a  Christian  temple  we  express  the  idea  that  public 
WORSHIP  is  to  be  perpetuated  by  human  instrumentalitt.  We  have  reason  to 
thank  God  that  He  has  left  such  work  as  the  building  of  temples  to  us.  Had  the 
necessaries  of  life  sprung  from  the  earth,  so  as  to  require  no  labour,  the  physical 
energies  of  man  would  never  have  been  developed.  Had  knowledge  come  into  our 
mind  without  the  exercise  of  our  faculties,  we  should  never  have  known  anything 
of  intellectual  force.  In  like  manner,  had  everything  in  religion  been  done  for  us, 
so  that  no  demand  would  have  been  made  upon  our  benevolent  sympathies,  we 
should  have  been  beings  of  morbid  religious  sentiment,  and  without  any  force  or 
greatness  of  character.  (Homilist.)  The  second  temple  : — From  this  subject  we 
learn — 1.  That  man  in  this  world  needs  a  sanctuary,  in  which  he  may  call  on  the  name 
of  the  Lord  his  God.  We  are  closely  bound  to  the  material  globe,  and  the  holiest 
affections.  The  most  spiritual  exercises  naturally  cling  round  some  sacred  spot 
where  we  have  been  accustomed  to  meet  with  God  and  with  His  people.     Speaking 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.ti. 

of  an  old  village  church,  Washington  Irving  says,  "  For  my  part,  there  are  feelings 
that  visit  me  in  a  country  church,  amid  the  beautiful  serenity  of  nature,  which  I 
experience  nowhere  else ;  and,  if  not  a  more  religious,  I  think  I  am  a  better  man 
on  Sunday  than  on  any  other  day  of  the  seven."     This  principle  lies   deep   in 
human  nature.    Among  the  most  sacred  memories  of  life  are  the  childhood  recol- 
lections which  carry  us  back  to  the  old  familiar  church,  which  then  seemed  so 
grand  and  impressive,  where  with  father  and  mother  we  reverently  worshipped 
God.    2.  We  learn  that  toil  and  sacrifice  enter  into  the  building  of  these  sanctuaries. 
God  does  not  ask  for  that  which  costs  us  nothing.     Sacrifice  may  not  be  needed  by 
Him,  but  it  is  necessary  for  us,  and  without  it  human  nature  cannot  attain  its 
highest  and  best.     3.  We  learn  not  to  neglect  the  sanctuary.     {E.  B.  Mason.) 
Kept  the  dedication  of  this  house  of  God  with  Joy. — Dedicatimj  the  temple: — I.  Thb 
BUiLDrNO  OF  God's  house  was  caekied  on  in  face  of  obstacles.     Every  important 
work  has  its  hindrances.    No  great  results  have  been  achieved  without  meeting 
obstacles.    But  men  have  always  been  found  qualified  for  the  hard  tasks.    A  clear 
brain,  boundless  energy,  and  unflinching  will  are  hidden  away  in  the  right  man, 
ready  to  be  revealed  at  the  right  time.     The  tremendous  barriers  that  stand  before 
the  waiting  and  needed  reform  chLU  the  courage  of   the  many,  while  they  also 
arouse  the  energy  and  provoke  the  will  of  the  true  leader.     Haggai  had  counted 
the  cost,  and  knew  exactly  what  he  had  to  contend  against.     There  was  the  cry  of 
procrastination.     "  The  time  is  not  come — the  time  that  the  Lord's  house  should 
be  buUt."     "The  time  is  not  ripe"  is  a  phrase  that  might  often  be  interpreted  to 
mean,   "the  people  are  not  ready."    When   any  reform  is  pressing,  you  hear  a 
clamour  for  delay.     There  are  some  who  take  counsel  of  their  fears  rather  than  of 
their  faith.     When  Lincoln  read  his  Proclamation  of  Emancipation  to  Seward,  the 
Secretary  of  State  counselled  delay,  until  at  last  the  President  took  the  matter  into 
his  own  hands  and  sent  the  message  of  liberty  ringing  through  the  land.     Haggai 
understood  the  reason  for  delay,  the  people  were  filled  with  self-love  and  desire  for 
display.     11.  The  building  of  the  temple  had  a  moral  and  spirituai,  influence 
ON  the  people.    At  the  dedication  they  offered  a  sin  offering  of  "twelve  he  goats, 
according  to  the  number  of  the  tribes  of  Israel."    When  once  the  temple  was 
furnished,  and  the  people  saw  all  the  appointments  complete  and  an  altar  standing 
before  them  and  in  use,  their  sense  of  sin  was  aroused.     The  first  sacrifice  on  that 
new  altar  was  for  their  sins.    With  their  new  house  they  began  a  new  life.     The 
house  of  God  in  a  community  stands  for  a  spiritual  idea.     The  school-house  and 
college  stand  for  the  intellectual  needs  of  man.     The  moral  and  spiritual  side  finds 
its  exponent  in  the  church.     These  silent  memorials  of  God's  grace  compel  us  for 
a  moment  to  think  of  duty  and  the  hereafter,  and  they  are  suggestive  of  the  rest 
that  "remaineth."    A  reverential  soul  can  worship  God  anywhere,  but  a  house 
dedicated  to  Him  is  an  aid  to  such  worship.     While  there  we  are  released  for  the 
time  from  the  distracting  sights  and  sounds  of  outside  life,  and  under  the  singing 
of  hymns  and  the  uplifting  influence  of  prayer  the  mind  becomes  calmed  for  the 
consideration  of  truth.     III.  The  house  of  God  is  the  home  of  jot.     The  Oriental 
expressed  his  feelings  in  most  demonstrative  ways.     He  shouted,  clapped  his  hands, 
and  danced  when  happy,  and  these  extravagances  were  carried  into  his  religious 
■worship.    Worship  with  the  Jew  was  a  natural  channel  for  the  display  of  feeling, 
while  the  Occidental  suppresses  his  emotion  in  worship.    We  need  more  naturalness 
in  the  house  of  God.    We  come  before  God  to  express  ourselves,  not  to  suppress 
ourselves.    The  very  truth  proclaimed  in  God's  house  is  fitted  to  produce  the 
liveliest  emotions.     Mankind  ought  to  be  induced  to  come  to  the  house  of  God 
because  of  the  abundance  of  peace  to  be  found  there.     The  view  of  God  should  be 
the  one  fitted  to  draw  all  hearts  to  Him.     A  young  man,  homeless  and  lonely, 
wandered  through  the  streets  of  one  of  our  cities.     He  could  get  no  work,  and  had 
had  no  food  for  some  time.    Despair  had  seized  his  soul,  and  in  that  frame  of  mind 
he  entered  a  church  and  dropped  into  a  back  seat.     The  sermon  was  being  delivered, 
and  it  presented  such  a  view  of  God  and  emphasised  certain  elements  of  truth 
that  it  deepened  his  despair,  and  he  rushed  from  the  church  and  threw  himsielf  into 
the  river.     This  ought  not  to  have  been.     There  are  stern  truths  in  the  yospel,  yet 
to  give  them  undue  prominence,  and  make  them  overshadow  the  obvious  intent  of 
the  gospel  is  to  deprive  it  of  its  essential  quality  of  hopefulness.     The  house  of  God 
stands  for  the  best  and  brightest  and  cheeriest  in  human  life,  (Monday  Club  Sermons.) 
Dedicating  the  temple  :— "We  are  here  advised  as  to  the  accessories  by  which  the 
builders  of  the  temple  were   enabled  to  succeed.     I.  God  was  with  them.     All 
along  He  had  been  predisposed  in  their  behalf.     We  also  are  exhorted  to  work  out 


CHAP.  Ti.]  EZRA.  41 

our  own  salvation  because  it  is  God  that  worketh  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do. 
n.  God  was  pleased  to  communicate  with  them  through  His  ordained  servants. 
Haggai  was  an  old  man  whose  strength  lay  largely  in  admonition.  Zechariah  was 
younger,  more  inclined  to  the  dreaming  of  hopeful  dreams  and  the  seeing  of  bright 
visions.  UI.  They  were  encouraged  by  the  favourable  attitude  of  temporal 
PRINCES.  The  dedication  took  place  in  the  month  Adar,  "  the  month  of  splendour," 
so  called  because  of  the  brightness  of  its  suns  and  the  beauty  of  its  flowers.  1.  A 
hundred  bullocks,  two  hundred  rams,  and  four  hundred  lambs  were  offered  in 
sacrifice ;  "  and  for  a  sin  offering,  twelve  he  goats  for  all  Israel."  There  is  some- 
thing pathetic  in  the  mention  of  these  he  goats.  Ten  of  the  twelve  tribes,  having 
cut  themselves  loose  from  their  brethren,  had  little  or  no  part  in  the  building  of  this 
temple,  but  they  were  remembered,  and  a  place  in  the  sin  offering  was  sacredly 
reserved  for  them.  It  was  as  when  mothers  set  vacant  chairs  for  their  absent, 
wayward  sons  on  thanksgiving  day.  Whatever  might  happen,  the  religious  unity 
of  Israel  must  be  preserved.  In  like  manner  the  Church  of  Christ,  however  parted 
asunder  by  the  controversies  of  the  past,  should  be  at  one  in  the  work  of  the 
kingdom  and  in  the  rejoicings  of  the  triumph  of  Christ.  2.  At  this  dedication  the 
ancient  order  of  service  was  restored.  The  assignments  of  the  priests  and  Levites 
•date  back  to  the  time  of  Moses  (Num.  iii.  6-10).  It  does  not  follow  that  because  a 
custom  is  old  it  is  obsolete.  Prayer  is  as  old  as  human  want,  like  the  air  we 
breathe,  and  time  can  make  no  improvement  upon  it.  It  should  be  observed  that 
the  Feast  of  Passover  was  among  the  venerable  customs  which  were  revived  at  this 
dedication.  It  was  a  foreshadowing  of  the  atonement  of  Christ,  without  which  aU 
other  pomp  and  circumstance  of  service  are  a  dumb  show.  (JD.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.) 
The  joy  of  dedicating  a  house  for  the  Lord: — I.  We  observe  in  general  that  the 

JOT  WITH  WHICH    THE    CHILDREN   OF   ISRAEL,  &C.,  KEPT  THE  DEDICATION   OF   THE    HOUSE 

OF  God  AROSE — 1.  Because  of  the  consideration  of  its  being  now  completely  finished. 
2.  Of  their  regarding  it  as  a  token  of  God  for  good,  a  demonstration  at  once  of  His 
faithfulness  and  favour  towards  them  and  of  the  delightful  prospect  which  it  held 
out  to  them  of  their  enjoying  with  comfort  and  with  advantage  the  public  ordinances 
of  religion.  II.  But  more  particularly  this  joy  arose — 1.  From  the  considera- 
tion of  their  having  been  honoured  and  enabled  to  build  a  house  to  the  Lord  their 
God.  2.  From  the  consideration  of  its  being  a  means  of  promoting  the  glory  of 
•God.  3.  From  its  being  a  means  of  securing  the  observance  and  extending  the 
benefits  of  religious  ordinances  to  future  and  succeeding  generations.  (G.  B.  Brand.) 
The  dedication  of  the  second  temple  : — I.  The  occasion  was  one  of  joy.  Hebrew 
and  Christian  worship  are  joyful,  because  behevers  worship  a  revealed  God  of 
salvation.  Heathen  worship  is  a  straining  or  groping  of  man  after  God  (1  Kings 
xviii.  26-29).     II.  The  service  was  one  for  which  all  who  had  to  take  part  in 

IT  HAD  previously  PURIFIED  THEMSELVES.  HI.  ThERE  WERE  BURNT  OFFERINGS  AS  A 
TOKEN     OF     THE     CONSECRATION    OF     THE     PEOPLE    HEART    AND     SOUL    AFRESH    TO     GoD. 

IV.  There  were  sin  offerings.  In  Divine  worship  there  should  always  be  a 
Tecognition  of  sin,  and  of  Christ's  having  "  put  away  sin  "  by  the  sacrifice  of 
Himself.  V.  There  was  the  observance  of  the  Passover.  They  loved  God 
because  God  loved  them;  this  is  the  order  now,  and  we  cannot  reverse  it  (1  John 
iv.  19).  VI.  The  feast  of  unleavened  bread  was  kept  joyfully  for  seven  days. 
1.  In  token  of  national  unity  and  fellowship.  2.  In  token  of  their  desire  to 
■cultivate  purity.  VH.  The  new  national  life  thus  inaugurated  had  far  less  of 
pomp  and  show  about  it  than  were  seen  in  the  days  of  Solomon.  But  there  was 
more  of  spiritual  power  (Hag.  ii.  9).  {C.  Clemance,  D.D.)  The  dedication  of  the 
temple  was  characterised  by — I.  Religious  rejoicing.  The  reasons  for  this 
were — 1.  Protracted  labours  brought  to  a  close.  2.  The  honour  offered  to  Jehovah 
their  God.  3.  The  benefits  which  were  likely  to  accrue  to  men  through  their  sacred 
edifice  and  its  worship.  TI.  Devout  gratitude.  IH.  Deep  humility.  IV.  Appbo- 
triate  arrangements  for  its  future  use.    {William  Jones.) 

Ver.  21.  To  seek  the  Lord  God  of  IsraeL — Seeking  God : — Birds  are  very  fond 
of  catching  the  last  evening  rays  of  a  winter's  sun,  and  are  often  to  be  found  in  the 
•fternoon  on  banks  facing  the  west,  or  swinging,  if  there  is  no  wind,  on  the  topmost 
branch  of  trees.  On  the  mountains,  too,  all  birds,  as  the  sun  gets  low,  take  to  the 
slopes  to  face  the  west,  whilst  in  the  morning  they  betake  themselves  to  the  eastern 
banks  and  slopes  to  meet  his  rays.  Golden  plovers,  in  the  evenings,  ascend  from 
slope  to  slope,  as  each  becomes  shaded  by  the  intervening  heights,  until  they  are 
All  collected  on  the  very  last  ridge  which  the  sun  shines  upon.    God's  children 

22 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

resemble  birds  in  seeking  light,  only  the  light  they  seek  is  the  light  of  goodness, 
and  truth,  and  righteousness  which  comes  from  God.  They  seek  the  Source  of 
Light,  and  turn  away  from  the  darkness.     (S.  S.  Chronicle.) 

Ver.  22.  For  the  Lord  had  made  them  Joyful. — God  the  joy-hringer : — I.  God- 
IB  THE  JOY-MAKER.  1.  The  object  of  much  that  God  does  is  simply  the  blessedness 
of  human  hearts.  The  poorest  creature  that  lives  has  a  right  to  ask  of  God  the 
satisfaction  of  its  instincts,  and  every  man  has  a  claim  on  God  to  make  him  glad. 
God  pays  all  cheques  legitimately  drawn  on  Him,  and  regards  Himself  as  occupied 
in  a  manner  entirely  congruous  with  His  magnificence  and  infinitude,  when  He 
stoops  to  put  some  kind  of  vibrating  gladnesses  into  the  wings  of  a  gnat  that  dances- 
for  an  hour  in  the  sunshine,  and  into  the  heart  of  a  man  that  lives  his  time  for 
only  a  very  little  longer.  2.  God's  method  of  making  us  glad  is  by  putting  Himself 
into  us.  The  secret  of  all  true  human  well-being  is  close  communion  with  God. 
3.  By  His  providences  He  gives  the  secondary  and  lower  gifts  which  men  according 
to  their  circumstances  need.  He  gives  whatever  is  contributory  to  any  kind  of 
gladness  ;  and  if  we  are  wise  we  shall  trace  all  to  Him.  Our  common  mercies  are- 
His  love-tokens  and  they  all  come  to  us  just  as  the  gifts  of  parents  to  their  children^ 
do,  with  this  on  the  fly-leaf,  "  With  a  father's  love."  II.  The  oblioation  and 
WISDOM  OF  TAKING  OUR  GoD-GivEN  JOYS.  1.  Bc  sure  you  take  Him.  When  He  is 
waiting  to  pour  all  His  love  into  your  heart,  and  all  His  sweetness  into  your  spirit,, 
to  calm  your  anxieties,  to  deepen  your  blessedness ;  to  strengthen  everything  thai 
is  good  in  you ;  to  be  to  you  a  stay  in  the  midst  of  crumbling  prosperity  and  a  light 
in  the  midst  of  the  gathering  darkness,  be  sure  that  you  take  the  joy  that  waits 
your  acceptance.  2.  Kecognise  Him  in  all  common  mercies,  because  He  is  at  the 
back  of  them  all.  Everything  ought  to  be  vocal  to  us  of  the  loving-kindness  of  our 
Pather  in  heaven.  Link  Him  with  everything  that  makes  your  heart  glad.  God 
does  not  desire  to  be  put  away  high  up  on  a  pedestal  above  our  lives,  as  if  He 
regulated  the  great  things  and  the  trifles  regulated  themselves ;  but  He  seeks  to^ 
come  as  air  into  the  lungs,  into  every  particle  of  the  mass  of  life,  and  to  fill  it  alJ 
with  His  purifying  presence.  3.  Kecognise  Him  in  common  joys.  4.  Be  sure  that 
you  use  the  joys  which  He  gives.  There  are  two  ways  in  which  you  can  look  at 
the  world  and  at  everything  that  befalls  you.  There  is  enough  in  everybody's  life 
to  make  him  sad  if  he  selects  these  things  to  dwell  upon.  There  is  enough  in 
everybody's  life  to  make  him  continually  glad  if  he  wisely  picks  out  these  things 
to  think  about.  It  depends  altogether  on  the  angle  at  which  you  look  at  your  life 
what  you  see  about  it.  For  instance,  you  know  how  children  do  when  they  get  a 
bit  of  a  willow  wand  into  their  possession.  They  cut  off  rings  of  bark  and  get  the 
switch  alternately  white  and  black,  white  and  black,  and  so  on  right  to  the  tip. 
Whether  will  you  look  at  the  white  rings  or  the  black  ones  ?  They  are  both  there, 
but  if  you  rightly  look  at  the  black  you  will  find  out  that  there  is  white  below  it, 
and  it  only  needs  a  very  little  stripping  off  of  a  film  to  make  it  into  white  too.  Na 
Christian  man  has  a  right  to  regard  anything  that  God's  providence  brings  to  him 
as  such  unmingled  evil  that  it  ought  to  make  him  sad.  We  are  bound  to  "  rejoice 
in  the  Lord  alway."  6.  Be  sure  that  you  limit  your  delights  by  God-made  joys. 
There  is  nothing  sadder  than  the  joys  that  come  into  a  life  and  do  not  come  from 
God.  Let  us  see  to  it  that  we  do  not  fill  our  cisterns  with  poisonous  sewage,  when 
God  is  waiting  to  fill  them  with  the  pure  river  of  the  water  of  life.  Does  my  joy 
help  me  to  come  near  to  God  ?  Does  it  interfere  with  my  communion  with  Him  ?' 
Does  it  aid  me  in  the  consecration  of  myself  ?  Does  my  conscience  go  with  it 
when  my  conscience  is  most  awake  ?  The  alternative  presented  to  each  of  us  is 
whether  we  will  have  surface  joy  and  a  centre  of  dark  discontent,  or  surface  sorrow 
and  a  centre  of  calm  blessedness.  The  film  of  stagnant  water  on  a  pond  of  rotten- 
ness simulates  the  glories  of  the  rainbow,  in  which  pure  sunshine  falls  upon  the 
pure  drops,  but  it  is  only  painted  corruption  after  all,  and  if  a  man  put  his  lips  to 
it,  it  will  kill  him.  Such  is  the  joy  which  is  apart  from  God.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Cheerfulness  : — Cheerfulness  is  the  root  of  constancy ;  for  there  is  no  more  shifty 
and  unreliable  person  than  your  curmudgeon,  who  is  the  slave  of  his  own  caprices ; 
it  is  the  best  assurance  of  life,  health,  and  wealth ;  it  is  the  sign  and  evidence  of  a 
steady  and  energetic  mind.  It  will  make  a  fruitful  youth,  a  happy  manhood,  and 
a  serene  old  age.  It  is  the  "  open  sesame  "  to  many  secrets  which  the  discontented 
and  peevish  strive  hard  to  discover  but  always  miss ;  it  is  the  magic  medium  of 
friendship,  if  not  even  of  love;  where  there  may  be  lack  of  special  tastes  and 
sympathies,  cheerfulness  will  do  much  to  supply  their  place.     As  water  to  the 


CHAP,  vn.]  EZRA.  43 

flower,  so  is  cheerfalness  to  the  mind.  It  keeps  all  green  and  sweet,  and  sends 
forth  a  gracious  savour  that  is  imperceptible,  but  wins  all  by  its  perfume.  By 
cheerfulness  a  man's  powers  of  work  and  production  are  doubled ;  he  has,  as  it 
were,  taken  in  a  set  of  working  partners  most  ready  to  aid  him  in  every  task  and 
enterprise.  Cheerfulness  keeps  all  the  faculties  in  good  condition,  so  that  they  are 
ever  ready  to  do  their  utmost  without  strain.  (Dr.  Japp,  in  the  "  Argosy.")  Joy 
favourable  to  religion :  sing  and  rejoice : — One  bright  summer's  day  we  noticed  a 
lark  ;  at  first  we  could  not  see  it,  but  with  the  eye  shaded  by  an  uplifted  hand  it 
was  soon  detected.  There  it  flew,  a  little  speck,  a  dim  spot  in  the  Italian-blue  sky, 
pouring  down  floods  of  music.  On  it  went,  higher  and  higher  ;  as  long  as  it  sang 
and  rejoiced,  it  arose.  But  when  the  song  ceased  its  flight  ceased  too.  Thus  is  it 
with  our  souls  ;  they  ascend  Godwards  while  we  sing  and  rejoice.  "  Eejoice  in  the 
Lord  ;  for  you  it  is  safe  "  ;  take  refuge  in  the  citadel  of  heaven-sent  bliss,  and  you 
are  secure  against  many  a  Satanic  attack.    (T.  R.  Stevenson.) 


CHAPTER  vn. 

Yebs.  1-10.  Ezra  the  son  of  Beraiah. — Ezra  the  distinguished : — Consider  Ezra 
as — I.  A  man  of  distinguished  ancestky.  II.  A  man  of  distinguished  attainments. 
III.  A  man  in  the  enjoyment  of  distinguished  favours.  IV.  A  man  of  distinguished 
INFLUENCE.  V.  A  man  of  distinguished  success.  VI.  A  man  of  distinguished  aim. 
He  aimed  at — 1.  The  acquisition  of  the  highest  knowledge.  2.  The  practice  of  the 
highest  knowledge.  3.  The  impartation  of  the  highest  knowledge.  VII.  A  man  of 
distinguished  BLESSING.  (William  Jones.)  And  he  was  a  ready  scribe  in  the  law 
of  Moses. — Scribism : — Scribism  was  one  of  the  remarkable  features  of  the  later 
days  of  Israel.  Its  existence  in  so  much  prominence  showed  that  religion  had 
passed  into  a  new  phase,  that  it  had  assumed  a  literary  aspect.  At  first  in  their 
religious  life  the  Jews  did  not  give  much  heed  to  literary  documents.  Priestism  was 
regulated  by  traditional  usages  rather  than  by  written  directions,  and  justice  was 
administered  under  the  kings  according  to  custom,  precedent,  and  equity.  Quite 
apart  from  the  discussion  concerning  the  antiquity  of  the  Pentateuch,  it  is  certain 
that  its  precepts  were  neither  used  nor  known  in  the  time  of  Josiah,  when  the 
reading  of  the  roll  discovered  in  the  temple  was  listened  to  with  amazement.  Still 
less  did  prophetism  rely  on  literary  resources.  What  need  was  there  of  a  book  when 
the  Spirit  of  God  was  speaking  through  the  audible  voice  of  a  living  man  ?  The 
function  of  the  scribes  was  to  collect  the  sayings  and  traditions  of  earlier  ages,  to 
arrange  and  edit  the  literary  fragments  of  more  original  minds.  Scribism  rose 
when  prophecy  declined.  It  was  a  melancholy  confession  that  the  fountains  of 
living  water  were  drying  up.  It  was  like  an  aqueduct  laboriously  constructed  in 
order  to  convey  stored  water  to  a  thirsty  people  from  distant  reservoirs.  Moreover, 
scribism  degenerated  into  rabbinism,  the  scholasticism  of  the  Jews.  We  may  see 
its  counterpart  in  the  Catholic  scholasticism  which  drew  supplies  from  patristic 
tradition,  and  again  in  Protestant  scholasticism — which  comes  nearer  to  the  source 
of  inspiration  in  the  Bible,  and  yet  which  stiffened  into  a  traditional  interpretation 
of  Scripture,  confining  its  waters  to  iron  pipes  of  orthodoxy.  (W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.) 
According  to  the  hand  of  the  Lord  his  God  upon  him. — God's  helping  hand : — Ezra 
was  wonderfully  blessed  in  his  desire  and  effort  to  restore  Jerusalem  and  rebuild  the 
temple.  Seemingly,  the  power  and  the  blessing  which  served  Ezra  so  signally  was 
aU  from  "  the  king,"  but  really  it  was  all  from  Ezra's  "  God,"  whose  will  disposed 
the  king's  heart,  whose  providence  guided  every  step,  and  whose  power  and  Spirit 
gave  efficiency  and  success  to  every  plan  and  effort.  And  so  it  is  in  all  human 
plaiming  and  effort.  The  success  is  just  in  the  measure  of  "  God's  hand  upon  us." 
If  we  rise  up  to  build,  and  do  not  first  enlist  His  gracious  approval,  providential 
interposition,  and  Spirit's  agency,  our  best  efforts  will  miscarry  or  prove  disastrous. 
If  we  plan  a  revival,  and  put  in  requisition  the  agencies,  and  will  the  conversion  of 
sinners,  we  shall  be  sadly  disappointed,  if  we  do  not  first,  by  prayer  and  prepara- 
tion, array  God  the  Lord  on  our  side,  and  get  hold  of  His  "  outstretched  arm  of 
salvation."  It  is  easy  to  work,  and  glorious  are  the  results — all  human  agencies  so 
readily  fall  into  line  and  aid  us — when  the  hand  of  the  Lord  our  God  is  upon  us. 
The  application,  the  lesson,  is  therefore  obvious — 1.  Prayer  lies  at  the  foundation 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cBif.  vn. 

of  all  wise  planning  and  all  successful  effort  to  advance  Christ's  kingdom  in  the 
world.  2.  God's  hand  must  be  upon  us — His  providence  must  be  enlisted  in  our 
behalf — there  must  be  co-operation  between  the  Divine  and  the  human.  3.  The 
secret  of  declension,  of  abounding  evil,  of  the  lack  of  converting  power  in  the  Church, 
of  the  dearth  of  revivals,  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  God's  hand  is  not  upon  us, 
because  of  the  lack  of  faith  and  prayer.  (J.  M.  Sherwood,  D.D.)  For  upon  the 
first  day  of  the  first  month. — New  Year's  Day  (a  talk  with  children) : — The  Bible 
attaches  a  great  deal  of  importance  to  first  things ;  the  first-fruits  of  the  earth  were 
sacred,  the  first  batch  of  bread  was  a  consecrated  batch,  the  first  hour  of  the  day, 
the  first  day  of  the  week,  the  first  week  of  the  month,  the  first  month  of  the  year, 
the  first  year  in  seven  years,  and  above  all  the  first  day  of  the  first  month,  or  in 
other  words  "  New  Year's  Day,"  were  considered  specially  important.  It  was  on 
New  Year's  Day  that  the  waters  of  the  deluge  finally  dried  up ;  it  was  on  New  Year's 
Day  that  the  tabernacle  was  set  up  for  the  first  time,  that  the  temple  was  com- 
pletely consecrated  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah ;  and  it  was  on  New  Year's  Day  that  the 
captives  in  Babylon  began  their  march  out  of  captivity  on  their  return  to  Canaan 
under  Ezra.  Now  if  you  will  just  remember  these  four  striking  instances  you  will 
say  that  New  Year's  Day  has  a  very  important  history.  How  monotonous  life 
would  be  if  there  were  not  something  new  every  day  I  Why  you  know  that  little 
baby  boy  at  home  wants  a  fresh  toy  every  day.  The  old  toys  soon  become 
uninteresting  and  he  wants  a  new  one  constantly.  Now  you  used  to  be  the  same 
when  you  were  a  very  little  boy,  and  you  are  not  very  different  from  that  now.  All 
through  your  little  life  you  have  been  glad  of  any  little  change  that  gives  a  novelty 
and  freshness  to  it.  God  thinks  of  all  that,  and  therefore  He  gives  you  one  thing  at 
a  time  that  will  be  likely  to  interest  you  ;  and  when  you  have  made  use  of  that  He 
gives  you  another  and  still  another.  He  gives  you  life  moment  by  moment,  hour 
by  hour,  day  by  day.  One  day  is  in  one  sense  very  much  like  the  other  ;  and  yet 
not  two  days  are  alike,  especially  when  you  think  of  the  experiences  of  each  day. 
Every  day  has  something  fresh  in  it ;  and  God  ordains  all  that  in  order  to  make 
you  happy  and  to  enable  you  to  learn  constantly,  from  some  experience  which  each 
day  teaches  you,  something  you  have  not  learnt  before.  This  is  specially  true  with 
regard  to  the  first  day  of  the  New  Year.  You  remember  when  at  school  you  had  a 
copy  book  given  you.  When  you  had  it  first  of  all  it  was  a  clean  and  charming 
copy  book.  When  you  began  to  write  you  took  a  great  deal  of  trouble,  especially  with 
the  first  page.  There  was  not  a  mistake  or  blot,  or  careless  line  on  the  whole  page. 
The  second  page  had  just  one  little  mistake.  Then  the  third,  perhaps,  had  a  blot, 
and  then  you  got  rather  careless,  and  hurried  over  some  of  the  pages  as  you  drew 
near  the  end  of  your  copy  book.  Your  teacher  was  probably  vexed  with  you  because 
you  had  not  improved  as  you  proceeded  with  it ;  then  you  felt  ashamed  of  yourself, 
and  said,  '•  I  wish  I  could  begin  again."  The  day  at  length  came  when  you  got  a 
new  copy  book,  and  you  were  permitted  to  begin  again.  Now  that  is  just  as  God 
deals  with  you.  He  gave  you  a  fine  copy  book  last  year — it  had  365  pages,  and  clean 
throughout ;  and  you  were  expected  to  write  your  very  best  on  those  pages.  I  know 
some  of  you  tried  the  first  day  or  two,  and  now  and  then  you  tried  again ;  but  some 
of  you  got  rather  careless  and  restless  as  you  advanced.  Here  and  there  you  did 
that  which  was  wrong,  and  that  in  each  case  left  a  blot  behind.  The  Master  took 
note  of  it,  and  there  it  is  now  in  His  presence.  You  cannot  be  very  proud  of  your 
last  year's  history.  Yet  to-day  the  Lord  says,  "  I  know  all  about  it ;  but  I  will  give 
you  a  new  copy  book  ;  and  will  put  that  old  one  aside  and  forget  all  about  it.  I  will 
forgive  you  ;  but  you  must  try  to  do  better  with  this  new  copy  book.  Do  your  very 
best.  If  you  cannot  write  as  you  would,  ask  Me  to  help  you,  and  I  will  take  your 
hand  and  guide  it,  and  will  help  you  to  do  what  is  right  and  well-pleasing  in  My 
sight."  When  I  was  a  boy  at  school  we  used  to  have  in  our  copy  books  what  we 
called  a  script  line  on  the  top  of  the  page.  We  used  to  copy  that.  Now  the 
Saviour  has  put  the  script  line  over  every  day  for  us.  It  is  His  own  writing,  and  we 
have  to  copy  it.  (D.  Davies.)  New  Year's  Day  : — The  name  of  Fernando  de 
Magellan  is  not  so  well  known  as  it  should  be.  'Tis  over  350  years  ago  since  he 
first  discovered  for  us  the  Pacific  Ocean,  and  to  reach  it  he  had  to  go  through  the 
Straits  which  have  ever  since  borne  his  name — straits  extending  hundreds  of  miles, 
sometimes  narrowing  to  the  breadth  of  a  broad  river,  and  again  expanding  to  the 
breadth  of  seas.  What  a  day  that  was  when,  after  long  windings  to  and  fro,  his 
ships  entered  the  waters  of  the  Pacific  I  These  were  the  first  keels  which  ploughed 
it.  His  ships  came  back,  but  their  brave  commander  never  did  ;  the  silent  sea 
which  had  beckoned  him  on  lured  him  to  his  death.     Is  it  much  diffejent  with  the 


CHAP,  vn.]  EZRA.  45 

boom  of  the  clock  which  tells  us  we  have  entered  on  the  unknown  stretch  of  a  New 
Year  ?  I  think  not ;  we  are  all  voyaging,  and  no  ship  has  gone  in  advance  into  the 
New  Year.  What  lies  ahead  of  us  ?  No  one  knows,  and  no  one  needs  to  know. 
The  important  thing  is,  that  with  all  our  tacking  to  and  fro  we  ar«  seeking  to  drop 
our  anchor  at  last  in  the  good  haven.  If  that  is  our  aim,  and  we  are  prayerful 
and  earnest  about  it,  it  matters  little  what  the  year  has  in  store  for  us :  all  will 
prove  well  and  rightly  done  in  the  end.  Bend  heart  and  head  to  this,  and  leave  all 
else  with  God.  (J.  Reid  Howatt.)  For  Ezra  had  prepared  his  heart  to  seek  the 
law  of  the  Lord,  and  to  do  it. — Man's  duty  in  relation  to  God's  redemptive  truth  : 
— The  text  indicates  man's  duty  in  relation  to  God's  redemptive  truth.  The  "  law  " 
here  refers  undoubtedly  not  to  God's  truth  in  general,  but  to  that  truth  which  He 
has  condescended  to  reveal  to  man  as  a  fallen  being.  In  relation  to  this  he  has  to 
do  three  things — I.  He  has  to  learn  it.  "  Ezra  had  prepared  his  heart  to  seek  the 
law  of  the  Lord."  Two  things  are  to  be  attended  to  in  our  endeavours  to  attain  a 
knowledge  of  the  truth  which  God  has  revealed  to  fallen  man.  1.  It  must  be 
sought  for  where  it  is  to  be  found.  Truth  from  God  may  be  found  written  in  the 
volume  of  nature,  in  the  facts  of  human  history,  in  the  constitution  of  the  human 
soul :  but  the  truth  from  God  which  man  wants  as  a  sinner  is  to  be  found  in  the 
Bible.  It  must  be  sought  for  here ;  it  is  here  under  the  cover  of  facts  and  histories, 
metaphors  and  poetries.  2.  It  must  be  sought  for  in  the  manner  in  which  it  is  to 
be  found.  There  is  a  right  way  of  seeking  as  well  as  a  wrong  way.  "  Ezra  had 
prepared  his  heart  to  seek  "  it.  It  must  be  sought — (1)  With  devout  earnestness.  It 
must  be  regarded  as  the  supreme  good.  (2)  With  persevering  diligence.  It  must 
be  searched  for  as  hidden  treasures.  H.  He  has  to  practise  it.  Ezra  had  not 
only  "  prepared  his  heart  to  seek  the  law  of  the  Lord,"  but  "  to  do  it."  The  truth 
that  God  has  revealed  to  sinners  is  not  a  subject  for  mere  speculative  thought  or 
logical  debate,  it  is  a  practical  system.  1.  The  doing  of  it  is  essential  to  a  thorough 
understanding  of  it.  •'  He  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  shall  know  of  the  doctrine." 
There  are  some  things  that  a  man  may  understand  without  practising.  A  man 
may  understand  architecture  who  has  never  built  a  house,  agriculture  who  has 
never  cultivated  a  farm,  but  no  one  can  understand  theology  unless  he  has 
practised  it.  2.  The  doing  of  it  is  necessary  in  order  to  be  really  benefited  by  it. 
Truth  as  ideas  in  the  mind  is  only  like  floating  clouds,  rolling  undischarged  over 
the  barren  soil ;  but  truth  as  deeds  is  like  living  streams  so  intersecting  each  other, 
and  winding  in  every  direction,  as  to  touch  the  whole  region  into  life,  verdure,  and 
beauty.  III.  He  has  to  preach  it.  "  And  to  teach  in  Israel  statutes  and  judg- 
ments." God's  truth  to  sinners  is  to  be  taught  by  men.  But  none  can  teach  it 
but  those  who  have  learnt  it  and  practised :  the  right  kind  of  preaching  is  life 
preaching.  This  life  preaching  is — 1.  The  most  intelligible.  2.  The  most  incon- 
trovertible. 3.  The  most  constant.  4.  The  most  Christlike.  Conclusion:  We 
must  learn,  practise,  and  preach  the  Bible.  The  last  can  only  be  done  by  those 
who  have  accomplished  the  first  and  second.     (Homilist.)        Ezra  the  scribe  : — 

I.  His  private  character.  1.  I  would  call  him  a  manly  man.  The  most  uncouth, 
ignorant  country  clodhopper  may  be  drilled  into  being  a  common  soldier,  who  may 
pass  muster  with  his  fellows  in  a  review.  But  there  are  few  men  who  can  become 
great  generals.  Many  are  able  and  willing  to  follow  a  leader,  but  there  are  only 
too  few  who  have  the  power  to  lead  others.  In  the  Church  as  well  as  in  the  State 
our  great  want  is  men,  manly  men.  2.  He  was  a  godly  man.  It  is  not  always  the 
case  that  great  men  are  godly  men  also.  Ezra  prepared  his  heart  to  seek  the  law 
of  the  Lord  his  God,  and  to  do  it ;  and  that  added  to  his  greatness.  3.  He  was  a 
man  of  discernment.  For  himself  he  found  it  was  wisest  and  best  to  seek  the  law 
of  the  Lord  and  to  do  it.  He  saw  also  that  it  was  righteousness  for  the  nation  as 
well  as  the  individual.  U.  Ezra  in  the  discharge  of  his  public  duties.  1.  As  the 
leader  of  the  returning  exiles  he  was  scrupulously  honest.  2.  He  showed  boundless 
trust  in  the  protection  of  God.  3.  As  the  ruler  of  the  people  in  Jerusalem 
he  identified  himself  with  the  people  under  him.  {James  Menzies.) 
Ezra's  exemj^lary  conduct : — Contemplate  its  chief  features.  I.  The  acquisition 
OF  DmtNE  TRUTH  FOR  HIMSELF.  In  aiming  at  this  attainment  he  adopted — 1.  The 
right  method.  He  sought  for  it.  2.  The  right  manner.  "  He  had  prepared " — 
i.e.,  fixed  or  set—"  his  heart  to  seek  the  law  of  the  Lord."     3.  The  right  place. 

II.  The  EMBODIMENT  OF  DiviNE  TRUTH  IN  HIS  LIFE.  Knowledge  misapplied  is — 
1.  Useless  (Matt.  vii.  21-27  ;  Jas.  i.  25).  2.  An  occasion  of  condemnation  (Luke 
xii.  47,  48).  III.  The  communication  of  Divine  truth  to  others.  He  taught 
others  both  by  his  speech  and  by  his  action.    Merely  verbal  teaching  will  not  bear 


46  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  ra. 

comparison  with  that  which  is  also  of  the  character  and  conduct.     The  latter  is — 

I.  More  intelligible.  2.  More  continuous.  3.  More  influential.  (William  Jo7ies.) 
The  Christian  ministry  : — We  have  here  pointed  out  some  indispensable  qualifica- 
tions for  an  able  minister  of  the  New  Testament.  I.  Devotedness  to  God's 
WoBD.  II.  Public  ikstbdction.  {The  Preacher's  Portfolio.)  Divine  sequence 
in  service  : — Everything  in  its  due  order  is  a  universal  law.  This  applies  to  Sab- 
bath-school teaching.     I.  There  must  be  diligent  searching  for  the  law  of  God. 

II.  There  must  be  a  hearty  doing  of  the  discovered  will.    Alas  I  for  him  who 
seeks  to  teach  others  laws  which  he  himself  does  not  obey,  and  to  enforce  com- 
mands which  he  himself  defies.     III.  Then  may  we  teach  the  law  of  the  Lord. 
Let  us  give  heed  to  this  sequence.     It  is  taught  in  many  parts  of  Scripture  ;  but 
let  Ezra's  embodiment  of  it  make  it  plain.     (Sunday  School  Teacher.)        A  mind 
saturated  with  Scripture: — The  late   Sydney  Dobell,  poet   and   philosopher,  and 
devout  Christian,  has  this  remark :   "  The  more  exquisite  your  sense  of  beauty 
becomes,  the  dearer  will  the  Holy  Scripture  become  to  you,  the  more  natural  and 
indispensable  will  the  wisest  and  grandest  of  its  sayings  become  to  your  heart  and 
mind — as  wings  to  the  air,  as  feet  to  the  ground,  as  light  to  the  eyes ;  you  will  feel 
certain  that  the  mind  was  created  for  the  saying,  and  the  saying  for  the  mind.     I 
learned  at  one  period  of  my  life  the  whole  New  Testament  by  rote,  and  I  cannot 
unlearn  the  beauty  of  those  sweet  old  Saxon  phrases  in  which  I  thought  so  long. 
Full  of  '  the  light  that  never  was  on  sea  or  shore,'  I  feel,  in  using  them,  to  mingle 
a  new  element  with  earthly  speech  and  to  relieve,  in  some  sort,  with  their  glory, 
the  dreary  lifelessness  of  words."        Testimonies  to  the  Bible: — "In  this  book," 
said  Ewald  to  Dean  Stanley,  "  is  all  the  wisdom  of  the  world."     "  That  book," 
said  Andrew  Jackson,  as  he  lay  on  his  death-bed,  "  is  the  rock  on  which   our 
republic  rests."     Said  the  great  chemist  Faraday,  "  Why  will  people  go  astray 
■when  they  have  this  blessed  book  to  guide  them?"     "If  we  be  ignorant,"  say  the 
translators  of  1611,  "the  Scriptures  will  instruct  us;  if  out  of  the  way,  they  will 
bring  us  home ;  if  out  of  order,  they  will  reform  us ;  if  in  heaviness,  they  will 
comfort  us;   if  dull,  quicken  us;  if  cold,  inflame  us."     Hooker  said,  "There  is 
scarcely  any  part  of  knowledge  worthy  of  the  mind  of  man  but  from  Scripture  it 
may  have  some  direction  and  light."     Theodore  Parker  said,  "  The  literature  of 
Greece,  which  goes  up  like  incense  from  that  land  of  temples,  has  not  half  the 
influence  of  this  book  of  a  despised  nation.     The  sun  never  sets  upon  its  gleaming 
pages."    Heine,  the  infidel,  said,  "  What  a  book !     Vast  and  wide  as  the  world, 
rooted  in  the  abysses  of   creation,  and  towering  up  behind  the  blue  secrets  of 
heaven.     Sunrise  and  sunset,  promise  and  fulfilment,  birth  and  death,  the  whole 
drama  of  humanity,  all  in  this  book."     (Sunday  School  Times.)        Study  of  the 
Scriptures  : — The  Abb6  Wincklemann,  a  classical  writer  on  the  fine   arts,  after 
descanting  with  great  zeal  on  the  perfection  of   sculpture,  as  exhibited  in  the 
ApoUo  Belvedere,  said  to  the  students,  "  Now  go  and  study  it,  and  if  you  see  no 
beauty  in  it,  go  again  and  again,  go  until  you  feel  it,  for  be  assured  it  is  there." 
So  we  say  to  the  Bible  student,  "Go  and  study  the  Scripture,  and  if  at  first  you 
discover  no  beauty,  go  until  you  feel  the  power  of  its  glorious  truths,  for  be  assured 
it  is  there."     (J.  Bawden  Allen.)        The  Scriptures  a  safeguard  of  a  nation  : — If  we 
wish  to  know  what  the  Christian  tradition  has  done  for  us,  we  must  examine  the 
moral  standards  of  nations  who  have   differed  from  us  in  not  having  it.    For 
example,  we  must  look  at  the  Greeks  of  the  fifth  century  before  Christ,  or  the 
Bomans  at  or  after  the  period  of  the  Advent.     The  Christian  faith  and  the  Holy 
Scriptures  arm  us  with  the  means  of  neutralising  and  repelling  the  assaults  of  evil 
in  and  from  ourselves.     Mist  may  rest  upon  the  surrounding  landscape,  but  our 
own  path  is  always  visible.     [W.  E.  Gladstone.)         The  inestimable  value  of  the 
Scriptures  : — Dr.    Smith,  of  Edinburgh,  preaching  recently,  said  the  Scriptures 
were  an  unalienable  treasure  of  the  Church,  and  urged  his  hearers  to  make  a  more 
diligent  use  of  them.     He  told  of  an  Australian  farmer,  who  for  years  tried  vainly 
to  make  a  competence  out  of  his  soil.      He  transferred  it  at  a  low  price  to  a 
neighbour,  who  shortly  discovered  a  priceless  mine  upon  the  property.     "  So," 
the  preacher  said,  "  we  are  apt  to  forget  that  underneath  the  newspapers  and 
novels  which  cumber  our  tables,  lies  a  small  volume  which  is  worth  inestimably 
more  than  all  of  them."         The  Scriptures  a  winding  splendour: — Passing  from 
Bonn  to  Coblentz,  on  the  Rhine,  the  scenery  is  comparatively  tame.     But  from 
Coblentz  to  Mayence  it  is  enchanting.     You  sit  on  deck,  and  feel  as  if  this  last 
flash  of  beauty  must  exhaust  the  scene ;  but  in  a  moment  there  is  a  turn  of  the 
river,  which  covers  up  the  former  view  with  more  luxuriant  vineyards,  and  more 


rHAP.  vn.]  EZRA.  47 

■defiant  castles,  and  bolder  bluffs,  vine-wreathed,  and  grapes  so  ripe  that  if  the 
hills  be  touched  they  would  bleed  their  rich  life  away  into  the  bowels  of  Bingen 
and  Hockheimer.  Here  and  there  there  are  streams  of  water  melting  into  the 
river,  like  smaller  joys  swallowed  in  the  bosom  of  a  great  gladness.  And  when 
night  begins  to  throw  its  black  mantle  over  the  shoulder  of  the  hills,  and  you  are 
approaching  disembarkation  at  Mayence,  the  lights  along  the  shore  fairly  bewitch 
the  scene  with  their  beauty,  giving  one  a  thrill  that  he  feels  but  once,  yet  that  lasts 
him  for  ever.  So  this  river  of  God's  Word  is  not  a  straight  stream,  but  a  winding 
splendour — at  every  turn  new  wonders  to  attract,  still  riper  vintage  pressing  to  the 
brink,  and  crowded  castles  of  strength — Stolzenfels  and  Johannisberger  as  nothing 
compared  with  the  strong  tower  into  which  the  righteous  run  and  are  saved — and 
our  disembarkation  at  last,  in  the  evening,  amid  the  lights  that  gleam  from  the 
shore  of  heaven.  The  trouble  is,  that  the  vast  majority  of  Bible  voyagera  stop  at 
Coblentz,  where  the  chief  glories  begin.     (Christian  Age.) 

Vers.  11-27.  Now  this  is  the  copy  of  the  letter  that  the  king  Artazerxes. — 

The  office  and  duty  of  the  civil  magistrate : — It  is  the  office  of  a  Christian  magis- 
trate to  encourage  and  protect  good  men  in  the  exercise  of  religion,  both  by  his 
own  example  and  wholesome  laws,  and  to  promote  true  religion  in  his  dominions. 
Thus  far  the  good  magistrates  among  Jews,  heathens,  and  Christians  have  pro- 
ceeded to  their  lasting  honour  and  commendation ;  but  those  who  acted  on  the 
contrary  have  been  branded  with  infamy  and  contempt.  Joshua,  the  Judges, 
David,  Solomon  and  Asa,  Jehoshaphat,  Joash,  Hezekiah  and  others,  destroyed 
idolatry,  erected  altars,  ordered  the  courses  of  the  priests,  built  and  repaired  the 
temple,  collected  and  disposed  of  money  for  those  charges,  caused  the  Passover  and 
other  religious  duties  to  be  celebrated,  and  wrought  a  glorious  reformation  in  true 
religion,  when  the  priests  and  Levites  were  negligent  in  their  oifice.  Nebuchad- 
nezzar, Cyrus,  Darius,  Artaxerxes,  the  King  of  Nineveh,  Alexander  the  Great,  and 
Seleucus,  &g.,  made  decrees  through  all  their  dominions  to  worship  the  true  God; 
they  set  His  people  at  liberty,  ordered  them  to  rebuild  the  temple  to  the  Lord  God 
of  heaven,  allowed  timber,  salt,  and  similar  charges  for  the  sacrifices  out  of  their 
own  treasury ;  they  required  the  prayers  of  God's  people  for  themselves,  their 
families  and  dominions,  they  protected  them  from  their  adversaries  and  appointed 
solemn  fasts,  &c.  Lycurgus,  Numa,  and  Solon  made  laws  concerning  religion  in 
Athens,  Eome,  and  Sparta ;  Timoleon,  Augustus,  and  others  rebuilt  and  endowed 
all  the  temples  that  had  fallen  into  decay  in  Crete  and  about  Kome.  Judas 
Maccabeus  repaired  the  breaches,  purchased  holy  vessels  and  instruments  for  the 
service  of  the  temple,  pulled  down  the  idols,  and  cleansed  the  sanctuary  from  the 
profanation  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  chose  priests  of  a  blameless  conversation,  and 
appointed  an  anniversary  festival  in  commemoration  of  the  reparation  of  the 
temple  which  our  Saviour  honoured  with  His  own  presence  (John  x.  22).  Con- 
stantine  published  several  edicts  in  favour  of  Christian  religion,  granting  to  all 
professors  the  free  exercise  of  it ;  he  destroyed  the  idol  temples,  restored  the  former 
places  of  worship  to  them,  and  built  several  magnificent  churches  and  gave  great 
gifts  to  them ;  he  also  commanded  fine  copies  of  the  Bible  to  be  made.  When  the 
heresy  of  Arius  infected  the  Church,  he  assembled  the  first  General  Council  at 
Nice,  consisting  of  318  bishops  from  all  quarters  of  the  empire.  He  banished 
Arius  and  burnt  his  books,  he  settled  the  time  for  the  keeping  of  Easter,  and  made 
many  good  laws  for  the  discipline  and  government  of  the  Church.  Theodosius, 
Justinian,  and  others  of  his  successors  thought  it  their  duty  to  enact  good  laws  for 
the  establishment  of  the  true  religion.  The  British,  Saxon,  and  English  princes 
have  been  as  active  therein  as  other  Christian  monarchs,  for  King  Lucius  sent  a 
letter  to  Eleatherius,  Bishop  of  Eome,  desiring  his  directions  to  make  him  a 
Christian ;  he  also  turned  some  heathen  temples  into  Christian  churches  and  built 
and  endowed  others  at  his  own  charges.  Ethelbert  kindly  received  and  main- 
tained Augustine  and  his  companions,  Edward  the  Confessor  built  and  granted 
great  privileges  to  the  Abbey  of  Westminster,  and  made  many  excellent  laws  for 
the  benefit  and  protection  of  the  Church,  which  were  rather  the  laws  of  his 
predecessors  than  those  of  his  own  making.  William  the  Conqueror  at  his 
coronation  took  an  oath  that  he  should  defend  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  all  our 
monarchs  have  done  the  like.  By  Act  of  Parliament  the  sovereign  is  declared  to 
be  supreme  Head  of  the  Church,  and  has  the  glory  of  being  described  as  Defender 
of  the  Faith.  (Philoclesius.)  The  commission  of  Artaxerxes  : — It  indicated  a 
Bpirit  of — I.  Great  reverence  tor  God.     II.  Profound  respect  for  the  law  of 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  th. 

God.  m.  Sincere  regard  tor  the  worship  op  God.  IV.  Hearty  appreciation 
OF  THE  CHARACTER  OF  A  GOOD  MAN.  His  liberal  gifts  may  be  exhibited  as — 1.  A 
rebuke  to  the  parsimony  of  many  Christians.  2.  An  example  to  all  Christians. 
{William  Jones.) 

Vers.  15.  The  Lord  Grod  of  Israel,  whose  habitation  is  in  Jemaalem. — Jehovah'i 
habitation : — I.  This  holy  alliance  :  "  The  God  of  Israel,"  We  have  here — 1.  A 
description  of  God  and  His  Church.  The  "  God  of  Israel  "  includes  both.  Israel 
His  Church ;  and  the  God  that  claims  it ;  a  living  God  amidst  a  living  people. 
2.  Infinitude  associated  with  a  royal  seed.  Israel  signifies  a  prevailing  prince 
before  God.  3.  A  veritable  portion  on  both  sides.  "  The  Lord's  portion  is  His 
people";  "The  Lord  is  my  portion,  saith  my  soul."  4.  The  living  connection 
between  God  and  His  people  constitutes  the  stronghold  of  faith.  JI.  His 
HABITATION.  He  dwells — 1.  In  "  the  Jerosalam  which  is  above."  2.  In  the  living 
Church  of  God  which  was  typified  by  Jerusalem.  3.  In  the  Jerusalem  of  every 
regenerated  soul.     {J,  Irons.) 

Ver.  23.  Whatsoever  is  commanded  by  the  God  of  heaven,  let  it  be  diligently 
done. — The  decree  of  Artaxerxes  : — It  is  remarkable  that  some  of  the  richest 
effusions  of  poetry  in  the  whole  Scriptures  proceeded  from  heathen  monarchs,  e.g., 
Darius  and  Nebuchadnezzar.  Consider  these  words — I.  In  reference  to  thh 
Jewish  Church.  1.  The  state  of  the  Jewish  Church  at  this  time  is  not  unlike  to 
that  in  which  it  was  in  the  days  of  Ezra.  It  is  impossible  to  behold  them  in  their 
religious  services,  and  not  to  see  how  thick  a  veil  is  yet  upon  their  hearts.  Nor  do 
they  manifest  any  respect  for  their  own  law  in  its  sublimer  precepts.  Of  real 
holiness  of  heart  and  life  they  are  ignorant  in  the  extreme.  2.  But  to  us  is  given, 
no  less  than  to  Ezra,  a  command  to  advance  their  welfare.  3.  In  this  work  we 
should  engage  with  all  diligence  (Rom.  xi.  30,  31).  II.  In  reference  to  the 
Church  which  is  amongst  us.  1.  We  need  to  have  God's  work  advanced  in  our 
midst.  2.  We  ought  to  engage  in  this  work  with  our  whole  hearts.  Conclusion : 
We  ought  to  obey  this  imperial  mandate — 1.  In  a  way  of  personal  reformation. 
2.  In  a  way  of  ministerial  exertion.  (C  Simeon,  M.A.)  Christian  missions: — 
We  may  well  sit  at  the  feet  of  Artaxerxes  and  learn  from  heathen  lips  the  extent 
of  our  duty  and  the  nature  of  our  obligations.     We  plead  for  missions.     I.  To 

ASSIGN    SOME   REASONS    FOR   ACTIVE    DEVOTEDNESS  TO  THE   CAUSE   OF  GOD  IN  THE  WORLD. 

I.  From  the  Divine  authority  by  which  it  is  enjoined.  It  "  is  commanded  by  the 
God  of  heaven."  We  love  to  see  the  estimate  of  Christian  duties  from  the  men  of 
the  world.  They  often  take  a  just  measure  of  our  obligations.  The  law  of  love  to 
the  perishing  heathen  is  clearly  laid  down.  God  makes  man  the  medium  of  His 
blessings  to  man.  The  same  God  who  bids  us  "  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ " 
that  we  may  be  saved  bids  us  "  go  into  all  the  world,"  <fec.  We  should  like  to  see 
inscribed  over  all  our  missionary  institutions  the  law,  "  Whatsoever  ye  would  that 
men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them."  2.  From  the  urgent  necessity 
which  exists  for  your  exertions.  3.  From  the  fearful  consequences  of  the  neglect 
of  this  duty.  "  For  why  should  there  be  wrath  against  the  realm  of  the  king  and 
his  sons  ?  "     4.  From  the  success  which  has  attended  the  fulfilment  of  this  duty. 

II.  To    OFFER    SOME    SUGGESTIONS    AS   TO    THE    SPIRIT    AND    MODE    IN    WHICH    THIS    WORK 

SHOULD  BE  CARRIED  ON.  1.  Earnestly,  without  remissness.  "  Let  it  be  diligently 
done."    2,  Prayerfully.     3.  Speedily.     {Samuel  Thodey.) 

Vers.  27,  28.  Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  our  fathers,  which  hath  put  snch  a 
thing  as  this  in  the  king's  heart. — Kings  of  Persia — mirsing  fathers  of  the  Church : 
— The  book  of  Ezra  contains  an  interesting  record  of  the  dealings  of  God  in  His 
providence  towards  His  visible  Church  under  the  Persian  Empire.  That  empire 
performed  important  services  for  the  Church — a  brief  consideration  of  which  as 
they  are  recorded  in  the  first  seven  chapters  of  Ezra  will  exhibit  wonderful 
instances  of  the  watchful  care  of  Providence  for  the  Church,  and  open  up  the  way 
for  the  following  inferences :    I.    The  decree  of  Artaxerxes  was  right  in  the 

JUDGMENT  OF  GOD  AS  WELL  AS  IN  THE  JUDGMENT  OF  THE  ChURCH.      Ezra    giveS  thanks 

to  God  for  this  decree  and  ascribes  the  procuring  of  it  to  the  immediate  hand  of 
God.     II.  That  it  is  of  great  importance  to  obtain  the  countenance  and  aid  of 

THE  CrVIL  power  IN  FAVOUR  OF  THE  VISIBLE  ChURCH  IN  ALL  AGES.      It    is  trUC  God  Can 

preserve  and  increase  His  Church  without  the  aid  and  in  spite  of  the  opposition  of 
kings  and  rulers.     It  multiplied  amidst  the  exterminating  persecution  in  Egypt; 


CHAP,  vn.]  EZRA.  49 

and  it  was  not  lost  during  the  seventy  years'  captivity  in  Babylon ;  and  for  thi-ee 
hundred  years  after  Christ  the  Church  was  generally  persecuted  by  the  civil  powers, 
and  yet  multiplied  exceedingly.  But  still  opposition  by  the  civil  powers,  and  much 
more  persecution,  is  in  itself  an  evil ;  and  the  nursing  care  of  the  kings  of  the 
earth  is  a  great  blessing  to  the  Church.     III.  If  crviL  aid  and  countenance  be  so 

IMPOKTANT    TO    THE    ChUBCH,  IT    IS    THE    DUTY    OF    ALL   WHO   LOVB   THE   PROSPERITY   OF 

Jerusalem  to  endeavour  to  obtain  it.  Ezra  did  so  (ver.  6),  "And  the  king 
granted  him  all  his  request  according  to  the  hand  of  the  Lord  his  God  upon  him." 
IV.  We  ought  not  to  be  discouraged  from  seekino  the  adequate  support  of  the 
State  by  the  apparent  improbability  of  obtaining  it.  "  Who  art  thou,  0  great 
mountain  ? "  said  the  prophet  Zechariah,  in  reference  to  the  usurping  Persian 
king,  stirred  up  by  the  enemies  of  the  Church,  "before  Zerubbabel  thou  shalt 
become  a  plain  "  (Zech.  iv.  6,  7).  V.  The  friends  of  religion  and  the  Church 
ought  not  to  be  unduly  concerned  which  party  is  up  or  which  is  down.  When 
the  friends  of  the  Church  are  uppermost,  give  thanks,  like  Ezra,  to  God,  who 
putteth  it  into  the  heart  of  the  king  to  beautify  His  house.  When  the  enemies  are 
uppermost,  do  as  David  did,  when  he  encouraged  himself  in  the  Lord  his  God. 
VI.  The  friends  of  the  Church  ought  not  to  be  much  moved  either  by  the 
flatteries  or  the  threats  of  the  enemies.  VII.  The  Church  needs,  and  is 
entitled  to,  the  private  liberality  of  individuals  as  well  as  the  public  support 
of  the  nation.  Large  and  liberal  as  were  the  government  grants  by  Darius,  Cyrus, 
and  Artaxerxes,  yet  the  voluntary  liberality  of  the  private  Jews  was  called  into 
exercise.  So  it  was  in  the  time  of  Moses  and  the  kings,  and  so  it  must  be  as  it  has 
been  in  the  times  of  the  gospel.  VIII.  The  Church  of  God  ought  not  to  be 
treated  either  by  individuals  or  nations  in  a  mean  and  niggardly  manner, 
Artaxerxes  had  not  to  build  the  temple — that  was  done  already — but  he  beautified 
it ;  he  laid  out  money  on  it,  as  some  would  say  unnecessarily  and  extravagantly. 
But  Ezra  thanks  God  for  putting  such  a  thing  as  this  into  the  king's  heart,  to 
beautify  the  house  of  God.  IX.  As  it  is  the  duty  op  all  to  serve  and  glokift 
God,  so  no  one  is  exempted  from  the  duty  of  supporting  His  true  Church. 
X.  We  ought  not  to  refuse  to  add  to  the  number  of  ministers  and  buildings  in 
THE  Church  until  the  Church  is  perfectly  reformed.  XL  The  aid  of  govern- 
ment TO  THE  extension  OF  THE  ChURCH  IS  THE  RICH  GIVING  TO  THE  POOR.  XII.  LeT 
US  NOT  THINK  THAT  WE  SHALL  GROW  POOR    IP    WE    GIVE  MUCH  TO  GOD.       {IV.  Mackenzie.) 

Exemplary  praise : — I.  The  true  offerers  of  praise.  Ezra  exhibits  in  these 
verses — 1.  Unaffected  humility.  2.  Sincere  piety.  3.  Practical  religiousness. 
II.  The  GRAND  OBJECT  OF  PRAISE.  1.  The  Supreme  Being.  2.  The  Supreme  Being 
in  covenant  relation  with  His  worshippers.  3.  The  Supreme  Being  whom  our 
fathers  worshipped.  III.  Good  reasons  for  praise.  1.  God  inspires  the  worthy 
purposes  of  men.  2.  He  beneficently  influences  the  moral  judgments  of  men. 
3.  He  invigorates  the  heart  and  life  of  His  servants.  {William  Jones.)  To 
beautify  the  house  of  the  Lord  which  is  in  Jerusalem. — God's  love  of  the  beautiful : 
— One  of  the  desires  common  to  humanity  is  the  desire  for  what  is  beautiful.  We 
need  not  go  far  for  evidence  of  this  univ'sal  feeling.  It  is  seen  declaring  itself  in 
the  little  flower  that  lends  a  nameless  grace  to  the  cottage  window,  in  many  a 
simple  ornament  and  picture  to  be  found  in  the  homes  of  labour  and  in  the 
preference  given  to  some  spot  favoured  with  more  than  usual  sweetness  and  charm. 
The  desire  for  beauty  and  the  expressions  of  it  are  the  creation  of  the  Divine 
inbreathing.  To  limit  human  conduct  to  what  is  strictly  useful  would  impoverish 
existence  and  rob  it  of  half  its  interest  and  grace.  If  utility  were  to  be  the  sole 
standard  of  human  action,  the  mother  would  be  forbidden  to  kiss  her  child  and 
the  mourner  to  shed  a  tear  at  the  graveside  of  a  friend.  According  to  this,  to 
admire  the  glowing  sunset  or  to  lift  our  eyes  in  wonder  to  the  star-spangled  sky 
would  be  foolishness.  The  spires  and  monuments  of  our  cities,  the  ornamental 
facings  of  our  buildings,  the  taste  and  skill  displayed  in  the  laying  out  of  our 
public  parks  and  gardens,  according  to  this  system  of  appraisement,  would  be 
wasteful  and  worthless.  Man  desires  beauty  in  the  house  of  God  because  of  its 
fittingness ;  we  feel  it  to  be  in  harmony  with  God's  works  above  and  around  us  to 
introduce  something  of  the  beautiful  into  the  house  of  prayer  and  praise.  The 
feeling  of  hostility  in  the  presence  of  flagrant  abuses  of  art  is  now  passing  away. 
There  is  no  inevitable  alliance  between  artistic  arrangement  and  idolatrous  prac- 
tices— superstition  need  never  be  the  offspring  of  the  beautiful ;  and  if  good  taste 
is  desirable  in  the  home,  there  is  even  stronger  reason  to  give  it  fitting  expression  in 
the  house  of  God.    We  are  learners  in  the  school  of  One  who  was  greater  than 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tin. 

the  temple,  One  who  was  altogether  lovely,  whose  loveliness  was  the  loveliness  of 
perfect  deeds,  and  whose  beauty  was  the  beauty  of  holiness.  With  this  beauty  we 
must  adorn  life's  daily  temple,  taking  care  that  no  image  of  falsehood,  uncleanness, 
or  dishonour  mars  its  fairness  and  grieves  the  Holy  Spirit  that  would  dwell 
within.  (W.  Proudfoot,  M.A.)  Beauty  in  God's  house  .-—So  long  as  our  streets 
are  walled  with  barren  brick,  and  our  eyes  rest  continually,  in  our  daily  life,  on 
objects  utterly  ugly,  or  of  inconsistent  and  meaningless  design,  it  may  be  a  doubt- 
ful question  whether  the  faculties  of  eye  and  mind  which  are  capable  of  perceiving 
beauty,  having  been  left  without  food  during  the  whole  of  our  active  life,  should 
suddenly  be  feasted  upon  entering  a  place  of  worship,  and  colour  and  music  and 
sculpture  should  delight  the  senses  and  stir  the  curiosity  of  men  unaccustomed  tc 
such  appeal,  at  the  moment  when  they  are  required  to  compose  themselves  for  acts 
of  devotion ;  but  it  cannot  be  a  question  at  all,  that  if  once  familiarised  with 
beautiful  form  and  colour,  we  shall  desire  to  see  this  also  in  the  house  of  prayer ; 
its  absence  will  disturb  instead  of  assisting  devotion ;  and  we  shall  feel  it  as  vain 
to  ask  whether,  with  our  own  house  full  of  goodly  craftsmanship,  we  should 
worship  God  in  a  house  destitute  of  it  as  to  ask  whether  a  pilgrim,  whose  day's 
journey  has  led  him  through  fair  woods  and  by  sweet  waters,  must  at  evening  turo 
aside  into  some  barren  place  to  pray.    (J.  Ruskin.) 


CHAPTER  Vm. 


Yebs.  1-20.  And  I  {fathered  them  together  to  the  river  that  runneth  to  Ahava; 

— The  assembly  at  Ahava  : — I.  The  long  jottbnky  commenced.  II.  An  impobtant 
INSPECTION  MADE.  TMs  halt  illustrates — 1.  The  need  of  seasons  of  rest.  2.  The 
use  of  seasons  of  rest.  III.  A  gbave  deficienct  discovered.  Ministers  of  religion 
are  sometimes  slow  in  making  personal  sacrifices  and  rendering  personal  assistance 
even  in  a  good  enterprise.  IV.  The  supply  of  the  deficiency  sought.  He  sought 
them — 1.  By  means  of  influential  men.  2.  By  sending  them  to  the  right  place. 
3.  By  sending  them  to  the  right  man.  4.  By  sending  them  with  precise  instruc- 
tions. V.  The  supply  of  the  deficiency  obtained.  1.  The  supply  was  sufficient. 
2.  The  supply  was  various.  3.  The  supply  was  remarkable  for  the  presence  of  at 
least  one  man  of  distinguished  ability.  4.  The  supply  was  obtained  by  the  blessing 
of  God.  (William  Jones.)  A  man  of  understanding,  of  the  sons  of  MahlL — Men 
of  understanding — I.  Abe  the  gifts  op  God.  1.  They  derive  their  abilities  from 
Him.  2.  They  rightly  develop  their  abilities  by  His  blessing.  3.  They  attain 
their  moral  excellences  by  His  blessing.     II.  Abe  of  gbeat  wobth  amongst  men. 

1.  Understanding  is  essential  to  the  beneficent  employment  of  other  gifts  and 
powers.  2.  The  employment  of  understanding  itself  confers  great  benefits  upon 
society.    Conclusion :  It  behoves  us — 1.  To  praise  God  for  men  of  understanding. 

2.  To  prize  such  men.  3.  To  endeavour  to  become  men  of  understanding. 
(Ibid.) 

Ver.  21.  Then  I  proclaimed  a  fast  there. — Prayer  and  fasting  (preached  on 
the  occasion  of  a  public  fast) : — I.  That  the  best  means  to  pbocube  success  upon 
ouB  counsels  and  endeavours  is  to  seek  God  for  His  blessing.  1.  This  results 
from  the  first  principles  on  which  all  religion  is  built.  (1)  That  there  is  a  God  of 
infinite  power  who  governs  the  world  and  can  dispose  all  things  in  it  to  such  ends 
as  are  agreeable  to  His  will.  (2)  That  human  policy  and  strength  are  of  no 
moment  when  they  come  in  opposition  to  His  providence :  "  There  is  no  wisdom, 
nor  understanding,  nor  counsel  against  the  Lord."  (3)  That  He  has  a  particular 
care  of  those  who  serve  Him  faithfully.  2.  In  giving  His  assistance  God  does  not 
always  act  in  so  palpable  a  manner  as  that  whereby  we  see  second  causes  producing 
their  effects.  But  that  it  is  the  most  rational  and  most  religious  way  to  begin  at 
Heaven  in  all  His  consultations  and  designs  will  appear  by  reflecting — (1)  That  it  is 
impossible  for  a  creature  to  be  independent.  (2)  That  God  can  no  more  cease  to 
govern  the  world  than  He  can  cease  to  be  God.  (3)  That  He  cannot  govern  His 
creatures  if  He  does  not  influence  them.  (4)  That  those  who  depend  upon  their 
own  policy  and  strength,  without  any  regard  to  His  will,  affront  His  majesty, 
reject  His  government,  and  justly  provoke  Him  to  punish  and  disappoint  them 


CHAP.  Tin.]  EZRA.  51 

(Prov.  iii.  6,  7).  II.  That  solemn  fasting  is  a  propeb  method  to  be  rsED  in  such 
ADDRESSES  TO  GoD.  We  have  but  two  ways  to  express  our  thoughts  and  the 
inclinations  of  our  minds,  either  by  words  or  by  such  actions  as  naturally  flow 
from  them,  and  both  of  these  are  equally  proper  and  therefore  such  as  become  our 
devotions.  For  God  is  the  author  of  decency  and  order,  and  His  service  is  then 
most  decent  and  orderly  when  it  is  unaffected  and  agreeable  to  nature ;  and  there- 
fore such  gestures  or  actions  are  proper  in  His  worship  which  do  naturally  flow 
from  or  by  custom  are  used  to  accompany  such  a  disposition  of  mind  as  we  ought 
to  be  in  when  we  make  our  approaches  to  Him.  Thus  kneeling  becomes  us  at  our 
prayers,  because  it  is  the  usual  posture  of  supplicants  ;  singing  of  hymns  is  decent 
in  thanksgiving,  because  songs  and  music  are  fit  attendants  on  praise  and  joy;  and 
fasting  is  extremely  proper  for  a  solemn  humiliation  before  God,  for  the  begging 
pardon  of  our  sins,  and  assistance  in  our  difficulties,  because  it  is  a  natural 
expression  of  sorrow,  and  is  productive  of  humble  thoughts  in  ourselves  and  devout 
ones  towards  God.  And  therefore  we  find  that  it  has  been  the  practice  not  only  of 
the  Churches  of  God,  but  even  of  the  heathens  themselves,  to  use  solemn  fasts  upon 
extraordinary  applications  to  Heaven,  so  that  fasting  is  a  part  of  worship  prescribed 
by  nature  and  by  common  sense  of  men.  Public  fasting  should  be  attended  with 
pubUc  demonstrations  of  seriousness,  such  as  gravity  in  our  discourse  and  behaviour, 
a  ceasing  from  the  business  of  our  particular  calUngs,  abstaining  from  ornaments, 
recreations,  and  places  of  civil  concourse,  and  spending  the  day  in  the  public 
devotions  of  the  Church  and  in  the  retirements  of  our  closets.  For  though  a 
private  Christian  may  fast  (as  he  may  pray)  without  any  of  this  pomp,  and 
discharge  the  duty  in  his  own  breast,  yet  to  make  it  public  there  is  no  other  way 
but  an  outward  solemnity ;  and  a  community  cannot  hold  a  fast  but  by  such  an 
appearance.  In  this  the  minds  of  men  are  more  apt  to  be  grave  and  serious  when 
there  is  no  appearance  of  jollity  to  divert  them,  they  are  drawn  off  from  thoughts 
of  worldly  business  and  fixed  on  pious  meditations,  when  they  see  their  neighbours 
thronging  to  the  temple,  when  there  is  no  commerce  in  the  shops  nor  hurry  in  the 
streets.  Such  a  face  of  things  shows  that  men  are  about  the  more  serious  business 
of  another  world.     (William  Hayley,  D.D.) 

Vers.  22,  23.  For  I  was  ashamed  to  require  of  the  king  &  band  of  soldiers. — 

Ezra'$  ccmfidence  in  God : — I.  Confidence  in  God  avowed.  1.  In  His  providence. 
2.  In  His  providence  as  efiSciently  promoting  the  interests  of  His  people.  3.  In 
His  providence  as  opposed  to  those  who  forsake  Him.  II.  Confidence  in  God 
tested.  1.  By  their  need  of  guidance.  2.  By  their  need  of  protection. 
in.  Confidence  in  God  maintained.  1.  In  not  seeking  guidance  and  defence 
from  the  king.  2.  In  seeking  guidance  and  defence  from  God.  IV.  Confidence 
IN  God  viNDiCATrD.  1.  In  their  inward  assurance.  2,  In  the  outward  result. 
{William  Jones.)        Ezra  and  his   times: — I.  Ezra's  lanouaoe  was  in  strikino 

CONTRAST  with   THE   GENERAL   STATE   OF    OPINION    AROUND    HIM.      He    kneW    he    WaS 

right,  and  could  afford  to  be  singular.  At  particular  crises  of  public  opinion  it 
devolves  upon  some  men  to  go  into  the  land  of  the  enemy,  that  they  may  bring 
truth  out  of  captivity.  Such  men  have  no  ultimate  fear  for  truth ;  they  know  its 
vitality.  Such  men  never  change  sides.  The  world  wonders  at  their  eccentricity, 
and  recommends  them  to  beg  or  borrow  a  band  of  soldiers  and  horsemen  to  assist 
them  in  their  progress ;  but  they  are  ashamed  to  think  of  such  a  thing.  If  they 
could  make  truth  successful  to-morrow  they  must  do  it  with  truth's  weapons  and 
her  weapons  only ;  but  they  cannot  advance  the  liberation  of  truth  by  any 
unworthy  means,  or  by  any  unnatural  alliance.    II.  Ezra's  situation  afforded 

HIM   an     OPPORTUNin     FOR     ASSERTING     THIS    GREAT     PRINCIPLE     UNDER   VERT   TRTINO 

CIRCUMSTANCES.  Christ's  whole  life  illustrates  Ezra's  principle  of  confidence  in 
God  under  circumstances  of  great  temptation.  (W.  G.  Barrett.)  Ezra  an 
example  in  business  : — I.  His  humiliation.  II.  His  faith.  III.  His  prater. 
IV.  His  HOLT  JEALOUST.  V.  His  SUCCESS.  (R.CecH.)  Heroic  faith: — Our  text 
gives  us  a  glimpse  of  high-toned  faith,  and  a  noble  strain  of  feeling.  Ezra  knew 
that  he  had  but  to  ask  and  have  an  escort  from  the  king  that  would  ensure  their 
safety  till  they  saw  Jerusalem.  It  took  some  strength  of  principle  to  abstain  from 
asking  what  it  would  have  been  so  natural  to  ask,  so  easy  to  get,  so  comfortable  to 
have.  The  symbolic  phrase  "  the  hand  of  our  God,"  as  expressive  of  the  Divine 
protection,  occurs  with  remarkable  frequency  in  the  books  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah, 
and  though  not  peculiar  to  them,  is  yet  strikingly  characteristic  of  them.  It  has  a 
certain  beauty  and  force  of  its  own.     The  hand  is,  of  course,  the  seat  of  active 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vm. 

power.  It  is  on  or  over  a  man  like  some  great  shield  held  aloft  above  him,  below 
which  there  is  safe  hiding.  So  that  great  hand  bends  itself  over  us,  and  we  are 
secure  beneath  its  hollow.  As  a  child  sometimes  carries  a  tender-winged  butterfly 
in  the  globe  of  its  two  hands,  that  the  bloom  on  its  wings  may  not  be  ruffled  by  it3 
fluttering,  so  He  carries  our  feeble,  enamoured  souls  enclosed  in  the  covert  of  His 
almighty  hand.  As  a  father  may  lay  his  own  large  muscular  hand  on  his  child's 
tiny  fingers  to  help  him,  or  as  "  Elisha  put  his  hands  on  the  king's  hands,"  that 
the  contact  might  strengthen  him  to  shoot  the  arrow  of  the  Lord's  deliverance,  so 
the  hand  of  our  God  is  upon  us  to  impart  power  as  well  as  protection  ;  and  "  our 
bow  abides  in  strength  "  when  "  the  arms  of  our  hands  are  made  strong  by  the 
hands  of  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob."  That  was  Ezra's  faith,  and  that  should  be 
ours.  Note  Ezra's  sensitive  shrinking  from  anything  like  inconsistency  between 
his  creed  and  his  practice,  and  we  may  well  learn  this  lesson — to  be  true  to  our 
professed  principles  ;  to  beware  of  making  our  religion  a  matter  of  words  ;  to  live, 
when  the  time  for  putting  them  into  practice  comes,  by  the  maxims  which  we  have 
been  forward  to  proclaim  when  there  was  no  risk  of  applying  them  ;  and  to  try 
sometimes  to  look  at  our  lives  with  the  eyes  of  people  who  do  not  share  our  faith, 
that  we  may  bring  our  actions  up  to  the  mark  of  what  they  expect  of  us. 
Especially  in  regard  to  this  matter  of  trust  in  an  unseen  hand,  and  reliance  on 
visible  helps,  we  all  need  to  be  very  rigid  in  our  self-inspection.  Faith  in  the  good 
hand  of  God  upon  us  for  good  should  often  lead  to  the  abandonment,  and  always 
to  the  subordination,  of  material  aids.  Each  man  must  settle  for  himself  when 
abandonment  or  subordination  is  his  duty.  We  ought  to  work  into  our  lives  the 
principle  that  the  absolute  surrender  and  forsaking  of  external  helps  and  goods  is 
sometimes  essential  to  the  preservation  and  due  expression  of  reliance  on  God. 
What  shall  we  say  of  people  who  profess  that  God  is  their  portion  and  are  as  eager 
in  the  scramble  for  money  as  anybody  ?  What  kind  of  commentary  will  sharp- 
sighted,  sharp-tongued  observers  have  a  right  to  make  on  us,  whose  creed  is  so 
unlike  theirs,  while  our  lives  are  identical  ?  Do  you  believe  that  "  the  hand  of  our 
God  is  upon  all  them  for  good  that  seek  Him "  ?  Then  do  you  not  think  that 
racing  after  the  prizes  of  this  world,  with  flushed  cheek  and  labouring  breath,  or 
longing,  with  a  gnawing  hunger  of  heart,  for  any  earthly  good,  or  lamenting  over 
the  removal  of  creaturely  defences  and  joys,  as  if  heaven  were  empty  because 
some  one's  place  here  is,  or  as  if  God  were  dead  because  dear  ones  die,  may  well  be 
a  shame  to  us,  and  a  taunt  on  the  lips  of  our  enemies  ?  Note  further  that  his  faith 
not  only  impels  him  to  the  renunciation  of  the  Babylonian  guard,  but  to  earnest 
supplication  for  the  defence  in  which  he  is  so  confident.  So  for  us  the  condition 
and  preparation  on  and  by  which  we  are  sheltered  by  that  great  hand  is  the  faith 
that  asks  and  the  asking  of  faith.  We  make  God  responsible  for  our  safety  when 
we  abandon  other  defence  and  commit  ourselves  to  Him.  He  will  accept  the  trust 
and  set  His  guards  about  us.  So  our  story  ends  with  the  triumphant  vindication 
of  this  Quixotic  faith  :  "  The  hand  of  our  God  was  upon  us,  and  He  delivered  us 
from  the  hand  of  the  enemy,  and  of  such  as  lay  in  wait  by  the  way  ;  and  we  came 
to  Jerusalem."  The  ventures  of  faith  are  ever  rewarded.  When  we  come  to  tell 
the  completed  story  of  our  lives,  we  shall  have  to  record  the  fulfilment  of  all  God's 
promises,  and  the  accomplishment  of  all  our  prayers  that  were  built  on  these. 
{A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Fear  of  inconsif:tencxj  : — I.  Ezra's  conviction.  1.  He  was 
convinced  that  there  were  some  men  who  sought  God,  and  others  who  forsook  Him. 
There  were  some  who  sought — (1)  The  knowledge  of  God.  (2)  The  favour  of  God. 
(3)  The  glory  of  God.  But  there  were  others  who  cared  for  none  of  these  things. 
So  it  is  still.  There  are  some  who  read  the  Bible  and  listen  to  the  gospel  with  an 
earnest  desire  to  know  God,  and  who  feel  that  to  have  God  for  their  friend  is  to 
have  the  business  of  life  accomplished ;  while  there  are  others  who  turn  a  deaf  ear 
to  the  invitations  of  Divine  love,  and  who  never  seriously  ask  regarding  the 
requirements  of  the  law  of  God.  The  conviction  of  Ezra  is  that  of  every  thought- 
ful good  man.  There  is  also  the  further  conviction  that  this  is  the  grand  distinction. 
He  who  thinks  of  one  neighbour  being  a  seeker  of  God,  and  another  a  forsaker  of 
God,  looks  at  a  distinction  of  the  soul,  and  one  which  will  prove  lasting  and  important 
as  the  soul  itself.  2.  Ezra  was  convinced  that  God's  hand  for  good  was  on  the 
one  class,  and  that  His  power  and  wrath  were  against  the  other.  (1)  The  Bible 
declares  this  in  the  plainest  terms  (Gen.  xviii.  23-25,  &c.).  (2)  This  is  illustrated 
by  the  history  of  the  Jews  and  of  others  with  whom  they  had  to  do.  (3)  This 
truth  is  as  evident  now  as  it  was  then.  Sloth  and  intemperance  and  profligacj 
lead  to  ruin,  while  diligence  and  sobriety  lead  to  respectability  and  competence. 


CHAP,  vin.]  EZRA.  53 

3.  Ezra  was  convinced  that  he  and  his  companions  were  among  those  who  sought 
God,  and  on  whom  God's  hand  was  for  good.  He  calls  Jehovah  "  our  Lord." 
His  language  was  intended  to  convey  that  they  were  in  a  state  of  favour  with  God, 
and  that  they  knew  this.  From  this  we  learn  that  a  man  may  assure  himself  of 
God's  friendship.  H.  Ezra's  declaration  of  his  conviction.  This  declaration 
was  probably  made  when  he  requested  authority  to  make  his  proposed  journey  to 
Jerusalem.  At  such  a  time  he  would  feel  under  peculiar  obligation  to  declare  his 
belief  in  God,  and  his  hope  that  Jehovah  was  his  own  Father,  Protector,  and 
Guide.  This  obligation  every  good  man  ought  to  feel.  Christ  requires  us  to 
confess  Him.  Such  a  profession  is  made  by  the  observance  of  outward  and  positive 
institutions.  When  a  man  calls  his  family  around  him,  sings  a  song  of  praise,  and 
reads  a  portion  of  Scripture,  and  presents  an  offering  of  supplication  and  thanks- 
giving, he  is  telling  his  children  and  neighbours  that  he  is  a  disciple  of  Jesus  Christ. 
When  he  engages  in  the  exercises  of  public  worship,  and  especially  when  he  takes 
his  place  at  the  communion-table,  he  is  making  an  open  and  decided  declaration 
that  he  is  a  disciple  of  Jesus.  lU.  Ezra's  anxiety  lest  he  should  do  anything 
INCONSISTENT  WITH  THIS  DECLARATION.  Two  Instructive  points  require  to  be  looked 
at.  1.  There  was  real  and  great  danger.  2.  The  inconsistency  from  which  he 
shrank  was  more  apparent  than  real.  A  good  man  believes  that  God  renews  the 
face  of  the  earth,  and  covers  the  valleys  with  corn,  but  he  does  not  neglect  to  plough 
and  sow ;  he  believes  that  God  is  a  refuge  and  a  strength,  a  sun  and  a  shield,  yet 
he  takes  food  when  he  is  hungry  and  medicine  when  he  is  sick ;  he  does  not 
expect  that  God  is  to  protect  and  bless  him  apart  from  such  means  as  prudence 
and  experience  may  dictate.  If  Ezra  had  asked  for  a  guard  of  soldieri,  the  request 
would  not  have  been  inconsistent  with  confidence  in  the  power  and  faithfulness  of 
God,  but  it  would  probably  have  appeared  so  to  the  king  and  his  nobles,  and  he 
feared  lest  in  this  way  the  character  of  God  should  suffer.  Things  which  are  in 
themselves  lawful  are  at  times  inexpedient,  and  a  Christian  man  by  doing  such 
things  may  greatly  injure  both  his  comfort  and  usefulness.  A  sacrifice  of  principle 
and  a  wise  consideration  of  times  and  circumstances  are  very  different  things,  and 
to  confound  them  shows  only  ignorance  and  folly.  (J.  B.  Johnston,  D.D.)  The 
good  hand  of  God  : — It  is  a  glimpse  into  a  spiritual  history  which  our  text  here 
presents  to  us.  Of  Ezra  himself  we  have  but  a  vague  and  shadowy  idea  ;  he  has 
long  since  passed  to  the  realm  where  storms  and  struggles  are  ended,  and  the 
mystery  of  life  gives  place  to  the  clear  sunlight  of  God's  love.  But  within  that 
strong,  devout  soul  a  great  struggle  was  once  fought  out.  The  anxious  questioning 
of  his  troubled  and  perplexed  spirit  was  real  enough  then.  And  while  it  is  possible 
to  miss  the  true  lesson  and  to  push  the  teaching  to  a  dangerous  extreme,  it  will,  if 
we  penetrate  to  the  spirit  of  the  story,  supply  an  answer  to  a  modern  problem  and 
a  truth  fruitful  for  our  modern  lives.  Ezra  sought  to  satisfy  the  old  equation 
between  the  Divine  power  and  the  human  agency.  He  put  to  himself  the  familiar 
question — Is  the  use  of  means  any  the  less  a  trusting  in  God  ?  may  not  the  means 
fall  within  the  compass  of  God's  plan  of  deliverance?  And  the  issue  of  the 
struggle  was  this :  at  every  hazard  he  must  stand  right  with  God  and  with  his 
own  heart,  and  therefore  he  refused  to  resort  to  an  arm  of  flesh  at  all.  We  appear 
to  have  here  a  plain  and  blank  refusal  to  use  means.  Some  would  have  said — 
"Surely  we  may  trust  in  the  good  hand  of  God,  and  the  soldiers  of  the  king."  But 
to  Ezra's  scrupulous  faith  it  presented  an  alternative.  One  orthe  other  but  not  both. 
One  or  the  other  he  must  elect  to  have.  He  refused,  not  only  because  of  the 
nature  of  the  instrument,  but  also  because  it  was  an  instrument.  He  said  in  effect, 
"  Both  we  and  our  enemies  are  in  the  hands  of  God  ;  it  is  His  work,  therefore,  and 
not  ours,  to  secure  our  safety  and  our  welfare."  Let  us  not  suppose  that  we  have 
here  a  unique  instance  of  complete  trust  in  God.  It  was  when  Jacob  saw  no 
human  way  of  escape,  and  God  had  showed  him  his  utter  helplessness,  that  he 
went  forth  with  a  calm  face  and  a  brave  heart  to  meet  his  brother  Esau.  It  was 
when  the  horsemen  were  hard  upon  the  children  of  Israel  that  the  Lord  began  to 
trouble  the  Egyptians.  There  is  nothing  grander  in  this  Book  than  the  calm  tramp 
of  Moses  on  through  the  wilderness,  with  no  attempt  at  self-defence,  only  the 
simple  assurance,  "  The  Lord  shall  fight  for  you,  and  ye  shall  hold  your  peace." 
Let  me  remind  you  of  the  boy  who  went  to  meet  the  mightiest  of  living  warriors 
with  a  sling  and  a  stone.  Perhaps  there  were  some  who  said,  "  Surely  you  can 
trust  in  God  and  put  on  the  armour  of  Saul  as  well."  But  David  felt  that  the 
armour  was  unnecessary  if  he  had  the  shield  of  God's  power.  In  all  these 
examples  we  find  a  faith  which  rested  in  God  and  not  in  means  of  deliverance. 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vni. 

We  may  find  it  hard  to  understand  Ezra,  because  our  Christian  character  is  often 
composed  of  one  part  of  faith  and  ninety-nine  parts  of  common  sense,  while  liis 
contained  ninety-nine  parts  of  faith  and  one  part  common  sense.     We  trust  in 
God,  but  feel  safer  if  the  mail-clad  warriors  are  at  our  side ;  we  know  the  twelve 
legions  of  angels  are  around  us,  but  we  are  glad  to  feel  the  two  swords  concealed 
beneath  our  cloaks  ;  we  believe  that  the  manna  will  fall  day  by  day,  yet  we  like  to 
take  bread  with  us  lest  it  should  fail  to  come.     At  the  same  time  it  is  important 
to  observe  that  it  is  the  spirit  of  this  incident  we  are  to  copy  and  not  the  form.    As 
an  instance  of  the  rejection  of  means  it  is  not  an  instance  for  all  times  and  for  all 
circumstances.     Our  Lord  Himself  taught  us  not  to  trust  in  God  to  do  that  which 
we  may  do  for  ourselves.     The  jars  of  water  at  Cana,  the  net  cast  into  the  sea, 
and  the  stone  rolled  away  from  the  sepulchre,  teach  us  that  God  will  work  through 
earthly  instruments.    But  we  maintain  that  failure  oftener  results  from  trusting  in 
the  means  more  than  in  God  than  from  trusting  in  God  and  not  in  means.     It  i» 
the  deepest  truth  for  the  Christian  worker  that  our  churches,  our  ministrations, 
our  methods,  are  but  channels  for  the  grace  of  God.     We  want  not  so  much  the 
eloquent  tongue  as  the  bended  knee ;  not  so  much  the  crowded  church  as  the 
crowded  prayer  meeting;    not   so  much  the  beautiful  temple   as    the    glory  of 
the  Lord  within.    The  great  need  now  is  not  for  better  and  more  perfect  machinery, 
but  for  a  more  consecrated  spiritual  life,  and  for  a  profounder  trust  in  God,  who 
can  work  with  or  without  our  machinery.     It  is,  moreover,  the  secret  of  peace  for 
the  Christian  life.    But  further,  not  only  had  Ezra  the  earnest  longing  to  be  right 
with  God,  but  also  to  seem  right.     He  was  unwilling  to  put  any  stumbling-block 
in  the  way  of  the  king.     Though  Artaxeixes  might  grant  the  request,  might  it  not 
lessfen  his  conception  of  the  goodness  and  power  of  God  ?     This  age,  which  more 
than  any  other  demands  reality  in  its  religion,  demands  the  most  careful  seeming 
also.     Tell  men   that  we  are  pilgrims,  and  then  let  them  see   us  making  our 
habitations  here ;  tell  them  that  we  are  laying  up  the  incorruptible  riches,  and 
then  let  them  see  us  intent  on  the  corruptible  gain  ;  tell  them  our  confidence  is  in 
God,  and  then  let  them  see  us  as  hard  in  sorrow,  as  cynical  in  disappointment,  as 
unbelieving  in  distress  as  themselves  ;  tell  them  that  we  live  for  the  unseen  and  the 
eternal,  and  then  let  them  mark  us  caring  for  nothing  we  cannot  see  and  clutch  with 
our  fingers  ;  tell  them  that  we  confess  a  higher  allegiance,  and  bow  before  a  higher 
will,  and  then  let  them  see  us  conforming  our  lives  to  their  cold,  worldly  maxims,  and 
we  may  say  what  we  will,  but  they  will  treasure  up  our  words  as  among  the  hollow 
falsities  of  a  false  creed.     Let  us  be  on  our  guard  not  to  offend  a  watching  world  by 
the  broad  gulf  between  the  spoken  word  and  the  visible  life.   (J.  H.  Sliakespeare,  M.A.) 
Faith  and  prudence  : — Ezra  felt  what  Christian  people  still  often  feel,  the  conflict 
between  prudence  and  faith.     We  observe — 1.  That  as  a  grand  eule  in  the 
Christian  life  faith  and  prudence  must  go  together.     The  Scriptures  give  no 
countenance  to  presumptuous  reliance  on  supernatural  intervention.     As  a  rule  of 
life  they  bind  us  to  take  all  human  precautions  against  the  various  forms  of  mis- 
chief we  have  reason  to  apprehend.     In  this  unbelieving  generation  there  is  not 
much  reason  to  speak  against  excessive  faith,  but  there  is  some  reason.    The  work- 
man gave  as  his  reason  for  not  going  to  church,   "That  religious  people  were 
hypocrites  because  they  called  the  temple  God's  house,  and  yet  put  upon  it  a 
lightning  rod."     This  worldly  workman  could  not  see  that  God's  Church  ought  to 
recognise  God's  law,  and  act  agreeably  thereto ;  but  he  thought  that  he  saw  a 
glaring  contradiction  in  this  union  of  prudence  and  piety.     And  some  noble  men  in 
the  Church  sympathise  with  this  workman,  and  reject  the  securities  which  prudence 
would  counsel.     They  have  no  faith  in  the  band  of  soldiers.     They  leave  their 
property  uninsured ;  in  times  of  disturbance  they  will  not  claim  the  protection  of 
the  magistrate ;  and  in  times  of  sickness  they  will  not  call  the  physician.    That  is, 
to  a  large  extent,  a  serious  mistake.     As  a  rule  we  are  to  accept  the  band  of  soldiers 
which  Ezra,  in  peculiar  circumstances,  rejected.    We  must  not  rashly  cast  ourselves 
into  peril  on  the  idea  that  angels  have  charge  concerning  us.     We  must  not  tempt 
the  Lord  our  God.    If  devout  men  do  not  attend  to  the  dictates  of  prudence  they 
must  suffer  for  it;  and  not  ordy  so,  but  they  injure  Christianity  likewise.   The  truth 
of  religion  is  based  on  false  issues,  and  thus  brought  into  suspicion  or  contempt. 
As  the  rule  of  life  we  must  march  through  the  desert  with  the  band  of  soldiers. 
Our  religion  is  not  fatalism.     "  The  good  man  guideth  his  affairs  with  discretion." 
Yet  there  are  times — H.  When  faith  in  God  must  supersede  the  provisions  ov 
OBDiNART  PRUDENCE.     When  faith  and  prudence  gave  different  counsel,  Ezra  chose 
to  walk  by  faith,  and  we  must  all  feel  that  he  did  i  ght.     The  question  is :  When 


CHAP,  vra.]  EZRA.  55 

are  we  to  go  beyond  merely  prudential  considerations  and  venture  all  on  the  unseen 
power  of  God  ?  When  are  we  justified  in  neglecting  policy  and  appealing  to  the 
higher  law  ?  We  are  "  shut  up  "  to  "  faith  "  when — 1.  Prudential  action  would 
most  probably  be  construed  as  a  denial  of  the  Divine  government.  Ezra  had  told 
the  king  that  "the  hand  of  God  was  upon  all  them  for  good  who  feared  Him."  And 
now  he  considered  that  to  reveal  any  anxiety  for  a  guard  of  soldiers  would  appear 
to  the  heathen  king  like  a  practical  denial  of  the  overshadowing  providence  of 
Jehovah.  On  this  ground  he  elected  to  brave  the  perils  of  the  wilderness  without 
the  military  escort.  A  band  of  soldiers  would  have  hidden  the  Shepherd  of  Israel, 
Artaxerxes  alone  would  have  been  seen  ;  and  so  Ezra,  with  a  fine  spiritual  instinct, 
saw  the  hour  for  simple  trust  had  come,  and  by  declining  the  soldiers  left  open  the 
full  view  of  God  and  His  gracious  and  glorious  government.  A  line  of  action  is 
marked  here  for  ourselves.  To  remove  the  scruples  of  the  few  we  are  not  to  take 
the  lightning  conductors  from  our  temples  and  essay  similar  reformations ;  but  we 
must  seek  so  to  act  that  we  satisfy  the  world  generally  that  we  do  believe  in  tha 
Divine  superintendence  and  care.  A  worldly  man  believes  only  in  the  band  of 
soldiers  ;  and  to  let  him  know  that  we  believe  in  something  beyond  we  must  some- 
times be  willing  to  act  without  the  soldiers  altogether.  Are  we  not  too  anxious 
about  material  helps  and  visible  securities  ?  Has  not  the  Church,  by  clinging  so 
feverishly  to  visible  resources  and  helps  and  defenders,  given  some  sanction  to  the 
world's  unbelief  ?  Ezra  blushed  to  ask  Artaxerxes  for  help  that  might  seem  a 
denial  of  the  power  and  presence  of  God.  Are  we  sufficiently  sensitive  on  this 
matter  ?  Trapp  says,  "  It  is  the  ingenuity  of  saints  to  study  God's  ends  more  than 
their  own."  And  if  we  are  very  jealous  for  the  honour  of  God,  and  seek  to  uphold 
His  government  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  we  shall  sometimes  be  ready  to  imperil 
our  personal  interest  and  safety  for  His  sake ;  and  let  us  be  assured  that  when  we 
act  in  this  lofty  spirit  of  faith  and  self-forgetfulness,  we  shall  not  be  confounded. 
When — 2.  Prudential  action  would  cause  us  to  lean  on  worldly  associations  and 
resources.  Artaxerxes  was  an  idolater,  and  Ezra  was  anxious  not  to  ask  too  much 
at  his  hands.  It  seemed  inconsistent  to  Ezra  that  he  should  be  soliciting  a  band  of 
pagan  soldiers  to  protect  God's  people  and  the  treasures  of  God's  temple.  Policy 
drove  him  to  find  assistance  in  a  suspicious  quarter,  and  so  he  retired  to  the  higher 
ground  of  simple  trust  in  God.  Here  again  we  have  a  Une  of  action  marked  out  for 
us.  We  are  the  confessed  servants  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  and  prudence  must 
not  lead  us  to  worldly  alliances  and  dependence  upon  sinful  circles.  In  our  personal 
Ufe  we  must  observe  this.  We  must  beware  of  compromises  with  the  world  for  the 
sake  of  our  personal  safety  and  aggrandisement.  And  in  regard  to  God's  Church 
we  must  observe  this.  Policy  would  often  direct  us  to  expect  great  things  from  the 
greatness,  wealth,  or  wisdom  of  unregenerate  men  for  the  Church's  sake.  So  far 
from  seeking  their  assistance,  we  ought  to  be  shy  of  their  gold  and  their  patronage. 
Thus  did  Ezra.  And  thus  acted  Paul  and  Silas  (Acts  xvi.  16-19).  When  prudence 
would  lead  us  to  seek  for  much,  either  for  ourselves  or  for  the  Church,  at  the  hands 
of  unbelieving  men,  we  must  pause  and  follow  the  path  faith  indicates.  Let  us  dare 
anything,  suffer  anything,  rather  than  compromise  our  own  character  and  the 
character  of  God  in  the  eyes  of  the  world  by  linking  our  fortunes  and  the  fortunes 
of  the  Church  with  those  who  are  joined  to  idols.  When — 3.  Prudential  action 
might  embarrass  the  progress  of  God's  kingdom.  If  Ai-taxerxes  had  detected  any 
inconsistency  in  Ezra  he  might  have  ceased  to  be  favourable  to  his  cause  and  have 
prevented  or  delayed  the  return  to  Jerusalem.  Eather  than  endanger  the  popularity 
and  progress  of  the  cause  of  God,  Ezra  was  prepared  to  run  great  risks.  Here 
another  line  of  action  is  marked  out  for  us.  If  prudence  would  circumscribe,  fetter, 
or  destroy  the  work  of  God,  the  time  has  come  to  appeal  to  loftier  considerations. 
Calculating,  cautious  piety  would  condemn  the  act  of  Ezra  as  imprudent ;  but  many 
imprudent  things  have  been  done  or  there  would  not  have  been  so  much  Christianity 
in  the  world  as  there  is  ;  and  many  more  imprudent  things  will  have  to  be  done 
before  Christianity  fills  the  world.  Let  us  remember  that  God's  kingdom  is  a  super- 
natural one,  and  in  its  promotion  we  must  often  act  with  a  boldness  which  could  not 
be  justified  in  the  court  of  prudence.  There  is  a  holy  venturesomeness  in  evange- 
lisation which  carries  with  it  a  far  higher  guarantee  of  success  than  do  the  pondered 
schemes  of  a  rationalising  statesmanship.  Thus,  then,  there  are  times  when  we 
must  renounce  the  counsellings  of  worldly  wisdom  and,  stepping  boldly  into  the 
darkness,  cry  with  Ezra,  "  Help  us,  0  Lord  our  God,  for  we  rest  on  Thee."    III.  The 

BEPABATION  OF  FAITH  FKOM  PRUDENCE  MUST  BE  EFFECTED  ONLY  IN  THE  SPIRIT  OF  SINCERE 

AND  EARNEST  DEPENDENCE  UPON  HEAVEN  (vcr.  23).     No  prccipitaucy,  no  Icvity,  no 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vni. 

presumption.  By  fasting  and  prayer  they  obtained  the  assurance  that  God  would 
honour  their  faith  and  preserve  them.  Not  lightly  must  we  discard  ordinary 
defences  and  helps.  When  we  can  do  no  other  we  must  humbly,  solemnly  rest  our- 
Belves  in  the  hands  of  God.  The  times  come  to  us  all  when  faith  and  policy  give 
contradictory  counsel.  When  such  times  come  let  us  not  be  found  wanting  to  our 
profession  and  our  God.  In  many  circumstances  simple  trust  in  God  will  prove  to 
be  the  truest  policy.  In  Heb.  xi.  7  Noah's  conduct  in  preparing  the  ark  is  spoken  of 
as  "  prudence."  "  By  his  believing  obedience  he  came  to  be  at  last  the  one  who 
was  truly  prudent.  A  truth  of  great  practical  importance.  He  who  like  a  child 
blindly  follows  the  will  of  God,  regardless  of  all  consequences,  is  the  one  who  is 
truly  prudent,  for  he  builds  on  the  Eternal,  and  He  will  never  allow  His  own  to 
come  to  shame." — Ebrard.  And  on  the  contrary,  policy  leading  God's  people  to 
rest  on  worldly  men  and  means  and  measures,  finally  demoralises  and  betrays  them 
(Isa.  xxxi.  3).  (IF.  L.  Watkinson.)  Alliance  with  God: — We  are  like  William 
of  Orange,  with  a  few  followers  and  an  empty  purse,  making  war  against  the  master 
of  half  the  world,  with  the  mines  of  Peru  for  a  treasury.  But  like  William,  too, 
when  questioned  concerning  our  resources,  we  can  reply,  "  Before  we  took  up  this 
cause  we  entered  into  a  close  alliance  with  the  King  of  Kings."  Those  on  the 
Lord's  side  are  on  the  winning  side.  He  never  has,  and  never  will,  lose  a  battle. 
{David  Gracey.)  God's  protection  : — Pastor  Oncken  was  forbidden  by  the  burgo- 
master of  Hamburg  from  holding  religious  meetings.  "  Do  you  see  that  little 
finger  ?  "  said  the  burgomaster  ;  "  as  long  as  I  can  move  that  finger,  so  long  will  I 
put  down  the  Baptists."  "  Yes,"  said  Oncken,  "  I  see  your  httle  finger,  and  I  see 
also  the  great  arm  of  God  ;  and  whilst  that  arm  is  lifted  on  our  behalf,  your  little 
finger  will  have  little  terror  for  us."  Want  of  faith  in  God  manifested  : — Mr,  G.  J. 
Holyoake,  in  his  "  Sixty  Years  of  an  Agitator's  Life,"  gives  an  interesting  account 
of  the  Zulus  who  converted  Bishop  Colenso.  Robert  Ryder,  a  secular  carpenter, 
was  employed  by  the  bishop  to  build  his  church  and  school-house  in  Natal.  Eyder 
Bent  Mr.  Holyoake  several  photographs  of  the  actual  Zulus  who  accomplished  the 
conversion,  long  before  the  change  was  heard  of  in  England.  The  Zulu  workers 
under  Eyder  were  conversed  with  by  the  bishop  daily.  They  were  remarkably 
shrewd  in  argument.  They  remarked  upon  the  fact  that  the  bishop  had  a  room 
built  in  the  rear  of  his  church,  in  which  he  stored  an  eighteen-pounder.  They 
knew  what  that  cannon  was  for,  and  they  thought  that  the  bishop,  fair-spoken  as 
he  was,  did  not  place  his  ultimate  reliance  on  the  "  Good  Father,"  in  whom  he  told 
them  to  trust.  Faith  in  God  : — A  century  ago  William  Carey  entered  Notting- 
ham with  the  thought  in  his  heart,  from  which  he  preached  the  following  day  in  a 
sermon  which  really  originated  the  Baptist  Missionaiy  Society:  "Expect  great 
things  from  God.  Attempt  great  things  for  God."  It  was  a  very  simple  thing.  It 
was  very  memorable.  It  was  one  of  those  inspirations  that  illumine  as  by  a  single 
flash  the  whole  realm  of  thought.  "Expect  great  things  from  God."  Looking 
back  over  a  hundred  years,  it  was  interesting  to  note  upon  what  Carey  based  his 
expectations.  Not  on  human  resources,  not  on  wealth,  not  on  eloquence.  Those 
few  men  who  gathered  together  at  Kettering  had  no  worldly  backing.  They  were 
obscure  men  in  the  extreme.  With  scarcely  an  exception  they  were  quite  unknown 
outside  their  own  immediate  neighbourhood.  The  wise  and  prudent  in  the 
Christian  world  doomed  the  enterprise  to  ignominious  failure.  With  one  exception, 
there  was  not  a  man  of  any  mark  in  London  who  would  have  anything  to  do  with 
it,  and  when  a  meeting  was  held  to  consider  the  advisability  of  forming  an  auxiliary, 
the  idea  was  negatived  by  an  overwhelming  majority.  But  Carey  believed  in  God. 
Doubts,  unlikelihoods,  impossibilities,  vanished  from  his  mind.  And  what  has  been 
the  result  of  this  faith  ?  During  the  last  hundred  years,  wherever  the  missionary 
had  gone  God  had  given  testimony  to  the  word  of  His  grace  by  signs  and  wonders 
as  marvellous  as  miracle.  As  in  no  former  age  the  world  lay  open,  aye,  and  opened- 
minded  to  the  Gospel.  {J.  Culross.)  Fearlessness  of  the  godly  : — "  I  go  up 
alone,"  General  Gordon  wrote,  as  he  started  from  Cairo  to  Khartoum,  "  with  an 
Infinite  Almighty  God  to  direct  and  guide  me  ;  and  I  am  so  called  to  trust  in  Him 
as  to  fear  nothing,  and,  indeed,  to  feel  sure  of  success."  A  lesson  of  faith  : — I 
was  passing  one  of  the  busiest  spots  in  the  City  of  London,  opposite  the  Eoyal 
Exchange.  Here  numerous  turnings  meet,  and  pour  their  mighty  burden  of 
rehicular  traffic  in  bewildering  streams.  As  the  cabs,  carriages,  carts  and  waggons 
hastened  along  I  could  not  help  thinking  what  need  there  was  for  care  in  crossing, 
and  how  dangerous  at  that  busy  hour  a  false  step  would  be.  With  such  thoughts, 
my  attention  was  attracted  by  something  that  seemed  entirely  out  of  harmony  with 


CHAP,  vm.]  EZRA.  67 

the  whole  surroundings.  Eight  in  the  midst  of  the  danger,  at  a  time  when  the 
traffic  was  most  bewildering,  I  saw  a  woman  crossing  the  street.  She  was  pushing 
a  perambulator,  not  eagerly  or  excitedly  trying  to  reach  the  other  side,  but  with 
perfect  calmness,  and  apparently  without  fear.  What  was  the  explanation  ?  A 
City  policeman  held  her  arm,  and  she  relied  upon  him.  And  shall  we  not  place  the 
same  confidence  in  our  Guide,  and  though  dangers  and  difficulties,  and  trials  and 
temptations  surround  us,  shall  we  not  trust  Him  perfectly  who  is  able  to  keep  us 
from  falling,  and  to  present  us  faultless  before  the  presence  of  His  glory  with 
exceeding  joy?  Shall  we  not  disdain  to  fear,  knowing  that  we  are  protected  and 
sustained  by  the  everlasting  arm  ?  {Signal.)  Luther's  courage : — Luther's  words 
in  the  first  struggles  of  his  public  ministry  have  the  sacred  anxiety,  the  solemn 
confidence,  and  almost  the  language,  of  the  apostle :  "  I  am  compassed  with  no 
:guards,  but  those  of  heaven.  I  live  in  the  midst  of  enemies  who  have  legal  power 
to  kill  me  every  hour.  But  this  is  the  way  in  which  I  comfort  myself :  I  know  that 
Christ  is  Lord  of  all ;  and  that  the  Father  hath  put  all  things  under  His  feet, 
Among  the  rest,  the  wrath  of  the  emperor  and  of  all  evil  spirits.  If  it  please  Christ 
that  I  should  be  slain,  let  me  die  in  His  name.  If  it  do  not  please  Him,  who  shall 
slay  me  ?  Definition  of  faith  : — PhiUips  Brooks  gave  a  definition  of  faith  so  true 
and  helpful  to  sinners  needing  salvation,  that  I  reproduce  it.  ♦'  Forsaking  All,  I 
Take  Him."  It  will  be  noticed  that  the  initial  letters  spell  "  Faith  " ;  and  what  I 
-want  you  to  do  to-night  is  to  "forsake  all  and  take  Him."  It  would  be  a  good 
-thing  if  every  one  present  were  to  write  on  the  fly-leaf  of  their  Bibles  those 
beautiful  words,  "  Forsaking  all,  I  take  Him."  {W.  R.  Bradlaugh.)  The  hand 
^f  our  God  is  upon  all  them  for  good  that  seek  Hun :  but  His  power  and  His  wrath 
is  against  all  them  that  forsake  Him. — Contrasts : — I.  A  contrast  of  human 
XJHARACTEK.  11.  A  coutrast  of  Divine  treatment.  Conclusion — 1.  How  solemnly 
man's  destiny  is  in  his  own  hands,  or,  more  correctly,  in  his  own  choice.  "  Deeds 
■are  destiny;  character  is  fate."  2.  In  this  world  character  may  be  changed 
(Hos.  xiv.  1,  2,  4).  (William  Jones.)  Seeking  the  Lord,  and  its  advantages  : — We 
«,re  directed— I.  To  seeking  God  and  its  advantages.     1.  Seeking  God  denotes — 

il)  A  consciousness  of  our  need  of  Him.  (2)  Earnest  and  fervent  prayer  to  Him 
ver.  23).  (3)  Coming  to  Him  in  the  way  of  His  appointment.  (4)  To  labour  in 
all  things  to  have  His  approbation.  2.  The  advantages  to  those  who  thus  seek 
Him.  "  The  hand  of  our  God  is  upon  all,"  &c.  The  hand  of  His — (1)  Pardoning 
mercy.  (2)  Delivering  power.  (3)  Providing  goodness.  (4)  Heavenly  guidance. 
(5)  Sustaining  grace.  (6)  Manifest  providence.  II.  Forsaking  God  and  its 
attendant  evils.  Learn — 1.  The  value  of  true  religion.  2.  The  awfulness  of 
apostasy.  3.  The  necessity  of  both  vigilance  and  perseverance  (Heb.  iii.  12 ; 
iv.  10-13).     {Jabez  Bums,  D.D.) 

Vers.  24-30.  And  weighed  unto  them  the  silver  and  the  gold,  and  the  vessels. — 
The  guardianship   of  the  sacred  treasures  : — I.  The   treasures   to   be   guarded. 

1.  Valuable  in  themselves.  2.  Valuable  as  being  consecrated  to  God.  3.  Valuable 
as  being  the  spontaneous  gifts  of  friends  and  well  wishers.  II.  The  guardians  of 
the  treasures.    III.  The  charge  to  tete  guardians  of  the  treasures.     IV.  The 

ACCEPTANCE    OF   THE    GUARDIANSHIP   OF   THE  TREASURES.       CoUClusion 1.    Our  SubjCCt 

-speaks  to  ministers  of  the  gospel  (1  Cor.  iv.  1,  2 ;  Titus  i.  7,  9  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  20 ; 
2  Tim.  i.  14).  2.  To  all  who  have  charge  of  pubUc  funds  or  the  property  of  others. 
3.  To  all  men  (Matt.  xxv.  14-30).  (William  Jones.)  The  charge  of  the  -pilgrim 
priests  : — Without  being  unduly  fanciful,  I  think  I  may  venture  to  take  these  words 
as  a  type  of  the  injunctions  which  are  given  to  us  Christian  people,  and  to  see  in 
them  a  picturesque  representation  of  the  duties  that  devolve  upon  us  in  the  course 
•of  our  journey  across  the  desert  to  the  temple-home  above.  I.  Consider :  The 
PRECIOUS  TREASURE  ENTRUSTED  TO  OUR  KEEPING.  1.  The  treasure  is  first  our  own 
selves,  with  all  that  we  are  and  may  be  under  the  humiliating  and  quickening 
influence  of  His  grace  and  spirit.  That  which  we  carry  with  us — tLe  infinite 
f)ossibihties  of  these  awful  spirits  of  ours,  the  tremendous  faculties  which  are  given 
to  every  human  soul,  and  which,  like  a  candle  plunged  into  oxygen,  are  meant  to 
burn  far  more  brightly  under  the  stimulus  of  Christian  faith  and  the  possession  of 
God's  truth,  are  the  rich  deposit  committed  to  our  charge.  The  precious  treasure 
'Of  our  own  natures,  our  own  hearts,  our  own  understandings,  wills,  consciences, 
■desires — keep  these  until  they  are  weighed  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  at  Jerusalem. 

2.  The  treasure  is  next — This  great  word  of  salvation,  once  delivered  to  the  saints, 
«ud  to  be  handed  on  without  diminution  or  alteration  to  the  generations  that  are  to 

23 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.iX. 

come.  Possession  involves  responsibility  always.  The  word  of  salvation  is  given 
to  us.  If  we  go  tampering  with  it,  by  erroneous  apprehension,  by  unfair  usage,  by 
failing  to  apply  it  to  our  own  daily  life,  then  it  will  fade  and  disappear  from  our 
grasp.  It  is  given  to  us  in  order  that  we  may  keep  it  safe,  and  carry  it  high  up 
across  the  desert  as  becomes  the  priests  of  the  most  high  God.  II.  Next,  Thb 
COMMAND,  THE  GUAKDiANSHip  THAT  IS  HERE  SET  FORTH.  Watch  ys  and  keep  them. 
That  is  to  say,  watch  in  order  that  ye  may  keep.  This  involves — 1.  Unslumbering 
vigilance.  2.  Lowly  trust.  3.  Punctilious  purity.  It  was  fitting  that  the  priests 
should  carry  the  things  that  belonged  to  the  temple.  No  other  hands  but  consecrated 
hands  had  a  right  to  touch  them.  To  none  other  guardianship  but  the  guardian- 
ship of  the  possessors  of  a  symbolic  and  ceremonial  purity  could  the  vessels  of  a 
symbolic  and  ceremonial  worship  be  entrusted ;  and  to  none  others  but  the  possessors 
of  real  and  spiritual  holiness  can  the  treasures  of  the  true  temple,  of  an  inward  and 
spiritual  worship  be  entrusted,  "  Be  ye  clean  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord," 
said  Isaiah  long  after.  The  only  way  to  keep  our  treasure  undiminished  and  un- 
tarnished, is  to  keep  ourselves  pure  and  clean.  4.  Constant  use  of  the  treasure. 
Although  the  vessels  borne  through  the  desert  by  those  priests  were  used  for  no 
service  during  the  march,  they  weighed  just  the  same  when  they  got  to  the  end 
as  at  the  beginning.  But  if  we  do  not  use  the  vessels  that  are  entrusted  to  our 
care  they  will  not  weigh  the  same.  There  never  was  an  unused  talent  yet,  but 
when  it  was  taken  out  and  put  into  the  scales  it  was  lighter  than  when  it  wa& 
committed  to  the  keeping  of  the  earth.  Gifts  that  are  used  fructify.  Capacities 
that  are  strained  to  the  uttermost  increase.  Service  strengthens  the  power  of 
service ;  and  just  as  the  reward  of  work  is  more  work,  the  way  for  making  our- 
selves fit  for  bigger  things  is  to  do  the  things  that  Are  lying  by  us.  The  black- 
smith's arm,  the  sailor's  eye,  the  organs  of  any  piece  of  handicraft,  as  we  all  know, 
are  strengthened  by  exercise,  and  so  it  is  in  the  higher  region.  III.  The  weighing 
IN  the  house  of  the  Lord,  Though  it  cannot  be  that  we  shall  meet  the  trial  and  the 
weighing  of  that  day  without  many  a  flaw  and  much  l(v<s,  yet  we  may  hope  that  by 
His  precious  help  and  His  pitying  acceptance  we  may  Uy  ourselves  down  in  peace 
at  last,  saying,  "  I  have  kept  the  faith,"  and  may  be  awakened  by  the  word 
"Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant."  {A.  Maclar^n,  D.D.)  From  Ahava  to 
Jerusalem  : — This  illustrates  the  pilgrimage  of  the  Christian.  I.  The  setting 
OUT  FROM  Ahava.  1.  From  captivity  to  liberty.  2.  Fxova.  exile  to  their  ancestral 
home.  3.  From  the  land  of  idolatry  to  the  seer  a  of  true  worship.  II.  Thh 
PROGRESS  ON  THE  JOURNEY.  III.  The  arrivai.  AT  Je'^jsalem.  TMs  WES  character- 
ised by — 1.  Grateful  rest,    2.  Joyful  welcome.    {Willmm  Jonei.) 


CHAPTER  IX. 


Vers.  1-4.  Doing  according  to  their  abomina*ions. — The  good  mari'i  sorrow  over 
the  people's  sin : — Learn — 1.  Separation  from  the  world  is  obligatory  upon  the  true 
Christian.  2.  Sin  in  others  should  be  regarded  by  the  true  Christian  with  unfeigned 
sorrow  and  reprobation  of  the  sin.  3.  Sin  in  tae  avowed  people  of  God  is  especially 
heinous  and  mournful.  4.  It  behoves  Christians  to  give  all  diligence  to  walk  holily 
and  unblamably  before  God  and  before  men      {.Ibid.) 

Vers.  5-15.  And  at  the  evening  sacrifice  I  rose  up  from  my  heaviness.— Ezra'* 
confession  of  the  people's  sin: — "We  hav   here — I.  Deep   personal  shame  and 

SORROW  ON  account  OF  THE  SINS  OF  THE  PEOPLE.  II.  HuMBLE  CONFESSION  OF  THB 
BINS  OF  THE  PEOPLE.  III.  A  SOLEMN  ANTICIPATION  OF  THE  CONSEQUENCE  OF  THE  CON- 
TINUANCE OF  THE  BINS  OF  THE  PEOPLE.  1.  Continuance  in  sin  would  lead  to  their 
utter  end  as  a  community.  2.  That  such  a  consequence  of  the  continuance  of  sin 
would  be  just  (ver.  15).  3.  That  such  a  consequence  of  the  continuance  of  sin 
was  to  be  dreaded.  Learn— 1.  The  great  evil  of  sin.  2.  The  grand  hope  of  the 
sinner  (Psa.  cxxx.  3,  4,  7  ;  1  John  i.  9).  3.  The  right  relation  of  the  good  man  to 
sin.  {Ibid.)  Ezra's  humiliation  for  the  sins  of  the  people: — I.  The  reason  of 
HIS  SORROW.  He  regarded  their  sin— 1.  As  being  a  violation  of  an  express  com- 
mand (vers.  10-12  ;  Deut.  2,  3).  2.  As  having  an  evident  tendency  to  bring  the 
people  back  to  idolatry.    U.  The  expression  of  his  borrow.     (C.  Simeon,  M.A.). 


CHAP.  IX.]  EZRA.  59 

And  now  for  a  little  space  grsM9  bath  been  shewed  from  the  Lord  our  God. — 
Ezra's  address : — I.  The  grace  Israel  had  experienced.    II.  The  exalted  position 

TO    WHICH     THEY    HAD     BEEN     RAISED.         III.    ThE    BLESSING    CONNECTED     WITH     THE8B 

PRivrLEQBS.    Let  the  subject  be — 1.  A  test  of  character.     2.  An  appeal  as  to  our 
position.     3.  A  question  as  to  our  desires.     4.  An  exhortation.     {Jabez  Burns,  D.D.) 

Ver.  12.  Now,  therefore,  give  not  your  daughters  unto  their  sons. — Forbidden 
marriages  : — I.  They  are  opposed  to  the  express  command  of  God  (2  Cor.  vi.  14). 
XL  They  ark  inconsistent  with  the  most  sacred  aspects  and  ends  of  marriage. 
III.  They  imperil  the  s.UjVation  of  the  soul.    IV.  They  are  inimical  to  wisb 

AND    HARMONIOUS     HOME     GOVERNMENT.         V.     ThEY    ARE    DETRIMENTAL    TO    THE    BEST 
INTERESTS   OF   THE   CHILDREN   OF  THE   UABBIAGE.       (William  JoneS.) 

Yers.  13-14.  And  after  all  that  is  come  upon  us  for  our  evil  deeds,  and  for  our 
great  trespass,  seeing  that  Thou  our  God  hast  punished  us  less  than  our  iniquities 
deserve. — The  goodness  of  God  and  the  aggravations  of  sin : — We  find  in  Scripture 
upon  the  most  solemn  occasions  of  humiliation  that  good  men  have  always  testified 
a  thankful  sense  of  the  goodness  of  God  to  them.  The  greater  and  more  lively 
sense  we  have  of  the  goodness  of  God  to  us,  the  more  we  shall  abhor  ourselves, 
nothing  being  more  apt  to  melt  us  to  tears  of  repentance  than  the  consideration  of 
great  and  undeserved  mercies  vouchsafed  to  us.  The  goodness  of  God  doth  naturally 
lead  to  repentance.  In  the  text  we  have — I.  A  case  supposed,  which  involves — 
1.  That  sin  is  the  cause  of  all  our  sufferings.     2.  That  great  sins  have  usually  a 

Sroportionable  punishment.  3.  That  all  the  punishments  which  God  inflicts  in  this 
fe  do  fall  short  of  the  demerit  of  our  sins.  4.  That  God  many  times  works  very 
great  deliverances  for  those  who  are  very  unworthy  of  them.  5.  That  we  are  but 
too  apt,  even  after  great  judgments  and  after  great  mercies,  to  relapse  into  our 
former  sins.  6.  That  it  is  good  to  take  notice  of  the  particular  sins  that  have 
brought  the  judgments  of  God  upon  us.  II.  A  sentence  and  determination  in  thb 
CASE — *' Wouldest  not  Thou  be  angry  with  us  tiU  Thou  hadst  consumed  us,  so  that 
there  should  be  no  remnant  nor  escaping  ? "  This  question  implies  a  strong 
affirmative.  1.  It  is  a  fearful  aggravation  of  sin  after  great  judgments  and 
great  deliverances  to  return  to  sin,  and  especially  to  the  same  sins  again.  (1)  To 
return  to  sin  after  great  judgments  is  an  argument  of  great  obstinacy  in  evil.  The 
longer  Pharaoh  resisted  the  judgments  of  God,  the  more  was  his  wicked  heart 
hardened,  tiU  at  last  he  arrived  at  a  monstrous  degree  of  hardness.  And  we  find 
that  after  God  had  threatened  the  people  of  Israel  with  several  judgments,  He  tells 
them  that  if  they  "  will  not  be  reformed  by  all  these  things.  He  will  punish  them 
seven  times  more  for  their  sins."  What  a  saJ  complaint  doth  Isaiah  make  of  the 
people  of  Israel  growing  worse  for  judgments  (Isa.  i.  4,  5 ;  ix.  13;  xxvi.  11).  There 
is  a  particular  brand  set  upon  Ahaz  because  affliction  made  him  worse 
(2  Chron.  xxviii.  2).  (2)  When  sin  is  committed  after  great  mercies  and 
deliverances  vouchsafed  to  us  is  an  argument  of  great  ingratitude.  This  we  find 
recorded  as  a  heavy  charge  upon  the  people  of  Israel  (Judg.  viii.  34,  35).  How 
severely  doth  Nathan  reproach  David  on  this  account  (2  Sam.  xii.  7-9).  And  he 
was  angry  with  Solomon  for  the  same  reason  (1  Kings  xi.  9).  However  we  may 
slight  the  mercies  of  God,  He  keeps  a  strict  account  of  them.  It  is  noted  as  a  blot 
of  Hezekiah  that  "  he  returned  not  again  according  to  the  benefits  done  unto  him." 
Ingratitude  to  God  is  so  unnatural  and  monstrous  that  we  find  Him  appealing 
against  us  for  it  to  the  inanimate  creatures  (Isa.  i.  2).  And  then  He  goes  on  and 
upbraids  them  with  the  brute  creatures  as  being  more  grateful  to  men  than  men  are 
to  God  (Isa.  i.  3 ;  xxvi.  10).  There  is  no  greater  evidence  of  an  untractable 
disposition  than  not  to  be  wrought  upon  by  kindness,  not  to  be  melted  by 
mercies,  not  to  be  obliged  by  benefits,  not  to  be  tamed  by  gentle  usage.  Nay, 
God  expects  that  His  mercies  should  lay  so  great  an  obligation  upon  us  that  even  a 
miracle  should  not  tempt  us  to  be  unthankful  (Deut.  xiii.  1,  2).  (3)  To  return  to 
the  same  sins  after  great  mercies  and  judgments  is  an  argument  of  a  perverse  and 
incorrigible  temper.  With  what  resentment  God  speaks  of  the  ill  returns  the 
children  of  Israel  made  to  Him  for  the  great  mercy  of  their  deliverance  from 
Egypt  (Judg.  X.  11-14).  Upon  such  an  occasion  well  might  the  prophet  say, 
"  Thine  own  wickedness  shall  correct  thee  and  thy  sins  shall  reprove  thee,"  &o. 
(Jer.  ii.  19).  2.  To  return  to  the  same  sins  again  after  great  judgments  and 
deUverances  is  a  sad  presage  of  ruin  to  a  people.  (1)  Because  this  doth  ripen  the 
sins  of  a  nation  (Gen.  xt.  16).    W^hen neither  the  mercies  nor  the  judgments  of  Cod 

I 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

will  bring  us  to  repentance,  we  are  then  fit  for  destruction  (Bom.  ix.  22).  (2) 
Because  this  incorrigible  temper  shows  the  case  of  such  persons  to  be  desperate 
and  incurable  (Isa.  i,  5 ;  Matt,  xxiii.  37,  38).  When  God  sees  that  all  the  means 
which  He  can  use  do  prove  ineffectual.  He  will  then  give  over  a  people  aa 
physicians  do  their  patients  when  they  see  that  nature  is  spent  and  their  case  past 
remedy.  When  men  will  not  be  the  better  for  the  best  means  that  Heaven  can  use, 
God  will  then  leave  them  to  reap  the  fruit  of  their  own  doings  and  abandon  them 
to  the  demerit  of  their  sin.  (Abp.  Tillotson.)  The  great  trespass  : — I.  That 
JUDGMENTS  ABE  SENT  AS  THE  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN.  1.  The  Unvarying  testimony  of 
Scripture  is  that  transgression  and  punishment  are  closely  united  (Gen.  ii.  17 ; 
vi.  13;  xviii.  20,  21).  Throughout  the  entire  history  of  Israel  this  fact  was 
continually  brought  out  into  distinct  recognition.  2.  The  "great  trespass" 
deplored  in  the  text.  When  God  gave  the  law  against  intermingling  with  the 
nations  he  said,  "  for  they  will  turn  away  thy  sons  from  following  Me  that  they  may 
serve  other  gods."  The  fatal  counsel  of  Balaam  to  Belak  was  to  seduce  Israel  into 
alliance  with  the  Moabites.  And  it  is  recorded  of  Solomon,  •'  when  he  was  old,  that 
his  wives  turned  away  his  heart  after  other  gods."  Whatever,  therefore,  tended  to 
lead  them  into  idolatry  was  to  be  regarded  as  an  evil  of  the  deadliest  character ; 
and  as  nothing  tended  so  powerfully  to  draw  away  their  hearts  as  this  forbidden 
affinity  with  the  heathen,  it  might  well  be  termed  their  "  great  trespass."  II.  That 
Divine  judgments  are  mingled  with  MERcy.  Ezra's  acknowledgment  was  also 
made  by  Nehemiah,  "Nevertheless,  for  Thy  great  mercy's  sake.  Thou  didst  not 
utterly  consume  them ;  for  Thou  art  a  gracious  and  merciful  God."  In  the  same 
spirit  of  grateful  humility  Jeremiah  says,  "  It  is  of  the  Lord's  mercies  that  we  are 
not  consumed."  The  Psalmist  sings  in  a  similar  strain,  "He  hath  not  dealt  with 
US  according  to  our  sins  nor  rewarded  us  according  to  our  iniquities."  Sinners  live 
under  a  respite — their  punishment  is  intended  to  alarm,  not  to  crush  them. 
III.  The  danger  of  disregarding  Divine  judgments.  The  history  of  the  Jews  is  a 
dark  narrative  of  mercies  and  ingratitude ;  exhortations  and  disobedience ;  warnings 
and  neglect;  judgments  and  impenitence;  judicial  blindness  and  total  rejection. 
God's  dealings  with  Israel  were  typical  of  His  dealings  with  the  Church  at  large  and 
with  its  individual  members.  Eeligious  privileges  are  sometimes  long  continued  to 
a  Church ;  but  when  it  proves  unfruitful,  then  is  fulfilled — "  The  kingdom  of  God 
is  taken  from  you,  and  given  to  a  nation  bringing  forth  the  fruits  thereof."  The 
Churches  at  Ephesus,  Sardis,  and  Laodicea  have  perished.  The  Spirit  strives  long 
with  the  disobedient ;  but  there  is  a  time  when  He  ceases.  As  Christians  we  are 
under  obligations  to  renounce  the  world  and  all  familiar  intercourse  with  those 
whose  character  and  conduct  might  prove  a  snare  to  beguile  us  into  sin 
(2  Cor.  vi.  14-17).  In  almost  every  similitude  employed  in  the  Scriptures  to 
characterise  the  situation  and  deportment  of  believers,  we  find  something  bearing  a 
pointed  allusion  to  this  matter.  They  are  called  a  "  little  flock  ";  "  brethren  living 
together  in  the  same  family";  "a  garden  enclosed";  "a  lily  among  thorns"; 
"hidden  ones";  a  peculiar  people;  "the  light  of  the  world"  shining  amid  the 
surrounding  darkness.  The  Christian  is  represented  as  a  "  soldier  "  enlisted  under 
the  banner  of  the  "  Captain  of  his  salvation,"  and  who  obviously  cannot  discharge 
his  duty  if  he  consort  with  his  Master's  enemies.  He  is  a  pilgrim  who  has  bidden 
adieu  to  all  the  friends  and  follies  of  his  youth,  and  who  has  set  out  alone  on  his 
wilderness  path.  In  all  these  figures  the  idea  of  separation  from  the  world  is 
clearly  implied.  Separation  from  the  world  is  not  the  supercilious  distance  of  the 
haughty  Pharisee.  Isaiah  speaks  of  a  people  which  say  "  stand  by  thyself,  come 
not  near  to  me,  for  I  am  holier  than  thou."  But  what  is  said  of  them  ?  "  These 
are  a  smoke  in  My  nose,  a  fire  that  burneth  all  the  day."  Neither  is  it  a 
superstitious  exclusion  from  society.  The  duties  and  business  of  active  life  must 
be  attended  to.  The  interchanges  of  civility  and  kindness  must  not  be  neglected. 
Our  Lord  and  His  apostles  have  left  us  an  example  in  this  matter.  But  there  is  a 
separation  which,  as  the  avowed  friends  of  the  Kedeemer,  we  must  maintain 
(Matt.  X.  37,  38).  We  must  come  out  of  every  society  where  our  consistency  may 
be  compromised,  where  our  character  may  be  suspected,  where  our  personal  piety 
may  be  invaded,  and  our  conscience  blunted.  (David  Amott,  D.D.)  The  voices  of 
the  soul  in  view  of  sin  and  of  salvation  from  it : — Under  the  influence  of  a  great  grief 
we  have  here  the  soul  uttering  two  voices.  I.  The  voice  of  conscience  in  view  op 
SIN.  Conscience  says — 1.  That  man  himself  is  responsible  for  his  sins.  "  Our 
evil  deeds  and  our  great  trespass."  There  is  a  strong  tendency  in  man  to  charge 
his  eins  on  others.     (1)  Sometimes  on  God  Himself.     (2)  Sometimes  on  his  fellow 


CHAP.  IX.]  EZRA.  61 

human  creatures,  as  Adam  did  (Gen.  iii.  12).  (3)  Sometimes  on  the  devil 
(Gen.  iii.  13).  But  an  awakened  conscience  says  with  emphasis,  "  Our  evil  deeds 
and  our  great  trespass."  Conscience  speaks — 2.  Of  the  great  evil  of  sin.  Man  ia 
prone  to  make  his  sins  look  less  than  they  really  are.  Conscience,  like  the  Divine 
commandment,  shows  the  "  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin."  Conscience  says — 
3.  That  punishment  is  connected  with  sin.  There  is  punishment  connected  with 
the  transgression  of  every  law  of  God,  both  m  the  natural  and  in  the  moral  world. 
God  has  so  made  His  laws  that  they  punish  every  one  that  transgresseth  them 
themselves.  Punishment  may  also  follow  sin  in  the  world  to  come  without  the 
direct  interposition  of  God.  Conscience  says — 4.  That  sin  is  not  punished  in  this 
world  according  to  its  ill  desert.  This  is  accounted  for — (1)  Because  this  is  a  world 
in  which  good  and  evil  exist.  (2)  Because  there  is  more  mercy  than  justice  in  this 
world.  The  scale  is  never  level  when  there  is  more  weight  in  one  end  than  in  the 
other.  The  cause  of  the  hghtning  and  thundering  in  the  natural  world  is  the  loss 
of  the  equilibrium  in  the  air.  So  in  the  moral  world,  we  see  it  sometimes  much 
disturbed,  and  that  in  consequence  of  there  being  more  mercy  here  than  justice. 
Justice  in  this  life  is  like  an  eternal  sea  kept  within  its  bounds  with  only  a  few 
streams  running  over  its  banks  just  to  show  that  it  exists,  while  mercy  is  like  an 
eternal  ocean  deluging  the  world.  II.  The  voice  op  wonder  in  view  of  God's 
SALVATION  FROM  SIN.  This  wondcr  is  caused  by  two  things.  1.  By  the  greatness  of 
the  deliverance.  This  is  seen — (1)  In  its  origin.  (2)  In  the  way  in  which  it  has  been 
brought  about.  (3)  In  the  vastness  of  the  blessings  which  it  brings  to  man.  2.  By 
looking  at  the  awful  consequences  of  rejecting  this  salvation.  Ezra  is  confounded 
here  by  thinking  of  the  people's  transgression  and  the  awful  consequences  that 
would  follow  if  they  would  not  repent  and  seek  forgiveness  (ver.  14).  "But  what 
shall  be  the  end  of  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  God?  "  {Homilist.)  A  past 
reviewed,  a  future  contemplated  (a  thanksgiving  sermon  for  the  removal  of 
cholera): — I.  A  past  reviewed.  We  are  reminded — 1.  That  the  distresses  of  a 
nation  come  upon  them  for  their  sins.  Now  on  this  point  we  must  be  careful  to 
use  nothing  but  the  language  of  holy  sobriety.  We  reason,  indeed,  neither  wisely, 
nor  safely,  nor  honourably  to  God,  when  we  make  every  national  calamity  stand  in 
some  definite  retributive  relation  to  certain  national  sins.  We  have  no  data  for 
establishing  such  a  relation  either  in  reason  or  in  Scripture,  or  in  the  constituted 
order  of  moral  government.  Thus,  if  a  country  should  lose  its  colonies  through 
misrule  or  bad  government,  or  if  an  army  should  be  cut  up  through  a  general's 
inconsiderate  rashness,  or  if  our  emigrant  population  should  perish  by  hundreds 
through  being  sent  out  in  vessels  that  were  not  seaworthy,  or  if  a  malaria  should 
infect  a  neighbourhood  where  all  sanitary  precautions  have  been  neglected,  it  were 
a  manifest  misuse  of  terms  to  call  any  one  of  these  resulting  evils  by  the  name  of  a 
Divine  judgment.  They  are  the  ordinary  consequences  of  a  broken  law.  Still, 
while  it  is  neither  safe  nor  Scriptural  to  interpret  as  direct  Divine  visitations 
what  are  manifestly  only  the  immediate  and  perceived  result  of  human  misdoing, 
it  is  just  as  bad  philosophy  to  disown  the  traces  of  God's  hand  in  calamities  where 
the  efficient  causes  are  more  occult  and  indirect  and  far-removed  and  untraceable. 
This  world  is  His  world ;  we  must  not  cast  Him  out  of  its  management.  Th© 
pestilence  is  His  servant,  not  His  vicegerent ;  the  strict  dispenser  of  His  judgment, 
not  the  uncontrolled  executioner  of  its  own.  Why,  I  could  just  as  soon  be  an 
idolater  as  one  of  our  modern  worshippers  of  second  causes ;  for,  if  the  one  bows 
the  knee  to  Juggernaut,  the  other  seems  to  build  a  temple  to  the  plague.  But  we 
have  not  so  learned  the  rod,  or  so  misinterpreted  its  harsh  but  emphatic  voice.  If 
Providence  does  travel  beyond  its  wonted  cycles,  if  the  Lord  does  come  out  of  His 
place,  we  know  what  it  is  for ;  it  is  "  to  punish  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  for  their 
iniquity."  Our  state  is  probationary,  but  God  will  have  some  smaller  reckonings 
with  us  now.  "All  this  came  upon  us,"  said  Ezra,  "  for  our  evil  deeds  and  for  our 
great  trespass."  2.  When  God  visits  a  nation  for  their  sins.  He  always  mingles 
mercy  with  His  chastisements.  "  Less  than  our  iniquities  deserve !  "  Why,  what 
do  they  deserve  ?  What  do  our  murmurings,  and  crimes,  and  cruelties,  and  wicked 
blasphemies  deserve  ?  What  do  we  deserve  for  the  licentiousness  of  our  pleasures, 
the  covetousness  of  our  gains,  the  stint  measure  of  our  charities,  the  worldliness  of 
our  homes  ?  What  do  our  rich  men  deserve  for  their  pride,  or  our  poor  men  for 
their  profaneness  ?  What  do  patriots  deserve  for  their  lukewarm  love,  or  Christian 
rulers  for  enforcing  a  breach  of  the  Divine  commandments  ?  Oh  1  iii,;Bjl.tbi««w«  , 
see  how  far  apart  are  offence  and  chastisement,  the  nation's  sins^fl'the  flSftie»<>'3 , , 
Booarge.    II.  A  posaiBLS  iuxobs.    Two  points  are  here  insi,^<^^^^6n.    1.  Sins    -  > 


I 


•*  -..-A  St  n''*:'^- 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it. 

after  warning   are   the  worst  sins.     To   go   on  committing  the  same  sins  after 

judgments  and  chastisements  evinces  an  obstinacy  in  evil,  a  stoutness  of  heart,  a 

baseness  of  ingratitude,  and  ahnost  a  defiance  of  God.    A  continuance  in  sin  under 

such  circumstances  shows   a  man's   spirit  to  be   intractable.    Alarm  him  with 

warnings,  he  will  not  be  affected  by  them  ;  load  him  with  benefits,  he  will  not  be 

obliged  by  them.     His  heart  is  like  an  anvil,  strokes  only  make  it  more  hard. 

2.  Judgments  after  deliverance  are  the  worst  judc^ments.     There  is   an   awful 

expression  used  by  the  apostle,  "vessels  of  wrath  fitted  for  destruction."    When 

God  has  used  all  merciful  expedients  to  no  purpose — when  judgments  awake  no 

terror,  and  deliverances  inspire  no  gratitude — then  He  takes  a  final  leave  of  us; 

we  must  reap  the  fruit  of  our  own  doings.     (Daniel  Moore,  M.A.)        Sorrowing 

for  the  tint  of  others : — I  propound  two  things :  First,  an  indictment  preferred 

by  Ezra  against  Israel ;  secondly,  his  pleading  it  for  God  against  themselves.     In 

the  first  he  remembers  God's  mercy  and  their  rebellion.     God's  mercy  is  laid  down 

in  the  thirteenth  verse,  and  that  three  ways.    First,  he  shows  that  they  were  not 

punished  without  cause  ;  secondly,  that  God  punished  them  less  than  they  deserved ; 

thirdly,  that  He  had  totally  delivered  them.     Their  rebellion  is  comprised  in  the 

fourteenth  verse,   in   which   there  are  two  parts :    first,  the  sin  ;   secondly,  the 

punishment.     The  sin  is  laid  down,  first  generally,  "  Should  we  again  break  Thy 

commandments  ?  "    Secondly  particularly,  "  and  join  in  affinity  with  the  people 

of  these  abominations  ? "      Then  follows  the  punishment.      First,   God  will   be 

angry ;  secondly,  there  is  the  degree  of  His  anger.  He  will  not  leave  consuming 

till  all  be  destroyed.     Before  we  handle  the  particulars  there  are  two  things  in 

general.     The  first  is  out  of  the  party,  which  was  Ezra ;  the  second  is  out  of  the 

course  he  takes,  and  that  is  humbling  himself  in  God's  presence.     I.  For  the 

PARTY,  it  is  Ezra.     Ye  shall  read  in  this  book  that  he  was  a  man  that  set  his  heart 

to  seek  the  Lord ;  neither  did  he  this  only  himself,  but  sought  by  all  possible  means 

to  incite  others  to  follow  his  godly  example.     Had  all  Israel  been  such  as  he,  they 

needed  not  to  have  feared  judgments  coming  upon  them.     Doctrine :  Good  men, 

though  they  be  at  peace  with  God,  find  cause  of  sorrow  for  other  men's  sins.     Ye 

Bhall  see  this  proved  in  the  Scripture.     The  Spirit  of  God  calls  Lot  a  righteous 

man — yet  this  righteous  man's  soul  was  vexed  from  day  to  day  with  the  unclean 

conversation  of  the  Sodomites  (2  Pet.  ii.  8).    The  like  we  see  in  Moses  (Exod.  xxxii. 

19).    It  was  so  with  the  prophet  (1  Sam.  xv.  35).     The  like   we  see  in   David 

(Psa.  cxix.  136).    May  some  man  say,  "  What  were  the  sins  of  the  world  to  David?  " 

It  is  true  they  were  none  of  his,  yet  he  thinks  himself  bound  to  grieve  for  them, 

because  he  knew  they  were  displeasing  to  his  Maker.    We  see  the  same  in  good 

Jeremiah  (Jer.  ix.  1,  2 ;  xiii.  17).     0  blessed  Saviour,  Thou  didst  mourn  for  the 

hardness  of  men's  hearts  (Mark  iii.  6 ;  Luke  xix.  41,  42).     Use  1.  It  shall  be  to  let 

us  see  the  stupidity  of  the  sons  of  Belial.     Though  they  have  most  cause  to  weep 

and  mourn,  yet  they  live  in  jollity  and  merriment,  and  are  mere  strangers  to  all 

sadness.     Some  of  these  stick  not  to  say.  What  hath  any  man  to  do  to  weep  for 

their  sins  ?  and  that  by  their  impieties  they  trouble  none  but  their  ovm  souls.    But 

I  tell  thee,  0  wretch,  thou  troublest  not  only  thine  own  house  and  soul,  but  thou 

troublest  all  Israel,  thou  givest  the  saints  of  God  occasion  to  be  pensive  for  that 

which  makes  thee  jocant  and  glad  ;  and  happy  is  it  for  thee  that  there  be  such  as 

Noah,   Lot,   Samuel,  and  David  to  mourn  for  thee;   for  were  it  not  that  some 

did  mourn  for  thy  profaneness,   thou   shouldst  not  live  again    to    commit   it. 

Use  2.  This  may  answer  a  common  objection  which  is  put  to  the  saints,  because 

they  be  sad.     I  would  have  you  know  that  it  is  not  holiness  which  makes  them 

sad,  but  the  profaneness  of  the  world  (Psa.  cxx.  5).     Use  3.  Lastly,  according  to 

the  practice  of  Ezra,  though  we  have  made  our  peace  with  God,  let  us  mourn  for 

the  wickedness  of  others  ;  every  one  knows  what  a  cause  there  is  for  this.     Religion 

is  out  of  fashion,  and  none  are  so  esteemed  as  fashion-mongers,  they  be  your  only 

men  now  in  credit.     First,  it  is  piety  to  mourn  for  the  sins  of  others.     Shall  we 

hear  and  see  God  to  be  dishonoured  and  not  grieve  for  it  ?     Piety  cannot  lodge  in 

that  breast  where  such  an  ill  spirit  inhabits.    A  man  will  and  ought  to  grieve  when 

his  friend  is  wronged  (John  xv.  15).    Secondly,  pity  requires  this  duty  at  our  hands. 

I  read  of  Marcellus,  the  Roman,  that  entering  a  city  which  he  had  gained  by 

composition  after  a  long  siege,  he  burst  forth  into  tears  ;  one  that  stood  beside  him 

demanded  why  he  wept.     Saith  he,  "  I  cannot  choose  but  weep  to  see  so  many 

thousand  led  into  captivity."     Shall  a  heathen  weep  for  the  captivity  of  men's 

bodies?  and  shall  not  Christians  mourn  for  their  sins  which  are  enough  to  enthral 

souls?    Thirdly,  if  we  do  not  mourn  for  other  men's  sins  we  make  them  our  own. 


CHAP,  rt.]  EZRA.  63 

Lastly,  we  should  be  moved  to  this  duty  by  the  blessing  which  attends  it.  What 
saith  our  blessed  Saviour  (Matt.  v.  4)  ?  And  in  Ezek.  ix.  4  the  Lord  gives  command 
to  spare  them  in  Jerusalem,  that  did  "sigh  and  cry  for  the  abominations  done  in 
the  midst  thereof."  II.  The  coubse  which  ezra  takes — and  that  is  humbling  him- 
self by  confession,  weeping,  and  supplication.  The  main  receipt  in  time  of  aflBiction 
is  humiliation.  This  will  appear  in  God's  people  (2  Chron.  xx.  3 ;  Eph.  iv.  16 ; 
Jonah  iii.  5 ;  Jer.  xiv.  20 ;  Joel  ii.  12).  The  people  of  God  have  done  the  same 
when  the  sword  hath  been  amongst  them  ;  this  we  find  in  Josh.  vii.  6.  So  likewise 
in  the  case  of  the  whole  Church  (Hos.  vi.  1).  The  grounds  they  went  upon  were 
these  two  :  First,  they  knew  it  was  God's  commandment — that  place  in  Zeph.  ii.  1,  2, 
is  notable  to  this  purpose.  Secondly,  the  saints  were  sure  that  sin  was  the  cause 
of  all  their  miseries  ;  that  being  the  Achan  which  troubled  the  whole  host,  and  the 
Jonah  endangering  the  whole  ship.  What  shall  we  think  of  a  number  of  desperate 
wretches  in  the  world  who,  when  they  should  be  humbled  under  God's  afflicting  hand, 
sin  more  and  more  and  more  against  Him  ?  This  was  the  sin  of  Ahaz  (2  Chron. 
xxviii.  22  ;  Isa.  Ivii.  17).  We  now  descend  to  the  particulars  as  they  were  laid 
down.  We  begin  with  the  indictment  preferred  by  Ezra  against  Israel,  in  which  is 
remembered  God's  mercy  and  their  rebellion.  God's  mercy  is  laid  down  in  the 
thirteenth  verse,  and  that  three  ways.  First,  he  shows  that  they  were  not  punished 
without  cause  ;  secondly,  that  God  punished  them  less  than  they  deserved ;  thirdly, 
that  He  had  totally  delivered  them.  First,  for  the  first  particular  in  the  gradation 
of  God's  mercy, "  Thou  our  God  hast  punished  us  " — that  is.  Thou  hast  punished  us 
deservedly.  Tyrants  will  and  do  punish  men  without  cause ;  but  the  Judge  of  all  the 
world  never  proceeds  to  punish  but  when  He  is  provoked.  In  that  Ezra  saith, 
"  Seeing  that  Thou  our  God  hast  punished  us."  Take  notice  in  the  first  place  of 
this  observation.  Whatsoever  is  the  instrument,  God  is  the  author  of  the  punish- 
ment (Isa.  xlv.  7;  Amos  iii.  6).  In  1  Cor.  xi.  32  St.  Paul  there  labours  to  persuade 
the  Corinthians  that  God  chastened  them  ;  and  David  saith  (Psa.  xxxix.  9),  "  I  was 
dumb,  and  opened  not  my  mouth,  because  Thou  didst  it."  This  may  inform  us 
what  is  the  ground  of  all  the  impatience  in  the  world.  There  be  a  number  which 
repine  when  God's  hand  is  upon  them.  What  is  the  reason  ?  They  stick  in  the 
second  causes,  and  look  so  much  on  the  lower  links  of  the  chain,  that  they  forget 
Him  that  hath  the  top  of  it  in  His  hand.  Secondly,  here  is  a  use  of  admonition. 
Ever  look  up  to  God  in  all  thy  afflictions.  Look  to  Him  in  thy  fever,  in  thy  ague, 
in  the  plague.  Lastly,  when  the  Lord's  hand  is  upon  us,  and  that  we  would  have 
it  removed,  the  nearest  way  we  can  take  is  to  have  recourse  to  God  by  prayer. 
God  doth  never  punish  any  without  desert  (Gen.  xviii.  25).  We  should  ever  justify 
God  in  all  the  judgments  He  brings  upon  us.  The  saints  of  God  have  done  this  in 
all  times ;  thus  did  David  (Psa.  cxix.  75).  In  the  second  place,  seeing  God 
punishes  none  without  cause,  let  it  teach  us  patience  under  His  afflicting  hand. 
Further,  we  may  observe  that  Ezra  speaks  not  only  of  sin  in  general,  but  of  "  a 
great  trespass."  What  was  it?  It  was  the  people  mingling  themselves  with  the 
heathen.  The  doctrine  arising  from  hence  is  thus  much.  When  God  arises  to 
judgment.  He  ever  sets  Himself  against  the  foul  sins  of  men.  Wilt  thou  deal  other- 
wise with  God  Almighty  than  with  thy  physician  ?  When  he  comes  to  thee  in  thy 
sickness  thou  wilt  conceal  nothing  from  him,  but  tell  him  how  it  is  with  thee  in 
every  particular.  And  yet  when  thou  comest  to  confess  thy  sins  to  thy  God,  thou 
concealest  those  capital  sins  which  have  most  offended  Him.  {Josiah  Shute,  B.D.) 
Divine  cordialt : — We  come  now  to  the  second  amplification  of  God's  mercy.  Ezra 
had  said  that  God  had  dealt  mercifully  with  them.  How  proves  he  the  mercy  of 
God  ?  He  proves  it  thus,  because  that  when  He  punished  them  it  was  less  than 
they  deserved.  Here  is  one  word  joined  with  punishing,  which  I  would  have  you 
take  notice  of,  "  Thou  our  God  hast  punished  us."  Hei-ein  he  is  a  pattern  to  us 
when  at  any  time  we  come  to  confess  our  sins  before  God.  "  Our  God  "  intimates 
a  strong  relation  and  affection.  Certainly,  when  he  saith  thus,  he  knew  there  was 
hope  of  God's  being  reconciled  to  them  again,  giving  us  thereby  to  understand  what 
is  required  of  men  in  the  confession  of  sin.  A  man  must  not  only,  as  David, 
"water  his  couch  with  his  tears  "  (Psa.  vi.  6) ;  nor  with  Peter,  "  go  out  and  weep 
bitterly "  (Matt.  xivi.  75) ;  nor  with  the  woman  which  was  a  sinner  in  the  city, 
"  wash  Christ's  feet  with  our  tears  "  (Luke  vii.  88) ;  nor,  secondly,  must  he  only 
with  a  great  deal  of  self  shame  confess  his  sin,  as  did  Ezra  in  this  chapter,  and  the 
poor  publican  (Luke  xviii.  13).  Thirdly,  nor  must  he  only  confess  his  sins  with 
anger,  as  did  Job  (Job  xlii.  6)  and  Ephr.iim  (Hos.  xiv.  8).  But,  lastly,  he  must 
confess  them  with  faith  and  confideiica  ;  that  is,  so  to  aggravate  his  sins  before 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

God  as  not  to  let  go  his  hold  in  God  (Dan.  ix.  9).  Let  the  consideration  of  thia 
teach  us  to  take  out  this  needful  lesson.  Some  there  be  that  confess  their  sins, 
but  it  is  with  despair  ;  thus  did  Cain  and  Judas.  But  for  ourselves,  let  us  confess 
our  sins  with  hope  that  God  will  pardon  us,  and  with  the  servants  of  Benhadad  let 
us  address  ourselves  to  Him,  and  say,  "We  have  heard  that  Thou,  who  art  the  King 
of  Israel,  art  a  merciful  King."  Let  us  never  despair.  God  may  love  and  yet 
punish.  I  desire  from  my  soul  that  people  would  be  persuaded  of  this.  I  confess 
it  is  a  hard  saying,  and  men  will  hardly  be  drawn  to  believe  it,  especially  when  the 
aflaiction  is  smart.  How  often  did  Job  think  God  his  enemy  when  His  hand  waa 
heavy  upon  him  !  So  in  David,  all  men  knew  that  he  loved  his  Absolom  well,  but 
yet  when  he  turns  rebel  he  must  take  up  arms  against  him ;  yet,  at  the  same  time, 
he  bids  his  men  intreat  the  young  man  Absolom  kindly.  Now,  can  man  punish 
and  yet  love  ?  And  shall  not  God  do  the  same,  who  is  fuller  of  mercy  than  the  sea 
is  of  water?  In  the  second  place,  it  should  teach  every  man  to  take  heed  of 
censuring  any  to  be  such  as  God  hates,  on  whom  God  lays  His  afflicting  hand. 
God  doth  not  punish  any  of  His  so  much  as  they  deserve.  Secondly,  let  us  learn 
of  our  heavenly  Father,  to  be  merciful  as  He  is  merciful.  The  last  amplification 
of  God's  mercy  is,  that  He  had  delivered  them — "  Thou  hast  given  us  such  a 
deliverance  as  this."  WiU  some  men  say,  "  What  deliverance  was  that  ?  "  It  waa 
the  delivering  of  Israel  from  the  Babylonish  captivity,  which  lasted  seventy  years, 
and  was  a  very  great  deliverance.  There  be  certain  deliverances  which  God  bestows 
on  men,  for  which  they  are  to  be  more  thankful  than  for  others.  It  is  true  God  is 
so  great  in  the  greatest  that  He  is  not  little  in  the  least,  yet  some  are  greater  than 
others.  Some  of  God's  works  are  written  in  greater,  some  in  smaller  characters. 
It  was  not  every  deliverance  which  caused  Hezekiah  to  pen  a  song,  but  it  was  God's 
adding  a  lease  of  fifteen  years  to  his  life  when  he  thought  himself  past  recovery. 
They  were  great  deliverances  that  made  the  Jews  keep  their  anniversaries,  as  the 
Feast  of  the  Passover,  of  Tabernacles,  and  of  Trumpets.  Let  me  call  upon  you  to 
reflect  and  to  say  with  Ezra,  "  God  hath  given  us  such  a  deliverance  as  this." 
What  a  deliverance  did  God  give  unto  us  in  this  land  at  the  entrance  of  good 
Queen  EUzabeth  of  ever  blessed  memory,  who  restored  true  religion  among  us  1 
As,  therefore,  at  that  time  of  need  His  mercy  was  great  towards  us,  so  let  it 
appear  in  our  lives  that  we  are  sensible  of  His  extraordinary  favour,  by  living 
holy   and   righteously   all   the   days  of    our   life.      (Ibid.)  Should  we   again, 

break  Thy  commandments,  and  join  In  afiftnity  with  the  people  of  these 
abominations. — No  affinity  with  abominations: — I.  Our  national  duty  to  God. 
This  may  be  viewed  in  three  lights.  1.  Of  moral  and  Christian  obligation.  2.  Of 
Scripture  precedent.  3.  Of  prophetic  promise.  11.  The  abominations  to  bb 
RENOUNCED.  Christian  idolatry  and  the  Papacy  of  Kome.  1.  It  is  unbelieving.  True 
faith  is  blotted  out  by  a  blind  credulity.  2.  It  is  idolatrous.  3.  It  is  self-righteous. 
4.  It  is  persecuting.  5.  In  its  whole  practice  it  denies  the  Father  and  the  Son. 
HI.  The  kind  of  affinity  which  is  sinful  and  forbidden.  It  is  one  of 
sympathy,  of  partial  adoption,  and  of  the  direct  patronage  of  idolatrous  error. 
IV.  The  aggravation  of  our  sin  by  former  mercies.  (T.  R.  Birks,  M.A.) 
Sorrow  for  sin  followed  by  amendment  of  conduct: — In  this  verse  we  may  take 
knowledge  how  Ezra  justifies  God's  severity  upon  the  precedency  of  man's  sin. 
The  verse  divides  itself  into  two  parts :  First,  the  sin ;  secondly,  the  punishment. 
The  sin  is  laid  down :  First,  generally,  "  Shall  we  return  to  break  Thy  command- 
ments?" Secondly,  particularly,  "And  join  in  affinity  with  the  people  of  these 
abominations?"  Then  follows  the  punishment:  First,  "God  will  be  angry"; 
secondly,  there  is  the  degree  of  His  anger,  "  He  will  not  leave  consuming  till  all  be 
destroyed."  We  begin  with  the  sin  in  general :  "  Should  we  return  to  break  Thy 
commandments?" — in  the  original  it  is  "Should  we  return  again  to  commit 
iniquities?" — which  intimates  to  us  that  when  God's  hand  was  upon  them  it 
wrought  them  to  amendment:  from  whence  I  note  this  much.  That  is  sound 
repentance  when  a  man  so  sorrows  for  his  sin  that  he  forsakes  it.  This  lets  us  see 
the  vanity  of  those  who  say  they  have  repented  of,  and  yet  have  not  turned  from 
their  evil  ways.  It  may  be  while  God's  hand  was  on  them  they  repented.  Secondly, 
as  we  say,  we  repent  of  our  sins,  so  let  us  turn  from  them.  This  was  the  savoury 
counsel  of  Daniel  to  Nebuchadnezzar,  "  0  king,  break  off  thy  sins  by  righteousness, 
and  thine  iniquities  by  showing  mercy  to  the  poor."  It  is  possible  for  a  man  to 
turn  from  sin  and  yet  be  never  the  better,  if  he  grieve  not  for  it ;  and  it  is  possible 
for  a  man  to  grieve  for  sin,  and  yet  far  enough  from  true  repentance  if  he  turn  not 
from  it.    If  any  of  us  should  have  a  servant  that  grieved  for  his  offence,  promising 


CHAP,  iz.]  EZRA.  65 

no  more  to  commit  the  like,  and  yet  as  soon  as  our  back  is  turned  should  ran  into 
the  same  again,  we  would  presently  conclude  that  he  did  but  dissemble.  "  Should 
we  return  to  break  Thy  commandments  ? "  The  manner  of  Ezra's  speaking 
intimates  to  us,  that  it  is  possible  for  a  man  to  be  engaged  in  sin  when  he  hath  had 
a  taste  of  God's  mercy ;  and  if  so,  give  me  leave  from  hence  to  gather  this  observa- 
tion. After  the  receipt  of  great  mercies,  God's  children  are  apt  to  be  engaged  in 
great  sins.  See  it  made  good  in  some  instances.  Was  there  ever  a  greater  deliverance 
bestowed  on  any  than  that  which  the  Lord  afforded  Noah,  when  he  outrid  that 
storm  of  the  deluge  in  the  ark,  when  all  the  world  besides  him  and  his  were 
drowned?  But  soon  after  he  forgot  his  great  favour,  and  was  overtaken  with 
intemperance.  So  in  the  children  of  Israel,  what  a  deliverance  did  God  vouchsafe 
them  when  He  freed  them  from  Egyptian  bondage  1  What  may  be  the  reason  of 
this  ?  First,  it  is  from  the  corruption  of  our  nature  since  the  fall  of  Adam,  which 
is  so  depraved  thereby  that  we  are  apt  to  forget  the  mercy  of  God  even  then,  when 
we  have  most  cause  to  remember  it.  Secondly,  it  proceeds  from  the  malice  of  the 
devil;  for  when  he  sees  God  to  bestow  great  mercies  on  men,  he  then  labours 
especially  to  engage  them  in  transgression.  And  why  so  ?  That  the  mercies  of 
God  may  be  obscured  by  their  unthankfulness.  Let  me  persuade  you,  that  as  ye  be 
sensible  of  God's  mercies,  so  to  watch  over  yourselves  upon  the  receipt  of  them  that 
ye  may  be  thankful  for  them.  And  as  the  devil  doth  labour  then  to  step  in  when 
God  hath  done  men  most  good,  so  above  all  times  labour  at  that  time  to  be  most 
thankful  and  obedient,  that  God  may  have  His  glory  and  you  a  sweet  relish  of  His 
mercy.  "  Shall  we  break  Thy  commandments  ?  "  How  shall  we  understand  this 
"  break  Thy  commandments  "  ?  How  could  it  be  otherwise  ?  Doth  any  man  live 
and  not  sin  ?  And  yet  shall  they  for  this  be  exposed  to  God's  judgments  ?  His 
meaning  is,  that  Lf  after  so  great  mercy  as  God  hath  vouchsafed  them  they  should 
fall  into  gross  sins,  then  God  should  be  just  in  punishing  them.  As  therefore  a 
man  should  avoid  great  sins,  so  also  all  lesser  impieties.  The  heart  of  man  should 
be  against  aU  sin,  and  he  should  have  respect  to  all  God's  commandments,  that  ii 
he  chance  to  fall  it  may  not  be  presumptuously,  but  by  infirmity.  "  Shall  we  join 
in  affinity  with  the  people  of  these  abominations  ?  "  Here  I  could  observe  how  hate- 
ful the  heathen  and  all  their  doings  be  unto  God,  as  also  how  odious  all  gross 
sinners  are  in  His  pure  eyes.  In  the  Scripture  ye  shall  find  if  the  godly  be  compared 
to  gold,  the  wicked  are  termed  dross.  Again,  if  the  godly  be  termed  sheep,  the 
wicked  are  called  goats  ;  nay,  in  our  text  "  they  be  abominable."  So  we  may  say 
of  the  wicked  man,  be  he  never  so  rich  and  honourable,  if  he  be  a  gross  sinner  he 
is  hateful  to  God.  The  Holy  Ghost  makes  it  a  foul  sin  to  join  in  affinity  with  the 
heathen  ;  and,  indeed,  so  it  is,  for  God  charges  the  contrary  (Exod.  xxxiv.  15,  16). 
And  ye  shall  find  that  God  hath  followed  those  with  punishments  that  have  joined 
themselves  to  heathens.  Esau  married  strange  wives,  to  the  great  grief  of  his  father 
a,nd  mother,  and  he  was  made  the  more  profane  by  it.  The  like  we  see  in  Solomon. 
It  was  so  with  Samson,  he  would  needs  have  the  daughter  of  a  Philistine  to  wife ; 
what  followed  upon  it  ?  she  proved  his  bane.  Make  no  league  with  gross  sinners, 
for  there  is  much  danger  in  it.  First,  the  danger  of  suspicion.  Let  a  man  be  never 
so  good,  yet  if  he  associate  himself  with  those  that  be  bad,  he  will  be  thought  as  bad 
as  they  ;  for  what  will  men  say?  "  Birds  of  a  feather  fly  together."  Secondly,  he 
runs  the  hazard  of  infection.  All  the  rivers  of  the  world  run  into  the  sea,  but  yet 
they  cannot  sweeten  it,  but  are  made  brakish  by  it.  And  a  wicked  man  is  ten 
times  more  apt  to  corrupt  a  good  man  than  he  is  to  be  wrought  on  by  the  conversa- 
tion of  a  good  man.  Thirdly,  there  is  a  danger  of  a  curse  by  consorting  with  wicked 
men.  For  as  many  ill  men  fare  the  better  for  one  man,  thus  the  household  of 
Potipher  was  blest  for  one  Joseph ;  and  all  in  the  ship  fared  the  better  for  Paul's 
presence.  So  many  good  men  may  sometimes  fare  the  worse  for  one  wicked  person, 
thus  for  one  Achan  the  whole  host  of  Israel  is  discomfited.  Besides,  when  a  good 
man  maintains  inward  familiarity  with  the  wicked  :  First,  he  seems  to  approve  and 
applaud  their  wickedness :  secondly,  it  is  a  scandal  to  religion,  and  doth  greatly 
prejudice  weak  Christians ;  thirdly,  it  is  a  great  means  to  keep  the  wicked  from 
repenting,  for  too  much  intimacy  with  them  hardens  them  in  their  sin.  We  now 
come  to  the  punishment:  "  Wouldst  Thou  not  be  angry  with  us  till  Thou  hadst 
consumed  us,  so  that  there  should  be  no  remnant  nor  escaping  ?  "  First,  here  is 
God's  anger  in  the  first  clause,  "  Wouldst  Thou  not  be  angry  with  us  ?  "  Secondly, 
we  have  the  degree  of  His  anger  in  the  last  words,  "  so  that  there  should  be  no 
escaping."  We  begin  with  God's  anger,  "Wouldst  Thou  not  be  angry  with  us?" 
Out  of  this  first  clause  I  note  two  things  for  our  instruction.     The  first  is  this : 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

great  sins,  after  the  receipt  of  great  favours,  are  usually  followed  by  great 
judgments.  And  wonder  not  at  this,  for  it  is  a  great  dishonour  to  God  that  His 
favours  should  be  slighted  (Rom.  ii.  4).  The  second  observation  arising  from  that 
clause,  "  Wouldst  Thou  not  be  angry  with  us  till  Thou  hadst  consumed  us  ?  "  is  this : 
there  be  degrees  of  God's  wrath  ;  it  rises  by  little  and  little  till  it  consume.  This 
is  proved  in  Lev.  xxvi.  There  we  find  that  as  men's  sins  increase,  so  God's  plagues 
shall  increase  ;  and  if  they  persist  in  sin,  He  will  plague  them  seven  times  more 
and  seven  times  more.  So  in  Psa.  Ixxviii.  38.  Thus  the  wrath  of  God  rises  higher 
and  higher.  Could  Rehoboam  make  his  little  finger  as  heavy  as  his  father's  loins  ? 
and  could  Nebuchadnezzar  make  his  oven  seven  times  hotter  than  it  was  before  ? 
and  shall  not  God  increase  His  wrath  ?  Yes,  He  can  at  pleasure.  One  meets  with  a 
great  number  who,  if  they  have  been  freed  from  an  ague  of  which  they  had  four  or 
five  fits,  they  presently  say  with  Agag,  "  The  bitterness  is  past,  and  they  shall  no 
more  have  it."  What  thinkest  thou  ?  Is  not  God  able  to  visit  thee  again  ?  In  the 
second  place,  whensoever  God's  hand  is  upon  us,  let  us  know  that  He  could  lay 
much  more  upon  us  if  He  would.     (Josiah  Shute,  B.D.) 

Yet.  15.  0  Lord  God  of  Israel,  Thou  art  righteous ;  for  we  remain  yet  escaped, 
as  it  is  this  day :  behold,  we  are  before  Thee  in  our  trespasses :  for  we  cannot 
stand  before  Thee  because  of  this. — Divirie  cordials : — In  this  verse  Ezra  pleads 
guilty  to  the  indictment,  acknowledging  God  to  be  just,  though  He  should  renew 
His  judgments  afresh  upon  them.  There  be  two  things  in  it:  First,  his  justifying 
God  in  these  words,  "  0  Lord  God  of  Israel,  Thou  art  righteous."  Secondly,  the 
reason  which  he  gives  for  it :  First,  on  God's  part.  He  had  used  all  possible  means 
to  bring  them  to  reformation — "  We  remain  yet  escaped  as  at  this  day."  Secondly, 
on  their  part.  They  were  still  in  their  trespasses ;  and  therefore  they  were  the 
fresh  fuel  of  God's  indignation.  Before  we  come  to  these  particulars,  give  me 
leave  to  speak  a  word  or  two  of  the  style  he  gives  God ;  he  calls  Him  "  Lord  God  of 
Israel."  The  title  "  Lord  "  signifies  His  greatness ;  "  the  God  of  Israel,"  His 
goodness.  A  fit  preface  for  a  prayer,  for  the  word  "  Lord "  is  a  term  well 
befitting  God.  In  the  Holy  Scripture  He  is  said  to  be  •'  strong  in  power,  and 
wonderful  in  working."  Let  it  comfort  God's  people :  God  is  the  Lord  Almighty  in 
power.  What  then  shall  be  too  hard  for  Him  to  perform  with  them  ?  Lastly,  it 
should  teach  us  to  stand  in  awe  and  not  sin  against  God.  So  we  come  to  the 
second,  which  is,  that  He  is  "  the  God  of  Israel."  And  if  in  the  first  He  was  the 
greatest,  then  in  this  He  is  the  best.  I  know  He  is  "the  God  of  all  the  earth" 
(Psa.  xxiv.  1) ;  but  more  especially  He  is  "  the  God  of  Israel.''  First,  by  a  special 
and  peculiar  worship.  To  them  above  other  people  He  revealed  how  He  would  be 
■worshipped.  Secondly,  He  is  the  God  of  Israel  in  regard  to  that  special  care 
He  had  of  them.  He  was  a  wall  of  fire  round  about  them  to  preserve  them  from 
their  enemies.  Thirdly,  He  is  the  God  of  Israel  by  a  special  reward  which  He  hath 
promised  them.  He  said  to  Abraham,  "  I  am  thy  exceeding  great  reward."  This 
that  hath  been  said  may  assure  God's  children  of  His  affection  towards  them. 
Secondly,  methinks  this  should  take  off  the  edge  of  all  persecutors.  Is  God  the 
God  of  His  people  ?  and  dare  they  touch  that  which  is  hallowed  unto  God  ?  Will 
they  meddle  with  the  apple  of  His  eye?  Thirdly,  methinks  it  should  teach  all 
persecutors  and  all  wicked  men  to  love  the  people  of  God.  How  are  we  affected 
with  earthly  things  ?  If  we  know  a  man  whom  the  king  favours,  how  do  we  seek 
to  get  into  his  favour  ?  We  will  do  him  any  service  to  obtain  it.  And  are  not  the 
saints  of  God  His  favourites  ?  Lastly,  is  the  Lord  the  God  of  Israel  ?  Let  Israel 
then  behave  themselves  as  God's  people.  What  saith  the  Spirit  of  God  in 
Deut.  xxvi.  18;  1  Cor.  vi,  20;  Titus  ii,  14?  Now  we  come  to  the  particulars  in 
the  text  as  we  laid  them  down.  First,  for  the  justifying  of  God,  "  Thou  art 
righteous."  This  hath  been  ever  the  practice  of  God's  people;  they  have  still 
confessed  God  to  be  just  in  what  He  hath  brought  upon  them.  Thus  doth  David 
{Psa.  Ii.  4 ;  cxix.  137).  This  lets  us  see  how  the  world  fails  in  this  particular.  When 
God  lays  His  hand  on  men,  how  apt  are  they  to  dispute  with  God  and  say,  ^Vhy  doth 
He  deal  thus  and  thus  with  us?  Who  art  thou,  O  man,  that  repliest  to  thy  Maker? 
Secondly,  let  us  always  be  persuaded  of  the  justice  of  God  in  all  His  proceedings;  for 
though  we  see  not  the  reason  why  He  doth  this  or  that,  yet  there  is  good  reason  for  it. 
We  proceed  now  to  the  reason  which  he  gives  for  justifying  God :  "  For  we  remain  yet 
escaped,  as  it  is  this  day."  As  if  he  had  said,  "  Thy  goodness  is  demonstrate  ;  he 
that  runs  may  read  it."  In  general  judgments  which  God  brings  upon  the  world, 
ihere  are  still  some  escaping.    When  God  sent  the  deluge  upon  the  world,  Noah  and 


CHAP.x.]  EZRA.  67 

his  family  perished  not.  In  the  j&ery  shower  which  God  rained  on  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah,  Lot  and  his  daughters  perished  not.  What  is  the  ground  of  this? 
First,  all  God's  ways  are  interveined  with  mercy.  Secondly,  God  still  spares 
some  to  bring  them  to  repentance,  that  they  may  turn  out  of  the  crooked  into  the 
straight  path.  Let  me  advise  them  that  have  tasted  of  God's  mercy  in  this  way 
never  to  forget  it ;  and  for  this  let  me  stir  up  my  own  soul  to  praise  God  with 
you.  Wiitn  my  next  neighbour  was  smitten  dead,  why  was  not  I  smitten  also? 
It  was  only  God's  mercy.  What  a  fearful  judgment  it  is  not  to  profit  by  afflictions. 
It  is  that  for  which  God  finds  great  fault  with  His  people  in  Deut.  xxix.  2,  3,  4.  In 
the  second  place,  let  us  labour  to  profit  by  affliction.  The  last  clause  is,  "  Neither 
can  we  stand  before  Thee,  because  of  this."  As  if  he  had  said,  "  We  cannot  come 
before  Thee  with  any  confidence  while  we  be  in  our  sins  unrepented  of."  That 
man  that  comes  before  God  in  his  sins  without  repentance  cannot  come  with 
any  confidence  or  hope  of  mercy.  In  Prov.  xxviii.  13,  mercy  is  promised  to 
him  that  confesseth  and  forsaketh  his  sin;  but  wrath  is  pronounced  against 
him  that  hideth  them.    (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  X. 

Vebs.  1-25.  Now  when  Ezra  had  prayed,  —  Prayer  and  confession:  —  The 
former  chapter  did  set  down  the  humiliation  of  Ezra ;  this  demonstrates  the 
fruit  and  effect  that  it  produced.  When  the  people  saw  that  he  was  so 
affected  and  afflicted, and  that  not  so  much  for  his  own  sins  as  for  the  sins 
of  the  people,  they  take  it  to  heart.  And  first,  there  is  a  very  great  assembly 
gathered  together ;  secondly,  they  weep  sore ;  thirdly,  one  particular  person, 
Shechaniah  by  name,  confesseth  the  sins  of  the  people ;  fourthly,  they  conceive 
hope  of  remission  ;  fifthly,  they  resolve  to  put  away  their  strange  wives ;  lastly, 
they  put  their  late  resolution  into  execution.  That  which  gives  occasion  to  all 
these  is  laid  down  in  the  first  words  of  the  chapter,  which  contains :  First,  the 
actions  of  Ezra,  and  they  be  two,  "  praying  and  weeping."  Secondly,  his  manner 
of  confessing,  "  he  cast  himself  down  before  the  house  of  the  Lord."  Upon  this 
follows  the  coming  together  of  a  great  assembly  of  men,  women,  and  children. 
We  begin  with  his  actions,  and  first  for  his  praying,  "  When  Ezra  had  prayed." 
The  commandment  of  God  is  for  it  (Psa.  1.  15),  "  Call  upon  Me  in  the  day  of 
trouble."  So  in  James  v.  13,  "Is  any  among  you  afflicted?  let  him  pray."  And 
as  God  commanded  it,  so  His  children  have  practised  it.  First,  pray  sensibly.  Be 
sensible  of  what  thou  sufferest.  God  loves  not  that  men  should  be  as  so  many 
Stoics.  Secondly,  a  man  must  pray  as  feelingly  as  fervently  (Jam.  v.  15).  Thirdly, 
we  must  pray  faithfully,  that  is,  believing  we  shall  receive  what  we  implore  God. 
Fourthly,  we  must  pray  constantly.  First,  we  must  aim  at  the  glory  of  God  in  all 
the  prayers  we  make.  Secondly,  a  man  must  so  pray  to  God  that  withal  he  use 
means  to  accomplish  his  desires.  So  much  for  Ezra's  first  act.  The  second 
act  performed  by  him  is  his  confession,  the  text  saith,  "  When  he  had  confessed." 
I  desire  you  to  practise  this  second  act  of  Ezra.  Do  not  only  pray  unto  God,  but 
likewise  confess  your  sins  unto  Him.  First,  we  must  confess  them  with  shame, 
thus  did  Job  (Job  xlii.  6).  Secondly,  we  must  do  it  ingenuously.  It  must  not  be 
extorted  from  us  as  it  was  from  Achan,  but  we  must  willingly  confess  our  iniquities. 
Thirdly,  we  must  do  it  with  sorrow  and  contrition  of  soul.  Fourthly,  with  anger. 
Fifthly,  with  honest  hearts ;  that  is,  with  an  assured  purpose  to  leave  our  impieties. 
Lastly,  we  must  confess  our  sins  fully ;  there  must  be  no  retaining,  excusing, 
or  extenuating  of  sin.  We  come  now  to  the  manner  of  Ezra's  confession,  laid 
down  in  these  words,  "  Weeping,  and  casting  himself  down  before  the  house  of  the 
Lord."  The  first  thing  in  it  is  his  weeping,  and  this  hath  ever  been  a  usual 
concomitant  of  prayer.  See  it  in  David  (Psa.  vi.  6).  Mark,  he  made  his  prayer 
to  God,  and  tears  went  along  with  it.  First,  because  of  the  great  good  that  sin 
deprives  us  of.  We  are  apt  to  grieve  for  the  loss  of  a  father,  a  wife,  or  a  child. 
And  shall  not  we  mourn  for  sin,  which  deprives  us  of  the  true  God?  Secondly,  we 
have  reason  to  weep  for  sin,  because  of  the  miseries  which  it  brings  on  the  sons  of 
men.  It  should  exhort  us  to  weep  and  mourn  for  our  sins.  We  spend  tears  in 
abundance  for  these  secular  things ;  but  we  should  spare  them  there,  and  spend 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [caxp.x, 

them  here.  Is  it  not  a  foolery  to  wash  a  stable  with  sweet  water  ?  Thy  tears  b» 
the  sweetest  water  in  the  world,  therefore  spend  them  on  thy  sins ;  I  am  sure  thoa 
canst  not  spend  them  better.  The  second  thing  in  the  manner  is,  "  He  cast  himsell 
down  before  the  house  of  the  Lord."  Where  repentance  is  true  inward,  it  will  put 
itself  outward.  Those  that  find  not  this  in  themselves  may  suspect  their  repentance. 
"  He  cast  himself  down  before  the  house  of  the  Lord."  Why  so?  It  was  the  more 
to  stir  him  up  to  humiliation.  He  seems  to  say,  "  What  ?  shall  Thy  people  enjoy  the 
privileges  of  Thy  house  ?  And  shall  they  thus  irritate  and  provoke  Thee?  "  (Ibid.) 
The  influence  of  an  eminent  example  : — We  come  now  to  the  firstfruit  of  Ezra's 
humiliation ;  and  that  is  the  convening  of  a  great  congregation  to  him.  So  that 
Ezra  hath  here  the  glory  of  being  an  example  of  goodness  to  others.  It  is  to  stir 
us  all  up  to  this  holy  pride,  to  be  the  first  in  good  actions.  He  that  did  first  invent 
printing,  his  name  will  be  famous  to  the  end  of  the  world.  So  now,  to  be  the  first 
that  believes  in  a  town,  to  be  the  first  that  puts  a  good  law  in  execution,  to  lay  the 
first  stone  in  a  pious  work,  this  is  no  small,  but  a  very  great  honour.  We  say  he 
is  an  ill  horse  that  will  not  lead  the  way  but  only  follow  ;  and  I  will  not  give  a 
button  for  that  Christian  that  will  do  no  more  than  he  sees  others  do.  How 
do  ye  in  your  afifairs  in  the  world  ?  If  a  commodity  come  from  beyond  the  seas  of 
which  you  stand  in  need,  do  you  stay  till  others  bid  money  for  it  ?  No ;  but  with 
all  speed  you  get  it  into  your  own  hands.  And  shall  there  be  such  a  moderation  in 
spiritual  things?  Further,  as  Ezra  had  the  honour  to  be  an  example  to  others  in 
goodness,  so  now  see  the  effect  of  it,  "  A  great  company  of  men,  women,  and  children 
assembled  together."  And  why  so  ?  Doubtless  for  no  other  cause  but  to  humble 
themselves  as  he  had  done.  So  efiBcacious  and  powerful  is  the  example  of  goodness 
in  great  ones.  It  is  said  of  Augustus  that  in  his  time  Bome  was  full  of  scholars 
because  he  affected  learning.  In  the  time  of  Commodus  it  was  full  of  fencers 
because  he  loved  that  exercise.  And  in  Nero's  time  it  was  full  of  musicians, 
for  he  took  great  delight  in  music.  All  men  compose  their  manners  to  his  who  i» 
their  governor.  The  truth  is,  the  example  of  great  ones  is  the  loadstone  which 
draws  inferiors  after  it;  that  is  the  compass  by  which  most  men  sail.  In  the 
second  place,  let  it  be  a  use  to  those  who  are  eminent  in  the  Church,  such  as  Ezra 
was.  Let  them  not  only  preach,  but  live  well.  Where  the  sin  is  general  and 
epidemical,  good  reason  that  aU  should  be  joined  together  in  humiliation.  When 
we  shall  see  that  the  sins  of  the  times  do  overflow  and  be  grown  up  to  heaven,  as 
at  this  time  they  are,  it  shall  be  fit,  though  a  public  humiliation  be  not  prescribed 
by  authority,  to  make  our  humiliation  general  by  every  man's  sorrowing  for  his 
own  sins.  "  Oh,"  say  those  in  the  city,  "  those  of  the  court  are  so  horribly  wicked 
that  we  are  all  like  to  smart  for  their  profaneness."  And  saith  the  court,  "  Such 
is  the  cheating  of  the  citizens,  that  they  will  draw  down  judgments  upon  us  all." 
Thus  one  accuses  another ;  but  in  the  meantime,  who  smites  his  hand  on  his  breast 
and  saith,  "  What  have  I  done?  "  But  mark  the  particular  numeration  which  the 
Spirit  of  God  makes,  "  men,  women,  children."  First,  men ;  and  good  reason  men 
should  lead  the  dance  and  go  before  the  rest  in  a  good  way.  Abraham  went  first 
out  of  his  country,  and  Sarah  followed  him.  I  press  it  no  further  than  thus  :  you 
that  are  men,  I  confess  you  have  more  honour  put  upon  you  than  women  have, 
and  I  know  you  are  apt  enough  to  arrogate  as  much  to  yourselves  ;  but  take  heed 
that  whilst  you  go  before  them  in  honour  that  they  prevent  j'ou  not  in  the  best 
things.  The  second  sort  of  people  spoken  of  are  women,  and  indeed  the  service  of 
God  is  charged  upon  them  as  well  as  upon  men,  as  in  1  Tim.  ii.  10,  15  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  4. 
Thirdly,  "the  children  came."  What?  the  children  join  in  humiliation?  Yes;  why 
not  ?  for  God  was  offended,  and  they  had  reason  to  be  humbled  for  it.  The  second 
thing  set  down  in  this  verse  is  "  that  the  people  wept  very  sore."  What  was  the 
reason  ?  The  reason  shall  be  the  observation.  Great  sins  must  have  a  great 
measune  of  sorrow.  In  Psa.  vi.  6,  David  having  committed  great  sins,  "  made  his  bed 
to  swim,  and  watered  his  couch  with  his  tears."  "  Sin  must  have  sorrow  at  one  time 
or  another"  (Prov.  xxix.  6).  (Ibid.)  Helping  the  minister: — What  comfort  it 
pleaseth  God  to  give  his  ministers  here  in  that  happy  fruit  of  people's  humiliation. 
So  great  is  the  comfort  of  this  kind  that  there  cannot  be  a  greater.  I  do  not  think 
but  at  this  very  time  the  tears  stood  in  Ezra's  eyes ;  yet  when  he  saw  tears  distill 
from  the  people's  eyes  it  made  him  glad  at  the  heart.  Ministers  know  that  if  great 
persons  be  won  to  God  they  will  win  others  by  their  example — so  powerful  is  the 
example  of  great  ones  to  inferiors.  It  should  teach  the  ministers  of  the  Word,  like 
Ezra,  to  labour  the  conversion  of  great  and  eminent  persons,  and  to  do  what  they 
can  to  bring  them  to  sorrow  for  their  sins.    How  comfortable  it  is  in  good  actions^ 


CHAP.  X.]  EZRA.  69 

to  have  an  assistant.  Is  it  not  lamentable  that  men  should  get  good  business  on 
loot  and  have  none  to  join  with  them  ?  It  is  a  happy  thing  when  the  priest  and 
magistrate,  the  word  and  the  sword,  go  hand  in  hand  together.  There  will  be  no 
reformation  till  the  word  of  Ezra  and  the  sword  of  Shechaniah  go  together.  But 
now  what  is  it  which  Shechaniah  saith  ?  He  speaketh  that  in  a  few  words,  which 
Ezra  had  delivered  more  largely,  "  We  have  trespassed  against  our  God."  The 
penitent  soul  is  more  severe  against  itself  than  the  most  slanderous  tongue  in  the 
world.  But  I  pass  by  that  and  fall  upon  another  observation,  which  naturally 
aprings  from  Shechaniah's  words,  and  it  is  this :  Above  all  other  griefs,  this  to  a  good 
soul  is  the  chiefest,  "  that  he  hath  offended  God."  (Ibid.)  Forgiveness  for  great 
iins : — We  descend  now  to  another  fruit  of  Ezra :  his  humiliation.  Shechaniah  con- 
fesseth  the  sin  of  the  people,  which  was  of  the  first  magnitude;  to  wit,  their  joining 
themselves  in  marriage  with  heathens.  Yet  he  despairs  not  of  forgiveness  from 
God,  but  saith,  "  Yet  there  is  hope  in  Israel  concerning  this  thing."  From  whence 
I  ground  this  observation.  The  greatness  of  a  sin,  if  there  be  repentance,  is  no 
impediment  to  the  forgiveness  of  it.  So  saith  Shechaniah.  First,  it  may  appear  to 
be  true  by  the  charge  that  God  gives  men  to  repent  (Isa.  i.  16).  The  second  reason 
is  drawn  from  the  examples  of  those  great  sinners  on  whom  God  hath  showed  mercy. 
The  third  reason  is  drawn  from  the  attributes  of  God.  (Ibid.)  Covenanting 
with  God : — Shechaniah  is  not  only  resolved  to  do  as  he  saith,  but  he  is  willing  to 
make  a  covenant  with  God,  both  in  his  own  and  the  people's  behalf.  The  true 
penitent  is  desirous  to  tie  himself  by  all  possible  bonds  to  keep  that  which  God 
commands.  Mark  it  in  some  proofs.  First,  the  child  of  God  knows  that  the  service 
of  God  is  a  matter  of  special  consequence.  He  knows  it  is  as  much  as  the 
salvation  of  his  soul,  and  therefore  he  conceives  he  cannot  perform  it  too 
strictly.  Secondly,  there  is  a  desire  in  God's  child  to  show  how  willing  he  is  to 
obey  God.  One  meets  with  those  which  are  afraid  of  these  bonds.  There  be  those 
that  will  not  come  to  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper  because,  they  say,  it  is  a 
sacred  thing  ;  and  if  they  come  there  they  must  enter  into  a  solemn  covenant  with 
God.  I  cannot  but  mourn  for  this,  that  they  are  afraid  to  tie  themselves  to  God.  In 
the  second  place,  let  us  ever  be  willing  to  be  tied  to  God  as  close  as  maybe.  Yea,  if 
we  know  any  way  in  the  world  to  tie  ourselves  faster  to  Him,  let  us  put  it  in 
practice.  Now  we  are  to  examine  the  matter  of  this  covenant.  First,  it  was  "  to 
put  away  their  strange  wives."  Beyond  doubt  this  to  flesh  and  blood  was  a  hard  and 
grievous  thing.  When  the  soul  is  truly  penitent,  whatsoever  it  be  that  is  pleasing 
to  a  man,  if  it  displease  God  he  will  forego  it.  It  serves  to  stir  us  up  to  this  hard 
task.  I  call  it  a  hard  task  because  a  man  will  be  content  to  part  with  many  sins 
rather  than  he  will  leave  his  beloved  corruption.  As  it  is  in  flaying  a  skin  of  a 
dead  body,  it  comes  off  with  ease  tiU  ye  come  to  the  dead,  but  there  it  sticks  and 
comes  not  off  without  difficulty ,  Come  to  the  covetous  man,  and  he  will  easily  be 
persuaded  to  avoid  prodigality.  Here  you  shall  find  him  as  tractable  as  may  be, 
but  yet  all  that  you  can  say  or  do  shall  not  work  upon  him  to  forsake  his  covetous- 
ness.  Secondly,  they  put  away  the  children  bom  of  them.  What  was  the  cause 
of  this  ?  Carthusian  gives  the  reason,  and  it  is  a  very  good  one,  which  will  yield 
us  the  ground  of  an  observation.  Saith  he,  "  They  cast  out  the  children  with  their 
mothers,  lest  the  wives  having  left  their  children  behind  them  should  take  occasion 
to  return  again  to  fetch  them.  He  that  would  avoid  sin  must  make  conscience  of 
avoiding  all  the  occasions  of  sin.  For  proof  hereof  see  that  place  (Gen.  xxxix.  10). 
Joseph  was  so  resolute  in  goodness  that  he  not  only  repels  his  mistress  her 
unlawful  request;  but,  saith  the  text,  "  Though  she  spake  to  him  day  by  day,  yet 
he  hearkened  not  unto  her  to  lie  with  her  or  to  be  with  her."  First,  if  it  be  a  sin 
that  a  man  hath  repented  of  before,  then  he  must  be  so  much  the  more  careful  to 
avoid  not  only  the  sin  itself,  but  all  occasions  tending  to  it.  Secondly,  if  it  be  an 
evil  that  a  man  was  never  engaged  in  before,  yet  he  must  avoid  the  occasion,  for 
there  is  great  need  that  our  prayers  strengthen  our  works,  and  that  our  works  give 
vigour  to  our  prayers.  Nothing  is  truer  than  that  proverb,  "  Occasion  makes  a 
thief."  If  therefore  we  desire  to  overcome  our  lusts,  let  us  avoid  all  the  occasions 
of  sin,  which  are  as  so  many  pandars  waiting  upon  it.  As  for  example,  thou  art  an 
excessive  person,  and  wouldest  conquer  that  sin.  First,  get  a  hatred  to  this  sin  ; 
secondly,  avoid  all  occasions  which  tend  this  way :  sit  not  long  at  wine,  and  beware 
of  idleness  and  iU  company.  Thou  art  a  contentious  person,  and  desirest  strength 
against  that  sin.  Take  heed  of  heat  in  holding  arguments  with  others.  Well, 
when  Shechaniah  and  the  rest  had  done  this,  what  rule  will  they  then  walk  by  ? 
"According  to  the  counsel  of  my  lord."    Now,  if  it  were  so  that  Shechaniah,  who 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  x. 

was  a  prince,  thus  said  to  Ezra  the  priest,  take  knowledge,  then,  of  this  much  :  what 
respect  in  times  past  was  given  to  those  whom  God  called  to  serve  Him,  as  to  be  His 
priests !  It  is  to  be  deplored  in  these  days,  when  every  base  fellow  thinks  himself  better 
than  the  minister.  (Ibid.)  Trembling  at  the  Word  of  God  : — It  should  seem  that 
there  were  others  besides  Ezra  which  advised  the  people  to  put  away  their  strange 
wives,  and  they  such  as  are  said  to  tremble  at  the  Word  of  God.  And  here  observe  the 
power  of  God's  Word.  The  power  of  God's  Word  is  such  that  it  makes  men  tremble. 
To  prove  this  look  at  Jer.  xxiii.  29.  Let  us  labour  for  this  holy  disposition  of  soul 
to  tremble  at  God's  Word.  A  man  that  hath  been  exercised  with  the  terrors  of 
God,  such  a  man  is  most  fit  to  advise  and  counsel  others.  A  man  that  knows  a 
country  by  the  map  may  be  able  to  speak  something  of  it,  but  it  is  nothing  in 
comparison  of  what  a  traveller  can  say  which  hath  been  there.  So  a  man  that 
hath  never  felt  the  terrors  of  God  may  be  able  in  part  to  advise  and  comfort  those 
in  such  distresses ;  but  not  like  him  that  hath  been  exercised  with  the  same  terror. 
Let  it  teach  those  that  be  teachers  of  others  to  lay  things  to  their  own  hearts,  and 
to  make  trial  of  them  there  before  they  prescribe  them  to  others.  Wilt  thou  teach 
the  people  how  to  conquer  such  a  lust?  Hast  thou  made  trial  of  it  thyself  ?  But 
I  go  another  way,  and  think  that  by  those  who  trembled  at  God's  Word  is  meant 
Buch  as  had  not  been  engaged  in  that  common  abomination  of  marrying  strange 
wives ;  and  if  so,  I  cannot  but  note  this  much  :  When  the  times  are  most  wicked 
God  reserves  some  to  Himself.  Secondly,  let  us  labour  to  keep  ourselves  from  the 
corruptions  of  the  times.  When  all  others  do  that  which  is  evil,  do  it  not  then.  And 
that  thou  mayest  do  so,  remember  these  things:  First,  David  makes  it  a  blessed 
thing  not  to  walk  in  the  way  of  sinners  (Psa.  i.  1).  Secondly,  the  purity  of  a  man's 
religion  stands  in  this,  "  to  keep  himself  unspotted  of  the  world "  (Jas.  i.  27). 
Thirdly,  remember  for  what  end  Christ  died.  He  gave  Himself  for  our  sins,  "  that 
He  might  deliver  us  from  this  present  evil  world  "  (Gal.  i.  4).  Fourthly,  I  would 
have  a  man  to  consider  what  a  glory  it  is  to  God  when  he  is  good  amidst  a  froward 
generation,  to  be  as  fish  which  retains  its  freshness  in  the  salt  sea.  Fifthly,  mark 
what  a  confusion  it  is  to  Satan  when  a  man  goes  on  in  a  good  way  where  most  men 
go  wrong.  Lastly,  if  we  sort  ourselves  with  the  sinners  of  the  time  we  hinder  the 
conversion  of  the  world.  Whereas,  when  a  man  shall  shun  such  a  wicked  man's 
company,  he  will  begin  to  say  with  himself,  "  Surely  such  a  man  sees  something 
amiss  in  me,  which  makes  him  refrain  my  society."  And  by  this  means  he  may 
be  reclaimed.  The  fear  of  God  is  the  restraint  of  all  sin.  This  is  proved  sufficiently 
(Prov.  xvi.  6).  That  man  is  most  fit  to  advise  others  who  is  not  engaged  in  the 
same  transgression.  The  hand  that  must  wash  a  thing  clean,  except  it  be  clean  will 
add   to  its  pollution.     (Ibid.)  The  reformation  proposed  : — I.  The  impression 

WHICH  Ezba'b  condition  and  conduct  by  reason  of  theib  sin  produced  upon 
THE  PEOPLE  WAS — 1.  Sympathetic.  2.  Deep.  II.  The  proposal  of  reformation 
MADE.  III.  The  proposal  of  reformation  accepted.  Learn — 1.  The  manifestation 
of  intense  feeling  is  sometimes  commendable,  and  very  influential  for  good.  2.  A 
deep  feeling  of  the  guilt  of  sin  is  a  strong  encouragement  to  hope  for  forgiveness, 
amendment,  &c.  (ver.  2).  3.  That  repentance  only  is  genuine  which  leads  to 
restitution  and  reformation  (ver.  3).  4.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  trans- 
late religious  feeling  into  corresponding  action  without  delay.  5.  Great  leaders 
may  receive  valuable  aid  from  even  their  humblest  followers.  6.  It  is  sometimes 
wise  to  fortify  good  resolutions  by  a  solemn  covenant  with  God,  or  by  a  serious 
pledge  to  men.  (William  Jones.)  Arise ;  for  this  matter  belongeth  unto  thee  : 
we  also  will  be  with  thee. — True  loyalty : — True  loyalty  is  marked — I.  By  genuine 
respect.  In  the  commonwealth  of  Israel  at  that  moment  there  was  great  need  of 
reform.  The  people  had  not  long  returned  from  captivity.  They  were  powerless  and 
few.  Yet  the  very  evil  which  had  previously  occasioned  their  captivity  had  begun 
to  reappear.  Steps  had  been  taken  which  if  not  retraced  would  certainly  bring 
that  evil  about.  Many  in  high  places — some  of  the  speaker's  own  relatives — were  in 
fault  (ver.  26).  The  matter  therefore  was  pressing.  He  felt  it  so.  He  desired 
reform  very  earnestly ;  he  recommended  it  very  strongly  (vers.  2,  3).  Yet  he  would 
not  take  it  upon  him  to  be  the  first  to  move  in  this  matter.  He  would  not  set 
aside  those  whose  office  it  was  to  do  this.  "  Arise ;  for  this  matter  belongeth  unto 
thee."  You  see  exactly  the  state  of  his  mind.  Notwithstanding  the  depth  of  his 
zeal  and  convictions,  he  would  sooner  do  nothing  than  be  disrespectful  to  Ezra. 
No  change,  in  his  judgment,  would  be  proper  reform  that  should  set  proper 
authority  on  one  side.  II.  By  sincere  sympathy.  This  is  shown  here  in  the 
words  that  come  next :  *•  We  will  also  be  with  thee :  be  of  good  courage  and  do  it." 


CHAP.  X.]  EZRA.  71 

It  is  possible  to  defer  to  authority  in  a  cold  and  unfriendly  spirit,  to  leave  too 
much  on  the  hands  of  our  rulers,  and  to  fail  in  taking  our  proper  share  of  odium 
in  supporting  them  and  their  measures.  If  we  wish  to  be  truly  loyal  we  are 
bound  tc  encourage  them  openly  in  their  righteous  efforts.  We  are  bound  also  to 
promise  them  our  support  and  assistance.  We  may  apply  these  lessons — 1.  To 
the  laws  of  our  land.  Except  where  religious  principle  is  in  question,  these  should 
be  the  laws  of  our  lives.  It  is  the  object  of  the  "  criminal  classes  "  to  try  to  evade 
them.  It  should  be  the  object  of  God-fearing  persons  to  try  and  observe  them. 
"  Render  unto  Caesar  the  things  which  are  Caesar's "  (Matt.  xxii.  21 ;  Rom.  xiii. 
1,  2,  7).  All  this  should  be  regarded  by  us  as  part  of  our  duty  towards  God. 
This  also  should  be  applied  by  us  carefully  to  all  the  points  it  embraces  ;  e.g.,  our 
income-tax  returns  ;  our  action  towards  contraband  trade ;  our  respect  for  the 
administrators  of  justice;  our  support  of  its  olficers,  and  so  on.  A  bad  citizen 
will  never  make  a  good  Christian.  2.  To  the  laws  and  officers  of  our  Church. 
Ezra  was  acting  here  ecclesiastically  as  much  as  politically  ;  of  the  two,  perhaps, 
rather  more  so.  In  all  things  in  regard  to  which  a  Church  hath  power  to  ordain, 
in  aU  matters  where  its  ministers  have  a  right  to  be  consulted,  let  us  not  only 
acquiesce,  but  encourage ;  not  only  encourage,  but  support.  The  English  word 
"  leader  "  signifies  both  a  commanijer  and  a  guide.  Therefore  never  be  many  steps 
behind  your  Leader;  never  be  one  steo  in  front.  {W.  S.  Lewis,  M.A.)  Pastor 
and  Church : — Three  general  remarks-^  -I.  That  the  Christian  ministeh  is  the 

CHIEF   instrument    IN    THE    MORAL   BENOTAT^ON    OF    SOCIETY,      FoUr    things   shoW  thiS. 

1.  He  is  originally  endowed  with  powers  whVih  specially  qualify  him  for  his  work. 

2.  He  has  been  educated  for  his  high  vocatioD.  3.  He  has  more  time  than  others 
for  such  an  end.  4.  It  is  to  the  Christian  min«iter  that  the  world  looks  for  moral 
and  spiritual  help.  II.  That  the  true  Chuit'h  gladlt  cooperates  with  the 
MINISTER  IN  HIS  NOBLE  AIM.  The  Church  cau  co-operate  with  him — 1.  By  showing 
him  practical  sympathy.  2.  By  working  out  his  plans.  3.  By  praying  for  him. 
III.  That  the  co-operation  of  the  Church  is  a  srvRCE  of  jot  and  encourage- 
ment TO  the  minister.  1.  Co-operation  is  indicativ?  of  the  spiritual  health  of 
the  Church.     2.  It  shows  that  the  Church  appreciates  the  minister's  exertions. 

3.  Co-operation  is  a  necessary  condition  of  success.     [Homilist.) 

Vers.  9.  Then  all  the  men  of  JudaJi  wid  Benjamin. — A  great  and  troubled 
assembly  : — The  text  teaches — I.  That  it  is  the  tendency  of  sin  to  produce  sorrow 
AND  consternation  OF  SOUL.  There  is  a  s'orpion  sin  in  remembered  guilt  when 
outward  troubles  and  inward  fears  meet  together  (Gen.  xlii.  21).    H.  That  God 

MARES  with  peculiar  INTEREST  THE  TIME  I^  WHICH  lEPENTANCB  UNTO  LIFE  BEGINS  IN 
THE  SOUL.      III.    That  repentance  when  it  is  real  will  bring  forth  its  APPROPRIATE 

FRUITS.  IV.  That  the  names  and  persons  of  genuine  penitents  are  for  eveb 
PRECIOUS  TO  God  and  recorded  in  His  b'ok.     (Samuel  Thodey.) 

Vers.  13-17.  But  the  people  are  many. — The  reformation  effected: — I.  Notwith- 
BTANDiNG  DIFFICULTIES.  1.  The  grcatncss  of  the  undertaking.  2.  The  inclemency 
of  ibe  weather.  Learn :  To  eradicate  sin  is  a  task  of  the  greatest  difficulty. 
n.  Notwithstanding  opposition  (ver.  15).  In  effecting  any  great  reformation 
opposition  is  to  be  expected.  IH.  PTith  exemplary  wisdom  and  fairness.  1.  By 
the  proper  authorities.  2.  With  competent  and  reliable  witnesses.  3.  In  the 
presence  of  the  accused.  4.  Wirti  due  regard  for  the  convenience  of  the  people. 
6.  With  careful  inquiry.  Learn ;  The  importance  of  combining  prudence  of  method 
with  earnestness  of  purpose  in  carrying  out  great  reformations.  IV.  Thoroughly. 
Learn :  The  importance  of  m'lking  an  end  of  sin  when  we  are  battling  with  it. 
{William  Jones.)  Postponed   reparations: — These  people,  called  upon  to  do 

justice,  to  confess,  to  go  and  begin  a  new  life,  said,  "  Certainly :  only  let  the 
rain  get  over,  and  you  will  find  us  pious  enough ;  in  the  meantime  we  cannot 
turn  the  heathen  wives  oat  of  doors."  How  pitiable,  how  conspicuously  human  I 
They  said  in  effect,  "  We  cannot  go  out  in  the  rain  to  settle  this  matter — 
'we  are  not  able  to  strnd  without'  —  we  are  without  shelter,  protection,  and 
thou  seest  how  the  rain  is  coming  down  in  cataracts :  we  are  not  trifling  with 
the  covenant,  we  respect  it  in  every  syllable  and  every  letter,  and  it  shall 
certainly  all  be  carriid  out :  but  let  the  weather  clear  up ! "  Treacherous 
conscience,  treacherous  reasi^n  I  How  can  a  man  go  over  a  muddy  road  to 
repair  an  injustice  he  has  done  I  Let  the  scavenger  come  first,  let  (he  high- 
way be  clean  for  hii  daintj   feet;  then  when  all  is  dry  as  summer  dust,  and 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Cchap-«» 

that  summer  dust  has  beeoi  well  laid  by  watering-cart,  mj  lord  will  cross  the  road. 
But  my  lord  is  too  late.  The  life  on  which  the  injustice  was  inflicted  is  dead. 
How  full  is  the  heart  of  these  postponed  reparations  1  How  much  we  are  going  to 
do  when  the  clouds  break  and  the  sun  comes  back  again  1  When  the  commercial 
Bun  returns  cloudlessly,  then  we  will  pay  up  our  arrears  and  discharge  our  obliga- 
tions ;  we  shall  then  be  able  to  go  out  with  some  comfort,  and  then  we  shall  return 
in  the  evening  with  a  new  song  and  a  secret  joy.  You  will  not  do  so.  If  you 
cannot  face  the  weather,  you  cannot  face  a  grand  moral  obligation.  You  are 
paltering  with  yourselves,  you  are  killing  your  conscience.  Every  day's  delay 
means  disqualification  for  the  thing  that  is  to  be  done.  Send  away  the  evil  though 
it  should  be  drenched  with  rain  I  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Delay  is  unwise  in  moral 
reformation : — The  longer  you  keep  a  sin  in  your  heart  the  more  it  gets  hold  of  you ; 
its  fangs  are  getting  deeper  and  deeper.  Thus  men  would  deal  with  all  manner  of 
problems,  whether  they  be  personal  problems,  or  social  problems,  or  imperial  ques- 
tions. Men  are  very  anxious  not  to  make  vital  reforms  speedily.  They  do  not 
want  to  guillotine  their  crimes.  Let  those  crimes  be  slowly  poisoned  ;  let  our  sins 
die  a  lingering  death.  The  drunkard  says  he  is  going  to  reform,  but  if  you  were 
to  take  away  the  intoxicating  poison  from  him  all  at  once  he  would  go  mad.  He  is 
going  to  slope  his  way  gradually  down  into  sobriety ;  he  is  going  to  drink  himself 
into  teetotalism.  "  This  thing,"  saith  he,  "  cannot  be  done  in  a  day  or  two ;  why  be 
unreasonable  about  it  ?  "  It  is  very  wonderful  what  our  prison  discipline  does  in 
this  matter.  A  man  is  caught  in  the  very  act  of  intoxication,  and  for  six  months 
he  sees  no  more  of  intoxicating  drink,  and  yet  he  does  not  go  mad.  What  can  be 
said  to  such  poor  innocents  as  Judah  and  Benjamin  and  Israel  when  they  say,  "We 
have  taken  a  covenant,  and  we  are  going  to  do  all  that  we  have  confessed  and 
promised ;  only  the  weather  is  so  atrociously  bad  and  the  great  problem  is  so  com- 
plicated and  far-stretching  that  it  cannot  be  done  in  a  day  or  two  "  ?  There  are 
thousands  of  people  involved  in  this  same  thing,  who  say,  "  Give  us  time  1 "  Not  an 
hour  should  be  given.  The  reformation  should  be  begun  now.  There  are  some 
things  you  cannot  make  right  little  by  little.  In  the  first  instance  you  should  make 
the  covenant  so  binding  that  you  will  not  touch  the  evil  thing  again,  and  then  you 
must  little  by  little  work  your  way  into  greater  and  greater  strength.  No  wise 
teacher  wiU  contend  that  the  strength  will  come  in  sufficient  adequateness  all  at 
once :  but  the  step  first  taken  must  be  positive  and  irreversible ;  then  the  after- 
progress  may  be  wisely  slow.  (Ibid.)  And  it  is  a  time  of  much  rain. — A  tiine  of 
much  rain : — The  rain  to  which  the  text  refers  fell,  it  is  supposed,  in  December,  the 
coldest  and  most  rainy  month  in  Palestine.  It  came  at  an  important  juncture, 
when  work  requiring  fine  weather  had  to  be  done.  Ezra  has  arrived  in  Jerusalem. 
He  has  come  full  of  patriotism,  clothed  with  authority,  with  vast  treasures  for  the 
temple  from  the  Persian  court.  He  has  come  fired  with  zeal  for  the  honour  of 
God,  determined  to  do  his  utmost  for  the  restoration  of  city,  temple,  and  reforma- 
tion of  life.  He  soon  learns  that  the  people  need  something  more  important  than 
gold  and  silver,  or  a  magnificent  ritualism.  Their  morals  had  been  corrupted 
through  their  marriage  alliances  with  the  heathen.  A  convocation  was  summoned, 
when  it  was  resolved  that  there  should  be  a  dissolution  of  all  marriage  relations 
that  were  contrary  to  the  law  of  the  land ;  but  so  heavy  was  the  rain  that  fell,  that 
the  people  trembled  for  fear,  as  though  the  judgment  of  a  second  flood  had  broken 
in  upon  them  on  account  of  their  sins.  Israel  could  not  forget  that  rain  ;  nor  will 
the  rain  of  the  present  year  (1880,  a  year  of  much  rain)  be  easily  forgotten.  Many 
are  looking  at  it  in  the  light  of  science,  some  in  the  light  of  agriculture,  others  are 
looking  at  it  in  the  light  of  commerce,  but  let  us  look  at  it  in  the  light  of  Revelation. 
There  is  a  Divine  meaning  in  aU  things.  Every  drop  of  rain  is  full  of  God's 
purpose,  I,  A  time  of  much  rain  teaches  us  our  dependence.  1.  It  shows  us 
there  can  be  no  harvests  unless  God  permit.  The  farmer  may  plough  and  sow,  his 
land  may  be  most  fertile,  the  seed  of  the  best  kind,  cultivation  perfect ;  but  if  God 
forbid  His  sun  from  shining,  and  command  the  clouds  to  pour  down  an  over- 
abundance of  rain,  day  by  day,  for  months,  the  hopes  of  harvest  will  be  blasted. 
2.  A  time  of  great  rain  reminds  us  that  our  commerce  is  at  the  Divine  disposal.  A 
bad  harvest  cannot  fail  to  lessen  the  wealth  of  a  country  and  seriously  affect  its 
merchandise.  3.  A  time  of  much  rain  shows  our  dependence  in  many  ways.  You 
need  change  of  air,  and  set  out  on  a  journey,  but  the  benefit  you  seek  depends  on 
the  weather  which  God  will  give ;  or  you  resolve  to  go  to  a  distant  town  for  the 
transaction  of  important  business,  you  appoint  the  hour  when  you  will  be  there  to 
meet  a  person  concerned  in  the  transaction.    But  if  it  please  God  that  at  that  very 


OHAP.  X.]  EZRA.  78 

time  there  shall  be  much  rain,  your  friend  may  fail  to  come,  your  plans  may  mis- 
carry, your  health  may  sufler,  and  your  life  may  be  imperilled  through  the 
inclemency  of  the  weather.  '*  Go  to  now,  ye  that  say,"  &c.  The  law  of  dependence 
is  stamped  on  all  things.  Every  atom  is  dependent  on  atom,  man  on  man,  nation 
on  nation,  world  on  world,  and  all  are  dependent  on  God.  4.  This  time  of  much 
rain  makes  us  feel,  as  Englishmen,  that  we  are  exceedingly  dependent  on  other 
nations.  What  a  dismal  future  would  be  before  England  to-day  if  she  could  not 
draw  supplies  of  corn  from  foreign  markets.  II.  That  a  time  of  much  bain  is  vebt 
TBTtNO.  1.  To  patience.  Have  we  stood  the  trial  ?  Have  we  murmured  ?  Have 
we  said,  *'  This  is  not  right  ?  A  season  so  wet  is  not  what  we  want ;  it  is  not  what 
■we  have  a  right  to  expect."  If  so,  we  have  forgotten  that  the  spiritual  life  requires 
trial.  A  flower  may  come  to  perfection  in  one  summer,  but  the  tree  that  is  to  bear 
fruit  requires  not  only  the  summer's  sun,  but  the  rain  and  storms  of  many  a  winter. 
2.  To  faith.  It  tried  the  faith  of  the  Hebrews  in  the  time  of  Ezra.  It  led  to  a 
temporary  loss  of  faith  in  the  goodness  of  God,  for  they  trembled,  thinking  that 
the  rain  was  a  sign  of  His  displeasure.  But  the  faith  of  some  people  seems  to  be 
tried  in  relation  to  the  Divine  justice  as  well  as  goodness.  Nay,  they  are  tempted 
to  question  the  very  existence  of  God  and  to  regard  the  world  as  an  orphan, 
abandoned  to  fate  or  stem  law.  They  see  the  great  machine  of  nature,  but  see 
not  the  personality  that  lives  behind  and  through  the  whole.  What  a  reproof  does 
the  wise  economy  of  nature  under  which  rain  descends  minister  to  such  unbelief. 
But  for  the  water  that  rises  from  the  sea  in  clouds,  and  falls  in  showers  on  the 
«arth,  vegetable,  animal,  and  human  life  could  not  exist.  It  is  wisely  ordained 
that  in  an  island  like  ours,  that  is  becoming  so  thickly  populated  and  the  large 
towns  of  which  require  at  times  more  than  an  ordinary  cleansing,  that  the  average 
fall  of  rain  should  be  maintained,  not  year  by  year,  but  by  the  overplus  of  one 
period  making  up  for  the  deficiency  of  another.  Sir  Charles  Lyell  was  on  the 
continent  when  he  said  to  a  gentleman  sitting  next  to  him  at  table :  "  I  fear  the 
rains  have  been  doing  a  great  deal  of  mischief."  "  I  should  think,"  repUed  his 
companion,  "  they  were  much  needed  to  replenish  the  springs  after  this  year  of 
drought."  "I  immediately  felt,"  says  Sir  Charles  LyeU,  "I  had  made  an  idle  and 
thoughtless  speech."  III.  That  a  time  of  much  rain  should  lvht^  to  peateb. 
Whatever  some  may  say  against  the  propriety  of  prayer  for  temporal  blessings, 
there  is  in  human  nature  an  instinct  that  bids  it  ask  for  the  Divine  interposition  in 
all  seasons  of  distress.  Surely  prayer  in  relation  to  rain  is  as  reasonable  to-day  as 
when  Elijah  prayed  that  there  might  be  no  rain  ;  "  and  it  rained  not  on  the  earth 
for  the  space  of  three  years  and  six  months."  {F.  Fox  Thomoi.)  A  wet  harvest : — 
It  has  been  with  us  a  time  of  much  rain.  And  yet  the  present  occasion  suggests — 
I.  Thankfulness.  We  are  here  to  thank  God,  and  we  do  weU.  If  we  cannot 
thank  God  for  giving  us  a  harvest  at  all,  we  are  unworthy  of  being  called  His  sons. 
What  we  ought  to  ask  ourselves  is  this :  When  times  were  good  and  the  seasons 
good,  how  did  we  show  our  gratitude  ?  Did  we  show  it  by  our  lives  ?  For  if  we 
only  show  it  by  eating  or  drinking  more  or  in  rude  merry-making  we  can  hardly 
wonder  that  we  should  not  always  be  likewise  blessed.  Are  there  not  some  of  ua 
always  ready  to  complain,  seldom  ready  to  give  thanks  ?  like  the  farmer  in  Cheshire 
that  two  boys  went  to  see.  The  season  had  been  particularly  good.  "  I  wonder  what 
he'U  find  to  complain  of  now,"  they  said  as  they  passed  along.  "WeU,  farmer," 
they  cried  out,  "  you  have  had  a  capital  season."  The  farmer's  brow  clouded  as  he 
pointed  indignantly  to  a  little  patch  of  beans.  "  Look  at  those  beans,"  he  said. 
Some  of  you  are  ready  to  complain  of  the  swollen  rivers,  the  sheets  of  water  in  the 
fields,  the  damaged  crops,  and  the  deluged  gardens.  But  I  would  ask  you  to 
remember  what  we  have  escaped  as  weU  as  what  we  have  suffered.  Only  a  few 
weeks  ago  men  were  trembling  at  the  approach  of  the  cholera,  but  through  mercy 
we  have  escaped  it.  If  we  cannot  thank  God  for  His  mercy  we  are  unworthy  of 
the  Christian  name.  II.  Amendment.  What  were  the  people  about  in  the  days  of 
Ezra  when  they  trembled  for  the  great  rain  ?  They  were  about  to  set  their  houses 
in  order  to  have  done  with  the  ways  of  sin.  The  time  of  careless  sin  was  to  give 
place  to  the  day  of  Reformation.  If  it  could  only  be  the  same  with  some  soul  in 
this  church  to-night  I  The  harvest  brings  you  to  think  of  the  day  when  God  shall 
look  over  His  fields,  and  gather  the  good  grain  into  His  bams  and  cast  the  bad 
away.  These  bad  years  and  these  floods  of  rain  will  not  be  wasted  on  you  if  they 
shall  turn  your  thoughts  from  the  good  things  of  earth  to  the  better  things  of  heaven 
— if  habits  of  careless  sensuality  give  place  to  the  fear  of  God.  {W.  R.  Hutton,  M.A.) 
Keither  la  this  a  work  of  one  day  or  two. — Perseverance : — I  take  this  word  as  a 

23* 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  x. 

motto  of  encouragement  to  all  beginning  or  baffled  by  the  hardships  of  the 
Christian   life.     I.   Perseverance   is  the  secret  of  every  successful  life  and 
WORK.     Walk  through   the  streets   of   our  city.     Who  are   its   prosperous   men  ? 
Many  who  began  in  a  low  estate,  all  their  wealth  then  but  two  willing  hands,  & 
clear  head,  a  determined  will.     How  has  the  change  come  about  ?     Perseverance 
has  done  it.     They  have  reached  their  position  by  no  sudden  flight.    They  plodded 
on.    Eung  by  rung  they  crept  up  the  ladder.     Step  by  step  they  climbed   the 
mountain.     Difficulties  have  been  wrestled  with  and  beaten  down.     It  has  been 
hard  work.     Not  a  work  of  one  day  or  two.     This  is  universal.     Look  at  men 
nationally  eminent.     Almost  without  exception  what  they  became  was  owing  to 
their  own  determined  efifort.     Men  are  what,  God  helping  them,  they  make  them- 
selves.   But  the  journey  to  success  in  commerce,  literature,  the  arts,  the  sciences, 
is  a  long  one.     A  long  journey  from  the  first  saved  shilling  to  the  millionaire's 
wealth ;  from  the  rude  chalk  profile  to  the  famous  painting  on  the  walls  of  the 
Academy ;  from  the  tirst  experiments  to  the  marvellous  discoveries  of  a  Faraday ; 
from  the  boy's  halting  verse  to  the  "poem  round  and  perfect  as  a  star."    The 
heights  of  prosperity  are  not  reached  at  a  bound.     Over  the  clerks'  desks  in  the 
office  of  a  prosperous  Christian  merchant  were  written  in  prominent  letters  the 
words — a  key  to  his  own  success — "  Try  again  1 "    By  trying  again,  and  again,  and 
again,  men  touch  the  top  of  their  ambition.     But  "neither  is  this  a  work  of  one 
day  or  two."     What  a  history  of  heroism  is  written  in  the  turbulent  pages  of  the 
great  book  of  the  deep  1     Think  of  Columbus.     How  splendid  his  day-dream  of 
lands  in  the  unknown  West.    But  how  difficulty  after  difficulty  shut  him  in  from 
the  ocean  he  desired  to  adventure.    Native  Genoa  was  deaf  to  him.    Venice  refused 
to  help  him.     The  Court  of  Portugal  deceived  him.     Spain  at  last  befriended  his 
request.     And  then,  when  out  on  the  vast  and  unknown  waters,  his  vessel  rang 
with  the  cries  of  mutiny.     But  the  stout  heart  quailed  not.    And,  at  length,  the  cry 
of  "  Land !  land  !  "  announced  a  New  World  given  to  the  Old.    And  in  our  own 
day  one  of  the  greatest  triumphs  of  perseverance  has  united  by  sensitive  and  com- 
municating wire  that  New  World  with  the  Old.    And  was  that  salutary  work  easily 
accomplished  ?    Hear  the  words  of  Cyrus  Field,  the  captain  of  this  bloodless  and 
blessed  victory  :  "  It  has  been  a  long  and  hard  struggle.     Nearly  thirteen  years  of 
anxious  watching   and  ceaseless  toil.     Often   has  my  heart  been  ready  to  sink. 
Many  times  when  wandering  in  the  forests  of  Newfoundland  in  the  pelting  rain  or 
on  the  deck  of  ships  on  dark,  stormy  nights,  alone,  far  from  home,  I  have  almost 
accused  myself  of  madness  and  folly  to  sacrifice  the  peace  of  my  family  and  all  the 
hopes  of  life  for  what  might  prove,  after  all,  but  a  dream.    I  have  seen  my  com- 
panions one  after  another  fall  by  my  side,  and  feared  I  too  might  not  live  to  see 
the  end.    And  yet  one  hope  has  led  me  on,  and  I  have  prayed  that  I  might  not 
taste  of  death  till  this  work  was  accomplished.     That  prayer  is  answered ;  and  now 
beyond  all  acknowledgments  to  men  is  the  feeling  of  gratitude  to  Almighty  God." 
A  vast  and  beneficent  success,  and  "  neither  was  that  a  work  of  one  day  or  two." 
So  with  all  great  and  philanthropic  movements.     They  have  sprung  from  a  feeble 
beginning.     They  have  become  incarnate  in  some  determined  man.     Slowly  have 
friends  gathered  to  his  side.     Obstacles  have  impeded  them.     Misrepresentations 
have  assailed  them.     Still  on  the  little  band  has  gone.     So  moved  John  Howard 
in  his  effort  to  cleanse  and  reform  prisons  and  prisoners.     So  moved  Clarkson  and 
others  in  their  efforts  to  secure  emancipation  for  every  English-owned  slave.     So 
have  moved  Livesey  and  others  in  their  effort  to  make  England  a  sober  land.     But 
we  must  say  in  view  of  the  huge  obstructions  and  tests  of  philanthropic  patience, 
"  neither  is  this  a  work  of  one  day  or  two."    II.  Perseverance  is  the  necessitt 
OF  sprRiTUAL  life  AND  PROSPERITY.     If  pciseverance  is  needed  for  secular  interests 
and  temporary  prosperity,  who  can  complain  if  it  is  also  needed  for  spiritual  and 
eternal  blessing.    Evil  ways  have  to  be  broken  off,  and  that  is  not  an  easy  thing. 
Habit  in  sin  is  tyrannic.     We  cannot  drop  a  habit  as  we  change  an  old  garment 
for  a  new,  discarding  the  old  at  once  and  for  ever.     The  guilt  of  sin  may  be  par- 
doned, but  something  still  of  its  power  survives.    Has  a  man  been  accustomed  to 
vice?     Though   a   new  creature,  he  must  prayerfully  and   resolutely  watch   lest 
in  unguarded  moment  he  fall  to  the  old  life.    Has  the  habit  been  profanity  ?     How 
well  must  the  lips  be  watched  lest  unconsciously  the  sinful  words  break  forth.    Has 
the  habit  been  inebriety  ?     How  well  the  reclaimed  must  avoid  scenes  and  associa- 
tions with   their  alluring  and   pitiless  spell,  and  the  very  beginning  of  the  cup 
whose  dregs  are  death.     Has  the  habit  been  profligacy  ?     How  well  must  the  eyes 
be  watched  lest  through  Ey«  Gate  the  soul  be  stormed  and  the  rescued  soul  b* 


CHAP.  X.]  EZRA.  75 

dragged  down  once  more  into  "  the  horrible  pit."  And  if  the  Bin  has  been  secret 
and  of  the  soul,  all  the  more  need  of  vigilance.  To  break  from  sin  to  holiness  is 
not  an  easy  thing.  It  is  possible,  though  difficult.  Possible,  "  though  not  a  work 
of  one  day  or  two."  Who  among  the  Bible  saints  were  without  sin  ?  Their  piety 
grew.  Take  the  case  of  Jacob.  He  is  an  unlovely,  self-seeking  man  when  he  first 
comes  into  history.  But  even  then  he  had  that  faith  by  which  the  heart  is  purified. 
Through  many  years  the  contest  went  on  between  the  baser  and  nobler  elements  of 
bis  nature.  To  be  all  that  the  saint  ought  was  not  easy  to  Jacob,  but  he  kept  on 
trying.  And  when  we  see  him  in  the  sunset  of  life  before  Pharaoh,  on  his  death- 
bed,  blessing  his  children,  we  see  a  man  so  unlike  the  Jacob  that  deceived  Isaac 
that  we  scarcely  know  him  for  the  same.  "  But  that  was  not  a  work  of  one  day  or 
two."  You  have  perhaps  in  your  eye  some  Christian  man  or  Christian  woman 
that  you  desire  to  be  like.  You  say,  "  If  now,  I  could  be  so  pure,  so  holy,  so  gentle,  so 
useful  as  that  one  or  that,  then  I  should  be  happy.  Well,  remember  that  they  to 
whom  perhaps  you  look  as  spiritual  models  have  had  many  years  and  many  trials 
to  fashion  them  to  what  they  are.  Then  take  heart  about  yourself.  Sad  indeed 
if  you  were  quite  content  with  yourself ;  but  despair  not.  Paul  said,  "  I  have 
learnt  in  whatsoever  state  I  am  therewith  to  be  content."  With  his  circumstances, 
though  often  hard  and  bitter,  he  had  learnt  to  be  content.  But  with  himself, 
never.  "  Not  as  though  I  had  already  attained,  either  were  already  perfect ;  but  I 
follow  after  if  that  I  may  apprehend  that  for  which  also  I  am  apprehended  of 
Christ  Jesus."  "  But  this  is  not  a  work  of  one  day  or  two."  Character  is  formed, 
as  life  is  filled,  with  little  things.  Some  of  you  may  have  a  future  of  distinguished 
eminence  in  usefulness,  but  for  the  majority  life  will  have  a  common  cast.  If  we 
are  to  do  any  good  we  must  utilise  as  they  come,  common  occurrences  and  oppor- 
tunities. If  we  are  to  be  holy  it  must  be  in  the  lowly  valley  seen  by  few.  And  if 
our  character  is  to  be  moulded  by  circumstances,  it  must  be  by  trivial- seeming  ones, 
by  events  that,  light  as  gentlest  chisel-touch  on  the  marble  face  brings  out  the 
perfect  beauty  of  expression  that  lives  in  the  sculptor's  soul  I  By  serving  God  in 
little  things  we  shall  become  liker  to  Him.  And  if  He  is  not  served  in  the  little  He 
will  not  be  in  the  greater.  Look  at  any  man.  If  he  is  not  kinder  for  his  religion, 
more  considerate  of  others,  their  comfort  and  feelings,  more  industrious  at  toil, 
more  courteous,  more  patient  under  trial,  more  happy  in  the  joy  of  others  and 
more  sorrowful  in  their  sorrow,  then  his  religion  is  vain.  Are  these  small  things  ? 
They  are  witnesses  to  the  greatest  of  all — the  man's  renewal.  By  little  acts  we  are 
forming  habits  and  shaping  character.  "  Little  strokes  made  that  ark  which  saved 
Noah."  The  good  work  is  a  much  hindered  work.  We  have  proclivities  to  evil. 
The  very  spirituality  of  religion  is  a  vital  element  of  difficulty.  Then  how  many 
hindrances  from  without?  With  such  hindrances  time  is  a  necessity  to  progress. 
We  are  called  to  perfection.  We  are  to  be  holy  as  Christ  is  holy.  There  is  a  work 
to  be  wrought  in  us.  A  work  of  one  day  or  two  ?  A  work  for  eternity  ?  Think  of 
the  encouragements  to  perseverance.  Christ  prays  for  us.  He  saves  us  from  sin. 
He  breaks  its  power.  He  marks  our  steps  and  rejoices  in  our  progress.  He  loves  us 
to  the  end.  Because  He  prays,  "  the  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirmities"  in  every  time 
of  need.  And  because  He  pleads  heaven  will  be  yours  at  last.  {G.  T.  Coster.) 
Character  improvement  takes  time : — The  masterpieces  of  literature  were  not  pro- 
duced in  a  few  weeks,  nay,  nor  a  few  years.  Their  authors  displayed  an  almost 
infinite  patience  before  they  were  finished.  Comparatively  few  authors  have  such 
patience  to-day,  and  hence  the  multitude  of  ephemeral  works.  Who  in  these  days 
would  seriously  attempt  such  buildings  as  the  Pyramids  ?  Works  that  last  cannot 
be  put  together  or  run  up  in  a  few  hours.  A  whole  crop  of  mushrooms  will  spring 
up  in  a  night;  oaks  take  centuries  to  come  to  perfection.  (Christian  Weekly.) 
Persistence  required  in  moral  reformations: — Virtue  is  not  a  mushroom  that 
springeth  up  of  itself  in  one  night,  when  we  are  asleep  or  regard  it  not ;  but  a 
delicate  plant  that  groweth  slowly  and  tenderly,  needing  much  pains  to  cultivate  it, 
much  time  to  guard  it,  much  time  to  mature  it.  Neither  is  vice  a  spirit  that  will 
be  conjured  away  with  a  charm,  slain  by  a  single  blow,  or  dispatched  by  one  stab. 
Who,  then,  will  be  so  foolish  as  to  leave  the  eradicating  of  vice  and  the  planting  in 
of  virtue  into  its  place  for  a  few  years  or  weeks  ?  Yet  he  who  procrastinates  his 
repentance  and  amendment  grossly  does  so  with  his  eyes  open,  he  abridges  the 
time  allotted  for  the  longest  and  most  important  work  he  has  to  perform ;  he  is  a 
fool.     (J.  Barrow.) 

Vers.  18-44.  And  amoaff  the  boos  of  tbe  priests  thero  were  fonnd  that  luUl 


7«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

taken  strange  wlTes :  namelj,  of  the  sons  of  Jeslina. — The  litt  of  offenders : — 
For  what  purpose  is  this  catalogue  of  names  inserted  here?  I.  As  ▲  wabniko 
AGAINST  BIN.  This  Catalogue  shows  us — 1.  Sin  extending  to  all  classes.  2.  Sin 
injuring  the  reputation.  8.  Sin  corrupting  the  influence.  II.  As  an  exauptje  or 
OENUiNE  BEPENTANOX.  1.  They  confesscd  their  sin  with  sorrow.  2.  They  offered 
eacrifice  on  account  of  the  sin.  3.  They  forsook  the  sin.  III.  As  am  emcoubaok- 
MENT  to  oentjinb  REPENTANCE.  1.  Their  sin  was  forgiven  (Ezek.  xxziii.  14-16). 
2.  The  Divine  favour  was  vouchsafed.  (William  Jones.)  A  ram  of  the  flock  for 
their  trespass. — Cheap  expiatioM : — Oh,  that  poor,  poor  ram  1  What  a  humiliation 
for  the  ram  1  That  ram  is  always  being  killed,  and  cannot  understand  the  reason 
why.  A  ram  cannot  save  you.  You  might  kill  all  the  flocks  that  browse  on  the 
hill  and  stiU  your  sin  would  stain  the  centre  of  your  heart  and  the  palm  of  your 
hand.  There  are  some  things  for  which  you  cannot  make  up.  There  are  some 
actions  which  lie  beyond  apology.  There  are  some  deeds  which  almost  go  beyond 
the  large  boundary  of  penitence.  Some  of  us  have  been  in  danger  of  sinning  our- 
selves beyond  God's  mercy.  Beware  of  every  method  of  getting  out  of  moral 
obligation  and  moral  penalty  by  cheap  ways,  by  expiations  that  cost  you  nothing. 
Every  man  must  have  a  true  expiation,  but  the  true  expiation  includes  the  offering 
of  himself  as  well  as  the  offering  of  the  priest  and  the  victim.  It  is  so  in  the  case 
of  the  Christ.  He  tasted  death  for  every  man ;  He  bore  my  sins  in  His  own  body 
on  the  tree ;  yet  I  must  be  crucified  with  Christ.  There  is  the  difference  between 
the  true  expiation  and  the  false.  The  true  expiation  involves  self-immolation ;  it 
involves  fellowship  with  the  sufferings  of  Christ  that  we  may  be  made  partakers  of 
His  resurrection.  Christ  being  crucified  for  us  is  an  aggravation  of  our  sin  if  we 
be  not  crucified  with  Christ.  Thus  there  is  absolute  loneliness  in  the  priesthood 
of  Christ,  and  thus  there  is  a  mysterious  fellowship  with  that  loneliness.  There  is 
a  work  which  none  but  Christ  could  do,  and  there  is  a  complete  work  which  the 
poorest,  meanest  sinner  has  to  do.  The  sinner  does  not  offer  Christ ;  if  he  did  so 
that  would  be  what  we  mean  by  a  cheap  or  poor  expiation.  Christ  was  not  offered 
by  man ;  by  man  Christ  was  murdered ;  by  God  Christ  was  offered.  Behold  the 
Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world.  The  Christian  expiation  is 
not  a  buying  off  or  a  calculated  substitution:  the  expiation  of  Christ  means  that 
we  are  to  enter  into  it,  in  a  sense  share  the  agony.  The  offering  is  all  God's,  the 
fiubstitution  is  all  divine ;  but  man  is  called  upon  to  enter  mystically,  spiritually, 
and  reaUy  into  the  offering  of  Christ  and  to  be  offered  as  it  were  with  Christ — the 
sinner  and  the  Saviour  united  in  one  sublime  sacrifice.  Do  not  imagine  that  you 
can  buy  yourself  off  by  offering  a  ram.  Do  not  suppose  that  you  can  make  up  for 
your  sin  by  doubling  your  pew  rent.  Do  not  imagine  that  you  can  be  forgiven 
every  outrage  against  reason,  justice,  and  conscience  by  doling  out  something 
superfluous  from  your  own  table  to  the  hunger  of  the  needy.  Expiation  touches 
the  sool  with  agony,  or  it  is  a  worthless  offering.    (/.  Parker,  DJ).) 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR. 
NEHEMIAH. 


THE 

Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 


Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,     on    the    Verses   of    the    Bible 


Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  A.  M. 


NEHEMIAH 


New  York 


Chicago 


Toronto 


Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

Publishers  of  Evangelical  Literature 


INTBODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH. 

The  modem  critics  are  probably  right  in  their  conclusion  that  Ezra  and 
Nehemiah  were  compiled  from  memoranda  of  those  two  persons,  who  were 
Tirshathas,  i.e.,  governors  under  the  Persian  kings,  and  other  contemporary 
historical  documents.  But  their  conclusion  does  no  more  than  confirm  the  previous 
opinion  on  the  subject.  It  is  evident  that  certain  sections  of  the  Book  of  Nehemiah 
are  the  personal  work  of  Nehemiah,  and  if  we  could  think  of  him  as  keeping  a 
diary,  we  should  say  there  were  selected  pages  from  his  diary.  But  it  is  also 
certain  that  the  literary  genius  of  the  compiler  of  Chronicles  and  Ezra  is  strongly 
marked  in  the  other  sections  of  Nehemiah  and  in  the  general  setting  and  arrange- 
ment of  the  whole  work.  The  very  retention  of  the  first  person  in  the  extracts 
which  he  selects  is  an  evidence  of  the  work  of  this  compiler.  We  may  therefore 
reasonably  assume  that,  while  some  of  the  material  was  the  work  of  Nehemiah,  the 
book,  as  we  have  it,  shows  the  editing  of  Ezra,  and  was  designed  by  him  to  form  a 
Listorical  supplement  to  his  larger  work. 

Thirteen  years  after  the  arrival  i"  Jerusalem  of  the  party  from  Babylon  that  was 
led  by  Ezra,  Nehemiah  appeared  at  Jerusalem.  On  the  whole,  it  seems  most 
probable  that  Ezra  was  not  in  Jerusalem  at  the  time,  but  returned  soon  afterwards. 
Nehemiah  came  with  the  authority  of  Tirshatha,  and  with  a  definite  purpose, 
which  he  judged  it  prudent  to  keep  secret  for  a  time.  The  first  six  chapters 
contain  an  account  of  the  circumstances  which  led  to  his  visiting  Jerusalem ;  the 
Bcheme  by  which  he  came  to  know  the  condition  of  the  city  wall,  his  successful 
plan  for  restoring  the  wall ;  the  resistance  he  met  with,  and  the  skilful  way  in 
which  he  outwitted,  and  overcame,  the  national  enemies.  The  seventh  chapter  is 
s  genealogy  after  the  manner  of  Ezra,  and  the  materials  for  it,  we  can  hardly 
doubt,  were  furnished  by  him.  From  the  eighth  chapter  Ezra  is  associated  with 
Nehemiah,  and  the  influence  of  Ezra  is  especially  marked  in  the  chapters  from  the 
eighth  to  the  end.  There  are  signs  of  his  characteristic  priestly  interest,  and  his 
fondness  for  genealogical  tables.  The  point  of  view  in  Nehemiah  is  clearly  the 
same  as  that  we  have  recognised  in  Chronicles  and  Ezra. 

The  Date  of  the  "Work,  so  far  as  collecting  and  putting  together  the  sections  is 
concerned,  must  be  the  later  years  of  Ezra's  life ;  but  the  re-editing  which  put  the 
book  into  its  present  form  may  be  dated  at  least  a  century  later. 

We  meet  with  the  same  difficulty  here  that  we  had  to  consider  when  dealing 
with  the  genealogy  from  David  in  the  Books  of  Chronicles.  Some  names  in  these 
genealogical  Usts  come  down  to  a  period  long  posterior  to  Nehemiah.  Jaddua, 
for  instance,  was  high-priest  at  least  a  century  later  than  Nehemiah.  But  th» 
explanation  previously  given  will  apply  with  equal  force  to  this  difficulty. 

Pebsonal  Histori  of  Nehemiah. — ^Very  little  is  known  of  the  personal  history 
of  Nehemiah,  bat  ft  very  fail  estimate  of  his  character  may  be  formed  from  the 


Tl  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH. 

pages  of  his  diary  which  have  been  preserved.  His  office,  as  cup-bearer  at  the 
Persian  Court,  was  an  honourable  one,  and  he  was  evidently  held  in  confidence  and 
esteem  by  the  king.  He  must  have  been  in  a  position  of  wealth  and  influence. 
"  He  was  a  man  of  profound  piety,  connecting  everything,  great  or  small,  with  the 
will  of  God."  But  the  interjectional  prayers  which  habitually  occur  in  his  diary 
indicate  a  somewhat  weak  self-consciousness.  The  truly  noble  man  does  right  in 
simple  loyalty  and  love,  and  does  not  think  about  its  being  accepted  and  rewarded. 
This  indicates  the  weak  side  of  an  otherwise  strong  and  vigorous  individuality. 
"  His  prudence  was  equally  marked;  and  there  is  no  better  example  of  dependence 
on  God,  nnited  with  practical  forethought.  He  was  disinterested  and  unselfish, 
and  there  is  not  the  slightest  reference  to  self  apart  from  the  common  good.  .  .  . 
He  always  appeals  to  the  judgment  of  a  merciful  God,  and  that  appeal  avails 
against  much  hard  modem  criticism  which  dwells  on  his  alleged  asperity,  self- 
confidence,  and  self-assertion."     (W.  B.  Pope,  D.D.) 

Dean  Stanley  says  :  "  There  is  a  pathetic  cry,  again  and  again  repeated  through- 
out this  rare  autobiographical  sketch,  har^y  found  elsewhere  in  the  Hebrew 
records,  which  shows  the  current  of  his  thoughts,  as  though  at  every  turn  he 
feared  that  those  self-denying,  self-forgetting  labours  might  pass  away,  that  his 
countrymen  of  the  future  might  be  as  ungrateful  as  his  countrymen  of  the  present. 
•  Think  upon  me,  my  God,  for  good.' " 

G.  Kawlinson  writes :  "  It  has  been  said  that  in  the  character  of  Nehemiah  it  is 
almost  impossible  to  detect  a  single  fault.  But  this  praise  is  a  little  exaggerated. 
Nehemiah's  nature  was  strongly  emotional,  and  he  did  not  always  control  hia 
emotions  sufficiently.  His  '  fiery  soul '  was  sometimes  '  roused  to  burning  frenzy.' 
In  these  fits  of  passion,  he  forgot  the  calmness  and  dignified  behaviour  which  befits 
a  governor.  He  may  'do  well  to  be  angry,'  but  he  does  Ul  to  be  vindictive. 
And  he  is  a  little  too  self-satisfied  and  self-complacent.  He  contrasts  with  some- 
-what  too  evident  self-approval  his  ovm  conduct  in  his  government  with  that  of 
former  governors.    And  there  is  a  tinge  of  Pharisaism  in  some  of  his  prayers." 

Contents  or  the  Book. — The  Book  of  Nehemiah  may  be  roughly  divided  into 
three  sections.  I.  Chaps,  i.-vii.,  comprising  the  narrative  of  Nehemiah's  appoint- 
ment to  office,  his  rebuilding,  in  spite  of  opposition,  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  and  his 
purpose  of  bringing  the  people  to  an  orderly  settlement.  II.  Chaps,  viii.-i.  contain 
an  account  of  certain  religious  solenmities.  lU.  Chaps.  xL-ziii.  are  made  up  of 
various  lists,  appointments,  and  settlements,  with  a  recital  of  some  acts  of  Nehemiah's 
administration  on  resuming  his  post.     (Ayre.) 

Nehemiah's  first  administration  at  Jerusalem  lasted  twelve  years.  Then  he 
relumed  to  the  Persian  Court.  After  some  years,  variously  estimated  from  five  to 
nine  years,  he  was  permitted  to  resume  his  office  at  Jerusalem,  and  endeavour  to 
redress  the  abuses  which  had  grown  up  during  his  absence.  It  is  probable  that  he 
spent  the  remainder  of  his  life  at  Jerusalem,  but  of  his  death  and  burial  no  record 
has  been  preserved.  Beyond  the  thirty-second  year  of  Artaxeries,  to  which 
Nehemiah's  own  narrative  leads  us,  we  have  no  account  of  Nehemiah  whaterer. 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE, 

NEHEMIAH. 

CHAPTEB  L 

Vem.  1-11.  The  words  of  NehemlaH  the  son  of  HachaHah.— rA«  royal 
eup-bearer : — I.  Let  us  notice  the  wobds  alijUded  to  bt  Nehemiah.  They  were 
as  follows :  "And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  month  Chislen,  in  the  twentieth  year,"  <feo. 

I.  You  observe  that  the  time  and  the  place  ol  this  conversation  are  given.  It  was  at 
Shushan  or  Susa,  the  winter  residence  of  the  King  of  Persia.  2.  There  are  places 
and  periods  that  stand  out  more  prominently  than  others  in  the  history  of  most  of 
US.  "  It  came  to  pass  in  the  month  Chisleo,"  &c.  3.  The  particular  matter  referred 
to  was  a  conversation  he  had  with  a  kinsman  of  his,  and  with  other  co-religionists 
lately  come  from  Palestine,  respecting  the  state  of  the  Jews  there,  "  and  concerning 
Jerusalem."  Nehemiah  was  not  indifferent  to  his  country's  condition.  It  was  a 
twofold  question  that  he  put.  (1)  He  wanted  to  know  how  it  had  fared  with  the 
Hebrews — "  the  delivered  ones,"  "  the  escaped  ones."  (2)  The  other  aspect  of  the 
question  here  put  by  Nehemiah  has  reference  to  Jerusalem.  An  exiled  Londoner 
or  Parisian's  love  for  London  or  Paris  would  not,  we  maybe  sure,  be  deeper,  stronger 
than  that  which  Nehemiah  must  have  had  for  the  promised  land,  and  for  "  the 
city,  the  place  of  his  fathers'  sepulchres."  As  was  to  be  expected,  he  asked  for 
information  "  concerning  Jerusalem."  It  has  been  well  said,  "  No  place  is  so  strong, 
no  building  so  grand,  no  wall  so  firm,  that  sin  cannot  undermine  and  overthrow  it." 
Let  no  man  trust  in  ceremonies,  or  sacred  houses,  or  sacred  traditions,  so  long  as 
his  heart  is  far  from  God,  and  his  life  is  not  in  accord  with  His  righteous  creed. 

II.  Let  US  notice  the  emotion  of  Nehemiah  on  heabinq  the  tidinos  alluded  to. 
"  I  sat  down  and  wept,"  he  says,  "  and  mourned  certain  days,  and  fasted."  He 
also  adds,  "  and  prayed  before  the  God  of  heaven."  He  wept.  Nor  was  it  weak  or 
unmanly  for  him  to  do  so.  "  His  was  the  tear  most  sacred  shed  for  others'  pain." 
To  weep  at  trifles,  or  at  fictitious  sorrows,  may  be  effeminate ;  but  'twas  no  trifle, 
no  imaginary  sorrow,  that  now  drew  tears  from  Nehemiah.  1.  His  grief  was  further 
manifested  by  lamentation  and  fasting.  2.  It  was  a  profound  grief  which  seized 
him.  3.  It  was  a  somewhat  prolonged  as  well  as  profound  grief.  It  lasted,  at  any 
rate,  certain  days.  4.  It  was  a  patriot's  grief.  6.  Again,  it  was  a  penitent  grief. 
6.  Nehemiah's  grief  reminds  us  of  another  and  yet  more  touching  spectacle,  the 
tears  which  Jesus  shed  over  Jerusalem.  ••  And  when  He  was  come  near.  He  beheld 
the  city,  and  wept  over  it,"  &c.  III.  In  the  third  place,  let  us  look  at  the  prater 
which  Nehemiah  was  thus  prompted  to  offer.  Let  us  learn  that  the  province  of 
prayer  is  not  restricted  to  things  spiritual.  It  embraces  the  affairs  of  everyday  life, 
and  all  lawful  undertakings  great  and  small.  (T.  Rowson.)  Thctypical  patriot  ;— 
Nehemiah  the  civilian,  as  contrasted  with  Ezra  the  ecclesiastic,  is  brought  before 
us  in  this  book  as  the  patriot  deliverer  of  his  people.  I.  The  typal  patriot  is  purelt 
disinterested  in  principle.  Personal  ambition  is  sunk  in  desire  for  public  good. 
Selfish  motives  are  abandoned  for  generous  impulses.  1.  This  does  not  prevent  his 
rising  to  a  position  of  honour  even  in  an  alien  country.  A  good  man  is  valued 
anywhere.  Fidelity  to  convictions  ever  commands  respect  apart  from  the  merit  of 
the  convictions  themselves.  Honour  from  an  alien  chief  can  only  be  allowed  to  the 
true  patriot  conditionally— (1)  That  no  vital  principle  is  sacrificed.    Nehemiah 

f 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA*.  X. 

evidently  remained  true  to  his  nation  and  loyal  to  his  God.  (2)  That  it  is  made 
subservient  to  the  interests  of  his  people.  At  Shushau  Nehemiah  was  really  serving 
them  better  than  he  could  do  at  Jerusalem  until  summoned  there  by  Divine  Provi- 
dence. He  was  learning  the  principles  of  government  at  the  centre  of  the  most 
powerful  government  in  the  world.  He  had  immediate  access  to  the  monarch 
himself.  2.  He  is  always  ready  to  surrender  personal  honour  for  his  people's  good 
— (1)  If  by  so  doing  he  can  be  of  more  service  to  his  brethren.  Self-sacrifice  is  the 
grand  test  of  all  pretension.  (2)  If  personal  honour  be  associated  with  his  people's 
oppression.  Learn — 1.  By  obedience  we  make  the  most  stubborn  laws  of  nature 
our  servants.  2.  By  patience  foes  may  be  transformed  into  friends.  3.  By  the 
discipHne  of  adversity  the  foundations  of  prosperity  are  laid.  II.  The  typal  patriot 
IS  LAKOE-HEAETED  IN  HIS  SYMPATHIES.  1.  He  manifests  a  real  interest  in  the  con- 
dition of  his  country  (ver.  2).  The  words  imply — (1)  That  Nehemiah  was  not  a 
passive  listener  to  the  rehearsal  of  his  people's  affliction.  (2)  That  he  entered  into 
particulars  and  was  most  minute  in  his  inquiries.  They  who  have  no  intention  of 
practical  sympathy  are  careful  to  elicit  no  tales  of  sorrow.  2.  He  takes  upon  himself 
the  burden  of  his  country's  woes  (ver.  4).  HI.  The  typal  patriot  eecoqnises  ▲ 
Divine  sovereignty  in  human  affairs.  1.  By  accepting  the  existence  and  authority 
of  the  King  of  kings.  Not  only  as — (1)  A  dogma,  but  also  as — (2)  A  regulative 
principle.  "  0  Lord  God  of  heaven,  the  great  and  terrible  God."  2.  By  regarding 
Divine  aid  as  superior  to  all  other.  (1)  As  the  most  powerful  that  can  be  obtained. 
(2)  As  controlling  all  other  aid.  Nenemiah  seeks  Divine  assistance  in  urging  his 
suit  in  his  approaching  interview  with  the  king — (a)  That  he  may  reach  the 
monarch's  wiU  by  the  most  accessible  channel.  (6)  That  he  may  approach  him 
at  the  most  accessible  moment,  (c)  That  he  may  urge  his  request  in  the  most 
prevalent  form.  3.  By  regarding  Divine  aid  as  available  through  prayer.  Nehe- 
miah's  prayer  is  one  of  the  model  prayers  of  the  Bible,  as — (1)  Reverent  in  its 
attitude  towards  God  (ver.  51.  (2)  Persistent  in  pressing  its  suit  (ver.  6).  (3)  Peni- 
tent in  its  tone  and  temper  (vers.  6,  7).  U)  Scriptural  in  its  argument  (vers.  8,  9). 
(5)  Childlike  in  its  spirit  (vers.  10,  11).  (6)  Definite  in  its  aim  (ver.  11).  Learn — 
1.  Nehemiah  is  a  type  of  Him  who  "  though  He  was  rich,  j'et  for  our  sakea 
became  poor,"  Ac.  2.  Intercessory  prayer  is  the  inspiration  and  the  evidence  of 
true  patriotism.  3.  Divine  interposition  is  the  safest  to  invoke  in  national  crises. 
{W.  H.  Booth.)  The  pious  patriot : — He  was  willing,  moreover,  to  make  no  little 
sacrifice  in  the  cause  of  patriotism.  Even  in  asking  the  king  for  leave  of  absence 
on  such  a  mission,  he  was  probably  risking  the  royal  displeasure.  No  one  could 
well  predict  how  an  Oriental  despot  would  be  likely  to  regard  such  a  request.  All 
might  depend  on  the  whim  or  caprice  of  the  moment.  That  Nehemiah  should  wish 
to  exchange  Susa  for  Jerusalem — that  he  should  desire  to  quit,  even  for  a  time,  the 
sunlight  of  the  royal  presence  which  was  condescending  to  shine  upon  him — might 
possibly  be  viewed  as  an  insult.  The  very  fact  that  he  was  a  favourite  might  only 
increase  the  royal  irritation.  A  tyrant  likes  his  pets  to  appreciate  their  privileges ; 
and  Nehemiah,  by  asking  for  leave  of  absence,  might  only  lose  the  royal  favour  and 
be  deposed  from  his  office.  Then,  again,  even  if  his  request  should  be  granted,  he 
would  have  to  sacrifice  for  a  time  all  the  luxury  and  ease  of  his  present  position ; 
he  would  have  to  subject  himself  to  toil  and  danger;  he  would  have  to  face  the 
arduous  journey  between  Susa  and  Jerusalem  ;  and  then,  after  arriving  in  the  city 
of  his  fathers,  he  would  have  to  confront  the  hostility  of  the  surrounding  tribes, 
and  might  even  have  to  exchange  the  courtier's  robes  for  the  soldier's  armour.  But 
all  these  sacrifices  Nehemiah  was  prepared  to  make  in  the  cause  of  patriotism.  His 
court  life  had  not  enervated  his  spirit.  An  intelligent  and  manly  piety  does  not 
destroy  or  despise  any  of  the  natural  affections.  There  is,  indeed,  a  "pietism" 
which  makes  light  of  the  ties  of  home  and  kindred,  which  disparages  patriotism,  as 
if  it  were  inconsistent  with  the  universal  love  inspired  by  the  gospel,  or  which  even 
ventures  to  taboo  politics  as  a  worldly  region  which  a  spiritual  man  ought  rather  to 
avoid.  Let  us  beware  of  this  false  spirituality.  The  world  of  natural  human 
relationships  is  God's  world,  and  not  the  devil's;  and  if  the  devil  has  intruded  into 
it,  there  is  all  the  more  need  that  it  should  be  occupied  by  the  earnest  soldiers  of 
God.  Pietism  may  say,  "  Never  mind  the  condition  of  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  :  souls 
are  the  grand  concern."  But,  in  point  of  fact,  the  condition  of  walls  may  sometimes 
affect  the  condition  of  souls.  Things  external  often  stand  in  subtle  relation  to 
things  spiritual.  The  body  influences  the  mind  ;  and  the  outward  conditions  of 
national  existence  may  stand  in  the  closest  connection  with  the  religious  life  of  a 
people.    Besides,  it  is  natural  that  we  should  love  our  own  country  with  a  special 


CHAP.  I.]  NEHEMIAH. 


affection ;  and  a  true  religion  does  not  destroy  but  consecrates  all  natural  attach- 
ments. On  the  other  hand,  there  are  many  politicians  who  are  no  patriots,  and 
there  is  also  a  patriotism  in  which  there  is  no  godliness,  There  are  men  who  take 
the  keenest  interest  in  politics  merely  because  it  furnishes  an  arena  for  the  exercise 
of  their  faculties,  the  display  of  their  talents,  and  the  furtherance  of  their  ambitions. 
And  there  are  also  true  patriots — real  lovers  of  their  country — who  yet  never  recog- 
nise the  hand  of  God  in  national  history,  who  never  think  of  praying  to  God  in 
connection  with  their  plans,  or  of  submitting  their  political  projects  and  methods  to 
the  test  of  His  will.  Now,  if  a  man's  patriotism  is  his  only  religion,  this  is  doubt- 
less better  than  that  his  "  god  "  should  be  his  "  belly,"  and  that  he  should  "  glory 
in  his  shame."  But  still,  this  patriotism  in  which  there  is  no  regard  for  God  is 
fraught  with  danger.  For  the  grand  and  prime  demand  on  every  one  of  us  is  that 
we  be  the  servants  of  the  Most  High,  the  soldiers  of  Christ,  the  loyal  subjects  of  the 
Divine  kingdom.  And  then  it  is  our  bounden  duty  to  serve  God  in  and  through  all 
our  natural  pursuits,  affections,  and  relationships,  and,  amongst  other  things,  to 
bring  all  our  political  theories,  aims,  and  methods  into  the  light  of  Christ  and  of 
His  Spirit.  We  want,  both  in  the  Church  and  in  the  commonwealth,  men  and 
women  in  whom,  as  in  Nehemiah  of  old,  piety  and  patriotism  are  blended  and 
intertwined.  {T.  C.  Finlayson.)  Divine  purposes  working  through  providence  : — 
I.  Here  is  eminent  piety  in  a  most  unlikely  place  (ver.  1).  1.  Palaces  are  not 
generally  favourable  to  piety — (1)  Because  unrestrained  Liberty  usually  degenerates 
into  license  and  lavish  luxury  into  licentiousness.  Court  morals  are  proverbially 
corrupt.  (2)  Because  religion  does  not  flourish  amidst  human  pomp  and  the  out- 
ward symbols  of  pride.  A  palace  is,  above  aU  others,  a  theatre  of  human  exaltation 
and  proud  display.  (3)  Because  the  commands  of  a  sovereign  are  Uable  to  clash 
with  the  mandates  of  Jehovah.  2,  Piety  is  not  impossible  even  in  a  palace — 
(1)  Inasmuch  as  God  wiU  protect  them  who  honour  Him.  If  God  has  placed  His 
servant  in  the  palace  to  do  His  work.  He  wiU  keep  him  there  until  the  work  is 
done.  (2)  Inasmuch  as  many  eminent  examples  are  recorded  in  Scripture.  Not 
only  Nehemiah,  but  Moses,  Joseph,  Obadiah,  and  Daniel.  Learn — 1.  Eminent 
piety  does  not  depend  upon  the  accidentals  of  a  man's  social  position.  2.  Exalted 
positions  are  less  desirable  than  they  appear.  3.  The  most  desirable  station  in 
life  is  that  in  which  we  can  serve  God  to  the  best  advantage.     II.  Hebe  is  an 

■VENT  APPARENTLY  TRIFLING  LEADING  TO  RESULTS  OF  THE  GREATEST  MAGNITUDE  (ver.  2), 

1.  The  most  trivial  event  may  lead  to  the  most  momentous  issues.  The  oak  is 
contained  in  the  acorn ;  the  prairie  is  fired  by  a  spark ;  a  nation  is  plunged  into 
war  as  the  result  of  a  jest.  Many  a  quiet  conversation  has  led  to  world-wide 
revolutions.  2.  Nothing  is  therefore  trivial  to  a  wise  man.  Learn — 1.  Every 
detail  in  a  good  man's  life  is  part  of  a  Divine  plan.  2.  To  avoid  crossing  the 
Divine  purpose  and  thwarting  the  Divine  plan  we  must  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God. 
ni.  Here  is  a  startling  summons  of  a  most  unexpected  chabacteb.  Although  no 
direct  appeal  was  made,  Nehemiah  as  truly  heard  the  Divine  call  as  Samuel  the 
voice  in  the  darkness,  or  Paul  the  voice  of  the  vision,  "Come  over  to  Macedonia." 

1.  Here  is  an  appeal  for  sympathy  and  help — not  the  less  powerful  because 
indirect.  Mute  appeals  are  often  the  most  eloquent,  ^schylus  appeahng  for  the 
life  of  his  brother  by  holding  up  the  stump  of  the  arm  he  had  lost  in  the  service  of 
his  country.  The  high-priest  in  the  holy  place  sprinkled  the  blood  seven  times 
without  speaking.  This  appeal  was — (1)  The  cry  of  humanity  appealing  to  human 
sympathies.  (2)  The  cry  of  brotherhood  appeahng  to  his  kinship.  (3)  The  cry  of 
fatherland  appealing  to  his  patriotism.  (4)  The  call  of  God.  2.  Here  is  a  summons 
which  involved  great  sacrifice.  Love  never  counts  the  cost.  Sacrifice  is  its  glory. 
Sincerity  always  distinguished  from  hypocrisy  by  this  test.  3.  Here  is  an  unex- 
pected summons  promptly  obeyed.  Learn — 1.  Life  is  full  of  surprises,  and  the 
tenure  of  ease  uncertain.  2.  The  good  man  is  prepared  to  foUow  the  leadings  of 
providence  without  hesitation  and  at  any  cost.  IV.  Here  is  a  saviour  raised  up 
IN  A  MOST  UNLOOKED-FOE  QUAETER.  1.  God  is  ever  training  His  agents  for  the  work 
which  He  means  them  to  accomplish.  Nehemiah,  Joseph,  Moses,  David,  Cyrus, 
Paul,  Luther,  Wesley,  and  many  others.  2.  At  the  proper  time  God  will  bring  His 
agents  into  contact  with  their  life-work.  3.  The  qualifications  of  God's  agents 
are  not  always  recognised  at  first.     Learn — 1.  God  uses  the  most  unlikely  agents. 

2.  God  leads  in  the  most  unlooked-for  ways.  3.  God's  redemptive  scheme  is  the  most 
incomprehensible  of  all  mysteries.  V.  Here  is  a  picture  of  the  demoralising  and 
dismantling  tendency  of  sin,  alike  in  cities  and  in  souls.  1.  The  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem  were  demorahsed  :  "  In  great  affliction  and  reproach."    Long  captivity 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X. 

and  dependence  had  enervated  them.  Powers  not  used  lapse  into  impotence.  Sin 
cherished  withers  moral  force.  2.  The  battlements  of  Jerusalem  were  dismantled. 
Thus  does  sin  ever  destroy  defences  and  throw  down  battlements,  leaving  souls  at 
the  mercy  of  destructive  forces  which  lead  to  eternal  shame.  Learn — 1.  Sin  reveals 
its  deadly  nature  in  its  direful  consequences  even  in  this  life.  2.  These  consequences 
are  designed  to  act  as  warnings  to  unwary  souls.  3.  They  suggest  still  more  awful 
penalties  in  that  world  where  judgment  is  untempered  by  mercy.  {W.  H.  Booth.) 
The  exile : — Nothing  is  here  said  of  the  parentage  or  early  training  of  Nehemiah. 
We  may  suppose  he  grew  up  in  a  pious  home,  where  daily  prayers,  and  instruc- 
tions, and  acts  of  godliness  were  imbued  with  deep  religious  feeling.  The  early 
days  of  the  future  reformer  were  perhaps  spent  in  listening  to  the  recital  of  many 
an  endeared  memory  of  the  land  of  Judah,  and  his  young  heart  was  probably  taught 
to  beat  high  with  hope  of  the  restoration  of  his  people  to  their  covenant  inheritance. 
I.  The  situation  he  occupied.  The  palace  at  Shushan  was  one  of  the  most  mag- 
nificent in  the  ancient  world.  The  site  of  its  ruins  has  been  identified  by  modern 
travellers,  and  here  large  blocks  of  marble,  with  other  fragments  of  splendid 
edifices,  are  often  dug  up — the  relics  of  a  grandeur  that  has  long  since  passed  away. 
The  place  of  his  abode  offered  many  attractions  to  captivate  a  youthful  mind.  There 
were  in  the  streets  of  that  vast  city  the  splendour  and  bustle  of  Oriental  life.  There 
might  seem  in  all  this  "  lust  of  the  eye  and  pride  of  life  "  ominous  danger  to  youthful 
piety.  But  it  is  a  wonderful  power,  the  grace  of  God  in  the  human  heart.  It  is 
marvellous  in  the  souls  it  selects  for  saving  change,  in  the  places  where  it  operates, 
and  in  the  triumphs  it  achieves.  Often  it  appears  wanting  in  those  who  seem 
most  favourably  situated  for  its  possession,  while  it  reigns  in  hearts  where  it  might 
seem  impossible  for  it  to  live  and  grow.  And  in  him  God  made  the  palace  of  a 
heathen  prince  the  nursery  and  sanctuary  of  an  eminent  servant  of  His  cause.  In 
view  of  this,  let  none  among  us  allege  that  their  situation  or  circumstances  render 
it  impracticable  for  them  to  cultivate  religion  or  abound  in  well-doing.  Men  may 
rush  into  temptation  in  their  earthly  business,  and  thereby  raise  up  invincible 
barriers  to  the  exercise  of  piety ;  but  God,  by  His  providence,  never  places  any  man 
in  a  situation  where  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  love  and  obey  Him.  If  you  are 
where  God  has  placed  you,  be  sure  you  may  be,  and  do,  what  God  requires  you. 
In  every  situation  of  life  there  is  enough  to  test  the  sincerity  of  faith  in  things 
unseen.  11.  The  spieit  he  displayed.  It  was  a  spirit  of  tender  interest  for  the  good 
of  Jerusalem.  The  subjects  of  inquiry  show  the  spirit  of  the  man.  He  was  Uving 
in  ease  and  affluence  himself,  but  he  could  not  forget  he  was  "  of  the  stock  of  Israel," 
and  he  felt,  therefore,  the  prosperity  of  religion  bound  up  with  that  feeble  remnant. 
He  might  have  seen  couriers  arrive  at  the  royal  palace  from  distant  regions,  bearing 
tidings  of  fresh  victories  gained  by  Persian  armies,  and  of  new  countries  subjected 
to  the  Persian  crown,  and  yet  not  be  greatly  moved  by  the  intelligence ;  but  the 
arrival  of  these  fellow-saints  stirred  up  his  spirit  within  him  to  inquire  concerning 
the  state  of  the  Church  in  the  land  of  his  fathers.  Do  we  not  see  here  that  it  is 
the  history  and  condition  of  the  cause  of  truth  on  earth  which  interests  the  wise 
and  good?  They  may  not,  indeed,  be  unaffected  by  events  which  concern  the 
welfare  of  mankind  and  illustrate  the  wisdom  of  God  in  His  providence ;  but  it  is 
especially  the  progress  of  the  kingdom  of  grace  that  engages  the  attention  of  its  true 
subjects.  It  was  a  spirit  of  deep  sorrow  for  the  distress  of  his  people  in  Judah. 
III.  The  exercises  in  which  he  engaged.  Nehemiah  "  fasted  and  prayed."  {W. 
Ritchie.)  The  use  of  a  great  purpose  : — To  a  thoughtful  mind  there  is  much 
interest  in  the  contemplation  of  the  circumstances  under  which  the  great  purpose 
of  a  life  first  rise  into  distinctness  before  the  mind  of  one  whose  energies, 
henceforth,  are  to  be  used  for  his  country  and  his  God,  and  whose  example 
stands  before  us  as  a  noble  incentive  to  steadfastness  of  purpose  and  courage 
in  the  performance  of  duty.  {Scenes  from  the  Life  of  Nehemiah.)  Piety  in 
unexpected  places : — Fine  gold  nas  often  been  found  under  a  barren  and  unpro- 
mising surface.  Bare  jewels  have  been  found  in  the  crevices  of  rocks  and  in  the 
pebbly  beds  of  rivers.  Exquisite  flowers  have  peeped  forth  from  the  ledge  of  a 
stupendous  Alpine  rock,  and  have  breathed  their  sweetness  amid  a  wilderness  of 
Ice  and  snow.  Palm-trees  have  lifted  up  their  tall  and  elegant  stems,  adorned  at 
the  summit  with  long  pendant  leaves  and  enriched  with  nourishing  fruit,  in  the 
midst  of  the  sandy  desert,  and  their  life  has  been  sustained  by  a  hidden  well  of 
springing  water  at  their  root.  This  has  often  been  the  case  with  Qod's  children — 
Joseph,  Obadiah,  saints  in  Cassar's  household.  Here  Nehemiah  in  the  conrt  of  ono 
of  the  most  laxurious  eastern  princes.     {J.  M.  Randall.)        Nehemiah  and  hit 


CHAP  I.]  NEHEMIAH.  11 

eontemporariet : — Nehemiah  floarished  four  centuries  before  Christ.  When  consuls 
and  dictators  were  beginning  to  play  an  important  part  in  Boman  politics ;  when 
Xenophon  and  Herodotus  were  historians  and  Phidias  was  sculptor ;  when 
Euripides,  Sophocles,  and  Aristophanes  wrote  tragedy  and  comedy ;  when  Socrates 
taught  philosophy  and  Pericles  was  prime  minister  at  Athens ;  and  when  tho 
western  nations  of  Europe  were  sunk  in  savage  barbarism,  Nehemiah  was  tha 
devout  cup-bearer  at  Shushan.  We  are  not  told  from  what  tribe  he  sprang.  His 
grandfather  had  been  taken  captive  by  Nebuchadnezzar  ;  his  father  was  bom  and 
educated  at  Babylon.  Probably  the  beauty  of  his  person  and  the  sweetness  of  his 
manners,  the  extensive  range  of  his  intellect,  and  the  integrity  of  his  character, 
recommended  Nehemiah  to  royal  favour.  {Hid.)  I  asked  them  concerning  the 
Jews  .  .  .  and  concerning  Jerusalem. — Careful  inquiry  helpful  to  philanthropic 
effort : — Few  portions  of  Scripture  set  forth  more  clearly  than  the  Book  of  Nehemiah 
the  power  of  one  man  to  do  great  things  for  God  when  God  is  with  him.  With  an 
earnest  desire  to  work  for  God,  Nehemiah  first  sought  to  gain  accurate  information, 
from  a  reliable  source,  both  as  to  the  need  that  existed  and  the  nature  of  the  work 
that  had  to  be  done.  Careful  inquiry  respecting  the  field  of  any  projected  effort 
wiU  often  reveal  much  of  which  we  had  previously  but  little  conception.  This 
should  not  dishearten  us,  however,  for  we  ought  rather  to  remember  that  the 
deeper  the  darkness  and  degradation  of  those  whom  we  seek  to  reach,  the  more 
needful  is  it  to  bring  them  under  the  enlightening  and  elevating  power  of  the 
gospel  of  Christ.  (W.  P.  Lockhart.)  Man's  love  for  the  land  of  his  birth : — 
Mr.  Christie  Murray,  writing  of  the  old  Australian  settlers,  relates  an  incident 
to  show  how,  after  a  long  life  of  exile,  they  stiU  pine  for  home  and  England. 
When  his  ship  left  Plymouth  Sound  a  good  deal  of  mud  adhered  to  the  anchor. 
After  it  was  dried  he  broke  off  a  bit,  declaring,  half  in  jest  and  half  in  earnest, 
that  this  piece  of  English  earth  should  go  with  hhn  around  the  world.  In 
Australia  he  showed  it  to  a  white-haired  ranchman  among  the  hiUs.  The  old 
man  eyed  it  wistfully.  "  Give  it  to  me,"  he  said  at  last.  "  You  wUl  see  old 
England  again ;  I  never  shall.  I  would  value  that  bit  of  earth  more  than 
diamonds."  Mr.  Murray  gave  it  to  him,  and  continued  his  journey.  When  he 
came  back,  months  later,  he  found  that  the  old  man  had  ridden  more  than  a 
hundred  miles  to  a  settlement  to  buy  a  gay  little  plush  stand  and  a  glass  case  in 
which  to  preserve  his  treasure.  De  Maistre,  describing  the  hut  of  the  Moravian 
missionary  in  the  most  northern  human  settlement  within  the  Arctic  circle,  says 
that  he  observed,  suspended  over  the  fireplace  like  a  holy  relic,  a  piece  of  rough, 
unbarked  wood.  He  looked  at  it  curiously.  The  Dane  touched  it  with  reverence. 
"  It  is  a  bit  of  the  old  oak-tree  at  home,"  he  said,  his  eyes  fuU  of  tears.  Nothing 
can  be  more  real  than  that  clinging  in  the  heart  of  a  man  to  the  land  of  his  birth. 
It  may  be  of  all  countries  in  the  world  the  poorest,  the  least  beautiful,  the  most 
insignificant.  But  it  is  his  own,  and  if  he  is  a  genuine  man  the  trifle  which  tells 
him  of  it,  though  he  stands  in  a  king's  palace,  will  speak  to  him  as  with  the  power 
of  his  mother's  voice.  (Christian  Age.)  The  wall  of  Jerusalem  also  is  broken 
down,  and  the  gates  thereof  are  burned  with  are. — Walls  and  gates  : — What,  then, 
are  the  "  walls  and  gates  "  of  the  New  Testament  ?  The  Church  is  now  catholic, 
and  no  longer  national.  It  is  not  now  a  civil  polity  and  the  necessities  of  a  civil 
community  that  determine  the  nature  of  these  "  walls  and  gates."  Yet  there  are 
some  things  of  prime  importance,  like  the  walls  and  gates  of  Jerusalem.  I.  The 
SACRED  OBSERVANCE  OF  THE  Lord's  Day.  All  history  shows  that  whenever  and 
wherever  the  Sabbath  is  overthrown  the  Church  is  perilously  exposed,  not  only  to 
decay,  but  even  to  extinction.     11.  A  numerous  congregation  of  attendants  upon 

THE    ORDINANCES    AND   WORSHIP    OF   THE    ChURCH.      III.    SaBBATH   SCHOOLS    ARE  "  THB 

GATES "  OF  OUR  Jerusalem.  IV.  The  liberality  and  self-saceifice  of  God's 
PEOPLE.  (J.  A.  Lefevre,  D.D.)  Interest  in  Jerusalem: — I.  The  story  of 
Jerusalem  throws  light  upon  God's  moral  government.  Great  privileges  involve 
great  responsibilities.  National  sin  brings  national  ruin.  Nations  are  rewarded 
and  punished  in  this  world.  II.  It  is  a  mark  of  real  piety  to  be  zealous  for  the 
CAUSE  AND  kingdom  OF  GoD.  How  bitterly  do  Christians  mourn  over  the  wickedness 
around  them,  and  the  severe  conflict  they  have  to  maintain  in  their  own  breasts. 
m.   Every  Christian  has,  more  or  less,  to  tread  a  solitary  path,  and  his 

DEEPEST    SORROWS    ARE   FREQUENTLY    THOSE   WHICH    HE   CANNOT   COMMUNICATE    TO    THE 

NEAREST  AND  DEAREST  ON  EARTH.  Who  would  have  thought  that  wheu  his  attendance 
apon  the  king  was  over  for  the  day,  Nehemiah  would  hasten  to  his  chamber,  weep 
bitter  tears  of  grief,  and  mourn  and  pray?     (J.  M.  Eandall.)        Jerusalem,  the  holy 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

city  : — Thoroughly  to  realise  the  sad  tidings  brought  to  Nehemiah,  we  must  briefly 
recall  the  former  history  of  Jerusalem.  No  city  possesses  so  deep  and  thrilling  an 
interest.  Other  cities  may  boast  of  a  higher  antiquity,  Thebes  and  Nineveh  may 
go  back  even  to  the  repeopling  of  the  world  after  the  deluge.  Other  cities  may 
claim  a  broader  area,  a  more  numerous  population,  a  more  extended  commerce. 
Other  cities  may  claim  to  be  the  centres  of  a  far  greater  earthly  dominion  than  waa 
ever  accorded  to  David.  But  whether  in  the  past,  the  present,  or  the  future,  there 
is  no  interest  like  that  which  attaches  to  the  holy  city.  (Ibid.)  Sin  ruins  a 
kingdom  : — I.  Ip  there  be  a  moral  Governor  ot  the  universe  sin  must  provokb 
Him.  II.  If  sm  provoke  God  He  is  able  to  punish  it.  HI.  Bodies  of  men  abk 
punishable  in  this  world  only.  IV.  There  is  a  tendency  in  the  vert  natubb 
of  sm  TO  injure  and  ruin  a  country.  V.  God's  dealings  with  guilty  nations 
are  confirmed  both  by  His  Word  and  all  human  history.  VI.  God  always 
gives  previous  intimation  of  His  coming  to  judge  a  nation.  VH.  If  God  has 
favoured  a  nation  with  an  intimation  of  his  will,  their  sins  abe  aggravated  by 

MEANS  OF  THIS  LIGHT.  VIH.  WhEN  GoD  HAS  DISTINGUISHED  A  PEOPLE  BY  SINOULAB 
INSTANCES  OF  HiS  FAVOUR,  THAT  PEOPLE  WILL  BE  PROPORTIONALLY  CRIMINAL  UNLESS 
THEY  DISTINGUISH  THEMSELVES  BY  THEIR  DEVOTEDNESS  TO  HiM.  IX.  WhEN  A  NATION 
IS  UNDER  CORRECTIONS  OF  THE  AliMIGHTY,  THEY  ARE  EMINENTLY  SINFUL  IF  THEY 
DISREGARD    THE    TOKENS   OF    HiS    WRATH.      X.    SHAMELESS    SINNING    IS    A    SURE    PROOF 

or  GENERAL  CORRUPTION.  {W,  Jay.)  The  walls  of  Jerusalem : — What  do  we 
know  of  these  walls  previous  to  the  time  of  Nehemiah  ?  The  city  of  Jerusalem 
passed  into  the  hands  of  the  Jews  under  David.  He  wrested  the  rocky  stronghold 
of  Zion,  which  commands  Jerusalem,  from  the  Canaanitish  tribe  of  the  Jebusites. 
He  made  it  the  capital  of  his  kingdom.  To  secure  his  position  David  threw  a  wall 
round  the  entire  city,  including  the  fortress  of  Zion.  In  the  reign  of  Solomon 
(b.c.  1016-976)  this  wall  was  greatly  strengthened.  Very  large  towers  were  erected 
at  intervals  upon  it,  and  its  height  was  increased.  Probably  also  some  outlying 
parts  of  the  city  were  now  comprised  within  its  circuit.  For  nearly  two  centuries 
this  wall  remained  intact.  Jerusalem  sustained  several  sieges  ;  but  it  was  only  in 
the  reign  of  Amaziah,  in  b.c.  826,  that  a  breach  was  made  in  the  fortiiications. 
Jehoash,  the  king  of  Israel,  "  brake  down  the  wall  of  Jerusalem,  from  the  gate  of 
Ephraim  to  the  corner  gate,  four  hundred  cubits  "  (2  Kings  xiv.  13).  Through  this 
gap  in  the  wall,  Josephus  tells  us,  the  victorious  Jehoash  drove  his  chariot  into 
Jerusalem,  leading  Amaziah  captive  with  him.  Uzziah  (b.c.  808)  the  succeeding 
king  of  Judah,  was  a  prosperous  and  enterprising  prince.  He  occupied  himself  for 
a  large  portion  of  his  life  in  the  improvement  of  his  capital.  He  repaired  the 
breach  made  by  Jehoash,  and  built  additional  towers.  Other  portions  of  the  walls 
that  had  been  suffered  to  fall  into  decay  were  renewed.  He  was  an  artillerist ;  he 
equipped  the  walls  and  their  towers  with  powerful  engines  for  hurling  stones  and 
other  missiles  against  besiegers.  Jothan,  his  son  (b.c.  756),  also  strengthened  the 
walls  by  building  new  massive  towers.  The  care  which  had  been  expended  upon 
the  fortifications  of  the  city  by  successive  kings,  for  so  long  a  period,  bore 
memorable  fruit  in  the  reign  of  Hezekiah.  The  tide  of  Assyrian  invasion  which 
then  swept  over  Palestine,  and  which  overwhelmed  for  ever  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel, 
met  with  a  check  before  the  fortress  of  Jerusalem.  In  prospect  of  this  invasion 
Hezekiah  had  repaired  the  walls  wherever  they  had  become  dilapidated,  and  had 
erected  an  additional  wall.  While  the  city  was  invested  the  mysterious  plague 
came  upon  the  camp  of  the  Assyrians,  which  swept  off  myriads  of  them  in  a  single 
night.  They  were  content  to  retire  (b.c.  710)  with  a  tribute  paid  by  Hezekiah  ;  the 
city  itself,  however,  remained  uncaptured.  Manasseh,  after  his  repentance  (b.c. 
677-642),  paid  attention  to  the  fortifications  of  the  city.  "  He  did  not  only,"  says 
Josephus,  "  repair  the  old  walls  with  great  diligence,  but  added  another  wall  to  the 
former.  He  built,  also,  very  lofty  towers,  and  the  garrisoned  places  before  the 
city  he  strengthened  not  only  in  other  respects,  but  with  provisions  of  all  sorts  that 
they  wanted."  It  was  nearly  forty  years  later  that  the  series  of  calamities 
commenced  which  lasted  for  twenty  years,  and  which  culminated  in  the  complete 
overthrow  of  this  illustrious  city.  In  b.c.  6()6  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  king  of 
Babylon,  entered  Jerusalem,  and  after  threatening  Jehoiakim,  the  king,  with 
captivity,  left  him  in  possession  of  his  throne.  He  appeared  before  the  city 
again  nine  years  later  ;  and  Jehoiachin,  who  had  succeeded  his  father  Jehoiakim, 
surrendered  Jerusalem  to  him  with  scarcely  a  struggle.  Nebuchadnezzar  canied 
him  off  with  him  to  Babylon,  and  placed  his  uncle  Zedekiah  upon  the  throne 
in  Jerusalem.     Six  years  after  this  Zedekiah  rebelled  against  Babylon,  and  after  » 


CHAP.  1.]  NEHEMIAH.  13 

siege  of  a  year  and  a  half,  the  severest  it  had  undergone  since  it  had  been  a  Jewish 
city,  a  breach  was  made  in  the  wall  of  Jerusalem,  through  which  the  Babylonian 
army  poured  into  the  city,  Zedekiah  and  most  of  the  people  were  transferred  to 
Babylon.  The  royal  palace,  the  temple,  and  all  the  principal  buildings  were 
burned,  and  the  stately  and  massive  walls  were  levelled  to  the  ground,  their  circuit 
being  only  traceable  by  the  vast  heaps  of  rubbish  left  by  the  devastators.  To 
restore  these  famous  walls,  to  perform  once  more  tLa  work  of  David  and  Solomon 
and  their  successors,  to  reproduce  in  a  few  weeks  the  labour  of  centuries,  this  was 
the  task  which  lay  before  Nehemiah.  But  what  was  their  size  ?  What  were  the 
particulars  of  the  work  undertaken  by  Nehemiah  ?  The  city  of  Jerusalem  is  not  at 
the  present  time  a  great  city.  The  circumference  of  the  modern  walls  is  two  and  a 
half  miles ;  and  while  the  ancient  walls  would  not  in  many  portions  coincide  with 
the  present,  nevertheless  the  total  circuit  of  the  old  walls  would  not  greatly  differ 
in  length  from  those  of  the  present  time.  It  has  been  stated  by  the  eminent 
architect,  Mr.  Ferguson,  in  Dr.  Smith's  "  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,"  that  the  area 
within  the  old  walls  was  never  more  than  one  hundred  and  eighty  acres  ;  and  he 
remarks,  by  way  of  comparison,  that  the  building  known  as  the  Great  Exhibition 
of  1851  covered  eighteen  acres,  or  a  tenth  part  of  the  area  of  ancient  Jerusalem. 
From  this  estimate  it  will  be  seen  that  the  city  was  one  of  moderate  dimensions. 
We  must  remember  also  that  here  and  there  portions  of  the  wall  were  left  standing. 
The  foundations,  too,  would  remain,  throughout  the  entire  circuit,  as  they 
originally  were.  The  object  of  the  invaders  would  be  to  render  the  fortifications 
incapable  of  serving  any  longer  as  a  defence  to  the  inhabitants ;  and  this  object 
would  be  gained  without  disturbing  the  foundations  of  the  walls.  The  stones  and 
rubble  of  which  they  had  been  built  were  not  carried  to  a  distance,  but  lay  in  heaps 
ready  to  the  hands  of  the  builders.  This  material  would  not,  however,  be  available 
in  every  case.  The  limestone  around  Jerusalem,  which  was  used  in  the  construc- 
tion of  the  important  buildings,  when  exposed  to  fire  (as  many  parts  of  the  wall 
had  been)  rapidly  disintegrated.  It  resembled  the  granite  of  which  Chicago  was 
built,  and  which  crumbled  to  dust  in  the  great  fire  which  destroyed  that  city  a  few 
years  since.  This  is  the  point  of  the  taunt  uttered  by  Sanballat  (chap.  iv.  2) : 
•'  Will  these  Jews  revive  the  stones  out  of  the  heaps  of  the  rubbish  which  are 
burned  ?  "  {A.  J.  Griffith.)  City  walls  important : — In  the  solicitude  of  Nehemiah 
over  the  ruined  condition  of  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  we  have  brought  into 
prominence  an  element  in  ancient  national  life  which  it  is  useful  to  understand, 
and  which  is  the  foundation  and  keystone  of  Nehemiah's  subsequent  action.  It 
was  the  walls  that  made  the  nation  in  those  days.  The  law  which  then  prevailed 
upon  the  face  of  the  earth  was  the  law  of  might.  A  town  of  any  size  was  at  the 
jnercy  of  every  roving,  plundering  horde,  if  it  were  unfortified.  When  once  it  was 
surrounded  with  strong  walls,  it  became  possible  for  the  citizens  to  accumulate 
property,  enact  laws  for  the  order  and  well-being  of  the  citizens,  and  to  elect 
magistrates  to  carry  these  laws  into  effect.  With  their  erection  dated  the  com- 
mencement of  civic  life.  Where  the  city  was  large,  the  citizens  became  a  nation. 
The  Babylonian  nation,  and,  earlier,  the  Ninevite  people,  meant  really  the  citizens 
living  within  the  walls  of  the  immense  cities — Babylon  and  Nineveh.  The  history 
of  Italy  in  the  ninth  century  of  our  era  illustrates  this  law  of  states.  The  counti-y 
was  overrun  by  the  armies  of  rival  princes,  who  disputed  for  the  throne  of  the 
Lombard  kingdom.  The  Saracens  from  the  opposite  shores  of  Africa  were  con- 
stantly landing  upon  the  coast,  and  penetrating  inland  for  the  purpose  of  pillage 
and  massacre.  In  this  condition  of  the  country  the  large  cities  were  compelled 
again  to  erect  their  walls,  which  had  been  levelled  to  the  ground  by  jealous  and 
tyrannical  kings.  The  great  Kepublics  of  Italy,  the  cities  which  afterwards  became 
nations  in  themselves,  Milan,  Florence,  Pisa,  and  others,  laid  in  this  way  the 
foundation  of  their  subsequent  greatness.  "From  the  time,"  says  Sismondi  in  his 
"  History  of  the  Italian  Eepublics,"  "  when  towns  were  secured  by  walls,  their 
:power  rapidly  increased  ;  the  oppressed  from  all  parts  sought  refuge  in  them  from 
the  oppressors  ;  they  carried  with  them  their  industry  and  arms  to  protect  the  walls 
that  defended  them.  Everywhere  they  were  sure  of  a  good  reception,  for  every  city 
felt  it  had  strength  only  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  its  citizens  ;  each  vied  with 
its  neighbour  in  efforts  to  augment  the  means  of  defence  and  in  the  reception  given 
to  strangers."  Of  such  supreme  importance  were  the  fortifications  of  a  city  to 
national  life  and  progress  in  those  ages  of  disorder.  (Ibid.)  Protective  walls  : — 
Have  you  ever  seen  a  hermit  crab  ?  Some  day,  when  you  are  at  the  seaside,  you 
.will  see  one.    It  is  a  crab  which  has  no  hard  shell  of  its  own,  and  consequently  ia 


U  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u 

an  easy  prey  for  sea-birds.  It  therefore  gets  possession  of  an  empty  whelk-shell» 
and  lives  in  the  abandoned  house  of  the  whelk,  barring  the  door  upon  itself  with 
the  one  great  claw,  which  has  grown  twice  the  size  of  the  other,  apparently  for  the- 
purpose.  But  when  his  crabship  grows  too  big  for  his  shell,  it  becomes  as  uncom- 
fortable as  a  shoe  that  pinches,  and  he  has  to  turn  out  to  look  for  another.  Look 
at  him  now !  He  in  a  great  hurry,  because  he  is  in  danger,  and  knows  it.  He 
wants  just  what  Jerusalem  wanted — a  wall  of  stone  and  lime  about  him.  That  is 
what  a  shell  is — a  wall  of  stone  and  lime.  Sometimes  the  hermit  crab  gets  eaten 
up  by  a  gull  or  skua  before  he  can  find  another  shell  to  suit  him ;  sometimes  he  has 
to  turn  out  the  rightful  owner  from  his  home  in  order  to  get  in  himself ;  but  he 
always  knows  that  he  needs  a  defence.  It  is  a  simple  comparison  ;  but  it  gives  a 
true  idea  of  the  state  of  the  case  to  say  that  Jerusalem,  without  a  stone  and  lime 
wall,  was  a  hermit  crab  without  a  shell,  surrounded  by  Galilean  gulls  and  Samaritan 
skuas.     (Sunday  School.) 

Vers.  4-11.  And  it  came  to  pass,  wlxen  I  heard  these  words,  that  I  sat  down  and 
^ept. — Sad   tidings   and  fruitful  grief: — I.  The  occasion  of  his  grief.     1.  Not 
personal  loss.     (1)  Men  grieve  on  account  of  personal  loss — failure  of  business, 
scarcity  of  work,  pecuniary  loss  involving  personal  privation,  &c.     (2)  Men  grieve 
on  account  of  spiritual  failure.    Neither  of  these  explains  the  occasion  of  Nehemiah'a^ 
grief.     2.  But  public  calamity.     (1)  He  had  inquired  carefully  into  the  state  of 
God's  work.     Every  good  man  should  thus  interest  himself  in  God's  work.     Men 
shun  this  conscientious  inquiry  for  various  reasons,     (a)  Some  on  account  of  the 
peace  which   ignorance  brings.      (6)  Some   dread  the  painful  discoveries  which 
careful  inquiry  may  reveal,     (c)  Others  the  sacrifices  which  such  discoveries  may 
demand.     (2)  He  had  received  sorrowful  tidings.     To  a  good  man  tidings  of  the 
Church's  desolation  are  ever  sad  tidings,     (a)  It  betrays  unfaithfulness.     A  holy 
and  loyal  Church  cannot  be  a  dishonoured   one.      The  shorn  strength,  as  with 
Samson,  betrays  unwatchfulness  and  worldUness.     (b)  It  furnishes  occasion  of 
reproach  to  the  enemies  of  the  Church.    II.  The  chabacteristics  of  his  grief. 
1.  It  was  profound.     2.  It  was  enduring.    3.  It  was  self-denying.    Eeal  heart-pain 
is  always  ascetic  in  its  bodily  aspect.     "And  fasted."     Observe — (1)  Fasting  is 
often  associated  with  profound  grief  in  Scripture  (2  Sam.  i.  12,  xii.  16-21 ;  Psa. 
XXXV.  13  ;  Ixix.  10  ;  Dan.  vi.  8  ;  Jonah  iii.  5).    It  may  be  the  natural  attendant  of 
Buch  grief,  or  the  outward  symbol  of  its  presence.     (2)  Fasting  is  recognised  and 
commended  in  Scripture  as  a  religious  exercise  (1  Sam.  vii.  6  ;  Jer.  xxxvi.  9 ; 
Matt.  vi.  17 ;   Acts  x.  30 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  5).    III.  The  issue  of  his  grief.     "  And 
prayed  before  the  God  of  heaven."    Herein  consists  the  difference  between  godly 
and  selfish  sorrow.     The  one  invariably  finds  relief  in  prayer,  the  other  ends  in 
blank  despair.     1.  Grief  is  sanctified   by  prayer.     It  then  becomes  sacred,  and 
softens  the  heart  like  showers  on  the  thirsty  soil.    Eebellious  grief  is  hardening  in 
its  effect.     2.  Grief  is  relieved  by  prayer.    Lessons — 1.  Profound  grief  on  behalf  of 
others  is  perfectly  consistent  with  personal  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  favour.    2.  Godly 
grief  usually  precedes  gracious  visitations     3.  Burdened  hearts  find  best  relief  in 
prayer.     (W.  H.  Booth.)        The  Church  and  social  evils: — The  accurate   dates 
given  in  this  book  show  that  the  period  of  Nehemiah's  brooding  sorrow  lasted  four 
months.     The  emotions  excited  in  Nehemiah  by  his  countrymen's  sorrows  suggest 
some  plain  lessons  for  Christian  people.     I.  The  doty  of  sympathetio  contem- 
plation OF  surrounding  sorrows.    The  first  condition  of  sympathy  is  knowledge ; 
the  second  is  attending  to  what  we  know.     How  demoralising  is  the  thought  that 
many  people  seem  to  entertain,  that  the  universe,  and  hideous  vices  and  sodden 
immorality,  and  utter  heathenism  which  are  found  down  among  the  foundations  of 
every  civic  community  are  as  indispensable  to  progress  as  the  noise  of  the  wheels  of 
a  train  is  to  its  advancement,  or  as  the  bilge-water  in  a  wooden  ship  is  to  keep  its 
seams  tight.    Every  consideration  of  communion  with  and  conformity  to  Jesus 
Christ,  of  loyalty  to  His  words,  of  a  true  sense  of  brotherhood,  and  of  lower  things 
— such  as  self-interest — demands  that  Christian  people  shall  take  to  their  hearts,  in 
a  fashion  that  Churches  have  never  done  yet,  "the  condition  of  England  question," 
and  shall  ask,  "  Lord,  what  wouldst  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "    II.  Such  a  realisa- 
tion   OF   THE    DARK     FACTS     IS     INDISPENSABLE     TO    ALL     TRUE    WORK     FOR    ALLEVIATING 

THEM.  There  is  no  way  of  helping  men,  but  by  bearing  what  they  bear.  No  man 
will  ever  lighten  a  sorrow  of  which  he  has  not  himself  felt  the  pressure.  The  Gross 
of  Christ  is  the  pattern  for  our  lives.  The  "saviours  of  society  "have  still  in 
lower  fashion  to  be  crucified.    No  work  of  any  real  use  will  be  done  except  by  those- 


CHAP.  I.]  NEHEMIAH.  16 

whose  hearts  have  bled  with  the  feeling  of  the  miseries  which  they  set  themselves 
to  cure.  III.  SocH  bealisation  of  surrounding  sorrows  wili  drive  to  com- 
munion WITH  God.  All  true  service  for  the  world  must  begin  with  close  com- 
munion with  God.  The  "  service  of  man"  is  best  done  when  it  is  the  service  of 
God.  You  will  never  get  the  army  of  workers  that  is  needed  to  grapple  with  the 
facts  of  our  present  condition  unless  you  touch  the  very  deepest  springs  of  conduct, 
and  these  are  to  be  found  in  communion  with  God.  All  other  efforts  at  alleviate 
work  by  those  who  ignore  Christian  motive  is  but  surface  drainage.  Get  down  to 
the  love  of  God,  and  the  love  of  men  therefrom,  and  you  have  got  an  artesian  well 
which  will  bubble  up  unfailingly.  We  hear  a  great  deal  about  a  "  social  gospel." 
Let  us  remember  that  the  gospel  is  social  second  and  individual  first.  If  you  get 
the  love  of  God  and  obedience  to  Jesus  Christ  into  a  man's  heart  it  will  be  like 
putting  gas  into  a  balloon — it  will  go  up  and  the  man  will  get  out  of  the  slums  fast 
enough ;  and  he  will  not  be  a  slave  to  the  vices  of  the  world  much  longer.  It  is 
the  work  of  the  Church  to  carry  to  the  world  the  only  thing  that  wiU  make  men 
deeply  and  abidingly  happy,  because  it  will  make  them  good.     IV.  Such  sympathy 

SHOULD   BB    THE    PARENT    OF  A  NOBLE    SELF-SACRIFICING   LIFE.       Nchcmiah,  like  MoSeS, 

"  chose  rather  to  suffer  affliction  with  the  people  of  God  "  and  to  turn  his  back  on 
the  dazzlements  of  a  court,  than  to  "  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season," 
while  his  brethren  were  suffering.  The  spirit  of  this  example  must  stiU  be  observed. 
It  is  no  part  of  my  business  to  prescribe  to  you  details  of  duty.  It  is  my  business 
to  insist  on  the  principles  which  must  regulate  these,  and  of  these  principles  in 
application  to  Christian  service  there  is  none  more  stringent  than  "  I  will  not  offer 
unto  my  God  burnt  offerings  of  that  which  doth  cost  me  nothing."  {A.  Maclaren, 
D.D.)  Personal  interest  leading  to  importunate  prayer : — The  story  begins  with 
an  account  of  the  condition  of  Jerusalem.  At  this  time  the  city  was  in  a  bad  plight 
— walls  broken  down,  gateways  burned  with  fire,  streets  deserted  and  grass  grown. 
The  heathen  passed  by  in  scornful  derision  and  said,  "  Is  this  the  city  which  was 
called  beautiful,  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth  ?  "  Only  six  months  go  by,  and  what 
a  wonderful  change  1  The  walls  are  built  and  the  gateways  are  secure.  Instead 
of  a  few  people  with  bent  heads  and  sad  hearts,  there  is  a  great  army  of  workmen. 
What  had  happened  ?  Had  God  sent  some  prophet  into  their  midst  like  Elijah, 
stirring  the  hearts  of  the  people  ?  or  some  mother  in  Israel  like  Deborah  of  old  ?  or 
another  warrior  like  Gideon  or  David  ?  Less  than  that,  a  great  deafl  less  than  that, 
as  we  count  things,  but  more  than  that,  much  more  than  that,  as  we  ought  to  count 
things.  One  man  had  taken  the  sorrows  of  Jerusalem  in  upon  his  heart — that  was 
all.  One  man  had  taken  the  sad  state  of  things  in  upon  his  heart,  and  began  to 
sorrow  about  it,  and  weep  over  it,  and  thought  so  much  about  it  that  it  quite 
spoiled  his  appetite.  He  could  not  rest  by  day  or  night,  and  at  last  he  had  to  take 
the  burden  right  in  before  God  and  cast  it  upon  Him,  That  was  all.  Ah,  but  that 
is  all  that  is  wanted  1  The  world's  salvation  rests  not  upon  organisations,  upon 
means,  upon  preachers,  or  upon  arrangements,  but  upon  deep  personal  interest — 
personal  interest  leading  to  importunate  prayer,  and  importunate  prayer  leading  to 
earnest  effort.  That  is  the  only  way  in  which  the  Church  can  ever  be  victorious, 
and  can  ever  be  saved.  The  saddest  thing  to-day  is  that  men  are  Christians  without 
being  Christlike,  that  men  do  not  take  the  sins  and  sorrows  of  the  world  in  upon 
their  hearts.  Now  what  are  the  most  of  us  doing  ?  1.  Here  is  one  who  has  heard 
these  evil  tidings  of  to-day,  and  of  a  thousand  other  ills  that  afflict  and  disgrace 
our  land.  "  It  is  sad,"  he  says,  "  very  sad  indeed ;  I  do  wish  I  could  help  you. 
But  you  see  I  can  do  so  very  little.  I  will  double  my  subscription  for  a  year ;  but 
of  course  I  am  not  in  a  position  to  do  anything  more.  You  see  I  am  not  a  prophet, 
or  then  I  might  go  forth  and  preach  to  the  people,  I  am  not  a  priest,  and  must  not 
take  upon  myself  a  task  which  belongs  to  others.  I  am  not  a  warrior,  and  cannot 
head  a  host  of  soldiers,  or  no  doubt  I  should  fight,  I  don't  see  that  I  can  do 
anything."  And  the  man  is  going  away  quite  satisfied  that  he  at  any  rate  has 
done  his  duty.  This  is  the  average  Christian  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Now 
there  comes  some  simple  man  who  lays  his  hand  upon  this  man's  shoulder,  and 
says,  "  There  is  one  thing  we  can  do  ;  we  can  pray  about  it."  Then  there  comes 
the  amiable  smile  which  we  keep  for  weak,  well-meaning  people — "  Of  course,  my 
friend ;  of  course.  We  all  do  that,  you  know."  And  the  adversity  continues  as  it 
always  does  when  we  pray  without  personal  interest.  2.  Then  I  think  of  another 
who  has  heard  of  the  sad  condition  of  things,  and  he  says,  "  Well,  I  really  am  very 
sorry,  indeed ;  yes,  quite  distressed.  You  know,  I  think  that  there  must  be  a  great 
deal  of  mismanagement  up  in  Jerusalem  somewhere  ;  Ezra  cannot  be  looking  after 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 


it  as  he  ought  to  be  ;  I  feel  he  is  wrong  altogether;  I  think  it  is  a  disgrace  to  him. 
I  wonder  whether  he  thinks  David  would  ever  have  allowed  a  condition  of  things 
like  this  to  come  about  ?  "     Personal  interest  leading  people  to  abuse  the  workers — 
that  is  not  a  very  uncommon  thing.     "  It  is  dreadful,  this  condition  of  things  in 
London.     But  do  you  think  that  ministers  are  doing  their  duty?  "     It  is  so  easy,  ia 
it  not,  when  we  are  disappointed  and  sad,  to  fling  stones  at  other  people  ?    It  is 
such  a  relief  to  be  able  to  find  fault  with  somebody  else.     Then  I  think  this  simple 
man  comes  up  and  says, "  Do  not  you  think  we  ought  to  pray  for  them  ?   They  have 
got  hard  work,  and  it  is  difficult  to  get  at."     "  Oh,  pray  I  yes,  of  course  ;  pray  all 
day,  of  course."     That  is  a  horrible  spirit,  the  spirit  that  prays  as  a  matter  of 
course,  and  finds  fault  with  everybody  else  as  a  matter  of  course,  too.     If  you 
cannot  do  good,  do  not  go  shooting  arrows  into  the  hearts  of  others.    I  marvel 
that  the  great  God  of  heaven  has  such  patience  with  those  people  who  criticise 
every  method,  who  find  fault  with  everybody's  failure,  and  who  never  In  their  lives 
lifted  a  finger  to  help  souls  to  Christ — personal  interest  that  can  only  find  fault  and 
blame  other  people,  and  that  kneels  down  and  prays  as  a  matter  of  course,  but 
neither  has  heart,  nor  earnestness,  nor  expectation  in  its  prayer.     3.  I  see  another 
type  of  character,  the  man  who  says,  "  WeU,  really,  it  is  very  sad  indeed."     He  is 
a  man  not  given  much  to  weeping ;  he  has  a  tender  heart ;  he  is  sharp,  definite, 
exact,  likes  to  have  things  down  in  black  and  white— your  typical  Englishman, 
"  Come  here,"  he  says  ;  "  now  let  us  just  have  it  down.    You  tell  me  that  the  walla 
have  been  broken  down :  how  many  yards  of  wall  will  you  want  ?    It  is  a  very 
serious  matter ;  we  shall  want  so  many  loads  of  stone ;  and  our  gateways  ?  yes, 
burned  with  fixe  ;  yes,  and  so  many  loads  of  timber.     We  are  practical  men.     It  ia 
very  sad.     How  many  men  have  you  got  up  there  ?    Tou  have  got  twenty  men. 
We  shall  want  a  thousand  men  to  build  up  that  city.     It  cannot  be  done  ;  it  is  no 
good,  it  cannot  be  done."    Do  not  you  know  that  man?    It  is  personal  interest 
stopping  short  of  importunate  prayer.     4.  I  think  I  see  another,  who  has  heard  of 
the  condition  of  the  poor,  and  thinks  this  is  a  dreadful  city,  perhaps  can  think  of 
nothing  else ;  perhaps,  like  Nehemiah,  he  feels  that  relish  for  appetite  is  gone ;  his 
tears  are  falling,  and  he  is  haunted  by  the  thought  of  the  homeless  and  outcast  ones 
and  hungry  little  children — Nehemiah  weeping  and  fasting.     God  loves  hearts  that 
fret  because  of  the  sins  and  sorrows  around  us.     God  set  such  store  by  men  who 
sighed  and  cried  because  of  the  abominations  that  He  sent  an  angel  down  from 
heaven  to  put  a  mark  upon  their  foreheads.    Do  you  know  what  the  angel  was 
doing  ?     I  think  he  was  taking  their  measure  for  their  crowns.     It  is  a  great  thing 
in  the  midst  of  this  London  to  keep  alive  a  tender  heart,  and  if  Christ  does  not 
give  a  man  a  tender  heart  I  question  whether  that  man  knows  much  about  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.    But  look  1  fretting  will  not  mend  the  evil.     Earnest  personal 
interest,  passing  into  importunate  prayer,  wiU.    Nehemiah  got  as  far  as  fretting, 
and  then  he  went  to  God.    That  is  a  grand  saying  of  John  Wesley's  :  "I  dare  no 
more  fret  than  I  would  curse  or  swear."     It  would  make  the   fortune   of   life 
insurance    offices  if  we    could    hit    upon    that    happy    receipt.     He    that    only 
frets    wiU    do    much,    but    he    who    cannot    fret    will    not    do    anything.      I 
think    a    Christian    ought   to    be    a   man    who    frets — frets,    mark   you,    until 
he  gets  to  God,  and  gets  hold  of  God  sufficiently,  and  feels:   "Great  Father 
in  heaven,  Thou  canst  remedy  these  ills,  and  Thou  wilt  I "     (Mark  Guy  Pearte.) 
God  provides  instruments  for  His    work: — When   God   has  work  to  be    done 
He   provides   suitable   instruments    and  places  them    in    favourable   situations 
to  promote  His  plans.      Martin  Luther,   called  to  withstand  the   power   of  the 
Papacy,   found    the   God-fearing   Elector   of    Saxony   ready   to  afford   him  the 
needed   protection,  and   when   the  persecuted  Waldenses  cried   for   help,   Oliver 
Cromwell   so   threatened  the  oppressor  that  deliverance  was  wrought.     (W.  P. 
Lockhart.)       Compassion  as  a    motive  power: — Some   men    work  because  they 
are  urged   to   it   by   others,   some    because    it    is    the  fashion   with  professors 
or  with  those   among  whom  their  lot  is  cast;    but  the  true  workers   because, 
"  moved  with  compassion,"  they  cannot  help  working.     (Ibid.)         And  fasted. — 
Fasting: — I.    Occasions   of    tasting.       1.    Afflictions    of     the    Church    (Nehe- 
miah.)  2.  National  judgments  (Joel).    3.  Domestic  bereavement  (David).    4.  Immi- 
nent  danger  (Esther).     5.  Solemn  ordinances  (Paul  and   Barnabas  set   apart). 
II.  The   design   of    fasting.     III.   The   duty  of   fasting.      1.  Forms  part  of 
general    principle  of    self-denial,   essential  to   true    discipleship   (Luke  ix.   23). 
2.  Implied,  and  therefore  enjoined,  by  words  of  Christ  (Matt.  xvii.  21).    IV.  Thb 
MANNEB  AND  DBOBBE  OF  FASTING.    1.  Sometimcs  total  abstinenoo  from  food  for  A 


CHAP.  I.]  NEHEMIAH.  17 

time  (Esther  iv.  16).     2.  More  often  abstinence  from  superfluous  food  (Dan.  i.  8). 

V.  The  spirit  in  which  to  fast.  (Homiletic  Commentary.)  Nehemiah's 
prayer : — I.  To  oivb  no  place  to  despaib,  however  deep  or  prolonged  oub 
GRIEF.  No  calamity  can  be  so  overwhelming  as  to  block  our  way  to  the  God 
before  whom  Abraham  and  Daniel,  and  every  devout  soul,  has  bowed  in  fervent 
petition  for  help  in  dire  extremity.  God  does  not  forsake  or  forget  the  lowliest  or 
weakest  or  most  unworthy.  The  more  we  need  God — for  any  reason,  our  mis- 
fortune or  our  fault — the  more  reason  for  our  seeking  Him,  and,  in  some 
true  sense,  the  more  ready  is  He  to  be  sought  and  found.    II.  We  should  not 

OVERLOOK    THE    SEVERITIES    OF    God's     CHARACTER     OR     DEALINGS     WHEN     APPROACHING 

Him  with  petitions.  Modern  ideas  of  God's  fatherhood  tend  much  to  put  His 
sterner  attributes  out  of  sight.  His  unquestionable  love  seems  to  preclude  severi- 
ties of  character  or  dealings.  But  our  prophet  could  unite  ideas  of  God  as  "  great 
and  terrible,"  and  also  keeping  '•  covenant  and  mercy  for  them  that  love  Him  and 
observe  His  commandments."  By  true  reasoning  we  should  be  wary  of  views  of 
God  which  leave  out  His  severity,  for  there  is  th«  side  of  His  character  which  is 
the  necessary  counterpart  of  love  for  righteousness  and  obedience.  III.  The 
importance  of  importunitt.  The  prayer  of  our  lesson  had  lasted  for  days, 
attended  by  fasting.  Fasting  prepares  the  way  for  clear  thought  and  tender 
feeling.  Nehemiah  did  not  say,  "  God  fully  understands  the  situation.  I  need 
only  refer  to  it."  With  familiar  urgency  he  pleads  for  the  '•  attentive  ear  "  and 
•'open  eyes,"  that  God  may  know  his  case  and  care  for  it.  Similar  travail  of  soul 
has  been  an  element  of  prevailing  prayer  in  all  ages.  Why  it  is  necessary  we  do 
not  fully  know.  It  may  be  that  importunity  is  the  only  safe  mood  to  which 
answers  to  prayer  can  be  wisely  accorded.  Without  it  the  desired  boon  or  the 
answer  would  not  be  appreciated.  IV.  The  fitness  and  dutt  of  thorough 
CONFESSION.  V.  Moses  was  an  historic  character,  and  our  record  of  him  is 
tbustwortht.    Nehemiah  would  not  talk  with  God  about  a  mythical  person. 

VI.  No   DEPTH   OF    FALL   OR   DISTANCE    OF    WANTDERINO  CAN  INVALIDATE  God's  COVENANT 

MERCIES.  Though  "  cast  out  into  the  uttermost  part  of  the  heaven,"  their  return 
would  be  certain  if  they  would  but  return  unto  God  and  keep  His  commandments. 

VII.  Past  mercies  and  mighty  rescues  are  a  logical  basis  of  confidence, 
OF  FAITH,  AND  BOLDNESS  OF  PETITION.  What  is  the  probable  logic  of  the  appeal, 
"  Now  these  are  Thy  servants  and  Thy  people,  whom  Thou  hast  redeemed  by  Thy 
great  power,  and  by  Thy  strong  hand  "  ?  This,  in  part:  God  had  made  an  invest- 
ment of  grace  in  these  children  of  His  adoption ;  from  true  economy  He  would  not 
wish  it  wasted.  Again,  the  love  that  sought  them  in  the  beginning  proceeded  from 
its  own  internal  impulses ;  such  love  cannot  be  easily  exhausted.  Being  a  motive 
unto  itself,  that  motive  abides  unchanging  in  character  and  sufficiency.  Again, 
these  subjects  of  His  grace  were  more  needy  than  ever  ;  any  help  based  upon  that 
need  could  not  be  lacking  on  occasion.  All  this  can  be  said  of  individual  cases  as 
truly  as  of  Israel.  The  individual  backslider  has  been  "  redeemed  by  great  power, 
and  by  a  strong  hand."  The  heavenly  Father  began  the  work  with  a  full 
knowledge  of  the  weakness  of  the  material  and  the  possibilities  of  failure.  Let 
the  tender  conscience,  the  sensitive  honour  writhing  in  the  memory  of  past 
mercies  that  have  been  abused,  grow  calm  and  hopeful  in  the  assurance  that 
redeeming  grace  does  not  depend  upon  dates  or  any  conditions,  but  genuine 
brokenness  of  heart  and  absolute  return  to  obedience.  VHI.  We  can  go  to  God 
IN  prater,  with  only  a  desire  to  fear  Him.  IX.  Prayer  should  be  practical 
IN  ITS  outlook.  Communion  with  God  may  well  have  our  time  and  attention  for 
its  reflex  influence  ;  for  the  nobler  soul -life  gained  thereby;  but  Nehemiah  counted 
prayer  a  practical  reliance  in  achieving  business  results.  He  needed  and  coveted 
the  king's  help.  His  example,  in  this  respect,  may  well  be  copied  in  all  our 
undertakings.  God  is  not  an  uninterested  spectator  of  our  toils  or  plans.  We 
may  come  to  Him  for  help  where  our  own  strength  ceases.  {S.  L.  B.  Speare.) 
Nehemiah's  prayer: — I.  One  quality  which  makes  Nehemiah's  prayer  effectual 
WAS  ITS  importunity.  Two  considerations  inspired  this — 1.  He  was  burdened 
with  a  single  great  desire.  Our  praying  often  lacks  at  this  point.  We  ask  amiss 
because  we  ask  for  nothing — in  particular.  It  is  the  time  for  devotion,  or  the 
place ;  so  we  approach  the  mercy-seat,  because  we  ought  to,  rather  than  because 
we  have  any  pressing  need — coming,  sometimes,  in  so  vague  a  way  that  it  rnight 
not  be  easy  afterwards  to  teU  just  what  request  had  been  presented.  Nehemiah's 
prayer  did  not  have  such  lack.  He  was  in  sore  trouble.  2.  Another  element 
which  gave  importunity  to  his  prayer  was  a  conviction  that  this  relief  could  come 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  «. 

only  from  God.  "  Give  U3  help  from  trouble,  for  Tain  is  the  help  of  man." 
During  the  civil  war  a  gentleman  from  New  England,  travelling  in  South  America, 
noticed  one  daj  a  Spaniard  reading  a  paper,  and  asked  him  the  news.  "  The 
news  is,"  replied  the  other,  "  that  your  government  is  getting  beaten.  They  have 
taken  to  praying,  and  when  people  have  to  call  on  God  for  help  it  shows,  evidently, 
they  are  in  a  bad  way."  That  is  always  the  reason  why  men  call  on  God,  because 
they  cannot  help  themselves.  This  was  what  made  Nehemiah  so  much  in  earnest. 
Dr.  Bushnell  remarked  once  in  the  Hartford  ministers'  meeting,  "  Brethren,  the 
thing  which  I  have  to  struggle  against  most  in  my  praying  is  a  spirit  of  submis- 
sion. I  give  up  too  easily.  I  want  to  learn  how  to  plead  more  as  Jacob  did,  with 
a  determination  not  to  let  God  go  without  the  blessing."  He  qualified  after- 
wards his  words,  explaining  true  submission,  but  pressed,  in  his  strong  way,  the 
importance  of  persistency.  So  Nehemiah  prayed,  not  once,  but  "  without 
ceasing."  He  wept  and  mourned,  and  fasted  "certain  days,"  "day  and  night." 
II.  A  second  quality  that  made  Nehemiah's  prayer  effectual  was  its  spirit  of 
CONFESSION.  He  seems  to  have  apprehended,  very  distinctly,  the  truth  which  the 
Bible  urges  in  many  ways,  that  men  must  come  into  right  relations  with  God 
before  they  can  ask  any  favour  of  Him.  1.  It  was  particular.  He  specified  some 
of  the  points  of  his  guilt.  "  We  have  dealt  very  corruptly  against  Thee,  and  have 
not  kept  the  commandments,  nor  the  statutes,  nor  the  judgments,  which  Thou 
commandest  Thy  servant  Moses."  2.  Then  his  confession  was  individual.  He 
began  with  an  acknowledgment  in  behalf  of  the  "  children  of  Israel " ;  but  it 
occurred  to  him  to  bring  that  nearer  home,  so  he  added,  "  Both  I  and  my 
father's  house  have  sinned."  He  was  conscious  of  his  own  shortcomings. 
With  all  his  zeal,  his  loyalty  so  constant  and  so  brave,  he  saw  that  at  many 
points  he  had  failed,  and  for  these  shortcomings  he  asked  forgiveness.  When 
David  has  made  his  confession  that  is  so  particular,  "Against  Thee,  Thee 
only  have  I  sinned  and  done  this  evil  in  Thy  sight " ;  and  so  individual, 
"  I  acknowledge  my  transgression  " ;  •'  Have  mercy  upon  me,  O  God."  UI.  A 
third  quality  that  made  Nehemiah's  prayer  effectual  was  its  faith.  Trusting 
God  first  in  his  own  behalf  for  pardon,  guidance,  strength,  he  could  trust 
Him  in  behalf  of  the  nation.  He  prayed,  "Kemember,  I  beseech  Thee,  the  word 
that  Thou  commandest."  He  seemed  to  know  the  Divine  will  by  some  clear 
intimation.  That  appears,  at  first,  to  diminish  the  worth  of  his  example.  We 
say,  '*  Yes,  certainly ;  no  wonder  he  had  faith ;  any  one  could  ask  for  wonderful 
blessing  if  the  Lord  told  him  to."  But  how  did  God  put  that  purpose  into  the 
heart  of  Nehemiah  ?  by  a  vision,  a  voice,  some  supernatural  revelation  ?  There  is 
no  intimation  of  either.  It  may  have  been  simply  by  the  influence  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  as  we  aU  are  moved,  through  conscience,  enlightened  by  the  Word  of  God. 
rV.  A  fourth  quality  in  Nehemiah's  prayer  which  made  it  effectual  was  its  spibit 
OF  GOOD  woEKs.  When  he  sat  down  to  pray  he  did  not  mean  to  stay  in  that 
attitude.  He  had  in  his  mind  a  plan  to  secure  permission  to  go  and  build  the 
wall.    {Monday  Club  Sermons.)  And  prayed  before  the  God  of  heaven. — 

Nehemiah' t  prayer : — "  This  poor  man  cried,  and  the  Lord  heard  him,  and  saved  him 
out  of  all  his  trouble  ! "  But  if  this  be  true  of  sorrow  on  one's  own  account,  how 
much  more  surely  will  God  hear  the  petitioner  who  pleads  for  others.  For  selfish- 
ness in  prayer  is  no  more  comely  than  anywhere  else.  This  man  was  a  layman. 
He  might  easily  have  shifted  the  responsibility  for  the  present  condition  of  things 
upon  the  priests  and  Levites,  on  whom  God  had  particularly  devolved  the  religious 
interests  of  Jewry.  But  laymen  then  were  no  more  absolved  from  such  responsi- 
bility than  laymen  are  in  these  days.  Indeed,  some  of  the  affairs  of  Zion  belong 
distinctively  to  them.  Never  yet  was  Zion  safely  left  to  her  priests  alone.  There 
is  always  something  for  Nehemiah  to  do.  The  prayer  of  Nehemiah  in  this 
instance  is  given  doubtless  for  our  guidance.  It  is  a  model  of  supplication  in 
many  ways.  Observe — I.  Its  bevkbent  spirit.  It  begins  with  adoration :  "  O 
Jehovah,  God  of  heaven,  the  great  and  terrible  God,  that  keepeth  covenant  and 
mercy  for  them  that  love  Him  I  "  In  our  eagerness  to  present  our  requests  at  the 
throne  of  the  heavenly  grace  there  is  always  danger  of  precipitation.  It  must  not 
be  forgotten  that  we  are  approaching  the  Infinite.  Therefore  a  reverent  humility 
becomes  us.  II.  Nehemiah  makes  confession  or  his  sins  :  "  We  have  sinned 
against  Thee  ;  both  I  and  my  father's  house  have  sinned."  This  cup-bearer  knew 
that  sin  lay  at  the  bottom  of  all  Israel's  troubles.  "  Both  I  and  my  father's  house 
have  sinned."  Spurgeon  says,  *'  He  spelled  'we'  with  an  *  I '  in  it."  His  own 
tiansgressions  and  shoitcomings  loomed  up  before  him.     IH.  His  confidei^cs  in 


CHAT.  I.]  NEHEMIAH.  19 

THE  Divine  Won©.  This  was  the  prayer  of  faith.  He  casts  himself  upon  the 
promises  of  God,  which  are  evermore  Yea  and  Amen.  He  ventures  to  par- 
ticularise :  he  puts  God  in  remembrance  of  a  certain  covenant  which  He  had 
been  pleased  to  make  long  before  with  Moses  His  servant  in  behalf  of  His  people. 
The  terms  of  this  covenant  are  gathered  from  various  passages  of  ancient  Scrip- 
ture (Lev.  xxitI.  27-45 ;  Deut.  xxviii.  45,  67,  xxx.  1,  10).  A  glorious  word 
of  promise  that  for  a  nation  of  stiff-necked  exiles !  Ajid  the  fact  that  on  the 
part  of  the  people  themselves  this  covenant  had  been  broken  does  not  prevent 
Nehemiah  from  putting  God  in  remembrance  of  it ;  for  he  knows  that  God  is  of 
long  suffering  and  tender  mercy.  Faith  at  the  mercy-seat  conquers  all.  IV.  The 
PBATEB  OF  Nehemiah  was  specieio.  It  is  the  part  of  wisdom  to  enter  upon  all 
enterprises  with  prayer.  A  Boman  general  would  not  march  to  battle  until  he 
had  first  offered  a  sacrifice.  A  right  apprehension  of  this  principle  would  keep  us 
always  in  the  spirit  of  prayer,  because  no  man  can  estimate  the  importance  of  any 
act.     The  least  thing  we  do  may  have  momentous  and  eternal  issues.    V.  His 

PBATEB    WAS   FOLLOWED    BT   THE    USE    OF    APPBOPEIATE   MEANS.      (X).  J.  BuiTell,  D.D.) 

Nehemiah^s  prayer : — Nehemiah  was  evidently  a  man  of  high  integrity,  as  appears 
from  the  situation  which  he  held,  that  of  the  king's  cup-bearer.    Only  a  person 
who  was  thoroughly  trustworthy  would  be  permitted  to  occupy  such  a  position, 
inasmuch  as  the  lives  of  eastern  monarchs  were  in  constant  danger  from  the 
aspiring  courtiers ;  and  as  one  of  the  most  common  methods  of  causing  death,  in 
ancient  times,  was  by  mixing  some  poisonous  ingredient  with  the  wine  that  was 
drunk,  it  is  quite  obvious  that  no  one  would  be  intrusted  with  the  above  office  in 
the  king's  household  who  was  likely  to  be  influenced  by  the  bribes  of  the  king's 
enemies.    But,  in  addition  to  his  strict  integrity,  he  was  a  man  of  sincere  and 
fervent  piety.    Very  frequently  did  he  give  himself  unto  prayer,  and  it  is  thus  we 
find  him  engaged  in  the  present  chapter.    I.  The  occasion  of  this  pbateb.    It  is 
stated  in  the  first  three  verses.    "  The  words  of  Nehemiah,  the  son  of  Hachaliah. 
And  it  came  to  pass,"  &o.    It  is  said  of  the  Redeemer — ♦•  In  all  their  affliction  He 
was  afflicted  " ;  and  His  people  are  like-minded  with  Him  in  this  respect.    They 
feel  for  others.    H.  The  Being  to  whom  his  prater  is  addressed.    Those  among 
whom  he  dwelt  were  accustomed  in  their  distress  to  invoke  the  aid  of  their 
heathen  deities ;  but,  knowing  full  well  how  vain  it  was  to  seek  relief  from  such 
lying  vanities,  he  called  upon  the  God  of  heaven.     In  applying  to  Him  he  felt 
assured  that  he  was  not  praying  to  a  god  that  could  not  save.    There  were  two 
aspects  of  His  glorious  character  in  which  he  more  especially  regarded  Him.     1.  As 
great  and  terrible.     2.  As  faithful  and  gracious.    UI.  The   penitential  spirit 
which  it  breathes.    IV.  The  powerful  plea  which  is  employed.    •'  Eemember, 
I  beseech  Thee,  the  word  that  Thou  conunandest  Thy  servant  Moses,  saying,  If  ye 
transgress,  I  will  scatter  you  abroad  among  the  nations  ;  but  if  ye  return  unto  Me," 
Ac.     "  Eemember,"  says  the  Psalmist,  "  Thy  word  unto  Thy  servant,  upon  which 
Thou  hast  caused  me  to  hope."    And  this  was  the  argument  of  Nehemiah ;  he 
pleads  that  God  would  accomplish  what  He  had  formerly  declared  (Deut.  iv.  25-29, 
xxx.  1-6.)    V.  The  earnest  importunitt  with  which  it  is  presented.    "  O  Lord, 
I  beseech  Thee,  let  now  Thine  ear  be  attentive,"  &c.  {The  Author  of  "  The  Footateps 
of  Jesus")        Eeligiousnesi  of  spirit : — A  large  part  of  the  greatness  of  this  man 
lies  in  the  intense  religiousness  of  his  spirit.    It  is  this  which  constitutes  his 
history  so  very  valuable  a  Study  to  Christian  people.    There  is  no  reason  beyond 
this  why  I  should  select  Nehemiah  as  a  subject  for  the  study  of  this  Church,  and 
not  Pericles,  or  Julius  Caesar,  or  Charlemagne,  or  Cavour,  or  any  other  great 
statesman  or  hero  who  has  raised  the  position  of  his  country  to  a  front  rank 
amongst  the  nations  of  the  earth.    But  this  advantage  does  lie  in  the  careful 
examination  of  the  lives  of  the  great  heroes  of  the  Bible  and  of  the  Church. 
Through  their  history  we  obtain  an  insight,  not  only  into  the  greatness  of  the 
human  soul,  its  capacity  for  conceiving  great  plans,  its  energy  and  resources  in 
carrying  them  out  to  a  successful  and  glorious  completion,  but  also  into  the 
measure  in  which  the  human  soul  can  depend  upon  Divine  help,  into  the  worth 
of  communion  with  God  as  a  solace  in  anguish,  and  as  a  stimulus  to  enterprise, 
and  further  into  the  certainty  with  which  God  responds  to  such  communion,  and 
administers  fortitude,  patience,  self-control,  and  other  virtues  which  make  the  soul 
of  man  strong,  brave,  and  triumphant  over  obstacles.     {A.  J.  Griffiths.)        Intelli- 
gent faith  in  prayer  : — Nehemiah's  prayer  reveals  the  great  thoughts  of  which  God 
was  the  eabject,  and  by  which  he  nourished  his  courage  and  determination  in 
pref  aring  himself  for  his  great  task.    For  we  must  ever  remember  that  the  result 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

of  onr  praying — the  comfort,  or  support,  or  stimulus  we  receive  from  the  act  of 
prayer — depend  not  only  upon  the  fact  that  we  do  pray,  but  also  and  especially 
upon  the  clearness  and  vividness  of  our  conceptions  of  God.     We  must  be  sure 
that  we  are  not  praying  to  ourselves,  or  into  the  air,  but  into  the  ear  of  a  God  who 
will  hear  us,  and  whom  we  can  move  by  our  entreaty.     Intelligent  faith — not  faith 
without    intelligence,   mere    blind,   superstitious  faith — nor    intelligence  without 
faith,  a  hard,  dead  knowledge — but  both  together,  intelligence  and  faith,  consti- 
tute the  very  soul  and  life  of  true  prayer.     (Ibid.)        Prayer  and  quiet  waiting  : — 
Some  when  they  have  prayed  think  that  they  must  at  once  begin  to  act,  and  if 
doors  are  not  open,  force  them  open  for  themselves.     Kunning  before  they  are  sent, 
Buch  persons  usually  find  that  failure  ensues.     Nehemiah,  on  the  contrary,  stayed 
where  he  was,  pursuing  his  ordinary  course  in  life,  and  still  waiting  on  the  Lord. 
(IF.  P.  Lockhart.)         Constancy  in  prayer: — A  woman  who  resided  on  the  sea- 
shore in  the  Isle  of  Wight  thought  that  she  heard,  during  a  terrible  storm,  a  cry 
for  help.     She  listened  and  the  cry  was  repeated.     She  could  not  be  mistaken ; 
between  the  pauses  of  the  storm  there  it  was,  the  piercing  cry  of  endangered 
mariners.      She  dressed  hastily,  she  roused  up  the  beachmen  ;   the  lifeboat  was 
launched,  and  with  the  blessing   of   God   the   storm-beaten   crew  were  rescued. 
Again  and  again  must  we  plead  in  Christ's  name,  at  the  mercy-seat,  if  we  would 
come  off  more  than  conquerors.     One  brief  cry  is  not  sufficient.     (J.  M.  Randall.) 
Patience  required  in  waiting  upon  God  : — An  eminent  minister  of  Christ  was  laid 
aside  from  his  work  by  severe  and  prolonged  sickness.     Sometimes  he  was  almost 
ready  to  repine  and  to  faint  under  his  chastisement.     One  morning  after  unusual 
suffering  he  fell  into  a  sweet  sleep,  and  as  he  slept,  he  thought  he  saw  a  luminous 
pillar  of  graceful  proportions  rise  before  him.     It  was  so  beautiful  that  it  attracted 
his  eye  and  fixed  his  attention.     Then  he  thought  he  saw  letters  of  gold  coming 
out  upon  the  pillar  ;  at  first  they  were  very  indistinct,  and  not  a  little  study  was 
required  to  decipher  them.    At  last  the  letters  shone  out  in  perfect  form  and 
order,  and  he  read  "  Patience  "  inscribed  upon  the  column.    The  effort  at  attention 
and  the  joy  of  discovery  awoke  him,  and  he  said,  "  Patience ;  yes,  Lord,  I  will  be 
patient,  and  through  grace  I  will  yield  myself  to  Thy  disposal."    God  sometimes 
exercises  the  faith   of  His  people  by  long  delay,  but  patient  waiting  will  be 
rewarded.     (Ibid.)        Nehemiah  or  the  characteristics  of  prayer  : — Nehemiah's 
spirit  of  prayer  particularly  appears — I.  In    his    sympathy  and  gbiet  foe  his 
couNTET.    II.  In  his  desibe  to  pbomotk  his  countby's  good.    m.  In  cabeyino 
OUT  his  object  though  beset  with  gbeat  DXFricuLTtES.    IV.  In  eeviewinq  his 
W0EK8.     {John  Patteson,  M.A.)        A  model  prayer : — For  matter,  this  prayer  is 
replete  with  instruction.     Let  us  observe — I.  How  Nehemiah  addeesses  himself  to 
God.     He  calls  upon  "Jehovah,  the  God  of  heaven,"  infinite,  supreme,  and  ever- 
lasting.    "  Great  "  in  power  and  dominion,  and  "  terrible  "  in  justice  and  holiness. 
And  withal  as  a  God  who  keepeth  covenant  and  mercy.     As  Bishop  Reynolds 
remarks,  "  God  in  creation  is  God  around  us  ;  God  in  providence  is  God  above  us ; 
God  in  the  law  is  God  against  us ;  but  God  in  Christ  is  God  for  us,  God  with  us, 
God  in  us,  our  all-sufficient  portion  for  ever."    II,  How  humbly  Nehemiah  con- 
fesses HIS  OWN  SINS  AND  THE  SINS  OF  HIS  COUNTEY.      III.   HoW   HE   PLEADS   WITH  GoD, 

WHAT  WEIGHTY  AEGUMENT8  HE  EMPLOYS  !  He  lays  hold  upoH  God's  word.  This  is  a 
firm  rock  in  a  troubled  sea  (Deut.  xxx.  1-5).  Let  us  come  to  God  with  a  promise, 
and  reverently  remind  Him  of  His  own  engagement:  "  Lord,  do  as  Thou  hast 
said  ;  remember  the  word  unto  Thy  servant,  upon  which  Thou  hast  caused  me  to 
hope."  We  shall  then  realise  the  consolation,  happily  expressed  by  a  pious  negro 
who  said,  when  he  was  asked  concerning  the  abiding  peace  which  he  enjoyed, 
"  Massa,  me  fall  flat  upon  the  promise,  and  me  pray  straight  up."  IV.  Obseevb 
THE  PAETicuLAE  BEQUEST  WHICH  HE  MAKES.  "  Prospcr,  I  pray  Thee,  Thy  servant  this 
day,  and  grant  him  mercy  in  the  sight  of  this  man."  Its  matter  is  very  full :  its 
manner  very  suggestive.  1.  How  reverent  was  Nehemiah  before  God  !  How  just 
were  his  views  of  the  Divine  majesty  1  Shall  angels  thus  humbly  prostrate  them- 
selves before  God?  Oh,  with  what  " reverence  and  godly  fear"  should  sinners 
come  to  His  footstool.  2.  How  earnest  was  his  prayer:  "  I  beseech  Thee,"  "hear 
the  prayer  of  Thy  servant  which  I  pray  before  Thee."  Many  say  their  prayers,  but 
do  they  pray  in  prayer  ?  Prayer  is  the  expression  of  want :  it  is  not  eloquence,  but 
earnestness  ;  not  fine  words,  but  deep  feeling.  To  be  effectual  it  must  be  fervent. 
Prayer  is  incense  :  but  if  the  fragrance  is  to  ascend  before  the  mercy-seat,  it  must 
be  kindled  by  holy  fire  from  the  altar.  Prayer  is  an  arrow,  but  if  it  is  to  travel  far 
and  pierce  deep,  the  bow  most  be  bent,  and  the  string  must  be  tense,  else  oar 


CHAi>.  1.]  NEHEMIAH.  21 

prayer  shall  fall  at  our  feet.    "  I  will  not  let  Thee  go  except  Thou  bless  me." 

3.  How  constant  too  was  Nehemiah  I  "  Day  and  night "  did  he  plead.  "  We 
onght  always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint."  4.  How  believing  was  his  supplication ! 
Faith  is  an  important  element  in  prayer  ;  it  honours  God,  it  pleads  the  Saviour's 
merits,  it  rests  upon  the  sure  promise.  Faith  laughs  at  impossibilities,  and  says  it 
shall  be  done.  6.  How  fervent  was  the  charity  which  dictated  this  prayer  I 
Nehemiah  was  a  patriot  in  the  best  sense  of  the  word.  He  earnestly  desired 
the  welfare  of  Jerusalem.  There  was  not  a  particle  of  selfishness  in  hia 
prayer.  May  we  not  learn  to  be  charitable  and  large-hearted  m  our  prayers 
—  to  intercede  for  others,  our  country,  and  the  Church  of  God,  and 
in  this  respect  to  copy  the  example  of  Nehemiah  ?  {J.  M.  Randall.) 
The  g^reat  and  terrible  God,  that  keepeth  covenant  and  mercy  for  them  that  love 
TTim — The  majesty  and  mercy  of  God : — From  this  sublime  invocation  we  gather — 
I.  That  there  is  perfect  harmony  in  the  attributes  of  the  Divine  nature. 
n.  That  the  Divine  attributes  are  equally  enlisted  in  the  work  of  human 
salvation.  III.  That  the  harmony  of  the  Divine  nature  is  the  only  true  basis 
OF  moral  goodness.  1.  The  contemplation  of  Divine  compassion  alone  tends  to 
antinomianism.  2.  The  contemplation  of  the  Divine  holiness  alone  tends  to 
legalism.  Hence  spring  meritorious  works,  penances,  and  self-inflicted  flagellations 
and  other  useless  tortures.     IV.  That  the  harmony  of  the  Divine  nature  furnishes 

THE  only  true  IDEAL  OF  MORAL  GOODNESS.      V.    ThAT  NOTWITHSTANDING   THE    HARMONY 

OP  THE  Divine  nature,  men  come  into  contact  with  different  aspects  of  that 
KATURE  according  TO  THEIR  MORAL  CONDITION.  {Homiletic  Commentary.)  False 
views  of  sin  and  prevailing  immorality  : — It  is  to  be  feared  that  in  our  day  sin  is 
often  made  light  of,  and  false  views  of  sin  lie  at  the  root  of  much  of  the  evil  that 
we  see  around  us,  both  in  the  Church  and  in  the  world.  Such  views  are  largely 
caused  by  an  imperfect  apprehension  of  the  righteousness  of  God,  and  this  in  its 
turn  usually  proceeds  from  a  refusal  to  bow  to  the  authority  of  His  Word.  Thus 
truths  about  His  judgments  are  set  aside,  statements  concerning  His  wrath  are 
explained  away,  and  His  mercy  is  magnified  at  the  expense  of  His  justice.  (W.  P. 
Lockhart.)  And  confess  the  sins  of  the  children  of  Israel. — Sins  of  a  com- 
munity confessed  : — Confession  of  sin  is  essential  to  success  in  prayer.  "  If  I  regard 
iniquity  in  my  heart  the  Lord  will  not  hear  me."  Nehemiah  feels  that  God  has 
reason  to  be  displeased  with  His  people.  They  have  been  guilty  of  sins  of  omission 
(have  not  kept)  and  of  commission  (transgression).  Their  -privileges  have  aggra- 
vated their  guilt :  they  have  sinned  against  light ;  the  commandments,  statutes, 
and  judgments  given  by  Moses  bear  witness  against  them.  And  Nehemiah  is 
conscious  that  he  shares  their  guilt.  He  has  sinned  himself ;  and  he  has  sinned  in 
their  sins.  For  all  of  us  have  a  part  in  the  sins  of  the  community.  Our  influence 
helps  to  mould  and  shape  its  life.  It  is  a  principle  in  Chinese  law  to  hold  the 
relatives  of  a  criminal  in  some  degree  responsible  for  his  crime,  so  that  the  whole 
family  is  concerned  in  the  conduct  of  its  individual  members.  That  principle  is 
founded  on  a  true  conception  which  applies  in  both  directions.  The  community 
has  a  responsibility  for  its  members,  each  of  whom  shares  a  Uke  responsibility  for 
the  life  of  the  community  itself.  So  we  need  to  say  "our  trespasses,"  "our  debts," 
in  our  daily  prayer.     {S.  S.  Times.)        Forgotten  sins  remembered  : — I.  We  are  all 

CHARGEABLE    WITH  FAULTS.      U.   We   ARE  LIABLE  TO  FORGET  OUR  FAULTS.       ThrOUgh^ 

1.  Ignorance  of  the  true   nature   of  sin.     2.   Self-love.     3.   Hurry  of  business. 

4.  Elevation  in  worldly  circi  mstances.    III.  Various  circumstances  are  adapted 

TO  REMIND  us  OF  OUR  FAULTS.  IV.  WhEN  WE  ARE  REMINDED  OF  OUR  FAULTS  WB 
SHOULD  BE  BEADY  TO  CONFESS  THEM.  V.  CONFESSION  OF  FAXntilS  SHOULD  ALWAYS  BB 
ATTENDED  WITH  EEAIj  AMENDMENT.      {J.  Kidd.) 

Ver.  9-11.  But  if  ye  turn  to  Me,  and  keep  My  commandments. — The  spiritual 
favourite  at  the  throne  of  grace : — "  If  you  turn  unto  Me,  and  keep  My  command- 
ments." There  is  no  promise  of  mercy  but  to  those  that  turn.  The  Scripture  is 
peremptory  in  denial  of  mercy  to  such  as  go  on  in  their  sins.  Yet  how  many  are 
there  that  bless  themselves  that  it  shall  go  well  with  them,  though  they  cast  off  aU 
God's  yokes.  "  If  ye  turn."  The  holy  man  Nehemiah  puts  God  in  mind  of  His 
promise,  and  his  argument  is  from  the  like,  and  indeed  from  the  less  to  the  greater. 
Because  God  would  rather  of  both  perform  His  promises  than  His  threatenings, 
because  mercy  is  His  own  proper  work.  "These  are  Thy  servants."  Though 
sinful  servants,  yet  they  are  Thy  servants.  "  These  are  Thy  people."  Thou  hast  no 
other  people  in  the  world  but  these,  and  "  Thou  art  their  God."    He  pleads  from 

25 


22  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

former  favours.  "Thou  hast  redeemed  them  by  Thy  great  power  and  strong 
hand."  It  is  a  good  argument  to  plead  with  God  for  former  favours  :  because 
"  there  is  no  shadow  of  change  in  Him  "  (James  i,  17)  ;  He  is  always  like  Himself  ; 
He  is  never  drawn  dry.  And  it  is  a  great  honour  to  go  to  Him  for  new  favoura 
upon  former,  because  He  hath  an  infinite  supply.  We  may  draw  so  much  from 
men  as  they  have  not  afterwards  to  make  good,  but  we  cannot  honour  God  more 
than  to  go  to  Him  with  a  large  faith,  to  fetch  large  favours  from  Him.  The  more 
He  gives,  the  more  He  can  give,  and  the  more  He  is  willing  to  give.  We  may 
much  more  take  this  argum^ent  in  our  mouths,  and  press  the  majesty  of  God. 
"  Thou  hast  redeemed  us,"  not  out  of  Egypt  or  Babylon,  the  land  of  the  north,  but 
«'  with  the  blood  of  Thy  Son,"  from  hell  and  damnation ;  and  therefore  Thou  canst 
redeem  us  from  this  petty  misery,  from  these  enemies.  We  may  allege  that  grand 
favour  to  all  other  petty  redemptions,  whatsoever  they  are.  "  Let  Thine  ear  be 
attentive  to  the  prayer  of  Thy  servants."  It  is  a  prayer ;  and  Thou  art  "  a  God 
hearing  prayer."  "  They  be  Thy  servants,  and  Thou  regardest  Thy  servants."  Here 
are  but  a  few  petitions  in  this  large  request:  "remember,"  "be  attentive,"  and 
"  give  me  favour."  It  is  an  excellent  skiU  and  art  in  prayer  to  have  strong  argu- 
ments. Then  the  suit  comes  off  easily,  as  in  Psalm  xc.  Therefore,  it  is  an 
excellent  thing  to  study  the  Scriptures,  and  to  study  all  the  arguments  whereby 
holy  men  have  prevailed  with  God  in  Scripture,  and  to  see  in  what  case  those 
arguments  were  used.  It  is  a  pitiful  thing  now  for  Christians  under  the  glorious 
light  of  the  gospel  to  come  to  God  only  with  bare,  naked  petitions  and  have  not 
reasons  to  press  God  out  of  His  own  Word.  They  cannot  bind  God  with  His  own 
promise,  nor  with  arguments  that  He  hath  been  bound  with  before.  "  They  desire 
to  fear  Thy  name."  Empty  relations  have  no  comforts  in  them:  to  profess  one's 
self  a  servant,  and  not  to  make  it  good  that  he  is  a  servant.  We  must  make  good 
the  relation  we  stand  in  to  God,  before  we  can  claim  interest  in  the  favour  of  God 
by  our  relation.  He  goes  to  make  it  good  that  he  was  the  servant  of  God,  not 
from  any  outward  thing,  but  from  his  inward  disposition,  "  the  fear  of  God,"  which 
I  will  not  now  stand  to  speak  largely  of.  God  requires  the  heart ;  and  religion  is 
most  in  managing  and  turninfj  the  affections,  for  they  are  the  wind  that  carries  the 
soul  to  every  duty.  The  devil  hath  brain  enough,  he  knows  enough,  more  than  any 
of  us  aU.  But  then  he  hates  God.  He  hath  no  love  to  God,  nor  no  fear  of  God, 
but  only  a  slavish  fear.  He  hath  not  this  reverential  fear,  childlike  fear.  There- 
fore let  us  make  it  good  that  we  are  the  servants  of  God,  especially  by  our  affections, 
and  chiefly  by  this  of  fear,  which  is  put  for  all  the  worship  of  God.  How  doth  he 
make  it  good  that  he  feared  the  name  of  God  ?  He  makes  it  good  from  this,  that 
he  had  had  good  desires.  "We  desire  to  fear  Thy  name."  First  of  all,  out  of  this, 
that  this  desire  to  fear  the  name  of  God  is  brought  as  an  argument  to  prevail  in 
prayer,  we  may  observe  that — 1.  Those  that  will  prevail  with  God  in  prayer  must 
look  to  the  bent  of  their  souls  for  the  time  to  come,  and  for  the  present.  "  Regard 
Thy  servants  that  desire  to  fear  Thy  name."  For  to  come  to  God  without  such  a 
frame  of  soul  as  this,  to  desire  to  please  God  in  all  things  for  the  present,  and  for 
the  time  to  come,  it  is  to  come  as  God's  enemy  ;  and  will  God  regard  His  enemies? 
2.  Religion  especially  is  in  holy  desires.  The  greatest  part  of  Christianity  is  to 
desire  to  be  a  sound  Christian  with  all  the  heart.  Why  are  desires  such  trials  of 
the  truth  of  grace  ?  Because  they  are  the  immediate  issues  of  the  soul.  Desires 
and  thoughts,  and  such  like,  they  are  produced  immediately  from  the  soul,  without 
any  help  of  the  body,  or  without  any  outward  manifestation.  They  show  the 
temper  and  frame  of  the  soul.  Thereupon  God  judgeth  a  man  by  his  desires.  But 
how  is  the  truth  of  these  desires  known  ?  I  will  name  a  few  signs.  1.  If  they  be 
constant  desires  and  not  flashes ;  for  then  they  come  from  a  new  nature.  Nature 
is  strong  and  firm.  Art  is  for  a  turn  to  serve  a  turn.  When  men  personate  a  thing 
they  do  it  not  long.  Creatures  that  are  forced  to  do  so  and  so  they  return  to  their 
own  nature  quickly ;  but  when  a  man  doth  a  thing  naturally,  he  doth  it  constantly. 
So,  constant  desires  argue  a  sanctified  frame  of  soul  and  a  new  creature.  They 
argue  that  the  image  of  God  is  stamped  upon  the  soul.  2.  And  likewise,  if  these 
desires  be  hearty,  strong  desires,  and  not  only  strong,  but  growing  desires — desire 
upon  desire,  deslr'5  fed  with  desire  still,  never  satisfied  till  they  be  satisfied.  Strong 
and  growing  desires  argue  the  truth  of  desires ;  as  indeed  a  child  of  God  hath  never 
grace  enough,  never  faith  enough,  never  love  enough,  or  comfort  enough,  till  he 
come  to  heaven.  They  are  growing  desires  more  and  more.  3.  Again,  true  desires 
they  are  not  only  of  the  favour  of  God,  but  of  graces  for  the  altering  of  our  nature ; 
%a  Nehemiah  here,  he  desires  not  the  favour  of  God  so  much  as  he  desires  to  fear 


<rHAi>.  1.]  NEHEMIAH.  2* 

God's  name.  Now  when  desire  is  of  graces,  it  is  a  holy  desire.  You  have  not  the 
•worst  men  but  would  desire,  with  Balaam,  •'  to  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,"  &c. 
(Num.  xxiii.  10),  that  they  might  enjoy  the  portion  of  God's  people.  But  to  desire 
grace,  that  is  opposite  to  corrupt  nature  as  fire  and  water,  this  is  an  argument  of  a 
holy  principle  of  grace  in  us,  whence  this  desire  springs,  when  we  desire  that  that 
is  a  counter  poison  to  corrupt  nature  that  hath  an  antipathy  to  corruption. 
4.  True  desire  is  carried  to  grace  as  well  as  glory,  and  the  desire  of  heaven  itself. 
A  true  spirit  that  is  touched  with  grace,  with  the  Spirit  of  God,  it  desireth  not 
heaven  itself  so  much  for  the  glory,  and  peace,  and  abundance  of  all  contentments, 
as  it  desires  it  that  it  is  a  place  where  it  shall  be  freed  from  sin,  and  where  the 
heart  shall  be  enlarged  to  love  God,  to  serve  God,  and  to  cleave  to  God  for  ever, 
and  as  it  is  a  condition  wherein  he  shall  have  the  image  and  resemblance  of  Jesus 
Christ  perfectly  upon  his  soul.  5.  True  desires  are  likewise  to  the  means  of 
salvation,  and  to  the  means  of  salvation  as  they  convey  grace,  as  sincere  milk ;  as 
you  have  it,  1  Pet.  ii.  2,  "  As  new-born  babes,  desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the  word." 
Where  a  man  hath  holy  desires  of  any  grace,  and  hath  them  in  truth,  he  will  desire 
those  means  whereby  those  graces  may  most  effectually  be  wrought  in  his  heart. 
Use :  The  comfortable  observation  hence  is  this,  that  weak  Christians  that  find  a 
debility,  and  faintness,  and  feebleness  in  their  performances,  hence  they  may  com- 
fort themselves  by  their  desire  to  fear  God,  and  to  worship  God,  and  to  serve  Him, 
if  their  desires  be  true.  The  reason  why  God  accepts  them  is  partly  because  they 
spring  from  His  own  Spirit.  These  desires  they  are  the  breathings  of  the  Spirit. 
And  because  they  are  pointed  to  heavenward,  to  show  that  a  man  is  turned ;  for  it 
is  put  here  instead  of  turning,  "  Turn  ye  to  Me,  saith  the  Lord  "  (ver.  9) ;  and  he 
answereth  here  instead  of  turning,  "  My  desire  is  to  fear  Thy  name."  "And  prosper, 
I  pray  Thee,  Thy  servant  this  day."  Now  he  comes  to  his  petition,  "  Prosper  I 
pray  Thee,  Thy  servant  this  day."  He  doth  not  capitulate  with  God  for  particular 
matters  much — for  he  knew  he  had  to  deal  with  an  all-wise  God — but  he  commends 
his  petition  in  general.  He  comes  again  with  his  relation  of  "  servant,"  to  teach 
us  alway  when  we  come  to  God  to  look  in  what  relation  we  stand  to  Him,  whether 
we  be  true  servants  or  no.  What  work  we  do  for  Him,  in  what  reference  we  do 
what  we  do  ;  whether  we  do  it  to  please  Him  as  servants  or  no.  In  all  our  services 
we  should  look  to  God ;  for  our  aim  in  our  works  shows  what  they  are,  whether  they 
come  from  servants  or  no.  As  the  stamp  upon  a  token  makes  it,  if  there  be  a  good 
stamp  on  it ;  it  is  not  the  matter  that  makes  it  current.  A  stamp  on  silver  makes 
it  current  as  well  as  gold,  though  the  metal  of  gold  be  better.  So  when  things  are 
done,  because  God  commands  them,  to  please  God,  as  a  service  to  Him,  this  makes 
it  good  that  we  are  servants  indeed,  that  the  relation  is  good.  When  we  go  about 
the  service  of  the  Church  or  country,  or  place  we  live  in,  to  think  I  do  God  service 
here,  and  do  it  as  a  service  to  God,  who  will  be  honoured  and  served  in  our  service 
to  others,  herein  I  am  a  good  servant.  "  Prosper  Thy  servant  this  day.''  What  is 
included  in  this  word  "  prosper  "  ?  It  includes  not  only  success,  which  is  the  main 
upshot  of  aU,  but  all  that  tends  to  good  success.  In  that  he  saith  "  Prosper  Thy 
servant,"  it  includes  these  things.  First  of  all,  that  in  ourselves  there  is  neither 
direction,  nor  wisdom,  nor  ability  enough  for  success.  We  have  not  power  in  our- 
selves to  bring  things  to  a  comfortable  issue.  2.  And  then  again,  to  attribute 
to  God  all,  both  wisdom  and  strength,  and  goodness,  and  all.  Here  is  a  giving  to 
God  the  glory  of  all,  when  he  saith,  "  Prosper  Thy  servant  this  day."  3.  Then  in 
the  third  place,  here  is  a  dependence  upon  God,  not  only  acknowledging  these 
things  to  be  in  God,  but  it  implies  a  dependence  upon  God  for  these :  "  Prosper 
me,  Lord."  I  cannot  prosper  myself.  4.  Again,  in  the  fourth  place,  here  is  a 
recommendation  of  all  by  prayer;  a  recommendation  of  his  inward  dependence 
upon  God  for  all.  Now,  Lord,  "  prosper  Thy  servant."  So  that  when  we  come  to 
God  for  any  prosperity  and  good  success,  let  us  remember  that  we  bring  self-denial, 
and  an  acknowledgment  of  all  excellency  to  be  in  God,  to  guide,  and  direct,  and 
assist,  and  bless  us.  Who  can  see  all  circumstances  that  stand  about  a  business  ? 
Who  can  see  all  circumstances  of  time,  and  place,  and  persons,  that  are  hindrances 
or  furtherances  ?  It  must  be  an  infinite  wisdom  that  must  foresee  them ;  man 
cannot  see  them.  So  that  unless  God  in  a  particular  business  give  success,  who  is 
infinitely  wise  and  powerful  to  remove  all  hindrances,  there  will  be  no  success.  As 
it  is  in  the  frame  of  the  body,  it  stands  upon  many  joints ;  and  if  any  be  out  of 
tune,  the  whole  body  is  sick.  And  as  it  is  in  a  clock,  all  the  wheels  must  be  kept 
clean  and  in  order,  so  it  is  in  the  frame  of  a  business.  There  must  all  the  wheels 
be  set  a-going ;  if  one  be  hindered,  there  is  a  stop  in  all.     It  is  so  with  us  in  [hi 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  l. 

affairs  of  this  world.  When  we  deal  with  kings  and  states,  if  all  the  wheels  be  not 
kept  as  they  should,  there  will  be  no  success  or  prosperity.  Nehemiah  knew  this 
well  enough,  "  Prosper  Thou,  therefore."  He  meant  not  to  be  idle  when  he  said 
this,  "Prosper  Thou,"  for  he  after  joined  his  own  diligence  and  waited.  Use  :  It 
should  teach  us  to  make  this  use  of  it,  when  we  deal  in  any  matter,  to  go  to  God 
to  prosper  it,  and  give  success  and  direction  and  assistance  and  a  blessed  issue. 
Let  us  learn  by  this  a  direction  to  piety  and  holy  walking  with  God ;  In  all  things 
to  pray  to  God  for  a  blessing.  And  to  that  purpose  we  must  be  in  such  a  condition  of 
spirit  as  we  may  desire  God  to  prosper  us  ;  that  is,  we  must  not  be  under  the  guilt  of 
Bin  when  we  come  to  God  to  prosper  us.  And  we  must  be  humble.  God  will  not 
prosper  a  business  till  we  be  humble.  Do  we  think  that  God  will  give  strength  to  an  ill 
business  ?  This  is  to  make  Him  a  factor  for  mischief,  for  the  devil's  work.  Then 
come  with  a  purpose  to  refer  all  to  His  service.  Lord,  if  Thou  wilt  bless  me  in  this 
business,  the  strength  and  encouragement  I  have  by  it,  I  will  refer  it  to  Thy  further 
service.  "  Prosper  now  Thy  servant."  What  is  the  reason  that  God  blasts  and  brings 
to  nothing  many  excellent  endeavours  and  projects?  Men  set  upon  the  business  of 
God,  and  of  their  callings,  in  confidence  of  their  wit  and  pride  of  their  own  parts. 
Men  come  as  gods  to  a  business  as  if  they  had  no  dependence  upon  Him  for 
wisdom,  or  direction,  or  strength.  They  carry  things  in  a  carnal  manner,  in  a 
human  manner,  with  human  spirits.  Therefore  they  never  find  either  success,  or 
not  good  success.  Now  when  we  deal  with  things  in  a  holy  manner,  we  may, 
without  tempting  God,  trust  Him.  "  And  grant  him  mercy  in  the  sight  of  this 
man."  He  comes  more  particularly  to  this  request,  "  Grant  me  mercy  in  the  sight 
of  this  man."  We  see  that,  a  king  is  a  great  organ  or  instrument  to  convey  good 
things  from  God,  the  King  of  kings  to  men.  Therefore  he  prays  that  God  would 
give  him  favour  in  the  sight  of  the  king.  For  a  king  is  the  first  wheel  that  moves 
all  other  wheels,  and  as  it  were  the  sun  of  the  commonwealth,  or  the  first  mover 
that  moves  all  inferior  orbs.  Therefore  in  heavenly  wisdom  he  desires  God  to  give 
him  favour  with  him ;  for  if  he  had  that,  the  king  could  turn  all  the  inferior  orbs 
to  his  pleasure.  And  when  God  means  to  do  good  to  a  Church  or  state,  He  raiseth 
up  "  nursing  fathers  and  nursing  mothers "  (Isa.  xlix.  23).  A  wise  and  holy 
prayer !  He  begins  at  the  head  ;  He  goes  to  the  spring  of  all  good.  Therefore  the 
observation  hence  is  this,  that  when  we  have  anything  to  do  with  great  men,  with 
kings,  &c.,  however,  begin  with  the  King  of  kings,  and  do  all  in  heaven  before  we 
do  it  in  earth ;  for  heaven  makes  the  laws  that  earth  is  governed  by.  Let  earth 
conclude  what  it  will,  there  will  be  conclusions  in  heaven  that  will  overthrow  all 
their  conclusions.  Therefore  in  our  prayers  we  should  begin  with  God.  And  when 
we  have  gotten  what  we  would  in  heaven,  it  is  easy  to  get  in  earth.  You  see  what 
great  good  a  good  man  may  do  in  a  state.  "  The  innocent  man  delivers  the  land," 
as  it  is  in  Job  xxii.  30.  (R.  Sibbes.)  The  prayer  of  Nehemiah : — I.  God  has  His 
SERVANTS  IN  ALL  CONDITIONS  AND  OCCUPATIONS  OF  LIFE.  We  behold  Zcnas  the  lawyer, 
Erastus  the  chamberlain,  Paul  the  tentmaker,  Luke  the  physician,  Zaccheus  the 
publican,  Peter  the  fisherman,  Joseph  the  carpenter,  Amos  the  herdsman,  Daniel 
the  minister  of  state,  Nehemiah  the  cup-bearer — all  standing  in  the  same  relation, 
swayed  by  the  same  influence.  Let  it  teach  us  two  things.  1.  Not  to  condemn 
bodies  and  professions  of  men  indiscriminately.  2.  Let  us  not  make  our  business 
an  excuse  for  ungodliness.  H.  If  we  have  access  to  superiors,  we  should  use  it 
FOR  good.  Let  us  remember  that  we  are  answerable  for  all  our  talents,  and  one  of 
them  is — the  influence  which  in  various  degrees  we  have  over  others.  How  are  we 
using  it  ?  III.  The  best  way  to  succeed  in  ant  enterprise  with  men  is  to  com- 
siEND  THE  matter  TO  GoD.  Our  intercourse  with  God  will  best  prepare  us  for  our 
dealings  with  men.  It  will  repress  every  unhallowed  purpose;  it  will  give  decision 
and  vigour  to  good  resolutions :  it  will  inspire  rectitude  and  dignity  in  action ;  it 
will  enable  us  to  bear  disappointment  or  success.  When  we  have  thus  commended 
a  concern  to  God,  the  mind  is  set  at  liberty,  and  feels  satisfaction  and  composure. 
When  we  have  thus  addressed  ourselves  to  God,  difficulties  vanish.  We  know  that 
if  the  affair  be  injurious,  He  can  easily  hinder  it ;  and  if  it  be  good  for  us,  He  can 
as  easily  promote  it.  "  His  kingdom  ruleth  over  all."  Every  event  is  under  His 
direction,  and  every  character  under  His  control.  Solomon  has  told  us,  and  not 
without  reason,  that  "  the  king's  heart  is  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  as  the  rivers  of 
water:  He  turneth  it  whithersoever  He  will."  Eastern  monarchs  were  absolute :  they 
consulted  nothing  but  their  own  pi.  .sure:  yet  God  had  them  more  under  His 
command  than  the  husbandman  has  a  direction  of  the  water  in  a  r-eadow.  There 
is  a  twofold  dominion  wliich  God  exercises  over  the  mind  of  man.     The  one  is  by 


CHAP.  I.]  NEHEMIAR.  25 

the  agency  of  His  grace.  Thus  He  can  enlighten  the  most  ignorant  understanding, 
and  subdue  the  most  rebellious  will.  We  see  this  exemplified  in  the  conversion  of 
Saul  of  Tarsus,  on  his  way  to  Damascus.  But  there  is  another  empire  which  He 
exercises  over  mankind — it  is  by  the  agency  of  His  providence.  History  is  full  of 
this.  He  can  give  another  heart,  when  He  does  not  give  a  new  one.  Where  He 
does  not  convert  He  can  check.  Jacob  was  convinced  of  the  dominion  and  influence 
of  God  over  the  affairs,  and  even  the  dispositions,  of  men.     IV.  How  Nehemiah 

8PE.\K3    OF    THE    GOVEBNOR    OF    ONE    HUNDRED    AND    TWENTY-SEVEN    PROVINCES.       "  This 

man."  Let  us  not  however  suppose  that  Nehemiah  "  despised  dominion,"  or 
"  spoke  evil  of  dignities."  But  Nehemiah  was  now  before  the  God  of  heaven  and 
earth  ;  and  what  is  the  greatest  monarch  in  the  world  compared  with  Him?  Lesa 
than  nothing  and  vanity.  This  is  the  way  to  reduce  worldly  impressions ;  the 
world  strikes  and  conquers  you  when  it  meets  you  absent  from  God.  Bring  it  into 
His  presence — view  it  there — and  what  is  it  ?  What  are  the  smiles  of  men  to  the 
favour  of  God  ?  V.  Observe  how  this  good  man  characterises  himself  and  his 
BRETHREN.  "  Thy  seivauts  who  desire  to  fear  Thy  name."  Modest,  diffident 
language  best  becomes  us,  especially  before  God.  There  are  many  who  must  derive 
their  satisfaction  from  their  desires,  rather  than  anything  else.  They  cannot  say 
they  do  fear  Him,  or  love  Him,  or  depend  upon  Him — but  they  "  desire  "  to  do  it. 
These  desires  are  proofs  of  something  good  and  pledges  of  something  better.  They 
are  evidences  of  grace  and  forerunners  of  glory.  Desires  are  the  pulse  of  the 
soul,  by  which  we  may  judge  of  our  spiritual  life  and  health.  In  some  res- 
pects they  are  more  decisive  than  actions.  Actions  may  be  counterfeited, 
desires  cannot ;  we  may  be  forced  to  act,  but  not  to  will.  All  the  desires  of 
the  Christian,  in  proportion  to  their  degree,  will  necessarily  excite  him  to  strive, 
to  wrestle,  to  fight,  and  to  use  all  the  means  which  lead  to  the  end  he  has  in 
view.  Desires  are  nothing  without  endeavours,  Balaam,  &c.  (William  Jatj.) 
Now  these  are  Thy  servants,  and  Thy  people,  whom  Thou  hast  redeemed  by  Thy 
great  power, — God's  doings  in  grace  are  as  the  links  of  a  chain : — The  whole  of 
God's  doings  in  grace  are  as  the  links  of  a  chain,  not  lying  apart,  but  united 
together,  and  the  first  through  an  unbroken  series  leading  to  the  last.  Hence 
Nehemiah  finds  a  plea  in  what  the  Lord  has  done  for  His  people,  that  He  will  still 
show  them  mercy,  (W.  Ritchie.)  Pleading  former  favours  : — Plutarch  teUs  us 
that  the  Ehodians  appealed  to  the  Eomans  for  help,  and  one  suggested  that  they 
should  plead  the  good  turns  they  had  done  for  Eome.  This  was  a  plea  difficult  to 
make  strong  enough,  very  liable  to  be  disputed,  and  not  at  all  likely  to  influence  so 
great  a  people  as  the  Eomans,  who  would  not  readily  consider  themselves  to  be 
debtors  to  so  puny  a  state  as  that  of  Ehodes.  The  Ehodians  were,  however,  wiser 
than  their  counsellor,  and  took  up  another  line  of  argument,  which  was  abundantly 
successful.  They  pleaded  the  favours  which,  in  former  times  the  Eomans  had 
bestowed  upon  them,  and  urged  these  as  a  reason  why  a  great  nation  should  not 
cast  off  a  needy  people  for  whom  they  had  already  done  so  much.  Nehemiah  here 
pleads  God's  former  favours  to  His  people.  (Signal.)  For  I  was  the  king's  cup- 
bearer.— The  king's  cup-bearers : — This  is  a  suggestive  text.  There  is  another 
King,  and  He,  too,  speaks  of  a  cup  which  is  His,  and  a  cup  which  we  may  bear,  not 
for  Him,  but  from  Him  to  others.  "  Whosoever  shall  give  to  drink  unto  one  of 
these  little  ones  a  cup  of  water  only,"  &c.    We  are  cup-bearers  of  our  King,  Jesus. 

I.    CuP-BEARERS    OP    THE    GrEAT  KiNG    SHOULD    REMEMBER    WHAT    THE    CUP    CONTAINS. 

The  cup  of  blessing  is  communion  with  Christ.  By  His  Cross  He  has  reconciled  the 
world  to  God,  and  now  He  invites  the  race  to  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good. 
In  the  East  there  are  various  costly  drinks.  Some  were  supposed  to  have  a  healing, 
and  others  a  life-preserving,  element  in  them.  The  world's  salvation  is  in  that  cup 
which  Christ  has  filled  for  the  life  of  the  world.     11.  Cup-bearers  or  the  Kino 

BHOULD   REMEMBER   THE   LOYAL   MANDATE    THEY   HAVE   TO  OBEY.       "  ComO  "  is    the    first 

word  of  Christianity,  Come  to  Christ  for  life,  for  ourselves.  Its  next  word  is 
"  Go,"  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,"  &c.  If  we  do  not  believe  in  the  healing  water 
we  shall  not  give  it.  Have  you  ever  noticed  how  heartily  people  recommend  their 
doctors  ?  During  the  memorable  illness  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  hundreds  of  people 
from  all  parts  of  the  empire  forwarded  their  nostrums  for  the  disease ;  they  felt 
quite  sure  that  if  these  special  remedies  were  tried  the  Prince  would  recover.  Selfish- 
ness probably  lay  at  the  bottom  of  some  of  those  recommendations,  but  in  the  main 
these  people  believed  in  their  prescriptions ;  they  had  tried  them  or  seen  them  tried, 
and  had  rejoiced  in  their  success.  We  must  believe,  then,  before  we  can  give.  And 
then  we  shall  each  do  it  in  oar  own  way.    1.  Quietly,  perhaps,  as  falls  the  dew,  our 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

influence  will  rest  on  others'  hearts.  2.  Suggestively,  perhaps,  by  a  spirit  of 
reverence  and  a  devout  habit  of  daily  walk,  which  tells  of  a  life  hid  with  Christ 
in  God.  3.  Communicatively,  perhaps,  as  when  we  gather  our  classes  in  Sunday 
school,  &c.  4.  Distributively,  perhaps,  by  means  of  the  printed  page.  Every  cup 
that  God  has  placed  in  our  hands — whether  filled  with  wealth  or  knowledge — we 
ought  to  raise  to  the  lips  of  others.  III.  Cup-beareks  of  the  King  should  ee- 
MEMBER  THE  WORK  OF  THE  ENEMIES  OF  GoD,  We  are  not  the  only  cup-bearers  in 
the  world.  Other  visitants  are  here  with  other  cups,  which  seem  as  if  they  ought 
to  hold  sweet  and  satisfying  waters :  pleasure,  beauty,  ambition,  &c.  Some  of 
these  cups  are  filled  with  deadliest  poison.  The  cup  of  knowledge — degrading 
literature,  the  cup  of  companionship,  the  cup  of  pleasure,  are  often  so  many  cups 
of  poison  presented  to  the  young.  IV.  Cdp-bearers  of  the  Kino  should  ke- 
MEMBEB  THAT  IT  IS  A  POST  OF  HONOUR.  Christians  are  the  representatives  of 
Christ.     They  are  doing  what  Christ  would  do  if  He  were  here.     V.  Cup-bearers 

OF     the    EllNO     ANTICIPATE    THE    DAY    OF    DlVINE    REWARD.        Let    US    nOtice 1.     That 

Christ's  rewards  are  ours  now.  2.  That  the  cup-bearer  will  be  rewarded  in  the 
redeemed  history  of  those  to  whom  he  has  borne  the  living  water,  and  who  will 
welcome  him  to  glory.  3.  That  the  cup-bearer  will  be  welcomed  and  rewarded 
also  by  the  King  of  kings  Himself.  (W,  M.  Statham.)  The  king^ s  cup-hearer  : — 
I.  Now,  observe,  this  must  be  by  Divine  appointment.  I  presume  that  this 
absolute  monarch  would  not  have  allowed  any  one  to  have  been  cup-bearer 
to  him  but  the  man  he  approved  of ;  nay,  he  would  give  the  appointment  him- 
self, and  insist  that  it  should  be  so.  No  man  has  a  right  to  assume  the 
Christian  ministry  but  by  royal  appointment.  There  are  thousands  of  impostors  in 
these  days  that  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  never  appointed  to  the  work. 
Now  this  oflice  is  one  in  which  both  Prince  and  people  are  deeply  interested.  I 
presume  that  Nehemiah — and  I  may  turn  to  him  for  illustrations  as  I  go  on — was 
concerned,  in  his  official  capacity,  to  present  the  cup,  not  only  to  the  prince,  but  to 
the  people  who  were  guests  with  the  prince.  I  pass  on,  just  to  notice  the  official 
responsibility  involved  in  this.  A  cup-bearer.  A  very  responsible  position  this. 
And  a  cup-bearer  must  at  his  peril  look  well  to  all  that  is  contained  in  the  cup,  as 
well  as  to  his  promptitude  in  presenting  it.  So  solemn  is  the  responsibility  that 
according  to  the  view  we  have  just  taken  of  the  Lord's  servants,  if  there  be  any  foul 
and  poisonous  ingredient  found  in  the  cup,  the  blood  of  the  injured  person  will  be 
required  at  his  hand.  Then,  if  we  observe  whence  this  cup-bearer  alluded  to  in  the 
text  was  taken,  I  think  we  shall  find  a  striking  correspondence.  He  was  taken 
from  among  the  captives,  by  an  act  of  sovereign  grace.  What  say  you  to  this 
humbling  view  of  the  subject  ?  Are  you  really  aware  that  you  were  captives,  slaves 
and  bondsmen,  in  the  lowest  degradation  to  sin  and  Satan,  when  God  took  posses- 
sion of  you  ?  Now  do  not  talk  about  your  pedigree  any  more.  H.  Now  let  us 
look  at  the  understandino  the  cup-beaeeb  ought  to  have  of  what  the  cup 
contains.  This  is  a  matter  of  vast  importance.  I  shall  guess  after  this  manner — 
that  the  cup-bearer,  in  the  presence  of  a  Persian  monarch,  would  be  required  to 
know  that  the  cup  contained  approved  old  wine,  of  the  purest  and  best  character. 
"  But  how  was  he  to  know  that  ?  "  Why,  by  tasting  it  for  himself.  "  Well,  but 
what  would  be  the  effect  ?  "  Why,  there  would  be  a  very  cheering  effect.  All 
must  come  from  the  King's  own  stores.  We  must  get  it  from  above — from  the 
fulness  treasured  up  in  the  covenant.  Bring  me  the  cup  that  is  full  of  the  atoning 
blood,  pressed  from  the  merits  of  Christ,  acceptable  before  God,  and  that  the  eternal 
cup-bearer  Himself  has  entered  into  the  King's  presence  to  present  before  God. 
III.  Now  let  us  look  at  this  cup-bearer,  as  taught  how  to  enter  the  peesence  ov 
the  Monaech  ;  because  this  is  a  very  essential  part  of  the  business.  He  must  be 
a  living  man.  It  will  not  do  to  bring  an  automaton,  much  less  a  putrid  corpse  ; 
he  must  be  a  living  man,  with  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul,  whether  he  be  intended 
for  a  public  pastor  or  a  more  private  labourer.  Then  as  regards  the  cleanUness. 
Oh,  how  sad  that  there  should  be  persons  pretending  to  be  ministers  of  Jesus 
Christ  whose  lives  are  impure  1  And  oh,  the  importance  of  a  steady  hand  1  If  the 
cup  be  full,  and  the  cup-bearer  have  a  trembling,  tottering  hand,  he  is  likely  to 
create  alarm,  at  least,  as  he  goes  round,  and  to  spill  over  some  of  the  precious 
liquor  he  has  to  dispense.  "  What  do  you  mean  by  this  steady  hand  ?  "  I  mean 
the  steadfast  confidence  of  faith.  A  word  more  respecting  the  cup-bearer's  qualifi- 
cations. He  must  not  go  to  the  king  vauntingly,  "  Please,  your  majesty,  see  what 
choice  wine  I  have  brought  for  you  " — that  would  not  do  at  all.  Now  yon  know 
that  this  must  be  repeated  as  often  as  called  for.     I  presume  that  Nehemiah  waa 


CHAP.  I.]  NEHEMIAH.  27 

called  for,  when  he  was  to  bring  his  majesty  the  cup.  Be  sure  you  are  always 
ready,  that  whenever  you  are  called  for,  you  may  go  in,  whenever  Jehovah-Jesus, 
the  King  of  kings,  summons  you.  Now  this  will  make  the  cup-bearer  very  familiar 
with  his  majesty,  as  well  as  with  his  guests.  If  a  man  were  only  admitted  once  to 
a  large  feast,  like  a  hired  waiter,  and  never  had  anything  to  say  to  the  company 
before  or  after,  he  could  not  be  supposed  to  be  very  familiar  with  them  ;  but  if  he 
is  appointed  day  by  day  to  hand  round  the  same  old  wine  to  the  same  guests,  under 
the  same  orders,  and  in  the  same  position,  as  a  graceful  cup-bearer,  will  not  he 
become  very  familiar  ?  A  word  more.  When  the  soul  has  become  so  familiar 
with  the  monarch,  has  been  admitted  so  frequently  into  the  banqueting-house, 
and  has  partaken  so  freely  of  this  good  old  wine,  his  must  be  an  exalted  station. 
{J.  Irons.)  The  king's  cup-bearer : — It  is  remarkable  that  Nehemiah  performed 
the  great  work  of  his  life  without  receiving  any  supernatural  communication 
from  heaven.  Other  eminent  servants  of  God,  in  their  labour  for  the  Church 
of  Israel,  enjoyed  special  direction  and  encouragement  from  above.  Moses 
heard  the  voice  of  God  at  the  bush,  and  saw  His  wonders  at  the  Ked  Sea. 
Elijah  met  the  Lord  in  Horeb,  and  received  words  of  comfort  at  the  brook 
Gherith.  Daniel  beheld  visions  of  God  in  Babylon,  and  enjoyed  the  visit 
of  an  angel  in  the  hour  of  his  earnest  prayer.  We  have  not  now  inspired 
prophets  among  us,  to  direct  us  in  the  trying  situations  of  life.  We  are 
appointed  to  learn  duty  from  studying  the  Word  of  God,  and  considering  the 
operation  of  His  hands.  In  this  dependence  on  the  ordinary  means  of  grace  for 
counsel  and  help  in  our  way  of  life,  we  have  Nehemiah  for  an  example  of  fidelity, 
of  patience,  and  of  wisdom.  I.  His  service.  He  was  "  the  king's  cup-bearer." 
The  monarch  whom  Nehemiah  served  in  this  capacity  is  generally  supposed  to 
have  been  Artaxerxes  Longimanus.  Artaxeries  reigned  on  the  throne  of  Persia 
forty-one  years,  from  466-425  B.C.  This  king  had  conceded  important  favours  to 
the  Jewish  people  ;  and  now  in  the  twentieth  year  of  his  reign,  Nehemiah  filled  the 
high  office  of  the  king's  cup-bearer.  It  was  a  situation  this  of  distinguished 
honour  and  emolument  in  the  Persian  court.  It  belonged  to  the  person  holding  it, 
not  only  to  bear  the  royal  cup  to  the  sovereign  on  high  festivals,  but  also  to  intro- 
duce all  persons  who  had  business  to  transact  into  the  king's  presence.  It  is 
a  remarkable  circumstance  that  one  of  the  captive  people  of  Judah  should  be 
invested  with  this  high  dignity  in  the  kingdom  of  their  conquerors.  We  may 
regard  it  as  an  illustration  of  God's  faithfulness  to  His  promise,  and  as  a  testimony 
to  the  power  of  religion  in  commending  its  possessors  to  confidence.  Then,  while 
the  faithful  providence  of  God  is  here  illustrated,  the  religion  of  these  Israelites  is 
also  signally  attested.  Their  piety  must  have  been  instrumental  in  elevating  them 
to  situations  of  such  responsibility  and  trust.  And  what  is  this  but  an  exemplifi- 
cation of  the  Scripture,  "  Godliness  is  profitable  for  all  things,  having  a  promise  of 
the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come."  True  religion  fits  its  possessors 
for  better  performing  all  the  duties  of  social  life  ;  and  men  find  it  valuable  in  the 
integrity  it  inspires.  Thus  was  Nehemiah  elevated  to  high  office  in  the  Persian 
court ;  yet  to  a  man  of  his  lofty  principle  it  was  a  place  of  peculiar  trial.  He  was 
called  to  serve  his  royal  master  in  that  which  is  perilous  to  the  character  of  princes, 
and  to  the  comfort  of  all  about  them.  His  office  was  to  bring  wine  before  him,  and 
to  give  it  to  the  king.  And  who  can  tell  what  power  for  good  the  pious  Israelite 
thus  exerted  over  the  prince  whom  he  served,  as  well  as  in  the  court  where  he 
moved  as  a  witness  for  God.  II.  His  sadness.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  there  is 
any  religion  in  morose  or  sombre  looks.  It  is  true,  religion  interdicts  the  frivolous 
mirth  which  the  world  calls  pleasure,  and  it  inspires  its  possessors  with  a  prevailing 
seriousness  of  mind.  But  so  far  from  forbidding  any  true  enjoyment,  piety  towards 
God  opens  the  weUspring  of  all  satisfying  felicity.  Is  not  this  manifest  from  the 
blessings  it  imparts  to  the  soul  ?  While  Nehemiah,  therefore,  here  makes  mention 
of  his  sorrow  of  spirit,  he  is  careful  to  note  that  he  had  not  "  been  beforetime  sad 
in  the  king's  presence."  He  owed  it  in  courtesy  to  his  sovereign,  and  he  owed  it 
also  in  justice  to  his  religion,  to  stand  in  his  place  with  a  cheerful  countenance. 
But  sorrows  at  time  press  on  the  spirit  which  cannot  be  concealed ;  and  seasons, 
too,  occur  when  they  should  be  known  to  others.  Still  there  was  peril  in  that  look 
of  anguish,  for  no  token  of  grief  was  allowed  in  the  royal  presence.  Several  reasons 
may  be  assigned  for  this  exclusion  of  all  signs  of  mourning  from  the  royal  presence. 
It  is  flattering  to  the  vanity  of  kings  to  have  all  looking  and  acting  before  them  as 
if  the  light  of  their  countenance  chased  away  sorrow ;  and  it  may  therefore  be 
accounted  an  affront  to  contravene  this  fiction  of  their  power.    Hence  the  proverb, 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 


"  In  the  light  of  the  king's  countenance  is  life,  and  his  favour  is  as  a  cloud  of  the 
latter  rain."  Then,  again,  princes  and  nobles  of  earth  are  loath  to  look  on  any 
memento  of  the  evanescence  of  their  grandeur.  They  are  fain  to  shut  out  of  view 
sights  of  sorrow  that  might  send  an  arrow  to  their  conscience,  or  constrain  them  to 
think  of  their  dying  hour.  And  surely  this  is  the  bitterest  drop  in  the  cup  of  the 
exile  and  the  bondman,  to  demand  from  him  looks  of  cheerfulness  while  his  very 
heart  is  wrung  with  anguish.  How  different  it  is  with  our  Saviour  King  I  Eia 
heart  is  the  seat  of  compassion  for  the  afflicted,  the  wellspring  of  sympathy  for  the 
sorrowful  in  their  distress.  III.  His  reasons  fob  bobrow.  Men  are  sometimes 
sad  when  they  cannot  give  an  adequate  reason  for  their  sorrow.  They  perhaps 
brood  over  imaginary  woes,  and  sink  into  melancholy  which  has  no  assignable 
cause ;  or  they  fall  into  distress,  the  reason  of  which  they  dare  not  allow  even 
to  their  own  hearts.  It  may  be  disappointed  pride,  or  vexation  at  the  success 
of  others,  that  occasions  their  griefs,  and  such  reasons  will  not  bear  to  be  expressed 
as  the  cause  of  a  sorrowful  countenance.  But  the  sadness  of  Nehemiah  was  a  look 
of  sublime  sorrow,  whose  expression  was  an  honour  to  his  heart.  Yet  we  mark  his 
self-possession  and  wisdom  in  that  trying  moment.  There  is  with  him  no  con- 
fusion— no  undue  excitement ;  he  quails  not,  nor  speaks  with  stammering  tongue. 
He  addresses  the  king  with  earnest  deference,  and  yet  with  manly  dignity.  Having 
thus  conciliated  the  king's  regard,  Nehemiah  frames  his  plea  for  sorrow  with  con- 
summate skill  and  delicacy.  "  Why  should  not  my  countenance  be  sad,  when  the 
city,  the  place  of  my  fathers'  sepulchres,  lieth  waste,  and  the  gates  thereof  are 
consumed  with  fire  ?  "  This  is  powerful  and  effective  pleading.  He  speaks  not  of 
Jerusalem  as  the  city  of  the  worship  of  his  God,  though  this  view  of  it  rendered  it 
dearest  to  his  heart,  and  awakened  his  deepest  sorrow  over  its  desolation.  The 
mention  of  it,  however,  in  this  relation,  would  either  not  have  affected  a 
heathen  prince  at  all,  or  it  might  have  aroused  his  anger  to  find  the  temple  of  God 
so  praised  above  the  altars  of  his  own  idols.  Neither  does  Nehemiah  speak  of 
Jerusalem  as  the  ancient  metropolis  of  a  great  nation,  the  capital  of  a  long  line  of 
illustrious  kings,  though  the  memory  of  its  past  greatness  made  his  bosom  swell 
with  grief  at  its  overthrow,  and  inspired  his  soul  with  unquenchable  desire  for  its 
restoration.  Any  reference,  however,  to  the  history  of  the  fame  and  power  of  the  city 
of  God  might  have  inflamed  the  jealousy  of  the  Persian  king,  and  fixed  his  reso- 
lution to  leave  it  in  its  present  ruin.  But  the  human  heart  naturally  softens  into 
tenderness  at  the  graves  of  the  dead,  and  here  the  appeal  is  made  to  the  place 
of  the  sepulchres  of  the  departed  ancestors  of  the  exile.  In  these  touching  and 
powerful  words  of  Nehemiah  we  remark  the  almighty  aid  God  gives  His  servants 
in  pleading  for,  and  bearing  witness  to,  His  cause.  The  man  of  God  here  stood 
up  before  the  Persian  monarch  a  solitary  witness  for  Divine  truth  ;  and  the  welfare 
of  Judah  for  ages  to  come  seemed  to  depend  on  the  manner  he  would  testify  for  the 
Lord.  But  the  great  Counsellor  gives  him  a  mouth  and  wisdom  in  this  trying 
hour,  that  honour  his  fidelity,  and  crown  his  petition  with  success.  It  has  been  so 
with  all  faithful  witnesses  for  God  in  every  age.  When  Luther,  at  the  Diet  of 
Worms,  was  arraigned  before  the  Papal  power,  and  called  to  retract  the  truth 
of  the  gospel,  it  appeared  as  if  the  whole  cause  of  the  Keformation  was  suspended 
on  his  utterance  of  "  Yes  "  or  "  No."  But  there,  too,  the  Lord  stood  by  him,  and 
enabled  him  to  hold  fast  the  profession  of  the  faith  without  wavering.  So,  when 
our  own  Knox  was  required  to  preach  before  the  lords  of  the  Congregation,  amid 
the  wavering  zeal  of  some,  and  the  warpinp;  policy  of  others,  the  very  existence  of 
pure  religion  in  Scotland  appeared  to  depend  on  the  courageous  faithfulness  with 
which  he  should  preach  the  Word.     IV.  Ht;^  bequest  io  this  kino.    V.  Hia 

PBEPABAXIOM  X'OB  DEPARIDBS.      {W.  RitcMe.) 


CHAPTER  n. 

Verb.  1-8.  And  It  came  to  pass  in  the  month  Nlzan. — Divine  interposition : — 
Was  OPPORTUNE.  1.  That  God's  plans  are  worked  out  with  the  utmost  precision. 
That  God  often  interferes  on  His  people's  behalf  when  they  least  expect  it. 
That  God  generally  interferes  on  His  people's  behalf  in  their  most  urgent 
extremity.    II.  EEguiKED  euuan  co-opebation.    HI.  Was  accompanuo)  by  pbovi- 


8 


<SHAP.  n.]  NEHEMIAH.  29 

DENTiAL  COINCIDENCES.  1.  Nehemiah  was  unusually  sad.  2.  The  king  was 
unusually  friendly.  3.  The  queen  also  was  present.  {Homiletic  Commentary.) 
A  true  patriot : — That  is  only  a  small  part  of  the  gospel  which  leads  a  man  to  ask, 
"What  must  I  do  to  be  saved?  "  The  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God  goes  forth 
■with  us  interested  in  everything  that  concerns  us  as  men — at  home,  in  business,  in 
town,  in  country,  in  all  national  affairs,  in  the  whole  world.  A  Christian  may 
thoughtlessly  throw  himself  into  political  exitement  with  no  other  motive  than  that 
of  party  feeling ;  but  because  he  is  a  Christian  he  will  be  glad  to  let  the  light  of 
■God  shine  in  upon  his  aims  and  motives,  and  will  be  glad  to  see  his  duty  in  the 
■quietness  and  sacredness  of  this  hour.  The  Bible,  which  gives  us  examples  of  men 
in  every  position  where  duty  leads,  has  given  us  amongst  its  most  brilliant  and 
noble  characters  this  of  the  statesman.  K  any  should  think  such  a  position 
inseparable  from  ambitious  craft  and  party  ends,  let  them  note  this  fact.  Nehemiah 
is  living  at  the  court  of  the  king,  occupying  a  position  of  high  rank,  of  much 
influence,  of  great  trust.  If  the  chief  thing  in  life  is  to  take  care  of  one's  own  ease 
and  luxury,  and  not  to  trouble  much  about  the  wants  and  sorrows  of  other  people, 
then  here  is  a  man  who  has  aU  that  heart  can  wish.  There  are  men,  thousands  of 
them,  who  have  no  thought  or  purpose  in  life  beyond  themselves.  Surely  that  is  to 
degrade  our  manhood.  But  what  of  any  man  who  should  call  himself  a  Christian 
and  yet  should  live  all  taken  up  in  himself  as  if  nothing  were  worth  a  thought  but 
how  he  may  be  as  happy  as  possible  on  earth — and  then  happier  stiU  in  another  world  ? 
Now  to  the  court  where  Nehemiah  dwells  come  certain  Jews  from  Jerusalem,  and  he 
goes  forth  to  inquire  about  the  state  of  his  countrymen  and  the  beloved  city.  As  a 
man,  as  a  brother,  as  a  servant  of  the  Living  God,  he  is  bound  to  feel  the  deepest 
concern  in  the  welfare  of  his  nation.  It  is  easy  enough  to  think  of  what  Nehemiah 
might  have  said,  if  he  had  been  easy-going  and  selfish,  "  I  really  am  sorry,  very 
sorry — but  I  do  not  see  that  I  can  do  anything,  you  know.  It  is  as  much  as  I  can 
do  to  look  after  my  own  duties  here  without  troubling  myself  about  the  affairs  of 
the  nation."  There  are  some  good  people  who  talk  so  to-day  and  think  it  sounds 
pious.  He  might  have  given  them  a  subscription,  say  of  a  guinea.  And  then  he 
could  have  turned  into  the  palace  thankful  not  to  be  mixed  up  in  these  worldly 
matters.  Or  he  might  have  sipped  his  wine  out  of  a  golden  goblet  and  thought 
•what  a  pity  it  was  that  everybody  could  not  be  as  comfortable  as  he  was.  Well,  if 
he  had,  you  may  be  sure  that  neither  this  Book  of  God  nor  any  other  would  have 
found  a  place  for  his  name.  Or  he  might  have  pleaded  that  he  was  in  a  very 
delicate  and  responsible  position,  holding  office  under  the  king,  and  that  it  would 
never  do  for  him  to  get  mixed  up  in  these  matters.  Those  good  people  who  separate 
themselves  from  the  duties  of  citizenship  can  find  no  example  in  the  Scriptures. 
Of  aU  false  notions  about  regenerating  the  world,  the  most  utterly  false,  as  well  aa 
the  laziest,  is  to  think  that  this  is  the  victory  which  overcometh  the  world  to  run 
away  from  it.  This  Book  does  not  teach  that  the  world  is  the  devil's,  and  the  less 
we  can  have  to  do  with  it  the  better.  No,  indeed  I  "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's  and 
the  fulness  thereof. "  The  men  of  the  Bible  are  not  monks  and  recluses ;  but  they 
are  in  the  very  midst  of  the  world  and  busied  with  its  affairs.  Its  prophets  and 
messengers  are  men  whose  whole  life  has  to  do  with  the  councUs  of  kings,  with  the 
ways  of  cities  and  courts.  Surely  it  is  impossible  to  think  of  the  religion  of  Jesus 
Christ  as  anything  but  a  profound  and  eager  interest  in  the  welfare  of  our  fellow- 
men — of  their  bodies  as  well  as  their  souls ;  of  their  work  as  well  as  their  worship ; 
of  their  homes  on  earth  as  well  as  their  getting  to  heaven.  Nor  have  any  the  right 
to  hold  themselves  aloof  from  politics  because  it  is  mixed  up  with  party  strife.  We 
deplore  and  condemn  the  bitterness  of  party  politics — but  is  there  not  a  great  deal 
of  nonsense  talked  about  party  politics?  How  are  you  going  ever  to  have  politics  at 
all  without  party  politics?  If  you  want  abuses  overthrown,  and  iniquities  set  right, 
and  the  privileges  of  the  few  shared  by  the  many,  and  abominations  like  the  opium 
trade  swept  away,  and  the  great  curses  of  drink  and  lust  and  gambling  cast  out,  are 
yfe  to  fold  our  hands  because  we  are  Christians,  and  let  the  devil  have  his  own  way 
because  these  things  involve  strife !  Of  course  they  do,  and  always  will.  We  must 
«xpect  opposition,  excitement,  abuse.  The  blessed  Lord  Jesus  accepted  and  dis- 
charged the  duties  of  citizenship.  Together  with  His  holiness.  His  meekness,  His 
majesty,  there  is  another  grace  and  virtue — there  is  in  Him  a  perfect  patriotism. 
*'  0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  which  killest  the  prophets  and  stonest  them  that  are 
sent  unto  thee,  how  often  would  I  have  gathered  thy  children  together  as  a  hen 
doth  gather  her  brood  under  her  wings,  and  ye  would  not !  Behold  your  house  is 
left  unto  you  desolate."    And  this  example,  subhme  it  is,  is  followed  closely  by  the 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

apostle  Paul,  whose  passionate  love  to  his  countrymen  prompts  that  daring  utter- 
ance (Eom.  ix.  1).  And  now  to  turn  to  ourselves.  What  think  you  ?  Can  we  dare- 
to  call  ourselves  by  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  and  yet  be  indifferent  to  the  needs,  the 
sorrows,  the  wants,  the  burdens  of  our  country  ?  Lastly,  see  how  this  brave  man 
served  his  country.  Nehemiah  sees  that  his  power  to  help  his  country  is  not  mostly 
in  his  rank,  nor  in  his  influence  with  royalty  ;  it  is  in  his  power  to  pray.  This  is 
the  great  truth  we  want  to  lay  hold  of.  The  greatest  power  to  bless  this  land  is  in 
our  power  to  pray  for  it.  Here  all  are  on  a  level.  Women  as  well  as  men.  We 
need  not  wait  for  Parliament  in  this  matter.  Women's  rights  are  as  ours  at  the 
throne  of  the  heavenly  grace.  Beginning  thus  in  prayer  right  speedily  a  glorious 
reformation  is  wrought  in  the  face  of  plotting  foes.  In  spite  of  the  poverty  and 
fewness  of  the  people  the  city  is  rebuilt.  So  shall  the  city  of  God  once  more  be  set 
up  in  the  midst  of  men,  if  every  Christian  man  and  woman  will  take  in  upon  their 
heart  the  wants,  the  woes,  the  wrongs,  the  sorrows  of  our  land,  and  will  plead  with 
God  to  send  us  a  parliament  that  shall  seek  first  in  all  things  His  kingdom  and  its 
righteousness.  {M.  G.  Pearse.)  Religious  patriotism  exemplified  in  the  history  of 
Nehemiah : — The  patriotism  of  Nehemiah  was  based  on  religion ;  and  hence  the 
interest  which  he  discovered  in  his  far  distant  but  afflicted  countrymen,  and  the- 
sacrifices  which  he  made  for  their  welfare.  The  love  of  country,  because  it  is  the 
country  of  our  birth,  and  of  countrymen,  is  no  narrow-minded  bigotry,  as  some- 
shallow  infidels  in  their  pretended  love  of  universal  mankind  have  imagined.  It  is 
a  principle  of  human  nature  implanted  in  our  hearts  for  the  wisest  purposes. 
There  is  a  patriotism  which  is  quite  selfish  in  its  nature.  Their  own  aggrandise- 
ment, or  that  of  their  friends  and  partisans,  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  their 
patriotism.  True  patriotism,  like  every  other  great  virtue,  must  be  founded  in  true 
religion.  Had  not  Nehemiah  been  a  pious  man,  and  loved  the  God  of  his  fathers' 
with  all  his  heart,  and  loved  his  countrymen  because  they  bore  the  image  of  God, 
he  never  would  have  relinquished  his  high  advantages  in  the  palace  of  Artaxerxes, 
and  sacrificed  so  largely  for  their  benefit.  The  true  way  to  love  man  is  to  begin  by 
loving  God.  On  hearing  of  the  affliction  of  his  countrymen,  who  he  might  have 
expected  by  this  time  would  have  been  in  prosperous  circumstances,  Nehemiah 
betakes  himself  to  prayer.  All  this  shows  Nehemiah's  acquaintance  with  his  Bible, 
and  also  the  warmth  of  his  piety.  We  might  have  expected  that  living  at  a 
heathen  court,  remote  from  the  means  of  grace,  with  few  to  strengthen  or 
encourage  him,  he,  though  a  good  man,  would  have  discovered  in  his  piety  the 
disadvantage  of  the  circumstances  in  which  he  had  been  placed.  But  no — God  can 
and  often  does  compensate  in  richer  effusions  of  His  grace,  for  an  adverse  outward 
situation.  And  here  let  us  mark  the  course  which  he  pursued  in  seeking  to  relieve 
and  restore  his  afflicted  countrymen.  He  did  not  say,  as  many  would  have  done, 
in  a  proud,  vaunting  spirit,  "  I  am  the  king's  cup-bearer.  Backed  by  his 
authority,  and  armed  besides  with  wealth  and  power,  I  will  soon  reduce  Jerusalem 
and  its  people  to  a  right  condition ;  I  will  soon  quell  all  opposition,  rebuild  the 
wall,  and  set  up  the  gates,  and  make  the  city  glorious  as  of  old."  This  had  been 
the  spirit  of  man  flushed  with  the  pride  of  power ;  but  he  had  been  taught  of  God, 
and  so  begins  with  humility  and  prayer.  Let  us,  and  let  all,  follow  his  example. 
All  are  occasionally  in  the  providence  of  God  required  to  discharge  great  duties. 
Important  undertakings,  involving  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  others,  ever 
and  anon  call  for  our  services.  How  should  we  engage  in  them  ?  In  a  spirit  of 
pride  and  self-confidence  ?  No.  But  in  a  spirit  of  prayer  and  penitence.  We  are 
apt  to  despair  of  an  undertaking  when  it  is  suspended  on  the  will  of  man,  and  he 
is  high  above  us,  and  we  have  ground  to  apprehend  his  hostility.  Let  this  encourage 
U8  to  be  much  in  prayer  for  a  good  cause,  even  where  it  seems  to  hang  upon  the 
will  of  man,  and  that  will  appear  hopelessly  opposed.  Nehemiah  having  thus  pre- 
pared himself  by  prayer,  is  not  slow  in  setting  out  in  his  work.  Here  we  may 
notice  the  prudence  and  piety  of  this  excellent  Jew.  He  showed  prudence  in 
addressing  a  motive  to  the  mind  of  the  king  for  his  journey,  which  the  monarch 
could  understand  and  appreciate.  He  did  not  ask  leave  to  go  to  Jerusalem  for 
the  sake  of  his  religion,  but  for  the  sake  of  his  fathers'  sepulchres.  This  was  an 
argument  to  which  even  a  heathen  would  defer.  With  regard,  again,  to  his  piety,  he 
did  not  only  pray  to  God  for  counsel  before  making  his  request,  but  he  strengthened 
and  emboldened  himself  by  prayer  at  the  very  time  he  stood  in  the  presence  of 
Artaxerxes.  And  then,  after  he  had  been  successful  in  the  petition,  he  did  not  refer 
the  success  to  his  own  wisdom,  or  to  his  services  as  a  faithful  servant,  but  to  the 
good  hand  of  God  upon  him.    He  arrogated  nothing  to  himself ;  he  ascribed  aU  to- 


CHAP.  II.]  NEHEMIAH.  31 

God.  How  much  piety  is  here,  and  how  beautiful  is  the  union  between  piety  and 
prudence  1  Considering  the  difificulties  with  which  Christians  have  to  struggle,  well 
may  the  Saviour  exhort  His  followers  to  be  wise  as  serpents,  at  the  same  time  that 
they  are  harmless  as  doves.  It  is  worthy  of  notice,  that  deeply  prayerful  and 
dependent  on  God  as  Nehemiah  was,  he  was  not  unmindful  of  the  duty  of  using  all 
legitimate  means  to  secure  the  important  object  which  he  had  in  view.  Prayer 
rightly  understood  does  not  destroy  the  use  of  means ;  it  only  strengthens  and 
regulates  its  application.  Prayer  without  means,  and  means  without  prayer,  are 
equally  presumptuous.  Duty  lies  in  employing  both,  but  keeping  both  in  their  right 
place.  This  excellent  man  now  set  out  on  his  journey,  received  the  aid  of  the 
heathen  governors  upon  the  way,  and  soon  reached  Jerusalem  in  safety.  With  his 
usual  prudence  he  did  not,  in  the  first  instance,  inform  any  one — priests,  nobles,  or 
rulers — what  his  intentions  were.  He  wished  to  see  the  city  with  his  own  eyes,  and 
draw  his  own  conclusions,  before  acquainting  them  with  the  object  of  his  mission. 
This  enabled  him  to  speak  from  personal  observation,  and  so  to  speak  with  greater 
effect.  (i7.  G.  Lorimer.)  WTij  is  thy  countenance  sad  7 — Royal  dislike  of  the 
sight  of  suffering : — A  late  empress  of  Eussia  enacted  a  severe  penalty,  if  any 
funeral  procession  should  pass  within  sight  of  her  palace.  A  princess  of  France,  on 
her  way  to  the  capital,  once  ordered  all  beggars  and  persons  suffering  under  disease 
to  be  removed  from  the  line  of  her  journey  that  she  might  not  behold  them.  This 
Persian  monarch  notes  signs  of  grief  on  his  faithful  servant  with  signs  of  dis- 
pleasure. How  different  it  is  with  our  Saviour  King  1  His  heart  is  the  seat  of 
compassion  for  the  afflicted.  {W.  Ritchie.)  So  I  prayed  to  the  God  of  heaven. — 
Effective  ejaculatory  prayer  the  outcome  of  the  habit  of  prayer  : — It  is  he  that  culti- 
vates the  habit  of  prayer  that  will  seize  the  fitting  opportunity  for  such  ejaculations. 
Some  think  because  they  may  pray  in  any  place  and  at  all  times  that  therefore 
seasons  of  prayer  may  be  neglected  with  impunity ;  but  only  he  who  delights  in 
communion  with  God,  and  does  not  omit  set  times  for  such  communion,  finds  that 
when  the  emergency  arises,  and  but  a  moment  is  given,  he  can  pray  as  truly  and 
with  as  much  calmness  as  in  his  own  closet.  (W.  P.  Lockhart.)  Ejaculatory 
prayer: — I.  The  nature  of  ejaculatokt  pbaxer.  It  differs  from  other  kinds  of 
prayer,  in  that — 1.  It  is  dependent  upon  no  place.  Prayer  is  founded  upon  a  full 
conviction  of  the  natural  perfection  of  God ;  His  omnipresence,  omniscience,  and 
omnipotence.  On  the  conviction  that  the  object  of  prayer  is  everywhere  present, 
and  that  we  may  in  every  place  make  known  our  request.  Artisan,  merchant, 
physician  can  pray  wherever  they  may  be.  2.  It  is  dependent  on  no  particular 
time.  3.  It  is  dependent  on  no  particular  occasion.  No  need  to  wait  for  Sabbath 
or  hour  of  public  worship.  II.  Examples  of  ejacdlatory  prater.  Abraham's 
servant  (Gen.  xxiv.  12) ;  Samson  (Judg.  xvi.  28) ;  Stephen  (Acts  vii.  69,  60) ; 
Christ  on  various  occasions.  III.  Necessary  occasions  for  ejaculatory  prayer. 
1.  When  suddenly  called  to  important  and  difficult  duties.  2.  The  Sabbath  day 
and  the  assembly  of  the  faithful.  If  hearers  were  more  engaged  in  ejaculatory 
prayer,  ministers  would  be  more  successful  preachers.  3.  The  hour  of  temptation. 
4.  The  hour  of  sickness.  IV.  The  advantages  of  ejaculatory  prayer.  1.  It  main- 
tains an  habitual  sense  of  our  dependence  upon  God.  2.  It  preserves  our  minds  in  a 
proper  tone  for  the  various  exercises  of  devotion.  3.  It  is  a  powerful  preventive 
against  sin.  4.  It  makes  us  bold  to  contend  with  enemies  or  difficulties.  5.  It 
quickens  our  zeal  and  activity  in  the  cause  of  God.  (J.  A.  James.)  Spiritual 
recollectedness  : — This  is  a  remarkable  illustration  of  religious  presence  of  mind. 

I.  The  outcome  of  a  consecrated  lifb.     H.  The  result  of  long  habit.    HI,  A 

MARK    of    SELF-DISTRUSTINO    HXJMILITY.        IV.    A    SOURCE    OF    INCALCULABLE    BLESSING. 

(Homiletic  Commentary.)        Ejaculatory  prayer : — It  was — I.  Suddenly  required. 

II.  Silently  offered.  III.  Suitably  addressed.  IV.  Very  brief.  V.  Completely 
SUCCESSFUL.  (Ibid.)  Ejaculatory  prayer: — Nehemiah  had  made  inquiry  as  to 
the  state  of  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  tidings  he  heard  caused  him  bitter 
grief.  "  Why  should  not  my  countenance  be  sad,"  he  said,  "  when  the  city,  the 
place  of  my  fathers'  sepulchres,  lieth  waste,  and  the  gates  thereof  are  consumed  with 
fire  ?  "  He  could  not  endure  that  it  should  be  a  mere  ruinous  heap.  Laying  the 
matter  to  heart,  he  did  not  begin  to  speak  to  other  people  about  what  they  would  do, 
nor  did  he  draw  up  a  wonderful  scheme  about  what  might  be  done  if  so  many 
thousand  people  joined  in  the  enterprise ;  but  it  occurred  to  him  that  he  would  do  some- 
thing himself.  This  is  just  the  way  that  practical  men  start  a  matter.  The  un- 
practical will  plan,  arrange,  and  speculate  about  what  may  be  done,  but  the  genuine, 
thorough-going  lover  of  Zion  puts  this  question  to  himself — "  What  can  you  do  ?  " 


S2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Coming  so  far,  he  resolved  to  set  apart  a  time  for  prayer.  He  never  had  it  off  his 
mind  for  nearly  four  months.  When  he  slept  he  dreamed  about  Jerusalem.  When 
he  woke,  the  first  thought  was  "  Poor  Jerusalem  !  "  The  man  of  one  thing,  you 
know,  is  a  terrible  man  ;  and  when  one  single  passion  has  absorbed  the  whole  of 
his  manhood  something  will  be  sure  to  come  of  it.  Before  long  Nehemiah  had 
an  opportunity.  Men  of  God,  if  you  want  to  serve  God  and  cannot  find  the  pro 
pitious  occasion,  wait  awhile  in  prayer  and  your  opportunity  will  break  on  your 
path  like  a  sunbeam.  There  was  never  a  true  and  valiant  heart  that  failed  to  find 
a  fitting  sphere  somewhere  or  other  in  His  service.  That  opportunity  came,  it  is 
true,  in  a  way  which  he  could  not  have  expected.  It  came  through  his  own  sadness 
of  heart.  This  matter  preyed  upon  his  mind  till  he  began  to  look  exceedingly 
unhappy.  But  you  see  when  the  opportunity  did  come  there  was  trouble  with  it, 
for  he  says,  "  I  was  very  sore  afraid."  You  want  to  serve  God,  young  man ;  you 
want  to  be  at  work.  Perhaps  you  do  not  know  what  that  work  involves.  It  is  not 
all  pleasure.  Thus  have  we  traced  Nehemiah  up  to  the  particular  point  where  our 
text  concerns  him.  I.  The  fact  that  Nehemiah  pbayed  challenges  attention. 
He  had  been  asked  a  question  by  his  sovereign.  The  proper  thing  you  would 
suppose  was  to  answer  it.  Not  so.  Before  he  answered  he  prayed  to  the  God  of 
heaven.  I  do  not  suppose  the  king  noticed  the  pause.  Probably  the  interval  was 
not  long  enough  to  be  noticed,  but  it  was  long  enough  for  God  to  notice  it.  We  are 
the  more  astonished  at  his  praying,  because  he  was  so  evidently  perturbed  in  mind. 
When  you  are  fluttered  and  put  out  you  may  forget  to  pray.  Do  you  not,  some  of 
you,  account  it  a  valid  excuse  for  omitting  your  ordinary  devotion  ?  At  least,  if 
any  one  had  said  to  you,  "  You  did  not  pray  when  you  were  about  that  business," 
you  would  have  replied,  "  How  could  I  ?  "  So  habitually  was  he  in  communion  with 
God  that  as  soon  as  he  found  himself  in  a  dilemma  he  flew  away  to  God,  just  as 
the  dove  would  fly  to  hide  herself  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock.  1.  His  prayer  was  the 
more  remarkable  on  this  occasion,  because  he  must  have  felt  very  eager  about  his 
object.  The  king  asks  him  what  it  is  he  wants,  and  his  whole  heart  is  set  upon 
building  up  Jerusalem.  Are  not  you  surprised  that  he  did  not  at  once  say,  "  0 
king,  live  for  ever.  I  long  to  build  up  Jerusalem's  walls.  Give  me  all  the  help 
thou  canst"?  But  no,  eager  as  he  was  to  pounce  upon  the  desired  object,  he 
withdraws  his  hand  until  it  is  said,  "  So  I  prayed  to  the  God  of  heaven."  I  would 
that  every  Christian's  heart  might  have  just  that  holy  caution  that  did  not  permit 
him  to  make  such  haste  as  to  find  ill-speed.  2.  It  is  all  the  more  surprising  that 
he  should  have  deliberately  prayed  just  then,  because  he  had  been  already  praying 
for  the  past  three  or  four  months  concerning  the  selfsame  matter.  Some  of  us 
would  have  said,  "  That  is  the  thing  I  have  been  praying  for  ;  now  all  I  have  got  to 
do  is  to  take  it  and  use  it.  Why  pray  any  more  ?  "  But  no,  you  will  always  find 
that  the  man  who  has  prayed  much  is  the  man  to  pray  more.  If  you  are  familiar 
•with  the  mercy-seat  you  will  constantly  visit  it.  3.  One  thing  more  is  worth 
recollecting,  namely,  that  he  was  in  a  king's  palace,  and  in  the  palace  of  a  heathen 
king,  too  ;  and  he  was  in  the  very  act  of  handing  up  to  the  king  the  goblet  of  wine. 
But  this  devout  Israelite,  at  such  a  time  and  in  such  a  place,  when  he  stands  at  the 
king's  foot  to  hold  up  to  him  the  golden  goblet,  refrains  from  answering  the  king's 
question  until  first  he  has  prayed  to  the  God  of  heaven.  II.  The  manner  of  lEOfl 
PBAYER.  1.  It  was  what  we  call  ejaculatory  prayer — prayer  which,  as  it  were,  hurls 
a  dart  and  then  it  is  done.  It  was  not  the  prayer  which  stands  knocking  at  mercy's 
door.  2.  Notice,  how  very  short  it  must  have  been.  It  was  introduced — slipped  in, 
sandwiched  in — between  the  king's  question  and  Nehemiah's  answer.  3.  We  know, 
also,  that  it  must  have  been  a  silent  prayer ;  and  not  merely  silent  as  to  sounds  but 
silent  as  to  any  outward  signs — perfectly  secret.  Artaxeries  never  knew  that 
Nehemiah  prayed,  though  he  stood  probably  within  a  yard  of  him.  In  the  inner- 
most shrine  of  the  temple — in  the  holy  of  holies  of  his  own  secret  soul — there  did 
he  pray.  It  was  a  prayer  on  the  spot.  He  did  not  go  to  his  chamber  as  Daniel  did, 
and  open  the  window.  4.  I  have  no  doubt  from  the  very  wording  of  the  text  that 
it  was  a  very  intense  and  direct  prayer.  That  was  Nehemiah's  favourite  name  for 
God — the  God  of  heaven.  He  knew  whom  he  was  praying  to.  He  did  not  draw 
a  bow  at  a  venture  and  shoot  his  prayers  anyhow.  5.  It  was  a  prayer  of  a  remarkable 
kind.  I  know  it  was  so,  because  Nehemiah  never  forgot  that  he  did  pray  it. 
III.  To  recommend  to  you  this  excellent  style  of  praying.  1.  To  deal  with  this 
matter  practically,  then,  it  is  the  duty  and  privilege  of  every  Christian  to  have  set 
times  of  prayer.  2.  But  now,  having  urged  the  importance  of  such  habitual  piety,  I 
want  to  impress  on  you  the  value  of  another  sort  of  prayer,  namely,  the  short,  brief, 


CHAP,  n.]  NEHEMIAE.  8$ 

quick,  frequent  ejaculations  of  which  Nehemiah  gives  us  a  specimen.  And  I 
recommend  this,  because  it  hinders  no  engagement  and  occupies  no  time.  It  requires 
you  to  go  to  no  particular  place.  No  altar,  no  church,  no  so-called  sacred  place  is 
needed,  but  wherever  you  are,  just  such  a  little  prayer  as  that  will  reach  the  ear  of 
God,  and  win  a  blessing.  Such  a  prayer  as  that  can  be  offered  anywhere,  under  any 
circumstances.  The  advantage  of  such  a  way  of  praying  is  that  you  can  pray 
often  and  pray  always.  Such  prayer  may  be  suggested  by  all  sorts  of  surroundings. 
3.  These  prayers  are  commendable,  because  they  are  truly  spiritual.  This  kind  of 
prayer  is  free  from  any  suspicion  that  it  is  prompted  by  the  corrupt  motive  of  being 
offered  to  please  men.  If  I  see  sparks  coming  out  of  a  chimney  I  know  there  is  a 
fire  inside  somewhere,  and  ejaculatory  prayers  are  like  the  sparks  that  fly  from  a. 
soul  that  is  filled  with  burning  coals  of  love  to  Jesus  Christ.  Short,  ejaculatory 
prayers  are  of  great  use  to  us.  Oftentimes  they  check  us.  Bad-tempered  people, 
if  you  were  always  to  pray  just  a  little  before  you  let  angry  expressions  fly  from 
your  lips,  why  many  times  you  would  not  say  those  naughty  words  at  all.  The 
habit  of  offering  these  brief  prayers  would  also  check  your  confidence  in  your- 
self. It  would  show  your  dependence  upon  God.  4.  Besides,  they  actually  bring  U3 
blessings  from  heaven.  I  believe  it  is  very  suitable  to  some  persons  of  a  peculiar 
temperament  who  could  not  pray  for  a  long  time  to  save  their  lives.  Their  minds 
are  rapid  and  quick.  But  if  I  must  give  you  a  selection  of  suitable  times  I  should 
mention  such  as  these.  Whenever  you  have  a  great  joy,  cry,  "  Lord,  make  this  a 
real  blessing  to  me."  Do  not  exclaim  with  others,  "Am  I  not  a  lucky  fellow  ?  " 
but  say,  "Lord,  give  me  more  grace,  and  more  gratitude,  now  that  Thou  dost 
multiply  Thy  favours."  When  you  have  got  any  arduous  undertaking  on  hand  or 
a  heavy  piece  of  business,  do  not  touch  it  till  you  have  breathed  your  soul  out  in  a 
short  prayer.  When  you  have  a  difficulty  before  you,  and  you  are  seriously  per- 
plexed, when  business  has  got  into  a  tangle  or  a  confusion  which  you  cannot 
unravel  or  arrange,  breathe  a  prayer.  Are  the  children  particularly  troublesome  to 
you  ?  Do  you  think  that  there  is  a  temptation  before  you  ?  Do  you  begin  to 
suspect  that  somebody  is  plotting  against  you  ?  Now  for  a  prayer,  "  Lead  me  in  a 
plain  path,  because  of  mine  enemies."  Are  you  at  work  at  the  bench,  or  in  a 
shop,  or  a  warehouse,  where  lewd  conversation  and  shameful  blasphemies  assail 
your  ears  ?  Now  for  a  short  prayer.  Does  sin  begin  to  fascinate  you  ?  Now  for  a 
prayer — a  warm,  earnest,  passionate  cry,  "  Lord,  hold  Thou  me  up."  And  when 
the  shadow  of  death  gathers  round  you,  and  strange  feelings  flush  or  chill  you,  and 
plainly  teU  that  you  near  the  journey's  end,  then  pray.  Oh !  that  is  a  time  for 
ejaculation.  "  Hide  not  Thy  face  from  me,  0  Lord"  ;  or  this,  "Be  not  far  from 
me,  0  God,"  will  doubtless  suit  you.  "Lord  Jesus,  receive  my  spirit,"  were  the 
thrilling  words  of  Stephen  in  his  extremity.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Ejaculatory 
prayer : — Such  a  sudden  uplifting  of  the  soul  to  God  is  the  most  real  of  all 
prayers.  The  man  who  can  thus  find  God  in  a  moment  must  be  in  the  habit 
of  fi-equently  resorting  to  the  Divine  presence.  This  ready  prayer  only  springs  to 
the  lips  of  a  man  who  lives  in  a  daily  habit  of  prayer.  The  deliberate  exercises  of 
adoration,  confession,  and  petition  prepare  for  the  one  sudden  ejaculation.  There 
we  see  the  deep  river  which  supplies  the  sea  of  devotion  from  which  the  momentary 
prayer  is  cast  up  as  the  spray  of  a  wave.  We  may  compare  Nehemiah's  two  kinds 
of  prayer  with  our  Lord's  fuU  and  calm  intercession  in  John  xvii.  and  the  short, 
agonised  cry  from  the  Cross.  {W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.)  Ejaculatory  prayer: — 
I.  The  person  named.  1.  As  patriot.  2.  As  statesman.  3.  As  a  man  of  God. 
Not  guided  by  the  policy  of  the  world.  He  did  nothing  without  prayer.  II.  The 
OCCASION.  A  moment  needing  great  wisdom.  III.  The  lesson  taught.  The  great 
duty  of  ejaculatory  prayer.  Various  uses :  1.  Throws  light  on  such  texts  as 
1  Thess.  V.  17  and  1  Cor.  x.  31.  2.  Comfort  in  bodily  pain  (Psa.  ciii.  13,  cxix.  2). 
3.  Helps  to  victory  over  sin.  (Ca7ion  Titcomh,  M.A.)  Prayer  before  choosing  : — • 
At  the  outset  two  things  strike  us  here.  1.  A  rare  opportunity  for  worldly  advance- 
ment. Here  is  a  king  saying  to  his  cupbearer,  "  What  dost  thou  want  me  to  do  for 
thee  ?  "  What  a  chance  this  for  any  man  1  Wealth,  dignity,  influence,  all  put 
within  his  reach,  left  to  depend  upon  his  choice.  2.  A  rare  treatment  of  such  an 
opportunity.  What  should  we  say  if  our  sovereign  should  speak  thus  to  us  ?  Most 
would  say,  "  Give  us  a  mansion  to  live  in,  lordly  estate  as  our  inheritance,  dazzling 
titles  and  extensive  patronage."  What  said  Nehemiah  ?  He  paused  and  reflected, 
and  then  he  prayed.  He  would  not  choose  for  himself.  Man  is  a  choosing 
creature;  his  daily  life  is  made  up  of  a  series  of  choices;  he  has  to  reject  and 
accept  in  order  to  live.    I.  God  alone  knows  what  is  best  for  us.    "  Who  knoweth 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  n. 

what  is  good  for  man  in  this  life,  all  the  days  of  his  vain  life  ?  "  Man  is  constantly 
making  mistakes  in  this  matter.  What  he  wants  and  struggles  for  as  a  prize 
sometimes  turns  out  to  be  one  of  his  sorest  calamities.  Because  Moses  looked  to 
heaven  in  such  a  case,  he  chose  a  life  which  to  unregenerate  man  would  be  revolting. 
II.  God  ALWAYS  DESIRES  WHAT  IS  BEST  FOB  us.  He  made  US  to  be  happy.  That  He  desires 
our  happiness  is  clear — 1.  From  the  capacity  of  enjoyment  with  which  He  has  endowed 
US.  2.  From  the  elements  of  happiness  with  which  the  world  abounds.  3.  From  the 
mission  of  His  only-begotten  Son.  III.  God,  in  answer  to  prater,  is  ever  ready 
TO  bestow  what  is  best  for  us.  "  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you ;  seek,  and 
ye  shall  find ;  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  to  you."  Conclusion :  Let  us  act 
ever  upon  the  principle  that  prayer  should  precede  choice.  (Homilist.)  The 
spiritual  telegraph  : — I.  How  great  is  the  privilege  of  prayer.  Great  indeed  is  the 
privilege  of  all  this  access  to  the  mercy-seat,  but  how  unspeakable  is  the  joy  and 
the  consolation  of  habitual  communion  with  God,  and  of  taking  occasion  from 
duties,  trials,  or  mercies,  as  they  follow  one  another,  to  lift  up  the  heart  in  pioua 
ejaculation.  The  word  ejaculation  is  derived  from  the  Latin  "  jaculum,"  an  arrow, 
and  suggests  the  rapidity  and  earnestness  with  which  such  a  prayer  can  be  winged 
up  to  the  God  of  heaven.  We  have  seen  how  Nehemiah  interposed  a  prayer  of  this 
kind  as  a  devout  parenthesis  between  the  king's  request  and  his  own  reply.  And 
there  is  no  book  of  Scripture  so  remarkable  for  ejaculatory  prayer  as  the  Book  of 
Nehemiah.  Such  an  acknowledgment  of  God  in  our  ways  is  no  hindrance,  but 
rather  a  mighty  help  in  business.  That  which  calms  the  mind,  fixes  the  purpose, 
and  strengthens  moral  principle,  must  be  a  great  assistance,  whether  in  duty  or 
trial.  As  Fuller  remarks,  "  Ejaculations  take  not  up  any  room  in  the  soul.  They 
give  liberty  of  callings,  so  that  at  the  same  instant  one  may  follow  his  proper 
vocation.  The  husbandman  may  dart  forth  an  ejaculation,  and  not  make  a  halt 
the  more.  The  seaman  nevertheless  steers  his  ship  right  in  the  darkest  night.  The 
field  wherein  the  bees  feed  is  no  whit  the  barer  for  their  biting :  when  they  have  taken 
their  full  repast  on  flowers  or  grass,  the  ox  may  feed,  the  sheep  fatten  on  their 
reversions.  The  reason  is  because  those  little  chemists  distil  only  the  refined  part 
of  the  flower,  leaving  the  grosser  substance  thereof.  So  ejaculations  bind  not  men 
to  any  bodily  observance,  only  busy  the  spiritual  half ,  which  maketh  them  consistent 
with  the  prosecution  of  any  other  employment."  The  rapidity  and  brevity  of 
ejaculatory  prayer  has  frequently  been  illustrated  by  a  reference  to  the  electric 
telegraph,  the  greatest  achievement  of  modern  science.  Christ  has  opened  a  path- 
way down  which  redeeming  mercy  may  flow  into  the  heart  of  the  sinner,  and  by 
which  the  aspirations  and  longings  of  that  penitent  sinner  may  climb  up  to  hia 
reconciled  God  and  Father.  Christians,  however,  can  tell  of  something  quicker 
far  than  electricity.  Thought,  winging  its  way  by  prayer,  travels  instantaneously 
from  the  depths  of  a  penitent's  need  to  the  height  of  God's  throne  in  heaven. 
Who  can  estimate  the  distance  thus  travelled,  or  the  relief  thus  experienced  ?  The 
child  cries,  and  the  Father  answers.  The  sinner  weeps,  and  the  Saviour  draws  near 
to  wipe  away  his  tears,  and  to  fill  him  with  an  overflowing  gladness.  II.  But  if 
the  privilege  of  prayer  be  great,  how  intensely  joyous  is  the  answer.  Eecurring 
to  the  narrative,  let  us  observe  in  the  gracious  answer  to  Nehemiah's  prayer  that 
delay  is  not  denial.  Four  weary  months  passed  before  Nehemiah  had  the  oppor- 
tunity of  bringing  under  the  king's  notice  the  desolation  of  Zion.  The  answer  to 
prayer  is  as  sure  as  Divine  power,  faithfulness,  and  love  can  make  it.  The 
providence  of  God  concurs  sweetly  with  His  grace  in  this  answer.  The  answer, 
moreover,  to  Nehemiah's  request,  through  the  good  hand  of  his  God  upon  him,  was 
overflowing  and  abundant.  The  utmost,  probably,  that  he  had  anticipated  would 
be  a  full  permission  to  resign  his  duties  at  court,  and  to  go  to  Jerusalem.  But  he 
received  much  more  than  this.  He  had  the  large-hearted  sanction  of  his  master 
for  all  his  undertakings.  He  was  provided  with  a  cavalry  escort,  with  letters 
for  safe  conduct  beyond  the  river,  and  ample  material  for  his  work.  Our  God  is 
able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  can  ask  or  think.  {J.  M.  Randall.) 
Ejaculatory  prayer  in  critical  junctures  .-—This  kind  is  a  short  petition,  hurled  like  a 
dart  at  its  mark.  I.  When  ?  In  critical  junctures.  1.  Before  choice.  2.  Before 
Budden  action.  3.  In  danger.  (The  sinking  Peter.)  II.  Why?  1.  Because 
critical  junctures  admit  of  no  other  kind.  2.  Because  it  leads  to  wisdom  (Prov. 
iii.  6).  3.  Because  it  tranquilises  the  mind.  4.  Because  it  would  prevent  sudden 
action.  III.  How?  1.  Do  we  pray  at  all?  2.  Do  we  cultivate  the  spirit  of 
prayer?  (1  Thess.  V.  17).  3.  Do  occasions  arise  for  ejaculatory  prayer?  4.  Would 
it  help  us  when  buying  or  selling,  when  making  calls  and  tempted  to  gossip  or  tell 


onAP.  n.]  NEHEMIAH.  35 

■"  white  lies  "  ?  {L.  0.  Thompson.)  The  praying  patriot : — The  true  secret  of  his 
success  was  Divine  interposition  in  his  behalf.  1.  Nehemiah,  under  God,  made 
the  most  of  this  opportunity.  He  had  waited  patiently  for  it ;  and  now,  when  it 
<!ame,  he  did  not  fail  to  turn  it  to  the  best  account.  It  is  not  always  that  this  is 
done.  Many,  we  fear,  if  they  had  the  chance,  would  be  more  ready  to  injure  the 
servants  of  Christ  than  to  do  them  good,  and  to  cripple  and  damage  His  cause  rather 
than  extend  it.  And  where  another  spirit  prevails,  have  we  not  often  to  mourn 
over  lost  opportunities  of  doing  good  ?  or  over  opportunities  of  doing  good  that 
have  been  very  imperfectly  improved  ?  2.  We  are  reminded  that  prayer  does  not 
supersede  efforts  in  other  directions.  Nehemiah  did  not  content  himself  with  the 
thought  that  he  had  prayed  for  Jerusalem,  and  for  its  poor  inhabitants.  He  supple- 
mented his  praying  by  using  his  best  endeavours  to  secure  such  help  as  man  could 
render.  And  did  he  under-estimate  the  power  of  prayer  by  this  procedure  ?  We 
think  not.  His  conduct  showed  that  he  was  neither  irreligious,  on  the  one  hand, 
nor  fanatical  on  the  other.  Some  objects  are  best  accomplished  by  prayer  alone. 
Some  persons  are  so  placed  now  that  all  we  can  do  in  their  behalf  is  to  pray  for 
them ;  and  some  objects  are  of  such  a  nature  that  we  cannot  advance  them  other- 
wise than  by  giving  them  an  interest  in  our  prayers.  But,  as  a  rule,  we  may,  and 
ought,  to  do  something  more  than  this  for  a  good  cause.  3.  Answers  to  prayer 
should  be  gratefully  acknowledged.  (T.  Roivson.)  Ejaculatory  prayer  : — In 
hard  havens,  so  choked  up  with  the  envious  sands  that  great  ships,  drawing  many 
feet  of  water,  cannot  come  near,  lighter  and  lesser  pinnaces  may  freely  and  safely 
arrive.  When  we  are  time-bound,  place-bound,  so  that  we  cannot  compose  our- 
selves to  make  a  large,  solemn  prayer,  this  is  the  right  instant  for  ejaculations, 
whether  oraUy  uttered  or  only  poured  forth  inwardly  in  the  heart.  {A.  Fuller.) 
The  Jlame  of  devotion  constant : — The  sacrifices  of  prayer  and  praise  cannot  be 
always  ascending  ;  but  the  flame  of  devotion  to  kindle  them,  as  opportunity  may 
serve,  ought  never  to  wax  dim.  {Hugh  Stowell,  M.A.)  The  devotional  spirit : — 
Of  all  the  habits  of  the  new  man,  there  is  none  more  distinctive,  none  more  con- 
ducive to  his  soul's  health  and  happiness,  none  more  essential  to  his  consistency 
of  conduct  and  beauty  of  holiness,  than  the  devotional  spirit.  {Ibid.)  Prayer  in 
few  words  : — We  make  a  great  many  mistakes  about  prayer  ;  and  one  of  them  is 
that  we  don't  think  we  have  prayed  properly  unless  we  have  prayed  a  certain  time. 
But  a  few  moments  of  real  prayer  are  better  than  many  minutes  of  only  formal 
prayer.  "  For  my  own  part,"  says  a  friend,  "  if  one  may  talk  of  a  '  best '  in  the  matter 
of  one's  prayers,  I  find  that  the  best  prayers  I  can  make  are  very  short  ones  indeed. 
Sometimes  they  have  only  one  sentence,  and  they  are  by  no  means  always  said 
upon  my  knees.  They  are  offered  up  while  I  am  walking  about,  or  lying  awake  at 
night,  or  riding  in  the  train."  When  Bengel,  the  great  commentator,  was  too  weary 
to  pray,  all  he  said  was,  "  Lord,  Thou  knowest  that  it  is  between  us  to-day  as  it 
was  yesterday  "  ;  and  so  he  went  to  sleep.  A  young  man,  who  was  worn  by  sick- 
ness and  suffering,  had  only  strength  to  pray  in  short  and  broken  sentences.  His 
heart  was  filled  with  foreboding  as  Satan  whispered  that  the  great  God  could  never 
listen  to  such  a  prayer.  Suddenly  he  came  upon  these  words  :  "  God  is  in  heaven, 
and  thou  upon  earth,  therefore  let  thy  words  be  few."  "Ahl"  he  said,  "  I  have 
found  a  verse  written  expressly  for  me.  God  will  accept  the  few  words  I  can  utter ; 
now  I  will  trust  and  not  be  afraid."  If  no  man  is  heard  for  his  much  speaking, 
no  man  is  rejected  for  his  little  speaking — if  compressed  into  that  little  be  the 
earnestness  of  his  heart.  {Signal.)  Prayer  in  perplexity : — A  little  child,  playing 
with  a  handful  of  cords,  when  they  begin  to  get  into  a  tangle,  goes  at  once  to  her 
mother,  that  her  patient  fingers  may  unravel  the  snarl.  How  much  better  this  than 
to  pull  and  tug  at  the  cords  till  the  tangle  becomes  inextricable  1  May  not  many 
of  us  learn  a  lesson  from  the  little  child  ?  Would  it  not  be  better  for  us,  whenever 
we  find  the  slightest  entanglement  in  any  of  our  affairs,  or  the  arising  of  any  per- 
plexity, to  take  it  at  once  to  God,  that  His  skilful  hands  may  set  it  right  ?  Prayer 
heard  in  heaven : — Ejaculatory  prayer  is  like  the  rope  of  a  belfry ;  the  bell  is  in  one 
room,  and  the  end  of  the  rope  which  sets  it  a-ringing  in  another.  Perhaps  the  bell 
may  not  be  heard  in  the  apartment  where  the  rope  is,  but  it  is  heard  in  its  own 
apartment.  Moses  laid  hold  of  the  rope  and  pulled  it  hard  on  the  shore  of  the  Eed 
Sea ;  and  though  no  one  heard  or  knew  anything  about  it  in  the  lower  chamber, 
the  bell  rang  loudly  in  the  upper  one.  {William:^  of  Wern.)  The  swiftness  of 
prayer : — We  may,  if  we  please,  have  a  mail  to  heaven,  conveying  in  a  moment 
intelligence  of  our  condition  and  concerns,  our  wants  and  our  desires,  to  our  God 
and  Father,  and  bringing  back  to  us  a  gracious  answer,  with  advice  and  comfort, 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cmr.  u, 

protection  and  help.  Prayer  is  the  swift  courier,  and  sighs  are  the  winged 
messengers.  Doves  have  been  trained  to  fly  from  place  to  place,  carrying  letters 
in  a  little  casket  fastened  to  their  neck  or  foot.  They  are  swift  of  flight ;  but  our 
prayers  and  sighs  are  swifter,  for  they  take  but  a  moment  to  pass  from  earth  to 
heaven,  and  bear  the  troubles  of  our  heart  to  the  heart  of  God.  {R.  Scriver.) 
Ejaculatory  prayer  possible  to  busy  people  : — The  following  extract  is  from  a  letter 
addressed  by  a  poor  woman  to  the  editor  of  the  Banner  of  Faith :  "  Poor  women 
with  large  families  often  think  they  have  little  time  for  prayer  or  praise.  As  I  am 
a  poor  woman  with  a  large  family,  and  know  the  value  of  prayer  and  praise,  I  will 
tell  them  how  I  find  time  for  it.  Whilst  I  am  cleaning  the  house  I  lift  my  heart  to 
God  and  say,  '  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  0  God,  and  renew  a  right  spirit  within 
me,  for  Christ's  sake.  Amen.'  When  I  am  washing  the  clothes  I  say,  '  Wash  me 
in  Thy  blood,  0  Jesus  ;  wash  me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than  snow.'  Then  as  I  get 
to  each  of  my  children's  clothes  I  pray  for  them  separately,  not  aloud,  but  in  my 
heart.  Again,  if  I  pick  up  the  shirt  of  one  who  drinks,  I  ask  God  to  change  his 
heart,  to  show  him  his  state  in  God's  sight,  and  to  help  him  to  give  up  drink  and 
become  a  sober,  godly  youth.  If  I  am  washing  the  shirt  of  another  who  has  a 
horrid  temper,  that  is  a  terror  to  us  all,  I  pray  to  God  to  break  his  stubborn  temper, 
to  soften  his  heart  of  stone,  and  give  him  a  heart  of  flesh.  If  I  am  washing  any- 
thing belonging  to  a  girl  who  is  idle,  then  I  pray  God  to  show  her  her  sin,  and 
change  her  whole  nature,  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Yes,  I  pray  for  each  as  I  know  their 
need.  Then  when  I  am  sewing  I  find  lots  of  time  both  for  prayer  and  praise.  When 
I  light  or  mend  the  fire,  I  say  in  my  heart,  '  Kindle,  0  Lord,  a  sacred  fire  in  this 
cold  heart  of  mine.'  "    [E.  J,  Hardy,  M.A.) 

Ver.  5.  If  it  please  the  king,  and  if  thy  servant  have  found  favonr. — The  man  of 

busi7ies$  : — Such  a  man  was  Nehemiah.  His  strong  practical  sagacity  is  manifest 
throughout  the  whole  record  of  his  work  in  Jerusalem.  And  in  his  case  this 
business  ability  was  blended  with  enthusiasm.  It  is  by  such  men — men  combining 
practical  sagacity  with  noble  impulse — that  the  best  work  of  the  world  is  done. 
Sometimes  we  find  men  of  enthusiastic  zeal  or  true  piety  who  have  little  or  no 
business  faculty,  who  are  deficient  in  powers  of  observation  and  management,  who 
lack  the  tough  energy  of  perseverance,  who  perhaps  scorn  tact  and  prudence,  and 
who  have  little  capability  of  adapting  means  to  ends.  Such  men  are  apt  to  become 
either  crotchety  or  fanatical ;  they  waste  both  time  and  strength  on  impracticable 
schemes;  they  may  have  noble  aims,  but  they  seek  to  carry  them  out  by  unwise 
methods  ;  they  damage  the  cause  which  they  have  at  heart  by  their  own  blunder- 
ing ;  they  isolate  themselves  from  those  with  whom  they  ought  to  work,  and 
alienate  those  whom  they  ought  to  conciliate;  they  grow  impatient  of  their 
imperfect  instruments  and  agents ;  and,  failing  to  realise  the  best  conceivable, 
they  become  careless  as  to  realising  the  best  practicable.  And,  on  the  other 
hand,  we  find  men  of  shrewd  sagacity  and  business  ability,  of  keen  observation 
and  ready  tact,  who  lack  all  the  higher  inspiration  of  noble  and  generous 
impulse;  who  are  deficient  in  imagination,  affection,  and  piety;  who  have  no 
real  enthusiasm  even  in  then-  bur iness ;  and  who  carry  on  their  practical  work 
with  the  successful  persistency  of  a  cold,  clever,  and  calculating  selfishness.  A 
man  of  this  type  might  have  gone  to  rebuild  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  if  he  had  been 
well  paid  for  the  work,  and  if  he  had  received  money  with  which  to  hire  the  labour 
of  the  builders ;  but  he  would  never  have  gone,  like  Nehemiah,  impelled  by  the 
fervours  of  a  pious  patriotism,  nor  could  he  have  roused  the  people,  as  Nehemiah 
did,  to  voluntary  effort  and  sacrifice.  The  practical  business  faculty  is  a  gift  of  no 
mean  order ;  but,  like  all  other  gifts,  it  ought  to  be  devoted  to  the  service  of  God. 
If  a  man  possesses  energy,  persistency,  tact,  quickness  in  forecasting  necessities 
and  results,  skill  in  adapting  means  to  ends,  he  ought  not  to  regard  these  powers 
as  mere  instruments  for  the  promotion  of  his  own  selfish  objects.  These  faculties 
are  part  of  himself,  and  he  is  himself  called  to  live  as  a  servant  of  God.  Then, 
again,  the  exclusive  development  of  mere  business  faculty  is  attended  with  the 
utmost  danger.  It  is,  indeed,  a  faculty  for  which  we  may  well  thank  God ;  but 
there  are  other  powers  of  our  nature — some  of  them  higher  and  more  important — 
which  ought  also  to  be  exercised.  The  whole  spiritual  side  of  our  being,  looking 
out  on  God,  on  righteousness,  and  on  eternity,  calls  for  cultivation.  Nor  ought  we 
to  neglect  the  affections  and  emotions  of  the  heart.  Even  the  culture  of  the  imagi- 
nation is  not  to  be  despised ;  it  furnishes  a  healthy  counterpoise  where  the  practical 
faculty  ia  keen  and  strong.    If  there  be  no  exercise  of  the  imagination,  no  deepen- 


CHAP,  n.]  NEHEMIAH.  S7 

ing  of  the  affections,  no  quickening  of  the  conscience  and  the  spiritual  nature,  then 
a  man's  practical  sagacity  may  only  tend  to  make  him  a  hard-headed  and  hard- 
hearted worldling.  His  tact  will  be  constantly  degenerating  into  mere  manoeuvre, 
Jinesse,  and  deceit.  His  power  of  managing  men  will  lead  him  to  deal  with  them 
as  tools.  He  may  thus  "  get  on  "  in  the  world,  as  some  people  count  getting  on  ; 
he  may  perhaps  gather  wealth,  and  leave  it  behind  him  to  his  heirs.  But  his  own 
nature  will  deteriorate  ;  it  will  become  narrow,  stunted,  and  impoverished,  and  ha 
will  never  do  any  of  the  best  kind  of  work  in  the  world,  either  for  God  or  for  man- 
kind. By  all  means  let  a  man  cultivate  practical  sagacity  ;  but  let  him  take  care 
to  consecrate  it  to  God,  and  to  make  it  the  handmaid  of  aims  that  shall  be  worthy 
of  his  spiritual  nature.  We  want  neither  fanatics  nor  worldlings,  neither  un- 
practical dreamers  nor  mere  selfish  tacticians  ;  we  want  men  who,  like  Nehemiah, 
are  open  to  the  promptings  of  generous  impulse  and  pure  enthusiasm,  and  at  the 
same  time  can  carry  out  their  projects  with  wise  foresight,  patient  energy,  and 
prudent  self-control.  (T.  C.  Finlayson.)  The  mission  of  Nehemiah : — The  text 
harmonises  with  the  historic  truth  that  for  every  great  work  there  must  be  an 
inspired  leader.  Every  great  revival  has  hinged  upon  the  deeds  of  some  one  man. 
The  success  of  Nehemiah  depended  upon  three  traits,  which  must  be  characteristic 
of  every  great  leader  in  human  affairs.  A  lack  as  to  either  one  of  the  three  would 
render  his  undertaking  a  failure.  I.  His  faith.  There  is  nothing  in  this  world 
more  sublime  than  the  man  of  faith,  and  there  is  no  one  more  truly  ridiculed. 
Faith,  dissatisfied  with  the  present,  looks  into  futurity.  The  multitudes  are  con- 
tent with  to-day's  attainments.  Nehemiah  pondered  upon  the  Jerusalem  which 
should  be.  Plans,  at  the  first,  were  indistinct.  It  seemed  an  impossibility.  His 
were  the  words  of  faith  and  not  of  sight :  "  The  God  of  heaven.  He  will  prosper 
ns;  therefore  we  His  servants  will  arise  and  build."  U.  His  sagacity.  Faith 
Incites  to  the  purest  wisdom.  The  intellect  of  man  is  made  to  be  the  servant  of 
his  faith.  His  faith  was  reasonable,  yet,  after  it  had  become  most  perfect,  in  order 
to  attain  its  object  he  was  compelled  to  reason  out  each  step  of  the  way.  Thus  is 
it  many  a  man  works  out  his  prayers.  Artaxerxes  had  chosen  a  sagacious  man  for 
his  cup-bearer,  and  Jehovah  said  Artaxerxes  had  chosen  wisely.  Jehovah  needed 
not  only  a  man  of  faith,  but  a  shrewd  man,  to  restore  Jerusalem  to  its  former  great- 
ness. III.  His  coueaoe.  Grant  him  to  have  been  a  man  of  strongest  faith,  and 
of  shrewdest  mind  to  reason  out  the  successive  steps,  yet  without  courage  to  take 
each  step,  he  had  failed  after  all.  {Monday  Club  Sermons.)  Nehemiah  before 
Artaxerxes: — And  now  it  was  that  the  man  of  piety  appeared  in  the  man  of 
patriotism  ;  and  admirably  does  Nehemiah  stand  forth  as  an  example  to  those  who 
profess  to  have  at  heart  their  country's  good,  and  to  be  stricken  by  its  calamities. 
He  did  not  immediately  call  a  meeting  of  the  Jews,  to  consult  what  might  be  done 
for  their  afflicted  countrymen.  He  did  not  gather  round  him  a  knot  of  politicians, 
that  plans  might  be  discussed,  and  assistance  levied.  But  Nehemiah  "  sat  down, 
and  wept."  But  Nehemiah  did  not  count  his  part  done  when  he  had  thus,  in  all 
humility,  confessed  the  sins  of  his  nation,  and  entreated  the  interference  of  God. 
He  was  not  one  of  those  who  substitute  prayer  for  endeavour,  though  he  would  not 
make  an  endeavour  until  he  had  prepared  himself  by  prayer.  Fortified  through 
humiliation  and  supplication,  he  now  sought  to  take  advantage  of  his  position  with 
the  king,  and,  true  patriot  as  he  was,  to  render  that  position  useful  to  his  country- 
men. Nehemiah  was  sore  afraid  when  Artaxerxes,  struck  with  the  sorrow  depicted 
on  his  features,  imperiously  asked  the  cause  of  the  too  evident  grief.  It  was  the 
moment  for  which  he  had  wished,  yea,  for  which  h«  had  prayed,  yet,  now  that  it 
had  come,  he  felt  so  deeply  what  consequences  hung  upon  a  word,  that  he  was 
almost  unmanned,  and  could  scarce  venture  to  unburden  his  heart.  The  facts  are 
these :  the  first,  that  it  was  as  the  city  of  his  fathers'  sepulchres  that  Jerusalem 
excited  the  solicitude  of  Nehemiah ;  the  second,  that  Nehemiah  found  a  moment 
before  answering  the  king  to  offer  petition  to  the  Almighty.  Now  Jerusalem  had 
not  yet  received  its  most  illustrious  distinction,  forasmuch  as  "  the  fulness  of  time  " 
had  not  arrived,  and  therefore  there  had  not  yet  been  transacted  within  her  circuits 
the  wondrous  scenes  of  the  redemption  of  the  world.  Nevertheless,  to  every  man, 
especially  to  a  devout  Jew,  there  were  already  reasons  in  abundance  why  thought 
should  turn  to  Jerusalem,  and  centre  there  as  on  a  place  of  peculiar  sanctity  and 
interest.  There  had  a  temple  been  reared,  "  magnifical  "  beyond  what  earth 
beforetime  had  seen,  rich  with  the  marble  and  the  gold,  but  richer  in  the  visible 
tokens  of  the  presence  of  the  universal  Lord.  There  had  sacrifices  been  continually 
offered,  whose  ef&cacy  was  manifest  even  to  those  who  discerned  not  their  typical 

26 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a 

Import,  forasmnch  as  at  times  they  prevailed  to  the  arrest  of  temporal  visitations, 
and  pestilence  was  dispersed  by  the  smoke  of  the  oblation.  There  had  monarchs 
reigned  of  singular  and  wide-spread  renown.  Hence,  it  might  easily  have  been 
accounted  for  why  Nehemiah  should  have  looked  with  thrilling  interest  to  Jeru- 
salem. But  the  observable  thing  is,  that  Nehemiah  fixes  not  on  any  of  these 
obvious  reasons  when  he  would  explain,  or  account  for,  his  interest  in  Jerusalem. 
Before  he  offered  his  silent  prayer  to  God,  and  afterwards,  when  he  might  be 
supposed  to  have  received  fresh  wisdom  from  above,  he  spake  of  the  city  merely  aa 
the  place  of  the  sepulchres  of  his  fathers,  as  though  no  stronger  reason  could 
be  given  why  he  should  wish  to  rebuild  it ;  none,  at  least,  whose  force  was  more 
felt  by  himself,  or  more  likely  to  be  confessed  by  the  king.  The  language  of  Nehe- 
miah is  too  express  and  too  personal  to  allow  of  our  supposing  that  he  adopted  it 
naerely  from  thinking  that  it  would  prevail  with  Artaxerxes.  If  we  may  argue 
from  the  expressions  of  Nehemiah,  then,  it  is  a  melancholy  sight — that  of  a  ruined 
town,  a  shattered  navy,  or  a  country  laid  waste  by  famine  and  war ;  but  there  is  a 
more  melancholy  sight  too,  that  of  a  churchyard,  where  sleeps  the  dust  of  our 
kindred,  desecrated  and  destroyed,  whether  by  violence  or  neglect.  There  is  some- 
thing so  ungenerous  in  forgetfulness  or  contempt  of  the  dead — they  cannot  speak 
for  themselves ;  they  so  seem,  in  dying,  to  bequeath  their  dust  to  survivors,  as 
though  they  would  give  affection  something  to  cherish,  and  some  kind  office  still 
to  perform.  We  do  not,  however,  suppose  that  the  strong  marks  of  respect  for  the 
dead,  which  occur  so  frequently  in  the  Bible,  are  to  be  thoroughly  accounted  for  by 
the  workings  of  human  feelings  and  affections.  We  must  have  recourse  to  the 
great  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body  if  we  would  fully  understand  why 
the  dying  Joseph  "  gave  commandment  concerning  his  bones,"  and  Nehemiah 
offered  no  description  of  Jerusalem,  but  that  it  was  the  place  of  the  sepulchres  of 
his  fathers.  The  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  throws,  as  you  must  all  admit,  a 
aacredness  round  the  remains  of  the  dead,  because  it  proves,  that,  though  we  have 
committed  the  body  to  the  ground,  "  ashes  to  ashes,  dust  to  dust,"  that  body  is 
reserved  for  noble  allotments,  destined  to  reappear  in  a  loftier  scene,  and  discharge 
more  glorious  functions.  Then  the  well-kept  churchyard,  with  its  various  monu- 
ments, each  inscribed  with  lines  not  more  laudatory  of  the  past  than  hopeful  of  the 
future,  what  is  it  but  the  public  testimony  to  all  that  is  precious  in  Christianity, 
forasmuch  as  it  is  the  public  testimony  that  the  dead  shall  live  again  ?  We  are 
now  to  detach  our  minds  from  Nehemiah  pleading  for  his  fathers'  sepulchres, 
and  fix  them  upon  Nehemiah  addressing  himself  to  God  in  ejaculatory  prayer. 
Under  how  practical  and  comforting  a  point  of  view  does  this  place  the  truth 
of  the  omnipresence  of  God.  Yet,  with  all  its  mysteriousness,  this  is  no  merely 
sublime  but  barren  speculation,  no  subject  to  exercise  the  mind  rather  than 
benefit  the  heart.  It  should  minister  wondrously  to  our  comfort,  to  know  that, 
whether  we  can  explain  it  or  not,  we  are  always,  so  to  speak,  in  contact 
with  God ;  so  that  in  the  crowd  and  in  the  solitude,  in  the  retirement  of  the 
closet,  the  bustle  of  business,  and  the  privacies  of  home,  by  day  and  by  night, 
He  is  alike  close  at  hand,  near  enough  for  every  whisper,  and  plenteous  enough 
for  every  want.  It  is  not  so  with  a  human  patron  or  friend,  who,  whatever 
be  his  power,  and  his  desire  to  use  it  on  our  behalf,  cannot  always  be  with  us,  to 
observe  each  necessity,  and  appoint  each  supply.  It  is  not  indispensable  that  there 
should  be  outward  prostration  and  set  supplication.  The  heart  has  but  to  breathe 
its  desire,  and  God  is  acquainted  with  it  so  soon  as  formed,  and  may  grant  it,  if 
He  will,  before  the  tongue  could  have  given  it  utterance.  The  man  of  business,  he 
need  not  enter  on  a  single  undertaking  without  prayer  ;  the  mariner,  he  need  not 
unfurl  a  sail  without  prayer ;  the  traveller,  he  need  not  face  a  danger  without 
prayer ;  the  statesman,  he  need  not  engage  in  a  debate  without  prayer ;  the  invalid, 
he  need  not  try  a  remedy  without  prayer  ;  the  accused,  he  need  not  meet  an  accuser 
without  prayer.  We  may  hallow  and  enlighten  everything  by  prayer,  though  we 
seem,  and  are,  engaged  from  morning  to  night  with  secular  business,  and  thronged 
by  eager  adherents.  We  cannot  be  in  a  difficulty  for  which  we  have  not  time  to 
ask  guidance,  in  a  peril  so  sudden  that  we  cannot  find  a  guardian,  in  a  spot  so 
remote  that  we  may  not  people  it  with  supporters.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Unto  the 
city  of  my  fathers'  sepulchres. — The  place  of  my  fathers'  sepulchres  : — Any  reference 
to  the  history  of  the  fame  and  power  of  the  city  of  God  might  have  inflamed  the 
jealousy  of  the  Persian  king,  and  fixed  his  resolution  to  leave  it  in  its  present  ruin. 
But  the  human  heart  naturally  softens  into  tenderness  at  the  graves  of  the  dead. 
Hence  the  consummate  skill  and  delicacy  with  which  Nehemiah  frames  his  plea 


CHAP,  n.]  NEHEMIAH.  89 

for  sorrow.  ( W.  Eitehie.)  Wise  musings  : — Men  love  to  think  of  the  honour  of 
their  fathers'  titles,  or  of  the  grandeur  of  their  fathers'  habitations.  It  is  wise  in 
us  to  muse  sometimes  on  the  place  of  our  fathers'  sepulchres.  The  graves  where 
they  lie  are  mementoes  whither  we  must  follow  them,  and  from  their  tomb  they 
call  us  to  prepare  for  entering  the  narrow  house  appointed  for  all  living.  {Ibid.) 
God  always  helps  His  faithful  witnesses : — In  these  touching  and  powerful  words 
we  remark  the  almighty  aid  God  gives  His  servants  in  pleading  for,  and  bearing 
witness  to.  His  cause.  He  gives  Nehemiah  mouth  and  wisdom  in  this  trying  hour. 
It  has  been  bo  with  all  faithful  witnesses  for  God  in  every  age.  It  was  so  with 
Luther  at  the  Diet  of  Worms.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  7.  If  it  please  the  king,  let  letters  be  eriren  me. — Beligiout  prudence : — 
I.  That  jkddent  forethought  is  essential  to  success  in  spiritual  as  in  secular 
ENTERPBiSES  (Psa.  cxii.  5;  Prov.  xi.  29,  xii.  23,  xiv.  15 ;  Luke  xiv.  28).  II.  That 
prudent  forethought  is  not  opposed,  but  helpful,  to  spiritual  paith.  1.  It 
furnishes  a  rational  basis  for  expecting  success.  2.  It  acts  upon  the  supposition 
that  mental  powers  were  given  to  be  employed  in  the  service  of  God.  3.  It  takes 
no  step  without  seeking  Divine  guidance  and  approval.  {Homiletic  Commentary.) 
Common  sense  in  religious  work : — When  we  go  about  the  Lord's  work,  we  must  not 
leave  our  wits  behind  us,  or  forget  the  principles  of  business  and  the  rules  of  daily 
life.  Neither  should  we  ignore  difficulties  or  suppose  that  they  will  disappear 
before  some  miracle-working  power.  Although  depending  solely  on  the  Lord,  we 
need  not  denude  ourselves  of  judgment  and  common  sense.  {W.  P.  Lockhart.) 
Prayer  and  common  sense  : — So  I  stood  and  •'  prayed  unto  the  God  of  heaven — then 
I  asked  the  king  to  give  me  letters."  This  is  the  true  model  of  prayer — to  pray  to 
the  King  of  kings  and  then  to  accept  the  ordinary  appointments  of  life ;  to  invoke 
Omnipotence,  and  then  to  use  your  senses.  Have  you  been  praying  ?  Did  you  sit 
in  your  chair  and  pray  that  you  might  be  able  at  the  end  of  the  week  to  make  both 
ends  meet,  and  then  fall  asleep  until  the  time  came,  and  wake  up  to  find  that  both 
ends  did  not  meet  ?  That  was  not  prayer  at  all.  I  will  pray  God  to  help  me  to 
pay  every  debt  I  owe,  to  overcome  every  difficulty  in  my  way.  Now,  having  said 
my  prayer,  let  me  go  out  and  do  it.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  And  the  Idng  granted  me,  according  to  the  good  hand  of  my  God  upon 

me. — The  power  of  God  in  the  individual  Christian  : — The  secret  of  success  is  to 
have  God  with  us,  and  what  we  want  in  our  day  is  not  more  machinery  or  new 
methods  of  work,  but  more  of  the  power  of  God  in  individual  Christians.  Nehe- 
miah, in  his  prolonged  prayerf  ulness,  shows  us  how  this  power  is  to  be  obtained,  for 
it  is  when  we  know  God  in  His  fulness  and  have  enlightened  communion  with  the 
Lord,  that  we  are  fitted  to  become  "  workers  together  with  Him."  {W.  P.  Lockhart.) 
God's  hand: — I.  A  spirit  of  dependence.  There  breathes  forth  a  feeling  of 
insignificance.  The  speaker  feels  scarcely  able  to  trust  himself.  1.  Man's  techni- 
cal skill.  Having  arrived  at  so  high  a  standard  in  design,  construction,  and  art, 
we  are  very  apt  to  think  very  highly  of  ourselves.  We  gaze  on  the  railway,  the 
steam-engine,  the  ocean-steamer,  the  tunnel  under  the  hills,  and  the  canal  through 
the  land,  and  fancy  we  can  do  anything.  2.  Man's  natural  conceit.  There  is  a 
great  tendency  to  think  more  highly  of  ourselves  than  we  ought  to  think.  Satan 
employs  this  tendency  to  induce  man  to  lift  up  his  hand  against  God.  H.  A  spirit 
OP  TRUST.  This  spirit  of  reliance  will  save  us  from  many  trials.  It  wiU  prevent — 
1.  Anxious  care.  If  we  leave  our  concerns  in  God's  hand,  we  shall  not  be  careful 
and  cumbered  about  many  things.  It  will  prevent — 2.  Worldly-mindedness  of 
disposition.  The  spirit  that  leaves  its  cares  in  God's  hand  will  leave  its  joys  there 
also.  3.  All  bitterness  of  sorrow.  (Homilist.)  The  recognition  of  God : — He 
recognised  God  in  all.  Not  to  his  favourable  circumstances,  nor  to  the  opportunity 
of  presenting  his  petition,  nor  to  the  good  mood  the  monarch  was  in,  nor  to  all  of 
these  combined,  did  he  ascribe  his  success.  Secondary  causes  would  not  explain 
the  result ;  it  must  be  traced  to  its  trae  source — God  and  God  alone  must  have  all 
the  glory.    (W.  P.  Lockhart.) 

Vers.  9-20.  Then  I  came  to  the  governors  beyond  the  river. — The  initial  stages 
of  a  great  reformation : — Great  reformations  often  have  an  insignificant  commence- 
ment and  are  slow  in  developing  their  true  proportions.    Beformation  work— - 

L   BxQUntKS  A  nOOBOUS  LEADER.      II.    SHOULD  NOT  BX   UNDERTAKEN   WITHOUT  A   DELI- 

Buuis  xazDCAn  ow  iia  maomrudb  aks  dipficultt.    III.  In  its  initial  staoks  is 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

ALMOST  CERTAIN  TO  PROVOKE  OrPOSITION.  IV.  CANNOT  BE  CARRIED  ON  WITHOUT  MUTUAIi 
CO-OPERATION.       V.    CaNNOT     SUCCEED     WITHOUT      THE      DiVINE      BLESSING.       {HomxUtie 

Commentary.)  And  gave  them  the  king's  letters. — The  king's  letters  : — Here  is 
a  beautiful  picture  of  the  Christian  evangelist.  When  he  goes  abroad  he  has  no 
introduction  of  himself  to  make — he  simply  delivers  the  King's  letters.  When  the 
preacher  appears  in  the  pulpit,  all  he  has  to  do  is  to  give  the  people  the  King's 
letters ;  when  the  student  bends  his  head  over  his  desk  in  the  study,  it  is  only  that 
he  may  study  what  is  written  in  the  letters  of  the  King.  The  moment  we  begin  to 
write  letters  of  commendation  for  ourselves,  we  become  as  other  men  ;  our  distinc- 
tiveness as  ambassadors  is  lost.  The  King's  letters  are  full  of  light  and  love. 
They  are  addressed  to  every  man.  (J.  Barker,  D.D.)  When  Sanballat  the 
Horonite  ...  it  grieved  them  exceedingly. — Secret  jealousy  : — There  is  jealousy — 
I.  Tyrannical  in  its  spirit.  II.  Anti-religious  in  its  attitude.  III.  Covetously 
SELFISH  IN  ITS  MOTIVES.  IV.  Self-tobtubing  IN  ITS  EFFECTS.  {Homiletic  Com- 
mentary.) 

Ver.  11.  So  I  came  to  Jerusalem,  and  was  there  three  days. — Days  of  quiet: — 
Some  workers  of  the  present  day  would  have  sent  round  the  bellman  and  summoned 
the  leading  inhabitants  to  a  preliminary  convention  within  half  an  hour  of  their 
arrival;  but  there  was  no  such  unbelieving  hurry-scurry  with  Nehemiah,  and 
therefore  three  days  were  allowed  to  elapse.  It  was  necessary  to  recover  from  the 
fatigue  of  the  journey.  He  who  is  the  God  of  our  bodies  as  well  as  of  our  souls 
knows  full  well  the  limit  of  our  powers,  and  would  not  have  us  outrage  physical 
laws,  even  in  seeking  to  do  Him  honour.  These  three  days  may  have  been  needful 
also  for  further  prayer  and  waiting  upon  God.  It  may  have  been  also  that  God 
would  not  have  him  begin  work  under  mere  natural  impulse  or  human  excitement. 
Hence  the  need  of  three  days  of  quiet.  Men  under  excitement  can  do  wonderful 
things,  whether  in  storming  a  redoubt  or  in  conducting  what  in  modern  times  is 
called  a  "mission";  but  God  does  not  want  His  work  done  under  excitement. 
Calm  and  quiet  of  soul  are  more  favourable  to  that  true  reliance  upon  Him  which 
gives  Him  all  the  glory  and  seeks  none  for  ourselves.  {W.  P.  Lockhart.)  The 
wisdom  of  waiting  : — This  interval  would  no  doubt  be  occupied  in  reflecting  on  the 
difficulties  of  his  enterprise — in  maturing  his  course  of  procedure.  Besides,  he  was 
probably  in  doubt  how  to  proceed,  till  God  revealed  to  him  His  will ;  and  for  this 
he  needed  to  make  his  requests  known  to  Him  in  prayer.  This  is  ever  the  discipline 
of  a  religious  life.  A  pious  writer  remarks,  "  I  need  just  as  much  patience  to  wait 
as  the  lamp  needs  oil,  till  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  flee  away."  (W.  Ritchie.) 
Preparatory  retirement: — God's  servants  frequently  thus  retired  for  deliberation 
before  entering  upon  arduous  tasks.  Moses,  Paul,  Christ  Himself.  Nehemiah'a 
retirement — I.  Gave  him  time  to  look  round.  II.  Gave  him  time  to  look 
FORWARD.  III.  Gave  him  time  to  look  within.  IV.  Gave  him  time  to  look 
UPWARD.     (Hom,iletic  Commentary.) 

Vers.  12-20.  And  I  arose  In  the  night. — Nehemiah,  the  model  worker : — I.  Eta 
WORKS  thoughtfully.  Bcforc  he  commences  this  tremendous  task  he  spends  some 
time  in  deliberation.  Who  can  tell  the  thoughts  of  Nehemiah  as  he  moved  amidst 
the  ruins  of  Jerusalem  this  night  ?  Jerusalem  was  the  home  of  his  fathers,  the 
centre  of  his  most  hallowed  associations.  Before  we  undertake  a  work  we  should 
gauge  its  magnitude  and  become  convinced  of  its  practicability  (Luke  xiv.  28-30). 
Men,  from  the  impulse  of  the  hour,  put  their  hand  to  undertakings  which  they 
have  never  given  themselves  time  to  understand,  and  for  which  they  are  not  fitted; 
and  hence,  when  the  excitement  is  over,  they  abandon  the  work  in  disappointment, 
if  not  in  disgust.  II.  He  works  independently.  "  I  arose  in  the  night,  I  and 
some  few  men  with  me,  neither  told  I  any  man  what  my  God  had  put  in  my  heart 
to  do  at  Jerusalem."  It  is  not  thus  that  we  are  wont  to  act  in  this  age.  There  are 
but  few  men  who  would  take  up  any  great  work,  and  set  about  it  themselves, 
without  seeking  the  sympathy  and  counsel  of  their  fellow-men.  If  we  have  some 
work  which  presses  on  us  as  a  duty  of  general  importance,  almost  the  first  thing  we 
do  is  to  call  our  friends  together,  get  their  sanction,  and  form  a  committee  to  aid  us 
In  carrying  it  out.  We,  in  these  days,  work  by  organisations.  Our  individuality  in 
work  is  scarcely  seen  or  felt.  We  are  the  limbs  of  societies,  wheels  in  organisations. 
What  we  want  is  more  individualism  in  action,  more  of  the  independent  man,  and 
less  of  the  society.  Two  things  will  show  the  importance  of  this.  1.  The  opinions  of 
others  cannot  determine  our  duty.    Duty  is  between  us  and  God.    It  is  something 


CHAP,  n.]  NE  HE  MI  AH.  41 

that  is  perfectly  independent  of  men's  thoughts.  2.  The  opinions  of  others  may 
embarrass  us  in  duty.  Duty  generally  comes  to  us  in  very  legible  writing,  wants  no 
interpreter,  speaks  to  us  in  a  very  distinct  voice.  Amid  the  din  of  human  opinion 
there  is  danger  of  its  losing  its  voice.  Let  us,  therefore,  cultivate  the  habit  of 
actiag  independently  ;  not  proudly,  not  despising  the  opinions  of  others,  or  refusing 
their  co-operation,  but  working  ever  from  the  force  of  our  own  convictions. 
III.  He  worked  influentially.  The  next  chapter  shows  that,  under  his  influence, 
all  classes,  male  and  female,  set  to  work  in  right  earnest.  1.  The  people  saw  that 
he  understood  the  matter.  They  recognised  in  him  at  once  a  man  who  knew  what 
he  was  about,  a  man  of  intellectual  grasp  and  might.  2.  The  people  saw  that  he 
was  thoroughly  in  earnest.     What  he  said  he  meant.     IV.  He  worked  heroically. 

1.  Look  at  the  sacrifices  he  made.  2.  Look  at  the  enemies  he  encountered.  He 
had,  at  least,  three  desperate  enemies  (ver.  19) — Sanballat,  Tobiah,  and  Geshem. 
These  men  showed  their  opposition — (1)  By  ridicule  (ver.  19,  chap.  iv.  3). 
(2)  By  indignation  (chap  iv.  7).  3.  The  labour  he  effected.  He  finished  the 
work  in  fifty -two  days,  notwithstanding  all  the  difficulties  that  seemed  insur- 
mountable. He  overcame  the  enemies  who  were  malignant,  he  triumphed  over  all. 
V.  He  worked  religiously.  "  Then  I  told  them  of  the  hand  of  my  God  which 
was  upon  me,"  &c.  (vers.  18-20).     1.  His  impulses  to  act  he  ascribed  to  God. 

2.  His  rule  of  action  he  derived  from  Him  (ver.  18).  3.  His  sacrifices  in  the  work 
he  made  for  Him  (chap  v.  15).  4.  The  spirit  with  which  he  performed  his  work 
was  that  of  dependence  upon  Him  (chap.  iv.  9-12).  This  religion  is  the  philosophy 
of  his  power.  He  felt  himself  the  messenger  and  the  servant  of  God.  (Homilist.) 
Preparation  before  work : — We  often  undertake  one  thing  and  another,  both  in  our 
spiritual  and  temporal  life,  without  preparation ;  and  for  the  want  of  this,  failure 
ensues.  Before  Dr.  Nansen,  the  Norwegian,  started  on  his  Polar  expedition,  he 
slept  under  his  silk  tent  for  the  double  purpose  of  testing  it  and  acclimatising 
himself.  Other  members  of  the  expedition  slept  in  the  open  air  covered  with  the 
wolf-skins  they  were  taking  out  with  them.  A  very  famous  writer,  in  order  to 
secure  as  good  a  description  of  a  thunderstorm  as  possible,  took  up  his  position 
during  six  such  storms  on  the  top  of  a  cathedral  tower,  getting  himself  drenched  to 
the  skin  each  time.  It  is  not  only  the  doing  of  a  thing,  but  the  preparation  for 
doing  it,  which  in  many  cases  issues  in  success.  No  time  spent  in  preparation  for 
what  is  worth  doing  is  lost.  {Signal.)  Purposes  not  to  he  prematurely  divulged : — 
The  purposes  of  ruling  spirits  are  sometimes  so  grand  and  daring  in  their  character 
as  to  be  incapable  of  deriving  support  from  other  minds ;  and  were  they  to  be 
prematurely  divulged,  they  would  be  ruined  in  their  execution.  Lord  Olive  was 
wont  to  say  that  he  never  called  a  council  of  war  but  once,  and  if  he  had  acted  on 
the  advice  given,  the  battle  of  Plessey  would  not  have  been  fought,  and  India  would 
have  been  lost  to  the  British  Empire.  (W.  Ritchie.)  A  time  for  silence : — Learn — 
Good  intentions  are  best  kept  secret. — I.  Until  they  are  ascertained  to  be 
■sacticable.  II.  Until  they  can  be  carried  out  with  decisive  energy. 
III.  From  those  who  are  likely  to  oppose  them.  IV.  Until  the  co-operation 
ESSENTIAL  TO  SUCCESS  CAN  BE  RELIED  ON.  (HomHetic  Commentary.)  The  Divine 
visit  to  the  soul : — In  this  visit  of  generous  sorrow  to  a  scene  of  temple  desolation 
we  are  reminded  of  the  first  approach  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  mercy  to  our  ruined 
souls,  (ir.  Ritchie.)  Personal  exploration : — Take  your  own  measure  of  the 
destitution  of  the  world.  Every  Christian  man  should  go  about  in  the  world,  so  far 
as  he  is  able  to  do  so,  by  the  aid  of  reports — to  take  his  own  measure  of  the  situation 
— steal  out  by  night  and  see  what  the  devil  has  done  with  this  human  nature  of 
ours,  and  he  should  say,  "  God  helping  me,  I  will  do  my  utmost  to  undo  this 
mischief  and  to  repair  the  shattered  house  of  the  Lord. "  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The 
midnight  horseman : — I.  My  subject  impresses  me  with  the  idea  what  an  intense 
THING  IS  attachment  TO  THE  HOUSE  OF  GoD.  It  is  through  the  spectacles  of  this 
scene  that  we  discover  the  ardent  attachment  of  Nehemiah  for  that  sacred  Jerusalem 
which  in  all  ages  has  been  the  type  of  the  Church  of  God,  our  Jerusalem,  which  we 
love  just  as  much  as  Nehemiah  loved  his  Jerusalem.  What  Jerusalem  was  to 
Nehemiah  the  house  of  God  is  to  you.  Infidels  may  scoff  at  the  Church  as  an 
obsolete  affair,  as  a  relic  of  the  dark  ages,  as  a  convention  of  goody-goody  people, 
but  all  the  impression  they  have  ever  made  on  your  mind  against  the  Church  of 
God  is  absolutely  nothing.  You  would  make  more  sacrifices  for  it  to-day  than  for 
any  other  institution,  and  if  it  were  needful,  you  would  die  in  its  defence.     II.  The 

BUINS    MUST    BE    EXPLORED    BEFORE    THE    WORK    OF    RECONSTRUCTION    CAN    BEGIN.      The 

reason  that  so  many  people  in  this  day,  apparently  converted,  do  not  remain  con- 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

verted,  is  because  they  did  not  first  explore  the  ruin  of  their  own  heart.  There  was 
a  superstructure  of  religion  built  on  a  substratum  of  unrepented  sins.  The  trouble 
with  a  good  deal  of  modern  theology  is  that,  instead  of  building  on  the  right 
foundation,  it  builds  on  debris  of  an  unregenerated  nature.  They  attempt  to 
rebuild  Jerusalem  before,  in  the  midnight  of  conviction,  they  have  seen  the  ghastli- 
ness  of  the  ruin.  A  dentist  said  to  me  a  few  days  ago,  "  Does  that  hurt  ?  "  I 
replied,  "  Of  course  it  hurts.  It  is  in  your  business  as  in  my  profession — we  have 
to  hurt  before  we  can  help  ;  we  have  to  explore  and  dig  away  before  we  can  put  in 
the  gold."  You  wiU  never  understand  redemption  until  you  understand  ruin.  A 
man  comes  to  me  to  talk  about  religion.  The  first  question  I  ask  him  is,  "  Do  you 
feel  yourself  to  be  a  sinner?  "  If  he  says,  "Well,  I — yes,"  the  hesitancy  makes  me 
feel  that  the  man  wants  a  ride  on  Nehemiah's  horse  by  midnight  through  the  ruing 
— in  at  the  gate  of  his  affections,  out  at  the  gate  of  his  will,  by  the  dragon  weU ; 
and  before  he  has  got  through  with  that  midnight  ride  he  will  drop  the  reins  on  the 
horse's  neck,  and  he  will  take  his  right  hand  and  smite  on  his  heart,  and  say, 
"  God  ke  merciful  to  me,  a  sinner  1 "  III.  My  subject  gives  me  a  specimen  of  busy 
AND  TKiuMPHANT  SADNESS.  If  there  was  any  man  in  the  world  who  had  a  right  to 
mope  and  give  up  everything  as  lost,  it  was  Nehemiah.  You  say,  *'  He  was  a  cup- 
bearer in  the  palace  of  Shushan,  and  it  was  a  grand  place."  So  it  was.  But  you 
know  very  well  that  fine  architecture  will  not  put  down  home-sickness.  Although 
he  had  a  grief  so  intense  that  it  excited  the  commiseration  of  the  king,  yet  he  rouses 
himself  up  to  rebuild  the  city.  He  gets  his  permission  of  absence  ;  he  gets  his 
passports,  he  hastens  away  to  Jerusalem,  By  night  he  rides  through  the  ruins ;  he 
arouses  the  piety  and  patriotism  of  the  people,  and  in  less  than  two  months 
Jerusalem  was  rebuilt.  That's  what  I  call  busy  and  triumphant  sadness.  The 
whole  temptation  is  with  you,  when  you  have  trouble,  to  do  just  the  opposite  to  the 
behaviour  of  Nehemiah,  and  that  is  to  give  up.  You  say,  "  I  have  lost  my  child, 
and  can  never  smile  again."  You  say,  "  I  have  lost  my  property,  and  I  can  never 
repair  my  fortunes."  You  say,  "  I  have  fallen  into  sin,  and  I  can  never  start  again 
for  a  new  life."  If  Satan  can  make  you  form  that  resolution,  and  make  you  keep 
it,  he  has  ruined  you.  Trouble  is  not  sent  to  crush  you,  but  to  arouse  you,  to 
animate  you,  to  propel  you.  Oh,  that  the  Lord  God  of  Nehemiah  would  arouse  up 
all  broken-hearted  people  to  rebuild.  Whipped,  betrayed,  shipwrecked,  imprisoned, 
Paul  went  right  on.  I  knew  a  mother  who  buried  her  babe  on  Friday,  and  on  the 
Sabbath  appeared  in  the  house  of  God,  and  said,  "  Give  me  a  class ;  give  me  a 
Sabbath-school  class.  I  have  no  child  now  left  me,  and  I  would  like  to  have 
a  class  of  little  children.  Give  me  really  poor  children.  Give  me  a  class  off  the 
back  street."  That  is  beautiful.  That  is  triumphant  sadness.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 
An  inspiration  for  workers : — It  was  like  the  magic  horn  that  awoke  the  inmates 
of  the  enchanted  castle.  The  spell  was  broken.  The  torpor  of  the  Jews  gave 
place  to  hope  and  energy.  Nehemiah  brought  with  him  no  new  labourers ;  but 
he  brought  what  was  better,  the  one  essential  requisite  for  every  great  enterprise — 
an  inspiration.  This  is  the  one  supreme  need  at  present.  {W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.) 
Nehemiah's  appeal: — I.  The  appeal  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem.  The 
distress  under  which  the  city  was  then  groaning  was  the  result — 1.  Of  the  opposi- 
tion of  enemies.  2.  The  indifference  of  friends.  II,  The  invitation  m  connection 
with  the  appeal.  It  was  an  invitation — 1,  To  laborious  and  self-denying  exertion, 
2.  To  immediate  exertion.  3.  To  individual,  to  combined,  to  persevering  exertion. 
in.  The  considerations  by  which  the  invitation  is  enforced.  1,  He  appeals  to 
their  sense  of  shame.  2.  He  notices  the  encouragement  which  was  afforded  them 
by  God.  3.  He  appeals  to  the  encouraging  circumstances  of  the  times.  IV.  The 
effect  which  all  this  had  upon  the  minds  of  the  people.  1.  It  raised  their 
enthusiasm.  2.  It  led  them  to  exertion.  3.  It  led  to  mutual  excitement  and  co- 
operation. 4,  It  led  to  final  success.  {W.  Onne.)  The  call  to  build  : — I.  A  typb 
OF  ALL  God's  true  REPAmERS,  Think  of  our  English  Church  alone.  Eidley  at 
Cambridge,  musing  in  his  walks  over  St.  Paul's  Epistles  ;  Wesley  in  days  when  our 
pulpits  were  too  much  filled  with  "  apes  of  Epictetus,"  brooding  over  the  gospel  of 
grace  and  the  sweetness  of  the  name  of  Jesus  ;  Simeon,  maturing  the  views  which 
stirred  so  many  stagnant  parishes,  and  gave  a  fresh  spring  to  missionary  work ;  in 
the  last  few  years  Aitken,  often  spending  six  hours  in  prayer  within  his  church 
upon  the  Cornish  cliff,  and  then  going  out  with  his  soul  on  fire  to  speak  to  sinners 
of  redeeming  love — what  are  these  and  many  others  but  Christian  Nehemiahs? 
Such  men  be^an  with  prayer  their  survey  in  solitude  and  silence  of  the  wall  which 
was  broken  down.     They  ended  by  crying  with  a  voice  that  went  forth  with  the 


CHAP,  n.]  NEHEMIAH.  43 

winds,  and  entered  with  the  power  of  God  into  hundreds  of  spirits — •*  Come  and  let 
us  build  up  the  wall  of  Jerusalem."  II.  Lessons  for  all  such  repairers.  1.  The 
builders  worked  under  arms.  Those  who  at  this  crisis  would  do  a  real  work  of 
spiritual  restoration  in  the  English  Church,  must  "  every  one  have  his  sword  girded 
by  his  side,"  and  "  so  build."  Those  who  seek  three  great  ends — a  more  reverent 
worship,  a  ministry  fuller  of  individual  consolation,  and  a  tenderer  devotion — must, 
even  while  they  build,  be  equipped  and  vigilant  against  a  hostile  influence. 
(1)  They  must  guard  against  a  Romanising  ritual,  and,  I  will  add,  a  sentimental 
ritualism.  (2)  They  should  be  vigilant  to  resist  other  and  far  subtler  invasions  of 
principles  hostile  to  the  spirit  of  the  English  Reformation,  (a)  We  are  often  told 
that  we  must  have  among  us  habitual  private  confession,  and  aosolution,  and  syste- 
matic spiritual  guidance.  I  hold  with  Mason,  who  says,  "  We  have  not  only  a  public 
absolution  in  our  Church,  but  a  private  one  also,  for  there  are  many  who  want 
particular  comfort.  And  therefore  we  use  a  private  absolution  in  the  visitation  of 
the  sick,  and  so  often  as  the  broken  hearts  and  wounded  consciences  of  particular 
persons  do  require  it."  But  if  any  desire  to  go  further — to  change  confession  from 
a  medicine  for  the  morbid  into  a  good  for  all — they  are  aiming  at  that  which  the 
genius  of  Teutonic  Christianity,  the  character  of  the  English  people,  and  of  the 
English  Reformation,  render  an  impossibility.  (6)  A  second  point,  in  which 
our  builders  need  to  wear  the  sword  while  they  repair  the  wall,  concerns  the  form 
of  the  devotions  which  they  may  introduce  or  recommend.  Let  me  instance  that 
of  which  so  much  has  lately  been  heard — the  worship  of  the  Sacred  Heart.  2.  The 
builders  worked  under  the  harmonious  co-operation  of  priesthood  and  laity.  Ezra 
and  Nehemiah  combined  in  the  restoration.  (Abp.  Alexander.)  A  desolate 
city  : — A  desolate  city  tells  a  tale  of  past  greatness,  past  resources,  past  life.  Who 
can  look  upon  the  nations  of  China  and  India  and  not  mourn  over  their  moral  and 
spiritual  desolation  ?  There  are  God's  gifts  in  abundance,  but  superstition  reigns 
supreme.  The  teeming  millions  are  in  a  state  of  moral  ruin.  Shall  we  not  feel 
compassion  for  them  ?  Let  us  arise  and  restore  the  breaches  made  by  sin,  Satan, 
and  superstition.  (J.  M.  Randall.)  The  ruins  of  Jerusalem : — Nehemiah  is  for 
us  an  example.   Like  him,  we  would  build  again  the  walls  of  Jerusalem.    I.  Let  us 

SEE  IN  WHAT  WAT  OUR  SITUATION  RECALLS  TO  US  THE  TIMES  OF  NeHEMIAH.      1,  Jerusalem, 

for  us,  is  the  Church.  I  use  the  word  in  the  wide  and  yet  exact  sense  that  the 
Scripture  does.  The  Church,  according  to  the  expression  of  Paul,  is  the  spiritual 
house  of  God,  built  upon  the  foundation  of  apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ 
Himself  being  the  chief  corner-stone.  The  Church,  according  to  the  expression  of 
Peter,  is  that  building  to  which  we  ought  to  belong  as  living  stones  in  order  to  be  a 
spiritual  house,  a  holy  priesthood.  The  Church  is  that  family  whose  members  are 
known  to  God  alone ;  it  is  that  great  city  of  souls  of  which  our  various  Churches 
are  but  imperfect  realisations.  If  the  house  in  which  we  have  grown  up  is  dear  to 
us  above  all,  what  then  will  be  the  Church,  especially  when  it  has  transmitted  to  us 
with  the  treasures  of  the  gospel  examples  of  heroic  fidelity  ?  Let  us  then  love  the 
Church  we  belong  to — love  it  more  than  others  ;  it  is  our  right,  it  is  our  duty ;  but 
above  this,  let  us  maintain  the  grand  reality  which  is  called  the  universal  Church, 
and  which  must  be  to  us  an  object  of  faith.  2.  "  The  wall  of  Jerusalem  is  broken 
down,"  said  the  fugitives  to  Nehemiah.  Is  not  this  the  message  that  many  voices 
bring  to  us  to-day  from  all  parts  of  Christendom  ?  The  Protestant  Church  has  been 
surprised.  Protected  heretofore  by  the  rampart  of  the  authority  of  the  Scriptures 
which  the  Reformation  had  built  up,  and  behind  which,  no  doubt,  were  sheltered 
many  intestine  struggles,  it  was  unanimous  in  rushing  to  the  breach  when  it  was 
necessary  to  defend  its  liberty  against  Catholicism,  its  faith  in  the  God  of  revelation 
against  infidelity.  To-day  that  rampart  has  been  forced ;  criticism  has  penetrated 
into  the  place  like  a  vast  and  impetuous  torrent.  The  authenticity  of  the  sacred 
books,  facts,  and  doctrines,  all  have  been  shaken ;  and,  after  having  denied  the 
reality  of  a  supernatural  revelation,  it  sees  itself  outstripped  by  a  philosophy  which, 
enlarging  the  breach  which  it  has  forced  open,  destroys  even  the  religious  sentiment 
itself,  well  knowing  that  nothing  will  have  been  accomplished  so  long  as  the  voice 
within  the  recesses  of  the  human  soul,  which  calls  for  succour  and  pardon  from  the 
living  God,  has  not  been  stifled.  II.  Let  us  now  see  what  his  example  ought  to 
TEACH  us.  Notice — 1.  His  sorrow.  Do  you  understand  such  sorrow  as  Nehemiah's? 
Do  you  know  what  it  is  to  groan  as  he  did  over  the  desolation  of  Jerusalem  ?  Our 
age  has  signalised  sorrow ;  its  poets  have  sung  of  the  secret  melancholy  of  the  soul 
with  a  vivid  emotion ;  but  in  the  sadness  which  inspects  itself,  which  analyses  itself 
with  complacent  curiosity,  which  exhibits  itself  to  the  world,  what  egotism  is  there. 


44  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

■what  bitter  pride  or  trivial  vanity  1  How  rare  ia  sorrow  for  the  cause  of  God. 
Curious  about  everything,  even  of  evil,  diverted  by  everything,  distracted  from  the 
one  thing  needful,  we  are  hardly  able  to  comprehend  the  sorrow  of  an  Elijah 
making  lament  over  erring  Israel,  of  a  Nehemiah  shedding  heartfelt  tears  over  the 
ruins  of  Jerusalem,  or  a  Paul  full  of  holy  bitterness  in  the  presence  of  Athenian 
idolatry,  of  a  Calvin  consumed  with  sadness  at  the  sight  of  the  persecuted  Churches. 
2.  His  spirit  of  sacrifice.  Nehemiah  does  more  than  lament.  He  acts,  and  to  act 
he  knows  how  to  sacrifice  all.  To  the  peace  which  he  enjoys  he  prefers  the 
dangers  of  a  struggle  without  a  truce ;  to  the  brilliant  future  which  awaits  him, 
the  reproach  of  his  people.  It  is  this  spirit  which  always  distinguishes  those  who 
wish  to  serve  God  here  below.  In  every  age  they  must  be  separated  from  the  world. 
I  have  seen,  in  another  denomination,  young  men  and  maidens,  at  the  age  when 
life  promised  them  its  enchantments,  giving  aU  up,  even  their  very  name,  putting 
on  the  serge  or  the  cassock,  and  for  ever  enhsting  themselves  in  the  service  of  the 
poor,  in  school  or  hospital.  We  like  an  easy  religion.  They  alone  are  able  and 
worthy  to  raise  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  who,  as  Nehemiah,  will  know  how  to 
sacrifice  all  for  God.  3.  His  earnestness  in  the  work  he  has  undertaken.  Notice 
here  the  greatness  of  his  faith,  as  measured  by  the  paucity  of  his  resources  and 
by  the  vast  obstacles  which  he  encounters.  Possibly  more  than  one  person  in  this 
assembly  has  felt  his  zeal  paralysed  by  the  spectacle  of  the  Church,  by  the  smaU- 
ness  of  our  resources  compared  with  the  vastness  of  the  obstacles  1  You  also,  like 
Nehemiah,  have  passed  dark  nights  in  which  you  have  reviewed  one  after  another 
all  the  ruins  which  our  century  piles  up.  Old  beliefs,  holy,  venerated  traditions, 
which  mingle  in  a  far-off  recollection  with  the  prayers  of  the  cradle,  scouted, 
abandoned  to  the  derision  of  the  multitude  I  Have  you  not  seen  in  those  souls 
which  are  dear  to  you  the  hopes  and  consolations  of  the  gospel  wear  away  one  by 
one  ?  Have  you  not  heard  from  lips  which  once  prayed  as  yours  the  cold  denials 
of  a  pitiless  criticism  ?  Once  they  heard,  when  beholding  the  skies,  the  song  of 
worlds  praising  their  creator  God ;  now  they  catch  nothing  more  than  the  inevit- 
able evolution  of  an  eternal  mechanism.  Once  it  was  Providence,  without  whose 
permission  not  a  sparrow  falls  to  the  ground,  and  who  counts  our  tears ;  now  it  is 
man,  who  stands  solitary  in  face  of  the  cold  immensities  of  space,  where  God  is  no 
more.  Alas  !  before  such  ruins  I  understand  how  the  heart  shudders.  But  it  is  the 
very  magnificence  of  these  ruins  that  fills  us  with  hope.  Between  the  living  God  of 
Christianity  and  the  nullity  of  fatalism  there  is  nothing  which  remains  standing ; 
not  one  system  which  keeps  together  even  sufiicient  stones  to  build  a  piece  of  wall 
or  a  shelter.  Now  humanity  does  not  live  upon  nothing.  It  sins,  it  suffers,  it  dies; 
it  has  need  of  pardon,  of  consolation,  of  hope ;  and  if,  before  those  supreme 
questions  which  we  can  shun  to-day,  but  which  will  return  to-morrow,  science  must 
confess  its  entire  ignorance ;  if,  to  the  spirit  which  has  a  thirst  for  the  absolute,  to 
the  heart  which  has  a  thirst  for  love,  to  the  conscience  which  has  a  thirst  for 
righteousness,  it  replies,  "  Leave  those  reveries ;  I  acknowledge  nothing  but  what  I 
touch  and  what  I  see  "  ;  if  such  are  its  latest  words,  as  we  are  given  to  understand, 
humanity  must  go  away  elsewhere  to  seek  for  repose,  peace,  certitude.  May  it  then 
find  opened  before  it  the  Jerusalem  of  the  living  God  1  Come  then,  I  say  to  you, 
come,  and  let  us  raise  again  the  wall  of  Jerusalem,  that  we  be  no  more  a  reproach. 
To  the  work,  in  days  of  difficulty ;  to  the  work,  notwithstanding  the  want  of  success. 
••  0  God,"  said  a  great  Christian,  "  success  is  Thine  affair ;  as  for  me,  give  me 
obedience."  [E.  Bersier,  D.D.)  And  they  said.  Let  us  rise  up  and  build. — 
Prepared  hearts  : — There  are  moments  when  human  hearts  are  so  prepared  by  God 
that  great  truths  require  only  to  be  addressed  to  them  to  meet  an  immediate  recep- 
tion. They  are  as  the  paper  made  ready  by  the  photographer  for  receiving  the 
impress  of  a  likeness ;  the  object  has  only  to  be  presented  before  it  in  a  proper 
light,  when  it  takes  on  its  exact  image.  It  was  so  in  this  instance  with  these 
men  of  Judah.  They  readily  responded  to  Nehemiah's  appeal.  (IF.  liitchie.) 
Enthusiasm  : — The  power  of  enthusiasm,  the  worth  of  an  enthusiastic  man,  is  the 
lesson  here  impressed  upon  our  minds.  1.  Nehemiah  comes  all  on  fire  for  his 
undertaking.  He  is  not  only  enthusiastic,  but  wise.  Enthusiasm  without  fore- 
thought is  blind  force.  It  is  hke  the  ocean  foaming  away  its  power  in  battle  with 
an  iron-bound  coast.  United  with  prudence  it  is  like  the  stream  of  a  broad,  deep 
river  fertilising  the  soil,  bearing  on  its  breast  the  ships  of  merchants,  giving  an 
impulse  to  industry,  to  enterprise,  and  to  the  spirit  of  adventure  and  discovery. 
2.  Christianity  is  a  feeble  power  if  it  is  not  enthusiastic.  It  is  the  amazing 
spectacle  of  the  great  Bedeemer  of  the  world  laying  down  His  life  for  the  world 


CHAP,  n.]  NEHEMIAH.  45 

which  has  created  the  Church,  and  which  is  the  life  and  energy  of  her  everj 
message  and  mission.  3.  Enthusiasm  is  the  need  of  the  Church  of  God.  Hearts 
with  fire,  souls  with  passion  glowing  within  them.  Before  such  men  the  mountain 
becomes  a  plain,  the  rough  places  smooth,  the  Impossible  possible.  It  is  humanity's 
true  cleansing  stream  and  motive  power.  The  enthusiasm  of  Christ  is  for  us  all  the 
aafeguard  of  conduct,  the  mightiest  inspiration  to  a  holy  and  useful  life.  (A.  J. 
Grilfith.)  Leaders  wanted  .-—Often  what  people  are  waiting  for  is  simply  a 
leader — a  man  of  courage,  energy,  and  hopefulness,  who  can  stimulate  their  zeal 
by  the  contagion  of  his  own,  and  who,  at  the  same  time,  has  practical  ability  to 
marshal  their  powers  and  to  organise  and  direct  their  resources.  Such  a  man  was 
Nehemiah.     (T.  Campbell  Finlayson.)  The  strength  of  unity— I.  Consists  in 

rrs  POWER  TO  pkotect  individual  workers  against  discouragement.  1.  Isolated 
workers  are  always  liable  to  depression.  2.  Mutual  sympathy  and  con- 
ference relieve  mental  strain,  and  renew  exhausted  energy.  II.  Consists 
IN  its    power   op   resisting  combined  opposition  from  without.     III.  Consists 

IN      ITS      power      to      cope     WITH      THE      INHERENT      DIFFICULTIES      OF      THE      WORK, 

WHICH  OTHERWISE  WOULD  BE  INSURMOUNTABLE.  {Homiletic  Commentary.)  The 
rebuilding  of  Jerusalevi: — I  remember  a  saying  of  Edward  Irving'a  which 
proved  a  guiding  light  to  so  great  a  man  as  Frederick  Maurice,  when  he  was  in 
4oubt  and  darkness.  It  was  this :  *'  The  Old  Testament  is  the  dictionary  of  the 
New  1 "  We  can  use  the  Old  Testament  reverently  as  such  to-day,  and  may  find 
the  meaning  and  motive  of  modern  service  in  this  story  of  earlier  days.  Let  us  try 
to  look,  then,  under  the  surface  and  see — I.  The  nature  of  this  work — the 
rebuilding  of  Jerusalem.  1.  It  was  for  religious  ends  that  it  was  undertaken. 
Babylon  and  Shushan  were  noble  cities ;  but  the  work  of  erecting  others  like  them 
would  not  have  inspired  Nehemiah  with  this  self-sacrificing  fervour.  Some  cities 
are  the  creatures  of  commerce,  and  grow,  as  London  grows,  by  the  numbers  who 
come  to  it  for  work  or  speculation ;  and  then  they  decay,  as  many  a  city  has  done, 
because  the  highway  to  the  sea  gets  closed  up  by  the  mass  of  matter  poured  down  by 
the  river  and  silted  up  by  the  tides.  Other  cities  are  planted  by  a  conqueror  for 
military  purposes,  to  dominate  some  disaffected  district,  or  to  guard  a  threatened 
frontier— as  xMetz  was  fortified  in  modern  days,  and  as  most  itoman  towns  were 
erected  in  our  own  country.  But  Jerusalem  was  not  a  military  centre ;  it  was  on 
no  great  highway,  and  its  site  would  have  been  ill  chosen  for  commercial  enterprise. 
That  city  was  pre-eminently  a  sacred  city,  containing  a  temple  whose  ritual 
enshrined  truths  which  the  world  could  not  have  done  without.  If  you  read  the 
subsequent  history  of  this  rebuilding  you  will  see  the  uses  to  which  the  city  was  put 
directly  it  was  safe  against  attack.  And  those  were  the  purposes  the  builders  con- 
templated. The  law  of  God  was  read  to  the  people  by  Ezra  ;  the  Feast  of  Taber- 
aacles  was  kept,  as  it  had  not  been  for  many  a  year ;  the  Day  of  Atonement  was 
solemnly  observed  ;  and  the  former  covenant  with  Jehovah  was  renewed.  And 
then  righteous  laws  were  enforced,  and  justice  was  done  to  all  the  people.  This 
teaches  us  that  all  our  undertakings,  as  God's  people — even  though  they  are  as 
material  as  building  a  city  or  enlarging  a  church — are  to  be  begun  and  carried  on 
with  such  ends  in  view.  2.  Again,  the  good  work  these  Jews  had  to  do  was  amid 
i,he  ruins  of  what  had  been  noble.  Every  dislodged  stone,  every  chiselled  capital, 
every  broken  piUar,  every  charred  fragment  of  carved  woodwork  was  an  evidence 
of  the  beauty  and  glory  which  had  been.  Buins !  we  Christian  workers  see  them 
everywhere.  Heathen  sacrifices  and  penances — what  are  these  but  the  fragments, 
the  dimly-remembered  traditions,  of  a  nobler  faith?  And  inspiring  utterances  from 
.the  lips  and  pens  of  great  thinkers,  who  doubt  or  deny  the  existence  of  God,  are 
xmlj  the  shattered  columns  which  tell  us  of  what  has  been  given  of  God,  though 
now  marred  by  human  folly.  Aye,  and  in  the  Church  are  ruins  of  theological 
systems  which  once  imperfectly  set  forth  the  Divine  ideal,  now  broken  up,  not  to  be 
destroyed,  but  to  be  rebuilt  in  statelier  and  nobler  forms.  And,  sadder  far,  we  see 
around  us  ruins  of  manhood,  ruins  of  womanhood,  ruins  of  childhood,  faces 
besotted  by  drink,  bodies  debased  by  impurity,  living  temples  defiled  and  desecrated, 
till  the  very  angels  might  weep  over  them.  God  help  us  to  do  a  little  upbuilding, 
and  give  us  grace  to  this  end  to  undertake  the  lowliest  work.  3.  Such  labour 
is  called  for  by  God.  II.  The  advantages  of  such  work.  1.  Its  tendency  is  to 
increase  strength.  I  have  seen  some  Churches  ruined  by  rust,  through  lying  by 
like  a  disused  plough  in  fallow  ground  ;  but  I  never  saw  (or  heard  of)  one  broken 
•down  by  overwork.  So  long  as  there  is  a  spirit  of  enterprise,  a  longing  to  do 
.greater  things — not  from  a  desiie  for  Belf-glorLfication,  but  from  a  sincere  wish 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  n. 

to  advance  the  cause  of  the  Master — so  long  there  is  life,  and  life  which  becomes 
more  abundant.     Use  develops  and  improves  living  things  and  living  gifts  always. 
There  is  more  muscle  in  the  ironworker  than  in  the  student ;  more  keenness  of 
sight  in  the  Highland  gillie  than  in  the  shopman  ;  more  intellectual  power  in  the 
student  than  in  the  ploughman — because  in  each  the  gift  has  been  developed  by 
exercise.     Let  a  Church  transmute  its  feeling  of  love  for  the  brethren  into  actual 
service  for  the  poor,  and  its  love  will  abound  yet  more  and  more.     2.  Its  tendency 
is  to  make  more  real  fellowship  among  the  workers.     III.  The  spikit  in  which  ali* 
woKK  FOB  God  should  be  undertaken,     1.  In  the   spirit  of  earnestness.     How 
seldom  we  pause  to  ask,  "  Is  this  the  best  I  can  do  ?  "    Is  this  "  the  most  I  can 
afford  "  ?     Nehemiah  sacrificed  ease  and  wealth,  but  our  Lord  sacrificed  Himself ; 
and  in  the  presence  of  Christ's  Cross  how  poor  our  offerings  and  services  seem  t 
Yet  men  who  do  not  profess  what  we  do  sometimes  put  us  to  shame.     Did  you 
read,  in  your  newspaper,  about  that  terrible  accident  at  the  Clifton  Colliery,  near 
Manchester,  whereby  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  men  and  boys  lost  their  lives  ? 
It  seemed  going  down  to  certain  death  to  descend  the  shaft ;  yet  when  there  was  a 
call  for  volunteers  there  was  eager  competition  for  the  honour  of  risking  life  to 
save  the  men  entombed  below.    And  one  of  the  men  down  there  at  the  time — 
Thomas  Worrall,  the  surviving  underlooker — knocked  to  the  ground  by  the  force  of 
the  explosion,  recovered  consciousness  only  to  devote  himself  to  the  guidance  and 
the  deliverance  of  the  frightened  men  and  lads  about  him ;  and  when  he  reached 
the  main  shaft  he  sent  up  all  the  injured,  and  then  the  uninjured,  himself  remain- 
ing in  danger  till  the  last.     In  another  part  of  the  pit  was  a  fireman,  George 
Hickson,  whose  duty  it  was  to  manipulate  the  signals  between  the  bottom  of  the 
shaft  and  the  engine-house  above.     He  stood  there  at  the  post  of  duty,  refusing  to 
leave,  whatever  happened;  for  he  was  the  appointed  means  of  communication 
between  the  rescuers  up  in  light  and  those  to  be  rescued  down  in  darkness.     We 
admire  and  praise  the  earnestness  and  devotion  of  such  heroes  in  humble  life ;  but 
should  we  not  emulate  them  if  we  profess  to  be  the  disciples  of  Him  who  gave  His 
life  for  the  world  ?     Standing  as  we  do,  like  that  poor  coUier,  between  the  living 
and  the  dead,  the  mediators — holding  God  with  the  hand  of  faith,  and  holding 
man  with  the  hand  of  love — let  us  realise  our  responsibility  and  be  true  to  our 
duty.     2.  In  the  spirit  of  hopefulness.     3.  In  the  spirit  of  prayerfulness.      {A. 
Rowland,  LL.B.,  B.A.)        They  laughed  us  to  scorn. — Derision: — A  poor,  godly 
man  was  the  subject  of  much  profane  ridicule  amongst  his  neighbours.     On  being 
asked  if  these  persecutions  did  not  sometimes  make  him  ready  to  give  up  his  pro- 
fession of  religior ,  he  replied,  "  No.     I  recollect  that  our  minister  once  said  in  his 
sermon,  that  if  we  were  so  foolish  as  to  permit  such  people  to  laugh  us  out  of  our 
religion,  till  at  last  we  dropped  into  hell,  they  could  not  laugh  us  out  again." 
Fortified  against  derision: — Admiral  Colpoys  relates  that  when  he  first  left  his 
lodgings  to  join  his  ship  as  a  midshipman,  his  landlady  presented  him  with  a  Bible 
and  a  guinea,  saying,  "  God  bless  you,  and  prosper  you  my  lad  ;  and  as  long  as  you 
live  never  suffer  yourself  to  be  laughed  out  of  your  money  or  your  prayers."     This 
advice  he  carefully  followed  through  life.         Open  derision  : — The  sin  of  mocking — • 
I.  Weakens  every  virtuous  restraint.     II.  Strengthens  vicious  propensities. 
IIL  Gives  great  advantage  to  your  worst  enemies.    IV.  Exposes  to  peculiar  marks 
OF  God's  displeasure  (2  Kings  ii.  23).    V.  Terminates  m  remediless  woe  (Isa.  Ixvi. 
3,  4 ;  Prov.  i.  25,  26).    (/.  Kidd.)       Ridicule  confronted : — There  are  some  natures — 
and  these  by  no  means  the  most  ignoble — that  are  peculiarly  sensitive  to  ridicule. 
They  could  meet  a  blow  better  than  a  sneer,  and  would  rather  be  persecuted  than 
despised.     If  we  hold  certain  views  on  political  questions,  let  us,  indeed,  make 
sure  that  we  are  holding  them  on  good  grounds  ;  but  let  us  not  give  them  up,  or  be 
ashamed  of  them,  merely  because  we  may  be  sneered  at  as  being  "  behind  the  age." 
There  is  an  intellectual  self-conceit  which  shelters  its  own  ignorance  behind  the 
authority  of  great  names,  and  all  but  exhausts  its  own  shallow  powers  in  flippant 
sarcasm  and  clever  scorn.     Or,  again,  if  we  take  an  interest  in  Christian  missions, 
or  try  to  teach  a  few  children  in  a  Sunday-school,  or  aim  at  lifting  some  of  our 
companions  into  a  more  thoughtful  life,  let  us  not  give  up  our  endeavours  merely 
because  some  Sanballat  or  Tobiah  may  jeer  at  us.     If  our  work  is  one  which  the 
God  of  heaven  is  likely  to  smile  upon  and  prosper,  we  can  afford  to  despise  all  this 
foolish  scorn.     Or,  again,  if  we  are  seeking  to  build  up  our  own  character  into  true 
godliness,   let  us    learn    to  confront  all  ridicule  with   calmness.     {T.   Campbell 
Finloyson.)        The  God  of  heaven.  He  will  prosper  ua — Confidence  in  God  an 
incentive  to  work: — Because — L  It  suggests  almighty  protection.    II.  It  buooesx» 


CHAP,  n.]  NEHEMIAH.  47 

PROVIDENTIAL  DIBKCTION.      III.  It  BDGOESTS  DiVINB  BENEDICTION.      IV.  It  ANTICIPATES 

ULTIMATE  SUCCESS.  [HomiUtic  Commentary.)  Signs  of  prosperity  : — We  are  not 
called  to  build  a  wall ;  but  to  raise  something  more  noble  than  that.  We  are 
called  of  Qod  to  go  and  search  amongst  the  rubbish  of  our  poor  fallen  humanity, 
and  find  our  precious  stones  that  shall  be  polished  after  the  similitude  of  a  palace. 
We  are  called  to  build  a  city  of  living  stones  that  shall  be  a  habitation  of  God 
through  the  Spirit.  The  times  in  which  we  are  doing  this  are  no  whit  better  than 
they  were  in  Nehemiah's  day.  The  men  who  scoffed  in  that  day  sent  their  spirit 
flitting  through  the  ages,  and  in  their  children  they  scoff  still.  I  hear  them  sneer, 
and  say,  "  What  are  these  poor  people  trying  to  do  ?  Do  they  presume  to  tread 
upon  our  domain,  and  think  of  building  on  our  ruins  ?  Why,  if  a  fox  comes  against 
their  work  it  will  fall."  Well,  what  is  our  answer  ?  "  The  God  of  heaven.  He  will 
prosper  us."  I.  Signs  of  prosperity.  1.  A  bold  independence  of  the  world.  2.  A 
total  dependence  upon  God.  3.  A  third  sign  of  prosperity  is  the  spirit  and  power  of 
prayer  in  a  Church.  This  is  the  great  secret  of  her  strength  and  success,  and  the 
power  that  moves  all  her  machinery.  My  little  child  wants  to  know  what  makes  the 
hands  of  my  watch  go  round  and  tell  me  the  time.  I  explain  the  power  of  the  spring, 
and  assure  her  that  is  the  secret  of  the  hands  going  round.  I  want  to  know  the  secret 
of  so  much  prosperity  in  some  Churches.  I  see  it  is  there  in  abundance,  and  wonder 
if  the  secret  is  in  the  learning  and  eloquence  of  the  preacher,  or  the  wealth  of  the 
deacons,  or  the  respectability  of  the  congregation.  I  have  found  out  the  secret.  There 
is  a  crowd  of  earnest  men,  and  in  the  crowd  the  spirit  and  power  of  prayer.  4.  When 
the  work  of  conversion  goes  on  in  the  congregation.    II.  The  source  of  prosperity. 

III.  The  certainty  op  prosperity.  {W.  Cuff'.)  The  worker's  watchword : — 
I.  The  honourable  name  Nehemiah  appropriates  to  himself  and  to  his  fellow- 
labourers  :  a  servant  of  God.  To  know  God  is  the  highest  aim  of  science ;  to  be 
like  God,  the  highest  ideal  of  humanity  ;  to  serve  God,  the  joy  of  angels.  A  child 
of  God  is  a  more  precious  designation  than  that  of  servant  of  God.  Yet  there  is  a 
resemblance  between  them,  for  true  liberty,  greatness,  salvation  consists  in  this — 
serving  God.  II.  The  holy  purpose  Nehemiah  had  before  him.  "  We  will  rise  and 
build."  The  true  servant  of  God  must  be  building  the  house  of  God.  1.  In  his 
own  heart.  2.  In  his  home.  3.  In  society.  4.  In  the  state.  5.  In  the  Church. 
6.  In  the  world.  III.  His  severe  strife.  His  work  does  not  prosper  without 
conflict.  The  world  and  the  kingdom  of  God  are  as  opposed  to  one  another 
as  the  Samaritans  and  Jews  were  of  old.  Ethics  they  hold  to  be  of  value  still, 
but  care  nothing  for  the  revelation  of  the  saving  grace  of  God  to  sinful  men. 

IV.  The  true  support.  V.  A  conscious  fidelity.  Nehemiah  was  conscious  of 
his  own  fidelity.  The  Lord  still  knows  those  who  preserve  their  fidelity. 
For  their  fidelity  they  are  responsible,  not  for  the  results.  VI.  A  glorious 
triumph.  The  Lord  causes  the  work  to  succeed.  If  we  buUd  and  trust,  pray  and 
work,  the  like  success  will  be  ours.  {J.  J.  Van  Oosterzee.)  A  well-grounded 
resolution  : — I.  The  answer  to  the  adversaries.  II.  The  confidence  expressed. 
III.  The  resolution  to  work,  (J.  Wells.)  Nehemiah's  answer  to  his  reproachful 
adversaries  : — I.  The  subject-matter  of  Nehemiah's  answer  and  what  it  teaches 
us.  It  reminds  us — 1.  Whence  aU  true  prosperity  and  success  in  the  Lord's  work 
are  to  be  looked  for  and  obtained.  "  Except  the  Lord  build  the  house,  they  labour 
in  vain  that  build  it ;  except  the  Lord  keep  the  city,  the  watchman  waketh  but  in 
vain."  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  My  Spirit  saith  the  Lord."  It  is 
"  God  that  giveth  the  increase."  What  the  Word  of  God  thus  plainly  teaches, 
providence  abundantly  illustrates,  and  human  experience  amply  confirms.  2.  That 
this  ought  to  have  the  effect  of  stirring  us  up  to  earnest  united  exertion,  and  of 
keeping  us  ever  actively  engaged  in  the  Lord's  service.  II.  The  spirit  in  which 
this  answer  was  made.  1.  It  was  made  in  a  strong,  unwavering  confidence  in  God, 
with  the  humble  assurance  of  Divine  help  and  success  in  the  work.  2.  It  was  the 
spirit  of  enlightened  zeal  for  the  cause  of  God  and  the  Divine  glory.  3.  It  was  the 
spirit  of  fearless  determination  to  prosecute  the  work  on  which  he  was  entering  at 
all  hazards.  4.  It  was  one  of  self-denying  patriotism.  Conclusion :  We  ought  to 
cultivate  the  spirit  and  imitate  the  example  of  Nehemiah — 1.  In  the  work  of  our 
own  individual  salvation.  2.  In  furthering  the  interests  of  the  Eedeemer's 
kingdom  in  the  world.  (J.  Sturrock.)  Inspiring  mottoes  for  Christian  workers  : — 
There  was  an  excellent  missionary  who,  from  his  conversion  to  his  death,  adopted 
three  texts  as  his  daily  mottoes.  1.  Personal  hope:  "Looking  unto  Jesus." 
2.  Personal  strength:  "My  grace  is  suificient  for  thee."  3.  Personal  service: 
"  Whose  I  am,  and  whom  I  serve."    (J.  M.  Randall.) 


48  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 


CHAPTER  ni. 

Vebs.  1-32.  Then  EUasMb  the  high  priest  rose  up  with  hla  brethren. — The 

builders  at  work : — Unity  in  diversity  seems  to  be  the  principle  on  which  God  works 
both  in  the  natural  and  spiritual  world — a  truth  which  is  capable  of  almost  endless 
illustration.  I.  We  see  it,  for  instance,  in  an  individual  Chuuch.  What  a  variety 
of  mental  constitution  and  habits  of  thought ;  what  difference  in  training,  in 
education,  and,  consequently,  in  apprehension  of  spiritual  things,  and  also  in  time, 
opportunity  and  social  influence,  among  individual  members.  Yet  where  there  is 
the  quickening  breath  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  there  will  be  unity  in  the  work  while 
there  is  diversity  in  the  operations.  Thus  one  man  is  called  to  preach,  another  to 
take  charge  of  the  finances  ;  while  each  takes  his  own  part  and  seeks  by  God's  help 
to  discharge  his  individual  responsibility,  there  must  be  a  chord  of  sympathy 
between  aU  the  workers,  for  they  "  are  members  one  of  another."    II.  The  same  is 

true    of    THE    DIFFERENT     SECTIONS    INTO     WHICH    THE    ChURCH     OF    ChRIST    IS    STILL 

UNHAPPILY  DIVIDED.      III.  We  may  go  farther  and  apply  this  truth  to  the  mant 

EFFORTS  THAT   ARE   NOW   BEING   PUT  FORTH  ALL  OVER  THE  WORLD.       AmOUg  the  natiOHS 

of  Europe  there  are  zealous  workers,  and  we  must  bear  them  up  before  God  in 
believing  prayer.    They  are  working  on  the  same  wall,  though  on  different  parts  of 
it.    And  there  are  indirect  workers,  too,  whom  we  must  not  fail  to  recognise.     The 
philanthropist,  the  temperance  reformer,  those  engaged  in  educational,  charitable, 
and  other  movements  which  tend  to  benefit  the  masses  of  the  people — they  also  are 
engaged  in  building  the  wall.    We  must  enlarge  our  sympathies  and  rejoice  in  every 
man  who  seeks  to  do  honest  work  for  God.     We  must  not  forget,  however,  that 
while  there  was  oneness  in  the  work,  there  was  individuality  in  its  different  parts. 
The  work  being  great,  it  was  subdivided,  and  each  man  had  a  special  portion  allotted 
to  him,  generally  that  which  lay  nearest  to  his  own  dwelling.     There  is  work  there 
if  he  will  only  look  for  it  under  the  guidance  of  God's  Spirit.    About  twenty  years 
ago  a  youth  in  whose  heart  lay  the  fervent  desire  to  preach  to  the  heathen,  stood  in 
a  crowded  assembly  listening  to  a  popular  preacher.    "  You  think,"  said  the  speaker, 
"of  a  group  of  blacks  gathered  under  the  wide-spreading  banian  tree,  and  you 
imagine  how  you  could  discourse  to  them  of  the  wondrous  love  of  Christ.    Ah  I  my 
brother,  begin  at  home ;  try  it  in  the  streets  of  London  first."     It  was  a  word  in 
season ;  the  young  man  began  to  build  over  against  his  house ;  God  blessed  him  to 
the  conversion  of  hundreds  of  souls,  and  He  is  blessing  him  stiU.    In  Christian  work, 
too,  we  may  see  that  the  selfish  instinct  is  recognised — not  the  selfishness  which  robs 
God  and  glorifies  self,  but  that  which  leads  a  worker  to  be  interested  in  his  own 
department  of  work  as  he  can  be  in  no  other.     In  this  sense  there  is  a  selfishness 
which  is  not  sinful,  and  which  we  may  almost  say  is  not  selfish.     If  kept  in  due 
subordination  to  thoughts  of  the  oneness  of  the  work,  it  is  commendable  and  ought 
to  be  cultivated.     How  often  in  conversation  with  a  brother  worker  have  we  failed 
to  gain  his  close  attention  while  we  spoke  to  him  of  our  work  or  the  work  of  other 
brethren  1    But  when  we  asked  about  his  congregation,  his  mission-room,  or  hia 
Sunday  or  ragged  school,  what  a  change  1     His  tongue  was  loosed,  and  his  whole 
face  glowed  with  animation  as  he  told  us  how  the  Lord  was  helping  and  blessing 
him.    It  is  both  natural  and  right  that  it  should  be  so.     He  is  building  before  his 
own  door,  and  while  not  ignoring  others,  he  thinks  of  the  work  over  against  his 
house  as  he  can  of  no  other  part  of  the  wall.     His  heart  is  specially  there.    From 
the  portions  of  work  allotted  to  the  individual  citizens,  we  may  learn  also  the 
importance  of  concentration  in  Christian  effort.     Had  a  man  put  a  brick  here,  and 
a  daub  of  mortar  there,  and  laid  a  beam  yonder,  the  wall  would  have  made  but  slow 
progress ;  but  as  one  man  built  before  his  own  door,  and  another  before  his,  and  so 
on  all  round  the  city,  the  attention  and  energy  of  each  were  concentrated  upon  his 
special  portion,  and  the  wall  rapidly  approached  completion.     Now,  concentration 
is  an  important  principle  in  Christian  work  as  well  as  in  the  building  of  a  wall,  and 
if  we  look  back  on  the  history  of  the  Church,  we  shall  find  that  the  greatest  results 
have  been  achieved  by  men  who  have  continuously  bent  their  energies  towards  a 
given  point.    It  is  the  fashion  in  our  day  rather  to  decry  "men  of  one  idea."    This 
fashion  is  much  promoted  by  men  of  no  idea,  who  are  jealous  of  brethren  more 
fortunate  than  themselves.     This  principle  is  important  in  reference  not  only  to  the 
object  of  life,  but  to  the  sphere  of  labour.     It  is  of  greater  consequence  to  do  one 
thing  well  than  many  things  indifferently.     Diffusion  seems  to  be  the  aim  of  many 
svorkers  in  this  restless  age,  and  breadth  rather  than  depth  is  characteristic  of  their 


CHAP,  m.]  NE  HE  MI  AH.  49 

efforts.  (TF.  P.  Lockhart.)  The  repairer  of  the  breach  : — I.  The  buildeks.  The 
patriots  have  expressed  their  purpose  to  build  the  wall,  and  they  proceed  immediately 
to  carry  this  good  resolution  into  effect.  We  know  nothing  in  all  history  like  the 
Bcene  here  portrayed.  We  have  read,  indeed,  of  ancient  Eome,  when  burned  by 
fire,  being  rebuilt  by  her  citizens ;  but  these  were  still  rich  and  powerful.  We  have 
heard,  too,  of  ancient  Carthage,  when  almost  razed  to  the  ground  by  foreign 
invaders,  being  repaired  and  fortified  by  the  patriots  of  the  nation ;  but  these  were 
yet  numerous  and  wealthy.  We  know  nothing,  however,  Uke  this  in  the  annals  of 
the  world,  where  the  small  remnant  of  the  captives  of  Judah,  with  simple  trust  in 
God,  set  themselves  to  rebuild  their  fallen  capital,  while  they  were  few  in  numbers, 
poor  in  resources,  and  surrounded  with  hosts  of  enemies  frowning  on  their  enterprise. 
1.  They  were  all  Israelites  in  the  land  of  Judah.  In  the  book  of  Ezra  we  learn  that 
aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel  were  not  permitted  to  join  in  rebuilding  the 
temple,  even  though  for  sinister  ends  they  proffered  their  services.  They  could  not 
enter  with  spirit  into  the  undertaking,  and  the  labour  of  the  hand  was  not  accepted 
when  unaccompanied  with  the  love  of  the  heart.  And  it  is  the  spiritual  Israel  still 
who  can  labour  in  promoting  Christ's  cause  and  truth  in  the  earth.  They  alone 
can  effectually  advance  religion  who  love  and  exemplify  it.  They  alone  can  truly 
know  the  truth  so  as  to  speak  it  and  spread  it.  It  is  a  profound  observation  of 
Pascal,  •'  that  natural  things  must  be  known  to  be  loved,  but  Divine  things  must  be 
loved  in  order  to  be  known."  Saving  truth  is  not  discerned  by  the  mere  power  of 
natural  reason,  or  through  the  acquirements  of  human  learning ;  it  can  be  perceived 
only  through  the  illumination  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Believers  of  the  word  of  salvation 
can  alone  declare  that  word  with  living  power.  It  is  a  feeble,  as  well  as  a  heartless 
thing,  for  a  man  to  speak  truth  for  the  faith  of  others,  that  he  does  not  believe  in 
his  own  soul.  It  is  in  vain  to  expect  earnest  effort  for  the  conversion  of  souls  from 
those  who  have  no  mercy  on  themselves,  and  who  have  never  repented  of  their  own 
sins.  2.  They  were  of  diversified  stations  and  gifts.  It  deserves  remark,  that 
those  mentioned  here  not  only  gave  contributions  in  money,  that  the  work  might 
advance,  but  they  laboured  by  personal  effort  in  the  building  of  the  wall.  This  is 
worthy  of  high  praise,  as  showing  a  heart  for  the  good  cause,  and  wisdom  in 
advancing  it.  Money  can,  no  doubt,  do  much  to  procure  or  sustain  effort  in 
promoting  the  work  of  God  ;  but  there  is  a  power  in  living  activity,  in  the  warm 
sympathy,  in  the  personal  influence,  of  the  present  believer  helping  forward  a 
religious  enterprise,  that  donations  of  gold  can  never  secure.  It  is,  hence,  to  the 
honour  of  those  saints  of  Judah  that  they  not  merely  gave  their  money,  but  they 
gave  themselves,  in  life,  in  love,  to  labour  with  their  hands  in  this  work  of  God  for 
building  their  city  walls.  In  the  narrative  of  these  diversified  personal  efforts  we 
observe — (1)  The  priests  and  Levites  joined  in  the  work.  "  Then  Eliashib  the  high 
priest  rose  up  with  his  brethren  the  priests,  and  they  builded  the  sheep  gate  " 
(ver.  1).  And  "  after  him  repaired  the  Levites  "  (ver.  17).  But  the  lowliest  act 
done  for  the  cause  of  God  receives  glory  from  its  connection  with  Him  ;  and  the 
ministers  of  the  sanctuary  should  be  foremost  in  effort  to  build  up  the  cause  of  truth 
in  the  earth.  (2)  The  governor  and  nobles  laboured  at  the  wall.  There  is,  indeed, 
one  notable  exception  to  this  patrician  work.  Eespecting  the  nobles  of  the  Takoites 
it  is  said,  "  But  their  nobles  put  not  their  necks  to  the  work  of  their  Lord  "  (ver.  5). 
(3)  The  daughters  of  Judah  shared  this  honourable  toil.  "  Shallum,  the  ruler  of 
the  half  part  of  Jerusalem,  repaired,  he  and  his  daughters"  (ver.  12).  (4)  The 
young  united  in  this  sacred  employment.  •»  And  Hanun  the  sixth  son  of  Zalaph, 
repaired  another  piece  "  (ver.  30).  Youth  are  often  tempted  to  think  religion  a 
gloomy  thing,  and  that  to  embrace  it  in  their  early  years  would  be  to  lose  all  the 
pleasures  of  life.  3.  The  builders  here  belonged  to  different  parts  of  the  Holy 
Land.  They  were  there  from  Jericho,  and  Gibeon,  and  Keilah,  and  Mizpah,  and 
Tekoa.  These  were  not  men  of  Jerusalem,  but  they  loved  the  public  interests  of 
reMgion  connected  with  the  city  of  God,  and,  as  true  Israelites,  they  laboured  for  its 
restoration.  The  extension,  the  purity,  the  revival  of  the  Church  in  every  part  of 
the  world,  is  the  common  cause  of  all  who  name  the  name  of  Christ,  Christians, 
then,  should  never  be  so  absorbed  with  their  own  party  interests  as  to  forget  the 
great  cause  of  His  glory,  and  the  good  of  man.  If  they  really  love  the  Lord  Jesus 
their  regard  for  His  honour  must  be  tested  by  their  active  effort  to  overthrow  the 
reign  of  sin,  and  advance  the  empire  of  righteousness.  11.  The  progbess  of  the 
WORK.  In  the  call  of  Divine  judgment  for  the  overthrow  of  the  city  God  commanded, 
"  Begin  at  My  sanctuary  "  ;  and  so  we  remark,  this  work  of  restoration  commences 
beside  the  temple,  proceeds  north,  and  westward,  till  it  completes  the  circuit  of  the 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cakr.  in. 

wall.  "  The  priests  built  the  sheep  gate,  and  they  sanctified  it,  and  set  up  the  doors 
of  it."  Through  it  the  sacrifices  were  brought  into  the  holy  place,  and  the  patriots 
first  repaired  it,  that  they  might  defend  the  house  of  God  from  all  assaults  or 
danger.  They  were  the  ministers  of  religion  that  performed  this  part  of  the  work, 
and  they  thus  teach  their  brethren  that  everything  connected  with  Divine  worship 
is  to  be  guarded  with  religious  care.  From  them,  too,  we  learn  that  our  first 
concern  in  all  reform,  as  well  as  in  the  activities  of  life,  should  be  for  the  safety  and 
prosperity  of  the  Church  of  God.  But  if  the  Church  of  Christ  is  dear  to  the  hearts 
of  her  members,  and  is  prosperous  through  their  works  of  faith,  the  cause  of 
humanity  and  of  truth  is  secure  in  the  earth.  The  work  here  was  carried  on  by  the 
labourers  where  each  of  them  was  most  deeply  interested.  It  is  recorded  of  several 
of  the  householders  of  Jerusalem  that  "  he  repaired  over  against  his  house  " 
(ver.  23),  and  respecting  one  who  seems  to  have  been  only  a  lodger,  it  is  said,  "  he 
repaired  over  against  his  chamber  "  (ver.  30).  Labour  near  their  respective  dwellings 
was  most  convenient  for  the  persons  engaged,  and  it  was  necessary  for  "their  own 
safety  that  the  wall  there  should  not  be  broken  down.  Keligion  ever  appeals  to  the 
instinct  of  self-love,  and  the  strength  of  domestic  affection  in  the  human  heart,  to 
animate  zeal  for  its  advancement.  Christian  parent  1  your  own  children  are  dear 
to  you,  and  you  are  appointed  to  labour  and  pray  for  their  salvation.  Christian 
philanthropist !  your  own  country  is  the  object  of  your  love,  and  you  are  required  to 
give  your  foremost  endeavours  for  the  religious  welfare  of  your  brethren,  your 
kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh.  This  work,  moreover,  was  prosecuted  with  varied 
zeal.  The  enterprise  required  co-operation  of  effort ;  and  we  find  sometimes  two 
persons  united  in  setting  up  one  gate.  There  was  need,  too,  for  diversity  of  zeal, 
for  while  one  part  had  only  to  be  repaired,  another  had  to  be  entirely  rebuilt ;  but 
the  diversity  of  grace  demanded  was  perseveringly  displayed.  To  the  honour  of  one 
we  read,  "  Baruch  earnestly  repaired  "  (ver.  20),  as  if  his  diligence  was  such  as  to 
be  manifest  to  all  beholders.  To  the  praise  of  others,  we  are  given  to  understand 
that  when  they  had  raised  up  one  part  they  proceeded  to  restore  another. 
•'Meremoth,"and  the"Tekoites"  (vers.  21,  27),  after  finishing|the  work  first  allotted 
to  them,  undertook  a  second  portion  of  labour,  as  if  they  felt  there  should  be  no 
remission  from  toil  so  long  as  any  part  of  Jerusalem  remained  broken  down. 
III.  The  opposition  op  eneboes.  It  is  not  good  that  the  spiritual  life  should  flow 
on  without  trial,  or  that  a  great  work  should  progress  without  admonition  of  its 
constant  dependence  on  God.  Long  seasons  of  repose  or  prosperity  are  apt  to 
produce  self-complacency  in  the  heart;  God  therefore  subjects  His  servants  to 
humbling  reverses,  and  pours  them  from  vessel  to  vessel,  lest  they  should  be  settled 
on  their  lees.  In  the  performance  of  a  good  work  the  encounter  of  diflBculties  is 
salutary,  and  it  is  permitted  in  profound  wisdom.  He  that  sits  in  the  seat  of  the 
scornful  seldom  needs  to  sit  long  there  alone.  Here  we  observe  the  leading  mocker 
is  soon  joined  by  a  humble  imitator,  in  the  same  strain  of  ridicule  at  the  works  of 
earnest  piety.  "  Now  Tobiah  the  Ammonite  was  by  him,  and  he  said,  Even  that 
which  they  build,  if  a  fox  go  up,  he  shall  even  break  down  their  stone  wall."  And 
80  it  has  been  in  all  ages.  The  most  solemn  scenes  and  venerable  characters,  the 
greatest  actions  and  the  grandest  enterprises,  have  encountered  the  derision  of  bad 
men,  sitting  in  the  seat  of  the  scomer.  The  leading  infidel  of  the  Continent  in  the 
close  of  last  century  vented  his  malicious  jests  at  the  sublime  verities  of  the 
Christian  faith,  and  sneered  at  the  redemption  of  the  world  by  the  blood  of  God's 
Son.  Thus,  too,  the  profane  wits  of  the  time  laughed  to  scorn  the  commencement 
of  the  great  enterprise  of  modern  missions  to  the  heathen,  and  derided  the  proposal 
to  convert  the  world  to  the  Christian  faith,  while  only  a  few  pounds  were  as  yet  in 
the  treasury,  and  some  illiterate  artizans  were  consecrated  the  apostles  of  the  gospel 
to  India.  All  such  mockers  overlook  this  one  thing,  that  the  cause  of  truth  has  God 
for  its  author,  and  therefore  faith  in  effort  for  its  advancement  rests  on  Omnipotence 
for  success.  It  requires  but  little  talent  to  raise  a  laugh  against  the  affections  and 
works  of  piety.  IV.  The  devotion  op  Judah  under  Neheuiah.  In  narrating  the 
zeal  of  the  builders,  Nehemiah  makes  no  mention  of  his  own  great  service  in  the 
common  cause.  He  was  the  soul  of  the  whole  undertaking — planning,  animating, 
and  sustaining  it,  at  every  point ;  yet  he  never  once  refers  to  himself  among  those 
whose  names  are  recorded  with  honour.  In  the  outset  of  the  enterprise,  while  it 
still  prospers,  this  truly  great  man  narrates  the  progress  of  the  work  in  the  third 
person,  as  if  he  had  had  no  share  in  the  honourable  toil.  But  so  soon  as  difficulties 
occur,  the  style  of  the  history  is  changed,  and  he  takes  his  place  under  the  term 
'•  we,"  among  the  sufferers  for  the  cause  of  truth.    It  is  •  b«aatifal  example  of 


CHAP,  m.l  NEHEMIAH.  61 

modesty  and  humility  to  all  the  servants  of  God.  Nehemiah  in  this  hoar  of  trial 
displays  great  forbearance  under  wrong.  The  prond  scorn  he  encountered  might 
have  provoked  his  resentment  to  inflict  punishment  on  its  despicable  authors.  He 
was  high  in  favour  with  the  king,  and  it  would  probably  have  been  easy  for  him  to 
obtain  power  to  chastise  these  adversaries  of  his  country ;  but  he  is  as  distinguished 
for  patience  as  for  courage.  There  is  not  a  Christian  that  suffers  reproach  in 
serving  Christ,  but  the  Lord  feels  it  as  done  to  Himself  ;  and  unless  mercy  is  asked 
to  pardon  the  afifront,  it  will  be  visited  with  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  for  evermore. 
v.  The  zeal  of  the  people  tor  the  completion  or  the  woek.  Derision  and 
discouragement  drive  multitudes  from  the  support  of  a  good  cause.  Many  have  begun 
to  run  well  in  their  religious  course.  How  many,  too,  are  frightened  away  from 
a  good  work  by  the  sneers  and  opposition  directed  against  those  who  are  zealous 
in  its  promotion.  They  believe  the  enterprise  to  be  right  in  itself,  they  are  persuaded 
it  is  fraught  with  blessings  to  men  ;  but  they  cannot  bear  the  jests  or  banter  which 
open  adherence  to  itentails.  {W.  Ritchie.)  Honourable  ynention : — It  was  natural  that 
the  Pasha  should  thus  make  "honourable  mention  "  of  those  who  came  to  the  front, 
and  threw  their  energies  into  this  patriotic  work.  Nehemiah  was  doubtless  anxious 
to  hand  down  to  posterity  the  names  of  all  who  were  leaders  in  the  movement ;  he 
did  not  wish  to  take  to  himself  the  whole  credit  of  the  work  ;  we  may  be  sure  that  he 
wrote  down  this  register  of  names  with  both  pleasure  and  pride.  We  find  that 
priests,  rulers,  merchants,  and  tradesmen  all  took  a  share  in  this  enterprise ;  and, 
where  the  work  of  the  Lord  is  concerned,  it  is  only  becoming  that  there  should  be 
this  unity  of  spirit  and  division  of  labour.  Often,  in  our  modern  Christian  Churches, 
too  much  is  left  to  the  ministers  of  religion  ;  and  sometimes  one  man  is  expected  to 
do  «  work  which  ought  to  be  shared  by  a  whole  congregation.  The  merchant  and 
tradesman  will  sometimes  plead  the  engrossing  claims  of  business  or  the  pressure 
of  "bad  times"  as  a  reason  for  holding  aloof  from  the  varied  efforts  of  Christian 
benevolence ;  and  it  is  to  be  feared  also  that  some  of  our  modem  aristocrats  are 
prevented  by  the  haughty  and  foolish  pride  of  rank  from  throwing  their  energies 
and  influence  into  the  activities  of  the  Christian  Church.  (T.  C.  Finlayson.)  A 
godly  ancestry  : — To  us  Nehemiah's  catalogue  of  the  builders  may  now  seem  to  be 
little  more  than  a  dry  register  of  names.  But  it  is  not  diflScult  to  imagine  how 
interesting  it  may  have  been  for  generations  after  it  was  written.  As  Jerusalem 
began  to  grow  again  in  power  and  splendour,  men  would  scan  with  eager  interest 
the  list  of  those  who  had  engaged  in  such  a  brave  and  self-denying  work.  We  can 
imagine  how,  centuries  later,  the  eye  of  some  young  boy  might  kindle  with  pride 
and  enthusiasm  when  he  read  here,  in  one  of  the  sacred  books,  the  name  of  some 
ancestor  of  his  own,  who  had  nobly  borne  his  part  in  building  up  the  walls  of 
Jerusalem.  It  is  a  grand  thing  to  come  of  a  patriotic  or  godly  lineage.  {Ibid.) 
At  work : — Words  have  given  place  to  deeds.  I.  In  looking  over  this  list  of  workers 
we  are  struck  with  the  fact  that  thet  are  dbawn  from  all  classes  of  socibtt. 
1.  The  priests  took  a  prominent  part  in  this  work.  "Then  Eliashib  the  high 
priest  rose  up  with  his  brethren  the  priests,  and  they  builded  the  sheep-gate,"  We 
fear  that,  as  respects  the  high  priest,  what  he  did  in  this  way  was  not  a  work  of 
love.  Some  years  afterwards,  much  to  Nehemiah's  regret,  this  same  Eliashib  acted 
a  very  unworthy  and  unpatriotic  part :  and  we  suspect  it  was  more  for  the  sake  of 
appearances  than  from  any  real  wish  to  promote  the  success  of  the  enterprise  that 
he  was  found  among  the  builders  mentioned  in  this  chapter.  Again,  it  was  quite 
right  the  priest  should  be  active  on  this  occasion,  for  it  was  owing  in  a  great 
measure  to  their  unfaithfulness — to  the  unfaithfulness,  that  is,  of  the  priesthood 
prior  to  the  time  of  the  Babylonian  captivity,  that  the  city  was  laid  in  ruins.  In 
Jeremiah  we  read,  "  The  priests  said  not.  Where  is  the  Lord  ?  and  they  that  handle 
the  law  knew  Me  not ;  the  pastors  also  transgressed  against  Me,  and  the  prophets 
prophesied  by  Baal,  and  walked  after  things  that  do  not  profit."  2.  The  rulers, 
too,  or  princes  of  the  house  of  Israel,  took  a  leading  part  in  repairing  the  wall,  and, 
as  in  the  case  of  the  priests,  it  was  proper  they  should ;  for  their  misconduct,  their 
evil  practices,  had  contributed  greatly  to  bring  about  the  downfall  of  the  city 
(Micah  iii.  9,  12).  The  advantages  of  co-operation  were  thus  secured.  By  means 
of  this  combination  the  work  was  done  quickly,  simultaneously,  and  economically. 
Here,  certainly,  was  a  remarkable  spectacle:  all  classes  of  the  community  con- 
centrating their  energies  on  a  common  object.  Difference  of  opinion  and  rivalries 
might  exist  among  them,  but  for  the  nonce  these  were  sunk  in  the  achievement  of  a 
purpose  dear  to  every  patriotic  heart.    II.  That  the  work  referred  to  was  xranEB- 

TAXXM  BT  PARTIES  PBOM  VARIOUS  LOCALITIES,  AND  NOT  BT  THE  CITIZENS   OP   THE  CAPITAL 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

ALONE.  Thus  we  read,  "And  next  unto  him  builded  the  men  of  Jericho."  The 
Tekoites  are  also  named,  and  the  men  of  Gibeon  and  of  Mizpah,  and  the  inhabitants 
of  Zanoah,  and  the  rulers  of  Bethhaccerem — these  and  others  from  places  round 
about  are  represented  as  co-operating  with  the  residents  of  the  city  in  repairing  the 
wall.  It  was  a  work  of  national  importance,  and  as  such  it  was  regarded  by  those 
just  named.  III.  On  further  examining  this  register  we  find  incidental  references 
in  it  that  should  not  be  overlooked.  1.  The  first  of  these  I  will  name  relates  to 
the  aristocracy  of  Tekoah,  and  is  evidently  not  intended  to  be  complimentary  to 
them.  The  Tekoites,  as  a  people,  were  not  backward,  "  but  their  nobles  put  not 
their  necks  to  the  work  of  their  Lord."  They  dishonoured  themselves  by  standing 
aloof  as  they  did  at  this  crisis.  Their  conduct,  it  is  true,  might  have  been  worse. 
If  they  were  not  active  in  it,  we  cannot  say  of  them  that  they  were  active  in  their 
opposition  to  it.  You  have  known  persons  not  content  with  a  passive  attitude 
towards  what  is  good.  What  restless — yea,  raging  opponents  Christianity  in  its 
early  days  had  to  encounter  I  2.  In  striking  contrast  to  the  supineness  of  the 
nobles  of  Tekoah  was  the  conduct  of  Baruch  the  son  of  Zabbai.  Nehemiah  says  of 
him  that  he  "  earnestly  repaired  "  his  section  of  the  wall.  He  specially  commends 
the  zeal  of  Baruch.  Luther,  Wesley,  Whitfield,  these  also  are  names  with  which, 
among  other  high  qualities,  will  ever  be  associated  an  unflagging  zeal,  as  attested 
by  their  more  abundant  labours.  Did  the  keen  glance  of  Nehemiah  note  the  zeal 
of  Baruch  ?  and  shall  the  eye  of  God  pass  over  unnoticed  one  earnest  worker  for 
Him  anywhere,  or  at  any  time  ?  3.  The  third  and  last  incidental  reference  to 
which  I  shall  call  your  attention  informs  us  that  there  were  those  engaged  in  this 
wall-building  whom  we  should  hardly  have  expected  to  find  thus  employed.  At 
ver.  12  we  read,  "  And  next  unto  him  repaired  Shallum  the  son  of  Halohesh,  the 
ruler  of  the  half  part  of  Jerusalem,  he  and  his  daughters."  All  honour  to  them. 
We  think  of  others  of  their  sex  who  have  toiled  right  worthily,  and  in  some 
instances  heroically,  in  the  service  of  Christ.  The  case  of  Sister  Dora  of  the 
Walsall  Cottage  Hospital  occurs  to  us.  We  think  too  of  some  who  are  thus 
labouring  to-day ;  ladies  by  birth  and  education  who  have  consecrated  their 
property  and  their  lives  to  the  Lord,  for  whose  dear  sake  they  shrink  not  from 
menial  tasks,  and  repulsive  ministries,  and  risks  and  dangers,  to  face  which 
requires  a  loftier  courage  than  nerves  the  soldier  for  the  battlefield.  (T.  Rowson.) 
Individual  labours  : — The  workman  is  always  the  world's  true  nobleman.  To  pay 
others  to  do  some  portion  of  our  work  for  us  does  not  absolve  us  from  the  duty  of 
personal  labour.  Every  merchant  knows  that  for  him  to  pay  a  manager  and  a  staff 
of  clerks  to  conduct  his  business,  while  he  himself  goes  away  into  the  country  to 
live  and  enjoy  himself,  means,  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  the  decline  of  his  receipts, 
the  breaking  up  of  his  trade  connection,  and  presently,  the  ruin  of  his  business. 
Every  lady  knows  that  to  engage  servants  is  not  sufiicient  to  secure  the  order  and 
wholesomeness  of  her  rooms,  the  regularity  of  meals  in  the  house,  nor  the  comfort 
of  her  husband,  herself,  and  her  children.  The  master,  the  mistress,  must  them- 
selves think,  and  plan,  and  labour.  In  Church-work  the  same  law  is  in  force  to  its 
utmost  jot  and  tittle.  {A.  Q.  Griffith.)  Life's  masonry : — More  than  one  figure 
in  Scripture  represents  the  work  of  life  as  a  building  (1  Pet.  ii.  4,  5  ;  Matt.  xvi.  18 ; 
1  Cor.  iii.  10-15).  I.  Every  one  to  contribdte  his  lite-toil  to  the  building  up  of 
THE  city  of  God.  II.  Every  man  has  his  own  appointed  sphere  and  kind  of  work. 
1,  Every  one  must  find  his  own  task.  2.  Every  one  must  be  content  with  his  own 
task.  HI.  Every  man  contributes  but  a  fragment  to  the  great  whole. 
IV.  Every  man  to  work  in  harmonious  aim  with  his  fellow-builders.  V.  The 
united  work  is  superintended  by  the  great  Architect.  1.  He  only  understands 
the  whole  of  the  great  intricate  plan  of  life.  2.  He  is  near  us  with  directions. 
3.  Let  the  thought,  "  Thou  God  seest  me,"  animate  us  at  our  toil.  (Homiletic 
Commentary.)  A  suggestive  Church  record : — I.  The  potency  of  personaIi 
influence.  Nehemiah  created  a  spirit  of  enthusiasm  which  set  all  this  train  of 
exertion  in  motion.  II.  The  force  of  example.  The  priests  took  the  lead  in  the 
common  labour.  III.  Advantages  op  systematic  organisation.  Each  volunteer 
made  responsible  for  some  limited  portion  of  work.  IV.  The  gigantic  result 
achievable  by  individual  action.  Like  coral  insects  at  work,  the  multitude  of 
builders  each  did  his  part  of  the  whole.  V.  The  diversity  op  disposition  revealed 
BY  THE  GREAT  EMERGENCY.  1.  Enthusiastic  work.  2.  Eefusal  to  put  the  neck 
to  the  yoke.    VI.  The  consentaneity   of  purpose   and  effort  which  a  great 

EMERGENCY    DEMANDS   AND    IS    CALCULATED    TO   BRING   ABOUT.      VH.    ThE  DIVERSITY  OP 

onrTS  which  a  great  emergency  calui  into  requisition.     {Ibid.)        Associated 


CHAP,  ra.]  NEHEMIAH.  53 

labour : — A  single  bee,  with  all  its  industry,  energy,  and  innumerable  journeys  it 
has  to  perform,  will  not  collect  more  than  a  teaspoonful  of  honey  in  a  single 
season,  and  yet  the  total  weight  of  honey  taken  from  a  single  hive  is  often  from 
sixty  to  one  hundred  pounds.  A  very  profitable  lesson  to  mankind  of  what  may 
arise  from  associated  labour.  (Scientific  Illustrations,  <&c.)  The  building  of  the 
wall : — Learn — 1.  That  while  God  gbants  success  to  earnest  effort,  that  very 

SUCCESS  WtLIi  OFTEN  AROUSE  OPPOSITION.  II.  OPPOSITION  TO  EARNEST  WORK  GENERALLY 
comes  FROM  "  THE  MIXED  MULTITUDE  "    WHO  HOVER   ROUND    THE   TRUE   PEOPLE  OF    GoD. 

ni.  What  one  man  dare  not  do  alone,  he  is  emboldened  to  do  by  association 
WITH  others  ;  and  often  men  of  diverse  opinions  and  tastes  are  banded  together  to 
oppose  God's  work,  their  only  bond  of  union  being  a  desire  to  have  it  stopped. 
IV.  Timid  and  fearful  ones  there  are  in  every  community  whose  hearts  readily 
FAIL  THEM,  and  who  often  think  that  the  good  cause  is  about  to  be  worsted.    V.  In 

ALMOST  EVERY  CHRISTIAN  ChUBCH  THE  ARDOUR  OF  THE  FEW  IS  MORE  OR  LESS  DAMPED 
BY  THE    APATHY   OF    THE   MANY.       VI.    We    MUST   WATCH   AS  WELL   AS   PRAY.      A  KuSSian 

proverb  says,  "  When  in  a  storm,  pray  to  God  and  row  to  the  shore."    VII.  The 

ONENESS  OF  THE  WORKERS,  AND  THAT  THEY  SHOULD  ENCOURAGE  EACH  OTHER  WHEN  BESET 
BY  FRIEND  OB  FOE.   VIII.  STEADY  AND  PERSISTENT  WORK  TELLS  BEST  IN  THE  LONG 

BUN.  IX.  That  even  in  the  midst  of  arduous  labour  for  the  Lord,  the  decencies 
AND  proprieties  OF  LIFE  ARE  IN  NO  WISE  OVERLOOKED.  [W.  P.  Lockkart.)  Ministers 
should  be  leaders : — The  ministers  of  Christ  must  not  only  give  good  exhortation  to 
their  flocks,  but  also  put  their  own  shoulder  to  the  work.  Example  is  mightier 
than  precept.  The  roads  in  the  Ban  de  la  Roche  were  soon  levelled  and  put  in 
order  when  the  good  pastor  Oberlin  set  the  example  of  manual  toil  to  his  parish- 
ioners. (J.  M.  Randall.)  Merchant  workers  : — In  our  own  country,  the  names 
of  Henry  Thornton,  Sir  Thomas  Fowell  Buxton,  Sir  Francis  Crossley,  and  Samuel 
Budget,  will  occur  to  many.  Our  merchants  and  tradesmen  have  indeed  glorious 
opportunities  for  extending  the  Eedeemer's  name,  if  they  had  but  a  mind  to 
the  work.  (Ibid.)  And  next  unto  him  builded  the  men  of  Jericho. — 
System  and  detail  in  work : — A  great  work — I.  Can  only  be  planned  by  a  great 
MIND.     II.  Can  only  be  carried  out  by  a  division  of  labour.     III.  Can  only  be 

ACCOMPLISHED  BY  ATTENTION  TO  DETAILS.  "  BaiS  and  locks."  IV.  BRINGS  OUT 
SPECIAL  ADAPTATIONS.       V.    MuST  HAVE  REGARD    TO    PRACTICAL   UTILITY.       The  fish-gate 

as  necessary  as  the  repairing  of  temple  wall.  VI.  Must  be  inspired  by  a  lofty 
PURPOSE.  Vn.  Must  look  on  to  the  futube.  It  must  have  in  it  the  element  of 
permanence.     {Homiletic  Commentary.) 

Ver.  8.  And  they  fortified  Jerusalem  tinto  the  broad  wall. — The  broad  wall : — 
I.  The  separation  of  the  people  of  God  from  the  world  is  like  that  broad  wall 
surrounding  Jerusalem.  An  actual  separation  is  made  by  grace,  is  carried  on  in 
the  work  of  sanctification,  and  will  be  completed  in  that  day  when  the  saints  shall 
be  caught  up  together  with  the  Lord  in  the  air.  1.  Christians  should  maintain  a 
broad  wall  of  separation  between  themselves  and  the  world.  The  distinction  ought 
not  to  be  one  of  dress  or  of  speech,  the  separation  ought  to  be  moral  and  spiritual. 
(1)  A  Christian  ought  to  be  more  scrupulous  than  other  men  in  his  dealings.  He 
must  never  swerve  from  the  path  of  integrity.  He  should  be  one  whose  word  is  his 
bond,  and  who  having  once  pledged  his  word,  sweareth  to  his  own  hurt  and 
changeth  not.  (2)  The  Christian  should  be  distinguished  by  his  pleasures.  We 
are  not  quite  ourselves,  perhaps,  in  our  daily  toil,  where  our  pursuits  are  rather 
dictated  by  necessity  than  by  choice,  but  our  pleasures  and  pastimes  give  evidence 
of  what  our  heart  is  and  where  it  is.  (3)  Such  separation  should  be  carried  into 
everything  which  affects  the  Christian.  When  a  stranger  comes  into  our  house  it 
should  be  so  ordered  that  he  can  clearly  perceive  that  we  have  a  respect  unto  Him 
that  is  invisible,  and  that  we  desire  to  live  and  move  in  the  light  of  God's 
countenance.  (4)  This  broad  wall  should  be  most  conspicuous  in  the  spirit  of  our 
mind.  There  should  be  about  a  Christian  always  the  air  of  one  who  has  his  shoes 
on  his  feet,  his  loins  girded,  and  his  staff  in  his  hand — away,  away  to  a  better 
land.  2.  Eeasons  why  this  wall  should  be  very  broad.  (1)  If  you  are  sincere  in 
your  profession,  there  is  a  very  broad  distinction  between  you  and  unconverted 
people.  (2)  Eemember  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  a  broad  wall  between  Him 
and  the  ungodly.  (3)  A  broad  wall  of  separation  is  abundantly  good  for  yourselves. 
When  a  Christian  gives  way  to  the  world's  custom  he  never  feels  profited  thereby. 
Ask  a  fish  to  spend  an  hour  on  dry  land,  and  I  think  did  he  comply  the  fish  would 
find  that  it  was  not  much  to  its  benefit,  for  it  would  be  out  of  its  element.    And  it 

27 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

is  so  with  Christians  in  communion  with  sinners.  (4)  To  keep  up  the  broad  wall 
of  separation  is  to  do  most  good  to  the  world.  A  Christian  loses  his  strength  the 
moment  he  departs  from  his  integrity.  Although  the  world  may  openly  denounce 
the  rigid  Puritan,  it  secretly  admires  him.  You  young  man  in  the  shop — you 
young  woman  in  the  workroom — if  you  keep  yourselves  to  yourselves  in  Christ's 
name,  chaste  and  pure  for  Jesus,  not  laughing  at  jests  which  should  make  you 
blush  ;  not  mixing  up  with  pastimes  that  are  suspicious  ;  but  being  tenderly  jealous 
of  your  conscience  at  all  times,  then  your  company  in  the  midst  of  others  shall 
be  as  though  an  angel  shook  his  wings,  and  they  will  say,  "  Refrain  from 
this  or  that  just  now,  for  So-and-so  is  there."  They  will  fear  you  in  a  certain 
sense ;  they  will  admire  you  in  secret ;  and  who  can  tell  but  they,  at  last,  may 
come  to  imitate  you  ?  II.  The  broad  wall  roxjnd  Jerusalem  indicated  safety. 
The  Christian  is  surrounded  by  the  broad  wall — 1.  Of  God's  power.  2.  Of  God's 
love.  3.  Of  God's  law  and  justice.  4.  Of  God's  immutability.  5.  Of  the  work 
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  6.  Almost  every  doctrine  of  grace  affords  us  a  broad  wall,  a 
mighty  bulwark,  a  grand  munition  of  defence.  III.  This  broad  wall  sdooests 
ENJOYMENT.  These  walls  were  used  as  promenades,  and  were  utilised — 1.  For  rest 
from  toU.    2.  For  communion.     3.  For  prospects  and  outlooks.     {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver  10.  Even  over  against  his  house. — Repairing  the  home : — We  are  all  temples, 
buildings  of  the  living  God,  and  some  of  us  are  sadly  out  of  repair ;  some  among 
us  have  fallen  into  absolute  ruin.  Our  bodies,  instead  of  being  the  sanctuary  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  are  inhabited  by  evil  lusts,  cruel  tempers,  foul  passions.  Others, 
although  not  in  such  a  sad  case,  are  yet  grievously  out  of  repair.  There  is  much 
in  their  lives  which  needs  altering,  mending.  Our  own  carelessness  and  neglect 
have  allowed  our  lives  to  fall  into  decay,  and  the  rubbish  to  accumulate.  A 
restored  congregation  is  ever  more  important  than  the  restored  fabric  of  the  church. 
Let  Nehemiah  teach  us  how  these  repairs  can  best  be  carried  out.  1.  In  the  first 
place,  before  he  undertook  the  work  at  all,  Nehemiah  prayed  unto  the  God  of 
heaven — "  Lord,  undertake  for  me."  "  Unless  the  Lord  build  the  house,  their 
labour  is  but  lost  that  buUd  it."  We  must  ask  God  to  restore  in  us  all  that  the 
iraud  and  malice  of  the  devil  have  decayed  in  us.  2.  The  next  thing  which 
Nehemiah  did,  after  praying  to  God,  was  to  set  to  work,  and  to  set  others  to  work, 
at  repairs.  Work  and  prayer  must  go  together ;  pray  most  earnestly,  work  with  a 
■will.  3.  Nehemiah  made  each  worker  wear  a  sword  by  his  side,  because  of  the 
enemies  around  them  who  would  try  to  hinder  them.  That  teaches  us  that  whatever 
our  work  may  be,  we  must  have  our  religion  with  us.  We  must  have  the  sword  of 
the  Spirit  beside  us.  Our  enemies — the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil — are  sure  to 
attack  us,  and  woe  unto  us  if  we  are  unarmed  !  There  was  a  drummer-boy  in  the 
great  American  war  who  lost  his  Bible,  a  book  which  he  valued  above  all  things. 
So  he  set  to  work  to  repair  his  loss  as  far  as  possible.  He  remembered  many  texts 
which  he  had  learnt  at  Sunday-school,  and  these  he  wrote  on  the  parchment  of  his 
drum.  Thus,  on  the  march,  in  the  field  of  battle,  or  wherever  he  did  his  work, 
God's  Word  was  before  his  eyes.  Like  Nehemiah's  builders,  he  had  the  sword  by 
his  side.  Before  the  work  of  repairs  actually  began,  Nehemiah  made  a  careful 
examination  of  the  state  of  the  ruins,  that  he  might  know  exactly  what  was  wanted. 
Let  us  survey  the  ruins,  the  breaches  in  the  walls,  the  rubbish  that  has  accumulated, 
the  weak  points  in  the  building.  And  where  shall  we  begin  ?  1.  For  the  most  part, 
he  set  each  of  his  workers  to  repair  ♦'  over  against  his  own  house."  In  trying  to 
repair  the  mistakes  and  faults  and  failures  of  our  lives,  let  us  begin  over  against 
our  own  house.  Let  us  survey  the  ruins  there,  not  those  of  our  neighbour. 
Mending  our  own  ways  is  the  surest  and  best  plan  to  fit  us  to  help  others  to  repair 
theirs.  Let  us  look  boldly  into  the  neglected  comers  of  our  life,  and  see  what 
repairs  are  needed.  2.  Let  us  examine  the  ruins  again  ;  is  there  no  need  of 
repairs  in  our  business  life  ?  Is  our  way  of  doing  our  work,  whatever  it  is,  quite 
satisfactory,  quite  true,  and  honest,  and  straightforward?  8.  Then  is  there  no 
need  of  repairs  in  the  home  circle,  remembering  that  we  must  begin  over  against 
our  own  house  ?  The  children  are  often  unruly,  selfish,  troublesome.  The  servants 
are  frequently  a  source  of  discomfort.  One  husband  sees  much  need  of  repairs  in 
his  wife.  The  wife  says  the  same  of  the  husband.  Well,  let  us  begin  over  against 
our  own  house.  Are  we  doing  our  best  to  set  a  good  example  in  the  family  ?  4.  Is 
there  no  need  of  repairs  in  our  praying?  I  think  many  of  us  feel  that  our  prayers 
are  sometimes  neglected,  often  hurried,  formal,  cold,  unreal.  Then  there  is  Bible- 
reading.     Some  of  us  neglect  this  altogether,  others  read  without  interest  or  under- 


CHAP,  in.]  NE  HE  MI  AH.  65 

standing.  Is  there  not  something  to  be  mended  here  ?  {H.  J.  Wilmot-Buxton,  M.A.) 
Building  over  against  one's  own  house  : — This  suggests — I.  The  care  of  one's  owk 
BOXJL.    Is  it  saved?    Is  it  prospering?    II.  A  deep  interest   m   the   spiritual 

WELFARE  OF  THOSE  WHO  LIVE  UNDER  THE  SAME  ROOF.  III.  LaBOUR  FOR  THE  SALVATION 
OF    ALL    WHO    IN    THE    PROVIDENCE    OF    GOD     ARE     BROUGHT     INTO     CLOSE    OR    FREQUENT 

RELATIONS  WITH  US.  (W.  P.  Lockhart.)  Work  at  each  door  : — The  principle  on 
which  a  great  pr.rt  of  the  work  was  done  is  indicated  in  several  places  in  this 
chapter.  Charles  Keade  says :  *'  This  may  seem  a  small  thing  to  busy  readers,  but 
it  was  a  master  stroke  of  genius.  Not  only  was  it  a  grand  division  of  labour,  but 
it  animated  the  work  with  a  noble  emulation  and  a  personal  pride."  Nehemiah 
made  use  of  a  method  which  is  generally  regarded  as  an  outgrowth  of  our  modern 
civilisation,  and  anticipated  the  managers  of  our  great  industries  in  the  use  of  the 
principle  of  division  of  labour,  which  in  our  day  is  carried  to  so  great  a  length. 
Every  man  over  against  his  own  house  is  the  principle  that  should  be  applied  in  all 
work  for  the  moral  and  spiritual  elevation  of  the  community  in  which  we  live. 

I.  There  is  work  to  be  done  at  our  very  doors.  There  is  still  plenty  of  work  to 
be  done  in  our  own  hearts.  The  best  wall  we  can  build  for  the  protection  of  our 
own  homes  is  the  structure  of  a  Christlike  life.  It  is  as  real  a  defence  to  our 
homes  to  have  them  surrounded  by  pure-hearted  men  and  women  as  was  to 
Jerusalem  the  wall  that  Nehemiah  raised.  The  reason  that  so  many  missionaries 
send  their  children  is  not  always  for  the  sake  of  the  superior  education  to  be  had 
in  our  schools,  but  oftener,  perhaps,  because  it  would  not  be  safe  to  allow  their 
children  to  grow  up  in  the  midst  of  the  moral  miasma  of  a  heathen  land.  In  the 
ruined  characters  and  worse  than  wasted  lives  of  many  of  the  men  and  women 
among  whom  we  live,  we  see  the  broken  wall,  and  the  work  of  repair  consists  in  the 
efforts  we  make  to  Christianise  them.     Here  there  is  work  at  every  one's  door. 

II.  Each  man  is  responsible  for  the  bit  op  work  that  lies  nearest  to  his  own 
HOUSE.  A  minister  is  placed  over  a  congregation,  not  to  do  the  people's  work  for 
them,  but  to  induce  each  of  them  to  do  the  work  that  God  has  laid  at  the  door  for 
each  to  do.  I  know  a  successful  minister  who  attributes  much  of  his  success  to  the 
fact  that  he  will  not  do  anything  himself  that  he  can  get  one  of  his  people  to  do. 
(A.  Soutar,  M.A.) 

Ver.  12.  He  and  his  daughters. — Worthy  women : — We  know  not  how  these  ladies 
wrought ;  probably  it  was  not  in  a  way  of  manual  labour,  but  rather  by  words  of 
kindness  and  acts  of  consideration  towards  the  builders.  We  need  not  tarry  to 
show  how  worthily  the  women  of  England  fulfil  their  mission  in  the  sweet  offices  of 
charity.  Some  of  them  make  the  noblest  sacrifices  from  love  to  their  Kedeemer. 
A  poor  woman  sought  admission  to  one  of  our  great  missionary  meetings  in  Exeter 
Hall.  The  young  man  who  acted  as  porter  demanded  her  ticket.  "  I  have  none," 
was  the  reply;  "I  cannot  afford  to  subscribe."  "You  cannot  enter  without  a  ticket," 
was  the  curt  rejoinder.  "  I  think,  sir,"  said  the  widow,  "  that  I  have  given  more  than 
ever  you  have  to  the  society ;  I  have  given  an  only  son,  and  he  is  now  labouring 
for  your  society  in  India."  The  widow  was  cheerfully  admitted  on  this  statement. 
(J.  M.  Randall.)  Family  zeal: — I.  Notable  women.  1.  Within  the  circle  of 
Biblical  story.  2.  In  history.  II.  Woman's  influence.  1.  For  evil.  Jezebel ; 
Solomon's  wives ;  devotees  of  fashion,  &c.     2.  For  good.    (Homiletic  Commentary .) 

Ver.  15.  By  the  king's  garden. — The  king's  garden: — There  are  six  of  these 
"  king's  gardens  "  to  which  I  shall  conduct  you,  but  we  shall  not  have  time  to  tarry 
in  more  than  one  of  them.  I  The  garden  of  paradise,  which  was  situate  in  the 
midst  of  Eden.  II.  The  garden  of  Gethsemane.  III.  The  garden  of  the  BURiAii 
AND  THE  resurrection.  IV.  The  garden  of  the  human  heart.  The  heart  is 
meant  to  be  a  garden  for  God.  By  nature  it  scarcely  deserves  the  name ;  it  is 
rather  a  tangled  wilderness  of  all  manner  of  noisome  things.  What  must  be  done 
to  this  neglected  garden  ?  The  rough  plough  of  conviction  must  be  dragged  through 
it.  The  spade  of  trouble  must  break  up  the  surface,  and  smash  in  pieces  the  clods, 
and  kill  the  weeds.  Into  this  prepai-ed  soil  the  Holy  Spirit  must  put  in  the  seeds  of 
faith,  and  love  and  hope,  and  patience  and  perseverance,  and  zeal.  Then  there 
must  be  drained  out  of  us  much  superfluity  of  naughtiness  and  excess  of  carnal 
confidence,  or  our  heart  will  be  a  cold  swamp,  a  worthless  plant-killing  bog.  And 
in  addition  to  all  this,  there  must  be  constant  hoeing  and  raking  and  digging.  After 
a  garden  is  made,  the  flower-beds  are  never  left  long  alone ;  if  they  were  left  to 
themselves  they  would  soon  breed  weeds  again,  and  return  to  the  old  confusion.   So 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

with  the  garden  of  the  heart,  cleansing  and  pruning  must  be  done  every  day,  and 
God  must  do  it  through  ourselves,  and  we  must  do  it  through  constant  examination 
and  repentance.  V.  The  garden  of  the  Christian  Church.  Follow  me  in  each 
word  of  the  text.  1.  What  is  it?  A  garden.  So  it  is  called  in  the  book  of 
Solomon's  Song.  Many  thoughts  are  gathered  in  that  one  metaphor  like  bees  in  a 
hive.  (1)  It  implies  separation.  I  earnestly  desire  to  see  the  wall  of  separation 
between  the  Church  and  the  world  made  broader  and  stronger.  Christians  should 
always  wear  their  regimentals  as  Christ's  soldiers.  They  are  to  go  forth  without 
the  camp  bearing  His  reproach.  "  Be  not  conformed  to  this  world."  (2)  It  is  a  place 
of  order.  You  do  not,  when  you  go  into  a  garden,  find  the  plants  arranged  anyhow, 
but  the  wise  gardener  arranges  them  according  to  their  tints  and  hues,  so  that  in 
the  midst  of  summer  the  garden  shall  look  like  a  rainbow  that  has  been  broken  to 
pieces  and  let  down  upon  the  earth.  Let  us  all  try  to  maintain  order  in  all  things 
as  the  servants  of  Christ.  We  seek  not  the  order  which  consists  in  all  sleeping  in 
their  places,  like  corpses  in  the  catacombs,  but  we  desire  the  order  which  finds  all 
working  in  their  places  for  the  common  cause  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  (3)  A  garden  is  a 
place  of  beauty.  Such  should  the  Christian  Church  be.  If  there  be  no  holiness,  no 
love,  no  zeal,  no  prayerfulness  outside  in  the  world,  yet  you  should  see  these  things 
in  the  Church.  (4)  It  is  a  place  of  growth.  (5)  It  is  a  place  of  retirement.  When 
a  man  is  in  his  garden,  he  does  not  expect  to  see  all  his  customers  walking  down 
between  the  beds  to  do  business  with  him.  So  the  Lord  Jesus  would  have  us 
reserve  the  Church  to  be  a  place  in  which  He  can  manifest  Himself  to  us  as  He  doth 
not  to  the  world.  2.  Whose  is  it  ?  It  is  the  King's  garden.  He  chose  it  for  Him- 
BeK.  He  bought  it.  What  a  nobility  this  gives  to  Christ's  Church  ?  3.  What  does 
it  need  ?  (1)  It  requires  labour.  In  every  Church  there  should  be — (a)  Planters. 
I  had  a  letter  last  week  from  a  young  woman.  She  says  she  has  been  here  for  two 
years,  that  she  has  been  very  anxious  about  her  soul,  and  she  has  often  wished  that 
somebody  would  speak  to  her,  but  nobody  has  done  so.  Somebody  has  been 
negligent,  very  negligent.  We  want  planters  who  can  get  the  young  slips  and  put 
them  where  they  will  grow.  (&)  Some  to  watch  over  those  who  are  planted, 
(c)  Some  to  collect  the  straggling,  (d)  Some  to  burn  up  the  rubbish  and  sweep  up 
the  leaves.  In  the  best  Church  there  will  always  be  some  falling  leaves.  Whenever 
a  brother  sees  any  mischief  he  ought  to  sweep  it  up  and  say  nothing  about  it. 
Whenever  you  find  that  such  and  such  a  brother  is  going  a  little  amiss,  talk  to  him 
quietly  ;  do  not  spread  it  all  over  the  Church  and  make  jealousies  and  suspicions. 
Pick  up  the  leaf  and  destroy  it.  When  a  brother  member  has  offended  you,  so  that 
you  feel  vexed,  forgive  him.  If  every  one  would  seek  to  make  peace,  there  never 
could  be  much  accumulation  of  discord  in  the  King's  garden  to  annoy  Him.  (2)  It 
wants  new  plants.  (3)  It  wants  rain  and  sunshine;  the  dew  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and 
the  sunshine  of  the  Divine  favour.  4.  What  does  it  produce  ?  "  Herein  is  My 
Father  glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit."  VI.  The  garden  of  the  paradise  abo\t: 
(Rev.  xxii.  1-5).  (C.  H.  Spuryeon.)  The  garden  of  the  heart: — Very  often 
when  I  am  going  through  a  garden  I  come  to  some  little  bit  marked  off  from 
the  rest  by  a  stick  or  a-  row  of  stones,  and  some  lad  or  some  little  maiden 
comes  running  up;  "This  is  my  garden,"  they  say,  "my  very  own,  to  do 
whatever  I  like  with."  Now  each  of  us  has  a  garden,  our  very  own,  and 
yet  it  ought  to  be,  and  must  be,  the  King's  garden.  It  is  the  garden  of  the 
heart.  I.  I  should  like  you  to  remember  that  gardens  are  made  out  op 
WASTE  PLACES.  We  Want  our  heart  to  be  nice  and  kind,  and  like  a  king's  garden 
ought  to  be  ;  and  we  look  at  the  brambles  and  the  waste  places,  and  fear  sometimes 
that  it  never  can  be  made  into  a  garden.  "I  never  shall  be  good,"  you  say  ;  "  I 
never  shall  be  hke  so-and-so."  When  I  was  a  little  boy  I  learnt  drawing,  and  one 
day  when  I  had  tried  again  and  again,  and  couldn't  do  it  right,  I  flung  down  the 

Eencil  and  said  angrily,  "  I  never  shall  be  able  to  draw."  The  master  was  a  very 
ind  and  a  very  wise  man.  He  laughed  pleasantly,  and  said,  "  Come — never  is  a 
long  time.  I  couldn't  draw  any  better  than  you  can  when  I  was  your  age."  That 
put  new  life  into  me.  He  who  could  draw  anything  with  his  pencil,  and  could  make 
it  exactly  right  with  just  a  touch — to  think  that  once  he  could  not  draw  any  better 
than  I  could  1  I  went  at  it  again  then,  and  never  felt  inclined  to  give  up  afterwards. 
And  so  with  all  good  people  that  ever  lived — their  hearts  were  wild  and  waste 
before  they  became  the  King's  garden.  II.  Before  the  Kino  can  make  a  garden  He 
MUST  OWN  the  land.  Jcsus  says  to  us,  "  My  son,  give  Me  thine  heart."  He  wants 
the  heart,  not  because  it  is  a  garden,  but  that  He  may  make  a  King's  garden  of  it. 
III.  It  MTjsT  BE  cleared  AND  PLANTED.     "Ah,"  you  Say,  "  this  is  hard  work."    The 


CHAP,  m.]  NEHEMIAH.  67 

weeds  will  grow  so  fast  when  you've  pulled  them  up.  But  suppose  you  could  get 
some  one  to  come  and  change  the  ground,  so  that  instead  of  bringing  forth  weeds  it 
should  bring  forth  flowers  and  fruits.  That  is  just  what  we  can  do.  Jesus  has 
come  on  purpose  to  create  clean  hearts.  IV.  Wb  have  to  keep  this  gabden  fob  thb 
King.  1.  We  must  plant  it  well.  "  The  seed  is  the  Word  of  God."  2.  We  must 
water  it  twice  a  day,  and  prayer  is  the  watering.  3.  We  must  watch  against 
enemies.  When  I  was  a  boy  we  used  to  set  little  heaps  of  "  grains  "  to  attract  the 
slugs  and  snails,  and  then  creep  out  at  night  with  a  lantern  and  take  these  mis- 
chievous creatures,  that  otherwise  would  have  spoiled  all  the  fruit  and  many  of  the 
flowers.  Take  care  of  these,  of  habits  that  spoil  all  the  fruit ;  of  little  neglects  and 
forgetfulnesses  that  ruin  the  King's  garden.  The  peach-trees  and  plum-trees  have  a 
matting  or  net  hung  in  front  of  them — in  winter  to  keep  off  the  frosts,  or  in  summer 
to  keep  off  the  busy  birds.  We  must  be  watchful  against  all  things  that  hurt  the 
King's  garden.  We  must  be  on  our  guard  against  bad  companions,  bad  books,  and 
bad  influences  of  all  kinds,  and  also  of  hasty  words,  thoughtless  ways,  and  little 
harmful  thoughts  and  feelings.  V.  If  it  be  the  King's  gabden  the  King  Hhiself 
WILL  COME  TO  IT.  Cyrus  used  to  say,  "  I  take  so  much  interest  in  my  garden  because 
I  have  planted  every  plant,  and  have  sown  every  seed  in  it."  So  it  is  that  Jesus 
loves  His  garden.  He  turned  it  from  a  waste  into  a  garden,  and  has  sown  the  good 
seed  and  planted  the  trees.  I  have  heard  of  a  poor  man  who  lived  in  a  very  poor 
cottage  far  away  from  everybody  else.  One  day  somebody  called  to  see  him  and 
said,  "  My  friend,  you  must  be  very  lonely  here."  "  Lonely  I  "  he  replied,  "  ah,  so 
I  might  be,  but  Jesus  is  such  blessed  company  I  "  He  had  been  walking  in  the  King's 
garden  with  the  King,  and  this  made  him  so  happy.     {Mark  Guy  Pearse.) 

Ver.  28.  From  above  the  horse  gate  repaired  the  priests,  every  one  over 
against  his  house. — How  to  sweeten  the  life  of  great  cities  : — I  take  these  words 
mainly  as  suggesting  some  thoughts  applicable  to  the  duties  of  Christian  people  in 
view  of  the  spiritual  wants  of  our  great  cities.  Consider — I.  The  buins  that  nbsd 
EEPAiB.  If  I  dwell  rather  upon  the  dark  side  than  on  the  bright  side  of  city  life,  I 
shall  not  be  understood  as  forgetting  that  the  very  causes  which  intensify  the  evil 
of  a  great  city  quicken  the  good — the  friction  of  multitudes,  and  the  impetus  given 
thereby  to  all  kinds  of  mental  activity.  Most  of  us  have  got  so  familiarised  with  the 
evils  that  stare  us  in  the  face  every  time  we  go  out  upon  the  pavement,  that  we  have 
come  to  think  of  them  as  inseparable  from  our  modern  life,  like  the  noise  of  a 
carriage  wheel  from  its  rotation.  And  is  it  so,  then  ?  Must  it  be  that  the  shining 
structure  of  our  modern  society,  like  an  old  Mexican  temple,  must  be  built  upon  a 
layer  of  living  men  flung  in  for  a  foundation  ?  If  it  be  so,  then  I  venture  to  say 
that  to  a  very  large  extent  progress  is  a  delusion,  and  that  the  simple  life  of  agricul- 
tural communities  is  better  than  this  unwholesome  aggregation  of  men.  The 
beginning  of  Nehemiah's  work  of  repair  was  that  sad  midnight  ride  round  the 
ruined  walls.  So  there  is  a  solemn  obligation  laid  upon  Christian  people  to  acquaint 
themselves  with  the  awful  facts,  and  then  to  meditate  upon  them,  till  Christlike 
compassion,  pressing  against  the  flood-gates  of  the  heart,  flings  them  open,  and  lets 
out  a  stream  of  helpful  pity  and  saving  deeds  (Prov.  xxiv.  11,  12).  II.  The  buin  is 
TO  BE  BEPAiBED  MAINLY  BY  THE  OLD  GOSPEL  OF  Jesus  Cheist.  Far  be  It  from  me  to 
put  remedies  against  each  other.  The  causes  are  complicated,  and  the  cure  must 
be  as  complicated  as  the  causes.  Intemperance  has  to  be  fought  by  the  distinct 
preaching  of  abstinence,  and  by  the  invoking  of  legislative  restrictions  upon  the 
trafiic.  Wretched  homes  have  to  be  dealt  with  by  sanitary  reform.  Art  and  music, 
pictures  and  window  gardening,  &c. ,  will  lend  their  aid  to  soften  and  refine.  I  say, 
God  speed  to  all  these,  but  I  believe  that  I  shall  best  serve  my  generation  by  trying 
to  get  men  to  love  and  fear  Jesus  Christ  the  Saviour.  This  will  produce  new  tastes 
an"  new  inclinations,  which  will  reform,  sweeten,  and  purify  faster  than  anything 
else  does.  III.  This  bemedt  is  to  be  applied  by  the  individual  action  of  Christian 
MEN  AND  women  ON  THE  PEOPLE  NEAREST  THEM.  If  you  Want  to  do  people  good  you 
must  pay  the  price  for  it.  That  price  is  personal  sacrifice  and  effort.  A  loving 
heart  and  a  sympathetic  word,  the  exhibition  of  Christian  life  and  conduct,  the  fact 
of  going  down  into  the  midst  of  evil,  are  the  old-fashioned  and  only  magnets  by 
which  men  are  drawn  to  purer  and  higher  life.  That  is  God's  way  of  saving  the 
world — by  the  action  of  single  souls  on  single  souls.  "  The  priests  repaired  every 
one  over  against  his  own  house."  Possession  involves  responsibility.  We  get  the 
grace  for  ourselves  that  we  may  pass  it  on.  "  God  hath  shined  into  our  hearts,  that 
we  may  give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesua 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  rv. 

Christ."  There  is  nothing  so  mighty  as  the  confession  of  personal  experience.  If, 
Uke  Andrew,  you  have  found  the  Messias,  you  can  say  so.  All  can  preach  who  can 
say,  "  We  have  found  the  Christ."  The  existence  of  a  Church  in  which  the  workers 
are  as  numerous  as  the  Christians  ought  to  be  something  more  than  an  Utopian 
dream.  There  are  people  in  your  houses,  people  that  sit  by  you  in  your  counting- 
house,  on  your  college  benches,  who  work  by  your  side  in  mill  or  factory  or  ware- 
house, who  cross  your  path  in  a  hundred  ways,  and  God  has  given  them  to  you  that 
you  may  bring  them  to  Him.  Oh  1  if  you  lived  nearer  Christ,  you  would  catch  the 
sacred  fire  from  Him,  and  like  a  bit  of  cold  iron  lying  beside  a  magnet,  touching 
Him,  you  would  yourselves  become  magnetic,  and  draw  men  out  of  their  evil  and 
up  to  God.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Personal  revival  sought: — Once  upon  a  time 
many  Christians  gathered  to  pray  for  a  revival  in  the  great  city  in  which  they  lived. 
For  a  week  they  prayed,  "  0  Lord,  revive  the  city  1 "  but  the  heavens  were  as  brass. 
For  some  weeks  they  continued  to  pray  almost  as  broadly  and  indefinitely,  until  one 
friend,  who  felt  the  need  of  individual  quickening,  exclaimed,  "  0  Lord,  revive  Thy 
work  in  my  heart  1  0  Lord,  revive  me  1 "  There  was  a  general  breaking  at  the 
conclusion  of  this  prayer.  Personal  revival  was  sought  and  vouchsafed,  and  the 
work  soon  became  widespread  and  deep.  A  Baptist  Church  in  New  York  once 
sought  for  the  gracious  Influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  there  was  no  consciousness 
of  response  or  blessing  till  a  coloured  brother,  devout  and  earnest,  respected  and 
beloved  by  all,  got  down  upon  his  knees,  and,  with  choked  utterance,  prayed  in  the 
language  of  the  51st  Psalm. 


CHAPTEB  IV. 

Yebs.  1-4.  But  it  came  to  pass,  that  when  Sanballat  heard  that  we  bnilded  the 
wall,  he  was  wroth. — Sanballat :  a  study  in  party  spirit : — You  must  clearly  under- 
stand, to  begin  with,  that  Samaria  was  already,  even  in  that  early  day,  the  deadly 
rival  of  Jerusalem ;  and  also  that  Sanballat  was  the  governor  of  Samaria.  And 
Sanballat  was  a  man  of  this  kind,  that  he  was  not  content  with  doing  his  very  best 
to  make  Samaria  both  prosperous  and  powerful,  but  he  must  also  do  his  very  best  to 
keep  Jerusalem  downtrodden  and  destroyed.  And  thus  it  was  that,  when  Sanballat 
heard  that  Nehemiah  had  come  from  Shushan  with  a  commission  from  Artaxerxes 
to  rebuild  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  the  exasperating  news  drove  Sanballat  absolutely 
beside  himself.  And  thus  it  is  that  such  a  large  part  of  Nehemiah's  autobiography 
is  taken  up  with  Sanballat's  diabolical  plots  and  conspiracies  both  to  murder 
Nehemiah  and  to  destroy  the  new  Jerusalem.  We  see  in  Sanballat  an  outstanding 
instance  of  the  sleepless  malice  of  all  unprincipled  party  spirit.  1.  Now,  in  the 
first  place,  diabolically  wicked  as  party  spirit  too  often  becomes,  this  must  be  clearly 
understood  about  party  spirit,  that,  after  all,  it  is  but  the  excess,  and  the  perversion, 
and  the  depravity  of  an  originally  natural  and  a  perfectly  proper  principle  in  our 
hearts.  It  was  of  God,  and  it  was  of  human  nature  as  God  had  made  it,  that 
Sanballat  should  love  and  serve  Samaria  best ;  and  that  Nehemiah  should  love 
and  serve  Jerusalem  best.  And  all  party  spirit  among  ourselves  also,  at  its  begin- 
ning, is  but  our  natural  and  dutiful  love  for  our  own  land,  and  for  our  own  city, 
and  for  our  own  Church,  and  for  those  who  think  with  us,  and  work  with  us,  and 
love  us.  2.  But  then,  when  it  comes  to  its  worst,  as  it  too  often  does  come,  party 
spirit  is  the  complete  destruction  both  of  truth  and  of  love.  The  truth  is  hateful 
to  the  out-and-out  partisan.  We  all  know  that  in  ourselves.  As  many  lies  as  you 
like,  but  not  the  truth.  It  exasperates  us  to  hear  it.  You  are  henceforth  our 
enemy  if  you  will  insist  on  speaking  it.  It  is  not  truth  that  divides  us  up  into 
6uch  opposed  parties  as  we  see  all  around  us  in  Church  and  State,  it  is  far  more 
lies.  It  is  not  principle  once  in  ten  times.  Nine  times  out  of  ten  it  is  pure  party 
spirit.  And  I  cling  to  that  bad  spirit,  and  to  all  its  works,  as  if  it  were  my  life. 
I  feel  unhappy  when  you  tell  me  the  truth,  if  it  is  good  truth,  about  my  rival.  And 
where  truth  is  hated  in  that  way  love  can  have  no  possible  home.  Truth  is  love 
in  the  mind,  just  as  love  is  truth  in  the  heart.  Trample  on  the  one  and  you  crush 
the  other  to  death.  Now  the  full-blown  party  spirit  is  utter  poison  to  the  spirit  of 
love  as  well  as  to  the  spirit  of  truth.  Love  suffereth  long,  and  is  kind ;  loye 
rejoiceth  not  in  iniquity,  &c.     But  party  spirit  is  the  clean  contradiction  of  all  that. 


CHIP.  IV.]  NEHEMIAH.  59 

3.  By  the  just  and  righteous  ordination  of  Almighty  God  all  our  sins  carry  their 
own  punishment  immediately  and  inseparably  with  them.  And  party  spirit,  being 
such  a  wicked  spirit,  it  infallibly  inflicts  a  very  swift  and  a  very  severe  punishment 
on  the  man  who  entertains  it.  You  know  yourselves  how  party  spirit  hardens  your 
heart,  and  narrows,  and  imprisons,  and  impoverishes  your  mind.  You  must  all 
know  how  party  spirit  poisons  your  feelings,  and  fills  you  with  antipathy  at  men 
you  never  saw,  as  well  as  at  men  all  around  you  who  never  hurt  a  hair  of  your 
head,  and  would  not  if  they  could.  4.  Another  Divine  punishment  of  party  spirit 
is  seen  in  the  way  that  it  provokes  retaliation,  and  thus  reproduces  and  perpetuates 
itself  till  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  is  visited  upon  the  children  to  the  third  and 
fourth  generation  of  them  that  hate  the  truth  and  murder  love.  And,  inheriting 
no  little  good  from  our  contending  forefathers,  we  have  inherited  too  many  of  their 
injuries,  and  retaliations,  and  antipathies,  and  alienations  also.  And  the  worst  of 
it  is  that  we  look  on  it  as  true  patriotism,  and  the  perfection  of  religious  principle, 
to  keep  up  and  perpetuate  all  those  ancient  misunderstandings,  and  injuries,  and 
recriminations,  and  alienations.  6.  Who,  then,  is  a  wise  man,  and  endued  with 
wisdom  among  you  ?  Who  would  fain  be  such  a  man  ?  Who  would  behave  to  his 
rivals  and  enemies,  not  as  Nehemiah,  good  man  though  he  was,  behaved  to  the 
Samaritans,  but  as  Jesus  Christ  behaved  to  them?  Who,  in  one  word,  would 
escape  the  sin,  and  the  misery,  and  the  long-lasting  mischief  of  party  spirit  ? 
Butler  has  an  inimitable  way  of  saying  some  of  his  very  best  and  very  deepest 
things.  And  here  is  one  of  his  great  sayings  that  has  helped  me  more  in  this 
matter  than  I  can  tell  you.  "  Let  us  remember,"  he  says,  "  that  we  differ  as  much 
from  other  men  as  they  differ  from  us."  What  a  lamp  to  our  feet  is  that  sentence 
as  we  go  through  this  world !  And  then,  when  at  any  time,  and  towards  any 
party,  or  towards  any  person  whatsoever,  you  find  in  yourself  that  you  are  growing 
in  love,  and  in  peace,  and  in  patience,  and  in  toleration,  and  in  goodwill,  and  in 
good  wishes,  acknowledge  it  to  yourself  ;  see  it,  understand  it,  and  confess  it.  Do 
not  be  afraid  to  admit  it,  for  that  is  God  within  your  heart.  That  is  the  Divine 
Nature — that  is  the  Holy  Ghost.  Just  go  on  in  that  Spirit,  and  ere  ever  you  are 
aware  you  will  be  caught  up  and  taken  home  to  that  Holy  Land  where  there  is 
neither  Jerusalem  nor  Samaria.  There  will  be  no  party  spirit  there.  There  will 
be  no  controversy  there.  {A.  Whyte,  D.D.)  What  do  these  feeble  Jews? — 
Feeble  agencies  not  to  be  despised: — When  we  behold  a  wide,  turf-covered  ex- 
panse, we  should  remember  that  its  smoothness,  on  which  so  much  of  its  beauty 
depends,  is  mainly  due  to  all  the  inequalities  having  been  slowly  levelled  by 
worms.  It  is  a  marvellous  reflection  that  the  whole  of  the  superficial  mould 
over  any  such  expanse  has  passed,  and  wiU  pass  again,  every  few  years,  through 
the  bodies  of  worms.  The  plough  is  one  of  the  most  ancient  and  most  valuable 
of  man's  inventions ;  but  long  before  he  existed  the  land  was,  in  fact, 
regularly  ploughed  by  earth-worms.  It  may  be  doubted  whether  there  are 
any  other  animals  which  have  played  so  important  a  part  in  the  history  of 
the  world  as  have  these  lowly  organised  creatures.  Some  other  animal,  however, 
still  more  lowly  organised — namely,  corals,  have  done  far  more  conspicuous  work 
in  having  constructed  innumerable  reefs  and  islands  in  the  great  oceans;  but 
these  are  almost  confined  to  the  tropical  zones.  {Charles  Darwin.)  Intrinsic 
energy  not  to  be  gauged  by  magnitude: — Eemember  that  lofty  trees  grow  from 
diminutive  seeds ;  copious  rivers  flow  from  small  fountains ;  slender  wires  often 
sustain  ponderous  weights ;  injury  to  the  smallest  nerves  may  occasion  the  most 
agonising  sensation ;  the  derangement  of  the  least  wheel  or  pivot  may  render  useless 
the  greatest  machine  of  which  it  is  a  part ;  an  immense  crop  of  errors  may  spring 
from  the  least  root  of  falsehood  ;  a  glorious  intellectual  light  may  be  kindled  by  the 
minutest  spark  of  truth;  and  every  principle  is  more  diffusive  and  operative  by 
reason  of  its  intrinsic  energy  than  of  its  magnitude.  {J.  Gregory.)  Censure 
should  not  interfere  with  duty  : — Be  not  diverted  from  your  duty  by  any  idle  reflec- 
tions the  silly  world  may  make  on  you,  for  their  censures  are  not  in  your  power, 
and  consequently  should  be  no  part  of  your  concern.  {Epictetus.)  FooVs-bolts 
should  be  disregarded : — What  action  was  ever  so  good,  or  so  completely  done,  as  to 
be  well  taken  on  all  hands  ?  It  concerns  every  wise  Christian  to  settle  his  heart  in  a 
resolved  confidence  of  his  own  holy  and  just  grounds,  and  then  to  go  on  in  a  constant 
course  of  his  well-warranted  judgment  and  practice,  with  a  careless  disregard  of 
those  fool's-bolts  which  wUl  be  sure  to  be  shot  at  him,  which  way  soever  he  goes. 
{Bp.  Hall.)  Petty  criticism  should  be  disregarded  : — It  is  often  more  difficult  to 
endure  the  stinging  of  insects  than  to  face  the  gravest  perils.    Explorers  in  tropical 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it, 

countries  find  these  tiny,  noxious  creatures  much  more  destructive  of  their  peaca 
and  comfort  than  the  larger  and  more  deadly  animals  which  sometimes  beset  them. 
Many  a  man  faces  courageously  a  grave  peril  who  becomes  a  coward  when  a  set  of 
petty  annoyances  have  worn  his  nerves  out  and  irritated  him  to  the  point  of  loss  of 
self-control.  Every  man  who  attempts  an  independent  course  of  life,  whether  of 
thought,  habit,  or  action,  finds  himself  beset  by  a  cloud  of  petty  critics,  who  are, 
for  the  most  part,  without  malice,  but  whose  stings,  inspired  by  ignorance,  are  quite 
as  hard  to  bear  as  they  would  be  if  inspired  by  hate.  The  misrepresentations  and 
misconceptions  which  good  men  suffer  are  a  part  of  the  pathos  of  life.  The  real 
answer  to  criticism  is  a  man's  Ufe  and  work.  A  busy  man  has  no  time  to  stop  and 
meet  his  critics  in  detail ;  he  must  do  hia  work,  and  let  that  be  his  answer 
to  criticism.    {Christian  Age.) 

Ver.  6.  So  we  built  the  wall. — Fellowship  in  Christian  service : — 1.  They  built  it 
notwithstanding  sneers.  "  What  do  these  feeble  Jews  ?  "  Sanballat  said.  All  the 
Sanballats  are  not  dead  yet.  Often,  when  you  would  attempt  some  new  or  difficult 
work  for  Christ,  there  are  a  good  many  modern  Sanballats  ready  to  stand  about 
and  say,  •'  You  can't  do  anything ;  you  are  not  strong  enough ;  you  are  not 
experienced  enough  ;  you  haven't  money  enough ;  the  idea  of  your  attempting 
such  a  thing  1  "  2.  They  built  the  wall,  notwithstanding  active  opposition.  They 
kept  right  on  steadily  building.  Said  the  great  William  Carey — who  wrought  such 
wonders,  and  against  such  opposition,  in  modern  missions — to  his  son  Eustace, 
"  Eustace,  if  they  say  I  am  a  genius,  it  is  not  true  ;  but  if  they  say  I  can  plod,  that 
is  true.  Yes,  I  can  plod,  I  can  plod."  And  a  plodding  persistence,  in  the  face  of 
almost  any  opposition,  is  sure  at  last  to  triumph.  3.  They  built  the  wall,  notwith- 
standing despairing  friends.  I  have  been  reading  how  General  Washington,  only  a 
little  time  before  the  battle  of  Yorktown,  was  in  the  very  darkest  time  of  the  long, 
hard  struggle.  Friends  on  every  side  were  despairingly  saying,  *'  You  can't  do  it ; 
you  might  just  as  well  give  up."  But  the  great  Washington  would  not  let  himself 
despair.  Whoever  else  might,  he  would  not.  He  would  keep  at  it ;  and,  keeping 
at  it,  notwithstanding  the  despair  of  friends,  a  nation's  independence  was  achieved 
at  Yorktown.  4.  They  built  the  wall  by  prayer.  I  asked  Mr.  Spurgeon  once  how 
he  prayed.  He  answered,  "  I  go  to  the  Bible  and  find  a  promise  applicable  to  my 
need,  then  I  reverently  plead  that  promise  before  the  Lord,  asking  Him  to  keep  it 
for  Jesus'  sake  ;  and  I  believe  God  will,  and  He  does."  That  is  the  prayer  of  faith 
— the  prayer  of  great  grip  on  the  Divine  promise.  6.  They  built  the  wall  by 
working  together.  Did  you  notice  that  "  we  "  ?  *'  So  '  we '  built  the  wall,"  our 
Scripture  says.  Even  one  is  worth  something,  but  two  are  worth  more,  and  many 
striving  together  are  worth  immeasurably  more.  Associate  others  with  yourself,  or 
yourself  with  others.  It  was  because  the  Rough  Riders  rushed  up  the  heights  of 
San  Juan  together,  and  because  the  coloured  regiments  rushed  up  together,  and 
together  with  them  they  were  enabled  to  plant  Old  Glory  on  the  summit.  Fellow- 
ship is  better  than  individualism  in  all  noble  service.  6.  They  built  the  wall  by 
willingness  on  the  part  of  each  to  do  whatever  he  could.  Sometimes  they  bore 
burdens ;  sometimes  they  grasped  swords  and  spears ;  sometimes  they  stood 
sentinel.  There  was  no  selfish  picking  and  choosing.  There  was  no  mean 
declaring  "  I  wiU  do  this,  but  I  won't  do  that."  Each  one  was  ready  to  do  any- 
thing ;  the  thing  which  seemed  just  then  the  thing  best  to  be  done.  It  is  no  wonder 
that  the  wall  went  steadily  and  triumphantly  up.  7.  They  built  the  wall  by 
courageous  trust  in  God.  Said  Nehemiah,  "Be  not  afraid  of  them;  remember 
the  Lord."  (W.  Eoyt,  D.D.)  For  the  people  had  a  mind  to  work. — 
Ccmditions  of  success  in  Christian  work : — The  chief  characteristics  displayed 
by  Nehemiah  and  his  fellow-citizens  in  prosecuting  their  work  were — 1.  Earnest- 
ness. Earnestness  is  an  important  factor  in  all  Christian  work  and  consists — 
(1)  In  a  thorough  persuasion  of  the  truth  of  the  message  we  make  known — 
the  efficacy  of  the  remedy  we  convey  to  men.  (2)  A  deep  sense  of  the  value 
of  those  we  seek  to  save.  (3)  An  intense  conviction  that  it  is  God's  work 
and  not  our  own  we  are  seeking  to  do.  2.  Persistency.  3.  Union.  4.  Courage. 
5.  Prayerfulness.  Summing  up  these  characteristics,  we  may  say  to  the  Christian 
worker,  "  Add  to  your  work  earnestness,  and  to  earnestness  persistency,  and 
to  persistency  union,  and  to  union  wisdom,  and  to  wisdom  courage,  and  to 
courage  prayer  "  ;  "  for  if  these  things  be  in  you,  and  abound,  they  make  you  that 
ye  shall  neither  be  barren  nor  unfruitful  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ"  (2  Pet.  i.  8).     (W.  P.  Lockhart.)         A  mind  to  work: — This  implies — 


CHAP.  IT.]  NE  HE  MI  AH.  61 

1.  A  BECOGNITION  OF  THE  DUTY  OF  WORK.  II.  A  RECOGNITION  OF  THE  PRITILEGE  OF 
VORK.       III.   Ak    EARNEST   SYMPATHY   WITH,  AND   LONGING   FOR,  THE   RESULTS   OF   WORK. 

{The  Church.)  A  mmd  to  work  : — I.  The  work.  Circumstances  have  changed, 
and  the  methods  are  altered,  but  the  work  is  the  same.  You  are  entitled  to  ask 
me,  "  What  are  we  to  do  ?  "  1.  Bear  the  insignia  of  your  rehgion  before  the  world. 
Let  all  men  know  that  you  are  the  followers  of  Christ.  2.  Maintain  His  public 
worship.     3.  Christianise  the  world.    II.  The  mind.    This  implies — 1.  Eeadiness. 

2.  Heartiness.  3.  Cheerfulness.  4.  Thoroughness  amid  discouragement  and 
opposition.  (T.  Davies,  M.A.)  A  viind  to  work : — I.  The  work  the  Jews  had  to 
PERFORM.  The  work  they  had  undertaken  was  one  in  which  it  was  natural  to 
suppose  they  felt  the  deepest  possible  interest.  It  will  be  admitted  that  the  work 
they  had  undertaken  was  a  great  work.  Then  as  to  the  magnitude  of  the  work,  it 
is  indescribable — it  is,  in  a  word,  to  seek  the  present  and  eternal  salvation  of  a  guilty, 
ruined,  and  perishing  world.  Nor  must  good  men  lose  sight  of  the  fact,  that  this 
glorious  work  is  to  be  accomplished,  not  by  miracle,  nor  by  a  Divine  power  or  agency 
in  the  abstract,  but  by  the  feeble,  and  of  itself  powerless,  instrumentality  of  Christian 
men,  as  accompanied  with  the  sanctifying  and  saving  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
of  God.  n.  The  obstacles  which,  in  the  prosecution  of  their  work,  the  Jews 
HAD  TO  encounter.  The  Church,  then,  must  never  forget  that  her  adversaries  are 
both  numerous  and  powerful.  But  have  not  the  Church's  greatest  difficulties  often 
proved  her  greatest  blessings  ?  It  has  led  the  Lord's  people  both  to  see  and  to  feel 
more  of  their  dependence  upon  Him.  HI.  The  spirit  in  which  the  Jews  carried 
ON  THEIR  WORK.  They  had  their  minds,  that  is  to  say,  their  souls,  in  it,  and  they 
were  determined  to  accomplish  it.  They  loved  their  Master,  their  work,  and  each 
other.  IV.  The  success  of  which  their  labour  was  productive.  1.  Are  there 
any  of  us  who  are  engaged  in  the  Lord's  service,  but  whose  hearts  are  not 
in  it?  2.  Are  there  any  who  have  no  disposition  to  labour  for  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ?  {Essex  Remembrancer.)  A  mind  to  work : — We  have  here — I.  Co-opera- 
tion. *'  The  people  had  a  mind  to  work. "  Nehemiah  was,  of  course,  the  ruling  spirit. 
He  was  only  one  man,  but  he  was  one  of  those  men  who  count  for  thousands. 
He  was  one  of  those  men  who  not  only  embody  but  create  the  spirit  of  an  age  and 
lead  it  on  to  victory.  He  was  only  one  man,  but  in  this  world  men  have  not  to 
be  counted  but  weighed ;  and  it  is  when  men  are  weighed — weighed  as  to  their 
intellect,  their  convictions,  their  courage,  their  principles,  their  self-denial — that  it 
is  seen  that  one  man  is  not  as  good  as  another.  AH  the  great  epochs  of  the  world 
have  gathered  around  one  man,  just  as  the  restoration  gathered  around  Nehemiah, 
and  so  filled  his  soul  that  the  electric  power  of  his  patriotic  purpose  enkindled  the 
hearts  of  the  people  with  a  flame  that  never  expired  till  the  work  was  done.  Then 
as  ever,  it  was  seen  that  the  world's  work  must  be  done  by  a  combination  of  men 
who  toil  with  the  brain  and  who  toil  with  the  hands.  Nehemiah  was  architect, 
clerk  of  the  works,  diplomatist,  general,  all  in  one.  But  he  could  have  done 
nothing  unless  he  had  been  able  to  secure  the  co-operation  of  the  people.  There  is 
here  a  lesson  on  the  value  and  the  necessity  of  co-operation  in  work  for  Christ. 
Success  in  war  is  due  to  two  principles — the  one  is  divide  your  enemy,  and  the 
other  is  unite  yourselves.  On  these  two  conditions  success  is  certain.  Real  and 
■^tal  co-operation  in  Church  work  will  be  equally  successful.  There  may  be  a 
Church  and  no  co-operation.  It  may  be  a  mass,  but  not  a  body.  Many  individual 
men  do  far  more  than  a  society,  because  the  individual  men  work,  and  the  society 
does  not,  but  thinks  that  it  has  fulfilled  all  its  duty  when  it  has  appointed  a 
committee,  with  its  usual  complement  of  officers.  You  would  think  that  an  army 
had  strangely  misconceived  its  mission  if  because  it  saw  its  staff-officers  it  lay  down 
and  left  the  fortunes  of  battle  to  be  settled  by  them.  But  this  is  just  what  is  done 
by  societies  which  devolve  on  committees  the  whole  work.  II.  Cheerful  resolu- 
TiON.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  work  done  in  our  world,  and  has  always  been,  in 
which  there  has  been  no  mind  at  all,  either  in  the  shape  of  intelligence  or  good- 
will. I  suppose  that  some  of  the  greatest  structures  of  the  world  were  so  built — the 
Pyramids,  the  great  aqueducts  of  Rome  and  the  Coliseum.  The  slaves  had  not  a 
mind  to  work,  but  had  an  eye  to  the  rod  of  the  taskmaster.  You  will  search  this 
book  in  vain  for  the  trace  of  a  taskmaster.  They  had  a  mind  to  work,  and  not  to 
criticise  or  cavil.  This  is  a  suggestive  warning  to  all  such  characters  in  our  day. 
Many  have  a  mind  only  to  think,  and  not  to  work.  You  ask  them  to  come  and  set 
their  shoulder  to  the  wheel,  but  they  prefer  to  spend  their  time  in  solving,  so  far  aa 
they  can,  sundry  theological  or  religious  riddles.  If  by  their  thinking  they  accom- 
plished anything,  then  tLej  might  think  on,  but  they  are  like  a  corn-mill,  the 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  iv, 

stones  of  which  are  perpetually  revolving,  but  there  is  no  corn  between  them,  and  so 
they  only  grind  themselves.  More  doubts  are  removed  and  more  difficulties  are 
solved  by  working  than  by  thinking.  "  If  any  man  will  do  the  will  of  God,"  &o. 
Some  people  have  a  mind  to  speak,  but  not  to  work.  Speech  is  good  enough  in  ita 
place.  The  end  of  all  talk  should  be  action.  As  a  rule  most  work  is  done  where 
there  is  least  noise.  When  a  machine  goes  noiselessly,  it  means  that  the  friction 
is  reduced  to  the  smallest  possible  quantity,  and  that  the  force  is  not  wasted  on  the 
process,  but  comes  out  in  the  accomplished  work.  At  the  building  of  Babel  there 
was  far  more  noise  than  at  the  building  of  the  temple,  but  the  temple  was  the  suc- 
cessful work.  Their  heart  was  in  their  work,  and  by  their  heart  we  mean  chiefly 
their  purpose  and  their  cheerfulness.  He  that  works  without  a  will  is  nothing 
better  than  a  machine,  and  may  be  worse.  When  people  have  a  mind  to  work  there 
will  be  no  unseemly  ambitions,  no  quarrels  for  posts  of  honour.  The  man  who  can 
lighten  labour  with  a  song  is  likely  to  be  a  good  worker.  He  wiU  be  like  a  soldier, 
who  marches  best  to  the  rhythmic  throb  of  the  drum,  and  to  the  sounds  of  inspiring 
music.  As  to  Christian  work,  none  can  be  entitled  to  such  a  name  unless  it  be 
cheerful.  God  loveth,  we  are  told,  not  a  giver,  but  a  "  cheerful "  giver.  If  we  show 
mercy  we  are  to  show  it  cheerfully.  We  are  to  serve  the  Lord  with  gladness.  We 
are  to  come  into  His  presence  with  songs.  Saints  are  to  be  joyful  in  the  Lord. 
III.  Work  CEOWNED  WITH  SUCCESS.  {Enoch  Mellor,  D.D.)  The  secret  of  iuccesi 
in  the  work  of  the  Lord  : — I.  That  we  have  a  great  and  an  important  work 
DEVOLVING  UPON  US :  to  aid  in  raising  the  world  from  the  ruins  of  the  fall,  and 
restoring  it  to  something  of  its  former  order  and  beauty,  that  the  Lord  may  dwell 
among  us.  This  work  has  been  committed  to  the  Church.  It  is  her  high  com- 
mission.   This  work  must  commence  with  our  own  hearts.     II.  That  this  work 

MUST  BE  ENGAGED  IN  WITH  CONSECRATED  ZEAL  AND   ACTIVITY.      III.    ThE   DILIGENT   USB- 

OF  ALL  APPOINTED  MEANS.  Nchcmiah  having  set  his  heart  upon  his  work,  judiciously 
employed  every  means  calculated  to  promote  it.  1.  Let  us  stimulate  each  other  to 
engage  vigorously  and  unitedly  in  this  work.  Generally  speaking,  there  is  only 
a  small  fraction  of  every  Church  that  engages  actively  in  the  great  purposes  of 
religion.  2.  Having  brought  all  the  truly  pious  up  to  a  proper  point,  we  should 
then  address  ourselves,  every  one  to  his  proper  sphere  of  labour.    IV.  That  in  thb 

USE   OF    MEANS   THE   WORK   MUST   BE   FOLLOWED  UP  WITH  FORTITUDE  AND  PERSEVERANCE. 

Such  was  the  perseverance  of  the  Jews  in  rebuilding  the  walls,  that  they  never 
puUed  off  their  clothes,  except  for  the  means  of  cleanliness,  during  the  whole  of  the 
work ;  but  continued  night  and  day  working.  There  was  no  time  for  delay  or 
indulgence.  V.  That  to  insure  the  successful  issue  of  the  work,  there  must 
BE  AN  ENTIRE  DEPENDENCE  ON  THE  BLESSING  OF  GOD.  Here  was  the  grand  secret  of 
Nehemiah's  success.  He  first  sought  Divine  direction,  then  employed  the  means,, 
and  then  implored  the  Divine  blessing.  In  no  other  way  can  we  account  for  the 
rapid  progress  of  the  work,  and  its  successful  issue  in  so  short  a  time.  (G.  Richards.) 
Rebuilding  of  the  walls  of  Jerusalem : — Consider — I.  The  persons  by  whom  thb. 

WORK  was  mainly  PERFORMED.      II.   ThE  SPIRIT  IN  WHICH  IT  WAS  ACCOMPLISHED.      In  a. 

great  multitude  of  instances  the  work  of  conversion  or  reform  is  begun  too  near  the 
surface.  You  ask  the  hand  to  work,  and  what  is  wanting  is  the  mind  to  work. 
What  we  want  is,  not  a  new  power  but  a  new  disposition,  to  have  the  mind  newly 
cast  in  the  image  and  character  of  God.  It  is  in  vain  to  change  the  hand  of  the. 
watch  if  the  mainspring  is  defective ;  it  is  in  vain  to  heal  the  muscle  or  the  sinew 
if  there  is  no  life's  blood  in  the  heart ;  it  is  in  vain  to  mould  the  mere  image  of  a 
man  if  the  spirit  of  life  is  not  communicated.  All  these  typify  the  man  without  the 
mind,  without  the  will.  {J.  W.  Cunningham,  A.M.)  Advance  in  solid  column  to- 
Christian  work : — When  General  Grant  was  in  front  of  Bichmond,  and  his  army 
had  been  repulsed  in  the  Wilderness,  he  called  together  his  co-commandera  and 
held  a  council,  and  asked  them  what  they  thought  he  had  better  do.  There  were. 
General  Sherman  and  General  Howard,  now  leading  generals,  and  all  thought  he 
had  better  retreat.  He  heard  them  through,  and  then  broke  up  the  council  of  war 
and  sent  them  back  to  their  headquarters ;  but  before  morning  an  orderly  came 
round  with  a  despatch  from  the  General  directing  an  advance  in  solid  column  on  the 
enemy  at  daylight.  That  was  what  took  Richmond  and  broke  down  the  rebellion 
in  our  country.  Christians,  let  us  advance  in  solid  column  against  the  enemy  ;  let 
us  lift  high  the  standard,  and  in  the  name  of  our  God  let  us  lift  up  our  voice,  and 
let  us  work  together,  shoulder  to  shoulder,  and  keep  our  eye  single  to  the  honour 
find  glory  of  Christ.  (D.  L.  Moody.)  Absorbing  work  w  successful: — A  gentle- 
man who  recently  visited  Mr.  Edison's  great  laboratory,  at  Menlo  Park,  and  whose. 


CHAP.  IT.]  NEHEMIAH.  63 

son  was  about  to  enter  upon  business  life,  asked  the  Professor  to  give  him  a  motto 
for  his  boy,  so  that  he  might  remember  it  as  a  guide  and  stimulus  in  after-life,  Mr, 
Edison  laughed  a  little  at  the  novel  request,  and  then  said,  "  Well,  I'll  give  him 
this — tell  him  never  to  look  at  the  clock  !  "  Which  means  this — that  the  man  who 
succeeds  to-day  is  not  the  man  who  does  just  what  he  has  contracted  to  do  and  no 
more,  but  the  man  who  throws  his  heart  into  his  work,  feels  a  genuine  interest  in 
it,  and  does  not  grumble  if  he  has  to  work  ten  minutes  after  office  hours.  Putting 
heart  into  work  : — ^An  employer,  pointing  to  two  men  working  side  by  side  in  his 
shop,  said,  "  Though  I  pay  them  the  same  wages,  one  of  them  is  worth  twice  as 
much  to  me  as  the  other,  because  he  puts  his  heart  into  everything  that  he  does. 
He  is  interested.  He  is  always  anxious  to  do  his  best.  His  neighbour,  on  the 
contrary,  thinks  only  of  his  wages.  He  will  shirk  whenever  he  thinks  that  he  can 
do  so  and  not  be  found  out.  I  cannot  trust  him.  I  have  to  watch  him  closely,  or 
he  will  send  out  work  that  is  imperfect,  and  will  injure  the  reputation  of  the  shop." 
"  Well,  what  does  the  man  you  commend  gain  by  putting  his  heart  in  it,  if  you  pay 
the  same  wages  ?  "  "  Nothing  at  present  except  the  satisfaction  one  feels  in  trying 
to  do  his  duty." 

Vers.  7-18.  But  it  came  to  pass,  that  when  Santtallat,  and  Toblah,  and  the 
Arabians,  and  the  Ammonites,  and  the  Ashdodites,  heard  that  the  walls  .  .  .  con- 
spired all  of  them  together, — Foes  oj  the  faith : — It  is  well  we  should  know  our 
enemies,  and  then  we  can  better  resist  them.  I.  Think  of  those  foes  of  the  faith 
Nehemiah  had  to  withstand.  1.  There  was  Noadiah  the  prophetess.  She  would 
have  put  Nehemiah  •'  in  fear."  She  used  a  sacred  position  and  the  name  of  God  to 
check  the  efforts  of  a  good  man.  Noadiah  could  threaten,  instil  doubts,  and  arouse 
dread.  The  Church  to-day  lacks  courage.  Too  many  Noadiahs  are  prophesying 
evil  things,  and  leading  others  to  believe  that  Christian  missions.  Christian  social 
efforts.  Christian  gospel  preaching,  and  Christian  hopes  of  the  final  triumph  of 
truth  are  only  doomed  to  disappointment,  but  the  Noadiahs  are  often  wrong. 
Pessimists,  philosophical  or  ecclesiastical,  are  all  the  prey  of  paralysis.  2.  Then 
there  was  Shemaiah  (chap.  vi.  10),  who  was  "  shut  in  the  temple."  He  pretended 
that  great  danger  approached.  He  sought  to  allure  the  Reformer  into  a  state  of 
inactivity.  He  said :  "  Let  us  shut  the  doors  of  the  temple,  for  they  will  come 
and  slay  thee ;  yea,  in  the  night  they  will  come  and  slay  thee."  However,  Shemiah 
had  his  price.  He  had  been  "hired."  Money  dictated  his  actions  as  it  does  that 
of  many  mercenary  hinderers  of  the  truth,  especially  the  men  who  say,  "  We 
exist  for  the  benefit  of  the  people."  3.  Then  there  was  Sanballat  the  Horonite. 
He  was  a  most  dangerous  enemy.  He  had  a  position  at  Samaria,  the  nearest 
strong  city.  He  had  special  influence  also  with  the  garrison.  Of  him  it  is 
said,  "  Sanballat  was  very  wroth,  and  took  great  indignation,  and  mocked 
the  Jews  and  spake  before  his  brethren  (relations),  and  the  army  of 
Samaria."  He  said,  "What  do  those  feeble  Jews?  Will  they  sacrifice? 
Will  they  make  an  end  in  a  day?  Will  they  revive  the  stones  out  of  the  heaps 
of  rubbish  that  are  burned?"  He  raged.  His  anger  was  like  Nebuchadnezzar's 
furnace,  heated  seven  times  hotter  than  usual.  It  was  like  the  fires  of  the 
Inquisition  that  did  put  out  evangelical  truth  throughout  Spain,  and  nearly  through 
France,  Sanballat  was  most  irritating  to  Nehemiah,  for  he  taunted  him  bitterly. 
He  sought  in  every  way  to  check  the  work  by  abuse  of  the  courageous  leader, 
Sanballat,  indeed,  was  a  bitter  east  wind.  4.  Tobiah,  who  lived  at  Ammon,  was 
another  enemy.  He  had  power  over  a  province.  He  had  probably  reached  his 
post  by  flattering  when  a  slave  in  the  imperial  court.  Nehemiah  calls  him  the 
slave  (chap.  ii.  19)  (where  servant  should  be  rendered  slave).  He  was  a  sprung-up, 
conceited  opponent  of  the  truth.  He  assumed  that  wisdom  would  die  with  him. 
This  Tobiah  was  acquainted  with  the  internal  state  of  Jerusalem,  and  had  shown 
contempt  for  the  efforts  of  Nehemiah,  He  said,  "  Even  that  which  they  build,  if 
a  fox  go  up,  he  shall  even  break  down  their  stone  wall  "  (chap.  iv.  3),  He  ridiculed 
their  aims,  and  kept  up  a  constant  intrigue  with  those  within  who  were  disaffected 
(chap,  vi,  17).  This  man,  even  after  the  temple  was  finished  and  the  walls  built, 
managed  to  establish  himself  in  the  sacred  place  itself,  because  he  had  relationship 
with  the  chief  priest  (chap,  xiii,  8),  This  man  may  represent  those  who  are  traitorous 
betrayers,  and  who  now  cast  ridicule  upon  the  truth,  or  on  efforts  after  the  truth — 
those  who,  pretending  to  help  Protestant  truth,  are  its  betrayers.  5.  Another 
enemy  was  Geshem  or  Gashmu  an  Arabian  (chap.  vi.  6).  Geshem  and  Gashmu  seem 
to  have  been  identical.  He  was  an  Ishlmaelite.   He  was  a  wild,  characterless  man — ■ 


(64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it. 

"  an  idle  chatterer."  He  had  nothing  to  lose  and  everything  to  gain  by  opposition. 
He  brought  false  charges  against  Nehemiah  as  one  who  only  wished  to  set  up  a 
sovereignty,  and  to  be  independent  of  the  central  power  at  Susa  (chap.  vi.  6).  Msst 
dangerous  of  all  enemies  was  this  Geshem,  or  Gashmu,  for  he  could  insinuate  that 
mean  motives  were  the  spring  of  holy  efforts.  He  was  a  whisperer.  Oh,  how  very 
many  Gashmus  there  are  even  now  I  They  are  of  no  importance,  save  that  they 
can  spread  reports,  and  do  much  damage.  Gashmus  will  say  that  they  pretend  to 
be  anxious  about  the  cause  of  God,  when  they  are  only  anxious  to  gratify  their 
own  ambition.  Or  Gashmu  will  say  that  Christians  only  desire  advance  in  material 
prosperity.  The  Gashmus  are  too  indifferent  to  understand  the  enthusiasm  of 
Christians.  6.  Noadiah,  Shemaiah,  Sanballat,  Tobiah,  and  Gashmu  were  united. 
They  were  cunning  and  cruel.  They  had  allies  within  Jerusalem.  Some  were 
half-hearted.  Individually  we  have  traitorous  tendencies  to  indifference  and  ease 
in  our  souls.  We  have  many  enemies  whom  we  find  represented  by  the  Ammonites 
and  Arabians.  They  are  such  as  these — doubts  as  to  whether  we  are  converted,  or 
unbelief  as  to  Christ's  acceptance  of  us,  or  superstitious  and  self-righteous  leanings, 
seductions  of  the  world,  of  pleasure,  of  wealth,  of  fame,  desire  to  have  the  good 
opinion  of  the  world,  desire  to  be  known  rather  as  "  good  fellows "  than  good 
Christians.  To  be  without  temptation  would  be  to  be  without  that  element  that 
goes  to  form  character.  "Better  have  the  devil's  war  than  have  the  devil's  peace." 
U.  Nehemiah  teaches  us  how  to  kesist  the  enemies  op  the  truth.  1.  He 
resisted  by  establishing  sentinels,  setting  the  watch  to  give  warning ;  he  resisted 
by  placing  weapons  into  the  hands  of  all.  Our  weapons  of  defence  are  God's 
commands,  God's  promises,  God's  love.  Nehemiah  resisted  by  teaching  the 
people  to  keep  behind  their  defences.  We,  when  assaults  on  our  faith  or  tempta- 
tions come,  should  get  behind  the  walls,  should  keep  within  conscience — keep 
within  the  Word.  2.  Nehemiah  resisted  his  foes  by  pressing  all  into  service. 
"  None  were  despised."  3.  Nehemiah  resisted  his  foes  by  inspiring  his  people  with 
confidence  in  God.  God  is  mightier  than  our  foes.  4.  Nehemiah  resisted  also  by 
insisting  that  there  should  be  no  parleying  with  the  enemy.  "  Answer  him  not 
again."  He  resisted  by  leading  the  people  to  be  as  unrestful  in  toil  as  unceasing 
in  outlook.  "  They  laboured,  and  half  of  them  held  the  spears  from  the  rising 
of  the  morning  till  the  stars  appeared  "  (chap.  iv.  21).  He  inspired  his  followers  with 
courage,  saying,  "  Be  not  afraid  of  them.  Remember  the  Lord,  great  and  terrible, 
and  fight  for  your  brethren,  your  sons,  your  daughters,  your  wives,  and  your 
houses."  And  again,  "  Our  God  shall  fight  for  us  "  (chap.  iv.  14,  20).  Words  these 
worthy  to  be  the  battle-cry  of  the  Church.  Moreover,  Nehemiah  resisted  best  by 
setting  an  example  of  courage.  "Should  such  a  man  as  I  flee?"  All  Christian 
hfe  should  be  courageous.  Shall  we,  in  view  of  the  value  of  our  souls,  yield  to 
evil?  The  more  we  work  for  Christ  and  watch  against  evil,  the  stronger  we  shall 
become.  Soldiers  are  not  kept  idle  while  in  garrison  ;  work  of  some  kind  is  always 
found  for  them.  If  unemployed  they  would  soon  become  flabby,  weak,  and  without 
muscle.  There  is  ever  something  in  Christian  life  to  develop  the  watchful  and  the 
heroic.  Persistency  prevailed.  We  are  told  that  "  when  his  enemies  heard  of  the 
fact  that  the  wall  was  finished  they  were  much  cast  dovra  in  their  own  eyes " 
(chap.  vi.  16) .  Walls  had  risen  which  they  could  not  batter.  Crestfallen,  the  enemies 
had  to  depart.  Chroniclers  might  have  said  of  them,  as  it  was  written  of  Charles 
VIII.  of  France,  and  his  expedition  against  Naples,  "  They  came  into  the  field  like 
■thunder,  and  went  out  like  a  soft  shower."  So  went  away,  in  the  time  of  Nehemiah, 
the  enemies  of  God's  struggling  Church.  "  God  brought  their  counsel  to  nought." 
(F.  Eastings.)  And  to  hinder  it. — The  builders  interrupted  : — I.  Ths  work 
Nehemiah  was  commissioned  to  do.  U.  How  Nehemiah's  wobk  was  hindebbd. 
1.  By  ridicule.  2.  By  weariness  ^ver.  10).  3.  By  fearfulness  (ver.  12).  Many 
now  feel  that  there  is  danger  in  Duilding  the  walls  of  Zion.  (1)  In  social  life. 
(2)  In  politics.  (3)  In  business.  4.  By  bribery.  No  other  cause  so  weakens  the 
Church  as  defection  in  her  own  membership.  IH.  The  measures  bt  which 
Nehemiah  accomplished  his  work.  1.  Prayer.  2.  Sagacious  efforts.  3.  Single- 
ness of  aim.  Nothing  could  divert  him.  4.  Enthusiasm.  Zeal  in  one  heart  sets 
other  hearts  burning.  There  is  a  suggestive  legend  of  the  venerable  Bede  which 
tells  us  that  when  he  was  old,  with  eyesight  almost  gone,  one  of  his  scholars  led 
him  to  a  heap  of  stones,  and  told  him  they  were  people ;  this  was  enough.  The 
aged  servant  was  true  to  his  commission.  With  fiery  tongue  he  preached  the 
gospel.  He  ended  as  usual  with  the  doxology,  "  To  whom  be  glory  through  all  the 
ages."    Then  from  that  heap  of  stones  a  voice  rose,  "  Amen  venerabilis  Bede  1 " 


CHAP,  rv.]  NEHEMIAH.  65 

True  zeal  springs  not  from  impulse,  but  from  conviction.  5.  His  securing  the 
co-operation  of  the  people.  "  Every  one  to  his  work."  When  Wesley  was  asked 
the  secret  of  his  success,  he  replied,  "  To  my  voice  in  the  pulpit  on  the  Sabbath  the 
people  add  a  thousand  echoes  during  the  week."  {Monday  Club  Sermons,}: 
Hinderers : — Nehemiah  had  enemies  and  hinderers  in  his  great  undertaking.. 
I.  Those  who  said,  "  Ye  shall  not  do  it."  Sanballat,  Tobiah,  and  Geshem,  &c.. 
These  are  the  least  to  be  dreaded.  II.  Those  who  said,  "  You  ought  not  to  do  it."' 
Those  were  the  Jews  who  dwelt  by  these  Samaritans.  They  were  near  neighbours 
to  them  ;  so  near  as  to  be  influenced  by  their  threats  and  their  derision.  This  was 
a  danger  far  more  serious  than  that  which  came  directly  to  the  good  governor  from, 
the  wicked  Sanballat.  The  solicitation  of  friends  was  far  more  likely  to  weaken 
his  forces  than  the  intimidation  of  foes.  This  would  tend  to  consolidate  the  people 
for  defence,  while  that  would  draw  them  off  little  by  little,  a  few  to  this  village  and 
a  few  to  that,  until  a  considerable  part  of  them  would  be  found  to  have  melted 
away.  The  pleas  of  friendship  are  stronger  than  the  threats  of  enmity.  This 
kindly  interest  shown  in  their  welfare,  this  fear  in  their  behalf,  and  the  possible 
need  of  them  at  home — these  were  strong  inducements  to  them  to  desert  and  go  back 
to  their  various  villages.  This  is  a  plea,  too,  which  can  be  repeated  many  times.  So 
while  the  threats  are  recorded  as  repeated  twice,  this  call  to  return  to  those  who  loved 
them  was  made  in  one  form  or  another  as  many  as  ten  times.  Let  the  Church  of 
Christ  and  let  the  Christian  man  beware  of  these  friendly  voices  which  urge  them 
to  withdraw  from  the  service  on  which  they  have  entered,  or  from  some  special  part 
of  it,  because  it  may  involve  some  danger  or  some  sacrifice.  It  is  those  who  live 
near  the  enemy  who  reinforce  his  threats  with  their  friendly  entreaties ;  who  add  to 
their  "  You  shall  not  do  it,"  their  own  "  Please  do  not  do  it."  Especially  if  we  are 
in  any  way  building  the  *walls  of  Jerusalem,  helping  the  cause  of  God  and  His 
kingdom,  we  will  be  wise  to  beware  of  the  call  of  those  we  have  just  left  to  enter  on 
this  service  when  they  say,  "  Ye  must  return  to  us."  III.  Those  who  said,  "  We 
CANNOT  DO  IT."  This  was  the  most  pressing  peril  that  could  befall  Nehemiah  and 
his  mission.  A  deserter  is  more  demoralising  than  a  dozen  foes.  One  taken  from 
the  helpers  and  added  to  the  hinderers  makes  a  difference  of  at  least  two.  Their 
complaint  is  twofold.  1.  They  find  that  their  strength  has  given  out.  2.  That 
there  is  much  "  rubbish,"  in  the  midst  of  which  they  had  to  build.  Out  of  the  past 
city  came  the  obstacles  to  the  building  of  the  future  city.  Some  of  the  worst 
hindrances  to  the  accomplishment  of  our  work  as  Christians  and  as  Christian 
Churches  are  those  whose  origin  is  in  our  own  past  selves,  lives,  habits — the  rubbisb 
which  has  fallen  from  the  neglected  walls  of  our  own  living.  For  the  future,  daily 
penitence  and  prayer  will  prevent  the  accumulation  of  so  much  rubbish  that  we 
cannot  build.  (George  M.  Boynton.)  Rebuilding  the  wall : — The  enemies  of  the 
Jews  felt  that  the  rebuilding  of  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  was  a  menace  to  their  own 
welfare  and  local  supremacy.  They  must  arrest  it.  I.  They  tkied  laughteb. 
God's  people  at  work  on  the  walls  of  Zion  are  continually  told  that  it  is  no  use, 
they  shall  have  their  labour  for  their  pains.  A  hundred  years  ago  William  Carey 
was  dubbed  "  the  consecrated  cobbler "  for  proposing  the  evangelisation 
of  India,  but  to-day  all  Christendom  delights  to  do  him  honour.  God  crowns 
the  heroism  that  can  face  an  epithet.  All  efforts  at  political  and  social 
betterment  are  met  in  the  same  manner.  The  same  is  true  of  the 
rebuilding  of  personal  character.  It  is  hard  work  to  rebuild  the  walls 
of  manhood  out  of  the  rubbish-heaps  of  mislived  years  while  old  comrades 
stand  by  pointing  their  fingers  and  cracking  jokes,  but  by  God's  grace  it  can  be 
done.  n.  Their  opposition  assumed  the  fokm  of  threatening  (chap.  ii.  19).  A 
good  work  is  always  in  the  realm  of  danger,  because  it  is  in  the  nature  of  Use 
majeste — rebellion  against  the  prince  of  this  world.  A  reformer  never  goes  scot- 
free.  Loss  of  business  or  social  standing,  ostracism,  political  decapitation,  are 
some  of  the  penalties  which  a  true  man  is  ever  called  upon  to  confront  in  the  dis- 
charge of  duty.  III.  They  proposed  a  compromise  (chap.  vi.  2).  Duty  knows  no 
compromise.  The  only  way  to  serve  God  is  unreservedly.  The  only  way  to  avoid 
evil  is  not  to  tamper  with  it.  The  apparently  innocent  diversions  of  Vanity  Fair 
gave  the  Pilgrim  more  trouble  than  all  the  giants  and  lions  along  his  way.  Diluted 
theology  and  limp  morals  will  sap  the  vitality  of  the  most  vigorous  man  or  Church. 
Bight  is  right ;  to  dilute  it  makes  it  wrong.  Truth  is  truth ;  to  adulterate  it  makes 
it  error.  Duty  is  duty;  to  alloy  it  with  disobedience  makes  it  sin.  Conclusion: 
Observe  how  these  efforts  were  met.  1,  By  prayer.  John  Knox  is  said  to  have 
bedewed  the  walls  of  his  closet  with  his  tears  of  supplication.     George  Washington 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

was  glad  to  profess  his  dependence  upon  God.  Abraham  Lincoln,  when  asked  if  ha 
was  accustomed  to  pray,  answered,  "  The  man  who  would  assume  to  perform  the 
duties  of  the  Presidency  without  seeking  Divine  guidance  must  be  a  blockhead." 
No  man  can  ever  afford  to  spend  a  prayerless  day.  2.  A  watch  was  set.  The 
countersign  was  given ;  it  was  the  same  that  long  afterwards  rang  from  the  lips  of 
the  Roundheads  in  their  struggle  for  English  freedom,  "  God  with  us  "  (ver.  20). 
The  authorship  of  the  famous  maxim,  "  Trust  in  God  and  keep  your  powder  dry," 
may  be  traced  to  Nehemiah.     No  enterprise  fails  that  is  backed  by  faith  and  works. 

3.  Nehemiah  and  his  men  kept  on  working.  Prayer,  vigilance,  and  patient  con- 
tinuance in  well-doing  can  work  wonders.  (D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  The  soldier 
buildert : — I.  Combination  of  prayeb  and  watchfulness.  II.  Combination  of 
PRKCEPT  and  example  (vers.  14,  15,  18.)     III.  Evert  builder  was  also  a  soldier. 

IV.    A    MUTUAL     CO-OPEBATION     WENT     HAND     IN      HAND     WITH      PEP.SONAL     WORK     AND 

BE3P0N8IBILITT.  (/.  M.  Randall.)  A  bold  and  united  front  to  the  enemy  : — It  was 
therefore  necessary  to  present  a  bold  and  united  front  to  the  enemy,  and  to  be 
soldiers  as  well  as  builders ;  and  it  was  only  by  similar  zeal,  diligence,  and  unity 
that  they  could  hope,  under  the  blessing  of  God,  to  encircle  Jerusalem  with  walli 
and  bulwarks.  Nelson,  the  day  before  the  battle  of  Trafalgar,  took  Collingwood 
and  Eotherham,  who  were  at  variance,  to  the  spot  where  they  could  see  the  fleet 
opposed  to  them.  "  Yonder,"  said  he,  "  are  your  enemies ;  shake  hands  and  be 
friends  like  good  Englishmen."  Let  Christians  learn  to  cultivate  unity  in  spirit, 
and  as  far  as  possible  unity  in  action.  Let  us  ascend  from  the  minor  specialities 
in  which  we  differ,  the  narrowness  and  jealousy  of  sect  and  party,  to  the  grand 
platform  of  truth,  wherein  we  are  all  agreed.    {Ibid.) 

Ver.  9.  We  made  our  prayer  unto  our  God,  and  set  a  watch. — Watch  and  pray : — 

1.  The  dutt  of  prayer.  1.  Prayer  implies  trust.  2.  It  implies  acknowledged 
weakness.  3.  It  realises  Divine  power.  Hence  in  the  Christian  life  that  man  is 
only  safe,  prosperous,  or  happy  who  is  constantly  on  his  knees.  II.  Activb 
VIGILANCE  AND  DUTT.  God's  help  is  Dot  intended  to  favour  indolence,  but  to 
encourage  exertion.  The  husbandman  knows  that  God  gives  the  increase,  and 
therefore  ploughs  and  sows.  A  man  may  talk,  says  Jay,  about  casting  his  care 
upon  God,  and  may  sing  "  Jehovah-Jireh  "  with  all  his  energy  as  long  as  he  pleases, 
but  if  he  is  idle,  dissolute,  foolish,  he  only  tempts  God,  not  trusts  Him,  for  if  a  man 

(will  not  work  neither  shall  he  eat.  We  have  to  carry  on  a  greater  work  than 
Nehemiah.  An  enemy  is  endeavouring  to  prevent  us  building  our  eternal  habitations, 
to  hinder  our  work  of  preparation  for  heaven.  Let  us  give  our  mental,  moral,  intel- 
lectual ability  to  working  out  our  own  salvation,  knowing  that  God  worketh  in  us  to 
will  and  to  do.  {Homilist.)  Piety  and  prudence  : — I.  The  appeal  of  the  Church 
OF  God.     1.  Recognising  their  weakness  and  dependence,  they  prayed  unto  God. 

2.  In  spite  of  discouragements  these  men  prayed.  "Nevertheless."  3.  They  must 
have  been  encouraged  by  remembering  what  relation  God  sustained  towards  them. 
"Our  God."  4.  They  united  in  supplication.  II.  The  reliance  of  the  Church 
UPON  itself.  "  Set  a  watch."  1.  There  are  enemies  all  around  us.  2.  God  will 
not  do  for  us  what  we  can  do  for  ourselves.  3.  Our  enemies  are  vigilant  and 
untiring.  4.  Our  enemies  conspire  together.  There  is  an  unholy  alliance  of  the 
forces  of  evil.  {The  Study.)  The  union  of  prayer  and  watchfulness  : — This  union 
is  equally  pleasing  and  profitable.  It  keeps  our  devotion  from  growing  up  into 
rank  enthusiasm,  and  our  diligence  from  sinking  into  the  wisdom  of  the  world 
which  is  foolishness  with  God.  The  life  of  the  Christian  is  held  forth  as  that  of  a 
warfare.  What,  then,  can  be  more  reasonable  than  to  betake  ourselves  to  prayer 
and  vigilance?  I.  Let  us  make  our  prater  to  God.  1.  It  is  recommended 
by  God  Himself — "  Call  upon  Me  in  the  day  of  trouble,"  &o.  2.  The  very  exer- 
cise of  prayer  is  useful.  3.  Prayer  is  the  forming  of  a  confederacy  with  God. 
II.  Set  a  watch,  because  of  our  enemies,  night  and  dat.  1.  Impress  your 
minds  with  a  sense  of  your  danger.  2.  Study  your  constitutional  weak- 
ness and  failings.      3.  Observe  how  you  have   already  been  foiled  or  ensnared. 

4.  Guard  against  the  beginnings  of  sin.  6.  Avoid  the  occasions  of  sin.  Nothing 
is  more  dangerous  than  idleness.  Our  idle  days,  says  Henry,  are  the  devil's  busy 
ones.  Stagnant  waters  breed  thousands  of  noxious  insects  ;  but  this  is  not  the  case 
with  living  water.  {William  Jay.)  The  model  of  a  Christian  warrior  : — I.  Hia 
praterfulness.  II.  His  watchfulness.  Watchfulness  without  prayer  is  pre- 
sumptuous pride,  but  prayer  without  watchfulness  is  presumptuous  sloth.  Confidence 
in  the  help  of  God  must  not  prevent  the  use  of  all  proper  means  for  safety  and 


CHAP.  IT.]  NEHEMIAH.  67 

deliverance.  God  promised  Paul  the  lives  of  all  on  board  the  ship  in  which  he 
sailed  ;  but  they  were  to  use  the  means  of  safety.  *'  Some  on  boards,  and  some  on 
broken  pieces  of  the  ship;  and  so  it  come  to  pass  that  they  escaped  all  safe  to  land." 
While  the  Christian  is  surrounded  with  a  powerful  conspiracy  of  all  the  principalities 
of  evil,  he  should  aim  at  a  military  discipUne  of  his  heart  and  his  thoughts.  His 
conscience,  like  the  trumpeter  at  Nehemiah's  side,  should  be  always  awake. 
III.  His  industbt.  IV.  His  exalted  courage,  associated  with  a  holt  caution. 
V.  His  cheerfulness  in  the  performance  of  his  arduous  duties.  {R.  P. 
Buddicom.)  Nehemiah's  devotion: — The  hardiest  devotion  is  the  healthiest. 
The  devotion  of  the  cloister  is  for  the  most  part  like  the  ghastly  light  that 
hovers  over  decomposition  and  decay ;  the  devotion  which  characterises  the 
diligent,  spiritually-minded  man  of  business  resembles  the  star  which  shines  on  in 
the  storm  as  in  the  calm — when  the  sky  is  clouded  as  when  it  is  serene.  {Ibid.) 
Praying  and  doing: — I.  Praying  is  the  most  important  step  of  life.  If  a 
bad  man  would  be  good,  the  first  step  should  be  that  of  prayer.  And  our  last 
breath  when  we  leave  this  earth  for  the  other  world  is  prayer.  II.  If  our  prayers 
are    to    bless    us,   we  must    prat    earnestly.     IH.  Moreover,   when    we    pray 

WE    ARE    NOT   TO   NEGLECT   THE   MEANS   OF   MAKING   OUB   PRATER   EFFECTUAL.      We    are 

to  do  as  Nehemiah  did — pray  to  God,  and  set  a  watch.  I  am  not  afraid 
of  thieves;  but  while  I  pray  to  God  to  let  His  angels  encamp  about  my  house 
and  guard  it,  I  do  not  expect  the  angels  to  come  into  my  lobbies  and  lock  the 
doors.  I  can  do  that.  WhUe  we  pray  we  are  not  to  neglect  any  Vaeans  at 
our  hands  for  doing  the  work  for  which  we  pray.  In  the  same  way,  a  working 
man  who  earns  a  couple  of  pounds  a  week  may  pray,  "  0  Lord,  provide  for  me, 
and  keep  me  from  debt."  It  is  right  thus  to  pray,  but  then  let  not  the  ^^orking 
man  neglect  the  means  which  are  in  his  power  to  fulfil  the  prayer ;  let  him  ^mt  by 
two  or  three  shillings  a  week  to  provide  for  any  time  of  need.  Some  people  seem 
to  think  that  religion  is  a  kind  of  spiritual  charm,  like  the  horse-shoe  that  our 
superstitious  forefathers  nailed  behind  the  front  door  to  keep  out  the  "  bogies." 
They  think  that  religion  is  for  them  to  say  prayers  and  go  to  church,  and  then 
God  will  keep  them  from  heU.  Oh,  no.  IV.  While  we  pray  for  success,  let  us 
take  heed  to  watch  for  opportunities  of  doing  good.  A  wealthy  farmer,  whose 
haystacks  were  numerous,  and  whose  barns  were  full  of  corn,  on  reading  in  the 
newspapers  about  the  great  distress  in  the  time  of  the  cotton  famine,  prayed 
earnestly  at  the  family  altar  that  the  poor  might  be  fed  and  clothed,  but  he  did 
not  send  any  donation  to  the  fund,  and  the  next  Sunday  he  uttered  the  same 
prayer.  On  the  way  to  church  the  little  son  said,  "  Father,  I  wish  I  had  your 
corn."  "  Why,  my  boy,  what  would  you  do  with  it  ?  "  "  Father,  I  would  give  it  to 
the  hungry  people  for  bread."  It  is  no  use  praying  that  the  hungry  may  be  fed  if 
you  will  not  help  to  feed  them  from  your  full  cupboard.  The  purpose  of  prayer  is 
— asking  God  to  give  you  power  to  do  good,  and  then  seeking  opportunities  to  exert 
that  power.  (W.  Birch.)  The  two  guards,  praying  and  watching  : — In  the  text  I 
see  two  guards.  I.  First  guard,  prayer.  1.  It  was  a  prayer  that  meant  business. 
2.  It  was  a  prayer  that  overcame  difficulties.  3.  It  was  a  prayer  that  came  before 
anything  else.  4.  It  was  a  prayer  that  was  contihued.  5.  It  was  a  prayer  that 
was  home-made.  6.  It  was  a  prayer  that  went  to  the  home  of  prayer.  7.  It  was 
a  prayer  saturated  with  faith.  II.  Second  guard,  watchfulness.  This  setting 
of  a  watch  was — 1.  A  work  appointed.  2.  A  work  carefuUy  done.  3.  A  work 
continued.  4.  A  work  quickened  by  knowledge.  (1)  We  ought  to  set  a  watch 
against  the  enemies  of  our  holy  faith.  (2)  We  must  set  a  watch  against  our 
personal  adversaries,  (a)  Ungodly  relatives.  Be  patient,  gentle,  loving  towards  them. 
Do  nothing  that  will  give  them  occasion  to  blaspheme,  (b)  The  evil  tendencies  of 
our  corrupt  nature.  (3)  We  must  watch  against  the  beginning  of  sin.  (4)  Watch 
for  what  God  has  to  say  to  you.  5.  Watch  for  yourself  when  you  see  another 
fall,  lest  you  should  fall  in  the  same  place.  IH.  I  finish  by  putting  the  two 
GUARDS  together.  Neither  is  sufficient  alone.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Watchfulness 
needed  : — An  old  writer,  speaking  of  men  as  stewards  of  God,  urges  upon  them  as 
wise  traders  and  servants  to  look  to  themselves  carefully,  and  take  care  of  four 
houses  which  are  under  their  charge.  1.  Their  warehouse,  or  heart  and  memory, 
wherein  they  should  store  up  precious  things,  holy  affections,  grateful  remem- 
brances, <fec.  2.  Their  workhouse,  or  their  actions,  wherein  they  retail  to  others, 
for  God's  glory,  the  grace  entrusted  to  them.  3.  Their  clock-house — their  speech — 
which  must  always,  like  a  well-tuned  bell,  speak  the  truth  accurately ;  and 
meaning  also  their  observance  of  time,  redeeming  it  by  promptly  doing  the  duties 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.it. 

of  every  hour.  4.  Their  counting-house,  or  their  conscience,  which  is  to  be 
scrupulously  kept,  and  no  false  reckonings  allowed,  lest  we  deceive  our  own  souls. 
(J.  M.  Randall.)  Watchfulness  and  prayer : — A  believer's  watchfulness  is  like 
that  of  a  soldier.  A  sentinel  posted  on  the  walls,  when  he  discerns  a  hostile  party 
advancing,  does  not  attempt  to  make  head  against  them  himseU,  but  informs  his 
commanding  officer  of  the  enemy's  approach,  and  leaves  him  to  take  the  proper 
measures  against  the  foe.  So  the  Christian  does  not  attempt  to  fight  temptations 
in  his  own  strength  :  his  watchfulness  lies  in  observing  its  approach,  and  in  telling 
God  of  it  by  prayer.  {W.  Mason.)  At  rest,  but  ready  : — At  Christmas-time 
soldiers  are  in  the  habit  of  decorating  their  barrack-rooms,  and  are  fond  of  putting 
mottoes  cut  out  of  gilt  paper  amongst  the  holly  on  their  whitewashed  walls.  Last 
year  I  noticed  in  one  room  these  two.  Over  the  door  there  was,  "  At  peace,  but 
still  on  guard " ;  and  in  another  place,  "  At  rest,  but  ready."  Are  not  these 
equally  applicable  to  spiritual  life  ?  If  we  have  left  our  sins  at  the  foot  of  the 
Cross,  we  should  be  at  peace  and  rest,  but  on  our  guard  against  temptation, 
watching  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  (The  Quiver.)  And  there  ia  much 
rubbish. — The  hindrances  of  rubbish: — I.  That  thebe  is  too  much  "eubbish"  in 
THE  PULPIT.  Carlyle,  in  giving  a  whimsical  instance  of  the  importance  attached 
to  etiquette  at  the  Court  of  Louis  XVI.,  while  the  infuriated  mob  were  demanding 
entrance  to  his  private  apartments,  compares  it  to  the  house-cricket  still  chirping 
amid  the  pealing  of  the  trump  of  doom.  And  so,  too,  when  the  ambassador  for 
Christ  doles  out  to  souls  perishing  for  the  Bread  of  Life  the  vain  speculations 
of  metaphysics  and  philosophy,  he  ought  to  be  held  accountable  for  the  spiritual 
slumber  which  such  narcotics  are  certain  to  produce.  11.  Another  reason  why 
the  walls  of  the  spiritual  Jerusalem  are  not  built  up  with  more  rapidity  is  because 
of  the  "  KUBBisH "  ABOUT  THE  FONT.  The  miuds  of  multitudes  are  bewildered 
and  turned  aside  from  the  pursuit  of  the  one  thing  needful  by  unprofitable  dis- 
cussions concerning  the  modes  of  baptism  and  the  disposition  to  magnify  unim- 
portant things  into  essentials.  III.  The  heaps  of  ' '  bubbish  "  about  the  Loed's 
TABLE  is  another  reason  why  the  walls  of  the  spiritual  Jerusalem  are  built  up  so 
slowly.  IV.  Then  there  is  the  "  bubbish  "  of  flimsy  excuses  which  blocks  xjp 
the  path  of  life.  (J.  N.  Norton.)  Removing  rubbish : — The  ancient  Jerusalem 
was  but  an  imperfect  type  of  the  true  city  of  God,  which  through  the  ages  prophets 
have  panted  for  and  poets  have  sung,  a  city  of  truth,  and  righteousness  and  love  ; 
of  liberty,  equality,  and  fraternity,  in  a  far  fuller  sense  of  the  words  than  Kousseau 
dreamed  of.  For  ages  men  have  been  building  against  opposition  malignant  and 
persistent,  and  with  sure  if  slow  progress.  And  we  are  building  to-day.  In  a 
moment  of  pause  we  look  round  and  still  we  say,  "  There  is  much  rubbish." 
What  rubbish  do  you  meet  with. — I.  In  English  law.  n.  In  English  society. 
III.  In  English  life.  IV.  In  Chuech  life.  V.  In  oub  libbaeies.  VI.  In 
newspapees  and  magazines.  Vn.  In  oue  minds.  VIII.  In  oub  heaets.  (David 
Brook,  M.A.)  Rubbish  : — We  have  to  build  the  wall  of  the  Church  for  God,  but 
we  cannot  build  it,  for  there  is  so  much  rubbish  in  our  way.  This  is  true — 
I.  Of  the  building  of  the  Chuech,  which  is  the  Jeeusalem  of  God.  1.  When 
the  apostles  began  to  build  for  God,  there  lay  before  them  towering  heaps  of 
rubbish.  (1)  Rabbinical.  (2)  Pagan.  (3)  Philosophical.  2.  Soon  after  apostoho 
times  came  the  old  Roman  rubbish.  3.  At  present  there  is  still  much  rubbish 
coming  from  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil.  11.  This  is  equally  teue  of 
the  temple  of  God,  which  is  to  be  built  in  each  one  of  oue  heaets.  There 
is  oftentimes  in  Christian  people  the  old  rubbish — 1.  Of  legal  thought,  of  legal 
acting,  of  legal  fearing.  2.  Of  old  habits.  3.  Of  worldly  associations.  4.  Lofty 
thoughts  of  ourselves,  engendered  by  worldly  prosperity  and  spiritual  acquisitions. 
(C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Rubbish: — But  in  our  text  we  read  of  an  unexpected 
difficulty  pleaded  by  the  men  of  Judah — a  weary,  trying,  and  depressing  task, 
entailing  much  toil  and  little  show  of  progress.  So  in  the  Christian's  inner  life  ; 
there  lies  in  his  way  a  heap  of  broken  resolutions,  of  former  good  intentions  never 
carried  out ;  a  ponderous  mass  of  indolent  excuses  for  doing  nothing ;  a  rubbish 
pile  of  petty  procrastinations,  promising  that  some  day  we  will  improve,  but 
putting  off  that  day  from  time  to  time  !  It  does  indeed  need  Divine  help  and  aid 
to  summon  up  energy  and  to  commence,  beginning  at  once,  that  arduous  work  of 
removing  the  rubbish  and  ruins  and  starting  afresh.  So,  also,  those  who  would 
do  good  to  others,  who  would  rebuild  God's  Zion  and  populate  the  kingdom  of 
Christ  with  souls,  must  expect  to  find  in  their  way  a  heavy  and  inert  mass  of 
ignorance,  apathy,  and  opposition.    We  shall  find  at  first  disappointments  and 


CHAP.  IV.]  NEHEMIAH.  69 

failures  heaped  up  high  in  our  path,  but,  like  the  faithful  men  of  Jerusalem 
of  old,  let  our  answer  be,  "  We  will  rise  up  and  build,"  and  the  encouraging 
voice  of  the  true  Nehemiah,  the  real  Restorer  of  the  Heavenly  Zion,  will  greet 
us  with  the  promise,  "The  God  of  heaven  will  prosper"  you  I  {W.  Hard- 
man,  LL.D.) 

Ver.  11.  And  our  adversaries  said.  They  shall  not  know. — The  craft  and 
cruelty  of  the  Churches  adversaries : — I.  A  strong  combination  against  the 
Church  op  God.  II.  A  wicked  design  they  were  combined  in.  III.  A  bloody 
m:eans  propounded.  IV.  A  subtle  way  projected  fob  the  affecting  of  this. 
(Matthew  Newcometi.)  Satanic  subtlety: — I.  In  this  serpentine,  crafty,  and 
malicious  dealing  of  these  wicked  men  appeareth  the  old  serpentine  nature 
AND  malice  of  Satan.  II.  The  next  property  of  the  serpent  that  appeareth  in 
them  is  that  they  mercilessly  would  murder  them  when  they  had  once  thus 
suddenly  invaded  them.  III.  The  last  property  of  Satan  appeareth  here  in  these 
wicked  men,  in  that  they  would  gladly  overthrow  this  building  of  Jeru- 
salem,  that  it  should    never  be  thought  of  any  more.     {Bp.  Pilkington.) 

Ver.  14.  Remember  the  Lord,  which  is  great. — The  power  of  memory:— 
Consider — I.  The  power  op  memory.  II.  The  application  op  the  text  to 
OURSELVES.  1.  Parents  should  remember  that  God  regards  them  as  stewards, 
to  whom  are  committed  the  care,  the  instruction,  and  the  discipline  of  their 
offspring.  2.  Children  should  remember  that  forgetfulness  of  the  claims  of 
home,  of  a  father,  of  a  mother,  is  a  forgetfulness  of  God.  3.  Employers  should 
"  remember  the  Lord  "  in  the  example  which  He  furnishes  of  gentleness,  patience, 
kindness,  forbearance,  and  deep  humility.  4.  Servants  should  "  remember  the 
Lord,"  that  He  "  took  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant."  Conclusion :  Remember  the 
promises  He  has  made,  the  deliverances  He  has  wrought,  the  blessings  He  has  con- 
ferred, the  invitations  He  has  given,  and  the  relations  He  now  fills.  Remember  Him 
— in  calamity  to  trust  Him,  in  prosperity  to  praise  Him,  in  danger  to  call  upon  Him, 
in  difficulty  to  expect  His  interference.  Remember  Him,  for  it  is  your  duty,  it  is 
your  privilege.  Remember  Him,  for  He  never  forgets  you.  {W.  Horwood.)  God 
is  on  the  field  .-—Always  believe  that  God  is  on  your  side.  "  He  is  on  the  field  when 
most  invisible."  In  one  of  the  great  continental  cities  the  regalia  are  not  kept 
behind  iron  bars  as  in  the  Tower  of  London,  but  lie  upon  an  open  table.  It 
might  appear  an  easy  thing  for  some  thief  to  snatch  a  diamond  or  a  jewel  from  the 
glittering  array,  and  yet  no  man  dare  put  out  his  band  to  take  one,  for  that  table 
is  charged  with  electricity,  and  woe  to  the  person  who  touches  it.  The  protection 
is  complete ;  you  cannot  see  it,  but  there  it  is.  Only  live  in  daily — hourly 
communion  with  Christ.  Don't  break  the  spiritual  connection,  and  you  are  as 
safe  from  Satan  and  sin  as  the  jewels  from  the  devices  of  the  thief.  Greater 
is  He  that  is  for  us  than  all  enemies  that  can  be  against  us.    [E.  Abbott.) 

Ver.  15.  Every  one  unto  his  work. — Specialty  of  work  for  each  man : — There  is 
something  beautiful  to  me  in  the  thought  that  there  is  a  specialty  of  work  for  each 
man.  In  work,  as  in  character,  disposition,  history,  and  destiny,  there  is  a 
specialty ;  and  when  the  Church  arises  to  the  New  Jerusalem,  it  will  not  be  to  sit 
there  as  one  vast  photographic  likeness,  nor  shall  one  be  able  to  say  of  its  members, 
"  I  have  heard  their  history,"  when  the  story  of  one  has  been  told.  The  history 
of  the  Church  will  be  made  up  of  individual  histories ;  and  each  one  shall  possess 
its  own  peculiar  interest.  Your  history  wiU  be  none  the  less  interesting  when  mine 
has  been  told,  nor  mine  when  you  have  related  yours.  Your  head  and  heart  will 
not  be  as  mine,  nor  mine  as  yours ;  we  shall  not  be  mere  fragments  of  a 
universal  Church  ;  but  we  shall  be  fully,  roundly,  and  conspicuously  ourselves,  in 
the  Church  of  which  we  make  a  whole,  and  perfect,  and  unexampled  individual. 
(H.  W.  Beeeher. )  Every  man  at  his  place  : — In  that  fearful  national  catastrophe 
which  befell  England,  i.e.,  the  loss  of  the  ironclad  Victoria,  the  staunch  steadfast- 
ness of  our  British  sailors  was  grandly  illustrated.  When  the  crash  came,  instead 
of  a  wild  rush  on  deck  of  all  below,  every  man  remained  true  to  his  post.  All  knew 
that  a  serious  colUsion  had  occurred,  yet  the  most  perfect  order  was  maintained. 
The  engineers  kept  their  eyes  on  the  indicator  and  moved  their  levers  as  directed, 
in  spite  of  the  fact  that  their  lives  were  in  imminent  danger.  Even  when  it  was 
seen  that  the  vessel  was  settling  down,  and  all  were  called  on  deck,  the  men  ranged 
themselves  in  line,  and  the  order,  "Right  about  face,"  was  obeyed,  though  while 

28 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

in  the  act  the  vessel  heeled  over,  and  all  vrere  precipitated  into  the  sea.  Our 
perianal  duty : — The  only  way  to  regenerate  the  world  is  to  do  the  duty  which  lies 
nearest  to  us,  and  not  to  hunt  after  grand,  far-fetched  ones  for  ourselves.  If  each 
drop  of  rain  chose  where  it  should  fall,  God's  showers  would  not  fall  as  they  do  now 
on  the  evil  and  the  good  alike.  {Charles  Kingsley.)  Our  own  duty  to  be  attended 
to  : — There  is  a  story  with  which  many  of  the  present  generation  have  been  made 
familiar  in  our  reading  books  which  has  an  important  application  to  Christian  life. 
The  story  la  that  a  German,  with  an  ear  sensitive  to  music,  one  day  entered  a 
church,  and,  being  distressed  by  the  discords  of  the  singing,  put  his  fingers  in  his 
ears ;  but  there  penetrated  through  them  a  single  clear,  rich  soprano,  singing  in 
such  perfect  tune,  that  he  was  moved  to  listen.  The  singer  never  faltered  because 
of  the  jarring  notes,  nor  increased  the  volume  of  her  voice  to  drown  them.  She 
kept  steadily  on  till  one  after  another  came  into  accord  with  her  sweet  tones,  till  she 
brought  the  entire  body  of  singers  into  harmony. 

Vers.  17, 18.  Every  one  with  one  of  his  hands  wrought  In  the  work,  and  with 
the  other  hand  held  a  weapon. — The  work  and  warfare  of  life : — Life  is  work,  and 
life  is  warfare  ;  and  these  are  ever  commingled.     Our  text  is  but  an  epitome  and 
sample  of  that  larger  and  longer  work  which  fills  the  broad  area  of  all  human 
history.     I.  This  lifb  is  to  men  a  scene  of  toil.     "  In  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt 
thou  eat  bread  "  is  the  universal  and  unchanging  law  of  human  life.     Inaction  is  no 
blessing.     The  spirit  of  man  stagnates  and  sickens  under  it,  and  it  issues  in  a 
weariness  which  is  worse  than  the  fatigues  of  labour.     Activity  is  needful  to  the 
true  enjoyment  of  life.    Adam  was  not  inactive  in  paradise  (Gen.  ii.  15).     Heaven 
is  a  rest,  but  not  a  rest  of  indolence.     There  "His  servants  do  serve  Him."    The 
true  labour  of  life  involves  self-denial,  apprehension,  patience,  fatigue,  disappoint- 
ment.    Every  man  has  a  work  that  is  specific  and  peculiar  to  him.    The  great 
Taskmaster  never  set  two  of  His  creatures  the  same  task.    Amid  much  general 
sameness,  there  is  the  strictest  individuality.     Life's  work  is  twofold.     1.  The 
secular  department.    How  great  is  the  number  of  human  avocations  1    And  in  each 
of  these  avocations  what  a  number  of  workers  I    And  each  one  has  a  task  given 
him  to  do  which  is  as  distinct  as  himself,  which  no  one  can  do  but  he,  and  which  is 
defined  by  his  circumstances,  his  relations  and  his  endowments.     2.  The  spiritual 
department.     The  work  of  the  soul  and  of  eternity;  the  end  of  which  is — "to 
glorify  God  and  enjoy  Him  for  ever."    U.  This  life  is  also  a  scene  or  conflict. 
We  have  to  fight — 1.  Against  ourselves.    As  internal  wars  are  ever  fiercest  and 
most  painful,  so  the  battle-ground  of  a  Christian's  own  heart  is  that  on  which  he  is 
called  to  wage  the  severest  fight  and  win  the  hardest  victory.    We  have  to  overcome 
our  sluggishness,  our  unbelief,  our  sensuality,  our  concupiscence,  the  heavy  clog  of 
sense,   and  the  fierce  impulse  of  corruption.     2.  Against  men.      This  enemy  is 
called  the  world.     And  by  it  we  mean  that  vast  mass  of  maxims,  opinions,  beliefs, 
pursuits,  ways,  habits,  opposed  to  the  mind  and  service  of  God,  which  characterise 
human  society.     3.  Against  spirits.     The  devil  and  his  angels,  numerous,  powerful, 
malignant  (Eph.  vi.  12).     (R.  A.  Hallam,  D.D.)        Construction  and  contention  : — 
We  have  here  illustrated  two  principles — I.  Construction.    Each  of  us  is  put  into 
the  world  to  be  a  builder,  and  himself  is  the  building.    Each  separate  disciple  is  a 
"  habitation  of  God,  through  the  Spirit."    If  your  faith,  your  work,  your  prayers, 
your  watchfulness  shall  ever  succeed  in  edifying  you  into  anything  like  a  com- 
pleted Christian,  your  character  will  be  an  edifice  where  God's  glory  will  be  more 
distinctly  manifest  than  it  is  over  any  altar,  where  His  praise  will  resound  more 
acceptably  than  from  the  grandest  organ,  and  where  His  truth  is  more  effectually 
preached  than   from  the   most  eloquent   pulpit   of   any  cathedral  in  the  world. 
1.  Because  character  is  a  building  it  is  not  therefore  to  be  understood  that  there  is  no 
need  in  the  Christian  life  for  an  instant  change,  or  conversion.     That  comes  before 
the  building  can  be  begun  to  any  purpose,  or  on  any  right  plan.    All  must  be  sound 
at  the  base.     If  any  man  should  try  to  build  on  a  false  foundation  his  work  would 
come  to  nought.    No  outside  clamps  would  hold  it  up.     Except  ye  be  converted,  ye 
cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.     2.  We  must  not  take  the  impression 
that  the  formation  of  Christian  character  consists  in  putting  pieces  of   moral 
propriety   together — a   patchwork  of    merits  without  any  all-controlling  Divine 
principle.     In  all  buildings  there  must  be  one  "  design,"  an  organising  principle 
held  clearly  in  the  builder's  mind.     In  the  structure  of  character  this  organising 
principle  is  the  inworking  life  of  Christ.    It  is  the  will  of  God.     The  spiritual  lawa 
are  just  as  necessary,  in  order  to  success  in  a  righteous  life,  as  the  mechanical  laws 


CHAP.  IV.]  NEHEMIAH.  71 

In  order  to  architectural  success.  The  first  of  those  laws  is  that  God  is  the  centre 
and  object  of  all  religious  affections ;  the  second,  that  Jesus  is  the  way  to  the 
Father.  Hence  —  self-renunciation  —  yielding  the  heart  —  submission  to  the 
Heavenly  Will  is  the  inmost  necessity  of  a  Christian  character.  To  the  question 
how  we  shall  build  character  fair  and  strong,  the  answer  is — "  Believe  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  Into  every  particle  of  life  must  run  this  secret  power  of  the  Holy 
Christ — like  the  builder's  invisible  design  spreading  through  all  the  beams  and 
braces  and  apartments  of  the  house,  or  else  it  will  be  no  "habitation  of  the  Spirit." 
Christian  character  means  a  righteous  will,  a  purpose  consecrated  to  God,  and 
acting  in  all  well-doing  for  man.  You  may  grow  in  character  by  doing,  thinking, 
and  feeling  more  vigorously  for  God  and  your  brother-man.  Construction,  then, 
is  the  multiplying  of  that  inward  spiritual  energy  out  of  which  right  outward 
deeds  will  be  sure  to  come.  It  is  replenishing  the  stock  of  life  in  the  heart.  It  is 
making  conscience  quick,  watchful,  unbending.  It  is  cultivating  loyalty  to  the 
voice  of  God  in  the  soul.  It  is  the  increase  of  humility,  sincerity,  temperance, 
integrity,  patience,  sweetness  of  temper,  submission,  benevolence.  Additions  to 
these,  by  whatever  means,  by  Bible  and  prayer,  and  sacrament  and  labour,  by  the 
study  of  them  in  the  lives  of  heroic  saints,  are  the  positive  building  of  character. 
n.  Contention.  In  the  positive  process  of  achieving  good,  hindrances  are  met. 
It  has  been  said,  "  There  is  nothing  real  or  useful  that  is  not  a  seat  of  war."  Take 
construction  without  resistance.  If  I  ignore  the  fact  of  sin  and  forget  temptations 
and  simply  go  on  cultivating  good,  as  if  there  were  no  opposite,  presently  I  shaU 
find  these  sins  are  making  assaults  on  me  from  behind :  my  work  will  be  under- 
mined, my  pious  pains  spoilt ;  I  shall  be  no  true  builder.  On  the  other  hand,  take 
resistance  without  construction.  This  will  produce  a  hard,  censorious,  belligerent 
type  of  piety.  The  sword  will  crowd  out  the  gentle  arts  of  peace.  It  makes 
soldiers  against  Satan,  but  not  tillers  of  the  soil  of  God.  We  become  clever  dis- 
putants, but  not  good,  trusting,  patient,  loving,  holy  men  and  women.  Looking  out 
so  sharply  for  the  Ammonites  and  Ashdodites  the  walls  do  not  go  up.  We  want  the 
watchful  eye  of  the  old  anchorite,  without  his  austerity.  We  want  the  practical 
activity  of  the  modern  reformer  without  his  blindness  to  the  personal  foes  in  his 
own  heart.  We  want  one  hand  for  service,  one  for  battle  ;  when  this  is  understood 
Christ's  Church  will  be  filled  with  consistent  believers  and  fearless  soldiers. 
(Bp.     Huntington.)  The    sword    and    the    trowel  : — The     stirring    incident 

suggests  lessons  to  the  workers  in  God's  cause  to-day.     I.  The  Church  of  God  has 

STILL  A  GREAT  WORK   TO  DO  FOR  THE  SALVATION  OF   THE  WORLD.       The  Walls  of    many  a 

Jerusalem  are  down  and  need  building  up.  Injustice,  oppression,  and  wrong  are 
found  in  many  places.  II.  How  is  the  Church  to  accomplish  all  this  work  ? 
Consider  the  people  named  in  the  text.  1.  They  had  a  wise  and  skilful  leader.  It 
is  said  that  Alexander  the  Great  was  strolling  among  the  tents  of  his  soldiers  on 
the  eve  of  some  great  battle.  Hearing  some  of  his  men  engaged  in  conversation  in 
one  of  the  tents,  he  stopped  to  listen.  The  men  were  losing  courage  and  heart,  and 
said  so.  As  they  deplored  their  insufficiency  for  the  task  of  the  morrow,  he  slipped 
up  to  the  door  of  the  tent,  and  swinging  back  the  canvas,  said,  "Kemember  that 
Alexander  is  with  you."  Nehemiah  told  the  people  of  a  greater  than  Alexander. 
In  all  aggressive  movements  there  must  be  aggressive  leaders.  2.  All  the  people 
were  willing  to  help.  The  danger  in  these  days  is  to  leave  the  work  to  a  few,  to 
recognised  leaders  and  officers.  This  is  always  foolish ;  in  the  Church  of  God  it  is 
fatal.  3.  Each  one  had  a  work  and  did  it.  God  has  a  piece  of  work  for  each  one 
of  us  to  do.  Some  have  to  stand  in  the  front ;  others  have  to  stand  in  the  rear. 
Some  work  in  the  blaze  of  day,  and  others  work  out  of  sight.  I  sometimes  admire 
the  bridges  which  cross  the  Thames.  As  I  have  sailed  under  them,  I  have  thought 
about  the  divers  who  had  to  work  below  the  surface  of  the  water  to  lay  the  founda- 
tion of  some  of  the  strong  work  which  carries  the  weight  of  the  whole.  The 
work  these  divers  did  out  of  sight  was  all-important.  If  they  had  done  it  badly  the 
whole  would  have  suffered  in  consequence.  It  may  be  so  with  our  work.  4.  They 
did  the  work  in  dependence  upon  God.  They  did  their  secular  work  in  a  religious 
spirit.  {C.  Leach,  D.D.)  The  work  of  a  Christian  : — This  is  well  set  forth  by  the 
occupations  of  a  builder  and  a  soldier.  1.  There  are  heaps  of  rubbish  to  be 
removed.  There  must  be  a  true  repentance,  a  confessing  and  forsaking  of  sin. 
2.  Foundations  deep  and  strong  must  be  laid,  Christ  the  one  Foundation.  3.  The 
wall  must  be  carried  up,  little  by  little,  &c.  There  must  be  a  growing  up  into 
Christ,  an  advance  in  grace  day  by  day.  4.  This  must  be  done  according  to  the 
eettled  plan,  by  rule  and  square.     Our  rule  is  the  written  Word.    5.  The  Christian 


72  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  17. 

has  to  carry  on  his  work  in  troublous  times.  He  must  stand  bravely  at  his  post, 
like  a  sentinel  on  watch.  He  must  stand  where  his  Captain  has  placed  him. 
Obedience  to  Christ  is  the  glory  of  the  Christian  soldier.  We  must  believe  where 
we  cannot  see,  and  trust  where  we  cannot  trace.  The  end  will  justify  all  His  deal- 
ings with  us  and  by  us.  In  the  Peninsular  War,  the  captain  of  a  division  waa 
placed  by  WeUington  at  a  point  remote  from  the  field  where  a  battle  was  about  to 
be  fought.  He  was  expressly  ordered  to  remain  there,  and  on  no  account  to  quit 
his  post.  When  the  battle  was  raging  fiercely  the  captain  could  no  longer  endure 
the  inaction  of  his  position,  and  so  left  it  and  joined  in  the  fight.  The  enemy  were 
driven  from  the  field,  and  fled  in  the  very  direction  that  Wellington  had  antici- 
pated, and  where  the  captain  with  his  men  had  been  posted.  The  genei-al  felt 
confident  that  their  flight  would  be  cut  off ;  but  great  was  his  anger  when  he  found 
that  his  orders  had  been  disobeyed,  and  the  post  vacated.  It  is  said  that  he  never 
again  employed  the  captain  in  any  important  affair,  and  that  the  latter  died  of  a 
broken  heart  through  the  loss  of  his  reputation  as  a  soldier.     (<7.  M.  Randall.) 

Vers.  19,  20.  The  work  is  g^reat  .  .  .  and  we  are  separated  upon  the  wall — The 

common  work  of  the  Master : — In  time  of  war  you  visit  the  camp.  There  is  flying 
from  the  flagpole  in  the  sun  the  stars  and  stripes.  You  look  upon  the  men  in  their 
scattered  avocations.  A  few  men  are  playing,  a  few  men  are  cleaning  their  guns, 
a  few  men  are  cooking,  here  and  there  a  sentry  is  pacing  back  and  forth,  some  men 
are  lying  on  the  grass  asleep,  there  is  no  common  life,  there  seems  to  be  no  common 
purpose,  there  appears  to  be  no  common  endeavour,  or  action.  But  suddenly  the 
bugle  sounds  the  call,  or  the  drum  its  roll,  and  instantly  the  men  spring  to  their 
feet,  drop  their  cards,  awake  from  their  slumber,  leave  their  cooking  utensils,  and 
stand  ready  to  meet  the  enemy,  ready  to  do  the  bidding  of  their  commander.  Deep 
down  in  their  hearts  there  is  a  common  purpose,  and  that  flag  that  floats  at  the 
topmost  pole  and  over  their  camp  indicates  what  that  purpose  is.  So  Christians  are 
to  gather  in  the  name  of  Christ — you,  merchant — you,  lawyer — you,  physician — 
you,  minister — you,  teacher — you,  parent,  each  in  your  several  place,  each  doing 
your  several  work.  Whenever  the  drum  shall  beat  its  roll-call,  you  are  to  be  ready, 
not  merely  to  do  your  own  work,  but  to  stand  shoulder  to  shoulder  in  serried  ranks, 
to  do  the  common  work  of  the  Master,  in  fulfilment  of  the  common  aim  which  has 
really  united  you.    {Lyman  Abbott.) 

Ver.  20.  So  we  laboured  in  the  work. — Perseverance: — The  builders  not  only  began 
well,  but  they  persevered  to  the  end  of  their  work.  Perseverance  is  a  great  element 
of  success.  It  was  George  Stephenson's  motto,  "  Persevere  "  ;  and  the  celebrated 
mathematician,  Arago,  tells  us  that  his  master  in  mathematics  gave  a  word  of 
advice  which  he  found  in  the  binding  of  one  of  his  text-books.  Puzzled  and 
discouraged  by  the  difficulties  he  met  with  in  his  early  studies,  he  was  almost  ready 
to  give  up  the  pursuit.  Some  words  which  he  found  on  the  waste  leaf  used  to 
stiffen  the  cover  of  his  paper-bound  text-book  caught  his  eye,  and  interested  him. 
It  proved  to  be  a  short  letter  from  D'Alembert  to  a  young  person  disheartened,  like 
himself,  by  the  difficulties  of  mathematical  study,  and  who  had  written  to  him  for 
counsel.  "  Go  on,  go  on,  sir,"  was  the  counsel  which  D'Alembert  gave  him.  "  The 
difficulties  you  meet  will  resolve  themselves  as  you  advance."  This  maxim  followed 
out  made  him  one  of  the  greatest  astronomers  of  his  day.  And  Christians  must 
persevere  in  the  work  of  God.  (J.  M.  Ra7idall.)  Perseverance : — A  Christian 
negro  was  once  asked  the  meaning  of  perseverance,  and  he  said,  "  Massa,  me  think 
it  mean  hang  on,  hold  fast,  and  no  let  go."  And  when  some  one  questioned  John 
Wesley  on  the  remarkable  success  of  his  followers,  "  Sir,"  he  said,  "  they  are  all  at 
it,  and  always  at  it."     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  23.  None  of  us  put  off  our  clothes,  saving  that  every  one  put  them  off  for 
washing. — The  necessary  and  the  unnecessary  : — Some  people  waste  all  their  energy 
in  putting  off  and  on  their  clothes :  their  whole  life  is  a  question  of  clothes  ;  they 
cannot  do  anything  until  their  clothes  are  right.  Nehemiah  showed  how  he  dis- 
tinguished between  the  necessary  and  the  unnecessary.  We  must  attend  to  health 
if  we  are  to  attend  to  successful  toil.  Time  is  not  wasted  that  is  spent  in  obeying 
the  laws  of  life.    (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


CHAP,  v.]  NEHEMIAH.  73 


CHAPTER   V. 

Vers.  1-13.  And  there  was  a  gTe&t  cry  of  the  people. — The  friend  of  the  poor : — 

I.  The  complaint  of  the  poor.  It  is  sometimes  alleged  the  poor  have  a  morbid 
disposition  to  complain  of  their  indigence  and  sufferings  ;  and  this  may  be  true  of 
certain  classes  of  them.  The  ignorant  and  vicious,  the  idle  and  intemperate,  are 
prone  to  bewail  their  hardships  in  querulous  words.  They  complain  bitterly  of  the 
miseries  of  their  lot,  and  perhaps  charge  those  with  having  a  hard  heart  who  do 
not  give  them  the  relief  they  desire.  They  try  thus  to  excite  the  pity  of  the 
benevolent,  or  to  extort  the  gifts  of  charity  which  they  do  not  deserve.  But  it  is 
altogether  different  with  the  industrious  and  pious  poor.  The  poor  of  the  children 
of  Judah  are  manifestly  brought  to  the  very  extremity  of  suffering  before  they  dis- 
close their  sorrowful  circumstances ;  and  when  they  are  compelled  to  make  them 
known,  it  is  in  language  remarkable  for  dignified  sobriety  and  true  pathos.  The 
complaint  of  these  poor  Israelites  unveils  their  varied  load  of  sorrow.  1.  Some 
complained  of  the  extent  of  their  necessities.  "  We,  our  sons,  and  our 
daughters,  are  many  :  therefore  we  take  up  com  for  them,  that  we  may 
eat,  and  live."  The  calls  of  hunger  were  many ;  the  means  of  supply,  on  their 
own  inheritance,  were  small;  and  they  required  to  purchase  corn  for  bread 
from  others.  Their  straits,  too,  were  increased  by  the  present  dearth.  It  is 
one  of  the  many  glories  of  the  religion  of  the  Bible  that  it  makes  a  benevo- 
lent care  of  the  poor  a  paramount  duty  in  all  who  have  it  in  their  power  to  relieve 
their  necessities,  and  enforces  this  duty  by  threatenings  for  its  neglect,  and  by 
promises  of  reward  for  its  observance.  2.  Some  of  the  poor  here  also  complain  of 
the  severity  of  public  burdens.  They  were  still  subject  to  the  Persian  king,  and  to 
secure  the  continuance  of  his  favour  to  Jerusalem  they  had  made  every  possible 
effort  to  pay  his  tribute.  Their  more  wealthy  countrymen  met  this  tax  without 
abridging  their  home  comforts,  but  the  burden  was  heavy  on  the  poor.  3.  The 
sorrows  of  the  poor  were  in  this  case  deepened  by  the  thought  that  they  were 
occasioned  by  the  ungenerous  conduct  of  their  own  brethren.  "  Yet  now  our  flesh 
is  as  the  flesh  of  our  brethren,  our  children  as  their  children :  and,  lo,  we  bring 
into  bondage  our  sons  and  our  daughters  to  be  servants,  neither  is  it  in  our  power 
to  redeem  them."  They  possessed  a  common  relation  to  the  covenant  inheritance. 
They  had  left  the  land  of  their  exile  animated  with  the  same  faith,  and  embarked 
in  the  same  enterprise.  Many  of  them  had  quitted  comforts  in  that  foreign  land, 
out  of  love  to  Jerusalem,  and  were  now  enduring  the  first  trials  of  returned  captives. 
They  had  laboured,  too,  by  their  united  endeavours,  to  restore  the  city  of  their 
fathers,  instead  of  seeking  every  man  his  own  things  in  the  care  of  his  patrimonial 
inheritance.  It  might  have  been  expected  that,  thus  labouring  for  a  common 
object,  they  would  have  shared  a  common  sympathy,  and  been  free  from  the  grasp 
of  selfishness.  4.  How  mysterious  are  sufferings  like  these,  especially  of  the  poor 
people  of  God  engaged  in  His  service.  We  do  not  wonder  that  those  Jews  who 
remained  in  the  land  of  idols,  after  they  were  free  to  return  to  Judah,  might  suffer 
adversity.  They  despised  the  Lord's  goodness  in  offering  deliverance  from  exile, 
and  preferred  ease  in  a  strange  country  to  spiritual  blessings  in  the  holy  land.  It 
is  not  wonderful  though  they  might  be  visited  with  trials  in  providence,  and  be 
made  to  read  their  sin  in  their  suffering.  But  here  those  endure  affliction  who 
willingly  left  the  land  of  the  heathen,  and  they  are  involved  in  deep  trouble  while 
doing  a  service  to  the  city  of  God.  Shall  we  think  that  they  disprove  either  the 
wisdom  or  goodness  of  God's  providence  to  His  people  ?  Do  they  not  rather  show 
His  thoughts  to  be  far  above  our  thoughts,  and  His  procedure  in  carrying  out  His 
great  plan  to  be  too  high  for  us  to  understand  ?  Do  they  not  clearly  indicate  that 
He  tries  the  faith  of  His  servants  in  the  very  moment  of  accepting  their  love,  and 
rewards  their  affection,  not  in  the  comfortc  of  earth,  but  in  the  glories  of  immor- 
tality ?  It  is  thus  that  the  world  in  which  we  dwell  is  still  a  place  of  weeping, 
where  the  poor  and  needy  pour  out  their  tears  in  floods.  Thousands  of  righteous 
ones  languish  in  poverty,  or  are  persecuted  for  their  fidelity  to  the  truth  of  God. 

II.  Nehemiah's  expostulation  with  the  nobles.  The  promptitude  with  which 
he  listens  to  the  complaint  of  the  poor  does  honour  to  his  heart,  and  the  courage 
with  which  he  proceeds  to  redress  their  wrongs  sheds  a  lustre  on  the  justice  of  his 
administration.  The  cry  of  the  lowly  for  relief  from  distress  or  opposition  is  often 
disregarded,  yea,  proves  the  occasion  of  augmenting  their  misery.  And  in  his 
very  first  step  for  reform  of  these  abuses  in  Judah  he  evinces  again  the  self- 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

reliance  of  a  great  mind.  "  Then,"  says  he,  "I  consulted  with  myself."  To  this, 
indeed,  he  was  shut  up  by  his  peculiar  and  trying  circumstances.  1.  He  "  rebuked 
the  nobles,  and  the  rulers,  and  said  unto  them.  Ye  exact  usury,  every  one  of  his 
brother."  To  see  the  full  force  of  this  charge,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the 
Israelites  were  forbidden  in  the  law  of  Moses  to  lend  money  to  the  poor  on  interest. 
With  strangers,  or  perhaps  with  the  rich,  they  might  trade  in  this  way ;  but  this  ia 
the  law  interdicting  such  a  practice  with  their  poor  brethren : — "  If  thou  lend 
money  to  any  of  My  people  that  is  poor  by  thee,  thou  shalt  not  be  to  him  an 
usurer,  neither  shalt  thou  lay  upon  him  usury."  This,  then,  is  a  grave  charge 
against  the  nobles  of  violating  the  Divine  law  ;  and  it  falls  on  ears  not  accustomed 
to  such  plain  words.  Men  of  rank  and  affluence  seldom  hear  this  language  of 
remonstrance  addressed  to  them,  and  they  can  ill  bear  such  reflections  on  their 
honour.  But  no  earthly  station  exempts  wrong-doers  from  just  reproof ;  and  Nehe- 
miah's  zeal  for  God,  as  well  as  his  love  to  His  people,  inspires  him  with  faithful- 
ness. True  kindness  to  them,  not  less  than  compassion  for  the  lowly  objects  of 
their  exactions,  prompted  his  faithful  expostulation.  The  reproof  here  was 
administered  with  firmness,  yet  it  was  accompanied  with  the  prudence  of  wisdom, 
adopting  a  course  fitted  to  fortify  remonstrance,  and  to  secure  its  desired  effect. 
♦'  I  set,"  says  he,  "  a  great  assembly  against  them."  What  was  the  object  of  this 
concourse  ?  We  cannot  suppose  that  the  servant  of  God  intended,  through  this 
means,  to  overawe  the  nobles  by  numbers,  or  to  constrain  them  to  a  decision  con- 
trary to  reason.  He  appears  rather  to  have  convened  this  assembly  to  allow  the 
free  expression  of  sentiment  on  the  evil  complained  of,  and  to  bring  all  under  the 
salutary  influence  of  public  opinion.  In  no  free  community  can  public  opinion  be 
set  at  defiance  with  either  justice  or  safety.  It  may,  indeed,  be  sometimes  corrupted 
by  designing  men,  and  it  may  for  a  season  be  swayed  by  impulses  perilous  to  the 
common- weal.  It  requires,  then,  to  be  corrected  and  regulated  by  the  power  of 
truth.  But  a  healthful  public  opinion,  wisely  formed,  rightly  guided,  freely 
expressed,  is  the  bulwark  of  national  liberty,  and  an  essential  condition  of  the  pro- 
gress of  mankind.  2.  Nehemiah  addressed  to  the  rulers  of  Judah  persuasive 
argument.  The  arguments  he  employed  are  threefold.  He  first  of  all  pleads  the 
efforts  already  made  to  redeem  Judah  from  captivity.  And  on  this  ground  he  asks 
if  it  is  right  they  should  be  again  sold  into  bondage,  "  We  after  our  ability  have 
redeemed  our  brethren  the  Jews,  who  were  sold  unto  the  heathen  ;  and  will  ye  even 
Bell  your  brethren  ?  "  This  appeal  reminds  believers  in  Christ  of  their  duty,  not  to 
come  again  into  bondage  to  sin.  "  Stand  fast  in  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  hath 
made  you  free,  and  be  not  entangled  again  with  the  yoke  of  bondage."  Nehemiah, 
moreover,  pleads  the  exposure  of  the  common  cause  to  the  reproach  of  the  enemy 
as  a  reason  for  the  nobles  ceasing  their  oppression.  "  Also  I  said.  It  is  not  good 
that  ye  do  :  ought  ye  not  to  walk  in  the  fear  of  our  God  because  of  the  reproach  of 
the  heathen  our  enemies  ?  "  This  is  a  powerful  argument  for  watchfulness  and 
consistency  in  all  who  love  Zion.  Many  are  jealous  for  their  own  reputation,  and 
quick  to  wipe  off  any  reproach  from  themselves,  while  they  have  little  care  for  the 
honour  of  God.  Nehemiah,  once  more,  appeals  to  his  own  conduct  as  an  example 
of  a  generous  spirit  to  his  poor  brethren.  He,  too,  might  have  exacted  money  and 
corn,  but  he  freely  surrendered  his  private  rights  for  the  sake  of  the  public  good. 
It  is  not  in  a  boastful  spirit  that  he  thus  refers  to  himself  and  the  course  of  self- 
denial  he  pursued.  Perhaps,  also,  he  wishes  to  suggest  that  he  gained  far  more  in 
enjoyment  than  he  gave  up  in  substance.  The  powerful  and  persuasive  appeal  was 
crowned  with  complete  success.  The  result  of  this  appeal  also  proves  the  power  of 
religious  motive  in  remedying  social  evils.  These  often  grow  and  spread  in  face  of 
all  arguments  deduced  from  considerations  of  humanity  and  justice.  But  here,  in 
Jerusalem,  religion  pours  the  oil  of  love  on  the  troubled  waters ;  she  addresses  a 
winning  appeal  to  open  hearts,  and  at  once  the  grasp  of  oppression  is  relaxed.  If 
any  great  social  evils  are  allowed  to  prevail  where  religion  is  professed,  it  is  only  by 
neglecting  or  denying  its  power.  Christianity  will  either  destroy  every  iniquity  that 
abounds  in  a  land,  or  itself  will  decline  and  depart  from  a  people  who  will  not  hear 
its  voice,  to  break  off  their  sins  by  righteousness.  Ill,  Nehemiah's  testimony 
TO  HIS  OWN  DISINTERESTED  CONDUCT.  (W.  Ritchk.)  Bravc  compassioTi : —iiovf 
Nehemiah,  as  we  have  seen,  was  a  business  man — a  man  of  great  energy 
and  prudence ;  and  it  would  not  have  been  strange  if  he  had  postponed  the 
consideration  of  the  complaints  thus  brought  before  him.  He  might  naturally 
enough  have  been  afraid  lest,  by  now  finding  fault  with  the  nobles  and  rulers,  he 
ehould  alienate  them  from  himself,  and  thus  hinder  the  completion  of  his  great 


CHAP.  T.]  NEHEMIAH.  75 

enterprise.  And  so  he  might  have  said  to  these  poor  people,  '*  You  see  that  my 
hands  are  full  of  work  ;  I  cannot  attend  to  this  matter  now — one  thing  at  a  time. 
No  doubt  you  have  a  grievance,  but  let  us  get  the  walls  finished  first,  and  then  I 
will  see  what  can  be  done."  It  is  thus  that  many  men  of  business  act  in  daily 
life.  Their  very  energy  leads  them  to  brush  aside  everything  that  threatens  to 
interfere  with  their  present  work.  They  cannot  bear  interruptions,  and  are  so 
eagerly  bent  on  reaching  their  end  that  they  cannot  pause  to  do  good  on  their  way. 
But  Nehemiah  was  more  than  a  mere  man  of  business ;  he  was  a  man  with  a  tender 
heart.     (T.  C.  Finlaysoti.)        A  great  schism  averted: — I.  That  social  injustice 

MAT  EXIST  EVEN  AMONGST  FELLOW- W0RKEB3  IN  A  GREAT  AND  GOOD  CAUSE.  II.  ThAT 
SOCIAL  INJUSTICE,  IF  NOT  CORRECTED,  WILL  UNDERMINE  THE  STABILITY  OF  ANY  CAUSE, 
HOWEVER  RIGHTEOUS.  III.  ThAT  SOCIAL  INJUSTICE  SHOULD  BE  REGARDED  BY  ALL 
GOOD  MEN  WITH  FEELINGS  OF  RIGHTEOUS  INDIGNATION.  IV.  ThAT  SOCIAL  INJUSTICE, 
WHENEVER  DISCOVERED,  SHOULD  BE  CALMLY,  YET  PROMPTLY,  DEALT  WITH.  V.  ThaT 
CONCILIATORY     APPEALS    ABE    SOMETIMES   MORE    EFFICACIOUS    THAN   COERCIVE    MEASURES 

IN  DEALING  WITH  SOCIAL  INJUSTICE.  (Homiletic  Commentary.)  The  accusing  cry 
of  humanity  : — I.  The  unending  struggle.  Wealth  and  poverty,  knowledge  and 
ignorance,  brain  and  brawn,  capital  and  labour — when  in  all  ages  have  not  these 
come  into  collision  ?  II.  Elements  op  bittebness  in  this  stbuggle.  1.  On  the 
side  of  the  oppressors  there  is  power  (ver.  7).  2.  The  oppressed  are  the  brethren 
of  the  oppressors.  3.  They  were  engaged  in  a  common  cause.  III.  Light  in  dark- 
ness. 1.  Christ  came  to  proclaim  the  brotherhood  of  humanity.  2.  Signs  of  the 
times.    The  teacher  is  abroad.    Society  is  tending  towards  redress.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  3-5.  We  have  mortgaged  our  lands. — The  miseries  of  debt : — I.  Mbntal 
UNREST.  II.  Social  degradation.  III.  Family  ruin.  IV.  A  disregard  of  a. 
DrviNB  command  :  *'  Thou  shalt  not  steal."  Application — I.  Christians  should  set 
the  world  an  example.  2.  Watch  the  beginnings  of  extravagance.  3.  In  small 
things  as  well  as  in  greater  act  on  Christian  principle.  (Ibid.)  The  blessing  and 
curse  of  mortgages  : — The  history  of  the  mortgage  would  be  the  history  of  the 
domestic,  social,  financial,  political,  and  ecclesiastical  progress  of  all  ages.  It  will 
be  useful  if  I  can  intelligently  and  practically  speak  of  the  mortgage  as  a  blessing 
and  as  a  curse.  There  is  much  absurd  and  wholesale  denunciation  of  borrowing 
money.  If  I  should  request  all  those  who  have  never  asked  a  loan  to  rise,  there 
would  not  out  of  this  audience  be  one  get  up  unless  it  were  some  one  who  had 
acted  so  badly  at  the  start  that  he  knew  no  one  would  trust  him.  At  the  inception 
of  nearly  all  enterprises,  great  or  small,  a  loan  is  necessary.  Years  ago  an  Irish- 
man landed  with  fifty  cents  in  his  pocket  on  the  Battery,  asked  the  loan  of  one 
dollar  from  an  entire  stranger,  and  now  is  among  the  New  York  princes.  A  mort- 
gage is  merely  borrowed  strength  of  others  to  help  us  in  crises  of  individual  or 
national  life  on  the  promise  that  we  will  pay  them  for  the  help  rendered.  But 
what  is  true  in  secularities  is  more  true  in  ecclesiastical  affairs.  If  churches  had 
not  been  built  till  all  the  money  could  be  raised,  tens  of  thousands  of  our  best 
churches  would  never  have  been  built,  and  millions  of  those  who  are  now  Christians 
on  earth  or  saints  in  heaven  would  never  have  been  comforted  or  saved.  The  old 
Collins's  line  of  steamers  went  into  bankruptcy,  but  that  does  not  change  the  fact 
that  they  transported  hundreds  of  passengers  in  safety  across  the  sea  ;  and  if  all 
the  churches  in  Christendom  to-morrow  went  down  under  the  thump  of  the  sherifif's 
hammer,  that  would  not  hinder  the  fact  that  they  have  already  transported  thousands 
into  the  kingdom,  and  have  done  a  stupendous  good  that  all  earth  and  hell  can 
never  undo.  All  consider  it  right  to  borrow  for  a  secular  institution.  Is  it  not 
right  to  borrow  for  a  religious?  It  is  safer  to  borrow  for  the  Church  than  for  any 
other  institution,  because  other  institutions  die,  but  a  Church  seldom.  When  the 
Israelites  of  my  text  wanted  to  rebuild  their  homes,  and  wanted  to  borrow  money 
for  that  purpose,  the  mortgagers  did  well  to  let  them  have  it,  though  I  wish  they 
had  not  asked  twelve  per  cent.  But  after  a  while  the  mortgage  spoken  of  in  the 
text  ceased  to  be  a  blessing,  and  became  a  plague.  It  had  helped  them  through  a 
domestic  and  ecclesiastical  crisis,  but  now  they  could  carry  it  no  longer,  and  they 
cried  out  for  rescue.  If  a  blessing  lies  too  long,  it  gets  to  be  a  curse.  At  the  first 
moment  the  farmer  can  get  the  mortgage  off  his  farm,  and  the  merchant  the  mort- 
gage off  his  merchandise,  and  the  citizen  the  mortgage  off  his  home,  and  the 
charitable  institution  the  mortgage  off  its  asylum,  and  the  religious  society  the 
mortgage  off  its  church,  they  had  better  do  it.  I  have  heard  people  argue  the 
advantage  of  individual  debts  and  national  debts  and  Church  debts  ;  but  I  could 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

not,  while  the  argument  was  going  on,  control  my  risibilities.  It  is  said  that  such 
debts  keep  the  individual  and  the  Church  and  the  State  busy  trying  to  pay  them. 
No  doubt  of  it.  So  rheumatism  keeps  the  patient  busy  with  arnica,  and  neuralgia 
keeps  the  patient  busy  with  hartshorn,  and  the  cough  with  lozenges,  and  the  tooth- 
ache with  lotions  ;  but  that  is  no  argument  in  favour  of  rheumatism,  or  neuralgia, 
or  coughs,  or  toothache.  Better,  if  possible,  get  rid  of  these  things,  and  be  busy 
with  something  else.     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 

Ver.  7.  Then  I  consulted  wltli  myself. — Precipitate  anger  avoided : — But,  thongh 
very  angry,  he  nevertheless  "  consulted  with  himself."    Even  righteous  indignation 
is  often  too  precipitate  in  its  expression,  and  vents  itself  in  a  fuming  and  storming 
which  does  little  or  no  good.     But  the  fervid  feeling  of  Nehemiah  was  blended  with 
practical  wisdom.    He  took  counsel  with  himself  as  to  what  was  best  to  be  done. 
{T.   C.  Finlayson.)        And  I  set  a  great  assembly  against  them. — An  assembly 
convoked    against   sinners: — I   wish   to   show   impenitent   sinners   how   great  an 
assembly  may  be  set  against  them.     That  so  large  a  majority  of  mankind  are  on 
the  side  of  irreligion,  tends  powerfully  to  preserve  a  majority  on  that  side,  for  a 
large  proportion  of  the  youth  in  each  successive  generation  will  enlist  under  the 
banner  of  the  strongest  party.     The  same  circumstance  operates  to  weaken  the 
force  and  prevent  the  success  of  those  means  and  arguments  which  God  employs 
for  the  conversion  of  sinners.    When  the  man  who  neglects  religion  looks  around 
him  and  sees  wealth,  rank,  power,  and  influence  all  ranged  on  his  side,  he  secretly 
says,  "  I  must  be  right,  I  must  be  safe.     If  I  fare  as  well  as  the  great  mass  of  my 
fellow-creatures,  I  shall  fare  well  enough."    This  being  the  case,  it  is  important 
that  sinners  should  be  made  to  see  what  a  great  assembly  may  be  set  against  them. 
Among  those  who  are  against  them,  we  mention — I.  The  good  men  now  in  the 
WORLD.     God  has  not  a  servant,  Jesus  Christ  has  not  a  friend  on  earth  who  is  not 
against  you.     Their  example  is   against    you,   their  testimony   is  against  you. 
II.  All  the   good  men  who  have  ever  lived  in  the  world,  the  spirits  of  just 
men  made  perfect.     III.  All  the  writers  of  the  Old  and  New   Testaments. 
With  one  voice  they  cry,  "  Woe  to  the  wicked !  it  shall  be  ill  with  him,  for  the 
reward  of  his  hands  shall  be  given  him."    IV.  The  holy  angels.     V.  The  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.     Every  doctrine  which  He  promulgated,  every  precept  which  He 
enjoined,  every  threatening  which  He  uttered,  every  action  of  his  life,  is  against 
you.    Christ  meets  all  the  impenitent,  and  says,  "  Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all 
likewise  perish."    He  meets  the  unbelieving,  and  says,  "He  that  believeth  not 
shall  be  damned."    He  meets  all  the  unholy,  and  says,  *'  Without  holiness  no  man 
shall   see  the  Lord."     He  meets   all   the  unregenerate,  and  exclaims,  "Verily, 
verily,  I  say  unto  you,  Except  ye  be  born  again,  ye  cannot  enter  the  kingdom  of 
heaven."     VI.  God  the  Father.     (E.  Payson,  D.D.)         Witnesses  against  you  : — 
Some  persons  are  deaf  to  the  voice  of  justice  until  it  is  repeated  loudly  by  thousands 
of  their  fellow-men.     The  silent  voice  of  principle  and  right  they  will  not  hear,  and 
the  gentle  rebuke  of  some  one  faithful  friend  they  will  despise  ;  but  when  righteous- 
ness enlists  public  opinion  on  its  side,  when  many  are  seen  to  be  its  advocates, 
then  these  very  persons  will  show  that  they  have  relics  of  conscience  left,  and  they 
yield  to  right  demands  because  they  see  them  not  only  to  be  just,  but  to  be  popular. 
This  is  the  main  point  with  those  of  the  feebler  sort,  and  we  turn  the  scale  if,  like 
Nehemiah,  we  "  set  a  great  assembly  against  them."     I   set  a  great  assembly 
against — I.  The  unconverted.     1.  The  great  assembly  of  all  the  godly  that  are 
upon  the  earth.     They  all  testify  against  you.     (1)  By  their  consistent  life.     (2)  By 
their  joy  in  God.     (3)  By  their  very  horror  at  your  sin.     They  cannot  bear  to  think 
of  that  which  awaits  you.     Holy  Whitfield,  when  he  began  to  touch  upon  that 
subject,  would,  with  the  tears  streaming  down  his  cheeks,  cry,  "  The  wrath  to 
come !  the  wrath  to  come  1 "     It  was  too  much  for  him.     He  could  but  repeat  those 
words  and  there  cease.     2.  All  the  inspired  writers  of  the  Bible.     3.  The  departed 
saints.     4.  The  whole  company  of  the  angels.     5.  God  Himself.     "  The  face  of  the 
Lord  is  against  them  that  do  evil,  to  cut  off  the  remembrance  of  them  from  the 
earth."    6.  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.     II.  Those  who  say  that  sin  is  a  very 
PLEASANT  AND  PROFITABLE  THING.     Oh,  what  an  assrmbly  it  would  be  if  I  could 
bring  up  from  the  hospitals  the  wretches  who  are  suit'ering  an  earthly  hell  from 
their  sins  1     Go  over  the  casual  ward,  enter  the  union-house,  spend  an  evening  in  a 
low  lodging-house,  and  sit  down  and  hear  the  tales  of  sons  of  ministers,  of  sons  of 
gentlemen,  of  sons  of  noblemen,  of  men  that  once  were  merchants,  traders,  lawyers, 
doctors,  who  have  brought  themselves  down  by  nothing  else  than  their  own  extra va- 


OTAP.  y.]  NEHEMIAH.  77 

gance  and  sin  to  eat  the  bread  of  pauperism.  III.  Those  who  sat  that  tkub 
RELIGION  MAKES  PEOPLE  MISERABLE.  I  have  Suffered  as  much  of  bodily  pain  as 
most  here  present,  and  I  know  also  about  as  much  depression  of  spirit  at  times  as 
any  one ;  but  my  Master's  service  is  a  blessed  service,  and  faith  in  Him  makes  my 
;Soul  leap  for  joy.  I  would  not  change  with  the  most  healthy  man,  or  the  most 
wealthy  man,  or  the  most  learned  man,  or  the  most  eminent  man  in  all  the  world, 
if  I  had  to  give  up  my  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  to  be  a  Christian 
and  all  God's  people  will  tell  you  so.  By  the  living  saints  that  do  rejoice,  and  by 
the  dying  saints  who  die  without  a  fear,  I  set  an  assembly  against  the  man  who 
dares  slander  true  religion  by  saying  that  it  does  not  make  men  happy.  (C7.  H. 
Sturgeon.) 

Ver.  9.  Ought  ye  not  to  walk  in  tlie  fear  of  our  God,  because  of  the  reproach  of 
the  heathen  our  enemies  ? — Jealousy  for  the  honour  of  God  : — There  was  much 
good  sense  and  Christian  wisdom  in  the  reply  which  was  once  given  to  a  dignitary 
■of  our  Church  by  a  simple  rural  pastor.  The  latter  had  said  to  the  former,  "  If  you 
act  so,  what  will  the  people  say  ?  "  The  reply  was,  "  Do  you  care  what  the  people 
say  ?  "  The  rejoinder  of  the  plain  man  was,  "I  care  as  little  as  any  man  what  the 
people  say ;  but  I  care  a  great  deal  what  the  people  have  a  right  to  say."  How 
just  the  distinction !  Human  opinion  ought  to  have  no  weight  with  us  when  it 
-contravenes  duty  ;  but  it  ought  to  weigh  much  with  us  when  we  incur  its  censure  by 
the  violation  of  duty.  The  ungodly  will  judge  chiefly  of  Christianity  by  those  who 
profess  it,  and  be  largely  won  or  scandalised  by  the  manner  in  which  it  is  adorned 
or  disgraced  by  them.     (Hugh  Stowell,  M.A.) 

Ver.  10.  Let  us  leave  oflf  this  usury. — Wise  rebuke  : — He  did  not  stand  on  a 
pedestal  and  look  down  on  them  with  scorn  and  contempt ;  he  rather  placed  himself 
alongside  of  the  offenders,  that  he  might  lift  them  to  a  higher  level.  Let  us  learn 
irom  this  beautiful  example  how  best  to  rebuke  and  restore  an  erring  brother  or 
sister.     {W.  P.  Lockhart.) 

Ver.  15.  But  so  did  not  I,  because  of  the  fear  of  God.— .4  motto  for  a  manly 
life : — I.  The  self-regulative  power  of  a  manly  motive.  "  The  fear  of  God  " ; 
"  the  love  of  Christ  "  ;  "  religious  principle  "  ;  "  conscience  "  ;  "  the  sense  of  duty  "  ; 
"the  instinct  of  right,"  are  all  variations  of  expressions  of  the  same  motive. 
n.  The  courage  to  be  singular  is  here  implied.  HI.  Applications  of  this  prin- 
ciple TO  the  commonplace  life  of  all  men.  1.  To  himself  a  man  must  say,  "  No ! " 
2.  To  the  world  a  man  must  say  "  No  1 "    3.  This  is  the  motto  for  youth.    IV.  The 

SIMPLICITy    AND    DIRECTNESS   OF    THIS   LIFE-MOTTO.       V.    ThIS    MOTTO    IS    OUR   GUIDE    IN 

DOUBTFUL  matters.  {Homiletic  Commentary.)  The  fear  of  the  Lord  : — I.  Wholk- 
.bome  self-restraint.  There  is  always  a  temptation  to  run  with  the  multitude.  It 
was  particularly  so  with  Nehemiah.  1.  His  superiors  were  evil.  A  man  is  fain  to 
follow  his  employers  or  masters.  2.  His  surroundings  were  evil.  A  person  gets  his 
tone  from  his  surroundings.  3.  His  temptations  were  to  evil.  He  would  have 
gained  the  applause  of  his  fellows  by  sinning.  4.  He  was  singular  in  his  convic- 
tions, also  almost  alone  in  an  idolatrous  land.  II.  An  all-powebful  motive. 
"Because  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord."  All  the  more  powerful  because  unseen— the 
mightiest  forces  are  those  the  eye  cannot  trace.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is — 1.  A  safe 
guide.  It  is  sure  to  be  right.  2.  A  powerful  incentive.  He  has  power  to  cast  into 
hell,  and  He  will  reward.  3.  A  plain  directive.  The  wayfaring  man,  though  a 
fool,  shall  not  err  therein.  Men  who  are  independent  in  their  purpose  of  rectitude 
-are  earth's  true  nobility.  Learn  to  stand  alone  for  the  cause  of  truth.  (Homilist.) 
NehemiaK's  master  principle : — The  religion  of  the  Bible  is  not  a  sickly  plant  which 
requires  the  forcing-house  to  keep  it  alive.  It  is  a  hardy  tree  which  flourishes  best 
in  the  open  field.  The  servant  of  God  anywhere  is  the  servant  of  God  everywhere. 
Few  notions  have  done  more  mischief  than  the  imagination  that  godliness  belongs 
to  the  closet  and  sanctuary,  the  cloister  and  the  cell,  and  that  it  is  too  ethereal  to 
be  interfused  into  the  occupations  of  secular  life.  To  refute  such  fallacies  nothing 
is  more  effectual  than  holy  example.  Example  shows  what  can  be  done,  and  at  the 
same  time  points  out  the  way  in  which  it  may  be  accomplished.  For  those  occupied 
in  the  busy  pursuits  of  the  world  there  is  no  more  appropriate  example  in  the 
Scriptures  than  that  of  Nehemiah.  I.  His  ruling  motive.  The  whole  tenor  of 
his  conversation  bespoke  the  supremacy  of  the  fear  of  God  in  his  soul.  This 
.chapter  contains  an  impressive  exercise  of  this  principle.     Of  those  returned  from 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.t. 

the  captivity,  many  were  destitute  and  distressed ;  their  poverty  made  them  a  prey 
to  their  richer  brethren.  Nehemiah's  predecessors  were  most  rigorous  in  their 
exactions,  and  failed  to  let  mercy  temper  justice.  Nehemiah,  on  the  contrary, 
not  only  refrained  from  oppression,  but  did  not  even  require  his  dues.  Had 
he  not  disclosed  the  principle  which  actuated  him,  we  might  have  filled  up  the  blank 
in  this  way  :  Because  of  the  promptings  of  generosity  ;  or  because  of  my  high  sense 
of  honour ;  or  because  of  the  patriotism  that  fired  my  breast ;  or  because  of  the  com- 
passion which  melted  my  heart.  Thus,  however,  spake  not  Nehemiah,  but  he  said, 
"  So  did  not  I,  because  of  the  fear  of  God."  This  gave  the  character  of  godli- 
ness to  his  conduct ;  this  transmuted  what  would  otherwise  have  been  no  better 
than  fair  tinsel  into  the  fine  gold  of  the  sanctuary.  11.  The  nature  of  the  fear 
OF  God.  The  fear  of  God  in  the  Old  Testament  is  equivalent  to  the  love  of  God  in 
the  New.  The  former  indicates  the  severer  aspect  of  the  one  economy  as  compared 
with  the  more  gracious  aspect  of  the  other.  What  viewed  in  one  light  is  love 
viewed  in  another  is  godly  fear.  They  are  but  different  aspects  of  the  same  principle. 
If  there  be  genuine  love  of  God,  there  cannot  fail  to  be  a  holy  fear  of  offending  Him. 
This  fear  is  therefore  the  beginning  of  wisdom  ;  the  guardian  of  holiness  ;  the  seal 
of  adoption.  What  need  there  is  for  this  principle  to  pervade  the  mercantile  world ! 
Examined  in  the  light  of  Scripture,  the  morals  of  that  world,  even  in  our  own 
favoured  land,  would  be  found  to  be  fearfully  faulty.  Along  with  much  that  is- 
honourable  and  of  good  report  among  our  merchant  princes,  if  you  penetrate  inta 
the  recesses  of  commerce,  you  will  frequently  detect  a  low  and  shifting  standard  of 
equity — you  will  discover  that  a  thousand  practices  are  connived  at  and  pass  current 
in  business  which  when  in  the  balances  of  the  sanctuary  are  found  utterly  wanting. 
III.  The  salutary  effects  of  the  feab  of  God.  It  gives  to  mercantile  morality — 
1.  Intrinsic  worth.  2.  Strength.  3.  Stability.  4.  Universality.  (1)  Taking  the 
morality  of  the  commercial  world  at  the  highest,  how  much  of  it  is  genuine?  If 
men  are  upright  in  their  dealings  merely  because  they  have  a  conviction  that 
honesty  is  the  best  policy,  and  that  fairness  will  answer  better  than  fraud,  or  if  they 
act  justly  simply  from  a  sense  of  honour  or  from  a  pride  which  raises  them  above 
being  guilty  of  a  low  and  disgraceful  transaction  ;  or  if  they  do  right  because  they 
instinctively  recoil  from  all  that  is  base  and  equivocal,  from  whatever  would  degrade 
and  disturb  their  mind,  then  all  their  imposing  array  of  mercantile  virtues  are  after 
all  of  the  earth  earthy,  hollow  at  the  core  and  unprofitable  in  the  sight  of  God.  It  i» 
the  fear  of  God  alone  which  can  impart  to  mercantile  morality  its  intrinsic  worth. 
(2)  Even  the  virtuous  qualities  which  exalt  men  in  the  commercial  world  must  lack 
reality  and  consistency  when  they  rest  on  a  lower  ground.  Hence  it  is  no  un- 
common thing  to  find  a  man  who  was  at  one  period  distinguished  for  honour  and 
integrity  at  another  period  making  utter  shipwreck  of  character ;  whilst  his  barque 
glided  along  in  smooth  water  and  his  sails  were  filled  with  prosperous  gales,  he 
steered  an  undeviating  course,  but  when  storms  arose  and  his  vessel  drifted  among 
quicksands  and  shallows,  he  soon  abandoned  the  compass  of  honesty  and  yielded 
himself  to  the  force  of  the  current.  His  rectitude  was  the  creature  of  circumstance  ; 
sustained  by  success,  with  success  it  fell.  Fragile  at  best  are  the  virtues  which 
spring  from  the  unregenerated  heart.  (3)  The  energy  of  this  principle  will  exert  a. 
strength  and  universality  of  influence  which  nothing  else  can  command.  God 
being  everywhere,  the  man  who  fears  Him  will  fear  Him  everywhere.  It  is  impos- 
sible to  delineate  fully  the  breadth  and  expansiveness  of  this  principle  of  action. 
It  will  go  with  a  man  into  the  little  as  well  as  the  great,  into  the  hidden  as  well  a» 
the  open ;  it  will  tell  upon  him  with  equal  force  whether  others  dissent  from  or 
concur  in  his  course  of  conduct.  It  will  elevate  him  to  freedom  and  independence 
of  character.  He  will  not  be  like  the  sundial,  useless  save  in  the  light ;  but  he  will 
be  Uke  the  timepiece,  which  keeps  the  tenor  of  its  way  alike  in  the  shade  as  in  the 
sunshine.  The  saint,  like  the  sunflower^  owns  the  centre  of  attraction  when  clouded 
as  well  as  when  clear,  (a)  It  will  keep  a  man  undefiled  amid  the  defilements  of 
public  life  like  the  pure  stream  that  is  said  to  pass  through  the  salt  lake  and  yet 
retain  its  freshness.  It  is  a  safeguard  against  the  tone,  the  spirit,  and  the  practices 
of  business,  and  it  will  prevent  compliance  with  the  expedients,  manoeuvres,  and 
subterfuges  of  trade,  (b)  A  trying  ordeal  for  a  godly  tradesman  is  to  be  reputed 
soft  and  behind  the  age  because  he  will  not  overreach  his  neighbour.  When  he  sees 
competitors  prospering  by  doubtful  expedients,  or  hears  them  glorying  in  their 
equivocal  gains,  his  reflection  and  joy  will  be,  "  So  did  not  I,  because  of  the  fear  of 
God."  (c)  It  will  restrain  from  the  unhallowed  indulgences  of  worldlings,  {d)  It 
will  guard  against  the  desecration  and  profanation  of  the  ordinances  of  the  Lord's 


CHAP,  v.]  NEHEMIAE.  79 

Day.     (Hugh  Stowell,  M.A.)  Uprightness  in  dealing  : — If  you  wish  to  apply  a 

touchstone  to  charaxjter,  take  this  as  the  most  searching — the  exercise  of  those  graces 
which  a  man  is  most  tempted  to  neglect,  and  the  eschewal  of  those  iniquities  which 
a  man  is  most  tempted  to  indulge.  He  who  can  stand  this  test  is  sterling  in  the 
sight  of  God.  Consider — I.  Some  great  principles  which  ought  to  obtain  in 
ALL  MERCANTILE  TRANSACTIONS.  1.  A  Christian  tradesman  ought  to  love  his  neigh- 
bour as  himself.  2.  "  Whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even 
BO  to  them."  This  is  a  code  of  morals  condensed  into  a  sentence.  3.  You  must  be 
faithful  in  the  little,  even  as  in  the  great.  11.  Some  of  the  less  obvious  devia- 
tions  FROM    THESE    PRINCIPLES   WHICH    PASS    CURRENT    IN     THE     MERCANTILE    WORLD. 

1.  How  common  is  it  for  men  to  defraud  society  by  idleness  and  self-indulgence  1 

2.  By  selfish  extravagance,  or  rash  speculations,  what  numbers  subject  themselves 
to  liabilities  which  their  resources  do  not  warrant,  or  plunge  into  debts  which  they 
have  no  prospect  of  discharging !  3.  How  diversified  the  deceptions  practised  in 
trade  for  the  purpose  of  taking  advantage  of  the  purchaser  1  (Ibid.)  The  fear  of 
God : — ^A  few  principles,  realised  in  the  heart,  will  generate  this  blessed  fear.  Let 
us  consider — I.  God's  majesty,  and  this  will  provoke  the  fear  of  beverencb. 
II.  God's  providence,  and  this  will  induce  a  fear  of  dependence.  HI.  Our 
advantages,  and  this  will  induce  a  fear  of  diffidexce.  IV.  Our  obliga- 
tions, and  this  will  induce  a  fear  of  gratitude  and  love.  (J.  M.  Randall.} 
The  fear  of  God  a  real  principle  of  life: — It  puts  a  difference  between  the 
world  and  the  servant  of  God — I.  As  it  regards  choice.  H.  As  to  service. 
IH.  As  to  worship.  IV.  As  to  affliction.  The  worldly  man  will  fret  and 
murmur;  not  so  the  godly.  V.  As  to  the  practical  conduct  of  daily  life.  (Ibid.) 
So  did  not  I : — I.  Let  me  put  the  main  principle  that  lies  here  in  these  words : 
Nothing  will  go  right  unless  you  daee  to  be  singular.  "  So  did  not  I."  How- 
soever common  the  practice,  howsoever  innocent  and  recognised  the  source  of  gain, 
the  multitude  that  approved  it,  and  adopted  it,  was  nothing  to  me.  Everything 
will  be  wrong  where  a  man  has  not  learnt  the  great  art  of  saying,  "  No."  Kesolute 
non-compliance  with  common  practice  should  be  exercised — 1.  In  the  field  of 
opinion.  If  we  are  building  on  traditional  opinion,  we  have  really  no  foundation 
at  all.  Unless  the  word  received  from  others  has  been  verified  by  ourselves  and 
changed,  as  it  were,  into  part  of  our  own  being,  we  may  befool  ourselves  with  creeds 
and  professions  to  which  we  fancy  that  we  adhere,  but  we  have  no  belief  whatso- 
ever. 2.  In  the  daily  conduct  of  life.  There  are  many  beckoning  hands  and 
enticing  voices  that  seek  to  draw  us  away.  Sturdy  resistance  is  necessary — (1)  From 
the  very  make  of  our  own  natures.  There  is  a  host  of  inclinations  and  desires  in 
every  man  which  will  hurry  him  to  destruction  unless  he  has  a  strong  hand  on  the 
brake.  "  God  gave  them  to  thee  under  lock  and  key,"  and  it  is  at  our  peril  that  we 
let  them  have  sway.  (2)  From  the  order  of  things  in  which  we  dwell.  We  are  set 
in  the  midst  of  a  world  full  of  things  which  are  both  attractive  and  bad,  and  which 
are  sternly  prohibited  and  lovingly  forbidden  by  God.  And  if  you  go  careering 
among  the  flowers  and  fruits  that  grow  around  you  in  the  life  that  is  opening  to 
you,  like  town  children  turned  loose  for  a  day  in  the  woods,  picking  whatever  is 
bright,  and  tasting  whatever  looks  as  if  it  would  be  sweet,  you  will  poison  your- 
selves with  nightshade  and  hemlock.  (3)  From  the  fact  that  every  one  of  us  is 
thrown  more  or  less  closely  into  contact  with  people  who  themselves  are  living  as 
they  should  not,  and  who  would  fain  drag  us  after  them.  For  us  all,  then,  in  every 
period  of  life,  the  necessity  is  the  same.  We  must  learn  to  say,  "  No."  Like 
Joseph,  like  Daniel,  like  the  three  Hebrew  youths,  like  Nehemiah,  we  must  dare,  if 
need  be,  to  be  singular.  (4)  Non-resistance  or  compliance  is  in  itself  weak  and 
unworthy.  What  a  shame  it  is  that  a  man  possessed  of  that  awful  power  which, 
within  limits  and  subject  to  conditions,  God  has  given  him,  of  shaping  and  deter- 
mining his  character,  should  let  himself  be  shaped  and  determined  by  the  mere 
pressure  of  circumstances  and  accidental  associations  !  What  a  shame  it  is  that 
a  man  should  have  no  more  volition  in  what  he  does  and  in  what  he  refrains 
from  than  one  of  those  gelatinous  creatures  that  float  about  in  the  ocean,  which 
have  to  move  wherever  the  current  takes  them,  though  it  be  to  cast  them  on  the  rocky 
shore  with  an  ebbing  tide.  That  "circumstances  make  character"  should  have 
its  vindication  in  the  actual  lives  of  the  great  bulk  of  men  is  only  another  proof  of 
the  weakness  and  depravity  of  humanity,  in  which  the  will  is  paralysed,  and  the 
conscious  choice  is  so  seldom  exercised,  and  a  man  lets  the  world  do  what  it  likea 
with  him.  (5)  Vigorous  non-compliance  with  the  temptations  that  are  around  us 
is  enforced  by  the  remembrance  of  what  a  poor  excuse  for  wrong-doing  they  will  be 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

found  to  be  at  last.    11.  Consider  that  tou  cannot  besist  the  evil  around  tod 
UNLESS  tod  give  todbselves  TO  GoD.     No  man  will  ever  for  a  lifetime  resist  and 
repel  the  domination  of  evil  unless  he  is  girded  about  with  the  purity  of  Jesus 
Christ,  as  an  atmosphere  in  which  all  poisonous  things  fade  and  die,  and  through 
which  no  temptation  can  force  its  way.     The  only  means  for  steadfast  resistance  is 
a  steadfast  faith  in  Jesus  as  our  Saviour.     1.  In  Christ  we  have  an  all-sufficient 
pattern.     The  one  command  which  contains  the  whole  of  Christian  duty,  the  whole 
law  of  moral  perfectness  attainable  by  man,  is — "  Be  ye  imitators  of  God,  as  beloved 
children,  and  walk  as  Christ  walked."     2.  That  fear  of  God  which  is  all  transfused 
and  mingled  with  the  love  of  Him,  gives  us  next  an  all-powerful  motive.     Love 
delights  to  please ;  fear  dreads  to  disobey.    3.  The  fear  of  God  strengthens  us  for 
resistance,  because  it  gives  us  an  omnipotent  power  within  ourselves  whereby  we 
resist.     "  The  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made  me  free  from  the 
law  of  sin  and  death."     {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        Resistance  to  evil : — Nehemiah  is 
an  illustrious  example  of  a  courage  that  is  within  reach  of  us  all,  a  courage  that 
dares  to  be  true  when  truth  is  unpopular,  and  to  do  that  which  is  right  when  right 
is  scorned.    Like  some  unfailing  river  which  defies  the  heat  and  the  drought  of 
the  longest  summer  because  its  sources  lie  on  the  margin  of  perpetual  snow,  this 
courage  in  its  noblest  form  is  independent  of  circumstances  because  it  has  its 
spring  in  the  presence  of  God.     I.  Why  should  we  dare  to  stand  alone,  and  to 
say  to  evil,  "  So  will  not  I"  ?     1.  Because  in  the  end  it  is  the  safest  course.     Life  is 
a  probation  and  an  education.    None  of  us  can  escape  temptation.     It  moulds  and 
tests  our  character  and  fits  us  for  service.     There  are  but  two  courses  open — com- 
pliance or  resistance.    Many  a  man  makes  shipwreck  on  the  very  verge  of  manhood 
for  the  want  of  courage  to  say,  "  No,"  and  of  the  resolution  to  stand  alone.     2.  It  is 
the  manliest  course.     What  do  we  think  of  one  out  on  a  wide  sea  in  an  open  boat 
who,  when  the  storm  gathers  and  the  waves  run  high,  drops  his  oars,  fastens  up  his 
helm  and  lets  himself  drift.     He  is  the  brave  man  who,  undaunted  by  the  dark  sky 
and  the  angry  waves,  toils  at  the  oar  and  makes  for  the  land.     And  he  who,  caught 
by  sudden  and  sharp  temptation,  allows  himself  to  drift  helplessly  with  the  tide, 
excites  only  scorn  and  compassion,  while  he  who,  like  Nehemiah,  faces  the  tempta- 
tion in  the  strength  of  God,  and  cries,  "  So  will  not  I,"  is  a  true  man,  a  real  hero, 
and  a  worthy  follower  of  Jesus  Christ.     3.  It  is  the  wisest  course.    We  escape 
thereby  the  consequences  of  sin,  and  the  very  temptation  we  resist  becomes  the 
means  of  strengthening  our  character.    II.  The  secret  of  this  courage  :  "  So  did 
not  I,  because  of  the  fear  of  God."    In  the  realisation  of  the  Divine  presence 
Bishop  Latimer  forgot  his  fear  of  the  King  of  England,  and  spoke  brave  and  strong 
and  faithful  words  of  warning  and  remonstrance.     In  the  fear  of  God  lived  Lord 
Lawrence,  the  great  British  Pro- Consul  as  he  has  been  called,  who  saved  India  in 
the  day  of  mutiny,  and  his  marble  in  Westminster  Abbey  tells  us  "  He  feared  man 
so  little  because  he  feared  God  so  much."     (F.  J.  Chavatse.)         Singularity  : — 
1.  Our  text  contains  the  regulative  spring  of  a  noble  life.     The  words  mean  most  to 
the  young.    Will  the  coming  generation  prefer  conscience  and  convenience  and 
make  God  the  pole-star  of  their  life  ?     Every  one  of  us  is  important  to  God,  and  the 
consciousness  of  this  is  the  parent  of  virtue  and  the  inspiration  of  heroism.     God 
wants  us.    When  Augustine  was  in  disquiet  of  mind,  he  said,  "  Soul,  what  aileth 
thee?"     And  he  seemed  to  hear  a  Divine  voice  within  answer,  "Look  above." 
Turning  upward  and  noting  the  stars  looking  down  on  him,  he  said,  "  Stars,  can 
you  tell  me  the  meaning  of  my  unrest  ?  "    And  the  stars  whispered,  "  Look  above." 
Eemembering  the  angel-hosts  of    God  marshalled   for   service  or  watchfulness, 
Augustine  cried,  "Ministers  of  God,  can  ye  minister  to  a  restless  mind ?  "     And 
they  chanted,   "  Look  above."     "  Maker  of  all  things,"  said  the  reverent  though 
unabashed  inquirer,  "  tell  me  the  meaning  of  this  unsatisfiedness  ?  "     And  God 
responded,  "  I  have  made  thee  for  Myself,  and  thy  soul  can  find  no  rest  till  it  find 
rest  in  Me."    When  Samuel  Webster  was  asked,  as  he  sat  at  dinner,  what  was  the 
most  formative  influence  that  entered  his  life,  he  replied,  "  The  greatest  influence 
that  ever  touched  my  life  was  the  sense  of  my  responsibility  to  God."    2.  Doing 
right  means  sometimes  being  unfashionable.     A  business  man  died  the  other  day. 
Writing  to  his  travellers,  he  was  accustomed  to  add  a  sentence  like  "  Go  straight." 
He  knew  that  both  right  and  wrong  doing  were  contagious.     Dr.  Bushnell  said  to  a 
young  man  who  was  consulting  him  as  to  the  calling  he  should  pursue,  "  Grasp  the 
handle  of  your  being  "    Your  taste  or  fitness  is  as  a  handle  to  your  faculties.     Find 
your  course  and  go  right  ahead  in  the  teeth  of  opposition,  in  spite  of  the  stings  of 
sarcasm  or  the  bitterness  of  temporary  forsakenness.    Remember  Him  who  said,  "  I 


CHAP,  v.]  NEHEMIAH.  81 

am  alone  ;  and  yet  I  am  not  alone,  because  the  Father  is  with  Me."  3.  The  power 
of  numbers  is  magical,  and  we  are  so  often  bidden  to  do  as  others  do.  Said  an 
avowed  and  educated  infidel  to  a  Christian  apologist.  "  Let  the  final  issue  be  what 
it  may,  the  majority  is  against  you,  and  I  go  with  the  majority."  But  the  world 
has  not  always  been  saved  by  majorities.  Reformers,  statesmen,  saints,  singers, 
prophets,  priests,  believers  in  God  and  duty — these  have  been  the  saviours  of 
society.  4.  It  is  a  moment  of  moral  victory  when  a  young  man  dares  to  say,  "  I 
cannot  afford  it."  5.  A  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  things  that  he 
possesseth,  nor  in  the  outward  success  of  his  noblest  efforts ;  it  does  consist  in  his 
harmony  of  conscience  with  the  fear  of  God,  in  the  peace  that  is  bom  of  obedience. 
Whitfield  and  a  companion  were  much  annoyed  one  night  by  a  set  of  gamblers  in  a 
room  adjoining  that  in  which  they  slept.  Their  clamour  and  their  horrid  blasphemy 
so  excited  Whitfield  that  he  could  not  rest.  "  I  will  go  and  reprove  their  wicked- 
ness," said  he.  His  companion  remonstrated  in  vain.  His  words  of  reproof  were 
apparently  powerless.  His  companion  asked  him,  "  What  did  you  gain  by  it  ?  "  "A 
soft  pillow,"  he  said,  and  soon  fell  asleep.  Duty  looks  upward;  duty  implies  God. 
Jesus  Christ  incarnated  duty.  Duty  is  the  minister  of  heaven.  This  prayer  was  found 
in  the  desk  of  a  schoolboy  after  his  death :  "  O  God,  give  me  courage  to  fear  none 
but  Thee."   (John  H.  Goodman.)        The  fear  of  God : — I.  What  it  is  to  fear  God. 

1.  In  general  it  is  a  passion  of  the  soul  whereby  a  man  doth  flee  from  imminent 
evil.  2.  In  particular  it  is — (1)  Servile,  (2)  Filial.  II.  That  a  man  who  feabs  God 
WILL  not  do  as  others  DO.  1,  In  the  matter  of  their  choice  (Matt.  xiv.  7,  8  ;  Heb. 
xi.  25).  2.  In  the  matter  of  their  worship  (Josh.  xxiv.  15).  3.  In  their  business 
calling.  4.  In  what  they  are  entrusted  with.  5.  In  their  refreshments.  6.  In  their 
afflictions.  7.  In  their  right  and  propriety.  Lot  would  not  let  Abraham  have  his 
right,  though  it  was  his  right,  yet  Abraham,  because  he  feared  God  and  for  peace 
sake,  gives  up  his  right.     III.  What  is  there  in  this  fear  of  God  that  should 

BALANCE  THE  SOUL,  AND  CAUSE  IT  NOT   TO   DO   AS    OTHERS    DO.       A    man    that    fcarS    tho 

Lord — 1.  Has  different  ends  from  others.  2.  Has  a  tenderer  conscience.  3.  Has 
different  restraints.  IV.  What  is  the  issue  and  consequence  of  the  feab  of  the. 
Lord  ?      1.  God  deals  well  with  the  man   who  fears  Him  (Psa.  i. ;  cxii.   6-8). 

2.  God  will  delight  in  him.  Conclusion :  If  you  would  fear  the  Lord  in  truth — 
1.  Be  humbled  for  the  want  of  it.  2.  Ask  God  to  fulfil  His  promise,  "  I  will  put 
My  fear  into  their  hearts."  3.  Observe  what  that  is  that  is  nearest  and  dearest  to 
you,  and  give  it  up.  4.  Worship  God  according  to  His  own  appointment.  5.  Take 
heed  of  sinning  when  you  have  the  opportunity.  6.  Labour  to  strengthen  your  love 
to  God.  7.  Live  much  in  and  study  much  upon  dependence  wholly  upon  God.  If 
a  man  be  upon  a  high  tower,  and  another  holds  him  from  falling  by  the  hand  only, 
he  will  certainly  be  very  fearful  of  offending  him  that  holds  him  so.  8.  Use  the 
world  as  not  abusing  it.  Deal  with  men  as  in  the  presence  of  God.  9.  Labour  after 
more  communion  with  Him.  We  used  to  say,  "  Too  much  familiarity  breeds  con- 
tempt "  ;  but  here  it  is  not  so,  for  by  familiarity  and  communion  with  God  we  shall 
have  more  sweetness  and  more  delight  in  His  ways,  more  strength  in  His  service, 
more  comfort  in  our  afflictions.     (W.  Bridge.)        The  fear  of  God  the  touchstone  : — 

1.  That  in  the  Christian  religion  it  is  the  motive  that  gives  worth  to  the 
ACTION.  II.  Nehemiah  here  ascribes  his  own  conduct  to  the  motive  from  which 
every  action  must  spring  that  obtains  the  approval  of  God.  He  might  have 
displayed  the  same  absence  of  self  on  quite  a  different  principle.     1.  Patriotism. 

2.  Desire  for  popularity.  But  his  refusal  of  the  emoluments  of  office  was  "  because 
of  the  fear  of  God."  This  is  a  kind  of  summary  of  character  which  includes  the 
various  features  of  spiritual  excellence.  It  is  a  Divinely  implanted  principle  which 
makes  Christ  the  motive  and  God  the  end  of  every  particular  of  conduct.  The  man 
that  fears  God  labours  to  act  up  to  the  measure  of  the  revelation  with  which  he  is 
favoured ;  to  appropriate  the  privileges,  to  act  upon  the  motives,  and  to  perform  the 
duties  of  the  dispensation  beneath  which  he  is  placed.  A  fear  such  as  this  cannot 
Bubsistunless  there  be  a  consciousness  that  "  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God."  It  may 
have  been  through  "  the  terror  of  the  Lord  "  that  we  were  first  brought  to  serious 
thoughts,  earnest  resolutions,  and  fervent  supplications,  yet  when  we  have  felt 
somewhat  of  the  consciousness  of  danger  there  will  be  a  thousandfold  more  motive 
to  us  to  strive  after  holiness,  in  the  love  and  grace  exhibited  on  Calvary.  III.  Some 
PROMINENT  instances  OF  THIS  GENERAL  TRUTH.  No  actioH  cau  be  approved  in  God's 
flight  which  may  not  be  traced  to  His  fear.  1.  Attention  to  the  outward  duties  and 
forms  of  religion  may  arise  from,  the  custom  of  society,  the  mere  force  of  habit, 
compliance  with  the  wishes  of  friends,  or  the  desire  of  setting  an  example  to  others^ 


83  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  T. 

without  there  being  the  slightest  vestige  of  vital  Christianity.  2.  When  we  tell  the 
man  of  high  morals  and  unflinching  integrity  and  high  generosity,  but  who  is  a 
stranger  to  Christ,  that  he  can  no  more  be  saved  in  his  present  condition  than  one 
of  the  worst  profligacy,  we  are  not  representing  morality,  integrity,  and  generosity 
as  things  to  be  dispensed  with  by  the  inheritor  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  we  are 
simply  affirming  that  they  are  of  worth  only  as  fruit  of  a  Divinely  implanted 
principle,  and  that  if  they  have  any  other  origin,  they  may  indeed  be  beneficial  to 
society,  but  they  cannot  promote  salvation.  Who  knows  not  that  there  is  in  many 
men  a  kind  of  philosophical  sense  of  the  beauty  and  dignity  of  virtue,  a  native 
repugnance  to  what  is  gross  and  dishonourable,  and  a  fine  sympathy  with  suffering, 
which  will  go  far  to  the  producing  what  is  regarded  as  exemplary  in  character, 
although  there  may  be  at  the  same  time  an  utter  ignorance,  and  even  contempt,  of  the 
doctrines  of  Christianity  ?  We  must  be  good  on  good  principles.  (Henry  Melvill,  B.D. ) 
Principle : — I.  The  guiding  principle  of  Nehemiah's  conduct — the  feab  of  God. 

I.  The  fear  of  God,  as  a  principle  of  action,  is  at  once  simple  and  potent.  Look  at 
the  machinery  in  some  of  your  mills.  You  have  there  a  forest  of  shafts,  an  army  of 
wheels,  a  perfect  maze  of  cunningly  invented  instruments  requisite  for  carrying 
out  the  various  processes  of  manufacture.  But  how  simple  and  how  mighty  the 
power  which  moves  and  controls  the  whole  machinery — the  power  of  steam  !  How 
immensely  superior  to  any  other  motive  power  as  yet  brought  into  general  use  1 
What  steam  is  in  this  relation,  so  is  the  fear  of  God  to  morals.  The  religious 
principle  in  its  influence  on  this  complicate  mechanism  termed  man,  and  on  these 
intricate  and  bewildering  human  affairs,  has  a  simple  efficacy  not  only  unsurpassed, 
but  with  which  no  other  principle  can  vie.  2.  The  superiority  of  this  principle 
appears  also  in  its  wide-reaching  sphere  of  action.  This  sphere  comprises  every- 
thing great  and  small  that  relates  to  human  conduct.  It  embraces  life  in  all  its 
aspects.  We  cannot  thus  speak  of  other  principles  of  action  which  men  acknow- 
ledge. Take  public  opinion,  for  instance.  If  it  be  this  which  influences  us  in  the 
course  we  pursue  our  morality  may  prove  a  very  precarious  thing.  A  life 
regulated  by  the  opinion  of  one's  fellow-creatures  is  likely  to  be  well-ordered  only 
go  far,  and  for  so  long,  as  it  shall  be  under  the  public  eye  ;  whereas  the  fear  of  God 
affects  us  as  truly  in  the  gloom  of  night  as  in  the  brightness  of  meridian  day ; 
affects  us  as  really  when  remote  from  the  city's  hum  and  the  crowded  mart  as  it 
would  in  the  midst  of  them  ;  affects  us  as  powerfully  in  mountain  solitudes  and  on 
watery  wastes  as  when  the  gaze  of  assembled  thousands  is  upon  us.  "  The 
morality,"  says  a  writer  previously  quoted,  "  the  morality  that  is  based  upon  self- 
interest  or  the  opinion  of  men,  will  not  endure  the  severest  tests.  For  what  if  a 
man  should  be  beset  by  a  temptation  so  great  as  to  buy  over  his  supposed  self- 
interest,  and  render  it  in  his  view  more  profitable  to  defraud  than  to  be  honest  ? 

II.  The  operation  of  this  principle  as  seen  in  the  chapter  before  us.  It  impelled 
Nehemiah  to  rectify  abuses.  Nehemiah  discharged  a  disagreeable  duty  with  all 
fidelity.  "  I  rebuked  the  nobles,  and  the  rulers,  and  said  unto  them,"  <Scc.  Hitherto 
the  fear  of  God  has  acted  on  Nehemiah  as  an  impelling  principle.  We  come  now 
to  the  incident  with  which  the  text  stands  immediately  connected,  and  we  see  the 
operation  of  this  principle  as  a  restraining  force.  "  So  did  not  I,  because  of 
the  fear  of  God."  It  held  Nehemiah  in  check.  (T.  Robson.)  An  ancient 
Nonconformist: — The  words  that  I  have  read  are  a  little  fragment  of  his  auto- 
biography which  deal  with  a  prosaic  enough  matter,  but  carry  in  them  large 
principles.  When  he  was  appointed  governor  of  the  little  colony  of  returned 
exiles  in  Palestine,  he  found  that  his  predecessors,  like  Turkish  pashas  and  Chinese 
mandarins  to-day,  were  in  the  habit  of  "  squeezing"  the  people  of  their  government, 
and  that  they  requisitioned  sufficient  supplies  of  provisions  to  keep  the  governor's  table 
well  spread.  It  was  the  custom.  Nobody  would  have  wondered  if  Nehemiah  had 
conformed  to  it ;  but  he  felt  that  he  must  have  his  hands  clean.  His  religion  went 
down  into  the  little  duties  of  common  life,  and  imposed  upon  him  a  standard  far  above 
the  maxims  that  were  prevalent  round  about  him.  I.  The  attitude  to  prevalent 
practices.  That  non-compliance  with  customary  maxims  and  practices  is  the  begin- 
ning, or,  at  least,  one  of  the  foundation-stones,  of  all  nobleness  and  strength,  of 
all  blessedness  and  power.  Of  course,  it  is  utterly  impossible  for  a  man  to  denude 
himself  of  the  influences  that  are  brought  to  bear  upon  hira  by  the  circumstances 
in  which  he  lives,  and  the  trend  of  opinion,  and  the  maxims  and  practices  of  the 
world,  in  the  corner,  and  at  the  time,  in  which  his  lot  is  cast.  But,  on  the  other 
hand,  be  sure  of  this,  that  unless  you  are  in  a  very  deep  and  not  at  all  in  a  technical 
sense  of  the  word  "  Nonconformists,"  you  will  come  to  no  good.     It  is  so  easy  to 


CHAP.  T.]  NEHEMIAH.  85 

do  as  others  do ;  partly  because  of  laziness,  partly  because  of  cowardice,  partly 
because  of  the  instinctive  imitation  which  is  in  us  all.  Men  are  gregarious.  A 
great  many  of  us  adopt  our  creeds  and  opinions,  and  shape  our  lives,  for  no  better 
reason  than  because  people  around  us  are  thinking  in  a  certain  direction,  and  living 
in  a  certain  way.  Now,  I  ask  you  to  take  this  plain  principle  of  the  necessity  of 
non-compliance  and  apply  it  all  round  the  circumference  of  your  lives.  Apply  it 
to  your  opinions.  There  is  no  tyranny  like  the  tyranny  of  a  majority  in  a  democratic 
country  like  ours.  "What  everybody  says" — perhaps — "is  true."  What  most 
people  say,  at  any  given  time,  is  very  likely  to  be  false.  Truth  has  always  lived 
with  minorities.  If  you  have  honestly  thought  out  the  subject  to  the  best  of  your 
ability,  and  have  come  to  conclusions  diverse  from  those  which  men  like  me  hold 
dearer  than  their  lives,  that  is  another  matter.  But  I  know  that  very  widely  there 
is  spread  the  fashion  of  unbelief.  So  many  influential  men,  leaders  of  opinion, 
teachers  and  preachers,  are  giving  up  the  old-fashioned,  evangelical  faith,  that  it 
takes  a  strong  man  to  say  that  he  sticks  by  it.  It  is  a  poor  reason  to  give  for  your 
attitude,  that  unbelief  is  in  the  air,  and  nobody  believes  those  old  doctrines  now. 
An  iceberg  lowers  the  temperature  all  round  it,  and  the  iceberg  of  unbelief  is 
amongst  us  to-day,  and  it  has  chilled  a  great  many  people  who  could  not  tell  why 
they  have  lost  the  fervour  of  their  faith.  On  the  other  hand,  let  me  remind  you  that 
a  mere  traditional  religion,  which  is  only  orthodox  because  other  people  are,  and 
has  not  verified  its  beliefs  by  personal  experience,  is  quite  as  deleterious  as  an 
imitative  unbelief.  It  is  no  excuse  for  shady  practices  in  your  trade  to  say,  "  It  is 
the  custom  of  the  trade ;  and  everybody  does  it."  Nehemiah  might  have  said : 
*♦  There  never  was  a  governor  yet  but  took  his  forty  shekels  a  day's  worth  " — about 
£1,800  of  our  money — "  of  provisions  from  these  poor  people,  and  I  am  not  going 
to  give  it  up  because  of  a  scruple.  It  is  the  custom,  and  because  it  is  the  custom 
I  can  do  it."  "  Oh,"  but  yon  say,  "that  involves  loss."  Very  likely!  Nehemiah 
was  a  poorer  man  because  he  fed  all  these  one  hundred  and  fifty  Jews  at  his  table, 
but  he  did  not  mind  that.  It  may  involve  loss,  but  you  will  keep  God,  and  that  is 
gain.  Do  not  be  tempted  to  follow  that  multitude  to  do  evil.  Unless  you  are 
prepared  to  say  "  No  1  "  to  a  great  deal  that  will  be  pushed  into  your  face  in  this 
great  city,  as  sure  as  you  are  living  you  will  make  shipwreck  of  your  lives.    II.  Thk 

MOTIVE    THAT   IMPELS    TO   THIS  STURDY  NON-COMPLIANCE.       NoW,  my  point  iS  this,  that 

Jesus  Christ  requires  from  each  of  us  that  we  shall  abstain,  restrict  ourselves,  refuse 
to  do  a  great  many  things  that  are  being  done  round  us.  I  need  not  remind  you 
of  how  continually  He  spoke  about  taking  up  the  cross.  I  need  not  do  more  than 
just  remind  you  of  His  parable  of  the  two  ways,  "  Enter  ye  in  at  the  strait  gate, 
for  strait  is  the  gate."  Just  because  there  are  so  many  people  on  the  path  suspect 
it,  and  expect  that  the  path  with  fewer  travellers  is  probably  the  better  and  the 
higher.  But  to  pass  from  that,  what  did  Jesus  Christ  mean  by  His  continual 
contrast  between  His  disciples  and  the  world  ?  Society  is  not  organised  on  Christian 
principles  ;  we  all  know  that.  And  until  it  is,  if  a  man  is  going  to  be  a  Christian 
he  must  not  conform  to  the  world.  "  Know  ye  not  that  whosoever  is  a  friend  of 
the  world  is  an  enemy  of  God  ?  "  I  would  press  upon  you  that  our  Christianity  is 
nothing  unless  it  leads  us  to  a  standard,  and  a  course  of  conduct  in  conformity  with 
that  standard  which  will  be  in  diametrical  opposition  to  a  great  deal  of  what  is 
patted  on  the  back,  and  petted  and  praised  by  society.  Now,  there  is  an  easy-going 
kind  of  Christianity  which  does  not  recognise  that,  and  which  is  in  great  favour 
with  many  people  to-day;  and  is  called  "liberality"  and  "breadth,"  and  "con- 
ciliating and  commending  Christianity  to  outsiders,"  and  I  know  not  what  besides. 
Weil,  Christ's  words  seem  to  me  to  come  down  like  a  hammer  upon  that  sort  of 
thing.  Society  does  not  think  much  of  these  trimmers.  It  may  dislike  an  out-and- 
out  Christian,  but  it  knows  him  when  it  sees  him,  and  it  has  a  kind  of  hostile 
respect  for  him  which  the  other  people  will  never  get.  HI.  The  power  which 
ENABLES  us  TO  EXERCISE  IT.  "  The  fear  of  God,"  or,  taking  the  New  Testament 
equivalent,"  the  love  of  Christ,"  makes  it  possible  for  a  man,  with  all  his  weak- 
ness and  dependence  on  surroundings,  with  all  his  instinctive  desire  to  be  like  the 
folk  that  are  near  him,  to  take  that  brave  attitude,  and  to  refuse  to  be  one  of  the 
crowd  that  runs  after  evil  and  lies.  Christ  will  enable  you  to  take  this  necessary 
attitude  because,  in  Himself  He  gives  you  the  example  which  it  is  always  safe  to 
follow.  The  instinct  of  invitation  is  planted  in  us  for  a  good  end,  and  because  it 
is  in  ns  examples  of  nobility  appeal  to  us.  He  makes  it  possible  for  us,  because  we 
have  the  strongest  possible  motive  for  the  life  that  He  prescribes.  As  the  Apostle 
puts  it,  "Ye  are  bought  with  a  price,  be  not  the  servants  of  men."    There  is 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

nothing  that  will  so  deliver  us  from  the  tyranny  of  majorities,  and  of  what  we  call 
general  opinion  and  ordinary  custom,  as  to  feel  that  we  belong  to  Him  because  He 
died  for  us.  Jesus  Christ  being  our  Kedeemer  is  our  Judge,  and  moment  by  moment 
He  is  estimating  our  conduct,  and  judging  our  actions  as  they  are  done.  The 
servant  of  Christ  is  the  master  of  all  men.  "  All  things  are  yours,  whether  Paul, 
or  Apollos,  or  Cephas — all  are  yours,  and  ye  are  Christ's."  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Fear  expels  fear: — How  often  we  see  fear  expel  fear.  The  fear  of  being  burnt 
will  nerve  a  woman  to  let  herself  down  by  a  water-pipe  from  the  upper  storeys 
of  a  house  in  flames.  The  fear  of  losing  her  young  will  inspire  the  timid  bird 
to  throw  herself  before  the  steps  of  a  man,  attracting  his  notice  from  them 
to  herself.  Oh  !  for  that  Divine  habit  of  soul  which  so  conceives  of  the  majesty, 
and  power,  and  love  of  God,  that  it  does  not  sin  against  Him,  but  would 
rather  brave  a  world  in  arms  than  bring  a  shadow  over  His  face.  {F.  B. 
Meyer.)  The   Christian  in  commerce : — It  is   a   noble   sight  to    see  a  man, 

moved  simply  by  religious  considerations,  departing  from  customs  sanctioned 
by  society ;  going  against  the  tide  of  opinion  and  practice  ;  foregoing  worldly 
profits ;  deaf  to  the  pleas  that  satisfy  the  multitude,  meekly  asserting  a  spiritual 
independence ;  silently  rebuking  the  sinfulness  and  servility  of  the  times ;  only 
careful  of  acquitting  himself  to  God,  and  realising  his  ideal  of  moral  integrity. 
He  is  like  a  spring  in  an  arid  desert.  He  is  like  a  star  shining  brightly  amid  dark 
clouds.  Our  subject  is,  "  The  Christian  in  commerce."  The  Christian  tradesman 
must  assume  the  attitude  of  Nehemiah.  His  principles  must  take  the  form  of 
reform  and  opposition.  Consider — I.  What  Christianity  requires  of  a  man  in  his 
DEALINGS  with  HIS  FELLOW-MEN.  1.  The  most  rigid  adherence  to  the  principles  of 
moral  integrity  in  commerce.  (1)  Truth.  This  is  the  basis  of  all  intercourse ;  society 
would  be  impossible  without  it.  Truth  is  a  most  comprehensive  virtue.  It  takes 
in  far  more  than  the  Uteral  statement  of  the  fact.  It  condemns — (a)  All  positive 
misrepresentations.  (6)  All  the  arts  by  which  one  thing  is  palmed  off  for  another, 
(c)  All  deficient  scales  and  measures,  {d)  All  pretences,  when  unfounded,  of  special 
bargains,  &c.  (e)  All  promises  which  cannot  be  or  are  not  meant  to  be  kept.  And 
on  the  part  of  the  purchaser  it  condemns  all  pretences — (a)  That  what  is  wanted  ia 
not  wanted,  (b)  That  it  has  been  purchased  more  cheaply  elsewhere,  (c)  That  it 
is  very  inferior  to  what  it  really  is.  "  It  is  naught,  it  is  naught,  saith  the  buyer, 
but  when  he  is  gone  his  way  he  boasteth."  (2)  Honesty.  This  involves  the  meeting 
of  all  equitable  claims,  the  fulfilment  of  all  engagements  voluntarily  undertaken  or 
assumed,  the  most  rigid  respect  for  the  rights  of  property.  2.  The  exercise  of 
love  and  kindness  in  commerce.      This  will  preserve  from  exclusive  dealing,  &c. 

3.  That  a  man  should  preserve  his  soul  in   peace  and   patience   in  commerce. 

4.  That  commerce  should  be  consecrated  and  elevated  by  the  spirit  of  holiness. 
II.  Whv  THIS  CONDUCT  IS  NECESSARY  IN  COMMERCE.  1.  Commerce  is  a  most  important 
part  of  our  life.  2.  Commerce  is  a  most  influential  part  of  our  life.  3.  Commercial 
holiness  is  imperatively  required  by  the  character  and  temper  of  the  times. 
(A.  J.  Morris.) 

Ver.  16.  Neither  bought  we  any  land. — Nehemiah  an  example  of  unworldlinets 

of  mind  : The  people  of  God  maintain  a  certain  unearthly  peculiarity  throughout 

all  their  relationship  to  earth  ;  they  do  not  become  assimilated  to  the  crowd  through 
which  they  hold  the  tenor  of  their  way.  Like  that  limpid  stream  of  which  we  are 
told  that,  entering  a  salt  and  bituminous  lake,  it  clears  its  way  through  the  uncon- 
genial waters,  untainted  and  uncommingled,  so  that  it  issues  forth  below  as  pure  as 
when  it  entered,  so  the  current  of  God's  people,  passing  through  the  dead  sea  of 
this  world,  does  not  blend  with  its  waters,  but  speeds  on  undefiled  to  the  clear 
ocean  in  heaven.  Consider  how  this  unworldly  spirit  will  tell  on  your  every-day 
course.  I.  It  will  restrain  you  from  intimacy,  though  you  cannot  avoid  inter- 
course WITH  THE  UNGODLY.  II.  YoU  WILL  BE  DISTINGUISHED  FROM  THE  WORLD  BY  THE 
MODERATION  WITH  WHICH  YOU  WILL  FORM  YOUR  PLANS  AND  PROSECUTE  YOUR  UNDER- 
TAKINGS. HI.  You  WILL  SHOW  "ANOTHER  SPIRIT"  IN  THE  FRIENDSHIPS  WHICH  YOU 
FORM  AND  THE  ASSOCIATIONS  WHICH  YOU  CHOOSE.  IV.  YoU  WILL  BE  RESTRAINED  FROM 
THAT  GREEDINESS  OF  GAIN  WHICH,  MORE  THAN  EVER,  CHARACTERISES  THE  WORLD  IN  THIS 
PRESENT  AGE.  V.  YoU  WILL  HAVE  A  LARGE  AND  OPEN  HAND  FOR  THE  CLAIMS  OF  GOD, 
THE    SERVICE    OF    HiS    ChURCH,    AND    FOR    THE     RELIEF     OF     THB     POOR    AND     NKKDY 

(Hugh  Stowell,  M.A.) 
Ver.  19.  Think   upon   me,  my  Qod. — The   iainVs    iupport : — I.    Thb   pbrson 


CHAS.  Ti.]  NEHEMIAH.  85 

PKTiTioNEi).  1.  General  title :"  God."  2.  Special  relation  :•' My."  II.  The  point 
PBATKD  for.  Lessons :  1.  God  the  support  of  His  saints.  2.  Peculiar  God  to  believer : 
"My."  3.  God  hath  remembrancers.  4.  God  is  soonest  drawn  to  His  own.  6.  Prayer 
proper  for  one's  own  good.  6.  Works  may  be  pleaded  before  God.  7.  Man's  works  are 
the  rule  of  God's  reward.  8.  Everything  well  done  shall  be  rewarded.  9.  Good 
done  to  God's  people  is  most  acceptable.  (Wm.  Gouge.)  The  remembrance  of  good 
deeds  a  pillow  of  rest  for  a  good  man : — I.  Life's  keview  will  be  a  review  of  the 

WHOLE    OF    LIFE.        II.    LlFS'S  REWARD  WILL    BE    RENDERED  ACCOSDINa   10   IIS    DEEDS. 

{Homiletic  Commentary.) 


CHAPTER  VL 

Vers.  1-19.  Now  It  came  to  pass,  when  Sanhallat. — The  witnesg  to  the  truth : — 
I.  His  TRIAL,  from  the  stratagems  OF  ENEMIES.  The  circumstances  of  his  trial 
were  peculiar.  Faith  and  prayer  and  pains  had  now  achieved  great  things  in 
Jerusalem,  For  many  days  the  patriots  had  persevered,  with  unremitting  toil,  to 
rebuild  the  wall.  And  now  their  enterprise  was  ready  to  be  crowned  with 
triumphant  success.  This,  to  them,  was  a  time  of  joyous  anticipation,  mingled,  no 
doubt,  with  solicitude,  lest  their  work  should  be  marred  on  the  very  eve  of  com- 
pletion. But  to  the  enemies  of  Zion  it  was  a  moment  of  vexation  and  dismay. 
"  They  heard,"  says  Nehemiah,  "  that  I  had  builded  the  wall,  and  that  there  was  no 
breach  left  therein. "  In  spite  of  their  vaunting  words  and  feeble  arms  the  good 
work  had  advanced,  and,  unless  they  could  instantly  crush  it,  they  plainly  saw  that 
all  would  be  lost.  Yet  what  shall  they  do  to  arrest  the  sacred  enterprise  ?  They 
have  tried  mockery  already,  but  have  found,  to  their  chagrin,  that  these  men  of 
Judah  will  not  be  driven  by  ridicule  from  what,  to  them,  is  a  work  of  conscience 
and  religion.  They  have,  moreover,  attempted  force ;  but  they  have  learned,  to 
their  dismay,  that  the  Israelites  are  ready  to  resist  unto  blood  the  invasion  of  their 
liberty  to  serve  God  in  the  city  called  by  His  name.  Foiled,  therefore,  in  these 
modes  of  attack,  they  are  compelled  to  resort  to  stratagem  in  order,  if  possible,  to 
gain  their  wicked  purpose.  This  desperation  of  the  enemies  of  Judah  is  just  a 
picture  of  the  rage  of  the  great  adversary  at  the  progress  of  the  Church  and  the 
growing  sanctification  of  each  believer  in  Christ.  More  than  once  in  the  history  of 
the  Church's  advance  has  the  devil  come  down  in  "  great  wrath,  because  he  knoweth 
he  hath  but  a  short  time."  But  trials  in  the  religious  life  often  prove  the  occasion  of 
higher  manifestations  of  mercy  than  could  have  been  experienced  without  them .  Trial, 
therefore,  here  comes  to  Nehemiah  ;  and  what  is  the  form  in  which  it  assails  him  ? 

1.  He  is  first  tried  by  the  wiles  of  enemies  to  draw  him  from  his  work  and  involve 
him  in  danger.  As  if  for  the  purpose  of  consultation,  they  sent  unto  him,  saying, 
"Come,  let  us  meet  together  in  some  one  of  the  villages  in  the  plain  of  Ono." 
The  object  of  these  crafty  foes  was  to  get  possession  of  the  person  of  Nehemiah ; 
and  in  all  probability  to  take  away  his  life.  But  the  noble  Israelite  answered  after 
this  manner,  "  I  am  doing  a  great  work,  so  that  I  cannot  come  down  :  why  should 
the  work  cease,  whilst  I  leave  it,  and  come  down  to  you  ?  "  Who  can  but  admire  the 
wisdom  and  fortitude  of  the  servant  of  God  in  this  hour  of  trial  ?  Is  not  this  a  grand 
example  to  imitate  in  Christ's  service  and  our  own  salvation  ?  Our  life  on  earth  is 
BO  transient,  and  our  work  for  eternity  so  arduous,  that  we  have  no  time  to  waste. 
"  This  I  say,  then,  Walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lust  of  the  flesh." 

2.  Further,  Nehemiah  is  tried  by  the  false  accusations  of  enemies,  designed  to 
undermine  his  character.  "  Sanballat  sent  his  servant  the  fifth  time  with  an  open 
letter  in  his  hand."  And  why  was  the  letter  sent  "open"?  It  was  no  doubt 
intended  to  give  all  the  people  opportunity  to  know  its  contents,  that  their  jealousy 
might  be  aroused  at  the  alleged  ambitious  aims  of  their  leader,  or  their  fears  be 
excited  of  incurring  the  wrath  of  the  king  by  continuing  their  work ;  but  it  was 
meant,  moreover,  thus  to  offer  an  insult  to  Nehemiah.  It  might  have  been  thought 
that  a  life  singularly  blameless  and  disinterested  as  his  would  have  been  exempt 
from  reproach.  But  who  may  expect  to  be  free  from  the  assaults  of  malice  and 
envy,  since  the  Son  of  God,  the  holy,  harmless,  undefiled  One,  did  not  escape  the 
shafts  of  calumny  ?  And  so  here,  one  of  the  lowliest  and  most  upright  of  good 
men  is  falsely  accused  of  ambition  and  rebellion.     How  striking  an  instance  is  this 

29 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Ti. 

of  misrepresentation  and  craft  in  the  enemies  of  truth  to  thwart  a  servant  of  God 
in  a  Divine  work.  It  often  happens,  as  here,  that  the  sacred  form  of  friendship  is 
assumed  to  seduce  the  children  of  faith  into  a  betrayal  of  their  trust ;  and  thej 
who  would  draw  them  aside  from  duty  pretend  a  regard  to  their  welfare.  Yet  under 
the  guise  of  affection  there  lurks  a  deadly  hostility  that  seeks  only  their  hurt  and  the 
ruin  of  their  good  name.  II.  His  testimont  to  the  tbuth.  Men  in  high  place  are 
little  to  be  envied.  They  are  often  exposed  to  special  dangers,  both  in  principle 
and  person.  He  bears  testimony  to  the  truth  by  fidelity  to  his  trust  in  midst  of 
imminent  danger.  He  was  fortified  by  a  good  conscience,  while  beset  with  wiles 
and  accusations  ;  and  he  possessed  his  soul  in  patience  through  the  hour  of  trial. 
He  looks  on  the  field  of  danger  with  the  eye  of  an  eagle,  and  walks  over  it  with  the 
heart  of  a  lion.  He  combines  a  clear  perception  of  the  plots  of  the  enemy  with  a 
heroic  courage  to  confront  all  their  power.  How  quickly  the  adversary  shifts  his 
method  of  assault  !  and  the  good  soldier  must  alter  his  manner  of  repulse  in  order 
to  overcome.  The  enemies  of  Nehemiah  here  follow  the  same  crafty  course.  They 
found  they  could  not  draw  him  into  the  country  for  counsel,  and  now  they  seek  to 
drive  him  into  the  temple  for  safety.  This  was  a  mean  as  well  as  a  wicked  device 
of  the  heathen ;  but  it  is  melancholy  to  reflect  that  men  were  found  in  Judah  base 
enough  to  abet  their  machinations.  It  was  not  among  the  common  people  that  the 
treacherous  spirit  appeared,  but  among  the  professed  prophets  and  messengers  of 
God,  Noble  things  are  always  most  vile  when  they  become  corrupt;  and  in  this 
case  these  so-called  ambassadors  of  heaven  debase  their  high  vocation  by  lending 
all  its  influence  to  the  work  of  the  enemies  of  religion.  But  these  arts,  employed 
to  intimidate  and  seduce  Nehemiah,  were  all  in  vain.  He  bore  testimony  to  the 
truth  by  steadfast  adherence  to  duty,  even  in  face  of  threatened  death.  Much  as 
he  may  value  life,  and  wish  to  preserve  it  till  the  work  is  done  which  is  so  dear  to 
his  heart,  yet  he  loves  God  and  a  good  conscience  far  more.  This  is  a  noble 
example  for  our  imitation.  What  faithful  care  does  this  man  of  God  exercise  to 
prove  all  things,  and  to  hold  fast  that  which  is  good  I  III.  His  triumph  over  all 
OPPOSITION.  It  is  instructive  to  remark  the  means  by  which  Nehemiah  achieved  this 
■victory.  He  was  first  of  all  careful  to  ascertain  facts,  and  to  detect  the  plots  of 
enemies  through  all  the  mazes  of  their  falsehood.  For  this  purpose  he  gave  his 
mind  to  weigh  evidence,  to  examine  character,  to  balance  circumstances,  that  he 
might  arrive  at  the  truth.  But  we  note,  as  his  chief  means  of  success,  effectual 
fervent  prayer  to  God.  His  labours  were  now  crowned  with  triumphant  success. 
""  So,"  he  writes,  "  the  wall  was  finished  in  the  twenty  and  fifth  day  of  the  month 
Elul,  in  fifty  and  two  days."  This  was  the  hour  of  Israel's  triumph,  and  of  their 
■enemies'  humiliation.  "  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  when  all  our  enemies  heard 
thereof,  and  all  the  heathen  that  were  about  us  saw  these  things,  they  were  much 
cast  down  in  their  own  eyes."  They  were  much  cast  down,  as  persons  who  have 
staked  their  full  strength  and  reputation  on  a  bad  end,  and  yet  have  utterly  failed 
in  its  attainment.  They  suffered  the  humiliation  of  those  who  boast  of  their  power, 
put  it  forth  to  the  utmost,  and,  after  all,  feel  themselves  completely  defeated  by  the 
people  whose  might  they  had  despised.  It  is  not  given  to  all  witnesses  for  God  to 
bear  testimony  for  Him  amid  great  works  and  conflicts  like  these ;  but  He  appoints 
each  of  us  our  duty  here  to  stand  by  His  truth,  and  to  contend  earnestly  for  the 
faith  against  all  assaults  on  it.  The  dominant  forms  of  opposition  to  Bible  truth  in 
these  days  are  unbelief,  or  error  in  creed,  and  worldliness,  or  error  in  conduct ;  and 
in  face  of  both  God  calls  us  to  be  witnesses  for  His  cause.  Whenever  you  profess 
your  faith  in  the  Bible,  the  whole  Bible,  as  the  Word  of  God,  your  creed  is  pro- 
nounced antiquated,  and  regarded  with  wonder  or  an  ill-dissembled  sneer.  Yet  all 
is  surrendered  if  the  integrity,  the  infallibility,  the  inspiration  of  the  whole  Bible  is 
given  up.  (W.  Ritchie.)  Nehemiah'' t  heroism: — Well,  to  come  to  the  history, 
when  Nehemiah  was  coming  to  an  end,  and  thought  he  had  got  through  all  his 
difiBculties,  Sanballat  and  the  others  came  wheedling  and  coaxing,  and  they  said, 
"  Come,  Nehemiah,  let  us  meet  together  in  one  of  the  villages  in  the  plain  of  Ono." 
And  they  sent  messengers  four  times  to  try,  if  they  could,  to  prevent  the  thorough 
fulfilment  and  accomplishing  of  God's  work  and  Nehemiah's  design.  Anything 
they  would  do,  the  enemies  of  Nehemiah,  as  our  enemies  also  would  do,  to  diminish 
our  zeal  for  God  and  truth  and  righteousness.  Thus  we  might  paraphrase  the 
arguments  used,  "Now,  Nehemiah,  you  really  are  a  most  excellent  man,  and, 
though  we  say  it  ourselves,  we  too  are  excellent  men  ;  and  if  we  can  only  just  meet 
together  in  a  quiet  little  spot,  we  shall  soon  settle  everything.  You  see,  Nehemiah, 
v/e  have  misunderstood  one  another — a  very  common  thing  among  good  people.    Yoa 


CHAP.  VI.]  NEHEMIAH.  87 

thought  we  were  against  you,  but  there  never  was  a  greater  mistake.  We  were 
misrepresented.  Come  now,  and  let  us  shake  hands  ;  and  when  we  have  looked 
into  each  other's  faces,  we  shall  discover  amidst  apparent  diversity  of  purpose  that 
our  hearts,  our  aims,  were  really  one,  that  we  are  seeking  the  same  object."  After 
such  fashion,  we  can  imagine  they  thought  to  draw  Nehemiah  from  his  purpose. 
"But  they  thought  to  do  me  mischief,"  says  Nehemiah.  Nehemiah  says,  "Why 
should  the  work  cease,  whilst  I  leave  it,  and  come  down  to  you  ?  "  And  you  will 
find  the  more  you  buckle  to  God's  work — that  is  to  say,  to  strive  to  be  first  of  all  a 
sterling,  righteous  man  in  lip  and  life,  in  thought,  in  word,  and  deed — and  the 
more  you  try  to  recover  the  blight  and  disaster  in  London  or  round  about  you,  the 
more  you  will  find  opposition  of  different  kinds,  and  perhaps  to-day  the  secret,  sly, 
and  cunning  opposition  which  is  to  be  dreaded  far  more  than  the  open,  the  overt. 
I  wonder  how  many  invitations  you  will  get  to  parties  this  week  ?  because  I  want 
you  to  work  for  God  in  this  coming  ten  days'  mission.  Very  likely  never  so  many 
as  this  week.  "  We  have  a  nice  little  party  this  week.  Come  down  ;  don't  be 
righteous  overmuch.  Don't  spoil  yourself,  and  take  all  the  pleasure  out  of  life." 
Let  us  make  up  our  mind  and  heart  to  work,  work,  work.  "  Why  should  I  let  the 
work  cease,  and  come  down  to  you  ?  "  Let  them  answer  that.  Why  should  God'a 
work  cease  while  I  leave  it,  and  come  down  to  you  ;  so  as  to  weaken  my  interest  in 
God's  work,  and  hinder  my  pace  in  the  actual  doing  of  God's  work  ?  Here  is  the 
test  and  touchstone.  How  do  these  things  tell  upon  the  work  ?  Do  they  lower  my 
temperature,  and  take  away  my  energies  from  God's  work  ?  Then  they  are  of  the 
devU ;  and  to  see  that  is  to  be  kept  right.  From  Nehemiah's  answer  (ver.  3)  we 
see  the  great  blessing  of  having  pure  motives  and  clean  hands.  Oh,  for  this  whole- 
heartedness  in  the  cause  of  God !  Nehemiah  said,  "  I  will  not  cease  doing  the 
work,  for  I  am  sure  it  is  not  for  my  own  personal  ends,  it  is  not  for  my  own 
aggrandisement,  my  own  vainglory.  There  are  no  such  things  as  thou  sayest,  but 
thou  feignest  them  out  of  thine  own  heart."  They  shot  sore  at  poor  Nehemiah, 
when  they  said,  "  Nehemiah,  it  is  your  own  glory  that  leads  you  on  in  this  work, 
not  zeal  for  God."  And  don't  think  Nehemiah  did  not  feel  this ;  that  message 
came  with  a  thump  to  him.  And  what  preserved  him  ?  His  integrity  and 
innocence.  He  could  lift  up  his  voice,  and  say,  "It  is  a  lie;  it  is  not  true. 
Do  as  you  like  I  Say  what  you  like  1  I  know  whom  I  am  serving.  You  may 
try  all  manner  of  means,  but  you  will  never  shake  me  from  this,  that  God  has  sent 
me  here,  given  me  this  work  to  do ;  and  in  His  name  I  give  myself  to  it,  with 
singleness  of  heart  and  effort."  If  God  promote  you,  and  make  you  prominent  in 
His  work,  remember  it  is  He  who  does  it ;  and  you  must  stay  at  your  post,  do  your 
day's  work  and  leave  your  reputation  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord.  Then  comes 
another  temptation  (ver.  10).  I  think  this  man,  this  Shemaiah,  was  a  man  who 
had  a  particular  reputation  for  wisdom  and  prudence.  "  Oh,  Nehemiah  !  "  he  would 
say,  "  now  you  are  wrong.  You  will  allow  me  to  speak  plainly  with  you.  No  one 
rejoiced  more  than  I  did  when  you  came  from  Persia,  and  I  rejoice  to  see  what  is 
going  on  at  Jerusalem.  But  the  position  is  far  different  from  what  you  think. 
And  I  have  been  here  longer  than  you ;  and  I  know  the  currents  of  thought  and 
feeling,  which  you  don't  know  anything  about.  And,  believe  me,  that  some- 
times the  roundabout  road  is  the  nearest ;  and  sometimes  to  go  straight  tramping 
on,  you  know,  is  the  way  never  to  reach  what  you  want.  You  are  carrying  things, 
they  think,  with  too  high  a  hand.  But  if  you  would  take  time,  stop,  and  let  things 
blow  over  a  little,  you  will  get  it  done  far  more  easily.  Believe  me,  Nehemiah,  I 
know  the  temper  of  this  people  "  (and  here  he  spoke  truly),  "  and  I  tell  you  they  are 
against  you,  and  are  going  to  seek  your  life.  Now  let  us  meet  together  in  the 
temple,  and  let  us  shut  the  doors  of  the  temple :  for  they  will  come  and  slay  thee." 
And  Nehemiah  said  to  him,  "  Should  such  a  man  as  I  flee?  "  He  virtually  stood 
up  and  said,  "  What,  Nehemiah  fleeing  after  all  he  has  gone  through  !  Get  thee 
behind  me,  Satan  1  Thou  savourest  not  of  the  things  that  be  of  God,  but  those 
that  be  of  men."  The  same  temptation  came  to  the  greater  than  Nehemiah,  to 
the  greatest  Worker  that  ever  God  sent  to  work  and  to  "  pray  for  the  peace  of 
Jerusalem,"  even  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  as  with  the  Master,  so  with  the 
servant.  The  servant  will  be  tempted  and  seduced  in  every  way,  that  the  work 
may  cease,  that  the  temperature,  the  heat  of  our  zeal  may  go  do\vn,  and  the  worse 
may  appear  the  better  reason,  and  carry  us  away  from  our  post.  Some  men  go  to 
the  temple,  but  to  them  it  is  simply  a  coward's  castle.  This  is  about  all  that  God 
gets  from  some  of  us.  We  go  sneaking  into  our  churches  on  the  Sunday,  but  not 
to  do  God's  work.     God  pity  you  !     You  never  stand  up  for  Him  out  there  oa 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbat.tu 

London  wall.  Exactly  I  Well,  this  invitation  from  Shemaiah  to  go  into  the 
temple  was  not  good  enough  for  Nehemiah — and  he  was  about  as  devout  a  man 
as  most  of  us.  He  was  a  man  who  feared  God  with  all  his  heart,  didn't  he  ?  But 
they  were  going  to  make  the  temple  a  coward's  castle.  Listen  1  I  will  bring  it 
nearer  to  us.  There  is  some  young  fellow  here  hard  beset  with  his  surroundings. 
You  are  set  there  on  that  commercial  bit  of  the  wall,  to  be  true,  to  be  honest, 
to  unfurl  the  flag  there,  and  to  work  with  and  for  God  there.  And  the  battle 
is  thickening,  and  coming  to  you  in  your  business ;  the  devil  as  an  angel  of  light  is 
trying  to  get  you  to  leave  your  work  and  go  and  study  for  the  ministry !  Go  into 
the  temple  to  save  your  life.  It  was  that  kind  of  thing  that  was  happening  to  the 
early  Church.  Men  and  women  were  going  to  leave  the  conflict  and  struggle,  to 
ran  away  into  cloisters  and  convents,  with  their  "  dim,  religious  light."  And  so 
you  would  go  and  shut  yourself  up,  and  give  yourself  up  to  a  life  of  contemplation, 
yoa  say.  It  is  a  delusion;  it  won't  do.  Let  us  see  how  Nehemiah  acted  when 
asked  to  go  into  the  temple.  He  would  have  been  spoiled  if  he  had  yielded  to  that 
temptation.  He  no  doubt  loved  the  house  of  God,  the  worship  of  God  as  we  do. 
We  love  all  its  regular  services.  How  sweet  it  is  to  us  to  meet  together,  to  hold 
communion,  to  join  in  our  solemn  feasts  and  hymns  of  love  and  praise  1  But  that 
is  on  Sabbath  days.  And  the  end  for  which  we  meet  is  to  strengthen  us  for  the 
work  of  testifying  for  God  and  Christ.  What  is  that  ?  I  think  I  see  Nehemiah 
with  his  note-book  in  his  hand  after  the  work  was  all  finished,  and  he  is  turning 
over  and  going  through  in  his  mind  aU  that  he  had  done  and  suffered.  And  he  is 
thinking  over  it  all,  and  wondering  what  made  all  the  opposition  to  the  building  of 
these  walls.  ♦'  I  never  could  rightly  understand,"  he  would  say,  "  why  that  was 
such  a  tough  job,  and  why  there  were  continually  things  coming  against  my  legs  to 
trip  me  up  from  unexpected  quarters.  I  felt  some  one  was  not  fighting  fair,  that 
the  enemy  had  got  into  our  own  camp  and  was  fighting  against  me  unfairly."  And 
it  was  the  mother-in-law  that  was  the  whole  secret.  They — families  of  God's  people 
and  their  enemies — were  married  and  intermarried  with  each  other ;  and  so  they 
had  their  grappling-irons  on  the  Israelitish  vessel.  And  they  pulled  the  vessel 
close  by  this  intermarriage  relationship,  and  they  got  on  board,  and  could  not 
be  kept  off.  By  this  marriage  relationship  Tobiah  had  got  in  with  the  very  chief 
of  them,  and  so  struck  hard  and  constantly  at  Nehemiah.  And  it  was  through  this 
marriage  relationship  they  tried  to  get  at  Nehemiah  and  pull  him  down,  and  thus 
cause  God's  work  to  cease.  Says  Christ,  "  I  am  not  come  to  send  peace,  but  a 
sword  ;  to  set  the  father  against  the  son,  and  the  daughter  against  the  mother,  and 
the  mother-in-law  against  the  daughter-in-law:  and  a  man's  foes  shall  be  those 
of  his  own  household."  Indeed,  you  will  ofttimes  be  fairly  perplexed.  You  say, 
'•  I  feel  the  devil  at  my  elbow,  and  he  is  whispering  in  my  ear  with  my  own  flesh 
and  blood,  and  would  overcome  me  unless  I  set  watch  with  vigilance."  This  same 
thing  is  working  to-day.  Now,  for  example,  I  know  a  young  fellow,  he  started  with 
great  vigour  in  the  cause  of  God,  he  started  with  great  vigour  to  build  the  wall, 
especially  to  build  the  total  abstinence  wall.  But  by  and  by  he  married  a  daughter 
of  a  wine  merchant,  and  that  brought  the  building  to  a  stop.  Yes.  He  says  now 
he  thinks  there  are  a  great  many  excellent  people  among  the  brewers.  Was  not 
that  the  kind  of  thing  they  said  to  Nehemiah  ?  "  Moreover,  they  reported  Tobiah's 
good  deeds,"  and  they  said  this  and  that  about  him.  Very  innocent-looking  things 
may  seduce  you  and  take  the  backbone  out  of  you.  Once  upon  a  time  your  friends 
called  you  old-fashioned  and  Puritanical,  But  lately  you  got  married,  and  that  has 
brought  you  into  close  contact  with  a  class  of  people  with  whom  you  had  little  or 
no  dealings  before.  You  had  nothing  in  common.  And  to  make  a  long  story  short 
you  were  at  the  theatre  the  other  evening — with  your  mother-in-law.  She  has  soon 
called  you  in  off  the  wall !  Everything  is  altered  now.  And  instead  of  your  going 
over  to  carry  war  into  the  enemy's  camp,  they  have  come  unto  you,  and  have 
overcome  you ;  and  you  have  purred  like  a  pussy-cat  where  before  you  were  bold 
and  outspoken :  and  the  reason  is  the  marriage,  the  mother-in-law  ;  and  the  marrow 
of  principle  is  being  thereby  sucked  out  of  some  of  you.  You  need  to  be  spoken  to, 
and  I  would  that  my  words  were  like  fire,  and  would  burn.  Oh  1  that  some  of  you 
would  come  back  to  your  earlier  faith,  enthusiasm  in  God's  work,  and  the  blood- 
heat  of  your  early  zeal.  For  now  you  are  as  namby-pamby  as  the  devil  could  wish. 
"  I  used  to  think,"  says  another,  "  very  harshly  of  those  who  didn't  hold  my  views. 
But  now  I  have  learnt  to  be  charitable.  I  have  discovered  that  many  things  which 
I  thought  were  essential  are  only  accidental."  Softly,  my  friend :  'twas  the  mother- 
in-law  made  the  discovery.    You  have  gone  off  on  that  charitable  dodge.    Ah, 


CHAP.  VI.]  NEHEMIAB.  89 

God's  Word  has  an  eye  in  every  direction.  "  Also  they  reported  his  good  deeds 
before  me,"  and  as  good  as  said,  "  We  know  Tobiah ;  and,  Nehemiah,  yon  are 
wrong  about  him  altogether.  He  is  an  excellent  man,  and  he  gave  five  shiUings  to 
this,  he  gave  ten  shillings  to  that ;  and  he  is  a  wonderful  f eUow  altogether.  He  is 
wonderfully  like  yourself."  Eeally  it  is  such  a  pity  that  two  such  good  men  should 
not  meet  together  and  shake  hands.  But  they  never  could,  and  Nehemiah  kept  his 
hands  behind  his  back  and  said,  '*  I  choose  my  own  company.  I  know  the  hands  of 
these  fellows  too  well."  (John  McNeill.)  Persistency  : — We  have  here  persist- 
ency of  opposition,  persistency  of  endeavour.  I.  This  PBiNCiPiiB  of  peksistenct 
13  ILLUSTRATED  IN  ALL  THE  CIRCLE  OF  NATURE  AND  LIFE.  1.  Everywhere  there  is 
exhibition  of  hostile  force.  All  natural  forces,  all  life,  all  energy  creep  to  their  goal 
as  the  wave  creeps  to  the  shore  after  many  a  rebuff,  and  after  many  a  spurning. 
2.  It  is  so  with  man  in  all  social  life.  3.  The  Bible  represents  all  moral  victory  as 
against  deep  and  persistent  hostility.  II.  This  principle  of  persistency  is  illus- 
trated IN  the  general  history  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.      III.    ThE   SAME   PRINCIPLB 

IS  ILLUSTRATED  IN  INDIVIDUAL  SALVATION  AND  WORK.  {HomiUtic  Commentary.)  Hin- 
derers  : — How  strange  it  is  that  no  good  work  can  be  attempted  without  exciting 
opposition,  and  the  better  the  work  the  more  intense  its  hindrances  1  No  beneficent 
measure  has  ever  been  propounded  without  obstacles  being  put  in  its  way,  oftentimes 
by  the  very  people  it  is  intended  to  benefit.  The  promulgation  of  Christianity  is  a 
notable  example.  Some  of  the  means  of  hindrance  are — I.  The  restless  activitt 
OF  EVUi.  Sin  is  essentially  aggressive.  It  cannot  let  well  alone.  11.  The  jealoust 
OF  THE  cTNRiGHTEOus.  They  canuot  bear  to  see  anything  prosper  in  which  they  are 
not  the  leaders.  They  will  never  attempt  any  good  work,  but  when  they  see  it  in 
progress  they  would  hinder  and  destroy.  III.  The  vindictive  spirit  of  Satan. 
{Romilist.) 

Ver.  3.  A  great  work. — A  great  worh : — A  story  is  told  of  an  old  man  who  lived 
long  ago.  A  friend  asked  him  the  cause  of  his  complaints,  since  in  the  evening  he 
so  often  complained  of  great  weariness  and  pain.  "Alas,"  answered  he,  "I  have 
every  day  so  much  to  do :  I  have  two  falcons  to  tame,  two  hares  to  keep  from  run- 
ning away,  two  hawks  to  manage,  a  serpent  to  confine,  a  lion  to  chain,  and  a  sick 
man  to  tend  and  wait  upon."  "  Why,  this  is  only  folly,"  said  the  friend ;  "  no  man 
has  aU  these  things  to  do  at  once."  "  Yes  indeed,"  he  answered,  "  it  is  with  me 
as  I  have  said.  The  two  falcons  are  my  two  eyes,  which  I  must  diligently  guard, 
lest  something  should  please  them  which  may  be  hurtful  to  my  salvation ;  the  two 
hares  are  my  feet,  which  I  must  hold  back  lest  they  should  run  after  evil  objects, 
and  walk  in  the  ways  of  sin ;  the  two  hawks  are  my  two  hands,  which  I  must  train 
and  keep  to  work,  in  order  that  I  may  be  able  to  provide  for  myself  and  for  my 
brethren  who  are  in  need ;  the  serpent  is  my  tongue,  which  I  must  always  keep  in 
with  a  bridle,  lest  it  should  speak  anything  unseemly ;  the  lion  is  my  heart,  with 
which  I  have  to  maintain  a  continual  fight  in  order  that  vanity  and  pride  may  not 
fill  it,  but  that  the  grace  of  God  may  dwell  and  work  there ;  the  sick  man  is  my 
body,  which  is  ever  needing  my  watchfulness  and  care.  AU  this  daily  wears  out 
my  strength."  The  friend  listened  with  wonder,  and  then  said,  "  Dear  brother,  if 
all  men  laboured  and  struggled  after  this  manner,  the  times  would  be  better,  and 
more  according  to  the  will  of  God."  (J.  M.  Randall.)  Determination  of  pur- 
pose:— The  ancient  Greeks  had  an  aphorism  which  is  worthy  of  remembrance: 
"  He  is  formidable  who  does  one  thing."  A  man  must  have  a  fixed  design,  or  he 
will  not  have  a  steady  course.  As  the  instrument  tuned  to  no  key-note,  so  is  the 
man  whose  spirit  is  strung  to  no  commanding  aim.  In  vain  does  the  vessel  launch 
forth  from  the  harbour  if  she  have  no  haven  for  which  to  steer  and  no  helm  by 
which  to  shape  her  voyage.  Take  a  just  view  of  your  life,  and  all  is  but  dung  and 
dross  in  comparison  with  your  final  acceptance  with  God.  This  is  the  object,  the 
one  object  which  you  must  enterprise,  prosecute,  and  secure.  What  a  work  is 
before  us!  (Hugh  Stowell,  M.A.)  A  great  work  in  the  face  of  strong  antago- 
nism .-—The  Christian  has  a  great  work  to  do  for  himself,  working  out  imder  gospel 
influences  his  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling.  It  is  great  in  regard  of 
others.  We  are  not  merely  children  of  God  going  home  to  glory;  but  we  are 
fellow-workers  with  God — keepers  of  beacons  to  imperilled  mariners  in  a  dark 
night  of  storms — oarsmen  of  a  lifeboat  out  on  the  wild  ocean  saving  drowning  souls 
from  destruction.  Yea,  we  have  a  great  work  in  regard  of  our  glorious  God  and 
Saviour.  We  may  not  understand  it,  yet  we  are  assured  by  God  Himself  of  the 
truth  that  more  than  in  all  His  works  of  creation  and  providence  is  there  manifes- 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

tation  made  of  His  manifold  wisdom  in  this  work  of  salvation.  Every  soul  saved 
on  earth  by  our  human  instrumentality  is  a  radiant  diadem  in  the  many  crowns  of 
Jesus.  Moreover,  like  Nehemiah,  we  are  doing  this  great  work  in  the  face  of  strong 
antagonisms,  and  against  the  insidious  opposition  of  enemies  striving  to  hinder  us. 
Alas  I  how  many  are  the  Sanballats  and  Tobiahs  of  the  world  I  I  am  not  railing 
at  the  world  itself,  for  it  is  a  good  world  for  Christian  work — a  world  whereof  we 
are  to  make  the  most;  and  the  pleasures  and  honours  and  riches  of  it,  when 
accepted  as  gifts  of  God  and  used  for  His  glory,  are  among  our  mighty  means  of 
grace,  whereby  our  own  souls  may  be  edified  and  Christ's  kingdom  enlarged.  I 
am  thinking  now  of  the  world  as  used  by  Satan  to  hinder  Christian  work — those 
scornful  words  or  seductive  arts  of  temptation,  and,  I  repeat,  they  are  many. 
Pleasure  comes  to  the  scene  of  Christian  labour  with  all-bewitching  beauty  and 
bewildering  blandishments,  and  she  pleads  for  sensual  indulgence,  and  would  draw 
the  worker  for  Christ  forth  and  down  to  the  fair  plains  of  Ono.  Avarice  comes 
with  jewels  of  great  price,  and  keys  offering  coffers  of  untold  wealth  in  the  strong- 
hold of  Mammon.  Ambition  comes,  in  the  pomp  and  glory  of  an  archangel,  fallen 
from  heaven,  and  points  to  a  perspective  of  surpassing  splendour,  with  shining 
palnis  and  triumphal  processions,  outflashing  diadems  and  uprising  throne.  With 
these  and  many  other  specious  beguilements  come  the  great  adversaries  of  the  soul 
and  the  Church.  They  plead  with  the  Christian  worker  as  he  builds  the  walls  of 
Zion,  crying  eloquently  and  earnestly,  "  Oh,  come  down  and  meet  us  in  some  plain 
of  Ono  1  "  And  to  all  this  our  reply  should  be  just  that  of  Nehemiah,  "  I  am  doing 
a  great  work,  and  I  cannot  come  down."  Oh,  fellow-worker  with  God  in  this 
glorious  salvation,  take  to  your  heart  as  the  inspiration  of  your  lives  this  strong 
argument ;  rise  to  a  comprehension  of  the  magnificent  part  you  are  acting  in  the 
face  of  the  universe ;  of  the  vastness  of  the  issues  you  are  working  out  for  God  1 
Say  to  the  assaulting  tempter,  "  Let  me  alone.  I  am  working — working.  I  am 
working  out  my  own  destiny.  I  am  striving  for  a  guerdon  in  the  skies  grander 
than  the  Conqueror's.  I  am  working  for  others — for  the  beloved  of  my  own  house- 
hold— my  child,  my  parent,  my  brother,  my  friend.  Oh,  do  not  hinder  me  I  I  am 
working  for  a  world — a  world  for  which  the  Son  of  God  bled  in  the  garden — died 
on  the  Cross  1  See  1  see  1  that  world  rolls  like  a  shattered  wreck  on  the  stormy  seas 
of  time,  and  I  am  keeping  the  beacon  aflame  1  Oh,  hinder  me  not !  Nay,  more,  I 
am  working  for  Jehovah — that  God  who,  when  I  was  lost,  sent  His  own  Son  to  save 
me."  (T.  L.Cuyler.)  Nehemiah,  the  model  man  of  business  : — In  studying  Nehe- 
miah as  a  man  of  business  we  notice — I.  He  was  a  model  of  earnestness.  II.  He 
was  a  model  of  unselfishness.  IH.  He  was  a  model  of  eaithfulness.  IV.  He 
was  a  model  of  prater.  (jR.  Newton,  D.D.)  A  good  man  in  a  great  work: — This 
narrative  illustrates — I.  The  characteristics  of  a  great  work.  It  has — 1.  A  high 
purpose.  It  was — 2.  Beset  with  difficulties.  A  true  work  will  have  generally  to 
surmount — (1)  Men's  scorn.  (2)  External  hindrances.  11.  The  temptations  that 
BESET  A  great  WORK.  1.  Tcmptatious  from  armed  enemies.  2.  Temptations  from 
professed  friends.  III.  The  spirit  of  a  true  worker.  There  will  be — 1.  Prayer 
for  the  work.  2.  Earnest  prosecution  of  it.  3.  Eesistance  of  all  temptations 
to  leave  it.  {Urijah  R.  Thomas.)  The  great  work : — We  learn  from  these  words — 
I.  That  Nehemiah  was  "doing  a  great  work."     II.  That  there  were  those  who 

ENDEAVOURED  TO  HINDER  HIM.  III.  ThAT  THE  MAGNITUDE  OF  THE  WORK  REQUIRED 
THAT  HE  SHOULD  NOT  CEASE  OR  ALLOW  HIMSELF  TO  BE  HINDERED  FROM    PROSECUTING    IT. 

IV.  We  may  learn  from  the  context  that  Nehemiah  succeeded  in  accomplishino 

THE    WORK    BY    PRATER    AND    PAINSTAKING    DILIGENCE.        (JameS    ShoVe,    M.A.)  The 

great  work : — I.  That  the  work  of  religion  in  general  is  a  great  work.  This 
will  appear  when  we  contemplate  it  as  being — 1.  God's  work.  It  originated  with 
God ;  its  foundations  were  laid  in  heaven ;  it  emanated  from  the  throne  of  the 
Eternal ;  it  is  the  product  of  infinite  wisdom,  love,  and  truth.  It  bears  on  its 
countenance  the  image  of  its  immaculate  Author,  and  it  is  every  way  worthy  of  its 
great  Original.  Unmistakable  traces  and  manifestations  of  its  Divinity  are  seen 
in  the  loftiness  of  its  character,  in  the  purity  of  its  principles,  and  in  the  efficiency 
and  permanency  of  its  influences.  Nothing  is  worth  the  name  of  greatness  com- 
pared with  the  system  God  has  devised  to  heal  the  sorrows  and  cleanse  the  pol- 
lutions of  the  soul.  And  is  there  not  a  glory  and  majesty  about  it  immeasurably 
great?  God  appears  great  in  the  works  of  creation.  If,  then,  God  is  so  great 
throughout  the  wide  range  of  creation,  how  great  must  He  be  in  restoring  man  to 
His  favour,  in  giving  life,  vigour,  and  beauty  to  souls  once  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins  I     That  religion  is  a  great  work  is  evident — 2.  From  the  importance  attached 


CHAP.  VI.]  NEHEMIAH.  91 

to  it  in  the  Bible.      The  Bible,  God's  holy  book,  is  pregnant  with  it,  its  glory  and 
beauty  being  reflected  from  every  page.    This  book  was  written  expressly  to  pourtray 
religion,  its  doctrines,  principles,  and  duties.     Let  the  question  be  settled  in  our 
minds — religion  is  the  "  principal  thing  " ;  it  is  emphatically  the  world's  great  bless- 
ing; so  the  sacred  penmen  estimate  it.     They  speak  of  it  as  "  God's  salvation  "  ;  as 
the  "  great  salvation  " ;  as  the  "  pearl  of  great  price  " ;  as  the  "  one  thing  needful " ; 
as  the  "  good  part " ;  the  "more  excellent  way  "  ;  "the  bread  of  life";  and  "life 
eternal."     That  religion  is  a  great  work  is  evident  from — 3.   The  qualifications 
necessary  to  engage  in  it.     A  high  state  of  intellect  is  not  essential  to  it.    The  most 
gigantic  intellect  is  no  qualification  for  God's  service,  if  not  renewed  and  sanctifieu 
by  the  Holy  Ghost.    The  qualifications  necessary  to  engage  in  this  work  must  have 
their  seat  in  the  heart  rather  than  in  the  head.     Right  moral  emotions  cannot  be 
dispensed  with.    4.  That  religion  is  a  great  work  appears  from  its  blessed  results 
on  human  character  and  conduct.     The  history  of  the  past  in  relation  to  God's 
work  unfolds  a  series  of  wonderful  achievements  and  glorious  results.     Its  wide- 
spread influence  amongst  the  various  nations  and  tribes  of  men  has  told  a  marvel- 
lous tale.    IL  The  good  man  is  engaged  in  this  woek.     This  expression  denotes — 
1.  Decision  of  character.      In  a  world  like  ours  fixedness  of  purpose  is  invaluable, 
whether  it  relate  to  the  active  duties  of  every-day  life  or  to  the  more  lofty  and 
ennobling  duties  of  religion.    It  is  essential  to  success.    The  man  whose  movements 
are  changeable,  and  who  is  never  steady  to  one  point  or  purpose,  brings  nothing  to 
a  good  issue.    What  a  paralysing  influence  indecision  has  upon  the  soul  in  relation 
to  religion  1     Men  dream  and  talk  about  their  future  course  of  action,  and  yet  they 
are  never  found  at  the  starting-point.   They  are  decided  for  the  future,  but  not  for  the 
present.     The  diligent  man  says, "  'I  am  doing  a  great  work ' ;  I  am  in  it ;  it  forror 
part  and  parcel  of  my  very  being."   The  Scriptures  furnish  us  with  specimens  of  the 
decision  we  plead  for.   We  see  it  in  Joshua,  when  he  says,  "  As  for  me  and  my  house, 
we  will  serve  theLord."    So,  too,  David  said,  "  0  God,  my  heart  is  fixed  "  ;  "  I  have 
cQosen  the  way  of  truth."     2.  Labour.     "  I  am  doing  a  great  work."    Eeligion  is 
essentially  active ;  it  has  no  sympathy  with  sloth  and  inactivity.     III.  The  spirit 
OF  PEKSEVEBANCE  IS  REQUIRED  IN  THIS  WORK.     The  good  man  engaged  in  this  work 
cannot  come  down,  because — 1.  The  work  requires  close  and  constant  application. 
To  acquire  anything  Uke  an  approach  to  perfection  or  completeness  in  religion  is 
no  easy  task.     The  world,  with  its  blandishments,  its  false  maxims,  and  glittering 
snares,  says,  "Come  down."      The  flesh,  naturally  in  favour  of  indulgence  and 
ease,  and  opposed  to  self-denial,  joins  in  the  cry,  and  says,  "  Come  down."    Satan, 
whose  malice  breaks  out  more  bitterly  as  he  sees  the  wall  rising  higher,  repeats  the 
order,  "  Come  down."     Thus  every  new  stone  added  to  the  building  is  the  subject 
of  dispute.     The  builder  cannot  leave  his  work,  because — 2.  Shame  and  misery 
would  be  the  result.     A  more  pitiful  sight  than  that  of  a  good  man  "  cast  down 
from  his  excellency"  is  certainly  not  to  be  found.     My  reason,  my  judgment,  my 
conscience,  all  concur  with  the  inspired  admonition,  "  Stand  fast,  therefore,  in  the 
liberty  wherewith  Christ  has  made  you  free,  and  be  not  entangled  again  with  the 
yoke  of  bondage."   IV.  "  Why  should  the  work  cease,  whilst  I  leave  it,  and  come 
DOWN  TO  Tou?  "    We  must  not  suppose  that  God's  work  would  entirely  cease,  even 
though  a  thousand  such  men  as  Nehemiah  were  to  desert  it.     1.  All  the  infidelity 
and  wickedness  of  men  cannot  stop  this  work.     Observe,  finally,  that — 2.  Were  it 
possible  that  His  work  should  cease,  it  would  be  the  greatest  calamity  the  world 
ever  knew.     (A,  Twiss.)        The  pre-eminence  of  God's  work: — I.  God's  work  is 
STILL  A  GREAT  WORK.     It  resolves  itsclf  into  two  parts — 1.  Work  in  relation  to  one's 
self — faith  in  the  Eedeemer,  progressive  holiness  and  final  glory.     2.   Work  in 
relation  to  others.     II.  God's  work  must  be  done  first.     To  Sanballat's  compli- 
mentary note  Nehemiah  replied  by  his  conduct,  "  God's  work  first,  compliments 
next."    III.  God's  work  preserves  from  mischief  and  misery.     IV.  God's  work 
should  be  loved  for  its  own  sake.     V.  God's  work  should  be  begun,  continued, 
AND  ENDED  WITH  PRATER.      {HomiUst.)         Safety  in  Christian  work: — Christian 
work  is — I.  A  safeguard  against  vice.    All  honest  work,  indeed,  is  an  antidote  to 
vice,  but  Christian  work  is  especially  so.     1.  It  fills  up  those  leisure  hours  that  so 
often  prove  fatal  to  the  unguarded  soul.     2.  By  its  very  nature  it  supplies  positive 
motives  against  temptation.    (1)  It  strengthens  all  one's  Christian  principles.    (2)  It 
keeps  one  constantly  under  the  play  of  Christian  influences.     (3)  It  prevents  the 
spiritual  life  from  dying  of  disuse.     11.  A  safeguard  against  spiritual  declension. 
Our  spiritual  life  depends  in  the  first  instance  on  the  work  of  Christ  for  us ;  but  its 
continuance  is  dependent  on  activity — on  the  work  we  do  for  Christ.     1.  Physical 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  vt. 

growth  is  dependent  on  activity.  2.  So,  too,  with  intellectual  life.  3.  So  in  a  still 
higher  degree  it  is  in  spiritual  life.  Selfishness  is  the  greatest  spiritual  poverty. 
Life  loses  in  the  proportion  in  which  it  withholds  itself,  and  gains  by  all  it  gives. 
According  to  the  width  of  my  sympathies  and  the  self-forgetting  ardour  of  my  zeal 
is  the  true  power  and  opulence  of  my  being.  If  it  be  lawful  or  possible  to  enlist  the 
higher  selfishness  in  the  service  of  unselfishness,  as  you  value  your  religious  life,  aa 
you  would  protect  it  on  the  one  hand  against  innate  tendencies  to  declension,  and 
on  the  other  against  the  sapping  and  undermining  influences  of  the  outer  world, 
give  your  sympathies,  your  energies,  your  substance  to  the  cause  of  God  and  man. 
It  is  not  enough  for  your  religious  safety  that  you  abstain  from  evil — you  must 
engage  in  positive  good.  III.  A  safeguard  against  scepticism.  Not  that  scep- 
ticism cannot  be  met  in  the  field  of  argument.  But  argument  is  not,  in  every  case, 
the  best  way  to  meet  the  native  scepticism  of  the  heart.  Christian  truth  is  of  such 
a  nature  that  to  understand  it  fully  you  must  Uvo  it.  "If  any  man  will  do  God's 
will  he  shaU  know  of  the  doctrine."  There  was  a  minister  who  at  an  early  period 
of  his  life  was  in  doubt  about  the  truth  of  Christianity.  He  had  almost  lost  hia 
faith,  when  hearing  this  text  he  resolved  to  make  trial  of  it.  He  went  and  feathered 
a  number  of  boys  together  from  the  streets  and  taught  them  as  best  he  could ;  from 
that  he  went  to  something  else  as  opportunity  offered,  with  the  result  that  he  found 
the  text  to  be  true ;  that  in  doing  God's  will,  especially  in  doing  good  to  others,  hia 
doubts  had  all  fled  and  never  troubled  him  more.  He  found,  as  Carlyle  says,  "  that 
doubt  of  whatever  kind  can  be  ended  by  action  alone."  As  a  rule  it  is  not  from 
the  great  class  of  Christian  workers  that  scepticism  draws  its  recruits,  but  from 
those  who  stand  aloof  from  all  Christian  activities,  and  in  many  cases  look  down 
on  them  with  contempt.  IV.  A  safegttabd  against  despondency.  It  is  an  old  saying 
and  true  that  while  the  water  flows  and  the  mill-stones  revolve  unless  the  grain  be 
thrown  between  them  to  be  ground,  the  stones  will  grind  each  other.  So  the  heart 
and  mind  which  are  inactive,  which  have  no  subjects  of  interest,  to  engross  them, 
turn  their  force  inward  and  prey  upon  themselves.  The  water  that  is  stagnant 
soon  loses  its  freshness  of  colour  and  of  flavour,  and  engenders  the  worthless  weed, 
the  green  scum,  the  foul  mud  and  noxious  exhalations  ;  so  the  man  or  woman  who 
leads  a  useless,  purposeless,  inactive  life  not  only  degenerates  in  inward  cha- 
racter, but  loses  the  freshness  and  brightness  of  life,  becomes  restless,  discontented, 
and  a  prey  to  melancholy.  To  a  woman  of  the  desponding  type  who  was  wont  to 
bewail  her  spiritual  poverty  in  the  language  of  the  prophet,  "  My  leanness  I  my 
leanness  1 "  a  shrewd  and  faithful  friend,  well-known  for  her  good  works,  adminis- 
tered the  needed  and  merited  reproof,  "  Nay,  but  it  would  better  become  you  to  say, 
•  My  laziness  1  my  laziness  I '  "    (Robert  Whyte,  D.D.)       Hindrances  to  revivals  : — 

I.   A  REVIVAL  OF  REIilGION  13   A   GREAT  WORK.      II.    SEVERAL  THINGS   MAT  PUT  A  STOP  TO 

jl  REVIVAL.  A  revival  will  cease — 1.  Whenever  the  Church  believes  it  is  going  to 
cease.  2.  When  Christians  consent  that  it  should  cease.  3.  Whenever  Christians 
suppose  the  work  will  go  on  without  their  aid.  4.  When  Christians  begin  to  prose- 
lytise. 5.  When  the  Church  in  any  way  grieves  the  Holy  Spirit.  6.  When  Christians 
lose  the  spirit  of  brotherly  love.  7.  When  Christians  are  frequently  reconverted. 
in.  Things  which  ought  to  be  done  to  continue  a  revival.  1.  Ministerial 
humiliation.  2.  Churches  which  have  opposed  revivals  must  repent.  3.  Those 
who  promote  the  work  of  revivals  must  repent  their  mistakes.     (G.  Finney.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  Gashmu  saith  it. — Detraction: — I.  What  is  detraction?  1.  In 
general  it  is  an  unjust  violation  of  another's  reputation  or  that  good  report  which 
is  due  to  him.  (1)  It  is  a  sin  against  God.  (2)  It  is  a  wrong  to  man.  (8)  The 
causes  it  proceedeth  from  are — (a)  Malice  and  ill-will,  (b)  Uncharitable  credulity, 
whereby  men  easily  believe  a  false  report,  and  so  propagate  and  convey  it  to  others, 
(c)  Rashness  and  unruliness  of  tongue,  (d)  Carnal  zeal,  which  is  nothing  else  but 
passion  for  our  different  interests  and  opinions.  2.  In  particular.  (I)  Whispering, 
which  is  privy  defamation  of  our  brother,  to  bring  him  into  disfavour  and 
disrespect  with  those  that  formerly  had  a  better  opinion  of  him.  (2)  Backbiting, 
which  is  a  more  public  speaking  evil  of  our  brother,  to  the  impairing  of  his  credit. 
II.  The  heinousness  of  the  sin.  (T,  Manton.)  Gashmu: — I.  Mark  the 
character  of  Gashmu.  His  history  we  know  nothing  of.  Parentage,  training, 
chieftainship,  whether  inherited  or  won,  life's  events,  end — all  are  secret  from  us. 
But  it  is  not  secret  that  he  was  in  friendship  with  Nehemiah's  enemies  Sanballat 
and  Tobiah.  These  three  were  one  in  their  desire  to  keep  Jerusalem  weak.  What- 
ever Gashmu  thought  of  Sanballat,  we  can  see  that  Sanballat  thought  much  of 


CHAP.  Tl.]  NEHEMIAH.  93 

him.  "  Gashmu  says  it."  That  must,  thinks  Sanballat,  carry  conviction  of  peril 
even  to  Nehemiah  and  bring  him  to  a  stand.  1.  Gashmu  evidently  was  a  man 
with  a  great  reputation.  His  word  had  weight.  It  was  the  word  of  a  superior 
person — of  one  who  perhaps  spoke  but  little,  but  who  took  care  when  he  did 
speak  to  put  a  sting  into  what  he  said.  He  took  care  not  hastily  to  commit 
himself.  He  not  only  thought  before  he  spoke,  but  chose  the  words  in  which  to 
pack  most  strikingly  the  thought.  His  was  a  quoted  opinion.  It  went  on  long 
journeys.  "  A  wise  word  that !  A  fine  remark  that  I  Whose  ?  "  **  Gashmu  says 
it  I  "  Men  looked  up  to  Gashmu.  From  silent  heights  he  spoke  down  to  them. 
He  despised  most  of  them,  as  one  of  a  loftier  race,  and  yet  strangely  loved  their 
reverential  attention,  prompt  praise,  and  their  homage  to  his  wisdom  in  quoting 
far  and  wide  his  opinion.  He  was  great  in  criticism.  If  there  was  a  fault  in 
anybody,  he  could  spot  it.  No  number  of  excellences,  however  bright,  could  blind 
him  to  that  fault.  He  could  not  only  see  it,  but  could  excel  all  others  in  speaking 
disagreeably  about  it.  Who  could  expect  such  a  superior  person  to  have  pity  on 
human  infirmities  ?  It  is  not  a  difficult  thing  for  a  man  to  build  up  to-day  such 
a  reputation  as  Gashmu's.  Let  him  be  blind  to  all  that  is  good  in  others.  Let 
him  darken  and  exaggerate  the  faults  he  sees,  and  when  he  cannot  see  them, 
imagine  them.  Let  him  pick  the  keenest  and  most  poisonous  words.  Nevel 
commend  anybody.  Let  him  have  a  clever  tongue,  with  a  bad  heart,  and  he  would 
be  a  great  man  among  pigmy  souls.  Let  Christian  men  and  women  be  on  their 
guard.  In  the  effort  to  live  purely,  and  to  serve  God  by  serving  their  generation, 
they  will  meet  with  Gashmu.  Let  not  such  hinder  you  from  Christian  life  and 
labour.  Answer  not  this  railing  with  railing  ;  answer  it  only  with  a  more  devoted 
piety,  and  a  larger  Christian  service.  2.  Gashmu  was  a  man  without  sympathy 
with  goodness.  Nehemiah  was  a  patriot.  From  love  to  his  country  and  his  God 
he  had  given  up  an  honourable  and  lucrative  office  at  the  Persian  Court.  If 
Nehemiah  is  dependent  upon  outside  sympathy  for  the  prosecution  and  completion 
of  his  work,  he  had  better  at  once  get  his  retinue  together  and  go  back  to  Babylon ! 
No  sympathy  for  him  from  clever  and  oft-quoted  Gashmu !  Welcome  to  all  the 
inspiration  of  sympathy.  The  kindly  eye,  the  warm-grasping  hand,  the  love- 
kindling  appreciation,  how  welcome !  Difficult  duty  becomes  easier,  the  burthened 
life  is  lightened  of  its  load.  But  do  not  live  on  this ;  don't  look  for  this.  Live  a 
life  that  lives  above  it.  Live  in  God.  Then  let  not  their  opinion  dishearten  you. 
Does  Gashmu  say  it?  Who  is  Gashmu?  A  man  who,  whatever  his  worldly 
shrewdness  and  reputation,  is  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  the  bonds  of  iniquity. 
What  judge  can  he  be  of  the  quality  of  Christian  labour,  of  the  beauty  of  a  holy 
and  Christian  life?  3.  Gashmu  had  keen  hatred  of  religious  enthusiasm. 
Nehemiah's  religion  was  the  root  of  his  patriotism.  He  lost  no  time  in  carrying 
out  the  rebuilding  of  the  ruined  wall.  He  allowed  not  the  quickened  and 
responsive  zeal  of  the  people  to  flag.  He  was  as  ready  to  fight  as  to  build.  No 
specious  pretence  could  call  him  from  the  work.  On  it  went — on  till  done.  This 
was  gall  and  wormwood  to  Gashmu.  If  Nehemiah  had  only  talked,  however 
loudly,  of  his  intentions,  it  had  not  mattered.  Gashmu  could  not  tolerate 
enthusiasm.  He  is  still  alive,  though  in  English  garb.  The  earnest  Christian  is 
certain  to  meet  with  him.  He  hates  earnestness,  and  enthusiasm  he  cannot  away 
'With.  4.  Gashmu  was  a  man  skilful  to  read  motives.  Or  so  he  deemed  himself. 
He  could  not  only  look  at  the  rising  walls  of  the  city,  but  right  through  them.  He 
could  not  only  see  Nehemiah  on  the  wall  inspiriting  the  armed  masons ;  but  he 
could  see  into  Nehemiah's  heart.  He  knew  the  secret  meaning  of  all  this  rapid 
labour.  "  What  do  you  think,  Gashmu,  about  it  ?  "  He  knew,  and  soon  the 
report  is  flying  abroad  among  the  surrounding  heathens,  that  the  Jews  intend  to 
rebel  against  the  Persian  power,  and  that  Nehemiah  means  to  be  their  king — King 
Nehemiah.  So  the  lying  rumour  goes  on  its  journey,  and  "Gashmu  saith  it" 
gives  it  wings.  Not  an  atom  of  truth  in  it!  But  Gashmu  smiled  and  nodded,  and 
calmly  whispered  into  willing  ears  the  lie  that  no  amount  of  confidence  and 
conceit  and  cleverness  could  make  true.  But  his  lie  is  written  here.  "  Gashmu 
says  it !  "  And  for  that  lie  Gashmu  is  remembered  to-day.  Live  to  God— do  any 
brave  stroke  of  work  for  Him,  and  some  present-day  Gashmu  will  know  all  about 
your  motive  for  doing  it.  He  will  know  more  about  you  than  you  know  about 
jourself.  Engage  in  work  for  Christ,  and  Gashmu  will  say,  "  I  know  pride  is  at 
the  bottom  of  this ;  he  wants  to  show  how  much  better  he  is  than  anybody  else. 
He  wants  to  be  talked  about.  Anything  to  make  headway.  Anything  to  build  up 
«  business.    He  knows  that  Sunday  will  help  Monday."    Slanderous  Gashmu ! 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

Is  he  not  alive  to-day?  11.  Imitate  Nehemiah's  treatment  of  Gashmu.  Ha 
would  not  be  hindered.  He  kept  to  prayer.  He  kept  to  work.  He  would  not  go- 
down.  Are  you  seeking  to  build  up  your  character  in  truth,  purity,  holiness  ? 
This  is  God's  work.  Be  not  hindered  in  it.  Ee  not  diverted  from  it.  Are  yoa 
seeking  to  build  up  some  other — some  neglected,  broken-down,  and  ruined 
character  ?     Do  the  work — finish    it.      (G.    T.    Coster.)  Gashmu  : — I.    Who- 

Gashmu  was.  Personally  we  do  not  know  Gashmu  from  the  ten  thousand  men  of 
his  era.  He  was  Gashmu  the  Arabian,  and  that  is  all.  But  his  real  identity  is- 
not  centred  on  the  year  of  his  birth,  or  who  was  his  father,  or  how  much  he  was 
worth.  When  our  Ufe  begins,  our  name  is  almost  everything ;  but  when  our  life  is 
ended  it  has  been  heavily  freighted  with  good  or  evil,  and  is  what  the  things  are  to- 
which  it  gives  personal  identity.  What  we  do  know  about  Gashmu  is  that  he- 
came  out  square  against  a  man  who  was  determined  to  do  good,  and  was  earnestly 
doing  it,  and  tried  to  put  him  down.  II.  What  he  tried  to  do.  A  good  man  was- 
doing  a  good  work  and  bad  men  tried  to  stop  him.  They  tried  to  hurt  his  person. 
Gashmu  was  above  that,  yet  he  will  sit  there  and  nurse  his  dislike,  and  be  glad  to 
hear  the  petty  stories  that  float  like  thistledown  in  the  neighbourhood  against  the 
innocent  man.  One  story  in  particular  gets  credence.  This  man  means  to  be  a^ 
king.  Gashmu  hears  the  floating  absurdity.  On  any  other  subject  he  would 
pronounce  anything  so  empty  as  this  silly ;  but  when  this  man  is  the  subject  of  the 
rumour,  he  would  rather  believe  it  than  not.  He  goes  and  sees  for  himself,  and 
when  he  returns,  ready  ears  listen,  and  the  fatal  word  is  uttered :  "  That  man 
certainly  means  to  be  a  king."  Before  night  it  is  repeated  by  twenty  tongues : 
"  He  intends  to  rebel ;  Gashmu  says  it."  Gashmu  has  permitted  his  prejudices  to 
grow  into  a  lie.  He  is  the  representative  man  of  unprincipled  gossips  and  narrow 
bigots.  1.  There  are  Gashmus  in  the  Church,  and  "  Gashmu  said  it "  is  at  the 
bottom  of  nine-tenths  of  all  the  differences  in  Christendom.  2,  There  are 
Gashmus  in  social  life.  Your  social  Gashmu  means  well  on  his  own  estimate  of 
things.  Perhaps  he  is  on  the  whole  a  good  man,  lives  a  life  that  wins  the  respect 
of  a  whole  town ;  tells  the  truth  so  constantly  that  his  word  is  as  good  as  gold. 
But  some  one  man  does  not  train  with  him,  he  does  not  like  that  man  at  all ;  does 
not  understand  him ;  and  so  cultivates  a  little  feeling  of  dislike,  until  it  bulges 
into  a  receptiveness  of  idle  rumours,  that  would  be  like  mere  straws  if  they  were 
reported  of  a  man  he  loves.  Yet  he  will  nurse  them  and  cherish  them,  and  at 
some  moment  his  dislike  will  come  to  a  head,  and  he  will  say,  "  I  have  no  doubt  it 
is  true."  Then  "  Gashmu  said  it  "  clips  that  man's  margin  at  the  bank,  draws  the 
sunshine  out  of  half  the  faces  he  meets  on  the  street,  and  puts  him  in  a  position 
that,  it  may  be,  brings  the  very  tendencies  for  which  Gashmu  has  spotted  him. 
How  many  grown  men  and  women  regret  bitterly  to-day  some  such  misjudgment 
on  another — the  hasty  word  of  a  single  moment,  that  we  could  never  recall  and 
never  atone  for,  by  which  the  life  of  the  man  or  woman  about  whom  we  said  it  has 
been  darkened  and  injured  past  redemption !  It  was  a  smaU  matter  of  itself,  but 
Gashmu  said  it,  and  that  was  like  sowing  the  thing  in  black  prairie  loam,  insuring 
to  us  a  harvest  of  bitter  regrets,  and  to  our  victim  a  harvest  of  bitter  memories. 
3.  There  are  Gashmus  in  the  nation  and  the  public  life.  HI.  What  came  of  it. 
It  came  to  nothing.  It  was  common  rumour,  and  Gashmu  on  the  one  side,  and. 
God  and  the  right  on  the  other ;  and  alas  for  Gashmu  when  he  is  found  fighting^ 
against  God !  Conclusion :  To  every  earnest  man  and  woman  I  would  say — 
1.  Keep  true  to  your  task,  whatever  it  may  be,  and  never  mind  Gashmu.  2.  When 
Gashmu  comes  and  begins  to  say  this  and  that  to  annoy  you,  do  not  come  down  ta 
talk  to  him.  3.  If  you  come  across  Gashmu  in  the  Church,  or  in  society,  or  in 
any  way  whatever,  keep  out  of  his  way  as  much  as  you  can — have  nothing  to  say 
to  him.  4.  Let  us  take  care  that  we  are  not  Gashmus.  5.  We  must  pity  Gashmu. 
(R.  Collyer.)  An  ancient  school  for  scandal : — That  some  people  will  say  things 
about  their  neighbours  is  a  great  evil.  That  some  persons  will  repeat  what  others, 
have  said  is  a  greater  evil.  That  some  persons  will  be  disturbed  by  what  other 
persons  report  that  other  persons  have  said  about  them  or  their  friends,  and  will 
permit  themselves  to  be  turned  aside  from  useful  service,  to  be  embittered  in  their 
personal  feelings  by  such  reports — this  is  the  greatest  evil  of  all.  We  hear  a  great 
deal  about  bigotry,  intolerance,  and  persecution.  These  things  have  ever  withstood 
the  onward  march  of  truth  and  righteousness.  But  no  fiercest  blast  of  persecution, 
no  form  of  open  antagonism,  has  ever  injured  the  Church  or  hindered  its  work  to 
such  a  degree  aa  the  secret  and  unrecorded  workings  of  gossip  and  slander.  The 
power  of  these  evils  lies  in  their  very  uncertainty  and  elusiveness.     Whoever  would 


CHAP.  VI.]  NEHEMIAH.  95 

fight  them  finds  himself  beating  the  air.  Who  tries  to  hold  them  fast  closes  his 
fijigers  upon  a  shadow.  Do  you  wish  to  know  all  about  the  spirit  of  gossip  and 
the  method  of  its  working?  Then  read  the  sixth  chapter  of  Nehemiah.  It 
antedates  Sheridan's  "  School  for  Scandal "  by  more  than  twenty  centuries,  and 
surpasses  it  in  quality  even  more  than  in  age.  It  is  a  drama  from  real  life. 
Toward  every  case  of  slander  or  gossip  four  relations  may  be  sustained.  In  the 
completing  of  the  chain  four  persons  may  be  involved.  These  relations  and 
persons  are  represented  by  Sanballat,  Gashmu,  Shemaiah,  and  Nehemiah.  First 
is  Sanballat.  He  is  not  the  originator  of  the  slander,  but  he  is  the  originator  of 
the  mischief,  for  he  reports  what  he  has  heard,  or  professes  to  have  heard,  from 
another.  Here  is  your  typical  scandal-monger.  Who  among  us  is  so  fortunate 
that  he  does  not  know  Sanballat,  yes,  many  Sanballats  ?  The  tribe  of  Sanballat 
is  numerous.  They  are  the  persons  who  tell  you  so  much,  not  on  their  own 
responsibility,  but  on  the  authority  of  others.  They  are  dealers  in  cast-off  testimony, 
traders  in  biographical  second-hands.  They  keep  no  new  goods,  but  they  are 
master  hands  at  polishing  up  that  which  is  old  and  giving  it  a  fresh  lustre.  They 
are  the  real  mischief-makers,  I  say,  for  it  is  chiefly  by  this  process  of  polishing  and 
revamping  that  stories  or  statements  become  injurious  and  acquire  unpleasant 
sharpness  of  venom.  The  most  innocent  and  well-meant  utterance  falls  into  the 
hands  of  one  of  these  repeaters  and  it  is  quickly  transformed  into  a  poisonous 
shaft.  Some  little  modification  of  emphasis  or  inflection,  an  added  or  omitted 
word,  and  it  becomes  a  source  of  heartburnings  and  bitterness  and  pain,  a  wedge 
that  may  sunder  the  strongest  ties  of  affection  and  friendship.  We  are  wont  most 
severely  to  denounce  the  careless  speaker,  to  lay  all  the  blame  of  gossip  and 
slander  on  the  heads  of  those  who  say  things  about  their  fellows.  And  far  be  it 
from  me  to  excuse  or  justify  unkind  speech  even  at  first-hand,  or  to  minify  the 
sinfulness  of  "  idle  words."  But  I  insist  that  he  is  a  greater  sinner  who  repeats 
what  others  say,  especially  if  in  the  repetition  he  gives  it  the  slightest  change  of 
form  or  emphasis.  It  is  the  Sanballat  who  comes  to  you  with  some  story  and  teUs 
you  that  "  Gashmu  saith  it  "who  deserves  the  severest  rebuke.  He  is  the  real 
pest  of  society,  the  enemy  of  all  good.  We  may  almost  say,  with  Carlyle,  that  he 
•*  is  among  the  most  indubitable  malefactors  omitted,  or  inserted,  in  the  criminal 
calendar."  But  what  of  Gashmu,  the  originator  of  the  story?  Who  was  Gashmu? 
A  most  important  question,  and  one  that  has  never  been  satisfactorily  answered. 
The  name  occurs  nowhere  else  except  in  this  verse.  The  preceding  narrative 
speaks  of  "  Geshem  the  Arabian,"  and  all  the  commentators  assume  that  Gashmu 
is  Geshem.  Every  reader  assumes  that  the  two  are  one.  In  fact,  nobody  doubts 
it.  But  it  is  worthy  of  notice  that  the  names  are  not  identical.  Sanballat  does 
not  say,  "  Geshem  saith  it,"  but  "  Gashmu  saith  it."  Why?  He  wants  Nehemiah 
to  understand  the  source  of  his  information,  but  he  does  not  propose  to  get  caught 
by  an  exact  statement.  Nehemiah  might  take  it  into  his  head  to  trace  the 
slander,  and  that  would  be  extremely  awkward  for  Sanballat.  Is  it  not  true  to 
life?  Is  not  Gashmu  about  as  near  as  the  modern  retailer  of  gossip  ever  comes  to 
Geshem  ?  How  often  has  one  come  to  you  with  some  injurious  tale  and  left  on 
your  mind  a  very  distinct  impression  as  to  its  source  without  exactly  telling  you  ? 
How  many  a  spicy  bit  of  personal  news  is  laid  on  the  shoulders  of  the  general 
public  in  the  words,  "They  say."  It  matters  little  that  you  think  you  know 
Gashmu.  Try  to  identify  him  and  make  him  a  responsible  author  of  stories,  and 
he  will  elude  you  every  time.  Go  to  Geshem  with  the  stories  that  are  attributed 
to  Gashmu,  and  he  will  know  nothing  whatever  about  them.  He  will  be  utterly 
surprised  that  you  could  have  imagined  him  to  be  their  author.  He  will  probably 
be  very  indignant  that  any  one  should  have  had  the  hardihood  to  invent  such  tales. 
Now  this  Gashmu,  unreal  though  he  may  be,  is  an  absolutely  essential  link  in 
every  chain  of  gossip.  Gossip  could  not  live  without  him.  It  were  easier 
to  spare  the  Prince  of  Denmark  from  the  play  of  Hamlet  than  to  omit  Gashmu 
from  the  real  School  for  Scandal.  That  is  to  say,  there  must  be  some  point 
on  the  way  which  gossip  has  travelled  where  the  trail  becomes  lost.  Authority 
must  vanish  into  impersonality.  You  attempt  to  follow  up  any  bit  of  gossip 
or  slander  that  you  hear,  and  if  you  do  not  come  to  Gashmu  sooner  or  later, 
your  experience  will  be  unique,  not  to  say  marvellous.  The  third  person  in 
this  drama  is  Shemaiah.  Shemaiah  is  the  man  who  is  afraid  of  gossip  and  runs 
away  to  hide  himself,  turning  aside  from  good  work  and  letting  duty  go  by  default. 
His  invitation  to  meet  in  the  house  of  God  has  a  very  pious  sound,  but,  after  all, 
it  is  only  the  expression  of  cowardice.     Not  for  worship,  but  for  safety,  does  he 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.vi. 

wish  to  enter  the  sanctaarj.  Now  this,  I  submit,  is  a  greater  evil  than  gossip — 
this  minding  of  gossip.  You  say  that  people  will  talk  about  you.  Well,  what  if 
they  do  ?  Did  talk  ever  kill  anybody  yet  ?  Did  it  ever  seriously  hurt  anybody 
when  he  was  hard  at  work  minding  his  own  business  and  the  Lord's  ?  Keep  a 
clear  conscience,  then,  and  you  need  have  no  fear  of  gossip,  however  venomous. 
Now  listen  to  Nehemiah,  the  last  of  this  quartet:  "And  I  said.  Should  such  a 
man  as  I  flee  ?  and  who  is  there,  that,  being  such  as  I,  would  go  into  the  temple 
to  save  his  life  ?  "  That  is  the  secret  of  it  all.  Get  so  thoroughly  absorbed  in  work 
for  God  and  man  that  the  work  shall  seem  great,  and  you  will  not  mind  gossip  and 
slander  any  more  than  you  mind  the  buzzing  of  flies  outside  the  screen.  Gossip 
may  be  afloat,  but  we  are  not  obliged  to  hear  it,  still  less  to  flee  from  it,  or  to  pay 
it  respectful  attention.  Our  hearing  is  for  the  most  part  a  matter  of  choice  as  well 
as  our  speaking.  We  are  as  truly  responsible  for  the  right  use  of  our  ears  as  for 
the  right  use  of  our  tongues,  though  we  seldom  look  at  the  matter  in  that  light. 
"Take  heed  what  ye  hear."  (G.  H.  Hubbard,  D.D.)  Serene  indifference  to 
tlander  : — A  young  clerk's  eyes  flashed  as  he  read  an  article  in  the  morning  papers. 
It  was  an  outrageous  attack  upon  the  gentleman  at  the  head  of  his  department  for 
a  course  of  action  which  was  represented  as  both  base  and  cowardly.  All  the 
correspondence  relating  to  the  affair  had  passed  through  the  young  man's  hands, 
so  he  knew  that  the  published  statements  were  false  and  most  damaging  to  the 
reputation  of  his  beloved  chief.  Carrying  the  paper  to  the  gentleman  assailed,  he 
asked  if  he  might  write  a  reply.  The  elder  man  read  the  paragraphs  calmly, 
smiled,  and  shook  his  head.  "What  will  you  do?  "the  clerk  asked.  "Live  it 
down,"  was  the  reply,  "  as  I  have  done  so  many  other  calumnies.  Talking  back  la 
the  most  futile  and  undignified  exertion  in  the  world.  If  you  succeed  in  cutting  up 
one  falsehood,  each  part  will  begin  to  wriggle  against  you.  Let  it  alone,  and  it 
will  die  of  starvation."  Frederick  the  Great  looked  with  serene  indifference  on  all 
that  his  enemies  might  say  of  him.  One  day,  as  he  rode  through  Berlin,  he  saw  a 
crowd  of  people  staring  up  at  something  on  the  wall,  and,  on  sending  his  groom  to 
inquire  what  it  was,  found  it  to  be  a  caricature  of  himself.  The  placard  was  put 
so  high  that  it  was  difficult  to  read  it,  so  Frederick  ordered  it  to  be  placed  lower  in 
order  that  the  people  might  not  have  to  stretch  out  their  necks.  The  words  were 
hardly  spoken  when,  with  a  joyous  shout,  the  placard  was  pulled  down  and  torn 
into  a  thousand  pieces,  while  a  hearty  cheer  followed  the  king  as  he  rode  away. 
(Christian  Age.) 

Ver.  9.  Now  therefore,  0  God,  strengrthen  my  bands. — God's  variotu  voayt  of 
strengthening  His  people's  hands  : — He  sometimes  does  it  by  infusing  into  them  an 
extraordinary  measure  of  wisdom  and  knowledge.  Joseph  and  Daniel  appear  to 
have  been  thus  enriched,  the  faculty  of  interpreting  dreams  being  conferred  upon 
them,  at  a  momentous  juncture,  to  qualify  them  for  a  great  and  special  work ;  our 
Lord  promised  His  disciples  that,  in  the  critical  moment,  though  not  before,  they 
should  be  supplied  with  the  mouth  of  wisdom,  that  might  answer  all  their  adver- 
saries. Sometimes  the  hands  of  such  believers  are  strengthened  by  a  strange 
alteration  in  the  feelings  of  powerful  foes  towards  them,  or  by  an  unexpected 
accession  of  friends  from  quarters  where,  perhaps,  they  have  expected  the  least. 
"  When  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  He  maketh  even  His  enemies  to  be  at  peace 
with  him."  Laban  shall  be  arrested  in  a  dream  by  night,  with  the  stem  command, 
•'  See  that  thou  speak  not  to  Jacob  good  or  bad  " ;  the  gaoler's  heart  shall  be 
Boftened,  that  he  bring  forth  Paul  and  Silas  "  out  of  their  dungeon,"  and  "  wash 
their  stripes,  and  set  meat  before  them  "  ;  and  the  Pharisees,  those  determined  foes 
of  the  gospel,  moved  by  their  hatred  of  the  Sadducees,  take  the  part  of  the  preacher 
of  the  resurrection.  God  may  add  to  our  strength  by  confounding  and  debilitating 
our  enemies ;  as  He  acted  by  David,  when  on  his  behalf  He  "  turned  the  counsel  of 
Ahithophel  into  foolishness " ;  when  He  struck  the  inhabitants  of  Sodom  with 
blindness;  when  He  poured  terror  on  the  Syrian  army  that  invaded  Judea;  and 
when  the  host  of  the  Midianites  fled  in  dismay  before  the  lamps  and  pitchers  of 
Gideon,  and  not  a  sword  was  drawn.  And  now  that  miracles  are  not  wrought,  we 
must  still  recognise  in  thousands  of  instances  the  overruling  providence  of  God, 
working  under  the  cover  of  natural  causes  to  strengthen  His  people's  hands. 
(J.  N.  Pearson,  M.A.) 

Vers.  10-13.  Should  such  a  man  as  I  flee  7 — Panic : — I.  Panto.  Unreasoning, 
helpless    fright.      1.  National    panic.      2.  Business    panio.     8.  Personal    panio. 


CHAP.  Ti.]  NEHEMIAH.  97 

4.  Spiritual  panic,  11.  The  effect  of  panic.  All  of  these  forms  are  commonly 
groundless  ;  the  wave  is  not  so  high  as  it  seems  to  the  retreating  bather  who  hears 
its  hiss  behind  him.  It  gathers  all  the  selfishness  of  man  to  a  focus.  It  substi- 
tutes a  brief  madness  for  calm  thoughtfulness  and  decision.  It  makes  a  man 
behave  unworthily — 1.  Of  himself.  2.  Toward  his  fellows.  3.  Of  his  God. 
III.  The  correctives  of  panic.  Remembrance  of — 1.  A  man's  own  dignity. 
2.  Others.  3.  God.  (Homiletic  Commentary.)  Christian  firmness :  —  I.  The 
subtlety  with  which  odb  great  adversary  will  assault  us.  1.  To  neglect  our 
social  duties  to  further  our  spiritual  welfare.  2.  To  conform  to  the  world  with  a 
view  to  conciliate  their  regard.  3.  To  use  undue  means  with  a  view  to  obtain 
some  desirable  end.  II.  The  firmness  with  which  wb  should  resist  him.  We 
should  set  the  Lord  ever  before  us,  bearing  in  mind — 1.  Our  relation  to  Him. 
2.  Our  obligations  to  Him.  3.  Our  expectations  from  Him.  4.  The  interest  which 
God  Himself  has  in  the  whole  of  our  conduct.  (C.  Simeon.)  Courage  : — 1.  In 
the  prosecution  of  this  work,  whilst  building  the  spiritual  wall  of  Zion,  there  are 
many  artifices  to  be  resisted.  Our  enemies  will  seek  to  draw  us  away  from  our 
work.  We  shall  be  invited  to  enter  into  friendly  conformity  with  the  world,  and 
we  shall  be  told  that  conciliation  on  our  side  will  be  met  by  concessions  on  theirs ; 
but  this  is  a  mistake,  for  the  world  will  take  all  and  give  none.  2.  Our  spiritual 
enemies  will  resort  to  intimidation.  If  they  cannot  draw  they  will  drive.  What 
fair  offers  were  made  of  seeming  friendship  to  the  noble  army  of  martyrs,  and 
when  these  failed,  intimidation  followed.  The  offence  of  the  Cross  has  not  ceased. 
It  is  "  through  much  tribulation  "  we  must  enter  the  kingdom,  and  the  Christian 
will  be  threatened  with  the  loss  of  caste  or  of  business  if  he  determine  to  maintain 
his  consistency.  Evil  motives  will  be  ascribed  to  him,  wicked  reports  will  be 
propagated  concerning  him.  Ridicule  and  reproach  are  weapons  of  great  severity. 
"  Should  such  a  man  as  I  flee  ?  and  who  is  there,  that,  being  as  I  am,  would  go 
into  the  temple  to  save  his  life?  I  will  not  go  in."  Let  the  earnest  Christian 
resist  the  solicitations  of  evil  in  a  similar  manner.  1.  Consider  your  relation  to 
God.  Say  to  yourself,  "  I  am  a  child  of  God,  a  disciple  of  Christ,  a  temple  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  '  should  such  a  man  as  I  flee,'  give  way  to  temptation,  dishonour 
my  high  calling,  disobey  my  blessed  Captain,  and  grieve  the  Spirit  of  grace?" 
2.  Consider  your  obligations  to  redeeming  mercy.  Say  to  your  heart,  "  0  Christian, 
I  have  been  loved  with  an  everlasting  love,  called  by  sovereign  grace,  washed  in 
the  blood  of  Jesus,  and  comforted  by  innumerable  tokens  of  goodness  and  mercy, 
and  '  should  such  a  man  as  i  dee  ?  '  "  3.  "  Consider  your  expectations.  You  are  a 
candidate  for  eternity.  Say  to  yourself,  "  0  Christian,  life  is  short  and  uncertain  ; 
death  may  be  near ;  my  Lord  Himself  may  come  in  His  glory.  In  that  day  of 
His  boundless  mercy  He  will  call  me  His  brother.  His  own,  and  He  will  bestow 
upon  me  an  inheritance  of  surpassing  lustre ;  and  '  should  such  a  man  as  I  flee  ?  ' 
shall  I  be  guilty  of  base  cowardice  or  perfidious  ingratitude?"  (J.  M.  Randall.) 
Faith,  courage,  and  prudence  : — We  may  consider  this  blending  of  faith,  courage,  and 
prudence  in  Nehemiah  as  worthy  of  admiration  and  imitation.  1.  Sometimes  we 
find  a  brave  man  who  lacks  both  faith  and  prudence.  In  this  case  his  courage  is 
very  apt  to  degenerate  into  a  foolish  bravado  ;  and  possibly  he  may  do  more  harm 
than  good  by  his  unwise  daring.  2.  When  prudence  is  the  marked  feature  of  a 
character  it  is  apt  to  degenerate  into  selfish  cunning  and  calculating  cowardice. 
8.  Even  when  courage  and  prudence  are  found  united,  the  character  is  still  sadly 
defective  if  there  be  no  spiritual  faith — it  is  apt  to  fall  into  an  unbecoming  and 
dangerous  self-sufiSciency.  4.  On  the  other  hand,  faith  without  prudence  may 
degenerate  into  fanaticism,  or  into  a  "  quietism  "  which  cultivates  the  passive  to 
the  neglect  of  the  active  virtues.  (J.  Campbell  Finlayson.)  Fortitude  in  duty : — 
Holy  courage  is  not  that  natural  bravery  which  belongs  to  some  men  constitu- 
tionally— this  is  little  more  than  strength  of  nerve  and  robustness  of  animal  spirits, 
and  in  thousands  of  instances  is  found  to  exist  apart  from  Christian  principle ;  it 
is  rather  the  bravery  of  the  lion  than  the  bravery  of  the  mind  and  the  man.  Some 
of  the  most  valorous  have  been  the  most  depraved ;  and  some  who  dragged  their 
enemies  at  their  chariot-wheels  have  themselves  been  dragged  through  the  mire 
of  pollution  by  their  own  appetites  and  passions.  As  water  cannot  rise  higher 
than  its  level,  neither  can  a  moral  quality  rise  higher  than  its  principle.  Holy 
courage  springs  from  the  fear  of  God,  from  "  seeing  Him  who  is  invisible."  Hence 
the  soldier  of  Christ  is  fearless  to  do  right,  fearful  to  do  wrong — afraid  to  sin,  but 
not  afraid  to  suffer.     In  considering  the  scope  for  this  virtue,  notice — I.  He  that 

WILL   BE    A   follower   OF    GOD    MUST    TAKE    UP    ARMS    AGAINST   HIMSELF.      It  WaS  fiuelv 


98  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Baid  by  Richard  Cecil  that  "  a  humble  Christian,  battling  against  the  world,  the 
flesh,  and  the  devil,  is  a  greater  hero  than  Alexander  the  Great."    II.  It  requires 

A  COURAGEOUS  BPIBIT  TO  HAVE  RESPECT  TO  ALL  God's  COMMANDMENTS.  III.  It 
BEQUIRE8    GREAT    COURAGE    TO    OVERCOME    THE    WORLD.       (Hugh  StOWell,  M.A.)  The 

higher  self-appeal : — When  I  lived  in  the  country  years  ago,  I  remember  one  of 
our  friends  was  a  great  smoker,  and  used  to  smoke  morning,  noon,  and  night,  and 
his  friends  used  to  say  it  was  a  very  bad  practice,  and  inconvenient  and  expensive, 
and  all  those  arguments  with  which  -^^e  are  familiar.  He  always  used  to  smile 
one  of  those  tranquil  smiles  which  come  from  parties  of  that  kind.  That  man 
could  not  give  up  his  pipe,  and  declared  that  he  could  not,  and  that  he  would 
smoke  till  he  died.  One  day  there  was  a  mouth  trouble.  He  went  to  a  distin- 
guished physician,  and  he  told  him  that  he  was  afraid  the  excessive  smoking  was 
inducing  cancer.  That  put  his  pipe  out.  It  did  ;  he  dropped  it  that  very  day.  It 
was  marvellous ;  he  had  done  with  that.  It  is  one  thing  when  it  touches  your 
shillings ;  one  thing  when  it  is  a  question  of  convenience  and  inconvenience  ;  it  is 
another  thing  when  it  touches  you.  And  I  say  to  you,  when  the  day  of  darkness, 
the  day  of  temptation,  when  all  the  sorcery  and  besetment  of  evil  is  around  you, 
don't  say,  "  Iniquity  will  mar  my  health  or  cloud  my  reputation  or  shorten  my 
days  " ;  say  with  Nehemiah,  "  Should  such  a  man  as  I  do  this  evil  " — such  a  man 
as  I,  with  reason  and  conscience,  the  heir  of  the  ages,  the  master  of  the  planet, 
redeemed  with  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God,  called  to  a  great  destiny— should  such 
a  man  as  I  do  this  mean  thing,  this  base  thing  ?  Appeal  in  the  sight  of  God  to 
your  own  greatness,  and  He  shaU  strengthen  you  in  the  day  when  the  worst  comes 
to  the  worst.  (W.  L.  Watkinson.)  Valour  is  sometimes  the  soul  of  discretion : — 
"We  are  constantly  being  reminded  that  discretion  is  the  better  part  of  valour  ;  but 
there  are  occasions,  and  those  not  a  few,  when  valour  is  the  very  soul  of  discretion, 
■when  at  all  hazards  we  must  stand  our  ground  and  face  the  foe,  that  the  work  be 
not  stopped.     (W.  P.  Lockhart.) 

Ver.  13.  Therefore  was  he  hired. — Bribery : — I.  Its  existence  and  varibties. 
1.  In  statecraft.  2.  In  trade.  3.  In  morals  and  religion.  II.  Its  effects. 
1.  Personal  degradation.  2.  General  disorganisation.  3.  Hindrance  of  all  good. 
in.  Its  cure.  1.  SeK-denial.  2.  Eesolute  unmercifulness  to  the  briber. 
3.  Trust  in  God  and  faith  in  right.     (Homiletic  Commentary.) 

Ver.  15.  So  the  wall  was  finished  in  the  twenty  and  fifth  day  ...  in  fifty  and 
two  days. — Fifty-two  days'  work : — Let  us  make  a  parable  of  the  story  and  use  the 
text  as  a  motto  of  a  deeper  theme.     Fifty-two  Sundays  and  their  work.     I.  How 

QUICKLY   THEY    PASS.       II.    WhAT    OPPORTUNITIES    THEY   FURNISH.       1.    Of    rCSt.       2.    Of 

spiritual  friendship.  3.  Of  Divine  instruction.  4.  Of  moral  renewal.  III.  What 
RESULTS  THEY  LEAVE.  1.  In  mcmory.  2.  In  life.  3.  For  judgment.  Application: 
1.  Thank  God  for  the  day  of  days.  2.  Use  each  day  as  it  comes.  3.  Determine 
upon  a  rounded  result  for  each  cycle  of  fifty-two.  (Ibid.)  Finished 
yjork :  —  1.  The  work  of  human  redemption.  Yes,  the  work  was  done.  The 
atoning  sacrifice  was  offered  and  accepted,  as  was  demonstrated  when  Jesus  rose 
again  from  the  dead.  2.  And  is  there  ground  for  hope  that  the  great  and  blessed 
work  of  renewal,  begun  in  the  believer's  heart,  will  be  perfected  ?  3.  The  progress 
of  the  Church  at  large  is  also  assured.  (T.  Rowson.)  Success  : — There  was 
great  exultation  when  Lesseps  completed  the  Suez  Canal,  by  which  the  com- 
munication between  Europe  and  the  East  has  been  materially  expedited.  There 
was  great  exultation  when  the  favourite  project  of  Count  Cavour  for  a  tunnel 
through  Mont  Cenis  was  brought  to  a  successful  termination,  by  which  Paris  and 
Turin  have  been  approximated  within  a  few  hours  of  each  other.  There  was  great 
exultation  and  loyal  thankfulness  when,  in  1873,  the  Prince  of  Wales  put  the  top- 
stone  to  the  Portland  Breakwater.  The  foundation-stone  of  this  work  had  been 
laid  twenty-three  years  before,  by  his  august  father;  and  it  was  an  interesting 
moment  when  the  Prince  completed  the  magnificent  undertaking  by  adding  to  the 
words  by  which  he  formally  announced  the  fact,  "  These  are  imperial  works,  and 
worthy  kings  " ;  and  echoing  shouts  of  joy  went  up,  from  two  hundred  thousand 
spectators.  Similarly,  it  was  a  great  day  for  Jerusalem  when  her  walls  and 
bulwarks  were  commended  to  the  blessing  of  the  Almighty.     (J.  M.  Randall.) 

Ver.  16.  For  they  perceived  that  the  work  was  wrought  of  our  Gtod- — The  croum 
of  Christian  evidence  .-—Christianity  does  not  stand  in  any  merely  literary  defence, 


<!HAP.  vn.]  NEHEMIAH.  99 

although  its  literary  defence  is  complete  ;  it  stands  rather  in  its  beneficent  accom- 
plishments, in  its  regenerated  hearts,  its  elevated  lives,  its  new  spirit  of  consecration, 
its  broad  unselfishness,  its  generous  sympathy — "  Go  and  show  John  again  those 
ihings  which  ye  do  hear  and  see."  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  world'$  acknowledgment 
vf  God : — I.  World's  past  ACKNOwiiEDOMENX  of  God.  1.  Biblical  instances.  2.  Later 
instances.  II.  World's  present  acknowledgment  of  God.  1.  Unconscious 
acknowledgments.  Think  of  the  way  in  which  Christianity  penetrates  the  life  of 
"the  modern  world.  2.  Unwilling  acknowledgment.  3.  Frank  acknowledgment. 
HI.  The  world's  future  acknowledgment.  1.  Willing.  2.  Enforced.  Applica- 
tion :  1.  Make  acknowledgment  of  God.  2.  Now.  {Homiletic  Commentary.) 
Nothing  succeeds  like  success : — It  is  amazing  sometimes  to  find  how  many  there  are 
"who  heartily  endorse  a  good  work  when  it  has  arrived  at  or  is  approaching  success, 
however  much  they  may  have  frowned  at  it,  or  even  opposed  it,  when  it  was 
struggling  with  difiSculties.  {W.  P.  Lockhart.)  God  acknowledged  in  results : — In 
the  present  day  there  is  an  impatient  craving  for  immediate  results  which  comes 
perilously  near  to  mistrust  of  God.  But  verUy  there  are  results,  and  when  such 
results  are  seen,  then  even  enemies  are  constrained  to  admit  that  God's  hand  is  in 
the  work.  The  faith  of  converts  must  always  be  evidenced  by  their  works,  otherwise 
the  world  wiU  not,  cannot,  perceive  that  God  is  working  with  us.    (Ibid.) 

Ver.  19.  Also  they  reported  Ms  good  deeds  before  me. — The  bad  men  praised : — 
I.  Bad  men  do  get  praised.  1.  Sometimes  this  praise  is  real.  2.  Sometimes  this 
praise  is  mistaken.  3.  Sometimes  this  praise  is  fictitious  altogether.  II.  Bad  men 
ARE  anxious  for  PRAISE.  1.  In  this  there  is  a  sentence  of  condemnation.  2.  In 
this  there  is  an  indirect  homage  to  virtue.  III.  Bad  men  are  not  hidden  by  the 
PRAISE  OF  the  world,  1.  Good  men  detect.  2.  God  detects.  Application  :  1.  Do 
not  be  discouraged  by  this  misdirected  praise.  2.  Do  not  be  deceived  into  any 
lowering  ol  the  standard  of  righteousness.     {Homiletic  Commentary.) 


CHAPTER  Vn. 


Vers.  1-7.  Now  it  came  to  pass,  when  the  wall  was  built — The  guardian  of  the 
holy  city  : — I.  His  care  for  Jerusalem's  protection.  It  is  a  beneficent  law  of  our 
nature  that  the  more  true  affection  is  exercised  it  increases  in  strength,  and  knits 
the  heart  to  its  object  in  fiirmer  bonds.  This  beautiful  law,  of  the  growth  of 
affection  by  its  exercise,  is  still  more  exemplified  in  the  labour  of  love  for  Christ's 
name  sake,  and  for  the  promotion  of  His  truth  in  the  earth.  Thus  it  was  that  the 
Buffering  and  sacrifice  which  Nehemiah  had  endured  for  Jerusalem  bound  him  to  it 
by  stronger  ties,  and  drew  him  to  seek  its  good  with  deepening  affection.  He  had 
wept  over  its  desolation  in  the  night;  he  had  toiled,  through  many  days,  for  its 
restoration ;  and,  when  its  walls  were  now  rebuilt,  how  could  he  but  cherish  a 
tender  solicitude,  lest  any  danger  should  befall  the  home  of  his  heart  ?  Was  it  not 
enough  to  fill  him  with  sorrowful  apprehension  that  false  men  were  vidthin  the 
walls  of  Zion,  and  that,  under  the  name  of  Israelites,  they  were  ready  to  betray 
the  dearest  interests  of  their  nation  into  the  hands  of  the  heathen?  Then,  as 
strong  walls  are  no  sufficient  protection  without  faithful  watchmen,  he  set  apart 
true  men,  to  keep  guard  in  the  common  danger.  1.  We  remark  the  character  of 
the  men  to  whom  he  committed  this  high  trust.  "  I  gave  my  brother  Hanani,  and 
Hananiah  the  ruler  of  the  palace,  charge  over  Jerusalem."  "My  brother  Hanani." 
The  expression  of  fraternal  relation  is  simple  and  dignified,  but  warm  and 
affectionate.  The  brother's  heart  speaks  the  word,  and  utters  in  it  a  brother's 
love,  glowing  with  a  brother's  pride,  over  one  so  dear,  ready  to  help  in  a  work  so 
Divine.  It  is  deeply  interesting  to  observe  how  often,  in  the  procedure  of  grace, 
God  hallows  the  social  affections,  by  grafting  on  their  stock  a  Divine  love;  and  how 
large  a  portion  of  the  inspired  history  of  the  religious  life  is  a  record  of  kindred 
dear  in  the  same  households,  united  in  the  same  faith,  walking  together  to  the 
better  country.  Abraham  and  Sarah,  Jacob  and  Joseph,  Moses  and  Aaron,  James 
and  John,  Martha  and  her  sister  Mary,  and  Lazarus,  with  many  more  revered 
names  in  Scripture  story,  united  in  the  bonds  of  nature  and  also  of  grace,  prove 
how  true  God  is  to  His  promise — "  I  wUl  take  you  one  of  a  city,  and  two  of  a 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOIt.  [chap.  vn. 

family,  and  I  will  bring  you  to  Zion."  Hananiah,  the  other  patriot,  here  entrusted 
with  charge  over  the  holy  city,  receives  this  high  encomium,  "  He  was  a  faithful 
man,  and  feared  God  above  many."  There  was  special  need  for  this  superior 
fidelity  and  piety  in  the  watchmen  of  Zion  then  ;  and  the  same  necessity  demands 
such  graces  still  in  all  who  have  charge  in  the  Church  of  God.  2.  We  notice  the 
nature  of  the  charges  given  to  these  faithful  men.  Walls  and  gates  are  set  around 
the  city  of  God,  not  to  foster  indolence,  but  to  aid  active  defence,  and  by  this  means 
to  secure  the  guardian  care  of  Omnipotence.  This  Divine  help  is  ever  sure  to  those 
who  are  wOling  by  God's  grace  to  help  themselves,  and  who  stand  on  their  watch- 
tower,  in  the  attitude  of  vigilance.  This  is  an  operation  of  faith,  and  an  effect  of 
that  wisdom  that  is  from  above.  Sound  principles  of  truth  are  believed,  not  for  the 
purpose  of  lying  in  the  mind  as  a  dead  letter,  or  to  be  in  themselves  a  certain 
defence  against  danger,  but  they  are  embraced  to  be  used  as  a  shield  in  times  of 
assault,  to  be  applied  to  the  practical  conduct ;  and  if  they  are  loosely  held,  the 
enemy  will  break  through  them  to  wound  the  heart,  as  surely  as  these  foes  of 
Jerusalem  would  have  entered  it  by  the  gates  or  walls,  had  these  been  ungaarded. 
The  word  is,  "  Take  unto  you  the  whole  armour  of  God,  that  ye  may  be  able  to 
stand."  Faith  everywhere  sets  on  this  enterprise  its  indubitable  seal.  The  city, 
we  are  told,  "  was  large  and  great ;  but  the  people  were  few  within,  and  the  houses 
were  not  builded."  It  was  reared  in  the  sure  confidence  of  a  future  increase, 
according  to  the  promise,  "  Jerusalem  shall  be  inhabited,  as  towns  without  walls, 
for  the  multitude  of  men  and  cattle  therein."  In  like  manner,  everything  devised 
and  done  for  the  kingdom  of  Christ  may  be  planned  on  the  largest  scale,  to  accord 
with  the  amplitude  of  the  purpose  of  grace.  There  is  room  in  the  heart  of  God  for 
all  sinners  of  mankind,  would  they  but  trust  His  love.  II.  His  ErFORT  fob 
Jerusalem's  purity.  In  a  work  of  God,  the  completion  of  one  service  to  His 
honour  makes  way  for  the  commencement  of  another.  A  holy  heart  feels  no 
desire  to  rest  in  complacency  after  the  labour  of  one  enterprise  is  finished,  as  if 
enough  were  done  for  a  while  to  come.  1.  We  remark  in  this  the  means  he 
adopts  to  secure  the  purity  of  Jerusalem.  He  owns,  with  grateful  humility,  the 
Divine  source  of  all  his  plans  of  wisdom  for  the  good  of  Jerusalem.  "  My  God  put 
into  mine  heart."  All  holy  desires,  all  good  counsels,  all  just  works  are  from 
God  ;  and  it  is  right  to  ascribe  to  Him  the  glory  of  these  precious  gifts.  The  great 
thinkers  of  the  world — the  men  whose  vocation  it  is  to  exercise  thought  for 
the  instruction  of  others — are  under  paramount  obligation  to  give  honour  to  the 
Father  of  lights  for  every  grand  or  good  idea  He  discovers  to  their  mind.  God  is 
specially  the  author  of  all  gracious  purposes  in  the  hearts  of  His  children,  and  of 
every  good  counsel  for  the  advancement  of  His  kingdom.  It  is  in  this  frame  of 
exultant  gratitude  to  the  Lord  for  all  good  counsels  that  Nehemiah  says,  "  My  God 
put  into  mine  heart  to  gather  together  the  nobles,  and  the  rulers,  and  the  people, 
that  they  might  be  reckoned  by  genealogy."  Recent  events,  no  doubt,  suggested 
reasons  for  making  sure  who  belonged  to  the  tribes  of  Israel ;  and  God,  by  opening 
His  servant's  mind  to  the  force  of  these  reasons,  rendered  the  path  of  duty  plain. 
False  men  had  lately  appeared  in  the  congregation  of  the  Lord,  claiming  a  place  in 
it,  who  were  not  of  it,  but  were  proving  traitors  to  its  dearest  interests.  At  this 
time,  then,  when  much  depended  on  the  possession  of  a  true  heart  in  the  children 
of  Zion,  the  heads  and  people  of  Judah  were  convened,  that  all  might  be  reckoned 
by  genealogy.  2.  We  notice  the  fidelity  Nehemiah  evinces  to  secure  the  purity  of 
Jerusalem.  Many  went  up  to  the  holy  city  who  could  not  show  their  father's 
house,  whether  they  belonged  to  Israel  or  no.  Some  of  them  would  prove  in  their 
conduct  they  were  the  people  of  God ;  but  they  could  not  as  yet  produce  evidence 
of  their  genealogy  as  the  seed  of  Jacob.  In  like  manner,  want  of  assurance  of 
personal  salvation  bars  the  way  of  no  sinner  in  applying  to  Christ;  and  if  any 
follow  on  to  seek  Him,  He  will  in  no  wise  cast  them  out,  though  they  may  not  be 
able  for  the  present  to  express  their  sure  hope  of  eternal  life.  Some  at  this  time  in 
Jerusalem  were  friends  of  Zion,  of  this  description,  truly  belonging  to  Israel  in 
spirit,  but  unable,  meanwhile,  to  prove  their  relation.  But  others  wore  there  of  a 
different  class,  and,  perhaps,  also  of  a  different  character.  Some  of  the  priests 
"  sought  their  register  among  those  who  were  reckoned  by  genealogy,  but  it  was  not 
found  "  (ver.  64).  In  the  fidelity,  therefore,  of  these  patriots  to  purify  from  alloy 
the  congregation  of  the  Lord,  we  have  an  example  for  the  imitation  of  the  universal 
Church  of  Christ.  Purity  of  communion  in  a  Church  is  essential  to  its  healthful 
condition,  and  to  its  success  in  spreading  religion  in  the  world.  A  diseased  member 
in  the  natural  body  may  gradually  destroy  the  vital  functions  of  the  entire  frame ; 


CHAP  TO.]  NEHEMIAH.  101 

and  so,  in  the  mystical  body  of  Christ,  one  member  unsound  in  heart  will  impair 
the  spiritual  action  of  the  whole,  just  as  one  Achan  in  the  camp  occasioned  the 
defeat  of  all  the  army  of  Israel.  This  register,  used  by  the  servant  of  God  to 
ascertain  who  were  the  children  of  Zion,  may  suggest  to  us  the  joyous  assurance 
that  God  knows  all  His  true  Israel,  and  wUl  take  means,  in  due  time,  to  make 
them  known.  Oh !  what  a  privilege  to  find  your  name  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life 
in  that  day  1  On  the  other  hand,  what  a  dismay  to  discover  then  it  is  not  there  I 
(W.  Ritchie.) 

Vers.   2,  3.    For   he   was  a  faithful  man,  and  feared  God  above  many. — 

Faithfulness  : — I.  Consideb  the  meaning  of  faithfxjlness.  It  is  the  reverent  and 
constant  acceptance  of  those  duties  springing  out  of  the  relations  in  which  I 
inevitably  stand.  Man  is  a  being  set  in  relations.  When  the  ivy  climbs  up  ruins 
and  binds  lovingly  the  fallen  stones  together,  and  wraps  them  in  its  green,  it 
clambers  and  winds  about  and  helps  and  beautifies  because  of  the  feelers  it  thrusts 
out,  laying  hold,  by  them,  of  the  crumbling  stones.  It  is  the  nature  of  the  ivy  to 
force  these  feelers  out.  So  forth  from  every  man  there  are  shooting  feelers  of 
relations.  They  are  part  of  his  life-endowment.  1.  Man  is  bound  into  relation 
with  God.  God  is  Creator — Father — Providence  and  Sustainer — King  and  Judge. 
2.  Men  and  women  are  bound  to  each  other  in  the  relation  of  father  and  mother, 
and  child  and  relative,  and  fellow-citizen,  and  so  on  endlessly.  Springing  out  of 
these  relations  there  are  forced  upon  us  certain  duties.  Faithfulness  is  accepting 
and  steadily  discharging  them.     11.  Faithfulness  is  a  chance  opening  right  at 

THE  feet  of  EVEKT  MAN  FOB  A  NOBLE  LIFE.   III.  FAITHFULNESS  IS  AN  OPEN  DOOB  FOR 

A  BIGHT  AMBITION — to  develop  a  noble  character.  Thus  we  may  lift  humdrum  from 
our  daily  life.  There  is  nothing  so  invigorating  as  the  consciousness  of  recognising 
and  accepting  duty.  The  peace  of  a  quiet  conscience  is  in  it.  1.  Thus  I  am  sure 
of  setting  a  right  example.  2.  Thus  I  shall  certainly  make  my  life  tell  in  all 
directions.  IV.  A  reward  of  faithfulness.  Nehemiah  gave  Hananiah  charge 
over  Jerusalem  because  "  he  was  a  faithful  man."  V.  The  eeal  source  and 
incitement  of  faithfulness.  He  "feared  God."  Think  of  Milton  as  holding 
himself  "  as  ever  in  his  great  Taskmaster's  eye."  Policy,  expediency,  self-interest 
may  seem  to  hold  a  man  to  duty  in  fair  weather.  The  only  lasting  motive  for 
faithfulness  for  all  times  is  God.  (WaylandHoyt,  D.D.)  Piety  and  faithfulness : — 
We  are  here  taught : — I.  That  the  feab  of  God — real,  Scriptural  piety — is  the 
solid  foundation  op  all  faithfulness  between  man  and  man.  II.  That  the 
indispensable  expression  and  peoof  of  the  feab  of  God  is  to  be  found  in  a  man's 
fidelity  as  to  the  affairs  and  transactions  which  take  place  between  him  and 

HIS    FELLOWS.       III.    ThAT    PERSONS    OF    EMINENT    PIETY    AND    GREAT   FIDELITY   WILL   BE 

HONOURED  BOTH  BY  GoD  AND  MAN.  {J.  TayloT.)  Eminent  'piety  : — I.  That  faith- 
fulness IN   RELIGION  IS    ESSENTIALLY  CONNECTED   WITH    EMINENCE   OF   ATTAINMENT   IN 

THE  Christian  character.  II.  Characteristics  of  eminent  piety.  1.  It  consists 
in  the  habitual  maintenance  of  a  close  walk  with  God,  2.  It  comprises  a  high  and 
enlightened  estimate  of  the  character  and  work  of  Christ.  3.  It  is  connected  with 
an  exquisite  spiritual  and  moral  sensibility.  4.  It  is  always  most  powerfully 
swayed  by  spiritual  motives  and  considerations.  5.  These  characteristics  show  the 
baselessness  of  the  claims  and  pretensions  to  the  possession  of  exalted  religious 
attainments  that  are  sometimes  advanced.  III.  Motives  which  may  lead 
Christians  to  aspire  after  eminence  of  personal  piety.  1.  The  honour  of 
religion.  2.  It  is  a  great  preservative  against  apostasy.  3.  Regard  to  personal 
enjoyment.  4.  Its  relation  to  usefulness.  5.  Its  bearing  upon  our  future  blessed- 
ness. 6.  The  enduring  nature  of  the  distinction  it  confers.  7.  The  adequate 
provision  that  has  been  made  to  aid  in  its  attainment.  {W.  Hurd.)  Eminent 
piety  : — I.  The  nature  of  eminent  piety.  1.  It  involves  a  habit  of  serious 
reflection.  2.  It  is  consistent  and  comprehensive.  The  man  who  exemplifies  it 
believes  the  doctrines  of  revelation,  is  awed  by  its  threatenings,  animated  by  its 
promises,  and  controlled  by  its  laws.  He  is  at  once  sober,  righteous,  and  godly. 
3.  It  endures  severe  tests.  It  resembles  a  robust  constitution,  which  can  pass 
through  all  varieties  of  climate,  while  a  sickly  constitution  demands  careful 
restriction  to  one.  4.  It  is  active  and  laborious.  6.  It  is  piety  that  grows. 
n.  Considerations  that  enforce  eminent  piety.  1.  The  effects  it  produces  on 
those  who  exemplify  it.  (1)  They  manifest  that  they  are  bom  of  God.  (2)  They 
are  fitted  for  every  spiritual  conflict.  (3)  They  are  provided  with  all  needful 
fiomolations.     (4)   They  are  qualified  for  an   advantageous  approach  to  Divine 

SO 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

ordinances.  (5)  Their  anticipations  are  bright  and  triumphant.  2.  The  effects  it 
produces  on  those  who  witness  it.  Conclusion :  1.  Eminent  piety  is  very  rare 
2.  The  means  of  acquiring  and  promoting  eminent  piety  are  invaluable.  Inter- 
course with  good  men — attendance  in  a  Christian  sanctuary — reading,  meditation, 
and  prayer.  3.  Keal  piety  is  indispensable.  {Joseph  Hughes.)  A  faithful  man : — 
I.  The  distikguishing  feature  of  Hananiah's  character.  "  He  was  a  faithful 
man."  If  we  suppose  with  some  that  Hananiah  is  the  same  as  Shadrach 
mentioned  in  the  Book  of  Daniel,  we  see  how  brightly  this  trait  of  his  character 
shone  forth  in  him  in  Babylon.  "  A  faithful  man "  is  perhaps  the  most 
distinguished  commendation  that  can  be  passed  upon  any  mortal.  It  refers  to 
that  attitude  under  which  God  Himself  has  been  pleased  to  allow  His  people 
to  regard  Him.  "God  is  faithful";  "the  Lord  is  faithful";  and  it  is  in  the 
faithfulness  of  God  that  His  people  hope  and  confide.  "  A  faithful  man  " — 1.  la 
one  that  can  be  depended  on,  who  performs  all  his  promises,  executes  all  trusts 
confided  to  him,  one  who  is  punctual  and  unwavering  in  all  his  engagements,  and 
whose  uprightness  and  integrity  are  transparent  to  all.  2.  He  is  one  who  has 
been  made  the  recipient  of  a  gracious  and  Divine  principle  that  is — (1)  Saving  in 
its  nature;  (2)  justifying  in  its  character;  (3)  purifying  in  its  results.  3.  He  is  a 
godlike  man  (2  Pet.  i.  4).  II.  The  conduct  which  Hananiah  showed — he  "  feared 
God."  The  fear  of  God  is — 1.  A  reverential  awe  of  the  majesty  of  God.  2.  An 
implanted  principle  (Jer.  xxxii.  40).  3.  A  governing  principle — Obadiah  (1  Kings 
xviii.  12,  13)  ;  Nehemiah  (chap.  v.  15).  III.  The  distinguished  position  assigned 
TO  Hananiah.  {Francis  Wills.)  An  example  of  excellent  piety  : — I.  He  was  a 
faithful  man.  To  serve  God  acceptably  we  must  be  faithful.  1.  By  believing  what 
God  has  revealed,  on  His  testimony  (2  Chron.  xx.  20).  To  the  exercise  of  this  faith 
•we  are  urged  by  the  best  example,  as  that  of  Abraham  (Gal.  iii.  9;  Rom.  iv,  20),  and 
that  of  Barnabas  (Acts  xi.  24).  Under  the  influence  of  this  faith,  we  shall  be  led 
to  seek  God  in  tne  way  He  prescribes.  2.  By  conscientiously  performing  those 
duties  which  arise  from  our  relations  to  God;  as  His  servants,  stewards,  and 
soldiers.  As  His  covenant-servants,  we  must  devote  ourselves  to  His  service 
(Jer.  i.  5  ;  1  Cor.  iv.  19,  20).  As  His  stewards,  we  must  employ  His  gifts  for  His 
glory  (1  Pet.  iv.  10,  11).  This  faithfulness  is  required  in  stewards  (1  Cor.  iv.  2). 
As  His  soldiers,  we  must  be  valiant  for  His  revealed  truth  (Jer.  ix.  3).  We  must  be 
faithful — 3.  By  steadfast  adherence  to  the  required  worship  and  service  of  God. 
-Tiike  the  Church  at  Pergamos,  we  must  not  deny  Christ  through  fear  of  suffering 
for  righteousness'  sake  (Eev.  ii.  13,  xvii.  14).  4.  By  seriously  realising  the 
invisible  things  of  God  (Heb.  xi.  1).  We  should  realise  God's  presence  with  us,  as 
our  Master,  Helper,  and  Observer  (Psa.  xvi.  8,  xlvi.  1 ;  Heb.  xi.  27).  We  should 
realise  the  general  judgment,  when  we  must  all  appear  before  Christ 
(2  Cor.  X.  7,  9,  10).  II.  And  he  feared  God  above  many.  1.  By  the  fear  of 
God,  in  this  place,  is  meant  the  whole  of  personal  religion,  including  the  principles 
and  practice,  the  dispositions  and  the  conduct  of  its  subject  or  possessor 
(Psa.  xxiiv.  11,  cxi.  10;  Prov.  xix.  23;  Eccles.  viii.  12).  2.  He  feared  God 
above  many.  This  implies  that  there  are  different  degrees  of  piety  among  those 
who  truly  fear  God.  This  is  intimated  by  our  Lord,  in  His  parable  of  the  Sower 
(Matt.  xiii.  8).  It  is  admitted  by  St.  Paul,  in  his  doctrine  of  future  rewards 
(2  Cor.  ix.  6).  This  difference  in  pious  attainments  is  also  evident  from  the 
present  state  of  the  religious  world.  Of  some  eminent  Christians,  who  are  now  the 
salt  of  the  earth  and  the  lights  of  the  world,  it  may  be  said  with  great  truth  that 
they  fear  God  above  many.  They  acknowledge  God  more  than  many  in  their 
secular  concerns  (Prov.  iii.  6;  Phil.  iv.  6);  they  are  more  careful  than  many  to 
allow  themselves  in  those  recreations  only  which  are  consistent  with,  and  favour- 
able to,  their  advancement  in  holiness  (1  Cor.  x.  31) ;  they  converse  more  spiritually 
and  profitably  than  many  (Eph.  iv.  29) ;  and  they  are  more  zealous  than  many, 
in  employing  all  their  talents  for  God's  glory  and  the  benefit  of  mankind 
(Acts  xiii.  36).  With  respect  to  reputation;  some  have  a  good  report  from  them 
that  are  without  the  Church,  while  the  good  that  is  in  others  is  evil  spoken  of, 
through  their  indiscretions.  With  respect  to  usefulness;  some  are  general  blessings 
to  their  respective  connections,  while  others  are  not  visibly  instrumental  in 
bringing  scarcely  any  souls  with  them  to  Christ  and  heaven.  3.  The  honourable 
mention  of  Hananiah's  distinguished  piety  should  excite  us  to  imitate  him,  by 
endeavouring  to  excel  in  piety  also.  To  excel  in  piety  is — (1)  Our  privilege.  This 
is  incontestable  from  the  prayers  which  the  Holy  Spirit  has  dictated  for  our 
adoption  (Eph.  iii.   14-21;    1    Thess.  v.  23,  24;    Heb,  xiii.  20,  21).      (2)  Gup 


CHAP,  vn.]  NEHEMJAH.  103 

interest.  For  this  will  be  conducive  to — (a)  Our  greater  happiness  (Isa.  xlviii.  18) ; 
(b)  our  greater  safety  (2  Pet.  i.  10) ;  (c)  our  greater  glory  in  heaven 
(2  Pet.  i.  11;  1  Cor.  xv.  51).  (3)  Our  duty,  (a)  God  caUs  us  to  this 
(1  Pet.  i.  15,  16) ;  (b)  God  will  hereby  be  glorified  (John  xv.  8)  ;  (c)  herewith 
He  will  be  pleased  (Psa.  xxxv.  27).  (Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermont.) 
Placed  in  trust: — It  was  a  State  appointment  made  on  moral  and  religious 
grounds.  Hananiah  was  put  in  "  charge  over  Jerusalem :  for  he  was  a  faithful 
man,  and  feared  God  above  many."  Without  discussing  in  detail  the  merits  of  the 
principle,  let  us  inquire.  What  would  be  its  effects  as  a  passport  to  office  ?  1.  In 
the  first  place,  it  would  shut  out  atheists  from  the  Legislature  of  the  country. 
2.  It  would  exclude  from  power  all  immoral  or  ungodly  persons.  3.  Such  recog- 
nition would  show  that  the  profession  of  religion  is  not  incompatible  with,  nor  a 
disqualification  for,  the  duties  of  public  life.  4.  The  appointment  was  on  Scriptural 
lines.  It  was  strikingly  in  accord  with  the  advice  of  Jethro  to  Moses  :  "  Moreover, 
thou  shalt  provide  out  of  all  the  people  able  men,  such  as  fear  God,  men  of  truth 
hating  covetousness,  and  place  such  over  them  to  be  rulers  of  thousands,  and  rulers 
of  hundreds,  rulers  of  fifties,  and  rulers  of  tens."  (T.  Robson.)  Eminent  of 
character : — It  is  not  the  first  thousand  feet,  but  the  last,  that  give  a  mountain 
its  name  and  fame.  There  is  not  a  vast  difference,  for  example,  between  Monte 
Eosa  and  Mont  Blanc,  but  the  latter  is  celebrated  owing  to  those  few  extra  feet. 
It  is  not  so  much  ability,  or  learning,  or  diligence  which  differentiates  Christian 
men  as  nearness  to  heaven  and  God.  Those  few  extra  hours  spent  in  prayer,  the 
additional  steps  of  approach  to  Christ — these  raise  above  the  level  of  average  piety 
and  impart  sanctity  to  the  character.  (Sunday  Companion.)  Religious  sentiment 
the  most  refining : — It  is  the  property  of  the  religious  sentiment  to  be  the  most 
refining  of  all  influences.  No  external  advantages,  no  good  birth  or  breeding,  no 
culture  of  the  taste,  no  habit  of  command,  no  association  with  the  elegant — even 
no  depth  of  affection  that  does  not  rise  to  a  religious  sentiment — can  bestow  that 
delicacy  and  grandeur  of  bearing  which  belong  only  to  a  mind  accustomed  to 
celestial  conversation.  (R.  W.  Emerson.)  Men  loyal  to  God  : — Martin  Luther 
used  to  say,  "  God  needs  strong  men  as  much  as  strong  men  need  God,"  and  it  was 
true.  Let  men  seek  to  escape  from  the  responsibilities  of  labour  and  law,  and  the 
freedom  won  by  patriots  and  martyrs  would  soon  fall,  superstition  would  soon 
reassert  its  sway,  and  passions  would  leap  forth  again  which  would  throw  civilisa- 
tion back  into  barbarism.  If  the  Apostles  had  trusted  the  men  of  their  age  there 
would  have  been  no  true  Christianity.  If  John  Knox  and  others  had  trusted  to 
such  there  would  have  been  no  Beformation.  Let  them  bestir  themselves  in  every 
noble  way.  They  could  each,  at  least,  give  to  God  one  life  that  was  true  and 
faithful,  one  loyal  to  the  core  to  truth  and  duty.  It  was  not  enough  to  contribute 
their  criticism,  they  must  contribute  themselves — be  willing  to  perish  that  others 
might  live.  That  was  what  was  meant  by  Christianity.  (John  Hunter.) 
Coherence  in  character: — What  is  the  cause  which  makes  one  life  so  full  to  U3 
while  another  has  no  meaning  ?  What  is  it  that  constitutes  the  articulateness  or 
the  inarticulateness,  the  significance  or  the  insignificance,  of  human  lives  ?  One 
very  simple  thing — coherence,  that  is  all.  The  reason  why  these  letters  spell 
something  is  because  they  cohere  together  according  to  a  certain  law,  and  express 
something.  The  reason  why  these  notes  are  sweet  aad  inspiring  to  your  ear  is 
because  they  blend  together  according  to  the  codes  of  harmony.  And  so  are 
human  lives  bound  together  by  something  which  brings  coherence  and  significa- 
tion, harmony  and  force.  Look  at  the  lives  which  strike  us ;  look  at  the  imperious 
and  imperial  personalities  amongst  us.  What  made  Bismarck  such  as  he  was  ? 
Coherence — one  purpose  1  The  difference  between  a  life  which  is  insignificant  lies 
precisely  in  the  word  "coherence."  Why  was  Newton  great?  Why,  because 
Newton,  like  all  great  men,  said,  "  This  one  thing  I  do,"  and  he  forgot  his  food 
in  the  earnest  contemplation  and  pursuit  of  science.  It  is  coherence  which  makes 
greatness  in  life.  (Bp,  Boyd  Carpenter.)  Every  one  in  his  watch. — Every 
one  in  his  watch : — This  book  may  almost  b^  called  the  Book  of  the  Busy  Man, 
telling  as  it  does  of  the  multifarious  duties  and  responsibilities  of  one  who  acted  as 
governor  of  the  Jewish  people  in  a  very  difficult  and  anxious  time,  and  who  had 
the  rare  and  excellent  faculty  of  leading  every  one  else  to  work  also.  The  picture 
which  this  book  presents  is  almost  that  of  a  beehive,  the  murmur  of  whose  work 
rises  from  every  page.  It  is  in  entire  sympathy  with  the  general  strain  and  tenor 
of  the  book  that  our  text  speaks  when  it  shows  us  "  every  one  in  his  watch." 
Consider — I.  The  imdividual  dealing  of  God  with  us — "  every  one  in  his  watch." 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

We  often  resist  the  thought  of  having  to  do  individually  with  God  ;  it  becomes  too 
solemn,  too  oppressive,  too  terrible  for  a  soul  that  is  not  reconciled  to  Him.  This 
is  partly  at  the  root  of  the  preference  which  many  have  for  the  Church  life  rather 
than  the  individual  life,  for  the  idea  of  the  multitude  in  which  we  may  hide 
rather  than  that  of  solitude  in  which  we  must  be  seen.  There  is  much  in  which 
we  can  have  no  companionship.  We  are  born  alone ;  every  great  disease  or  pain 
finds  us  in  the  deep  places  of  a  loneliness  which  none  can  share  with  us ;  and  it  is 
in  utter  solitude  that  each  of  us  dies.  In  all  such  cases  it  is  individual  dealing 
between  the  Lord  and  us.  We  never  come  right,  we  never  come  to  the  Pardoner 
of  sin,  or  the  trust  of  daily  life,  or  real  work  for  Christ,  till  we  have  had  the 
individual  dealing  with  God  which  brings  us  into  the  position  of  those  whom  God 
has  accepted  for  Christ's  sake,  and  for  whom  henceforth  He  will  provide.  II.  The 
text  is  also  universal  in  its  reach.  Evert  man  means  all  men,  which  gives  us  the 
thought  that  there  is  a  post  for  every  man  which  God  has  appointed  for  him. 
Ill,  The  work  of  the  Christian  may  be  regarded  as  military  service.  In  this 
aspect  of  life  three  things  are  required.  1.  Strict  discipline.  2.  Instant  obedience. 
3.  Perfect  obedience.  IV.  The  part  of  military  service  which  falls  to  us  all  is 
sentinel  duty.  V.  The  object  of  the  watch  which  is  laid  upon  every  Christian. 
1.  It  is  a  watch  against  attack.  2.  It  is  a  watch  for  reinforcement  and  succour. 
(T.  Elder  Gumming.) 

Ver.  67.  And  they  had  two  hundred  forty  and  five  singing  men  and  singing 
women. — Church  music : — The  captives  in  the  text  had  music  left  in  them,  and 
if  they  could  find,  amid  all  their  trials,  two  hundred  and  forty  and  five  singing  men 
and  singing  women,  then  in  this  day  of  gospel  sunlight  and  freedom  from  all  per- 
secution there  ought  to  be  a  great  multitude  of  men  and  women  willing  to  sing  the 
praises  of  God.  All  our  churches  need  arousal  on  this  subject.  Those  who  can 
sing  must  throw  their  souls  into  the  exercise,  and  those  who  cannot  sing  must 
learn  how,  and  it  shall  be  heart  to  heart,  voice  to  voice,  and  the  music  shall  swell 
jubilant  with  thanksgiving  and  tremulous  with  pardon.  Have  you  ever  noticed 
the  construction  of  the  human  throat  as  indicative  of  what  God  means  us  to  do 
with  it  ?  In  only  an  ordinary  throat  and  lungs  there  are  fourteen  direct  muscles 
that  produce  16,383  sounds,  and  thirty  indirect  muscles  that  produce  173,741,823 
sounds,  and  the  human  voice  can  produce  seventeen  trillion,  five  hundred  and 
ninety-two  billion,  one  hundred  and  eighty-six  million,  forty-four  thousand,  four 
hundred  and  fifteen  different  sounds.  What  does  that  mean  ?  It  means  that  yoa 
should  sing  1  Do  you  suppose  that  God,  who  gives  us  such  a  musical  instrument 
as  that,  intends  us  to  keep  it  shut  ?  Suppose  some  great  tyrant  should  get  pos- 
session of  the  musical  instruments  of  the  world,  and  should  lock  up  the  organ  of 
Westminster  Abbey,  and  the  organ  of  Lucerne,  and  the  organ  at  Haarlem,  and  the 
organ  at  Freiburg,  and  all  the  other  great  musical  instruments  of  the  world — you 
would  call  such  a  man  as  that  a  monster ;  and  yet  you  are  more  wicked  if,  with 
the  human  voice — a  musical  instrument  of  more  wonderful  adaptation  than  all  the 
musical  instruments  that  man  ever  created — you  shut  it  against  the  praise  of  God. 
I.  Music  seems  to  have  been  born  in  the  soul  of  the  world.  The  omnipotent 
voice  with  which  God  commanded  the  world  into  being  seems  to  linger  yet  with  its 
majesty  and  sweetness,  and  you  hear  it  in  the  grain-field,  in  the  swoop  of  the  wind 
amid  the  mountain  fastnesses,  in  canary's  warble  and  in  thunder-shock,  in  brook's 
tinkle  and  in  ocean's  paean.  There  are  soft  cadences  in  nature,  and  loud  notes, 
some  of  which  we  cannot  hear  at  aU,  and  others  are  so  terrific  that  we  cannot 
appreciate  them.  The  animalculce  have  their  music,  and  the  spicula  of  hay  and 
the  globule  of  water  are  as  certainly  resonant  with  the  voice  of  God  as  the  highest 
heavens  in  which  the  armies  of  the  redeemed  celebrate  their  victories.  When  the 
breath  of  the  flower  strikes  the  air  and  the  wing  of  the  firefly  cleaves  it,  there  is 
sound  and  there  is  melody ;  and  as  to  those  utterances  of  nature  which  seem  harsh 
and  overwhelming,  it  is  as  when  you  stand  in  the  midst  of  a  great  orchestra,  and 
the  sound  almost  rends  your  ear  because  you  are  too  near  to  catch  the  blending  of 
the  music.    11.  Music  seems  dependent  on  the  laws  of  acoustics  and  mathematics,. 

AND    YET    WHERE    THESE    LAWS    ARE     NOT    UNDERSTOOD    AT    ALL    THE    ART    IS   PRACTISED. 

There  are  to-day  five  hundred  musical  journals  in  China.  Two  thousand  years 
before  Christ  the  Egyptians  practised  this  art.  Pythagoras  learned  it.  Lasus,  of 
Hermione,  wrote  essays  on  it.  Plato  and  Aristotle  introduced  it  into  their  schools; 
but  I  have  not  much  interest  in  that.  My  chief  interest  is  in  the  music  of  the 
Bible.     The  Bible,  like  a  great  harp  with  innumerable  strings,  swept  by  the  fingera 


CHAP,  vn.]  NEHEMIAH.  105 

of  inspiration,  trembles  with  it.  So  far  back  as  the  fourth  chapter  of  Genesis  yoa 
find  the  first  organist  and  harper — Jubal.  So  far  back  as  the  thirty-first  chapter 
of  Genesis  you  find  the  first  choir.  All  up  and  down  the  Bible  you  find  sacred 
music — at  weddings,  at  inaugurations,  at  the  treading  of  the  wine-press.  The 
Hebrews  understood  how  to  make  musical  signs  above  the  musical  text.  When 
the  Jews  came  from  their  distant  homes  to  the  great  festivals  at  Jerusalem  they 
brought  harp  and  timbrel  and  trumpet,  and  poured  along  the  great  Judsean  high- 
ways a  river  of  harmony,  until  in  and  around  the  temple  the  wealth  of  a  nation's 
song  and  gladness  had  accumulated.  All  through  the  ages  there  has  been  great 
attention  paid  to  sacred  music.  Ambrosius,  Augustine,  Gregory  the  Great,  Charle- 
magne, gave  it  their  mighty  influence,  and  in  our  day  the  best  musical  genius  is 
throwing  itself  on  the  altars  of  God.  Handel,  and  Mozart,  and  Bach,  and  Durante, 
and  Wolf,  and  scores  of  other  men  and  women  have  given  the  best  part  of  their 
genius  to  Church  music.  A  truth  in  words  is  not  half  so  mighty  as  a  truth  in  song. 
Luther's  sermons  have  been  forgotten,  but  the  "  Judgment  Hymn  "  he  composed 
is  resounding  yet  all  through  Christendom.  IH.  While  there  may  be  great  varieties 
of  opinion  in  regard  to  music,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  general  spirit  of  the  Word 
OF  God  indicates  what  ought  to  be  the  great  characteristics.  1.  A  prominent 
characteristic  ought  to  be  adaptiveness.  Music  that  may  be  appropriate  for  a 
concert-hall  or  the  opera-house  or  the  drawing-room  may  be  shocking  in  church. 
Glees,  madrigals,  ballads  may  be  as  innocent  as  psalms  in  their  places.  There  is 
no  reason  why  music  should  always  be  religious  music.  So  I  am  in  favour  of 
concert-halls  as  well  as  churches.  But  church  music  has  only  one  design,  and 
that  is  devotion,  and  that  which  comes  with  the  toss,  the  song,  and  the  display  of 
an  opera-house  is  a  hindrance  to  the  worship.  From  such  performances  we  go 
away  saying,  "What  splendid  execution!  Did  you  ever  hear  such  a  soprano? 
Which  of  those  solos  did  you  like  the  better  ?  "  When,  if  we  had  been  rightly 
wrought  upon,  we  would  have  gone  away  saying,  "  Oh !  how  my  soul  was  lifted 
up  in  the  presence  of  God  while  they  were  singing  the  first  hymn  ;  I  never  had 
such  rapturous  views  of  Jesus  Christ  as  my  Saviour  as  when  they  were  singing 
that  last  doxology."  There  is  an  everlasting  distinction  between  music  as  an 
art  and  music  as  a  help  to  devotion.  Though  a  Schumann  composed  it,  though 
a  Mozart  played  it,  though  a  Sontag  sang  it,  away  with  it  if  it  does  not 
make  the  heart  better  and  honour  Christ.  2.  Correctness  ought  to  be  a  charac- 
teristic of  church  music.  God  loves  harmony,  and  we  ought  to  love  it.  There 
is  no  devotion  in  a  howl  or  yelp.  3.  Another  characteristic  must  be  spirit  and 
life.  Music  ought  to  rush  from  the  audience  like  the  water  from  a  rock — clear, 
bright,  sparkling.  If  all  the  other  part  of  the  church  service  is  dull,  do  not 
have  the  music  dull.  With  so  many  thrilling  things  to  sing  about,  away  with 
all  drawling  and  stupidity.  Let  our  song  be  like  an  acclamation  of  victory.  You 
have  a  right  to  sing.  Do  not  surrender  your  prerogative.  If,  in  the  performance 
of  your  duty,  or  the  attempt  at  it,  you  should  lose  your  place  in  the  musical  scale 
and  be  on  C  below  when  you  ought  to  be  on  C  above,  or  you  should  come  in  half  a 
bar  behind,  we  will  excuse  you.  Still,  it  is  better  to  do  as  Paul  says,  and  sing 
"  with  the  spirit,  and  the  understanding  also."  4.  Again,  I  remark,  church  music 
must  be  congregational.  This  opportunity  must  be  brought  down  within  the  range 
of  the  whole  audience.  A  song  that  the  worshippers  cannot  sing  is  of  no  more  use 
to  them  than  a  sermon  in  Choctaw.  Let  us  wake  up  to  this  duty.  Let  us  sing 
alone,  sing  in  our  families,  sing  in  our  schools,  sing  in  our  churches.  I  never  shall 
forget  hearing  a  Frenchman  singing  the  "  Marseillaise  Hymn  "  on  the  Champs 
Elys^es,  Paris,  just  before  the  battle  of  Sedan.  I  never  saw  such  enthusiasm  before 
or  since.  As  he  sang  that  national  air,  oh  I  how  the  Frenchmen  shouted.  Have 
you  ever  in  an  English  assemblage  heard  a  band  play  "  God  Save  the  Queen  "  ? 
If  you  have,  you  know  something  about  the  enthusiasm  of  a  national  air.  Now,  I 
tell  you  that  these  songs  we  sing  Sabbath  by  Sabbath  are  the  national  airs  of  Jesus 
Christ  and  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  if  you  do  not  learn  to  sing  them  here,  how 
do  you  ever  expect  to  sing  the  song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb  ?     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 

Ver.  72.  And  that  which  the  rest  of  the  people  gave. — The  rest  of  the  people 
gave  : — It  is  a  great  misfortune  when  any  Christian  effort  is  supported  by  the  con- 
tributions of  the  few  and  not  of  the  many.  All  should  be  encouraged  to  contribute 
BO  far  as  they  are  able.  Workers,  too,  should,  as  their  means  admit  of,  subscribe 
towards  the  expenses  of  work.  "What  people  pay  for  they  will  pray  for,  and 
what  they  pray  for  they  will  pay  for."     (W.  P.  Lockhart.) 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vra. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

Yebs.  1-12.  And  all  the  people  gathered  themselves  together  as  one  man  into 
the  street. — The  instructor  in  the  law  : — God  has  evermore  blessed  His  own  Word 
as  the  chosen  instrument  of  all  revival  and  progress  in  His  Church.     It  was  in  this 
faith  of  the  power  of  Bible  truth  in  the  hand  of  the  Holy  Spirit  that  Nehemiah 
here  sought  to  instruct  the  remnant  of  Judah  in  the  Divine  law.     His  past  labours 
for  the  good  of  Jerusalem  had  chiefly  tended  to  inspire  his  brethren  with  patriotic 
love,  and  to  surround  the  holy  city  with  a  material  defence.     But  his  affection  for 
Zion  had,   from  the  beginning,   higher  aims   than  these;   and   henceforth  his 
endeavours  move  in  a  loftier  sphere.     He  rises  now  above  the  work  of   setting 
dead  stones  into  a  strong  wall  around  the  city  of  God,  and  labours  to  place  holy 
affections  in  the  hearts  of  its  people,  that  they  may  be  adorned  with  the  beauties 
of  the  Lord's  own  Israel.     To  secure  these  great  ends,  the  first  and  highest  means 
he  employs  is  the  diffusion  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Holy  Scriptures.    He  perceived, 
no  doubt,  that  many  of  the  children  of  Judah  needed  much  this  instruction  in  the 
law  of  the  Lord.     They  had  been  long  scattered  abroad  in  strange  lands,  far  away 
from  temple  privileges,  and  were  on  this  account  sadly  defective  in  their  knowledge 
of  the  Divine  Word.     I.  The  assembly  of  Israel  convened.     The  persons  who 
presided  in  this  assembly  deserve  our  notice.     When  God  raises  up  a  great  man  to 
perform  an  important  work  He  usually  associates  another  with  him  of  a  kindred 
spirit,  who,  though  endowed  with  different  gifts,  is  a  helper  in  the  good  cause. 
The  defects  of  the  one  are  thus  counterbalanced  by  the  graces  of  the  other,  and 
religion  is  promoted  by  their  mutual  co-operation.    In  the  redemption  of  Israel 
from  the  house  of  bondage  Moses  and  Aaron  were  united  in  the  common  enterprise. 
And  so,  in  this  revival  of  Judah,  Nehemiah  and  Ezra  are  joined  together ;  and, 
through  means  of  the  energy  of  the  man  of  action,  coupled  with  the  influence  of 
the  man  of  sacred  study,  God  blesses  Zion  with  His  quickening  and  restoring 
grace.   It  is  an  honour  to  the  youthful  Nehemiah  that,  though  invested  with  ruling 
power  in  the  holy  city,  he  gives  place  to  the  ministers  of  the  sanctuary  in  their 
proper  work  of  teaching.     These  two  servants  of  God,  presiding  in  this  great  con- 
gregation of  Israel,  differed  much  from  each  other  in  age,  in  office,  in  rank,  in 
character ;  but  they  were  one  in  heart,  and  they  join  here  in  complete  harmony 
of  action  for  the  revival  of  their  beloved  Zion.     God  in  nature  makes  full  provision 
for  diversity  of  elements  and  forces  co-operating  together  for  a  common  result. 
And  God  in  the  Church  also  provides  for  different  men  looking  on  revealed  truth 
with  free  thought  and  honest  heart,  where  the  shades  of  belief  may  vary  like  the 
colours  of  the  rainbow,  but  all  blend  under  the  power  of  love,  into  a  pure  white  ray 
as  from  the  parent  orb.     The  time  at  which  this  assembly  was  held  also  merits  our 
consideration.     '*  They  gathered  themselves  together  on  the  first  day  of  the  seventh 
month  "  (vers.  1,  2).    This  was  emphatically  the  sacred  month  of  the  Jewish  year, 
during  which  the  most  touching  and  impressive  ceremonies  of  their  law  were 
observed.     1.    It  was  a  full   assembly.     "  All   the  people  gathered  themselves 
together  as  one  man."    They  were  all  there,  and  they  were  there  all  of  one  heart. 
In  times  of  spiritual  indifference  and  decay  the  ways  of  Zion  mourn  because  few 
come  to  her  solemn  feasts.    The  Great  Physician  is  present  to  heal  them,  but  they, 
the  dying  patients,  are  not  there  to  be  made  whole.    2.  It  was  an  earnest  assembly. 
"  They  spake  unto  Ezra  the  scribe  to  bring  the  book  of  the  law  of  Moses,  which 
the  Lord  had  commanded  to  Israel."    3.  It  was  an  attentive  assembly.     "  Ezra 
the  priest  brought  the  law  before  the  congregation,  and  read  therein  from  the 
morning  until  mid-day,  before  the  men  and  the  women ;  and  the  ears  of  all  the 
people  were  attentive  unto  the  book  of  the  law."    This  deep  attention  to  His  truth 
is  demanded  as  an  act  of  reverence  to  God  who  speaks  it.    It  is  reckoned  an  affront 
for  any  one  to  turn  his  back  on  an  earthly  sovereign  or  converse  with  others  while 
the  king  is  addressing  words  of  importance  to  all  in  his  presence.    Besides,  men 
require  to  give  earnest  heed  to  the  Word  of  life  in  order  to  derive  saving  benefit 
from  it  I    Alas  !  many  give  attendance  on  the  Word  who  do  not  give  attention  to  it. 
Gospel  truth  is  a  means  of  persuasion  to  repentance,  but  if  attention  to  the  Word 
of  conviction  is  suffered  to  waver  the  blessing  will  in  all  likelihood  be  lost.     It  is 
difficult  with  an  arrow,  however  well  aimed,  to  strike  a  bird  on  the  wing  that 
rapidly  changes  its  flight  in  the  air ;  and  so  it  is  not  easy  to  fix  the  arrow  of  con- 
viction in  the  heart  that  flits  meanwhile  from  thought  to  thought,  inattentive  to 
the  Word.     4.  It  was  a  devout  assembly.     "  Ezra  blessed  the  Lord,  the  great  God. 


CHAP,  vm.]  NEHEMIAH.  107 

And  all  the  people  answered,  Amen,  Amen,  with  lifting  up  their  hands ;  and  they 
bowed  their  heads,  and  worshipped  the  Lord  with  their  faces  to  the  ground."  This 
devout  frame  of  mind  is  essential  to  full  spiritual  profit  in  Divine  worship  for 
hearing  the  truth.  II.  The  Divine  knowledge  conveyed.  Ezra  was  chief  among 
the  teachers  of  Israel  in  this  great  assembly,  and  his  eminent  gifts  fitted  him  for 
this  position.  He  is  elsewhere  distinguished  as  "  a  ready  scribe  in  the  law  of 
Moses  " ;  he  possessed  a  true  love  for  it,  an  intimate  acquaintance  with  it,  and 
a  profound  knowledge  of  it.  *'  For  Ezra  had  prepared  his  heart  to  seek  the  law  of 
the  Lord,  and  to  do  it,  and  to  teach  in  Israel  statutes  and  judgments."  1.  The 
instruction  here  embraced  an  exposition  of  the  law.  "  So  they  read  in  the  book  of 
the  law  of  God  distinctly,  and  gave  the  sense,  and  caused  them  to  understand  the 
reading."  2.  The  instruction  comprised  exhortation  to  present  duty.  "  By  the 
law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin."  •'  For  all  the  people  wept  when  they  heard  the 
words  of  the  law."  These,  with  them,  were  tears  both  of  alarm  and  compunction — 
of  apprehension  for  the  consequences  of  their  sin  and  godly  sorrow  on  account 
of  it.  It  was  an  expression  of  deep  anxiety,  in  view  of  their  spiritual  danger, 
as  revealed  in  God's  Word.  Some  men  insinuate  that  all  such  agitation  about  the 
state  of  the  soul  is  questionable,  and  not  consistent  with  rational  piety.  Shall  it 
be  deemed  reasonable  that  tears  may  freely  flow  on  account  of  temporal  bereave- 
ments and  losses  and  no  sorrow  be  expressed  in  fear  of  everlasting  ruin  ?  Observe, 
then,  how  nobly  Nehemiah  here  appears  to  give  direction  and  counsel  to  his 
people,  mourning  all  of  them  for  their  iniquity  :  "  This  day  is  holy  unto  the  Lord 
your  God ;  mourn  not,  nor  weep."  It  is  not  implied  that  their  sorrow  was  altogether 
wrong  or  without  foundation,  but  it  was  out  of  time  and  defective  in  its  views  of 
the  Divine  mercy.  It  might  not  take  too  lowly  a  view  of  their  own  sinfulness,  but 
it  was  wanting  in  a  believing  apprehension  of  the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord,  their 
covenant  God.  This  is  needful  caution  for  awakened  ones,  to  make  sure  that  they 
exercise  the  full  look  of  faith  upward  to  grace  as  well  as  downward  to  guilt.  This 
counsel  to  Judah  not  to  weep  prepares  the  way,  and  then  follows  this  threefold  call 
for  relieving  their  sorrows :  "  Go  your  way,  eat  the  fat  and  drink  the  sweet,  and 
Bend  portions  unto  them  for  whom  nothing  is  prepared  ;  for  this  day  is  holy  unto 
our  Lord  ;  neither  be  ye  sorry  :  for  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."  This  is 
first  a  call  to  assuage  their  griefs  in  social  enjoyment  of  the  gifts  of  Providence. 
It  is  not  best  always  to  seek  to  cure  sorrow  by  reasoning  against  it ;  it  is  often 
more  effectual  to  meet  it  with  a  counteracting  joy ;  and  this  is  the  course  here 
followed  by  this  "  son  of  consolation."  This  is  a  call,  moreover,  to  relieve  sorrow 
by  the  exercise  of  benevolence  to  poor  brethren.  "  Send  portions  unto  them  for 
whom  nothing  is  prepared."  To  inherit  the  full  blessing  of  life  it  is  not  enough 
to  partake  of  the  comforts  of  Providence ;  there  requires  to  be  joined  with  this  a 
compassionate  charity  to  the  needy  and  the  destitute.  This  compassion  of  the 
needy  sanctifies  all  the  enjoyments  of  life.  It  possesses  a  wonderful  power  of 
removing  the  load  of  sorrow  from  the  giver's  heart  and  of  chasing  the  cloud 
of  sadness  from  his  brow.     {W.  Ritchie.)        The  open-air  meeting  : — We  see  here — 

I.  That  the  Word  of  God  is  the  great  means  for  the  instruction  of  His  people, 

II.  That  the  Word  of  God  is  not  only  to  be  read,  but  understood.  III.  That 
IT  must  be  read  with  prayer.  IV.  That  this  Word  will  often  rebuke 
us  and  lead  us  to  mourn  after  a  godly  sort.  v.  That  it  will  also 
encourage  us,  and  in  the  end  bring  us  much  joy  and  great  gladness.    VI.  That 

THE    source  of    JOY   AND    THE    SECRET    OP    STRENGTH    IS  DiVINE.       {W.    P.   Lockhart.) 

And  Ezra  the  priest  brought  the  law  before  the  congregation.— Heariy  appre- 
ciation of  God's  Word  : — 1.  The  people  of  Jerusalem,  like  the  disciples  at  Pentecost, 
were  "of  one  accord,  in  one  place."  Their  hearts  were  inclined  to  God's  testi- 
monies. 2.  The  standing  position  is  one  of  respect.  Men  stand  before  their 
superiors.  Moses  before  Pharaoh,  Daniel  before  Nebuchadnezzar.  3.  The  mes- 
sages of  a  king  are  entitled  to  respect.  I  once  witnessed  the  reception  of  a  royal 
message  by  the  Parliament  of  Prussia.  As  the  messenger  entered  the  hall  and  the 
royal  seal  was  broken  "all  the  people  stood  up."  Officers,  members,  and  visitors 
by  one  impulse  rose  to  hear  the  writing  of  their  king.  A  like  impulse  moved  the 
people  before  whom  Ezra  brought  the  law.  4.  A  proper  appreciation  of  God's 
Word  is  necessary  to  spiritual  success.  5.  Eespect  for  God's  Word  involves  respect 
for  His  day.  It  is  interesting,  in  this  age  of  Sabbath  desecration,  to  notice  that  in 
the  revival  of  Jewish  institutions  the  observance  of  the  fourth  commandment  was 
enforced  both  among  Jews  and  unbelievers.  6.  Eespect  for  God's  Word  also 
involves  respect  for  His  worship  (vers.  14-16).    Worship  wiU  be  a  delight.    7.  Re- 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vra. 

ligion  is  not  only  joyous,  but  unselfish.  8.  Eespect  for  God's  Word  involves  respect 
for  all  His  commandments.  9.  A  proper  appreciation  of  the  Bible  is  possible  only 
as  its  Divine  authorship  and  object  are  recognised.  10.  The  object  of  the  Bible  is 
to  reveal  God  and  the  duty  He  requires  of  men.  11.  Hov?  are  we  to  show  out 
appreciation  of  the  Bible  ?  Our  duty  is  to  receive  and  use  it.  The  whole  mind  and 
soul  must  lay  hold  of  and  appropriate  its  truths.  It  must  be  esteemed  above  all 
books,  and  its  decisions  recognised  as  final.  A  wealthy  gentleman,  having  built 
him  a  library,  placed  in  it,  on  a  pedestal  high  above  all  the  shelves,  a  copy  of  the 
Bible.  We  should  do  for  the  sacred  volume  what  he  signified  by  this  act.  We 
should  give  it  also  a  place  in  our  affections — such  a  place  as  it  had  in  the  heart  of 
the  Scotch  girl,  who,  when  driven  from  her  burning  home,  cared  first  for  her  copy 
of  the  Scriptures.  12.  We  do  appreciate  the  Bible.  We  read  it  at  family  prayers, 
and  in  our  closets,  and  learn  verses,  and  hear  it  on  Sabbath  from  the  pulpit.  I 
have  heard  that  when,  in  a  long  war,  the  city  of  Haarlem  had  been  desolated  by 
fire  and  sword,  the  news  of  peace  was  a  long  letter,  which  a  feeble  old  man  read 
from  a  window.  His  voice  could  scarcely  be  heard,  yet  the  people  gave  profound 
attention.     When  the  Bible  is  read  men  should  Usten  as  those  burghers  listened. 

13.  The  best  acceptance  of  such  news  is  an  acceptance  of  the  relief  it  brings.  So 
the  best  appreciation  of  the  Bible  is  an  acceptance  of   its  salvation  in  Christ. 

14.  Respect  for  God's  Word  places  it  above  all  creeds  and  criticism.  15.  Bespect  for 
God's  Word  also  demands  that  it  be  handled  reverently.  This  condemns  all  trifling 
with  God's  truth.  All  puns,  parodies,  and  riddles  based  upon  mis-quotation  of  the 
Scriptures  are  hereby  condemned.     {F.  G.  Monfort,  D.D.)        Reading  the  law  : — 

I.      A    NEGLECTED    DiVINE    ORDINANCE    MAI    BE    BESTORED    A3     A     CHANNEL   OF    DiVINB 

GRACE.  Is  there  not  a  suggestion  in  this  incident  of  how  we  may  often  return  to 
methods  of  service,  to  means  of  grace  that  have  been  passed  by,  as  useful  for  the 
present  time  ?  Certain  truths  have  been  allowed  to  remain  in  the  background  for 
a  time  which  may  be  wisely  pressed  at  another.  Currents  never  carry  all  that 
floats  on  their  surface  to  the  sea.  Much  is  left  on  the  banks  of  the  channel.  So 
currents  of  thought  in  any  age  or  time  do  not  carry  forward  all  that  is  valuable. 
There  are  cargoes  of  flotsam  and  jetsam  that  will  reward  the  wreckers  along  the 
shore.      II.  Religious   quickening  mat  result  from  moral  reforms  and    wise 

MEASURES  of  CIVIC  RULERS.      HI.    AlL    DiVINE    ORDINANCES,  AS  WELL   AS    PROVIDENTIAL 

experiences,  are  CHANNELS  FOR  THE  JOT  OF  THE  LoRD.  (Monday  Cluh  Sermons.) 
Reading  the  law : — Concerning  "  the  book,  in  the  law  of  God,"  and  the  giving  of 
the  sense  to  the  people,  we  remark  in  explanation — I.  The  actual  speech  in  which 

THE    gospel   was   FIRST    UTTERED    BT   JeSUS   AND    PROCLAIMED    BT  THE   APOSTLES  AMONG 

THE  Israelites  is  here,  probablt  for  the  first  time,  publiclt  put  to  sacred 
USE.  The  old  Hebrew  language  in  which  the  law  was  written  had  become,  when 
the  exile  was  over,  the  tongue  of  the  learned.  It  was  unknown  to  the  common 
people,  as  that  of  Spencer  and  Chaucer  is  unknown  to  us.  Interpreters  were 
necessary.  Ezra  knew  the  need,  and  provided  for  it.  The  Levites  gave  the  sense 
and  caused  the  people  to  understand  the  reading.  II.  In  this  event  we  behold  the 
RISE  of  the  SYNAGOGUE  AND  OF  STSTEMATic  BiBLE  STUDY.  From  the  time  of  Ezra 
the  temple  gradually  retired  into  the  background,  and  the  synagogue  came  into 
prominence.  The  pulpit  and  sermons  were  institutions.  The  soul  was  nurtured 
by  Bible  study.  Less  and  less  did  the  priests  wield  power  in  the  regions  beyond 
Jerusalem,  and  more  and  more  did  the  congregations  or  synagogues  become  like 
our  best  modern  prayer-meetings,  where  speech  and  devotional  service  are  free. 
When  Christianity  spread  over  the  world  the  synagogue  was  its  cradle.  Every- 
where the  apostles  found  first  welcome  here  and  the  place  and  privilege  of  preaching 
Christ.  In  the  substitution  of  prayer  for  sacrifice,  in  the  triumph  of  moral  over 
mechanical  functions  of  worship,  we  see  a  tremendous  advance,  and  read  for  our 
times  an  inspiring  lesson.  (IF.  Elliot  GriJJis.)  The  reading  of  the  laio  : — In 
this  scene  are  suggested — I.  Some  sources  of  power  in  preaching.  1.  The  simple 
proclamation  of  the  law  of  God.  2.  The  statement  of  God's  work  in  human 
history.  2.  The  earnest  utterance  of  intelligent  faith.  II.  The  conditions  fob 
PROFITABLY  HEARING  THE  WoRD  OP  GoD.  1.  An  arouscd  interest.  2.  A  prayerful 
spirit.  3.  Listening  with  the  resolve  to  obey.  III.  Practical  lessons.  1.  Love 
for  the  law  makes  noble  men.  2.  Honouring  the  law  insures  the  prosperity  of  the 
Church.  (Monday  Cluh  Sermons.)  Ezra  expounding  the  law: — I.  A  largk 
gathering.  There  are  two  important  advantages  connected  with  a  numerous 
congregation  over  one  that  is  thinly  attended.  1.  It  gives  an  opportunity  for 
more  extensive  usefulness.    We  grant  that  there  is  not  a  little  to  encourage  even 


CHAP,  nil.]  NEHEMIAH.  109 

those  whose  hearers  are  few,  "  For  where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  My 
name,  there  am  I  in  the  midst  of  them."  "  A  sportsman,"  says  Jay,  "  has  fired 
into  a  flight  of  birds  and  not  kUIed  one,  and  he  has  killed  one  when  he  had  only 
one  to  aim  at."  That  may  be  true ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  if  two  anglers  went 
forth  with  rod  and  line  to  spend  a  day  in  fishing,  it  would  be  naturally  expected 
that  the  largest  number  would  be  caught  by  him  who  had  secured  a  pond  where 
fish  were  abundant,  rather  than  by  the  other,  who  had  toiled  from  morning  till 
night  in  a  place  where  they  were  scarce.  2.  Large  congregations  possess  a  peculiar 
power  of  stimulating  those  who  have  to  address  them.  Probably  the  man  has 
never  yet  lived  who  could  long  be  an  orator  before  a  small  assembly.  Even  Cicero 
<50uld  not  deliver  his  famous  oration  in  behalf  of  the  poet  Archias,  though 
addressed  to  a  single  man,  without  having  aU  that  was  learned  and  great  in  Eome  to 
listen  to  him.  Those  who  love  the  means  of  grace  should  do  all  they  can  to  induce 
their  friends  and  neighbours  to  attend.  II.  An  open-air  gathering.  III.  A  pro- 
tracted  GATHERING.      IV.   An    ATTENTIVE   GATHERING.      V.   A   DEVOUT,    EARNEST,    AND 

REVERENTIAL  GATHERING.  To  Stand  in  awe  of  God's  holy  Word,  whenever  it  is  read 
and  expounded  in  our  hearing,  indicates  a  right  state  of  mind ;  and  those  who  are 
1;hus  influenced  are  regarded  by   God  with   approval    and  delight   (Isa.  Ixvi.   2). 

VI.    An  INTELLIGENT  AND  WELL-INSTRUCTED  GATHERING.     (ExpOSitOry  OutUneS.)  The 

Scriptures  related  to  revwals  of  religion : — Every  great  revival  of  religion  has  had 
its  beginning  in  this  hunger  for  the  Word,  and  has  been  pei-manent  and  wide- 
spread exactly  in  proportion  as  it  has  been  rooted  in  the  Scriptures.  There  is 
Wickliffe,  frightened  like  the  rest  of  the  nation  by  the  plague  that  had  swept  from 
Asia  to  Europe,  and  now  had  burst  upon  England,  sounding  in  the  ears  of  men 
like  the  trump  of  the  judgment  day.  Lying  in  his  cell  poring  over  the  pages  of  an 
old  Latin  Bible,  he  finds  the  truth  that  fills  his  soul  with  the  sweetness  of  God's 
peace  and  the  music  of  heaven.  At  once  he  began  to  translate  passages  of  the 
blessed  book  into  English,  and  sent  them  forth  by  his  "  poor  priests,"  as  they  were 
-called,  to  be  read  as  best  they  might  amongst  the  peasants  of  England ;  and  so 
came  the  dawning  of  the  day  of  God  upon  our  land.  Thus,  too,  was  it  that  the 
later  reformation  had  its  birth.  Erasmus  had  sent  to  Cambridge  his  new  trans- 
lation of  the  Greek  Testament;  and  a  copy  of  it  comes  into  the  hands  of  "Little 
Bilney,"  who  tells  us  how  that  on  the  first  reading  of  it  he  chanced  on  these 
words,  "  It  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  men  to  be  embraced,  that  Christ 
Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  of  whom  I  am  chief."  "  These  words," 
Bays  he,  "  by  God's  inward  working  did  so  lift  up  my  poor  bruised  spirit,  that  the 
very  bones  within  me  leapt  for  joy  and  gladness."  Then  forthwith,  he,  unable  to 
keep  the  sweet  secret  to  himself,  goes  to  confess  his  soul  to  Father  Latimer,  and 
pours  out  the  story  of  his  great  discovery,  how  that  being  justified  by  faith  he  has 
peace  with  God  through  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  thus  Latimer  was  led  into  the 
light,  and  became  the  great  preacher  of  the  English  Eeformation.  And  Luther, 
more  slowly,  but  no  less  surely,  is  led  by  the  study  of  the  Word  of  God  to  the  great 
truth  which  comes  back  again  to  him,  as  from  the  lips  of  God,  whilst  crawling  up 
the  steps  of  the  sacred  stairs  in  Kome,  "  The  just  shall  live  by  faith."  It  was  two 
iundred  years  later  that  a  little  meeting  was  being  held  in  Aldersgate  Street, 
London,  where  one  was  reading  Luther's  Preface  to  the  Romans ;  and  amongst 
the  company  was  one  who,  as  he  listens,  tells  us  that  he  felt  his  heart  strangely 
warned :  "  I  did  trust  in  Christ,  Christ  alone,  for  salvation,"  says  he,  "  and  an 
assurance  was  given  me  that  He  had  taken  away  my  sins,  even  mine."  So  was  it 
that  John  Wesley  went  forth  to  claim  the  whole  world  for  his  parish,  and  uplift  the 
nation  by  the  Word  of  truth,  the  gospel  of  our  salvation.  {Sunday  School.)  Im- 
proper hearing  of  the  Scriptures : — Suppose  a  company  of  people  coming,  not  to  an 
elbow,  but  to  a  working  goldsmith's  shop ;  one  buys  a  chain,  another  a  diamond 
ring ;  this  buys  a  jewel,  that  a  rich  piece  of  plate ;  and  that  there  should  be  one 
amongst  them  so  self-conceited,  should  take  up  a  coal  from  off  the  floor,  and 
handle  it  so  long,  till  he  had  all  besmeared  his  fingers,  refusing  what  the  shop 
afforded,  so  as  he  might  but  have  that  coal  along  with  him.  Were  not  this  great 
absurdity  ?  Yet  such  and  more  is  the  condition  of  those  captious  hearers  of  God's 
Word,  that  while  others  carry  away  good  and  wholesome  doctrine,  precious 
promises,  such  as  is  food  for  their  souls,  they  come  only  to  carp  and  catch  at  their 
minister,  that  so  they  may  more  easily  traduce  him,  and  brand  him  with  the  black 
coal  of  infamy  and  disgrace.  {J.  Spencer.)  All  the  Bible  wanted  : — A  little  blind 
girl  in  Cairo,  who  had  read  a  copy  of  the  Psalms  in  Arabic,  by  the  aid  of  Dr.  Moon's 
•"Alphabet  for  the  Blind,"  sent  a  message  by  a  gentleman  who  was  coming  to 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  thi. 

England,  "  Please  tell  Dr.  Moon,  when  you  see  him,  I  am  so  hungry,  I  want  all  the 
Bible."  {Great  Thoughts.)  Familiarity  with  theBible ;  its  danger : — There  were 
no  listless  or  indifferent  ones  among  them.  They  had  been  so  long  without  the 
Word  of  God  that  their  appetites  were  whetted.  We  are  so  familiar  with  it  that 
possibly  we  are  not  as  sensitive  to  its  Divineness  as  we  should  be.  Our  familiarity^ 
induces  a  measure  of  indifference.  The  settlers  of  Arizona  walked  over  their  fields 
for  years  without  knowing  that  untold  treasures  of  precious  ore  lay  just  below  the. 
surface.  Thus  we  treat  our  Bibles  as  we  treat  other  books ;  but  other  books  are 
mere  pasture-land,  while  this  is  a  goldfield.  (D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  And  the  ears 
of  all  the  people  were  attentive  imto  the  book  of  the  law. — Constant  attention : — 
One  of  Mr.  Browning's  particular  pleasures  was  to  lie  beside  a  hedge,  or  deep  in 
meadow  grasses,  or  under  a  tree,  and  there  to  give  himself  up  so  absolutely  to  the 
life  of  the  moment  that  even  the  shy  birds  would  alight  close  by,  and  sometimes- 
venturesomely  poise  themselves  upon  his  body.  I  have  heard  him  say  that  his 
faculty  of  observation  would  not  have  appeared  despicable  to  an  Iroquois  Indian. 
He  saw  everything — the  bird  on  the  wing,  the  snail  dragging  its  shell  up  the  wood- 
bine, the  bee  adding  to  his  golden  treasure,  the  green  fly  darting  hither  and  thither 
like  an  animated  seedling,  the  spider  weaving  her  gossamer  from  twig  to  twig,  the 
woodpecker  scrutinising  the  lichen  on  the  gnarled  oak,  the  passage  of  the  wind 
across  the  grass,  the  motions  and  shadows  of  the  clouds.  And  his  own  words  are 
"  Keep  but  ever  looking,  whether  with  the  body's  eye  or  the  mind's,  and  you  wilj 
soon  find  something  to  look  onl  "  (William  Sharp.)  Attention  and  retention 
of  Divine  truth  : — It  is  related  that  Gotthold  had  for  some  purpose  taken  from 
a  cupboard  a  phial  of  rose-water,  and,  after  using  it,  inconsiderately  left  it  unstopped. 
Observing  it  some  time  after,  he  found  that  all  the  strength  and  sweetness  of  the 
perfume  had  evaporated.  Here,  thought  he,  is  a  striking  emblem  of  a  heart  fond 
of  the  world  and  open  to  the  impression  of  outward  objects.  What  good  does  it  do 
to  take  such  a  heart  to  the  house  of  God,  and  there  fill  it  with  the  precious  essence- 
of  the  roses  of  paradise,  which  are  the  truths  of  Scripture  ?  What  good  to  kindle 
in  a  glow  of  devotion,  if  we  afterward  neglect  to  close  the  outlet — that  is,  keeping, 
the  Word  in  an  honest  and  good  heart  ?  (Luke  viii.  15).  How  vain  to  hear  much, 
but  to  retain  little,  and  practise  less !  How  vain  to  experience  within  us  sacred  and 
holy  emotions,  unless  we  are  afterward  careful  to  close  the  heart  by  careful  and 
diligent  reflection  and  prayer,  and  so  keep  it  unspotted  from  the  world !  Negleci 
this  duty,  and  the  whole  strength  and  spirit  of  devotion  evaporates  and  leaves  only 
a  lifeless  froth  behind.  (Christian  Age.)  And  Ezra  the  scribe  stood  upon  a 
pulpit  of  wood. — The  oldest  pulpit : — We  offer  three  remarks  upon  this  old  pulpit. 

I.  It  was  occcpied  by  duly  qualified  men.  Ezra  the  priest  and  scribe,  with 
thirteen  other  Levites,  occupied  this  pulpit.  They  were  the  recognised  teachers  of 
Israel.  Who  is  the  duly  qualified  preacher  of  the  truth  ?  The  man  who  is  superior 
to  the  people  in  mental  capability,  spiritual  intelligence,  and  practical  godliness,, 
having  the  power  to  convey  his  thoughts  acceptably,  and  with  propriety  and  foroe» 

II.  This  old  pulpit  was  attended  by  ar  exemplary  congregation.  1.  It  was  a 
congregation  disposed  to  hear.  2.  It  was  a  congregation  competent  to  understands 
3.  It  was  a  congregation  deeply  interested  in  the  discourse.  4.  It  was  a  congre- 
gation inspired  with  religious  reverence.  III.  This  old  pulpit  accomplished  thb- 
GRAND  end  of  PREACHING.  1.  It  imparted  spiritual  instruction.  2.  It  made  a  deep 
religious  impression.    3.  It  stimulated  a  practical  godliness.     (Homilist.) 

Ver.  6.  And  all  the  people  answered.  Amen,  Amen. — "  Amen  "  in  public  worship : — 
The  subject  is :  That  it  is  a  lawful  and  laudable  practice  for  people,  in  the  conclusion 
of  pubUc  prayer  or  praising  God,  to  pronounce  an  amen.  I.  I  will  explain  what- 
IS  MEANT  BY  "  AMEN."  1.  There  is  an  amen  substantive.  And  that  is  God  Himself 
(Rev.  iii.  14).  2.  There  is  an  amen  affirmative — a  phrase  used  in  the  beginning  of 
any  momentous  truth,  as  an  asseveration  (Matt.  ivi.  28;  Luke  ix.  27).  3.  There  is 
an  optative  amen — "Let  it  be  so"  (Jer.  xxviii.  6;  1  Kings  i.  36;  Num.  v.  22; 
Deut.  xxvii.  15-2G).  II.  Show  what  warrant  there  is  for  the  practice. 
1.  Assent  to  repetitions  is  essential  unto  prayer,  and  it  is  not  signified  publicly  but 
by  our  amen.  2.  We  have  the  practice  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament  believers  for 
our  example.  Moses  in  Numbers  and  Deuteronomy ;  David  (Psa.  li.  13,  cvi.  48) ; 
Jeremiah  (Jer.  li.  5) ;  Paul  (1  Cor.  xiv.  16 ;  Eph.  iii.  21)  ;  Christ  Himself 
(Matt.  vi.  9-13 ;  Rev.  v.  14,  vii.  11,  12,  xix.  1-6,  xxii.  20).  3.  Amen  after  prayer 
and  praise  is  the  man's  consent,  judgment,  and  approbation  of  what  is  offered  unto- 
God.    4.  This  vocal  amen  is,  as  it  were,  the  epitome  and  sum  of  all  our  petitioim 


CHAP,  vui.]  NEHEMIAH.  Ill 

and  praises  to  God.  It  is  the  centre  which  all  those  lines  are  drawn  towards.  It 
is  all  the  duty  virtually  reduced  to  one  word  and  point.  It  is  the  repeating  and 
echoing,  or  redoubling  of  all  over  again.  As  the  mercury  behind  the  glass,  it 
reverberates  the  lively  image  of  all  preceding  devotion.  It  is  the  drawing  the 
arrow  to  the  pile  by  a  strong  ejaculation  in  Bellarmine's  phrase,  '*  Whereby  the 
whole  heart  is  darted  up  to  God."  It  is  a  "  stirring  up  of  ourselves  to  take  hold  of 
God  "  (Isa.  liiv.  7).  It  is  taking  aim,  and  "  directing  our  prayer  to  Him  and  looking 
up  "  (Psa.  v.  3),  as  if  they  would  hand  up  God's  praises  to  Him,  and  stand  ready  to 
receive  His  mercies  with  open  hands  and  mouths.  It  winds  up  all  together  in  one 
bundle.  5.  Amen,  rightly  pronounced,  is  an  intensive  act  of  faith,  or  it  involves  a 
strong  faith.  (1)  That  God  is  firm  and  immutably  true  in  Himself  and  His  Word. 
(2)  That  we  will  not  only  believe  His  truth,  but  trust  to  His  veracity  and  build  upon 
it  (Jer.  xi.  5).  The  Jews  say  "  amen  "  hath  three  kernels ;  the  one  is  of  an  oath, 
the  second  of  faith,  the  third  of  confidence.  6.  The  unanimous  pronunciation  of 
amen  is  an  assurance  that  God  will  accept  our  praises  and  answer  our  prayers 
(Matt,  zviii.  19 ;  Mark  xi.  23).  7.  This  unanimous  amen  of  faith  strikes  terror  in 
the  enemies  of  the  Church,  whether  devils  or  men.  When  the  Romans  had 
conquered  Philip  and  the  Grecians,  and  Flaminius  caused  peace  to  be  proclaimed 
to  the  Grecians,  "  there  was  such  a  shout,"  says  Plutarch,  "that  the  very  crows  and 
other  birds  fell  down  to  the  ground."  Our  amens  must  not  drop  like  a  cold  bullet 
of  lead  out  of  the  mouth  of  a  musket,  bowing  to  the  ground  ;  but  they  must  be  fired 
by  preparations  of  the  heart  and  warm  affections,  they  must  be  discharged  and  shot 
off  with  the  utmost  vehemency  of  the  soul  and  fervency  of  the  spirit.  When  God's 
people  can  unite  in  one  voice,  God  gives  His  voice  with  them  and  for  them.  {Thomas 
Woodcock  A.M.)  Amen  : — St.  Jerome  tells  us  it  was  the  custom  in  his  days 

to  close  up  every  prayer  with  such  a  unanimous  consent  that  their  amen  rang  and 
echoed  in  the  church,  and  sounded  like  the  fall  of  waters  or  the  noise  of  thunder. 
The  Chinese  have  no  word  which  will  compare  with  our  English  word  amen.  They 
Bay  instead  :  "  Sin  yenen  ching  sing  " — '•  The  heart  wishes  exactly  so." 

Yer.  8.  So  they  read  in  the  book  In  the  law  of  God  distinctly,  and  gare  the 
sense. — The  Bible  ought  to  be  intelligently  understood : — It  is  to  be  feared  that 
nowadays  there  are  some  Christians  who,  although  they  almost  worship  the  Bible, 
care  little  for  an  intelligent  understanding  of  its  contents.  The  sacred  Scriptures 
are  useful  to  us  in  proportion  as  they  help  us  to  worship  God  more  reverently, 
intelligently,  and  spiritually ;  and  therefore  we  truly  honour  them  by  diligently 
seeking  to  understand  their  real  sense,  and  to  profit  by  their  meaning.  (T.  Campbell 
Finlayson.)  The  viission  of  the  pulpit : — The  pulpit  of  Ezra  was  the  place  for  the 
unfolding  of  the  law  of  God.  It  was  the  place  of  a  new  religious  departure. 
Formerly  the  temple  had  filled  the  whole  religious  horizon  of  the  Jew.  It  was  the 
Alpha  and  Omega  of  his  faith.  The  temple  was  a  place  for  sacrifice,  not  instruction. 
It  was  the  home  and  sphere  not  of  the  scribe  or  prophet,  but  of  the  priest.  Its  chief 
object  was  not  a  pulpit  or  a  desk,  but  an  altar.  In  it  the  law  was  not  unfolded,  but  the 
▼ictim  slain.  But  before  us  we  have  the  introduction  of  a  new  element  into  the 
religious  realm.  The  altar  falls  into  the  background,  the  pulpit  comes  to  the  front. 
The  priest  is  shadowed  by  the  scribe.  It  is  the  beginning  of  an  order  of  things 
which  has  quietly  gone  forward  ever  since.  The  modern  pulpit  is  connected  by 
subtle,  mental,  and  spiritual  associations  with  that  of  Ezra.  Our  worship  of 
instruction  is  the  gradual  outgrowth  of  that  begun  by  this  scribe  of  old.  This  desk 
is  consecrated  to  a  like  purpose.  It  is  the  place  where  the  law  of  God  may  be  read 
and  expounded ;  not  of  course  within  the  narrow  limits  imposed  upon  Ezra.  Before 
him  lay  only  the  scroll  of  the  law.  It  was  but  the  beginning  of  the  sacred  oracles. 
The  hazy  lamp  of  the  olden  time  which  Ezra  held  has  grown  clear  and  clearer  until 
its  light  is  as  the  sun  in  the  perfect  day.  But  it  is  stiU  a  law,  not  in  the  sense  that 
it  is  one  long  list  of  commandments,  but  in  the  far  higher  sense — that  it  is  the 
unfolding  of  the  eternal  mind  to  men.  God's  thoughts  ought  to  be  man's  law. 
There  is  a  law  higher  than  that  of  commandment.  Commandment  can  only  work 
in  the  lowest  realm.  I  can  bid  my  child  to  do  or  leave  undone  certain  things,  but 
higher  than  these  are  my  thoughts  of  what  he  might  be  and  my  longings  for  what 
he  should  be.  I  can't  put  these  into  commandments,  or  into  law.  They  are  too 
high  for  that.  And  yet  they  ought  to  be  my  child's  highest  law,  moving  him  far 
more  strongly  than  my  mere  commands.  Here  we  have  "  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  Ufa 
in  Christ  Jesus."  The  very  centre  of  God's  purpose  for  us — His  highest  command- 
ment.    Such  ia  our  law.     How  has  it  to  be  treated  ?     1.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  pulpit 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha?.  vra. 

to  give  the  sense  of  Scripture.  It  is  no  part  of  that  duty  to  make  nonsense  of  it, 
to  wrest  it,  to  handle  it  deceitfully.  This  has  too  often  been  done.  Even  by  learned 
men — e.g.,  Augustine  insisted  that  the  Psalms  ascribed  in  their  titles  to  Korah  are 
descriptions  of  the  Passion,  and  that  the  sons  of  Korah  are  Christians  because  Eorah 
in  Hebrew  and  Calvary  in  Latin  may  be  translated  "  baldhead,"  and  because  Elisha 
was  derided  under  that  name.  Gregory  the  Great  saw  the  twelve  apostles,  and 
therefore  the  clergy  in  the  seven  sons  of  Job,  and  the  lay  worshippers  of  the  Trinity 
in  his  three  daughters.  Scripture  is  not  to  be  played  with  in  that  style.  "  We 
must  give  the  sense."  2.  Not  only  was  the  sense  given,  but  it  was  given  in  the 
language  of  the  people,  their  common,  every-day  speech.  It  is  our  duty  to  set  forth 
God's  law  in  language  that  will  be  intelligible  to  the  people.  It  is  possible  to  put  it 
into  English  and  yet  be  unintelligible.  If  the  law  be  made  known  in  the  technical 
language  of  theology,  or  even  of  literature,  it  may  utterly  fail  of  its  purpose.  The 
law  of  God  may  be  spoken  in  speech  understood  of  the  people,  and  yet  not  adapted 
to  their  needs.  It  must  be  spoken  not  only  in  the  language  of  our  time,  but  suited 
to  its  present  wants.  In  his  Aids  to  Keflection,  S.  T.  Coleridge  says  "  that  there  is 
one  sure  way  of  giving  freshness  and  importance  to  the  most  commonplace  maxims, 
that  of  reflecting  on  them  in  direct  reference  to  our  own  state  and  conduct,  to  our 
own  past  and  future  being."  When  you  think  of  those  whose  high  functions  are 
discharged  in  the  pulpit  there  is  no  prayer  more  necessary  to  be  offered  than  this, 
that  they  may  be  "  men  having  understanding  of  the  times  to  know  what  Israel 
ought  to  do."  3.  It  may  be  still  further  worthy  of  remark  that  Ezra  and  his 
disciples  spoke  to  the  people  the  law  of  God.  Printed  will  never  take  the  place  of 
spoken  words.  Christ  said  to  the  disciples,  "  Go  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every 
creature."  The  word  "  preach  "  means  to  make  known  as  a  herald.  The  herald'a 
voice  is  more  powerful  than  a  printed  proclamation.  The  voice  carries  feeling 
better  than  the  printed  page.  Life  expresses  itself  more  fuUy  through  the  voice 
than  by  paper  or  book.  The  world  has  caught  its  highest  inspiration  through 
spoken  words.  Great  changes,  political,  social,  moral,  religious,  have  been  brought 
about  by  the  speech  of  mighty  men.  The  Corn  Laws  would  never  have  been 
repealed  by  books  on  the  subject.  Slavery  would  never  have  been  abolished  by 
anti-slavery  literature.     {W.  Garrett  Horder.) 

Vers.  9, 10.  This  day  is  holy  unto  the  Lord  your  God ;  mourn  not,  nor  weep. — 

True  penitence  and  spasmodic  emotion : — Observe  the  profound  wisdom  of  Nehemiah's 
injunction.  The  distress  of  the  people  was  not  unnatural ;  neither  was  it  excessive. 
It  might,  however,  through  indulgence  of  it,  have  become  excessive  and  unreal.  The 
surest  test  by  which  to  distinguish  between  true  penitence  and  spasmodic  emotion 
is  to  set  a  man  about  the  common  duties  of  life.  If,  amid  the  distractions  of  these 
things,  he  loses  his  contrition,  it  is  evident  that  he  never  was  earnestly  contrite ; 
that  his  was  mere  excited  sensibility  and  not  inward  feeling.  And  even  a  true 
emotion  requires  to  be  directed  into  wholesome  channels.  There  was  hard  work 
for  these  Jews  to  do  ;  the  whole  task  of  religious  reformation  lay  before  them.  Their 
penitence  needed  to  be  husbanded  for  future  motive,  not  wasted  in  floods  of  tears 
and  the  ecstasy  of  a  common  weeping.  It  may  seem  strange  to  us  that  a  cold 
external  commandment  should  have  been  the  consideration  by  which  they  were 
bidden  to  self-restraint.  But  when  people  have  lost  their  self-control  it  is  only  by 
an  external  influence  that  they  can  be  recovered.  If  you  have  to  do  with  hysterical 
persons,  it  is  not  along  the  line  of  their  feeling  you  restore  them,  but  by  definitely 
settling  yourself  against  it ;  not  by  sympathising  with  their  emotion  and  words  of 
tenderness,  but  by  the  quick,  sharp  rebuke,  "  Enough  of  this ;  you  must  ilot  give 
way."  You  recover  the  widowed  mother  to  composure  by  bidding  her,  not  indeed 
forget  her  dead  husband,  but  remember  her  living  children.  We  always  draw  back 
stricken  mourners  to  hope  and  usefulness  by  reminding  them  of  imperative  and 
healing  duty.  (A.  Mackerinal.)  Go  your  way,  eat  the  fat  .  .  .  send  portions  .  .  . 
for  whom  nothing  is  prepared. — Christian  sympathy  : — I.  The  characters 
SPECIFIED  IN  THE  TEXT.  They  are  said  to  be  those  "  for  whom  nothing  is  prepared." 
The  Scriptures,  when  speaking  of  man's  condition  by  nature  and  practice,  in  the 
sight  of  God,  very  pointedly  state  the  matter.  The  language  of  the  text  speaks  of  our 
poverty,  destitution,  starvation,  and  ruin.  II.  The  "portions" — these  blessings. 
Behold  the  grace  and  mercy  of  Godl  If  God  meted  out  to  us  mere  justice,  where 
should  we  be?  and  if  God  left  us  in  our  condemnation  and  ruin,  where  should  we 
go  ?  If  God  neglected  us,  in  what  condition  should  we  be  ?  Was  God  under  any 
obligation  to  us  ?    And  yet  we  are  in  mercy  spared,  and  instead  of  vengeance,  behold 


CHAP,  vm.]  NEHEMIAH.  113 

our  text  speaks  of  "  blessings."  And  these  are  not  only  worthy  of  God  to  give,  but 
blessings  suitable  to  us.  III.  The  command  :  "  Send."  {H.  Allen,  M.A.)  For  the 
joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength. — The  joy  of  a  Christian : — Let  us  bear  in  mind 
three  things — I.  A  bright  and  happy  walk  is  one  of  the  greatest  ornaments  of 
OUR  Christian  profession.  II.  Indulgence  of  sin,  carelessness  of  walk,  incon- 
sistency OF  conversation,  will  surely  bring  a  cloud  over  the  Christian's  joy. 
III.  In  Christ  alone  must  we  place  all  our  hope  and  confidence.  (J.  31. 
Eandall.)  Pure  joy  an  inspiration  : — It  refreshes  and  exhilarates  the  whole 
nature.  It  helps  to  fortify  the  soul  against  the  assaults  of  the  devil.  See  how  the 
joy  of  a  human  affection  will  often  lift  a  young  man  right  out  of  the  range  of  low, 
sensual  temptations,  and  fire  his  soul  with  noble  and  worthy  ambitions.  Can  we 
wonder  then,  that  it  should  be  true  of  the  joy  which  springs  from  the  revelation 
of  God's  protection  and  favour  ?     (T.  Campbell  Finlayson.)         Spiritual  joy  : — 

1,  Believers  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  are  called  upon  to  rejoice.  Would  that 
this  were  more  remembered  by  us,  and  experienced  by  us,  and  gloried  in !  1.  None 
but  the  believer  ought  to  rejoice,  fl  do  not  deny  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as 
natural  joy  in  natural  objects.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  natural  joy  oftentimes 
stirred  up  on  spiritual  subjects.  It  is  like  the  arrow  that  passes  through  the  air ;  it 
is  like  the  early  frost — the  sun  arises  and  it  is  gone.  Oh !  no  one  can  rejoice  but 
the  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  the  worldly  man  does  not  know  what  true 
joy  is.  You  cannot  explain  it  to  him  ;  he  cannot  receive  it ;  he  calls  it  enthusiasm, 
fancy,  and  imagination.  A  Christless  man,  a  graceless  man,  a  prayerless  man,  a 
thoughtless  man,  a  godless  man,  a  hopeless  man,  how  can  I  expect  him  to  rejoice. 
In  this  one  thing  thou  canst  rejoice :  thou  canst  rejoice  that  the  door  of  mercy  is 
not  closed.  For  their  own  sakes,  the  Lord  will  have  His  people  to  rejoice.  He  loves 
them ;  and  therefore  He  commands  them  to  be  happy.  For  the  sake  of  others,  Ha 
■would  have  them  to  rejoice.  He  would  have  them  bring  the  grapes,  to  show  the 
fruit  of  the  land.  And  not  only  so,  but  for  His  own  great  name's  sake,  for  His 
glory's  sake.  He  would  have  His  people  rejoice.  As  He  is  Himself  infinitely  happy 
in  Himself,  He  would  have  His  people  reflect  Himself.  II.  As  this  joy  is  not  a 
natural  joy  in  natural  objects,  so  it  is  not  a  natural  joy  in  spiritual  objects, 
BUT  it  is  "  the  joy  OF  THE  LoRD."  1.  It  is  prc-cminently  and  peculiarly  the  joy  of 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  author.  Nature  gives  it  not ;  nature  maintains  it  not. 
It  is  the  fruit  of  the  Holy  Ghost:  "the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace." 

2.  But  observe,  it  is  not  only  the  joy  of  the  Lord,  but  it  is  joy  in  the  Lord.  That 
which  made  the  eunuch's  heart  rejoice  was  Jesus.  And  if  you  and  I  see  Him  with 
the  eye  of  faith  at  this  moment,  we  shall  rejoice  and  be  glad  too.  Oh !  there  is 
everything  in  Jesus  to  make  the  soul  to  rejoice.  What  is  there  not  in  His  work,  to 
make  the  soul  to  rejoice?  The  completeness  of  His  atonement.  Is  there  not 
enough  cause  in  the  matchless,  majestic,  glorious  righteousness  to  make  the  soul 
rejoice  ?  III.  That  this  "  joy  of  the  Lord  "  is  not  for  our  own  enjoyment  merely, 
NOB  FOR  our  self-gratification,  BUT  TO  STRENGTHEN  US.  There  are  two  passages  of 
Scripture,  to  which  I  would  direct  your  attention  here.  In  the  first  place,  remark 
in  the  first  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians,  the  twenty-fifth  verse— "And  having 
this  confidence,  I  know  that  I  shall  abide  and  continue  with  you  all  for  your 
furtherance  and  joy  of  faith."  See  how  "furtherance"  stands  connected  with 
"  joy  of  faith  "  ;  joy  springing  from  faith,  and  that  joy  furthering,  advancing,  lead- 

"  ing  onwards  and  forwards,  in  the  Divine  life.  Observe  too  in  the  third  of  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  the  sixth  verse,  there  is  that  same  rejoicing,  "  the  rejoicing 
of  hope,"  and  see  how  it  stands  connected  with  the  confidence  of  hope :  "  if  we 
hold  fast  the  confidence  and  the  rejoicing  of  the  hope  firm  unto  the  end."  We  have 
some  precious  instances  in  the  Word  of  God,  to  show  the  strengthening  power  of 
joy.  Observe  one  in  the  thirtieth  of  the  first  of  Samuel.  David  was,  as  you  and  I 
often  are,  "  greatly  distressed,"  "for  the  people  spake  of  stoning  him,  because  the 
soul  of  all  the  people  was  grieved,  every  man  for  his  sons,  and  for  his  daughters ; 
but  " — ah  !  that  "  but,"  it  is  a  volume,  it  is  a  folio — "  but  David  encouraged  himself 
in  the  Lord  his  God."  Observe  how  that  strengthened  him.  Do  you  ask.  What  is 
that  which  strengthens  for  service?  It  is  "  the  joy  of  the  Lord."  Take  the 
instance  of  the  prophet  Isaiah.  Now  observe — "Also  I  heard  the  voice  of  the 
Lord  saying,  Whom  shall  I  send,  and  who  will  go  for  us  ?  Then  said  I,  Here  am 
I ;  send  me."  "  Then  "  said  I.  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  was  his  strength  "  :  "  whither- 
soever Thou  wouldst  send  me  I  go."  Ajid  now  there  are  some  few  remarks  I  would 
make  by  way  of  conclusion.  1.  In  the  first  place,  I  would  say,  that  the  believer  is 
placed  by  his  covenant  God  and  Father  in  that  position  that  he  requires  day  by  day 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nn. 

fresh  accession  of  strength.  2.  Then  the  question  now  arises,  How  comes  it  to 
pass  that  there  is  so  much  feebleness  amongst  many  of  the  real  children  of  God  if 
the  "  joy  of  the  Lord  "  is  our  strength  ?  May  we  not  at  once  answer,  Because  they 
do  so  little  enjoy  "  the  joy  of  the  Lord  "  ?  3.  Remember  that  this  is  a  joy  which 
the  Holy  Ghost  alone  can  give ;  ask  it,  then,  of  Him  ;  wait  on  Him  for  it ;  use  every 
means  for  it.  (J.  H.  Evans.)  Joy  of  tlu  Lord  : — There  is  a  joy  that  enervates 
one's  powers.  The  joy  of  the  miser,  the  joy  of  the  worldling,  the  joy  of  all  carnal 
gratification.  The  strength  of  a  good  man  is  "  the  joy  of  the  Lord."  Observe — I.  Thk 
NATOKE  OF  KEL1GI0U8  JOY.  1.  It  is  purc.  2.  It  is  clcvating.  3.  It  is  solid.  4.  It  is 
durable.  6.  It  is  heavenly.  6.  It  is  Divine.  II.  The  conditions  of  belioious  jot. 
(Homiletic  Review.)  Religious  joy  : — I.  The  jot  hebe  spoken  of  is  said  to  be  "  of 
THE  LoBD,"  AKD  IT  IS  SO  IN  A  TWOFOLD  SENSE.  1.  God  imparts  it — it  is  one  of  the 
fruits  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22;  Rom.  xiv.  17).  2.  God  Himself  shares  in  it 
(Isa.  liv.  19  ;  Jer.  liii.  11,  xxiiii.  9 ;  Zeph.  iii.  17).  H.  The  jot  of  the  Lord  is 
said  to  BE  A  stbength;  and  it  is  so.  1.  Because  it  is  of  God.  2.  Because,  as  such, 
it  enables  ns  to  bear  up  against  the  ills  and  disappointments  of  life  (Psa.  iv.  7). 
Witness  what  it  did  for  David,  Daniel,  Paul,  and  Silas.  3.  Because,  when  earthly 
joys  fail,  the  "  joy  of  the  Lord  "  remains  ("  your  joy  no  man  taketh  from  you  ") ; 
and  on  the  very  ruins  of  the  former  the  latter  ofttimes  finds  the  soil  most  fitted  to 
its  growth,  in.  To  whom  the  "  jot  of  the  Lobd  "  is  given.  It  is  imparted  to  those 
only — 1.  Who  are  in  union  and  communion  with  Jesus  Christ;  this  is  its  true 
source.  2.  Who  ask  for  it  by  earnest  prayer.  "  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive,  that  your 
joy  may  be  full  "  (John  xvi.  24).  3.  Who  love  God,  and  keep  His  commandments 
(Psa.  xix.  8).  IV.  Fob  what  pubpose  it  is  given.  It  is  imparted — 1.  To  be  as 
"  oil  to  the  wheels  of  our  devotion."  Joys  are  our  wings,  sorrows  are  our  spurs. 
2.  To  be  an  inward  testimony  to  ourselves  that  we  have  the  smile  of  God's  approval 
coming  down  upon  our  efforts  to  do  what  is  "  pleasing  and  acceptable  in  His  sight " ; 
and — 3.  To  be  an  outward  testimony  that  our  religion  is  not  the  "  joyless  "  service 
that  the  world  judges  it  to  be ;  but  that  all  its  crosses  and  calls  for  penitence  and 
self-denial  lead,  even  in  this  life,  to  an  inward  joy  which  is  unspeakable  and  full  of 
glory.  (C.  G.  E.  Appleyard,  B.A.)  Joy  our  strength: — The  jot  of  the  Lobd  is 
that  sensation  of  gladness  and  happiness  which  the  Holt  Spibit  convets  to 
the  sotjl,  and  maintains  in  the  soul,  thbodgh  the  knowledge  of  god  in  his 
TBUE  CHABACTEB  TOWABDS  US.  1.  It  has  nothing  to  do  with  worldly  joy.  It  is 
substantial,  eternal,  shines  brighter  and  brighter  unto  the  perfect  day  of  its  consum- 
mation in  the  saints  around  God's  heavenly  throne  (Gal.  iii.  22 ;  Rom.  xiv.  17). 
2.  It  belongs  to  the  people  of  God  to  rejoice  in  a  sense  of  their  reconciliation ;  to 
know  their  salvation  is  sure  through  Christ's  life  ;  to  rejoice  in  the  glorious  Creator 
Himself  (Rom.  v.  11).  H.  Mant  a  time  have  these  shobt  wobds  delighted  the 
believeb's  eab,  and  cheebed  his  heabt.  1.  Mark  their  excellency.  Sound  like  a 
sentence  uttered  in  the  full  knowledge  of  the  gospel  rather  than  under  the  law. 
Weak  and  helpless  in  yourselves,  the  Spirit  can  strengthen  you,  and  supply  you  with 
new  motives  and  ability  to  please  the  Lord.  God  has  given  His  only  Son  to  be  our 
joy  and  our  strength.  We  have  a  strong  city  (Isa.  xxvi.  1 ;  Heb.  vi.  18 ;  Eph.  vi.  10). 
2.  But  how  does  joy  act  in  rendering  us  strong — strong  to  deny  ourselves,  to  suffer, 
to  labour  in  the  cause  of  Christ  ?  We  know  our  privileges  in  Christ.  This  makes 
us  joyful  and  happy.  3.  The  Christian  rejoices  in  the  past  work  of  Christ,  who 
died ;  in  the  present  work,  intercession  ;  in  the  future  work,  returning  again  in 
majesty,  to  endow  His  servants  with  eternal  bliss  (Rom.  viii.  32).  4.  Again,  joy 
in  the  Lord  will  enable  the  Christian  to  accomplish  works  for  the  glory  of  God  and 
the  good  of  others.  We  know  that  "  heart "  or  "  spirit "  will  enable  the  com- 
petitor for  a  prize  to  go  through  extraordinary  exertion.  It  is  the  same  with  the 
soldier,  the  labourer,  all  who  have  to  exert  themselves  with  tbeir  bodies  or  minds. 
So  with  the  Christian.  (F.  Trench.)  Christian  joy  : — That  few  men  are  pro- 
foundly happy  is  but  too  true.  Nor  is  it  difficult  to  account  for  the  universal 
failure  on  man's  part  to  compass  the  desires  of  his  soul.  1.  The  sources  on  which 
he  draws  may  be  drained  dry.  2.  The  satisfaction  which  these  resources  yield  is  a 
measurable  quantity.  3.  Men  are  not  happy,  because  they  seek  happiness  as  an 
end,  and  not  as  a  means.  Now,  if  Christianity  be  Divine,  it  will  accomplish  for  ma 
what  I  cannot  do  for  myself.  It  claims  to  give  men  true  lasting  happiness,  because 
it  opens  a  perennial  fountain.  In  other  words,  the  source  of  Christian  joy  is  God. 
This  joy  is  the  secret  of  Christian  strength.  I.  The  soubce  of  Christian  jot  is  God. 
Not  without  significance  that  one  of  Divine  attributes  is  "  blessedness."  God  is 
absolutely  happy  in  Himself,  and  happy  in  relation  to  His  creatures.     1.  We  can 


CHAP.  VIII.]  NEHEMIAH.  115 

tell  something  of  a  man's  character  and  disposition  by  his  works.  Now  God's  works 
are  full  of  gladness.  There  is  joy  in  the  streams,  the  woods,  the  meadows,  the 
cornfields.  2.  As  in  nature,  so  in  grace.  The  Bible,  from  cover  to  cover,  warrants 
the  conclusion.  The  Old  Dispensation  a  much  brighter  and  more  beautiful  scheme 
than  many  superficial  students  will  allow.  Law,  Prophets,  Psalms  are  fuU  of 
declarations  that  God's  people  are  a  happy  people.  Moses :  "  Happy  art  thou,  0 
Israel,  O  people  saved  of  the  Lord !  "  David :  "Blessed  are  the  people  that  know 
the  joyful  sound  1 "  Isaiah  :  "  With  joy  shall  ye  draw  water  from  the  wells  of 
salvation."  And  when  we  turn  to  the  New  Testament  the  witness  becomes  over- 
whelming. The  "  Man  of  Sorrows  "  went  to  the  house  of  feasting  to  hallow  it  with 
the  sunshine  of  His  presence,  and  to  the  house  of  mourning  to  make  it  radiant  with 
His  everlasting  joy.  One  of  His  last  bequests  was  this  :  •♦  These  things  have  I 
spoken  unto  you,  that  My  joy  might  remain  in  you,  and  that  your  joy  might  be 
full."  n.  The  jot  or  God  is  strength.  1.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our  strength  for 
service.  No  man  can  work  well  unless  his  heart  is  in  it.  The  three  essential 
elements  of  successful  service  are  fitness,  enjoyment,  enthusiasm.  God  has  a  work 
for  all  that  is  in  harmony  with  the  best  powers  of  each.  2.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is 
our  strength  against  temptation.  We  are  tempted  to  doubt,  but  the  joy  of  the  Lord 
will  afford  a  sufficient  answer  to  all  anxious  questions.  We  are  tempted  to  fear,  but 
fear  is  the  child  of  doubt  or  suspicion.  We  are  tempted  by  the  pleasures  of  sin,  but 
God's  ways  are  the  ways  of  pleasantness.  3.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our  strength 
for  endurance.  Christ :  "  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation,  but  be  of  good 
cheer,"  &o.  (John  xvi.  33).  Paul:  "  I  am  filled  with  comfort,"  &c.  (2  Cor.  vii.  4). 
in.  The  joy  of  the  Lord,  therefore,  becomes  a  Christian  law  of  life.  Ingratitude 
not  to  accept  rich  provision  God  has  made  for  profoundest  needs  of  human  spirit. 
And,  further,  this  provision  stands  in  relation  to  our  duty  as  means  to  an  end.  To 
neglect  our  joys  is  to  leave  our  work  undone.  But  it  maybe  said  that  our  emotions 
are  the  creatures  of  circumstances.  But  then  we  are  not  the  creatures  of  circum- 
stances. The  man  who  turns  his  thoughts  in  upon  himself  creates  for  himself  an 
atmosphere  in  which  there  can  be  no  joy.  Look  away  from  self  to  God.  "  Walk  in 
the  light,  as  He  is  in  the  light."  Or  if  you  must  look  at  self,  let  it  be  as  "  accepted 
in  the  Beloved  "  ;  if  at  the  past,  as  forgiven  ;  if  at  the  present,  as  full  of  Divine 
favour ;  if  at  the  future,  as  bright  with  all  the  promises  of  God.  (J.  W.  Burn.) 
Strength  and  joy : — The  physical  strength  of  a  man  as  a  labourer  is  not  unfrequently 
regarded  as  the  measure  of  his  worth ;  but  mental  strength  is  as  much  superior  to 
the  physical  as  the  soul  is  to  the  body.  Physical  weakness  often  co-exists  with 
mental  might ;  but  both  bodily  and  mental  strength  may  be  found  in  combination 
with  the  utterest  spiritual  weakness.  I.  Human  joy  is  identical  with  Divine  jot. 
1.  The  joy  of  atonement  with  God.  God  and  man  atoned  by  Christ's  death,  de  facto 
as  well  as  de  jure,  produces  joy  in  God  and  man.  "  We  joy  in  God  through  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  also  we  have  received  the  atonement."  2.  The  joy  of 
reciprocated  love.  Antecedent  to  reconciliation  with  God,  His  love  to  us  is  love 
of  pity  and  compassion ;  but  atoned  in  Christ,  God's  love  to  us  is  that  of  moral 
esteem,  and  our  love  to  Him  is  the  re-percussion  of  His  love  to  us.  "  We  love  Him 
because  He  first  loved  us."  "If  any  man  love  Me,"  &c.  (Johnxiv.  23).  3.  Joy  of 
assimilated  character.  As  an  element  of  the  kingdom  of  God  joy  is  a  Divine 
attribute,  inherited  by  those  who  are  "one  with  Christ."  "  That  they  might  have 
My  joy  fulfilled  "  (John  xvii.  13).  "  That  they  all  maybe  one,"  Ac.  (John  xvii.  21). 
Divine  strength  and  joy  are  our  everlasting  inheritance.  II.  Human  strength  is 
generated  bt  Divine  joy.  1.  As  experienced  in  freedom  from  man-fear.  "  Only 
fear  the  Lord  "  is  one  of  the  first  lessons  of  Christian  manliness.  God-fear 
annihilates  man-fear,  which  ever  "  bringeth  a  snare."  2.  As  experienced  in  freedom 
from  death-fear.  Eeally  in  birth  we  take  up  death  ;  but  in  Christian  decease  death 
dies.  "  That  through  death  He  might  destroy,"  &c.  (Heb.  ii.  14,  15.)  3.  As 
developed  in  all  holy  action  and  endurance.  The  strength  of  health  must  be 
operative.  To  use  is  to  gain  strength.  "  They  go  from  strength  to  strength " 
(Psa.  liiiiv.  7).      (Homilist.)  Strengthening  influence    of  Christian   joy  : — A 

morose  man  is  generally  morally  weak.  "  A  merry  heart  doeth  good  like  a 
medicine,"  and  medicates  itself.  Men  weary  with  sombre  thoughts,  and  are 
disposed  to  get  rid  of  them  ;  hence  the  danger  of  lapsing  from  harsh  theology  into 
infidelity.  Christ  came  with  "  glad  tidings."  Strengthening  influence  of  Christian 
joy  shown  in  the  elements  of  it.  1.  The  joy  of  faith  is  strengthening.  Faith  is 
eiUargement  of  mind,  seeing  man  in  relation  to  the  Creator,  a  system  of  providence, 
redemptive  love,  immortality,  &c.    It  is  intellectual  patience — the  "  tiuss-beam" 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  vm. 

of  the  soul.     2.  The  joy  of  a  free   conscience   is   strengthening.      No   man   has 
courage  for  high  duty  who  does  not  know  of  a  forgiven  past.     The  Cross  has  done 
more  for  building  up  character  than  did  the  law.     3.  The  joy  of  Divine  companion- 
ship  and   help  is  strengthening.      Dependence   upon  God  does  not  destroy  the 
courage  of  self-reliance  ;  just  the  reverse.     Bismarck  said  that  without  his  faith  in 
God's  purpose  with  him,  he  would  not  have  courage  to  keep  the  German  portfolio  a 
single  day.     Read  Froude's  "  Calvinism  "  for  the  influence  of  Divine  faith  upon 
the  enterprise   of  nations.      Gibbon    explains    the    fulfilment  of    prophecies  by 
assuming  that    the   belief    in    God's    presence    and  plan   for  them    gave    men 
the    ability   to   accomplish   the    predictions.      4.   The    joy    of    love    to    Christ 
is     strengthening.       We    always     serve     willingly,      patiently,      unswervingly, 
according  as    we    put  our  hearts   into   the  duty.      {Homiletic  Review.)        The 
duty    and  utility  of  Christian  joy  : — In   all    human   systems    of   theology   the 
terrible    has    preponderated  over  the  lovable,  the  severe  over  the  kind,  in  the 
conceptions  of  the  Divine  nature.     The  outlines  of  the  Eternal  face,  as  imaged  by 
the  creature,  have  been  stern ;  as  disclosed  by  the  Creator,  they  are  unspeakably 
gracious.     Hence  in  the  Bible  descriptions  of  heaven,  the  increase  of  happiness  and 
of  nearness  to  the  Almighty  go  hand  in  hand.     Hence  again,  joy,  not  grief,  is  the 
frame  of  mind  in  which  we  are  encouraged  to  come  before  the  Lord.     The  connec- 
tion between  gladness  and  God  is  strikingly  brought  out  by  Nehemiah.     A  reunion 
with  God  must  not  be  sullied  with  weeping,  for  God  is  a  God  of  gladness ;  and  the 
gathering  in  His  presence  on  earth  is  to  be  a  forepart  of  the  heavenly  meeting. 
Therefore  does  he,  who  in  Babylon  at  the  king's  table  could  not  repress  his  own 
tears — what  a  strange  shadow  of  a  great  truth  was  that  heathen  tradition  that  no 
sign  of  grief  must  be  shown  in  a  monarch's  presence-chamber  ? — therefore  does  he 
allow  no  waiUng  in  Jerusalem.     L  The  joy  of  the  Lord — what  is  it  ?    11.  How 
DOES  IT  coNSTiTUTB  THE  MORAL  STRENGTH  OF  A  MAN?    It  has  been  wcU  remarked 
that  even  cheerfulness  of  animal  spirits  is  of  great  aid  to  virtuousness.     There 
are  certain  temptations  to  which  a  joyous  temperament  is  at  once  a  bar.     For 
example,   hardness  in  judging  others,   malice,  pride,   can  scarcely  coexist  with 
brightness  and  cheerfulness  of  heart.  Many  temptations  at  once  flee  away  when 
cheerfulness  is  enjoyed  within.     The  power  of  exertion  revives  after  sorrow  from 
the  habit  of  looking  at  the  brighter  side.     There  is  one  special  way  in  which  glad- 
ness in  God  is  essentially  strength.    What,  it  may  be  asked,  is  to  be  the  uneducated 
man's  guard  against  unbelief  ?     What  shall  garrison  his  soul  against  the  infidel 
tract  ?    I  reply,  the  "  joy  of  the  Lord,"  that  secret  complacency  which  he  consciously 
gathers  from  the  practice  of  the  commandments  of  Christianity,  and  from  the  rest- 
ing in  the  doctrines  of  Christianity.     Teach  a  man  to  find  a  happiness  in  his 
Sundays,  a  gladness  in  the  going  up  to  the  house  of  God,  knitting  the  pleasures 
of  his  life  with  the  mysteries  of  his  faith,  and  the  wave  of  unbelief  will  only  break 
itself  upon  him.     It  is  when  you  separate  pleasure  and  duty  ;  giving  to  the  things 
of  time  all  the  bright  colours,  and  to  the  things  of  eternity  all  the  dark;  calling 
men  away  from  what  they  like,  to  pay  the  debt  of  a  dull,  forced  uninteresting 
homage  to  God,  instead  of  making  the  rendering  such  homage  in  itself  a  delight — it 
is  then  that  you  create  a  temptation  to  withhold  the  homage,  and  a  temptation  to 
the  unbelief  which  comes  in  secondly  to  justify  such  withholding.     When  the  lamp 
is  gone  out  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  what  marvel  if  the  world  stands  aloof  ? 
{Bp.  Woodford.)        Smircei  of  happiness  : — Happiness  in  the  highest  sense  of  the 
word  is  not  a  quality  brought  into  the  soul  from  without,  but  music  that  flows  from 
qualities  already  existing  within  the  soul.     Circumstances,  environments,  posses- 
sions, and  pursuits  may  affect  the  harmony,  but  it  is  the  attuning  of  the  soul's 
capacities  to  the  key-note  of  the  music  of  heaven  that  is  the  secret  source  of  happi- 
ness.    There  can  be  no  happiness  without  religion.     The  most  truly  religious  man 
ought  to  be  the  happiest  man.     The  object  of  the  religion  of  Christ  is  sanctified 
service  ;  the  end  of  that  religion  is  nobility  of  character,  honesty  of  conduct,  purity 
of  heart,  veracity,  self-sacrifice,  high  aims,  Godlike  pursuits.    All  the  happiness  of 
a  Christian  man  will  come  from  the  exercise  of  his  faculties,  in  the  attuning  of  all 
his  capacities  and  energies  to  the  Divine  will  and  to  the  eternal  laws  of  truth,  recti- 
tude, justice,  and  righteousness.     Thus  the  music  of  life  is  evolved  by  our  own. 
fingers  from  capacities  that  we  ourselves  possess.   To  ensure  the  highest  happiness — 
I.  Have  high'  aims  and  pursue  them  with  aviditt.     Our  faculties  are  only  pro- 
ductive of  happiness  when  they  are  in  motion,  just  as  the  string  of  the  harp  only 
makes  music  when  it  vibrates.     Many  lives,  therefore,  are  wretched  because  th  :j 
are  passed  in  indolence ;  many  more  are  tuneless  and  musicless  because  they  are 


CHAP,  vm.]  NEHEMIAH.  117 

frittered  away  in  unworthy  pursuits.    II.  Chekish  the  spniiT  of  contentment.   III. 

Al.WAYS   MAINTAIN   AN    ABIDING   FAITH   IN    GoD  AND  IN  THE  PROVIDENCE  WHICH   GOVERNS 

THE  WORLD.  (Jf.  J.  Hoclcing.)  Joy  : — The  goodness  of  God  in  His  providential 
dealings  with  us,  and  in  the  general  economy  of  the  world,  is  shown  not  so  much 
by  the  supply  of  what  is  necessary  as  by  the  provision  of  what  is  in  excess  of  the 
bare  necessaries  of  life.  To  call  creatures  into  existence,  and  then  to  make  no  sort 
of  provision  for  their  existence,  would  argue  not  so  much  want  of  benevolence  as 
despotic  inconsistency  and  capricious  ineptitude.  In  our  Zoological  Gardens,  with 
their  regulation  allowances  to  the  animals,  there  is  just  enough  to  meet  the  claims 
of  necessity  ;  but  God  makes  that  wonderful  environment  in  which,  when  left  to 
themselves,  these  animals  find  not  only  a  bare  sufBciency  that  makes  life  possible, 
but  a  profusion  of  favourable  conditions  and  features  that  makes  life  worth  living. 
The  lark  soaring  heavenward ;  the  herd  of  hippopotami  disporting  themselves  in  an 
African  river ;  the  school  of  whales  shooting  up  their  foam-fountains,  or  placidly 
basking  on  the  sun-warmed  surface  of  the  bay — these  and  a  thousand  other  objects 
all  seem  to  bear  the  same  witness  that  God  has  made  provision,  not  only  for  the 
maintenance,  but  for  the  enjoyment,  of  His  creatures.  If  He  shows  His  goodness 
towards  the  lower  animals  by  surrounding  them  with  all  that  seems  necessary  for 
their  enjoyment  of  life,  it  is  only  reasonable  to  suppose  that  He  will  make  a  similar 
provision  for  man.  Such  provision  is  made  in  the  gospel  revelation.  Man  asks 
for  happiness,  and  God  proposes  to  give  him  joy ;  he  asks  for  security,  and  God 
proposes  to  give  him  peace  ;  he  asks  for  permanence,  and  God  proposes  to  give  him 
eternal  life ;  he  asks  for  satisfaction,  and  God  offers  him  nothing  less  than  Himself. 
If  men  could  be  persuaded  that  there  is  more  real  happiness  to  be  found  in  serving 
God  than  in  serving  self,  in  doing  right  than  in  doing  wrong,  Satan  would  be  robbed 
of  his  favourite  weapor ,  and  we  should  soon  see  the  whole  world  transformed.  But 
how  is  this  to  be  brought  about  ?  Happy  lives  that  are  happy  because  they  are  holy 
are  more  likely  to  speak  f oprcibly  to  the  hearts  of  the  children  of  this  world  than  any 
amount  of  theological  theorising.  This  was  one  of  the  mightiest  arguments  em- 
ployed by  primitive  Christianity.  Eeal  joy  in  religion — a  joy  that  followed  men 
into  their  daily  life,  and  lit  up  all  their  experiences  ;  a  joy  that  was  unspeakable 
and  full  of  glory — all  this  was  entirely  new  in  the  history  of  the  world,  and  it  must 
have  seemed  just  what  the  world  wanted.  What  a  weary  world  wants  as  much  as 
anything  to-day  is  the  testimony  of  bright  faces  and  bounding  hearts  as  well  as 
joyful  tongues,  to  the  fact  that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  only  righteousness,  but 
peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  weak  to-day  because 
there  is  so  little  joy  in  it.  Joy,  then,  is  designed  to  play  an  important  part  in 
Christian  experience.  We  shall  do  well  to  consider — I.  The  source  from  which 
IT  PROCEEDS.  1.  Joy  is  mentioned  next  to  love  amongst  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit, 
and  this  order  is  usually  illustrated  in  spiritual  experience.  Joy  is  one  of  the 
earliest  signs  of  the  new  life ;  if  there  is  joy  in  heaven  over  the  sinner  saved, 
no  wonder  that  there  is  joy  on  earth  in  the  sinner's  consciousness  of  salvation. 

2.  It  is  also  the  product  of  the  new  and  wondrous  influence  which  stirs  the  soul  to 
its  depth  when  we  are  restored  to  our  proper  relations  to  the  Divine,  the  mighty 
impulse  of  renewed  vitality.  There  is  always  something  essentially  joyous  in  the 
bursting  forth  of  new  Ufe.  As  in  nature,  so  it  is  in  grace.  The  new  life  that  is  born 
is  indeed  an  Isaac — a  child  of  laughter.  When  the  Divine  Spirit  enters  and  takes 
possession  of  our  quickened  nature  He  necessarily  brings  His  own  joy  along  with 
Him.  II.  The  characteristics  that  belong  to  it.  1.  As  joy  flows  from  a  renewal 
of  our  proper  relations  with  God,  so  it  is  dependent  upon  the  maintenance  of  those 
relations.  St.  Peter  tells  us  that  it  is  in  Him  "  whom  having  not  seen  we  love  "  that  we 
"  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory,"  and  Paul,  "  Rejoice  in  the  Lord." 
Twice  he  speaks  of  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  There  is  always  something  in 
God  that  we  may  rejoice  in  (Hab.  iii.  17,  18).  It  is  this  characteristic  of  true 
spiritual  joy  that  raises  those  that  possess  it  superior  to  the  circumstances  with 
which  they  may  be  surrounded,  and  which  makes  it  possible  for  them  to  realise  in 
their  experience  what  may  seem  a  paradox — "  sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicing." 

3.  This  joy  is  enhanced  by  all  that  is  in  accordance  with  the  mind  and  will  of  God. 
What  causes  joy  to  Him,  causes  joy  naturally  enough  to  those  whose  joy  is  in  Him. 
Thus  we  have — (1)  The  joy  of  calm  acquiescence  in  the  Divine  will.  (2)  The  joy  of 
co-operation  in  the  Divine  work.  4.  The  intensity  of  this  joy  will  be  in  proportion 
to  its  purity.  Conclusion:  It  may  be  asked,  How  are  we  to  get  this  joy?  I 
answer — 1.  Cease  to  seek  joy  for  its  own  sake.  Self-abnegation  is  the  condition 
of  the  higher  joy,  and  when  we  are  pursuing  joy  for  its  own  sake,  we  are  not 

81 


118  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [Chap.  vm. 

complying  with  this  condition.  2.  Eemember  that  joy  is  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  and 
you  can't  make  fruit  grow.  It  is  the  life  that  prodnces  the  fruit ;  but  you  must  see 
to  it  that  the  life  has  fair  play.  Beware  of  loss  of  communion.  Guard  against 
disobedience.  Exercise  yourself  in  contemplation,  in  praise,  and  in  adoring  wor- 
ship. The  tree  needs  to  be  bathed  in  sunshine  if  its  fruit  is  to  be  ripe  and  perfect ; 
and  nothing  must  come  between  us  and  the  light  of  His  face  if  our  joy  is  to  be 
perfected.  In  heaven  it  will  be  all  joy,  because  in  that  fair  land  God  haa  His 
way.  (W.H.  M.  H.  Aitken,  M.A.)  On  religious  joy,  as  giving  strength  and  support  to 
virtue: — I.  That  in  the  pbactice  of  religious  doties  there  is  found  an  inward 
JOY,  here  styled  "the  joy  of  the  Lord."  1.  Joy  is  a  word  of  various  signification.  By 
men  of  the  world  it  is  often  used  to  express  those  flashes  of  mirth  which  arise  from 
irregular  indulgences  of  social  pleasure.  It  will  be  easily  understood  that  the  joy 
here  mentioned  partakes  of  nothing  akin  to  this ;  but  signifies  a  tranquil  and  placid 
joy,  an  inward  complacency  and  satisfaction,  accompanying  the  practice  of  virtue, 
and  the  discharge  of  every  part  of  our  duty.  2.  In  order  to  ascertain  this,  let  us 
consider  the  disposition  of  a  good  man  with  respect  to  God.  When  wo  consider  in 
what  manner  religion  requires  that  a  good  man  should  stand  affected  towards  God, 
it  will  presently  appear  that  rational  enlightened  piety  opens  such  views  of  Him  as 
must  communicate  joy.  It  presents  Him,  not  as  an  awful  unknown  Sovereign,  but 
as  the  Father  of  the  universe,  the  lover  and  protector  of  righteousness,  under  whose 
government  all  the  interests  of  the  virtuous  are  safe.  With  delight  the  good  man 
traces  the  Creator  throughout  all  His  works,  and  beholds  them  everywhere  reflect- 
ing some  image  of  His  supreme  perfection.  Amidst  that  Divine  presence  he  dwells 
with  reverence,  but  without  terror.  Conscious  of  the  uprightness  of  his  own  inten- 
tions, and  of  the  fidelity  of  his  heart  to  God,  he  considers  himself,  by  night  and  by 
day,  as  under  the  protection  of  an  invisible  guardian.  He  listens  to  the  gracious 
promises  of  His  Word.  With  comfort  he  receives  the  declarations  of  His  mercy  to 
mankind,  through  a  great  Redeemer.  All  the  various  devotional  exercises  of  faith 
and  trust  in  God,  all  the  cordial  effusions  of  love  and  gratitude  to  this  Supreme 
Benefactor  in  the  acts  of  prayer  and  praise,  afford  scope  to  those  emotions  of  the 
heart  which  are  of  the  most  pleasing  kind.  But  it  may  here  be  objected.  Are 
there  no  mortifications  and  griefs  that  particularly  belong  to  piety  ?  What  shall 
we  say  to  the  tear  of  repentance,  and  to  that  humiliation  of  confession  and  remorse 
which  may,  at  times,  be  incumbent  on  the  most  pious,  in  this  state  of  human  infir- 
mity? To  this  I  reply,  first,  that  although  there  may  be  seasons  of  grief  and 
•dejection  in  a  course  of  piety,  yet  this  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  joy  of  the 
Lord  being,  on  the  whole,  the  predominant  character  of  a  good  man's  state ; 
as  it  is  impossible  that,  during  this  life,  perpetual  brightness  can  remain  in  any 
quarter,  without  some  dark  cloud.  But  I  must  observe,  next,  that  even  the 
penitential  sorrows  and  relentings  of  a  pious  heart  are  not  without  their  own 
satisfactions.  A  certain  degree  of  pleasure  is  mingled  with  the  tears  which  the 
returning  offender  sheds.  3.  When  we  consider,  next,  the  disposition  of  a  good 
man  towards  his  fellow-creatures,  we  find  here  the  joy  of  the  Lord  exerting  its 
influence  fully.  That  mild  and  benevolent  temper  to  which  he  is  formed  by  virtue 
and  piety ;  a  temper  that  is  free  from  envious  and  malignant  passions,  and  that 
can  look  with  the  eye  of  candour  and  humanity  on  surrounding  characters,  is  a 
constant  spring  of  cheerfulness  and  serenity.  With  respect  to  that  part  of  religion 
which  consists  in  the  government  of  a  man's  own  mind,  of  his  passions  and  desires, 
it  may  be  thought  that  much  joy  is  not  to  be  expected,  for  there  religion  appears 
to  lay  on  a  severe  and  restraining  hand.  Yet  here  also  it  will  be  found  that  the  joy 
of  the  Lord  takes  place.  To  a  person  just  reclaimed  from  the  excesses  of  sensual 
indulgence,  the  restraints  imposed  by  virtue  will,  at  first,  appear  uncouth  and 
mortifying.  But  let  him  begin  to  be  accustomed  to  a  regular  life,  and  his  taste 
will  soon  be  rectified,  and  his  feelings  will  change.  In  purity,  temperance,  and 
self-government  there  is  found  a  satisfaction  in  the  mind  similar  to  what  results 
from  the  enjoyment  of  perfect  health  in  the  body.  A  man  is  then  conscious  that  all 
is  sound  within.  There  is  nothing  that  gnaws  his  spirit ;  that  makes  him  ashamed 
of  himself,  or  discomposes  his  calm  and  orderly  enjoyment  of  life.  His  conscience 
testifies  that  he  is  acting  honourably.  He  enjoys  the  satisfaction  of  being  master 
of  himself.  He  feels  that  no  man  can  accuse  him  of  degrading  his  character. 
From  this  slight  sketch  it  plainly  appears  that  there  is  an  inward  satisfaction, 
justly  termed  "  the  joy  of  the  Lord,"  which  runs  through  all  the  parts  of  religion. 
This  is  a  very  different  view  of  religion  from  what  is  entertained  by  those  who 
consider  it  as  a  state  of  perpetual  penance.     But  what  it  concerns  us  at  present 


CHAP.  VIII.]  NEHEMIAH.  119 

to  remark  is,  that  some  experience  of  this  joy  of  the  Lord  which  I  have  described 
enters  as  an  essential  part  into  the  character  of  every  good  man.  In  proportion  to 
the  degree  of  his  goodness,  to  his  improvement  and  progress  in  virtue,  will  be  the 
degree  of  his  participation  in  the  pleasure  and  joy  of  religion.    U.  To  show  ik 

■WHAT   RESPECTS    THE    JOT    OF    THE    LoRD    IS    JUSTLY    SAID    TO    BE    THE    STRENGTH  OE  THK 

BiGHTEOus.  1.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  the  animating  principle  of  virtue;  it 
supports  its  influence,  and  assists  it  in  becoming  both  persevering  and  progres- 
sive. Experience  may  teach  us  that  few  undertakings  are  lasting  or  successful 
which  are  accompanied  with  no  pleasure.  If  a  man's  religion  be  considered 
merely  as  a  task  prescribed  to  him,  which  he  feels  burdensome,  it  is  not  likely 
that  he  will  long  constrain  himself  to  act  against  the  bent  of  inclination.  It 
is  not  until  he  feels  somewhat  within  him  which  attracts  him  to  his  duty  that 
he  can  be  expected  to  be  constant  and  zealous  in  the  performance  of  it.  Was 
it  ever  found  that  a  person  advanced  far  in  any  art  or  study,  whether  of  the 
liberal  or  mechanical  kind,  in  which  he  had  no  pleasure?  A  sense  of  duty 
may  sometimes  exercise  its  authority,  though  there  be  no  sensations  of  pleasure 
to  assist  it.  Belief  of  those  religious  principles  in  which  we  were  educated,  and 
dread  of  future  punishment,  will,  in  cases  where  no  strong  temptation  assails 
us,  restrain  from  the  commission  of  atrocious  crimes,  and  produce  some  decent 
regularity  of  external  conduct.  But  on  occasions  when  inclination  or  interest 
prompt  to  some  transgression  of  virtue,  which  safety  or  secrecy  encourages,  and 
which  the  example  of  the  world  seems  to  countenance,  is  it  to  be  thought  that 
conscience  will  then  stand  its  ground  with  one  who  never  was  attached  to  virtue 
on  its  own  account,  and  never  experienced  any  joy  in  following  its  dictates  ?  But 
these  are  the  occasions  when  the  joy  of  the  Lord  proves  the  strength  of  the  righteous 
man.  Accustomed  to  take  pleasure  in  doing  his  duty ;  accustomed  to  look  up  to 
God  with  delight  and  complacency,  and  to  feel  himself  happy  in  all  the  offices  of 
kindness  and  humanity  to  men  around  him ;  accustomed  to  rejoice  in  a  clear  con- 
science, in  a  pure  heart,  and  the  hope  of  heavenly  bliss,  he  cannot  think  of  parting 
with  such  satisfactions  for  the  sake  of  any  worldly  bribe.  There  is  something 
within  his  heart  that  pleads  for  religion  and  virtue.  2.  In  the  next  place,  the  joy 
of  the  Lord  is  the  strength  of  the  righteous,  as  it  is  their  great  support  under  the 
discouragements  and  trials  of  life.  From  the  view  which  we  have  now  taken  of 
the  subject,  it  must  clearly  appear,  that  to  every  one  who  wishes  to  possess  the 
spirit,  and  to  support  the  character  of  genuine  goodness  and  virtue,  it  is  an  object 
most  desirable  and  important,  to  acquire  a  prevailing  relish  for  the  pleasures  of 
religion.  To  attain  this  spirit,  of  considering  the  discharge  of  our  duty  as  our 
pleasure  and  happiness,  is  certainly  not  incompatible  with  our  present  state  of 
infirmity.  It  is  no  more  than  what  good  men  have  often  attained,  and  have  testified 
to  it,  that  their  delight  was  in  the  law  of  God ;  that  His  statutes  were  sweet  to  their 
taste;  that  they  had  taken  them  as  an  heritage  for  ever,  for  they  were  the  rejoicing 
of  their  heart :  "  I  delight  to  do  Thy  wiU,  0  my  God  ;  Thy  law  is  within  my  heart." 
It  is  therefore  of  high  importance,  that  all  proper  means  be  employed  to  form  our 
internal  taste  to  a  proper  relish  for  this  joy  of  the  Lord.  (H.  Blair,  D.D.)  The 
gospel  of  joy : — The  first  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  to  convince  of  sin,  but  that  is 
by  no  means  His  only  work^,  It  is  only  in  preparation  for  another  and  more  blessed 
work.  I.  What  is  meant  bt  the  jot  of  the  Lord.  1.  Much  is  said  of  the  joy  of 
the  Lord  in  sacred  Scriptures ;  sometimes  the  Lord  Himself  is  said  to  rejoice  over 
His  people;  of  Christ  it  is  said,  "  For  the  joy  that  was  set  before  Him,"  so  also  in 
prospect  of  His  death.  He  rejoiceth  over  the  truly  repentant  sinner.  When  the 
Lord  assures  His  people  of  their  salvation  from  every  danger  and  every  enemy.  He 
says,  "  The  Lord  thy  God  in  the  midst  of  thee  is  mighty.  He  will  save.  He  will 
rejoice  over  thee  with  joy."  In  like  manner  they  also  are  exhorted  to  joy  in  Him : 
*'  Let  the  children  of  Zion  be  joyful  in  their  King."  Indeed,  the  gospel  itself  is  a 
gospel  of  joy.  As  such  it  was  announced  by  the  angel  to  the  shepherds  :  "  Behold  I 
bring  you  tidings  of  great  joy,  which  shall  be  to  all  people."  And  we  find  that  the 
preaching  of  that  gospel  was  a  matter  of  joy  to  the  poor  sinners  to  whom  it  was 
sent.  Philip,  we  are  told  in  the  Acts,  "  went  down  to  the  city  of  Samaria,  and 
preached  Christ  unto  them,"  and  the  consequence  was  that  there  was  great  joy  in 
that  city.  Now  we  shall  find  that  their  joy  arose  from  a  threefold  source — 
1.  What  the  Lord  had  done  for  them.  The  Lord  had  brought  them  back  from  a 
miserable  and  degrading  captivity.  He  had  brought  them  from  under  the  yok« 
of  Babylon ;  they  had  been  protected  and  delivered  in  a  more  marvellous  manner ; 
they  were  restored  to  Zion,  the  city  of  their  solemnities;  the  king's  heart  had  been 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

softened  towards  them,  and  under  his  authority  and  protection  they  were  obtaining 
a  secure  settlement  in  their  own  land.  Surely  this  was  a  cause  for  joy.  When  they 
looked  at  the  difficulties  that  stood  in  their  way,  and  the  steps  by  which  the  Lord 
had  led  them,  they  could  not  but  rejoice.  2.  What  the  Lord  would  do  for  them. 
Why,  even  before  they  took  possession  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  while  they  were 
under  the  guidance  of  Moses,  and  under  the  Lord's  special  care  in  the  wilderness, 
in  the  foresight  of  their  future  dangers  and  sins,  the  Lord  had  declared,  even  in 
their  greatest  straits  and  most  pressing  difficulties,  though  those  very  straits  and 
difficulties  were  occasioned  by  their  sins,  that  He  would  never  forget  His  cove- 
nant, and  would  still  receive  them  with  mercy  (Lev.  xxvi.  40-45).  3.  That  the 
people  understood  all  this.  When  Ezra  read  in  the  book  of  the  law  of  God,  he 
did  it  "  distinctly,  and  gave  the  sense,  and  caused  them  to  understand  the  reading  " 
(ver.  8).  n.  Its  happy  effects.  When  Nehemiah  called  upon  the  people  thus  to 
joy  in  the  Lord,  he  told  them  at  the  same  time  what  eifect  it  would  produce  in  them. 
It  would  be  their  strength.  1.  It  will  support  the  Christian  under  all  difficulties. 
This  world  is  not  one  of  ease  and  prosperity  to  the  children  of  God.  2.  It  will 
sustain  him  in  all  his  temptations.  3.  Encourage  him  for  the  performance  of  all 
duties.  It  will  make  duties  which  without  it  would  be  burdensome  and  irksome, 
pleasant.  4.  It  will  encourage  him  in  prayer.  He  who  has  the  joy  of  the  Lord 
for  his  strength,  does  not  live  upon  his  joy,  nor  upon  his  strength.  His  life  is  in 
the  Lord,  and  in  proportion  as  he  lives  upon  Him,  he  has  joy  and  strength  both  in 
and  from  the  Lord.  5.  Incite  him  to  hold  on  to  the  end.  He  who  has  the  joy  of 
the  Lord  for  his  strength  will  not  rest  in  present  attainments.  The  joys  that  are  in 
Btore  for  the  people  of  God  are  far  greater  than  those  already  tasted.  (1)  How 
greatly  are  many  people  mistaken  as  to  the  nature  of  true  religion.  (2)  Learn 
what  you  should  be  anxious  to  obtain.  No  man  can  joy  in  God  through  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  till  he  has  received  the  atonement.  (3)  What  a  vast  diiJerence  between 
the  empty  joys  of  the  world  and  the  solid  joys  of  the  gospel  1  ((?.  Maxwell,  B.A.) 
The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength : — I.  Our  joy  in  the  Lord  is  the  eifect  of 
His  joy  in  ns.  As,  for  example,  the  brightness  of  the  stars  of  night  is  derived 
from  the  unseen  sun,  so  the  light  of  our  joy  beams  from  the  face  of  the  Sun  of 
Righteousness,  which  is  the  God-Man,  Christ.  Now,  God's  joy  in  His  people  ia 
most  wonderful,  as  we  find  in  the  hundred  and  forty-seventh  Psalm,  the  eleventh 
verse.  In  the  moral  world  all  happiness  and  joy  are  but  reflections  of  heaven's 
light.  Peace  and  order  are  but  the  echoes  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  amidst  the  tumul- 
tuous tossings  and  confusions  of  this  world.  Again :  other  and  unf alien  worlds 
might  cause  joy  to  God ;  for  remember,  God  must  rejoice  in  His  own  image, 
which  is  reflected  more  perfectly  in  unfallen  creation ;  for  example,  angels  are  a 
perfect  mirror,  in  which  His  image  is  reflected.  They  have  larger  capacities  for 
comprehending  God's  perfections.  But  mark  the  littleness  of  man's  mind.  If  we 
compare  our  own  modes  of  feeling  towards  one  another,  we  shall  find  that  the 
philosopher  delights  not  in  the  company  of  the  unlearned,  but  rather  despises  it, 
and  seeks  the  companionship  of  those  who  move  in  a  more  congenial  element. 
Hence  it  is  wonderful  that  God  should  delight  in  us,  fallen  sinful  creatures.  But 
the  measure  of  God's  joy  in  us  is  the  more  wonderful  when  we  come  to  consider 
the  language  of  David  in  the  hundred  and  thirty-fifth  Psalm  and  the  fourth  verse, 
wherein  it  is  written  of  His  rebellious  children,  "  For  'the  Lord  hath  chosen  Jacob 
unto  Himself,  and  Israel  for  His  peculiar  treasure."  God's  people  are  also  called 
His  portion,  as  we  read  in  Deuteronomy,  the  thirty-second  chapter  and  ninth 
verse—  "  For  the  Lord's  portion  is  His  people.  God's  joy  in  His  people,  as  we  read 
in  Ephesians,  the  first  chapter  and  the  tenth  and  eleventh  verses,  is  the  cause  of 
the  rich  inheritance  which  He  has  provided  for  them — "  that  in  the  dispensation  of 
the  fulness  of  times.  He  might  gather  together  in  one  all  things  in  Christ,  both 
which  are  in  heaven  and  which  are  on  earth,  even  in  Him :  in  whom  also  we  have 
obtained  an  inheritance,  being  predestinated  according  to  the  purpose  of  Him  who 
worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  His  own  will."  But  we  must  remember  also 
the  other  and  numberless  sources  of  glory  to  God,  namely,  the  glory  of  the  kingdom 
of  nature  stretching  along  infinity  which  is  only  filled  with  the  beauty  and  majesty 
of  the  Deity  itself.  But  it  is  not  wonderful  that  God  should  joy  in  us,  when  we 
reflect  upon  it,  for  He  is  more  glorified  in  us  than  in  any  other  portion  of  His 
creation,  considering  that  the  work  of  redemption  stamps  a  value  upon  us ;  for 
human  nature,  and  none  other,  was  taken  up  into  the  Godhead,  so  that  our  fallen 
condition  opened  up  a  way  for  glorifying  God.  Whether  we  consider  His  mercy  or 
His  justice,  His  long  suffering  or  His  love,  all  of  which  were  exercised  and  glorified 


CHAP,  vra,]  NEHEMIAH.  121 

by  the  redemption  scheme,  God  rejoices  over  the  theatre  where  His  own  glory  is 
exhibited    amongst  His  redeemed  children   rather  than  over  angels,  just   as   a 
parent  rejoices  more  over  the  sick  child  restored  to  health  than  he  does  over  the 
naturally  robust  and  strong  one.     God  blesses  other  worlds  through  the  medium  of 
ours.     II.  Let  us  now  consider  our  joy  in  the  Loed.     We  have  greater  cause  to 
rejoice  in  the  Lord  than  the  Jews,  for  our  deliverance  is  from  a  worse  captivity, 
namely,  from  the  bondage  of  sin.     Nehemiah  could  not  set  before  his  people  any- 
thing but  a  distant  hope  of  things  to  come.     For  how  indistinct  must  have  been 
their  views  of  the  promised  Saviour  compared  with  ours  !     III.  The  jot  of  the 
Lord  is  oub  steength.    A  broken   spirit   disqualifies   us  for  action.    "A  merry 
heart  doeth  good  like  a  medicine  ;  but  a  broken  spirit  drieth  up  the  bones  "  ;  while, 
on  the  contrary,  a  joyous  spirit  disposes  man  for  action,  as  may  be  seen  in  Psalm 
fifty-one,  and  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  verses — "  Eestore  unto  me  the  joy  of  Thy 
salvation,  and  uphold  me   with  Thy  free  Spirit :  then  will  I  teach  transgressors 
Thy  ways,  and  sinners  shall  be  converted  unto  Thee."     The  condition   of  the 
animal  spirits  is  admitted  to  have  a  powerful  influence  upon  all  our  faculties. 
Sorrow  and  dejection  unnerve  the  body  as  well  as  the  mind,  and  take  away  the 
power  of  exertion.     The  discharge  of  our  several  duties  depends  upon  the  spirit  in 
which  they  are  conducted  ;  for  an  earthly  servant,  brooding  over  his  misfortunes, 
would  be  unfit  for  his  position  in  life.     The  soldier  entering  the  battlefield  must  have 
a  spirit  and  courage  to  encounter  the  enemy.     So  likewise  must  a  Christian  feel  com- 
petent for  the  encounter  with  his  spiritual  duties  and  enemies.    No  man  can  diligently 
and  cheerfully  apply  himself  to  any  duty  unless  he  has  the  hope  of  success  in  the 
performance  of  it.     In  conclusion,  let   us   consider,  how   this   strength  is  to  be 
attained.     It  is  not  to  be  procured  by  any  intellectual  process  of  reasoning,  nor  is 
it  the  creature  of  imagination .     We  must  move  into  an  atmosphere  of  holiness  in 
order  to  secure  it ;  for  the  Christian's  joy  is  the  fruit  of  another  clime.     We  must 
embark  for  a  foreign  land.     It  is  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  life,  and  must  be  plucked 
by  the  hand  of  faith.     We  must  yield  ourselves  up  to  the  guidance  of  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  our  souls  must  be  tuned  and  re-tuned  to  heaven's  harmonies  by  Him.     Joy 
is  the  voice  of  order,  and  peace,  in  the  soul ;  and  God  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  moved 
over  creation's  dark  waters,  must  breathe  over  the  angry  passions  of  our  fallen 
nature  to  produce  this  result.     (G.  F.  Galaher,  M.A.)         God's  joy  our  strength : — 
The  truth  to  which  I  would  call  your  attention  is  this  :  that  notwithstanding  the 
misery,  the  shame,  the  conflict  of  human  life — a  misery  and  shame  and  conflict 
which  are  keenly  felt  by  Him  whose  nature  is  sympathy,  and  whose  name  is  Father 
— there  is  in  God  a  deep,  abiding,  essential  joyousness  ;  and  that  this  joyousness  is 
the  strength  of  His  people.     I.  The  essential  joyousness  of  God.     This  is  seen — 
1.  In  nature.    All  simple  things  in  nature  are  joyous — flowers  and  fruits,  woods 
and  streams,  the  meadows  and  the  breezes,  the  song  of  birds,  the  movements  of 
animals,  the  irrepressible  mirth  of  children.     AU  the  strong  things  of  nature  are 
magnificently  joyous.     The  sun,  the  sea,  the  tempest,  &c.     What  are  we  to  think 
of  Him,  what  must  He  be  like,  who  has  so  constituted  man  that  the  very  aspect  of 
the  world  in  which  he  lives  furnishes  him  with  quenchless  impulses  of  gladness. 
The  maker  is  known  by  his  work ;  his  thoughts  will  be  in  it ;  as  he  is  so  it  will 
be.     2.  In  the  Christian  revelation.     The  Jewish  system  enters  into  the  history  of 
the  Christian  revelation.     This  system  was  in  the  main  a  festal,  joyous  service.    Its 
restrictions  were  for  the  well-being  of  the  people,  and  added  comfort  to  their  life  ; 
its  festivals  were  more  numerous  than  its  fasts.     If  anywhere  we  should  find  an 
incident  typical  of  Jewish  history,  we  should  find  it  in  our  text,  where  we  see  a 
grave  preacher  calling  on  remorseful  and  broken-hearted  penitents  to   be   more 
glad  for  God's  sake  than  they  were  mournful  for  their  own,  because  the  Lord  was 
Btill  joyous,  and  the  joy  of  the  Lord  was  their  strength.     Christ  is  the  Christian 
revelation ;  the  Son  and  manifestation  of  God.     Although  we  call  Christ  a  "  man 
of  sorrows  "yet  it  should  be  impossible  to  speak  of  Him  as  an  unhappy,  a  wretched, 
a  miserable  man.     "  He  bore  our  griefs  and  carried  our  sorrows  " ;  but  He  was  not 
daunted  by  them,  not  worn  down  by  them.     Sadness  oppressed  Him,  but  never 
gloom  ;  care,  but  not  despondency.     He  was  a  welcome  guest  at  feasts.     Mothers 
brought  their  children  to  Him  ;  little  ones  sang  around  Him,  and  He  was  glad  to 
hear  their  singing.     There  broke  from  Him  signs  of  a  quenchless  joy :  "  At  that 
hour  Jesus  rejoiced  in  spirit."     He  has  no  better  thing  to  leave  His  disciples  than 
His  own  joy.     He  was  sustained  under  the  tribulation  of  His  mission  by  the  deeper 
joy  of  His  achievement.     The  deep,  unquenchable  joy  of  Christ  is  itself  a  revelation 
of  the  essential  joyousness  of  God.    3.  In  the  spiritual  Hie.    Speaking  doctrinaUj, 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

joy  is  the  "  fruit  of  the  Spirit,"  and  a  direct  result  of  the  gospel :  "  Behold  I 
bring  you  good  tidings  of  great  joy,  which  shall  be  to  all  people."  God  intended  to 
give  to  the  penitent  the  joy  of  pardon;  to  the  defiled  the  joy  of  holiness;  to  the 
feeble  the  joy  of  strength.  God  intended  by  His  promises  to  lift  our  hearts  to 
exultation  ;  and  therefore  He  sent  His  Son  for  our  acceptance.  Christian  history 
and  experience  confirm  the  testimony.  Witness  the  writings  of  Paul  to  the  buoyancy 
of  his  spirit.  Strong  Christians  are  always  gladsome  men ;  they  find  inspiration  in 
their  mission,  bliss  in  their  work.  "  The  voice  of  rejoicing  and  thanksgiving  "  is  in 
their  "  tabernacles"  ;  they  "  rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway  "  ;  they  "  rejoice  with  them 
that  do  rejoice,"  and  thus  give  lull  play  and  scope  to  the  spirit  of  their  Father  who 
dwelleth  in  them.  The  inspirations  of  the  indwelling  Spirit  declare  the  essential 
joyousness  of  God.  II.  The  blessedness  of  apprehending  the  essential  joyous- 
NESS  OF  God.  It  is  too  much  forgotten  that  joy  equally  with  sorrow  enters 
into  a  true  human  development.  "  'Tis  held  that  sorrow  makes  us  wise  " ;  but 
it  needs  a  strong  soul  to  endure  the  discipline.  "  A  merry  heart  doeth  good  like  a 
medicine."  Joy  is  the  tonic  of  the  mind.  There  are  some  households  into  which  it 
does  us  good  to  enter ;  the  inmates  are  so  happy,  so  frank,  so  loving,  that  only  to  be 
with  them  refreshes  the  weary  spirit.  We  thus  see  how  the  joy  of  others  may  be 
our  strength.  It  is  a  refuge  for  the  distressed,  a  hiding-place  from  the  storm,  a3 
"  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land."  And  "the  name  of  the  Lord  "  is 
above  all  others  the  "strong  tower"  into  which  "the  righteous  runneth  and  is 
safe."  To  turn  from  the  contemplation  of  a  smiling  world,  and  smiling  men  and 
women,  to  the  thought  of  a  joyous  God:  what  inspiration  is  here  1  {A.  Mac- 
kenna.1.)  On  religious  joy  : — A  few  years  ago  a  fierce  and  violent  dispute  was 
carried  on  between  the  chief  physicians  of  Europe  concerning  antimony.  And 
while  some  maintained  that  this  mineral  was  a  most  valuable  medicine,  and 
extolled  it  to  the  skies,  others  asserted  that  it  was  injurious,  and  ought  to  be 
classed  among  the  deadly  poisons.  The  debate  at  length  subsided ;  and  it  is  now 
admitted  that  the  article  in  question  may  be  useful  when  administered  with  sound 
judgment.  The  opinions  of  men  have  always  been  greatly  divided  on  the  subject 
of  religious  joy — some  extol  it  in  the  highest  strains ;  others  reprobate  and  con- 
demn and  labour  to  extinguish  it.  I.  The  nature  and  source  of  religious  jot. 
An  able  writer  on  the  passions  says,  "  Joy  is  the  vivid  pleasure  inspired  on  our 
receiving  something  peculiarly  grateful ;  something  evidently  productive  of  advantage, 
or  something  which  promises  to  contribute  to  our  present  or  future  happiness." 
The  worldly  man  exults  in  the  acquisition  of  wealth,  power,  titles,  and  honours. 
When  religion  enters  the  mind  it  both  informs  the  understanding  and  moves  the 
passions.  Among  the  passions  joy  holds  a  conspicuous  rank.  1.  Eeligious  or  holy 
joy  arises  from  a  sense  of  the  free  favour  of  a  merciful,  covenant  God.  2.  Religious 
joy  arises  from  a  sense  of  the  special  presence  of  a  merciful,  covenant  God.  (1)  While 
he  contemplates  the  grand  and  beautiful  scenes  of  visible  nature.  (2)  In  the 
ordinances  of  His  worship.  II.  Holt  joy  tends  to  invigorate  and  sustain  those 
who  are  the  partakers  of  it.  There  are  certain  states  of  mind  which  we  are 
accustomed  to  express  in  figurative  terms  and  in  the  form  of  maxims.  Thus  we 
say  knowledge  is  power,  and  ignorance  is  imbecility  ;  hope  braces,  and  fear  relaxes 
the  soul.  If  there  be  any  aptness  in  such  contrasts,  we  may  assert,  that  as 
melancholy  is  weakness,  joy  is  strength.  Joy  has  a  manifest  tendency  to  invigorate 
and  sustain — 1.  The  Christian's  resolutions,  in  prosecuting  all  the  arduous  labours 
of  virtue  and  piety.  2.  The  Christian's  faith  under  the  afflictions  and  trials  he  is 
called  to  endure  (Hab.  iii.  17-18).  Conclusion  :  We  have  an  express  warrant 
to  rejoice:  "Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway."  1.  Our  personal  interest  is  wrapt  up 
in  this  duty.  2.  The  welfare  of  our  brethren  is  in  a  certain  degree  involved  in 
this  duty.  3.  The  honour  of  our  Master  is  implicated  in  the  right  discharge  of 
this  duty.      (Congregational   Remembrancer.)  The   ttrength  of  Divine  joy : — 

Christianity  asserts  with  great  emphasis  and  illustrates  with  all  its  light  the  old 
doctrine  of  Nehemiah  and  the  priests,  that  Divine  gladness  is  power.  I.  Its 
nature.  There  is  a  broad  distinction  between  mere  gladness  and  spiritual  joy. 
Spiritual  joy  rises  from  within  the  soul,  and  does  not  depend  on  the  outward 
circumstances  of  its  life.  It  wells  like  a  fountain  from  the  inner  soul.  It  is  con- 
fined to  no  place.  It  is  bounded  by  no  time.  It  may  grow  where  earthly  gladness 
would  perish.  It  is  a  joy  springing  from  the  inner  communion  of  the  spirit  with 
its  God.  1.  It  is  the  joy  of  self-surrender  to  God.  True  joy  can  only  begin  when 
the  self -life  has  been  surrendered.  Until  this  surrender  has  been  made  the  con- 
sciousness of  a  guilty  past  hangs  like  a  burden  on  the  heart.     Men  know  that  their 


CHAP,  vra.]  NEHEMIAH.  123 

gleams  of  joy  are  only  like  flowers  growing  on  the  edge  of  a  dark  volcano,  which 
when  they  are  alone  and  outward  excitements  have  passed  away  will  waken  in 
lurid  glare  and  thunder,  and  distract  their  repose.  They  want  a  joy  that  shall 
pierce  deeply  into  the  region  of  self  and  rise  from  the  consciousness  of  self- 
surrender  and  forgiveness.  At  the  Cross  of  Christ  the  burden  of  the  past  falls,  for 
at  the  Cross  he  yields  himself.  2.  The  joy  of  fellowship  with  the  Father.  All 
profound  gladness  springs  from  sympathy  with  a  spirit  or  a  truth  higher  than 
ourselves.  Why  do  our  hearts  bound  on  spring  mornings  with  the  joy  of  nature  ? 
Why  does  the  beauty  of  a  summer  evening  calm  us  ?  Why  do  we  feel  a  "  glory  and 
a  joy  "  as  we  tread  the  mountain  sides  ?  Why  do  we  feel  a  deepening  peace  as  we 
walk  amid  the  splendours  of  the  golden  autumn  ?  Is  it  not  because  we  realise  the 
presence  of  a  spirit  of  beauty  surrounding  us,  and  inspiring  us  with  an  emotion 
which  no  words  can  describe  ?  Or  why  is  it  when  a  truth  breaks  in  upon  us 
through  clouds  of  doubt,  and  a  clear  vision  of  its  beauty  is  gained  after  long  and 
fruitless  searching,  that  we  feel  a  thrill  of  joy  deep  and  unspeakable  ?  _  Have  we 
not  after  communion  with  some  greater  soul  felt  our  own  darkness  dissipated  and 
our  own  isolation  broken  down  ?  In  that  hour  has  not  the  touch  of  a  greater  Spirit 
made  us  feel  nobler,  stronger,  wiser?  And  if  this  be  true  of  earthly  communion, 
must  it  not  be  supremely  so  when  we  realise  the  fellowship  of  God  as  our  Father  ? 
It  is  this  which  makes  "our  joy  full."  11.  The  power  op  this  joy  of  the  Lobd. 
We  may  trace  it  in  three  ways.  1.  It  is  power  to  resist  temptation.  It  forms  in 
itself  the  fulness  of  emotion,  and  surrounds  us  with  a  heavenly  atmosphere  in 
which  the  assaults  of  evil  fall  powerless  away.  2.  It  is  strength  for  Christian 
action.  3.  It  is  strength  for  patient  endurance.  We  are  too  weak  to  endure  the 
discipline  of  life  unless  we  have  joy — the  present  earnest  of  the  future  reward. 
{E.L.Hull,  B.A.)  The  joy  of  the  Lord: — George  Whitfield,  it  is  said,  once 
addressed  a  great  gathering  of  colliers.  As  he  discoursed  to  the  rude,  rough  men 
who  stood  there  in  their  working  garb,  and  with  unwashed  faces,  the  Spirit  of  God 
touched  their  hearts.  Tears  filled  their  eyes  and  ran  down  their  faces,  making 
channels  for  themselves  through  the  coal-dust  there.  And  so  here.  As  the  priest 
made  plain  the  Word  of  God,  the  people  wept  and  could  not  help  it.  As  Nehemiah 
saw  them  weep,  he  exclaimed,  "  Weep  not,"  &c.  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your 
strength."  I.  There  is  joy  and  happiness  in  living  with  and  fob  God.  I  can 
well  remember  the  first  time  I  saw  an  engraving  of  the  picture,  '*  The  Pursuit  of 
Pleasure."  In  the  picture  was  the  beautiful  figure  of  a  woman,  with  butterfly  wings 
gliding  through  space.  Following  hard  after  her  were  all  ranks  and  conditions  of 
men,  so  arranged  by  the  artist  as  to  suggest  many  forms  of  enjoyment  and  excite- 
ment, but  all  eager  to  get  the  goddess.  In  the  haste  and  whirl,  and  rush,  some 
had  fallen  and  were  trampled,  but  all  who  could  were  pressing  on,  eagerly  on,  to 
the  abyss.  Men  pursue  that  goddess  still,  forgetting  that  peace,  joy,  real  happiness, 
must  arise  from  within,  from  the  state  of  the  mind  and  heart,  from  union  with 
God  and  all  that  is  purest  and  best  men  rush  blindly  off  into  a  thousand  outward 
diversions,  all  which  fail  to  give  rest  to  the  troubled  conscience,  ease  to  the  sore 
heart,  or  anything  of  the  nature  of  permanent  joy  and  happiness.  This  is  only 
realised  by  those  who  will  live  with  and  for  God.  II.  Thebe  is  joy  in  wobkinq 
FOR  God.  1.  All  work  for  the  good  of  man  is  work  for  God.  2.  Those  have 
greatest  joy  who  work  in  a  godly  spirit,  and  put  heart  into  their  work.  3.  God 
has  a  work  for  us  all,  and  can  give  us  joy  in  it.  I  know  what  it  is  to  have  the 
good  word  of  one's  fellow-men,  to  have  the  confidence  of  one's  companions  and 
helpers  in  toil,  to  have  some  of  the  honours  which  men  have  to  bestow,  to  enjoy  the 
comforts  of  home  and  to  share  the  advantages  and  blessings  of  travel,  but  not  all 
these  equal  the  blessing  which  God  gives  me  when  I  am  used  as  the  instrument  to 
make  one  sad  heart  happy.  III.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  youb  strength.  1.  In 
temptation.  2.  In  suffering  and  loss.  3.  In  all  your  life.  {Charles  Leach,  D.D.) 
The  joy  of  the  Lord  .-—All  deep  religion  ought  to  be  joyful,  and  all  strong  religion 
assuredly  will  be.  I.  Joy  in  the  Lord  is  the  natural  result  of  Christian  faith. 
1.  Because  of  what  it  gives  us.  (1)  A  sense  of  acceptance  with  God.  (2)  God  for 
the  rest  of  our  spirits.  (3)  Communion  with  Him.  2.  Because  of  what  it  takes 
away  from  us.  (1)  The  fear  that  lies  before  us.  (2)  The  strifes  that  lie  within  us, 
the  desperate  conflict  between  conscience  and  inclination,  our  will  and  our  passions. 
(3)  The  sense  of  sin.  Faith  in  Christ  naturally  works  gladness.  It  also  produces 
sorrow — solemn,  manly,  noble,  and  strong.  This  is  not  contradictory.  All  great 
thoughts  have  a  solemn  quiet  in  them,  which  not  unfrequently  merges  into  a  still 
sorrow:  "As  sorrowing,  yet  always  rejoicing."     These  two  states  of  mind,  both  of 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nn. 

them  the  natural  operation  of  any  deep  faith,  may  co-exist  and  blend  into  one 
another,  so  as  that  the  gladness  is  sobered,  and  chastened,  and  made  manly  and 
noble ;  and  that  the  sorrow  is  like  some  thunder-cloud,  all  streaked  with  bars  of 
sunshine,  that  go  into  its  deepest  depths.  The  joy  lives  in  the  midst  of  the  sorrow ; 
the  sorrow  springs  from  the  same  root  as  the  gladness.  They  blend  into  one 
another ;  just  as,  in  the  Arctic  regions,  deep  down  beneath  the  cold  snow,  you 
shall  find  the  budding  of  the  early  spring  flowers  and  the  fresh  green  grass  ;  just 
as  some  kinds  of  fire  burn  below  the  water  ;  just  as  in  the  midst  of  the  undrinkable 
sea  there  may  be  welling  up  some  little  fountain  of  fresh  water  that  comes  from  a 
deeper  depth  than  the  great  ocean  around  it.  The  Christian  life  is  all  like  one  of 
those  spring  showers  in  early  April,  when  the  rain-drops  weave  for  us  a  mist  that 
hides  the  sunshine,  and  yet  the  hidden  sun  is  in  every  sparkling  drop,  and  they  are 
all  saturated  and  steeped  in  its  light.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  the  natural  result  of 
Christian  faith.  11.  Joy  is  a  Chbistian  duty.  It  is  a  commandment  here  and 
also  in  the  New  Testament.  It  follows  from  this  that  the  degree  to  which  a 
Christian  life  shall  be  a  cheerful  life  is  dependent  in  a  large  measure  upon  our  own 
volitions.  By  the  selection  or  the  rejection  of  the  appropriate  subjects  which  shall 
make  the  main  portion  of  our  religious  contemplations  we  can  determine  the 
complexion  of  our  religious  life.  Just  as  you  inject  colouring  matter  into  the  fibres 
of  some  anatomical  preparation,  so  a  Christian  may,  as  it  were,  inject  into  all  the 
veins  of  his  religious  character  and  life,  either  the  bright  tints  of  gladness,  or  the 
dark  ones  of  self-despondency.  If  your  thoughts  are  chiefly  occupied  with  God, 
and  what  He  has  done  and  is  for  you,  then  you  will  have  peaceful  joy.  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  they  are  bent  ever  on  yourself  and  your  own  unbelief,  then  you  will 
always  be  sad.  It  is  only  where  there  is  much  faith  and  consequent  love  that 
there  is  much  joy.  If  there  is  but  little  heat  around  the  bulb  of  the  thermometer, 
no  wonder  that  the  mercury  marks  a  low  degree.  If  there  is  but  small  faith  there 
will  not  be  much  gladness.  III.  Rejoicing  in  the  Lord  is  a  source  or  strength. 
All  gladness  has  something  to  do  with  our  efliciency ;  for  it  is  the  prerogative  of 
man  that  his  force  comes  from  his  mind,  and  not  from  his  body.  If  we  have 
hearts  full  of  light  and  souls  at  rest  in  Christ,  work  will  be  easy,  endurance  wiU  be 
easy,  sorrows  wiU  be  bearable,  trials  will  not  be  so  very  hard;  and  above  all 
temptations  we  shall  be  lifted  and  set  upon  a  rock.  If  the  soul  is  full,  and  fuU  of 
joy,  what  side  will  be  exposed  to  any  temptation  ?  If  it  appeal  to  fear,  the  gladness 
that  is  there  is  the  answer.  If  it  appeal  to  passion,  desire,  wish  for  pleasure  of  any 
Bort,  there  is  no  need  for  any  more  —the  heart  is  full.  Christian  gladness,  like  the 
magic  shield  of  the  old  legends,  invisible  in  its  crystalline  purity,  will  repel  aU  the 
"  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked."  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  joy  of  God  the  strength 
of  men  : — I.  Ezra  felt  the  unique  power  of  the  nation's  literature.  For  him 
it  contained  all  that  is  best  for  men  to  do,  and  happiest  to  desire.  Therefore,  he 
and  his  fellow-reformers  were  "  the  men  of  the  book  "  of  the  law  of  the  Lord,  using 
it  as  "  the  man  of  their  counsel "  a  fount  of  refreshing,  a  goad  to  penitence,  and  a 
stimulus  to  faith,  generosity,  and  joy.    II.  God  is  infinixe,  and  no  man,  nay,  not 

ALL  MEN,  CAN  EXPRESS  HiM  ;  BUT  EVERY  TRUE  SOUL  MAY  SAY  SOMETHING  ABOUT  HiM, 

and  every  nature  He  trains  by  His  spirit  may  either  add  something  of  freshness  of 
setting  and  force  of  applicability  to  an  old  truth,  or  open  for  some  soul  new 
glimpses  of  His  wondrous  fulness.  High  thoughts  do  not  disdain  lowly  minds. 
The  ascent  to  the  loftiest  ranges  of  light  and  power  is  given,  not  to  a  prophet  like 
the  seraphic  Isaiah,  nor  to  a  singing  poet  like  David,  nor  to  a  great  leader  like 
Moses,  but  to  Neheraiah,  a  courtier  and  a  statesman,  a  politician  and  a  reformer. 
Nehemiah  is  for  the  moment  lifted  to  the  highest  grade  of  teachers,  and  placed  by 
the  side  of  Christ  when  He  says,  "  These  words  have  I  spoken  to  you  that  My  joy 
may  remain  in  you,  and  that  your  joy  may  be  full."  He  has  fellowship  with  Paul, 
when  he  rejoices  that  he  is  counted  worthy  to  preach  "  the  glorious  gospel  of  the 
happy  God."  He  anticipates  Christianity  in  its  most  vital  and  essential  element ; 
links  together  in  natural  sequence  the  two  economies ;  shows  that  God  is  a  Being 
not  coldly  impressive,  stolidly  majestic,  without  sy..ipalhy,  but  tender-hearted, 
forgiving,  delighting  in  mercy,  and  plenteous  in  redemption ;  a  God  whose  joy  ia 
strength  for  troubled  men.  III.  To  me  it  appears  like  a  stroke  of  true  genius 
AS  MEN  CALL  IT — a  breath  of  inspiration  from  God,  as  I  would  name  it — that 
Nehemiah  delivers   this  higher   and  richer   message   concerning   God  at  thk 

MOMENT  when  the  PEOPLE  ARE  PROFOUNDLY  STIRRED  BY  THE  RECENTLY  REDISCOVERED 
1iIP:SSAGE    of    the    ancient    L.AW,    and    OVERWHELMED   WITH    DEJECTION    AND    SORROW   for 

their  newly-revealed  sins.     The  law  is  not  a  goal,  but  a  light  and  a  goad  ;  a  light 


CHAP.  TUi.]  NEHEMIAH.  125 

on  the  way  to  God,  and  a  goad  to  petition  for  His  pardon.  This  disclosure  of  sin 
and  penalty  is  intended,  like  the  flames  out  of  the  mountain,  to  hurry  the  approach 
of  the  pilgrim  to  the  wicket-gate  of  repentance.  IV.  "  God's  joy  a  stkonghold  " 
(marginal  rendering).  Who  can  tell  the  immense  strength  infused  into  a  soul  to 
whom  God  is  an  ever-present,  ever-bright  consciousness  of  infinite  joy  ?  Such  a 
consciousness  of  the  presence  of  the  joyful  God  flings  around  us  an  all-protecting 
shield  from  the  shafts  of  doubt  and  care  ;  builds  about  us  a  defensive  tower  from 
obtrusive  fears;  delivers  us  from  the  world,  with  its  ceaseless  din,  low  ideals,  &c. ; 
from  the  flesh,  with  its  blinding  passion,  base  motive,  and  thwarting  caprice ;  and 
from  the  devil,  with  his  insinuations  of  the  necessity  of  evil,  the  selfishness  of  the 
good,  and  the  folly  of  righteousness.  1.  This  consciousness  of  God's  presence 
makes  to  us  this  world  of  nature  a  new  creation,  instinct  with  a  new  significance, 
and  potent  with  an  evangelical  energy.  We  know  we  are  under  law.  We  accept 
the  teachings  of  science  as  the  teachings  of  our  Father  God,  and  rejoice  in  its 
demonstrations  of  the  Abiding  Order  and  Fixed  Law  of  this  world  because  we  know 
the  Lawgiver  Himself  is  not  a  stern  Draco,  imaged  only  in  the  desolating  earth- 
quake, fire-belching  volcano,  and  fierce  tornado ;  but  a  Father,  yea,  our  Father  and 
Kedeemer,  and  that  we  belong  to  Him  and  not  to  the  house  in  which  He  has  put 
us.  2.  This  consciousness  makes  us  feel  that  the  bitter  and  painful  experiences  of 
life  are  part  of  the  Divine  order  and  plan  of  a  loving  and  rejoicing  Father. 
A  poor  fellow  said  to  me  after  thrusts  and  stabs  of  bewildering  pain  that 
almost  made  him  reel,  "  Still,  we  know  it's  all  right,  don't  we  ?  We  know  whom 
we  have  believed,  and  are  persuaded  we  are  not  going  to  lose  anything  we  have 
given  over  to  Him."  Such  testimonies  show  how  the  consciousness  of  God  changes 
the  very  face  of  sorrow  ;  that  grief  is  a  joy  misunderstood  ;  that  the  burdens  of  life 
are  its  benedictions  ;  that  the  old  gospel  is  still  new,  and  that  though  in  the  world 
men  may  have  tribulation,  in  Christ  they  have  peace.  Such  testimonies  interpret 
to  me  the  rapturous  experiences  of  persecuted  and  afflicted  men  that  in  my  earlier 
years  I  was  tempted  to  think  over- weighted  and  unreal :  Samuel  Eutherford, 
Payson,  Doddridge,  Erskine,  Eobertson,  F.  K.  Havei-gal,  Mrs.  Prentiss,  and  many 
others.  3.  This  pervading  consciousness  of  the  happiness  of  God  invests  death 
itself  with  a  new  mission,  forces  it  to  take  its  place  amongst  the  servants  of  the 
Father  and  the  friends  of  His  children.  "Absent  from  the  body,  we  are  at  home 
•with  the  Lord."  V.  The  joy  of  God  is  the  source  of  oub  active,  SELF-roKGETTiNa 
OENERosiTY.  "  Go  your  way,  eat  the  fat,  and  drink  the  sweet,  and  send  portions 
for  whom  nothing  is  prepared."  Whatever  God  is.  He  is  for  us.  Whatever  God 
is  for  us  and  to  us,  it  is  that  we  may  be  the  same  for  and  to  others.  Joy  in  the 
Lord  is  strength,  positive  actual  power  for  ministry.  It  creates  around  us  the 
most  favourable  atmosphere  for  evoking  our  resources ;  raises  our  entire  nature  to 
the  highest  pitch  of  energy,  and  gives  unwonted  elasticity  and  capacity  of  tension 
to  all  our  faculties.  As  bodies  expand  under  heat,  so  the  soul  enlarges  under  the 
genial  influence  of  joy.  Indeed,  men  never  reach  their  best  before  they  have 
mastered  the  whole  gamut  of  joy,  from  the  lowest  note  of  cheerfulness  to  the 
highest  of  rapture.  As  some  men  do  business  without  obtaining  a  fiftieth  part  of 
the  profit  gained  by  others,  so  some  Christians  never  "  nett "  the  "great  gains" 
that  flow  from  a  cheerful  piety.  Vast  is  the  difference  between  working  for  God 
from  a  sense  of  responsibility  and  from  a  delight  which  springs  out  of  fellowship 
with  Christ.  Kesponsibility  is  a  goad.  Joy  is  a  magnet.  One  pricks  and  urges 
forward  by  a  sense  of  painfulness  that  reduces  all  work  to  the  severe  limits  of 
obedience  to  imperative  and  resistless  orders.  The  other  is  life ;  and  such  is  its 
magic  it  converts  even  hard  toil  into  play,  and  makes  it  as  welcome  as  song  to  the 
merry  birds,  or  sport  to  romping  children.  The  joy  of  God  is  strength  for  the 
suppression  of  all  life's  evils,  the  solace  of  all  sad  hearts,  and  the  service  of  all  for 
whom  nothing  is  prepared.  Conclusion :  1.  The  God  of  the  Hebrews  is  no  mere 
object  of  worship  seated  coldly  apart  and  awaiting  the  homage  of  men ;  He  is  a 
radiant  presence,  inspiring  the  mandate,  "  Eejoice  in  the  Lord,  0  ye  righteous." 
2.  Eemember,  too,  that  the  joy  of  our  friends  is  our  strength.  The  bare  sight  of 
some  men  is  an  instant  dismissal  of  despair.  The  arrival  of  another  is  as  the 
report  of  a  disaster.  A  light  heart  dissipates  gloom  as  the  sun  lifts  fog.  The  joy 
of  friends  is  a  flowing  fountain  of  perennial  strength.  3.  What  an  exhaustless 
fund  of  gladness  is  a  free,  healthy,  simple,  and  natural  child ;  how  unspeakably 
indebted  many  of  us  are  to  the  irrepressible  joy  and  strange,  heaven-sent  wisdom 
of  children  for  the  loss  of  our  moroseness,  acerbity,  and  misery.  The  joy  of 
children  is  our  strength.    4.  It  is  a  common  experience,  this  contagion  of  joy — 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vra. 

this  conversion  of  joy  into  power.     Rejoice,  then,  in  the  God  of  joy,  and  minister 
to  those  for  whom  nothing  is  prepared.     Pour  out  your  gladness  for  other  hearts. 
Restrain  it,  and  you  destroy  it.     Cage  your  lark,  and  it  will  not  sing.     Open  the 
door,  give  it  access  to  the  wide  heavens,  and  away  it  goes  merrily  chanting  its 
music  up  to  heaven's  gate.     (J.  Clifford,  D.D.)         The  joy  of  the  Lord  the  strength 
of  His  people : — The  people  here  bidden  to  rejoice  were  even  then  melted  with 
penitential  grief,  "  for  all  the  people  wept  when  they  heard  the  words  of  the  law." 
As  certain  fabrics  need  to  be  damped  before  they  will  take  the  glowing  colours  with 
■which  they  are  to  be  adorned,  so  our  spirits  need  the  bedewing  of   repentance 
before  they  can  receive  the  radiant  colouring  of  delight.     The  glad  news  of  the 
gospel  can  only  be  printed  on  wet  paper.    I.  There  is  a  jot  of  Divine  origin. 
1.  It  springs  from  God  and  has  God  for  its  object.     2.  It  springs  from  a  deep 
sense  of  reconciliation  to  God,  of  acceptance  with  God,  and  yet  beyond  that,  of 
adoption  and  close  relationship  to  God.     3.  It  springs  from  an  assurance  that  all 
the  future,  whatever  it  may  be,  is  guaranteed  by  Divine  goodness.     4.  There  is  an 
abyss  of  delight  for  every  Christian  when  he  comes  into  actual  fellowship  with 
God.    5.  Another  form  of  "  the  joy  of  the  Lord"  is  the  honour  of  being  allowed  to 
serve  Him.    11.  This  jot  is  a  source  of  great  strength.     1.  It  is  so  because  it 
arises  from  considerations  which  always  strengthen  the  soul.    Very  much  of  tha 
depth  of  our  piety  will  depend  upon  our  thoughtfulness.     He  is  the  joyful  Christian 
who  uses  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  for  spiritual  meat,  as  they  were  meant  to  be 
used.    2.  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  "  within  us  is  always  the  sign  and  symbol  of  strong 
spiritual  life.     The  warmth  of  the  South  of  France  does  not  spring  from  soft, 
balmy  winds,  but  from  the  sun;  at  sunset  the  temperature  falls.    A  man  who 
walks  in  the  sunlight  of  God's  countenance  for  that  very  reason  is  warm  and 
strong.      3.  It  fortifies  him   against  temptation.     4.    It  makes  him  strong  for 
service.    5.  A  joyous  man  such  as  I  have  in  my  mind's  eye  is  to  all  intents  and 
purposes  a  strong  man.      He  is  strong  in   a  calm,  restful  manner.      Whatever 
happens  he  is  not  ruffled  or  disturbed.     III.  This  strength  leads  to  practicaIi 
RESULTS.       1.   Great  praise.      2.   Great  sacrifice.     3.   Other  expressions  of  joy. 
When  a  man  has  the  oil  of  joy,  then  in  his  business  and  in  his  family  the  wheels 
of    his  nature    ghde  along   sweetly  and    harmoniously.     4.  Family    happiness. 
"The  wives  also  and  the  children  rejoiced."    I  dislike  much  that  Christianity 
which  makes  a  man  feel,  "  If  I  go  to  heaven  it  is  all  I  care  for."     Why,  you 
are  like  a  German  stove  which   I  found  in   the  room  of    an  hotel — a   kind   of 
stove  which  required  all  the  wood  they  could  bring  up  merely  to  warm  itself,  and 
then  all  the  heat  went  up  the  chimney.     IV.  This  jot,  this  strength,  are  both 
within  our  reach.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Joy  in  the  Lord  a  source  of  strength  : — 
There  is  strength  in  joy,  and  a  sense  of  adequate  security  is  an  element  of  joy.     If 
a  man  deem  himself  certain  of  triumph  at  last,  he  will  be  joyful,  whether  that 
triumph  be  achieved  by  himself  or  another.     The  joyful  man  is  a  strong  man 
because  he  is  a  confident  man,  and  the  dejected  man  is  a  weak  man  because  he 
distrusts  his  cause,  himself,  or  some  one  else  upon  whom  he  depends.    Two  armies, 
with  numbers  equal,  are  mustering  for  battle.     They  are  well  matched  in  war 
materials,  both  brave,  both  earnest,  eager  for  battle.    But  one  side  are  exhilarated 
by  repeated  successes ;  they  have  won  a  terrible  name ;  the  general  who  leads 
never  knew  defeat.     On  the  other  side  is  the  humiliation  of  repeated  failures ; 
again  and  again  with  lowered  standards  they  have  retreated.     They  have  lost  all 
confidence  in  themselves  and  their  commanders.     Now,  who  deems  the  conflict 
doubtful  ?     Triumph  is  written  in  the  joyful  confidence  of  one,  and  defeat  in  the 
deep  dejection  of  the  other.     The  assurance  of  the  army  expectant  of  success  is 
worth  ten  regiments  and  a  hundred  guns ;  and  it  may  be  truly  said  of  them,  "  In 
the  joy  of  victory  is  their  strength."    Let  us— I.  Ascertain  what  is  the  jot  op 
the  Lord.     The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  that  sweet  and  holy  gladness  which  springs 
from  and  originates  in  a  calm,  humble  faith  that  we  are  the  recipients  of  the 
Divine  favour,  under  the  Divine  protection.     In  the  followers  of  the  Lord  it  is  a 
holy  cheerfulness  founded  on  the  belief  that  they  are  the  children  of  God  by  Jesua 
Christ.     That  their  Substitute  has  paid  the  debt  and  accomplished  the  work  of 
redemption  ;  that  they  are  saved  now.     Just  in  proportion  as  you  make  salvation 
a  contingency  you  undermine  the  basis  of  Christian  joy.     Dr.  Doddridge  once 
succeeded  in  procuring  the  pardon  for  one  condemned  to  die.     As  the  cell-door  was 
thrown  open  the  poor  man  cast  himself  down,  and  clasping  the  feet  of  his  deliverer, 
exclaimed,  "  Every  drop  of  my  blood  thanks  you,  for  you  have  saved  them  all." 
This  was  the  joy  of  salvation  realised  as  a  fact.     II.  Let  us  see  how  this  jot  of 


CHAP,  vni.]  NEHEMIAH.  127 

THE  Lord  is  our  strength.  1.  It  strengthens  us  negatively  in  the  removal  of 
anxieties.  2.  It  imparts  assurance  of  final  victory.  3.  It  permits  a  concentration 
of  the  whole  life  force  upon  a  single  point.  The  Christian  who  believes  himself 
saved  trains  all  his  guns  in  one  direction,  the  end  of  which  is  his  Master's  glory. 
4.  It  reinforces  all  other  motives  by  the  power  of  gratitude,  and  puts  us  under  the 
sweetest  and  holiest  of  obligations.  (W.  T.  Sabine.)  Joy  in  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord : — I.  The  nature  of  joy  in  Christ.  1.  It  is  the  joy  which  springs  from  the 
knowledge  of  the  reconciliation  of  God  to  His  sinful  creatures  ;  by  which  our  lives 
are  saved  from  destruction,  and  we  are  brought  into  a  condition  to  enjoy  His 
presence  and  favour.  2.  It  is  such  a  joy  as  arises  from  the  possession  of  a  perfect 
revelation  of  the  character  and  will  of  the  Most  High,  and  consequently  of  our 
interest,  duty,  and  destination.  Before  the  coming  of  Christ  idolatry  reigned,  and 
with  it  necessarily  prevailed  a  general  depravation  of  morals,  and  a  total  want  of 
those  spiritual  excellences  and  comforts  which  exalt  and  bless  the  human 
character.  Some  few  sages,  indeed,  shed  by  their  researches  a  dubious  light  on 
the  path  of  life.  But  they  were  like  the  scattered  and  glimmering  stars  of  a 
cloudy  midnight.  They  could  neither  impart  the  warmth  nor  give  the  light  which 
the  wretched  traveller  needed.  Their  occasional  twinklings  only  rendered  the 
darkness  more  apparent  and  oppressive.  This  darkness  was  dispersed  by  the 
rising  of  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness.  The  gospel  makes  us  acquainted  with  all  that 
it  is  necessary  for  us  to  know  of  God  and  with  all  that  He  requires  of  us.  3.  It  is 
the  joy  which  springs  from  the  well-grounded  hope  of  inheriting  heaven  and 
immortality.  4.  It  is  the  joy  which  arises  from  our  knowledge  of  the  exalted 
character  of  our  Redeemer,  which  furnishes  a  peaceful  assurance  of  the  suflSciency 
of  the  atonement  and  of  the  greatness  of  the  Almighty's  love.  II.  This  jot  is  our 
strength.  1.  It  is  the  foundation  of  our  encouragement  in  approaching  our 
Maker.  2.  This  joy  which  we  have  in  the  character,  instructions,  and  achievements 
of  Christ  animates  us  in  the  performing  of  the  duties  of  life.  3.  It  is  our  strength 
in  bearing  up  under  life's  troubles  and  adversities.  4.  It  gives  us  comfort  in  the 
approach  and  will  give  us  victory  in  the  conflict  with  death.  5.  It  is  the  principal 
source  of  composure  and  hope  when  we  contemplate  the  final  judgment.  {Bp. 
Dehon.)  The  nature  and  effects  of  a  true  believer's  joy  : — I.  The  nature  of  a. 
true  believer's  jot.  It  is  "  the  joy  of  the  Lord."  Why  ?  1.  Because  God  is  its 
author.  This  joy  is  no  mere  animal  sensation.  It  is  not  the  same  thing  as 
what  we  call  "  good  spirits."  It  is  not  that  flow  of  lively  feelings  and  sensations 
which  spring  up  themselves  in  a  man's  heart  when  things  are  grateful  and 
agreeable.  Such  feelings  are  of  nature  only,  and  never  hold.  Eeligion  has  no 
root  in  them  (Matt.  xiii.  20,  21).  The  joy  of  true  believers  is  a  spiritual  gift 
(Gal.  V.  22).  2.  Because  God  is  its  subject.  True  believers  "  joy  in  the  God  of 
their  salvation."  (1)  They  joy  in  the  freeness  of  His  great  salvation.  (2)  They 
joy  in  the  imputation  of  His  justifying  righteousness.  3.  They  joy  in  God  as  the 
Giver  of  their  present  privileges  and  the  Preparer  of  their  future  glories  (2  Cor.  v. 
21,  xii.  9,  10 ;  Isa.  Ixi.  10 ;  Kom.  v.  5  ;  Phil.  iv.  7 ;  Prov.  iii.  17 ;  Jas.  i.  2. 
II.  The  effect  of  this  jot  upon  the  believer's  heart  and  life.  1.  It 
strengthens  him  for  duty.  How  beautifully  is  this  exemplified  in  the  case  of 
the  Churches  of  Macedonia  (2  Cor.  viii.  2-^).  What  made  them  so  warm,  so 
zealous  in  their  duties  ?  "  The  abundance  of  their  joy."  The  joy  of  the  Lord 
was  their  strength.  2.  It  strengthens  him  for  suffering.  See  this  exemplified : 
David  (1  Sam.  xxx.  6) ;  the  apostles  when  they  were  beaten  before  the  Jewish 
council  (Acts  v.  41) ;  Paul  when  he  calls  his  heavy  trials  "  light  afflictions " 
(2  Cor.  iv.  17) ;  Paul  and  Silas  in  the  prison  at  Philippi  (Acts  xvi.  25) ;  the  victories  in 
the  dying  hours  of  true  believers  (Psa.  cxlix.  5,  6 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  16).  (A.  Roberts,  M.A.) 
God's  tonic  of  gladness  : — The  man  I  am  thinking  of  had  been  born  in  a  Christian 
home,  but  had  gone  away  and  tramped  the  world.  The  story  of  the  prodigal  or 
some  other  lyric  of  salvation  is  read.  And,  as  the  old  forgotten  sanctities  sweep 
over  his  memory  and  are  sung  into  his  neglected  heart,  the  crust  of  careless  habit 
is  broken,  the  founts  long  closed  are  reopened,  and  he  is  bent  and  swayed  with 
Burging  recollections  of  the  good  and  beautiful  in  the  Christian  life  which  has  passed 
out  of  his  existence.  Such  emotions  sweep  over  the  hearts  of  the  Jews  as  they 
hear  the  long-neglected  Law  while  Ezra  reads  it  from  his  extemporised  pulpit  of 
wood.  They  had  returned  from  the  captivity  of  Babylon.  Now  is  the  opportunity 
for  Ezra  to  introduce  the  neglected  Law.  The  Levites  go  about  among  little  groups 
answering  questions  and  expounding  what  is  read.  The  effect  is  that  the  multitude 
are  swept,  as  only  an  Oriental  people  can  be  swept,  with  a  wave  of  feeling  and 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

lamentation.  Why  these  outbursts  of  distress  ?  Because  the  ancient  covenant  of 
God  with  their  race  had  almost  dropped  out  of  memory.  When  they  hear  again 
what  God  did  for  their  fathers — the  story  of  Egypt  and  Sinai,  of  the  tabernacle, 
the  temple,  the  shechinah  and  the  pledges  of  sheltering  mercy — it  comes  upon 
them  as  the  revelation  of  a  new  discovery.  The  sins  and  faithlessness  of  the  past 
bow  them  low.  "  Grieve  no  longer,"  cry  Nehemiah  and  Ezra  to  the  distraught 
people;  "do  not  waste  your  hearts  with  sorrow."  Put  away  tears  of  distressful 
memory,  "  for  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."  1.  Listen  to  God's  comfort- 
able words  of  reassurance  to  hearts  filled  with  shame  and  sorrow.  "  Grieve  not, 
grieve  not " ;  and  it  is  said  over  and  over  again.  Such  comfortable  words  can 
only  be  spoken  to  men  and  women  already  softened.  To  most  people  the  trumpet 
call  is  rather,  "  Grieve  and  lament  for  your  sins  ;  abase  yourselves  for  your  follies 
and  self-willed  lives."  But  here  the  people's  hearts  have  been  made  soft.  Encrust- 
ing callousness  has  been  broken  through  ;  a  wave  of  tender  feeling  is  passing  over 
them.  And  God  is  quick  to  speak  peace  to  them  and  offer  them  "  the  garment  of 
praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness."  When  men's  hearts  are  moved  and  softened, 
when  at  last  they  let  all  the  barricades  of  feeling  give  way  and  the  long  pent-up  sin 
and  the  hunger  for  good  and  love  Divine  pour  out  in  the  hidden  chambers  of  the 
soul,  then  God  hastens  to  them  with  His  generous  assurances.  "  Do  not  lay  waste 
your  hearts  with  grief.  Take  comfort  to  yourselves.  Kejoice  that  now  at  last  the 
dead  and  careless  years  are  gone,  and  that  the  words  of  life  and  love  ring  in  your 
ears  once  more."  Lq  every  company  of  people  there  are  some  whose  shame  and 
grief  over  past  folly  and  misbehaviour  is  a  sore  that  runs  perpetually,  they  cannot 
get  over  it  nor  escape  its  anguish,  the  dark  burden  on  memory  paralyses  them. 
Yet,  if  only  they  could  get  the  records  on  the  table  of  the  heart  wiped  clean  they 
would  be  strong  men  of  God.  Let  me  echo  the  generous  comforts  of  Divine  com- 
passion. Oh,  let  the  Divine  heart  bear  away  these  curses  that  lie  heavy  on  you. 
Yield  to  the  goodness  that  has  come  into  your  life.  Let  sheer  goodness  and  love 
swamp  all  self-accusations.  Then  will  you  enjoy  the  sacrament  of  forgiving  grace. 
Your  life  will  be  given  back  to  you  as  a  new  and  clean  thing.  Many,  I  feel  sure, 
are  going  cold  and  comfortless,  wearing  out  their  spirit  in  secret  regrets  that  are 
never  salved  and  soothed  away  with  love.  The  one  thing  they  need  most  is  a  bit 
of  gladness  in  their  life,  sun's  warmth  in  enveloping  love.  2,  The  proper  Christian 
note  is  gladness  of  heart.  What  a  piece  of  irony  is  the  laughter  and  merry-making 
of  the  careless,  unforgiven  man  1  Underneath  the  mirth  and  free  play,  what  a 
region  of  unpurged  evil  deep  down  within  them  in  their  tastes,  memories,  and 
habits  1  How  dare  men  sing  and  take  the  delight  of  life  while  they  are  moribund 
with  sin's  leprosy  and  going  forward  to  face  the  last  reckoning  unprepared  ?  But 
Christians — they  have  the  heritage  of  Christ,  the  peace  that  makes  the  singing 
heart.  True,  you  cannot  ignore  the  inevitable  hardships  and  pains  of  living,  which 
are  no  respecters  of  persons  ;  and  the  Christian  is  as  open  as  any  one  to  the  cut  of 
unkindness,  the  depression  of  dark  times,  and  the  heartache  over  others'  wrong- 
doing. Yet  so  far  as  the  inevitable  will  allow,  you  are  entitled  and  required  to 
accept  the  good  and  joy  of  your  days,  to  delight  in  all  beauty,  all  the  cheer  of 
human  love,  all  stimulating  influences  and  glad  hopes.  The  common  delights  of 
human  life  are  all  the  more  yours  because  you  have  the  diviner  reasons  for  happi- 
ness. I  am  certain  that  numbers  of  Christians  have  never  accepted  the  full  gladness 
of  their  high  calling  in  Christ.  What  is  the  reason  ?  Is  it  that  they  think  it 
unbecoming  to  let  their  hearts  swell  with  natural  joy  ?  Has  religious  seriousness 
overpowered  their  natural  good  spirits,  a  tradition  of  sombre  piety  suppressing  their 
buoyancy  ?  It  is  a  false  conception  of  the  Christian  mind.  Take  joy  in,  and  let 
radiance  suffuse  your  life.  Yes,  I  know  there  is  a  heartless  element  in  the  un- 
mitigated delight  of  some  people.  There  is  a  heartless  mirth  which  is  careless  of 
mankind.  And  it  is  possible  for  us  to  take  the  pleasure  of  our  days  without  regard 
to  the  sore  problems  of  the  world  and  the  sins  of  men.  Christian  music  must  have 
its  minor  as  well  as  its  major  notes.  Yet  we  are  not  meant  to  surrender  our  hearts 
much  or  long  to  the  oppressing  burden  of  human  sin  and  distress.  We  are  to  feel 
it  so  far  that  we  shall  "  send  portions  to  them  for  whom  nothing  is  prepared,"  to 
better  the  hard  lot  of  such  as  we  can  reach  and  assist  Christ  to  gladden  the  whole 
race.  That  is  an  essential  condition  of  a  joy  that  is  Christian.  But,  having  done 
this,  we  are  to  take  the  sun.  If  we  took  all  the  world's  misery  into  our  hearts  it 
would  crush  us,  spoiling  our  personal  influence,  without  doing  any  good.  We  must 
leave  the  most  of  it  to  Almighty  God  to  bear,  who  alone  has  the  almighty  heart. 
The  sun  of  righteousness  is  not  sinking  in  the  sky,  but  ascending  over  the  world. 


CHAP.  Tin.]  NEHEMIAE.  ISS 

In  spite  of  evil  we  rejoice  by  faith,  by  anticipation  of  what  God  in  Christ  is  in 
process  of  achieving,  because  of  the  entrance  of  Divine  power  into  the  world  in 
Christ.  Even  our  sins  which  sadden  us  will  be  overcome  if  we  remain  faithful. 
3.  There  is  God's  tonic  for  our  hearts  in  this  devout  gladness.  Happiness  is  a 
bracing  tonic  in  its  own  time  and  place.  I  do  not  forget — it  is  often  enough  said — 
that  suifering  and  sorrow  are  bracing  forces,  and  they,  too,  are  required  to  make 
men  sterling  and  strong  in  virtue  and  godliness.  Shadow  and  discipline  have  their 
indispensable  work  to  do  in  forging  Christian  character.  The  paler  hues  of 
character,  the  sombre  greys  of  meekness  and  gentleness,  are  not  the  sole  Christian 
colours.  Those  who  suffer  prolonged  discipline  are  apt  to  lose  the  warmer  tints 
which  brighten  the  Christian  faith,  and  to  miss  the  elasticity  of  spirit  which  helps 
us  to  rise  from  our  errors  and  press  toward  the  mark.  If  we  could  get  some  rays 
of  luminous  sunshine  transmitted  into  our  hearts  we  should  take  a  new  lease  of  life; 
new  springs  would  be  opened  in  us  for  the  refreshment  of  others.  (R.  E.  Welsh,  M.A.) 
The  joy  oj  the  Lord  the  Christian's  strength : — Here  observe  that  the  parties  to  whom 
these  words  were  originally  addressed  were  in  the  act  of  expressing  deep  sorrow  for 
sin.  Nehemiah  had  no  intention  to  make  light  of  sorrow  for  sin,  nor  to  represent 
it  as  aught  else  than  a  necessary  ingredient  in  the  composition  of  genuine  repent- 
ance. The  sin  that  is  not  lamented  will  hardly  be  forsaken ;  and  thoug^l  there 
may  be  grief  which  does  not  issue  in  amendment,  we  may  doubt  whether  you  will 
find  the  amendment  which  has  not  been  preceded  by  grief.  There  is  a  point 
beyond  which  sorrow  being  carried,  will  neither  constitute  nor  prove  repentance. 
The  grief  cannot  be  such  as  God  demands  which  hides  from  man  the  attributes  of 
God  and  the  arrangements  Divinely  made  for  the  pardon  of  sin.  A  man  who 
sorrows  for  a  sin  with  a  sorrow  that  seems  to  say  that  sin  is  unpardonable  draws 
for  himself  and  presents  to  others  a  picture  of  God  which  is  altogether  unscriptural. 
In  the  Ught  of  the  gospel  there  is  a  point  at  which  sorrow  for  sin  becomes  itself 
sinful,  and  that  is  the  point  at  which  we  sorrow  "  even  as  those  who  have  no  hope"; 
when  we  lament  as  if  there  were  no  remedy.  Looking  at  the  text  with  special 
reference  to  ourselves,  we  observe  that  "the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our  strength" — 
I.  In  eendeking  effective  our  soreow  for  sin.  Sorrow  alone  and  by  itself  can 
produce  no  genuine  repentance ;  but  "  the  joy  of  the  Lord  " — the  assurance  of  a 
free  and  unqualified  forgiveness — must  be  mixed  with  the  sorrow  to  produce  such  a 
result.  We  understand  by  repentance,  not  only  the  lamenting  sin,  which  is  a  part, 
but  the  forsaking  sin,  which  is  a  greater  part.  It  is  the  pleasure  of  God,  the  joy  of 
God,  that  men  should  forsake  their  sins  and  receive  salvation  at  His  hands  without 
money  and  without  price.  "  Have  I  any  pleasure  at  all  that  the  wicked  shall 
die,  saith  the  Lord  God,  and  not  that  he  should  return  from  his  wicked  way  and 
live  ?  "  God  joys  in  nothing  so  much  as  in  welcoming  transgressors  who  trust 
themselves  to  the  suretyship  of  His  Son.  It  is  right  to  tremble  at  the  wrath  of 
God.  It  is  right  to  mourn  over  your  sins.  But  you  must  do  more  than  tremble 
and  mourn — you  must  "  eat  the  fat  and  drink  the  sweet."  "  The  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ  cleanseth  from  all  sin  " — here  is  the  fat.  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  are 
weary  and  heavy  laden,  and  I  wUl  give  you  rest" — there  is  the  sweet.     11.  Ik 

ENCOURAGING  US  AND    HELPING   US   TO   WRESTLE   WITH   TEMPTATION.      The  aSSUraUCe  Of 

Divine  help  is  "  the  joy  of  the  Lord,"  and  in  this  joy  does  the  true  Christian's 
strength  consist.  The  encouragements  of  the  gospel  are  encouragements  to  strive, 
encouragements  to  labour — to  resist  evil,  to  mortify  passions,  and  to  cultivate 
holiness.  They  are  encouragements  to  hold  on  through  a  course  of  temptation  in 
the  assurance  that  the  Bedeemer  will  furnish  help  proportionate  to  the  attack. 
The  slave  may  be  kept  in  awe  by  the  scourge,  but  the  affectionate  son  is  best  ruled 
by  a  smile ;  and  as  soon  as  the  believer  has  been  admitted  into  the  very  family  and 
household  of  God,  he  will  derive  from  "  the  joy  of  the  Lord  "  his  best  strength  for 
the  mastery  of  evil.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  Christian  in  his  spiritual  joys: — 
Let  us  contemplate  the  Christian — I.  In  the  divinitt  of  his  jot.  H.  In  the 
UTiiiiTT  of  his  jot.  1.  In  the  profession  of  his  religion.  Joy  is  the  very  strength 
of  this.  2.  In  his  concern  to  recommend  religion  to  others.  3.  In  the  discharge 
of  his  duties.  4.  In  his  perils.  5.  In  his  sufferhigs.  6.  In  death.  {W.  Jay.) 
Joy  a  strength : — Go  out  of  your  cares,  and  your  fevers  and  perils,  by  going  nearer 
to  your  Saviour.  Catch  that  glance  of  His  gaze,  the  very  rest  of  God.  The  sky  is 
blue  above  the  bleak  and  barren  ground ;  the  heavens  simle  above  the  storms.  All 
things  seem  to  die ;  but  God  is  over  all,  blessed  for  ever.  His  joy  will  comfort  your 
sorrows.  It  will  conquer  your  fears.  It  will  neutralise  your  bereavements.  It 
will  negative  your  death.     You  are  on  a  vessel,  and  it  seems  to  you  that  the  storm 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

is  awful ;  the  waves  ton  moantains  high ;  the  ship  pitches,  and  shudders,  and 
creaks.  "  Captain,"  you  say,  with  pale  face  and  staring  eyes,  "  this  is  a  terrible  peril. 
We  shall  go  down ;  she  never  will  weather  this  gale  I  "  "  Gale  I  "  says  the  captain, 
"I  call  this  a  good  breeze.  If  we  had  a  little  more  of  it  we  should  soon  make 
land."  Then  you  turn  and  look  with  wonder  in  the  captain's  eyes ;  they  are  full 
of  smiling  satisfaction,  and  his  heroic  face  is  mild  and  calm.  The  captain  says, 
"  AU  is  well."  He  is  not  disturbed.  And  the  captain's  calm  is  your  strength.  He 
ought  to  know.  So  Jesus  knows.  {Hugh  S.  Carpenter,  D.D.)  The  joy  of  the 
Lord  in  the  hour  of  death  : — When  I  was  about  fifteen  years  of  age  I  sat  up  one 
night  with  one  of  my  class-mates,  an  aged  man,  who  had  suffered  from  spasmodic 
asthma  for  a  number  of  years  with  great  resignation  and  patience  ;  and  about  the 
noon  of  night  he  called  me  to  his  bedside,  and  with  difficulty  articulated  a  few 
words,  which  were  these  :  "  Now  no  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth  to  be  joyous, 
but  grievous :  nevertheless  afterward  it  yieldeth  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness 
tmto  them  which  are  exercised  thereby."  He  then  closed  his  eyes,  gathered  up  his 
feet,  and  slept  with  his  fathers.  I  have  blessed  God  a  hundred  times,  a  thousand 
times,  that  when  I  was  so  young  in  the  way  I  saw  a  Christian  die.  "  In  the  joy  of 
the  Lord  "  was  his  "  strength  " — the  strength  of  his  heart,  and  his  portion  for  ever. 
(J.  Entwistle. )  Conspicuous  Christian  joy  : — ^Let  your  face  shine  with  love  to 
God  and  to  men.  The  expression  of  one's  countenance  speaks  more  eloquently 
sometimes  than  words.  When  Murray  McCheyne  died  there  was  found  on  his 
desk  an  unopened  letter,  which  proved  to  be  from  a  man  in  Broughty  Ferry,  who 
wrote  that  he  was  converted,  not  by  anything  Mr.  McCheyne  had  said,  but  "  By 
your  look,  sir,  as  you  entered  the  pulpit."  Christ's  joy  should  be  in  all  who  love 
and  serve  Him.  "  Let  the  children  of  Zion  be  joyful  in  their  King."  "  Eejoice  in 
the  Lord  alway,  and  again  I  say,  Eejoice"  (Psa.  cxlix.  2;  Phil,  iv.  4).  (Dr. 
Fergus  Ferguson.)  The  joy  of  the  Lord  our  strength  : — George  Stephenson  and 
a  friend  were  once  looking  at  a  train  which  was  rushing  along.  The  trains  in 
those  days  were  not  so  common  as  they  are  now,  and  George  asked  his  friend  what 
he  thought  propelled  the  train  along.  His  friend  answered,  "  Probably  the  arm  of 
Bome  stalwart  north  country  driver."  "  No,"  said  George,  "it  is  the  heat  and  light 
of  the  Bun  which  shone  millions  of  years  ago,  which  has  been  bottled  up  in  the  coal 
all  this  time,  and  is  now  driving  that  train."  In  the  same  way  the  joy  of  the  Lord, 
the  sun  of  our  spiritual  lives,  is  the  power  that  works  in  us  and  gives  us  our 
strength.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  continues  in  sorrow : — The  joy  the  Holy  Spirit  gives 
lives  on  in  the  heart  when  all  earthly  sources  of  gladness  have  failed.  It  hides  like 
a  rainbow  in  the  bosom  of  the  darkest  cloud,  and  shines  out  in  the  gloom.  There 
is  a  legend  of  a  wondrous  golden  organ  that  was  in  some  ancient  monastery,  which 
once,  when  in  danger  of  being  stolen,  was  cast  by  the  monks  into  a  deep  river,  to 
be  hidden  from  the  robbers ;  and,  in  the  waters,  buried  out  of  sight  in  the  floods,  it 
still  played  on,  pouring  out  its  sweet  music.  This  legend  illustrates  the  heart  which 
has  in  it  the  secret  of  Christian  joy.  Floods  of  sorrow  may  roll  over  it,  but  in  the 
depths  its  song  is  not  silenced,  (J.  R.  Miller,  D.D.)  Religious  happiness  : — Mr, 
Haslam  told  how  "  Happy  Peter  "  was  in  the  habit  of  saying  he  had  been  happy 
for  thirty-seven  years.  One  who  visited  him,  and  noticed  the  appearance  of  his 
sickly  wife  and  humble  home,  said,  *'  Have  you  no  clouds  ?  "  "  Yes,"  replied  Peter, 
"  but  if  there  were  no  clouds  there  would  be  no  sweet  rain."  Dwelling  on  common 
mistakes  about  the  gloom  of  a  religious  life,  Mr.  Haslam  added  :  "  I  have  a  friend 
in  Norfolk  who  was  converted  seventeen  years  ago.  He  is  a  magistrate  and  chair- 
man of  the  Local  Board.  People  said  when  he  was  converted,  '  It's  all  over  with 
him ' ;  and  a  cousin  of  his  said  to  me,  about  the  same  time,  '  My  cousin  has  become 
serious.'  'No,' I  said,  'he  hasn't.'  ' Well,  well,  he  has  become  religious.'  'No, 
he  hasn't.  A  Hindoo,  a  Mohammedan,  a  Jew  is  religious,  and  your  cousin  might 
be  that  and  be  going  to  hell.'  '  Then  he  must  be  going  to  die.'  '  No,  he  isn't,  for 
I've  got  hold  of  the  same  thing,  and  am  stronger  far  than  I  was  thirty  years  ago.' 
There  are  many  people  like  that ;  and  to  one  and  all  of  them  I  give  the  same  answer." 
The  joy  of  religion:—  Christ  never  means  us  to  stay  in  shadowland  ;  He  desires  ua 
to  substitute  His  joy  for  the  less  permanent  joys  of  earth ;  and  it  should  be  our 
wish  to  please  Him  by  apprehending  the  deep  and  solemn  joyousness  which  is  the 
very  soul  of  His  religion.  It  is  joy  to  know  Christ,  to  love  Him,  to  serve  Him,  to 
follow  Him.  It  is  joy  to  meditate  on  the  Divine  grace  in  redemption ;  it  is  joy  to 
know  that  we  are  being  sanctified ;  it  is  joy  to  share  with  others  our  spiritual 
heritage.  It  is  joy  to  look  forward  to  that  fair  season  when  conflict  and  struggle 
shall  be  over,  and  the  best  we  have  loved  on  earth  will  reunite  with  us  in  a  joy  that 


CHAP,  vm.]  NEHEMIAH.  131 

ehall  never  be  broken  or  shadowed  any  more.  Compared  with  this  vision,  what 
has  the  world  to  offer  ?  No  kind  of  gratification  that  the  world  gives  ever  lasts 
veiy  long.  There  is  a  law  of  diminishing  returns  in  our  earthly  joys.  Our  tastes 
alter,  our  wishes  change,  all  pleasures  and  successes  pall  in  time.  There  is,  as 
Professor  Komanes  has  said,  only  one  joy  which,  instead  of  diminishing,  continually 
increases  in  intensity  and  power  while  life  remains :  it  is  the  joy  of  religion.  A 
grand,  exalted  sentiment  it  is,  but  never  an  unreal  or  fictitious  one.  [R.  J.  CampbeU.) 
Christian  joy  an  inspiration  to  other» : — There  was  a  young  lad  who  had  a  great 
ambition  to  learn  to  play  on  the  bugle,  and  to  that  end  he  practised  continually. 
As  the  practice  went  on  night  after  night  without  intermission,  his  mother,  after 
hearing  it  as  long  as  she  could,  got  thoroughly  disgusted  and  finally  suggested  that 
he  should  get  out  of  the  house  and  practise  in  the  open-air.  The  boy  took  his 
bugle  and  went  to  the  top  of  a  hill  and  there  practised  the  one  tune  that  he  could 
play.  When  he  had  thoroughly  mastered  it,  he  went  one  evening  to  his  favourite 
spot  on  the  top  of  the  hill  and  there  started  a  grand  solo  concert.  He  could  not 
see  any  one,  but  unobserved  by  him,  down  towards  the  valley,  seated  upon  a  dyke 
was  an  old  man,  with  his  face  buried  in  his  hands.  He  was  very  much  down- 
hearted ;  everything  seemed  to  be  going  wrong  with  him.  He  had  lost  all  his  life's 
savings  ;  he  had  not  heard  for  a  long  time  from  his  only  son ;  and  his  daughter  had 
just  gone  and  left  him.  Just  when  down  in  the  deepest  depths  of  despair  the  sound 
of  the  bugle  caught  his  ear  as  it  poured  forth  the  strains  of  "  The  march  of  the 
Cameron  men,"  the  one  tune  the  boy  could  play.  Somehow  it  seemed  to  put  new 
life  into  the  old  man.  His  spirits  rose,  and  rising  from  his  seat  he  started  home- 
wards with  new  vigour.  Eveiything  seemed  to  be  brighter.  Oh !  we  should  be 
cheerful  Christians.  How  much  good  Christian  happiness  does  not  only  to  our- 
selves, but  to  others  I  How  it  cheers  them  on  in  life's  dark  and  steep  places ! 
(J.  Robertson.)  Increasing  joy : — I  remember,  when  an  undergraduate  at  Oxford, 
being  invited  to  breakfast  by  one  of  the  city  clergy.  The  good  man  showed  us  three 
photographs  of  himself,  taken  at  different  times,  remarking,  "  Don't  I  look  happier 
as  I  grow  older  ?  "  It  shall  be  even  so  with  every  one  who  drinks  at  the  fountain 
of  all  joy,  and  thirsts  no  more.  {F.  Harper,  M.A.)  Joy  in  Jewish  worship  : — 
It  is  remarkable  how  largely  feelings  of  joy  characterised  Jewish  worship.  The 
abjectness  and  terror  that  were  often  such  marked  features  of  idolatrous  worship 
were  altogether  absent.  Heathen  worship  was  never  joyous  except  when  it  took 
the  form  of  a  licentious  orgie.  It  is  true  the  Jewish  festival  was  also  a  sacrificial 
feast,  but  the  feast  was  only  a  form  of  public  entertainment  for  a  multitude  who 
had  been  brought  from  their  homes  and  needed  some  kind  of  hospitality.  These 
feasts  were  not  occasions  for  riotous  excess.  The  sternest  of  the  prophets  utter  no 
reproach  of  this  kind.  Even  the  social  character  of  the  festivals  is  scarcely  more 
than  indicated  in  the  psalms  that  were  composed  for  them.  They  are  gladsome 
very,  but  with  a  religious  joy,  a  joy  of  faith. 

Vers.  15-18.  So  the  people  went  forth,  and  brought  them,  and  made  themselves 
booths. — The  celebration  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  : — I.  We  ake  reminded  here 
THAT  THERE  IS  SUCH  A  THING  AS  BURIED  TRUTH.  Truc  reformations  and  revivals  of 
religion  have  always  consisted  in  people's  minds  being  directed  to  some  portion 
of  truth  which,  though  contained  in  the  Word  of  God,  has  for  a  time  been  lost 
sight  of.     II.  We  observe  that  m  this  instance  the  Jews  dared  to  follow  God, 

APART  FROM  AND   IN    SPITE  OF  THE  TRADITIONS  OF  A  THOUSAND  TEARS.      It  is  HOt  a  Valid 

argument  against  a  view  of  truth  that  it  has  found  no  acceptance  for  long,  or  even 
that  the  testimony  of  successive  generations  is  against  it.    IH.  Weak  and  despised 

INSTRUMENTALITY  IS  OFTEN  USED  OF  GoD  TO  RECOVER   LOST   TRUTH.       "  It  WaS  TCServed 

for  the  feeble  remnant  that  returned  from  the  Babylonish  captivity  to  do  what  had 
not  been  done  even  in  the  bright  days  of  Solomon."  The  Waldenses  bearing 
dogged  testimony  against  Rome  for  centuries.  The  Gospellers  of  Wycliffe's  and 
other  days  in  our  own  land.      George  Fox  and  his  noble  band  of  "  Friends." 

IV.    It  was  after  bitter  chastisement  of  captivity  that  the  nation  was  THUS  MADE 

"wiiiLiNo  AND  OBEDIENT."  (W.  P.  Lockhart.)  Religion  in  booths  : — It  is  a  grand 
festival.  It  is  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  The  people  celebrate  the  deliverance 
of  their  fathers  from  desert  travel,  where  they  lived  in  tents.  And  it  is  also  typical 
of  our  march  to  heaven — pilgrims  in  a  temporary  booth  on  the  way  to  Canaan. 
So  that  I  say  to  you  in  a  figurative  sense  what  was  said  to  the  Jews  in  a  literal 
sense,  "  Go  forth  into  the  mount,  and  fetch  olive  branches,  and  pine  branches, 
and  myrtle  branches,  and  palm  branches,  and  branches  of  thick  trees,  to  make 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  rax, 

booths."  I.  The  "  olive  "  branch  is  alwats  used  as  a  sign  of  peace.  The  olive-trea 
grows  in  warm  climates  to  the  height  of  about  twenty-five  feet,  has  an  upright 
stem,  and  many  out-shooting  branches  which  can  easily  be  stripped  off.  If  a  twig 
of  this  tree,  in  time  of  war,  is  handed  from  one  general  to  another,  it  mean^  the 
unsaddling  of  cavalry  horses  and  the  hanging  up  of  the  war  knapsacks.  After 
hostilities  have  ceased,  these  branches  are  placed  over  doorways,  and  they  are  built 
into  triumphal  arches,  and  they  are  waved  in  processions.  They  spell  out  in 
verdurous  letters  that  heaven-born  word  of  "  Peace  I  "  Now  in  this  gospel  arbour 
which  God  sends  us  to  build  we  must  have  two  of  these  olive  branches.  1.  Peace 
with  God.  2.  Peace  with  each  other.  II.  My  text,  in  the  next  place,  suggests 
that  in  this  arbour  for  our  soul,  on  the  way  toward  glory,  we  ought  to  have  a  oood 
MANY  "  PINE  branches."  Now,  pine  is  healthful,  aromatic,  and  an  evergreen.  It 
has  often  been  the  case  that  invalids  have  been  sent  into  the  regions  where  the  pine 
grows,  and  they  have  come  back  thoroughly  well.  It  is  a  frequent  prescription,  on 
the  part  of  physicians,  to  say,  "  Go  for  a  few  weeks  amid  the  pines,  and  you  will 
be  better."  Now  we  want  in  this  gospel  arbour  pine  branches.  We  want  some- 
thing that  means  health,  aroma,  and  evergreen.  This  is  a  very  healthy  religion. 
I  have  known  an  old  Christian,  with  no  capital  of  physical  health,  and  carrying 
about  him  all  the  respectable  diseases  that  one  can  carry,  and  yet  kept  alive  by 
nothing  at  all  but  his  religion.  But  this  gospel  is  evergreen.  What  does  the  pine 
forest  care  for  the  snow  on  its  brow  ?  It  merely  considers  it  a  crown  of  glory. 
You  cannot  freeze  out  the  pine  forest,  and  this  grace  of  God  is  just  as  good  in  the 
winter  of  trouble  as  it  is  in  the  summer  of  prosperity.  It  is  the  religion  you  want 
— not  dependent  upon  weather  or  upon  change.  III.  My  text  suggests  still  further 
that  this  arbour  of  Christian  grace  ought  to  have  in  it  a  good  many  "  palm  branches." 
You  know  that  it  is  a  favourite  tree  at  the  East.  The  ancients  used  to  make  it  into 
three  hundred  and  sixty  uses.  The  fruit  is  conserved.  The  sap  becomes  a  beverage. 
The  stones  are  ground  up  as  food  for  camels.  The  base  of  the  leaves  is  twisted 
into  rope.  Baskets  and  mats  are  made  out  of  it,  and  from  the  root  to  the  tip-top 
of  the  palm  it  is  all  usefulness.  It  grows  eighty-five  feet  in  height,  is  columnar, 
its  fringed  leaves  sometimes  four  or  five  yards  long,  and  the  ancients  used  to  carry 
it  in  processions  as  a  symbol  of  victory.  Oh,  for  more  palm  branches  in  our 
gospel  arbour  1  Usefulness  and  victory  I  Head,  heart,  tongue,  pen,  money,  social 
position — all  employed  for  God.  Counsel  is  often  given  on  worldly  matters — about 
investments — that  you  must  not  put  all  the  eggs  in  one  basket ;  but  in  this  matter 
of  religion  I  wish  that  we  might  give  all  to  God,  and  get  in  ourselves.  "  Oh,"  says 
some  man,  "  my  business  is  to  sell  silks  and  calicoes."  Then  sell  silks  and  calicoes 
for  the  glory  of  God.  Says  another  man,  "  My  business  is  to  edit  a  newspaper." 
Then  edit  a  newspaper  for  the  glory  of  God.  Anything  that  a  man  cannot  do  for 
fie  glory  of  God  he  has  no  right  to  do.  The  vast  majority  of  professed  Christians 
in  this  day  do  not  amount  to  anything.  You  have  to  shovel  them  off  the  track 
before  the  chariot  of  God's  grace  can  advance.  What  we  want  in  the  Church  now 
is  not  weeping  willows,  sighing  and  weeping  by  the  water-courses,  admiring  their 
long  fringes  in  the  glass  of  the  stream  ;  not  hickories  full  of  knots ;  not  wild  cherry, 
dropping  bitter  fruits  ;  but  palm-trees,  adapted  to  three  hundred  and  sixty  purposes 
— root,  trunk,  branch,  leaf,  producing  something  for  God  and  man  and  angels. 
IV.  My  text  demands  that  in  the  making  of  this  gospel  arbour  we  shall  get 
"  branches  of  thick  trees.  "  You  know  that  a  booth  or  arbour  is  of  little  worth 
unless  there  be  stout  poles  at  the  corners,  or  the  wind  will  upset  the  booth ;  and  you 
will  be  worse  off  than  without  shelter  unless  you  have  strong  branches  of  thick 
trees.  A  gospel  that  is  all  mellowness  and  sweetness  will  have  no  strength  to 
withstand  the  blast  of  temptation  and  trial  and  trouble.  We  want  a  brawny 
Christianity.  We  want  a  gospel  with  warnings  as  well  as  with  invitations.  While 
olive  branches  are  good  in  their  places,  and  the  palm  branches,  and  the  myrtle 
branches,  we  want  the  stout  branches  of  thick  trees.  The  tempest  of  temptation 
will  come  down  after  a  while  ;  the  hurricane  of  death  will  blow ;  and  alas  1  for 
that  man  who  has  not  his  soul  sheltered  under  the  stout  branches  of  the  thick 
trees.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Also  day  by  day,  ...  lie  read  In  the  book  of  the 
law  of  God. — Daily  Bible-reading  : — I.  Wht  ?  I.  Because  of  its  infinite  preciouB- 
ness  and  value.  2.  Because  of  its  tendency  to  build  up  the  inner  and  spiritual  life. 
3.  Because  all  great  revivals  of  the  power  of  religion  have  been  associated  with  high 
reverence  for  the  written  Word.  4.  Because  by  this  Word  you  must  be  judged, 
n.  How?  1.  With  reverence.  2.  With  special  affection  and  prayerfulness. 
8.  Take  time.     4.  Keep  the  end  in  view.     {S.  Thodey.) 


CHAP.  IT.]  NEHEMIAH.  133 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Vers.  4-38.  And    cried  with  a  loud  voice  unto  the  Lord  their  Ood. — The 

iuppliant : — The  true  test  of  the  good  received  in  religious  ordinances  is  their 
sanctifying  effect  on  the  life.  Many  a  tree  is  gay  with  blossoms  in  spring  that 
yields  no  fruit  in  autumn ;  and  so  many  gospel  hearers,  who  appear  full  of  promise 
in  the  time  of  ordinances,  show  no  decided  piety  in  their  subsequent  conduct. 
I.  The  cmcuMSTANCES  of  the  pkater.  It  is  often  easier  to  act  for  God  than  to  pray 
to  Him — to  work  in  His  vineyard  than  to  wait  at  His  throne.  Activity  may  afford 
occasion  for  excitement,  and  scope  for  display,  and  opportunity  to  attract  the 
admiration  of  others ;  while  prayer  calls  to  the  exercise  of  faith,  to  cultivate 
humility,  to  live  under  the  eye  of  God.  Spiritual  work,  indeed,  might  be  expected 
to  draw  the  servant  near  to  the  Master  for  communion  and  help.  It  soon  discovers 
human  weakness  and  want,  and  dependence  on  almighty  power  for  strength,  for 
supply,  for  all  blessing.  But,  instead  of  proving  an  incentive  to  prayer,  it  is  often 
made  a  substitute  for  it ;  and  the  labourer  feels  as  if  too  busy  in  service  to  find 
time  for  unceasing  supplication.  And  thus  the  people  of  Judah  here  set  a  high 
value  on  prayer.  They  have  laboured  to  restore  the  walls  and  temple  of  Jerusalem, 
and  success  has  crowned  their  efforts.  But  activity  in  these  sacred  undertakings, 
BO  far  from  cooling  their  devotion,  inspires  them  to  growing  fervour  in  prayers  and 
supplications  to  God.  In  reference  to  the  circumstances  of  this  prayer,  it  may  be 
remarked — 1.  It  was  offered  immediately  after  the  observance  of  the  Feast  of 
Tabernacles.  On  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  seventh  month  this  festival  commenced, 
on  the  twenty-second  it  was  closed ;  and  "  on  the  twenty-fourth  day  of  this  month 
the  children  of  Israel  were  assembled  "  for  this  prayer.  The  time  of  meeting  is 
proof  of  the  ardour  of  their  devotion.  Formal  worshippers  are  soon  wearied  in 
spiritual  exercises,  and  ask,  "  When  will  the  new  moon  be  gone,  that  we  may  sell 
corn  ;  and  the  Sabbath,  that  we  may  set  forth  wheat  ?  "  It  is  a  frame  of  devotion 
much  to  be  desired.  Protracted  meetings  like  this,  for  religious  exercises,  may  be 
expedient  only  on  extraordinary  occasions,  but  habitual  love  of  communion  with 
God  is  both  the  strength  and  joy  of  a  holy  heart.  It  is  not  one  intense  momentary 
influence,  flowing  from  the  summer  sun,  that  covers  fields  with  corn  and  trees  with, 
fruit,  but  the  daily  glow  of  his  genial  beams ;  so  it  is  not  a  single  hour  in  the 
presence  of  Christ,  receiving  one  full  manifestation  of  Him  in  the  soul,  that  saves 
it  from  the  fears  of  guilt,  and  beautifies  it  with  His  image,  but  it  is  an  abiding  in 
Him,  a  "  looking  unto  Jesus,"  a  "  coming  unto  God  by  Him."  "  Abide  in  Me,  and 
I  in  you.  As  the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself,  except  it  abide  in  the  vine ;  no 
more  can  ye,  except  ye  abide  in  Me."  Further,  this  prayer  was  offered  in  a  season 
of  solemn  fasting  (ver.  1).  In  the  pilgrimage  to  the  better  land,  the  valley  of 
humiliation  lies  near  the  delectable  mountains ;  and  the  goodly  prospects  of 
Emmanuel's  land  obtained  from  the  one  prepare  for  walking  in  safety  through  the 
rugged  paths  of  the  other,  while  the  same  life  of  faith  is  maintained  in  both. 
Moreover,  the  prayer  was  offered  amid  earnest  desires  after  new  obedience.  "  The 
seed  of  Israel  separated  themselves  from  all  strangers  "  (ver.  2).  This  sincere 
desire  to  put  away  sin,  and  to  obey  the  Divine  Word,  is  essential  to  effectual  prayer. 
"  If  I  regard  iniquity  in  my  heart,  the  Lord  will  not  hear  me."  U.  The  substance 
OF  the  PRATER.  1.  Au  adoration  of  the  Divine  majesty  (ver.  6).  2.  A  review  of  past 
mercies.  The  mercies  celebrated  are — God's  choice  of  Israel ;  His  deliverance  of 
them  from  bondage ;  His  guidance  of  them  through  the  wilderness ;  and  His 
bestowal  on  them  of  spiritual  privileges.  3.  We  notice  in  the  prayer  confession 
of  numerous  sins  (vers.  16-35).  The  light  of  Divine  mercy  here  shows  the  dark 
cloud  of  their  iniquities.  They  confess  their  obstinate  disobedience  to  God  (vers. 
16-19).  They  hardened  their  necks,  and  hearkened  not  to  the  Lord's  command- 
ments. They  confess  their  slighting  of  almighty  goodness  (vers.  20-26).  They 
confess  their  refusal  of  Divine  warning  (vers.  27-30).  They  confess  they  did  not 
glorify  God  in  His  gifts  (vers.  34, 35).  4.  We  observe  in  the  prayer  a  plea  for  sovereign 
mercy  (vers.  32,  36,  37).  III.  The  lessons  of  the  prayer.  1.  The  duty  of  prayer 
in  public  distress.  The  people  of  Judah  were  here  in  public  distress,  and  they 
offer  united  prayer  to  God  for  His  help  in  their  time  of  need.  2.  The  blessing  of 
prayer  to  a  community.  This  prayer  for  Jerusalem  was  succeeded  by  times  of 
prosperity  in  the  holy  city,  and  all  it  represented.  3.  The  power  of  prayer  for  the 
revival  of  the  Church.  (W.  Ritchie.)  Thou,  even  Thou,  art  Lord  alone;  Thou 
hast  made  h«»w«n. — The  Te  Deum : — In  this  we  have  perhaps  the  fullest  settin^' 

32 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

forth  of  the  glorious  and  manifold  character  of  Jehovah  which  is  to  be  found  in 
any  single  passage  of  Scripture,  and  in  it  also  is  brought  out  in  striking  contrast 
the  sinful  conduct  of  His  chosen  people.  The  Almighty  is  here  recognised  as — 
1.  The  God  of  creation.  2.  The  God  of  the  covenant.  3.  The  God  of  redemption 
(vers.  9-11).  4.  The  Leader  of  His  people.  5.  The  Lawgiver.  6.  The  Sustainer  of 
His  people.  7.  The  God  of  compassion  and  the  hearer  of  prayer.  {W.  P.  Lockhart.) 
The  purpose  of  the  rehearsal  of  national  shortcomings  : — I.  To  encoubage  them  to 

«XPECT   rURTHEB   HELP    EROM    GOD.       11.    To    CONSTRAIN   THEM    TO    ENTER    INTO    CLOSEB 

COVENANT  WITH  HiM.  (Ibid.)  Thou  art  the  Lord  the  God,  who  didst  choose 
Abraxn. — God's  choice: — My  strength  during  all  my  life  has  been  precisely 
this,  that  I  have  made  no  choice.  During  the  last  thirty-six  years  God  has  twelve 
times  changed  my  home  and  fifteen  times  changed  my  work.  I  have  scarcely  ever 
done  what  I  myself  would  have  chosen.  (Dean  Farrar.)  And  hast  performed 
Thy  words. — The  certainty  of  God's  promises : — All  means  are  in  His  hands.  A 
father  may  promise  his  son  that  he  will  make  something  of  him  when  he 
grows  up,  but  his  business  declines,  he  is  made  bankrupt.  But  the  great  Father 
will  never  become  bankrupt,  never  faU ;  His  power  is  infinite.  Many  a  sea 
captain  has  had,  during  a  storm,  to  tell  the  passengers,  *'  I  have  done  all  I 
can ;  there  is  now  nothing  but  the  boat."  God  has  never  to  tell  His  people 
that.  (Thomas  Jones.)  The  Divine  promise  sure  : — Corporations  may  be  dis- 
franchised and  charters  revoked.  Even  mountains  may  be  removed,  and  stars 
drop  from  their  spheres ;  but  a  tenure  founded  on  the  Divine  promise  is  inalienably 
secure,  and  lasting  as  eternity  itself.    (Hervey.) 

Yer.  9.  And  didst  see  the  affliction  of  our  fathers  In  Egypt — The  path  of  duty 
the  path  of  trial : — I.  That  the  path  of  human  ddtt  here  runs  through  great 
TRIALS.  1.  Sometimes  it  involves  the  sacrifice  of  endeared  friendship.  Lot  had 
to  separate  from  Abraham,  Barnabas  from  Paul,  Paul  from  Mark.  2.  Sometimes 
it  involves  the  sacrifice  of  worldly  prospects.  3.  Sometimes  it  involves  the 
endangering  of  life  itself.  4.  Sometimes  it  involves  an  outrage  on  our  tender 
sentiments.     Abraham  offering  up  Isaac.     H.  That  great  trials  through  which 

the  path  of  DUTT  here    runs   serve  to  test  the  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE   PILGRIMS.      1.    It 

reveals  the  bad  principles  of  the  heart.  The  Jews  at  the  Red  Sea  revealed  their 
ingratitude,  meanness,  aspostasy,  cowardice.  2.  It  reveals  the  good  principles  of 
ihe  heart.     IH.  That  unbounded  faith  in  God  is  essential  to  carry  us  safelt 

THROUGH    the    path    OF    DUTT   WITH    ALL   ITS    GREAT    TRIALS.       (HoniiUst.)  God  OUT 

helper : — The  following  is  an  extract  from  Stanley  to  Sir  William  Mackinnon : 
*'  You,  who  throughout  your  long  and  varied  life  have  steadfastly  believed  in  the 
Christian's  God,  and  before  men  have  professed  your  devout  thankfulness  for  many 
mercies  vouchsafed  to  you,  will  better  understand  than  many  others  the  feelings 
■which  animate  me  when  I  find  myself  back  again  in  civilisation,  uninjured  in 
life  or  health,  after  passing  through  so  many  stormy  and  distressful  periods. 
Constrained  at  the  darkest  hour  to  humbly  confess  that  without  God's  help  I  was 
helpless,  I  vowed  a  vow  in  the  forest  solitudes  that  I  would  confess  His  aid  before 
men.  A  silence  as  of  death  was  round  about  me  ;  it  was  midnight ;  I  was  weakened 
by  illness,  prostrated  with  fatigue,  and  worn  with  anxiety  for  my  white  and  black 
companions  whose  fate  was  a  mystery.  In  this  physical  and  mental  distress  I 
besought  God  to  give  me  back  my  people.  Nine  hours  later  we  were  exulting  with 
a  rapturous  joy.  In  full  view  of  all  was  the  crimson  flag  with  the  crescent,  and 
beneath  its  waving  folds  was  the  long-lost  rear  column."  Mungo  Park  was 
comforted  by  the  Lord  by  a  tiny  morsel  of  moss,  and  Livingstone  was  preserved 
by  Him  when  most  people  gave  him  up  for  lost :  and  now,  from  the  awful  gloom 
of  endless  forests,  Stanley  cries  unto  the  living  God,  and  lives  to  bear  witness  to 
the  faithfulness  of  the  prayer-hearing  Jehovah. 

Ver.  12.  Moreover  Thou  leddest  them  in  the  day  by  a  cloudy  pillar.— TAe  pillars 
of  cloud  and  fire : — The  people  who  for  forty  years  followed  that  tire-cloud  have  left 
footprints  in  the  sands  of  time  which  serve  us  as  an  alphabet  of  life.  The  march 
of  the  Israelites  is  an  allegory  of  the  life  of  man.  Like  a  providence  palpable  to 
the  very  eyes  of  man,  the  fire-cloud  indexed  that  will  of  God  which  it  is  the  longing 
of  true  hearts  in  every  age  to  fulfil.  This  fire-cloud  suggests — I.  That  man's  life 
ON  earth  is  a  DrviNELY-coNDUCTED  DISCIPLINE.  The  IsraoUtcs  emerged  from  Egypt 
a  huge  bee-swarm  of  humanity  making  for  another  hive.  From  the  dark  super- 
stitions of  Uf  e  and  the  coarse  immoraUties  of  antiquity  they  went  into  the  wilderness 


CHAP.  IX.]  NEHEMIAH.  135 

to  learn  the  rudiments  of  life.  Outside  the  sphere  of  man's  natural  resources  Israel 
had  to  learn  faith  in  the  supernatural  environment  of  man.  Their  wilderness 
journey  was  the  drill  of  a  nation  destined  to  be  the  vehicle  of  Divine  revelation  to 
a  world.  Our  life  on  earth  is  mainly  a  prolonged  and  various  discipline,  and  its 
significance  lies  in  the  finally  resulting  manhood.  The  main  matter  is  not  how 
long  it  takes  us  to  cross  this  strip  of  earth,  or  how  much  we  have  while  we  travel, 
but  what  the  journey  makes  of  us  as  regards  the  naked,  moral  character  of  us  all. 
Very  suggestive,  if  you  will  ponder,  is  Israel's  inability  to  comprehend  the  meaning 
of  a  great  deal  of  their  march.  Why  they  should  lie  still,  and  why  move,  were  not 
always  plain.  We  cannot  readily  comprehend  the  zigzag  ways  of  life.  Looking 
at  our  things,  and  not  at  our  soul,  we  sometimes  seem  to  be  moving  in  a  very 
resultless  way — marking  time  rather  than  marching.  Said  a  good  and  active  man 
whose  work  is  his  life,  "By  this  sickness  I  have  lost  a  month."  How  so?  Through 
every  day  of  his  life  henceforth  he  will  carry  a  reverent  thoughtfulness  of  God,  and 
in  all  his  character  there  will  be  the  tinge  of  a  mellow  tenderness,  the  results  of 
that  "lost  month's"  meditative  realisations.  Was  the  month  lost,  then?  God 
leads  and  leaves  us  not  where  we  would  like  to  be,  but  where  we  have  need  to  be. 
There  is  wisdom  in  every  stage  of  life's  march  and  countermarch.  Life's  roughest 
mile  is  "  ordered  of  the  Lord,"  and  its  darkest  place  is  illuminated  by  the  piUar  of 
fire.  It  is  wisdom  to  store  the  lessons  of  experience.  ChUd-like,  we  forget  the  back 
lessons.  The  teachings  of  sorrow's  school  are  forgotten  in  the  playground  of  our 
joyfulness.  II.  That  thboughodt  oub  life-journet  ■«•£  follow  a  God  we  never 
SEE.  That  fire-bordered  cloud  was  not  God.  The  cathedral  window  ablaze  with 
its  mingled  glories  hides  the  sun,  while  it  is  at  the  same  time  a  many-coloured 
witness  of  his  living  radiance.  Life  leaves  room  for  doubt,  and  gives  worldliness 
its  chance.  Herein  lies  much  of  our  probation.  Those  tokens  of  God  which  are 
evidence  of  things  not  seen  are  frequently  familiarised  into  comparative  powerless- 
ness  over  the  soul.  1.  Some  of  the  Israelites  sinned  under  the  very  shadow  of  the 
pillar  of  fire.  The  sentiments  of  reverence  and  wonder  are  in  danger  of  exile  from 
the  mind.  2.  Nature,  with  its  transformations  of  the  seasons.  3.  The  Sabbath. 
4.  The  house  of  God.  5.  Prayer ;  our  prayers  may  become  like  the  winding  of 
our  watches — acts  we  do,  scarcely  sure  whether  they  are  done  or  not.  We  often 
see  most  of  God  in  the  night  of  experience.  HI.  That  protection  which  God's 
PRESENCE  INSURES  TO  THOSE  THAT  FOLLOW  HiM.  OvcT  the  sleeping  camp  the  cloud 
lay  like  a  golden  warrior-shield.  Yet  how  slowly  was  Israel  trained  to  courage ! 
Every  new  danger  created  a  coward  hubbub  in  the  camp.  Their  foes  could  do 
them  no  harm ;  but  their  imaginations  were  terrible  to  them  as  an  army  with 
banners.  Their  minds  were  made  nervous  by  their  own  delusions.  The  Parisians 
have  exhibited  what  they  call  a  "  Panorama  of  the  War."  Climbing  what  appears 
to  be  a  kind  of  tower,  you  seem  to  see  the  country  around  Paris  alive  with  the  grim 
activities  of  war.  Nearest  the  spectator  are  placed  real  cannon  and  the  like,  and 
these  shade  off  into  painted  forms  beyond  so  perfectly  as  to  produce  an  illusion  like 
that  of  the  painter  who  attracted  the  quick-eyed  birds  to  his  painted  grapes.  The 
illusion  is  wonderful,  and  you  can  all  but  smell  the  gunpowder.  But  there  is  no 
movement — the  soldiers  are  still  as  stones,  the  bursting  shell  remains  in  the  act  of 
explosion,  and  the  flame-flash  continues  from  the  cannon-mouth.  That  breaks  the 
spell.  It  is  but  picture,  after  aU.  Thus  we  go  at  times  up  the  tower  of  appre- 
hension, and  see  besieging  armies  of  trouble.  Near  to  us  are  some  real  objects  of 
fear,  and  from  them  we  go  on  to  paint  a  long  perspective  of  morbid  fancies,  until 
life  seems  ringed  round  with  innumerable  foes.  After  awhile  we  find  it  is  mostly 
picture — "  the  very  painting  of  our  fear."  Let  the  chief  anxiety  of  aU  be  to  follow 
the  great  Leader  of  life's  pilgrimage.     {Samuel  Gregory.) 

Yer.  13.  Thou  earnest  down  also  upon  mount  Sinai,  and  spakest  with  them 
from  heaven. — Go  by  the  directions  : — I  saw  a  picture  once  which  has  stuck  to  my 
memory  for  years  and  years.  It  was  a  picture  of  a  dark,  wild,  stormy  night,  and 
a  traveller  was  standing  up  in  the  stirrups  of  his  horse  at  a  parting  of  the  way, 
trying  to  read  the  directions  on  the  finger-post.  How  eagerly  he  is  looking !  I  can 
see  him  yet — holding  the  lighted  match  carefully  in  his  hands  lest  the  wind  should 
blow  it  out  before  he  had  read  the  directions  I  It  was  a  good  thing  for  him  that 
there  were  directions,  and  it  is  a  good  thing  we  have  them  too.  Where  are  our 
directions?  They  are — the  Bible.  That  is  God's  Word  to  us,  telling  us  which 
road  to  take  when  we  come  to  the  parting  of  the  way.  Go  by  the  directions.  Do 
what  God  says,  and  you  will  never  go  wrong.     (J.  Reid  Howatt.) 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

Ver.  16.  But  they  and  our  fathers  dealt  proudly,  and  hardened  their  necks. — 
Hardened  by  sin : — Dr.  Manton  says  :  "  As  a  delicate  constitution  is  more  capable 
of  pain  than  a  robust  and  stubborn  one,  and  the  tender  flesh  of  a  child  will  sooner 
feel  the  lash  than  the  thick  skin  of  a  slave,  so  the  children  of  God,  having  a  more 
serious  apprehension  of  things,  and  a  more  tender  spirit,  soonest  feel  the  burden  of 
their  Father's  displeasure,  and  do  more  lay  it  to  heart  than  careless  and  stupid 
spirits,  who  laugh  at  their  cross,  or  drink  away  their  sorrows."  Tenderness  of 
heart  is  thus  an  attribute  of  the  child  of  God,  and  a  very  precious  attribute,  too. 
Hard-hearted  men  are  not  men  after  God's  own  heart.  In  proportion  as  feeling 
declines,  life  has  declined.  Spiritual  men  are  sensitive  men.  Ossification  of  the 
heart  is  a  fatal  disease.  Declensions  in  grace  are  a  searing  of  the  soul.  When 
water  is  warmed  by  the  summer  sun,  the  smallest  stone  sinks  into  it ;  when  it  is 
frozen  in  the  northern  blast,  a  huge  block  will  be  borne  up  upon  the  surface  of  it, 
and  will  never  penetrate  to  its  depths.  So,  when  the  soul  grows  cold  with  distance 
from  God,  it  will  sustain  an  enormous  weight  of  sin;  but  when  grace  returns,  and 
the  soul  is  in  a  right  spiritual  condition,  an  ounce  of  sin  will  be  more  than  the  soul 
can  bear.     Oh,  for  more  of  this  holy  sensitiveness  1     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  17.  But  Thou  art  a  God  ready  to  pardon,  gracions  and  merciful. — Divine 
forgivenets : — I.  What  is  necessary  to  render  the  subject  interestdjo.  1.  A 
conviction  of  guilt.  2.  An  apprehension  of  our  danger  as  transgressors.  3.  A 
discovery  of  the  privileges  of  a  pardoned  state.  II.  The  PROors  which  establish 
THE  truth  of  the  DOCTRINE.  1.  The  provisioH  He  has  made  for  the  exercise  of 
pardon.  2.  The  promptitude  with  which  He  pardons  on  our  return.  3.  Hia 
earnestness  to  excite  us  to  seek  after  the  blessing.  4.  The  character  of  those  who 
have  received  pardon.  5.  The  number  of  those  who  obtain  forgiveness.  III.  The 
WAT  IN  WHICH  THIS  SUBJECT  MAT  BE  ABUSED.  1.  When  it  leads  us  to  deny  any 
disposition  in  God  to  punish.  2.  When  it  encourages  us  to  hope  for  pardon  in 
ways  not  warranted  by  the  Word  of  God.  (1)  Without  a  reference  to  the  work  of 
Christ.  (2)  Without  repentance.  (3)  By  delaying  an  application  for  it  to  the  close 
of  life.  (4)  By  expecting  to  find  this  pardon  in  another  world  if  we  fail  to  obtain 
it  in  this.  IV.  Improvement.  1.  It  should  yield  encouragement  to  the  broken- 
hearted. 2.  It  should  afford  consolation  to  those  who  have  believed  through  grace. 
3.  The  subject  demands  our  admiration  and  praise.  4.  It  also  calls  upon  us  not 
only  to  admire,  but  to  imitate  (Eph.  iv.  31,  32,  v.  1).  (TF.  Jay.)  Pardon  of  sin : — 
I.  The  cebtaintt  of  this  readiness  to  pardon.  This  may  be  discerned — 1.  In  the 
plans  which  He  devised  for  its  bestowment  consistent  with  His  honour  as  a 
sovereign,  and  compatible  with  His  character  as  a  just  and  moral  Euler.  2.  In  the 
repeated  assurances  and  urgent  entreaties  with  regard  to  the  facts  which  are 
furnished  in  His  Word.  3.  In  the  efforts  He  makes  to  effect  it,  and  so  frequently 
recorded  in  the  pages  of  history.  II.  The  conditions  of  this  readiness  to  pardon. 
1.  A  vivid  apprehension  of  personal  guilt.  2.  A  full  consciousness  of  personal 
danger.  3.  Repentance  and  faith.  {W.S.Edwards.)  The  pardon  of  sin  : — No 
attribute  of  the  Deity  is  so  calculated  to  afford  encouragement  and  relief  to  the 
distressed  and  penitent  sinner  as  that  of  His  mercy.  His  justice  and  holiness  make 
him  tremble.  The  Divine  mercy  is  the  only  fountain  from  which  all  our  hope  is 
derived.  If  God  were  unmerciful — if  He  were  unable  and  unwilling  to  forgive,  how 
awful  and  desperate  would  be  our  condition !  I.  Some  .  of  the  distinouishino 
CHARACTERISTICS  OF  DiviNE  PARDON.  Respecting  this  blessing,  we  observe  that  it  is — 
1.  Gratuitous  in  its  bestowment.  Had  it  not  been  perfectly  free,  it  would  be  for 
ever  beyond  our  reach.  As  fallen  man  is  altogether  destitute  of  all  inherent  and 
acquired  righteousness,  he  can  never  obtain  it  on  the  ground  of  his  own  merit. 
Conscious  of  his  utter  unworthiness,  and  that  he  was  destitute  of  all  merit,  the 
psalmist  cried,  "  For  Thy  name's  sake,  pardon  mine  iniquity,  for  it  is  great."  In 
the  forgiveness  of  sin,  God  acts  like  the  creditor  towards  his  two  debtors ;  one  owes 
him  five  hundred  pence,  and  the  other  fifty ;  and  when  they  had  nothing  to  pay,  he 
frankly  (freely)  forgave  them  both.  It  is  true  that  there  are  certain  duties  which 
must  be  discharged  by  the  sinner  ;  he  must  repent  and  believe ;  but  these  acts  can 
never  merit  forgiveness.  The  pardon  of  the  penitent  flows  from  the  free  and 
sovereign  grace  of  God,  and  is  conveyed  through  the  channel  of  the  Redeemer's 
atoning  blood.  2.  Unlimited  in  its  extent.  The  pardoning  mercy  of  God  is  not 
confined  to  any  degrees  of  guilt  or  amount  of  transgression.  "  Bless  the  Lord,  0  my 
soul,  and  forget  not  all  His  benefits;  who  forgiveth  all  thine  iniquities,  who  healeth 
all  thy  diseases."    The   pardoning  mercy  of  God   extends  to  the  most  flagrant 


CHAP,  n.]  NEHEMIAH.  137 


transgressions,  and  transcends  all  human  conception.     There  is  no  sin  so  heinous 
•which  God  cannot  forgive,  and  no  guilt  of  so  deep  a  hue  which  He  cannot  remove. 
3.  Permanent  in  its  enjoyment.     II.  Prove  the  truth  of  the  declaration.     God'a 
readiness  to  pardon  is  manifest — 1.  From  the  provisions  made  for  this  purpose. 
Before  sinners  could  be  pardoned  and  saved,  there  were  certain  barriers  that  must 
be  removed.     As  God  was  the  supreme  Lawgiver  and  Judge  of  the  world — the 
Protector  of  righteousness  and  goodnoss — it  became  Him  not  to  pardon  the  guilty 
without  the  punishing  of  sin,  and  that  in  such  a  manner  as  would  satisfy  His 
injured  justice,  and  vindicate  the  honour  of  His  despised  law,  and  at  the  same  time 
declare  His  greatest  hatred  to  sin.     Had  there  been  no  Mediator,  the  justice  and 
holiness  of  God  would  have  stood  as  everlasting  obstructions  to  the  exercise  of 
pardoning  mercy.    2.  The  express  declarations  of  Scripture.    Listen  to  the  exulting 
and  triumphant  language  of  the  prophet  Micah :  "  Who  is  a  God  like  unto  our 
God,  that  pardoneth  iniquity,  and  passeth  by  the  transgression  of  the  remnant  of 
His  heritage  ?   He  retaineth  not  His  anger  for  ever,  because  He  dehghteth  in  mercy." 
See  how  earnestly  does  God  exhort  the  careless  and  impenitent,  saying,  "  Turn  ye, 
turn  ye  from  your  evil  way,  for  why  will  ye  die,  0  house  of  Israel  ?  "     "  How  shall 
I  give  thee  up,  0  Ephraim  ?    How  shall  I  deUver  thee,  0  Israel  ?    How  shall  I 
make  thee  as  Admah  ?     How  shall  I  set  thee  as  Zeboim  ?  "     Observe  the  grand 
commission  of  the  apostles,  "that  repentance  and  remission  of  sins  should  be 
preached  in  His  name,  among  all  nations,  beginning  at  Jerusalem."     3.  Becorded 
facts.     This  glorious  truth  is  not  only  declared  by  the  voice  of  inspu-ation,  but  also 
by  the  loud  and  impressive  testimony  of  experience.    What  multitudes  have  already 
obtained  forgiveness  1     The   Scriptures   abound  with  the  most  a.stonishing  and 
striking  instances  of  this  delightful  truth.     But  if  we  look  into  the  New  Testament, 
we  shall  see  this  *ruth  shining  forth  with  greater  lustre  stiU,     The  first  instance 
that  strikes  us  here  is  Peter.     How  great  and  dreadful  were  his  sins  1     He  denied 
his  Divine  Lord  and  Master,  and  that  with  oaths  and  curses ;  and  yet  repenting,  he 
was  forgiven.     In  the  same  list  we  behold  Mary  Magdalene,  "  out  of  whom  seven 
unclean  spirits  were  cast."     (Essex  Congregational  Remembrancer.)        Pardoning^  ^ 
mercy  : — These  words — I.  Prefer  an  nipoRTANT  charge.     "  And  refused  to  obey,"  ' 
&c.    Though  this  charge  was  primarily  brought  against  the  Jews,  it  is  substantially 
applicable   to   all    impenitent    sinners.     Here  is— 1.  A  charge  of  obstinate  dis- 
obedience.    We  p,re  guilty  of  the  same  charge.    We  are  under  infinite  obligations 
to  the  Divine  Being.     He  is  the  Creator,  Sovereign,  Benefactor,  Eedeemer,  Saviour, 
and  Judge  of  mankind.     2.  A  charge  of  criminal  forgetfulness._L'JJeithef  were 
mindful  of  Thy  wonders  "  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  10-17,  cvi.  21-26).     God  has  crowned  each 
of  us  with  loving-kindness  and  tender  mercies,  and  wrought  wonders  in  our  creation, 
preservation,  redemption,  and  salvation.     We  have  too  often  unfaithfully  forgotten 
His  innumerable  benefits,  and  ungratefully  murmured  against  His  kind  dispensa- 
tions (Isa.  i.  2,  3).     3.  A  charge  of  hardened  impenitence.     "  But  hardened  their 
necks,"  &c.     This  is  an  awful  state  (Prov.  xxix.  1;  Kom.  ii.  5,  6;  Heb.  ui.  15). 
II.  Contain  a  gracious  declaration.     "  Thou  art  a  God  ready  to  pardon."     This 
is  manifest  from — 1.  The  perfections  of  the  Divine  character.     2.  The  glorious 
scheme  of  human  redemption  (Isa.  liii.  5,  6 ;  Rom.  iii.  25,  26 ;  2  Cor.  v.  18,  21). 
3.  The  testimonies  and  promises  of  Scripture.    III.  Suggest  appropriate  instruc- 
tion.    {Sketches  of  Four  Hundred  Sermons.)        A  God  ready  to  pardon: — I.  The 
history  of  Israel  singularly  illustrates  the  readiness  of  God  to  pardon.    H.  It 
is  equally  true  that  the  lord  at  all  times  18  a  god  ready  to  pardon.    1.  it  is 
true  of  Him  by  nature.     Mercy  is  an  essential  attribute  of  God.     2.  He  Himself 
removed  the  impediment  which  lay  in  the  way  of  forgiveness.    3.  He  sends  His 
message  of  love  to  sinners  while  they  are  yet  in  their  sins.     4.  He  makes  no  hard 
conditions  with  sinners.    6.  What  He  demands  of  man  by  the  gospel  He  also  works 
in  Him  by  His  Spirit.     6.  He  accepts  even  the  very  lowest  grade  of  the  necessary 
graces.    Eepentance,  &c.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        A  pardoning  God  :—l.  The  nature 
OF  this  pardon.     It  is— 1.  Free.     Pardon  must  be  so.     It  is  no  objection  to  say  that 
Christ  has  purchased  it.     True,  He  has  purchased,  but  it  is  free  in  its  bestowment 
on  us,  because  we  could  not  merit  it,  nor  claim  it  as  a  right.     2.  Complete.    Do  not 
mean  that  it  refers  to  the  future.     Some  say  when  once  pardoned  all  done.    Not  so 
Scriptures.     Complete  because  it  refers  to  all;  complete  because  it  is  full.      3. 
Present.     Some  say  not  until  death.     Not  so   Scriptures.     4.  Eighteous.      "Be 
it  known    unto    you,   therefore,   men    and    brethren,"    &c.      Eighteous   because 
bestowed  on  righteous  principles;   because   of   Christ's   atonement.     5.  Discrimi- 
nating.    If  Christ  died  for  all,  how  is  it  that  all  are  not  pardoned?     Eemedj 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

only  available  for  those  who  apply  for  it.  Hence — II.  The  conditions.  Scrip- 
tures teach  us  duty  of  forgiveness  if  offender  repents  and  asks.  So  with  God 
our  confession  must  be — 1.  Frank.  "  He  that  covereth  his  sins  shall  not  prosper, 
but  whoso  confesseth  and  forsaketh  them  shall  have  mercy."  2.  Penitent. 
"  The  sacrifice,"  &c.  Many  frankly  confess,  but  not  penitently.  True  penitence 
seen  in  the  publican.  3.  Believing.  IH.  Evidknce  that  God  is  ready  to  pardon. 
1.  From  scheme  of  redemption.  Love  in  scheme,  end  of  scheme ;  and  if  pardon 
not  dispensed,  end  defeated.  2.  From  His  relation  to  the  Saviour.  As  Father 
He  could  not  furnish  a  greater  guarantee.  3.  From  means  He  employs  to  bring 
to  Him.  Sends  Spirit — Providence — Word.  Characterised  by  love.  4.  From 
receptions  others  have  met  with.  Manasseh — dying  thief — Saul.  Shown  in 
Prodigal.  Lessons :  1.  Subject  does  not  imply  God  will  not  punish.  2.  Subject 
shows  only  way  of  deUverance,  and  that  way  to  be  taken  now.  (E.  R.  Derry.) 
The  joy  of  pardon : — A  man  named  John  Welsh  lay  in  prison  in  Chicago  under 
sentence  of  death.  His  friends  tried  to  get  his  sentence  commuted  to  imprison- 
ment for  life.  The  day  before  that  fixed  for  the  execution  arrived  without 
any  favourable  reply  being  received.  The  prisoner  sat  in  his  cell  listening 
and  longing  earnestly  for  a  respite.  Presently  he  heard  the  rumbling  of  the 
wheels  of  a  car.  It  brought  the  materials  for  his  scaffold,  and  soon  he 
heard  the  strokes  of  the  hammers,  and  pictured  himself  hanging  on  the  scaffold 
which  he  could  hear  them  raising.  The  sound  almost  drove  him  frantic,  and  he 
sent  for  the  governor,  and  begged  that  he  might  be  taken  away  anywhere  from  that 
dreadful  noise.  He  was  taken  to  a  distant  cell,  and  there  he  sat  on  the  edge  of  his 
bed,  haunted  with  gloomy  thoughts,  all  hope  gone.  He  was  startled  from  his 
reverie  by  a  hurried  step  along  the  corridor.  The  key  was  thrust  into  the  lock,  and 
one  of  the  officers  of  the  prison  stood  before  him.  He  held  a  paper  in  his  hand 
signed  by  the  Governor  of  the  State  of  Illinois.  It  was  a  commutation  of  hia 
sentence.  .  .  .  How  the  truth  burst  on  his  mind !  When  the  paper  was  handed  to 
him  he  could  not  read  it  for  tears ;  but  it  was  a  paper  bringing  him  his  life,  and  he 
hugged  it,  and  clasped  it,  and  kissed  it.     (H.  W.  Taylor.) 

Vers.  26-29.  Nevertheless  they  were  disobedient,  and  rebelled  against  Thee. — 
Provocations  and  punishment : — I.  How  justly  we  mat  be  charged,  as  the  Jews 

ABE     IN     THE     TEXT,     WITH     HAVING     WROUGHT     GREAT     PROVOCATIONS.        This     wiU     be 

manifest  if  we  consider — 1.  To  what  a  prodigious  height  all  kinds  of  iniquity  are 
raised  amongst  us.  Atheism,  infidelity,  blasphemy,  intemperance,  impurity, 
commercial  immorality.  2.  What  engagements  we  are  under  to  abstain  from 
all  transgressions  of  the  laws  of  God.  3.  That  our  sins  have  been  committed 
against  the  most  prevailing  attempts  of  the  Spirit  of  God  to  restrain  and  reclaim 
us  from  them.  4.  That  our  sins  have  been  committed  against  many  and  great 
mercies.  5.  That  our  sins  have  been  committed  against  the  discipline  of  God's 
rod  and  those  many  judgments  He  hath  sent  to  teach  us  righteousness.     II.  That 

we  have  great  REASON  TO  FEAR  THAT  OUR  GREAT  PROVOCATIONS  MAT  BE  PUNISHED 

BT  God  as  those  of  the  Jews  were.  Conclusion :  What  is  the  most  effectual 
means  to  prevent  the  punishment  our  great  provocations  threaten  us  with  ? 
{Lilly  Butler.)  And  testifiedst  against  them,  that  Thou  mightest  bring  them 
again  unto  Thy  law. — God's  laws : — Some  years  ago  I  was  enjoying  a  ramble  on 
the  Portsdown  Hills,  a  favourite  resort  of  the  Portsmouth  people,  and  commanding 
a  delightful  view  of  the  sea.  They  are  all  open  to  the  public,  except  a  few  places 
which  are  carefully  fenced  off.  Are  these  the  most  luxurious  spots,  where  the  grass 
is  softest  and  the  moss  most  green?  No,  indeed,  these  are  the  broken  and 
precipitous  parts,  where  serious  accidents  might  occur.  God's  laws  are  just  like 
these  fences.  God's  love  has  placed  fences  there  to  keep  us  from  hurting  ourselves. 
{F.  S.  WebiUr.)  Danger  signals  : — In  travelling  along  our  great  railroads  we 
pass  many  signal  stations.  In  connection  with  each  of  these  there  is  a  man 
appointed,  one  of  whose  duties  it  is  to  see  that  the  way  is  clear.  If  a  bridge  should 
be  broken,  or  any  obstruction  is  on  the  road,  he  is  expected  to  ring  a  bell,  wave  a 
flag,  or  make  a  signal  of  some  kind,  so  that  the  driver  of  any  train  coming  along 
the  road  may  know  in  time  to  stop  his  train  before  any  harm  is  done.  And  the 
flag  the  man  waves,  or  the  signal  he  puts  out,  is  the  warning  given  to  approaching 
trains  to  save  them  from  injury.  In  the  journey  that  we  are  pursuing  through 
this  life  we  are  sure  to  meet  with  many  dangers.  The  Bible  is  the  guide-book 
which  God  has  given  as  to  use  on  the  journey.  And  the  warnings  found  in  this 
book  are  the  signals  to  tell  as  of  the  dangers  that  lie  along  oar  path  in  order  that 


CHAP.  IX.]  NEHEMIAH.  139 

■we  may  avoid  them.  We  cannot  be  safe  in  our  journey  through  the  world  unless 
we  are  careful  to  mind  these  warnings. 

Ver.  33.  Howbeit,  Thou  art  Just  in  all  that  Is  brought  upon  us. — The  miseries  of 
life ;  their  origin  and  remedy  : — The  miseries  of  Ufe  have  been  a  fruitful  theme  to 
writers  in  all  ages.  Some  have  endeavoured  to  engage  us  in  their  contemplation 
for  a  wise  and  good  end.  Others  have  taken  occasion  from  them  to  dispute  the 
wisdom,  justice,  and  goodness  of  God.  Such  notions,  thus  derogatory  from  the 
providence  of  God,  tend,  even  in  the  best  of  men,  if  not  timely  eradicated,  to 
weaken  those  impressions  of  reverence  and  gratitude  which  are  necessary  to  add 
warmth  to  devotion  and  vigour  to  virtue.  The  teaching  of  Scripture  is,  that  God 
is  not  to  be  charged  with  disregard  of  His  creation.  He  created  man  for  happiness, 
and  this  happiness  was  forfeited  by  a  breach  of  the  conditions  to  which  it  was 
annexed.  Physical  and  moral  evil  entered  the  world  together.  To  avoid  misery 
we  must  avoid  sin.  Consider — I.  How  few  of  the  evils  of  life  can  justly  be 
ASCRIBED  TO  GoD.  We  must  carefully  distinguish  that  which  is  actually  appointed 
by  Him  from  that  which  is  only  permitted,  or  that  which  is  the  consequence  of 
something  done  to  ourselves,  and  could  not  be  prevented  but  by  the  interruption 
of  those  general  laws  which  we  term  the  course  of  nature  or  the  established  order 
of  the  universe.  If  we  examine  all  the  afflictions  of  mind,  body,  and  estate  by 
this  rule,  we  shall  find  God  not  otherwise  accessory  to  them  than  as  He  works  no 
miracles  to  prevent  them,  as  He  suffers  men  to  be  masters  of  themselves,  and 
restrains  them  only  by  coercions  applied  to  their  reason.  1.  In  making  an 
estimate  of  the  miseries  that  arise  from  the  disorders  of  the  body,  we  must  consider 
how  many  diseases  proceed  from  our  own  laziness,  intemperance,  or  negligence ; 
how  many  the  vices  or  follies  of  our  ancestors  have  transmitted  to  us.  2.  Nor  are 
the  disquietudes  of  the  mind  less  frequently  excited  by  ourselves.  (1)  Pride  is  the 
general  source  of  our  infelicity.  (2)  Immoderate  desires.  (3)  Undue  solicitude 
about  future  events  which  gives  rise  to  harassing  fears  and  anxieties.  3.  Poverty 
is  not  always  the  effect  of  wickedness — it  may  often  be  the  effect  of  virtue ;  but  it  is 
not  certain  that  poverty  is  an  evU.  II.  How  far  a  general  piety  might  exempt 
ANY  community  FROM  THOSE  EVILS.  A  Community,  in  which  virtue  should  generally 
prevail,  of  which  every  member  should  fear  God  with  his  whole  heart  and  love  his 
neighbour  as  himself,  where  every  man  should  labour  to  make  himself  "  perfect 
even  as  his  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfect,"  would  find  these  evils  practically 
non-existant.      III.  How   much   in   the   present   corrupt   state  of  the  world 

PARTICULAR   MEN    MAY,  BY   THE   PRACTICE  OF    THE    DUTIES  OF    RELIGION,  PROMOTE    THEIR 

OWN  HAPPINESS.     {John  Taylor,  LL.D.)  God  has  done   right : — I.  Right    as 

TO  WISDOM.  It  is  of  great  importance  for  us  to  know,  and  to  feel,  especially  when 
tossed  on  the  billows  and  enveloped  in  the  darkness  of  some  heavy  affliction,  that 
God  is  infinitely  wise,  and  that  His  wisdom  can  and  will  conduct  all  the  circum- 
stances of  His  people  to  a  happy  issue.  This  is  absolutely  necessary  to  the  enjoy- 
ment of  anything  like  calm  security  amidst  such  scenes.  It  is  so  in  the  common 
affairs  of  life.  The  soldier  trusts  in  the  wisdom  of  his  general,  and  is  calm  in 
battle.  The  sailor  trusts  in  the  wisdom  of  his  captain,  and  is  calm  in  the  tempest. 
The  traveller  has  confidence  in  the  wisdom  of  his  guide,  and  pursues  his  course  in 
peaceful  security.  And  so,  if  believers  would  enjoy  a  calm  and  cheerful  assurance 
in  fighting  the  battles,  braving  the  storms,  and  pursuing  the  pilgrimage  of  their 
present  probation,  they  must  have  a  settled  and  solid  repose  in  the  infallible 
wisdom  of  God.  And  they  must  seek  this,  not  so  much  from  the  deductions  of 
human  reason,  or  the  better  lights  of  their  own  experience  in  relation  to  providence, 
as  from  the  operations  of  faith  in  the  Scripture  revelations  of  God  and  His  govern- 
ment. II.  Right  as  to  justice.  Amidst  the  afflictions  of  life,  not  only  must  we 
recognise  and  trust  the  infinite  wisdom  of  God,  but  we  must  endeavour,  by  the 
lights  of  revelation  and  experience,  to  reconcile  the  justice  of  God  with  the 
afflictions  of  the  righteous,  and  thus  justify  the  ways  of  God  to  men.  Men  who 
only  look  on  the  surface  of  things  and  events,  and  judge  from  that,  often  charge 
God  with  being  rigorous,  unjust,  and  unrighteous  in  the  operations  and  issues  of 
His  providence.  All  temporal  sufferings  are  the  righteous  consequence  of  original 
or  actual  sin,  and  are  frequently  merited  by  the  best  of  men.  None  can  affirm  that 
they  are  free  from  human  frailties  and  sinful  defects,  and  therefore  they  have  no 
right  to  complain  of  the  punishment  of  their  sins.  Our  afflictions,  generally,  fall 
far  below  the  guilt  which  we  have  contracted.  The  time  is  hastening  on  when 
the  wisdom  and  justice  of  providence  vdll  be  convincingly  evident  to  all.    III.  Right 


140  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 


AS  TO  GOODNESS.  "  Thou  art  good,  and  doest  good."  Such  was  the  testimory  of 
the  psalmist ;  such  is  the  uniform  testimony  of  revelation ;  and  such,  notwith- 
standing its  mysteries,  is  the  acknowledgment  of  universal  providence.  And  it  la 
very  necessary  for  us  to  be  convinced  of  this,  and  live  under  the  perpetual  and 
growing  influence  of  it,  amidst  the  tribulations  of  life.  Else  how  can  we  be  calm, 
secure,  and  happy?  1.  Strive  to  understand  God  in  your  afSictions.  From  the 
absence  of  this  intelligent  view  of  God's  providence  in  affliction  the  greatest 
mischief  often  springs.  Ignorance  here,  as  everywhere  else,  is  ever  attended  by 
distrust,  fear,  dissatisfaction,  and  wasting  anxiety ;  while,  on  the  other  hand, 
intelligence  produces  confidence,  serenity,  contentedness,  and  a  delightful  peace 
and  repose.  2.  Learn  to  avoid  a  spirit  of  envy  and  murmuring.  If  God  acta 
wisely,  justly,  and  mercifully,  in  often  permitting  the  wicked  to  live  and  prosper 
and  the  righteous  to  fall  into  great  afflictions,  then  resign  yourselves  to  His  will,  be 
satisfied  with  the  dispensations  of  His  hand,  envy  not  the  condition  of  others, 
neither  murmur  at  your  own.  Consider  well  the  folly,  vanity,  and  misery  of  sinful 
prosperity,  which  rather  needs  your  pity  than  your  envy.  3.  Learn  to  be  firm  and 
faithful  in  the  service  and  cause  of  God.  Afflictions  have  driven  many  from  Christ 
and  His  kingdom.  {TV.  Gregory.)  God's  proceediiigt  in  His  justice  sometvmet 
inexplicable : — Take  a  straight  stick  and  put  it  into  the  water,  then  it  will  seem 
crooked ;  why  ?  because  we  look  upon  it  through  two  mediums,  air  and  water. 
There  lies  the  deceptio  visus ;  thence  it  is  that  we  cannot  discern  aright.  Thus  the 
proceedings  of  God  in  His  justice,  which  in  themselves  are  straight,  without  the 
least  obliquity,  seem  unto  us  crooked.  That  wicked  men  should  prosper,  and  good 
men  be  afflicted ;  that  the  Israelites  should  make  the  bricks,  and  the  Egyptians 
dwell  in  the  houses ;  that  servants  should  ride  on  horseback,  and  princes  go  on 
foot — these  are  things  that  make  the  best  Christians  stagger  in  their  judgments. 
And  why?  but  because  they  look  upon  God's  proceedings  through  a  double 
medium  of  flesh  and  spirit,  that  so  all  things  seem  to  go  cross,  though  indeed  they 
go  right  enough.  And  hence  it  is  that  God's  proceedings  in  His  justice  are  not  so 
well  discerned,  the  eyes  of  man  alone  being  not  competent  judges  thereof.  (J. 
Spencer.) 

Ver.  38.  And  because  of  all  this,  we  make  a  sure  covenant,  and  write  it. — 

Covenanting  with  God  : — It  may  be  asked.  Are  Christians  of  the  present  day 
expected  to  enter  into  such  covenants  ?  To  this  we  reply  both  yes  and  no.  Yes, 
if  regard  be  had  to  true  heart-consecration  to  the  Lord.  No,  if  it  be  a  mere 
matter  of  form,  a  source  of  bondage  or  a  minister  to  spiritual  pride.  If  we  mistake 
not,  some  of  the  Churches  of  New  England  have  a  form  of  covenant  which  each 
new  adherent  is  required  to  sign,  and  we  know  that  the  esteemed  President 
Edwards  advocated  the  making  of  written  covenants  between  individual  Christiana 
and  the  Almighty.  In  reference  to  this  each  must  exercise  his  own  judgment  as 
before  God.    {W.  P.  Lockhart.) 


CHAPTER  X. 

Vers.  1-39.  Now  those  that  sealed  were,  Nehemiah. — Covenanting  with  God  : — 
I.  The  parties  entekino  the  covenant.  1.  Nehemiah  the  governor.  This  is 
true  greatness  in  the  sight  of  God,  to  be  foremost  in  consecration  to  the  service 
of  religion,  and  to  stand  among  His  people  in  trying  times.  2.  The  priests.  It 
is  remarkable  that  the  name  of  Eliashib,  the  high-priest  does  not  appear  in  this 
list.  It  is  honourable  to  the  rest  of  the  priests  that  notwithstanding  this  defection 
of  their  chief,  so  many  of  them  set  their  hands  to  this  holy  bond.  3.  The  Levites. 
We  observe  among  them  almost  all  the  names  of  those  who  took  part  in  the  previous 
solemnities  of  this  memorable  day.  It  is  well,  when  those  who  are  eminent  in 
devotion  are  also  eminent  for  devotedness.  It  sometimes  happens  that  those  who 
are  gifted  in  prayer  are  not  distinguished  for  holy  practice.  4.  The  chiefs  of  the 
nation.  This  fidelity  to  the  cause  of  truth  adds  a  lustre  to  all  earthly  glory,  and 
sets  an  ornnment  of  grace  on  the  noblest  brow.  5.  The  rest  of  the  people.  It  is 
a  blessed  thing  when  whole  families  thus  unite  together  in  the  faith  of  Christ  and 
the   life  of  religion.      II.  The   engagements    of    the   covenant.     1.  Sins   to   ba 


CHAP.  X.]  NEHEMIAH. 


renounced.  It  is  vain  to  make  loud  profession  of  spiritual  experience,  and  o) 
devotion  to  the  Saviour,  unless  besetting  sins  are  abandoned  and  a  new  coursti 
of  obedience  begun.  2.  Duties  to  be  performed.  (1)  To  give  to  God.  (2)  To  work 
ior  God  (ver.  34).  All  vow  #o  work  for  God,  each  in  his  own  place,  according  to 
the  Divine  will,  at  the  appointed  times,  and  unwearied  in  well-doing.  Henry 
Martyn  wrote :  "  With  resignation  and  peace,  I  can  look  forward  to  a  life  of 
labour  and  seclusion  from  earthly  comforts,  while  Jesus  stands  near  changing  me 
into  His  holy  image.  How  happy  and  honoured  am  I  in  being  suffered  to  be  a 
missionary,"  And  Levi  Parsons  testified:  "I  can  subscribe  with  my  hand  to  be 
for  ever  the  Lord's,  to  be  sent  anywhere,  to  do  anything,  to  endure  any  hardship, 
to  live  and  die  a  missionary."  (3)  To  wait  on  God.  HI.  The  inferences 
DEDuciBLE  FEOM  THE  COVENANT.  1.  We  here  866  the  propriety  of  religious 
covenanting.  2.  The  obligation  in  covenanting  established.  When  you  devote 
yourself  to  the  Lord  in  covenant,  to  obey  the  precepts  of  His  Word,  your  essential 
obligation  is  not  strengthened  or  altered;  it  is  merely  recognised  by  you,  and 
promised  to  be  fulfilled.  3.  The  benefits  from  covenanting  illustrated.  (W. 
Ritchie.)  Covenant  comfort : — Christmas  Evans,  after  being  sorely  tried,  was 
led  to  enter  afresh  into  personal  covenant  with  God ;  and  such  was  the  joy  in  God 
•which  followed,  that  he  said  of  it,  "  After  forming  this  covenant  I  felt  great  calm- 
ness and  peace.  I  had  the  feelings  of  a  poor  man  who  has  just  come  under  the 
protection  of  the  Eoyal  Family,  and  has  obtained  a  pension  for  life,  the  dreadful 
lear  of  poverty  and  want  having  left  his  house  for  ever.  I  felt  the  safety  and 
shelter  which  the  little  chickens  feel  under  the  wings  of  the  hen."  (^The  Thinker.) 
A  national  covenant : — On  February  25,  1638,  a  memorable  scene  was  witnessed 
in  the  churchyard  of  Greyfriars,  Edinburgh.  The  National  Covenant  to  maintain 
Presbyterianism,  and  to  resist  contrary  errors,  having  been  numerously  signed 
-within  the  church,  the  parchment  was  subsequently  placed  upon  the  flat  tombstone, 
still  extant,  of  Boswell  of  Auchinleck,  where  many  others,  to  show  their  determina- 
tion to  die  rather  than  yield,  signed  it  with  blood  from  their  arms.  History 
testifies  that  numbers  of  them  endured  much  suiJering  rather  than  violate  their 
pledge.  If  frail  men  will  so  keep  their  promise,  much  more  must  the  Omnipotent 
<jod  honour  His  covenant.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  28-30.  And  all  they  that  had  separated  themselves  from  the  people  of  the 
lands  unto  the  law  of  God. — A  genuine  revival : — 1.  The  crucial  test  of  any  revival 
is  the  extent  to  which  it  actually  purifies  and  reforms  the  lives  of  those  who  come 
under  its  influence.  2.  This  is  the  kind  of  revival  which  ever  and  again  we  all 
need.  For  we  are  constantly  liable  to  fall  below  the  level  of  our  Christian  privileges. 
We  are  also  apt  to  grow  blind  to  our  own  defects,  and  to  under-estimate  the  extent 
of  our  own  shortcomings.  We  have  need  to  bring  our  lives  into  the  light  of  God's 
holy  law,  and  into  the  light  of  the  life  of  Christ,  that  our  consciences  may  be 
•awakened  to  a  truer  and  deeper  penitence.  3.  A  repentance  which  is  the  fruit  of 
a  true  revival  of  the  religious  life  naturally  goes  into  the  details  of  conduct. 
{T.  Campbell  Finlayscm.)  And  that  we  would  not  give  our  daughters  unto  the 
people  of  the  land. — Marriage  and  purity  : — Wherever  I  find  a  purely  savage  life, 
which  means  life  eaten  up  by  impure  sin,  there  I  also  find  no  capacity  in  the  life 
to  advance  and  grow.  You  have  an  instance  in  the  case  of  Africa,  the  life  of  which 
has  not  moved  for  a  couple  of  thousand  years,  simply  because  it  is  soaked  with 
impurity.  Turning  to  the  earliest  efforts  of  civilisation,  as  recorded  in  the  Bible, 
I  find  men  making  effort  after  effort,  getting  a  little  way,  and  then  each  effort 
vanishing  in  a  sink  of  impure  sin.  Life  ought  to  grow  if  natural,  but  if  impurity 
is  natural,  it  is  natural  to  stagnate,  never  to  grow,  to  fall  to  pieces,  and  for  civilisa- 
tions to  be  swept  out  by  weakness  and  impotence.  The  history  of  our  European 
civilisation  is  the  history  of  the  gradual  rise  in  the  idea  of  marriage  and  purity. 
{Canon  Scott-Holland.) 

Ver.  31.  And  If  the  people  of  the  land  hring  ware  or  any  victuals  on  the 
"Babbath  day  to  all. — The  profit  of  Sabbath-keeping : — John  Brand  was  an  old 
Cornish  fisherman.  The  fishing  had  not  been  good  for  some  days,  the  water  had 
been  wild  and  stormy ;  but  at  length,  on  the  Sunday,  the  weather  became  fine,  and 
the  other  fishermen  said,  "  We  would  keep  Sunday — but — we  have  had  so  few 
■fish  lately  ;  and  we  are  sorry  to  go  out  to-day — but — the  weather  is  so  good.  It  is 
ft  pity  ;  we  would  not  go  if  we  were  not  so  poor."  "What!"  said  honest  John, 
•«•  are  you  going  to  break  God's  laws  with  your  ifs  and  buts  ?     Better  be  poor  than 


U2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 


be  wicked.  My  religion  is  not  the  kind  that  shifts  with  the  wind.  '  Thou  shalt 
remember  the  Sabbath  day  to  keep  it  holy ' — that  is  enough  for  me."  So  h& 
persuaded  them,  and  they  took  his  advice,  and  spent  the  day  in  worshipping  God. 
And  it  was  well  they  did  so  ;  for  that  night,  just  when  the  boats  would  have  been 
coming  back,  a  terrible  storm  suddenly  burst  over  the  deep,  and  lasted  two  days. 
Any  boat  out  in  that  weather  would  certainly  have  been  wrecked.  But  two  days 
after  the  beautiful  weather  returned,  and  more  fish  were  taken  then  than  had  been 
caught  for  weeks  before.  No ;  no  one  ever  yet  lost  by  obeying  God.  Be  you  Uke 
John  Brand;  be  thorough,  honest,  and  God-fearing  in  and  out;  do  not  have  a 
religion  like  a  weathercock  that  shifts  with  the  wind,  or  one  that  can  be  broken 
with  an  "  if  "  or  a  "  but."  (J.  Reid  Howatt.)  The  Sabbath  beneficial : — In  a  prize 
essay  on  the  Sabbath  written  by  a  journeyman  printer  in  Scotland,  there  appears 
the  following  striking  passage  :  "  Yoke-fellows,  think  how  the  abstraction  of  the 
Sabbath  would  hopelessly  enslave  the  working-classes  with  whom  we  are  identified. 
Think  of  the  labour  thus  going  on  in  one  monotonous,  and  continuous,  and  eternal 
cycle — limbs  for  ever  on  the  rack,  the  fingers  for  ever  plying,  the  eyeballs  for  ever 
straining,  the  brow  for  ever  sweating,  the  feet  for  ever  plodding,  the  brain  for  ever 
throbbing,  the  shoulders  for  ever  drooping,  the  loins  for  ever  aching,  and  the  rest- 
less mind  for  ever  scheming !  Think  of  the  beauty  it  would  efface,  of  the  merry- 
heartedness  it  would  extinguish,  of  the  giant  strength  it  would  tame,  of  the 
resources  of  nature  it  would  exhaust,  of  the  aspirations  it  would  crush,  of  the  sick- 
ness it  would  breed,  of  the  projects  it  would  wreck,  of  the  groans  it  would  extort,  of 
the  lives  it  would  immolate,  of  the  cheerless  graves  it  would  prematurely  dig  1  See 
them  toiling  and  moiling,  sweating  and  fretting,  grinding  and  hewing,  weaving  and 
spinning,  sowing  and  gathering,  mowing  and  reaping,  raising  and  building,  digging 
and  planting,  unloading  and  storing,  striving  and  struggling — in  the  garden  and  in 
the  field,  in  the  granary  and  in  the  barn,  in  the  factory  and  in  the  mill,  in  the  ware- 
house and  in  the  shop,  on  the  mountain  and  in  the  ditch,  on  the  roadside  and  in 
the  wood,  in  the  city  and  in  the  country,  on  the  sea  and  on  the  shore,  on  the  earth 
in  days  of  brightness  and  of  gloom.  What  a  sad  picture  would  the  world  present 
if  we  had  no  Sabbath  1 " 

Vers.  32-39.  Also  we  made  ordinanceB  for  us,  to  charge  ourBelves  yearly  -witlx 
the  third  part  of  a  shekel. — Voluntary  taxation: — Not  to  enter  upon  the  thorny 
path  of  endowed  or  voluntary  religion,  nor  to  inquire  whether  tithes  are  coeval 
with  the  first  man,  and  binding  upon  the  present  age,  let  us  maintain — I.  That 
THE  Church  supposes  an  edifice.  God  may  be  worshipped  in  any  house. 
Experience  has  taught  the  convenience  and  value  of  a  house  of  God.  The  edifice 
must  be  built  and  maintained.  II.  That  a  Chukch  requibes  a  minister.  "  No 
man  can  rightly  labour  in  the  Word  and  doctrine  without  diligent  and  habitual 
BibUcal  study;  no  man  can  conduct  such  study  without  the  renunciation  of  secular 
pursuits  ;  no  man  can  abandon  such  pursuits  without  an  adequate  and  guaranteed 
salary  from  the  Church  in  which  he  teaches,  for  which  he  labours."  The  ministry 
must  be  sustained.  III.  That  a  Church  is  a  brotherhood.  "  The  rich  and  poor 
meet  together."  "  The  poor  ye  have  always  with  you."  In  a  Church  sense,  "  if 
any  provide  not  for  his  own  house,  he  hath  denied  the  faith."  lY.  That  a  Church 
is  a  missionary  organisation.  It  has  duties  both  at  home  and  abroad.  The  Word 
of  God  must  be  translated,  the  masses  evangelised,  society  leavened.  A  true 
Church  must  of  necessity  be  a  generous  Church.  It  gets  to  giva  (Homiletieal 
Commentary.) 

Ver.  35.  And  to  bring  the  flrat-fruitB  of  our  ground. — A  fruit-service  : — We 
notice  in  this  text — L  Willinqhood.  "  And  to  bring."  It  was  no  tax.  Love  is 
its  own  tai-levier,  and  it  ever  gathers  the  richest,  the  ripest,  and  the  best  fruit. 
When  a  Church  or  a  community  is  filled  with  love  you  need  have  no  fear  for 
revenue.  II.  Precedence.  "First-fruits."  In  all  things  Christ  must  have  the 
"  pre-eminence."  He  must  be  Alpha.  III.  Universal  lordship.  First-fruits  of 
"  all  trees."  He  is  Lord  of  all.  So  it  is  with  the  fruit  of  our  souls.  Jesus  claims 
tribute  from  all  provinces  of  our  nature.  He  is  not  satisfied  with  actions.  He 
claims  the  captivity  of  our  thoughts.  He  wants  not  only  the  first-fruits  of  our 
emotions,  of  penitence,  but  also  of  our  gratitude,  our  adoration,  our  trust,  and  our 
love.  Let  us  see  that  His  flag  is  waving  over  every  province  of  our  nature,  and 
that  we  give  to  Him  the  first-fruits  of  conscience  and  meditation,  of  imagination 
and  memory,  of  ardent  love  and  submissive  will.     IV.  Annual  offerino.     "  Year 


CHAP.  X.]  NEHEMIAH,  143 

by  year."  We  should  lose  the  consciousness  of  advancing  time  if  it  were  not  for 
our  birthdays.  We  should  miss  much  of  occasions  for  gratitude  if  it  were  not  for 
seed-time  and  harvest,  summer  and  winter.  The  living  earth  reminds  us  of  the 
living  God,  who  supplies  all  we  need.     (W.  M.  Statham.) 

Ver.  87.  And  the  tithes. — Tithe$  : — ^Without  inquiring  into  the  reason  for  which 
the  number  ten  has  been  so  frequently  preferred  as  a  number  of  selection  in  the 
cases  of  tribute  offerings,  both  sacred  and  secular,  voluntary  and  compulsory,  we 
may  remark  that  numerous  instances  of  its  use  are  found  both  in  profane  and  also 
in  Biblical  history,  prior  to,  or  independently  of,  the  appointment  of  the  Levitical 
tithes  under  the  law.  In  Biblical  history  the  two  prominent  instances  are — 
1.  Abram  presenting  the  tenth  of  his  property,  according  to  the  Syrian  and  Arabic 
versions  of  Heb.  vii.,  but  as  the  passages  themselves  appear  to  show,  of  the  spoils 
of  his  victory,  to  Melchisedek  (Gen.  xiv.  20;  Heb.  vii.  2-6).  2.  Jacob,  after  his 
vision  at  Luz,  devoting  a  tenth  of  all  his  property  to  God  in  case  he  should  return 
home  in  safety  (Gen.  xxviii.  22).  These  instances  bear  witness  to  the  antiquity  of 
tithes,  in  some  shape  or  other,  previous  to  the  Mosaic  tithe  system.  But  numerous 
instances  are  to  be  found  of  the  practice  of  heathen  nations,  Greeks,  Komans, 
Carthaginians,  Arabians,  of  applying  tenths  derived  from  property  in  general,  from 
spoil,  from  confiscated  goods,  or  from  commercial  profits,  to  sacred,  and  quasi- 
sacred,  and  also  to  fiscal  purposes,  viz.,  as  consecrated  to  a  deity,  presented  as  a 
reward  to  a  successful  general,  set  apart  as  a  tribute  to  a  sovereign,  or  as  a 
permanent  source  of  revenue.  {Smithes  Bible  Dictionary.)  Giving  as  a  meant  of 
character  culture  : — God  carries  on  His  cause  in  the  world  by  the  aid  of  His  people. 
He  is  constantly  calling  on  us  to  give,  now  to  this  cause  and  now  to  that.  Why  so  ? 
Surely  He  to  whom  the  silver  and  gold  belong  has  no  need  of  us  to  help  forward 
His  work.  He  could,  if  He  would,  do  it  much  more  eflficiently  without  us.  But  He 
is  striving  to  educate  us  into  resemblance  to  Christ  and  meetness  for  heaven.  If  a 
father  could  place  his  child  where  he  would  be  habitually  giving,  giving,  in 
the  expression  of  a  benevolent  sympathy  and  helpfulness,  he  would  be  putting  him 
under  the  most  efficient  of  all  means  for  the  development  in  him  of  a  truly 
Christian,  or  Christlike,  spirit.  He  would  be  conferring  on  him  one  of  the  richest 
possible  blessings.  This  is  the  blessing  which  our  heavenly  Father  is  trying  to 
bestow  upon  us,  in  surrounding  us  as  He  does  with  those  who  need  our  sympathy 
and  help.  If  we  gratefully  recognise  our  Father's  wise  and  loving  design,  and,  so 
far  as  we  can,  give  our  help  with  a  truly  Christian  spirit,  our  contributions  will  do 
more  good  to  us  who  give  than  to  those  who  receive  them.  Every  such  expression 
of  Christian  love  will  leave  an  impress  on  our  character  which  we  shall  carry  with 
us  for  ever.  It  will  develop  into  augmented  power  and  more  absolute  supremacy 
within  us  that  Christlike  spirit  without  which  we  can  never  walk  the  golden 
streets.  We  need,  then,  to  cultivate  the  habit  of  giving  as  much  as  the  habit 
of  praying. 

Ver.  39.  And  we  will  not  forsake  the  house  of  our  God. — Zeal  for  the  tanctuary  :— 
Why  should  we  say  of  "  the  habitation  of  God's  house,"  "  We  will  not  forsake  it "  ? 
1.  God  has  clearly  ordained  public  worship.  He  made  man  to  be  social — social  in 
virtue  of  his  sorrows,  joys,  wants,  affections,  and  relationships.  He  also  made 
man  to  be  social  in  things  spiritual.  The  isolation  of  selfishness  is  sin.  Union 
is  cherished  by  communion,  and  communion  strengthened  by  public  worship. 
Jesus  honoured  the  temple.  The  faithful  in  every  age  have  desired  to  dwell  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord.  2.  The  special  manifestations  of  the  Divine  presence,  vouch- 
safed in  the  congregations  of  the  saints,  ought  to  endear  to  us  such  privileged 
scenes.  3.  As  the  sanctuary  has  been  the  place  of  the  Lord's  rest,  so  has  it  been 
the  scene  where  He  has  imparted  the  richest  gifts  to  His  worshippers.  4.  The 
servant  of  God  will  love  the  courts  of  the  Lord,  and  not  forsake  them,  because  in 
them  he  tastes  most  of  heaven  below.  You  cannot  form  a  better  conception  of 
heaven  than  by  fixing  on  the  happiest  Sabbath,  and  the  happiest  hour  of  worship 
on  the  happiest  Sabbath,  you  ever  enjoyed  in  the  assembly  of  the  saints.  (Canon 
Stowell.)  Zeal  for  God's  house  expressed  in  a  holy  resolution  not  to  forsake  it : — 
I.  A  RESOLUTION  WKLL  BECOMING  CHRISTIANS  THEMSELVES.  This  icsolution  Com- 
prehends the  following  particulars  :  1.  That  we  will  never  cast  off  the  profession 
of  our  faith,  nor  make  a  defection  from  the  truth  and  ways  of  the  gospel,  for  any 
cause,  nor  upon  any  account  whatsoever.  2.  That  we  will  not  neglect  the 
ordinances  of  Divine  worship,  nor  be  wanting  in  our  attendance  on  them  whenever 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

we  are  called,  and  have  an  opportunity  of  appearing  before  God   in  His  house. 
(1)  Jesus  Christ,  as  Lord  of  His  own  house,  has  appointed  divers  ordinances  to  be 
observed.     (2)  There  must  be  an  assembly  of  people  meeting  together  for  the  public 
administration  of  these  holy  ordinances.      (3)  There  must  be  some   proper  and 
convenient  places  appointed  and  agreed  upon  for  such  religious  assemblies  where 
they  can  be  had.     (4)  There  are  particular  times  and  seasons  for  the  holding 
these  religious  assemblies.     (5)  There  are  certain  persons  whose  work  and  duty  it 
is  to  go  before  others  in  these  holy  administrations.     3.  That  we  will  promote  as 
far  as  in  us  lies  the  interests  of  religion,  and  spread  the  kingdom  of  Christ  in  the 
world,     n.  It  is  not  only   lawful,  but   mat   be   useful    and    expedient,    fob 
Christians  in  societies  to  engage  themselves  to  God,  and  the  duties  they  owe 
TO  Him  and  one  another.     IH.  Offeb  reasons  both  for  making  this  resolution 
AND  OBLIGING  OURSELVES  TO  MAKE  IT  GOOD.     1.  Becausc  it  is  God's  house.     (1)  To 
forsake  God's  house  would  be  to  forsake  our  own  mercies.     (2)  To  leave  this  house 
is  to  forsake  the  place  which  God  Himself  hath  chosen  and  where  He  delights  to 
dwell.     (3)  To  forsake  this  house  is  to  forsake  God  Himself.     We  cannot  quit  the 
inheritance  of  the  Lord  but  in  effect  we  go  and  serve  other  gods.     2.  Because  our 
particular  good  is  lodged  in  the  public  interest.    3.  This  is  the  noblest  way  of 
imitating  the  great  God  Himself,  and  conforming  to  the  example  of  our  blessed 
Saviour.     4.  This  makes  men  real  blessings  to  the  world.     Such  men  reaUy  are  the 
strength  and  security  of  a  nation.    For  their  sakes  God  sometimes  preserves  others 
from  those  judgments  which  their  crying  sins  would  otherwise  pull  down  upon 
their  guilty  heads.     Sodom  had  been  preserved  for  the  sake  of  ten  righteous  men, 
could  BO  many  have  been  found  in  the  place.     5.  This  will  be  our  rejoicing  and 
comfort  another  day.    Application  :   Having  made  this  resolution,  we  must  oblige 
ourselves  to  make  it  good.    Because  of  the  inconstancy  and  deceitfulness  of  our 
hearts.     Such  engagements  will  help  to  fix  us  more  firmly  in  the  interests  of 
religion,  and  make  us  more  successful  in  resisting  all  temptations  to  apostasy. 
Hereby  we  are  rendered  more  capable  of  serving  the  interests  of  religion.     A  force 
when  united  becomes  the  stronger.     The  joint  concurrence  of  many  gives  a  great 
advantage  to  a  design,  and  a  better  prospect  of  success.   (Matthew  Clarke.)      Attach- 
ment to  God^s  house : — Consider — I.  The  resolution  itself  :  "  We  will  not  forsake," 
&G.    This  resolution  includes — 1.  Constant  and  regular   attendance.     2.  A  lively 
interest  in  its  welfare  and  prosperity.    H.  The  grounds  of  this  resolution.    1.  Our 
gracious  union  with  God.     All  connected  with  God  should  be  dear  and  sacred  to 
us — His  Word,  ordinances,  people  ;  therefore  His  house.     2.  Our  clear  and  impera- 
tive duty.     Public  worship  is  of  His  own  appointment.     3.  Our  public  profession. 
4.  The  special  advantages  we  shall  derive  from  it.     Exaltation  of  desires;  soul 
elevation ;  enlargement  of   mind ;  soul  enrichment  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in 
Christ.     "  A  day  in  Thy  courts  is  better  than  a  thousand,"  &c.     "  They  that  wait 
npon  the  Lord,"  &c.     5.  The  connection  of  the  house  of  God  with  the  celestial  world. 
It  is  "  the  gate  of  heaven."    Application :    1.  Where  professors  are  indifferent  to 
the  welfare  of  God's  house,  it  is  an  unfailing  indication  that  the  heart  is  not  right 
with  God.     2.  Let  the  subject  inspire  the  sincere  friends  of  Christ  to  more  ardent 
zeal  for  the  diffusion  of  the  Divine  glory.     3.  How  suited  is  God's  house  to  every 
description.     The    reckless  here    are  warned,  the   supine  aroused,    the    inquirer 
directed,  the  mourner  comforted,  the  faithful  established,  do.    (J.  Burns,  JD.D.) 


CHAPTEB   XI. 

Vers.  1-19.  And  the  ralem  of  the  people  dwelt  at  JeruBalem. — TTu  holy  city 

replenished : — Jerusalem  is  called  here  the  holy  city,  because  there  the  temple  was, 
and  that  was  the  place  God  had  chosen  to  put  His  name  there.  Upon  this  account 
one  would  think  the  holy  seed  should  all  have  chosen  to  dwell  there.  They 
declined,  however.  Either — 1.  Because  a  greater  strictness  of  conversation  was 
expected  from  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  than  from  others,  which  they  were  not 
willing  to  come  up  to  ;  or — 2.  Because  Jerusalem,  of  all  places,  was  most  hated  by 
the  heathen,  their  neighbours,  and  against  it  their  malicious  designs  were  levelled, 
which  made  that  the  post  of  danf^er,  as  the  post  of  honour  uses  to  be,  and  therefore 
they  were  not  willing  to  expose  themselves  there  ;  or — 3.  Because  it  was  more  for 


CHAP.  XI.]  NEHEMIAH.  145 

their  worldly  advantage  to  dwell  in  the  country.  We  are  here  told — I.  By  what 
MEANS  IT  WAS  EEPLENisHED.  1.  The  rulers  dwelt  there.  The  "  mighty  are  magnetic." 
When  great  men  would  choose  the  holy  city  for  their  habitation,  it  brings  holiness 
into  reputation,  and  their  zeal  will  provoke  very  many.  2.  There  were  some  that 
"  willingly  offered  themselves  to  dwell  at  Jerusalem,"  bravely  postponing  their  own 
secular  interest  to  the  public  welfare.  The  people  blessed  them.  They  praised 
them,  they  prayed  for  them,  they  praised  God  for  them.  Many  that  do  not  appear 
forward  themselves  for  the  public  good  will  yet  give  a  good  word  to  those  that  do. 
3.  They,  finding  that  yet  there  was  room,  concluded,  upon  a  review  of  their  whole 
body,  to  bring  one  in  ten  to  dwell  in  Jerusalem,  and  who  they  should  be  was 
determined  by  lot ;  the  disposal  they  all  knew  was  of  the  Lord.  The  proportion  of 
one  in  ten  seems  to  refer  to  the  ancient  rule  of  giving  the  tenth  to  God.  And  what 
is  given  to  the  holy  city  He  reckons  given  to  Himself.  11.  By  what  persons  it  was 
EEPLENISHED.  1.  Many  of  the  children  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  dwelt  there. 
Originally  part  of  the  city  lay  in  the  lot  of  those  tribes  and  part  in  that  of  the 
other ;  but  the  greater  part  was  in  the  lot  of  Benjamin ;  hence  more  families  of 
that  tribe  abode  in  the  city.  2.  The  priests  and  Levites  did  many  of  them  settle  at 
Jerusalem.  Where  else  should  men  that  were  holy  to  God  dwell,  but  in  the  holy 
city  ?  {Matthew  Henry.)  Eepeopling  the  capital : — This  was  altogether  worthy 
of  Nehemiah's  practical  sagacity.  The  restored  walls  of  Jerusalem  could  not  do 
much  to  promote  its  security  and  welfare  so  long  as  it  was  inhabited  by  a  mere 
handful  of  people.  It  would  be  well  if  some  of  our  modem  statesmen  were  to  grasp 
the  principle  of  this  poHcy,  and  open  their  eyes  to  the  fact  that  the  chief  wealth 
and  strength  of  any  nation  must  ever  lie,  not  in  massive  fortifications  or  colossal 
armies,  but  in  the  numbers,  the  chairacter,  the  patriotism,  and  the  prosperity  of  its 
people,  (r.  Campbell  Finlayson.)  The  holy  city  : — The  two  leading  thoughts 
connected  with  the  holy  city  in  this  phase  of  her  history  are  singularly  applicable 
to  the  Christian  community.   I.  Enclosed  within  walls,  the  citt  gained  a  PECULiAit 

CHARACTER    AND    PERFORMED  A  DISTINCTIVE    MISSION    OF    HER   OWN.       Our  Loi'd  WaS  not 

satisfied  to  rescue  stray  sheep  on  the  mountains  only  to  brand  them  with  His  mark 
and  then  turn  them  out  again  to  graze  in  solitude.  He  drew  them  as  a  flock  after 
Himself,  and  His  disciples  gathered  them  into  the  fold  of  Christian  fellowship. 
This  is  of  as  vital  importance  to  the  cause  of  Christianity  as  the  civic  organisation 
of  Jerusalem  was  to  that  of  Judaism,  The  Christian  City  of  God  stands  out  before 
the  world  on  her  lofty  foundation,  the  Rock  of  Ages — a  beacon  of  separation  from 
sin,  a  testimony  to  the  grace  of  God,  a  centre  for  the  confession  of  faith,  a  home  for 
social  worship,  a  rallying-point  for  the  forces  of  holy  warfare,  a  sanctuary  for  the 
helpless  and  oppressed.  II.  The  public  duty  of  citizenship.  The  reluctance  of 
Christians  to  accept  the  responsibilities  of  Church  membership  may  be  compared  to 
the  backwardness  of  the  Jews  to  dwell  in  Jerusalem.    (W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.) 

Ver.  16.  Had  the  oversight  of  the  outward  business  of  the  house  of  God. — The 
secular  in  sacred  service  : — I.  It  is  possible  to  secularise  the  sacred.  When 
sacred  service  is  entered  upon  from  secular  motives ;  when  it  is  performed  in  a 
perfunctory  manner ;  when  any  object  less  than  God  is  regarded  in  its  performance. 
An  unhallowed  hand  may  not  bear  up  an  ark.  A  cowl  does  not  make  a  monk. 
High  ofl&ce  cannot  elevate  a  base  man.  II.  It  is  necessary  to  make  the  secular 
SACRED.  "  He  can  who  thinks  he  can."  Application  :  1.  The  secret  of  content- 
ment. "  Self-humiliation  is  full  of  truth  and  reality."  2.  The  law  of  growth.  Be 
thy  ambition  to  become  pure  in  thought  and  feeling,  strong  in  resolve  and  deed. 
Serve.  Care  not  how,  mind  not  where.  {Homiletic  Commentary.)  Outward 
business : — We  have  prayed  about  that  house,  we  have  thanked  God  that  the 
crumbling  walls  of  our  little  houses  lean  against  the  foundations  and  the  walls 
of  God's  dwelling-place.  Do  we  catch  the  music,  do  we  see  the  vision  of  the  house 
of  God  ?  Do  the  words  balance  well  ?  "  House  "  is  a  familiar  word,  "  God  "  is 
the  most  awful  of  all  words  ;  yet  here  we  find  them  together  in  sublime  unity  and 
relation.  What  is  the  house  of  God  ?  "A  church."  "  A  chapel,  a  sanctuary,  a 
tabernacle,  a  temple."  Not  necessarily.  You  may  have  a  cathedral  without  a 
house  of  God,  and  you  may  find  in  some  little  thatched  cottage  or  chapel  on  the 
hillside  all  the  cathedrals  out  of  heaven.  Hence  it  is  that  we  must  not  look  at 
magnitudes,  sizes,  revenues,  apparatus,  but  at  the  ideal.  "  I  never  go  to  the  house 
of  God."  How  do  you  know  that  ?  Have  you  ever  been  really  out  of  it  ?  Let  us 
go  to  Jacob  for  an  answer.  What  said  he  when  he  awoke  after  the  delight  and 
yet  the  torment  of  the  dieam  ?    He  said,  "  This  is  none  other  than  the  house  ol 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  mi. 

God."  There  are  those  who  only  know  houses  by  architecture,  by  walls,  stones, 
bricks.  Well,  now,  what  was  Jacob's  environment  at  that  time?  Churches, 
chapels,  institutions  ?  Not  one.  Yet  he  was  in  a  walled  place,  walled  in  with 
light,  and  ministered  to  by  ascending  and  descending  angels.  We  must  get  the 
house  of  God  and  many  other  things  back  from  little  definitions  and  narrow  and 
petty  localisations,  and  regard  the  universe  as  God's  house.  Of  course  Jacob, 
having  seen  all  these  things,  could  have  said,  "  Nightmare  ! "  That  is  all  the 
answer  some  men  can  return  to  the  universe.  Let  us  so  live  as  to  make  the  house, 
even  though  a  little  one,  grand,  tender  in  all  its  ministries,  a  nest  in  the  heart  of 
God.  Let  us  be  careful  how  we  divide  things  into  outward  and  inward.  The  time 
will  come  when  we  shall  get  rid  of  even  Scriptural  uses  of  outward,  alien,  strange, 
foreign.  All  these  words  are  doomed  to  go.  "  I  saw  no  temple  therein,"  said 
John.  Why  did  he  not  see  a  temple  in  heaven  ?  Because  heaven  was  all  temple. 
He  who  lives  in  light  does  not  even  see  the  sun ;  he  who  lives  in  God  has  no  moon, 
for  he  has  no  night.  But  men  are  crafty  and  expert  almost  at  making  little  defini- 
tions, parties,  separations,  and  the  like.  Some  men  divide  music  into  sacred  and 
profane.  I  never  heard  any  profane  music  ;  1  do  not  believe  there  is  any.  I  have 
heard  sacred  music,  and  I  have  heard  music  profaned,  perverted,  taken  away  to 
bad  uses,  made  a  seduction  on  the  road  to  hell.  But  we  must  get  back  to  real 
definitions  and  proper  qualities,  and  see  things  as  God  meant  them  to  be  seen.  I 
have  also  heard  of  profane  history  and  sacred  history.  There  is  no  profane  history. 
History  truly  written,  and  true  to  human  experience,  is  an  aspect  of  Providence,  an 
elucidation  of  that  marvellous  mystery  which  penetrates  all  life,  and  that  whispers 
to  us  in  many  a  moment  of  unexpectedness,  ','  The  very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all 
numbered."  Who  is  it  that  rises  up  amongst  us  and  splits  up  history  into  sacred 
and  profane  ?  What  right  has  such  a  man  to  define  and  separate  and  classify  ? 
I  would  follow  the  historian  who  sees  God  in  everything,  in  the  defeat  as  well  as 
in  the  success  of  the  battle.  And  there  are  persons  who  have  carried  their  defining 
powers,  if  powers  they  be,  into  what  are  called  ecclesiastical  matters,  so  that  now 
we  have  "  the  temporalities  "  and  "  the  spiritualities."  What  man  devised  so 
insane  a  distinction  ?  There  is  a  sense,  but  a  very  poor,  narrow  sense  not  worth 
considering,  in  which  the  work  of  the  Church  may  be  divided  into  the  temporal  and 
the  spiritual,  but,  properly  regarded,  in  the  spirit  of  Christ  and  in  the  spirit  of  the 
Cross,  the  gift  of  the  poor  man's  penny  may  be  as  true  an  act  of  worship  as  the 
singing  of  the  anthem.  There  is  nothing  secular,  or  if  there  is  anything  that  we 
call  secular  it  is  only  for  momentary  convenience.  He  that  made  all  things  is 
God ;  He  built  the  wall  of  the  Church,  and  He  will  take  care  of  the  roof ;  it  is  His 
place.    {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  Xn. 

Vebs.  1-23.  "Were  written  in  the  book  of  the  chronlelea. — A  book  : — I.  A  booi 
UNITES  THE  AGES.  Brings  the  past  into  the  present ;  borrows  the  future  to  give  the 
present  significance.  The  "  sceptred  spirits  of  history  "  rule  us  still.  With  books 
the  poorest  enters  the  highest  society :  the  loneliest  need  not  be  solitary.  11.  A  book 
REVEALS  Lira's  IMPORTANCE.  It  givcs  permanence  to  thought.  Life  is  a  writing. 
III.  A  BOOK  SILENTLY  ANTICIPATES  THE  JUDGMENT.  A  Tecord  may  be  appealed 
to  :  •'  Is  this  thy  handwriting  ?  "  God's  "  Book  of  Eemembrance."  {Ibid.)  Books  : — 
"  The  commerce  of  books,"  says  our  gossiping  Montaigne  "  has  the  constancy  and 
facility  of  its  service  for  its  own  share :  it  goes  side  by  side  with  me  in  my  whole 
course,  and  everywhere  is  assisting  to  me  :  it  comforts  me  in  my  age  and  solitude; 
it  eases  me  of  a  troublesome  weight  of  idleness,  and  delivers  me  at  all  times  from 
a  company  that  I  dislike :  and  it  blunts  the  point  of  griefs,  if  they  are  not  extreme, 
and  have  not  got  an  entire  possession  of  my  soul  ,  .  .  books  do  not  mutiny  to  eee 
that  I  have  only  recourse  to  them  for  want  of  other  more  real,  natural,  and  lively 
conveniences  ;  they  always  receive  me  with  the  same  kindness." 

Ver.  24.  According  to  the  commandment  of  David  the  man  of  God. — Po»thumou$ 
injlnence  : — A  man's  influence  after  he  is  dead.  He  is  still  present  with  his  people. 
I.  By  his  WILL.     "  The  commandment  of  David."    The  grip  of  the  dead  is  on  our 


CHAP.  XII.]  NEHEMIAH.  147 


fields  and  churches,  our  schools  and  hospitals.  II.  By  his  weitinos.  Immortality 
of  genius.  David's  psalms.  Solomon's  proverbs.  The  writings  of  Shakespeare, 
Milton,  Bunyan,  and  many  others.  III.  By  his  example.  "David  the  man  of 
God."  For  good  or  evil  a  man  lives.  For  good  or  evil  his  deeds  will  live  after  him. 
*'  The  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed."    (Homiletic  Commentary.) 

Vers.  27-43.  And  at  the  dedication  of  the  wall  of  Jerusalem. — The  dedication 
of  the  wall : — In  this  dedication — I.  It  was  designed  to  offer  thanks  to  God  for 

THE  completion  OF  A  GOOD  WORK.  11.  It  WAS  INTENDED  TO  BET  APART  THE  HOLY  CITY 
FOR  ITS  SACRED  ENDS.  III.  It  WAS  DESIRED  TO  INVOKE  THE  DiVINB  BLESSING  AND 
GUARDIANSHIP  ON  THE  CITY  OF  GoD.  IV.  It  IS  BEAUTIFUL  TO  OBSERVE  HOW  FULLY  THE 
DOMESTIC    AFFECTIONS  ARE    CHERISHED    AND  DISPLAYED.      "  The  wlvCS   alsO   and    the 

children  rejoiced."    (W.  Ritchie.) 

Ver.  30.  And  the  priests  and  the  Levltea  purified  themselves,  and  purified  the 
people. — Beginning  at  the  right  place  : — I.  A  pure  Church  may  make  a  sound 
COMMONWEALTH.  "  They  purified  themselves."  Like  priest,  like  people.  Cleric 
and  laic  act  and  react  on  each  other."  Be  ye  clean,  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the 
Lord."  Eli's  sons.  Uzzah  may  not  sustain  the  ark.  II.  To  a  pure  people  all 
THINGS  ARE  piTRE.  "  They  purffied  the  people  and  the  gates  and  the  wall."  Citizens 
and  city ;  sanctuary  and  house ;  God's  work  and  their  own. 

••  All  things  are  sacred ; 
The  eye  of  God  is  on  them  all, 
And  hallows  all." 

Jesus  revealed  God  in  the  minutest.  Peter's  vision.  The  present  preparatory.  "  I 
think  our  fathers  had  a  better,  grander,  a  diviner  idea  even  of  common  life  than  we 
have  when  they  spoke  of  the  trades  and  professions  of  men  as  being  their  calling. 
There  is  a  great  thought  in  this  word.  It  makes  all  the  men,  streets,  shops,  and 
warehouses  to  me  as  I  walk  along  Divine  objects.  I  feel  that  I  am  in  a  Divine 
place  when  I  think  of  the  men  about  me  as  following  their  calling.  I  feel  that  there 
is  a  God  above  men ;  that  there  is  a  God  in  human  society ;  a  God  in  the  shops  and 
counting-houses  of  London,  touching  and  teaching  every  human  being ;  and  that 
every  man  is  occupying  the  place,  and  putting  his  hand  to  the  work  to  which  God 
has  called  him.  Sometimes  you  may  see  a  man  at  a  certain  calling  which  is  but 
preparatory.  He  is  meant  for  something  else.  Providence  opens  the  way,  and  he 
goes  up  higher  and  does  another  thing.  God  has  given  us  a  spiritual  vocation — a 
Divine  calling  in  Christ  Jesus — and  we  are  to  walk  worthy  of  that  vocation  here, 
doing  all  worldly  things  in  a  spiritual  manner,  preparatory  to  a  higher  calling  which 
shall  come  one  day,  when  we  shall  enter  upon  other  forms  of  duty  and  service,  to 
which  the  present  inferior  forms  of  duty  and  service  faithfully  fulfilled  shall 
gradually  prepare  and  fit  us.     (T.  Binney.) 

Ver.  43.  Also  that  day  they  offered  great  sacrifices,  and  rejoiced. — A  great 
rejoieing : — A  great  rejoicing  as  it  should  be.  I.  Associated  with  the  rites  op 
RELIGION.  II.  The  outcome  of  a  GREAT  DELIVERANCE.  From  Captivity  to  freedom  : 
heathen  surroundings  to  heaven-chosen  city  and  Divinely-built  temple.  The 
memory  of  God's  great  goodness  should  awaken  joy — a  joy  that  all  may  share. 
•'  The  wives  also  and  the  children  rejoiced."  III.  The  preparation  for  strong 
ADHESION  TO  A  GREAT  CAUSE.  Sacrcd  fcstivals  Dot  an  end,  but  a  means  to  an  end. 
(H'miletic  Commentary.)  True  joy  : — I.  Its  eight.  The  God  who  has  given  us 
life  wishes  also  that  it  shall  move  joyfully ;  the  God  who  always  anew  overwhelms 
us  with  favours  wishes  that  they  should  fulfil  their  mission  ;  that  is,  make  us  happy, 
in  the  end  holy.  II.  Its  occasion.  God's  grace,  which  has  strengthened, 
protected,  assured,  and  elevated  our  lower  or  higher  life.  III.  Its  kind.  It  raises 
itself  to  God,  is  a  joy  in  Him ;  that  is,  becomes  a  service  to  God  and  our  neighbours. 
{Dr.  Schultz.)  The  joy  of  Christian  wor/::— Notice — I.  That  great  sacrifices 
ALWAYS  PRECEDE  GREAT  JOY.  God's  bcst  gifts  uevcr  incrcasc  by  saving,  but  by 
scattering.  The  sea  is  in  a  constant  state  of  evaporation.  The  mist  rises,  there 
are  clouds  above  the  hills,  there  are  streams  running  into  the  valleys,  there  is  life 
and  greenness  everywhere.  There  are  some  men  who  do  not  believe  in  evaporation. 
They  believe  in  getting  all  they  can  and  keeping  all  they  get.  But  they  are  never 
joyfuL    There  is  no  joy  in  selfishness.    It  is  against  the  great  law  of  God,  the  law 


143  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

of  sacrifice  by  His  own  Son.  What  is  the  meaning  of  these  sacrifices  mentioned  in 
the  text?  1.  The  sin-offering.  This  shadowed  the  great  sacrifice.  Morality  alone 
will  not  save  any  man,  and  if  you  will  only  admit  sin,  you  admit  half  the  Bible, 
and  the  rest  has  to  do  with  God's  way  of  getting  rid  of  it.  2.  The  burnt-offering. 
This  means  that  we  give  ourselves  up  to  God  entirely ;  and  the  happiest  men  I  have 
met  in  my  life  have  been  men  who  have  handed  the  keys  of  every  room  in  their 
soul  up  to  Christ,  without  keeping  one  closed  to  hide  a  loved  sin.  3.  The  peace- 
offering.  This  was  a  peculiar  offering  in  Israel.  It  was  a  free-will  offering.  When 
a  man  brought  the  peace-offering,  God  gave  him  a  feast  there  and  then  in  his 
house.  A  part  of  the  offering  was  given  back  to  the  offerer.  This  peace-offering  is 
very  much  like  your  contributions  to-day.  You  can  keep  your  offerings,  but  if  you 
do  God  will  keep  the  feast  from  you.  We  in  Wales  have  two  sermons  in  one 
service  very  often,  and  the  collection  comes  before  the  second  sermon.  I  have 
watched  a  man  drop  the  smallest  coin  into  the  plate  from  a  richly  gloved  hand.  I 
have  seen  a  poor  old  woman  unwrapping  a  two-shilling  piece  from  a  paper,  from 
another  paper,  from  a  third  paper,  in  which  she  had  wrapped  it  in  order  to  keep  it 
for  the  collection.  And  I  have  watched  them  through  the  second  sermon.  The 
tears  of  joy  are  coursing  down  the  wrinkled  face  of  the  poor  Christian  woman,  but 
the  man  who  dropped  his  miserly  coin  is  as  dry  as  Gilboa.  It  is  a  remarkable  fact 
that  the  Almighty  never  accepted  a  wild  animal  as  an  offering  in  the  olden  time.  A 
man  was  always  obliged  to  offer  something  he  had  taken  trouble  with  :  the  fruit  of 
his  own  garden,  the  fruit  of  his  own  farm,  or  from  his  own  flock.  I  have  heard  a  man 
say  sometimes,  "  If  I  succeed  in  this  speculation  now,  I  will  give  to  the  cause  of 
Christ."  Ah !  that  is  a  wild  hare.  II.  Great  work  for  God  brings  great  jot 
FROM  God.  Charles  Kingsley  has  said  that  every  man  ought  to  thank  God  every 
morning  because  he  has  something  to  do  that  must  be  done  that  day.  Work  is  the 
greatest  blessing.  I  was  once  struck  down  with  complete  nervous  prostration,  and 
a  medical  man  told  me  that  I  must  do  nothing  for  a  twelvemonth,  and  that  was  the 
hardest  work  I  ever  did  in  my  life — to  do  nothing.  I  see  gentlemen  come  up  along 
the  Menai  Straits  in  their  yachts  fighting  the  tempest.  On  they  come  like  sailors 
on  the  ocean-wave,  because  it  is  easier  to  do  that  than  to  do  nothing.  You  may 
see  the  room  in  which  Louis  XVI.  worked  as  a  common  blacksmith,  because  it  was 
easier  to  do  that  than  to  do  nothing.  Prisoners  have  come  to  the  gaoler  many  a 
time,  when  confined  in  a  room  to  do  nothing,  asking  him  for  permission  to  pick 
oakum,  or  anything  rather  than  do  nothing.  It  is  possible  to  do  the  most  common 
work  to  God,  to  Christ,  and  when  every  one  will  do  his  work  to  Christ,  that  is  the 
time  when  this  world  will  be  full  of  happiness  and  song.  There  is  joy  in  serving 
Christ.  Just  think,  for  instance,  of  the  erection  of  a  place  of  worship :  what  an 
investment  it  is  to  contribute  towards  that.  III.  This  religion  of  great  sacrifice 
AND  GREAT  J01  WILL  TELL  ON  OUR  FAMILIES.  "  The  wives  also  and  the  children 
rejoiced."  Joyful  religion  repeats  itself  to  others.  Parents  should  let  their  children 
see  that  they  value  religion.  1.  By  making  sacrifices  for  it.  2.  By  letting  them 
see  that  they  are  most  anxious  for  them  to  become  decided  Christians.     IV.  That 

THE  RELIGION  OF  GREAT  SACRIFICES  AND  GREAT  JOY  WILL  BE  HEARD  OF  AFAR  OFF.      "  Then 

joy  was  heard  afar  off."  It  is  the  names  of  self-sacrificers  that  live — Abraham — 
Abraham  Lincoln — Florence  Nightingale — Jesus,  the  Eedeemer  of  the  world. 
(E.  Hcrber  Evans,  D.D.)  Sacrifice,  a  condition  of  joy  : — The  principle  of  sacrifice 
stands  at  the  very  threshold  of  the  ever-fascinating  study  of  life,  and  is  found  at 
every  turn  of  the  bewildering  maze  which  marks  life's  upward  pathway  of  struggle 
and  survival.  In  merely  physical  processes,  as  well  as  in  many  vital  functions  of 
vegetable  and  animal  life,  there  are  clear  foreshadowings  of  the  part  which  sacrifice 
plays  in  the  great  tragedy  of  existence.  The  primitive  rock,  when  subjected  to  the 
disintegrating  action  of  the  atmospheric  agents,  yields  up  its  characteristic 
compactness,  and  crumbles  into  soil,  which,  in  turn,  surrenders  its  richness  to 
promote  the  welfare  of  multitudinous  forms  of  vegetable  growth.  In  the  lower 
species  of  animal  life  the  death  of  the  parent  is  the  essential  condition  of  the  life  of 
the  offspring,  and  in  the  higher  grades  of  creatures  there  is  invariably  a  parental 
sacrifice  in  favour  of  the  well-being  of  the  progeny.  Notwithstanding  that  these 
functions  are  nothing  more  than  compulsory  obedience  to  the  stern  mandates  of 
nature,  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  calls  them  acts  of  unconscious  sacrifice,  and  so 
distinguishes  them  from  those  voluntary  surrenders  of  self  which  spring  from  love 
to  others,  and  which,  strictly  speaking,  can  only  be  termed  sacrifice.  The  helpless 
infant  survives  merely  on  account  of  the  care  which  the  maternal  love  lavishes  upon 
it.    Let  the  attention  of  others  be  withdrawn,  and  the  child  must  perish.    It  lives 


CHAP.xm.]  NEHEMIAH,  149 

by  the  sacrifices  -which  others  make  for  it.  The  bond  of  family  life  is  kept  intact 
by  a  succession  of  beautiful  deeds,  springing  from  the  ever-growing  tendency  to 
sacrifice  the  immediate  interests  of  self  to  promote  the  good  of  others.  The  capacity 
to  enjoy  purely  egoistic  pleasures  is  heightened  by  ministering  to  the  wants  of 
others.  Indulged  selfishness,  by  producing  satiety,  defeats  itself.  But  a  nobler 
truth  than  that  is  this — that  the  deepest  satisfactions  and  most  lasting  joys  of  life 
are  blossoms  on  the  tree  whose  roots  derive  nutriment  from  the  soil  of  sacrifice. 
{S.  S.  Chronicle.) 

Vers.  45-47.  And  both  the  singers. — Thanks-giving  and  thankt-living : — We  have 
here  the  effects  of  the  joy  that  was  at  the  dedication  of  the  wall.    L  The  junisteks 

WERE  MORE  CAREFUL  THAN  THEY  HAD  BEEN  OF  THEIR  WORK.  11.  ThE  PEOPLE  WERE  MORE 
CAREFUL  THAN  THEY  HAD  BEEN  OF  THE  MAINTENANCE  OF  THEIR  MINISTERS.       The  SUiest 

way  for  ministers  to  recommend  themselves  to  their  people,  and  gain  an  interest  in 
their  affections,  is  to  wait  on  their  ministry,  to  be  humble  and  industrious,  and  to 
mind  their  business ;  when  these  did  so,  the  people  thought  nothing  too  much  for 
them  to  encourage  them.  1.  Care  is  here  taken  for  the  collecting  of  their  dues. 
2.  Care  is  taken  that,  being  gathered  in,  it  might  be  duly  paid  out.  (Matthew 
Henry.)  For  in  the  days  of  David  and  Asaph  of  old. — The  good  old  times  : — 
I.  Nothing  is  necessarily  good  because  it  is  old.  "  Hast  thou  marked  the  old 
way  which  wicked  men  have  trodden?"  Habit,  education,  tradition,  prejudice, 
play  an  important  part  in  history.  U.  That  which  is  old  is  presumptively 
valuable.  Good  lasts.  Truth  is  as  old  as  the  hills.  Application:  Prove  all 
things.  Despise  nothing.  The  present  is  a  huge  borrower  from  the  dead  past. 
{Homiletic  Commentary.) 


CHAPTEB  Xm. 


Veb.  2.  Howbeit  our  God  turned  the  curse  into  a  blessing.  —  The  eurse 
turned  into  a  blessi7ig : — This  was  just  like  God,  whose  name  and  nature  are 
love.  1.  The  devil  turns  the  blessing  into  a  curse.  When  God  created  man  He 
endowed  him  with  the  power  of  choice,  made  his  will  free,  so  that  he  might  choose 
good  and  evil.  The  creature  was  thus  endowed  with  an  inestimable  blessing. 
The  devU,  by  the  subtlety  and  force  of  temptation,  turned  man's  dignity  against 
himself  and  effected  his  ruin,  and  through  successive  generations  he  has  sought  to 
turn  the  blessing  into  a  curse.  2.  Man  often  turns  the  blessing  into  a  curse. 
Physical  strength,  intellectual  endowments,  social  position,  wealth,  opportunities 
for  usefulness — things  good  in  themselves — are  often  transformed  by  man's 
depraved  nature  into  instruments  and  occasions  of  evil.  Of  aU.  the  plots  and 
assaults  of  the  devil,  all  the  mischievous  purposes  of  wicked  men,  aU  the  disasters 
of  life,  all  the  forms  of  evil  we  may  have  to  encounter  we  may  say,  "  Howbeit  our 
God  turned  the  curse  into  a  blessing."  I.  God  has  turned  the  curse  of  sin 
INTO  A  blessing.  The  existence  of  sin  is  an  awful  and  mysterious  fact,  permitted 
by  God  for  wise  and  gracious  issues.  We  can  conceive  of  no  greater  curse.  It 
separated  man  from  God.  It  destroyed  his  original  righteousness.  It  cut  him  off 
from  happiness.  It  brought  upon  him  condemnation  and  death.  God  comes  to 
man  in  this  state  with  the  blessings  of  His  grace.  1.  The  fall  of  man  furnished 
an  occasion  for  the  exercise  of  the  restoring  grace  of  God.  Sin  prepared  the  way 
for  salvation,  "  Paradise  Regained  "  is  more  than  "  Paradise  Lost."  2.  The 
curse  of  sin  has  supplied  an  opportunity  for  such  arv.  exhibition  of  the  character 
and  glory  of  God  as  we  nowhere  else  behold.  God's  brightest  glory  shines  in  the 
method  of  man's  salvation.  God  in  Christ  is  more  glorious  far  than  God  in 
creation.  In  the  Saviour  of  the  world  we  have  the  most  perfect  manifestation  of 
God.  3.  Throughout  the  earth,  following  in  the  track  of  the  destroyer,  God 
bestows  the  blessings  of  His  great  salvation.  God  is  still  "  in  Christ  reconciling 
the  world  unto  Himself."  H.  God  turns  sorrow  into  a  blessing.  1.  Sorrow 
is  a  teacher.  Sorrow  seems  sent  for  our  instruction  as  we  darken  the  cages  of 
birds  when  we  would  teach  them  to  sing.  As  the  night  brings  out  the  stars,  so 
trouble  reveals  to  us  many  truths  that  would  otherwise  remain  unseen.  It  clears 
our  visions,  so  that  we  get  new  views  of  God  and  ourselves,  of  truths  and  duty,  of 

33 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

this  world  and  the  next.  2.  It  awakens  thoughtfulness.  3.  Under  this  gracions 
ministry  and  discipline  the  noblest  characters  have  been  perfected.  Poets,  it  is 
said,  "learn  in  suffering  what  they  teach  in  song."  Sorrow  is  one  of  the  best 
nurses  of  godliness.  Some  plants  thrive  better  in  a  poor  than  in  a  rich  soil ;  so 
some  virtues  come  to  speedier  and  fuller  perfection  in  grief  than  in  gladness. 
When  spices  are  crushed,  then  they  emit  their  odours.  After  the  diamond  is 
ground  and  polished  on  the  wheel,  its  facets  flash  with  lustre.  It  la  said  that 
when  growers  of  roses  want  to  develop  the  bloom  of  a  favourite  tree  in  special 
richness  and  beauty  they  sometimes  deprive  it  for  a  season  of  light  and  moisture. 
In  this  condition  its  leaves  fall  off.  But  while  this  process  is  going  on,  and  the 
tree  is  almost  leafless,  a  new  life  is  springing,  from  which  come  in  due  season  a 
tenderer  foliage  and  a  choicer  and  more  abundant  bloom.  This  suggests  some  of 
the  sweet  uses  of  sorrow.  4.  In  the  gracious  arrangements  of  God  sorrow  is  often 
succeeded  by  joy.  5.  God  is  preparing  the  way  for  the  extinction  of  sorrow  on 
the  earth.  III.  God  turns  the  corse  or  death  into  a  blessino.  To  the 
Christian  man  death  ceases  to  be  the  king  of  terrors,  and  becomes  a  friend  to 
call  him  home.  He  delivers  him  from  the  infirmities  of  the  flesh,  the  corruptions 
of  sin,  the  temptations  of  Satan,  and  the  sufferings  and  troubles  of  life.  Death  is 
the  gate  of  life.  In  conclusion — 1.  The  subject  teaches  us  the  benevolence  of 
God.  2.  Learn  the  loving  confidence  you  may  cherish  in  God.  Let  us  learn  to 
imitate  God.  Let  us  endeavour  through  life  to  turn  the  curse  into  a  blessing. 
{William  Walters.)  Sorroics  turned  to  blessings  : — We  might  tell  of  the  blessed 
effects  of  the  captivity  of  Joseph — the  means  of  preserving  his  father's  household 
and  the  lives  of  the  thousands  of  Egypt.  We  might  speak  of  the  happy  results  of 
Israel's  national  calamities  ;  how  they  were  led  to  seek  the  Lord  in  their  sorrow, 
and  the  Lord  hearkened  and  heard  them.  We  might  tell  of  Paul's  imprisonment 
issuing  in  the  conversion  of  his  jailor  and  his  household  ;  or  we  might  speak  of 
John's  banishment  to  the  lonely  Isle  of  Patmos,  where  his  spirit  was  refreshed 
with  those  wondrous  discoveries  of  God's  doings  and  purposes  that  form  the  last 
book  in  the  Canon  of  Sacred  Writ.  In  these  instances  sorrow  is  not  to  be  denomi- 
nated a  curse,  but  a  blessing — not  a  punishment,  but  a  medicine.  True  it  is  that 
sorrow  has  been  styled  the  winter  of  the  soul,  because  it  freezes  up  the  streams  of 
<5omfort,  and  ices  the  soul  over  with  the  frosts  of  sadness;  but,  like  as  that  season, 
rough  and  stormy  and  bleak  as  it  is,  is  conducive  to  the  ultimate  fertility  of  the 
earth,  so  the  moral  winter  at  once  prepares  for  the  fuller  enjoyment  of  the  coming 
spring  of  peace,  and  is  productive  of  a  richer  harvest  of  righteousness  to  the  praise 
and  glory  of  our  God.  Affliction  has  been  styled  the  storm  of  life ;  but,  like  as 
those  tempests  that  agitate  the  bosom  of  the  ocean  serve  alike  to  overpower  the 
shattered  bark,  and  to  urge  forward  others  more  speedily  to  their  desired  haven,  so 
these  moral  tempests,  while  they  may  overwhelm  the  wicked  and  impenitent,  are 
ever  conducive  in  speeding  forward  the  journey  of  the  children  of  the  kingdom 
to   heaven   and   to   God.      (J.   Macnaughton,  A.M.)  Curses   aiui   blessings : — 

Nehemiah  sees  God  at  work  in  this  transformation,  and  openly,  gladly,  gratefully 
acknowledges  that  the  transformation  of  the  curse  was  not  the  work  of  human 
good-will  or  of  human  genius,  but  a  direct  operation  of  the  Divine  almightiness 
itself.  We  lose  so  much  by  not  seeing  God  immediately.  Why  do  we  allow  God 
to  go  so  far  away  from  our  consciousness  and  appreciation  and  love  ?  Why  do 
we  not  cry  for  Him,  and  bid  Him  come  to  us,  and  give  Him  no  rest  until 
He  draws   near?     This  is  the  true  religion;  this  is  the  noble  piety.     I.  To  bb 

CURSKD  OF  MAN  IS  REALLY  NO  PROOF  OF  God's  DISAPPROBATION.  II.  He  OUGHT  TO 
BE  A  VERT  GREAT  MAN,  AND  A  VERT  PURE,  LOFTY,  AND  GODLY  SOUL,  WHO  UNDER- 
TAKES  TO   CURSE    ANYBODY  ELSE.       III.    To    BE    BLESSED   OF   MAN    IS    NO  PROOF  OF  God'S 

FAVOUR.  IV.  The  vanity  of  trusting  in  anything  which  can  be  turned  into  a 
CURSE.  Application  of  these  truths  to  your  personal  experience:  1.  The  frowns 
of  society.  2.  Wronged  in  business.  3.  The  seeming  opposition  of  nature.  God 
is  willing  and  able  to  turn  all  curses  into  blessings.  But  the  blessing  will  not  be 
given  without  action  on  our  part.  Art  thou  suffering?  Go  to  thy  knees;  tell 
God  thy  sin ;  then  the  film  shall  be  taken  from  thine  eyes — thou  shalt  see  the 
great,  mighty,  redeeming  Cross  of  Christ,  and  He  shall  say,  "  Thy  sins,  which  are 
many,  are  all  forgiven  thee."  The  curse  will  be  turned  into  a  blessing,  and  thou 
shalt  be  the  better  for  the  abasement.     {Joseph  Parker,  D.D.)  Sorroivs  keeping 

from  worldliness  : — An  evangelist  tells  of  a  young  lad  who  left  his  father's  home  to 
be  a  sailor.  He  was  absent  for  three  years,  and  on  the  return  voyage,  just  as  he 
was  thinking  of  how  soon  he  should  see  all  the  dear  ones  at  home,  his  ship  was 


CHAP.xm.]  NEHEMIAH.  161 

wrecked  off  the  coast  of  Norway.  Many  were  lost,  but  he  and  some  others 
managed  to  get  into  a  boat.  They  tried  to  row  for  the  shore,  but  the  men  being 
wet,  and  the  cold  so  intense,  many  of  them  were  frozen  to  death.  The  first  mate 
had  command  of  the  boat,  and  the  lad  being  a  favourite  of  his,  he  was  afraid  that 
he  should  fall  a  victim  to  the  cold,  and  whenever  he  saw  him  dozing,  or  showing 
any  signs  of  sleepiness,  he  thrashed  him  with  a  rope's-end.  In  vain  the  lad  expostu- 
lated, the  thrashing  continued  until  all  drowsiness  was  gone.  At  length  they 
reached  land,  and  were  hospitably  entertained  by  the  natives,  and  in  time  were 
forwarded  home.  That  young  man  often  says  he  owes  his  life  to  the  mate  who 
administered  to  him  that  timely  discipline.  The  sufferings  and  sorrows  which 
God  puts  upon  His  people  are  like  that  thrashing.  Only  to  keep  them  from  falling 
into  the  sleep  of  worldliness  that  leads  to  death,  to  keep  them  alive  in  grace,  and 
looking  unto  Him,  does  He  afflict  them.  God's  providences  not  to  be  feared : — 
We  ought  never  to  be  afraid  of  God's  providences  when  they  seem  to  break  up  our 
lives  and  crush  our  hopes,  and  even  to  turn  us  away  from  our  chosen  paths  of 
usefulness  and  service.  God  knows  what  He  wants  to  do  with  us,  how  He  can  best 
use  us,  and  where  and  in  what  lines  of  ministry  He  would  have  us  serve.  When 
He  shuts  one  door  it  is  because  He  has  another  standing  open  for  our  feet.  When 
He  breaks  our  lives  to  pieces  it  is  because  they  will  do  more  for  His  glory  and  the 
world's  good  broken  and  shattered  than  whole. 

Vers.  7-31.  And  I  came  to  Jerusalem,  and  understood  of  the  evil  that 
Eliashib  did. — The  religious  reformer  : — Kemark — I.  The  statb  of  JERUSAiiEM 
DUBiNQ  Nehemiah's  ABSENCE.  H.  The  beforms  HE  ACHIEVED.  1.  His  purifi- 
cation of  the  temple.  2.  His  renewal  of  the  observance  of  Divine  ordinances. 
3.  His  promoting  the  sanctification  of  the  Sabbath.  4.  His  setting  apart  Judah 
from  mingling  with  the  heathen.  (W.  Ritchie.)  Personal  purification  of 
the  belieoer : — We  must  never  forget  that  the  Christian  is  now  what  the 
temple  was  of  old,  the  dwelling-place  of  the  Most  High  (1  Cor.  vi.  19).  Luther 
observes:  "A  Christian  may  be  compared  with  the  tripartite  temple  of  Solo- 
mon. His  spirit  is  the  holy  of  holies,  God's  dwelling  amid  the  darkness 
of  faith  (he  believes  what  he  neither  sees,  nor  feels,  nor  grasps) ;  his  soul 
is  the  holy  place,  where  are  the  seven  lights  of  the  golden  candlesticks ;  his 
body  is  the  fore-court  exposed  to  general  view,  where  every  one  can  observe  how  he 
lives  and  what  he  does ;  in  the  fore-court  stands  the  altar  of  burnt-offerings, 
whereon  we  are  to  lay  our  bodies  as  living  sacrifices  unto  God.  How  sad  when 
the  temple  in  any  part  of  it  is  desecrated  I  When  the  heart  in  which  Christ 
should  dwell  is  occupied  by  the  world,  many  things  must  be  cast  forth,  in 
order  that  it  may  become  the  abode  of  the  King.  {W.  P.  Lockhart.)  The 
devoted  patriot : — The  story  commences  with  the  return  of  Nehemiah  to 
Babylon.  Either  through  the  reports  that  his  enemies  had  sent  to  the  court,  or  the 
leave  of  absence  having  expired  (chap.  ii.  6),  Nehemiah  returns  to  the  king  to  report 
himself,  and  to  seek  permission  for  a  further  sojourn  in  Jerusalem.  The  fact  that 
Ezra  is  absent  at  the  same  time  strengthens  the  opinion  that  the  misrepresenta- 
tions of  those  about  them  moved  the  jealousy  of  the  king  and  led  to  their  recall. 
It  is  scarcely  possible  to  think  of  the  swift  and  complete  destruction  of  the  religious 
life  of  the  city  apart  from  a  deeply-laid  plot  on  the  part  of  the  foes  who  saw  in  the 
recall  of  Nehemiah  their  own  opportunity,  and  whose  plans  were  carefully  laid  and 
boldly  carried  out  as  soon  as  he  had  left.  The  building  of  the  walls  and  gateways 
of  the  city  had  been  followed  by  a  yet  bolder  effort  for  the  security  of  Jerusalem. 
Taking  advantage  of  the  fervour  of  the  new  religious  life  which  had  sprung  up 
amongst  them,  Nehemiah  had  gathered  the  people  together  and  got  them  to  enter 
into  a  very  solemn  covenant,  which  they  had  signed  and  sealed.  The  list  of  those 
who  signed  this  covenant  is  given — in  itself  a  suggestion  that  it  was  not  signed  by 
all.  The  first  name  is  that  of  Nehemiah :  and  next  to  his  we  should  naturally 
look  for  that  of  Eliashib,  the  high  priest,  and  of  Jehoiada  his  son.  But  these  two 
are  conspicuously  absent.  So  then  it  is  plain  that  before  the  departure  of  Nehemiah 
there  were  two  parties  whose  antagonism  could  only  be  fierce  and  bitter  ;  a  party 
which  had  surrendered  itself  to  the  strictest  observance  and  enforcement  of  the  law, 
and  another  party  which  had  entangled  itself  by  heathen  relationships  ;  and  of  this 
latter  party  the  first  and  foremost  was  Eliashib,  the  high  priest.  As  soon  as 
Nehemiah  has  gone  this  Eliashib  at  once  becomes  the  head  and  ruler  of  the  city. 
Now  comes  the  collision  of  the  two  parties ;  on  the  one  side  a  people  like  the 
Puritans  of  old — stern,  resolute,  exclusive,  hateful  of  everything  that  swerved  a 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

hair's  breadth  from  the  letter  of  the  law.  On  the  other  side  was  the  party  of  the 
court— hand  in  glove  with  the  wealthy  "  people  of  the  land  "  ;  eager  for  their  own 
advancement  and  position.  Eliashib,  the  leader  of  the  courtiers,  had  nothing  to 
expect  from  the  covenanters  but  a  stern  and  bitter  opposition.  To  strengthen  his 
position,  and  perhaps  for  his  own  personal  security,  he  gathers  about  him  these 
from  the  outside,  intending  doubtless  to  draw  the  line  sharply  as  soon  as  they  had 
served  his  purpose,  but  finding,  as  such  men  always  do,  that  he  has  to  yield  step 
by  step,  until  everything  that  the  law  held  sacred  was  broken  down  before  the 
influx  of  "  the  people  of  the  land."  A  swift  and  terrible  reaction  followed  the 
high-pitched  fervour  of  the  great  revival.  First  to  be  swept  away  were  the  reforms 
that  Nehemiah  had  introduced  in  the  matter  of  mixed  marriages.  That  which  the 
high  priest  himself  had  sanctioned  by  the  example  of  his  own  family  was  speedily 
imitated,  until  it  seems  to  have  become  a  rage  amongst  the  people,  many  of  the 
Jews  putting  away  their  own  wives  for  these  women  of  Ammon  and  Moab  and 
Ashdod.  The  Book  of  Malachi  throws  a  lurid  light  upon  the  condition  of  things 
in  this  as  in  other  respects  (Mai.  ii.  11,  14,  16).  Eliashib  seeks  further  to 
strengthen  his  position  and  to  weaken  his  opponent's  by  a  concession  to  the  greed 
of  the  people,  as  he  had  previously  indulged  their  lust.  The  tithes  and  offerings 
which  were  claimed  by  the  priests  and  Levites  were  withheld  from  them,  or  the 
people  brought  only  that  which  was  diseased  or  torn  by  the  wild  beasts  ;  the  people 
robbed  God,  as  Malachi  says.  Thus  the  temple  came  to  be  neglected,  as  the  priests 
had  to  go  "  every  one  to  his  own  field."  With  this  must  have  fallen  every  barrier 
for  the  protection  of  Jerusalem.  When  things  had  reached  such  a  pass  it  was 
evident  that  the  heathen  had  everything  their  own  way.  The  occupations  of  the 
people  went  on  as  if  there  were  no  Sabbath  day.  The  wine  presses  were  trodden ; 
the  corn  was  carried  ;  the  asses  were  laden  ;  through  the  city  gates  came  the  men 
of  Tyre  with  their  fruit  and  fish  for  sale ;  foreigners  filled  the  streets  with  their 
cries,  and  the  place  rang  with  the  noisy  chaffering  of  those  who  stood  to  sell  and 
those  who  came  to  buy.  With  them  these  strangers  brought  their  evU  ways,  and 
their  foul  idolatries — the  sorceries  of  which  Malachi  speaks  (Mai.  iii.  5).  Such  is  the 
state  of  things  which  Nehemiah  finds  on  his  return  to  Jerusalem.  Perhaps  his 
coming  was  unlooked  for,  the  enemy  hoping  to  keep  him  still  at  the  court  of  the 
king.  We  have  thought  perhaps  of  Nehemiah  as  the  graceful  courtier,  the  stately 
cupbearer,  whose  appearance  would  have  much  to  do  with  his  high  position.  But 
here  is  a  very  different  man.  He  seems  to  stand  before  us  with  knitted  brows  and 
flashing  eyes — a  man  who  does  not  hesitate  to  lay  hands  upon  the  offenders,  and 
whose  words  terrify  the  city.  Nehemiah's  indignation  is  kindled  first  by  the 
tidings  of  the  desecration  of  the  House  of  God ;  and  hastening  thither  he  faces 
Eliashib  on  his  own  ground,  and  with  his  own  hands  he  flings  out  the  "  household 
stuff  "  of  the  intruding  Tobiah,  and  has  the  chambers  cleansed  from  the  defilement, 
and  the  holy  vessels  set  again  in  them.  That  EUashib  and  his  party  should  have 
submitted  to  such  a  high-handed  proceeding  may  seem  surprising ;  but  the 
conscience  of  the  people  was  with  Nehemiah,  and  they  felt  that  it  was  useless  to 
resist  one  of  such  resoluteness,  backed  by  such  authority  as  he  possessed.  Then 
the  priests  and  Levites  were  again  set  in  their  places,  and  the  provisions  were  duly 
delivered,  treasurers  being  appointed  to  receive  and  distribute  the  offerings  of  corn 
and  oil  and  wine.  Meanwhile  the  rulers  had  gathered  themselves  together,  as  thej 
did  when  Christ  came  to  the  temple.  The  interference  with  the  hope  of  their  gains 
stirred  their  resentment ;  for  to  those  nobles  a  working  day  was  not  to  be  lightly 
parted  with,  since  others  did  the  work  of  which  they  reaped  the  advantage. 
Nehemiah  orders  the  gates  to  be  shut  at  sunset  on  the  Sabbath  eve,  and  that  none 
shall  enter  bearing  burdens  until  the  day  is  done.  Yet  more  difficult  and  involved 
was  the  matter  of  the  mixed  marriages.  But  in  this  as  in  everything  else  Nehemiah 
would  tolerate  no  half  measures.  When  the  people  gathered  to  protest,  he  tells  us 
that  "I  contended  with  them,  and  cursed  them,  and  plucked  off  their  hair,  and 
made  them  swear  by  God,  saying.  Ye  shall  not  give  your  daughters  unto  their 
sons,  nor  take  their  daughters  unto  your  sons,  or  for  yourselves."  Jehoiada,  the 
son  of  the  high  priest,  and  the  son-in-law  of  Sanballat,  thought  doubtless  to  screen 
himself  behind  these  high  relationships.  But  instead  of  defence  it  added  to  the 
wrong,  and  the  indignant  governor  chased  him  out  of  the  city,  and  forbade  him  to 
return.  Taking  refuge  in  Samaria  with  others  who  resented  the  action  of 
Nehemiah,  he  set  up  there  a  rival  temple  and  service,  and  thus  cleared  the  way  for 
the  reforms  which  were  established  in  Jerusalem.  Looking  back  over  the  chapter, 
we  see  a  lesson  for  all  time  and  for  us :  that  we  can  never  loosen  the  law  of  God  in 


CHAP,  xin.]  NEHEMIAH.  153 

one  particular  without  loosening  it  in  all.  The  law  of  God  is  one,  and  to  break  it 
in  any  point  is  to  endanger  it  in  all.  The  thickening  of  the  ills  about  Eliashib  one 
by  one  until  everything  is  lost,  is  the  story  of  the  destruction  of  the  individual  and 
the  nation.     {M.  G.  Fearse.) 

Ver.  11.  Then  contended  I  with  the  rulers. — Work  and  worthip : — Then  the 

topic  is  not  new.  It  is  a  question  which  propounds  itself  in  every  age.  The 
particular  aspect  of  the  question  we  have  to  deal  with  at  present  is  this.  Why 
does  the  working  man  forsake  the  house  of  God  ?  Many  of  the  reasons  given  arise 
out  of  the  industrial  conditions  of  the  working  classes.  1.  One  of  the  reasons 
given  by  working  men  is  that  the  conditions  of  their  industrial  existence  afford  them 
no  leisure  time.  Is  this  a  reason  or  an  excuse  ?  It  is  true  that  there  is  a  consider- 
able number  of  working  men  who  are  doomed  to  drag  on  a  weary,  dreary, 
grinding,  rayless  life.  They  have  no  leisure.  The  only  rest  they  have  is  the 
unconscious  rest  of  sleep.  The  system  that  perpetuates  this  state  of  things  is 
unrighteous,  inhuman,  and  hostile  to  the  teachings  of  the  Bible.  But  this  is  not 
true  of  the  majority  of  working  men ;  their  absence  arises  not  from  want  of  leisure, 
but  from  want  of  inclination.  2.  Another  reason  assigned  is  that  the  Christian 
ministry  is  in  league  with  the  employers.  I  am  not  here  to  hold  a  brief  for  the 
ministry,  but  I  am  here  to  defend  the  interests  of  truth,  and  I  wish  to  ask  where 
this  weak  and  effeminate  ministry  is  to  be  found  ?  I  venture  to  believe  that  there 
never  was  a  time  when  the  pulpits  were  ringing  with  a  clearer  and  more  unam- 
biguous note,  when  there  was  more  straight  and  wholesome  teaching  on  the 
obligations  of  power  and  the  responsibilities  of  wealth.  I  believe  that  to-day 
there  is  far  more  preaching  to  the  rich  than  there  is  to  the  poor,  and  this  charge 
of  sinful  silence  and  sinful  flattery  cannot  be  sustained.  3.  Another  reason 
advanced  is  that  ministers  do  not  take  their  rightful  position  as  leaders  of  secular 
progress,  and  that  they  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  van  of  social  and  political  reform. 
This  is  a  more  reasonable  objection.  I  wish  to  confess  candidly  and  frankly  that 
in  my  opinion  the  pulpit  has  been  too  speculative,  too  abstract,  too  unpractical, 
too  other-worldly.  But  this  reproach  is  now  being  rapidly  rolled  away,  and  the 
ministry  are  giving  both  hands  to  the  neglected  work  of  social  reform.  4.  Work- 
ing men  further  complain  that  when  they  do  come  to  church  they  meet  with  a  cold 
and  unfriendly  reception.  In  the  church  there  is  "  respect  unto  persons."  It  is 
charged  against  us  that  our  profession  of  brotherhood  is  a  mere  pretence.  It  is 
said  that  men  will  sit  by  their  fellows  in  the  house  of  God  for  years,  will  pray  and 
sing  of  their  brotherHness  and  love,  and  then  outside  the  church  will  ignore  and 
pass  them  by  without  so  much  as  recognition.  Against  such  conduct  no  word  can 
be  too  outspoken  or  too  severe.  5.  Another  reason  is  that  the  church  is  not 
democratic,  and  that  the  workman  has  no  voice  or  influence  in  its  affairs.  This 
reason  has  been  confirmed  and  emphasised  by  the  editors  of  our  daily  press.  But 
it  is  a  statement  altogether  too  sweeping.  If  the  working  man  wants  democratic 
churches  he  need  not  seek  far  to  find  them.  6.  One  speaker  at  a  meeting 
convened  to  consider  this  question,  declaimed  against  the  pulpit  because  it 
treats  of  such  topics  as  the  restoration  of  man  and  the  forgiveness  of  sins. 
He  declared  that  there  is  no  practical  value  in  such  teaching,  and  that  the 
working  man  does  not  hold  to  it  or  believe  in  it.  Here  there  is  no  room  for 
compromise.  Oh  !  fellow-men,  the  Nazarene  wears  many  crowns,  and  among  His 
crowns  is  that  of  Social  Reformer.  But  there  is  another  crown  brighter  by  far  than 
that  of  Eeformer,  the  crown  of  Eedeemer.  The  gospel  we  have  to  preach  is  not  a 
mere  uprooter  of  social  wrongs,  an  equaliser  of  men's  estates ;  it  is  a  regenerator 
of  the  human  heart.  The  supreme  aim  of  the  gospel  is  not  to  beautify  man's 
circumstances,  but  to  beautify  man's  life.  The  Master  Himself  told  us  how  useless 
it  is  to  reform  a  man's  house  unless  you  redeem  the  man.  The  gospel  is  preached, 
then,  that  man  may  be  rectified,  and  that  rectified  man  may  transform  the  world. 
The  work  of  the  Redeemer  includes  the  work  of  the  Reformer,  but  redemption  is 
the  first  and  dominant  note  in  the  Church's  song.  '  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  are 
truly  Christ's  we  are  genuine  reformers.  The  Church  of  Christ  should  be  the 
centre  of  all  the  reforming  agencies  of  our  time.  All  true  reformers  get  their 
weapons  from  Christ.     {J.  A.  Jowett,  M.A.) 

Vers.  14-22.  Remember  me,  0  my  God,  concerning  this. — The  mercy  of  God  the 
origin  of  the  reward  of  good  works  : — Learn— I,  That  to  make  pbovision  fob  thb 

MAINTBNANCB  OF  God's  WORSHIP  AND  THE   MIKISTEBS   THEBEOF  IS  A  WOBTHY  WOBK,  AND 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

OF  HIGH  ESTEEM  AKD  FAVOUR  WITH  GoD  (1  ChroH.  xxix.  17, 18 ;  Deut.  xii.  19  ;  2  Kings 
iv. ;  Luke  vii.  3-6 ;  Matt.  x.  41  ;  Phil.  iv.  18 ;  2  Tim.  i.  16-18).      II.  That  God 

BEWAEDETH  THESE  AND  AliL  OUB  OTHEE  GOOD  DEEDS  AND  WOBKS  NOT  FOB  ANY  MEBIT  OR 
\V0UTHINE8S     THAT    IS    IN     THEM,  HOT     OF     HiS     FBEE     MERCY    AND     GOODNESS.       1.    The 

Scriptures  encourage  us  to  work  in  hope  of  reward  (Psa.  xix.  11 ;  Prov.  xi.  18  ; 
Matt.  V.  11,  12,  X.  41,  42;  Luke  vi.  35;  2  John  8).  2.  Whence  this  reward 
Cometh.  "  According  to  Thy  great  mercy  "  (Hos.  i.  12 ;  Rom.  vi.  23  ; 
Psa.  Ixii.  12).  III.  That  it  is  LA\^TUL  to  do  good  wobks  with  bespect  to  the 
RECOMPENSE  OF  REWARD.  It  is  plain  Nehcmiah  here  did  so.  So  did  Moses 
(Heb.  xi.  25,  26).  (Joseph  Mede,  B.D.)  The  law  of  reward  : — Nehemiah's  prayer 
occurs  thrice  in  this  chapter,  at  the  close  of  each  section  recounting  his  reforming 
acts.  In  the  first  instance  (ver.  14)  it  is  most  full,  and  puts  very  plainly  the  merit 
of  good  deeds  as  a  plea  with  God.  The  same  thing  is  implied  in  its  form  in  ver.  22. 
But  while,  no  doubt,  the  tone  of  the  prayer  is  startling  to  us,  and  is  not  such  as 
should  be  offered  now  by  Christians,  it  but  echoes  the  principle  of  retribution  which 
underlies  the  law.  *'  This  do,  and  thou  shalt  live,"  was  the  very  foundation  of 
Nehemiah's  form  of  God's  revelation.  We  do  not  plead  our  own  merits,  because 
we  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace,  and  the  principle  underlying  the  gospel 
is  life  by  impartation  of  unmerited  mercy  and  Divine  life.  But  the  law  of  retribution 
still  remains  valid  for  Christians  in  so  far  as  that  God  will  never  forget  any  of  their 
works,  and  will  give  them  full  recompense  for  their  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love. 
Eternal  life  here  and  hereafter  is  wholly  the  gift  of  God ;  but  that  fact  does  not 
exclude  the  notion  of  "  the  recompense  of  reward  "  from  the  Christian  conception 
of  the  future.  It  becomes  not  us  to  present  our  good  deeds  before  the  Judge,  since  they 
are  stained  and  imperfect,  and  the  goodness  in  them  is  His  gift.  But  it  becomes 
Him  to  crown  them  with  His  gracious  approbation  and  to  proportion  the  cities  ruled 
in  that  future  world  to  the  talents  faithfully  used  here.  We  need  not  be  afraid  of 
obscuring  the  truth  that  we  are  saved  "  not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should  boast," 
though  we  insist  that  a  Christian  man  is  rewarded  according  to  his  works.  (A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  Nehemiah's  sincerity: — Paul  assures  the  believing  Hebrews  that 
God  wUl  not  forget  "  their  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love,"  and  this  prayer  of 
Nehemiah's  is  nothing  more  than  a  petition  that  God  will  be  pleased  to  fulfil  His 
own  promise  regarding  him.  It  was  not  the  dictate  of  a  self-righteous  spirit.  There 
is  no  self-righteousness  in  the  humble  prayer  that  God  would  look  upon  him  in  love ; 
that  He  would  deign  to  accept  of  his  feeble  services  as  proof  and  evidences  of  a 
religious  spirit ;  that  He  would  be  pleased  to  verify  His  promise,  that  "  it  shall  be 
well  with  them  that  fear  the  Lord,"  and  that  "  godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things, 
having  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  as  well  as  of  that  which  is  to  come." 
Consider — I.  A  sketch  of  Nehemiah's  history.  H.  Nehemiah's  character.  1.  His 
steady  religious  principle.  Dwelling  amid  scenes  very  uncongenial  to  the  progress 
of  piety  in  the  heart,  he  displayed  a  firmness  of  principle  and  an  ardour  of  religious 
feeling  truly  admirable.  Amidst  the  enticements  of  a  splendid  and  licentious 
court  he  sought  the  glory  of  God  and  not  the  gratification  of  vanity,  ambition,  or 
worldly  desire.  Surrounded  by  the  ensigns  of  a  gross  and  impious  superstition,  he 
reared  a  standard  for  the  true  God,  and  stood  forth  as  a  witness  for  Him,  in  the 
midst  of  His  enemies.  Confidence  in  God  kept  him  steady  in  the  scene  of  danger ; 
and  the  lofty  aims  of  a  devoted  spirit  raised  him  above  the  grovelling  pursuits  of 
sense.  2.  His  self-denial.  This  is  one  of  the  best  evidences  of  sound  religious 
principle.  When  the  will  is  subjugated  to  the  will  of  God ;  when  the  mind  feels 
itself  completely  satisfied  with  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  Uie  Divine  economy ; 
when  self  is  thrown  into  the  background,  and  a  noble  disinterestedness  gives  its 
tone  to  the  character,  then  we  have  some  good  proof  that  our  religion  is  sincere. 
Nehemiah  improved  his  advantages  at  the  Persian  court  not  for  his  individual  good, 
but  for  the  good  of  his  countrymen.  He  lost  sight  of  selfish  considerations,  and 
feeling  for  the  humblest  of  the  people,  he  gave  them  the  full  value  of  his  labours, 
without  the  slightest  remuneration.  That  which  he  asked  not  from  man  he  knew 
God  would  bestow  ;  hence  the  prayer  of  the  text.  3.  His  zeal  for  the  worship  and 
ordinances  of  God.  This  is  specially  displayed  in  his  anxiety  to  vindicate  God's 
ordinances  from  abuse,  and  to  enforce  their  punctual  observance.  The  public 
reading  and  expounding  the  law,  for  the  edification  of  the  people,  testified  his 
regard  for  God's  Holy  Word.  The  exactness  with  which  the  appointed  rites  in  the 
feasts  of  trumpets  and  tabernacles  were  gone  about,  under  his  superintendence, 
testified  his  reverence  for  the  law,  in  all  the  minuteness  of  its  requisitions.  His 
eeal  for  the  aanctification  of  the  Sabbath  proved  the  high  sense  he  entertained  of 


CHAP,  xin.]  NEHEMIAH.  155 

its  value.  4.  His  enlightened  and  consistent  perseverance  in  the  discharge  of 
personal  and  official  duty.     {Robert  Bums,  D.D.) 

Vers.  15-22.  In  those  days  I  saw  in  Judah  some  treading  wine  presses  on  the 
Sabbath. — Keeping  the  Sabbath  : — In  reforming  the  evil  of  Sabbath  desecration 
Nehemiah — I.  Contended  with  the  nobles,  or  Jewish  aeistockacy.  It  was  their 
trade  that  kept  the  marts  open.  Were  they  to  hold  aloof,  the  Sabbath-breakers 
would   fail  for  want  of  patronage.     II.  He  enforced  the  law.      IH.  He  dealt 

PARTICULARLY  WITH  THOSE  WHO  SOUGHT  TO  EVADE    THE   LAW.      IV.    He    TOOK    MEASURES 

TO  PERPETUATE  THE  REFORM.  Couclusion :  Eeflect  on  the  considerations  which 
underlie  the  duty  of  Sabbath  rest.  1.  The  institution  of  the  Sabbath  is  coeval  with 
the  race.  Adam  in  paradise  kept  the  holy  day.  This  is  evidenced  by  the  primitive 
division  of  time  into  weeks.  The  word  "  remember  "  in  the  fourth  commandment 
shows  that  this  injunction  was  but  the  revival  and  re-emphasising  of  one  which  had 
all  along  been  binding  upon  them.  2.  It  is  based  upon  a  ground  which  in  the 
nature  of  the  case  makes  it  perpetual.  The  Lord  "  rested  on  the  seventh  day ; 
wherefore  the  Lord  blessed  the  Sabbath  day,  and  hallowed  it."  3.  The  Sabbath  law 
was  interwoven  with  the  nerves  and  sinews  of  the  human  constitution  before  it  was 
inscribed  on  the  tables  of  stone.  4.  The  injunction,  "  Eemember  the  Sabbath  day 
to  keep  it  holy,"  when  placed  in  the  Decalogue,  received  the  formal  sanction  of 
Jehovah  as  an  essential  part  of  the  moral  law.  6.  Christ  came  to  fulfil  the 
ceremonial  law ;  at  His  coming  it  vanished  as  shadows  do  before  the  sun.  But  as  to 
the  moral  law.  He  came  to  fasten  it  more  and  more  permanently  on  the  hearts  and 
consciences  of  men.  6.  The  change  from  the  seventh  to  the  first  day  was  in  no 
wise  a  violation  of  the  original  injunction,  but  rather  in  pursuance  of  it.  It 
commemorates  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  and  thus  a  new  and  living  branch  of  joy 
was  engrafted  upon  it.  (D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D.)  Keeping  the  Sabbath : — The 
several  points  suggested  by  this  narrative  are  specially  suited  to  times  like  our  own. 
I.  It  reminds  us  of  the  blinding  and  hardening  power  of  worldliness.  It  blunts 
conscience,  deadens  spirituality,  and  estranges  from  God.     JI.  It  reminds  us  of  the 

RISKS  OF  association  WITH  CARELESS  AND  IRRELIGIOUS  NEIGHBOURS.  IH.  It  REMINDS 
US  OF  THE  RESPONSIBILITT  OF  MEN  IN  HIGH  POSITION  FOR  PREVAILING  EVILS.  IV.  It 
REMINDS  US  THAT  NEGLECT  TO  KEEP  THE  SaBBATH  IS  AN  EVIL  WITH  WHICH  GoD  CAN 
NEVER  BE  OTHERWISE  THAN  SORELY  DISPLEASED.  V.  It  REMINDS  US  OF  THE  RESOLUTE 
FIDELITY  REQUIRED   TO    SAVE    THIS    DAY   FROM    GENERAL   PROFANATION.       (Monday    Club 

Sermons.)        Keeping  the  Sabbath  : — I.  Sabbath  observance  has  to  contend  with 

THE  greed  of  men  WITH  WEALTH.      II.    SaBBATH  OBSERVANCE  SECURES  THE    COMMUNITY 

AND  NATION  FROM  PERIL.  DiviQC  requirements  have  always  a  wise  and  loving  purpose 
in  them.  A  God-fearing  nation  is  strong  because  it  has  learned,  in  its  several 
elements,  to  exalt  those  things  which  have  abiding  power  in  them.  Charity  and 
integrity,  reverence,  purity,  intelligence,  and  self-control  are  mighty  forces.  Against 
these  immorality,  intemperance,  extortion,  ignorance,  surge  like  a  desolating  flood. 
The  Sabbath  is  a  protecting  dyke  raised  across  their  path,  so  clear  and  effective  that 
they  each  hate  and  would  abolish  it.  A  million  soldiers  under  arms  cannot  defend 
us  as  sixty  million  citizens  without  other  weapon  than  recognition  of  God's  claims 
and  their  fellows'  rights  will  do.  The  former  may  be  defeated  as  Rome's  numerous 
legions  were.  The  latter  are  invincible.  III.  Sabbath  observance  may  be  decreed 
BY  PUBLIC  STATUTE  AND  ENFORCED  BY  THE  CIVIL  MAGISTRATE.  The  State  may,  and  must, 
maintain  itself.  It  may,  and  should,  forbid  those  practices  which  threaten  its  life. 
It  must  respect  the  religious  nature  and  requirements  of  its  citizens.  Its  province 
is,  not  to  say  how  any  shall  observe  the  hours  of  rest,  but  simply  to  guarantee  that 
they  shall  have  them.  {De  Witt  S.  Clarke.)  The  benefit  of  the  Sabbath : — 
Consider  it — I.  As  an  acceptable  rest  from  the  toils  and  labours  of  life.    H.  As  a 

HIGHLY    useful   AND    CIVIL   INSTITUTION.       HI.    As  A  NECESSARY  RELIGIOUS    ORDINANCE. 

IV.  As  A  SIGN  BETWEEN  GoD  AND  MAN.  (J.  Venn,  M.A.)  Sabbath  desecration: — 
The  last  page  of  many  a  reformer's  history  has  been,  like  Nehemiah's,  a  sad  account 
of  efforts  to  stem  the  ebbing  tide  of  enthusiasm  and  the  flowing  tide  of  worldliness. 
The  heavy  stone  is  roUed  a  little  way  up  hill,  and,  as  soon  as  one  strong  hand  is 
withdrawn,  down  it  tumbles  again  to  its  old  place.  The  evanescence  of  great  men's 
work  makes  much  of  the  tragedy  of  history.  Our  lesson  is  particularly  concerned 
with  Nehemiah's  efforts  to  enforce  Sabbath  observance.  I.  The  abuse  consisted  in 
Sabbath  work  and  trading.  It  is  easy  to  ridicule  the  Jewish  Sabbath  and  "  the 
Puritan  Sunday."  No  doubt  there  have  been  and  are  well-meant  but  mistaken 
efforts  to  insist  on  too  rigid  observance.    No  doubt  it  has  been  often  forgotten  by 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xni. 

good  people  that  the  Christian  Lord's  Day  is  not  the  Jewish  Sabbath.  Of  course, 
the  religious  observance  of  the  day  is  not  a  fit  subject  for  legislation.  But  the  need 
for  a  seventh  day  of  rest  is  impressed  on  our  physical  and  intellectual  nature  ;  and 
devout  hearts  will  joyfully  find  their  best  rest  in  Christian  worship  and  service. 
The  vigour  of  religious  life  demands  special  seasons  set  apart  for  worship.  Unless 
there  be  such  reservoirs  along  the  road,  there  will  be  but  a  thin  trickle  of  a  brook  by 
the  way.  It  is  all  very  well  to  talk  about  religion  diffused  through  the  life,  but  it 
wUl  not  be  so  diffused  unless  it  is  concentrated  at  certain  times.  They  are  no 
benefactors  to  the  community  who  seek  to  break  down  and  relax  the  stringency  of 
the  prohibition  of  labour.  If  once  the  idea  that  Sunday  is  a  day  of  amusement  takes 
root,  the  amusement  of  some  will  require  the  hard  work  of  others,  and  the  custom 
of  work  will  tend  to  extend,  till  rest  becomes  the  exception  and  work  the  rule. 
There  never  was  a  time  when  men  lived  so  furiously  fast  as  now.  The  pace  of 
modem  life  demands  Sunday  rest  more  than  ever.  If  a  railway-car  is  run 
continually,  it  will  wear  out  sooner  than  if  it  were  laid  aside  for  a  day  or  two 
occasionally ;  and  if  it  is  run  at  express  speed,  it  will  need  the  rest  more.  We  are 
all  going  at  top  speed ;  and  there  would  be  more  breakdowns  if  it  were  not  for  that 
blessed  institution  which  some  people  think  they  are  promoting  the  public  good  by 
destroying — a  seventh  day  of  rest.  II.  The  vigorous  remedies  applied  bt 
Nehemiah  were  administered  riRST  TO  THE  RULERS.  He  sent  for  the  nobles,  and 
laid  the  blame  at  their  doors.  "  Ye  profane  the  day,"  said  he.  Men  in  authority 
are  responsible  for  crimes  which  they  could  check  but  prefer  to  wink  at.  Nehemiah 
was  governor  for  the  Persian  king,  and  so  had  a  right  to  rate  these  nobles.  In  this 
day  the  people  have  the  same  right,  and  there  are  many  social  sins  for  which  they 
should  arraign  civic  and  other  authorities.  Christian  principles  unflinchingly 
insisted  on  by  Christian  people,  and  brought  to  bear,  by  ballot-boxes  and  other 
persuasive  ways,  on  what  stands  for  conscience  in  some  high  places,  would  make  a 
wonderful  difference  on  many  of  the  abominations  of  our  cities.  Go  to  the  "  nobles" 
first,  and  lay  the  burden  on  the  backs  that  ought  to  carry  it.     III.  Then  Nehemiah 

TOOK  PRACTICAL   MEASURES  BY  SHUTTING  THE  CITY  GATES  ON   THE   EVE   OF  THE  SaBBATH, 

AND  PUTTING  SOME  OF  HIS  OWN  SERVANTS  AS  A  WATCH.  The  mcthods  adopted  may  yield 
suggestions  for  all  who  would  aim  at  reforming  abuses  or  public  immoralities. 
1.  One  most  necessary  step  is  to  cut  off,  as  far  as  possible,  opportunities  for  the  sin. 
There  will  be  no  trade  if  you  shut  the  gates  the  night  before.  There  will  be  little 
drunkenness  if  there  are  no  liquor-shops.  It  is  quite  true  that  people  cannot  be 
made  virtuous  by  legislation,  but  it  is  also  true  that  they  may  be  saved  temptations 
to  become  vicious  by  it.  2.  Once  more,  the  guard  of  Levites  may  suggest  that  the 
execution  of  measures  for  the  reformation  of  manners  or  morals  is  best  entrusted  to 
those  who  are  in  sympathy  with  them.  Levites  made  faithful  watchmen.  Many 
a  promising  measure  for  reformation  has  come  to  nothing  because  committed  to  the 
hands  of  functionaries  who  did  not  care  for  its  success.  The  instruments  are 
almost  as  important  as  the  means  which  they  caiTy  out.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
An  argument  for  Sabbath-keeping : — "  I  tell  our  directors  that  if  they  compel 
conductors  to  break  the  fourth  commandment  they  have  no  right  to  expect  them 
to  keep  the  eighth."  That  was  the  Hon.  William  E.  Dodge's  business  way  of 
putting  to  railroad  companies  the  argument  for  Sabbath-keeping.  Loyalty  to  the 
Sabbath  : — A  ferry  company,  with  a  fine  prospect  of  a  lucrative  business,  desired  the 
late  Governor  Gamble  to  make  an  investment  in  their  stock,  which  he  declined, 
because  they  ran  their  boats  on  the  Sabbath.  "  We  are  obliged  by  law  to  do  so," 
was  the  excuse  offered.  "  Yes,"  he  replied;  "  I  know  that  the  law  requires  your 
company  to  run  its  boats  on  the  Sabbath,  but  the  law  does  not  require  me  to  invest 
my  money  in  your  stock."  Profanation  of  the  Sabbath: — Consider — L  We  also 
HAVE  A  Sabbath  which  ought  to  be  observed.  H.  Some  of  the  prevalent  abuses 
OF  the  Sabbath.  III.  Practical  remedies.  Nehemiah  is  here  our  pattern.  1.  He 
took  no  part  in  the  sin  himself.  2.  He  made  a  public  protest.  3.  He  promoted 
active  measures  for  the  suppression  of  Sabbath  profanation.  (J.  Hambleton.) 
Sabbath  observance: — This  passage  contains  a  detailed  statement  of  the  trans- 
gressions of  the  Israelites  in  this  particular,  as  well  as  of  the  testimony  of 
God  through  Nehemiah  against  them ;  and  as  it  distinctly  indicates  certain 
transactions  on  the  Sabbath  as  grossly  sinful,  the  guilt  of  which  is  by  some 
considered  as  at  least  questionable,  it  will  be  profitable  to  closely  examine  the 
sacred  writer's  words,  in  order  to  evince  the  iniquity  of  such  practices.  I.  In 
what  consisted  the  abuses  themselves.  1.  Agricultural  work  on  the  Sabbath. 
"  In   those   days  saw  I  in  Judah  some  treading  wine-presses,  and   btinging  in 


<3HAP.  xra.]  NEHEMIAS.  157 

sheaves,"  &o.  The  feeding  of  cattle  and  similar  labours  on  the  Sabbath  are 
clearly  permitted,  because  the  life  or  health  of  the  beast  depends  on  its  nourish- 
ment ;  but  all  other  sorts  of  work  are  plainly  evil,  and  as  much  just  subject  of 
rebuke  from  the  Christian  minister  as  the  labours  of  the  Jews  were  from  the  Jewish. 
2.  Sabbath  traffic  (ver.  16).  The  pleas  of  opposition,  convenience,  and  such-like, 
cannot  be  allowed  even  in  palliation ;  for  the  law  of  God  must  not  be  bent  or 
modified  to  suit  the  will  and  caprices  of  man.  Here  no  subterfuge,  or  sophistry,  or 
excuse,  is  permitted,  n.  The  prophet's  proceedinos  consequent  upon  these 
PRACTICES.  1.  He  testified  against  them.  It  is  the  duty  of  ministers  on  any 
symptoms  of  irreligion  in  their  respective  districts  to  rebuke  and  raise  their  voices 
against  it.  For  that  purpose  they  are  appointed  as  sentinels  and  guardians.  Now 
this  word  "testify"  is  a  comprehensive  term,  and  will  signify,  first,  that  he 
indicated  the  evil — that  he  expressed  his  dislike  of  the  practice — that  he  showed 
them  its  sinfulness,  and  the  punishment  surely  consequent  upon  it.  He  then  • 
charged  them  with  it.  "  Ye  do  it."  "  What  evil  thing  is  this  that  ye  do?  "  The 
better  sort  were  not  sellers,  but  buyers  ;  they  connived  at  the  practice,  and ' 
encouraged  it.  The  prophet  accordingly  accuses  them  with  being  accessories, 
and  casts  on  them  the  major  part  of  the  guilt.  "  Ye  do  it,"  he  says,  because  but 
for  their  purchases  the  markets  would  have  been  shut.  He  censures  them,  more- 
over, on  the  ground  of  bad  example.  The  people  naturally  took  their  tone  from 
them,  and  when  they  saw  the  Sabbath  traffic  of  the  nobles,  they,  also,  profaned  the 
Sabbath  day.  He  rebukes  them,  too,  for  contempt  of  God  and  want  of  patriotism. 
"  What  evil  thing  is  this  that  ye  do,"  &c.  Now  this  instance  of  the  destiny  of 
Israel  proves  the  fact,  that  God  does  not  reserve  His  wrath  against  the  Sabbath- 
breaking  nation  for  the  next  world,  but  here  inflicts  at  least  a  part  of  the  retribu- 
tion. 2.  He  exerted  his  authority  to  prevent  the  entrance  of  the  traders  into  the 
<5ity.  "I  commanded  that  the  gates  should  be  shut,  and  charged  that  they  should 
not  be  opened  till  after  the  Sabbath,"  &c.  The  authority  he  exercised  was 
exclusively  secular.  Therefore,  though  the  state  should  be  cautious  of  interfering 
in  matters  purely  ecclesiastical,  yet  with  this  case  before  us  it  is  evident  that  the 
magistrate  may  interpose  to  carry  out  the  Divine  ordinances.  The  authority,  then, 
vested  in  magistrates  or  others  by  the  state  for  this  purpose  is  a  legal  authority, 
according  to  Divine  law  ;  and  the  conduct  of  Nehemiah  in  this  case  sets  a  proud 
example  to  officials  of  every  time  and  place,  with  equal  zeal  and  prudence  to 
execute  their  functions.     {John  Bvdgen,  M.A.) 

Ver.  22.  Spaxe  me  according  to  the  greatness  of  Thy  mercy. — Nehemiah?*  appeal 
to  God's  mercy : — The  bird  which  soars  the  highest  builds  the  lowest  nest.  The 
more  a  man  is  lifted  up  in  communion  with  Heaven  the  deeper  is  his  abasement 
in  his  own  eyes.  The  holiest  are  the  humblest.  Those  who  bear  most  fruit  have 
least  "confidence  in  the  flesh."  How  interesting  to  observe  that,  though  the  con- 
ceptions of  beUevers  under  the  old  dispensation  respecting  the  exact  mode  of 
salvation  were  dim,  yet  they  themselves  clung  as  earnestly  to  the  mercy  of  the 
Lord  as  more  privileged  believers  do  now!  (Hugh  Stowell,  M.A.)  Increasing 
holiness  means  increasing  sensitiveness  to  the  need  of  mercy  : — The  more  holy  a 
man's  spirit  becomes,  the  more  sensitive  will  it  become ;  and  the  more  sensitive  his 
spir#,  the  deeper  and  livelier  will  be  his  sense  of  sinfulness.  Shut  up  an  individual 
in  a  dark  room,  hung  round  with  cobwebs  and  defiled  with  dust,  and  he  will  be 
insensible  to  its  condition  ;  then  admit  a  little  light,  and  he  will  begin  to  suspect 
its  state,  and  the  more  clearly  the  light  shines,  the  more  clearly  will  he  discern 
the  impurities  which  were  hidden  before.  (Ibid.)  Nehemiah  : — Here  is — I.  An 
APPEAL  TO  God's  approbation.  Nehemiah  often  makes  appeals  of  this  kind.  This 
was  an  appeal  to  God — 1.  From  man's  judgment.  He  had  engaged  in  an  under- 
taking which  was  likely  enough  to  appear  contemptible  in  the  eyes  of  his  Persian 
acquaintance.  But  what  then?  It  was  for  God's  honour,  and  therefore  he 
despises  this  shame,  casting  himself  upon  the  approbation  of  God.  This  principle 
it  was  that  influenced  Noah,  Abraham,  Moses,  David,  Paul.  It  is  the  principle  of 
faith  rendering  an  unseen  God  visible.  Such  men  look  for  a  future  "  recompense 
of  reward  "  promised  by  Him  who  cannot  lie.  2.  From  man's  enmity.  While  one 
party  satisfied  themselves  with  despising,  there  was  another  party  in  Jerusalem 
itself  who  hated  and  opposed  his  proceedings.  It  is  in  reference  to  their  enmity 
that  the  appeal  of  the  text  is  made.  Modem  enmity.  3.  From  man's  ingratitude. 
It  was  here  that  he  found  his  greatest  trial.  How  painful,  when  the  very  persons 
whom  in  God's  name  he  sought  to  benefit  were  cold,  reluctant,  unfeeling  I    Nehe- 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xnr. 

miah's  was  no  solitary  case.  Yoa  find  in  connection  with  this  appeal — II.  A 
CONTRITE  PBATER  FOR  God's  FORGIVENESS.  1.  After  all  he  has  done  for  God's 
service,  Nehemiah  cannot  forget  that  there  is  a  load  of  original  and  actual  sia 
recorded  against  him  for  which  no  subsequent  obedience  can  make  satisfaction. 
2.  He  finds  even  his  religious  actions  so  stained  with  sin  that  though  he  may  appeal 
from  man,  he  cannot  make  them  a  plea  for  merit  before  God.  3.  He  casts  himself^ 
with  a  steadfast  faith,  on  the  free  grace  and  covenanted  mercies  of  the  Lord. 
Application :  If  the  despised  believer  may  thus  appeal  from  man  to  God,  what 
hope  can  there  be  for  those  who  compel  him  so  to  do  ?     (Joseph  Jowett,  M.A.) 

Ver.  26.  Did  not  Solomon  king  of  Israel  sin  by  these  things  7 — Solomon : — 
1.  It  may  appear  remarkable  that  one  who  fell  so  grievously  should  contribute  at 
all  to  the  Book  of  God,  nor  is  there  any  other  instance  of  the  kind ;  but  his  sad 
history  adds  a  peculiar  weight  of  warning  to  his  words ;  nor  are  there  any  books 
more  strongly  marked  by  the  finger  of  God.  2.  Solomon  was  chosen  of  God,  and 
afterwards  rejected  as  Saul  had  been  ;  he  was  full  of  wisdom  and  understanding, 
and  what  is  far  more,  of  holiness  and  goodness.  There  is  perhaps  no  one  of  whom 
the  early  promise  of  good  seemed  so  decisive.  3.  It  has  been  said,  as  by  St. 
Augustine,  that  Solomon  was  more  injured  by  prosperity  than  profited  by  wisdom. 
Yet  we  may  observe  that  his  falling  away  is  not  attributed  in  Scripture  to  his. 
wealth,  his  power  and  honour.  4.  We  cannot  conclude  that  Solomon  himself  did 
not  at  last  repent,  but  this  has  always  been  considered  by  the  Church  as  very 
doubtful,  to  say  the  least.  All  we  know  is  that  Scripture  has  fully  made  known 
to  us  his  falling  away  from  God,  but  has  said  nothing  of  his  repentance.  The 
very  silence  is  awful  and  impressive.  5.  What  more  melancholy  than  the  fall  of 
one  so  great — so  wise  I  What  words  could  have  been  spoken  to  him  more  powerful 
than  his  own !  What  eloquence  could  describe  his  fall  with  more  feeling  and 
beauty  than  his  own  words  1  What  could  more  powerfully  paint  the  loveliness  of 
that  holiness  from  which  he  fell  ?  what  the  overpowering  sweetness  of  that  Divine 
love  which  he  has  consented  to  give  up  to  feed  on  ashes  1  Who  can  describe  the 
temptations  to  those  very  sins  by  which  he  was  ensnared  in  a  more  searching 
manner  than  he  has  done  ?  It  is  very  awful  to  think  how  God  may  use  men  as 
instruments  of  good  that  His  Spirit  may  teach  them,  and  through  them  teach 
others,  and  guide  them  to  the  fountain  of  living  waters,  yet  they  themselves  at  last 
fail  of  the  prize  of  their  high  calling.  What  a  warning  for  fear  1  (Isaac  WilliaTru.) 
Solomon's  restoration : — I.  The  wanderings  op  an  erring  spirit.  "  Did  not 
Solomon  king  of  Israel  sin  by  these  things  ?  "  1.  That  which  lay  at  the  bottom  of 
all  Solomon's  transgressions  was  his  intimate  partnership  with  foreigners.  "  Did. 
not  Solomon  sin  by  these  things  ?  " — that  is,  if  we  look  to  the  context,  marriage 
with  foreign  wives.  The  history  of  the  text  is  this — Nehemiah  discovered  that  the 
nobles  of  Judah,  during  the  captivity,  when  law  and  religious  customs  had  been, 
relaxed,  had  married  wives  of  Ashdod,  of  Ammon,  and  of  Moab;  and  then,  in  his 
passionate  expostulation  with  them,  he  reminds  them  that  it  was  this  very  trans- 
gression which  led  to  the  fall  of  the  monarch  who  had  been  most  distinguished  for 
God's  favour.  Exclusiveness  was  the  principle  on  which  Judaism  was  built^ 
Everything  was  to  be  distinct — as  distinct  as  God's  service  and  the  world's. 
And  it  was  this  principle  which  Solomon  transgressed.  The  Jewish  law 
shadowed  out  an  everlasting  truth.  God's  people  are  an  exclusive  nation ;  God's 
Church  is  for  ever  separated  from  the  world.  This  is  her  charter,  "  Come  out 
from  among  them,  and  be  ye  separate,"  &c.  We  are  to  be  separate  from  the  world.^ 
Mistake  not  the  meaning  of  that  word.  The  world  changes  its  complexion  in  every 
age.  Solomon's  world  was  the  nations  of  idolatry  lying  round  Israel.  Our  world 
is  not  that.  The  world  is  that  collection  of  men  in  every  age  who  live  only 
according  to  the  maxims  of  their  time.  The  world  may  be  a  profligate  world,  or  it 
may  be  a  moral  world.  All  that  is  a  matter  of  accident.  Our  world  is  a  moral 
world.  The  sons  of  our  world  are  not  idolaters,  they  are  not  profligate ;  they  are, 
it  may  be,  among  the  most  fascinating  of  mankind.  No  marvel  if  a  young  and 
ardent  heart  feels  the  spell  of  the  fascination.  No  wonder  if  it  feels  a  relief  ia 
turning  away  from  the  dulness  and  the  monotony  of  home  life  to  the  sparkling 
brilliancy  of  the  world's  society.  The  brilliant,  dazzling,  accomplished  world — 
what  Christian  with  a  mind  polished  like  Solomon's  does  not  own  its  charms? 
And  yet  now,  pause.  Is  it  in  wise  Egypt  that  our  highest  blessedness  lies? 
Is  it  in  busy,  restless  Sidon  ?  Is  it  in  luxurious  Moab  ?  No.  The  Christian 
most    leave    the    world    alone.    His    blessedness    Ues  in  quiet  work    with    Ui« 


CHAP,  xni.]  NEHEMIAH.  159 

Israel  of  God.  2.  The  second  step  of  Solomon's  wandering  was  the  nnre- 
strained  pursuit  of  pleasure.  And  a  man  like  Solomon  cannot  do  anjrthing  by 
halves.  No  man  ever  more  heartily  and  systematioallj  gave  himself  up  to  the 
pursuit.  There  are  some  men  who  are  prudent  in  their  epicureanism.  They  put 
gaiety  aside  when  they  begin  to  get  palled  with  it,  and  then  return  to  it  moderately 
again.  Men  like  Solomon  cannot  do  that.  No  earnest  man  can.  No !  if 
blessedness  lies  in  pleasure,  he  will  drink  the  cup  to  the  dregs.  But  let  us 
mark  the  wanderings  of  an  immortal  soul  infinite  in  its  vastness.  There  is  a  moral 
to  be  learnt  from  the  wildest  worldliness.  When  we  look  on  the  madness  of  life, 
and  are  marvelling  at  the  terrible  career  of  dissipation,  let  there  be  no  contempt 
felt.  It  is  an  immortal  spirit  marring  itself.  It  is  an  infinite  soul,  which  nothing 
short  of  the  Infinite  can  satisfy,  plunging  down  to  ruin  and  disappointment.  That 
unquenched  impetuosity  within  you  might  have  led  you  up  to  God.  You  have 
chosen  instead  that  your  heart  shall  try  to  satisfy  itself  upon  husks.  There  was 
another  form  of  Solomon's  worldliness.  3.  It  was  not  worldliness  in  pleasure, 
but  worldliness  in  occupation.  He  had  entered  deeply  into  commercial  specula- 
tions. He  had  alternate  fears  and  hopes  about  the  return  of  his  merchant  ships 
on  their  perilous  three-years'  voyage  to  India  and  to  Spain.  He  had  his  mind 
occupied  with  plans  for  building.  The  architecture  of  the  temple,  his  own  palace, 
the  forts  and  towns  of  his  now  magnificent  empire,  all  this  filled  for  a  time  his 
soul.  He  had  begun  a  system  of  national  debt  and  ruinous  taxation.  Much  of 
this  was  not  wrong ;  but  aU  of  it  was  dangerous.  It  is  a  strange  thing  how  business 
duUs  the  sharpness  of  the  spiritual  affections.  It  is  strange  how  the  harass  of 
perpetual  occupation  shuts  God  out.  There  are  writers  who  have  said  that  in  this 
matter  Solomon  was  in  advance  of  his  age — enlightened  beyond  the  narrowness  of 
Judaism,  and  that  this  permission  of  idolatry  was  the  earliest  exhibition  of  that 
spirit  which  in  modern  times  we  call  religious  toleration.  But  Solomon  went 
far  beyond  toleration.  The  truth  seems  to  be,  Solomon  was  getting  indifferent 
about  religion.  He  had  got  into  light  and  worldly  society,  and  the  libertinism  of 
his  associations  was  beginning  to  make  its  impression  upon  him.  He  was  beginning 
to  ask,  "  Is  not  one  religion  as  good  as  another,  so  long  as  each  man  believes  his 
own  in  earnest?"  There  are  few  signs  in  a  soul's  state  more  alarming  than  that  of 
religious  indifference ;  that  is,  the  spirit  of  thinking  all  religions  equally  true,  the  real 
meaning  of  which  is,  that  all  religions  are  equally  false.  H.  God's  lovino  guidancb 
OF  Solomon  in  the  midst  of  all  his  apostasy.  In  the  darkest,  wildest  wanderings  a 
man  to  whom  God  has  shown  His  love  in  Christ  is  conscious  still  of  the  better  way. 
In  the  very  gloom  of  his  remorse,  there  is  an  instinctive  turning  back  to  God.  It 
is  enumerated  among  the  gifts  that  God  bestowed  upon  Solomon  that  He  granted 
to  him  "  largeness  of  heart."  Now  that  largeness  of  heart  which  we  call  thought- 
fulness  and  sensibility,  generosity,  high  feeling,  marks  out  for  the  man  who  has 
it  a  peculiar  life.  You  look  to  the  life  of  Solomon,  and  there  are  no  outward 
reverses  there  to  speak  of.  His  reign  was  a  type  of  a  reign  of  the  power  of  peace. 
No  war,  no  national  disaster,  interrupted  the  even  flow  of  the  current  of  his  days. 
No  loss  of  a  chUd,  like  David's,  pouring  cold  desolation  into  his  soul — no  pestilences 
nor  famines.  Prosperity  and  riches,  and  the  internal  development  of  the  nation's 
life — that  was  the  reign  of  Solomon.  And  yet,  with  all  this,  was  Solomon 
happy  ?  Is  there  no  way  that  God  has  of  making  the  heart  grey  and  old  before 
its  time  without  sending  bereavement,  or  loss,  or  sickness  ?  Has  the  Eternal 
Justice  no  mode  of  withering  and  drying  up  the  inner  springs  of  happiness  while 
all  is  green,  and  wild,  and  fresh  outwardly?  We  look  to  the  history  of  Solomon 
for  the  answer.  The  first  way  in  which  his  aberration  from  God  treasured  up  for 
him  chastisement  was  by  that  weariness  of  existence  which  breathes  through  the 
whole  Book  of  Ecclesiastes.  Another  part  of  Solomon's  chastisement  was  doubt. 
Once  more  turn  to  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes.  *'  All  things  come  alike  to  all :  there 
is  one  event  to  the  righteous,  and  to  the  wicked ;  to  the  good  and  to  the  clean,  and 
to  the  unclean ;  to  him  that  sacrificeth,  and  to  him  that  sacrificeth  not."  In 
this  you  will  observe  the  querulous  complaint  of  a  man  who  has  ceased  to 
feel  that  God  is  the  ruler  of  this  world.  A  blind  chance,  or  a  dark  destiny,  seems 
to  rule  all  earthly  things.  And  that  is  the  penalty  of  leaving  God's  narrow  path 
for  sin's  wider  and  more  flowery  one.  But  the  love  of  God  brought  Solomon  through 
all  this  to  spiritual  manhood.  "  Let  us  hear  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter : 
Fear  God,  and  keep  His  commandments :  for  this  is  the  whole  duty  of  man."  In 
this  we  have  the  evidence  of  his  victory.  Doubt,  and  imprisonment,  and  worldliness 
have  passed  away,  and  clear  activity,  belief,  freedom,  have  taken  their  place.    It  was 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

a  terrible  discipline,  but  God  hap  made  that  discipline  successful.  I  speak  to  those 
who  know  something  about  what  the  world  is  worth,  who  have  tasted  its  fruits,  and 
found  them  like  the  Dead  Sea  apples — hoUowness  and  ashes.  By  those  foretastes 
of  coming  misery  which  God  has  already  given  you,  those  lonely  feelings  of  utter 
wretchedness  and  disappointment  when  you  have  returned  home  palled  and  satiated 
from  the  gaudy  entertainment,  and  the  truth  has  pressed  itself  icy  cold  upon  your 
heart,  "Vanity  of  vanities" — is  this  worth  living  for?  By  all  that,  be  warned. 
Be  true  to  your  convictions.  Be  honest  with  yourselves.  Learn  from  the  very 
greatness  of  your  souls,  which  have  a  capacity  for  infinite  agony,  that  you  are 
in  this  world  for  a  grander  destiny  than  that  of  frittering  away  life  in  usefulness. 
Lastly,  let  us  learn  from  this  subject  the  covenant  love  of  God.  There  is  such  a 
thing  as  love  which  rebellion  cannot  weary,  which  ingratitude  cannot  cool.  {W.  F. 
Robertson,  M.A.) 

Ver.  31.  Remember  me,  0  my  God,  for  good. — Simplicity  and  power : — Conscious- 
ness of  religion  cannot  be  of  necessity  wrong,  and  it  is  only  a  false  estimate  of 
human  nature  with  regard  to  God  which  enables  men  to  take  another  view  with 
regard  to  such  acts.  With  boldness  and  without  hesitation  Paul  says  he  has  run 
a  good  course  and  fought  a  good  fight;  and  he  based  upon  this  declaration 
that  there  was  laid  up  for  him  a  crown  of  righteousness.  In  the  same  way  we 
find  constant  recognition  by  David  of  his  own  good  conduct  throughout  the  Psalmi ; 
and  Samuel  protests  his  innocence  in  the  sight  of  the  congregation.  Hezekiah 
upon  his  sick-bed  narrates  the  better  acts  of  his  life  as  a  reason  for  God  to  prolong 
his  term  of  years ;  while  more  than  one  of  the  apostles  reminds  our  Lord  of  their 
self-denying  adherence  to  His  cause.  While  Nehemiah's  consciousness  of  certain 
acts  that  he  knew  he  had  done  to  please  God  shines  with  a  soft  and  mellowed 
lustre  on  his  figure  whenever  he  comes  Into  notice,  the  evident  simplicity  of  his  purpose 
and  sincerity  of  his  mind,  and  the  utter  absence  of  anything  like  censoriousness  or 
boastf ulness,  prevent  him  from  being  in  the  least  degree  shadowed  by  vanity  or 
presumption.  A  view  like  Nehemiah's  of  those  acts  which  are  performed  with 
a  pure  intention  of  pleasing  God  is  justified,  because — 1.  The  doing  so  involves 
truthfulness  in  our  estimate  of  moral  action.  2.  Of  the  very  direct  encouragement 
that  we  receive  from  the  consciousness  that  we  have  done  what  is  pleasing  to  God. 
In  our  intercourse  with  our  fellow-creatures  nothing  so  encourages  in  the  effort  to 
please  as  the  fact  of  having  pleased  ;  nothing  so  discourages  as  the  consciousnesa 
of  not  having  given  satisfaction,  or  what  is  worse,  the  impression  that  we  have 
dissatisfied.  {E.  Monro.)  Prayer  for  God's  blessing  : — The  Rev.  Dr.  Brock,  of 
Bloomsbury,  when  about  twenty-one  years  old  (1828),  and  just  out  of  his  apprentice- 
ship, left  Devonshire  for  London.  "  He  had  not  gone  far  from  his  home  before  he 
stopped,  and  sat  down  under  a  hedge,  in  a  lane,  and  opening  his  Bible  at  the  13th 
chapter  of  Nehemiah,  his  eye  fell  upon  the  31st  verse  :  '  Remember  me,  O  my  God, 
for  good.'  Kneeling  down  upon  his  knees  under  that  hedge,  with  his  hand  upon 
the  passage,  he  put  up  a  fervent  prayer  that  God  would  befriend  him  by  remem- 
bering him  for  good  in  his  metropolitan  life.  How  strikingly  was  that  prayer 
answered  1  Dr.  Brock  himself  used  to  say,  •  Who  can  tell  how  maoh  of  the 
suoceu  of  my  after-life  may  be  traced  back  to  that  prayer?' " 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR. 
ESTHER. 


THE 

Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 


Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,     on    the    Verses  of    the    Bible 


Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL.  A.  M. 


ESTHER 


New  York  Chicago  Toronto 

Fleming  H.  Revell  Company 

Publishers  of  Evangelical  Literature 


INTEODUGTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHEB, 

Charactebistic  Featuebs  of  the  Book. — ^In  considering  the  characteristic  f  eatnrea 
of  this  work,  it  is  necessary  first  to  decide  upon  its  date,  lest  we  should  get  this 
book  confused  with  the  Chronicles,  Ezra,  and  Nehemiah,  which  immediately 
precede  it  in  oar  Canon.  Their  historical  range  does  not  reach  later  than  about 
420  B.C.  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  both  lived  in  the  reign  of  Artaxerxes  Longimanus. 
Dean  Stanley  dates  Ezra  459  b.c.  and  Nehemiah  445  b.c.  But  the  story  of  Esther 
belongs  to  an  earlier  period,  and  to  the  reign  of  Xerxes,  who  was  the  king  before 
Longimanus.  Dean  Stanley  dates  the  story  of  Esther  485  b.o.  It  has  therefore 
nothing  to  do  with  the  restored  Jews,  who  had  at  the  time  settled  in  Jerusalem 
under  Zerubbabel,  bu*.  is  wholly  concerned  with  those  scattered  Jews  who  remained 
behind  in  the  various  provinces  of  the  Persian  Empire. 

The  Date  of  the  Composition  of  this  Work  and  its  Author  cannot  possibly 
be  known.  It  is  but  an  effort  to  get  out  of  a  difficulty  to  affirm  the  authorship  of 
Mordecai.  It  is  quite  possible — as  we  find  historical  records  were  preserved  at  the 
Persian  Court  of  a  previous  attempt  on  the  life  of  the  sovereign — that  official  records 
were  made  of  the  incidents  which  led  to  the  death  of  Haman  and  the  preservation 
of  the  Jews  from  the  scheme  laid  for  their  destruction,  and  that  some  Jewish 
officer,  cup-bearer  or  other,  found  these  records,  and  transcribed  them. 

Modern  critics  think  the  book  was  written  as  early  as  the  third  century,  300-200 
B.C.  In  their  view  it  is  not  an  authentic  historical  writing.  It  is  a  question 
whether  it  contains  a  nucleus  of  facts,  or  is  simply  a  romantic  tale.  In  any  case, 
its  object  is  simply  to  commend  the  observation  of  the  Feast  of  Purim. 

The  Book  of  Esther  is  distinctly  Persian,  and  it  must  surely  have  been  written 
in  Persia.  Its  place  is  properly  outside  the  characteristic  Jewish  literature.  It 
classifies  rather  with  the  works  that  now  form  the  Apocrypha.  There  is  no  feature 
more  strongly  marked  in  the  whole  Jewish  literature  than  the  association  of  God 
with  every  person  and  every  event,  every  prophecy  and  every  word.  In  this  Book 
of  Esther  the  very  name  of  God  is  wanting,  and  the  relativity  of  God  to  events  is 
never  indicated  or  suggested.  *'  It  is  the  one  example  in  the  sacred  volume  of  a 
story  of  which  the  whole  scenery  and  imagery  breathes  the  atmosphere  of  an 
Oriental  Court  as  completely  and  almost  as  exclusively  as  the  *  Arabian  Nights.' 
.  .  .  Even  the  names  which  most  closely  connect  the  story  with  the  history  of 
Israel  are  not  Hebrew,  but  Chaldasan  or  Persian.  '  Mordecai '  is  '  the  worshipper 
of  Merodach,  the  war-god  of  Babylon.'  'Esther '  is  the  '  star  of  the  planet  Venus.' 
The  '  Purim,'  from  which  the  Festival  of  Deliverance  took  its  name,  is  the  Persian 
word  for  '  lot,'  and  has  even  been  supposed  to  be  the  name  for  an  ancient  Persian 
solemnity." 

Ahasuerus  has,  with  some  confidence,  been  identified  as  Xerxes,  whose  other 
name,  Achashverosh,  sounds  very  similar  to  Ahasuerus ;  and  whose  character  as 
known  in  history  is  in  precise  keeping  with  his  conduct  as  described  in  this  work. 

34  V 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER. 


In  his  time  Egypt  revolted  from  the  Persian  rale,  and  was  re-conquered  ;  and  some 
five  years  later  occurred  the  battles  of  Thermopylae,  Artemis,  and  Salamis.  It  may 
help  to  fii  the  period  in  our  minds  if  we  remember  that  477  b.c.  is  given  as  the 
death  of  Confucius,  and  475  as  the  death  of  Gautama,  the  Buddha.  At  this  time 
Home  was  quite  a  second-rate  Italian  commonwealth. 

Veritication  of  thb  Story. — ^It  must  be  admitted  that  we  have  hq  verification 
of  the  story  of  Esther  from  any  independent  sources  whatever.  Neither  such 
Persian  annals  as  have  been  found,  nor  any  Jewish  memorials,  contain  any  records 
of  such  a  peril  and  deliverance  of  the  scattered  Jews  in  the  Persian  provinces  as  is 
narrated  in  this  book. 

But  the  fact  remains  that  the  Festival  of  Purim  began  to  be  observed  about  this 
time,  and  that  tradition  associated  some  remarkable  deliverance  with  it,  of  which 
it  was  treated  as  a  perpetual  memorial.  Probably  the  genesis  of  this  festival  needs 
some  further  research.  It  is  quite  possible  that  it  really  bears  relation  to  the 
deliverances  of  the  Maccabsean  period,  and  the  love  of  making  mysterious  origins 
for  things  led  to  the  invention  of  a  tale  associated  with  earlier  times.  In  the 
Second  Book  of  Maccabees  the  festival  is  spoken  of  as  the  "  day  of  Mordecai,"  and 
JosephuB  also  refers  to  it.  In  favour  of  its  historical  genuineness,  mention  may  be 
made  of  the  appeal  of  the  writer  to  the  "  Book  of  the  Chronicles  of  the  Kings  of 
Media  and  Persia  "  (chap.  z.  2),  which  certainly  indicates  that  the  author  regarded 
bis  work  as  verifiable. 

Purim. — The  Jews  appear,  to  have  given  the  name  Purim,  or  Lota,  to  this 
festival  because  Haman  had  thrown  lots  to  ascertain  what  day  would  be  auspicious 
for  him  to  carry  into  effect  the  bloody  decree  which  the  king  had  issued  at  his 
instance.  But  the  uncertainty  of  the  origin,  or  even  date  of  beginning,  of  this 
festival  have  led  to  a  variety  of  conjectures  in  connection  with  it.  Ewald,  in 
support  of  his  theory  that  there  was,  in  patriarchal  times,  a  religious  festival  at 
every  new  and  full  moon,  conjectures  that  Purim  was  originally  the  full  moon 
feast  of  the  month  Adar.  Kepler  identified  the  "feast  of  the  Jews,"  in  John  v.  1, 
with  the  Feast  of  Purim,  and  in  this  he  is  supported  by  Alford  and  Ellicott.  The 
festival  lasted  for  two  days,  and  was  regularly  observed  on  the  14th  and  15th  of 
Adar.  It  was  not  a  Divine  institution,  and  there  was  no  obligation  to  keep  it  at 
Jerusalem. 

The  Contents  of  thb  Boos  or  Esther  are  so  familiar  to  Bible  readers  that 
ihey  need  not  be  even  outlined.  On  the  whole  it  may  be  safe  to  decide  that  the 
main  facts  of  the  story  are  genuinely  historical,  and  that  such  a  peril  for  the 
scattered  Jews  and  such  a  deliverance  did  actually  occur  in  the  reign  of  Xerxes ; 
but  it  may  also  be  admitted  that  some  later  author,  of  the  period  of  the  Apocryphal 
books,  has  worked  up  the  materials  at  his  command  into  the  elaborate  and 
descriptive  story  which  we  now  have  in  our  hands. 


THE   BIBLICAL   ILLUSTKATOE. 

ESTHER. 

OHAPTEB  L 

Verb.  1-4.  Now  it  came  to  pass  In  tbe  days  of  Ahasnenu  (this  Is  Ahasnenu 
whlcli  reined,  tram  India  even  onto  Ethiopia). — Artaxerxes : — By  almost  imiTerBal 
acknowledgment  now,  the  sovereign  here  referred  to  is  Artaxerxes,  surnamed 
Longimanus,  or  the  long-handed  ;  the  term  Ahasuerns  being,  like  that  of  Pharaoh, 
expressive  of  the  kingly  dignity,  and  not  the  name  of  an  individual.  In  his  time 
the  Persian  empire  was  of  vast  extent,  comprehending  all  the  countries  from  the 
river  Indus  on  the  east  to  the  Mediterranean  on  the  west,  and  from  the  Black  Sea 
and  the  Caspian  in  the  north  to  the  extreme  south  of  Arabia,  then  called  Ethiopia. 
{A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  God  liberal  to  sinners  : — What  rich  gifts  hath  God  often 
bestowed  on  men  who  know  Him  not!  Think  not,  however,  that  God  is  more 
liberal  to  His  enemies  than  to  His  friends.  Some  of  the  vilest  of  men  possessed  all 
the  great  and  large  dominions  of  the  Persian  empire.  But  if  God  has  bestowed 
on  you  the  least  measure  of  true  faith,  of  unfeigned  love,  of  unaffected  humUity, 
He  hath  bestowed  on  you  treasures  of  inestimably  greater  value  than  all  the  posses- 
sions of  Artaxerxes  Longimanus  or  of  Nero.  {G.  Lawson,  D.D.)  Prosperity 
cursed  : — A  curse  is  mingled  with  all  the  prosperity  of  sinners,  because  they  know 
not  how  to  use  or  to  enjoy,  but  are  disposed,  by  their  corrupt  tempers,  to  abuse 
everything  which  they  possess.  (Ibid.)  A  great  want  in  the  soul  of  man: — 
There  is  a  want  in  the  soul  of  man  which  all  the  wealth  of  one  hundred  and 
twenty-seven  provinces  cannot  supply.  There  is  a  want  which  the  best  social 
arrangements  cannot  supply.  There  is  a  craving  in  the  heart  of  man  beyond  all 
creature  power  to  satisfy.  Guilty  man  needs  to  be  placed  in  a  right  relation  toward 
God.  Money  cannot  purchase  for  him  peace  and  pardon.  Artaxerxes  was  as  poor 
as  the  humblest  serf  in  his  dominions  in  this  respect,  and  far  poorer  than  the 
poorest  of  the  children  of  Judah,  dispersed  through  his  empire  as  exiles,  but 
knowing  Jehovah.  {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Character  of  Ahasuerus : — First  to 
come  before  us  in  the  story  is  the  king,  Ahasuerus,  more  familiar  to  us  as  Xerxes. 
Cruel,  passionate,  capricious,  his  character  as  set  forth  in  contemporary  history  is 
wholly  in  keeping  with  all  that  we  see  of  him  here.  This  is  the  man  who  was 
hospitably  entertained  by  Pythias  of  Lydia  when  on  his  way  to  Greece,  and  helped 
by  an  enormous  contribution ;  but  when  the  old  man,  who  had  given  all  his  other 
sons  to  the  service  of  the  king,  pleaded  that  the  eldest  might  stay  with  him, 
Herodotus  tells  us  that  Xerxes  in  a  fury  commanded  that  the  son  should  be  slain, 
and  he  made  his  whole  army  pass  between  the  severed  body.  Of  him  it  is  told  how 
that  when  a  storm  destroyed  the  bridge  by  which  he  would  cross  into  Greece,  he 
commanded  the  engineers  to  be  slain,  and  then  had  the  sea  beaten  with  chains  to 
subdue  it  into  better  manners.  He  comes  near  to  us  by  his  association  with  the 
famous  Greek  heroes.  Marching  in  his  pride  with  a  host  of  five  millions,  with 
which  he  would  subdue  the  world,  he  is  stayed  by  three  hundred  Spartans,  whilst 
his  vast  fleet  is  destroyed  by  the  skill  and  courage  of  the  Greeks  at  Salamis,  a 
victory  that  secured  the  deliverance  of  Europe  from  Oriental  despotism,  and  pre- 
served for  us  the  literature  and  art  which  have  uplifted  and  beautified  our  civilisa- 
tion.   (Mark  Guy  Pearte.)        Whicli  was  in  Shuslian  the  palace. — The  palace  at 

f 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

Shushan  is  presented  before  us.  Shushan  was  the  metropolis  of  Persia,  a  magnifi- 
cent city  of  about  fifteen  miles  circumference,  and  the  residence  of  the  kings.  In 
winter  the  climate  was  very  mild,  but  in  summer  the  heat  was  so  excessive  that  an 
old  writer  says  the  very  lizards  and  serpents  were  consumed  by  it  on  the  streets.  It 
was  probably  on  this  account  that  the  seat  of  government  was  at  Ecbatana  in 
Bummer,  and  only  in  winter  at  Shushan.     (T.  McEwan.) 

Vers.  3-9.  In  the  third  year  of  his  reign,  he  made  a  feast. — The  occasion  of  the 
feast : — It  was  the  third  year  of  the  reign  of  Xerxes.  Now  we  know  from  the  Greek 
historian  Herodotus  that  in  that  very  year  Xerxes  "  summoned  a  council  of  the 
principal  Persians,  as  well  to  hear  their  opinions  as  to  declare  his  own,"  on  the 
matter  of  the  invasion  of  Greece.  At  first,  on  his  accession  to  the  throne,  we  are 
told  that  *'  he  showed  little  disposition  to  make  war  against  Greece,  and  turned  his 
thoughts  to  the  reduction  of  Egypt  "  ;  but  after  he  had  succeeded  in  Egypt,  he  was 
all  the  more  inclined  to  listen  to  the  advice  of  his  cousin  Mardonius,  and  seek  to 
punish  the  Athenians  for  the  defeat  of  his  father  at  Marathon,  Accordingly,  at 
the  council  assembled  in  Shushan,  he  declared  his  purpose  "  to  lay  a  bridge  over 
the  Hellespont,  and  to  transport  an  army  into  Greece,  that  he  might  punish  the 
Athenians  for  the  injuries  they  had  done  to  the  Persians  and  to  his  father."  Nay, 
not  content  with  that,  he  added,  "  I  intend,  with  your  concurrence,  to  march 
through  all  the  parts  of  Europe,  and  to  reduce  the  whole  earth  into  one  empire ; 
being  well  assured  that  no  city  or  nation  of  the  world  will  dare  to  resist  my  arms 
after  the  reduction  of  those  I  have  mentioned."  He  was  opposed  by  his  uncle, 
Artabanus,  but  ultimately,  under  the  influence  of  Mardonius  and  some  illusory 
oracles  which  fell  in  with  his  own  ambition,  the  die  was  cast,  and  the  decision  was 
made  to  prepare  for  and  carry  out  the  invasion  of  Greece  with  such  an  army  as  the 
world  had  never  before  seen.  Now  it  was  in  connection  with  this  determination, 
and  in  order,  as  I  believe,  to  give  the  greatest  possible  impulse  to  the  carrying  out 
of  the  enterprise  so  resolved  on,  that  this  long-continued  fete  was  held.  He  wanted 
to  produce  the  conviction  that,  with  such  resources  as  he  had  at  his  command,  it 
was  impossible  that  he  should  fail.  This  accounts  for  the  magnificent  scale  on 
which  everything  was  done.  It  looks  supremely  foolish,  but  it  is  a  folly  that  keeps 
its  ground  to  this  day  even  in  western  lands,  where  it  is  still  the  fashion  for  men 
to  banquet  themselves  into  enthusiasm  for  some  great  railway  enterprise  or  some 
party  campaign.  (W.  H.  Taylor.)  Feasting  not  favourable  to  valour  : — There  is 
good  reason  to  suppose  that  this  feast  was  held  on  the  occasion  of  his  projected 
invasion  of  Greece.  To  fill  the  minds  of  his  captains  with  confidence,  and  to  fire 
his  soldiers  with  military  ardour,  he  makes  all  this  vain  display  and  provides  this 
munificence  of  self-indulgence.  If  this  be  so,  with  how  little  favourable  result 
when  the  brunt  of  the  struggle  came !  Yet  what  other  result  than  that  which 
actually  came  could  be  reasonably  expected  ?  Eeal  courage  and  endurance  are 
bred  of  much  harder  conditions  than  these.  How  are  real  men  made  ?  and  how 
are  they  made  ready  for  any  manly  thing  of  more  than  common  difiiculty  ?  By 
feasting  on  rich  viands  ?  By  drinking  wine  and  looking  on  it  when  it  is  red  in  the 
cup  ?  By  nights  of  revelry  ?  By  gazing  on  the  outside  shows  of  life  ?  By  sink- 
ing into  voluptuous  ease?  Never  since  the  world  began  have  manhood  and 
courage  sprung  of  such  things  as  these,  although  in  a  few  rare  instances  they  may 
have  passed  through  them  unbroken  and  not  much  defiled.  The  Greeks  were  com- 
paratively few  and  comparatively  poor ;  and  their  country  had  no  vast  harvest- 
bearing  plains.  They  were  fighting  for  rocks  and  mountains  and  seas.  But  those 
mountains  and  seas  were  the  symbols  and  the  guardians  of  their  liberty.  (A. 
Raleigh,  D.D.)  Pride  spoils  hot^pitality  : — He  has  ordained  a  feast  for  them. 
But  the  feast  is  really  to  his  own  power  and  pride,  (ibid.)  The  vanity  of  irorldly 
grandeur  .•—1.  There  is  unlimited  power.  The  man  presented  to  our  view  is 
"  reigning  from  India  even  unto  Ethiopia,  over  an  hundred  and  seven  and  twenty 
provinces."  2.  His  power  was  supreme.  The  life  of  every  subject  in  his  kingdom 
depended  on  his  word.  He  ruled  without  resistance  and  without  control.  The 
wealth,  the  productions,  the  inhabitants  of  the  greatest  empire  of  the  earth,  were 
thus  his  undisputed  right.  Here  was  one  great  object  of  human  ambition  com- 
pletely gained.  What  struggles  are  made  on  earth  for  the  attainment  of  office  and 
personal  dominion  I  The  lust  of  power  has  waged  the  deadliest  wars  of  earth, 
excited  the  cruellest  murders  of  men,  and  deluged  nations  with  blood.  Among 
ourselves  we  see  this  lust  of  power  on  a  smaller  scale,  in  all  the  political  efforts 
and  contested  elecaons  of  our  own  day,  and  in  our  own  land.      3.  There  is  a. 


CHAP.  I.]  ESTHER.  9 

peaceful  and  secure  possession  of  this  unlimited  power.  The  view  is  given  to  us 
"  in  those  days  when  Ahasuerus  sat  on  the  throne  of  his  kingdom."  Ahasuerus 
possessed  his  father's  dominions  in  perfect  peace.  He  had  nothing  to  do  but  to 
govern  peacefully  and  to  enjoy  abundantly.  What  blessings  he  might  have  dispersed 
abroad  !  What  monuments  of  usefulness  to  men  he  might  have  established  1  The 
peaceful  possession  of  power  is  a  great  privilege,  as  well  as  a  great  temptation.  It 
enables  man  to  be  a  benefactor  to  his  race.  He  may  sit  as  king  among  the 
mourners  and  make  a  thousand  weary  hearts  to  sing  for  joy.  But  it  is  a  great 
temptation  to  the  sensual  cupidity  of  man.  The  history  of  the  world  is  filled  with 
the  stories  of  human  power,  oppressive  and  destructive.  4.  There  is  the  possession  of 
vast  wealth  and  outward  glory.  Ahasuerus  gathered  around  him  "  all  his  princes,  hia 
servants,  the  power  of  Persia  and  Media,  the  nobles  and  princes  of  the  provinces 
being  before  him,  when  he  showed  the  riches  of  his  glorious  kingdom  and  the 
honour  of  his  excellent  majesty."  No  condition  could  appear  to  an  earthly  mind 
more  desirable  or  tempting.  We  know  something  of  the  struggle  for  wealth.  It  ia 
the  great  object  for  contest  in  the  peaceful  walks  of  business  and  commercial 
enterprise.  To  be  rich,  in  modern  society,  is  to  be  influential  and  exalted.  What 
a  vast  privilege  is  the  possession  of  such  wealth  !  What  happiness  it  may  commu- 
nicate when  it  is  faithfully  dispensed  and  employed  as  an  instrument  for  human 
benefit !  How  great  is  the  honour  and  the  joy  of  being  thus  a  public  benefactor  to 
mankind !  But  the  responsibility  is  also  great.  Alas,  how  opposite  to  all  this  ia 
the  habitual  use  of  wealth !  It  leads  the  selfish  mind  to  a  forgetfulness  and 
neglect  of  the  wants  of  others.  It  persuades  sinful  men  that  they  have  the  right  to 
live  for  their  own  indulgence  and  pleasure,  and  are  not  to  be  held  responsible  to 
others  for  the  way  in  which  their  own  acquisitions  and  means  of  influence  are 
employed.  5.  There  is  also  splendid  display.  Wealth  is  often  hoarded  with  a 
covetous  grasp  for  mere  accumulation.  Man  wants  even  the  openness  of  heart  for 
its  display.  But  in  the  picture  by  which  the  Holy  Spirit  will  illustrate  for  us  the 
emptiness  of  the  world  there  shall  be  no  such  defect.  The  wealth  which  has  been 
amassed  shall  have  the  opportunity  of  the  utmost  manifestation.  How  we  follow 
after  pageants  and  exhibitions  of  the  lowest  kind !  The  gilded  tinsel  of  such 
scenes,  whether  military  or  dramatic,  funereal  or  joyous,  is  always  exciting  and 
attractive  to  the  giddy,  silly  minds  of  the  multitude.  6.  There  is  not  only  all  thia 
power,  wealth,  and  display  combined  ;  there  is  also  here  boundless  actual  indulgence 
and  hospitality.  What  could  have  been  more  grand  or  satisfying  in  earthly 
things  ?  Doubtless  the  whole  multitude  applauded  the  magnificence  and  hospitality 
of  the  youthful  monarch.  If  the  world  can  give  man  happiness  in  sensual 
indulgence,  here  was  a  scene  of  its  perfect  joy.  No  element  of  delight  is  wanting 
in  such  a  picture.  All  these  provisions  are  unsatisfying  still.  (1)  They  are  all 
unsuitable.  The  soul  has  other  views  and  needs,  which  none  of  these  outward 
provisions  of  the  earth  can  ever  reach.  There  is  still  the  burden  of  inward  sin. 
There  is  still  the  want  of  reconciliation  to  God.  (2)  They  are  temporary.  They 
are  the  things  of  a  day  at  the  best.  The  whole  of  a  worldly  life  is  but  a  day's 
dream  of  pleasure.  To-morrow  it  will  be  over.  To  take  you  off  from  this  vain 
pursuit  of  earth  is  the  purpose  of  such  a  scene  as  the  one  we  have  considered. 
Look  at  it,  not  to  desire  it,  but  to  discern  its  vanity.  Behold  how  empty,  how 
unsatisfying,  how  unsuitable,  how  transitory  it  is  1  Cease  to  look  there  for  your 
joys.  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  Ahasuerus : — I.  The  king  of  Persia  at  this  time  waa 
Ahasuerus.  We  read  in  Scripture  of  four  grand  earthly  empires,  of  which  this 
was  one — and  the  second  in  the  order  of  succession.  The  Babylonian,  the  Medo- 
Persian,  the  Grecian,  and  the  Roman  all  passed  away  as  a  dream — they  crumbled 
to  dust,  and  their  glory  is  long  ago  departed  !  Notwithstanding  the  strength  and 
celebrity  of  these  ancient  kingdoms,  they  came  to  nought  and  "their  dominion 
was  taken  away."  But  there  is  a  kingdom  which  passeth  not  away.  Its  King 
will  remain  in  honour  and  glory  for  ever,  and  its  subjects  shall  be  blessed  with 
everlasting  happiness.  1.  Great  as  was  the  extent  of  these  kingdoms.  His  is 
inconceivably  more  extensive.  2.  It  is  also  more  durable.  "  His  dominion  is  an 
everlasting  dominion."  Let  us  be  anxious  to  be  numbered  among  the  subjects  of 
this  kingdom,  for  they  are  all  "kings  and  priests"  for  ever.  With  Christ  on  Hia 
throne  we  shall  stand  before  His  throne  and  that  of  His  Father  in  the  celestial 
city ;  we  shall  see  His  face,  and  His  name  shall  be  in  our  foreheads  ;  we  shall  need 
no  candle  nor  light  of  the  sun,  for  the  Lord  God  will  give  us  hght,  and  we  shall 
reign  for  ever  and  ever  !  II.  This  mighty  potentate,  Ahasuerus,  wished  to  make  a 
DISPLAY  OF  HIS  GREATNSss.      Seldom,  alas !  is  that  expression,  "  Where  much  ia 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.i. 

given,  mnch  will  be  required,"  practically  in  their  remembrance  1  Oh  I  let  us 
beware  of  glorying  in  anything  of  our  own — of  "  sacrificing  unto  our  own  net, 
and  burning  incense  to  our  own  drag."  Man  at  his  best  state  is  altogether  vanity, 
and  possesses  nothing  of  any  value  but  what  God  has  given  him.  Where  provi- 
dence has  bestowed  much  of  earthly  wealth  and  authority,  it  requires  much  grace 
not  to  be  unduly  elevated  by  them,  and  to  keep  ever  in  mind  that  they  are  given 
for  usefulness.  The  weighty  responsibilities  which  they  bring  with  them  are  seldom 
considered.  Let  us  beware  of  pride.  "  The  proud  in  heart  is  abomination  to  the 
Lord."  Crush  the  first  risings  of  vanity  and  self-importance.  Dread  every  high 
thought  of  yourselves,  every  towering  imagination,  every  exalted  idea  of  your 
own  moral  excellency,  remembering  that  God  knoweth  the  proud  afar  off,  but 
giveth  grace  to   the  humble.     III.  At  this  feast,  though  a  heathen  one,  there 

WAS     ONE    THING    WHICH    CONDEMNED    THE    PRACTICE    OF     MANY    WHO    CALL    THEMSELVES 

Christians.  "  And  the  drinking  was  according  to  law  ;  none  did  compel,  for  so  the 
king  had  appointed  to  all  the  officers  of  his  house,  that  they  should  do  according  to 
every  man's  pleasure."  Intemperance  is  an  abomination  to  God  and  a  degradation 
to  man.  Hereby  the  creature,  which  is  inferior  only  to  the  angels,  makes  himself 
lower  than  th«  beasts  of  the  field  I  The  bounties  of  providence  are  continued 
evidences  of  God's  tender  care  toward  us.  His  undeserving  creatures,  and  are  to 
be  thankfully  and  humbly  received  and  used  piously  and  in  moderation.  They  are 
given  for  the  support  of  our  nature,  to  enable  us  to  glorify  God  in  our  bodies 
and  in  our  spirits :  let  us  not,  then,  render  ourselves  incapable  of  doing  so  by 
drowning  our  rational  powers  in  intoxicating  liquors,  and  throwing  our  bodies  out  of 
health  and  comfort  by  a  worse  than  beastly  abuse  of  God's  mercies.  IV.  But  though 
the  feast  of  Ahasuerus  was  free  from  the  disgrace  of  compelling  the  guests  to  pro- 
ceed to  drunkenness,  yet  did  vert  evil  consequences  result  from  it  ;  indeed,  it 
is  but  seldom  that  such  meetings  are  free  from  such  consequences.  We  read  of 
Belshazzar's  feast,  and  that  it  was  not  without  its  grievous  impieties.  We  read 
likewise  of  Herod's  feast,  and  of  the  deed  of  darkness  which  gave  it  its  notoriety. 
Our  Lord,  too  (Luke  xiv.),  teaches  us  that,  though  the  entertaining  of  our  friends 
in  this  way  is  not  entirely  prohibited,  the  money  thereby  expended  would  be  much 
better  laid  out,  against  the  day  of  reckoning,  in  consoling  the  miserable  and 
relieving  the  distresses  of  the  indigent  and  needy.  V.  Let  us  consider  the  evil 
which  was  occasioned  by  the  feast.  1.  It  behoveth  us  to  lead  exemplary  lives, 
and  the  higher  we  are  placed  in  community  the  more  ought  this  to  be  the  object 
of  our  ambition,  2.  It  behoveth  us  to  regard  the  duties  which  appertain  to 
the  relations  of  life  in  which  we  are  placed.  (J.  Hughes.)  The  short-lived 
treasure  : — The  apostle  Paul  speaks  of  the  world  as  if  it  were  a  pageant  which 
has  been  exhibited  and  is  over  ;  a  procession  which  is  on  the  march  and  has 
passed  by ;  a  scene-picture  which  drops  for  a  moment  and  then  gives  way  to  another 
which  succeeds  it.  Here  there  is  no  continuing  city  for  man.  If  he  would  have  a 
kingdom  which  cannot  be  removed,  he  must  seek  it  beyond  the  Umits  of  the  present 
world,  among  the  things  which  are  unseen  and  eternal.  1.  Our  first  reflection  must 
be,' the  world  passeth  away.  It  has  gone.  All  its  indulgences  and  all  its  glories 
have  come  to  their  appointed  end.  Nothing  of  them  remains.  Ahasuerus  feasted 
and  Vashti  suffered.  All  is  silent  and  dead.  No  single  voice  of  the  glory  or  of  the 
sorrow  remains.  Where  is  the  splendour  of  Shushan?  Not  one  stone  remains  upon 
another  of  all  the  palaces  of  its  glory  or  the  portals  of  its  majestic  display.  How 
wonderfully  contrasted  are  the  works  of  God  and  the  works  of  man  1  The  one  has 
perished.  The  others  remain.  But  is  not  this  equally  true  of  earth  in  all  the 
relations  and  displays  of  its  glory  ?  Look  where  you  will,  you  see  the  same  history 
continually  repeated.  The  bloom  of  youth,  the  gaiety  of  health,  the  boast  of  riches, 
the  clarion  sound  of  triumph  and  power,  all,  all  pass  away.  They  live  a  moment; 
they  shine  for  a  day ;  and  they  are  gone.  Man  tries  in  vain  to  prolong  their  enjoy- 
ment and  their  being  ;  or  even  to  recover  their  shape,  and  perpetuate  their  memory. 
He  is  doomed  to  disappointment  in  them  all.  The  retrospect  is  sadness  and  self- 
condemnation.  There  at  least  we  may  say,  "  My  heart  and  my  hope  shall  not  be 
fixed.  Something  better  than  this  I  must  have  and  will  have.  The  joys  that  fade 
80  rapidly  and  so  certainly  are  not  for  me.  This  world,  and  all  the  things  which 
are  in  this  world,  shall  never  be  the  treasure  of  my  choice."  2.  As  our  second 
reflection  upon  this  accomplished  scene,  the  manner  of  its  passing  has  been  most 
remarkable.  In  the  lesson  we  have  considered,  God  has  been  pleased  to  show  us 
this  experiment  on  the  grandest  scale.  The  world  began  with  every  possible  advan- 
tage for  its  working  and  its  display,  and  in  every  succeeding  step  it  went  downward 


CHAP.  I.]  ESTHER.  11 

until  it  came  to  nothing.  Its  first  scene  was  its  brightest  one.  The  morning  rosa 
when  the  tide  was  at  his  full  and  the  surface  calm  as  the  molten  silver.  Every 
hour  marked  its  rapid  ebb,  till  the  evening  closed  upon  a  full  accumulation  of 
defilement  and  disgust  which  the  preceding  show  had  vainly  covered  for  a  season. 
It  was  a  sad  experiment  indeed.  In  the  manner  of  its  passage  and  trial  it  was  a 
universal  type.  In  aU  our  possessions  of  the  world,  in  the  whole  scheme  of  mere 
worldly  enjoyment,  the  first  is  always  the  best.  The  clock  of  this  world  still  strikes 
backward.  It  begins  at  twelve,  runs  rapidly  round  to  one,  and  then  stops.  Thug 
its  circle  is  complete,  larger  or  smaller  as  it  may  happen  to  be.  How  many  have  I 
seen,  starting  in  all  the  pride  of  inherited  wealth,  closing  their  career  in  neglect  and 
poverty !  How  many  have  I  beheld  the  centre  of  personal  admiration  in  the  world 
of  fashion,  of  earthly  pomp  and  folly,  living  to  be  forgotten  and  abhorred  I  Thus 
this  present  world  repays  its  votaries.  And  when  the  result  comes  in  age,  or  sick, 
ness,  or  poverty,  or  neglect,  and  the  whole  machine  has  run  down  and  stopped,  bitter 
and  disgusting  indeed  is  the  remembrance  of  the  world  which  has  gone.  But  what 
a  contrast  there  is  between  this  passing  worldly  portion  and  the  reality  of  that 
treasure  which  stands  in  opposition  to  it  I  The  heavenly  portion  ever  grows  more 
and  more  compensating  and  satisfactory.  The  heart  never  grows  old  or  dull  in  the 
faithful  pursuit  of  it.  3.  In  this  passage  of  the  world  you  may  see  what  are  the 
elements  of  its  short-lived  power  to  please — what  are  the  facts  which  make  up  the 
necessity  of  this  rapid  rush  of  all  that  sinful  man  has  sought  and  desired  on  the 
earth.  Ahasuerus  had  everything  which  a  mere  sensual  mind  could  ask.  What 
formed  the  necessity  of  his  wretchedness  in  the  midst  of  it  all  ?  We  may  answer 
at  once,  because  nothing  of  all  that  he  had  was  adapted  in  itself  to  give  him 
satisfaction.  This  is  the  first  difficulty.  You  have  a  spiritual  nature,  a  soul  within 
which  can  never  be  satisfied  with  the  mere  shams  of  an  earthly  life.  The  soul  looks 
out  in  the  midst  of  all  the  joys  of  earth  unmet  and  unhappy,  unable  to  be  contented 
thus,  because  there  is  no  real  proportion  between  the  two.  There  is  here  an  original 
and  inseparable  defect  in  the  things  of  the  world,  which  no  multiplication  of  them 
can  supply.  These  joys  and  treasures  are  all  short-lived  and  perishing  in  them- 
selves. They  have  the  sentence  of  death  within  themselves  ;  and  you  cannot 
prolong  the  period  of  their  power.  They  corrupt  and  decay  in  your  hands  while 
you  grasp  them.  The  appetites  which  desire  and  seek  these  joys  pass  away  with 
them  also.  There  soon  comes  the  time  when  there  is  no  longer  a  susceptibility  to 
their  power.  Their  invitations  find  no  longer  a  response  in  the  heart  to  which  they 
are  offered.  The  voices  of  singing  men  and  singing  women  can  be  heard  no  more. 
And  this  with  no  reference  to  a  change  of  principle  or  heart.  No,  it  may  be  we 
would  willingly  prolong  their  power  if  we  could  ;  we  would  gladly  renew  our  former 
gratifications  in  them  if  it  were  possible.  But  all  their  power  to  please,  and  all  our 
facility  to  be  pleased  by  them,  have  passed  away  and  cannot  be  recalled.  The  whole 
scene  of  which  these  earthly  joys  make  up  a  part  also  goes,  and  cannot  be  arrested  or 
recalled.  Friends  are  gone ;  families  are  broken ;  homes  are  lost ;  companions  have 
departed.  We  stand  here  to  contemplate  this  inherent  fading  character  in  the  world 
which  has  passed.  What  a  contrast  are  all  its  provisions  to  the  joys  and  advantages 
of  real  religion !  4.  We  may  look  at  the  result  of  this  passage  of  the  fashion  of  the 
world.  What  does  it  leave  behind  ?  Ah,  this  is  the  worst  of  all.  We  have  seen  the 
evidence  in  the  experiment  before  us.  Nothing  in  memory.  There  is  no  remem- 
brance of  benefit  or  pleasure.  The  past  gives  no  satisfaction.  There  is  no  room  for 
delight  in  retrospection.  A  wasted  life,  enfeebled  powers,  conscious  degradation, 
are  all  the  residuum  of  a  life  of  sensual  enjoyment  in  the  world.  Added  to  this, 
there  is  extreme  regret,  often  the  bitterness  of  unappeased  remorse.  Nothing  in 
actual  possession.  What  of  all  the  array  of  human  pleasures  outlasts  itself  ?  Youth, 
gaiety  and  wealth  successively  pass  by.  Man  goes  out  of  one  vain  indulgence  into 
another,  but  carries  nothing  away  with  him.  The  soul  is  empty.  He  presses  on  in 
this  vain  succession  to  the  end.  The  fact  of  the  result  remains  the  same.  He  has 
nothing.  Pleasure  has  gone ;  time  has  gone ;  indulgence  has  gone  ;  means  have 
gone ;  appetites  have  gone  ;  life  has  gone.  And  of  the  whole  pageant  as  it  has 
passed   nothing    remains.      {S.  H.    Tyng,  D.D.)  Self-glorification  : — I.  The 

HONABCH  WAS  ABLE  TO  UAXE  A  PROOD  DISPLAY  AND  TO  GRATIFT  THE  ORIENTAL  TASTE  FOB 
MAGNIFICENCE.         H.  BuT   THIS    PRODD    DISPLAY   WAS   A   CONTEMPTIBLE    EXHIBITION.       It 

showed — 1.  The  materialism  of  his  nature.  2.  The  narrowness  of  his  view.  3.  The 
childishness  of  his  spirit.  IH.  This  proud  display  has  a  sorrowful  aspect.  The 
display  only  lasted  for  "  days  "  after  all.  Let  our  wealth — material,  intellectual, 
or  moral — speak  for  itself.      Let  us  see  the  warning  word  "  days  "  inscribed 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

on  all  our  possessions.  {Homiletic  Commentary.)  A  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the 
abujidance  of  his  wealth  : — The  whole  struggle  of  modern  life  is  exactly  after  the 
first  chapter  of  Esther  and  the  first  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes.  Every 
Ahasuerus  thinks  he  could  do  better  than  hia  namesake,  and  every  new  Solomon 
says  that  he  would  never  play  the  fool  as  the  old  one  did.  What  httle  toy  houses 
are  ours  as  compared  with  this  palace  ;  and  yet  we  will  persist.  Why  do  we  not 
believe  history  ?  Why  do  we  not  accept  the  verdict  that  it  is  not  in  time  or  sense, 
in  gold  or  precious  stones,  to  make  a  man  great  or  happy  ?  When  we  have  built  up 
our  little  toy  houses,  Ahasuerus  looks  down  upon  them',  and  smiles  at  the  little 
honeycombs.  His  "  beds  were  of  gold  and  silver,  upon  a  pavement  of  red,  and 
blue,  and  white,  and  black  marble."  Yet  it  was  an  elaborate  tomb,  a  magnificent 
sarcophagus  1  When  will  men  come  to  learn  that  a  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the 
abundance  of  the  things  which  he  possesseth  ;  that  he  is  most  jewelled  who  has  no 
jewellery ;  that  he  only  is  great  who  is  great  in  soul  ?  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The 
honours  of  the  world  should  not  elate : — Alcibiades  was  one  day  boasting  of  his 
wealth  and  great  estate,  when  Socrates  placed  a  map  before  him,  and  asked  him  to 
find  Attica.  It  was  insignificant  on  the  map  ;  but  he  found  it.  "  Now,"  said  the 
philosopher,  "point  out  your  own  estate."  "It  is  too  small  to  be  distinguished  in  so 
little  a  space,"  was  the  answer.  "  See,  then,"  said  Socrates,  "  how  much  you  are 
affected  about  an  imperceptible  point  of  land."  Your  bags  of  gold  should  be 
ballast  in  your  vessel  to  keep  her  always  steady,  instead  of  being  topsails  to  your 
masts  to  make  your  vessel  giddy.  Give  me  that  distinguished  person  who  is  rather 
pressed  down  under  the  weight  of  all  his  honours  than  puffed  up  with  the  blast 
thereof.  (Abp.  Seeker.)  Waste  of  wealth: — I  am  no  advocate  for  meanness  of 
private  habitation.  I  would  fain  introduce  into  it  all  magnificence,  care,  and 
beauty,  when  they  are  possible ;  but  I  would  not  have  that  useless  expense  in 
unnoticed  fineries  or  formalities — cornicing  of  ceilings,  and  graining  of  doors,  and 
fringing  of  cm-tains,  and  thousands  of  such  things — which  have  become  foolishly 
and  apathetically  habitual.  ...  I  speak  from  experience :  I  know  what  it  is  to  hve 
in  a  cottage  with  a  deal  floor  and  roof,  and  a  hearth  of  mica  slate ;  I  know  it  to  be 
in  many  respects  healthier  and  happier  than  living  between  a  Turkey  carpet  and  a 
gilded  ceiling,  beside  a  steel  grate  and  polished  fender.  I  do  not  say  that  such  things 
have  not  their  place  and  propriety ;  but  I  say  this  emphatically,  that  a  tenth  part  of  the 
expense  which  is  sacrificed  in  domestic  vanities,  if  not  absolutely  and  meaning- 
lessly  lost  in  domestic  comforts  and  encumbrances,  would,  if  collectively  afforded 
and  wisely  employed,  build  a  marble  church  for  every  town  in  England.  (J.  Raskin.) 
The  royal  feast : — Let  us  draw  a  comparison  between  the  great  Persian  feast  and 
the  feast  of  the  gospel.  I.  The  one  was  pkovided  by  the  king  ;  the  otheb  by  the 
King  of  kings.    II.  The  one  feast  is  limited  to  nobles  and  princes  ;  the  other  is 

MADE  FOB  ALL  NATIONS.  III.  In  THE  ONE  WE  BEE  THE  FADING  GLORIES  OF  MAN  ;  IN  THE 
OTHER  WE  SEE  THE  0NFADING  GLORIES  OF  GoD.  IV.  ThE  ONE  FEAST  CONTINUED  FOR  SIX 
MONTHS  ;  THE  OTHER  CONTINUES  THROUGH  ALL  TIME.  V.  In  THE  ONE  CASE  SOME 
WERE  OBLIGED  TO  FEAST  IN  THE  COURT  OF  THE  GARDEN,  A8  THERE  WAS  NOT  ROOM  FOR 
THEM  IN  THE  PALACE  ;  THE  ChURCH  OF  GOD  IS  FOR  ALL  COMERS.  VI.  In  THE  ONE  CASE 
THERE  WAS  A  SEPARATION  OF  HUSBANDS  AND  WIVES  ;  BUT  IN  THE  OTHER  BOTH  ARE 
WELCOME  TOGETHER.  VII.  ThE  ONE  FEAST  ENDED  IN  CONSTERNATION  AND  SORROW  ;  BUT 
THE    OTHER   SHALL    CONTINUE   IN   JOY    AND   HAPPINESS.       Lcam,  iu    COnclusion — 1.  The 

insufficiency  and  instability  of  all  earthly  things.  2.  The  rich  grace  and  goodness 
of  our  God.  {21ie  Study  and  the  Pulpit.)  When  he  shewed  the  riches  of  his 
glorious  kingdom  and  the  honour  of  his  excellent  majesty. — Despotism  occasionally 
generous : — Despotism,  while  it  has  its  caprices  of  cruelty,  has  also  its  occasional 
fits  of  generosity  and  kindness.  (A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Extravagance : — Every  one 
is  to  live,  and  to  entertain  his  friends,  according  to  his  rank  and  circumstances ; 
but  those  who  are  of  a  liberal  spirit  are  in  danger  of  indulging  in  extravagance, 
to  gratify  their  vanity  and  passion  for  show.  (T.  McCrie,  D.D.)  Unsatis- 
fying splendour: — What  was  there  in  all  that  to  satisfy  the  soul's  hunger  and 
thirst,  its  craving  and  longing  ?  One  morsel  of  the  bread  of  life  would  be  better, 
one  drop  of  the  wine  of  the  kingdom  more  blessed  and  exhilarating,  than  it  all.  So 
that  when  we  look  abroad  upon  the  scene  of  Persian  magnificence  and  luxury,  the 
glitter  and  splendour  of  it  seems  to  dissolve  and  fade  away  when  there  is  brought 
into  prominence  our  Lord's  solemn  inquiry,  "  What  is  a  man  profited  if  he  shall 
gain  the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own  soul?  "  [T.  McEwan.)  Temperance  best : — 
Epicurus  himself,  who  placed  happiness  in  pleasure,  enjoined  temperance  as  a 
necessary  means  of  this  pleasure.     An  author  of  our  own  nation  justly  observes 


«HAP.  I.]  ESTHER,  13 

that  when  a  great  multitude  of  alluring  dishes  are  set  upon  a  table  a  wise  man 
anay  see  palsies,  apoplexies,  and  other  grievous  or  mortal  distempers  lurking 
.amongst  them.  Poor  men,  who  are  unable  to  provide  for  themselves  anything 
beyond  the  bare  necessaries  of  life,  are  apt  to  envy  those  who  have  it  in  their  power 
to  fare  sumptuously  every  day.  Be  persuaded,  if  you  desire  to  be  content  with  your 
condition,  that  happiness  does  not  lie  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  a  man 
possesseth,  or  in  the  rich  entertainments  which  he  is  able  to  furnish  out  for  himself 
-or  his  friends.  Could  not  Jesus  have  furnished  out  as  elegant  an  entertainment  for 
those  whom  He  fed  by  miracles  as  Ahasuerus  to  his  noble  guests  ?  And  yet  He  fed 
them  only  with  barley  loaves  and  fishes.  Could  not  God  have  brought  wine  as 
easily  as  water  out  of  the  rock  for  the  refreshment  of  His  people  ?  (G.  Lawson.) 
Tlie  expense  of  feasting  : — Poor  man !  Little  did  he  know  wherein  true  riches,  and 
glory,  and  royalty  consisted.  It  is  said  of  the  father  of  Louis  XV.,  king  of  France, 
that  when  his  preceptor  one  day  was  speaking  of  this  feast  of  Ahasuerus,  and 
wondered  how  the  Prince  of  Persia  could  find  patience  for  such  a  long  feast,  he 
replied  that  his  wonder  was  how  he  could  defray  the  expense  of  it.  He  was  afraid 
that  the  provinces  would  be  compelled  to  observe  a  fast  for  it.  The  majesty 
of  the  Divine  Ruler : — From  the  tinselled  splendour  of  the  Persian  court  it  may  be 
well  for  us  to  turn  that  we  may  contemplate  the  majesty  of  Him  who  is  the  true 
King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  ;  of  Him  whom  Isaiah  represents  as  "  sitting  upon 
the  circle  of  the  earth,  and  all  the  inhabitants  thereof  are  as  grasshoppers ;  that 
.■stretcheth  out  the  heavens  as  a  curtain,  and  spreadeth  them  as  a  tent  to  dwell  in." 
To  acquire  adequate  conceptions  of  His  majestic  greatness  is  an  impossibility.  That 
which  surrounded  Ahasuerus  was  no  doubt  such  as  to  inspire  awe.  And  were  it 
possible  that  a  human  potentate  should  hold  sway  over  the  several  planets  con- 
stituting the  solar  system — ruling  subjects  innumerable  by  his  uncontrolled  will — 
what  majesty  in  the  eyes  of  millions  would  centre  around  his  person  and  government  I 
He,  however,  into  whose  majestic  presence  we  shall  one  day  enter,  and  at  whose 
iootstool  we  ought  now  to  bow  in  reverence,  is  the  Euler,  not  alone  of  earth,  nor 
ainaply  of  the  solar  system,  but  He  whose  government  is  coextensive  with  the 
universe,  whose  presence  fills  immensity,  whose  sceptre  when  lifted  in  mercy 
bestows  life,  when  in  anger  consigns  to  wretchedness.  The  inconceivable  majesty 
^f  God  ought  to  impress  us  with  a  becoming  sense  of  our  own  insignificance.  A 
proper  conception  of  the  majesty  of  God  is  fitted  to  induce  the  inquiry,  "  Lord,  what 
wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  It  should  prompt  the  desire  for  some  humble  part  in 
•enhancing  God's  glory,  the  inclination  to  do  something  toward  accomplishing  the 
work  He  is  carrying  forward  in  the  earth  and  is  willing  to  effect  in  our  own  hearts. 
He  whose  ambition  it  is  to  conquer  the  kingdom  of  evil  within  himself  and  who 
accepts  Christ  as  the  Captain  of  his  salvation  is  destined  to  no  such  disappointment 
AS  crushed  the  spirit  of  Xerxes,  forcing  him  to  feed  upon  the  ashes  of  crushed  hopes 
and  to  surrender  to  self-indulgence  that  he  might  drown  the  memory  of  former 
anguish.  (J.  Van  Dyke,  D.D.)  Where  were  white,  green,  and  blue  hangings. — 
The  beauty  of  nature  : — Every  day  we  behold  a  more  glorious  scene  in  the  canopy 
of  the  heavens  spread  over  our  heads.  The  roses  and  lilies  which  adorn  our 
gardens  are  more  beautiful  than  any  of  the  productions  of  art  which  royal  wealth 
can  call  forth.  The  earth  is  full  of  God's  riches.  The  heavens  show  forth  His  glory. 
Those  who  delight  to  have  their  eyes  and  their  minds  at  once  entertained  can  be  at 
vno  loss,  though  they  are  far  from  royal  palaces,  when  the  earth  displays  her  beauty 
and  the  stars  their  glory.  (G.  Lawson.)  And  gave  them  drink  in  vessels  of  gold. — 
An  absurd  drinking  custom  : — "What  a  miserable  thing  it  is  that  we  hear  some- 
times that  a  man  cannot  do  his  business  without  drinking  !  "  Come  and  have  a 
drink ! "  is  the  beginning  of  business,  and  "  Come  and  have  a  drink ! "  is  the  completion 
.of  it.  What  a  glutton  and  a  beast  a  man  should  be  if  before  he  could  begin  or 
finish  any  business  he  must  say,  "  Come  and  have  a  meal !  "  And  is  he  any  better 
who  must  always  drink  something  ?  Surely,  when  competition  is  so  keen,  it  is 
needful  that  he  who  buys  or  sells  should  keep  his  wits  as  clear  as  God  made  them. 
To  muddle  one's  own  brain  with  drink  is  to  play  the  fool ;  to  muddle  another's  is 
•to  play  the  knave.     (Mark  Guy  Pearse.) 

Ver.  8.  And  the  drinking  was  according  to  the  law ;  none  did  compel. — Political 
prudence  : — It  is  not  entirely,  however,  in  moral  recoil  that  sanction  is  thus  given 
in  law  to  the  better  practice.  There  is  a  touch  of  political  prudence  in  it.  For 
here  at  the  feast  are  princes  from  all  parts,  with  their  retainers  and  tribes.  There 
Are  men  here  from  the  mountains  who  are  famous  for  their  temperance  and  for  the 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

strictness  and  simplicity  of  their  manners.  Such  men  would  not  be  won,  but  dis- 
gusted rather  and  alienated  from  the  royal  cause,  by  anything  like  Bacchanalian 
excess.  In  prudence,  therefore,  as  well  as  from  possibly  higher  motive,  the 
principle  of  temperance  must  have  the  reinforcement  of  pubhc  law.  (A.  Ralcijh, 
D.D.)  God  not  to  be  insulted  by  the  abiLse  of  His  creatures  : — Did  an  absolute 
prince  pay  such  regard  to  the  laws  of  his  country,  and  to  the  liberty  of  his  subjects, 
and  shall  not  Christians  pay  an  equal  regard  to  the  laws  of  their  religion  ?  Are 
these  laws  less  obligatory  upon  us  at  feasts  than  on  other  occasions  ?  Shall  we 
requite  the  liberal  Giver  of  all  good  things  with  insults  on  His  authority,  at  the  very 
time  that  our  table  is  covered  by  His  bounty  ?  (G.  Lawson.)  The  compulsion  of 
our  drinking  customs : — Whether  we  do  not,  on  a  wider  scale,  as  a  people  in  fact, 
and  with  the  force  of  law,  practise  compulsion  still,  and  that  on  the  weakest  and 
most  helpless  part  of  our  people,  is  a  very  serious  question,  and  one  which,  to  say 
the  least,  we  cannot  answer  with  the  same  confidence.  If  places  where  drink  is 
sold  to  the  common  people  are  multiplied  much  beyond  the  reasonable  needs  of  the 
community ;  if  exceptional  privileges  are  given  to  the  sellers  ;  if  their  houses,  with 
many  exits  and  entrances,  are  planted  in  the  most  conspicuous  spots  ;  if  they  burn 
the  brightest  lights  in  the  streets,  and  are  allowed  to  keep  open  long  after  other 
trades  and  industries  are  closed  and  silent,  does  not  all  this  and  more  of  the  same 
kind  amount  to  a  sort  of  compulsion  to  working-people,  and  trades-people,  and 
thoughtless  young  people  of  both  sexes?  {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  No  compultion  to 
dri7ik  : — The  statement  here  made  reminds  us  of  an  incident  which  is  said  to  have 
occurred  at  the  table  of  Queen  Victoria  in  one  of  the  early  years  of  her  reign.  The 
temperance  movement  was  just  beginning  to  make  its  way  into  the  upper  classes  of 
English  society,  and  on  the  occasion  to  which  I  refer  a  British  nobleman,  well- 
known  for  his  activity  in  all  good  causes,  declined  to  comply  with  the  request  of  one 
of  his  fellow-guests  that  he  should  drink  wine  with  him,  whereupon  the  appeal  was 
made  to  her  Majesty  that  she  should  exert  her  authority  in  the  case  ;  but  she  nobly 
replied,  in  the  spirit  of  this  Persian  law,  *'  There  shall  be  no  compulsion  at  my 
table  "  ;  and  that  reply  did  much  to  discountenance  the  old  custom  of  badgering, 
and  browbeating  and  insisting  upon  guests  drinking  out  of  regard  for  their  hosts, 
until  they  felt  themselves  in  a  position  where  it  was  difi&cult  to  refuse,  and  were 
virtually  compelled  either  to  act  against  their  better  judgment  or  to  do  that  which 
was  considered  rude  and  unmannerly.     (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 

Ver.  10.  When  the  heart  of  the  king  was  merry  with  wine. — Intoxication : — 
There  is  a  difference  between  not  being  intoxicated  and  being  sober.  A  person  may 
be  able  to  speak  and  to  walk,  and  yet  may  be  guilty  of  excess  in  the  use  of  strong 
drink.  He  may  not  have  lost  the  use  of  his  senses,  and  yet  have  lost  the  sound  use 
of  his  senses.  He  may  lose  his  guard,  and  expose  himself  defenceless  to  the  attack 
of  temptation.  Beason  is  the  glory  of  a  man,  and  whatever  tarnishes  or  dims  the 
lustre  of  this  crown  is  criminal.  Next  to  reason,  speech  is  man's  glory,  and 
everything  which  causes  it  to  falter  is  sinful.  Whatever  makes  a  man  slow  to 
hear,  swift  to  speak,  swift  to  wrath — whatever  makes  him  rash  in  counsel,  and 
precipitate  in  action — whatever  makes  him  say  or  do  what  is  unbecoming  his 
character,  and  what  he  would  be  ashamed  of  at  another  time — cometh  of  evil,  and 
may  be  the  source  of  great  vexation  to  himself  and  injury  to  others.  {T.  McCrie.) 
Drunkenness  does  not  destroy  responsibility: — The  worst  effect  of  the  vice  of 
drunkenness  is  its  degrading  influence  on  the  conduct  and  character  of  men.  It 
robs  its  victims  of  self-respect  and  manliness  and  sends  them  to  wallow  in  the  mire 
with  swinish  obscenity.  What  they  would  not  dream  of  stooping  to  in  their  sober 
moments  they  revel  in  with  shameless  ostentation  when  their  brains  are  clouded 
with  intoxicating  drink.  It  is  no  excuse  to  plead  that  a  drunkard  is  a  madman 
unaccountable  for  his  actions ;  he  is  accountable  for  having  put  himself  in  his 
degraded  condition.  The  man  who  has  been  foolish  enough  to  launch  his  boat  on 
the  rapids  cannot  divert  its  course  when  he  is  startled  by  the  thunder  of  the  falls  he 
is  approaching ;  but  he  should  have  thought  of  that  before  leaving  the  safety  of  the 
shore.  {W.  F.Adeney,  M.A.)  The  drunkard^s  excuses  and  the  drunkard's  woe: — 
I.  The  drunkard's  excuses.  1.  Good-fellowship.  But  can  friendship  be  founded 
on  vice ;  especially  on  a  vice  which  impairs  the  memory  and  the  sense  of  obliga- 
tion, leads  to  the  betrayal  of  secrets,  and  stirs  up  strife  and  contention  ?  2.  It 
drowns  care.  But  the  drunkard's  care  must  arise  either  from  the  ill  state  of  his 
health,  the  unfortunate  position  of  his  worldly  affairs,  or  the  stings  of  a  guilty  con- 
science ;  and  in  either  case  his  temporary  oblivion  is  purchased  at  the  cost  of  an 


CHAP,  I.]  ESTHER.  15 

aggravation  of  the  evils  which  cause  him  to  desire  it.  11.  Thx  dbunkabd's  woe. 
This  is  made  up  of  the  miserable  effects.  1.  Temporal.  (1)  Poverty.  (2)  Con- 
tempt. (3)  Ill-health.  (4)  An  untimely  death.  2.  Spiritual.  (1)  The  under- 
standing is  depraved  and  darkened.  (2)  The  will  is  enfeebled  and  dethroned. 
(3)  Begard  for  men,  reverence  for  God,  are  destroyed.  Drunkenness  travels  with  a 
whole  train  of  other  vices,  and  requires  the  whole  breadth  of  the  broad  vay  to  give 
it  room.  (Clapham's  Selected  Sermons.)  Afraid  of  drink : — Stonewall  Jackson, 
"Jeb"  Stuart,  and  a  large  number  of  the  most  distinguished  of  the  Confederate 
officers  imitated  the  example  of  their  chief,  and  were  strict  temperance  men.  Upon 
one  occasion  Jackson  was  suffering  so  much  from  fatigue  and  severe  exposure  that 
his  surgeon  prevailed  on  him  to  take  a  little  brandy.  He  made  a  very  wry  face  as 
he  swallowed  it,  and  the  doctor  asked,  "  Why,  general,  is  not  the  brandy  good  ?  It 
is  some  that  we  have  recently  captured,  and  I  think  it  very  fine."  "  Oh,  yes  1  "  was 
the  reply,  "  it  is  very  good  brandy.  I  like  Uquor — its  taste  and  its  effects — and  that 
is  just  the  reason  why  I  never  drink  it."  Upon  another  occasion,  after  a  long  ride 
in  a  drenching  rain,  a  brother  officer  insisted  upon  Jackson's  taking  a  drink  with 
him ;  but  he  firmly  replied,  "  No,  sir,  I  cannot  do  it.  I  tell  you  I  am  more  afraid 
of  King  Alcohol  than  of  all  the  bullets  of  the  enemy."  The  battle  with  drink : — • 
And  drink  is  such  a  degrading  enemy  to  the  intellectual  man  :  the  foe  is  unworthy 
of  his  steel.  The  battle  of  drink  is  not  like  the  old  contests  of  chivalry,  when  knight 
assailed  knight  with  unblemished  shield,  and  there  was  such  a  grace  and  elegance 
about  the  conflict  that  even  defeat  was  not  dishonourable.  It  is  more  like  a  battle 
with  a  chimney-sweep  falling  foul  of  you,  rolling  on  you  his  heavy  bulk  till  he  has 
you  sprawling  in  the  mud,  and  so  smearing  you  that  you  become  an  object  of  loath- 
ing— to  yourself,  if  you  have  any  sense  of  shame,  and  certainly  to  all  who  pass  by. 
Could  any  humiliation  be  deeper?  (G.  W.  Blaikie.)  The  safety  of  temperance  : — 
Suppose  there  were  two  lines  of  railroad ;  on  one  of  them  was  an  accident  regularly 
once  a  week,  sometimes  on  one  day,  and  sometimes  on  another ;  and  on  the  other 
there  never  had  been  an  accident.  Suppose  your  only  son  wanted  to  go  the  journey 
traversed  by  the  respective  lines,  and  he  were  to  come  to  you  saying,  "  Which  road 
shall  I  take,  father  ?  "  would  you  dare  to  tell  him  to  take  that  upon  which  the  acci- 
dents were  so  frequent,  because  it  was  the  most  fashionable  ?  You  would  say  at 
once,  "  Take  the  safe  road,  my  boy."  And  that  is  just  what  we  temperance  folks 
say.  {John  B.  Gough.)  Wise  abstinence : — There  was  a  half-witted  boy  in  one  of 
the  southern  counties  of  Scotland  who  was  known  as  an  "  innocent "  or  "  natural." 
Upon  one  occasion  he  was  enticed  into  a  public-house  where  a  company  of  young 
men  were  drinking.  Some  of  them  offered  spirits  to  this  supposed  simpleton, 
whereupon  he  instantly  and  absolutely  refused  them,  saying,  "  If  the  Lord  Almighty 
has  given  few  wits  to  Daft  Davie,  He  has  at  least  given  him  sense  enough  to  keep 
the  little  that  he  has !  "  {Sunday  School.)  All's  well  that  ends  weU ;  but  wine 
never  ends  well.     {A.  M.  Symington,  B.A.) 

Vers.  11, 12.  To  bring  Vashti  the  qneen  before  the  king:. — Vanity : — ^Whatever 
be  the  ruling  passion  of  a  man,  whether  it  be  pride,  vanity,  or  anger,  or  lust,  or 
impiety,  or  even  benevolence,  it  will  display  itself  when  he  is  inflamed  by  strong 
drink.  Vanity  was  the  ruling  passion  in  the  breast  of  the  Persian  monarch.  He 
had  feasted  his  nobles  for  weeks  to  "  show  the  riches  of  his  glorious  kingdom  " ;  and 
now  he  would  bring  in  the  queen,  to  "  show  the  people  and  the  princes  her  beauty." 
He  was  vain  of  Vashti ;  and  having  displayed  "  the  honour  of  his  royal  majesty," 
he  would  now  exhibit  the  beauty  of  her  royal  majesty.  We  are  hurt  by  the  ebulli- 
tion of  pride — but  ready  to  laugh  at  the  display  of  vanity.  It  is  true  that  it  makes 
its  subject  ridiculous,  but  it  is  a  vice  as  well  as  a  weakness,  and  is  often  productive 
of  great  mischief.  The  female  sex  is  commonly  supposed  to  be  most  addicted  to 
vanity ;  but  men  are  not  free  from  it,  and,  if  they  have  nothing  to  be  vain  of  them- 
selves, are  sometimes  fain  to  shine  in  borrowed  feathers.  {T.  MeCrie.)  Vashti'i 
refusal  : — What  the  reason  was  that  swayed  her  to  this  bold  step  we  are  not  told. 
Her  motives  may  have  been  mixed.  Perhaps  she  was  tired  with  her  own  exertions. 
Perhaps  she  felt  that  for  the  time  she  was  not  beautiful,  and  would  not  look  queenly. 
Perhaps  she  thought  the  summons  too  peremptory,  and  the  bearers  of  it  not  dignified 
enough  to  come  to  her  with  such  a  message.  We  cannot  certainly  tell.  All  human 
motives  are  more  or  less  mixed,  and  so  were  hers— but  one  feels  bound  to  say  that 
by  far  the  most  probable  cause  of  her  refusal  was  a  deep  sense  of  injury  done  to  her 
womanhood,  and  of  course  to  her  queenliness,  in  this  sudden  call  to  show  herself  in 
such  a  company,  at  such  a  time.    {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)        The  pride  of  Vashti  .-—Bad 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

as  the  conduct  of  the  king  was  in  issuing  the  order,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  queen 
was  right  in  disobeying  it.     If  the  action  had  been  in  itself  positively  immoral,  then 
it  would  have  been  her  duty  to  have  resisted,  whatever  the  consequences  might  be. 
Ko  authority  can  bind,  and  no  danger  should  constrain,  a  woman  to  do  anything 
which  is  vicious  or  essentially  immodest.     Had  Vashti  of  her  own  accord  gone  into 
the  company,  had  she  sought  the  opportunity,  or  embraced  it  joyfuUy,  she  would 
have  been  convicted  of  immodesty  ;  but  had  she  complied  merely  out  of  respect  to 
authority,  and  to  prevent  her  husband  from  being  dishonoured  by  her  refusal,  in  the 
presence  of  his  subjects,  her  conduct  would  have  appeared  in  a  very  different  light 
in  the  eyes  of  all  reasonable  persons.     She  was  a  subject,  as  well  as  a  wife  ;  and  if 
her  royal  husband  had,  when  heated  with  wine,  issued  an  order  which  reflected  on 
her  honour,  she,  being  perfectly  sober,  might  have  consulted  his.     But  Vashti  was 
as  proud  as  Ahasuerus  was  vain,  and  determined  that  if  he  was  imperious,  she 
would  be  haughty  and  unyielding.     She  was  piqued  that  such  a  message  should  be 
Bent  to  her  in  the  presence  of  her  maids  of  honour  and  the  great  ladies  of  Persia, 
and  resolved  to  show  her  spirit  by  setting  at  nought  the  request  of  the  king  her 
husband.    Instead  of  making  a  modest  excuse,  or  sending  "  a  soft  answer  which 
turneth  away  wrath,"   she  gave  a  flat  and  peremptory  refusal.     (T.  McCrie.) 
Vashti  obeyed  the  higher  law : — Thus  the  question  was  publicly  forced  on  all,  Is 
this  man,  who  rules  from  India  to  Ethiopia,  really  a  great  man,  after  all  ?    For 
Vashti   disobeyed  him ;    and  Vashti  was   right.      There  is   a  higher  law  than 
even  the  will  of  a  king  and  a  husband — the  law  that  gives  a  woman  right  to  guard 
her    own  modesty  when  those  who   should  guard   it  for  her  do  not.      Vashti 
obeyed  that  higher  law    written  by  the    Creator    in   the    nature    of    men    and 
women;  and  we  can  think  nothing  but  good  of  her  in  the  matter.      Had  force 
been  used,  her  responsibihty  would  have  ceased,  but  she  had  no  right  to  yield; 
and  the  crown  royal  was  a  cheap  price  to  pay  for  her  own  self-respect.         Selfish- 
ness is  unfeeling : — Did   he  send  a  message  to  Vashti  to  ask   if   she  would  be 
willing  ?     When  was  woman  ever  honoured  out  of  Christ,  who  redeemed  her  out 
of   her  social  estrangement  and  solitude,  and  set  her  forth   invested   with   the 
queenliness  of  a  God-given  beauty  and  modesty.     Hear  the  king :    "  Fetch  Vashti 
now,  and  make  a  show  of  her  beauty,  for  she  is  fair  to  look  upon."    AU  this  is  in 
natural  order.     Selfishness  never  considers  the  feelings  of  others.     Selfishness  will 
be  gratified  at  all  costs  and  hazards.     When  a  man's  heart  is  merry  with  wine  all 
that  is  most  sacred  in  humanity  goes  out  of  him.     Who  can  withhold  anything 
from  a  ravenous  beast  ?    Who  should  stay  his  power  and  say  be  quiet,  be  self- 
controlled,   be   contented?     None.     This  is  human   nature  when   left  to  itself. 
(J.  Parker,  D.D.)         Amestris  : — If  Ahasuerus  is  to  be  identified  with  Xerxes,  it  is 
probable  that  Vashti  is  the  same  as  the  Amestris  who  is  spoken  of  by  the  Greeks 
as  the  wife  of  Xerxes,  and  whom  he  must  have  wedded  before  his  accession  to  the 
throne.     (IF.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)         Vashti  right  .-—But  for  my  part  I  consider  U 
worthy  of  all  praise,  and  hold  that  she  was  entirely  right  in  what  she  did.    It  is 
true  that  by  the  appointment  of  God  the  husband  is  the  head  of  the  wife,  but  the 
headship  is  not  absolute  and  autocratic.     Here,  too,  the  government  must  be  con- 
stitutional and  within  limits  which  have  been  fixed  by  the  Lord  Himself.     No 
husband  has  a  right  to  command  a  wife  to  do  that  which  is  wrong,  and  liberty  of 
conscience  ought  to  be  as  sacred  in  the  home  as  in  the  State.     (Ibid.)         Vashti 
had  good  reason  to  be  excused : — Vashti  had  good  reason  to  beg  to  be  excused  from 
appearing  in  a  company  where  too  many  were  merry  with  wine,  and  it  is  probable 
that  if  she  had  sent  her  humble  request  to  the  king  to  spare  her  modesty  he  might 
have  recalled  his  orders.     (G.  Lawson.)        Disobedience  of  Vashti : — She  was  in 
no  danger  of  being  insulted  by  indecent  words  or  wanton  glances  in  the  presence 
of  her  royal  husband,  whose  frown  was  death  to  his  subjects.     She  thought  she 
was  supporting  the  honour  of  her  sex.     But  did  not  she  see  that  she  was  affronting 
her  husband  and  her  king  not  only  before  his  chamberlains  but  before  all  his 
people  ?    If  he  suffered  his  own  family  to  trample  upon  his  authority  his  respecta- 
bility amongst  his  other  subjects  must  have  been  greatly  lessened.     The  queen  is 
the  first  subject  in  the  kingdom ;  she  ought,  therefore,  to  go  before  all  the  other 
subjects  in  showing  a  becoming  deference  to  the  king's  pleasure.     If  men  expect 
due  obedience  from  their  wives,  let  them  be  always  reasonable  in  their  commands, 
otherwise  half  the  guilt  of  the  disobedience  of  their  wives  will  remain  with  them- 
selves.    Never  impose  a  burden  upon  your  wife  which  either  female  delicacy  or  her 
particular  temper,  which  you  ought  to  know,  will  render  too  heavy  for  her  to 
bear.    Ahasuerus  hoped  to  show  to  all  his  princes  and  people  in  Shushan  how 


CHAP.  I.]  ESTHER.  17 

happy  he  was,  and  only  showed  them  his  misery.  (Ibid.)  Worldly  indul- 
gence disappointing : — Was  Ahasuerus  contented  with  what  he  had  so  richly 
enjoyed  ?  We  stand  in  this  chamber  of  the  world  to  witness  a  remarkable  scene 
of  its  madness  and  folly.  1.  Behold  the  thorough  dissatisfaction  which  attends  its 
joys.  See  the  conscious  wretchedness  which  limits  all  its  pleasures.  Man  finds 
an  inherent  and  inseparable  element  of  dissatisfaction  in  all  the  scenes  of  his 
earthly  joys.  They  do  not,  they  cannot  meet  his  wants.  He  awakes  always  to 
find  that  his  soul  is  empty,  and  sad  in  the  consciousness  of  the  fact.  Ahasuerus 
is  just  as  unsatisfied  with  all  his  magnificent  display  and  with  his  six  months' 
pompous  festival  as  the  poorest  subject  of  his  realm  is  with  his  own  hard  lot. 
Unlimited  opportunity  of  indulgence  is  nothing,  while  there  is  a  limited  capacity 
to  enjoy  and  an  unlimited  craving  for  enjoyment.  Such  was  Ahasuerus.  His 
heart  was  empty  of  joy  though  filled  with  madness.  He  imagines  a  new  spectacle 
which  will  awaken  a  new  admiration.  He  commands  his  seven  chamberlains  "  to 
bring  Vashti  the  queen  before  the  king,  with  the  crown  royal,  to  show  the  people 
and  the  princes  her  beauty,  for  she  was  fair  to  look  on."  But  he  is  not  alone. 
Where  is  the  feast  or  where  the  provision  of  the  world  for  human  gratification  in 
which  there  is  nothing  left  for  the  heart  to  desire  ?  Ahasuerus  is  but  a  specimen. 
His  folly  has  been  multiplied  in  myriads  of  instances,  and  in  every  variety  in  the 
scale  of  imitation.  It  only  shows  what  emptiness  there  is  in  the  whole  of  this 
scheme  of  sensual  gratification.  2.  Behold  the  bitter  disappointment.  •'  Queen 
Vashti  refused  to  come  at  the  king's  commandment  by  his  chamberlains." 
Eefused  to  come ! — what  a  disappointment  to  morbid,  vulgar  curiosity  I  What 
a  fall  to  intoxicated  pride!  But  it  was  a  noble  specimen  of  woman's  dignity, 
modesty,  and  virtue.  All  his  indulgence  is  forgotten — the  happiness  of  his  palace 
has  passed  away.  The  worldly  heart  is  empty  and  ve^ed  with  itself.  His  dream 
of  glory  has  vanished.  Its  beauty  and  splendour  have  withered  completely  for 
him.  One  "  dead  fly  "  has  destroyed  the  fragrance  of  the  whole  provision.  But 
is  this  a  peculiar  case  in  the  disappointment  which  it  describes  ?  Was  Ahasuerus 
the  only  victim  of  such  conscious  mistake  in  the  midst  of  indulgence  ?  You  see 
the  madness,  the  disappointment  in  the  sensual  heart  which  worldly  indulgence 
everywhere  produces.  Go  where  you  will,  as  far  as  you  will,  still  desire  and 
imagination  press  further  on.  Something  is  yet  demanded  to  complete  your 
attainment.  This  is  the  inevitable  law  of  the  result  in  human  pleasure.  The 
brightest  portion  leaves  something  still  to  ask.  The  highest  attainment  is  as 
unsatisfying  as  the  lowest.  3.  Behold  the  degradation  to  which  this  disappoint- 
ment has  brought  its  victim.  The  king  is  wretched  in  the  presence  of  them  all. 
Ahasuerus  is  degraded,  but  he  has  degraded  himself.  The  man  who  has  sacrificed 
his  virtue,  his  integrity,  his  self-respect,  may  be  sure  that,  sooner  or  later,  his  sin 
will  find  him  out.  But  this  is  another  lesson  in  the  chamber  of  worldly  indulgence. 
This  is  the  habitual  end  of  a  life  of  mere  sensual  gratification.  Personal  degrada- 
tion is  its  habitual  result — in  some  shape  or  other  its  final,  inevitable  result. 
Moral,  outward  degradation  frequently  1  Intellectual,  conscious  degradation, 
social  degradation  !  what  can  be  more  degrading  than  such  a  subjection  ?  What 
can  be  more  degrading  than  such  a  slavery  to  brute  appetite  and  sensual  display  ? 
It  is  the  defiling  and  destroying  of  a  mind  that  might  be  elevated  to  God  and 
educated  for  glory.  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  Vashti  : — 1.  In  the  first  place  I  want 
you  to  look  upon  Vashti  the  queen.  A  blue  ribbon  rayed  with  white,  drawn  around 
her  forehead,  indicated  her  queenly  position.  It  was  no  small  honour  to  be  queen 
in  such  a  realm  as  that.  Hark  to  the  rustle  of  her  robes  1  See  the  blaze  of  he** 
jewels  I  And  yet  it  is  not  necessary  to  have  palace  and  regal  robe  in  order  to  be 
queenly.  When  I  see  a  woman  with  stout  faith  in  God,  putting  her  foot  upon  all 
meanness  and  selfishness  and  godless  display,  going  right  forward  to  serve  Christ 
and  the  race  by  a  grand  and  glorious  service,  I  say,  "  That  woman  is  a  queen," 
and  whether  she  comes  up  from  the  shanty  on  the  common  or  the  mansion  of  the 
fashionable  square  I  greet  her  with  the  shout,  "All  hail.  Queen  Vashti  1  "  When 
Scarron,  the  wit  and  ecclesiastic,  as  poor  as  he  was  brilliant,  was  about  to  marry 
Madame  de  Maintenon  he  was  asked  by  the  notary  what  he  proposed  to  settle  upon 
Mademoiselle.  The  reply  was,  "  Immortality  ;  the  names  of  the  wives  of  kings 
die  with  them ;  the  name  of  the  wife  of  Scarron  will  live  always. "  In  a  higher 
and  better  sense  upon  all  women  who  do  their  duty  God  will  settle  immortality  1 
Not  the  immortality  of  earthly  fame,  but  the  immortality  celestial.  And  they  shall 
reign  for  ever  and  ever  1  Oh,  the  opportunity  which  every  woman  has  of  being  a 
queen  1    The  longer  I  live  the  more  I  admire  good  womanhood.     If  a  man  have 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

a  depressed  idea  of  womanly  character  he  is  a  bad  man,  and  there  is  no  exception 
to  the  rule.  The  writings  of  Goethe  can  never  have  any  such  attractions  for  me  as 
Shakespeare,  because  nearly  all  the  womanly  characters  of  the  great  German  have 
some  kind  of  turpitude.  2.  Again,  I  want  you  to  consider  Vashti  the  veiled.  Had 
she  appeared  before  Ahasuerus  and  his  court  on  that  day  with  her  face  uncovered 
she  would  have  shocked  all  the  delicacies  of  Oriental  society,  and  the  very  men 
who  in  their  intoxication  demanded  that  she  come,  in  their  sober  moments  would 
have  despised  her.  As  some  flowers  seem  to  thrive  best  in  the  dark  lane  and  in 
the  shadow,  and  where  the  sun  does  not  seem  to  reach  them,  so  God  appoints  to 
most  womanly  natures  a  retiring  and  unobtrusive  spirit.  God  once  in  a  while  does 
call  an  Isabella  to  a  throne,  or  a  Miriam  to  strike  the  timbrel  at  the  front  of  a  host, 
or  a  Marie  Antoinette  to  quell  a  French  mob,  or  a  Deborah  to  stand  at  the  front  of 
an  armed  battalion  crying  out,  "  Up  1  Up  I  This  is  the  day  in  which  the  Lord  will 
deliver  Sisera  into  thy  hands."  And  when  women  are  called  to  such  outdoor  work 
and  to  such  heroic  positions  God  prepares  them  for  it.  When  I  see  a  woman  going 
about  her  daily  duty — with  cheerful  dignity  presiding  at  the  table ;  with  kind  and 
gentle  but  firm  discipline  presiding  in  the  nursery ;  going  out  into  the  world  without 
any  blast  of  trumpets,  following  in  the  footsteps  of  Him  who  went  about  doing  good 
— I  say,  "  This  is  Vashti  with  a  veil  on."  But  when  I  see  a  woman  of  unblushing 
boldness,  loud-voiced,  with  a  tongue  of  infinite  clitter-clatter,  with  arrogant  look, 
passing  through  the  streets  with  a  masculine  swing,  gaily  arrayed  in  a  very  hur- 
ricane of  millinery,  I  cry  out,  "Vashti  has  lost  her  veil."  3.  Again,  I  want  you 
to  consider  Vashti  the  sacrifice.  Who  is  this  that  I  see  coming  out  of  that  palace 
gate  of  Shushan  ?  She  comes  homeless,  houseless,  friendless,  trudging  along  with 
a  broken  heart.  Who  is  she  ?  It  is  Vashti  the  sacrifice.  Oh,  what  a  change  it 
was  from  regal  position  to  a  wayfarer's  crust  1  Ah  1  you  and  I  have  seen  it  many 
a  time.  Here  is  a  home  empalaced  with  beauty.  All  that  refinement  and  books 
and  wealth  can  do  for  that  home  has  been  done ;  but  Ahasuerus,  the  husband  and 
the  father,  is  taking  hold  on  paths  of  sin.  He  is  gradually  going  down.  Soon  the 
bright  apparel  of  the  children  will  turn  to  rags ;  soon  the  household  song  will 
become  the  sobbing  of  a  broken  heart.  The  old  story  over  again.  The  house  full 
of  outrage  and  cruelty  and  abomination,  while  trudging  forth  from  the  palace  gate 
are  Vashti  and  her  children.  Oh,  Ahasuerus,  that  you  should  stand  in  a  home  by 
a  dissipated  life  destroying  the  peace  and  comfort  of  that  home  1  4.  Once  more,  I 
want  you  to  look  at  Vashti  the  silent.  You  do  not  hear  any  outcry  from  this 
woman  as  she  goes  forth  from  the  palace  gate.  From  the  very  dignity  of  her 
nature  you  know  there  will  be  no  vociferation.  Sometimes  in  life  it  is  necessary  to 
make  a  retort ;  sometimes  in  life  it  is  necessary  to  resist ;  but  there  are  crises  when 
the  most  triumphant  thing  to  do  is  to  keep  silence.  Affliction,  enduring  without 
any  complaint  the  sharpness  of  the  pang,  and  the  violence  of  the  storm,  and  the 
letter  of  the  chain,  and  the  darkness  of  the  night — waiting  until  a  Divine  hand 
shall  be  put  forth  to  soothe  the  pang  and  hush  the  storm  and  release  the  captive. 
An  Arctic  explorer  found  a  ship  floating  helplessly  about  among  the  icebergs,  and 
going  on  board  he  found  that  the  captain  was  frozen  at  his  log-book,  and  the 
helmsman  was  frozen  at  the  wheel,  and  the  men  on  the  look-out  were  frozen  in 
their  places.  That  was  awful,  but  magnificent.  All  the  Arctic  blasts  and  all  the 
icebergs  could  not  drive  them  from  their  duty.  Their  silence  was  louder  than 
thunder.  And  this  old  ship  of  the  world  has  many  at  their  posts  in  the  awful  chill 
of  neglect,  and  frozen  of  the  world's  scorn,  and  their  silence  shall  be  the  eulogy  of 
the  skies,  and  be  rewarded  long  after  this  weather-beaten  craft  of  a  planet  shall 
have  made  its  last  voyage.  I  thank  God  that  the  mightiest  influences  are  the  most 
silent.  The  fires  in  a  furnace  of  a  factory  or  of  a  steamship  roar  though  they  only 
move  a  few  shuttles  or  a  few  thousand  tons,  but  the  sun  that  warms  the  world  rises 
and  sets  without  a  crackle  or  faintest  sound.  Travellers  visiting  Mount  Etna, 
having  heard  of  the  glories  of  sunrise  on  that  peak  went  up  to  spend  the  night 
there  and  see  the  sun  rise  next  morning,  but  when  it  came  up  it  was  so  far  behind 
their  anticipations  that  they  actually  hissed  it.  The  mightiest  influences  of  to-day 
are  like  the  planetary  system— completely  silent.  Don't  hiss  the  sun !  (T.  De 
Witt  Talmage.)  Therefore  was  the  king  very  -wioVt^.— Self-control  the  highest 
attainment : — "  Therefore  was  the  king  very  wroth,  and  his  anger  burned  in  him." 
Literally,  he  frothed  at  the  mouth  and  became  as  a  wild  boar.  The  strength  of 
manhood  is  in  self-control.  The  Oriental  king  could  not  brook  that  his  will  should 
be  resisted.  It  is  the  very  highest  attainment  of  Christian  education  that  a  man 
shall  accept  the  resistance  of  his  will  as  an  element  in  his  culture.     No  man  will 


CHAP.  I.]  ESTHER.  19 

seek  to  force  his  will;  he  will  reason  about  it,  he  will  be  mighty  in  argument,  tender 
and  gentle  in  persuasion,  and  if  he  cannot  win  the  first  day  or  the  second  day,  he 
may  be  successful  on  the  third  day.  But  mere  force  never  won  a  true  victory. 
Conquer  by  love  and  you  will  reign  by  consent.  Let  men  feel  that  your  wisdom  is 
greater  than  theirs,  and  they  will  say,  "  God  save  the  king  I  "  The  time  is  coming 
when  every  man  will  have  to  prove  his  kingliness  not  because  of  the  insignia  he 
Jceeps  in  the  tower,  but  because  of  a  wise  head,  a  noble  heart,  and  a  hand  that 
never  refused  its  ofiBces  to  an  honest  causa.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Anger : — I,  Thk 
DEFORMITY  OF  ANOEB.  What  an  ugly  thing  ia  anger.  11.  The  disgbace  of  anger. 
III.  The  danger  or  anger.  {J.  Trapp^  The  batterie$  of  passion: — ^Regular 
ill-temper  is  altogether  a  different  thing  from  passion.  The  one  corrodes  incessantly 
like  an  acid  or  metal,  the  other  discharges  desperate  shocks  like  the  electric  shocks  of 
the  gymnotus,  and  spends  itself.  Do  not  get  in  the  way  of  passionate  men  until  their 
batteries  are  discharged.  The  exhaustion  of  these  batteries  is  only  a  matter  of 
time  and  opportunity.  And  you  may  watch  the  process  calmly,  and  be  instructed 
by  Humboldt's  description  of  the  way  in  which  the  gymnotes  use  their  batteries, 
and  see  if  you  discover  therein  any  resemblance  to  and  lesson  for  passionate 
persons.  He  tells  us  that  the  gymnotes  abound  in  the  vicinity  of  Galaboza  in 
iJouth  America,  and  the  Indians,  well  aware  of  the  danger  of  encountering  them 
when  their  powers  are  in  vigour,  collect  from  twenty  to  thirty  horses,  drive  them 
into  the  pools,  and  when  the  gymnotes  have  exhausted  their  electric  batteries  on 
the  poor  horses  they  can  be  taken  without  risk.  Time  and  repose  are  needed 
before  the  batteries  are  ready  to  act  again.  The  first  assault  of  the  gymnotes,  says 
Humboldt,  was  chiefly  to  be  dreaded.  In  fact,  after  a  time  the  eels  resembled  dis- 
charged batteries.  Their  muscular  motion  continued  active,  but  they  had  lost  the 
power  of  giving  energetic  shocks.  When  the  combat  had  endured  for  a  quarter  of 
an  hour  the  horses  seemed  to  be  less  in  fear.  They  were  no  longer  seen  to  fall 
backwards,  and  the  gymnotes,  swimming  with  their  bodies  half  out  of  the  water, 
were  now  flying  from  the  horses  and  making  for  the  shore.  The  Indians  then 
began  to  use  their  harpoons,  and  by  means  of  long  cords  attached  to  them  drew 
the  fish  out  of  the  water.  When  the  batteries  of  his  passion  have  been  discharged 
many  a  passionate  man  has  also  afforded  a  similarly  easy  conquest  to  those  who 
have  just  watched  and  waited.  (Scientific  Illustrations,  <&c.)  The  passionate 
character : — The  panther  rarely  attacks  man  without  being  provoked ;  but  it  is 
irritated  at  the  merest  trifle,  and  its  anger  is  manifested  by  the  lightning  rapidity 
of  its  onset,  which  invariably  results  in  the  speedy  death  of  the  imprudent  being 
who  has  aroused  its  fury.  Avoid  passionate  people,  for  they  are  like  the  panther. 
(Ibid.)  Beautiful  surroundings  may  be  inoperative  for  good: — Surely  a  palace 
will  be  a  sanctuary.  The  palace  of  this  man  was  worse  than  a  stable.  Surely  in 
the  presence  of  beauty  men  must  grow  beautiful  I  This  man  looked  on  beauty  but 
did  not  see  it,  and  perpetrated  the  irony  of  living  amongst  beautiful  things  until  he 
became  ghastly  and  hideous.  Never  did  Pleasure  hold  such  carnival ;  never  were 
such  Saturnalia  known  in  all  the  earth.  Yet  the  men  did  not  retire  from  it  heroes 
aqd  chief  of  virtue  and  beneficence ;  they  staggered  away  half  beast  and  half  devU. 
(/.  Parker,  D.D.)  Character  is  not  in  circumstances : — Sometimes  we  say,  looking 
upon  the  abodes  of  poverty,  "  What  can  we  expect  here  of  decency,  moral  education, 
and  progress  ?  See  how  the  poor  are  huddled  and  crowded  together  !  What  can  be 
looked  for  here  but  a  hotbed  bringing  forth  a  most  evil  harvest  ?  "  All  that  is  right. 
But  if  there  is  any  argument  in  it  at  all  it  is  an  argument  that  covers  a  large  space. 
Here  is  a  man  who  has  room  enough,  he  has  everything  at  his  command ;  if  he 
wants  gold  or  silver  or  precious  stones  he  can  have  them  by  a  nod  of  his  head, 
what  can  we  expect  here  but  piety,  contentment,  thankfulness,  moral  progress  ? 
Family  life  under  such  a  canopy  must  be  a  daily  doxology,  a  sweet,  hallowed  thing 
more  of  heaven  than  of  earth.  We  must  beware  of  the  sophism  in  both  sides  of 
this  popular  argument.  Character  is  not  in  circumstances.  The  poorest  people 
have,  in  no  solitary  instances  easily  numbered,  most  vividly  illustrated  the  purest 
and  noblest  character.  There  are  kings  who  are  paupers,  there  are  paupers  who 
are  kings.  We  owe  everything  to  moral  education — we  owe  nothing  to  kingly 
splendour.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  16.  Wliat  shall  we  do  nnto  the  queen  Vashti  according  to  law. — The  great 
advantage  of  law*  : — Here  let  us  remark  the  great  advantage  of  laws.  Law  is  mind 
without  passion ;  and  it  is  better  to  have  a  code  of  laws,  however  bad,  than  to 
have  none  but  the  will  of  a  man.     Had  the  king  on  this  occasion  acted  according 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

to  his  passion,  it  is  more  than  probable  that  the  scene  might  have  terminated  mor* 
tragically ;  but  he  acted  "  according  to  law."  Secondly,  we  see  the  great  advantage 
of  counsel.  "  In  the  multitude  of  counsellors  there  is  safety,"  says  the  wise  man. 
This  is  more  especially  the  case  with  those  who  have  the  lives,  the  property,  and 
even  the  religion  of  others,  to  consider  and  determine  upon.  What  an  advantage  is 
it  to  have  for  counsellors  good  men,  who  hate  covetousness,  who  have  the  welfare 
of  their  country  at  heart,  and  especially  those  who  act  under  the  fear  of  God  I 
(T.  McCrie.) 

Vers.  16-26.  And  Memucan  answered  before  the  king:. — Hasty  counsellors : — If 
they  had  been  wise,  as  counsellors  ought  to  be,  they  would  have  been  in  no  haste  to 
give  judgment  in  a  matter  so  important  as  that  which  was  submitted  to  them. 
They  would  have  delayed  till  passion  had  cooled,  and  right  reason  had  been 
restored.  But,  half -intoxicated  they  proceeded  to  give  judgment  at  once,  falling  in 
with  the  humours  of  royalty,  and  hastening  to  do  what  could  not  afterwards  be 
recalled.  (T.  McEwan.)  Jflatterers: — It  is  the  punishment  of  despots  to  be  sur- 
rounded by  flatterers,  and  the  words  of  counsellors  are  but  the  dicta  of  their  whims 
and  conceits.  (Ibid.)  Flatterers  : — There  is  a  general  lesson  suggested  by  what 
passed  between  the  king  and  his  counsellors  as  to  the  danger  of  flattery.  It  is 
natural  to  all  men  to  desire  to  have  their  opinions  confirmed  and  approved  by 
others.  The  feeling  of  self -approbation,  which  forms  one  element  of  happiness,  is 
gratified  and  strengthened  when  several  persons  give  their  verdict  in  favour  of  a 
choice  which  we  have  made  or  a  course  of  action  which  we  have  judged  it  right  to 
pursue.  But  then,  when  men  occupy  exalted  stations,  and  have  it  in  their  power 
to  reward  richly  those  who  are  in  any  way  instrumental  to  the  advancement  of 
their  comfort  and  happiness,  they  are  exposed  to  the  very  serious  calamity  of  having 
counsels  and  opinions  poured  into  their  ear  for  the  purpose  of  pleasing  them,  and 
not  of  presenting  truth  to  them  or  guiding  them  rightly  through  difi&culties.  There 
is  hardly  any  one,  indeed,  who  is  exempted  from  the  influence  of  flattery.  It  is 
less  and  less  exercised  as  wealth  and  power  diminish  ;  but  when  a  man  is  possessed 
of  anything  that  can  afford  gratification  to  others,  he  will  find  some  to  fall  in  with 
his  wishes  and  approve  of  his  opinions,  until  all  he  has  is  expended.  Perhaps  it  is 
in  the  condition  of  absolute  poverty  alone  that  the  voice  of  flattery  is  not  heard. 
Whether  we  have  or  have  not  wherewithal  to  bribe  others  to  our  way  of  thinking 
and  feeling,  and  to  secure  their  approval  of  our  conduct,  certain  it  is  that  we  have 
a  flatterer  in  our  own  hearts  whose  insidious  attempts  to  mislead  us  we  should 
guard  against  most  anxiously.  In  every  man  there  is  a  conflict  between  inclination 
and  the  power  of  conscience.  This  conflict  arises  and  is  carried  on  without  refer- 
ence to  a  man's  religious  knowledge  or  belief.  The  heathen  were  as  conscious  of  it 
as  those  are  who  possess  the  oracles  of  God.  When  unlawful  desire  prompts  in  one 
direction,  there  is  another  influence,  the  natural  conscience,  which  points  in  a 
different  way,  and  has  its  strong  arguments  to  repress  the  cravings  of  desire.  Now 
all  the  reasonings  against  the  conviction  of  what  is  right  are  just  so  many  self- 
flatteries  by  which  we  are  seduced  into  sin.  And  their  strength  is  too  great.  They 
put  a  false  colouring  upon  the  objects  of  human  pursuit,  they  make  what  is  wrong 
appear  right  and  what  is  hurtful  seem  innocent,  and  thus  the  maxim  is  verified, 
"  There  is  a  way  which  seemeth  right  unto  a  man,  but  the  end  thereof  are  the  ways  of 
death."  We  may  wonder  at  the  folly  of  Artaxerxes  in  allowing  himself  to  be 
guided  by  the  judgment  of  men  who  only  spoke  what  they  supposed  would  please 
him  I  But  all  men  have  as  good  reason — yea,  Christ's  own  people  have  as  good 
reason — to  wonder  at  the  strange  flatteries  by  which  at  one  time  their  progress 
heavenward  is  interrupted,  and  at  other  times  their  will  is  enlisted  on  the  side  of 
what  is  positively  evil.  {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  The  result  of  sensual  indulgence  : — 
1.  The  flattery  and  the  falsehood  of  the  world.  The  king  is  surrounded  by 
admirers  and  friends.  They  are  "  wise  men  who  knew  the  times."  One  faithful 
but  persecuted  woman  is  the  object  of  their  hostility  and  the  subject  of  their 
counseL  But  ah,  where  is  the  faithful  man  among  them  all  ?  Why  is  there  no  one 
to  take  the  side  of  persecuted  innocence  and  injured  virtue  ?  What  an  aspect  this 
council  exhibits  of  the  mind  and  motives  of  guilty  men  I  How  rarely  do  the  rich 
and  great  listen  to  the  voice  of  truth  or  find  the  fidelity  of  real  friendship  1  To 
maintain  the  side  of  truth  and  virtue  against  wealth  and  pride  and  power  in  the 
world  is  a  signal  mark  of  the  great  and  noble  mind.  Thus  hand  joins  in  hand  in 
the  perpetration  of  human  sin.  Is  this  pecuUar  ?  Nay,  this  is  the  transgression 
with  which  the  world  aboundeth.     What  swarms  of  flatterers  hang  about  the  path 


CHAP.  I.]  ESTHER.  21 

of  self-indulgent  youtli  I  See  that  daughter  of  wealth  and  fashion.  How  is  she  led 
on  from  step  to  step  in  the  blandishments  of  her  career.  There  is  none  to  restrain, 
none  to  warn,  and  she  has  no  real  friend  to  whom  she  can  be  induced  to  listen. 
Memucans  abound  wherever  appetite  asks  an  excuse  for  the  gratification  it  seeks. 
2.  See  the  total  want  of  domestic  confidence,  the  violation  of  that  pure  and  mutual 
family  dependence  which  follows  in  the  train  of  earthly  selfishness  and  sensuality. 
What  a  reason  this  prince  of  the  kingdom  of  Persia  gives  for  his  cruel  and  unjust 
advice !  "  This  deed  of  the  queen  shall  come  abroad  unto  all  women,"  &c. 
Memucan's  grand  fear  alleged  is  that  all  the  wives  in  Persia  wiU  prove  either  too 
virtuous  to  be  degraded  or  too  rebellious  to  be  governed.  Nothing  marks  a  debased 
and  consciously  criminal  mind  more  clearly  and  habitually  than  its  suspicion  and 
increduUty  of  the  virtue  and  integrity  of  others.  This  painful  and  disgraceful  fact 
is  brought  before  us  in  our  present  illustration.  It  is  the  family  relation  of  which 
Memucan  speaks.  What  is  it  that  maintains  in  our  households  the  spirit  and 
dominion  of  mutual  confidence  ?  I  answer,  not  the  world  or  the  pursuit  of  the 
world,  but  the  power  of  true  religion.  Take  this  great  principle  of  life  and  truth 
from  the  household,  let  the  world  rule  there  in  its  pride  of  covetousness,  or  in  its 
lust  of  indulgence,  and  how  soon  and  how  thoroughly  are  domestic  happiness, 
dignity  and  peace  sacrificed  and  cast  away!  Mutual  suspicion,  recrimination, 
alienation,  separation,  divorce,  hatred,  persecution,  murder,  aU  follow  in  the  legiti- 
mate train  of  succession  as  natural  and  too  often  habitual  results.  Half  the  talent 
and  ingenuity  of  the  world  is  exercised  in  plans  for  counterworking  and  over- 
reaching the  schemes  of  other  people,  or  in  self-defence  against  their  violence  or 
fraud.  What  an  exhibition  this  makes  of  human  sin  I  The  children  of  the  world 
expend  their  life  and  time  and  powers  in  suspecting,  watching,  guarding,  forestall- 
ing each  other.  3.  The  actual  crime  to  which  this  course  of  indulgence  in 
sensuality  must  lead.  The  king  assents  at  once  to  the  cruel  and  unjust  advice 
which  he  receives.  "  The  saying  pleased  the  king  and  princes,  and  the  king  did 
according  to  the  word  of  Memucan."  The  self-indulgent  monarch  finds  himself 
involved  in  the  grievous  injustice  and  wrong  which  has  been  the  result  of  his  own 
sin.  This  is  the  regular  process  through  which  the  worldly  and  the  ungodly 
habitually  travel.  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  they  are  all  allowed  to  attain  this 
result  of  open  crime.  The  providence  of  a  gracious  God  often  interposes  to  keep 
men  back  from  the  results  of  their  own  choice.  Merciful  indeed  is  this  inter- 
position. Who  can  tell  to  what  an  extent  of  wickedness  a  rebellious  world  would 
run  but  for  the  interference  of  this  unseen  Divine  restraint  ?  But  such  a  restraint 
is  a  special  and  peculiar  interposition  in  the  case  of  individuals.  When  intemper- 
ance sinks  into  poverty  and  rejection — when  fraud  and  robbery  bring  the  victim  to 
a  felon's  cell — when  vanity  and  indecorous  exposure  prove  the  destruction  of  female 
virtue — when  anger  and  revenge  result  in  bloodshed  and  murder — men  are  not 
astonished.  They  recognise  in  all  these  the  natural  issues  of  the  principles  we 
have  traced.  4.  See  how  surely  the  day  of  regret  must  come  to  human  guilt.  The 
king  has  finished  his  purpose  and  the  advice  of  his  attendants.  But  he  is  far  from 
peace.  Sin  can  never  satisfy  the  sinner.  "  After  these  things,  when  the  wrath  of 
King  Ahasuerus  was  appeased,  he  remembered  Vashti,  and  what  she  had  done,  and 
what  was  decreed  against  her."  Human  wrath  cannot  last  for  ever.  The  whirl  of 
the  excitement  passes,  and  then  comes  the  bitterness  of  the  memory  of  sin.  The 
soul  is  filled  with  remorse — literally,  a  biting,  gnawing  of  itself.  It  is  the  fearful 
result  of  human  sin.  This  is  the  chamber  of  the  world.  In  all  these  there  comes 
the  question  that  will  be  answered,  "  What  fruit  had  ye  then  of  those  things  whereof 
ye  are  now  ashamed  ?  for  the  end  of  these  things  is  death."  This  is  ever  the 
result.  What  i-emembered  follies  crowd  upon  the  mind  1  The  soul  looks  inward 
and  holds  communion  with  itself.  A  thousand  Vashtis  are  remembered,  what  they 
have  done  and  what  they  have  suffered.  It  is  a  deeply  convincing  hour.  New  and 
wonderful  light  is  poured  in  upon  the  conscience.  This  is  the  end  of  the  sensual 
indulgence  of  the  world.  {S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  Courtiers  fomake  a  failing  cause  : — 
I.  The  courtly  orator.  II.  His  cunning  flattery.  III.  His  vicious  reasoning. 
rV.  His  time-serving  policy.  V.  His  unfeeling  nature.  (W.  Burrows,  B.A.) 
The  folly  of  trusting  in  man : — Ahasuerus  was  guilty  of  it.  Remark  that  this 
practice — I.  Is  idolatrous  in  its  principles.  II.  It  is  grovelling  in  its  aim, 
ni.  It  is  unreasonable  in  its  foundation.  IV.  It  is  destructive  in  its  issue. 
Learn — 1.  There  is  no  safety  in  man.  2.  To  put  your  trust  in  the  Lord.  {Sketches 
of  Sermons.)  Counsel  needed  : — Not  only  kings,  but  also  private  persons,  often 
«uaed  wise  counsels,  especially  when  they  are  hurried  away  by  their  passions.    But 

R5 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i, 

our  loss  is,  that  at  such  times  we  are  uncommonly  unfit  to  receive  counsel.  {O. 
Larvson.)  Fit  counsellors  few : — Every  man  is  not  fit  to  be  a  counsellor. 
(Ibid.)  For  this  deed  of  the  queen  shall  come  abroad  unto  all  women. — 
Fashions  travel  downward  : — Fashions  and  maxims  usually  go  downward  from  one 
class  of  society  to  another.  Customs,  adopted  by  the  higher  orders  as  their  rule, 
gradually  make  their  way  until  at  length  they  pervade  all  ranks.  (A.  B.  Davidson, 
D.D.)  Evil  actions  do  not  terminate  in  themselves  : — "  What  the  queen  doth  will 
be  done  by  all,"  was  his  statement,  and  we  must  feel  the  truthfulness  of  it.  It 
embodies  a  maxim  peculiarly  applicable  to  the  followers  of  Christ.  They  are 
supposed  to  be  separate  from  the  sinful  world  by  the  very  circumstance  of  their 
being  Christ's.  Then,  if  they  become  worldly — if  they  act  inconsistently — their 
acts  do  not  terminate  in  and  with  themselves.  What  they  say  and  do  produces 
effects  far  beyond  their  own  calculation  and  their  own  sphere.  A  word  spoken  for 
Christ  may  bear  fruit  where  they  would  not  have  been  prepared  to  look  for  such  a 
result.  (Ibid.)  Among  the  laws  of  the  Persians  and  the  Medes,  that  it  he 
not  altered. — Unalterable  judgments  foolish : — He  who  prides  himself  on  never 
reversing  his  judgments  should  be  extremely  cautious  about  forming  them. 
Obstinacy  may  refuse  to  change  its  opinions ;  wisdom  will  be  guilty  of  no  such 
rashness.  (J.  S.  Van  Dyke,  D.D.)  And  let  the  king  give  her  royal  estate  unto 
another. — The  vicissitudes  of  life : — Perhaps  you  look  back  upon  scenes  different 
from  those  in  which  now  from  day  to  day  you  mingle.  You  have  exchanged  the 
plenty  and  luxuriance  of  your  father's  house  for  privation  and  trials  known  to  God 
and  your  own  heart.  The  morning  of  life  was  flushed  with  promise.  Troops  of 
calamities  since  then  have  made  desperate  charge  upon  you.  Darkness  has  come. 
Sorrows  have  swooped  like  carrion  birds  from  the  sky,  and  barked  like  jackals  from 
the  thicket.  You  stand  amid  your  slain,  anguished  and  woe-struck.  Eizpah  on 
ihe  rock.  So  it  has  been  in  aU  ages.  Vashti  must  doff  the  spangled  robes  of  the 
Persian  Court,  and  go  forth  blasted  from  the  palace  gate.  Hagar  exchanges 
•Oriental  comfort  for  the  wilderness  of  Beersheba.  Mary  Queen  of  Scots  must  pass 
out  from  flattery  and  pomp  to  suffer  ignominious  death  in  the  Castle  of  Fotheringay. 
The  wheel  of  fortune  keeps  turning,  and  mansions  and  huts  exchange,  and  he  who 
rode  in  the  chariot  pushes  the  barrow,  and  instead  of  the  glare  of  festal  lights  is 
the  simmering  of  the  peat  fire,  and  in  place  of  Saul's  palace  is  the  rock,  the  cold 
rock,  the  desolate  rock.  But  that  is  the  place  to  which  God  comes.  Jacob  with 
his  head  on  a  stone  saw  the  shining  ladder.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Unjustifiable 
divorce  : — We  cannot  but  remark  upon  the  facility  with  which  divorce  took  place  in 
that  land  of  Persia.  We  cannot  be  too  thankful  that  we  live  not  where  such  unjust 
laws  obtain.  Nor  can  we  too  zealously  guard  the  sacred  obligations  of  wedded  life. 
Perhaps  many  cases  of  unhappiness  might  be  traced  to  a  similar  cause  to  that 
which  brought  about  the  separation  of  Ahasuerus  and  Vashti.  Any  mere  trifle 
becomes  sufficient  as  an  excuse  for  separation.  We  have  heard  of  a  quarrel  and 
divorce  taking  place  because  one  asserted  that  there  were  a  certain  number  of 
windows  in  a  house  opposite  and  the  other  denied  it.  Each  maintained  their 
point  with  obstinacy,  and  neglected  to  settle  their  difference  by  counting  them. 
(J*".  Hastings.)  The  Nemesis  of  absolutism  : — The  character  of  Ahasuerus  illus- 
trates the  Nemesis  of  absolutism  by  showing  how  unlimited  power  is  crushed  and 
dissolved  beneath  the  weight  of  its  own  immensity.  The  very  vastness  of  his 
domains  overwhelms  the  despot.  He  is  the  slave  of  his  own  machinery  of  govern- 
ment. But  this  is  not  all.  The  man  who  is  exalted  to  the  pedestal  of  a  god  is 
made  dizzy  by  his  own  altitude.  Absolutism  drove  Caligula  mad;  it  punished 
Xerxes  with  childishness.  The  silly  monarch  who  would  decorate  a  tree  with  the 
jewellery  of  a  prince  in  reward  for  its  f ruitf ulness,  and  flog  and  chain  the  Hellespont 
as  a  punishment  for  its  timpestuousness,  is  not  fit  to  be  let  out  of  the  nursery. 
When  the  same  man  appears  on  the  pages  of  Scripture  under  the  name  of 
Ahasuerus,  his  weakness  is  despicable.     (F".  F.  Adeney,  M.A.) 

Vers.  20.  All  the  wives  shall  give  to  their  husbands  honour,  both  to  grreat  and 

small Wives  to  honour  their  husbands : — All  the  wives  too  are  included,  for  they 

are  all  "  to  give  honour  to  their  husbands,  both  to  the  great  and  small."  Well,  the 
great,  the  really  great,  will  get  the  honour  easily,  and  could  do  very  well  probably 
without  the  helpful  edict.  Where  there  is  real  greatness,  which,  in  Christian 
speech,  we  may  translate  into  real  goodness,  it  is  the  wife's  joy  to  render  what  it  is 
the  husband's  pride  to  wear.  But  the  honour  is  to  be  given  "  both  to  the  great  and 
small  1 "     "  Ay,  there's  the  rub."     If  this  insurrectionary  torch  should  go  through 


CHAP.  I.]  ESTHER.  23 

the  land,  what  will  become  of  the  small  ones  ? — the  selfish,  the  spiteful,  the  meddle- 
some, the  rude,  the  mean,  the  silly,  the  helpless,  the  good-for-nothing  ?  They  are 
all  to  have  honour  !  As  if  a  decree  could  really  get  it,  or  keep  it  from  them. 
Wouldn't  the  better  plan  be,  in  that  case,  and  in  many  a  case  besides,  that  the 
small  shall  try  to  grow  larger  ?  Let  them  be  ashamed  of  their  littleness,  and  rise 
out  of  it  into  something  like  nobleness.  Let  them  love  and  help  their  wives,  and 
care  for  their  children,  and  honour  will  come  as  harvest  follows  sowing.  But  unless 
they  do  something  like  that,  one  fears  that  all  the  edicts  that  can  be  devised  and 
promulgated  wiU  leave  them  as  it  finds  them — "  small."  (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.) 
Love  is  the  law  : — 1.  And  does  not  this  history  teach  us  that  the  great  law  of 
domestic  happiness  is  love?  No  Persian  decrees  are  required  to  execute  the 
mandates  of  love,  nor  can  any  royal  commandment  make  a  household  happy 
without  it.  The  true  way  for  all  queens  to  rule  is  to  "  stoop  to  conquer."  Let 
their  husbands  call  themselves  as  much  as  they  please  "  the  lords  of  creation,"  and 
let  them  seem  to  hold  the  reins,  but  it  is  theirs  to  tell  them  how  to  drive.  This  is 
the  more  excellent  way.  The  dispute  about  the  sphere  of  the  sexes  is  as  unphiloso- 
phical  as  it  is  unscriptural.  It  is  God's  will  that  man  should  be  the  head  and 
woman  the  heart  of  society.  If  he  is  its  strength,  she  is  its  solace.  If  he  is  its 
wisdom,  she  is  its  grace  and  consolation.  Domestic  strife  is  always  a  great  evil, 
but  it  becomes  doubly  so  when  it  occurs  before  company,  as  happened  with  the 
king  of  Persia,  and  when  professed  friends  come  in  and  make  bad  worse.  It  is 
then  the  wound  becomes  incurable.  2.  Let  us  learn  to  guard  against  all  excesses, 
not  only  in  feasting  and  in  the  loss  of  time,  but  of  feeling  and  passion.  How 
inconsiderate,  how  rash,  how  sinful  was  Herod's  oath  and  terrible  decree  against 
John  the  Baptist  1  And  scarcely  less  wicked  were  the  king's  unjust  and  cruel 
proceedings  against  his  wife.  It  was  a  maxim  with  General  Jackson  to  take  much 
time  to  deliberate — to  think  out  the  right  resolution — but  when  once  the  resolution 
was  taken,  then  to  think  only  of  executing  it.  3.  How  emphatic  a  lesson  is  here  of 
human  vanity  !  The  great  monarch  of  such  a  vast  empire  is  not  able  to  govern 
himself.  And  all  the  grandeur  of  half  a  year's  feasting  is  spoiled  by  the 
disobedience  of  his  queen.  This  was  the  dead  fly  in  his  pot  of  ointment.  4.  Alas  ! 
that  so  lovely  a  place  as  a  garden  should  have  been  the  scene  of  such  revelry  and 
sinning.  A  garden  is  associated  with  some  of  our  holiest  and  saddest  thoughts. 
Sin  fastened  on  our  race  in  a  garden.  It  was  in  a  garden  the  curse  was  pronounced, 
and  there  too  the  great  promise  of  a  Kedeemer  was  given.  And  it  was  in  a  garden 
the  Messiah  entered  the  lists  of  mortal  combat  to  bruise  the  old  serpent's  head. 
Instead,  then,  of  making  our  gardens  the  scenes  of  sinful  mirth  and  dissipation,  as 
did  the  Persian  king,  let  us  make  them  oratories  for  pious  breathings  to  heaven — 
let  them  give  us  thoughts  of  God  and  of  the  love  and  sufferings  of  His  Son  Jesus 
Christ.  It  is  to  Him  we  owe  all  our  pleasures  in  the  creatures  and  gifts  of  provi- 
dence, as  well  as  the  hope  of  eternal  life.  And  so  also  let  the  garden  be  a  preacher 
to  us  of  our  frailty.  {W.  A.  Scott,  D.D.)  The  husband  to  bear  rule  in  his 
house  : — This  is  truly  a  Divine  appointment,  but  it  is  not  made  in  an  arbitrary 
manner,  like,  for  instance,  a  positive  institution  of  the  Jews,  which  might  be  this 
way  or  that  way  with  equal  propriety — the  thing  deriving  its  sacred  character 
chiefly  from  the  fact  of  the  appointment.  Even  a  Divine  appointment  could  not 
make  the  wife  supreme,  human  nature  continuing  what  it  is.  For  one  thing, 
woman  is  weaker  than  man  physically,  and  supremacy  goes  with  strength.  All 
kinds  of  force  have  their  ultimate  source  in  God,  and  when  He  makes  man  perma- 
nently stronger  than  woman,  no  doubt  He  means  some  corresponding  authority  to 
rest  where  the  permanent  strength  does.  No  doubt  strength  may  be  abused,  is 
most  shamefully  abused  in  some  instances,  by  the  husband.  But  the  way  to 
prevent  the  abuse  of  strength  is  not,  surely,  to  attempt  to  transfer  its  proper 
responsibilities  to  weakness  ?  Weakness  may  be  abused  as  much  as  strength,  and 
in  some  ways  even  more.  Again,  there  are  many  things  of  less  or  more  importance 
which  come  to  require  a  single  ultimate  decision.  One  must  say  how  this  thing  is 
to  be.  Practical  action  must  be  taken  one  way  or  other.  Who  shall  decide  ?  Is 
the  husband  to  submit  to  the  wife  ?  He  decides  with  whom  God  has  lodged  the 
responsibility.  But  the  truth  is  that  in  a  properly  regulated,  or  rather  a  properly 
inspired  home,  the  question  of  authority  in  its  bald  form  never  arises.  The 
husband's  rule  and  the  wife's  obedience  are  alike  unconscious,  and  alike  easy. 
The  sweet  laws  of  nature,  the  good  laws  of  God,  make  them  one.  This  leads  us  to 
say,  on  the  other  band,  with  equal  emphasis,  that  the  authority  of  the  husband  is 
clearly  a  limited  authority.    Common  sense  ought  to  teach  a  man  that  there  ia  a 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

large  sphere  of  the  practical  family  life  where  he  ought  to  leave  the  wife  and 
mother  practically  supreme.  His  interference  at  all  (whatever  may  be  the  abstract 
right)  will  not  help  the  industry,  the  order,  the  peace  of  the  household.  But, 
rising  higher,  look  at  the  grand  fact  that  the  authority  of  the  husband  over  the 
wife  has,  and  must  have,  clear  and  strong,  and  altogether  impassable  limits. 
{A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Bear  rule  in  his  own  house. — Hojises  should  be  homes  : — 
•'  In  his  own  house  " — who  has  a  house  of  his  own  ?  The  house  is  a  prison  until 
somebody  else  shares  it.  The  house  belongs  to  all  the  people  that  are  in  it — part 
to  the  husband,  part  to  the  wife,  part  to  the  children,  part  to  the  servants,  right 
through  all  the  household  line.  Develop  the  notion  of  partnery,  co-responsibiUty; 
let  every  one  feel  a  living  interest  in  the  place :  then  the  house  shall  be  built  of 
living  stones,  pillared  with  righteousness,  roofed  with  love.  It  is  here  that 
Christianity  shines  out  with  unique  lustre.  Obedience  is  right  for  all  parties,  but 
the  obedience  has  to  be  in  the  Lord  ;  it  is  to  be  the  obedience  of  righteousness,  a 
concession  to  wisdom,  a  toll  paid  to  honour,  which  is  to  be  returned  in  love  and 
gratitude.  Christianity  has  made  our  houses  homes.  We  owe  everything  that  is 
socially  beneficent  to  Christianity.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  His  own  house  : — A  man 
living  at  a  hotel  is  like  a  grape-vine  in  a  flower-pot — movable,  carried  around  from 
place  to  place,  docked  at  the  root  and  short  at  the  top.  Nowhere  can  a  man  get 
real  root-room,  and  spread  out  his  branches  tiU  they  touch  the  morning  and  the 
evening,   but  in  his   own   house.  The  overruling  providence   of   God : — The 

important  thing,  in  order  to  our  understanding  the  story,  is  that  we  should  keep 
these  first  links  in  our  hand,  and  should  mark  the  working  of  "  another  King." 
Into  the  administration  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  no  mistake  can  creep,  and  so 
perfect  is  His  grasp  that  mosaic  pavements,  golden  couches,  throngs  of  noblemen, 
fawning  courtiers,  excess  of  wine,  swelling  vanity,  and  a  woman's  firmness,  are  all, 
without  the  slightest  knowledge  on  the  part  of  any  actor  in  the  drama,  made  to 
bring  about  a  purpose  of  His,  the  execution  of  which  is  more  than  four  years 
distant.  Had  Ahasuerus  not  been  the  proud  voluptuary  he  was ;  had  he  not  made 
his  great  feast ;  had  he  not  in  the  last  day  of  it  let  slip  or  thrown  away  the  reins 
of  sound  reason  and  run  his  head  against  a  first  law  of  nature ;  had  his  vanity 
taken  any  other  direction  than  that  of  wishing  to  parade  the  queen's  beauty  ;  had 
Vashti  been  less  of  a  true  woman ;  had  the  courtiers  been  honester  than  they  were 
— then  there  would  have  been  no  vacant  place  for  Esther  to  fill,  and  the  plot  of 
Haman  might  have  thriven.  But  we  have  this  song,  "  Surely  the  wrath  of  man 
ghaU  praise  Thee :  the  remainder  of  wrath  shalt  Thou  restrain."  {A.  M.  Syming- 
ton, B.A.) 


CHAPTER  n. 

Veb.  1.  After  tbese  things,  when  the  wrath  of  king  Ahasnerua  was  appeased,  he 
remembered  Vashti. — Acting  under  the  impulse  of  rage : — The  king  had  given  full 
Bway  to  his  passion  and  wounded  pride,  and  treated  his  wife  with  great  severity. 
In  his  moments  of  cool  reflection  he  probably  repented  of  the  harshness  of  his 
proceedings  towards  her.  Excitement  is  a  bad  guide  in  human  affairs.  He  who 
acts  under  the  impulse  of  rage  is  sure  to  be  driven  astray,  even  as  a  vessel  in  a 
storm  is  driven  to  situations  of  embarrassment  and  peril.  Man  in  wrath  speaks 
freely  and  eloquently,  but  never  wisely,  and  he  works  with  decision  and  energy, 
but  who  is  benefited  by  his  operations  ?  He  doeth  much,  but  uniformly  to  a  bad 
purpose.  {J.  Hughes.)  Avenging  memories: — 0,  memory  I  thou  art  a  bitter 
avenger.  (2'.  McEwan.)  Bitter  memories  : — Ah  1  these  bitter  memories  of  earth 
will  be  ingredients  in  tne  future  cup  of  the  penal  suffering  of  the  lost.  (Ihid.) 
Too  late : — Repentance  may  come  too  late.  Ahasuerus  could  not  retrace  his  steps. 
{A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Vain  remembering  : — I.  The  keoret  of  the  kino  for 
HIS  RASH  AND  UNWARRANTABLE  ACT.  Hc  was  Sensible  that  he  had  committed  injury 
and  that  he  had  not  only  wronged  Vashti,  but  also  made  himself  a  sufferer. 
1.  He  could  not  devise  a  remedy.  There  are  wishes  that  even  the  most  powerful 
despots  cannot  get  gratified,  and  limits  to  their  will  that  even  they  cannot  pass 
over.     2.  The  law  of  the  Medcs  and  Persians  must  stand.     II.  The  expedient 

WHICH    HIS    COUNSELLORS    SUOGESTED    TO    FREE    HIM    FROM    HIS    DIFFICULTY.        Lcam 

1.  When  men  suffer  themselves  to  be  carried  away  by  the  impulse  of  any  violent 


CHAP,  n.]  ESTHER.  25 

passions,  they  may  commit  acts  which  cannot  afterwards  be  remedied,  and  which 
they  themselves  may  have  especially  to  lament.  2.  It  forms  no  excuse  for  sin 
committed,  that  the  transgressor  had  reduced  himself  to  a  condition  in  which  he 
ceased  to  retain  his  full  consciousness  of  the  distinction  between  right  and  wrong. 
Take  an  illustration  from  the  history  of  Saul.  He  failed  to  improve  his  privileges ; 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  departed  and  the  evil  spirit  took  possession  of  him — slew 
prophets,  &c.  He  was  held  responsible  because  he  had  laid  his  heart  open  for  the 
reception  of  the  evil  spirit.     3.  Bepentance  may  come  too  late.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  2-17.  And  let  the  king  appoint  offlcers. — The  weak  and  lowly  : — Poor,  help- 
less, feeble,  may  be  the  earthward  aspect  of  true  religion.  Beggars  shall  be  taken 
from  the  dunghill,  to  set  them  among  princes.  God  will  be  indebted  to  no  outward 
help  or  influence.  We  see  how  God  is  pleased  to  overrule  the  very  sins  and  passions 
of  guilty  men  for  the  accomplishment  of  His  own  designs.  The  banishment  of 
Vashti  has  left  Ahasuerus  solitary  and  self-reproaching.  Some  scheme  must  be 
adopted  by  those  who  counselled  her  overthrow,  to  supply  her  place.  "  Let  the 
king  appoint  olficers  in  all  the  provinces  of  his  kingdom  that  they  may  gather 
together  all  the  fair  young  virgins  unto  Shushan,  the  palace.  And  let  the  maiden 
that  pleaseth  the  king  be  queen  instead  of  Vashti.  And  the  thing  pleased  the  king, 
and  he  did  so."  How  perfectly  natural  was  all  this  arrangement  and  plan  !  And 
yet  it  was  but  one  part  of  God's  Divine  arrangement  to  bring  about  His  own 
plan,  a  plan  of  which  they  knew  nothing.  Thus  He  leaves  men  to  act  out 
their  own  purposes  and  accomphsh  their  own  ends,  and  yet  overrules  their 
whole  scheme  for  the  attainment  of  the  results  which  He  has  already  deter- 
mined. This  is  His  providence  ;  this  is  the  wise  and  perfect  government  of 
the  Most  High.  1.  We  see  a  youthful  female,  a  poor  girl.  Her  very  sex 
betokens  weakness  and  exposure.  But  yet  woman  is  called  "  the  weaker  vessel," 
and  is  so,  as  the  crystal  vase  is  a  weaker  vessel  than  the  oaken  cask,  more 
easily  overthrown,  more  surely  injured,  more  irreparably  destroyed,  by  the  power 
of  vicious  habit  or  sinful  temptation.  To  her,  exposure  to  evil  is  far  the  heavier, 
and  far  more  dangerous.  Upon  her,  sorrows  press  with  a  far  more  grievous  load. 
To  her,  misfortunes  come  with  a  jfar  more  sharpened  power.  The  wrongs  of 
women  have  filled  every  age  and  every  history.  But  here,  when  the  illustration  of 
rising,  conquering  piety  is  brought  before  us,  the  subject  is  a  woman ;  and  a 
woman  in  her  weakest  and  most  forlorn  position,  a  lonely  girl.  It  is  enough  for  us 
to  see  and  know  that  God  is  there,  the  Father  of  the  fatherless  and  the  God  of  the 
widows  in  His  holy  habitation.  2.  She  is  an  orphan  girl.  "  She  has  neither 
father  nor  mother."  What  a  privilege  are  parents  spared  to  bless  and  cheer 
our  maturity !  What  a  joy  and  cause  for  thanksgiving  is  it  to  be  permitted  even 
to  shelter  and  cheer  their  age  in  our  own  home  I  What  solitude,  separation, 
want  of  confidence,  fear,  distrust,  yea,  anguish,  often  fill  up  the  orphan's  heart  I 
Few  can  sympathise ;  and  even  to  those  few  it  is  impossible  to  pour  out  the  secret 
sorrows  which  are  the  burden  and  distress  within.  But  imaginary  as  the  causes 
may  be,  the  sorrows  which  they  produce  are  real  and  abiding.  Yet,  when  we 
add  poverty  to  the  orphan's  lot,  what  increased  bitterness  do  we  throw  into  the 
cup  I  An  orphan  boy  may  struggle.  The  very  poverty  which  oppresses  him  may 
excite  his  energies  and  call  out  his  powers  of  endurance  and  of  action.  His  self- 
dependence  is  aroused.  But  an  orphan  girl  in  poverty  1  what  human  case  is 
habitually  harder  ?  Everything  in  her  sex,  and  everything  in  her  condition,  is 
against  her.  Her  exposure  to  the  wickedness  and  the  arts  of  the  corrupt  is  the 
subject  of  constant  observation  and  of  constant  dread.  (1)  That  God  loves  the 
lowly.  Let  every  imagination  which  exalteth  itself  against  God  be  cast  down.  Be 
content  to  allow  Him  to  take  you  from  the  dust  in  all  your  sinfulness  and  unworthi- 
ness,  and  to  wash  and  cleanse  and  save  you  by  His  own  grace  and  power  alone. 
(2)  Forget  not  that  your  honour  and  happiness  will  always  be  promoted  by  gaining 
the  mind  of  God  in  this  relation.  This  surely  is  the  path  of  happiness  for  us.  The 
world  says,  "  Happy  are  the  rich, the  luxurious,the  self-indulgent."  God  says,  "Happy 
are  the  poor  in  spirit,  the  meek."  The  weak  things  of  the  world,  if  He  choose 
them,  and  love  them,  will  confound  the  things  that  are  mighty.  {S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.) 
Esther  the  queen: — In  this  chapter  we  find  illustrated — I.  Providence.  We  must 
not  judge  the  heathen  court  of  Persia  by  our  standard  of  morality.  Bather  let  ua 
see  how  God  overrules  all  these  arrangements  for  the  accomplishment  of  His  own 
purposes.  II.  Adoption.  In  ten  thousand  things  the  strongest  and  wisest  of  us  ia 
bat  a  lonely  orphan,  needing  some  strong  hand  to  protect  us,  the  pity  of  soma 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

loving  heart  for  our  comfort.  How  blest  is  he  who  has  learned  to  say,  "  Our 
Father."  III.  Kecompense.  Think  of  the  joy  of  Mordecai  as  he  sees  his  adopted 
daughter    thus    uplifted.      {Mark    Guy  Pearse.)  Esther  at   court : — There  is, 

unquestionably,  a  difficulty  connected  with  this  8th  verse.     1.  If  Mordecai,  of  hia 
own  accord,  presented  Esther  as  a  candidate  for  the  royal  favour,  then  he  acted  in 
opposition  to  the  law  of  Moses,  which  forbade  that  the  daughters  of  Israel  should 
be  given  to  the  heathen.     It  would  be  no  apology  for  his  conduct  that  he  designed 
by  what  he  did  to  advance  the  interests  of  his  nation.     What  is  forbidden  by  the 
law  must  not  be  done  that  good  may  come  of  it.     2.  Many  interpreters  suppose 
that  those  who  were  commissioned  to  select  the  virgins  for   the   king's   seraglio 
executed  their  office  without  respect  to  the  feelings  of  the  parties  interested.    Esther 
was  taken,  therefore,  without  there  being  any  choice  left,  either  to  her  or  Mordecai, 
in  the  matter.      3.  Others   that,  as   the   whole   was    so   manifestly  providential, 
Mordecai  may  l.ave  received  special  intimation  from  heaven  to  bring  his  orphan 
cousin  under  the  notice  of  the  king's  officers.     There  is  nothing  in  the  history  to 
warrant  this  opinion ;  therefore  we  embrace  the  first  supposition  as  the  most  pro- 
bable account  of  the  affair.    4.  But  whatever  may  have  been  the  feelings  of  Mordecai 
and  Esther,  we  see  the  special  workings  of  providence  in  her  behalf.     She  obtained 
favour  of  the  chief  of  the  eunuchs  above  all  the  other  maidens  who  had  been  com- 
mitted to  his  care,  so  that,  without  solicitation  on  her  part,  not  only  was  there  more 
than  ordinary  indulgence  toward  her,  but  she  was  even  treated  with  a  degree  of 
respect  that  seemed,  as  it  were,  the  prelude  to  yet  higher  advancement.     The  com- 
mencement of  Esther's  life  in  the  palace  gave  promise  of  a  prosperous  issue.     (A. 
B.  Davidson,  D.D.)        The  beginning  of  true  prosperity  : — Our    study  is  in  the 
chamber  of  true  religion.     There  we  see  a  solitary  girl,  and  she  an  orphan.     She 
hath  "  neither  father  nor  mother."     On  the  doctrine  of  earthly  chances,  everything 
is  against  her.     But  in  the  scheme  of  the  Divine  government,  we  shall  see  that  she 
has  an  Almighty  Friend.     Her  beginning  is  small  indeed,  and  disastrous  enough ; 
her  latter  end  shall  greatly  increase.   But  there  are  other  discouraging  circumstances 
also,  which  seem  completely  to  forbid  the  latter  end  of  advancement  which  is 
promised.     1.  She  is  a  stranger.     We  find  her  in  a  land  not  her  own,  though 
perhaps   she  was  born  upon   its   soil — among  a  people  with  whom  she  has  no 
affinity  and   no  bond   of   affection.     A   girl,   an   orphan,   and   a    stranger.     To 
wander  among  multitudes  with  whom  we  have  no  connection  and  no  sympathy  is 
often  a  depression  to  the  brightest  spirits.    But  this  poor  girl  is  not  a  stranger  in 
voluntary  journeying — she  is  a  captive.     She  is  a  servant  of  the  true  God  in  a  land 
of  dark  idolatry;  a  pure,  praying  girl  amidst  a  people  whose  licentious  profligacy 
made   the  most  wasting  crimes  to  be  no  dishonour.    But  if  piety  can  be  made 
triumphant  under  circumstances  so  completely  opposed  to  it,  and  a  child  of  God 
can  glorify  her  Father's  name,  and  keep  His  commandments  amidst  temptations 
and  difficulties  so  numerous  and  pressing,  how  great  will  be  the  responsibility  of 
those  who  are  exposed  to  no  such  contests  1     2.  This  orphan  stranger,  this  lonely 
girl,  is  also  beautiful  in  person.     "  The  maid  was  fair  and  beautiful."    This  is  a 
gift  which  all  naturally,  perhaps  not  unreasonably,  prize.     It  is  God  who  hath  given 
to   the   youthful  form   and   face  their  attractions  and  their  loveliness.     One   of 
the  marks  of  His  benevolence  is  here  seen.     His  goodness  shines   in   all  these 
aspects  of  His  power.     He  has  made  everything  beautiful  in  its  time.     Yet  the 
beauty  of  our  daughters  is  but  too  frequently  a  snare.     Sin  in  the  heart  perverts 
and   corrupts  it.     It  is  welcomed  as  a  merchandise  for  gain.    It  is  nourished 
as  the  food  for  vanity.     It  is  perverted  to  awaken  an  earthly  taste,  and  to  encour- 
age a  carnal  mind.     It  brings  an  attending  exposure   to  peculiar  temptations. 
Her  parents  delighted  over    her   childish    promise,   and   called   her   Hadassah, 
their  myrtle,  their  joy.     They  looked  forward  to  great  parental  delight  in  her 
coming  bloom,  when  as  a  fragrant  myrtle  they  should  see  her  blossoming  at  their 
side.     But  this,  alas,  they  were  not  to  see.     She  was  to  bloom  for  the  gaze  of  other 
eyes,  but  not  for  theirs.     Could  I  lead  you  off  from  this  outward  beauty  to  think  of 
the  fair  beauty  of  the  Lord — how  much  more  precious  and  desirable  is  that  pure 
and  obedient  mind  which  we  find  united  with  Hadassah's  loveliness  of  person ! 
Outward  beauty  we  cannot  all  have.    But  this  higher  and  more  enduring  beauty  of 
the  Spirit  you  may  all  possess.     3.  The  sole  earthly  protector  of   this  beautiful 
orphan  was  poor  and  unable  to  defend  her.     "  In  Shushan,  the  palace,  there  was  a 
certain  Jew  whose  name  was  Mordecai.   And  he  brought  up  Hadassah,"  &c.    When 
her  father  and  her  mother  were  obliged  to  forsake  her,  the  Lord  took  her  up,  by 
providing  her  a  faithful  friend  in  her  father's  nephew.    He  took  her  for  his  own 


CHAP,  n.]  ESTHER.  27 

daughter.  But  she  was  really  one  of  God's  hidden  ones,  chosen  in  His  love,  to  be 
protected  and  loved  by  Him.  Never  forget  this  highest  security  of  His  protection 
and  His  presence.  There  you  are  secure  for  ever.  No  one  can  be  poor  who  is 
rich  in  faith  toward  God.  No  one  can  be  deserted  who  has  the  Divine  friendship 
and  fellowship.  4.  This  lonely  orphan  girl  was  grateful  and  obedient :  "  Esther  did 
the  commandment  of  Mordecai  like  as  when  she  was  brought  up  with  him."  Happy 
indeed  is  such  a  manifestation  of  grace  as  this !  You  may  build  with  confidence 
any  hope  of  usefulness  and  any  desired  attainment  of  human  excellence  upon  a 
cl.aracter  so  true.  A  spirit  thus  pure,  subdued,  affectionate  and  sincere,  what  may 
it  not  do  that  is  lovely,  honest,  and  of  good  report  ?  It  spreads  happiness  for  others 
around  its  path.  It  converts  the  cares  and  trials  of  life  into  pleasures  and  delights. 
It  crowns  the  whole  personal  walk  with  loveliness  and  attractions.  But  Esther's 
gratitude  to  her  earthly  benefactor  was  founded  on  her  still  deeper  gratitude  to 
God.  This  poor  and  lonely,  but  faithful  and  beautiful  girl,  God  means  to  raise  up 
to  be  an  eminent  blessing  and  restorer  to  His  people.  Her  latter  end  is  to  be  in 
great  prosperity.  This  is  our  great  lesson  now.  We  are  witnessing  the  purpose 
and  the  work  of  God.  He  is  exalting  a  child  of  His  own,  and  showing  what  He 
can  do  with  His  own,  and  by  His  own  power.  No  condition  is  beneath  His  notice. 
No  child  of  grace  is  below  His  care.  None  who  love  Him  can  be  forsaken  or 
destroyed.  We  see  here  a  low  beginning ;  none  could  be  more  so  ;  but  it  is  a  very 
lovely  one.  And  as  we  study  the  course  through  which  God  is  pleased  to  lead  this 
child  of  grace,  we  shall  see  Him  to  be  justified  in  His  whole  course,  and  to  come 
forth  completely  victorious  in  the  work  which  He  hath  undertaken.  How  great  is 
the  advantage  of  having  God  upon  your  side,  and  of  being  under  His  special  pro- 
tection and  care  1  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  The  viysterious  beginning  : — This  is  a 
most  important  truth  for  us  to  study.  Man  proposes,  but  God  disposes.  The  eyes 
of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place.     The  government  of  the  world  is  on  His  shoulder. 

1.  We  may  consider  the  object  of  this  exaltation.  This  poor  Jewish  orphan  is  to  be 
made  the  Queen  of  Persia.  The  change  of  position  is  as  wide  and  wonderful  as 
earth  can  illustrate.  Why  did  God  thus  select  and  elevate  her  ?  He  designed  to 
give  to  aU  His  people  a  great  illustration  of  His  power  and  goodness.  He  would 
have  them  see.  He  would  have  all  to  see,  how  certain  and  adequate  is  His  protection 
to  those  who  love  and  trust  Him.  But  He  had  further  designs  in  this  work.  He 
not  only  intended  to  show  His  goodness  to  Esther  in  protecting  and  rewarding  a 
child  whom  He  loved.  He  also  purposed  to  make  her  an  eminent  blessing  to  others. 
She  was  to  be  a  restorer  to  her  people,  a  great  blessing  to  her  own  captive  nation. 
No  one  is  exalted  in  this  world  for  himself  alone.  Whatever  gifts,  or  gains,  or 
influence  we  have,  they  are  for  the  benefit  of  others.  No  man  liveth  for  himself. 
But  how  clearly  and  with  what  peculiar  power  does  God  teach  us  this  truth  in  the 
whole  plan  of  Divine  redemption.  Why  has  the  Lord  Jesus  hved  and  died  ?  _  And 
why  is  He  stiU  living  as  a  mediator  at  the  right  hand  of  God?  " For  us,"  is  the 
only  answer  to  the  question.  He  is  exalted  on  high  that  He  may  bestow  gifts  upon 
men.  This  important  truth  God  equally  teaches  us  in  our  own  enjoyment  of  the 
blessings  which  redemption  brings  to  us.  He  enriches  us  with  all  our  gifts  that  we 
may  be  made  the  instruments  of  enriching  others.  We  should  look  around  and  ask, 
"  Whom  can  I  bless  ?  Whom  can  I  serve  ?  To  whom  can  I  give  even  a  cup  of  cold 
water  in  my  Master's  name  ?  "  We  can  never  tell  how  wide  may  be  the  appointed 
influences  of  such  a  spirit.  We  see  the  end  of  the  Lord,  that  He  is  faithful  and  very 
gracious,  and  we  may  learn  from  it  to  understand  and  to  confide  in  the  loving-kind- 
ness of  the  Lord.  When  the  gracious  purpose  of  God  comes  out  in  the  result  of 
His  dispensation,  we  have  no  longer  any  doubt  or  darkness  resting  upon  His  Word. 

2.  We  may  consider  the  circumstances  of  Esther's  exaltation.  They  were  painful 
and  repulsive  to  her  in  an  extreme  degree.  Such  was  the  subject  of  violent  com- 
pulsion. Such  is  the  true  meaning  of  the  term  "  brought,"  literally,  "  brought  by 
force."  In  this  exaltation  of  the  captive  orphan,  God  remarkably  overruled  and 
employed  the  wicked  passions  of  men.  The  king  consulted  only  his  own  corrupt 
desires.  His  officers  combined  to  minister  to  his  wicked  tempers  and  gratifications. 
No  happiness  of  others,  no  peace  of  violated  households,  no  wretchedness  of  ruined 
and  discarded  youth,  was  to  be  considered  as  an  obstacle  in  the  path.  _  The  king's 
commandment  and  decree  must  be  obeyed.  This  does  not  lessen  the  wickedness  of 
men.  However  God  may  restrain  and  employ  them,  their  purpose  is  only  to  sin. 
And  whatsoever  results  God  may  bring  out  of  their  wickedness,  they  must  bear 
the  guilt  of  their  sin  in  the  same  condemnation.  God's  mercy  may  compel 
them  to  bless  His  people,  and  to  glorify  Himself,  while  His  justice  punishes 


23  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ciiap.  n. 

their  transgression,  and  overthrows  their  own  plans  of  personal  gain  and  glory. 
Henry  VIII.  was  a  monster  of  crime.  His  motives  appeared  to  be  his  own  wicked 
passions  alone.  He  murdered  and  he  married  at  his  pleasure.  Yet  God  over- 
ruled the  whole  result  for  the  establishment  of  His  truth.  This  glorious  Refor- 
mation has  been  often  reproached  for  Henry's  crimes.  It  would  be  just  as 
reasonable  to  reproach  the  deliverance  of  the  Israelites  and  their  subsequent 
prosperity  with  the  crimes  of  Pharaoh.  God  can  make  even  our  own  pardoned 
sins  and  foUies  to  become  a  blessing  to  us,  and  to  bring  honour  to  Him.  (Ibid.) 
The  important  friendship  : — What  principle  of  Divine  providence  can  be  more 
important  than  this  ?  To  have  the  friendship  of  God  is  to  have  all  that  men  can 
ask.  If  He  is  on  our  side,  it  is  of  little  consequence  who  may  be  against  us.  But 
He  is  always  on  the  side  of  those  whose  ways  please  Him.  Esther's  history  shows 
us  this.  In  all  its  aspects  her  exaltation  was  most  remarkable.  1.  Mark  the  simple 
cause  of  this  exaltation.  It  was  the  Divine  tribute  to  her  character.  Because  her 
ways  pleased  the  Lord,  He  made  her  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  her.  Do  you  ask 
for  success,  for  happiness,  for  final  triumph  ?  Do  you  desire  a  result  of  blessedness 
for  this  life  and  for  the  life  to  come  ?  Embrace  the  hope  which  the  gospel  gives. 
Go  to  the  fountain  which  the  gospel  opens.  Enter  into  the  Saviour's  ranks  and 
belong  to  Him.  He  will  carry  you  safely  through  every  trial  and  every  contest. 
2.  Mark  the  way  in  which  this  exaltation  was  accomplished.  God  gave  her  favour 
in  the  sight  of  others.  An  unseen  influence  and  power  preceded  her  in  the  path  through 
which  she  was  led  and  prepared  her  way  before  her.  And  now  we  see  the  begin- 
ning of  the  turning  tide.  "  When  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord,  He  maketh  even 
his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him."  The  maiden  pleased  Hegai,  the  keeper  of 
the  women,  and  she  obtained  kindness  of  him.  Everything  now  is  to  be  in  her 
favour.  "  The  best  place  in  the  house  of  the  women  "  is  assigned  to  her.  "  Seven 
maidens  meet  to  be  given  to  her  out  of  the  king's  house  "  are  appointed  her 
attendants.  So  easily  can  your  gracious  heavenly  Father  change  and  order  the 
minds  of  others  concerning  you.  He  can  make  all  your  enemies  at  peace  with  you. 
Thus  He  prepared  Pharaoh's  daughter  to  be  the  defender  and  the  royal  nurse  for 
the  infant  Moses.  Thus  also  He  dealt  with  Daniel  and  his  companions.  He  gives 
a  pleasant  and  attractive  aspect  to  religious  character,  adorns  it  by  His  Spirit  with 
traits  of  meekness  and  spiritual  beauty,  makes  its  influence  agreeable  and  pleasant 
to  those  who  become  connected  with  it,  and  in  this  way  makes  His  servants 
acceptable  to  others  and  a  real  blessing  to  many.  This  system  of  His  gracious 
government  lays  out  the  line  of  personal  duty  for  you.  It  is  your  duty  to  be  a 
blessing  to  all  persons  and  at  aU  times.  3.  Mark  the  state  of  mind  which  true 
piety  wiU  display  under  the  most  trying  circumstances.  This  was  beautifully 
exhibited  in  Esther  as  she  passed  through  the  trying  ordeal  which  was  to  lead  to 
her  exaltation.  Esther  showed  great  self-respect.  What  is  so  dignified  and 
refining  as  true  piety  ?  It  habitually  clothes  the  character  with  grace  and  purity, 
and  the  manners  with  delicacy  and  elegance.  We  see  the  poorest  daughters  of  earth 
exalted  by  the  transforming  power  of  true  religion  to  a  hold  on  the  reverence  of  all, 
and  often  to  the  admiration  and  delight  of  many.  True  piety  is  patient,  quiet  and 
unassuming.  Esther  showed  a  quiet  submission  to  the  will  of  God.  She  asked  for 
nothing.  She  desired  nothing  of  all  that  she  saw  around  her.  All  the  state  and 
magnificence  of  her  new  condition  were  nothing  to  her.  Her  mind  could  find 
repose  only  in  God.  How  beautiful  is  such  an  example !  Remember  that  Divine 
promise  (Isa.  xxvi.  3) :  "  Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace,  whose  mind  is 
stayed  on  Thee,  because  he  trusteth  in  Thee.  Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever,  for  in 
the  Lord  Jehovah  is  everlasting  strength."  Esther  showed  entire  indifference  to 
worldly  display.  But  "  when  the  turn  of  Esther  was  come  to  go  in  unto  the  king, 
she  required  nothing  but  what  Hegai,  the  king's  chamberlain,  appointed."  She 
was  contented  to  leave  her  whole  influence  and  prospects  in  her  Father's  hands, 
and  therefore  "  she  required  nothing."  This  was  true  modesty,  as  well  as  a  simple 
and  pious  trust  in  God.  Her  mind  and  thoughts  were  directed  to  Him,  not  to 
herself.  What  an  example  was  this  to  youth  in  the  midst  of  the  snares  and 
aniticial  glare  of  the  world!  True  adorning  is  "not  the  outward  adorning  of 
plaiting  the  hair,  and  of  wearing  of  gold,  or  of  putting  on  apparel,  but  it  is  in  the 
hidden  man  of  the  heart,  in  that  which  is  not  corruptible,  even  the  ornament  of  a 
meek  and  quiet  spirit,  which  is  in  the  sight  of  God  of  great  price."  What  attractive 
beauty  there  is  in  a  heavenly  temper,  a  lowly  spiritual  mind  1  This  is  a  jewel  of 
the  Lord's  preparation  and  appomtment,  and  eminently  becomes  and  adorns  the 
children  of  God.     Esther  showed  a  simple  and  entire  trust  in  God.     In  the  bitter- 


•CHAP,  n.]  ESTHER.  29 

tiesa  of  her  heart's  sorrow  she  had  no  other  protector.  (Ibid.)  The  myrtle  that 
became  a  star: — I.  Hadassah,  the  orphan.  Mordecai  took  the  little  tree,  growing 
without  shelter  from  the  stoi-m,  and  planted  it  by  his  own  hearth.  II.  Look  next  at 
Hadassah,  the  captive.  III.  Then  at  Hadassah,  the  beautiful  maiden.  Nobody 
should  despise  beauty  of  face ;  but  bad  character  spoils  beauty,  whilst  beauty  of 
Boul  may  supply  the  lack  of  physical  beauty.  IV.  Last  of  all,  at  Esther,  thh 
queen.  V.  Let  us  conclude  with  a  twofold  wish.  1.  May  you  grow  like  a  myrtle, 
and  resemble  it  in  two  qualities :  in  that  it  is  an  evergreen,  and  always  fragrant. 
Be  thou  lovely  in  the  dark  days  as  well  as  the  bright ;  and  do  thou  always  cheer 
thy  dwelling  with  the  fragrance  of  godliness.  2.  May  you  glow  like  a  star,  which 
God  has  clothed  with  light  and  placed  so  high  in  the  heavens.  Do  thou  walk  in 
light — Christ's  light — the  hght  of  truth,  and  love,  and  holiness  ;  and,  finally,  shine 
as  a  star  in  heaven,  your  home  for  evermore.  {J.  Edmons,  D.D.)  Beauty  : — 
Esther,  in  addition  to  her  outward  comeliness,  was  modest,  engaging,  contented, 
and  possessed  all  those  amiable  qualities  which  adorn  the  individual,  while  they 
make  him  useful  to  society.  Beauty  is  one  of  the  gifts  of  nature  ;  but  if  it  consist 
only  in  symmetry  of  form  and  fineness  of  colouring,  it  is  no  more  than  a  beautiful 
statue;  it  can  only  gratify  the  eye.  That  which  reflects  as  a  mirror  the  good 
qualities  of  the  mind  can  alone  form  an  object  of  rational  attraction.     (T.  3IcCrie.) 

Vers.  5-20.  Wbose  name  was  HordecaL — Mordecai : — Providence  opens  avenues 
through  which  merit  may  attain  elevation.  I.  Mordecai  was  kind  to  his  orphan 
COUSIN.  He  brought  her  up,  adopting  her  as  his  own  daughter.  He  was  intensely  soli- 
citous for  her  welfare.  He  was  her  counsellor,  guardian,  friend.  He  seems  to  have 
possessed  respect  for  womanhood — what  Charles  Lamb  in  one  of  his  Essays  of 
Elia  designates,  "  reverence  for  the  sex."  Are  we  not  justified  in  afi&rming  that 
this  is  indicative  of  nobility?  Love  of  woman,  as  woman,  produces  beneficent 
results,  which  few  can  afford  to  dispense  with.  It  aids  in  developing  perfection  of 
character.  U.  He  possessed  good  judgment.  He  advised  Esther  not  to  reveal  her 
kindred.  He  did  not  enjoin  her  to  deny  her  nationality,  much  less  to  become 
alienated  from  her  suffering  countrymen  ;  but  he  exhorted  her  to  maintain  silence 
in  reference  to  her  descent.  He  will  await  deliverance  from  Israel's  God,  carefully 
watching  the  indications  of  providence,  and  endeavouring,  meanwhile,  to  induce 
Esther  to  strengthen  her  influence  with  the  king.  "  The  prudent  man  looketh  weU 
to  his  going."  III.  He  was  humble.  He  sat  as  porter  at  the  royal  gate  of  the 
palace  and  was  contented.  IV.  He  was  lotal  to  justice.  "When  two  of  the 
chamberlains  sought  to  lay  hands  on  the  king  he  disclosed  the  plot  to  the  queen, 
who,  by  reporting  it  to  the  monarch,  delivered  the  culprits  over  to  the  vengeance  of 
law,  and  "  they  were  both  hanged  on  a  tree."  V.  He  was  conscientious,  and  to  a 
right-minded  person  the  approval  of  conscience  is  the  richest  reward,  one  which 
depends  upon  himself  and  of  which  no  other  can  rob  him.  Mordecai  refused  to 
bow  before  Haman.  "  If  the  monkey  reigns,  dance  before  him,"  is  a  proverb 
which  evidently  had  little  force  with  Mordecai.  If  Haman  does  not  deserve  respect, 
he  shall  not  receive  reverence  from  him.  Kind,  prudent,  humble,  just  and  con- 
scientious, need  we  marvel  that  Mordecai  rose  from  lowly  station  to  become 
chief  minister  of  State?  Though  he  has  saved  the  life  of  the  king,  he  is 
not  promoted.  He  returns  to  his  humble  duties.  By  the  simple  fact  that  a 
record  is  made  of  the  services  of  a  porter,  preparation  is  made  for  the  stirring 
events  of  the  future.  {J.  S.  Van  Dyke,  D.D.)  Tried  fidelity : — Here  we 
have  the  fact  demonstrated  in  a  striking  illustration  that  no  man  can  serve 
God  for  nought.  He  will  never  be  a  debtor  to  any  of  His  creatures.  The 
path  of  truth  and  goodness,  of  love  to  God  and  love  to  men,  will  always 
advance  in  light  and  purity  to  a  perfect  day.  This  is  the  illustration  we  have 
in  the  character  and  history  of  Mordecai.  Ahasuerus,  Esther,  Haman,  and 
Mordecai,  in  their  relations  make  a  perfect  dramatic  exhibition.  Their  paths 
cross  each  other,  and  their  interests  mingle.  Their  conditions  and  responsibilities 
are  in  constant  close  connection,  and  are  contmually  intermingled.  Each  cha- 
racter is  a  separate  living  principle.  And  in  each  the  operation  and  result  of  this 
pecuUar  principle  is  distinctly  and  very  beautifully  displayed.  1.  In  this  fidelity 
in  duty  we  first  see  this  path  of  duty  beginning  in  the  very  lowest  circumstances  of 
life.  Enrich  and  exalt  the  indulgence  of  the  world  by  every  imagination  of  its 
wealth  and  pleasure,  and  yet  He  shows  its  end  to  be  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit. 
He  will  show  the  reward  of  fidelity  in  duty.  He  will  display  the  history  of  its 
certain  triumph,  and  perfect  security  and  success.     Begin  as    ow  as  you  will  in 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cbulp.  n. 

human  condition ;  make  the  sphere  as  limited  as  you  can ;  multiply  difiSculties 
around  its  strait  and  narrow  path  as  you  choose,  and  He  will  show  you  how  easily 
and  how  certainly  He  can  exalt  and  honour  it,  and  that  by  the  very  instruments 
which  have  been  collected  to  oppose  it.  Thus  Mordecai  begins  a  poor  captive  Jew, 
perhaps  a  beggar,  certainly  a  menial  at  the  king's  gate.  Men  often  think  it  of  little 
consequence  what  one  does  who  is  so  concealed  and  so  little  known.  But,  ah,  never 
forget  that  there  is  no  such  distinction  before  God  between  duties  great  and  little, 
or  sins  venial  or  mortal.  Whatever  God  requires  or  forbids  is  great.  Every  station 
■which  His  providence  has  assigned  and  ordered  is  necessary  and  important.  Virtue 
must  always  be  tried  by  little  things.  The  beginnings  of  all  temptations  are  small, 
and  the  question  of  resistance  or  compliance  with  them  is  always  settled  in  very 
narrow  contingencies  of  trial.  It  is  far  easier  to  perform  higher  duties,  and  to 
resist  greater  temptations.  The  real  trial  of  human  principles  is  in  unknown  and 
secret  dangers.  When  everybody  is  watching,  it  is  easy  to  walk  uprightly.  The 
soldier  on  parade  will  be  sure  to  keep  time  and  step.  But  when  our  walk  is  unobserved, 
our  conduct  unnoticed,  our  position  in  life  of  no  consequence  in  human  sight,  then 
are  our  difiSculties  and  our  temptations  always  the  greater  and  the  more  dangerous, 
"No  one  will  know;  no  one  sees;  example  is  nothing;  it  is  of  no  consequence  what 
I  do;  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  do  much  good  in  any  way."  Ah,  not  thus  did 
Mordecai  argue,  though  in  these  very  circumstances  of  narrow  influence  Mordecai 
begins.  2.  We  see  this  poor  and  faithful  man  perfectly  contented  with  his  low 
estate.  He  is  unmurmuring  though  poor.  If  you  would  have  larger  and  higher 
responsibility,  gain  it  and  be  prepared  for  it,  by  earnestly  and  contentedly  fulfilUng 
the  obligations  which  are  laid  upon  you  now.  3.  We  see  him  affectionate  and 
liberal  in  his  social  relations.  Though  poor,  yet  making  others  rich.  Though  poor 
himself,  he  cheerfully  adopts  his  orphan  cousin,  and  divides  his  comforts,  whatever 
they  might  be,  with  her.  "  He  brought  up  Hadassah,  his  uncle's  daughter."  The 
largest  generosity  is  often  among  the  most  straitened  in  earthly  condition.  But 
it  is  an  indispensable  characteristic  of  true  virtue.  Obedience  to  God  is  imitation 
of  God,  who  giveth  liberally  and  upbraideth  not.  A  covetous,  harsh,  narrow,  selfish 
temper  can  never  have  tasted  that  God  is  gracious,  or  have  known  anything  of  the 
Saviour's  transforming  love.  He  was  delicate  and  refined  in  his  Uberality.  There 
is  much  in  the  way  in  which  kindness  is  bestowed  to  make  it  either  acceptable  or  & 
burden.  The  Uttle  orphan  Mordecai  "  took  and  brought  up  for  his  own  daughter." 
There  is  nothing  in  the  religion  of  the  New  Testament  to  encourage  bluntness, 
coarseness,  or  assumption  of  superiority.  But  Mordecai's  tenderness  was  watchful 
as  well  as  delicate.  "  To  know  how  Esther  did,  and  what  should  become  of  her," 
was  the  dearest  interest  he  had  on  earth.  And  for  this  "  he  walked  every  day 
before  the  court  of  the  women's  house."  4.  We  see  him  faithful  in  every 
claim  as  a  subject.  In  his  solitude  he  overheard  the  counsel  of  two  con- 
spirators against  the  life  of  the  king.  He  sought  the  opportunity,  therefore,, 
to  preserve  the  life  of  the  king,  and  he  succeeded.  This  also  is  an  eminent 
example.  The  virtuous,  religious  man  is  always  an  orderly  and  peaceful  man. 
6.  We  see  in  Mordecai  especial  fidelity  to  God.  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  For 
Bbe  had  neither  father  nor  mother. — Religion  promotes  benevolence : — Now 
there  are  some  remarks  very  obviously  suggested  by  this  part  of  the  narrative. 
I  should  say  that  here  we  have  a  fine  example  of  the  practical  power  of  true 
religion,  in  leading  to  a  benevolent  regard  for  the  comfort  and  well-being  of 
the  unprotected.  {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Personal  benevolence : — It  is  an 
easy  matter  for  the  wealthy  to  be  charitable  when  their  gifts,  administered  by 
others,  involve  no  sacrifice  of  time  or  labour,  and  no  care  and  anxiety  to  them- 
selves. But  the  noblest  exercise  of  charity  is  exhibited  when  we  take  an  interest 
personally  in  the  well-being  of  the  unprotected,  and  when  they  can  look  to  us  as 
their  friends  and  counsellors,  to  whom  they  can  have  recourse  in  their  sorrows  and 
troubles  and  diCficulties.  (Ibid.)  MordecaVs  tenderness  in  adopting  Esther  : — 
We  Christians  have  not  always  been  ready  to  give  the  Jew  credit  for  such  tender- 
ness, such  ready  pity,  such  gentle  helpfulness.  Let  us  ask  ourselves  if  we  are 
willing  to  come  up  to  the  standard  of  this  Jew?  What  is  the  good  of  any 
religion  unless  it  do  make  us  pitiful,  loving,  eager  to  help  the  poor  world  about  us  ? 
I  heard  a  very  beautiful  story  some  time  since.  A  friend  was  telling  me  that  one 
Sunday  he  was  preaching  at  some  little  country  chapel,  and  went  to  dinner  at  the 
house  of  a  labourer,  where  he  found  eight  children.  He  was  struck  with  the  fact 
that  they  seemed  to  run  in  pairs,  as  if  they  were  all  twins.  After  dinner  the  good 
woman  said,  "  I  saw  you  looking  at  the  children,  sir,  as  if  you  could  not  quite 


CHAP,  n.]  ESTHER.  81 

make  them  out."  "  Well,  yes,"  said  he,  ♦•  I  could  not  help  wondering  if  they  were 
all  twins !  "  The  good  wife  laughed.  "  No,"  said  she,  "  they  are  not  twins.  You 
see  they  are  all  ours,  so  to  speak,  and  yet  four  of  them  are  not.  When  we  came 
into  this  house  the  man  and  woman  who  lived  here  before  us  had  just  died  and  left 
four  little  children  just  the  age  of  our  four.  They  had  to  go  to  the  workhouse,  and 
the  van  was  at  the  door  to  take  them  just  as  we  came  in.  Three  of  them  were  in 
the  van ;  but  the  fourth  little  fellow  would  not  go.  He  had  got  hold  of  the  door, 
and  was  screaming  with  all  his  might.  The  man  was  trying  not  to  hurt  him,  and 
yet  of  course  he  wanted  to  make  him  let  go.  I  felt  very,  very  sorry  for  them  all, 
and  said,  '  You  can't  take  him  screaming  Uke  that.  People  will  think  that  you  are 
murdering  him.  Put  the  three  back  again  and  come  again  to-morrow.  We  will 
look  after  them  for  the  night.'  The  man  was  very  glad  to  do  it,  so  they  all  came 
in  again.  Well,  then  you  see  our  children  began  to  play  with  them,  and  we  all 
sat  down  together  at  supper,  and  managed  to  get  them  off  to  bed.  Well,  that  night 
I  could  not  sleep  for  thinking  about  them.  I  could  not  get  it  out  of  my  mind  what 
I  should  Uke  anybody  to  do  for  mine  if  they  were  left  like  that.  As  I  lay  tossing, 
John  said  to  me,  '  I  can't  help  thinking  about  those  children.'  '  WeU,  John,'  I 
said,  '  what  do  you  think  about  them.'  '  Well,  Mary,  do  you  think  if  we  pinched 
a  bit  that  we  could  manage  to  keep  them ? '  'I am  sure  we  could,'  I  said,  and  then 
we  went  to  sleep.  The  guardians  gave  us  six  shillings  a  week  towards  their  keep,  and 
it  went  on  all  right  until  John  began  to  think  that  we  ought  to  have  a  Sunday-school 
for  the  children  about  here.  '  We  have  eight  to  start  with,'  said  John.  So  the  school 
was  started.  But  there  was  a  gentleman  that  set  himself  against  the  school,  and 
tried  to  put  it  down.  However,  John  would  not  have  that ;  so  this  gentleman  went 
to  the  guardians  and  got  them  to  stop  the  six  shillings  a  week.  We  could  not  let 
the  children  go,  for  to  us  it  was  just  as  if  they  were  our  own.  But  it  was  hard 
work,  for  John  fell  ill  and  was  in  bed  for  six  weeks.  And  when  he  got  about  again 
he  had  to  try  and  find  a  new  place,  for  his  had  been  filled  up.  At  last  he  got  a  job 
at  hedging  and  ditching,  and  that  meant  a  stout  pair  of  boots  and  a  pair  of 
leggings  and  a  bill-hook.  I  had  saved  a  few  shilUugs  for  the  children's  shoes,  but 
now  I  had  to  give  all  that  to  John,  and  away  he  went  to  buy  what  he  wanted. 
But  as  soon  as  he  came  back  I  said,  '  You  must  go  again  to  get  the  children's 
shoes,  John,'  and  I  put  two  sovereigns  in  his  hand.  He  looked  at  me  wondering. 
I  told  him  how  that  the  gentleman's  daughter  had  called  to  say  how  sorry  she  was 
for  us,  and  she  gave  us  this  to  keep  the  children.  And  since  then  we  have  managed 
to  get  on  right  well,  sir."  {Mark  Guy  Pearse.)  Worldly  exaltation  : — Providence 
and  grace  have  two  separate  dominions.  Tlxe  providence  of  God  rules  over  out- 
ward things  for  the  welfare  of  His  children.  The  grace  of  God  redeems,  renews, 
governs  and  preserves  their  own  inward  heart  and  character.  Both  are  the  subjects 
of  covenant  and  earnest  promises  to  them.  One  part  of  this  gracious  work  we  have 
seen  in  Esther's  case.  God  protected  and  preserved  the  captive  orphan  by  His 
own  power.  And  all  the  elements  of  her  ovm  character  are  the  evidences  of  the 
grace  and  power  of  her  Lord.  There  is  something  extremely  beautiful  and  even 
grand  in  this  exhibition  of  youthful  piety.  Few  will  be  carried  through  the 
extremes  of  Esther's  trial.  Now  we  are  to  look  upon  Esther,  the  queen  of  Persia, 
and  see  how  God  fulfils  all  His  promises,  and  protects  and  maintains  in  usefulness 
and  happiness  the  souls  of  His  servants.  I.  In  this  view  we  see  true  piety  in 
WORLDLY  EXALTATION.  TMs  exaltatiou  has  been  brought  about  by  a  remarkable 
train  of  circumstances  in  the  good  providence  of  God.  Every  probability  was 
against  it,  and  nothing  could  be  more  unlikely  than  the  result  which  was  thus 
produced.  "  The  king  loved  Esther  above  all  the  women,"  &c.  Eemarkable 
as  this  result  was  in  itself,  the  reason  given  for  it  is  yet  more  worthy  of  our 
attention.  "  She  obtained  grace  and  favour  in  his  sight."  Her  exaltation  is 
ascribed  to  a  far  higher  power  than  any  that  outwardly  appeared.  God  was 
ruhng  and  ordering  it  in  His  own  way.  You  may  carry  out  this  principle 
in  all  your  expectations  and  plans  of  life.  Your  youthful  hearts  desire  earthly 
success.  God  may  surely  give  it  to  you.  But  He  would  have  you  realise  that  it  is 
His  gift.  The  wise  and  the  only  sure  way  to  make  the  earth  a  blessing  to  you  is  to 
seek  His  favour  with  it.  But  it  will  also,  which  is  far  more,  make  the  earthly 
substance  which  you  do  gain  a  real  and  permanent  blessing  to  you.  But  surely 
there  is  a  higher  exultation  than  any  which  is  wholly  confined  to  earth.  There  is 
a  throne  above  all  earthly  thrones  for  those  who  conquer  in  the  Saviour's  host. 
This  God  reserveth  for  those  who  love  Him.  Seek  this  throne  and  kingdom,  the 
kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness.    This  is  the  more  excellent  v?ay.    Make 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

your  possession  of  it  sure.  The  king  of  Persia  made  a  royal  feast  at  Esther's 
exultation.  It  was  a  feast  of  far  different  character  from  that  which  preceded  the 
downfall  of  Vashti.  "  The  king  made  a  great  feast  unto  all  his  princes  and  his 
servants,  even  Esther's  feast ;  and  he  made  a  release  to  the  provinces,  and  gave 
gifts  according  to  the  state  of  the  king."  The  former  feast  was  distinguished  by 
abounding  selfish,  sensual  indulgence.  This  was  marked  by  releases,  gifts  and  acts 
of  favour  to  the  destitute  and  the  suffering.  The  people  of  God  are  always  made  a 
blessing  to  men  in  the  influence  which  they  exercise,  and  in  their  final  exaltation 
among  men,  when  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  shall  be  given  to  the  saints  of  the  Most 
High,  the  most  abounding  gifts  and  mercies  shall  be  showered  upon  the  world 
around.  If  God  shall  give  you  the  high  places  of  the  earth,  so  improve  and  employ 
your  influence  here  that  others  may  have  reason  to  bless  God  in  your  behalf.  II.  We 
see  here  the  emptiness  op  eaethlt  contrasts.  No  earthly  contrast  could  be 
greater  than  between  a  poor  Jewish  captive  orphan,  amidst  the  oppressions  of 
a  heathen  land,  and  the  queen  of  all  the  provinces  of  the  kingdom  of  Persia.  Yet 
all  this  is  nothing  when  viewed  in  relation  to  the  power  and  greatness  of  God. 
Man  looks  upon  the  outward  appearance.  God  looketh  upon  the  heart.  Let  us 
seek  to  gain  His  mind,  and  learn  to  value  others,  and  to  think  of  ourselves  according 
to  the  reality  of  character,  and  not  according  to  the  mere  appendages  and  aspects 
of  the  outward  condition.  The  vain  mind  of  youth  delights  in  worldly  elevation 
and  grandeur.  But  Esther's  trials  of  character  will  be  far  greater  in  her  new 
condition  than  in  her  former  one.  Few  can  bear  great  earthly  prosperity  with 
advantage.  It  is  here  that  the  principle  of  our  text  comes  in,  "  He  preserveth  the 
souls  of  His  saints."  He  delivers  them  from  the  destructive  influence  which 
surrounds  them.  He  carries  them  safely  through  the  hour  of  trial.  Prosperity 
brings  in  the  claims  of  worldly  fashion,  the  examples  of  the  exalted  wicked,  the 
hostility  of  a  world  which  at  the  same  time  tempts  to  transgression  and  scoffs 
at  fidelity.  It  introduces  a  multitude  of  new  thoughts  and  new  relations  which 
corrupt  the  character  and  entangle  the  soul.  The  life  of  piety  declines.  The  spirit 
of  prayer  grows  dull.  The  modesty  of  dress  and  personal  appearance  is  laid  aside. 
The  purity  of  the  outward  walk  is  disregarded.  III.  We  see  in  Esther's  case  that 
under  the  Divine  guidance  and  grace  tbue  piety  mat  pass  uninjured  through 
EVERY  STATE.  Esther's  sudden  exaltation  had  no  effect  on  her  fidelity  to  God,  or  on 
her  attachment  to  His  people.  We  see  the  same  guarded  self-respect,  and  the 
same  love  for  Mordecai  afterwards  as  before.  The  proportioned  usefulness  of 
individual  piety  in  different  stations  in  human  life  it  would  be  very  difficult  to 
decide.  God  often  selects  the  feeblest  instruments  as  the  most  important  agencies 
to  promote  His  glory.  We  may,  therefore,  dismiss  all  anxiety  about  the  influence 
of  our  appointed  station.  He  will  give  the  blessing  according  to  His  own  will. 
But  what  can  show  more  beautifuUy  the  reality  of  the  work  of  God  in  the  heart 
than  the  constant  exercise  and  display  of  the  same  kindness,  tenderness,  and 
simplicity  in  a  high  estate  as  in  a  previous  low  condition  ?  One  of  the  most 
striking  facts  in  Esther's  character  is  this  repeated  assertion  of  her  faithful  remem- 
brance of  Mordecai  and  of  her  permanent  regard  to  his  instructions.  Ah,  what  a 
blessing  do  we  confer  when  we  succeed,  under  the  sovereign  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
in  laying  up  in  the  youthful  mind  the  principles  of  true  religion  and  real  love  for  God ! 
This  is  something  real ;  a  gift  that  will  abide.    IV.  We  see  Esther's  exaltation 

MARKED  BY  SINCERE  GRATITUDE  AND  AFFECTIONATE  CARE  FOB  THE  APPOINTED  INSTRU- 
MENT OF  II.  A  low  and  upstart  mind  hates  to  acknowledge  obligations ;  nay, 
often  feels  a  new  hostility  towards  those  from  whom  benefits  have  been  received. 
But  a  truly  great  and  exalted  mind  forgets  no  benefits  that  have  been  conferred, 
and  esteems  it  a  high  privilege  to  be  able  to  pay  them  directly  back  to  the  person 
who  has  bestowed  them.  Esther  acknowledges  her  twofold  obligation,  while  she 
gives  the  information  which  saves  the  life  of  the  king,  and  gives  it  in  the  name  of 
Mordecai,  that  it  might  in  some  way  be  the  instrument  of  promoting  his  advantage, 
and  of  rescuing  him  from  the  poverty  of  his  condition.  This  gratitude  for  kindness 
from  our  fellow-men  is  always  characteristic  of  true  piety,  A  religious  heart  is 
ashamed  of  no  obligations.  Shun  that  sinful  pride  which  hates  the  feeling  and 
the  acknowledgment  of  dependence.  A  joyful  and  pleasant  thing  it  is  to  be 
thankful.  {S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  And  Mordecai  walked  every  day  before  the 
court  of  the  women's  house. — Mordecai's  loving  tolicitude  : — The  histories  of 
Mordecai  and  Esther  run  side  by  side,  like  the  two  differently-coloured  rivers — 
the  Arve  and  the  llhone.  But  the  course  of  the  one  is  from  time  to  time  being 
crossed  and  coloured  by  the  course  of  the  other.    Esther  played  a  leading  part  io 


CHAP,  n.]  ESTHER.  83 

the  deliverance  of  the  Jewish  nation,  but  she  owed  much  to  the  teaching,  influence, 
and  directions  of  Mordecai.  She  was  the  seen  and  he  the  unseen  worker.  These 
latter  often  do  the  most  important  work.  I.  Moedecai's  loving  solicitude. 
II.  This  loving  solicitude  was  of  Divine  origin.  God  makes  use  of  human 
passions  for  the  promotion  of  His  merciful  purposes.  Human  reasons  may  be 
given  to  account  for  Mordecai's  love  for  Esther,  but  there  were  also  Divine 
reasons.  III.  This  loving  solicitude  quickened  Mordecai's  discernment. 
IV.  This  loving  solicitude  taught  Mordecai  a  true  creed.  Love  is  light.  He 
that  dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth  in  a  clear  apprehension  of  Divine  truth  and  of 
Divine  methods.  "  Although  he  trusted  God  with  his  niece,  yet  he  knew  that  an 
honest  care  of  her  might  well  stand  with  faith  in  God's  providence.  God  must  be 
trusted,  but  not  tempted  by  the  neglect  of  careful  means  "  (Trapp).  V.  Mordecai's 
love  made  him  watchful.  VI.  Mordecai's  love  made  him  self-forgetful. 
VII.  Mordecai's  love  concerned  itself  about  Esther's  highest  welfare. 
(W.  Burrows,  B.A.)  She  required  nothing'. — Simple  attire  : — It  seems  to  be 
implied  in  the  text  that  while  the  other  maidens  endeavoured  by  dress  and 
ornament  to  make  an  impression  upon  the  heart  of  the  king,  Esther  had 
recourse  to  no  such  artifice.  If  she  was  to  gain  the  royal  favour,  which  no  doubt 
she  desired  to  do,. she  trusted  to  her  native  graces  and  accomplishments  as  the 
means  of  obtaining  it  rather  than  to  the  splendour  of  her  attire.  And  such 
wiU  always  be  the  procedure  of  true  beauty  and  modesty.  Excessive  attention 
to  the  decoration  of  the  person,  and  the  lavish  use  of  gaudy  ornament,  indicate 
the  consciousness  of  some  personal  defect,  and  are  inconsistent  alike  with  good 
taste,  with  female  delicacy,  and  with  the  law  of  Scripture.  {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.) 
Reality  versus  superficiality : — She  had  grace  in  her  heart,  humility  in  her  deport- 
ment, and  the  high  attractions  of  gentleness,  meekness,  and  pity.  These  would 
speak  to  the  heart  in  look  and  gesture,  and  obtain  favour  for  her  "  in  the  sight 
of  all  them  that  looked  upon  her."  There  was  realness  in  contrast  with  super- 
ficiality, true-heartedness  in  opposition  to  mere  pretension,  and  the  heroic  love  of 
the  right  and  the  noble  over  against  all  that  is  hollow,  hypocritical,  and  base.  Even 
in  a  heathen  court  spiritual  excellences  such  as  these,  rarely  to  be  found  there,  were 
sure  to  command  respect  and  win  the  affections.     (T.  McEwan.) 

Vers.  17-20.  So  that  he  set  the  royal  crown  upon  her  head. — The  elevation 
of  woman : — Gloss  it  as  you  may,  this  is  not  pleasant  reading,  and  yet  not  un- 
profitable, having  much  to  say  to  us,  and  especially  to  women,  of  what  we 
owe  to  Christianity  for  the  elevation  of  woman.  Telling  of  a  despot  and  sen- 
sualist, and  how  he  claimed  his  country's  fairest  beauty  for  his  insatiate 
pleasure.  But  it  is  purely  told  us.  It  can  be  read  without  dulling  the  con- 
science or  staining  the  imagination.  What  nation  of  antiquity  looked  not  upon 
woman  as  a  decorated  toy  or  an  abject  drudge?  There  was  one  exception. 
Among  the  Jews  her  position  was  relatively  high  as  compared  with  that  assigned 
to  her  in  adjacent  nations.  She  had  larger  liberty  than  even  now  is  allowed  her  in 
Oriental  countries,  with  greater  variety  and  importance  of  employments.  She 
headed,  like  Miriam,  the  bands  of  women  who  celebrated,  with  triumphant  song, 
the  overthrow  of  enemies.  She  led  armies,  like  Deborah,  and  was,  like  her,  a 
prophetess  and  a  judge.  In  the  free  grace  of  an  unconfined  maidenhood  she 
went  out  to  meet  her  father  with  timbrels  and  dances.  Her  hymns  were  included 
in  sacred  records,  as  was  the  song  of  Samuel's  mother.  She  was  consulted,  like 
Huldah,  by  high-priest  and  king.  And  while  the  effect  of  polygamy  was  disastrous, 
BC  tar  as  'that  obtained  before  the  captivity,  and  while  it  was  obvious  that  the 
husband,  not  the  wife,  was  the  acknowledged  head  of  the  household,  in  inde- 
pendence of  whom  the  wife  could  enter  on  no  engagements,  the  dowry  was  given  for 
the  wife,  not  with  her.  The  modern  harem  was  unknown,  the  matron  walked 
abroad  unveUed,  her  husband's  house  was  esteemed  her  "  rest,"  she  had  a  large 
authority  in  the  family,  and  the  grace  and  force  of  her  character  and  mind  were 
honoured,  cultured,  and  allowed  opportunity.  {R.  S.  Starrs.)  Esther's  advance- 
ment from  low  estate  to  share  the  throne  of  Persia  reminds  us  of  what  God  does 
for  His  people  in  raising  them  from  the  miry  clay  to  sit  with  Christ  upon  His 
throne.     (A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  20.  For  Esther  did  the  commandment  of  Mordecai,  like  as  when  she  was 
brought  up  with  him. — Repaying  parental  kindness  : — Then  I  would  say  that  there 
is  a  lesson  here  for  the  young.     How  can  they  repay  in  any  measure — for  fully 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

they  can  never  repay — the  tenderness  of  their  godly  parents  to  them  in  their  youth, 
and  the  anxiety  which  has  been  felt  on  their  account  as  they  advanced  toward 
maturity  ?  In  one  way  only — by  endeavouring  to  pursue  the  path  which  leads  to 
present  respectability  and  usefulness,  and  which  Christ  in  His  Word  has  marked 
out  as  that  which  His  disciples  must  tread.     {Ibid.) 

Yet.  21.  Two  of  the  king's  chamberlains,  Bigthan  and  Teresh  .  . .  sought  to  lay 
hand  on  the  king  Ahasuerus. — Traitors  .- — Besides  flatterers,  despots  are  apt  to  have 
traitors  and  assassins  about  them,  such  asBigthan  and  Teresh.  Mordecai  detected 
their  villainy,  and  no  doubt  ran  considerable  risk  in  exposing  it.  But  he  was  not  one 
of  those  who  are  honest  only  when  honesty  appears  to  them  to  be  the  best  policy  ;  he 
did  the  right  because  it  was  the  right,  faithfully  and  fearlessly.  {A.  M.  Symington.) 
Crafty  foes : — There  are  crafty  spiritual  foes  who  wait  for  the  opportunity  to  kill 
the  soul.  (T.  McEwan.)  Danger  of  great  men : — I.  The  dangeb  of  gkeat  men. 
II.  The  fidelity  of  the  godly  man.  III.  The  certainty  that  sin  will  find  us 
OUT.  (J.  Hughes.)  Danger  and  service  : — History  is  full  of  examples  of  plots 
and  assassinations  in  the  palaces  of  Eastern  princes.  Favouritism,  founded  usually 
upon  mere  caprice,  is  one  of  the  characteristics  of  a  despotic  government.  Then 
envy  and  hatred  are  naturally  excited  in  consequence  of  this,  among  such  as  think 
themselves  as  well  entitled  to  preferment  as  those  on  whom  it  has  been  bestowed. 
We  have  no  means  of  knowing  what  led  the  two  chamberlains  to  conspire  against 
the  king.  An  angry  word,  or  some  apparent  slight  or  insult,  may  have  provoked 
them  to  revenge,  or  they  may  have  been  bribed  by  other  parties  whom  the  king  had 
injured.  The  narrative  in  the  text  is  given  so  briefly  that  we  are  not  told  how 
Mordecai  came  to  discover  the  plot.  He  may  have  been  requested  to  become  an 
accomplice,  in  order  that  by  his  assistance  the  actual  perpetrators  of  the  bloody 
deed  might  the  more  easily  effect  their  escape.  But  whether  in  this  way,  or  by 
overhearing  the  conspirators  as  they  were  speaking  together  of  the  time  and 
manner  of  carrying  out  their  purpose,  he  became  aware  of  it — he  immediately 
took  measures  to  counteract  the  dark  design.  There  are  three  topics  suggested  by 
them,  to  which  we  may  briefly  advert.  1.  In  the  first  place,  we  cannot  read  this 
narrative  without  drawing  from  it  a  lesson  as  to  the  uncertainty  of  life.  The 
destroying  sword  may  be  hanging  as  by  a  single  hair  over  the  head  of  the  ruler 
of  a  vast  empire,  making  his  life  as  contingent  as  that  of  the  mariner  when  the 
storm  suddenly  bursts  forth  upon  him,  or  of  the  soldier  when  he  is  under  the  thick 
fire  of  the  enemy.  Humanly  speaking,  those  who  occupy  the  middle  class  of 
society,  whose  wants  are  supplied  without  any  danger  or  painful  toil,  and  who 
have  nothing  to  dread  from  the  envy  and  enmity  of  others,  live  in  greatest  security, 
and  have  least  occasion  to  fear  what  is  usually  called  accident,  as  affecting  their 
life.  And  the  practical  use  which  we  should  make  of  the  uncertainty  of  the 
present  life  is  to  have  a  sure  interest  in  Christ,  which  will  render  the  life  to  come 
all  certainty  and  blessedness  to  us.  2.  In  the  second  place,  the  narrative  before  us 
teaches  us  that  whatever  station  in  providence  men  are  called  to  fill,  they  may  be 
instrumental  in  conferring  important  benefits  on  others.  Mordecai,  a  man  of 
humble  rank,  saved  the  life  of  the  king.  But  the  remark  which  we  have  just  made 
may  be  transposed  to  services  more  important  than  those  which  have  reference  to 
the  present  life  and  its  concerns.  What  an  immense  power,  for  instance,  is 
possessed  by  the  nurse  to  whose  care  the  children  of  a  family  are  committed,  and 
who,  by  the  faithful  execution  of  her  trust,  may  implant  the  seeds  of  truth  in 
the  youthful  heart  so  deeply  that  no  worldly  influence  will  afterwards  efface  them. 
There  is  something  higher  here  than  the  mere  saving  of  life.  Every  follower  of 
Christ,  in  whatever  sphere  he  moves,  may  do  incalculable  good  to  those  around 
him,  even  to  those  who  are  placed  high  above  him.  If  you  cannot  do  so  much  as 
you  would,  a  consistent  and  faithful  life,  spent  in  all  the  unobtrusiveness  of  true 
humility,  will  be  a  lesson  to  some  that  may  be  productive  of  vast  benefit.  3.  In 
the  third  place,  from  the  narrative  under  review  we  are  led  to  think  of  a  record  of 
unrequited  deeds.  Mordecai's  information  saved  the  life  of  the  king,  and  was  duly 
noticed  in  the  annals  of  the  kingdom  ;  but  it  lay  there  for  a  considerable  time, 
apparently  as  a  dead  letter.  There  is  evidently  a  twofold  application  that  may  be 
made  of  this  particular.  The  acts  of  wicked  men  are  all  recorded,  and  will  be 
brought  into  judgment.  The  hand  of  justice  does  not  always  follow  the  perpetra- 
tion of  the  evil  act.  Yet  the  retribution,  if  it  be  slow,  is  certain.  But  it  is  not  so 
much  this  aspect  of  the  question  that  is  presented  to  us  in  the  text  as  the  more 
pleasing  one,  that  the  services  of  God's  people  are  recorded,  and  are  not  suffered 


CHA*.  ni.]  ESTHER.  85 

to  pass  unrewarded  in  the  end.  The  reward,  indeed,  may  not  come  in  the  present 
life.  The  faithful  disciples  of  Christ  have  often  been  left  to  contend  with  the 
world's  opposition,  and  to  fall  victims  to  the  world's  enmity,  just  on  account  of 
their  steadfast  attachment  to  the  truth.  But  they  are  all  recorded,  and  the  record 
■will  be  produced  hereafter.  The  Scripture  teaches  us  this  very  plainly.  "  God  is 
not  unrighteous,"  says  the  apostle,  writing  to  the  Hebrews,  "  to  forget  your  work 
and  labour  of  love,  which  ye  have  showed  toward  His  name,  in  that  ye  have 
ministered  to  the  saints  and  do  minister."    {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.) 


CHAPTEE  m. 

Yeb.  1-6.  After  these   things   did   king   Ahasuems   promote   Haman. — The 

protperous  wicked  man  : — Matthew  Henry  says  :  "  I  wonder  what  the  king  saw  in 
Haman  that  was  commendable  or  meritorious  ?  It  is  plain  that  he  was  not  a  man  of 
honour  or  justice,  of  any  true  courage  or  steady  conduct,  but  proud  and  passionate 
and  revengeful ;  yet  he  was  promoted  and  caressed,  and  there  was  none  as  great  as 
he.  Princes'  darlings  are  not  always  worthies."  I.  The  wicked  man  in  pbospeeity. 
Haman  is  typical.  He  is  the  progenitor  of  a  long  line  that  by  skilful  plotting  rise 
above  the  heads  of  superior  men.  In  this  world  rewards  are  not  rightly  administered. 
Push  and  tact  get  the  prize.  II.  The  prosperous  wicked  man  is  suRBOtrNDED  by 
FAWNING  SYCOPHANTS.  "  The  king  had  so  commanded."  A  king's  commandment 
is  not  required  to  secure  outward  homage  towards  those  in  high  places.  Clothe  a 
man  with  the  outward  marks  of  royal  favour,  and  many  are  at  once  prepared  to 
become  his  blind  adulators.  Imperialism  is  glorified  in  political,  hterary,  and 
ecclesiastical  spheres.  Power  in  arms,  push  in  business,  skill  in  politics,  success 
in  literature,  and  parade  in  religion  are  the  articles  of  the  creed  in  which  modern 
society  believes.  HI.  The  pbospekoos  wicked  man  is  surrounded  by  meddling 
SYCOPHANTS.  Eveu  admiicrs  may  be  too  officious.  If  Haman  had  known  and  seen 
all,  he  might  have  prayed,  "  Save  me  from  my  friends."  The  king's  servants,  in 
their  selfish  zeal,  frustrated  their  own  purposes  of  aggrandisement.  How  often  in 
trying  to  grasp  too  much  we  lose  all.  IV.  The  prosperous  wicked  man  finds  that 
lALSE  greatness  beikgs  TROUBLE.  That  greatness  is  false  which  is  not  the  outcome 
of  goodness.  The  course  of  wicked  prosperity  cannot  run  smooth.  Haman  meets 
with  the  checking  and  detecting  Mordecai.  V.  The  prosperous  wicked  man  may 
learn  that  an  unrestrained  nature  brings  trouble.  Haman  was  intoxicated 
with  his  greatness.  He  was  fuU  of  wrath.  Wrath  is  cruel  both  to  the  subject  and 
the  object.  VI,  The  prosperous  wicked  man  unwittingly  plots  his  own  down- 
fall. Haman's  wrath  led  him  to  dangerous  extremes.  Poor  Haman !  Already 
we  see  thee  treading  on  a  volcano.  Thy  hands  are  digging  the  pit  into  which  thou 
shalt  fall.  Thy  minions  are  preparing  the  gallows  on  which  thou  thyself  shalt  be 
hung.  Learn — 1.  Prosperity  has  its  drawbacks.  2.  "Better  it  is  to  be  of  a  humble 
spirit  with  the  lowly  than  to  divide  the  spoil  with  the  proud."  3.  That  our  greatest 
troubles  often  spring  from  our  own  depraved  natures.  {W.  Burrows,  B.A.) 
Mordecai  and  Haman : — I.  The  insecurity  of  earthly  greatness.  The  king  in 
this  story  was  exposed  to  the  plot  of  Bigthan  and  Teresh.  From  it  he  was  saved 
by  the  intervention  of  Mordecai,  though  by  and  by  to  fall  beneath  the  assassin's 
blow.  Great  are  the  perils  of  the  great.  Their  lives  often,  behind  all  the  splendour 
that  takes  the  public  eye,  a  sad  story.  H.  The  Divine  foresight  of  and  prepara- 
tion FOR  coming  evil.  The  plotters,  Bigthan  and  Teresh,  paid  the  penalty  with 
their  lives.  But  what  had  that  plot  to  do  with  the  great  stoiy  of  this  book — Israel's 
deliverance  from  Haman  ?  Much,  for  mark,  the  plot  was  detected  by  Mordecai. 
The  news  was  conveyed  to  Esther,  and  by  her  to  the  king.  Thus  God's  design  for 
Israel's  deliverance  precedes  Haman's  design  for  Israel's  destruction.  Oh  !  the 
Divine  preparations  1  How  God  goes  before  us !  Does  Jacob  look  round  upon 
famished  Canaan  ?  Lo !  by  the  hand  of  long-lost  Joseph,  God  has  prepared  for 
him  a  house  in  Egypt.  Do  we  come  into  peril  ?  Before  we  reach  it  God  has  been 
preparing  for  us  a  way  of  escape.  His  love  is  older  than  our  sin — than  all  sin. 
III.  The  dignity  of  conscientiousness  in  little  things.  Mordecai  would  not  bow 
to  Haman.  Not  from  disloyalty.  He  had  stood  by  the  king  and  saved  him  from 
the  plotted  death.    Because — this  is  the  reason  he  gave — because  he  was  a  Jew : 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

and  Haman,  he  knew,  was  the  Jews'  enemy.  Others  bowed — he  could  not.  A  little 
thing,  do  you  say,  to  bow  to  Haman  ?  but  a  little  thing  may  have  much  effect  on 
others,  as  this  had  on  Haman — on  ourselves  ;  and,  often  repeated,  is  not  little  in  its 
influence.  He  had  conscience  in  this  matter,  and  to  defile  it  had  not  been  a  little 
harm.  Conscience  can  appear  in  little  things,  but  it  deems  nothing  little  that 
affects  it,  that  expresses  it.  The  early  Christians  would  rather  die  than  cast  a  few 
idolatrous  grains  of  incense  into  the  fire.  Many  an  English  martyr  went  to  the 
prison  and  the  stake  rather  than  bow  down  to  the  wafer-god  of  Eomanisra.  In 
little  things,  as  some  would  deem  them,  we  can  take  a  stand  for  Christ.  IV.  The 
WICKEDNESS  OF  EEVENGE.  Had  Haman  a  just  grudge  against  Mordecai?  Let  him 
have  the  matter  out  with  Mordecai  alone?  No ;  that  will  not  suit  him.  He  would 
punish  a  whole  nation.  The  proud  became  the  revengeful.  If  a  man  is  humble 
and  has  a  lowly  estimate  of  himself,  he  will  bear  in  silence  the  contempt  and 
unkindness  of  men.  But  pride  is  easily  wounded — sees  slights  often  where  none 
were  intended.  On  a  great  platform  we  see,  in  the  case  of  Haman,  to  what  sin 
wounded  pride  will  hurry  a  man.  And  to  what  a  doom!  We  need  to  beware. 
Are  none  of  us  ever  tempted  harshly  to  judge  a  whole  family  because  of  the  con- 
duct of  one  of  its  members  ?  to  say,  in  the  spirit  of  Haman,  he  is  bad — the  whole 
lot  is  bad?  "Hath  any  wronged  thee?"  says  Quarles,  "  be  bravely  revenged; 
slight  it,  and  the  work  is  begun;  forgive  it,  and  the  work  is  finished,"  V.  The 
PATIENCE  OF  FAITH.  The  king's  life  had  been  saved  by  Mordecai.  But  no  honour 
had  come  to  him  for  the  service — no  reward.  And  now  an  edict  is  out  against  him 
and  his  nation,  dooming  them  all  to  death.  And  does  he  regret  the  stand  that  he 
has  taken?  Does  he  loudly  complain  of  the  king's  ingratitude?  He  keeps 
silence.  God  will  think  on  him  for  good.  Oh,  troubled  one  1  oh,  darkened  life  I 
oh,  soul  tempest-tossed,  "only  believe."  The  clouds  will  pass — vrill  melt  into  the 
eternal  blue  !  {G.  T.  Coster.)  Haman  and  Mordecai  : — 1.  It  shows  in  a  lurid  but 
striking  manner  the  diabolical  character  of  revenge.  Pride  is  pride,  and  revenge  is 
revenge  in  quality,  although  they  only  show  themselves  in  words  with  little  stings 
in  them,  and  by  insinuations  that  have  no  known  ground  of  verity.  If  we  do  not 
make  it  our  business  to  chastise  our  spirits  and  purify  them  from  the  seeds  and 
shadows  of  these  vices,  in  the  forms  in  which  they  can  assail  us,  can  we  be  quite 
sure  that  if  we  were  on  the  wider  stage,  and  had  the  ampler  opportunity,  we  should 
not  be  as  this  devilish  Amalekite  ?  2.  A  lesson  of  personal  independence.  What 
meanness  there  is  in  this  country  in  bowing  down  to  rank  1  in  letting  some  lordly 
title  stand  in  the  place  of  an  argument  1  in  seeking  high  patronage  for  good 
schemes,  as  men  seek  the  shadow  of  broad  trees  on  hot  days  1  in  running  after 
royal  carriages !  in  subservience  to  power,  and  adulation  of  wealth  !  Rise  up, 
Mordecai,  in  thy  Jewish  grandeur,  and  shame  us  into  manliness,  and  help  us  to 
stand  a  little  more  erect !  3.  Finally,  a  lesson  of  patience  and  quietness  to  all  the 
faithful.  Obey  conscience,  honour  the  right,  and  then  fear  no  evil.  Is  the  storm 
brewing  ?  It  may  break  and  carry  much  away,  but  it  will  not  hurt  you.  A  little 
reputation  is  not  you.  A  little  property  is  not  you.  Health  even  is  not  you,  nor  is 
life  itself.  The  wildest  storm  that  could  blow  would  only  cast  you  on  the  shores  of 
eternal  peace  and  safety.  But  more  probably  the  storm  may  melt  aU  away  in  a 
while  and  leave  you  in  wonder  at  your  own  fears.     {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  But  Mordecai  bowed  not. — Decision  for  God: — Bat  why  did  Mordecai  not 
obey  the  commandment  of  the  king  ?  It  may  have  been  because  he  had  a  personal 
dislike  to  Haman,  but  that  would  not  have  justified  him  in  contradicting  the  will  of 
the  sovereign.  Or  it  may  have  been  that,  being  a  Jew,  he  regarded  himself  as 
exempted  from  doing  honour  to  one  of  a  race  which  God  had  cursed.  "  And  the 
Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Write  this  for  a  memorial  in  a  book,  and  rehearse  it  in  the 
ears  of  Joshua,  for  I  will  utterly  put  out  the  remembrance  of  Amalek  from  under 
heaven."  But  so  long  as  Mordecai  was  a  captive  in  Persia  he  could  hardly  be 
excused,  on  this  account,  from  resisting  the  law  of  the  land.  The  ground  of  this 
righteous  Jew's  refusal  must  be  sought  for  deeper  than  either  of  these  things. 
There  can  be  little  doubt,  we  think,  that  the  homage  commanded  to  be  paid  to 
Haman  amounted,  in  this  Jew's  estimate,  to  that  which  should  be  rendered  to 
God  only.  The  stand  which  he  took  had  its  foundation  in  religion — a  foundation 
which  the  men  of  the  world  have  ever  failed  to  comprehend.  {T.  McEwan.) 
Mordecai  refuses  to  bow  doivn  to  Haman  : — But  on  what  ground  did  Mordecai 
refuse  to  bow  to  Haman  and  do  him  reverence  ?  The  only  answer  which  comes 
clearly  out  of  the  chapter  to  that  question  is,  that  the  position  which  he  took  was 


CHAP,  m.]  ESTHER.  37 

one  that  was  common  to  him  with  all  his  people,  so  that  it  was  sufficiently 
accounted  for  to  others  when  he  said,  '*  I  am  a  Jew."  It  was  a  matter  of  religion 
with  him.  But,  that  being  admitted,  the  question  still  arises.  What  was  there  in 
such  a  command  as  this  of  Xerxes  to  offend  the  conscience  of  a  pious  Jew  ?  Some 
have  answered  that,  as  the  Persian  monarch  was  regarded  as  an  incarnation  of 
Ahura-Mazda,  and  therefore  entitled  to  Divine  honours,  the  act  of  prostration 
before  him  was  understood  to  imply  worship  ;  and  so  homage  paid  to  Haman  as 
the  king's  representative  would  be  a  virtual  giving  of  Divine  honour  to  a  human 
creature.  This  is  confirmed  even  by  heathen  writers — for  Herodotus  tells  us  that 
certain  Greeks,  on  being  pressed  to  prostrate  themselves  before  the  king,  when  they 
were  introduced  into  his  presence  at  Susa,  declared  "  that  it  was  not  their  custom 
to  worship  a  man,  nor  had  they  come  for  that  purpose  " ;  and  Curtius  has  said, 
"  The  Persians,  indeed,  not  only  from  motives  of  piety,  but  also  from  prudence, 
worship  their  kings  among  the  gods."  Now,  if  that  explanation  be  adopted,  the  act  of 
Mordecai  takes  its  place  beside  the  refusal  of  the  early  Christians  to  sacrifice  to  the 
Eoman  emperor,  and  puts  him  on  the  honour  roll  among  those  whose  rule  of  life  in 
all  such  cases  was,  "  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  men."  But  while  it  would 
fully  justify  Mordecai,  this  explanation  is  in  itself  not  without  difficulty.  For  did 
not  Joseph's  brethren  make  similar  obeisance  to  him  ?  Would  not  Mordecai  after 
his  own  elevation  to  Haman's  place  be  required  to  bow  before  the  king  ?  and  must 
we  condemn  Nehemiah  for  rendering  to  Artaxerxes  the  homage  which  Mordecai 
here  refused  to  Haman,  though  Xerxes  himself  had  commanded  that  it  should  be 
rendered  ?  It  is  possible,  of  course,  that  Mordecai  was  right,  and  that  all  the  rest 
were  wrong;  but  it  is  not  absolutely  incontrovertible  that  the  reverence  here 
required  was  of  the  nature  of  religious  worship.  Others,  therefore,  have  sought 
for  the  reason  of  Mordecai's  disobedience  to  the  royal  mandate  in  the  nationality  of 
Haman.  Taking  Agagite  as  equivalent  to  Amalekite,  they  remind  us  that  the 
Amalekites  were  the  first  to  attack  the  Israelites  after  their  escape  from  Egypt,  and 
that  after  his  victory  over  them  on  that  occasion  Moses  said,  "  The  Lord  hath  sworn 
that  the  Lord  will  have  war  with  Amalek  from  generation  to  generation."  They 
recall  to  our  remembrance,  also,  the  fact  that  it  was  for  sparing  some  of  the 
Amalekites  that  Saul  was  first  rejected  by  God  from  being  king  over  Israel,  and  that 
the  only  time  that  Samuel  wielded  a  sword  was  when  he  "  hewed  Agag  in  pieces 
before  the  Lord."  Now  if  Haman  was  indeed  an  Amalekite,  it  would  be  easy  to  find 
in  that  a  reason  for  Mordecai's  conduct  as  well  as  for  Haman's  purpose  of  revenge ; 
for  these  descending  feuds  between  races  in  the  East  are  both  undying  and  enve- 
nomed, especially  when  they  are  rooted  in  religious  differences.  But  then  we  have 
no  other  case  in  Scripture  where  a  royal  title  like  Agag  becomes  a  public 
patronymic,  so  as  to  be  the  name  of  a  tribe ;  and  it  is  hard  to  account  for  the 
appearance  of  one  of  the  hated  race  of  Amalek  here,  at  this  late  date,  in  Susa. 
So  there  are  difficulties  connected  with  both  solutions,  and  it  is  not  easy  to  choose 
between  them.  Perhaps  the  first,  all  things  considered,  is  the  more  satisfactory. 
{W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Strong  conviction : — The  commandment  of  the  king  was 
very  express,  and  Mordecai  manifestly  exposed  himself  to  imminent  danger  by 
disregarding  it.  If,  indeed,  his  objection  to  pay  homage  to  Haman  was  founded 
upon  a  conviction  that  such  homage  amounted  to  something  like  idolatry, 
then  we  might  regard  his  refusal  as  ranking  him  with  the  three  illustrious  youths 
who  braved  the  wrath  of  Nebuchadnezzar  rather  than  they  v/ould  submit  to 
worship  the  image  which  he  had  set  up.  But  we  can  scarcely  take  'his  view  of  the 
matter,  as  it  is  not  likely  that  Mordecai  would  have  withheld  from  the  king 
himself  the  outward  reverence  which  the  law  and  usage  of  the  country  required. 
But  if  it  was  because  Haman  was  of  the  seed  of  Amalek,  that  the  Jew  would  not 
bow  to  him  nor  do  him  reverence,  then  intense  must  have  been  the  detestation  of 
that  race,  when  he  would  rather  run  the  risk  of  incurring  the  displeasure  of  the 
king  than  pay  respect  to  one  of  them  who  stood  so  high  in  the  royal  favour.  Yet 
we  conceive  that  he  might  feel  himself  fully  vindicated  in  his  own  conscience  for 
acting  as  he  did.  It  was,  after  all,  a  high  religious  scruple  by  which  he  was 
influenced.  By  the  law  of  Moses  the  Amalekites  were  condemned  to  perpetual 
infamy.  No  earthly  rank  or  station  could  blot  out  or  modify  that  sentence.  In 
this  view  of  the  subject,  Mordecai  would  have  supposed  himself  an  apostate  from 
his  religion  had  he  done  reverence  to  Haman,  and  therefore  he  refused  to  do  it, 
whatever  might  be  the  consequence  to  himself.  We  cannot  but  respect  such  a 
feeling  as  this,  generated  as  it  was  by  regard  for  the  Divine  law.  It  could  not  be 
appreciated  bv  the  other  servants  of  the  king,  who  may  have  attributed  Mordecai's 

36 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  m. 

conduct  to  a  sullen  and  haughty  temper ;  but,  although  the  matter  in  itself  was 
apparently  unimportant,  it  was  an  evidence  of  real  heroism  of  character  in  this 
man  to  obey  the  dictate  of  conscience  at  the  hazard  of  personal  suffering.  Trtie 
religion  does  not  interfere  with  the  discharge  of  the  ordinary  courtesies  of  life,  nor 
does  it  forbid  our  rendering  that  honour  to  rank  and  station  which  is  their  due. 
But  when  vice  and  real  infamy  are  shrouded  under  high  rank,  the  Christian  must 
beware  of  acting  so  as  to  make  it  supposed  that  the  rank  forms  an  apology  for  the 
vice  and  infamy,  or  renders  them  less  hateful  than  they  really  are.  (A.  B. 
Davidson,  D.D.)  A  little  matter  ; — All  was  going  well  with  this  man.  His  rivals 
had  been  crushed,  his  seat  had  been  set  above  the  seats  of  all  the  noblemen  at 
court,  the  king  had  made  him  his  boon  companion,  and  had  issued  orders  that  the 
palace  servants  should  bow  before  him  and  do  him  reverence.  He  was  as  nearly  happy 
as  a  man  can  be  whose  ruling  passion  is  vanity  ;  but  such  men  hold  their  happiness 
by  a  very  frail  tenure.  It  does  not  look  altogether  well  that  Ahasuerus  should  have 
needed  to  give  special  orders  about  his  servants  bowing  to  Haman.  Darius 
had  not  needed  to  do  this  in  the  case  of  Daniel.  Had  the  favourite  been  respected 
and  liked,  men  would  have  given  him  all  seemly  honour  unbidden.  "  But  Mordecai 
bowed  not,  nor  did  him  reverence."  It  does  seem  a  very  small  matter  ;  but  when 
such  a  man  as  Mordecai  attached  importance  to  it  we  must  pause  and  consider 
whether  the  matter  was  really  so  small  as  it  seemed.  For  it  is  an  unsafe  way  of 
reasoning  to  say  about  anything,  "It  is  only  one  little  act ;  why  scruple  over  it  ?  If 
it  does  no  good  it  can  do  no  harm  "  ;  and  so  forth.  By  such  reasoning  habits  of 
untruth  and  intemperance  have  many  a  time  been  formed,  and  what  was  perhaps 
little  in  itself,  if  it  had  been  possible  to  separate  it  from  all  else,  has  been  found  to 
be  anything  but  little  in  its  results.  The  truth  is,  we  cannot  separate  any  single 
action  from  the  rest  of  our  lives;  so  that  the  importance  of  an  action  depends 
not  on  its  greatness  or  its  littleness,  but  on  many  other  circumstances,  such  as  how 
often  we  do  it,  the  effect  it  has  on  others,  particularly  its  influence  on  our  own  con- 
sciences. In  this  case  it  so  happened  that  what  Mordecai  did — rather  what  he 
determined  not  to  do — proved  to  be  of  very  great  importance  to  the  whole  Jewish 
people  and  the  whole  Persian  empire ;  but  he  could  not  know  that.  What  he  did 
know  was  that,  if  he  had  once  bowed  to  Haman,  his  conscience  would  have  been 
defiled,  as  surely  as  Daniel's  would  have  been  if  he  had  eaten  the  king's  meat ;  and 
a  polluted  conscience  is  no  trifle.  A  man  has  to  carry  it  about  with  him  all  day,  to 
go  to  sleep  with  it  if  he  can,  to  encounter  it  again  when  he  awakes,  until  God 
purges  out  the  stain.  But  why  should  Mordecai  have  feared  that,  by  bowing  to 
Haman  as  the  rest  did,  he  would  bring  on  himself  this  worst  evil,  a  bad  conscience? 
"We  do  not  need  to  suppose  that  the  homage  enjoined  was  idolatrous  ;  it  may  have 
been  nearly  so ;  but  Mordecai  knew  the  character  of  the  prime  minister,  and  he 
knew  the  fifteenth  Psalm :  in  his  eyes  "  a  vile  person  is  contemned ;  but  he 
honoureth  them  that  fear  the  Lord."  In  addition  to  the  knowledge  Mordecai 
could  not  but  have  of  Haman's  character,  he  knew  him  to  be  of  the  seed-royal  of 
Amalek ;  and  a  man  with  the  spirit  of  Moses  and  Samuel  in  him  would  not 
recognise  the  advancement  of  "  the  Jews'  enemy."  The  point  might  be  small  in 
itself,  but  the  principle  involved  in  it  was  to  Mordecai  more  important  than  life. 
The  day  was  not  far  off  when  Ahasuerus  and  all  Persia  agreed  with  Mordecai  in 
his  estimate  of  Haman.  But  persons  who  act  on  high  principle  must  be  content  to 
find  that  few  on  earth  understand  them  at  the  time.  Angels  understand  and  smile 
on  them,  but  the  smiles  of  angels  are  not  seen.  Possibly  some  of  Mordecai's 
Jewish  brethren  might  hint  to  him  that  his  conduct  was  rather  extreme  (that 
terrible  word !) — savouring  more  of  bigotry  than  of  pious  charity.  (A.  M. 
Symington,  B.A.)  The  difference  between  right  and  wrong  shown  in  little 
things  : — The  difference  between  right  and  wrong  may  be  shown  in  a  little  matter, 
but  it  is  not  therefore  a  little  difference ;  and  they  who  are  determined  to  be 
thorough  in  their  allegiance  to  God  will  make  no  distinction  in  their  conduct 
between  small  things  and  great.  Very  noble,  too,  was  Mordecai's  firmness  in 
resisting  the  entreaties  of  his  fellow-servants,  for  he  shut  up  the  whole  con- 
troversy with  the  simple  confession,  "  I  am  a  Jew."  He  will  not  needlessly 
publish  his  religion  on  the  house-top,  but  neither  will  he  be  ashamed  of  it  in  the 
"  king's  gate."  It  might  cost  him  much  to  make  the  confession,  but  he  knew  that 
sin  would  be  still  more  costly,  and  so  he  did  not  shrink  from  saying,  "  I  am  a 
Jew."  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Limits  to  the  claims  of  official  civility: — In 
Mordecai's  adherence  to  his  religious  principles  we  see  that  there  are  limits  to  the 
claims  of  social  and  official  civUity — bounds  that  duty  does  not  allow  us  to  pass  in 


CHAP,  m.]  ESTHER.  89 

our  respect  for  our  superiors.  The  Word  of  God  is  the  standard  of  respectability  and 
manners  as  well  as  of  faith,  and  it  forbids  all  lying  and  deceit,  all  flattery  and  all 
mean  compliances  with  the  wishes  of  others,  however  exalted.  It  does  not  allow 
us  to  do  anything  that  is  contrary  to  good  breeding  and  the  chivalry  of  right.  It 
does  not  allow  us  to  neglect  our  duties,  waste  our  time  or  injure  our  health,  merely 
to  please  a  friend  or  a  potentate.  Let  it  be  remembered,  to  the  honour  of  one  of  the 
Presidents  of  the  United  States,  General  Jackson,  that  he  never  allowed  any 
visitors  to  keep  him  from  the  house  of  God  on  the  Lord's  day.  (W.  A.  Scott,  D.D.) 
Then  the  king's  servants,  which  were  in  the  Idngr's  gate,  said  unto  Mordecai,  Why 
transgresseat  thou  the  king's  commandment  ? — MordecaVs  companions : — But 
yonder  come  his  fellow-servants  of  the  palace ;  what  have  they  to  say  ?  Why  they 
say  to  him,  "  Why  transgressest  thou  the  king's  commandment  ?  "  And  verily, 
aged  man,  why  ?  Is  it  that  all  eyes  may  be  turned  upon  you  ?  It  is  true,  indeed, 
that  he  is  the  observed  of  all  observers  who  does  not  go  with  the  multitude,  even 
though  they  go  to  do  evil.  Any  one  that  dares  to  think  and  speak  for  himself  is 
sure  to  be  condemned  by  the  many  that  he  differs  from;  for  his  position  and 
principles  are  a  running  commentary  of  condemnation  upon  them.  It  has  ever 
been  so,  and  perhaps  it  will  always  continue  to  be  so,  for  it  is  not  for  the  man  that 
lives  in  the  cellar  to  say  what  he  sees  who  dwells  on  the  house-top.  Some  men  are 
before  their  times,  and  some  men  never  catch  up  with  the  age  in  which  they  live  ; 
and  some  men  have  not  moral  courage  enough  to  hear  themselves  breathe 
honestly  and  freely.  We  see  this  daily  as  to  the  press  and  the  pulpit.  Is  not  the 
daily  bread  of  the  printer  put  in  jeopardy  if  his  journal  does  not  meet  the  popular 
taste  ?  And  have  we  not  seen  large  bodies  of  business  men  combine  to  starve 
newspapers  to  death  by  withholding  their  patronage  unless  the  said  papers  would 
defend  their  conduct  ?  And  is  it  not  true  that  it  one  pulpit  has  the  courage  to  utter 
an  honest  opinion,  that  does  not  happen  to  coincide  with  the  rest  of  the  pulpits,  that 
then  all  the  pulpits  and  papers  that  have  neither  capacity  to  understand  nor  the 
moral  honesty  to  comprehend  the  poor  dissenter  open  their  batteries  upon  him  ? 
(Ibid.)  Principle  seems  impolitic : — And  again  his  fellow-servants  say,  "  Friend 
Mordecai,  consider  well  what  you  are  going  to  do.  Eemember,  it  is  not  Haman 
merely,  but  his  master  also,  that  you  offend.  Is  it  wise,  then,  for  you  to  peril  the 
forfeiture  of  your  place  and  your  life  upon  a  question  of  mere  etiquette  or 
courtesy  ?  It  is  extremely  impolitic  and  dangerous  for  you  not  to  do  homage  to  so 
great  a  prince.  And  besides,  if  you  will  not  bow  with  us,  then  you  wUl  have  to 
suffer  alone."  "Yes,  friends,"  says  he,  "I  have  considered  all  this;  and  I  am  con- 
tent to  meet  the  consequences.  It  is  not  a  mere  question  of  courtesy.  I  am  a  Jew. 
My  religion  is  with  me  a  glorious  reality."  [Ibid.)  Cowardice  cannot  understand 
courage : — Mordecai's  fellow-servants  were  not  capable  of  understanding  his 
principles.  Cowards  never  apprehend  the  true  character  of  a  brave  man.  Little 
minds  cannot  see  up  into  the  magnanimity  of  a  great  and  noble  soul.  (Ibid.) 
For  he  told  them  that  he  was  a  Jew. — Fidelity  to  principle  : — We  have  in  the  case 
of  Mordecai  an  example  of  fidelity  to  principle  which  is  worthy  of  all  study  and 
imitation.  He  felt  that  it  was  wrong  to  do  homage  to  Haman.  In  resisting  the 
entreaties  of  his  fellow-servants,  he  shut  up  the  whole  controversy  with  the  simple 
confession,  "  I  am  a  Jew."  Herein  he  gave  an  example  which  Christians  might 
follow  with  advantage.  Have  the  courage,  young  men,  when  you  are  asked  to  do 
what  you  know  to  be  wrong,  to  reply  simply,  "I  am  a  Christian."  Add  to  your 
faith  courage — the  heroism  not  of  the  warrior  but  of  the  man  who  has  learned  to 
run  the  gauntlet  of  ridicule  and  scorn,  and  to  foUow  the  dictates  of  duty 
"uncaring  consequences."  To  quote  the  words  of  the  greatest  wit  of  his  age — 
"  Learn  to  inure  your  principles  against  ridicule.  You  can  no  more  exercise  your 
reason  if  you  live  in  the  constant  dread  of  laughter  than  you  can  enjoy  your  life  if 
you  are  in  the  constant  terror  of  death.  If  you  think  it  right  to  differ  from  the 
times,  and  to  make  a  point  of  morals,  do  it,  however  rustic,  however  antiquated, 
however  pedantic  it  may  appear ;  do  it  as  a  man  who  wore  a  soul  of  his  own  and 
did  not  wait  till  it  was  breathed  into  him  by  the  breath  of  fashion."  {W.  M. 
Taylor,  D.D.) 

Vers.  5,  6.  And  when  Haman  saw  that  Mordecai  bowed  not  .  .  .  then  was 
Haman  full  of  wrath. — Vanity  and  cruelty  : — Haman  manifests  by  his  behaviour 
the  intimate  connection  there  is  between  vanity  and  cruelty.  1.  Vanity  is  a  form 
of  magnified  egotism.  When  a  vain  man  looks  out  on  the  world  it  is  always 
through  the  medium  of  his  own  vastly  magnified  shadow.     Like  the  Brocken 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

Ghost,  this  shadow  becomes  a  haunting  presence  standing  out  before  him  in  huge 
proportions.  He  has  no  other  standard  of  measurement.  The  good  is  what  gives 
him  pleasure  ;  evil  is  what  is  noxious  to  him.  (1)  Egoism  utilises  the  sufferings  of 
others  for  its  own  ends.  No  doubt  cruelty  is  often  the  result  of  sheer  callousness. 
It  is  not  so  in  Haman's  case ;  he  is  irritated,  and  vents  his  annoyance  in  a  vast 
explosion  of  malignity  that  must  take  account  of  the  agony  it  produces,  for  in  that 
agony  its  own  thirst  for  vengeance  is  to  be  slaked.  (2)  Egoism  promotes  cruelty  by 
destroying  the  sense  of  proportion.  Self  is  not  only  regarded  as  the  centre  of  the 
universe ;  like  the  sun  surrounded  by  the  planets,  it  is  taken  to  be  the  greatest  object, 
and  everything  else  is  insignificant  when  compared  to  it.  What  is  the  slaughter  of 
a  few  thousand  Jews  to  so  great  a  man  as  Haman  ?  It  is  no  more  than  the 
destruction  of  as  many  flies  in  a  forest  fire  that  the  settler  has  kindled  to  clear  hi» 
ground.  The  same  self-magnification  is  visibly  presented  by  the  Egyptian  bas- 
reliefs,  on  which  the  victorious  Pharaohs  appear  as  tremendous  giants  driving  back 
hordes  of  enemies  or  dragging  pigmy  kings  by  their  heads.  It  is  but  a  step  from 
this  condition  to  insanity,  which  is  the  apotheosis  of  vanity.  The  chief  characteristic 
of  insanity  is  a  diseased  enlargement  of  self.  2.  Vanity  leads  to  cruelty  through 
the  entire  dependence  of  the  vain  person  on  the  good  opinion  of  others.  In  this 
vanity  differs  from  pride.  A  proud  man  is  satisfied  with  himself,  but  the  vain  man 
is  always  looking  outside  himself  with  feverish  eagerness  to  secure  all  the  honours 
that  the  world  can  bestow  upon  him.  While  a  proud  man  in  an  exalted  position 
scarcely  deigns  to  notice  the  "  dim,  common  people,"  the  vain  man  betrays  his 
vulgarity  by  caring  supremely  for  popular  adulation.  Therefore,  while  the  haughty 
person  can  afford  to  pass  over  a  slight  with  contempt,  the  vain  creature  who  lives 
on  the  breath  of  applause  is  mortally  offended  by  it  and  roused  to  avenge  the 
insult  with  corresponding  rage.  {W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.)  The  viiserij  of  pride: — 
A  man  of  principle  would  have  respected  the  conscientiousness  of  the  act,  even 
though  he  might  have  laughed  at  what  he  regarded  the  smallness  of  the  scruple. 
A  man  of  ordinary  common  sense  would  have  treated  the  whole  affair  with  indiffer- 
ence ;  but  Haman  valued  his  office  just  because  it  carried  with  it  the  right  to  such 
homage,  and  therefore  what  would  have  been  a  mole-hill,  or  hardly  so  much,  to 
others,  was  a  mountain  to  him.  The  proud  man  thus  increases  his  own  misery ; 
and  little  slights,  which  other  people  would  not  so  much  as  notice,  are  felt  by  him 
with  great  keenness.  He  whose  arm  has  been  recently  vaccinated  is  very  sensitive 
where  the  pustule  is,  so  that  a  push  which  you  would  think  nothing  of  is  agony  to  him. 
Now,  in  precisely  the  same  way  the  proud  man  is  "  touchy,"  as  we  say ;  the 
slightest  infringement  on  his  dignity  wounds  him  to  the  quick,  and  when  other 
people  are  laughing  he  is  vowing  revenge  ;  for,  as  this  story  illustrates,  the  passions 
are  all  near  of  kin,  and  one  prepares  the  way  for  another.  Brooding  over  the 
refusal  of  Mordecai  to  do  him  reverence,  it  became  so  magnified  in  his  estimation 
that  he  determined  to  punish  it ;  there  was  revenge.  That  he  might  gratify  that 
revenge,  it  became  necessary  to  bring  the  peculiarities  of  the  Jewish  nation  before 
the  king,  and  he  requested  their  destruction  on  the  ground  that  they  were  not 
profitable  to  the  monarch,  whereas  the  sole  reason  why  he  suggested  their  extirpa- 
tion was  that  Mordecai  had  slighted  him  ;  there  was  falsehood.  Then,  in  planning 
their  massacre,  there  was  murder.  Hei-e,  therefore,  were  four  sins  all  in  a  line, 
each  rising  above  the  other  in  enormity — pride,  revenge,  falsehood,  murder. 
People  think,  sometimes,  that  pride  is  no  great  sin  ;  some  almost  speak  of  it  as  if 
it  were  half  a  virtue  ;  but,  as  this  and  other  histories  make  plain,  it  is  the  germ  of 
other  evils  that  are  worse  than  itself,  and  therefore  we  ought  to  be  on  our  guard 
against  allowing  ourselves  to  become  its  victims.  And  how  shall  we  best  counteract 
it  ?  I  reply,  by  cultivating  a  sense  of  responsibility.  That  which  we  have,  whether 
it  be  ability,  or  wealth,  or  exalted  position,  we  have  received  as  a  trust,  and  we  are 
to  use  it,  as  stewards  for  God,  in  the  service  of  our  fellow-men.  Let  us  keep 
pressing  the  questions.  Who  hath  made  me  to  differ  from  others  ?  What  have  I 
that  I  have  not  received  ?  For  what  purpose  have  I  been  entrusted  with  these 
things?  And  the  more  we  ponder  these,  the  less  we  shall  be  inclined  to  plume 
ourselves  on  our  possessions,  and  the  more  we  shall  be  stirred  up  to  the 
service  of  our  generation  by  the  will  of  God.  (IF.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Injured 
vanity : — "  A  man  will  forgive  you  anything,"  Professor  Huxley  said,  "  if  you 
do  not  injure  his  vanity.  Once  do  that,  and  he  will  ne%'er  forgive  you."  Evil 
passionits  own pen/tlty  : — Now,  it  may  be  thought  by  some  that  the  case  of  Haman 
allowing  himself  to  be  so  chafed  and  perturbed  by  a  trifle  as  to  be  made  miserable 
in  the  midst  of  so  many  advantages,  is  to  be  regarded  as  altogether  extreme  and 


CHAP.  III.]  ESTHER.  41 

without  parallel ;  but  we  believe  that  on  examination  it  will  be  found  that  the 
wicked  always  receive  part  of  their  punishment  in  the  violence  of  some  unhallowed 
passion  which  blinds  them  to  all  the  real  benefits  of  their  lot.  Is  there  not  a  gnaw- 
ing disease  in  the  heart  of  the  covetous  man,  for  example,  which  prevents  him  from 
enjoying  the  good  things  which  are  placed  within  his  reach,  just  because  he  has  not 
yet  acquired  all  that  he  wishes  to  possess  ?  And  still,  as  he  gets  more  and  more,  is 
he  not  as  far  as  ever  from  being  satisfied,  since  he  has  not  yet  reached  the  point  at 
which  he  aims  ?  Or  again,  look  to  the  man  who  is  the  slave  of  envy,  and  mark 
how  miserable  this  base  passion  makes  him.  He  has  ample  means  of  enjoyment, 
which  he  can  call  his  own  ;  but  his  neighbour  has  something  which  pleases  him 
better,  and  just  because  that  one  thing  is  awanting  to  himself,  he  can  find  no  satis- 
faction in  the  varied  blessings  which  a  kind  providence  has  showered  upon  him. 
His  neighbour's  good  is  to  him  what  Mordecai  at  the  king's  gate  was  to  Haman. 
In  like  manner,  I  might  advert  to  the  working  of  the  more  violent  passions  of  anger 
and  revenge  as  a  cause  of  intense  torment  to  those  who  cherish  them,  and  as 
altogether  preventing  them  from  taking  advantage  of  many  sources  of  happiness 
which  lie  open  to  them  on  every  side.  I  might  also  allude  to  the  misery  which 
wounded  vanity  and  affronted  pride  often  bring  to  those  who  have  high  notions  of 
their  own  importance,  as  when  a  trifling  word  or  action  will  discompose  them  for 
many  days  together,  and  deprive  them  of  their  relish  for  the  things  that  formerly 
pleased  them,  and  made  them  happy.  But  enough  has  been  said  to  show  how  by  a 
just  retribution  the  ungodly,  following  their  natural  tendencies  and  passions,  work 
out  their  own  passion.  How  different  is  the  picture  presented  to  us,  where  grace 
reigns  in  the  heart.  Although  corruption  is  not  altogether  eradicated  from  the 
spiritual  man,  yet  its  power  is  subdued ;  the  fierce  passions  are  tamed,  love  takes 
the  place  of  envy,  malignity,  and  wrath ;  and  the  believer,  seeking  and  finding  his 
chief  enjoyment  in  God,  remains  comparatively  unruffled  by  those  incidents  which 
breed  so  much  vexation  and  disquietude  in  the  breast  of  the  ungodly.  (A.  B. 
Davidson,  D.D.)  Wounded  pride: — Wounded  pride  excites  revenge,  and  this 
always  burns  hottest  in  the  weakest  minds.  How  insatiable  is  revenge,  especially 
when  it  is  associated  with  national  and  religious  rancour  !  Haraan  learned  that 
Mordecai  was  a  Jew,  a  name  that  called  up  the  bitterest  recollections  in  the  breast 
of  an  Amalekite,  and  he  resolves  at  once  on  the  total  extermination  of  that  people. 
(T.McCrie,  D.D.)  A  favourite  litst : — And  it  has  always  been  one  of  the  devices 
of  the  enemy  to  drive  men  into  criminal  excesses  to  their  own  ruin,  through  the 
instrumentality  of  some  favourite  lust  or  appetite.  It  was  the  covetous  spirit  of 
Judas  that  opened  a  way  to  the  tempter  to  hurry  him  on  to  betray  the  Saviour. 
{A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Then  was  Haman  full  of  wrath. — The  penalty  of  an  evil 
passion : — How  dreadfully  this  wrath  flamed  in  his  bosom  we  learn  from  the 
method  which  he  took  to  express  it.  We  may  observe,  at  present,  what  misery 
pride,  by  its  own  nature  and  inseparable  consequences,  brings  upon  men.  No 
proud  man  ever  received  all  that  respect,  or  was  treated  with  all  that  delicacy  of 
regard,  which  he  thought  his  due.  Now  pride  mortified  by  neglect  or  contempt, 
kindles  a  fire  in  the  soul  which  burns,  and  torments,  and  destroys.     (G.  Lawson.) 

Ver.  6.  Wherefore  Haman  thought  to  destroy  all  the  Jews  that  were 
throughout  the  whole  kingdom. — Plotting  in  vain : — We  proceed  to  consider 
the  scheme  of  destruction  which  Haman  arranged  with  the  utmost  craft.  It 
seemed  in  its  arrangement  perfectly  secure.  Its  accomplishment  appeared 
certain  and  beyond  resistance.  1.  Haman's  malice  was  extreme,  equal  to  any 
result  to  which  it  might  lead.  There  was  no  reluctance,  no  holding  back  in 
the  carrying  out  his  purposes  of  wickedness  to  the  utmost.  2.  Haman's  plan 
was  extremely  crafty  and  determined.  It  involved  many  successive  steps,  and 
he  faithfully  persevered  through  them  all.  But  what  avails  all  this  plotting 
against  God?  How  mad  and  silly  seem  aU  the  well-arranged  plans  of  this 
scheme  of  wickedness  when  the  providence  and  power  of  God  are  brought  into  the 
account !  The  secrecy  of  the  plan  is  nothing.  He  that  is  higher  than  the  highest 
regardeth  it.  An  infinite  power  unseen  is  contending  against  him.  Eememberthe 
story  of  Elisha,  and  his  servant  on  the  hill  of  Samaria  (2  Kings  vi.  15).  3.  We  see 
the  people  whom  Haman  desired  to  destroy  given  entirely  into  his  hands.  The 
king  makes  him  an  unlimited  grant.  "  The  king  said  unto  Haman,  The  silver  is 
given  to  thee,  the  people  also,  to  do  with  them  as  it  seemeth  good  to  thee." 
"  Mordecai  rent  his  clothes,  and  put  on  sackcloth  with  ashes,  and  went  out  into  the 
midst  of  the  city,  and  cried  with  a  loud  and  bitter  cry,"  &c.    Alas,  what  extended 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

Borrow  among  men  the  arbitrary  wickedness  of  man  is  able  to  produce !  Ambition 
deluges  the  earth  with  blood.  The  wicked  covetousness  of  a  few  may  doom  myriads 
to  misery,  with  no  relief.  The  pride  of  this  world  will  not  stop  to  hear ;  the 
business  of  this  world  will  not  stop  to  consider ;  the  prosperity  and  self-indulgence 
of  this  world  will  not  be  troubled  with  the  griefs  of  the  absent  suffering ;  the 
indifference  of  this  world  cannot  take  the  trouble  to  read,  or  think,  or  act,  concern- 
ing them.  4.  We  see  on  the  side  of  the  Jews  no  power  to  resist.  The  highest 
human  power  was  irrevocably  pledged  to  their  oppressor.  Every  advantage  ia  on 
the  side  of  the  oppressor.  But  God  has  His  own  plans  already  laid  and  fixed. 
6.  We  are  ready  to  ask,  in  reference  to  the  case  before  us,  How  could  any  one  ever 
present  greater  difiSculties  ?  But  God  delights  in  overcoming  difficulties,  and  in 
causing  the  faith  of  His  people  to  endure  in  the  midst  of  all  discouragements.  He 
allows  the  obstacles  in  their  path  to  accumulate  to  the  utmost.  And  God 
graciously  honoured  the  faith  which  He  imparted  by  fulfilling  all  its  expecta- 
tions in  a  manner  the  most  complete.  If  you  come  to  serve  the  Lord,  you 
must  endure  your  part  of  the  trials  which  His  people  meet.  (S.  H.  Tyng, 
D.D.)  Revenge  : — Justice  is  said  to  blindfold  herself  that  she  may  hold  the 
scales  evenly,  not  knowing  what  has  been  put  into  each ;  but  revenge  shuts  both 
eyes  that  it  may  see  no  scales  at  all.  What  monstrous  disproportion  between 
the  offence  and  the  penalty,  to  avenge  a  small  personal  affront  received  from 
one  Jew  by  "  causing  to  perish  in  one  day  all  Jews,  old  and  young  "  1  To  say 
nothing  of  Nero  or  Domitian,  nor  of  Radama  in  Madagascar — for  these,  being 
heathen,  had  to  that  extent  the  same  excuse  as  Haman — let  me  recall  in  a  few 
words  a  well-known  story.  There  were  many  Protestants  in  France  after  the 
Reformation,  some  of  them  nobles,  all  of  them  peaceful  citizens.  Their  numbers 
and  their  growth  vexed  the  Pope,  and  especially  vexed  the  Pope's  "  niece," 
Catherine  de  Medici,  queen  of  France,  and  mother  of  three  of  its  kings.  Suddenly, 
while  one  of  her  sons,  Charles  IX.,  was  young,  Catherine  made  peace  with  the 
Huguenots,  and  displayed  great  zeal  in  enforcing  new  laws  in  favour  of  her  Protes- 
tant subjects.  After  two  years,  without  any  warning,  on  the  eve  of  St.  Bartholo- 
mew's Day,  there  began  a  massacre  in  which  six  thousand  persons  perished  in 
Paris  alone,  and  fifty  thousand  in  the  provinces  of  France,  within  three  days. 
When  the  joyful  tidings  reached  Rome,  public  thanks  were  given  in  the  churches. 
Haman  would  have  rejoiced  in  the  bloodshed ;  but  he  must  have  owned  himself 
outdone  in  cunning  and  blasphemy.  Catherine  succeeded  where  Haman  failed ; 
her  victims  were  effectually  blindfolded,  and  she  took  the  name  of  a  holy  God  and  a 
merciful  Saviour  to  justify  an  act  which  even  those  of  her  own  creed  now  blush  to 
acknowledge.  (A.  M.  Symington,  B.A.)  Enmity  to  God's  people  : — We  see  how 
enmity  to  God's  truth  and  His  people  displays  itself  with  restless  activity  for  the 
accomplishment  of  its  ends.     {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.) 

Ver.  7.  In  the  first  month  .  .  .  they  cast  Pur,  that  is,  the  lot. — The  tim.e  of  the 
lot : — The  drawing  of  the  lot  took  place  in  the  month  Nisan,  or  about  March  of  our 
year,  and  the  day  fixed  by  it  was  the  thirteenth  day  of  Adar,  or  February — a  period 
of  nearly  twelve  months  intervening.  The  patience  of  Haman  would  be  sadly  tried 
by  this  result,  but  his  superstitious  fears  would  prevent  him  from  acting  contrary 
to  the  decision  of  "Pur."  In  tracing  the  deep  lines  of  providence  in  the  whole 
narrative,  however,  we  cannot  help  seeing  a  higher  and  more  beneficent  wisdom 
than  that  of  chance.  Had  an  earlier  day  been  decided  upon,  sufficient  time  might 
not  have  been  given  to  Mordecai  to  use  the  means  which  he  did  to  frustrate  the 
conspiracy.  If  the  suspense  of  the  Jews  was  a  trial  of  their  faith,  and  an  incentive 
to  prayer,  the  interval  was  also  a  boon  in  so  far  as  it  gave  Mordecai  leisure  for 
deliberate  action  in  view  of  the  king's  subsequent  decree.  No  doubt,  in  this 
instance,  the  disposing  of  the  lot  was  of  the  Lord — a  disposing  of  it  very  different 
from  the  intention  of  those  who  used  it.  So  may  the  lot  become  in  the  hands  of 
those  who  believe  in  its  decisions  the  means  for  the  accomplishment  of  the 
retributive  purposes  of  God.  (T.  McEwan.)  The  blind  method  of  revenge : — 
Revenge,  when  it  becomes  a  master  passion,  is  the  worst  madness.  I.  Revknqk  ib 
BLIND  IN  ITS  METHOD.  This  is  illustrated  in  the  conduct  of  Haman.  He  caused 
the  lot  to  be  cast  to  find  out  the  favourable  day  for  the  accomplishment  of  his 
purpose.  1.  He  was  blind  to  the  fact  that  there  is  no  chance.  2.  He  was  blind  to 
the  fact  that  so-called  chance  might  as  easily  be  against  him  as  for  him.  3.  He 
was  blind  to  the  fact  that  "  the  lot  is  cast  into  the  lap  ;  but  the  whole  disposing 
thereof  is  of  the  Lord."   H.  Haman  peksisted  in  his  kevexqeful  purpose.    What  a 


CHAP,  in.]  ESTHER.  43 

glorious  revolution  would  soon  take  place,  if  the  good  were  as  persistent  in  the 
pursuit  of  merciful  purposes  as  the  bad  are  in  revengeful  projects.  Every  bad 
passion  is  injurious  in  its  permanence.  III.  Revenge  is  destructive  in  its 
PATIENCE.  Haman  was  willing  to  wait  twelve  months  in  order  that  his  revenge 
might  be  the  more  signally  marked.  But  his  very  patience  worked  his  ruin.  Time 
is  not  on  the  side  of  revengeful  waiters.     (W.  Burrows,  B.A.) 

Ver.  8.  And  Haman  said  unto  king  Ahasuerus. — Listening  to  scandal: — If  we 
blame  Ahasuerus  for  too  readily  listening  to  the  invective  of  Haman,  and  con- 
demning the  Jews  untried  and  unheard,  we  should  be  on  our  guard  against  com- 
mitting the  same  sin,  by  giving  heed  to  scandal  in  regard  to  others,  without  careful 
personal  inquiry  and  observation,  lest  we  should  be  only  crediting  the  creations  of 
the  worst  passions  and  distempers  of  our  fallen  nature.  {T.  McEioan.)  Half 
the  truth  dangerous  : — There  is  no  notice  taken  of  Mordecai.  Not  a  syllable  about 
his  own  injured  pride.  No  reference  made  to  the  enmity  of  the  Amalekites  to  the 
Jews.  The  real  merits  of  the  proposal  are  all  kept  back,  and  only  those  things  are 
mentioned  which  were  fitted  to  arouse  the  indignation  of  the  king  against  the  Jewish 
people.  They  were  "a  certain  people" — a  nondescript  race,  scattered  abroad,  like 
BO  many  rebels  against  the  government,  and  yet  preserving  their  own  unity  ;  having 
their  own  laws,  and  despising  constituted  authority ;  contemning  the  king's  laws, 
and  setting  the  example  of  insubordination ;  and  sowing  dissension  and  strife 
throughout  aU  the  provinces  of  the  empire.  For  these  reasons  it  was  clearly  not 
expedient  that  they  should  be  tolerated  any  longer.  How  skilfully  does  the  crafty 
conspirator  conceal  his  malice  and  revenge  under  cover  of  the  king's  profit.  He 
did  not  ask  for  the  destruction  of  this  disaffected  people  as  a  favour  to  himself,  but 
in  making  the  proposal  he  artfully  insinuated  that  he  was  doing  the  king  a  service. 
{Ibid.)  There  is  a  certain  people  scattered  abroad. — The  destruction  of  the 
Jews  : — He  stood  high  in  the  favour  of  his  prince,  but  did  he  not  risk  the  total  loss 
of  that  favour  by  a  proposal  so  evidently  unjust  and  inhumane  ?  Why  did  he  not 
dread  the  wrath  of  the  king,  which  is  as  messengers  of  death  ?  Might  he  not  have 
heard  such  words  as  these  in  answer  to  his  proposal :  "  Audacious  wretch !  what 
hast  thou  seen  in  me  that  thou  shouldst  hope  to  make  me  the  murderer  of  my 
people  ?  Man  of  blood  1  thou  scruplest  not  to  seek  the  destruction,  at  one  blow,  of 
thousands  of  my  subjects,  upon  a  vague,  unsupported  charge  which  thou  bringest 
against  them  I  Wilt  thou  not  another  day  follow  the  example  of  Bigthan  and 
Teresh  ?  Wilt  thou  be  more  afraid  to  lay  thy  hand  upon  one  man,  though  a  king, 
than  upon  many  thousands  of  my  subjects  who  have  done  thee  no  wrong?  "  (G. 
Laioson.)  Hainan's  proposition  contained  truth  enough  to  make  it  plausible,  and 
error  enough  to  make  it  cruel,  and  enough  personally  agreeable  to  the  king  to  make 
it  popular  with  him.  {W.  A.  Scott,  D.D.)  Cunning  malice  : — But  observe  the 
cunning  malice  of  his  address  to  the  king.  He  does  not  say,  "  There  is  an  old  Jew 
that  has  offended  me,  and,  through  me,  offered  an  affront  to  your  sacred  majesty; 
therefore  let  me  execute  vengeance  upon  him."  No,  not  a  word  of  this  sort.  He 
feared  to  show  his  real  character  for  rancour  to  the  king,  or  courtiers.  He  professes 
to  have  no  personal  motives,  but  to  be  moved  altogether  by  a  desire  for  the  public 
good.  {Ibid.)  True  and  false  accusations  : — Having  formed  so  thorough-going 
a  purpose,  Haman  took  steps  to  execute  it.  We  need  not  wonder  at  his  lying  about 
the  character  of  the  Jews ;  for  it  is  often  possible  to  use  nothing  but  the  language 
of  truth,  and  yet  to  utter  only  the  greater  falsehood.  It  was  quite  true  of  God's 
people,  that  their  laws  were  "  diverse  from  all  people  "  :  it  is  true  of  them  to-day, 
and  was  equally  true  then,  that,  being  bought  with  a  price,  they  cannot  be  slaves  of 
men  ;  that,  if  any  human  law  interferes  with  the  will  of  their  Saviour,  they  can 
give  only  the  one  answer,  "  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  men."  But  it  was 
false  to  say, "  Neither  keep  they  the  king's  laws";  for,  in  respect  of  everything 
that  man  has  a  right  to  command,  God's  people  are  the  best  subjects.  To  the 
fathers  of  these  exiles  the  God  of  Israel  had  given  this  commandment :  "  Seek  the 
peace  of  the  city  whither  I  have  caused  you  to  be  carried  away  captives,  and  pray 
unto  the  Lord  for  it :  for  in  the  peace  thereof  shall  ye  have  peace  "  ;  and  Haman 
could  scarcely  be  ignorant  that  both  the  former  empire  and  this  one  had  profited  by 
the  private  virtue  and  pubUc  faithfulness  of  pious  Jews.  God  will  answer  Haman 
in  His  own  way.  But  we  ought  to  be  fully  prepared  for  the  calumny,  seeing  it 
arises  from  two  causes  which  remain  always  in  force.  The  world  cannot  under- 
stand what  it  is  that  we  owe  to  the  love  of  God  and  to  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  how 
He  must,  therefore,  reign  supreme  in  the  believing  heart ;  and  the  world  extremely 


4i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

dislikes  to  hear  a  claim  advanced  for  liberty  of  conscience  which  reminds  it  of  a 
power  higher  than  its  own.  {A.  M.  Symington,  B.A.)  Therefore  it  is  not  for 
the  king'!  profit  to  suffer  them. — Profit : — Worldly  hearts  are  not  led  by  good  or 
evil,  but  by  profit  and  loss  ;  neither  have  they  grace  to  know  that  nothing  is  profit- 
able but  what  is  honest ;  they  must  needs  offend  by  rule,  that  measure  all  things  by 
profit  and  measure  profit  by  their  imagination.  How  easy  it  is  to  suggest  strange 
untruths  when  there  is  nobody  to  make  answer  1  False  Haman,  how  is  it 
not  for  the  king's  profit  to  suffer  the  Jews  ?  If  thou  construe  this  profit 
for  honour,  the  king's  honour  is  in  the  multitude  of  his  subjects;  and  what 
people  more  numerous  than  they  ?  If  for  gain,  the  king's  profit  is  in  the 
largeness  of  his  tributes ;  and  what  people  are  more  deep  in  their  payments  ? 
If  for  service,  what  people  are  more  officious  ?  No  name  under  heaven  hath 
made  so  many  fools,  so  many  villains,  as  this  of  profit.  {Bp.  Hall.)  No 
true  profit  in  sin : — It  is,  then,  a  question  of  profit  or  loss,  not  of  right  and 
justice.  Never  was  there  a  scheme  of  villainy  that  was  not  gilded  over  with  the 
plausible  pretence  of  public  utility.  Nothing  under  heaven  has  made  so  many  fools 
and  so  many  heartless  villains  as  supposed  profit.  The  greatest  good  to  the 
greatest  number  is  indeed  desirable,  but  such  an  object  was  never  yet  reached  by  a 
disregard  of  justice  and  right.  Expediency  is  a  fallacy.  It  is  never  allowed  us  to 
try  the  experiment  of  doing  evil  that  good  may  come.  How  did  it  turn  out  in  the 
case  before  us  ?  The  king  is  to  get  ten  thousand  talents  for  this  execution.  But 
instead  of  that  his  only  profit  was  the  blood  and  mangled  bodies  of  thousands  of  his 
faithful  subjects.  Ah,  cruel  Haman  !  Are  these  the  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  ? 
Are  these  the  profits  of  sin?  What  "  if  thou  couldst  have  swum  in  a  whole  sea  of 
Jewish  blood,  if  thou  couldst  have  raised  mountains  of  their  carcasses  ?  What  if 
thou  couldst  have  made  all  Persia  thy  shambles,  who  would  have  given  thee  one 
farthing  for  all  those  piles  of  flesh,  for  all  those  streams  of  blood  ?  " — Hall.  (W.  A. 
Scott,  D.D.)  Hainan's  murderous  proposal ; — I.  The  commonness  op  it.  In  every 
age  God's  people  have  been  hated  for  the  very  reasons  that  are  here  assigned. 
They  worship  the  one  true  and  living  God.  David  tells  of  confederacies  formed  to 
"  cut  off  the  Jews  from  being  a  nation."  The  ten  persecutions  in  the  early  ages 
of  Christianity.  At  the  present  day  private  animosity  is  indulged  as  far  as  the  laws 
of  the  land  will  allow.  "  All  that  will  Uve  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  perse- 
cution." II.  The  impiety  of  it.  III.  The  folly  of  it.  Haman  with  all  his  power 
could  not  prevail  against  the  Jews,  who  yet  in  appearance  were  altogether  in  his 
hands.     {C.  Simeon.) 

Ver.  9.  I  will  pay  ten  thousand  talents  of  silver. — Haman^s  wealth :  ancient 
millionaires : — Crassus  owned  a  landed  estate  valued  at  more  than  one  million  and 
a  half  pounds  sterling,  and  Eidorus,  after  having  lost  a  good  deal  in  the  civil  war,  left 
an  estate  worth  one  milhon  forty-seven  hundred  pounds.  AndLentulus,  the  augur, 
died  worth  three  millions,  three  hundred  and  thirty-three  thousand,  three  hundred 
and  thirty-three  pounds  sterling.  Apicius  was  possessed  of  above  nine  hundred 
and  sixteen  thousand,  six  hundred  and  seventy-one  pounds.  His  weaU".!,  however, 
was  by  no  means  satisfactory  or  sufUcient  for  him.  For  after  having  spent  vast 
$uras  in  his  kitchen,  he  was  so  miserable  that  he  put  an  end  to  his  own  life  by 
poison.  These  rich  old  Komans  were  not  bankers  or  mere  merchants  and  traders. 
These  amounts  did  not  merely  pass  through  their  hands  in  the  vray  of  trade.  They 
were  worth  so  much  in  hard  money.  Nor  were  all  the  millionaires  of  ancient  times 
Romans.  Herodotus  says  that  Xerxes,  in  going  to  Greece,  the  father  of  Ahasuerus 
— or  as  some  say,  Ahasuerus  himself — found  Pythius,  the  Lydian,  possessed  of  two 
thousand  talents  of  silver  and  four  millions  of  gold  darics  ;  that  is,  about  twenty- 
seven  and  a  half  millions  of  dollars  (Lib.  vii.).  And  Plutarch  informs  us,  that 
after  Crassus,  the  Roman  general,  had  given  the  tenth  of  all  he  had  to  Hercules, 
he  entertained  ten  thousand  people  at  his  tables,  and  gave  to  every  citizen  as 
much  corn  as  would  support  him  three  months  ;  and  then  had  seven  thousand  one 
hi.ndred  Roman  talents  remaining;  that  is,  about  twenty-eight  millions  of  dollars. 
Surely,  then,  there  is  nothing  incredible  in  our  history  because  it  spoaks  of  ten 
thousand  talents  of  silver.  The  wealth  and  luxury  of  the  old  world,  in  many 
particulars,  surpassed  our  own  times.  The  enormous  debts  contracted  in  the  days 
of  Alexander  and  of  the  Ctcsars  prove  that  the  wealth  of  those  times  \fras  great, 
ali'.iough  this  is  a  way  to  prove  one's  wealth  by  that  is  not  at  all  to  my  mind, 
especially  for  a  Church.  Anthony  owed,  we  are  told,  at  the  ides  of  March, 
JC33i),bo  J  13s.  4d.,  which,  however,  it  is  said  he  paid  before  the  calends  of  April,  every 


CHAP,  m.]  ESTHER.  45 

penny  of  it.  (W,  A.  Scott,  D.D.)  Costly  revenge  : — His  revenge  •was  so  dear  to 
him,  that  he  would  not  only  hazard  the  king's  favour  by  the  horrid  proposal  of 
murdering  a  whole  nation,  but  expose  himself  to  a  severe  loss  in  his  fortune,  rather 
than  suffer  the  hated  race  to  live.  What  liberal  sacrifices  will  men  make  to  their 
passions  !  They  will  give  a  great  part  of  the  substance  of  their  house  to  the  grati- 
fication of  their  hatred  or  their  lust.  Why  then  should  we  think  it  a  hard  matter 
to  give  a  part  of  our  substance  to  God  ?  If  our  desires  are  as  eager  for  the  advance- 
ment of  virtue  and  purity,  if  we  are  as  earnest  in  our  wishes  to  have  the  wants  of 
ihe  poor  supplied,  and  the  afflictions  of  the  unfortunate  relieved,  as  revengeful  men, 
like  Haman,  are  to  gratify  their  ill-nature,  it  will  give  us  pleasure  to  honour  the 
Lord  with  our  substance,  and  to  minister  to  the  needs  of  our  fellow-men.   (G.  Lawson. ) 

Ver.  11.  To  do  with  them  as  It  seemeth  good  to  thee. — The  danger  of  an  easy 
temper : — ^Ahasuerus  appears  to  have  been  a  man  of  an  easy  temper,  and  ready  to 
confer  the  greatest  obligations,  without  dehberation,  on  those  whom  he  loved.  But 
thei'e  is  no  true  wisdom  without  judgment  and  steadiness.  A  thoughtless  man,  of 
an  easy  temper,  is  more  likely  to  turn  out  a  vicious  than  a  virtuous  character, 
because  in  a  world  where  so  many  more  bad  than  good  men  are  to  be  met  with,  he 
is  likely  to  give  up  himself  to  the  guidance  of  those  who  will  lead  him  out  of  the 
•way  of  understanding;  or  if  he  should  be  led  in  the  right  path  by  some  of  his 
friends,  there  are  others  that  will  lead  him  out  of  it.  Ahasuerus  would  have  heaped 
favours  upon  the  Jews,  if  Mordecai  had  been  to  him  at  this  time  what  Haman  was. 

I.  Many  have  not  duly  distinguished  between  an  easy  and  a  good  temper.  An 
easy  temper  is  a  very  dangerous  one,  when  it  is  not  under  the  powerful  restraints  of 
wisdom.  It  is  vain  to  boast  of  a  ready  compliance  with  every  good  motion  suggested 
to  us  if  we  are  equally  ready  to  comply  with  bad  motions.  If  we  surrender  our- 
selves to  the  direction  of  our  friends,  we  may  soon  find  that  we  have  given  up 
ourselves  to   our  enemies.     He   is  not  our   friend  who   desires  to   be  our  lord. 

II.  Please  men  fob  theib  good  to  edification.  Be  always  ready  to  grant 
reasonable  requests,  and  to  follow  good  counsels.  But  you  must  judge  for  your- 
selves, by  the  light  which  God  has  given  you,  what  requests  are  lawful  to  be  granted, 
and  what  counsels  are  worthy  to  be  followed.  (Ibid.)  The  terrors  of  despotism : — 
I.  This  history  is  an  illustration  of  the  danger  of  a  one-man  power — of  an  absolute 
despotism.  The  hberty  that  rests  on  the  selfishness,  or  the  inclination  of  one  man, 
or  of  a  hundred  men,  is  suspended  despotism,  and  if  we  must  choose  between  the  rule 
of  one  man,  or  of  thirty,  without  a  written  constitution  and  laws,  we  should  greatly 
prefer  the  one.  In  either  case,  our  property  and  personal  liberty  are  at  the  will  of 
human  caprice  or  passion.     II.  We  see  how  greatly  we  are  blest,  in  having  a 

OOVEKNMENT,  NOT  OF    MEN,  BUT    OF    JUST,  MILD,  ENLIGHTENED   AND    EQUITABLE    WRITTEN 

AND  PUBLISHED  LAWS,  guaranteeing  to  us  liberty  in  the  worship  of  God,  and  in  the 
pursuits  of  life  and  the  enjoyment  of  our  institutions.  The  King  of  Persia,  in  some 
instances,  seems  to  have  been  surrounded  by  the  restraints  of  precedents,  yet,  in 
other  cases,  he  could  do  what  he  pleased  with  the  lives  and  property  of  his  subjects. 
There  was  no  written  constitution.  III.  We  are  never  to  despair  of  the  ark, 
EVEN  WHEN  IT  FALL  INTO  THE  HANDS  OP  THE  PHILISTINES.  God  wiU  never  f orsake  His 
people.  It  is  no  new  thing  for  the  godly  to  have  to  suffer  persecution.  The  Jews 
were  misrepresented.  Even  what  Haman  said  of  them  that  was  true  was  so  said 
as  to  give  a  fresh  colouring  to  the  whole  picture.  There  is  no  proof  that  the  Jews 
were  factious  under  the  Persian  rule.  On  the  contrary,  from  the  lives  of  Daniel, 
Ezra,  and  Nehemiah  we  should  infer  just  the  opposite.  It  is  an  old  aspersion  of 
God's  people,  to  charge  them  with  singularity.  Would  to  God  there  was  more 
■cause  for  the  imputation  than  there  is  I  The  very  thing,  therefore,  that  constituted 
their  glory  was  made  their  offence.  But  it  is  better  always  to  fall  into  the  hands 
of  God  than  of  men.  This  was  David's  choice,  and  observation  approves  of  it. 
The  very  reasons  Haman  gave  for  destroying  the  Hebrews  are  among  the  very 
reasons  why  God  will  not  let  them  perish  out  of  the  earth.  That  which  whets  the 
sword  of  men  moves  the  pity  of  the  Almighty.  God  sometimes  leaves  His  people 
to  come  into  the  greatest  peril,  that  His  power  may  be  the  more  easily  seen  in  their 
deliverance.  Pharaoh  was  raised  up  to  show  His  power,  and  so  was  Haman. 
♦'  God  taketh  the  wise  in  their  own  craftiness,  and  ensnares  the  wicked  in  the  works 
of  their  own  hands."  In  the  darkest  hour  it  is  our  duty  and  our  highest  happiness 
etill  to  trust  in  God.     (IT.  A.  Scott,  D.D.) 

Vers.  12-15.  Then  were  the  king's  scribes  called  on  the  thirteenth  day. — Fruit- 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 


le$»  preparations : — I.  Here  is  ukbeemly  haste.  II.  Here  are  inconsistent 
PEECURSOEV  measdees.  Wickedness  renders  a  man  inconsistent.  Revenge  impelled 
to  action,  but  conscience  still  spoke  in  reproving  tones.  All  must  be  done  according 
to  law.  Obedience  to  the  eternal  law  of  right  is  the  only  method  by  which  human 
lives  can  be  rendered  consistent  and  harmonious.  III.  Here  is  a  low  estimate  of 
HUMAN  life,  shown — 1.  In  the  unmethodical  nature  of  the  slaughter  designed. 
2.  In  the  indiscriminate  nature  of  the  slaughter  designed.  3.  In  the  rapacity  after 
property.  Life  versv£  property.  This  decree  is  one  of  the  unwritten  decrees  of 
modern  civilisation.  IV.  Here  is  wickedness  bolstered  up  by  human  authobity* 
Learn — 1.  Great  men  should  try  to  get  a  true  idea  of  the  importance  of  human 
life.  2.  Statesmen  should  remember  that  the  true  wealth  of  a  community  is  its 
men.  3,  All  ought  to  remember  that  life  is  ignoble  when  passion  is  allowed  to  rule. 
{W.  Burrows,  B.A.)  Persian  postal  facilities  : — The  postal  service  for  that  age 
was  exceedingly  good,  but  only  the  king  could  take  advantage  of  it.  Indeed,  it  was 
one  of  the  means  used  by  him  for  the  government  of  the  empire,  and  was  very 
largely,  according  to  Herodotus,  the  device  of  this  same  Xerxes.  Along  the  chief 
lines  of  travel  he  established,  at  intervals  of  fourteen  miles,  post-houses,  at  each  of 
which  relays  of  horses  and  couriers  were  always  in  readiness.  One  of  these  mes- 
sengers, receiving  an  official  document,  rode  with  it  at  his  utmost  speed  to  the  next 
post-house,  where  it  was  taken  onward  by  another  courier  with  another  horse,  and 
in  this  way  a  proclamation  like  that  here  described  would  reach  the  farthest  limits 
of  the  empire  in  five  or  six  weeks,     {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 

Ver.  13.  To  Trrn,  and  to  cause  to  perisli. — A  wicked  massacre : — The  wickedness 
of  the  intended  massacre  does  not  rest  with  Ahasuerus  and  Haman.  Great 
multitudes  of  the  king's  subjects  must  participate  in  the  guilt.  The  governors  and 
rulers  of  every  province,  and  the  people  under  their  command,  have  letters  written 
to  them,  sealed  with  the  king's  seal,  to  contribute  their  part  to  the  massacre.  Let 
the  great  consider  what  they  do.  If  they  are  wicked,  they  are  not  wicked  alone. 
We  ought  to  bless  God  that  no  man  hath  power  to  require  us  to  do  anything  but 
according  to  the  known  laws  of  the  land.  And  yet  men  of  true  virtue  will  not 
comply  with  the  will  of  the  most  absolute  monarchs  when  it  is  not  consistent  with 
the  laws  of  justice  and  of  mercy.  At  the  famous  Bartholomew  massacre,  when  the 
King  of  France  sent  his  orders  to  the  commanders  in  the  different  provinces  to 
massacre  the  Huguenots,  one  of  them  returned  him  this  answer  :  "  In  my  district 
your  Majesty  has  many  brave  soldiers,  but  no  butchers."  That  virtuous  governor 
never  felt  any  effects  of  the  royal  resentment.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  few  of  the 
Persian  governors  would  have  given  such  proofs  of  virtuous  courage  if  the  king's 
edict  had  not  been  reversed.     (G.  Lawson.) 

Ver.  15.  And  the  king  and  Haman  sat  down  to  drink ;  but  the  city  Shushan  was 
perplexed. — Society  broken  into  sections  : — Alas  !  how  society  is  broken  up  into  sec- 
tions— one  part  caring  little  for  another  that  is  closest  to  it,  and  at  the  very  moment 
pressing  upon  it  for  sympathy  and  succour.  Stone  walls  were  all  that  separated 
these  two  men  from  an  agonising  population,  and  yet  they  were  as  insensible  to  the 
sufferings  which  were  without  as  though  they  had  been  hundreds  of  miles  removed 
from  that  scene  of  perplexity  and  dismay.  How  many  are  in  suffering  in  every  great 
city  1  How  many  tears  are  being  shed,  groans  of  distress  uttered,  pangs  of  anguish 
and  remorse  endured  1  But  the  world  takes  no  notice  of  them — enjoys  its  ease, 
and  dulls  all  sensibility  to  the  pain  of  others  by  sensual  delights.  "  What  is  that 
to  us?  see  thou  to  that,"  is  still  the  reply  of  the  world  to  those  who  have  been  its 
slaves.  Happy  shall  be  the  time  when  the  gospel  shall  have  rectified  this  state  of 
things ;  when  each  shall  regard  himself,  like  the  Saviour,  as  a  minister  to  others  ; 
when  the  wide  breaches  of  fashion  and  caste  shall  be  bridged  over  and  healed; 
when  priest  and  Levite  shall  disappear  in  the  compassionate  Samaritan ;  when 
every  man  shall  look  not  upon  his  own  things,  but  also  on  the  things  of  others,  and 
when  society,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  shall  be  a  holy,  sympathising,  loving 
brotherhood,  possessed  of  the  spirit  and  imitating  the  example  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  1  It  was  not  the  Jews  only  who  were  distressed  and  alarmed,  but  the  whole 
community — some,  because  in  the  destruction  of  the  Jews  thej  would  themselves 
suffer  in  friendship  or  outward  estate — others  from  feelings  of  humanity  at  the 
prospective  slaughter  of  good  citizens  and  unoffending  women  and  child'-en — some 
through  fear  that  a  deed  so  cruel  and  horrible  might  lead  to  an  insurrectioD  in  the 
provinces,  and  an  indiscriminate  plundering  and  murdering  among  the  inhabitants 


CHAP.  IV.]  ESTHER.  47 

— and  others  lest  such  an  anrighteous  decree  might  provoke  the  judgment  of  the 
Almighty.  The  city  was  panic-stricken.  If  the  king  was  to  act  thus  arbitrarily 
and  unreasonably  in  one  instance,  might  he  not  do  so  in  many  ways  ?  (T.  McEwan.) 
Self-indulgence : — How  self-indulgence  renders  men  callous  to  the  distresses  and 
sufferings  of  their  fellow-men.  {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  The  irregularities  of 
human  conditions  : — I.  The  xnkqualities  of  human  cokditions.  1.  The  most 
striking  instance  of  inequality  is  that  which  is  illustrated  between  the  condition  of 
the  oppressor  and  the  oppressed.  2.  This  is  further  illustrated  by  the  contrast 
between  the  jollity  of  the  palace  and  the  perplexity  of  the  city.  3.  The  indifference 
of  one  class  of  the  community  towards  another  and  seemingly  less  favoured  class  is 
brought  to  view  in  this  passage.  4.  This  indifference  has  its  root  in  and  is  the 
outcome  of  selfishness.  11.  The  mysteries  of  human  conditions.  Haman  feasting 
with  the  king,  Mordecai  mourning  at  the  king's  gate.  III.  The  compensatino 
FOBCES  OF  HUMAN  CONDITIONS.  The  pleasurc  of  Ahasuerus  was  not  a  permanent  stream. 
The  glory  of  Haman  was  soon  tarnished.  The  sorrow  of  Mordecai  was  turned  into 
laughter.  IV.  The  sympathetic  element  in  human  conditions.  Sorrow  draws 
men  and  women  more  closely  together  than  joy.  When  one  part  of  a  city  suffers, 
the  whole  of  the  city  should  be  perplexed.  V.  The  harmonising  principle  fob  human 
CONDITIONS.  What  principle  is  there  that  is  to  adjust  in  fit  proportions  the  various 
parts  and  members  of  human  society?  The  gospel  rightly  understood,  broadly 
interpreted,  and  fully  received.  The  gospel, dethrones  selfishness,  and  teaches  the 
true  brotherhood  of  humanity.  VI.  The  true  sustaining  power  fob  all  human 
CONDITIONS  :  "  Even  our  faith."  The  true  help  in  life's  difi&culties  is  to  go  into  the 
sanctuary  of  God.  By  faith  and  prayer  the  world's  true  heroes  have  ever  con- 
quered. Here  learn — 1.  To  keep  away  from  sensuality,  which  hardens  the  nature. 
2.  To  cultivate  sympathy,  which  ennobles  the  nature.  3.  To  foster  firm  faith  in  an 
overruling  power,  which  brightens  life.  4.  To  have  respect  unto  the  harmonies 
of  heaven  amid  the  discords  of  earth.     (W.  Burrows,  BA.) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Veb.  1.  Wlien  Mordecai  perceived  all  that  was  done,  Kordeeai  rent  his  clothes, 
and  put  on  sackcloth  with  ashes. — MordecaVs  grief : — In  the  case  of  Mordecai,  the 
first  effect  of  the  proclamation  was  bitter  anguish,  for  his  conduct  had  been  the  flint 
out  of  which  the  spark  leaped  to  kindle  this  portentous  conflagration.  But  Mordecai's 
grief  did  not  upset  his  judgment.  The  genuine  sorrow  of  an  honest  soul  very  seldom 
has  that  effect ;  and  this  man's  greatness  comes  out  in  his  deliberateness.  Faith, 
too,  as  well  as  sound  judgment,  may  be  discerned  under  this  good  man's  grief. 
(A.  M.  Symington,  B.A.)  Mordecai  in  sackcloth  : — I.  Mordecai  was  exceedingly 
AFFECTED  AT  WHAT  THE  KING  HAD  COMMANDED  (vcr.  1).  See  the  Stirring  bcnevolence 
of  this  man,  the  sweet  philanthropy  which  dwelt  in  his  soul,  and  how  deeply  he  felt 
the  common  calamity,  which  resulted  from  his  own  conscientious  doings.  There  is 
nothing  new  in  the  Lord's  people  meeting  with  adversities  and  troubles  in  this  life. 
"  Let  them  that  suffer  according  to  the  will  of  God,  commit  the  keeping  of  their 
souls  to  Him  in  well-doing,  as  unto  a  faithful  Creator."  "As  the  sufferings  of 
Christ  abound  in  us,  so  our  consolation  also  aboundeth  by  Christ."    II.  In  the  depth 

OF  his  GRIEF,  MoRDECAI  "  CAME  EVEN  BEFORE  THE  KING'S  GATE,  CLOTHED  VmS  SACK- 
CLOTH :  FOR  NONE  MIGHT  ENTER  INTO  THE  KING'S  GATE  CLOTHED  WITH  SACKCLOTH  (vcr.  2). 

Amusements  or  diversions  are  one  class  of  spiritual  idols  to  which  many  of  the  sons 
of  men  render  homage.  The  wise  man  informs  us  that  a  scene  of  unbroken  enjoy- 
ment is  not  the  best  for  the  interest  of  the  soul.  "  It  is  better  to  go  to  the  house  of 
mourning,"  &c.,  "  for  that  is  the  end  of  all  men,  and  the  living  will  lay  it  to  heart." 
Do  as  the  saints  of  old  did  ;  we  never  hear  them  saying,  "  I  will  rejoice  in  the  world  " ; 
but  "  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord,"  "  I  will  rejoice  in  Thy  salvation."  "  In  the  shadow 
of  Thy  wings  will  I  rejoice."  "  My  soul  shall  be  joyful  in  my  God  :  for  He  hath 
clothed  me  with  the  garments  of  salvation.  He  hath  covered  me  with  the  robe  of 
righteousness."  IH.  Mordecai,  though  he  could  not  enter  within  the  king's  gate 
with  his  signals  of  distress,  went  as  near  it  as  he  dared  to  go,  with  the  view  of 

ACQUAINTINa    EsTHER,    BY    MEANS   OF    HER   ATTENDANTS,    WITH   THE   IMPENDING   DANGER. 

As  soon  as  she  heard  of  his  mournful  habit,  she  sympathised  with  him,  and  sent 


43  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

him  raiment  instead  of  his  sackcloth,  that  he  might  resume  his  place.  We  cannot 
but  admire  two  things  which  the  grace  of  God  had  wrought  in  this  woman — her 
condescension  and  gratitude.  She  was  now  a  queen.  Providence  had  placed  her 
on  the  summit  of  worldly  greatness,  yet  did  she  not  disregard  one  of  her  subjects  in 
distress.  She  kindly  inquired  into  the  cause  of  his  sorrow.  Her  gratitude  also  was 
lovely.  Mordecai  had  acted  the  part  of  a  tender  father  towards  her,  when  she  was 
cast  a  parentless  child  on  the  wide  world.     She  does  not  now  forget  that  tenderness. 

IV.    MOEDECAI  SENT  BACK  TO  EsTHER  TIDINGS  OF  THE  SITUATION  IN  WHICH  HE,  AND  SHE, 

AND  THEIR  PEOPLE  WERE  PLACED  (veis.  7,  8).  Esther  was  now  in  a  station,  high  and 
influential,  and  she  is  here  charged  to  use  her  influence  on  the  side  of  right  and 
justice,  and  against  oppression  and  tyranny.  It  is  delightful  to  behold  power  thus 
employed!  Power  is  a  mighty  weapon,  and  effects  great  things  either  to  the  injury 
or  benefit  of  the  community.     V.  Esther  sent  again  to  Mordecai,  to  tell  him  that 

SHE  HAD  not  FOR  A  CONSIDERABLE  PERIOD  BEEN  INVITED  TO  THE  ROYAL  PRESENCE,  AND 
THAT    TO    GO    UNIN^aTED    WAS    CERTAIN    DEATH.       VI.    NOTWITHSTANDING    WHAT    ESTHEB 

SAID,  Mordecai  would  bt  no  means  have  her  neglect  the  work  which  he  had 
ASSIGNED  HER  (veis.  13,  14).  We  learn  a  few  particulars  from  these  words.  1.  That 
Mordecai  had  a  strong  belief  that  God  would  interfere  for  His  people  in  this  case. 
2.  That  we  are  not  to  flinch  from  our  duty  by  reason  of  the  danger  which  we  incur 
by  its  performance.  It  is  easy  to  walk  in  the  way  while  it  is  smooth  and  easy,  but 
it  must  be  walked  in  also  when  it  is  rough  and  thorny,  3.  That  the  work  of  the 
Lord  shall  prosper,  whether  we  endeavour  to  promote  it  or  otherwise.  "  Deliverance 
shall  arise  to  the  Jews  from  another  place :  but  thou,"  &c.  God  is  never  at  a  losa 
for  instruments  to  accomplish  His  wUl.  If  we  neglect  the  honour,  He  will  make 
others  willing  to  spend  and  to  be  spent  in  His  service.  VII.  We  come  now  to 
Esther's  answer  (vers.  15,  16).  Fasting  and  prayer  were  resorted  to  on  this 
occasion.  Spiritually  performed,  they  never  fail  of  success.  United  prayer,  as  in 
these  cases,  and  in  that  of  Peter,  who  was  about  to  be  killed  by  Herod,  is  omni- 
potent. Like  Esther,  let  us  work  and  pray.  These  duties  must  ever  be  associated. 
To  work  without  praying  is  Pharisaism  and  presumption.  To  pray  without  working 
is  insincerity  and  hypocrisy.  Like  Mordecai,  let  us  counsel  others  to  do  their  duty, 
heedless  of  all  temporal  consequences,  and  pray  that  they  may  have  power  from  on 
high  for  its  due  accomplishment.  (J.  Hughes.)  AnguUh  keenly  felt : — At  first  it 
would  appear  that  he  was  so  stunned,  and  almost  stupefied,  by  the  news,  that  he 
knew  not  what  to  do.  He  was  cast  into  the  uttermost  disti-ess.  He  was  like  a 
vessel  struck  by  a  cyclone.  He  would  get  to  the  use  of  efforts  to  meet  the  crisis  by 
and  by ;  but,  for  the  moment,  when  the  hurricane  first  burst  upon  him,  he  could  do 
nothing  but  give  way  to  the  violence  of  the  storm.  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Great 
sorrow  : — I.  Sorrow  cannot  be  prevented.  Sibbes  says,  "  None  ever  hath  been  so 
good  or  80  great  as  could  raise  themselves  so  high  as  to  be  above  the  reach  of 
troubles."  Thomas  Watson  observes,  "  The  present  state  of  life  is  subject  to 
afflictions,  as  a  seaman's  life  is  subject  to  stomis.  Man  is  born  to  trouble  ;  he 
is  heir-apparent  to  it ;  he  comes  into  the  world  with  a  cry  and  goes  out  with  a 
groan."  II.  Sorrow  cannot  be  explained.  In  its  general  aspect  sin  is  the  cause  of 
sorrow.  When  we  come  to  particularise  we  find  ourselves  at  fault.  Eternity  is  the 
only  true  and  complete  interpreter  of  time.  Heavenly  joys  only  can  make  plain  the 
meaning  of  earthly  sorrows.  HI.  Sorrow  cannot  be  hidden.  Emotion  is  as  much 
part  of  our  God-given  nature  as  intellect.  The  man  who  does  not  feel  is  a  man  with 
the  better  part  of  manhood  destroyed.  Feeling  must  sooner  or  later  find  an  expres- 
sion. It  is  better  not  to  hide  our  sorrows-  Trouble  concealed  is  trouble  increased. 
IV.  Sorrow  cannot  be  confined.  It  passes  from  nature  to  nature  ;  from  home  to 
home.  This  community  of  feeling,  this  susceptibility  to  sorrow,  speaks  to  us  of  our 
brotherhood.  We  are  members  one  of  another.  V.  But  sorrow  can  be  mitigated. 
1.  By  believing  that  the  threatened  trouble  may  never  come.  2.  By  believing  that 
God  knows  how  to  effect  a  deliverance.  3.  By  believing  that  sorrow  may  be  made 
productive.  As  the  waters  of  the  Nile  overflow  the  surrounding  country,  and  open 
up  the  soil,  and  prepare  it  for  the  reception  of  the  rice  seed,  so  the  waters  of  sorrow 
should  overflow  and  open  up  the  otherwise  barren  soil  of  our  nature,  and  prepare  it 
for  the  reception  of  the  seed  of  all  truth  in  its  manifold  bearings.  "  Tribulation 
worketh  patience,"  &c.  [IV.  Burrows,  B.A.)  MordecaVs  grief: — There  is  per- 
haps but  little  doubt  that  Mordecai  passed  hours — they  come  to  nearly  all — when 
gloom  lay  heavy  upon  the  soul,  when  the  shock  he  had  felt  seemed  to  render  exist- 
ence a  blank,  leaving  little  of  hope  before  him  save  that  which  glittered  around  the 
gateway  of  death  and  seemed  to  whisper,  "  Abandon  effort ;  accept  the  inevitable  " — 


CHAP.  IV.]  ESTHER.  49 

seasons  when  the  fruitlessness  of  labour,  the  unreasonableness  of  man,  the  malig- 
nancy of  human  enmity,  the  worthlessness  of  human  sacrifice,  the  emptiness  of  the 
most  ardent  aspirations,  and  the  inefficiency  of  goodness,  leave  the  soul  drifting 
upon  the  open  sea  of  despondency  with  a  torturing  sense  of  loneliness — moments 
when  faith  in  man,  even  faith  in  the  Church,  is  shaken,  inducing  the  spirit  to  cast 
itself  upon  the  Fatherhood  of  God,  as  the  storm  drives  the  wearied  bird  to  its  home 
in  the  rocks.  But  since  faith  still  lives,  and  can  only  live,  in  the  performance  of 
present  duty — which  alone  has  the  power  of  maintaining  piety  in  the  soul — he  soon 
discovers  that  continued  reliance  upon  God  is  urging  him  to  labour  for  the  realisa- 
tion of  the  results  he  covets.     {J.  S.  Van  Dyke,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  Clothed  with  sackclotli. — The  transfigured  sackcloth : — The  sign  of  afflic- 
tion was  thus  excluded  from  the  Persian  court  that  royalty  might  not  be  discom- 
posed. This  disposition  to  place  an  interdict  on  disagreeable  and  painful  things 
still  survives.  Men  of  all  ranks  and  conditions  hide  from  themselves  the  dark  facts 
of  life.  Eevelation,  however,  lends  no  sanction  to  this  habit.  We  wish  to  show 
the  entire  reasonableness  of  revelation  in  its  frank  recognition  of  the  dark  facts  of 
existence.  I.  We  consider  first  the  recognition  by  revelation  of  sin.  Sackcloth 
is  the  outward  and  visible  sign  of  sin,  guilt,  and  misery.  What  is  popularly  called 
sin,  certain  philosophers  call  error,  accident,  inexperience,  imperfection,  disharmony, 
but  they  will  not  allow  the  presence  in  the  human  heart  of  a  malign  force  which 
asserts  itself  against  God  and  against  the  order  of  His  universe.  Intellectual 
masters  like  Emerson  and  Kenan  ignore  conscience ;  they  refuse  to  acknowledge  the 
selfishness,  baseness,  and  cruelty  of  society.  Men  generally  are  wUling  to  dup& 
themselves  touching  the  fact  and  power  of  sin.  We  do  not  unshrinkingly  acquaint 
ourselves  with  the  malady  of  the  spirit  as  we  should  with  any  malady  hinting  itself 
in  the  flesh.  The  sackcloth  must  not  mar  our  shallow  happiness.  In  the  vision  of 
beautiful  things  we  forget  the  troubles  of  conscience  as  the  first  sinners  hid  them- 
selves amid  the  leaves  and  flowers  of  paradise  ;  in  fashion  and  splendour  we  forget 
our  guilty  sorrow,  as  mediaeval  mourners  sometimes  concealed  the  cerements  with 
raiment  of  purple  and  gold ;  in  the  noises  of  the  world  we  become  oblivious  of  the 
interior  discords,  as  soldiers  forget  their  wounds  amid  the  stir  and  trumpets  of  the 
battle.  Nevertheless  sin  thrusts  itself  upon  our  attention.  The  creeds  of  all  nations 
declare  the  fact  that  men  everywhere  feel  the  bitter  working  and  intolerable  burden 
of  conscience.  The  sense  of  sin  has  persisted  through  changing  generations.  The 
sackcloth  is  ours,  and  it  eats  our  spirits  like  fire.  More  than  any  other  teacher, 
Christ  emphasised  the  actuality  and  awfulness  of  sin  ;  more  than  any  other  He  has 
intensified  the  world's  consciousness  of  sin.  He  never  sou.Ljht  to  relieve  us  of  the 
sackcloth  by  asserting  our  comparative  innocence ;  He  never  attempted  to  work  inta  • 
that  melancholy  robe  one  thread  of  colour,  to  relieve  it  with  one  solitary  spangle  of 
rhetoric.  He  laid  bare  its  principle  and  essence.  The  South  Sea  Islanders  have  a 
singular  tradition  to  account  for  the  existence  of  the  dew.  The  legend  states  that  in 
the  beginning  the  earth  touched  the  sky,  that  being  the  golden  age  when  all  was 
beautiful  and  glad ;  then  some  dreadful  tragedy  occurred,  the  primal  unity  was 
broken  up,  the  earth  and  sky  were  torn  asunder  as  we  see  them  now,  and  the  dew- 
drops  of  the  morning  are  the  tears  that  nature  sheds  over  the  sad  divorce.  This 
wild  fable  is  a  metaphor  of  the  truth,  the  beginning  of  all  evil  lies  in  the  alienation 
of  the  spirit  of  man  from  God,  in  the  divorce  of  earth  from  heaven ;  here  is  the  final 
reason  why  the  face  of  humanity  is  wet  with  tears.  Instead  of  shutting  out  the 
signs  of  woe,  Christ  arrayed  Himself  in  the  sackcloth,  becoming  sin  for  us  who  knew 
no  sin,  that  we  might  become  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him.  We  have  redemp- 
tion through  His  blood,  even  the  forgiveness  of  sins ;  He  establishes  us  in  a  true  relation 
to  the  holy  God ;  He  restores  in  us  the  image  of  God  ;  He  fills  us  with  the  peace  of 
God.  Not  in  the  spirit  of  barren  cynicism  does  Christ  lay  bare  the  ghastly  wound 
of  our  nature,  but  as  a  noble  physician  who  can  purge  the  mortal  virus  that  destroys 
us.  We  go  to  Him  in  sackcloth,  but  we  leave  His  presence  in  purity's  robe  of  snow, 
in  the  heavenly  blue  of  the  holiness  of  truth.  II.  We  consider  the  recognition  bt 
revelation  op  sorrow.  Sackcloth  is  the  raiment  of  sorrow,  and  as  such  it  was 
interdicted  by  the  Persian  monarch.  We  still  follow  the  same  insane  course, 
minimising,  denying  suffering.  Society  sometimes  attempts  this.  Literature  some- 
times follows  the  same  cue.  Goethe  made  it  one  of  the  rules  of  his  life  to  avoid 
everything  that  could  suggest  painful  ideas.  Art  has  yielded  to  the  same  tempta- 
tion. Most  of  us  are  inclined  to  the  sorry  trick  of  gliding  over  painful  things.. 
When  the  physician  prescribed  bUsters  to  Marie  BashkirtsefE  to  check  her  consump- 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iy. 

tive  tendency,  the  vain,  cynical  girl  wrote  :  '•  I  will  put  on  as  many  blisters  as  they 
like.  I  shaU  be  able  to  hide  the  mark  by  bodices  trimmed  with  flowers  and  lace  and 
tulle,  and  a  thousand  other  things  that  are  worn,  without  being  required  ;  it  may 
even  look  pretty.  Ah  I  I  am  comforted."  The  real  secret  of  the  power  of  many  of 
the  fashions  and  diversions  of  the  world  is  found  in  the  fact  that  they  hide  disagree- 
able things,  and  render  men  oblivious  for  awhile  of  the  mystery  and  weight  of  an 
unintelligible  world.  There  is  no  screen  to  shut  off  permanently  the  spectacle  of 
suffering.  When  Marie  Antoinette  passed  to  her  bridal  in  Paris,  the  halt,  the  lame, 
and  the  blind  were  sedulously  kept  out  of  her  way,  lest  their  appearance  should  mar 
the  joyousness  of  her  reception;  but  ere  long  the  poor  queen  had  a  very  close  view 
of  misery's  children,  and  she  drank  to  the  dregs  the  cup  of  life's  bitterness.  Eeason 
as  we  may,  suffering  will  find  us  out,  and  pierce  us  to  the  heart.  We  will  not  have 
the  philosophy  that  ignores  suffering ;  witness  the  popularity  of  Schopenhaur.  We 
resent  the  art  that  ignores  sorrow.  The  most  popular  picture  in  the  world  to-day  is 
the  '*  Angelus"  of  Millet.  We  will  not  have  the  literature  that  ignores  suffering. 
Classic  religions  had  little  or  nothing  to  do  with  the  sorrows  of  the  million ;  the 
gods  reigned  on  Mount  Olympus,  taking  little  note  of  the  grief  of  mortals.  Christian- 
ity boldly  recognises  the  sad  element  in  human  nature.  Christ  makes  clear  to  us 
the  origin  of  suffering.  He  shows  that  its  genesis  is  in  the  error  of  the  human  will ; 
but  if  suffering  originate  in  the  error  of  the  human  will,  it  ceases  at  once  if  the 
erring  will  be  brought  into  correspondence  with  the  primitive  order  of  the  universe. 
Christ  has  power  to  establish  this  harmony.  Dealing  with  sin,  He  dries  up  the 
stream  of  sorrow  at  its  fountain.  By  the  authority  of  that  word  that  speaks  the 
forgiveness  of  our  sin.  He  wipes  away  all  tears  from  the  face  of  such  as  obey  Him. 
Christ  gives  us  the  noblest  example  of  suffering.  So  far  from  shutting  His  gate  on 
the  sackcloth,  once  more  He  adopted  it,  and  showed  how  it  might  become  a  robe  of 
glory.  Poison  is  said  to  be  extracted  from  the  rattlesnake  for  medicinal  purposes ; 
but  infinitely  more  wonderful  is  the  fact  that  the  suffering  which  comes  out  of  sin 
counterworks  sin,  and  brings  to  pass  the  transfiguration  of  the  sufferer.  It  is  a 
clumsy  mistake  to  call  Christianity  a  religion  of  sorrow — it  is  a  religion  for  sorrow. 
III.  We  considek  the  becognition  by  revelation  of  death.  We  have,  again,  adroit 
ways  of  shutting  the  gate  upon  that  sackcloth  which  is  the  sign  of  death.  Some 
would  have  us  believe  that  through  the  scientific  and  philosophic  developments  of 
later  centuries  the  sombre  way  of  viewing  death  has  become  obsolete.  The  fact, 
however,  still  remains,  that  death  is  the  crowning  evil,  the  absolute  bankruptcy,  the 
final  defeat,  the  endless  exile.  If  we  are  foolish  enough  to  shut  the  gate  on  the 
thought  of  death,  by  no  stratagem  can  we  shut  the  gate  upon  death  itself.  Christ 
displays  the  fact,  the  power,  the  terror  of  death  without  reserve  or  softening.  He 
shows  that  death  is  unnatural,  that  it  is  the  fruit  of  disobedience,  and  by  giving  us 
purity  and  peace  He  gives  us  eternal  life.  He  demonstrates  immortality  by  raising 
us  from  the  death  of  sin  to  the  life  of  righteousness.  Here  is  the  supreme  proof  of 
immortality  :  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  He  that  believeth  on  Me,  the  works 
that  I  do  shall  he  do  also  ;  and  greater  works  than  these  shall  he  do,  because  I  go 
unto  the  Father."  The  moral  works  are  the  greater  works.  If  Christ  has  raised  us 
from  the  death  of  sin,  why  should  we  think  it  a  thing  incredible  that  God  should 
raise  the  dead  ?  If  He  has  wrought  the  greater,  He  will  not  fail  with  the  less. 
Christ  bringing  life  and  immortality  to  light  has  brought  about  the  great  change  in 
the  point  of  view  from  which  we  regard  death,  the  point  of  view  which  is  full  of 
consolation  and  hope.  Once  more,  by  boldly  adopting  the  sackcloth  Christ  has 
changed  it  into  a  robe  of  light.  We  cannot  escape  the  evils  of  life.  Wearing 
wreaths  of  roses,  our  heads  will  still  ache.  "  The  king  sighs  as  often  as  the  peasant " ; 
this  proverb  anticipates  the  fact  that  those  who  participate  in  the  richest  civilisation 
that  will  ever  flower  will  sigh  as  men  sigh  now.  Esther  "  sent  raiment  to  clothe 
Mordecai,  and  to  take  his  sackcloth  from  him,  but  he  received  it  not."  In  vain  men 
offer  us  robes  of  beauty,  chiding  us  for  wearing  the  robes  of  night ;  we  must  give 
place  to  all  the  sad  thoughts  of  our  mortality  until  we  find  a  salvation  that  goes  to 
the  root  of  our  suffering,  that  dries  up  the  fount  of  our  tears.  Christianity  gives 
such  large  recognition  to  the  pathetic  element  of  life,  because  it  divines  the  secret  of 
our  mighty  misfortune,  and  brings  with  it  the  sovereign  antidote.  The  critics 
declare  Rubens  had  an  absolute  delight  in  representing  pain,  and  they  refer  us  to 
his  picture  of  the  "  Brazen  Serpent."  The  writhing,  gasping  crowd  is  everything,  and 
the  supreme  instrument  of  cure,  the  brazen  serpent  itself,  is  small  and  obscure,  no 
conspicuous  feature  whatever  of  the  picture.  Revelation  brings  out  broadly  and 
impressively  the  darkness  of  the  world,  the  malady  of  life,  the  terror  of  death,  only 


CHAP.  IT.]  ESTHER.  61 

that  it  may  evermore  make  conspicuous  the  uplifted  Cross,  which,  once  seen,  is  death 
to  every  vice,  a  consolation  in  every  sorrow,  a  victory  over  every  fear.  [W.  L. 
Watkinson.)  Sorrow  may  be  transfigured  : — Science  tells  how  the  bird-music  has 
arisen  out  of  the  bird's  cry  of  distress  in  the  morning  of  time ;  how  originally  the 
music  of  field  and  forest  was  nothing  more  than  an  exclamation  caused  by  the 
bird's  bodily  pain  and  fear,  and  how  through  the  ages  the  primal  note  of  anguish 
has  been  evolved  and  differentiated  until  it  has  risen  into  the  ecstasy  of  the  lark, 
melted  into  the  silver  note  of  the  dove,  swelled  into  the  rapture  of  the  nightingale, 
unfolded  into  the  vast  and  varied  music  of  the  sky  and  the  summer.  So  Christ 
shows  that  out  of  the  personal  sorrow  which  now  rends  the  believer's  heart,  he  shall 
arise  in  moral  and  infinite  perfection ;  that  out  of  the  cry  of  anguish  wrung  from  ua 
by  the  present  distress  shall  spring  the  supreme  music  of  the  future.     {Ibid.) 

Ver.  2.  For  none  might  enter  into  the  king's  gate  clothed  with  sackcloth.— 
Death  must  be  encountered  : — Since  the  last  enemy  must  be  encountered  by  the 
greatest  as  well  as  the  least  of  our  race,  is  it  not  far  better  to  be  prepared  for  meet- 
ing him,  than  to  banish  him  from  our  thoughts  ?  (G.  Lawson.)  Death  a  visitor 
that  catinot  be  stopped  at  the  gate : — And  is  Death  included  in  this  prohibition  ? 
Have  you  given  orders  to  your  porters  and  guards  to  stop  this  visitor  at  the  gate, 
and  to  say  to  him,  "  Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  but  no  further  "  ?  Or  will  they  be 
able  to  persuade  him,  and  his  train  of  ghastly  attendants,  gout,  fever,  con- 
sumption, and  other  diseases,  to  lay  aside  their  sable  dress,  together  with  their 
darts  and  spears  and  scorpions?  (T.  McCrie.)  We  cannot  keep  trouble  from  our 
hearts  by  banishing  the  signs  of  mourning  from  our  dwellings  : — It  is  the  height  of 
folly,  therefore,  for  us  to  try  to  surround  ourselves  with  the  appearance  of  security, 
and  make  believe  that  no  change  can  come  upon  us.  That  is  to  do  like  the  ostrich, 
which  buries  its  head  in  the  sand,  and  thinks  itself  safe  from  its  pursuers  because 
it  can  no  longer  see  them.  Trouble,  sorrow,  trial,  death  are  inevitable,  and  the 
wise  course  is  to  prepare  to  meet  them.  We  cannot  shut  our  homes  against  these 
things  ;  but  we  can  open  them  to  Christ,  and  when  He  enters  He  says,  "  My  grace 
is  sufficient  for  thee;  My  strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness."  {}V,  M. 
Taylor,  D.D.) 

Ver.  3.  And  in  every  province  . . .  there  was  great  mourning  among  the  Jews. — 

A  sentence  of  death  : — If  a  sentence  of  death  pronounced  by  an  earthly  sovereign 
produced  such  grief,  such  anxiety,  such  cries  of  deliverance,  what  impression  ought 
to  be  made  on  the  minds  of  sinners  by  that  sentence  which  is  passed  against  them 
in  the  court  of  heaven  ? — "  Judgment  is  come  upon  all  men  to  condemnation."  We 
are  still  under  that  sentence  of  condemnation  if  we  are  not  in  Christ  Jesus.  Surely 
we  believe  neither  law  nor  gospel,  if  we  can  enjoy  peace  in  our  own  minds,  without 
the  humble  hope  of  mercy  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life.  (G. 
Lawson.) 

Ver.  4.  Then  was  the  queen  exceedingly  grieved ;  and  she  sent  raiment. — Sorrow 
not  superficially  removed : — Esther,  in  her  elevation,  and  in  her  separation  from 
her  friends,  was  far  from  forgetting  them.  She  was  deeply  afflicted  when  she  heard 
of  the  mourning  habit  and  sore  affliction  of  Mordecai.  She  was  vexed  that  he 
should  appear  at  the  king's  gate  in  a  dress  in  which  he  could  not  enter  it,  and 
therefore  sent  to  him  change  of  raiment.  But  she  knew  not  the  sources  of  his 
distress.  Grief  so  firmly  rooted,  and  so  well  founded,  could  not  be  removed  with- 
out a  removal  of  its  cause.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  5.  Then  called  Esther  for  Hatach,  one  of  the  king's  chamberlains. — Hatach, 
the  chamberlain,  gives  us  a  good  subject  for  reflection  ;  and  not  a  hackneyed  one. 
Pause  we  a  moment  then  on  this  undistinguished  name.  Let  the  greater  actors 
stand  aside — king  and  queen — Haman  and  Mordecai — mourning  Jews  and  raging 
Amalekites — and  let  a  servant  (in  high  office  no  doubt,  but  still  a  servant),  render- 
ing true  fealty  in  the  spirit  of  reverence  and  faithfulness,  stand  before  us  in  his 
undistinguished  honesty  and  simplicity.  The  queen  begins  to  be  in  sore  trouble. 
The  darkness  is  deepening.  Some  unknown  but  dire  calamity  is  near — "  Send  me 
Hatach — I  need  my  truest  and  my  best — '  that  I  may  know  what  it  is,  and  why  it 
is,'  and  what  may  be  done  to  prepare  for,  or  avert  the  evil  day."  Imagine,  if  you 
can,  what  this  world  would  be  if  all  the  Hatachs  were  taken  out  of  it,  or  taken  out 
of  its  offices.    Let  Abraham  have  no  Eliezer ;  Sarah  no  Deborah ;  Naaman's  wife 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

no  little  maid  of  Israel ;  Saul  no  armour-bearer ;  Esther  no  Hatach.  Let  that 
process  go  on  through  a  particular  section  of  society,  and  what  helpless  creatures 
kings  and  queens  would  be,  and  all  the  men  of  great  name,  and  all  who  live  in 
state,  and  luxury,  and  grandeur  !  It  would  be  like  a  landslip  in  society.  The  upper 
stratum  would  come  sliding  down,  in  some  cases  perhaps  toppliog  down  in  many 
things  to  a  level  with  the  lowest.  There  are  men  in  government  offices  never 
heard  of  in  public  life,  who  have  more  merit  in  particular  measures  which  pass 
than  some  of  those  whose  names  are  connected  with  them.  There  are  managers 
and  confidential  clerks  who  mainly  conduct  great  businesses  in  the  city,  and  in 
whom  their  masters  proudly  and  safely  trust.  Or,  to  enter  the  private  scene,  many 
a  house  is  kept  quiet,  and  orderly,  and  sweet,  and  homelike,  mainly  by  the  assidui- 
ties of  one  confidential  servant.     {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.) 

Ver.  8.  And  to  charge  her  that  she  should  go  In  unto  the  Wng',  to  make  supplica- 
tion unto  him. — A  resolute  will : — In  the  meantime,  this  lesson  may  be  drawn  from 
his  conduct— that  a  resolute  will,  when  it  is  exerted  for  the  accomplishment  of  any 
purpose,  is  usually  successful  in  the  end.  The  triumphs  of  the  Reformation,  for 
example,  in  our  own  country  and  in  other  lands,  where  it  did  triumph,  while  they 
are  really  to  be  ascribed  to  the  overruling  providence  of  God,  are  instrumentally  to 
be  attributed  to  this,  that  God  raised  up  and  qualified  for  the  work  certain  men  of 
determined  wiU  and  unflagging  energy,  who  kept  before  them  the  great  purpose 
which  they  sought  to  effect,  and  would  be  turned  aside  by  no  danger  or  difficulty 
from  working  it  out.  And  I  would  remark,  that  in  things  spiritual — in  things 
affecting  the  eternal  salvation  of  man — resoluteness  of  wiU  and  indomitable  energy 
are  as  indispensable  as  in  the  pursuit  of  temporal  good.  (A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.) 
Human  sympathy  : — How  ardently  Mordecai  is  coveting  the  sympathy  of  one  whom 
his  self-sacrifice  elevated  to  a  position  above  his  own  !  Human  sympathy,  exhibited 
in  practical  ways,  proves  wondrous  in  power,  multiplying  joys  and  dividing  sorrows. 
It  is  like  sunshine  upon  rosebuds,  unfolding  hidden  beauty  and  evoking  new  frag- 
rance. Like  May  breezes  upon  consumptive  cheeks,  it  brings  back  the  glow  of 
health  where  pallor  of  death  has  been,  and  paints  cheerfulness  where  despondency 
has  been  brooding  too  long  already.  It  is  a  contribution  of  the  heart  more  priceless 
than  the  wealth  of  the  Indies.  It  may  be  incapable  of  explaining  the  mysteries  of 
providence  ;  it  may  be  disqualified  for  recommending  resignation  to  the  Divine  will ; 
possibly  it  may  be  powerless  in  effecting  deliverance ;  but  when  genuine  it  possesses 
inestimable  value,  though  it  may  not  open  avenues  from  Marah  to  the  land  of 
Beulah.     {J.  S.  Van  Dyke,  D.D.) 

Ver.  11.  But  I  have  not  been  called  to  come  in  onto  the  king  these  thirty  day^. — 

Providence  tries  faith : — Thus  it  is  that  Providence  sometimes  frowns  on  the 
cause  of  His  Church  and  people,  by  not  only  exposing  them  to  imminent  danger, 
but  by  shutting  up  all  the  ordinary  avenues  of  escape,  so  that  there  appears  no 
evasion  for  them.  This  proves  a  severe  trial  to  their  faith,  but  affords  an  oppor- 
tunity for  displaying  His  own  wisdom  and  mercy  in  their  ultimate  deliverance.  (T. 
McCrie.)  The  darker  aspect  of  providence  : — We  have  here  an  illustration  of 
what  is  not  unfrequently  observable  in  the  arrangements  of  the  Divine  providence 
— that  the  affairs  of  God's  people  assume  a  darker  and  darker  aspect,  just  before  a 
favourable  interposition  comes  —  in  order,  no  doubt,  to  make  the  truth  more 
palpable,  that  it  is  by  His  hand  that  their  deliverance  is  wrought  out,  and  that 
therefore  they  should  never  distrust  Him,  nor  think  that  He  has  forgotten  to  be 
gracious.  (A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Access  to  God  withorit  fear : — It  is  indeed 
with  the  Great  King  you  have  to  deal,  and  life  and  death  are  at  His  disposal ;  but 
you  may  go  to  Him  without  fear,  if  you  go  with  a  true  heart.  There  was  all  the 
formality  of  priestly  services  under  the  law,  between  the  worshippers  and  Jehovah, 
to  make  them  feel  that  they  could  not  come  nigh  personally ;  just  as  there  were 
functionaries  to  prevent  Esther  from  coming  into  the  presence  of  the  king,  when 
she  merely  felt  the  wish  to  do  so.  Now,  however,  God  invites  us  to  come  to  Him 
at  all  times,  and  what  prevents  us  from  having  full  communion  with  Him  is  not 
our  personal  unworthiness,  but  our  unbelief.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  13.  Then  Mordecai  commanded  to  answer  Esther. — Repeated  admonition 
necessary  : — It  is  necessary  for  those  who  desire  to  be  useful  to  the  souls  of  their 
neighbours  not  only  to  tell  them,  as  occasion  requires,  what  it  is  their  duty  to  do, 
but  to  repeat  their  admonitions,  to  enforce  them  by  reasons,  and  to  obviate  those 


CHAP.  IV.]  ESTHER.  53 

objections  which  rise  up  in  their  minds  against  the  performance  of  it.  (G.  Lawson.) 
High  motives  necessary .- — Mordecai's  answer  is  tra.qical  and  grand.  Esther's 
womanly  caution  brought  out  his  courage  and  his  faith.  In  his  consuming  zeal 
for  God  and  God's  people,  he  left  the  domestic  affections  far  below  him.  Though 
loving  Esther  more  than  he  loved  any  one  else  on  earth,  he  never  scrupled  about 
risking  her  life.  For  the  same  reason  he  made  no  allusion  to  the  obligations  under 
which  she  lay  to  his  kindness.  He  had  nursed  her  on  his  knees,  he  had  taught  her 
to  walk  and  speak,  he  had  fed  and  clothed  her,  he  had  surrounded  the  perilous 
steps  of  her  maidenhood  with  the  shield  of  his  watchful  and  wise  affection  ;  but  he 
neither  remembered  these  things  now  nor  wished  her  to  remember  them.  As  none 
of  them  moved  him  to  spare  her  the  risk,  so  neither  will  he  urge  them  as  reasons 
■why  she  should  undertake  it.  This  great  thing  must  be  gone  through  under  the 
influence  of  higher  motives  than  these,  and  in  obedience  to  a  higher  will  than  his. 
(A.  M.  Symington,  B.A.)  Think  not  with  thyself  that  thou  shalt  escape  In  the 
king's  house,  more  than  all  the  Jews. — False  hopes  of  safety  are  one  fruitful  source 
of  delusion,  by  making  persons  careless  or  averse  to  use  means  for  their  own 
escape,  or  the  deliverance  of  others,  from  danger,  temporal  or  eternal.  They  must, 
therefore,  be  disabused  and  undeceived  ;  the  veil  of  covering  which  is  spread  over 
their  minds  must  be  torn  off,  and  they  must  be  shown  their  real  state,  and  their 
impending  danger  in  all  its  nakedness  and  nearness.  We  never  will  persuade 
sinners  to  flee  to  the  refuge  opened  for  them  if  we  do  not  convince  them  that  wrath 
is  coming  upon  them.  "  Save  yourselves  from  this  untoward  generation."  Think 
not  with  yourselves  that  you  shall  escape  their  doom,  however  sober,  and  decent, 
and  moral  you  may  be,  compared  with  some  of  them.  While  profligacy  destroys 
its  thousands,  false  peace  and  lying  confidences  destroy  their  ten  thousands, 
(r.  McCrie.)  Reluctant  self-denial : — Alas  !  how  often  it  happens  that  the 
Christian  needs  to  be  plied  with  arguments  rooted  in  selfishness  ere  he  can  be 
induced  to  perform  an  unpleasant  duty,  especially  if  it  involves  the  possibility 
of  self-sacrifice !  John  Sterling  well  said,  "  The  worst  education  which  teaches 
self-denial  is  better  than  the  best  which  teaches  everything  else  but  that."  Strange 
that,  although  we  announce  ourselves  followers  of  the  Saviour,  we  should  be  so 
reluctant  to  endure  hardship  as  good  soldiers,  while  yet  fulsome  in  the  declaration,. 
"No  sweat,  no  sweet;  no  cross,  no  crown;  no  pains,  no  gains."  {J.  S.  Van 
Dyke,  D.D.)  No  refuge  in  the  king's  house : — In  many  ways  do  men  cherish  false 
hopes,  from  the  simple  circumstance  of  dwelling  in  what  may  be  called  "  the  king's 
house."  For  example :  The  Word  of  God  includes  all  under  condemnation  who 
have  not  a  personal  faith  in  the  Divine  Redeemer  ;  but  in  the  neglect  of  that  urgent 
duty  there  are  some  who  hope  for  salvation  simply  because  descended  of  pious 
parentage,  or  possessed  of  an  outwardly  good  moral  character,  or  connected  with 
the  Christian  Church.  When  they  are  charged  with  their  duty  in  relation  to  the 
gospel  these  are  the  king's  houses  in  which  they  vainly  flee  for  refuge.  (T. 
McEwan.) 

Vers.  14.  Then  shall  there  enlargement  and  deliverance  axise  to  the  Jews  from 
another  place. — Female  deliverers  in  Israel ; — In  former  ages  women,  as  Deborah 
and  Jael,  had  been  made  the  instruments  of  saving  Israel.  Esther  might  have  a, 
place  among  those  whose  memories,  after  so  many  generations,  were  still  fragrant 
among  their  countrymen.  {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Enlargement  and  deliverance : — 
Enlargement  and  deliverance  will  arise  to  the  Jews,  to  the  Israel  of  God,  under  the 
gospel  as  well  as  under  the  law.  Amidst  all  the  distresses  of  the  Church,  we  may  rest 
assured  that  she  cannot  perish.  AU,  therefore,  who  perform  eminent  services  to  the 
Church  ought  humbly  to  thank  the  Lord  for  choosing  to  employ  them  rather  than 
others  ;  for  He  is  never  at  a  loss  for  servants  to  do  His  work.    (G.  Lawson.)        And 

who  knoweth  whether  thou  art  come  to  the  kingdom  for  such  a  time  as  this  7 

The  use  of  talents  to  be  accounted  for  : — A  man  who  knows  a  particular  remedy  for  a 
certain  disease,  of  which  others  are  ignorant,  would  be  chargeable  with  the  fatal 
consequences  that  may  arise  from  the  general  ignorance  if  he  locks  up  his  knowledge 
within  his  own  breast.  If  Providence  furnish  us  with  talents  which  are  not  granted 
to  others,  we  must  account  for  our  use  of  them.  If  we  have  opportunities  of  doing 
much  good  which  others  have  not,  and  make  no  use  of  them,  we  make  ourselves 
guilty  of  a  crime  which  can  be  charged  upon  none  but  ourselves.  (Ibid.)  Services 
iuitable  to  our  situation  required  by  God : — If  God  has  done  remarkable  things  for 
us,  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  He  expects  some  services  from  us  suited  to  the 
situation  in  which  He  has  placed  us,  and  to  the  means  of  service  with  which  He  has 

37 


/^  .    -''%.<■ 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it. 

furnished  us.  We  ought,  therefore,  when  we  consider  what  God  hath  done  for  us, 
to  consider  at  the  same  time  what  He  requires  from  us.  If  our  circumstances  are 
peculiar  it  is  likely  that  some  peculiar  services  are  required.  (Ibid.)  The  time 
for  usefulness  : — Our  times  are  in  the  Lord's  hands.  He  fixes  the  bounds  of  our 
habitations  and  arranges  our  conditions  according  to  His  own  will.  His  servants 
have  a  special  earthly  calling  wherein  they  are  called,  the  duties  of  which  they  are 
individually  to  fulfil.  He  has  particular  relative  objects  to  secure  in  the  exaltation 
of  those  whom  He  loves.  And  when  any  of  His  servants  are  raised  to  influence,  or 
wealth,  or  power,  it  is  that  He  may  make  them  effective  instruments  of  His  power 
for  blessing  to  others.  There  is,  therefore,  a  special  propriety  of  time  at  which 
His  gifts  of  power  and  influence  are  bestowed  upon  particular  men.  If  one  is  made 
rich,  it  is  because  there  are  many  poor  waiting  to  be  enriched  by  him,  and  he  is  to 
have  the  greater  blessing  of  imparting,  giving  to  his  fellow-men.  There  is  a  par- 
ticular reason,  could  we  know  it,  for  which  we  are  "  come  to  the  kingdom  for  such 
a  time."  We  should  study  our  duty  in  the  circumstances  of  its  time.  Every 
virtue  and  trait  of  holiness  in  her  character  shines  with  increasing  brightness  and 
beauty  as  Esther  goes  forward  in  her  appointed  dispensation.  Let  us  consider  the 
circumstances  of  the  time.  1.  It  was  a  time  of  great  trial  for  the  people  of  Israel. 
2.  The  time  tested  the  sincerity  of  Esther's  affection  for  Mordecai,  and  brought 
that  into  immediate  demonstration,  3.  The  time  also  tried  the  sincerity  of  Esther's 
affection  for  her  nation.  The  truly  pious  heart  will  cherish  an  universal  love.  The 
wants  and  sorrows  of  all  mankind  are  the  subjects  of  its  sympathy  and  its  concern. 
But  true  religion  especially  exalts  and  enlarges  domestic  love,  and  love  for  our 
country  and  nation.  The  more  truly  the  heart  is  engaged  for  God  the  more 
earnestly  will  it  feel  the  sorrows  and  needs  of  those  who  are  near  to  us.  Have  we 
wealth  ?  We  have  those  connected  with  us  who  are  poor  and  suffering.  Have  we 
station  or  knowledge?  It  is  no  Christian  heart  which  has  no  fellowship  in  suffering 
and  no  tenderness  for  woe.  Yet  we  sadly  see  a  hardness  of  heart  often  attendant 
on  exalted  conditions.  Men  seem  to  feel  that  they  have  been  elevated  by  their  own 
efforts,  and  that  inability  to  do  the  same  in  others  is  in  some  degree  a  crime  which 
ought  to  be  punished  by  suffering.  They  invent  every  possible  excuse  for  with- 
iolding  their  demanded  aid.  4.  The  time  displayed  her  entire  disinterestedness  of 
spirit,  and  her  trust  in  God.  She  resolved  to  put  the  request  of  Mordecai  into 
immediate  operation.  Mere  self-indulgence  would  have  delighted  in  her  own  state 
of  luxury  and  enjoyment,  and  have  shut  her  ears  and  her  heart  against  the  cries 
and  woes  of  her  people.  To  preserve  this  people  she  must  hazard  her  own  life. 
JBeautiful  is  this  illustration  of  a  disinterested  and  devoted  spirit.  I  am  content  to 
perish  to  gain  the  great  end  of  blessing  to  others  which  I  have  before  me.  Such 
i^as  the  love  of  our  Divine  Redeemer  for  us.  "  For  the  joy  that  was  set  before  Him 
He  endured  the  Cross  and  despised  the  shame."  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  A  human 
voice  speaks  Divine  lessons  for  human  lives  : — What  are  the  Divine  lessons  which 
this  human  voice  speaks,  not  only  to  Esther,  but  to  every  true  soul.     I.  That  great 

ADVANTAGES    ABE    CONFERRED   FOB    A    DiVINE    PURPOSE.       TalcUtS,   positiou,    influence, 

wealth.     II.  That  God  requires  that   such  advantages  should  be  faithfully 

USED  FOB  THE  PROMOTION  OF  HiS  PURPOSES.  III.  ThaT  SUCH  DiVINE  PURPOSES 
CANNOT     BE    FRUSTRATED.        IV.     ThOSE    WHO   FRUSTRATE    DiVINE    PURPOSES    SHALL    BE 

INJURED,  V.  Learn  that  a  faithful  discharge  of  dutt  must  bbino  rich 
RESULTS.      {W.    Burrows,    B.A.)  Esther's    exaltation;    or   who    knoxveth : — I 

shall  lay  out  my  sermon  under  four  words.  I.  Hearken!  1,  To  a  question. 
Brother,  will  you  separate  your  interests  from  those  of  your  people  and  your 
God  ?  Do  you  mean  to  say,  "  I  shall  look  to  my  own  salvation,  but  I  cannot 
be  supposed  to  take  an  interest  in  saving  others  "  ?  In  such  a  spirit  as  that  I  do 
not  say  you  will  be  lost,  but  I  say  you  are  lost  already.  It  is  as  needful  that  you 
be  saved  from  selfishness  as  from  any  other  vice,  2.  To  a  second  question :  If 
you  could  separate  your  interests  from  those  of  the  cause  of  God,  would  you 
thereby  secure  them  ?  3,  Eemember,  for  your  humiliation,  that  God  can  do  without 
you,  4.  As  God  can  do  without  us,  it  may  be  He  will  do  without  us.  6.  How  will 
you  bear  the  disgrace,  if  ever  it  come  upon  you,  of  having  suffered  your  golden 
opportunities  to  be  despised  ?  11.  Consider— 1.  To  what  some  of  you  have  been 
advanced.  2.  Why  the  Lord  has  brought  you  where  you  are.  3.  At  what  a  time 
it  is  that  you  have  been  thus  advanced.  4.  Under  what  special  circumstances  you 
have  come  where  you  are.  5.  With  what  singular  personal  adaptations  you  are 
endowed  for  the  work  to  which  God  has  called  you.  III.  Aspire.  "  Who 
kno.voth,"  &o.    When  Louis  Napoleon  was  shut  up  in  the  fortress  of  Ham,  and 


CHAP.  IV.]  ESTHER.  65 

everybody  ridiculed  his  foolish  attempts  upon  France,  yet  he  said  to  himself, 
"  Who  knows  ?  I  am  the  nephew  of  my  uncle,  and  may  yet  sit  upon  the  imperial 
throne,"  and  he  did  so  before  many  years  had  passed.  I  have  no  desire  to  make 
any  man  ambitious  after  the  poor  thrones,  &c.,  of  earth,  but  I  would  fain 
make  you  all  ardently  ambitious  to  honour  God  and  bless  men.  IV.  Con- 
fide. 1.  If  thou  art  come  to  the  kingdom  for  such  a  time  as  this,  be  con- 
fident that  thou  art  safe.  2.  If  God  has  a  purpose  to  serve  by  a  man,  that 
man  will  live  out  his  day  and  accomplish  the  Divine  design.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  duty  of  the  hour  (to  an  agricultural  college) : — This  exempliiies  a  truth  of 
universal  application  and  of  particular  pertinency.  The  idea  is  that  the  general 
welfare  is  best  promoted  by  the  advancement  of  the  individual,  while  the  advance- 
ment of  the  individual  can  be  maintained  only  by  his  loyal  devotion  to  the  public 
weal.  We  have  discovered  in  these  latter  days  that  relations  are  of  more  moment 
than  things.  Charcoal,  sulphur,  nitre  are  things  of  some  potency,  in  themselves 
considered ;  but  they  must  be  brought  into  the  proper  relations,  the  one  to  the 
other,  before  the  might  of  gunpowder  shakes  the  earth.  I  observe — 1.  That  the 
college  graduate  of  to-day,  who  has  completed  a  four  years'  course  of  liberal 
training  in  a  well-equipped  and  thoroughly-manned  institution  of  learning  comes 
into  a  kingdom.  2.  The  college  graduate  of  to-day  comes  into  his  kingdom  at  a 
time  of  marvellous  and  portentous  significance.  3.  Our  time,  with  its  sudden 
transitions,  is  fraught  with  danger  to  all  classes  of  society,  but  to  none  more  than 
to  those  who  till  the  soil.  (C.  S.  Walker,  Ph.D.)  The  principles  of  Divine 
providence: — I.  That  the  pkovidence  of  God  is  conceened  about  the  highest 
GOOD  or  MAN.  This  is  shown — 1.  In  the  advent  of  Christ  for  the  world's  salvation. 
2.  The  spread  of  the  gospel  and  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles.  3.  The  restoration 
of  peace  between  nations  and  the  final  destruction  of  slavery.     II.  The  highest 

GOOD     OF     MAN     IS     SECURED    INDEPENDENTLY     OF     MAN's     INDIVIDUAL     CONDUCT.       The 

stream  of  human  agency  is  like  a  river,  ever  flowing  and  ever  changing.  One  drop 
in  the  stream  cannot  say,  "  When  I  am  gone  the  channel  will  be  dry."  No  sooner 
is  room  made  than  another  follows,  and  the  channel  is  ever  full.  So  it  is  in  the 
history  of  man.     God's  providence  will  secure  workers.     III.  That  men  aee  placed 

BY  God   in    such    positions    that   they  may  secure   fob    themselves    the    HONOUR  OF 

helping  God  in  His  providential  work.  IV.  In  not  making  use  of  our  provi- 
dential position  we  expose  ourselves  to  fearful  evils,     v.  That  in  making  use 

OF  OUB  providential  POSITIONS,  WE  SHALL  REQUIRE  SPECIAL  QUALIFICATIONS,  AND 
SHALL   HAVE    THE    SYMPATHY  AND    CO-OPERATION    OF   A   HOLY  UNIVERSE,  AS    WELL  AS    THE 

COMMENDATION  AND  BLESSING  OF  GoD.  Noticc — 1.  That  in  doiug  our  duty  we  show 
the  possession  of  the  highest  and  noblest  moral  qualities.  (1)  Duty  done  under 
the  pressure  of  difficulty  is  done  by  faith  in  God,  and  is  therefore  a  proof  of  piety. 
(2)  Duty  done  in  difficulty  requires  a  self-sacrificing  disposition.  (3)  Duty  done 
amid  difficulties  requires  consummate  skill.  (4)  In  doing  duty  no  time  should  be  lost. 
2.  That  in  doing  our  duty  we  have  the  help  of  a  holy  universe  (chap.  vi.  1).  {Evan 
Lewis. )  The  preservation  of  the  Jews  an  illustration  of  the  Divine  government : — 
The  text  presents  for  our  consideration — I.  A  firm  conviction  of  an  overruling 
Providence.     II.  The  recognition   of  human  instbumentalities  in  the  Divine 

OOVEBNMENT.  III.  ThE  PBINCIPLE  OF  SELF-SACBIFICE  WHICH  ENABLES  MEN  TO  BE 
ACCEPTABLE    INSTRUMENTS    IN    THE    DiVINE    GOVERNMENT.        (Prof.    E.   J.    Wolf,    D.D.) 

Position  and  responsibility  : — Our  Lord's  great  principle,  "  Unto  whom  much  is 
given  of  him  shall  much  be  required,"  is  clear  as  a  mathematical  axiom  when  we 
look  at  it  in  the  abstract ;  but  nothing  is  harder  than  for  people  to  apply  it  to  their 
own  cases.  If  it  were  freely  admitted,  the  ambition  that  grasps  at  the  first  places 
would  be  shamed  into  silence.  If  it  were  generally  acted  on,  the  wide  social  cleft 
between  the  fortunate  and  the  miserable  would  be  speedily  bridged  over.  The  total 
ignoring  of  this  tremendous  principle  by  the  great  majority  of  those  who  enjoy  the 
privileged  positions  in  society  is  doubtless  one  of  the  chief  causes  of  the  ominous 
unrest  that  is  growing  more  and  more  disturbing  in  the  less  favoured  ranks  of  life. 
If  this  supercilious  contempt  for  an  imperative  duty  continues,  what  can  be  the  end 
but  an  awful  retribution  ?  Was  it  not  the  wilful  blindness  of  the  dancers  in  the 
Tuileries  to  the  misery  of  the  serfs  in  the  fields  that  caused  revolutionary  France 
to  run  red  with  blood  ?  {W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.)  God's  purpose  and  man's  oppor- 
tunity : — I  draw  from  the  text  the  following  general  truths  :  I.  That  running 

THROUGH  THE  PROVIDENCE    OF   THIS   WORLD    THERE    IS  A  GRACIOUS    DiVINB    PURPOSE    FOB 

ITS  ULTIMATE  SALVATION.  1.  Moidccai  believed  in  the  indestructibility  of  the  Jews. 
This  was  with  him  evidently  a  religious  faith.     This  faith  must  have  been  founded 


C6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

on  one  or  more  of  the  promises  of  God.  2.  This  purpose  of  the  preservation  of  the 
Jews  is  but  a  branch  and  a  sign  of  another  and  grander  purpose — a  purpose  to 
gather  and  save  the  whole  world.  This  types  itself  in  the  kingly  history ;  gleams 
in  the  prophet's  vison  ;  breathes  in  the  holy  psalm  ;  speaks  out  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles ;  runs  through  all  the  epistles,  and  sighs  up  to  heaven  in  that  last 
apocalyptic  cry,  "  Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus."    II.  That  rich  and  r.uie  oppob- 

TUNITIES  OCCUB  IN  THE  PBOGRESS  OF  THINGS,  BY  WHICH  BELIEVING  MEN  ARE  ALLOV^'ED 
TO  COME  EFFECTUALLY  "  TO    THE    HELP  OF  THE  LoRD  AGAINST  THE  MIGHTY."       We  mUSt 

spread  the  gospel  or  lose  it.  Our  moral  opportunities,  our  seasonable  times  for 
action,  are  very  precious,  are  very  brief,  and  when  they  are  gone  they  cannot  be 
renewed.  So  it  is  at  times  with  Churches,  with  societies,  and  with  nations. 
in.  That  the  neglect  of  such  providential  calls  has  a  tendency  to  brinq 
DESTRUCTION.  Mordccal  probably  had  in  view  a  general  principle  of  retribution, 
acting  at  all  times,  but  sure  to  act  swiftly  and  terribly  in  a  case  like  this.  This 
principle  has  its  fullest  application  to  the  ungodly.  The  way,  the  hope,  the 
expectation,  the  works,  the  memory,  and  saddest  of  all,  the  soul  of  the  wicked  shall 
perish.  Let  a  Christian  man  neglect  opportunities  and  hold  truth  in  unrighteous- 
ness, and  what  will  happen  to  him  ?  He  perishes  as  to  the  real  power  of  his  life. 
It  is  the  same  with  Churches,  &c.  No  Church,  &c.,  can  live  except  as  they  continue 
to  be  in  harmony  with  the  purpose  and  the  providence  of  God.  Where  are  the 
seven  Churches  in  Asia?  IV.  That  obedience  will  bbing  elevation  and  blessing. 
(A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)       Inactivity  in  the  cause  of  Christ  condemned  : — Eeflect — I.  That 

THE  MAN  WHO  USED  THESE  WORDS  WAS  EVIDENTLY  WELL  AW  ABE  THAT  THE  CAUSE  OF  GoD 

WAS  NOT  DEPENDENT  ON  THE  AIDS  OF  MEN.  This  is  evident  if  wc  considcr — 1.  The 
meanness  of  the  instruments  and  the  greatness  of  the  work  to  be  done.  2.  How 
absolute  are  the  promises  of  God,  which  show  His  determination  to  bless  His 
people.  3.  The  power  of  God.  These  considerations  ought  to  teach  the  instruments 
to  be  humble,  and  they  ought  also  to  confirm  the  faith  of  the  people  of  God. 
n.  That  His  providence  does  baise  up  suitable  instruments  to  cabby  fobward 
His  work.  III.  That  it  is  the  duty  of  those  instruments  to  give  themselves  up 
TO  the  work.  We  are  not  only  to  study  the  book  of  God  to  know  what  is  our  duty 
in  general,  but  also  the  book  of  providence  to  know  what  is  the  particular  duty  He 
designs  us  to  do.  We  ought  to  study — 1.  Our  particular  talent.  2.  Our  sphere. 
3.  Our  circumstances.  4.  The  times.  IV.  That  an  awful  doom  bests  on  those 
WHO  listen  not  to  the  call  of  providence.  1.  We  shall  lose  the  satisfaction  of 
doing  good.  2.  We  shall  not  prosper.  (1)  Temporally.  (2)  Spiritually.  Those 
who  are  not  actively  employed  in  the  service  of  Christ  feel  most  of  the  bitterness 
arising  from  doubts  as  to  their  actual  condition  and  fears  as  to  their  spiritual  state. 
Listlessness  in  the  cause  of  Christ  will  be  a  cause  of  gloom  on  a  dying  bed. 
3.  There  is  an  intimate  connection  between  the  degrees  of  glory  in  heaven  and  the 
exercises  of  activity  here.  (W.  H.  Cooper.)  Providence  and  opportunity: — 
God's  providential  purpose ;  man's  present  opportunity  ;  that  is  how  I  read  th© 
lesson  of  this  marvellous  history.  A  purpose  clearly  written  on  the  face  of  events 
and  to  be  readily  deciphered  from  their  grouping.  Moses  at  the  Red  Sea  heard  a 
voice  telling  him  to  stretch  his  rod  over  the  sea,  that  a  way  might  be  made  for 
the  ransomed  to  pass  over.  Now  we  have  no  voice ;  but  circumstances  gather 
about  us,  the  rod  is  thrust  into  our  hand,  and  we  miss  our  deliverance  if  we  do 
not  see  that  we  must  wave  the  rod.  We  are  not  in  intellectual  and  religious 
infancy.  We  ought  to  be  able  to  discover  without  any  warning  voice  what  God's 
purpose  is,  and  what  our  opportunity  is  worth.  I.  As  to  life  itself,  human 
existence  ;  entry  upon  it  is  a  coming  to  a  kingdom.  Living  now,  we  are 
conditioned  by  the  time  and  circumstances  of  to-day.  Our  days  have  fallen  on  a 
time  different  from  all  that  have  gone  before,  unique  in  this  particular,  if  in 
nothing  else — the  power  of  public  opinion.  In  former  days  but  one  man  here  and 
there  seemed  to  have  a  kingdom  to  enter  upon,  a  few  men  swayed  the  nations,  a 
few  men  seemed  to  be  inspired  to  deeds  which  raised  them  into  leaders  of  the 
people.  But  now  the  rulers  in  name  are  the  ruled  in  fact.  The  government  is 
governed  and  the  people  control  everything.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  live  now. 
Literature  and  science  pour  their  wealth  out  before  us.  By  these  things  we  have 
the  chance  of  being  better  men  in  some  directions  of  thought  and  of  exerting  a 
mightier  influence  in  the  world  than  our  fathers  could  exert.  Some  men  might 
jus't  as  well  have  lived  hundreds  of  years  ago,  for  any  appreciation  they  -eem  to 
have  of  the  privileges  and  demands  of  the  time.  No  time  is  like  another  la  all  its 
details.     We  have  to  make  it  what  it  shall  be.    By  the  impulse  of  an  earnest  life, 


CHAP.  IT.]  ESTHER.  67 

by  the  influence  of  holy  character,  by  brief  words  spoken  and  little  deeds  done 
according  to  our  opportunity,  must  we  do  something  to  mould  that  public  opinion 
which  is  omnipotent.  II.  As  Christians  we  have  come  to  a  kingdom.  Christianity 
has  always  presented  two  aspects,  the  offensive  and  the  defensive.  In  the  old  days 
of  national  warfare,  when  ships  were  made  of  wood,  rough-wrought  cannon  and 
shot  were  sufficient  means  of  attack.  But  with  the  iron-plating  has  necessarily 
come  improvement  in  the  means  of  destruction.  As  the  ship  becomes  more 
exposed  to  the  danger  of  improved  appliances  she  must  be  more  scientifically 
defended.  We  sometimes  smile  as  we  see  the  way  in  which  truth  used  to  be 
asserted  and  defended.  We  now  see  that  truth  is  its  own  best  defence.  (J.  Jones.) 
The  day  we  live  in  : — Esther  had  her  God-appointed  work.  You  and  I  have  ours. 
I.  In  order  to  meet  the  special  demand  of  this  age  you  need  to  be  an 
unmistakable,  aggressive  Christian.  Of  half-and-half  Christians  we  do  not 
want  any  more.  A  great  deal  of  the  piety  of  the  day  is  too  exclusive.  It  hides 
itself.  It  needs  more  fresh  air,  more  outdoor  exercise.  There  are  many  Christians 
who  are  giving  their  entire  life  to  self-examination.  They  are  feeling  their  pulses 
to  see  what  is  the  condition  of  their  spiritual  health.  How  long  would  a  man  have 
robust  physical  health  if  he  kept  all  the  day  feeling  his  pulse  instead  of  going  out 
into  active,  earnest,  every-day  work  ?  I  was  once  amid  the  wonderful,  bewitching 
cactus  growths  of  North  Carolina.  I  never  was  more  bewildered  with  the  beauty  of 
flowers,  and  yet  when  I  would  take  up  one  of  these  cactuses  and  pull  the  leaves 
apart  the  beauty  was  all  gone.  You  could  hardly  tell  that  it  had  ever  been  a  flower. 
And  there  are  a  great  many  Christian  people  in  this  day  just  pulling  apart  their 
Christian  experiences  to  see  what  there  is  in  them,  and  there  is  nothing  left  in 
them.  This  style  of  self-examination  is  a  damage  instead  of  an  advantage  to  their 
Christian  character.  I  remember  when  I  was  a  boy  I  used  to  have  a  small  piece  in 
the  garden  that  I  called  my  own,  and  I  planted  corn  there,  and  every  few  days  I 
would  pull  it  up  to  see  how  fast  it  was  growing.  Now,  there  are  a  great  many 
Christian  people  in  this  day  whose  self-examination  merely  amounts  to  the  pulling 
up  of  that  which  they  only  yesterday  or  the  day  before  planted.  If  you  want  to 
have  a  stalwart  Christian  character,  plant  it  right  out  of  doors  in  the  great  field  of 
Christian  usefulness.  The  century  plant  is  wonderfully  suggestive  and  wonderfully 
beautiful,  but  I  never  look  at  it  without  thinking  of  its  parsimony.  It  lets  whole 
generations  go  by  before  it  puts  forth  one  blossom ;  so  I  have  really  more 
admiration  when  I  see  the  dewy  tears  in  the  blue  eyes  of  the  violets,  for  they 
come  every  spring.  Time  is  going  by  so  rapidly  that  we  cannot  afford  to  be 
idle.  A  recent  statistician  says  that  human  life  now  has  an  average  of  only 
thirty-two  years.  From  these  thirty-two  years  you  must  subtract  all  the  time  you 
take  for  sleep,  and  the  taking  of  food,  and  recreation ;  that  will  leave  you  about 
sixteen  years.  From  those  sixteen  years  you  must  subtract  all  the  time  that  you 
are  necessarily  engaged  in  the  earning  of  a  livelihood ;  that  will  leave  you  about 
eight  years.  From  those  eight  years  you  must  take  all  the  days,  and  weeks,  and 
months — all  the  length  of  time  that  is  passed  in  sickness  ;  leaving  you  about  one 
year  in  which  to  work  for  God.  11.  To  meet  the  duties  this  age  demands  of  you, 
you  must,  on  the  one  hand,  avoid  reckless  iconoclasm,  and  on  the  other  hand, 
not  stick  too  much  to  things  because  thet  are  old.  Do  not  take  hold  of  a  thing 
merely  because  it  is  new.  Do  not  adhere  to  anything  merely  because  it  is  old. 
There  is  not  a  single  enterprise  of  the  Church  or  the  world  but  has  sometime  been 
scoffed  at.  There  was  a  time  when  men  derided  even  Bible  societies,  and  when  a 
few  young  men  met  in  Massachusetts  and  organised  the  first  missionary  society 
ever  organised  in  this  country  there  went  laughter  and  ridicule  all  around  the 
Christian  Church.  They  said  the  undertaking  was  preposterous.  And  so  also  the 
work  of  Jesus  Christ  was  assailed.  People  cried  out,  "  Who  ever  heard  of  such 
theories  of  ethics  and  government  ?  Who  ever  noticed  such  a  style  of  preaching  as 
Jesus  had  ?  "  Many  have  thought  that  the  chariot  of  God's  truth  would  fall  to 
pieces  if  it  once  got  out  of  the  old  rut.  And  so  there  are  those  who  have  no 
patience  with  anything  like  improvement  in  church  architecture,  or  with  anything 
like  good,  hearty,  earnest  church  singing,  and  they  deride  any  form  of  religious 
discussion  which  goes  down  walking  among  every-day  men  rather  than  that  which 
makes  an  excursion  on  rhetorical  stilts.  Oh,  that  the  Church  of  God  would  wake 
up  to  an  adaptability  of  work  !  There  is  work  for  you  to  do,  and  for  me  to  do,  in 
order  to  this  grand  accomplishment.  Here  is  my  pulpit,  and  I  preach  in  it. 
Your  pulpit  is  the  bank.  Your  pulpit  is  the  store.  Your  pulpit  is  the  editorial 
chair.    Your  pulpit  is  the  anvil.    Your  pulpit  is  the  house  scaffolding.    Your  pulpit 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

is  the  mechanic's  shop.  III.  In  order  to  be  qualified  to  meet  your  duty  in 
this  particular  age,  \ov  want  unbounded  faith  in  the  triumph  of  the 
TEUTH  AND  THE  ovEKTHROW  OF  WICKEDNESS.  (T.  De  Witt  Talviage,  D.D.) 
Woinen'$  duty  to  the  age  (a  woman's  sermon  to  women) : — "What  is  women's 
duty  ?  It  is  to  be  gentle,  true,  devoted.  It  is  to  be  as  strong  as  it  is  in  her  to  be 
and  as  beautiful  as  possible.  It  is  to  be  a  discreet  keeper  at  home,  a  willing  per- 
former of  out-of-sight  duties,  a  helpmeet  to  man,  a  mother  in  Israel,  a  handmaid 
of  the  Lord.  It  is  a  fact  past  denial  that  women  do  exert  an  immense  influence  in 
the  world.  An  English  bishop  has  said,  "  A  nation  is  what  its  women  make  it." 
No  man  is  so  strong,  or  so  wise,  or  so  good,  that  he  can  afford  to  do  without  the 
gentle  remonstrance,  the  inspiriting  plaudits,  the  pure  and  bright  life-example  of 
the  women  of  his  family.  There  is  great  need  now  for  "  women  who  understand 
the  times  and  know  what  the  people  ought  to  do."  Eeforms  are  necessary,  and  in 
making  them  we  shall  certainly  have  to  begin  with  ourselves.  Better  women  will 
make  better  homes,  better  homes  will  make  better  society,  better  society  will  raise 
the  tone  of  public  opinion,  and  influence  those  who  frame  and  execute  our  laws. 
Let  us  learn  from  the  example  of  Queen  Esther  how  to  become  better.     I.  Let  us 

RECOGNISE   THE    FACT    THAT    AS   SHE     HAD     HER     OPPORTUNITY,    SO     HAVE     WE     OURS.       II 

we  look  around  us  we  must  see  how  God  brings  certain  persons  into  certain 
circumstances  because  they  are  most  fit  to  be  there.  One  in  a  family  converted. 
One  in  a  family  to  whom  has  been  given  the  seeing  eyes  and  the  understanding 
heart.  One  in  a  family  more  clever,  more  strong,  more  amiable  than  the  rest. 
Why  ?  That  that  one  may  fulfil  the  duties,  and  meet,  not  shirk,  the  responsibilities 
of  that  position.     II.  Let  us  learn  that  the  fact  of  a  duty  being  difficult  and 

DANGEROUS  IS  NO  EXCUSE    FOR   OUR   FAILING   TO   PERFORM   IT   HONESTLY.      III.    We   MAY 
liEABN  THE    SOURCE    OF    TRUE    STRENGTH    AND    CONFIDENCE.       IV.    We    MAY   LEARN    THAT 
HAVING  SEEN  OUR  DUTY,  AND  ABKED  God's   GUIDANCE    AND   BLESSING,  WE    SHOULD    FEAR- 
LESSLY GO  THROUGH  WITH  OUR  TASK.     Fcarlessly,  but  wisely,  according  to  the  light 
that  is  given  to  us.     Esther  fortified  her  soul  with  trust  in  God,  and  then  used  her 
own  common  sense.     Esther's  judgment  was  equal  to  her  courage.     She  knew  how 
to  "  bide  her  time."     {Marianne  Farningham.)        Public  duty  : — This  message 
sets  before  us  three  weighty  principles.    I.  That  God's  cause  is  independent  of 
OUR  efforts.     Mordecai  believed  that  the  record  of  God's  faithfulness  in  the  past 
gave  the  assurance  that  in  some  way  of  His  own  He  would  prevent  the  extinction 
of  His  people.     This  is  an  attitude  of  mind  we  should  seek  to  cultivate  in  reference 
to  the  cause  of  Christ.     This  cause  has  the  omnipotence  of  God  behind  it.     He  has 
promised  Christ  the  heathen  for  His  inheritance  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth 
for  His  possession,  and,  whoever  helps  and  whoever  hinders.  His  word  shall  not  be 
broken.     One  man  with  truth  and  the  promise  of  God  at  his  back  is  stronger  than 
an  opposing  world.     The  cause  of  Christ  has  come  through  crises  when  persecution 
has  tried  to  exterminate  it.    It  has  passed  through  periods  of  scepticism  when 
learning  and  cleverness  have  fancied  that  they  have  blown  it  away  as  an  exploded 
superstition.     Men  have  had  to  stand  up  for  it  single-handed  against  principalities 
and  powers,  but  with  it  at  their  backs  they  have  been  stronger  than  all  that  were 
against  them.     II.  That  we  are  not  independent  of  it.     We  cannot  hold  back 
from  Christ's  cause  with  impunity.     It  can  do  without  us,  but  we  cannot  do 
without  it.    If  religion  is  a  reality,  to  live  without  it  is  to  suppress  and  ultimately 
destroy  the  most  noble  part  of  our  being.    To  live  without  God  is  to  renounce  the 
profoundest  and  most  influential  experience  which  life  contains.    If  Christ  is  the 
central  figure  in  history,  and  if  the  movement  He  has  set  agoing  is  the  central 
current  of  history,  then  to  be  dissociated  with  His  aims  is  to  be  a  cipher  or  perhaps 
even  a  minus  quantity  in  the  sum  of  good.    III.    Christ's  cause  offers  the 
NOBLEST  employment   FOR  ouB    GIFTS.     It  is  a  transfiguring  moment  when   the 
thought  first  penetrates  a  man  that  the  purpose  for  which  he  has  received  his  gifts 
is  to  help  humanity  and  the  cause  of  Christ  in  the  world.    A  man  enters  upon  his 
spiritual  majority  when  he  ceases  to  be  the  most  important  object  in  the  world  to 
himself,  and  sees  outside  an  object  which  makes  him  forget  himself  and  irresistibly 
draws  him  on.    The  problem  of  the  degraded  and  disinherited  is  pressing  on  the 
attention  of  intelligent  minds  with  an  urgency  which  cannot  be  disregarded.     The 
heathen  world  is  opening  everywhere  to  the  influences  of   the  gospel.     If  you 
would  run  in  response  to  this  call,  do  not  neglect  the  preparation.    Knowledge  is 
the  armour  of  light  in  which  the  battles  of  progress  have  to  be  fought.     Life  for 
God  in  public  must  be  balanced  by  life  with  God  in  secret.     (James  Stalker,  D.D.) 
Woman'*  opportunities : — It  has  been  observed  that  with  every  great  emergency 


CHAP  IV.]  ESTHER.  69 

God  has  raised  up  a  man  equal  to  the  emergency.  As  God  called  Moses,  Joshua, 
Samuel,  Elijah,  David,  and  Daniel  for  a  special  work,  so  He  called  Alfred  the 
Great,  William  the  Conqueror,  Washington  and  Lincoln.  As  God  inspired 
Bezaleel  to  invent  cunning  works,  so  to-day  He  raises  up  such  men  as  an  Edison  to 
solve  and  use  mysterious  forces  of  nature.  Every  age  and  every  emergency  has 
had  the  men  needed  for  the  age  and  the  emergency.  The  apostles  met  the  demand 
of  their  age.  The  Church  Fathers  did  a  peculiar  work  for  which  they  were  fitted. 
Luther  came  upon  the  scene  just  when  needed.  This  is  also  true  of  all  great  men 
who  have  become  the  world's  leaders  and  saviours.  I  have  spoken  of  man,  but 
what  has  been  said  of  him  is  equally  as  true  of  woman.  She  may  not  have  been 
so  conspicuous  a  figure,  but  she  was  none  the  less  important.  When  Samuel's 
mother  consecrated  her  boy  to  the  service  of  Jehovah,  had  she  no  part  in  deter- 
mining the  destiny  of  Israel?  When  the  mother  and  grandmother  instructed 
young  Timothy  in  the  Scriptures,  did  they  have  no  part  in  the  establishment  of 
the  Apostolic  Church  ?  When  Martha  and  Mary  made  a  home  for  the  Saviour, 
a  place  where  He  could  lay  His  head,  did  they  not  perform  an  important  part  ? 
When  the  mother  of  Augustine  taught  and  conversed  with  him  about  Scriptures, 
did  she  not  do  much  toward  making  Augustinian  confessions  possible  ?  The 
mother  of  Alfred  the  Great  was  his  first  teacher  and  always  his  most  trusted 
counsellor.  The  mother  of  Henry  VII.  of  England  did  more  than  her  royal  son 
for  the  dissemination  of  learning  and  the  establishment  of  colleges.  The  rise  of 
Methodism  goes  back  beyond  John  or  Charles  Wesley  to  their  noble  mother. 
Who  familiar  with  the  life  of  Herschel  and  his  sister  can  doubt  that  much  of  his 
greatness  rests  upon  her  co-operation  and  untiring  labour  ?  The  name  of  Joan  of 
Arc  suggests  what  woman  can  do  on  the  field  of  war.  Of  every  woman  mentioned 
it  might  be  said,  "  Thou  art  come  to  the  kingdom  for  such  a  time  as  this."  The 
breadth  of  woman's  influence  is  widening.  She  is  the  strongest  social  force  of 
to-day.  Life  is  her  key-board  which  she  may  sweep  with  a  master's  touch  if  she 
will.  To  woman  all  doors  are  open.  She  may  enter  and  win  her  bread  without 
being  touched  by  snobbishness  and  caste.  The  entrance  of  woman  into  the  various 
occupations  has  had  the  tendency  to  stop  the  growing  boorishness  which  was 
manifesting  itself  in  business  circles.  It  is  slowly  but  surely  leading  men  to 
recognise  the  one  great  work  of  life  not  to  be  money  getting,  but  character  building. 
She  is  giving  a  shading  to  the  values  of  life ;  hence  we  are  beginning  to  place 
things  more  nearly  where  they  belong.  In  temperance  reform  woman  has  been, 
and  is  still,  the  leader.  Time  and  again  she  has  undergone  the  scoffs  of  rowdies 
and  the  ridicule  of  pot-house  politicians,  but  feeling  that  God  called  her  to  the 
kingdom  for  such  an  hour  as  this,  she  has  risked  popularity  and  society  influence 
in  defence  of  home  and  children.  The  most  important  work  in  all  this  widening 
field  of  woman's  activity  is  the  evangelisation  of  the  world.  It  is  of  God.  It 
touches  man's  deepest  need.  It  brings  him  the  blessings  of  a  Christian  civilisation 
and  the  assurance  of  life  eternal.  It  is  therefore  the  highest  service  woman  can 
enter  into.  There  is  nothing  that  will  yield  greater  joy  or  larger  returns.  {W.  C. 
Burns,  D.D.)  The  Church  and  the  present  crisis  : — 1  ask  you  to  observe — 
I.  That  a  crisis  has  come  of  overwhelming  importance  in  the  religious  history 
OF  the  world.  It  is  a  crisis  of  magnificent  opportunity  and  also  of  infinite 
responsibility.  It  is  a  crisis  in  which  unparalleled  success  may  be  achieved  for  the 
glory  of  God,  or  where  Churches  may  be  utterly  broken  and  destroyed  by  their 
unfaithfulness  and  disobedience.  It  is,  indeed,  the  crisis  of  history;  for  never 
have  such  opportunities  for  the  evangelisation  of  our  own  country,  or  of  the 
heathen  abroad,  been  presented  ;  never  have  difliculties  been  so  remarkably 
removed,  and  never  were  calls  for  help  so  loud  and  piercing  as  just  now.  That  I 
may  help  you  to  realise  this  truth,  let  me  recall  a  few  facts  to  your  remembrance. 
Within  the  lifetime  of  some  now  here  the  world  was  practically  closed  against  the 
extension  of  Protestant  Christianity.  Mohammedanism  sealed  itself  against  the 
truth  of  Jesus;  and  the  heathen  nations  of  the  earth  were  walled  around  by 
prejudice  or  by  prohibitory  laws.  China  and  Japan  were  hermetically  sealed 
against  the  entrance  of  Christianity.  And  now,  with  our  scientific  discoveries, 
our  mechanical  inventions,  our  great  social  movements  and  combinations,  we  are 
sweeping  along  with  a  rapidity  which  it  is  almost  bewildering  to  contemplate. 
AH  this  is  wonderful  beyond  realisation.  Never  did  the  human  race  move  so 
quickly.  Time  after  time  have  the  maps  of  the  world  been  altered  and  reformed 
in  our  day.  Now  with  a  startling  swiftness  the  moral  map  of  the  world  is  chang- 
ing, and  no  one  can  presage  what  wUl  be  the  next  great  movement  that  will 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it. 

command  the  wonder  of  mankind.  In  all  these  revolutions  and  developments  of 
the  hour,  what  institution  ought  to  be  more  concerned  than  the  Church  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  The  Church  of  to-day  is  the  arbiter  of  the  world's  future.  It 
is  called  on  to  save  idolatrous  nations  awakening  from  the  sleep  of  ages  from 
relapsing  into  the  abyss  of  scepticism.  It  is  summoned  to  sanctify  and  beautify 
the  growing  intelligence  and  wealth  of  barbarous  peoples,  by  suffusing  them  with 
the  glory  of  Christian  holiness  and  truth.  It  is  destined  to  become  the  harbinger 
and  bestower  of  liberty,  of  enfranchisement,  of  spiritual  expansion  to  classes  and 
masses  of  the  race  who  have  hitherto  groaned  in  bondage  and  shame.    II.  What 

IS  KEQUIKED  FROM  THE  ChUBCH  TO  MEET  THE  PBESSING  CRISIS.       We  have  a  Church  of 

the  times ;  we  need  a  Church  for  the  times.  The  Church  of  the  times  is  far  too 
much  formal,  aiming  at  gentility  and  fashion  ;  the  Church  for  the  times  must  be 
spiritual  and  powerful,  aiming  at  evangelistic  aggression  and  the  conversion  of  the 
world.  If  the  Church  will  seek  a  new  baptism  and  enter  on  a  new  career  of 
aggressiveness,  how  soon  the  most  glorious  prophecies  of  time  shall  be  fulfilled  it 
is  impossible  to  realise.  "  A  short  work  will  God  make  upon  the  earth."  Avery 
brief  period  sufficed  for  the  destruction  of  Sennacherib's  host  and  for  the  downfall 
of  Babylon.  It  was  a  short  time  only  that  was  required  for  the  humbling  of 
Napoleon's  pride.  And  if  the  Church  of  God,  with  her  splendour  of  learning,  her 
ripeness  of  intellect,  her  boundless  wealth,  and  her  unparalleled  vantage-ground, 
be  only  faithful  and  obedient,  and  ready  for  the  avalanche  of  opportunities  which 
now  present  themselves,  the  progress  of  the  gospel  must  be  far  more  rapid  and 
glorious  than  ever  before.  ( W.  J.  Townsend.)  Man  born  for  an  end  : — While 
we  continue  on  earth  we  are  obliged  to  a  sort  of  spiritual  speculation  ;  to  judge  as 
well  as  we  can,  but  to  remain  uncertain ;  to  take  the  most  important  steps  in  the 
dark ;  to  pursue  our  course  like  vessels  in  a  mist,  cautiously  and  fearfully,  having 
no  clear  view  of  the  coast  by  which  we  sail,  but  only  catching  here  and  there  a 
dubious  sign  of  where  we  are,  and  whither  we  are  tending.  This  acting  on 
venture  is  emphatically  taught  in  the  text.  Observe — I.  That  all  generations 
AND  individuals  ARE  CREATED  FOR  THEIR  OWN  END.  We  canuot  doubt  that  it  was 
with  a  definite  design  that  God  set  up  the  pillars  of  the  universe.  And  so  with  its 
continued  existence.  The  mighty  river  of  human  life  which  gushed  forth  in  Adam, 
flows,  we  are  sure,  to  some  goal  and  makes  to  some  issue.  God  beholds  the  vast 
tide  of  being  sweeping  on  to  a  glorious  consummation,  which  He  perceives  now, 
and  we  shall  see  hereafter,  to  have  been  the  point  to  which  the  current  tended  from 
the  beginning.  This  will  appear  from  the  continual  changes  which  take  place. 
Why  do  not  men's  habits  remain  always  the  same?  Why  does  one  generation 
abandon  the  principles  and  tastes  of  its  predecessor?  How  is  it  that  the  nine- 
teenth century  is  not  like  the  sixteenth  ?  Continual  change  intimates  that  we  are 
travelling  on  to  an  appointed  destination.  To  suppose  otherwise  would  be  to 
suppose  God  to  be  a  God,  not  of  order,  but  of  confusion.  We  sec  traces  of  this  in 
the  several  dispensations  of  religion  which  God  has  revealed.  The  law  prepared 
the  way  for  the  gospel ;  all  the  wars  and  conquests  of  Rome  brought  the  human 
family  into  a  condition  the  most  favourable  for  the  preaching  of  the  apostles. 
The  Patriarchal,  the  Levitical,  and  the  Christian  dispensations,  appear  to  follow  in 
manifest  order,  each  working  up  and  fading  into  that  which  came  next.  What  the 
world  is  now  is  a  necessary  step  to  what  the  world  is  to  be.  And  what  is  true  of 
periods  of  a  thousand  years  is  true  also  of  each  period  of  fourscore  years.  Every 
generation  of  human  kind  is  born  for  an  end.  We  are  apt  to  consider  overmuch 
individual  life,  not  the  life  of  the  universe.  We  see  unnumbered  ripples  on  the 
stream  of  time,  coming  and  going  apparently  without  cause  or  effect :  God  beholds 
in  each  ripple  an  onward  flow  ;  that  not  one  could  be  withdrawn  without  injury  to 
the  symmetry  of  the  great  whole.  There  arises  out  of  all  this  a  very  solemn 
character  attaching  to  our  tenure  of  life.  We  have  our  part  in  a  stupendous  work, 
whose  limits  we  cannot  discern.  We  have  been  launched  into  being  just  at  the 
moment  when  we  were  wanted.  Not  to  do  our  own  pleasure,  but  to  fulfil  a  part  in 
•working  out  God's  counsels.  This  is  the  solemn  vocation  of  each  generation. 
II.  Very  commonly  a  man's  life  works  dp  to,  or  hangs  upon  a  certain  critical 
MOMENT.  "  Who  knoweth  whether  thou  art  come  to  the  kingdom  for  such  a  time 
as  this  ?  "  Oh  I  they  are  words  which  may  well  sound  in  the  ears  of  the  soul,  at 
many  a  sick-bed,  at  many  an  event  of  inferior  importance  in  our  earthly 
career.  How  did  Abraham  live  seventy  years  in  his  father's  house  an  ordinary 
man,  till  the  mysterious  moment  when  the  voice  said  to  him,  "  Come  out  from  thy 
kindred  "  ?  and  on  what  he  did  at  that  strange  bidding  hung  not  only  his,  but  the 


CHAP.  IT.]  ESTHER.  61 

■world's  history  1  How  did  all  David's  life  turn  upon  the  incident,  that  at  the 
moment  when  he  chanced  to  visit  his  brethren  in  the  camp,  at  that 
moment  Goliath  came  out  with  his  defiance  of  the  living  God !  And  so 
with  ourselves :  there  are  in  almost  every  man's  life  turning-points  upon  which 
all  hangs.  Who  cannot  look  back  and  discern  times  and  seasons  when,  if  he 
h&d  acted  otherwise,  his  whole  after-life  would  have  been  altered  ?  And  thus 
in  religion — whether  a  man  be  lost  or  saved  will  frequently  depend  upon  a 
step  taken  at  a  particular  crisis ;  all  subsequent  steps  grow  out  of  that  step. 
True  that  every  hour  of  our  lives  is  an  hour  when  good  and  evil  are  set  before 
■us.  There  are  strong  temptations  occurring  at  intervals,  which,  well  got  over, 
leave  a  man's  heart  for  a  long  time  at  liberty ;  which,  if  not  resisted,  lead 
from  deceit  to  deceit — from  sin  to  sin — until  there  is  no  getting  the  feet 
out  of  the  net.  "  Who  knoweth  whether  thou  art  come  to  the  kingdom  for 
such  a  time  as  this  ?  "  Sometimes  a  man's  whole  life  may  be  traced  afterwards 
to  have  led  up  to  one  such  moment.  His  education,  his  tastes,  his  companionships 
may  all  be  discerned  to  have  been  the  instrumentality  of  drawing  him  into  the 
'wilderness  for  his  one  great  conflict  with  the  adversary.  [J.  B.  Woodford,  M.A.) 
Every  one  has  his  peculiar  work  : — The  thought  to  a  devout  man  is  always  supreme 
— thou  art  come  here  for  such  a  time — for  such  a  purpose.  Thy  steps  are  ordered 
•of  the  Lord.  Thy  talents,  thy  character,  thy  place  in  society  have  all  been  shaped 
and  settled,  with  a  special  adaptation  to  the  Divine  purpose.  "  Nothing  walks  with 
aimless  feet."  As  in  the  human  body  every  function,  so  in  the  Divine  government 
•every  Christian  is  placed  to  do  a  work  which  none  else  can  do,  and  his  Lord's  eye 
is  ever  on  him.  While  this  is  his  victory  over  every  base  fear,  and  discouraging 
thought,  his  faith,  his  confidence  that  God  has  called  him  to  his  proper  work,  will  i 
rsustain  him  in  it.  (Homilist.)  Emergency : — Let  us  learn  from  the  appeal  of^ 
Mordecai  to  Esther  that  opportunity  is  the  test  of  character.  "Who  knoweth,"  he  j 
-said,  "  whether  thou  art  come  to  the  kingdom  for  such  a  time  as  this  ?  "  It  was  ' 
the  tidal  time  of  her  life,  the  great  opportunity  of  her  existence,  and  the  question  ; 
■was  whether  she  would  rise  to  the  occasion  and  make  it  subservient  to  her  greatness  / 
■or  whether  it  would  sweep  her  away  with  it  as  weak,  irresolute,  and  unequal  to  the  ' 
emergency.  Happily  she  stood  the  test,  and  by  her  courageous  self-devotion  proved 
that  she  was  worthy  of  the  affection  with  which  her  foster-father  regarded  her. 
Character  is  revealed  only  by  being  tested,  and  that  test  often  comes  in  the  shape 
of  sudden  elevation.  The  common  idea,  I  know,  is  that  character  is  tested  only  by 
affliction  ;  but  I  am  not  sure  if  prosperity  be  not  a  more  searching  acid  than 
4idversity.  Now,  this  is  a  truth  which  ought  never  to  be  lost  sight  of  by  any  one 
among  us.  What  we  shall  do  in  a  crisis  depends  upon  what  we  have  been  doing 
all  along  in  the  ordinary  routine  of  our  lives,  when  no  such  emergency  was  on  us. 
We  cannot  cut  ourselves  off  from  the  past.  There  is  a  continuity  in  our  lives,  such 
■ihat  the  habits  which  we  have  formed  in  the  days  that  are  gone  do  largely  condition 
for  us  our  resources  in  the  present.  Every  day  we  live  we  are  either  adding  to  that 
■constant  element  in  us  which  constitutes  our  truest  selves,  and  so  increasing  that 
reserve  force  on  which  in  times  of  emergency  we  can  draw  with  advantage,  or  we 
are  expending  with  imprudent  prodigality  our  spiritual  capital,  and  living  morally 
beyond  our  means,  so  that  when  a  crisis  comes  we  cannot  stand  it,  and  must 
inevitably  go  down.  The  careful  man  who  husbands  his  earnings  and  stores  them 
in  some  safe  bank  is  able,  when  a  time  of  adversity  comes  upon  him,  to  tide  over 
the  diificulty  by  breaking  in  upon  the  surplus  which  he  has  accumulated.  We  all 
see  and  admit  that  in  the  case  of  deposits  that  are  made  outside  of  ourselves,  and 
which  are  not  us  so  much  as  they  are  ours.  But  we  too  frequently  fail  to  take  note 
of  it  in  respect  to  the  character  deposits  or  drafts  which  we  are  constantly  making 
on  or  from  ourselves — meaning,  thereby,  our  souls.  If,  as  each  morning  dawns, 
we  meet  every  duty  as  it  calls  us,  or  face  every  temptation  as  it  attacks  us,  as  a 
duty  to  be  performed,  or  a  temptation  to  be  resisted  out  of  regard  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
■Christ,  we  shall  thereby  add  to  our  store  of  strength  for  the  confronting  of  what 
may  yet  be  before  us ;  but  if  we  go  through  our  lives  seeking  only  our  own  ease  or 
the  gratification  of  our  appetites,  or  the  indulgence  of  some  evil  ambition,  we  are, 
in  all  that,  only  weakening  ourselves,  and  making  ourselves  so  much  the  less  to  be 
relied  upon  when  we  come  into  our  kingdom,  and  have  to  face  a  time  like  that 
which  Esther  was  here  required  to  meet.  Travellers  tell  us  of  a  tree  in  tropical 
countries,  the  inner  parts  of  which  are  sometimes  eaten  out  by  ants,  while  the  bark 
and  leaves  remain  apparently  as  fresh  as  ever,  and  it  is  not  till  the  tornado  comes 
And  sweeps  it  down  that  its  weakness  is  discovered.     But  the  storm  did  not  make 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  rr. 

the  tree  weak :  it  only  revealed  how  weak  it  really  was  ;  and  its  feebleness  was  the 
result  of  the  gnawings  of  innumerable  insects  through  a  long  course  of  years.  In 
like  manner,  if  we  let  our  characters  be  honeycombed  by  neglect  of  common  duty, 
or  by  daily  indulgence  in  secret  sin,  or  by  habitual  yielding  to  some  temptation,  we 
cannot  expect  anything  else  than  failure  when  the  testing  hour  shall  come.  What 
an  importance  thus  attaches  to  what  I  may  call  the  commonplace  of  life  !  We  are' 
apt,  when  we  read  such  a  history  as  that  before  us,  to  exclaim,  "  How  tremendously 
important  these  grand  outstanding  opportunities  of  doing  some  great  service  are  1 " 
And  no  doubt  they  are  all  that  we  can  say  they  are.  But  then  we  forget  that  the'' 
bearing  in  these  of  the  individuals  to  whom  they  have  been  given  will  depend  on 
the  characters  which  they  have  been  forming  and  strengthening  in  the  ordinary 
routine  life  of  every  day  before  they  came  into  their  kingdom.  It  is  out  of  the 
commonplace,  well  and  faithfully  done,  that  the  heroic  is  born  ;  and  the  splendid 
devotion  of  Esther  to  the  welfare  of  her  people  would  never  have  been  heard  of  had 
she  not  meekly  learned  and  diligently  practised  the  lessons  of  her  girlhood  which 
Mordecai  taught  her  in  his  pious  home.  The  prize-taker  at  the  end  of  the  year  i» 
the  daily  plodder  all  through  it.  The  gaining  of  his  diploma  by  a  student  depends, 
no  doubt,  on  the  maimer  in  which  he  passes  his  final  examination.  That  is  for 
him  the  equivalent  of  this  occasion  in  the  life  of  Esther ;  but  then  the  proficiency 
which  at  that  time  he  manifests  does  itself  depend  on  the  steady,  constant  perse- 
verance which  he  has  maintained  in  his  class  work  from  hour  to  hour  throughout 
his  course.  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Junctures: — Nor  does  this  prophetic  utter- 
ance of  Mordecai  apply  simply  to  our  position  and  responsibility  as  a  nation,  but 
also  to  our  circumstances  and  obligations  as  individuals.  When  a  ship  is  moving 
in  a  ceiiain  course,  and  there  is  descried  a  wrecked  crew  and  passengers  tossed  in 
their  little  boat,  or  imprisoned  on  some  lonely  island,  the  captain  might  well 
consider  whether  he  has  not  been  brought  into  the  course  which  he  has  taken  for 
"  such  a  time  " — such  an  occasion  of  humanity  and  benevolent  action  as  that — and 
would  be  censured  if  he  did  not  avail  himself  of  it  for  the  rescue  of  the  perishing. 
In  every  life  there  are  junctures  when  the  same  reflection  should  have  a  place  in 
our  minds.  It  may  be  an  orphan  family  cast  in  the  way  of  a  wealthy  relative  whom 
he  has  the  opportunity  of  taking  under  his  protection  and  guardianship,  or  an 
infidel  assault  on  the  vital  doctrines  of  Christianity,  when  just  such  talents  and 
faith  as  we  may  possess  may  be  what  is  needful  to  repel  it,  or  an  injury  being 
done  to  a  neighbour  when,  from  our  position  and  influence,  interference  on  our 
part  may  be  all  that  is  called  for  to  prevent  it.  In  a  thousand  different  ways  may 
we  have  to  consider  whether  God  has  not  so  placed  us  in  providence  as  to  be 
specially  qualified  and  circumstanced  for  the  accomplishment  of  particular 
works  of  faith  and  labours  of  love.  (T.  McEioan.)  Our  opportunity: — As 
I  read  Captain  Mahan's  masterly  and  noble  "  Life  of  Nelson "  the  other  day 
with  Esther  in  my  mind,  I  could  not  but  mark  with  my  pencil  such  things  as 
these  in  that  great  sea-captain  who  had  such  a  hand  in  setting  England  up  on 
her  high  opportunity.  "  Opportunity,"  says  the  excellent  biographer,  "  flitted  by, 
but  Nelson  was  always  ready  and  grasped  it."  Again,  and  again,  and  again  the 
Bame  thing  is  said  of  Nelson,  till  it  shines  out  above  all  his  other  great  gifts, 
and  becomes  the  best  description  of  his  great  genius.  But  we  are  not  great  queens 
like  Esther,  with  the  deliverance  of  Israel  in  our  hands ;  nor  are  we  great  sea- 
captains  like  Lord  Nelson,  with  the  making  of  modern  England  in  our  hands.  No. 
But  we  are  what  we  are,  and  what  God  has  made  us  to  be  and  to  do.  We  all  have 
our  own  circle  set  round  us  of  God,  and  out  of  our  own  circle  our  own  opportunities 
continually  arise.  Our  opportunities  may  not  be  so  far-reaching  or  so  high- 
sounding  as  some  other  men's  are ;  but  they  are  our  opportunities,  and  they  are 
far-reaching  enough  for  us.  Our  opportunities  are  life  or  death  to  us  and  to  others ; 
they  are  salvation  or  condemnation  to  our  immortal  souls  ;  and  is  that  not  circle 
and  opportunity  enough  ?  We  are  all  tempted  every  day  to  say,  "  If  I  only  were 
Esther  I  If  I  only  had  a  great  opportunity,  would  I  not  rise  to  it  I  Would  I  not 
speak  out  at  any  risk !  Would  I  not  do  a  work,  and  win  a  name,  and  deliver 
Israel,  and  glorify  God  I "  Did  you  ever  read  of  Clemens,  and  Fervidus,  and 
Eugenia,  and  their  imaginary  piety?  Clemens  had  his  head  full  of  all  manner  of 
hypothetical  liberalities.  He  kept  proposing  to  himself  continually  what  he  would 
do  if  he  only  had  a  great  estate.  Come  to  thy  senses,  Clemens.  Do  not  talk  what 
thou  wouldst  be  sure  to  do  if  thou  wast  an  angel,  but  think  what  thou  canst  do  as 
a  man.  Eemember  what  the  poor  widow  did  with  her  one  mite,  and  go  and  do 
likewise.    Fervidus,  again,  is  only  sorry  he  is  not  a  minister.     What  a  reformation 


CHAP.  IV.]  ESTHER.  63 

he  would  have  worked  in  his  own  life  by  this  time,  and  in  his  whole  parish,  if  only 
God  had  made  him  a  minister  I  He  would  have  saved  his  own  soul,  and  the  souls 
of  his  people,  in  season  and  out  of  season.  Do  you  believe  yourself,  Fervidus  ? 
You  are  deceiving  yourself.  You  hire  a  cabman  to  drive  you  to  church,  and  he 
Bits  in  the  wet  street  waiting  for  you,  and  you  never  ask  him  how  he  manages  to 
live  with  no  Sabbath.  It  is  not  asked  of  you,  Fervidus,  to  live  and  die  a  mfirtyr ; 
but  just  to  visit  your  cabman's  wife  and  children,  and  have  family  worship  with 
them  on  a  Sabbath  night  like  you  would  have  done  if  you  had  been  a  minister. 
Eugenia,  again,  is  a  young  lady  full  of  the  most  devout  dispositions.  If  she  ever 
has  a  family  she  will  let  you  see  family  religion.  She  is  more  scandalised  than 
she  can  tell  you  at  the  way  that  some  of  her  schoolfellows  have  married  heathens, 
and  at  the  life  they  lead  without  God's  worship  in  their  newly-married  houses. 
But,  Eugenia,  you  may  never  be  married  so  as  to  show  married  people  how  to  live. 
At  the  same  time,  you  have  a  maid  already,  all  to  yourself.  She  dresses  you  for 
church,  and  then  you  leave  her  to  have  as  little  religion  as  a  Hottentot.  You  turn 
her  away  when  she  displeases  you,  and  you  hire  another,  and  so  on,  till  you  will 
die  unmarried,  and  without  a  godly  household,  and  your  circle  will  be  dissolved 
and  your  opportunity  for  ever  lost.  Your  maid,  and  her  sister,  and  her  widowed 
mother,  and  her  ill-doing  brother,  and  her  sweetheart,  they  aU  are  your  circle  at 
present,  and  your  opportunity  is  ifast  flitting  by ;  and,  because  it  is  so  near  you 
every  day,  you  do  not  discover  it.  Oh,  Eugenia,  full  to  the  eyes  of  so  many  vain 
imaginations  I  You  never  heard  of  Eugenia,  and  Fervidus,  and  Clemens  before, 
and  do  not  know  where  to  find  them.  But  no  matter.  You  and  I  are  Fervidus 
and  Eugenia  ourselves.  You  and  I  are  Mordecai  and  Esther  ourselves.  We  are 
in  that  circle,  and  amid  those  opportunities,  the  very  best  that  all  the  power,  and 
all  the  wisdom,  and  all  the  love  of  God  can  provide  for  us.     {A.  Whyte,  Jj.D.) 

Vers.  15-17.  Qo,  gather  together  all  the  Jews  that  are  present  in  Shushan. — 
The  crisis  in  the  life  of  Esther  : — The  spectacle  presented  reminds  us — I.  That  in 

NEITHEB   PliACK    NOB   FORTUNE    HAS   ANY     ONE     SECURITY     AGAINST     TRIAL     AND   DANGER. 

The  palace  may  be  a  prison  to  its  inmate,  the  hut  cannot  exclude  the  approaches 
of  a  grief.     II.  That  one  reason  not  only  fob  gifts  op  place  and  fortune,  but 

FOR  experiences  OF  TROUBLE  ALSO,  MUST  BE  THAT  WE  MAT  HELP  OTHERS  IN  THEIR 

PERILS.  Power  and  opportunity  measure  obligation.  Even  sorrow  and  peril  as 
they  enrich  and  mellow  the  nature,  enhance  the  power  to  help  and  bless.   III.  That 

RISK     AND   DIFFICULTY     DO     NOT    EXEMPT     FROM     DUTY   OB   BELEASE     FEOM    OBLIGATION. 

It  is  told  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington  that,  in  one  of  his  campaigns,  an  oflScer  awoke 
him  to  say  to  him  that  a  certain  enterprise  to  be  carried  into  effect  that  night  was 
impossible.  As  the  officer  was  going  on  to  give  reasons  for  this  opinion,  the  Duke 
replied,  "Bring  me  my  order-book."  Turning  over  its  leaves,  he  said,  "It  is  not 
at  all  impossible ;  see,  it  is  down  in  the  order-book."  Whereupon  he  lay  down  to 
sleep  again.  Risks  are  not  to  be  unprovided  for.  Difficulties  are  not  to  be  despised ; 
but  had  there  been  none  to  run  great  risks,  to  undertake  in  the  face  of  great  hard- 
ships, prophets  and  apostles  had  been  few.  There  had  been  no  Elijah  or  Daniel, 
no  John  the  Baptist  or  Paul  the  apostle,  no  Luther  or  Enox.    IV.  THAX...aKLPiNO 

TO   SAVE    OTHERS     18     OFTEN     THE     BEST    WAY     TO     INSURE     OUB     OWN     SALVATION.       The 

teaching  of  experience  and  history  is  that  mere  self-seeking  is  self -ruin.  There  is 
such  a  thing  as  the  solidarity  of  human  interests.  The  capitalist  thrives  best  when 
he  promotes  the  weal  of  the  labourer,  the  labourer  when  he  regards  the  interests  of 
his  employer.  To  save  my  children  I  must  help  to  save  my  neighbour's.  To  one 
who  inquired  if  the  heathen  can  be  saved  if  we  do  not  give  them  the  gospel,  the 
apt  reply  was,  "  A  much  more  practical  question  for  us  is  whether  we  can  be  saved 
if  we  do  not  help  to  give  it  them."  An  eminent  statesman  early  professed  his 
Christian  faith,  and  for  some  years  maintained  a  godly  walk.  After  a  time  he 
ceased  to  be  religiously  active,  and  allowed  his  light  to  be  hid.  While  not 
renouncing  his  faith,  yet  his  Christian  character  did  neither  himself  nor  Christ  any 
honour.  One  evening  he  dropped  into  a  little  school-house  gathering,  and  at  the 
close  he  introduced  himself  to  the  preacher,  and  after  an  earnest  conversation  with 
him,  he  said,  "  Sir,  I  would  give  all  the  fame  I  now  have,  or  expect  to  have,  for 
the  assurance  of  that  hope  of  which  you  have  spoken  to-night."  To  be  ourselves 
saved  we  must  help  to  save  others.  V.  Of  the.  true  source  of  courage  and  help 
IN  perplexity  and  ILL.  Although  no  distinct  mention  of  prayer  is  made,  yet  it  is 
evidently  implied.  It  is  an  instinct  of  the  human  heart  to  resort  to  the  Hearer  of 
Prayer.     In  its  distress  the  soul  cries  unto  God.     When  a  great  steamship  was 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

hourly  expected  to  sink  in  mid-ocean  we  are  told  that  all  on  board  gave  themselves 
to  prayer.  VI.  That  God's  peovedence  is  always  over  His  people  fob  good. 
(Sermons  by  Monday   Club.)  Difficulties  cleared  up  : — 1.  Esther's  heart  was 

moved  not  to  shrink  from  manifest  duty.     "  Add  to  your  faith,  virtue,"  courage,  a 
manly  and  determined  purpose  to  carry  out  its  calls  to  their  utmost  extent.     Stop 
not  to  ask  leave  of  circumstances,  of  personal  convenience  or  indolent  self-indul- 
gence, but  go  forward  in  your  appointed  work.     How  prone  we  are  to  shrink  from 
disagreeable  or  dangerous  duty.     How  many  excuses  we  are  able  to  frame  for  our 
neglect.     How  easy  it  becomes  to  satisfy  our  sinful  hearts  that  God  will  not  require 
that  which  it  is  so  difficult  or  so  dangerous  to  perform.     Fly  from  no  duty  when 
the  word  and  providence  of  God  call  you  forward.     Go  on,  and  trust  yourself  to 
God.     2.  Esther's  heart  was  moved  to  sincere  dependence  on  God.     Prayer  seems 
the  natural  voice  of  danger  and  sorrow.     The  ancient  philosopher  said,  "  If  a  man 
would  learn  to  pray,  let  him  go  to  sea."    The  hour  of  the  tempest  will  be  to 
multitudes  a  new  lesson  in  their  relations  to  God.     When  men  are  in  affliction  and 
trouble  they  are  easily  led  to  cry  unto  God.     Esther  and  her  maidens  prayed. 
What  if  the  husband  does  not  or  will  not  bless  his  household  ?     Cannot  the  mother 
and  the  wife  collect  her  children  and  her  maidens  for  prayer  ?     3.  The  king's  heart 
was  moved  to  listen  and  to  accept  her.     The  clouds  have  passed,  and  the  Lord 
whom  she  loved  has  given  her  a  token  for  good.     This  is  the  power  of  prayer,  the 
work  of  providence,  the  influence  of  grace.     The  king's  heart  is  in  the  hands  of  the 
Lord,  and  as  the  rivers  of  water,  He  has  turned  it  according  to  His  will.     What  a 
lesson  in  providence  is  this  I     The  same  power  which  leads  to  prayer,  and  supports 
us  in  prayer,  at  the  same  time  works  over  other  minds  and  other  things  to  make 
an  answer  completely  ready  for  our  enjoyment.     How  easily  can  God  remove  all 
the  stumbling-blocks  out  of  the  way  of  His  children  I     "  What  art  thou,  0,  great 
mountain?    Before  Zerubbabel  thou  shalt  become  a  plain."    Anticipated  diffi- 
culties suddenly  vanish ;  enemies  whom  we  had  expected  are  not  found ;  the  things 
which  apparently  threatened  our  hurt  turn  out  to  our  advantage ;  and  blessings 
which  we  had  not  dared  to  hope  for  crowd  around  our  path.     Thus  Paul  found  it 
at  Rome.     4.  God  moved  Esther's  heart  to  great  wisdom  and  prudence  in  her 
management  of  the  undertaking  she  had  assumed.     Peculiar  wisdom  and  skill 
often  are  imparted  to  us  in  answer  to  prayers  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  work 
of  the  Lord.     Our  dependence  and  prayer  have  no  tendency  to  make  us  headlong 
or  rash.     We  are  still  to  employ  all  the  proper  means  and  agencies  which  our 
utmost  wisdom  will  suggest  to  attain  the  end  we  have  in  view.     True  piety  in  the 
exercise  of  its  faith  and  love  and  hope  towards  God,  is  the  highest  wisdom.     It 
unites  all  the  wisest  calculation  and  effort  of  man  with  all  the  goodness  and  power 
of  God.    It  is  a  fellowship,  a  partnership  with  God  in  whichvHe  furnishes  all  the 
capital,  and  employs  our  sanctified  labours  alone  ;  in  which  we  strive  to  be  faithful, 
and  He  promises  to  bless,     {S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)        Esther's  petition  : — I.  We  note 
the  fact  that  evebt   one  has  some   special   mission.    Esther's  special  mission 
was  to  avert  the  destruction  which  threatened  her  people.     Is  it  true  that  all  have 
some  such  peculiar  charge  ?    We  read  of  the  decisive  battles  of  the  world  and  their 
commanders  ;  of  the  dominating  philosophies  and  their  masters  ;  of  the  ruling  arts 
and  their  teachers  ;  of  the  controlling  religions  and  their  high-priests  ;  of  the  great 
reforms  and  their  leaders.     Yet  these  elect  ones  are  but  as  a  handful  of  sands  to 
the  grains  which  make  the  shore.    For  the  rest,  mere  existence  seems  to  be  its  own 
end  and  object.     But  it  is  not  so.    A  persistent  pressure  is  in  and  on  every  heart 
to  enter  into  secret  communication  with  God,  and  linking  its  weakness  with  His 
strength,  exerts  a  blessed  influence  which,  like  the  sound-waves,  goes  on  endlessly. 
That  hour  of  audience  with  its  Maker  is  its  greatest  possibility.    For  that,  at  least, 
it  has  a  special  mission.    From  Him  it  receives  what  almost  might  be  called 
"sealed  orders."     Saul  of  Tarsus  was  given  his  at  Damascus,  and  so  he  went  to 
Jerusalem,  not  knowing  how  they  would  read  as  he  opened  them  there.      So  every 
Christian  goes  his  way,  till  we  find  Henry  Martyn  preaching  Christ  to  the  Hindus, 
Isaac  Newton  solving  the  problem  of  the  apple's  fall,  Leigh  Richmond  writing  "The 
Dairyman's  Daughter,"  George  Miiller  erecting  his  orphanage,  Mary  Lyon  opening 
collegiate  doors  to  her  sisters,  and  Abraham  Lincoln   issuing  the  emancipation 
proclamation.    And  though  not  yet  widely  observed,  the  prayers,  counsels,  and 
inspirations  by  which  gifted  souls  have  roused,  led,  and  saved  society  originated 
in  the  closet,  and  kitchen,  and  field,  where  the  godly  parent  or  teacher  has  fulfilled 
a  holy  and  particular  mission.    The  successful  general  is  f6ted  and  praised.    Every 
soldier  in  the  ranks  is  just  as  essential  to  the  victory.    Every  individual,  however 


CHAP,  IV.]  ESTHER.  65 

insignificant,  has  his  momentous  obhgation.  The  child's  hand  in  the  lighthouse 
tower  may  turn  the  helm  of  a  whole  navy,  that  it  is  not  strewn  along  the  reefs. 
II.  Note  the  fact  that  love  for  others  is  worthy  love  of  self.  To  lose 
one's  love  of  life,  comfort,  and  honour  in  the  greater  love  of  the  life,  comfort,  and 
honour  of  his  kin  is  counted  the  highest  of  human  virtues.  Mettus  Curtius,  in 
spurring  his  horse  into  the  yawning  chasm  to  save  Rome,  was  not  the  first  nor  the 
last  to  hold  the  welfare  of  the  many  above  that  of  the  individual.  "We  have  no 
religion  to  export,"  meanly  argued  a  legislator  against  the  Act  of  incorporation  of 
the  American  Board.  "  Eeligion,"  was  the  profound  reply,  "  is  a  commodity 
which  the  more  we  export  the  more  we  have."  III.  Note  the  need  of  timely 
preparation  for  our  work.  Then — always — ^the  idea  has  prevailed  that  united 
petitions,  like  the  volume  of  the  sea,  would  be  mighty,  while  the  solitary  plea,  like 
the  single  drop,  would  be  null.  Jesus  promised  answer  when  two  or  three  were 
agreed  in  their  request.  Spiritual  momentum,  like  physical,  seems  to  be  pro- 
portioned to  the  quantity  of  soul  multiplied  by  its  eagerness.  The  Church  has 
upborne  its  ministers,  and  made  them  speak  with  authority  when  it  has  been 
praying  with  them.  Individual  preparation  must  also  be  made.  Esther  must  fast 
no  less  than  her  people.  She  does  all  she  can  to  pave  the  way  for  a  favourable 
reception  of  her  cause.  Jacob's  present  of  flocks  and  herds,  sent  forward  to  placate 
Esau,  with  the  greeting  "  and  behold  he  is  behind  us,"  fitly  represents  the  fore- 
thought and  tact  which  oftenest  gains  its  end.  We  may  call  it  "  policy  "  ;  but  what 
harm,  if  it  be  not  bribery  ?  IV.  Note  the  reward  of  venturing  in  a  good  cause. 
The  supreme  hazard  gains  the  supreme  desire.  The  fearless  champion  of  a  full 
and  free  religious  life  oftenest  triumphs.  St.  Patrick  before  the  Druid  chieftain ; 
Wickhffe  before  the  angry  bishops,  and  Luther  before  the  Diet,  succeed,  when 
others  of  as  noble  wish,  but  of  less  courage,  must  have  failed.  Into  the  densest 
heathenism  the  soldier  of  the  Cross  penetrates,  and  a  redeemed  people  build 
their  monument  of  thanksgiving,  not  for  his  piety  simply,  but  for  his  bravery. 
Holy  causes  seem  often  to  clothe  their  advocates  in  such  shining  dress, 
that  assaulting  powers  are  abashed  at  the  sight.  (Monday  Club  Sermons.) 
A  suggestion  and  its  operation : — We  have  here  illustrated — I.  Human  obligation 
TO  suggestion.  By  far  the  majority  of  the  imports  into  the  soul  and  life  of  the 
world  are  marked  "  via  suggestion."  As  the  present  holds  in  it  the  past,  so 
suggestion  is  the  essential  of  progress,  the  root  of  accomplishment,  the  spur  of 
duty.  Compute,  if  you  can,  the  poet's  debt  to  suggestion ;  Burns  and  the  mouse,  <fec. 
The  prime  factor  of  invention  is  suggestion.  Men  see  something,  hear  something, 
touch  something,  and  in  a  flash  an  idea  springs  full-armed  and  captures  the  mind. 
The  eye  suggests  the  telescope,  the  heart  the  engine.  Is  naval  architecture  to  be  com- 
pletely revolutionised  ?  Is  the  new  leviathan  to  be  the  future  type  of  ocean  steamers  ? 
Subtract  the  suggestion  of  a  whale's  back,  and  what  then  ?  Human  experience  is 
largely  the  outcome  of  suggestion.  Mordecai  could  not  command  Queen  Esther, 
but  he  could  pace  in  sackcloth  before  the  palace  gate.  He  could  send  a  message 
to  the  queen  making  an  entreating,  pitiful  suggestion.  II.  The  struggle  which 
ensues  in  carrying  a  suggestion  over  into  practice.  Carlyle  has  said,  "  Transi- 
tions are  ever  fuU  of  pain."  Thus  the  eagle  when  it  moults  is  sickly,  and  to  attain 
his  new  beak  must  harshly  dash  off  the  old  one  upon  the  rocks.  There  is  no  more 
critical  experience  for  a  human  soul  than  when  a  suggestion  lodges  in  it ;  especially 
when  it  means  the  readjustment  of  all  our  spiritual  furniture,  burying  of  cherished 
plans,  crucifying  selfish  ambition,  stripping  off  desire,  defying  danger,  releasing 
power,  and  making  us  risk  the  sarcasm,  the  scorn  which  are  ever  the  pall-bearers 
of  failure.  This  gives  scope  for  the  true  heroism  of  life,  a  hereism  which  finds  ita 
choicest  exhibit,  not  in  those  who  have  the  leverage  of  a  great  enthusiasm  and  who 
are  consciously  beneath  the  eyes  of  a  great  multitude,  but  in  those  duels  between 
souls  and  suggestions  fought  out  in  the  solitude  of  the  human  breast.  Thus  John 
Knox,  when  summoned  in  public  assembly  to  the  ministry,  rushes  from  the 
congregation  in  tears  to  enter,  in  his  solitary  chamber,  upon  a  struggle  which 
should  last  for  days,  but  the  outcome  of  which  should  be  a  face  set  like  a  flint. 
Thus  Moses,  Isaiah,  Ezekiel  shrink  and  wrestle  but  obey.  Thus  Esther  hesitates 
and  excuses  herself  on  the  ground  of  personal  danger,  till  at  last  the  suggestion 
rides  over  her  soul  roughshod,  and  in  the  heroism  of  a  great  surrender  she 
declares,  "  So  will  I  go  in  unto  the  king  .  .  .  and  if  I  perish,  I  perish." 
HI.  The  availing  of  one's  self  of  allies  in  the  execution  of  a  determined 
purpose.  Esther  made  three  allies.  1.  With  herself.  She  knew  her  royal  spouse 
was  impulsive ;  she  knew  be  was  susceptible.    And  so,  bent  on  subduing  him,  she 


<S6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

bedecks  herself  with  jewels,  and  right  royally  attired  stands  in  the  court.  Impulse 
leaps,  susceptibility  flames :  "  She  obtained  favour  in  his  sight :  and  the  king  held 
out  to  Esther  the  golden  sceptre."  2.  With  her  husband.  In  the  execution  of 
a  worthy  purpose  one  may  find  and  may  avail  himself  of  the  ally  which  resides  in 
that  which  is  to  be  overcome.  It  makes  a  deal  of  difference  how  you  take  hold  of 
a  thing.  The  handle  of  a  pail  is  the  water-carrier's  ally ;  he  may  despise  it  and 
fare  worse  I  Said  one  of  the  keenest  logicians  in  this  country,  "  In  entering  upon 
a  debate,  find,  to  begin  with,  common  ground  with  your  antagonist,  something 
you  can  both  accept — a  definition,  a  proposition,  or  if  nothing  else,  the  state 
of  the  weather."  Here  is  a  deep  truth.  There  are  natural  allies  in  the  enemy's 
country;  it  is  strategy,  it  is  generalship,  to  get  into  communication  with  them. 
Esther  recognised  her  ally,  and  so  she  approached  her  husband,  not  with  entreaty 
or  rebuke,  but  with  invitation.  The  suggestion  of  a  feast  prepared  under  her 
direction  in  honour  of  his  majesty  was  the  warder  within  the  castle  of  the  fickle 
king's  soul,  who  would  not  fail  to  raise  the  portculUs  of  his  will  to  admit  the 
entrance  of  a  queen's  desire.  3.  With  time.  There  is  a  ministry  in  wise  delay  ; 
haste  is  not  of  necessity  success.  Is  procrastination  the  thief  of  time?  Then 
precipitation  is  the  assassin  of  it.  To  work  and  wait — to  wait  for  the  order,  the 
chance,  the  moment  to  strike,  was  a  lesson  Esther  had  learned  by  heart,  and  so  she 
refused  to  unbosom  her  petition  till  the  hour  struck.  When  Leyden  was  besieged 
by  the  Spaniards  the  inhabitants  sent  word  to  the  enemy  that  they  would  eat  their 
left  arms  and  fight  with  their  right  before  they  would  surrender.  At  last,  in  their 
extremity,  they  told  the  governor  they  must  surrender.  "  Eat  me,  but  don't 
surrender,"  was  the  heroic  reply.  Then  some  one  thought  of  cutting  the  dykes 
and  flooding  the  enemy's  camp ;  they  did  it,  rushed  upon  the  enemy  in  the 
confusion,  and  out  of  apparent  disaster  snatched  a  glorious  victory.  (Nehemiah 
Boynton.)  Esther's  petition : — Learn — I.  That  in  the  exigencies  of  kelioion  and 
OF  God's  kingdom,  the  Church  may  demand  of  tis  the  disbegakd  of  personal 
SAFETY.    II.  That  when  God  gives  us  a  mission  which  we  are  wise  enough  to 

SEE  AND  TO  FULFIL,  THEN  WE  MAY  HUMBLY  EXPECT  THAT  He  WILL  ACCOMPLISH    BLESSED 

RESULTS  BY  THE  FEEBLEST  INSTRUMENTS.  (W.  E.  Boggs,  D.D.)  I  also  End  my 
maidens  will  fast  likewise. — Mistress  and  maid : — Some,  it  is  probable,  of  Esther's 
maids  were  heathens  when  they  came  into  her  service.  Yet  we  find  her  promising 
that  they  would  fast.  She  can  answer  for  them,  as  Joshua  for  his  household,  that 
they  would  serve  the  Lord.  If  mistresses  were  as  zealous  as  Queen  Esther  for  the 
honour  of  God  and  the  conversion  of  sinners,  they  would  bestow  pains  upon  the 
instruction  and  religious  improvement  of  their  female  servants.  If  women  may 
gain  to  Christ  their  own  husbands  by  their  good  conversation,  may  they  not  also 
gain  the  souls  of  their  servants  ?  and  if  they  are  gained  to  Christ,  they  are  gained 
to  themselves  also.  (G.  Lawson.)  Fasting  i$  in  itself  a  prayer : — It  is  remark- 
able that  nothing  is  here  said  about  prayer,  but  fasting  was  in  itself  a  prayer  ;  for 
it  was  not  a  form  put  on  from  without,  but  the  natural  expression  of  the  inner 
emotion,  and  as  an  application  to  God,  it  is  to  be  explained  much  as  we  do 
the  touching  of  the  Saviour  by  the  woman,  who  in  that  way  sought  her  cure. 
Words  are  signs,  just  as  fasting  is  a  sign.  That  which  is  essential  in  either  is 
genuineness.  God  does  not  look  to  the  words  themselves,  any  more  than  He  does 
to  the  fasting  in  itself.  He  has  regard  only  to  that  which  the  soul  expresses, 
either  by  the  one  or  through  the  other.  The  touch  of  the  soul  of  the  woman  went 
to  the  Master's  heart  through  her  touching  of  His  garment  with  her  fingers  ;  and 
the  yearning  of  the  soul  of  Esther,  through  her  fasting,  made  its  appeal  to  Jehovah, 
even  though  she  did  not  breathe  His  name.  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  And  so  will  I 
go  in  unto  the  king. — Prayer  accompanied  by  appropriate  use  of  means  : — She  will 
not  think  that  her  duty  is  done  when  she  has  prayed  and  fasted.  She  will  seek,  by 
the  use  of  proper  means,  to  obtain  that  blessing  which  she  has  been  asking.  The 
insincerity  of  our  prayers  is  too  often  discovered  by  our  sloth  and  cowardice. 
We  ask  blessings  from  God,  and,  as  if  He  were  bound  to  confer  them,  not 
according  to  His  own  will,  but  according  to  ours,  we  take  no  care  to  use  those 
means  which  He  hath  appointed  for  obtaining  them,  or  we  do  not  use  them  with 
requisite  diligence.  {G.  Laioson.)  Courage  to  face  difficulties  : — There  are  two 
kinds  of  courage — the  mere  animal  courage,  which  results  from  well-strung  nerves, 
and  is  exerted  by  impulse  rather  than  by  reflection ;  and  the  moral  courage,  which, 
on  a  calm  calculation  of  difficulties,  and  of  the  path  of  duty,  will  face  the 
difficulties  and  prosecute  the  path  of  duty  at  any  hazard,  even  at  the  risk  of 
life  itself.     It  will  often  be  found  that  men  are  deficient  in  the  latter  of  these 


<3HAP.  IT.]  ESTHER.  67 

qualities,  while  they  are  remarkable  for  the  former.  (A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.) 
Esther't  resolve : — I.  The  pkepabation  :  fasting  and  prayer.  1.  Fasting  is 
abused  by  the  Church  of  Rome,  therefore  disused  by  many  who  belong  to  the 
Church  of  Christ.  Deep  feeling  will  make  fasting  natural.  Moses  (Exod.  xxxiv.  28), 
Elijah  (1  Kings  xix.  7,  8),  Christ  (Matt.  iv.  2),  fasted  forty  days  each.  See  Ezra's 
fast  (Ezra  viii.  21,  23).  Directions  how  to  fast  (Matt.  vi.  16-18).  Paul  was  given 
to  fasting  (2  Cor.  vi.  4,  5 ;  xi.  27).  Fasting  is  useless  without  faith.  The  Pharisee 
(Luke  xviii.  12).  2.  Prayer.  Three  days'  special  prayer.  The  Jews  in  their 
synagogues.  Esther  in  the  palace.  With  what  humility,  sorrowful  confession,  and 
earnestness  did  they  pray  1  II.  The  resolution  :  "  So  will  I  go  in  unto  the 
king,"  &c.  There  are  some  points  of  resemblance  and  of  contrast  between  the 
case  of  Esther  and  that  of  the  poor  sinner.  1.  Points  of  resemblance.  (1)  She 
was  in  extreme  danger  (ver.  13).  So  with  the  sinner  (Psa.  vii.  11-13).  (2)  There 
was  no  other  way  for  her  escape.  "  By  no  means  "  (Psa.  xlix.  7).  (3)  This  way 
seemed  full  of  difficulty  and  danger.  Haman's  influence.  The  king's  temper. 
The  royal  guards.  2.  Points  of  contrast.  (1)  She  went  into  the  presence  of  an 
earthly  monarch  who  was  partial,  changeable,  irritable,  weak.  God  is  always  the 
same.  (2)  She  was  uninvited.  The  sinner  pressed  to  come.  (3)  The  law  forbade 
her  to  come.  (4)  The  king  has  apparently  forgotten  her  for  thirty  days.  (5)  She 
might  have  been  stopped  by  the  guards.  (6)  She  might  have  been  misunderstood. 
(7)  She  might  have  failed  by  going  the  wrong  time.  Lessons — 1.  Warning. 
Danger  threatens.  2.  Instruction.  Prepare.  3.  Encouragement.  {The  Study 
and  the  Pulpit.)  And  if  I  perish,  I  perisli. — Love  to  God  stronger  than  death : — 
"  If  I  perish,  I  perish."  Our  lives  are  not  our  own ;  they  cannot  be  long  preserved 
by  us.  They  will  be  of  little  value  to  us  without  a  good  conscience.  The  life 
which  is  purchased  by  neglect  of  duty  is  shameful,  bitter,  worse  than  death. 
Whoever  shall  save  his  life  in  this  manner  shall  lose  it  in  this  world  as  well 
as  in  the  next.  But  to  lose  life  for  the  sake  of  Christ  and  a  good  conscience 
is  truly  to  live.  A  day  of  life  employed  in  the  most  hazardous  duties,  by  which 
we  show  that  our  love  to  God  is  stronger  than  death,  excels  a  thousand  days 
of  a  life  spent  in  the  service  and  enjoyment  of  the  world.  (G.  Lawson.)  Esther^t 
resolve  : — I.  The  impending  danger.  1.  A  wicked,  crafty,  designing  foe.  2.  An 
irrevocable  decree  of  destruction.  8.  No  visible  way  of  escape.  II.  The  bold 
besoldtion.  III.  The  solemn  preliminary  :  fasting  and  prayer.  IV.  The  success- 
ful issue.  1.  Life  spared.  2.  Enemy  is  destroyed.  3.  Honour  is  given.  {The  Study 
and  the  Pulpit.)  The  crisis  met : — I.  Observe  the  queen's  modesty — her  extra- 
ordinary prudence  at  the  very  moment  that  she  is  most  successful.  Her  request 
was  a  simple  invitation  to  have  the  king  come  to  a  banquet  of  wine  the  next  day, 
and  as  a  mark  of  regard  for  his  preferences,  she  wishes  him  to  bring  Haman. 
n.  In  Esther's  fasting  and  prayer  and  pious  courage  we  see  that  faith  and  piety 

ABE  NOT  ALWAYS  SHORN  OF  THEIR  FRUITS  UNDER  UNFAVOURABLE  INFLUENCES  ;  they  may 

flourish  in  a  palace.  In  a  chaotic  state  of  society  a  pious  man  may  have  greater 
difficulties  to  overcome  in  maintaining  a  godly  walk,  but  then,  in  overcoming  these 
difficulties,  he  will  gain  a  greater  degree  of  spiritual  strength.  III.  Queen  Esther 
WAS  A  true  representative  woman.  Every  one  is  raised  up  as  she  was,  not  to 
be  a  Sultana,  and  do  just  the  work  she  did,  but  to  do  his  or  her  own  work.  Every 
one  has  a  duty  to  perform — a  post  to  maintain — a  lot  to  fulfil.  IV.  It  may  some- 
times be  our  duty  to  ourselves,  our  country,  our  fellow-men  and  our  God  to  put 
our  LIVES  IN  jeopardy  for  the  truth,  or  for  the  Church,  and  for  the  sake 
OF  Jesus.  True  piety  ought  to  make  men  brave.  V.  We  should  never  fear 
TC  DO  OUR  duty.  The  God  whom  we  serve  is  able  either  to  sustain  us  under 
our  trials  or  to  deliver  us  out  of  them.  Why  should  we  yield  to  the  fear  of  man 
that  bringeth  a  snare,  seeing  that  we  are  in  the  hands  of  Him  who  holdeth  the 
hearts  of  all  men  and  of  devils  in  His  hand  ?  VI.  The  privilege  and  efficacy 
OF  PBAYEB.  1.  As  Hcury  remarks,  here  is  an  example  of  a  mistress  praying  with 
her  maids  that  is  worthy  of  being  followed  by  all  housekeepers  and  heads  of 
families.  2.  And  we  are  here  encouraged  to  ask  the  sympathy  and  prayers  of 
others  when  we  undertake  any  great  or  perilous  enterprise.  The  king's  favourite 
was  her  greatest  enemy.  But  if  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  Advocate  with  the 
Father,  even  His  own  Son,  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.     VII.  One  of  the  gracious 

DESIGNS  OF  AFFLICTION  IS  TO  MAKE  US  FEEL  OUR  DEPENDENCE   UPON  GoD.      A   gracioUS 

result  of  trials  to  the  people  of  God  is  that  it  drives  them  to  prayer.  But  the 
court  of  heaven  is  not  like  that  of  Persia,  into  which  there  was  no  entrance 
for  those  that  were  in  mourning  or  clothed  with  sackcloth.     Such  could  not  come 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  IT. 

near  the  palace  of  Ahasuerus.  But  it  is  the  weary,  the  heavy-laden,  and  the 
sorrowing  that  are  especially  invited  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and  invited  to  come 
boldly.  "  Is  any  among  you  afflicted,"  saith  the  apostle  James,  "  let  him  pray." 
{W.  A.  Scott,  D.D.)  Courage  ought  to  be  cultivated: — The  exigencies  of  human 
existence  call  loudly  for  the  cultivation  of  courage.  Victory  is  frequently  suspended 
upon  boldness.  Cromwell's  Ironsides  were  accustomed  to  enter  the  battle  shouting, 
"  The  Lord  is  with  us ;  the  God  of  Jacob  is  our  refuge."  They  were  always 
victorious.  The  Christian's  heroism  should  be  like  that  of  the  Prince  of  Cond6, 
who,  when  offered  by  his  monarch  the  choice  between  three  things — "  To  go  to 
Mass,  to  die,  or  to  be  imprisoned" — heroically  replied,  "I  am  perfectly  resolved 
never  to  go  to  Mass,  so  between  the  other  two  I  leave  the  choice  to  your  majesty." 
If  Luther  dared  to  enter  the  Diet  of  Worms  relying  on  the  justice  of  his  cause 
and  the  protection  of  God,  assuredly  the  Christian  in  this  age  may  confidently 
face  the  dangers  which  confront  him.  Genuine  piety  has  a  powerful  tendency 
to  develop  heroism.  Moses,  Elijah,  Nathan,  Daniel,  John  the  Baptist,  &c.  {J.  S. 
Van  Dyke,  D.D.)  Moral  heroism  : — 1.  The  Christian  should  make  no  concealment 
of  his  piety.  If  Esther  dared  to  reveal  her  religion,  asking  her  maidens  to  unite  in 
imploring  the  interposition  of  Jehovah,  surely  the  Christian  ought  not  to  cloak  his. 
2.  Sympathy  shown  to  the  suffering  is  advantageous  to  the  giver  as  well  as  to  the 
receiver.  3.  Those  who  resist  the  evidence  that  the  Church  is  not  infrequently  in 
a  condition  calling  for  immediate  deliverance  are  enemies  of  true  religion,  not 
friends.  4.  Christians  should  possess  moral  heroism.  5.  If  desirous  of  securing 
deUverance  for  the  Church,  we  should  endeavour  to  impress  upon  each  a  keen 
sense  of  personal  responsibility.  6.  We  should  endeavour  to  sustain  those  who 
are  passing  through  trials  for  us.  Mordecai  and  the  Jewish  people  engaged  in 
prayer  while  Esther  exposed  herself  to  death  on  their  behalf.  7.  Assurance  of 
deliverance  should  impel  to  the  performance  of  present  duty.  {J,  S.  Van  Dyke.) 
Esther's  peril  and  its  attendant  success  : — Notice — I.  The   situation  in   which 

ESTHEB   WAS    PLACED.        11.    HeB    CONDUCT   IN    THE    EMERGENCY.       III.    ThE     8DCCEB3 

WHICH  ATTENDED  HER  APPLICATION.  (R.  P.  Buddicom.)  Esthcr's  Tesolvt : — This 
was  not — I.  The  resolution  of  a  fatalist  who  acts  upon  the  principle   that 

WHAT    IS    destined    TO    BE     MUST    BE.       II.    ThE    RESOLUTION    OF    DESPERATION,    WHICH 

FEELS  "  MATTERS  CANNOT  BE  WORSE,  and  to  havc  doHC  the  utmost  may  bring 
relief,  while   it  cannot  possibly  aggravate  the  evil."    III.  The  resolution  of  a 

PERSON  prostrated  UNDER  DIFFICULTIES,  AND  YET,  WITH  A  VAGUE  HOPE  OF  DE- 
LIVERANCE, saying,  "  I  will  make  one  effort  more,  and  if  that  fail,  and  all  is  lost,  I 
can  but  die."  Esther's  purpose  was  framed  in  a  spirit  altogether  different.  It  was 
the  heroism  of  true  piety,  which  in  providence  shut  up  to  one  course,  and  that,  full 
of  danger,  counts  the  cost,  seeks  help  of  God,  and  calmly  braves  the  danger, 
saying,  "  He  will  deliver  me  if  He  have  pleasure  in  me  ;  if  not,  I  perish  in  the  path 
of  duty."  (A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Access  to  the  throne: — I  remember  at  the 
time  of  that  marvellous  "  blizzard,"  as  it  was  called,  in  America,  there  was  an 
astounding  instance  of  roundabout  communication.  There  were  parties  in 
Philadelphia  who  wanted  to  communicate  with  Boston,  but  all  the  telegraph 
lines  were  down,  and  they  actually  cabled  the  message  across  the  sea  to  London, 
and  from  London  by  cable  to  Boston,  in  order  to  get  the  message  through  which  it 
was  desired  to  communicate  to  parties  in  that  city.  This  may  illustrate  what 
I  mean,  that  sometimes,  when  interruption  of  communication  exists  on  earth, 
or  there  are  closed  doors  or  insurmountable  obstacles  which  hinder  our  effective 
labour,  and  when  in  vain  we  knock  and  ring  at  the  closed  doors,  or  attempt 
to  overcome  the  hindrances  that  exist  between  us  and  the  ends  that  we  desire 
to  attain — if  we  can  get  access  to  the  King  of  kings,  and  if  we  can  send  our 
message  up  to  the  throne,  from  the  throne  the  answer  will  come.  We  shall  find 
that  the  surest  way  to  get  to  the  upper  storey  of  the  house,  or  to  reach  across 
the  intervening  obstacles  that  have  accumulated  in  our  path,  is  to  approach 
the  desired  end  by  way  of  God's  throne.  (A.  T.  Pier$on.)  Gospel-consecration 
does  not  go  farther  than  this.  Everything  dear  and  valued  was  left  behind  in 
order  that  she  might  serve  God.  "  All  things  were  counted  but  loss  "  that  she 
might  maintain  "  a  conscience  void  of  offence  towards  God  and  towards  man." 
Ah  I  how  this  believer,  in  old  times,  when  as  yet  the  Saviour  was  only  had  in 
promise,  puts  to  shame  many  in  these  latter  days  who  are  in  possession  of  the 
finished  salvation  !  Even  the  pleasures  of  sense,  and  the  wealth  and  rewards 
of  the  world,  keep  them  in  a  state  of  indecision  and  vacillation,  if  not  of  absolute 
indifference,  to  the  call  and  claims  of  the  gospel.     (T.  McEwan.) 


CHAP,  v.]  ESTHER.  6* 


CHAPTER  V. 

Yebs.  1-14.  Now  it  came  to  pass  on  the  third  day,  that  Esther  put  on  her  royal 
apparel. — There  is  nothing  stationary  : — "  Now  it  came  to  pass."  These  words  call 
for  special  notice  in  a  book  which  strikingly  illustrates  the  providence  of  God  both 
in  regard  to  nations  and  individuals.  They  remind  us  that  there  is  nothing 
stationary — that  what  comes  is  moving  on.  Seasons  of  trial  and  perplexity  would 
be  overwhelming  if  they  had  the  character  of  fixedness.  It  is  happily  not  so.  As 
you  have  stood  gazing  on  a  mountain,  bathed  in  sunlight,  you  may  sometimes  have 
observed  a  dark  shadow  creeping  along  the  side  of  it,  as  though  hastening  to 
accomplish  its  mission,  and  quickly  gliding  away  out  of  sight,  leaving  the  land- 
scape all  the  more  beautiful  because  of  your  remembrance  of  it.  So  is  it  with  what 
is  painful  and  sad  in  providence.  Events  of  this  kind  have  come  at  intervals,  but 
it  was  only  to  pass — not  to  abide — Uke  the  floating  of  little  clouds  between  us  and 
the  sun,  and  when  past,  giving  to  human  life,  as  to  nature,  a  greater  richness  and 
variety.  Biographies  are  but  commentaries  on  these  familiar  words.  Indeed,  men 
themselves  but  come  to  pass.  (Ibid.)  Performance  must  follow  resolve : — 
Esther  was  not  one  of  those  who  resolve  and  promise  well,  bat  do  not  perform. 
(G.  Lawson.)         Crisis  help: — I.  We  have  here  an  illustration  of  the  fact  that 

WHEN  THE  CRISIS  COMES  GoD  GIVES  HiS  PEOPLE  GKACE  TO  MEET  IT.       DoubtlcSS  Esthcr 

looked  forward  with  much  trepidation  to  the  moment  of  her  entering  in  before  the 
king.  When  the  time  came  she  found  that  the  way  was  clear.  This  is  far  from 
being  an  uncommon  experience  with  the  children  of  God.  That  which  in  the 
prospect  is  most  formidable  turns  out  to  be  in  the  reality  most  simple.  The 
women  at  the  sepulchre.  When  God  asks  us  to  perform  some  dangerous  duty,  we 
may  rely  that  the  way  up  to  the  duty  will  be  made  open  to  us,  and  that  strength 
will  be  given  to  us  for  its  discharge.  "  I  will  make  darkness  light  before  them,  and 
crooked  things  straight."  "  As  thy  days  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  "  My  grace  is 
sufficient  for  thee."  How  often  have  these  promises  been  made  good  to  Christians 
in  these  days.  It  is  a  time  of  extremity  ;  the  enemies  of  truth  are  bitterly  assailing 
the  very  citadel  of  the  faith,  and  now  a  stand  has  to  be  made  which  shall  determine 
the  issue  for  years.  The  eyes  of  aU  humble  Christians  are  turned  to  one  singularly 
gifted  man ;  all  are  saying  that,  like  Esther,  he  has  come  to  the  kingdom  for  such  a 
time  as  this.  But  he  is  f  uU  of  anxiety  and  trepidation.  At  length  he  consents  to  lift 
the  standard  and  enter  on  the  conflict,  and  when  the  time  comes  he  is  carried  away 
out  of  himself,  and  so  sensibly  helped  by  the  Spirit  of  God  that  he  sweeps  everything 
before  him  on  the  resistless  torrent  of  his  eloquence.  Or  there  is  a  terrible  disease 
invading  the  frame ;  it  cannot  be  cured,  and  if  let  alone  it  will  issue  in  a  lingering 
illness  and  painful  death.  There  is  nothing  for  it  but  a  critical  surgical  operation, 
and  yet  from  that  the  patient  shrinks.  At  length,  however,  the  consent  is  given. 
It  is  to  be  performed  on  a  certain  day  and  at  a  certain  hour.  The  meanwhile  is 
given  to  prayer,  and  all  the  friends  and  relatives  are  requested,  each  in  his  own 
closet,  to  join  in  the  supplication.  Then  when  the  hour  strikes  the  diseased  one 
walks  with  a  strength  that  is  not  her  own  into  the  room,  and  gives  herself  into  the 
hands  of  the  surgeons,  saying,  "  Living  or  dying,  I  am  the  Lord's."  The  shrinking 
is  gone,  the  fear  is  subdued,  and  there  is  nothing  but  a  calm  heroism,  which  is  the 
gift  of  God  for  the  occasion.  Or,  yet  again,  a  difiicult  duty  is  to  be  performed — a 
brother  to  be  expostulated  with  for  some  serious  sin,  or  to  be  warned  of  some 
insidious  danger.  But  we  do  not  know  how  he  will  take  it,  and  the  question  comes 
to  be  whether  our  effort  to  save  him  may  not  aggravate  the  danger  to  which  he  is 
exposed.  Who  will  undertake  the  task  ?  There  is  one  who,  of  all  others,  seems  to 
be  the  fittest ;  but  the  very  idea  of  it  fills  him  with  anxiety.  How  shall  he  pro- 
ceed ?  There  is  nothing  for  it  but  prayer  ;  and  in  the  faith  that  God  will  answer 
he  goes  forward.  He  finds  the  way  marvellously  opened.  He  has  a  most  satis- 
factory interview.    All  his  fears  are  dispelled — he  has  saved  his  brother.    II.  Whek 

THE    HEART    IS   NOT   RIGHT  WITH    GoD    A    LITTLE  MATTER  WILL    MAKE    A    GREAT    MISERY. 

Happiness  does  not  consist  in  the  bearing  of  others  towards  us,  but  in  the  relation 
of  our  own  souls  to  God.  A  self-centred  heart  cannot  avoid  misery.  The  one 
thing  needful  to  happiness  is  a  new  heart.     III.  When  a  little  mattes  makes  a 

GREAT  MISERY,  THAT  IS  AN  EVIDENCE  THAT  THE  HEART  IS  NOT  RIGHT  WITH  GoD.  IV.  It 
IS  A  GREAT  MISFORTUNE  WHEN  A  MAN'S  WORST  COUNSELLORS  ARE  IN  HIS    OWN   HOUSE.       A 

good  wife  would  have  turned  his  thoughts  in  another  direction.  Here,  then,  is  a 
beacon  of  warning  for  aU  wedded  wives.     Let  them  beware  of  adding  fuel  to  a  tire 

33 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

already  burning  far  too  strongly  in  their  husbands'  hearts,  as  Zeresh  did  here. 
When  they  see  those  ■whom  they  love  best  going  in  the  way  of  envy  or  passion  or 
revenge,  let  them  exert  themselves  wisely,  yet  firmly,  to  alter  their  determination. 
And  let  those  husbands  who  have  wives  that  are  wise  enough  to  see  when  they  are 
going  astray,  and  brave  enough  to  endeavour  to  keep  them  from  doing  that  which  is 
wrong,  thank  God  for  them  as  for  the  richest  blessings  of  their  lives.     A  wife  who 
is  merely  the  echo  of  her  husband,  or  who,  as  in  the  instance  before  us,  only 
seconds  and  supports  that  which  she  sees  he  is  determined  upon,  is  no  helpmeet  for 
any  man.     {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.I).)        The  glory  of  intercession : — I.  The  bowed 
roBM  of  the  suppliant  queen.     To  bend  the  knees  for  others  is  the  noblest  attitude 
possible  for  the  children  of  men.     What  shall  be  said  of  the  selfish  pietist  who 
prays,  *'  Forgive  us  our  trespasses,"  and  gives  no  heed  to  the  multitudes  who  lie 
in  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death?    What  shall  be  said  of  those  Christiana 
who  "  don't  believe  in  missions"?    When  the  ship  Algona^eni  down  and  the 
captain  made  off  with  one  of  the  boats,  leaving  forty-eight  passengers  to  drown, 
the  whole  world  stood  in  horror  of  him.      It  is  far  better  to  sing  "  Kescue  the 
perishing  "  than  to  make  too  much  of  "  When  I  can  read  my  title  clear."    A 
glorious  award  awaits  those  who  in  self-forgetfulness  have  adventured  all  in  behalf 
of  their  fellow-men.     II.  The  outstketched  sceptre.    It  means  to  us  that  the 
great  King  is  ever  ready  to  hear  intercessory  prayer.     In  the  rabbinical  legend 
of   Sandalphon   an  angel  is  represented  as  standing  at  the  uttermost  gates  of 
heaven,  one  foot  on  a  ladder  of  light.     He  is  listening  for  a  mother's  appeal,  the 
fiob  of  a  burdened  heart,  the  cry  "  God  be  merciful  to  him!  "     On  hearing  these 
voices  of  intercession  he  bears  them  aloft,  and  they  turn  to  garlands  as  he  lays 
them  before  the  feet  of  God.     It  stands  in  the  nature  of  the  case  that  God  should 
be  most  willing  to  hear  unselfish  prayers.    III.  The  sequel.     The  Jews  were  saved 
and  the  Feast  of  Purim  instituted  in  recognition  of  this  deliverance.     The  world 
waits  to  be  won  by  Christian  intercession.     When  General  Grant  was  languishing 
on  his  bed  of  pain,  no  message  of  sympathy  touched  him  more  than  that  from  an 
aged  quaker  :  "  Friend  Grant,  I  am  a  stranger  to  thee.    I  would  not  intrude  upon 
thy  Buffering,  but  I  am  anxious  for  thy  soul.    Trust  in  Jesus ;  He  will  not  fail 
thee."     The  abundant  entrance  into  heaven  is  for  those  who  by  prayer  and  its 
supplementary  effort  have  wrought  deliverance  for  others.     At  the  close  of  the 
American    Civil  War,    when   Lincoln  went  down  to  Eichmond,   the  freedmen 
loosed  the  horses  from  his  carriage  and  dragged  it  through  the  streets,  shouting, 
•"  God  bless  Massa  Lincoln  1 "    He  had  broken  their  chains,  and  this  was  a  slight 
expression  of  their  gratitude.     In  the  apportionment  of  the  honours  of  heaven 
there  is  nothing  comparable  with  this,  "  He  hath  saved  a  soul  from  death  !  "    (D. 
J.  Burrell,  D.D.)        The  royalty  of  faith : — I.  Eotal  appabel  may  cover  a  sad 
heart.     II.  The  royalty  of  faith  sustains  in  sadness.    Faith  possesses  the  true 
alchemy  which  can  transmute  the  base  metal  of  sadness  into  the  celestial  gold  of 
abiding  gladness.  The  sick  saint ;  the  imprisoned  martyr ;  the  lonely  missionary  bereft 
of  wife  and  child  on  a  foreign  shore ;  the  pastor  labouring  amongst  an  unresponsive 
people — all  acknowledge  the  sustaining  power  of  faith.     IH.  The  royalty  of  faith 
leads  to  daring  ventures.    Abraham  was  ready  to  offer  up  his  only-begotten  son  ; 
Esther  was  ready  to  offer  up  herself.    Hers  was  a  Divinely  inspired  faith,  worthy  of 
a  place  among  those  celebrated  in  Hebrews.     IV.  The  royalty  of  faith  is  greater 
THAN  the  royalty  OF  MERE  ciRCUMSTANTULS.   The  CsBsars  and  the  Neros  do  not  now 
rule — the  Pauls  and  the  Peters  do.    Faith  is  better  and  mightier  than  weapons  of 
war,  words  of  wisdom,  or  the  gilded  trappings  of  earthly  royalty.     V.  The  royalty 
OF  faith  commands  success.    VI.  The  royalty  of  faith  bways  the  golden  sceptre. 
{W.  Burrows,  B.A.)        A  conquest  by  feminine  beauty  : — One  of  the  most  stirring 
passages  in  history  with  which  I  am  acquainted  tells  us  how  Cleopatra,  the  exiled 
Queen  of  Egypt,  won  the  sympathy  of  Julius  CBBsar,  the  conqueror,  until  he  became 
the  bridegroom  and  she  the  bride.     Driven  from  her  throne,  she  sailed  away  on  the 
Mediterranean  Sea  in  a  storm,  and  when  the  large  ship  anchored  she  put  out  with 
one  womanly  friend  in  a  small  boat  until  she  arrived  at  Alexandria,  where  was  Caesar, 
the  great  general.     Knowing  that  she  would  not  be  permitted  to  land  or  pass  the 
guards  on  the  way  to  Caesar's  palace,  she  laid  upon  the  bottom  of  the  boat  some 
shawls  and  scarfs  and  richly  dyed  upholstery,  and  then  lay  down  upon  them,  and 
her  frirnd  wrapped  her  in  them  and  she  was  admitted  ashore  in  this  wrapping 
of  goods,  which  was  announced  as  a  present  for  Caesar.    This  bundle  was  permitted 
to  pass  the  guards  of  the  gates  of  the  palace,  and  was  put  down  at  the  feet  of  the 
Roman  general.     When  the  bundle  was  unrolled  there  rose  before  Caesar  one  whosa 


CHAP.  T.]  ESTHER.  71 

courage  and  beauty  and  brilliancy  are  the  astonishment  of  the  ages.  This  exiled 
Queen  of  Egypt  told  the  story  of  her  sorrows,  and  he  promised  her  that  she 
should  get  back  her  throne  in  Egypt  and  take  the  throne  of  wifely  dominion  in  his 
own  heart.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  A  queen  on  the  vanity  of  jewellery  : — Among 
the  treasures  most  coveted  are  jewels,  but  in  the  "Diary"  of  Madame  D'Arblay, 
whose  maiden  name  was  Burney,  and  who  was  lady-in-waiting  on  Queen  Charlotte, 
consort  of  George  III.,  we  read  :  "  The  queen  told  me  how  well  at  first  she  had 
liked  her  jewels  and  ornaments.  'But  how  soon,'  cried  she,  'was  that  over  I 
Believe  me,  Miss  Burney,  it  is  a  pleasure  of  a  week — a  fortnight  at  most.  The 
trouble  of  putting  them  on,  the  care  they  require,  and  the  fear  of  losing  them, 
made  me  in  a  fortnight's  time  long  for  my  own  earlier  dress,  and  wish  never  to 
see  them  more.'  "  Esther's  nobleness  : — The  splendour  of  Esther's  career  is  seen 
in  the  fact  that  she  does  not  succumb  to  the  luxury  of  her  surroundings.  The 
royal  harem  among  the  lily-beds  of  Shushan  is  like  a  palace  in  the  land  of  the 
lotus-eaters  "  where  it  is  always  afternoon,"  and  its  inmates  in  the  dreamy 
indolence  are  tempted  to  forget  all  the  obligations  and  interests  beyond  the  obliga- 
tions to  please  the  king  and  their  own  interests  in  securing  every  comfort  wealth 
can  lavish  upon  them.  We  do  not  look  for  a  Boadicea  in  such  a  hot-house 
of  narcotics.  And  when  we  find  there  a  strong,  unselfish  woman  such  as  Esther 
conquering  almost  insuperable  temptations  to  a  life  of  ease,  and  choosing  a  course 
of  terrible  danger  to  herself  for  the  sake  of  her  oppressed  people,  we  can  echo 
the  admiration  of  the  Jews  for  their  national  heroine.  {W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.) 
The  sight  of  a  face  : — It  is  a  constant  fact  in  nature  that  the  sight  of  a  face 
wiU  do  what  nothing  else  can  do  in  the  way  of  awakening  love,  touching 
sympathy,  securing  trust,  evoking  help,  or,  it  may  be,  in  the  way  of  provoking  and 
stimulating  feelings  of  a  very  opposite  description.  IJf  a  purpose  be  very  important 
and  very  good,  generally  it  will  be  better  promoted  by  a  personal  appearance  than 
by  any  kind  of  representation.  If  I  am  seeking  a  good  thing,  my  face  ought  to  be 
better  than  the  face  of  another  for  the  getting  of  it ;  better,  too,  than  my  own  letter 
asking  it.  If  the  poor  widow  had  sent  letters  to  the  unjust  judge,  he  probably  would 
not  have  been  much  discomposed,  but  by  her  continual  coming  she  wearied  him,  and 
won  her  quest.  When  the  king  saw  Esther  she  obtained  favour.  (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.) 
And  the  king  held  out  to  Esther  the  golden  sceptre  that  was  in  his  hand. — God 
grants  requests  : — Did  this  haughty  monarch  hold  out  the  sceptre,  and  say,  "  What 
wilt  thou,  and  what  is  thy  request  ?  "  and  shall  not  God  hear  His  own  elect — His 
chosen  spouse — crying  to  Him  day  and  night  ?  Esther  had  to  go  into  the  presence 
of  a  proud  imperious  man,  we  to  go  into  the  presence  of  a  God  of  love  and  conde- 
scension. She  was  not  called  ;  we  are  invited.  She  went  in  against  the  law ;  we 
have  both  precept  and  promise  in  our  favour — yea,  precept  upon  precept,  and 
promise  upon  promise.  "Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find  ; 
knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you."  She  had  no  friend  at  court  on  whom  she 
could  rely,  and  the  great  favourite  was  the  accuser  of  her  brethren,  the  mortal  foe 
of  her  name  and  race ;  we,  even  when  we  have  sinned,  and  sinned  after  light  and 
pardon,  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father,  His  beloved  Son  in  whom  He  is  well 
pleased,  who  also  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins.  Esther  was  encouraged  to  ask 
to  the  extent  of  the  half  of  the  kingdom  of  Persia ;  we  are  encouraged  to  ask  to  the 
whole  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  with  a  life-rent  on  earth  of  all  that  is  needful  for 
us.  Ought  we  not  then  to  "come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace"?  {T.  McCrie.) 
The  gifts  of  the  heavenly  King : — 1.  Ahasuerus  held  out  the  sceptre  to  his  queen, 
who  had  never  offended  him,  nor  been  unfaithful  to  him ;  but  Jehovah  holds  out 
His  sceptre  to  the  unfaithful.  2.  But  the  king  not  only  bade  the  queen  to  his 
presence,  but  made  her  a  bountiful  offer.  "What  is  thy  request?  It  shall  be 
given  thee  to  the  half  of  my  kingdom."  This  offer  he  makes  three  times  over. 
Surely  the  Lord  wrought  marvellously  herein,  and  in  His  goodness  to  His  people, 
exceeded  their  largest  expectations.  God  grants  a  kingdom  to  His  people,  and  that 
an  everlasting  kingdom — their  crowns  fade  not  away,  their  purses  wax  not  old. 
Their  riches  cannot  be  corrupted  by  moth  and  rust,  and  thieves  cannot  deprive 
them  of  their  treasures.  Their  joy  no  one  taketh  from  them,  and  their  pleasures 
are  those  which  are  at  God's  right  hand  for  evermore.  Oh  1  let  us  approach  the 
heavenly  King  in  the  all-powerful  name  of  the  one  Mediator,  and  fervently  pray 
for  these  imperishable  blessings.  (J.  Hughes.)  Confidence  in  prayer : — The 
Church  is  "  the  Lamb's  wife."  She  has  free  access  to  the  throne  of  the  King  of 
kings.  Oh  1  how  timidly  and  doubtfully  do  believers  sometimes  draw  near  to  Him  1 
It  is  as  though  thej  feared  His  royal  sceptre,  forgetting  that  it  is  the  sceptre  of 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  T. 

mercy ;  as  though  they  were  apprehensive  that  He  had  taken  away  His  love  from 
them,  forgetting  that  "  having  loved  His  own  who  were  in  the  world,  He  loves  them 
unto  the  end."  He  has  no  half-measures — no  half -kingdoms  to  offer.  He  promises 
you  the  kingdom — wholly,  willing,  unreservedly — and  even  chides  you  for  having 
hitherto  asked  nothing  in  His  name,  and  encourages  you  to  "  ask,  and  ye  shall 
receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full."  King  Ahasuerus  could  not  anticipate  the 
request  of  Esther ;  after  his  own  carnal  heart  he  thought  that  it  must  be  some 
additional  temporal  good.  But  our  King  knows  all  beforehand,  and  has  provided 
for,  and  is  ready  to  bestow  upon  us  all  that  we  can  need  upon  the  earth,  and  all 
that  we  can  desire  to  prepare  us  for  heaven.  And  surely,  if  we  require  to  be  stirred 
to  earnestness  and  importunity  by  the  presence  of  a  great  cause,  we  all  have  it  in 
the  condition  of  our  own  hearts,  the  souls  of  others,  and  the  salvation  of  the  world, 
(r.  McEwan.)  The  golden  sceptre  : — In  reverence,  in  submission,  and  for  safety, 
she  touched  the  top  of  the  sceptre,  and  then  all  the  power  of  the  empire  was 
between  her  and  harm.  We  cannot  assert  that  this  was  meant  to  be  a  symbolical 
act ;  but  certainly  it  does  express  in  a  striking  way  the  method  and  the  result  of 
our  coming  as  sinners  to  God.  The  golden  sceptre  of  grace  is  ever  in  the  King'8 
hand.  Never  does  He  cast  one  wrathful  glance  upon  any  who  approach  unto  Him  ; 
He  is  on  the  throne  of  grace,  that  He  may  be  gracious.  When  we  touch  the  sceptre 
we  yield  submission ;  we  are  reconciled,  accepted,  and  protected  by  all  the  forces  of 
the  universe,  and  by  all  the  perfections  of  God.  {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Touching  the 
sceptre : — I.  The  sceptre  in  the  hands  of  Christ.  We  read  that  He  is  "  head 
over  all  things,"  and  more  than  this,  "  head  over  all  things  to  the  Church."  He 
holds  that  sceptre  for  them  —  for  their  protection — for  their  highest  and  best 
interests.  Christ  is  on  the  throne  1  The  steps  which  lead  to  that  throne  ought  to 
assure  us  what  He  is,  now  that  He  is  there.  The  Cross  best  explains  Christ.  Hia 
character  in  all  its  transparency  and  purity,  its  glory  and  beauty,  fitted  Him  to 
reign  over  aU.  But  we  want  more  than  a  righteous  King ;  more  than  a  true 
King  I  Love  must  be  on  the  throne  which  is  to  sway  the  hearts  of  men,  and 
"  herein  is  love."  II.  In  all  appeals  to  Hm  we  touch  that  sceptre.  1.  When 
we  touch  that  sceptre,  we  prove  that  we  believe  His  Word.  It  is  certain  that 
actions  bespeak  faith  more  than  words.  Do  we  believe  in  Christ's  purposes  of 
mercy  ?  Do  we  believe  that  all  the  vice,  misery,  wrong,  around  us,  Christ  desires 
to  do  away  with  ?  that  it  grieves  His  heart  more  than  it  ever  can  ours  ?  We  must 
believe  this  in  the  light  of  His  Incarnation,  coming  into  this  world  as  He  did  to 
seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost.  When  we  touch  His  sceptre,  we  proclaim  our 
belief  in  His  mercy,  we  come  to  the  King  as  those  who  know  that  He  is  the  same 
Saviour  that  walked  this  world,  and  went  about  doing  good,  and  preached  deliver- 
ance to  the  captives  everywhere.  2.  When  we  touch  that  sceptre,  we  bespeak  its 
aid  ;  we  imply  confidence  in  its  power.  We  manifest  our  consciousness  that  there 
is  a  greater  power  than  that  of  evil :  that  Jesus  must  and  will  reign.  It  were  sad 
to  live  were  it  otherwise.  We  who  know  Christ  for  ourselves,  have  confidence  in 
His  ability  to  realise  the  ideal  of  the  Inspired  Word,  "  Godliness  is  profitable  for 
all  things :  having  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to 
come."  3.  When  we  touch  that  sceptre,  we  imply  our  oneness  of  spirit  with  Him. 
Many  would  like  to  touch  other  sceptres,  and  turn  their  purposes  of  success  into 
golden  achievements.  See  how  men  wait  on  others.  But  Christ's  purposes  are 
moral  and  spiritual  purposes.  His  kingdom  is  not  meat  and  drink,  but  righteous- 
ness, peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  we  say  by  our  touch  of  His  sceptre, 
"  Master,  we  do  desire  this  end;  deliver  our  people  from  slavery,  from  the  plots  of 
our  Hamans,  from  the  desires  which  would  destroy  their  peace  of  mind,  hinder 
their  happiness,  and  harm  their  souls  hereafter.  Oh  I  King  Jesus,  we  are  one  with 
Thee  !  "  4.  When  we  touch  that  sceptre,  we  imply  that  Christ  loves  us.  We  love 
Him,  and  He  loves  us.  We  know  that  the  fact  of  His  love  to  us  will  make  our 
petitions  powerful  before  Him.  III.  The  sceptre  mat  be  touched  by  the 
humblest  hand.  Yes ;  and  it  often  is.  Poor  and  humble  saints,  weak  and 
afflicted  saints,  that  can  do  little  else,  can  pray.  Not  through  door-keepers,  and 
past  stately  sentinels,  do  we  reach  the  Eoyal  PaviUon  1  No  1  Esther  goes  straight 
in  to  the  king.  So  may  we  !  The  privilege  of  prayer  itself  is  not  more  wonderful 
than  the  freeness  of  it.  The  Heavenly  Koyalty  needs  no  poor  pageantry  of  outward 
state.  You  can  touch  that  sceptre.  You  can  come  in,  and  be  face  to  face  with  the 
King.  IV.  This  sceptre  is  not  swayed  by  us,  but  touched  by  us.  Esther 
touched  it  1  And  then  the  king  said  unto  her,  "  What  wilt  thou,  Esther  ?  "  And 
thus  it  is  with  us.     It  pleased  the  king  to  grant  her  widest  request.    But  still  ik 


CHAP,  v.]  ESTHER.  73 

was  the  king's  will.  And  so  it  is  with  us.  I  would  ask  this  question  :  Who  would 
dare  to  touch  the  sceptre,  if  the  touch  was  to  turn  to  swaying  it  ?  Not  1 1  Not 
you  1  No  ;  you  know  enough  of  life  to  wish  at  all  events  its  government  taken  out 
of  your  hands.  We  touch  the  sceptre,  but  we  do  not  take  it.  No.  That  moment 
an  awful  consciousness  would  come  over  us,  and  we  should  flee  from  mountain  to 
city,  to  be  absolved  from  the  responsibility.  We  might  seem  to  benefit  ourselves, 
but  whom  might  we  not  harm  ?  We  might  seem  to  gain  a  transitory  good,  but 
what  beneficent  laws  of  the  universe,  working  for  the  common  good,  might  we  not 
endanger  ?  It  is  a  comfortable  thing  to  be  able  to  cast  all  our  care  upon  Christ. 
V.  In  swaying  that  sceptke  Chbist  can  overcome  ail  the  designs  of  our 
ENEMIES.  The  danger  seemed  great  to  the  company  of  Jews  in  the  Persian  empire, 
but  in  one  brief  hour  the  darkening  cloud  had  disappeared,  and  Esther  had  "  come 
to  the  kingdom  for  such  a  time  as  this."  (W.  M.  Statham.)  What  wilt  thou, 
queen  Esther  ?  and  what  is  thy  request  ? — Prayer  should  be  definite  : — To  make 
prayer  of  any  value,  there  must  be  definite  objects  for  which  to  plead.  We  often 
ramble  in  our  prayers  after  this,  that,  and  the  other,  and  we  get  nothing,  because 
in  each  we  do  not  really  desire  anything.  We  chatter  about  many  subjects,  but  the 
soul  does  not  concentrate  itself  upon  any  object.  Do  you  not  sometimes  fall  on 
your  knees  without  thinking  beforehand  what  you  mean  to  ask  God  for  ?  You  do, 
as  a  matter  of  habit,  without  any  motion  of  your  heart.  You  are  like  a  man  who 
would  go  to  a  shop  and  not  know  what  articles  he  would  procure.  He  may,  perhaps, 
make  a  happy  purchase  when  he  is  there,  but  certainly  it  is  not  a  wise  plan  to 
adopt.  And  so  the  Christian  in  prayer  may  afterwards  attain  to  a  real  desire,  and 
get  his  end ;  but  how  much  better  would  he  speed  if,  having  prepared  his  soul  by 
consideration  and  self-examination,  he  came  to  God  for  an  object  at  which  he  was 
about  to  arrive,  with  a  real  request.  Did  we  ask  an  audience  at  her  Majesty's 
court,  we  should  not  be  expected  to  go  into  the  presence  of  royalty  and  then  to 
think  of  some  petition  after  we  came  there.  Even  so  with  the  child  of  God.  He 
should  be  able  to  answer  the  great  question,  "  What  is  thy  petition  ?  and  what  is 
thy  request?  and  it  shall  be  done  unto  thee."  Imagine  an  archer  shooting  with 
his  bow,  and  not  knowing  where  the  mark  is  1  Would  he  be  likely  to  have  success  ? 
Conceive  a  ship,  on  a  voyage  of  discovery,  putting  to  sea  without  the  captain 
having  any  idea  of  what  he  was  looking  for !  Would  you  expect  that  he  would 
come  back  heavily  laden  either  with  the  discoveries  of  science  or  with  treasures  of 
gold  ?  In  everything  else  you  have  a  plan.  You  do  not  go  to  work  without  knowing 
that  there  is  something  that  you  designed  to  make  ;  how  is  it  that  you  go  to  God 
without  knowing  what  blessing  you  design  to  have?  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Large 
offers  : — 1.  With  respect  to  the  largeness  of  the  offer.  "  Even  to  the  half  of  my 
kingdom,"  the  king  said,  "  will  thy  request  be  granted."  "  AH  things  are  yours," 
it  is  said  to  believers ;  and  it  may  well  be  said,  since  Jehovah  gives  Himself  to  them 
as  their  God,  and  Christ  is  theirs,  and  the  Spirit  dwells  in  them.  2.  But  then  as 
Esther  was  afraid  all  at  once  to  ask  what  she  most  desired,  so  God's  people  are 
often  slow  or  afraid  to  avail  themselves  to  the  full  of  their  privilege  of  asking. 
Many  are  contented  to  live  from  year  to  year  with  little  more  to  uphold  them  than 
an  indistinct  hope  that  they  shall  reach  heaven  at  last,  when,  if  they  would  but 
take  home  God's  promises  in  aU  their  freeness  and  richness,  they  might  be  able  to 
rejoice  in  Him  as  theii'  portion.  But  perhaps  it  may  be  that  as  Esther  did  not  feel 
herself  in  a  condition  all  at  once  to  close  with  the  king's  most  liberal  offer,  so  some 
among  us,  for  other  reasons  than  the  feeling  that  it  would  be  presumptuous,  may 
be  exercised  in  the  same  way  with  respect  to  spiritual  privileges.  (A.  B.  Davidson, 
D.D.)  Directions  for  prayer  : — I.  There  must  be  method  in  prayer.  "  What  ia 
thy  petition  ?  "  Self-examination  is  especially  beneficial  as  we  are  about  to  approach 
God.  Prayer  with  too  many  is  too  much  like  the  hurried  salute  given  to  a  passing 
friend ;  or  it  is  like  the  quick  march  of  an  army  past  the  royal  standard.  It  is 
often  little  better  than  counting  beads  strung  on  a  cord ;  or  as  one  turning  a 
praying  wheel.  More  strength  in  prayer  would  be  obtained  by  more  method  in 
prayer.  II.  There  must  be  assurance  in  prayer.  Not  merely  the  assurance  that 
God  is  ready  to  hear  prayer,  but  the  assurance  that  we  •'  have  found  favour  in  the 
sight  of  the  King."  Esther  desired  to  feel  her  ground  sure  here.  How  shall  we 
know  if  our  heavenly  King  is  favourable  to  us  ?  By  looking  to  the  unspeakable 
gift.  "  God  commendeth  His  love  toward  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners, 
Christ  died  for  the  ungodly."  The  gift  of  Christ  implies  the  gift  of  aU  things 
needful.  III.  There  may  be  hesit.\ncy  in  prayer.  Not  the  hesitancy  of  doubt, 
but  of  deliberation.    That  is  sometimes  the  truest  prayer,  when  the  heart  is  too 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

full  for  utterance.     IV.  There  must  be  submission  to  the  Divine  will  in  prayer.     "I 
will  do  to-morrow  as  the  king  hath  said."     {}V.  Burrows,  B.A.) 

Yer.  8.  Let  the  king  and  Haman  come  to  the  banquet  that  I  shall  prepare  for 
them,  and  I  will  do  to-morrow  as  the  king'  hath  said. — Do  not  hasten  -providence : — 
The  very  persons  are  here  before  whom  it  will  be  told  to-morrow — the  king,  the 
queen,  Haman  1  Then  why  delay  ?  Nine  people  out  of  ten  would  have  said,  if 
consulted  beforehand,  "  Ah,  she  is  losing  her  case,  through  fear  or  through  finesse, 
or  by  some  evil  counsel.  She  is  losing  the  ripe  and  favourable  hour,  which  will 
never  return.  To-morrow  1  0  Queen,  why  not  to-night  ?  "  And  so,^  oftentimes, 
we  would  hasten  providence  in  our  own  affairs,  fretting  against  His  wise  delays, 
and  laying  our  poor  shoulders  to  the  great  wheels  of  God,  as  though  He  were  not 
moving  them  fast  enough,  when,  in  fact,  they  are  going  as  evenly  as  the  sun,  as 
sublimely  as  time  itself.  "  The  king  is  here  ;  why  not  speak  ?  "  Yes,  he  is  here, 
and  he  is  not  here.  He  is  not  here  as  he  will  be  to-morrow  night.  To-night  he 
will  be  sleepless.  To-night  he  will  be  reminded,  through  his  sleeplessness,  of  an 
act  of  loyal  faithfulness  on  the  part  of  Mordecai,  which  has  been  hitherto  un- 
rewarded. To-night  the  order  will  be  given  for  the  preparation  of  a  gallows.  In  a 
word,  when  the  same  three  meet  at  to-morrow's  banquet,  they  will  be  the  same, 
and  yet  not  the  same.  They  will  be  really  in  different  relations  to  each  other,  and 
to  many  beyond.  So  the  banquet  is  ended,  as  if  by  the  utterance  of  the  word 
"wait."  "  He  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste."  (A,  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Wisdom 
to  act  in  critical  situatio7is  : — When  persons  are  placed  in  critical  situations,  and 
endeavour  to  act  singly  and  honestly,  wisdom  is  granted  to  them  to  direct  their 
course.  Though  she  had  met  with  a  reception  equal  to  her  most  sanguine  expecta- 
tions, Esther  did  not  immediately  present  the  request  which  was  nearest  her  heart, 
but  contented  herself  with  begging  that  the  king,  accompanied  with  Haman,  would 
"  come  to  the  banquet  of  wine  which  she  had  prepared."  By  this  she  testified  her 
disinterestedness.  She  was  afraid  of  precipitating  the  decision,  and  sought  to  avail 
herself  of  every  prudent  method  for  ensuring  success.     (T.McCrie.) 

Vers.  9.  Then  went  Haman  forth  that  day  Joyful. — The  superficial  man : — 
I.  Haman's  gladness.  It  arose — 1.  From  a  false  estimation  of  himself.  2.  From 
a  false  estimate  of  his  position.  II.  Haman's  use  of  his  eyes.  He  saw,  but  not 
correctly.  Pride  casts  a  film  over  the  mental  vision.  Prejudice  lessens  the  power 
of  vision.  Green-eyed  jealousy  cannot  see  correctly.  He  could  not  see  that 
stubbornness  rightly  read  meant  integrity  of  purpose.  III.  Haman's  consequent 
CHANGE  OF  STATE.  A  false  use  of  the  eyes  has  its  penalties.  No  faculty  can  be 
perverted  without  bringing  retribution.  IV.  Haman's  power  of  self-control.  The 
power  of  self-control  is  not  to  be  despised,  but  the  power  of  self -conquest  is  a  nobler 
achievement.  V.  Haman's  resource  in  trouble.  It  is  observable  how  many  bad 
men  have  attached  themselves  to  wives  who  have  stuck  to  them  in  all  circum- 
stances. {W.  Burrows,  B.A.)  Joy  from  meagre  sources  : — There  is  much  joy 
among  the  children  of  men  which  arises  from  very  meagre  sources,  much  joy  the 
loss  of  which  would  be  better  than  its  possession.  {J.  Hughes.)  Short-lived 
gladness  : — That  day  was  the  last  of  his  gladness ;  next  morning's  sun  should  not 
set  before  aU  his  glory  was  laid  in  the  dust.  Nay,  that  very  day,  and  that  very 
moment  when  it  was  most  buoyant,  his  joy  was  destined  to  suffer  a  dash  from 
which  it  would  never  completely  recover.  {T.  McCris.)  The  last  to-morrow  : — 
Be  not  so  cruel  as  speak  to  him  of  to-morrow  1  Let  the  wicked  enjoy  their  bright 
to-day — it  is  the  only  bright  to-day  which  they  will  ever  have.  Yes,  to-morrow  1 
Let  worldly  men  fear  and  prepare  for  their  last  to-morrow  I  "  He  that  being  often 
reproved  hardeneth  his  neck  shall  suddenly  be  destroyed  and  that  without  remedy." 
(T.  McEwan.) 

Ver.  10.  Nevertheless  Haman  refrained  himself, — Self-restraint  possible  : — 
Haman  refrained  himself.  It  is  a  circumstance  not  unworthy  of  notice,  that  even 
those  persons  who  are  habitually  self-willed,  and  destitute  of  the  power  of  self- 
government,  can  nevertheless,  when  occasion  requires  it,  exercise  a  wonderful 
control  over  both  their  speech  and  their  passions.  Thus,  for  example,  a  man  who 
is  addicted  to  the  sin  of  profane  swearing  will  be  found  to  put  such  guard  upon 
his  words  in  the  presence  of  a  superior  who  detests  that  sin,  that  not  one  oath  will 
escape  from  his  lips.  A  man  who  has  no  command  of  his  temper  at  ordinary  times 
will  appear  smooth  and  unruffled  in  his  intercourse  with  those  on  whom  he  is 


CHAP,  v.]  ESTHER.  75 

dependent,  or  whose  good  opinion  he  desires  to  gain.  A  man  given  to  excess  in 
the  indulgence  of  his  appetites  will  be  careful  not  to  transgress  in  company  where 
it  would  be  accounted  shameful.  Now  there  is  an  important  principle  involved  in 
all  this,  deeply  affecting  the  moral  responsibility  of  such  men  for  all  their  conduct. 
For  if  they  can  lay  themselves  under  such  restraint — when  it  serves  their  purpose- 
that  long-formed  habits  can  be  checked  and  mastered,  then  we  think  that  even  they 
themselves  must  admit  that  they  are  deprived  of  all  excuse  when  they  suffer  them- 
selves to  be  usually  governed  by  these  habits.  And  if  regard  for  the  opinions  and 
feelings  of  their  fellow-men  exerts  a  power  over  them  which  the  law  of  God  does 
not  possess,  then  manifestly  they  are  chargeable  with  the  guilt  of  standing  more  in 
awe  of  men  than  of  God.  {A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  And  when  he  came  home. — Home 
with  a  bad  man  : — It  is  not  pleasant  to  go  home  with  Haman  ;  but  God  thinks  it 
good  for  us  to  see  the  inside  of  a  bad  man's  heart.  We  shall  understand  the  irony 
of  His  providence  the  better.     (T,  McCrie.) 

Vers.  11-13.  And  Haman  told  them  of  the  glory  of  his  riches,  and  the  multitude 
of  his  children. — The  discontented  man  as  a  reckoner  : — The  discontented  man  is — 

1.  A  GOOD  RECKONER,  UP  TO  A  CERTAIN  POINT.  Look  at  Hamau's  statement :  Biches 
— children — position — honour.  These  represent  the  ideal  of  happiness  to  a  large 
majority  of  men.  The  whole  is  stated  correctly,  but  the  result  is  false.  II.  A  bad 
BECKONBR,   because — 1.  He  places  too  high  an  estimate  on  the  mere  material. 

2.  He  does  not  take  into  account  the  unknown  quantity.  3.  He  over-estimates  his 
own  deserts.  4.  He  is  bad  at  subtraction.  He  enumerates  his  blessings  as  four, 
and  his  drawback  as  one.  He  subtracts  one  from  four,  and  makes  nothing  the 
strange  result.  6.  He  is  defective  in  multiplication.  Haman  made  more  of 
Mordecai's  refusal  to  render  him  homage  than  it  deserved.  Discontent  is  always 
an  unreliable  multiplication.  It  makes  evils  where  there  are  none,  and  more  of 
existing  evils  than  it  ought  to  do.  III.  The  discontented  man  unknowingly  makes 
A  good  computation.  "  All  is  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit  "  is  the  statement  of 
those  who  have  taken  their  fill  of  this  world's  good  things,  and  have  forgotten  God 
their  maker.     {W.  Burrows,  B.A.) 

Yer.  13.  7et  all  this  availeth  me  nothing:,  so  long  as  I  see  Mordecai  the  Jew 
sitting  at  the  king's  gate. — Outward  prosperity  and  an  evil  heart : — Haman's  misery 
sprung  from  his  most  prominent  vice.  The  avenger  did  not  so  much  track  his  path, 
like  an  independent  retributive  messenger,  as  that  it  was  secreted  in  his  very  sin. 
It  is  often  so  in  providence.  God  does  not  need  to  stretch  forth  His  hand  against 
the  sinner.  It  is  enough  that  He  allows  the  working  of  his  sin  to  overtake  him. 
Had  there  been  no  pride  in  Haman's  heart  he  could  never  have  been  subjected  to 
this  soul-torture  because  of  a  harmless  affront  by  an  inferior  in  rank ;  but  for- 
asmuch as  he  had  nursed  and  cherished  his  pride  to  an  ungovernable  extent,  the 
pain  and  anguish  which  he  had  to  endure  when  it  was  thwarted  and  injured  was 
crucifying  to  all  his  prosperity  and  joy.  He  became  his  own  tormentor.  The  law 
is  universal,  giving  to  all  sin  its  entail  of  evil.  The  sinner  may  suppose  that  his 
sin  is  not  known,  and,  because  not  known,  that  it  will  escape  punishment;  but  the 
sin  will  itself  find  out  the  man,  and  the  punishment  will  grow  out  of  it  as  a  poisonous 
plant  from  a  hidden  seed.  Sceptics  may  theoretically  deny  the  Divine  govern- 
ment, but  practically  it  is  beyond  dispute.  By  an  inexorable  law  "  evil  pursueth 
sinners,  but  to  the  righteous  good  shall  be  repaid."  Intimately  connected  with  this 
thought  there  is  another  of  equal  importance — that  we  are  not  in  a  position  to 
judge  of  the  relative  amount  of  happiness  or  unhappiness  in  the  lot  of  man  upon  the 
earth.  Surveyed  from  without  there  might  not  appear  to  be  a  more  enviable  man 
than  Haman.  If  earthly  good  could  make  happiness  there  was  no  element  awanting 
in  his  case.  There  was  ostensibly  no  comparison  between  his  lot  and  that  of  some 
contented  poor  man,  who,  besides  meanness  and  obscurity,  has  to  bear  the  burden 
of  bodily  suffering.  Nevertheless  you  might  never  get  from  the  poor  sufferer  under 
the  influence  of  religion  the  same  confession  of  wasted  happiness  and  blighted  peace 
that  we  have  from  this  lordly  great  man  in  the  high  day  of  his  abounding  prosperity. 
Let  the  outward  condition  be  what  it  may,  his  spirit — the  real  man — rises  superior 
so  it,  and  is  not  touched  by  it.  But  in  the  other  case  it  was  the  spirit  which  was 
diseased,  and  which,  like  the  scorpion  when  surrounded  by  fire,  turned  its  sting  in 
upon  itself.  So  that,  before  we  could  estimate  relative  individual  happiness  or 
unhappiness,  we  would  require  to  go  below  the  surface  of  things  and  look  upon  the 
heart.    Moreover,  we  cannot  fail  to  notice  that  outward  prosperity  in  an  unsanctified 


TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  T. 


heart  renders  the  man  more  susceptible  to  trifling  annoyances.  He  becomes  so 
accustomed  to  what  is  highly  pleasing  that  a  very  small  thing  occasions  great 
uneasiness.  While  he  looks  at  his  good  things  through  the  large  end  of  the 
telescope,  he  beholds  what  is  troublesome  and  vexatious  through  the  small. 
The  world's  broad  way  is  crowded  with  eager  seekers  after  happiness.  "It 
is  here,"  cries  one,  and  there  is  a  rush  in  that  direction,  only  to  be  followed 
by  disappointed  looks  and  longing  hearts.  "It  is  there,"  cries  another,  and 
there  is  anxious  toiling  and  plodding  for  its  attainment ;  but  the  cisterns  are 
found  at  last  to  be  broken  and  empty.  In  the  midst  of  this  thirsting,  moiling, 
weary  world,  Jesus  has  caused  His  voice  to  be  heard,  pleading  and  saying  : 
"If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  Me  and  drink."  (T.  McEwan.) 
Vain  prosperity  : — The  servants  of  God  may  be  sometimes  so  foolish  as  to  envy  the 
prosperity  of  the  wicked.  But  a  sure  result  is  before  the  wicked,  and  in  due  time 
their  sin  finds  them  out.  They  are  set  in  slippery  places.  We  see  here  the  most 
crafty  and  accomplished  wickedness  caught  in  its  own  snare,  and  made  the 
instrument  of  its  own  punishment.  All  its  schemes  of  evil  are  overruled ;  all  its 
revengeful  and  hostile  purposes  are  made  to  bless  those  against  whom  they  have 
been  prepared.  1.  We  see  every  possible  advantage  of  condition  and  power 
conceded  to  him.  God  allows  the  cause  opposed  to  Him  to  have  all  the  means 
of  apparent  triumph  and  success,  so  that  if  such  opposition  may  ever  prevail, 
it  shall  have  the  fullest  opportunity.  When  He  would  show  us  the  vanity  of  the 
world  He  allows  it  to  heap  up  every  possible  means  of  gratification  and  pleasure. 
When  He  would  show  us  the  security  of  piety  He  permits  every  possible  difficulty 
and  objection  to  be  in  its  way.  Haman  shall  complain  of  no  want  on  his  side 
of  any  instrument  which  might  render  his  triumph  certain.  And  then,  in  defiance 
of  all  his  power  and  his  craft,  God  will  overturn  all  his  schemes.  Could  the 
wickedness  of  man  ever  succeed,  it  must  in  circumstances  like  his.  He  was  rich ; 
unlimited  wealth  seemed  to  be  in  his  control.  For  a  single  grant  of  power  he 
offered  the  king  ten  thousand  talents  of  silver,  nearly  twenty  millions  of  dollars. 
Not  only  rich,  he  was  highly  exalted  in  station.  No  subject  of  the  monarch 
equalled  him  in  rank  or  in  the  influence  which  his  station  gave.  Eich  and  exalted, 
he  was  powerful  also.  The  king  had  given  him  his  own  ring.  All  the  powers 
of  governrnent  in  the  kingdom  were  thus  placed  in  the  hands  of  Haman.  In  this 
high  condition  he  was  flattered  and  honoured  by  universal  homage.  "All  the 
king's  servants  that  were  in  the  king's  gate  bowed,"  &c.  And  as  we  survey  his 
condition  we  exclaim,  "  What  gratitude  such  a  man  must  owe  to  God  1  What 
blessings  he  might  bestow  upon  his  fellow-men."  But  Haman  had  no  heart  for 
gratitude,  no  love  for  mankind.  He  was  an  enemy  to  God,  to  His  people,  and 
to  His  truth.  The  controlling  spirit  of  his  wicked  heart  was  selfishness.  "  Though 
hand  join  in  hand  the  wicked  shall  not  go  unpunished."  2.  We  see  the  small 
amount  of  Haman's  alleged  deficiencies.  "  Mordecai  bowed  not  nor  did  him 
reverence."  What  an  illustration  of  the  prosperity  of  this  world.  It  is  impossible 
that  any  earthly  portion  should  be  free  from  every  cause  of  complaint.  The  decay 
and  sorrow  which  human  sin  produces  must  everywhere  in  some  shape  be  found. 
It  is  left  as  a  token  of  God's  authority,  as  a  test  of  man's  submission,  as  a  teacher 
of  contentment  and  humility  in  the  midst  of  occasions  for  pride  and  self-indulgence. 
There  is  to  every  man  a  Mordecai  in  the  gate,  an  unbending  and  unsubmissive 
difficulty  of  some  kind  in  human  life,  to  guard  the  children  of  God  from  the  ruin 
which  prosperity  would  bring,  and  to  awaken  the  sinful  to  a  consciousness  of  the 
insufficiency  of  an  earthly  portion,  and  the  importance  of  something  higher  and 
something  better  than  earth  can  give.  Less  than  Haman's  sorrow  no  living  man 
can  have.  But  this  fact  of  trial  in  human  condition  is  always  a  constantly 
recurring  one.  It  was  so  here.  Day  by  day  Haman  must  pass  the  gate,  and 
Mordecai  could  not  be  avoided.  The  sorrow  is  small,  but  it  is  ever  present, 
like  a  broken  tooth,  or  a  missing  step  in  the  stairs  on  which  we  must  habitually 
pass.  It  can  never  be  forgotten.  A  submissive  mind  receives  it  as  a  call  for 
acknowledgment  and  humility.  A  rebellious  mind  makes  it  an  occasion  of  com- 
plaint, and  the  same  annoyance  hardens  the  heart  in  rebellion  and  impiety.  Let 
us  rnake  a  friend  and  teacher  of  every  Mordecai  in  our  way.  We  shall  never 
be  without  him.  3.  This  leads  us  to  mark  the  effect  of  this  one  exception  upon 
Haman's  feelings  and  mind.  This  single  deficiency  completely  destroyed  all  his 
enjoyment  and  peace.  To  make  a  man  happy  whose  heart  is  astray  from  God 
is  impossible.  Whatever  of  earthly  bounties  may  be  given,  there  is  the  secret 
feeling  of  remorse  and  consciousness  of  guilt  which  nothing  can  silence  or  dismiss. 


CHAP.  T.]  ESTHER.  77 

The  mind  is  in  rebellion  against  the  only  power  which  can  give  it  peace.  4.  All 
these  circumstances  in  Haman's  condition  showed  how  small  was  his  temptation 
to  crime.  Haman  had  no  reasonable  excuse,  no  motive  but  in  his  own  wicked 
heart,  for  the  course  of  crime  on  which  he  was  to  enter.  It  was  simply  the 
working  of  malicious  wickedness,  his  own  fretful,  hateful  temper.  Mordecai  did 
him  no  injury,  diminished  none  of  his  real  advantages  or  possessions.  Such  is  the 
process  of  yielding  to  the  suggestions  and  claims  of  a  sinful  temper.  It  leads  us 
from  one  step  to  another  in  the  course  of  sin,  until  the  sinner  is  ensnared  in 
unexpected  guilt,  and  entangled  in  crimes  hideous  in  their  aspect  and  beyond 
his  power  to  escape.  It  may  be  the  appetite  for  gain,  the  haste  to  be  rich,  which 
pushes  him  on  to  every  sacrifice  of  duty,  and  through  every  species  of  fraud  and 
every  scheme  of  attempted  concealment,  tiU  God  suddenly  reveals  the  whole  plot 
and  the  man  is  ruined  beyond  recovery.  Let  no  young  man  feel  that  he  is  safe 
from  temptation  to  the  worst  of  criuiej  in  allowing  the  power  for  a  moment  of 
such  a  spirit.  Watch  against  its  first  encroachment.  Cultivate,  as  the  rule  of 
life,  high  and  pure  motives,  habits  of  self-control,  refusal  to  receive  affronts  or  to 
take  offence  at  the  errors  or  neglect  of  others.  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.)  Poisoned 
pleasures : — Give  a  whole  world  of  pleasure  to  a  man  who  loves  tne  world  and 
the  things  of  it,  he  will  soon  find  that  something  is  wanted,  though  perhaps  he 
does  not  know,  so  well  as  Haman  thought  he  did,  what  it  is.  He  finds  some  gall 
and  wormwood  that  spread  poison  over  his  pleasures.  All  his  abundance  cannot 
compensate  for  the  loss  of  some  one  thing  or  other  that  he  deems  essential  to 
his  happiness.  The  fact  is  that  the  world  cannot  give  a  right  constitution  to  his 
disordered  soul,  or  be  a  substitute  for  that  Divine  favour  in  which  lies  the  life 
of  our  souls.  (G.  Lawton.)  On  the  disorders  of  the  passions  : — These  are  the 
words  of  one  who,  though  high  in  station  and  power,  confessed  himself  to  be 
miserable.  His  whole  soul  was  shaken  with  a  storm  of  passion.  Wrath,  pride, 
and  desire  of  revenge  rose  into  fury.  With  difficulty  he  restrained  himseK  in 
public ;  but  as  soon  as  he  came  to  his  own  house  he  was  forced  to  disclose  the 
agony  of  his  mind.  I.  How  miseeable  is  vice  when  one  guilty  passion  is  capable 
OF  CREATING  SO  MUCH  TORMENT !  We  might  leasou  from  the  constitution  of  the 
rational  frame,  where  the  understanding  is  appointed  to  be  supreme  and  the 
passions  to  be  subordinate,  and  where,  if  this  due  arrangement  of  its  parts  be 
overthrown,  misery  as  necessarily  ensues  as  pain  is  consequent  in  the  animal 
frame  upon  the  distortion  of  its  members.  Had  this  been  a  soliloquy  of  Haman's 
within  himself,  it  would  have  been  a  sufficient  discovery  of  his  misery.  But  when 
we  consider  it  as  a  confession  which  he  makes  to  others,  it  is  a  proof  that  his 
misery  was  become  insupportable.  For  such  agitations  of  the  mind  every  man 
strives  to  conceal,  because  he  knows  they  dishonour  him.  Other  griefs  and 
sorrows  he  can  with  freedom  pour  out  to  a  confidant.  When  he  suffers  from 
the  injustice  or  malice  of  the  world  he  is  not  ashamed  to  acknowledge.  But  when 
his  suffering  arises  from  the  bad  dispositions  of  his  own  heart ;  when,  in  the  height 
of  prosperity,  he  is  rendered  miserable  solely  by  disappointed  pride,  every  ordinary 
motive  for  communication  ceases.  Nothing  but  the  violence  of  anguish  can  drive 
him  to  confess  a  passion  which  renders  him  odious,  and  a  weakness  which  renders 
him  despicable.  To  what  extremity  in  particular  must  he  be  reduced  before  he 
can  disclose  to  his  own  family  the  infamous  secret  of  his  misery !  In  the  eye  of 
his  family  every  man  wishes  to  appear  respectable,  and  to  cover  from  their 
knowledge  whatever  may  vilify  or  degrade  him.  Attacked  or  reproached  abroad, 
he  consoles  himself  with  his  importance  at  home ;  and  in  domestic  attachment 
and  respect  seeks  for  some  compensation  for  the  injustice  of  the  world.  Judge, 
then,  of  the  degree  of  torment  which  Haman  endured  by  its  breaking  through  all 
these  restraints  and  forcing  him  to  publish  his  shame  before  those  from  whom  all 
men  seek  most  to  hide  it.  How  severe  must  have  been  the  conflict.  Assemble  all 
the  evils  which  poverty,  disease,  or  violence  can  inflict,  and  their  stings  will  be 
found  by  far  less  pungent  than  those  which  such  guilty  passions  dart  into  the 
heart.  Amidst  the  ordinary  calamities  of  the  world  the  mind  can  exert  its  powers 
and  suggest  relief.  And  the  mind  is  properly  the  man  ;  the  sufferer  and  his 
sufferings  can  be  distinguished.  But  those  disorders  of  passion,  by  seizing  directly 
on  the  mind,  attack  human  nature  in  its  stronghold,  and  cut  off  its  last  resource. 
They  penetrate  to  the  very  seat  of  sensation,  and  convert  all  the  powers  of  thought 
into  instruments  of  torture.  1.  Let  us  remark,  in  the  event  that  is  now  before 
us,  the  awful  hand  of  God,  and  admire  His  justice  in  thus  making  the  sinner's  own 
wickedness  to  reprove  him,  and  his  backsUdings  to  correct  him.    Sceptics  reason  in 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

vain  against  the  reality  of  Divine  government.  It  is  not  a  subject  of  dispute. 
It  is  a  fact  which  carries  the  evidence  of  sense  and  displays  itself  before  our  eyes. 
We  see  the  Almighty  manifestly  pursuing  the  sinner  with  evil.  2.  Let  us  remark 
also,  from  this  example,  how  imperfectly  we  can  judge,  from  external  appearances, 
concerning  real  happiness  or  misery.  All  Persia,  it  is  probable,  envied  Haman  as 
the  happiest  person  in  the  empire  ;  while  yet,  at  the  moment  of  which  we  now 
treat,  there  was  not,  within  its  bounds,  one  more  thoroughly  wretched.  Think  not, 
when  you  behold  a  pageant  of  grandeur  displayed  to  public  view,  that  you  discern 
the  ensign  of  certain  happiness.  In  order  to  form  any  just  conclusion  you  must 
follow  the  great  man  in  the  retired  apartment,  where  he  lays  aside  his  disguise ; 
you  must  not  only  be  able  to  penetrate  into  the  interior  of  famiUes,  but  you  must 
have  a  faculty  by  which  you  can  look  into  the  inside  of  hearts.  3.  Unjust  are  our 
complaints  of  the  promiscuous  distribution  made  by  providence  of  its  favours 
among  men.  From  superficial  views  such  complaints  arise.  The  distribution 
of  the  goods  of  fortune,  indeed,  may  often  be  promiscuous  ;  that  is,  disproportioned 
to  the  moral  characters  of  men  :  but  the  allotment  of  real  happiness  is  never  so. 
For  to  the  wicked  there  is  no  peace.  They  are  like  the  troubled  sea  when  it 
cannot  rest.  They  travail  with  pain  all  their  days.  Trouble  and  anguish  prevail 
against  them.     Terrors  make  them  afraid  on  every  side.     II.  How  uNAVAiLiNa 

WOBLDLT    PROSPERITY    IS,    SINCE,    IN    THE    MIDST    OF    IT,    A    SINGLE    DISAPPOINTMENT    la 

SUFFICIENT  TO  EMBITTER  ALL  ITS  PLEASURES.  We  might  at  first  imagine  that  the 
natural  effect  of  prosperity  would  be  to  diffuse  over  the  mind  a  prevailing 
satisfaction  which  the  lesser  evils  of  life  could  not  rufSe  or  disturb.  We  might 
expect  that  as  one  in  the  full  glow  of  health  despises  the  inclemency  of  the  weather, 
so  one  in  possession  of  all  the  advantages  of  high  power  and  station  should 
disregard  slight  injuries,  and,  at  perfect  ease  with  himself,  should  view  in  the  most 
favourable  light  the  behaviour  of  others  around  him.  Such  effects  would  indeed 
follow  if  worldly  prosperity  contained  in  itself  the  true  principles  of  human  felicity. 
But  as  it  possesses  them  not,  the  very  reverse  of  those  consequences  generally 
obtains.  Prosperity  debilitates  instead  of  strengthening  the  mind.  Its  most, 
common  effect  is  to  create  an  extreme  sensibility  to  the  slightest  wound.  It 
foments  impatient  desires,  and  raises  expectations  which  no  success  can  satisfy. 
It  fosters  a  false  delicacy,  which  sickens  in  the  midst  of  indulgence.  By  repeated 
gratification  it  blunts  the  feelings  of  men  to  what  is  pleasing,  and  leaves  them 
unhappily  acute  to  whatever  is  uneasy.  Hence  the  gale,  which  another  would 
scarcely  feel,  is  to  the  prosperous  a  rude  tempest.  Hence  the  rose-leaf  doubled 
below  them  on  the  couch,  as  it  is  told  of  the  effeminate  Sybarite,  breaks  their  rest. 
Hence  the  disrespect  shown  by  Mordecai  preyed  with  such  violence  on  the  heart 
of  Haman.  Upon  no  principle  of  reason  can  we  assign  a  sufficient  cause  for 
all  the  distress  which  this  incident  occasioned  to  him.  The  cause  lay  not 
in  the  external  incident — it  lays  within  himself;  it  arose  from  a  mind  dis- 
tempered by  prosperity.  Let  tliis  example  correct  that  blind  eagerness  with 
which  we  rush  to  the  chase  of  worldly  greatness  and  honours.  Let  the  memorable 
fate  of  Haman  suggest  to  us  also  how  often,  besides  corrupting  the  mind  and 
engendering  internal  misery,  they  lead  us  among  precipices  and  betray  us  into 
ruin.  At  the  moment  when  fortune  seemed  to  smile  upon  him  with  the  most 
serene  and  settled  aspect  she  was  digging  in  secret  the  pit  for  his  fall.  Prosperity 
was  weaving  around  his  head  the  web  of  destruction.  Success  inflamed  his  pride  ; 
pride  increased  his  thirst  of  revenge ;  the  revenge  which,  for  the  sake  of  one  man, 
he  sought  to  execute  on  a  whole  nation,  incensed  the  queen ;  and  he  is  doomed 
to  suffer  the  same  death  which  he  had  prepared  for  Mordecai.  An  extensive 
contemplation  of  human  affairs  will  lead  us  to  this  conclusion,  that  among  the 
different  conditions  and  ranks  of  men  the  balance  of  happiness  is  preserved  in 
a  great  measure  equal ;  and  that  the  high  and  the  low,  the  rich  and  the  poor, 
approach,  in  point  of  real  enjoyment,  much  nearer  to  each  other  than  is  commonly 
imagined.  In  the  lot  of  man  mutual  compensations,  both  of  pleasure  and  of 
pain,  universally  take  place.  Providence  never  intended  that  any  state  here  should 
be  either  completely  happy  or  entirely  miserable.  If  the  feelings  of  pleasure  are 
more  numerous  and  more  lively  in  the  higher  departments  of  life,  such  also  are 
those  of  pain.  If  greatness  flatters  our  vanity,  it  multiplies  our  dangers.  If 
opulence  increases  our  gratifications,  it  increases,  in  the  same  proportion,  our 
desires  and  demands.  If  the  poor  are  confined  to  a  more  narrow  circle,  yet  within 
that  circle  lie  most  of  those  natural  satisfactions  which,  after  all  the  refinements 
tf  art,  are  found  to  be  the  most  genuine  and  true.     HI.  How  weak  human  naiubs 


CHAP,  v.]  ESTHER.  79 

IS  WHICH,  IN    THE   ABSENCE    OF   REAL,    IS   THUS   PHONE   TO    CREATE  TO  ITSELF   IMAOINABTt 

WOES.  Let  It  not  be  thought  that  troubles  of  this  kind  are  incident  only  to  the 
great  and  the  mighty.  Though  they,  perhaps,  from  the  intemperance  of  their 
passions,  are  peculiarly  exposed  to  them,  yet  the  disease  itself  belongs  to  human 
nature,  and  spreads  through  all  ranks.  In  the  humble  and  seemingly  quiet  shade 
of  private  life,  discontent  broods  over  its  imaginary  sorrows,  preys  upon  the  citizen 
no  less  than  upon  the  courtier,  and  often  nourishes  passions  equally  malignant  in 
the  cottage  and  in  the  palace.  Having  once  seized  the  mind,  it  spreads  its  own 
gloom  over  every  surrounding  object ;  it  everywhere  searches  out  materials  for 
itself,  and  in  no  direction  more  frequently  employs  its  unhappy  activity  than  in 
creating  divisions  amongst  mankind  and  in  magnifying  slight  provocations  into 
mortal  injuries.  Those  self-created  miseries,  imaginary  in  the  cause  but  real  in 
the  suffering,  will  be  found  to  form  a  proportion  of  human  evils  not  inferior,  either 
in  severity  or  in  number,  to  all  that  we  endure  from  the  unavoidable  calamities 
of  life.  In  situations  where  much  comfort  might  be  enjoyed,  this  man's  superiority, 
and  that  man's  neglect,  our  jealousy  of  a  friend,  our  hatred  of  a  rival,  an  imagined 
affront,  or  a  mistaken  point  of  honour,  allow  us  no  repose.  Hence  discords  in 
families,  animosities  among  friends,  and  wars  among  nations.  Hence  Haman 
miserable  in  the  midst  of  all  that  greatness  could  bestow.  Hence  multitudes  in 
the  most  obscure  stations  for  whom  providence  seemed  to  have  prepared  a  quiet 
life,  no  less  eager  in  their  petty  broils,  nor  less  tormented  by  their  passions,  than  if 
princely  honours  were  the  prize  for  which  they  contended.  From  this  train  of 
observation  which  the  text  has  suggested,  can  we  avoid  reflecting  upon  the  disorder 
in  which  human  nature  plainly  appears  at  present  to  lie  ?  Amidst  this  wreck  of 
human  nature,  traces  still  remain  which  indicate  its  Author.  Those  high  powers 
of  conscience  and  reason,  that  capacity  for  happiness,  that  ardour  of  enterprise, 
that  glow  of  affection,  which  often  break  through  the  gloom  of  human  vanity  and 
guilt,  are  like  the  scattered  columns,  the  broken  arches,  and  defaced  sculptures  of 
some  fallen  temple,  whose  ancient  splendour  appears  amidst  its  ruins.  In  this 
view  let  us  with  reverence  look  up  to  that  Divine  Personage,  who  descended 
into  this  world  on  purpose  to  be  the  light  and  the  life  of  men ;  who  came  in 
the  fulness  of  grace  and  truth  to  repair  the  desolation  of  many  generations, 
to  restore  order  among  the  works  of  God,  and  to  raise  up  a  new  earth  and  new 
heavens,  wherein  righteousness  shall  dwell  for  ever.  Under  His  tuition  let  us 
put  ourselves ;  and  amidst  the  storms  of  passion  to  which  we  are  here  exposed, 
and  the  slippery  paths  which  we  are  left  to  tread,  never  trust  presumptuously 
to  our  own  understanding.  Thankful  that  a  heavenly  Conductor  vouchsafes  His 
aid,  let  us  earnestly  pray  that  from  Him  may  descend  Divine  light  to  guide 
our  steps,  and  Divine  strength  to  fortify  our  minds.  Fix,  then,  this  conclusion 
in  your  minds,  that  the  destruction  of  your  virtue  is  the  destruction  of  your  peace. 
At  your  first  setting  out  in  life,  especially  when  yet  unacquainted  with  the  world 
and  its  snares,  when  every  pleasure  enchants  with  its  smile,  and  every  object 
shines  with  the  gloss  of  novelty,  beware  of  the  seducing  appearances  which 
surround  you,  and  recollect  what  others  have  suffered  from  the  power  of  headstrong 
desire.  If  you  allow  any  passion,  even  though  it  be  esteemed  innocent,  to  acquire 
an  absolute  ascendant,  your  inward  peace  will  be  impaired.  From  the  first  to  the 
last  of  man's  abode  on  earth,  the  discipline  must  never  be  relaxed  of  guarding  the 
heart  from  the  dominion  of  passion.  Eager  passions  and  violent  desires  were  not 
made  for  man.  They  exceed  his  sphere.  They  find  no  adequate  objects  on  earth, 
and  of  course  can  be  productive  of  nothing  but  misery.  [H.  Blair,  D.D.)  The 
mission  and  the  curse  of  jealousy  : — In  the  formation  of  character,  as  in  the  make- 
up of  the  world,  nothing  is  ever  lost  or  misplaced.  The  heat  of  the  tropics  in  the 
belt  of  the  equator  makes  trade-wind  currents,  and  trade-wind  currents  make 
northerly  gales,  and  northerly  gales  bring  hail  and  snow,  and  the  rivers  swoUen 
from  the  mountain  streams  flow  again  into  the  ocean.  There  are  scavengers  on 
land  and  sea  which  consume  the  world's  refuse;  there  are  processes  at  work  in 
the  economy  of  nature  by  which  the  refuse  of  the  barn-yard  and  the  dry  bones 
of  the  slaughter-house  become  restorers  of  the  soil  and  fertilisers  of  Mother  Earth 
robbed  yearly  of  her  life-giving  qualities.  And  in  the  economy  of  character  we 
see  this  same  endless  chain  of  results.  God  does  not  work  at  right  angles  to 
His  guiding  principles.  When  a  great  law  or  tendency  is  boldly  thrown  out  in  the 
material  world,  we  shall  be  sure,  if  we  look  closely  enough,  to  find  a  corresponding 
principle  in  the  mental  and  moral  world.  Just  as  there  are  sharks  in  the  ocean 
and  crocodiles  in  the  jungle,  and  lizards  and  snakes  and  a  world  of  crawling 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

things  about  us ;  just  as  there  are  fevers  and  poisons  and  dreadful  illnesses  stored 
up  in  certain  lovely-looking  regions,  so  there  are  dreadful  passions  and  instincts, 
revenges  and  jealousies,  stored  away  in  nature,  which  look  as  charming  but  are 
as  deceitful  as  Brazilian  wild  meadow  land.  All  these  things  have  their  use. 
Consider  the  mission  and  curse  of  jealousy.  I.  Its  mission.  Have  you  ever  felt 
in  a  yacht  that  the  masts  and  the  sails  could  not  stand  the  strain  of  wind  much 
longer  ?  But  the  skipper  at  the  helm  laughs  down  your  fears,  for  he  knows 
how  much  lead  is  on  the  keel,  or  how  much  centre-board  is  down.  Bulk  is  planted 
in  that  boat  somewhere  on  purpose  to  steady  it  when  the  wind  draws  on  for 
a  blow.  In  some  such  way  has  jealousy  been  planted  in  human  nature  to  steady 
the  character  when  flaws  of  temptation  or  gusty  currents  of  animalism  strike  us. 
In  its  existence  we  find  the  reason  for  monogamy  and  marriage  faithfulness  and 
domestic  happiness  and  concord.  Why  should  we  be  jealous  if  the  Christian  view 
of  marriage  is  false  ?  God  has  placed  this  Cerberus-like  attribute,  this  watch-dog 
instinct,  chained  but  barking,  at  the  door  of  domestic  happiness  on  purpose  to 
guard  the  honour  and  sanctity  of  those  within.  II.  Its  cnRSE.  Any  force  perverted 
becomes  an  evil,  and  when  jealousy  steps  an  inch  beyond  its  lawful  limits,  then  it 
becomes  the  direst  curse.  It  is  just  like  the  mission  or  the  curse  of  any  strong 
drug  or  medicine.  Any  instinct  or  attribute  which  becomes  inflamed  or  enlarged 
and  assumes  an  undue  prominence,  causes  trouble  in  the  character,  in  the  same 
way  in  which  any  enlarged  or  congested  organ  asserts  itself  with  pain  and  irritation 
in  the  physical  system.  And  when  jealousy  passes  beyond  its  proper  sphere  and 
rankles  in  the  nature  like  some  smouldering  back-log,  it  lights  up  every  new  object 
which  is  thrown  upon  it.  It  is  like  a  secret  fever,  which  burns  and  keeps  one  hot 
amid  all  sorts  of  cool  surroundings,  as  when  Haman  said,  "  Yet  all  this  availeth 
me  nothing  so  long  as  I  see  Mordecai  the  Jew  sitting  at  the  king's  gate."  It 
assumes  many  varying  forms.  It  appears  as  tribe  jealousy  with  its  clannish 
smallness ;  it  appears  in  the  countless  bickerings  of  society,  in  the  pride  of  caste, 
and  in  that  vulgar  pride  which  rejoices  in  trampling  upon  caste ;  it  is  the  great 
motive  power  of  ambitious  and  scheming  women  ;  it  gives  the  cud  of  reflection  to 
innumerable  artists,  painters,  musicians,  and  business  men.  It  is  with  the 
physician  in  consultation  with  his  fellow  physician  as  they  finger  the  pulse  of 
their  dying  patient.  It  is  with  the  warring  lawyers,  in  strife  over  the  sentence 
upon  the  accused  murderer;  it  defiles  the  sacred  chancel,  it  defiles  the  pulpit 
steps ;  it  makes  us  think  hard  things  of  our  brethren.  In  all  these  instances 
it  is  a  moral  malaria  within  the  soul.  It  is  the  sight  of  the  hated  Mordecai 
sitting  at  the  gate.  The  old  Goth  Alaric  was  called  the  scourge  of  God, 
as  he  came  thundering  down  the  plains  of  Lombardy.  But  jealousy  is  a 
greater  scourge  than  the  old  Goth.  It  is  the  root  of  aU  our  domestic  troubles. 
Jealousy  means  pride ;  it  means  selfishness ;  it  means  inordinate  self-conceit ; 
it  means  being  fiist  all  the  time  ;  it  means  a  blighted  life  and  a  miserable  old 
age.  If  you  want  to  please  yourself  you  can  count  up  what  you  save  and  all 
you  have  got,  as  Haman  did,  and  yet  all  this  will  avail  you  nothing  every 
time  you  see  the  one  you  are  jealous  of  sitting  where  you  want  to  be.  But  il 
you  cast  these  demons  out — jealousy,  selfishness,  self-conceit — if  you  sink  your- 
self and  throw  overboard  for  ever  this  thought  of  always  being  first,  a  whole 
new  world  of  life  and  honour  will  be  before  you.  {IV.  Wilber/orce  Newton.) 
The  festering  thorn  that  poisons  the  body  : — It  does  not  take  much  to  spoil  a  man's 
life.  One  little  thing  may  mar  his  usefulness  and  the  veriest  trifle  may  destroy 
his  peace.  The  record  of  lost  men  will  be  a  record  of  apparent  trifles.  "  One 
thing  lacking  "  will  be  the  keynote  of  the  wail  of  hell,  as  it  is  the  cry  of  those  who 
have  slipped  down  when  they  have  reached  the  topmost  rung  but  one  of  the  ladder 
of  life's  ambition.  This  man  would  have  been  the  greatest  of  senators  but  for  one 
infirmity.  He  has  brilliance,  power,  eloquence,  wisdom,  but  he  has  no  stability. 
That  man  would  have  been  the  greatest  soldier.  He  has  courage,  knowledge,  skill, 
self-denial,  but  he  has  an  unbridled  temper.  And  so  it  is  in  every  grade  of  life. 
In  Haman  we  have  a  notable  example  of  a  worldly  life,  and  a  potent  instance  of 
the  working  of  sin,  sending  its  poisonous  influence  through  a  man's  character  until 
it  works  out  its  own  deadly  end.  "  Sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth 
death."  We  have  the  history  of  sin  in  the  world  exemplified  in  this  individual 
man.  I.  The  poison  latent.  There  is  not  a  thing  on  earth  but  is  poisoned.  We 
attain  learning,  and  while  attaining  it  we  swallow  the  poison  with  which  it  is 
infected.  We  derive  honour,  but  at  the  same  time  we  lay  hold  of  the  seeds  of 
misery  which  accompany  it.     Heavy  is  the  head  that  wears  a  crown.     The  baton 


CHAP.  T.]  ESTHER.  81 

of  power  is  a  symbol  of  weariness.  The  seat  of  honour  is  a  seat  of  persecution. 
There  is  a  great  system  of  compensation  in  life  which  makes  men  much  more 
nearly  equal  than  they  appear  to  be.  II.  Notice  the  sore  festeeing.  This 
festering  grievance  was  nothing  but  a  sentimental  fancy.  And  such  are  most  of 
our  festering  sores.  Mental,  moral,  or  bodily  maladies  are  soon  got  rid  of,  but 
visionary  troubles — never.  A  man  will  recover  after  small-pox  or  fever ;  he  will 
revive  after  bereavement  or  sorrow ;  he  will  be  cheerful  after  the  loss  of  a  leg  or 
the  ruin  of  his  pecuniary  affairs.  But  once  let  him  get  a  sentimental  grievance, 
and  he  is  never  the  same  again.  III.  Notice  the  sore  working.  Death.  {J.  J.  S. 
Bird.)  The  ruinous  nature  of  discontent : — In  treating  upon  these  words  I  shall 
endeavour  to  show — I.  That  the  discontent  thet  express  is  common  with 
persons  in  evert  possible  condition  or  LiFB.  n.  Its  evil  and  ruinous  nature. 
III.  Its  contrariety  to  the  Christian  temper.  {W.  Richardson.)  Human 
limitations  : — Is  there  not  a  gnawing  worm  in  the  heart  of  every  joy  ?  Is  there 
not  a  Mordecai  in  the  way  of  every  ambitious  man  ?  We  cannot  have  all  things 
exactly  our  own  way ;  there  is  one  nail  we  cannot  extract,  one  lock  we  cannot  undo, 
one  gate  we  cannot  open,  one  claim  we  cannot  pacify.  In  every  path  there  would 
seem  to  be  a  deep,  gaping  grave  which  even  mountains  cannot  fill  up.  How  near 
are  some  men  to  perfect  bliss  1  If  but  one  thorn  could  be  extracted,  then  the  men 
themselves  would  be  safe  in  heaven  ;  but  that  one  thorn  abides  to  remind  them  of 
their  limitations,  and  to  sting  them  with  a  useful  sense  of  disappointment. 
{J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Haman's  confession : — This  confession  is  calculated  to 
impress  two  things  upon  us.  I.  That  material  things  cannot  make  us  happy. 
n.  That  human  happiness  is  au,  too  easily  destroyed.  The  work  of  destruc- 
tion is,  in  general,  easy.  What  is  a  flower  worth  after  you  roughly  plant  your  foot 
upon  it?  What  damage  is  done  to  a  fair  picture  by  throwing  a  bottle  of  ink 
against  it  1  A  servant  can  by  mistake  burn  in  a  few  minutes  a  MS.  on  which 
years  of  study  were  expended  by  her  master.  A  succession  of  strokes  with  a 
hammer  soon  disfigure  the  most  skilful  and  costly  piece  of  furniture  that  ever  was 
made  ;  and  it  cannot  have  escaped  the  notice  of  any  thoughtful  man  that  human 
happiness  is  a  flower  of  amazing  delicacy.  It  takes  but  little  to  lay  it  low.  A 
headache  or  the  scratch  of  a  pin  unfits  us  for  enjoying  ourselves.  An  unkind 
remark  renders  us  miserable  for  days.  A  disappointment  does  the  same ;  and  so 
with  scores  of  other  things.  Mordecai's  want  of  respect  was  in  itself  a  small 
matter ;  but  it  sadly  interfered  with  Haman's  enjoyment.  It  had  the  effect  of 
neutralising,  and  more  than  neutralising,  all  the  felicities  of  his  office  and  condition. 
He  may  be  compared  to  the  owner  of  a  mansion  sitting  at  a  blind  window  seeing 
nothing,  and  all  the  while  there  are  windows  in  every  room  from  which  excellent 
views  of  the  surrounding  scenery  can  be  obtained  if  he  would  only  place  himself 
at  them  and  look  through  them.  Haman  made  the  mistake — 1.  Of  thinking  too 
much  about  Mordecai's  refusal  to  pay  him  the  honour  to  which  he  considered 
he  was  entitled.  2.  Of  setting  too  high  a  value  on  the  respect  of  Mordecai. 
(Homilist.)  Things  that  ought  to  be  unnecessary  for  happiness : — A  forcible 
writer  of  our  day  has  some  remarks  to  the  point  which  will  well  bear  quotation — a 
few  words  only  being  altered.  He  is  speaking  of  the  great  Lord  Bacon.  After 
describing  the  chancellor's  strenuous  efforts  within  his  library,  where  his  rare 
powers  were  guided  by  an  enlarged  philanthropy  and  a  sincere  love  of  truth,  this 
writer  observes:  "Far  different  was  the  situation  of  the  great  philosopher  when 
he  came  forth  from  his  study  and  laboratory  to  mingle  with  the  crowd  which  filled 
the  galleries  of  Whitehall.  In  aU  that  crowd  there  was  no  man  equally  qualified 
to  render  great  and  lasting  services  to  mankind.  But  in  all  that  crowd  there  was 
not  a  heart  more  set  on  things  which  no  man  ought  to  suffer  to  be  necessary  to  his 
happiness  — on  things  which  can  often  be  obtained  only  by  the  sacrifice  of  integrity 
and  honour.  To  be  the  leader  of  the  human  race  in  the  career  of  improvement 
...  to  be  revered  by  the  latest  generations  as  the  most  illustrious  among  the 
benefactors  of  mankind — all  this  was  within  his  reach.  But  all  this  availed  him 
nothing,  while  some  quibbling  special  pleader  was  promoted  before  him  to  the 
bench,  while  some  obscure  commoner  took  precedence  of  him  by  virtue  of  a> 
purchased  coronet  .  .  .  while  some  buffoon,  versed  in  all  the  latest  scandal  of  the 
court,  could  draw  a  louder  laugh  from  the  king."  This  illustration  shows  how  the 
profoundest  intellect  may  be  enslaved  by  a  puerile  self-conceit.  It  shows  that 
refined  mental  power,  together  with  exalted  rank,  immense  reputation,  European 
greatness  (in  fact  or  in  tendency),  may  yet  be  coupled  with  a  wretched,  drivelling 
idolatry  of  toys  and  follies.    And  the  difference  is  soon  reached ;  we  see  that  the 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

sonl  of  man  is  too  capacious  to  be  filled  by  the  largest  gifts  of  earth,  and  that  time 
will  not  satisfy  the  cravings  of  a  spirit  made  for  eternity.  Wealth  not  happi- 
jiesg : — Haman's  wealth,  honour,  power,  palace,  friends,  &c.,  failed  to  satisfy  and 
make  him  happy.  "  There  be  as  many  miseries  beyond  riches,  as  on  this  side  of 
them."  "  Pleasure  is  like  lightning,  a  flash  and  away.  The  world  is  like  an 
artichoke — nine  parts  of  it  are  unprofitable  leaves  ;  about  it  there  is  a  little  picking 
meat,  and,  in  the  midst,  there  is  a  core  enough  to  choke  them  that  devour  it."  It 
may  be  said  of  the  world,  as  of  Athens,  "  It  is  a  fine  place  to  pass  through,  for 
there  is  much  to  be  learned  there ;  but  it  is  a  bad  place  to  live  at,  there  are  so  many 
dangers  in  it."  The  pleasures  of  sin  are  momentary  and  unsatisfying  ;  its  punish- 
ment is  eternal  and  terrible.  Adrian,  a  pope  of  Eome,  said,  "  I  had  great  hard- 
ships and  troubles  in  early  life,  but  none  gave  me  such  misery  as  the  papal  crown." 
Diocletian,  a  Eoman  emperor,  gave  up  his  sovereignty,  and  retired  to  private  life 
for  comfort  and  happiness.  It  would  be  very  foolish  to  pay  genuine  golden 
sovereigns  for  base  counterfeit  farthings.  It  is  incredible  that  an  angel  should 
come  from  heaven  to  seek  enjoyment  with  a  baby's  toys.  And  the  soul  should  seek 
satisfaction  and  blessing  from  God.  (H.  Burton.)  Unsatisfied  : — In  the  deserts 
of  Central  Australia  there  grows  a  plant  called  the  Nardoo  plant,  which  although 
it  satisfies  hunger,  is  said  to  be  destitute  of  nutritious  elements,  and  a  party  of 
English  explorers  once  perished  of  starvation  while  feeding  daily  upon  it.  It  is  so 
in  the  experience  of  those  who  find  their  portion  in  earthly  things.  Their  desires  are 
crowned,  but  they  are  actually  perishing  of  want.  {Hugh  Maanillan,  D.D.)  The 
hlack  ewe  : — Some  time  ago,  as  a  gentleman  was  passing  over  one  of  the  extensive 
downs  in  the  West  of  England,  about  mid-day,  where  a  large  flock  of  sheep  was 
feeding,  and  observing  the  shepherd  sitting  by  the  roadside  preparing  to  eat  his 
dinner,  he  stopped  his  horse,  and  entered  into  conversation  with  him  to  this  effect : 
"  Well,  shepherd,  you  look  cheerful  and  contented,  and  I  daresay  you  have  few 
cares  to  vex  you.  I,  who  am  a  man  of  pretty  large  property,  cannot  but  look  at 
such  men  as  you  with  a  kind  of  envy."  "  Why,  sir,"  replied  the  shepherd,  "  'tis 
true  I  have  no  troubles  like  yours ;  and  I  could  do  well  enough  was  it  not  for  that 
black  ewe  that  you  see  yonder  amongst  my  flock.  I  have  often  begged  my  master  to 
kill  or  sell  her ;  but  he  won't,  though  she  is  the  plague  of  my  life,  for  no  sooner  do 
I  sit  down  to  look  at  my  book,  or  take  up  my  wallet  to  get  my  dinner,  but  away  she 
sets  off  over  the  down,  and  the  rest  follow  her,  so  that  I  have  many  a  weary  step 
after  them.  There,  you  see,  she's  off,  and  they  are  all  after  her."  "  Ah,  friend," 
said  the  gentleman,  '•  I  see  every  man  has  a  black  ewe  in  his  flock  to  plague 
him  as  well  as  I."  Small  things  annoy  the  greatest : — How  small  things  may 
annoy  the  greatest  1  Even  a  mouse  troubles  an  elephant,  a  gnat  a  lion,  a  very  flea 
may  disquiet  a  giant.  What  weapon  can  be  nearer  to  nothing  than  the  sting  of 
this  wasp?  Yet  what  a  painful  wound  hath  it  given  me!  That  scarce  visible 
point,  how  it  envenoms,  and  rankles,  and  swells  up  the  flesh.  The  tenderness  of 
the  part  adds  much  to  the  grief.  If  I  be  thus  vexed  with  the  touch  of  an  angry  fly, 
how  shall  I  be  able  to  endure  the  sting  of  a  tormenting  conscience.  {Bp.  Hall.) 
Worldly  possessions  cannot  give  full  satisfaction  : — Who  that  looked  upon  Haman  as 
he  rode  forth  in  all  the  glory  of  purple  and  gold,  or  as  he  lounged  on  his  divan  in 
the  midst  of  his  friends,  would  have  supposed  that  he  had  anything  to  cause  him 
so  much  annoyance  ?  And  yet  is  it  not  always  so  ?  There  is  a  skeleton  in  every 
house,  the  worm  in  every  rose,  sorrow  in  every  heart.  Look  into  that  stately 
mansion.  See  how  richly  it  is  furnished  with  finely  carved  chairs,  luxurious 
lounges,  marble-topped  tables,  and  bookcases  with  rows  of  costly  books.  Pictures 
of  the  choicest  character  deck  the  walls.  Busts  and  antiques  are  here  and  there. 
The  velvety  carpets  feel  like  a  mossy  bank  beneath  the  feet.  Ask  the  occupants  of 
the  mansion  if  they  are  content,  and  perhaps  the  owner  will  tell  you,  "  All  this 
availeth  me  nothing  "  so  long  as  my  neighbour  on  the  hill  has  a  house  larger  and 
better  furnished.  The  wife  will  perhaps  tell  you  that  "  all  availeth  nothing  "  so 
long  as  a  certain  family  is  accounted  as  higher  in  the  social  scale  than  hers ;  or 
because  at  a  dinner-party  she  noticed  with  annoyance  that  some  one  had  taken 
precedence  of  herself  ;  or  because  she  had  not  been  invited  to  some  great  gathering 
where  certain  of  the  Hite  were  expected.  The  absurdities  and  vexations  of  the 
weak-minded  and  exclusive  are  more  than  equal  to  those  of  the  excluded.  The 
petty  social  fanciful  annoyances  oft  make  all  comforts  and  possessions  to  "  avail 
nothing  "  in  the  production  of  real  happiness.  Enter  the  shop  of  that  tradesman. 
What  a  large  business  he  carries  on  I  Yet  he  in  his  soul  is  not  happy.  He  is 
envious.     lie  will  confe  :3  to  himself,  if  not  to  you,  "  All  this  availeth  me  nothing  " 


CHAP,  n.]  ESTHER.  83 

so  long  as  a  certain  competitor  in  the  same  business  can  buy  cheaper  or  make 
money  more  rapidly  than  myself.  Go  along  a  country  road,  and  note  some  pretty 
homestead  nestling  among  the  trees  ;  surely  that  must  be  the  abode  of  content  and 
peace  !  You  approach  it,  and  meeting  the  occupant  thereof,  you  congratulate  him 
on  the  beauty  of  his  dwelling-place  and  charm  of  the  surrounding  hills ;  he, 
haggard  and  worn,  only  replies,  "  All  this  availeth  me  nothing."  Look  at  my 
neighbour's  barn,  how  much  larger,  and  his  crops  how  much  finer  than  mine  1  So 
the  warrior  or  statesman,  the  preacher  and  the  potentate,  are  alike  discontented. 
Dissatisfied,  successful  men  !  The  blessings  and  privileges  they  possess  are  nothing ; 
the  trifling  lack  or  annoyance  is  everything.  Their  state  is  as  sinful  as  it  is  miser- 
able. They  are  lineal  descendants  of  Haman  the  Agagite.  It  is  not  in  the  nature 
of  worldly  possessions  or  position  to  give  full  satisfaction.  If  they  could,  the  results 
•would  have  been  injurious  to  man's  moral  nature.  No  thoughts  of  higher  things 
entering  man's  mind,  he  would  soon  have  been  degraded  to  the  level  of  the  brute 
creation.     {F.  Hastings.) 

Vers.  14.  Then  said  Zeresli  his  wife  and  all  Ills  friends. — Bad  advice : — If  a 
proud  man  make  his  complaint  to  you  of  his  unhappiness,  you  but  make  him 
more  unhappy  if  you  advise  him  to  gratify  his  pride  by  unreasonable  and  sinful 
means.  You  might  as  well  advise  a  man  dying  of  a  dropsy  to  pour  into  his  throat 
large  quantities  of  water.  Advise  him  to  mortify  his  pride,  and  to  learn  of  Him 
who  was  meek,  and  lowly  of  heart ;  to  deny  himself,  to  prepare  himself  for  bearing 
the  cross,  to  take  upon  himself  the  yoke  of  Christ,  which  is  easy.  The  humble 
man  is  always  happy.  The  proud  man  can  never  be  happy  till  he  is  effectually 
humbled.  It  is  not  consistent  with  the  nature  of  things,  nor  with  the  will  of  the 
High  and  Lofty  One,  who  abhors  the  proud,  that  the  gratifications  which  pride 
requires  should  ever  give  pure  or  lasting  pleasure  to  the  soul.  (G.  Lawson.) 
Women  best  and  worst : — The  truth  is  women  are  the  best  and  the  worst.  Because 
they  can  be  the  best,  they  can  be  the  worst.  Because  they  can  rise  to  the  highest 
in  moral  grandeur,  in  self-sacrificing  love,  in  the  things  which  bring  human  nature 
nearest  to  the  angelic  mood,  therefore  they  can  sink  to  the  lowest,  and  when  "  past 
feeling  "  can  be  most  like  the  angels  fallen.  Thank  God  that  your  best  friends 
would  renounce  your  society  rather  than  stand  by  you  in  anything  revengeful  or 
mean.    {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  VI. 

YxB.  1.  On  that  night  could  not  the  king  sleep. — The  power  of  a  sleepless 
night : — ^A  trifling  circumstance  to  record.  Ah  !  how  important  are  little  things : 
the  unnoticed  things  are  the  life-blood  of  the  world.  In  a  great  palace  we  think  of 
the  marble  and  the  stone,  the  cedar  and  the  iron,  but  who  thinks  of  the  mortar  and 
the  nails?  And  yet,  in  the  architecture,  mortar  and  nails  are  as  important  as 
pillars  and  columns  and  beams.  Thus  in  the  architecture  of  the  world,  and  in  the 
conduct  of  its  moral  affairs,  trifles  are  the  mortar  and  the  nails.  I.  The  first 
thing  I  see  here  is  i.  wonderfuIj  lesson  in  the  illimitable  plan  of  peovidbnce. 
How  events  ripen  to  the  close  I  How  crime  matures  itself  to  its  doom  !  Amazing 
is  the  work  of  providence.  You  see  two  distinct  sets  of  actions  progressing  at  the 
same  moment.  The  election  of  Esther,  the  choice  of  a  merely  capricious  king ; 
the  elevation  to  dignity :  the  integrity  of  Mordecai ;  the  ambition  of  Haman : 
the  desire  to  crush  the  Jews ;  the  yearning  desire  to  save  them.  All  these  things 
are  working  together.  You  remember  "  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work." 
And  "  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God."  Calmly  and 
surely  proceeds  the  Divine  plan,  and,  unaware  of  the  Divine  idea,  proceeds  the 
infernal  plan.  See  how  triumphantly  Haman  looks  at  the  letters  of  persecution 
signed  with  the  signet  of  the  king :  and  see  how  he  gloats  as  the  morning  sun 
shines  over  the  black  gallows-tree,  and  never  for  a  moment  suspects  it  to  be  his 
own.  The  poor  blind  fool  checkmated  by  himself  1  ingeniously  rearing  his  own 
scaffold,  and  twisting  the  rope  for  his  own  neck.  You  will  perhaps  say  to  me, 
"  Why  did  God  allow  all  this  to  go  on  so  far  ?  Why  did  He  not  check  Haman  in 
the  first  moment  of   his  invidious  attempting  ?     Why  is  the  crime  matured  ?  " 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

And  the  answer  perhaps  only  pushes  the  inquiry  farther  back.  "  Why  did  He 
allow  Haman  to  be  near  the  court  at  all  ?  "  The  answer  must  be,  that  God  and 
providence  are  not  the  capricious  and  intermeddling  agencies  you  have  sometimes 
supposed:  they  prosecute  their  own  path,  and  Satan  and  sin  prosecute  their  path 
too.  On  they  hasten,  every  step  hastens  to  judgment ;  every  movement  winds  the 
entangling  coil   of   circumstances    more   irretrievably  around    them.     II.    How, 

FROM     THE     WIDE       SWEEP       OF      IMMENSE      PROVIDENCES      WE      DESCEND     TO     TRIFLES ! 

How  the  scheme  of  providence  includes  and  encloses  the  small  details  of 
human  affairs  1  I  will  extract  three  other  lessons — 1.  How  remote,  and  yet 
how  distinct  and  minute,  are  the  operations  of  God's  providence !  Here  was 
a  circumstance  connected  with  the  history  of  the  Church,  with  the  preservation 
of  God's  people,  and  with  the  conservation  of  Divine  truth,  and  the  advent 
of  the  Messiah.  How  small  a  place  is  Shushan  and  the  whole  of  Media  and 
Ahasuerus  !  2.  See  the  perfect  compatibility,  nay,  unity,  of  prayer  with  the  plans 
of  providence.  The  prayers  of  Mordecai,  the  mournings  of  the  Jews,  they  are  the 
operating  causes  round  the  sleepless  couch.  The  prayer  so  troubled  the  couch, 
that  the  king  could  not  sleep.  3.  May  I  not  apply  it  yet  once  more,  and  ask  you 
the  meaning  of  some  sleepless  nights,  some  troubled  days?  (E.  P.  Hood.) 
Ahasuerus'  sleepless  night — the  Divine  government : — 1.  Who  is  the  sleepless 
monarch  on  this  night?  2.  What  was  the  book  he  read  that  night ?  3.  What 
was  the  discovery  he  made  that  night?  4.  What  was  the  result  of  the  discovery 
that  night?  Two  things,  at  least,  came  out  from  the  king's  sleeplessness  this 
night.  (1)  The  preservation  and  exaltation  of  Mordecai.  (2)  The  frustration  of 
enormous  wickedness,  and  the  salvation  of  the  whole  Jewish  people.  Truly,  this 
was  a  memorable  night.  From  this  subject  we  may  learn  a  few  lessons  in  con- 
nection with  God's  government  of  the  world.     I.  He  often  works  out  His  purpose 

THROUGH  THE  FREE    WORKINGS    OF    DEPRAVED    MINDS,  UNCONSCIOUS    OF    HiS    INFLUENCE. 

The  brethren  of  Joseph,  prompted  by  evil  passions,  sell  him  to  the  Ishmaelites, 
and  he  is  borne  a  slave  into  Egypt.  They  are  free  in  their  wicked  counsels  and 
deed;  but,  unconsciously  to  themselves,  all  the  while  they  are  carrying  out  the 
purposes  of  Heaven.  The  same  with  Vespasian  and  Titus  in  their  destruction  of 
Jerusalem.  Though  a  spirit  most  fiendish  moved  and  directed  these  bloodthirsty 
and  ambitious  pagans,  yet  they  wrought  out  almost  with  letter  minuteness  the 
long-threatened  judgment  of  Heaven.  As  nature  moves  on  to  the  magnificence  of 
summer,  as  well  through  cloudy  skies  and  thunderstorms  as  sunshine  and  serenity, 
BO  providence  advances  its  purposes,  as  well  through  such  a  mind  as  that  of 
Ahasuerus  as  that  of  Peter,  or  of  Paul.  H.  He  always  overrules  the  conduct 
OF  SINNERS  for  THE  OVERTHROW  OF  THEIR  OWN  PLANS.  The  vcry  dcstruction  which 
Haman  and  his  accomplices  plotted  for  Mordecai  and  the  whole  Jewish  people 
came  upon  themselves.  On  the  lofty  gallows  that  Haman  had  raised  for  another, 
he  was  hanged  himself.  Thus  it  ever  is.  The  men  of  Babel  build  a  tower  in  order 
to  be  kept  in  close  social  combination  ;  but  that  structure  leads  to  their  confusion 
and  separation.  The  Egyptians  rush  into  the  Ked  Sea  in  order  to  wreak  ven- 
geance on  the  fleeing  Israelites;  but  the  channel  in  which  they  sought  to  bury 
their  enemies  became  their  own  grave.  It  is  the  very  nature  of  sin  to  confound 
itself.  Its  struggles  for  pleasure  will  lead  to  misery ;  for  honour,  will  lead  to 
degradation.  Sin  always  conducts  the  sinner  to  a  result  never  sought,  never 
intended.  What  sinner  aims,  as  an  intelligent  purpose,  at  the  blasting  of  all  his 
hopes,  the  loss  of  all  his  friendships,  the  everlasting  ruin  of  his  soul  ?  Yet  to 
these  every  sin  he  commits  is  conducting  him.  Like  Haman,  every  sinner  is 
building  his  own  gallows.     Sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death.     III.  He 

BOMETIMES    WORKS     OUT    HiS     PURPOSES    BY    MEANS     APPARENTLY     MOST    INSIGNIFICANT. 

{Homilist.)  The  sleepless  night: — I.  How  God  operates  to  mighty  ends 
THROUGH  INCONSIDERABLE  AGENCIES.  We  are  apt  to  measure  God  by  standards 
established  between  man  and  man.  The  Divine  greatness  is  regarded  as  that  of 
some  very  eminent  king :  what  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  dignity  of  the 
potentate  is  regarded  as  inconsistent  with  the  dignity  of  God  ;  and  what  seems  to 
us  to  contribute  to  that  dignity  is  carried  up  to  the  heavenly  courts,  or  supposed  to 
exist  there  in  the  highest  perfection.  But  we  should  gain  a  grander  and  juster 
idea  of  our  Maker  by  considering  in  what  He  differs  from  men,  than  by  ascribing 
to  Him,  only  in  an  infinite  degree,  what  is  found  amongst  ourselves.  It  is  not  by 
putting'  unbounded  resources  at  the  disposal  of  God  and  representing  Him  as 
working  through  stupendous  instrumentality  that  we  frame  the  highest  notions  of 
Him  as  a  sovereign  and  ruler.     There  is  something  sublimer  and  more  over- 


CHAP.  VI.]  ESTHER.  85 

-whelming  in  those  sayings  of  Scripture,  "  Out  of  the  mouth  of  babes  and  sucklings 
hast  Thou  ordained  strength,"  "  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  the  world 
to  confcund  the  wise,  the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  things  that  are 
mighty,"  than  in  the  most  magnificent  and  gorgeous  descriptions  of  dominion  and 
strength.  Christianity,  for  example,  diffused  through  the  instrumentality  of  twelve 
legions  of  angels  would  have  been  immeasurably  inferior,  as  a  trophy  of  Omnipo- 
tence, to  Christianity  diffused  through  the  instrumentality  of  twelve  fishermen. 
When  I  survey  the  heavens,  with  their  glorious  troop  of  stars,  and  am  told  that  the 
Almighty  employs  them  to  His  own  majestic  ends,  I  seem  to  feel  as  though  they 
were  worthy  of  being  employed  by  the  Creator.  But  show  me  a  tiny  insect,  just 
floating  in  the  breeze,  and  tell  me  that,  by  and  through  that  insect,  God  will  carry 
forward  the  largest  and  most  stupendous  of  His  purposes,  and  I  am  indeed  filled 
with  amazement.  And  is  there  anything  strained  or  incorrect  in  associating  with 
an  insect  the  redemption  of  the  world  ?  Nay,  not  so.  In  saving  the  race  whence 
Messiah  was  to  spring,  God  worked  through  the  disturbed  sleep  of  the  Persian 
monarch,  and  the  buzz  of  an  inconsiderable  insect  might  have  sufficed  to  break 
that  monarch's  repose.  When  God  interfered  on  behalf  of  His  people  groaning 
under  the  bondage  of  Pharaoh,  it  was  with  miracle  and  prodigy,  with  a  mighty 
hand  and  a  stretched-out  arm ;  but  I  fall  before  Him  as  yet  more  amazing  in 
wisdom  and  power,  when  I  find  the  bloody  purpose  of  Haman  defeated  through 
Buch  instrumentality  as  this :  "  The  king  could  not  sleep,"  &c.     II.  The  setting 

UNDER   A   BIGHT    POINT    OF    VIEW   OF    THE    UTILITY     OF     PRATER.       It    is     often     objectcd 

against  prayer  that  it  seeks  for  miracles  and  expects  God  to  interrupt  at  our  call 
the  established  course  of  things.  It  may  be  that  when  the  Jews  betook  themselves 
to  prayer,  that  they  looked  for  visible  and  miraculous  interference,  as  in  other 
emergencies  when  God  bared  His  arm  in  defence  of  His  people.  Although  I 
thoroughly  believe  that  were  a  case  to  arise  in  which  nothing  short  of  a  miracle 
would  meet  the  circumstances  of  a  servant  of  God,  the  miracle  would  not  be 
withheld  ;  yet  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is  not  required  that  there  should  be  miracles 
in  order  to  our  prayers  being  granted,  neither  does  the  granting  them  suppose  that 
God  is  variable  or  changes  in  His  purposes.  There  was  no  miracle  in  His  causing 
Ahasuerus  to  pass  a  sleepless  night :  a  little  heat  in  the  atmosphere,  or  the  buzzing 
of  an  insect,  might  have  produced  the  result ;  and  philosophy,  with  all  its  sagacity, 
could  not  have  detected  any  interruption  of  the  known  laws  of  nature.  Neither 
were  God's  purposes  variable,  though  it  may  have  actually  depended  on  the 
importunity  of  prayer,  whether  or  not  the  people  should  be  delivered.  God's 
purpose  may  have  been  that  He  would  break  the  king's  sleep  if  prayer  reached  a 
certain  intenseness ;  that  He  would  not  break  it  if  it  came  below  that  intenseness ; 
and  surely  this  would  accord  equally  with  two  propositions — 1.  That  the  Divine 
purposes  are  fixed  and  immutable.  2.  That  notwithstanding  this  fixedness  and 
Immutability,  they  may  be  affected  by  human  petitions,  and  therefore  leave  room 
tor  importunate  prayer.  Comparatively  I  should  not  be  encouraged,  were  I  told 
that  what  disquieted  the  monarch  was  the  standing  of  a  spectre  by  his  bedside  in 
an  unearthly  form,  which  in  unearthly  accents  upbraided  him  for  leaving  Mordecai 
unrequited.  But  when  I  observe  that  the  king's  rest  was  disturbed  without  any- 
thing supernatural ;  that  all  which  God  had  to  do  in  order  to  arrange  a  great 
deliverance  for  His  people  was  to  cause  a  sleepless  night,  but  so  to  cause  it,  that 
no  one  could  discern  His  interference,  then  indeed  I  learn  that  I  may  not  be 
asking  what  the  world  counts  miracle,  though  I  ask  what  transcends  all  power  but 
Divine.  There  is  something  encouraging  in  this  to  all  who  feel  their  insignificance. 
If  the  registered  deliverances,  vouchsafed  to  the  Church,  were  all  deliverances 
which  had  been  effected  through  miracles,  we  might  question  whether  they  formed 
any  precedent  on  which  creatures  like  ourselves  could  justly  rest  hope.  We  dare 
not  think  that  for  us  armed  squadrons  will  be  seen  in  the  heavens,  or  the  earth  be 
convulsed,  or  the  waters  turned  into  blood.  But  look  from  Israel  delivered  from 
Pharaoh  to  Israel  delivered  from  Haman,  and  we  are  encouraged  to  believe  that 
God  will  not  fail  even  us  in  our  extremity,  seeing  that  He  could  save  the  people 
through  such  a  simple  and  unsuspected  process  as  this  :  "  On  that  night  could  not 
the  king  sleep,  and  he  commanded  to  bring  the  book  of  the  records  of  the 
chronicles."  (JET.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  sleepless  night : — There  may  have  been 
three  or  four  reasons  for  this  restlessness.  1.  The  care  of  his  kingdom.  2.  The 
revolving  of  ambitious  schemes.  3.  His  raging  passions.  His  passions  often 
showed  themselves  in  a  ridiculous  way.  When  he  came  back  from  his  Grecian 
expedition  he  was  so  mad  at  the  river  Hellespont  for  breaking  up  his  bridge  oi 

39 


SQ  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  n. 

boats,  that  he  ordered  his  servants  to  whip  that  river  with  three  hundred  lashes. 
4.  A  troubled  conscience.  There  is  nothing  like  an  aroused  conscience  to  keep  a 
man  awake  when  he  wants  to  sleep.  There  was  a  ruler  who  one  morning  was 
found  with  his  sword  cutting  a  nest  of  swallows  to  pieces.  Somebody  came  up  and 
said,  "'V^hy  do  you  cut  that  nest  of  swallows  to  pieces?"  "  Why,"  he  replied, 
*'  those  swallows  keep  saying  that  I  murdered  my  father."  The  fact  was,  that  the 
man  had  committed  the  crime,  and  his  conscience,  by  Divine  ventriloquism,  waa 
speaking  out  of  that  birds'  nest.  No,  Ahasuerus  could  not  sleep.  The  more  he 
tried  to  sleep,  the  wider  he  got  awake.  All  around  about  his  pillow  the  past  came. 
There,  in  the  darkness,  stood  Vashti,  wan  and  wasted  in  banishment.  There 
stood  the  princes  whom  he  had  despoiled  by  his  evil  example.  There  were  the 
representatives  of  the  homes  he  had  blasted  by  his  infamous  demand  that  the 
brightest  be  sent  to  his  palace;  broken-hearted  parents  crying,  "  Give  me  back  my 
child,  thou  vulturous  soul  I"  The  outrages  of  the  past  flitting  along  the  wall, 
swinging  from  the  tassels,  crouching  in  the  corner,  groaning  under  the  pillow, 
setting  their  heels  on  his  consuming  brain,  and  crying,  "  Get  up !  This  is  the 
verge  of  belli  No  sleep  I  No  sleep  I  "  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  The  tleepless 
night : — How  many  different  causes  or  occasions  there  may  be  of  the  sleepless 
night!  Some  cannot  sleep  in  the  remembrance  of  recent  sin.  Some  are  kept 
waking  by  great  sorrow.  Some  by  brain  excitement.  Some  in  very  weariness 
of  overwork.  {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Sleep  a  necessity  : — Without  it  human  life 
would  soon  come  to  an  end.  It  would  burn  rapidly  away.  {Ibid.)  Men 
sleep  or  wake  as  God  wills : — Kings  have  no  specific  to  secure  healthful 
rest;  rather  they  are  apt  to  miss  the  best  specific,  hard  work  and  a  good 
conscience.  {A.  M.  Symington,  B.A.)  Resource  in  sleeplessness: — A  good 
book  is  a  better  resource  in  sleeplessness  than  drugs.  (Ibid.)  Divine 
providence : — I.  Note  the  minute  UNrvEESAiiTY  of  God's  supervision  and 
CONTROL.  The  notion  of  many  is  that  providence  is  concerned  only  with  great 
matters.  But  those  who  so  believe  forget  that  perfection  in  anything  cannot  be 
secured  without  attention  to  details,  and  that  great  issues  often  hinge  on  apparently 
very  trifling  affairs.  A  sleepless  night  is  in  itself  no  very  important  thing.  Again, 
it  is  a  matter  of  little  moment  what  a  man  shall  do  to  fill  in  the  hours  of  sleepless- 
ness and  keep  himself  from  ennui ;  but  if  Xerxes  had  adopted  any  other  plan  than 
that  which  he  followed,  or  if  the  attendant  had  chosen  to  read  from  any  other 
section  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kingdom  than  that  which  he  selected,  there  would 
have  been  nothing  to  recall  Mordecai's  services  to  the  king's  remembrance.  Once 
more :  if  Haman  had  not  come  to  the  court  at  the  time  he  did,  and  been  introduced 
into  the  presence  at  the  precise  moment  when  the  mind  of  the  king  was  pondering 
the  question  what  honour  should  be  conferred  on  Mordecai,  then  the  first  word 
might  have  been  his,  and  so  the  fiat  might  have  gone  out  for  the  consigning  of 
Mordecai  to  the  gallows,  even  at  the  moment  when  the  monarch  was  thinking  about 
doing  him  honour.  Now,  this  history  is  not  exceptional  in  any  respect.  It  cer- 
tainly is  not  exceptional  in  this  particular.  You  see  the  same  supervision  of  the 
most  apparently  trifling  things  by  God  in  the  biography  of  Joseph,  and  there  are 
many  striking  illustrations  of  it  in  secular  history.  A  change  of  wind  from  west  to 
east  is  not  a  great  matter,  and  yet  on  such  a  change  as  that,  at  a  particular  hour  of 
a  particular  day,  the  history  of  Great  Britain  turned  ;  for  thereby  the  fleet  of 
William  of  Orange  was  wafted  to  Torbay,  while  that  of  James  II.  was  by  the  same 
means  prevented  from  putting  out  to  sea  to  intercept  its  progress.     11.  But  note 

THAT  WE  HAVE  HERE  NO  INTERFERENCE  WITH  THE  OPERATION  OF  THE  LAWS  OF  NATURE, 
AND  NO  INFRINGEMENT  OF  THE  LIBERTT  OF  MORAL  AGENTS.       We  have  HO  rCCOrd  of  any 

miracle  in  this  case.  There  is  nothing  supernatural  in  a  man's  having  a  sleepless 
night,  or  in  his  fixing  on  a  certain  part  of  his  chronicles  to  read,  or  in  the  coming 
in  of  another  person  upon  him  at  a  particular  juncture ;  and  no  single  one  of  the 
actors  in  the  case  was  working  under  compulsion— each  one  knew  at  the  moment 
that  he  was  following  his  own  bent.  But  it  was  not  less  the  work  of  God,  or  less 
glorifying  to  God.  Now  this  non-miraculous  providence,  if  I  may  so  call  it,  is  a 
greater  and  grander  and  more  glorious  achievement  of  God's  than  it  would  have 
been  if  the  same  results  had  been  accomplished  through  the  direct  forth- 
putting  of  His  own  omnipotence.  Now,  if  what  I  have  advanced  on  this 
important  matter  be  true,  it  may  cast  some  light  on  the  way  in  which 
God  answers  His  people's  prayers.  There  are  those  who  affirm  that  to 
ask  God  to  confer  on  us  a  physical  blessing  is  to  ask  Him  to  work  a  miracle 
in  our  behalf.     Even  if  I  believed  that,  I  would  still  ask  Him  for  what  I  need,  because 


CHAP.  VI.]  ESTHER.  87 

He  has  commanded  me  to  do  so,  and  I  would  trustfully  leave  the  method  of  His 
answer  in  His  own  hands.  But  I  do  not  believe  that  to  ask  a  physical  blessing  from 
God  is  to  ask  Him  to  work  a  miracle  in  our  behalf,  and  such  a  history  as  this  of 
Esther  confirms  me  in  that  non-belief.  Then,  finally,  here,  if  what  I  have  advanced 
in  this  connection  be  correct,  it  may  tend  to  reconcile  us  to  the  minor  incon- 
veniences that  come  upon  us  in  life.  What  an  amount  of  fretting  we  do  over  httle 
things !  We  go  off  our  sleep,  or  we  miss  a  train,  or  we  have  to  wait  for  some 
tedious  hours  at  a  railroad  station,  or  we  approach  the  harbour  in  a  fog  and  have 
to  lie  outside  for  a  long  while,  so  near  our  homes  and  yet  so  far  from  them,  or  a 
friend  disappoints  us  and  our  plans  are  deranged.  Yet  why  should  we  be  impatient 
if  it  be  true  that  even  these  little  things  are  taken  cognisance  of  by  God,  and  woven 
by  Him  for  His  glory  and  our  good  into  the  fabric  of  our  lives  ?  If  we  could  but 
pause  a  moment  and  say  within  ourselves,  "  This  is  all  in  the  plan  of  God  concern- 
ing us,"  we  should  at  once  have  self-control.  Lessons — 1.  Think  how  valuable 
God's  commonest  gifts  are.  Keep  your  conscience  clean,  that  nothing  of  guilt  may 
put  thorns  into  your  pillow.  Take  no  ambitious  schemes  with  you  to  your  couch, 
leat  you  should  be  constrained  to  lie  awake  in  the  attempt  to  work  them  out.  Finish 
each  day's  business  in  its  own  day,  that  there  may  be  no  nervous  anxiety  in  your 
mind  about  the  morrow.  Watch  over  your  table,  and  take  nothing  there  that  will 
make  you  restless.  Think  more  of  this  common  blessing  of  sleep,  and  see  in  that 
one  of  the  richest  tokens  of  the  Divine  goodness  which  is  not  to  be  trifled  with,  but 
to  be  valued  and  enjoyed.  2.  And  this  leads  me,  by  a  very  natural  transition,  to 
ask  whether  you  have  ever  reviewed  your  obligations  to  God  for  all  that  He  has 
done  for  you  ?  Xerxes  utilised  his  sleepless  hours  in  discovering  wherein  he  had 
failed  to  meet  his  obligations  to  his  benefactors.  But  what  a  benefactor  you  have 
had  in  God  I  He  gave  His  only  Son  for  your  salvation.  Xerxes'  indebtedness  to 
Mordecai  was  nothing  in  comparison  to  your  obligation  to  Jehovah.  Now  let  me 
ask.  What  have  you  done  to  Him  for  that?  [W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Sleeplessness 
providentially  used  : — There  is  no  reason  assigned  for  this.  The  king  was  not 
afflicted  with  illness,  he  was  not  suddenly  seized  with  any  disease  to  cause  this 
wakefulness,  nor  was  it  occasioned  by  any  intelligence  of  a  distressing  character, 
such  as  that  formidable  enemies  had  made  their  appearance  before  Shushan,  or  that 
grievous  misfortunes  had  happened  to  any  one  dear  to  him.  No  ;  but  the  matter 
was  entirely  of  the  Lord.  God  has  employed  sleep  for  weighty  purposes,  in  various 
ages  of  the  world.  It  was  while  Adam  was  in  "  deep  sleep  "  that  "  one  of  his  ribs 
was  taken,"  and  made  a  living  being  and  an  help  meet  for  him.  It  was  while  Jacob 
was  asleep  that  he  was  favoured  with  that  wonderful  vision,  in  which  he  beheld  a 
ladder  set  upon  the  earth,  whose  top  reached  to  heaven — a  striking  representation 
of  God's  providential  care  for  His  people,  and  likewise  of  that  Eedeemer  who  is 
the  way  to  the  Father — a  way  in  which  whosoever  walketh  the  angels  of  glory  con- 
tinually afford  him  their  friendly  ministrations.  It  was  when  Joseph  was  asleep 
that  he  was  directed  from  heaven  to  take  Mary  for  his  wife,  because  that  which 
had  been  conceived  in  her  was  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  But  here  God  carries  His 
purposes  into  execution  by  means  of  the  absence  of  sleep.  He  is  never  at  a  loss  to 
bring  His  designs  to  pass.  (J.  Hughes.)  Watches  of  the  night : — Had  Ahasuerus 
been  a  pious  man,  and  acquainted  with  the  Word  of  God,  he  would  have  filled  up 
the  watches  of  the  night  with  religious  meditations,  or  called  for  the  book  of  the 
law  of  the  Lord,  in  which  he  would  have  found  both  instruction  and  entertainment. 
(T.  McCrie,  D.D.)  Historical  records  : — Nor  was  the  custom  wholly  confined  to 
the  East.  The  "  Chronicles  of  the  Cid,"  William  of  Malmesbury's  "  Chronicles  of 
the  Kings  of  England,"  the  six  old  English  Chronicles,  viz.,  Asser's  Life  of  Alfred, 
and  Chronicles  of  Eldred,  Ethelred,  Nennius,  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,  and  of 
Richard,  and  "  The  Chronicles  of  the  Crusaders,"  of  Robert  of  Gloucester,  and 
Ossian,  and  the  famous  Spanish  and  English  ballads,  are  a  part  and  parcel  of 
the  history  and  literature  of  our  own  day.  {W.  A.  Scott,  D.D.)  A  sleepless 
king  : — In  one  of  the  dungeons  of  the  fortress  of  Glatz  lay  a  Prussian  nobleman. 
King  Frederick  William  III.  had  confined  him  there  for  treason.  He  had  been 
long  a  prisoner,  and  there  was  no  hope  that  he  would  ever  be  released.  Hi»  only 
company  was  a  Bible — the  book  he  hated,  and  never  read.  But  suffering  and 
solitude  wore  upon  his  spirit,  and  he  did  read  at  last — till  there  rose  in  his  soul 
some  sense  of  a  just  God,  who  punishes  those  that  forsake  Him.  He  had  forsaken 
Him — and  now  he  repented  of  it.  One  night,  by  the  dim  light  of  his  dungeon 
lamp,  he  was  turning  the  leaves  of  the  Bible  for  consolation,  when  his  eyes  fell  on 
Psa.  1.  16,  **  Call  upon  Me  in  the  day  of  trouble  :  I  will  deUver  thee,  and  thou  shalt 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

glorify  Me."  Then,  for  the  first  time  since  childhood,  the  proud  man  knelt  and 
prayed,  and  the  peace  of  God  came  into  his  heart  and  dwelt  there.  That  same 
night  King  Frederick  in  his  palace,  like  King  Ahasuerus,  could  not  sleep.  Worn 
out,  he  begged  the  Lord  to  give  him  one  hour  of  rest  from  pain  ;  and  his  prayer 
was  granted.  He  awoke  refreshed  and  grateful,  and  said  to  his  wife,  '•  Who  in  all 
my  kingdom  has  wronged  me  most  ?    I  will  forgive  him."     Said  Queen  Louise, 

•'  It  is  the  Count  M in  the  prison  of  Glatz."     "  Send  orders  to  release  him  at 

once,"  commanded  the  king.  And  in  a  few  days  the  prisoner  was  a  free 
man,    glorifying    God     for    both    spiritual    and    temporal    deliverance.  All 

records  before  God's  eye  continually : — When  Ahasuerus  read  in  the  book  of  the 
records  of  the  chronicles,  and  there  found  how  Mordecai  had  discovered  a  plot  of 
treason  against  his  person,  he  did  not  lay  the  book  aside,  and  slightly  pass  by  such 
a  piece  of  service,  but  inquires  what  honour  and  what  dignity  had  been  done  to 
Mordecai.  It  seems  if  the  king  had  thought  on,  or  read  of  him  sooner,  he  had 
rewarded  him  sooner :  but  God  hath  ever  in  His  eye  all  the  records  and  chronicles 
of  His  people's  actions  ;  He  reads  their  journals  every  day.     (J.  Spencer.) 

Ver.  3.  There  is  nothing  done  for  him. — Merit  overlooked : — Modest  merit  iff 
overlooked,  while  the  aspiring,  the  a?nbitiou3,  and  the  time-serving  rise  to  honour  and 
riches.  Nor  is  ingratitude  confined  to  courts.  (T,  McCrie,  D.D.)  Ingratitude 
to  God : — But  if  gratitude  to  man  for  his  comparatively  little  kindness  (for  mam 
cannot  do  much  for  his  fellow)  animate  the  believer's  bosom,  it  glows  with  still 
more  fervent  gratitude  to  God,  for  the  invaluable  and  merited  blessing  of  salvation. 
{T.  Hughes.)  A  resurrection  of  good  works  : — Things  are  done  and  forgotten,  and 
men  never  suppose  that  they  will  come  up  again ;  yet  after  many  days  they  are 
vivified,  and  history  begins  to  take  up  the  thread  where  it  was  dropped.  (J.  Parker, 
D.D.)  God's  time  best : — But  God  is  never  surprised,  and  the  end  of  all  is  to 
make  us  think  of  Him.  Nothing  entered  in  His  "  book  of  remembrance  "  is  ever 
forgotten.  His  time  for  bringing  the  good  deeds  of  His  people  to  light  may  seldom 
be  the  time  we  would  judge  best,  but  it  is  always  the  most  fit.  Look  to  this  case. 
Had  it  been  a  day,  an  hour,  half  an  hour  sooner,  would  the  effect  have  been  as 
good  for  Mordecai  or  for  his  people?  Would  humility,  prayer,  patience,  have 
been  called  into  strengthening  exercise?  (A.  M.  Symington,  B.A.)  Unearthed  : — 
The  loyalty  and  faithfulness  of  Mordecai  had  not  been  rewarded  at  the  time. 
On  the  human  side  that  might  have  been  regarded  as  a  piece  of  ingratitude,  if  not 
a  reprehensible  oversight ;  but  on  the  Divine  side  it  was  a  prepared  cause,  secreted 
and  hidden  for  a  long  period,  and  yet  waiting,  and  ready  for  the  accomplishment, 
at  the  right  time  of  a  beneficent  result.  It  was  destined  to  come  to  the  light.  It 
was  a  seed-corn  buried  in  the  earth,  which  should  bear  fruit  in  due  season.  In  an 
opposite  direction  there  is  the  same  particular  providence  often  manifested  in  the 
unveiling  of  crime,  and  the  bringing  home  of  guilt  to  the  hearts  of  those  who  have 
contracted  it,  as  in  the  envy  and  malice  of  Joseph's  brethren  and  the  avaricious 
covetousness  of  Achan.  As  shells,  deep  in  the  sea,  grope  their  way  to  the  shore, 
or  as  hidden  springs  burst  their  way  through  to  the  surface,  and  form  little 
rivulets,  so  is  there  in  providence  a  great  law,  constantly  in  operation,  for  the 
disclosure  of  all  that  is  either  good  or  bad  in  human  character  or  conduct.  If  bad, 
it  is  as  though  the  avenger  was  tracking  the  steps  of  the  transgressor,  and  at  some 
turning  in  his  path,  and  by  some  trivial  accident,  the  evil  is  unearthed,  and  the 
doer  of  it  brought  to  judgment.  Or  if  good,  it  is  as  though  the  rewarder  was 
following  in  the  way  of  the  righteous,  and  at  the  best  time,  and  apparently  by  the 
most  fortuitous  combination  of  circumstances,  the  well-doing  is  made  known,  and 
meets  with  its  recompense.  Even  now  it  is  so.  But  the  lines  are  drawn  out  far 
beyond  the  present,  and  converge  in  the  transactions  of  a  distant  day.  (T.  McEwan.) 
Reward  and  retribution: — I.  It  teaches  us  how  well  a  good  man  can  afford 

TO  WAIT  FOR  THE  DUE  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  OF  HIS  TJPRIGHTNISS,  AND  FOR  ANT 
REWARD   HE    MAT   NEED    FOR    THE   GOOD    HE     HAS     DONE.       The    COUJOCture    is    that    siX: 

long  years  had  gone  by  since  Mordecai  revealed  the  plot  of  the  chamberlains  and 
saved  the  king's  life,  and  not  even  a  word  of  acknowledgment  had  come  to  him 
during  all  that  time.  But  what  we  most  admire  is  his  behaviour  meantime.  If 
he  had  been  a  self-seeking  man,  he  could  easily  have  found  means  to  refresh  the 
king's  memory  as  to  his  services  ;  but  he  kept  silence.  If  he  had  been  a  malignant 
man,  he  might  have  sought  what  he  would,  in  that  case,  have  called  a  just  revenge- 
for  the  ungrateful  neglect  with  which  he  had  been  treated,  by  hatching  or  falling  in 
with  some  other  plot.     And  then,  how  well  all  turns  out  in  the  end  I     How  mucb 


CHAP.  VI.]  ESTHER.  89 

•better  than  if  the  reward  had  been  given  at  the  time !  •'  He  that  believeth  shall 
not  make  haste  "  ;  God's  time  is  always  the  best.  Eighteousness  is  its  own  reward, 
and  we  are  never  righteous  as  God  would  have  us  be  until  we  feel  this  deeply  and 
act  accordingly.  He  who,  in  God's  strength,  looks  every  day  on  the  face  of  duty, 
and  walks  with  her  along  whatever  paths  her  sacred  feet  may  tread,  has  in  his  own 
spirit,  in  his  own  character,  what  soon  or  late  wiU  blossom  out  into  all  beauty  and 
■grandeur  ;  what  will  in  the  end  become  "  glory,  honour,  and  immortality."  II.  The 
next  lesson  is  just  the  opposite  of  this,  viz.,  "  how  certainly  a  bad  man  must  be 
OVERTAKEN  AND  PUNISHED !  "  We  Say  "  how  Certainly "  because  there  is  in  his 
badness  the  root  and  element  of  the  retribution,  and  often,  without  knowing  it, 
he  carefully  develops  and  ripens  by  his  own  action  the  retribution  that  falls  on.  his 
head.  IH.  For  there  is  an  increscent  power  in  evil  (as  indeed  there  is  also 
in  good),  IN  VIEW  of  which  we  cannot  be  too  watchful  and  anxious,  lest  by 
ANY  means  we  should  FALL  UNDER  THE  POWER  OF  IT.  The  powcr  of  it,  remember, 
is  very  silent  and  gentle,  generally,  in  its  operations.  {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.) 
Facijication  of  conscience  : — The  king  was  determined  to  rectify  this  matter,  for 
he  thought  that  by  the  pacification  of  conscience  sleep  might  return.  Many  men 
are  willing  to  purchase  sleep  on  high  terms.  Could  the  murder  but  be  undone ; 
could  the  evil  deed  be  but  blotted  out ;  could  the  stolen  money  be  but  safely 
returned ;  could  the  cruel  word  but  be  recalled ;  in  short,  could  anything  be  done 
that  sleep  might  once  more  come  to  the  house,  and  fold  all  memories  and  anxieties 
within  its  healing  robes  1     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6-11.  What  shall  be  done  unto  the  man  whom  the  king  delighteth  to 
honour? — Pride  associated  with  folly  : — 1.  In  Haman  honouring  Mordecai  we  have 
a  remarkable  verification  of  the  fable  of  the  dog  and  the  shadow.  He  gaped  after 
the  shadow  and  lost  the  substance.  Folly  generally  rides  after  pride.  Haman 
grew  more  and  more  insolent  and  arrogant  as  he  advanced  in  wealth  and  power, 
until  he  reached  the  highest  point  allowed  to  him  by  providence.  He  did  not  con- 
sider that  he  who  does  not  climb  gets  no  fall,  and  that  he  that  climbs  too  high  is 
sure,  at  last,  to  come  down  with  a  terrible  crash.  His  temerity  is  remarkable. 
Thinking,  however,  that  he  was  ordered  to  cut  out  his  own  honour,  it  is  natural 
he  should  have  made  the  measure  large.  2.  How  completely  wretched  are  the 
envious  and  the  proud.  Pride  is  the  canker-worm  of  the  soul.  It  always  renders 
us  unhappy.  It  is  ever  so  with  those  who  have  not  a  new  heart.  The  most 
wealthy  and  highly  honoured  are  not  content.  There  is  something  stiU  wanting. 
There  is  something  they  stUl  complain  about.  They  make  themselves  miserable 
when  they  ought  to  be  happy.  Oh,  how  little  a  thing  is  earthly  grandeur  I  How 
little  a  thing  may  embitter  all  human  honour  and  affluence  1  There  can  be  no 
happiness  on  earth  tUl  there  is  selt-denial  and  trust.  There  is  no  happiness  till  we 
begin  to  crucify  selfishness,  and  to  trust  in  God  as  the  portion  of  our  souls.  3.  We 
see  here  how  great  a  misfortune  it  is  to  have  friends  and  counsellors  whd  are 
ignorant,  wicked,  or  evil-disposed.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  truth  in  the  proverb, 
"  Save  me  from  my  friends,  and  I  wiU  take  care  of  my  enemies."  It  is  sad  when  a 
man's  bosom  counsellor  is  not  true  and  faithful.  And  there  is  always  danger  to  be 
apprehended  when  the  advice  of  a  professed  friend  is  pleasing  to  our  own  angry  or 
revengeful  feelings.  If  Haman's  wife  had  been  a  meek,  quiet,  prudent,  intelligent, 
God-fearing  woman,  her  advice,  at  first,  had  been  altogether  of  a  different  sort,  and 
her  bearing  toward  her  husband,  when  he  hastened  home  from  court,  almost 
heartbroken  with  disappointment  and  rage,  would  have  been  altogether  different 
from  what  it  was.  Instead  of  adding  fuel  to  his  malignant  passions,  she  should 
have  endeavoured  to  moderate  and  restrain  them.  And  instead  of  bruising  a  heart 
already  broken,  by  adding  taunt  and  reproach  to  grief,  she  should  have  sought  to 
cahn  him  and  make  him  feel  that,  with  her,  in  his  own  home,  he  was  still  with 
friends,  respected  and  beloved,  however  much  he  had  suffered  at  court.  The 
husband's  fortune  is  more  fully  in  the  hands  of  his  wife  than  anywhere  else.  It 
is  hers  to  make  his  home  happy,  and  to  gird  him  with  strength  by  sympathy  and 
counsel.  When  his  spirits  are  almost  overwhelmed,  she  alone,  of  all  human  beings, 
is  the  one  to  minister  to  him.  Her  nursing  is  as  sovereign  to  his  sick  soul  as  it  is 
for  his  ailing  body.  It  is  her  gentle  tones  only  that  can  steal  over  his  morbid  senses 
with  more  power  than  David's  harp.  And  when  his  courage  is  almost  gone,  her 
patience  and  fortitude  will  rekindle  his  heart  again  to  dare  and  do,  and  meet  anew 
the  toils  and  troubles  of  life.  What  a  misfortune  it  was  that  Haman  had  not  a 
Bweet  Christian  home  to  retire  to  after  the  terrible  disappointments  and  bitter 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ti. 

experiences  of  that  day!  Yes,  a  sweet,  quiet  home.  But  you  tell  me  I  forget  that 
he  was  a  man  of  large  estates,  great  honours,  and  the  owner  of  a  princely  palace. 
True,  but  a  palace  is  not  always  a  home.  What  is  a  home  ?  It  is  something  for 
which  many  of  earth's  babbling  tongues  have  no  term.  A  home  is  not  a  mere 
residence  for  the  body,  but  a  place  where  the  heart  rests  and  the  affections  nestle 
and  dwell  and  multiply.  Just  in  the  proportion  that  a  good  woman  is  a  blessing, 
in  the  same  proportion  is  a  bad  woman  a  curse.  Woman's  mission  is  a  high  and 
grand  one.  She  is  connected  with  everything  that  belongs  to  our  race  that  is  noble, 
refining,  and  hopeful.  Great  is  the  calamity,  then,  for  a  community  to  be  under 
the  influence  of  such  opinions  or  sentiments  as  are  degrading  to  its  women.  One 
bad  woman  can  do  more  harm  in  society  than  a  dozen  bad  men.  (W.  A.  Scott, 
D.D.)  The  Nemesis  of  providence  : — Had  he  been  planning  for  Mordecai  all  the 
time  he  had  been  thinking  of  himself  ?  Yea,  verily,  that  was  the  Nemesis  of 
providence ;  and  yet,  bad  as  it  was,  that  was  only  one-half  of  the  matter,  for  before 
long  he  would  find  that  he  had  also  been  planning  for  himself  when  he  had  been 
thinking  of  Mordecai.  The  honour  which  he  had  designed  for  himself  went  to 
Mordecai,  and  the  destruction  which  he  had  devised  for  Mordecai  fell  upon  him- 
self. The  royal  apparel  was  worn  by  the  Jew,  and  the  Agagite  was  hanged  upon 
the  gallows.  His  head  had  not  been  turned  by  the  brief  honour,  nor  his  heart  up- 
lifted by  the  short-lived  glory,  for  he  was  well  ballasted,  and  his  people  were  not 
yet  delivered.  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Great  changes: — What  a  marvellous 
change  !  what  an  unlooked-for  revolution  1  The  side  of  the  wheel  that  was  lately 
the  lowest  is  now  the  highest.  That  which  was  a  short  time  ago  shrouded  in  dark- 
ness is  now  radiant  with  light !  "  This  is  the  Lord's  doing,  and  it  is  marvellous  in 
our  eyes."  {J.  Hughes.)  The  vain  man: — We  see  here  the  working  and  the 
punishment  of  vanity  and  pride.  "  Whom  can  the  king  think  worthy  of  special 
honour  but  myself  ?  "  thought  Haman.  The  vain  man  is  always  occupied  about 
himself.  He  thinks  about  himself ;  he  speaks  about  himself ;  he  is  all  in  all  to 
himself.  The  idea  never  crossed  Haman's  mind  that  there  could  possibly  be  any- 
one besides  himself  whom  the  king  could  desire  to  distinguish  by  any  particular 
mark  of  favour.  But  then  how  crushing  was  the  order :  "  Go  and  do  as  thou  hast 
said  to  Mordecai  the  Jew."  (A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  The  Church  honoured  by 
her  enemies  : — In  this  manner  does  God  sometimes  make  the  enemies  of  His  Church 
and  servants  to  honour  them.  He  not  only  makes  the  sinners'  hands  to  forge  the 
snares  in  which  they  themselves  are  caught,  but  He  compels  them  to  weave  the 
crovm  and  impose  it  on  the  head  of  the  righteous.  (T.  McCrie,  D.D.)  Insatiable 
vanity  : — Haman's  answer  reveals  the  insatiableness  of  vanity.  No  sooner  was 
honour  mentioned  than  his  heart  cried,  "  Let  me  have  it  1  Make  me  a  king,  though 
it  be  only  for  an  hour  ;  if  without  the  power,  yet  with  all  the  pomp  and  trappings." 
Will  this  man  never  have  enough  ?  Never  ;  the  food  is  so  light  and  the  appetite  so 
strong  that  there  must  be  a  constant  supply.  Give  him  this,  and  to-morrow  he 
will  seek  something  more.  The  craving  is  a  disease,  an  atrophy,  a  cancer.  To 
enjoy  honour  and  to  be  satisfied  with  it,  a  man  must  be  healthy — that  is,  humble. 
Mark  the  strong  delusion :  "  Now  Haman  thought  in  his  heart."  A  man  cannot 
have  a  worse  guide  than  the  thought  of  his  heart,  unless  God  has  broken  and  new- 
made  it.  Twice  within  this  single  minute  Haman  was  cheated  by  the  thought  of 
his  heart.  He  thought  others  must  esteem  him  as  highly  as  he  esteemed  himself  ; 
but  it  is  never  the  case  that  when  a  man  has  a  lofty  opinion  of  himself  other  men 
have  an  opinion  equally  flattering.  And  he  thought  that  all  was  going  well  with 
him,  that  this  sudden  honour  would  only  postpone  his  revenge  for  an  hour,  that  by 
the  time  he  returned  from  the  queen's  banquet  he  would  be  the  happiest  man  in 
Persia;  but  he  was  just  on  the  brink  of  perdition.  The  water  is  always  smooth 
above  a  cataract.  (A.  M.  Symington,  B.A.)  Self-flattery  leading  to  self-humilia- 
tion:— I.   An    JJITLBSS    QUESnON     ADDRESSED     TO    CONCEIT.       II.    ThE    BEASONINO   OF 

CONCEIT.     III.  The   answer   of   conceit.    IV.  The    fearful  blow  to  conceit. 
V.  The  hdmilutino  condition  of  conceit.     {W.  Burrows,  B.A.) 

Yer.  12.  And  Mordecai  came  again  to  the  king's  gata. — Humility  : — ^A  proud, 
ambitious  man  would  have  said  to  himself,  "  No  more  of  the  king's  gate  for  mel 
I  shall  direct  my  steps  now  to  the  king's  palace,  and  hold  myself  ready  for  honour, 
office,  emolument,  which  surely  must  now  be  at  hand."  Mordecai  seems  to  have 
said  within  himself,  "  If  these  things  are  designed  for  me  in  God's  good  providence, 
they  will  find  me.  But  they  must  seek  me,  for  I  shall  not  seek  them.  Those  who 
confer  them  know  my  address.     '  Mordecai,  at  the  king's  gate,'  will  still  find  me." 


CHAP,  vn.]  ESTHER.  91 

(A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Honours  modestly  borne : — Few  can  bear  honours  and 
dignities  with  equanimity,  even  when  they  come  upon  them  gradually ;  but  such 
sudden  and  high  advancement  was  enough  to  make  any  ordinary  person  giddy,  to 
cause  him  to  forget  himself,  and  behave  unseemly.  What  fatal  effects  upon  the 
head  and  heart  do  we  often  witness  in  persons  who  have  all  at  once  been  raised 
from  poverty  to  riches  and  rank.  Even  good  men  are  not  always  proof  against  the 
intoxicating  influence  of  such  transitions.  But  Mordecai  kept  his  place ;  like  a 
gallant  ship,  firmly  moored  in  a  bay,  which  during  a  flood-tide  heaves  and  seems 
for  a  time  borne  along  with  the  lighter  craft,  but,  obeying  its  anchor,  comes  round 
and  resumes  its  former  position.  The  pageantry  of  an  hour  could  not  unsettle  his 
mind  ;  he  regarded  it  in  its  true  light — a  vain  show.     (T.  McGrie,  D.D.) 

Ver.  13.  Before  whom  thou  hast  begun  to  fall. — Descent  easy : — The  ascent  to 
honour  and  greatness  is  steep,  and  those  who  aspire  after  them  must  climb  it  slowly, 
and  with  difficulty ;  but  the  descent  is  easy,  and  so  precipitous,  that  when  they  lose 
their  footing  they  fall  in  minutes  what  they  rose  in  years.    {Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  vn. 

Vers.  1-6.  What  Is  thy  petition,  Queen  Esther  7 — EttTier't  petition : — 1.  When 
called  to  speak  for  God  and  His  people,  we  must  summon  up  our  courage,  and  act 
with  becoming  confidence  and  decision.  Had  Esther  held  her  peace,  under  the 
influence  of  timidity  or  false  prudence,  or  spoken  with  reserve  as  to  the  designs 
against  the  Jews  and  their  author,  she  would  have  been  rejected  as  an  instrument  of 
Jacob's  deliverance,  and  her  name  would  not  have  stood  at  the  head  of  one  of  the 
inspired  books.  2.  When  persons  resolve  singly  and  conscientiously  to  discharge 
their  duty  in  critical  circumstances,  they  are  often  wonderfully  helped.  The 
manner  in  which  Esther  managed  her  cause  was  admirable,  and  showed  that  her 
heart  and  tongue  were  under  a  superior  influence  and  management.  How  becoming 
her  manner  and  the  spirit  with  which  she  spoke !  3.  It  is  possible  to  plead  the 
most  interesting  of  all  causes,  that  of  innocence  and  truth,  with  moderation  and  all 
due  respect.  The  address  of  Esther  was  respectful  to  Ahasuerus  as  a  king  and  a 
husband  :  "  If  I  have  found  favour  in  thy  sight,  0  king,  and  if  it  please  the  king." 
Esther  was  calm  as  well  as  courageous,  respectful  as  well  as  resolute.  4.  It  argues 
no  want  of  respect  to  those  in  authority  to  describe  evil  counsellors  in  their  true 
colours  in  bringing  an  accusation  against  them,  or  in  petitioning  against  their 
unjust  and  destructive  measures.  "  The  adversary  and  enemy  is  this  wicked 
Haman."  5.  It  is  horrible  to  think  and  hard  to  believe  that  there  is  such  wicked- 
ness as  is  perpetrated  in  the  world.  "  Who  is  he,  and  where  is  he,  that  durst 
presume  in  his  heart  to  do  so  ?  "  We  might  well  ask,  Who  was  he  that  betrayed 
his  master,  and  where  did  they  live  who  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory  ?  Who  or 
where  is  he  that  dares  presume  to  say,  even  in  his  heart,  "There  is  no  God" — that 
denies  a  providence,  profanes  the  name  and  day  of  God,  turns  the  Bible  into  a 
jest-book,  mocks  at  prayer  and  fasting,  and  scoffs  at  judgment  to  come  ?  And  yet 
such  persons  are  to  be  found  in  our  own  time.  6.  We  sometimes  startle 
at  the  mention  of  vices  to  which  we  ourselves  have  been  accessory.  "  Who 
is  he,  and  where  is  he,  that  durst  presume  in  his  heart  to  do  so  ?  "  He  is  not 
unknown  to  thee,  neither  is  he  far  from  thee,  0  king.  "  Thou  art  the  man ! "  And 
how  seldom  do  we  reflect  on  the  degree  in  which  we  have  been  accessory  to  and 
participant  in  the  sins  of  others  by  our  bad  example,  our  criminal  silence,  and 
the  neglect  of  those  means  which  were  in  our  power,  and  which  we  had  a 
right  to  employ  for  checking  them.  7.  Persecution  is  not  more  unjust  than  it  is 
impolitic.  (Ibid.)  Tlie  prudent  management  of  things  : — I.  We  see  the  great 
IMPORTANCB  OF  CAPABLE  AND  PRUDENT  MANAGEMENT  OF  THrvos.  Esthcr's  manage- 
ment of  these  great  affairs  is  evidently  consummate.  There  is  an  overruling 
providence,  but  there  is  also  a  teaching  wisdom  of  God,  and  if  we  wish  to  be  fully 
under  the  protection  of  the  one,  we  must  open  all  our  faculties  to  receive  the 
other.    II.  We  have  in  Esther's  behaviour  a  vert  notable  and  noble  instance  of 

CALM  AND  COURAGEOUS  ACTION  IN  STRICT   CONFOBMITT  WITH   THE  PBEDETERMINED  PLAN. 

How  lew  women  are  born  into  the  world  who  could  go  through  these  scenes  as 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vri. 

Esther  does  I  How  many  would  faint  through  fear  I  How  many  would  be  carried 
by  excitement  into  a  premature  disclosure  of  the  secret  1  How  many  would  be 
under  continual  temptation  to  change  the  plan  !  Only  a  select  few  can  be  calm 
and  strong  in  critical  circumstances,  patient  and  yet  intense,  prudent  and  yet 
resolved.      HI.   Her  boldness  takes  here  a  form  which  it  has   not   SKroRE 

ASSUMED  :      it     is     SHOWN     IN    THE     DENUNCIATION     OF    A    PARTICULAR     PERSON  I      "  The 

adversary  and  enemy  is  this  wicked  Haman."  Strong  language ;  but,  at  any  rate, 
it  is  open  and  honest  and  above-board — no  whispering  into  the  king's  private  ear ; 
no  secret  plotting  to  supplant  the  Prime  Minister.  Every  word  is  uttered  in  the 
man's  hearing,  and  to  his  face.  Let  him  deny,  if  he  can ;  let  him  explain,  if  ha 
can.  {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  Let  my  life  be  given  me  at  my  petition. — A  plea  for 
life  : — We  have  the  very  same  cause  for  urgency  of  suit  as  she  had.  It  behoveth 
us  to  say  in  the  presence  of  another  King,  "  Oh,  let  my  life  be  given  me  at  my 
petition."  There  is  a  royal  law,  and  under  that  law  our  lives  are  forfeited.  Life, 
in  the  narrative  before  us,  was  about  to  be  taken  away  unjustly — by  force  of  a  moat 
cruel  mandate  ;  but  it  is  a  holy  law  that  dooms  us  to  death.  (J.  Hughes.)  For 
we  are  sold. — A  plea  for  liberty  : — We  also  ought  to  sue  both  for  our  Uves  and  our 
liberties.  By  nature  we  are  the  bondmen  and  bondwomen  of  sin  and  Satan. 
(Ibid.)  Who  is  he,  and  where  is  he,  that  durst  presume  in  his  heart  to  do  so  ? — 
The  doings  of  a  wicked  heart : — I.  A  wicked  heart  induces  foolhardiness.  "  Who 
is  he,  and  where  is  he,  that  durst  presume  in  his  heart  to  do  so?  "  Haman '3 
daring  presumption.  A  wicked  heart  is  both  deceitful  and  deceiving.  11.  A  wicked 
heart  sooner  or  later  meets  with  open  condemnation.  III.  A  wicked  heart  leads 
TO  fearfulness.  (W.  Burrows,  B.A.)  Moral  indignation,  being  commonly 
sudden  and  intense  in  uttering  itself,  furnishes  strong  testimony  in  favour  of  the 
universal  principles  of  God's  moral  law ;  but  we  have  need  to  be  careful  how  we 
indulge  in  expression  of  virtuous  wrath.  It  is  safe  and  wholesome  for  us  to  pause 
and  ask  whether  there  is  no  risk  that  in  judging  others  we  may  be  condemning 
ourselves.  Ahasuerus  will  feel  ere  long  that  he  has  uttered  his  own  condemnation. 
(A.M.  Symington,  B.A.)  The  adversary  and  enemy  is  this  wicked  Haman. — The 
index  finger  : — "  The  adversary  and  enemy  is  this  wicked  Haman."  This  is  the 
best  way  of  dealing  with  every  enemy.  Definite  statements  are  manageable,  but 
vague  charges  are  never  to  be  entertained.  No  man  makes  progress  who  deals  in 
generalities.  The  sermon  is  in  the  application.  The  prayer  is  in  the  amen.  Let 
us  apply  this  teaching.  I.  In  the  matter  of  our  own  personal  character. 
1.  Put  your  finger  upon  the  weak  point  of  your  character,  and  say,  "  Thy  name  is 
Self-indulgence."  Tell  yourself  that  you  are  allowing  your  life  to  ooze  away 
through  self -gratification.  You  never  say  no  to  an  appetite,  you  never  smite  a 
desire  in  the  face.  2.  Take  it  another  direction.  "  The  adversary  and  enemy  is 
this  infernal  jealousy."  Your  disease,  say  to  yourself,  is  jealousy.  Speak  in  this 
fashion  when  you  have  entered  your  closet  and  shut  your  door ;  say,  "  I  am  a  jealous 
man,  and  therefore  I  am  an  unjust  man ;  I  cannot  bear  that  that  man  should  be 
advancing  ;  I  hate  him ;  the  recollection  of  his  name  interferes  with  my  prayers ; 
would  God  I  could  lay  hold  of  something  I  could  publish  against  him,  I  would  run 
him  to  death."  Yes,  this  is  the  reality  of  the  case,  God  never  casts  out  this  devil,  this 
all-devil ;  only  thou  canst  exorcise  this  legion.  3.  Or  take  it  in  some  other  aspect 
and  say,  *'  The  adversary  and  enemy  is  this  eternal  worldliness,  that  will  not  let  me 
get  near  my  God."  II.  With  regard  to  public  accusations.  1.  Take  it  in  the 
matter  of  public  decay.  (1)  Who  in  looking  abroad  upon  the  country  will  say, 
"The  adversary  and  enemy  is  this  wicked  liquor  traffic"?  (2)  Or,  "The 
adversary  and  enemy  is  this  wicked  official  self-seeking  "  ?  2.  Apply  the  same  law  to 
the  decline  of  spiritual  power.  It  is  an  easy  thing  to  read  a  paper  on  this  subject, 
but  who  names  the  Haman?  What  keeps  us  back?  (1)  Fear  of  offending  the 
world.  The  world  ought  to  be  offended.  No  worldling  should  ever  have  one 
moment's  comfort  in  the  house  of  God.  He  should  feel  that  unless  he  is  prepared 
to  change  his  disposition,  he  is  altogether  in  the  wrong  place.  (2)  Sometimes  the 
enemy  is  doubt  in  the  heart  of  the  preacher  himself.  The  man  is  divided.  His 
axe  is  split  across  the  very  edge.  There  is  no  power  in  his  right  arm.  When  he 
speaks  he  keeps  back  the  emphasis.  IH.  Wk  might  apply  the  same  doctrine  to 
hindrances  in  the  Church.  The  adversary  and  enemy  is  this  wicked,  cold-hearted 
man.  Whenever  he  comes  into  the  church  the  preacher  cannot  preach  ;  he  cannot 
do  many  mighty  works  because  that  man  is  there,  cold,  icy,  critical.  We  are  afraid 
to  name  the  adversary  in  church;  we  confine  ourselves  to  "proper"  words,  to 
*•  dtcent "  expressions,  to  euphemisms  that  have  neither  beginning  nor  ending  as 


CHAP,  vn.]  ESTHER.  93 

to  practical  vitality  and  force.  We  are  the  victims  of  circumlocution,  we  go  round 
and  round  the  object  of  our  attack,  and  never  strike  it  in  the  face.  What  we  want 
is  a  definite,  tremendous,  final  stroke.  Esther  succeeded.  Her  spirit  can  never 
fail.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Then  Haman  was  afraid  before  the  king  and  the 
'queen. — Guilt  cowardly : — Haman  was  now  left  alone  with  his  righteous  accuser. 
Innocence  is  courageous,  but  guilt  is  cowardly.  Men,  with  the  consciousness  of 
having  truth  and  justice  on  their  side,  have  risen  superior  to  the  fear  of  death,  and 
.stood  undaunted  before  wrathful  kings.  But  this  man,  haughty  and  hardened  in 
view  of  the  sufferings  of  others,  no  sooner  sees  that  evil  is  determined  against 
himself  than  he  becomes  a  poor,  unnerved  trembling  suppliant  at  the  feet  of  her 
whom  he  had  most  grievously  wronged.  (T.  McEwan.)  Cruel  people  often 
cowardly : — Very  cruel  people  are  sometimes  very  cowardly.  Judge  Jeffreys  could 
go  through  his  black  assize  in  the  West  of  England,  the  terror  of  the  land, 
manifesting  the  fury  of  a  wild  beast ;  but  when  the  tide  turned,  and  he  saw  nothing 
before  him  but  ignominy  and  disgrace,  he  sank  into  a  state  of  abject  fear  which  was 
pitiable  to  see.  "  Haman  was  afraid  before  the  king  and  the  queen."  As  he  well 
may  be.     {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.) 

Vers.  7-10.  And  the  king,  arising  from  the  banquet. — Unexpected  results : — Man's 
•calculation  is  always  upon  the  result  of  his  own  forethought  and  skill.  There  is  to 
■be  a  sure  success  from  the  wisdom  of  his  plans.  The  race  is  for  the  swift  and  the 
battle  is  for  the  strong.  Napoleon  said,  "  Heaven  is  always  on  the  side  of  the 
heaviest  artillery."  The  history  of  human  contests  would  give  innumerable 
illustrations  of  the  contrary.  God  vindicates  His  own  right  to  rule  by  employing 
the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  mighty,  and  taking  the  wise  in  their 
-own  craftiness.  Haman  has  illustrated  this  in  a  very  clear  and  remarkable  manner 
But  Haman's  course  is  not  yet  complete.  "  The  adversary  and  enemy  is  this  wicked 
Haman."  Now  Haman  sees  and  feels  the  folly  of  his  malice,  however  well  contrived. 
He  illustrates  the  ever-remarkable  fact,  that  the  boldest  oppressor  of  others  is  the 
most  cowardly  suppliant  in  a  returning  danger  upon  himseQ.  Then  said  the  king, 
■*'  Hang  him  thereon.  So  they  hanged  Haman  on  the  gallows  that  he  had  prepared  for 
Mordecai.  Then  was  the  king's  wrath  pacified."  This  closed  his  career  of  wickedness. 
Thus  its  folly  and  madness,  as  well  as  its  guilt  and  certain  ruin,  were  displayed. 
"  Who  hath  hardened  himself  against  the  Lord,  and  hath  prospered  ?  "  "I  have  seen 
the  wicked  in  great  power,  and  spreading  himself  like  a  green  bay  tree ;  yet  he  passed 
away,  and,  lo,  he  was  not.  Yea,  I  sought  him,  but  he  could  not  be  found."  The 
prosperity  of  the  wicked  is  short ;  the  triumph  of  the  ungodly  is  but  for  a  moment. 
We  see  it  thus  displayed.  Why  shall  we  ever  be  tempted  to  test  it  for  ourselves  ? 
Survey  the  whole  course  of  this  providence  as  it  has  passed.  1.  It  was  a  train  of 
very  trifling  circumstances  in  each  particular.  There  has  been  no  event  in  the 
whole  succession  in  itself  of  a  remarkable  or  unusual  character.  2.  It  was  a  very 
■circuitous  and  remote  process.  The  first  step  we  have  seen  was  very  far  off  from 
the  final  result,  and  could  not  have  been  imagined  to  have  any  connection  with  it. 
Every  succeeding  step  seemed  equally  independent  and  unlikely  to  produce  the  end 
'designed.  A  wonderful  plan  was  lately  proposed  for  connecting  New  York  and 
Brooklyn  by  a  bridge,  the  foundation  of  which  should  be  in  the  park.  Who  that 
saw  men  digging  and  laying  stone  in  the  middle  of  the  park,  with  no  knowledge  of 
the  plan  proposed,  could  have  imagined  that  it  was  the  starting  of  a  bridge  over 
water  so  far  distant,  and  to  a  shore  so  entirely  out  of  sight  ?  Yet  such  has  been  the 
course  of  this  providence  which  we  have  considered.  Stop  at  any  point,  and  the 
connection  is  just  as  hidden,  and  the  calculation  of  the  future  remains  just  as 
difficult.  "  Known  only  unto  God  are  aU  His  works  from  the  beginning."  We  may 
stand  and  ask,  Why  should  the  king  have  selected  Esther  at  the  very  time  of 
Haman's  elevation?  Yet  every  step  is  sure  and  leading  forward  to  the  result 
designed.  Nothing  is  lost,  and  no  error  is  committed  upon  the  road.  This  is  the 
wonderful  skill  of  Divine  providence.  The  wheels  are  full  of  eyes  on  every  side. 
8.  It  was  a  perfectly  unexpected  result.  Haman  had  gone  through  his  whole 
preliminary  course  with  entire  success.  But  how  suddenly  and  wonderfully  was  he 
•disappointed.  4.  God  overturns  this  whole  scheme  of  wickedness  without  appearing 
-directly  to  interfere  with  it  in  any  step  of  the  proceeding.  The  whole  plan  wrought 
■out  its  own  result  as  naturally  as  the  seed  of  spring  brings  forth  the  summer's  plant 
and  the  autumn's  fruit.  The  sinner  was  entrapped  in  his  own  devices.  The  sinner 
was  deluded,  by  his  prosperity,  to  suppose  the  race  was  for  the  swift  and  the  battle 
'to  the  strong.     And  yet  the  whole  scheme  was  overturned  in  a  moment,  without  one 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  yn, 

▼iolent  interruption  occurring  in  its  process.  This  is  a  most  important  lesson  to  U8, 
It  must  teach  us  never  to  doubt  the  constant  presence  of  God  in  all  our  concerns^ 
and  His  directing  power  over  all  events  involved  in  them.  A  change  of  wind  may 
turn  the  dreaded  flame  from  our  habitation,  a  sudden  lull  may  break  the  force  of 
the  tempest,  the  very  means  of  apparent  death  may  be  made  the  real  instrument  of 
security  and  protection.  And  all  this  may  be  with  no  remarkable  interference  of 
special  Divine  power.  Thus  remarkable  in  the  simplicity  of  its  arrangement,  as  well 
as  in  the  perfection  of  its  result,  was  this  whole  process  of  the  Divine  overthrow  of 
the  crafty  wickedness  of  Haman.  He  was  caught  in  the  very  pride  of  his  power. 
Haman  was  made  the  instrument  of  exalting  the  very  adversary  he  so  much  hated. 
The  very  sorrow  which  he  had  prepared  for  his  victim  he  was  himself  required  to 
endure.  Dr.  Mason  of  New  York,  describes  a  remarkable  scene  of  which  he  was  an 
unexpected  witness.  A  butcher  in  this  city,  in  his  rage  with  his  aged  father  who 
had  offended  him,  knocked  him  down  upon  the  floor,  and  was  dragging  him  by  his 
hair  to  throw  him  into  the  street.  He  had  pulled  him  to  the  outer  door,  when  the 
old  man  cried  out,  "  There,  stop  now,  I  did  not  drag  him  any  further,"  and  then 
confessed  that  he  had  abused  his  own  father  in  the  same  manner,  and  dragged  him 
to  that  very  spot,  with  the  same  design.  Such  instances,  in  some  shape,  are 
constantly  occurring,  so  that  it  is  a  familiar  expectation  that  the  wicked  shall  fall 
into  the  pit  they  have  digged  for  others,  and  they  who  take  the  sword  perish  by  the 
Bword.  The  result  of  this  whole  providence  was  complete  deliverance  and  exaltation 
to  the  oppressed,  and  complete  destruction  to  the  oppressor.  This  was  the  final 
result,  and  an  illustration  of  that  which  will  always  be,  and  at  last  surely  be,  the- 
final  result.  God  will  exalt  those  whom  man  oppresses.  {S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.) 
Retributive  justice  : — An  indestructible  connection  exists  between  the  violation  of 
Divine  law  and  consequent  suffering.  A  disregard  to  the  conditions  of  health  entails 
sickness.  Poison  destroys  human  life.  He  who  thrusts  his  hand  into  the  flame  invites 
suffering.  A  like  measure  of  changelessness  marks  the  operations  of  moral  law. 
Transgression  is  followed  by  suffering.  Eemorse  is  entailed  by  doing  what  on& 
knows  to  be  wrong.  A  sense  of  humiliation  succeeds  an  unreasonable  outbreak  of 
anger.  Loss  of  happiness  and  of  self-restraint,  and  of  the  esteem  of  friends,  is  a 
portion  of  the  legacy  of  self-indulgence.  A  knowledge  of  this  law  of  retribution  is 
not  dependent  on  revelation.  The  conviction  of  its  existence  is  inwoven  with, 
human  nature.  Graven  on  the  conscience,  it  cannot  be  effaced.  Of  the  examples 
of  retribution  few  are  more  worthy  of  consideration  than  that  of  Haman.  This 
illustrates — I.  The  channel  through  which  eethibution  comes.  The  harvest  is 
garnered :  how  shall  the  grain  reach  the  seaboard  ?  Along  iron  rails  laid  down  by 
man.  The  rice-fields  are  gleaned :  how  shall  the  product  be  conveyed  to  ita 
destination  ?  Through  canals  cut  by  man's  agency.  The  fruits  of  malice,  of  cruelty, 
of  ambition,  and  of  tyranny  are  perfected :  how  shall  they  be  delivered  to  him  for 
whom  they  are  designed  ?  Through  agencies  he  himself  has  prepared — by  some 
human  hand  to  which  a  higher  power  has  consigned  them.  Retribution  though 
prepared  in  heaven,  in  coming  to  earth  traverses  the  road  which  man  has  made 
ready  for  it.  The  lightning-bolt,  though  forged  in  the  clouds,  may  make  as  it  comes 
to  earth  a  pathway  of  the  tree  planted  by  human  hands.  Haman's  wickedness  ia 
BO  conspicuous  that  the  shafts  of  retributive  justice  are  certain  to  strike  him,  miss 
whom  else  they  may.  Oppression  and  heartlessness,  cherished  hatred  and  the 
spirit  of  revenge,  are  towering  upward  to  such  heights  that  their  summits  are  hidden 
in  clouds  already  black  with  fury.  The  particular  person  commissioned  of  Heaven 
to  mete  out  retributive  justice  to  Haman  was  Ahasuerus.  This  is  in  accordance- 
with  God's  usual  method  of  dealing.  Though  bearing  the  seal  of  the  invisible 
kingdom,  retribution  comes  through  some  agency  with  which  we  are  familiar.  The 
king  showed  good  judgment  in  the  earlier  stages  of  his  anger.  "  In  his  wrath  he 
went  into  the  palace  garden."  Anger  which  speedily  vents  itself  in  harsh  words  is- 
less  harmful  to  its  object  than  that  which  is  repressed  till  a  settled  purpose  is  formed. 
Fear  the  man  who  can  so  far  control  his  resentment  as  to  be  able  to  exercise  good 
judgment  in  deciding  upon  measures  which  noiselessly  bring  the  results  of  deeds 
home  to  their  author.  The  steam  which  is  generated  so  speedily  as  to  cause  a 
violent  explosion  might  have  proved  sufficient,  if  properly  controlled,  to  convey  a 
long  train,  freighted  with  the  enginery  of  death,  to  some  advantageous  position 
whence  every  missile  would  have  told  with  deadly  effect  upon  the  enemy.  II.  A 
PRurrLESS  PLEA  FOR  DELIVERANCE.  Hamau  stood  up  to  make  request  for  his  life. 
Verily  no  man  can  tell  what  awaits  him  1  A  few  days,  a  few  hours,  may  suffice  to 
cloud  the  most  brilliant  prospects.    The  question,  What  new  requisition  is  possible  f 


CHAP,  vii.]  ESTHER.  95 

may  be  suddenly  converted  into  the  anxious  inquiry,  Can  I  save  anything  from  the 
common  wreck,  even  life  iwaif  ?   Haman's  prayer,  though  importunate,  was  fruitless. 
The  arrival  of  retribution  chronicles  the  departure  of  mercy.    In  the  presence  of  the 
king  even  the  queen  is  powerless  to  rescue  the  culprit.     He  is  now  before  the  judge 
whose  will  is  Esther's  law.     At  the  day  of  final  adjudication  it  will  no  doubt  be 
evident  that  mercy  is  powerless  to  rescue  those  who  have  incurred  "  the  wrath  of 
the  Lamb."    When  mercy  is  driven  to  assume  an  attitude  of  vengeance,  hope  is  for 
ever  extinguished.    III.  The  signs  of  coMrxG  doom.     Haman's  sinful  career  must 
be  checked,  or  the  queen  must  perish.     Wickedness  unchecked  would  ultimately 
extinguish  goodness.     Thistles  and  grass  cannot  continuously  occupy  the  same  soil, 
nor  is  it  doubtful  which  would  gain  the  mastery.     "  As  the  word  went  out  of  the 
king's  mouth  they  covered  Haman's  face."     Guilt  is  left  to  bear  the  penalty  alone. 
Alas,  the  heartlessness  of   those  who  are  comrades  in  iniquity!     No  ingratitude 
surpasses  that  of  those  who  have  been  associated  in  wickedness.     To  be  deserted  in 
the  critical  hour  is  the  fate  of  those  who  have  violated  Divine  commands.     "  So 
they  hanged  Haman  on  the  gallows  he  had  prepared  for  Mordecai."    He  is  snared 
in  his  own  devices.    The  arrow  he  directed  at  another  has  rebounded,  causing  his 
own  death.    The  cannon  which,  loaded  to  the  muzzle,  was  to  annihilate  his  enemy, 
has  recoiled,  crushing  him  beneath  its  ponderous  wheels.     •'  As  Haman  brewed,  so 
he  drank."     "  He  made  his  bed,  and  he  lay  in  it."    Cruelty  displayed  can  have  but 
one  issue — cruelty  endured.  "With  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you 
again."    (J.  S.  Van  Dyke,  D.D. )       The  fear,  the  folly,  and  the  doom  of  the  evil-doer : — 
I.  The  EVUi-DOER  reckivks  warning.     "  Haman  saw  that  there  was  evil  determined 
against  him  by  the  king."    He  clearly  heard  the  sound  of  the  avenging  deity  though 
his  feet  might  be  shod  with  wool.      Evil-doers  receive  warning.      Nature  gives 
warning.     Revelation  gives  warning.     History  gives  warning.    II.  The  foolish 
EVIL-DOER  WORKS  HIS  OWN  DESTRUCTION.     The  Very  mcans  Haman  took  to  save  his 
life  was  the  means  of  bringing  about  his  speedy  execution.     III.  The  evil-doer 
RAISES  STRiKDJO  EVIDENCE  OF  HIS  OWN  GUILT,     "  Behold  the  gallows  fifty  feet  high," 
&c.     IV.  The  evil-doer  is  practically  his  own  executioner.     "  So  they  hanged 
Haman  on  the  gallows  he  had  prepared  for  Mordecai."    (W.  Burrows,  B.A.)       The 
wicked  overthrown: — This  great  fact  of  Divine  government  we  constantly  forget. 
The  person  of  the  Deity  is  invisible.    His  ways  and  plans  are  not  governed  by  the 
principles  or  the  expectations  of  men.     But  the  government  is  still  on  His  shoulders, 
and  He  upholdeth  all  things  by  the  word  of  His  power.     The  history  of  Haman 
shows  us  how  completely  God  controls  the  wicked  and  makes  their  crafty  and 
malicious  plans  result  in  their  own  overthrow  and  ruin.     But  we  come  now  to 
consider  the  peculiar  method    which  God   adopted  for  his  overthrow.     It  is  a 
wonderful  illustration  of  the  Divine  providence  in  its  minuteness  of  application. 
The  successive  steps  in  this  scheme  of  counteraction  are  very  minute.    It  is  a 
regular  arrangement  of  mining  and  countermining,  as  in  military  assaults  and 
sieges.    Each  successive  step  is  taken  in  direct  reference  to  the  previous  motion  of 
the  antagonist,  and  as  secretly  as  possible  from  him.     1.  God  lays  up  in  store  for 
His  future  use  Esther's  unexpected  relation  to  the  king.    It  was  a  fearful  trial  of 
Mordecai's  faith  and  Esther's  piety.      It  seemed   an  unaccountable  and  dark 
proceeding.     Their  broken  hearts  both  grieved  in  bitterness  over  the  dispensation. 
But  God  was  mercifully  preparing  for  the  evil  to  come.     The  hold  which  was 
allowed  upon  the  afifections,  and  the  influence  which  was  thus  exercised  upon  the 
character  of  Ahasuerus,  were  very  important  in  the  train  of  results  which  was  to  be 
brought  out.     2.  God  prepared  a  special  obligation  from  the  king  to  Mordecai. 
"  Two  of  the  king's  chamberlains,  of  those  which  kept  the  door,  were  wroth,  and 
sought  to  lay  hands  on  King  Ahasuerus,"  &c.    3.  God  interposed  in  the  settling  of 
Haman's  lot,     "  They  cast  the  lot  from  day  to  day,  and  from  month  to  month  to 
the  twelfth  month."    This  was  a  very  peculiar  interposition.    It  gave  nearly  a 
year's  delay  to  the  executing  of  the  plan.     4.  God  gave  great  ease  and  apparent 
prosperity  to  Haman's  plan.     The  king  granted  his  request  at  once,  and  gave  him 
unlimited  power  to  fulfil  his  purpose.     Thus  Haman  was  enticed  forward  to  perfect 
security.     His  success  was  so  flattering  to  his  own  power  that  it  led  him  to  an 
immediate  publication  of  his  whole  scheme,     "  There  was  written  according  to  all 
that  Haman  commanded,  to  the  governors  that  were  over  every  province,"  &c. 
5.  God  endowed  Esther  with  singular  wisdom  in  arranging  her  scheme  of  argument 
and  defence.    6.  God  awakens  the  slumbers  of  the  king.     "  On  that  night  the  king 
could  not  sleep."    What  trifling  incidents  does  God  e  nploy  to  accomplish  His  great 
results !     You  will  sometimes  hear  of  His  providence  as  if  it  were  only  concerned  in 


96  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

what  men  call  great  events ;  but  there  are  no  distinctions  of  great  and  little  in 
human  events  before  God.  Never  be  deluded  by  any  false  schemes  of  men.  Not  a 
sparrow  faUeth  to  the  ground  without  the  notice  of  your  heavenly  Father,  and  the 
very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered.  7.  God  remarkably  employs  the  waking 
king.  "  The  king  could  not  sleep,  and  he  commanded  to  bring  the  book  of  records 
of  the  chronicles  ;  and  they  were  read  before  the  king."  This  was  a  singular  step. 
He  might  as  readily  have  called  for  any  other  book.  8.  God  furnished  the  very 
agent  desired  for  the  accomplishment  of  His  plan.  "  And  the  king's  servants  said 
unto  him,  Behold  Haman  standeth  in  the  court.  And  the  king  said,  Let  him  come 
in."  Every  step  appears  to  be  propitious  to  Haman.  He  enters  instantly,  perfectly 
secure  of  the  triumphant  attainment  of  his  purpose.  But  God  had  now  perfectly 
prepared  the  way  for  Mordecai's  exaltation,  and  Haman,  who  had  planned  his  death, 
must  be  the  instrument  of  his  honour.  "  God  shall  judge  the  righteous  and  the 
wicked,  for  there  is  a  time  there  for  every  purpose  and  for  every  work."  There  is 
providence,  and  this  was  its  course  thus  far.  Every  step  is  natural,  voluntary, 
trifling  in  itself.  No  single  step  had  any  apparent  earthly  connection  with  the  others, 
in  the  mind  of  the  one  who  took  it.  The  threads  all  seemed  perfectly  separate  and 
unconnected.  But  it  was  a  single  hand  which  wove  them  all.  How  perfect  is  the 
scheme !  How  indispensable  is  every  part  1  How  clear  the  wisdom  which  has 
ordered  the  whole  !  With  what  confidence  we  may  rely  on  such  a  Protector.  The 
eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place,  beholding  the  evil  and  the  good.  His  eyes  are 
over  the  righteous,  and  His  ears  are  open  to  their  prayers.  (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.) 
The  precarious  positioii  of  princes'  favourites  : — Thus  empty  vessels  swim  aloft ; 
rotten  posts  are  gilt  with  adulterate  gold  ;  the  worst  weeds  spring  up  bravest ;  and 
when  the  twins  strive  in  Eebekah's  womb  Esau  comes  forth  first,  and  hath  the 
primogeniture.  But  while  they  seek  the  greatest  dignities  they  most  meet  with  the 
greatest  shame ;  like  apes,  while  they  be  climbing  they  the  more  show  their 
deformities.  They  are  lifted  up  also  that  they  may  come  down  again  with  the 
greater  poise.  It  was,  therefore,  well  and  wisely  spoken  by  Alvarer  de  Luna,  when 
he  told  them  that  admired  his  fortune  and  favour  with  the  King  of  Castile,  "You  do 
wrong  to  commend  the  building  before  it  is  finished,  and  until  you  see  how  it  will 
stand."  Princes'  favourites  should  consider  with  themselves  that  honour  is  but  a 
blast,  a  glorious  fancy,  a  rattle  to  still  men's  ambition  ;  and  that  as  the  passenger 
looketh  no  longer  upon  the  dial  than  the  sun  shineth  upon  it,  so  it  is  here.  (J.  Trapp.) 
For  he  saw  that  there  was  evil  determined  against  him  by  the  king. — Esteem 
changed  to  hatred  : — How  easily  does  he  appear  to  have  taken  off  his  regards  from 
his  favourite  1  There  was  nothing  lasting  in  the  bond  which  united  them.  The 
esteem  of  yesterday  was  changed  into  hatred  to-day.  All  their  convivial  meetings 
and  merry-making,  when  the  city  of  Shushan  was  perplexed,  were  forgotten,  and 
the  man's  destruction  was  determined  upon  with  as  much  zest  and  zeal  as  his 
elevation  had  been  promoted.  Such  is  largely  the  characteristic  of  the  friendship 
of  worldly  men.  Close  and  ardent  for  a  time,  but  liable  at  any  moment  to  be 
turned  into  enmity.  How  different  from  the  tie  which  ought  to  bind  together 
Christian  hearts  in  the  common  love  of  the  same  Saviour.  (T.  McEioan.)  Unex- 
pected peril : — The  wicked  know  not  the  moment  that  the  mine  is  to  be  sprung 
under  their  feet.  (Ibid.)  Will  he  force  the  queen  also  before  me  in  the  house. — 
Suspicions  : — It  is  the  misery  of  those  who  have  been  detected  in  the  commission 
of  great  crimes,  and  it  is  a  just  part  of  their  punishment,  to  be  suspected  or  accused 
of  that  of  which  they  were  guiltless.  But  yesterday,  all  that  Haman  said  or  did 
was  viewed  with  a  favourable  eye  ;  now,  the  most  innocent  actions  are  construed  to 
his  disadvantage.  (T.  McCrie,  D.D.)  And  Harhonah,  one  of  the  king's  chamber- 
lains, said  before  the  king,  Behold  also,  the  gallows  fifty  cubits  high.— The 
falling  man : — When  a  great  man  is  going  down,  the  meanest  will  give  him  a  push. 
{W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Fickle  courtiers  : — Courtiers  are  very  clever  persons,  and 
turn  with  wonderful  agility.  [A.  M.  Symington,  B.A.)  Reverses: — But  how 
terrible  are  the  reverses  of  princes,  and  how  sudden  the  fall  of  statesmen.  Wolsey, 
Raleigh,  Essex  and  Louis  Phillippe,  are  only  a  few  out  of  many  that  illustrate  how 
slippery  are  the  steps  of  thrones  and  the  standings  around  them.  [W.  A.  Scott, 
D.D.)  So  they  hanged  Haman  on  the  gallows  that  he  had  prepared  for 
Mordecal. — Moral  retribution : — We  all  remember  the  ballad  of  Southey  which 
tells  how  Sir  Ralph  the  Rover,  who  cut  away  Inch  Cape  Bell,  perished  with  all  hia 
crew  upon  the  Inch  Cape  Rock  ;  and  even  secular  historians  have  been  constrained 
to  remark  on  illustrations  of  the  fulfilment  of  this  law  of  providence.  Thus 
Macaulay  reminds  us  that  no  man  ever  made  a  more  unscrupulous  use  of  tht 


CHAP.  VII.]  ESTHER.  97 

legislative  power  for  the  destruction  of  his  enemies  than  Thomas  Cromwell,  and 
that  it  was  by  the  unscrnpulous  use  of  the  legislative  power  that  he  was  himself 
destroyed.  And  Alison  recognises  in  the  death  of  Murat  a  memorable  instance  of 
the  "  moral  retribution  which  often  attends  upon  great  deeds  of  iniquity,  and  by 
the  instrumentality  of  the  very  acts  that  appeared  to  place  them  beyond  its  reach." 
He  underwent,  in  1815,  the  very  fate  to  which,  seven  years  before,  he  had  consigned 
a  hundred  Spaniards  of  Madrid,  guilty  of  no  other  crime  than  of  defending  their 
country,  and  this,  as  the  historian  adds,  "  by  the  application  of  a  law  to  his  own 
case  which  he  himself  had  introduced  to  check  the  attempts  of  the  Bourbons 
to  regain  a  throne  which  he  had  usurped."  Thus,  often,  in  the  words  of  the 
great  dramatist,  the  engineer  is  "  hoist  with  his  own  petard " ;  and  we  see 
that  even  in  this  life  there  is  retribution.  But  it  may  be  said  that,  though 
this  is  observable  in  great  matters  and  with  great  people,  it  is  not  found  in 
small.  And  to  that  I  reply  that  there  is  nothing  small  in  the  providence 
of  God.  But  others  may  say  that  this  law  is  not  absolutely  universal,  and 
that  there  have  been  cases  in  which  it  has  not  been  fulfilled.  To  that  I 
reply  that  there  are  such  anomalies  in  God's  providence  on  earth,  but  the 
existence  of  these  is  only  a  reason  for  our  believing  that  the  retribution  which 
has  not  overtaken  the  sinner  here  will  surely  come  upon  him  hereafter ;  for  then 
God  "  shall  render  to  every  man  according  to  his  works."  {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
Haman  confounded  : — 1,  Oh,  how  great  are  the  vicissitudes  of  life  I  When  Haman 
thought  himself  secure,  then  he  was  nearest  to  his  ruin.  2.  How  sudden  and 
astonishing  the  change  that  takes  place  in  the  feelings  of  those  about  the  court. 
Yesterday,  everybody  envied  Haman  for  his  prosperity,  but  hated  him  for  his 
insolence.  Yesterday,  they  bowed  the  knee,  and  did  him  homage,  but  now  that 
they  see  he  has  fallen,  they  are  just  as  hearty  in  their  rejoicings  at  his  downfall. 
If  Haman  be  going  down,  they  all  cry,  "  Down  with  him ! "  And  as  Mordecai  is  now 
the  favourite,  all  are  ready  to  exalt  him.  The  old  Louis,  dead  in  Versailles,  may 
rot  or  bury  himself,  while  the  courtier  and  countesses  are  making  fair  weather  with 
the  rising  sun.  3.  Haman  pleading  at  Esther's  feet  is  a  proof  that  "  the  heathen 
are  sent  down  in  the  pit  that  they  made  :  in  the  net  which  they  hid  is  their  own 
foot  taken,"  The  Jews'  enemy,  and  the  adversary  of  the  Hebrew  orphan,  a  suppliant 
at  the  queen's  feet,  illustrates  how  God  regarded  the  low  estate  of  his  handmaiden, 
and  scattered  the  proud  in  their  imagination.  4.  Another  lesson  learned  from 
Haman's  gallows,  perhaps,  better  than  from  any  other  standpoint  of  this  history,  is 
to  beware  of  the  first  risings  of  evQ  passions.  5.  We  see  again  that  human  prosperity 
is  wholly  unavailing  in  the  hour  of  calamity.  The  glory  of  Haman  yesterday  only 
enhances  his  disgrace  to-day.  6.  It  is  then  an  unfair,  limited,  and  partial  view  of 
providence  to  say  that  God's  favours  are  not  wisely  and  equitably  distributed 
among  men.  The  purposes  of  God  are  not  to  be  judged  of  by  the  events  of  a 
moment,  nor  by  the  occurrences  that  are  near  together.  The  chain  of  providence 
has  many  links ;  some  are  so  high,  and  some  are  so  far  away,  that  at  present  we 
cannot  see  them,  nor  can  we  judge  correctly  of  it  tUl  we  see  the  whole  chain 
together.  7.  You  must  learn  to  discriminate  between  real  and  apparent  happiness. 
{}V.  A.  Scott,  D.D.)  A  warning  to  ambitious  men  : — Let  all  ambitious  men  read 
the  story  of  Haman  and  take  warning.  His  story  may  not  be  repeated  in  all  its 
Oriental  details ;  yet  there  remains  enough  in  the  tale  to  remind  us  that  we  too  are 
ambitious,  that  we  too  may  have  ignoble  thoughts  towards  our  feUow-men,  and 
that  even  we  are  not  above  resorting  to  the  foulest  practices  to  get  rid  of  the 
Mordecai  who  stands  in  our  way  as  a  stumbling-block.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The 
law  of  retribution  : — A  proverb  says,  "  Harm  watch,  harm  catch,"  and  it  is  a  true 
saying.  Haman  : — In  the  character  of  Haman  there  is  a  singular  exhibition  of 
ambition  and  envy.  He  was  a  man  without  benevolence,  justice,  or  mercy.  From 
the  one  external  act  in  respect  to  Mordecai,  we  infer  the  fearful  depth  of  depravity 
within.  It  does  not  appear  but  that  his  character  might  have  been  without  reproach 
previous  to  his  promotion.  Exemplary  conduct,  however,  previous  to  an  open  act  of 
sin,  must  not  be  taken  as  a  proof  of  purity  of  character  at  any  time,  for  the  external 
acts  of  sin  may  be  compared  to  the  eruptions  of  a  volcano,  which  sometimes  occur 
only  after  intervals  embracing  centuries,  while  the  internal  depravity  is  like  those 
pent  fires  which  lie  couched  beneath  the  base  of  the  mountain,  where  in  secret  the 
lava  wave  is  in  perpetual  motion.  From  the  life  and  death  of  Haman  learn — 
1.  That  the  wicked  man  cannot  go  unpunished.  2.  That  the  wicked  man  will  be 
punished  when  he  least  expects  it.  3.  That  the  wicked  man  will  be  punished  by 
means  of  his  own  devising.     (0.  T.  Lanphear,  D.D.)         Gallows  for  Haman: — 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

Here  is  an  Oriental  courtier,  about  the  most  offensive  man  in  Hebrew  history. 
I.  That  when  the  heart  is  wrong  things  vert  insignificant  will  destroy 
OUR  comfort.  Who  would  have  thought  that  a  great  prime  minister,  admired 
and  applauded  by  millions  of  Persians,  would  have  been  so  nettled  and  harassed 
by  anything  trivial  ?  The  silence  of  Mordecai  at  the  gate  was  louder  than 
the  braying  of  trumpets  in  the  palace.  Thus  shall  it  always  be  if  the  heart  is 
not  right.  Circumstances  the  most  trivial  will  disturb  the  spirit.  It  is  not  the 
great  calamities  of  life  that  create  the  most  worriment.  I  have  seen  men,  felled 
by  repeated  blows  of  misfortune,  arising  from  the  dust,  never  desponding.  But 
the  most  of  the  disquiet  which  men  suffer  is  from  insignificant  causes  ;  as  a  lion 
attacked  by  some  beast  of  prey  turns  easily  around  and  slays  him,  yet  runs  roaring 
through  the  forests  at  the  alighting  on  his  brawny  neck  of  a  few  insects.  You  meet 
some  great  loss  in  business  with  comparative  composure ;  but  you  can  think  of 
petty  trickeries  inflicted  upon  you,  which  arouse  all  your  capacity  for  wrath,  and 
remain  in  your  heart  an  unbearable  annoyance.  If  you  look  back  upon  your  life 
you  will  find  that  the  most  of  the  vexations  and  disturbances  of  spirit  which  you 
felt  were  produced  by  circumstances  that  were  not  worthy  of  notice.  If  you  want 
to  be  happy  you  must  not  care  for  trifles.  Do  not  be  too  minute  in  your  inspection 
of  the  treatment  you  receive  from  others.  Who  cares  whether  Mordecai  bows  when 
you  pass  or  stands  erect  and  stiff  as  a  cedar  ?  That  woodman  would  not  make 
much  clearing  in  the  forest  who  should  stop  to  bind  up  every  little  bruise  and 
scratch  he  received  in  the  thicket ;  nor  will  that  man  accomplish  much  for  the 
world  or  the  Church  who  is  too  watchful  and  appreciative  of  petty  annoyances. 
n.  Again,  I  learn  from  the  life  of  this  man  that  worldly  vanity  and  sin  are  vert 
ANXIOUS  to  have  PIETY  BOW  BEroRE  THEM.  Hamau  was  a  fair  emblem  of  entire 
worldliness,  and  Mordecai  the  representative  of  unflinching  godliness.  When, 
therefore,  proud  Haman  attempted  to  compel  a  homage  which  was  not  felt,  he  only 
did  what  tJiie  world  ever  since  has  tried  to  do,  when  it  would  force  our  holy  religion 
in  any  way  to  yield  to  its  dictates.  Paul  might  have  retained  the  favour  of  his 
rulers  and  escaped  martyrdom  if  he  had  only  been  willing  to  mix  up  his  Christian 
faith  with  a  few  errors.  His  unbending  Christian  character  was  taken  as  an  insult. 
Faggot  and  rack  and  halter  in  all  ages  have  been  only  the  different  ways  in  which 
the  world  has  demanded  obeisance.  Why  was  it  that  the  Platonic  philosophers  of 
early  times,  as  well  as  Toland,  Spinoza,  and  Bolingbroke  of  later  days,  were  so 
madly  opposed  to  Christianity  ?  Certainly  not  because  it  favoured  immoralities,  or 
arrested  civilisation,  or  dwarfed  the  intellect.  The  genuine  reason,  whether  admitted 
or  not,  was  because  the  religion  of  Christ  paid  no  respect  to  their  intellectual 
vanities.  Blount,  and  Boyle,  and  the  host  of  infidels  hatched  out  during  the  reign 
of  Charles  II.,  could  not  keep  their  patience,  because,  as  they  passed  along,  there 
were  sitting  in  the  gate  of  the  church  Christian  men  who  would  not  bend  an  inch 
in  respect  to  their  philosophies.  Reason,  scornful  of  God's  Word,  may  foam  and 
strut  with  the  proud  wrath  of  a  Haman,  and  attempt  to  compel  the  homage  of  the 
good,  but  in  the  presence  of  men  and  angels  it  shall  be  confounded.  When  science 
began  to  make  its  brilliant  discoveries  there  were  great  facts  brought  to  light  that 
seemed  to  overthrow  the  truth  of  the  Bible.  The  archaeologist  with  his  crowbar, 
and  the  geologist  with  his  hammer,  and  the  chemist  with  his  batteries,  charged 
upon  the  Bible.  Thus  it  was  that  the  discoveries  of  science  seemed  to  give  temporary 
victory  against  God  and  the  Bible,  and  for  awhile  the  Church  acted  as  if  she  were 
on  a  retreat;  but  when  all  the  opposersof  God  and  truth  had  joined  in  the  pursuit, 
and  were  sure  of  the  field,  Christ  gave  the  signal  to  His  Church,  and,  turning,  they 
drove  back  their  foes  in  shame.  There  was  found  to  be  no  antagonism  between 
nature  and  revelation.  The  universe  and  the  Bible  were  found  to  be  the  work  of 
the  same  hand,  strokes  of  the  same  pen,  their  authorship  the  same  God.  III.  Again, 
learn  that  pride  ooeth  before  a  fall.  Was  any  man  ever  so  far  up  as  Haman, 
who  tumbled  so  far  down  ?  Yes,  on  a  smaller  scale  every  day  the  world  sees  the 
same  thing.  Against  their  very  advantages  men  trip  into  destruction.  When  God 
humbles  proud  men,  it  is  usually  at  the  moment  of  their  greatest  arrogancy.  If 
there  be  a  man  in  your  community  greatly  puffed  up  with  worldly  success,  you  have 
but  to  stand  a  little  while  and  you  will  see  him  come  down.  You  say,  "I  wonder 
that  God  allows  that  man  to  go  on  riding  over  others'  heads  and  making  great 
assumptions  of  power."  There  is  no  wonder  about  it.  Haman  has  not  yet  got  to 
the  top.  The  arrows  from  the  Almighty's  quiver  are  apt  to  strike  a  man  when  on 
the  wing.  IV.  Again,  this  Oriental  tale  reminds  us  that  wrongs  we  prepare  fob 
others  return   upon  ourselves.     The  gallows  that   Haman  built  for  Mordecai 


CHAP.  VII.]  ESTHER.  99 

became  the  prime  minister's  strangulation.  Bobespierre,  who  sent  so  many  to  the 
guillotine,  had  his  own  head  chopped  off  by  the  horrid  instrument.  The  evil 
you  practise  on  others  will  recoil  upon  your  own  pate.  Slanders  come  home. 
Oppressions  and  cruelties  come  home.  When  Charles  I.,  who  had  destroyed 
Strafford,  was  about  to  be  beheaded,  he  said,  "  I  basely  ratified  an  unjust  sentence, 
and  the  similar  injustice  I  am  now  to  undergo  is  a  sensible  retribution  for  the 
punishment  I  inflicted  on  an  innocent  man."  Haman's  gallows  came  a  little  late, 
but  it  came.  Opportunities  fly  in  a  straight  line,  and  just  touch  us  as  they  pass 
from  eternity  to  eternity ;  but  the  wrongs  we  do  others  fly  in  a  circle,  and  however 
the  circle  may  widen  out,  they  are  sure  to  come  back  to  the  point  from  which  they 
started.  They  are  guns  that  kick !  Furthermore,  let  the  story  of  Haman  teach  us 
how  quickly  turns  the  wheel  of  fortune.  So  we  go  up,  and  so  we  come  down.  You 
seldom  find  any  man  twenty  years  in  the  same  circumstances.  Of  those  who,  in 
political  life,  twenty  years  ago  were  the  most  prominent,  how  few  remain  in  con- 
spicuity  I  Of  those  who  were  long  ago  successful  in  the  accumulation  of  property, 
how  few  have  not  met  with  reverses  I  while  many  of  those  who  then  were  straitened  in 
circumstances  now  hold  the  bonds  and  the  bank-keys  of  the  nation.  Of  all  fickle 
things  in  the  world,  Fortune  is  the  most  fickle.  Every  day  she  changes  her  mind, 
and  woe  to  the  man  who  puts  any  confidence  in  what  she  promises  or  proposes  ! 
She  cheers  when  you  go  up,  and  she  laughs  when  you  come  down.  V.  Again,  this 
Haman's  history  shows  us  that  outward  possessions  and  circumstances  cannot 
MAKE  A  MAN  HAPPY.  There  are  to-day  more  aching  sorrows  under  crowns  of  royalty 
than  under  the  ragged  caps  of  the  houseless.  Much  of  the  world's  aflluence  and 
gaiety  is  only  misery  in  colours.  Many  a  woman  seated  in  the  street  at  her  apple- 
stand  is  happier  than  the  great  bankers.  The  mountains  of  worldly  honour  are 
covered  with  perpetual  snow.  Tamerlane  conquered  half  the  world,  but  could  not 
subdue  his  own  fears.  Ahab  goes  to  bed  sick  because  Naboth  will  not  sell  him  his 
vineyard.  The  soul's  happiness  is  too  large  a  craft  to  sail  up  the  stream  of  worldly 
pleasure.  As  ship-carpenters  say,  it  draws  too  much  water.  This  earth  is  a 
bubble,  and  it  will  burst.  This  life  is  a  vision,  and  it  will  soon  pass  away.  Time  ! 
It  is  only  a  ripple,  and  it  breaketh  against  the  throne  of  judgment.  Mordecai  will 
only  have  to  wait  for  his  day  of  triumph.  It  took  all  the  preceding  trials  to  make 
a  proper  background  for  his  after-successes.  The  scaffold  built  for  him  makes  all  the 
more  imposing  and  picturesque  the  horse  into  whose  long  white  mane  he  twisted  his 
fingers  at  the  mounting.  You  want  at  least  two  misfortunes,  hard  as  flint,  to  strike 
fire.  Heavy  and  long-continued  snows  in  winter  are  signs  of  good  crops  next 
summer.  So  many  have  yielded  wonderful  harvests  of  benevolence  and  energy 
because  they  were  for  a  long  while  snowed  under.  We  must  have  a  good  many 
hard  falls  before  we  learn  to  walk  straight.  It  is  on  the  black  anvil  of  trouble  that 
men  hammer  out  their  fortunes.  Sorrows  take  up  men  on  their  shoulders  and 
enthrone  them.  Tonics  are  nearly  always  bitter.  Men,  like  fruit-trees,  are  barren 
nnless  trimmed  with  shai-p  knives.  They  are  like  wheat — all  the  better  for  the 
flailing.  It  required  the  prison  darkness  and  chill  to  make  John  Bunyan  dream. 
Mordecai  despised  at  the  gate  is  only  predecessor  of  Mordecai  exalted.  {T.  De  Witt 
Talmage.)  Retribution : — A  bishop  said  to  Louis  XI.  of  France,  "  Make  an  iron 
cage  for  all  those  who  do  not  think  as  we  do — an  iron  cage  in  which  the  captive 
can  neither  lie  down  nor  stand  straight  up."  It  was  fashioned — the  awful  instru- 
ment of  punishment.  After  a  while  the  bishop  offended  Louis  XI.,  and  for 
fourteen  years  he  was  in  that  same  cage,  and  could  neither  lie  down  nor  stand 
np.  It  is  a  poor  rule  that  will  not  work  both  ways.  "  With  that  measure  ye 
mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again."  (Ibid.)  The  purpose  of  God  : — 
The  wheels  in  a  watch  or  a  clock  move  contrary  one  to  another,  some  one 
way,  some  another,  yet  all  serve  the  intent  of  the  workman,  to  show  the  time, 
or  to  make  the  clock  to  strike.  So  in  the  world  the  providence  of  God  may 
seem  to  run  cross  to  His  promises.  One  man  takes  this  way,  another  runs  that 
way.  Good  men  go  one  way,  wicked  men  another.  Yet  all  in  conclusion 
accomplish  the  will,  and  centre  in  the  purpose  of  God,  the  great  creator  of  all 
things.     {R.  Sibbu.) 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vm. 


CHAPTEE  vm. 

Yebs.  1,  2.  On  that  day  did  the  king  Ahasuerus  give  the  honse  of  Haman  tho 
Jews'  enemy  unto  Esther  the  queen. — Right  use  of  wealth  -. — I.  We  see  how,  in  thk 

PKOVIDENCE  OF  GoD,  THE  WEALTH  WHICH  WOBLDLT  MEN  WOOLD  USE  IN  OPPOSITION  TO 
THE  INTERESTS  OF  God's  CAUSE  AND  PEOPLE  MAT  BE  WEEBTED  FROM  THEM,  AND  MADB 
AVAILABLE    FOB   THE    ADVANCEMENT    OF    THESE    INTERESTS.       The  COncluslon  which  We 

draw  from  all  this  is,  that  the  best  and  happiest  arrangement  which  a  man  can 
make  with  respect  to  the  good  things  which  have  been  bestowed  upon  him  is  that 
in  his  hfetime  he  seek  to  be  personally  the  dispenser  of  good  to  others.  If  he  lives 
and  acts  in  this  spirit,  then  he  will  have  the  less  anxiety  as  to  the  disposal  of  what 
he  may  be  able  to  leave  behind  him.  11.  The  peculiar  providence  which  we  see 
exercised  in  the  case  of  Mordecai  teaches  us  that  men  may  be  well  content  to 

WAIT,    while    they    ABE    IN    THE    WAY    OF    WELL-DOINQ,    UNTIL     THEY     BECEIVE      THEHl 

recompense.  Worth  and  faithfulness  and  humility,  after  they  have  been  long 
neglected,  are  brought  into  the  light,  and  are  honoured  in  proportion  to  the  neglect 
which  they  formerly  experienced.  III.  From  Ebtheb's  love  foe  her  people  we  take 
A  LESSON.  Then  should  not  this  be  an  example  to  those  among  us,  who  themselves 
have  had  their  souls  gladdened  by  the  grace  of  God,  to  be  mindful  of  others  who 
have  not  been  visited  so  graciously  ?  IV.  The  lesson  which  is  to  be  drawn  from 
the  conduct  of  the  king  as  it  is  here  exhibited.  If  one  man,  for  example, 
has  injured  another,  and  knows  it,  but  is  too  proud  to  acknowledge  it,  then  he  is 
destitute  of  the  true  spirit  of  Christianity.  If  a  man  is  engaged  in  a  wrong  course 
of  action,  and  is  sensible  of  it,  but  will  put  his  soul  in  peril  rather  than  yield  to  the 
remonstrances  of  his  friends,  then  his  pride  will  certainly  prove  the  ruin  of  his  soul. 
There  is,  perhaps,  more  real  heroism  in  confessing  and  correcting  errors  and  weak- 
nesses than  there  is  in  boldly  contending  for  truth,  when  we  are  conscious  that  we 
have  it  on  our  side.  Many  voices  will  cheer  us  onward  in  the  defence  of  principles 
which  we  defend  at  some  risk.  The  courage  that  suffers  in  a  good  cause  will 
always  get  applause.  But  when  I  have  done  wrong,  and  make  confession  of  the 
wrong,  the  men  of  the  world  do  not  sympathise.  [A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  And 
the  king  took  off  his  ring,  which  he  had  taken  from  Haman,  and  gave  it  unto 
Mordecai. — The  end  in  peace  : — But  success  to  faithfulness,  even  in  the  narrowest 
sphere  and  with  the  feeblest  powers,  is  uniform  and  certain,  and,  as  an  example, 
blessed  and  wholesome.     This  is  the  great  principle  which  Mordecai  illustrates. 

1.  In  his  case  we  first  see  this  fidelity  for  a  period  exceedingly  tried  and  hopeless. 

2.  We  see  this  faithfulness  in  duty  brought  to  extreme  danger.  Not  only  was 
Mordecai  unrewarded,  but  he  was  condemned  to  an  appointed  destruction.  3.  Wo 
see  this  fidelity  in  duty  completely  rescued  and  delivered.  4.  We  see  this  fidelity 
in  duty  proportionably  exalted.  6.  We  see  this  fidelity  in  duty  abundantly  rewarded 
in  outward,  earthly  things.  6.  We  see  this  fidelity  in  duty  not  only  rewarded  in 
itself,  and  in  the  person  and  condition  of  the  man  who  is  distinguished  by  it,  but 
crowned  with  eminent  usefulness  to  others.     (S.  H.  Tyng,  D.D.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  Besought  ^^ni  with  tears  to  put  away  the  mischief  of  Haman. — 

Counteracting  evil ; — It  requires  earnest  and  vigorous  efforts  on  the  part  of  the  pious 
to  undo  the  evil  wrought  by  the  wicked,  and  left  by  them  as  a  legacy  to  the  world. 
How  much  thought  and  research  have  been  expended  in  this  way  in  answering  the 
works  of  such  men  as  Voltaire  and  Paine!  The  evil  cannot  be  sufficiently  deplored, 
but  may  it  not,  in  the  providence  of  God,  be  overruled  and  sanctified  for  good  ? 
In  nature  we  have  opposing  forces  at  work,  which  issue  in  greater  stability  and 
permanence ;  and  somewhat  the  same  result  is  secured  by  the  opposition  and 
conflict  of  minds.  By  the  strain  to  which  the  truth  is  subjected  it  is  put  to  the  test, 
and  whilst  what  cannot  be  maintained  falls  away,  all  that  is  founded  on  reliable 
evidence  is  retained,  and  made  on  every  side  more  perspicuous,  as  the  pressure  of  a 
great  need  has  stimulated  the  inventive  genius  of  a  people  to  provide  appliances  to 
meet  it.  So  has  one  infidel  book  or  wicked  action  occasioned  the  writing  of  treatises 
in  defence  of  Divine  revelation,  or  the  performance  of  holy  and  generous  deeds,  and 
the  evil  of  the  former  has  been  more  than  counteracted,  and  the  result  proved  an 
absolute  boon.  In  this  direction  also  we  may  see  the  hand  of  God,  and  praise  Him 
for  His  goodness.  (T.  McEwan.)  Sin  survives  the  sinner: — I.  Evil  outlives 
its  first  contrivers.  1.  Haman  is  dead,  but  the  mischief  he  devised  still  hangs 
over  the  Jews.     A  passing  stranger  may  loosen  a  stone  in  an  embankment,  and  go 


CHAP,  vra.]  ESTHER.  101 

on  his  way ;  but  a  whole  province  will  bewail  his  folly.  An  infidel  father  trains 
most  carefully  an  infidel  son;  the  son  becomes  an  eminent  writer  and  spreads 
through  a  whole  generation  the  poison  he  imbibed  on  his  father's  knee.  An  English 
colonist,  fiUed  with  pity  for  the  Caribbseans,  introduces  negro  slavery  into  the  West 
Indies— -doing  evil  that  good  may  come — and  for  centuries  those  fair  islands  are 
cursed  by  his  device.  2.  Evil  tends  to  permanency.  (1)  Because  of  the  natural 
corruption  of  the  heart.  (2)  This  principle  is  assisted  by  the  solidarity  of  our  race. 
What  affects  one  affects  all.  II.  Evil  yields  before  holt  self-sacrifice.  Esther 
was — 1.  Intensely  solicitous.  2.  Persistent.  3.  Boldly  self-sacrificing.  4.  Success- 
ful. III.  Evil  crushed  but  not  killed.  IV.  Pbactical  lessons.  1.  The  foUy  of 
infallibility.  2.  The  power  of  intercession.  3.  The  awful  nature  of  sin.  (IF". 
Burrows,  B.A.) 

Yers.  5,  6.  For  how  can  I  endure  to  see  the  evil  that  shall  come  unto  my 
people. — Great  changes  : — The  world  is  full  of  changes.  There  are  no  elements  of 
stability  belonging  to  it.  When  all  appears  fair  and  promising,  some  unlooked-for 
event  takes  place,  to  darken  the  prospect,  and  to  render  it  cheerless  and  gloomy. 
And,  on  the  other  hand,  when  the  atmosphere  forbodes  great  storms,  a  gale  arises 
unexpectedly,  to  chase  away  the  clouds,  and  to  pour  liveliness  on  all  around  us. 
We  find  these  statements  strikingly  verified  in  this  chapter.  1.  Haman's  prosperity 
vanished  away  suddenly,  and  the  objects  of  his  deadly  enmity  rose  to  power  and 
happiness.  "On  that  day"  (in  which  Haman  was  executed)  "did  the  king 
AhasueruB  give  the  house  of  Haman,  the  Jews'  enemy,  unto  Esther  the  queen." 
Here  she,  who  had  been  doomed  to  an  untimely  death  by  a  wicked  man,  is  enriched 
with  his  estates.  How  true  the  declaration  of  the  psalmist,  "  Surely  every  man 
walketh  in  a  vain  shew :  surely  they  are  disquieted  in  vain :  he  heapeth  up 
riches,  and  knoweth  not  who  shall  gather  them  "  I  2.  Esther  was  not  the  only  one 
that  profited  by  Haman's  doom.  Mordecai  also  was  advanced  by  it.  How  could 
he  advance  a  more  deserving  character,  one  who  had  been  more  faithful  in  every 
duty  ?  Were  things  properly  conducted,  such  would  always  be  the  case.  Worth- 
lessness  of  character  would  ever  act  as  an  hindrance  to  power,  and  a  life  conducted 
on  the  principles  of  integrity  and  faithfulness  would  lead  to  preferment  and  honour. 
Such  will  be  the  case  on  a  future  day.  The  good  and  faithful  servant  shall  enter 
into  the  joy  of  his  Lord.  Esther  likewise  behaved  well  on  this  occasion.  She  did 
not  forget  Mordecai's  kindness  to  her  when  she  was  destitute  and  in  trying  circum- 
stances. There  is  a  perpetuity  in  holy  affection  and  friendship  which  you  look  for 
in  vain  in  the  children  of  this  world.  These  may  for  a  season  be  loud  in  their 
professions  of  attachment;  but  when  it  suits  their  purpose  they  find  it  convenient 
to  forget  those  professions,  and  allow  their  attachments  to  degenerate  into  neglect 
and  obhvion.  But  Christian  friendship,  based  on  permanent  principles,  is  per- 
manent in  duration.  The  sweet  friendship  between  Jonathan  and  David  nothing 
could  extinguish,  no  reverse  of  fortune  could  even  cool.  But  there  is  no  friend 
equal  to  Jesus  !  the  acts  of  His  friendship  are  unceasing.  He  is,  what  every  friend 
ought  to  be,  "  a  friend  that  loveth  at  all  times."  3.  The  Jews  also  derived  great 
advantage  from  the  death  of  Haman,  for  his  edict  contemplated  their  destruction. 
Esther  interceded  for  them,  and  as  far  as  circumstances  permitted,  prevailed.  She 
approaches  the  king  again,  uncalled,  in  the  humblest  manner,  and  with  abundant 
tears  in  his  eyes.  It  is  a  good  sign  when  we  feel  an  interest  in  the  welfare  of  those 
related  to  us,  and  when  we  can  with  importunity  invoke  the  blessings  of  God  upon 
them.  Thus  did  Esther.  She  was  not  more  earnest  for  herself  than  for  her  people. 
Thus  felt  Jesus.  "  When  He  was  come  near,  He  beheld  the  city,  and  wept  over  it." 
Thus  felt  St.  Paul.  He  poured  out  his  very  soul  for  his  people,  the  Jews,  though 
they  persecuted  him,  and  tried  to  effect  his  destruction.  He  tells  us  that  he 
"had  great  heaviness,  and  continual  sorrow  in  his  heart"  at  their  folly  and 
wickedness  in  rejecting  Christ,  and  that  his  "  heart's  desire  and  prayer  unto  God 
for  them  was,  that  they  might  be  saved."  Are  we  thus  minded  ?  Esther  fell  down 
at  the  kmg's  feet  for  her  people.  Have  you  done  so  for  your  relatives  and  friends  ? 
"  Oh  that  "  my  children  "  might  live  before  Thee  1 "  4.  Esther  interceded  not  in 
vain :  for  the  king  took  immediate  steps  to  avert,  at  least  in  some  degree,  the  storm 
which  had  long  been  gathering  over  their  heads.  The  unchangeableness  of  the 
Persian  laws  was  deeply  to  be  regretted,  and  caused  much  injustice  and  cruelty. 
The  law  of  God  is  indeed  unchangeable,  and  properly — necessarily  so.  His  com- 
mands are  based  on  immutable  foundations,  and  therefore  they  must  be  eternally 
the  same.     How  strangely  was  this  kingdom  managed  1    Here  are  two  dilierent  and, 

40 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  mx, 

contrary  laws — authorising  civil  war  from  the  one  end  of  the  realm  to  the  other — 
one  decree  authorising  the  Persians  to  attack  the  Jews,  the  other  authorising  the 
Jews  to  defend  themselves,  and  to  slay  the  Persians.  Let  us  bless  God  for  more 
rational  and  equitable  enactments  in  our  kingdom.  We  owe  this  altogether  to  His 
goodness  in  giving  us  the  Scriptures ;  for  our  civil  as  well  as  religious  light  are 
derived  from  their  sacred  page.  5.  If  such  anxiety  was  manifested  for  this  newly- 
enacted  law  to  be  known  throughout  the  empire,  how  much  more  anxious  should 
we  be  to  circulate  the  Word  of  God  throughout  the  world  1  And  if  it  was  deemed 
of  such  moment  that  the  decree  should  be  "  written  unto  every  people,  after  their 
language,"  how  should  we  rejoice  that  the  great  charter  of  salvation  has  been 
translated  into  so  many  of  the  languages  of  the  earth,  and  that  a  copy  of  the  Scrip- 
tures goeth  forth  into  distant  parts  of  the  world  for  every  moment  that  passeth 
away  I  The  speed  with  which  the  decree  in  favour  of  the  Jews  was  to  be  made 
known  to  them  deserves  our  attention.  "The  posts  that  rode  upon  mules  and 
camels  went  out,  being  hastened  and  pressed  on  by  the  king's  commandment — that 
the  Jews  should  be  ready  against  that  day  to  avenge  themselves  on  their  enemies." 
Was  preservation  from  temporal  death  of  such  consequence  to  the  Jews  that  all 
this  expedition  was  enjoined  that  they  might  obtain  it?  Of  how  much  greater 
consequence  is  preservation  from  everlasting  death.  6.  Mordecai,  being  now  chief 
minister  of  state,  went  forth  arrayed,  according  to  the  dignity  of  his  ofiQce,  and  the 
people  rejoiced  at  beholding  power  conferred  on  one  who  would  use  it  beneficially. 
"  When  the  righteous  are  in  authority,  the  people  rejoice ;  but  when  the  wicked 
beareth  rule,  the  people  mourn."  Their  weeping  endured  for  a  night,  and  there 
was  joy  in  the  morning.  "  A  good  day  !  "  yes  !  a  day  of  everlasting  sunshine,  awaits 
holy  mourners,  in  a  future  world.  "  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their 
eyes."  (J.  Hughes.)  Esther's  patriotism  and  piety  : — Patriotism  among  the 
Jews  was  not  a  mere  beautiful  sunflower  that  flourished  and  expanded  in  days  of 
prosperity,  but  a  strong  and  powerful  principle  that  displayed  itself  as  much,  if  not 
more,  in  days  of  adversity.     Our  text  breathes  the  spirit  of  the  truest  patriotism. 

1.  The  scene  that  presented  itself  to  Esthee's  feeling  heart.  What  patriotic 
Christian  can  contemplate  the  condition  of  large  masses  of  our  people  without 
being  moved  to    sympathy  and  confession  ?     1.  Their  poverty    and  privations. 

2.  Their  want  of  moral  and  religious  influence.  3.  Their  spiritual  wants.  11.  The 
effort  she  used  under  the  circumstances  in  which  she  was  placed.  1.  She 
addressed  herself  in  earnest  prayer  to  the  king  in  behalf  of  her  countrymen.  Let 
us  arise  and  plead  their  cause  with  the  King  of  kings  who  are  the  willing  captives 
of  sin  and  Satan.  2.  She  was  active  in  the  use  of  proper  and  legitimate  means  to 
accomplish  her  heart's  desire.  "  Prayer  without  works  is  enthusiasm,  and  works 
without  prayer  presumption."  3.  She  did  all  in  deep  humility  (ver.  5). 
III.  Encouragements    to    Christian    exertion.     1.  The   times   are    favourable. 

2.  The  gospel  is  admirably  adapted  to  meet  the   wants    of  people    everywhere. 

3.  The  example  of  pious  characters  in  all  ages  from  the  time  of  Christ  down  to  our 
own  time,  who  have  felt  it  their  duty  and  privilege  to    propagate    the  gospel. 

4.  "  The  value  of  the  soul."  (C.  Hyatt.)  Esther,  an  example  of  intercession : — 
I,  Esther's  deep  affection  for  her  kindred.  II.  The  character  of  her  inter- 
cession ON  their  behalf.  She  had  singular  advantages  and  great  opportunities, 
and  she  turned  them  to  the  best  purpose.  III.  She  used  her  advantages  with 
earnest  and  persevering  importunity.  Conclusion  :  There  are  two  points  of 
diliference  between  Esther's  intercession  with  Ahasuerus  and  ours  with  the  Lord 
Jesus.  1.  She  went  into  the  king's  presence  uncalled  and  unbidden ;  we  are  urgently 
invited  and  commanded  to  make  our  requests  known  unto  God.  2.  Esther  had 
reason  to  fear  a  repulse ;  we  are  positively  assured  of  a  welcome.  (R.  Glover,  D.D.) 
Concern  for  unsaved  relatives  : — It  is  one  of  the  results  of  sin  that  it  deadens  the 
spiritual  side  of  our  nature  so  that,  while  in  theory  we  admit  the  danger  of  the  un- 
saved, in  fact  we  fail  to  realise  it.  How  anxious  parents  are  about  the  health  of 
their  children  1  If  they  have  any  fatal  disease,  what  care  and  pains  they  will  take 
until  they  feel  that  they  are  out  of  danger.  Or  if  on  a  steamer  that  was  reported 
in  the  city  to  be  in  danger,  how  distressed  they  would  feel  until  they  learned  of 
their  safety.  When  the  ocean  steamer  A  tlantic  was  wrecked  some  years  ago  on  the 
Banks  of  Nova  Scotia,  a  gentleman  from  Chicago  was  reported  among  the  lost. 
Then  came  the  telegram  "  Saved,"  and  his  name  under  it.  His  business  partner 
had  it  framed  and  hung  up  in  the  store.  If  the  members  of  a  family  really  felt  the 
true  condition  of  every  one  in  it  who  is  not  a  Christian,  they  would  never  rest  until 
all  were  safe.    But  the  true  condition  is  not  realised.    A  mother  will  say,  '*  My  boy 


CHAP.  Tin.]  ESTHER.  103 

is  steady,  industrious,  no  bad  habits,  stays  at  home,  is  kind  and  good."  All  well. 
Many  a  son  is  the  opposite,  disgraces  his  family  and  breaks  his  parents'  hearts. 
But  is  your  son  a  Christian  ?  Is  he  saved  ?  It  would  be  a  pity  that  a  good  boy 
should  be  lost.  When  one  of  the  family  is  lying  on  the  brink,  what  a  concentration 
of  effort  is  put  forth  to  rescue  him  from  the  grave.  The  ventilation,  temperature, 
quiet  of  the  house  ;  the  exclusion  of  all  excitement,  consultation  of  physicians,  all 
the  ordering  of  household  affairs  to  one  end.  Then  in  convalescence  moving  from 
one  place  to  another.  Oh,  if  the  same  care  and  skill  and  devotion  were  employed 
to  save  the  soul  as  is  put  forth  to  save  the  body,  how  many  holy,  happy  Christian 
homes  there  would  be — father  and  mother,  son  and  daughter,  all  one  in  Christ  1 
(G.  H.  Smyth,  D.D.)  Neglecting  the  spiritual  safety  of  others  : — Some  of  you 
perhaps  remember  when  you  were  awakened  to  your  danger  and  saw  your  condition 
before  God.  Does  not  the  recollection  move  you  for  the  safety  of  others  ?  "  How 
can  I  endure  to  see  the  destruction  of  my  kindred  ?  "  If  the  awful  fate  must  be 
theirs,  we  would  shrink  from  it.  Hagar  in  the  wilderness — "  Let  me  not  see  my 
child  die."  David— "And  the  king  was  much  moved,  and  went  up  to  the  chamber 
over  the  gate  and  wept ;  and  as  he  wept,  thus  he  said,  0  my  son  Absalom  1  my 
son  !  my  son,  my  son  Absalom  !  Would  God  I  had  died  for  thee,  O  Absalom  my 
son,  my  son!  "  (2  Sam.  xviii.  33).  A  boy  was  once  lost  in  a  storm  at  sea.  Hia 
mother  went  to  learn  the  sad  story  from  the  captain  of  the  vessel,  who  barely 
escaped  with  his  life.  Among  other  inquiries  she  asked,  '*  Did  you  see  my  boy  at 
the  time  he  met  his  sad  fate?  "  The  captain  replied,  "Yes,  he  was  clinging  to  a 
piece  of  broken  spar  that  hung  over  the  side  of  the  ship  a  short  time  before  she 
sank."  "  Did  he  speak  to  you  or  say  anything  about  his  father  or  me  ?  "  The 
captain  said  yes,  and  then  a  long  pause  was  broken  by  the  weeping  mother 
impatiently  saying,  "  Oh,  tell  me  what  he  said,  one  word  of  my  dear  boy  will  bring 
me  comfort."  The  captain  still  tried  to  avoid  telling  her,  but  she  insisted.  "  Well, 
then,"  replied  the  weather-beaten  seaman,  "  your  boy  looked  despairingly  at  me 
and  said,  'My  parents  never  prepared  me  for  a  moment  like  this  I'  Then  a  huge 
wave  washed  him  from  my  sight."     {Ibid.) 

Vers.  7-14.  Then  the  king  Ahasuerus  said  unto  Esther  the  queea — A  monarches 

ivibecility : — Always  distrust  the  man  who  is  the  victim  of  circumstances.  Great 
men  make  their  circumstances  and  little  men  are  made  by  them.  Ahasuerus  here 
pleads  his  circumstances,  and  rather  than  acknowledge  an  error,  plunges  the  whole 
empire  in  danger  of  civil  war.  He  throws  upon  Mordecai  the  duty  of  contriving 
a  remedy  against  his  own  mistakes.  I.  A  weak  man's  self-defence.  "  I  have 
given  Esther  the  house  of  Haman,"  &c.  He  had  given  what  cost  him  nothing. 
With  a  maudlin  tenderness,  like  that  of  a  drunken  man,  while  Esther  is  inspired 
with  an  almost  Divine  passion  of  patriotism,  he  pleads  his  affection  for  her  person. 
A  small  propitiation  for  a  great  wickedness.  As  if  the  hero  of  one  hundred  swindles 
flung  a  copper  to  a  beggar ;  as  if  a  cowardly  murderer  gave  a  crust  to  his  victim's 
orphan;  as  if  a  life-long  sinner  offered  to  God  the  compensation  of  a  Sunday 
prayer ;  so  Ahasuerus  hopes  that  Haman's  death  will  make  Esther  unmindful  of 
the  wickedness  devised  against  her  kindred.  II.  A  weak  man's  "  non-possumus." 
III.  A  WEAK  man's  refusal  OF  BESPONSiBiLiTT.  (W.  Burrows,  B.A.)  May  no 
man  reverse. — The  repealahle  and  unrepealable  in  human  conduct : — 1.  There  ia 
something  in  all  human  action  unrepealable.  But  the  only  way  of  making  quite 
sure  that  we  shall  obviate  or  nullify  the  consequences  of  an  evil  action  or  an  evil 
course  of  conduct  (if  one  may  express  the  thing  in  a  strong  solecism)  is — not  to  do 
the  action  ;  not  to  follow  the  course  of  conduct.  Few  things  are  more  melancholy 
and  affecting  than  the  deep  concern  and  trouble  of  aroused  consciences  in  view  of 
things  deeply  regretted,  but  seen  to  be  beyond  recall,  and,  in  a  large  degree,  intract- 
able to  modification  and  management.  It  is  easy  to  touch  a  spring  in  a  piece  of 
complex  machinery  where  there  is  force  of  water  or  steam  pent  up  and  ready 
to  play ;  but  if  you  don't  know  all  the  consequences,  you  had  better  not  touch  the 
spring.  We  must  not  take  a  morbid  view,  and  afflict  ourselves  with  imaginary 
fears,  and  think  of  this  great  machine  we  call  providence  as  if  it  were  full  of  lurking 
mischiefs  ready  to  break  out  at  the  slightest  touch.  We  are  responsible  chiefly, 
almost  exclusively,  for  this — the  action  in  itself,  the  course  of  conduct  in  itself. 
We  cannot  control  the  consequences,  and  we  shall  not  be  accountable  for  them 
except  in  so  far  as  they  are  the  direct  and  proper  fruit  of  the  action.  If  we  do 
what  is  right,  and  wise,  and  for  good  reasons,  we  have  nothing  to  fear.  If  we  do 
wilfully  or  carelessly  what  we  know  to  be  wrong,  we  have  every  reason  to  look  for 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  viii. 

the  evil  consequences,  and  every  reason  to  judge  that  we  are  responsible  for  them 
as  far  as  personal  responsibility  goes  in  such  a  case.  2.  This  narrative  may  teach 
us  farther  that  in  the  darkest  and  most  unpromising  circumstances  there  is  nearly 
always  some  way  of  relief  and  improvement.  How  seldom  are  things  so  in  human 
life  that  literally  nothing  can  be  done !  There  is  something  unrepealable  in  all 
important  human  action.  But  there  is  also  much  that  may  be  practically  repealed. 
I  think  we  may  say  that  never,  at  any  one  time,  in  the  history  of  a  nation,  never 
in  the  life  of  an  individual,  are  things  so  dark  and  bad  that  nothing  can  be  done  to 
amend  and  lighten  them.  If  this  were  not  so,  the  world  would  soon  be  full  of  the 
most  pitiable  spectacles  that  could  be  conceived ;  communities  and  individual* 
sitting  hopelessly  amid  the  gloom  of  their  own  failures.  But  who  knows  not,  also, 
that  calamities  and  misfortunes  are  retrieved,  that  injuries  are  redressed,  that 
mistakes  are  rectified  ?  As  Esther  set  her  single  will  against  the  deadly  edict,  and 
drew  from  it,  as  far  as  her  people  were  concerned,  its  deadhness,  so  a  single  will  is 
often  set  against  a  whole  system  of  evil,  and  by  vigorous  and  persevering  assaults 
it  is  brought  to  an  end.  {A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  The  irreversible  in  human  life  : — 
The  word  once  spoken  cannot  be  recalled.  The  deed  once  done  cannot  be  undone. 
The  book  once  issued  begins  to  eiercise  an  influence  which  cannot  be  bottled  up 
again,  but  which  must  go  on  operative  for  evermore.  The  man  who  in  youth 
sowed  "  wild  oats  "  cannot  stop  the  production  of  the  harvest  which  has  sprung 
from  his  folly.  The  hasty-tempered  one,  whose  words  sank  into  the  heart  of  a 
friend  and  stabbed  him  with  something  keener  than  a  poniard,  cannot  undo  the 
mischief  he  has  wrought.  The  author  of  a  vile  book  may  see  his  folly  and  lament 
it,  but  he  cannot  catch  and  confine  the  influence  it  exerted,  even  supposing  every 
copy  were  to  be  recalled.  You  cannot  stop  the  ball  after  it  has  left  the  gun.  If 
you  shake  the  dewdrop  from  a  flower  you  cannot  put  it  back  again.  "  Don't  write 
there,  sir,"  said  a  newsboy  to  a  young  dandy  in  the  waiting-room  of  an  English 
railway  station,  when  he  saw  him  take  off  his  ring  and  begin  with  the  diamond  in 
it  to  scratch  some  words  upon  the  surface  of  the  mirror.  "  Don't  write  there,  sir." 
"  Why  not?  "  "  Because  you  can't  rub  it  out."  (IF.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  And  to 
stand  for  their  life,  to  destroy,  to  slay. — War  against  evil : — There  is  not  an  evil 
passion  or  lust  against  which  we  are  not  called  upon  to  do  battle,  not  a  temptation 
which  we  are  not  commanded  to  resist,  not  a  spiritual  adversary  which  we  are  not 
required  to  put  forth  all  our  energies  to  overcome.  In  our  "  evil  day  "  we  are 
summoned  by  our  King  to  "  stand  for  our  lives,"  and  be  prepared  to  war  against 
our  enemies  as  though  the  victory  lay  with  ourselves.  God  helping  us,  we  will  do 
it.     (T.  McEwan.) 

Vers.  15-17.  The  Jews  had  light,  and  gladness,  and  Joy,  and  honour.— Proper 
use  of  power : — Now  let  us  pause  for  a  little,  and  take  from  this  passage  one  or  two 
of  the  important  lessons  which  it  suggests.  1.  In  the  first  place,  the  conduct  of 
Mordecai  under  the  strange  revolution  which  had  been  wrought  in  his  condition 
and  prospects  is  full  of  practical  instruction  to  us.  The  lesson  is  this,  that 
advancement  in  worldly  honour  and  prosperity  should  be  turned  to  account,  by 
being  made  conducive  to  the  promotion  of  the  interests  of  the  Church  of  Christ  and 
to  the  good  of  His  people.  It  reflects  high  honour  upon  Mordecai,  that  the  first  act 
of  authority  which  he  performed  in  the  exalted  position  to  which  he  had  been 
raised  was  one  which  secured  the  enlargement  of  the  Church  and  the  safety  of  his 
brethren.  In  other  hands  the  king's  signet  had  been  more  frequently  employed  to 
give  effect  to  decrees  of  violence  and  cruelty ;  but  no  sooner  does  it  pass  into  his 
hands  than  it  is  used  in  behalf  of  the  oppressed.  Worldly  honour  and  dignity  in 
his  case  were  invested  with  a  value  which  does  not  intrinsically  belong  to  them, 
and  which  never  can  belong  to  them,  except  when  they  are  made  subservient  to 
such  ends  as  he  sought  to  promote  by  means  of  them.  Now  we  say  that  all  who 
have  been  blessed  with  wealth  and  influence  may  well  look  to  this  example  and 
learn  from  it.  The  natural  selfishness  of  the  human  heart  prompts  men  to  overlook 
the  miseries  of  others,  when  they  have  gathered  about  them  all  that  is  needful  for 
their  own  comfort.  If  they  can  but  obtain  the  luxuries  which  gratify  the  senses, 
they  care  not  what  amount  of  woe  and  wretchedness  may  be  experienced  by  those 
who  live  almost  at  their  door.  They  waste  not  a  thought  upon  the  sad  condition 
of  the  victims  of  spiritual  darkness.  We  would  remind  them,  therefore,  that  there 
is  a  luxury,  the  sweetest  and  best  which  wealth  can  purchase,  and  which  lies  fully 
within  their  reach — the  luxury  of  doing  good.  2.  In  the  second  place,  the  account 
given  in  the  text  of  the  feelings  of  the  Jews  when  the  edict  was  issued  for  their 


CMkt.  vin.]  ESTHER.  105 

deliverance,  suggests  some  profitable  reflections  to  us.  It  caused  them  light,  and 
gladness,  and  joy  ;  and  the  day  of  its  publication  was  a  day  of  feasting  to  them, 
and  a  good  day.  But  our  thoughts  are  directed  by  the  description  to  a  still  higher 
theme.  "  How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains  are  the  feet  of  him  that  bringeth 
good  tidings,  that  publisheth  peace ;  that  bringeth  good  tidings  of  good ;  that 
publisheth  salvation ;  that  saith  unto  Zion,  Thy  God  reigneth."  All  mere 
temporal  deliverances  sink  into  insignificance  when  contrasted  with  this 
which  the  prophet  celebrates.  The  sentence  of  doom  under  which  we  all 
naturally  lie,  as  transgressors  of  God's  covenant,  has  been  followed  by  a  message 
of  pardon  and  life  through  Jesus  Christ  to  all  who  will  accept  God's  gracious  ofifer. 
Surely,  then,  we  are  warranted  to  ask,  What  has  been  the  effect  of  this  message 
upon  you  who  have  so  often  heard  it  ?  Now,  according  to  the  views  of  some,  where 
spiritual  joy  and  gladness  are  awanting,  spiritual  life  must  be  awanting  also.  But 
to  this  opinion  we  cannot  give  our  assent.  Various  causes  there  may  be  for  the 
obscuration  of  the  light  of  Divine  joy  in  the  soul,  while  there  is  no  good  reason  for 
supposing  that  the  soul  is  still  dead  in  sin.  No  one  who  has  had  experience  of  the 
conflicts  of  the  life  of  faith,  and  of  the  power  of  temptation,  will  require  any  formal 
reasoning  in  proof  of  the  fact  that  there  may  be  spiritual  life  without  joy,  or  at 
least  with  not  a  little  darkness  and  disquietude.  Yet,  it  is  unquestionably  the 
duty  of  all  Christ's  followers  to  rejoice  in  His  salvation.  3.  In  the  third  place, 
we  may  take  a  lesson  from  what  is  said  in  the  text  respecting  the  readiness 
which  was  shown  by  multitudes  to  join  themselves  to  the  Jews,  when  the  king's 
edict  in  their  favour  was  published.  It  may  be  believed  that  in  some  instances 
those  of  the  people  of  the  land  who  professed  the  Jewish  religion  were  influenced 
by  right  motives,  and  forsook  their  heathenism  because  they  felt  that  Jehovah,  the 
God  of  the  Jews,  was  the  true  God.  Zechariah  had  foretold  such  event  (Zech. 
viii.  23).  It  is  very  manifest,  from  the  language  used  in  the  text,  that  such  was 
not  the  generally  prevalent  feeling.  "  Many  became  Jews,  for  the  fear  of  the  Jews 
fell  upon  them."  The  sunshine  of  the  royal  favour  was  now  resting  upon  the  seed 
of  Abraham.  They  were  a  numerous  body  of  themselves  ;  and  now,  when  they  had 
liberty  of  action,  by  their  wealth  they  could  bring  over  to  their  side  those  who 
would  protect  them.  It  was  good  policy,  therefore,  to  profess  to  be  friendly  toward 
them.  And  so  not  the  fear  of  God,  but  the  fear  of  the  Jews,  moved  many  to 
renounce  heathenism,  and  acknowledge  submission  to  the  law  of  Moses.  The 
Church  was  in  one  of  her  prosperous  periods,  and  hence  there  were  strong  induce- 
ments to  the  worldly-minded  to  enrol  themselves  among  her  members.  Now  this 
is  no  isolated  case.  Such  things  have  often  occurred,  although  by  no  means 
tending  to  the  advancement  of  vital  religion.  For  example,  it  must  have  often 
struck  the  reflective  readers  of  history,  as  a  subject  rather  of  painful  than  of 
pleasant  contemplation,  that  the  progress  of  the  Reformation  in  many  countries 
should  have  been  so  intimately  connected  with  and  dependent  upon  the  belief  and 
practice  of  the  ruling  powers.  The  flowing  and  ebbing  of  the  tide  of  religious  pro- 
fession might  be  calculated  too  surely  from  the  prevailing  sentiments  of  the  court. 
Thus,  for  instance,  how  sudden  were  the  changes  which  the  aspect  of  the  Church 
in  England  presented  during  the  reigns  of  three  successive  sovereigns.  In  the 
brief  time  of  the  Sixth  Edward,  when  his  counsellors  were  Protestant,  and  Popery 
was  disallowed,  how  fast  did  the  principles  of  Protestantism  spread  through  the 
kingdom  I  Then  Popery  became  rampant  again,  and  the  majority  were  glad  to 
seem  to  be  upon  its  side.  And  no  less  remarkable  was  the  revival  of  Protestantism 
during  the  reign  of  Mary's  successor,  Elizabeth.  The  nation  appeared  to  be  born  in  a 
day ;  and  again  multitudes  who  had  joined  in  the  celebration  of  the  Mass  cried, 
*'  Away  with  it ! "  and  became  the  friends  and  promoters  of  the  purer  faith.  And  thus, 
from  regard  to  character,  and  with  a  view  to  maintain  respectability  and  to  forward 
worldly  interests,  very  many  join  themselves  to  the  Church  of  Christ  without  being 
influenced  at  all  by  the  love  of  Christ.  Now,  if  we  examine  all  the  circumstances 
carefully,  we  shall  perceive  that  we  have  as  little  reason  to  take  comfort  to  our- 
selves from  the  external  state  of  religion  among  us  as  the  Jews  had  from  the 
apparent  respect  which  was  shown  for  their  religion  in  the  days  of  Mordecai,  or  as 
the  conflicting  parties  had  which  alternately  sunk  or  prevailed  in  many  countries 
at  the  period  of  the  Eeformation.  The  worldly  and  selfish  element — the  fear  of 
man,  and  not  the  fear  of  God — has  ever  been  too  prevalent  in  moulding  religious 
profession  ;  the  fires  of  persecution  being  sometimes  employed  to  compel,  and  the 
attractions  of  self-interest  at  other  times  to  draw  men  to  confess  with  the  mouth 
what  they  did  not  believe  in  their  heart.    And  thus  it  is  that  the  numerical  force 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap  vru. 

of  ChriBtianity,  if  I  may  so  speak,  is  so  different  a  thing  from  the  vital  power  of  it. 
A  profession  of  Christianity,  with  some  show  of  reverence  for  its  ordinances,  will 
not  carry  you  to  heaven.  It  will  not  even  abide  the  trouble  of  a  sifting-time  on 
earth,  if  such  time  should  overtake  you.  It  will  not  give  you  solid  comfort  when 
you  come,  as  soon  you  must  come,  to  pass  through  the  dark  valley  of  the  shadow 
of  death.  Nothing  will  avail  but  the  faith  which  rests  on  Christ,  and  which,  being 
the  substance  of  things  hoped  for  and  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen,  makes  the 
possession  of  heaven  sure,  by  the  present  foretaste  of  it  with  which  it  feasts 
the  soul.  (A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.)  Light  and  gladness  : — I.  The  folly  of 
CLAIMING  HUMAN  iNFiLLiBiLiTT.  Think  of  what  the  king  had  here  to  do.  His  law 
•'  might  no  man  reverse."  To  save  the  doomed  Jews  the  king  was  reduced  to  the 
absurd  necessity,  as  Matthew  Henry  pithily  puts  it,  "  of  enacting  a  civil  war  in  hia 
own  dominions  between  the  Jews  and  their  enemies,  so  that  both  sides  took  up 
arms  by  his  authority  and  yet  against  his  authority."  What  is  not  claimed  by  our 
sovereigns  or  legislators  is  claimed,  in  matters  of  religion,  by  the  Roman  Pontiff. 
As  a  general  belief  it  may  be  held  by  Roman  Catholics.  But  in  what  one  law  has 
this  personal  infallibility  been  exercised  ?  In  the  end  it  must  be  a  manifest  failure 
in  religion,  as  it  has  been  in  politics.  II.  Into  all  the  languages  of  Persia  was 
THE  new  decree  tbanslated.  Thus  with  man's  law.  Thus  too  it  should  be  with 
God's  law,  Happy  day  for  any  nation  when  in  its  own  language  it  comes  into 
possession  of  the  Bible,  the  good  news  from  God.  III.  The  promptitude  in  the 
COMMUNICATION  OF  GOOD  NEWS.  Wonderful  the  promptitude  that  marks  the  postal 
service  of  to-day  I  It  may  bring  its  burden  to  some,  but  it  is  a  ministry  of  con- 
solation  to  the  many.  It  brings  the  distant  nigh.  It  revives  with  oil  of  love  the 
lamp  of  life.     IV.  The  temporal  salvation  of  the  Jews  was  but  a  faint  shadow 

OF  THE  good  things   TO    COME    IN    THE   GREAT    SPIRITUAL    SALVATION    WROUGHT   BY   OUR 

Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (G.  F.  Coster.)  The  story  of  a  great  deliverance  : — Some  of 
the  most  striking  illustrations  of  Divine  truth  are  afforded  to  us  in  the  incidents 
of  history.  It  might  be  too  much  to  say  that  the  Book  of  Esther  is  an  allegory,  but 
I  believe  that  its  spiritual  purpose  is,  that  it  should  furnish  us  with  a  most  striking 
illustration  of  that  greater  deliverance  which  God  hath  wrought  for  the  sons  of  men 
through  Jesus  Christ.  I,  Now  the  first  thing  to  be  noticed  in  this  story  is,  the 
SECRET  OF  Israel's  danger.  It  arose  from  the  fact  that  Israel  had  an  enemy  at  court 
— "  that  wicked  Haman,"  who  was,  in  the  first  place,  moved  by  bitter  hatred 
against  the  person  of  Mordecai,  but  who  extended  his  antipathy  to  the  whole 
nation  to  which  the  object  of  his  hatred  belonged.  Observe,  however,  that  the 
strength  of  the  enemy's  position  rested  upon  a  more  valid  basis  than  his  own 
personal  hatred.  In  urging  this  case  against  them,  he  was  able  to  appeal  to  the  laws 
of  the  king's  realm,  and  that  "  it  was  not  for  the  king's  profit  to  suffer  them."  We 
need  to  point  out  where  the  analogy  fails,  as  well  as  where  it  becomes  instructive. 
There  is  no  kind  of  moral  resemblance  between  the  Christian's  God,  and  this  half- 
barbarous  monarch,  Ahasuerus.  This  man  was  a  capricious  and  licentious  Oriental 
tyrant,  utterly  selfish ;  while  righteousness  and  mercy  are  blended  in  wondrous, 
harmony  with  the  attributes  of  Him  whom  we  acknowledge  as  King  of  kings,  and 
who  holds  our  lives  and  our  destinies  in  His  hands.  Once  again,  these  Jews  were 
harmless  folk,  and  the  charge  brought  against  them,  though  plausible,  was  destitute 
of  any  such  foundation  in  fact  as  could  have  justified  severe  measures  against  them. 
We  may  despise  the  moral  character  of  this  Oriental  despot,  and  yet  the  attitude 
which  he,  as  a  king,  assumed  towards  the  Jews  may  well  serve  to  illustrate  the 
attitude  which  the  King  of  kings  is  constrained  to  assume  towards  those  who  disobey 
His  laws.  Further,  though  the  Jewish  people  were  innocent  of  any  moral  or  serious 
political  offence,  yet  at  the  same  time,  the  fact  that  they  had  laws  and  institutions 
of  their  own  and  that  these  laws  and  institutions  were  diverse  from  those  of  other 
nations,  and  in  particular  did  not  wholly  accord  with  the  laws  of  the  Medes  and 
the  Persians,  placed  them  in  a  position  of  apparent  sedition  against  the  ruling 
power.  Here,  then,  first  we  have  a  striking  illustration  of  the  relations, 
between  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  and  His  rebel  creature  man. 
In  virtue  of  the  sovereign  position  which  He  occupies  in  His  universe, 
He  cannot  tolerate  anything  like  deviation  from  those  eternal  statutes  of 
righteousness  which  He  Himself  has  laid  down  for  His  creatures ;  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  sinner  does  break  the  King's  laws,  and 
Bet  His  authority  at  defiance.  We  also  have  a  determined  and  malignant  foe,  "  the 
accuser  of  the  brethren,"  who  first  lays  himself  out  to  induce  us  to  sin  against  these 
eternal  edicts,  and  to  form  habits  of  life  which  are  altogether    at  variance  withr 


CHAP,  vin.]  ESTHER.  107 

the  Divine  mind,  and  who  then  turns  round  upon  his  victims  and  next  accuses  us 
to  the  Divine  Being  as  persons  whose  very  existence  in  the  universe  is  a  source  of 
danger,  moral  disorder,  and  general  peril  to  the  stability  of  the  kingdom  over  which 
the  King  of  kings  holds  sway.     He  presses  upon  the  notice  of  the  Supreme  Kuler 
the  fact  that  it  is  not  for  His  profit  to  allow  us  to  go  on  as  we  are  doing.    Between 
the  case  of  Haman  against  the  Jews,  however,  and  Satan's  case  against  us,  there  is 
this  wide  difference — that  the  charge  brought  by  the  enemy  of  the  Jews  was  morally 
a  plausible  pretext,  a  trumped-up  accusation ;  whereas  in  the  case  of  the  sinner  the 
charge  is  only  too  true.     If  there  is  one  single  person  whose  heart  has  not  been 
surrendered  to  God,  and  whose  will  is  not  yet  wholly  yielded  to  Him,  then  of  such 
an  one  the  accusation  is  true,  terribly  true,  "  It  is  not  for  the  King's  profit  to  suffer 
him."     Let  me  ask  you,  then.  Have  you  yielded  yourself  to  God?    For  observe  that 
if  God  were  to  allow  men  to  go  on  from  age  to  age,  defying  and  disregarding  His 
Divine  will  and  law,  He  would  be  permitting  His  own  rule  to  be  overthrown,  and 
would  be  virtually  abdicating  the  throne  of  the  universe,  and  giving  all  over  to 
general  anarchy  and  disorder.    Nay,  God  can  never  lay  aside  His  claims,  and 
therefore  it  is  not  for  the  King's  profit  to  suffer  those  who  reject  or  ignore  Him. 
"  Has  it  been  for  the  King's  profit  that  thou  hast  lived  ?  "    If  you  were  eliminated 
from  human  society  to-day,  would  it  be  a  gain  instead  of  a  loss  to  the  world  in  which 
you  have  hved?    You  may  reply,  "I  have  affections  as  well  as  other  people.     There 
are  many  whom  I  love,  and  who  love  me,  and  whose  hearts  would  bleed  if  I  were 
taken  away  ;  how,  then,  could  the  world  be  anything  but  a  loser  by  my  removal  ?  " 
Stay,  let  me  ask  you,  What  is  the  character  of  your  influence  and  the  effect  of  your 
example  upon  those  very  persons  whose  affections  you  have  won  ?    Are  you  doing 
them  harm  or  good  ?     What  fruit  does  your  life  bear  from  day  to  day  ?    Father, 
might  it  not  be  better  for  your  sons'  spiritual  and  eternal  well-being  if  you  were 
taken  away  from  them  ?    Mother,  might  it  not  be  better  for  your  daughters,  better  for 
your  household,  if  your  baneful  influence  were  removed  ?    And  you,  young  man  I 
who  are  the  ringleader  of  a  little  band  of  friends,  let  me  ask,  Whither  are  you  leading 
those  young  companions  of  yours  ?    Is  your  fatal  influence  dragging  them  down  to 
ever-deepening  depths  of  moral  degradation  and  sin  ?    Ah  !  if  that  be  thy  case,  if 
thy  very  friendship  is  a  source  of  danger  to  those  who  are  its  objects,  surely  it  is  not 
for  the  King's  profit  to  suffer  you.     Well,  you  say,  or  some  one  says,  "  Why  does 
He  suffer  me,  then  ?  "    Ah,  here  is  a  point  to  which  we  can  find  nothing  to  answer 
in  the  analogy.     Let  St.  Paul  explain  why  God  suffers  you,  "  Despisest  thou  the 
riches  of  His  goodness,  and  forbearance,  and  long-suffering ;  not  knowing  that  the 
goodness  of  God  leadeth  thee  to  repentance  ?  "     Such  is  the  secret  of  our  danger ; 
and  now,  turning  again  to  our  illustration,  let  us  observe  the  sequel.     There  goes 
forth  as  the  result  of  all  this,  a  terrible  edict  against  these  unfortunate  Jews,  no  less 
than  an  edict  of  utter  destruction.     Just  let  us  picture  to  ourselves  what  effects 
must  have  been  produced  wherever  the  proclamation  came.      Yonder  comes  the 
royal  herald  into  a  large  provincial  town ;  he  blows  his  trumpet  and  proceeds  at 
once  to  nail  up  his  proclamation  at  the  gate  of  the  city,  or  in  the  crowded  market- 
place.    The  news  spreads  like  wildfire,  and  soon  it  reaches  the  Jewish  quarter  of 
the  city.     See  the  terrified  inhabitants  rushing  about  from  house  to  house,  and  at 
last  collecting  in  a  crowd  around  the  fatal  parchment,  eager  to  know  the  worst. 
One  in  a  clear  voice  begins  to  read  the  dreadful  paragraphs  amidst  a  silence  still  as 
death.     As  he  proceeds,  strong  men  begin  to  weep  like  children,  mothers  clasp  their 
children  to  their  hearts  in  an  agony  of  despair,  till  by  and  by,  as  with  one  voice,  all 
break  forth  into  a  cry  of  lamentation ;  they  rend  their  garments  and  grovel  in  the 
dust,  utterly  overwhelmed  by  a  misfortune  so  unlooked-for  and  so  inevitable.     It  is 
easy  to  account  for  their  consternation,  but  it  is  much  more  difficult  to  explain  the 
stolid  equanimity  with  which  sinners  listen  to  the  terrible  threats  against  them  of  a 
proclamation  more  appalling  than  that  which  caused  such  terror  to  Israel  of  old. 
The  dread   and  righteous  decree  which  must  expel   the  sinner  from  the  Divine 
presence,  and  consign  him  to  the  darkness  of  death,  may  not  be  carried  into  effect 
at  once ;  no  more  was  the  decree  of  Ahasuerus  ;  but,  remember,  the  command  has 
gone  forth,  the  sword  of  judgment  is  drawn,  and  under  that  most  dread  edict  the 
sinner  is  condemned  already.     "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."     Oh,  if  there  was 
weeping    and  wailing    throughout    the  provinces  of  Persia  when  that   ancient 
proclamation  was  read,  no  less  is  there  horror  and  fear  in  the  heart  of  the  sinner 
when,  his  conscience  being  roused,  he  at  last  becomes  aware  of  his  actual  state,  and 
of   his  terrible   danger.      Too   many,  indeed,  are   so   absorbed  with  the  passing 
nothings  of  this  world,  that  they  endeavour  to  evade  all  serious  thought,  and  to 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

forget  the  real  perils  of  their  present  condition.  But,  thank  God,  it  ia  not  so  with 
all.  See  that  terrified  jailer  of  Philippi.  Why  does  he  exclaim  with  such 
undisguised  trepidation,  "Sirs,  what  must  I  do  to  be  saved?"  Surely  it  was 
because  in  his  own  conscience  he  had  discovered  the  proclamation.  Kemember 
that  nothing  is  gained  by  shutting  our  eyes  to  facts.  II.  The  secret  or  Israel's 
SAFETY  ;  for  saved,  eventually,  they  were  in  spite  of  the  foe  and  the  terrible  edict  of 
the  king.  How  were  they  saved  ?  As  their  danger  was  due  to  the  presence  of  an 
enemy  at  court,  so  their  safety  was  due  to  the  fact  that  they  also  had  a  faithful 
friend  at  court.  1.  Let  us  consider  their  deliverer  ;  and  the  first  thing  that  strikes 
us  about  her  is  the  fact  that  she  was  connected  by  a  double  relationship  with  each 
of  the  parties  concerned.  On  the  one  hand  she  was  related  to  the  doomed  race ;  she 
was  one  of  them — a  Jewess,  bone  of  their  bone,  and  flesh  of  their  flesh ;  while,  on 
the  other  hand,  she  was  also  closely  related  to  the  monarch.  She  was  his  wife. 
Thus  she  stands,  then,  between  the  two — the  monarch  and  the  condemned  race — 
and  so  in  her  own  person  effects  a  reconciliation.  2.  Notice,  again,  that  the  motive 
which  inspired  her  to  risk  her  life  was  love  for  her  people.  One  angry  word,  one 
look,  and  she  and  her  people  were  alike  lost ;  but  for  love  of  them  she  was  content 
to  risk  her  all  1  3.  She  stood  before  King  Ahasuerus,  not  for  herself,  but  as  the 
representative  of  her  people.  She  approaches  him,  not  in  her  royal  dignity  aa 
queen,  but  as  identified  with  her  kindred.  For  us,  too,  there  is  a  secret  of  safety, 
and  blessed  are  they  who  are  acquainted  with  it.  Let  us  proceed  to  consider  how 
this  safety  has  been  secured.  We,  too,  have  a  Friend  at  Court,  and,  like  Esther, 
He  is  possessed  of  a  certain  double  relationship.  On  the  one  hand.  He  is  bound  to 
humanity,  for  He  Himself  is  man.  Voluntarily  He  took  our  nature  upon  Him, 
"  He  was  made  flesh,  and  tabernacled  amongst  us."  He  has  identified  Himself  for 
ever  with  mankind ;  but,  on  the  other  hand.  He  is  no  less  closely  bound  to  the 
everlasting  Father  than  to  us.  He  is  one  with  the  Father  from  all  eternity,  the  Son 
of  His  love,  the  express  image  of  His  Person.  Further,  observe  that  it  was  as  the 
representative  of  His  people  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  undertook  to  perform  the 
work  that  had  to  be  done  before  man  could  be  saved.  Queen  Esther  took  her  life  in 
her  hand  and  presented  herself  before  the  king,  in  order  to  save ;  but  our  Deliverer 
has  done  much  more  than  that — He  has  not  risked,  but  given  His  life  for  the 
doomed  race.  Now  observe,  further,  when  Queen  Esther  entered  into  the  presence 
of  King  Ahasuerus,  we  read  that  she  found  favour,  or  grace  in  his  sight ;  but  this 
favour  was  shown  her  on  her  own  account,  and  not  because  she  was  a  Jewess. 
Ahasuerus  would  scarcely,  under  the  circumstances,  have  been  disposed  to  listen  to 
such  a  plea,  even  when  advanced  by  his  wife.  What  does  she  do  ?  First  she  wins 
the  king's  favour  for  herself,  and  then  she  is  in  a  position,  so  to  speak,  to  transfer 
that  favour  to  those  whom  she  represents.  Even  so  was  it  with  our  Great  Deliverer 
when  He  entered  within  the  veil,  with  His  own  blood  having  perfected  the  work  of 
filial  obedience  which  He  had  undertaken  on  our  behalf.  He  was  then  most  of  all 
the  Beloved  Son  in  whom  the  Father  was  well  pleased,  but  the  special  favour  with 
which  He  was  then  rewarded  by  the  Divine  Father  was  won  on  our  behalf  that  it 
might  be  transferred  to  us.  When  the  grace  of  Ahasuerus  reached  Esther,  it 
reached  through  her  the  Jew ;  and  even  so  when  the  grace  of  the  Father  reaches  the 
Beloved  Son  as  Representative  of  the  human  family,  it  reaches  us  also  through 
Him.  Thus  indeed  "the  grace  of  God  hath  appeared,  bringing  salvation  to  all 
men."  You  will  notice  that  this  grace  thus  assumes  a  definite  form  in  a  second 
proclamation  made  this  time  in  favour  of  the  Jews,  whom  the  former  proclamation 
had  given  over  to  death.  This  second  proclamation,  observe,  does  not  override 
or  conflict  with  the  first.  The  law  could  not  be  abrogated,  and  yet  its  fatal 
operation  had  to  be  prevented,  its  condemning  force  was  to  be  rendered  nugatory. 
Here  again  we  need  to  call  attention  to  points  of  difference  as  well  as  points  of 
agreement.  The  Gospel  dispensation  was  not  designed  to  abrogate  but  to  fulfil  the 
law.  The  law  of  God  must  remain  unalterable,  not  in  virtue  of  an  arbitrary  decree 
of  Omnipotence,  but  because  it  is  founded  on  moral  principles  of  eternal  obligation ; 
it  is  only  because  Christ  is  "  the  end  of  the  law  to  every  one  that  believeth,"  that  ie 
to  say,  produces  consequences  greater  and  better  even  than  the  law  was  designed  to 
effect,  that  the  dread  penalties  of  the  law  can  be  escaped  under  the  new  dispensation. 
Now  let  us  observe  more  closely  the  nature  of  this  second  proclamation,  for  we  shall 
find  the  illustration  very  suggestive.  The  first  proclamation  puts  the  whole  of  the 
Jews  into  the  hands  of  their  enemies,  and  arrays  against  them  all  representatives  of 
the  king's  authority  and  of  legal  justice  throughout  the  land.  The  second 
proclamation,  on  the  other  hand,  has  the  opposite  effect,  for  it  puts  the  law  on  the 


<«HAP.  Tm.]  ESTHER.  109 

side  of  the  Israelites ;  it  gives  them  the  right  to  defend  themselves.  Thus  it  is  that 
the  story  of  this  marveUous  deliverance  shadows  forth  ours  with  strange  fidelity. 
For  us,  too,  there  has  been  issued  from  the  throne  of  the  Eternal  Being  a  second 
proclamation.  It  has  been  nailed  to  the  Cross  of  Calvary,  it  has  been  revealed  in 
the  broken  body  of  the  Son  of  God.  First,  it  puts  the  sinner  who  avails  himself  of 
it  right  with  his  God ;  it  arrays  all  the  forces  of  justice  on  his  side,  and  enables  him 
to  find  his  surest  protection  in  that  which  but  for  the  work  of  Christ  must  have 
condemned  him ;  and  further,  it  puts  him  in  a  position  to  rise  up  against  the  tyrant 
sins  by  which  he  was  previously  enslaved,  and  to  lead  his  captivity  captive.  From 
the  condemnation  of  the  law  and  from  the  cruel  dominion  of  sin  the  believing 
sinner  is  equally  delivered  by  the  proclamation  made  from  Calvary.  The  eternal 
justice  of  God,  which  apart  from  the  Cross  of  Christ  must  have  righteously 
demanded  our  punishment,  now  secures  our  safety  ;  and  we  find  now  that  "  if  we 
confess  our  sins.  He  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us 
from  all  unrighteousness."  Many  see  that  God  is  merciful  to  forgive  us  our  sin ; 
but  how  much  stronger  is  our  confidence  when  we  see  even  His  eternal  justice,  that 
attribute  of  His  from  which  we  needs  must  have  most  to  fear,  arrayed  on  our  side ! 
And  here  again  I  think  we  may  notice,  without  pressing  the  illustration  unduly,  that 
this  second  proclamation  demanded  a  certain  believing  response  from  the  Jews 
before  it  could  be  of  any  practical  utility  to  them.  The  favour  of  the  king  towards 
the  race  was  conveyed  by  the  proclamation ;  but  unless  the  Jews  had  sufficient  faith 
in  the  king's  word  to  act  upon  it,  and  to  arm  themselves  and  issue  forth  against 
their  enemies,  they  might  still  have  fallen  an  easy  prey.  The  proclamation  from 
Calvary  is  described  by  St.  Paul  as  "  the  grace  of  God  which  bringeth  salvation  to 
■every  man,"  but  it  is  not  every  one  that  ventures  forth  upon  it,  claims  justification, 
and,  as  it  were,  takes  his  spiritual  enemies  by  the  throat  because  that  proclamation 
has  delivered  them  into  his  hands.  Alas !  how  many  are  there  still  who  receive  the 
grace  of  God  in  vain  I  But  to  return  to  our  story,  let  us  follow  the  second 
proclamation  in  its  journey  forth  from  the  court  of  King  Ahasuerus.  In  hot  haste 
the  heralds  speed  on  their  way,  for  the  business  is  urgent,  and  the  tidings  spread 
from  city  to  city,  until  they  reach  the  uttennost  parts  of  the  great  king's  dominions. 
Let  us  watch  this  royal  messenger  as  he  enters  that  same  provincial  town  that  we 
were  visiting  in  our  thoughts  when  I  was  describing  the  promulgation  of  that  first 
terrible  edict.  See,  he  rides  up  the  street  in  great  haste,  he  blows  his  trumpet,  and 
the  people  begin  to  gather  in  a  crowd.  What  is  going  to  happen  now  ?  Another 
proclamation  !  What  is  it  all  about  ?  Some  poor  trembling  Jews  venture  into  the 
throng  in  deadly  terror,  lest  it  should  prove  but  some  fresh  aggravation  of  their 
woes.  "  Oh,  it's  about  these  Jews  again  1  What  more  about  them  ?  Are  they 
to  be  given  up  to  us  at  once  instead  of  our  having  to  wait  three  or  four  days 
longer  ?  "  It  is  in  three  or  four  different  languages,  amongst  others  in  Hebrew, 
and  signed  with  the  king's  seal.  See,  there  is  one  of  the  doomed  race.  His 
«yes  fall  upon  the  Hebrew;  eagerly  he  begins  to  read,  the  colour  comes  and 
goes.  "  God  of  my  fathers ! "  I  fancy  I  hear  him  exclaim,  "  what  is  this  ? " 
Another  glance  to  make  sure  that  his  eyes  don't  deceive  him,  and  then  away 
he  hies  to  the  Jewish  quarter  of  the  town.  "Deliverance!"  he  cries,  "we  are 
delivered,  we  are  saved,  God  has  saved  us !  "  The  Jews  rush  out  of  their  houses, 
the  whole  multitude  throng  to  the  market-place.  Eagerly  they  listen  as  one  reads 
aloud  ;  and  as  sentence  after  sentence  falls  from  the  lips  of  the  reader,  sobs  of  joy 
and  gladness  are  heard.  Ah,  that  was  a  day  long  to  be  remembered  by  all.  What 
tears  of  joy  were  shed,  what  songs  of  rejoicing  were  raised,  what  feasts  they  held  ! 
But  what  shall  we  say  of  the  joy  of  the  ransomed  sinner  when  the  proclamation  of 
life  reaches  his  liberated  heart  ?  He  has  heard  the  sentence  of  doom  from  Sinai, 
he  has  felt  his  impotence  to  resist  his  terrible  foes,  and  has  wrung  his  hands  in 
despair  as  the  iron  has  entered  into  his  soul.  "  O  wretched  man  that  I  am,  who 
shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  It  may  be  that  his  misery  is  so 
great  that  he  can  scarcely  attend  to  his  ordinary  business,  or  even  find  an  appetite 
for  his  necessary  food  ;  and  if  so,  why  should  we  wonder  at  it  ?  Are  you  surprised, 
then,  at  his  joy  when  first  he  reads  the  second  proclamation,  and  discovers  that  it  is 
really  intended  for  him  ?  Do  you  blame  him  for  being  excited  ?  I'll  answer  for  it, 
these  Jews  were  excited  enough.  How  could  they  help  it  ?  And  how  can  he  ?  The 
Jews,  we  read,  had  light  and  gladness,  and  joy  and  honour ;  and  such  are  the  blessed 
privileges  still  of  him  who  hears  the  gospel  "  report,"  and  believes  it.  The  Sun  of 
Righteousness  has  arisen  upon  him  with  healing  in  His  wings — joy  within,  and 
^gladness  without ;  and  honour,  for  are  we  not  children  of  the  Most  High,  "  heirs  0/ 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ec. 

God,  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ ;  if  so  be  that  we  suffer  with  Him,  that  we  may  also 
be  glorified  together  "  ?  Honour  1  Yes,  for  all  things  are  ours,  and  we  are  Christ's, 
and  Christ  is  God's.  Well,  now,  that  second  proclamation  has  been  made  to  us ;  the 
voice  from  Calvary  has  been  spoken.  On  the  Cross,  favour  has  been  secured  for  a 
guilty  world.  Have  you  received  the  report?  But  do  you  say,  "  I  don't  realise  it;. 
I  am  afraid  it  can't  be  for  me,  because  I  don't  feel  happy ;  I  don't  feel  as  if  I  were 
free  from  condemnation ;  I  don't  feel  that  I  am  saved  "  ?  Did  these  Jews  of  old 
know  that  they  were  delivered  because  they  felt  happy  ?  Or  did  they  feel  happy 
because  they  knew  that  they  were  delivered  ?  Which  ?  Thy  happiness  is  the 
effect,  not  the  cause  of  thy  safety.  If  thou  wouldst  be  happy  read  the  proclamation. 
Answer  all  thy  inward  misgivings  by  telling  thy  troubled  heart  that  the  good  news- 
is  for  thee.  When  we  really  believe  a  thing,  we  cease  to  look  for  evidence  of  our 
believing  it  in  the  effect  produced  in  our  own  experience.  Let  me  put  it  thus: 
Suppose  we  were  to  visit  that  Persian  city  shortly  after  the  proclamation,  and  find 
there  an  aged  Israelite  of  a  sorrowful  countenance.  "  Well,  sir,"  we  remark,  "  thi» 
is  a  day  of  good  tidings :  it  occurs  to  us  that  a  more  cheerful  look  might  be  more  in 
keeping  with  the  occasion."  "  Ah,  sirs,"  he  replies,  "  this  is  a  sad,  sad  time  with 
me.  I  can  get  no  comfort."  "  Why  not,  my  good  friend  ?  Haven't  you  heard  aU 
about  the  king's  decree,  and  how  you  Jews  are  to  stand  up  against  your  enemies ; 
and  don't  you  know  that  the  king's  officers  are  all  going  to  defend  you,  and  that  yotc 
are  safe  ?  "  '♦  Ah !  "  he  replies,  with  a  mournful  shake  of  his  head,  "  that  may  be 
all  very  true,  but — but — I  don't  realise  it !  "  "  But  what  has  your  realising  got  ta 
do  with  it :  do  tell  us,  is  it  true  or  false  ?  If  it  is  true,  your  realisings  won't  make  it 
any  truer ;  and  if  it  be  false,  your  realisings  won't  make  it  true ;  which  is  it  ?  " 
"  Oh,  no  doubt  it's  perfectly  true ;  but  still,  how  can  you  expect  me  to  be  happy 
when  I  don't  realise  it?"  Beally,  if  we  could  have  found  such  a  man,  don't  yoa 
think  we  should  have  felt  something  like  irrepressible  impatience  with  him? 
( W.  H.  M.  H.  Aitken,  M.A.)  Many  became  Jews,  for  the  fear  of  the  Jews  were  upon 
them. — Reasons  for  uniting  with  a  Church : — The  true  reasons  why  one  should 
unite  himself  with  a  particular  Church  are  because,  first  of  all,  he  is  already  united 
to  Christ ;  because,  next,  the  organisation  and  activities  of  that  special  Church 
commend  themselves  to  him  as  most  in  harmony  with  the  principles  of  the  New 
Testament;  and  because,  finally,  he  is  most  edified  and  sustained  by  its  ordinances 
and  ministry.  But  to  allow  fashionable  or  worldly  motives  to  intervene  and 
become  the  determining  elements  is  to  secularise  the  Church  by  making  it  an 
anteroom  of  the  world  and  so  subordinating  it  to  the  world.  One  should  be  in 
that  Church  where  he  sees  most  of  Christ ;  where  he  gets  most  from  Christ ; 
and  where  he  can  do  most  for  Christ.  The  Church  that  is  composed  of  such 
members  will  be  blessed,  and  will  be  made  a  blessing,  not  to  its  own  adherent? 
only,  but  to  all  around.    {W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Ver.  1.  Now  in  the  twelfth  month,  that  is,  the  month  Adar. — Hope  and  fore- 
boding : — I.  Hope  blighted.  In  the  day  that  the  enemies  of  the  Jews  hoped  to 
have  power  over  them.  The  human  reasonableness  of  this  hope  may  be  shown — 
1.  From  their  own  numbers.  2.  From  the  insignificance  of  the  Jews.  3.  From 
the  known  unchangeableness  of  Persian  law.  II,  Foeebodino  reproved.  How 
often  we  look  forward  to  a  month  Adar,  and  see  it  shrouded  with  ominous  darkness. 
But  the  month  Adar  may,  after  all,  be  the  month  of  rejoicing.  III.  Tuue  hope 
REWARDED.  (W.  Burrows,  B  .A.)  The  method  of  providence  : — 1.  Although,  then, 
as  has  been  already  said,  the  grand  design  of  this  whole  Book  of  Esther  ia  an 
illustration  of  a  retributive  providence  in  working  out  the  deliverance  of  the  chosen 
people,  still  it  is  better  for  us  to  note  the  proofs  of  such  a  providence,  as  they 
occur,  in  detail,  2.  We  see  here,  as  well,  indeed,  as  also  in  other  portions  of 
sacred  history,  and  as  the  lessons  of  all  history  and  of  every-day  life  also  demon- 
strate, that  God,  in  the  exercise  of  His  sovereignty,  uses  men  of  very  different 
characters  as  instruments  for  fulfilling  His  supreme  purpose.  Both  Esther  and- 
Ahasuerus,  both  Mordecai  and  Haman,  were  Divine  agents  for  bringing  about  the 
Hebrew  deliverance,     3.  These  pictures  show  us  that  we  are  to  construct  men'* 


CHAP,  nt.]  ESTHER.  Ill 

reputation  for  character  out  of  their  whole  life  and  principles,  and  not  from  any 
one  moment,  nor  from  any  word  or  act.  4.  We  are  here  taught  to  feel  the  deepest 
interest  in  the  welfare  of  our  fellow-men,  especially  of  those  who  may  be  associated 
with  us,  or  be  bound  to  us  by  social  ties,  or  by  blood  and  nationality.  5.  I  am 
perfectly  sure  that  in  the  lives  of  the  men  and  women  as  illustrated  in  the  sacred 
writings  we  are  taught  the  mind  of  God  Himself,  as  to  the  precepts  and  principles 
which  are  agreeable  to  Him ;  and  that  it  is  in  the  teachings  of  the  Word  of  God, 
and  in  it  alone,  that  we  can  find  the  true  principles  of  all  proper  reforms.  It  is  in 
the  Bible,  and  in  the  Bible  alone,  we  have  the  principles  of  happiness — the  only 
true  principles  of  reformation.  6.  We  see  here  how  great  a  blessing  we  enjoy  in 
having  mild,  equitable,  salutary  laws,  and  in  having  a  written  constitution,  that 
provides  for  its  amendment,  and  points  out  the  way  for  the  repeal  or  alteration  of 
any  laws  that  may  be  made  in  haste,  or  in  ignorance,  or  through  party  zeal,  that 
are  found  to  be  unconstitutional  and  not  for  the  good  of  the  people,  7.  The  diffi- 
culties of  the  Persian  monarch,  growing  out  of  his  rash  decree,  even  after  the 
author  of  it  has  been  punished,  are  a  warning  to  us  to  beware  of  the  consequences 
of  our  words  and  actions.  8.  This  history  teaches  us  to  trust  in  God  for  the 
vindication  of  His  own  ways  and  the  justification  of  His  judgments  against  the 
wicked,  as  well  as  in  His  faithfulness  to  His  people,  in  remembering  to  keep  and 
fulfil,  at  the  right  time,  all  His  promises  to  them.  9.  The  delay  of  judgment 
against  evil-doers,  instead,  therefore,  of  encouraging  them  to  boldness  in  sin,  should 
melt  them  to  penitential  sorrow.  (1)  For  the  delay  of  providence  to  punish  the 
wicked  does  not  change  the  nature  of  sin.  It  remains  intrinsically  the  abominable 
thing  that  God  hates.  It  is  impossible,  in  the  nature  of  things,  that  sin  should 
ever  meet  with  His  approbation.  The  patience  of  God,  therefore,  produces  no 
mitigation  of  the  enormity  of  wrong-doing.  It  is  no  proof  of  Divine  indifference 
to  sin,  or  of  its  being  a  trifling  offence  in  the  sight  of  God,  that  He  does  not 
instantly  express  His  abhorrence  of  it,  and  pour  out  His  wrath  upon  the  guilty. 
Men  kindle  immediately  into  a  transport  of  passion  when  provoked.  But  God  is 
not  a  man.  He  punishes  sin  not  from  passion,  but  from  principle — not  to 
revenge  Himself  for  any  injury  He  sustains  from  sin,  but  in  order  to  maintain  a 
righteous  government  for  the  happiness  of  His  creatures.  And  the  punishment  of 
sin  will  only  be  the  more  severe  because  of  the  aggravations  of  abused  mercy. 
(2)  But  an  evil  work  is  itself  a  judgment.  It  was  so  with  Haman.  His  whole 
history  shows  that  pride  goeth  before  destruction,  and  a  haughty  spirit  before  a 
fall — that  God  can  easily  so  direct  human  affairs  as  to  thwart  the  best  laid 
schemes  of  wicked  men.  {W.  A.  Scott,  D.D.)  Providence — as  teen  in  the  Book 
of  Esther : — From  the  narrative  of  the  preceding  chapters  we  learn — I.  That  God 
PLACES  His  agents  in  fitting  places  fob  doing  His  work.     II.  That  the  Lord  not 

ONLY  ABRANGES   HiS    SERVANTS,    BUT    Hb    RESTRAINS    HiS     ENEMIES.      HI.    ThAT     GoD 

IN  His  providenck  tries  His  people.    IV.  That  the  Lord's  wisdom  is  seen  in 

ARRANGING  THE  SMALLEST  EVENTS   80  AS   TO   PRODUCE   GREAT   RESULTS.      V.    ThaT    THE 

Lord  in  His  providence  calls  His  own  servants  to  be  active.  VI.  That  in  the 
END  the  Lord  achieves  the  total  defeat  of  His  foes  and  the  safety  of  Hi3 
people.  Lessons — 1.  It  is  clear  that  the  Divine  will  is  accomplished,  and  yet  men 
are  perfectly  free  agents.  2.  What  wonders  can  be  wrought  without  miracles  I  In 
the  miracles  of  Pharaoh  we  see  the  finger  of  God,  but  in  the  wonders  of  providence, 
without  miracle,  we  see  the  hand  of  God.  3.  How  safe  the  Church  of  God  is ! 
4.  The  wicked  will  surely  come  to  an  ill  end.  3.  Let  each  child  of  God  rejoice 
that  we  have  a  Guardian  so  near  the  throne.  Every  Jew  in  Shushan  must  have 
felt  hope  when  he  remembered  that  the  queen  was  a  Jewess.  To-day,  let  us  be 
glad  that  Jesus  is  exalted.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  2,  3.  The  Jews  gathered  themselves  together  in  their  cities. — The  wise 
conduct  of  the  Jews : — The  Jews  acted — 1.  Wisely.  They  acted  in  unison. 
"  They  gathered  themselves  together,  and  stood  for  their  lives."  Union  is  power : 
concentration  of  strength  is  mighty  for  good  and  for  evil.  How  awful  the  extent 
of  the  mischief  perpetrated  by  the  evil  spirits,  because  they  act  in  concert — 
unitedly :  whereas  disunion  would  cause  even  their  kingdom  to  fall.  Union  and 
co-operation  are  likewise  powerful  for  the  production  of  good.  Hence  copies  of  the 
Divine  writings  are  flying  to  all  parts  of  the  world,  and  missionaries  to  unfold 
their  precious  contents  to  those  who  are  perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge.  What 
would  individual  efforts  do  in  cases  like  these  ?  2.  Manfully.  "  They  laid  hands 
on  all  such  as  sought  their  hurt,  and  no  man  could  withstand  them."     They  were 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

acting  legally :  for  the  royal  law  permitted  them  to  defend  themselves.  Trust  in 
God,  in  His  power  and  faithfulness,  is  the  only  source  of  true  magnanimity.  It  is 
this  alone  that  makes  man  undaunted  on  rational  grounds.  St.  Paul  tells  us  of 
the  ancient  believers,  that  "  out  of  weakness  they  were  made  strong,  waxed  valiant 
in  fight,  and  turned  to  flight  the  armies  of  the  aliens."  And  this,  he  tells  us,  waa 
the  effect  of  relying  on  God.  3.  Moreover,  they  acted  forbearingly,  or  self- 
denyingly.  They  merely  defended  themselves,  and  seized  not  upon  the  spoils  of 
their  enemies  :  "  On  the  spoil  they  lay  not  their  hand."  They  wanted  only  their 
lives  and  their  own  possessions,  and  not  the  riches  of  their  neighbours.  We  find 
that  great  believer,  Abraham,  acting  thus  self-denyingly  in  Gen.  xiv.  The  victory 
which  the  Jews  obtained  on  this  occasion  was  a  very  signal  one.  "  The  Jews 
smote  all  their  enemies  with  the  stroke  of  the  sword,  and  slaughter  and  destruc- 
tion, and  did  what  they  would  unto  those  that  hated  them."  "  In  Shushan,  the 
palace,  the  Jews  slew  and  destroyed  five  hundred  men."  At  the  request  of  the 
queen,  three  hundred  more  were  slain  in  the  royal  city.  And  in  the  different 
provinces  of  the  empire  they  slew  of  their  foes  seventy  and  five  thousand. 
Behold,  how  great  a  matter  a  little  fire  kindleth  1  Behold  the  fruits  of  the  wicked- 
ness of  one  individual  I  (J.  Hughes.)  Self-help  brings  help  : — I.  Divine  help. 
In  this  narrative  we  see  all  along  that  the  Jews  were  helped  of  God.  11.  Divinb 
HELP  FOSTERS  AND  SUCCEEDS  SELF-HELP.  Diviue  help  must  first  work,  and  then 
there  can  be  successful  self-help.  These  Jews  helped  themselves — 1.  By  co- 
operation. 2.  By  active  agency.  3.  By  a  name  of  power.  4.  By  aggressive 
measures.    III.  Self-help  sbcdbks  the  help  or  othebs.     {W.  Burrowt,  B.A.) 

Ver.  10.  But  on  the  spoil  laid  they  not  their  hand. — Leaving  the  spoilt : — It  is 
not  always  good  to  seize  all  the  money  to  which  one  has  a  legal  right.  There  are 
many  cases  in  which  a  regard  to  one's  own  credit,  and  there  are  others  in  which  a 
sense  of  duty,  should  bind  up  our  hands  from  receiving  what  we  might  otherwise 
take  without  injustice.  The  king's  edict  gave  the  Jews  the  right  to  take  the  spoil 
of  their  enemies.  If  they  had  done  so,  the  tongue  of  slanderers  might  have 
alleged  that  they  had  slain  innocent  persons  to  enrich  themselves.     (G.  Lawson.) 

Vers.  17-28.  On  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  month  Adar. — A  national  memorial : — 
This  national  memorial — I.  Was  established  by  supreme  authority.     II.  W.\3 

APPROVED  BY  A  GRATEFUL  PEOPLE.  III.  WaS  SANCTIONED  BY  THE  MARVELLOUS  NATURE 
CI  THE  EVENTS  CELEBRATED.  IV.  WaS  HALLOWED  BY  THE  MANNER  OF  ITS  CELEBRA- 
TION.      V.    Was   PRESERVED    BY   A   WISE    METHOD.       VI.    Is    PERPETUATED    WITH   A    GOOD 

BE8ULT.  (W.  Burrows,  B.A.)  The  memorial: — It  would — 1.  Keep  in  remem- 
brance an  interposition  of  the  Almighty,  without  which  the  Jewish  nation  and 
religion  had  been  in  a  great  measure,  if  not  wholly,  extinct  in  the  world.  2.  Mark 
a  striking  fulfilment  of  prophecy  in  the  destruction  of  the  Amalekites,  who  were 
the  hereditary  enemies  of  the  Jews.  3.  Stimulate  confidence  in  God  in  the  most 
critical  circumstances,  and  refusal  to  pay  such  homage  to  the  creature  as  is  due  to 
God  only.  4.  Foster  that  recognition  of  God  in  history  and  providence  which 
men  are  ever  liable  to  overlook  and  forget.  In  these  respects  it  was  an  institution 
which  should  prove  as  advantageous  to  after-generations,  and  even  more  so,  than 
to  the  people  of  God  who  were  then  living.  "  The  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth." 
{T.  McEwan.)  Memorial  days,  their  obligation  and  manner  of  observance : — 
I.  Take  a  view  of  the  reasons  here  assigned  for  the  establishing  the  observa- 
tion OF  the  days  mentioned  in  the  text.  1.  They  were  delivered  from  the  entire 
extirpation  of  themselves  and  their  religion  out  of  the  dominions  of  the  Persian 
king.  2.  The  destruction  with  which  they  were  threatened  was  in  all  human 
appearance  inevitable.  3.  The  Jews  might  plainly  discern  a  special  hand  of  God 
in  the  deliverance  which  was  granted  them.  4.  As  this  was  a  signal  instance  of 
God's  special  favour  towards  them,  so  it  was  but  one  instance  among  many  others 
which  they  continually  had  from  one  generation  to  another.    II.  Consiijee  the 

MANNER  in    WHICH    THE    JeWS    ABE    HERE    COMMANDED  TO  OBSERVE   THEIR  FESTIVAL.       It 

includes  three  parts.  1.  The  natural.  Feasting,  rejoicing,  &c.  2.  The  religious. 
Thanksgiving  and  praise.  3.  The  charitable.  Sending  portions  one  to  another. 
If  our  gratitude  to  God  on  memorial  days  be  sincere,  we  shall  go  on  to  express  our 
sense  of  great  deliverances.  1.  By  living  as  becomes  those  who  have  received  such 
great  favours  from  the  hands  of  God.  2.  We  shall  be  zealous  to  maintain  and 
secure  the  inestimable  blessings  hitherto  continued  to  us.  {Samuel  Bradford.) 
A  national  memorial : — The  feast  instituted  by  Mordecai  was  designed  to  be — 1.  A 


CHAP,  nt.]  ESTHER.  113 

memorial  of  kest.  II.  A  memorial  of  joy.  III.  A  memorial  of  triumph.  (J.  S, 
Van  Dyke,  D.D.)  The  Feast  of  Purim  : — Looking  at  the  establishment  of  Purim, 
we  are  struck — I.  With  the  historical  value  of  a  feast  of  this  sort.  II.  There 
IS  ALSO  AN  educational  VALUE  IN  SUCH  A  FEAST.  All  the  education  of  a  child  is  not 
comprised  in  what  he  receives  at  school.  He  learns  much  in  the  home.  He  is 
greatly  affected  by  what  he  sees  on  the  streets.  Dr.  Andrew  Beid  tells  us  how 
profoundly  he  was  moved  by  the  sight  of  the  statue  of  John  Howard  in  St.  Paul's 
Cathedral,  and  traces  to  that  the  benevolent  purpose  of  his  life,  which  ended  in  the 
establishment  of  so  many  asylums  for  orphans  and  imbeciles.  So  we  ought  to  be 
careful  what  sort  of  men  those  are  whom  we  allow  to  be  honoured  in  that  way. 
For  every  one  who  looks  upon  a  statue  is  moved  to  ask,  "  Whose  is  it  ?  what  was 
his  character  ?  what  was  his  history  ?  and  why  has  he  been  honoured  thus  ?  " 
And  the  answers  will  be  a  part  of  the  education  of  those  who  put  the  questions, 
stirring  their  ambition  or  firing  their  enthusiasm.  It  is  the  same  with  national 
holidays.  The  Passover,  &c.  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Different  means  of  com- 
memorating great  events  : — Different  means  have  been  employed  by  different  nations 
and  in  different  ages  to  perpetuate  the  memory  of  great  events.  We  are  told 
(Gen.  ixxi.  45) :  "  Jacob  took  a  stone  and  set  it  up  for  a  pillar."  Again  (Gen, 
v.  51).  Achan  and  his  family.  The  king  of  Ai.  Absalom.  Alexander  the  Great 
caused  a  tumulus  to  be  erected  over  the  grave  of  his  friend  Hephsestion,  costing  a 
million  and  a  half  of  dollars.  Virgil  makes  mention  of  memorial  stones,  as  does 
also  Homer.  Standing-stones,  or  "menhirs,"  were  also  erected  in  memorial  of 
particular  events ;  and  stone  circles,  constructed  with  the  same  design  most  pro- 
bably, were  so  numerous  that  they  may  be  found  even  yet  in  almost  every  country 
— in  the  Orkneys,  in  Russia,  in  Hindustan,  in  Africa,  in  Greenland,  in  America,  in 
all  parts  of  Europe.  The  most  remarkable  are  Stonehenge  and  Abury,  in  England. 
As  a  means  of  transmitting  events  to  succeeding  generations,  a  simple  ceremony 
committed  to  those  who  sympathise  with  the  cause  in  which  the  observance 
originated  is  far  more  effective  than  even  the  most  imposing  monumental 
structure  which  art  has  devised,  strength  erected,  or  wealth  adorned.  The  latter 
is  dumb;  the  former  has  loving  hearts  and  living  tongues  to  perpetuate  the 
memory  of  deeds  that  once  stirred  human  souls  and  distilled  blessings  upon  the 
world.  The  celebration  of  the  4th  of  July  is  likely  to  prove  more  satisfactory, 
as  a  memorial  of  a  national  birthday,  than  any  other  monument  which  the  energy 
and  liberality  of  the  American  people  could  have  reared.  In  the  rites  connected 
with  the  Feast  of  Purim,  Mordecai  and  Esther  have  a  more  enduring  monument 
than  the  Egyptian  monarch  who  erected  the  pyramid  of  Gizeh,  or  the  Pharaoh 
who  constructed  the  marvellous  labyrinth.  In  confirmation  of  the  theory  that  a 
ceremony  is  more  effective  as  a  memorial  than  dolmens,  cromlechs,  &c.,  I  have 
only  to  remind  you  that  the  touching  incidents  connected  with  the  life  and  death 
of  Christ  have  been  conveyed  to  the  human  family  in  a  most  remarkable  way  by 
the  Eucharist.  (J.  S.  Van  Dyke,  D.D.)  And  that  tliese  days  should  be  remem- 
bered.— Days  to  be  remembered : — I.  Our  birthdays.  II.  Days  of  awakening  and 
CONVERSION.  III.  Days  of  darkness.  1.  Days  of  bereavement.  2.  Days  of 
mental  depression.     3.  Days  of  perplexity.    IV.  Days  of  deliverance.     V.  Times 

of    REFRESHING    AND    SEASONS    OF    COMMUNION  WITH  GOD.       VI.    The  day  of   DEATH    AND 

THE  DAY  OF  JUDGMENT.  (J.  Bolton,  B.A.)  A  memorial  day: — In  these  words 
we  have  an  account  of  the  founding  of  the  Jewish  national  memorial  day.  It 
was  not  so  much  a  religious  as  a  national  memorial  day.  It  celebrated  a 
day  of  victory  and  triumph ;  and  they  made  it  memorable  by  annual  observance. 
I.  Let  us  think  of  it  as  a  memory  day.  There  are  those  who  think  it  unkind  to 
recall  the  memory  of  the  dead,  or  even  to  speak  to  the  bereaved  of  their  losses. 
There  are  some  who  think  that  the  only  way  to  console  is  by  diverting  the  thoughts 
from  all  memory  of  that  which  occasioned  pain.  There  is  no  more  mistaken  treat- 
ment for  the  human  heart  than  to  prescribe  oblivion  for  its  cure.  The  very  memory 
of  the  loved  one  blesses  us  and  makes  us  more  gentle  and  tender  toward  the  living. 
It  is  neither  manly  nor  womanly  nor  human  to  be  either  hard-hearted  or  forgetful. 
Then,  do  you  think  that  the  heart  of  our  nation  is  softened,  and  that  sympathy, 
sensibility,  and  true  greatness  are  promoted  by  our  observance  of  a  national  memorial 
day  ?  II.  That  our  memorial  day  is  a  day  with  very  important  lessons.  1.  It 
teaches  Christian  patriotism.  Love  of  country  is  not  only  a  natural  sentiment  in 
every  true  heart,  but  it  is  right  in  the  sight  of  God.  No  man  can  ignore  his  relation 
to  his  country  and  not  sin  against  God.  2.  Again,  our  memorial  day  teaches  the 
value  of  peace.    Memorial  day  is  a  constant  reminder  of  the  terrible  price  paid. 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

3.  The  day  also  brings  lessons  of  gratitude  and  hope.  Memory  is  the  mother  of 
gratitude.  So  when  we  recall  our  national  blessings  how  much  cause  we  have  for 
gratitude  to  God  I  "  The  Lord  hath  done  great  things  for  us  whereof  we  are  glad." 
{Southern  Fuljait.) 


CHAPTER  X. 

Yebs.  1-8.  And  the  king  Ahasuerus  laid  a  tribute  upon  the  land. — A  good 
government : — A  good  government — I.  Has  a.  wise  system  of  taxation.  II.  Makes 
ITS  power  felt.  hi.  Places  oood  men  in  office.  IV.  Promotes  the  welfare  of 
THE  PEOPLE.  V,  Strives  to  preserve  peace.  VI.  Is  acceptable  to  a  virtuous 
AND  enlightened  people.  {W.  Burrows,  B.A.)  The  greatness  of  Ahasuerut  and 
of  Mordecai : — I,  The  greatness  of  the  monarch  is  seen — 1.  In  the  character  of 
his  government.  "  He  laid  a  tribute  on  the  land,"  &o.  Possibly  this  was  a 
judicious  system  of  taxation,  designed  to  displace  some  obnoxious  method  of  raising 
money  for  the  public  treasury.  2.  In  the  acquiescence  of  his  subjects.  11.  The 
greatness  of  Mordecai  is  seen — 1.  In  the  contrast  existing  between  his  present 
and  his  former  position.  2.  In  the  fact  that  his  severest  trials  became  the  avenue 
through  which  he  ascended  to  fame.  3.  In  his  reaching  the  pinnacle  of  greatness 
by  simple  fidelity  to  principle  and  unwearied  diligence.  4.  In  his  employing  the 
influence  he  acquired,  not  for  selfish  ends,  but  to  promote  the  welfare  of  his  people. 
Lessons — 1.  He  who  fills  well  the  position  he  occupies  thereby  effectually  recommends 
himself  to  a  higher.  2.  Nothing  is  lost  by  maintaining  integrity.  3.  Worldly 
prosperity  is  often  the  result  of  religious  faith.  4.  It  is  unwise  to  be  disheartened 
in  the  hour  of  adversity  (J.  S.  Van  Dyke,  D.D.)  MordecaVs  exaltation :  a 
summary  of  providential  interpositions  : — To  extirpate  the  Jewish  nation  would 
have  been  to  destroy  the  Church  of  God,  to  make  void  His  everlasting  covenant,  and 
to  bring  to  nought  Hia  merciful  and  gracious  counsels  in  behalf  of  a  sinful  and 
unhappy  world.  1.  It  was  not,  therefore,  for  his  own  sake  only  that  Mordecai  was 
exalted.  2.  Before  Mordecai  was  exalted  it  was  the  will  of  God  to  try  the  faith  of 
the  Jews.  3.  One  great  purpose  of  the  trial  was  to  recall  them  to  a  recollection  of 
their  true  office  and  position  in  the  world  as  witnesses  of  God  and  pilgrims  to  the 
heavenly  city.  4.  God  prepared  an  advocate  and  protector  for  His  people  years 
before  Haman  had  power  to  do  them  harm.  6.  To  prepare  the  way  for  this  advocate 
and  protector,  the  divorce  and  dethronement  of  Vashti  was  overruled  by  God  for  the 
advancement  of  Esther  to  the  crown  of  Persia.  6.  The  foundation  of  Mordecai's 
greatness  was  actually  laid  by  his  bitterest  and  most  implacable  enemy.  7.  To 
pave  the  way  for  Mordecai's  future  advancement,  a  claim  had  to  be  established  on 
the  gratitude  and  confidence  of  the  king,  long  before  the  rise  of  Haman.  8.  The 
time  pointed  out  by  the  lot  for  the  slaughter  of  the  Jews  providentially  fell  so  close 
to  the  end  of  the  year  as  to  give  almost  as  much  time  as  possible  to  Esther  and 
Mordecai  to  consider  what  steps  could  be  taken  to  avert  the  destruction  of  their 
nation.  9.  Esther's  concealing  her  Jewish  origin,  both  before  and  after  coming  to 
the  throne,  was  overruled  to  the  confusion  and  destruction  of  Haman.  He  would  never 
have  issued  the  decree  against  the  Jews  had  he  known  that  the  queen  was  a  Jewess. 
10.  Haman's  concealing  from  the  king  that  it  was  the  Jewish  nation  he  wished  to 
destroy  was  overruled  so  as  to  become  the  means  of  his  own  downfall.  11.  The 
insolence  and  impatience  of  Haman  getting  the  better  of  his  prudence  was  the 
means  of  defeating  and  disappointing  his  malicious  schemes.  12.  That  Esther 
should  have  been  received  with  favour  by  the  king,  after  she  had  apparently  been 
slighted  by  him  for  thirty  days,  was  clearly  an  instance  of  the  hand  of  God. 
13.  That  Esther,  through  some  impression  on  her  mind,  should  have  deferred  her 
petition  till  the  following  day,  was  one  of  the  most  remarkable  providential 
interferences  in  the  whole  history.  The  delay  led  to  the  erection  of  the  gibbet  on 
which  Haman  afterwards  suffered  and  also  to  his  humiliation  in  being  compelled  to 
do  public  honours  to  Mordecai.  14.  The  king's  sleepless  night  had  momentous 
results.  15.  How  providential  that  Haman  should  have  been  at  hand  at  the  very 
moment  the  king  was  desirous  for  some  one  to  propose  a  suitable  reward  for 
Mordecai  1  16.  Haman's  humiliation  at  being  compelled  to  do  honour  to  Mordecai 
so  dispirited  him  that  when  Esther's  terrible  charge  was  made  against  him  he  was 
not  able  to  make  even  a  plausible  defence,  such  as  his  ignorance  that  the  queen  waa 


,CHAP.  X.]  ESTHER.  115 

s  Jewess  and  his  ignorance  of  any  conscious  intention  to  injure  her.  17.  Even  the 
trivial  circumstances  that  the  chamberlains  sent  to  summon  Haman  to  the  banquet 
arrived  before  he  had  time  to  have  the  gibbet  taken  down  and  removed,  and  that 
thus  they  came  to  be  informed  that  it  was  prepared  for  Mordecai,  were  as  plainly 
the  work  of  providence  as  any  other  event  in  the  whole  narrative.  18.  To  all  these 
extraordinary  accidents  and  coincidences  we  must  add  that  the  issue  of  the  whole 
matter  placed  the  Jews  in  a  much  more  prosperous  condition  than  they  were  in 
before,  and  confirmed  their  faith  in  the  Divine  promises  and  protection. 
{W.  Crosthwaite.)  The  Book  of  Esther: — I.  We  have  hebe  a  golden  leaf  in  thh 
CHAIN  of  pbovedence  teaching  ua  that "  the  Most  High  ruleth  in  the  kingdom  of  men." 
II.  Wb  leabn  here  the  pectillab  care  with  which  God  watches  over  His  Church 
AND  people,  ni.  We  see  the  wonderful  manner  in  which  God  raises  up  instru- 
ments FOR  THE  PRESERVATION  AND  DELIVERANCE  OF  HiS  PEOPLE.  IV.  We  NOTICB 
the  surprising  manner  in  WHICH  PROVIDENCE  OPENS  UP  THE  WAT  IN  WHICH  THESE 
INSTRUMENTS  ABE  DESTINED  TO  ACT.  V.  We  ARE  TAUGHT  THE  DUTY  OF  PLACING  OUR  SOLE 
TRUST  AND  DEPENDENCE  ON  GOD.      VI.    We  LEABN  FROM  THIS  BOOK  THE  HIGH  UTILITY  OF 

THE  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  and  their  standing  authority  as  a  rule  both  to 
INDIYIDUALS  AND  COMMUNITIES.  {Thomas  McCrie,  D.D.)  A  well-governed  empire : — 
The  Chinese  have  a  political  saying  which  is  worthy  the  reading  even  of  English 
statesmen.  It  is  as  follows :  When  is  the  empire  well  governed,  and  affairs  go  as 
they  should  go  ?  When  swords  are  rusty,  and  spades  are  bright ;  when  prisons  are 
empty,  and  grain-bins  filled ;  when  the  law  courts  are  lonely  and  o'ergrown  with 
grass  ;  when  doctors  walk  and  bakers  ride :  it  is  then  that  things  go  as  they  ought, 
and  the  State  is  well  ruled.  The  highest  government : — Above  all,  it  is  ever  to  be 
kept  in  mind  that  not  by  material  but  by  moral  power  are  men  and  their  actions 
governed.  How  noiseless'is  thought  1  No  rolling  of  drums,  no  tramp  of  squadrons, 
or  immeasurable  tumult  of  baggage-waggons,  attend  its  movements.  In  what 
obscure  and  sequestered  places  may  the  head  be  meditating  which  is  one  day  to  be 
crowned  with  more  than  imperial  authority  I  for  kings  and  emperors  will  be  among 
its  ministering  servants ;  it  will  rule,  not  over,  but  in,  all  heads,  and  with  these  its 
solitary  combinations  of  ideas,  as  with  magic  formulas,  bend  the  world  to  its  will. 
The  time  may  come  when  Napoleon  himself  will  be  better  known  for  his  laws  than 
for  his  battles  ;  and  the  victory  of  Waterloo  prove  less  momentous  than  the  opening 
of  the  first  Mechanics' Institute.  (Thomas  Carlyle.)  Seeking  the  wealth  of  his 
people. — Mordecai  was  a  true  patriot,  and  therefore  being  exalted  to  the  highest 
position  under  Ahasuerus,  he  used  his  eminence  to  promote  the  prosperity  of  Israel. 
In  this  he  was  a  type  of  Jesus,  who,  upon  His  throne  Of  glory,  seeks  not  His  own, 
but  spends  His  power  for  His  people.  Every  Christian  should  be  a  Mordecai  to  the 
Church,  striving  according  to  his  ability  for  its  prosperity.  Some  are  placed  in 
stations  of  affluence  and  influence;  let  them  testify  for  Jesus  before  great  men. 
Others  have  what  is  far  better,  namely,  close  fellowship  with  the  King  of  kings ; 
let  them  be  sure  to  plead  daily  for  the  weak  of  the  Lord's  people,  the  doubting,  the 
tempted,  and  the  comfortless.  Instructed  believers  may  serve  their  Master  greatly 
if  they  lay  out  their  talents  for  the  general  good,  and  impart  their  wealth  of 
heavenly  learning  to  others,  by  teaching  them  the  things  of  God.  The  very  least 
in  our  Israel  may  at  least  seek  the  welfare  of  his  people ;  and  his  desire,  if  he  can 
give  no  more,  shall  be  acceptable.  It  is  at  once  the  most  Christlike  and  the  most 
happy  course  for  a  believer  to  cease  from  living  to  himself.  He  who  blesses  others 
cannot  fail  to  be  blessed  himself.  On  the  other  hand,  to  seek  our  own  personal 
gr<>atness  is  a  wicked  and  unhappy  plan  of  life,  its  way  will  be  grievous  and  its  end 
will  be  fatal.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 


1    1012  01090  1074 


Date  Due 


',  » 


