THE  LIFE  OF

CHARLES  HADDON
SPURGEON


THE    LIFE    OF
CHARLES    HADDON    SPURGEON.


•

(


i


(Elliott  &°  Fry,  photo,  55,  Baker  Street.)
CHARLES    HADDON    SPURGEON.


THE  LIFE  OF

CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON


BY

CHARLES     RAY


WITH    AN    INTRODUCTION      .

BY

PASTOR    THOMAS    SPURGEON.


LONDON
PASSMORE     AND     ALABASTER

PATERNOSTER    BUILDINGS   E.G.

ISBISTER     AND     COMPANY    LIMITED

15   &  16  TAVISTOCK   ST.   COVENT    GARDEN
1903.

(All  rights  reserved.)


DEDICATED

TO   THE   MEMORY  OF

THE    LATE

MRS.    C.    H.    SFURGEON.

WHO  SINCE  THE  WRITING
OF  THIS   BIOGRAPHY

HAS  GONE  TO
JOIN    HER   HUSBAND.


Annex


PREFACE.

IT  is  not  easy  hi  the  compass  of  a  single  volume  to
give  anything  like  a  fair  idea  of  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon's  life  and  work.  Indeed  his  activities  were  so
manifold,  and  the  channels  in  which  his  energies  were
exerted  were  so  numerous,  that  the  biographer  is
bewildered  by  the  very  mass  of  material  at  his  disposal.
The  great  divine's  connection  with  all  the  organisations
and  institutions  that  owed  their  inception  and  growth  to
his  untiring  efforts,  was  so  intimate  that  the  history  of  any
one  of  them  would  be  the  history  of  a  single  phase  of
C.  H.  Spurgeon's  life.  Hence  to  give  a  full  and  clear
idea  of  the  preacher's  organising  ability  alone,  would
require  as  many  volumes  as  there  are  agencies  connected
with  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  Then,  his  wonderful
ministry  in  London,  was  so  vast  in  its  conception  and
results,  that  to  tell  it  fully  would  need  many  volumes  the
size  of  this  one,  whilst  the  story  of  his  preaching  engage-
ments away  from  London  would  fill  another  book.  And
so  the  story  might  be  multiplied  until  a  whole  library  were
brought  into  existence,  without  the  fear  of  the  minute
detail  engendering  dulness.

That  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  was  a  wonderful  man,
those  with  only  a  slight  knowledge  of  his  life  will  readily
agree,  but  few  who  were  .not  in  close  contact  with  him  for
many  years,  have  any  idea  how  wonderful  he  was.  In  the
following  pages  an  attempt  has  been  made  not  only  to  tell
something  of  what  he  did,  but  to  convey  some  idea  of  what
he  was — his  sterling  character,  his  unflinching  courage,  his
tireless  energy,  his  mountain-moving  faith,  his  personal  piety,


viii.  PREFACE.

Ms  unexampled  generosity,  his  lack  of  anything  approaching
selfishness,  his  unquenchable  zeal,  his  marvellous  ability,
and  his  persistent  and  consistent  Christianity.  If  "  the
evil  that  men  do  lives  after  them  "  so  does  the  good,  and
in  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  case  it  must  ever  live.

The  writer  has  laid  down  his  pen  with  regret.  But  he
has  been  helped  during  the  preparation  of  this  biography
by  learning  afresh  the  fact  that  mighty  men  of  faith  are  not
the  production  of  a  bygone  day  only,  but  that  in  this  utili-
tarian and  materialistic  age,  it  is  possible  for  a  man  to
literally  fulfil  the  apostle's  words :  "  For  me  to  live  is
Christ"

The  marvellous  growth  in  circulation  of  the  printed
sermons  has  been  dealt  with  at  some  length  and  the  story
has  been  continued  to  the  present  time,  for,  as  the  motto  on
the  weekly  cover,  "  He  being  dead  yet  speaketh,"  suggests,
these  sermons  prove  that  though  "  absent  from  the  body  "
C.  H.  Spurgeon  is  still  a  silent  worker  for  righteousness.
Paradoxical  as  it  may  seem  the  record  of  his  life  by  no
means  stops  at  his  death.

Some  new  material  and  many  hitherto  unpublished
illustrations  will  be  found  in  this  volume.  For  the  former
the  writer  gratefully  acknowledges  his  indebtedness  to
Messrs.  Passmore  and  Alabaster  and  the  Rev.  C.  Evelyn
Charlesworth,  Baptist  Minister  of  Waterbeach,  and  for  the
latter  to  Messrs.  Passmore  and  Alabaster,  the  Rev.  Vernon
J.  Charlesworth,  headmaster  of  the  Stockwell  Orphanage,
Mr.  Edward  Johnson  and  others.

One  word  in  conclusion.  This  biography  is  not  a  piece
of  special  pleading  by  one  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  own
denomination.  The  writer  belongs  to  a  body  with  which
the  great  preacher  had,  ecclesiastically,  no  sympathy  and  of
which  at  times  he  said  some  rather  hard  things.


INTRODUCTION.

J5v  PASTOR  THOMAS  SPURGEON.

LATE  in  the  fifties  the  SS.  "  Omeo  "  ploughed  her  way
through  the  Southern  Seas,  in  the  track  of  a  recent
storm.  She  was  bound  from  Melbourne  to  New  Zealand,
with  a  goodly  passenger  list.  Waves  are  waves  in  those
latitudes,  even  when  they  doi  not  run  mountains  high;  and
though  the  wind  had  subsided,  there  was  still  commotion
enough  on  the  water.  Consequently,  there  were  not  a  few
empty  places  at  the  dinner  table.  Only  a  few  "  good  sailors  '
gathered  at  the  Captain's  end  of  the  saloon.  So  proof  were
these  seasoned  travellers  against  mat  de  mer,  that  they  not
only  did  full  justice  to  a  somewhat  elab'orate  meal,  but,  seeing
that  the  night  was  dark  and  cold,  they  continued  chatting  and
jesting  over  their  dessert.  All  kinds  of  topics  were  dis-
cussed— the  weather,  of  course,  the  probable  length  of  the
voyage,  the  politics  of  Victoria  and  of  New  Zealand,  farming
prospects,  the  price  of  land,  the  play,  and  last  of  all  religion,
or,  more  accurately,  the  professors  and  preachers  of  it.

Just  then  the  world  was  ringing  with  the  fame  of  one —
Spurgeon,  quite  a  youth,  who  had  taken  London  by  storm,
and  was  making  friends  and  foes  at  an  altogether  unprece-
dented rate.  All  the  dessert-eaters  had  heard  of  him,
though  not  one  of  their  number  had  had  opportunity  of.
hearing  him.  They  were  disposed  to  swell  the  number  of
his  critics,  almost  without  exception,  and  some  among  them
were  specially  severe.  For  a  while  there  was  none  to

2


x.  INTRODUCTION.

champion  his  causei  but  there  was  a  silent  member  sitting
by, — a  canny  Scot  who  knew  how  to  "  bide  a  wee."

It  should  be  known  that  at  this  time,  all  sorts  of  wild  tales
were  abroad.  Dame  Rumour  was  specially  talkative,  and
inventive.  Some  of  her  most  remarkable  creations  survive
to  this  day,  so  hard  do  such  fabrications  die.  But  in  the
days  of  which  I  write  they  were  young,  and  vigorous.  More-
over, by  the  time  they  reached  the  Antipodes  they  were
yarns  indeed.

"The  flying  rumours  gathered  as  they  rolled,
Scarce  any  tale  was  sooner  heard  than  told ;
And  all  who  heard  it  added  something  new,
And  all. who  told  it  made  enlargements  too  ;
On  every  ear  it  spread,  on  every  tongue  it  grew."

Thus  lie  after  lie  was  bandied  about^  and  there  were  few
who  knew  the  truth,  and  fewer  still  who  dared  to  tell  it.

The  voyagers  did  not  hesitate  to  run  the  young  preacher
down.  He  was  an  upstart,  a  nine  days'  wonder,  a  mounte-
bank, an  ignoramus,  and  worse.  The  Scot  still  sat  silent.
But  his  blood  was  beginning  to  boil.

At  length  he  lifted  his  stalwart  form,  standing  six  feet  in
his  stockings,  and  with  a  visage  stem  and  strong,  he
addressed  his  fellow-travellers  in  some  such  words  as  these :
— "  Gentlemen,  I  have  listened  with  painful  interest  to  your
denunciations  of  a  great  and  good  man.  I  note  that  none
of  you  has  seen  or  heard  him,  and  I  am  bound  to  say  that
such  sweeping  condemnation  of  the  absent  strikes  me  as
Jt>eing  most  unfair.  I  myself,  alas !  have  never  listened  to
the  preacher,  but  I  have  read  many  of  his  utterances,  and
I  have  carefully  studied  his  character  as  they  reveal  it.  I
do  not  hesitate  to  declare  my  conviction  that  he  is  an
honest,  and  true  man.  Moreover,  I  am  persuaded  that  he


INTRODUCTION.  xi.

is  a  God-sent  preacher.  The  Spirit  of  God  rests  upon  him,
and  works  through  him.  He  neither  fears  the  frown  of
man,  nor  courts  his  favour1.  He  is  possessed,  in  my  judg-
ment, of  surprising  gifts,  and  they  are  all  consecrated  to
the  service  of  God  and  man.  You  have  said  that  he  is
unlearned  and  ignorant.  True.,  he  has  not  received  a
university  education ;  but  he  is  by  no  means  ignorant.  They
said  of  his  Master,  '  Whence  hath  this  man  letters,  having
never  learned  ? '  I  verily  believe  that  C.  H.  Spurgeon  is
taught  of  God,  and  has  been  specially  equipped  by  the
Holy  Spirit.  His  sermons  prove  very  plainly  that  he  is
the  reverse  of  uninformed.  I  havs*  studied  them.  They
are  truly  eloquent,  as  well  as  deeply  spiritual.  Portions  of
them  have  found  an  abiding-place  in  my  memory,  and,
though  I  fear  I  may-  mar  the  message  if  I  attempt  to  repro-
duce it,  I  will  venture  to  quote  one  passage,  and  you
yourselves  shall  be  the  judges  as  to  whether  a  mere  mounte-
bank could  talk  like  that  by  the  hour  together,  week  after
week : —

"  '  O,  young  man,  build  thy  studio  on  Calvary  !  There
raise  thine  observatory,  and  scan  by  faith  the  lofty  things
of  Nature.  Take  thee  a  hermit's  cell  in  the  Garden  of
Gethsemane,  and  la,ve  thy  brow  with  the  waters  of  Siloa.
Let  the  Bible  be  thy  standard  classic — thy  last  appear  in  all
matters  of  contention.  Let  its  light  be  thine  illumination,
and  thou  shalt  become  more  wise  than  Plato;  more  truly
learned  than  the  seven  sages  of  antiquity.'  "

An  ominous  silence  fell  on  the  company  when  the  reciter
resumed  his  seat.  His  astonished  hearers  looked  each  on
the  other^  and  without  remark  retired.  To  their  credit  be
it  said  that  there  were  some  among  them  who  came,  a  little
later,  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  champion,  to  express  their  regret
that  they  had  spoken  so  ill  of  a  man  whom  they  knew  not,


xii.  I XTRODUCTION.

and  of  whom  they  would  henceforth  be  prepared  to  think
better  things.

Now,  these  things  were  done  in  the  days  wherein  C.  H.
Spurgeon,  although  already  well  known,  was  little  under-
stood. His  detractors  were  greatly  prejudiced,  and  sadly
ill-informed.  They  did  not  judge  righteous  judgment,
deciding  often — like  the  "  Omeo's  "  passengers — by  hear-
say only.  It  was  well  that  in  those  early  days  there  were
found  some  to  speak  a  good  word  for  the  Lord's  servant,
and  boldly  to  challenge  the  false  witnesses  and  mischief-
makers.  God  does  not  leave  His  faithful  ambassadors
without  a  body-guard  of  heart-touched  men.  Not  a  few  of
those  who  espoused  the  cause  of  the  persecuted  preacher
had  not  seen  him,  but  they  had  been  fed  and  fired  by  his
discourses,  as  reproduced  in  the  Press.  They  delighted  in
the  doctrines  which  he  proclaimed  so  unhesitatingly  and
forcefully.  They  rejoiced  in  his  whole-hearted  devotion  to
the  cause  of  God;  they  admired  his  unique  talents;  and
they  divined  that  he  was  a  man  sent  of  God  to  rouse  the
sleeping  churches,  and  to  "  take  "  many  men  for  Christ.

C.  H.  Spurgeon  paid  little  heed  to  criticism.  While
the  dogs  were  baying,  the  moon  continued  shining.  He
knew  his  cause  was  righteous,  and  he  kept  his  conscience
void  of  offence  alike  towards  God  and  man.  Nevertheless,
his  spirit  was  often  wounded  sore,  and  he  welcomed  very
gratefully  the  succour  and  sympathy  of  the  loving  hearts
and  sanctified  intellects  which  counted  it  their  glory  to
share  his  shame.  How  well  I  remember  the  tears  of  thank-
ful joy  that  glistened  in  his  eyes  when  first  he  heard  the
incident  related  above.  He  wished  to  know  at  once  who
his  champion  was,  and,  had  it  been  possible,  he  would,  I
am  sure,  have  grasped  the  hand  of  such  a  Jonathan  with
one  of  his  never-to-be-forgotten  "  God-bless-yous."


INTRODUCTION.  xiii.

In  later  days  there  was  little  need  to  tell  of  the  preacher's
fame,  or  to  sing  his  praise.  He  had  lived  down  detraction,
and  had  transformed  many  a  foe  into  a  friend.  Into  almost
every  corner  of  the  globe  his  sermons  had  penetrated,  and
his  name  had  become  a  household  word  in  every  clime.

I  do  remember  meeting  with  one  person  who  had  not
heard  his  name,  but  that  poor  old  Irish  woman  in  one  of
the  long  disused  convict-stations  of  Tasmania  was  as  much
cut  off  from  Protestant  Church  history  by  her  Roman
Catholicism,  as  the  place  in  which  she  dwelt  was  from
civilization,  by  its  geographical  position.  I  have  found  the
name  of  Spurgeon  not  only  recognised,  but  greatly  respected,
on  either  side  of  the  world.  The  Colonial  Custom-House
officer  was  lenient  as  to  the  luggage  when  he  read  the  name
SPURGEON  on  the  label.  The  inevitable  question,  "Any
relation  of  the  great  preacher  ? "  being  answered  satis-
factorily, most  doors  flew  open,  and  all  hearts  grew  warm
towards  the  young  traveller.  Many  an  opportunity  have  I
had  of  hearing  striking  testimony  concerning  my  dear  father
from  some  who  had  not  the  remotest  idea  that  I  was  a  son
of  his.  I  recall  some  of  this  witness  as  I  write.  There  is
the  old  gardener,  leaning  on  his  spade  in  the  centre  of
the  garden-plot,  exclaiming  with  the  authority  of  a  Scribe,
and  the  triumph  of  a  Caesar,—"  SPURGEON !  Ah,  there
was  no  humbug  about  him  I  "  I  hear  one  of  the  rowers  in
the  ferry-boat  saying  to  his  mate  as  they  pull  across  the
stream,  "  Oh,  but  you  should  ha'  heard  his  father.  Why
man,  he  made  one's  hair  stand  on  end !  "  I  remember  the
broken  English  of  the  Maori  local  preacher  who  had  read
"  John  Ploughman's  Talk  "  : — "  I  say,  it  was  very  wonderful.
He  told  every  things:  animal,  bird,  and  many  of  them.
He  must  full  of  readings  of  lots  book.  He  must  have  had
a  very  big  head  full  of  wisdom.  I  should  think  he  was  very


xiv.  INTRODUCTION.

close  to  Solomon."  I  catch  the  quavering  accents  of  the
aged  saint  who,  though  he  had  never  seen  the  Preacher's
face,  assured  me  that  he  loved  my  father  even  better  than
his  own.  I  call  to  mind  the  little  lass  who  in  her  heart
believed  that  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  the  Prime  Minister,  and
I  hear  the  softened  tones  of  the  strong-voiced  fisherman
who  was  sounding  forth  the  gospel  on  the  beach,  when  he
quoted  from  "  dear  old  Spurgeort."  As  there  pass  before
my  mind's  eye  the  multitudes  who  have  grasped  my  hand
with  special  heartiness^  and  the  saints — not  a  few  of  them
bed-ridden — who  have  murmured  a  blessing  on  my  head,
"  for  your  dear  father's  sake,"  I  ask  myself,  "  Was  there  ever
a  man  more  widely  or  more  deeply  loved  ?  "  Those  who
knew  him  best4  wonder  least  at  this.  So  rare  a  combination
of  lovable  qualities  could  hardly  fail  to  secure  affection,
even  in  this  cold  and  careless  age.  God  had  so  richly
dowered  him,  and  he  used  these  gifts  so  manifestly  for  God's
glory ;  he  was  so  utterly  unselfish,  so  genial,  so  human,  and
yet  so  faithful  and  uncompromising,  that  even  unbelievers
were  forced  to  exclaim,  "  This  is  a  good  man  and  true."
They  were  wont  to  say  that  he  was  better  than  his  creed,
little  knowing  how  closely  allied  were  his  deeds  and  his
creed.

He  has  been  away  from  us — "  at  home  with  the  Lord  " —
for  nearly  a  dozen  years.  They  said  truly  who  declared  that
his  loss  was  irreparable.  The  gap  his  departure  made
seems  larger  every  year.  It  speaks  volumes  for  the  stability
of  his  work,  that  his  power  is  felt,  and  his  Institutions  thrive
unto  this  present.  His  own  literary  works,  published  before
and  since  his  death,  form  quite  a  considerable  library.  His
sermons  are  still  appearing  week  by  week,  together  with  the
running  comment  which  is  hardly  less  valuable  than  the  dis-
course itself.  The  living  voice  can  hardly  die  away  into


INTRODUCTION.  xv.

silence  so  long  as  these  sweet  echoes  last.  The  best  of
all  is  that  these  sermons  seem  as  potent  as  those  that  went
before.  As  the  bones  of  the  deceased  prophet  brought  life
to  the  deadj  so  these  posthumous  discourses  are  used  of
God  to  minister  the  saving  grace  of  spiritual  life  to'  their
readers.  The  Jubilee  of  "The  Metropolitan  Tabernacle
Pulpit  "  is  at  hand.  Fifty  years  of  weekly  printed  sermons  !
— an  absolutely  unique  record,  surely.  And  there  are
more  to  follow.  As  the  buried  bells  of  the  old  legend  con-
tinued pealing,  long  after  the  tower  in  which  they  had  hung
was  ruined,  so  the  gospel  bells  which  C.  H.  Spurgeon  rang
so  ably  are  sounding  yet,  albeit  he  himself  is  no  more.  For
all  of  which  we  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  continually.

But  I  must  not  wander  thus,  however  sweet  these  by-
paths are;  for  I  set  out  to  introduce  this  "  Life."  I  was
led  to  write  as  I  have  written  by  the  consideration  that  the
wonderful  career,  and  the  not  less  wonderful  character  here-
in portrayed  ought  to  be  told  to  the  generations  following.
Such  a  memory  well  deserves  to  be  kept  the  greenest  of  the
green.  Already,  though  it  seems  well-nigh  incredible,  there
are  some  who  have  not  so  much  as  heard  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon,
A  "  Life  "  reliable  and  full,  though  necessarily  condensed,
the  price  of  which  is  low  enough  to  place  it  within  the  reach
of  the  multitude,  was  "  a  felt  want."  The  pages  of  "  The
Sunday  Magazine  "  have  carried  far  and  wide  the  record  of
the  great  preacher's  life-story,  and  now  these  chapters  are
gathered  up,  and  added  to,  and  issued  in  a  dainty  and
copiously  illustrated  volume.  If  it  be  fancied  by  some
that  "  C.  H.  Spurgeon 's  Autobiography,  by  his  Wife  and
Private  Secretary  "  form  the  staple  of  this  work  both  as  to
matter  and  illustration,  it  will  not  be  prized  the  less  on
that  account,  and  any  new  features  that  are  noted  will  be
gladly  welcomed.  The  fact  is  that  while  he  was  yet  alive,


xvi.  INTRODUCTION.

nearly  all  that  concerned  this  mighty  man  was  told  and
retold.  He  said,  as  the  author  of  this  biography  reminds
us  in  his  opening  sentence,  "  You  may  write  my  life  across
the  sky ;  I  have  nothing  to  conceal."  In  a  very  real  sense,
his  life  -was  written  across  the  sky.  Moreover,  no  secrets
remained  to  be  discovered  and  published  when  he  was
gone,  nor  were  any  buried  in  his  tomb.

Because  I  judge  that  this  book  will  help  to  introduce  him
to  a  larger  circle,  I  hail  it  heartily;  and  because  I  perceive
that  the  difficult  task  has  been  accomplished  with,  no  little
skill,  and  with  evident  sympathy,  I  commend  it  cheerfully.
Doubtless  the  author  himself  would  be  among  the  first  to
admit  that  to  do  full  justice  to  the  subject  is  out  of  the
question;  but  he  acknowledges  that  the  writing  of  this
biography  has  been  the  most  congenial  work  he  has  ever
done,  or  is  likely  to  do.  His  heart  has  evidently  been  in  it.
If  his  readers  put  their  hearts  into  the  perusal  of  it,  they
also  will  find  their  task  congenial,  and,  if  I  mistake  not,  they
will  want  to  know  more  of  him  of  whom  they  have  been
reading.  This  they  may  do  by  perusing  what  he  himself
has  written.  Thus  also,  by  Divine  grace,  they  may  hope  to
catch  something  of  his  spirit.  May  the  universal  Church
continue  increasingly  to  thank  Heaven  for  C-  H.  Spurgeon,
and  to  glorify  God  in  him.


Clapham,  1903.


CONTENTS.

CHAP.  PAGE

PREFACE         : vii-

INTRODUCTION  BY  PASTOR  THOMAS  SPURGEON  ix.

I.    ANCESTRY  AND  BIRTH

II.    EARLY  CHILDHOOD l&

III.  SCHOOLDAYS 27

IV.  EARLY  RELIGIOUS  IMPRESSIONS  36
V.    CONVERSION 5&

VI.    BAPTISM  CHURCH  MEMBERSHIP  AND  CHRISTIAN

SERVICE 7°

VII.    THE  FIRST  PASTORATE  AT  WATERBEACH         .  94

VIII.    FIRST  VISIT  TO  NEW  PARK  STREET  CHAPEL  .  116

IX.    SETTLEMENT  IN  LONDON I27

X.    INCREASING  POPULARITY  AND  SUCCESS     .        .  136

XI.    COURTSHIP  AND  MARRIAGE                                .  MS

XII.    ABUSE  AND  SLANDER  IN  THE  PRESS.  157

XIII.  FRIENDLY  TRIBUTES 182

XIV.  SERVICES    AWAY    FROM    LONDON  :     FIRST

LITERARY  WORK I9I

XV.   THE  SURREY  GARDENS  Music  HALL       .       .  201
XVI.    LATER  SERVICES  AT  THE  Music  HALL  :  FAST

DAY  AT  THE  CRYSTAL  PALACE    .        .        .  224

XVII.    THE    TURNING    OF    THE    TIDE  :    DOCTRINAL

CONTROVERSIES 235

XV I II.   THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  BEGUN        .  249.


xviii.  CONTENTS.

CHAP.  PAGE

XIX.    OPENING  OF  THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  265

XX.    THE  CHURCH  OFFICERS       .               .        .        .  275

XXI.    NOTABLE  LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES.       .      ~.  287

XXII.    MEMORABLE  SERVICES  AND  SERMONS        .        .  300

XXIII.  THE  PASTORS'  COLLEGE       .       .       .       .       .  320

XXIV.  THE  STOCKWELL  ORPHANAGE     ....  343
XXV.    OTHER  INSTITUTIONS    .        ......        .        .  365

XXVI.    PASTOR,  PARENT  AND  CITIZEN    ....  374

XXVII.    SOME  NOTABLE  CELEBRATIONS  ....  390

XXVIII.    VISITS  AND  VISITORS 407

XXIX.    THE  DOWNGRADE  CONTROVERSY        .        .        .  418

XXX.    CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON  AS  AN  AUTHOR  430

XXXI.    THE  PRINTED  SERMONS .  448

XXXII.    LAST  ILLNESS  AND  DEATH  .        ....       .        .  465

XXXIII.    CONCLUSION    ...        .        .        .        .        .487

APPENDIX  A.    CHRONOLOGICAL  SUMMARY        .  493

APPEMDIX  B.  TABLE  SHOWING  THE  NUMBER
OF  MEMBERS  BAPTIZED  AND  RECEIVED  INTO
THE  CHURCH  WORSHIPPING  AT  NEW  PARK
STREET  CHAPEL  AND  THE  METROPOLITAN
TABERNACLE  UNDER  THE  PASTORATE  OF

CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON       .        .        .  495

INDEX 497


ILLUSTRATIONS.

Charles  ff addon  Spurgcon  Frontispiece

Page

The  house  at  Keh>edon,  Essex,   where  Charles  Haddon

Spttrgeon  was  born 2

The  family  residence  of  the  Spurgeon  family  at  Hythe  Hill,

Colchester 3

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeoris  mother 5

The  Rev.  John  Spurgeon,  father  of  Charles  Haddon  .  .  8

The  Rev.  James  Spurgeon,  grandfather  of  Charles  Haddon  10

Mrs.  James  Spurgeon,  Charles  H addons  grandmother  .  1 2

The  old  manse  and  meeting-house  at  Stambourne  .  .  13

Back  view  of  the  old  meeting-house  at  Stambourne  .  .  14
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  as  a  child  of  six  reproving

a  backslider  in  the  bar  of  the  village  inn  at  Stambourne  18

The  present  meeting-house  at  Stambourne  .  .  .  .  21
A  foe-simile  page  of  the  "Juvenile  Magazine"  which

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  as  a  boy  produced  for  the

benefit  of  his  brother  and  sisters 28

The  Rev.  Richard  Knill 32

St.  Augustine  s  College,  Maidstone 34

The  Artillery  Street  Primitive  Methodist  Chapel,  Colchester,

in  which  C.  H.  Spzirgeon  was  converted  .  .  .  61
The  pulpit  from  which  the  sermon  was  preached  on  the

occasion  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon' s  conversion  .  63

Interior  of  the  Artillery  Street  Chapel 66

The  tablet  in  Artillery  Street  Chapel,  commemorating  the

conversion  of  C.  H.  Spurgcon 68

The  Rev.  W.  W.  Cantlow 75

Isleham  Ferry,  on  the  River  Lark,  where  C.  H.  Spurgeon

was  baptized 77

The  Baptist  Chapel  and  Manse  at  Isleham  ....  79


xx.  ILLUSTRATIONS.

Page

Inscription  on  the  Memorial  Stone  of  the  new  school  room

adjoining  Isleham  Chapel 81

The  house  in  Cambridge,  formerly  a  school  where  Charles

Haddon  Spurgeon  acted  as  iisher  '"•  ....  84
St.  Andrew  Street  Chapel,  Cambridge  '  .  .  .  .  86
The  cottage  at  Teversham,  where  in  1850  C.  H.  Spurgeon

preached  his  first  sermon  ...  .  .  .  88

Interior  of  the  cottage  at  Te-versham 90

Old  Waterbeach  Chapel  .  .  ,  .  .  .  .  95

The  earliest  known  portrait  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  97
The  house  of  Mr.  Smith,  in  which  Charles  H 'addon

Spurgeon  slept  on  his  first  night  at  Waterbeach  .  .  99
The  place  of  baptizing  on  the  Cam  used  by  Waierbeach

Chapel ioi

Reduced  fac-simile  of  an  entry  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon  in  the

Waterbeach  Church  Book 103

The  present  Baptist  Chapel  at  Waterbeach  .  .  .  f.  105
Interior  of  the  present  Chapel  at  Waterbeach  .  .  .107
The  Waterbeach  Communion  Plate,  presented  to  the  Church

by  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon 109

Reduced fafrsimile  of  inscription  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon  in  the

Pulpit  Bible,  presented  to  Waterbeach   Chapel  by  the

New  Park  Street  congregation 1 1 1

Reduced  fac-similes  of  the  title  pages  of  two  early  "volumes

of    manuscript   sermon-outlines,    written    by    C.    H.

Spurgeon  .        ...        ...        .        .        .       113

Fac-simile  of  part  of  a  hymn,  "  Immanuel,"  written  by

C.  H.  Spurgeon  for  the  Waterbeach  Jubilee  Services  .  115
An  early  portrait  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  .  .  117
New  Park  Street  Chapel  at  the  time  Charles  Haddon

Spurgeon  commenced  his  pastorate  there  .  .  .  119
The  three  famous  ministers  of  the  Baptist  Church,  South-

wark,  prior  to  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  s  pastorate  .  121
Charles  Haddan  Spurgeon  when  he  first  came  to  London  .  124
The  Declaration  of  Faith  of  the  Church  which  met  first

at  Carter  Lane,  then  at  New  Park  Street,  and  finally

in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle 125


ILLUSTRATIONS.  xxi.

Page

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  and  his  friend  and  publisher,

Mr.  Joseph  Passmore 126

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  preaching  in  New  Park  Street

Pulpit 129

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  and  his  first  deacons          .        .       131
Charles  Haddon  Sp^trgeon  in  the  pulpit  at  New  Park

Street  Chapel 137

A  rare  photograph  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon      .        .       141
Mrs .  Spurgeon  at  the  time  of  her  marriage  ....       147
Inscription  on  the  fly -leaf  of  a  first  volume  of  printed
sermons  presented  by   Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  to
the  lady  who  shortly  afterwards  became  his  wife        .       151
Reduced  fac-simile  of  an  inscription  by  Charles  Haddon

Spurgeon  in  his  family  Bible 153

C.  H.  Spurgeon  and  his  wife  in  their  garden  soon  after

marriage 155

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,   his  brother  James,  and  Mr.

Joseph  Passmore 159

"  Catch  'em  alive,  Of"    A  caricature  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon,

published  in  1855 163

"  Brimstone  and  Treacle."    From  a  cartoon  published  soon

after  C.  H.  Spurgeon  came  to  London    .        .        .        .166
The  Slow  Coach  and  the  Fast  Train      .         .         .        .        -173

The  Two  Conductors 185

The  young  lion  of  the  pulpit  and  tlie  funny  old  woman  of

the  pulpit  . 189

The  Royal  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Ha1 1 — the  scene  of  the

great  disaster  on  October  19,  1856 203

A  photograph  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  taken  about  the  time  of

the  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall  disaster       .        .        .      209
Charles    Haddon    Spurgeon    preaching   in    the    Surrey

Gardens  Music  Hall 227

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  preaching  to  23,654  persons  at

the  Crystal  Palace  on  Fast  Day,  October  7,  1857     .        .      231
Charles  Haddon  and  Mrs.  Spurgeon 's  second  home  after

marriage        -'  •.  . 245

The  site  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle        .        .        .        .251


xxii.  ILLUSTRATIONS.

Page

The  architect's  detign,  which  -with  cettain  modifications  was

adopted  for  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  .  .  .  253
A  photo  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  taken  during  his  first  visit  to

Ireland      ......        .        .        .     *  .        .        .        .  260

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  from  a  portrait  engraved  at

the  time  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  was  building  .  264
The  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  From  the  first  photograph

taken  after  it  was  opened  in  1861 271

The  earliest  photo  of  the  interior  of  the  Metropolitan

Tabernacle;  taken  in  1861        .        .        .        .        .        .  273

The  Deacons' Vestry  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  .  .  277

Marble  Bust  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon 280

The  Elders  Vestry  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  .  .  283
The  Rev.  James  Spurgeon,  D.D.,  Assistant-Pastor  of  the

Metropolitan  Tabernacle .        ...        .        .        .  285

Interior  of  the  first  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  as  seen  from

the  platform  .  291

C.  H.  Spurgeon  as  Great- Heart 293

"  A  Gorilla  lecturing  on  Mr.  Spurgeon  "  296

A  familiar  pulpit  attitude  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  .  .  .  302
Another  very  common  attitude  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  when

preaching  at  the  Tabernacle     .        ...        .        .        .  303

The  Baptistery  of  the  first  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  in

which  nearly  fifteen  thousand  persons  were  baptized    .  305

C.  H.  S  urgeon's  Pulpit  Chair      .        .        . '       .        .        .  307

C.  H.  Spurgeon  as  Gulliver    .        .        ...        .        .  309

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  preaching  to  20,000  people  in

the  Agricultural  Hall,  Islington 311

Back  view  of  the  new  "  Helensburgh  House,"  C.  H.

Spurgeon1  s  third  home  after  marriage  .  .  .  3 1 3

C.  H.  Spurgeon  in  1870  .  316

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  about  1870 318

Mr.  T.  IV.  Medhurst,  C.  H.  Spurgeon 's  first  student  .  .  322

Rev.  George  Rogers,  first  Principal  of  the  Pastors'  College  325

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  in  1873  •  •  •  •  •  329
The  Men's  Bible  Class  Room  at  the  Metropolitan  Taber-


nacle


33i


ILLUSTRATIONS.  xxiii.

Page

C.  H.  Spurgeon,  from  a  photograph  taken  in  1876  .  .  335

The  Pastors  College  Building 339

The  Library  of  the  Pastors  College 341

A  bird's-eye  view  of  the  Stockwell  Orphanage  as  it  appears

to-day  . 345

The  inner  entrance  gates  of  the  Stockwell  Orphanage  .  .  350
The  Rev.  VernonJ.  Charlesworth,  headmaster  of  Stockwell

Orphanage 352

The  boys'  side  of  the  Stockwell  Orphanage  ....  354

A  typical  group  of  Stockwell  Orphanage  boys  .  .  .  356

The  Infirmary  at  Stockwell  Orphanage  ....  358

Mr.  F.  G.  Ladds,  Secretary  of  the  Stockwell  Orphanage  .  360
The  girls'1  side  of  the  Stockwell  Orphanage  .  .  .361
The  C,  H.  Spurgeon  Memorial  at  Stockwell  Orphanage,

sculptured  in  terra-  cotta  by  George  Tinworth  .  .  363
The  Depot  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Colportage

Association  in  the  Pastors'  College  Building  .  .  367
The  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Almshouses,  rebuilt  and

increased  in  number  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon  .  .  .  369

"  The  Dream  of  Paul,  the  Parish  Clerk  "  .  376
Bronze  Busts  of  Calvin  and  Luther,  which  were  among

the  few  ornaments  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  s  Vestry  at  the

Tabernacle 378

The  Ladies'1  Working  Room,  also  used  for  committee

meetings  .-  . 380

C.  H.  Spurgeon' s  two  sons,  Thomas  and  Charles,  as  boys  .  382
A  Postcard  written  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon  on  the  day  postcards

first  came  into  use 385

Three  notable  Chairs  which  stood  in  the  Pastor's  Vestry  at

the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle 387

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  in  1878 393

C.  H.  Spurgeon  s  Vestry  Clock 398

C.  H.  Spurgeon  at  fifty  years  of  age  ...  .  402
Mrs.  Spurgeon  at  the  time  of  her  husband's  jubilee  .  .  403
C.  H.  Spurgeon' s  Vestry  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  .  411
"  Westwood"  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  s  home  at  Nor-
wood .....  ....  413


xxiv.  ILLUSTRATIONS.

Page

The  Lake  at  "  Westwood"      .        .       .        .       .        .        .415

The  Fernery  at  "Westwood"       ...        .        .        .      420

A  Painting  of  the  Baptism  of  Christ  which  hung  in  the

Metropolitan  Tabernacle  .  .  '_'  ..,.-,'  ....  425
C.  H.  Spurgeon,  from  a  photo  taken  in  the  New  Forest

during  a  holiday  tour       .        .        .        .        .        .        .      433

•"  The  Red  Lion  "  Inn,  at  Ockley,  where  C  H.  Spurgeon

often  stayed,  and  where  much  of  "John  Plonghmans

Talk"  was  written  .  .  .'  .  .  .  .  .  436

Mrs.  C.  H.  Spurgeon  in  her  boudoir 439

The  Library  at  "  Westwood."  -.  .  .  .  .  .  443

C.  H.  Spurgeon  at  fifty  years  of  age 450

The  Study  at  "  Westwood" 455

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  in  1886 459

A  fac-simile  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon 's  corrected  proof  of  the  first

sermon  published  in  the  long  series  now  known  as  the

Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Pulpit  .  .  .  .  .461
C.  H.  Spurgeon  in  1890  .  .  :  .  .  .__  .  468

Mrs.  C.  H.  Spurgeon  .  ,  .  .  .  .  .  469

A  Painting  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  which  hung

with  portraits  of  his  distinguished  predecessors  in

the  Pastor's  Vestry  at  the  Tabernacle  ....  473
€.  H.  Spurgeon  in  the  Gardens  of  the  Hotel  Beau  Rivage,

Mentone  .  .  • 475

•C  H.  Spurgeon  s  sitting-room  at  the  Ho/el  Beau  Rivage,

Mentone,  where  he  conducted  private  services  that  were

largely  attended  by  visitors 477

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  s  remains  arriving  at  Mentone

railway  station  for  removal  to  England  .  .  .  479
The  Olive  Casket  containing  C.  H.  Spurgeon  s  remains,  as

it  stood  in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  .  .  .  .481
The  place  at  the  back  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  where

a  lift  was  to  be  erected  for  the  convenience  of  C.  H.

Spurgeon .  .  .  483

C.  H.  Spurgeon' s  Monument  in  Norwood  Cemetery  .  .  485


CHAPTER   I.
ANCESTRY   AND    BIRTH.

"  "\  T^OU  may  write  my  life  across  the  sky,  I  have
nothing  to  conceal."  Few  men  are  privileged  to
use  such  words  conscientiously;  and  yet  when
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  made  this  statement  he  was  only
putting  into  concrete  form  that  of  which  every  one  who
ever-came  in  personal  contact  with  him  was  convinced,
his  absolute  honesty  and  sincerity  in  thought,  word  and
deed.  From  earliest  childhood  to  his  latest  day  the  very
taint  of  anything  approaching  guile  was  foreign  to  his
nature,  and  he  was  always  prepared  to  follow  what  he  con-
sidered the  right  course,  no  matter  how  thankless  the  task
or  how  bitter  the  consequences  to  himself  might  be  through
the  misunderstanding  and  misrepresentation  of  his  motives
by  others.  And  surely  than  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  in
his  early  days,  no  man  was  ever  more  misunderstood  or
misrepresented,  not  only  by  his  enemies  but  by  many  of
those  who  should  have  been  regarded  as  his  friends.  His
originality  was  warped  into  eccentricity,  his  simple  and
happy  style  of  oratory  into  vulgarity  and  frivolity,  whilst  to
lend  verisimilitude  to  this  distorted  picture  of  the  great
preacher's  character,  a  legion  of  false  anecdotes  were  manu-
factured, many  of  which  have  survived  to  the  present  day.
His  mastery  in  the  use  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  tongue  was  com-
mended by  Mr.  Ruskin;  and  yet  that  rare  gift  has  been
misconstrued  into  evidence  that  the  great  preacher  was

3


3       LIFE  OF  CHARLES  H ADDON  SPURGEON.

-not  educated  in  the  academic  sense  of  the  word.  True,
he  never  went  through  a  University  course,  for  reasons
which  will  be  set  forth  hereafter;  but  he  was  a  Latin  and
Greek  scholar  of  no  mean  merit,  systematically  studying
the  New  Testament  in  the  original  tongue,  and  he  was


The  House  at  KelvecJon,  Essex,  where  Charles   Haddon
Spurgeon  was  born.

acquainted  with  Hebrew  sufficiently  well  to  consult  the
Old  Testament  in  that  language.  Further,  he  understood
French;  and  yet  to  this  day  there  are  thousands,  even  of
his  admirers,  who  believe  he  had  no  classical  or  polite
'learning.  Other  men  might  have  taken  steps  to  correct


ANCESTRY    AND    BIRTH.  3-.

the  erroneous  popular  impression,  but  C.  H.  Spurgeon
cared  nothing  for  public  opinion  so  long  as  his  conscience-
was  void  of  offence  to  God  and  man.  "  They  say,"  he
remarked  on  one  occasion  to  Dr.  William  Wright,  who
found  him  with  the  Hebrew  and  Greek  texts  before  him,


The  Family  Residence  of  the  Spurgeon  family
at  Hythe  Hill,  Colchester.


"  they  say  that  I  am  ignorant  and  unlearned.  Well,  let
them  say  it ;  and  in  everything  by  my-  ignorance  and  by
my  knowledge  let  God  be  glorified."

The  great  preacher's  proficiency  in  almost  all  subjects
was   remarkable,   and   his    sermons  are  full   of  historical.-


4   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

-classical,  and  scientific  references,  each  of  the  minutest
accuracy.  Even  that  most  conservative  of  individuals,  the
British  farmer,  has  been  known  on"  more  than  one  occasion
to  remark  that  the  preacher  was  better  acquainted  with  the
details  of  agricultural  science  than  he  himself.  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon  was  a  genius,  but  a  genius  wholly  conse-
crated to  the  service  of  God.  Had  he  devoted  himself  to
literature,  to  science,  to  politics,  his  name  to-day  would
have  been  emblazoned  upon  the  walls  of  the  Temple  of
Fame:  but  he  loved  the  praise  of  God  more  than  the
praise  of  men,  and  like  Paul  preferred  to  count  earthly
glory  as  but  dross,  that  he  might  preach  the  unsearchable
riches  of  Christ  to  the  multitude.

In  these  days  we  hear  much  of  heredity,  and,  rightly
or  wrongly,  the  base  propensities  of  the  vicious  are  attri
buted  in  a  great  measure  to  inherited  tendencies.  But  if
there  be  a  heredity  of  evil  there  must  also  be  a  heredity  of
good,  and  in  the  Spurgeon  family  we  have  a  remarkable
instance  of  the  benefits  resulting  from  godly  parentage
accompanied  by  faithful  religious  tutelage.  As  far  back  as
the  family  can  be  traced,  the  members  of  it  have  been
noted  for  their  piety  and  loyalty  to  Puritan  truth,  and  for
four  successive  generations  at  least,  the  Spurgeons  have
filled  the  pulpit  with  manifest  ability  and  spiritual  success.
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  was  proud  of  his  ancestry,  and
often  expressed  his  gratitude  to  God  that  he  should  have
had  grace  to  be  the  continuator  of  any  of  the  virtues  of  his
forbears.  The  family  was  of  Dutch  origin,  tracing  its
descent  to  the  exiles  who  found  a  refuge  in  this  country  from
the  persecution  of  the  Duke  of  Alva  in.  the  Low  Countries.
One  branch  settled  in  Essex,  and  another  in  Norfolk,  and  in
both  cases  down  to  the  present  time  the  Spurgeons  have
'been  characterized  by  a  close  adherence  to  evangelical  doc-


ANCESTRY    AND    BIRTH.  5

trine  and  truth.  In  the  latter  part  of  the  seventeenth  century,
at  the  same  time  as  John  Bunyan  was  lying  in  Bedford
gaol,  one  Job  Spurgeon  was  suffering  for  righteousness
sake  in  Essex.  He  had  attended  a  Nonconformist  meeting
in  1677,  and,  under  the  iniquitous  Conventicle  Act  of
Charles  II.,  a  distress  was  levied  upon  him  and  his  goods
were  seized.  Six  years  later  for  a  similar  offence  he  was
sent  to  Chelmsford  Gaol,  where  he  remained  for  fifteen


Charles  Haddon  Spurgeou'.-.  mother.

weeks,  suffering  severely  from  the  intense  cold,  for  no  fire
was  allowed  to  him  in  prison,  and  he  had  nothing  better
to  sleep  upon  than  a  straw  pallet  "  I  had  far  rather  be
descended,"  said  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  when  speaking  of  this
ancestor,  who  was  his  great  grand-father's  great  grand-
father, "  from  one  who  suffered  for  the  faith,  than  bear  the
blood  of  all  the  emperors  within  my  veins."

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  was  born  on  June  19,  1834,
in  the  little  Essex  village  of  Kelvedon.     The  quaint  old-


6   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

fashioned  cottage  where  he  first  saw  the  light  is  still
standing,  and  has  changed  scarcely  at  all  since  that
memorable  day  when  it  sheltered  the  tiny  babe  who  was
to  become  England's  greatest  preacher.  C.  H.  Spurgeon
had  no  early  recollection  of  the  place,  however ;  for  when
he  was  but  ten  months  old,  his  father,  the  Rev.  John
Spurgeon,  removed  to  Colchester  with  his  family,  and  six
or  eight  months  later  the  little  boy  was  taken  to  live  with
his  grandparents  at  Stambourne.  He  remained  there  for
nearly  six  years,  and  thus  the  responsibility  for  the  lad's
earliest  upbringing  devolved  upon  his  grandfather  and
grandmother,  and  his  Aunt  Anne,  for  all  of  whom  he  ever
cherished  the  deepest  affection.  Even  after  the  boy's
return  to  the  parental  roof,  the  Rev.  John  Spurgeon's  duties
took  him  so  frequently  away  from  home  that  the  training
of  the  family  fell  largely  to  the  sainted  mother;  and  this
important  duty,  her  husband  declared,  she  fulfilled  nobly
with  constant  and  prayerful  thought.  On  Sunday  evenings
she  would  gather  the  children  round  her,  and  as  they  read
a  passage  of  Scripture  verse  by  verse  she  would  explain
its  meaning  and  drive  home  the  lessons  which  it  taught
The  remarks  were  pointed,  and  the  children  were  appealec
to  individually  to  seek  the  Lord.  Then  she  would  pray
earnestly  with  them,  and  one  solemn  prayer  offered  on  such
an  occasion  was  vividly  impressed  upon  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon's  mind  to  the  day  of  his  death.  His  mother  had
pleaded  with  the  children  to  consider  their  state  before
God,  and  in  her  prayer  she  used  the  words  :  "  Now,  Lord
if  my  children  go  on  in  their  sins  it  will  not  be  from
ignorance  that  they  perish,  and  my  soul  must  bear  a  swift
witness  against  them  at  the  day  of  judgment  if  they  lay  not
hold  of  Christ."  That  thought  of  a  mother  bearing  s\vifi


ANCESTRY   AND    BIRTH.  7

witness  against  her  own  children  pierced  young  Spurgeon's
conscience  and  stirred  his  heart.

The  Rev.  John  Spurgeon  survived  his  son  more  than
ten  years.  He  passed  away  in  July,  1902,  at  the  age  of
ninety-one,  and  to  the  last  retained  the  vigour  and  energy
for  which  the  Spurgeons  have  been  noted.  Only  the
year  before  he  died  he  personally  raised,  by  sheer  hard
work,  a  hundred  pounds  for  the  Norwood  church  in
which  he  was  accustomed  to  worship.  Not  many  men  of
ninety  would  have  undertaken  such  a  task;  for  the  aged
minister's  plan  was  to  invite  subscriptions  of  a  sovereign,
and  to  each  donor  he  undertook  to  write  an  autograph
letter  of  thanks.

The  grandfather  of  the  great  preacher,  the  Rev.  James
Spurgeon,  whose  influence  upon  the  lad  in  those  early
impressionable  days  must  have  been  enormous,  was  a  man
of  remarkable  integrity,  ability  and  kindness  of  heart.
His  grandson  and  he,  indeed,  had  many  characteristics  in
common,  and  their  preaching  was  very  similar,  as  to  both
style  and  resultSj  and  also  as  to  the  estimation  in  which  it
was  held  by  listeners.  Wherever  the  minister  of  Stam-
boume  Meeting  House  went,  there  souls  were  sure  to  be
saved ;  and  a  devout  working  man  once  admirably  summed
up  the  preaching  in  the  phrase  :  "It  was  always  so  experi-
mental." Many  persons  told  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon
in  the  years  of  his  early  success,  that  they  had  heard
his  grandfather  preach,  and  would  run  their  shoes  off  their
feet  to  hear  a  Spurgeon,  and  he  himself  maintained  that  no
earthly  house  would  ever  accommodate  a  sounder  or  more
useful  ministry  than  that  of  his  grandfather.

The  Rev.  James  Spurgeon,  who  was  born  in  1776,  at
Halstead,  in  Essex,  had  been  from  childhood  of  a  serious


(Bender  and  Lewit,  photo,  Cray  don.)

The  Rev.  John  Spurgeon,  father  of  Charles  Haddon,  from  the  last
photograph  taken  of  the  venerable  minister.


ANCESTRY    AND    BIRTH.  9

disposition,  and  while  still  a  lad  joined  the  Independent
Church  of  his  native  village.  He  was  apprenticed  to  a
trade  and  worked  thereat  until  his  twenty-sixth  year  when
he  was  led  to  devote  himself  entirely  to  the  ministry,  and
after  a  two  years'  course  at  Hoxton  Academy  took  up  his
first  pastorate  at  Clare,  in  Suffolk.  It  was  in  1811  that  he
went  to  Stambourne  Meeting  House,  a  church  probably
unique  in  that  it  had  only  four  pastors  during  a  period  of
two  hundred  years.  Mr.  James  Spurgeon's  ministry  at  the
little  Essex  Chapel  lasted  for  fifty-four  years,  and  he
continued  preaching  with  great  power  and  success  up  to
the  time  of  his  death  at  the  age  of  eighty-eight.  "  I  have
not" had  one  hour's  unhappiness  with  my  church  since  I
have  been  over  it,"  was  the  remarkable  comment  that
the  aged  minister  was  able  to  make  a  few  years  before  he
died.

If  nothing  else  had  done  so,  an  incident  in  his  life
at  Stambourne  would  have  endeared  the  Rev.  James
Spurgeon  to  his  flock.  After  holding  possession  of  the
chapel-house  and  land  for  more  than  twenty-one  years,
he  incidentally  discovered  that  all  the  trustees  of  the  pro-
perty being  dead,  it  was  legally  his,  and  counsellors  were
not  wanting  who  advised  him  to  go  home  and  make  a  will
leaving  the  whole  to  his  heirs.  But  James  Spurgeon  was  a
man  who  had  not  a  shadow  of  covetousness  in  his  nature,
and  with  disinterested  generosity  he  at  once  called  a  meeting
of  the  church  and  had  the  property  put  into  trust  according
to  the  original  wishes  of  the  donor.  The  minister  of  Stam-
bourne was  far  from  being  well-off,  but  he  was  always
ready  "  to  do  good  and  to  communicate."  When  one  of
his  deacons  died,  his  bedridden  wife  complained  to  her
pastor  that  she  was  in  gieat  distress  on  account  of  the


io     LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEOX.

rent  not  being  paid.  The  funds  of  the  church  were  very
low  at  the  time,  and  the  needs  of  the  minister's  large
family  prevented  him  from  providing  the  sum  required.
But  he  soon  lighted  upon  a  method  of  helping  the  widow.
He  asked  all  the  members  of  his  familv  and  of  the


The  Rev.  James  Spurgeon,  grandfather  of  Charles  Haddon.

congregation  to  glean  a  handful  of  corn,  and  no  fewer
than  six  hundred  persons  engaged  in  this  labour  of  love.
The  corn  was  sold,  the  rent  paid,  and  a  substantial  balance
handed  over  to  the  widow.


ANCESTRY    AND    BIRTH.  n

Like  his  distinguished  grandson,  the  Rev.  James
Spurgeon  firmly  believed  in  and  taught  the  reality  and
personality  of  the  devil.  An  incident  in  his  career  is
recorded  which  vividly  recalls  some  of  Luther's  experi-
ences. The  story  is  best  told  in  the  words  of  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon  :  "  My  grandfather,"  he  says,  "  remarked
that  there  was  formerly  a  wood  in  what  I  think  he  called
Honeywood  Park,  which  was  a  very  memorable  place  to
him.  In  that  wood  he  had  groaned  and  wept  before  the
Lord  while  under  the  burden  of  sin  and  under  a  tree  of
oak,  then  only  a  sapling,  he  had  received  the  grace  of
faith  and  entered  upon  the  enjoyment  of  peace  with  God.
It  was  a  lonely  spot,  but  henceforth  it  was  to  him  no
other  than  the  house  of  God  and  the  very  gate  of  heaven.
Often  he  resorted  thither  and  praised  the  name  of  the
Lord.  Some  time  after  this  happy  event,  having  to
go  from  Coggeshall  to  Halstead,  his  route  was  over  the
hallowed  spot.  On  the  night  previous  he  dreamed  very
vividly  that  the  devil  appeared  to  him,  and  threatened  to
tear  him  in  pieces  if  he  dared  to  go  along  that  footpath
and  pray  under  the  oak  as  he  had  been  wont  to  do.  The
evil  one  reminded  him  that  there  was  another  way  through
the  farmyard,  and  that  if  he  took  the  farmyard  path  all
would  go  well  with  him.  When  my  grandfather  awoke,
the  impression  on  his  mind  was  overpowering,  and  he
reasoned  thus  with  himself,  '  Whether  it  be  a  dream  or
really  a  temptation  from  Satan,  I  cannot  tell,  but,  anyhow,  I
will  not  yield  to  it,  but  will  show  the  devil  that  I  will  not
do  his  bidding  in  anything,  but  will  defy  him  to  his  face.'
My  grandfather,  then  a  young  man,  .went  on  cheerily
enough  till  he  came  to  the  stile  where  two  paths  diverged,
then  a  horrible  fear  came  upon  him  and  he  felt  his  heart
beat  fast.  Suppose  he  really  should  meet  the  archfiend  and


12      LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

should  find  him  too  strong  for  him,  what  then?  Better
take  the  farmyard  path.  No,  that  would  be  yielding  to
Satan,  and  he  would  not  do  that  for  ten  thousand  worlds.
He  plucked  up  courage  and  tremblingly  pressed  on.  The
stile  was  leaped,  the  narrow  tract  through  the  wood  was
trodden  with  resolution  mingled  with  forebodings.  The


Mrs.  James  Spurgeon,  Charles  Haddon's  grandmother,  who
had  so  much  to  do  with  his  early  training.


oak  was  in  sight,  the  sweat  was  on  his  face,  the  pace  was
quickened,  a  dash  was  made,  and  the  tree  was  grasped,
but  there  was  no  Satan  there.  Taking  breath  a  moment
the  young  man  uttered  aloud  the  exclamation,  '  Ah,
cowardly  devil,  you  threatened  to  tear  me  in  pieces  and
now  vou  do  not  dare  show  vour  face ! '  Then  followed  a


i4      LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

•fervent  prayer  and  a  song  of  praise,  and  the  young  man
was  about  to  go  on  his  way  when  his  eye  was  caught  by
something  shining  on  the  ground.  It  was  a  ring,  a  very
large  ring,  he  told  me,  nearly  as  large  as  a  curtain  ring,
and  it  was  solid  gold ;  how  it  came  there  it  would  be
hard  to  guess.  Enquiries  were  made,  but  no  claimant
ever  appeared,  and  my  grandfather  had  it  made  into  my
;grandmother's  wedding-ring  in  memory  of  the  spot  so  dear


CBack  view  of  the  old  MeetingiHouse  at  Stambourne.

to  him.  Year  by  year  he  continued  to  visit  the  oak  tree
on  the  day  of  his  conversion  to  pour  out  his  soul  before
the  Lord."

In  the  course  of  time  modern  improvements  swept  away
the  wood  and  the  oak,  and  on  the  Rev.  James  Spurgeon's
last  visit  to  the  spot  it  was  covered  with  growing  wheat.
However,  he  knelt  down  to  pray,  as  was  his  custom,  but  the


ANCESTRY    AND    BIRTH.  15

prayer  was  interrupted  in  a  most  ludicrous  manner.  He
had  scarcely  begun  to  offer  praise  when  the  voice  of  a
farm  labourer  was  heard  close  by  crying  out  in  alarm,
"  Maister,  there  be  a  creazy  man  a-saying  his  prayers
down  in  the  wheat  over  thay're."

To  the  last  the  old  gentleman  had  a  fine  voice,  not
unlike  his  famous  grandson's,  and  no  doubt  the  latter
inherited  this,  as  also  that  appreciation  of  humour  which  he-
put  to  such  good  use  in  his  sermons  and  addresses.  "  It
was  my  grandfather,"  said  Dr.  James  Spurgeon,  brother  of
Charles  Haddon,  "  who  gave  me  the  first  notion  of  a  joke.
Someone  had  asked  him  how  much  he  weighed.  '  Well,'
he  said,  '  that  will  all  depend  upon  where  you  take  me.
If  weighed  in  the  balances  I  am  afraid  I  should  be  found
wanting ;  but  if  in  the  pulpit  they  tell  me  that  I  am  heavy
enough.' "

The  venerable  preacher  entered  into  his  rest  on
February  i2th,  1864.  Mr.  Bridge,  of  Ridgewell,  preached
the  funeral  sermon  at  Stambourne,  while  the  Rev.  John
Spurgeon,  at  Cranbrook,  and  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon.
at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  each  delivered  a  memorial
sermon.


CHAPTER  H

EARLY    CHILDHOOD.

TO  give  anything  like  a  full  and  detailed  story  of  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon's  childhood  is  quite  impossible,
owing  to  the  fragmentary  character  of  the  material  at  the
disposal  of  a  biographer.  But  from  these  fragments  may
be  obtained,  what  is  far  more  valuable  and  interesting  than
any  dry  chronological  summary,  a  vivid  picture  of  the
wonderful  child  who  set  himself  to  fathom  all  the  mysteries
and  solve  all  the  puzzles  that  presented  themselves  to  him
in  his  young  life.  Of  the  many  stories  told  of  those  early
days  at  Stambourne,  it  is,  indeed,  not  always  clear  whether
the  incidents  occurred  during  the  first  stay  of  five  or  six
years,  or  in  some  of  the  many  long  holidays  which  the
lad  subsequently  spent  with  his  grandfather  and  grand-
mother. There  is  no  doubt2  however,  that  it  was  during
his  first  sojourn  at  Stambourne  that  the  oft-recounted  "  kill-
ing "  of  old  Roads  took  place.  Little  Charles,  not  yet
six  years  old,  had  witnessed  the  grief  of  the  good  old
minister  over  the  inconsistent  conduct  of  one  of  his  flock,
a  man  who  frequented  the  village  inn,  drinking  and  smoking
among  ungodly  companions.  One  day  the  boy  astonished
his  grandfather  by  declaring  "I'll  kill  old  Roads,  that  I
will !  "  The  pastor  reproved  the  child,  telling  him  that  if
he  did  anything  wrong,  he  would  be  taken  by  the  police.
But  the  child,  very  serious  and  very  much  in  earnest,
repeated  that  he  would  kill  old  Roads,  though  he  would


EARLY   CHILDHOOD.  17

not  do  anything  wrong.  The  grandfather  was  puzzled,  but
he  let  the  subject  drop  and  it  passed  from  his  mind.
Shortly  afterwards,  however,  the  child  came  into  his  grand-
father's room,  saying,  "  I've  killed  old  Roads,  he'll  never
grieve  my  dear  grandpa  any  more."

"  My  dear  child,"  said  the  minister,  in  some  alarm  at
the  boy's  serious  tone,  "  whatever  have  you  done  ?  "

"  I  haven't  been  doing  any  harm,  grandpa,"  he  replied.
"  I've  been  about  the  Lord's  work,  that's  all."  And  from
the  child  nothing  further  could  be  elicited.

The  mystery  was  cleared  up  by  old  Roads  himself,  who
called  upon  the  pastor,  and  with  a  shamefaced  air  told
hojv  he  had  been  "  killed."  "  I  was  a-sitting  in  the  public,
just  having  my  pipe  and  mug  of  beer,"  he  said,  "  when  that
child  comes  in — to  think  an  old  man  like  me  should  be
took  to  task  and  reproved  by  a  bit  of  a  child  like  that!
Well,  he  points  at  me  with  his  finger,  just  so,  and  says,
'  What  doest  thou  here,  Elijah,  sitting  with  the  ungodly  ?
and  you  a  member  of  a  church  and  breaking  your  pastor's
heart.  I'm  ashamed  of  you !  I  wouldn't  break  my  pastor's
heart,  I'm  sure.'  And  then  he  walks  away.  Well,  I  did
feel  angry;  but  I  knew  it  was  all  true  and  I  was  guilty;
so  I  put  down  my  pipe  and  did  not  touch  my  beer,  but
hurried  away  to  a  lonely  spot  and  cast  myself  down  before
the  Lord  confessing  my  sin  and  begging  for  forgiveness.
And  I  do  know  and  believe  the  Lord  in  mercy  pardoned
me ;  and  now  I've  come  to  ask  you  to  forgive  me  and  I'll
never  grieve  you  any  more,  my  dear  pastor."  It  was  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon's  first  mission,  and  was  attended  with
the  wonderful  success  which  resulted  from  his  great  efforts
in  after  life.  The  backslider's  restoration  was  evidently
genuine  and  lasting,  for  Mr.  Houchin,  the  Rev.  James
Spurgeon's  successor  at  Stamboume,  declared  many  years


Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  as  a  child  of  six  reproving  a  backslider
in  the  bar  of  the  village  inn  at  Stambourne.


EARLY    CHILDHOOD.  19

afterwards  that  Thomas  Roads  was  "  an  earnest  and
zealous  Christian,  striving  to  be  useful  in  every  way  possible
to  him,  especially  in  the  prayer  meetings  and  among  the
young  people;  opening  his  house  for  Christian  conversa-
tion and  prayer."

Such  an  action  on  the  part  of  so  young  a  child  gave  mani-
fest token  of  unusual  precocity,  and  of  a  mind  cast  in
deeply  religious  lines.  No  doubt  the  boy's  association  with
people  so  much  his  elders,  whose  lives  were  devoted
entirely  to  Christian  service,  had  a  vast  deal  to  do  with  his
rapid  development  and  his  serious  attachment  to  sacred
matters.  We  can  hear  nothing  of  youthful  playmates
during  these  first  six  years  or  so  that  he  spent  with  his
grandparents.  He  was  thrown  to  a  great  extent  upon  his
own  resources,  and  his  mind  worked  rapidly  in  solving  the
problems  that  presented  themselves.

One  of  the  earliest  perplexities  of  which  C.  H.
Spurgeon  retained  any  recollection  was  caused  by  the
sight  of  a  large  apple  in  a  bottle  with  a  small  neck.
How  did  it  get  there?  "Though  it  was  treason  to
touch  the  treasures  on  the  mantel-piece,"  he  says,  "  I  took
down  the  bottle  and  convinced  my  youthful  mind
that  the  apple  never  passed  through  its  neck ;  and  by
means  of  an  attempt  to  unscrew  the  bottom,  I  became
equally  certain  that  the  apple  did  not  enter  from  below."
The  child  appears  not  to  have  asked  anyone  for  an  explana-
tion, but  he  pondered  over  the  matter  until  one  day  the
mystery  was  solved.  Upon  the  bough  of  a  tree  he  saw
an  identical  bottle  within  which  was  growing  an  apple  that
had  been  passed  while  very  small  through  the  neck.  It
must  have  been  no  ordinary  childish  mind  that  could
deduce  the  explanation  of  so  curious  a  mantle  ornament
from  the  bottle  on  the  bough.  The  same  spirit  of  inquiry


2o      LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

and  determination  to  get  at  the  bottom  of  things  led  the
boy  some  time  later  to  dig  away  the  soil  the  day  after  he
had  planted  some  seeds  in  his  little  garden  plot,  to  see  if
the  plants  had  commenced  to  sprout.  Once  a  problem
presented  itself  to  his  mind,  nothing  would  satisfy  him
save  a  solution  that  appealed  to  his  reason,  or  an  explana-
tion from  an  elder  in  whom  he  had  full  confidence.  If  he
could  learn  nothing  by  his  own  observation,  then  he  persist-
ently questioned  his  grandfather  and  grandmother  until  they
set  his  mind  at  ease.  As  a  small  boy  Charles  was  allowed
by  his  grandfather  to  read  the  Scripture  portion  at  family
worship.  It  happened  that  on  one  particular  morning  the
passage  was  the  seventeenth  chapter  of  Revelation  where
the  bottomless  pit  is  mentioned.  "  Why,  Grandpa,  what
can  this  mean  ? "  asked  the  boy,  stopping  the  reading
suddenly.  "  Pooh,  pooh,  child,  go  on,"  answered  his
grandfather,  without  attempting  any  explanation.  The  next
morning  young  Charles  selected  the  same  passage  again,
and  when  he  came  to  the  mention  of  the  bottomless  pit
repeated  his  inquiry.  Getting  no  satisfactory  answer  he
read  the  same  chapter  morning  after  morning  for  a  week,
until  at  last  his  grandfather  asked  the  boy  what  it  was  that
puzzled  him.  Charles  explained  that  he  had  often  seen
baskets,,  the  bottoms  of  which  after  much  use  wore  away,
leaving  the  receptacles  bottomless.  Any  fruit  then  placed
inside  would  fall  to  the  ground,  but  if  the  pit  referred  to
had  no  bottom,  where,  he  wanted  to  know,  would  all  the
people  fall  who  dropped  out  at  its  lower  end !

Young  Spurgeon  was  an  omnivorous  reader  from  his
childhood.  His  father  declared  that  he  did  nothing  else  all
his  time  but  to  busy  himself  with  books.  Nothing  could
entice  the  boy  from  his  studies,  and  his  wonderful  memory
retained  what  he  read,  so  that  he  had  something  to  say  on


22  LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

almost  every  subject.  And  the  books  he  read  were  good
books.  True  on  one  occasion  a  friend  lent  him  a  work
entitled  "  Spanish  Bullfights, ;  and  his  parents  punished  him
for  reading  it.  But  the  boy  told  one  of  his  sisters  shortly
afterwards  that  he  thought  it  was  very  right  he  should  have
been  punished.  "  I  should  like  to  forget  even  the  half  I
read  in  that  book,"  he  said,  "  but  I  cannot,  it  sticks  to  me
like  glue !  Bad  books  are  terrible  things."  At  Stam-
bourne there  was  a  little  dark  room,  where  the  window  had
been  blocked  up  on  account  of  the  old  window-tax.
This  chamber  was  full  of  venerable  theological  works  by
Puritan  divines,  and  the  young  boy  would  often  steal  up  to
the  room  and  get  therefrom  a  ponderous  volume  almost  too
large  for  him  to  carry  to  the  living  room  of  the  house.  But
he  would  manage  the  task  somehow,  and  then  sitting  on
the  floor  would  silently  read  by  the  light  of  the  fire,  for
candles  were  expensive  luxuries  in  those  days  and  his  grand-
father monopolised  the  flickering  rushlight  for  the  prepara-
tion of  his  sermons.  It  was  at  Stambourne  that  the  boy
made  the  acquaintance  of  those  old  classics  Foxe's  "  Book
of  Martyrs  "  and  Bunyan's  "  Pilgrim's  Progress."  from  his
early  memory  of  which  he  has  over  and  over  again  used
telling  illustrations.  Indeed  the  whole  of  his  experiences
in  the  home  of  his  grandparents  were  vividly  impressed
upon  his  mind  through  life,  and  provided  him  with  illus-
trations innumerable  in  his  public  discourses  and  written
works.  "  Sermons  in  Candles,"  for  instance,  is  very  largely
made  up  of  incidents  and  facts  that  came  before  his  notice
as  a  boy  in  the  old  Essex  manse.

The  lad's  earliest  acquaintance  with  books  was  when,
during  his  long  sojourn  at  Stambourne,  his  grandfather
used,  after  breakfast  on  Sunday  morning,  to  give  him
the  Evangelical  Magazine  to  keep  him  quiet  while  the  good


EARLY    CHILDHOOD.  23

minister  prepared  himself  for  preaching.  If  the  boy  made
any  noise  his  grandfather  told  him  to  be  quiet,  and  gave  as
a  reason,  tfyat  he  had  the  magazine.  "  I  did  not  at  the
time  perceive  the  full  force  of  the  argument  to  be  derived
from  that  fact,"  said  C.  H.  Spurgeon  in  after  years,  "  but  no
doubt  my  venerable  relative  knew  more  about  the  sedative
effect  of  the  magazine  than  I  did.  I  cannot  support  his
opinion  from  personal  experience.  Another  means  of  still-
ing '  the  child '  was  much  more  effectual.  I  was  warned
that  perhaps  grandpa  would  not  be  able  to  preach  if  I
distracted  him,— -ah!  then,  what  would  happen  if  poor
people  did  not  learn  the  way  to  Heaven  ?  This  made  me
look  at  the  portrait  and  the  missionary-station  (in  the
magazine)  once  more."

After  prayers  on  Sunday  morning  the  little  boy  was  taken
to  the  adjacent  meeting-house,  sometimes  to  sit  in  the
pulpit  with  his  grandfather,  but  more  often  in  one  of  the
large  square  pews  below.  These  pews  were  quite  of  the
old-fashioned  type,  being  lined  with  green  baize  and  fitted
with  brass  rods  and  curtains  so  that  they  could  be  made
private,  and  shut  out  from  the  occupant's  sight  every-
thing save  the  minister.  Immediately  beneath  the  pulpit
was  the  table-pew,  so-called  because  it  contained  the  table
used  at  communion  services,  and  from  this  pew,  which  by  the
way  was  paved  with  old  gravestones,  Mr.  Haddon  Spurgeon,
the  boy's  uncle,  gave  out  the  hymns  and  notices  and  raised
the  block  of  wood  which  indicated  to  the  singers  in  the
gallery  above  the  metre  of  each  hymn.  Commodious  stables
were  attached  to  the  meeting-house  where  worshippers,
who  came  from  a  distance,  might  put  up  their  horses  and
vehicles,  and  sometimes  as  many  as  twenty-six  traps  or
carts  would  be  sheltered  at  one  time  on  a  Sunday  morning.
Large  folding  doors  on  one  side  of  the  pulpit  enabled


24   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

vehicles  to  be  wheeled  into  the  chapel  itself,  and  this  was
done  when  an  invalid  or  an  infirm  worshipper  from  a
distance  found  the  task  of  alighting  and  entering  a  pew  too
much.  This  provision  must  have  been  wonderfully  useful,
and  yet  how  strange  would  the  sight  appear  nowadays.
Another  curious  custom  was  that  the  worshippers  who  had
driven  into  Stambourne  used  to  stand  their  long  whips  in
the  corners  of  their  pews.

Such  was  the  quaint  chapel  where  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon  first  attended  divine  service.  He  did  not,  like
most  children,  drop  asleep,  but  kept  very  much  awake,
listening  to  his  grandfather's  sermon  and  taking  stock  of
the  building.  One  thing  that  struck  him  particularly  was
the  huge  sounding-board  over  the  pulpit,  and  it  was  a
matter  of  no  small  anxiety  to  the  child  what  would  become
of  the  minister  if  this  board  should  fall  suddenly  during
the  service.  He  thought  of  his  Jack-in-the-box  at  home,
and  hoped  that  his  grandfather  would  never  be  shut  down
and  shut  up  in  such  a  fashion.

On  Monday  Charles  was  sometimes  taken  by  his  vener-
able relative  to  the  Squire's  house  to  tea,  and  Mr.  James
Spurgeon  would  there  have  friendly  converse  with  the  Rector
of  Stambourne,  Mr.  Hopkins.  The  two  preachers  were  much
attached  to  one  another,  and  worked  hand-in-hand  as  far  as
possible1,  realising  that  they  were  brethren  preaching  the
same  gospel.  Sometimes  the  squire  went  to  church  in  the
morning  and  to  chapel  in  the  afternoon^  and  the  Bible
Society  held  its  meetings  alternately  in  connection  with  the
parish  church  and  the  meeting-house.  Those  tea-parties
were  happy  times  for  the  boy,  and  indeed  for  the  three  old
gentlemen  as  well,  for  they  all  ate  sugared  bread-and-
butter,  a  treat  appreciated  equally  by  the  four.

It  was  his  visits  to  Stambourne  that  familiarised  young
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  with  the  sight  of  the  foxhounds


EARLY    CHILDHOOD.  25

in  full  cry  after  Reynard.  The  dogs,  the  red  coats  of  the
huntsmen,  the  horn-blowing,  and  the  hue-and-cry  generally
constituted  his  boyish  seventh  heaven,  his  climax  of
delight.  The  coming  of  the  hounds  was  always  a  time  of
wild  excitement  at  Stambooirne,  and  many  of  the  humbler
folk  would  join  in  the  chase,  following  the  hunt  on  foot
over  ditch  and  hedge,  through  field  and  farm,  and  one
who  never  missed  this  delight  was  young  Spurgeon.  He
always  declared  as  a  boy,  on  being  asked  what  profession
he  would  like  to  adopt  when  he  grew  up,  that  he  would
prefer  being  a  huntsman  to  anything  else  in  the  wide
world.  His  ardour  for  the  chase,  however,  was  somewhat
damped  by  an  incident  that  occurred  when  he  had  once
been  sent  upon  an  errand.  Returning  with  a  basket  con-
taining a  pound  of  tea,  a  quarter-of-a-pound  of  mustard
and  three  pounds  of  rice,  he  caught  sight  of  the  hounds,
and  at  once  set  off  in  pursuit  over  hedge  and  ditch.  His
excitement  made  the  boy  quite  forget  his  purchases,  and
when  at  last  he  reached  home,  all  the  goods  were  found  to
be  mixed  in  an  inextricable  mass.  The  lesson  learnt  on
that  occasion,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  has  recorded,  proved  very
useful  to  him  as  a  preacher  of  the  Gospel.  "  I  have  under-
stood the  necessity  of  packing  up  my  subjects  in  good  stout
parcels,  bound  round  with  the  thread  of  my  discourse ;  and
this  makes  me  keep  to  firstly,  secondly  and  thirdly,  how-
ever unfashionable  that  method  may  now  be.  People  will
not  drink  mustardy  tea,  nor  will  they  enjoy  muddled  up
sermons  in  which  they  cannot  tell  head  from  tail."

The  lad's  hunting  experiences  prove  that  with  all  his
love  of  books  and  devotion  to  study,  he  was  by  no  means
a  "  prig,"  who  looked  with  contempt  upon  the  healthy
amusements  of  other  boys  of  his  age.  Indeed,  despite
his  seriousness,  he  was  full  of  fun.  It  was  no  uncommon
joke  for  him  and  others  to  scoop  out  a  turnip,  cut  eyes  and


26   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

nose  in  the  shell  and  then  place  a  lighted  candle  inside,  to
scare  youngsters  and  country  bumpkins,  with  the  impres-
sion that  a  ghost  was  in  the  way.  After  he  went  to  school,
too,  at  Maidstone,  he  often  played  practical  jokes  on  new
boys.  One  piece  of  mischief  was  to  lead  the  lads  to  a
jar  of  ammonia  which  stood  in  a  certain  cupboard,  and
persuade  them  to  take  a  good  hard  sniff.  The  practice
had  to  be  abandoned,  however,  after  one  boy  fell  down  in
a  dead  faint,  overcome  by  the  ammonia.

As  a  child  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  loved  to  have
seasons  of  quiet  meditation.  Dreaming  of  days  to  come,
he  has  told  us,  befell  him  every  now  and  then,  and  to  be
quite  alone  was  a  delight  to  him.  A  favourite  resort
of  his  at  Stambourne  was  the  old  horsing  block  outside  the
meeting-house,  a  kind  of  platform  approached  by  steps,
which  enabled  lady  riders  to  mount  their  horses  with  ease.
When  the  autumn  leaves  fell  they  were  collected  and  stuffed
under  the  block,  and  the  boy  would  pull  out  sufficient  to
make  room  for  his  little  body  and  then  hide  himself  for
hours  together.  His  guardians  would  call  his  name  and
pass  the  horsing  block  time  and  again,  but  the  boy  kept
his  hiding  place  a  secret,  and  it  was  only  when  he  became
a  middle-aged  man  that  he  revealed  it  to  his  Aunt  Anne.

When  at  last  Charles  left  Stambourne  at  the  close  of  his
first  long  visit,  it  was  a  great  sorrow  to  both  himself  and
his  grandfather,  and  they  wept  over  the  parting.  But
the  child  obtained  great  comfort  when  his  aged  relative
pointed  out  that  at  any  rate  they  had  the  moon  in  common,
and  that  when  the  boy  looked  at  it  from  Colchester,  he
must  remember  that  his  grandfather  was  gazing  upon  the
same  heavenly  body  from  Stambourne.  "  For  years  as  a
child  I  used  to  love  the  moon"  said  C.  H.  Spurgeon,
"  because  I  thought  that  my  grandfather's  eyes  and  my  own
somehow  met  there  on  the  moon."


CHAPTER    III.

SCHOOLDAYS.

WE  are  not  told  what  the  feelings  of  young  C.  H.
Spurgeon  were  on  his  return  to  the  parental
home.  By  this  time  there  were  a  number  of  brothers  and
sisters,  and  Charles  at  once  became  their  leader,  and  a
kind  of  second  father.  He  prayed  with  them  and  often
preached  little  sermons  or  gave  spirited  addresses  to  the
juvenile  congregation.  He  brought  with  him  from  Stam-
bourne  his  love  for  books,  and  at  once  set  about  putting
neat  covers  upon  those  volumes  which  had  become
dilapidated  through  use  or  age,  numbered  them  and
organized  a  home  library,  making  one  of  his  sisters
librarian.  He  would  recite  to  the  children  the  many  hymns
his  grandfather  had  taught  him,  and  a  particular  favourite
was  the  one  in  which  occurs  the  verse  :  —

"Now  will  I  tell  to  sinners  round.
What  a  dear  Saviour  I  have  found ;
I'll  point  to  Thy  redeeming  blood,
And  say,  Behold  the  way  to  God,"

because  at  the  words  "  I'll  point "  the  boy  would  solemnly
raise  his  finger  and  point  upward.  At  this  time,  too,  he
wrote  a  little  book  called  "  Passing  Events,"  containing  an
article  and  an  original  poem,  and  he  also  compiled  a
manuscript  magazine  to  which  he  gave  the  title,  "  Scraps
of  Missionary  News."  Another  of  these  early  literary  and


28      LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

editorial  efforts  was  the  "  Juvenile  Magazine,"  a  little  book
of  sixteen  pages,  one  copy  at  least  of  which  is  still  in
existence.  In  "his  the  boy  lamented  that  some  of  his
friends  appeared  to  be  falling  from  grace,  and  he  reminded


w,
0


n          /r

^^^4^-  m,a,ut^


A    facsimile    page    of    the    "Juvenile   Magazine"    which

Charles    Haddon    Spurgeon    as    a    boy  produced   for  the

benefit  of  his  brothers  and  sisters.

his  readers  that  certain  prayer  meetings  were  to  be  held,
urging  upon  them  the  value  and  importance  of  supplicating
the  Throne  of  Grace.  Such  was  the  lad  as  he  first


SCHOOLDAYS.  29

became  known  to  his  brothers  and  sisters.  His  grand-
father had  trained  him  well,  and  he  was  not  only  devout
and  loving,  but  was  a  model  child  in  the  respect  and
reverence  which  he  showed  for  his  parents.  One  precept
of  the  aged  minister  at  Stamboume,  however,  led  the
boy  into  trouble.  His  grandfather  had  impressed  upon
him  to  do  always  that  which  he  believed  to  be  right,  no
matter  ^hat  the  consequences  might  be.  It  was  the
curious  custom  at  Stambourne  meeting-house  to  repeat  the
last  line  of  every  verse  that  was  sung ;  and  so  when  Charles
returned  to  Colchester,  and  attended  his  father's  chapel,
he  continued  the  practice  whether  the  congregation  did
so  Or  not.  The  lad's  voice  was  penetrating  even  then,
and  the  sensation  in  chapel  when  it  was  heard  singing  the
last  lines  over  a  second  time,  can  be  imagined.  A  good
deal  of  punishment  was  necessary  before  he  could  be  con-
vinced that  he  must  in  that  case  do,  not  as  his  grandfather
did,  but  as  his  parents  directed.

The  first  school  that  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  attended
was  conducted  by  a  lady  named  Mrs.  Cook.  He  was
undoubtedly  the  smartest  pupil  she  ever  had,  and  soon
learnt  all  that  was  to  be  known  there;  so,  after  a  short
course,  his  parents  decided  to  send  him  to  a  more
advanced  school,  kept  by  Mr.  Henry  Lewis,  of  Colchester.
It  was  while  under  the  tuition  of  Mrs.  Cook  that  young
Spurgeon  contracted  his  first  and  last  debt.  He  needed

stick  of  slate  pencil,  and,  having  no  money  with  which
to  buy  it,  was  in  great  trouble  and  perplexity.  At  home
he  dared  not  ask  for  the  money,  nor  did  he  dare  to  go
to  school  without  the  pencil.  Suddenly  he  remembered
having  seen  boys  and  girls  get  things  on  trust  from  an
old  lady  who  kept  a  little  general  shop  close  by  the  school.
So  he  determined  to  buy  a  farthing  pencil,  and  pay  as


3o     LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

soon  as  he  should  receive  a  copper,  which  could  not  be
long,  as  Christmas  was  drawing  near.  But  Charles's
father,  by  some  occult  means,  got  to  hear  of  the  trans-
action, and  when  the  boy  arrived  home  rebuked  him
severely,  likening  a  debtor  to  a  thief.  So  vivid  was  the
picture  he  drew  of  a  boy  who,  having  owed  a  farthing,
might  one  day  owe  a  hundred  pounds,  and  get  into  prison,
disgracing  his  family,  that  Charles  then  and  there  deter-
mined never  again  to  get  into  debt.  After  the  reproof  he
was  marched  off  to  the  shop  to  pay  the  farthing,  crying
bitterly  all  down  the  street,  because  he  was  so  ashamed
of  himself,  and  believed  everyone  he  met  looked  with
contempt  upon  the  youthful  debtor.  The  story  is  told  in
"John  Ploughman's  Talk,"  with  many  pithy  comments
thereon,  and  the  parental  warnings  against  debt  are
repeated.  "  Ever  since  that  early  sickening,"  wrote  C.  H.
Spurgeon,  "  I  have  hated  debt  as  Luther  hated  the  Pope."

While  attending  this  old  dame's  school,  Charles's
brother  James  suffered  from  weak  ankles,  which
caused  him  to  fall  down  frequently,  and  the  mud
and  dirt  upon  his  clothes  led  to  trouble' at  home.  At  last
the  father,  thinking  to  cure  the  child  of  what  he  believed
was  only  carelessness,  threatened  to  punish  him  whenevei
he  showed  any  signs  of  having  been  upon  the  ground.
From  that  time  he  seemed  cured,  and  it  was  only
when  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  had  himself  got  sons
grown  to  manhood  that  he  offered  an  explanation  to  his
father  which  put  a  different  complexion  upon  the  "  punish-
ment cure."  It  transpired  that  James  had  many  a  tumble
after  the  threat  had  been  made;  but  young  Charles,  in
order  that  he  might  not  be  punished,  used  to  wash  his
brother's  knees  and  brush  his  clothes  to  remove  all  trace  of
dirt.


SCHOOLDAYS.  31

At  Mr.  Lewis's  establishment,  which  was  a  good
middle-class  classical  and  commercial  school,  the  remark-
able boy  soon  worked  his  way  to  the  head  of  the  class.
He  received  a  prize  and  was  praised  by  the  master.  But
suddenly  he  went  to  the  bottom  with  the  same  rapidity
as  he  had  previously  reached  the  top.  For  some  time
the  teacher  could  not  understand  this  falling  off,  but  at
last  it  dawned  upon  him  that  perhaps  the  position  of  the
fire  had  something  to  do  with  the  matter.  The  warm
place  in  the  room  had  hitherto  been  at  the  bottom  of  the
class,  but  the  positions  were  reversed,  and  it  was  not
long  before  Charles  was  again  at  the  head.

The  lad  used  to  spend  his  summer  holidays  at  this
period  with  his  grandparents  at  Stambourne,  and  it  was
during  a  visit  in  his  tenth  year  that  the  Rev.  Richard
Knill  made  his  wonderful  prophecy  concerning  the  future
career  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon.  The  story  is  so  remarkable
that  it  might  well  be  doubted  were  it  not  told  by  Mr
Spurgeon  himself,  and  confirmed  by  a  letter  of  Mr.  Knill.
In  1844  this  minister,  while  journeying  from  place  to
place,  holding  meetings  on  behalf  of  the  London  Mis-
sionary Society,  went  to  Stambourne  and  stayed  with  the
Rev.  James  Spurgeon.  He  took  a  fancy  to  the  young
boy,  and,  rousing  him  at  six  o'clock  one  morning,  asked
him  .to  come  into  the  manse  garden.  The  lad  went,  and
Mr.  Knill,  leading  him  to  a  secluded  arbour,  told  him  of
the  love  of  Jesus,  and  of  the  blessedness  of  trusting  Him
in  childhood.  He  knelt  down  in  the  arbour  and  prayed
for  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon.  with  his  arms  round  the
boy's  neck.  For  three  successive  days  this  scene  was
repeated,  and  made  a  great  and  lasting  impression  upon  the
little  lad.  Oh  the  morning  of  his  departure,  while  all  the
family  was  gathered  for  worship,  Mr.  Knill  took  the  boy  on


32      LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

his  knee,  and  said,  "  This  child  will,  one  day,  preach  the
Gospel,  and  he  will  preach  it  to  great  multitudes.  I  am
persuaded  that  he  will  preach  in  the  chapel  of  Rowland


/*-  ?


The  Rev.  Richard  Knill,  whose  prophecy  respecting
C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  literally  fulfilled.

Hill."     He  spoke  solemnly,  and  adjured  those  present  to
witness  what  he  said.     Then  he  gave  the  lad  sixpence,  and


SCHOOLDAYS.  33

made  him  promise  that  when  he  preached  in  Rowland  Hill's
chapel  he  would  let  that  hymn  of  Cowper's  "  God  moves  in
a  mysterious  way,  His  wonders  to  perform,"  be  sung.
What  a  promise  to  ask  from  a  child !  And  yet  every  word
that  the  good  minister  had  said  came  true  in  due  course,
and  when  C.  H.  Spurgeon  preached  in  Surrey  Chapel  the
hymn  was  sung.  Later,  he  preached  in  Rowland  Hill's
other  chapel  at  Wotton-under-Edge,  and  there,  too,  the
memorable  hymn  was  sung.  Years  after  the  incident  at
Stambourne,  when  C.  H.  Spurgeon  had  become  famous,  he
went  to  Chester  and  preached  for  Mr.  Knill  himself.

After  learning  all  that  was  to  be  learnt  at  Mr.  Lewis's
school,  Charles,  now  fourteen  years  of  age,  was  sent  with
his  -  brother  James  to  All  Saints'  Agricultural  College,
Maidstone  (now  known  as  St.  Augustine's),  to  complete
his  schooling.  This  was  a  Church  of  England  institution,
and  three  clergymen  used  to  visit  it  in  turns  to  impart
religious  instruction  to  the  scholars.  Not  long  after  C.  H.
Spurgeon  had  entered  the  college,  a  boy,  being  questioned
as  to  the  number  of  sacraments  according  to  Anglican
belief,  replied,  "  seven,"  and  when  asked  to  think  again,
answered,  "  Oh,  sir,  there  is  the  one  they  take  at  the
Aaltar !  "  Young  Spurgeon's  sense  of  humour  was  excited,
and  he  could  not  refrain  from  calling  out,  "  That's  hanging,
I  should  think,"  a  suggestion  that  raised  a  smile  to  the
clergyman's  countenance,  but  drew  forth  a  reprimand  for
the  interruption.  Charles's  uncle  was  a  master  at  this
school,  and  he  was  greatly  offended  on  one  occasion  at
his  nephew  correcting  an  arithmetical  error  of  his  before
the  whole  class.  He  declared  that  it  was  derogatory  to
his  dignity,  but  Charles  maintained  that  it  would  not  have
been  right  to  let  the  mistake  pass.  "I  think  after  that
incident,"  said  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "  he  judged  that  I  could

i


SCHOOLDAYS.


35


employ  my  time  to  the  greatest  advantage  by  taking  my
books  and  studying  by  myself  beneath  an  old  oak-tree
by  the  river  Medway."  So  far  advanced  was  the  lad,
indeed,  in  mathematics  that  his  uncle,  who  had  been
commissioned  by  a  certain  insurance  company  to  compile
life  tables  for  it,  handed  the  work  over  to  the  boy;  and
at  the  present  day  the  tables  which  he  calculated  are  in
use  in  the  company's  office  in  London.

From  Maidstone  young  Spurgeon  passed  to  Newmarket,
where  he  became  an  articled  pupil  to  assist  in  the  school
of  one  J  ohn  Swindell.


CHAPTER  IV.
EARLY   RELIGIOUS    IMPRESSIONS.

IT  will  have  become  evident  from  what  has  already
been  told  of  the  early  life  of  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon,  that  his  character  was  cast  in  a  deeply  religious
mould,  and  his  training,  both  in  his  grandfather's  manse
and  at  home,  as  well  as  in  the  various  schools  he  attended,
was  all  of  a  nature  to  engender  in  him  a  reverence  for
sacred  things.  But  it  was  not  merely  that  the  atmosphere
in  which  he  moved  led  to  a  passive  acquiescence  in  the
religious  life  and  beliefs  of  his  elders ;  he  was  himself  even
as  a  child  keenly  interested  in  all  that  pertained  to
Christian  doctrine  and  the  manifold  activities  of  the  Church.
From  the  time  when  his  father  found  the  boy  preaching
from  the  hayrack  of  a  stable,  with  his  brother  James  in
the  manger  underneath  as  clerk,  and  his  sisters  as  congre-
gation, seated  upon  clean  straw  which  he  had  placed  on
the  floor  for  their  use,  to  the  day  when  he  became  a
recognised  minister  of  the  Gospel,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  took
a  personal  and  active  interest  in  all  the  matters  relating  to
religious  life  and  work.  He  had  a  good  grasp  of  the  doc-
trines taught  by  his  father  and  grandfather,  and  could  hold
his  own  in  disputation  and  debate  with  many  an  experienced
divine.  An  interesting  instance  of  this  took  place  at  the
Maidstone  College  which  he  attended  for  a  short  time.
One  of  the  clergymen  who  used  to  visit  the  institution,  to
question  the  boys  upon  the  Church  of  England  Catechism,


EARLY    RELIGIOUS    IMPRESSIONS.  37

endeavoured  to  convince  young  Spurgeon  that  his
father  and  grandfather  were  wrong  in  baptizing  children,
because,  unlike  their  Anglican  brethren,  they  failed  to  take-
into  consideration  the  matters  of  faith  and  repentance.
The  boy  felt  certain  that  his  parents  were  right,  but  he
promised  to  look  up  the  subject  in  the  Bible,  and  a  short
time  afterwards  told  the  clergyman  that  in  spite  of  himself
he  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  action  of  his  father
and  grandfather  could  not  be  borne  out  from  Scripture.
He  ventured  to  suggest,  however,  that  the  Anglican  clergy
appeared  equally  unscriptural  in  their  christening  of
infants.  But  here  the  clergyman  stopped  him  and  explained
that  the  Prayer  Book  took  cognisance  of  the  lack  of  faith
in  infants  and  provided  for  this  by  appointing  sponsors.
The  case  of  a  note-of-hand  being  given  in  place  of  money
and  accepted  as  an  earnest  of  payment  from  an  honest  man
was  used  as  an  illustration,  and  the  clergyman  concluded
with  the  remark :  "  As  the  child  cannot  at  the  time  have
faith,  we  accept  the  bond  that  he  will ;  which  promise  he
fulfils  at  confirmation  when  he  takes  the  bond  into  his  own
hand."

"  Well,"  answered  young  Spurgeon,  "  I  think  it  is  a  very
bad  note  of  hand,"  and  after  further  consideration  he
declared  his  opinion  that  not  only  his  own  relations  were
wrong,  but  that  the  Church  of  England  was  wrong  also.
When  the  clergyman  asked  if,  in  view  of  his  own  confes-
sion, that  he  had  not  been  properly  baptized,  he  would
.not  think  it  his  duty,  if  in  his  power,  to  conform  to  the
Anglican  practice  of  baptism,  and  have  sponsors  to  promise
on  his  behalf,  the  youth  promptly  replied :  "  Oh,  no !  I
.have  been  baptized  once  before  I  ought;  I  will  wait  next

time  till  I  am  fit  for  it."

Curiously  enough  it  was  this  examination  of  the  subject


38      LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

of  baptism  in  the  Bible  and  the  Catechism  that  led  later
on  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon  becoming  a  Baptist.  Preaching
in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  more  than  forty  years  after-
wards he  referred  to  the  matter  and  declared  that  he  owed
his  position  there  to  having  attended  the  Church  of  England
school  at  Maidstone.  "  The  Church  of  England  Catechism
has  in  it,  as  some  of  you  may  remember,"  he  said,  "  this
question  :  '  What  is  required  of  persons  to  be  baptized  ?  '
and  the  answer  I  was  taught  to  give  and  did  give,  was,
'  Repentance  whereby  they  forsake  sin ;  and  faith  whereby
they  steadfastly  believe  the  promises  of  God  made  to  them
in  that  sacrament'  I  looked  that  answer  up  in  the  Bible,
and  I  found  it  to  be  strictly  correct  as  far  as  repentance  and
faith  are  concerned ;  and  here  I  am,  and  it  is  due  to  the
Church  of  England  Catechism  that  I  am  a  Baptist.  Having
been  brought  up  amongst  Congregationalists,  I  had  never
looked  at  the  matter  in  my  life.  I  had  thought  myself  to
have  been  baptized  as  an  infant ;  and  so  when  I  was  con-
fronted with  the  question :  '  What  is  required  of  persons
to  be  baptized  ? '  and  I  found  that  repentance  and  faith
were  required,  I  said  to  myself :  '  Then  I  have  not  been
baptized;  that  infant  sprinkling  of  mine  was  a  mistake;
and,  please  God  that  I  ever  have  repentance  and  faith,  I
will  be  properly  baptized.'  I  did  not  know  that  there  was
one  other  person  in  the  world  who  held  the  same  opinion;
for  so  little  do  Baptists  make  any  show,  or  so  little  did
they  do  so  the^  that  I  did  not  know  of  their  existence.  So
I  feel  grateful  to  the  Church  school  and  grateful  to  the
Church  Catechism  for  what  I  learnt  at  Maidstone."

At  the  Newmarket  school,  where  he  became  a  kind  of
pupil  teacher,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  found  himself  amid  surround-
ings more  congenial,  religiously,  than  at  All  Saints'
College,  Maidstone.  Mr.  Swindell,  the  principal,  was  a


EARLY    RELIGIOUS    IMPRESSIONS.  39

Baptist,  although  the  school  itself  was  conducted  on
Independent  lines,  and  among  the  inmates  was  an  aged
cook  named  Mary  King,  who  often  had  long  conversations
with  the  young  usher,  and  according  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon
himself,  gave  him  the  first  lessons  he  ever  had  in  theology.
She  was  a  strong  Calvinist  in  belief,  and  as  she  and
young  Spurgeon  attended  the  same  chapel  in  Newmarket,
they  usually  discussed  the  sermons  together.  These  were
apparently  not  of  a  character  to  satisfy  either.  The  only
way  in  which  the  old  lady  obtained  any  good  was  by
"  scratching  over  the  poor  sermons,"  as  a  hen  scratches
over  a  heap  of  rubbish,  and  when  she  found  no  corn,  as
was  generally  the  case,  the  exercise,  she  declared,  at  any
rate  warmed  her.  On  one  occasion  she  told  the  young
usher  that  she  had  that  night  got  on  better  than  usual,  for
to  all  the  preacher  said,  the  old  dame  put  in  a  "  no,"  and
that  "  turned  his  talk  into  real  Gospel."  "  Many  a  time,"
said  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "  we  have  gone  over  the  covenant  of
grace  together,  and  talked  of  the  personal  election  of  the
saints,  their  union  to  Christ,  their  final  perseverance,  and
what  vital  godliness  meant;  and  I  do  believe  that  I  learnt
more  from  her  than  I  should  have  learned  from  any  six
doctors  of  divinity  of  the  sort  we  have  nowadays.  There
are  some  Christian  people  who  taste  and  see  and  enjoy
religion  in  their  own  souls,  and  who  get  at  a  deeper  know-
ledge of  it  than  books  can  ever  give  them,  though  they
should  search  all  their  days.  The  cook  at  Newmarket
was  a  godly,  experienced  woman,  from  whom  I  learned
far  more  than  I  did  from  the  minister  of  the  chapel  we
attended."  This  old  lady,  whose  conversations  had  so
much  to  do  with  the  young  usher's  theological  education,
lived  for  many  years  after  the  days  spent  together  at  New-
market. She  moved  to  Ipswich,  and  when  C.  H.  Spurgeon


40      LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEOX.

heard  that  her  small  income  had  been  almost  expended,
he  made  her  a  generous  weekly  allowance  which  continued
to  the  time  of  her  death.

At  this  period  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  had  net
experienced  the  change  of  heart  known  as  conversion  ;  but
nevertheless  he  manifested  an  earnestness  in  religious
matters  rare  in  one  of  his  age.  Perhaps  the  most  remark-
able instance  of  this  is  furnished  by  the  Essay  on  Popery,
which  he  wrote  at  the  age  of  fifteen  in  competition  for  a
prize  offered  by  Mr.  Samuel  Morley,  M.P.  The  essay,  which
was  entitled,  "Antichrist  and  her  Brood ;  or  Popery  Un-
masked," did  not  win  the  prize,  nor  has  it  ever  been  published
in  its  entirety.  But  even  for  a  man  of  ripe  years  and  scholar-
ship, it  would  have  been  no  mean  performance,  and  indeed
Mr.  Morley  appreciated  the  work  so  highly  that  two  years
later  he  sent  the  youthful  writer  a  sum  of  money  as  a
reward  for  his  ability  and  perseverance.  The  purpose,
however,  in  referring  to  the  matter  here,  is  to  indicate  the
remarkable  circumstances  attending  the  writing  of  the
essay.  It  was  penned,  confessedly,  before  the  writer  went
through  those  deep  spiritual  experiences  that  culminated
in  his  conversion,  and  yet  the  whole  of  the  long  manuscript,
covering  nearly  three  hundred  pages,  was  written  by  C.  H.
Spurgeon  upon  his  knees,  in  a  little  upper  room  away  from
everyone,  after  he  had  solemnly  vowed  to  give  two  tithes
of  anything  he  might  gain  by  it  "  to  the  Lord's  cause."
The  compact  was  rigidly  carried  out,  and  from  that
time  onward  the  youth  who  had  hitherto  given  a  tenth  of
his  income  for  religious  purposes,  made  it  a  practice  to
distribute  a  fifth.

We  do  not  know  a  great  deal  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's
life  at  this  period,  but  the  little  glimpses  we  get  show  that
his  practice  was  in  accordance  with  his  religious  profession.


EARLY    RELIGIOUS    IMPRESSIONS.  41

Professor   Everett,   who    was    a  fellow-assistant  with  him
at  the  Newmarket   School,   kept  a  journal   at   the  time,
and  the  entry  for  Tuesday,  October  pth,  1849,  is  interesting
as    showing   the   conscientiousness    of    the    young    usher.
The    entry    runs    thus :     "  After    dinner    I     took    Percy
and   four   other   boys    to   see    the   races.      We    saw    the
Cesarewitch,  the    most    celebrated    race  at    Newmarket ;
thirty-one  horses  ran.     We  also  saw  four  other  races.     I
saw  quite  enough  to  gratify  my  curiosity,  and  did  not  wish
to  stop  to  see  any  more  races.     Mr.  Spurgeon  did  not  go,
as  he  thought  he  should  be  doing  wrong  if  he  went."     The
home-training  of   his   mother,  the  sum  and  substance  of
which  was  to  abstain  not  only  from  evil,  but  from  every
appearance  of  evil  was  bearing  fruit.     In  Sabbath  observ-
ance he    was    strict,   and   regularly  attended   a    place    of
worship  morning  and  evening.     The  whole  household  of
Mr.  Swindell  was  conducted   on  the  principle  of  as  little
Sunday  work  as  possible.       No  cooking  was  done,  save
perhaps  the  heating  up  of  a  pudding  made  on  Saturday,  or
of  a  few  potatoes,  and  thus  the  young  usher  enjoyed  the
inestimable  advantage  of  a  continuance  of  the  strict  religious
discipline    practised    in    his    grandfather's    and    father's
homes.

Now  came  those  months  of  soul-agony,,  of  searching
after  God,  of  darkness  and  gloom,  which  remind  one  of  the
experiences  of  John  Bunyan  and  other  old  Divines, — deep
spiritual  turmoils  such  as  one  hears  little  of  nowadays.  But
C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  ever  thankful  to  God  for  leading  him
through  deep  waters.  "A  spiritual  experience,"  he  tells
us,  "  which  is  thoroughly  flavoured  with  a  deep  and  bitter
sense  of  sin  is  of  great  value  to  him  that  hath  had  it.  It  is
terrible  in  the  drinking,  but  it  is  most  wholesome  in  the
whole  of  the  after  life.  .  .  .  We  would  not  judge  modern


42   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

converts,  but  we  certainly  prefer  that  form  of  spiritual  exer-
cise which  leads  the  soul  by  the  way  of  Weeping-cross
and  makes  it  see  its  blackness  before  assuring  it  that  it  is
clean,  every  whit.  Too  many  think  lightly  of  sin,  and
therefore  think  lightly  of  the  Saviour.  He  who  has  stood
before  his  God  convicted  and  condemned,  with  the  rope
about  his  neck,  is  the  man  to  weep  for  joy  when  he  is
pardoned,  to  hate  the  evil  which  has  been  forgiven  him,
and  to  live  to  the  honour  of  the  Redeemer  by  whose  blood
he  has  been  cleansed."

The  beginning  of  these  deep  experiences  was  when
under  a  powerful  sermon  the  youth  felt  his  heart  shake
-  within  him,  and  bowing  his  knee  wrestled  in  prayer  with
the  object  of  seeking  the  Lord.  Again  he  went  to  the
sanctuary,  eager  and  anxious  to  hear  and  grasp  a  promise
that  should  bring  peace  and  joy  to  his  soul,  but  this  time
he  heard  a  sermon  in  which  there  was  no  mention  of
Christ  as  the  Saviour  of  sinners.  Thereupon  he  lost
hope,  and  for  the  time  being  his  soul  knew  not  what  was
truth  or  what  was  error.  Ordinances  he  found  "  vain  as
bottles  scorched  by  the  simoom  and  drained  of  their
waters."  "  Vain  were  ceremonies — vain  as  empty  wells  to
the  thirsty  Arab.  Vain  were  the  delights  of  the  flesh —
bitter  as  the  waters  of  Marah,  which  even  the  parched
lips  of  Israel  refused  to  drink.  Vain  were  the  directions
of  the  legal  preacher — useless  as  the  howling  of  the  wind
to  the  benighted  wanderer.  Vain,  worse  than  vain,  were
our  refuges  of  lies,  which  fell  about  our  ears  like  Dagon's
Temple  on  the  heads  of  the  worshippers."  The  wretched
youth  remembered  how  as  a  child  he  had  prayed,  and
on  one  occasion,  at  any  rate,  received  a  marked  answer  to
prayer,  and  so  he  prayed  perpetually,  "  Jesus,  Thou  Son  of
David,  have  mercy  on  me !  O  Jesus  come  to  me."  Never,


EARLY    RELIGIOUS    IMPRESSIONS.  45

he  tells  us,  did  such  a  prayer  escape  his  lips  as  that  which
he  offered  in  the  bitterness  of  his  spirit  when  seeking  the
Saviour.  "  There  was  then  no  sleepiness  or  sluggishness  in
our  devotion ;  we  did  not  then  need  the  whip  of  command
to  drive  us  to  labours  of  prayers;  but  our  soul  could  not
be  content  unless  with  sighs  and  lamentations  with  strong
crying  and  tears,  it  gave  vent  to  our  bursting  heart.  Then
we  had  no  need  to  be  dragged  to  our  closets  like  oxen  to
the  slaughter,  but  we  flew  to  them  like  doves  to  their
windows ;  and  when  there,  we  needed  no  pumping  up  of
desires,  but  they  gushed  forth  like  a  fountain  of  waters,
although  at  times  we  felt  we  could  scarcely  find  them  a
channel."

As  a  boy  he  had  often  repeated  a  form  of  prayer,  but
this  crying  to  God  in  an  agony  of  soul  was  something  quite
different  from  a  repetition  of  words  that  lose  their  meaning
through  familiarity.  He  poured  out  his  soul  in  prayer,
"  And  then  I  saw  myself  standing  before  God  in  the
immediate  presence  of  the  heart-searching  Jehovah,  and  I
said  within  myself,  '  I  have  heard  of  Thee  by  the  hearing
of  the  ear,  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  Thee;  wherefore  I
abhor  myself  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes.'  I  felt  like
Esther  when  she  stood  before  the  king,  faint  and  overcome
with  dread.  I  was  full  of  penitence  of  heart,  because  of
His  majesty  and  my  sinfulness.  I  think  the  only  words  I
could  utter  were  something  like  these,  '  Oh — ah ! '  And
the  only  complete  sentence  was, '  God  be  merciful  to  me  a
sinner ! '  The  overwhelming  splendour  of  His  majesty,
the  greatness  of  His  power,  the  severity  of  His'  justice,
the  immaculate  character  of  His  holiness  and  all  His
dreadful  grandeur — these  things  overpowered  my  soul  and
I  fell  down  in  utter  prostration  of  spirit ;  but  there  was  in
that  prayer  a  true  and  real  drawing  near  to  God."


44  LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

At  times,  in  the  deep  anguish  of  his  spirit,  the  penitent
would  stay  his  petitions  because  he  thought  them  hopeless,
or  because  he  felt  himself  unworthy  even  to  pray.  The
heavens  seemed  brass  above  him,  and  he  believed  that
if  he  cried  never  so  earnestly,  the  Lord  would  shut  out
his  prayer.  At  another  time  he  durst  not  pray  because  he
was  too  guilty.  Prayer  seemed  presumption,  and  his  spirit
could  only  lament  and  long  and  pant  and  sigh  to  be
able  to  pray.  Day  and  night  God's  hand  was  heavy  upon
him.  He  longed  for  deliverance,  and  feared  lest  the  very
skies  should  fall  upon  him  and  crush  his  soul.  When  he
slept  he  dreamed  of  the  bottomless  pit,  and  when  he  woke
the  misery  of  the  dream  remained  with  him.  First  thing
in  the  morning  he  would  read  feverishly  Alleine's  Alarm
to  Sinners,  or  Baxter's  Call  to  the  Unconverted,  but  that  was
like  "  sitting  .at  the  foot  of  Sinai."  His  childhood's  years
came  before  him  as  years  of  guilt  and  sin,  and  so  out-
rageous did  his  conduct  in  the  sight  of  God  appear  that
over  and  over  again  he  wished  he  had  never  been  born.
"  I  had  rather  pass  through  seven  years  of  the  most
wearisome  pain  and  the  most  languishing  sickness,"  he
declared  afterwards,  "  than  I  would  ever  again  pass
through  the  terrible  discovery  of  the  evil  of  sin.  It  was
my  sad  lot  at  that  time  to  feel  the  greatness  of  my  sin
without  a  discovery  of  the  greatness  of  God's  mercy.  I
had  to  walk  through  this  world  with  more  than  a  world
upon  my  shoulders,  and  sustain  a  grief  that  as  far  exceeds
all  other  griefs  as  a  mountain  exceeds  a  molehill ;  and  I
often  wonder  to  this  day  how  it  was  that  my  hand  was
kept  from,  rending  my  own  body  in  pieces  through  the
awful  agony  which  I  felt  when  I  discovered  the  greatness
of  my  transgression.  Yet  I  had  not  been  openly  and
publicly  a  greater  sinner  than  others;  but  heart  sins  were


EARLY    RELIGIOUS    IMPRESSIONS.  45

laid  bare,  sins  of  lip  and  tongue  were  discovered,  and
then  I  knew — oh  that  I  may  never  have  to  learn  over  again
in  such  a  dreadful  school  this  terrible  lesson!  'the  iniquity,
of  Judah  and  of  Israel  is  exceeding  great.'  Before  I
thought  upon  my  soul's  salvation,  I  dreamed  that  my  sins
were  very  few.  All  my  sins  were  dead,  as  I  imagined,  and
buried  in  the  graveyard  of  forgetfulness.  But  that  trumpet
of  conviction  which  aroused  my  soul  to  think  of  eternal
things  sounded  a  resurrection-note  to  all  my  sins;  and,
oh,  how  they  rose  up  in  multitudes  more  countless
than  the  sands  of  the  sea !  Now  I  saw  that
my  very  thoughts  were  enough  to  damn  me,  that
my  words  would  sink  me  lower  than  the  lowest  hell ;
and  as  for  my  acts  of  sin,  they  now  began  to  be  a  stench
in  my  nostrils,  so  that  I  could  not  bear  them.  I  thought
I  had  rather  have  been  a  frog  or  a  toad  than  have  been
made  a  man;  I  reckoned  that  the  most  defiled  creature,
the  most  loathsome  and  contemptible,  was  a  better  thing;
than  myself,  for  I  had  so  grossly  and  grievously  sinned
against  God."

After  a  train  of  thought  like  this  the  youth  would  be
almost  overwhelmed  with  fear  and  misery.  Then  would
come  a  reaction  and  taking  stock  of  his  life  he  would
begin  to  regard  himself  as  a  respectable  lad,  and  pride
himself  that  he  had  not  indulged  in  outward  forms  of  sin
like  other  boys — disobedience,  dishonesty,  swearing,
Sabbath-breaking  and  lying.  And  this,  be  it  remembered,
was  no  mere  idle  boast  from  the  human  standpoint,  for
his  Aunt  Anne,  who  lived  under  the  same  roof  for  many-
years  with  the  boy,  declared  that  she  had  never  once  known
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  to  tell  a  lie.  But  he  would  not
be  long  in  this  state  of  mind  before  Moses  carrying  the
law  of  God  would  rise  before  his  mental  vision,  and  as


46      LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

he  thought  of  the  ten  commandments  they  all  seemed  to
join  in  accusing  and  condemning  him  in  the  sight  of  a
thrice-holy  Jehovah.     At  such  time  he  was  dumb  in  spirit,
and  could   speak  no   word   of   self-justification.     He   felt
himself  to  be  a  sinner,  even  in  the  house  of  God.     Singing
seemed  a  mockery,  and  prayer  an  insult  to  Jehovah.     The
workings  of  his  mind  were  as  a  maelstrom.     At  times  he
would  have  evil  desires,  but  no  opportunities  of  sinning
presented    themselves,    for    which    he    devoutly    thanked
•God ;  at  other  times  the  opportunities  were  there,  but  the
desire  toward  evil  had  fled.     He  dared  not  plunge  into
profligacy  like  others,  for  even  to  put  one  foot  before
another  caused  him   to  tremble  lest   he  did   wrong.     At
•every  turn,  sleeping  or  waking,  God's  law  came  up  before
him,  and  the  words  would  flash  upon  his  mind  again  and
again.     "  Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all
things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do
them."     Then  the  agonized  youth  would  sit  in  judgment
upon  himself,  declaring  that  if  God  did  not  send  him  to
hell   He  ought  to  do  it.      "  I   could   not   have  gone   to
heaven  with  my  sin  unpardoned,  even  if  I  had  had  the
offer  to  do  it,  for  I  knew  that  it  would  not  be  right  that
I  should  do  so,  and  I  justified  God  in  rny  own  conscience
while  I  condemned  myself."     When  he  tried  to  do  good
works  he  found  the  attempt  only  slavery.     If  he  went  to
God's  house  it  was  because  he  thought  he  must  do  so ;  if
he  thanked  God  for  a  mercy  it  was  because  he  thought  he
should  not  get  another  if  he  were  not  thankful.     "  If  I
-could  have  had  my  will,  there  would  have  been  no  chapel-
going  for  me,  no  religion  for  me.     I  would  have  lived  in
the  world  and  followed  the  ways  of  Satan  if  I  could  have
done  as  I  pleased."     And  yet  such  thoughts  only  increased
a  hundred-fold  his  sense  of  sin.     He  wondered  that  the


EARLY    RELIGIOUS    IMPRESSIONS.  47

earth  bore  up  such  a  sinner  as  he  was,  and  that  the  heavens
did  not  fall  and  crush  him,  and  that  the  stars  in  their
courses  did  not  fight  against  such  a  "  wretch  "  as  he  felt
himself  to  be.  "  Then,  indeed,  did  I  seem  as  if  I  should  go
down  to  the  pit,  and  I  had  perpetually  to  endure  the
tortures  of  the  never-dying  worm  of  conscience  that  was
gnawing  at  my  heart."

For  several  months  this  state  of  things  continued,  and  it
is  a  marvel  that  with  such  mental  distraction  and  agony
the  young  usher  could  perform  his  duties  in  the  school.
Whenever  he  obtained  any  spare  time  he  used  to  read  the
Bible,  but  while  the  threatenings  seemed  all  printed  in
capitals,  the  promises  were  in  such  small  type  that  he
could  not  for  a  long  time  make  them  out.  He  did  not
believe  the  promises  were  for  him  at  all,  but  the
threatenings  he  took  as  all  his  own.  It  is  quite  impossible
for  those  who  have  not  been  through  such  deep  and
varied  experiences — and  how  few  there  are  who  have —
to  understand  the  workings  of  the  youth's  mind  at  this
time.  "  Though,  God  knoweth,  I  would  weep  and  cry,
and  lament  till  my  heart  was  breaking  within  me,"  he
tells  us,  "  if  any  man  had  asked  me  whether  I  sorrowed  for
sin,  I  should  have  told  him,  '  No,  I  never  had  any  true
sorrow  for  sin.'  '  Well,  do  you  not  feel  the  burden  of
sin?'  'No1!'  'But  you  really  are  a  convinced  sinner?'
1  No,'  I  should  have  said,  '  I  am  not.' "

And  now  occurred  what  was  to  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon
undoubtedly  the  most  awful  period  of  his  life  from  the
spiritual  standpoint — a  period  when  he  was  tempted  to
give  up  everything  he  had  ever  learned  of  religion  and  to
blaspheme  God,  a  period  when  he  let  go  the  anchor  that
had  held  him  to  the  truths  of  revelation,  and  became  an
unbeliever.  He  has  told  us  little  about  the  experience,


48   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

but  that  little  reveals  a  world   of  fiercest   conflict.     The
story  is  graphically  recorded  in  his  own  words  :  —

"  I  speak  what  I  do  know  and  not  what  I  have  learned
by  report  when  I  say  that  there  is  a  chamber  in  the  experi-
ence of  some  men  where  the  temptations  of  the  devil
exceed  all  belief.  Read  John  Bunyan's  Grace  Abounding
if  you  would  understand  what  I  mean.  The  devil
tempted  him,  he  says,  to  doubt  the  existence  of  God,
tempted  him  to  say  things  which  he  will  never  write,  lest
he  should  pollute  others.  Ah!  I  recollect  a  dark  hour
with  myself  when  I,  who  do  not  remember  to  have  even
heard  a  blasphemy  in  my  youth,  much  less  to  have  uttered
one,  found  rushing  through  my  mind  an  almost  infinite
number  of  curses  and  blasphemies  against  the  Most  High
God.  I  specially  recall  a  certain  narrow  and  crooked  lane
in  a  country  town  along  which  I  was  walking  one  day  while
I  was  seeking  the  Saviour.  On  a  sudden  it  seemed  as  if
the  floodgates  of  hell  had  been  opened ;  my  head  became
a  very  pandemonium;  ten  thousand  evil  spirits  seemed
to  be  holding  carnival  within  my  brain ;  and  I  held
my  mouth  lest  I  should  give  utterance  to  the  words  of
blasphemy  that  were  poured  into  my  ears.  Things  I  had
never  heard  or  thought  of  before  came  rushing  impetuously
into  my  mind,  and  I  could  scarcely  withstand  their
influence.  It  was  the  devil  throwing  me  down  and  tearing
me.  These  things  sorely  beset  me;  for  half-an-hour
together  the  most  fearful  imprecations  would  dash  through
my  brain.  Oh,  how  I  groaned  and  cried  before  God  I
That  temptation  passed  away ;  but  ere  many  days  it  was
renewed  again;  and  when  I  was  in  prayer,  or  when  I  was
reading  the  Bible,  these  blasphemous  thoughts  would  pour
in  upon  me  more  than  at  any  other  time.  I  consulted
with  an  aged  godly  man  about  it.  He  said  to  me,  '  Oh,.


EARLY    RELIGIOUS    IMPRESSIONS.  49

all  this  many  of  the  people  of  God  have  proved  before
you.  But/  he  asked,  '  do  you  hate  these  thoughts  ? '
'  I  do,'  I  truly  answered.  '  Then,'  said  he,  '  they  are  not
yours ;  serve  them  as  the  old  parish  officers  used  to  do
with  vagrants  :  whip  them  and  send  them  on  to  their  own
parish.  So/  said  he,  '  do1  with  those  evil  thoughts.  Groan
over  them ;  repent  of  them  and  send  them  on  to  the  devil,
the  father  of  them  to  whom  they  belong,  for  they  are  not
yours.' "

Those  who  know  John  Bunyan's  life  story  as  told  in
his  Grace  Abounding  will  appreciate  the  reference  thereto.
And  yet  how  strange  that  two  men,  whose  youthful  days
were  _spent  so  differently,  whose  early  lives  and  aspirations
were  wide  as  the  poles  asunder,  should  have  had  spiritual
experiences  almost  identical,  that  each — the  respectable
religious  youth  who  was  never  known  to  tell  a  lie,
and  trie  profligate  who  even  as  a  child  had  few  equals  in
cursing,  swearing,  lying  and  blasphemy,  and  whose  lan-
guage made  even  notorious  sinners  tremble — should  have
had  that  dread  sense  of  their  heinous  sinfulness
before  God.

But  more  remarkable,  perhaps,  than  the  persistent
temptations  to  blasphemy  and  profanity,  in  the  case  of
one  whose  early  and  after  life  was  such  as  that  of  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon,  is  the  fact  that  he  should  for  a  time
have  been  a  sceptic.  "  I  have  never  been  thoroughly  an
unbeliever  but  once,"  he  says,  "  and  that  was  not  before  I
knew  the  need  of  a  Saviour,  but  after  it.  It  was  just  when
I  wanted  Christ  and  panted  after  Him  that,  on  a
sudden,  the  thought  crossed  my  mind — which  I  abhorred
but  could  not  conquer — that  there  was  no  God,  no  Christ,
no  Heaven,  no  hell ;  that  all  my  prayers  were  but  a  farce
and  that  I  might  as  well  have  whistled  to  the  winds  or

5


50     LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

spoken  to  the  howling  waves.  Ah !  I  remember  how  my
ship  drifted  through  that  sea  of  fire,  loosened  from  the
anchor  of  my  faith  which  I  had  received  from  my  fathers.
I  no  longer  moored  myself  hard  by  the  coasts  of  Revela-
tion ;  I  said  to  reason,  '  Be  thou  my  captain  ' ;  I  said  to
my  own  brain,  '  Be  thou  my  rudder,'  and  I  started  on  my
mad  voyage.  Thank  God,  it  is  all  over  now;  but  I  will
tell  you  its  brief  history.  It  was  one  hurried  sailing  over
the  tempestuous  ocean  of  free  thought.  I  went  on,  and
as  I  went  the  skies  began  to  darken ;  but  to  make  up  for
that  deficiency  the  waters  were  gleaming  with  coruscations
of  brilliancy.  I  saw  sparks  flying  upwards  that  pleased
me,  and  I  felt,  '  If  this  be  free  thought,  it  is  a  happy
thing.'  My  thoughts  seemed  gems,  and  I  scattered  stars
with  both  my  hands ;  but,  anon,  instead  of  these  corusca-
tions of  glory,  I  saw  grim  fiends,  fierce  and  horrible,  start
up  from  the  waters ;  and  as  I  dashed  on  they  gnashed
their  teeth  and  grinned  upon  me ;  they  seized  the  prow  of
my  ship  and  dragged  me  on,  while  I,  in  part,  gloried  at
the  rapidity  of  my  motion,  but  yet  shuddered  at  the
terrific  rate  with  which  I  passed  the  old  landmarks  of  my
faith.  I  went  to  the  very  verge  of  the  dreary  realms  of
unbelief.  I  went  to  the  very  bottom  of  the  sea  of
infidelity.  As  I  hurried  forward  at  an  awful  speed  I  began
to  doubt  if  there  were  a  world.  I  doubted  everything
until  at  last  the  devil  defeated  himself  by  making  me
doubt  my  own  existence.  I  thought  I  was  an  idea
floating  in  the  nothingness  of  vacuity;  then,  startled  with
that  thought  and  feeling  that  I  was  substantial  flesh  and
blood  after  all,  I  saw  that  God  was  and  Christ  was  and
Heaven  was  and  hell  was,  and  that  all  these  things  were
absolute  truths.  The  very  extravagance  of  the  doubt
proved  its  absurdity,  and  there  came  a  voice  which  said,


EARLY    RELIGIOUS    IMPRESSIONS.  51

*  And  can  this  doubt  be  true  ?  '  Then  I  awoke  from  that
death-dream,  which  God  knows  might  have  damned  my
soul  and  ruined  my  body  if  I  had  not  awoke.  When  I
arose  faith  took  the  helm ;  from  that  moment  I  doubted
not.  Faith  steered  me  back;  faith  cried,  'Away,  away!'
I  cast  my  anchor  on  Calvary ;  I  lifted  my  eye  to  God ;
and  here  I  am  alive  and  out  of  hell.  Therefore  I  speak
what  I  do  know.  I  have  sailed  that  perilous  voyage;  I
have  come  safe  to  land.  Ask  me  again  to  be  an  infidel !
No;  I  have  tried  it;  it  was  sweet  at  first,  but  bitter
afterwards."

The  young  usher  was  not  yet  at  the  end  of  his  searchings
after  God  and  his  strivings  after  peace.  He  now  sought  to
win  salvation  by  good  works  and  laboured  hard  and  strove
•diligently  to  preserve  a  character  for  integrity  and  upright-
ness. Nothing  that  he  thought  might  be  pleasing  to  God
-was  left  undone,  and  he  tells  us  that  if  in  order  to  be  saved
it  had  been  declared  necessary  to  take  off  his  shoes  and
•stockings  and  run  to  John  o'  Groats  he  would  not  even  have
gone  home  first,  but  would  have  started  off  that  very
night;  if  he  had  been  told  to  bare  his  back  to  the  scourge
and  to  take  fifty  lashes  he  would  have  said  :  "  Here  I
.am !  Come  along  with  your  whip  and  beat  as  hard  as  you
please  so  long  as  I  can  obtain  peace  and  rest  and  get  rid
•of  my  sin."  But  the  only  result  was  that  the  now  dis-
tracted youth  learnt  that  his  strivings  were  vain.  "  I  tried
a  long  time  to  improve  myself,"  he  says,  "  but  I  never  did
make  much  of  it;  I  found  I  had  a  devil  within  me  when
I  began,  and  I  had  ten  devils  when  I  left  off.  Instead  of
becoming  better  I  became  worse ;  I  had  now  got  the  devil
of  self-righteousness  of  self-trust  and  self-conceit,  and
many  others  that  had  come  and  taken  up  their  lodging
within  my  heart.  While  I  was  busy  sweeping  my  house


52     LIFE  OF  CHARLES  H ADDON  SPURGEON.

and  garnishing  it,  behold  the  one  I  sought  to  get  rid  of
who  had  only  gone  for  a  little  season  returned  and  brought
with  him  seven  other  spirits  more  wicked  than  himself,
and  they  entered  in  and  dwelt  there.  Then  I  laboured  to
believe.  It  is  a  strange  way  of  putting  it,  yet  so  it  was.
When  I  wished  to  believe  I  found  I  could  not.  It  seemed
to  me  that  the  way  to  Heaven  by  Christ's  righteousness
was  as  difficult  as  by  my  own,  and  that  I  could  as  soon  get
to  Heaven  by  Sinai  as  by  Calvary.  I  could  do  nothing ;
I  could  neither  repent  nor  believe.  I  fainted  with  despair,
feeling  as  if  I  must  be  lost,  despite  the  Gospel,  and  be  for
ever  driven  from  Jehovah's  presence,  even  though  Christ
had  died."  Yet  notwithstanding  such  experiences  C.  H.
Spurgeon  in  later  years  declared  that  he  never  would
have  been  saved  if  he  could  have  helped  it.  As  long  as
he  could,  he  rebelled  and  revolted  and  struggled  against
God.  "  When  He  would  have  me  pray  I  would  not  pray  ;
when  He  would  have  me  listen  to  the  sound  of  the
ministry  I  would  not.  And  when  I  heard  and  the  tear
rolled  down  my  cheek  I  wiped  it  away  and  defied  Him  to
melt  my  heart.  When  my  heart  was  a  little  touched  I
tried  to  divert  it  with  sinful  pleasures ;  and  would  not
then  have  been  saved  until  God  gave  me  the  effectual
blow  and  I  was  obliged  to  submit  to  that  irresistible  effort
of  His  grace.  It  conquered  my  depraved  will  and  made
me  bow  myself  before  His  gracious  sceptre.  When  the
Lord  really  brought  me  to  myself  He  sent  me  one  great
shot  which  shivered  me  to  pieces ;  and  lo,  I  found  myself
utterly  defenceless.  I  thought  I  was  more  mighty  than
the  angels  and  could  accomplish  all  things ;  but  I  found
myself  less  than  nothing."

The  end,  however,  was  not  yet.     A  series  of  what  C.  H.
Spurgeon  describes  as  "  falls  "  succeeded,  each  of  whichr


EARLY    RELIGIOUS    IMPRESSIONS.  53

although  he  did  not  know  it  at  the  time,  had  the  effect  of
bringing  him  nearer  to  the  truth  of  salvation  through  faith
in  the  crucified  Saviour.  Like  Zaccheus,  the  young  usher
heard  the  Master's  voice  saying  to>  him,  "  Make  haste  and
come  down."  "  One  of  the  first  steps  I  had  to  take  was
to  go  right  down  from  my  good  works ;  and,  oh,  what  a
fall  was  that !  Then  I  stood  upon  my  own  self-sufficiency
and  Christ  said,  '  Come  down  !  I  have  pulled  you  down
from  your  good  works,  and  now  I  will  pull  you  down
from  your  self-sufficiency ! '  So  I  had  another  fall  and  I
felt  sure  I  had  gained  the  bottom,  but  again  Christ  said,
'  Come  down !  '  and  He  made  me  come  down  till  I  fell  on
some  point  at  which  I  felt  I  was  yet  salvable.  But  still
the  command  was,  'Down,  sir!  Come  down  further  yet.'
And  down  I  came  until  in  despair  I  had  to  let  go  every
bough  of  the  tree  of  my  hopes  and  then  I  said,  '  I  can
do  nothing ;  I  am  ruined ! '  The  waters  were  wrapped
round  my  head  and  I  was  shut  out  from  the  light  of  day
and  thought  myself  a  stranger  from  the  commonwealth  of
Israel.  But  Christ  said,  '  Come  down  lower  yet,  sir !  thou
hast  too  much  pride  to  be  saved.'  Then  I  was  brought
down  to  see  my  corruption,  my  wickedness,  my  filthiness,
for  God  always  humbles  the  sinner  whom  He  means  to
save.  While  I  was  in  this  state,  trying  to  make  myself
believe,  a  voice  whispered,  '  Vain  man,  vain  man,  if  thou
wouldst  believe,  come  and  see ! '  Then  the  Holy  Spirit
led  me  by  the  hand  to  a  solitary  place,  and  while  I  stood
there,  suddenly  there  appeared  before  me  One  upon  His
cross.  I  looked  up ;  I  had  then  no  faith ;  I  saw  His  eyes
suffused  with  tears  and  the  blood  still  flowing ;  I  saw  His
enemies  about  Him  hunting  Him  to  His  grave;  I  marked
His  miseries  unutterable;  I  heard  the  groaning  which
cannot  be  described ;  and  as  I  looked  up,  He  opened  His


54      LIFE  OF  CHARLES  H ADDON  SPURGEON.

eyes  and  said  to  me,  '  The  Son  of  Man  is  come  to  seek
and  to  save  that  which  was  lost'  "  But  the  youth  did  not
yet  find  that  peace  which  he  sought,  although  light  was
dawning  upon  his  soul.  He  wanted  not  only  salvation
from  hell  but  salvation  from  sin,  and  when  he  heard  and
read  that  if  he  gave  his  heart  to  Christ,  He  would  keep
him  from  sin  and  preserve  him  so  long  as  he  lived,  his
young  heart  was  filled  with  rapture.  He  was  afraid,  how-
ever, that  Christ  would  never  save  him,  but  for  all  that
the  lad  felt  in  his  heart  that  he  must  love  the  Saviour  for
what  He  had  done  for  other  sinners.  "  It  seemed  to  me
as  I  read  the  wondrous  story  of  His  life  and  death  that
if  He  refused  me  I  would  still  lie  at  His  feet,  and  say.
'  Thou  mayest  spurn  me  but  Thou  art  a  blessed  Christ
for  all  that ;  and  if  Thou  dost  curse  me  yet  I  can  only  say
to  Thee  that  I  well  deserve  it  at  Thy  hands.  Do  what
Thou  wilt  with  me;  but  Thou  didst  save  the  dying  thief.
and  thou  didst  save  her  out  of  whom  Thou  didst  cast
seven  devils,  and  if  Thou  dost  not  deign  to  save  mer
yet  Thou  art  a  blessed  Christ,  and  I  cannot  rail  at  Thee
or  find  fault  with  Thee,  but  I  lie  down  at  Thy  feet  and
worship  Thee.'  I  could  not  help  saying  once  that  even
if  He  damned  me  I  would  love  God  because  He  was  so
gracious  to  others."

In  the  midst  of  his  despair  the  troubled  youth  proved
the  value  of  a  mother's  early  teaching,  and  some  words
that  his  beloved  parent  had  once  uttered  brought  a
measure  of  comfort  to  his  soul.  Mrs.  John  Spurgeon
had  declared  that  although  she  had  heard  many  people
swear  and  blaspheme  God,  one  thing  she  had  never
heard  was,  a  man  to  say  that  he  had  sought  Christ  and
Christ  had  rejected  him.  The  youth  remembered  these
words,  and  although  at  first  he  thought  the  Saviour  had


EARLY    RELIGIOUS    IMPRESSIONS.  55

rejected  him,  and  even  if  it  destroyed  his  soul  was  deter-
mined to  say  so,  yet  his  mother's  words  acted  as  a  restraint
and  an  incentive  to  further  seeking,  with  the  result  that
from  personal  experience  he  was  afterwards  able  to  add
his  own  witness  to  that  of  his  parent.  And  how  it  testifies
to  the  absolutely  sterling  and  rigidly  honest  character  of
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  that  at  this  early  age  and  in  the
midst  of  such  agonizing  experiences  when  he  grasped  at
hope  as  a  drowning  man  at  a  straw,  he  yet  had  upon  his
mind  a  deep  concern  .for  the  honour  of  God's  name  and  the
integrity  of  His  moral  government.  He  felt  that  it  would
not  satisfy  his  conscience  if  he  were  forgiven  unjustly,
while  at  the  same  time  the  question  how  God  could  be
just  and  yet  justify  him  who  had  been  so  guilty,  appeared
unanswerable.

So  great  was  the  agony  of  his  soul  at  times  that  but  for
one  text  which  came  to  him  repeatedly  in  his  moments
of  greatest  despair,  he  would,  according  to  his  own  con-
fession, more  than  probably  have  been  driven  to  suicide.
"  Whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall
be  saved"  was  the  text,  and,  although  the  young  usher
could  not  believe  in  Christ  as  he  wished,  he  nevertheless
knew  that  day  and  night,  with  groans  and  tears  and  sighs,
he  called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  if  the  promise
were  true  God  could  not  cast  him  off.

Light  was  near,  but  the  story  of  how  it  came  must  be
reserved  for  another  chapter.  We  have  given  the  history  of
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  spiritual  conflicts,  his  alterna-
tions of  gloom  and  hope,  of  defiance  and  supplication,  thus
fully,  because  of  their  influence  upon  his  theology  and
preaching  in  after  life.  Save  in  his  "  Autobiography  "  this
remarkable  and  important  period  of  his  life  has  never
been  adequately  dealt  with  in  any  book,  most  biographers


56      LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

telling  of  his  conversion  with  no  more  than  a  passing
reference  to  the  soul-agony  he  endured  before  finding
peace  in  believing.  It  is  noteworthy  that  most  of  the
great  divines  who  have  dealt  with  the  Protestant  truth  of
salvation  by  faith,  and  have  urged  upon  assembled  multi-
tudes the  needs  of  personal  religion,  have  passed  through
spiritual  experiences  more  or  less  akin  to  those  described
above.  Luther  and  Bunyan  are  instances  in  point,  and
there  is  no  doubt  that,  as  C.  H.  Spurgeon  says,  "  it  often
proves  a  great  blessing  to  a  man  that  he  has  had  a  terrible
conflict,  a  desperate  encounter,  a  hard-fought  engagement,
in  passing  from  the  empire  of  Satan  into  the  kingdom
of  God's  dear  son."  Such  an  experience  enables  a  man
to  deal  sympathizingly  and  adequately  with  another  in
similar  case,  and  the  fact  that  the  preacher  when  talking
with  a  young  convert  in  deep  distress  about  his  sin  can
tell  him  something  more  of  his  anxious  plight  than  he
himself  knows,  is  calculated  to  inspire  the  confidence  and
open  the  heart  of  the  inquirer.  "  I  know  that  a  man's  own
experience  is  one  of  the  very  best  weapons  he  can  use
in  fighting  with  evil  in  other  men's  hearts,"  said  C.  H.
Spurgeon  on  one  occasion.  "  Often  their  misery  and
despondency,  aggravated  as  it  commonly  is  by  a  feeling
of  solitariness,  will  be  greatly  relieved  before  it  is  effectu-
ally driven  out  when  they  find  that  a  brother  has  suffered
the  same  and  yet  has  been  able  to  overcome."  And  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon  did  suffer  during  those  six  terrible
months  as  few  other  men  of  his  time  suffered,  but  his
after  life  was  all  the  brighter  and  his  faith  the  stronger  for
the  experience.  Well  might  he  say,  "  There  is  a  power  in
God's  Gospel  beyond  all  description."  He  experienced  it
and  he  knew  the  power.  "  Once  I,  like  Mazeppa,  lashed
to  the  wild  horse  of  my  lust,  bound  hand  and  foot,


EARLY    RELIGIOUS    IMPRESSIONS.  57

incapable  of  resistance,  was  galloping  on  with  hell's  wolves
behind  me,  howling  for  my  body  and  my  soul  as  their
just  and  lawful  prey.  There  came  a  mighty  hand  which
stopped  that  wild  horse,  cut  my  bands,  set  me  down,  and
brought  me  into  liberty.  Is  there  power  in  the  Gospel?
Ay,  there  is,  and  he  who  has  felt  it  must  acknowledge  it.
There  was  a  time  when  I  lived  in  the  strong  old  castle
of  my  sins,  and  rested  in  my  own  works.  There
came  a  trumpeter  to  the  door  and  bade  me  open  it.
I  with  anger  chid  him  from  the  porch  and  said  he  ne'er
should  enter.  Then  there  came  a  goodly  Personage  with
loving  countenance !  His  hands  were  marked  with  scars
where  nails  had  been  driven,  and  His  feet  had  nail-prints,
too.  He  lifted  up  His  cross,  using  it  as  a  hammer;  at
the  first  blow  the  gate  of  my  prejudice  shook ;  at  the
second,  it  trembled  more ;  at  the  third,  down  it  fell  and
in  He  came ;  and  He  said,  '  Arise,  and  stand  upon  thy
feet,  for  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love.'  The
Gospel  a  thing  of  power !  Ah !  that  it  is.  It  always
wears  the  dew  of  its  youth;  it  glitters  with  morning's
freshness,  its  strength,  and  its  glory  abide  for  ever.  I  have
felt  its  power  in  my  own  heart,  I  have  the  witness  of  the
Spirit  within  my  spirit,  and  I  know  it  is  a  thing  of  might
because  it  has  conquered  me  and  bowed  me  down."


CHAPTER    V.

CONVERSION.

LIKE  many  another  giant  of  the  pulpit,  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon  was  converted  through  a  poor
sermon  preached  by  a  man  of  mean  ability  but  undoubted
earnestness.  The  youth's  spiritual  conflicts  had  left  him
distracted  and  hopeless,  but  a  turning  point  came  which
was  the  first  of  a  train  of  circumstances  that  led  him  to
the  little  chapel  where  light  at  last  shone  into  his  soul.
He  was  out  walking  one  day  when,  as  he  tells  us,  he  sa\v
before  him  his  Friend,  his  best  and  only  Friend  murdered.
Affrighted,  the  youth  stooped  to  gaze,  and  saw  that  that
Friend's  hands  had  been  pierced  with  rough  iron  nails
and  His  feet  had  been  rent.  There  was  misery  in  His
dead  countenance  so  terrible  that  the  lad  scarcely  dared
to  look  upon  it.  His  body  was  emaciated  with  -  hunger,
His  back  was  red  with  bloody  scourges,  and  His  brow
had  a  circle  of  wounds  about  it.  The  vision  was  a
realistic  one,  and  the  youth  shuddered.  This  Friend,  he
knew  full  well,  had  never  had  a  fault ;  He  was  the  purest
of  the  pure,  the  holiest  of  the  holy.  Who  could  have
injured  Him  ?  He  had  never  injured  any  man  :  all  His
life  long  He  went  about  doing  good,  healing  the  sick,
feeding  the  hungry,  raising  the  dead,  and,  as  young
Spurgeon  looked  into  the  sorrowful  face,  so  full  of  agony
and  yet  so  full  of  love,  He  wondered  who  could  have  been
a  wretch  so  vile  as  to  pierce  hands  like  His.  A  flood  of


CONVERSION.  59

indignation  swept  over  the  youth,  and  he  longed  to  seize
the  murderers  and  torment  them  to  the  utmost  of  his
power.  "  Oh !  what  jealousy,  what  revenge  I  felt,"  he
says.  •'  If  I  might  but  find  these  murderers,  what  would
I  do  with  them !  And  as  I  looked  upon  that  corpse  I
heard  a  footstep  and  wondered  where  it  was.  I  listened
and  I  clearly  perceived  that  the  murderer  was  close  at
hand.  It  was  dark,  and  I  groped  about  to  find  him.  I
found  that,  somehow  or  other,  wherever  I  put  out  my
hand  I  could  not  meet  with  him  for  he  was  nearer  to  me
than  my  hand  would  go.  At  last  I  put  my  hand  upon  my
breast.  '  I  have  thee  now,'  said  I,  for  lo !  he  was  in  my
own  heart;  the  murderer  was  hiding  within  my  own
bosom,  dwelling  in  the  recesses  of  my  inmost  soul.  Ah  !
then  I  wept  indeed,  that  I,  in  the  very  presence  of  my
murdered  Master,  should  be  harbouring  the  murderer ;
and  I  felt  myself  most  guilty  while  I  bowed  over  His
corpse  and  sang  that  plaintive  hymn  :  —

'Twas  you  my  sins,  my  cruel  sins,
His  chief  tormentors  were  ;
Each  of  my  crimes  became  a  nail,
And  unbelief  the  spear."

The  youth's  attitude  in  connection  with  the  matter  that
had  convulsed  him  was  from  that  time  completely  changed.
He  went  home  for  the  Christmas  holidays  at  the  end  of
1849  with  a  firm  determination  to  visit  every  place  of
worship  in  the  town  in  order  to  find  out  the  way  of
salvation.  No  record  exists  of  exactly  how  many  chapels
he  attended,  but  nowhere  could  he  leam  what  he  wanted  to
know.  The  ministers  expounded  the  great  truths  of  the
Christian  faith  and  their  sermons  were  eminently  suited  to
spiritually-minded  people.  But  what  the  youth  required
was  knowledge  as  to  how  he  could  get  his  sins  forgiven,  and


60      LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

this  no  man  told  him.  At  last  there  came  a  day  when  the
hand  of  God  was  unmistakably  extended  to  lead  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon  a  way  he  thought  not  of.  He  had
intended  to  go  to  a  certain  chapel  some  distance  from  his
home  and  set  out  upon  the  road.  But  a  heavy  snowstorm
came  on  and  prevented  him  from  continuing  the  journey.
He  turned  into  an  obscure  street,  and  saw  at  the  end  of  a
court  a  little  sanctuary  which  proved  to  be  the  Artillery
Street  Primitive  Methodist  Chapel.  This  church,  hitherto
known  perhaps  to  few  people  even  in  Colchester,  was
destined  to  become  world-famed  as  the  result  of  that  visit
by  the  youth  of  little  more  than  fifteen  years.  He  was  not
prepossessed  in  its  favour  as  he  entered,  for  he  had  always
heard  that  the  Primitive  Methodists  were  people  who  sang
so  loudly  that  they  made  one's  head  ache.  But  even  if
this  were  true  he  cared  not  so  long  as  they  taught  him  how
he  might  be  saved.  The  remainder  of  the  story  shall  be
told  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon  himself.

"  The  minister  did  not  come  that  morning ;  he  was
snowed  up,  I  suppose.  At  last  a  very  thin-looking  man,
a  shoe-maker  or  tailor  or  something  of  that  sort,  went
up  into  the  pulpit  to  preach.  Now  it  is  well  that  preachers
should  be  instructed ;  but  this  man  was  really  stupid.
He  was  obliged  to  stick  to  his  text,  for  the  simple  reason
that  he  had  little  else  to  say.  The  text  was  '  Look  unto
Me,  and  be  ye  saved  all  the  ends  of  the  earth.'  He  did
not  even  pronounce  the  words  rightly,  but  that  did  not
matter.  There  was,  I  thought,  a  glimpse  of  hope  for
me  in  that  text.  The  preacher  began  thus :  '  My  dear
friends,  this  is  a  very  simple  text  indeed.  It  says,  "  Look."
Now,  lookin'  don't  take  a  deal  of  pains.  It  ain't  liftin'
your  foot  or  your  finger ;  it  is  just  "  Look."  Well,  a  man
needn't  go  to  college  to  learn  to  look.  You  may  be  the


1


62      LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEOX.

biggest  fool  arid  yet  you  can  look.  A  mail  needn't  be
worth  a  thousand  a  year  to  be  able  to  look.  Anyone  can
look;  even  a  child  can  look.  But  then  the  text  says,
"  Look  unto  Me."  Ay ! ;  said  he  in  broad  Essex,  '  many
on  ye  are  lookin'  to  yourselves,  but  it's  no  use  lookin'
there.  You'll  never  find  any  comfort  in  yourselves.
Some  look  to  God  the  Father.  No;  look  to  Him
by-and-by.  Jesus  Christ  says,  "  Look  unto  Me."  Some  on
ye  say,  "  We  must  wait  for  the  Spirit's  workin'. "  You  have
no  business  with  that  just  now.  Look  to  Christ.  The
text  says,  "  Look  unto  Me !  "

"  Then  the  good  man  followed  up  his  text  in  this  way  :
'  Look  unto  Me ;  I  am  sweatin'  great  drops  of  blood.
Look  unto  Me;  I  am  hangin'  on  the  cross.  Look
unto  Me;  I  ascend  to  Heaven.  Look  unto  Me;  I
am  sittin'  at  the  Father's  right  hand.  O  poor  sinner,
look  unto  Me !  look  unto  Me ! '

"  When  he  had  gone  to  about  that  length  and  managed
to  spin  out  ten  minutes  or  so  he  was  at  the  end  of  his
tether.  Then  he  looked  at  me  under  the  gallery,  and
I  dare  say  with  so  few  present  he  knew  me  to  be  a
stranger.  Just  fixing  his  eyes  on  me,  as  if  he  knew  all
my  heart,  he  said,  '  Young  man,  you  look  very  miserable.'
Well,  I  did;  but  I  had  not  been  accustomed  to  have
remarks  made  from  the  pulpit  on  my  personal  appearance
before.  However,  it  was  a  good  blow,  struck  right  home.
He  continued,  '  And  you  always  will  be  miserable — miser-
able in  life  and  miserable  in  death — if  you  don't  obey
my  text;  but  if  you  obey  now,  this  moment,  you  will  be
saved.'  Then  lifting  up  his  hands  he  shouted,  as  only  a
Primitive  Methodist  could  do,  '  Young  man,  look  to  Jesus
Christ.  Look !  Look  !  Look !  You  have  nothin'  to  do
but  to  look  and  live.'  I  saw  at  once  the  way  of  salvation.


CONVERSION.  63

I  know  not  what  else  he  said — I  did  not  take  much
notice  of  it — I  was  so  possessed  with  that  one  thought.
Like  as  when  the  brazen  serpent  was  lifted  up,  the  people


This  is  the  pulpit  which  stood  in  Artillery  Street  Chapel,

Colchester,  and  from  which  the  sermon  was  preached

on  the  historic  occasion  of  Charles  Haddon  Spur-

geon's  conversion.    The  pulpit  was  purchased  by

the    Rev.  V.  J.  Charlesworth    and    removed   to

Stockwell  Orphanage,  where  it  now  stands.

only  looked  and  were  healed,  so  it  was  with  me.     I  had
been  waiting  to  do  fifty  things,  but  when  I   heard  that


64      LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEOX.

word  '  Look ! '  what  a  charming  word  it  seemed  to  me !
Oh !  I  looked  until  I  could  almost  have  looked  my  eyes
away.  There  and  then  the  cloud  was  gone,  the  darkness
rolled  away,  and  that  moment  I  saw  the  sun ;  and  I  could
have  risen  that  instant  and  sung  with  the  most  enthusiastic
of  them  of  the  precious  blood  of  Christ  and  the  simple
faith  which  looks  alone  to  Him.

"  That  happy  day  when  I  found  the  Saviour  and  learned
to  cling  to  His  dear  feet  was  a  day  never  to  be  forgotten
by  me.  An  obscure  child,  unknown,  unheard  of,  I  listened
to  the  Word  of  God ;  and  that  precious  text  led  me  to  the
cross  of  Christ.  I  can  testify  that  the  joy  of  that  day  was
utterly  indescribable.  I  could  have  leaped,  I  could  have
danced  ;  there  was  no  expression,  however  fanatical,  which
would  have  been  out  of  keeping  with  the  joy  of  my  spirit
at  that  hour.  Many  days  of  Christian  experience  have
passed  since  then,  but  there  has  never  been  one  which  has
had  the  full  exhilaration,  the  sparkling  delight  which  that
first  day  had.  I  thought  I  could  have  sprung  from  the
seat  on  which  I  sat,  and  have  called  out  with  the  wildest
of  those  Methodist  brethren  who  were  present,  '  I  am
forgiven !  I  am  forgiven !  A  monument  of  grace !  A
sinner  saved  by  blood.'  I  felt  that  I  was  an  emancipated
soul,  an  heir  of  Heaven,  a  forgiven  one,  accepted  in  Christ
Jesus,  plucked  out  of  the  miry  clay  and  out  of  the  horrible
pit;  with  my  feet  upon  a  rock  and  my  goings  established
I  thought  I  could  dance  all  the  way  home.  I  could  under-
stand what  John  Bunyan  meant  when  he  declared  he
wanted  to  tell  the  crows  on  the  ploughed  land  all  about
his  conversion."

The  great  event  took  place  on  the  morning  of  Sunday.
January  6th,  1850,  and  naturally,  repeated  efforts  have
been  made  to  discover  who  the  preacher  was.  It  is  a


CONVERSION.  65

remarkable  fact  that  no  fewer  than  three  persons  claimed
to  have  occupied  the  pulpit  on  the  occasion,  but  C.  H.
Spurgeon  did  not  recognize  any  one  of  them  as  the  man
to  whom  he  listened  on  the  memorable  day.  Mr.  Danzy
Sheen,  a  Primitive  Methodist  minister,  expended  a  good
deal  of  time  and  took  much  trouble  to  settle  the  question,
and  he  published  the  result  of  his  researches  in  a  little
book  called  "  Pastor  Spurgeon  :  his  Conversion,  Labour
and  Success."  Here  he  pointed  out  that  on  a  certain  Sunday
in  1850  the  Rev.  Robert  Eaglen,  the  Primitive  Methodist
minister  travelling  in  the  Ipswich  Circuit  in  1850-51,
preached  in  the  Artillery  Street  Chapel  from  the  text,
"  Look  unto  Me  and  be  ye  saved."  A  snowstorm  delayed
his  arrival  at  the  chapel  considerably  beyond  the  time  of
starting  the  service,  and  the  circumstances  were  so  like
those  of  the  day  on  which  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  converted
that  it  was  thought  Mr.  Eaglen  must  be  the  preacher,
whom  the  troubled  youth  heard.  Still  more  circumstantial
evidence  was  given  by  Mr.  John  Blomfield,  a  local  preacher
of  Colchester,  who  was  present  when  Mr.  Eaglen  preached.
But  the  whole  of  the  argument  collapsed  after  C.  H.
Spurgeon  declared  the  date  of  his  conversion,  for  the  day
on  which  Mr.  Eaglen  preached  in  the  circumstances
referred  to  above  was  December  i5th,  1850,  nearly  a
year  after  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  visit  to  Artillery
Street  Chapel.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  when
introduced  to  Mr.  Eaglen  C.  H.  Spurgeon  did  not  recog-
nize him  as  the  preacher  who  had  pointed  at  him  from
the  pulpit.

The  event  was  too  vividly  impressed  upon  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon's  mind,  and  his  account  of  it  is  too
detailed,  for  him  to  have  made  any  mistake  through  lapse
of  memory,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  as  he  states  the

6


2  oo

M  ~"

s*i

o    >•

J^    ~

K      g

••    B

2^
S     =


o  X


CONVERSION.  67

preacher  was  "  a  poor,  uneducated  man,  a  man  who  had
never  received  any  training  for  the  ministry,  and  probably
will  never  be  heard  of  in  this  life,  a  man  engaged  in  busi-
ness, no  doubt,  of  a  humble  kind  during  the  week."

C.  .H.  Spurgeon  visited  the  Artillery  Street  Chapel  on
October  nth,  1864,  and,  preaching  from  the  momentous
text,  Isaiah  xlv.  22,  he  pointed  to  a  seat  on  the  left  of
the  building,  under  the  gallery,  and  said,  "  I  was  sitting
in  that  pew  when  I  was  converted."  A  memorial  tablet
has  since  been  erected  over  the  pew,  with  an  inscription
setting  forth  the  tacts.

In  his  conversion,  the  great  preacher  has  declared  the
point  lay  in  making  the  discovery  that  he  had  nothing  to  do
but  to  look  to  Christ.  As  a  child  he  had  listened  attentively
to  all  the  sermons  he  heard,  but  either  the  way  of  salva-
tion was  not  set  forth,  which  can  scarcely  have  been  the
case,  or  else  he  was  spiritually  blind  and  deaf  to  the  fact.
The  news  that  he  was,  as  a  sinner,  to  look  away  from
himself  to  Christ,  as  much  startled  him  and  came  as  fresh
to  him  as  any  news  he  ever  heard  in  his  life.

On  the  evening  of  that  memorable  Sunday  the  youth
attended  a  Baptist  chapel  in  Colchester,  and  listened  to  a
sermon  from  the  text,  "  Accepted  in  the  Beloved."  It  was
exactly  suited  to  his  spiritual  requirements  and  did  much
to  confirm  him  in  the  faith.  On  his  return  to  the  family
circle  all  noticed  his  joyousness,  and  that  night  after  the
others  had  retired  to  rest  he  told  his  father  the  great  news,
much  to  that  parent's  joy  and  thankfulness.

In  the  days  immediately  following,  however,  his  own
happiness  was  not  unmarred  by  sorrow.  When  he  was  con-
verted he  most  emphatically  believed  that  he  was  going  to
live  a  perfect  life,  but  very  soon  discovered  that  Cowper's
line,  "And  cut  up  all  my  follies  by  the  root,"  was  not


68     LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

true  in  fact.     The  follies  began  to  sprout  again,  and  to
the  mirth  and  joy  following  conversion  succeeded  a  sad


tT  FAITH  I  SAW  THE  STREAM,
WING   Wol'SitoR    SCPPIV.
C    LOVE   HAS    &S.K.H  MY    THEM!
SHALL  BE  TI1.L  (  WE."


THIS  TABtT/WAS  IWVEHED  BY
Sm  W.o. PEARSON,  BART,  M.P.
16TH  1897,       -

THE  SIXTIETH  YEAR  OF  THE  REIGK  OI

HER  MAJKSTY  QvttN  VICTORIA.


The  tablet  in  Artillery  Street  Chapel  commemorating  the

conversion  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  and  marking  the

pew  where  he  sat  on  January  6,  1850.

fit   of  despondency.     The   youth    went    to   the   Primitive
Methodist  chapel  where  the  light  had  first  shone  into  his


CONVERSION.  69

soul,  to  see  if  he  could  there  learn  something  that  should
meet  his  need.  The  preacher  took  as  his  text,  "  O
wretched  man  that  I  am ;  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the
body  of  this  death,"  and  went  on  to  say  that  no  child  of
God  ever  did  feel  any  conflict  within.  Such  theology  not
only  seemed  unscriptural,  but  certainly  failed  to  satisfy
young  Spurgeon's  requirements.  The  lad  knew  for  certain
that  he  was  saved,  and  he  knew  also  that  there  was  a
very  great  conflict  within,  so  he  took  up  his  hat  and  left
the  chapel.  But  it  was  not  only  despondency  that
troubled  him  in  those  early  days  of  Christian  life.  He
was  again  sorely  tempted  by  blasphemous  and  profane
thoughts  that  came  to  his  mind  in  spite  of  himself,  and
he  had  once  more  to  place  his  hand  upon  his  mouth  to
avoid  uttering  them.


CHAPTER    VI.

BAPTISM,  CHURCH  MEMBERSHIP,  AND
CHRISTIAN  SERVICE.

IMMEDIATELY  after  his  conversion  the  young  usher
had  to  return  to  his  duties  at  Newmarket,  and  it  was
not  long  before  he  commenced  to  work  for  his  Master.
Within  a  week  or  so  he  was  regularly  distributing  tracts  at
thirty-three  houses  in  the  town,  having  taken  over  a  district
formerly  served  by  two  ladies  living  in  the  house  of  Mr.
Swindell.  "  Oh,  how  I  wish  that  I  could  do  something
for  Christ!  "  he  wrote  home  to  his  mother  on  February  19.
"  Tract  distribution  is  so  pleasant  and  easy  that  it  is  a
nothing — nothing  in  itself,  much  less  when  it  is  compared
with  the  amazing  debt  of  gratitude  I  owe."  He  also
placed  specially-chosen  tracts,  suitable  to  individual  cases,
in  envelopes,  and  then  sealing  these  up  sent  them  to
persons  he  knew,  in  the  hope  that  God  would  bless  the
little  printed  sheets.  After  a  time  the  youth  became
bolder,  and  as  he  went  from  house  to  house  distributing
tracts  he  began  to  tell  in  humble  language  the  truths  of
Christ's  salvation.  This  led  him  to  take  up  Sunday-school
work,  a  more  trying  task  for  a  young  convert  in  those
days  than  in  these.  If  his  lesson  became  at  all  dull  the
scholars  would  begin  playing,  using  the  forms  on  which
they  sat  as  a  gymnasium.  "  That  was  a  very  plain  inti-
mation to  me,"  said  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "  that  I  must  give  them
an  illustration  or  an  anecdote,"  and  thus  by  being  obliged


BAPTISM  AND  CHRISTIAN  SERVICE.         71

to  tell  stories,  in  order  to  secure  the  attention  of  his  class.
he  learned  that  inimitable  method  of  illustration  which
characterized  his  preaching  in  after  years.  As  a  result  of
his  success  in  the  class  the  superintendent  asked  him  to
address  the  whole  Sunday  School,  and  on  June  n  he
wrote  home  to  his  mother  :  "  I  have  had  two  opportunities
of  addressing  the  Sunday  School  children,  and  have
endeavoured  to  do  so  as  a  dying  being  to  dying  beings."
His  wonderful  gift  of  oratory  soon  became  manifest,  and
the  older  people  took  to  attending  school  when  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon  was  speaking,  so  that  before  long  the
auditory  looked  more  like  a  chapel  than  a  school — a
circumstance  which  the  old  pastor,  jealous  of  the  seeming
invasion  of  his  province,  did  not  quite  like.  '  I  always  spoke
as  best  I  could,"  says  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "  after  carefully
preparing  my  subject.  '  Though  only  a  youth,'  I  said,  '  I
think  I  am  bound  to  give  myself  unto  reading  and  study
and  prayer,  and  not  to  grieve  the  Spirit  by  unthought-of
effusions ' ;  and  I  soon  found  that  my  hearers  appreciated
what  I  said.  Oh,  but  how  earnestly  I  did  it  all !  I  often
think  that  I  spoke  better  then  than  I  did  in  later  years,  for
I  spoke  so  tremblingly,  but  my  heart  went  with  it  all."

Soon  after  he  took  charge  of  a  Sunday  School  class  he
began  to  find  his  way  into  the  homes  of  his  scholars  by
calling  at  certain  times  to  teach  them  writing,  and  the
copies  set  always  contained  the  Gospel.  His  kindness
won  the  hearts  of  the  parents,  and  many  a  time  this  earnest
youth  of  sixteen  was  able  to  explain  the  way  of  salvation
to  older  people,  whose  interest  he  had  secured  by  his
ingenious  method  of  reaching  them  through  the  children.
Every  means  within  his  power  was  used  to  spread  a  know-
ledge of  the  Gospel,  and  no  stone  was  left  unturned  to  get
new  scholars  to  attend  the  Sunday  School.  When  he  felt  he


72      L[FE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SFURGEON.

could  do  nothing  else,  he  would  write  texts  on  little  slips
of  paper  and  drop  them  about  the  streets  and  roads  that
some  might  pick  them  up  and  receive  them  as  messages
of  mercy  to  their  souls.  "  I  could  scarcely  content
myself,"  he  says,  "  even  for  five  minutes,  without  trying  to
do  something  for  Christ.  If  I  walked  along  the  street,
I  must  have  a  few  tracts  with  me ;  if  I  went  into  a  railway
carriage,  I  must  drop  a  tract  out  of  the  window ;  if  I  had
a  moment's  leisure,  I  must  be  upon  my  knees  or  at  my
Bible;  if  I  were  in  company,  I  must  turn  the  subject  of
conversation  to  Christ,  that  I  might  serve  my  Master."

C.  H.  Spurgeon's  letters  to  his  parents  at  this  time
make  it  clear  that  two  things  forcibly  presented  themselves
to  him  as  duties  not  to  be  neglected  or  delayed  by  a  young
Christian.  One  was  baptism  by  immersion,  and  the  other
church  membership.  On  the  former  question  he  had  long
since  made  up  his  mind  as  to  what  the  Scriptures  taught ;
but  before  going  through  the  ceremony  he  thought  it
right  to  secure  his  parents'  consent  "  I  firmly  believe  and
consider,"  he  wrote  to  his  father  on  January  30,  1850,
just  after  his  return  from  Newmarket,  "  that  baptism  is  the
command  of  Christ,  and  shall  not  feel  quite  comfortable
if  I  do  not  receive  it.  I  am  unworthy  of  such  things,
but  so  am  I  unworthy  of  Jesus'  love.  I  hope  I  have
received  the  blessing  of  the  one  and  think  I  ought  to
take  the  other  also."

Again,  on  February  ipth,  in  a  letter  to  his  mother,
he  says,  "  I  have  come  to  a  resolution  that  by  God's  help
I  will  profess  the  name  of  Jesus  as  soon  as  possible,  if  I
may  be  admitted  into  His  Church  on  earth.  It  is  an
honour — no  difficulty.  Grandfather  encourages  me  to  do
so,  and  I  hope  to  do  so  both  as  a  duty  and  privilege.  I
trust  that  I  shall  then  feel  that  the  bonds  of  the  Lord  are


BAPTISM  AND  CHRISTIAN  SERVICE.        73

upon  me  and  have  a  more  powerful  sense  of  my  duty
to  walk  circumspectly.  Conscience  has  convinced  me  that
it  is  a  duty  to  be  buried  with  Christ  in  baptism,  although
I  am  sure  it  constitutes  no  part  of  salvation.  I  am  very
glad  that  you  have  no  objection  to  my  doing  so.  Mr.
Swindell  is  a  Baptist."  His  father  had  been  very  careful
before  giving  his  consent  to  the  ceremony  to  assure  him-
self that  his  son  had  no  leaning  whatever  towards  the
doctrine  of  baptismal  regeneration.  There  was  no  Baptist
Church  in  Newmarket,  and  10  the  public  testimony  of
faith  had  to  be  postponed  for  a  time.  A  delay  also
occurred,  though  of  less  duration,  in  securing  church
membership  at  the  Independent  Chapel.  Four  successive
days  the  young  usher  called  upon  the  minister  but  was
unable  to  see  him,  and  then  he  acted  with  his  characteristic
persistence,  in  what  he  believed  to  be  right,  by  writing  to
the  minister  and  declaring  that  he  would  go  down  to  the
church  meeting  and  propose  himself  as  a  member.  "  He
looked  upon  me  as  a  strange  character,"  says  C.  H.
Spurgeon,  "  but  I  meant  what  I  said ;  for  I  felt  that  I
could  not  be  happy  without  fellowship  with  the  people  of
God.  I  wanted  to  be  wherever  they  were;  and  if  anybody
ridiculed  them,  I  wished  to  be  ridiculed  with  them;  and
if  people  had  an  ugly  name  for  them  I  wanted  to  be
called  by  that  ugly  name ;  for  I  felt  that  unless  I  suffered
with  Christ  in  His  humiliation  I  could  not  expect  to  reign
with  Him  in  His  glory."

The  outcome  of  his  importunity  to  the  dilatory  minister
was  that  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  was  proposed  for
membership  at  a  church  meeting  early  in  March,  1850,
and  although  there  was  again  a  delay  in  sending  brethren
to  visit  him,  he  was  duly  admitted  a  member  on  Thursday,
April  4.  "  Oh,  that  I  may  henceforth  live  more  for  the


74      LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

glory  of  Him  by  whom  I  feel  assured  that  I  shall  be
everlastingly  saved !  "  he  wrote  to  his  father  in  announcing
the  news.  "  Owing  to  my  scruples  on  account  of  baptism
I  did  not  sit  down  at  the  Lord's  Table,  and  cannot  in
conscience  do  so  until  I  am  baptized.  To  one  who  does
not  see  the  necessity  of  baptism  it  is  perfectly  right  and
proper  to  partake  of  this  blessed  privilege ;  but  were  /  to
do  so,  I  conceive  it  would  be  to  tumble  over  the  wall,  since
I  feel  persuaded  it  is  Christ's  appointed  way  of  pro-
fessing Him."  Again.  "  Since  last  Thursday  I  have  been
unwell  in  body,  but  I  may  say  that  my  soul  has  been  almost
in  heaven."  At  this  time  he  evidently  had  an  ardent  desire
to  become  a  preacher,  for  in  the  same  letter  to  his  father
he  says,  "  How  I  long  for  the  time  when  it  may  please
God  to  make  me  like  you,  my  father,  a  successful
preacher  of  the  Gospel.  I  almost  envy  you  your  exalted
privilege."

The  benefits  of  church  fellowship  could  not  be  enjoyed
to  the  full  until  the  young  member  was  able  to  participate  in
the  Lord's  Supper,  and  from  this  he  felt  bound  to  abstain
until  he  had  been  baptized.  There  was,  therefore,  every
incentive  to  undergo  the  ordinance  with  the  least  possible
delay.  On  inquiry  young  Spurgeon  found  that  the
nearest  Baptist  Chapel  was  at  Isleham,  distant  about
eight  miles  from  Newmarket,  and  he  was  not  long  in
communicating  with  the  minister,  Mr.  W.  W.  Cantlow,  a
former  Jamaican  missionary,  who  arranged  to  baptize  him
on  May  3,  his  mother's  birthday.

In  a  letter  to  his  mother,  two  days  before  the  event,  he
said,  "  Your  birthday  will  now  be  doubly  memorable,  for
on  the  third  of  May  the  boy  for  whom  you  have  so  often
prayed,  the  boy  of  hopes  and  fears,  your  firstborn,  will
join  the  visible  Church  of  the  redeemed  on  earth,  and


BAPTISM  AND  CHRISTIAN  SERVICE.


75


will  bind  himself  doubly  to  the  Lord  his  God  by  open
profession.  You,  my  mother,  have  been  the  great  means
in  God's  hand  of  rendering  me  what  I  hope  I  am.  Your
kind  warning  Sabbath-evening  addresses  were  too  deeply
settled  on  my  heart  to  be  forgotten.  You,  by  God's
blessing,  prepared  the  way  for  the  preached  Word,  and


The  Rev.  W.  W.  Cantlow,  who  baptized
C.  H.  Spurgeon  in  the  River  Lark  at  Isleham.


for  that  holy  book  The  Rise  and  Progress.  If  I  have  any
courage,  if  I  feel  prepared  to  follow  my  Saviour  not  only
into  the  water,  but  should  He  call  me  even  into  the  fire,
I  love  you  as  the  preacher  to  my  heart  of  such  courage,
as  my  praying,  watching  mother."


76      LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

The  memorable  day  arrived.  The  young  convert  had
obtained  leave  of  absence  from  his  teaching  duties,  and
rising  early  he  spent  a  couple  of  hours  in  prayer  before
walking,  in  company  with  a  younger  lad,  to  Isleham.
"  What  a  walk  it  was !  "  he  says,  "  what  thoughts  and
prayers  thronged  my  soul  during  that  morning's  journey."
The  weather  was  far  from  warm,  and  the  Isleham  Baptists
carried  out  the  ordinance  not  in  their  church-building
but  by  the  ferry  on  the  river  Lark.  Indeed,  all  the
Baptists  in  that  district  performed  the  solemn  rite  in  the
open-air,  and  the  river  in  the  course  of  seven  or  eight
miles  served  no  fewer  than  five  churches.  Naturally  a
baptism  drew  a  large  crowd  of  spectators  together  on
either  bank,  and  the  ordeal  was  therefore  no  small  one
for  a  young  Christian  to  go  through.

Arrived  at  Mr.  Cantlow's  house,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was
greatly  cheered  by  the  sight  of  the  minister's  smiling  face,
and  after  a  talk  over  the  open  confession  which  the  youth
was  to  make  the  couple  walked  down  to  the  ferry,  half
a  mile  from  the  village.  The  ferry-house  was  always  freely
placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  minister  and  candidates  at  a
baptizing,  and  here  a  short  service  was  held  prior  to  the
immersion.  The  youth,  however,  was  unable  to<  follow  the
proceedings  closely,  for,  he  tells  us,  his  thoughts  were  in
the  water,  sometimes  with  his  Lord  in  joy,  sometimes  with
himself  in  trembling  awe  at  making  so  public  a  confession.
Two  young  women  were  to  be  baptized  at  the  same  time
— Diana  Wilkinson  and  Eunice  Fuller — and  C.  H.
Spurgeon  was  asked  to  conduct  them  through  the  water  to
the  minister,  but  never  having  seen  a  baptism  before  he
timidly  declined,  for  fear  of  making  a  mistake.  So  far  as
natural  circumstances  went  there  was  much  to  hold  back
the  young  convert  from  his  bold  confession.  The  method  of


78   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

procedure  was  unknown  to  him,  the  wind  blew  down  the
river  with  a  cutting  blast,  and  at  ever)7  available  place  on
either  shore,  on  the  ferry-boat  and  even  in  row-boats,
along  the  river  curious  spectators  had  gathered  to  see  the
youth  immersed.  For  a  moment  he  felt  nervous,  but  after
walking  a  few  steps  into  the  water  he  experienced  an
inward  joy  and  delight  at  being  able  to  make  so  open  a
confession,  and  felt  as  if  Heaven  and  earth  and  hell
might  all  gaze  upon  him,  for  he  was  not  ashamed  there
and  then  to  own  himself  "  a  follower  of  the  Lamb."  "  My
timidity  was  washed  away,"  he  declared  many  years  after-
wards, "  it  floated  down  the  river  into  the  sea,  and  must
have  been  devoured  by  the  fishes,  for  I  never  felt  anything
of  the  kind  since.  Baptism  also  loosed  my  tongue,  and
from  that  day  it  has  never  been  quiet.  I  lost  a  thousand
fears  in  that  River  Lark,  and  found  that  in  keeping  His
commandments  there  is  great  reward."  A  happy  evening
was  spent  with  Mr.  Cantlow  and  other  friends  round  a  peat-
fire  in  the  chapel  vestry,  where  a  prayer-meeting  was  held,
and  young  Spurgeon  so  prayed  that  the  people  who  heard
him  marvelled  greatly  and  wept  for  joy.

All  through  his  life  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  very  emphatic
in  declaring  explicitly  his  belief  as  to  baptism.  "  If  any  ask
why  I  was  baptized,"  he  once  said,  "  I  answer  because  I
believed  it  to  be  an  ordinance  of  Christ  very  specially
joined  by  Him  with  faith  in  His  Name.  '  He  that
believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved.'  'I  had  no  super-
stitious idea  that  baptism  would  save  me,  for  I  was  saved.
I  did  not  seek  to  have  sin  washed  away  by  water,  for  I
believed  that  my  sins  were  forgiven  me  through  faith  in
Christ  Jesus.  Yet  I  regarded  baptism  as  the  token  to
the  believer  of  cleansing,  the  emblem  of  his  burial  with
his  Lord,  and  the  outward  avowal  of  his  new  birth.  I


8o      LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

did  not  trust  in  it ;  but  because  I  trusted  in  Jesus  as  my
Saviour  I  felt  bound  to  obey  Him  as  my  Lord  and  follow
the  example  which  He  set  us  in  Jordan  in  His  own
baptism.  I  did  not  fulfil  the  outward  ordinance  to  join  a
party  and  become  a  Baptist,  but  to  be  a  Christian  after  the
apostolic  fashion;  for  they,  when  they  believed,  were
baptized."

One  of  the  most  interesting  documents  relating  to  this
period  which  has  been  left  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon  is  a  diary
commenced  two  days  after  he  had  been  admitted  to  Church
fellowship  at  Newmarketj  and  continued  to  June  2oth,  1850.
The  journal  is  prefaced  by  six  important  dates  in  the
writer's  spiritual  career,  and  is  headed:  "1850 — A  blessed
year  of  Jubilee."  In  this  little  book  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon  lays  bare  'his  soul,  and  records  with  vivid
accuracy  the  spiritual  experiences  he  was  passing  through.
Again  he  had  those  alternations. of  depression  and  cheerful-
ness. On  April  pth,  he  writes,  "  Happy  again  to-day ;  if
such  days  continue  earth  and  Heaven  will  be  but  one."
Three  days  later  we  read,  "  Earthly  things  have  engaged
too  much  of  my  thoughts  this  day.  I  have  not  been
able  to  fix  my  attention  entirely  upon  my  Saviour.  Yet,
even  yet,  the  Lord  has  not  hidden  His  face  from  me."
On  April  i6th  he  was  moie  self-condemnatory.  "I  am
now  getting  drowsy  in  spirit.  Strong  Deliverer,  keep  my
eyes  open !  My  soul  seems  to  long  after  the  fleshpots  of
Egypt,  and  that  after  eating  Heavenly  manna;  help  and
forgive  me,  O  my  Saviour."  On  the  following  day :
"There  is  a  little  cloud  betwixt  me  and  my  Sun  of
righteousness,  but  I  doubt  not  that  He  still  shines  upon
me."  From  the  next  entry  we  judge  the  depression  to  have
been  less.  "  I  trust  the  cloud  has  burst.  I  have  seen
some  few  gleams  of  sunshine  to-day.  ...  I  have  been


BAPTISM  AND  CHRISTIAN  SERVICE.        8r

able  to  renew  my  strength";  but  on  April  ipth  the
trouble  had  returned :  "  I  do  not  live  near  enough  to
God.  I  have  to  lament  my  coldness  and  indifference  in
the  ways  of  the  Lord."  Again,  on  April  20th,  "Went
round  with  my  tracts;  could  not  feel  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord  upon  me.  I  seemed  to  have  a  clog  upon  my  feet


Inscription  on  the  Memorial  Stone  of  the  new  school-
room adjoining  Isleham  Chapel.


and  my  tongue.  I  have  richly  deserved  this,  for  I  have
not  prayed  or  studied  my  Bible  as  I  ought."  But  a  bright
change  soon  followed.  The  next  day,  Sunday,  he  declares,
"  On  the  whole  I  have  much  enjoyed  this  day,"  and  on
Monday  at  the  prayer  meeting  he  engaged  in  prayer
publicly  for  the  first  time.


82  LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

As  his  baptism  drew  near  his  faith  grew  stronger.  After
an  entry  on  April  26th,  "  How  my  father's  fears  that  I
should  trust  to  baptism  stir  up  my  soul !  My  God,  Thou
knowest  that  I  hate  such  a  thought,"  he  writes  on  the
27th:  "Fear  begone!  Doubts  fall  back.  In  the  name
of  the  Lord  of  hosts  I  would  set  up  my  banner.  Come  on
ye  demons  of  the  pit ;  my  Captain  is  more  than  a  match
for  you ;  in  His  name,  armed  with  His  weapons  and  in
His  strength  I  dare  defy  you  all.  How  glorious  'twould
be  to  die  by  the  side  of  such  a  Leader."  The  day  before
his  baptism  he  wrote,  "  To-morrow  will  be  a  solemn  day,"
and  after  the  ceremony  was  over  we  find  the  entry,  "  Blest
pool !  Sweet  emblem  of  my  death  to  all  the  world  !  May
I,  henceforward,  live  alone  for  Jesus !  Accept  my  body
and  soul  as  a  poor  sacrifice,  tie  me  unto  Thee;  in  Thy
strength  I  now  devote  myself  to  Thy  service  for  ever;
never  may  I  shrink  from  owning  Thy  Name.

'  Witness  ye  men  and  angels  now,
If  I  forsake  the  Lord ! ' "

So  the  diary  goes  on.  Sometimes  there  is  an  entry  to
this  effect,  "  I  have  again  to  confess  my  lukewarmness ;  I
fear  I  am  losing  my  first-  love.  Coldness  and  deadness
seem  to  be  natural  to  me;  I  have  no  inward  warmth."  Or
like  this,  "How  feeble  I  am.  I  am  not  able  to  keep
myself  near  to  God.  I  am  compelled  to  own  my  own
deadness,"  whilst  at  another  time  we  read,  "  Glorious  day ;
happy  were  all  like  this ! "  and  "  Enjoyed  an  ecstasy  of
delight.  I  seemed  transported  and  able  to  fly  beyond  the
bounds  of  this  poor  atom  of  an  earth.  Spiritual  realities
were  present  to  view,  while  the  flesh,  like  Abraham's
servant,  tarried  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain."  And,  be  it
remembered,  the  writer  was  a  youth  not  yet  sixteen  years
of  age !


BAPTISM  AND  CHRISTIAN  SERVICE.         83

But  the  distress,  caused  by  his  own  supposed  luke-
warmness,  was  not  the  only  trouble  which  disturbed
C.  H.  Spurgeon's  peace  of  mind.  Even  at  this  early  age
we  find  him  the  subject  of  slander.  Under  date  May  4th
is  the  entry :  "  There  is  a  report  in  the  church  that
Mr.  S.  and  I  have  been  on  the  heath.  Mr.  A.  told  me
of  it  very  gruffly.  Mr.  H.  will  not  commune  because  so
many  have  been  to  the  races.  My  Master  knows  I  have
no  need  to  tell  Him  I  am  innocent.  Though  I  be  cast
out  and  rejected  of  the  disciples,  the  Lord  will  not  cast
off  one  of  His  chosen,  I  can  in  this  respect  wash  my
hands  in  innocency."  The  lack  of  earnestness  in  his
fellow  Sunday  School  teachers,  too,  caused  him  much
sorrow.  On  May  8th  he  writes :  "  Teachers'  business
meeting.  Too  much  joking  and  levity  to  agree  with  my
notions  of  what  a  Sunday  School  teacher  should  be.  Lord
keep  me  from  the  evil  of  the  world,  let  me  not  be  led
away ;  but  if  these  are  Thy  people,  help  me  to  serve  Thee
better  than  they  and  to  be  more  like  my  Master."  Four
weeks  later  an  entry  reads :  "  Teachers'  meeting  after  the
service.  What  a  want  of  spirituality  and  vital  godliness !  "
It  is  not  difficult  to  understand  how  wrong  this  spirit  of
levity  must  have  appeared  to  a  youth  who,  after  attending
at  the  deathbed  of  one  of  his  scholars,  could  not  but
think  everybody  a  fool  for  doing  anything  except  preparing
to  die.  The  solemnity  of  death  made  him  look  upon  the
men  who  drove  the  carts  in  the  street,  those  who'  were
busy  at  their  shops  and  those  who  were  selling  their  wares
as  being  all  foolish  for  heeding  anything  except  their
eternal  destiny,  and  he  regarded  himself  as  most  of  all
foolish  for  not  pointing  dying  sinners  to  a  living  Christ.

It  is  clear  from  the  entries  in  the  diary  that  the  church
at  Newmarket  was  in  a  very  dead  condition.  The  various


84     LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

services  were  poorly  attended,  and  there  was  an  absence  of
interest  in  those  Christian  activities  which  should  always
characterize  a  church  that  is  alive  to  its  own  needs  and  the
needs  of  the  people  around.  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's
removal  to  Cambridge,  in  August,  1850,  was  therefore  of
benefit  to  him  in  his  spiritual  as  well  as  in  his  intellectual


(Starr  &>  Rigiiall,  photo,  Cambridge.)

The  house  in  Cambridge,  formerly  a  school,  where
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  acted  as  usher.


life.  He  left  Newmarket  on  June  i7th,  and  paid  a  visit
to  his  grandfather  at  Stambourne,  with  whom  he  had  much
pleasant  and  helpful  intercourse  respecting  religious  matters,
and  at  the  close  of  the  summer  vacation  proceeded  to  the
University  city  to  become  usher  in  the  school  of  Mr.


BAPTISM  AND  CHRISTIAN  SERVICE.         85

Leeding,  a  former  teacher  of  his  at  Colchester.  The
new  surroundings  and  acquaintanceship  were  con-
genial. In  Mr.  Leeding's  household  it  was  the  custom
at  eight  o'clock  every  morning  for  each  person,  from  the
master  to  the  servants,  to  spend  half  an  hour  in  prayer
and  meditation  in  his  or  her  chamber,  a  privilege  which
the  young  usher  highly  appreciated.  Then  he  found  in
the  St.  Andrew  Street  Baptist  Chapel,  once  the  scene  of
the  Rev.  Robert  Hall's  labours,  a  church  full  of  life  and
activity,  with  plenty  of  opportunity  for  a  young  convert  to
engage  in  Christian  service.  The  first  Sunday  he  par-
ticipated in  the  Communion  of  the  Lord's  Supper  there,
his -characteristic  honesty  and  bluntness  led  to  an  amusing
incident.  A  gentleman  sat  in  the  same  pew  as  himself,
and,  at  the  close  of  the  service,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  asked
him  if  he  was  well.  "  You  have  the  advantage  of  me,"
said  the  gentleman,  looking  at  the  bold  youth  before  him.
"  I  don't  think  I  have,"  replied  young  Spurgeon,  unabashed,
"  for  you  and  I  are  brothers."  "  I  don't  quite  know  what
you  mean,"  said  the  gentleman.  "Well,"  replied  C.  H.
Spurgeon,  "  when  I  took  the  bread  and  wine  just  now  in
token  of  our  being  one  in  Christ  I  meant  it,  did  not
you  ? "  By  this  time  they  were  in  the  street.  Stepping
before  the  strange  youth  the  astonished  church  member
put  his  hands  on  young  Spurgeon's  shoulders  and
exclaimed  :  "  Oh,  sweet  simplicity !  "  Then  he  added,
"  You  are  quite  right,  my  dear  brother,  you  are  quite
right ;  come  in  to  tea  with  me.  I  am  afraid  I  should  not
have  spoken  to  you  if  you  had  not  first  addressed  me."
That  afternoon  C.  H.  Spurgeon  went  to  tea  with  the  gentle-
man, and  a  close  friendship  sprang  up  which  lasted  to  the
time  of  the  great  preacher's  death.

The  young  usher  had  been  in  Cambridge  only  a  week  or


86  LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

two  when  he  took  charge  of  a  class  in  the  Sunday  School,
and  from  time  to  time  addressed  the  whole  of  the  scholars
and  teachers.  His  youth  and  ability  attracted  the  atten-
tion and  roused  the  interest  of  the  church  officials,  and
he  was  encouraged  to  join  the  Lay  Preachers'  Association,
founded  in  connection  with  St.  Andrew  Street  Chapel  by


(Starr  &*  Rignall,  photo,  Cambridge.)

St.  Andrew  Street  Chapel,  Cambridge,  the  officials  of  which  first  sent  out
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  to  preach  in  the  villages  round  the  town.

the  Rev.  Robert  Hall.  This  association  provided
preachers  for  the  various  villages  round  Cambridge,  and
C.  H.  Spurgeon  had  only  been  domiciled  in  the  city  a
month  or  two  when  he  was  appointed  to  take  a  village
service  regularly  each  Sunday.  There  had  been  some


BAPTISM  AND  CHRISTIAN  SERVICE.        87

difficulty  in  getting  him  to  preach,  so  great  was  his
diffidence,  and  the  story  of  his  first  sermon  is  well  worth
repeating  in  his  own  words.

"  I  had,  one  Saturday,  finished  morning  school  and  the
boys  were  all  going  home  for  the  half-holiday,  when  in
came  the  aforesaid  '  Bishop  '  (Mr.  James  Vinter,  known
among  local  Nonconformists  as  '  Bishop  '  Vinter)  to  ask
me  to  go  over  to  Teversham  the  next  evening,  for  a  young
man  was  to  preach  there  who  was  not  much  used  to
services  and  very  likely  would  be  glad  of  company.  That
was  a  cunningly-devised  sentence,  if  I  remember  rightly —
and  I  think  I  do;  for  at  the  time,  in  the  light  of  that
Sunday  evening's  revelation,  I  turned  it  over  and  vastly
admired  its  ingenuity.  A  request  to  go  and  preach  would
have  met  with  a  decided  negative;  but  merely  to  act  as
company  to  a  good  brother  who  did  not  like  to  be  lonely,
and  perhaps  might  ask  me  to  give  out  a  hymn  or  to  pray,
was  not  a  difficult  matter,  and  the  request  understood  in
that  fashion  was  cheerfully  complied  with.  Little  did
the  lad  know  what  Jonathan  and  David  were  doing  when
he  was  made  to  run  for  the  arrow,  and  as  little  did  I  know
when  I  was  cajoled  into  accompanying  a  young  man  to
Teversham.

"  My  Sunday  School  work  was  over,  tea  had  been  taken,
and  I  set  off  through  Barmwell  and  away  along  the
Newmarket  Road  with  a  gentleman  some  few  years  my
senior.  We  talked  of  good  things,  and  at  last  I  expressed
my  hope  that  he  would  feel  the  presence  of  God  while
preaching.  He  seemed  to  start,  and  assured  me  that  he
had  never  preached  in  his  life  and  could  not  attempt  such
a  thing,  he  was  looking  to  his  young  friend,  Mr.  Spurgeon,
for  that.  This  was  a  new  view  of  the  situation,  and  I
could  only  reply  that  I  was  no  minister ;  and  that  even  if


88  LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

I  had  been  I  was  quite  unprepared.  My  companion  only
repeated  that  he,  in  a  still  more  emphatic  sense,  was  not  a
preacher,  that  he  would  help  me  in  any  other  part  of  the
service,  but  that  there  would  be  no  sermon  unless  I
delivered  one.  He  told  me  that  if  I  repeated  one  of  my
Sunday  School  addresses  it  would  just  suit  the  poor
people,  and  would  probably  give  them  more  satisfaction
than  the  studied  sermon  of  a  learned  divine.  I  felt  that  I


The  cottage  at  Teversham  where  in   1850  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  as  a  lad  of
sixteen,  preached  his  first  sermon.

was  fairly  committed  to  do  my  best.  I  walked  along
quietly,  lifting  up  my  soul  to  God,  and  it  seemed  to  me
that  I  could  surely  tell  a  few  poor  cottagers  of  the
sweetness  and  love  of  Jesus,  for  I  felt  them  in  my  own
soul.  Prayrng  for  Divine  help  I  resolved  to  make  the
attempt.  My  text  should  be,  "  Unto  you  therefore  which
believe  He  is  precious,"  and  I  could  trust  the  Lord  to
open  my  mouth  in  honour  of  His  dear  Son.  It  seemed  a


BAPTISM  AND  CHRISTIAN  SERVICE.        89

great  risk  and  a  serious  trial ;  but  depending  upon  the
Power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  I  would  at  least  tell  out  the
story  of  the  cross  and  not  allow  the  people  to  go  home
without  a  word.

"  We  entered  the  low-pitched  room  of  the  thatched
cottage,  where  a  few  simple-minded  farm  labourers  and
their  wives  were  gathered  together;  we  sang  and  prayed
and  read  the  Scriptures,  and  then  came  my  first  sermon.
How  long  or  how  short  it  was  I  cannot  now  remember.
It  was  not  half  such  a  task  as  I  had  feared  it  would  be,
but  I  was  glad  to  see  my  way  to  a  fair  conclusion  and  to
the  giving  out  of  the  last  hymn.  To  my  own  delight  I
had"  not  broken  down,  nor  stopped  short  in  the  middle,
nor  been  destitute  of  ideas,  and  the  desired  haven  was  in
view.  I  made  a  finish  and  took  up  the  hymn  book ;  but
to  my  astonishment  an  aged  voice  cried  out,  '  Bless  your
dear  heart,  how  old  are  you  ?  '  My  very  solemn  reply  was,
'  You  must  wait  till  the  service  is  over  before  making  any
such  inquiries.  Let  us  now  sing.'  We  did  sing.  The
young  preacher  pronounced  the  benediction,  and  then  there
began  a  dialogue  which  enlarged  into  a  warm,  friendly
talk,  in  which  everybody  appeared  to  take  part.  '  How
old  are  you  ?  '  was  the  leading  question.  '  I  am  under
sixty,'  was  the  reply.  'Yes,  and  under  sixteen,'  was  the
old  lady's  rejoinder.  '  Never  mind  my  age ;  think  of  the
Lord  Jesus  and  His  preciousness,'  was  all  that  I  could
say,  after  promising  to  come  again  if  the  gentlemen  at
Cambridge  thought  me  fit  to  do  so."  Such  was  the
beginning  of  that  wonderful  ministry,  which  was  to  last
over  forty  years  and  be  of  world-wide  note  and  usefulness.

After  this  the  young  usher's  name  was  placed  upon  the
plan  of  village  preachers,  and  he  was  no  week  without  an
appointment.  He  used  to  walk  out  six  or  eight  miles  fo


BAPTISM  AND  CHRISTIAN  SERVICE.        9r

fulfil  his  engagements  and  then  walk  back  again.  His
dress  was  similar  to  that  which  he  wore  on  the  first
occasion  at  Teversham — round  jacket  with  broad  turn-
down white  collar,  trousers  to  the  ankles  and  large  peaked
cap.  If  the  weather  was  wet  he  would  put  on  waterproof
leggings,  mackintosh  overcoat  and  a  hat  with  a  waterproof
covering,  whilst  in  order  to  find  his  way  across  the  fields
in  the  dark  a  lantern  was  necessary.  On  one  occasion
before  he  could  reach  his  destination  a  severe  thunder-
storm occurred,  and  passing  a  cottage  on  the  road  he
noticed  a  woman  who  seemed  to  be  greatly  alarmed  by  the
lightning  and  thunder.  The  youth  felt  he  could  not  leave
a  fellow-creature  in  distress,  so  he  entered  the  home,  read
a  few  verses  of  Scripture,  and  prayed  with  the  woman  until
she  was  comforted.  Continuing  his  journey  to  the  village
he  found  that  the  people  were  not  expecting  a  service
as  it  was  thought  the  storm  would  prevent  the  preacher
travelling  from  Cambridge.  But  the  young  usher  was
nothing  daunted.  He  went  round  quickly  from  house  to
house,  invited  the  people  to  come  to  the  regular  meeting-
place,  and  gathered  a  larger  congregation  than  usual.  On
another  occasion,  going  home  late  from  a  preaching
engagement,  he  saw  standing  by  the  side  of  a  lonely  foot-
path, a  gaunt  and  ghostly  object  with  outstretched  arms.
The  surroundings  and  circumstances  were  calculated  to
cause  alarm,  and  for  a  moment  the  youth  believed  he  was
face  to  face  with  a  supernatural  being.  But  the  next  moment
he  had  jumped  a  ditch  and  grasped  the  object,  which
proved  to  be  nothing  more  dreadful  than  an  old  tree  that
some  wag  had  covered  with  whitewash  to  frighten  simple
folk.  The  low  pitched  rooms  of  small  cottages  were  not
ideal  places  for  crowded  gatherings,  and  often  did  C.  H.
Spurgeon  see  the  candles  burn  dimly  for  want  of  air,  a


92  LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEON.

circumstance  to  which  he  has  referred  in  his  "  Sermons  in
Candles."  Once  when  preaching  in  a  little  village  chapel
the  youth  had  a  candle  on  each  side  of  him  in  the  front  of
the  pulpit.  Warming  to  his  subject  his  gestures  became
somewhat  vigorous,  and  an  unfortunate  wave  of  the  hand
knocked  one  candle  from  its  place  "  It  fell,"  says  the
preacher,  "  upon  the  bald  head  of  a  friend  below,  who
looked  up  with  an  expression  which  I  can  see  at  this
moment,  and  it  makes  me  smile  still.  I  took  no  more
notice  of  the  accident  than  to  weave  it  into  what  I  was
saying;  and  I  believe  most  of  my  hearers  considered  it
to  have  been  a  striking  practical  illustration  of  the  remark
which  accompanied  it,  '  How  soon  is  the  glory  of  life
dashed  down ! ' '

From  the  first  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  ability  as  a  preacher
was  evident,  and  yet  at  this  very  time  there  were  not
wanting  those  who  dissuaded  him  from  preaching.  Fortu-
nately, however,  their  counsel  was  outweighed  by  the
judgment  of  persons  of  wider  experience.  In  the  open-
air  he  was  as  successful  as  inside  a  building,  and  at  all
times  his  earnestness  was  most  marked.  "  Souls,  souls,
souls, — I  hope  this  rings  in  my  ears  and  hurries  me  on,"
he  wrote  to  a  friend,  and  that  was,  indeed,  his  burden
throughout  his  long  ministry.

•  It  must  not  be  supposed  that  his  Sunday  School  work
and  his  numerous  preaching  engagements  were  allowed  to
interfere  with  his  teaching  duties  or  his  studies.  Mr.
Leeding's  letters  were  filled  with  praise  of  the  young  usher,
and  had  it  not  been  for  the  fact  that  his  Nonconformity
debarred  him,  he  would  doubtless  have  entered  the
University  and  taken  a  degree.  Statements  such  as  have
been  frequently  made  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  want  of  learning
are  as  ridiculous  as  they  are  untrue.  He  was  even  at


BAPTISM  AND  CHRISTIAN  SERVICE.         93

this  period  a  proficient  Latin,  Greek,  and  mathematical
scholar,  and  Mr.  Leeding,  a  tutor  of  ability  and  discern-
ment, expressly  stated  that  he  considered  the  young  man
sufficiently  proficient  in  his  studies  to  take  a  good  place
on  the  list,  had  the  way  been  open,  and  to  "  win  in  a
canter."  And  yet  even  after  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  death,  a
prominent  journal  described  the  great  preacher  as  "  all  but
unlettered."  Ignorance  must  be  the  charitable  excuse  for
such  a  false  statement.


CHAPTER   VII.

THE  FIRST  PASTORATE  AT  WATERBEACH.

CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON  was  now  seven-
teen years  of  age,  and  his  remarkable  gifts  made
him  the  most  acceptable  of  all  the  young  men  sent  out  by
the  Cambridge  Lay  Preachers'  Association  into  the  villages
surrounding  the  University  town.  Never  a  Sunday  passed
but  what  he  was  preaching  somewhere,  and  in  the  autumn
of  1851  he  paid  his  first  visit  to  Waterbeach,  afterwards
memorable  as  being  the  scene  of  his  maiden  pastorate.
The  village  boasted  a  chapel,  a  curious  little  structure
with  a  thatched  roof,  that  had  once  been  a  dovecote,  and
was  purchased  by  the  local  Baptists  for  a  hundred  pounds.
It  had  a  bricked  floor,  below  the  level  of  the  road,  and
the  pews  were  of  the  old-fashioned  high-backed  kind,
whilst  on  the  fronts  of  the  galleries  and  on  the  square
posts  supporting  them  were  placed  hooks  for  the  garments
of  the  worshippers.  In  front  of  the  pulpit,  a  lofty  struct-
ture  of  the  "  wine-glass  "  order,  stood  a  long  table,  at  the  end
of  which,  immediately  under  the  preacher,  sat  the  precentor,
with  the  musicians  down  each  side,  and  during  the  sermon
these  would  rest  their  instruments  upon  the  table.

It  was  the  custom  at  Waterbeach  Chapel  for  any
worshipper  who  might  feel  drowsy  to  keep  himself  awake
by  standing  up,  and  it  must  have  been  indeed  a  curious
sight  to  witness  the  worshippers  one  after  another  rising
in  their  places  to  prevent  themselves  from  falling  asleep


THE    FIRST    PASTORATE.


95


during  dull  sermons  delivered  by  prosy  divines.  At  the
offering  of  prayer,  too,  every  member  of  the  Waterbeach
congregation  used  to  stand  with  his  back  to  the  pulpit,
leaning  forward  over  the  rear  of  the  pew,  an  attitude
regarded  as  particularly  devotional.  Such  was  the  quaint
little  church  to  which  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  went  for
the  first  time  in  i85r.  One  of  the  deacons,  Mr.  Coe,  many


Old  Waterbeach  Chapel,  the  sc;ne  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  first  pastorate.

years  afterwards   thus   described   the   visit   of   the  young
preacher  :  —

"  He  sat  on  one  side  of  the  table-pew  and  I  on  the
other  side.  I  shall  never  forget  it.  He  looked  so  white,
and  I  thought  to  myself,  Mil  never  be  able  to  preach —
what  a  boy  he  is.  I  despised  his  youth,  you  know,  and


96     LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

thought  all  this,  while  the  congregation  was  singing.
Then  when  the  hymn  was  over,  he  jumped  up  and  began
to  read  and  expound  the  chapter  about  the  Scribes  and
Pharisees  and  lawyers,  and  as  he  went  on  about  their
garments,  their  phylacteries,  and  long  prayers,  I  knew  that
he  could  preach."  He  did  preach,  and  after  one  or  two
more  visits  the  deacons  asked  him  to  become  their  pastor.
The  church  was  poor  and  could  not  afford  to  pay  an
adequate  salary,  but  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  not  seeking
worldly  riches,  and  feeling  that  the  call  was  from  God,
he  accepted  it  and  became  minister  of  Waterbeach  Chapel,
with  its  forty  members.  At  the  same  time,  to  obtain  the
wherewithal  to  live  without  want,  he  continued  his  work
as  usher  at  Cambridge,  and  it  is  surprising  that  so  young
a  lad  was  able  to  teach  all  the  week,  preach  three  sermons
full  of  power  and  original  thought  on  Sunday,  and  address
village  congregations  almost  every  evening  from  Monday
to  Saturday,  without  breaking  down  in  health.  But
young  Spurgeon's  heart  was  in  the  work,  and  what  might
have  been  a  labour  to  another  was  a  delight  and  a
pleasure  to  him.  A  few  weeks  of  such  a  ministry  were
sufficient  to  revive  the  cause.  All  the  empty  seats  were
taken,  the  aisles  were  filled  with  standing  listeners,  and
crowds  of  country  folk,  some  of  whom  had  driven  or
walked  in  from  a  distance,  surrounded  the  doors  unable  to
gain  admittance.  The  increased  prosperity  of  the  church
brought  an  increased  income,  and  after  a  time  the  young
minister  gave  up  his  position  as  usher  and  received  a
salary  from  the  church  of  forty-five  pounds  a  year,  which
was  supplemented  by  gifts  in  kind.  "  I  do  not  think,"
he  says,  "  there  was  a  pig  killed  by  any  one  of  the  congre-
gation without  my  having  some  portion  of  it,  and  one  or
other  of  them,  when  coming  to  the  market  at  Cam-


THE    FIRST    PASTORATE.


97


bridge,  would  bring  me  bread,  so  that  I  had  enough  bread
and  meat  to  pay  my  rent  with,  and  I  often  paid  my  land-
lady in  that  fashion."  An  extra  gift  of  money,  too,  would
occasionally  reach  the  young  minister  from  an  unexpected
source,  one  of  the  most  remarkable  of  such  cases  being
when  a  miser,  never  before  known  to  give  anything,


The  earliest  known  portrait  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon.

presented  C.  H.  Spurgeon  with  seven-and-sixpence  for
the  purchase  of  a  much-needed  hat.  Everyone  was
surprised  at  the  extravagance  and  generosity  of  the  miser,
but  the  explanation  was  forthcoming  on  the  following
Sunday,  when  the  man  went  to  the  minister  and  asked
to  be  prayed  for,  that  he  might  be  saved  from  the


98     LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

sin  of  covetousness,  "  for,"  said  he,  "  the  Lord  told  me  to
give  you  half-a-sovereign,  but  I  kept  back  half-a-crown,  and
I  can't  rest  of  a  night  for  thinking  of  it."  "  Oh,  if  that's
the  case,"  said  young  Spurgeon,  "  you  can  easily  set  the
matter  right,"  and  the  remaining  half-a-crown  was  at  once
handed  over.

Waterbeach,  with  its  surrounding  district,  at  the  advent
of  the  youthful  preacher,  seems  to  have  been  notorious
for  its  drunkards,  gamblers,  Sabbath-breakers,  and
ne'er-do-weels  of  every  type  and  kind.  It  was,  in  fact,  one
of  the  worst  rural  districts  in  England,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon
himself  testified  that  there  had  been  "robberies  and
villainies  of  every  kind  all  round  the  neighbourhood."  But
as  in  the  church,  so  in  the  district,  an  extraordinary
change  was  witnessed  within  a  very  short  time.  The
biggest  vagabonds  of  the  village  were  "  weeping  floods  of
tears,"  and  those  who  had  been  the  curse  of  the  parish
became  its  blessing.  Crime  ceased  because  the  criminals
were  themselves  in  the  house  of  God,  "  rejoicing  to  hear  of
Jesus  crucified,"  and  of  an  evening,  from  almost  every
cottage,  the  sound  of  hymn-singing  might  be  heard.
This  wonderful  change  in  the  character  of  the  district,
which  has  lasted  even  till  now,  was  all  the  result  of  the
ministry  of  the  youth  from  Cambridge.  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon's  secret  then,  as  ever  afterwards,  was  his  abso-
lute dependence  upon  God  and  his  whole-hearted  earnest-
ness and  zeal.  A  typical  instance  of  the  latter  occurred
on  his  first  visit  to  Waterbeach.  He  was  put  up  for  the
night  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Smith,  and  shared  a  bed  with
Mr.  Smith's  son,  then  a  young  boy.  Before  retiring,
C.  H.  Spurgeon  went  upon  his  knees,  but  his  companion
tumbled  into  bed  without  prayer  and  lay  down.  No  sooner
had  young  Spurgeon  finished  his  devotions  than  he  inquired


8"2F

»  5


ioo  LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

of  his  bedfellow  if  he  were  not  afraid  to  go  to  bed
without  asking  God  for  protection  during  the  night.
"  What  a  fearful  thing  would  it  be,"  he  said,  "  if  you  went
to  your  last  sleep  without  a  prayer  and  a  Saviour."  For
an  hour  or  more  the  young  preacher  talked  to  the  boy,
and  his  earnestness  was  so  evident  that  the  boy  was
moved.  The  youthful  preacher  had  him  out  of  bed  and
prayed  with  him,  and  that  night  the  lad  was  converted.
He  is  now  an  honoured  deacon  at  Waterbeach.  The  same
boy  was  sleeping  with  C.  H.  Spurgeon  on  another  occasion,
when  in  the  early  hours  the  young  preacher,  in  great
distress,  awoke  his  companion  and  told  him  that  his  mind
was  filled  with  thoughts  of  the  Judgment.  He  described,
as  in  a  vision,  the  fiery  torments  of  the  lost  and  the
ascending  smoke  of  the  wrath  of  God,  and  never  will  his
listener  forget  that  Saturday  night,  or,  rather,  Sunday
morning.  The  matter  was  so  laid  upon  the  preacher's
heart,  that  on  the  Sunday  evening  he  embodied  the
thoughts  in  his  sermon  and  preached  the  most  terrible
address  ever  delivered  by  him.  The  chapel  was  crowded,
and  as  the  young  minister,  appearing  almost  inspired,  took
his  congregation  to  the  verge  of  the  bottomless  pit  he
seemed  to  hold  them  over  the  awful  brink  and  cause  them
to  look  into  its  seething,  lurid  depths,  until  strong  men
grew  afraid  and  cried  for  mercy,  and  women  sobbed  and
fainted.  The  memory  of  that  dreadful  picture,  painted
before  their  eyes,  startles  those  who  were  present  in
the  chapel,  even  to  this  day.

The  youth  was  not  content  merely  to  preach  to  those
who  cared  to  enter  the  chapel;  he  would  go  out  into
the  streets  and  lanes,  reproving  the  idlers  and  the  flagrant
sinners,  and  by  his  very  earnestness  compelling  them  to
attend  the  services.  Sunday  after  Sunday  was  he  seen


» ?

&3


--     B

s-

5-0


102   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

leading  to  the  chapel  a  little  crowd  of  men  and  boys  whose
thoughts  had  never  before  turned  towards  the  house  of
God,  and  almost  weekly  some  of  this  number  were  con-
verted and  entered  upon  respectable,    God-fearing  lives.
Nothing  like  it  had  ever  been  known,  and  from  miles  round
people  who  had  heard  of  the  "  boy-preacher's  "  fame  went
to  Waterbeach  to  see  and  hear  him  for  themselves.     But  it
was  not  fame  that  he  sought;    he  wanted   to  see  souls
saved,  lives  changed,  and  the  church  a  centre  of  blessing
to  the  district  round ;  and  what  joy  was  his  when  he  heard
of  sinners  being  led  to  the  Saviour  through  the  instru-
mentality of  his  preaching !     He  tells  us,  "  When  I  began
to  preach  in  the  little  thatched  chapel  at  Waterbeach  my
first  concern  was,  would  God  save  any  souls  through  me  ?
They  called  me  a  ragged-headed  boy,  and  I  think  I  was
just  that.     I  know  I  wore  a  jacket.     After  I  had  preached
for  some  little  time  I  thought,  '  This   Gospel  has  saved
me,   but   then  somebody   else  preached  it;    will   it  save
anybody    else   now   that   I  preach    it  ? '     Some    Sundays
went  over,  and  I  used  to  say  to  the  deacons,  '  Have  you
heard  of  anybody  finding  the  Lord  under  my  ministry  ?  '
My  good  old  friend  and  deacon  said  '  I  am  sure  somebody
must  have  received  the  Saviour ;   I  am  quite  certain  it  is
so.'     '  Oh ! '  I  answered,  '  but  I  want  to  know  it.     I  want  to
prove  that  it  is  so.'     How  my  heart  leaped  for  joy  when  I
heard  tidings  of  my  first  convert !     I  could  never  be  satis-
fied with  a  full  congregation  and  the  kind  expressions  of
friends;    I  longed  to  hear  that  hearts  had  been  broken,
that   tears   had   been   seen    streaming  from    the   eyes    of
penitents.     How  I  did  rejoice  as  one  that  findeth  great
spoil,  one  Sunday  afternoon,  when  my  good  deacon  said
to   me  '  God  has   set   his  seal   on  your  ministry  in   this
place,  sir.'     Oh,  if  anybody  had  said  to  me,  '  Someone  has


THE    FIRST    PASTORATE.  103.

left  you  twenty  thousand  pounds,'  I  should  not  have  given
a  snap  of  my  fingers  for  it,  compared  with  the  joy  which
I  felt  when  I  was  told  that  God  had  saved  a  soul  through
my  ministry !  '  Who  is  it  ?  '  I  asked.  '  Oh,  it  is  a  poor
labouring  man's  wife  over  at  such  and  such  a  place.  She
went  home  broken-hearted  by  your  sermon  two  or  three
Sundays  ago,  and  she  has  been  in  great  trouble  of  soul,
but  she  has  found  peace  and  she  says  she  would  like  to


(Starr  &*  Rignall,  photo,  Cambridge.}

Reduced  facsimile  of  an  entry  by  C.   H.  Spurgeon  in  the
Waterbeaeh  Church   Book.

speak  to  you.'  I  said,  'Will  you  drive  me  over  there?
I  must  go  to  see  her ' ;  and  early  on  the  Monday  morning.
I  was  driving  down  to  the  village  my  deacon  had  mentioned
to  see  my  first  spiritual  child.  I  felt  like  the  boy  who
has  earned  his  first  guinea,  or  like  a  diver  who  has  been
down  to  the  depths  of  the  sea  and  brought  up  a  rare  pearl."
The  tact  of  the  young  minister  in  dealing  with  difficult


104    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

problems  that  presented  themselves,  and  with  peculiar
individuals  with  whom  he  came  in  contact,  was  remarkable
even  in  these  early  days.  A  woman  at  Waterbeach,
notorious  as  a  virago,  abused  him  one  morning  as  he
passed  her  gate,  in  language  compared  with  which,  he
tells  us,  that  of  the  typical  Billingsgate  fish-woman  would
have  been  nowhere.  The  youth  had  heard  of  this  scold's
weakness,  and  had  already  made  up  his  mind  how  to  act
when  she  assailed  him,  so  smiling  he  said,  "  Yes,
thank  you;  I  am  quite  well;  I  hope  you  are  the  same."
Another  outburst  of  vituperation  followed,  to  which  the
minister  replied,  still  smiling,  "  Yes,  it  does  look  rather
as  if  it  were  going  to  rain ;  I  think  I  had  better  be  getting
on."  "  Bless  the  man,"  she  exclaimed,  "  he's  as  deaf  as  a
post ;  what's  the  use  of  storming  at  him  ?  "

A  different  case  was  that  of  a  good  old  lady  whom
C.  H.  Spurgeon  has  described  as  Mrs.  "  Much-Afraid."
She  had  been  a  believer  in  Christ  for  fifty  years,  but
was  always  fearing  that  she  would  never  enter  the  Gates  of
Heaven,  and,  although  ever  ready  to  help  her  neighbours,
or  to  speak  a  word  to  the  unconverted,  she  was  always
doubting  and  fearing  about  her  own  spiritual  condition,
One  day  when  talking  with  the  young  minister  she  told  him
that  she  had  not  any  hope  at  all ;  she  had  no  faith ;  in
fact  she  believed  she  was  a  hypocrite.  "  Then  don't  come
to  the  chapel  any  more,"  replied  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  promptly,
"  we  don't  want  hypocrites  there.  Why  do  you  come  ?  "
"  I  come  because  I  can't  stop  away,"  said  the  old  lady.
"  I  love  the  people  of  God ;  I  love  the  house  of  God ;  and
I  love  to  worship  God."

"Well,"  said  the  preacher,  "you  are  an  odd  sort  of
hypocrite ;  you  are  a  queer  kind  of  unconverted  woman."
He  then  offered  to  give  her  five  pounds  for  her  hope  of


THE    FIRST    PASTORATE.


105


salvation  if  she  would  sell  it,  but  although  a  moment
before  she  had  declared  she  had  no  hope,  the  old  dame
exclaimed,  indignantly,  "Why,  I  would  not  sell  it  for  a
thousand  worlds."

At  Waterbeach  there  were  a  good  many  people  of  an
Antinomian  tendency,  but  the  young  minister  was  a  match


(Starr  &*  Rtgnall,  photo,  Cambridge.)

The  present  Baptist  Chapel  at  Waterbeach.     The  old

building  in  which  C-  H.  Spurgeon  preached  so  often

and  with  such  ability,  was  burned  to  the  ground.

for  them  all.  One  man  of  bad  life  had  the  hardihood  and
impudence  to  describe  himself  as  one  of  God's  dear
children.  "  So  you  are,"  replied  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "  dear
at  any  price,  either  to  be  given  or  thrown  away."  Another
man  said  that  he  knew  exactly  how  many  children  of  God


io6  LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

there  were  in  his  parish;  there  were  exactly  five.  The
minister  expressed  curiosity  to  learn  their  names,  so  the  man

began  by  saying,  "  There  is  myself '  "  Stop  !  "  said

young  Spurgeon,  "  are  you  quite  sure  about  the  first  one  ?  "

In  contrast  with  people  of  this  stamp — apologists  for
sin — were  some  who  claimed  to  be  perfect  and  to  live
for  months  without  sinning.  One  such  asked  the  youthful
minister  to  visit  him  so  that  he  (C.  H.  Spurgeon)  might
receive  valuable  instruction.  The  preacher  replied  that  he
had  no  doubt  about  the  benefits  he  would  derive,  but
declared  he  did  not  like  to  go  to  the  man's  house  as  he
was  hardly  likely  to  get  into  any  of  the  rooms.  "  How
is  that  ?  "  inquired  the  puzzled  individual.  "  Well,"  replied
the  minister,  "  I  suppose  that  your  house  would  be  so  full
of  angels  that  there  would  be  no  room  for  me !  "

All  the  people  at  Waterbeach,  however,  were  not  of
such  types.  Many  true  and  loving  friends  were  made  in
those  early  days,  and  sweet  communion  was  enjoyed  with
kindred  spirits.  On  no  two  occasions  in  the  first  year  was
he  entertained  for  the  week-end  in  the  same  house,  and
at  the  end  of  the  twelvemonth  there  were  still  some  invita-
tions outstanding.  Occasionally  the  minister  would  be
corrected  in  some  small  matter  by  an  elderly  deacon,
and  when  the  reproof  was  apt  and  timely  it  was  taken  in  a
truly  humble  spirit  and  duly  profited  by.  One  rebuke
which  C.  H.  Spurgeon  described  as  "  well  deserved  and
lovingly  taken  "  was  that  of  a  Mr.  King,  who  did  not  tell
the  young  minister  that  he  should  speak  more  guardedly
in  the  pulpit,  but  placed  a  pin  in  his  Bible  through  the
text,  Titus  ii.  8 :  "  Sound  speech  that  cannot  be  con-
demned ;  that  he  that  is  of  the  contrary  part  may  be
ashamed,  having  no  evil  thing  to  say  of  you."  With  mere
fault-finders  and  hair-splitters,  however,  young  Spurgeon


n  >.

if  §.

•0      ,?


io8   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  STURGEON.

was  not  so  docile.  An  amusing  story  is  told  of  one  man,
Mayor  of  Cambridge  at  the  time,  who  was  often  attempting
to  correct  supposed  mistakes  made  by  the  young  preacher.
On  this  occasion  he  expressed  shocked  surprise  that  the
minister  should  have  declared  from  the  pulpit  that  were  a
thief  to  enter  Heaven  unregenerate,  he  would  remain  a
thief  still  and  would  go  round  picking  the  angels'  pockets.
"  My  dear  young  man,"  said  the  Mayor  in  all  seriousness,
"  don't  you  know  that  the  angels  haven't  any  pockets.  "
"  No,  sir,"  replied  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "  I  do  not  know
that;  but  I  am  glad  to  be  assured  of  the  fact* from  a
gentleman  who  does  know.  I  will  take  care  to  put  it  all
right  the  first  opportunity  I  get."  The  following  Sunday
the  preacher  told  his  congregation  that  he  was  sorry  he
had  made  a  mistake  the  last  time  he  spoke  to  them ;  but
that  he  had  met  a  gentleman — the  Mayor  of  Cambridge —
who  had  assured  him  that  the  angels  had  no  pockets,  so
he  must  correct  what  he  said,  as  he  did  not  want  anybody
to  go  away  with  a  false  notion  of  Heaven.  He  would
therefore  say  that  if  a  thief  got  among  the  angels  without
having  his  nature  changed,  he  would  try  to  steal  the
feathers  out  of  their  wings !

The  youth's  preaching  engagements  at  this  period  were
by  no  means  confined  to  Waterbeach.  Almost  every
evening  he  went  to  one  of  the  villages  round,  and  from
time  to  time  was  asked  to  preach  the  anniversary  sermons
at  some  country  chapel.  On  one  such  occasion  he  had
been  asked  by  the  old  minister  of  Cottenham,  Mr.  Sutton,
who  had  never  seen  the  youth  but  had  heard  he  was  a
good  speaker,  to  come  over  for  the  anniversary.  Young
Spurgeon  went,  but  when  Mr.  Sutton  saw  him  he
exclaimed,  "Oh,  I  shouldn't  have  asked  you  here  had  1
known  you  were  such  a  bit  of  a  boy.  Why,  the  people


no   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

have  been  pouring  into  the  place  all  the  morning  in
waggons  and  dickey  carts  and  all  kinds  of  vehicles — more
fools  they ! "  He  seemed  so  perturbed  that  the  young
preacher  offered  to  return  home,  but  Mr.  Sutton,  with  all
his  affected  distress,  was  too  wise  to  allow  this.  "No,
no,"  he  said,  "now  you  are  here  you  must  do  the  best
you  can.  There  is  a  young  fellow  over  from  Cambridge
who  will  help  you ;  and  we  sha'n't  expect  much  from  you."
Then  he  paced  up  and  down  the  vestry,  exclaiming,  "  Oh,
dear !  oh,  dear !  what  a  pass  the  world  is  coming  to  when
we  get  as  preachers  a  parcel  of  boys  who  have  not  got
their  mother's  milk  out  of  their  mouths !  "  It  is  probable
that  the  old  minister  was  not  quite  so  dubious  of  his
visitor's  ability  as  he  pretended  to  be,  but  no  doubt  he
thought  it  wise  to  chasten  the  youth's  spirit  lest  pride
should  uplift  him.  A  surprise  awaited  the  old  gentleman.
After  the  prayer  and  hymns  C.  H.  Spurgeon  read  from
the  Book  of  Proverbs  the  chapter  containing  the  words,
"  The  hoary  head  is  a  crown  of  glory."  He  stopped  there
and  remarked,  "  I  doubt  it,  for  this  morning  I  met  with  a
man  who  has  a  hoary  head,  yet  he  has  not  learnt  common
civility  to  his  fellow-men."  Then  the  preacher  resumed  :
"  if  it  be  found  in  the  way  of  righteousness."  "  Ah !  "  he
said  "  that's  another  thing :  a,  hoary  head  would  then  be
a  crown  of  glory,  and  for  the  matter  of  that  so  would  a
red  head  or  a  head  of  any  other  colour."  After  the
sermon,  Mr.  Sutton,  who  had  been  sitting  at  the  foot  of
the  pulpit,  slapped  the  young  preacher  on  the  back,  and
exclaimed,  "  Bless  your  heart !  I  have  been  a  minister
nearly  forty  years,  and  I  was  never  better  pleased  with  a
sermon  in  all  my  life;  but  you  are  the  sauciest  dog  that
ever  barked  in  a  pulpit."  The  couple  became  fast  friends
from  that  time  forth.


THE    FIRST    PASTORATE.  in

Had  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  not  believed  strongly  in
the  Divine  origin  of  his  call  to  preach,  and  had  he  not
possessed  a  dogged  determination  to  do  what  he  believed
to  be  right,  he  would  very  soon  have  left  the  pulpit
severely  alone.  Everywhere  he  was  discouraged  by  those
who  should  have  helped  him.  Here  his  style  was  con-


(Starr  &*  Rignall,  photo,  Cambridge.)

Reduced   facsimile  of  inscription  by   C.   H.   Spurgeon

in  the  Pulpit  Bible  presented  to  Waterbeach  Chapel

by  the  New  Park  Street  congregation.

demned,  and  there  he  was  abused  for  his  youthful  appear-
ance. "  Let  me  give  you  a  bit  of  good  advice,  my  young
friend,"  said  a  pillar  of  the  church  at  Houghton ;  "  you'll
never  make  a  preacher;  so  just  give  it  up  and  stick  to


ii2    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

your  teaching."  To  carry  out  the  latter  suggestion  was
becoming  necessary,  for  although  he  had  resigned  the
position  of  usher,  the  small  salary  at  Waterbeach  did
not  prove  sufficient  to  keep  him  in  comfort.  Books,
theological  and  otherwise,  had  to  be  bought,  and  even
when  these  were  taken  in  instalments,  as  for  instance  Gill's
Commentary,  published  in  half-crown  parts,  the  drain
upon  the  young  man's  resources  was  great.  He  therefore
determined  to  take  a  number  of  pupils,  and  with  this  idea
inserted  the  following  advertisement  in  a  Cambridge  news-
paper :  "  No.  60,  Park  Street,  Cambridge.  Mr.  C.  H.
Spurgeon  begs  to  inform  his  numerous  friends  that  after
Christmas  he  intends  taking  six  or  seven  young  gentlemen
as  day  pupils.  He  will  endeavour  to  the  utmost  to  impart
a  good  commercial  education.  The  ordinary  routine  will
include  Arithmetic,  Algebra,  Geometry  and  Mensuration ;
Grammar  and  Composition ;  Ancient  and  Modern  History ;
Geography,  Natural  History,  Astronomy,  Scripture,  and
Drawing.  Latin  and  the  elements  of  Greek  and  French
if  required.  Terms,  ^5  per  annum."  Before  he  could
form  a  school,  however,  developments  occurred  which
rendered  such  a  course  unnecessary.  How  very  far  from
mercenary  was  the  young  minister's  spirit  is  clearly  testified
by  the  fact  that  while  needing  more  money  for  the  purchase
of  books  and  clothes,  he  declined  the  offer  of  a  good
position  in  a  high-class  school  near  London,  because  it
would  compel  him  to  give  up  the  evangelistic  work  which
he  loved  so  dearly.

While  at  Waterbeach  the  question  of  his  entering  a
college  to  get  the  usual  ministerial  training  arose,  and  at
one  time  C.  H.  Spurgeon  seriously  thought  of  becoming
a  student  of  Stepney  Baptist  College,  since  removed  to
Regent's  Park.  An  interview  was  arranged  with  Dr.


ii4    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

Angus,  tutor  of  the  institution,  at  the  house  of  Mr.
Macmillan,  the  publisher,  in  Cambridge,  and  after  a  season
of  prayer  the  young  preacher  went  there,  but  owing  to
the  mistake  of  a  servant,  who  kept  the  two  visitors  in
separate  rooms  waiting  for  each  other,  Dr.  Angus  had  to
leave  for  London  without  seeing  the  youth,  while  the
latter,  after  waiting  a  couple  of  hours,  ventured  to  ring  a
bell,  only  to  learn  that  the  opportunity  he  had  sought  was
gone.  Still  intending  to  enter  college,  young  Spurgeon
thought  of  making  an  immediate  application  in  writing,  but
that  afternoon,  as  he  was  walking  out  in  the  country  to
fulfil  a  preaching  engagement  at  one  of  the  villages,  he
was  startled  by  what  seemed  a  loud  voice  speaking  to  him.
"  The  impression  was  vivid  to  an  intense  degree,"  he  says ;
"  I  seemed  very  distinctly  to  hear  the  words,  '  Seekest  thou
great  things  for  thyself  ?  Seek  them  not ' !"  This  led  the
youth  to  look  at  his  position,  and  although  at  that  time  he
anticipated  obscurity  and  poverty  as  the  result  of  the
resolve,  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  did  there  and  then
solemnly  renounce  the  offer  of  collegiate  instruction,  looking
upon  the  two  incidents  as  Divine  interpositions.  His  father
sadly  wanted  him  to  enter  the  college,  but  Charles  explained
the  whole  of  the  circumstances,  expressing  his  aversion  to
the  proposed  course2  and  as  nothing  short  of  a  command  from
his  parent  would  have  induced  him  to  leave  his  Waterbeach
congregation  for  the  college,  the  Rev.  John  Spurgeon  wisely
left  his  son  to  follow  his  own  judgment,  although  he  still
thought  a  collegiate  training  to  be  the  proper  course.  That
the  son's  judgment  was  right  who  can  now  doubt  ?


*  ^^


•
'


m


Facsimile  of  part  of  a  hymn,  "Immanuel,"  written  by  C.  H.  Spurgeonlfor  the
Waterbeach  Jubilee  Services  on  Sunday,  June  26th,  1853.;


CHAPTER  VIII.
FIRST  VISIT  TO  NEW  PARK  STREET  CHAPEL.

AFTER  C.  H.  Spurgeon  had  been  pastor  of  Water-
beach  Church  for  about  three  years  an  incident
happened  which,  although  of  comparative  insignificance  in
itself,  had  far-reaching  results,  and  was  really  the  first  step
in  his  progress  to  London.  He  had  been  asked  to  give  an
address  at  the  annual  meeting  of  the  local  Sunday-school
Union  in  the  Guildhall  at  Cambridge,  and  spoke  to  a  large
congregation  with  his  usual  straightforwardness  and  ability.
Whether  the  young  preacher's  popularity  had  rendered  them
jealous,  or  whether  his  Calvinistic  leanings  were  opposed  to
their  own  cherished  doctrines,  it  is  impossible  to  say,  but  no
sooner  had  young  Spurgeon  concluded  his  address  than
two  elderly  ministers  who  sat  with  him  on  the  platform  rose
in  succession  and  made  violent  attacks  upon  him.  One
asked  why  the  young  Baptist  minister  had  "  left  his  few
sheep  in  the  wilderness,"  and  declared  pretty  plainly  that
without  any  worthy  motive  he  had  come  up  merely  to  see  the
battle.  But  the  other  speaker  went  farther ;  he  was  personal
and  even  grossly  insulting  in  his  remarks.  "  Was  it  not  a
pity,"  he  asked,  after  contemning  the  youthfulness  of  the
minister  from  Waterbeach,  "  that  boys  did  not  adopt
the  Scriptural  practice  of  tarrying  at  Jericho  till  their
beards  were  grown  before  they  tried  to  instruct  their
seniors  ?  "

"The  boy"  was   equal    to   the    occasion.      Obtaining


NEW  PARK    STREET   CHAPEL.


117


the  chairman's  permission  to  reply  he  rose,  and  speaking
with  calm  dignity  reminded  the  audience  that  those  who
were  bidden  to  tarry  at  Jericho  were  not  boys  but  full-grown
men  whose  beards  had  been  shaved  off  by  their  enemies  as
the  greatest  indignity  they  could  be  made  to  suffer,  and  who
were  therefore  ashamed  to  return  home  until  their  beards


An  early  portrait  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon.

were  grown  again.  The  true  parallel  to  their  case,  he
suggested,  would  be  found  in  a  minister  who,  through  falling
into  open  sin,  had  disgraced  his  sacred  calling  and  so  needed
to  go  into  seclusion  for  a  while  until  his  character  had  been
to  some  extent  restored.  The  effect  was  instantaneous.
Quite  unknown  to  himself,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  had  exactly


n8   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

described  the  minister  whose  insult  had  called  forth  the  re-
buke, and  it  is  safe  to  say  that  not  one  of  those  present  who
knew  the  circumstances  could  possibly  have  entertained  any
sympathy  for  the  elderly  preacher  in  his  crushing  defeat.

A  Mr.  George  Gould,  deacon  of  the  Baptist  church  at
Loughton,  Essex,  was  present  in  the  Guildhall  on  this  occa-
sion, and  the  high  opinion  which  he  formed  of  C.  H.
Spurgeon's  abilities,  after  hearing  his  address,  was  confirmed
by  the  able  reply  to  his  censurer,  which  the  young  minister
had  delivered  without  any  youthful  bravado.     Mr.  Gould's
keen  and  critical  discernment  was  not  at  fault.     He  felt  then
and  there  that  the  youth   of  nineteen  years  had  a  great
future  before  him,  and  that  that  future  lay  in  London,  a
belief  which  was  strengthened  the  more  it  was  dwelt  upon.
Not  long  afterwards  this  -unknown  admirer,  in  talking  with
a  friend  of  his,  Mr.  Thomas  Olney,  one  of  the  deacons  of
New  Park  Street  Chapel,  Southwark,  then  without  a  pastor,
readily  seized  the  opportunity  of  recommending  the  young
preacher  of  Waterbeach.  New  Park  Street  Chapel  possessed
a  brilliant  history  and  an  inspiring  past,  but  it  now  seemed
to  have  fallen  on  evil  days.     Although  capable  of  seating
twelve  hundred  people,  its  congregation  had  dwindled  to
about  a  couple  of  hundred,  and  but  for  the  devotion  of  the
deacons,  well-to-do  men  who  spent  much  of  their  wealth  in
the  service  of  Christ,  the  Southwark  Chapel  as  a  spiritual
force  would  have  collapsed  altogether.     It  had  numbered
among  its  pastors  men  of  note  and  power,  first  and  foremost
being  the  famous  Benjamin  Keach.     Dr.   John  Gill  (the
commentator),  and  Dr.  Rippon  had  also  ministered  to  the
congregation  when  it  met  in  Carter  Lane,  and  the  chapel  in
New  Park  Street  had  been  built  only  after  the  Carter  Lane
sanctuary  was  demolished  to  make  room  for  the  approaches
to  London  Bridge.     The  site  was  not  well  chosen.     It  was


NEW  PARK    STREET   CHAPEL.


119


so  low-lying  as  to  be  often  flooded  by  the  river,  was
approached  from  the  City  over  Southwark  Bridge,  where  a
toll  was  charged,  and  no  hackney  carriages  could  be  hired
within  half-a-mile.  Already,  when  the  church  was  being
erected,  there  were  many  large  factories  in  the  immediate
vicinity,  and  within  a  few  years  the  district  practically  ceased
to  be  residential  at  all.  It  may  be  gathered,  therefore,  that


tNew'Park  Street  Chapel,  at  the  time'Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon
commenced  his  pastorate  there.

to  revive  the  flagging  cause,  in  the  midst  of  so  many  dis-
advantages and  adverse  circumstances,  required  a  minister
of  more  than  ordinary  power  and  ability  in  the  pulpit.  An
unknown  youth,  who  preached  to  simple  folk  in  an  obscure
village  chapel,  hardly  seemed  likely  to  be  the  minister
for  the  purpose,  but  after  Mr.  Olney  had  been  again


120   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  H ADDON  SPURGEON.

urged  to  the  experiment  by  his  Loughton  friend  he  con-
sented to  bring  the  matter  before  his  deacons.  The  outcome
was  that,  when  C.  H.  Spurgeon  arrived  at  Waterbeach
Chapel  on  the  last  Sunday  morning  in  November,  1853,  he
found  a  letter  awaiting  him  with  an  invitation  to  preach
at  the  New  Park  Street  Chapel.  So  great  was  the  youth's
modesty  that  it  never  occurred  to  him  that  he  was  the
person  invited,  and  handing  the  letter  to  one  of  his  deacons,
he  said,  there  was  evidently  some  mistake.  But  the  good
man  knew  better,  and  sorrowfully  returning  the  note  declared
that  what  he  had  always  anticipated  had  come  at  last —
C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  too  great  a  preacher  to  remain  pastor
of  a  small  village  congregation  and  he  would  soon  be  going
away.  The  young  minister,  however,  was  alarmed  rather
than  flattered  by  the  honour  proposed  in  the  letter,  and  the
next  day  wrote  back  accepting  the  invitation  to  preach  on  a
certain  Sunday,  provided  that  it  had  not  been  given  under
any  misapprehension!.  He  then  expressed  wonder  at  being
known  to  the  deacons,  and  explained  that  his  last  birthday
was  but  his  nineteenth.

A  second  letter  from  London,  confirming  the  first,  led  to
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  memorable  visit  to  the  Metro-
polis, where  his  voice  was  shortly  afterwards  to  sound  forth
to  congregations  numbering  thousands,  and  to  echo  and  re-
echo in  all  parts  of  the  world.  The  young  minister's  advent
to  London  was  not  auspicious.  Arriving  on  a  dull  December
evening,  alone  and  friendless,  he  reached  a  boarding-
house  in  Queen  Square,  Bloomsbury,  to  which  he  had
been  directed.  Bloomsbury  was  a  smarter  district  then  than
it  is  now,  and,  as  may  be  imagined,  the  arrival  of  the  wonder-
ful young  minister  who  was  coming  to  London  to  preach  in
one  of  the  most  important  Nonconformist  chapels  was
anticipated  with  considerable  curiosity  by  the  boarders.


122   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

particularly  by  the  young  men  of  the  house.  C.  H.
Spurgeon  arrived  in  due  course  and  the  youths  were
immensely  diverted.  Here  was  a  country  lad,  gauche  and
apparently  unsophisticated,  dressed  in  clothes  of  anything
but  a  stylish  cut,  with  a  huge  black  satin  stock  round  his
neck  and,  horror  of  horrors,  a  blue  handkerchief  with  white
spots !  This  was  the  great  pulpit  orator  who  was  to  revive
a  drooping  cause  and  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  such  men  as
Gill  and  Rippon  !  It  was  too  amusing,  and  the  "  clever  "
youths  enjoyed  the  joke  immensely.  But,  of  course,  their
polite  "breeding"  would  not  allow  them  to  parade  their
diversion ;  on  the  contrary,  they  sought  to  encourage  the
young  minister,  and,  says  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "  I  was  encouraged
accordingly !  What  tales  were  narrated  of  the  great  divines
of  the  Metropolis  and  their  congregations !  One,  I
remember,  had  a  thousand  city  men  to  hear  him;  another
had  his  church  filled  with  thoughtful  people  such  as  could
hardly  be  matched  all  over  England ;  while  a  third  had  an
immense  audience  almost  entirely  composed  of  the  young
men  of  London,  who  were  spellbound  by  his  eloquence.
The  study  which  these  men  underwent  in  composing  their
sermons,  their  herculean  toils  in  keeping  up  their  congrega-
tions, and  the  matchless  oratory  which  they  exhibited  on  all
occasions,  were  duly  rehearsed  in  my  hearing,  and  when  I
was  shown  to  bed  in  a  cupboard  over  the  front  door,  I  was
not  in  an  advantageous  condition  for  pleasant  dreams."

The  loneliness  of  his  situation,  the  recollection  of  the
youths'  stories,  the  miserable  environment  of  the  petty
room,  the  remembrance  of  the  suppressed  amusement  at
his  appearance,  and  the  noise  of  the  traffic  in  the  streets,
which  frightened  away  slumber,  all  combined  to  make
that  sojourn  in  a  London  boarding-house  the  most
depressing  agency  that  could  have  been  brought  to  bear


NEW  PARK   STREET    CHAPEL.  123

upon  the  young  minister's  spirit.  But  he  was  expectant
of  Divine  assistance,  and  although  at  first  sight  of  New
Park  Street  Chapel  he  felt  amazed  at  his  own  temerity,
because  the  building,  imposing  and  ornate  after  Water-
beach  Chapel,  seemed  to  suggest  a  congregation  wealthy
and  critical,  yet  with  the  small  audience  that  gathered  he
felt  that,  God  helping  him,  he  was  not  out  of  his  depth.
The  text  was  James  i.  17:"  Every  good  gift  and  every
perfect  gift  is  from  above,  and  cometh  down  from  the
Father  of  lights,  with  whom  is  no  variableness,  neither
shadow  of  turning."  The  sermon,  which,  by  the  way,  was
the  673rd  that  C.  H.  Spurgeon  had  preached,  was  far  and
away  better  than  any  that  had  been  delivered  in  that
chapel  for  a  long  time,  and  greatly  surprised  the  members
of  the  congregation.  On  returning  home  they  spoke
eulogistically  to  their  friends  of  the  young  minister  from  the
country,  and  that  evening  the  audience  was  much  larger  than
usually  met  at  New  Park  Street.  This  time  the  text
was  Revelation  xiv.  5  :  "  They  are  without  fault  before  the
throne  of  God,"  and  after  the  sermon,  Mr.  Holden  Pike
tells  us,  the  congregation  was  too  excited  to  leave  the
chapel  to  go  home.  Nearly  all  the  members  of  the  old
church  were  at  last  raised  from  their  condition  of
despondency,  and  in  all  parts  of  the  building  they  were
seen  in  groups  conversing  about  what  they  had  heard  and
of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  eligibility  for  the  pastorate.  The
deacons  had  t6  *come  forth  from  the  vestry  and  promise
that  they  would  use  their  endeavours  to  secure  the  young
preacher,  and  it  was  arranged  that  a  church  meeting
should  be  held  as  soon  as  possible.

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  own  comment  on  the  events
of  the  day  is  interesting :  "  The  Lord  helped  me  very
graciously.  I  had  a  happv  Sabbath  in  the  pulpit,  and  spent


124  LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.


the  interval  with  warm-hearted  friends ;  and  when  at  night
I  trudged  back  to  the  Queen  Square  narrow  lodging,  I  was
not  alone,  and  I  no  longer  looked  on  Londoners  as  flinty-
hearted  barbarians.  My  tone  was  altered;  I  wanted  no
pity  of  anyone;  I  did  not  care  a  penny  for  the  young


Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  when  he  first  came  to  London.

gentlemen  lodgers  and  their  miraculous  ministers,  nor  for
the  grind  of  the  cabs  nor  for  anything  else  under  the
sun.  The  lion  had  been  looked  at  all  round,  and  his
majesty  did  not  appear  to  be  a  tenth  as  majestic  as  when.
I  had  only  heard  his  roar  miles  away."


DECLARATION

Of          THE

Faith  and  PmfKx  of    the  Church  |jf    CHRIST,   in  Carter-tone    South-
wart,  under  the  Paftoral  Care  of  Dr.  John  G,U;

Read  and  a&ated  to,    at  the  AdmHEon  of  MEMIEU.


(Photo  by  Mr.  £.  Johnson.)


The  Declaration  of  Faith  of  the  Church  which  met  first  at  Carter

Lane,  then  at  New  Park  Street,  and  finally  in

the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.


126  LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

Mr.  Joseph  Passmore  was  the  friend  who  walked  back
with  C.  H.  Spurgeon  to  his  boarding-house  in  Blooms-
bury,  and  the  companionship  thus  commenced  was  of
lifelong  endurance.  Mr.  Passmore  was  the  first  real  friend
that  the  famous  preacher  had  in  London,  and  the  relations


Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  and  his  friend  and  publisher
Mr.  Joseph  Passmore.

between  the  two,  both  personal  and  business,  were  always
of  the  happiest  character,  so  that  for  the  forty  years  which
they  lasted,  never  a  single  jar  or  an  approach  to  coolness
came  in  to  mar  the  mutual  love  and  esteem.


CHAPTER    IX.

SETTLEMENT    IN    LONDON.

THE  young  preacher  was  not  puffed  up  by  the
success  of  his  first  attempt  to  minister  to  a
London  congregation.  The  deacons  of  New  Park  Street
Chapel  had  told  him  that,  if  he  preached  there  three
Sundays,  not  one  of  the  twelve  hundred  seats  would  be
vacant,  and  directly  after  his  first  sermon  he  was  invited
by  the  principal  deacon  to  supply  for  six  months,  a  request
which  the  youth  declined  as  he  thought  it  too  hasty,  but
he  promised  to  preach  on  alternate  Sundays  during  the
following  month.  No  other  minister  who  had  visited  New
Park  Street  since  the  vacancy  in  the  pastorate  had  been
invited  to  preach  a  second  time,  and  the  honour  implied  in
the  request  of  the  deacons  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon  might  well
have  given  him  cause  for  self-satisfaction  and  pride.  But
how  far  from  such  thoughts  his  mind  really  was  is  proved
by  his  letters  to  his  father,  who,  by  the  way,  thought
he  was  wrong  in  going  to  London.  In  his  first  letter  after
the  visit  of  November,  1853,  young  Spurgeon  recounted
what  the  deacons  had  said,  but,  so  far  from  taking  any
credit  to  himself,  he  wrote,  "  I  told  them  they  did  not
know  what  they  were  doing,  nor  whether  they  were  in  the
body  or  out  of  the  body ;  they  were  so  starved  that  a

morsel  of  Gospel  was  a  treat  to  them It  is  God's

doing.     I  do  not  deserve  it; — they  are  mistaken.     I  only
mention  facts.     I  have  not  exaggerated,  nor  am  I   very


128  LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

exalted  by  it,  for  to  leave  my  own  dear  people  makes  it  a
painful  pleasure."  A  few  days  later  he  wrote,  "  Should  I
be  settled  in  London,  I  will  come  and  see  you  often.  I
do  not  anticipate  going  there  with  much  pleasure.  I
am  contented  where  I  am;  but  if  God  has  more  for  me
to  do,  then  let  me  go  and  trust  in  Him."  This  same
letter  has  an  interesting  passage  showing  the  doctrinal
position  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at  this  time,  as  indeed
throughout  his  long  ministry.  "  The  London  people,"  he
says,  "  are  rather  higher  in  Calvinism  than  I  am ;  but  I
have  succeeded  in  bringing  one  church  to  my  own  views
and  will  trust  with  Divine  assistance  to  do  the  same  with
another.  I  am  a  Calvinist :  I  love  what  someone  called
'  glorious  Calvinism,'  but  '  Hyperism '  is  too  hot-spiced
for  my  palate."

The  invitation  of  the  deacons  to  the  young  minister  to
supply  for  six  months  was  confirmed  at  a  church  meeting,
and  several  of  the  officials  wrote  begging  him  to  accept.
But  while  expressing  intense  gratification  at  the  unanimity
of  the  church  in  relation  to  its  invitation.  C.  H.
Spurgeon  felt  that  it  would  be  unbecoming  in  one  so
young  to  promise  to  minister  to  a  London  congregation
for  such  a  long  period  without  further  experience.  He
therefore  suggested  a  test  of  three  months,  and  wrote:
"With  regard  to  a  six  months'  invitation  from  you,  I
have  no  objection  to  the  length  of  time,  but  rather  approve
of  the  prudence  of  the  church  in  wishing  to  have  one  so
young  as  myself  on  an  extended  period  of  probation,  but
I  write  after  well  weighing  the  matter  to  say  positively
that  I  cannot,  I  dare  not  accept  an  unqualified  invitation
for  so  long  a  time.  My  objection  is  not  to  the  length  of
the  time  of  probation,  but  it  ill  becomes  a  youth  to  promise
to  preach  to  a  London  congregation  so  long  until  he


SETTLEMENT    IN    LONDON.  129

knows  them  and  they  know  him.  I  would  engage  to  supply
for  three  months  of  that  time,  and  then,  should  the
congregation  fail,  or  the  church  disagree,  I  would  reserve
to  myself  liberty  without  breach  of  engagement  to  retire ;
and  you  could  on  your  part  have  the  right  to  dismiss  me
without  seeming  to  treat  me  ill.  Should  I  see  no  reason
for  so  doing,  and  the  church  still  retain  their  wish  for
me,  T  can  remain  the  other  three  months  either  with  or


Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  preaching  in  New  Park  Street  pulpit-

without  the  formality  of  a  further  invitation,  but  even
during  that  time  (the  second  three  months)  I  should  not
like  to  regard  myself  as  a  fixture  in  case  of  ill-success,  but
would  only  be  a  supply,  liable  to  a  fortnight's  dismissal  or
resignation.  Perhaps  this  is  not  business-like — I  do  not
know ;  but  this  is  the  course  I  should  prefer,  if  it  would
be  agreeable  to  the  church.  Enthusiasm  and  popularity

8


130   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

are  often  the  crackling   of   thorns   and   soon    expire.     I
do  not  wish  to  be  a  hindrance  if  I  cannot  be  a  help."

In  a  letter  to  a  friend  written  at  this  time,  the  young
preacher  mentions  that  he  has  a  presentiment  that  before
long  he  will  be  more  intimately  connected  with  New  Park
Street  Chapel.  There  was  some  delay  in  commencing
work  at  Southwark  owing  to  the  difficulty  of  securing
supplies  for  Waterbeach,  but  eventually  all  the  hindrances
were  overcome,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon  came  to  London  on
his  first  extended  visit.  No  sooner  had  he  commenced
his  ministry  than  the  prophecy  of  the  deacons  was
fulfilled.  All  the  seats  were  occupied,  the  aisles  were
blocked,  and  in  every  niche  and  corner  people  were
packed  till  the  building  could  hold  no  more;  the
prayer  meetings  were  full  of  power  and  many  con-
versions took  place.  In  such  circumstances  the  comple-
tion of  the  period  of  probation  was  quite  unnecessary.
On  April  19,  1854,  a  special  church  meeting  unanimously
invited  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  to  the  pastorate
of  New  Park  Street  Chapel,  and  a  week  later  he  accepted.
"  I  sought  not  to  come  to  you,"  he  wrote,  "  for  I  was  the
minister  of  an  obscure  but  affectionate  people;  1  never
solicited  advancement.  The  first  note  of  invitation  from
your  deacons  came  quite  unlooked-for,  and  I  trembled  at
the  idea  of  preaching  in  London.  I  could  not  under-
stand how  it  had  come  about,  and  even  now  I  am  filled
with  astonishment  at  the  wondrous  Providence.  I  would
wish  to  give  myself  into  the  hands  of  our  covenant  God,
whose  wisdom  directs  all  things.  He  shall  choose  for
me,  and,  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  this  is  His  choice.  I  feel
it  to  be  a  high  honour  to  be  the  pastor  of  a  people  who
can  mention  glorious  names  as  my  predecessors,  and  I
entreat  of  you  to  remember  me  in  prayer  that  I  may


SETTLEMENT  "IN    LONDON.  131

realize  the  solemn  responsibility  of  my  trust.  Remember
my  youth  and  inexperience,  and  pray  that  these  may  not
hinder  my  usefulness.  I  trust  also  that  the  remembrance
of  these  will  lead  you  to  forgive  mistakes  I  may  make,  or
unguarded  words  I  may  utter."


(Photo  by  Mr.  E.  Johnson)
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  and  his  first  deacons.

His  lack  of  college  training  had  been  referred  to  by
C.  H.  Spurgeon,  but  the  only  comment  of  the  deacons
was,  "  That  is  to  us  a  special  recommendation,  for  you
would  not  have  mudi  savour  or  unction  if  you  came


132    LIFE  OF  CHARLES -HADDON  SPURGEON.

from  college,"  and  his  wishes  in  regard  to  the  abandon-
ment of  a  formal  ordination  or  recognition  ceremony  were
also  readily  acceded  to.  In  a  letter  to  Mr.  James  Low
he  set  forth  his  objections,  the  strongest  being  mentioned
first :  "  Because  I  am  a  minister  and  will  never  receive
authority  and  commission  from  men ;  nor  do  I  like  that
which  has  the  shadow  of  such  a  thing  about  it.  I  detest
the  dogma  of  apostolic  succession,  and  dislike  the  revival
of  the  doctrine  by  delegating  power  from  minister  to
minister."  If  God  would  make  him  useful,  he  declared,
he  was  not  afraid  of  being  recognized  by  all  good  men.

And  so  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  became  pastor  of
New  Park  Street  Chapel,  Southwark,  and  began  that  long
and  wonderful  ministry  in  London  which  has  had  no
parallel,  in  modern  times  at  any  rate.

The  following  contemporary  description  of  the  young
preacher's  style  at  this  time,  written  by  a  Mr.  Hare,  is
interesting.  "  His  voice  is  clear  and  musical ;  his
language  plain ;  his  style  flowing,  but  terse ;  his  method
lucid  and  orderly ;  his  matter  sound  and  suitable ;  his
tone  and  spirit  cordial ;  his  remarks  always  pithy  and
pungent,  sometimes  familiar  and  colloquial,  yet  never
light  or  coarse,  much  less  profane.  Judging  from  a  single
sermon,  we  supposed  that  he  would  become  a  plain,
faithful,  forcible  and  affectionate  preacher  of  the  Gospel
in  the  form  called  Calvinistic ;  and  our  judgment  was  the
more  favourable,  because  while  there  was  a  solidity  beyond
his  years  we  detected  little  of  the  wild  luxuriance  naturally
characteristic  of  very  young  preachers."

More  eulogistic  was  the  opinion  of  Sheridan  Knowles,
the  actor  and  playwright,  who  after  his  conversion  was
baptized  and  became  a  tutor  at  Stepney  College.  "Go
and  hear  the  Cambridgeshire  lad  at  once,"  he  said  to  the


SETTLEMENT    IN    LONDON.  133

students.  This  was  in  May,  1854,  just  after  C.  H.
Spurgeon  had  become  permanent  pastor  at  New  Park
Street.  "  He  is  only  a  boy.  but  he  is  the  most  wonderful
preacher  in  the  world.  He  is  absolutely  perfect  in  his
oratory;  and  beside  that,  a  master  in  the  art  of  acting.
He  has  nothing  to  learn  from  me  or  anyone  else.  He  is
simply  perfect.  He  knows  everything.  He  can  do-  any-
thing. I  was  once  lessee  of  Drury  Lane  Theatre;  and
were  I  still  in  that  position  I  would  offer  him  a  fortune
to  play  for  one  season  on  the  boards  of  that  house.
Why,  boys,  he  can  do  anything  he  pleases  with  his
audience !  He  can  make  them  laugh  and  cry  and  laugh
again  in  five  minutes.  His  power  was  never  equalled.
Now  mark  my  words,  boys,  that  young  man  will  live  to  be
the  greatest  preacher  of  this  or  any  other  age.  He  will
bring  more  souls  to  Christ  than  any  man  who  ever  pro-
claimed the  Gospel,  not  excepting  the  Apostle  Paul.  His
name  will  be  known  everywhere,  and  his  sermons  will  be
translated  into  many  of  the  languages  of  the  world."
Sheridan  Knowles  lived  long  enough  to'  see  his  remarkable
prophecy  in  the  way  of  fulfilment.

Few  young  men  of  twenty  years  could  have  had  the
success  which  attended  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  ministry  at
New  Park  Street,  without  being  spoiled  therewith.  In
his  case,  however,  the  success  only  engendered  greater
humility.  He  attributed  it  entirely  to  the  Giver  of  every
good  and  perfect  gift,  and  declared  his  appreciation  of
the  fact  that  he  ministered  to  a  praying  congregation.
"  My  success  appalled  me,"  he  says,  "  and  the  thought  of
the  career  which  it  seemed  to'  open  up,  so  far  from  elating
me  cast  me  into<  the  lowest  depth,  out  of  which  I  uttered
my  miserere  and  found  no  room  for  a  gloria  in  excelsis.
Who  was  I  that  I  should  continue  to  lead  so  great  a


i34    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEOX.

multitude?  I  would  betake  me  to  my  village  obscurity  or
emigrate  to  America  and  find  a  solitary  nest  in  the
backwoods,  where  I  might  be  sufficient  for  the  things
which  would  be  demanded  of  me.  It  was  just  then  that
the  curtain  was  rising  upon  my  life-work  and  I  dreaded
what  it  might  reveal.  I  hope  I  was  not  faithless;  but  I
was  timorous  and  filled  with  a  sense  of  my  own  unfitness."

These  were  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  personal  and  secret
experiences  of  soul  and  mind.  In  the  work  of  the  ministry
he  showed  all  the  ability  and  tact  of  a  man  of  ripe  age.
Those  who  had  been  doubtful  were  soon  among  his  best
friends,  and  an  unanimity  and  fellowship  reigned  which  had
been  unknown  at  the  church  for  years.  One  ex-member
of  the  congregation  tried  to  revive  an  old  dispute  and  draw
the  young  minister  into  the  question,  but  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon  would  have  none  of  it.  Bygones  must  be  bygones,
he  said,  and  the  peace  of  the  church  remained  unbroken.
Conversions  under  his  preaching  were  matters  of  weekly
occurrence,  many  of  the  cases  being  of  a  remarkable
character.  One  man,  who  had  been  accustomed  to  go  to
a  gin-palace  to  procure  drink  for  his  Sunday  evening's
carousal,  saw  a  crowd  round  the  door  of  the  chapel  and
went  in  out  of  curiosity.  He  forced  his  way  to  the  top
of  the  gallery  stairs,  and  at  that  moment  the  preacher
turned  towards  the  place  where  he  was  standing,  and
knowing  nothing  of  the  circumstances,  remarked  that  there
might  be  a  man  in  the  gallery  who  had  come  in  with  no  very
good  motive,  for  even  then  he  had  a  gin  bottle  in  his  pocket.
The  singularity  of  the  expression  struck  the  man,  and  being
startled  because  the  preacher  so  exactly  described  him  he
listened  attentively  to  the  warnings  which  followed  and
was  converted,  becoming  afterwards  a  consistent  Christian.
That  first  vear  in  London  was  a  difficult  one  for  the


SETTLEMENT   IN    LONDON.  135

young  preacher.  As  has  been  shown  already,  his  very
success  caused  him  anxiety,  and  before  he  had  been  in
Southwark  twelve  months  the  Asiatic  cholera  broke  out,
entailing  twenty  times  the  usual  amount  of  work,  besides
adding  vastly  to  the  responsibility  and  solemnity  of  his
office.  Although  having  preaching  engagements  out  of
London,  he  felt  it  was  his  duty  to  be  on  the  spot  in  such
a  time  of  disease  and  death  and  sorrow,  and  he  gave  him-
self up  with  ardour  to  the  ministration  of  the  sick.  The
young  minister  was  sent  for  from  all  corners  of  the  district
by  persons  of  various  ranks  and  religions,  and  almost  every
day  he  was  called  upon  to  do  duty  by  the  open  grave.
Many  an  older  and  more  experienced  minister  might  well
have  broken  down  in  the  circumstances,  but  C.  H.
Spurgeon  was  sustained  in  both  health  and  spirit,  and  if
any  lingering  doubts  had  still  been  entertained  by  the
deacons,  of  his  fitness  for  the  pastorate,  they  must  have
been  dispelled  in  that  time  of  calamity.


CHAPTER     X.

INCREASING  POPULARITY  AND  SUCCESS.

BEFORE  many  months  had  passed  it  became  evident
to  the  deacons  of  New  Park  Street  Chapel  that
something  would  have  to  be  done  to  secure  greater
accommodation  for  the  crowds  who  wanted  to  hear  C.  H.
Spurgeon  preach.  Sunday  after  Sunday  every  available
place  and  corner  where  a  human  being  could  sit,  stand  or
crouch  was  occupied,  and  hundreds  were  unable  even  to
get  near  the  doors.  The  officials  of  the  chapel  were  at
their  wits'  end,  but  one  day  the  young  minister,  turning  to
the  wall  behind  him,  exclaimed,  "  By  faith  the  walls  of
Jericho  fell  down  and  by  faith  this  wall  at  the  back  shall
come  down  too !  "  The  shock  caused  by  so  daring  a
proposal  was  considerable,  and  an  elderly  deacon  imme-
diately reproved  the  young  pastor,  saying,  "  Let  us  never
hear  of  that  again."  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  however,
was  not  to  be  suppressed.  He  said  the  best  way  to
dismiss  the  subject  was  to  get  the  work  done,  and  sure
enough  at  a  special  church  meeting  it  was  decided  to  open
a  fund  for  the  purpose  of  removing  the  wall  and  throwing
the  vestries  and  schools  into  the  chapel.  This  work,  which
cost  two  thousand  pounds,  occupied  from  February  nth  to
May  27th,  1855,  and  in  the  meantime  the  church  met  in
Exeter  Hall.  The  news  that  a  large  chapel  whose  congre-
gation had  dwindled  to  less  than  a  couple  of  hundred
persons,  had  in  a  year  become  too  small  for  the  crowds


INCREASING  POPULARITY  AND  SUCCESS.  137

of  people  who  went  to  hear  a  country  lad  preach,  caused
general  amazement  and  led  to  still  greater  numbers
attending  his  ministry.  Even  after  the  enlarged  chapel
had  been  opened  it  was  soon  found  far  too  small  for  the
evening  congregations.  To  use  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  own  apt
illustration,  to  accommodate  the  vast  crowds  who  tried  to


Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  in  the  pulpit  at  New
Park  Street  Chapel.

enter  the  chapel  was  like  attempting  "  to  put  the  sea  into
a  teapot,"  and  in  June,  1856,  Exeter  Hall  was  again
taken  for  the  Sunday  evening  services.  During
both  sojourns  the  great  auditorium  was  invariably
filled  to  excess.  For  an  hour  before  the  opening  of  the


i38   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

doors  the  Strand  used  to  be  blocked  with  people,  and
traffic  had  to  be  diverted  into  side  streets.  Nine-tenths
of  the  congregations  were  men,  and  the  explanation  of  this
strange  fact,  which  was  suggested  at  the  time,  was  that
women  were  unable  to  endure  the  awful  pressure  and  the
rending  of  clothes.  Parties  would  sometimes  go  to  the
Hall  from  places  ten  or  twelve  miles  distant,  and,  although
arriving  half-an-hour  before  the  time  of  the  service,  would
never  get  so  much  as  near  the  door.  "  Dear  me,  how  little
satisfies  the  crowd !  "  wrote  C.  H.  Spurgeon  in  a  letter  to  a
friend.  "  What  on  earth  are  other  preachers  up  to,  when,
with  ten  times  the  talent  they  are  snoring  along  with  prosy
sermons  and  sending  the  world  away?  The  reason  is,  I
believe,  they  do  not  know  what  the  Gospel  is;  they  are
afraid  of  real  Gospel  Calvinism  and  therefore  the  Lord
does  not  own  them."  It  has  been  said  that  if  preaching
takes  nothing  out  of  a  man,  it  puts  nothing  into  anyone
else.  At  this  time  the  strain  on  the  young  minister  was
tremendous.  His  voice  would  oftentimes  almost  break  as
he  earnestly  pleaded  with  the  people,  and  more  than  once
his  strength  was  well-nigh  exhausted.  A  glass  of  Chili
vinegar  always  stood  on  a  shelf  under  the  desk  before  him
at  Exeter  Hall,  and  very  frequently  the  preacher  found  it
necessary  to  have  recourse  to  this  stimulant.  Once,  when
preaching  from  the  text^  "  His  Name  shall  endure  for
ever,"  he  so  poured  out  his  soul  that  at  last  utterance
failed,  and  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  who  was  present,  tells  us  that
she  thought  he  would  have  died  there  in  the  face  of  all
the  people.  But  recovering  his  voice,  he  uttered,  in
broken  accents,  the  words,  "  Let  my  name  perish,  but  let
Christ's  Name  last  for  ever !  Jesus !  Jesus !  Jesus !
Crown  Him  Lord  of  all!  You  will  not  hear  me  say  any-
thing else.  These  are  my  last  words  in  Exeter  Hall  for  this


INCREASING  POPULARITY  AND  SUCCESS.  139

time.  Jesus  !  Jesus !  Jesus !  Crown  him  Lord  of  all !  "  and
then  he  fell  back  almost  fainting  in  the  chair  behind  him.

Persons  of  note  were  very  early  seen  in  C.  H.  Spurgeon's
congregations.  At  the  beginning  of  1856  the  Lord  Mayor
of  London,  a  Jew,  paid  a  visit  to  New  Park  Street  Chapel
and  afterwards  went  into  the  vestry  to  thank  the  preacher
and  to  invite  him  to  the  Mansion  House,  while  about  the
same  time  the  Chief  Commissioner  of  Police  listened  to  a
sermon  and  greeted  C.  H.  Spurgeon  in  the  vestry  at  the
close  of  the  service.  But  he  was  not  elated  by  the
attention  of  the  great.  After  mentioning  these  facts  in
a  letter  to  a  friend,  the  young  preacher  wrote,  "  Better  still
seme  thieves,  thimble-riggers,  harlots,  etc.,  have  come  and
some  are  now  in  the  church,  as  also  a  right  honourable
hot-potato  man,  who  is  prominently  known  as  '  a  hot
Spurgeonite.' "

There  were  not  wanting  those  who  described  the  new
preacher  as  a  "  nine  days'  wonder,"  and  prophesied  that
his  career  would  be  as  brief  as  that  of  a  comet,  leaving
behind  nothing  tangible  as  a  witness  of  its  course.  But
the  work  done  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  from  the  first  solid
and  lasting.  He  did  not  merely  draw  large  crowds  to  hear
him  preach ;  he  built  up  his  church  and  consolidated  the
congregation,  which  at  the  end  of  1856  had  increased
to  860 — a  result  probably  without  precedent,  considering
the  briefness  of  the  period.  The  financial  state  of  the
church  was  equally  prosperous,  there  being  no  debt  despite
the  enormous  sums  which  had  been  expended  in  enlarging
the  chapel  and  hiring  Exeter  Hall.  The  Baptist  Denomi-
nation owed  a  vast  deal  to  the  young  pastor's  ministry.
The  annual  gatherings  of  the  London  Association  of
Baptist  Churches  had  for  a  long  time  been  very  poody
attended,  but  when  in  January,  1855,  the  meetings  were


1 40    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON":

held  at  New  Park  Street,  and  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon
preached,  the  chapel  was  crowded.  It  was  on  this  occasion
that  Dr.  Thomas  Binney,  who  was  present,  said  of  the
young  minister's  sermon,  "  It  is  an  insult  to  God  and  man ;
I  never  heard  such  things  in  my  life  before."  But  he
lived  to  change  his  mind,  and  years  afterwards  the  same
distinguished  divine  said,  "  If  I  ever  said  anything  against
him  I  might  just  as  well  have  pulled  down  a  skep  of  bees
about  my  head ;  but  now  I  have  no  feeling  towards  him
but  that  of  the  utmost  regard  arid  affection."

Wherever  he  went  the  young  preacher  drew  immense
congregations  such  as  had  not  been  seen  since  the  days
of  Wesley  and  Whitefield.  No  buildings  could  accommo-
date the  people  who*  flocked  to  hear  him..  On  a  Tuesday
in  April,  1855,  he  preached  at  Shoreditch,  and  the  chapel,
which  was  built  to  hold  six  hundred  people,  contained
nine  hundred.  Huge  crowds  gathered  outside,  and  it  was
only  when  C.  H.  Spurgeon  himself  went  and  personally
appealed  to  them,  that  some  dispersed.  But  a  large
number  continued  to  stand  round  the  building,  and  all  the
windows  had  to  be  thrown  open  so  that  the  people  outside,
as  well  as  those  inside,  could  listen  to  the  sermon.  Even
more  remarkable  were  the  scenes  when  he  preached  in  the
open  air.  In  a  great  field  at  Hackney,  on  June  22nd,
1855,  ten  thousand  persons  gathered  and  listened  intently
to  a  sermon  upon  the  text,  "Christ  is  all"  (Col.  iii.  n).
The  scene  at  the  close  is  graphically  described  in  a  letter
which  the  preacher  wrote  to  his  fiancee  on  the  following
day.  "  The  Lord  was  with  me,  and  the  profoundest
silence  was  observed ;  but,  oh,  the  close — never  did
mortal  man  receive  a  more  enthusiastic  ovation !  I
wonder  I  am  alive !  After  the  service,  five  or  six  gentle-
men endeavoured  to  clear  a  passage,  but  I  was  borne


•
A  rare  photograph  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon.


i42    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

along,  amid  cheers  and  prayers  and  shouts,  for  about  a
quarter  of  an  hour — it  really  seemed  more  like  a  week!
I  was  hurried  round  and  round  the  field  without  hope  of
escape  until,  suddenly  seeing  a  nice  open  carriage  with
two  occupants  standing  near,  I  sprang  in  and  begged  them
to  drive  away.  This  they  most  kindly  did,  and  I  stood  up
waving  my  hat  and  crying,  '  The  blessing  of  God  be  with
you ! '  while  from  thousands  of  heads  the  hats  were  lifted
and  cheer  after  cheer  was  given.  Surely  amid  these
plaudits  I  can  hear  the  low  rumblings  of  an  advancing
storm  of  reproaches ;  but  even  this  I  can  bear  for  the
Master's  sake."

In  the  provinces  and  in  Scotland  the  same  thing
happened.  But  in  the  midst  of  all  his  popularity  never  was
man  more  humble  and  never  did  minister  work  more  dis-
interestedly. Although  at  this  time  he  could  have  enjoyed
considerable  wealth,  the  preacher's  style  of  living  was
almost  penurious,  so  that  he  might  help  others.  When
he  went  to  New  Park  Street  an  arrangement  was  made
between  him  and  the  deacons  that  whatever  the  seat-rents
produced  should  be  his.  As  a  matter  of  fact  at  that  time
the  rents  produced  very  little,  and  the  sum  thus  realized
in  former  pastorates,  had  had  to  be  supplemented  by  a
great  number  of  collections.  With  C.  H.  Spurgeon's
advent  the  vacant  seats  were  soon  occupied,  but  so  far
from  keeping  the  money  which  legitimately  belonged  to
him,  he  announced  to  the  deacons,  at  the  close  of  the
first  three  months,  that  there  must  be  no  more  collections
for  incidental  expenses;  he  would  himself  pay  for  the
cleaning  and  lighting  of  the  chapel,  and  this  he  did  not
only  at  New  Park  Street  but  at  the  Metropolitan  Taber-
nacle to  the  time  of  his  death.  His  disregard  of  wealth
for  himself  and  his  unstinting  generosity  to  others  had


INCREASING  POPULARITY  AND  SUCCESS.  145

their  effect  upon  the  congregation  in  making  them  like-
minded,  so  that  the  total  church  income,  which  in  1853
had  been  less  than  ^300  was  in  1855  over  .£2,374.  The
pastor's  earnestness,  too,  was  manifested  not  only  in  the
pulpit,  but  everywhere  he  went,  and  so  heavily  was  the
burden  of  souls  laid  upon  his  heart  that  he  was  impelled
to  speak  upon  spiritual  matters  to  the  men  and  women  with
whom  he  came  in  personal  contact.  "  Sometimes,"  he  tells
us,  "  I  have  found  it  less  easy  than  it  might  otherwise  have
been  to  influence  certain  persons  for  good  because  of  the
neglect  of  those  who  ought  to  have  done  the  work  before
me."  As  an  instance  we  are  given  the  following  experience :
"  I  -was  trying  to  say  a  word  for  my  Master  to  a  coachman,
one  day,  when  he  said  to  me,  '  Do  you  know  the  Rev.  Mr.
So-and-so  ?  '  '  Yes,'  I  replied ;  '  I  know  him  very  well ;  what
have  you  to  say  about  him?  '  '  Well,'  said  the  man,  '  he's
the  sort  of  minister  I  like,  and  I  like  his  religion  very
much.'  '  What  sort  of  a  religion  is  it? '  I  asked.  '  Why,'  he
answered,  '  he  has  ridden  on  this  box-seat  every  day  for  six
months  and  he  has  never  said  anything  about  religion  all
the  while ;  that's  the  kind  of  minister  I  like.'  It  seemed  to
me,5>  adds  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "  a  very  doubtful  compliment
for  a  man  who  professed  to  be  a  servant  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ"  The  young  preacher  always  adapted  himself  to
the  needs  of  any  with  whom  he  might  speak,  and  never
was  he  at  a  loss  to  know  how  to  deal  with  persons.  Once
he  met  a  man  who  assented  to  all  he  said.  When  he
talked  about  the  evil  of  sin  the  man  agreed  and  said  the
minister  was  very  faithful.  When  he  spoke  of  the  way  of
salvation  the  man  acquiesced,  although  it  was  evident  his
heart  was  not  affected.  So  at  last,  feeling  that  it  was  quite
hopeless  to  continue  the  conversation,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  said,
"The  fact  is,  one  of  these  days  you  will  die  and  be


i44   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

•damned,"  and  then  walked  away.  The  arrow  went  home,
and  after  a  period  of  soul-agony  the  man  was  brought  to
repentance  and  faith.  He  was  baptized  and  joined  the
church,  of  which  he  remained  an  honoured  and  useful
member  to  the  time  of  his  death.

Such  stories,  showing  the  young  preacher's  earnestness,
his  originality  and  his  blunt  honesty,  might  be  multiplied
till  they  filled  a  large  volume,  but  sufficient  has  been  said
to  show  his  character  at  this  period.  It  was  not  by  flattery
and  compromise  that  he  won  the  people :  of  such  methods,
in  the  ministry  or  out  of  it,  he  knew  nothing.  He  dispensed
the  truth  undiluted,  he  put  his  finger  on  the  most  secret
sins  of  his  hearers  and  told  them,  without  mitigation  or
toning  down,  the  consequence  of  ignoring  God  and  living
without  personal  religion.  It  was  this  boldness  and  plain
presentation  of  the  truth  that  appealed  to  a  people  sick  at
heart  of  mere  "  culture  "  in  the  pulpit  and  of  a  Christianity
•characterized  only  by  eminent  respectability.


CHAPTER  XI.

COURTSHIP  AND  MARRIAGE.

SOON  after  settling  in  London,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  took
that  important  step  which  has  such  an  influence
upon  the  lives  of  all  men — particularly  public  men ;  he
chose  for  himself  a  partner  to  share  his  joys  and  sorrows
and"  it  must  be  confessed  that  never  was  man  happier  in
his  choice.  Among  those  present  in  the  evening  congre-
gation when  the  minister  from  Waterbeach  first  visited
New  Park  Street  Chapel,  was  a  young  girl  named  Susannah
Thompson,  a  friend  of  Mr.  and  Mrs,  Olney.  Her  ideas
of  the  dignity  and  propriety  of  the  ministry,  she  tells  us,
had  been  rather  shocked  by  the  reports  which  the  morning
worshippers  had  brought  back,  so  that  she  was  not  pre-
possessed in  the  preacher's  favour ;  nor  was  she  at  all
fascinated  by  the  young  orator's  eloquence  when  she. heard
him,  while  his  countrified  manner  and  speech  excited
more  regret  than  reverence.  Later  on,  when  C.  H.
Spurgeon  was  called  to  the  pastorate  of  New  Park  Street
Chapel,  Miss  Thompson  met  him  from  time  to  time  at
the  house  of  Mr.  Olney,  and  often  went  to  hear  him
preach.  She  had  already  been  brought  to  see  her  need
of  a  Saviour,  and  had  solemnly  resolved  to  surrender
herself  to  the  will  of  Christ2  but  at  this  time  she  had
become  cold  and  indifferent  to  the  things  of  God,  and
seasons  of  darkness,  despondency  and  doubt  passed  over
her.  Under  the  ministry  of  the  young  preacher  it  was  not


i46    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  H ADDON  SPURGEON.

long  before  she  became  alarmed  at  her  backsliding  state,
and  she  sought  comfort  from  Mr.  William  Olne\ ,  old  Mr.
Olney's  son,  who  was  an  active  worker  in  the  Sunday-
school.  Whether  he  spoke  of  the  young  girl  to  the  pastor
is  not  certain,  but  not  long  afterwards  Miss  Thompson
received  an  illustrated  copy  of  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  with
the  inscription  in  C.  H.  Spurgeoivs  handwriting,  "  Miss
Thompson,  with  desires  for  her  progress  in  the  blessed
pilgrimage,  from  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  April  20,  1854."

"  I  do  not  think,"  says  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  "  my  beloved
had  at  that  time  any  other  thought  concerning  me  than
to  help  a  struggling  soul  heavenward ;  but  I  was  greatly
impressed  by  his  concern  for  me  and  the  book  became
very  precious  as  well  as  helpful.  By  degrees,  though  with
much  trembling,  I  told  him  of  my  state  before  God ;  and
he  gently  led  me  by  his  teaching  and  by  his  conversation
through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  the  Cross  of
Christ  for  the  peace  and  pardon  my  weary  soul  was
longing  for."

The  friendship  steadily  grew,  but  so  far  as  the  young
girl  was  concerned  there  was  no  thought  of  love  until  one
day,  in  very  characteristic  and  original  fashion,  the  pastor
made  known  the  state  of  his  heart.  It  was  the  day  of  the
opening  of  the  Crystal  Palace  at  Sydenham,  June  10,  1854,
and  a  large  party  of  friends  associated  with  New  Park
Street  Chapel  was  present,  including  Miss  Thompson  and
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon.  While  waiting  for  the  cere-
mony to  begin,  the  pastor,  who  had  been  reading  Tuppers
Proverbial  Philosophy,  handed  the  volume  to  the  young
girl  sitting  by  his  side,  and  asked  her  what  she  thought
of  the  lines  under  the  heading  "  Of  Marriage."

Then  in  a  very  low  whisper,  heard  by  none  save  the
ear  for  which  it  was  intended,  he  asked.  "  Do  you  pray


COURTSHIP  AND  MARRIAGE.  147

for  him  who  is  to  be  your  husband  ?  "  In  a  moment  the
significance  of  the  remark  flashed  upon  the  maiden's  mind,
her  heart  beat  fast,  her  cheeks  flushed,  and  from  that
time  the  brilliant  pageant  before  her  eyes  seemed  to  have
few  attractions.  Two  months  later  C.  H.  Spurgeon  form-
ally proposed  and  was  accepted.  "  To  me,"  says  Mrs.
Spurgeon,  "  it  was  a  time  as  solemn  as  it  was  sweet ;  and
with  a  great  awe  in  my  heart  I  left  my  beloved,  and
hastening  to  the  house  and  to  an  upper  room  (the  troth
had  been  plighted  in  the  old-fashioned  garden  of  her


Mrs.  Spurgeon  at  the  time
of  her  marriage.

grandfather's  home)  I  knelt  before  God  and  praised  and
thanked  Him  with  happy  tears  for  His  great  meorcy  in
giving  me  the  love  of  so  good  a  man."

Of  necessity  the  young  people  did  not  see  very  much  of
one  another,  for  at  this  time  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  preaching
twelve  or  thirteen  sermons  a  week,  and  travelling  hundreds
of  miles  by  road  and  rail  to  fulfil  engagements,  so  that  he
had  little  enough  spare  time.  But  their  love  grew
stronger  as  the  weeks  went  by,  and  the  fact  that  in  the


148    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

highest  matters  their  thoughts  were  one,  united  their
hearts  in  a  way  that  no  mere  earthly  ties  could
have  done.

When,  a  short  time  afterwards,  it  became  his  duty  as
minister  to  baptize  his  fiancee,  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon
asked  her  to  put  upon  paper  her  confession  of  faith.  She
did  so,  and  in  acknowledging  this  he  wrote :  —

"  The  letter  is  all  I  can  desire.  Oh !  I  could  weep  for
joy  (as  I  certainly  am  doing  now)  to  think  that  my  beloved
can  so  well  testify  to  a  work  of  grace  in  her  soul.  I
knew  you  were  really  a  child  of  God,  but  I  did  not  think
you  had  been  led  in  such  a  path.  ...  I  flatter  no  one.
but  allow  me  to  say  honestly  that  few  cases  which  have
come  under  my  notice  are  so  satisfactory  as  yours.  Mark,
.  I  write  not  now  as  your  admiring  friend,  but  impartially
as  your  pastor.  If  the  Lord  had  intended  your  destruction
He  would  not  have  told  you  such  things  as  these,  nor
would  He  enable  you  so  unreservedly  to  cast  yourself  upon
His  faithful  promise.  As  I  hope  to  stand  at  the  bar  of
God  clear  of  the  blood  of  all  men,  it  would  ill  become
me  to  flatter;  and  as  I  love  you  with  the  deepest  and
purest  affection,  far  be  it  from  me  to  trifle  with  your
immortal  interests;  but  I  will  say  again  that  my  gratitude
to  God  ought  to  be  great,  as  well  on  my  own  behalf  as
yours,  that  you  have  been  so  deeply  schooled  in  the
lessons  of  the  heart,  and  have  so  frequently  looked  into
the  charnel-house  of  your  own  corruption.  There  are
other  lessons  to  come :  that  you  may  be  thoroughly
furnished ;  but,  oh !  my  dear  one,  how  good  to  learn  the
first  lesson  well!  I  loved  you  once,  but  feared  you  might
not  be  an  heir  of  Heaven; — God  in  His  mercy  showed  me
that  you  were  indeed  elect.  I  then  thought  I  might
without  sin  reveal  my  affection  to  you, — but  up  to  the  time


COURTSHIP  AND  MARRIAGE.  149

I  saw  your  note,  I  could  not  imagine  that  you  had  seen
such  great  sights,  and  were  so  thoroughly  versed  in  soul-
knowledge.  God  is  good,  very  good,  infinitely  good.  Oh,
how  I  prize  this  last  gift,  because  I  now  know,  more  than
ever,  that  the  Giver  loves  the  gift,  and  so  I  may  love  it,
too,  but  only  in  subservience  to  Him.  Dear  purchase  of
a  Saviour's  blood,  you  are  to  me  a  Saviour's  gift,  and  my
heart  is  full  to  overflowing  with  the  thought  of  such  con-
tinued goodness.  I  do  not  wonder  at  His  goodness,  for
it  is  just  like  Him ;  but  I  cannot  but  lift  up  the  voice  of
joy  at  His  manifold  mercies."

Ajremarkable  love-letter  surely,  and  yet  one  that  reveals
clearly  the  writer's  mind  and  the  bond  of  sympathy,  as  well
as  of  love,  that  existed  between  himself  and  the  recipient.
This  bond  became  stronger  as  time  went  on,  and  late  in
life,  referring  to  his  wife,  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  wrote,
"  She  has  been  to  me  God's  best  earthly  gift,  and  not  a
little  even  of  heavenly  treasure  has  come  to  me  by  her
means.  She  has  often  been  as  an  angel  of  God  unto  me."

Few  women  would  have  been  capable  of  proving  a  true
helpmeet  for  a  man  with  a  mission  such  as  C.  H.  Spurgeon's.
There  was  no  room  for  selfishness,  and  the  striking  tribute
which  the  great: preacher  was  able  to  give  to  his  partner  in
life  is  one  which  should  be  everywhere  "told  for  a
memorial  of  her."  On  Mondays,  the  time  when  he  was
able  usually  to  snatch  a  few  hours  from  his  duties  to  see
his  fiancee,  the  young  minister  would  take  his  previous
day's  sermon  with  him  to  revise  for  the  Press,  and  the
young  girl  had  to  "  sit  quiet "  and  "  mind  her  own  busi-
ness "  while  this  important  work  went  on.  She  was  an
apt  pupil,  but  there  were  some  lessons  to  be  mastered  to
fit  her  .for  the  position  of  a  great  minister's  wife,  which
were  not  altogether  agreeable.  More  than  once  at  the


:5o   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

chapel  he  was  so  occupied,  with  the  thoughts  of  the  coming
service  that  he  failed  to  recognize  his  fiancee  in  the  vestry,
and  greeted  her  with  merely  a  handshake  and  a  grave,  "  How
are  you  ?  "  as  though  she  were  a  stranger.  On  a  certain
occasion,  however,  a  more  painful  lesson  had  to  be  leamt.
The  couple  had  gone  together  one  afternoon  to  a  hall
in  Kennington  where  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  to  preach.  A
great  crowd  had  gathered,  and  as  the  young  minister  and
his  •fiancee  ascended  the  thronged  staircase,  the  burden  of
the  message  he  was  to  deliver  filled  his  mind  so  that  he
quite  forgot  his  companion,  and  went  through  a  side  door
into  a  kind  of  reception  room,  leaving  Miss  Thompson  to
struggle  with  the  crowd.  She  was  naturally  indignant  at
what  she  then  considered  unpardonable  thoughtlessness,
and  in  no  comfortable  frame  of  mind  returned  home  at
once.  But  Miss  Thompson  had  that  choicest  of  posses-
sions, arsensible  and  loving  mother,  who,  after  soothing  her
ruffled  spirit,  pointed  out  that  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon
was  no  ordinary  man,  that  his  whole  life  was  absolutely
dedicated  to  God  and  His  service,  and  declared  that  the
young  girl  must  never,  never  hinder  him  by  trying  to  put
herself  first  in  his  heart  The  lesson  was  well  learned,  and
when  the  preacher  later  on  hurried  in,  excitedly  inquiring
for  his  •fiancee,  it  was  not  to  meet  with  protests  and  expostu-
lations, but  to  receive  a  submissive  and  repentant  little
maiden.  He  listened  to  her  story  and  assured  her  of  his
deep  affection,  but  explained'  that  before  all  things  he
was  God's  servant  and  she  must  be  prepared  to  yield  her
claims  to  those  of  the  Divine  Master.

It  was  not  merely  passive  help,  however,  that  the  young
girl  rendered  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon.  She  was  his  active
associate  through  life,  and  even  before  they  were  married
began  to  assist  him  in  his  literary  labours.  A  little  book,


COURTSHIP  AND  MARRIAGE.  151

entitled,  "  Smooth  Stones  taken  from  Ancient  Brooks,"
was  the  joint  work  of  the  devoted  couple,  Miss  Thompson,
at  the  request  of  the  young  minister,  having  gone  through
an  old  Puritan  folio  and  marked  passages  of  peculiar  sweet-
ness or  instructiveness,  which  were  extracted  and  arranged
by  C.  H.  Spurgeon  for  republication  in  handy  form.

The  wedding  took  place  at  New  Park  Street  Chapel  on
January  8th,  1856,  Dr.  Alexander  Fletcher  conducting  the


Inscription  on  the  fly-leaf  of  a  first  volume  of  printed  sermons

presented  by  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  to  the  lady

who  shortly  afterwards  became  his  wife.

simple  service.  Naturally  the  chapel  was  filled  to  its
utmost  capacity.  From  an  early  hour  the  streets  had  been
thronged  with  people,  and,  indeed,  so  congested  were  the
adjoining  thoroughfares  that  a  body  of  police  had  to  be
summoned  to  control  the  traffic  and  prevent  accidents.
Over  two  thousand  persons  were  unable  to  gain  admission
although  they  waited  outside  to  cheer  the  young  couple


152    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

and  wish  them  God  speed  as  they  drove  away.  The  brief
honeymoon  of  ten  days  was  spent  in  Paris,  and  then  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Spurgeon  returned  to  London  and  took  up  their
abode  in  their  first  home  in  the  New  Kent  Road,  London.
Those  were  difficult  times  for  the  young  couple  financially.
Rigid  economy  had  to  be  practised  in  all  things,  and  they
even  had  to  "  pinch "  to  "  make  both  ends  meet,"  for
from  their  slender  resources  they  contributed  largely  to
the  support  and  education  of  a  young  man  for  the  ministry
— the  beginning  of  that  wonderful  work  carried  on  after-
wards at  the  Pastors'  College.  "  We  never  had  enough  left
over  to  '  tie  a  bow  and  ends,' "  says  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  "  but
I  can  see  now  that  this  was  God's  way  of  preparing  us  to
sympathize  with,  and  help  poor  pastors  in  the  years  which
were  to  come."

At  times  the  resources  would  be  apparently  at  an  end,
and  then  were  vouchsafed  to  the  young  couple  remarkable
instances  of  God's  providential  care  for  those  who  reposed
their  trust  in  Him.  On  one  occasion  a  demand  was  made
for  the  payment  of  a  rate  or  tax,  but  the  coffers  were
empty,  and  the  only  thing  the  minister  and  his  wife  could
do  was  "  to  lay  their  burden  before  the  Lord."  The  answer
came  with  almost  startling  swiftness,  for  that  very  night
or  early  the  next  morning  an  anonymous  letter  was  received
containing  twenty  pounds  "  for  the  use  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Spurgeon."  They  never  learnt  who  sent  the  money,  and
only  knew  that  it  was  in  answer  to  prayer.  "  As  the  years
rolled  by,"  says  the  great  preacher's  wife,  "such  eventful
passages  in  our  history  were  graciously  multiplied  and  even
excelled ;  but  perhaps  this  first  blessed  deliverance  was  the
foundation-stone  of  my  husband's  strong  and  mighty  faith,
for  I  do  not  remember  ever  afterwards  seeing  him  painfully
anxious  concerning  supplies  for  any  of  his  great  works;


COURTSHIP  AND  MARRIAGE.


153


he  depended  wholly  on  the  Lord,  his  trust  was  perfect  and
he  lacked  nothing."

What  times  of  domestic  felicity  the  young  minister
now  enjoyed !  At  the  close  of  a  hard  Sabbath  day's  work
he  would  go  home  and  rest  in  his  easy  chair,  while  his


Reduced  facsimile  of  an  inscription'by  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon  in  his  family  Bible-

wife  sat  at  his  feet  and  read  to  him  from  some  favourite
book.  One  evening  it  would  be  something  to  soothe  or
refresh  him  after  a  period  of  excitement  or  exhaustion,
and  another  evening  the  preacher  would  ask  for  Baxter's
"Reformed  Pastor,"  or  a  work  of  an  equally  stimulating


i54   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

character  to  quicken  what  he  described  as  his  "  sluggish
heart,"  though  never  was  minister  more  faithful  to  his  God
and  to  his  flock.  It  was  oftentimes  hard  for  the  wife  to
part  with  her  beloved  husband  when  he  went  on  distant
missions,  but  never  did  she  hinder  him,  and  the  surrender
was  always  made  as  a  willing  sacrifice  to  God.

Many  strange  incidents  happened  during  those  early
days  of  married  life.  One  Saturday  evening  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon  found  himself  unable  to  collect  his
thoughts  and  dissect  the  text  which  he  had  chosen  for  his
sermon  on  the  morrow.  Utterly  exhausted  and  dispirited,
he  agreed  to  his  wife's  suggestion  that  he  should  retire  to
rest,  on  the  condition  that  she  woke  him  early  in  the
morning  when  he  hoped  to  be  better  able  to  study  and  pre-
pare for  the  day's  work.  Some  hours  of  sound  and
peaceful  sleep  followed,  but  with  the  dawning  of  day  Mrs.
Spurgeon  was  aroused  by  hearing  her  husband  talk  in  his
sleep.  She  listened  intently  for  it  was  no  mere  meaning-
less ramble  of  words ;  he  was  going  over  the  subject  of
the  verse  that  had  appeared  so  difficult,  and  giving  a  full
and  distinct  exposition  of  its  meaning.  There  were  no
means  at  hand  for  taking  notes,  but  praying  that  her
memory  might  be  strengthened,  Mrs.  Spurgeon  repeated
over  and  over  again  in  her  mind  the  striking  sermon  she
had  heard.  Then  all  her  efforts  to  keep  awake  being
fruitless,  she  fell  into  a  sound  slumber,  only  to  be  awakened
at  a  late  hour  by  her  husband's  distress  at  having  slept  so
long.  "  Oh,  why  did  you  let  me  sleep  ?  "  he  cried.  "  What
shall  I  do?  What  shall  I  do?"  "Listen,"  replied  Mrs.
Spurgeon,  and  she  repeated  what  she  had  heard  in  such
strange  circumstances,  much  to  the  amazement  of  her
husband.  The  exposition  was  original  and  clear,  and
C  H.  Spurgeon  that  morning  preached  a  powerful


COURTSHIP  AND  MARRIAGE.  155

discourse   built   upon   his   wife's   report   of    his    sleeping
utterances.

On  September  2oth  twin  sons  were  born  to  Mrs.
Spurgeon,  and  the  young  pastor's  joy  knew  no  bounds.
But  the  story  so  often  told,  even  in  the  present  day,  of  how


/


C.  H.  Spurgeon  and  his  wife  in  their  garden

soon  after  marriage-
he  received  the  news  in  the  pulpit  and  repeated  it  to  the
congregation,  quoting  the  lines, —

Not  more  than  others  I  deserve,
But  God  hath  given  me  more,

is  untrue.  Mr.  Spurgeon  did  not  leave  his  house  on
that  day,  which  happened  to  be  a  Saturday,  and  never
in  his  life  did  he  preach  on  the  seventh  day.  It  is  another


156   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

instance  of  a  falsehood  repeated  so  often  that  some
have  at  last  come  to  believe  not  only  that  it  was  true,  but
that  they  themselves  heard  the  declaration.  A  few  weeks
later  the  boys  were  solemnly  dedicated  to  the  service  of
God,  in  the  presence  of  a  number  of  friends,  who  joined
with  the  parents  in  praying  that  the  children  might  grow
up  and  become  active  workers  in  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord
— a  petition  the  answer  to  which  has  been  obvious  for
many  years  in  the  lives  of  Pastors  Thomas  and  Charles
Spurgeon.


CHAPTER    XII.

ABUSE  AND  SLANDER  IN  THE  PRESS.

UP  to  the  time  of  his  departure  from  Waterbeach  the
successful  young  preacher  had  met  with  hostile
criticism  only  at  the  hands  of  his  elder  brethren  in  the
local  ministry,  who  in  many  cases  were  moved  by  jealousy
at  his  youthfulness  and  popularity.  But  with  his  accession
to  one  of  the  most  important  Nonconformist  pulpits  in  the
Metropolis,  commenced  a  campaign  of  slander  and  men-
dacity such  as  no  other  preacher  of  modern  times  has  had
to  endure.  Of  course  a  position  of  so  much  prominence
and  a  success  so  sudden  and  extraordinary  laid  him  open
to  a  searching  criticism;  and  the  fact  that  a  country  lad
with  no  college  training  could  in  a  week  or  two  draw
congregations  twice  and  thrice  as  large  as  those  of  the
most  brilliant  and  distinguished  London  preachers,  besides
reviving  so  wonderfully  a  cause,  in  many  quarters  regarded
as  dead,  was  likely  to  call  forth  a  good  deal  of  disparage-
ment, and  expressions  of  doubt  as  to  the  prospect  of
its  continued  success.  Looking  back,  however,  over  the
records  of  the  period,  it  is  not  altogether  easy  to  under-
stand the  reason  for  the  intense  bitterness  of  the  attack
which  was  made  upon  C.  H.  Spurgeon  by  writers  and

speakers  of  all  classes  and  creeds.     The  line  was  drawn

»

nowhere,  and  not  only  were  gross  personalities  indulged
in,  but  lying  stories  were  invented,  without  the  slightest
foundation  of  fact,  the  authors,  in  many  cases,  vouching


158    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEON.

for  the  "  truth  "  as  hearers  or  eye-witnesses.  Indeed,  late
in  life,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  declared  that  few  of  the  anecdotes
told  of  himself  were  true.  He  instanced  the  story  of
how  he  slid  down  the  pulpit  banisters  at  New  Park  Street
Chapel,  to  illustrate  the  backslider's  course.  At  the  time
the  incident  was  supposed  to  have  happened  there  were
no  banisters  to  the  pulpit,  which  was  fitted  to  the  wall  and
entered  from  the  vestry  behind.  "  I  never  gave  even  the
remotest  occasion  for  that  falsehood,"  he  said,  "  and  yet
it  is  daily  repeated,  and  I  have  even  heard  of  persons  who
have  declared  that  they  were  present  when  I  did  so,  and
with  their  own  eyes  saw  me  perform  the  silly  trick."  So
recently  as  1897  a  minister  in  the  United  States  publicly
affirmed  that  he  was  present  at  New  Park  Street  Chapel
and  saw  C.  H.  Spurgeon  slide  down  the  banisters.
That  the  statement  was  a  deliberate  untruth  is  clear  from
the  construction  of  the  pulpit,  but  although  contradicted
many  times  the  story  continues  to  be  repeated.  As  a
matter  of  fact  it  was  told  of  Lorenzo  Dow,  years  earlier,
the  trunk  of  a  tree  from  which  he  was  preaching  to  a
large  crowd  taking  the  place  of  the  pulpit  banisters.

But  why,  it  may  be  asked,  were  such  calumnies  heaped
upon  the  head  of  the  inoffensive  youth,  whose  sole  object
was  to  benefit  his  fellows  by  making  the  Gospel  a  living
force  in  their  lives?  The  explanation,  we'  believe,  lies  in
the  fact  that  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  a  reformer,  and  reformers
in  all  ages  have  been  the  subjects  of  abuse  and  libel.  At
the  time  of  his  appearance  in  London  preaching  had
degenerated,  until  it  had  practically  ceased  to  be  a  power.
Every  sermon  was  a  carefully-prepared  theological  essay,
full  of  platitudes  and  fine  periods,  while  the  weightier
matters  of  sin  and  the  divine  judgment  of  evil-doers  were
all  but  ignored.  The  upper  classes  and  the  wealthier


ABUSE  AND  SLANDER  IX  THE  PRESS.     159

bourgeoisie  liked  such  preaching,  because  it  made  no  attempt
to  touch  their  lives  of  indulgence  and  left  their  consciences
easy;  but  the  lower  middle  classes  and  the  proletariat
saw  the  hollowness  of  the  current  orthodoxy,  and  they  were
beginning  to  drift  away  from  the  churches.  There  was  an
almost  entire  lack  of  personal  religion  and  personal  responsi-


Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  his  brother  James,
and  Mr.  Joseph  Passmore.


bility  in  the  pulpit  presentation  of  Christianity,  but  at  the
same  time  an  unexpressed  yearning  was  felt  by  the  masses
for  a  man  who  would  revive  the  preaching  of  Whitefield  and
the  Puritans  and  deal  vigorously  with  the  spiritual  needs
of  the  day.  That  man  was  sent  in  the  person  of  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon.  Like  a  bombshell  he  was  thrown  into


i6o   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEOX.

the  midst  of  London,  and  all  the  soothing,  soft-mannered
and  gentlemanly  preachers,  with  their  sleepy  and  cultured
congregations,  were  agitated  as  they  had  never  been  agitated
before.  They  could  not  ignore  the  youth.  Thousands
flocked  to  hear  him :  lives  were  changed,  and  men  and
women,  hitherto  careless,  began  to  show  somewhat  of  the
spirit  of  presenting  their  bodies  to  Christ  as  "  a  living
sacrifice."  The  new  preacher  vigorously  denounced  evil
in  every  shape  and  form;  he  set  forth  realistically  the
judgment  of  the  wicked  as  well  as  the  glories  of  heaven,  and
the  difference  between  his  preaching  and  that  of  the
fashionable  clergymen  and  ministers  of  the  day  was  very
aptly  set  forth  in  the  cartoons  which  began  to  appear  at
this  time,  such  as  "  Brimstone  and  Treacle,"  and  "  The
Slow  Coach  and  the  Fast  Train."  Propriety  had  been
the  order,  but  here  was  a  boy-preacher  occupying  a
prominent  Metropolitan  pulpit,  who  set  all  the  proprieties
at  defiance.  Religious  England  was  scandalized.  This
upstart  minister  must  be  put  down ;  this  new  light  must  be
extinguished ;  and  the  snuffing-out  process  was  commenced
forthwith,  ministers,  laymen,  authors  and  editors  all
joining  in  the  work.  The  "  polish  "  of  the  preachers  and
the  politeness  of  the  writers  were  forgotten,  and  rapidly
the  criticism  and  censure  developed  into  mere  vulgar
vituperation  and  abuse.  If  the  country  lad's  ministry  were
to  be  tolerated  for  never  so  short  a  period,  then  it  was
evident  that  for  other  divines  to  compete  with  him,
the  whole  character  of  their  preaching  would  have  to  be
reformed.  They  were  not  prepared  to  take  lessons  from  a
"  boy  "  :  he  must  be  suppressed ;  and  so  no  weapons  were
thought  too  foul  to  deal  the  blows  that  forthwith  rained
upon  the  pastor  of  New  Park  Street  Chapel.

The  first  serious  attack,  bitter,  but  free  from  vulgarity,


ABUSE  AND  SLANDER  IN  THE  PRESS.      161

appeared  in  The  Earthen  Vessel  of  January,  1855,  signed,
"Job,"  the  writer  being,  as  was  generally  acknowledged,  the
Rev.  James  Wells,  of  the  Surrey  Tabernacle.  It  was  in
reply  to  an  article  by  the  editor,  the  Rev.  Charles  Waters
Banks,  who  spoke  more  or  less  kindly  of  the  young
preacher  and  his  work.  "  Job  "  acknowledged  that  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon  had  read  much  and  possessed  himself
of  every  kind  of  information.  "  In  addition  to  this,  he
appears  to  be  a  well-disposed  person, — kind,  benevolent,
courteous,  full  of  goodwill  to  his  fellow-creatures, —
endearing  in  his  manners,  social, — a  kind  of  person  whom
it  would  seem  almost  a  cruelty  to  dislike.  The  same
may  be,  with  equal  truth,  said  both  of  Dr.  Pusey  and
of  Cardinal  Wiseman.  But,  then,  it  becomes  us  to
be  aware,  not  only  of  the  rough  garment  of  a  mock
and  '  arrogant  humility,'  but  also  of  Amalekite-measured
and  delicate  steps ;  and  also  of  the  soft  raiment  of
refined  and  studied  courtesy  (Matt.  xi.  8),  and  fascin-
ating smile  with,  '  Surely  the  bitterness  of  death  is  past '
(i  Sam.  xv.  32).  But  Samuel  had  too  much  honesty  about
him  to  be  thus  deceived.  We  must,  then,  beware  of
words  that  are  smoother  than  butter,  and  softer  than  oil
(Psalm  Iv.  21).  Not  one  of  the  Reformers  appears  to
have  been  of  this  amiable  caste ;  but  these  creature-refine-
ments pass  with  thousands  for  religion ;  and  tens  of
thousands  are  deluded  thereby.  It  was  by  great,  very
great  politeness  that  the  serpent  beguiled  Eve ;  and,
unhappily,  her  posterity  love  to  have  it  so; — so  true  is  it
that  Satan  is  not  only  a  prince  of  darkness,  but  transformed
also  as  '  an  angel  of  light,'  to  deceive,  if  it  were  possible,
even  the  very  elect.

"  And  yet  further  than  all  this,  Mr.   Spurgeon  was,  so
says  the  Vessel,  brought  to  know  the  Lord  when  he  was

9


1 62    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

only  fifteen  years  old.  Heaven  grant  it  may  prove  to  be
so, — for  the  young  man's  sake,  and  for  that  of  others  also !
But  I  have — most  solemnly  have — my  doubts  as  to  the
Divine  reality  of  his  conversion.  I  do  not  say — it  is  not
for  me  to  say — that  he  is  not  a  regenerated  man ;  but  this
I  do  know,  that  there  are  conversions  which  are  not  of
God ;  and  whatever  convictions  a  man  may  have,  whatever
may  be  the  agonies  of  his  mind  as  to  the  possibility  of  his
salvation,  whatever  terror  anyone  may  experience,  and
however  sincere  they  (sic)  may  be,  and  whatever  deliverance
they  may  have  by  dreams  or  visions,  or  by  natural  con-
.science,  or  the  letter  or  even  apparent  power  of  the  Word,
yet,  if  they  cannot  stand,  in  their  spirit  and  ministry,  the
test  of  the  law  of  truth,  and  the  testimony  of  God,  there
is  no  true  light  in  them  ;  for  a  person  may  be  intellectually
.enlightened,  he  may  taste  of  the  Heavenly  gift,  and  be
made  partaker  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  professionally,  and  taste
of  the  good  Word  of  God  (Hebrews  vi.),  and  yet  not  be
regenerated,  and  therefore  not  beyond  the  danger  of  falling
.away,  even  from  that  portion  of  truth  which  such  do  hold.
.Such  are  never  thoroughly  convinced  of  what  they  are  by
nature;  Psalm  xxxviii.  and  Romans  vii.  show  a  path  to
which  they  make  some  approaches,  and  of  which  they  may
•eloquently  talk,  but  at  the  same  time  give  certain  proofs
that  they  are  not  truly  walking  therein."

The  writer  then  proceeded  to  enumerate  his  objections
•to  the  ministry  of  the  young  preacher.  "  It  is  most  awfully
deceptive  "  because  "  it  passes  by  the  essentials  of  the  work
of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  sets  people  by  shoals  down  for
Christians  who  are  not  Christians  by  the  quickening  and
indwelling  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost " ;  it  "  may  be  morally
:and  socially  beneficial  to  some  people  who,  perhaps,  would
.care  to  hear  onlv  such  an  intellectually  or,  rather,


ABUSE  AND  SLANDER  IX  THE  PRESS.      165

rhetorically-gifted  man  as  is  Mr.  Spurgeon ;  but  then  they
have  this  advantage  at  the  cost  of  being  fatally  deluded."'
The  young  preacher's  ministry  "  pays  its  address  courte-
ously to  all;  hence,  in  this  sermon  (one  referred  to  in-


"Catch  'em  alive,  O!"
A  caricature  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  published  in  1855.

Mr.  Banks'  article)  he  graciously  receives  us  all — such  a
reception  as  it  is — he  who  preaches  all  doctrine  and  he
who  preaches  no  doctrine ;  he  who  preaches  all  experience-
and  he  who  preaches  no  experience ;  and  hence  intellectu-


1 64    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEOX.

ally  High  Calvinists  of  easy  virtue  receive  such  a  ministry
into  their  pulpits,  at  once  showing  that  the  man  of  sin,
the  spirit  of  apostasy,  is  lurking  in  their  midst.  Low
Calvinists  also  receive  him,  showing  that  there  is  enough
of  their  spirit  about  him  to  make  him  their  dear  brother  ;
only  his  Hyperism  does  sometimes  get  a  little  in  their  way."

The  writer  concluded,  "  I  would  make  every  allowance
for  his  youth ;  but  while  I  make  this  allowance  I  am,
nevertheless,  thoroughly  disposed  to  believe  that  we  have
a  fair  sample  of  what  he  will  be  even  unto  the  end,"  a
statement  that,  owing  to  the  way  in  which  it  was  under-
stood, needed  a  qualification  from  "  Job,"  who  wrote  in  a
later  number  of  The  Earthen  Vessel,  "  It  is  to  be  regretted
that  some  persons  have  tried  to  make  the  above  (the
ambiguous  statement)  mean  that  as  Mr.  Spurgeon  is  in  a
state  of  nature  now,  he  will  so  continue  even  unto  the
end ;  whereas  I  neither  did,  nor  do  I  mean,  any  such  thing  :
all  I  mean  is  that  his  ministry,  as  it  now  is,  is,  I  am  strongly
disposed  to  believe,  a  fair  sample  of  what  it  will  be  even
unto  the  end."

A  heated  controversy  followed  in  the  pages  of  The
Earthen  Vessel,  but  the  editor  continued  to  declare  his
faith  in  the  honesty  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  and  the  Divine
value  of  his  work.  "  In  the  course  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's
ministry,"  he  wrote,  "  there  are  frequently  to  be  found  such
gushings  forth  of  love  to  God,  of  ravishing  delights  in
Christ,  of  the  powerful  anointings  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
as  compel  us  to  believe  that  God  is  in  him  of  a  truth.
We  must  confess  that  is  the  deep-wrought  conviction  of
our  spirit ;  and  we  dare  not  conceal  it.  Why  should  we  ?
We  may  be  condemned  by  many;  but  whatever  it  may
cast  upon  us, — whoever  may  discard  us, — we  must  acknow-
ledge that  while  in  these  sermons  we  have  met  with


ABUSE  AND  SLANDER  IN  THE  PRESS.      165

sentences  that  perplex  us,  and  with  what  some  might
consider  contradiction,  still,  we  have  found  those  things
which  have  been  powerful  demonstrations  of  the  indwelling

of  THE    LIFE    AND    THE  LOVE    OF    THE    TRIUNE    GOD    in   the

preacher's  heart."

The  Rev.  James  Wells,  however,  continued  to  show  his
hostility  to  the  young  minister  who  was  so  soon  to  outstrip
him  in  his  ability  and  success  as  a  preacher,  and  it  is  diffi-
cult to  believe  that  the  pastor  of  Surrey  Tabernacle  was
altogether  disinterested  in  his  opposition,  for  later  on,
when  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  divine  mission  and  the  value  of
his  ministry  were  generally  recognized  by  ministers  of  all
denominations,  Mr.  Wells  refused  to  fulfil  an  engagement
to  preach  because  his  brother-minister  was  to  take  one  of
the  services  on  the  same  day.  Did  he  fear  a  comparison
of  his  own  preaching  with  that  of  his  brilliant  young
brother?

The  secular  Press  was  not  long  in  following  the  lead
given  by  "Job."  On  February  27th  of  the  same  year,  The
Ipswich  Express  published  a  communication  from  iis
London  correspondent,  headed,  "  A  Clerical  Poltroon,"
which  contained  the  first  of  those  untrue  stories  invented
with  the  deliberate  intention  of  defaming  the  young
preacher's  character.  After  declaring  that  all  his  dis-
courses were  "  redolent  of  bad  taste,"  and  "  vulgar  and
theatrical,"  the  writer  continued,  "  Actually  I  hear  the
other  Sunday  the  gifted  divine  had  the  impudence  before
preaching  to  say,  as  there  were  many  young  ladies  present,
that  he  was  engaged — that  his  heart  it  was  another's,  he
wished  them  clearly  to  understand  that — that  he  might
have  no  presents  sent  him,  no  attentions  paid  him,  no
worsted  slippers  worked  for  him  by  the  young  ladies
present.  I  suppose  the  dear  divine,"  added  the  writer,


166    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEOX.

"  has  been  rendered  uncomfortable  by  the  fondness  of  his
female  auditors ;  at  any  rate  such  is  the  impression  he
wishes  to  leave."  A  few  days  later  the  story  was  contra-
dicted in  The  Ipswich  Express,  and  a  rather  lame  apology
published,  but  those  responsible  for  the  conduct  of  the
journal  were  evidently  hostile  to  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,


"  Brimstone  and  Treacle."

From  a  cartoon  published  soon  after  C.  H.  Spurgeon  came  to  London.    The
figure  on  the  right  is  intended  for  a  fashionable  preacher  of  the  day.


for  when  in  April  and  May  of  the  same  year  they  reviewed
certain  of  his  sermons,  the  series  of  reviews  concluded
thus  :  <:  There  is  enough  foolishness  in  London  to  keep
up,  in  flourishing  style,  Tom  Thumb,  Charles  Kean,  the
Living  Skeleton,  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  and  many  other  delusions
all  at  once,  and  yet  to  allow  a  vast  mass  of  sober-minded


ABUSE  AND  SLANDER  IN  THE  PRESS.      167

citizens  to  go  '  the  even  tenor  of  their  way,'  quite  unaffected
by  such  transient  turmoils.  Our  decided  opinion  is,  that
in  no  other  place  but  London  could  Mr.  Spurgeon  have
caused  the  juror  that  he  has  excited.  It  must  not  be
forgotten  that  in  London,  or  anywhere  else,  a  religious
delusion  is,  of  all  others,  the  most  easy  to  inaugurate  and
carry  on.  When  a  man  obtains  possession  of  a  pulpit,  he
has  credit  for  meaning  well,  at  any  rate,  and  expressions
are  thenceforward  often  listened  to  from  him,  without
hostile  criticism,  which  would  not  be  tolerated,  if
enunciated  from  any  other  position.  Mr.  Spurgeon's
career  is  suggestive  of  various  interesting  questions.  If
such  a  man  can  obtain,  in  a  short  time,  the  position  he
now  certainly  occupies,  does  that  fact  say  much  for  the
condition  of  the  religious  world?  If  Mr.  S.  be,  as  is
stated,  the  very  best  among  a  large  section  of  preachers,
what  sort  of  a  man  is  the  very  worst  of  that  section  ?  Does
the  pulpit,  upon  the  whole,  keep  pace  with  the  age,  or
does  it  lag  behind?  Will  not  the  immense  success  of
such  as  Spurgeon  go  far  to  account  for  that  aversion  of
men  of  taste  to  the  public  profession  of  Evangelical
religion  complained  of  long  ago  by  John  Foster  ?  "

Although  so  promptly  contradicted,  the  story  of  the
slippers  was  copied  into  journals  all  over  the  country,  and
it  has  continued  to  show  signs  of  life  even  in  the  present
day,  for  the  writer  himself  has  heard  it  told  in  a  slightly
modified  form,  of  another  popular  preacher,  still  living,
who  was  trained  in  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  Pastors'  College.  The
young  preacher's  own  opinion  of  the  libel  is  set  forth  in
a  letter  which  he  wrote  to  his  father  on  March  4th,  1855  :
"Do  not  be  grieved  at -the  slanderous  libel  in  this  week's
Express?  he  wrote.  "  Of  course  it  is  all  a  lie,  without  an
atom  of  foundation ;  and  while  the  whole  of  London  is


168   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEOX.

talking  of  me,  and  thousands  are  unable  to  get  near  the
door,  the  opinion  of  a  penny-a-liner  is  of  little  consequence.
...  I  only  fear  for  you.  I  do  not  like  you  to  be  grieved.
For  myself  I  WILL  REJOICE ;  the  devil  is  roused,  the
Church  is  awakening,  and  I  am  now  counted  worthy  to
suffer  for  Christ's  sake.  .  .  .  Good  ballast,  father,  good
ballast."

Exactly  a  year  after  C.  H.  Spurgeon  had  been  invited
to  occupy  permanently  the  pulpit  of  New  Park  Street,
there  was  an  attack  upon  him  in  The  Essex  Standard.
The  writer,  signing  himself  "  Iconoclast,"  described  a
Sunday  evening  service  at  Exeter  Hall  which  he  was  sup-
posed to  have  attended.  He  condemned  the  exposition,
he  condemned  the  prayer,  which  he  falsely  declared  to  be
an  "  arrogant  dictation  to  the  Deity,"  and  he  condemned
the  sermon.  Deliberate  misrepresentation  and  falsehood
were  the  foundations  upon  which  this  structure  of  calumny
was  based,  and  "  Iconoclast "  proved  to  be  the  bitterest
of  all  the  young  preacher's  opponents  in  the  secular  Press
up  to  that  time.  "  Mr.  Spurgeon  loves  controversy,"  said
the  writer,  "  but  with  the  modesty  peculiar  to  himself  told
us  that  nowadays  '  he  found  no  foeman  worthy  of  his
steel.'  His  favourite  action  is  that  of  washing  his  hands
and  then  rubbing  them  dry.  He  belongs  to  the  peripatetic
or  Walker  school,  perpetually  walking  up  and  down  as  an
actor  treading  the  boards  of  a  theatre.  His  style  is  that
of  the  vulgar  colloquial  varied  by  rant.  .  .  .  All  the  most
solemn  mysteries  of  our  holy  religion  are  by  him  rudely,
roughly  and  impiously  handled.  Mystery  is  vulgarised,
sanctity  profaned,  common  sense  outraged  and  decency
disgusted.  .  .  .  His  rantings  are  interspersed  with  coarse
anecdotes  that  split  the  ears  of  the  groundlings ;  and  this
is  popularity  !  and  this  is  the  '  religious  furor  '  of  London  !


ABUSE  AND  SLANDER  IN  THE  PRESS.      169

and  this  young  divine  it  is  that  throws  Wesley  and  White-
field  into  the  shade !  a*d  this  is  the  preaching  and  this
the  theology  that  five  thousand  persons  from  Sabbath  to
Sabbath  hear,  receive  and  approve,  and — profit  by  it !  "
This  attack  was  followed  up  in  the  next  number  of  the
same  newspaper  by  a  letter  from  one  signing  himself,  "  A
Lover  of  Propriety."  He  described  the  letter  of  "  Icono-
clast "  as  "  a  faithful  delineation  of  the  young  preacher
who  is  making  so  great  a  stir  just  now,"  and  explained  that
having  heard  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at  Earl's  Calne,  he  was
"  extremely  disgusted  "  at  "  a  young  man  of  twenty-one
years  assuming  airs  and  adopting  a  language  which  would
be -scarcely  tolerated  in  the  man  of  grey  hairs.  In  common
with  many  others,"  continued  this  "  Lover  of  Propriety,"
*  though  obliged  to  smile  during  his  performances,  we  felt
more  inclined  to  weep  over  such  a  prostitution  of  the
pulpit  and  hours  devoted  to  professedly  religious  worship.
His  prayer  to  us  appeared  most  profanely  familiar;  and
never  were  we  impressed  more  with  the  contrast  between
this  effusion  and  the  beautifully-simple,  reverential  and
devout  language  of  the  Church  of  England  Liturgy,  and
said  within  our  hearts,  '  Would  that  Dissenters  would  bind
down  their  ministers  to  use  those  forms  of  sound  words,
rather  than  allow  of  these  rhapsodies  which  to  all  persons
of  taste  and  true  devotion  must  have  been  very  offensive.'  "

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  trenchant  comment  on  these
letters  is  interesting.  "  The  devil  has  barked  again  in
The  Essex  Standard"  he  wrote  in  the  postscript  of  a  note
to  his  future  wife.  "  It  contains  another  letter.  Never
mind ;  when  Satan  opens  his  mouth  he  gives  me  an  oppor-
tunity of  ramming  my  sword  down  his  throat."

And  now  the  arrows  of  slander  and  invective  fell  thick
and  fast.  One  after  another  the  newspapers  published


1 70   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEOX.

bitter  and  censorious  articles  upon  the  young  pastor  of
New  Park  Street,  but  these  only  served  to  make  him  better
known,  to  increase  his  congregations  and  to  bind  his  flock
closer  together.  "  A  star  has  appeared  in  the  misty  plain
of  orthodoxy,"  wrote  the  London  correspondent  of  The
Bucks  Chronicle,  on  April  24th,  1855,  "  and  such  a  star,
that,  were  it  not  for  the  badge  which  encircles  that  part  of
it  called  neck,  we  should  for  the  more  distinguishing
characteristic  write  comet.  It  has  made  its  appearance  in
Exeter  Hall,  and  is  to  be  seen  on  the  first  day  of  the
week  by  putting  a  few  '  browns '  into  a  basket.  The  star
is  a  Spurgeon — not  a  carp,  but  much  resembling  a  pike.
Thousands  flock  weekly  to  see  it ;  and  it  shines  grandilo-
quently. It  is  a  parson — a  young  parson.  Merciful  good-
ness !  such  a  parson  seldom  talks.  It  is  a  railway  speed  of
joining  sentences,  conflabergasticated  into  a  discourse.  It
is  now  near  eleven  o'clock  a.m.  He  rises  to  read;  and
as  if  the  Book  of  Inspiration  was  not  fine  enough  in  its
composition,  enters  into  explanations  of  his  own  as  apt  as
a  coalheaver  would  give  of  Thucidydes  (sic).  Never  mind  !
the  great  gun  of  starology  in  theology  has  a  mission.  Xot
to  convert  the  doggerelisms  of  Timbuctoo  into  rationalisms
— not  to  demonstrate  the  loving-kindness  of  the  great
Fatherhood — not  to  teach  the  forgiveness  of  Jehovah
Jirah  (sic)  in  His  great  heart  of  mercy — not  to  proclaim
the  extension  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Master  of  assemblies.
No !  but  to  teach  that  if  Jack  Scroggins  was  put  down  in
the  black  book  before  the  great  curtain  of  events  was
unfolded,  that  the  said  Jack  Scroggins,  in  spite  of  all  he
may  do  or  say,  will  and  must  tumble  into  the  limbo  of  a
brimstone  hell  to  be  punished  and  roasted  without  any
prospect  of  cessation  or  shrinking  into  a  dried  cinder;
because  Jack  Scroggins  had  done  what  Jack  Scroggins


ABUSE  AND  SLANDER  IN  THE  PRESS      171

could  not  help  doing.  ...  It  is  not  pleasant  to  be
frightened  into  the  portal  of  bliss  by  the  hissing  bubbles  of
the  seething  cauldron.  It  is  not  Christian-like  to  say,  '  God
must  wash  brains  in  the  Hyper-Calvinism  a  Spurgeon
teaches  before  man  can  enter  Heaven.'  It  does  not  har-
monize with  the  quiet  majesty  of  the  Nazarene.  It  does
not  fall  like  manna  for  hungry  souls ;  but  is  like  the  gush
of  the  pouring  rain  in  a  thunderstorm  which  makes  the
flowers  to  hang  their  heads,  looking  up  afterwards  as  if
nothing  had  happened.  When  the  Exeter  Hall  stripling
talks  of  Deity,  let  him  remember  that  He  is  superior  to
profanity,  and  that  blasphemy  from  a  parson  is  as  great  a
crime  as  when  the  lowest  grade  of  humanity  utters  the
brutal  oath  at  which  the  virtuous  stand  aghast."

How  far  from  the  truth  such  a  description  of  the  young
minister's  preaching  was,  can  be  clearly  seen  by  a  perusal
of  his  sermons  published  at  this  period.  Indeed  it  is
remarkable  that  in  one  discourse  delivered  in  the  same
year  as  the  above  attack  was  made,  he  said  exactly  the
opposite  of  what  the  reporter  declared  he  had  said.  It  is
worth  while  to  give  an  extract  from  this  sermon  to  show
how  barefaced  and  deliberate  was  the  misrepresentation.
"  Enthusiastic  divines,"  said  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "  have
thought  that  men  were  to  be  brought  to  virtue  by  the
hissings  of  the  boiling  cauldron ;  they  have  imagined  that
by  beating  a  hell-drum  in  the  ears  of  men  they  should
make  them  believe  the  Gospel ;  that  by  the  terrific  sights
and  sounds  of  Sinai's  mountain  they  should  drive  men  to
Calvary.  They  have  preached  perpetually,  '  Do  this  and
thou  art  damned.'  In  their  preaching  there  preponderates
a  voice  horrible  and  terrifying ;  if  you  listened  to  them  you
might  think  you  sat  near  the  mouth  of  the  pit  and  heard
the  '  dismal  groans  and  sullen  moans  '  and  all  the  shrieks


172    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

of  the  tortured  ones  in  perdition.  Men  think  that  by  these
means  sinners  will  be  brought  to  the  Saviour.  They,  how-
ever, in  my  opinion,  think  wrongly.  Men  are  frightened
into  hell  but  not  into  Heaven.  Men  are  sometimes  driven
to  Sinai  by  powerful  preaching.  Far  be  it  from  us  to
condemn  the  use  of  the  law  for  '  the  law  was  our  school-
master to  bring  us  unto  Christ ' ;  but  if  you  want  to  get  a
man  to  Christ,  the  best  way  is  to  bring  Christ  to  the  man.
It  is  not  by  preaching  law  and  terrors  that  men  are
made  to  love  God.

"  'Law  and  terrors  do  but  harden,
All  the  while  they  work  alone  ;
But  a  sense  of  blood-bought  pardon,
Soon  dissolves  a  heart  of  stone.'

•'  I  sometimes  preach  '  the  terror  of  the  Lord,'  as  Paul
did  when  he  said,  '  Knowing  therefore  the  terror  of  the
Lord  we  persuade  men  ' ;  but  I  do  it,  as  did  the  apostle,
to  bring  them  to  a  sense  of  their  sins.  The  way  to  bring
men  to  Jesus,  to  give  them  peace,  to  give  them  joy,  to  give
them  salvation  through  Christ,  is  by  God  the  Spirit's
assistance  to  preach  Jesus  Christ !  "

On  the  same  day  that  the  hostile  criticism  just
referred  to  appeared,  The  Sheffield  and  Rotherham  Inde-
pendent published  an  article  of  a  somewhat  similar
character.  It  described  C.  H.  Spurgeon  as  "the  Exeter
Hall  religious  demagogue,"  and  after  comparing  his
popularity  with  that  of  Dr.  Chalmers  and  Edward  Irving,
though  it  would  not  ''  dishonour  "  such  men  by  comparing
him  with  them,  it  proceeded,  "  They  preached  the  Gospel
with  all  the  fervour  of  earnest  natures,  Mr.  Spurgeon
preaches  himself.  He  is  nothing  unless  he  is  an  actor —
unless  exhibiting  that  matchless  impudence  which  is  his
great  characteristic,  indulging  in  coarse  familiarity  with


174   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  H ADDON  SPURGEON.

holy  things,  declaiming  in  a  ranting  and  colloquial  style,
strutting  up  and  down  the  platform  as  though  he  were
at  the  Surrey  Theatre,  and  boasting  of  his  own  intimacy
with  Heaven  with  nauseating  frequency."  The  writer  then
.tells  how  he  "  turned  away  in  disgust "  from  the  "  coarse
sentiments "  and  "  clap-trap  style "  of  the  preacher's
.sermons.  "  It  would  seem  that  the  poor  young  man's
brain  is  turned  by  the  notoriety  he  has  acquired,  and  the
incense  offered  at  his  shrine.  .  .  .  He  glories  in  his  isola-
tion, and  is  intoxicated  by  the  draughts  of  popularity  that
have  fired  his  feverish  brain.  He  is  a  nine  days'  wonder
— a  comet  that  has  suddenly  shot  across  the  religious
atmosphere.  He  has  gone  up  like  a  rocket  and  ere  long
will  come  down  like  a  stick."  But  Tempora  mutantur :  it
is  worth  while  noting  that  the  same  journal  in  1898  spoke
of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  as  "  this  noble  Puritan  preacher  and
saintly  Christian."  The  writer  in  the  Sheffield  paper  told
the  story  of  the  slippers  in  all  seriousness,  and  this  was
repeated  soon  afterwards,  with  embellishments,  in  The
Lambeth  Gazette.  "  He  (the  preacher),"  said  that  journal,
"  is  a  very  young  man,  too,  and  the  young  '  sisters '  are
dancing  mad  after  him.  He  has  received  slippers  enough
from  these  lowly-minded  damsels  to  open  a  shoe-shop ;
and  were  it  not  that  he  recently  advertised  them  that  he
was '  engaged,'  he  would  very  soon  have  been  able  to  open
a  fancy  bazaar  with  the  nicknacks  that  were  pouring  in
upon  him."

Time  seemed  to  have  no  effect  in  softening  the  pens
of  the  critics.  Week  after  week  and  month  after  month
the  attacks  continued.  The  Bristol  Advertiser  for  April
i2th,  1856,  gave  a  homily  upon  "Quackeries  in  public  as
well  as  in  professional  life,"  and  spoke  of  the  existence  of
"Dr.  Holloways  among  the  vendors  of  religious  doctrine


ABUSE  AND  SLANDER  IN  THE  PRESS,     175
i

as  well  as  among  the  vendors  of  patent  medicines,"  who.,
"  get  advertised  everywhere  "  and  "  have  agents  all  about
the  country  ready  and  willing  to  assist  them  in  pushing
the  trade.  Now  what  is  there  in  Mr.  Spurgeon,"  it  con-
tinued, "  to  account  for  the  extraordinary  sensation  he  makes-
everywhere?  It  is  not  the  doctrine  he  preaches,  for  that
is  '  orthodox ' ;  that  is,  it  is  preached  by  a  thousand  other
clergymen.  It  is  not  his  personal  appearance,  for  that
is  but  ordinary  :  his  forehead  is  low ;  his  eye  is  smallr
and  though  capable  of  vivid  flashes  of  self-appreciation,  not
radiant  with  those  '  heavenly  '  rays  by  which  sentimental
ladies  are  usually  fascinated;  his  figure  is  broad  and
stumpy;  his  manners  are  rude  and  awkward.  In  short,
we  can  find  no  genuine  qualities  in  this  gentleman  sufficient
to  explain  the  unrivalled  notoriety  he  has  acquired.  If  he
were  simple  in  his  pretensions  and  had  the  serene  •and
sacred  dignity  of  religious  earnestness  to  support  him,
his  destitution  of  refinement,  his  evident  ignorance,  his-
positive  vulgarities  of  expression  and  of  manner  might
be  forgiven.  We  should  feel  that  he  was  doing  good  in  an
important  direction,  and  that  to  follow  him  with  criticism
or  contempt  would  be  in  a  sort  profane.  Or  if  he
possessed  unusual  powers  of  mind,  imagination  or  speechr
we  could  understand  how  many  would  seek  to  hear  him.
But  his  intellect  not  only  lacks  culture,  it  is  evidently  of

meagre  grasp Solemnly  do  we  express  o>ur  regret

that  insolence  so  unblushing,  intellect  so  feeble,  flippancy
so  ostentatious  and  manners  so  rude,  should  in  the  name
of  religion  and  in  connection  with  the  Church,  receive  the
acknowledgment  of  even  a  momentary  popularity."

Even  The  Daily  News  described  the  preaching  as
"  pulpit  buffoonery,"  and  spoke  of  the  young  minister's
"  utter  ignorance  of  any  theology  except  that  current  among


176    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEON.

the  sect  to  which  he  belongs ;  and  of  his  ludicrous  misin-
terpretations of  Scripture  occasioned  by  his  want  of  even
a  moderate  acquaintance  with  Oriental  customs  and  forms
of  language."  It  finally  prophesied  that  the  preacher
would  be  obliged  to  become  more  and  more  extravagant
as  his  audience  became  more  and  more  exacting,  and  the
end  might  be  an  extensive  development  of  dangerous
fanaticism.

This  selection  from  the  scores,  if  not  hundreds,  of
abusive  articles  and  letters  that  appeared  in  the  public
Press  at  this  time  does  not  include  the  worst  of  the  libels
published.  Some  were  so  scurrilous  and  blasphemous  that
they  cannot  be  quoted  here,  and  it  is  surprising  that  self-
respecting  editors  ever  allowed  such  statements  to  appear
in  their  pages.

Meanwhile,  how  was  the  young  preacher  affected  by
the  undeserved  and  uncalled  for  onslaught  of  the  critics?
We  have  seen  that  in  his  letters  to  his  father  and  future
wife  he  made  light  of  the  matter,  but  this  was  on
account  of  his  generous  nature,  which  did  not  like  to  see
his  loved  ones  worried.  His  true  feelings  were  better
expressed  in  a  sermon  preached  in  March.  1857,  in  which
he  said,  "  I  shall  never  forget  the  circumstance,  when,  after
I  thought  I  had  made  a  full  consecration  to  Christ,  a
slanderous  report  against  my  character  came  to  my  ears,
and  my  heart  was  broken  in  agony  because  I  should  have
to  lose  that,  in  preaching  Christ's  gospel.  I  fell  on  my
knees,  and  said,  '  Master,  I  will  not  keep  back  even  my
character  for  Thee.  If  I  must  lose  that,  too,  then  let  it
go ;  it  is  the  dearest  thing  I  have ;  but  it  shall  go:  if,  like
my  Master,  they  shall  say  I  have  a  devil,  and  am  mad;
or,  like  Him,  I  am  a  drunken  man  and  a  wine-bibber.' "

Even  from  his  friends  he  was  not  able  to  conceal  com-


ABUSE  AND  SLANDER  IN  THE  PRESS.      177

pletely  the  effect  of  the  cruel  blows,  for  in  a  letter  to  his
-fiancee,  dated  May,  1855,  he  wrote  that  he  was  "down  in
the  valley  "  because  of  desperate  attacks  in  two  newspapers.
His  work,  however,  did  not  suffer.  The  preacher  knew
that  his  conscience  was  void  of  offence  to  God  and  man,
and  the  bitterness  of  the  attacks  only  threw  him  more  and
more  in  dependence  upon  the  Divine  Father,  to  whom
alone  he  held  himself  responsible  for  the  execution  of  his
ministry.  Referring  to  the  matter  in  a  sermon  at  Exeter
Hall,  in  the  midst  of  the  campaign  of  slander,  he  said,
"  Young  men,  are  you  striving  to  do  good,  and  do  others
impute  wrong  motives  to  you?  Do  not  be  particular
about  answering  them ;  just  go  straight  on  and  your  life
will  be  the  best  refutation  of  the  calumny " ;  surely  a
prophetic  utterance  in  view  of  after  events.  The  most
cruel  misrepresentation  of  all  was  that  C.  H.  Spurgeon
in  his  services  kept  himself  well  to  the  front :  no  preacher
ever  sought  so  to  hide  himself  and  to  exalt  his  Lord.  A
letter  which  he  wrote  to  his  wife  at  this  time  reveals  his
true  humility  of  spirit,  "  I  shall  feel  deeply  indebted  to
you,"  he  said,  "if  you  will  pray  very  earnestly  for  me.  I
fear  I  am  not  so  full  of  love  to  God  as  I  used  to  be.  I
lament  my  sad  decline  in  spiritual  things.  You  and  others
may  not  have  observed  it,  but  I  am  now  conscious  of  it,
and  a  sense  thereof  has  put  bitterness  in  my  cup  of  joy.
Oh!  what  is  it  to  be  popular,  to  be  successful,  to  have
abundance,  even  to  have  love  so  sweet  as  yours, — if  I
should  be  left  of  God  to  fall,  and  to  depart  from  His
ways?  I  tremble  at  the  giddy  height  on  which  I  stand,
and  could  wish  myself  unknown,  for  indeed  I  am  unworthy
of  all  my  honours  and  my  fame.  I  trust  I  shall  now  com-
mence anew,  and  wear  no  longer  the  linsey-woolsey
garment ;  but  I  beseech  you,  blend  your  hearty  prayers


178    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

with  mine,  that  two  of  us  may  be  agreed,  and  thus  will
you  promote  the  usefulness,  and  holiness,  and  happiness
of  one  whom  you  love."

Some  months  later,  he  wrote: — "  The  Patriot  has  a
glowing  account  of  me,  which  will  tend  to  make  me  more
popular  than  ever.  MAY  GOD  PRESERVE  ME!  I  believe
all  my  little  troubles  have  just  kept  me  right.  I  should
have  been  upset  by  flattery,  had  it  not  been  for  this  long
balancing  rod."

After  a  time  the  young  preacher  grew  inured  to  false-
hood and  spite.  "The  stings  at  last,"  he  says,  "caused
me  no  more  pain  than  if  I  had  been  made  of  iron ;  but  at
first  they  were  galling  enough.  Do  not  be  surprised,  dear
friends,  if  you  have  the  same  experience ;  and  if  it  comes,
count  it  no  strange  thing,  for  in  this  way  the  saints  have
been  treated  in  all  time.  Thank  God,  the  wounds  are  not
fatal,  nor  of  long  continuance !  Time  brings  ease,  and
use  creates  hardihood.  No  real  harm  has  come  to  any  of
us  who  have  run  the  gauntlet  of  abuse;  not  even  a  bruise
remains."

As  a  matter  of  fact,  nothing  but  ultimate  good  resulted
from  the  attacks,  for  the  more  the  preacher  was  abused
and  vilified  the  more  the  people  flocked  to  hear  him  in
thousands,  and  the  more  numerous  were  the  conversions.
"  The  Press  has  kicked  me  quite  long  enough ;  now  they
are  beginning  to  lick  me,"  he  wrote  after  a  complimentary
article  had  appeared  in  The  Globe;  "but  one  is  as  good
as  the  other  so  long  as  it  helps  to  fill  our  place  of  worship."
One  of  the  criticisms  of  his  preaching  was  that  the
majority  of  those  who  listened  to  it  were  people  who  had
never  attended  a  place  of  worship  before.  Surely  no
greater  testimony  to  the  power  of  his  ministry  could  have
been  declared  than  this.  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  in


ABUSE  AND  SLANDER  IN  THE  PRESS.      179

one  of  his  early  sermons  to  an  immense  London  congrega-
tion, said,  "  1  have  looked  upon  the  hundreds,  nay,  upon
the  thousands,  whom  I  have  around  me,  who  were  once
the  vilest  of  the  vile — drunkards,  swearers,  and  such-like
— and  I  now  see  them  '  clothed  and  in  their  right  mind,'
walking  in  holiness  and  in  the  fear  of  God;  and  I  have
said  within  myself,  '  This  must  be  the  truth,  then,  because
I  see  its  marvellous  effects.  It  is  true,  because  it  is
efficient  for  purposes  which  error  never  could  accomplish.
It  exerts  an  influence  among  the  lowest  order  of  mortals
and  over  the  most  abominable  of  our  race.' "  Many  of
these  reformed  characters  had  originally  been  led  to  visit
the  services  merely  out  of  curiosity  to  see  the  much-vilified
preacher.

After  a  time  the  abuse  became  less  virulent,  and
then  the  young  minister  declared :  "I  do  not  expect
to  see  so  many  conversions  in  this  place  as  1  had  a  year
ago,  when  I  had  far  fewer  hearers.  Do  you  ask  why?
Why,  a  year  ago,  I  was  abused  by  everybody ;  to  mention
my  name,  was  to  mention  the  name  of  the  most  abominable
buffoon  that  ever  lived.  The  mere  utterance  of  it  brought
forth  oaths  and  curses ;  with  many  men  it  was  the  name  of
contempt,  kicked  about  the  street  as  a  football;  but  then
God  gave  me  souls  by  hundreds,  who  were  added  to  my
church,  and  in  one  year  it  was  my  happiness  personally  to
see  not  less  than  a  thousand  who  had  then  been  converted.
I  do  not  expect  that  now.  My  name  is  somewhat  esteemed,
and  the  great  ones  of  the  earth  think  it  no  dishonour  to
sit  at  my  feet ;  but  this  makes  me  fear  lest  my  God  should
forsake  me  while  the  world  esteems  me.  I  would  rather
be  despised  and  slandered  than  aught  else.  This
assembly,  that  you  think  so  grand  and  fine,  I  would  readily
part  with,  if  by  such  a  loss  I  could  gain  a  greater


i8o    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEOX.

blessing It  is  for  us  to  recollect,  in  all  times  of

popularity,  that  '  Crucify  Him !  Crucify  Him ! '  follows
fast  upon  the  heels  of  '  Hosanna ! '  and  that  the  crowd  of
to-day,  if  dealt  with  faithfully,  may  turn  into  the  handful
of  to-morrow;  for  men  love  not  plain  speaking.  We
should  learn  to  be  despised,  learn  to  be  contemned,  learn
to  be  slandered,  and  then  we  shall  learn  to  be  made  useful
by  God.  Down  on  my  knees  have  I  often  fallen,  with  the
hot  sweat  rising  from  my  brow,  under  some  fresh  slander
poured  upon  me ;  in  an  agony  of  grief,  my  heart  has  been
well-nigh  broken ;  till  at  last  I  learned  the  art  of  bearing
all,  and  caring  for  none.  And  now  my  grief  runneth  in
another  line,  it  is  just  the  opposite ;  I  fear  lest  God  should
forsake  me,  to  prove  that  He  is  the  Author  of  salvation,
that  it  is  not  in  the  preacher,  that  it  is  not  in  the  crowd,
that  it  is  not  in  the  attention  I  can  attract,  but  in  God,  and
in  God  alone.  This  I  hope  I  can  say  from  my  heart, —
if  to  be  made  as  the  mire  of  the  streets  again,  if  to  be  the
laughing-stock  of  fools  and  the  song  of  the  drunkard  once
more,  will  make  me  more  serviceable  to  my  Master,  and
more  useful  to  His  cause,  I  will  prefer  it  to  all  this
multitude,  or  to  all  the  applause  that  man  could  give."

Probably  the  only  letter  that  C.  H.  Spurgeon  wrote  to
the  Press  throughout  this  period  of  censure  was  to  the
Editor  of  The  Chelmsford  Chronicle,  who  had  published
an  article  of  a  somewhat  friendly  character.  It  bore  the
date  April  24th,  1855,  and  was  as  follows:  "I  am  usually
careless  of  the  notices  of  papers  concerning  myself,
referring  all  honour  to  my  Master  and  believing  that
dishonourable  articles  are  but  advertisements  for  me  and
bring  more  under  the  sound  of  the  Gospel.  But  you,
my  dear  sir  (I  know  not  why),  have  been  pleased  to  speak
so  favourably  of  my  labours  that  I  think  it  only  right


ABUSE  AND  SLANDER  IN  THE  PRESS.      181

that  I  should  thank  you.  If  I  could  have  done  so  person-
ally I  would  have  availed  myself  of  the  pleasure,  but  the
best  substitute  is  by  letter.  Amid  a  constant  din  of  abuse
it  is  pleasant  to  poor  flesh  and  blood  to  hear  one  favourable
voice.  I  am  far  from  deserving  much  that  you  have  said
in  my  praise,  but  as  I  am  equally  undeserving  of  the  coarse
censure  poured  on  me  by  The  Essex  Standard,  etc.,  etc.,
I  will  set  the  one  against  the  other.  I  am  neither  eloquent
nor  learned,  but  the  Head  of  the  Church  has  given  me
sympathy  with  the  masses,  love  to  the  poor  and  the  means
of  winning  the  attention  of  the  ignorant  and  unenlightened.
I  never  sought  popularity,  and  I  cannot  tell  how  it  is  so
many  come  to  hear  me  ;  but  shall  I  now  change  ?  To
please  the  polite  critic,  shall  I  leave  '  the  people '  who  so
much  require  a  simple  and  stirring  style?  I  am,  perhaps,
'  vulgar,'  and  so  on,  but  it  is  not  intentional,  save  that  I
must  and  will  make  the  people  listen.  My  firm  conviction
is  that  we  have  quite  enough  polite  preachers,  and  that
'  the  many  '  require  a  change.  God  has  owned  me  to  the
most  degraded  and  off-cast ;  let  others  serve  their  class  :
these  are  mine,  and  to  them  I  must  keep.  My  sole  reason
for  thus  troubling  you  is  one  of  gratitude  to  a  disinterested
friend.  You  may  another  time  have  good  cause  to  censure
me; — do  so,  as  I  am  sure  you  will,  with  all  heartiness;
but  my  young  heart  shall  not  soon  forget  '  a  friend.' "


CHAPTER   XIII.

FRIENDLY    TRIBUTES.

IT  must  not  be  supposed  that  amid  the  outpouring  oi
abuse  and  vituperation,  no  powerful  voices  were
raised  on  behalf  of  the  young  preacher.  In  the  corre-
spondence which  followed  the  publication  of  "  Job's "
strictures  in  The  Earthen  Vessel,  many  spoke  in  favour  of
C.  H.  Spurgeon,  and  it  has  already  been  shown  that  the
Rev.  Charles  Waters  Banks  held  a  high  opinion  of  the
young  pastor's  mission.  Correspondents  in  other  journals,
too,  expressed  plainly  their  opinion  that  the  new  pulpit
orator  was  a  worthy  successor  to  Bunyan  and  Wesley  and
Whitefield.  But  the  first  secular  newspaper  of  prominence
to  espouse  the  cause  of  the  abused  minister  was  TJie
Morning  Advertiser,  at  that  time  under  the  able  editorship
of  James  Grant.  This  journal  was  then  second  only  to
The  Times  in  importance,  and  two  articles  published  on
February  ipth,  1855,  and  February  1 8th,  1856,  were  master-
pieces of  critical  foresight.  In  the  former  it  was  declared
that  there  could  be  no  doubt  that  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon
possessed  superior  talents,  while  "  in  some  of  his  happier
flights,"  the  article  said,  "  he  rises  to  a  high  order  of
pulpit  oratory."  Some  useful  advice  was  tendered  in  a
kindly  manner,  which  the  young  preacher  seems  to  have
taken  in  a  right  spirit  and  followed  out.  "  He  is  quite  an
original  preacher,"  concluded  the  writer,  "  and  therefore
will  always  draw  large  congregations,  and  consequently  may


FRIENDLY    TRIBUTES.  183

be  eminently  made  the  means  of  doing  great  good  to  classes
of  persons  who  might  never  otherwise  be  brought  within
the  sound  of  a  faithfully-preached  Gospel.  He  has
evidently  made  George  Whitefield  his  model ;  and,  like
that  unparalleled  preacher,  that  prince  of  pulpit  orators,
is  very  fond  of  striking  apostrophes."  Years  later  C.  H.
Spurgeon  himself  declared  that  his  model,  if  he  might  have
such  a  thing  in  due  subordination  to  his  Lord,  was  George
Whitefield.

In  February,  1856,  James  Grant  discerned  "a  decided
improvement  both  as  regards  his  matter  and  manner."
The  preacher's  doctrinal  views,  it  was  explained,  remained
unchanged,  but,  "  He  does  not  speak  so  often  with  asperity
of  other  preachers  of  the  Gospel,  whom  he  conceives —
and  we  must  say  in  the  main  rightly — to  be  unfaithful  to
their  high  calling.  There  is,  too,  a  marked  and  gratifying
improvement  in  Mr.  Spurgeon  as  regards  the  manner  of  his
pulpit  appearances."  Again  he  was  compared  favourably
with  George  Whitefield,  and  the  writer  finally  praised  his
humility  and  his  originality.  "  When  this  able  and  eloquent
preacher  first  made  his  appearance  in  the  horizon  of  the
religious  world  and  dazzled  the  masses  in  the  Metropolis
by  his  brilliancy,  we  were  afraid  that  he  might  either  get
intoxicated  by  the  large  draughts  of  popularity  which  he
had  daily  to  drink,  or  that  he  would  not  be  able,  owing  to
a  want  of  variety,  to  sustain  the  reputation  he  had  so
suddenly  acquired.  Neither  result  has  happened.  What-
ever may  be  his  defects,  either  as  a  man  or  as  a  preacher
of  the  Gospel,  it  is  due  to  him  to  state  that  he  has  not
been  spoiled  by  popular  applause.  Constitutionally  he  has
in  him  no  small  amount  of  self-esteem,  but  SO'  far  from  its
growing  with  his  daily  extending  fame,  he  appears  to  be
more  humble  and  more  subdued  than  when  he  first  burst


184    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

on  our  astonished  gaze.  With  regard  again  to  our  other
fear  that  his  excellence  as  a  preacher  would  not  be  sus-
tained, the  event  has,  we  rejoice  to  say,  no  less  agreeably
proved  the  groundlessness  of  our  apprehensions.  There
is  no  falling  off  whatever.  On  the  contrary,  he  is  in  some
respects  improving  with  the  lapse  of  time.  We  fancy  we
can  see  his  striking  originality  to  greater  advantage  than
at  first."

Other  papers  followed  in  championing  the  young
preacher.  The  Western  Times  (Exeter)  declared  that  he
bid  fair  to  rival,  if  not  to  eclipse,  such  men  as  Carey,  Gill,
Rippon  and  Robert  Hall,  while  The  Christian  Weekly
News,  after  acknowledging  that  many  who  had  listened
to  him  had  gone  away  to  speak  ill  of  his  name,  declared
that  "  others  and  by  far  the  larger  number  have  been
stimulated  by  his  earnestness,  instructed  by  his  arguments
and  melted  by  his  appeals.  We  have  seen  among  his
hearers,"  continued  the  writer,  "  ministers  of  mark  of  nearly
every  section  of  the  Christian  Church ;  laymen  well-known
in  all  circles  as  the  supporters  of  the  benevolent  and
evangelical  institutions  of  the  day;  and  citizens  of  renown
from  the  chief  magistrate  down  to  the  parish  beadle.  That
the  man  who  causes  such  a  furor  must  possess  some
power  not  commonly  found  in  men  of  his  profession  will
only  be  doubted  by  his  detractors.  .  .  .  May  the  Lord
continue  to  hold  him  as  a  star  in  His  right  hand,  and
through  his  instrumentality  bring  many  souls  to  bow  to
the  sceptre  of  His  love  and  mercy."

One  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  earliest  literary
friends  was  the  Rev.  Edwin  Paxton  Hood,  who,  in  his
book,  "The  Lamps  of  the  Temple,"  published  in  1886,
gave  some  plain  home  truths  to  the  ministerial  censurers
for  the  way  in  which  they  had  boycotted  and  maligned


3  2


»  n


-f- '  ^.


i86    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEON.

their  younger  brother.  He  especially  referred  to  the
conduct  of  the  Rev.  James  Wells  in  refusing  to  associate
with  C.  H.  Spurgeon  in  the  opening  of  a  country  chapel.
"  Among  things — remarkable  or  not  remarkable  according
to  the  reader's  ideas,"  said  the  writer,  "  is  the  treatment
of  the  young  preacher  by  his  brethren — shall  we  say
brethren? — in  the  ministry.  We  understand  they  have
pretty  generally  agreed  to  regard  him  as  a  black  sheep.
His  character  is  good — unexceptionable; — his  doctrines
have  no  dangerous  heresy  in  them; — still  he  is  tabooed.
The  other  day,  a  very  eminent  minister,  whose  portrait  we
have  attempted  to  sketch  in  this  volume,  and  whom  we
certainly  regarded  as  incapable  of  so  much  meanness  when
we  were  sketching  it — perhaps  the  most  eminent  of  the
London  Dissenting  ministers — was  invited  to  open  a  chapel
in  the  country — at  any  rate,  to  take  the  evening  service ;
but  he  found  that  Spurgeon  was  to  take  the  morning,  and
he  smartly  refused  to  mix  in  the  affair;  it  was  pitiable,
and  we  discharged  ourselves,  as  in  duty  bound,  of  an
immense  quantity  of  pity  upon  the  head  of  the  poor
jealous  man  who  dreaded  lest  the  shadow  of  a  rival  should
fall  prematurely  over  his  pulpit.  No  ;  usually  the  ministers
have  not  admired  this  advent ;  the  tens  of  thousands  of
persons  who  flock  to  hear  the  youth  preach  his  strong,
nervous  Gospel,  do  not  at  all  conciliate  them — perhaps
rather  exasperate  them."

Mr.  Hood  then  went  on  to  praise  the  young  minister's
preaching,  and  to  combat  those  who  said  that  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon  was  a  mere  imitator  of  other  preachers.
"  Robert  Hall,"  he  caustically  remarks,  "  was  charged  with
imitating  Robert  Robinson,  of  Cambridge; — in  fact,  there
was  not  the  slightest  resemblance  between  those  two
minds."  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  in  the  writer's  opinion,  had  "  the


FRIENDLY    TRIBUTES.  187

unbridled  and  undisciplined  fancy  of  Hervey  without  his
elegance ;  but  instead  of  that,  the  drollery  of  Berridge  and
the  ubiquitous  earnestness  of  Rowland  Hill  in  his  best
days.  But  it  is  probable,"  he  added,  "  that  many  of  us
walk  far  too  gingerly  in  our  estimate  of  public  speech.  He
who  determines  never  to  use  a  word  that  shall  grate  harshly
on  the  ears  of  a  refined  taste,  may  be  certain  that  he  will
never  be  very  extensively  useful ;  the  people  lo've  the  man
who  will  condescend  to  their  idiom,  and  the  greatest
preachers — those  who  have  been  the  great  apostles  of  a
nation — have  always  condescended  to  this.  Bossuet,
Massillon,  Hall,  Chalmers,  McAll,  were  the  doctors  of
the'  pulpit ;  at  their  feet  sat  the  refinement,  the  scholar-
ship, the  politeness  of  their  times ;  but  such  men  as
Luther  and  Latimer,  St.  Clara  and  Knox,  Whitefield  and
Christmas  Evans — such  men  have  always  seized  on  the
prevailing  dialect  and  made  it  tell  with  immense  power  on
their  auditors."

This  splendid  tribute  concluded  with  an  emphatic
declaration  of  belief  that  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  power  and
ability  would  last — that  he  himself  would  wear  but  not
wear  out.  A  sly  knock  was  given  at  those  preachers  "  who
consume  the  midnight  oil  and  make  it  their  boast  that
they  can  only  produce  one  sermon  a  week,'3  but  some  of
whose  discourses  nevertheless  were  characterized  by  "  great
mental  poverty."  With  regard  to  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon,  the  writer  said,  "  His  present  amazing  popularity
will  of  course  subside,  but  he  will  still  be  amazingly
followed ;  and  what  he  is  now,  we  prophesy,  he  will,  on
the  whole,  remain  :  for  polished  diction  we  shall  not  look
to  him  ;  for  the  long  and  stately  argument  we  shall  not  look
to  him ;  for  the  original  and  profound  thought  we  shall
not  look  to  him ;  for  the  clear  and  lucid  criticism  we  shall


1 88   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEOX.

not  look  to  him ;  but  for  bold  and  convincing  statements
of  Evangelical  truth,  for  a  faithful  grappling  with  convic-
tions, for  happy  and  pertinent  illustrations,  for  graphic  de-
scription and  for  searching  common  sense  we  shall  look,
and  we  believe  we  shall  seldom  look  in  vain.  In  a  word,
he  preaches — not  to  metaphysicians  or  logicians — neither  to
poets  nor  to  savants — to  masters  of  erudition  or  masters
of  rhetoric ;  he  preaches  to  men."

One  other  friendly  tribute  must  be  referred  to  as  it
caused  a  considerable  stir  in  the  religious  world  when  it
appeared.  It  was  in  the  form  of  a  pamphlet,  entitled.
"  Why  so  Popular  ?  An  Hour  with  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon.
By  a  Doctor  of  Divinity,"  and  the  remarks  were  addressed
personally  to  the  young  preacher,  who  was  described  as
standing  on  an  eminence  "  which  since  the  days  of  White-
field  no  minister — with  a  single  exception,  if,  indeed,  there
be  one — of  any  church  in  this  realm,  has  attained."  The
writer  realized  that  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  ministry  was  one  in
which  the  Divine  hand  was  marvellously  extended  to  bless,
and  with  generous  encouragement  he  concluded,  "  Go  on,
my  brother,  and  may  God  give  you  a  still  larger  amount
of  ministerial  success!  'Preach  the  Word,'  the  old
theology,  that  '  Glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God,'  for
which  apostles  laboured  and  martyrs  died.  In  all  your
teachings  continue  to  exhibit  the  cross  of  Christ  as
occupying  in  the  Christian  revelation,  like  the  sun  in  our
planetary  system,  the  very  centre,  and  imparting  to  all
their  light  and  heat.  Tell  the  people  that  every  doctrine,
duty  or  promise  of  the  Scripture  stands  intimately  con
nected  with  the  cross,  and  from  that  connection  derives  its
meaning  and  value  to  us.  Thus  exhibiting  the  whole
system  of  Divine  Truth  in  its  harmony  and  symmetry —
judging  even  by  your  own  antecedents — what  a  glorious


i9o    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

prospect  of  honour,  happiness  and  usefulness  presents
itself  to  your  view !  A  star  in  the  churches — a  star  of  no
mean  magnitude,  of  no  ordinary  brilliancy — you  may  be
honoured  to  diffuse,  very  luminously,  the  derived  glories
you  possess,  and  having  run  your  appointed  course,  ulti-
mately set — but  far  distant  be  the  day ! — as  sets  the  morn-
ing star, —

•'  'Which  falls  not  down  behind  the  darkened  West,
Nor  hides  obscured  amid  the  tempests  of  the  sky,
But  melts  away  into  the  light  of  Heaven.'"

Copies  of  all  the  newspaper  cuttings  relating  to  her  hus-
band, both  complimentary  and  abusive,  in  those  early  days,
were  preserved  by  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  to  whom  they  used  to  be
handed  by  the  young  preacher  as  they  appeared,  with  the
remark,  "Here's  another  contribution  for  your  museum."
They  were  collected  in  a  large  book  which  bears  upon  its
title-page,  in  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  handwriting,  the
very  significant  and  expressive  title,  "  Facts,  Fiction  and
Facetiae."


CHAPTER    XIV.

SERVICES  AWAY  FROM  LONDON:  FIRST
LITERARY  WORK.

MOST  ministers  would  have  found  the  gigantic
labours  of  the  New  Park  Street  pastorate  more
than  enough  to  occupy  all  their  time  and  exhaust  all  their
energies.  Such,  however,  was  not  the  case  with  C.  H.
Spurgeon.  In  addition  to 'preaching  several  times  a  week
from  his  own  pulpit,  and  visiting  various  parts  of  the  Metro-
polis, he  also  travelled  about  the  country  addressing
congregations  as  large  as  those  which  listened  to  him  in
London.  Here  is  a  typical  list  of  engagements  for  one
week,  taken  from  a  letter  written  to  a  friend  at  Cambridge.
The  list  was  given  by  way  of  explanation  for  the  brevity
of  his  correspondence.

"  I  have  been  this  week  to  Leighton  Buzzard,  Foots  Cray
and  Chatham ;  everywhere  no  room  for  the  crowd.  Next
week  I  am  to  be  thus  occupied  :  —

"  Sabbath.     Morning  and  evening,   New    Park    Street ;
Afternoon  to  address  the  Schools.

Monday.     Morning  at  Howard  Hinton's  Chapel.
Afternoon,  New  Park  Street.
Evening,  New  Park  Street.

Tuesday.     Afternoon,  Leighton.
Evening,  Leighton.


192    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  H ADDON  SPURGEON.

Wednesday.     Morning,  Zion  Chapel,  Whitechapel.
Evening,  Zion  Chapel,  Whitechapel.

Thursday.     Morning,  Dalston.

Evening,  New  Park  Street.

Friday.     Morning,  Dr.  Fletcher's  Chapel.

Evening,  Mr.  Rogers'  Chapel,  Brixton."

Fourteen  sermons  in  six  days,  to  be  delivered  at  places
far  distant  from  one  another !  The  discomfort  of  travel-
ling in  those  days  severely  tried  the  young  minister,  and
his  first  long  journey  by  rail — that  to  Scotland  in  July,
1855 — was  an  experience  long  to  be  remembered.  Unable
to  sleep  a  moment  all  the  way,  he  felt  very  unwell,  and
arrived  at  Glasgow,  "  tired,  begrimed  with  dust,  sleepy,  not
over  high  in  spirits,  and  with  a  dreadful  cold  in  my  head."
A  sleep  of  twelve  hours  in  a  comfortable  bed  left  him  as
tired  as  when  he  stepped  from  the  train,  and  no  wonder
he  declared  he  would  not  travel  so  far  again  in  one  day.
The  trip  was  primarily  intended  as  a  holiday  and  rest,  but
almost  every  day  he  had  to  fulfil  preaching  engage-
ments, and  iin  a  letter  to  his  -fiancee  from  Aberfeldy,
describing  crowded  services  there,  he  writes,  "  L'nless  I
go  to  the  North  Pole  I  never  can  get  away  from  my
holy  labour."

In  Glasgow,  on  the  first  Sunday  spent  in  Scotland,  he
preached  twice,  crowds  at  the  evening  service  standing
outside  the  church  to  hear  the  sermon  through  the  open
windows,  while  hundreds  had  to  be  turned  away.  The
secular  papers  of  the  city  were  full  of  praise,  but  the
hostility  of  a  certain  section  of  the  religious  community
was  again  manifest  by  an  abusive  article  in  The  Christian
Neivs,  which  spoke  of  the  services  as  "  exhibitions "'  that
"  amused  or  disgusted  a  respectable  audience."  and


SERVICES    AWAY   FROM    LONDON.        193

referred  to  the  "  buffoonery "  and  "  the  mask  of  the
clown."  On  a  flying  visit  to  the  Highlands  a  large  crowd
again  gathered,  but  here  the  cold  reserve  of  the  Scot  was
exhibited  inside  the  chapel,  although  outside  the  mem-
bers of  the  congregation  expressed  their  delight  at  the
preaching.  In  the  middle  of  this  "  holiday "  a  hasty
journey  had  to  be  made  to  Bradford  to  fulfil  a  preaching
engagement,  and  there  the  Music  Hall,  holding  a  thousand
persons  more  than  Exeter  Hall,  was  crowded  to  excess.
For  hours  before  the  service  the  streets  in  the  vicinity  were
blocked  by  a  solid  mass  of  men  and  women,  and  almost
as  many  as  secured  admission  had  to  be  excluded  owing
to  lack  of  accommodation.  The  collections  in  aid  of  the
Sunday-schools  that  day  amounted  to  ^144.  From  Brad-
ford C.  H.  Spurgeon  went  to  Stockton  and  preached  to
several  thousands,  returning  to  Glasgow  by  way  of  Edin-
burgh, where  in  Queen  Street  Hall  he  addressed  a  large
concourse  of  people  who  had  gathered  to  hear  him,  despite
a  heavy  downpour  of  rain.  This  service  was  remark-
able from  the  fact  that  C.  H.  Spurgeon  declared  the  Spirit
of  God  had  been  pleased  to  desert  him.  "  I  could  not  speak
as  usually  I  have  done.  I  was  obliged  to  tell  the  people
that  the  chariot  wheels  were  taken  off,  and  that  the  chariot
dragged  along  very  heavily.  ...  It  humbled  me  bitterly ;
and  if  I  could  I  would  have  hidden  myself  in  any  obscure
corner  of  the  earth.  I  felt  as  if  I  should  speak  no  more
in  the  Name  of  the  Lord ;  and  then  the  thought  came,
'  Oh,  thou  art  an  ungrateful  creature !  Hath  not  God*
spoken  by  thee  hundreds  of  times  ?  And  this  once,  when
He  would  not  do  so,  wilt  thou  upbraid  Him  for  it  ?  Nay,
rather  thank  Him  that  He  hath  so  long  stood  by  thee ;
and  if  once  He  hath  forsaken  thee,  admire  His  goodness,
that  thus  He  would  keep  thee  humble.' "  The  reason

TO


i94   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

suggested  by  the  preacher  for  the  lack  of  power  on  this
occasion  is  interesting.  "  Some  may  imagine,"  he  says,
"  that  want  of  study  brought  me  into  that  condition,  but  I
can  honestly  affirm  that  it  was  not  so.  I  think  that  I  am
bound  to  give  myself  unto  reading  and  not  to  tempt  the
Spirit  by  unthought  of  effusions.  I  always  deera  it  a
duty  to  seek  my  sermons  from  my  Master,  and  implore
Him  to  impress  them  on  my  mind ;  but  on  that  occasion  I
think  I  had  prepared  even  more  carefully  than  I  ordinarily
do,  so  that  unpreparedness  was  not  the  reason  for  the  lack
of  force  I  then  mourned.  The  simple  fact  is  this,
'  The  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth ' ;  and  sometimes  the
winds  themselves  are  still.  Therefore  if  I  rest  on  the
Spirit  I  cannot  expect  that  I  should  always  feel  His
power  alike.  What  could  I  do  without  His  celestial  influ-
ence? To  that  I  owe  ever)  thing.  Other  servants  of  the
Lord  have  had  experiences  similar  to  mine.  In  the  '  Life
of  Whitefield '  we  read  that  sometimes  under  one  of  his
sermons  two  thousand  persons  would  profess  to  be  saved,
and  many  of  them  were  really  so;  at  other  times,  he
preached  just  as  powerfully  and  no  conversions  were
recorded.  Why  was  that  ?  Simply  because  in  the  one
case  the  Holy  Spirit  went  with  the  Word ;  and  in  the  other
case  He  did  not.  All  the  Heavenly  result  of  preaching  is
owing  to  the  Divine  Spirit  sent  from  above."

The  Christian  News  again  abused  the  preacher,  falsely
stating  that  he  gloried  in  the  fact  that  he  never  prepared
"before  preaching,  and  describing  his  oratory  as  "unequal
and  clumsy  in  the  extreme."  "  Mr.  S.,  in  our  estimation,"
said  this  most  Christian  of  Christian  journals,  "  is  just
a  spoiled  boy,  with  abilities  not  more  than  mediocre,  and
will  for  certain,,  if  he  do  not  retrace  his  steps,  share  the
fate  of  the  '  early  gooseberry '  or  the  '  monster  cucumber


SERVICES   AWAY   FROM    LONDON.        195

that  appear  almost  annually  in  the  columns  of  the  news-
papers— sink  into  obscurity,  leaving  only  the  memorial  of
his  career,  that  he  was,  and  that  he  has  descended  to  that
nihility  from  which  by  puffing  and  blustering  he  originally
and  unworthily  sprang"

In  Glasgow  he  again  preached  twice  on  the  Sunday,
and  at  the  evening  service,  although  the  great  Greyfriars
Church  was  crowded  to  the  .doors,  twenty  thousand  per-
sons had  to  go  away  unable  to  obtain  admission.  The
secular  papers  on  the  following  day  described  the  preacher
as  possessing  genius  in  an  unusual  degree,  and  contradicted
the  various  slanderous  statements  that  had  been  circulated
as  to  his  irreverence  and  presumption.  He  returned  to
London  after  this  hasty  and  exhausting  preaching  tour,
having  convinced  all  with  whom  he  came  in  contact,
except  the  hopelessly  biassed,  of  his  remarkable  power  and
ability,  and  the  reality  of  his  Divine  mission.

In  all  the  English  towns  which  he  visited  similar  scenes
were  witnessed.  At  Trowbridge,  for  instance,  one  Monday,
after  preaching  in  the  afternoon  and  evening  to  crowded
congregations,  a  third  service,  to  which  many  were  unable
to  gain  admission,  had  to  be  held  after  ten  o'clock  at
night.  Again,  in  South  Wales,  near  Risca,  the  Welsh
miners  kept  the  young  minister  well-nigh  to  midnight
preaching  three  sermons,  one  after  another,  almost  without
a  break,  the  church  being  filled  to  suffocation  throughout
the  long-continued  service.  On  another  occasion  in  the
same  neighbourhood  a  mighty  gathering  was  addressed  in
the  open  air,  when  the  working  of  the  Spirit  of  God  was
so  manifest  that  men  and  women  "  were  swayed  to  and  fro
under  the  Heavenly  message  as  the  corn  is  moved  in  waves
by  the  summer  winds."  Perhaps  the  service  away  from
London  at  this  period,  to  which  he  always  looked  back


1 96   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEOX.

with  the  greatest  pleasure,  was  that  which  he  conducted
at  Stambourne  on  May  27th,  1856,  in  commemoration  of
his  grandfather's  jubilee  as  pastor  of  the  Congregational
Church.  Here,  as  usual,  the  chapel  was  thronged,  people
driving  into  Stambourne  from  the  surrounding  districts
in  hundreds.

Many  stories  might  be  told  of  the  young  preacher's
unconventionally,  which  sometimes  rather  startled  sleepy
or  careless  congregations.  At  one  place  where  he  was
preaching  the  people  continually  looked  round  as  new-
comers entered  the  chapel.  "  Now,  friends,"  said  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon,  when  this  rude  behaviour  had  con-
tinued for  some  minutes,  "  as  it  is  so  very  interesting  to
you  to  know  who  comes  in  and  it  disturbs  me  so  very  much
for  you  to  look  round,  I  will,  if  you  like,  describe  each
one  as  he  comes  in,  so  that  you  may  sit  and  look  at  me
and  keep  up  at  least  a  show  of  decency."  He  then
described  a  gentleman,  a  friend  of  his,  who  entered
at  that  moment,  as  "a  very  respectable  gentleman
who  has  just  taken  his  hat  off,"  and  so  on.  Needless  to
say,  it  was  not  found  necessary  to  continue  the  descriptions
of  later  arrivals.  At  Tring  he  preached  in  a  little  chapel,
the  minister  of  which  only  received  fifteen  shillings  a
week  as  stipend,  and  stood  much  in  need  of  a  suit  of
clothes.  C.  H.  Spurgeon  brought  the  service  to  a  conclu-
sion, and  then  said,  "  Now,  dear  friends,  I  have  preached  to
you  as  well  as  I  could,  and  you  know  that  our  Saviour  said
to  His  disciples,  '  Freely  ye  have  received,  freely  give.'  I
don't  want  anything  from  you  for  myself,  but  the  minister
of  this  chapel  looks  to  me  as  though  he  would  not  object
to  a  new  suit  of  clothes."  He  pointed  to  old  Mr.  Thomas
Olney,  his  deacon,  at  whose  suggestion  the  visit  to  Tring
had  been  paid,  and  said,  "  Father  Olney,  down  there,  I


SERVICES   AWAY   FROM    LONDON.        197

am  sure  will  start  the  collection  with  half-a-sovereign ;  I
will  gladly  give  the  same  amount;  and  if  you  will  all
help  as  much  as  you  can  our  brother  will  soon  have  a  new
suit,  and  a  good  one  too."  The  collection  taken  was
more  than  sufficient  to  provide  the  clothes.  After
the  service  C.  H.  Spurgeon  apologized  to  the  minister  for
drawing  attention  to  bis  worn  clothes,  but  so  far  from
being  offended  that  worthy  thanked  the  young  preacher,
adding,  "  Ever  since  I  have  been  in  the  service  of  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ  my  Master  has  always  found  me  my  livery."
Probably  it  is  unnecessary  to  state  that  when  this  story
became  known  it  appeared  in  the  newspapers  with  many
embellishments.

An  experience  that  happened  to  the  preacher  when
returning  from  one  of  these  early  preaching  engagements
out  of  London  is  worth  recording.  He  was  in  a  train  on
the  Eastern  Counties  Railway — now  the  Great  Eastern —
when  he  suddenly  discovered  that  his  ticket  had  disap-
peared, and  he  was  without  money.  A  fellow-traveller
learning  this  appeared  to  manifest  some  concern,  but
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  declared  that  he  was  not  at  all
troubled,  "  For,"  said  he,  "  I  have  been  on  my  Master's
business  and  I  am  quite  sure  all  will  be  well.  I  have  had
so  many  interpositions  of  Divine  providence  in  small
matters  as  well  as  in  great  ones  that  I  feel  as  if,  whatever
happens  to  me,  I  am  bound  to  fall  on  my  feet  like  the
man  on  the  Manx  penny."  When  the  train  reached
Bishopsgate  a  collector  entered  and  at  once  touched  his
hat  to  the  minister's  companion,  who  said,  "  All  right,
William."  The  man  thereupon  left  the  compartment
without  asking  for  any  tickets.  It  transpired  that  the
traveller  was  the  general  manager  of  the  railway,  and  both
he  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon  regarded  the  incident  as  a  proof


198    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

of  God's  watchful  care  over  those  who  trust  in  Him  for
small  matters  as  well  as  for  great.

After  fulfilling  all  his  London  engagements  and  taking
these  frequent  journeys  into  the  provinces,  very  little  time
was  left  to  the  young  minister  except  for  sleep.  Neverthe-
less he  thus  early  commenced  that  literary  work  which  has
made  his  name  as  an  author  rival  that  as  a  preacher.
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  first  printed  effort  was  No.  i
of  a  short  series  of  "  Waterbeach  Tracts,"  which  appeared
in  1853,  and  in  the  same  year  the  Baptist  Reporter  pub-
lished an  account  from  his  pen,  signed  C.  H.  S.,  of  the
conversation  with  the  Maidstone  clergymen  which  led
him  as  a  boy  to  search  the  Scriptures  in  connection  with
the  subject  of  baptism.  After  he  came  to  London,  the
young  minister  contributed  some  expository  articles  to
another  Baptist  magazine,  and  then  several  of  his  sermons
were  published  in  James  Paul's  "  Penny  Pulpit."  The
sale  of  these  was  so  considerable,  and  the  demand
increased  so  greatly  that  Messrs.  Passmore  and  Alabaster
proposed  to  publish  a  sermon  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon  weekly,
the  series  to  be  called  "  The  New  Park  Street  Pulpit."
The  young  preacher  gave  his  consent  "  with  much  fear
and  trembling,"  and  in  January,  1855,  the  first  of  that
long  series  which  is  still  appearing  week  by  week  was
issued.  In  another  place  something  will  be  said  about  the
extraordinary  sale  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  sermons,  extending
over  half  a  century,  but  from  the  first  they  enjoyed  an
immense  circulation  both  singly  and  in  volumes.

The  little  book,  "  Smooth  Stones  Taken  from  Ancient
Brooks,"  in  compiling  which  his  -fiancee  helped  him,  has
already  been  referred  to,  and  another  early  venture,  partly
intended  as  an  answer  to  the  slanders  and  calumnies  by
which  he  was  assailed,  was  a  new  edition  of  "  The  Baptist


FIRST    LITERARY    WORK.  199

Confession  of  Faith,"  with  prefatory  notes.  One  volume,
"  The  Saint  and  his  Saviour,"  containing  480  pages,  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon  sold  to  a  publisher  for  fifty  pounds — a
sum,  that  seemed  large  to  him  at  that  time.  But  the
success  of  the  book  must  have  put  hundreds  of  pounds
into  the  publisher's  pocket,  and  as  that  gentleman  never
suggested  that  the  writer  should  receive  anything  further
for  his  share  of  the  work,  the  young  minister  did  not  offer
him  another  book.  Thus  it  was  that  Messrs.  Passmore
and  Alabaster,  the  former  of  whom  was  a  nephew  of  Dr.
Rippon,  and,  as  already  stated,  a  leading  deacon  at  New
Park  Street,  came  to  be  publishers  for  the  great  and
popular  divine,  and  the  relations  between  them  from  the
beginning  to  the  end  were  of  the  most  cordial  and  friendly
character.  It  is  interesting,  in  view  of  after  events,  to-
learn  that  just  as  many  prophesied  his  utter  failure  as  a
preacher,  and  urged  him  to  abandon  that  work  altogether,
so,  in  his  early  literary  days  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  strongly
advised  to  give  up  writing  on  the  ground  that  he  was
not  likely  to  gain  any  success  in  that  field.  That  he
persevered  amid  discouragement,  and  found  time  from
his  ministerial  work  to  write  at  all,  is  characteristic  of  the
man.  Literary  work  was  to  him  no  light  and  pleasurable
recreation  for  the  filling  up  of  spare  moments.  This  is
clear  from  his  account  of  how  "  The  Saint  and  his  Saviour  "
was  produced.  "  Never,"  he  says,  "  was  a  book  written
amid  more  incessant  toil.  Only  the  fragments  of  time
could  be  allotted  to  it,  and  intense  mental  and  bodily
exertions  have  often  rendered  me  incapable  of  turning
even  those  fragments  to  advantage.  Writing  is  to  me  the
work  of  a  slave.  It  is  a  delight,  a  joy,  a  rapture  to  talk
out  my  thoughts  in  words  that  flash  upon  the  mind  at
the  instant  when  they  are  required ;  but  it  is  poor  drudgery-


200    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

to  sit  still  and  groan  for  thoughts  and  words  without
succeeding  in  obtaining  them.  Well  may  a  man's  books
be  called  his  '  works,'  for  if  every  man's  mind  were  con-
stituted as  mine  is  it  would  be  work  indeed  to  produce  a
quarto  volume.  Nothing  but  a  sense  of  duty  has  impelled
me  to  finish  this  little  book,  which  has  been  more  than  two
years  on  hand.  Yet  have  I  at  times  so  enjoyed  the
meditation  which  my  writing  has  induced,  that  I
would  not  discontinue  the  labour  were  it  ten  times
more  irksome ;  and,  moreover,  I  have  some  hopes  that
it  may  yet  be  a  pleasure  to  me  to  serve  God  with  the  pen
as  well  as  the  lip."  This  was  no  vain  hope,  as  the
Spurgeon  shelves  in  the  Pastors'  College  Library,  and  the
publishing  house  in  Paternoster  Buildings  clearly  prove.


CHAPTER  XV.

THE  SURREY  GARDENS  MUSIC  HALL.

WE  now  come  to  what  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon
described  as  the  greatest  ordeal  of  his  life.
Towards  the  end  of  1856  the  Exeter  Hall  directors
intimated  to  the  authorities  of  New  Park  Street  Chapel,
that  they  found  themselves  unable  to  let  their  building
continuously  to  one  congregation,  for  fear  that  it  should
thereby  acquire  a  denominational  character.  This
appeared  quite  fair  to  the  deacons,  but  it  nevertheless
put  them  in  a  dilemma,  for  the  congregations  continued  to
be  of  enormous  size;  while  hundreds,  and  frequently
thousands,  had  to  be  refused  admission  to  the  services
owing  to  lack  of  accommodation.  A  fund  had  recently
been  started  for  the  erection  of  a  new  chapel,  suited  to
the  needs  of  the  congregation,  but  it  would  be  a  long  time
before  a  sufficient  sum  was  forthcoming  to  meet  the  cost
of  building  operations,  and  even  then  a  considerable  period
must  elapse  before  the  structure  would  be  ready  for  use.
For  a  time  the  church  authorities  felt  helpless,  but  the
difficulty  was  met  in  a  characteristically  daring  manner.
The  proprietors  of  the  Royal  Surrey  Gardens,  on  the  south
side  of  the  river,  had  just  added  to  the  attractions  of  that
resort  by  erecting  a  magnificent  music-hall,  capable  of
accommodating  ten  thousand  persons,  and  one  of  the
deacons,  Mr.  Moore,  proposed  that  this  building  might  be
rented  for  the  Sunday  evening  services.  The  decision,  of


202    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

course,  lay  with  the  young  pastor,  and  although  he  shrank
from  preaching  in  a  place  of  such  vast  size,  he  neverthe-
less agreed  to  the  proposal.  A  music-hall  in  those  days
was  very  different  from  its  namesake  of  to-day ;  the  enter-
tainments consisted  only  of  popular  concerts,  but  the
employment  of  such  a  building  for  Gospel  services  was
unheard  of.  However,  the  young  minister  and  Mr.
William  Olney  went  to  view  the  place,  and  although  it
seemed  indeed  a  venturesome  experiment  to  attempt  to
preach  there,  on  account  of  both  the  size  and  the  associa-
tions of  the  hall,  yet  their  faith  in  God  and  the  purity  of
their  motives  induced  them  to  believe  that  blessing  and
success  would  result.  Several  of  the  church  members
seriously  objected  to  using,  for  sacred  purposes,  what  they
described  as  "  the  devil's  house,"  but  the  young  preacher
was  not  to  be  daunted,  and  while  he  urged  these  fearful
ones  to  stop  away  rather  than  violate  their  consciences,  he
begged  them  not  to  discourage  others  from  coming  under
the  sound  of  the  Gospel.  "We  did  not  go  to  the  music-
hall  because  we  thought  it  was  a  good  thing  to  worship  in
a  building  usually  devoted  to  amusement,"  said  C.  H.
Spurgeon  afterwards,  "  but  because  we  had  no  other  place
to  go  to'."  So  far  as  location  was  concerned  the  building
offered  every  advantage,  for  it  lay  at  no  great  distance
from  New  Park  Street  Chapel,  and  was  easily  reached
from  all  parts  of  South  London.

The  hall  was  engaged  for  four  Sundays,  commencing
with  October  19,  1856,  and  much  prayer  having  been
offered  that  rich  spiritual  blessings  might  result  from  the
services,  the  deacons  and  church  members  looked  forward
to  the  opening  meeting  with  hopeful  expectations.  But
as  the  day  grew  near,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  seems  to  have  had
inexplicable  forebodings  of  coming  disaster.  "  I  felt  over-


204   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

weighted,"  he  says,  "  with  a  sense  of  responsibility,  and
filled  with  a  mysterious  premonition  of  some  great  trial
shortly  to  befall  me."  This  feeling  had  not  lessened  but
rather  increased  when  Sunday,  October  19,  arrived,  and  in
his  morning  sermon  at  New  Park  Street  Chapel  he  gave
utterance  to  statements  which,  in  the  light  of  after  events,
appear  little  short  of  prophetic.  "  What,"  asked  the
preacher,  "  does  God  say  to  the  Church  ?  '  You  have  proved
Me  aforetime,  you  have  attempted  great  things;  though
some  of  you  were  faint-hearted  and  said,  "  We  should  not
have  ventured,"  others  of  you  had  faith  and  proved  Me.
I  say  again,  "  Prove  me  now." '  See  what  God  can  do  just
when  a  cloud  is  Jailing  on  the  head  of  him  whom  God
has  raised  up  to  preach  to  you.  Go  and  prove  Him  now."
As  the  evening  of  the  memorable  day  drew  near,  people
began  to  gather  at  the  gardens,  and  long  before  the  time
cf  service  every  thoroughfare  converging  upon  the  noted
pleasure-grounds  was  thronged.  The  doors  were  opened
at  an  early  hour,  and  within  a  very  short  space  of  time
the  vast  hall  was  filled  as  it  had  never  been  filled  before.
Scarcely  could  standing  room  for  another  person  have
been  found:  and  it  was  estimated  that  between  ten  and
twelve  thousand  people  were  present.  But  outside  a
crowd  equally  large,  and,  according  to  some  eye-witnesses,
even  larger,  vainly  sought  admission.  Not  only  were  the
streets  all  round  the  gardens  still  thronged,  but  the  road
leading  from  the  entrance  of  the  grounds  up  to  the  hall
doors  was  filled  with  a  solid  mass  of  humanity.  Only  with
difficulty  could  the  pteacher  gain  admission  through  a
private  entrance,  and  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  sight  of
the  unprecedented  crowds  should  almost  have  unnerved
him.  The  responsibility  of  his  position  was  brought
home  with  ten-fold  force,  and  for  a  time  faintness  overtook


THE  SURREY  GARDENS  MUSIC  HALL.     205

him.  Then  when  he  had  rallied,  friends  conducted  him
to  the  pulpit,  which  was  placed  at  the  end  of  the
auditorium,  where  the  orchestra  usually  sat.

Considering  the  class  of  people  of  which  the  congrega-
tion was  largely  composed,  the  class  which  never  entered
a  place  of  worship,  the  sight  inside  the  music-hall  was
indeed  a  remarkable  one.  There  was  naturally  some
excitement  as  visitors  entered  and  hurried  to  secure  seats,
but  once  the  place  was  filled,  the  congregation  became  as
tranquil  as  that  inside  the  average  church  or  chapel.  Dr.
Campbell,  who  wrote  a  vivid  description  of  the  events  of
the  evening  in  his  journal,  The  British  Banner,  declared
that  even  the  scene  of  commotion  witnessed  while  the
people  entered  would  have  borne  a  very  favourable  com-
parison with  the  huge  religious  anniversary  meetings  at
Exeter  Hall.

The  building  being  packed,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  thought  it
wise  to  begin  the  service  ten  minutes  before  time,  which  he
did  by  making  a  few  remarks  appropriate  to  the  occasion.
His  voice  was  wonderful.  It  filled  the  whole  place,  so  that
even  in  the  remotest  corners  every  word  could  be  heard
plainly,  and  this  without  apparent  effort  and  without  harsh
shouting.  A  brief  prayer  was  offered,  and  then  followed
the  singing  of  a  hymn — an  event  never  forgotten  by  those
who  were  present,  the  vast  multitude  joining  together
heartily,  so  that  the  hymn  rolled  out  as  the  voice  of  many
waters.  After  the  reading  of  a  passage  of  Scripture,  with
running  commentary,  the  general  prayer  was  commenced.
And  now  happened  what,  if  caused  deliberately,  as  it  seems
impossible  to  disbelieve,  was  one  of  the  most  dastardly
deeds  recorded  in  recent  religious  history.  The  preacher
was  pleading  earnestly  with  God  for  the  salvation  of  souls,
and  a  remarkable  hush  was  upon  the  vast  assembly.


206    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

Suddenly  among  the  dense  mass  of  people  sitting  and
standing  round  the  main  entrance  of  the  hall?  cries  of
"  Fire !  Fire !  "  were  raised.  At  the  same  instant  a  little
distance  away,  and  presumably  in  the  galleries,  a  number
of  voices  shouted,  "  The  galleries  are  giving  way,"  and  at
still  another  place  a  cry  of  well-feigned  alarm  was  raised,
"  The  building  is  falling ! "  Panic  at  once  ensued  in  that
part  of  the  hall.  The  people  rushed  for  the  doors  and
staircases,  and  a  terrible  scene  of  disaster  was  witnessed.
Men  and  women  tore  the  clothes  from  one  another's  backs
in  their  mad  efforts  to  escape  from  the  building,  and  those
who  were  too  weak  to  save  themselves  from  falling  were
trodden  upon  in  the  stampede.  Wild  cries  and  shrieks
rent  the  air,  adding  to  the  terror  and  confusion,  and  many,
unable  to  get  to  the  doors,  climbed  over  the  balustrades
and  dropped  from  the  galleries,  injuring  themselves  and
those  on  whom  they  fell.  On  the  staircases  the  scene  was
even  more  dreadful  than  in  the  hallj  for  large  numbers
were  borne  aloft  and  precipitated  over  the  banisters,  and
in  one  place  the  balustrade  itself  gave  way.  The  panic
among  the  people  did  not  cease  when  they  reached  the
gardens,  for  a  rush  was  made  to  the  gates  leading  into  the
street,  and  here  another  disaster  occurred.  The  gates  had
been  locked  to  prevent  the  disappointed  crowds  outside
from  entering  the  grounds,  and  owing  to  the  crush  on  both
sides,  they  could  not  now  be  opened.  The  unreasoning
terror  of  'he  people  knew  no  bounds.  Even  if  the  hall  had
been  a  mass  of  leaping  flames,  they  were  safe  in  the
extremity  of  the  gardens,  but  their  mad  fight  for  life  con-
tinued, and  men.  women  and  children  climbed  or  were
pushed  over  the  railings,  many  being  crushed  and
injured.

To  make  matters  worse  in  the  hall,  it  appears  that  as


THE  SURREY  GARDENS  MUSIC  HALL.     207

the  terror-stricken  fugitives  rushed  out,  the  people  who
had  been  waiting  outside  ran  in,  some  not  knowing  an
accident  had  happened,  to  get  places,  and  others  who  had
heard  the  cries,  to  discover  what  really  had  occurred.
This  seems  almost  incredible,  for  one  would  think  the
crush  of  fugitives  at  all  the  doors  would  be  so  great  as  to
bar  effectually  the  ingress  of  new  comers.  The  wild  ^anic
did  not  extend  to  every  part  of  the  hall,  however,  and
possibly  the  people  from  outside  poured  in  at  the  opposite
end  to  that  at  which  the  alarm  had  been  given.

What  was  the  effect  upon  the  preacher  of  this  sudden
and  awful  interruption  of  his  prayer  for  blessing  on  the
people?  At  first  he  was  surprised  by  the  commotion,  for
the  earliest  cries  of  alarm  seem  not  to  have  been  heard  in
his  end  of  the  hall.  Then  when  he  saw  the  rush  to  the
doors  and  heard  the  word  "  Fire ! "  he  tried  to  stop  the
panic  and  calm,  the  people's  fears  by  calling  to  them  in  a
stentorian  voice  that  there  was  no  fire  and  no  cause  for
fear:  the  alarm  had  probably  been  raised  by  thieves  and
pickpockets.  The  happenings  on  the  staircases,  where
people  were  being  trampled  to  death,  were  of  course  quite
unknown  to  the  young  minister  and  those  near  him,  and
when  after  quietness  had  been  to  some  extent  restored,  cries
of  "  Preach !  preach !  "  were  raised  repeatedly,  he  made  a
brief  statement  referring  to  the  false  alarm.  "  My
friends,"  he  said,  "you  bid  me  preach,  but  what  shall  I
preach  about?  I  am  ready  to  do  all  I  can;  but,  in  the
midst  of  all  this  confusion,  what  shall  be  my  subject  ?  May
God's  Holy  Spirit  give  me  a  theme  suited  to  this  solemn
occasion  !  My  friends,  there  is  a  terrible  day  coming,  when
the  terror  and  alarm  of  this  evening  shall  be  as  nothing.
That  will  be  a  time  when  the  thunder  and  lightning  and
blackest  darkness  shall  have  their  fullest  power,  when  the


2o3    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEOX.

earth  shall  reel  to  and  fro  beneath  us,  and  when  the  arches
of  the  solid  heavens  shall  totter  to  their  centre.  The  day
is  coming  when  the  clouds  shall  reveal  their  wonders  and
portents,  and  Christ  shall  sit  upon  those  clouds  in  glory,
and  shall  call  you  to  judgment.  Many  have  gone  away  to-
night, in  the  midst  of  this  terrible  confusion,  and  so  shall  it
be  on  that  great  day.  I  can,  however,  believe  that  the
results  of  that  time  of  testing  will  show  that  there  will  be
many — not  a  less  proportion  than  those  who  now  remain
to  those  who  have  left — who  will  stand  the  ordeal  even  of
that  day.  The  alarm  which  has  just  arisen  has  been
produced,  in  some  measure,  by  that  instinct  which  teaches
us  to  seek  self-preservation ;  but  in  the  more  numerous  of
the  cases,  it  is  not  so  much  the  dread  of  death  which  has
influenced  them,  as  '  the  dread  of  something  after  death, —
the  undiscovered  country,  from  whose  bourn  no  traveller
returns.'  'Tis  conscience  that  has  made  cowards  of  them.
Many  were  afraid  to  stop  here,  because  they  thought,  if
they  stayed,  they  might  die,  and  then  they  would  be
damned.  They  were  aware — and  many  of  you  are  aware —
that,  if  you  were  hurried  before  your  Maker  to-night,  you
would  be  brought  there  unshriven,  unpardoned,  and  con-
demned. But  what  are  your  fears  now  to  what  they  will
be  on  that  terrible  day  of  reckoning  of  the  Almighty,  when
the  heavens  shall  shrink  above  you,  and  hell  shall  open  her
mouth  beneath  you?  But  know  you  not,  my  friends,  that
grace,  sovereign  grace,  can  yet  save  you  ?  Have  you  never
heard  the  welcome  news  that  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to
save  sinners?  Even  if  you  are  the  chief  of  sinners,  believe
that  Christ  died  for  you,  and  you  shall  be  saved.  Do  you
not  know  that  you  are  lost  and  ruined,  and  that  none  but
Jesus  can  do  helpless  sinners  good?  You  are  sick  and
diseased,  but  Jesus  can  heal  you;  and  He  will  if  you  only


THE  SURREY  GARDENS  MUSIC  HALL.     209

trust  Him.  I  thought  of  preaching  to-night  from  the  third
chapter  of  Proverbs,  at  the  33rd  verse :  '  The  curse  of  the
Lord  is  in  the  house  of  the  wicked  :  but  He  blesseth  the
habitation  of  the  just.'  I  fesl  that,  after  what  has
happened,  I  cannot  preach  as  I  could  have  wished  to  do;
I  fear  that  you  will  have  another  alarm,  and  I  would  rather


A  photograph  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  taken  about  the  time  of
the  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall  disaster.

that  some  of  you  would  seek  to  retire  gradually,  in  order
that  no  harm  may  be  done  to  anyone."

At  this  point  a  fresh  disturbance  broke  out,  but  during
the  singing  of  a  hymn  quiet  was  again  restored,  and  the
preacher  essayed  to  continue  his  address.  It  cannot  be  too


210   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  H ADDON  SPURGEON.

much  emphasized  that  at  this  point  C.  H.  Spurgeon  and
the  friends  about  him  were  quite  unconscious  that  anyone
had  been  injured,  much  less  that  there  had  been  loss  of
life.  It  was  supposed  that  nothing  worse  had  happened
than  an  alarm  causing  fear  and  a  confused  exit.  Gradually,
however,  there  were  whispers  that  some  accidents  had
occurred,  though  not  in  the  character  of  a  real  disaster,  and
so  when  for  a  third  time  disorder  broke  out,  the  preacher
closed  the  terrible  service  by  saying :  "  My  brain  is  in  a
whirl,  and  I  scarcely  know  where  I  am,  so  great  are  my
apprehensions  that  many  persons  must  have  been  injured
by  rushing  out.  I  would  rather  that  you  retired  gradually,
and  may  God  Almighty  dismiss  you  with  His  blessing  and
carry  you  in  safety  to  your  homes !  If  our  friends  will  go
out  by  the  central  doors,  we  will  sing  while  they  go,  and
pray  that  some  good  may,  after  all,  come  out  of  this  great
evil.  Do  not,  however,  be  in  a  hurry.  Let  those  nearest
the  doors  go  first."  After  the  hymn  the  Benediction  was
pronounced,  and  then  overcome  by  the  terrible  strain,  the
young  preacher  was  led  from  the  pulpit  apparently  insen-
sible. He  heard,  however,  whispers  that  loss  of  life  had
occurred.  Thereupon,  with  reason  almost  shattered,  and
in  such  a  state  of  collapse,  that  many  thought  he  was  dead,
he  was  borne  to  his  home  where  his  wife  lay  still  an
invalid,  only  a  month  having  elapsed  since  the  birth  of  her
twin-boys.

At  the  scene  of  the  disaster,  when  at  last  it  was  possible
to  get  a  clear  idea  of  the  extent  of  the  evil,  seven  persons
were  found  to  have  been  killed  and  a  large  number  more
or  less  seriously  injured,  twenty-eight  of  whom  had  to  be
removed  to  the  hospitals.  The  garments  collected  in  the  hall
on  the  morning  after  the  disaster  were  so  numerous  that  the
local  police-station  could  scarcely  find  room  to  store  them.


THE  SURREY  GARDENS  MUSIC  HALL.     211

It  now  becomes  necessary  to  examine  the  evidence
with  a  view  of  discovering,  if  possible,  the  causes  that  led
to  this  terrible  disaster.  Three  theories  present  them-
selves :  first  that  there  was  one  of  those  senseless  panics
that  occur  so  mysteriously  from  time  to  time  when  large
numbers  of  people  are  gathered  together;  secondly,  that
the  alarm  was  given  by  thieves  and  pickpockets  with  the
intention  of  creating  a  scene  of  confusion  in  which  they
could  ply  their  nefarious  business  the  more  easily;  and
thirdly,  that  for  some  reason  known  to  themselves  a
number  of  evil-disposed  persons  had  organised  a  con-
spiracy to  break  up  the  meeting  at  all  costs,  and  to  ruin
for  ever  the  popularity  of  the  young  preacher.  This  last
theory,  terrible  as  it  is,  seems  the  only  reasonable  solution
of  the  mystery.  That  the  trouble  did  not  arise  from  a
spontaneous  and  inexplicable  panic  all  those  qualified  to
speak  with  authority — level-headed  persons  present  in
different  parts  of  the  hall — seem  agreed.  The  second
suggestion,  that  the  earliest  cries  of  alarm  came  from  pick-
pockets, was  advanced,  but  the  reasons  against  accepting
this  theory  appear  overwhelming.  Let  us  carefully  examine
the  testimony  of  eye-witnesses.  In  the  first  place  all  are
unanimous-  that  the  cries  of — "Fire!"  "The  gallery
is  giving  way !  "  "  The  building  is  falling !  "  given  from
different  places,  were  only  signals,  and  that  there  was  a
distinct  conspiracy  among  a  large  number  of  people  to
cause  a  panic  in  the  crowds  adjacent  to  the  doors.  Dr.
Campbell,  editor  of  The  British  Banner,  who  was  taking
careful  notice  from  the  first  of  everything  that  happened
in  the  hall,  with  a  view  of  writing  a  detailed  report,  is  very
clear  on  this  point.  "  To  say  it  began  with  one  or  two
cries  of  '  Fire ! ' "  he  writes,  "  as  we  view  the  matter,  is
wholly  to  misrepresent  it.  For  our  own  part  we  heard  no


2i2    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  H ADDON  SPURGEON.

such  cries.  Such,  however,  there  doubtless  were ;  but  they
were  only  signals.  The  thing  bore  the  impress  of  a  plan
to  which  some  hundreds  of  persons  at  least  appeared  to  be
parties.  The  mere  cry  of  '  Fire ! '  would  have  produced
more  or  less  of  a  general  commotion  extending  to  all  parts
of  the  house,  which  was  but  slightly  moved ;  whereas  the
indescribable  and  terrible  outbreak  was  limited  to  a  large
portion  of  people  in  a  given  locality  surrounding  the  great
entrance.  The  outbreak  could  be  likened  to  nothing  but
the  sudden  bursting  forth  of  an  immense  body  of  trained
singers  or  a  vast  reservoir  of  water,  whose  sluices  were
opened  or  whose  banks  had  given  way.  It  is  impossible
that  any  cries  of  two  or  three  individuals  could  ever  have
produced  so  sudden,  so  simultaneous,  and  so  sustained  a
display  of  fear?  horror  and  consternation.  We  are  strongly-
impressed  with  the  conviction  that  the  thing  from  the
adroitness  of  the  performance  must  have  been  well
practised  beforehand.  So  far  as  we  could  judge  from
appearances  the  parties,  or  a  portion  of  them,  who  led  in
the  terrific  uproar,  also  led  in  the  rush,  which  appeared  as
an  especial  part  of  their  infernal  arrangement."

Mr.  Moore,  the  deacon  already  referred  to,  declared  that
"  with  reference  to  the  origin  of  the  alarm,  there  is  no
doubt  that  it  originated  from  wicked  designing  men,"  and
this  was  the  opinion  of  the  whole  of  the  deacons  who
recorded  the  fact  in  the  church  book  when  chronicling
the  terrible  events  of  the  evening  of  October  ipth,  1856.

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  himself,  always  loth  to
believe  evil  of  anyone,  expressed  the  hope  soon  after  the
disaster  that  there  was  no  concerted  wickedness  at  the
bottom  of  the  affair.  But  he  was  compelled  to  change
his  opinion  a  year  later  when  he  had  heard  all  the  evidence
that  could  be  gathered,  and  he  then  declared  emphatically


THE  SURREY  GARDENS  MUSIC  HALL.     213

that  the  calamity  had  occurred  "  by  the  malicious  act  of
wicked  men."

Now  who  were  these  conspirators?  Were  they  pick-
pockets desirous  of  reaping  a  rich  harvest,  or  mere
roisterers,  or  were  they  men  who  had  a  deeper  motive
for  their  dark  deed?  Justice  compels  us  to  believe  that
they  belonged  to  neither  of  the  former  classes  named.
That  an  attempt  might  be  made  to  create  confusion
from  motives  of  mischief  or  trifling  gain  was  very-
probable,  but  neither  brawlers  nor  thieves  would  persist
in  repeating  their  offence  again  and  again  when  the
shrieks  of  the  dying  were  rending  the  air,  and  the  awful
results  of  the  alarm  were  manifest  on  every  hand.  The
unlooked-for  outcome  of  events  would  have  appalled  them.
Further,  although  there  were  thefts  both  inside  and  outside
the  hall,  we  are  unable  to  learn  that  these  exceeded  in
number  the  pilferings  that  invariably  take  place  in  any  great
assemblage  of  excited  persons.  A  police  officer,  Superin-
tendent Lund,  who  was  present  and  witnessed  the  whole
course  of  events,  was  emphatically  of  opinion  that  the
panic  was  not  started  by  thieves  for  their  own  purposes,
but  by  opponents  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  who  had  repaired  to
the  hall  for  the  express  purpose  of  disturbing  the  meeting.
Across  the  hall,  he  distinctly  saw  several  persons  rise  and
shout  "  Fire !  "  but  these  people  occupied  positions  far  too
prominent  for  "  swell-mobsmen,"  who  invariably  keep  in
the  background  and  round  the  doorways.

We  are  left  then  to  the  decision  that  the  disaster  was
deliberately  brought  about  by  enemies  of  the  preacher  and
his  work.  As  Dr.  Campbell  and  others  have  stated,  a  large
number  of  conspirators  must  have  been  concerned,  and  so
thoroughly  and  persistently  was  the  dastardly  work  carried
out,  that  it  is  clear  not  only  was  the  plot  well  organised,  but


214    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  H ADDON  SPURGEON.

the  men  engaged  must  have  practised  their  parts  thoroughly.
The  decision  to  break  up  the  meeting  was  evidently  to  be
carried  out  at  all  costs,  for  in  that  part  of  the  hall  where
the  disturbance  first  occurred,  even  after  it  became  known
that  many  people  had  been  killed  and  injured  and  quiet
was  restored,  the  mysterious  cries  again  went  up,  renewing
the  confusion.  A  second  time  perfect  order  was  restored,
but  the  miscreants  were  persistent,  and  the  shouting  ceased
only  when  the  meeting  was  brought  to  a  close.  From  the
nature  of  events,  however,  nothing  could  be  distinctly
proved,  and  when  an  inquest  was  held  on  the  bodies  of  the
victims^  a  verdict  of  accidental  death  was  returned.  A
fund  was  immediately  raised  for  the  sufferers,  and  the
members  of  the  New  Park  Street  Church  did  everything  in
their  power  to  allay  the  distress.  A  reward  of  fifty  pounds
was  offered  by  the  deacons  for  information  which  would
lead  to  the  discovery  of  the  person  or  persons  who  gave
the  first  false  alarms,  but  the  perpetrators  of  the  terrible
crime  were  never  found.

The  calamity  was  eagerly  seized  upon  by  writers  of  the
baser  sort,  who  attempted  to  vilify  the  young  preacher's
character  by  throwing  on  him  the  blame  for  all  that  had
happened.  He  had  only  taken  the  great  hall  out  of  vanity,
they  said,  and  to  his  charge  must  be  laid  the  responsibility
for  the  deaths  and  injuries  that  had  resulted.  Some  of  the
most  eminent  of  London  journals  joined  in  the  ferocious
attack,  and  what  had  occurred  was  deliberately  misrepre-
sented to  the  detriment  of  the  young  preacher  then  lying
prostrate  at  the  house  of  a  friend,  with  his  wife  an  invalid,
and  his  twin  children  scarcely  a  month  old.  The  Daily
Telegraph  was  most  bitter  of  all.

"  Mr.  Spurgeon,"  it  said,  "  is  a  preacher  who  hurls  damna-
tion at  the  heads  of  his  sinful  hearers.  Some  men  there  are


THE  SURREY  GARDENS  MUSIC  HALL.  215

who,  takjng  their  precepts  from  Holy  Writ,  would  beckon
erring  souls  to  a  rightful  path  with  fair  words  and  gentle
admonition;  Mr.  Spurgeon  would  take  them  by  the  nose,
and  bully  them  into  religion.  Let  us  set  up  a  barrier  to
the  encroachments  and  blasphemies  of  men  like  Spurgeon,
saying  to  them,  '  Thus  far  shalt  thou  come,  but  no  further ;'
let  us  devise  some  powerful  means  which  shall  tell  to  the
thousands  who  now  stand  in  need  of  enlightenment, — This
man,  in  his  own  opinion,  is  a  righteous  Christian ;  but  in
ours,  nothing  more  than  a  ranting  charlatan.  We  are
neither  strait-laced  nor  Sabbatarian  in  our  sentiments;  but
we  would  keep  apart,  widely  apart,  the  theatre  and  the
church ; — above  all,  we  would  place  in  the  hand  of  every
right-thinking  man,  a  whip  to  scourge  from  society  the
authors  of  such  vile  blasphemies  as,  on  Sunday  night,  above
the  cries  of  the  dead  and  the  dying,  and  louder  than  the
wails  of  misery  from  the  maimed  and  suffering?  resounded
from  the  mouth  of  Spurgeon  in  the  music-hall  of  the  Surrey
Gardens.  And  lastly,  when  the  mangled  corpses  had  been
carried  away  from  the  unhallowed  and  disgraceful  scene —
when  husbands  were  seeking  their  wives,  and  children  their
mothers  in  extreme  agony  and  despair — the  chink  of  the
money  as  it  fell  into  the  collection-boxes  grated  harshly,
miserably  on  the  ears  of  those  who,  we  sincerely  hope,  have
by  this  time  conceived  for  Mr.  Spurgeon  and  his  rantings
the  profoundest  contempt."

Scarcely  less  bitter  was  the  Daily  News,  which
declared  :  "  The  crowd  had  been  assembled  to  collect  a
subscription  towards  the  erection  of  such  a  mammoth
chapel  (the  proposed  Tabernacle),  and  Mr.  Spurgeon  and
his  friends  were  unwilling  that  the  opportunity  should  be
lost.  Therefore  his  untimeous  reminder;  therefore  Mr.
Spurgeon's  exclamation  to  the  panic-stricken  fugitives  that


216    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  H ADDON  SPURGEON.

they  were  more  afraid  of  temporal  than  eternal  death;
therefore  the  indecent  rattling  of  money-boxes  in  their  ears.
We  might  go  further  and  remark  on  the  callous  manner  in
which  Mr.  Spurgeon  and  his  friends  left  the  meeting,
without  one  attempt  to  aid  or  soothe  the  sufferers ;  but  we
are  willing  to  make  allowance  for  the  bewilderment  which
such  a  spectacle  was  calculated  to  produce."

As  many  pointed  out  at  the  time,  the  statements  referred
to  were  either  wholly  fabrications  or  deliberate  misrepre-
sentations of  the  truth.  The  people  were  not  gathered
for  the  purpose  of  raising  a  subscription,  the  money-boxes
were  never  brought  forward,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  brief
remarks  had  been  made  after  repeated  calls  to  preach  when
he  was  quite  unaware  that  anybody  had  been  hurt.  Further,
everything  possible  had  been  done  to  succour  the  injured
and  comfort  the  distressed,  and  it  is  safe  to  say  that  of
nobody  but  a  minister  of  the  Gospel  would  such  libels  have
been  published  for  fear  of  an  action-at-law.  In  justice  to
the  newspapers  concerned,  however,  it  must  be  stated  that
they  afterwards  became  among  the  most  generous  admirers
of  the  great  preacher.

At  the  end  of  the  week  the  Saturday  Review  came  out
with  a  long  article  in  which  it  classed  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon  with  Joe  Smith  (the  Mormon  Prophet),  and
his  preaching  with  spirit-rapping  from  the  point  of
view  of  novelty.  "  His  success,"  said  the  writer,  "is  simply
of  the  vulgarest  and  most  commonplace  type.  Given  a
person  of  some  natural  talents  with  matchless  powers
of  acquired  impudence,  and  a  daring  defiance  of
good  taste  and  often  of  common  decency — and  he  will
always  produce  an  effect.  Anybody  who  will  give  himself
out  as  some  great  one,  will  find  followers  enough  to  accept
his  leadership.  A  charlatan  will  never  be  without  dupes.


THE  SURREY  GARDENS  MUSIC  HALL.     217

The  crowds  who  flock  to  the  various  Spurgeon  conventicles
are  only  of  the  class  who  would  follow  the  bottle  conjuror,
or  anyone  who  chose  to  advertise  that  he  would  fly  from
the  Monument  to  the  dome  of  St.  Paul's."

The  article  then  referred  to  the  preacher  as  "  a  very
ordinary  impostor,"  and  suggested  that  as  a  counter-attrac-
tion to  his  preaching,  Sunday  bands  should  be  set  playing
so  that  there  might  be  "  a  chance  of  thinning  the  crowds.'3
The  innovation,  it  was  explained,  would  "  only  be  the  sub-
stitution of  one  set  of  amusements  for  another."  The
hiring  of  places  of  public  amusement  for  Sunday  preaching
was  .a  painful  novelty.  It  looked  as  if  religion  were  at  its
last  shift,  and  so  far  from  the  move  being  a  wrestling  with
Satan  in  his  strongholds,  it  was,  said  the  writer,  "  a
cowardly  truce  and  alliance  with  the  world."  "  Why,"  it  was
asked,  "  should  Mr.  Spurgeon  be  content  with  his  present
achievement  ?  The  Surrey  Gardens  affair  was  a  great  coup.
The  deplorable  accident,  in  which  seven  people  lost  their
lives,  and  scores  were  maimed,  mutilated,  or  otherwise
cruelly  injured,  Mr.  Spurgeon  only  considers  as  an  additional
intervention  of  Providence  in  his  favour.  '  This  event  will,
I  trust,  teach  us  the  necessity  of — being  sober,  rational,
and  decent?- -No; — 'having  a  building  of  our  own.'
Preach  another  crowd  into  a  frenzy  and  terror, — kill  and
smash  a  dozen  or  two  more, — and  then  the  speculation  will
have  succeeded.  Mr.  Spurgeon,  improving  the  occasion,  is
said  to  have  remarked  that  '  this  gathering  had  aroused
Satan,  and  he  would  not  allow  the  service  to  go  on  without
endeavouring  to  interrupt  it.'  We  do  not  profess  that
familiarity  with  Satan  and  his  doings  which  is  enjoyed  by
Mr.  Spurgeon.  Doubtless,  he  possesses  more  of  Satan's
confidence,  and  more  knowledge  of  his  character,  than
ordinary  men ;  at  least,  with  our  estimate  of  the  power  of


2i8   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

evil,  we  should  judge  so  from  this  mode  of  dealing  with  the
deplorable  result  of  his  vanity  and  cupidity.  We  certainly
believe  that  Satan  was  busy  enough  on  Sunday  evening  last.
The  reporters  tell  us  that  the  publicans  and  pickpockets
'  reaped  a  rich  harvest '  from  the  occasion.  These  are2  at
any  rate,  new  fruits  of  a  gospel  ministry,  and  strange
triumphs  of  the  cross.  Expostulation  and  advice  are  thrown
away  upon  one  who  can  act  as  Mr.  Spurgeon  is  reported
to  have  acted  in  the  presence  of  these  unusual  seafs  to  his
ministry.  Yet  it  is  always  a  public  duty  to  show  up  selfish-
ness and  vanity ;  and  we  can  only  hope  that  it  will  prove  in
this  instance  to  be  a  public  benefit  also."

Several  journals,  however,  notably  the  Morning  Adver-
tiser, The  British  Banner,  and  The  Freeman  defended  the
young  preacher,  and  maintained  that  he  had  done  right  in
taking  the  Music  Hall  for  his  services,  and  had  inaugurated
the  movement  with  no  unworthy  motives  of  ambition  or
vanity.

At  the  time  of  their  appearance,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  knew
nothing  of  the  dastardly  attacks  that  were  being  made  upon
him  in  the  public  Press.  On  the  night  of  the  disaster,  when
taken  to  his  home,  his  whole  appearance  had  changed ;  he
was  nothing  but  a  wreck  of  his  former  self,  and  for  a  time
it  was  feared  that  the  agony  of  mind  he  suffered  would  cause
him  to  lose  his  reason.  The  young  preacher,  with  his  wife,
went  to  stay  with  a  friend  at  Croydon  in  the  hope  that
the  quiet  and  the  change  would  aid  in  restoring  his  mental
equilibrium,  but  restless  and  anguished  he  used  to  walk
about  the  garden,  a  dulness  in  his  eyes,  such  as  had  never
before  dimmed  them.  The  experiences  of  his  mind  at  and
after  the  calamity  he  has  described  in  "  The  Saint  and  his
Saviour."

'"  Strong  amid  danger,  I  battled  against  the  storm;  nor


THE  SURREY  GARDENS  MUSIC  HALL.  219

did  my  spirit  yield  to  the  overwhelming  pressure  while  my
courage  could  reassure  the  wavering,  or  confirm  the  hold ;
but  when,  like  a  whirlwind,  the  destruction  was  overpast,
when  the  whole  of  its  devastation  was  visible  to  my  eye,
who  can  conceive  the  anguish  of  my  sad  spirit  ?  I  refused
to  be  comforted ;  tears  were  my  meat  by  day,  and  dreams
my  terror  by  night.  I  felt  as  I  had  never  felt  before.  '  My
thoughts  were  all  a  case  of  knives,'  cutting  my  heart  in  pieces,
until  a  kind  of  stupor  of  grief  ministered  a  mournful
medicine  to  me.  I  could  have  truly  said,  '  I  am  not  mad,
but  surely  I  have  had  enough  to  madden  me,  if  I  should
indulge  in  meditation  on  it.'  I  sought  and  found  a  solitude
which  seemed  congenial  to  me.  I  could  tell  my  griefs  to
the  flowers,  and  the  dews  could  weep  with  me.  Here  my
mind  lay,  like  a  wreck  upon  the  sand,  incapable  of  its  usual
motion.  I  was  in  a  strange  land,  and  a  stranger  in  it.  My
Bible,  once  my  daily  food,  was  but  a  hand  to  lift  the  sluices
of  my  woe.  Prayer  yielded  no  balm  to  me;  in  fact,  my  soul
was  like  an  infant's  soul,  and  I  could  not  rise  to  the  dignity
of  supplication.  '  Broken  in  pieces  all  asunder,'  my
thoughts,  which  had  been  to  me  a  cup  of  delights,  were  like
pieces  of  broken  glass,  the  piercing  and  cutting  miseries  of
my  pilgrimage."

But  hope  was  about  to  dawn.  One  day,  walking  in  the
Croydon  garden  with  his  wife,  he  suddenly  stopped,  and
turning  to  her  with  the  old  light  once  again
in  his  eyes,  he  exclaimed :  "  Dearest,  how  foolish  I  have
been !  Why !  what  does  it  matter  what  becomes  of  me  if
the  Lord  shall  but  be  glorified  ?  "  Then  he  repeated  the
words  :  "  Wherefore  God  also  hath  highly  exalted  Him,  and
given  Him  a  name  which  is  above  every  name  :  that  at  the
name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow,  of  things  in  Heaven,
and  things  in  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth;  and  that


220   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to
the  glory  of  God  the  Father,"  adding,  "  If  Christ  be  exalted,
let  Him  do  as  He  pleases  with  me;  my  one  prayer  shall  be
that  I  may  die  to  self  and  live  wholly  for  Him  and  for  His
honour."

This  sudden  access  of  light  and  joy  into  his  anguished
soul,  where  for  days  all  had  been  darkness  and  despair,  was
almost  like  a  second  experience  of  conversion.

"  Like  a  flash  of  lightning  from  the  sky,"  he  says,  "  my
soul  returned  unto  me.  The  burning  lava  of  my  brain
cooled  in  an  instant.  The  throbbings  of  my  brow  were
still ;  the  cool  wind  of  comfort  fanned  my  cheek,  which  had
been  scorched  in  the  furnace.  I  was  free,  the  iron  fetter
was  broken  in  pieces,  my  prison  door  was  open,  and  I
leaped  for  joy  of  heart.  On  wings  of  a  dove,  my  spirit
mounted  to  the  stars — yea,  beyond  them.  Whither  did  it
wing  its  flight,  and  where  did  it  sing  its  song  of  gratitude  ?
It  was  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  whose  Name  had  charmed  its
fears,  and  placed  an  end  to  its  mourning.  The  Xame — the
precious  Name  of  Jesus,  was  like  Ithuriel's  spear,  bringing
back  my  soul  to  its  own  right  and  happy  state.  I  was  a
man  again,  and  what  is  more,  a  believer.  The  garden  in
which  I  stood  became  an  Eden  to  me,  and  the  spot  was  then
most  solemnly  consecrated  in  my  restored  consciousness.
Happy  hour !  Thrice-blessed  Lord,  who  thus  in  an  instant
delivered  me  from  the  rock  of  my  despair,  and  slew  the
vulture  of  my  grief !  Before  I  told  to  others  the  glad  news
of  my  recovery,  my  heart  was  melodious  with  song,  and  my
tongue  endeavoured  tardily  to  express  the  music.  Then
did  I  give  to  my  Well-beloved  a  song  touching  my  Well-
beloved  ;  and,  oh  !  with  what  rapture  did  my  soul  flash  forth
its  praises !  But  all — all  were  to  the  honour  of  Him,  the
First  and  the  Last,  the  Brother  born  for  adversity,  the


THE  SURREY  GARDENS  MUSIC  HALL.     221

Deliverer  of  the  captive,  the  Breaker  of  my  fetters,  the
Restorer  of  my  soul.  Then  did  I  cast  my  burden  upon  the
Lord ;  I  left  my  ashes,  and  arrayed  myself  in  the  garments
of  praise,  while  He  anointed  me  with  fresh  oil.  I  could
have  riven  the  very  firmament  to  get  at  Him,  to  cast  myself
at  His  feet,  and  lie  there  bathed  in  the  tears  of  joy  and
love.  Never  since  the  day  of  my  conversion  had  I  known
so  much  of  His  infinite  excellence,  never  had  my  spirit
leaped  with  such  unutterable  delight.  Scorn,  tumult,  and
woe  seemed  less  than  nothing  for  His  sake.  I  girded  up
my  loins  to  run  before  His  chariot,  I  began  to  shout  forth
His  glory,  for  my  soul  was  absorbed  in  the  one  idea  of  His
glorious  exaltation  and  Divine  compassion."

The  terrible  events  of  that  fatal  Sunday  evening
remained  with  the  preacher  to  the  end  of  his  days  as  :i
vivid  memory.  He  could  never  hear  the  text  from  which
he  had  intended  to  preach  (Proverbs  iii.  33)  without  turning
pale  and  becoming  deeply  moved,  and  any  suggestion  of
confusion  at  the  crowded  gatherings  which  he  afterwards
addressed  would  almost  unman  him.  The  Rev.  R.  Shindler
tells  how  a  quarter  of  a  century  after  the  music-hall  disaster,
when  C.  H.  Spurgeon  preached  in  the  largest  available  hall
in  Portsmouth,  there  was  some  confusion  as  the  preacher
was  passing  on  to  the  platform,  and  in  a  moment  the  scene
at  the  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall  was  recalled  vividly  to
his  mind,  completely  unnerving  him.  He  stood  in  the
passage  leaning  his  head  upon  his  hand,  and  although  later
he  preached  well  to  the  large  congregation,  which  included
Prince  Edward  of  Saxe-Weimar,  he  could  not  completely
control  his  agitation  at  the  terrible  memories  which  the  noise
had  conjured  up.

The  narrowest  escape  of  a  repetition  of  the  disaster  which
the  preacher  experienced  was,  less  than  two  years  later,  when


222    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

he  preached  at  Halifax  to  six  thousand  persons  in  a  large
wooden  structure  erected  for  the  purpose.  Three  services
were  held  that  day,  and  as  the  people  were  dispersing  after
the  evening  meeting,  a  portion  of  the  gallery  floor  gave
way.  Fortunately  the  majority  of  the  congregation  had
left,  and  of  the  persons  who  fell  with  the  woodwork,  only
two  were  severely  injured,  sustaining  broken  legs.

"  Now,  had  this  happened  any  earlier,"  said  C.  H.
Spurgeon,  recording  the  providence  in  one  of  his  sermons
at  the  Surrey  Music  Hall,  "  not  only  must  many  more  have
been  injured,  but  there  are  a  thousand  chances  to  one,  as  we
say,  that  a  panic  must  necessarily  have  ensued  similar  fo  that
which  we  still  remember,  and  deplore  as  having  occurred  in
this  place.  Had  such  a  thing  happened,  and  had  I  been  the
unhappy  preacher  on  the  occasion,  I  feel  certain  that  1
should  never  have  been  able  to  occupy  the  pulpit  again.
Such  was  the  effect  of  the  first  calamity,  that  I  marvel  that
I  ever  survived.  No  human  tongue  can  possibly  tell  what
I  experienced.  The  Lord,  however,  graciously  preserved
us;  the  fewness  of  the  people  in  the  gallery  prevented  any
such  catastrophe,  and  thus  a  most  fearful  accident  was
averted.  But  there  is  a  more  marvellous  providence  still
to  record.  Overloaded  by  the  immense  weight  of  snow
which  fell  upon  it,  and  beaten  by  a  heavy  wind,  the  entire
structure  fell  with  an  enormous  crash  three  hours  after  we
had  left  it,  splitting  the  huge  timbers  into .  shivers,  and
rendering  very  much  of  the  material  utterly  useless  for  any
future  building.  Now  mark  this, — had  the  snow  begun
three  hours  earlier,  the  hall  must  have  fallen  upon  us,  and
how  few  of  us  would  have  escaped,  we  cannot  guess.  But
mark  another  thing.  All  day  long  it  thawed  so  fast,  that
the  snow  as  it  fell  seemed  to  leave  a  mass,  not  of  white
snow,  but  of  snow  and  water  together.  This  ran  through


THE  SURREY  GARDENS  MUSIC  HALL.     223

the  roof  upon  us,  to  our  considerable  annoyance,  and  I  was
almost  ready  to  complain  that  we  had  hard  dealings  from
God's  providence.  But  if  it  had  been  a  frost2  instead  of  a
thaw,  you  can  easily  perceive  that  the  place  must  have  fallen
several  hours  before  it  did ;  and  then  your  minister,  and  the
greater  part  of  his  congregation,  would  probably  have  been
in  the  other  world.  Some  there  may  be  who  deny  provi-
dence altogether.  I  cannot  conceive  that  there  were  any
witnesses  of  that  scene  who  could  have  done  so.  This  I
know,  if  I  had  been  an  unbeliever  to  this  day  in  the  doctrine
of  the  supervision  and  wise  care  of  God,  I  must  have  been
a  believer  in  it  at  this  hour.  Oh,  magnify  the  Lord  with
me,  and  let  us  exalt  His  Name  together !  He  hath  been
very  gracious  unto  us,  and  remembered  us  for  good."

Such  is  the  story  of  the  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall
disaster,  as  completely  as  it  can  be  told  now.  It  is  doubtful
if  any  other  preacher  could  have  survived  the  terrible  event.
A  man  of  less  dogged  spirit  and  of  weaker  faith  in  God  must
have  succumbed  under  the  strain^  and  become  a  mental  and
physical  wreck,  whilst  his  popularity,  even  had  he  survived,
would  have  entirely  departed.  But  such  was  not  the  case
with  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon.  He  was  sustained  in  his
terrible  trial,  was  enabled  'to  resume  his  preaching  with
unimpaired  powers,  and  within  a  short  time  delivered  the
Gospel  message  to  huge  congregations  in  the  very  building
where  the  disaster  had  occurred.  Many  of  those  who  had
been  injured  afterwards  joined  the  young  pastor's  church.
Surely  in  all  this  is  to1  be  seen  proof  that  the  work  was  of
God,  for  had  it  been  of  men,  it  must  undoubtedly  have
"  come  to  nought."


CHAPTER  XVI.

LATER  SERVICES  AT  THE  MUSIC  HALL:  FAST
DAY  AT  THE  CRYSTAL  PALACE.

A  FORTNIGHT  after  the  disaster,  the  young  preacher
was  sufficiently  recovered  to  occupy  his  pulpit  at
New  Park  Street,  but  he  bore  sad  traces  of  the  terrible
ordeal  through  which  he  had  passed.  The  service  was  from
the  very  nature  of  the  circumstances  a  sad  one.  Although
no  single  member  of  the  church  had  lost  his  or  her  life,  it
could  not  but  be  remembered  that  many  people  in  the  neigh-
bourhood had  suffered  bereavement,  and  that  a  large  propor-
tion of  the  injured  still  lay  suffering  in  the  hospitals.  For
these  the  pastor  prayed  most  earnestly  that  they  might  be
comforted  and  blessed  with  every  blessing  that  they  needed.
Then  at  the  opening  of  his  discourse  he  briefly  referred  to
what  had  happened,  declaring,  however,  that  he  could  then
say  but  little  about  the  matter.  "  I  could  not,"  he  explained,
"  preach  to  you  upon  a  subject  that  should  be  in  the  least
allied  to  it ;  I  should  be  obliged  to  be  silent  if  I  should
bring  to  my  remembrance  that  terrific  scene  in  the  midst
of  which  it  was  my  solemn  lot  to  stand."  He  went  on  to
speak  of  those  who  had  caused  the  tragedy,  expressing  the
hope  that  God  would  forgive  them.  "  They  have  my  for-
giveness from  the  depths  of  my  soul.  It  shall  not  stop  us,
however;  we  are  not  in  the  least  degree  daunted  by  it.  I
shall  preach  there  again  yet;  aye,  and  God  will  give  us
souls  there,  and  Satan's  empire  shall  tremble  more  than  ever.


LATER  SERVICES  AT  THE  MUSIC  HALL.    225

God  is  with  us ;  who  is  he  that  shall  be  against  us  ?  "  The
text  of  the  brief  address  which  followed  was  the  one  that
had  brought  such  comfort  to  the  preacher's  soul  in  the  midst
of  darkness  and  distress  :  "  Wherefore  God  also  hath  highly
exalted  Him,  and  given  Him  a  name  which  is  above  every
name :  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow,  of
things  in  Heaven,  and  things  in  earth,  and  things  under  the
earth;  and  that  every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus
Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father."

Both  at  that  time  and  ever  afterwards  C.  H.  Spurgeon
strongly  maintained  that  such  disasters  were  not  to  be
viewed  in  the  light  of  Divine  judgments  upon  sinners  of  an
exceptionally  deep  dye,  as  some  declared  or  seemed  inclined
to  think.  The  fact  that  devout  Christians  and  unconscious
infants  oftentimes  perished  in  accidents,  clearly  disproved
such  a  thought,  he  believed.  Nor  was  he  prepared,  like
some,  to  accept  the  disaster  as  a  sign  of  God's  disapproval.
He  had  no  faith  in  omens,  and  so,  as  soon  as  possible,,
another  attempt  was  made  to  conduct  Gospel  services  in  the
Music  Hall,  this  time  with  remarkable  success.  But  it  was.
decided  that  the  preaching  there  should  take  place  in  the
mornings,  so  that  daylight  might  aid  in  preventing  further
deeds  of  darkness,  and  although  that  time  of  the  day  is
unfavourable  for  large  congregations,  the  people  turned  out
in  thousands  from  the  first,  and  the  hall  was  filled  Sunday
after  Sunday  for  a  period  of  over  three  years.  The  first
morning  service  was  held  on  November  23rd,  1856,  and  the
last  on  December  nth,  1859,  and  during  that  time
thousands  of  conversions  took  place,  which  bore  the  test  of
time,  continual  additions  were  made  to  the  church,  and  all
the  various  enterprises  which  afterwards  emanated  from  the
Metropolitan  Tabernacle  owed  their  prosperity  in  a  large
degree  to  the  advance  made  by  the  church  during  the

ii


226    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

period  of  the  Music  Hall  services.  The  effort  was  initiated
for  the  purpose  of  reaching  those  people  who  never
attended  a  place  of  worship,  and  that  it  was  successful
in  this  object  was  proved  by  the  fact  that  before
the  commencement  of  each  service  it  was  usual
for  large  numbers  of  the  visitors  to  spend  the
time  in  reading  newspapers.  Such  were  the  people,
hundreds  of  whom  afterwards  became  earnest  Christians  and
diligent  workers  in  the  Lord's  vineyard.  What  the  Church
at  large  and  the  nation  owe  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  daring
innovation  in  preaching  at  the  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall
cannot  be  fully  estimated.  It  led  the  way  for  those
wonderful  services  which  have  for  years  past  been  continu-
ously conducted  in  theatres  and  other  places  of  amusement,
thereby  carrying  the  Gospel  to  thousands  who  would  never
have  entered  a  church  or  chapel,  and  the  great  evangelistic
services  commenced  in  Westminster  Abbey  and  St.  Paul's
Cathedral  in  1858,  at  which  thousands  of  men  and  women
of  the  artisan  class  were  regularly  present,  with  splendid
results,  were  the  direct  outcome  of  the  religious  movement
inaugurated  at  the  Music  Hall.

A  point  upon  which  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  always
laid  the  greatest  stress  was  that  the  preaching  should  be
of  such  a  character  that  the  simplest  could  follow  it.  "  I
determined,"  he  says,  "  that  whether  my  hearers  would
receive  the  Gospel  or  reject  it,  they  should  at  least  under-
stand it,  and  therefore  I  preached  it  in  plain,  homely  Saxon
that  a  child  could  comprehend^  and  with  all  the  earnestness
of  which  I  was  capable."  But  although  the  preaching  was
thus  plain,  it  proved  as  acceptable  to  the  classes  as  to  the
masses.  Many  distinguished  and  learned  men  and
women  were  delighted  with  the  sermons  of  the  gifted
young  divine,  and  among  those  who  at  different  times  sat


228    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEON.

under  his  ministry  at  the  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall  were
one  of  her  late  Majesty's  Prime  Ministers,  Lord  John
Russell,  Lord  Stanley  of  Alderley,  Lord  Campbell  (the
Lord  Chief  Justice  of  England),  Dukes,  Duchesses,  and
many  other  peers  and  peeresses,  Lady  Peel,  Sir  Richard
Mayne  (Chief  Commissioner  of  Metropolitan  Police),  Dr.
Livingstone,  and  John  Ruskin,  the  last  named  being  a  very
regular  attendant.  Lord  Campbell  remarked  to  the  Com-
missioner of  Police  at  the  close  of  one  service,  "  He  is  doing
great  good,  sir, — great  good,"  and  the  Sun  newspaper,  com-
menting on  this,  declared  that  London  could  find  room  for
twenty  such  preachers ;  "  they  are  just  what  the  populace
needs."  From  the  West  End  of  London  on  Sunday  morn-
ings a  stream  of  carriages  was  always  to  be  seen  conveying
fashionable  occupants  to  the  Surrey  Gardens — a  fact  which
in  itself  proved  the  wisdom  of  the  young  pastor's  innovation,
for  few,  if  any,  of  these  people  would  ever  have  dreamt  of
entering  a  dissenting  chapel.  On  one  occasion  his  huge
congregation  included  the  Marquis  of  Lansdowne,  Baron
Bramwell,  and  thirty  Members  of  Parliament.

Of  course  there  were  many  critics,  but  some  at  least  of
these  helped  the  preacher.  One  anonymous  correspondent
used  to  send  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon  weekly  a  list  of  the  mis-
pronunciations and  other  slips  of  speech  which  he  had  made
in  the  previous  Sunday's  sermon.  "  Concerning  some  of  his
criticisms,"  says  the  preacher,  "  he  was  himself  in  error :
but  for  the  most  part  he  was  right,  and  his  remarks  enabled
me  to  perceive  many  mistakes,  and  to  avoid  them  in  the
future.  I  looked  for  his  weekly  memoranda  with  much
interest,  and  I  trust  I  am  all  the  better  for  them.  If  I
repeated  a  sentence  which  I  had  used  two  or  three  Sundays
before,  he  would  write,  '  See  the  same  expression  in  such-
and-such  a  sermon,'  mentioning  the  number  and  page.  He


LATER  SERVICES  AT  THE  MUSIC  HALL.    229

remarked  on  one  occasion  that  I  too  often  quoted  the
line, —

'Nothing  in  my  hand  I  bring,—

and  he  added,  'we  are  sufficiently  informed  of  the  vacuity
of  your  hand.'  He  demanded  my  authority  for  calling  a
man  covechus  ;  and  so  on.  Possibly  some  young  men  might
have  been  discouraged,  if  not  irritated,  by  such  severe
criticisms,  but  they  would  have  been  very  foolish,  for,  in
resenting  such  correction,  they  would  have  been  throwing
away  a  valuable  aid  to  progress."

A  remarkable  feature  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  preaching  at
this  time  was  that  he  oftentimes  felt  impelled,  he  knew  not
wh'y,  to  point  at  a  certain  part  of  the  hall  and  make  a  remark,
without  having  any  idea  that  what  he  said  was  right,  except
that  he  believed  he  was  moved  by  the  Spirit  to  say  it.  "  1
have  known  many  instances,"  he  says,  "  in  which  the  thoughts
of  men  have  been  revealed  from  the  pulpit.  I  have  some-
times seen  persons  nudge  their  neighbours  with  their  elbow
because  they  had  got  a  smart  hit,  and  they  have  been
heard  to  say  when  they  were  going  out,  '  The  preacher  told
us  just  what  we  said  to  one  another  when  we  went  in  at  the
door.' "  Perhaps  the  most  striking  instance  of  this  was  in
the  case  of  a  shoemaker  who,  accustomed  to  engage  in
Sunday  trading,  yet  went  one  morning  out  of  curiosity  to
hear  the  popular  preacher.  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,
who  knew  nothing  whatever  of  such  a  man  being  present,
suddenly  felt  led  to  point  at  the  very  place  where  the
tradesman  sat,  and  exclaimed,  "  There  is  a  man  sitting  there
who  is  a  shoemaker ;  he  keeps  his  shop  open  on  Sundays ;
it  was  open  last  Sabbath  morning ;  he  took  ninepence,
and  there  was  fourpence  profit  out  of  it ;  his  soul  is  sold
to  Satan  for  fourpence !  "  But  the  astonishing  point  is
that  every  word  was  literally  true,  and  the  shoemaker


230   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  H ADDON  SPURGEON.

returned  home  greatly  perturbed.  He  could  not  think  how
the  preacher  should  know  the  facts  he  had  mentioned,  and
then  it  struck  him  that  God  had  spoken  to  his  soul  by  what
was  nothing  less  than  an  interposition.  He  shut  up  his
shop  the  following  Sunday,  but  was  afraid  for  a  time  to  go
to  hear  the  preacher.  At  last  he  went,  and  the  result  was
his  conversion.  The  facts,  thoroughly  authenticated,
became  known  through  a  City  missionary,  and  C.  H.
Spurgeon  himself  has  confirmed  the  story.

So  remarkable  was  the  spiritual  work  done  in  the  Music
Hall,  and  so  numerous  were  the  conversions,  that  after  a
time  the  character  of  the  congregation  completely  changed,
and  from  being  a  crowd  of  careless  hearers  gathered  out  of
curiosity,  it  became,  in  great  part,  an  assemblage  of  earnest
Christians.  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  thereupon  changed
the  character  of  his  preaching,  and  many  of  the  later  sermons
are  expository  and  doctrinal.  Such  a  result  has,  probably,
never  been  achieved  at  any  other  time  in  connection  with
Gospel  services  in  a  secular  building.  The  congregations
after  the  night  of  the  terrible  disaster  were  always  most
orderly  and  attentive.  Any  thought  of  frivolity  or  mis-
chief seemed  to  vanish  in  the  presence  of  the  man  and  his
message.  Once  some  young  men  entered  the  hall,  and  out
of  bravado  retained  their  hats  after  the  service  had  begun.
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  method  of  dealing  with  them
was  such  as  would  have  occurred  to  no  other  preacher,  and
it  was  at  a  time  like  this  that  his  vein  of  humour  stood  him  in
good  stead.  In  the  middle  of  the  opening  hymn  he  told  the
congregation  that  a  short  time  before  he  had  visited  a  Jewish
synagogue,  and  in  accordance  with  the  custom  of  the  place
had  worn  his  hat.  "  But  as  it  is  the  Christian  practice  to
uncover  in  a  place  of  worship,"  he  continued,  "  I  will  ask
those  young  Jewish  gentlemen  down  there  to  kindly  remove


232    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEON.

their  hats."  There  was  no  need  to  make  any  further
remark,  but  who  else  could  have  dealt  with  a  similar  situa-
tion in  such  an  effective  manner  ?

During  the  course  of  the  services  at  Surrey  Gardens
Music  Hall,  the  Indian  Mutiny  broke  out,  and  when  a  fast
day  was  proclaimed,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  invited  by  the
directors  of  the  Crystal  Palace  to  hold  a  service  in  the  centre
transept  of  the  building,  a  collection  to  be  taken  on  behalf
of  the  national  fund  for  the  sufferers  through  the  Mutiny.
He  accepted,  and  on  October  7,  1857,  addressed  the  largest
congregation  to  which  he  ever  preached  inside  a  building.
No  fewer  than  23,654  persons  were  present,  and  the  scene
was  a  most  impressive  one.  The  collection  amounted  to
five  hundred  pounds,  to  which  the  Crystal  Palace  Company
added  another  two  hundred,  and  when  the  preacher  refused
to  accept  any  fee  for  his  services  another  fifty  pounds  was
given  by  the  company  to  the  Tabernacle  Building  Fund.
Even  before  the  sen-ice  itself  one  man  was  led  to  think  of
eternal  matters  as  a  result  of  the  effort,  and  was  converted
to  God.  It  was  arranged  that  the  preacher  should  use  the
Music  Hall  pulpit,  and  a  day  or  two  before  the  service  he
went  to  the  Palace  in  order  to  test  the  acoustic  properties  of
the  building  and  decide  where  the  pulpit  should  be  placed.
Standing  at  a  certain  point  he  cried  in  stentorian  tones,
"  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of
the  world,"  while  friends  in  various  parts  of  the  transept
waited  to  hear  if  the  words  could  be  recognised  distinctly.  A
long  time  afterwards  it  transpired  that  a  carpenter  working
in  one  of  the  galleries,  knowing  nothing  of  what  was  going
on  below,  heard  what  seemed  to  him  a  voice  from  heaven
repeating  the  above  text.  He  was  smitten  with  conviction
on  account  of  sin,  put  down  his  tools,  and  going  home
found  peace  and  life  after  a  time  of  spiritual  struggling.  The


FAST  DAY  AT  THE  CRYSTAL  PALACE.  233

source  of  the  voice  only  became  known  to  him,  when  on  his
death-bed  he  told  a  visitor  the  story  of  his  conversion.

The  exertion  of  preaching  to  such  a  huge  audience  must
have  been  great,  although  C.  H.  Spurgeon  tells  us  he  did
not  at  the  close  feel  conscious  of  any  unusual  fatigue.  But
that  Wednesday  night  he  went  to  bed  and  slept  continuously
until  Friday  morning,  an  experience  he  had  at  no  other
period  of  his  life.  All  through  Thursday  Mrs.  Spurgeon
went  at  intervals  to  look  at  her  husband,  but  finding  him
sleeping  peacefully  she  wisely  let  him  rest  until  nature  should
be  satisfied.

The  last  service  at  the  Music  Hall  was  held  on  Sunday
morning,  December  nth,  1859,  when  C.  H.  Spurgeon
preached  from  St.  Paul's  farewell  words  to  the  Ephesian
elders  :  "  Wherefore  I  take  you  to  record  this  day  that  I  am
pure  from  the  blood  of  all  men.  For  I  have  not  shunned
to  declare  unto  you  all  the  counsel  of  God."  The  sermon,
which  reviewed  the  events  of  the  past  three  years,  was  a
particularly  solemn  one,  and  many  of  the  people  present
were  moved  to  tears.  The  discontinuance  of  the  services
was  decided  upon  as  a  matter  of  principle.  The  proprietors
of  the  Hall  and  Gardens  had  wished  to  open  the  grounds  to
the  public  on  Sundays,  a  course  to  which  those  responsible
for  the  morning  services  were  strongly  opposed.  For  a  time
better  counsels  prevailed,  but  at  last  the  directors  came  to
the  determination  to  open  the  Gardens  as  a  public  resort  on
Sunday,  December  i8th,  1859,  and  so  the  authorities  of  New
Park  Street  Chapel  closed  their  long  series  of  evangelistic
services  on  the  morning  of  the  previous  Sabbath.  The  rent
paid  by  the  church  for  the  use  of  the  Hall  had  been  the
company's  chief  source  of  revenue,  and  from  the  time  that
this  ceased,  the  place  failed  to  be  a  financial  success.  The
fees  for  Sunday  admissions  were  insignificant,  and  although


234    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

various  attempts  v  ere  made  to  gain  popularity  an 3  fill  the
company's  coffers,  the  venture  never  paid  from  the  time  that
th3  services  ceased.

The  Music  Hall  period  has  been  dealt  with  at  some
length,  because  it  marked  not  only  an  important  period  in
C.  H.  Spurgeon's  life  and  ministry,  but  an  epoch  in  tne
religious  history  of  the  ipth  century.  In  the  cities  and
towns,  at  any  rate,  it  had  been  so  long  since  preachers
attempted  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  masses,  that  few  of
the  lower  middle  and  artisan  classes  ever  entered  a
place  of  worship.  The  Exeter  Hall  meetings  had
attracted  some  of  these  people,  but  it  was  the
Music  Hall  services  that  brought  them  once  again
into  touch  with  Christianity  and  the  churches,  and  showed
to  clergymen  and  ministers  their  responsibility  to  put  the
Gospel  intelligibly  before  the  common  people.  The  result
was  that  many  churches,  led  by  Westminster  Abbey  and  St.
Paul's  Cathedral,  as  already  stated,  threw  open  their  doors
to  the  working  classes,  who  readily  appreciated  the  efforts
made  on  behalf  of  their  spiritual  welfare.  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon,  at  a  later  period,  and  in  a  different  connection,
made  a  blunt  remark  which  well  expressed  the  character  of
the  preaching  that  had  obtained  generally,  prior  to  the
Music  Hall  services.  "  Christ  said,  '  Feed  My  sheep,  feed
My  lambs,'  "  he  declared.  "  Some  preachers,  however,  put
the  food  so  high  that  neither  lambs  nor  sheep  can  reach  it.
They  seem  to  have  read  the  text,  '  Feed  My  giraffes.'  "
"  We  are  to  feed  men  with  the  bread  of  life/'  he  remarked,
on  another  occasion,  "  but  that  does  not  mean  we  are  to  ram
a  quartern  loaf  down  their  throats."


CHAPTER    XVII.

THE  TURNING  OF  THE  TIDE:    DOCTRINAL
CONTROVERSIES.

WITH  continued  popularity  and  success,  which  no
amount  of  abuse  could  lessen,  the  tide  of  criti-
cism began  slowly  to  turn.  Complimentary  notices  of  the
preacher  and  his  work  became  more  frequent  in  the  news-
papers and  reviews,  and  the  repeated  visits  of  distinguished
scholars  and  eminent  statesmen  to  the  young  preacher's
services,  compelled  the  writers  to  recognise  his  ability  and
gift,  and  to  change  their  opinions  of  his  work.  But  he  was
quite  independent  of  their  praise,  any  distinction  which
accrued  to  him  through  their  efforts  being  due  to  blame  and
censure  rather  than  to  eulogy  or  recommendation.  When
the  critics  changed  their  style,  the  young  minister  might  well
have  used  Dr.  Johnson's  words  to  Lord  Chesterfield  :  "  The
notice  which  you  have  been  pleased  to  take  of  my  labours,
had  it  been  early,  had  been  kind ;  but  it  has  been  delayed
till  I  am  indifferent  ....  till  I  am  known  and  do  not  want
it."  Some  journals,  however,  besides  those  that  have  been
referred  to  earlier,  were  clear-sighted  enough  to  perceive
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  greatness  while  he  was  yet  being
abused,  and  generously  recognised  his  worth.  One  of  the
ablest  criticisms  during  the  music-hall  period  appeared  in
The  Evening  Star  : —

"  There  never  yet  was  a  popular  orator  who  did  not  talk


236    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

more  and  better  with  his  arms  than  with  his  tongue,"  said
the  writer.  "  Mr.  Spurgeon  knows  this  instinctively.  When
he  has  read  his  text,  he  does  not  fasten  his  eyes  on  a  manu-
script, and  his  hands  to  a  cushion.  As  soon  as  he  begins  to
speak,  he  begins  to  act, — and  that  not  as  if  declaiming  on
the  stage,  but  as  if  conversing  with  you  in  the  street.  He
seems  to  shake  hands  with  all  around,  and  put  everyone  at
his  ease.  There  is  no  laboured  exordium,  making  you
wonder  by  what  ingenious  winding  he  will  get  back  to  his
subject ;  but  a  trite  saying,  an  apt  quotation,  a  simple
allegory,  one  or  two  familiar  sentences,  making  all  .who  hear
feel  interested  and  at  home.  Then  there  is  no  philosophical
pomp  .  of  exposition, — but  just  two  or  three  catch-words,
rather  to  guide  than  to  confine  attention.  Presently  comes,
by  way  of  illustration,  a  gleam  of  humour, — perhaps  a  stroke
of  downright  vulgarity, — it  may  be,  a  wretched  pun.  The
people  are  amused,  but  they  are  not  left  at  liberty  to  laugh.
The  preacher's  comedy  does  but  light  up  his  solemn  earnest-
ness. He  is  painting  some  scene  of  death-bed  remorse,  or
of  timely  repentance;  some  Magdalene's  forgiveness,  or  some
prodigal's  return.  His  colours  are  taken  from  the  earth
and  sky  of  common  human  experience  and  aspiration.  He
dips  his  pencil,  "so  to  speak,  in  the  veins  of  the  nearest
spectator,  and  makes  his  work  a  part  of  every  man's  nature.
His  images  are  drawn  from  the  homes  of  the  common
people,  the  daily  toil  for  daily  bread,  the  nightly  rest  of
tired  labour,  the  mother's  love  for  a  wayward  boy,  the
father's  tenderness  to  a  sick  daughter.  His  anecdotes  are
not  far-fetched,  they  have  a  natural  pathos.  He  tells  how
some  despairing  unfortunate,  hastening  with  her  last  penny
to  the  suicide's  bridge,  was  stopped  by  the  sound  of
psalmody,  and  turned  into  his  chapel;  or  how  some  widow's
son,  running  away  from  his  mother's  home,  was  brought


DOCTRINAL    CONTROVERSIES.  237

back  by  the  recollection  of  a  prayer,  and  sits  now  in  that
pew.  He  does  not  narrate  occurrences^  but  describes  them,
with  a  rough,  graphic  force  and  faithfulness.  He  does  not
reason  out  his  doctrines,  but  announces,  explains,  and
applies  them.  He  ventures  a  political  allusion,  and  it  goes
right  to  the  democratic  heart.  In  the  open  air?  someone
may  interrupt  or  interrogate,  and  the  response  is  a  new
effect.  In  short,  this  man  preaches  Christianity — his  Chris-
tianity, at  any  rate, — as  Ernest  Jones  preaches  Chartism,
and  as  Gough  preaches  temperance.  Is  it  any  wonder  that
he  meets  with  like  success  ?  Or  is  he  either  to  be  blamed
or  scorned  ?  Let  it  first  be  remembered  that  Latimer  was
not  less  homely  when  he  preached  before  the  king, — -nor
South  less  humorous  when  he  cowed  Rochester, — nor
Whitefield  less  declamatory  when  he  moved  Hume  and
Franklin, — nor  Rowland  Hill  less  vulgar,  though  brother  to
a  baronet.  To  us,  it  appears  that  dulness  is  the  worst  fault
possible  to  a  man  whose  first  business  it  is  to  interest, — that
the  dignity  of  the  pulpit  is  best  consulted  by  making  it
attractive, — and  that  the  clergy  of  all  denominations  might
get  some  frequent  hints  for  the  composition  of  their  sermons
from  the  young  Baptist  preacher  who  never  went  to
college."

But  what  perhaps  more  than  anything  else  had  the  effect
of  turning  public  opinion  in  favour  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  a
letter  which  appeared  in  the  Times  of  April  i5th,  1857,  over
the  signature  Habitans  in  Sicco,  which  was  known  to  be
written  by  an  eminent  scholar.  The  letter  was  cast  in  a  light
vein,  though  underlying  the  humorous  and  almost  bantering
tone,  a  serious  lesson  was  conveyed  which,  as  after  events
proved,  was  not  given  in  vain.  The  very  appearance  of  a
contribution  of  such  unusual  character  in  the  staid  and
solid  pages  of  the  great  daily,  led  to  universal  comment,


238    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEON.

and  so  important  a  part  did  the  letter  play,  that  \\e
reproduce  the  whole  of  it : —

"  PREACHING  and  PREACHING.

. "  To  the  Editor  of  The  Times.

"  SIR, — One  Sunday  morning,  about  a  month  ago,  my
wife  said,  '  Let  us  send  the  children  to  St.  Margaret's  to

hear  the  Archbishop  of preach  on  behalf  of  the  Society

of  Aged  Ecclesiastical  Cripples,  which  is  to  celebrate  to-
day its  three-hundreth  anniversary.'  So  the  children  went,
though  the  parents,  for  reasons  immaterial  to  mention,  could
not  go  with  them.  '  Well,  children,  how  did  you  like  the

Archbishop  of ,  and  what  did  he  say  about  the  Aged

Ecclesiastical  Cripples  ?  '  Here  the  children — for  it  was
during  their  dinner — attacked  their  food  with  great  voracity ;
but  never  a  word  could  we  get  out  of  their  mouths  about  the
spiritual  feast  of  which  they  had  just  partaken.  No !  not
even  the  text  could  they  bring  out.  The  more  they  were
pressed  the  more  they  blushed  and  hung  their  heads  over
their  plates  until,  at  last,  in  a  rage,  I  accused  them  of  having
fallen  asleep  during  the  service.  This  charge  threw  my
first-bom  on  his  defence,  and  he  sobbed  out  the  truth,  for
by  this  time  their  eyes  were  full  of  tears.  '  Why,  papa  !  we

can't  say  what  the  Archbishop  of  said,  because  we

could  not  hear  a  word.  He  is  very  old,  and  has  got  no
teeth,  and  do  you  know,  I  don't  think  he  has  got  any  tongue
either,  for  though  we  saw  his  lips  moving,  we  could  not  hear
a  single  word.'  On  this  I  said  no  more,  but  I  thought  a  good
deal  of '  the  Aged  Ecclesiastical  Cripples '  and  their  vener-
able advocate,  and  being  something  of  a  philologist,  1
indulged  in  dreamy  speculations  on  the  possibility  of  an
alphabet  composed  entirely  of  labials;  and  if  my  wife  had
not  roused  me  from  my  dream  by  some  mere  matter-of-fact


DOCTRINAL    CONTROVERSIES.  239

question,  I  almost  think  I  should  have  given  my  reflections
to  the  world  in  the  shape  of  a  small  pamphlet  entitled,  '  The
Language  of  Labials ;  or  how  to  Preach  Sermons  without  the
Aid  of  either  Tongue  or  Teeth/  published  for  the  benefit  of
the  Society  of  Aged  Ecclesiastical  Cripples,  and  dedicated,

of  course,  by  permission,  to  the  Archbishop  of  .

"  Now  listen  to  another  story  :  A  friend  of  mine,  a  Scotch
Presbyterian,  comes  up  to  town  and  says,  '  I  want  to  hear
Spurgeon;  let  us  go.'  Now,  I  am  supposed  to  be  a  High
Churchman,  so  I  answered, '  What !  go  and  hear  a  Calvinist,
— a  Baptist, — a  man  who  ought  to  be  ashamed  of  himself  for
being  so  near  the  Church  and  yet  not  within  its  pale?'
'  Never  mind,  come  and  hear  him.'  Well  we  went  yesterday
morning  to  the  Music  Hall  in  the  Surrey  Gardens.  At
first  I  felt  a  strange  sensation  of  wrong-doing.  It  was  some-
thing like  going  to  a  morning  theatrical  performance  on
Sunday;  nor  did  a  terrific  gust  of  wind  (which  sent  the
Arctic  regions,  erected  out  of  laths  and  pasteboard,  in  a  style
regardless  of  expense,  flying  across  the  water  of  the  lake)
tend  to  cheer  a  mind  depressed  by  the  novelty  of  the
scene.  Fancy  a  congregation  consisting  of  ten  thousand
souls,  streaming  into  the  hall,  mounting  the  galleries,  hum-
ming, buzzing,  and  swarming — a  mighty  hive  of  bees, —
eager  to  secure  at  first  the  best  places,  and  at  last,  any  place
at  all.  After  waiting  more  than  half-an-hour, — for  if  you
wish  to  have  a  seat,  you  must  be  there  at  least  that  space  of
time  in  advance, — Mr.  Spurgeon  ascended  the  tribune.  To
the  hum:,  and  rush,  and  trampling  of  men,  succeeded  a  low,
concentrated  thrill  and  murmur  of  devotion,  which  seemed
to  run  at  once,  like  an  electric  current,  through  the  breast
of  everyone  present ;  and  by  this  magnetic  chain,  the
preacher  held  us  fast  bound  for  about  two  hours.  It  is
not  my  purpose  to  give  a  summary  of  his  discourse.  It  is


240   LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEOX.

enough  to  say  of  his  voice,  that  its  power  and  volume  are
sufficient  to  reach  everyone  in  that  vast  assembly;  of  his
language,  that  it  is  neither  high-flown  nor  homely;  of  his
style,  that  it  is  at  times  familiar,  at  times  declamatory,  but
always  happy,  and  often  eloquent ;  of  his  doctrine,  that
neither  the  Calvinist  nor  the  Baptist  appears  in  the  fore-
front of  the  battle  which  is  waged  by  Mr.  Spurgeon  with
relentless  animosity,  and  with  gospel  weapons,  against  irre-
ligion,  cant,  hypocrisy,  pride,  and  those  secret  bosom  sins
which  so  easily  beset  a  man  in  daily  life ;  and  to  sum  up
all  in  a  word,  it  is  enough  to  say  of  the  man  himself  that  he
impresses  you  with  a  perfect  conviction  of  his  sincerity.

"  But  I  have  not  written  so  much  about  my  children's
want  of  spiritual  food  when  they  listened  to  the  mumbling  of

the  Archbishop  of ,  and  my  own  banquet  at  the  Surrey

Gardens,  without  a  desire  to  draw  a  practical  conclusion
from  these  two  stories,  and  to  point  them  by  a  moral.  Here
is  a  man  not  more  Calvinistic  than  many  an  incumbent  of
the  Established  Church  who  '  humbles  and  mumbles,'  as
old  Latimer  says,  over  his  liturgy  and  text.  Here  is  a  man
who  says  the  complete  immersion,  or  something  of  the  kind,
of  adults  is  necessary  to  baptism.  These  are  his  faults  of
doctrine;  but,  if  I  were  the  examining  chaplain  of  the  Arch-
bishop of ,  I  would  say, '  May  it  please  your  Grace,  here

is  a  man  able  to  preach  eloquently,  able  to  fill  the  largest
church  in  England  with  his  voice,  and,  what  is  more  to  the
purpose,  with  people.  And  may  it  please  your  Grace,  here
are  two  churches  in  the  Metropolis,  St.  Paul's  and  West-
minster Abbey.  What  does  your  Grace  think  of  inviting
Mr.  Spurgeon,  this  heretical  Calvinist  and  Baptist,  who  is
able  to  draw  ten  thousand  souls  after  him,  just  to  try  his
voice,  some  Sunday  morning,  in  the  nave  of  either  of  those
churches  ?  At  any  rate,  I  will  answer  for  one  thing  that,  if


DOCTRINAL    CONTROVERSIES.  241

he  preaches  in  Westminster  Abbey,  we  shall  not  have  a
repetition  of  the  disgraceful  practice,  now  common  in  that
church,  of  having  the  sermon  before  the  anthem,  in  order
that  those  who  would  quit  the  church  when  the  arid  sermon
begins,  may  be  forced  to  stay  it  out  for  the  sake  of  the
music  which  follows  it.'  But  I  am  not,  I  am  sorry  to  say,

examining  chaplain,  to  the  Archbishop  of  ,  so  I  can

only  send  you  this  letter  from  the  devotional  desert  in  which
I  reside,  and  sign  myself, —

"  HABITANS  IN  Sicco."
"  Broad  Phylactery,  Westminster."

This  letter  with  the  Times  leader  thereupon,  in  which
the  influential  journal  suggested  that  some  clergyman  of  the
Evangelical  party,  with  a  strong  voice,  might  do  what
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  was  already  doing,  the  doctrines
of  the  two  being  "  in  reality  much  the  same,"  caused  a
mild  sensation  in  the  ecclesiastical  world,  and  the  fact
that  within  a  year  services  for  working  men  were  being
held  in  Westminster  Abbey,  and  shortly  afterwards  popular
services  in  St.  Paul's  Cathedral,  justify  the  belief  that
the  new  movement  in  the  Established  Church  was
not  unconnected  with  the  appearance  of  this  letter  and
leader.

From  this  time  it  became  "  respectable  "  to  go  to  hear
the  young  Baptist  preacher,  and  gradually  the  abuse  ceased
until  even  those  most  opposed  to  him  ecclesiastically  and
doctrinally,  spoke  well  of  his  gift  and  his  labours.  He
began  to  have  many  powerful  and  distinguished  friends,  too,
one  of  the  closest  at  this  period  being  John  Ruskin.  The
preacher  had  removed  from  New  Kent  Road  to  Nightingale
Lane,  Clapham,  and  it  was  here,  during  an  illness,  towards
the  end  of  1858,  that  he.  received  a  visit  from  the  illustrious
writer,  which  has  been  most  interestingly  described  by  Mrs.


242    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEON.

Spurgeon.  "  How  well  I  remember  the  intense  love  and
devotion  displayed  by  Mr.  Ruskin  as  he  threw  himself  on
his  knees  by  the  dear  patient's  side  and  embraced  him  with
tender  affection  and  tears.  '  My  brother,  my  dear  brother/
he  said,  '  how  grieved  I  am  to  see  you  thus ! '  His  sorrow
and  sympathy  were  most  touching  and  comforting.  He
had  brought  with  him  two  charming  engravings — gems  of
artistic  taste,  which  still  adorn  the  walls  of  one  of  the  rooms
at  '  Westwood/  and  some  bottles  of  wine  of  a  rare  vintage
which  he  hoped  would  prove  a  cordial  to  the  sufferer's  much
weakened  frame.  My  husband  was  greatly  moved  by  the
love  and  consideration  so  graciously  expressed,  and  he  very
often  referred  to  it  afterwards  in  grateful  appreciation."

In  time,  as  is  generally  known,  Ruskin's  theological
opinions  considerably  changed,  but  he  always  entertained  a
great  admiration  and  a  kindly  regard  for  the  Baptist  pastor
who,  while  disagreeing  with  the  author's  views,  recipro-
cated the  feelings  of  esteem.  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's
library  included  a  large  number  of  Ruskin's  works,  first
editions  presented  and  inscribed  by  the  author.  The
markings  on  the  pages  clearly  prove  that  they  were
well  read  by  their  recipient,  and  indeed  few  books
of  a  secular  character  gave  the  preacher  greater
pleasure  than  "  Stones  of  Venice,"  and  kindred  works  from
John  Ruskin's  pen.  The  opinion  which  the  distinguished
author  entertained  of  C.  H-  Spurgeon's  gifts  and  abilities,
even  after  he  disagreed  with  his  views,  is  shown  by  his
telling  the  latter  he  was  a  fool  "  for  devoting  your  time  and
talents  to  that  mob  of  people  down  at  Newington  when  you
might  employ  them  so  much  more  profitably  upon  the  intel-
lectual and  cultured  few."  So  far  from  being  flattered  by
the  compliment  implied,  the  preacher  declared  that  he
always  liked  to  be  the  means  of  saving  people  whose  souls


DOCTRINAL    CONTROVERSIES.  243

were  worth  saving,  and  he  was  quite  content  to  be  the
minister  of  the  "  mob  of  people  down  at  Newington,"  and  let
those  who  wished  to  do  so  look  after  the  cultured  and
refined.  John  Ruskin,  it  is  not  generally  known,  gave  a
hundred  pounds  towards  the  Tabernacle  Building  Fund.

The  two  men  long  corresponded,  and  their  letters,  so
characteristic  of  each?  are  exceedingly  interesting.  On
November  25th,  1862,  Ruskin  wrote  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon
from  Denmark  Hill :  "  Dear  friend,  I  want  a  chat  with  you.
Is  it  possible  to  get  it— quietly — and  how  and  where  and
when  ?  I'll  come  to  you — or  you  shall  come  here — or  what-
ever you  like.  I  am  in  England  only  for  ten  days,  being  too
much  disgusted  with  your  goings  on — yours,  as  much  as
everybody  else's — to  be  able  to-  exist  among  you  any  longer.
But  I  want  to  say  '  good-bye '  before  going  to  my  den  in  the
Alps.  Ever,  with  sincerest  remembrances  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon,
affectionately  yours,  J.  Ruskin."  To  this  the  preacher
replied,  from  his  home :  "  My  dear  Mr.  Ruskin,  I  thought
you  had  cast  me  off;  but  I  perceive  that  you  let  me  alone
when  all  is  right,  and  only  look  me  up  when  you  are  .getting
disgusted  with  me.  May  the  disgust  increase  if  it  shall  bring
me  oftener  into  your  company  !  I  shall  be  delighted  to  see
you  to-morrow  here,  at  any  time  from  10  to  12,  if  this  will
suit  you.  I  wish  7  had  a  den  in  the  Alps  to  go  to ;  but  it  is
of  no  use  for  me  to  grow  surly,  for  1  am  compelled  to  live
amongst  you  sinners,  and  however  disgusted  I  may  get  with
you  all,  I  must  put  up  with  you,  for  neither  Nature  nor
Providence  will  afford  a  den  for  me. — Yours  ever,  most  truly
and  affectionately,  C.  H.  Spurgeon."

During  one  of  the  great  author's  visits  to  Nightingale
Lane,  the  two  men  discussed  the  question  of  supernatural
interpositions,  and  John  Ruskin  told  the  preacher  of  a
remarkable  incident  that  had  come  within  his  knowledge,


244    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

and  which  both  agreed  was  an  instance  of  direct  and  Divine
preservation  from  a  dreadful  death.  A  Christian  gentleman,
a  widower,  desirous  of  taking  the  tenancy  of  a  certain  old
farmhouse  in  the  country,  visited  it  with  his  children,  and
while  he  conversed  with  the  owner,  the  youngsters  explored
the  house  and  garden.  At  last  they  found  a  door  leading  to
the  cellars,  and  were  rushing  helter-skelter  down  the  gloomy
staircase,  when  suddenly  at  the  bottom  appeared  what
seemed  to  be  their  dead  mother,  with  outstretched  arms,
waving  them  back.  They  ran  excitedly  to  inform  their
father  of  the  strange  sight  that  had  greeted  their  eyes,  and
amazed  he  went  to  examine  the  staircase,  which  had  not
been  used  for  many  a  long  year.  At  the  foot  was  found  a
deep  and  open  well,  quite  unguarded,  into  which,  but  for  the
apparition,  the  children  would  have  fallen  and  undoubt-
edly been  killed.  When  asked  if  he  believed  in  Divine
interpositions,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  used  to  repeat  this  story  of
John  Ruskin's.

To  this  period  belong  what  was  known  as  "  The  Rivulet
Controversy,"  and  also  the  discussion  that  centred  around
the  Rev.  J.  Baldwin  Brown's  "  Divine  Life  in  Man."  Refer-
ence must  be  made  to  these,  as  C.  H.  Spurgeon  joined  in
the  fray,  and  his  action  then  was  a  forecast  of  the  part  he
took  later  in  the  more  notable"  Down-grade  Controversy."
Throughout  his  career  the  great  preacher  was  consistent  in
opposing  what  he  believed  to  be  serious  error,  and  personal
considerations  were  never  allowed  by  him  to  stand  in  the  way
of  upholding  truth  and  righteousness.

At  the  end  of  1855  appeared  a  small  volume  of  hymns,
written  by  the  Rev.  Thomas  Toke  Lynch,  entitled,  "  The
Rivulet;  or  Hymns  for  the  Heart  and  Voice,"  which
attracted  no  unusual  attention  until  Mr.  James  Grant  re-
viewed it  in  the  Morning  Advertiser,  and  declared  the  verses


246    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEON.

to  be  devoid  of <:  one  particle  of  vital  religion  or  evangelical
piety."  Nearly  the  whole,  he  said,  mignt  have  been  written
by  a  Deist ;  and  a  very  large  portion  of  the  hymns  might  be
sung  by  a  congregation  of  Freethinkers.  The  Eclectic
Review  came  to  the  rescue  of  Mr.  Lynch,  and  before  long
all  the  Nonconformist  journals  and  many  of  the  most
distinguished  ministers  were  engaged  in  a  heated  controversy.
The  Revs.  Henry  Allon,  Newman  Hall  and  Thomas  Binney
supported  the  poet,  and  thereby  lent  an  importance  to  the
discussion  which  it  might  not  otherwise  have  had.  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon's  contribution  consisted  of  the  penning  of
a  long  review  of  the  book  in  The  Christian  Cabinet,  in
which  he  said,  "  it  is  our  firm  opinion  that  until  Butler's
*  Hudibras  '  is  sung  in  Heaven,  Mr.  Lynch's  '  Rivulet '  will
not  be  adopted  in  the  assemblies  of  the  saints  below.  There
is  scarcely  an  old  woman  in  our  churches  who  would  not
imitate  that  ancient  dame  in  Scotland  who  hurled  her  stool
at  the  minister's  head,  should  any  of  us  venture  to  mount  our
pulpits  and  exclaim,  Let  us  commence  the  present  service
by  singing  the  34th  hymn  in  '  The  Rivulet.'  "  Theologically,
he  was  at  a  loss  to  judge  the  verses,  for  there  was  so  little
of  the  doctrinal  element  in  them,  and  that  little  so  indefinite,
that  one  could  scarcely  guess  the  author's  doctrinal  views  at
all.  "  Certainly,  some  verses  are  bad, — bad  in  the  most  un-
mitigated sense  of  that  word ;  but  others  of  them,  like  noses
of  wax,  will  fit  more  than  one  face.  There  are  sweet  sentences
which  would  become  the  lips  of  those  rich  poets  of  early
times  in  whom  quaintness  of  style  and  weight  of  matter  were
united,  but  an  unkind  observer  will  notice  that  even  these
are  not  angular  enough  to  provoke  the  hostility  of  the
Unitarian,  and  might  be  uttered  alike  by  the  lover  and  the
hater  of  what  we  are  well  known  to  regard  as  the  Gospel.  .  .
If  I  should  ever  be  on  amicable  terms  with  the  chief  of  the


DOCTRINAL    CONTROVERSIES.  247

Ojibewas,"  continued  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "  I  might  suggest
several  verses  from  Mr.  Lynch  as  a  portion  of  a  liturgy  to  be
used  on  the  next  occasion  when  he  bows  before  the  Great
Spirit  of  the  West  wind,  for  there  are  some  most  appropriate
sonnets  for  the  worship  of  the  God  of  nature  which  the  un-
enlightened savage  would  understand  quite  as  well  as  the
believer  in  Revelation,  and  might  perhaps  receive  rather
more  readily."

The  Review  was  good-natured  throughout,  and  Mr.  Lynch
himself  declared,  "  This  review  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  enjoys  the
credit  with  me  of  being  the  only  thing  on  his  side — that  is
against  me — that  was  impertinent  without  being  malevolent."
For  a  long  time  the  controversy  continued,  and  as  a  result  of
the  excitement  arising  from  the  protests  made  against
the  doctrine,  or  absence  of  doctrine,  in  the  book,  the
Congregational  Union  actually  postponed  its  autumn
session.  Whatever  else  resulted,  the  trouble  had  the  effect
of  bringing  prominently  before  the  churches  the  funda-
mental truths  of  the  Gospel,  and  those  on  the  side  of
orthodoxy  generally  agreed  that  real  good  had  accrued
from  the  prolonged  discussion.  A  curious  feature  of  the
controversy  was  that  practically  all  the  critics,  favourable
and  adverse,  spoke  kindly  of  the  poetry,  as  distinct  from
the  theology,  although  many  literary  writers  since  have
described  the  verses  as  little  better  than  doggerel,  an
opinion  in  which  we  certainly  agree.

Four  years  later  British  Nonconformity  was  again  in  the
throes  of  a  doctrinal  battle.  The  Rev.  J.  Howard  Hinton
had,  in  "  The  Baptist  Magazine  "  for  March  and  April,  1860,
passed  strictures  upon  certain  passages  in  the  Rev.  J.  B.
Brown's  "  Divine  Life  in  Man,"  which  showed  the  author  of
the  book  to  be  unsound  upon  the  doctrine  of  the  Atone-
ment. In  noticing  these  strictures,  The  Freeman,  generally


248    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

regarded  as  the  organ  of  the  Baptist  denomination,  seemed
to  lean  rather  to  Mr.  Brown  than  to  his  critic,  and  the
attitude  of  that  journal  called  forth  a  protest  from  seven
prominent  Baptist  ministers,  including  Dr.  Angus  and
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon.  The  Freeman  justified  its
reviewers'  attitude  and  further  correspondence  ensued,  but
the  discussion  between  the  protesting  ministers  and  the
denominational  organ  never  came  to  any  satisfactory  con-
clusion, and  so  far  as  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  was
concerned,  his  last  effort  in  this  particular  controversy  was  a
sermon  on  April  i5th,  1860,  dealing  with  the  burning  ques-
tions of  the  hour4  in  which  he  said :  "  I  have  often  thought,
the  best  answer  to  the  new  theology  is,  that  the  true  Gospel
was  always  preached  to  the  poor  : '  The  poor  have  the  Gospel
preached  to  them.'  I  am  sure  that  the  poor  will  never  learn
the  Gospel  of  these  new  divines,  for  they  cannot  make  head
or  tail  of  it ;  nor  will  the  rich  either.  After  you  have  read
'  one  of  their  volumes,  you  have  not  the  least  idea  what  the
book  is  about  until  you  have  gone  through  it  eight  or  nine
times,  and  then  you  begin  to  think  you  are  very  stupid  for
having  ever  read  such  inflated  heresy,  for  it  sours  your
temper,  and  makes  you  feel  angry,  to  see  the  precious  things
of  God  trodden  under  foot.  Some  of  us  must  stand  out
against  these  attacks  on  truth,  although  we  love  not  con-
troversy. We  rejoice  in  the  liberty  of  our  fellow-men,,  and
would  have  them  proclaim  their  convictions;  but  if  they
touch  these  precious  things,  they  touch  the  apple  of  our  eye.
We  can  allow  a  thousand  opinions  in  the  world,  but  that
which  infringes  upon  the  doctrine  of  a.  covenant  salvation,
through  the  imputed  righteousness  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
— against  that  we  must,  and  will,  enter  our  hearty  and  solemn
protest,  as  long  as  God  spares  us."


CHAPTER  XVIII.
THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  BEGUN.

AS  already  intimated,  when  the  authorities  of  New  Park
Street  Chapel  saw  that  their  young  pastor's  popu-
larity and  success  were  likely  to  be  permanent,  they  came  to
the  conclusion  that  a  new  and  very  much  larger  chapel  would
have  to  be  erected.  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  had  himself
arrived  at  a  similar  decision,  and  he  determined  that  unless
this  could  be  done,  he  would  resign  his  pastorate  and  become
a  travelling  evangelist.  Of  course,  the  deacons  would  not
hear  of  the  latter  proposal,  and  being  heartily  agreed  as  to
the  necessity  of  a  larger  chapel,  a  building  committee  was
appointed  in  June,  1856,  and  arranged  for  a  public  meeting
in  aid  of  the  project,  to  be  held  on  Monday,  September  2pth
of  that  year.  The  Tabernacle,  as  the  building  had  already
come  to  be  calledj  was  to>  provide  five  thousand  sittings,
with  standing  room  for  not  less  than  a  thousand,  and  the
total  cost  was  estimated  at  ^12,000.  As  a  matter  of  fact
the  ultimate  expenditure  was  ^31,000,  a  sum  so  great,  that
had  it  been  anticipated,  some  of  the  deacons  might  well
have  hesitated  in  embarking  on  such  an  enterprise.  Many
of  the  newspapers,  including  The  Times,  The  Daily  News
and  The  Saturday  Review,  had  declared  that  C.  H.  Spurgeon
and  his  friends  wanted  to  build  a  chapel  that  would  hold
fifteen  thousand  persons,  but  at  the  first  public  meeting  in
aid  of  the  new  Tabernacle,  the  pastor  denied  that  such  a
thought  had  ever  been  entertained.  "  It  has,  however,"


250    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  H ADDON  SPURGEON.

he  explained,  "  bean  judged  that  a  place  of  worship
capable  of  accommodating  about  five  thousand  persons  is
necessary.  For  my  own  part,  I  have  no  wish  for  such  a
large  sanctuary;  only  I  cannot  bear  to  see,  Sabbath  after
Sabbath,  as  many  people  go  away  as  are  able  to  enter  the
chapel  where  we  have  been  accustomed  to  assemble  for
worship.  It  is  the  will  of  people  to  come  in  great  multi-
tudes to  listen  to  my  proclamation  of  the  truths  of  the
Gospel ;  I  have  not  asked  them  to  comej  it  is  of  their  own
free  will  that  they  meet  with  us ;  and  if  it  is  a  sin  for  me  to
have  so  many  hearers,  it  is  at  least  an  uncommon  sin,  which
many  others  would  like  to  commit  if  they  could.  It  has
been  saidj  '  Let  those  who  wish  to  hear  Mr.  Spurgeon
pay  for  their  seats;'  but  that  method  would  defeat
the  object  I  have  in  view.  I  want  to  preach  to  those
who  cannot  afford  to  pay  for  seats  in  a  chapel,  and  it
is  my  wish  to  admit  as  many  of  the  general  public  as
possible."

A  fund  was  opened,  and  after  a  second  large  meeting
held  on  March  23rd,  1857,  at  which  ,£500  was  subscribed,
the  total  sum  collected  amounted  to  .£4,500,  whilst  on
December  i3th,  1858,  this  had  increased  to  £9.418  195.  yd.,
showing  an  average  of  £348  175.  per  month  since  the
first  meeting,  twenty-seven  months  earlier.  Much  difficulty
was  experienced  in  securing  an  eligible  site.  Some  were
for  going  to  Kensington  and  others  to  Holloway,  but  at  a
meeting  at  New  Park  Street,  on  December  i3th,  1858,  it
was  announced  that  after  long  and  tedious  negotiations,  the
Fishmongers'  Company  had  promised  to  sell  a  portion  of
its  land  at  Newington,  Mr.  W.  Joynson,  of  St.  Mary  Cray,
a  great  admirer  and  friend  of  the  young  preacher,  agreeing
to  give  £400  towards  the  expense  of  obtaining  an  Act  of
Parliament  should  such  be  necessary  to  legalise  the  sale  of


o  «


-  2.


252    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

the  land.  The  ground  had  been  occupied  since  1618  by
St.  Peter's  Hospital,  the  almshouses  of  the  Fishmongers'
Company,  but  these  had  recently  been  rebuilt  at  Wands-
worth,  and  the  old  site,  since  the  removal  of  the  pensioners,
presented  anything  but  a  picturesque  appearance.  The
acquirement  of  the  land  for  the  erection  of  the  Tabernacle
was  therefore  a  gain  not  only  to  the  New  Park  Street  congre-
gation, but  also  to  the  district  of  Newington.  The  historical
associations  of  that  neighbourhood,  too,  were  very  apposite,
for,  as  C.  H.  Spurgeon  has  pointed  out,  close  by,  if  not  on
the  very  spot  where  thousands  have  been  brought  to  a
knowledge  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  their  Saviour,  a
number  of  Englishmen  were  three  centuries  before  burnt  at
the  stake  for  holding  doctrines  identical  with  those  of  the
church  meeting  in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  In  one
case  we  read  of  some  Baptists  being  burnt  "  at  the  Butts
at  Newington,"  while  another  record,  dated  1546,
tells  how  "  three  men  were  condemned  as  Anabaptists  and
brente  in  the  highway  beyond  Southwark  towards
Newington."

Having  secured  the  site,  the  building  committee  next
offered  premiums  of  .£50,  ^30,  and  £20  for  the  three
best  designs  for  the  new  chapel.  Certain  conditions
as  to  size  were  laid  down,  and  with  regard  to  the  style
of  architecture,  it  was  announced  that  "  Gothic  designs  will
not  be  accepted  by  the  comr-'ttee.  The  plan  of  the  Surrey
Music  Hall  has  proved  to  be  acoustically  good  and  will  be
decidedly  preferred."  More  than  two  hundred  and  fifty
architects  applied  for  the  circular  in  which  these  particulars
were  set  forth,  and  by  January  3ist,  1859,  the  last  day  for
receiving  plans,  sixty-two  sets  of  drawings  and  one  model
had  been  received.  These  were  exhibited  in  the  Newington
Horse  and  Carriage  Repository,  and  large  numbers  of  the


o   3

srl


is-

o  5


3  °


254    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEOX.

general  public  went  to  see  them.  A  vote  for  the  awarding
of  the  first  and  third  prizes  was  taken  among  the  com-
petitors, and  about  forty  selected  the  design  of  Mr.  E.
Cookworthy  Robins  for  the  first  premium  of  ^50.  This
architect's  set  of  drawings  had  been  placed  among  the  first
three  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon  and  the  building  committee,  but
for  various  reasons  the  design  of  Mr.  W.  W.  Pocock,  to
whom  the  committee  awarded  the  second  premium,  was
considered  more  suitable  for  the  new  chapel,  and  it  was
adopted  with  considerable  modifications,  chief  among  which
was  the  abandonment  of  the  towers  at  the  four  corners.
These  would  have  cost  a  thousand  pounds  each,  and  C.  H.
Spurgeon  and  his  friends  considered  that  the  money  could
be  far  more  usefully  expended.

Preparations  for  the  building  of  the  great  church  being
now  in  an  advanced  stage,  Sir  Samuel  Morton  Peto.  M.P.,
laid  the  foundation  stone  on  August  i6th,  1859,  in  the
presence  of  about  three  thousand  persons.  The  meeting
was  a  most  inspiring  one.  It  began  with  the  singing  of  the
hundreth  Psalm,  and  prayer  offered  by  the  pastor.  Then
a  declaration  was  read  on  behalf  of  the  deacons^  rehearsing
the  history  of  the  church,  after  which  C.  H.  Spurgeon  made
the  following  statement : —

"  In  the  bottle  which  is  to  be  placed  under  the  stone,  we
have  put  no  money, — for  one  good  reason,  that  we  have
none  to  spare.  We  have  not  put  newspapers,  because,
albeit  we  admire  and  love  the  liberty  of  the  Press,  yet  that
is  not  so  immediately  concerned  in  this  edifice.  The
articles  placed  under  the  stone  are  simply  these  : — the  Bible,
the  Word  of  God;  we  put  that  as  the  foundation  of  our
church.  Upon  this  rock  doth  Christ  build  the  ministration
of  His  truth.  We  know  of  nothing  else  as  our  standard.
Together  with  this,  we  have  put  "  The  Baptist  Confession


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  BEGUN.     255

of  Faith,"  which  was  signed  in  the  olden  times  by  Benjamin
Keach,  one  of  my  eminent  predecessors.  We  put  also  the
declaration  of  the  deacons,  which  you  have  just  heard  read,
printed  on  parchment.  There  is  also  an  edition  of  Dr.
Rippon's  Hymn  Book,  published  just  before  he  died ;  and
then,  in  the  last  place,  there  is  a  programme  of  this  day's
proceedings.  I  do  not  suppose  that  the  New  Zealander
who,  one  day,  is  to  sit  on  the  broken  arch  of  London
Bridge,  will  make  much  out  of  it.  If  we  had  put  gold  and
silver  there,  it  is  possible  he  might  have  taken  it  back  to
New  Zealand  with  him;  but  I  should  not  wonder,  if  ever
England  is  destroyed,  these  relics  will  find  their  way  into
some  museum  in  Australia  or  America,  where  people  will
spell  over  some  of  our  old-fashioned  names,  and  wonder
whoever  those  good  men  could  be  who  are  inscribed  here,  as
Samuel  Gale,  James  Low,  Thomas  Olney,  Thomas  Cook,
George  Winsor,  William  P.  Olney,  George  Moore,  and
C.  H.  Spurgeon.  And  I  think  they  will  say,  '  Oh !  depend
upon  it,  they  were  some  good  men,  so  they  put  them  in
stone  there.'  These  deacons  are  living  stones,  indeed ;
they  have  served  this  church  well  and  long.  Honour  to
whom  honour  is  due.  I  am  glad  to  put  their  names  with
mine  here;  and  I  hope  we  shall  live  together  for  ever  in
eternity."

Sir  Morton  Peto,  having  laid  the  stone  and  congratulated
the  pastor  and  church,  on  commencing  such  a  magnificent
building,  which  he  trusted  would  be  opened  free  of  debt,
C.  H.  Spurgeon  again  spoke  at  some  length  upon  the  great
chapel  which  was  to  be  erected.  He  declared  that  it  was
to  him  a  matter  of  congratulation  that  the  building  would
be  Grecian  in  its  style  of  architecture.  Every  Baptist
chapel,  he  thought,  should  be  Grecian — never  Gothic — for
Greek  was  the  sacred  tongue  in  which  the  fullest  revelation


256    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

of  God's  will  was  made  known.  He  next  set  forth  the
belief  of  the  church  which  would  later  on  meet  in  the  com-
pleted building,  and  finally  concluded  with  some  remarks
upon  the  prospects  before  them.  "  I  look  on  this  Taber-
nacle," he  said,  "  as  only  the  beginning ;  within  the  last  six
months  we  have  started  two  churches^ — one  in  Wandsworth
and  the  other  in  Greenwich^ — and  the  Lord  has  prospered
them;  the  pool  of  baptism  has  often  been  stirred  with
converts.  And  what  we  have  done  in  two  places,  1  arn
about  to  do  in  a  third,  and  we  will  do  it:  not  for  the  third
or  the  fourth,  but  for  the  hundredth  time,  God  being  our
Helper.  I  am  sure  I  may  make  my  strongest  appeal  to
my  brethren,  because  we  do  not  mean  to  build  this  Taber-
nacle as  our  nest,  and  then  to  be  idle.  We  must  go  from
strength  to  strength,  and  be  a  missionary  church,  and
never  rest  until,  not  only  this  neighbourhood,  but  our
country,  of  which  it  is  said  that  some  parts  are  as  dark  as
India,  shall  have  been  enlightened  with  the  Gospel."

At  the  conclusion  of  this  address  an  opportunity  was
given  for  those  who  desired,  to  make  contributions  towards
the  building  fund.  First  of  all  Mr.  Inskip,  of  Bristol,
declared  that  he  was  there  as  the  representative  of  a  wealthy
gentleman,  then  confined  to  a  sick  chamber,  whose  riches
were  devoted  to  the  service  of  God.  He  had  sent  Mr.  Inskip
there  to  say  that  he  would  give  three  thousand  pounds
towards  the  fund,  and  if  twenty  gentlemen  would  come
forward  with  one  hundred  pounds  each  upon  the  opening
of  the  chapel,  he  was  prepared  to  put  down  twenty  hundreds
more  to  meet  theirs.  Many  other  donations  were  given
that  afternoon,  and  at  the  evening  meeting,  which  was  pre-
sided over  by  the  Lord  Mayor  of  London  (Alderman  Wire),
the  contributions  of  the  day  were  brought  up  to  nearly  five
thousand  pounds.  Before  many  weeks  had  elapsed,  twenty


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  BEGUN.     257

gentlemen  had  come  forward  and  given  the  ^2,000  neces-
sary to  claim  a  like  amount  from  Mr.  Inskip's  anonymous
friend,  who  was  delighted  at  the  result  of  his  offer.  By
April  2nd,  1860,  the  fund  had  grown  to  ,£18,904  155.  2d.
It  soon  became  evident  that  instead  of  ^12,000,  the  original
estimate  of  the  cost  of  the  building  would  have  to  be  at  least
doubled,  and  some  of  the  members  of  the  committee  rathei
shrank  from  this  added  responsibility.  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon,  however,  had  no  fears.  From  the  first  he  secretly
believed  that  the  original  estimate  would  prove  altogether
inadequate,  but  his  faith  in  God  was  such  that  he  told  his
friends,  <;  It  may  as  well  be  twenty  thousand  as  ten,  for  we
shall  get  one  amount  as  readily  as  the  other.;)  As  to1  how
the  money  was  to  be  obtained  his  method  was  simple :
"  Brethren,  we  must  pray  that  God  will  be  pleased  to  give
us  the  money,  and  we  shall  surely  have  it.  If  we  had
possessed  more  faith,  we  should  have  had  it  before  now ;
and  when  this  Tabernacle  is  built2  we  shall  find  money
enough  to  build  a  dozen.  Look  at  what  Mr.  Muller,  of
Bristol,  has  done  by  faith  and  prayer.  When  this  land  was
threatened  with  famine,  people  said,  '  What  will  you  do
now,  Mr.  Muller  ? '  '  Pray  to  God,'  was  the  good  man's
answer.  He  did  pray,  and  the  result  was,  that  he  had  an
overwhelming  increase."  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  too,
prayed  earnestly  and  in  full  faith,  with  the  result  that  he
received  equally  remarkable  answers  to  his  petitions.  About
;£io, coo  had  been  collected,  and  he  was  riding  one  day  with
a  friend  to  preach  in  the  country,  when  a  gentleman  over-
took the  trap  and  asked  the  preacher  to  come  into  his  gig.
C.  H.  Spurgeon  acceded  to  the  request,  and  the  gentleman
said,  "  You  have  got  to  build  that  big  place ;  you  will  find
that  many  friends  will  feel  nervous  over  it.  Now  as  a
business  man,  I  am  sure  you  will  succeed,  and  beside  that,

12


258    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

God  is  with  the  work  and  it  cannot  fail.  I  want  you  never
to  feel  anxious  or  downcast  about  it."  The  preacher
replied  that  it  was  a  great  work,  and  he  believed  the  Lord
would  enable  him  to  carry  it  through.  "  What  do  you
think,"  asked  the  gentleman,  "  would  be  required,  at  the  out-
side, to  finish  it  off  altogether  ?  "  "  Twenty  thousand
pounds  in  addition  to  what  we  have,"  said  C.  H.  Spurgeon.
"  Then  I  will  let  you  have  the  twenty  thousand  pounds,"
replied  the  other,  "  on  the  condition  that  you  shall  keep
only  what  you  need  of  it  to  finish  the  building.  Mark,"  he
added,  "  1  do  not  expect  to  give  more  than  ^50 ;  but  you
shall  have  bonds  and  leases  to  the  full  value  of  ^20,000  to
fall  back  upon."

A  very  large  proportion  of  the  cost  of  the  Tabernacle
was  obtained  by  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  himself,  who
went  all  over  the  kingdom  preaching  in  aid  of  the  building
fund.  He  never  gained  a  penny  for  his  own  use  from
the  provincial  towns  he  visited,  but  many  thousands  of
pounds  were  contributed  by  the  sympathetic  con-
gregations whom  he  delighted  with  his  ministry.
On  one  visit  to  Scotland,  lasting  only  a  few  days,
for  instance,  the  collections  in  aid  of  the  building  fund
amounted  to  ^391.  But  it  was  not  only  for  the
benefit  of  his  own  building  that  C.  H.  Spurgeon
travelled  to  different  parts  of  the  country.  Scores  of  needy
chapels  sought  his  services  and  he  gave  them  without
hesitation,  the  phenomenal  collections  which  always
succeeded  his  sermons  going  entirely  to  the  local  funds.
For  such  a  purpose  he  preached  twice  in  the  pavilion  of
the  Grand  Stand,  Epsom,  on  Friday,  June  nth,  1858,  and
the  local  chapel  benefited  to  the  extent  of  £60  which  was
collected.  The  congregations  both  in  the  morning  and  in
the  afternoon  numbered  about  fifteen  hundred.  Another


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  BEGUN.     259

kindly  act  of  the  young  minister  was  that  which  he  performed
on  Sunday,  July  loth,  1859.  A  violent  storm  had  a  little
before  passed  over  London,  and  the  lightning  had  struck  a
tree  on  Clapham  Common,  killing  a  man  who  stood  beneatn
it.  The  incident  impressed  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  and  he
determined  to  preach  on  the  fatal  spot  and  to  make  a
collection  for  the  widow  of  the  dead  man.  Ten  thousand
persons  gathered  on  the  Common,  and  using  a  waggon  as
a  pulpit,  the  preacher  delivered  a  stirring  and  solemn
sermon  from  the  text,  St.  Luke  xii.  40,  "  Be  ye  therefore
ready  also."  The  congregation  contributed  ^27  IDS.  4d.
towards  the  support  of  the  distressed  widow.

In  August,  1858,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  first  visited  Ireland,  and
preached  to  huge  congregations  in  Belfast.  Irish  friends
were  amongst  the  most  generous  contributors  to  the  Taber-
nacle Building  Fund,  and  the  great  preacher  many  times
afterwards  visited  the  Sister  Isle.  On  more  than  one
occasion  he  was  delighted  to  find,  in  his  passage  between
the  two  coasts,  that  the  majority  of  the  ship's  crew  was
composed  of  earnest  Christian  men,  who  held  meetings
regularly  for  prayer,  and  for  the  reading  of  the  preacher's
own  sermons.

A  memorable  visit  was  paid  to  the  village  of  Castleton,
between  Newport  and  Cardiff,  on  July  20,  1859,  when
C.  H.  Spurgeon  preached  twice  in  a  field  which  gradually
sloped  to  a  level  at  the  bottom,  enabling  all  those  present
to  see  and  hear  him  distinctly.  The  congregations  at  each
service  numbered  about  ten  thousand  persons.  In  May  of
the  following  year  he  preached  in  the  open  air  at  Abercarne
to  twenty  thousand  people.  Among  the  most  notable  of
the  services  away  from  London,  were  those  which  the  great
preacher  conducted  in  Paris  during  February,  1860.  He
had  been  asked  to  go  over  to  the  French  capital,  and  readily


260    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

consented  to  preach  five  sermons  in  three  days,  believing
that  the  collections  were  to  be  in  aid  of  the  American
Church,  where  three  of  the  services  were  held.  But  those
who  had  invited  him  to  that  church  declared  that  whatever
might  be  contributed  should  go  to  the  Tabernacle  Building
Fund,  and  altogether  a  sum  of  ^64  was  given,  despite  the


A  photo  of  C-  H.  Spurgeon  taken  during  his
first  visit  to  Ireland.

fact  that  at  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  particular  request  the  collec-
tions were  not  taken  in  the  ordinary  way,  but  by
placing  boxes  at  the  doors.  The  contributions  at  the
Reformed  Church  of  the  Oratory,  where  the  remaining  two
,cei vices  were  held,  amounted  to  £40,  which  sum  was  given


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  BEGUN.     261

to  the  poor  of  Paris.  Even  this  disinterested  visit  was  made
the  excuse  for  abusive  criticisms  in  the  London  Press.  A
prophet  is  not  without  honour,  save  in  his  own  country
however,  and  the  French  newspapers,  including  those  con-
ducted by  Roman  Catholics,  spoke  most  kindly  of  the
preacher.  The  Journal  des  Debats  in  the  course  of  an
eulogy  from  the  pen  of  M.  Prevost-Paradol,  its  principal
leader  writer,  and  one  of  the  most  distinguished  litterateurs
in  Paris,  said,  "  One  listens  with  pleasure  to  his  powerful
and  sympathetic  voice,  which  never  rises  or  falls  beyond
proper  limits,  and  yet  fills  the  whole  church  with  its  sweet
cadences.  The  man  who  possesses  these  gifts  and  uses
them  so  generously  is  not  yet  twenty-six  years  of  age.  It
is  impossible  to  look  upon  his  energetic  and  loyal  face
without  reading  there  conviction,  courage  and  earnest  desire
to  do  the  right.  This  orator,  who  is  the  most  popular
preacher  in  a  country  where  liberty  of  speech  and  conscience
exercises  such  potent  influence,  is  not  only  the  most  modest,
but  also  the  most  simple  of  men.  It  is  true  that  he  has  the
happiness  to  address  a  nation  which  does  not  think  it
necessary  to  be  Unjust  in  its  public  criticism;  but  after  all,
Mr.  Spurgeon  owes  to  himself  alone  the  great  and  salutary
influence  which  he  has  acquired,  and  yet  no  one  could  ever
rightly  accuse*"  him  of  egotism.  It  is  without  affectation
that  he,  unreservedly,  ascribes  all  the  glory  to  God.  It
seems  to  us  that  all  disputes  concerning  religion  ought  to
vanish  before  such  an  apostle;  and  to  recognise  his  power  is
but  just.  As  for  us  who  have  seen  in  this  youthful  and
eloquent  preacher  one  of  the  most  happy  examples  of  what
modern  Christianity  and  liberty  can  produce,  we  feel  that
it  is  an  honour  to  come  into  contact  with  such  a  man  as  Mr.
Spurgeon,  and  to  exchap^p  with  him  the  grasp  of  friend-


262    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEON.

Later  in  the  same  year  C.  H.  Spurgeon  visited  the
Continent  again,  with  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  going  first  to  Belgium,
where  he  spent  some  time  in  Antwerp  and  Brussels.  Of
the  latter  city  he  says :  "  In  Brussels  I  heard  a  good  sermon
in  a  Romish  Church.  The  place  was  crowded  with  people,
many  of  them  standing,  though  they  might  have  had  a  seat
for  a  halfpenny  or  a  farthing;  and  I  stood,  too;  and  the
good  priest — for  I  believe  he  is  a  good  man — preached  the
Lord  Jesus  with  all  his  might.  He  spoke  of  the  love  of
Christ,  so  that  I,  a  very  poor  hand  at  the  French  language,
could  fully  understand  him,  and  my  heart  kept  beating
within  me  as  he  told  of  the  beauties  of  Christ  and  the
preciousness  of  His  blood,  and  of  His  power  to  save  the
chief  of  sinners.  He  did  not  say  'justification  by  faith,''
but  he  did  say  '  efficacy  of  the  blood,'  which  comes  to  very
much  the  same  thing.  He  did  not  tell  us  that  we  were
saved  by  grace  and  not  by  our  works ;  but  he  did  say  that
all  the  works  of  men  were  less  than  nothing  when  brought
into  competition  with  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  that  the
blood  of  Jesus  alone  could  save.  True,  there  were  objec-
tionable sentences,  as  naturally  there  must  be  in  a  discourse
delivered  under  such  circumstances ;  but  I  could  have  gone
to  the  preacher  and  have  said  to  him,  '  Brother,  you  have
spoken  the  truth ;'  and  if  I  had  been  handling* his  text  I  must
have  treated  it  in  the  same  way  as  he  did,  if  I  could  have
done  it  as  well."

From  Brussels  the  preacher  and  his  wife  went  to  Namur,
down  the  Meuse  to  Chaufontaine,  thence  to  Cologne,  Frank-
fort, Heidelberg,  Baden-Baden,  Freiburg.  Schauffhausen,
Zurich,  Lucerne,  and  at  last  to  the  city  of  Calvin,  whither
Dr.  Merle  D'Aubigne  had  invited  the  distinguished  English
divine.  They  missed  one  another  at  the  station,  and  when
C.  H.  Spurgeon  asked  a  gentleman  in  the  street  to  direct


METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  BEGUN.     263

him,  mentioning  who  he  was,  to  his  delight  the  stranger
replied,  "  Come  to  my  house,  the  very  house  where  Calvin
used  to  live."  Both  the  Established  and  the  Free  Churches
sought  to  honour  the  great  English  minister,  and  he
preached  to  a  crowded  congregation  in  the  cathedral  at
Geneva,  from  Calvin's  pulpit  and  in  Calvin's  gown.  This
was  probably  the  only  time  that  C.  H.  Spurgeon  ever
preached  in  a  gown,  and  his  comment  thereon  is  amusing.
"  I  did  hot  feel  very  happy,"  he  says,  "  when  I  came  out  in
full  canonicals,  but  the  request  was  put  to  me  in  such  a
beautiful  way  that  I  could  have  worn  the  Pope's  tiara  if  by
so  doing  I  co'uld  have  preached  the  Gospel  more  freely."
Before  he  left  he  was  presented  with  a  handsome  medal
bearing  Calvin's  likeness  on  the  obverse  side,  and  on  the.
reverse  the  text  in  French,  "  He  endured  as  seeing  Him
who  is  invisible."  "  I  am  not  superstitious/'  declared  C.  H.
Spurgeon,  "  but  the  first  time  I  saw  this  medal  bearing  the
venerated  likeness  of  John  Calvin  I  kissed  it."

From  Geneva  the  travellers  went  to  Chamouin,  and  after-
wards crossed  the  Alps  by  the  Simplon  Pass,  accepting  en
route  the  hospitality  of  the  monks  at  the  hospice  which
crowns  '  the  mountain  top.  "  It  pleased  me,"  said  the
preacher,  in  recounting  his  journeys  afterwards,  "  to  find
that  they  were  Augustinian  monks,  because  next  to  Calvin  I
love  Augustine.  I  feel  that  Augustine's  works  were  the
great  mine  out  of  which  Calvin  dug  his  mental  wealth ;  and
the  Augustinian  monks,  in  their  acts  of  charity,  seemed  to
say,  '  Our  Master  was  a  teacher  of  grace,  and  we  will
practise  it,  and  give  to  all  comers  whatsoever  they  shall  need,
without  money  and  without  price.'  Those  monks  are
worthy  of  great  honour ;  there  they  are  spending  the  best
and  noblest  period  of  their  lives  on  the  top  of  a  bleak  and
barren  mountain  that  they  may  minister  to  the  necessities  of


264    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

the  poor".  They  go  out  in  the  cold  nights  and  bring  in  those
that  are  frostbitten ;  they  dig  them  out  from  under  the  snow,
simply  that  they  may  serve  God  by  helping  their  fellow-
men.  I  pray  God  to  bless  the  good  works  of  these  monks
of  the  Augustinian  Order."

This  Continental  trip  formed  perhaps  the  most  enjoyable


Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  from  a  portrait  engraved  at
the  time  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  was  building.

holiday  that  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  ever  spent.  It
extended  over  eight  weeks,  his  wife  accompanied  him,  and
the  visit  to  Geneva,  with  its  Calvin  associations,  ever
remained  a  vivid  memory  in  the  mind  of  the  great
reformer's  gifted  disciple.


CHAPTER    XIX.

OPENING    OF   THE    METROPOLITAN
TABERNACLE.

ON  August  2ist,  1860,  a  great  meeting  was  held  in
the  unfinished  Tabernacle  to  give  thanks  to  God
for  the  success  which  had  thus  far  been  enjoyed  in  the
enterprise,  and  to  raise  from  the  friends  present  as  much
as  possible  of  the  sum  still  required  to  open  the  building
free  from  debt.  At  this  meeting  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon  gave  a  very  full  account  of  the  undertaking —
telling  of  its  inception,  its  present  position,  and  its  future
purpose.  With  regard  to  the  structure  itself,  he  declared
his  belief  that  it  was  the  most  perfect  triumph  of  acoustics
that  had  ever  been  achieved,  and  as  to  its  appearance  the
architect  was  to  be  heartily  congratulate;!.  Some  visitors
had  expressed  disappointment  at  the  size  of  the  Tabernacle,
which  seemed  much  smaller  than  they  had  anticipated ;  but
the  preacher  was  pleased  at  this,  for  it  showed  him,  he  said,
that  the  structure  did  not  appear  huge  and  unsightly.  To
look  very  large  a  building  must  be  generally  out  of  propor-
tion, for  with  due  symmetry  the  idea  of  size  was  often  lost.
He  then  gave  an  account  of  the  lecture  hall,  the  various  side
rooms,  and  the  galleries,  each  of  which  had  separate  stair-
cases to  avoid  overcrowding,  and  spoke  with  great
appreciation  of  the  builder,  Mr.  William  Higgs,  a  member,
and  afterwards  a  deacon,  of  the  church.  Some  exception
had  been  taken  in  the  Press  to  the  title,  "  Metropolitan  "


266    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

Tabernacle,  as  savouring  of  arrogance;  and  one  paper  had
suggested  that  possibly  the  preacher  would  style  himself
"  The  Metropolitan  " ;  but  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at  this  meeting
justified  the  adjective,  for,  as  he  stated,  more  than  a  million
people  had  contributed,  chiefly  in  small  sums,  towards  the
erection  of  the  building ;  and  so  far  as  the  word  "  Taber-
nacle "  was  concerned,  he  thought  it  far  more  appropriate
than  Temple,  seeing  that  the  people  of  God  had  not  come
to  the  Temple-state  here,  but  were  in  the  Tabernacle-state,
passing  through  the  wilderness,  and  the  building  was,  there-
fore, only  temporary.  "  We  have  not  here  the  King  in
person — the  Divine  Solomon,"  he  added  ;  "  till  He  come,  we
call  it  a  Tabernacle  still."

The  preacher  then  made  a  bold  declaration  upon  the
"  voluntary  principle,"  of  which  the  new  Tabernacle  was
the  embodiment.  "  We  earnestly  desire."  he  said,  "  to  open
this  place  without  a  farthing  of  debt  upon  it.  You  have
heard  that  sentence  again  and  again.  Let  me  repeat  it;
and  I  pray  that  our  brethren  here,  who  have  the  command  of
the  public  Press,  will  repeat  it  again  and  again  for  me.  It
is  not  because  a  small  debt  would  weigh  upon  this  Church
too  much ;  we  are  not  afraid  of  that ;  it  is  just  this,  we
think  it  will  tell  well  for  the  whole  body  of  believers  who
rely  upon  the  voluntary  principle,  if  this  Tabernacle  is
completed  without  a  loan  or  a  debt.  Our  new  place  of
worship  has  been  spoken  of  in  the  House  of  Commons,  it
has  been  mentioned  in  the  House  of  Lords ;  and  as  every-
body happens  to  know  of  it,  since  it  stands  so  conspicuously,
we  want  to  do  our  utmost,  and  we  ask  our  brethren  to  give
us  their  help,  that  this  forefront  of  Nonconformity,  for  the
time  being,  may  have  about  it  no  failure,  no  defect  to  which
any  one  can  point  and  say.  '  Your  voluntaryism  failed  to
carry  the  project  through.'  T  believe  in  the  might  rf  the


OPENING  OF  THE  TABERNACLE.          267

voluntary  principle.  I  believe  it  to  be  perfectly  irresistible
in  proportion  to  the  power  of  God's  Spirit  in  the  hearts  of
those  who  exercise  it.  When  the  Spirit  of  God  is  absent,
and  the  Church  is  at  a  low  ebb,  the  voluntary  principle  has
little  or  no  power;  and  then  it  becomes  a  question  with  many
carnal-wise  men,  whether  they  shall  not  look  to  Egypt  for
help  and  stay  themselves  on  horses.  But  when  the  Spirit
of  God  is  shed  abroad,  and  men's  hearts  are  in  the  right
state,  we  find  the  voluntary  principle  equal  to  every  need  of
the  Church.  Whenever  I  see  members  of  any  denomination
turn  aside  and  begin  to  take  so  much  as  a  single  halfpenny
from  the  hand  of  the  State,  I  think  they  do*  not  believe  in
their  God  as  they  ought,  and  that  the  Spirit  of  God  is  not
with  them  in  all  His  Divine  power.  Only  give  us  a  minister
preaching  Christ  and  a  people  who  will  serve  their  God,
and  feel  it  to  be  their  pleasure  to  devote  themselves  and
their  substance  to  His  cause,  and  nothing  is  impossible.

"  I  ask  you  to  prove  this  to  all  men ;  and  I  appeal  to  you
to  help  us  in  the  effort  to  raise  the  remnant  of  ^8,000.  I
believe  we  shall  have  a  good  and  hearty  response,  and  that
on  the  day  of  opening  we  shall  see  this  place  filled  with  a
vast  multitude,  who  will  complete  the  work  and  leave  not
a  shilling  unpaid.  We  pledge  ourselves  to  the  Christian
public  that  they  shall  be  no  losers  by  us.  While  this  build-
ing has  been  going  on,  we  have  done  as  much  as  any  Church
for  all  other  agencies — as  much  as  it  was  possible  for  us  to
do.  We  hope  to  help  other  places  by  first  giving  to  our
young  men  an  education  when  God  has  called  them  to  the
ministry,  and  afterwards  helping  them  when  they  are  settled.
We  wish  our  Church,  to  become  a  fruitful  mother  of  children,
and  pray  that  God  may  make  this  Tabernacle  a  centre  from
which  rays  of  truth  and  light  and  glory  may  radiate  to  dispel
the  darkness  of  the  land.  We  will  not  be  an  idle  Church ;


268    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

we  do  not  ask  to  have  our  load  taken  away,  that  we  may  eat
and  drink  and  play,  but  only  that  we  may  go  straight  on  to
do  God's  work.  Of  all  things,  I  do  abhor  a  debt.  I  shall
feel  like  a  guilty,  sneaking  sinner  if  I  come  here  with  even
a  hundred  pounds  debt  upon  the  building.  '  Owe  no  man
anything  '  will  stare  me  in  the  face  whenever  I  try  to  address
you.  I  do  not  believe  that  Scripture  warrants  any  man  in
getting  into  debt.  It  may  stimulate  the  people  to  raise
more  money,  but,  after  all,  attention  to  the  simple  Word  of
God  is  infinitely  better  than  looking  at  the  end  which  may
be  attained  by  the  slightest  deviation  from  it.  Let  us  not
owe  a  farthing  to  any  living  soul ;  and  when  we  come  here
for  the  opening  services,  let  us  find  that  all  has  been  paid."

During  the  day,  the  Building  Fund  was  increased  by
^1,050,  and  within  the  next  six  or  seven  months  the  whole
of  the  cost,  amounting  to  ^31,332  45.  iod.,  had  been  made
up,  the  money  being  contributed  by  members  of  almost
every  denomination,  and  coming  from  almost  every  part  of
the  world — from  Europe,  Asia,  Africa,  America,  and  Austral-
asia, The  erection  of  such  a  building  by  voluntary  contribu-
tions indeed,  marked  an  epoch  in  English  Nonconformity,
and  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  preacher  and  his  church
officers  looked  upon  the  completion  of  the  work,  and  the
provision  of  every  penny  of  the  heavy  cost,  as  a  direct  inter-
position of  God,  and  a  distinct  mark  of  His  approval.  At
the  first  church  meeting  held  at  the  Tabernacle  the  preacher
wrote  in  the  church  book,  "  I,  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,
the  least  of  all  saints,  hereby  set  to  my  seal  that  God  is  true,
since  He  has  this  day  fulfilled  my  hopes,  and  given  according
to  our  faith,  O  Lord,  be  Thou  praised  world  without  end,
and  do  Thou  make  me  more  faithful  and  more  mighty  than
ever !  C.  H.  Spurgeon."

The  following  inscription,  also  in  the  Pastor's  handwriting,


OPENING  OF  THE  TABERNACLE.          269

was  signed  by  himself,  the  deacons,  the  elders,  and  a  large
number  of  church  members,  headed  by  Mrs.  Spurgeon  :

"  We,  the  undersigned  members  of  the  church  lately  wor-
shipping in  New  Park  Street  Chapel,  but  now  assembling  in
the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  Newington,  desire  with  over-
flowing hearts  to  make  known  and  record  the  lovingkindness
of  our  faithful  God.  We  asked  in  faith,  but  our  Lord  has
exceeded  our  desires,  for  not  only  was  the  whole  sum  given
us,  but  far  sooner  than  we  had  looked  for  it.  Truly  the
Lord  is  good  and  worthy  to  be  praised.  We  are  ashamed
of  ourselves  that  we  have  ever  doubted  Him ;  and  we  pray
that,  as  a  Church,  and  as  individuals,  we  may  be  enabled
to  trust  in  the  Lord  at  all  times  with  confidence,  so  that  in
quietness  we  may  possess  our  souls.  In  the  name  of  our
God  we  set  up  our  banner.  Oh,  that  Jehovah-Jireh  may
also  be  unto  us  Jehovah-shammah  and  Jehovah-shalom !
To  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  we  offer  praise  and  thanks-
giving, and  we  set  to  our  seal  that  God  is  true."

By  the  beginning  of  March,  1861,  the  Tabernacle  was
completed,  and  in  that  month  the  third  and  last  sojourn  of
the  New  Park  Street  congregation  at  Exeter  Hall  ended.
Not  a  single  workman  had  been  either  killed  or  injured,  a
mercy  for  which  C.  H.  Spurgeon  and  Mr.  Cook,  the  Secre-
tary of  the  Building  Committee,  had  prayed  earnestly  upon
their  knees  amid  the  scaffolding  and  bricks  and  mortar  soon
after  building  operations  commenced.  The  opening
services,  which  lasted  about  a  month,  were  inaugurated  with
a  great  prayer  meeting  on  the  morning  of  Monday,
March  i8th,  1861.  By  seven  o'clock,  the  hour  appointed,
over  a  thousand  persons  had  gathered,  and  the  fervour  of  the
meeting  will  remain  as  a  life-memory  to  those  who  had  the
privilege  of  being  present.  A  week  later,  at  the  same  early
hour,  another  large  prayer-meeting  was  held;  and  in  the


270    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  H ADDON  SPURGEON.

aiternoon  C.  H.  Spurgeon  delivered  his  first  sermon  in  the
Tabernacle  from  the  text,  "  And  daily  in  the  temple,  and  in
every  house,  they  ceased  not  to  teach  and  preach  Jesus
Christ  "  (Acts  v.  42).  In  the  evening  the  Rev.  W.  Brock,
of  Bloomsbury  Chapel,  spoke  from  St.  Paul's  words  in
Philippians  i.  18,  "Christ  is  preached;  and  I  therein  do
rejoice,  yea,  and  will  rejoice."  Two  more  appropriate  and
harmonious  texts  could  hardly  have  been  selected,  and  it  is
interesting  to  learn  that  neither  minister  knew  beforehand
what  passage  of  Scripture  his  fellow-preacher  had  decided
to  choose  for  his  sermon.  The  next  night  more  than  three
thousand  contributors  to  the  Building  Fund  assembled  in  the
Tabernacle  under  the  presidency  of  Sir  Henry  Havelock;
and  on  the  following  evening,  the  ministers  and  members  of
neighbouring  churches,  to  the  number  of  about  four
thousand,  met  to  offer  their  congratulations  to  the  Taber-
nacle congregation  on  the  completion  of  the  fine  building.

The  church's  first  Sunday  at  the  new  Tabernacle  was  a
memorable  one ;  and  both  pastor  and  members  must  have  felt
in  a  very  special  sense  a  consciousness  of  the  Divine  blessing
when  they  remembered  that  the  great  building  in  which  they
were  gathered  was  free  of  all  debt,  and  represented  the
home  of  what,  but  very  few  years  ago,  was  regarded  as  a
failing  cause.  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  preached  from
2  Chronicles  v.  13,  14  and  vii.  i — 3,  and  his  utterance  on
this  occasion  was  prophetical.  "  Let  God  send  the  fire  of
His  Spirit  here,"  he  declared,  "  and  the  minister  will  be  more
and  more  lost  in  his  Master.  You  will  come  to  think  less  of
the  speaker  and  more  of  the  truth  spoken ;  the  individual
will  be  swamped,  the  words  uttered  will  rise  above  every-
thing. When  you  have  the  cloud,  the  man  is  forgotten ;
when  you  have  the  fire,  the  man  is  lost,  and  you  only  see  his
Master.  Suppose  the  fire  should  come  here,  and  the


272    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

Master  be  seen  more  than  the  minister^  what  then  ?  Why,
this  church  will  become  two  or  three  or  four  thousand
strong !  It  is  easy  enough  for  God  to  double  our  numbers,
vast  though  they  are  even  now.  We  shall  have  the  lecture
hall  beneath  this  platform  crowded  at  each  prayer-meeting,
and  we  shall  see  in  this  place  young  men  devoting  themselves
to  God ;  we  shall  find  ministers  raised  up  and  trained  and
sent  forth  to  carry  the  sacred  fire  to  other  parts  of  the  globe.
Japan,  China,  and  Hindustan  shall  have  heralds  of  the  Cross
who  have  here  had  their  tongues  touched  with  the  Divine
flame.  Through  us,  the  whole  earth  shall  receive  bene-
dictions ;  if  God  shall  bless  us,  He  will  make  us  a  blessing  to
multitudes  of  others.  Let  God  but  send  down  the  fire  and
the  biggest  sinners  in  the  neighbourhood  will  be  converted ;
those  who  live  in  dens  of  infamy  will  be  changed;  the
drunkard  will  forsake  his  cups,  the  swearer  will  repent  of
his  blasphemy,  the  debauched  will  leave  their  lusts —

" '  Dry  bones  be  raised  and  clothed  afresh
And  hearts  of  stone  be  turned  to  flesh.'  "

Night  after  night  there  were  important  gatherings.  On
Sunday,  April  yth,  the  first  communion  service  was  held,
while  on  the  following  Tuesday  the  first  baptisms  in  the
new  Tabernacle  were  conducted  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  about
twenty  candidates  presenting  themselves.  On  Wednesday,
April  icth,  a  great  communion  service  was  held,  which  has
been  described  as  probably  the  largest  since  the  day  of
Pentecost.  Members  soon  began  to  join  the  church,  and  on
June  2nd  120  persons  were  received  into  full  fellowship.

Of  course,  the  opening  of  the  new  building  was  made  the
occasion  of  further  slander  by  certain  journals  hostile  to  the
preacher.  A  prominent  Scottish  paper,  for  instance,  pub-
lished an  article  from  its  London  correspondent,  in  which


OPENING  OF  THE  TABERNACLE.


273


it  said  :  "  Sympathetic  Aberdonians  need  not  trouble  them-
selves to  make  up  any  more  money-boxes  for  Mr.
Spurgeon's  Tabernacle.  All  the  debts  have  been  paid,


(Fhoto  by  Mr.  E.  Johnson.)

The  earliest  phots  of  the  interior  of  the  Metropslitan  Tabernacle;
taken  in   :861.

and  the  chapel  was  opened  on  Sunday  evening.  As  the
Tabernacle  is  Mr.  Spurgeon's  own  property,  pew  rents  and
all,  he  will  probably  be  able  to  enjoy  his  'privilege'  of


274    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

riding  in  a  carriage  to  the  end  of  his  days.  This  being  the
case,  it  is  sincerely  to  be  hoped  that  he  will  now  finally
dissociate  the  work  of  the  Gospel  from  the  pursuit  of
mammon."  The  whole  of  this  statement  was  a  deliberate
falsehood,  as  some  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  defenders  in  the
Press  did  not  hesitate  to  declare.

For  several  years  after  the  opening  of  the  Metropolitan
Tabernacle,  an  attempt  was  made  to  retain  New  Park  Street
Chapel  with  a  view  of  its  becoming  the  abode  of  another
church,  but  it  was  eventually  found  useless  to  keep  so  large  a
building  in  such  a  situation,  and  the  chapel  was  sold  by
auction.  The  unselfishness  and  entire  lack  of  anything
approaching  to  the  mercenary  spirit  which  characterised
C.  H.  Spurgeon's  deacons  was  manifested  in  connection  with
the  sale  of  the  New  Park  Street  building.  Mr.  William
Higgs,  who  had  valued  the  property  at  a  certain  sum,  was
asked  to  attend  the  mart  for  the  protection  of  the  sale.  He
did  so,  and  when  the  limit  he  had  named  was  reached,  went
on  himself  bidding  until  the  property  was  knocked  down  to
him  at  a  considerably  enhanced  figure.  Later  on  he  sold
the  building  for  ^500  more  than  he  gave  for  it,  and  going
to  C.  H.  Spurgeon  handed  over  the  whole  of  that  sum,
saying  that  he  could  not  think  of  keeping  it  for  himself.


CHAPTER    XX.

THE    CHURCH    OFFICERS.

CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON,  like  all  great
leaders  and  organizers,  had  the  happy  faculty  of
gathering  round  him  men  whole-heartedly  devoted  to  the
cause  and  causes  which  he  made  his  own,  and  ready  to
stand  by  him  through  evil  report  and  good.  Particularly
was  this  the  case  with  his  church  officers.  All  through  his
remarkable  career  the  deacons  and  other  officials  were  men
who  had  unbounded  faith  in  their  pastor's  sincerity,  piety
and  ability,  and  from  first  to  last  there  was  nothing  on  any
single  occasion  approaching  to  unpleasantness  in  their
relations.  The  very  name,  "  the  Governor,"  by  which
C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  known,  was  an  indication  of  the  light
in  which  he  was  regarded,  and  yet  he  never  took  advantage
of  the  influence  which  he  wielded  to  carry  things  with  a
high  hand.  He  looked  upon  the  officials  of  the  church  as
brethren  and  fellow-workers,  and  always  consulted  them
upon  the  matters  of  difficulty  and  importance  which  arose
during  his  pastorate.  "  My  present  staff  of  deacons,"  he
wrote  on  one  occasion,  "  consists  of  peculiarly  lovable,
active,  energetic,  warm-hearted,  generous  men,  every  one
of  whom  seems  specially  adapted  for  his  own  particular
department  of  service.  I  am  very  thankful  that  I  have
never  been  the  pastor  of  a  dead  church,  cont  rolled  by  dead
deacons.  I  have  seen  such  a  thing  as  that  with  my  own
eyes,  and  the  sight  was  truly  awful.  I  recollect  very  well


276    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEON.

preaching  in  a  chapel  where  the  church  had  become  exceed-
ingly low,  and  somehow  the  very  building  looked  like  a
sepulchre,  though  crowded  that  one  night  by  those  who
came  to  hear  the  preacher.  The  singers  drawled  out  a  dirge
while  the  members  sat  like  mutes.  I  found  it  hard  preach-
ing; there  was  no  'go'  in  the  sermon,  I  sesmed  to  be
driving  dead  horses.  After  the  service  I  saw  two  men  who,
I  supposed,  were  the  deacons. — the  pillars  of  the  church. —
leaning  against  the  posts  of  the  veitry  door  in  a  listless
attitude,  and  I  said,  '  Are  you  the  deacons  of  this  church  ?  '
They  informed  me  that  they  were  the  only  deacons,  and  I
remarked  that  I  thought  so.  To  myself  I  added  that  I
understood,  as  I  looked  at  them,  several  things  which  else
would  have  been  a  riddle.  Here  was  a  dead  church,  com-
parable to  the  ship  of  the  ancient  mariner  which  was  manned
by  the  dead.  Deacons,  teachers,  minister,  people — all
dead,  and  yet  wearing  the  semblance  of  life.  .  .  .  All  my
church-officers  are  in  a  very  real  sense  my  brethren  in
Christ.  In  talking  to  or  about  one  another,  we  have  no
stately  modes  of  address.  I  am  called  '  the  Governor.'  I
suppose  because  I  do  not  attempt  to  govern ;  and  the
deacons  are  known  among  us  as,  '  Brother  William.'  '  Uncle
Tom,'  '  Dear  Old  Joe,'  '  Prince  Charlie,'  '  Son  of  AH,'  and
so  on.  These  brethren — are  some  of  them  esquires,  who
ought  also  to  be  M.P.'s;  but  we  love  them  too  well  to
dignify  them.  One  day  I  spoke  rather  sharply  to  one  of
them,  and  I  think  he  deserved  the  rebuke  I  gave  him ;  but
he  said  to  me,  '  Well,  that  may  be  so;  but  I  tell  you  what,
sir,  I  would  die  for  you  any  day.'  '  Oh !  '  I  replied,  '  bless
your  heart,  I  am  sorry  I  was  so  sharp;  but  still,  you  did
deserve  it,  did  you  not  ?  '  He  smiled,  and  said  he  thought
he  did,  and  there  the  matter  ended.

"  One  of  my  deacons  made  a  remark  to  me  one  night


278    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

which  would  have  mortally  offended  a  more  sensitive
individual  than  1  am.  It  was  the  first  Sabbath  in  the
month,  the  preaching  service  was  over,  and  we  \vere  just
going  down  to  the  great  communion  in  the  Tabernacle.  I
enquired  how  many  new  members  there  were  to  be
received,  and  the  answer  was,  '  Only  seven.'  In  an  instant
my  good  friend  said,  '  This  won't  pay,  Governor ;  running
all  this  big  place  for  seven  new  members  in  a  month !  '  He
was  quite  right,  although  a  Christian  church  is  not  '  run  ;
on  exactly  the  same  lines  as  a  business  undertaking ;  but  I
could  not  help  thinking,  at  the  time,  that  it  would  not  have
done  for  some  deacons  to  make  such  an  observation  to
certain  ministers  of  my  acquaintance,  or  if  the  remark  had
been  made,  it  would  have  been  attended  with  very  serious
consequences.  I  know  one  pastor  who  is  very  decidedly  of
opinion  that  the  Lord  never  made  anyone  equal  in  import-
ance to  a  Baptist  minister  (that  is  himself} ;  but  it  so
happened  that  one  of  his  church-officers  had  the  notion
that  a  deacon  is  a  being  of  a  still  higher  order,  so  it  was
not  very  surprising  that  the  time  came  when  they  could  no
longer  work  together  harmoniously.

"  On  going  into  the  Tabernacle  one  day,  I  gave  directions
about  some  minor  alterations  that  I  wished  to  have  made,
not  knowing  at  the  time  that  I  was  cancelling  the  orders
given  by  the  deacon  who  had  the  main  care  of  the  building
resting  upon  him.  When  he  arrived,  in  the  evening,  he
saw  what  had  been  done^  and  at  once  asked  who  had  inter-
fered with  his  instructions.  The  reply  was,  '  the  Governor,
sir.'  The  spirit  of  unquestioning  loyalty  at  once  asserted
itself  over  any  temporary  annoyance  he  may  have  felt,  and
he  said,  '  Quite  right ;  there  must  be  only  one  captain  in  the
ship ;'  and  for  a  long  while  that  saying  became  one  of  our
most  familiar  watchwords.  I  have  often  been  amazed  at


THE    CHURCH    OFFICERS.  279

the  devotion  of  our  brethren ;  I  have  told  them,  many  a
time,  that,  if  they  would  follow  a  broomstick  as  they  have
followed  mei  the  work  must  succeed.  To  which  Mr.
William  Olney,  as  the  spokesman  for  the  rest  has  answered,
'  Yes,  dear  Pastor ;  but  it  is  because  we  have  such  absolute
confidence  in  your  leadership  that  we  are  ready  to  follow
you  anywhere.  You  have  never  misled  us  yet,  and  we  do
not  believe  you  will  ever  do  so.'  "

This  love  and  devotion  of  the  deacons  for  their  minister
often  took  a  practical  form.  During  one  of  his  trying  ill-
nesses, C.  H.  Spurgeon  had  a  sudden  fit  of  nervousness
respecting  the  financial  affairs  of  his  multifarious  work.
There  was  no  real  cause  for  this^  but  the  weakness  of
body  had  brought  on  a  condition  of  mental  anxiety
impossible  to  overcome,  and  which  reacted  badly  upon  the
physical  state  of  the  invalid.  One  of  the  deacons  hearing
of  this  visited  C.  H.  Spurgeon  and  sought  to  comfort  him,
but  in  vain.  "  Well,  good-bye,  sir,"  he  said,  "  I'll  see  what  I
can  do,"  and  going  straight  home  collected  the  certificates
of  all  the  stockSj  shares,  and  available  funds  that  he  had,
and  brought  them  to  the  pastor's  bedside.  "  There,"  he
said,  "  I  owe  everything  that  I  have  in  the  world  to  you,  and
you  are  quite  welcome  to  all  I  possess.  Take  Avhatever  you
need  and  do, not  have  another  moment's  anxiety."  Of
course,  as  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  explained,  however
much  he  had  heeded  funds2  he  could  never  have  touched  the
generous  deacon's  property,  and  as  soon  as  he  got  better  he
returned  all  the  certificates  to  their  owner.  "  It  seemed  to
me,"  he  wrote,  "  very  much  as  the  water  from  the  well  of
Bethlehem  must  have  appeared  to  David."

The  long  illnesses  of  the  pastor  always  drew  out  the
keenest  sympathy  of  his  deacons,  and  on  one  occasion  he
remarked  to  them  that  he  was  afraid  they  would  get  tired  of


280    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

their  poor  crippled  minister.  "  Why,  my  dear  sir,"  replied
one,  by  no  means  noted  for  a  demonstrative  spirit.  "  we
would  sooner  have  you  for  one  month  in  the  year,  than  any-


Marble  Bust  of  C-  H    Spurgeon,  presented  to  him  with  the

pedestal  and  kept  by  him  in  his  Vestry.     The   portrait  was

taken  from  life,  by  meins  of  plaster  casts,  but  the   preacher

de:lared   he  would  never  undergo  such   an  ordeal  again.

one  else  in  the  world  for  the  whole  twelve  months,"  and  the
others  heartily  endorsed  his  opinion.

Soon  after  going  to  New  Park  Street,  Charles  Haddon


THE    CHURCH    OFFICERS.  281

Spurgeon  suggested  that  in  accordance  with  the  teaching  of
scripture  and  the  practice  of  the  Primitive  Church,  certain
brethren  should  be  appointed  to  the  office  of  elder  to  watch
over  the  spiritual  affairs  of  the  church,  and  after  due  con-
sideration a  number  of  elders  were  elected.  Unlike  the
deacons,  however,  whose  appointment  was  permanent,  the
elders,  it  was  decided,  should  be  chosen  year  by  year,  and
it  was  emphasized  that  their  duties  pertained  to  the
spiritual  affairs  of  the  church  only,  and  not  to  the  temporal
matters.

"  My  elders,"  said  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "  have  been  a  great
blessing  to  me;  they  are  invaluable  in  looking  after  the
spiritual  interests  of  the  church.  The  deacons  have  charge
of  the  financei  but  if  the  elders  meet  with  cases  of  poverty
needing  relief,  we  tell  them  to  give  some  small  sum,  and
then  bring  the  case  before  the  deacons.  I  was  once  the
unseen  witness  of  a  little  incident  that  greatly  pleased  me.
I  heard  one  of  our  elders  say  to  a  deacon, '  I  gave  old  Mrs.
So-and-so  ten  shillings  the  other  night.'  '  That  was  very
generous  on  your  part,'  said  the  deacon.  '  Oh !  but,'
exclaimed  the  elder,  '  I  want  the  money  from  the  deacons.'
So  the  deacon  asked,  '  What  office  do  you  hold,  brother  ? '
'  Oh ! '  he  replied, '  I  see;  I  have  gone  beyond  my  duty  as  an
elder,  so  I'll  pay  the  ten  shillings  myself ;  I  should  not  like
"  the  Governor  "  to  hear  that  I  had  overstepped  the  mark.'
'  No,  no,  my  brother,'  said  the  deacon ;  '  I'll  give  you  the
money,  but  don't  make  such  a  mistake  another  time/

"  Some  of  the  elders  have  rendered  great  service  to  our
own  church  by  conducting  Bible  classes  and  taking  the  over-
sight of  several  of  our  home-mission  stations,  while  one  or
two  have  made  it  their  special  work  to  '  watch  for  souls  '  in
our  great  congregation,  and  to  seek  to  bring  to  immediate
decision  those  who  appeared  to  be  impressed  under  the


282    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

preaching  of  the  Word.  One  brother  has  earned  for  him-
self the  title  of  my  hunting  dog,  for  he  is  always  ready  to
pick  up  the  wounded  birds.  One  Monday  night  at  the
prayer-meeting,  he  was  sitting  near  me  on  the  platform  ;  all
at  once  I  missed  him,  and  presently  I  saw  him  right  at  the
other  end  of  the  building.  After  the  meeting  I  asked  him
why  he  went  off  so  suddenly,  and  he  said  that  the  gas  just
shone  on  the  face  of  a  woman  in  the  congregation,  and  she
looked  so  sad  that  he  walked  round  and  sat  near  her  in
readiness  to  speak  to  her  about  the  Saviour  after  the
service."

Speaking  of  elders,  it  is  worth  while  recording  a
remarkable  incident  that  happened  in  connection  with  a
man  whom  C.  H.  Spurgeon  had  once  proposed  for  the
office  of  elder,  but  whom  the  other  elders  declared  was
unsuitable.  The  man  became  a  disturbing  influence,  and
often  tried  to  annoy  and  offend  the  pastor,  but  without  avail.
At  last,  one  Sunday  when  he  had  been  unusually  trouble-
some, C.  H.  Spurgeon  said  to  him,  "  Brother  So-and-so,
will  you  come  and  see  me  to-morrow  morning  ?  "  The  man
replied  surlily,  "I  have  got  my  living  to  earn,  and  I  can't
see  you  after  five  o'clock  in  the  morning."  "  Oh  !  "  said  the
preacher,  "  that  will  suit  me  very  well,  and  I  will  be  at  your
service  and  have  a  cup  of  coffee  ready  for  you  to-morrow
morning  at  five  o'clock."  At  the  appointed  hour  C.  H.
Spurgeon  was  ready  to  receive  the  man  who,  for  no  other
reason  than  to  satisfy  his  irascibility,  had  walked  several
miles  at  that  unconscionable  hour  to  tell  the  pastor  his  latest
grievance.  His  story  was  that  he  had  lost  twenty-five  pounds
for  something  which  he  professed  to  have  done  for  the
church,  but  which  everyone  else  regarded  as  his  own  private
speculation,  and  he  indignantly  declared  that  he  could  not
afford  to  lose  so  large  a  sum.  Thereupon  C.  H.  Spurgeon


g  g


284    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEOX.

counted  out  five  ^5  notes  and  presented  them  to  the  man,
who  asked  if  they  came  out  of  the  church  funds.  "  Xo,"
replied  the  pastor ;  "  I  feel  that  you  cannot  afford  such  a
loss,  and  though  it  is  no  concern  of  mine,  I  willingly  give
you  the  money."

"  I  noticed  a  strange  look  come  over  his  face,"  says  C.  H.
Spurgeon,  "  but  he  said  very  little  more,  and  I  prayed  with
him  and  he  went  away.  At  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  he
sent  round  for  my  brother  to  go  to  see  him.  When  he
returned,  he  said  to  me,  '  Brother,  you  have  killed  that
man  by  your  kindness;  he  cannot  live  much  longer.  He
confessed  to  me  that  he  had  broken  up  two  churches  before,
and  that  he  had  come  into  the  Tabernacle  Church  on
purpose  to  act  in  the  same  way,  and  he  had  specially  sought
to  put  you  out  of  temper  with  him; — which  he  never  could
do, — and  he  told  me  that  he  was  a  devil  and  not  a
Christian.  I  said  to  him,  "  My  brother  once  proposed  to
have  you  as  an  elder  of  the  church."  He  seemed  very
surprised,  and  asked  me,  "  Did  he  really  think  so  much  of
me  as  that  ?  "  I  answered,  "  Yes ;  but  the  other  elders  said
that  you  had  such  a  dreadful  temper  that  there  would  be  no
peace  in  their  midst  if  you  were  brought  in  among  them."  '

That  evening,  during  the  progress  of  the  prayer-meeting,
a  note  was  passed  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon  saying  that  the  man
had  cut  his  throat.  "  I  felt  his  death  terribly,"  he  said,
"  and  the  effect  of  it  upon  the  people  generally  was  much
the  same  as  when  Ananias  and  Sapphira  were  slain  because
of  their  lying  unto  the  Holy  Ghost :  '  Great  fear  came  upon
all  the  church  and  upon  as  many  as  heard  these  things.'  I
had  often  spoken  of  '  killing  people  by  kindness,'  but  I  never
wished  to  have  another  instance  of  it  in  my  own
experience."

Soon  after  the  opening  of  the  Tabernacle  another  office


THE    CHURCH    OFFICERS.


285


in  the  church  was  revived^  that  of  teacher.  It  was  found
that  in  the  early  days  of  the  Baptist  Church  in  Southwark
there  had  been  godly  men  holding  this  post,  Benjamin  Reach
himself  being  teacher  under  William  Rider's  pastorate,  and


The  Rev.  James  Spurgeon,  D.D.,  Assistant-Pastor  of  the
Metropolitan  Tabernacle.

C.  H.  Spurgeon  pointed  out,  that  without  dividing  the  unity
of  the  pastorate,  the  appointment  of  a  teacher  would,  in  his
judgment,  be  a  valuable  aid  "  for  the  edification  cf  the


286    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

saints  in  the  matter  of  Word  and  doctrine."  A  Mr.  John
Collins  had  been  really  doing  the  work  of  a  teacher  for  years
past,  and  he  was,  at  the  Pastor's  suggestion,  officially  recog-
nized by  the  title  of  teacher.  In  less  than  a  year  Mr.
Collins  was  called  to  the  pastorate  of  a  Baptist  Church  at
Southampton,  and  a  few  months  later  Mr.  Thomas  Ness
became  teacher  at  the  Tabernacle.  But  he,  too,  was  called
to  a  pastorate  in  less  than  a  year,  so  after  a  period  of  con-
sideration, it  was  decided,  instead  of  appointing  another
teacher,  to  ask  the  Rev.  James  A.  Spurgeon,  brother  of
Charles  Haddon?  to  become  assistant-pastor  of  the  church
meeting  in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  Certain  con-
ditions were  laid  down,  as,  for  example,  that  the  assistant-
minister  should  not  consider  himself  as  "  having  any  claim
to  occupy  the  pulpit,  or  any  rights  of  possession  such  as  are
supposed  to  belong  to  ministers  in  ordinary  cases,"  but  that
he  should  render  "  aid  mainly  in  pastoral  work,  in  visiting
the  sick,  in  seeing  enquirers,  in  attending  at  church-meet-
ings, and  in  such  other  works  as  naturally  fall  to  the  lot  of
a  pastor."  The  invitation  was  accepted  on  January  6th,
1868,  and  James  Spurgeon  thenceforth  became  associated
with  his  brother  in  the  Tabernacle  work.  Charles  Haddon
always  spoke  with  the  greatest  appreciation  of  his  brother's
helpful  co-operation,  which  relieved  him  of  much  anxiety
and  left  him  free  to  give  greater  time  to  those  agencies  which
depended  so  largely  upon  his  masterly  direction.


CHAPTER    XXI.
iNOTABLE    LECTURES    AND    ADDRESSES.

A     LTHOUGH   when  he  delivered  an  address  to  the
£  Y_      Young    Men's     Christian    Association    upon    the
subject  De  Propaganda  Fide,  on  January  4th,  1859,  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon  described  it  as  his  first  appearance  as  a
lecturer  before  any  audience  worthy  of  being  called  a  multi-
tude, yet  he  had,  a  year  before,  delivered  what  was  really
his  first  lecture  at  the  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall.     The
subject  was,  "  A  Christian's  Pleasures,"  and  every  class  of
amusement  was  touched  upon.     Such  games  as  chess  and
draughts,  the  lecturer  thought,  should  not  be  objected  to  by.
the  most  precise  Christian,  provided  they  were  not  played
for  money;  but  with  regard   to  the  games  of  chance,  he
declared  the  time  had  now  arrived  when  all  England  ought
to  be  heartily  sick  of  every  form  of  gaming.    "  It  used  to  be
a  comparatively  harmless  thing  for  ladies  and  gentlemen  to
spend  all  the  evening  over  a  pack  of  cards  or  a  box  of  dice,
without  any  money  being  at  stake;  but  we  have  had  such
practical  proof  that  the  worst  crimes  have  sprung  from  this
apparently  inoffensive  practice,  that  every  Christian  mind
must  revolt  from  it.     Besides,  I  have  always  felt  that  the
rattle  of  the  dice  in  the  box  would  remind  me  of  that  game
which  was  played  by  the  soldiers  at  the  foot  of  Christ's
cross,  when  they  cast  lots  for  His  vesture  and  parted  His
garments  among  them.     He  who  sees  His  Saviour's  blood
splashed  on  the  dice  will  never  wish  to  meddle  with  them."


288    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

Equally  emphatic  was  the  speaker's  opinion  upon  dancing.
"  Some  persons  ask,"  he  said,  "  '  What  do  you  think  about
dancing  ?  '  Well,  I  never  hear  the  subject  mentioned  with-
out having  an  uncomfortable  feeling  in  my  throat,  for  I
remember  that  the  first  Baptist  minister  had  his  head  danced
off !  I  am  sure  I  should  have  to  be  off  my  head  before  I
should  indulge  in  that  pastime.  The  usual  associations  of
the  ball-room  and  dancing  parties  are  of  such  a  character
that  it  is  marvellous  to  me  how  Christians  can  ever  be  found
taking  pleasure  in  them.  A  safe  rule  to  apply  to  all  occupa-
tions is,  '  Can  I  take  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  me  if  I  go
there?  If  not,  it  is  no  place  for  me  as  one  of  His
followers.'  "

In  the  lecture,  De  Propaganda  Fide,  C.  H.  Spurgeon
made  a  notable  pronouncement  concerning  war  and  its
influence  upon  heathen  nations.  "  There  is  one  thing  I  must
say,"  he  declared ;  "  I  often  hear  Christian  men  blessing
God  for  that  which- 1  cannot  but  reckon  as  a  curse.  They
will  say,  if  there  is  a  war  with  China,  '  The  bars  of  iron
will  be  cut  in  sunder,  and  the  gates  of  brass  shall  be
•opened  to  the  Gospel.'  Whenever  England  goes  to  war,
.many  shout,  '  It  will  open  a  way  for  the  Gospel.'  I  cannot
understand  how  the  devil  is  to  make  a  way  for  Christ ;  and
what  is  war  but  an  incarnate  fiend,  the  impersonation  of  all
that  is  hellish  in  fallen  humanity?  How  then  shall  we
rouse  the  devilry  of  man's  nature : —

"  'Cry,  Havoc  and  let  slip  the  dogs  of  war,' —

and  then  declare  it  is  to  make  straight  in  the  desert,  a  high-
way for  our  God — a  highway  knee-deep  in  gore  ?  Do  you
believe  it  ?  You  cannot.  God  does  overrule  evil  for  good  ;
but  I  have  never  seen  yet — though  I  look  with  the  cautious
eye  of  one  who  has  no  party  to  serve — I  have  never  seen  the


NOTABLE  LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES.    289

rare   fruit    which    is   said    to    grow    upon    this    vine    of
Gomorrah.     Let  any  other  nation  go  to  war;  and  it  is  all
well  and  good  for  the  English  to  send  missionaries  to  the
poor  inhabitants  of  the  ravaged  countries.     In  such  a  case,
our  people  did  not  create  the  devastation,  so  they  may  go
there  to  preach ;  but  for  English  cannon  to  make  a  way  in
Canton  for  an  English  missionary  is  a  lie  too  glaring  for  me
to  believe  for  a  moment.     I  cannot  comprehend  the  Chris-
tianity which  talks  thus  of  murder  and  robbery.     If  other
nations  thus  choose  to  fight,  and  if  God  lets  them  open  the
door  for  the  Gospel,  I  will  bless  Him;  but  I  must  still  weep
for  the  slain,  and  exclaim  against  the  murderers.     I  blush
for  my  country  when  I  see  it  committing  such  terrible  crimes
in  China,  for  what  is  the  opium  traffic  but  an  enormous
crime?     War  arises  out  of  it,  and  then  men  say  that  the
Gospel  is  furthered  by  it.     Can  you  see  how  that  result  is
produced?     Then  your  eye  must  be  singularly  fashioned.
For  my  part  I  am  in  the  habit  of  looking  straight  at  a  thing —
I  endeavour  to  judge  it  by  the  Word  of  God — and  in  this
case  it  requires  but  little  deliberation  in  order  to  arrive  at  a
verdict.     It  seems  to  me  that  if  I  were  a  Chinaman  and  I
saw  an   Englishman  preaching  in  the  street  in  China,   I
should  say  to  him, '  What  have  you  got  there?  '     '  I  am  sent
to  preach  the  Gospel  to  you.'     '  The  Gospel !  what  is  that  ?
Is  it  anything  like  opium  ?     Does  it  intoxicate  and  blast  and
curse  and  kill  ? '       '  Oh,  no,'  he  would  say — but  I  do  not
know  how  he  would  continue  his  discourse;  he  would  be
staggered  and  confounded ;  he  could  say  nothing.     There
is  a  very  good  story  told  of  the  Chinese  that  is  quite  to  the
point.     '  A  missionary  lately  went  to  them  with  some  tracts
containing  the  ten  commandments ;  a  Mandarin  read  them,
and  then  sent  back  a  very  polite  message  to  the  effect  that
those  tracts  were  very  good ;  indeed,  he  had  never  read  any

13


->9o  LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEON.

laws  so  good  as  those,  but  there  was  not  so  much  need  of
them  in  China  as  among  the  English  and  the  French.
Would  the  missionary  have  the  goodness  to  distribute  them
where  they  were  most  wanted  ?  ' '

What  would  C.  H.  Spurgeon  have  said,  had  he  lived  to
see  the  allied  armies  of  Christian  Europe  sacking  Pekin  and
avenging  the  killing  of  missionaries  who  had  gone  to  preach
the  Gospel  of  peace  and  goodwill  ?

After  the  building  of  the  Tabernacle,-  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon  gave  many  interesting  lectures  of  a  semi-religious
character  there,  some  of  which  have  been  published  and  can
still  be  obtained.  The  first  was  upon  "  Southwark,"  and  was
delivered  in  the  lecture-hall  three  months  before  the  com-
pletion of  the  building.  It  was  the  result  of  much  labour
and  research,  and  the  little  booklet  in  which  the  lecture  is
now  available,  probably  gives  a  better  and  more  detailed
account  of  the  borough's  history  than  any  other  work  of
moderate  size  that  has  been  written.

But  the  lecture  that  created  the  greatest  stir  was  that
entitled,  "  The  Gorilla  and  the  Land  he  Inhabits."  A
stuffed  specimen  of  the  animal  stood  upon  the  platform,
and  the  lecturej  which  was  illustrated  with  coloured  lantern
slides,  dealt  largely  with  the  recently  published  work  of
M.  Paul  Du  Chaillu,  "  Explorations  and  Adventures  in
Equatorial  Africa."  This  volume  had  been  the  subject  of
much  criticism,  some  writers  even  asserting  that  the  stories
about  the  gorilla  were  fabulous,  and  that  M.  Du  Chaillu  had
never  seen  the  creature  alive,  but  had  obtained  his  specimens
from  the  natives.  It  is  significant  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's
clear-sighted  judgment  that  he  announced  in  the  course  of
his  lecture  as  a  result  of  a  careful  examination  of  the
volume,  "  I  do  verily  believe  in  spite  of  all  that  has  been
said,  that  M.  Du  Chaillu's  book  is  matter  of  fact.  It  is  not


z<)2    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

written  so  carefully  as  a  scientific  man  might  write  it,  nor  so
orderly  and  regularly  as  the  author  might  re-write  it,  if  he
had  another  seven  years  to  do  it  in ;  yet  I  believe  that  it  is
true,  and  that  he  himself  is  worthy  of  our  praise  as  one  of
the  greatest  modem  discoverers, — a  man  who  has  done  and
dared  more  for  science,  and  I  think  I  may  add,  more  for  the
future  spread  of  religion,  than  most  men  of  his  time."  The
credibility  of  M.  Du  Chaillu's  statements  was  completely
established  some  time  afterwards  by  the  researches  of  a.
French  expedition  which  thoroughly  explored  the  country  in
-which  he  had  been  the  pioneer  traveller.

The  Right  Hon.  A.  H.  Layard,  M.P.,  took  the  chair  at
this  lecture,  and  by  his  side  sat  M.  Du  Chaillu,  while  the
Tabernacle  was  crowded  to  excess,  and  large  numbers  of
people  had  to  be  turned  away  from  the  doors.  In  the  course
of  the  address  there  were  many  references  to  the  Scriptures,
the  power  and  goodness  of  God,  and  the  responsibility  of
the  Christian  Church  to  send  missionaries  to  the  newly-
explored  lands  of  equatorial  Africa.  Yet  for  some  strange
reason  the  lecturer  was  violently  attacked  in  the  Press.
Nothing  seemed  too  abusive  to  say  of  him,  and  this  onslaught
was  perhaps  the  most  unreasonable  and  offensive  of  all  that
he  had  to  meet  through  his  remarkable  career.  He  was
described  as  "  The  ass  of  the  Conventicle/'  "  A  broken-down
Boanerges,"  "  A  Merry-Andrew,"  and  his  lectures  were  said
to  rival  the  comic  journals.  So  fierce  was  the  assault,  that  a
friend  of  the  preacher  became  nervous,  and  wrote  expostulat-
ing with  him.  In  reply  C.  H.  Spurgeon  sent  a  long  letter
meeting  the  objections  seriatim.

"  I  have  been  dumb,"  he  wrote,  "  under  the  cruel  rebukes
of  my  enemies,  and  the  ungenerous  reproofs  of  pretended
friends.  I  have  proved  hitherto  the  power  of  silence,  and
although  most  bitterly  tempted,  I  shall  not  change  my


—  -


294    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

custom,  or  venture  a  syllable  in  order  to  stay  these  mad
ravings.  But  your  brotherly  note  deserves  one  or  two  words
of  answer.

"  (i.)  Have  I  well  weighed  what  I  have  done  in  the
matter  of  these  lectures?  Aye, — and  so  weighed  it  that
neither  earth  nor  hell  can  now  move  me  from  my  course.  I
have  a  life-work  to  perform,  and  towards  its  completion,
through  evil  report  and  good  report,  I  speed  my  way.

"  (2.)  You  imagine  that  my  aim  is  merely  to  amuse,  and
you  then  speak  very  properly  of  '  stooping.'  Indeed,  if  it
were  so,  if  I  had  no  higher  or  nobler  aim  in  view,  it  would
be  stooping  with  sorrowful  emphasis ;  but,  then,  think  you
that  the  devil  would  care  to  roar  at  me?  Why,  surely,  it
would  be  his  best  policy  to  encourage  me  in  forsaking  my
calling,  and  degrading  my  ministry !

"  (3.)  '  Is  the  Master's  eye  regarding  His  servant  with
pleasure?'  Yes,  I  solemnly  feel  that  it  is;  nor  am  1
conscious  of  any  act,  or  motive, — the  common  infirmity  of
man  excepted, — which  could  cause  me  to  incur  Divine
displeasure  in  connection  with  that  which  is,  to  me,  the  work
of  my  life.

"  (4.)  With  regard  to  laughter, — you  and  I  may  differ
upon  this  matter,  and  neither  of  us  be  quite  infallible  in  our
judgment.  To  me,  a  smile  is  no  sin,  and  a  laugh  no  crime.
The  Saviour,  the  Man  of  sorrows,  is  our  example  of  morality,
but  not  of  misery,  for  He  bore  our  griefs  that  we  might  not
bear  them ;  and  I  am  not  John  the  Baptist,  nor  a  monk,  nor
hermit,  nor  an  ascetic,  either  in  theory  or  practice.  Un-
hallowed mirth  I  hate,  but  I  can  and  do  enjoy  my  Father's
works,  and  the  wonders  of  Creation,  none  the  less,  but  all  the
more,  because  I  am  a  Christian.  At  any  rate,  I  hold  my
own  views  upon  this  point;  and  during  eleven  years  of
ministry,  I  have  seen  no  ill  effect,  but  very  much  good  from


NOTABLE  LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES.   295

my  preaching,  although  the  charge  has  always  been  laid  at
my  door  that  I  sometimes  provoke  the  risible  faculties.

"  (5.)  Concerning  '  sowing  to  the  flesh,'  I  have  not  done
so  in  these  lectures,  but  have  rendered  honest  and  hearty
service  to  my  Lord,  and  believe  that  spiritual  fruit  has
already  been  reaped.

"  (6.)  As  to  the  grief  of  friends,  let  them,  as  well  as
myself,  be  ready  to  bear  the  cross ;  and  let  them  not  attempt
to  evade  reproach  by  weeping  where  no  tears  are  needed.  I
have  given  no  cause  to  the  enemy  to  blaspheme,  or  only  such
blessed  cause  as  shall  be  renewed  with  greater  vigour  than
ever."

He  then  went  on  to  explain  that  these  lectures,  which  were
primarily  intended  for  the  students  of  the  Pastors'  College
(although  the  general  public  were  also  admitted),  had
included  English  History,  Sabbath-school  Teaching,  Ethno-
logy, Books  and  Reading,  Habit  and  Instinct,  etc.,  and  both
he  and  the  other  lecturers  had  laboured  not  merely  to
instruct,  but  to  do  spiritual  good.  "  My  present  course  is
upon  Natural  History,"  he  continued.  "  For  the  lectures
already  delivered,  especially  the  abused  ones,  I  have  had
the  thanks  of  the  members  passed  spontaneously  and
unanimously ;  and  I  believe  the  lectures  have  been  as  accept-
able to  the  audience  as  any  which  were  ever  delivered.  We
who  have  seen  the  wonders  of  wisdom  in  anatomy,
providential  adaptation,  and  creating  perfection,  have  gone
home  praising  and  blessing  God.  We  have  laughed,  doubt-
less; and  we  have  wept,  too;  but,  with  an  audience  f>f  150
young  men,  and  a  considerable  company  of  men  and  women
of  the  working-class,  what  would  be  the  use  of  dull,  drowsy
formality  ?  Last  Friday  week,  the  '  Shrews '  lecture  came
in  due  course,  and  I  thought  it  might  be  useful  to  give  a  few
words  as  to  the  value  of  love  and  kindness  in  Christian


296    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

families,  for  which  words  I  have  had  grateful  acknowledg-
ment. We  went  home^  and  I  have  not  heard  of  one  of  the
audience  who  did  not  feel  that  it  was  an  evening  well  and
profitably  spent.  Many  Christian  people  gave  me  a  hearty
shake  of  the  hand  and  glowing  thanks.


"A  Gorilla  Lecturing  on  Mr.  Spurgeon."     From  a  cartoon  published
at  the  time  of  the  Gorilla  controversy-

"  But,  lo !  to  our  utter  amazement,  one  morning  we  dis-
covered that  the  lecture  was  considered  vulgar,  coarse,  and
I  know  not  what.  The  gentleman  of  the  Press  had  nothing
else  just  then  to  do,  so  they  said,  '  Let  us  abuse  Spurgeon,
no  matter  whether  he  deserves  it  or  not.'  Since  this  abuse,


NOTABLE  LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES.    297

I  have  asked  scores  who  were  there  if  anything  had  been
said  for  which  one  might  be  sorry,  and  all  have  answered,
'  No,  nothing  was  said  at  all  deserving  censure,  or  anything
but  approval.'  Think  you  that  my  hearers  are  also  so
degraded  as  to  tolerate  conduct  such  as  a  lying  Press  imputes
to  me  ?  "

The  letter  concluded  with  a  P.S.  "  Get  the  '  Gorilla '
lecture ;  read  it,  and  see  if  there  be  any  evil  in  it ;  yet  it  is
the  least  religious  of  them  all."

The  chairman  at  the  "  Gorilla  "  meeting  had  in  the  course
of  his  remarks  made  use  of  the  words  :  "  We  are  now  to  be
entertained  by  Mr.  Spurgeon's  lecture  on  the  gorilla ;  but,  in
after  ages, — according  to  the  development  theory, — we  shall
doubtless  have  a  gorilla  lecturing  on  Mr.  Spurgeon;"  and
within  a  short  time  a  cartoon  was  published  and  sold  to  the
public  representing  "  a  gorilla  lecturing  on  Mr.  Spurgeon,"
the  creature  being  shown  with  one  arm  uplifted  and  the  other
resting  upon  a  bust  of  the  preacher.  Some  wag,  too,
wrote  the  following  letter  to  M.  Blondin,  who  was  then
performing  at  the  Crystal  Palace,  and  he  sent  it  on  to  the
pastor.

"  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE,

"NEWINGTON,  Oct.  5,  1861.

"  M.  BLONDIN, — Sir — In  consequence  of  the  over-flowing
attendance  at  my  Tabernacle  on  Tuesday  evening  last,  when
I  gave  a  lecture  on  the  gorilla,  it  has  occurred  to  myself  and
to  my  brethren,  the  managers  of  the  Tabernacle,  that  to
engage  your  services  for  an  evening  (say  next  Wednesday)
for  the  following  programme,  would  result  in  mutual  benefit.
You  must  meet  me  at  the  Tabernacle  on  Tuesday  next,  at
12  o'clock,  to  confirm  or  to  alter  the  proposed  order  of  enter-
tainment, which  I  flatter  myself  will  be  highly  gratifying  to  all
concerned.


298    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

"  PROGRAMME.

"  At  6  o'clock  on  Wednesday  evening,  October  pth,  M.
Blondin  to  ascend  from  the  platform  in  the  Tabernacle  by
an  easy  spiral  ascent,  five  times  round  the  interior  to  one
of  the  upper  windows  opposite  the  Elephant  and  Castle,
thence  by  an  easy  incline  in  at  the  first-floor  window  of  that
inn  and  return  the  same  way  to  the  platform.  The  admis-
sion to  be  as  at  the  'gorilla  '  lecture,  6d.,  is.  and  25.  6d.

"  Yours  sincerely,

"C.  H.  SPURGEON."

All  the  abuse  and  ridicule  which  were  heaped  upon  the
preacher  had  not  the  slightest  effect  in  weakening  his
popularity.  As  an  instance  of  the  way  in  which  he  was
beloved  by  the  masses  of  the  people,  the  following  story,
which,  we  believe,  has  never  been  told  before,  is  significant.
On  March  7th,  1863,  the  Princess  Alexandra  of  Denmark,
destined  to  become  the  Queen  of  Great  Britain  and
Ireland,  made  her  public  entry  into  London,  and  the  streets
were  thronged  with  sightseers.  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon
drove  into  town  in  his  closed  brougham,  and  possibly  with
a  view  of  escaping  inconvenient  notice,  wore,  what  was  very
unusual  for  him,  a  tall  hat.  His  carriage  came  to  a  standstill
on  London  Bridge,  owing  to  a  block  of  the  traffic,  and  here
he  was  recognised  by  a  working  man  who  had  often  attended
his  services.  In  a  moment  the  news  spread  among  the
people,  and  they  thronged  the  carriage,  giving  the
preacher  such  an  ovation  as  even  the  Princess  might  have
envied.  He  was  cheered  again  and  again,  men  and  women
struggled  for  front  places  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  his  face,  and
his  hand  was  nearly  wrung  off  and  his  arm  almost  drawn  out
of  its  socket  in  the  enthusiasm  of  the  delighted  bystanders.

Among  other  notable  lectures  at  the  Tabernacle  were,


NOTABLE  LECTURES  AND  ADDRESSES.    299

"  The  Two  Wesleys,"  "  Sermons  in  Candles,"  and  "  Eccen-
tric Preachers,"  all  of  which  have  been  published  and  are
so  well-known  that  it  is  unnecessary  more  than  to  mention
them  here.

Away  from  home,  too,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  often  delighted
large  audiences  with  his  racy  addresses  on  interesting
subjects.  A  curious  incident  once  happened  in  connection
with  a  lecture  which  he  delivered  in  the  City  Hall,  Glasgow.
In  the  company  of  the  Lord  Provost,  the  speaker  went  to
the  entrance  of  the  building,  but  was  informed  by  the
policeman  in  charge  that  no  one  without  tickets  could  be
admitted.  The  distinguished  visitors  had  no  tickets,  so
C.  H.  Spurgeon  told  the  constable  that  his  companion  was
the  Lord  Provost.  The  policeman  said  he  did  not  know,
neither  did  he  care  who  the  gentleman  was,  but  if  what  had
been  said  was  true,  he  was  sure  no  Lord  Provost  would
wish  him  to  disobey  orders.  He  had  his  directions  from  the
inspector  to  let  nobody  in  without  a  ticket,  and  he  was
going  to  obey  the  rules.  The  Lord  Provost  replied,  "  But
this  is  Mr.  Spurgeon,  and  he  has  to  deliver  the  lecture."
"  I  cannot  help  that,"  rejoined  the  constable.  "  I  have  my
orders,  and  he  shall  not  come  in  without  a  ticket."
Eventually,  after  much  trouble,  the  visitors  managed  to
get  their  cards  sent  to  the  inspector,  who  came
out  and  escorted  them  into  the  hall.  The  preacher  often
used  the  story  of  his  friend's  and  his  own  persistence  and
ultimate  success  as  an  illustration  in  preaching  the  Gospel
and  inviting  sinners  to  Christ.


CHAPTER  XXII.

MEMORABLE    SERVICES    AND    SERMONS.

r  I  "  0  speak  of  all  the  memorable  services  held  at  the
Metropolitan  Tabernacle  would,  of  coursej  be
impossible  here,  but  there  are  some  which  may  be  referred
to  on  account  of  their  peculiar  interest  or  the  remarkable
manner  in  which  their  fame  spread.  The  first  service  of
unusual  moment  after  .  the  opening  was  that  held  on
December  22nd,  1861,  when  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon
preached  a  wonderful  sermon  from  the  text  Amos  iii.  6,
"  Shall  there  be  evil  in  a  city  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done
it?"  The  occasion  was  the  death  of  the  Prince  Consort,
to  whose  goodness  and  usefulness  the  preacher  paid  an
eloquent  tribute,  at  the  same  time  praying  fervently  that
the  widowed  sovereign  might  find  the  truest  consolation
and  comfort  in  the  God  who  cares  for  the  afflicted  and
grief -stricken.

A  few  weeks  later  the  preacher  again  had  a  sorrowful
topic  to  refer  to.  There  had  been  an  accident  at  the
Hartley  Colliery,  over  two  hundred  persons  losing  their
HveSj  and  he  took  for  his  text  on  this  occasion  the  words  in
Job  xiv.  14,  "  If  a  man  die,  shall  he  live  again  ?  "  At  the
close  of  his  discourse  the  preacher  pleaded  for  the  widows
and  orphans  of  those  who  had  been  killed ;  and  although
the  attendance  was  thinner  than  usual,  owing  to  the  evening
— a  Thursday — being  very  wet,  the  congregation  generously
gave  ;£i2o  in  the  collection.


MEMORABLE  SERVICES  AND  SERMONS.   301

On  Sunday  morning,  May  i8th,  1862,  Dr.  Merle
D'Aubigne,  the  historian  of  the  Reformation^  was  present
at  the  Tabernacle,  and  after  the  sermon  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon
he  addressed  the  great  congregation  of  over  six  thousand
persons  on  Christian  love  and  unity.

But  of  all  the  sermons  ever  preached  in  the  Metropolitan.
Tabernacle,  that  on  "  Baptismal  Regeneration,"  delivered
on  Sunday  morning,  June  5th,  1864,  undoubtedly  became
the  most  renowned.  In  its  printed  form  a  quarter-of-a-
million  copies  have  been  sold,  and  it  is  still  in  great  demand.
Speaking  of  this  discourse,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  said :  "  It  was
delivered  with  the  full  expectation  that  the  sale  of  the
sermons  would  receive  very  serious  injury;  in  fact,  I
mentioned  to  one  of  the  publishers  that  I  was  about  to
destroy  it  at  a  single  blow,  but  that  the  blow  must  be  struck,
cost  what  it  might,  for  the  burden  of  the  Lord  lay  heavy
upon  me,  and  I  must  deliver  my  soul.  I  deliberately
counted  the  cost,  and  reckoned  upon  the  loss  of  many  an
ardent  friend  and  helper,  and  I  expected  the  assaults  of
clever  and  angry  foes.  I  was  not  mistaken  in  other
respects ;  but  in  the  matter  of  the  sermons  I  was  altogether
out  of  my  reckoning,  for  they  increased  greatly  in  sale  at
once.  That  fact  was  not  in  any  degree  to  me  a  test  of  my
action  being  right  or  wrong;  I  should  have  felt  as  well
content  in  heart  as  I  am  now  as  to  the  rightness  of  my
course  had  the  publication  ceased  in  consequence;  but  still
it  was  satisfactory  to  find  that,  though  speaking  out  might
lose  a  man  some  friends,  it  secured  him  many  others ;  and
if  it  overturned  his  influence  in  one  directionz  it  was  fully
compensated  elsewhere.  No  truth  is  more  sure  than  this,
that  the  path  of  duty  is  to  be  followed  thoroughly  if  peace
of  mind  is  to  be  enjoyed.  Results  are  not  to  be  looked  at;,
we  are  to  keep  our  conscience  clear,  come  what  may;  and


3o2    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

all  considerations  of  influence  and  public  estimation  are  to
be  as  light  as  feathers  in  the  scale.  In  minor  matters,  as
well  as  in  more  important  concerns,  I  have  spoken  my  mind
fearlessly,  and  brought  down  objurgations  and  .anathemas


A  familiar  pulpit  attitude  of  C.   H.  Spurgeon.      From   a

photograph  taken  just  after  the  opening  of  the

Metropolitan  Tabernacle.

innumerable ;  but  I  in  nowise  regret  it,  and  shall  not  swerve
from  the  use  of  outspoken  speech  in  the  future  any  more
than  in  the  past.  I  would  scorn  to  retain  a  single  adherent


MEMORABLE  SERVICES  AND  SERMONS.   303;

by  such  silence  as  would  leave  him  under  any  misappre-
hension.    After  all,  men  love  plain  speech."

The  text  of  the  sermon  was  St.  Mark  xvi.  15,  16.  "  And


Another  very  common  attitude  of  C-   H.   Spurgeon  when

preaching  at  the  Tabernacle,  taken  at  the  same  time  .as

the  photograph  on  the   opposite   page.

He  said  unto  them,  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the-
Gospel  to  every  creature.  He  that  believeth  and  13  baptized
shall  be  saved ;  but  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."


304    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

After  pointing  out  that  the  Prayer  Book  plainly  taught
baptismal  regeneration,  as  shown  by  the  words  prepared
for  children,  "  my  baptism  wherein  I  was  made  a  member
of  Christ,  the  child  of  God,  and  an  inheritor  of  the  King-
dom of  Heaven,"  and  by  the  form  tor  the  administration  of
baptism :  "  Then  shall  the  priest  say,  '  Seeing  now,  dearly
beloved  brethren,  that  this  child  is  regenerate  and  grafted
into  the  body  of  Christ's  church,  let  us  give  thanks  unto
Almighty  God  for  these  benefits;  and  with  one  accord
make  our  prayers  unto  Him,  that  this  child  may  lead  the
rest  of  his  life  according  to  this  beginning,"  the  preacher
went  on  to  make  the  statement  which  led  to  such  an  outcry :
" '  But,'  I  hear  many  good  people  exclaim,  '  there  are
many  good  clergymen  in  the  church  who  do  not  believe  in
baptismal  regeneration  ! '  To  this  my  answer  is  prompt.
'  Why,  then,  do  they  belong  to  a  church  which  teaches  that
doctrine  in  the  plainest  terms  ? '  I  am  told  that  many  in
the  Church  of  England  preach  against  her  own  teaching.
I  know  they  do,  and  herein  I  rejoice  in  their  enlightenment,
but  I  question,  gravely  question  their  morality.  To  take
•oath  that  I  sincerely  assent  and  consent  to  a  doctrine  which
I  do  not  believe,  would  to  my  conscience  appear  little
short  of  perjury,  if  not  absolute,  downright  perjury;  but
those  who  do  so  must  be  judged  by  their  own  Lord.  For
me  to  take  money  for  defending  what  I  do  not  believe —
for  me  to  take  the  money  of  a  church,  and  then  to  preach
against  what  are  most  evidently  its  doctrines — I  say,  -for  me
to  do  this  (I  judge  others  as  I  would  that  they  should  judge
me)  for  me,  or  for  any  other  simple,  honest  man  to  do  so,
were  an  atrocity  so  great,  that  if  I  had  perpetrated  the  deed,
I  should  consider  myself  out  of  the  pale  of  truthfulness,
•honesty,  and  common  morality.  Sirs,  when  I  accepted  the
•office  of  minister  of  this  congregation,  I  looked  to  see  what


.3


306    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

were  your  articles  of  faith :  if  I  had  not  believed  them  I
should  not  have  accepted  your  call;  and  when  I  change
my  opinions,  rest  assured  that  as  an  honest  man  I  shall
resign  the  office ;  for  how  could  I  profess  one  thing  in  your
declaration  cf  faith,  and  quite  another  thing  in  my  own
preaching?  Would  I  accept  your  pay,  and  then  stand  up
even'  Sabbath-day  and  talk  against  the  doctrines  of  your
standards  ?  For  clergymen  to  swear  or  say  that  they  give
their  solemn  assent  and  consent  to  what  they  do  not
believe,  is  one  of  the  grossest  pieces  of  immorality  perpe-
trated in  England,  and  is  most  pestilential  in  its  influence,
since  it  directly  teaches  men  to  lie  whenever  it  seems  neces-
sary to  do  so  in  order  to  get  a  living  or  increase  their
supposed  usefulness ;  it  is,  in  fact,  an  open  testimony  from
priestly  lips  that  at  least  in  ecclesiastical  matters  falsehood
may  express  truth,  and  truth  itself  is  a  mere  unimportant
nonentity.  I  know  of  nothing  more  calculated  to  debauch
the  public  mind  than  a  want  of  straightforwardness  in
ministers ;  and  when  worldly  men  hear  ministers  denounc-
ing the  very  things  which  their  own  Prayer  Book  teaches,
they  imagine  that  words  have  no  meaning  among
ecclesiastics,  and  that  vital  differences  in  religion  are  merely
a  matter  of  tweedle-dee  and  tweedle-dum;  and  that  it  does
not  much  matter  what  a  man  does  believe  so  long  as  he  is
charitable  towards  other  people.  If  baptism  does
regenerate  people,  let  the  fact  be  preached  with  a  trumpet
tongue,  and  let  no  man  be  ashamed  of  his  belief  in  it.  If
this  'be  really  their  creed,  by  all  means  let  them  have  full
liberty  for  its  propagation.  My  brethren,  those  are  honest
churchmen  in  this  matter  who,  subscribing  to  the  Prayer
Book,  believe  in  baptismal  regeneration,  and  preach  it
plainly.  God  forbid  that  we  should  censure  those  who
believe  that  baptism  saves  the  soul,  because  they  adhere  to


MEMORABLE  SERVICES  AND  SERMONS.   307

a  church  which  teaches  the  same  doctrine.  So  far  they
are  honest  men ;  and  in  England,  wherever  else,  let  them
never  lack  a  full  toleration.  Let  us  oppose  their  teaching
by  all  Scriptural  and  intelligent  means,  but  let  us  respect
their  courage  in  plainly  giving  us  their  views.  I  hate  their


Photo  by  Mr.  E.  Jo/niton.)
C-  H.   Spurgeon's  pulpit  chair.


doctrine,  but  I  love  their  honesty;  and  as  they  speak  but
what  they  believe  to  be  true,  let  them  speak  it  out,  and  the
more  clearly  the  better.  Out  with  it,  sirs,  be  it  what  it  may,
but  do  let  us  know  what  you  mean.  For  my  part,  I  love  to


308    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

stand  foot  to  foot  with  an  honest  foeman.  To  open
warfare,  bold  and  true  hearts  raise  no  objection  but  the
ground  of  quarrel ;  it  is  covert  enmity  which  we  have  most
cause  to  fear,  and  best  reason  to  loathe.  That  crafty  kind-
ness which  inveigles  me  to  sacrifice  principle  is  the  serpent
in  the  grass — deadly  to  the  incautious  wayfarer.  Where
union  and  friendship  are  not  cemented  by  truth,  they  are
an  unhallowed  confederacy.  It  is  time  that  there  should  be
put  an  end  to  the  flirtations  of  honest  men  with  those  who
believe  one  way  and  swear  another.  If  men  believe  baptism
works  regeneration,  let  them  say  so;  but  if  they  do  not
so  believe  it  in  their  hearts,  and  yet  subscribe,  and  yet  more,
get  their  livings  by  subscribing  to  words  asserting  it,  let
them  find  congenial  associates  among  men  who  can  equivo-
cate and  shufflei  for  honest  men  will  neither  ask  nor  accept
their  friendship."

Despite  the  vigour  of  this  language,  it  is  difficult  at  the
present  day  to  realise  the  extraordinary  sensation  which  the
sermon  created.  On  all  hands  replies  and  refutations
were  preached  and  printed,  a  hundred  and  thirty-five  of
which  were  collected  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon  and  bound  in
three  thick  volumes.  But  this  set  was  by  no  means  com-
plete, and  it  is  impossible  to  say  how  many  pamphlets  and
sermons  were  published  as  a  result  of  that  discourse  on
"  Baptismal  Regeneration "  and  the  three  supplementary
sermons  which  the  great  preacher  afterwards  delivered.
The  replies  and  counter-replies  varied  in  character,  from
the  serious,  refined  and  learned  to  the  abusive,  burlesque,
and  whimsical.  A  selection  of  the  titles  taken  at  random
will  give  some  idea  of  the  variety.  Among  others  there
were :  "  An  Exposure  of  the  Fallacies  and  Misrepresenta-
tions in  Mr.  Spurgeon's  Sermon  on  '  Baptismal  Regenera-
tion,' in  connection  with  his  attacks  on  the  Church  of


00-

Is

1  I-


o^


310    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

England,"  "  The  Voice  of  the  Church  on  Holy  Baptism,"
"  A  Reply  to  the  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  Attack  on  the
Doctrines  of  the  Church  of  England  and  the  Character  of
the  Evangelical  Clergy,"  "  The  Church  of  England  Right :
She  and  Her  Clergy  Vindicated,"  "  What  has  Mr.  Spurgeon
Done  ?  and  by  Whose  Authority  Has  He  Done  It  ?  "  "  The
Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  Baptismal  Critics  Criticised,"  "The
Great  Gun  is  Sounding!  Clergymen  Beware;  or,  a  Few
Words  Showing  that  Mr.  C.  H.  Spurgeon  is  in  the  Light
and  the  Evangelical  Clergy  are  in  the  Dark,"  "  What  is  to  be
Done  with  this  Spurgeon  ?  "  "  The  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon
Settled  " ;  "  Great  is  Diana ;  or,  Mother  Church  and  the
Babes  " ;  "  ^-generation  or  Zte-generation ;  A  Pill  for  the
Parsons  and  a  Spur  for  Spurgeon  " ;  "  On  Which  Side  is
Dishonesty  ?  or  a  Brief  Exposure  of  the  Serious  Perversion
of  the  Words  of  Holy  Scripture  in  Mr.  Spurgeon's
Sermon";  "The  Spurgeon  Antidote  on  Baptismal
Regeneration  " ;  "  What  Is  It  All  About ;  or  an  Inquiry  into
the  Statements  of  the  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon  " ;  "  Weighed
in  the  Balances ;  the  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon  Self-
condemned  " ;  "  Regeneration  not  Salvation  " ;  "A  Chal-
lenge to  the  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon";  "  Regeneration ;  The
Use  and  Abuse  of  a  Word  " ;  "  Mr.  Spurgeon  Shown  to  be
a  Teacher  of  Baptismal  Regeneration  " ;  "  The  Evil  Speak-
ing and  Ignorance  of  the  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon  " ;  "  The
Pasdo-Baptist  Mode  Vindicated  " ;  "  The  Tables  Turned  ;
Mr.  Spurgeon's  Ignorance  Wisdom,  and  His  Critics'
Wisdom  Ignorance " ;  "  The  Divine  Validity  of  Infant
Baptism  as  Administered  by  Pouring  or  Sprinkling " ;
"  Infant  Baptism,  Why  Sneer  at  It  ?  "  The  names  of  most  of
the  writers  have  passed  into  oblivion,  but  there  were  among
them  many  distinguished  men  such  as  Dean  Goode,  of
Ripon;  the  Rev.  Hugh  Stowell,  M.A.,  of  Manchester;  the


312    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

Rev.  Hugh  Allen,  D.D.,  and  the  Rev.  Joseph
Bardsley,  M.A.,  on  the  Church  of  England  side;  and  Dr.
Brock,"  of  Bloomsbury  Chapel;  Dr.  Landels,  of  Regent's
Park  Chapel,  and  Dr.  Haycroft,  of  Bristol,  on  the  Baptist
side.

One  result  of  the  controversy  was  that  C.  H.  Spurgeon
left  the  Evangelical  Alliance.  He  had  received  a  letter
from  the  secretary,  Mr.  James  Davis,  strongly  asserting  that
the  only  alternative  open  to  him  was  either  to  retract  or
to  withdraw  from  the  Alliance ;  and  believing  the  letter  to
be  written  with  the  authority  of  the  committee,  C.  H.
Spurgeon  at  once  withdrew  from  membership.  It  trans-
pired, however,  that  the  secretary's  action  had  not  been
authorised,  and  some  years  later  the  distinguished  Baptist
preacher  rejoined  the  Alliance  and  remained  a  member  of
its  Council  until  his  death  in  1892.

Early  in  1867  it  was  found  that  owing  to  the  enormous
crowds  which  had  attended  it  weekly,  the  Tabernacle  build-
ing had  suffered  considerably  from  vvear  and  tear,  and  it  was
decided  to  repair  the  interior.  The  great  sanctuary  was
therefore  closed,  and  for  five  Sunday  mornings  (March  24th
to  April  2ist,  1867)  C.  H.  Spurgeon  preached  in  the
Agricultural  Hall,  Islington,  to  congregations  numbering
not  fewer  than  twenty  thousand  persons.  These  were  the
largest  audiences  he  ever  had  inside  a  building,  with  the
single  exception  of  the  Crystal  Palace  gathering  on  the
occasion  of  the  Fast  Day  service.

The  increasing  work  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  had  long
necessitated  a  larger  residence  than  the  old  house  which
he  inhabited  in  Nightingale  Lane,  and  in  1869  the  building
was  pulled  down  and  a  new  "  Helensburgh  House  "  erected
by  Mr.  William  Higgs,  the  builder  cf  the  Tabernacle.  This
was  a  far  more  commodious  and  imposing  building  than  the


a.  n


3M    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

old  house;  and  when  the  garden  had  been  re-arranged  under
the  direction  of  Mr.  Shirley  Hibberd,  who,  among  other
things,  laid  out  a  new  lawn  where  the  preacher  could  play
"  the  old  Puritan  game  of  bowls  "  with  his  sons  and  friends,
the  new  Helensburgh  House  became  a  very  comfortable
home.  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  had  never  accumulated
wealth.  Whenever  he  had  a  spare  five-pound  note  from  the
sale  of  his  sermons  and  books  it  invariably  went  to  help
one  of  the  numerous  works  carried  on  in  connection  with  the
Tabernacle,  and  the  many  opportunities  of  making  money
which  presented  themselves  to  him  were  never  accepted.
He  had,  for  instance,  been  offered  ^10,000  and  all  expenses
if  he  would  visit  America  and  deliver  fifty  lectures  there,  but
had  declined  because  he  felt  his  duty  to  lay  at  home.  As
a  mark  of  appreciation,  therefore,  a  few  of  his  liberal  and
devoted  helpers  determined  to  defray  the  principal  part  of
the  cost  of  the  new  home;  and  when  C.  H.  Spurgeon  met
the  generous  donors  to  thank  them,  he  made  one  of  the
most  charming  little  speeches  that  could  have  been  uttered
on  such  an  occasion.

"  It  was  a  law  of  Abdul  the  Merciful/'  he  said,  "  that  no
man  should  be  compelled  to  speak  when  overwhelmed  by
kindness.  Doth  a  man  sing  when  his  mouth  is  -ill  of  the
sherbet  of  Shiraz,  or  a  prince  dance  when  he  wears  on  his
head  the  crown  of  Ali,  with  its  hundredweight  of  jewels  ?
Or,  as  Job  saith,  '  Doth  the  wild  ass  bray  when  he  hath
grass  ?  Or  loweth  the  ox  over  his  fodder  ? '  As  he  that
marrieth  a  virgin  is  excused  from  war,  so  he  that  receiveth
a  great  gift  is  exempted  from  a  public  speech.  My  heart
is  as  full  of  thanks  as  Paradise  was  full  of  peace.  As  the
banks  of  Lugano  ring  with  the  songs  of  nightingales,  so
my  whole  being  reverberates  with  gratitude;  and  there  is
another,  for  whom  I  may  also  speak,  who  echoes  all  I  utter,


MEMORABLE  SERVICES  AND  SERMONS.   315

as  the  cliffs  of  Meringen  prolong  with  manifold  sweetness
the  music  of  the  horn.

"  From  you, — it  comes  with  double  pleasure  like  the  nuts
and  the  almonds  that  were  carried  to  Joseph  fresh  from  his
father's  tents.  From  my  brethren, — it  is  a  flower  dripping
with  the  dew  of  Hermon,  and  perfumed  with  the  fragrance
of  affection.  From  my  fellow-soldiers, — it  comes  as  a  cup
of  generous  wine  in  which  we  pledge  each  other  for  future
battles.  From  my  children  in  the  faith, — as  a  love-token
such  as  a  tender  father  treasures.  From  the  church, — it
is  offered  as  a  sacrifice  of  sweet  smell  acceptable  unto
God.

"  A  house, — founded  in  love,  walled  with  sincerity,  roofed
in  with  generosity.  Its  windows  are  agates,  its  gates  car-
buncles. The  beam  out  of  the  wall  shall  talk  with  me.
and  the  stones  shall  give  me  sermons.  I  shall  see  your
names  engraven  on  every  room ;  and  I  shall  read,  in  a  mystic
handwriting,  the  record  that  your  love  was  weighed  in  the
balances,  and  was  not  found  wanting.

"  The  time  of  your  love.  During  my  life; — not  like  the
poor  philosopher,  who  was  starved  to  death,  but  who  after-
wards had  a  pillar  erected  in  his  honour.  This  house  will
be  a  monument  of  your  generosity,  and  so  it  will  be  a
double  memorial."

The  speaker  concluded  with  a  remark  about  the  fear  of
making  too  much  of  a  minister,  and  added,  "  There  is  no
intent  on  my  part  to  rest  now  that  I  have  a  new  house-  If
possible,  I  shall  work  harder  than  before,  and  preach  better
than  ever."

Mrs.  Spurgeon,  who  had  been  staying  for  some  time  at
Brighton  as  an  invalid,  came  up  to  London  in  order  to  be
present  at  this  gathering,  but  immediately  afterwards
returned  until  the  house  was  ready  for  its  occupant.  The


3i6    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

devotion  of  the  husband  was  most  touching.  Despite  his
multifarious  labours  he  busied  himself  in  the  purchase  of
new  furniture  so  that  nothing  should  worry  his  wife,  and
he  had  a  room  adjoining  his  study  specially  fitted  up  for
her  use.  Everything  was  ready  when  she  returned  to
London  improved  somewhat  in  health  as  the  result  of  an
operation  performed  by  Sir  James  Simpson,  of  Edinburgh,


(Mattll  &>  Fox,  photo,  Piccadilly.)
C.    H.   Spurgeon   in    1870.

who  travelled  from  Scotland  to  Brighton  twice  for  the
purpose.  The  distinguished  surgeon  had  a  great  regard
for  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  and  when  asked  about  his  fee  replied,
"  Well,  I  suppose  it  should  be  a  thousand  guineas,  and  when
you  are  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  I  shall  expect  you  to  pay
it ;  till  then  let  us  consider  it  settled  by  love."

An  incident  that  happened  during  this  long  and  painful


MEMORABLE  SERVICES  AND  SERMONS.   517

*

illness  of  Mrs.  Spurgeon  is  so  remarkable  that  it  must  be
recounted.  In  seeking  to  comfort  her  in  her  distress,  C.  H.
Spurgeon  often  asked  the  question,  "  What  can  I  bring  you,
wifey  ?  "  and  one  day  she  replied,  playfully,  and  without  any
serious  intent,  "  I  should  like  an  opal  ring  and  a  piping
bullfinch."  The  husband  looked  surprised,  and  answered,
"  Ah,  you  know  I  cannot  get  those  for  you  !  "  The  strange
request  was  made  the  subject  of  much  banter  for  a  day  or
two  between  husband  and  wife,  and  then  almost  passed
from  memory.  But  one  Thursday  evening,  not  long  after-
wards, C.  H.  Spurgeon,  on  returning  from  the  Tabernacle,
showed  his  wife  a  tiny  box.  This  he  opened,  and  produced
therefrom  a  beautiful  opal  ring  which  he  placed  on  Mrs.
Spurgeon's  finger.  Of  course  she  wanted  to  know  its
history,  and  it  transpired  that  an  old  lady  whom  the  preacher
had  once  seen  when  she  was  lying  ill,  had  sent  a  note  to
the  Tabernacle  asking  that  someone  would  call  upon  her
to  receive  a  small  present  she  wished  to  give  to  Mr.
Spurgeon.  The  preacher's  private  secretary  visited  the
old  lady  and  received  from  her  a  small  parcel  which  was
found  to  contain  the  opal  ring!

This  happened  while  Mrs.  Spurgeon  was  in  London.
Soon  afterwards  she  was  removed  to  Brighton  and  one  day
when  her  husband  visited  her  there,  he  carried  with  him  a
parcel  of  some  size.  On  undoing  the  covering,  a  bird-cage
was  disclosed  containing  a  beautiful  piping  bullfinch  !  The
lady's  astonishment  and  joy  were  great,  and  when  she  heard
of  the  strange  way  in  which  her  second  wish  had  been
granted,  she  naturally  believed  that  both  the  ring  and  the
bird  were  direct  love-gifts  from  the  pitiful  Father  above.
It  appeared  that  the  preacher  had  been  to  see  a  friend  whose
husband  was  dying,  and  after  praying  with  the  sufferer  he
was  about  to  leave,  when  the  lady  said :  "  I  want  you  to


3i8    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

take  my  pet  bird  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  I  would  give  him  to
none  but  her ;  his  songs  are  too  much  for  my  poor  husband
in  his  weak  state,  and  I  know  that  '  Bully '  will  interest  and


(Russetl  &*  Sons,  photo,  London.}
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  about  1870.

amuse  Mrs.  Spurgeon  in  her  loneliness  while  you  are  so
much  away  from  her."

Of  course  the  preacher  told  the  lady  how  remarkably  her


MEMORABLE  SERVICES  AND  SERMONS.   319

offer  had,  all  unconsciously,  fulfilled  the  wishes  of  his  wife,
and  with  him  she  rejoiced  at  this  instance  of  God's  care  for
His  children  even  in  comparatively  trifling  matters.  The
most  sceptical  must  certainly  own  that  the  story  is  a
strange  one,  even  if  they  believe  the  succession  of  circum-
stances to  have  been  due  merely  to  coincidence  and
chance.


CHAPTER  XXIII.

THE  PASTORS'  COLLEGE.

IMMEDIATELY  after  his  advent  to  London,  C.  H.
Spurgeon's  activities  became  so  manifold,  and  his
energies  were  exerted  in  so  many  different  directions,  that
it  is  impossible  to  give  anything  liki  a  consecutive  account
of  his  life  from  that  period.  The  strenuous  career  of  a
distinguished  worker  has  been  likened  to  a  broad  stream,
ever  widening  as  it  runs  its  course ;  but  in  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon's  case,  for  the  simile  to  be  apt,  the  river  must
possess  a  vast  delta  with  many  channels,  and  in  exploring,
one  is  bewildered  as  to  which  channel  should  be  followed
first.  Of  course,  the  pastorate  of  the  great  church  which
met  in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  is  to  be  regarded  as
the  main  stream  of  the  preacher's  life,  but  that  stream
had  not  gone  far  on  its  course  before  many  channels,
scarcely  less  important,  branched  off  in  different  directions,
and  these  again  became  the  parents  of  other  tributaries,
urtil  it  seems  hopeless  to  attempt  to  follow  the  almost
endless  ramifications  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  work  and
ministry.

The  first  of  the  many  secondary  channels  branching  off
from  the  main  stream  was  the  Pastors'  College.  This
institution  has  had  literally  a  world-wide  influence :  from
it  have  gone  forth  preachers  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  and
many  of  the  most  successful  and  most  crowded  churches
in  Great  Britain  to-dav  have  been  built  up  and  are  ministered


THE  PASTORS'  COLLEGE.  321

to  by  preachers  trained  in  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  college— his
"first  born  and  best  beloved/'  as  he  often  called  the
institution.

Like  'many  another  Christian  agency  that  has  made  its
mark  upon  the  life  of  the  country,  the  Pastors'  College
originated  in  the  self-denial  and- godly  love  for  humanity  of
its  founder.  A  young  man,  Thomas  William  Medhurst,  who
had  been  much  exercised  about  his  spiritual  condition,  had
written  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon  for  help,  and  after  some  corre-
spondence he  was  able  to  tell  the  preacher  of  his  conversion
through  one  of  the  latter's  Thursday  evening  sermons.
This  news  naturally  gave  great  joy  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon,
especially  as  the  youth  expressed  his  desire  to  be  baptized
and  to  join  the  church,  and  in  the  pastor's  note-book,  the
following  entry  referring  to  the  matter  has  been  found :
"  Thomas  William  Medhurst — a  very  promising  young
man — his  letters  to  me  evince  various  degrees  of  progress  in
the  pilgrim's  road.  He  has  been  very  anxious,  but  has  now,
I  trust,  found  refuge  in  the  Rock  of  Ages."

About  two  months  later,  the  young  man  was  baptized  at
New  Park  Street  Chapel,  and  soon  afterwards  was  received
into  the  church.  Without  delay  he  began  preaching  in  the
open  air,  his  testimony  being  attended  with  marked  success,
but  there  were  several  precise  members  of  New  Park  Street
Chapel,  who  complained  to  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon
of  what  they  described  as  the  young  convert's  "want  of
education."  They  even  went  so  far  as  to  suggest  that  his
preaching  should  be  stopped  for  fear  it  brought  disgrace
upon  the  cause.  To  satisfy  these  critical  folk  the  pastor
had  a  talk  with  the  young  man,  who  was  quite  prepared  to
admit  that  there  was  some  truth  in  what  was  said ;  "  but,"
he  added,  "  I  must  preach,  sir ;  and  I  shall  preach  unless
you  cut  off  my  head."  The  words  being  repeated  to  the

14


322    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

disapproves,  they  took  them  in  all  seriousness,  and
exclaimed  :  "  Oh !  you  can't  cut  off  Mr.  Medhurst's  head,
so  you  must  let  him  go  on  preaching."

This  incident,  trifling  as  it  may  seem,  led  to  the  'founda-
tion of  the  Pastors'  College.  Two  persons  had  become
members  of  New  Park  Street  Chapel  as  a  result  of  Mr.  Med-
hurst's preaching,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon  suggested  that  he
should  prepare  himself,  educationally  an  1  otherwise,  for  the


Mr.   T.  W.  Medhurst,  C-    H.   Spurgeon's
first  student.

ministry,  promising  to  bear  the  expense  of  his  tuition  and
support  during  the  period  cf  training.  Mr.  Medhurst  was
then  a  young  man,  about  twenty  years  of  age,  just  out  of  his
apprenticeship,  but  feeling  called  to  the  ministry,  he  gladly
agreed  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  proposal,  and  went  in  July,  1855,
to  live  at  Bexley  Heath  with  the  Rev.  C.  H.  Hosken;  pastor
of  Crayford  Baptist  Church.  That  it  needed  something
more  than  ordinary  self-denial  on  the  part  of  the  young


THE  PASTORS'  COLLEGE.       323

minister  of  New  Park  Street  to  support  his  protege  is  very
clear  when  we  remember  that  from  his  first  settlement  in
London  he  had  always  given  away  a  large  proportion  of  his
income,  and  at  this  period  his  wedding  was  approaching,
and  he  needed  all  the  money  he  could  save  towards  furnish-
ing a  home.  He  says  himself :  "  With  a  limited  income  it
\vas  no  easy  thing  for  a  young  minister  to  guarantee  ^50  a
year,"  and  the  difficulty  must  have  been  greater  after
marriage.  But  his  wife  entered  thoroughly  into  the  spirit
of  the  work,  and,  as  she  tells  us,  to  find  the  requisite  money,
11  planned  and  pinched  "  at  home.

Mr.  Medhurst  progressed  well  with  his  studies.  Once  a
week  he  spent  several  hours  with  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at  the
latter's  home,  and  already  in  1855,  the  pastor  of  New  Park
Street,  was  anticipating  the  training  of  further  students.  "  1
have  been  thinking  that  when  you  are  gone  out  into  the
vineyard,"  he  wrote  to  Mr.  M'edhurst,  "  I  must  find  another
to  be  my  dearly  beloved  Timothy  just  as  you  are  "  ;  and  he
forthwith  commenced  to  get  together  a  set  of  text-books
and  works  on"  divinity  which  became  the  nucleus  of  the
splendid  library  now  in  possession  of  the  Pastors'  College.

Mr.  Medhurst  continued  to  preach  in  the  open-air  while
studying  at  Bexley  Heath,  and  his  ministrations  were  highly
appreciated  as  an  amusing  incident  proves.  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon  went  there  to  preach  on  one  occasion,  and
after  the  service  he  overheard'  two  old  ladies  discussing  tne
sermon.  "  How  did  you  like  Mr.  Spurgeon  ?  "  asked  the
first,  to  which  her  companion  replied,  "  Oh !  very  well ;  but
I  should  have  enjoyed  the  service  more  if  he  hadn  t  imitated
our  dear  Mr.  Medhurst  so  much."  Apparently  it  did  not
strike  the  old  lady  that  there  was  an  alternative  explanation
of  the  similarity  of  style.  All  round,  the  people  were  loud
in  their  praises  of  the  student-preacher,  and  many  bore


324    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

testimony  to  the  spiritual  good  they  had  received,  so  that
C.  H.  Spurgeon  felt  encouraged  to  go  on  in  his  plan  of
training  young  men  for  the  ministry.  At  the  end  of  1856
Mr.  Medhurst  preached  at  Kingston-on-Thames,  and  soon
afterwards  the  Baptist  Church  at  that  place  offered  him  the
pastorate,  an  invitation  whichz  after  consultation  with  C.  H.
Spurgeon,  he  accepted  temporarily  while  completing  his
studies.  The  great  preacher's  kindness  of  heart  was  mani-
fested in  connection  with  this  matter,  for,  having  arranged
with  the  church  that  in  addition  to  the  amount  they  were
to  give  Mr.  Medhurst  for  his  services,  they  should  repay  him
(C.  H.  Spurgeon)  the  sum  he  was  expending  upon  the  young
student's  tuition,  he,  at  the  end  of  the  first  quarter,  offered
the  cheque  for  this  latter  amount  to  Mr.  Medhurst,  saying,
"  That  is  yours ;  the  deacons  would  not  have  given  that
extra  if  I  had  not  put  it  in  the  way  I  have  done."  Mr.  Med-
hurst refused  to  accept  the  money,  and  so  C.  H.  Spurgeon
took  a  second  student  in  the  person  of  Mr.  E.  J.  Silverton.
In  the  same  year  (1857)  Mr.  Medhurst  went  to  live  with
the  Rev.  George  Rogers,  the  gifted  Congregational  minister
who  afterwards  became  first  Principal  of  the  Pastors'
College.

Thus  began  that  great  institution  which,  up  to  the  present
year  (1903),  has  educated  no  fewer  than  1,045  men  for  the
ministry,  the  churches  ministered  to  by  them  in  the  same
period  (so  far  as  reports  have  been  received)  showing  a
gross  increase  of  253,289  church-members  and  a  net
increase  of  113,091.

Private  friends  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  heard  of
his  zeal  in  this  work,  and  offered  their  assistance,  so  thai
gradually  the  number  of  students  was  increased  until  there
were  more  than  a  dozen  under  tuition^  whilst  six  or  seven
had  accepted  pastorates  in  which  they  were  doing  good


THE  PASTORS'  COLLEGE.


325


service  to  the  Church  of  God.  The  students  were  accommo-
dated in  Mr.  Rogers'  house  at  Camberwell  until  the
Metropolitan  Tabernacle  was  completed,  when  they
migrated  thither,  and  met  in  the  class-rooms  beneath  the-


Rev.  George  Rogers,  first  principal  of  the
Pastors'  College.

chapel.  This  was  the  period  when  the  Pastors'  College  was-
moulded  into  shape,  and  it  will  be  interesting  to  learn  in
C.  H.  Spurgeon's  own  words  his  reasons  for  founding  such
an  institution  on  the  original  lines  which  he  followed.  "  We-


326    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

had  before  us,:'  he  says,  "  but  one  object,  and  that  was,  tne
glory  of  God,  by  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel.  To  preach  with
acceptance,  men,  lacking  in  education,  need  to  be  instructed ;
and  therefore  our  institution  set  itself  further  to  instruct
those  whom  God  had  evidently  called  to  preach  the  Gospel,
but  who  laboured  under  early  disadvantages.  We  never
dreamed  of  making  men  preachers,  but  we  desired  to  help
those  whom  God  had  already  called  to  be  such.  Hence,  we
laid  down,  as  a  basis,  the  condition  that  a  man  must,  during
about  two  years,  have  been  engaged  in  preaching,  and  must
have  had  some  seals  to  his  ministry,  befote  we  could  enter-
tain his  application.  No  matter  how  talented  or  promising
he  might  appear  to  be,  the  College  could  not  act  upon  mere
hopes,  but  must  have  evident  marks  of  a  Divine  call,  so  far
.as  human  judgment  can  discover  them.  This  became  a
main  point  with  us,  for  we  wanted,  not  men  whom  our  tutors
could  make  into  scholars,  but  men  whom  the  Lord  had
-ordained  to  be  preachers.

"  Firmly  fixing  this  landmark,  we  proceeded  to  sweep  away
-every  hindrance  to  the  admission  of  fit  men.  We  determined
never  to  refuse  a  man  on  account  of  absolute  poverty,  but
rather  to  provide  him  with  needful  lodging,  board,  and
raiment,  that  he  might  not  be  hindered  on  that  account.
We  also  placed  the  literary  qualifications  for  admission  so
low  that  even  brethren  who  could  not  read  have  been  able
to  enter,  and  have  been  among  the  most  useful  of  our
students  in  after  days.  A  man  of  real  ability  as  a  speaker,
of  deep  piety,  and  genuine  faith,  may  be,  by  force  of  birth
and  circumstances,  deprived  of  educational  advantages,  and
yet,  when  helped  a  little,  he  may  develop  into  a  mighty
worker  for  Christ ;  it  would  be  a  serious  loss  to  the  Church
to  deny  such  a  man  instruction  because  it  was  his  •  mis-
fortune to  miss  it  in  his  youth.  Our  College  began  by


THE  PASTORS1  COLLEGE.  327

»

inviting  men  of  God  to  her  bosom,  whether  they  were  poor
and  illiterate,  or  wealthy  and  educated.  We  sought  for
earnest  preachers,  not  for  readers  of  sermons,  or  makers  of
philosophical  essays.  '  Have  you  won  souls  for  Jesus  ? '
was  and  is  our  leading  enquiry  of, all  applicants.  'If  so,
come  thou  with  us,  and  we  will  do  thee  good.'  If  the
brother  has  any  pecuniary  means,  we  feel  that  he  should
bear  his  own  charges,  and  many  have  done  so;  but  if  he
cannot  contribute  a  sixpence,  he  is  equally  welcome,  and  is
received  upon  the  same  footing  in  all  respects.  If  we  can
but  find  men  who  love  Jesus,  and  love  the  people,  and  will
seek  to  bring  Jesus  and  the  people  together,  the  College
will  receive  two  hundred  of  such  as  readily  'as.  one,  and  trust
in  God  for  their  food;  but  if  men  of  learning  and  wealth
should  come,  the  College  will  not  accept  them  unless  they
prove  their  calling  by  power  to  deliver  the  truth,  and  by
the  blessing  of  God  upon  their  labours.  Our  men  seek  no
Collegiate  degrees,  or  classical  honours, — though  many  of
them  could  readily  attain  them;  but  to  preach  efficiently,
to  get  at  the  heart  of  the  masses,  to  evangelize  the  poor,—
this  is  the  College  ambition,  this  and  nothing  else.

"We  endeavour  to  teach  the  Scriptures,  but,  as  every-
body else  claims  to  do  the  same,  and  we  wish  to  be  known
and  read  of  all  men,  we  say  distinctly  that  the  theology  of
the  Pastors'  College  is  Puritanic.  We  know  nothing  of  the
new  ologies  ;  we  stand  by  the  old  ways.  The  improvements
brought  forth  by  what  is  called "'  modern  thought '  we
regard  with  suspicion,  and  believe  them  to  be,  at  best,
dilutions  of  the  truth,  and  most  of  them  old,  rusted  heresies,
tinkered  up  again,  and  sent  abroad  with  a  new  face  put
upon  them,  to  repeat  the  mischief  which  they  wrought  in
ages  past.  We  are  old-fashioned  enough  to  prefer  Manton
to  Maurice,  Chamock  to  Robertson,  and  Owen  to  Voysey.


328    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

Both  our  experience  and  our  reading  of  the  Scriptures
confirm  us  in  the  belief  of  the  unfashionable  doctrines  of
grace;  and  among  us,  upon  those  grand  fundamentals,
there  is  no  uncertain  sound.  Young  minds  are  not  to  be
cast  into  one  rigid  mould?  neither  can  maturity  of  doctrine
be  expected  of  beginners  in  the  ministry;  but,  as  a  rule,
our  men  have  not  only  gone  out  from  us  clear  and  sound
in  the  faith,  but  with  very  few  exceptions  they  have
continued  so."

It  was  determined  from  the  first  that  the  students  should
be  boarded  out  in  twos  and  threes,  so  that  they  might  not  be
dissociated  from  ordinary  social  life  by  living  altogether,
as  at  other  colleges,  and  this  practice  has  proved  very
successful  and  is  continued  to  the  present  time.

The  College  being  now  located  in  the  Tabernacle,  C.  H.
Spurgeon  brought  the  work  and  its  requirements  before  the
members  of  his  congregation,  and  as  a  resultj  a  church-
meeting  was  held  at  which  the  following  resolution  was
passed :  "  That  this  church  rejoices  very  greatly  in  the
labours  of  our  pastor  in  training  young  men  for  the
ministry,  and  desires  that  a  record  of  his  successful  and
laborious  efforts  should  be  entered  in  our  church-books.
Hitherto,  this  good  work  has  been  rather  a  private  service
for  the  Lord  than  one  in  which  the  members  have  had  a
share,  but  the  church  hereby  adopts  it  as  part  of  its  own
system  of  Evangelical  labours,  promises  its  pecuniary  aid,
and  its  constant  and  earnest  prayers."  A  weekly  offering
was  henceforth  taken  on  behalf  of  the  institution^  and  many
generous  gifts  were  contributed  privately.  The  work  was
now  extended,  so  that  members  of  the  church  who  had  no
intention  of  entering  the  ministry,  but  who  desired  to  get
a  sound  education,  might  attend  classes  held  in  the  evening.
A  weekly  lecture,  too,  to  the  students  was  thrown  open  to


THE  PASTORS'  COLLEGE.


329


the  public,  and  the  abuse  which  C.  H.  Spurgeon  received  as
a  result  of  this  praiseworthy  effort  has  already  been
referred  to.

As  the  number  of  students  grew  larger,  so  the  necessary
funds  were  forthcoming.  No  list  of  guaranteed  subscribers
was  compiled,  but  resort  was  had  to  prayer,  and  never  on
any  single  occasion  did  this  lever  fail  to  act.  The  preacher's


(Elliot  &*  fry,  photo,  London.']
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  in   1873.

faith  was  sometimes  tried  severely,  but  the  result  was  always
well  worth  the  trial.  For  instance,  by  the  increased  sale  of
his  sermons  in  Americai  he  was  soon  able  to  spend  from
six  to  eight  hundred  pounds  upon  his  favourite  work,  but
suddenly,  owing  to  the  preacher's  unqualified  denunciation
of  the  then  existing  slavery,  his  sermons  became  unpopular
in  the  United  States,  and  resources  from  that  quarter  were


33°    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

cut  off.  Many  a  bolder  man  might  have  quailed,  but  C.  K.
Spurgeon  had  faith  that  the  work  being  of  God  could  not
come  to  nought.  From  his  own  income  he  devoted  every
penny  that  could  be  spared,  and  was  only  dissuaded  from
selling  his  brougham  and  horse  when  Mr.  Rogers  pointed
out  that  such  a  course  would  in  the  long  run  be  anything
but  wise,  as  a  carriage  was  an  absolute  necessity  to  a  man
who  went  preaching  all  over  the  metropolis.  The  preacher
was  reduced  to  his  last  sovereign  when  a  letter  was  received
from  a  banker  to  the  effect  that  a  lady  had  just  deposited
^200  to  be  used  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon  for  the  education  of
young  men  for  the  ministry.  Some  weeks  later  a  further
;£ioo  was  deposited  in  the  same  bank  by  another  unknown
friend,  whilst  at  a  dinner  given  by  Messrs.  Passmore  and
Alabaster  to  celebrate  the  publication  of  the  preacher's  five
hundredth  sermon,  a  sum  of  ^500  was  raised  for  the
College.  So  the  work  went  on  and  prospered,  the  supplies
increasing  as.  the  need  grew.  On  one  occasion  ^1,000  was
sent  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon  by  an  unknown  donor,  and  many
other  large  sums  were  also  received,  in  addition  to  numerous
smaller  gifts.

As  in  monetary  matters  so  in  the  provision  of  efficient
and  suitable  tutors  the  needs  of  the  Pastors'  College  were
always  effectively  met.  Mr.  David  Gracey,  a  gifted  scholar,
who  had  been  educated  at  Glasgow  University,  left  the
Presbyterian  Church  for  the  Baptist,  and  entering  the
college  as  a  student  became  first  its  classical  tutor,  and  atter
th»  death  of  Mr.  Rogers,  its  Principal.  Great  help  was
rendered  by  the  president's  brother,  the  Rev.  J.  A.
Spurgeon;  whilst  Mr.  W.  R.  Selway  became  science
lecturer,  and  Professor  A.  Fergusson  English  and  elocution
tutor.  All  were  well  qualified  for  their  positions,  and  when
they  passed  away  one  after  the  other,  their  losses  were


332    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

sorely  felt,  although  other  gifted  men  took  their  places.*
Every  Friday  the  founder  and  president  of  the  College
himself  used  to  lecture  to  the  students,  a  pleasure  to  which
they  looked  forward  keenly  week  by  week.  Many  of
these  addresses  have  been  published  in.  the  four  volumes  of
"  Lectures  to  my  Students,"  and  together  they  form  a  com-
pendium for  the  aspiring  preacher  surpassing  in  common
sense  and  sound  advice  anything  else  that  has  been  written
for  a  similar  purpose.  At  intervals,  too,  the  students  had  a
field-day  at  the  home  of  their  president,  and  very  inspiring
these  gatherings  were  to  those  privileged  to  participate  in
them.

It  was  in  connection  with  the  Pastors'  College,  perhaps,
that  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  wit  and  humour  had  the  fullest  oppor-
tunity of  getting  play,  and  his  anecdotes  about  students  and
would-be  students  and  others  with  whom  he  came  in  contact
through  the  College  are  very  diverting.  Some  opponents
described  the  institution  as  "  a  parson  manufactory,"  but
C.  H.  Spurgeon  declared  "  it  would  be  nearer  the  truth  if
they  called  me  '  a  parson  killer,'  for  a  goodly  number  of
beginners  have  received  their  quietus  from  me."  If  an
applicant  suffered  from  physical  defects  which  made  it
obvious  he  could  never  become  a  successful  preacher,  or  if
after  reading  his  testimonials  and  seeing  his  replies  to
questions  it  was  clear  that  he  had  not  received  a  call  from
above,  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  never  hesitated  to  refuse
admission,  although,  except  in  rare  instances,  this  would  be
done  in  the  gentlest  and  kindliest  way  possible.  At  times,
however,  circumstances  justified  a  different  manner  of
declining.  On  one  occasion  a  young  man  came  with  an

*  The  present  tutors  of  the  Pastors'  College  (1903)  are  the
Rev.  Archibald  McCaig,  B.A.,  LL.D.,  Principal,  the  Rev.  W.
Hackney,  M.A.  (both  former  students  of  the  College),  the  Rev.
W.  A.  Gaussen,  M.A.,  LL.B.,  and  Mr.  Josiah  Richardson.


THE  PASTORS'  COLLEGE.       333

open  letter  from  his  pastor,  warmly  commending  him  to
the  President  of  the  College  as  "a  man  called  to  the
ministry  "•  but  in  another  letter  sent  through  the  post,  the
minister  told  C.  H.  Spurgeon  that  the  young  fellow  was
never  likely  to  become  a  preacher,  and  the  recommendation
had  only  been  written  because  the  candidate's  father  was
chief  deacon  in  the  minister's  church^  and  he  feared  to
offend  this  worthy  by  telling  him  the  truth.  "  I  felt,"  says
C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "  that  it  was  quite  unjust  to  put  upon  me
the  onus  of  refusing  the  young  man ;  so  when  he  arrived,  I
gave  him  the  epistle  I  had  received,  and  left  him  and  his
father  to  settle  the  matter  with  their  pastor  in  the  best  way
they  could."  It  would  be  interesting  to  know  what  happened
at  the  next  meeting  of  that  deacon  and  his  minister.

At  another  time  a  young  man  sought  admission  who  had
a  sort  of  rotary  action  of  the  jaw,  and,  although  he  was
highly  recommended  by  his  pastor  as  "  a  very  holy  man  who
had  been  the  means  of  bringing  some  to  Christ/'  he  had  to
be  refused,  for  as  C.  H.  Spurgeon  said,  "  I  could  not  have
looked  at  him  while  he  was  preaching  without  laughter,  if
all  the  gold  of  Tarshish  had  been  my  reward,  and  in  all
probability  nine  out  of  ten  of  his  hearers  would  have  been
more  sensitive  than  myself."  General  physique  was  always
regarded  by  the  President  of  the  College  as  a  fair  criterion
whether  a  man  was  fitted  for  the  ministry.  "  I  feel  assured,"
he  saidj  "  that  when  a  man  has  a  contracted  chest  with  no
distance  between  his  shoulders,  the  all-wise  Creator  did  not
intend  him  habitually  to  preach.  If  He  had  meant  him  to
speak,  he  would  have  given  him,  in  some  measure,  breadth
of  chest  sufficient  to  yield  a  reasonable  amount  of  lung  force.
A  man  who  can  scarcely  get  through  a  sentence  without  pain
can  hardly  be  called  to  '  cry  aloud  and  spare  not.'  Brethren
with  defective  mouths  and  imperfect  articulation  are  not


334    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

usually  qualified  to  preach  the  Gospel.  The  same  rule
applies  to  brethren  with  no  palate  or  an  imperfect  one."
The  great  preacher  once  mentioned  that  among  those  whom
he  had  had  the  pain  of  declining  "  on  the  ground  that  God
had  not  given  them  those  physical  appliances  which  are,  as
the  Prayer  Book  would  put  it,  '  generally  necessary,'  "  were :
"  A  man  with  a  big  tongue  which  filled  up  his  mouth  and
caused  indistinctness,  another  without  teeth,  another  who
stammered,  and  another  who  could  not  pronounce  all  the
alphabet."

With  those  men  who,  having  failed  in  various  other
callings,  turned  to  the  ministry  because  they  regarded
their  non-success  as  "  the  Lord  shutting  up  all  other  doors,"
C.  H.  Spurgeon  had  no  sympathy.  "  The  ministry  needs
the  very  best  men,"  he  used  to  tell  them,  "  not  those  who
cannot  do  anything  else.  A  man  who  would  succeed  as  a
preacher  would  probably  do  right  well  either  as  a  grocer  or  a
lawyer  or  anything  else."  And  every  minister  at  any  rate
will  agree  when  he  adds  that  there  is  scarcely  anything
impossible  to  a  man  who  can  keep  a  congregation  together
for  years,  and  be  the  means  of  edifying  them  for  hundreds
of  consecutive  Sabbaths.

Perhaps  the  most  remarkable  young  man  who  ever  sought
admission  to  the  College  was  one  who  sent  word  into  the
vestry  one  Sunday  morning  that  he  must  see  the  distin-
guished preacher  at  once.  "  His  audacity  admitted  him,''
says  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "  and  wh'en  he  was  before  me,  he
said,  '  Sir  I  want  to  enter  your  College,  and  should  like  to
enter  it  at  once.'  '  Well,  sir,'  I  said,  '  I  fear  we  have  no
room  for  you  at  present  but  your  case  shall  be  considered.'
'  But  mine  is  a  very  remarkable  case,  sir ;  you  have  probably
never  received  such  an  application  as  mine  before.'  '  Very
good,  we'll  see  about  it ;  the  secretary  will  give  you  one  of


THE  PASTORS;  COLLEGE.  335

the  application  papers,  and  you  can  see  me  on  Monday.'
He  came  on  the  Monday,  bringing  with  him  the  questions,
answered  in  a  most  extraordinary  manner.  As  to  books,  he
claimed  to  have  read  all  ancient  and  modern  literature,  and
after  giving  an  immense  list,  he  added,  '  This  is  merely  a


(Rns;ell&1  Sans,  photo,  Landau.)
C.   H.  Spurgeon,  from  a  photograph  taken  about    1876.

selection ;  I  have  read  most  extensively  in  all  departments.'
As  to  his  preaching,  he  could  produce  the  highest  testi-
monials, but  hardly  thought  they  would  be  needed,  as  a
personal  interview  would  convince  me  of  his  ability  at  once.
His  surprise  was  great  when  I  said,  '  Sir,  I  am  obliged  to


336    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

tell  you  that  I  cannot  receive  you.'  '  Why  not,  sir  ?  '  'I
will  tell  you  plainly.  You  are  so  dreadfully  clever  that  I
could  not  insult  you  by  receiving  you  into  our  College,  where
we  have  none  but  rather  ordinary  men;  the  President,
tutors,  and  students^  are  all  men  of  moderate  attainments,
and  you  would  have  to  condescend  too  much  in  coming
among  us.'  He  looked  at  me  very  severely,  and  said  with
dignity,  'Do  you  mean  to  say  that,  because  I  have  an
unusual  genius,  and  have  produced  in  myself  a  gigantic  mind
such  as  is  rarely  seen,  I  am  refused  admittance  into  your
College?  '  '  Yes,'  I  replied,  as  calmly  as  I  could,  consider-
ing the  overpowering  awe  which  his  genius  inspired,  '  for
that  very  reason.'  '  Then,  sir,  you  ought  to  allow  me  a  trial
of  my  preaching  abilities;  select  me  any  text  you  like,  or
suggest  any  subject  you  please,  and  here,  in  this  very  room,
I  will  speak  upon  it,  or  preach  upon  it  without  deliberation,
and  you  will  be  surprised.'  '  No,  thank  you,  I  would  rather
not  have  the  trouble  of  listening  to  you.'  '  Trouble,  sir  !  I
assure  you  it  would  be  the  greatest  possible  pleasure  you
could  have.'  I  said  it  might  be,  but  I  felt  myself  unworthy
of  the  privilege,  and  so  bade  him  a  long  farewell.  The
gentleman  was  unknown  to  me  at  the  timei  but  he  has  since
figured  in  the  police  court  as  too  clever  by  half."

The  men  who  were  admitted  to  the  College  were,  almost
without  exception,  men  worthy  of  the  vocation  wherewith
they  were  called.  There  was  one  of  the  early  students,
however,  who  gave  his  president  great  cause  to  fear  con-
cerning his  future  when  he  commenced  his  petition  at  a
prayer-meeting  by  saying,  "O  Thou  that  art  encinctured
with  an  auriferous  zodiac,"  evidently  a  grandiloquent  para-
phrase of  Revelation  i.  13.  "  Alas,"  says  C.  H.  Spurgeon,
"  my  fears  proved  to  be  only  too  well  founded  ;  after  he  left
the  College,  he  went  from  the  Baptists  to  the  Congrega-


THE  PASTORS'  COLLEGE.  337-

tionalists,  then  became  a  play-writer  and  play-actor;  and
where  is  he  now,  I  do  not  know.  For  many  years  I  had  the
sad  privilege  of  helping  to  support  his  godly  wife,  whom  he
had  deserted.  I  thank  God  that,  among  so  many  hundreds
of  men,  so  few  have  caused  me  such  sorrow  of  heart  as  he
did."

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  had  some  amusing  experiences
with  deacons  in  search  of  pastors.  One  wrote  to  ask  him
if  he  would  send  a  student  who  could  "  fill  the  chapel."
The  great  preacher  replied  that  he  had  not  one  big  enough
as  that  was  the  people's  business,  but  he  could  send  a
brother  who  would  do  his  best  to  fill  the  pulpit  and  preach
the  Gospel  faithfully.  At  another  place  a  particularly  able
student  had  preached  and  was  informed  that  if  he  had  been.
a  bigger  man  he  would  have  been  invited  to  the  pastorate,
C.  H.  Spurgeon  says,  "  I  really  could  not  blame  him  when  I
heard  that  in  reply  to  this  very  foolish  objection  he  said  to  the
deacons, '  If  Mr.  Spurgeon  had  known  that  you  wanted  bulk
instead  of  brains,  he  would  have  sent  you  a  bullock !  ' '
Indifferent  to  personal  gain  himself,  wherever  other  ministers
were  concerned,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  always  upheld  the  maxim
that,  "  The  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire."  To  the  officers
of  a  small  country  church  who  applied  to  him  for  a  pastor,
but  offered  a  ridiculously  small  salary,  he  wrote : — "  The
only  individual  I  know,  who  could  exist  on  such  a  stipend,
is  the  angel  Gabriel.  He  would  need  neither  cash  nor
clothes;  and  he  could  come  down  from  Heaven  every
Sunday  morning,  and  go  back  at  night,  so  I  advise  you  to
invite  him."  Even  more  ironical  was  his  reply  to  the  deacon
of  another  church  who  sent  a  very  long  list  of  the  qualifica-
tions to  be  possessed  by  the  man  "  whom  they  could  look  up
to  as  their  leader."  C.  H.  Spurgeon  recommended  his-
correspondent  to  take  a  large  sheet  of  brown  paper  and  cut


338    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

out  a  minister  of  the  size  and  shape  desired,  or  else  to  seek
to  secure  the  services  of  the  eminent  Dr.  So-and-so,  who  had
been  for  a  good  many  years  in  glory,  for  he  could  think  of
no  one  else  who  could  fulfil  the  conditions  that  such  an
important  church  and  diaconate  seemed  to  regard  as  in-
dispensable. The  deacon  wrote  again  in  a  more  reasonable
strain,  and  eventually  secured  a  pastor  from  the  College,
whose  ministry  was  highly  appreciated.

The  president's  advice  to  his  students  was  always  pithy
and  had  a  rare  vein  of  humour  running  through  it.  Once
when  Mr.  T.  W.  Medhurst  came  to  him  and  sorrowfully
declared  that  he  had  been  preaching  for  three  months  with-
out hearing  of  a  single  soul  being  converted,  C.  H.  Spurgeon
said,  "  Do  you  expect  the  Lord  to  save  souls  every  time  you
open  your  mouth  ? "  "  Oh !  no  sir^"  was  the  reply.
"  Then,"  rejoined  the  president,  "  that  is  just  the  reason
why  you  have  not  had  conversions  :  '  According  to  your
faith  be  it  unto  you.'  "  To  another  studenc  who  was  about
to  leave  for  his  first  pastorate,  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon
said  :  "  I  want  you  to  go  under  an  operation  before  you  leave.
I  am  going  to  put  out  one  of  your  eyes,  to  stop  up  one  of
your  ears,  and  to  put  a  muzzle  on  your  mouth.  Then  you
had  better  have  a  new  suit  of  clothes  before  you  go,  and  you
must  tell  the  tailor  to  make  in  the  coat  a  pocket  without  a
bottom.  You  understand  my  parable?  "  "  I  think  so,  sir,"
replied  the  student,  "  but  should  like  your  interpretation."
"  Well,  there  will  be  many  things  in  your  people  that  you
must  look  at  with  the  blind  eye,  and  you  must  listen  to  much
with  the  deaf  ear,  whiie  you  will  often  be  tempted  to  say
things  which  had  better  be  left  unsaid ;  then,  remember
the  'muzzle.  Then  all  the  gossip  you  may  hear,  when
doing  pastoral  work,  must  be  put  into  the  bottomless
pocket."


340    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

At  another  time,  just  before  the  students  went  away  for
their  vacation,  the  president  said,  if  he  had  been  able  to
afford  it,  he  would  have  given  every  man  a  present.  "  To
you,"  he  said  to  one,  "I  would  give  a  corkscrew,  because
although  you  have  a  good  deal  in  you,  you  cannot  get  it  out."
4t  As  to  you,  my  brother,"  turning  to  another  student,  "  I
should  give  you  a  sausage  stuffer,  for  you  need  to  have
something  put  into  you."  A  third  student  was  to  have  a
canister  of  gunpowder  to  be  set  alight  exactly  at  the  second
head  of  his  discourse  to  stir  him  up.

Many  pages  might  be  filled  with  similar  stories  and  reminis-
cences of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  and  his  College  students,  did  not
more  important  matters  call  for  notice.  Sufficient  has  been
told,  however,  to  explain  why  the  Pastors'  College  has
always  had  an  originality  and  virility  which  more  pretentious
institutions  have  lacked.  The  founder's  character  is
impressed  more  or  less  vividly  upon  every  man  who  passed
through  his  training  school  and  under  his  own  immediate
tuition.

For  fourteen  years  after  the  opening  of  the  Metro-
politan Tabernacle,  the  classes  were  held  in  the  rooms
beneath  that  building,  but  the  institution  grew  so  rapidly
it  became  necessary  to  get  more  ample  and  suitable
accommodation.  For  many  years  C.  H.  Spurgeon  had  been
putting  aside  legacies  and  other  amounts  that  could  be
spared  in  readiness  for  the  time  when  a  Pastors'  College
building  should  be  erected,  and  on  October  i4th,  1873,  the
foundation-stone  was  laid.  Money  soon  began  to  come  in
as  the  result  of  prayer.  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  own  contribution
amounted  to  several  thousand  pounds,  a  friend  sent  a
thousand,  another  thousand  was  contributed  by  those
present  at  the  stone^laying,  the  students  gave  ^300.  and
promised  to  raise  the  amount  to  a  thousand.  The  following


THE  PASTORS'  COLLEGE.


34i


year  Messrs.  Cory  and  Sons,  of  Cardiff,  gave  to  the  building-
fund  ;£  1,000  worth  of  fully  paid-up  shares  in  their  colliery
company,  and,  about  twelve  months  later,  the  president
received  a  legacy  of  ^5,000  for  the  same  object,  whilst  still
further  legacies  of  ^3>ooo  and  ^2,000  were  also  received.
The  total  cost  of  building  and  furnishing  was  .£15,000,  all
of  which  was  in  hand  before  the  new  college  was  opened,
and  a  sufficient  sum  was  invested  to  pay  the  rates  and  keep


{Photo  by  Mr.  E.  Johnson.}
The  Library  of  the  Pastors'  College.

the  building  in  repair.  The  freehold  of  the  ground,  which
was  formerly  a  rectory-garden,  had  been  purchased  from
the  Ecclesiastical  Commissioners,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon  laugh-
ingly declared  that  he  had  secured  the  parson's  garden  and
was  going  to  cultivate  it  for  him  by  growing  dissenters  in  it.
When  all  was  completed  the  building  was  solemnly  dedicated
to  the  service  for  which  it  had  been  erected,  and  in  every


342    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

separate  room   a   prayer-meeting   was    held,   led    by   the
president  himself.

From  that  time  the  growth  was  greater  than  ever.  The
new  building  provided  splendid  accommodation  for  all  the
needs  of  the  students,  and  when  C.  H.  Spurgeon  passed
away  in  1892,  nearly  nine  hundred  men  had  been  trained
for  the  ministry  in  his  institution.  In  1888  was  formed  the
Pastors'  College  Evangelical  Association,  consisting  of
former  and  present  students  and  a  certain  number  of  other
ministers  in  sympathy  with  the  doctrinal  views  of  the  college.
This  was  really  the  yearly  conferences  of  old  and  new
students,  held  regularly  since  1865,  reconstituted  as  an  out-
come of  the  "  Down-grade "  controversy,  which  will  be
referred  to  later.  There  were  also  started  in  connection
with  the  Institution  a  Pastors'  College  Society  of  Evan-
gelists, a  Pastors'  College  Missionary  Association,  which
supports  a  number  of  workers  in  the  foreign  field,
and  a  Loan  Fund  to  assist  in  the  erection  of  places  of
worship.


CHAPTER  XXIV.
THE    STOCKWELL    ORPHANAGE,

OF  the  many  monuments  left  by  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon,  that  testify  to  his  mighty  trust  in  God
and  prove  the  efficacy  of  prevailing  prayer,  none,  perhaps,
has  struck  the  popular  imagination  with  greater  force  than
the  Stockwell  Orphanage.  The  story  of  its  inception,
foundation,  and  growth  is  indeed  a  romance  of  faith:  and  in
many  points  bears  a  striking  resemblance  to  the  history  of
the  Miiller  Orphanage  at  Bristol,  for  the  founder  of  which
C.  H.  Spurgeon  always  entertained  a  lively  admiration.  Like
those  in  charge  of  the  larger  institution  at  Bristol,  the
trustees  of  Stockwell  Orphanage  have  from  the  first  avoided
anything  in  the  way  of  organised  methods  of  obtaining  funds,
relying  upon  God  to  send  whatever  should  be  needed  for
the  maintenance  of  the  homes  and  orphans.  As  with  the
College,  no  lists  of  guaranteed  subscribers  have  ever  been
compiled,  no  paid  collectors  have  been  engaged,  and  the
common  practice  of  sending  out  pathetic  appeals  for  help,
to  the  public  at  large,  has  always  been  studiously  avoided.
At  the  very  beginning  C.  H.  Spurgeon  referred  to  the
wondrous  way  in  which  the  funds  for  the  building  of  the
Tabernacle  had  been  provided,  and  added :  "  Mark  you,  it
will  be  so  in  the  erection  of  this  Orphan  Home.  We  shall
see  greater  things  than  these  if  only  our  faith  will  precede
our  sight.  But  if  we  go  upon  the  old  custom  of  our  general
societies,  and  first  look  out  for  a  regular  income,  and  get


344    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

our  subscribers  and  send  round  our  collectors  and  pay  our
percentages — that  isf  do  not  trust  God  but  trust  our  sub-
scribers— if  we  go  by  that  'rule  we  shall  see  very  little,  and
have  no  room  for  believing.  But  if  we  shall  just  trust  God
and  believe  that  He  never  did  leave  a  work  that  He  put  upon
us,  and  never  sets  us  to  do  a  thing  without  meaning  to  help
us  through  with  itj  we  shall  soon  see  that  the  God  of  Israel
still  lives  and  that  His  arm  is  not  shortened."  This  was  no
mere  enunciation  of  a  theory,  but  what  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon  then  declared  he  constantly  put  into  practice.
When  funds  ran  short  he  first  of  all  gave  every  penny  he,
himself,  could  spare;  then  if  more  money  were  needed,  his
co-trustees  were  asked  to  do  the  sa,met  and  with  the
generosity  and  faithful  stewardship  which  invariably
characterized  them,  they  willingly  followed  their  leader's
example.  The  end  of  the  Orphanage's  resources  was  now
reached  and  prayer  was  resorted  to.  Faith  never  failed,  and
many  remarkable  instances  of  Divine  interposition  were
experienced.  On  one  occasion  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  dining
with  some  friends  in  London  and  the  subject  of  the  new
Orphanage  was  being  discussed.  The  preacher  mentioned
that  although  the  money  was  not  in  hand?  in  a  day  or  two
the  builder  would  require  payment;  but  he  declared  his
confidence  that  God  would  provide,  so  that  no  debt  should
be  incurred.  As  the  meal  ended,  a  servant  entered  with  a
telegram,  and  this,  on  being  opened,  was  found  to  announce
that  an  unknown  donor  had  just  handed  in  a  thousand
pounds  for  the  Orphanage.  On  another  occasion  when  the
funds  were  completely  exhausted,  the  Orphanage  authorities
met  specially  for  prayer  to  God  that  He  would  send  needed
help,  and  at  once  gifts  began  to  pour  in  so  that  on  that  very
day,  sums  amounting  to  nearly  four  hundred  pounds  were
received.  Not  only  was  C.  H.  Spurgeon  himself  a  man  of


346    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEOX.

faith,  but  the  friends  and  colleagues  he  gathered  round  him
in  connection  with  the  Orphanage  were  men  like-minded,
and  to  this  day  the  same  methods  are  followed  with  the
same  wonderful  results.

Although  an  article  by  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  in.  The
Sword  arid  the  Trowel  was  the  immediate  instrument  that
led- to  the  establishment  of  the  Stockwell  Orphanage,  it  is
perhaps  not  incorrect  to  say  that  the  real  beginning  of  that
institution  was  a  prayer-meeting.  At  one  of  the  usual
Monday  evening  services  at  the  Tabernacle  the  pastor  had
in  the  course  of  a  short  address  made  use  of  the  words  :  "  We
are  a  huge  Church,  and  should  be  doing  more  for  the  Lord
in  this  great  city.  I  want  us  to-night  to  ask  Him  to  send
us  some  new  work ;  and  if  we  need-money  to  carry  it  on,  let
us  pray  that  the  means  may  also  be  sent."

Some  time  before  this,  Mrs.  Hillyard,  the  widow  of  a
clergyman,  then  in  fellowship  with  the  Brethren,  had  deter-
mined to  devote  her  wealth,  amounting  to  .£20,000,  to  the
service  of  Godi  and  had  been  advised  by  a  friend,  whose  aid
she  sought,  to  put  this  money  into  the  hands  of  C.  H.  Spur-
geon, as  a  man  of  integrity,  who  would  use  it  aright.  Mrs.
Hillyard's  income  had  not  been  a  large  one,  but  she  had
accumulated  the  considerable  sum  mentioned  by  dint  of
living  simply  and  saving  all  'she  could  for  some  good
purpose.  After  the  advice  given  by  her  friend — a  Congre-
gational Minister  of  Brixton — who  had  no  other  motive  in
recommending  C.  H.  Spurgeon  than  to  suggest  a  thoroughly
suitable  administrator,  a  copy  of  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel
came  into  Mrs.  Hillyard's  hands.  This  happened  to  be  a
number  containing  an  article  by  the  editor,  in  which  he
urged  the  importance  of  training  children  in  "  the  fear  of  the-
Lord,"  and  advocated  the  establishment  of  schools  where
"  all  that  we  believe  and  hold  dear  shall  be  taught  to  the


THE   STOCKWELL   ORPHANAGE.          347

children  of  our  poorer  adherents."  This  suggestion
appealed  with  great  force  to  Mrs.  Hillyard,  who  had  long  felt
a  special  sympathy  with  fatherless  boys,  and  believing  her-
self to  be  the  subject  of  Divine  guidance,  she  at  once  wrote
to  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  telling  him  of  her  desire  to  aid
in  establishing  an  orphanage,  and  requesting  his  assistance.
This  letter  reached  the  preacher  only  a  few  days  after  the
prayer-meeting  at  which  he  had  asked  God  to  send  some
new  work,  and  if  necessary,  the  money  to  carry  it  on.  No
wonder  then  that  C.  H.  Spurgeon  looked  upon  the  proposal
of  Mrs.  Hillyard  as  a  direct  answer  to  that  prayer.  In  reply
to  a  request  for  further  particulars,  the  lady  wrote,  saying :
"  That  which  the  Lord  has  laid  upon  my  heart  at  present,  is
the  great  need  there  is  of  an  orphan  house,  requiring  neither
votes  nor  patronage  and  especially  one  conducted  upon
simple  Gospel  principles."  She  went  on  to  say :  "  I  have
now  about  ^20,000,  which  I  should  like  (God  willing)  to
devote  to  the  training  and  education  of  a  few  orphan  boys.
Of  course,  bringing  the  little  ones  to  Jesus  is  my  first  and
chief  desire.  I  doubt  not  that  many  dear  Christians  would
like  to  help  in  a  work  of  this  kind,  under  your  direction  and
control;  and  should  such  an  institution  grow  to  any  large
extent,  I  feel  sure  there  would  be  no  cause  to  fear  the  want
of  means  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  dear  orphan  Sj  for  have
they  not  a  rich  Father  ?  "

Mrs.  Hillyard  made  an  appointment  to  see  C.  H.  Spurgeon,
and  the  preacher  took  with  him  Mr.  William  Higgs,  one  of
his  trusted  deacons.  He  found  the  lady's  house  to  be  one  of
modest  dimensions,  and  for  fear  that  there  had  been  some
mistake  he  said  to  Mrs.  Hillyard,  when  shown  into  her
presence :  "  We  have  called,  Madam2  about  the  ^200  you
mentioned  in  your  letter."  "^200,  did  I  write?"  asked
the  lady.  "  I  meant  ,£20,000."  "  Oh,  yes !  "  replied  C.  H.


34«    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

Spurgeon,  "  you  did  put  ^20,000 ;  but  I  was  not  sure
whether  a  nought  or  two  had  slipped  in  by  mistake,  and
thought  I  would  be  on  the  safe  side."

The  whole  matter  was  then  discussed  at  length,  and  it  is
characteristic  of  the  singleness  of  purpose  of  the  great
preacher  that  so  far  from  grasping  at  this  opportunity  of
becoming  an  important  administrator  of  considerable  wealth,
he  took  pains  to  leam  whether  or  not  the  money
ought  to  go  to  some  relative,  and  finding  that  everything  was
clear  that  way,  he  suggested  that  Mrs.  Hillyard  should
present  her  gift  to  George  Miiller,  of  Bristol.  But  her
desire  was  that  C.  H.  Spurgeon  himself  should  be  entrusted
with  its  use,  believing,  as  he  also  did,  that  the  manner  of
their  coming  together  had  been  Divinely  arranged,  and  a
proof  that  the  contemplated  step  was  the  right  one.  This
notable  interview  is  commemorated  in  a  stained-glass
window,  pourtraying  the  scene,  which  has  been  placed  at  one
end  of  the  Board-room  of  the  Orphanage.

These  events  had  taken  place  in  August  and  September,
1866,  and  a  preliminary  notice  was  soon  afterwards  inserted
in  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel.  But  it  was  not  until  January
of  the  following  year  that  the  actual  work  of  founding  the
Orphanage  commenced  with  the  purchase  of  a  very  good
site,  two  and  a  half  acres  in  extent,  lying  back  a  little  from
the  Clapham  Road.  Building  operations  would  have  com-
menced at  once,  but  owing  to  a  panic  in  the  financial  market,
it  was  found  difficult  to  realise  the  securities  of  Mrs.  Hill-
yard's  gift,  and  so  the  trustees  determined  to  wait  awhile.
This  apparent  difficulty  proved  in  the  end  to  be  really  a
blessing  in  disguise,  for  it  led  to  the  Orphanage  retaining
a  far  more  considerable  endowment  than  probably  would
have  been  the  case;  while  the  money  for  building  was,  in
answer  to  prayer,  soon  forthcoming  from  other  sources.


THE    STOCKWELL   ORPHANAGE.          345

The  scheme  of  the  Orphanage,  in  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  words,
"  proposed  to  do  away  with  all  voting  and  canvassing,  with
the  wasteful  expenditure  necessitated  thereby,  and  also  to
form  the  orphans  into  large  families  instead  of  massing
them  together  on  the  workhouse  system,"  This  latter  idea
was  very  helpful  in  the  raising  of  funds,  for  many  donors-
each  gave  a  sum  sufficient  to  build  one  house,  while  the
smaller  gifts  of  less  wealthy  sympathisers  provided  the  means
to  build  the  dining-hall  and  other  common  rooms.  By
August,  1867,  a  considerable  sum  had  been  given  towards
the  erection  of  the  Orphanage  buildings.  Mr.  George  Moore,
of  Bow  Churchyard,  was  the  first  large  contributor  with
^250 ;  then  Mrs.  Tyson,  a  lady  who  afterwards  in  her  will
left  ^25,000  to  the  Orphanage,  gave  ^500  to  build  a  house.
As  this  was  a  silver-wedding  gift  from  her  husband  it  was
decided  that  the  house  should  be  called  "  Silver-wedding
House."  A  merchant  next  provided  .£600  for  a  "  Mer-
chant's House,"  and  Mr.  William  Higgs  and  his  workmen
promised  to  build  a  "  Workmen's  House,"  while  Mr.  Thomas
Olney  and  his  sons  agreed  to  provide  "  Unity  House,"  in
memory*  of  Mrs.  Unity  Olney.  The  first  stones  of  these
houses  were  laid  on  September  pth,  1867,  by  C.  H.
Spurgeon,  Mrs.  Hillyard,  Mr.  W.  Higgs,  and  Mr.  Thomas
Olney  respectively.  Other  gifts  poured  in.  On  one
occasion  when  he  was  preaching  in  the  open-air  an  unknown
lady  put  an  envelope  into  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  hand,  which  on
being  opened  was  found  to  contain  £20  for  the  Pastors'
College  and  £20  for  the  Orphanage.  In  January,  1868,
the  gift  of  ;£i,ooo  from  the  anonymous  donor  already
referred  to  was  received  and  the  same  friend  in  the  following
March  again  sent  an  anonymous  contribution,- with  a  letter
in  which  he  said  :  "  I  have  this  day  dropped  into  your  letter-
box an  envelope  containing  two  bank-notes  (^2,000).  one  of


350    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

which  is  for  the  College  and  the  remaining  ^£1,000  to  help
complete  the  Orphanage.  The  latter  led  me  to  contribute
to  the  former.  I  am  a  stranger  to  you,  but  not  to  your
sermons  (printed)."  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  looked
upon  this  as  a  most  distinct  and  startling  rebuke  to  his  fears
that  the  Orphanage  might  impoverish  the  College.  Exactly
the  opposite  had  happened,  and  the  College  had  substanti-
ally benefited  by  the  Orphanage.  In  June,  1868,  the


The  inner  entrance  gates  of  the   Stockwell  Orphanage.

Baptist  Churches  of  the  United  Kingdom  presented  -£1,200
(afterwards  made  up  to  ^1,765)  as  a  testimonial  to  C.  H.
Spurgeon  for  the  erection  of  two  houses  at  the  Orphanage.
These  were  called  "  Testimonial  Houses."

So  the  good  work  went  on.  A  "  Sunday  School  House  "
was  given  by  the  Tabernacle  Sunday  School,  and  a
"  Student's  House  "  by  the  ministers  trained  in  the  Pastors'
College,  and  by  the  end  of  1869  all  the  buildings  had  been


THE    STOCKWELL   ORPHANAGE.          351

completed,  and  their  cost,   amounting  to  ^10,200,   paid
in  full.*

But  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  and  his  co-trustees  did  not
wait  until'the  Orphanage  was  built  before  they  sought  out
the  orphans.     In  July,  1867,  a  Christian  woman  had  besu
engaged  to  receive  into  her  house  the  first  six  boys  until  the
Orphanage  buildings  were  ready,  and  the  cost  of  maintenance
was  generously  provided  by  Mrs.  Hillyard,  who  sold  her
plate  in  order  to  make  a  further  gift  to  the  work.     As  the
building  operations  progressed  some  anxiety  began  to  be
felt  as  to  who  should  have  charge  of  the  Orphanage.    There
had  been  many  applicants  for  the  post  of  headmaster,  but
none  had  seemed  to  fulfil  all  the  requirements  needed  for
so  responsible  and  difficult  a  post.     At  last,  an  apparently
suitable  man  presented   himself,  and  was   elected   to   the
office,  but  at  the  eleventh   hour  he  declined  to  fulfil   his
engagement.       And  now  C.  H.  Spurgeon  had  another  of
those  remarkable  overrulings  of  God  which  were  so  manifest
throughout  his  life.     It  was  at  the  very  moment  when  the
letter  of  refusal  was  in-  his  hands,  that  the  Rev.  Vernon  J.
Charlesworth,  assistant  Minister  to  the  Rev.  Newman  Hall
at  Surrey  Chapel,  called  upon  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon.
The  visitor  had  been  deeply  interested  in  the  foundation  of
the  new  Orphanage,  and  to  a  request  that  he  would  become
headmaster,  he  assented.     Never  was  there  a  more  marked
case  of  the  right  man  for  the  right  place.     Mr.  Charleswortn,
who  still  has  control  of  the  Orphanage,  has  all  along  been
one  of  the  most  earnest  workers  on  behalf  of  the  fatherless
children,  to  whom  he  has,  indeed,  become  a  second  father.
His  love  for  them  has  been  that  of  a  parent,  and  every
succeeding    batch   of   children  has  cherished    for  him  an
affection  that  has  lasted  far  beyond  school  days.     An  able
organiser  and  administrator,  he  possessed  all  the  qualifica-


.352    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

tions  necessary  for  one  who  was  to  take  complete  control
•of  a  large  institution,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon  many*  times
expressed  his  intense  pleasure  and  satisfaction  at  securing
Mr.  Charlesworth's  services.  From  first  to  last  the  relations
between  the  two  men  were  of  the  most  cordial  character.
On  one  occasion,  however,  the  trustees  were*  somewhat


(William  H'hiteby,  Ltd.,  ph  to,  London.}

The   Rev.  Vernon  J-   Charlesworth,   headmaster

of  Stockwell  Orphanage-
perplexed  when  Charles  Haddbn  Spurgeon  announced
that  he  wished  to  call  their  attention  to  the
fact  that  the  headmaster  had  introduced  a  child
into  the  Orphanage  without  the  permission  of  the
Managers,  and  added  that  it  was  not  the  first  time  such  a
thing  had  happened.  The  trustees  looked  serious,  and  one


THE    STOCKWELL    ORPHANAGE.          355

of  their  number  proposed  that  Mr.  Charlesworth  should  be
called  in  and  asked  for  an  explanation,  and  that  he  should
be  told  that  such  a  proceeding  must  not  be  repeated.  This,
however,  was  not  necessary.  The  whole  matter  was  a  little
joke  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's,  who  explained  that  he
merely  referred  to  a  recent  addition  to  Mr.  Charlesworth's
own  family !

There  has  never  been  any  lack  of  means  to  carry  on  the
work  of  the  Orphanage,  for,  although  at  times  little  or  no
money  has  been  in  hand,  gifts  have  soon  poured  in  as  the
result  of  earnest  prayer.  At  the  end  of  1869,  C.  H.  Spur-
geon  was  laid  low  by  an  attack  of  smallpox,  and  some  friends
feared  for  the  orphans  on  account  of  the  temporary  retire-
ment of  their  great  advocate.  But  the  sick  preacher,  in  the
midst  of  his  weakness,  prayed  for  them,  and  within  a  few
hours  somebody,  knowing  nothing  of  the  illness,  called  and
left  ^500  for  the  Orphanage.  A  day  or  two  aftenvards
another  donor  sent^i,ooo.

Many  gifts  in  kind,  too,  were  received,  a  ladies'  school,
for  example,  sending,  in  the  course  of  a  few  years,  2,590
shirts  for  the  boys,  while  for  years  Mr.  James  Toller,  of
Waterbeach,  gave  the  produce  of  an  acre  of  land  to  the
Orphanage,  an  example  worthy  of  emulation  by  other
farmers.  At  one  time — in  1873 — when  all  bills  had  been
paid,  a  sum  of  only  £$  was  left  in  hand — with  220  boys  ta
feed.  As  C.  H.  Spurgeon  wrote  soon  after,  it  was  that
condition  of  things  that  tested  one's  faith  in  the  promise
inscribed  on  one  of  the  pillars  of  the  gateway :  "  The  Lord
will  Provide."  On  May  8th  of  the  following  year  (1874)  the
funds  ran  completely  dry,  but  prayer  again  proved  wonder-
fully effectual.  The  trustees  met  specially  to  plead  with  God
for  supplies,  and,  as  already  mentioned,  on  that  very  day
sums  amounting  to  nearly  £400  weTe  received.  Nearly  a

=  5


THE    STOCK  WELL   ORPHANAGE.          355

year  later,  the  funds  were  again  almost  exhausted.  "  Our
230  boys  persist  in  eating  and  wearing  out  their  clothes,"
wrote  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "  or  we  would  not  even  mention  the
matter  of  failing  funds,  but  appetites  are  stubborn  things  and
our  boys  have  double-barrelled  ones."  Six  months  after-
wards a  sum  of  ^10,000  was  sent  to  the  pastor,  the  largest
amount  save  one  that  had  been  entrusted  to  his  care  up  to
that  time.  Half  of  this  amount  was  for  the  Orphanage,,
and  was  invested  according  to  the  practice  usually  followed
in  connection  with  legacies.  Two  months  later  again  ,£1,158-
came  from  friends  at  Reading,  where  a  very  successful
bazaar  had  been  held  in  aid  of  the  Orphanage.  Thus  the^
story  continues.  Sometimes  the  funds  would  be  all  but
exhausted,  but  in  answer  to  prayer,  money  would  pour  in,  so
that  the  children  were  never  without  the  things  they  needed.
The  Stockwell  Orphanage  was,  and  is,  indeed  an  object-
lesson  to  the  sceptic  and  the  man  of  little  faith.

Something  must  be  said,  before  passing,  with  regard  to  the
method  of  conducting  the  Orphanage.  As  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon  wrote  early  in  the  history  of  the  institution,
"  Children  nesd  something  more  than  a  roof  and  four  walls-
to  shelter  them ;  they  want  a  home  where  the  virtues  of  a
Christian  character  shall  be  fostered  and  developed.  To
ignore  social  instincts  and  filial  reverence  by  massing,
hundreds  of  children  together  in  one  huge  building  is  to
incur  a  grave  responsibility,  if  not  to  provoke  a  failure,,
fraught  with  most  lamentable  consequences.  On  the  other
hand,  when  an  institution  is  adapted  as  far  as  possible  to
compensate  the  loss  of  parental  influence  and  control,  one
of  the  essential  elements  of  success  is  secured."  And  so  each
house,  or  villa,  became  a  home,  with  an  unusually  large
family  it  is  true,  but  nevertheless  a  self-contained  home,
having  a  Christian  "  mother  "  or  matron^  at  its  head.  The-


.356     LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

meals,  however,  have  always  been  taken  by  the  boys  in  a
common  hall  for  the  sake  of  convenience  and  economy.
Every  morning  family  prayers  are  conducted  before  the
duties  of  the  day  commence.

Then,  with  regard  to  dress,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  very
-•emphatic  in  his  opinion  that  orphan  children  should  not


A   typical  group  of  Slockwell   Orphanage   boys.

wear  a  uniform,  marking  them  as  the  recipients  of  charity.
"  Orphanhood,"  he  wrote2  "  is  a  child's  misfortune,  and  he
should  not  be  treated  as  though  it  were  his  fault.  In  a  garb
which  is  a  symbol  of  dependence  it  is  difficult,  if  not
impossible,  for  an  orphan  to  preserve  a  feeling  of  self-
respect;  and  we  wish  the  older  institutions  were  free  to


THE    STOCKWELL   ORPHANAGE.          357

break  through  the  traditions  which  have  so  little  to  be  said
in  their  favour."  The  children  at  Stockwell  Orphanage
wear  the  ordinary  dress  of  the  day,  no  two  being  attired
exactly  alike  as  to  the  cloth.  Out  in  the  street,  they  would
strike  no  one  as  charity  children,  and  their  invariably  happy
faces  testify  unmistakably  to  the  pleasant  lives  they  lead.

The  boys  are  given  a  good  English  education,  which
fits  them  for  commercial  positions,  and  many  are  now
occupying  places  of  trust  and  importance  in  large  business
establishments.  In  all  the  examinations  for  which  they
have  entered  the  Stockwell  Orphanage  children  have  done
well.  Two  Government  inspectors  who  went  over  the
institution  in  1873  described  it  in  their  report  as  "  an
admirable  institution;  good  in  design,  and,  if  possible,
better  in  execution";  while  Dr.  Henry  Gervis,  of  St.
Thomas'  Hospital,  at  the  same  time  wrote,  "  I  cannot  speak
too  highly  of  all  the  arrangements  and  of  the  admirable
manner  in  which  the  institution  is  conducted."  At  the
same  time  the  Stockwell  Orphanage  has  always  been  most
economically  managed.

With  regard  to  the  religious  arrangements  at  Stockwell,
C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  determined  that  the  institution  should
be  strictly  Christian  but  non-sectarian,  and  open  to  all
classes  of  the  community.  Neither  the  station  in  life  of
the  parents  nor  the  religious  denomination  has  ever  been
allowed  to  influence  the  counsels  of  the  Committee,  which
treats  every  case  submitted  entirely  on  its  merits,  the
vacancies  that  may  occur  in  the  homes  being  filled  by  the
most  necessitous  cases.  The  appointment  of  Mr.  Charles-
worth — a  Congregational  minister  at  the  time— as  head-
master was  proof  that  the  Orphanage  was  no  mere  institu-
tion of  the  Baptist  denomination,  and  if  further  testimony
to  this  fact  were  needed,  it  could  be  found  by  a  glance  at


358    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEON.

the  table  setting  forth  the  religious  persuasions  of  the
parents  of  orphans  admitted  into  the  homes.  In  the  last
report  during  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  lifetime  (1891),  these  were
given  as  follows: — Church  of  England,  609;  Baptist.  415;
Congregational,  168;  Wesleyan,  143;  Presbyterian,  28;
Brethren,  12;  Roman  Catholic,  3;  Moravian,  2;  Bible
Christian,  3 ;  Society  of  Friends,  2  :  Salvation  Army,  i ;


The   infirmary  at   Stockwell   Orphanage.

not  specified,  200.*  These  came  from  all  parts  of  the
United  Kingdom,  though  the  larger  proportion  belonged
to  London.

*  In  the  most  recent  report  issued,  that  for  1901  —  1902,  the
figures  stand  thus :— Church  of  England,  965  ;  Baptist,  635  ;
Congregational,  243;  Wesleyan,  189;  Presbyterian,  36;  Brethren,
25;  Bible  Christian,  6;  Moravian  and  Lutheran,  5  ;  Society  of
Friends,  4  ;  Roman  Catholic,  4 ;  Salvation  Army,  4 ;  not
specified,  307.


THE    STOCKWELL    ORPHANAGE.  359

On  Sunday  mornings  detachments  of  the  children  have
always  attended  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  and  neigh-
bouring chapels,  whilst  in  the  afternoons,  under  the  direc-
tion of  Mr.  W.  J.  Evans,  a  local  resident,  who  has  acted  as
Superintendent  for  over  thirty  years,  a  band  of  Sunday-
school  teachers  from  local  churches  visit  the  Orphanage
and  take  classes  of  the  children.  Every  Wednesday  a
week-night  service  is  held  and  in  addition  there  is  a  Young
Christians'  Band,  with  monthly  meetings,  a  Band  of  Hope,
and  a  branch  of  the  International  Bible-Reading
Association.

A  remarkable  feature  of  the  conduct  of  the  Orphanage
is  the  fact  that  every  year  a  comparatively  large  sum  has
been  obtained  by  the  lads  themselves  towards  the  funds.
Under  the  able  direction  of  Mr.  Charlesworth,  a  band  of
choir-boys  and  hand-bell  ringers  has  annually  visited  various
towns  and  given  services  of  song,  the  collections  among
the  congregations  being  given  to  the  Orphanage.  In
1884,  for  instance,  after  all  travelling  and  other  expenses
had  been  paid,  ^1,132  i8s.  6d.  was  realised  in  this  way.

The  girls'  wing  of  the  Orphanage  was  founded  in  1879
by  a  gift  of  ^50  from  Mrs.  Hillyard,  to  which  C.  H.
Spurgeon  added-  another  ^50  from  the  testimonial
presented  to  him  on  the  occasion  of  the  celebration  of  his
pastoral  silver-wedding,  and  a  third  ^50  was  given  by  Mr.
T.  D.  Galpin.  The  story  of  how  the  necessary  funds  for
the  girls'  homes  were  provided  is  almost  identical  with  that
of  the  boys'.  First  of  all  a  large  house  with  grounds
adjoining  the  existing  Orphanage  was  purchased  for
/4,ooo,  but  as  the  day  for  payment  drew  near — July  i5th,
1879 — the  necessary  sum  was  not  in  hand.  Here  again
was  witnessed  one  of  those  remarkable  interpositions
of  Providence  so  frequent  in  the  life  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon.


360    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

It  was  suddenly  discovered  tnat  the  date  of  payment  fell
fifteen  days  later  than  was  expected,  and  on  the  very
morning  of  July  3oth,  when  the  money  was  to  be  made  over,
a  letter  was  received  announcing  that  a  gentleman  who  had
recently  died  had  left  ^1,500  for  the  girls'  Orphanage,
bringing  up  the  amount  in  hand  to  within  a  small  sum  of


(C.  F.  Treble,  photo,  Brixton.}

Mr.   F.   G-   Ladds,  Secretary  of  the   Stockwetl

Orphanage.     He  was   formerly   an    inmate    of

the  Orphanage,  and  has  held  his  present  post

for  twenty-four  years.

the  ^4,000  required.  Then,  one  after  another,  friends
came  forward  with  donations  for  the  building  of  the  various
girls'  houses,  and  by  1882  the  entire  Orphanage,  covering
more  than  four  acres,  and  providing  accommodation  for


THE    STOCK  WELL    ORPHANAGE.          361

250  boys  and  250  girls,  was  completed;  forming  an  ideal
institution  for  fatherless  children.

The  conduct  of  the  girls'  homes  is  very  similar  to  that  of
the  boys',  the  most  notable  difference  being  that  the  girls,
instead  of  taking  their  meals  in  a  common  hall,  dine  in
their  several  houses.

To  the  time  of  his  death  Charles   Haddon   Spurgeon


The  girls',  sidelof  the_  StockwelU  Orphanage.

kept  a  place  very  near  his  heart  for  the  orphans,  and
even  in  the  midst  of  sickness,  when  away  in  the  South  of
France,  he  always  wrote  a  letter  to  the  boys  and  girls  at
such  periods  as  Christmas,  or  when  any  special  occasion
called  for  a  communication  from  him.  One  such  letter  is
worth  quoting.  It  was  written  at  Mentone  on  January  24th,
1874,  after  a  lad  had  died  in  the  Orphanage:  "  Dear  Boys,


362    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

I  have  been  much  impressed  by  hearing  that  death  has  been
to  the  Orphanage.  Are  you  all  prepared  if  he  should  shoot
another  arrow  into  one  of  the  houses  and  lay  another  low  ?
I  wonder  who  will  be  the  next !  Dear  boys,  would  you  go
to  Heaven  if  you  were  now  at  once  to  die  ?  Wait  a  bit  and
let  each  one  answer  for  himself.  You  know  you  must  be
born  again ;  you  must  repent  of  sin ;  you  must  believe  in
Jesus.  How  is  it  with  you  ?  If  you  are  not  saved  you  are
in  great  danger,  in  fearful  peril !  Be  warned,  I  pray  you !
I  cannot  bear  to  think  of  one  boy  going  from  the  Orphanage
to  hell;  that  would  be  terrible  indeed.  But  to  rise  to
Heaven,  to  be  with  Jesus  for  ever ;  why,  this  makes  it  worth
while  even  to  die  a  hundred  deaths.

"  I  hope  my  dear  friend,  Mr.  Charlesworth,  and  all
the  teachers  and  matrons  and  nurses  are  well ;  I  send  them
all  my  kindest  regards.  I  often  think  about  you  all.  I
want  to  see  you  all  happy  here  and  hereafter.  May  you
grow  up  to  be  honourable  Christian  men ;  and  if  God
should  take  any  of  you  away,  may  we  all  meet  in  Heaven !
Will  you  pray  a  special  prayer,  just  now,  that  the  death
of  one  boy  may  bring  all  of  you  to  Jesus  to  find  eternal  life  ?
Be  diligent  in  school,  be  very  kind  in  the  houses.  Do  not
cause  us  pain,  but  give  us  all  joy,  for  we  all  love  you,  and
desire  your  good.

"  Mr.  Charlesworth  will,  on  my  behalf,  give  you  a  couple
of  oranges  all  round,  and  I  will  pay  him  when  I  come  home.
Your  loving  friend.  C.  H.  SPURGEOX."

Whenever  the  great  preacher  visited  the  Orphanage,  he
was  at  once  surrounded  by  the  children,  who  loved  him
dearly.  His  hand  was  extended  to  one  and  all,  and  in
describing  the  way  the  little  ones  thronged  him.  he
often  used  the  words  of  the  Psalmist,  "  They  compassed  me
about  like  bees."  At  the  conclusion  of  such  visits  C.  H.


O  v>


364    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

Spurgeon  usually  left  sufficient  money  with  the  headmaster
to  provide  a  penny  apiece  for  all  the  orphans.  After  the
great  preacher's  death  it  was  ascertained  that  every  one  of
the  five  hundred  children  then  in  the  Orphanage  had,  at
some  time  or  otherz  shaken  hands  with  him.

To  speak  of  the  good  wrought  by  the  Orphanage  is  of
course  superfluous,  so  self-evident  are  the  results.  Some-
thing more  is  done  for  the  boys  and  girls  than  the  mere
feeding  and  clothing  of  their  bodies  and  the  provision  of  a
start  in  life;  they  are  diligently  trained  in  soul  and  mind,
and  not  the  least  pleasing  result  of  this  is  the  gratitude
which  the  old  boys  and  girls  manifest  when  they  become
wage-earners.  Many  gifts  of  money  are  received  from
them  as  tokens  of  their  appreciation  of  what  was  done
for  thenij  and  of  their  desire  to  see  other  orphans  equally
benefited.  The  Orphanage  is  still  conducted  with  the  same
ability  as  in  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  day  by  Mr.  Charlesworth
and  a  splendid  staff  of  workers.*


*  According  to  the  last  report  issued,  that  for  1901-2,  the  total
number  of  children  which  had  been  in  the  Orphanage  since  its
founding  was  2,423,  the  inmates  at  that  time  numbering  446.


CHAPTER   XXV.

OTHER    INSTITUTIONS.

\  LTHOUGH  the  Pastors'  College  and  the  Stockwell
^~~Y,  Orphanage  are  the  largest  of  the  institutions  which
owe  their  origin  to  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  ministry  at
the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  there  are  others,  scarcely
less  important  though  perhaps  not  so  well  known  to  the
people  at  large,  which  must  be  referred  to  here.  In
August,  1866,  an  article  appeared  in  The  Sword  and  the
Trowel  from  the  great  preacher's  own  pen,  in  which  he
urged  the  necessity  of  combating  error,  then  advancing
with  such  rapid  strides  in  the  land,  and  suggesting  as  one  of
the  best  means  possible,  the  distribution  of  wholesome
Christian  literature.  A  member  of  the  Tabernacle  congre-
gation, Mr.  E.  Boustead,  at  once  came  forward  and  offered
substantial  monetary  support  for  the  establishment  of  a
society  of  colporteurs.  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  delighted  at
this  speedy  response  to  his  suggestion,  and  on  September
3rd,  at  a  meeting  of  friends  whom  he  had  called  together
to  discuss  the  matter,  it  was  decided  to  form  an  association
"to  extend  the  circulation  of  the  Scriptures,  and  to
increase  the  diffusion  of  sound  religious  literature,  in  order
to  counteract  the  evils  arising  from  the  perusal  of  works
of  a  decided  Romish  tendency."  Thus  was  the  Metro-
politan Tabernacle  Colportage  Association  started.  It  had
been  intended  originally  to  conduct  the  society  upon
Baptist  lines,  but  as  the  work  grew  this  was  found  to  be


366    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

inadvisable,  and  the  ranks  of  the  colporteurs  have  included
members  of  various  denominations,  it  only  being  required
of  them  that  they  should  be  men  of  sterling  Christian
character,  holding  firmly  the  great  evangelical  doctrines.
Most  of  the  colporteurs  have  been  earnest  and  acceptable
preachers,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon  described  their  work  as
"  one  of  the  cheapest  and  most  effective  means  of  scattering
Gospel  light  in  the  darkest  places,"  for  by  the  profit  on
their  sales,  they  obtain  a  considerable  sum  towards  their
own  support,  and  Christian  friends  in  each  of  the  various
districts  where  they  work  guarantee  a  subscription  of  ^40
or  ^45  a  year,  thus  relieving  the  central  office  of  much
financial  responsibility  and  care.  Charles  Haddon  Spur-
geon, to  the  time  of  his  death,  liberally  supported  the
Association  with  both  purse  and  pen.  "  I  believe  it  to
be  one  of  the  most  efficient  and  economical  agencies  in
existence,"  he  wrote;  "and  as  education  increases,  it  will
be  more  and  more  so.  The  sale  of  vicious  literature  can
only  be  met  by  the  distribution  of  good  books ;  these  can
best  be  scattered  in  rural  districts  by  carrying  them  to  the
houses  of  the  people;  and  even  in  towns,  the  book-hawkers'
work  greatly  stimulates  their  sale.  The  colporteur  not
only  endeavours  to  sell  the  books,  but  he  visits  from  door
to  door ;  and,  in  so  doing,  converses  with  the  inmates  about
their  souls,  prays  with  the  sick,  and  leaves  a  tract  at  each
cottage.  He  is  frequently  able  to  hold  prayer-meetings,
open-air  services  and  Bible  readings.  He  gets  a  room,  if
possible,  and  preaches ;  founds  Bands  of  Hope,  and  makes
himself  generally  useful  in  the  cause  of  religion  and
temperance.  He  is,  in  fact,  at  first  a  missionary,  then
a  preacher,  and  by-and-by,  in  the  truest  sense,  a  pastor.
We  have  some  noble  men  in  the  work."

The  headquarters  and  central  depot  of  the  Association


368    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

are  situated  in  a  room  of  the  Pastors'  College,  and  the
annual  conferences  of  colporteurs,  which  C.  H.  Spurgeon
always  had  much  satisfaction  in  attending,  are  held  at  the
Stockwell  Orphanage.  Mr.  Stephen  Wigney  has  for  many
years  been  the  Secretary.*

No  branch  of  Christian  responsibility  missed  C.  H.
Spurgeon's  attention.  For  "  the  poor  of  the  flock  "  he  was
very  solicitous,  and  this  solicitude,  as  usual,  took  a  practical
turn.  During  Dr.  Rippon's  pastorate  six  almshouses  had
been  founded  for  aged  females,  and  did  good  service  for
.a  long  time.  But  after  the  church  removed  from  New
Park  Street  to  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  the  necessity
was  realized  of  moving  the  almshouses  also,  so  that  the
inmates  might  be  able  to  attend  the  new  sanctuary.  A
•site  was  purchased  in  Station  Road,  Walworth,  and  in  1867,
with  the  money  obtained  from  the  sale  of  the  old  buildings,
together  with  ^1,750  added  by  friends  at  the  solicitation
of  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  a  new  block  of  buildings,  consisting  of
seventeen  almshouses,  with  premises  for  a  day  school
accommodating  four  hundred  children,  and  a  head-master's
house,  was  erected.  Later  on  the  great  preacher  himself
gave  five  thousand  pounds  as  an  endowment  for  the  aims-
houses,  so  that  his  successors  might  never  find  the  institution
an  intolerable  burden.  The  inmates  have  to  be  aged  and
needy  members  of  the  church,  and  the  Metropolitan
Tabernacle  has  thus  become  unique  among  Nonconformist
places  of  worship,  in  the  extensive  accommodation  which
it  provides  for  its  indigent  communicants.

*  The  report  for  1902  shows  that  during  the  year  55  colporteurs
•were  at  work  in  different  parts  of  England  and  Wales  and  one
in  Ireland.  The  visits  to  the  homes  of  the  people  numbered
268,769,  and  509,307  separate  articles  were  sold,  including
11,000  Bibles  and  Testaments.  In  addition  60,000  tracts  were
freely  distributed.  Of  Gospel  addresses  6,141  were  delivered,
giving  an  average  of  two  or  three  each  week  for  every  colporteur.


370    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

Another  valuable  agency  for  good  in  which  C.  H.
Spurgeon  always  took  the  deepest  interest,  which  he  helped
to  support  financially,  and  which,  with  his  wife,  he  was
instrumental  in  starting,  was  "Mrs.  Spurgeon's  Book
Fund,"  an  institution  having  for  its  bbject  the  supply  of
necessary  theological  works  to  poor  pastors  unable  to  buy
them.  The  launching  of  this  work  was  a  typical  instance
of  prompt  action  on  the  part  of  the  preacher  and  his
wife,  and  it  is  safe  to  say  that  not  many  women,  constantly
suffering  as  did  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  would  have  had  the  energy
and  zeal  to  devote  themselves  so  entirely  to  this  labour  of
love  as  she  has  done.

In  the  summer  of  1875,  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  com-
pleted the  first  volume  of  his  "  Lectures  to  Students,"  and
handing  a  proof  copy  to  his  wife,  asked  her  what  she
thought  of  the  book.  After  reading  it  Mrs.  Spurgeon
declared  that  she  wished  she  could  place  a  copy  in  the
hands  of  every  minister  in  England.  "  Then  why  not  do
so?"  rejoined  her  husband  without  a  moment's  hesitation.
"  How  much  will  you  give  ?  "  The  lady  was  not  prepared
for  such  a  practical  acceptation  of  her  words,  but  she
determined  to  think  over  the  matter  and  see  if  some  means
could  not  be  devised  of  carrying  her  desire  into  effect.
Then  suddenly  the  thought  came  to  her  that  the  needed
money  was  ready  and  waiting.  A  curious  fancy  had  led
her  for  some  time  past  to  put  away  in  a  drawer  every
crown  piece  that  came  into  her  hands,  and  counting  these
coins  she  found  the  amount  would  exactly  cover  the  cost
of  sending  out  a  hundred  copies  of  the  "  Lecturer,"  "  In
that  moment,"  she  tells  us,  "  though  I  knew  it  not,  the
Book  Fund  was  inaugurated."

A  note  was  published  in  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel  for
July,  1875,  stating  that  a  copy  of  the  recently-issued


OTHER    INSTITUTIONS.  371

"  Lectures  "  would  be  sent  free  of  cost  to  each  of  a  hundred
poor  Baptist  ministers,  but  the  demand  was  so  great  that
Mrs.  Spurgeon  felt  bound  to  give  an  additional  hundred
copies.  Her  husband,  in  the  next  number  of  his  magazine,
set  forth  the  facts,  and  asked  if  something  could  not  be
done  to  provide  poor  ministers  with  books.  "  Some  of
the  applicants,"  wrote  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "  say  that  they
have  not  been  able  to  buy  a  new  book  for  the  last  ten
years!  Does  anybody  wonder  if  preachers  are  sometimes
dull  ?  "  Almost  directly  came  the  first  outside  contribution
— a  gift  of  five  shillings  in  stamps  sent  anonymously.
Other  amounts  quickly  followed,  and  within  two  months
of  the  earliest  announcement  in  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel,
Mrs.  Spurgeon  was  sending  out  parcels  of  books,  containing
not  only  the  "Lectures,"  but  other  and  more  expensive
works.  The  grants  were  extended  to  ministers  of  all
denominations,  and  the  books  distributed  were  not  confined
to  the  authorship  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  although  of  course
the  larger  proportion  were  from  his  pen.  The  letters  of
thanks  received  from  poor  ministers  who  benefited  by  the
kindness  of  Mrs.  Spurgeon  and  her  helpers  were  quite
pathetic,  and  they  revealed  a  state  of  poverty  on  the  part
of  the  pastors  of  poor  congregations  little  dreamt  of  by
the  Church  at  large.  Hundreds  of  clergymen  of  the
Church  of  England,  principally  curates,  have  participated
in  the  benefits  of  the  Book  Fund,  and  have  been  among
the  most  appreciative.  It  says  much  for  the  broad  basis
on  which  the  institution  has  been  conducted  that  the
ministers  receiving  parcels  of  books  have  included  not
only  Baptists,  Congregationalists,  Methodists,  Anglicans,
and  Presbyterians,  but  preachers  of  the  following  denomina-
tions: Moravian,  Swedenborgian,  Irvingite,  Plymouth
Brethren,  Waldensian,  Countess  of  Huntingdon's  Con-


372    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

nexion,  Nestorian,  Unitarian,  Morrisonian,  the  Friends,  and
Lutheran.

In  1879  a  Pastors'  Aid  Society  was  founded  in  con-
nection with  the  Book  Fund,  the  generosity  of  friends
enabling  Mrs  Spurgeon  to  assist,  with  grants  of  money  and
clothing,  poor  ministers  who  were  hard  pressed  through
illness  or  other  unavoidable  circumstances.  This  Society
has  proved  a  boon  to  many  a  tried  pastor,  and  has  often
kept  the  wolf  from  the  door  when  no  other  means  were
available.  Still  another  branch  was  added  to  the  Book
Fund  in  1883,  when  Mrs.  Spurgeon  undertook  to  send  out
monthly,  four  copies  of  her  husband's  sermons  to  a
number  of  foreign  missionaries.  A  gentleman  in  Russia
had  written  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  suggesting  such  a  course,
and  stating  that  the  sermons  would  prove  of  great  assist-
ance to  the  recipients.  He  enclosed  five  pounds  as  the
first  instalment  of  a  fund  for  the  purpose,  and  to  this  the
preacher  himself  added  another  five  pounds  when  handing
the  money  over  to  his  wife.  This  work  has  wonderfully
grown,  and  in  the  last  year  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  life,  35,306
sermons  were  distributed  by  means  of  this  special  fund,
in  addition  to  5,970  books  to  poor  ministers.*

It  had  always  been  a  matter  of  regret  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon
that  owing  to  urgent  need  for  books  among  ministers,  she
was  quite  unable  to  extend  the  benefits  of  her  Book  Fund
to  the  great  army  of  lay-preachers,  many  of  whom,  as  one
put  it,  were  "  poor  in  purse,  short  of  time,  and  in  need
of  teaching."  Mrs.  Spurgeon  mentioned  this  matter  in
her  report  for  1887,  and  Mr*.  Sydney  S.  Bagster,  of  the

*  The  number  of  sermons  distributed  at  home  and  abroad
through  this  fund  in  the  years  1901  and  1902  (the  joint  report  for
which  is  the  last  issued  at  the  time  of  writing)  was  147,180.  The
number  of  books  in  those  two  years  was  10,113  !  making  a  total
of  199,315  volumes  distributed  in  the  twenty-seven  years  since
the  foundation  of  the  Book  Fund  in  1875.


OTHER    INSTITUTIONS.  373

Conference  Hall,  Mildmay  Park,  offered  to  take  up  the
work.  An  Auxiliary  Book  Fund  was  started,  and  each
year,  by  its  aid,  a  large  number  of  valuable  volumes  have
been  distributed  among  poor  lay-preachers.  Mr.  Bagster
managed  the  fund  until  1891,  when  Mrs.  Spurgeon  took
over  the  work  and  it  became  a  part  of  the  regular  labours
carried  on  in  connection  with  the  Book  Fund  at  her  home.


CHAPTER   XXVI.

PASTOR,  PARENT  AND  CITIZEN.

AFTER  the  opening  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,
when  it  was  seen  that  the  popular  approbation  of
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  preaching  was  no  mere  passing
fancy,  but  that  a  solid  and  lasting  work  was  being  done,
the  "furore  occasioned  by  his  advent  to  the  Metropolis
gradually  subsided.  He  came  to  be  regarded  as  an  inevit-
able component  of  the  religious  life  of  London,  and
although  still  generally  recognized  as  the  most  remarkable
preacher  of  his  day — remarkable  in  a  good  sense  or  other-
wise, according  to  the  standpoint  of  the  observer — yet  it
was  the  custom  (and  in  many  quarters  still  is)  to  view
his  early  achievements  of  attracting  huge  crowds  wherever
he  went  as  the  most  extraordinary  feature  of  his  life.  But
such  an  idea  is  certainly  incorrect.  Other  earnest  and
eloquent  preachers  have  been  able  to  gather  the  multitudes
to  hear  them — St.  John  Chrysostom,  Wycliffe,  Luther,
Wesley,  Whitefield,  for  instance — but  none  of  these  did
what  C.  H.  Spurgeon  succeeded  in  doing.  In  the  whole
range  of  Christian  history  you  cannot  find  another  instance
of  a  man  gathering,  building  up,  and  holding  together  for
nearly  forty  years  a  church  and  congregation  of  five  or  six
thousand  souls  without  a  single  sign  of  disintegration
making  itself  visible.  Three  times  a  week — twice  on  Sun-
days and  once  on  Thursdays — he  used  to  preach  a  lengthy
sermon,  and  in  addition  conducted  various  other  meetings


PASTOR,    PARENT    AND    CITIZEN.         375

and  services  weekly,  but  never  once  did  his  people  tire  of
him.  Instead,  their  love  and  devotion  increased  as  time
went  on,  and  it  is  perhaps  no  exaggeration  to  say  that
many  members  of  his  congregation  would  have  willingly
endured  his  sufferings  and  even  gone  to  death  for  his
sake  had  he  been  able  thereby  to  escape  the  pain  which
clung  to  him  in  his  later  years.  Preaching  to  the  same
congregation  for  forty  years  and  ever  remaining  fresh,
ministering  to  the  same  assembly  of  six  thousand  souls  for
close  upon  half-a-century  without  a  suspicion  of  friction
discovering  itself,  making  his  church  the  centre  of  a  vast
net-work  of  organizations  any  single  one  of  which  would
have  been  a  splendid  achievement  for  a  man,  and  never
finding  the  finances  to  fail,  all  this  was  the  marvel  and
miracle  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  life.

The  only  breaks  in  the  continuity  of  his  ministry  were
caused  by  illness,  breaks  which  became  more  frequent  in
later  life,  when  the  distinguished  preacher  found  it  neces-
sary to  seek  escape  from  the  rigours  of  an  English  winter
by  sojourning  in  the  Riviera.  The  first  long  illness
occurred  at  the  end  of  1869,  the  preacher  having  contracted
a  mild  attack  of  small-pox  soon  after  attending  the  Lord
Mayor's  annual  banquet  for  the  first  and  only  time  in  his
life.  C.  H.  Spurgeon  could  never  again  be  induced  to
become  a  guest  at  that  function,  although  many  times
invited  to  do  so  by  Lord  Mayors  who  delighted  to  honour
him.  "I  have  only  once  been  in  such  high  society,"  he
would  say,  "and  then  I  caught  the  small-pox,  so  I  have
determined  never  again  to  form  one  of  that  company."

Two  years  later  the  preacher  was  laid  low  by  a  long  and
painful  illness,  which  kept  him  out  of  his  pulpit  for  twelve
weeks.  During  that  time  he  often  wrote  to  his  flock,
urging  them  to  pray  for  him  and  to  manifest  increased


U  S
<   e

i
*


U


PASTOR,    PARENT    AND    CITIZEN.         377

zeal  and  diligence  in  the  Lord's  work.  "  I  hope  the  week-
night  services  will  not  droop,"  he  writes  in  a  letter  dated
June  ii.  "If  you  stay  away,  let  it  be  when  I  am  there,
but  not  now.  May  the  deacons  and  elders  find  themselves
surrounded  by  an  untiring  band  of  helpers  at  every  meeting
for  worship."  In  this  same  letter  he  asks  that  in  addition
to  the  individual  prayer,  which  was  being  offered  every-
where, the  church  should  meet  and  intercede  for  his
recovery,  and  this  suggestion  was  instantly  followed.  A
week  later  the  invalid  writes :  "  As  soon  as  the  church  had
resolved  to  meet  for  special  prayer  for  me  I  began  rapidly
to  recover.  It  pleased  God  to  turn  the  wind  at  the  begin-
ning of  this  week,  and  the  change  in  the  temperature  has
worked  wonders.  We  may  truthfully  say  of  the  Wednesday
meeting  for  prayer  that  the  Lord  fulfilled  His  word :
'  Before  they  call,  I  will  answer ;  and  while  they  are  yet
speaking,  I  will  hear.'  For  all  this  great  goodness  I  pray
you  to  unite  with  me  in  sincere  and  intense  gratitude  to  the
Lord  our  God."

The  pain  of  the  sufferer  had  been  terrible — almost
beyond  endurance,  and  he  had  had  to  cry  out  in  his
torment.  At  last,  begging  everyone  to  leave  the  sick
chamber,  he  prayed  in  an  agony  that  God  would  ease  him.
"  Thou  art  my  Father  and  I  am  Thy  child,"  pleaded  the
sufferer,  "and  Thou,  as  a  Father,  art  tender  and  full  of
mercy.  I  could  not  bear  to  see  my  child  suffer  as  Thou
makest  me  suffer;  and  if  I  saw  him  tormented  as  I  am
now,  I  would  do  what  I  could  to  help  him  and  put  my  arms
under  him  to  sustain  him.  Wilt  Thou  hide  Thy  face
from  me,  my  Father?  Wilt  Thou  still  lay  on  me  Thy
heavy  hand  and  not  give  me  a  smile  from  Thy  counten-
ance?" The  prayer  was  very  real  and  the  petitioner's
faith  was  great,  so  that  when  those  who  nursed  him


378    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.


returned  he  had  full  confidence  that  the  prayer  would  be
speedily  answered.  "  I  shall  never  have  such  agony  again
from  this  moment,"  he  declared,  "  for  God  has  heard  my
prayer  "  ;  and  sure  enough  ease  came  and  the  racking  pain
did  not  return.

By    Sunday,   July  2,  C.  H.  Spurgeon    was    sufficiently


(Photos  by  Mr.  E.Johnson.)

Bronze  busts  of  Calvin  and   Luther  which   were  among  the  few
ornaments  of   C.   H.  Spurgeon's  vestry  at  the  Tabernacle.

recovered  to  preach  at  the  Tabernacle  in  the  morning,  and
he  took  for  his  text  the  appropriate  passage  in  Psalm  Ixxi.
14:  "  But  I  will  hope  continually,  and  will  yet  praise  Thee
more  and  more."  The  congregation  was  delighted  to  get
its  beloved  pastor  back  again,  and  in  the  minutes  of  a
church-meeting,  held  on  July  24th,  it  recorded  its  sense


PASTOR,    PARENT    AND    CITIZEN.         379

of  gratitude  to  Almighty  God  for  restoring  the  preacher,
and  expressed  sincerest  sympathy  with  the  iatter  in  his
severe  and  protracted  illness.  The  church-books,  indeed,
throughout  the  pastorate  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  are  sprinkled
with  entries  recording  gratitude  and  satisfaction  at  the
blessings  received  from  his  ministry,  or  condoling  with  him
in  time  of  illness  and  pain.  The  bond  of  love  between
pastor  and  people  was  made  perfect  in  suffering.  But  it
was  no  one-sided  bond.  If  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  loved
by  his  flock,  he  bore  for  them  an  equally  strong  admiration
and  affection.  "  I  have  beheld  in  this  church,"  he  once
said,  "  apostolical  piety  revived ;  I  will  say  it  to  the  glory
of  "God  that  I  have  seen  as  earnest  and  as  true  piety  as
Paul  or  Peter  ever  witnessed.  I  have  marked  in  some
here  present,  such  godly  zeal,  such  holiness,  such  devotion
to  the  Master's  business,  as  Christ  Himself  must  look  upon
with  joy  and  satisfaction.  ....  Though  we  are  not  free
from  ten  thousand  faults,  yet  I  have  often  admired  the
goodness  of  God  which  has  enabled  us  with  a  hearty  grip
to  hold  each  other  by  the  hand  and  say,  '  We  love  each
other  for  Christ's  sake  and  for  the  truth's  sake,  and  we
hope  to  live  in  each  other's  love  till  we  die,  wishing,  if  it
were  possible,  to  be  buried  side  by  side.' "

C.  H.  Spurgeon  always  felt  severely  the  loss  of  old  and
tried  members  of  his  church.  When  Mrs.  Bartlett,  the
conductor  of  the  Young  Women's  Bible  Class  at  the
Tabernacle,  through  whose  instrumentality  nearly  a  thou-
sand members  had  joined  the  church,  passed  away  in
1875,  the  preacher  paid  a  touching  tribute  to  her  memory.'
"  Mrs.  Bartlett,"  he  said,  "  was  a  choice  gift  from  God  to
the  church  at  the  Tabernacle,  and  the  influence  of  her
life  was  far-reaching,  stimulating  many  others  besides  those
who  by  her  means  were  actually  led  to  the  Saviour.  We


PASTOR,    PARENT    AND    CITIZEN.         381

miss  her  sadly,  but  her  spiritual  children  are  with  us  still;
they  have  stood  the  test  of  years,  and  the  most  searching
test  of  all,  namely,  the  loss  of  her  motherly  counsel,  and
inspiring  words.  She  did  not  build  with  wood,  hay  and
stubble,  for  the  edifice  remains,  and  for  this  let  God  be

glorified It  pleased  God  to  make  our  sister  an

eminently  practical  woman.  She  was  no  dreamer  of
dreams,  but  a  steady,  plodding  worker.  She  never  wasted
two  minutes  of  her  Pastor's  time  with  marvellous  methods
and  miraculous  plans;  she  instinctively  saw  what  could  be
done  and  what  should  be  done,  and  she  did  it,  looking  to
God  for  the  blessing."  The  inscription  on  her  monument
in  Nunhead  Cemetery  records  that  "  The  Pastors,  Deacons
and  Elders  of  the  Church  in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle
unite  with  .her  class  and  the  students  of  the  College  in
erecting  this  memorial  to  her  surpassing  worth."

Perhaps  nothing  gave  Charles  Hadclon  Spurgeon
greater  satisfaction  than  the  fact  that  his  sons,  as  they
grew  up,  followed  in  their  father's  footsteps.  The  lads
were  converted  at  an  early  age,  and  when  they  went  to
Mr.  Coding's  school  at  Brighton  they  started  a  little  prayer-
meeting  among  their  fellow-pupils.  Charies  wrote  and  told
his  father,  who,  in  replying,  said,  "  Dear  boy, — One  of  my
sweetest  joys  is  to  hear  that  a  spirit  of  prayer  is  in  your
school,  and  that  you  participate  in  it.  To  know  that  you
love  the  Lord  and  are  mighty  in  prayer  would  be  my
crowning  joy;  the  hope  that  you  do  so  already  is  a  happy
one  to  me.  I  should  like  you  to  preach;  but  it  is  best
that  you  pray ;  many  a  preacher  has  proved  a  castaway,  but
never  one  who  has  truly  learned  to  pray."

Later  on,  in  June,  1874,  when  Charles  was  about  to
enter  upon  a  commercial  career  (for  both  sons  had  some
training  in  secular  pursuits,  Charles  in  a  business  house,


382    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEON.

and  Thomas  in  a  wood-engraving  establishment),  C.  H.
Spurgeon  wrote :  "  We  shall  hope  to  see  you  an  upright
man,  capable  of  any  honest  achievement,  and  bending  all


C.    H.   Spurgeon's   two  sons,  Thomas  and
Charles,    as  boys.

your  strength  to  accomplish  an  honourable  life-work.  I
am  full  of  hope  about  you ;  and  if  I  feel  any  anxiety,  it  is
because  I  love  you  so  well  that  I  want  you  to  be  a  greater


PASTOR,   PARENT   AND    CITIZEN.         383

success  than  other  young  men.  I  believe  you  love  the
Lord,  and  that  is  the  main  thing;  the  next  is,  stick  to  it.
Leave  childish  things  once  for  all,  and  buckle  to  the
work.  It  will  not  be  pleasant,  and  it  may  even  become
irksome ;  but  the  harder  you  work  at  first,  the  less  you  will
have  to  do  in  later  life.  The  times  are  so  pushing  that
you  must  put  all  your  energies ;  and,  above  all,  you  must  be
careful  and  very  persevering;  and  then,  with  God's
blessing,  you  will  soon  take  a  position  to  which  your
father  and  mother  can  point  with  pleasure.  If  you  do  not
preach  the  Gospel  you  must  help  me  to  do  it,  and  make
money  for  Jesus.  With  my  two  sons  at  my  side,  I  shall
be  able  to  do  marvels,  if  the  Lord  be  with  us."

The  preacher  was  not  deceived  in  his  belief  that  his
sons  "loved  the  Lord."  Three  months  after  the  date  of
the  above  letter  they  came  before  the  church  at  the
Metropolitan  Tabernacle  for  membership,  and  having  given
a  satisfactorv  statement  of  the  work  of  grace  in  their  souls,
were  on  September  2ist,  1874,  baptized  by  their  father
in  the  presence  of  an  enormous  congregation.  To  com-
memorate the  occasion,  Mrs.  Spurgeon  was  presented  with
an  illuminated  address,  in  which  the  church  unanimously
recorded  its  thanks  to  God  for  so  greatly  using  the  pious
teachings  and  example  of  the  mother  to  the  quickening  and
fostering  of  the  Divine  life  in  the  hearts  of  her  twin  sons,
and  earnestly  praying  that  amidst  her  long  continued
sufferings  she  might  ever  be  consoled  with  all  spiritual
comfort,  and  by  the  growing  devoutness  of  those  who  were
thus  "  twice  given  to  her  in  the  Lord."  Thomas  and
Charles  Spurgeon  were  received  into  fellowship  by  the
church,  and  participated  in  the  communion  service  for  the
first  time  on  October  4th.

Soon  afterwards  they  entered  the  Pastors'  College,  and


384    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

when  Charles  at  the  close  of  his  course  was  called  to  the
pastorate  of  South  Street  Baptist  Chapel,  Greenwich,  his
father  delivered  the  sermon  at  the  recognition  service.
"  Preach  up  Christ,  my  boy !  "  he  said,  leaning  over  the
pulpit  rail  and  looking  at  the  young  minister  below.
"  Preach  Him  up ! "  Many  times,  when  C.  H.  Spurgeon
was  laid  aside  by  illness,  one  or  other  of  his  sons  occupied
the  Tabernacle  pulpit  in  his  stead,  and  often  when  the
father  went  to  fulfil  preaching  engagements  away  from
his  own  church  he  would  take  one  of  his  sons  with  him  to
address  an  overflow  meeting.

Even  at  this  period  the  great  preacher  was  slandered
pretty  freely,  and  words  were  put  into  his  mouth,  which
not  only  he  had  never  used  but  which  expressed  opinions
quite  contrary  to  those  held  by  him.  It  began  to  be
repeated,  for  instance,  that  he  had  declared  there  were  in
hell  infants  a  span  long.  At  last  a  correspondent  inquired
if  he  had  ever  said  this,  and  in  reply  C.  H.  Spurgeon
wrote :  "  I  have  never  at  any  time  in  my  life  said,  believed,  or
imagined  that  any  infant,  under  any  circumstances,  would
be  cast  into  hell.  I  have  always  believed  in  the  salvation
of  all  infants,  and  I  intensely  detest  the  opinions  which
your  opponent  dared  to  attribute  to  me.  I  do  not  believe
that  on  this  earth  there  is  a  single  professing  Christian
holding  the  damnation  of  infants;  or,  if  there  be,  he  must
be  insane,  or  utterly  ignorant  of  Christianity.  I  am
obliged  by  this  opportunity  of  denying  the  calumny,
although  the  author  of  it  will  probably  find  no  difficulty  in
inventing  some  other  fiction  to  be  affirmed  as  unblushingly
as  the  present  one.  He  who  doubts  God's  Word  is
naturally  much  at  home  in  slandering  the  Lord's  servants."

At  another  time  an  American  Presbyterian  paper  stated,
"  on  the  authority  of  a  sainted  gentleman,"  that  C.  H.


336    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

Spurgeon  had  declared  :  "  I  hate  a  close-communion  Baptist
as  I  hate  the  devil."  His  attention  was  drawn  to  the
statement,  and  of  course  he  categorically  denied  that  he
had  ever  said  or  thought  such  a  thing.  "  The  '  saint,' ''  he
added  drily,  "  must  have  dreamed  it,  or  have  mistaken
the  person."

In  politics,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  a  Liberal,  and  at  the
time  of  a  General  Election  it  was  widely  reported  that  he
had  said  he  would  vote  for  the  devil  himself  if  he  were  a
Liberal.  The  preacher  was  bombarded  with  inquiries
from  scandalized  correspondents,  and  it  became  necessary  to
print  a  circular  postcard  to  send  by  way  of  reply.  The  denial
was  couched  in  characteristic  phraseology.  "  I  certainly
should  not  vote  for  the  devil  under  any  circumstances,  nor
am  I  able  to  conceive  of  him  as  so  restored  as  to  become
a  Liberal.  I  think  he  has  had  a  considerable  hand  in
the  invention  of  many  a  story  which  has  of  late  been
published  concerning  ma."

His  attitude  towards  politics  often  added  to  the
preacher's  heavy  correspondence.  Some  disliked  his
voting  for  the  Liberal  Party,  and  others  would  not  have
him  vote  at  all.  One  gentleman  wrote  during  a  General
Election,  expressing  regret  that  C.  H.  Spurgeon  should
have  descended  "  from  his  high  and  lofty  position  as  a
servant  of  God  and  preacher  of  the  everlasting  Gospel,
into  the  defiled  arena  of  party  politics."  "  Your  letter
amuses  me,"  replied  the  preacher,  "  because  you  are  so
evidently  a  rank  Tory,  and  so  hearty  in  your  political
convictions  that  in  spite  of  your  religious  scruples  you  must
needs  interfere  in  politics  and  write  to  me.  If  there  is
anything  defiling  in  it,  you  are  certainly  over  head  and
ears,  nowever,  dear  sir,  I  thank  you  for  your  kindness
in  wishing  to  put  me  right,  and  I  can  assure  you  that  I


3   S


^  3

•<    H


388    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

vote  as  devoutly  as  I  pray,  and  feel  it  to  be  a  part  of  my
love  to  God  and  to  my  neighbour  to  try  to  turn  out  the
Government  whom  your  letter  would  lead  me  to  let
alone.  You  axe  as  wrong  as  wrong  can  be  in  your  notion ;
but  as  it  keeps  you  from  voting,  I  shall  not  try  to  convert
you,  for  I  am  morally  certain  you  would  vote  for  the  Tory
candidate.  In  things  Divine  we  are  probably  at  one;  and
you  shall  abstain  from  voting  as  unto  the  Lord,  and
I  will  vote  as  unto  the  Lord,  and  we  will  both  give  Him
thanks."

At  another  time,  on  the  way  to  fulfil  a  preaching  engage-
ment, he  called  at  a  polling  station  to  vote,  and  mentioning
this  fact  to  the  friend  whose  pulpit  he  was  to  occupy,  that
worthy  exclaimed,  "  To  vote !  but,  my  dear  brother,  I
thought  you  were  a  citizen  of  the  New  Jerusalem !  "  "  So
I  am,"  replied  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "  but  my  '  old  man  '  is  a
citizen  of  this  world."  "  Ah ! "  said  the  friend,  "  but
you  should  mortify  your  '  old  man.'  "  "  That  is  exactly
what  I  did,"  was  the  rejoinder,  "  for  my  old  man  is  a  Tory
and  I  made  him  vote  for  the  Liberals  !  "

Although  a  hearty  admirer  of  Mr.  Gladstone  in  most
things,  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  differed  from  him  on  a
number  of  points,  and  when  the  Home  Rule  Bill  was
brought  in  the  preacher  declared  to  an  English  friend  of
his  that  he  believed  it  to  be  "  a  fatal  stab  at  our  common
country,"  and  "  a  very  serious  error  "  which  he  was  bound
to  oppose.  Mr.  Gladstone,  on  his  part,  held  C.  H.
Spurgeon  in  great  estimation,  and  on  one  occasion  attended
an  evening  service  at  the  Tabernacle.  He  invited  the
preacher  over  and  over  again  to  take  breakfast  or  dinner
at  Downing  Street,  and  also  to  pay  a  visit  to  Ha  warden,  but
pressure  of  work,  or  illness,  invariably  prevented  C.  H.
Spurgeon  from  accepting.  The  only  occasion  on  which


PASTOR,    PARENT    AND    CITIZEN.          389

he  visited  Mr.  Gladstone  was  when,  having  some  matter  to
discuss  with  the  Premier,  he  asked  for  an  interview  of  ten
minutes  at  Downing  Street.  The  interview  was  readily
granted,  and  when  the  allotted  time  had  expired,  the
preacher  rose  to  leave,  but  Mr.  Gladstone  begged  him  to
remain  longer,  and  the  two  distinguished  men  talked  for
some  time  on  subjects  of  mutual  interest.

Years  later,  when  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  was  in  his
last  illness,  Mr.  Gladstone  wrote  to  the  preacher's  wife :
"  In  my  own  home,  darkened  at  the  present  time,  I  have
read  with  sad  interest  the  daily  accounts  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's
illness;  and  I  cannot  help  conveying  to  you  the  earnest
assurance  of  my  sympathy  with  you  and  with  him,  and  of
my  cordial  admiration,  not  only  of  his  splendid  powers,  but
still  more  of  his  devoted  and  unfailing  character.  May  I
humbly  commend  you  and  him,  in  all  contingencies,  to  the
infinite  stores  of  the  Divine  love  and  mercy."  The  letter
arrived  at  Westwood  when  the  sufferer  was  enjoying  a  brief
period  of  relief  from  the  delirium  which  was  so  distressing;
a  feature  of  the  illness,  and  with  his  own  hand  he  appended
a  postscript  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon's  letter  of  grateful  thanks.
"  Yours  is  a  word  of  love  such  as  those  only  write  who  have
been  into  the  King's  country  and  have  seen  much  of  His
face.  My  heart's  love  to  you. — C.  H.  Spurgeon."


CHAPTER   XXVII.

SOME    NOTABLE    CELEBRATIONS.

AS  might  be  supposed  in  the  case  of  a  man  of  so  many
activities  as  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  every  day
almost  was  the  anniversary  of  some  notable  event  in  his  life
or  ministry.  The  course  of  time,  too,  brought  round  many  a
date  worthy  of  commemoration,  from  the  fact  that  five,
ten,  or  twenty  years  before  some  successful  Christian  agency
had  been  inaugurated  thereon  or  some  remarkable  event
in  the  history  of  his  church  had  happened.  Such  occasions
were  frequently  signalised  by  an  entry  in  the  church-book
recording  grateful  thanks  to  God  for  His  goodness,  and
by  the  raising  of  a  sum  of  money  for  the  particular  work
then  under  notice,  the  latter  showing  clearly  that  the  former
was  no  mere  empty  platitude.

There  were,  however,  some  anniversaries  of  more  than
ordinary  interest  or  importance,  when  the  celebrations  were
of  an  exceptional  character,  such,  for  instance,  as  the  com-
pletion of  the  twenty-first  year  of  the  pastor's  ministry.
The  minutes  of  the  annual  church-meeting,  held  at  the
Tabernacle  on  January  8th,  1875,  contain  the  following  entry
referring  thereto :  "  That  we  desire  as  a  church  to  record
our  devout  gratitude  to  our  heavenly  Father  on  the  comple-
tion of  the  twenty-first  year  of  our  pastor's  ministry  amongst
us.  We  also  desire  to  present  our  hearty  congratulations
to  him  that  he  has  been  privileged  to  complete  the
twentieth  volume  of  his  printed  sermons,  and  also  during


SOME    NOTABLE    CELEBRATIONS.  391

the  past  year  to  accomplish  the  erection  of  the  new
College  Buildings.  We  feel  it  desirable  that  a  permanent
record  should  be  made  of  these  important  events,  and
therefore  agree  that  it  shall  be  entered  in  our  church-book
and  that  a  suitable  address,  handsomely  framed  and  beauti-
fully illuminated,  shall  be  presented  to  our  pastor  as  an
expression  of  our  loving  sympathy  with  him,  which  was
never  felt  by  us  to  a  greater  degree  than  at  the  present
time."  The  address  was  duly  prepared,  and  presented  to
C.  H.  Spurgeon  on  March  3oth  at  a  great  meeting  of  the
church,  which  had  gathered  to  welcome  him  on  his  return
from  the  Continent  after  an  absence  of  eleven  weeks.  It
had  been  proposed  that  the  address  should  be  accompanied
by  a  present  of  ^2,000,  but  this  C.  H.  Spurgeon  resolutely
declined  to  receive,  asking  that  any  monetary  gifts  might
find  their  way  into  the  funds  of  the  Pastors'  College  or
other  institutions.

But  the  greatest  of  all  the  celebrations  which  marked
epochs  in  the  preacher's  life  was  that  associated  with  his
pastoral  "  silver  wedding  " — the  completion  of  the  twenty-
fifth  year  of  his  ministry  in  London.  His  friends  and
fellow-workers  naturally  felt  that  such  an  event  should  not
pass  without  some  worthy  recognition,  and  it  was  proposed
to  present  the  pastor  with  a  substantial  testimonial,  as  a
mark  of  his  people's  appreciation  and  gratitude.  The
matter  was  mentioned  to  him,  but  again,  with  characteristic
unselfishness,  he  declined  to  reap  any  personal  benefit
from  the  event,  suggesting,  however,  that  if  the  friends
wished  to  make  a  gift  which,  while  commemorating  the
goodness  of  God  in  blessing  the  church  with  its  pastors,
officers,  and  members,  should  at  the  same  time  meet  with
his  own  personal  appreciation,  they  might  raise  a  fund
of  £5,000  as  an  endowment  for  the  Almshouses,  the


392    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

church's  heaviest  burden  at  that  time.  Although  they
would  have  liked  their  pastor  to1  reap  some  material  benefit
himself  from  their  gifts,  the  church-members  readily  fell
in  with  his  suggestion,  and  by  January,  1879,  far  more  than
the  amount  named  had  been  received.  A  great  bazaar  in
aid  of  the  fund  was  held  at  the  Tabernacle,  and  realized
,£3,463,  which  the  contributions  of  friends  increased  to
^6,476  95.,*  surely  a  remarkable  sum  toi  be  raised  by  a
single  church  for  such  a  purpose.  At  that  time  bazaars  had
not  become  associated  with  the  questionable  and  worldly
methods  which  afterwards  led  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  and  others
like-minded,  to  decide  that  such  means  of  raising  money  for
religious  purposes  were  best  left  alone.

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  had  had  a  long  and  painful
illness,  while  friends  were  thus  preparing  to  celebrate  his
pastoral  "  silver  wedding."  He  had  spent  many  months  at
Mentone  in  the  company  of  his  son  Thomas,  but  progress
was  slow,  and  it  was  not  till  April,  1879,  that  he  was  able
to  return  to  London,  even  then  against  the  advice  of  his
medical  attendants.  Tuesday,  May  2oth,  was  the  date
fixed  for  the  presentation  of  the  testimonial,  but  the
celebration  of  the  "  silver  wedding "  commenced  on  the
previous  Sunday,  when  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  in  the  course  of
his  sermons  reviewed  the  events  of  the  past  twenty-five
years  in  so  far  as  they  affected  the  church  and  its  work.
"  Brethren,"  he  said,  "  there  is  about  '  the  midst  of  years '
a  certain  special  danger,  and  this  led  the  prophet  as  it  shall
lead  us  at  this  time  to  pray  in  the  words  which  I  have
selected  for  my  text :  '  O  Lord,  revive  Thy  work  in  the
midst  -of  the  years,  in  the  midst  of  the  years  make  known.'

*  The  sum  was  first  of  all  made  up  to  .£6,233,  but  after  the
presentation  it  was  increased  to  the  larger  amount,  the  contribu-
tions ranging  from  single  farthings  to  one  gift  of  ^250.


SOME    NOTABLE    CELEBRATIONS.  393

Youth  has  its  perils,  but  these  are  past ;  age  has  its  infirmi-
ties, but  these  we  have  not  yet  reached ;  it  is  ours  then  to
pray  against  the  dangers  which  are  present  with  us  '  in  the
midst  of  the  years.'  The  middle  passage  of  life  with  us  as
individuals  and  with  us  as  a  church  is  crowded  with  peculiar
perils.  There  is  a  certain  spur  and  stimulus  of  novelty


Charles   Haddon   Spurgeon  in    1878.

about  religious  movements  which  in  a  few  years  is  worn
out.  I  well  recollect  when  we  were  called  '  a  nine  days'
wonder,'  and  our  critics  prophesied  that  our  work  would
speedily  collapse.  Such  excitement  had  been  seen  before
and  had  passed  away;  and  this  would  be  one  among  other
bubbles  of  the  hour.  The  nine  days  have  lasted  consider-


394    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

ably  long; — may  nine  such  days  follow  them  in  God's
infinite  mercy !  Now,  whatever  detractors  may  say,  we
know  that  there  was  then  a  life,  an  energy,  a  freshness
about  everything  which  was  done  by  us  as  a  church  which
we  could  hardly  expect  to  continue  with  us  for  all  these
years.  From  ail  admirable  fervour  many  cool  down  to  a
dangerous  chill.  This  is  to  be  bemoaned  where  it  has
occurred,  and  it  is  to  be  feared  where  as  yet  it  has  not  hap-
pened, for  such  is  the  natural  tendency  of  things.  Beloved
brethren,  I  have  prayed  to  God,  that  when  what  is  called
the  esprit  de  corps  is  gone  from  us,  the  Esprit  de  Dieu  may
still  abide  with  us;  that  when  the  spirit  which  grows  out
of  our  association  with  each  other  declines,  we  may  be
sustained  by  the  Spirit  which  unites  us  all  to  the  Lord
Jesus."

He  then  went  on  to  speak  of  the  happy  fellowship  and
the  close  bonds  of  love  in  which  the  church  and  its  pastor
had  been  united,  and  of  their  joint  gratitude  to  God  for  the
power  which  invariably  accompanied  the  preaching  of  the
Gospel.  This  last  statement  was  absolutely  free  from
egotism,  for  the  preacher  ascribed  all  the  glory  to  God.
"  It  was  not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God  which  was  with  me.
There  were  stricken  down  among  us  some  of  the  most
unlikely  ones.  There  were  brought  into  the  church  and
added  to  God's  people,  some  of  those  who  had  wandered
far  away  from  the  path  of  truth  and  righteousness ;  and
these,  by  their  penitent  love,  quickened  our  life  and
increased  our  zeal.  The  Lord  gave  the  people  more  and
more  a  willingness  to  hear,  and  there  was  no  pause  either  in
the  flowing  stream  of  hearers  or  in  the  incoming  of  converts.
The  Holy  Spirit  came  down  like  showers  which  saturate
the  soil  till  the  clods  are  ready  for  the  breaking ;  and  then
it  was  not  long  before  on  the  right  and  on  the  left  \ve  heard


SOME    NOTABLE    CELEBRATIONS.  395

the  cry,  '  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  '  We  were  busy
enough  in  those  days  in  seeing  converts;  and  thank  God
we  have  been  so  ever  since.  We  had  some  among  us  who
gave  themselves  up  to  watch  for  the  souls  of  men,  and  we
have  a  goodly  number  of  such  helpers  now,  perhaps  more
than  ever  we  had;  and,  thank  God,  these  found  and  still
find  many  souls  to  watch  over.  Still  the  arrows  fly  and
still  the  smitten  cry  out  for  help  and  ask  that  they  may  be
guided  to  the  great  healing  Lord.  Blessed  be  God's  Name
for  this !  He  went  with  us  all  those  early  days,  and  gave
U3  sheaves  even  at  the  first  sowing,  so  that  we  began  with
mercy;  and  He  has  been  with  us  even  until  now,  till  our
life  has  become  one  long  harvest-home."

The  next  day  there  was  a  praise-service,  and  on  the
Tuesday  the  great  meeting  for  the  presentation  of  the  testi-
monial was  held  in  the  Tabernacle.  It  lasted  for  several
hours,  and  was  characterized  throughout  by  an  enthusiasm
that  can  never  have  been  exceeded  in  similar  circumstances.
Everyone  present  seemed  anxious  to  show  in  some  unmis-
takable manner  his  deep  love  and  regard  for  the  pastor  of
the  church,  and  tears  filled  the  eyes  of  many  as  they
listened  to  Mr.  B.  W.  Carr,  one  of  the  deacons,  giving  a
grateful  retrospect  of  events  in  connection  with  the  church
during  the  past  quarter-of-a-century.  A  deputation  from
the  London  Baptist  Association  presented  a  letter  of  con-
gratulation, and  after  an  address  from  the  Rev.  C.  Stanford,
D.D.,  upon  "  The  Baptist  Churches  Twenty-five  Years  Ago
and  Now,"  the  presentation  was  made  by  Mr.  W.  Olney.
His  speech  was  short,  but  as  the  spokesman  for  the  whole
church  he  sought  to  convey  some  idea  of  the  love  in  which
the  pastor  was  held.  The  entire  lack  of  self-interest  which
had  always  characterized  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  his  unexampled
generosity,  and  his  amazing  activity,  were  all  dwelt  upon,


396    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

and  then  the  large  sum  that  had  been  raised  was  placed  at
the  pastor's  absolute  disposal.

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  rose  to  thank  the  people
for  enabling  him  to  endow  the  Almshouses,  but  the  out-
burst of  cheering  was  so  great  that  it  was  a  con-


C.   H.   Spurgeon   and   his  wife   in    1881.

siderable  time  before  he  had  a  chance  of  making  himself
heard.  So  soon  as  it  had  been  found  that  the  sum  col-
lected exceeded  the  ^5,000  required  for  the  Almshouses
by  more  than  a  thousand,  the  deacons  had  pressed  their
pastor  to  accept  the  balance  for  his  own  personal  use,  but


SOME    NOTABLE    CELEBRATIONS.  397

this  he  resolutely  refused  to  do,  and  he  now  told  the  people
his  reason  for  such  action.  "  It  is  a  testimonial  of  gratitude
to  God  for  twenty-five  years  of  happy  communion  and  pros-
perity, and  unto  God  let  the  testimonial  go — all  of  it,  with
the  exception  of  a  bronze  clock  for  my  study,  which  I  will
accept  as  a  memorial  of  the  fond  affection  of  my  dear
people  towards  me/'  He  outlined  the  way  in  which  he
intended  to  dispose  of  the  money,  the  Colportage  Associa-
tion, Mrs.  Spurgeon's  Book  Fund,  the  Poor  Fund,  and  the
Orphanage  all  benefiting.  "  Oh,  that  I  could  do  more  for
Christ  and  more  for  the  poof.  For  these  I  have  turned
beggar  before  now,  and  shall  not  be  ashamed  to  beg  again.
The  outside  world  cannot  understand  that  a  man  should
be  moved  by  any  motive  except  that  of  personal  gain ;  but
if  they  knew  the  power  of  love  to  Jesus  they  would  under-
stand that  greed  of  wealth  is  vile  as  the  dust  beneath  his
feet  to  the  lover  of  the  Saviour."

No  doubt  this  remark  was  called  forth  by  statements
which  had  appeared  in  the  newspapers  of  late  to  the  effect
that  the  preacher  made  "  a  very  good  thing  out  of  the
Tabernacle,"  and  instancing  as  a  proof  the  presentation  of
a  large  sum  of  money  to  him  for  personal  use.  He  had
referred  to  this  matter  the  previous  day  in  even  more
pointed  terms.  "  I  daresay  you  have  all  heard  that
'  Spurgeon  makes  a  good  thing  out  of  the  Tabernacle.'
Well,  whenever  anybody  hints  that  to  you,  you  may,  on  my
authority,  assure  them  that  I  do.  I  should  not  like  anybody
to  think  that  my  Master  does  not  pay  His  servants  well.
He  loadeth  us  with  benefits,  and  I  am  perfectly  satisfied
with  His  wages;  but  if  any  persons  assert  that,  by  my
preaching  in  this  place,  I  have  made  a  purse  for  myself,  I
can  refer  them  to  those  who  know  me  and  my  way  of  life
among  you.  '  Ah,  but,'  they  say, '  he  has  had  a  testimonial


398    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

of  ^6,000  presented  to>  him.'  Yes,  he  has  had  it,  and  he
thanks  everybody  for  it.  Perhaps  there  are  some  other
persons  who  would  like  a  similar  testimonial,  and  I  wish
they  may  get  it  and  do<  the  same  with  it  as  I  have  done.
Legacies  left  to  me,  and  sums  subscribed  for  the  Orphanage


{Photo  by  Mr.  E.  Johnson.)

C.  H.  Spurgeon's  Vestry  Clock-     The  timepiece  was

destroyed   entirely  in    the    Tabernacle    fire,    but    the

bronze  figure  on  top  was  recovered,  although  somewhat

damaged,  and   has  since   been   restored.

and  College,  and  so  on,  are  spoken  of  as  if  I  had  some
private  interest  in  them,  whereas  I  have  neither  a  direct  nor
indirect  pecuniary  interest  in  any  of  these  works  to  the
amount  of  a  penny  a  year*.  With  regard  to  all  things  else,


SOME    NOTABLE    CELEBRATIONS.  399

from  the  first  day  until  new,  I  have  acted  on  no  other
principle  but  that  of  perfect  consecration  to  the  work  where-
unto  I  am  called.  I  have  no  riches.  I  sometimes  wish  that
I  had,  for  I  could  use  money  in  an  abundance  of  profitable
ways.  What  have  I  gained  of  late  years  in  my  ministry
here?  I  have  received  all  that  I  wished  by  way  of  salary,
but  I  have  for  years  expended  almost  all  of  it  in  the  cause
of  God,  and  in  some  years  even  more  than  all.  As  far  as
my  pastoral  office  is  concerned,  the  net  income  for  myself,
after  giving  my  share  to  all  holy  service,  is  not  so  much  that
any  man  could  envy  me.  Yet  this  is  not  your  fault,  or  any-
one's fault ;  it  is  my  joy  and  delight  to  have  it  so.  The
Lord  is  a  good  and  gracious  paymaster ;  and  inasmuch  as
men  say, '  Doth  Spurgeon  serve  God  for  nought  ?  '  Spurgeon
replies,  '  No,  he  is  paid  a  thousand  times  over,  and  finds  it
a  splendid  thing  to  be  in  the  service  of  the  Lord  Jesu,».
If  anyone  will  serve  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  after  the  same
or  better  fashion,  he  too  will  make  the  same  splendid  thing
of  it ;  he  shall  have  splendid  opportunities  for  working  from
morning  till  night,  and  far  into  the  night  on  many  an
occasion ;  splendid  openings  for  giving  away  as  much
as  he  can  earn ;  splendid  opportunities  of  finding
happiness  in  making  other  people  happy  and  easing
the  sorrows  of  others  by  entering  into  hearty  sympathy
with  them."

But  whatever  evil-disposed  persons  and  the  outside  world
generally  might  think  and  say,  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's
own  friends  and  flock  knew  that  he  was  far  above  any  sordid
motive,  and  their  confidence  in  him  ever  remained  the  same.
"  The  tie  which  unites  us  is  quite  unlike  that  which  usually
exists  between  miinisters  and  people — we  are  truly  and
heartily  one,"  he  said  in  acknowledging  the  testimonial,  and
his  concluding  words  are  well  worth  repeating :  "  This  love


400    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

is  to  me  an  amazement.  I  am  the  most  astonished  person
among  you.  I  do  not  comprehend  it.  It  seems  a  romance
to  me.  What  I  have  done  I  shall  do  still,  namely,  love  you
with  all  my  heart,  and  love  my  Lord  as  His  grace  enables
me.  I  mean  to  go  on  preaching  Jesus,  and  His
Gospel,  and  you  may  be  sure  that  I  shall  not  preach  any-
thing else,  for  it  is  with  me  Christ  or  nothing.  I  am  sold
up;  and  my  stock-in-trade  is  gone  if  Jesus  Christ  is  gone.
He  is  the  sum  of  my  ministry,  my  all  in  all.  Now  you
will  please  to  understand,  th^at  I  mean  all  that  you  would
mean,  if  you  were  in  my  position ;  and  I  beg  again  to  thank
you  most  heartily,  every  one  of  you,  especially  the  dear
friends  who  read  us  the  papers,  especially  those  who
listened  to  them,  and  especially  everybody."

Rather  more  than  five  years  after  the  pastoral  "  Silver
Wedding "  there  was  another  celebration  of  a  somewhat
similar  character.  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  completed
the  fiftieth  year  of  his  life  on  June  ipth,  1884,  and  the
Tabernacle  church,  which  had  decided  to  recognize  the
event  in  some  suitable  manner,  instructed  the  deacons  to
make  arrangements  for  the  formation  of  a  testimonial  fund,
which  should  be  presented  to  the  pastor,  and  on  this  occa-
sion be  accepted  for  his  own  personal  benefit.  No  sooner,
however,  was  the  matter  broached  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  than
he  let  it  be  understood  once  and  for  all,  that  he  could  accept
no  money  for  himself,  but  would  be  glad  if  an  amount
should  be  devoted  to  the  Lord's  work  in  recognition
of  his  jubilee.  A  fund  was  opened,  and  although,
as  on  the  occasion  of  the  silver  wedding,  many  stated
that  they  would  have  given  more  if  the  money  had
been  for  the  pastor's  personal  use,  yet  the  sum  collected
reached  ^4,500.

The  jubilee  meetings  extended  over  two  evenings,  those


SOME    NOTABLE    CELEBRATIONS.  401

of  June  1 8th  and  ipth,  the  former  being  for  the  Tabernacle
congregation  and  for  those  connected  with  missions  and
other  agencies  emanating  from  the  church,  whilst  the
Thursday  gathering  was  a  public  one.  From  the  general
point  of  view  the  meetings  were  even  more  interesting  than
those  which  were  held  at  the  time  of  the  "  Silver  Wedding,"
for  a  number  of  men  distinguished  in  the  religious  world
were  present  who  had  not  been  at  the  earlier  celebration.
The  Wednesday  meeting  was  addressed  by  Mr.  D.  L.
Moody,  the  e  /angelist,  who  told  how,  when  he  made  his
maiden  trip  to  London  in  1867,  the  first  well-known
building  he  visited  v;as  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.
Away  in  America  the  desire  had  seized  him  to  hear  the
young  preacher  who  was  stirring  London,  and  after  coming
to  England,  he  followed  C.  H.  Spurgeon  about  wherever  he
preached.  Among  other  places  he  heard  the  pastor  of  the
Tabernacle  in  the  Agricultural  Hall,  Islington,  little  thinking
that  he  would  himself  preach  there  later.  "  I  want  to  say
to  you,  Mr.  Spurgeon,"  he  concluded,  " '  God  bless  you.'
I  know  that  you  love  me,  but  I  assure  you  I  love  you  a
thousand  times  more  than  you  c~u  ever  love  me,  because
you  have  been  such  a  blessing  to  me,  while  I  have  been  a
very  little  blessing  to  you.  When  I  think  of  a  man  or
woman  who  has  been  in  this  Tabernacle  time  after  time,
and  heard  the  Gospel,  I  pity  them,  deep  down  in  my  heart,
if  they  are  found  among  the  lost.  I  have  read  your
sermons  for  twenty-five  years,  and  what  has  cheered  my
heart  has  been  that  in  them  was  no  uncertain  sound.  In
closing,  let  me  give  you  a  poem  that  one  of  our  American
Indians  wrote :  "  The  first  line  began  with,  '  go  on,'  the
second  line  was,  '  go  on,'  and  the  third  line  was  '  go  on,'
and  this  was  all  he  could  write.  I  say,  '  Go  on,  brother,
and  God  bless  you ! ' "


402     LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEON

The  meeting  was  made  still  more  interesting  from  the
fact  that  three  generations  of  Spurgeons  were  present  and
addressed  the  audience — the  pastor,  his  aged  father,  and  his
sen  Charles.


C.   H.   Spurgeon   at  fifty  years  of  age.

The  Thursday  meeting  was  presided  over  by  the  Earl  of
Shaftesbury,  and  among  the  speakers  were  the  present
Archdeacon  of  Westminster,  Sir  William  McArthur,  M.P.,
Dr.  Parker,  the  Rev.  Newman  Hall,  and  the  Rev.  O.  P.


SOME    NOTABLE    CELEBRATIONS.  405

Gifford,  of  Boston,  who  presented  an  address  from  the
Baptist  ministers  of  Boston.  In  thanking  those  who  had
contributed  to  the  testimonial,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  declared
that  he  had  quite  intended  handing  over  the  total  amount


Mrs.   Spurgeon   at  the  time  of    her  husband's  jubilee-

en  bloc,  as  he  had  done  with  the  silver-wedding  gift,  but
his  friends  would  not  hear  of  that.  Some  had  even
declared  that  they  would  give  nothing  if  the  Jubilee  were
made  a  pretext  for  assisting  the  societies,  so  he  had  asked


4o4    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

that  the  contributors  should  themselves  allocate  their  gifts,
mentioning  four  particular  objects  to  be  assisted  after  the
Jubilee  House,  thai  being  erected  at  the  rear  of  the
Tabernacle  at  a  cost  of  a  thousand  pounds,  had  been  paid
for.  Comparatively  small  sums,  however,  were  allotted  to
these  causes,  the  contributors  evidently  being  very  anxious
that  the  pastor  should  receive  the  money  as  a  personal  gift.
He  declared,  therefore,  that  he  would  accept  the  money
for  himself  so  far  as  that  was  the  expressed  desire,  but  he
did  not  know  how  he  could  better  have  it  than  by  being
allowed  to  give  it  away.  "  What  I  have,"  he  said,  "  is  best
enjoyed  by  myself  personally  when  I  can  use  it  in  some  way
or  other  for  the  advantage  of  the  work  of  God."  He  then
went  on  to  mention  the  manner  in  which  he  intended  to
dispose  of  the  money.  The  Jubilee  House  was  to  be  paid
for  and  furnished,  St.  Thomas's  Hospital  was  to  receive  a
grant  because  it  often  helped  poor  friends  of  the  Taber-
nacle and  the  Almshouses,  the  Baptist  Fund  for  the  relief
of  poor  ministers,  the  Colportage  Association,  the  Book
Fund,  and  many  other  agencies  were  to  be  liberally  helped.
Finally,  the  pastor  declared  that  he  wanted  to  give  ^250
towards  the  cost  of  the  new  Tabernaclej  then  being  built
at  Auckland,  New  Zealand,  for  his  son  Thomas  The
speaker  concluded :  "  Now  I  thank  everybody  who  has  given
a  hundred  pounds,  and  everybody  who  has  given  a
penny.  God  bless  you  and  return  it  to  you  in  every  way.
One  of  our  brethren  told  you  the  other  night  what  once
happened  to  me.  I  had  been  preaching  in  a  country  place,
and  a  good  woman  gave  me  five  shillings.  I  said  to  her,
'  Well,  my  dear  friend,  I  do  not  want  your  money.'  She
said,  '  But  you  must  take  it ;  I  give  it  to  you  because  I  get
good  from  you.'  I  said,  '  Shall  I  give  it  to  the  College? '
She  answered, '  I  don't  care  about  the  College,  I  care  about


SOME    NOTABLE    CELEBRATIONS.  405

you.'  '  Then  I  will  give  it  to  the  Orphanage.'  '  No,'  she
said,  '  you  take  it  yourself.'  I  said,  '  You  want  it  more  than
I  do.'  She  replied,  '  Now  do  you  think  that  your  Lord  and
Master  would  have  talked  like  that  to  the  woman  who  came
and  broke  the  alabaster  box  over  Him  ?  I  do  not  think  He
would.'  She  added,  '  I  know  you  do  not  mean  to  be
unkind.  I  worked  extra  to  earn  it  and  give  it  to  you.'  I
told  her  that  she  owed  me  nothing,  and  that  woman  owed
the  Lord  everything.  '  What  am  I  to  do  with  it  ? '  She
said,  '  Buy  anything  you  like  with  it.  I  do  not  care.  Only
mind,  you  must  have  it  for  yourself.'  I  mention  the  inci-
dent because  it  is  much  in  that  spirit  that  the  friends  have
given  now.  The  Lord  bless  you !  The  Lord  bless  you  !
The  Lord  bless  you  yet  more  and  more,  you  and  your
children !  "

There  was  considerable  relief  on  the  part  of  the  deacons
when  these  Jubilee  meetings  were  over,  for  at  that  period
the  Fenians  were  very  active,  and  a  threat,  which  there  was
reason  to  believe  was  not  a  mere  idle  hoax,  had  been  made
to  blow  up  the  Tabernacle  while  it  was  crowded  with  those
celebrating  the  historic  event.  The  general  public  knew
nothing  of  this  threat  till  afterwards,  but  the  police  were  on
the  alert  and  the  officials  of  the  Tabernacle  felt  the  strain
and  anxiety  severely.

For  a  long  time  after  the  presentation  of  each  of  the
testimonials.  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  pestered  with  begging
letters  from  all  parts  of  the  country,  asking  for  assist-
ance under  various  pleas.  Indeed  all  his  life  he  suffered
from  this  nuisance,  particularly  when  the  newspapers
published  reports,  as  they  often  did,  of  mythical  fortunes
left  to  the  preacher.  Many  of  the  writers  were  no  doubt
impostors,  but  there  were  also  people,  who  had  failed
in  business  through  misfortune  and  other  causes,  who


406    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

expected  the  preacher  to  pay  their  debts.  One  woman
wrote  asking  substantial  help  for  her  husband,  and  stated
that  it  was  clear  C.  H.  Spurgeon  had  so  much  money  that
he  did  not  want  any  more,  or  he  would  never  have  given
away  the  testimonial.  It  must  not  be  thought,  however,
that  the  preacher  was  generous  only  in  connection  with
the  great  causes  which  he  inaugurated  or  pleaded.  Few
men  have  done  more  in  the  way  of  private  philanthropy,
and  although  in  helping  the  distressed  he  worked  as
secretly  as  possible,  it  is  known  that  he  was  constantly
giving  mangles  and  sewing  machines  to  poor  widows,  and
doing  similar  deeds  of  kindness  where  he  knew  of  deserving
cases  for  help.  Even  street  beggars  who  called  at  his  house
were  generously  treated,  and  among  the  fraternity  the  great
preacher  passed  by  the  name  of  "  Soft  Tommy."  "  I  would
rather  be  remembered  as  '  Soft  Tommy  '  than  as  '  Hard
Jack,' "  was  his  comment  when  a  friend  informed  him  of
his  nickname.


CHAPTER    XXVIII.

VISITS    AND    VISITORS.

IN  these  later  years  everyone  delighted  to  honour  the
preacher  who  had  so  wonderfully  weathered  the
storm  of  criticism  and  abuse,  and  he  was  frequently  the
guest  of  distinguished  men  at  private  parties,  although  he
could  never  bring  himself  to  attend  banquets.  "  Really
I  am  not  a  man  for  a  feast,  even  if  I  could  come,"  he
wrote  once  to  the  Sheffield  Master  Cutler-elect,  declining
an  invitation  to  the  annual  Cutlers'  Feast  on  account  of
an  accumulation  of  work.  "  Our  Lord  Mayor  pressed  me
to  meet  the  Archbishops  and  Bishops  at  a  banquet
but  I  could  not  bring  my  soul  to  it — I  mean  the
banquet;  I  had  no  objection  to  the  Bishops."  Where
two  or  three  friends  had  been  invited  to  meet  him  at
a  private  gathering,  however,  he  usually  went  if  his
ministerial  work  allowed  him,  and  on  such  occasions
his  rare  wit  was  highly  appreciated  by  the  guests.  Dining
with  a  number  of  her  Majesty's  Judges  once,  at  the  house
of  Mr.  Justice  Lush,  he  announced  that  he  had  a  difficult
point  of  law  which  he  should  like  to  have  decided  by  the
legal  authorities  present.  A  man  had  been  lying  in  Cam-
berwell  for  a  fortnight  past,  and  neither  the  police  nor  the
parish  officials  had  been  able  to  get  him  buried.  What
should  be  done?  The  judges  were  greatly  interested,
consulted  together  for  a  long  time,  and,  after  quoting
various  Acts  of  Parliament,  said  that  if  the  relatives


4o8    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

persisted  in  their  refusal  to  bury  the  man,  certain  local
authorities  whom  they  named  could  step  in.  "  There  was
one  little  item  in  the  case  that  I  omitted  to  mention,"  said
C.  H.  Spurgeon,  after  listening  to  the  learned  arguments
of  the  judges,  "  the  man  is  not  yet  dead!  "

At  another  time  he  dined  with  Dean  Stanley  at  West-
minster, and  there  met  the  Rector  of  Bishopsgate,  £>  Hang
Theology"  Rogers.  "We  had  a  merry  time,"  says  C.  H.
Spurgeon,  "  especially  when  the  question  of  Disestablish-
ment was  under  discussion."  The  Dean  asked  the  Baptist
preacher  if  when  that  event  happened  he  would  like  to
have  Westminster  Abbey.  "  No,  thank  you,"  said  C.  H.
Spurgeon,  "I  have  not  horses  enough  to  fill  it."  Dean
Stanley  acknowledged  that  the  building  was  more  adapted
for  stables  than  for  preaching  the  Gospel  to  the  masses.
Then  becoming  serious  he  asked  what  was  to  happen  to
Mr.  Rogers  and  himself  if  Disestablishment  became  a
fact.  "  Why,  you  will  have  to  do  as  I  do,"  replied  the
pastor,  "  live  upon  what  your  people  give  you."  "  Oh,
dear !  "  cried  the  others  in  unison,  "  if  we  only  had  what  our
people  gave  us  it  would  be  a  very  poor  living."  C.  H.
Spurgeon  suggested  that  they  should  educate  their  congre-
gations in  the  Scriptural  system  of  giving  before  the  day
of  "  emancipation  "  arrived.

The  fact  that  his  conversations  and  addresses  often
sparkled  with  wit  offended  some  of  the  more  strait-laced
of  his  followers,  although  in  the  pulpit  a  very  sparing  use
was  made  of  his  powers  in  this  respect.  "If  you  had
known  how  many  others  I  kept  back,"  he  wrote  to  a
correspondent  who  had  objected  to  a  certain  humorous
expression,  "you  would  not  have  found  fault  with  that
one,  but  you  would  have  commended  me  for  the  restraint
I  had  exercised."  He  never  went  out  of  his  wav  to  make  a


VISITS    AND    VISITORS.


409


joke,  but  the  fun  was  quite  spontaneous,  and  often  served
its  purpose  in  emphasizing  a  point  or  conveying  a  rebuke
which  a  more  solemn  selection  of  words  would  have  failed
in  doing.  What,  for  instance,  could  have  been  happier
than  his  remark  to  the  newly-married  bride  of  Pastor  T.  W.
Medhurst.  "According  to  the  teaching  of  the  apostle,
'  The  husband  is  the  head  of  the  wife.'  Don't  you  try  to
be  the  head ;  but  you  be  the  neck,  then  you  can  turn  the
head  whichever  way  you  like";  or  his  advice  to  a  bride-
groom, "  My  dear  friend,  don't  you  begin  to  feel  proud,
because  Paul  says  that  the  husband  is  the  head  of  the  wife.
Solomon  says  that  'a  virtuous  woman  is  a  crown  to  her
husband,'  and  the  crown  is  the  top  of  the  head.  Still,  the
governing  faculty  should  rest  with  the  head;  and  the
family  will  never  be  ordered  aright  unless  we  each  keep
our  proper  place."  At  another  time  he  said,  "  I  have  seen
husbands  obeying  their  wives,  but  I  have  never  much
admired  the  conduct."

In  dealing  with  undesirable  visitors,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was
always  very  ready.  Once  in  his  earlier  days  an  eccentric
individual  called  upon  the  preacher  to  set  him  right  in
some  points  of  doctrine,  but  failing  to  make  any  impression
rose  and  said,  "  Then  I  will  shake  off  the  dust  of  my  feet
against  you."  "Please  don't  do  that,"  replied  C.  H.
Spurgeon,  "  you  might  make  the  carpet  dirty ;  you  will  find
a  scraper  and  a  mat  at  the  front  door,  they  will  answer  the
purpose  quite  as  well !  "

All  visitors,  however,  were  not  so  harmless,  and  on
several  occasions  the  preacher  had  to  do  with  dangerous
lunatics  who  had  escaped  from  asylums.  "  I  have  come  to
cut  your  throat,"  said  a  madman,  who  had  by  some  means
gained  admission  to  the  pastor's  vestry  at  the  Metropolitan
Tabernacle,  and  the  wild  expression  in  his  eyes  showed  that


4io    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEON.

it  was  no  vain  threat.  "  Have  you  ?  "  said  C.  H.  Spurgeon.
"  I  would  not  do  that  if  I  were  you ;  see  what  a  mess  it
would  make  on  the  carpet."  "  I  never  thought  of  that,"
replied  the  man,  and  he  quieted  down  and  allowed  himself
to  be  led  from  the  room.

Another  madman  went  to  the  preacher's  house  and  was
admitted  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon  himself.  Directly  the  door
was  shut  the  man  stood  with  his  back  against  it  and  said,
angrily,  that  he  had  come  "  to  kill  Mr.  Spurgeon  !  "  Assist-
ance could  not  be  summoned,  and  the  situation  might
well  have  unnerved  a  strong  man,  for  the  lunatic  had  in  his
hand  a  stout  cudgel  which  he  waved  threateningly.  "  You
must  mean  my  brother,"  said  the  pastor,  knowing  that  if
the  man  left  the  house  he  could  be  followed  and  seized.
''  His  name  is  Spurgeon."  "  Ah  !  "  replied  the  maniac,  "  it
is  the  man  that  makes  jokes  that  I  mean  to  kill."  "  Then
you  must  go  to  my  brother,  for  he  makes  jokes."  "  No,"
rejoined  the  man  after  a  pause,  "  I  believe  you  are  the
man "  Then  he  shouted,  "  Do  you  know  the  asylum  at

?  That  is  where  I  live,  and  it  takes  ten  men  to

hold  me."  The  preacher  was  not  terrified.  Drawing  him-
self up  and  assuming  a  threatening  aspect  he  exclaimed,
"  Ten  men !  that  is  nothing ;  you  don't  know  how  strong  I
am.  Give  me  that  stick."  The  madman  was  cowed
instantly,  and  as  he  handed  over  the  cudgel  C.  H.  Spurgeon
shouted,  "  If  you  are  not  out  of  the  house  this  very  moment
I'll  break  every  bone  in  your  body."  The  man  fled,  and
information  being  given  to  the  police  it  was  not  very  long
before  he  was  overtaken  an'd  captured.

More  serious  was  the  case  of  another  lunatic  who  found
his  way  into  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  presence  at  Mentone.  The
preacher  was  lying  very  ill  at  the  time,  and  his  friends
having  gone  out  for  a  little  exercise  no  help  was  at  hand.


4i2    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  BGADDON  SPURGEON.

The  madman  rushed  in  and  shouted,  "  I  want  you  to  save
my  soul."  The  invalid  bade  the  man  kneel  down  and
prayed  with  him,  after  which  he  told  him  to  go  away  and
return  in  half-an-hour's  time.  The  lunatic  went,  and
C.  H.  Spurgeon  rang  for  the  doctor  and  servants,  who
chased  the  man,  but  were  unable  to  seize  him  before  he  had
stabbed  someone  in  the  street.

An  undesirable  visitor,  the  real  motive  for  whose  call  upon
the  preacher  seems  uncertain,  was  a  young  man  who
posed  as  the  son  of  Henry  Ward  Beecher.  After  being
conducted  over  the  house  and  grounds,  he  suddenly  asked
if  C.  H.  Spurgeon  could  cash  a  cheque  for  him.  The
pastor's  suspicions  were  instantly  aroused,  and  he  said,,
"  I  do  not  think  you  ought  to  make  such  a  request  to  me.
Tf  you  are  really  Mr.  Beecher's  son,  you  must  be  able,
through  the  American  Consul  or  some  friend,  to  get  your
cheque  cashed  without  coming  to  a  complete  stranger.'r
The  young  man  departed,  but  a  few  days  later  C.  H.
Spurgeon  saw  in  a  newspaper  the  portrait  of  a  man  who
had  murdered  an  old  gentleman  in  a  carriage  on  the
Brighton  Railway,  and  the  assassin  was  none  other  than
the  visitor  who  had  called  upon  the  preacher.

With  the  growth  of  London,  Nightingale  Lane,  Claphamr
l^ecame  very  different  from  the  secluded  spot  it  once  was,
and  the  preacher's  medical  attendants  were  constantly
advising  him  to  get  farther  away  from  the  fogs  of  the
Metropolis.  He  himself,  too,  felt  the  necessity  of  removing
to  a  quieter  neighbourhood,  but  he  took  no  steps  in  the
matter  until  in  1880  a  combination  of  circumstances  led
him  to  the  conclusion  that  he  was  again  the  subject  of  an
interposition  of  God.  Driving  down  Beulah  Hill,  Nor-
wood, one  day,  after  making  a  business  call  in  the  district,
C.  H.  Spurgeon  saw  by  a  notice  on  the  gate  that  a  small


4i4    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

estate  was  for  sale,  and  stopping  his  carriage  obtained
permission  to  go  over  the  property.  As  soon  as  he  caught
sight  of  the  house,  however,  he  exclaimed,  "  Oh !  that  place
is  far  too  grand  for  me !  "  and  after  a  cursory  inspection
gave  up  all  idea  of  trying  to  purchase  the  place,  and
resumed  his  journey  home.  He  sent  no  one  to  the  sale,
but  shortly  afterwards  the  agents  wrote  him  a  letter  saying
that  the  reserve  price  had  not  been  reached,  and  asking  it
he  cared  to  make  an  offer  for  the  property.  That  very  day
he  had  an  application  from  a  neighbour  who  wanted  to
purchase  Helensburgh  House  for  a  relative  returning  from
abroad.  The  pastor  felt  that  this  was  more  than  coinci-
dence, and  he  agreed  that  If  he  could  get  for  his  old
house  anything  approaching  the  sum  required  for  the  pur-
chase of  the  new,  he  should  be  glad  to  make  the  exchange.
After  a  consultation  he  mentioned  what  he  thought  was  a
fair  value  for  the  Nightingale  Lane  house,  and  this  was
at  once  agreed  to  by  the  neighbour.  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon  then  drove  to  Norwood,  and  finding  that  he
was  well  able  to  meet  the  difference  in  the  prices  of  the  two
houses,  the  old  home  was  sold  and  the  new  one  bought.

All  sorts  of  wild  stories  began  to  be  published  about
this  very  ordinary  transaction.  It  was  stated  that  the
preacher's  people  had  presented  him  with  a  new  house,
and  exaggerated  descriptions  of  the  magnificence  of
"  Westwood "  might  have  led  people  to  suppose  that
C.  H.  Spurgeon  had  acquired  a  baronial  castle  with  a  vast
estate.  Indeed,  one  American  journal  gave  such  a  glowing
account  from  the  pen  of  a  "  Doctor  of  Divinity,"  of  the
park  and  meadows,  and  lakes  and  streams,  and  statuary
and  stables  that,  as  Mrs.  Spurgeon  has  remarked,  these
might  have  been  supposed  to  rival  those  of  the  Queen  at
Windsor  Castle  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  "  park "  was


VISITS    AND    VISITORS  415

comprised  of  less  than  nine  acres,  three  of  which  were
leasehold,  and  the  "  lakes  and  streams  "  consisted  of  one
small  piece  of  water.

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  appreciated  the  increase  of
room  in  his  new  home.  The  commodious  drawing-room
became  the  library,  and  another  large  room  the  study,
so  that  he  had  ample  space  for  arranging  his  books  in  a
convenient  and  accessible  manner.  Being  much  farther


The   Lake  at  "Westwood."

out  of  London  than.Clapham,  too,  the  preacher  was  able
to  take  more  enjoyable  drives,  and  a  favourite  route  was
over  the  Shirley  Hills  and  through  Addington  Park.  The
Archbishop  of  Canterbury  and  Mrs.  Benson  were  friends
and  admirers  of  the  Tabernacle  pastor,  who  received  each
year  from  his  Grace  a  card  giving  the  right  of  free  passage
through  the  private  grounds  at  Addington,  and  here  C.  H.
Spurgeon  was  entertained  to  luncheon  or  tea  on  several


416    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

occasions.  Once  when  the  pastor  accepted  an  invitation
to  lunch,  Dr.  Benson  pointed  to  his  butler  and  footman
and  said,  "  There  are  two  members  of  your  congregation,
Mr.  Spurgeon.  When  I  am  in  residence  at  Lambeth,  they
always  go  to  the  Tabernacle.  I  don't  blame  them,  for  I
would  do  the  same  myself  if  I  had  the  chance.  When
your  coachman  gets  round  to  the  stables  he  will  recognize
another  Tabernacle  attendant ;  and  I  can  truly  say  that
they  are  all  a  credit  to  the  instruction  they  receive
from  you."

Another  member  of  the  episcopal  bench,  who  was  a
close  friend  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  was  Dr.  Thorold,  Bishop
of  Rochester,  and  the  two  distinguished  men  often  visited
one  another.  It  was  usual  for  the  Bishop,  when  the  time
approached  to  prepare  the  addresses  for  his  annual  visita-
tion, to  invite  the  Pastor  of  the  Tabernacle  to  spend  a
quiet  day  with  him  at  Selsdon  Park  in  prayer  and  conversa-
tion upon  spiritual  topics ;  and  similar  seasons  of  mutual
help  took  place  at  Westwood.  Both  preachers  enjoyed
and  benefited  by  these  meetings.  "  We  have  had  such  a
delightful  time  of  talk  and  prayer  together,"  C.  H.
Spurgeon  remarked  more  than  once  after  an  interview  of
this  kind,  and  when  he  had  taken  tea  with  the  Bishop  at
Selsdon,  the  prelate  wrote,  "  We  all  have  a  most  charming
impression  of  your  visit.  Next  time  you  come  I  shall
try  to  pick  your  brains  about  preaching."

Distinguished  men  were  constantly  seeking  to  be  intro-
duced to  the'  great  preacher,  through  mutual  friends,  and
although  up  to  his  eyes  in  work,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  usually
found  time  for  the  solicited  interviews.  Many  close  friend-
ships were  begun  in  this  way.  Bishop  Welldon  (then
headmaster  of  Dulwich  College),  who  attended  the  Taber-
nacle several  times,  was  very  anxious  to  know  C.  H.


VISITS    AND    VISITORS.  417

Spurgeon  personally,  and  he  was  introduced  by  Mr.  John
Cook.  An  intimate  friendship  sprang  up,  and  when  the
preacher  heard  that  Dr.  Welldon's  grandmother  greatly
prized  his  sermons,  he  sent  a  note  to  her  through  the
headmaster.  In  reply,  Dr.  Welldon  wrote,  "  I  am  deeply
grateful  for  your  kind  thought  of  my  grandmother.
Nothing,  I  think,  could  cheer  her  so  much  in  her  last
days  as  this  word  from  you  It  will,  perhaps,  be  a  little
interesting  to  you  to  know  that  some  years  ago,  when  I
was  about  to  live  in  Germany,  she  put  into  my  hands
several  volumes  of  your  sermons,  and  made  me  promise
to  read  one  every  Sunday  morning  until  I  came  home,  as
she  thought,  poor  dear!  that  senior  classics  were  sure  to
be  sceptical,  and  ever  since  then  I  have  been  a  student
of  your  writings,  so  that  I  suppose  there  are  few  members
of  the  English  Church  who  know  them  better  or  owe  more
to  them  than  I  do."

This  chapter  must  not  be  closed  without  a  reference  to
the  Earl  of  Shaftesbury,  whose  visits  to  Westwood  were
very  frequent,  and  who  probably  had  no  closer  friend
than  the  pastor  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  C.  H.
Spurgeon  sent  the  Earl  most  of  his  books  as  they  came
out,  and  in  acknowledging  some  of  these  on  one  occasion,
and  expressing  thanks  for  the  preacher's  inscription,  he
wrote.  "I  shall  add  my  own — a  prayer  that  my  de-
scendants will  cherish  the  volumes  as  the  gift  of  a  man
whom  their  ancestor  honoured  and  loved  as  a  private
friend,  but  far  more  as  a  powerful,  bold,  true  and
single-hearted  servant  of  our  most  blessed  Lord  and
Saviour."


CHAPTER    XXIX.

THE     DOWNGRADE     CONTROVERSY.

THE  time  has  not  yet  come  when  anything  like  a
complete  history  of  the  "  Downgrade  Controversy  "
can  be  written.  Many  of  those  who  took  a  prominent
part  in  the  affair  are  still  living,  and  the  .personal  element
was  allowed  to  intrude  itself  so  largely  into  the  discussion
that  to  deal  with  the  matter  here  at  all  exhaustively  would
only  re-open  old  wounds  and  serve  no  useful  purpose.
All  through  his  ministry  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  had
been  zealous  in  upholding  the  authority  of  the  Scriptures,
and  in  battling  with  what  he  considered  serious  error
regarding  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  Christianity.  His
action  in  connection  with  the  "  Rivulet  Controversy,"  and
the  discussion  over  the  Rev.  Baldwin  Brown's  "  Divine  Life
in  Man,"  showed  that  he  was  particularly  hostile  to  the
preaching  and  teaching  of  modem  theological  opinions  by
men  who  had  entered  the  ministry  while  subscribing
actually  or  in  effect  to  orthodox  creeds,  and  when  it
became  manifest  that  many  preachers  in  his  own  denomina-
tion and  outside  held  views  respecting  the  inspiration  and
accuracy  of  the  Bible,  the  person  of  Christ,  the  Atonement,
the  Future  Life  and  other  doctrines,  quite  opposed  to
those  which  orthodox  Christians  had  held  for  centuries,
he  believed  the  time  had  come  to  speak  out  and  warn
the  Christian  world  of  its  danger  in  tolerating  such
teaching.


THE    DOWNGRADE    CONTROVERSY.       419

This  movement  or  tendency  he  named  the  "  Down-
grade," and  after  giving  a  history  of  its  growth  in  The
Sword  and  the  Trowel  for  August,  1887,  he  published
an  important  article  dealing  with  the  matter  as  it  affected
the  present  day.  This  was  really  the  beginning  of  the
controversy.  The  writer  described  the  days  as  evil,  and
said  that  things  were  much  worse  in  many  churches  than
they  seemed  to  be,  and  were  rapidly  tending  downward.
"  The  Atonement  is  scouted,  the  inspiration  of  Scripture
is  derided,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  degraded  into  an  influence,
the  punishment  of  sin  is  turned  into  a  fiction,  and  the
resurrection  into  a  myth,  and  yet  these  enemies  of  our  faith
expect  us  to  call  them  brethren  and  maintain  a  confederacy
with  them."  The  results  of  the  new  teaching  were  said
to  be  manifest  on  all  hands,  and  included  a  decline  of
spiritual  life,  a  taste  for  questionable  amusements,  and  a
weariness  of  devotional  services,  whilst  the  value  of  prayer-
meetings  was  doubted.  '"  The  fact  is  that  many  would
like  to  unite  church  and  stage,  cards  and  prayer,  dancing
and  sacraments.  If  we  are  powerless  to  stem  this  torrent
we  can  at  least  warn  men  of  its  existence  and  entreat  them
to  keep  out  of  it."  Avowed  atheists,  the  writer  emphatic-
ally declared,  were  not  a  tithe  as  dangerous  as  those
preachers  who  scattered  doubt  and  stabbed  at  faith.
"  Attendance  at  places  of  worship  is  declining  and
reverence  for  holy  things  is  vanishing,  and  we  solemnly
believe  this  to  be  largely  attributable  to  the  scepticism
which  has  flashed  from  the  pulpit  and  spread  among  the
people.  Possibly  the  men  who  uttered  the  doubt  never
intended  it  to  go  so  far;  but  none  the  less  they  have
done  the  ill  and  cannot  undo  it."

But  the  most  important  statement  in  the  article  was  that
which  forecasted  the  future  action  of  the  great  Baptist


420    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEOX.

preacher.  "  It  now  becomes  a  serious  question,"  he  wrote,
"  how  far  those  who  abide  by  the  faith  once  delivered  to
the  saints  should  fraternize  with  those  who  have  turned
aside  to  another  Gospel.  Christian  love  has  its  claims,
and  divisions  are  to  be  shunned  as  grievous  evils ;  but
how  far  are  we  justified  in  being  in  confederacy  with  those
who  are  departing  from  the  truth?  It  is  a  difficult  ques-
tion to  answer  so  as  to  keep  the  balance  of  the  duties.


The   Fernery   at   "  Westwood."

For  the  present  it  behoves  believers  to  be  cautious,  lest
they  lend  their  support  and  countenance  to  the  betrayers
of  the  Lord.  It  is  one  thing  to  overleap  all  boundaries
of  denominational  restriction  for  the  truth's  sake;  this  we
hope  all  godly  men  will  do  more  and  more.  It  is  quite
another  policy  which  would  urge  us  to  subordinate  the
maintenance  of  truth  to  denominational  prosperity  and


THE    DOWNGRADE    CONTROVERSY.       421,

unity.  Numbers  of  easy-minded  people  wink  at  error  so-
long  as  it  is  committed  by  a  clever  man  and  a  good-
natured  brother  who  has  so  many  fine  points  about  him.
Let  each  believer  judge  for  himself;  but  for  our  part  we
have  put  on  a  few  fresh  bolts  to  our  door,  and  we  have
given  orders  to  keep  the  chain  up;  for  under  colour  of
begging  the  friendship  of  the  servant  there  are  those  about
who  aim  at  robbing  the  Master."

The  article  concluded  with  an  expression  of  fear  that
it  was  hopeless  ever  to  form  a  society  which  could  keep
out  men  base  enough  to>  profess  one  thing  and  believe
another;  but  a  hope  was  entertained  that  an  informal
alliance  might  be  possible  among  all  who  held  the-
Christianity  of  their  fathers.  "Little  as  they  might  be
able  to  do>,"  said  the  writer,  "  they  could  at  least  protest,,
and  as  far  as  possible  free  themselves  of  that  complicity
which  will  be  involved  in  a  conspiracy  of  silence.  If  for
a  while  the  evangelicals  are  doomed  to  go  down,  let  them
die  fighting,  and  in  the  full  assurance  that  their  Gospel"
will  have  a  resurrection  when  the  inventions  of  '  modern
thought '  shall  be  burned  up  with  fire  unquenchable."

This  article  from  the  pen  of  the  great  preacher  created
a  sensation  not  only  in  his  own  denomination,  but  in  the-
churches  generally.  Many  thought  that  this  was  his  earliest
action  in  connection  with  the  matter,  and  loudly  blamed1
him  for  not  first  going  to<  the  officials  of  his  denomination
and  putting  the  subject  before  them.  As  a  matter  of
fact,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  had  on  various  occasions  brought
the  matter  before  the  notice  of  succeeding  Presidents  of
the  Baptist  Union,  but  the  subject  was  shelved,  and  he-
only  made  his  public  protest  when  it  was  clear  that  other-
wise no  action  would  be  taken.  Even  then  he  felt  hope,
believing  that  so  far  as  the  Baptists  were  concerned,  com-


422    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

paratively  few  ministers  were  affected  by  the  "  new
theology."  To  his  surprise,  however,  the  controversy  and
correspondence  in  the  various  religious  journals  which
followed  his  protest  revealed  the  fact  that  large  numbers
of  preachers  hitherto  regarded  as  orthodox  were  "  higher
critics,"  believed  in  the  "  larger  hope,'"'  and  held  other  views
opposed  to  the  traditional  Baptist  creed.  In  C.  H.
Spurgeon's  opinion,  men  holding  such  beliefs,  however
pleasing  their  personalities  might  be,  should  not  be
associated  in  fellowship  with  orthodox  divines,  as  was
the  case  in  the  Baptist  Union.  The  doctrines  of  the  two
were  so  utterly  opposed  as  to  leave  little  or  nothing  in
common  between  the  two  classes  of  ministers.

Those  who  disagreed  with  C.  H.  Spurgeon  were  not
united  among  themselves.  Many  declared  that  the  alleged
evil  was  almost  non-existent,  while  others  denied  that  it
was  an  evil  at  all,  and  declared  that  there  should  be  room
in  the  union  for  ministers  of  varying  views.  To  prove  his
point,  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  in  the  next  number  of
The  Sword  and  the  Trowel  (October),  quoted  letters  which
were  appearing  in  the  religious  journals,  and  asked,  "  Are
brethren  who  remain  orthodox  prepared  to  endorse  such
sentiments  by  remaining  in  union  with  those  who  hold  and
teach  them  ?  These  gentlemen  have  full  liberty  to  think
as  they  like;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  those  who  love  the
old  Gospel  have  equally  the  liberty  to  dissociate  themselves
from  them,  and  that  liberty  also  involves  a  responsibility
from  which  there  is  no  escaping."

What  action  should  be  taken  officially  he  left  "  to  those
who  can  see  more  plainly  than  we  do  what  Israel  ought
to  do,"  but  so  far  as  he  himself  was  concerned,  the  writer
had  made  up  his  mind.  "  One  thing  is  clear  to  us  :  we
cannot  be  expected  to  meet  in  any  union  which  compre-


THE    DOWNGRADE    CONTROVERSY.       423

hends  those  whose  teaching  is  upon  fundamental  points
exactly  the  reverse  of  that  which  we  hold  dear.  Those
who  can  do  so  will  no  doubt  have  weighty  reasons  with
which  to  justify  their  action,  and  we  will  not  sit  in  judg-
ment upon  those  reasons ;  they  may  judge  that  a  minority
should  not  drive  them  out.  To  us  it  appears  that  there
are  many  things  upon  which  compromise  is  impossible,
but  there  are  others  in  which  it  would  be  an  act  of  treason
to  pretend  to  fellowship.  With  deep  regret  we  abstain
from  assembling  with  those  whom  we  dearly  love  and
heartily  respect,  since  it  would  involve  us  in  a  confederacy
with  those  with  whom  we  can  have  no  communion  in  the
Lord."

A  month  later  he  writes  that  he  is  tired  of  the  whole
business.  The  flood  of  correspondence  which  continued
to  pour  forth  through  the  religious  Press  served  largely  to
becloud  the  issue,  and  there  was  much  misunderstanding,
if  not  misrepresentation,  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  motives.
One  desires  to  be  charitable,  but  after  an  examination  of
the  records  of  the  period,  published  and  unpublished,  it
needs  a  pretty  large  charity  to  use  the  former  rather  than
the  latter  word.  However,  the  Pastor  of  the  Metropolitan
Tabernacle  found  it  necessary  again  and  again  to  explain
his  position,  so  that  he  might  not  be  wrongly  judged  by  the
false  position  into  which  the  statements  of  his  opponents
would  have  placed  him.  "  Believers  in  Christ's  Atone-
ment," he  wrote  in  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel  for
November,  "  are  now  in  declared  religious  union  with
those  who  make  light  of  it;  believers  in  Holy  Scripture
are  in  confederacy  with  those  who  deny  plenary  inspira-
tion ;  those  who  hold  evangelical  doctrine  are  in  open
alliance  with  those  who  call  the  Fall  a  fable,  who  deny
the  personality  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  call  justification


4-M    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

by  faith  immoral,  and  hold  that  there  is  another  probation
after  death  and  a  future  restitution  for  the  lost."

The  writer  recorded  it  as  his  solemn  conviction  that
where  there  could  be  no  real  spiritual  communion  there
should  be  no  pretence  of  fellowship.  "  Fellowship  with
known  and  vital  error,"  he  said,  "  is  participation  in  sin.
Those  who  know  and  love  the  truth  of  God  cannot  have
fellowship  with  that  which  is  diametrically  opposed
thereto,  and  there  can  be  no  reason  why  they  should
pretend  that  they  have  such  fellowship."  Many  ministers
had  written  or  spoken  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  asking  him  what
course  they  should  take,  but  he  disclaimed  any  right  to
dictate  to  others.  "  Each  one,"  he  said,  "  must  act  for
himself,  after  seeking  direction  of  the  Loid.  In  our  own
case  we  intimated  our  course  of  action  in  last  month's
paper.  We  retire  at  once,  and  distinctly,  from  the  Baptist
Union.  The  Baptist  churches  are  each  one  of  them  self-
contained  and  independent.  The  Baptist  Union  is  only
a  voluntary  Association  of  such  churches,  and  it  is  a
simple  matter  for  a  church  or  an  individual  to  withdraw
from  it.  The  Union  as  at  present  constituted  has  no
disciplinary  power,  for  it  has  no  doctrinal  basis  whatever,
and  we  see  no  reason  why  every  form  of  belief  and
misbelief  should  not  be  comprehended  in  it,  so  long  as
immersion  only  is  acknowledged  as  baptism.  There  is
no- use  in  blaming  the  Union  for  harbouring  errors  of  the
extremest  kind,  for  so  far  as  we  can  see  it  is  powerless  to
help  itself,  if  it  even  wished  to  do  so.  Those  who
originally  founded  it  made  it  '  without  form  and  void,'  and
so  it  must  remain.  At  least  we  do  not  see  any  likelihood
of  a  change.  A  large  number  have  this  state  of  things
in  admiration,  and  will  go  on  with  it ;  we  have  no  such
admiration,  and  therefore  have  ceased  from  it.  But  we


426    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

want  outsiders  to  know  that  we  are  in,  no-wise  altered
in  our  faith  or  in  our  denominational  position.  As  a  bap-
tized believer  our  place  is  where  it  has  ever  been."

Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  withdrawal  from  the
Baptist  Union,  and  also  from  the  London  Baptist  Associa-
tion, was  severely  condemned  by  many,  and  the  Council  of
the  Union  passed  a  vote  of  censure  upon  his  action.  This
the  preacher  could  not  quite  understand,  because  at  the
very  time  of  the  censure  the  Council  was  supposed  to  be
discussing  matters  with  him,  and  not  long  before  had
sent  four  doctors  of  divinity  "  to  deliberate  how  the  unity
of  the  denomination  can  be  maintained  in  truth  and  lO've
and  good  works."  Impartial  onlookers  must  therefore  own
that  in  the  circumstances  the  censure  was,  to  say  the
least,  premature.  C.  H.  Spurgeon  defended  his  own
withdrawal  from  the  Union  on  the  ground  that  he  could
bring  no  charges  before  the  Council,  as  under  its  constitu-
tion, which  laid  down  no  doctrinal  basis  except  the  belief
that  "  the  immersion  of  believers  is  the  only  Christian
baptism,"  no  one  could  be  heterodox  unless  he  should
forswear  his  baptism.  This  statement  was  disputed,  and
C.  H.  Spurgeon  offered  to  pay  the  fee  for  counsel's  opinion
to  show  that  he  was  correct  in  his  view,  but  the  offer  was
not  accepted.  If  his  reading  of  the  constitution  was  right,
then,  obviously,  as  he  says,  there  was  nothing  for  him  to
work  upon,  whatever  evidence  he  might  bring.

What  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  had  asked  was  that  the
Baptist  Union  should  be  formed  "  on  a  Scriptural  basis."
"  I  never  sought  to  intrude  upon  it  any  Calvinistic  or  other
personal  creed,  but  only  that  form  of  belief  which  has
been  accepted  for  many  years  by  the  Evangelical  Alliance,
which  includes  members  of  well-nigh  all  Christian  com-
munities." The  Council  objected  to  any  creed,  but,  as


THE    DOWNGRADE    CONTROVERSY.       427

C.  H.  Spurgeon  pointed  out,  every  Union,  unless  it  be  a
mere  fiction,  must  be  based  upon  certain  principles.
''  How  can  we  unite,"  he  asked,  "  except  upon  some  great
common  truths?  And  the  doctrine  of  baptism  by -immer-
sion is  not  sufficient  for  a  groundwork.  Surely,  to  be  a
Baptist  is  not  everything.  If  I  disagree  with  a  man  on
ninety-nine  points,  but  happen  to  be  one  with  him  in
baptism,  this  can  never  furnish  such  ground  of  unity  as
I  have  with  another  with  whom  I  believe  in  ninety-nine
points,  and  only  happen  to  differ  upon  one  ordinance."
He  could  not  understand  how  persons  who  held  positions
connected  with  churches  and  institutions,  having  creeds,
could  fairly  object  to  such  creeds  when  they  met  in  a
united  character,  for,  as  he  pointed  out,  the  trust-deeds  of
chapels  and  colleges  usually  have  some  doctrinal  declara-
tion, and  even  the  Baptist  Union  itself  had  a  creed  about
baptism.

Here  practically  the  matter  rested,  so  far  as  the  Union
was  concerned.  A  small  number  of  ministers  withdrew
after  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  but  the  majority  remained.  From
the  orthodox  point  of  view,  however,  the  great  preacher's
protest  did  good,  for  it  aroused  evangelical  ministers  of  all
denominations,  and  large  numbers  wrote  thanking  C.  H.
Spurgeon  for  his  fearlessness  in  maintaining  amid  censure
and  opposition  those  fundamental  truths  which  were  taught
by  the  orthodox  in  all  ages.  What  it  cost  him,  however,
to  be  hurled  in  the  midst  of  such  a  conflict,  at  a  time  when
continued  illness  had  wearied  and  exhausted  him,  none
but  those  who  were  in  close  intimacy  with  him  can  know.
"  This  struggle  is  killing  me,"  he  said  to  Pastor  Ellis,  when
the  latter  bade  him  good-bye  just  before  sailing  for
Australia.  Many  of  the  great  preacher's  friends  left  him
and  "  walked  no  more  with  him."  For  a  time  it  looked  as


428    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

though  the  various  agencies  connected  with  the  Tabernacle
would  suffer  severely  through  the  withdrawal  of  support
by  one  and  another.  But  the  preacher  never  lost  his
faith.  He  prayed  more  earnestly,  and  other  and  new
friends  stepped  into  the  places  of  those  who  had  failed.
Once  at  Mentone,  when  perplexed  by  a  financial  difficult)
resulting  from  loss  of  subscriptions  through  the  Down-
grade controversy,  a  lady  visited  him  and  presented  a
cheque  for  a  hundred  pounds.  She  declared  that  while  in
London  she  had  been  impressed  in  some  mysterious  and
unmistakable  way  that  she  must  go  to  Mentone  and  give
the  preacher  a  sum  of  money  towards  his  work.  "  It  is  as
nearly  a  miracle  as  anything  I  ever  heard  of,"  he  wrote
to  a  deacon.  About  a  week  later  another  cheque  for  a
hundred  pounds  was  received.

With  many  of  the  Baptist  ministers  who  continued  in  the
Union,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  remained  on  friendly  terms  to  the
•close  of  his  life.  "  Do  I  need  to  say,"  he  wrote  to  Dr.
Culross,  President  of  the  Baptist  Union,  in  November,
1887,  "  that  with  you  and  such  brethren  as  Dr.  McLaren,
Mr.  Aldis  and  Mr.  Angus,  I  have  no  sort  of  disagreement,
except  that  you  stay  in  the  Union  and  I  am  out  of  it  ?  We
shall  according  to  our  light  labour  for  the  same  cause.
We  are  all  Christians  and  Baptists,  and  can  find  many
ways  of  co-operation,"  Again,  in  the  same  letter,  he
•declared,  "  I  am  in  fellowship  with  you — Union  or  no
Union."  Dr.  Culross  had  written  kindly  to  C.  H.
Spurgeon,  and  the  latter  appreciated  the  courtesy  of  the
former,  so  different  from  many  who  took  the  pastor  of  the
Tabernacle  to  task.  "  I  think  it  most  kind  of  you  to
write  to  me,"  he  said.  "Your  brethren  have  usually  fired
at  me  through  the  newspapers  their  loving  appeals  and
advices."


THE    DOWNGRADE    CONTROVERSY.       429

Charles  Haddon  spurgeon  never  changed  his  views  in
regard  to  the  Downgrade  Controversy.  To  the  end  he
was  firmly  convinced  that  the  position  he  had  taken  up
•was  the  right  one,  and,  though  all  men  should  have
forsaken  him,  he  would  still  have  done  what  he  believed
to  be  his  duty.  "  The  error  in  the  Baptist  denomination
is  ten  times  more  widely  spread  than  we  knew  of  when
we  wrote  the  '  Downgrade :  papers,"  he  declared,  some
time  after  his  secession  from  the  Union ;  "  and  we  are
bound  not  to  withdraw  a  syllable,  but  to  emphasize  each
word  with  all  our  might."

One  thing  is  certain  that,  from  the  human  point  cf
view,  the  great  preacher's  death  was  hastened  by  the
bitterness  of  the  struggle — a  struggle  which,  at  such  a
time,  in  the  midst  of  weariness  and  sickness,  he  was  ill-
fitted  to  sustain.


CHAPTER  XXX.

CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEON  AS  AN
AUTHOR.

A>J  important  phase  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  life
remains  to  be  dealt  with,  a  phase  in  some  senses  the
most  remarkable  of  all.  That  so  constant  and  untiring
a  preacher,  who  had  the  pastoral  care  of  the  largest  church
in  Christendom  upon  his  shoulders,  and  at  the  same  time
originated  and  mainly  directed  a  vast  multitude  of  religious
agencies  and  institutions,  should  find  time  to  write  books-
at  all,  is  surprising,  but  that  those  books  should  be  of  so
original  a  character  and  of  so  high  a  quality  as  to  command
for  them  an  extensive  sale  a  dozen  years  after  the  writer's
death  is  little  short  of  amazing.  Exclusive  of  the  yearly
volumes  of  sermons,  which  will  be  referred  to  later,  and  of
the  volumes  of  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel  which  he  edited,
and  in  which  he  wrote  extensively,  there  are  in  Messrs.
Passmore  and  Alabaster's  catalogue  something  like  n
hundred  and  fifty  volumes  standing  against  the  name  of
Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon.  Many  of  these  works,  such  as
"  The  Treasury  of  David  "  and  "  The  Salt  Cellars,"  are  the
result  of  careful  and  patient  research  extending  over  years,
whilst  others,  like  "John  Ploughman's  Talk,"  and  "John
Ploughman's  Pictures,"  strike  an  entirely  new  vein  in  the
way  of  religious  appeal.  Then  as  to  the  style  of  writing,
this  varies  from  the  simplicity  of  "  Around  the  Wicket-
Gate,"  which  a  child  could  understand,  to  the  more  pro-


C.  H.  SPURGEOX  AS  AN  AUTHOR.         431

found  diction  of,  say,  the  commentary  on  the  Psalms,
intended  for  the  use  of  preachers;  and  from  the  plain,
homely  language  of  the  "  Ploughman "  series,  to  the
beautifully  finished  sentences  of  the  Communion  medita-
tions in  "  Till  He  Come,'1'  where  each  paper  is  in  reality  a
delightful  prose  poem.  Writing  was  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon  as
laborious  a  task  as  preaching  was  a  pleasure,  and  yet  he
did  most  of  his  writing  during  periods  of  convalescence,
when  work  of  the  kind  must  have  proved  doubly  irksome.
But  in  this,  as  in  all  else,  he  looked  to  the  end  rather  than
the  means,  and  the  knowledge  which  the  author  received
from  time  to  time,  that  his  books  were  proving  helpful  to
others  was  sufficient  incentive  to  him  to  continue  the  use  of
his  pen.  In  writing,  as  in  preaching,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  had
a  wonderful  command  of  language,  and  it  may  be  truly
said  of  him,  as  of  Chaucer,  that  he  was  a  "  well  of  English
undefyled."  To  acquire  a  plain,  simple  style  of  composi-
tion, and  to  realise  how  the  deepest  thoughts  can  be  con-
veyed in  pure  Anglo-Saxon,  one  could  not  do  better  than
read  Spurgeon's  writings.

The  circulation  of  the  great  preacher's  books  established
a  record  which  is  never  likely  to  be  surpassed.  No  other
writer,  much  less  an  author  of  religious  works,  has,  in  his
lifetime,  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  his  books  so  widely
read,  and  that  they  continue  to  be  bought  in  large  numbers
to  the  present  day  is  a  proof  that  they  possess  a  freshness
and  a  virility  not  confined  to  the  period  in  which  they  were
written.  Taking  the  eight  most  popular  of  his  works,  over
a  million  volumes  of  these  have  been  sold,  and  of  one,
"  John  Ploughman's  Talk,"  nearly  half  a  million  copies  have
been  issued.  Nor  does  the  statement  about  extensive
circulations  apply  only  to  the  cheaper  books.  The  more
expensive  works  have  been  almost  equally  acceptable.


432     LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

Of  "  The  Treasury  of  David,"  for  instance,  published  in
seven  volumes  at  8s.  each,  no  fewer  than  148,000  volumes
have  been  sold.  The  readers,  too,  have  not  been  of  the
masses  only ;  they  have  included  all  classes — royal  person-
ages, bishops,  university  professors,  eminent  literary  men
and  peers  of  the  realm — and  few  writers  of  religious  books
have  obtained  such  a  mixed  following,  socially,  education-
ally, and  religiously.

Of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  literary  works  the
magnum  opus  is  undoubtedly  "  The  Treasury  of  David,"
already  referred  to.  It  comprises  an  original  exposition  of
the  Book  of  Psalms,  a  collection  of  illustrative  extracts
from  the  whole  range  of  literature,  a  series  of  homiletical
hints  upon  almost  every  verse,  and  lists  of  writers  upon
each  Psalm.  The  task  of  preparing  this,  the  most  volu-
minous work  on  the  Psalms  extant,  occupied  twenty  years,
and  in  collecting  the  extracts  the  preacher  was  assisted  by
his  amanuensis,  Mr.  J.  L.  Keys,  and  by  the  late  Dr.  Gracey,
of  the  Pastors'  College.  Some  idea  of  the  labour  involved
may  be  gathered  from  the  fact  that  nearly  four  hundred
authors  were  quoted  from,  or  referred  to,  in  the  first  volume
alone,  and  oftentimes  to  get  one  thought  briefly  stated,  a
whole  volume  of  prosy,  pointless  matter  had  to  be  carefully
examined.  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  own  expositions,  like  his
sermons,  are  pithy,  and  rich  in  original  thought,  and  each
volume  contains  suggestions  which  can  be  used  as  outlines
for  a  multitude  of  sermons.  The  first  volume  was  pub-
lished in  1870,  and  the  others  followed  at  irregular
intervals,  the  preacher  beting  often  hindered  by  ill-health.
When  at  last  the  great  work  was  finished,  C.  H.  Spurgeon
wrote  in  his  preface  to  the  final  volume :  "  And  now  the
colossal  work  is  done !  To  God  be  all  glory !  More  than
twenty  years  have  glided  away  while  this  pleasant  labour


C.  H.  SPURGEON  AS  AN  AUTHOR.         433

has  been  in  the  doing;  but  the  wealth  of  mercy  that  has
been  lavished  on  me  during  that  time  my  grateful  heart  is
unable  to  measure  Surely  goodness  and  mercy  have


C-  H.  Spurgeon,  from  a  photo  taken  in  the  New!  Forest

during  a  holiday  tour.     It  was  of  this  picture  that  the

great  preacher  said,  "  I  like  the  photograph  better  than

any  portrait  ever  taken  of.me  "

followed  me  all  these  years  and  made  my  heart  sing  new
psalms  for  new  mercies.  There  is  none  like  the  God  of
Jeshurun.  To  Him  be  all  glory  for  ever  and  ever !  "


434    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

After  "  The  Treasury  of  David,"  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  chief
expository  works  are  "  The  Interpreter,  or  Scripture  for
Family  Worship,"  a  selection  of  passages  from  the  Word  of
God  for  every  morning  and  evening  throughout  the  year,
with  running  commentary,  written  mostly  during  a  holiday
in  the  New  Forest ;  and  "  The  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  :  a
Popular  Exposition  of  the  Gospel  according  to  Matthew/'
upon  which  he  was  engaged  at  the  time  of  his  death.  This
commentary  was  completed  by  his  private  secretary,  with
quotations  from  the  preacher's  sermons  and  writings.

Among  the  devotional  works  of  the  distinguished
preacher,  "  Manning  and  Evening  Daily  Readings "  will
always  hold  first  place.  The  readings,  published  in  one
pocket  volume,  and  also  in  two  volumes  of  larger  type,  are
not  a  series  of  extracts  from  sermons,  but  were  specially
written  for  the  purpose  for  which  they  are  intended.  In
the  preface  to  the  evening  portion,  the  author  said,  "  We
have  striven  to  keep  out  of  the  common  track,  and  hence
we  have  selected  unusual  texts  and  have  brought  forward
neglected  subjects.  The  vice  of  many  religious  works  is
their  dulness; — from  this  fault  we  have  striven  to  be  free,
our  friends  must  judge  how  far  we  have  succeeded."
There  is  no  doubt  about  the  success,  and  none  of  his  books
show  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  freshness  of  thought  more  than
this.  It  is  amazing  how  a  man  who  during  his  ministry
preached  three  or  four  thousand  sermons,  each  a  master-
piece of  originality,  could  in  these  volumes  of  daily  readings
give  what  really  amount  to  seven  hundred  and  thirty-two
sermon  outlines,  full  of  suggestive  thought  and  teaching.
There  is  not  a  single  page  but  could  be  used  as  the  skeleton
for  an  address,  and  many  of  the  readings  cover  quite
untrodden  fields.

"The  Cheque  Book  of  the  Bank  of  Faith,"  another


C.  H.  SPURGEON  AS  AN  AUTHOR.         435

devotional  work,  has  proved  helpful  to  large  numbers  of
people  in  trouble  and  distress.  It  consists  of  a  collection
of  Scripture  promises,  which  comforted  and  sustained
C.  H.  Spurgeon  himself  during  the  Downgrade  Con-
troversy, and  these  he  afterwards  arranged  for  daily  use,
adding  brief  experimental  comments.

But  the  literary  work  by  which  the  great  preacher  will
be  remembered  longest  is  undoubtedly  "  John  Ploughman's
Talk  "  (with,  of  course,  the  supplementary  volume,  "  John
Ploughman's  Pictures  ").  As  Dr.  James  Stalker  has  said
of  this,  it  "  is  a  collection  of  wit  and  wisdom  that  is
certain  of  immortality  among  the  popular  classics  of
England."  Like  Martin  Luther,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  early  in
life  read  a  large  quantity  of  children's  songs  and  stories,
that  he  might  perfect  himself  in  simplicity  of  language,
and  here  he  has  penned  plain  and  pure  English,  such  as
has  not  been  excelled  since  Bunyan.  "  I  have  written,"  he
says,  "  for  ploughmen  and  common  people.  Hence,  refined
taste  and  dainty  words  have  been  discarded  for  strong
proverbial  expressions  and  homely  phrases.  I  have  aimed
my  blows  at  the  vices  of  the  many  and  tried  to  inculcate
those  moral  virtues  without  which  men  are  degraded.
Much  that  needs  to  be  said  to  the  toiling  masses  would  not
well  suit  the  pulpit  and  the  Sabbath ;  these  lowly  pages  may
teach  thrift  and  industry  all  the  days  of  the  week  in  the
cottage  and  the  workshop ;  and  if  some  leam  these  lessons
I  shall  not  repent  the  adoption  of  a  rustic  style.  Plough-
man is  a  name  I  may  justly  claim.  Every  minister  has  put
his  hand  to  the  plough :  and  it  is  his  business  to  break  up
the  fallow  ground.  That  I  have  written  in  a  semi-
humorous  vein  needs  no  apology,  since  thereby  sound  moral
teaching  has  gained  a  hearing  from  at  least  300,000
persons.  There  is  no  particular  virtue  in  being  seriously


436    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

unreadable.  A  pickle-jar  has  these  words  upon  it,  '  If  you
like  our  pickles,  try  our  sauce,'  and  so  I  would  add,  '  If
you  like  "  John  Ploughman's  Talk,"  try  his  "  Pictures."  '  "

The  papers  of  which  the  volumes  consist  were  originally
published  anonymously  in  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel,  and
there  was  much  speculation  as  to  the  authorship.  The


'The   Red   Lion"   Inn  at  Ockley,  where  C-    H.  Spurgeon  often  stayed,  and  where
much   of  "John   Plough-nan's  Talk  '  was  written.

greater  number  of  them  were  written  at  "  The  Red  Lion  "
Inn,  Ockley,  where  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  a  frequent  visitor,
and  as  they  came  out  in  the  magazine  the  preacher  used  to
read  them  to  his  students  to  see  the  effect  they  had.  One
of  these,  however,  soon  guessed  the  authorship.  "  John


C.  H.  SPURGEON  AS  AN  AUTHOR.        437

Ploughman's  Talk,"  like  many  others  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's
books,  has  been  translated  into  several  languages,  and  some
years  ago  the  German  Empress  purchased  a  copy,  together
with  the  "  Morning  and  Evening  Readings,"  from  a  col-
porteur who  was  vending  the  German  editions.

Of  a  somewhat  similar  character  to  the  "  Ploughman  "
volumes  are  "  The  Salt  Cellarsj  a  collection  of  proverbs,
with  homely  notes  thereon."  For  many  years  C.  H.
Spurgeon  had  compiled  a  sheet-almanack  for  workshops
and  kitchens,  which  was  known  as  "  John  Ploughman's
Almanack,"  and  was  intended  to  promote  temperance,
thrift,  kindness  to  animals,  and  a  regard  for  religion  among
he  working  classes.  Naturally  the  accumulation  of  pro-
verbs over  a  course  of  twenty  years  was  very  great,  and  had
involved  much  labour  which  it  seemed  to  the  preacher  a
pity  to  waste.  He  therefore  made  a  selection  from  his  stock
and  published  these  in  two  volumes,  the  collection  being  of
the  greatest  value  to  preachers  and  teachers.  One  paper,
in  reviewing  the  work,  said,-  "  The  proverbs  are  excellent ;
but  Mr.  Spurgeon's  comments  are  perfect."  The  preacher
sent  the  volumes  to  his  friend,  Dr.  Thorold,  Bishop  of
Rochester,  who  replied :  "  I  thank  you  exceedingly  for
your  valued  gift.  '  The  Salt  Cellars  '  shall  have  an  oppor-
tunity of  sparkling  in  my  sermons,  and  I  shall  begin  to
read  '  The  Cheque-book  of  the  Bank  of  Faith  '  to-day."

In  connection  with  "  John  Ploughman's  Almanack  "  there
is  a  story  worth  telling.  The  editor  of  a  Church  of
England  magazine  put  into  his  pages  each  month  the  whole
of  the  proverbs  for  that  month  from  the  almanack  without
any  acknowledgment.  "  I  wondered  how  long  that  kind  of
thing  was  going  on,"  says  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "  so  I  wrote  to
the  editor  to  say  that  it  was  a  very  bright  idea  for  him  to
take  all  my  friend  '  John  Ploughman's  '  proverbs  in  that


438    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEOX.

way,  and  print  them  in  his  magazine  as  he  was  doing,  but
that  I  was  instructed  by  '  John  Ploughman  '  to  say  that  he
was  not  to  do  it  any  longer.  The  editor  wrpte  back  to
ask  what  he  should  do,  because  he  had  begun  printing  the
proverbs,  and  he  should  like  to  publish  them  in  his  maga-
zine right  through  the  year.  I  said,  '  Well,  if  you  do  so,
you  ought  to  say  that  you  took  them  from  me.  If  you
do  that  you  will  be  a  gentleman  and  a  Christian  and  I  will
say  nothing  more  about  the  matter ;  but  as  that  is,  perhaps,
too  much  to  expect  from  you,  you  may  simply  put  the
names  of  the  publishers  and  say  that  the  proverbs  are
"  John  Ploughman's,"  and  then  my  name  will  not  defile
your  pages.'  It  seems  almost  incredible,  but  the  gentleman
actually  accepted  the  second  alternative."  There  is  scarcely
any  need  to  mention  that  this  occurred  just  after  the
Baptismal  Regeneration  controversy.

Another  class  of  books  very  characteristic  of  the  author
were  those  consisting  of  illustrations,  original  and  selected,
compiled  principally  for  the  use  of  preachers  and  teachers.
Perhaps  the  best  of  these  bears  the  apt  title,  "  Feathers
for  Arrows."  "  My  aim,"  wrote  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  in  the
preface,  "  has  not  been  to  amuse  the  reader,  but  to  furnish
'  Feathers  for  Arrows  '  for  the  servants  of  Christ  Jesus."
The  method  of  collecting  the  illustrations  was  typical  of
the  man;  no  opportunities  were  missed  and  no  time  was
wasted.  "  Whenever  I  have  been  permitted  sufficient
respite  from  my  ministerial  duties,"  he  says,  "  to  enjoy  a
lengthened  tour,  or  even  a  short  excursion,  I  have  been  in
the  habit  of  carrying  with  me  a  small  '  Xote  Book,'  in
which  I  have  jotted  down  any  illustrations  which  have
occurred  to  me  by  the  way.  My  recreations  have  been  all
the  more  pleasant  because  I  have  made  them  subservient  to
mv  life  work.  The  '  Xote  Book  '  has  been  useful  in  mv


C.  H.  SPURGEOX  AS  AN  AUTHOR.


439


travels  as  a  mental  purse.  If  not  fixed  upon  paper,  ideas
are  apt  to  vanish  with  the  occasion  which  suggested  them.
A  word  or  two  will  suffice  to  bring  an  incident  or  train  of


Mrs.  C.  H.  Spurgeon  in  her  boudoir,  from  a  photograph  taken
at  the  time  of  her  husband's  jubilee.

thought  to  remembrance;  and  therefore  it  would  be  inex-
cusable in  a  minister  who  needs  so  much  not  to  preserve
all  that  comes  in  his  way.  From  the  pencil  marks  of  the


440    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

pocket  book  my  notes  have  been  enlarged  into  more
permanent  manuscript,  and  have  been  of  great  service
to  me.  Out  of  the  hundreds  of  metaphors  and  anecdotes
thus  collected  I  have  used  the  main  body  in  my  constant
sermonisings ;  but  as  enough  remained  unused  to  make  me
feel  competently  rich  in  illustrations,  I  determined  to  offer
a  portion  of  my  hoard  to  my  fellow-workers,  feeling  the
less  difficulty  in  so  doing  because  the  ingatherings  of  con-
tinual observation  more  than  replace  the  material  expended
in  this  distribution."

It  was  scarcely  carrying  out  the  spirit,  however,  of
C.  H.  Spurgeon;s  intentions,  even  if  the  letter  was  obeyed,
when  a  Church  of  England  magazine  published  month
after  month  extracts  from  "  Feathers  for  Arrows,"  and
put  at  the  bottom  of  each,  "  By  an  Old  Author."
This,  like  the  Almanack  incident,  occurred  soon  after
the  Baptismal  Regeneration  sermon,  which  no  doubt
accounted  for  the  sudden  antiquarian  character  that  the
book  assumed.

A  somewhat  similar  volume  is  "  Illustrations  and  Medita-
tions :  or,  Flowers  from  a  Puritan's  Garden,  Distilled  and
Dispensed  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon."  The  history  of  this  book
is  interesting.  While  commenting  upon  the  upth  Psalm,
the  preacher  was  brought  into  intimate  communion  with
Thomas  Manton,  and  came  to  know  the  old  Puritan  so
well  that  he  tells  us  he  could  "  choose  him  out  from
among  a  thousand  divines."  Manton  used  but  few  figures
and  illustrations,  and  knowing  that  these  must  be  unusually
forcible,  C?  H.  Spurgeon  went  through  volume  after  volume
marking  the  metaphors.  Then  he  selected  the  best  and
used  them  as  texts  for  brief  meditations.  The  latter  were
'composed  in  the  gardens  and  olive  groves  of  Mentone,  and
the  preacher's  wish  that  the  sentences  might  be  flooded


C.  H.  SPURGEON  AS  AN  AUTHOR.         441

with  the  sunlight  of  that  charming  region  has  certainly
been  fulfilled.

Among  the  illustrative  volumes  must  be  placed  "  Sermons
in  Candles,"  which  sets  forth  some  of  the  lessons  to  be
learnt  from  common  candles.     In  addressing  his  college
students    one    day,    the    preacher   urged   upon    them    the
advantage  of  using  plenty  of  illustrations  in  their  sermons,
even  as  the   Saviour  Himself  did,  whereupon  a  student
remarked  that  it  was  difficult  to  get  illustrations  in  any
great  abundance.     "  Yes,"  said1  C.  H.  Spurgeon,   "  if  you
do  not  wake  up,  but  go  through  the  world  asleep,  you
cannot  see  illustrations ;  but  if  your  minds  were  thoroughly
aroused,  and  yet  you  could  see  nothing  else  in  the  world
but  a  single  tallow  candle,  you  might  find  enough  illustra-
tions in  that  luminary  to  last  you  for  six  months."     Some
of   the   young   men    appearing    sceptical,     the    preacher
promised  to  prove  his  words,  and  soon  afterwards  delivered
an  object-lesson  upon  candles.      The    lecture  was  seized
upon  by  many  speakers,  who  delivered  it  with  variations
all    over  the   kingdom,  and,  after    a    quarter-of-a-century,
C.  H.   Spurgeon  decided  to  publish  it  in  book  form.     It
was  greatly  amplified  and  divided  so  as  to  form  two  lectures.
The  book  contained  an  amusing  reference  to  those  who
had  used  his  address  up  and  down  the  country  without
acknowledgment.     "  This    lecture    of    mine,"    wrote    the
author,  "  has  proved  a  boon  to  several  other  public  instruc-
tors, who  have  largely  used  it  and  possibly  have  improved
upon  the  original.     I  am  sure  they  have  not  been  more
free  than  welcome.     As  I  have  taken  out  no  letters  patent,
I  have  never  called  upon,  them  for  a  royalty  for  the  use  of
my   invention.     Still,   if   their   consciences   trouble   them,
I  am  like  Matthew,  '  at  the  receipt  of  custom.'     I  have
now  resolved  to  print  my  lecture;  and  I  hope  those  gentle-


442    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEON.

men  will  not  be  angry  with  me  for  stopping  their  borrowing,
but  the  rather  I  trust  they  will  think  me  generous  for
having  refrained  from  publishing  the  lecture  for  so  long
a  period  as  five-and-twenty  years.  These  candles  have
now  become  '  ancient  lights,'  but  I  do  not  propose  to
prevent  anybody's  building  near  the  premises;  for  they
will  not  block  up  my  light.  These  symbols  have  light  in
themselves  which  cannot  be  hid.  My  friends  can  go  on
delivering  their  own  versions  all  the  same;  and  if  they
think  fit,  they  may  use  the  original  text  also."

In  "  The  Bible  and  the  Newspaper,"  C.  H  Spurgeon  gave
another  instance  of  his  fertility  in  the  use  of  illustration.
Taking  a  number  of  paragraphs  from  the  daily  papers,  he
deduced  from  these  pointed  spiritual  lessons  and,  like  the
"  Sermons  in  Candles,"  this  little  book  is  in  itself  an
object-lesson  in  the  art  of  illustration.

Several  of  the  preacher's  popular  lectures,  besides
"  Sermons  in  Candles,"  were  expanded  and  published  as
books.  Among  these  were  "  Southwark,"  "  The  Two
Wesleys,"  and  "  Eccentric  Preachers."  The  latter,  in  the
form  of  newspaper  reports,  had  been  so  mutilated  that
C.  H.  Spurgeon  refused  to  own  it^  and  out  of  self-defence
decided  to  publish  the  lecture.  The  volume  became  very
popular,  and  is  still  sold  largely.

Reference  has  already  been  made  in  the  chapter  dealing
with  the  Pastors'  College,  tO'  the  lectures  that  C.  H.
Spurgeon  delivered  to  his  students,  and  the  sound  common
sense  and  invaluable  hints  to  the  aspiring  preacher  which
they  contained.  These  have  been  published  in  four
volumes — three  entitled  "  Lectures  to  my  Students  "  (first,
second  and  third  series),  and  the  fourth,  "  Commenting
and  Commentaries,"  consisting  of  two  lectures  and  an
exhaustive  catalogue  of  Biblical  Commentaries  and  Exposi-


444    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

tions.  An  enormous  number  of  these  volumes  has  been
bought  by  ministers  and  students  of  all  denominations,  and
the  late  Bishop  of  Liverpool,  Dr.  Ryle,  wrote  to  the  author,
soon  after  the  first  volume"  was  issued :  "  You  want  no
praise  of  man,  and  you  know  its  worthlessness.  But  I  must
tell  you  how  much  I  like  your  '  Lectures  to  Students.3  I
have  rarely  seen  so  many  nails  hit  right  on  the  head.  I
should  like  to  give  a  copy  to  every  young  clergyman  in  the
Church  of  England."

A  brief  mention  must  be  made  of  those  unequalled  books
for  "seekers,"  "Around  the  Wicket  Gate,"  and  "All  of
Grace,"  which  have  been  the  means  of  spiritual  blessing
to  thousands.  This  was  the  sole  object  of  the  author  in
penning  them,  and  believing  that  many  poor  men  and
women  would  take  up  the  volumes,  he  used  the  very
plainest  language  and  freely  introduced  homely  expres-
sions. "  But,"  he  says  in  the  preface  to  "  All  of  Grace  "
(which  has  been  translated  into  many  languages,  including
Urdu),  "  if  those  of  wealth  and  rank  should  glance  at  this
book,  the  Holy  Ghost  can  impress  them  also ;  since  that
which  can  be  understood  by  the  unlettered  is  none  the  less
attractive  to  the  instructed.  Oh,  that  some  may  read  it
who  will  become  great  winners  of  souls !  "

Other  books,  such  as  "  The  Clue  of  the  Maze :  a  Voice
Lifted  up  on  Behalf  of  Honest  Faith  "  (written  at  Mentone),
and  "  According  to  Promise ;  or,  the  Method  of  the  Lord's
Dealing  with  His  Chosen  People,"  were  penned  to  confirm
the  faith  of  those  who  had  already  passed  "  from  darkness
to  light."

A  number  of  volumes  of  extracts  has  also  been  compiled
from  the  preacher's  sermons,  note-books  and  other  sources.
Chief  among  these  may  be  mentioned  "  Flashes  of
Thought,"  containing  a  thousand  extracts  from  C.  H.


C.  H.  SPURGEON  AS  AN  AUTHOR.        445

Spurgeon's  works,  "  Spurgeon's  Gems,"  a  similar  work  cf
smaller  size,  "  Barbed  Arrows  from  the  Quiver  of  C.  H.
Spurgeon,"  collected  and  edited  by  the  preacher's  sc;<
Charles,  "  Spurgeon  Anecdotes,"  and  "  Glorious  Themes
for  Saints  and  Sinners,"  the  latter  printed  in  specially  large
type  for  the  use  of  the  aged.  Even  at  the  present  time,
nearly  a  dozen  years  after  the  death  of  the  preacher,  new
volumes  are  being  prepared,  and  several  of  his  earlier
works  have  been  reprinted.  "  Smooth  Stones  taken  from
Ancient  Brooks,"  the  little  volume  in  compiling  which  his
wife  (then  his  fiancee)  helped  him  soon  after  he  came  to
London,  has  just  been  made  available  for  the  younger
generation  of  readers  in  this  way.

A  word  must  be  said  about  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel,
C.  H.  Spurgeon's  monthly  magazine,  which,  as  already
stated,  was  the  direct  cause  of  the  founding  of  the  Stockwell
Orphanage  and  the  Colportage  Association.  When  the
work  at  the  Tabernacle  began  to>  expand  so  amazingly  the
pastor  felt  that  it  would  be  of  real  assistance  to  have  a
special  organ  of  his  own — a  magazine  which  should  interest
friends  in  the  various  institutions  connected  with  his
church,  and  which  at  the  same  time  should  provide  inter-
esting and  instructive  reading  for  Christian  families.  It
was  therefore  decided  to1  publish  a  threepenny  magazine
monthly,  and,  seeing  that  this  was  to  be  "  a  Record  of
Combat  with  Sin  and  Labour  for  the  Lord,"  the  appro-
priate title  of  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel  was  selected,  the
reference,  of  course,  being  to  the  building  of  the  walls  of
Jerusalem  in  the  time  of  Nehemiah,  when  "  every  one  with
one  of  his  hands  wrought  in  the  work,  and  with  the  other
hand  held  a  weapon  "  (Xehemiah  iv.  17).

In  his  opening  article  the  editor  wrote :  "  Our  monthly
message  will  be  a  supplement  to  our  weekly  sermon,  and


446    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

will  enable  us  to  say  many  things  which  would  be  out  of
place  in  a  discourse.  It  will  inform  the  general  Christian
public  of  our  movements  and  show  our  sympathy  with  all
that  is  good  throughout  the  entire  Church  of  God.  It  will
give  us  an  opportunity  of  urging  the  claims  of  Christ's
cause,  of  advocating  the  revival  of  godliness,  of  denouncing
error,  of  bearing  witness  for  the  truth,  and  of  encouraging
the  labourers  in  the  Lord's  vineyard.  We  do  not  pretend
to  be  unsectarian— if  by  this  term  be  meant  the  absence
of  all  distinctive  principles  and  a  desire  to>  please  parties
of  all  shades  of  opinion.  We  believe,  and  therefore  speak.
We  speak  in  love;  but  not  in  soft  words  and  trimming
sentences.  We  shall  not  court  controversy,  but  we  shall
not  shun  it  when  the  cause  of  God  demands  it."

From  its  inception  until  within  a  short  period  of  his
death,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  actively  edited  The  Sword  and  the
Trowel,  reading  all  the  manuscripts  that  were  received,
and  correcting  many  of  the  proof -pages. .  But  his  work
did  not  stop  here;  for  during  more  than  a  quarter-of-a-
century  he  himself  wrote  a  very  large  proportion  of  the
magazine.  Ill  or  well,  at  home  or  abroad,  he  always
found  time  to  devote  to  his  periodical,  and  its  character
for  vitality  and  brightness  may  be  gathered  from  the  fact
that  it  was  once  spoken  of  in  the  House  of  Lords  as  "  a
lively  newspaper."  For  twelve  years  since  his  death,
C.  H.  Spurgeon  has  continued  to  speak  from  the  pages  of
The  Sword  and  the  Trowel,  hitherto  unpublished  articles  of
his  appearing  in  the  monthly  numbers  to  the  present  time.

Of  course,  many  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  books
consist  of  sermons  and  addresses,  but  it  must  not  be
thought  from  this  fact  that  the  preacher  had  little  or  no
work  to  do  as  an  author.  Although  such  addresses  were
taken  down  by  shorthand  writers,  the  manuscripts  were  in


C.  H.  SPURGEOX  AS  AN  AUTHOR.         447

all  cases  carefully  edited  by  the  preacher,  who  usually  made
such  copious  additions  as  to  render  the  volumes  entirely
new  works.  No  doubt  the  phenomenal  success  of  the
books  was  to  a  large  degree  due  to  the  author's  fame  as  a
preacher,  yet  there  is  no  doubt  that  had  C.  H.  Spurgeon
devoted  himself  entirely  to  literature,  and  never  entered
a  pulpit,  his  remarkable  gifts  would  have  still  made  him
one  of  the  most  successful  of  authors.  Those  who  think
he  made  money  out  of  his  church  never  erred  more  sadly.
He  gave  away  each  year  probably  twice  and  thrice  as
much  as  his  ministerial  salary.  Had  he  saved  all  the
money  that  came  to  him  as  a  result  of  his  literary  work  he
might  have  died  an  immensely  rich  man.  But  in  writing,
as  in  preaching,  his  one  desire  was  to  help  his  fellows
spiritually,  and  the  royalties  on  the  books  were  only  looked
upon  as  desirable  because  they  enabled  the  author  to  give
substantial  monetary  grants  to  all  his  numerous  institutions.


CHAPTER    XXXI.

THE    PRINTED     SERMONS.

IF  the  success  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  books  was  remark-
able, what  can  be  said  of  his  printed  sermons?
For  close  upon  fifty  years  they  have  been  appearing,  a  fresh
one  each  week,  and  although  the  preacher  died  in  1892
there  are  sufficient  remaining  unpublished  to  last  for
several  years  yet.  "  Penny  Pulpits "  there  have  been
without  number,  but  theis  existence  has  at  the  best  been
precarious,  and  even  where  the  fare  was  varied  by  giving
the  discourses  of  different  divines,  readers  have  become
tired  after  a  few  years,  and  the  publication  has  had  to
cease.  But  here  is  a  "  Penny  Pulpit "  consisting  entirely
of  one  man's  sermons,  which,  after  an  existence  of  half-a-
century,  and  long  after  the  death  of  the  preacher,  possesses
all  the  vitality  and  freshness  of  youth,  and  circulates  to
such  a  prodigious  extent  as  to  eclipse  everything  that  has
ever  been  known  in  the  history  of  printing.  So  vast,
indeed,  is  the  number  of  copies  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  printed
sermons  that  has  been  disposed  of  since  "  The  New  Park
Street  Pulpit  "  was  inaugurated  in  1855,  that  all  count  has
been  lost  by  the  publishers;  but  it  is  estimated  that  no
fewer  than  a  hundred  and  fifty  millions  have  been  disposed
of  in  this  form  alone !  Then,  remembering  that  the
sermons  have  appeared  in  newspapers  all  over  the  world,
and  that  they  have  been  translated  into  nearly  forty
languages  and  published  in  many  foreign  countries,  the


THE  PRINTED  SERMONS.  449

total  number  of  Spurgeon's  sermons  issued  in  print  during
half-a-century  must  be  between  two  and  three  hundred
millions !  The  languages  in  which  they  are  to  be  read
range  from  the  polished  tongues  of  Europe  to  the  primitive
forms  of  language  used  in  Africa,  and  include  Arabic,
Armenian,  Bengali,  Bulgarian,  Castilian  (for  the  Argentine
Republic),  Chinese,  Congo,  Czech,  Danish,  Dutch,  English,
Esthonian,  French,  Gaelic,  German,  Hindi,  Hungarian,
Italian,  Japanese,  Kaffir,  Karen,  Lettish,  Maori,  Norwegian,
Polish,  Russian,  Servian,  Spanish,  Swedish,  Syriac,  Tamil,
Telugu,  Urdu,  and  Welsh,  with  a  few  sermons  in  the  Moon
and  Braille  type  for  the  blind.

Oh  one  occasion  an  order  was  given  for  a  million  copies
of  the  sermons,  whilst  at  another  time  a  single  individual
purchased  and  distributed  freely  two  hundred  and  fifty
thousand  copies ;  he  had  selections  of  these  bound  up  into
elaborate  volumes  and  presented  one  to  each  of  the
sovereigns  of  Europe,  and  sent  smaller  volumes  to  all  the
students  of  the  universities  and  to  all  the  Members  of  both
Houses  of  Parliament.  Many  admirers,  quite  unknown
personally  to  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  took  surprising
pains  and  spent  considerable  sums  in  bringing  the  sermons
before  the  public  in  this  and  other  countries.  In  the  very
early  days  a  city  merchant  belonging  to  the.  Society  of
Friends,  quite  as  a  labour  of  love,  advertised  the  sermons
in  a  large  number  of  newspapers  and  journals  and  offered
to  supply  them  to  applicants  direct  from  his  own  office.
Another  gentleman,  having  obtained  the  preacher's  per-
mission, had  a  sermon  printed  each  week  in  the  advertise-
ment columns  of  a  number  of  Australian  newspapers,  so  as
to  convey  the  Gospel  to  the  isolated  dwellers  in  the  bush.
The  manager  of  one  of  the  most  influential  of  these  jour-
nals— a  sporting  paper — having  no  sympathy  with  such  a

18


450    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

scheme,  charged  the  advertiser  on  the  highest  scale  for  the
sermons,  and,  as  C.  H>.  Spurgeon  once  said,  the  gentleman
spent  week  by  week  "  a  sum  which  we  scarcely  dare  to
mention,  lest  it  should  not  be  believed."  After  this  had
been  going  on  for  six  or  eight  months  the  readers  of  the
sporting  paper  in  question  were  asked  to  express  their


C,  H.  Spurgeon  at  fifty  years  of  age.

opinion  as  to  the  usefulness  or  otherwise  of  continuing
the  publication,  and  in  reply  about  four  hundred  letters
were  received,  begging  for  their  continuance,  many  of  them
containing  remarkable  testimonies  of  spiritual  blessings
received  as  a  result  of  reading  the  sermons.

"I  have  been,"  wrote  one  man,  "for  five  years  or  more,


THE  PRINTED  SERMONS.  45  j

one  of  those  unfortunates  who  are  commonly  called  '  swag-
men.'  Travelling  about,  a  few  months  since,  looking  for
employment,  I  came  to  a  public-house  by  the  roadside,
into  which  I  went  for  a  drink  and  an  hour's  rest,  as  I  was
very  tired.  A  newspaper  was  lying  on  the  counter,  con-
taining Mr.  Spurgeon's  sermon  on  the  text,  '  Turn,  O
backsliding  children,  saith  the  Lord;  for  I  am  married
unto  you.'  I  read  it  through  with  increasing  interest  as  I
went  along;  and  it  exactly  met  my  case.  It  aroused  me
to  a  sense  of  my  utterly  lost  condition  as  a  sinner  of  the
deepest  dye,  and  at  the  same  time  so  encouraged  me  to
seek  for  mercy  and  peace  at  the  foot  of  the  cross  that  I
could  not  resist  doing  so;  and  I  humbly  hope  and  believe
that  I  did  not  seek  in  vain.  I  left  the  public-house,
resolved  never  to  enter  one  again  unless  absolutely  com-
pelled by  circumstances  to  do  so.  Since  then  I  have
enjoyed  a  peace  to  which  I  had  been  long  a  stranger.  I
now  make  God's  Word  my  daily  study  and  attend  Divine
service  whenever  I  can."  The  writer  added  that  to  his
personal  knowledge  the  sermons  were  read  extensively  in
the  country  districts  of  Victoria.

Another  correspondent,  after  stating  that  he  had  been
in  the  Colony  sixteen  years,  during  which  period  he  had
entered  a  place  of  worship  only  about  three  times,  and
then  more  from  accident  than  design,  continued,  "  During
my  abode  in  this  Colony,  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  I  have
contracted  the  horrible  habit  of  drunkenness,  occasionally
getting  what  some  people  call  '  on  the  spree  '  for  a  fort-
night or  three  weeks  at  a  stretch.  The  summer  before
last  I  had  '  the  horrors  '  twice ;  and  last  summer  I  had
delirium  tremens  just  coming  on.  Unable  to  either  sit,
stand,  lie  down  or  walk  about,  I  casually  picked  up  The
Australasian,  and  what  should  catch  my  eye  but  Mr.


452    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

Spurgeon's  sermon  on  '  The  Approachableness  of  Jesus.'
I  commenced  reading  it ;  and  before  I  had  gone  far,  tears
came  into  my  eyes ;  and  I  had  not  got  through  it  before  I
had  to  hold  my  hand  before  my  face  for  very  shame.  By  the
time  I  had  read  it  all,  I  found  myself  looking  to  Christ  to
be  relieved  from  my  hideous  burden  of  sin;  and  to  my
astonishment  the  delirium  tremens  vanished  like  a  heavy
dew  on  a  summer's  morning.  I  was  weak  in  consequence
of  the  long  drinking-bout,  but  felt  quite  happy  in  my
mind;  and  since,  am  glad  to  say  that  I  never  enjoyed
such  peace  in  my  life  before."  The  genuineness  of  the
man's  conversion  was  made  evident  some  years  later  when
Pastor  Thomas  Spurgeon  was  in  Geelong,  for  the  writer  of
the  letter  called  upon  him,  and,  exhibiting  the  torn  and  dis-
coloured copy  of  the  newspaper  containing  the  sermon,
testified  to  the  work  of  God  in  his  soul.

In  addition  to  the  facts  that  became  known  through
these  letters,  many  other  instances  of  conversion  resulting
from  the  novel  advertisements  were  brought  to  light  from
time  to  time.  A  man,  while  keeping  sheep  some  miles
beyond  Ballarat,  picked  up  a  sheet  of  a  weekly  -news-
paper that  the  wind  had  blown  over  the  plains,  and  this
sheet  contained  a  sermon  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon.  Had  he
known  that,  the  man  would  not  have  begun  to  read,  but
probably  the  heading  of  the  discourse  was  torn  away,  and
to  pass  the  time  he  perused  the  sheet.  The  matter  inter-
ested him,  and  he  read  on,  until  at  last  a  desire  was
engendered  to  see  how  the  discourse  ended.  Then  having
read  once  and  obtained  food  for  thought,  he  went  through
the  sermon  over  and  over  again  and  it  was  the  means  of
leading  him  to  Christ.

Still  more  remarkable  was  another  case.  A  publican's
wife  in  England  received  a  parcel  from  Australia  wrapped


THE  PRINTED  SERMONS.  455

in  an  old  newspaper.  This  contained  a  sermon  by  C.  H.
Spurgeon,  and  the  woman  reading  it  was  led  to  trust  in
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  her  Saviour.

In  America  the  printed  sermons  were  for  a  time  quite  as
popular  as  in  England.  Besides  an  enormous  circulation
of  the  weekly  issues,  no  fewer  than  twenty  thousand  copies
of  the  first  annual  volume  were  sold,  and  in  a  few  years
half-a-million  volumes,  it  was  calculated,  had  been  pur-
chased. Here  the  blessings  resulting  from  the  reading  of
the  sermons  were  as  marked  and  as  widespread  as  in
Australia.  One  case  may  be  cited.  On  July  8th,  1856.
C.  H.  Spurgeon  preached  in  Exeter  Hall  from  the  text
Hebrews  vii.  25,  "Wherefore  He  is  able  also*  to  save  them
to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  Him,  seeing  He
ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them."  This  sermon
was  published,  and  more  than  thirty  years  afterwards  the
preacher  received  tidings  that  a  murderer  in  South  America
had  been  brought  to  the  Saviour  through  reading  it.

"It  made  me  very  happy,"  he  says,  "when  I  heard  the
glad  news  that  a  poor  condemned  murderer  had  thus  been
converted  and  I  am  thankful  to  know  that  he  is  not  the
only  one  who,  although  he  had  committed  the  awful  crime
of  murder  had,  through  the  Spirit's  blessing  upon  the
printed  sermons,  been  brought  to  repentance,  and  to  faith
in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  There  was  another  man,  who
had  lived  a  life  of  drunkenness  and  unchastity,  and  who
had  even  shed  human  blood  with  his  bowie  knife  and  his
revolver,  yet  he,  too,  found  the  Saviour,  and  became  a  new
man;  and  when  he  was  dying  he  charged  someone  who
was  with  him  to  tell  me  that  one  of  my  discourses  had
brought  him  to  Christ  '  I  shall  never  see  Mr.  Spurgeon
on  earth,'  he  said,  '  but  I  shall  tell  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
about  him  when  I  get  to  Heaven.'  It  was  a  sermon,  read


454    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

far  away  in  the  backwoods,  that,  through  sovereign  grace,
•was  the  means  of  the  salvation  of  this  great  sinner."

When  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  in  his  sermons  made
references  to  the  burning  question  of  slavery,  condemning
.the  sad  traffic  in  humanity,  the  American  sales  fell  off,  and
he  was  greatly  abused  in  the  Press  of  the  United  States.
Scores  of  violent  and  insulting  letters  reached  him
from  the  South,  but  although  the  loss  was  considerable
.and  prevented  him  giving  so  much  financial  support  to  his
institutions  as  -he  had  hitherto  done,  he  did  not  alter  his
.attitude  or  change  his  opinions  one  iota.  After  the  war
•the  sermons  again  became  popular,  in  the  Northern  States
.at  any  rate,  and  their  sales  gradually  increased.

In  1883,  an  American  press  syndicate  arranged,  without
any  reference  to  the  preacher,  to  cable  on  the  day  of
delivery  his  Sunday  morning  sermons,  omitting  the  little
words.  Th;s  was  done,  and  after  "  the  little  words  "  had
been  supplied  where  they  seemed  necessary,  the  cablegrams
"were  published  in  a  number  of  American  newspapers  on  the
Monday.  The  course;  pursued,  which  lasted  only  a  few
weeks,  was  unpleasant  for  the  preacher  in  two  ways.  First
•of  all  the  sermons  as  published  were  so  garbled,  that  as
he  wrote  in  The  Sword  and  the  Trowel,  "We  would  not
have  owned  them.  In  the  process  of  transmission  the
•eggs  were  broken,  and  the  very  life  of  them  was  crushed  " ;
and  secondly,  he  was  blamed  by  some  for  the  Sunday
labour  involved.  "  So  far  as  this  (the  cabling)  involves
Sunday  work,"  he  wrote  in  reply  to  a  correspondent,  "I
xegret  it ;  but  I  have  no  more  to  do  with  it  than  you  have.
I  have  never  been  in  any  way  consulted  in  the  matter."

In  the  Transvaal  the  sermons  circulated  very  largely,
and  it  was  quite  usual  for  translations  of  them  to  be  seen
lying  beside  the  family  Bible  in  the  farmsteads  of  the


456    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEON.

burghers.  The  Dutch,  too,  were  amongst  the  most  enthusi-
astic readers  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  and  when  quite  a  young
man  the  preacher  had  an  interview,  at  her  Majesty's  own
request,  with  Queen  Emma  of  the  Netherlands^  who  greatly
admired  his  ministry  and  work.

A  number  of  the  sermons  were  approved  and  licensed
by  the  heads  of  the  Russian  Orthodox  Church,  and  bore
on  their  front  cover  the  official  stamp  certifying  that  they
might  be  read  and  circulated  by  faithful  members  of  the
Church,  The  permission  of  the  censor  to  publish  the
Russian  translations  of  the  sermons  was  obtained  by  a
wealthy  gentleman,  who  at  once  ordered  a  million  copies  to
be  prepared,  and  scattered  them  all  over  the  Czar's
dominions.  That  the  discourses  of  a  heretic  should  be
blessed  and  sanctioned  by  the  officials  of  the  most
tyrannous  Church  of  Christendom  is  surely  an  inexplicable
wonder  which  must  be  added  to  the  many  marvels  of
•C.  H.  Spurgeon's  marvellous  life.

From  all  parts  of  the  world  the  preacher  was  constantly
receiving  letters  telling  of  blessings  received  through  the
printed  sermons.  Kaffirs  in  South  Africa,  and  the  blacks
of  the  West  Indies  were  converted  by  their  means,  whilst
in  Sweden  the  converts  included  the  very  highest  in  the
land — personages  of  noble  and  even  royal  birth.  "  Seldom
does  a  day  pass,"  said  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "and  certainly
never  a  week,  for  some  years  past,  without  letters  from  all
sorts  of  places,  even  at  the  utmost  ends  of  the  earth,
declaring  the  salvation  of  souls,  by  means  of  one  or  other
of  the  sermons."

At  a  religious  convention  in  Chicago  in  1867  a  delegate
"was  present  from  a  newly-formed  settlement  in  the  Far
"West,  asking  that  a  missionary  might  be  sent  to  minister
••to  the  Christians  there,  as  through  the  reading  of  C.  H.


THE  PRINTED  SERMONS.  457

Spurgeon's  sermons  two  hundred  people  had  been  converted
to  God.

One  of  the  most  remarkable  instances  of  blessing  from
a  printed  sermon  was  related  by  the  pastor  to  his
congregation  at  the  Tabernacle.  At  the  close  of  one  of
his  services  a  poor  woman  entered  the  vestry  in  deep  dis-
tress and  said  her  husband  had  left  her  and  fled  the
country.  Seeking  for  consolation,  she  entered  the  Taber-
nacle, and  something  the  preacher  said  in  his  sermon
convinced  her  that  he  was  personally  acquainted  with  her
case.  Of  course,  he  really  knew  nothing  about  her,  but
had  made  use  of  a  general  illustration  which  corresponded
with  her  circumstances.  After  listening  to  her  sad  story,
C.  H.  Spurgeon  said  :  "  There  is  nothing  that  we  can  do
but  to  kneel  down  and  cry  to  the  Lord  for  the  immediate
conversion  of  your  husband."  They  knelt  down  and  the
pastor  prayed  that  God  would  touch  the  heart  of  the
deserter,  convert  his  soul,  and  bring  him  back  to  his
home.  Upon  rising  from  his  knees  C.  H.  Spurgeon  told
the  poor  woman  not  to  fret  about  the  matter  as  he  felt  sure
her  husband  would  come  home;  and  that  he  would  yet
become  connected  with  the  Tabernacle  church.

She  left,  and  the  incident  passed  from  the  preacher's
mind.  But  several  months  later  the  woman  re-appeared
with  her  neighbours  and  a  man,  whom  she  introduced
as  her  husband.  He  had  indeed  come  back  and  had
returned  a  converted  man.  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon
made  inquiries,  and  found,  to  his  delight,  though  not  to
his  astonishment,  that  the  very  day  on  which  he  had  prayed
for  the  erring  husband's  conversion  was  the  day  on  which
he  had  been  led  to  see  his  wickedness.  The  man  was  at
that  time  on  board  a  ship,  far  away  at  sea,  when  he  came
most  unexpectedly  upon  a  stray  copy  of  one  of  C.  H.


.458    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

Spurgeon's  sermons.  He  read  it;  realised  that  God  was
speaking  to  his  conscience,  and,  repenting,  sought  the
Lord,  with  the  result  that  as  soon  as  possible  he  came  back
•to  his  wife  and  to  his  daily  calling.  The  man  was  after-
wards admitted  as  a  member  at  the  Tabernacle,  and  his
wife,  who  up  to  that  time  had  not  joined  the  church,  was
.also  received  into  fellowship.

In  many  of  the  quaint  little  chapels  up  and  down  the
.kingdom  whose  congregations  are  unable  to  support  a
minister,  it  has  long  been  the  custom  for  a  deacon  to  read
•one  of  Spurgeon's  printed  sermons,  whilst,  more  often  than
•one  would  think,  at  the  present  time,  and  even  in  the
preacher's  lifetime,  his  sermons  have  been  delivered  from
the  pulpit  without  acknowledgment.  A  curious  instance
of  this  is  recorded  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon  himself  :  "  I  once
learnt  something,"  he  says,  "  in  a  way  one  does  not  often
get  a  lesson.  I  felt  at  that  time  very  weary,  and  very  sad,
.and  very  heavy  at  heart;  and  I  began  to  doubt  in  my  own
mind  whether  I  really  enjoyed  the  things  which  I  preached
to  others.  It  seemed  to  be  a  dreadful  thing  for  me  to
be  only  a  waiter  and  not  a  guest  at  the  Gospel  feast.  I
went  to  a  certain  country  town,  and  on  the  Sabbath  day
•entered  a  Methodist  chapel.  The  man  who  conducted  the
service  was  an  engineer;  he  read  the  Scriptures  and  prayed
and  preached.  The  tears  flowed  freely  from  my  eyes ;
I  was  moved  to  the  deepest  emotion  by  every  sentence  of
the  sermon,  and  I  felt  all  my  difficulty  removed,  for  the
'Gospel,  I  saw,  was  very  dear  to  me  and  had  a  wonderful
•effect  upon  my  own  heart.  I  went  to  the  preacher,  and
said,  '  I  thank  you  very  much  for  that  sermon.'  He  asked
me  who  I  was,  and  when  I  told  him,  he  looked  as  red  as
possible,  and  he  said,  '  Why,  it  was  one  of  your  sermons
that  I  preached  this  morning.'  '  Yes,'  I  said,  '  I  know  it


THE  PRINTED  SERMONS.


459


was ;  but  that  was  the  very  message  that  I  wanted  to  hear,
because  I  then  saw  that  I  did  enjoy  the  very  Word  I  myself
preached.'  It  was  happily  so  arranged  in  the  good  Provi-
dence of  God.  Had  it  been  his  own  sermon  it  would


Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  in   1886.

not  have  answered  the  purpose  nearly  so  well  as  when  it
turned  out  to  be  one  of  mine."

It  is  not  surprising,  in  view  of  the  widespread  circulation
of  his  sermons,  that  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  in  his  lifetime
perhaps  the  best  known  of  contemporary  Englishmen.


460    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

In  the  secluded  glens  of  the  Scottish  Highlands,  where
even  the  names  of  Beaconsfield  and  Gladstone  had  never
been  heard,  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  sermons  were
regularly  read,  and  the  preacher  was  held  in  the  very
highest  esteem.

The  story  of  the  beginning  of  the  penny  sermons  has
already  been  told  in  an  earlier  chapter.  At  first,  owing
to  his  many  engagements,  very  little  was  done  in  the  way
of  revision,  but  later  on  both  the  reporter's  manuscript
and  the  printer's  proof  were  very  carefully  gone  through  by
the  preacher  himself.  This  was  no  easy  task,  for  often-
times the  sermon  would  be  too  short  to  fill  the  required
number  of  pages,  and  then  it  would  have  to  be  expanded,
whilst  at  other  times  it  would  be  too  long  and  require
condensation.  It  was  necessary  for  the  work  to  be  done
on  Monday,  and  sometimes  when  the  preacher  had  an
engagement  in  a  distant  town  on  that  day  he  would  have  to
work  on  Sunday  night  or  get  up  very  early  on  Monday
morning.  On  one  occasion  at.leas^  he  was  found  to  have
been  revising  the  sermon  manuscript  at  4  a.m. !

What  was  the  secret  of  the  success  of.  the  printed
sermons?  Many  a  preacher  has  held  the  multitude  by  his
eloquence,  but  when  his  discourses  came  to  be  printed  all
the  life  seemed  to  have  gone  from  them.  Far  different  was
it  with  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  sermons.  Even  when  his  match-
less oratory  and  his  telling  gestures  were  absent  the  dis-
courses were  so  full  of  original  thought  and  real  spiritual
help  that  they  were  as  acceptable  as  ever,  and  bore  reading
again  and  again.  Their  power  was  clearly  demonstrated  in
the  silent  work  they  accomplished  in  all  parts  of  the  world,
among  all  kinds  of  characters,  and  amid  varying  circum-
stances. Even  Dr.  Livingstone,  buried  in  the  dense  forests
of  Central  Africa,  hundreds  of  miles  from  the  nearest


THE  IMMUTABILITY  OF  GOD.
DELIVERED  os.  SABBATH  MOHNISO,  JANDAET  Trn.  1855.  m

\.  C.  H.  SPURGEON,


"  I  •«  O*  Lord.  I  clunge  not :  tittrabre  ye  loin  of  Jicob  irt  not  eonramed  "— Mlbehl.  Hi.  t.

IT  has  been  said  by  some  one  that  "  the  proper  study  of  mankind  is  man."     I  will

not  oppose  the  idea,  but  I  believe  it  is  equally  true  that  the  proper  study  of  God's

elect  is  God  ;  the  proper  study  of  a  Christian  is  the  Godhead.  The  highest  science,

tlic  loftiest  speculation,  the  mightiest  philosophy,  which   can  ever   engage  the

attention  of  a  child  of  God,  is  the  name,  the  nature,  the  person,  the  work,  the

doings,  and  the  existence  of  the  great  God  whom  he  calls  his  Father.  ("There  is  /•  '     /          h

something  exceedingly  improving  to  the  mind  in  a  contemplation  of  theTDivinity^/^'  •*  -

It  is  a  subject  so  vast,  that  all  our  thoughts  are  lost  in  its  immensity  ;  so  deep,     "£'C7^^

Utat  our  pride  is  drowned  in  its  infinity.    Other  subjects  we  can  compass  and       /  .,

grapple  with  ;  in  them  we  feel  a  kind  of  self-content,  and  go  our  way  with  the      t-*~~i*£/~  1~

thought,  "Behold, I  am  wise."    But  when  we  come  to  this  master-science,  finding      ^  ''

that  our  plumb-line  cannot  sound  its  depth,  and  that  our  eagle  eye  cannot  see  its  "

height,  we  turn  away  with  the   thought,  that  vain  man  would  be  wise,  but  he  is       /•  •./*£     jj/L^j

like  a  wild  ass's  colt  ;  and  with  the  solemn  exclamation,  "  I  am  but  of  yesterday,  I    "^J

and  know  nothing."    No  subject  of  contemplation  will  tend  more  to  humble  th»

mind,  than  thoughts  of  God.     We  shall  be  obliged  to  feel  —

-  Great  God,  borr  infinite  art  then.
What  worthless  worms  are  wel"

,       Dot  while  the  subject  Avni/n  the  mind,it  also  trpandi  it.    He  who  often  thinks
•  (%"—y   of  God,  will  have  a  larger  mind  than  the  man  who  simply  plods  around  this  narrow
^"^    globe.    He  may  be  a  naturalist,  boasting  of  his  ability  to  dissect  a  beetle,  anatomize

a  fly,  or  arrange  insects  and  animals  in  classes  with  well-nigh  unutterable  names; f  c«~£.iCt~*'

he  may  be  a  geologist,  able  to  discourse  of  the  megalhwnraTand  the  plesiosaurus,  ^  /

and  all  kinds  of  extinct  animals/  he  may  famgsBfrthat  his  science,  whatever  it  is,
ennobles  and  enlarges  his  muKL  I  daresay  it  does;  bu^after  all,  the  most  excellent
•tody  for  expanding  the-«6ul,  is  the  science  of  Christ,  and  him  crucified,  and  the  (~)
knowledge  of  the  Geofiead  in  the  glorious  Trinify.'  Nothing  will  so  enlarge  the
intellect,  nothjng'so  magsify  the  whole  soul  of  man,  as  a  devout,  earnest,  continued
investigation  of  the  great  subject  of  the  Deity.  And,  Whilst  humbling  and  ex-  /

pandipgVthis  subject  is  eminently  cantofalftry.    Oh,  there  is,  in  contemplating         o  /
Cbrut,  a  balm  for  every  wound;  in  musing  on  the  Father,  there  is  a  quietus  for"          /
,«frery  grief;  and  in  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Ghott,  there  is  a  balsam  for  every         /
/ton.    Would  yon  lose  your  sorrows?   Would  you  drown  your  cares?     Then  go,
/        plunge  yourself  in  the  Godhead's  deepest  «aj  be  lo;t  in  his  immensity;   and  you
f          shall  come  forth  as  from  a  couch. of  rest,  refreshed  and  invigorated.    I  know  nothing
which  can  so  comfort  the  souli  10  calm  the  swelling  billows  of  grief  and  sorrow  j  so
speak  peace  to  the  wind»  of  trial,  as  a  devout  muting  upon  the  aubject  of  the
Godhead.    H  is  to  that  subject  that  I  invite  you  this  morning.    We  shall  present
you  with  one  view  of  it,— that  is,<^  immutability  cf  On  florioui  Jekowh.    "  I  am,"
aays  my  text,  "  Jehovah,"  (for  so  it  should  be  translated)  "  I  am  Jehovah.  I  change
not ;  therefore  ye  sou  of  Jacob  are'  not  ounsDued."


A  facsimile  of  C-  H.  Spurgeon's  corrected  proof  of  the

first  sermon  published  in  the  long  series  now  known  as

the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Pulpit.


462    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

white  man,  found  comfort  in  C.  PL  Spurgeon's  sermons.
Among  the  preacher's  most  treasured  possessions  was  an
old  discoloured  paper — a  copy  of  one  of  his  sermons,
entitled,  "  Accidents  and  Punishments,"  which  Dr.  Living-
stone had  carried  with  him  in  his  travels,  and  on  the  top  of
which,  in  the  explorer's  handwriting,  were  the  wbrds,  "  Very
good. — D.  L."  It  was  found,  after  the  traveller's  death,  in
his  diary,  and  was  sent  to  C.  H.  Spurgeon  by  Dr.  Living-
stone's daughter.

The  preacher's  own  explanation  of  the  success  of  the
Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Pulpit  is  interesting.  "  I  am  more
astonished  at  the  fact  than  any  other  man  can  possibly  be,"
he  says,  "and  I  see  no  other  reason  for  it  but  this — the
sermons  contain  the  Gospel,  preached  in  plain  language,
and  this  is  precisely  what  multitudes  need  beyond  anything
else.  The  Gospel  ever  fresh  and  ever  new  has  held  my
vast  congregation  together  these  many  long  years,  and
the  same  power  has  kept  around  me  a  host  of  readers.
'  Wheresoever  the  body  is,  thither  will  the  eagles  be
gathered  together.'  A  French  farmer,  when  accused  of
witchcraft  by  his  neighbours,  because  his  crops  were  so
large,  exhibited  his  industrious  sons,  Ms  laborious  ox,  his
spade,  and  his  plough  as  the  only  witchcraft  which  he  had
used,  and  under  the  Divine  Blessing  I  can  only  ascribe  the
continued  acceptance  of  the  sermons  to  the  Gospel  which
they  contain,  and  the  plainness  of  speech  in  which  the
Gospel  is  uttered."

The  popularity  continues  both  of  the  newly-published
sermons  and  of  the  older  discourses  that  have  been  issued
in  millions  for  years  past.  Next  year  (1904)  is  the  fiftieth
year  of  publication,  and  every  one  of  the  sermons  yet  issued
— nearly  three  thousand  in  number — is  constantly  being
reprinted  to  meet  the  demand.  Complete  sets  of  volumes


THE  PRINTED  SERMONS.  463

are  continually  being  sent  to  all  parts  of  the  world,  the
purchasers  including  dignitaries  such  as  Bishops  and  Deans,
and  ministers  of  every  denomination.  Even  High  Church
clergymen  are  among  the  regular  subscribers  to  the
sermons.

In  the  year  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  death,  a  society,  having
for  its  object  the  circulation  of  the  preacher's  sermons,
originated  at  Brighton.  The  founder  was  Mr.  William
Taverner,  and  for  some  time  he  and  his  mother  did  the
necessary  work  unaided.  Financial  help,  however,  was
given,  the  work  spread,  and  the  organization  was  properly
instituted  under  the  name  of  "  The  Spurgeon  Memorial
Sermon  Society,"  with  a  magazine  of  its  own.  Large
numbers  of  the  sermons  are  sold,  but  many  are  also  lent
to  readers,  and  at  the  headquarters  at  Greenhithe,  near
London,  the  permanent  stock  on  the  premises  averages  over
a  million  copies,  while  a  quarter  of  a  million  sermons  change
hands  each  week.  The  society  works  in  all  parts  of  the
world,  and  there  is  a  branch  office  and  depot  in  America.
The  order  for  a  million  sermons,  once  given  to  Messrs.
Passmore  and  Alabaster,  was  on  behalf  of  this  society.

In  addition  to  the  discourses  which  appear  in  the  forty-
nine  volumes  of  the  "  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Pulpit,"  and
in  the  series  of  twelve  sermons,  of  which  some  fifty  volumes
have  already  been  issued,  a  number  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's
works  consist  of  sermons  on  special  topics  and  subjects.
Among  the  most  notable  of  these  are  "  Types  and
Emblems,"  "  Trumpet  Calls  to  Christian  Energy,"  "  The
Present  Truth,"  "Storm  Signals,  "Our  Lord's  Parables,"
"  Our  Lord's  Miracles,"  "  The  Messiah :  our  Lord's
Names,  Titles,  and  Attributes,"  "  Christ  in  the  Old  Testa-
ment," "  The  Gospel  for  the  People,"  and  the  very  excellent
series  of  "  Farm,  Sermons "  preached  from  texts  in  which


464    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

agricultural  illustrations  are  used.  Four  volumes  of
"  Sermon  Notes  "  have  been  published,  containing  outlines
of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  discourses,  and  a  very  interesting  book
is  "  Fac-simile  Pulpit  Notes,"  which  gives  a  number  of
sermons,  and  with  each  an  exact  reproduction  of  the  sheet
of  paper  containing  the  notes  which  C.  H.  Spurgeon  took
with  him  into  the  pulpit,  and  from  which  he  preached  the
sermon.  The  origin  of  this  book  was  curious.  A  para-
graph appeared  in  the  newspapers  to  the  effect  that  such
a  volume  was  about  to  appear,  although  up  to  that  time
no  undertaking  of  the  kind  had  been  thought  of.  The  idea
seemed  so  good,  however,  that  it  was  adopted,  and
"  Fac-simile  Pulpit  Notes  "  was  the  result.

A  passing  reference  must  be  made  to  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon  as  a  hymn-writer.  No  book  of  songs  for  public
worship  could  be  found  that  exactly  suited  the  needs  of
the  Tabernacle  congregation,  and  the  Pastor  decided
to  compile  a  volume  of  hymns  specially  for  the  use  of  his
people.  This  was  completed  in  1866,  and  entitled  "  Our
Own  Hymn-Book."  It  has  since  been  adopted  by  a  large
number  of  congregations  all  over  the  country.  Included
in  the  selection  are  several  hymns  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon  him-
self, and  some  of  these  have  been  copied  into  other
hymn-books.  Perhaps  the  best  known  are  the  three  com-
mencing, "  Sweetly  the  holy  hymn  Breaks  on  the  morning
air,"  "  Amidst  us  our  Beloved  stands,"  and  "  The  Holy
Ghost  is  here."


CHAPTER    XXXII.
LAST    ILLNESS    AND    DEATH.

THE  mention  of  Mentone  will  always  call  up  memories
of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  for  it  was  to  that
sunniest  spot  of  the  sunny  Riviera  that  he  went  winter  by
winter,  to  seek  relief  from  his  painful  malady,  and  there  he
passed  away  into  well-earned  rest  at  a  time  when  it  seemed
he  could  ill  be  spared.  For  about  twenty  years  the
preacher  paid  an  annual  visit  to  the  South  of  France,
staying  for  a  few  days  at  this  place  and  a  short  time  at
that,  but  always  going  for  the  major  portion  of  the  holiday
to  Mentone,  the  spot  he  loved  above  all  others  on  the
Riviera,  During  the  first  of  these  visits  to  the  Mediterra-
nean coast,  he  spent  a  day  or  two  at  Nice,  and  the  captain
of  the  United  States  warship  Alabama,  which  happened  to
be  lying  in  Villefranche  harbour,  invited  C.  H.  Spurgeon
to  preach  on  board  his  vessel  to  the  officers  and  men.
The  invitation  was  accepted,  and  the  visitor  declared  that
he  did  not  remember  that  he  had  ever  enjoyed  preaching
more  than  he  did  on  that  occasion.  Some  years  later  he
was  again  asked  to  preach  on  an  American  warship,  but
was  prevented  from  acceding  owing  to  pressure  of  work.
It  is  significant  in  view  of  the  courtesy  of  the  American
naval  officers,  that  C,  H.  Spurgeon  was  never  invited  to
preach  aboard  a  British  man-o'-war.

The  preacher's  heartiness  and  thoughtfulness  for  others,
even  in  the  midst  of  illness  and  convalescence,  endeared


466    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

him  not  only  to  those  with  whom  he  came  in  close  contact
in  the  hotels  at  which  he  stayed,  but  with  the  poor  people
of  the  district.  On  one  occasion  a  man  was  playing  a
piano-organ  in  the  gardens  of  the  Hotel  des  Anglais  without
getting  much  recognition  from  the  guests,  when  C.  H.
Spurgeon,  taking  pity  upon  him,  went  and  turned  the  handle
of  the  instrument  himself.  Immediately  the  people  staying
in  the  hotel  gathered  round  or  appeared  at  the  windows,
and  a  shower  of  coins  poured  upon  the  man,  who  gathered
up  the  money  while  the  preacher  played.  Other  guests
entered  into  the  spirit  of  the  thing  and  took  their
turns  at  the  handle^  with  the  result  that  the  organ-
grinder  went  home  richer  probably  than  he  had  ever  been
before.

For  several  years  C.  H.  Spurgeon  stayed  at  the  Hotel
Beau  Rivage,  which  became  quite  a  centre  for  persons  like-
minded  with  himself.  In  time  the  family  devotion  con-
ducted by  the  great  preacher  developed  into  a  service,  for
not  only  were  there  many  guests  in  his  own  hotel  who
obtained  permission  to  be  present,  but  a  considerable
number  of  people  came  from  hotels  and  villas  in  the  neigh-
bourhood. It  was  the  custom  at  the  Hotel  Beau  Rivage
for  a  bell  to  be  rung  each  evening  when  the  hour  arrived
at  which  C.  H.  Spurgeon  usually  conducted  prayers,  a
fact  which  eloquently  testifies  to  the  influence  he  thus
quietly  exerted  on  those  around  him.  Every  Sunday
afternoon  a  communion  service  was  held  in  the  preacher's
private  sitting-room,  and  so  many  persons  were  in  the
habit  of  attending  this  gathering  that  oftentimes  the
folding-doors  had  to  be  opened,  so  that  when  the  sitting-
room  was  full  the  meeting  might  overflow  into>  the  adjoining
apartment.  Many  of  the  beautiful  addresses  in  the  volume,
"  Till  He  Come,"  were  delivered  at  these  semi-private


LAST  ILLNESS  AND  DEATH.  467

communion  services.  Sunday  mornings  were  usually
spent  in  worship  with  the  Presbyterian  friends  at  Villa  les
Grottes.

There  were  no  idle  moments  at  Mentone.  The  corre-
spondence was  always  great,  and  to  this  the  preacher  invari-
ably insisted  upon  attending  unless  prevented  by  illness.
Then  the  amount  of  literary  work  he  accomplished  during
these  periods  was  enormous;  and  further  he  was  constantly
writing  home  to*  his  church,  urging  the  members  to
increased  zeal  and  effort,  and  particularly  impressing  upon
them  the  importance  of  maintaining  the  prayer-meetings
at  "  blood-heat."  He  never  forgot  his  church,  his  people,
his  institutions,  or  any  single  branch  of  his  work.  "  It
would  be  well,"  he  says  in  one  letter,  "  if  I  could  write
without  mentioning  myself  and  for  your  edification  only.
Forgive  the  need  which  there  is  of  alluding  to  my  health ;
i:  would  best  please  me  if  I  could  work  right  on,  and  never
have  the  wretched  item  of  self  to  mention.  My
mind  runs  much  upon  the  work  at  home;  the
services,  the  College,  the  Orphanage,  the  Colportage,
the  Sabbath  school,  the  coming  special  meetings,  and  so
on.  I  picture  all  things  in  my  mind's  eye  and  wonder  how
all  are  going  on;  then  I  pray  and  leave  the  whole  with
'  that  great  Shepherd  of  the  Sheep' "  At  another  time  he
writes  :  "  I  feel  grieved  to  be  out  of  the  running,  but  I
cannot  help  it.  I  can  pray  and  I  do.  Rally  round  your
leaders.  Pray  with  double  earnestness.  Be  instant  in
season  and  out  of  season.  Attempt  great  things  and  expect
great  things."

During  these  periods  even  when  encouraging  his  brethren
at  home  and  belittling  his  own  troubles,  C.  H.  Spurgeon
was  an  intense  sufferer.  The  pain  of  the  gout  and  the
rheumatism,  very  often  complicated  and  rendered  more


468    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

acute  by  other  diseases,  was  almost  unbearable,  and  he
gave  some  idea  of  the  agony  he- endured  when  describing
his  sensations  to  a  friend.  "  If  you  put  your  hand  into  a
vice,"  said  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  "  and  let  a  man  press  as  hard


(Elliot  d-3  Fry,  p/toto,    London.)
C.  H.  Spurgeon  in  1890.

as  he  can,  that  is  rheumatism ;  if  he  can  be  got  to  press
a  little  harder,  that  is  gout  " ; — a  rather  humorous  way  of
explaining  a  sensation  which  was  anything  but  humorous
to  the  sufferer.


LAST  ILLNESS  AND  DEATH.  469

The  preacher's  health  did  not  improve  as  time  went  on.
His  illnesses  became  longer  and  more  serious.  The  gout
spread,  bringing  with  it  fever  and  insomnia.  In  November,
1890,  the  day  after  his  arrival  at  Mentone,  the  complaint


Mrs-  C.  H.  Spurgeon


seized  the  patient's  right  hand  and  arm,  causing  him  untold
agony,  yet  in  the  midst  of  his  sufferings  he  wrote  to  his
wife  through  his  secretary :  "  The  day  is  like  one  in  Eden
before  our  parents  fell.  When  my  head  is  better  I  shall


470    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

enjoy  it.  I  have  eau  de  Cologne  dripped  on  to  my  hot
brain-box;  and,  as  I  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  look  out
on  the  perfect  scene  before  me,  my  case  is  not  a  bad  one.''"
For  eight  days  the  pain  was  terrific.  The  arm,  the  foot,
the  knee  were  all  attacked,  and  the  seizure  of  the  right
hand  prevented  the  patient  from  holding  a  pen.  Yet  when
at  last  he  could  scrawl  a  few  words  with  the  left  hand  in  a
note  to  his  wife,  there  was  no  complaint,  no  repining.
"  Wished  myself  at  home  when  pains  came,"  he  said,  "  but
when  worst,  this  soft,  clear  air  helps  me.  It  is  as  heaven's
gate.  All  is  well.  Thus  have  I  stammered  a  line  or  two.
Not  quite  dumb,  bless  the  Lord !  What  a  good  Lord  He
is !  I  shall  yet  praise  Him !  Sleeplessness  cannot  so
embitter  the  night  as  to  make  me  fear  when  He  is  near."
To  an  aged  literary  friend  who  wrote,  saying  he  had  been
wrestling  in  prayer  on  the  preacher's  behalf,  C.  H.  Spur-
geon  replied  a  week  or  two  later :  "  It  made  my  heart  leap
for  joy  when  I  read  in  your  note  that  you  had  liberty  in
prayer  for  me.  I  am  recovering.  I  can  hold  the  pen,  as
/ou  see.  My  hand  was  puffed  up,  and,  in  consequence,
like  all  puffed-up  things,  useless ;  but  it  is  coming  to  its
true  form,  and  I  am  rallying  from  the  weakness  which
follows  great  pain.  Of  a  surety  it  is  well.  I  praise  God
with  all  my  heart  for  the  furnace,  the  hammer,  and  the
file.  May  He  bless  to  you  the  infirmities  of  years  and
carry  you  ever  in  His  bosom !  "  Two  or  three  days  after
this  he  writes  gleefully  to  his  wife :  "  To-day  I  dressed
myself."  But  by  Christmas  his  condition  was  worse,  and
Mrs.  Spurgeon  received  a  letter  in  which  occurred  the
significant  statement :  "  There  is  some  deep-seated  gout  in
me."  The  patient  had  evidently  come  to  the  conclusion
that  his  complete  recovery  was  unlikely,  although  this  was
the  first  intimation  of  any  such  belief  on  the  part  of  either


LAST  ILLNESS  AND  DEATH.  471

himself  or  his  friends.  It  was  February,  1891,  before  he
was  able  to  return  to  London,  but  on  the  8th  of  that
month,  the  first  Sunday  after  his  arrival,  he  occupied  his
old  place  at  the  Tabernacle  and  preached  a  powerful
sermon  upon  the  necessity  of  prayer  and  testimony.  His
strength,  however,  had  not  returned,  nor  did  he  seem  to
improve  as  the  weeks  went  by.  The  Pastors'  College
conference  in  April,  the  last  at  which  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was
present,  was  a  severe  tax  upon  him  in  his  weakened  state,
and,  as  a  result  of  the  reaction,  a  low,  nervous  condition
ensued.  So  serious  was  this  that  when  on  the  following
Sunday  he  entered  the  pulpit  to  preach,  he  was  obliged  to
hurry  out  of  it  and  another  took  his  place — the  first  time
such  a  thing  had  happened  in  a  ministry  of  forty  years.
The  following  Sunday,  however,  the  preacher  was  at  his
post  both  in  the  morning  and  in  the  evening,  and  for
several  days  following  he  was  fulfilling  preaching  engage-
ments either  at  his  own  church  or  elsewhere,  doing  at  the
same  time  a  certain  amount  of  literary  work.  But  he  had
overtaxed  his  strength  by  all  these  labours,  and  on  Sunday,
May  1 7th,  was  unable  to  occupy  has  pulpit  owing  to  an
attack  of  congestion  of  the  lungs.  Three  weeks  later  he
was  in  the  Tabernacle  Pulpit,  and  this  occasion  (Sunday
morning,  June  7th,  1891)  was  the  last  on  which  he
preached  to  the  congregation  he  had  so  wonderfully
gathered  and  held  for  thirty  years.  The  text  was  i  Samuel
xxx.  21. — 25,  the  statute  of  David  for  the  sharing  of  the
spoil,  and  his  last  words  in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle
were  typical  of  his  pulpit  ministry  throughout  the  whole  of
his  career.  "  If  you  wear  the  livery  of  Christ  you  will
find  Him  so  meek  and  lowly  of  heart  that  you  will  find  rest
unto  your  souls.  He  is  the  most  magnanimous  of  captains.
There  never  was  His  like  among  the  choicest  of  princes.


472    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEOX.

He  is  always  to  be  found  in  the  thickest  part  of  the  battle,
when  the  wind  blows  cold  He  always  takes  the  bleak  side  of
the  hill.  The  heaviest  end  of  the  cross  lies  ever  on  His
shoulders.  If  He  bids  us  carry  a  burden  He  carries  it  also.
If  there  is  anything  that  is  gracious,  generous,  kind,  and
tender,  yea,  lavish,  superabundant  in  love,  you  always  find
it  in  Him.  His  service  is  life,  peace,  joy.  Oh,  that  you
would  enter  on  it  at  once !  God  help  you  to  enlist  under
the  banner  of  Jesus  Christ !  "

It  was  clear  to  the  congregation  that  the  preacher's
health  was  terribly  shattered,  and  as  he  spoke  with  all  his
old  earnestness,  though  with  some  of  the  fire  gone,  there
was  many  a  wet  eye  and  not  a  few  seem  to  have  had  a
premonition  of  coming  calamity.  Had  it  been  known
that  that  was  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  last  appearance
in  his  great  church,  what  a  lamentation  would  have  gone
up  from  the  assembled  multitude.

That  week  the  illness  took  an  alarming  turn,  and  a
fatal  issue  began  to  be  feared.  The  opening  of  the  Surrey
Gardens  Memorial  Hall,  commemorating  his  early  ministry
in  the  great  secular  building,  had  been  postponed  from
June  2nd  to  23rd  in  the  hope  that  C.  H.  Spurgeon  might
be  able  to  take  part  in  the  inauguration,  but  by  the  latter
date  all  thought  of  his  presence  had,  of  course,  to  be
abandoned,  and  the  building  was  opened  under  the  shadow
of  a  cloud.

The  church  at  the  Tabernacle  began  to  meet  morning,
noon,  and  night,  for  intercession  on  behalf  of  its  beloved
pastor,  and  in  thousands  of  churches  and  chapels  through-
out the  land  prayer  was  offered  for  the  great  preacher's
recovery.  The  whole  nation  watched  with  anxious  concern
for  some  bulletin  that  should  hold  out  hope,  and  all
denominations  seemed  united  in  pleading  for  this  man's


LAST  ILLNESS  AND  DEATH.


473


recovery.  The  Archbishops  and  Bishops,  the  dignitaries
of  St.  Paul's  Cathedral  and  Westminster  Abbey,  and  the
Chief  Rabbi,  all  publicly  prayed  that  he  might  be  spared.
It  must  have  seemed  strange  to  those  old  enough  to
remember  the  abuse  and  ignominy  heaped  upon  the


\Fkoio  by  Mr.   E.  Johnson.)

A  painting  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon  which  hung

with  portraits  of  his  distinguished  predecessors  in

the  Pastor's  Vestry  at  the  Tabernacle.

preacher  in  his  early  days  in  London.  Telegrams,  letters,
and  resolutions  of  sympathy  reached  "  Westwood "  in
thousands,  and  a  constant  stream  of  visitors  called  at  the
Norwood  home  to  learn  something  of  the  patient's  condi-
tion. The  inquirers  included  the  Prince  of  Wales,  the


474    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

Primate,  many  of  the  Bishops,  and  a  large  proportion  of
the  nobility,  besides  statesmen,  men  of  the  learned  profes-
sions, ministers,  and  tradesmen,  down  to  what  are  usually
described  as  "  the  common  people."

By  the  autumn  the  patient  had  sufficiently  recovered  to
be  taken  for  drives  in  the  country,  a  favourite  route  being
through  Addington  Park.

After  one  of  these  visits  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,
Dr.  Benson,  wrote  a  note  in  which  he  said,  "  I  was  surprised
and  delighted  to  see  your  handwriting,  and  to  see  it  so  firm
and  clear.  I  only  lamented  that  as  you  were  actually  here
it  had  not  been  my  good  fortune  to1  see  you.  We  do
earnestly  hope  that  when  (and  may  it  be  soon!)  you  are
able  to  leave  your  carriage  and  come  in,  you  will  do  so ;
or  in  the  middle  of  your  ride  let  us  bring  you  out  a  glass
of  wine  or  a  cup  of  tea.  We  know  how  much  you  must
have  suffered,  and  we  have  watched  yooir  retardations  and
advances  with  hearts  full  of  regard  and  hope.  It  has  been
given  to  you  not  only  to  labour  for  Christ  and  to  bring
many  souls'  within  the  knowledge  and  feeling  of  the
Atonement ;  but — it  seems  to  follow  with  so  many  of
those  who  have  come  nearest  to  Him  in  that  great  way  to
be  drawn  into  closest  sympathy  with  His  sufferings — to
catch  the  reality  of  those  mysterious  words  :  —

KCLI   a.VTava.TrXrjpw  TO.  v(TTepf]/u.a.Ta  TMV  $At^ewv  rov   Xptoroi)
ev  TT]  crapKi  pov.*

No  doubt  there  are  also  some  verses  in  the  Psalms  which
you  can  now  more  than  ever  make  your  own."

It  became  evident  that  the  sick  pastor  would  have  to
winter  in  the  South  of  France,  and  after  an  experimental

*  Colossians  i.  24:  "And  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the
afflictions  of  Christ  in  my  flesh."


LAST  ILLNESS  AND  DEATH.


475


visit  to  Eastbourne  for  a  fortnight  to  see  how  he  could
bear  the  journey  and  change,  he  started  for  Mentone  on
October  26th,  accompanied  by  his  wife,  Pastor  and  Mrs.


C.  H.  Spurgeon  in  the  gardens  of  the  Hotel  Beau
Rivage,  Mentone.

J.  A.  Spurgeon,  and  Mr.  Harrald.     The  preacher's  brother
and  sister-in-law  had  soon  to  return  to  England,  and  the


476    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  H ADDON  SPURGEON.

party  at  Mentone  was  then  joined  by  Miss  E.  H.  Thome,
Mrs.  Spurgeon's  companion.

The  warmth  of  the  southern  sun  appeared  to  have  a
beneficial  effect  upon  the  patient's  condition,  and  for  a  time
there  were  signs  of  improvement,  although  he  himself
seems  to  have  been  firmly  convinced  of  the  hopeless
nature  of  his  complaint.  Most  of  the  days  were  spent  in
the  open-air,  driving,  or  riding  in  a  Bath  chair,  and  the
preacher,  although  so  weak,  was  indefatigable  in  his  literary
work.  He  devoted  much  time  to  the  exposition  of  St.
Matthew's  gospel,  and  wrote  reviews  and  articles  for  The
Sword  and  the  Trowel,  but  he  was  unable  to  continue  the
series  of  semi-private  services  in  his  rooms  which  had  been
so  appreciated  by  guests  on  previous  visits  to  Mentone.
On  four  ocasions  only  did  he  conduct  such  services,  the
last  two  being  on  January  loth  and  i7th,  1902,  when
his  strength  did  not  enable  him  to  prepare  new  addresses,
and  he  reluctantly  agreed  to  read  portions  of  an  old
sermon.  The  latter  of  these  occasions  was  the  last  on
which  he  ever  spoke  to  a  company  of  worshippers  on  earth,
for  three  days  later  serious  symptoms  made  their  appear-
ance and  the  great  preacher  retired  to  his  bed,  from
which  he  never  again  rose.  Night  and  day  he  had  to  be
nursed  and  watched,  Mrs.  Spurgeon  and  Miss  Thome
taking  service  alternately,  while  the  other  members  of  the
party  rendered  all  the  help  they  could,  and  Dr.  FitzHenry
was  in  almost  constant  attendance.  Hopes  were  still
entertained  that  the  patient  would  recover,  but  he  himself
seems  to  have  realized  that  the  end  was  near.  "  My  work
is  done,"  he  said  to  his  secretary,  in  discussing  various
matters  with  whom  he  spoke  as  though  he  were  soon  to
be  finished  with  the  things  of  earth.  It  had  been  arranged
some  weeks  earlier  that  on  January  26th  thankofferings


LAST  ILLNESS  AND  DEATH.

should  be  brought  to  the  Tabernacle  in  recognition  of  the
Pastor's  partial  recovery,  but  on  that  day  his  condition
was  so  alarming  that  for  a  long  time  he  was  only  semi-
conscious. He  did  not,  however,  in  the  midst  of  pain
and  weakness,  forget  his  flock  and  his  church,  but  dictated
the  following  message  to  be  telegraphed  to  the  deacons :
"  Self  and  wife,  ;£ioo,  hearty  thankoffering  towards  Taber-


C.  H.  Spurgeon's  Sitting-room  at  the  Hotel   Beau   Rivage,

Mentone,  where   he   conducted   private  services   that  were

largely  attended  by  visitors-

nacle  general  expenses,  love  to  all  friends."  It  was  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon's  last  public  act  and  message,  and  was
characteristic  of  his  whole  life.  Shortly  afterwards  he
became  totally  unconscious,  and  remained  so  until  just
after  eleven  o'clock  on  Sunday  night,  January  3151,  1892,
when  he  passed  away  in  the  presence  of  his  wife  and  a
few  friends.


478    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

It  is  scarcely  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  whole  world
was  watching  the  course  of  events  at  Mentone.  Something
of  the  true  worth  of  this  plain-living  man,  who  had  never
sought  the  favours  of  the  great  or  the  applause  of  the
multitude,  who  had  always  shrunk  from  notice  and  popu-
larity save  where  such  were  the  necessary  accompaniments
of  faithful  service  for  his  Master,  was  now  realised ;  and
when  it  became  known  that  his  wonderful  career  had
closed,  it  was  generally  felt  by  men  of  all  schools  and
shades  of  thought  that  the  loss  was  irremediable.  Never
again  would  there  be  a  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon.  Within
a  short  time  of  the  sad  news  becoming  known  the  telegraph
wires  at  Mentone  were  blocked  with  messages  of  condol-
ence and  sympathy.  These  were  from  all  parts  of  the
world,  although  naturally  the  majority  came  from  England.
King  Edward  and  Queen  Alexandra  (then  Prince  and
Princess  of  Wales)  were  among  the  first  to  express  their
grief  and  sympathy,  and  they  were  followed  by  men  and
women  of  almost  every  class  and  creed.

The  French  laws  did  not  allow  the  body  to  remain  long
at  the  hotel,  and  without  delay  it  was  placed  in  an  olive
casket,  which  bore  the  inscription  :  —

IN  EVER  LOVING  MEMORY
OF

CHARLES     HADDON    SPURGEON,

BORN   AT  KELVEDON,   JUNE    19,    1834,

FELL  ASLEEP  IN  JESUS
AT  MENTONE,   JANUARY  31,    1892.

"  I  have  fought  a  good  fight ;  I  have  finished  my
course ;  I  have  kept  the  faith."

After  a  memorial  service  at  the  Scotch  Presbyterian
Church,  at  which  the  great  divine  had  preached  the  opening


480    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.    .

sermon  about  a  year  before,  his  remains  were  removed  to
England  for  burial  in  Norwood  Cemetery,  where  he  had
often  expressed  a  desire  that  his  body  might  lie  amid  those
of  his  departed  Tabernacle  friends  and  deacons.  The
remains  reached  London  on  the  morning  of  Monday,
February  8th,  and  were  taken  direct  to  the  Pastors'  College,
and  there  the  massive  olive  casket  rested  all  day.  At  night
it  was  borne  by  students  into  the  Tabernacle  and  placed
just  below  the  platform  from  which  for  so  many  years  the
great  preacher  had  told  forth  the  Gospel  to  the  multitudes
who  gathered  in  his  church.  On  either  side  of  the  coffin
were  fixed  palm  branches,  sent  specially  for  this  purpose
from  the  South  of  France  by  Mrs.  Spurgeon,  while  across
the  top  of  the  casket  lay  the  Bible  which  the  preacher  had
used  in  the  Tabernacle  pulpit.  It  was  opened  at  the  page
bearing  the  text,  Isaiah  xlv.  22  :  "  Look  unto  Me,  and  be
ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth,"  which  had  been  the
means  of  the  great  preacher's  conversion  in  the  little  chapel
at  Colchester  more  than  forty  years  earlier.

The  next  day,  Tuesday,  the  Tabernacle  was  thrown  open
to  the  public,  so  that  those  who  cared  to  do  so  might  pass
in  front  of  the  preacher's  remains,  and  about  sixty  thou-
sand persons  of  all  classes  availed  themselves  of  the
opportunity.  To. each  one  as  he  or  she  left  the  building
was  given  a  copy  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  sermon  published  in
the  previous  week,  entitled,  "  God's  will  about  the  Future."

Wednesday  was  a  day  of  memorial  services.  In  the
morning,  members  of  the  church  and  its  various  organiza-
tions filled  the  Tabernacle.  The  afternoon  service  was
for  ministers  and  students  of  all  denominations,  and  the
evening  was  devoted  to  Christian  workers  and  church
members  of  the  various  denominations,  the  service  being
presided  over  by  Mr.  (now  Sir)  George  Williams,  and  Mr.


LAST  ILLNESS  AND  DEATH.  481

Ira  D.  Sankey  singing  the  hymn,  "  Sleep  on, . beloved,  sleep
and  take  thy  rest."  At  the  afternoon  meeting  the  speakers
included  Dr.  Alexander  McLaren,  Canon  Fleming,  Dr..
Monro  Gibson  (Moderator  of  the  English  Presbyterian
Synod),  Dr.  Herber  Evans  (Chairman  of  the  Congregational
Union),  Dr.  T.  B.  Stephenson  (President  of  the  Wesleyan
Conference),  and  the  Rev.  F.  B.  Meyer.

Still  another  service    was  held  on    Wednesday,  at  ten


The  Olive  Casket  containing  C.    H.  Spurgeon's  remains,  as  it
stood  in  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.

o'clock  at  night,  for  the  general  public.  The  hour  fixtd
had  been  10.30  p.m.,  but  at  ten  the  great  building  was
filled  to-  excess,  and  the  service  started  then.  Mr.  Sankey
was  again  present,  and  sang,  "  Only  remembered  by  what  I
have  done."

Thursday  was  the  day  of  the  interment.     Dr.  Pierson,
who  preached  the  funeral  sermon  in  the  Tabernacle,  drew

19


482    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

attention  to  the  fact  that  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon's  death
had  occurred  almost  exactly  a  century  after  that  of  John
Wesley,  and  then  referred  to  the  curious  correspondence
in  the  lives  of  the  two  brothers,  John  and  Charles  Wesley,
and  those  of  the  two  brothers,  Charles  and  James
Spurgeon.  In  each  case  the  two  brothers  had  wrought
together  as  right-hand  and  left-hand  work  together  in
mechanical  arts.  The  posthumous  work  of  John  Wesley
was  greater  than  the  work  he  did  during  his  life,  and  as
the  century  was  looked  back  upon,  Wesley's  name  was
surrounded  with  much  of  the  glory  of  the  work  carried  on
after  his  decease.  "  The  posthumous  work  of  Charles
Haddon  Spurgeon,"  said  the  preacher,  "  no  man  can  at  this
day  estimate  or  conjecture ;  "  but  his  suggested  comparison
of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  with  Wesley  in  this  respect  has  been
amply  borne  5ut  since.

Forty-one  carriages  followed  the  hearse  to  Norwood
Cemetery,  the  first  being  the  empty  brougham  of  the
preacher.  All  along  the  route  the  people  had  gathered  in
hundreds  of  thousands,  and,  as  the  cortege  passed,  the  men
bared  their  heads  and  women  could  be  seen  and  heard
weeping  and  sobbing.  The  shops,  even  the  public-houses,
were  closed,  and  many  were  draped  with  black ;  flags  floated
at  half-mast,  and  the  bells  of  the  churches  were  tolled.
At  the  gates  of  the  cemetery  the  Bishop  of  Rochester  (the
present  Primate  of  All  England)  entered  the  carriage  of  the
Rev.  James  A.  Spurgeon,  having  expressed  a  desire  to  pay
a  parting  tribute  to  the  memory  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  by
being  present  at  the  funeral.  Immediately  round  the
grave  gathered  the  near  relatives  of  the  deceased,  then  a
thousand  mourners  stood  within  the  barriers  that  had  been
erected,  and  outside  thousands  of  the  general  public  waiterl
silently,  while  Pastor  Archibald  Brown  conducted  the


LAST  ILLNESS  AND  DEATH.


483


solemn   burial-service.     Such   a   funeral   had   never   been
seen  in  South  London  before,  nor  is  likely  to  be  seen  again.


(Photo  by  Mr.  E.  Johtison.}

The  place  at  the  back  of  the   Metropolitan  Tabernacle

where  a  lift  was  to  be  erected  for  the  convenience  of

C    H-    Spurgeon.      He  died    just   after   the  work    had

been  put  in  hand-

Scarcely   an  eye    was    dry,    and    as    Mr.    Brown    uttered
his     concluding    sentences,    everyone    present    felt    that


484    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SP.URGEON.

indeed  -a  great  man  and  a  master,  in  Israel  had  been
laid  to  rest.

None  who  heard  them  will  ever  forget  those  pathetic  yet
triumphant  words :-  —

"  Beloved  President.  Faithful  Pastor,  Prince  of
Preachers,  Brother  Beloved,  Dear  Spurgeon !  we  bid  thee
not  'Farewell,''  but  only  for  a  little  while,  '  Good-night. :
Thou  shalt  rise  soon  at  the  first  dawn  of  the  Resurrection-
day  of  the  redeemed.  Yet  is  not  the  good-night  ours  to
bid,  but  thine ;  it  is  we  who  linger  in  the  darkness ;
thou  art  in  God's  holy  light.  Our  night  shall  soon
be  passed,  and  with  it  all  our  weeping.  Then,  with
thine,  our  songs  shall  greet  the  morning  of  a  day  that
knows  neither  cloud  nor  close;  for  there  is  no  night
there.

"  Hard  worker  in  the  field !  thy  toil  is  ended.  Straight
has  been  the  furrow  thou  hast  ploughed.  No  looking  back
has  marred  thy  course.  Harvests  have  followed  thy
patient  sowing,  and  Heaven  is  already  rich  with  thine
ingathered  sheaves,  and  shall  be  still  enriched  through
years  yet  lying  in  eternity.

"  Champion  of  God !  thy  battle  long  and  nobly  fought
is  over;  the  sword  which  clave  to  thy  hand,  has  dropped
at  last;  a  palm  branch  takes  its  place.  No  longer  doe's
the  helmet  J^ress  thy  brow,  oft  weary  with  its  surging
thoughts  of  battle,  a  victor's  wreath  from  the  great
Commander's  hand  has  already  proved  thy  full
reward.

"  Here  for  a  little  while  shall  rest  thy  precious  dust.
Then  shall  thy  Well-Beloved  come ;  and  at  His  voice  thou
shalt  spring  from  thy  couch  of  earth,  fashioned  like  unto
His  body,  unto  glory.  Then  spirit,  soul  and  body  shall
magnify  thy  Lord's  redemption.  Until  then,  beloved.


LAST  ILLNESS  AND  DEATH.  485

sleep.  We  praise  God  for  thee,  and  by  the  blood  of  the
everlasting  covenant,  hope  and  expect  to  praise  God  with
thee.  Amen."

Dr.  Pierson  led  in  prayer  and  the  Bishop  of  Rochester
pronounced  the  benediction.


C.  H.   Spurgeon's  Monument  in    Norwood  Cemetery.'

Thus  was  the  great  preacher  laid  to  his  final  earthly  rest.
The  whole  of  the  memorial  sendees  had  been  characterised
by  a  simplicity  which  was  eminently  fitting  in  the  case  of
one  whose  personal  life  had  been  simple  in  the  extreme,
and  yet  with  all  its  plainness  the  funeral  was  such  as  might


486    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

have  done  honour  to  a  great  king.  A  thousand  or  more
churches,  societies,  colleges,  corporations,  school-boards,
lodges,  hospitals,  and  leagues  sent  either  deputations  to
the  services  and  graveside,  or  letters  of  condolence  and
sympathy  to  the  Tabernacle  and  relatives,  and  the  United
States  Legation  was  officially  represented.

A  simple  monument  was  erected  over  the  vault,  bearing
in  front  a  medallion  of  the  preacher,  the  representation  of
an  open  Bible  on  a  cushion,  and  the  short  inscription  :  —

HERE   LIES  THE  BODY
OF

CHARLES   HADDON   SPURGEON

WAITING  FOR  THE  APPEARING  OF  HIS

LORD  AND  SAVIOUR
JESUS  CHRIST.

While  on  the  right-hand  side  of  the  tomb  were  two  verses
from  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  favourite  hymn  :  —

E'er  since  by  faith  I  saw  the  stream

Thy  flowing  wounds  supply,
Redeeming  love  has  been  my  theme,

And  shall  be  till  I  die;

Then  in  a  nobler,  sweeter  song,

1 11  sing  Thy  power  to  save,
When  this  poor  lisping,  stammering  tongue

Lies  silent  in  the  grave.


CHAPTER    XXXIII.

CONCLUSION.

IT  is  close  upon  twelve  years  since  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon  passed  away,  and  his  influence  shows  little
sign  of  weakening.  Speaking  generally,  the  ministers
trained  in  his  Pastors'  College,  and  believing  and  teaching
the  same  doctrines  as  he  believed  and  taught,  still  have  the
largest,  healthiest  and  most  liberal  churches  in  the  country.
His  sermons  sell  as  largely  as  ever,  and  the  fact  that  you
can  go  into  many  a  provincial  or  colonial  church,  into
many  a  British  or  American,  Australian  or  South  African
home,  on  board  many  a  vessel,  and  hear,  Sunday  after
Sunday,  one  of  Spurgeon's  printed  discourses  read  as  the
devotional  exercise  of  the  day,  clearly  proves  that  the
secret  of  his  success  did  not  lay,  as  was  so  often  stated,  in
his  wonderful  voice  or  his  personality.  Were  that  the  case,
he  could  not  be  at  the  present  time,  as  he  undoubtedly  is,  a
living  force,  nor  could  it  be  true  in  any  real  sense  that
"  he  being  dead  yet  speaketh."

It  has  always  been  the  fashion  in  some  quarters  to
describe  him  as  unlettered,  a  man  of  scant  education,  and
of  scarcely  any  reading,  one  who  was  good  enough  for  the
masses  but  quite  beneath  the  attention  of  those  with  any
pretence  to  "  culture."  Yet  he  numbered  among  his  close
personal  friends  some  of  the  most  learned  and  refined  men
cf  the  day,  men  who  delighted  in  spending  hours  com-
muning with  him,  and  men  who,  had  these  statements  about


488    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

the  lack  of  education  been  true,  would  hardly  have  found  his
society  and  his  conversation  congenial.  Again,  it  has  been
the  fashion  to  speak  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  as  a  man  of  no
original  thought.  But  it  is  astonishing  what  a  number  of
preachers  who  pass  as  "  thinkers  "  find  it  worth  their  while
and  make  a  practice  to  get  the  great  Baptist  minister's  ser-
mons on  a  particular  text  or  subject  before  preaching  them-
selves from  the  same  text  or  subject.  These  keen  students  of
Spurgeon's  sermons  are  confined  to  no  particular  denomina-
tions. They  include  Bishops  and  other  dignitaries  of  the
Established  Church,  and  men  of  note  in  the  various  Non-
conformist churches.  True,  sometimes  thoughts  and  points
only  are  taken  and  clothed  in  a  new  theological  dress,  but
it  is  within  the  writer's  knowledge  that  at  other  times
preachers  who  have  received  University  training  and
honours  have  preached  a  sermon  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  with
little  or  no  alteration.

Surely  these  facts  hardly  bear  out  the  idea  that  the
preacher  was  a  man  of  meagre  attainments  and  no  original
thought.  He  certainly  spoke  with  great  acceptation  to  coster-
mongers,  butchers  and  sailors,  but  at  the  same  time  he
could  hold  for  an  hour  or  more  the  close  attention  of  City
merchants,  members  of  the  Stock  Exchange,  literary  men,
eminent  lawyers  and  peers  of  the  realm.  Why,  then,
should  such  palpably  erroneous  opinions  gain  currency  ?
The  reason  we  believe  to  be  this.  "The  newspapers  anJ
reviews  which  had  so  violently  abused  the  preacher  were
compelled  afterwards  by  force  of  circumstances  to  modify
their  views,  and  to  acknowledge  that  he  was  doing  good,
at  any  rate,  in  his  own  immediate  sphere.  The  value  of
the  Orphanage  and  the  Almshouses  could  not  be  gainsaid,
even  by  the  bitterest  opponent  But  the  unfriendly  critics
and  journals,  save  in  a  few  honourable  cases,  such  as  the


CONCLUSION.  489

Daily  News  and  Daily  Telegraph,  were  not  prepared  to
own  that  they  had  erred,  and  so  they  continued  to  mis-
represent the  preacher,  though  in  a  less  violent  manner.

In  some  quarters  the  wholesale  utterance  of  Greek  and
Latin  quotations  in  a  sermon,  and  the  repetition  of  extracts
from  modern  authors  of  a  sceptical  nature,  pass  as  evidence
of  the  preacher's  culture.  With  such  parade  of  knowledge,
C.  H.  Spurgeon  would  have  nothing  to  do,  and  because  he
never  thought  it  worth  his  while  to  make  a  show  of  learning
some  supposed  that  he  had  none.  A  man,  however,  who
could  read  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  in  the  original
Hebrew  and  Greek  could  hardly  be  described  with  accuracy
as  unlettered.  His  contempt,  too,  for  the  degrees  bestowed
so  liberally  upon  British  ministers  by  American  Universities
of  questionable  standing  was  very  great.  "  Many  times/''
he  once  wrote,  "  we  meet  in  American  papers  with  our  own
name  adorned  or  disfigured  with  a  doctor's  degree.  In  a
periodical  we  see  every  month  there  is  an  extract  from
the  Rev.  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  D.D.  We  like  the  prefix  quite
as  well  as  the  affix;  that  is  to  say,  we  detest  them
equally."

The  great  preacher  was  no  ascetic.  He  believed  in
enjoying  the  good  gifts  of  God,  although  over  and  over
again  he  has  denied  himself  for  the  sake  of  others.  He
allowed  no  man's  opinion  to  influence  him,  if  he  felt  that
what  he  was  doing  was  not  displeasing  to  his  divine  Master.
This  was  particularly  noticeable  in  connection  with  the
practice  of  smoking,  which  some  people  thought  was  wrong
or  at  any  rate  inadvisable  in  a  man  of  his  position.  He
made  no  secret  of  his  attitude  in  this  respect,  and  when
some  public  utterance  of  his  regarding  the  use  of  tobacco
was  exaggerated  out  of  all  proportion  with  a  view  of
lessening  his  influence,  he  wrote  to  the  Daily  Telegraph :


490    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEON.

"  I  demur  altogether  and  most  positively  to  the  statement
that  to  smoke  tobacco  is  in  itself  a  sin.  It  may  become
so,  as  any  other  indifferent  action  may,  but  as  an  action
it  is  no  sin,.  Together  with  hundreds  of  thousands  of  my
fellow-Christians  I  have  smoked,  and  with  them  I  am
under  the  condemnation  of  living  in  habitual  sin,  if  certain
accusers  are  to  be  believed.  As  I  would  not  knowingly
live  even  in  the  smallest  violation  of  the  law  of  God,  and
sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  law,  I  will  not  own  to  sin,
when  I  am  not  conscious  of  it.  There  is  growing  up  in
Society  a  Pharisaic  system  which  adds  to  the  commands
of  God  the  precepts  of  men;  to  that  system  I  will  not
yield  for  an  hour.  The  preservation  of  my  liberty  may
bring  upon  me  the  upbraidings  of  many  of  the  good  and
the  sneers  of  the  self-righteous ;  but  I  shall  endure  both
with  serenity,  so  long  as  I  feel  clear  in  my  conscience
before  God.

"  The  expression  '  smoking  to  the  glory  of  God  '  standing
alone  has  an  ill  sound,  and  I  do  not  justify  it ;  but  in  the
sense  in  which  I  employed  it  I  still  stand  to  it.  No
Christian  should  do  anything  in  which  he  cannot  glorify
God — and  this  may  be  done,  according  to  Scripture,  in
eating  and  drinking  and  the  common  actions  of  life.
When  I  have  found  intense  pain  relieved,  a  weary  brain
soothed,  and  calm,  refreshing  sleep  obtained  by  a  cigar.
I  have  felt  grateful  to  God  and  have  blessed  His  name;
this  is  what  I  meant,  and  by  no  means  did  I  use  sacred
words  triflingly.  If  through  smoking  I  had  wasted  an
hour  of  my  time,  if  I  had  stinted  my  gifts  to  the  poor,  if  I
had  rendered  my  mind  less  vigorous,  I  trust  I  should  see
my  fault  and  turn  from  it;  but  he  who  charges  me  with
these  things  shall  have  no  answer  but  my  forgiveness.

"  I  am  told  that  my  open  avowal  will  lessen  my  influence,.


CONCLUSION.  49r

and  my  reply  is  that  if  I  have  gained  any  influence  through
being  thought  different  from  what  I  am,  I  have  no  wish  to
retain  it.  I  will  do  nothing  upon  the  sly  and  nothing  about
which  I  have  a  doubt."

The  preacher  was  never  free  from  censure,  and  very
often  received  hostile  letters  of  the  cruellest  kind,  but  his
early  training  in  the  London  ministry  inured  him  to  this,
and  he  could  regard  with  amusement  what  was  intended
to  give  him  pain,.  When  a  clergyman,  for  instance,  wrote
to  inform  him  that  the  dreadful  bodily  sufferings  caused  by
the  gout  were  a  judgment  from  God  upon  him  for  speaking
against  the  Church  of  England,  and  that  he  would  soon
have  another  attack  for  a  recent  Liberation  Society  speech,
he  replied  to  his  correspondent  asking,  if  a  swollen  hand'
or  foot  were  to  be  regarded  as  a  mark  of  Divine  displeasure,
what  was  to  be  said  concerning  a  broken  neck  ?  A  dis-
tinguished Anglican  prelate,  the  Bishop  of  Winchester
(Samuel  Wilberforce)  had  not  long  before  fallen  from  his
horse  and  been  killed.  No  answer  was  vouchsafed  to  the
question.

Through  evil  report  and  good,  Charles  Haddon
Spurgeon  pressed  toward  the  mark.  The  burden  of  all  the
Tabernacle  agencies  was  upon  his  shoulders,  but  he  bore
it  manfully ;  the  vast  literary  work  entailed  by  the  books  and
printed  sermons  might  have  been  another  man's  life-work,
but  he  did  it  in  his  spare  moments,  and  in  his  periods  of
convalescence;  his  services  were  wanted  up  and  down  the
country  to  stimulate  effort  and  revive  flagging  causes,  and
he  gave  them  freely ;  the  huge  congregation  at  the  Taber-
nacle had  to  be  maintained,  interested,  and  led  on  to  in-
creased usefulness  in  the  service  of  God  and  man ;  and  last,
but  not  least,  the  careless,  the  indifferent  and  the  flagrant
sinners  had  to  be  attracted  and  drawn  under  the  sound  of


492    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

the  Gospel  without  the  use  of  any  strange  or  sensational
device.  On  this  latter  point  C.  H.  Spurgeon  was  very
-emphatic.  "  The  chief  point,"  he  once  wrote,  "  is  to  get
the  people  in,  not  by  bribing  them  with  tea,  etc.,  but  by
fair  persuasion."  No  other  man  could  do  Charles  Haddon
-Spurgeon's  work  nor  fill  the  place  that  he  filled  for  so
many  years.  His  faith  removed  mountains  of  difficulty,
-and  his  genius,  supplemented  by  his  persistent  and  un-
quenchable zeal,  reared  an  imperishable  edifice  in  the  lives
:.and  characters  of  those  who  came  under  his  inspiring
influence.

It  is  difficult  to  say  what  his  place  will  prove  to  be  in
the  history  of  the  nineteenth  century,  when  in  years  to
<come  that  history  is  viewed  in  a  right  perspective.  There
is  no  doubt,  however,  that  he  will  rank  among  the  very
-foremost  religious  leaders;  His  influence,  we  believe,  was,
.and  is,  far  greater  than  is  generally  acknowledged.  It  was
the  ministry  and  work  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon,  for
instance,  that  was  the  greatest  barrier  to  the  spread  of
Bradlaughism  and  the  revolutionary  ideas  that  follow  in  its
train,  among  the  lower  middle  and  working  classes,  and
•finally  led  to  its  collapse.  The  most  plausible  negative  argu-
ments were  futile  in  face  of  the  great  fact  of  the  man  and
his  message,  with  the  practical  outcome  of  plain  Christian
teaching  witnessed  in  the  various  philanthropic  institutions
that  rose  around  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle.  The  nation
•owes  much  to  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon.  He  was  a  man
of  God  in  a  ve'ry  special  sense,  he  left  not  only  his  native
land,  but  the  world  at  large,  far  better  than  he  found  it,
and  none  can  estimate  this  side  of  the  grave  the  fruits  of
his  wonderful  life  and  ministry  for  his  Master.  May  it
Jong  be  true,  as  assuredly  it  must,  that —

"  HE  BEING  DEAD  YET  SPEAKETH."


APPENDIX  A.

CHRONOLOGICAL  SUMMARY.

Charles    Haddon     Spurgeon,     born     at     Kelvedon,     Essex,..
June  19,    1834.

Converted  at  Colchester,  January  6,  1850.

Admitted  to    Church  membership    at  Newmarket,    April  4..
1850.

Baptized  in  the  river  Lark,  at  Isleham,  May  3,  1850.
Removes  from  Newmarket  to  Cambridge,  August,   1850.
Becomes  Pastor  of  Waterbeach  Baptist  Chapel,  1851.
First  literary  effort,  No.    i  of  Waterbeach  Tracts,  published'


Preaches  at  New  Park  Street  Chapel,  London,  for  the  first
time,  December,  1853.

Accepts  Pastorate  of  New  Park  Street  Chapel,  April,  1854.

First  sermon  in  the  ''  New  'Park  Street   Pulpit/'  published
January,  1855.

Earliest  attack  in  the  Press  appears  in  The  Earthen  Vessel.  .

January,  1855.

First  preaches  at  Exeter  Hall,   February,   1855.
Mr.     T.     W.    Medhurst    becomes    C.     H.     Spurgeon's    first

ministerial  student,  July,  1855.
Visits  Scotland  for  the  first  time,  July,  1855.
Marries  Miss  Susannah  Thompson,  January  8,  1856.
Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Building  Committee  formed,  June,  .

1856.

Twin  sons  Thomas  and  Charles,  born,  September  20,  1856.
Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall  Disaster,  October  19,  1856.
Services  recommenced  at  the  Music  Hall,  November  23,  1856.
A   second   student   accepted  by   C-    H.    Spurgeon    and    the

Pastors'  College  practically  founded,  1857.
Preaches  to  23,654  persons  at  the  Crystal   Palace  on  Fast

Day,  October  7,  1857.
First  visit  to  Ireland,  August.  1858.


494    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDON  SPURGEON.

Foundation  Stone  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle  laid,
August  16,  1859.

Last  service  at  the  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall,  December  1 1,
1859.

Visits  Paris  and  is  eulogised  in  the  Roman  Catholic  Press  of
that  city,  February,  1860.

Preaches  in  Calvin's  gown  and  pulpit  at  Geneva,  1860.

Metropolitan  Tabernacle  opened  with  a  great  prayer  meeting,
March  18,  1861.

First  communion  service  at  the  Tabernacle,  April  7,  1861.
Delivery  of  the  ''Gorilla'5  Lecture,  October,  1861.

The  famous  "  Baptismal  Regeneration "  sermon  preached,
June  5,  1862.

Metropolitan  Tabernacle  Colportage  Association  founded,
1866.

Sunday  services,' each  attended  by  20,000  persons,  held  at
the  Agricultural  Hall,  Islington,  during  the  renovation
of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  March  24  to  April  21,
1867.

.Stockwell  Orphanage  (Boys'  side)  founded,   1867.

The  Rev.  James  Spurgeon  appointed  assistant  Pastor  at  the
Tabernacle,  January  6,  1868.

Foundation  Stone  of  the  Pastors'  College  Building  laid,
October  14,  1873.

Mrs.  Spurgeon's  Book  Fund  inaugurated,   1875.
Girls'  Orphanage  founded,   1879.

Presentation  of  the  Pastoral  "  Silver  Wedding "  gift  of
,£6,476  95.,  May  20,  1879.

The    preacher    removes    from     Clapham     to    "Westwood,"

Norwood,  1880.
Jubilee  Celebrations  and  presentation  of  testimonial  (,£4,500),

June  18  and  19,  1884.

First  "  Down-grade  "  paper  published  in  The  Sword  and  the
Trowel,  August,  1887-

Withdrawal  from  the  Baptist  Union,  October,   1887.

Last  sermon  at  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  June  7,  1891.

Goes  to  Mentone  for  the  last  time,  October  26,  1891.

Takes  to  his  bed  finally,  January  20,  1892.

Passes  away,  January  31,  1892.

Interred  at  Norwood  Cemetery,  February,  n,   1892.


APPENDIX  B.

The  following  table  shows  the  number  of  members
baptized  and  received  into  the  church  worshipping  at
New  Park  Street  Chapel  and  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle
under  the  pastorate  of  Charles  Haddon  Spurgeon:  —

Number    of    members    at    New    Park    Street

previous  to   1854         ............     232

Added  in  1854         ...............     121


.,    1856  ...    ...........  279

.,    1857  ...............  216

1858  ...............  231

1859  ...............  217

,,    1860  ..    ............  207

;,    1861  ...............  431

,,    1862  ...............  463

1863  ...                  ...  427

1864  .......         ......  486

1865  ........  ........  497

1866  ...............  477

1867  .........         .-•  4i3

1868  .....    ...    .....  452

1869  ...............  451

1870  ...............  409

1871  ......  312

1872  .-         .........  S7i

1873  ......    .........  359

1874  -  509


496    LIFE  OF  CHARLES  HADDOX  SPURGEOX.

Added  in  1876          474

1877  ...  ...  437

1878  ...         ...  ...  394

»         1879  445

1880  453

,,         1881          382

3,         1882     ':  .;;'-      ...  444

„  ';     1883  ...  '449

.  •„:     1884  ..."  426

-:,,:.    -1885  -  ...    -  353

,,         1886 418

.  „      1887    -  :':  -  ...  '•'•] ...  357

,,       1888    ..  '..I-     "...       ..."     307

-  ,,         1889  433

1890         379

.    ,,         1891         ...  261

Total  added  in  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  pastorate     14,692

Average    number    of    members    baptized    and
added  to  the  church  each  year  from  1854

to  1891  387


INDEX.

ACCIDENTS  and  Punishments,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  on,  225,  462.
Agricultural  Hall,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  holds  great  services  in,

312.
Almshouses   connected  with  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,   368,

396.

America,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  declines  invitation  to,  314.
America,  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  Sermons  in,  453,  456.
American  Warship,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  preaches  on  an,  465.
Angus,  Dr.,  114,  428.
Artillery  Street  Chapel,  Colchester,  60.
Auckland  Tabernacle,  The,  404.
Augustinian  Monks,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  and  the,  263.
Australian  Newspapers,  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  sermons  inserted

as  advertisements  in,  449 — 452.
Auxiliary  Book  Fund,  The,  373.

BANKS,  Rev.  Charles  Waters,  161.

Baptist  Union,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  withdraws  from,  424.

"Baptismal  Regeneration"  sermon  and  controversy,   301  —

3I25  438;  440.
Bartlett,  Mrs.,  379.
Beggars,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  and,  406.
Begging  Letters,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  pestered  with,  405.
Belgium,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  visits,  262.
Benson,  Archbishop,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  415,  474.
"  Bible  and  the  Newspaper,  The,"  442.
Binney,  Dr.  Thomas,  on  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  140.
Bishops,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  invited  by  the  Lord  Mayor  to  meet

the,  407.

Book  Fund,  Mrs.  Spurgeon's,  370.
Bradford,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  visits,  193.
Bristol  Advertiser,  The,  attacks  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  174.
British  Banner,   The,   on  the  Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall

disaster,  211,  218.
Brown's,    Pastor   Archibald,    address    at   funeral    of    C.    H.

Spurgeon,  483.

Brown's.  Rev.  J.  Baldwin,  "  Divine  Life  in  Man,"  247.
Bucks  Chronicle,  The,  attacks  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  170.

CAMBRIDGE,  Mayor  of,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  108.
Campbell,  Dr.,  on  the  Music  Hall  disaster,  205,  211,  213.


498  INDEX.

Canterbury,    Present   Archbishop   of,    at   funeral    of    C.    H.

Spurgeon,  482.

Cantlow,  Rev.  W.  W.,  74 — 78.
Celebrations,  Some  notable,  390—406.
Charlesworth,  Rev.  Vernon  J.,  351.
Chelmsjord   Chronicle,   The,   Letter  from   C.    H.    Spurgeon

to,  i 80.

"  Cheque  Book  of  the  Bank  of  Faith,  The,"  434.
Cholera  outbreak  in  London,  135.
Christian  News,  The,  abuses  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  194.
Christian's  Pleasures,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  lectures  on  a,  287.
Christian  Weekly  News,  The,  praises  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  184.
Chronological  Summary  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  life,  493.
Church  officers,  C.  H.  Spurgeon's,  275 — 286.
Colchester,  The  Spurgeon  family  at,  5,  29.
Colportage  Association,  The  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  365.
Consort,  Death  of  the  Prince,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  on,  300.
Crystal  Palace,  Fast  Day  Service  at  the,  232.
Culross,  Dr.,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  428.
Cutlers'  Feast,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  invited  to  the,  407.

Daily  News,  The,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  175,  215,  249,  489.
Daily  Telegraph,  The,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  214,  489.
D'Aubigne,  Dr.  Merle,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  262,  301.
Deacons  of  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  275 — 280.
De  Propaganda  Fide,  Lecture  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon  on,  287 —

290.
Distinguished  persons  in  C.    H.    Spurgeon's  congregations,

221,  226,  228,  301,  388.

"  Divine  Life  in  Man,"  the  Rev.  J.  Baldwin  Brown's,  247.
Doctrinal  Controversies,  244 — 248,  418 — 429.
Down-grade  Controversy,  The,  418 — 429,  435.
Du  Chaillu's,  M.  Paul,  Book  on  Equatorial  Africa,  290.

Earthen  Vessel,  The,  161.  164,  182.

Elders  of  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  281 — 284.

Epsom,   C.  H.   Spurgeon  preaches  in  the  Grand  Stand  at,

258.
Essex  Standard,  The,  attack  upon  C.  H.  Spurgeon  in,  168,

181.

Evangelical  Alliance,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  leaves  the.  312.
Evening  Star,  The,  Able  criticism  of  C.   H.   Spurgeon  in,

235-
Everett,  Professor,  41.

Exeter  Hall,    C.   H.    Spurgeon  preaches    in,    136.    137,   201,
269,  287.


INDEX.


499


"  FACSIMILE  Pulpit  Notes,"  464.
'•  Feathers  for  Arrows,'"'  438.

Fishmongers'    Company    sells    site    for   building    of   Metro-
politan Tabernacle,  250.

GENEVA,   C.   H.    Spurgeon  preaches  in  Calvin's  gown  and

pulpit  at,  263.

Gladstone,  Mr.,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  388,  389.
Globe,    The,   publishes    complimentary   article    on     C.     H.

Spurgeon,  178.

Gorilla,  C.  H.   Spurgeon's  lecture  on  the,  290 — 298.
li  Gospel  of  the  Kingdom,  The,"  434,  476.
Gracey,  Dr.  David,  330,  432.
Greenwich,  South  Street  Baptist  Church,  384.

"  Habitans  in  Sicco?  Letter  from,  praising  C.  H.  Spurgeon,

237-

Halifax,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  preaches  at,  222.
Hartley  Colliery  Disaster,  Sermon  on  the,  300.
Higgs,  Mr.  William,  265,  312,  347,  349.
Hillyard,  Mrs.,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  346,  349,  359.
Holland,  Queen  of,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  456.
Hood,  Rev.  Paxton,  on  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  184.
Hymns  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  464

"  ILLUSTRATIONS  and  Meditations,"  440.

Indian  Mutiny,  Fast  Day  Service  in  connection  with  the,  232.

Institutions    connected   with    the   Metropolitan    Tabernacle,

320 — 373.

"  Interpreter,  The,"  434.

Ipswich  Express,  The,  Attack  on  C.  H.  Spurgeon  in,  165.
Ireland,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  visits,  259.

"JOB,"'  Attack  of,  upon  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  161.
""John  Ploughman's  Talk,"  430,  431,  435 — 437.
Journal  des  Debats,  The,  praises  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  preach-
ing, 261.

Jubilee,  C.  H.  Spurgeon's,  400 — 406.
Jubilee  House,  The,  404.
Judges,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  dines  with  the,  407.

KING  Edward  sends  message  of  sympathy  to  Mrs.  Spurgeon,

478.

Knill,  Rev.  Richard,  v-
Knowles,  Sheridan,  on  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  132.


500  INDEX.

Lambeth  Gazette,  The,  slanders  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  174.

Layard,  Right  Hon.  A.  H.,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  292.

Lay  Preachers'  Association,  The  Cambridge,  86.

Lectures,  Notable,  287 — 299.

Leeding,  Mr.  84,  85,  92,  93.

Lewis,  Mr.,  29,  31,  33.

Literary  works  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  150,  151,  198,  199,  430 —

447,  463,  464-

Livingstone,  Dr.,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  460,  462.
Lynch,  Rev.   Thomas  Toke,   and  the  Rivulet  Controversy,.

244—247.

MADMEN,  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  encounters  with,  409 — 412.
Maidstone,   All   Saints'  College,   attended  by  C.    H.    Spur-
geon, 33.

Marriage  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  151.
Married.  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  advice  to  the  newly,  409.
Medhurst,  Mr.  Thomas  William,  becomes  C.  H.  Spurgeon's

first  student,  321.

Mentone,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at,  440,  465 — 478.
Metropolitan  Tabernacle  built  and  opened,  249 — 274.

threat  to  blow  up,  405.

growth   in  membership  of  during  C.   H.    Spurgeon's
ministry,  495.

last  sermon  delivered  by  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at,  471.

renovated,  312.

Moody,  Mr.  D.  L.,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  401.
Morning  Advertiser,  The,  upholds  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  182,  218
"  Morning  and  Evening  Daily  Readings,"  434,  437.
Muller,  George,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  on,  257,  348.
Murderer  visits  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  A,  412.

NEWMARKET,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at,  35,  38,  70 — 84.

New  Park  Street  Chapel,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  invited  to  become

pastor  of,  and  accepts,  130.
enlarged,  136.

first  visit  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  to,  116 — 126.
sold,  274.

Nick-names   of   C.    H.    Spurgeon    and   his   church    officers,
276,  406.

OLNEY,  Mr.  Thomas,  118,  196,  255,  349.

Olney,   Mr.  William,  255,   279.  »

PARIS,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  preaches  in,  259 — 261.
Parliament,  Spurgeon's  sermons  sent  to  Members  of,  449.


INDEX.  501

Passmore,  Mr.  Joseph,  126.
Pastors'  Aid  Society,  The,  372.
Pastors'  College,  The,  320 — 342.

Evangelical  Association,  342.

Missionary  Association,  342.
Patriot,  The,  praises  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  178.
Peto,   Sir  Samuel  Morton,   M.P.,  lays  foundation  -stor.e  of

Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  254.
Portsmouth,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  preaches  at,  221.
Posthumous  works  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon    444,  446.
Prayers  for  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  recovery,  473.
Printed  sermons  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  The,  198,  329,  448 — 464.

•QUEEN  Alexandra  sends  message  of  sympathy  to  Mrs.  Spur-
geon, 478.

JiABBI,  Chief,  prays  for  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  recovery,  473.
Religious   world   at   time   of   C.    H.    Spurgeon's   advent   in

London,  The,  158.
Rivulet  Controversy,  The,  244 — 247.
Roads,  The  Killing  of  old,  16- — 19.
Rogers,  Rev.  George,  324,  325,  330

Hoyal  converts  through  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  sermons,  456.
;=s=3Kuskin,  John,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  i,  241 — 244.

JRussian  Orthodox  Church  sanctions  the   reading  of   C.   H.

Spurgeon's  sermons,  456.
Ryle,  Bishop,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  444.

ST.  ANDREW  Street  Chapel,  Cambridge,  85,  86.

"  Saint  and  his  Saviour,  The,"  199.

.St.  Paul's  Cathedral,  Great  Evangelistic  services  at,  226,  234.

St.  Thomas's  Hospital,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  and,  404.

"  Salt-Cellars,  The,"  437.

Saturday  Review,  The,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  216,  249.

Scotland,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  visits,  142,  192,  193,  258.

Sermons,  C.  H.  Spurgeon's,  cabled  to  America,  454.

"Sermons  in  Candles,"  299,  441.

Sermons,  Printed,  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  198,  329,  448—464.

Services,   Memorable,  300 — 319.

Shaftesbury,  Earl  of,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  402,  417.

Sheffield  and  Eotherham  Independent,  The,  attacks  C.  H.

Spurgeon,  172.

"  Silver  Wedding,"  Pastoral,  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  391—400.
Slavery,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  and,  454.
"Smooth  Stones  taken  from  Ancient  Brooks,"  150,  151,  198,

445-


502  INDEX.

Spurgeon,  Charles  Haddon,  abuse  and  slander  of,  in  the
Press,  157 — 181,  194,  214 — ^218,  272—274,  292 — 298,
384—386.

addresses    Sunday    School    Union    gathering    in    the
Guildhall  at  Cambridge,  116.

advertises  for  pupils,  112.

aged  cook  at  Newmarket  assists  him  theologically,  39.

Agricultural  Hall,  preaches  to  vast  crowds  in,  312.

Almshouses  rebuilt  by,  368,  396.

Alps,  crosses  the,  263.

America,  declines  invitation  to  visit,  314.

American  warship,  preaches  on,  465.

ancestry,  3 — 15.

Antinomians,  dealings  with,  105.

attends  Stambourne  Meeting-house,  23,  24.

baptism,  discussion  with  a  clergyman  respecting,  37.

baptism  of,  72 — 80,  82.

"Baptismal  Regeneration,"  sermon  preached  by,  301.

Baptist  Union,  withdraws  from,  424.

baptizes  his  fiancee,  148.

beggars,  his  manner  of  treating,  406.

Benson,  Archbishop,  and,  415,  474.

Binney,  Dr.  Thomas,  on,  140.

birth  of,  5.
,     blasphemous  thoughts  suggested  to  the  mind  of,  47,  48.

book  fund,  Mrs.  Spurgeon's,  370 — 373.

Bradford,  visits,  193.

Brussels,  hears  good  sermon  by  a  priest  in  church  atr
262.

Calvinistic  belief  of,  128.

Cambridge,  at,  84.

censured  by  Baptist  Union  Council,  426.

childhood,  16 — 26.

childish  perplexities,  19,  20.

cholera  year,  experiences  during,  135.

church,  joins  the,  73.

church  officers  of  the  Tabernacle,  and,  275 — 286.

Clapham  Common,  preaches  on,  259.

College   training   suggested  for,    112.

Colportage  Association  suggested  by,  365.

comforts  woman  during  a  storm,  91.

conversion,   58 — 69.

Cottenham,  preaches  at,  108.

courtship,  145 — 151.

Crystal  Palace,  preaches  to  23,654  persons  at  the.  232.

Culross,  Dr.,  and,  428.


INDEX.


5°3


Spurgeon,   Charles  Haddon,

Cutlers'  Feast,  invited  to,  407.
death,  477.

debt,  gets  into,  for  first  and  only  time,  29.
describes  the  circumstances  of  unknown  persons  accu-
rately, 229,  457.
diary  of,  80 — 83.

discouraged  from  preaching,  in.
Divine  interpositions  in  life  of,  152,  197,  222,  317 — 319,

3.44,  346,  347,  353)  412—414.
doctrinal  controversies,   244 — 248,   418 — 429.
Epsom  Grand  Stand,  preaches  in,  258.
Exeter  Hall,  preaches  in,  136,  137,  201,  269,  287.
experience  with  a  virago,  104.
first  ministerial  student  accepted  by,  321.
first  sermon,  87 — 89.

first  visits  New  Park  Street  Chapel,  116 — 126.
funeral  of,  482 — 486.

funeral  services  for,  at  the  Tabernacle,  480 — 482.
future  greatness  foretold  by  Rev.  Richard  Knill,  31.
generosity  of,    142,  344,  390,  391,  396,  397,  398,  400,

404.

Geneva,  preaches  in  Calvin's  gown  and  pulpit  at,  263.
Germany,  visits,  262.
"  ghost,''  adventure  with  a,  91.
Gladstone,  Mr.,  and,  388,  389.
Hackney,  preaches  in  a  field  at,  140.
Halifax,  preaches  at,  222.
Homes  of,    152,  241,  312,  412 — 415.
humility  of,   133,   178.
hunting  experiences  of,  24.
hymn-writer,  as,  464.

illnesses,  279.  375—379,  392,  427,  465— 477-
Ireland,  visits,  259.
Jubilee  of,  400 — 406.
judges,  dines  with  the,  407.
Knowles',  Sheridan,  opinion  of,  132.
last  sermon  at  the  Tabernacle,  471.
lectures,  notable,  by,  287 — 299.
literary  efforts  as  a  boy,  27.
literary  works  of,    150,    151,    198,    199,  430 — 447,  463..

464.

Livingstone,  Dr.,  and,  461,  462.
London,  first  night  in,  122.
London,  settlement  in,  127 — 135.
madmen,  encounters  with,  409 — 412.


504  INDEX.

Spurgeon,   Charles  Haddon,

Maidstone,  attends  school  at,  26,  ^,  36.
Marriage  of,  151.

meditations,  season  of,  as  a  child,  26.
Mentone,  at,  440,  465 — 478.
Metropolitan  Tabernacle  begun,  250.

opened,  269.

first  sermon  in,  270.
monument  to,  486.
murderer,  visited  by  a,  412.
Newmarket,  life  at,  35,  38,  70 — 84.
organ-grinder  aided  by,  466.
Paris,  preaches  in,  259 — 261.
Pastors'  College,  The,  325 — 342.
political  views  of,  386 — 388.

popularity  of,   136 — 144,  235 — 241,   298,  407 — 408.
Portsmouth,  preaches  at,  221.
practical  joking  by,  as  a  boy,  25.
praise  in  the  Press,  178,  180,  182 — 190,  235 — 241.
preaches  in  the  villages  round  Cambridge,  90 — 92,  108.
preaches  to  brothers  and  sisters,  as  a  child,  27.
printed  sermons,  198,  329,  448 — 464.
private  services  at  Mentone  conducted  by,  466.
Puritan  writers,  studied  by,  22,  440.
reads  much  as  a  child,  20 — 22.
recreation  of,  the  game  of  bowls,  a,  314.
religious  impressions  of,  early,  36 — 57.
reproves  a  backslider  when  a  child,  16 — 19.
.j^-^Ruskin's  intercourse  with,  i,  241 — 244.
Ryle,  Bishop,  and,  444.

St.  Andrew  Street  Chapel,  Cambridge,  joins,  85,  86.
sceptic,  becomes  a,  49.
scholarship  of,  2,  487,  489.
schools  attended  by,  26,  27 — 35.
Scotland,  visits,   142,   192,   193,  258.
sermons,  memorable,  300 — -319.
services  away  from  London,    142,   191—200,  258,  259,

262.

Shaftesbury,  Earl  of,  and,  402,  417.
"  silver  wedding,"  pastoral,  celebrated,  391 — 400.
smoking,  views  on,  489 — 491.
sons,  Thomas  and  Charles,  155,  381 — 384.
soul  agony  of,  41 — 57.

Stambourne,  visits  to,  5,  16 — 26,  31,  84,  196.
'-Stanley,  Dean,  and,  408.
Stockton,  visits,  193.


INDEX.


5°5


-Spurgeon,   Charles  H addon,

Stockwell  Orphanage,  343 — 364.

students  of  Pastors'  College  and,  336 — 340.

Sunday-school,  works  in  the,  70,  83,  87.

Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall  disaster,  201 — 223.
services  at,  224 — 234.

tact  of,  134,  230,  409—412.

thinker,  as  a,  488.

Thorold,  Bishop,  and,  416.

tracts,  distributes,  72.

Tring,  preaches  at,  196.

Trowbridge,  visits,   195.

twenty-first  year  of  pastorate  celebrated,  390.

usher,  becomes  an,  38.

village  ministry  round  Cambridge,  90,  92,  108.

Wales,  preaches  in,  195,  259.

Waterbeach,  first  visit  to,  94.
.  Waterbeach,  pastorate  at,  94 — 120.

Welldon,  Bishop,  and,  416.

would-be  students  and,  332 — 335.
Spurgeon,  Dr.  James,  30,  286,  330,  475,  482.
Spurgeon,  Mrs.  C.  H.,  145—156,  315—319,  370— 373.  475.  48o.
Spurgeon,  Mrs.  John,  6.

Spurgeon,  Pastor  Charles,  155,  381 — 384,  402.
Spurgeon,  Pastor  Thomas,  155,  381 — 383,  404.
Spurgeon,  Rev.  James,  6—15,  24,  196.
Spurgeon,  Rev.  John,  5,  6,  402.
Spurgeon  Memorial  Sermon  Society,  The,  463.
Stambourne  Meeting  House,  7,  23,  24,  26.
Stanley,  Dean,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  408.
Stockton,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  visits,  193.
Stockwell  Orphanage,  The,  343 — 364.
Surrey  Gardens  Memorial  Hall  opened,  472.
Surrey  Gardens  Music  Hall  disaster,  201 — 223.

services  at,  224 — 234.
Sutton,  Mr.,  108.
.Sword  and  the  Trowel,  The,  History  of.  445.

TEACHER,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  revives  office  of,  285.
Teversham,  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  first  sermon  at,  87 — 89.
Thorold,  Bishop,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  415.
Times,  Letter  in  the,  praising  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  237.
Transvaal.  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  sermons  in  the,  454.
"  Treasury  of  David,  The,"  430,  432,  433.
Tring,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  preaches  at,  196.
Trowbridge,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  at,  195.


506  INDEX.

WALES,  C.  H.  Spurgeon  preaches  in,  195.  259.
Waterbeach,  94 — 120,  130.
Welldon,  Bishop,  and  C.  H.  Spurgeon,  416.
Wells,  Rev.  James,  161,  165,  186.

Western  Times,  The,  foretells  the  greatness  of  C.  H.  Spur-
geon, 184.

Westminster  Abbey,  Great  evangelistic  services  at,  226.  234.
"Westwood,"  C.  H.  Spurgeon's  home  at  Norwood.  412 — 415,


FROM  SUNDAY  TO  SUNDAY.

BY

The  Rt  Rev.  HANDLEY  C.  G    MOULE,

BISHOP  OF  DURHAM.
Crown  8vo,  5s.

This  volume  is  on  the  lines  of  the  Bishop  of  Durham's
last  book,  "  Thoughts  for  every  Sunday  in  the  year,"  of
which  sixteen  thousand  copies  were  sold  in  a  few  months.
It  is  the  first  work  published  by  Dr.  Moule  during  the  time
that  he  has  filled  the  See  of  Durham.  "  From  Sunday  to
Sunday  "  is  a  series  of  devotional  readings,  in  which  the
Bishop's  wide  learning  and  evangelical  teaching  are
happily  combined.


THE   SIMPLE    LIFE.

BY

CHARLES   WAGNER.

Translated  by  MARY  LOUISA  HENDEE,  with  an  introduction
and  Biographical  Note  by  GRACE  KING.

Crown  8vo,  3s.  6d.

In  this  book  the  author  pleads  for  simplicity  of  thought,
speech,  duty,  needs,  pleasure  and  beauty.  It  has  had  the
unique  distinction  of  having  been  publicly  mentioned  by
President  Roosevelt  and  highly  commended  by  him.  In
New  England  the  President  said :  "  The  other  day  I
picked  up  a  book  called  '  The  Simple  Life,'  written  by  an
Alsatian,  Charles  Wagner,  and  he  preached  such  whole-
some, sound  doctrine  that  I  wish  it  could  be  used  as  a
tract  throughout  our  country."


ISBISTER  &  CO.,  LIMITED.
15  &  1 6,  TAVISTOCK  ST.,  COVENT  GARDEN,  LONDON,  W.C.


HELP    FOR    THE    TEMPTED.

BY

Professor  AMOS   R.  WELLS.

With  an  Introduction  by  the  Rev.  F.  B.  MEYER,  B.A.
Cloth,  fcap.  8vo,  gilt  top,  gilt  letters,  2s.  6d.

"  We  know  of  no  book  more  likely  to  help  the  young
believer  in  the  struggle  against  the  evils  of  the  world  from
without  or  from  within." — Baptist.

"  A  perfect  storehouse  of  thought,  and  the  sympathetic
treatment  of  these  short  graphic  sentences,  bearing  upon
the  various  sources  of  help  under  trial,  add  much  to  the
scholarly  instruction  given  throughout." — Church  Bells.

"  It  is  not  every  day  that  one  comes  across  such  a  striking
little  book  as  Mr.  Amos  Wells' '  Help  for  the  Tempted.' .  .  .
There  is  thought  in  the  book ;  there  is  deep  experience  of
human  nature ;  there  is  genuine  faith ;  there  is  human
sympathy  of  a  bracing  kind;  there  is  a  faculty  of  expressing
these  qualities  in  terse,  epigrammatic  sentences  which  bite
into  the  memory." — Sunday  School  Chronicle.


ISBISTER  &  CO.,  LIMITED,
15  &  16,  TAVISTOCK  ST.,  COVENT  GARDEN,  LONDON,  W.C.


C  H.  SpuRGEON's  WORKS.

C.  H  Spurgeon's  Sermons.

THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE  PULPIT.

PUBLISHED     EVERY    THURSDAY.  PRICE    ONE     PENNY.

Each  Number  contains  a  New  Sermon  and  Exposition  by  the  late  C.  H.  Spurgeon,

Also  may  be  had  in  Monthly  Parts,  price  5d     Yearly  Vols.,  bound  in

Cloth,   7s.  each.     Vols.   1  to  49  always  In  Stock.

THE  Publishers  are  glad  to  be  able  to  announce  that  they  have  in  hand
several  hundred  Manuscripts  which  have  never  been  published,
and  they  are  therefore  enabled  to  continue  the  weekly  issue  of  sermons  for
many  years  to  come.  They  are  also  able  to  publish  each  week  with  the
Sermon,  the  Exposition,  which  will  doubtless  be  welcomed  by  many,  and
whereby  the  value  of  the  Sermons  is  enhanced.  Thus,  though  the  voice  of  the
beloved  preacher  is  silent,  in  a  very  real  manner  "he,  being  dead, , 'yet
speaketh."

The  Weekly  Sermons  will  be  sent  Post  Free  for  Six  Months  for  3s.  3d. ;
for  Twelve  Months,  6s.  6d.


COMMENTARY    ON  THE  BOOK  OF

PSALMS.
treasury  of  Dauid.

Containing  an  Original  Exposition  of  the  Book  of  Psalms  ;  a  Col  lection  £of
Illustrative  Extracts  from  the  whole  range  of  Literature  ;  a  Series  '.of
Homiletical  Hints  upon  almost  every  verse ;  and  a  list  of  Writers  upon
each  Psalm.  Complete  in  7  Volumes,  price  8s.  per  volume.  May  also
be  had  in  Calf  and  Half-Calf  bindings.
"  No  man,  whatever  his  theological  predilections  may  be,  who  has  a  spark

of  justice  in  him  will  hesitate  to  pronounce  the  work  of  great  merit,  revealing

an  intellect  of  remarkable  vivacity  and  vigour,  and  a  soul  aflame  with  religious

earnestness." — Homilist.


A    POPUUR   EXPOSITION    OF   THE  GOSPEL
ACCORDING  TO  ST.  MATTHEW.

Cbc  eospci  or  tDc  Kingdom.   Price  6s  ^'S31' I06

£CCtUrCS  tO  HIP  StUdCntS-    In  Three  Volumes,  Cloth,2s.6d.each.

CONTENTS  :— The  Call  to  the  Ministrv— Sermons,  their  Matter— On  the  Choice
of  a  Text— On  Spiritualizing— On  the  Voice— Attention— On  the  Faculty
of  Impromptu  Speaking — The  Minister's  Fainting  Fits— The  Minister's
Ordinary  Conversation— To  Workers  with  Slender  Apparatus— Open-
Air  Preaching  :  A  Sketch  of  its  History— Open-Air  Preaching  :  Remarks
thereon— Posture,  Attitude,  Gesture— Illustrations  in  Preaching  ;  Anec-
dotes from  the  Pulpit  ;  The  Uses  of  Anecdotes  and  Illustrations  ;  Where
can  we  find  Anecdotes  and  Illustrations?;  Cyclopaedias  of  Anecdotes
and  Illustrations ;  Books  of  Fables,  Emblems  and  Parables  ;  The
Sciences  as  Sources  of  Illustration — Astronomy.

Illustrated  Catalogues  and  Textual  List  of  over  2,800  Sermons,  Post
Free  on  Application.


PASSMORE  &  ALABASTER,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,  E.G.


SERMON  OUTLINES.

TOP  SCriHOn  ROtCS,      %  C.  H.  SPURGEON.

CONTAINING    264   SKELETON    SERMONS.

Each  Outline  Illustrated  by  numerous  Anecdotes,  Extracts,  &c.

Complete  in  Two  Volumes,  55.  each.     Four  Parts,  2S.  6d.  each.     A  complete

Index  of  Subjects  and  Texts  in  each  Volume.


Our  tord's  Parables.

By  C.  H.  SPURGEON.  Containing  65  Sermons  delivered  in  the  New  Park  Street
Chapel  and  the  Metropolitan  Tabernacle,  Newington.     Cloth  Gilt,  73.

Our  lord's  miracles,

Containing  107  Sermons.     Two  Vols.,  Cloth  Gilt,  78.  each.

<brist  in  tbe  Old  testament.

60  Sermons  on  the  Foreshadowings  of  our  Lord  in  Old  Testament  History.
Ceremony  and  Prophecy.     By  C.   H.  SPURGEON.     Cloth,  73.

Cbe  messiab.

Our  Lord's  Names,  Titles  and  Attributes.     60  Sermons  by  C.  H.  SPURGEON.
Cloth  Gilt,  73.

Cbe  most  fiolp  Place.

52  Sermons  on  the  Song  of  Solomon.      By  C.  H.  SPURGEON     Cloth  Gilt,  78.

6ospei  for  tbe  People.


60  Short  Sermons,  with  a  Sketch  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  Life,  and  Fourteen
Portraits  and  Engravings,  with  Preface  by  Pastor  THOMAS  SPURGEON.
Cloth  Gilt,  58.


simile  Pulpit  notes*

With  Sermons  preached  from  them.  Cloth  extra,  23.  6d.  This  volume  con-
tains 12  fac-simile  reproductions  of  Mr.  Spurgeon's  vvritten  notes  used
by  him  when  preaching,  with  two  portraits  and  view  of  interior  of
Tabernacle  with  congregation.


3s    6d    Vols.  of

C  H.  SPURGEON'S  SERMONS.

"4Cill  Re  Come."

Communion  Meditations  and  Addresses.     Cloth  Gilt,  33.  6d.

Ceacbinas  or  nature  in  tbe  Kingdom  or  Grace.

Unifonn  with  "Till  He  Come."    Cloth  Gilt,  3s.  6d.

fl  6ood  Start.

A  Book  for  Young  Men  and  Women.    By  C.  H.  SPURGEON.    Cloth  Gilt,  33.  6d.

Pictures  rrom  Pilgrim's  Progress.

Drawn  by  C    H.  SPURGEON.     Cloth  Gilt,  33.  6d.

PASSMORE  &  ALABASTER,  PATERXOSTTR  BUILDINGS.  F.C.


38.  6d.  VOLUMES  of  C.  H.  Spurgeon  s  Sermons— continued.

Cbe  soui=Winner;

Or,  How  to  Lead  Sinners  to  the  Saviour.   Cloth  Gilt.  33. 6d.

farm  Sermons.  Discourses  on  Kir m ma.

Illustrated.    Cloth  Gilt,  35.  6d.

"These  sermons  are  as  fresh  and  fragrant  as  the  newly-ploughed  soil,
or  the  new-mown  hay,  and  ought  to  be  perused  with  pleasure  and  profit  by
many  who  know  little  or  nothing  of  agricultural  pursuits." — The  Chiistian.

44  Onlp  a  praper=meetina ! "    Forty  Addresses  at  the

Metropolitan    Tabernacle    and    other    Prayer  -  meetings.
Cloth  Gilt,  33.  6d.

fln  flll  round  ministry.

Addresses  to  Ministers  and  Students.    Cloth  Gilt,  33.  6d.

Cbe  Present  Crutb.    cioth  cut,  3S.  e±

Cbe  eceriastina  Gospel  of  tbe  Oia  ana  neu>

testaments,   cioth,  3S.  6d.
Storm  Signals,   cioth  cm,  3S.  6d.

"  Discourses  which  come  upon  the  soul  as  the  trumpet  blast  of  judgment,
but  alwavs  end  with  salvation.  .  .  .  These  are  some  of  the  most  useful
sermons  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  ever  preached." — Christian  Age.

Crumpet  Calls  to  Christian  €nergp.

Cloth  Gi't.  33.  6d.

...  "  The  aim  in  each  of  these  addresses  is  the  simple  one  of  rousing
Christian  men  and  women  to  renewed  activity  for  God.  .  .  .  Believing  them  to
be  eminently  calculated  to  do  good,  we  wish  them  a  wide  circulation." — Rock.

Cppes  ana  emblems.    Price  3S.


TWELVE    SERMONS"    SERIES.


Each  Vol.  containing  12  Sermons.     CU
Christmas  Sermons.
New  Year's  Sermons.
Sermons  on  the  .Second  Coming  of

Cnrist.

Sermons  on  Temptation.
Sermons  on  the  Passion  and  Death
of  Christ.  [the  Cross.

Sermons  on  our  Lord's  Cries  from
Sermons  on  the  Atonement.
Sermons  on  the  Resurrection.
Sermons  on  the  Holy  Spirit.
Sermons  on  the  Prodigal  Son,  Ac.
Sermons  on  Repentance
Sermons  on  the  Love  of  Christ.
Sermons  on  the  Gospel  for  Sinners.
Sermons  on  Conversion.
Popular  Sermons.
Sermons  on  Prayer.
Sermons  on  the  "Plan  of  Salvation.
Sermons  on  Various  Subjects.
Sermons  on  Vital  Questions.
Sermons  for  the  Troubled  and  Tried.
Sermons  to  Seekers.
Soul-winning  Sermons.
Striking  Sermons.
Missionary  Sermons.
Sennons  on  the  Word  of  God.


ih,  is.  each.     P.>«t  free,  is.  ad.  each.

Sermons  on  Kaith.

Sermons  on  Unbelief.

-Sermons  on  Praise.

Sermons  on  Thanksgiving.

Sermons  on  Forgiveness.

Sermons  on  Death.

Sermons  on  Heaven.

Sermons  on  Backsliding.

Sermons  on  the  Christian  Warfare.

Sermons  on  Hope.

Sermons  on  Holiness.

Sermons  on  Joy.

•Sermons  on  Peace.

Sermons  with  Strange  Titles.

Revival  Sermons.

Sermons  for  Christian  Workers.

Memorable   Sermons    Preached  on

Remarkable  Occasions.
Sermons  to  Young  Men.
Sermons  on  Grace  Abounding.
Sermons  on  Obedience.
Sermons  on  Sanctification.
Sermons  on  Decision.
Sermons  on  Humility.
Sermons  on  Precious  Promises.
Sermons  on  Doctrines  of  Grace.
Sermons  on  Ritualism.


PASSMORE  &  ALABASTER,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,  E  C.


C.    H.    SPURGEON'S    BOOKS   OF

Extracts  and    Illustrations.

"6ood  Cidinas  of  6rcat  3op";

Christ's  Incarnation  the  Foundation  of  Christianity.     "  Central
Truth  Series."    Vol.  1.     Cloth  Boards,  is.  6d.
The  Christian  says:    "The  chapters  are  short,  the  number
nearly  forty.     The  book  is  a  feast  of  good  things."

Or    JlrrOWS;    or,    Illustrations    for    Preachers
and  Teachers,  from  my  Note  Book.    Cloth,  2s.  6d.

JlrrOWS,  from  the  Quiver  of  C.  H.  SPURGEON.  A
Collection  of  Anecdotes,  Illustrations  and  Similes.  A  com-
panion volume  to  "  Feathers  for  Arrows."  Cloth  2s.  6d.

Illustrations  and  meditations;

or,  Flowers  from  a  Puritan's    Garden.    Distilled  and  Dispensed
by  C.  H.  SPURGEON.    Cloth,  23.  6d.

?la$he$  Of  CDOUaht ;     being    One    Thousand     Choice

Extracts  from  the  works  of  C.  H.  SPURGEON.    Alphabetically
arranged,  and  with  a  copious  Index.     Price  53.

SPUr aCOn'S  6em$  ;  being  Brilliant  Passages  Selected  from
the  Discourses  of  C.  H.  SPURGEON.     Large  Type,  33.  6d.

Che  Salt  Cellars ;

being  a  Collection   of  Proverbs,  together  with    Homely  Notes
thereon.     In  2  Vols.     Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  33.  6d.  each.

Gleaninas  amona  the  Sheaces*  cioth,  is
C.  E.  Spuraeon  Anecdotes,  cioth  cut,  is
6ospel  extracts  from  C.  fi.  Spuraeon.  cioth,  IS

SCrmOnS   in   CanClkS*    Illustrations  which  may  be  found  in
Common  Candles.     Stiff  Covers,  is.     Cloth,  Gilt  Edges,  2s.

Words  of  Counsel  for  Christian  Workers.

44  We  endeavour/*  cioth,  2S.  [cioth  out,  2S.

"COme,   Pe  Children/*    A  Book  for  Parents  and  Teachers
on  the  Christian  Training  of  Children.     Cloth  Gilt,  2s.

Words  of  flduice  for  Seekers,  cioth  cut,  2S
Words  of  Wisdom  for  pailp  £ife,  cioth  cm,  2S
words  of  Cheer  for  flaiiv  £ife.  cioth  GIU,  2S
Words  of  Warning  for  Dai  IP  £ife,  cioth  out,  2S

Illustrated  Catalogue  and  Textual  List  of  over  2,800  Sermons,
Post  Free  on  application.


PASSMORE  &  ALABASTER,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS,  E.C,


University  of  California

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388

Return  this  material  to  the  library

from  which  it  was  borrowed.


0  f  1995
DUE  2  WKS  FROM  DATE  RECEIVED


3  1158  012


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRAR


A     000  227  42
