f^isnrnifoi 


MAY  2  5  1903      * 


\m^ 


Division      "TS^ cr  /IQ 

san 


IHVALUABLR  IN  THE  STUDY, 

The  Biblical  Illustrator; 

OK 

Anecdotes,  Similes,  Emblems,  and  Illustrations,  Expository,  Scientific, 
Geographical,  Historical  and  Homiletic. 

Gathered  from  a  wide  range  ot  Home  and  Foreign  Llterattite^ 
on  the  verses  of  the  Bible^  by  the 

Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 


Royal  OctaTO,  Clatb,  each  about  650  pages,  per  Volume.  $2.00. 


"No  matter  how  full  his  library  may  be,  nor  how  empty  his 
pocket-book,  the  minister  who  sges  this  work  will  want  it." — Oba«rv9r. 

"It  promises  to  be  the  most  useful  cyclopedia  for  ministers  is- 
sued as  yet." — Christian. 

"Every  volume  is  profusely  treated  and  explained  verse  by  ver««, 
with  apposite,  varied  and  suggestive  extracts  from  a  vast  number 
of  ancient  and  modern  authors.  The  meaning  of  v/ords,  the  lessons 
deducible  from  the  text,  the  doctrine  it  teaches,  the  duty  it  enjoins, 
pithy  remarks  of  commentators  and  other  writers  upon  it,  and  an- 
ecdotes with  which  to  enforce  its  teachings  follow  each  verse.  .  . 
The  author  has  put  the  condensed  substance  of  many  commentaries 
in  one,  giving  the  results  reached  by  many  learned  experts." — Meth- 
oditt  Review. 

"There  is  little  or  no  exposition,  properly  so  called,  but  an  abun- 
dant citation  of  the  opinions  of  men  called  forth  by  the  inspired 
writers.    In  this  respect  the  book  is  unique." — Christian  Intelligeneer. 

OLD  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 


Genesis,  Vol.  1. 

Joshua,  Judoes  and  Ruth. 

Genesis,  Vol.  2. 

I.  and  II.  Chronicles,  Ezra,  N 

Exodus. 

hemiah  and  Esther. 

Leviticus  and  Numbers. 

Proverbs. 

Deuteronomy. 

The  Psalms.    Vol.  1:  1-xxvL 

NEW  TESTAMENT  VOLUMES: 

St.  Matthew. 

Philippians  and  Colossians. 

St.  Mark. 

Thessalonians. 

St.  Luke,  Vol. 

1. 

First  Timothy. 

St.  Luke,  Vol. 

2. 

Second  Timothy,  Titus,  and 

St.  Luke,   Vol. 

3. 

Philemon. 

St.  John,    Vol. 

1. 

Hebrews,  Vol.  1. 

St.  John,    Vol. 

2. 

Hebrews,  Vol.  2. 

St.  John,    Vol. 

3. 

James. 

Acts,  Vol.  "L 

First  Corinthians,  Voc.  1. 

Acts,  Vol.  2. 

First  Corinthians,  Vol.  2. 

Acts,  Vol.  3. 

Second  Corinthians. 

Romans,  Vol.  1. 

First  and  Second  Pbtbr. 

Romans,  Vol.  2. 

First,  Second  and  Third  Jokn 

Qalatians. 

AND    JUDK. 

Bphj)sla.ns. 

Revelation. 

Index  Volume  to  Entire  New  Testament.  $5.00. 

Bend  for  our  eiroular  gMng  special  offert. 

Fleming  H,  RevcII  G)mpany> 

MlwYoNRi  CHicAao:  Toronto i 

t}8  FirTK  AvBNiTB.      6s  Washington  Street.      17  Richmond  St.  W. 


THE 


Biblical  Illustrator 


OR 

Anecdotes,  Simfles,  Emblems,  Illustrations; 
Expository,  Scientific,  Geographical,  His- 
torical, and  Homiletic,  Gathered  from 
a  Wide  Range  of  Home  and  Foreign 
Literature,    on  the   Verses   of  the    Bible 


BY.     ' 
Rev.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M,A. 


HEBREWS,  Vol.  I 


^ 


New  York  Chicago  Toronto 

Fleming   H.  Revell   Company 

London    and     Edinburgh 


INTEODTJCnON  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 

AxTTHOBSHip  or  iHB  BpisTiiB. — lo  Bpito  of  the  antiqaity  and  aathority  of  the 
Epistle,  no  writer  of  the  Western  Ohnroh  in  the  first,  second,  or  third  century 
qaotes  it  as  St.  Paol's;  the  first  Latin  writer  who  attributes  it  to  St.  Paul  ia 
Hilary,  late  in  the  fourth  century;  and  in  the  fifth  century  both  Jerome  and 
Augustin,  though  loosely  quoting  it  as  St.  Paul's,  had  serious  misgivings  about  its 
direct  genuineness.  In  the  Eastern  Ghuroh,  Pantsnus  and  Olement  of  Alexandria 
seem  to  have  set  the  fashion  of  accepting  the  Pauline  authorship ;  but  on  this 
subject  even  Origen  felt  grave  doubts.  Eusebius  wavered  about  it,  and  admitted 
that  the  Epistle  was  counted  spurious  by  many,  but  thought  it  might  perhaps  be 
a  translation  from  an  Aramaic  original.  Even  in  the  Eastern  Church  it  did  not 
meet  with  unhesitating  acceptance  as  a  work  of  St.  Paul.  A  Jewish  rule,  which 
has  found  unconscious  acceptance  in  all  ages,  says  that  "Custom  is  Law."  But  if 
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  owes  its  recognition  among  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  far 
more  to  an  unthinking  custom  than  to  careful  argument,  how  is  it  that  such  a 
custom  arose  ?  The  answer  is  simple.  It  arose  mainly  in  the  Eastern  Church 
from  the  initiative  of  Pantsenus,  and  it  was  only  accepted  in  the  Western  Church, 
after  considerable  hesitation,  by  the  force  of  example.  In  both  Churches  it  origi- 
nated, not  from  trustworthy  tradition,  but  from  the  superficial  acceptance  of  prima 
facie  phenomena.  The  general  theology  of  the  Epistle  was  Pauline,  and  the  finer 
differences  escaped  notice.  Many  characteristic  phrases  coincided  with  those  in 
St.  Paul's  Epistles,  and  were  current  in  his  school  of  thought.  The  allusions  at 
the  close  of  the  Epistle  led  to  the  careless  assumption  that  they  were  penned  by 
St.  Paul.  The  observation  of  similarities  is  easy  to  any  one;  the  detection  of 
differences,  which,  however  deep,  are  yet  to  some  extent  latent,  is  only  perceptible 
to  students  who  do  not  rely  upon  authority  and  tradition  except  so  far  as  they  are 
elements  in  the  sacred  search  for  truth.  Nothing  can  more  decisively  prove  the 
incompetence  of  a  mechanical  consensus  than  the  fact  that  millions  of  readers  have 
failed  to  perceive,  even  in  the  original,  the  dissimilarity  of  style,  of  method,  and 
of  theologic  thought,  which  proves  that  the  same  pen  could  not  have  written,  nor 
the  same  mind  have  originated,  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  and  the  Epistles  of  St. 
Paul.  Luther  showed  his  usual  insight  and  robust  sense  when  he  saw  that  Heb. 
ii.  3  could  not  have  been  written  by  the  author  of  GaL  i.  1,  12.  Again,  though  the 
author  does  not  fall  into  any  demonstrable  error  in  his  allusion  to  the  details  of 
Temple  worship  in  chaps,  vii.  27,  ix.  S,  4,  x.  11,  yet  he  goes  to  the  verge  of  apparent 
inaccuracies,  against  which  St.  Paul,  who  was  familiar  with  the  Temple  service, 
would  surely  have  guarded  himself.  In  reading  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  we 
are  In  contact  with  the  mind  of  a  great  and  original  writer  of  the  Apostolic  age, 
whose  name  escaped  discovery  till  modem  times.  It  is  hardly  worth  while  to 
quote  later  authorities.  They  can  have  no  effect  but  to  impose  upon  the  ignorant. 
They  simply  float  with  the  stream.  They  are  uncritical,  and  therefore  valueless. 
When  such  writers  as  Clement  of  Alexandria  and  Origen  in  the  Eastern  Church, 
and  Jerome  and  Augustin  in  the  Western,  had  made  timid  concessions  to  the 


▼i  INTRODUCTION  TO  TEE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 

castom  of  popularly  qaoting  the  Epistle  as  St.  Paul's,  it  was  natural  that  later 
vnriters  should  follow  their  example.  Gradually,  by  the  aid  of  conoiliar  decrees, 
prevalent  assumption  hardened  into  ecclesiastical  conviction.  The  result  of  the 
evidence  may  be  summed  up  by  sayiug  that,  as  far  as  the  evidence  of  antiquity  is 
ooneemed,  looBe  conjecture  tended  in  one  direction  and  genuine  criticism  in  the 
other.  .  .  .  But  among  thoughtful  writers  who  really  tamed  their  attention  to  the 
matter,  the  old  doubts  on  the  subject  were  by  no  means  extinguished.  In  the 
Western  Church  the  Epistle  was  not  publicly  read  to  the  same  extent  or  on  the 
same  footing  as  the  others,  even  at  the  close  of  the  fourth  century.  The  assertion 
that  it  was  written  by  St.  Paul  was  sometimes  accompanied  with  modifications,  in 
the  fifth  century.  It  had  never  been  commented  on  by  any  Latin  writer  as  late  as 
the  sixth.  In  the  seventh,  Isidore  of  Seville  records  that  many  still  attributed  it, 
at  least  in  part,  to  Barnabas  or  Clement  "  because  of  the  discrepancy  of  style." 
Even  in  the  ninth  it  is  entirely  omitted  by  the  Codex  Boemerianus,  and  only 
appears  in  a  Latin  translation  in  the  celebrated  F,  the  Codex  Augiensis.  But  long 
before  the  ninth  century,  and  for  centuries  afterwards,  the  science  of  criticism  was 
forgotten.  St.  Thomas  of  Aquinum,  in  the  thirteenth  century,  repeats  the  old 
objections  in  order  to  refute  them  by  the  old  arguments;  but  all  doubt  on  the 
subject  was  lulled  to  sleep  by  the  spell  of  ecclesiastical  infallibility.  Then  came 
the  reviving  dawn  of  the  sixteenth  century,  when  "  Greece  rose  from  the  dead  with 
the  New  Testament  in  her  hand."  Erasmus,  while  confessing  his  willingness  to 
accept  any  definition  of  the  Church  on  the  subject,  yet  quotes  some  of  the  Fathers 
to  show  the  absurdity  of  the  pseudo-orthodoxy  which  condemned  a  man  as 
"  plusquam  heretical  "  if  he  doubted  about  the  authorship  of  this  Epistle.  His 
own  opinion  was  that  St.  Paul  did  not  write  it.  Luther  calls  attention  to  its  style, 
and  quotes  various  passages  to  show  that  it  could  not  have  been  written  by  St.  Paul 
or  by  any  apostle.  While  speaking  of  it  with  admiration  as  "  strong,  mighty,  and 
lofty  Epistle,"  he  considers  that  its  Scriptural  method  indicates  the  authorship  of 
Apollos,  and  says  that  at  any  rate  it  is  the  work  of  "  an  excellent  apostolic  man." 
Calvin,  again — while,  like  some  of  the  Fathers,  he  popularly  quotes  it  as  "  the 
Apostle's  " — says  that  he  cannot  be  induced  to  recognise  it  as  St.  Paul's  because  it 
differs  from  him  in  its  style  and  method  of  teaching,  and  because  the  writer  speaks 
of  himself  as  a  pupil  of  the  apostles,  a  thing  very  alien  from  St.  Paul's  custom. 
Melancthon  never  quotes  it  as  St.  Paul's.  The  Magdeburg  Centuriators  denied 
that  it  was  his.  Grotius  and  Limborch  and  Le  Clero  supposed  it  to  have  been 
written  by  St.  Luke,  Apollos,  or  some  companion  of  St.  Paul.  Then  for  a  time  the 
tyranny  of  indolent  custom  began  once  more  to  reassert  itselt  During  the  seven- 
teenth  century,  and  long  afterwards,  especially  in  England,  no  one,  without 
incurring  dislike  or  suspicion,  could  hint,  even  apologetically,  at  any  doubt  as  to 
whether  the  translators  of  the  English  Bible  were  in  the  right  when  they  headed 
the  Epistle,  "The  Epistle  of  Paul  the  Apostle  to  the  Hebrews."  But  since  the 
time  of  Semler  (1763)  many  eminent  writers  have  practically  set  the  question  at 
rest  by  furnishing  the  results  of  that  close  examination  which  prove,  not  only  that 
St.  Paul  was  not  the  actual  writer — a  fact  which  had  been  patent  even  in  the  days 
of  Origen — but  that  it  is  not  even  indirectly  due  to  his  authorship.  The  phraseology 
has  been  passed  through  a  fresh  mint,  and  the  thoughts  have  been  subjected  to  the 
crucible  of  another  individuality.  It  will,  therefore,  serve  no  purpose  to  heap  up 
words  and  phrases  which  are  common  to  the  author  and  to  St.  Paul.  Many, 
indeed,  of  those  which  have  been  adduced  belong  to  the  current  coin  of  Christian 
theology.  Those  that  are  distinctively  Pauline  only  prove  a  point  which  every  one 
is  ready  to  concede,  that  the  writer  had  adopted  much  of  the  apostle's  teaching, 
and  had  been  deeply  influenced  by  his  companionship.  It  is  this  very  fact  which 
throws  into  relief  the  positive  dissimilarities.  Again,  it  is  vain  to  talk  about 
difterence  of  subject  or  difference  of  aim  as  furnishing  any  explanation  of  these 
dissimilarities.  We  have  writings  of  St.  Paul  on  all  kinds  of  topics,  and  at  all 
ages  of  his  mature  life  ;  and  though  the  style  of  a  writer  may  vary  in  different 
moods,  as  the  style  of  St.  Paul  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  differs  from  that  in 
the  Pastoral  Epistles,  yet  every  style  retains  a  certain  stamp  of  individuality.  Now, 
the  differences  between  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  and  the  Epistles  of  St.  Paul  are 
differences  which  go  down  to  the  root  of  the  being.  That  the  same  pen  should 
have  been  engaged  on  both  is  a  psychological  impossibility.  The  Greek  is  far 
better  than  the  Greek  of  St.  Paal.  St.  Paul  is  often  stately  and  often  rhetorical, 
and  sometimes  writes  more  in  the  style  of  a  treatise  than  of  a  letter ;  bat  the 
Btateliness  and  rhetoric  and  systematic  treatment  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  in 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.         ▼« 

no  yr&y  resemble  his.    The  form  and  rhythm  of  its  Bentences  are  wholly  different. 
Paul  is  often  impassioned  and  often  argumentative,  and  so  is  the  author  of  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews ;  but  the  passion  and  the  dialectics  of  the  latter  famish 
the  most  striking  contrast  to  those  of  the  former.     The  writer  cites  differently 
from  St.  Paul ;  he  writes  differently ;  he  argues  differently ;  he  thinks  differently ; 
he  declaims  differently ;  he  constructs  and  connects  his  sentences  differently ;  he 
builds  up  his  paragraphs  on  a  wholly  different  model.     His  style  is  the  style  of  a 
man  of  genius  who  thinks  as  well  as  writes  in  Greek :  whereas  St.  Paul  wrote 
in  Greek,  and  thought  in  Syriac.    The  notion  that  the  Epistle  is  a  translation  may 
be  set  aside.    A  translation  may  be  very  able,  but  it  can  never  bear  upon  its 
surface  such  marks  of  originaUty  as  we  find  in  this  Epistle.    Its  eloquence  belongs 
to  the  language  in  which  it  is  composed.     The  movement  of  this  author  is  that  of 
an  Oriental  sheikh  with  his  robes  of  honour  wrapped  around  him ;  the  movement 
of  St.  Paul  is  that  of  an  athlete  girded  for   the   race.      The  rhetoric   of  this 
writer,  even  when  it  is  at  its  most  majestic  volume,  is  like  the  smooth  flow  of  a 
river  amid  green  fields ;  the  rhetoric  of  St.  Paul  is  like  the  rash  of  a  mountain 
torrent  amid  opposing  rocks.    {Archdeacon  Farrar.)     Tertullian's  hypothesis  that 
Barnabas  was  the  author  had  no  basis  in  tradition.    His  anxiety  to  bring  the 
Epistle  into  esteem  led  him  to  confound  it  with  the  Epistle  of  St.  Barnabas,  which 
perhaps  he  had  heard  of,  but  not  seen.    The  Western  Church,  had  they  really 
beheved  the  Epistle  to  be  even  the  composition  of  Barnabas,  would  not  so  easily 
have  set  it  aside.    The  Oriental  tradition,  on  the  other  hand,  persistently  declared 
it  to  be  Pauline,  and  the  private  opinions  which  made  a  Luke  or  a  Clement  to  have 
had  a  hand  in  its  production  rested,  at  any  rate,  on  grounds  of  reason  and 
criticism.     St.  Clement's  connection  with  it  was  made  to  rest  on  the  grandU 
siviilitudo  between  it  and  the  style  of  his  Epistles  to  the  Corinthians.    But  this 
grandis  similitudo  is  after  all  illusory — the  result  of  direct  plagiarisms  from  oar 
Epistle.     The  difference   is  immeasurable  between  the   originality,  profundity, 
and  nervous  strength  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  and  the  simply  reproductive, 
diffuse,  and  sermonising  character  of  the  Epistles  to  the   Corinthians.      The 
other   conjecture   therefore    remains,    that   the   Epistle  to   the  Hebrews    is  a 
work    of   St.    Paul  which   owes  its  present   form  to  the  intervention   of  St 
Luke.    And  this  happens  to  be  the  first  view  of  its  origin  which  is  presented 
to  as  in  Christian  antiquity.     We  cannot  indeed  assert  positively  that  Clemens 
Alexandrinus,  who  gives  this  view  in  his  Hypotyposes,  himself  derived  it  from  those 
before  him.     But  one  thing  is  noteworthy — he  first  states  as  a  fact  that  St.  Luke 
translated  and  published  the  Epistle  for  the  Greeks,  and  then  by  this  fact  explains 
the  similarity  between  its  d'ction  and  that  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.    He  does 
not,  as  would  be  natural  in  the  case  of  a  mere  conjecture,  derive  the  fact  from  the 
observed  similarity,  but  accounts  for  the  similarity  after  stating  the  fact.    His 
testimony  therefore  remains  the  only  one  well-founded  statement  which  Christian 
antiquity  has  handed  down  to  us  concerning  the  origin  of  the  Epistle.  (F.  Delitzsch, 
D.D.)        The  happy  suggestion  of  Luther,  that  ApoUos  might  be  the  author  of  the 
epistle  has  commended  itself  to  many  since  his  time.    Tbe  author  was  certainly 
such  a  man  as  Apollos — a  certain  Jew  ...  an  Alexandrian  by  race,  a  learned  man 
,  .  .  mighty  in  the  Scriptures  .  .  .  instructed  in  the  way  of  the  Lord  .  .  .  fervent 
in  spirit  .  .  .  and  one  that  powerfully  confuted  the  Jews,  showing  by  the  Scriptures 
that  Jesus  was  the  Christ  (Acts  xviiL  24-28).    More  felicitous  words  could  not  be 
found  to  describe  a  writer  whose  thinking  moves  on  the  lines  of  the  primitive 
Jewish  Christianity,  who  is  possessed  of  Alexandrian  culture,  and  who  wields  with 
such  skill  and  fervour  the  weapon  of  the  Alexandrian  exegesis.     {A.  B.  Davidson, 
LL.D.)        Even  in  minor  matters  we  have  the  same  congruence  between  Apollos 
and  the  writer  of  this  Epistle.    We  are  told  that  he  was  originally  acquainted  only 
with  the  baptism  of  John,  and  this  writer  places  the  "  doctrine  of  baptisms  "  among 
the  rudiments  of  Christian  teaching.    We  are  told  that  "  he  began  to  speak  with 
confident  boldness  in  the  synagogue,"  and  this  writer  has  a  high  estimate  of  con- 
fident boldness  as  a  virtue  which  the  Christian  should  always  retain.    Lastly,  we 
see  in  Apollos  the  rare  combination  of  a  dislike  of  prominence  with  a  remarkable 
power  of  oratory.    This  is  exemphfied  in  his  refusal  of  the  invitation  of  the 
Corinthians,  some  of  whom  so  greatly  admired  his  culture  and  oratory  that  they 
preferred  his  teaching  even  to  that  of  St.  Paul.    Li  that  generous  refusal  he  dis- 
played the  very  feeUng  which  would  have  induced  him  to  suppress  all  personal 
references,  even  when  his  readers  were  perfectly  well  acquainted  witii  the  name 
and  antecedents  of  him  who  was  addressing  them.    It  is  stated  as  an  insuperable 


Tiii         INTBODUOTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 

objection  to  this  theory  that  the  Church  of  Alexandria  retained  no  tradition  that 
this  Epistle  was  written  by  their  brilliant  f  ellow-conntryman.  Bat  although  Apollos 
was  an  Alexandrian  by  birth  and  training,  it  does  not  follow  that  he  had  lived  in 
his  native  city,  and  as  he  had  left  the  city  before  he  became  a  Christian,  he 
might  have  been  a  stranger  to  the  Alexandrian  Christians.  We  do  not  hear 
a  word  abont  the  Epistle  in  that  Choroh  until  a  century  after  it  was  written. 
At  any  rate,  this  difficulty  is  not  so  great  as  that  which  arises  from  the 
supposition  that  the  Epistle  was  the  work  of  St.  Panl,  and  yet  was  not  recog- 
nised as  such  for  some  centuries  by  the  Western  Church,  and  only  partially 
and  hesitatingly  by  the  Eastern.  For  there  would  be  every  temptation  to  attri- 
bute the  work  to  the  apostle,  and  none  to  associate  it  with  the  name  of  Apollos, 
which,  except  in  one  or  two  Churches,  seems  to  have  been  but  little  known. 
It  is  not  a  decisive  objection  to  the  Apollonian  authorship  that  no  one  is  known  to 
have  suggested  it  before  Luther.  In  the  early  centuries  the  Epistle  was  only 
assigned  to  this  or  that  author  by  a  process  of  tentative  guesswork.  Those  who 
saw  that  St.  Paul  could  not  have  been  the  actual  author  often  adopted  one  of  the 
arbitrary  hypotheses,  that  it  is  a  translation,  or  that  the  sentiments  and  the  language 
were  supplied  by  different  persons.  The  self-suppression  of  Apollos  resulted  in  the 
comparative  obscurity  of  his  work,  and  the  Fathers,  having  nothing  but  conjecture 
to  deal  with,  fixed  upon  names  every  one  of  which  was  more  generally  familiar  than 
that  of  the  eloquent  Alexandrian.  And  if  it  be  strange  that  the  name  of  ApoUoa 
should  not  have  been  preserved  by  the  Church  to  which  the  letter  was  despatched, 
we  may  account  for  this  by  the  absence  of  superscription,  and  by  the  fact  that  it 
was  only  addressed  to  the  Jewish  section  of  that  Church.  This  much  may  be  said 
with  certainty,  that  if  it  were  not  written  by  Apollos,  at  any  rate  the  evidence  which 
points  to  him  as  its  author  is  more  various  and  more  conclusive  than  that  which 
can  be  adduced  to  support  the  claims  of  any  one  else.  [Archdeacon  Farrar.)  May 
we  not  say  that  this  Epistle  resembles,  in  these  respects,  the  great  Melchisedeo  of 
sacred  story,  of  whom  its  central  portion  treats  ?  Like  him,  it  marches  forth  in 
lonely,  royal,  and  sacerdotal  dignity,  and  like  him  is  without  genealogy.  We  know 
not  whence  it  cometh  nor  whither  it  goeth.  (F.  Delitzsch,  D.D.)  Whoever  is 
the  author  of  this  Epistle,  its  value  and  authority  remain  the  same.  "  We  may 
compare  it,"  says  Thiersch,  "to  a  painting  of  perfect  beauty,  which  had  been 
regarded  as  a  work  of  Eaphael.  If  it  should  be  proved  that  it  was  not  painted  by 
Raphael,  we  have  thereby  not  lost  a  classical  piece  of  art,  but  gained  another  master 
of  first  rank." 

To  WHOM  THE  Epistlb  wab  Wbittkn.— 1.  The  heading  "  To  the  Hebrews  "  is  the 
proper  heading  of  the  Epistle,  and  is  found  from  the  time  that  the  Epistle  is  histori- 
cally mentioned  in  cormection  with  other  New  Testament  books.  This  inscription 
does  not  come  from  the  hand  of  the  original  writer  of  the  Epistle.  It  originated,  no 
doubt,  in  the  coarse  of  transcription,  and  whether  it  rests  on  tradition,  or  was 
suggested  by  the  contents  of  the  Epistle,  cannot  be  ascertained.  Any  one  reading 
the  Epistle  now  would  stamp  it  with  the  same  title,  apart  from  all  tradition  respect- 
ing its  origin  or  destination.  The  term  "  Hebrews  "  is  used  in  a  wider  and  in  a 
narrower  sense.  In  a  wider  sense,  itdescribes  all  who  were  descendants  of  Abraham, 
wherever  they  resided,  and  whatever  language  they  spoke  (2  Cor.  xi.  22  ;  Phil.  iii.  5). 
In  its  narrower  sense,  it  describes  Jews  living  in  Palestine  and  using  the  native 
language  of  that  country  (Acts  vi.  1,  ix.  27).  There  is  nothing  to  determine  in  which 
of  these  senses  the  term  is  used  in  the  superscription  to  the  Epistle.  The  phrase 
"To  the  Hebrews"  might  mean  of  itseli  that  the  Epistle  was  addressed  to  all 
Christians  of  Jewish  extraction ;  but  the  local  colour  of  tiie  Epistle  is  very  distinct, 
and  the  allusions  are  of  such  a  kind  as  to  make  it  certain  that  the  Epistle  was 
addressed  to  "Hebrews"  in  a  particular  locality.  No  allusion  is  made  in  the 
Epistle  to  Gentile  believers,  and  this  seems  to  imply  that  it  was  written  to  a  com- 
munity consisting  exclusively  of  Jewish  Christians,  or  one  at  least  in  which^  the 
Hebrew  element  very  greatly  predominated.  2.  The  Hebrews  to  whom  the  Epistle 
was  addressed  had  not  been  themselves  hearers  of  the  Lord,  but  had  received  the 
gospel  from  those  who  heard  Him  (chap.  ii.  3),  and  who  worked  many  wonders  in 
attestation  of  their  preaching  (chap.  ii.  4).  The  Church  had  not  apparently  been 
founded  by  mere  believers  from  Palestine  congregating  in  numbers  in  the  locality, 
but  by  some  apostolic  missionaries,  themselves  direct  hearers  of  the  Lord  (chap.  ii. 
3,  xiiL  7;  comp.  x.  32,  where -their  enUghtermient  is  referred  to  as  a  distinct 
historical  event).    Their  conversion  to  the  faith  of  Christ  was  a  thing  that,  when 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TEE  HEBREWS,  ix 

the  Epistle  was  written,  had  long  taken  place  ;  for,  on  aoconnt  of  the  time,  they 
onght  themselves  to  hare  been  teachers  (chap.  v.  12) ;  those  who  bronght  the  gospel 
to  them  were  already  dead  (chap.  xiii.  7) ;  and  their  history  had  been  one  of  varied 
vicissitudes,  for  on  the  back  of  their  first  faith  the^  had  been  subjected  to  sharp 
persecutions  (chap.  x.  32),  though  presumably  their  later  history,  until  recently 
(chap.  xii.  4,  11-13),  had  been  more  peaceful.  In  the  early  days  of  their  faith  they 
had  shown  much  enthusiasm  and  public  spirit,  taking  joyfully  the  spoiling  of  their 
goods,  and  voluntarily  sharing  the  reproaches  and  sympathising  with  the  bonds  of 
those  who  suffered  in  the  Christian  cause  (chap.  z.  S3,  34) ;  and  this  spirit  of 
sympathy  and  love  to  their  suffering  brethren,  which  had  been  their  characteristic 
always,  continued  to  distinguish  them  when  this  apostle  addressed  them.  Never- 
theless, in  these  later  days,  a  change  for  the  worse  had  come  over  them.  External 
circumstances  were  perhaps  beginning  again  to  press  heavily  upon  them,  and  their 
condition  of  mind  was  not,  as  it  had  been  in  former  times,  such  as  to  enable  them  to 
bear  up  successfully  against  them.  The  reproach  which  they  suffered  was  one  no 
doubt  common  to  the  people  of  God  in  all  ages  (chap.  xi.  25, 26),  but  it  was  something 
more  specific,  it  was  the  reproach  of  Christ,  and  borne  at  the  hands  of  their  own 
countrymen  (ehap.  xiii.  13).  The  apostle  teUs  them  they  have  need  of  patience  (chap. 
X.  36) ;  he  admits  that  their  Christian  course  is  a  hard  race  (chap.  xii.  1) ;  their 
afflictions  are  severe,  and  he  endeavours  to  set  them  in  such  a  light  as  will  mora 
than  reconcile  them  to  them — they  are  not  accidents,  they  are  the  chastisements  of 
a  Father,  and  proof  of  their  true  sonship,  common  to  them  with  all  sons,  and  indeed 
with  the  Son  Himself  (chap.  xii.  7-10,  xii.  2) ;  he  sets  before  them  the  example  of 
the  great  worthies  of  former  days,  Abraham  (chap.  vL  15)  and  the  cloud  of  witnesses, 
who  patiently  endured  and  are  now  made  perfect  (chap,  xi.) ;  and,  above  all,  he 
reminds  them  that  they  have  a  great  High  Priest,  Jesus  the  Son  of  God,  who  can 
be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  their  infirmities,  and  exhorts  them  to  come  with 
confidence  to  the  throne  of  grace,  to  obtain  help  in  time  of  need  (chap.  iv.  14-16, 
V.  1-5,  xii.  2-4).  These  severe  trials  their  condition  of  mind  unhappily  made  them 
ill  fitted  to  meet.  Though  they  had  been  so  long  enlightened  that  they  ought  to 
have  been  themselves  teachers,  they  had  again  need  that  some  one  should  teach 
them  the  first  elements  of  Christian  truth  (chap.  v.  12) ;  they  had  become  children  in 
intelligence,  having  need  of  mUk,  and  were  incapable  of  receiving  such  solid  food  as 
this  apostle  desired  to  offer  them  when  he  vrished  to  bring  the  Melchisedec  priest- 
hood of  the  Son  before  them ;  they  were  growing  sluggish,  and  no  more  imitators 
of  the  faith  and  patience  of  those  who  inherit  the  promises  (chap.  vi.  12).  This 
want  of  interest  was  leading  them  to  cease  to  frequent  the  Christian  meetings  for 
mutual  confirmation  and  edifying  (chap.  x.  25).  They  were  casting  away  their  joy- 
ful confidence  (chap.  x.  35).  And  besides  this  general  coldness  that  was  creeping 
over  them,  there  were  perhaps  some  symptoms  showing  themselves  of  a  mistrust  of 
their  teachers,  and  suspicion  of  their  teaching,  possibly  owing  to  influences  from 
without  (chap.  xiii.  17, 18) — to  which  influences  may  also  have  been  due  a  tendency  to 
busy  themselves  with  meats,  and  to  be  carried  aside  by  strange  teachings,  forgetful 
of  the  teaching  of  those  who  first  spoke  to  them  the  Word  of  God  (chap.  xiii.  7-9). 
3.  Beyond  the  reference  in  the  words,  '•  they  of  Italy  salute  yon  "  (chap.  xiii.  24),  no 
allusion  is  made  to  any  locality  by  name.  "  They  of  Italy  "  means  those  belonging 
to  Italy,  and  the  words  might  be  said  of  such  persons  whether  they  were,  when 
spoken  of,  in  Italy  or  out  of  it.  The  mention  of  them  of  Italy,  however,  seems  to 
imply  one  of  two  things :  either  the  author  of  the  Epistle  wrote  from  Italy,  and 
added  to  his  own  the  salutations  of  the  Christians  there,  or  he  wrote  to  soma 
locality  in  Italy,  and  sent  the  salutations  of  some  Italian  brethren,  who  were  beside 
bim,  to  the  Church  of  their  native  country.  No  other  reason  for  such  a  special 
reference  to  them  of  Italy  suggests  itself  naturally.  The  Epistle  seems  to  have  been 
written  from  or  to  Italy.  (1)  An  opinion  widely  received  has  been,  that  the  Epistle 
was  written  from  Italy  to  the  Church  of  JeruscJem.  It  is  difficult  to  reconcile  this 
opinion,  in  regard  to  the  destination  of  the  Epistle,  with  many  things  said  in  it.  In 
chap.  ii.  8,  it  is  said  that  the  Hebrews  owed  their  knowledge  of  the  great  salvation 
not  to  the  Lord  Himself,  but  to  them  who  heard  Him.  At  whatever  date  the  Epistle 
was  written,  there  must  have  been  many  persons  living  in  the  Church  at  Jerusalem 
who  had  heard  Christ  HimseU  ;  and,  besides,  the  Church  seems  everywhere  treated 
as  having  throughout  its  history  a  personal  identity.  Elsewhere  (chap.  x.  32),  the 
"  enlightenment "  of  the  Hebrews  is  spoken  of  as  a  distinct  historical  event,  and  in 
a  manner  scarcely  applicable  to  the  ministry  of  our  Lord.  Again,  the  low  condition 
of  Christian  knowledge  in  the  community  (chap.  v.  11)  can  scarcely  be  supposed 


X  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 

that  of  the  original  Chnrch  at  Jenisalem,  and  the  reproach,  that  for  the  time  they 
ought  to  have  been  teachers,  sounds  very  strangely  if  said  of  a  community  from 
which  teacbers  had  gone  out  to  all  the  world.  It  is  difficult  to  suggest  any  period 
in  the  history  of  the  Jerusalem  Church  during  which  a  liberal-minded  Hellenist  like 
the  author,  who  was  probably  ignorant  of  Hebrew,  and  who  could  in  an  oS-hand 
way  dispose  of  the  whole  Old  Testament  ritual  as  "  standing  on  meats  and  drinks 
and  divers  washings  "  (chap.  ix.  10),  and  "  useless  "  (chap.  vii.  18),  could  have 
stood  in  such  relations  to  this  Church,  or  at  which  his  restoration  to  it  along  with 
Timothy,  the  devoted  attendant  of  St.  Paul,  could  be  looked  forward  to  as  an  event 
(chap.  xiii.  19,  23).  (2)  Failing  Jerusalem,  it  has  been  thought  that  Eome  answered 
the  conditions  of  the  problem  better  than  any  other  locality,  and  the  Epistle  is  con- 
sidered by  many  to  have  been  addressed  to  the  Jewish  portion  of  the  Roman  Church, 
or  to  the  Roman  Church  in  general,  which  was  probably  largely  composed  of 
Hebrews,  (a)  In  this  way  the  salutation  of  "them  of  Italy"  is  satisfactorily 
explained — they  were  Italians  present  with  the  writer  in  some  place  out  of  Italy. 
(b)  The  Epistle  was  very  early  known  at  Rome,  being  largely  made  ase  of  by 
Clement  of  Eome  before  the  end  of  the  first  century,  (c)  The  interest  of  the  Church 
in  Timothy  is  readily  understood,  (d)  The  author's  presumed  familiarity  with  the 
Epistle  to  the  Romans  is  easily  explained,  (e)  The  allusion  to  meats  (chap.  xiii.  7) 
indicates  an  ascetic  tendency  such  as  is  exposed  in  Bom.  xiv. ,  and  the  divers  and 
strange  teachings  (chap.  xiii.  9)  are  such  as  were  to  be  expected  in  a  city  which 
was  the  intellectual  centre  of  the  world,  and,  naturally,  a  hotbed  of  speculations 
and  heresies,  and  from  which  in  fact  proceeded  many  strange  opinions  which  dis- 
tracted the  early  Church,  and  fiU  some  of  the  most  interesting  pages  of  her  history. 
(/)  It  is  known  that  at  an  early  period,  about  the  year  50,  the  Jews,  that  is, 
probably  the  Christian  Jews,  were  expelled  from  Rome  by  the  Emperor  Claudius,  a 
fact  which  might  explain  the  allusion  to  loss  of  goods  and  the  like  (chap.  x.  32). 
Some  of  these  considerations  are  not  vrithout  weight ;  others  have  very  little  force. 
Even  if  the  reference  in  chap.  xiii.  7,  &c.,  were  to  ascetic  tendencies,  which  is  far 
from  certain,  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians,  and  the  whole  history  of  the  age,  show 
that  such  moral  developments  were  to  be  found  in  many  places.  The  most  that 
cau  be  said  is,  that  they  were  found  in  Rome  also.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are 
difficulties  not  easy  to  surmount  in  the  way  of  the  Roman  theory.  The  Church  at 
Rome  was  probably  founded,  not  by  the  preaching  of  any  apostolic  man,  but  by  the 
congregating  there  of  believers  from  Palestine  and  other  parts  of  the  world  (Acts  ii. 
10).  The  Hebrews,  on  the  contrary,  were  evangelised  by  hearers  of  the  Lord, 
amidst  many  signs  and  wonders  and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (chap.  ii.  3,  4  ;  comp. 
Acts  viii.  6,  xiv.  3).  Elsewhere  (chap.  x.  32)  their  enlightenment  is  referred  to  as 
a  distinct  historical  event ;  and  these  two  things  together  naturally  suggest  that  the 
Hebrews  received  the  gospel  from  some  apostolic  men  in  the  course  of  a  special 
missionary  tour.  Further,  the  Epistle  must  have  been  written  some  time,  and  it  is 
usually  thought  only  a  very  few  years,  after  the  Neronic  persecution  (a.d.  64  and 
after).  Close  upon  their  enlightenment  the  Hebrews  sustained  a  great  conflict  of 
sufferings  (chap.  x.  32).  These  are  referred  to  in  the  Epistle  distantly  as  the  "  former 
days."  The  reference  can  scarcely  be  to  the  persecutions  of  Nero.  On  the  other  hand, 
if  Roman  Christians  are  addressed,  it  is  impossible  that  all  reference  to  these  persecu- 
tions should  be  awanting.  We  can  find  a  way  out  of  this  difficulty  only  by  desperate 
shifts.  We  must  suppose  that  the  afflictions  alluded  to  in  chap.  x.  32  are  the 
Neronic  persecutions ;  then,  that  the  author  assumed  that  tliese  followed  close 
upon  the  conversion  of  the  Roman  Church,  which  he  must  have  regarded  as  a 
definite  historical  occurrence,  and  due  to  the  preaching  of  the  Apostle  Paul  and 
perhaps  Peter ;  and  finally,  that  the  Epistle  was  not  written  for  a  very  considerable 
number  of  years  after  this  period.  The  date  of  the  Epistle  is  no  doubt  uncertain. 
But  if  the  author  made  the  above  assumptions,  he  must  have  read  history  in  a 
strange  way ;  and  if,  as  is  supposed,  he  was  familiar  with  St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the 
Romans,  he  must  have  perused  the  work  of  his  master  with  very  httle  attention, 
especially  that  part  of  it  where  he  meutions  members  of  the  Roman  Church  who 
were  of  note  among  the  apostles,  and  in  Christ  before  him  (chap.  xvi.  7).  Neither 
are  the  terms  of  chap.  x.  32  adequate  to  describe  the  ferocious  cruelties  of  the 
Neronic  persecution ;  and,  as  has  been  said,  the  passage  chap.  xiii.  7  does  not 
imply  death  by  violent  means.  Again,  it  is  difficult  to  find  in  history  a  time  at 
which  the  Roman  Church,  the  moat  lively  and  vigorous  of  the  Churches,  could  be 
described  in  the  terms  employed  in  chap.  v.  11.  Once  more,  the  Roman  Judaism, 
as  we  know  it  from  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  was  of  the  usual  Pharisaic  type,    It 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.  xi 

is  possible  indeed  that  St.  Paul  the  Pharisee  found  Pharisaic  Judaism  everywhere, 
as  he  conceived  it  under  that  aspect,  and  that  this  author,  the  Hellenist,  contem- 
plated Judaism  under  another  aspect,  a  Judaism  with  an  allegorical  tendency,  which 
resolved  the  "  customs  "  into  ideas  and  principles,  and  was  not  bound  fast  to 
external  practice.  But  while  there  may  be  truth  in  this,  it  is  plain  that  the  author 
assumes  that  his  readers  will  go  along  with  him  in  most  of  his  opinions,  and  that 
the  type  of  Judaism  exhibited  in  the  Epistle  is  real.  (3)  Others  have  thought  of 
Alexandria.  Naturally,  Alexandria,  as  the  centre  of  Hellenistic  Judaism,  offers 
what  answers  to  the  conditions  of  the  problem  in  general.  But  no  particular  trait 
in  the  Epistle  seems  to  point  to  Alexandria.  Though  the  Epistle  was  early  known 
and  highly  valued  among  the  Alexandrians,  no  trace  of  the  opinion  appears  that 
they  were  the  recipients  of  it.  On  the  contrary,  the  prevailing  tradition  in 
Alexandria,  connected  with  the  belief  of  its  Pauline  authorship,  was  that  the 
Epistle  was  addressed  to  the  Hebrews  of  Palestine.  Upon  the  whole,  while  nothing 
approaching  to  certainty  can  be  reached,  some  community  of  the  Dispersion  in  the 
East — not,  however,  Jerusalem,  nor  any  Church  in  its  immediate  neighbourhood — 
with  a  Hellenistic  type  of  Judaism,  best  suits  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  The 
imprisonment  of  Timothy  (chap.  xiii.  23)  would  probably  be  in  Borne,  or  some- 
where in  Italy,  and  the  letter  was  probably  addressed  from  that  country,  whither 
the  author  had  gone,  either  on  a  missionary  enterprise  or  on  some  other  call,  and 
where  he  waa  waiting  to  be  joined  by  Timothy  when  he  wrote  it.  This  might 
account  for  the  letter  being  so  early  known  in  Bome,  and  for  the  consistent  denial 
there  of  its  Pauline  authorship.     (A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.) 

Where  and  when  the  Epistle  was  Written. — The  entire  current  of  the  Epistle 
throughout  chap.  t.  1-6,  and  chaps,  vii.-x.  inclusive,  assumes  that  the  temple  was 
then  standing,  and  that  the  priesthood  and  the  whole  sacrificial  system  were  then 
in  their  normal  operation.  But  the  passage  chap.  viii.  18  shows  that  they  were 
then  "  waxing  old  and  ready  to  vanish  away  " — i.e.,  the  destruction  of  the  temple, 
and  the  consequent  cessation  of  the  Mosaic  sacrifices  was  very  near  at  hand. 
Moreover,  the  love  of  those  long- cherished  institutions  was  still  in  its  strength  in 
the  souls  of  Jewish  converts,  and  hence  was  a  grave  temptation  to  relapse  back  from 
Christ  into  Judaism.  The  Epistle  labours  to  withstand  this  special  temptation. 
Yet,  again ;  the  Epistle  was  certainly  written  from  Italy — ^probably  written  and  sent, 
not  from  Bome  itself,  but  from  some  point  not  far  distant.  If  from  Bome,  some 
definite  salutation  would  probably  have  indicated  it.  The  Epistle  alludes  to 
Timothy's  recent  release  from  imprisonment.  Have  we  any  other  intimation  of 
this  fact,  and  of  the  date  of  his  release  ?  Some  critics  have  assumed  such  indica- 
tions in  Phil.  ii.  19,  23,  24 — an  assumption  strengthened  by  Paul's  using  the  same 
language  of  Timothy  as  of  himself :  "  I  trust  in  the  Lord  to  send  Timothy  shortly 
unto  you";  "I  trust  in  the  Lord  that  I  also  myself  shall  come  shortly  " ;  but 
weakened  by  the  doubt  whether  Timothy  was  detained  by  his  own  imprisonment  or 
by  Paul's,  inasmuch  as  Paul  says — "  I  hope  to  send  him  so  soon  as  I  shall  see  how 
it  will  go  with  7ne."  It  is  not  safe,  therefore,  on  this  authority,  to  date  Timothy's 
imprisonment  and  release  from  the  writing  of  this  Epistle  to  Philippi  (a.d.  62), 
though  it  may  have  occurred  then.  It  is  generally  conceded  that  it  occurred  either 
in  A.D.  62  or  64.  If  Timothy  was  imprisoned  and  released  but  once,  it  would  carry 
with  it  the  precise  date  of  our  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  With  high  probability  we 
may  fix  its  date  not  later  than  a.d.  64.  Judaism  and  its  temple  were  then  nearing 
their  final  fall,  as  this  Epistle  assumes.  {H.  Cowles,  D.D.)  About  five  years 
after  the  date  of  this  Epistle  the  Temple  was  burnt,  and  the  Levitical  service 
"  vanished  away."  How  inestimably  precious  a  treasure  would  this  Epistle  then 
become  to  the  scattered  Hebrew  Christians  1    {W.  Kay,  D.D.) 

OooAsioN  OF  THE  EpisTLE. — If,  as  is  usually  supposed,  the  danger  which  the 
apostle  sought  to  avert  was  a  relapse  of  the  Hebrews  into  Judaism,  whether  this 
was  a  Judaism  that  stiU  held  fast  to  the  hope  of  Israel,  though  not  according  to 
knowledge,  a  thing  with  which  St.  Paul  was  able  to  sympathise  (Bom.  x.  2 ;  Acts 
xxiii.  6-9),  or  rather  a  Judaism  like  that  of  the  Sadducean  high  priest  who  crucified 
the  Son  of  God  (John  xix.  15;  Heb.  vi.  6,  x.  29),  perhaps  no  special  occurrence  or 
circumstance  calhng  forth  the  Epistle  need  be  sought.  The  depressed  condition  of 
the  Hebrew  Christians  in  general,  the  overbearing  attitude  of  their  countrymen,  the 
imposing  memories  of  the  national  religion,  the  long  delay  of  Christ's  coming,  and 
the  imperfect  onderstanding  on  the  part  of  the  Hebrews  of  the  meaning  of  the 


xU  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 

Christian  atonement — these  were  all  constant  forces  which  circumstances  of  no  great 
importance  in  themselves  might  at  any  moment  aggravate  so  as  to  render  the  sitoa- 
tion  perilous.  On  the  other  hand,  the  free  views  of  this  apostle  are  not  views  which 
he  has  been  led  now  only  to  form,  or  which  he  expresses  now  for  the  first  time. 
And  yet  in  some  sense  he  belonged  to  the  community  of  the  Hebrews,  and  thej 
sympathised  in  general  with  his  teaching.  It  is,  therefore,  not  impossible  that  in 
the  passage  chap.  xiii.  7-10,  so  important  and  yet  so  difficult  to  estimate,  wa 
have  a  hint  of  the  occasion  that  called  forth  the  Epistle,  though  everywhere  else  the 
immediate  motive  of  it  is  kept  in  the  backgrounds  Chap.  xiii.  indicates  throughout 
a  certain  strain  in  the  relations  of  the  Hebrews  to  their  teachers  and  to  the  writer. 
And  this  may  have  been  due  to  external  infiuenoes  (chap.  xiii.  9).  These  infiuenoea, 
however,  were  but  a  single  force  among  many,  all  bearing  in  the  same  direction ; 
and  this  may  account  for  the  somewhat  obUque  manner  in  which  they  are  referred 
to.  Others  have  sought  a  more  definite  occasion  in  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  and  the 
Temple.  Though  not  actually  engaged  in  the  practice  of  the  Temple  worship,  the 
Hebrews  may  still  have  regarded  this  as  the  bond  of  their  national  unity,  and  the 
symbol  of  their  continued  covenant  relation  to  the  God  of  their  fathers,  a  relation 
within  which  their  Christian  faith  itself  was  professed.  The  overthrow  of  the 
Temple  services  shattered  this  bond,  and  threatened  to  shake  the  foundations  of 
their  faith  in  general.  And  the  object  of  the  Epistle  is  supposed  to  be  to  meet  this 
despair,  by  showing  that  this  dissolution  of  the  national  service  had  been  predicted 
and  prepared  for  in  the  Old  Testament,  as  history  had  now  accomplished  it,  and 
that  their  Christian  faith,  instead  of  being  involved  in  its  fall,  rose  to  its  true  place 
above  its  ruins.  This  view  suits  much  that  is  said  in  the  Epistle  equally  well  with 
the  other  view,  though  it  sets  the  whole  in  a  different  light.  Any  positive  grounds 
for  such  a  theory,  however,  are  difficult  to  find.  Such  a  despair  ought  to  have 
seized  all  Hebrews  alike,  whether  Christians  or  not ;  but  there  is  no  historical 
evidence  of  such  a  thing.  The  danger  threatened  in  such  a  case  would  be  utter 
irreligion,  akin  to  heathenism.  But  the  author,  instead  of  warning  his  Hebrews 
against  this,  exhorts  them  to  sever  their  connection  wholly  with  their  countrymen 
still  adhericg  to  the  ancient  faith  (chap.  xiii.  13).  And  such  expressions  as,  "Fall 
away  from  the  living  God  "  (chap.  iii.  12),  "  Ye  have  need  again  that  some  one 
teach  you  the  rudiments  of  the  oracles  of  God  "  (chap.  v.  12),  which  have  been 
appealed  to  as  proof  that  the  Hebrews  were  in  danger  of  falling  away  from  more 
than  what  was  distinctively  Christian,  do  not  sapport  such  a  conclusion.  [A.  B. 
Davidson,  LL.D.) 

Natuke  and  Method  op  the  Epistlb. — Wherever  the  nature  of  the  book  is  defined 
by  early  writers  it  is  called  an  "  Epistle."  The  description  is  substantially  correct, 
though  the  construction  of  the  writing  is  irregular.  It  opens  without  any  address 
or  salutation  (comp.  1  John  i.  1),  but  it  closes  with  salutations  (chap.  xiii.  24  f). 
There  are  indeed  personal  references  throughout,  and  in  the  course  of  the  book 
there  is  a  gradual  transition  from  the  form  of  an  '*  essay  "  to  that  of  a  "  letter  "  : 
chaps,  ii.  1,  iii.  1,  12,  iv.  1,  14,  v.  11,  vi.  9,  x.  19,  xiii.  7,  22  ff.  The  writer 
himself  characterises  his  composition  as  Xoyoc  irapaKKJianuQ  (chap.  xiii.  22) ;  and 
the  verb  which  he  used  of  his  communication  (kntarnXa),  while  it  does  not  neces- 
sarily describe  a  letter,  yet  presupposes  a  direct  personal  address.  (Bp.  Westcott.) 
Originally,  doubtless,  it  was  not  written  as  an  actual  Epistle,  although  in  its  present 
form  such  designation  cannot  be  denied  it.  It  divides  itself,  that  is  to  say,  into 
two  easily  distinguishable  parts :  a  rhetorical  essay  on  the  theme  of  superiority  of 
Christianity  to  Judaism,  and  an  epistolary  postscript,  which  has  no  funher  connec- 
tion with  the  preceding,  and  perhaps  was  not  in  the  original  plan  of  the  author. 
At  every  step  a  twofold  parallel  is  drawn  between  the  Old  Covenant  and  the  New  : 
first  with  regard  to  their  respective  mediators,  the  angels  and  Moses  on  the  one 
side,  and  the  Son  on  the  other  ;  then  with  regard  to  their  contents,  promises,  and 
results,  wherein  the  unsatisfying,  material,  external,  ever-repeated  and  ever  in- 
effective character  of  the  old  temple,  priest,  and  offering,  is  set  in  vivid  contrast 
with  the  eternally  enduring,  valid,  and  efficacious  one  which  the  new  revelation 
has  brought  to  light.  Impressive  warnings  are  interspersed  through  the  whole 
Epistle,  and  close  it,  showing  that  in  this  case  also  the  building  up  of  the  Church 
was  the  aim  of  the  work,  not  the  desire  to  make  an  exhibition  of  acuteness.  The 
method  of  the  book,  when  compared  with  that  of  the  other  apostolic  books,  is  one 
pecaliar  to  the  author,  although  by  no  means  invented  by  him.  It  is  based 
easentially  upon  the  allegorical-typical  intetpretatiou  of  the  Old  Testament.    Xhia 


INTBODUOnON  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS,        xfli 

had  long  been  used  in  the  phflosophy  of  the  Alexandrian  Jewish  schools.  Bat 
ginc«  Christianity  stood  in  maoh  closer  connection  with  the  sacred  writings  of  Israel 
than  did  the  Greek  philosophy,  Christian  writers  may  and  most  have  early  applied 
them  with  great  felicity  to  the  purposes  of  the  gospel  preaching.  Oalj  what  had 
before  been  done  rather  occasionally  and  in  single  points  appears  here  as  the  perfect 
modd  of  the  class,  and  at  the  same  time  as  a  saccessfol  attempt,  by  means  of  this 
particular  way  of  looking  at  theological  truth,  to  free  the  Jewish  Ohristians  from 
their  confining  attachment  to  their  ancestral  forme.  There  is,  moreover,  some- 
thing very  interesting  in  the  peculiar  form  in  which  the  fundamental  ideas  of  this 
theology  are  expressed;  hence  it  has  in  all  ages  called  out  a  great  number  of 
imitators,  most  of  them  worthless.  With  great  spiritual  mastery  the  author  raises 
his  readers,  bound  down  within  the  narrow  limits  of  inherited  Judaism,  up  to  the 
free  heights  of  the  Pauline  position,  without  causing  them  to  recoil  by  too  loud  a 
■hout  of  victory.  Without  giving  countenance  to  any  error,  the  well-known  figures 
and  familiar  hopes  are  still  found,  and  honour  is  still  given  to  Moses  in  his  house. 
The  ancient  period,  with  its  memories  and  customs,  is  transformed  into  the  living 
picture  of  a  new  age,  revealed  to  faith ;  the  Sabbath  rest  on  this  side  the  Jordan, 
never  fully  won,  symbolises  to  the  people  of  God  the  heights  of  a  new  mount  of 
covenant,  the  Zion  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  where  the  High  Priest  is  even  now 
bringing  an  everlasting  offering  into  the  sanctuary.  Perhaps  at  the  very  time  when 
the  master  hand  of  the  unknown  author  was  delineating  and  adorning  this  new  and 
imperishable  sanctuary  the  thunder  cloud  was  already  gathering  which  was  to  laj 
the  old  earthly  one  upon  Moriah  in  ashes.    {Prof.  Beuu.) 

Stvlb  ow  teb  Epistls. — We  are  attracted  and  riveted  by  the  majestie  and 
sabbatic  style  of  this  Epistle.  Nowhere  in  the  New  Testament  writings  do  we 
meet  language  of  suoh  euphony  and  rhythm.  A  peculiar  solemnity  and  anticipa« 
tion  of  eternity  breathe  in  these  pages.  The  glow  and  flow  of  language,  the  state- 
linesB  and  fulness  of  diction,  are  but  an  external  manifestation  of  the  marvellous 
depth  and  glory  of  spiritual  truth,  into  which  the  apostolic  author  is  eager  to  lead 
his  brethren.  The  Epistle  reminds  us  in  this  respect  of  the  latter  portion  of  the 
prophet  Isaiah,  in  which,  out  of  the  abundance  of  an  enraptured  heart,  flows  such 
a  mighty  and  beautiful  stream  of  consoling  revelations.  In  both  Scriptures  we 
behold  the  glory  which  dwelleth  in  Immanuel's  land ;  we  breathe  the  Sabbatic  air 
of  Messiah's  perfect  peace.  Both  possess  the  same  massiveness;  both  describe 
things  which  are  real  and  substantial,  the  beauty  and  strength  of  which  is  eternal ; 
in  both  is  the  same  intensity  of  love,  and  the  same  comprehensiveness  of  vision. 
In  aU  his  argument,  in  every  doctrine,  in  every  illustration,  the  central  aim  of  tho 
Epistle  is  kept  prominent — the  exhortation  .to.  steadfastness.  Surrounded  by 
temptations  of  a  peculiarly  sifting  character,  tested  by  persecution  and  reproach 
most  fitted  to  shake  their  faith  and  their  loyalty  to  the  Messiah,  rejected  by  the 
nation,  the  apostle  speaks  to  them,  in  language  of  intense  and  piercing  earnestness, 
of  the  fearful  danger  of  apostasy,  and  points  out  to  them  that  it  was  a  mark  of  the 
true  Israel,  and  a  necessary  sign  of  the  follower  of  Jesus,  to  be  despised  and  perse* 
cnted.  It  is  worthy  of  notice  and  thought,  that  when  the  Hebrews  were  in  such  a 
dangerous  condition  of  mind,  the  method  which  he  adopts  in  his  Epistle  is  to 
enter  into  the  depth  of  Christian  truth,  to  unfold  before  them  all  the  glory  of  the 
eternal  High  Priest  and  the  heavenly  sanctuary,  to  leave  behind  the  elementary 
doctrine,  and  to  launch  forth  into  the  deep  ocean  of  New  Testament  mysteries.  As 
in  the  Epistle  which  the  exalted  Saviour  sends  unto  the  Church  of  Laodicea,  there 
is  the  most  glorious  description  of  the  person  of  Jesus,  and  of  His  overflowing  and 
tender  love,  as  in  all  His  seven  Epistles  the  self-revelation  of  Jesus  is  the  basis  and 
source  of  exhortation,  thus  in  every  age  of  the  Church  the  renewal  of  strength,  the 
rekindling  of  love,  the  deliverance  from  languor  and  inertness,  bordering  on  death 
and  destruction,  can  only  proceed  from  a  fuller  and  deeper  knowledge  of  the  Lord 
and  His  truth,  from  a  renewed  beholding  of  His  countenance  and  of  His  glory. 
When  the  love  of  the  majority  shall  wax  cold,  when  iniquity  shall  abound,  and  the 
last  struggle  prepare,  then  let  the  Church  go  on  unto  perfection,  and  behold  with 
open  face  the  glory  of  Christ ;  and,  gazing  on  His  brightness,  she  will  be  strong 
and  eourageous,  and  remain  steadfast  unto  the  end.  (A.  Saphir.)  No  other 
book  of  the  New  Testament  is  distinguished  by  such  orilliant  eloquence  and 
euphonious  rhythm ;  and  this  rhetorical  form  is  not  superinduced  on  the  subject, 
but  is  its  true  expression,  as  setting  forth  the  special  glories  of  the  new  covenant 
and  of  a  new  and  Christ-transfigured  world.    Old  and  New  Testaments  are  set  the 


xi>         INTRODUCTION  TO  TEE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS. 

oue  over  against  the  other,  the  moonlight  of  the  Old  Testament  paling  once  and 
again  before  the  Bonrise  of  the  New  Testament,  and  the  heavenly  prospect  thus 
illumined.  The  language  is  more  oratorical  than  dialeetic,  not  so  excited  and 
lively  as  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians,  not  pressing  forward  with  such  quick 
triumphant  step  as  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Bomans,  not  so  unrestrained  and  super- 
abundant as  in  that  to  the  Ephesians,  but  characterised  throughout  by  consoiooB 
repose,  dignified  solemnity,  and  majestic  quietude.    (F.  Delitttch,  DJ>.) 

Obiginal  Lanouaob  or  the  Epistlb. — 1.  The  earliest  direct  notice  of  the  Epistle, 
quoted  by  Eusebius  from  Clement  of  Alexandria,  states  that  it  was  written  (by 
Paul)  to  Hebrews  in  the  Hebrew  (Aramaic)  language,  and  translated  (into  Greek) 
by  Luke.  This  statement  was  repeated  from  Eusebius  (and  Jerome  who  depended 
on  him),  as  it  appears,  and  not  from  Clement  himself,  by  a  series  of  later  writers, 
but  there  is  not  the  least  trace  of  any  independent  evidenoe  in  favour  of  the  tradi- 
tion, nor  is  it  said  that  any  one  had  ever  seen  the  original  Hebrew  document.  2. 
Internal  evidence  appears  to  establish  absolutely  beyond  question  that  the  Greek 
text  is  original,  and  not  a  translation  from  any  form  of  Aramaic.  The  vocabulary, 
the  style,  the  rhetorical  characteristics  of  the  work  aU  lead  to  the  same  conclusion. 
3.  A  stUl  more  decisive  proof  that  the  Greek  text  is  original  lies  in  the  fact  that 
the  quotations  from  the  Old  Testament  (except  x.  80 ;  Deut.  xxxii.  35),  taken  from 
the  LXX.,  even  when  the  LXX.  differs  from  the  Hebrew  (e,g.,  it  7,x.  38,  xii.  5  f,). 
And  arguments  are  based  on  peculiarities  of  the  LXX.,  so  that  the  quotations  cannot 
hare  been  first  introduced  in  the  translation  from  Aramaic  to  Greek  (e.g.,  x.  5,  xii. 
26  f.).  4.  It  may  also  be  added  that  the  passages  in  which  difficulties  in  the 
Greek  text  are  supposed  to  be  removed  by  the  hypothesis  of  a  false  rendering  of 
the  original  offer  no  solid  support  to  the  theory.  Scholars  who  allege  them  show 
little  agreement  m  to  the  difficulties  or  as  to  the  solutions  of  them.  (Bp. 
Wettcott.) 

Pbebbnt  VaiiOB  o»  thb  Epistlb. — It  deals  in  a  peculiar  degree  with  the  thoughts 
and  trials  of  oor  own  time.  The  situation  of  Jewish  converts  on  the  eve  of  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  was  necessarily  marked  by  the  sorest  distress.  They  had 
looked  with  unhesitating  confidence  for  the  redemption  of  Israel  and  for  the  re- 
storation of  the  kingdom  to  the  people  of  God ;  and  in  proportion  as  their  hope 
had  been  bright,  their  disappointment  was  overwhelming  when  these  expectations, 
as  they  had  fashioned  them,  were  finally  dispelled.  They  were  deprived  of  the 
consolations  of  their  ancestral  ritual ;  they  were  excluded  from  the  fellowship  of 
their  countrymen ;  the  letter  of  Scripture  had  failed  them ;  the  Christ  remained 
outwardly  un vindicated  from  the  judgment  of  high  priests  and  scribes;  and  a 
storm  was  gathering  round  the  Holy  City,  which  to  calm  eyes  boded  utter  de- 
struction without  any  prospect  of  relief.  The  writer  of  the  Epistle  enters  with 
the  tenderest  sympathy  into  every  cause  of  the  grief  and  dejection  which  troubled 
his  countrymen,  and  transfigures  each  sorrow  into  an  occasion  for  a  larger  hope 
through  a  new  revelation  of  the  glory  of  Christ.  So  it  will  be  still,  I  cannot  doubt, 
in  this  day  of  our  own  visitation  if  we  look,  as  he  directs  as,  to  the  ascended  Lord. 
The  difficulties  which  come  to  us  through  physical  facts  and  theories,  through 
criticism,  through  wider  views  of  human  history,  correspond  with  those  which 
came  to  Jewish  Christians  at  the  close  of  the  apostolic  age,  and  they  will  find  their 
solution  also  in  fuller  views  of  the  person  and  work  of  Christ.  The  promise  of  th« 
Lord  awaits  fulfilment  in  this  present  day,  as  it  found  fulfilment  for  them :  **  la 
your  patience  ye  shall  win  your  souls."    (Bp.  WeitcotL) 

Om  thb  Bbvbbbnobs  vs  thb  Epistlb  to  thb  Gospbl  Histobt. — The  direct  r»- 
fwenoei  in  the  Epistle  to  the  facts  of  the  gospel  history  are  not  very  numerous,  bat 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS,  Kt 

it  ean  be  Been  that  the  record,  saoh  as  it  has  been  handed  down  to  as  in  the 
(Synoptio)  Gospels,  was  constantly  present  to  the  mind  of  the  writers.  The  Inoar- 
nation,  as  described  in  the  Synoptic  Gospels,  and  sommarily  presented  by  St.  John, 
is  implied  in  ii.  14  compared  with  i.  2,  5 ;  and  it  is  definitely  said  that  the  Lord 
sprang  *'  oat  of  the  tribe  Jadah."  Nothing  is  said  in  detail  of  the  Lord's  life  of 
silent  preparation.  On  the  other  hand,  the  general  aoooont  of  the  completeness  of 
His  experience,  as  corresponding  to  that  of  man  "in  all  things,  sin  apart "  (iv.  16), 
necessarily  involves  the  recognition  of  His  perfect  growth  from  stage  to  stage,  and 
this  truth  of  a  complete  human  development  is  made  clear  by  the  conception  of  His 
rt\tiuoic  (iL  10).  The  Epistle  contains  no  certain  reference  to  the  Baptism ;  bat 
the  form  in  which  the  qaotation  from  Psa.  iL  7  is  giren  in  v.  6  suggests  the  thought 
that  the  writer  may  have  had  in  mind  the  Divine  voice  at  that  time.  The  em- 
phatic assertion  of  the  fact  that  the  Lord  was  tempted  and  saflered  (ii  18,  iv.  16) 
probably  presupposes  a  knowledge  of  the  critical  Temptation  before  His  pablio 
ministry.  The  proclamation  of  the  gospel  "  through  the  Lord  in  whom  Qoi 
spake"  (L  2)  is  specially  noticed  (ii.  3),  but  nothing  is  said  of  His  works. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  description  of  the  "prayers  and  supplications 
with  strong  crying  and  tears  "  (v.  7)  includes  a  reference  to  the  Agony,  though 
it  may  point  tilso  to  other  moments  of  peculiar  trial  The  reality  (ii  14)  and 
the  voluntariness  (ix.  14)  of  the  Lord's  death  are  marked.  He  endured  a  Orosa 
(xii.  2 ;  comp.  vi  6).  He  suffered  "  without  the  gate "  (xiii.  12 ;  comp. 
John  xiz.  17) ;  and  perhaps  from  among  the  details  of  the  Passion 
there  is  an  allusion  to  the  rending  of  the  veil  of  the  Temple  in  x.  20. 
Afterwards  God  "brought  Him  back  from  the  dead"  (xiii.  20);  and  He  haa 
ascended  (vi.  20;  comp.  ix.  12,  24),  and  passed  through  the  heavens  (iv.  14; 
comp.  vi.  20),  and  taken  His  seat  on  the  right  hand  of  Qod  (i.  8,  iy.  14,  viii 
1,  z.  IS) ;  and  now  believers  look  for  His  Betam  (ix.  28 ;  comp.  i.  6).  The 
mention  of  "the  Spirit  of  grace"  after  the  "Blood  of  the  Covenant"  in  x.  29 
may  point  to  the  gift  at  Pentecost.  From  first  to  last,  through  every  vioissitnda 
of  life,  the  Lord  remained  absolutely  faithful  to  Qoi  in  the  adminlBtration  of  th« 
Divine  economy  (ill.  2  ff.)  and  sinless  (vii  26).    {Bp.  Wateott.) 

Th0  works  of  the  kte  BaTerenA  a  H.  Spaigeoa  an  OMi  in  Vu  |f«p«mtloa  if  Ms  fSllHi  It 
penniadoa  at  If  eun.  PMimnw  aad  AJtlwrtar. 


THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOB. 

HEBREWS. 

CHAPTER  L 

Vers.  1-3.  God  .  .  .  batb  .  .  .  spoken  ...  by  His  Son. — Personal  reserve  t — 
The  Epistle  opens  abruptlj,  like  1  John,  without  either  greeting  from  the  author, 
address  to  the  church,  or  words  of  introduction.  This  omission  distinguishea 
these  two  from  every  other  epistle  in  the  New  Testament,  and  creates  of  itself  a 
strong  presumption  that  St.  Paul  was  not  the  author.  It  is  obviously  not  due  to 
any  attempt  at  concealment ;  for  the  tone  of  personal  authority  occasionally 
assumed,  and  the  personal  allusions  towards  the  close,  show  that  the  author  was 
well  known  to  his  readers,  and  affected  no  disguise.  The  character  of  the  Epistle 
supplies  an  obvious  explanation:  the  dignity  of  an  oratorical  address  demanded 
some  personal  reserve  ;  and  this  dignity  is  especially  conspicuous  in  the  measured 
rhythm  and  elaborate  antitheses  of  the  opening  period.  {F.  Rendall,  M.A.) 
Apostolic  tact : — The  wisdom  of  the  apostle  is  strikingly  displayed  in  the  manner  of 
commencing  this  letter.  He  is  writing  to  Jews  for  the  purpose  of  removing  their 
misconceptions  and  allaying  their  prejudices;  and  the  line  of  argument  which  he 
intends  to  pursue,  requires  him  first  of  all  to  treat  of  the  native  and  essential 
dignity  of  Jesus  Christ.  But  he  so  constructs  the  opening  sentence  of  his  letter, 
that  on  the  very  fore-front  of  it  there  stands  a  spontaneous  acknowledgment  of  the 
heavenly  origin  of  the  system  which  they  so  much  admired.  The  Jews  were  apt  to 
imagine  that  Christians  undervalued  the  ancient  institutions.  Paul  does  not  wait 
to  state  Ms  views  afterwards  in  tlie  shape  of  a  concession ;  but  the  very  first  words 
that  fiow  from  his  pen  do  homage  to  Moses  and  the  prophets.  In  dealing  with  an 
adversary,  if  it  is  your  wish  to  persuade  him,  if  you  are  not  merely  actuated  by  the 
empty  desire  of  gaining  a  triumph  over  him,  by  all  means  frankly  and  at  on.;e 
acknowledge  whatever  you  believe  to  be  good  and  sound  in  his  views.  The  sama 
acknowledgment,  afterwards  made  and  viewed  as  a  concession,  will  not  produce 
the  same  effect.  The  Scriptures  display  a  profound  knowledge  of  human  nature. 
(W.  Lindsay,  D.D.)  Christ  and  the  prophets: — This  long,  sonorous  sentence 
forms  the  introduction  to  the  whole  Epistle,  is,  as  it  were,  the  portico  of  an  august 
temple,  its  many  weighty  clauses  being  as  rows  of  stately  ornamental  pillars 
supporting  the  roof.  This  temple  front  has  a  most  imposing  aspect  1  It  fills  the 
mind  with  awe,  and  disposes  one  to  enter  the  sacred  edifice  in  religious  silence, 
rather  than  to  indulge  in  critical  remarks.  In  these  opening  verses  the  writer 
announces  at  once  the  theme  of  his  discourse,  and  introduces  the  leading  thoughts 
on  which  he  intends  to  expatiate.  The  first  point  to  be  noticed  in  the  proem  is  the 
contrast  drawn,  in  antithetic  terms,  between  the  Old  and  the  New  Testament 
revelations.  By  "  the  prophets  "  may  be  meant  those  strictly  so  called,  but  more 
probably  the  phrase  is  meant  to  cover  the  whole  Old  Testament  revelation,  in- 
cluding the  law-giving;  the  recognition  of  the  angels  as  the  agents  by  whom  the  law 
was  given  being  rather  a  concession  to  Jewish  opinion  than  the  expression  of  the 
writer's  o\vn  view.  To  be  noted  is  the  use  of  the  phrase  "  the  fathers  "  absolutely, 
as  the  recipients  of  the  ancient  revelation.  It  implies  that  the  Epistle  is  meant 
solely  for  Jewish  readers.  Very  remarkable  are  the  terms  emplo3'ed  to  describe  the 
character  of  the  Old  Testament  revelation.  It  is  characterised  as  a  piecemeal 
multiform  revelation.    Por  what  purpose  are  these  epiihets  employed?    Hiurdiy  for 

1 


9  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

the  purpose  of  mere  literary  description,  to  suggest,  for  example,  the  picturesque 
nature  of  the  Hebrew  literature;  still  less  for  the  purpose  of  pointing  out  its 
spiritual  excellences.  Eather,  to  indicate  the  inferiority  of  the  earlier  revelation, 
that  the  Hebrew  Christians  might  hot  cling  to  it  as  something  final.  This  end  these 
epithets  are  well  fitted  to  serve.  The  first  of  the  two  points  to  a  fact  with  which 
the  first  readers  of  the  Epistle  were  perfectly  familiar.  They  knew  that  the 
Divine  communications  to  Israel  came  bit  by  bit :  the  promise  by  Abraham ;  the 
law  by  Moses ;  the  song  of  the  sanctuary  by  David  and  other  poets  ;  the  wisdom  of 
life  by  Solomon  and  the  other  sages  of  Israel ;  and  by  the  prophets  commonly  so 
called,  to  reUeve  the  gloom  of  the  present,  successive  rays  of  light  concerning 
Messiah  and  the  Messianic  kingdom.  And  of  course  they  understood  that  no  one 
of  these  partial,  fragmentary  revelations  could  be  regarded  as  complete  or  final. 
Each  successive  piece  of  revelation  proved  the  incompleteness  of  all  that  went 
before.  But  might  not  all  the  pieces  taken  together,  when  the  last  had  been  given, 
and  the  Hebrew  canon  was  complete,  amount  to  a  full,  adequate  revelation,  possess- 
ing the  character  of  finality?  The  presumption  was  the  other  way.  The  likeli- 
hood was  that  the  prophets  collectively,  including  under  that  category  all  the  men 
by  whom  the  Hebrew  books  were  written,  were  but  luminaries  of  the  night — street 
lamps  set  in  a  row  to  show  travellers  their  way  through  the  gloom ;  stars  set  in  the 
epiritual  firmament  to  mitigate  the  darkness  tiUthejun_should_arise,  bringing  in  the 
day.  This  presumption  is  converted  into  certainty  by  the  second  epithet,  which 
greatly  strengthens  the  argument  against  finaUty  suggested  by  the  first.  It  gives  ua 
to  understand  that  the  ancient  revelation  was  communicated,  not  only  in  many 
parts,  but  in  many  modes.  The  general  idea  intended  is  plain.  It  is  that  the 
revelation  made  to  each  prophet  was  jelative — relative  to  his  temperament,  circum- 
stances, an3""Eistorical  position.  This 'relativity  or  subjectivity  of  the  ancient 
revelation  makes  it  impossible  to  add  together  the  separate  pieces  of  revelation,  and 
80  bring  out  the  whole  final  revelation.  For  the  pieces  are  not  homogeneous 
fragments  of  one  whole.  They  are  heterogeneous  wholes,  often  incapable  of  com- 
bination. This  is  most  clearly  seen  in  the  Messianic  prophecies  uttered  by 
successive  prophets,  which  are  not  separate  fragments  of  one  picture  of  the  future 
capable  of  beiug  combined  into  a  harmonious  whole,  but  independent  pictures,  each 
exhibiting  the  future  from  its  own  point  of  view.  Of  Him  by  whom  the  much- 
needed  new  revelation  was  made  the  writer  next  proceeds  to  speak.  "  God  hath,  in 
the  end  of  these  days,  spoken  unto  us  in  (His)  Son."  The  revelation  made  in  the 
Son  is  not  qualified  by  descriptive  epithets,  as  in  the  case  of  the  earlier  revelation, 
the  reason  beiug  that  such  epithets  in  this  case  are  not  needed.  The  finality  of 
the  revelation  made  through  the  Son  is  expressly  taught  by  the  phrase  "  in  the  end 
of  these  days."  The  writer  expresses  himself  in  accordance  with  the  Jewish  mode 
of  viewing  the  history  of  the  world  as  divided  into  two  great  periods,  the  present 
age,  and  the  age  to  come.  He  conceives  of  Christ  as  the  divider  and  maker  of  the 
ages  {as  of  the  worlds),  coming  at  the  end  of  the  old  time  and  inaugurating  the  new. 
Having  made  mention  of  the  Son,  the  writer  proceeds  to  invest  Him  with  all  due 
honours,  Divine  and  mediatorial,  to  win  for  His  word  fitting  attention.  The 
elaborate  encomium  which  follows  presents  a  very  high  view  of  the  Person  of 
Christ.  It  ascribes  to  Him  (by  implication)  pre-existence,  an  essential  and  therefore 
eternal  relation  to  God,  universal  heirship,  participation  in  the  Divine  functions  of 
making  and  upholding  the  world.  {A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.)  God's  revelation  of 
Himself:—!.  The  revelation  of  the  will  of  God,  as  to  all  things  which  concern  His 
worship  and  our  faith  and  obedience,  is  peculiaelt  and  in  a  way  of  eminence  from 
THE  Father.  1.  The  whole  mystery  of  His  will  antecedently  to  the  revelation  of 
it,  is  said  to  be  hid  in  God,  that  is,  the  Father  (Eph.  iii.  9),  it  lay  wrapt  up  from  the 
eyes  of  men  and  angels,  in  His  eternal  wisdom  and  counsel  (Col.  i.  26,  27).  2.  The 
revelation  of  the  mystery  of  the  will  of  God,  so  hidden  in  the  counsel  of  His  will 
from  eternity,  was  always  made  and  given  out  in  the  pursuit,  and  for  the  accom- 
plishment of  the  purpose  of  the  Father ;  or  of  that  eternal  purpose  of  the  will  of 
God,  which  is  by  the  way  of  eminence  ascribed  unto  the  Father  (Eph.  i.  8,  9). 
8.  This  purpose  of  God  being  communicated  with,  and  unto  the  Lord  Christ, 
or  the  Son,  became  the  counsel  of  peace  between  thern  both  (Zech.  vi.  13).  The 
Son,  rejoiciug  to  do  the  work  that  was  incumbent  on  Him  for  the  accomplishment 
of  it  (Prov.  viii.  30-32  ;  Psa.  xl.  7,  8),  it  became  peculiarly  the  care  and  work  of 
ithe  Father  to  see  that  the  inheritance  promised  Him  upon  His  undertaking 
(Isa.  liii.  10-12)  should  be  given  unto  Him.  This  is  done  by  the  revelation  of  the 
(Will  of  God  unto  men,  concerning  their  obedience  and  fcalvation,  whereby  they  are 


CHAP.  1.]  HEBREWS.  B 

made  the  lot,  the  seed,  the  portion  and  inheritance  of  Christ.  4.  The  whole  reve- 
lation and  dispensation  of  the  will  of  God  in  and  by  the  Word,  is,  as  was  said, 
eminently  appropriated  unto  the  Father.  "Eternal  life  (the  counsel,  the  purpose, 
ways,  means,  and  procurer  of  it)  was  with  the  Father,  and  was  manifested  to  us  by 
the  Word  of  truth  "  (1  John  i.  1,  2).  And  it  is  the  Father,  that  is.  His  will,  mind, 
purpose,  grace,  love,  that  the  Son  declares  (John  i.  18) ;  in  which  work  He  speaks 
nothing  but  what  He  heard  from,  and  was  taught  by  the  Father  (John  viii.  28). 
And  thence  He  says,  "  the  doctrine  is  not  Mine,"  that  is,  principally  and  originally, 
"but  His  that  sent  Me  "  (John  vii.  16).  And  the  gospel  is  called,  the  "  gospel  of 
the  glory  of  the  blessed  God  "  (1  Tim.  1.  11),  which  is  a  periphrasis  of  the  person  of 
the  Father,  who  is  the  "  Father  of  glory  "  (Eph.  i.  17).  And  from  the  appro- 
priating of  this  work  originally  and  principally  to  the  Father,  there  are  three  things 
that  are  particularly  intimated  unto  us.  1.  The  authority  that  is  to  be  considered 
in  it ;  the  Father  is  the  original  of  all  power  and  authority ;  of  Him  the  whole 
family  in  heaven  and  earth  is  named  (Eph.  iii.  15).  2.  There  is  also  love.  It  was 
out  of  infinite  love,  mercy,  and  compassion,  that  God  would  at  all  reveal  His  mind 
and  will  unto  sinners.  This  mixture  of  authority  and  love,  which  is  the  spring  of 
the  revelation  of  the  will  of  God  unto  us,  requires  all  readiness,  willingness,  and 
cheerfulness  in  the  receipt  of  it,  and  submission  unto  it.  3.  There  is  care  eminently 
geen  in  it.  The  great  care  of  the  Church  is  in,  and  on  the  Father.  He  is  the 
husbandman  that  takes  care  of  the  vine  and  vineyard  (John  xv.  1,  2).  What 
directions  from  these  considerations  may  be  taken  for  the  use  both  of  them  that 
dispense  the  word,  and  of  those  whose  duty  it  is  to  attend  unto  the  dispensation  of 
it,  shall  only  be  marked  in  our  passage.  For  the  dispensers  of  the  Word,  let  them — 
1.  Take  heed  of  pursuing  that  work  negligently,  which  hath  its  spring  in  the 
authority,  love,  and  care  of  God  (see  1  Tim.  iv.  13-16).  2.  Know  to  whom  to  look 
for  support,  help,  ability,  and  encouragoment  in  their  work  (Eph.  vi.  19,  20). 
3.  Not  to  be  discouraged,  whatever  opposition  they  meet  with  in  the  discharge  of 
their  duty,  considering  whose  work  they  have  in  hand  (2  Cor.  iv.  15,  16).  4.  Know 
how  they  ought  to  dispense  the  Word, so  as  to  answer  the  spring  from  whence  it  comes; 
namely,  witti  authority,  love  to,  and  care  for  the  souls  of  men.  6.  Consider  to  whom 
they  are  to  give  an  account  of  the  work  they  are  called  to  the  discbarge  of,  and 
t-ntrusted  with  (Heb.  xiii.  7).  And  for  them  to  whom  the  Word  is  preached,  let 
them  consider — 1.  With  what  reverence  and  godly  fear  they  ought  to  attend  to  the 
dispensation  of  it,  seeing  it  is  a  proper  effect  and  issue  of  the  authority  of  God 
(Heb.  xii.  25).  2.  How  they  will  escape  if  they  neglect  so  great  salvation  declared 
unto  them  from  the  love  and  care  of  God  (Heb.  ii.  3).  8.  With  what  holiness  and 
fpiritual  subjection  of  soul  unto  God,  they  ought  to  be  conversant  in  and  with  all 
the  ordinances  of  worship,  that  are  appointed  by  Him  (Heb.  xii.  28,  29).     H.  The 

AUTHORITY  OF    GoD   SPEAEINO   IN  AND  BY  THE  PENMEN  OF   THE  ScEIPTDRES,  IS  THE  SOLE 

BOTTOM  AND  FOUNDATION  OF  OUR  ASSENTING  TO  THEM,  and  what  is  Contained  in  them, 
with  faith  divine  and  supernatural.  He  spake  in  them:  He  then  continues  to  speak 
by  them,  and  therefore  is  their  word  received  (2  Pet.  i.  20,  21).  III.  God's  oraduaii 
BEVELATioN  OF  HiMSELF,  His  mind  and  will  unto  the  Church,  was  a  fruit  of  inflnite 
wisdom  anS'cafe  towar3s  His  elect.  1.  He  over-filled  not  their  vessels ;  He  gave 
them  out  light  as  they  were  able  to  bear.  2.  He  kept  them  in  a  continual  depend- 
ence upon  Himself,  and  waiting  for  their  rule  and  direction  from  Him,  which,  as  it 
tended  to  His  glory,  so  it  was  exceedingly  suited  to  their  safety,  in  keeping  them  in 
an  humble  waiting  frame.  3.  He  so  gave  out  the  light  and  knowledge  of  Himself, 
as  that  the  great  work  which  He  had  to  accomplish,  that  lay  in  the  stores  of  His 
infinitely  wise  will,  as  the  end  and  issue  of  aU  revelations,  namely  the  bringing  forth 
of  Christ  into  the  world,  in  the  way  wherein  He  was  to  come,  and  for  the  ends 
which  He  was  to  bring  about,  might  not  be  obviated.  4.  He  did  this  work  so  that 
the  pre-eminence  fully  and  ultimately  to  reveal  Him,  might  be  reserved  for  Him,  in 
whom  all  things  were  to  be  gathered  unto  a  head.  All  privileges  were  to  be  kept  for, 
and  luito  Him,  which  was  principally  done  by  this  gradual  revelation  of  the  mind  of 
God.  5.  And  there  was  tender  care  conjoined  with  this  infinite  wisdom.  None  of 
His  elect  in  any  age  were  left  without  that  light  and  instruction  which  were  needful 
for  them  in  their  Beasons  and  generations.  And  this  so  given  out  unto  them,  as 
that  they  might  have  fresh  consolation  and  support  as  their  occasions  did  require. 
IV.  We  may  see  hence  the  absolute  perfection  of  the  revelation  of  the  will  of  God  by 
Christ  and  His  apostles,  as  to  every  end  and  purpose  whatever,  for  which  God  ever 
did,  or  ever  will  in  this  world  reveal  Himself,  or  His  mind  and  will.  For  as  this 
was  the  last  way  and  means  that  God  ever  designed  for  the  discovery  of  Himself,  aa 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

to  the  worship  and  obedience  which  He  requires,  so  the  person  by  whom  H» 
accomplished  this  work,  makes  it  indispensably  necessary  that  it  be  also  absolutely 
perfect ;  from  which  nothing  can  be  taken,  to  which  nothing  must  be  added  under 
the  penalty  of  the  extermination  threatened  to  him  that  will  not  attend  to  the  voice 
of  that  prophet.  (John  Owen,  D.D.)  The  method  of  the  Divine  Teacher  ;— 
I.  The  Divine  method  as  to  time.  1.  As  the  ages  passed  on,  first  one  and  then 
another  truth  was  revealed  ;  first  one  and  then  another  aspect  of  a  truth  was  made 
known,  until,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  the  glory  of  God  shone  in  the  face  of  Jesua 
Christ  There  is  in  the  East  an  anticipatory  dawn,  a  sort  of  premature  twilight, 
which  always  disappears  before  the  true  dawn  commences.  So  in  the  history  of 
the  world,  especially  in  the  history  of  Israel,  have  there  been  many  dawnings  of 
light,  to  be  followed  perhaps  by  periods  of  obscurity,  yet  graciously  illumining  the 
successive  ages,  and  heralding  the  coming  of  the  Light  of  the  world.  2.  Is  there 
not  even  fuller  light  for  the  individual,  even  fuller  Light  for  the  Church,  until  wa 
come  to  that  city  where  the  glory  of  God  shall  shine  forth  with  unclouded 
splendour  7  God  always  gives  light  as  we  are  able  to  (1)  Bear,  (2)  Use  it.  XL  Tna 
Divine  method  as  to  mode.  1.  God  presents  the  truth  to  the  individual  in  such 
a  form  as  may  best  secure  his  obedience.  The  Spirit  of  God  shows  the  things  of 
Christ  in  an  intellectual,  ethical,  imaginative,  emotional  light,  according  to  the 
genius  of  those  to  whom  He  may  appeal.  2.  God  influences  the  preacher,  that  in 
the  selection  and  presentment  of  his  themes  he  may  best  win  his  congregation. 
3.  God  knows  the  special  truths  for  the  times;  or  the  particular  aspect  in  which 
the  truth  needs  to  be  recognised.  III.  The  Divine  method  as  to  organ.  Not  any 
men,  but  certain  men,  of  spiritual  susceptibility  and  force  were  selected  to  be  the 
organs  in  which  God  would  "  speak  to  the  fathers  " ;  and  the  same  rule  of  selection 
obtains  still,  for  Christ  makes  Himself  known  to  the  world  through  certain  spiritual 
agents  and  holy  ministries.  Lessons  :  1.  Let  unconverted  men  learn  the  greatness 
of  their  responsibility.  2.  Let  the  Church  take  encouragement  touching  tlie 
salvation  of  the  world.  8.  Let  the  Church  be  more  faithful,  that  she  may  increa  e 
in  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  4.  Let  the  Chmch  be  more  pure,  that  she  may  the  better 
make  Christ  known.     (The  Metropolitan  Pulpit.)        God's  revelation  of  Himself : — 

I.  The  knowledge  we  possess  op  God  was  bupeenatdrally  communicated. 
Language — the  words  we  use  to  utter  our  thoughts  and  feeUngs— must  have  been  a 
supernatural  gift  in  the  first  instance.  If  the  casket  came  from  heaven,  much 
more  the  jewel.  The  mind  of  man  was  created  as  much  to  receive  the  thoughts  of 
God,  as  the  eye  was  to  receive  the  light  of  the  sun,  and  to  behold  the  many  beauties 
of  creation.    All  the  truest  and  best  thoughts  of  our  mind  are  heaven-inspired. 

II.  The  knowledge  we  possess  of  God  was  gradually  and  variously  revealed. 
There  was,  first  of  all,  the  morning  star,  then  the  soft  grey  dawn,  which  spi  ead 
itself  by  degrees  over  the  horizon,  until,  in  these  latter  days,  the  whole  world  was 
overtaken  by  the  fuller  light  of  the  meridian  sun.  III.  In  Christ  we  have  a  full 
AND  FINAL  REVELATION  OF  God's  TRUTH.  We  Sometimes  find  the  light  in  our  houses 
small  and  feeble,  not  because  there  is  an  insufiicient  quantity  of  the  means  of 
lighting  manufactured,  but  because  a  large  portion  of  it  is  shut  up  in  the  meter  ;  only 
a  small  quantity  is  allowed  to  run  into  our  dwellings,  consequently  the  light  is  faint, 
and  only  illuminates  a  very  small  space  ;  but  when  it  is  turned  on  in  full  force,  the 
light  is  abundant,  lighting  up  every  nook  and  comer  of  the  apartments  in  which  it 
is  kindled.  When  men  depended  on  the  amount  of  light  which  was  in  the  prophets, 
they  could  not  see  far ;  only  a  small  quantity  of  Heaven's  light  was  allowed  to  flow, 
or  could  flow,  into  them,  and  therefore  they  could  only  emit  a  faint  glimmer  upon 
those  who  looked  to  them  for  illumination ;  they  only  saw  through  "  a  glass  darkly  " 
themselves,  and  so  their  power  to  impart  light  could  not  be  great.  But  of  Christ  it 
was  said,  "In  Him  was  life,  and  the  life  was  the  light  of  n,ei."  Between  the 
measure  of  light  that  came  by  the  first  prophets  and  that  which  came  by 
Christ  there  is  no  comparison,  but  a  perfect  contrast.  Just  as  there  is  no 
comparison  between  the  degree  of  the  light  of  a  star  and  the  sun ;  the 
star  has  just  enough  light  to  show  the  darkness,  but  the  sun  chases  the 
night  away  and  makes  it  day.  It  is  our  inestimable  privilege  to  live  in  the  meridian 
light  of  Him  who  said,  "I  am  the  Light  of  the  world."  (D.  Rhys  Jenkins.) 
The  manner  of  revelation: — L  Time.  Centuries  were  required  to  complete  the 
Bcheme.  Man  was  to  be  taken  at  a  low  and  infantile  point,  and  raised  up  to  the 
fulness  of  the  stature  of  a  perfect  manhood  ;  from  "  a  living  soul "  to  "  a  quicken- 
ing spirit."  By  no  one  sudden  blow  could  the  benevolent  design  of  giving  man  the 
true  knowledge  of  God,  and  his  own  duty  and  destiny,  be  executed.    The  laws  ol 


«HAP.  l]  HEBREWS. 


progress,  gradation,  and  periodicity  must  be  observed  in  regard  to  our  highet 
nature.  One  age  was  to  witness  one  attainment,  and  another,  another.  It  waa 
much  to  establish  the  unity  of  the  Deity  ;  it  was  more  to  develop  the  idea  of  the 
Father.  U.  Agents  and  examples.  Again,  the  manner  of  revelation  is  not 
abstract,  but  concrete.  The  ordinary  as  well  as  supernatural  agencies  are 
employed.  If  angels  are  sent,  so  are  men  ;  if  the  special  messenger  raised  up, 
sanctified,  and  commissioned  be  the  Son  of  God  by  excellence,  yet  a.long  line  of  the 
good  and  the  great  bear  up  the  ark  of  God  ;  and  patriarch,  king,  and  priest,  and 
prophet,  and  apostle,  are  seen  at  different  intervals  along  the  majestic  procession. 
In  selecting  men  to  act  so  distinguished  a  part  in  the  designs  of  God  towards  His 
children,  we  perceive  a  part  of  the  same  system  which  we  witness  in  business,  art, 
science,  government,  and  literature.  For  if  "  History  be  philosophy  teaching  by  1 1 
example,"  then  is  revelation  religion  teaching  by  example.  In  this  feature  of  the  ' 
mode  of  communication  we  see  the  wise  adaptation  of  means  to  ends,  the  use  of 
causes  to  produce  effects,  such  as  we  should  anticipate  from  so  great  a  Designer. 
III.  Languages  and  books.  In  two  principal  languages,  Hebrew  and  Greek,  with  a 
few  passages  in  the  Chaldee — in  sixty-six  books,  written  by  at  least  thirty-nine 
authors — the  Jewish  and  Christian  Scriptures  present  that  fertility  of  human  genius, 
as  well  as  of  sacred  truth,  that  fitly  entitles  it  to  be  called  the  Bible — The  Book. 
Here  are  flowers  of  every  hue  and  fragrance,  fruits  of  every  taste  and  nutriment. 
The  sinner  cannot  read  far  without  meeting  with  his  warning,  nor  the  saint  without 
hearing  his  beatitude,  nor  the  sad  without  alighting  upon  his  consolation,  nor  the 
weak  without  touching  the  wand  of  spiritual  strength,  nor  the  poor  without  open- 
ing the  mine  of  heavenly  treasures,  nor  the  rich  without  being  reminded  that  they 
brought  nothing  into  this  world,  and  that  they  can  carry  nothing  out.  IV.  Miracles. 
Most  of  us  are  so  earthly-minded  that  some  extraneous  means  to  arouse  us  from 
indifference  are  needed.  We  want  a  bell  rung  to  call  us  to  the  temple  of  the  Lord 
to  receive  His  gracious  message.  Miracles  are  that  bell.  They  prove  nothing  by 
their  soUtary  selves.  It  would  be  hard  to  defend  miracles  in  general,  but  not  the 
Christian  miracles ;  for  they  subserve  a  great  and  good  end,  worthy  of  the  interpos- 
ing finger  of  God.  All  along,  too,  in  speaking  of  His  signs  and  wonders,  Jesus  very 
remarkably  and  clearly  points  out  their  office.  It  was  that  men  might  believe  on 
Him,  and  believing,  have  life.  They  added  no  weight  to  the  truth  as  truth,  but 
Ihey  did  add  weight  to  truth,  as  received  by  the  ignorant,  the  degraded,  and  the 
i  I  attentive.  V.  Institutions  and  ordinances.  The  institutions  of  Moses,  however 
puerile  they  may  seem  to  a  Christian,  were  yet  admirably  adapted  to  raise  up  a  low 
and  barbarous  people,  and  give  a  race  of  idolaters  the  knowledge  and  woiship  of 
the  One  True  and  Living  God.  But  if  we  turn  to  the  Christian  revelation,  the 
institutions  are  more  simple,  as  becomes  a  more  perfect  faith  and  spirituality. 
Forms  are  not  absolute,  but  relative ;  not  essential,  but  important ;  they  have  a 
place,  but  it  is  not  the  first  place.  They  are  a  species  of  gigantic  language,  whose 
letters  are  facts  and  whose  sentences  are  customs.  They  are  to  be  observed,  not 
for  their  own  sake,  but  for  the  spiritual  purport  they  imply  and  convey.  (A.  A. 
Livermore.)  The  various  classes  of  prophetical  announcement : — I.  Dreams  were 
a  frequent  mode  by  which  the  future  was  opened  up  to  the  minds  of  the  prophets. 
There  is  something  peculiarly  solemn  in  the  thought  of  these  revelations  of  the 
future  made  to  the  mind,  whilst  the  body  is  in  a  state  of  repose  and  temporary 
insensibility.  They  illustrate  the  capabilitieB  and  susceptibilities  of  the  human 
mind,  independent  of  the  corporeal  frame  :  the  power  of  the  Most  High  and  His 
grace  and  condescension  in  thus  commuuicatiug  to  man  His  counsels  and  purposes. 
They  prove  the  fact  of  God's  interest  in  what  concerns  the  human  race,  and  Hia 
constant  intercourse  with  a  family  of  His  intelligent  creatures,  perhaps  the  most 
unworthy  of  His  notice.  The  state  of  the  body,  too,  when  these  revelations  were 
made,  may  be  regarded  as  a  type  of  the  respective  conditions  of  the  mind  and  body, 
when  death  has  severed  the  bond  that  unites  them.  The  body  asleep  in  the  grave, 
the  mind  conversant  with  the  plans  of  the  Almighty,  and  blessed  with  the  vision  of 
His  glory.  The  body  at  rest — the  cares  of  life,  its  scenes,  its  passions  all  hushed — 
its  conflicts  and  struggles  succeeded  by  repose  ;  the  mind  released  from  its  attention 
to  what  was  immediate  and  temporary;  but  in  that  solemn  hour  of  release,  God, 
its  Creator,  appears ;  the  future  is  unveiled,  and  truth  revealed  leaves  its  right  and 
unqualified  impression.  II.  The  second  class  of  prophetical  announcements  may 
be  ranged  under  the  head  of  visions.  Dreams  and  visions  are  not  always  dis- 
tinguished in  sacred  scripture.  Sometimes  the  same  revelation  is  said  to  be  made 
by  a  dream  and  a  vision.     Thus  Nebuchadnezzar's  dream  is  called  the  visions  oi 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTIUTOR,  [chap.  I. 

his  head  (Dan.  ii.  28).  A  vision,  then,  may  be  defined  as  a  representation  ol 
things  made  to  the  mind  of  the  prophet  while  he  was  awake.  The  eyes  rest  on  the 
object,  the  impression  is  not  only  as  distinct  and  vivid  as  if  the  object  were  present 
to  the  senses  in  an  ordinary  way,  but  more  so,  from  the  extraordinary  manner  of  its 
appearance.  The  most  terrible  elements  of  nature — the  most  beautiful  of  its  in- 
animate objects — all  that  is  magnificent  and  costly  in  art,  all  that  is  dignified  in 
personal  form,  formed  scenes  surpassing  in  splendour  the  conceptions  of  the  most 
brilliant  fancy.  They  were  fitted  and  intended  to  produce  a  due  measure  of 
impression  on  minds  like  ours,  necessarily  more  affected  by  what  is  thus  clothed 
and  presented  to  the  eye  and  the  imagination  in  vivid  forms,  in  order  to  its  awaken- 
ing  attention,  and  giving  a  just  conception  of  the  importance  of  the  events  thus 
represented.  Our  responsibility  is  great,  and  onr  gratitude  ought  to  be  intense. 
III.  Another  method  in  which  these  announcements  were  made,  and  to  which  we 
must  advert,  is  an  audible  voice.  Moses  at  bush.  Giving  of  law.  Elijah  in 
cave.  IV.  But  although  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  communicate  His  will  to 
men,  and  the  knowledge  of  His  purposes,  by  such  direct  addresses  to  the 
senses,  or  to  the  imagination,  yet  a  great  part  of  the  sacred  Scriptures  was 
written  under  a  more  direct  inspibation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  conmiunicating 
immediately  to  the  mind,  the  doctrines  and  facts  to  be  recorded.  1.  From 
them  all  we  learn  that  the  communications  thus  made,  various  as  they  were — 
sometimes  judgments,  and  at  others  most  signal  mercies — all  furnish  striking 
illustrations  of  the  providence  and  government  of  God.  2.  The  condescension  of 
God.  3.  Our  responsibilities.  4.  The  unbroken  continuity  of  the  Divine  govern- 
ment, and  unity  of  God's  purposes.  (J.  Robinson.)  A  revelation  from  God  to  man 
both  probable  and  necessary : — I.  The  infidel  meets  us  with  this  preliminary  objec- 
tion— A  REVELATION  FROM  GOD  IS  CONTRARY  TO  ALL  THE  EXPERIENCE  AND  ANALOGIES  0» 

OCR  COMMON  HISTORY.  Now  I  maintain,  in  the  first  place,  that  a  revelation  is  not 
contrary  even  to  fact.  For  how  was  Adam  instructed  ?  Where  got  he  language  f 
God  must  have  taught  him.  And  now  we  proceed,  further,  to  maintain  that  a 
revelation  is  not  contrary  to  our  experience  or  to  the  analogies  of  nature.  We  allege 
that  there  is  every  probability  that  God  would  give  a  revelation  of  His  will.  Can 
we  believe  that  the  God  of  nature  is  benevolent,  yet  leaves  millions  of  the  family 
He  fashioned  to  grope  in  "  darkness  that  may  be  felt "  ?  I  say,  the  surprise  should 
not  be  that  God  has  given  a  revelation  ;  the  matter  of  surprise  would  be  if  He  had 
not.  Observe  that  such  a  revelation  of  God's  will  is  not  contrary  to  the  analogies 
of  nature.  For,  observe  how  we  are  taught.  You  find  the  child  is  taught  by  its 
father ;  the  scholar  is  taught  by  his  tutor ;  the  inexperienced  taught  by  the 
experienced.  Now  what  is  a  revelation  but  just  the  extension  of  this  plan,  just  the 
addition  of  another  link  ?  If  the  young  be  taught  by  the  aged,  the  stripling  by  the 
patriarch,  the  inexperienced  by  the  experienced,  you  have  only  to  add  another  link 
to  the  chain,  and  you  come  to  the  inference  that  the  world  may  be  taught  by  its 
Creator,  the  human  family  by  its  Almighty  Father.  Let  me  ask,  in  the  next  place, 
what  is  the  nature  of  the  instruction  that  we  derive  one  from  another.  Is  it  not  ol 
an  experimental  and  a  moral  kind  ?  In  other  words,  when  you  see  the  patriarch  or 
the  aged  teaching  the  group  that  is  around  him,  what  is  the  nature  of  his  teaching  ? 
He  is  teaching  them  all  the  dangers  and  the  difficulties  through  which  he  has  come ; 
he  is  telling  them  how  to  withstand  this  peril,  how  to  overcome  that  trial,  how  to 
meet  this  emergency,  how  to  unravel  that  perplexity.  Now  what  else  is  God  doing 
in  revelation  ?  Just  teaching  us  how  we  are  to  meet  the  difficulties,  to  overcome 
the  trials,  to  vanquish  the  foes,  and  to  inherit  the  glory  and  the  happiness  which 
he  before  us.  U.  I  observe,  in  the  second  place,  that  a  revelation  is  not  only 
probable,  but  that  it  was  absolutely  demanded  by  the  existing  state  of  the 
WORLD.  Here  I  might  show  you  that  there  are  wants  in  man's  heart,  which  all  the 
philosophy  of  a  Plato  cannot  satisfy ;  that  there  are  feelings  and  perplexities  in 
man's  moral  constitution,  which  all  the  writings  of  all  the  moralists  in  the  world 
cannot  meet.  I  might  show  you  that  there  is  a  consciousness  of  sin  and  a  dread  of 
punishment,  which  cannot  be  stilled  unless  by  the  pages  of  the  oracles  of  God. 
But  I  forbear  from  that,  and  I  take  facts;  and  I  will  show  you,  first,  from  the 
admitted  state  of  the  ancient  heathen;  secondly,  of  the  modern  heathen;  and, 
lastly,  of  infidels  themselves,  that  a  revelation  from  God  was  a  desideratum,  for 
which  all  creation  groaned,  and  for  which  all  mankind  earnestly  (though  un- 
intentionally) prayed.  (J.  Gumming,  D.D.)  The  reasonableness  of  a  Divine 
revelation: — The  question  before  us  is,  whether  the  great  Author  of  truth,  the 
inexhaustible  source  of  pure  celestial  light,  can — and  if  He  can,  whether  it   be 


CHAP.  I. J  HEBREWS. 


probable  that  He  would — and  if  it  be  probable  that  He  would,  whether  He  has — 
rolled  back  the  veil  that  hangs  between  Himself  and  us ;  whether  it  be  true  that 
"  He  giveth  wisdom  to  the  wise,  and  knowledge  to  them  that  know  understanding," 
and  whether  "  He  revealeth  the  deep  and  secret  things."  I.  In  entertaining  this 
grave  inquiry,  it  will  be  proper,  in  the  first  place,  to  ascertain  whether  it  be  possible 
roR  THE  Supreme  Mind  to  reveal  Himself  to  men.  Two  things  must  be  proved. 
First,  that  there  is  a  Supreme  Being,  the  Maker  and  Preserver  of  all  being.  And, 
secondly,  that  we  are  rational  creatures,  capable  of  entertaining  the  question  at 
present  in  debate.  It  is  then  admitted  that  we  all  are  the  offspring  of  God.  Such 
is  the  testimony  of  reason,  or  rather  of  the  common  sense  of  mankind.  But  surely 
it  will  not  be  denied  that  He  who  made  us  can  influence  and  inform  our  under- 
standings— can,  in  one  word,  operate  upon  our  souls,  in  any  manner  that  shall  be 
suitable  to  its  faculties.  II.  Presuming  that  we  are  agreed  on  the  possibility,  let 
ns  advance  another  step  in  the  argument.  Let  us  carefully  inquire  whether  there 
are  not  considerations,   that   render   it   highly  probable   that   the  Supreme 

iNTELLItfiNCE    WOULD     FAVOUR     MAN     WITH     A     REVELATION.       The    qUCStion     is    this : 

whether,  taking  into  our  consideration  the  character  of  the  Supreme  Being,  our 
necessary  connection  with  Him,  the  peculiar  capacities  with  which  we  are  endowed, 
and  the  deplorable  condition  in  which  we  find  the  human  family,  it  be  not  most 
probable  that  this  infinitely  benevolent  Being  would  make  important  communica- 
tions to  mankind.  1.  It  cannot  be  rationally  denied,  that  the  human  spirit  is 
capable  of  enjoying  intercourse  with  "  the  Father  of  our  spirits."  Minds  corre- 
spond with  fellow-minds,  and  hearts  sympathise  with  kindred  hearts.  But  who  will 
eay  that  that  noble  spirit,  witli  which  the  Almighty  has  distinguished  us,  is  not 
formed  for  communion  with  Him  who  is  a  pure  spirit,  and  who  has  been  subUmely 
defined  as  Light  and  Love.  •  Now  if  it  cannot  reasonably  be  denied  that  man  is 
formed  for  such  lofty  communion,  then  it  is  highly  irrational  to  deny  that  God  would 
impart  such  instructions  to  him  as  would  lay  the  foundation  for  this  communion. 

2.  But  if  it  be  rational  to  suppose  that  the  chief  end  of  our  being  is  to  know,  and 
love,  and  obey  our  Maker,  to  glorify  God,  is  it  not  equally  rational  to  suppose  that 
God  would  make  such  communications  to  His  creature  as  should  enable  him  at 
once  to  fulfil  the  end  of  his  being  ?  Can  it  be  rationally  believed  that  God  would 
create  the  first  man,  or  the  first  men,  capable  of  religion,  and  designed  for  its 
obligations  and  its  exercises,  and  then  abandon  him  to  gather  up  the  necessary 
information  as  best  he  might  ?  3.  We  must  not,  however,  overlook  the  real 
condition  of  mankind.  Indeed,  who  can  deny  that  man  is  the  subject  of  moral 
derangenjent — the  child  of  misery?  Ask  yourself  whether  it  be,  or  be  not,  an 
improbable  thing  that  his  compassionate  Creator  should  mercifully  make  some  dis- 
coveries that  should  enlighten  and  relieve  him  in  relation  to  his  condition,  the 
means  of  his  restoration  to  happiness,  and  his  final  destiny?  III.  I  would  ascend 
another  step  in  the  argument,  and  endeavour  to  show  that  such  a  revelation  is 
necessary.  1.  It  has  been  the  practice  amongst  a  certain  portion  of  the  community, 
to  speak  of  those  who  are  believers  in  a  Divine  revelation  as  being,  on  that  account, 
weak  and  irrational  persons,  seduced  by  prejudice,  and  overreached  by  designing 
and  self-interested  men.  Now  it  may  be  as  well  to  remind  those  who  thus  judge  of 
their  fellow-countrymen,  that  men  of  all  ages  and  all  creeds — Heathens,  Jews,  Chris- 
tians, and  disbelievers  in  Christianity — have  not  thought  it  a  proof  of  an  irrational 
weakness  to  believe  that  our  Creator  has  made  some  revelations  to  us,  His  creatures. 
Nay,  many  in  each  of  these  classes  of  persons  have  entertained  the  conviction  that 
a  revelation  is  even  necessary  to  teach  men  language.  Even  Hobbes  gives  it  as  hia 
decided  opinion,  that  God  taught  Adam  this  useful  invention.  2.  But  I  am  to  show 
that  God  has  given  to  men  something  more  than  the  faculty  of  receiving  knowledge, 
and  reasoning  upon  such  knowledge.  I  contend  that  He  has  actually  unveiled  to 
our  race  Hia  own  character  and  His  law.  The  constitution  of  our  nature  renders 
the  knowledge  of  these  great  things  absolutely  necessary.  But  was  it  possible  that 
this  knowledge  could  have  been  originally  acquired  otherwise  than  by  revelation  ? 

3.  But  the  necessity  of  such  revelation  is  most  fully  sustained  by  facts.  Bead 
history,  and  learn  what  man  has  been ;  look  around  you,  and  see  what  man  is  ;  and 
turn  your  eyes  within,  and  analyse  yourself  ;  and  then  candidly  say  whether  such  a 
process  has  not  induced  the  conviction  that  revelation  is  necessary.  IV.  In  con- 
clusion, I  would  direct  attention  to  the  Bible,  which  professes  to  be  given  by 
INSPIRATION  op  God.  1.  I  remark  that  the  disclosures  which  the  Bible  makes, 
relating  to  the  character  of  the  Supreme  Being,  are  such  as  commend  themselves  to 
right  reason.    Let  not  those  who  live  in  a  country  where  the  revelations  of  the 


8  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Bible  ara  known  forget  the  manifold  infonnation  which,  whether  they  think  so  or 
not,  they  cannot  but  have  derived  from  this  source.  2.  Again,  the  disclosures 
which  the  Bible  makes  to  us,  relating  to  the  Divine  Law,  are  such  as  commend 
themselves  to  right  reason.  That  law,  which  this  book  records  as  coming  from  God, 
will  be  found  to  accord  with  the  characters  which  it  ascribes  to  God.  There  is  no 
discrepancy  between  the  Lawgiver  and  His  enactments.  This  law  is  well  deserv- 
ing the  description  of  ''holy,  just,  and  goud."  It  has,  moreover,  the  high 
advintage  of  being  spiritual ;  insinuating  itself  into  the  soul — reaching  the  heart  — 
and  convincing  the  understanding.  It  is  further  possessed  of  the  character  of 
universal  adaptation.  It  suits  men  in  all  conditions,  ages,  and  circumstances. 
And  then  it  ought  to  be  particularly  remarked  of  it,  that  it  possesses  two  points  of 
excellence  which  every  other  code  must  be  acknowledged  to  want — it  exhibits  a 
fixed  standard,  and  adequate  motives.  3.  Once  more ;  I  argue,  that  the  things 
which  the  Bible  reveals,  relating  to  the  system  of  reconciliation,  commend  them- 
selves to  right  reason.  We  are  accustomed  to  trace  out  the  fitness  of  things  in  the 
works  of  nature.  The  soil  of  the  earth  is  made  for  its  vegetable  productions,  and 
those  vegetables  are  fitted  to  the  soil  in  which  they  grow — the  fish  is  made  for  the 
waters,  and  the  waters  for  the  fish  ;  the  eye  is  made  for  the  light,  and  the  light  for 
the  eye  ;  and  the  lungs  are  made  for  the  air,  and  the  air  is  adapted  to  the  lungs. 
Now  if  we  are  accustomed  to  trace  these  contrivances  of  the  material  and  visible 
world  to  an  all-wise  Contriver,  can  we  refuse  to  allow  that  a  system,  which,  like 
nature,  is  adapted  to  the  end  it  seeks  to  accomplish,  is  likewise  from  God  ?  A  few 
instances  may  be  sufficient  to  bring  out  this  fitness  of  Christianity  to  the  wants  of 
man.  Are  we  not  ignorant  ?  And  does  not  this  revelation  impart  all  necessary 
knowledge  ?  What  is  there  necessary  to  be  known  about  the  Supreme  Being — our 
relation  to  Him — our  own  nature  and  responsibilities — our  immortality — our  death 
— the  final  judgment  and  our  ultimate  destiny — which  this  book  does  not  unfold  ? 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  hght  of  the  world  ;  and  he  that  believeth  in  Him  shall  not  walk 
in  darkness.  Have  we  not  broken  the  Divine  Law  ?  In  other  words,  are  we  not 
guilty  ?  Do  not  our  consciences  accuse  us  of  guilt  ?  And  does  not  the  doctrine  of 
Christ's  substitution  meet  our  case?  Yet  again  ;  are  we  not  conscious  of  being  in  a 
state  of  moral  pollution  ?  Must  not  all  agree  that  our  minds  are  darkened, 
and  our  hearts  depraved?  Can  anything,  then,  be  more  rational  than  the 
doctrine  of  a  spiritual  influence — the  influence  of  God  the  Spirit  renew- 
ing us  in  knowledge,  righteousness,  and  holiness,  after  the  image  of  Him 
that  created  us  ?  This  the  scheme  of  redemption  provides.  (H.  Christmas,  M. A.) 
God's  revelation  to  man : — I.  He  has  actually  made  a  revelation  oh  Himself  to 
MAN.  1.  Man  has  a  capacity  to  appreciate,  to  some  extent,  God's  thoughts.  2. 
Man  stands  in  need  of  God's  thoughts.  3.  Man  is  bound  to  study  God's  thoughts. 
II.  He  has  revealed  Himself  to  man  thbough  man.  1.  To  increase  the  intelligi- 
bility of  God's  thoughts.  2.  To  increase  the  attraction  of  God's  thoughts.  III. 
He  has  revealed  Himself  to  man  in  a  variety  of  ways.  1.  The  necessity  of 
modesty  in  pronouncing  concerning  the  methods  of  Divine  influence.  2.  The 
importance  of  keeping  the  soul  ever  in  a  waiting  attitude.  IV.  He  has  made  Christ 
THK  final  revelation  OF  HiMSELF.  Christ,  as  the  final  organ  of  Divine  revelation 
to  man,  transcends  all  preceding  organs — 1.  In  His  relation  to  the  universe.  (1) 
He  is  the  inheritor  of  the  creation.  "  Appointed  heir  of  all  things."  (2)  He  is  the 
creator  of  the  universe.  "  By  whom  also  He  made  the  worlds."  (3)  He  is  the 
sustainer  of  the  universe.  "Upholding  all  things,"  &c.  (4)  He  is  the  Sovereign 
of  the  universe.  "On  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high."  2.  In  the  com- 
pleteness of  His  Divine  manifestations.  Bepresents  Him  more  accurately  than  the 
impression  on  the  wax  represents  the  seal  that  produced  it.  3.  In  the  moral  service 
He  has  rendered  to  humanity.  4.  In  His  superiority  to  all  angelic  intelligences. 
(1)  In  His  position.  (2)  In  His  reputation.  (Homilist.)  Revealed  truth: — L  Ths 
sdpernatdralism  of  the  truth.  It  is  impossible  for  nature  to  reveal — 1.  The 
spiritual  Deity.  2.  The  special  truths  needed  for  fallen  man.  H.  The  immortality 
OF  THE  truth.  It  Is  truth  about — 1.  The  unchangeable  God.  2.  The  immutable 
law.  3.  The  eternal  universe.  III.  The  unity  of  the  truth.  The  Divine 
revelation  is  a  plant  of  life  and  healing  in  which  the  different  parts  are  not  essen- 
tially different,  but  variously  developed  according  to  the  will  of  God,  and  the  differing 
conditions  of  the  human  race  in  successive  generations.  IV.  The  fulness  or  the 
truth.  In  Christ  we  have  the  truth— 1.  Fully.  2.  Finally.  {W.  L.  Watkinson.) 
The  superiority  of  the  Christian  revelation  over  the  prophetic  : — I.  Its  supeeiority 
in  ths  excellency  and  extent  of  the  discoveries  made.     1.  In  reference  to  tha 


CHAP.  I.]  HEBREWS. 


perfections  of  God.  His  existence,  unity,  holiness,  goodness,  love,  Ac.  2.  In 
reference  to  the  doctrine  of  providence.  3.  In  reference  to  a  future  life,  4.  In 
reference  to  the  method  of  salvation.  II.  Its  stjpebiokity  in  the  mode  of  making 
THESE  DISCOVERIES.  1.  The  authority  of  the  medium.  2.  The  finish  and  perfec 
tion  stamped  upon  it.  3.  The  simplicity,  clearness,  mildness,  and  benignity  which 
characterise  it.  4.  The  superior  energy  and  influence  with  wbich  it  is  accompanied. 
{Jos.  Bromley.)  The  old  and  new  covenants  one  in  Christ : — The  great  object  of 
the  Epistle  is  to  describe  the  contrast  between  the  old  and  the  new  covenant.  But 
this  contrast  is  based  upon  their  unity.  The  new  covenant  is  contrasted  with  the 
old  covenant,  not  in  the  way  in  which  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  God  is  con- 
trasted with  the  darkness  and  ignorance  of  heathenism,  for  the  old  covenant  also  is 
of  God,  and  is  therefore  possessed  of  Divine  glory.  Great  is  the  glory  of  the  old 
covenant ;  yet  greater  is  the  glory  of  the  new  dispensation,  when  in  the  fulness  of 
time  God  sent  forth  His  own  Son  and  gave  unto  us  the  substance  of  those  things  of 
which  in  the  old  times  He  had  shown  types  and  prophecy.  "  God  hath  spoken  unto 
the  fathers  "  ;  and  by  that  expression  "  unto  the  fathers  "  the  apostle  reminds  us 
that  without  a  church,  without  a  union  of  believers,  without  a  manifestation  of  God 
in  grace,  histdrically,  among  a  people  whom  He  had  set  apart  for  His  service,  there 
would  have  been  no  Scripture ;  and  that  there  was  a  congregation  of  the  Most  High 
from  the  very  beginning  of  the  world.  "  Unto  the  fathers  "  whom  He  had  chosen 
that  tljey  might  have  fellowship  with  Him,  God  spake  in  old  times,  even  as  in  the 
last  times  unto  the  Church — unto  those  who  are  called  both  from  among  Jews  and 
Gentiles — He  has  made  fuUy  known  His  purpose  in  Christ  Jesus.  This,  then,  is 
the  great  resemblance.  The  Father  is  the  author  of  revelation  in  both.  The 
Messiah  is  the  substance  and  centre  of  the  revelation  in  both.  The  glory  of  God's 
name  in  a  people  brought  nigh  unto  Him,  to  love  and  to  worship  Him,  is  the  end 
of  the  revelation  in  both.  The  two  are  one.  Martin  Luther  has  quaintly  compared 
it  to  tbe  two  men  who  brought  the  branch  with  the  cluster  of  grapes  from  the 
promised  land.  They  were  both  bearing  the  same  fragrant  fruit ;  but  one  of  them 
eaw  it  not,  yet  he  knew  what  he  was  carrying.  The  other  saw  both  the  fruit  and 
the  man  who  was  helping  him.  Thus  is  it  that  the  prophets  who  came  before  Jesus 
testified  of  Him,  although  they  did  not  yet  behold  Him ;  and  we  who  live  in  the 
fulness  of  times  see  both  the  Christ  of  whom  they  testified  and  themselves  who  were 
sent  by  God  to  witness  of  Him.  But  let  us  consider  the  marvellous  unity  of  the  two 
covenants.  "God  hath  spoken,"  This  is  the  fiist  point.  Oh,  how  little  do  we 
think  of  the  grandeur  and  majesty  and  all-importance  of  this  simple  declaration, 
"  God  hath  spoken."  A  living  God  and  a  loving  God  must  needs  speak.  The  god 
of  the  philosophers  is  a  silent  god,  for  he  hath  neither  life  nor  affection  ;  but  our 
God,  who  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  who  is  and  who  loves,  must  speak. 
Even  in  the  creation,  which  is  an  act  of  the  condescension  of  God,  He  utters  His 
thoughts  ;  and  when  He  created  man  as  the  consummation  of  the  world,  it  was  for 
this  purpose,  that  man  should  hear  Him  and  love  Him,  and  should  rejoice  in  His 
light  and  in  His  life.  When  sin  enters  into  the  world  silence  ensues.  Man  dreads 
God,  and  the  melody  of  praise  and  prayer  ceases;  but  the  need  of  a  revelation 
remains  continually  the  same.  When  man  forsakes  the  fountain  of  hving  water  he 
cannot  get  rid  of  tbe  thirst,  and  he  cannot  divest  himself  of  the  nature  with  which 
God  has  endowed  him  ;  so  that  there  is  still  within  man  the  same  absolute  necessity 
for  a  revelation  of  God  from  on  high.  AndGQd_d.oes  speak.  Often  we  read  the 
words  and  do  not  realise  what  marvel  of  conSescending  loveThey  reveal,  wliat  great 
and  central  mystery  they  unfold.  Unless  God  speaks  we  do  not  know  the  thoughts 
of  God.  But  notice,  secondly,  man  having  by  his  own  sin  fallen  away  from  God, 
and  silence  reigning  now,  it  is  only  the  infinite  compassion  and  love  of  God  that 
induces  Him  to  speak.  If  there  was  no  redemption,  there  would  be  no  revelation. 
The  love  of  the  Father,  and  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  inspiration  of  tha 
Holy  Ghost ;  behold,  these  are  the  three  necessary  foundations  upon  which  the 
Scripture  rests,  God,  the  Triune  Covenant  God,  hath  spoken.  God  hath  spoken : 
in  old  times  unto  the  fathers  by  the  prophets ;  fully  and  perfectly  unto  us  by  His 
Son.  In  both  dispensations  the  same  God,  on  account  of  the  same  sacrifice,  im- 
pelled by  the  same  love,  and  for  the  same  sublime  and  gracious  purpose.  Both  Old 
and  New  Testaments  are  of  God  ;  tbe  New  Testament,  as  the  Church-father 
Augustine  said,  is  e?ifolded  in  the  Old,  and  the  Old  Testament  is  MJtfoKled  in  tLe 
New.  Nor  can  we,  who  live  in  the  times  of  fulfilment,  dispense  with  the  record  of 
the  preceding  dispensation.  As  an  old  author  writes:  "As  the  brilliancy  of  the 
eun  appears  far  greater  when  contrasted  with  the  darkness  of  the  shade,  so  this 


10  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

epistle  compares  the  light  of  the  gospel  with  the  shadows  and  types  of  the  Old 
Testament,  and  by  this  means  displays  the  glory  of  the  gospel  in  fuU  relief ;  for  aa 
shadows  are  images  of  bodies,  so  the  ancient  shadows  are  images  of  Jesus  Christ,  of 
His  power  and  of  His  graces,  and  assist  us  to  recognise  more  and  more  the  sub- 
stance and  the  truth  ;  but  from  hence  we  derive  also  this  additional  advantage,  that 
although  the  shadows  of  other  bodies  serve  only  to  obscure  them,  the  shadows  of 
the  Old  Testament  are  so  many  reflectors,  contributing  light  to  the  gospeh"  But 
now  let  us  consider  the  contrast.  Jesus  Christ  was  not  born  till  four  thousand  years 
after  the  creation  of  the  world.  "  At  sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners  "  did  God 
speak  unto  the  fathers  by  the  prophets.  These  three  things  constitute  a  prophet : 
direct  commission  from  God  Himself,  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  being  entrusted 
with  the  very  thoughts  and  words  of  the  Most  High.  It  is  not  merely  by  the  pro- 
phets that  God  spake.  They  were  chosen  not  merely  as  the  channels  of  separate 
and  isolated  revelation.  God  spake  in  them.  They  were  the  personal  bearers  of  the 
message,  the  representatives  and  exponents  of  Divine  truth.  Their  words  and  tjpical 
actions  were  inspired,  and  in  them  th«  word  of  the  Loid  came  unto  Israel.  Yet  let 
us  consider  what  were  the  imperfections  of  these  messengers.  The  first  imperfec- 
tiiim  was  this — that  they  were  numerous ;  they  were  many.  One  succeeded 
another.  They  lived  in  different  periods.  Another  imperfection  was,  that  it  was 
"  in  divers  manners,"  in  dreams,  in  Bimilitudes,  in  visions,  in  symbols.  Each 
prophet  had  his  peculiar  gift  and  character.  Their  stature  and  capacity  varied. 
They  were  men  of  differeut  temperament  and  tone  of  mind.  The  manner  in  which 
the  revelation  of  God  was  given  to  them  varied  ;  even  in  the  case  of  the  same  pro- 
phet the  One  Spirit  appeared  in  various  manifestations.  Another  imperfection  was 
that  they  were  sinful  men.  Another  imperfection  was  that  they  did  not  possess  the 
Spirit  constantly.  Of  a  sudden,  after  a  long  pause,  the  Spirit  of  God  came  upon 
them.  God  spake  unto  them,  and  gave  unto  them  His  message.  But  it  was  not 
like  a  continuous  river.  The  word  came  to  them  from  time  to  time  ;  they  did  not 
possess  the  word.  Another  imperfection  was  this,  that  of  that  message  that  was  en- 
trusted to  them  Ihey  did  not  understand  the  heights  and  the  depths.  They  them- 
selves had  to  search  diligently,  and  to  inquire  what  the  Spirit  that  was  in  them  did 
signify  of  the  sufferings  and  glory  that  should  come.  Another  imperfection  was 
that,  as  they  did  not  understand  adequately  that  portion  of  the  message  that  was 
given  unto  them,  they  could  still  less  comprehend  and  contain  the  whole  message. 
They  saw  only  one  aspect  of  it,  ordy  one  portion  of  it  in  connection  with  the 
peculiar  history  and  the  peculiar  trials  of  the  people  at  the  period  to  which  they 
were  sent.  Another  imperfection  was,  that  they  all  testified,  like  John  the  Baptist, 
"I  am  not  the  light.  I  am  only  sent  to  witness  of  the  light."  They  were  only 
finger-posts  directing  the  pilgrim,  as  he  was  in  pursuit  of  the  heavenly  city,  to  go 
on  further,  until  he  would  come  to  the  pearly  gates  of  the  new  Jerusalem.  We 
notice  the  imperfect  and  fragmentary  character  of  the  old  dispensation,  when  we 
consider  not  merely  the  words,  but  the  types,  which  are  living  prophecies.  There 
was  not  a  single  one  which  could  stand  by  itself,  it  had  always  to  be  supplemented. 
Wherever  we  go  we  find  it  is  in  fragments.  There  is  an  altar;  there  is  a  sacrifice. 
There  is  a  fourfold  sacrifice,  a  sin-offering,  a  burnt-offering,  a  peace-offering,  a 
meat-offering.  There  is  a  high  priest ;  there  is  a  tabernacle ;  there  is  a  holy  of 
holies  ;  there  is  a  candlestick ;  there  is  a  shewbread  ;  there  is  a  veil.  Everything 
a  fragment ;  everything  in  itself  showing  unto  us  some  aspect  of  truth,  some  por- 
tion of  the  treasure,  without  which  we  would  be  poor ;  but  we  must  combine  them 
all  to  see  the  f  uU  and  blessed  truth.  But  now  the  time  of  fragmentary,  imperfect, 
and  temporary  revelation  is  past.  God  speaks  to  us  now  in  another  and  more 
glorious  manner.  Look  now  at  the  contrast.  The  whole  contrast  is  in  one  word — 
in  our  language  in  one  syllable — "  by  the  Son"  The  prophets  were  many :  the  Son 
is  one.  The  prophets  were  servants :  the  Son  is  the  Lord.  The  prophets  were 
temporary :  the  Son  abideth  for  ever.  The  prophets  were  imperfect :  the  Son  is 
perfect,  even  as  the  Father  is  perfect.  The  prophets  were  guilty :  the  Son  is  not 
merely  pure,  but  able  to  purify  those  that  are  full  of  sin  and  pollution.  The  pro- 
phets point  to  the  future :  the  Son  points  to  Himself,  and  says,  "  Here  am  I." 
God  has  spoken  to  us  "  by  His  Son."  He  is  the  true  and  faithful  witness,  whose 
testimony  is  co-extensive,  if  I  may  so  say,  with  the  counsel  and  the  things  of  God  : 
the  Prophet  whose  mind  is  adequate  to  understand  the  mind  of  the  Fatlier.  He  is 
not  merely  the  true  and  faithful  witness  because  He  is  from  everlasting.  He  is  also 
the  beloved  of  God.  Notice  this  in  the  word  "  Sou."  "  The  only  begotten,"  says 
John,  "  who  was  in  the  bobom  of  the  Father,"  who  is  His  treasure  and  dehght,  the 


CHAP.  1.]  HEBREWS.  11 

infinite  object  of  His  love,  in  whom  from  all  eternity  was  His  rejoicing,  who  shares 
with  Him  all  His  counsels.  This  beloved  one  of  God — oh,  surely  He  is  the  true 
messenger  who  will  reveal  all  the  secrets  of  the  Father's  heart,  and  who  will  tell 
unto  us  all  the  fulness  of  His  counsel,  and  all  the  purposes  of  His  grace  1  God 
hath  spoken  to  us  by  His  Son.  Let  me  remind  you  how  in  the  Son  all  the  message 
of  God  is  contained.  You  who  know  the  Scripture,  and  you  especially  who  have 
come  through  the  law  unto  the  gospel,  will  understand  me  when  I  say  that  if  the 
sinner  knew  nothing  else  but  this,  "  God  has  sent  a  messenger,  and  this  messenger 
is  His  own  Son,"  he  might  discover  in  this  the  whole  gospel ;  for,  in  order  to  send 
unto  us  condemnation,  in  order  to  give  unto  us  the  knowledge  of  our  sin  and  of  our 
desert.  His  own  Son  is  not  needed.  Any  angel  would  suliice  for  this  work ;  any 
servant  could  proclaim  this  message.  When  God  sends  His  own  Son  into  the 
world,  when  God  makes  the  stupendous  sacrifice  of  allowing  His  only  begotten  to 
take  upon  Him  our  flesh  and  blood,  there  can  be  only  one  meaning  in  it — salvation. 
It  can  only  have  one  purpose — our  redemption.  It  can  only  have  one  motive — the 
overwhelming  love  of  God.  God  has  spoken  to  us  by  His  Son,  and  therefore  we 
know  that  He  has  spoken  peace  to  us.  But  notice,  secondly,  as  the  Sonship  is  the 
beginning  of  the  gospel,  so  it  is  also  the  end  and  purpose  of  God's  message.  God, 
speaking  to  us  by  His  Son,  shows  unto  us  that  we  also  are  to  become  the  sons  of 
God.  In  the  Incarnate  Son  the  Father  has  brought  many  sons  unto  glory.  The 
only  begotten  of  the  Father  has,  after  His  death  ou  the  cross,  become  the  firstborn 
among  many  brethren.  The  Holy  Ghost,  coming  through  the  glorified  humanity 
of  Jesus,  unites  us  to  Him,  who  is  the  beloved  Son,  and  in  whom  the  eternal  and 
infinite  love  of  the  Father  rests  upon  all  His  believing  people.  In  tbe  Son  we  know 
and  have  the  Father ;  in  the  Son  we  also  are  the  children  of  God.  Lastly,  remember 
this  is  the  ultimate  revelation.  There  can  be  nothing  higher ;  there  can  be  nothing 
further.  If  Christ  is  our  life,  then,  when  the  Son  of  God  shall  appear,  we  also  who 
are  the  sons  of  God — now  in  weakness,  suffering,  temptation — shall  be  made  mani- 
fest with  Him  in  glory.  (A.  Sapldr.)  The  prophetic  revelation  contrasted  with 
the  filial  revelation  vuide  by  Jesus  Christ : — I.  First  let  us  note  and  consider  well, 
touching  this  doctrine  which  we  are  taught  by  Christ — the  certainty  of  it,  which 

IS    FIRST  IN  THE  AuTHOR,   WHO  IS  GOD  HlMSELi",  EVEN  THE    SAME  GoD  OF  OUR  FATHERS, 

which  SO  many  times  and  ways  spake  ever  by  His  prophets ;  even  He,  in  assured 
truth,  hath  also  spoken  by  His  Son.  Thus  giving  the  authority  of  the  word  of 
Christ  to  God  the  Father,  that  it  might  be  confessed  true,  and  to  take  away  all  vain 
quarrelling  of  contentious  men,  who  under  pretence  of  the  name  of  God,  would  easily 
have  disputed  against  our  Saviour  Christ,  and  said :  We  know  God  is  true,  and  He 
spake  to  Moses,  He  spake  to  the  prophets ;  but  this  man  speaketh  of  Himself,  and 
we  will  not  hear  Him.  II,  Now,  as  our  Saviour  Christ  is  our  certain  teacher  of 
undoubted  truth,  so  how  fab  this  truth  is  taught  by  Him  appeabeth  also  in 
THE  words,  "many  times,"  "many  ways,"  "  by  many  prophets,"  "of  old,"  "  to  our 
forefathers."  Of  all  these  we  must  set  the  contrariety  in  our  Saviour  Christ,  that 
God  spake  by  Him,  not  many  times,  revealing  His  will  by  measure,  now  some,  then 
more ;  but  once  He  has  sent  Him,  filled  with  all  treasure  of  wisdom  and  under- 
standing. And  before  God  spake  many  ways,  either  by  angels,  or  by  the  cloud,  or 
between  the  cherubims,  or  by  Urim,  or  by  visions,  or  by  dreams ;  but  now  He  hath 
spoken  one  way,  even  by  Christ  made  our  brother,  with  the  voice  of  a  man,  in  the 
midst  of  the  congregation,  plain  and  evident  in  all  men's  hearing,  and  all  variety 
shall  cease  for  evermore.  Likewise  before  God  spake  by  many  prophets ;  now  He 
doth  not  so,  but  hath  sent  His  Son  alone  instead  of  all,  that  all  His  people  should 
hear  him.  Likewise  those  times  they  are  old  and  past ;  but  the  time  of  Christ's 
teaching  passeth  not,  but  is  for  ever.  And  that  was  to  the  fathers,  men  of  divers 
calling,  but  this  is  to  us  all  of  one  condition.  1.  Now  let  us  see  the  difference  here 
spoken  of  between  our  Saviour  Christ  and  all  other  prophets,  what  we  may  learn  of 
them  was  at  divers  times  revealed,  but  that  which  Christ  teacheth  is  revealed  but 
once.  And  this  is  twice  after  expressly  noted  by  the  apostle  (chaps,  ix.  26,  xxii.  26.) 
And  this  it  is  which  St.  Jude  saith  of  the  Christian  faith,  "  that  once  it  was  given  to 
the  saints  " ;  which  once  doth  mean  the  time  of  Christ  in  earth  ;  for  so  he  saith,  is 
was  by  His  Son.  2.  The  second  difference,  that  the  doctrine  of  Christ  is  taught 
after  one  sort.  For  though  first  were  miracles,  and  now  none ;  first  apostles,  now 
none :  these  were  but  means  to  confirm  the  preaching,  the  Word  only  was  tha 
]»ower  of  salvation,  which  is  the  same  it  was  then.  Which  because  it  is  but  one, 
therefore  it  is  perfect,  3.  The  third  difference  here  is,  that  that  was  old,  and 
therefore  abolished ;  for  it  cannot  be  but  that  which  waxeth  older  and  older  must  at 


M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t 

last  vanish.  But  the  testament  of  Christ,  it  is  still  new,  yea,  though  it  wera  from 
the  beginning,  yet  it  is  still  the  same,  and  the  day  passeth  not  in  which  it  was 
given,  but  it  endureth  with  the  age  of  man.  4.  The  fourth  difference  is  in  the 
fathers  with  whom  the  first  covenant  was  made,  who,  though  they  were  all  called 
in  Jesus  Christ,  yet  was  there  a  difference  of  their  honour,  and  every  one  more 
exalted,  as  God  approached  more  near  unto  them.  So  Abraham  and  his  posterity 
were  a  more  honourable  people  than  the  others  before  him.  So  the  Israelites  that 
had  received  the  law,  and  dwelt  in  the  land  of  promise,  had  greater  blessing  than 
their  fnthers  in  Egypt.  So  John  Baptist  more  than  all  Israel.  But  now  they  that 
are  called  of  Jesus  Christ  by  His  own  voice,  and  in  Him  crucified  before  their  eyes, 
have  attained  a  singular  honour,  and  the  least  of  them  touching  their  calling  are 
greater  than  all  patriarchs  and  propbets.  And  these  all  in  like  precious  faith,  like 
spirit,  like  promises,  like  covenants,  Mke  accepted  of  God,  every  man  in  his  own 
measure  of  grace.  5.  The  fifth  difference  is,  that  God  then  spake  by  His  prophets, 
now  by  His  Son  :  by  prophets,  meaning  the  continual  succession  of  prophets  in  all 
ages.  For  as  they  were  men  taken  away  by  death,  so  it  was  necessary  for  others  to 
come  in  their  places  :  and  because  no  prophet  was  able  to  give  his  grace  to  other, 
or  of  his  fulness  make  other  learned  in  the  mysteries  of  God,  but  they  were  all 
taught  of  the  Lord ;  therefore  they  had  the  credit  of  their  word  every  one  in  him- 
self, and  none  judged  by  another's  gifts.  But  so  it  is  not  with  the  Son  of  God ;  for 
both  He  liveth  to  appoint  us  teachers  still,  and  of  His  fuluess  He  giveth  all  other 
their  continual  increase  of  grace  ;  for  which  cause  now  the  warrant  of  all  dependeth 
upon  Him  alone ;  and  the  greatest  apostle  that  ever  was  hath  no  other  glory  but 
only  to  be  His  servant  and  messenger  ;  for  He  is  that  Redeemer  whose  word  must 
be  in  the  mouth  of  His  seed,  and  in  the  mouth  of  His  seed's  seed  after  Him  for  ever- 
more. {E.  Deering,  B.D.)  Divine  revelation  under  the  law,  and  under  the  gospel : — 
I.  The  siatter  of  the  docteine.  It  was  given  them  by  piecemeal,  now  a  part, 
then  a  pait.  They  had  one  part  of  it  in  Adam's  time,  another  in  Noah's;  one  in 
Abraham's,  another  in  Moses'  time ;  one  in  David's  time,  another  in  Jeremiah's, 
Isaiah's,  and  the  rest  of  the  prophets.  It  was  parcelled  out  to  them  as  the  capacity 
of  the  people  in  sundry  times  did  require  ;  but  we  have  the  doctrine  of  salvation  at 
one  lump  propounded  to  us,  in  one  whole  and  entire  sum.  Thus  God  hath  dealt 
more  graciously  and  bountifully  with  us.  They  had  one  flower  now  and  another 
anon  ;  we  have  all  the  flowers  in  God's  garden  sweetly  smelhng  all  at  once  in  our 
nostrils.  They  had  now  a  loaf  and  then  a  loaf ;  now  a  draught  and  then  a  draught 
of  the  Lord's  wine ;  the  whole  magazine  of  God  Almighty  is  open  to  us.  Then  how 
thankful  ought  we  to  be  to  God  above  them  1  And  how  careful  should  we  be  to 
enrich  ourselves  with  these  heavenly  wares,  that  may  freely  enter  the  whole  store- 
house of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  1  II.  "The  manneb.  God  delivered  His  will  to  them 
after  divers  manners  :  to  Abraham  by  angels  in  the  shape  of  men  ;  to  Moses  in  a 
bush  and  a  cloud  ;  to  Samuel  in  a  dream  ;  to  Ezekiel  in  visions  ;  by  the  oracles  and 
answers  of  the  priests,  in  soft  wind.  <fec.  To  us  He  hath  deUvered  His  will  in  one 
manner,  by  tiie  sweet,  comfortable,  powerful  voice  of  His  own  Son.  This  one 
manner  far  surpasses  all  the  maimers  whereby  God  spake  to  them.  Those  were 
dark  and  obscure,  this  plain;  many  of  those  were  terrible  to  the  hearers,  this  was 
a  most  mild  and  amiable  manner.  IH.  The  time.  He  spake  to  them  of  old  time, 
in  the  first  and  oldest  age  of  the  world ;  He  speaks  to  us  in  a  new  time,  wherein  all 
things  are  made  green,  fresh,  and  flourishing  by  our  Saviour  Christ.  IV.  Thb 
persons  by  whom  and  in  whom  it  was  delivered.  They  were  men  ;  Christ,  by  whom 
God  speaks  to  us,  is  God  aud  man ;  they  were  wise,  could  foretell  things  to  come, 
aptly  and  pithily  interpret  the  Word  of  God,  yet  all  their  wisdom  and  knowledge 
was  borrowed;  Christ  was  wise  of  Himself,  clad  with  His  own  feathers  ;  they 
mortal,  dust  and  ashes ;  Christ  never  saw  corruption,  but  abideth  for  ever  and  ever ; 
they  were  servants  in  the  House  of  God ;  Christ  is  the  Son,  yea,  the  Lord  and  owner 
of  the  house.  Therefore  wonderfully  hath  God  honoured  us  in  the  time  of  the 
gospel  above  them  in  the  time  of  the  law.  If  a  king  should  speak  to  us  by  one  of 
his  privy  council,  it  is  much  ;  but  if  he  speak  to  us  by  his  son  and  heir  apparent  to 
the  crown,  it  is  a  greater  dignity.  Many  (prophets  and  kings)  have  desired  to  see 
these  things  which  we  see,  and  have  not  seen  them.  God  give  us  grace  to 
use  our  happiness  to  His  glory  and  the  salvation  of  us  all.  (W.  Jones,  D.D.) 
The  progressiveness  of  revelation : — In  these  few  words  are  set  forth  the  relation  in 
which  the  two  dispensations  stand  to  one  another,  the  hght  in  which  the  revelation 
as  a  whole  is  to  be  regarded.  No  words  can  more  strongly  lay  down  a  principle 
which  was  for  long  regarded  with  suspicion.    That  revelation  was  given  by  degreei. 


CHAP.  I.]  HEBREWS.  19 

This  truth  is  necessary  in  order  to  prove  the  necessity  or  even  the  allowableness  of 
Christianity ;  the  incompleteness  of  the  first  covenant  must  be  admitted  ere  the  reason 
for  the  existence  of  the  second  could  be  perceived.  God  bad  undoubtedly  spoken,  bui 
how  had  He  spoken  ?  He  bad  spoken  at  sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners.  1.  At 
sundry  times,  or  rather,  by  divers  portions.  It  was  by  degrees — fragmentarily — one 
trutk  at  one  time,  another  at  another.  And  the  degree  in  which  God  was  known, 
in  wbich  He  had  been  manifested  to  successive  generations,  was  clearly  not  the 
same  in  all.  There  might  be  faith,  there  might  be  obedience  in  all  ages  to  Him. 
who  was  invisible ;  but  unquestionably,  though  the  men  of  one  generation  might 
not  be  better  than  the  men  of  another — though,  unfortunately,  in  all  sin  and  un- 
belief  had  prevailed,  yet  who  could  not  see  that,  as  time  went  on,  there  were  new 
truths  insisted  on,  new  discoveries  made  as  to  His  holiness  and  His  spirituality  ; 
that  while  it  was  the  same  eternal  One  whom  men  served  or  dishonoured,  the  way 
in  which  His  will  revealed  itself  varied  from  age  to  age ;  that  the  knowledge  of 
David  or  of  Jeremiah  was  different  from  the  knowledge  of  Noah  or  of  Abraham  f 
This  difference — this  evolution,  we  might  almost  call  it — lies  upon  the  surface  of 
the  Old  Testament.  The  history  which  is  recorded  there  is,  as  has  frequently  been 
pointed  out,  like  the  biography  of  an  individual  life.  It  narrates  so  palpably  the 
childhood,  the  youth,  the  manhood  of  a  race;  the  education  in  Divine  things,  the 
development  of  spiritual  truth.  There  were  times  when  there  were  no  Scriptures 
and  no  solemn  ceremonies ;  there  were  times  when  men  observed  the  complicated 
ritual  of  the  law ;  tbere  were  times  when  men  worshipped  amid  the  splendours  of 
the  Temple  ;  there  were  days  when  in  exile  they  could  not  sing  the  Lord's  song  in 
a  strange  land.  Thus  gradually,  thus  at  different  times,  as  they  were  able  to  bear 
it,  they  heard  God  speaking.  2.  And  varied  as  were  the  times  in  which  He  had 
spoken  to  men,  equally  varied  were  the  modes  which  He  had  employed  to  make 
them  listen.  How  diversified  was  that  volume  in  which  they  thought  they  had 
eternal  life.  By  what  different  means  were  its  lessons  conveyed  :  by  command- 
ments and  by  promises,  by  similitudes  and  by  symbols,  by  prophecy  and  by  visions. 
History,  psalms,  proverbs,  poetry,  philosophy,  all  were  in  turn  employed ;  the  heart, 
the  mind,  the  imagination  were  in  turn  appealed  to.  How  different  also  from  one 
another  were  those  to  whom  the  Word  of  the  Lord  came.  But  amid  all  the  variety 
there  was  unity,  amid  all  the  diversity  of  means  there  was  oneness  of  end  and  aim. 
There  was  progress,  there  was  order.  The  whole  revelation  pointed  onward,  con- 
fessed itself  imperfect  and  shadowy,  placed  its  completion  and  glory  in  the  future, 
could  not  be  realised  until  what  it  showed  forth  in  figare  and  under  a  veil  should  be 
fully  manifested.  "  Consciously  or  unconsciously,"  as  has  been  said  by  DeiU 
Stanley,  *'  the  character  and  writings  of  the  rest  of  the  Bible  fall  into  their  relative 
places  around  the  gospel  history,  as  surely  as  in  that  history  itself  the  soldiers, 
priests,  disciples,  Jews,  and  Romans  derive  their  interest  and  significance  from 
being  grouped  round  the  central  figure,  and  round  the  Cross  on  Calvary."  3.  God 
hath  spoken  in  His  Son,  the  brightness,  the  effulgence,  the  shining-forth  of  His 
glory,  the  express  image  of  His  Person,  the  impress  of  His  substance,  the  essence 
of  the  Divine  Being,  the  revelation  of  the  very  heart  of  God.  In  Him  has  been 
seen  the  embodiment  of  the  Eternal  Power  by  which  the  worlds  were  made.  la 
Him  has  been  unveiled  the  Eternal  Love  by  which  all  things  are  preserved  and  sus- 
tained. In  His  sacrifice  has  been  seen  that  offering  of  Himself  through  the  Eternal 
Spirit  without  spot,  to  God,  which  alone  can  purify  and  reconcile  a  guilty  world. 
In  His  exaltation  to  the  right  hand  of  God  is  seen  the  completion  of  the  Divine 
purpose,  the  final  triumph  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  our  own  deliverance  from  sin 
and  faultless  appearance  before  the  throne,  the  gathering  together  in  one  of  all 
things  in  Christ,  both  which  are  in  heaven  and  which  are  on  earth.  (P.  3J. 
Muir.)  The  Old  and  the  New  Testavient  dispensations  compared  with  respect  ta 
the   different   ways   in  which   the  will    of  God  wag  revealed  in  each  : — I.    The 

MANNEB   IN    WHICH    GoD    COMMUNICATED   HlS    WILL   IN    OlD    TESTAMENT    TIMES.        Tbis 

He  is  said  in  the  text  to  have  done  "  at  sundry  times,  and  in  divers  manners."  The 
sundry  times  here  spoken  of  may  perhaps  refer  to  the  three  great  eras  of  the  Old 
Testament  history — the  patriarchal,  the  Mosaic,  and  the  prophetical  ages  of  the 
Church.  But  as  this  view  of  the  subject,  however  warrantable  in  itself,  would  con- 
duce but  little  to  the  elucidation  of  the  subject,  namely,  the  manner  in  which  the 
will  of  God  was  revealed,  we  shall  consider  the  sundry  times  here  spoken  of  as 
referring  simply  to  the  gradual  and  successive  intimations  of  God's  will,  which 
were  given  to  the  fathers,  or  Old  Testament  saints,  from  the  time  of  Adam  to  the 
time  of  Christ.    During  the  whole  of  that  period,  though  the  maimers  in  which  He 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i 

spake  were  divers,  yet  there  is  one  common  property  which  belonged  to  tte  mode  ol 
all  His  communications,  namely,  that  they  were  made  "  by  the  prophets."  1.  Let 
ns,  then,  briefly  glance  at  the  means  by  which,  when  the  prophets  had  ascertained 
the  will  of  God  for  themselves,  they  communicated  it  to  the  people.  The  two  great 
means  by  which  the  prophets  communicated  God's  will  to  the  people  were  words 
and  representative  acts.  2.  But  before  it  could  be  communicated  by  the  prophets 
to  the  people,  it  required  first  of  all  to  be  announced  to  the  prophets  themselves. 
And  this  also  God  accomplished  not  only  at  sundry  times,  but  in  divers  manuers. 
Sometimes  it  was  effected  by  an  impulse  or  inspiration  of  the  Spirit  upon  the  mind 
— "holy  men  of  old  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost" — and  sometimes 
by  an  audible  voice,  as  it  was  to  Elijah  when  he  stood  upon  the  mount  before  the 
Lord  (1  Kings  xix.  11-13).  But  there  was  yet  another  mode  of  communication 
between  God  and  His  prophets  more  striking  and  wonderful.  We  find  frequent 
instances  in  the  Old  Testament  history  of  the  appearance  of  a  mysterious  visitor 
from  heaven,  who  talks  with  His  servants  face  to  face.  This  is  to  be  understood 
of  Christ,  our  own  Immanuel,  the  great  Prophet  of  the  Church.  It  was  the  eternal 
"  Word,"  though  not  then  "made  flesh,"  whose  voice  was  heard  by  the  first  guilty 
pair  in  Eden,  in  the  cool  of  the  day,  who  appeared  to  Abraham,  and  wrestled  with 
Jacob.  It  was  our  identical  Saviour  who,  having  heard  the  groaning  of  His  people 
in  Egypt,  came  down  to  deliver  them,  and  gave  Moses  his  commission  from  the 
midst  of  the  bush.  In  short,  it  was  He  by  whom  the  scheme  of  salvation  has  been 
administered  from  its  commencement,  and  shall  continue  to  be  administered  till 
its  close.  What  a  glorious  consistency  is  thus  stamped  upon  the  whole  scheme  of 
grace  1  U.  The  mode  in  which  God  is  now  addressino  us  under  the  New 
Testament  dispensation.  God  "  hath  in  these  last  days  spoken  unto  us  by  His 
Son."  The  use  of  the  word  "  spoken  "  is  here  striking  and  pecuhar.  It  is  not  said 
that  God  hath  sent  us  a  message,  but  that  He  hath  spoken  to  us,  by  or  in  His  Son. 
It  seems  to  contain  an  allusion  to  one  of  Christ's  titles — "  The  Word."  Just  as  a 
word  spoken  or  written  is  an  audible  or  visible  representation  of  invisible  thought, 
BO  is  Christ  "  the  visible  image  of  the  invisible  God."  "  No  man  hath  seen  God  at 
any  time,  the  only-begotten  Son,  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  He  hath 
declared  Him."  Now,  as  we  have  already  seen  that  there  were  two  ways  in  which 
the  prophets  addressed  the  people,  namely,  by  words  and  by  reprepentative  acts,  so 
there  are  two  ways  in  which  the  Son  of  God  addresses  us.  He  speaks  to  us  both 
by  His  preaching  and  by  His  patience,  by  what  He  said  and  by  what  He  suffered. 
Is  there  not  a  speaking  power  in  the  humbleness  of  His  birth,  and  the  stedfastness 
of  His  obedience — in  His  fasting,  aud  watching,  and  temptation — in  His  tears,  and 
His  agonies,  and  His  cries.  As  He  hung  upon  the  Cross,  a  spectacle  to  angels  and 
to  men.  His  latest  words,  "  It  is  finished,"  tell  of  His  completed  obedience,  and 
the  full  purchase  of  eternal  salvation  to  as  many  as  believe.  And  even  after  His 
body  has  ceased  to  breathe,  and  His  heart  has  ceased  to  beat,  what  mean  those  out- 
stretched arms — those  bleeding  hands?  Do  they  not  tell  of  the  efficacy  of  His 
Mediatorship  for  reconciling  sinners  to  the  Holy  One?    III.  Let  us  now  compare 

THESE  TWO  modes  IN  WHICH  GoD  HAS  REVEALED  HiS  WILL  BT  NOTICING  A  FEW 
POINTS   OF   RESEMBLANCE    AND    CONTRAST    BETWEEN    THEM.        1.    NoW     it     is    obvioUS    tO 

remark  that  the  revelation  contained  in  the  Old  Testament  and  that  contained  in 
the  New  have  the  same  author.  Both  are  from  God.  Nor  is  there  any  difference 
in  regard  to  their  substance.  Christ  is  set  forth  as  the  object  of  saving  faith  in 
both.  2.  Let  us  now  consider  wherein  they  differ.  (1)  First,  then,  there  is  this 
obvious  difference  between  them,  that  the  way  of  salvation  is  more  clearly  revealed 
to  us  than  it  was  to  the  fathers.  The  Old  and  the  New  Testament  revelations  thua 
resemble  the  lesser  and  the  greater  lights  which  were  made,  the  one  "  to  rule  the 
night,"  the  other  "  to  rule  the  day."  (2)  But,  again,  the  will  of  God  is  now  revealed 
more  extensively  than  it  was  under  the  ancient  economy.  Under  that  economy  the 
written  revelation  of  God's  will  was  confined  to  the  Jews.  (3)  Once  more,  the 
revelation  made  to  us  in  the  gospel  is  final,  and  therefore  more  enduring  than  that 
contained  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures.  The  revelations  which  those  Scriptures 
contained,  and  the  economy  with  which  they  were  more  immediately  connected, 
were  not  intended  to  be  final.  (4)  But,  finally,  the  most  important  distinction  of 
all  remains  to  be  noticed.  In  times  past,  God  spake  to  the  fathers  by  the  prophets, 
but  He  hath  in  these  last  days  spoken  to  us  by  His  Son.  Not  that  we  are  to  sup- 
pose that  in  former  times  God  spake  to  the  prophets  directly  and  immediately  with- 
out the  intervention  or  mediatorship  of  the  Son.  We  have  already  seen  that  it  has 
always  been  the  office  of  Christ  to  reveal  as  well  as  to  purchase  salvation  for  His 


CHA*.  I.]  HEBREWS.  IS 

people.  Bat  the  grand  distinctive  difference  consists  in  this — that  while  formerly 
the  Son  of  God,  in  His  Divine  person,  revealed  the  will  of  God  to  the  prophets  ;  in 
these  last  times,  Jesus  Christ,  Incarnate,  hath  revealed  the  will  of  God  to  the 
Church.  In  conclusion,  are  there  any  who,  while  gratefully  alive  to  the  importance 
of  all  these  distinctions,  and  joyfully  appreciating  the  pre-eminent  privileges  now 
possessed,  yet  feel  as  if  all  these  advantages  were  counterbalanced  by  the  fact  that 
the  Jewish  people  lived  under  a  theocracy,  and  that  prophets  were  raised  up  to 
address  them  from  time  to  time,  according  to  the  ever-varying  exigencies  of  their 
condition,  while  Christ  is  now  gone  "  to  His  Father  and  our  Father,"  and  we  have 
no  farther  revelation  to  expect,  however  our  circumstances  may  vary  ?  Now  it  is 
most  true  that  the  Shekinah  is  no  longer  visible,  resting  upon  the  mercy-seat,  and 
that  He  whom  the  Shekinah  represented  no  longer  tabernacles  among  men.  '•  The 
heavens  have  received  Him  until  the  time  of  the  restitution  of  all  things."  Yet  He 
has  not  left  His  people  comfortless.  Among  His  latest  words  we  find  the  promise 
recorded,  "Lo!  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  to  the  end  of  the  world."  But  the 
objection  keeps  out  of  view  the  important  truth  that  Christ  still  "  walks  among  the 
seven  golden  candlesticks " — that  He  sends  forth  His  Spirit  to  enlighten  His 
people's  eyes,  and  to  comfort  His  people's  hearts.  Indeed,  the  objection  seems  to 
be  anticipated  and  answered  by  the  very  form  of  expression  in  the  text.  "  God  hath 
Bpoken  to  us  by  His  Son  "  ;  aa  if  He  had  said.  You  are  not  dependent  merely  upon 
a  dead  book  for  counsel  and  consolation ;  you  have  a  living  teacher,  an  ever-present 
guide  1  (A.  Grierson,  M.A.)  The  heavenly  voice: — God  has  now  ceased  to  speak 
in  sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners ;  therefore,  if  you  dream,  you  are  not  to  put 
a  construction  on  your  dream  as  if  God  inspired  it.  And  hence,  if  God  has  ceased 
thus  to  speak,  we  may  expect  now  that  the  Bible,  beginning  with  Genesis  and  closing 
with  the  Apocaljpse,  is  the  completed  volume  of  all  God's  will  and  God's  ways;  and 
that  we  are  not  to  expect  any  additional  revelation  in  the  course  of  this  present 
dispensation ;  for  God  has  now,  says  the  apostle,  in  this  passage,  spoken  to  us  by 
His  Son.  Man  left  to  his  own  fancy  falls  into  all  sorts  of  idolatries  and  delusions ; 
and  it  is  only  when  God  speaks  that  man  responds  rationally,  and  justly,  and  purely, 
and  worships  Him  who  is  a  Spirit  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  We  must  notice  here 
what  is  very  remarkable ;  God  speaks  to  us  by  His  Son.  You  must  have  heard 
sometimes  those  who  object  to  the  Bible  as  the  only  rule  of  faith  argue  that  they 
want  a  speaking  judge ;  they  want  a  hving  high-priest,  or  prelate,  or  pope,  who 
will  speak  audibly  as  well  as  infallibly  to  them.  We  answer,  though  they  may  feel 
the  want  of  it,  yet  il  such  an  officer  be  not  given,  it  is  presumptuous  evidence  that 
it  is  not  necessary.  But  the  fact  asserted  here,  that  God  speaks  in  the  Bible,  is 
evidence  that  we  actually  have  a  speaking  tribunal.  The  Bible  is  spoken  every 
day ;  there  is  a  freshness  in  every  chapter  of  the  Bible  that  makes  us  feel  that  we 
are  reading  something  higher  than  man's  writing,  and  are  in  contact  with  God 
speaking  to  us  in  these  last  days  by  His  Son.  I  might  argue,  in  the  next  place, 
the  great  necessity  of  such  a  revelation.  If  this  earth  were  as  it  once  was  before 
Bin  corrupted  it,  it  would  be  a  lesson-book  that  any  one  might  adduce  as  quite 
sufficient  to  teach  us  all  we  ought  to  know.  But  if  there  were  placed  in  your  hands 
a  book  with  a  great  many  precious  lessons  in  it,  but  all  stained  and  blotted  with 
ink,  and  so  stained  and  blotted  that  whole  pages  are  illegible,  that  fragments  of 
other  passages  only  are  legible,  and  those  fragments  broken  sentences,  that  you 
cannot  fully  understand,  some  of  which  at  times  convey  meaning  positively  opposite 
to  that  which  they  originally  were  designed  to  convey,  you  would  be  very  anxious 
to  have  some  book  clearer,  distincter,  and  more  intelhgible.  This  world  of  ours  is 
that  blotted  book,  stained  by  sin ;  and  what  it  revealed  when  it  was  made  in 
Paradise  as  the  grand  and  the  illuminated  lesson-book,  it  has  lost  and  is  now  unable 
to  reveal.  And  if  we  appeal  to  the  inner  page  of  conscience  for  an  estimate  of  God, 
there  is  in  the  conscience  of  the  holiest  upon  earth  so  much  sin,  that  if  we  look  at 
God  through  the  misty  and  broken  atmosphere  of  our  own  consciences,  our  sins 
will  instantly  suggest  the  notion  of  an  angry  and  an  offended  God.  If,  again,  we  look 
into  the  law ;  if  we  stand  with  the  Israelites  at  the  bottom  of  the  burning  mount, 
and  see  the  lightning  and  hear  the  thunder,  and  listen  to  God's  voice  as  He  pro- 
claims, *•  Thou  shalt,  and  thou  shalt  not,"  we,  like  Moses,  must  quake  ;  and  like 
the  children  of  Israel,  we,  too,  should  beg  that  God  would  be  silent,  and  not  speak 
any  more  to  us.  God  in  nature  is  above  us,  and  inscrutable  by  our  investigation  to 
a  very  great  extent ;  God  in  the  law  is  against  us ;  but  God  in  Christ  is  God  with 
us,  our  Father  and  our  Guide.  And,  therefore,  we  rejoice  now  to  hear  the  apostle 
Bay  in  this  passage  that  God,  who  spake  at  sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [cha».  u 

in  times  past,  has  now  spoken  to  os  by  His  Son.  But  what  has  He  spoken  f 
Words  of  truth,  words  of  Ufe,  words  of  peace,  and  happiness,  and  hope,  and  joy. 
The  Bible  was  not  written  to  teach  me  anything  but  religion.  If  the  geologist 
come  and  consult  it  for  lessons  in  geology,  the  oracle  is  dumb  ;  if  the  astronomer 
come  and  ask  for  explanations  about  the  stars,  it  is  dumb ;  if  the  philosopher  ask 
it  for  explanations  about  metaphysical  subjects,  the  oracle  is  also  dumb.  But  il 
the  humblest  peasant  or  the  poorest  mechanic  inquire  of  it  the  way  to  heaven,  it 
will  tell  him  in  a  thousand  places,  by  a  thousand  different  simihtudes,  so  plainly, 
80  intelligibly,  that  the  wayfaring  man  need  not  err  therein.  Now,  what  He  has 
said  in  this  blessed  book  by  His  Son,  and  what  He  still  speaks  in  it,  is  a  word  for 
aU ;  it  is  an  encycUcal,  addressed  from  heaven  to  all  that  God  has  made,  from  the 
rising  of  the  sun  to  the  going  down  of  the  same ;  so  much  so,  that  if  you  are  not 
acquainted  with  the  Bible,  it  is  not  because  the  Bible  was  not  sent  to  you,  but 
because  you  have  not  studied  it.  Let  us  be  thankful  that  God  has  thus  spoken  to 
us ;  let  us  study  this  precious  book ;  let  us  pray  that  the  Spirit  would  lead  us  unto 
all  truth ;  and  especially  plead  that  promise  that  He  will  take  of  whatsoever  Christ 
has  said,  that  is,  whatsoever  God  has  spoken  by  His  Son,  and  will  show  it  unto 
us.  {J.  Cumminij,  D.D.)  The  variety  of  prophetic  revelation : — Some  men  ask, 
If  the  prophets  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  why  did  they  not  all 
speak  in  the  same  manner  ?  why  these  varieties  of  style  ?  I  will  answer  that  by 
asking  you  another  question :  Why  do  not  all  the  pipes  of  that  organ  give  one  and 
the  same  sound  ?  What  awakens  all  the  sounds,  but  one  and  the  same  blast  from 
the  wind-chest  ?  If  there  be  a  mono-blast,  why  is  there  not  a  mono-tone  ?  Because 
the  pipes  are  of  different  shapes  and  different  sizes  :  the  awakening  breath  is  one, 
the  intonation  varies  with  the  shape  and  size  of  the  pipe.  The  inspiration  was  one, 
but  the  style  and  manner  varied  with  the  disposition  and  character  of  tlie  individual 
employed.  (H.  M^Neile.)  Progressive  revelation: — It  is  impossible  rightly  to 
comprehend  Scripture  if  we  read  it  as  we  read  the  Koran,  as  though  it  were  in  all 
its  parts  of  equal  authority,  all  composed  at  one  time,  and  all  addressed  to  persona 
similarly  situated.  (Thos.  Arnold,  D.D.)  Judaism  and  Christianity  : — Canon 
Stubbs  says  in  his  "  History  of  England  "  that  "  the  roots  of  the  present  lie  deep 
in  the  past,  and  that  nothing  in  the  past  is  dead  to  the  man  who  would  learn  how 
the  present  comes  to  be  what  it  is.  The  poUtical  forces  which  are  operatiug  now 
are  the  result  of  forces  which  have  been  operating  ever  since  Enghsh  history  began. 
What  they  are  cannot  be  understood  except  on  condition  of  understanding  whence 
they  come.  On  the  same  condition  only  can  it  be  foreseen  whither  they  tend." 
Now,  as  it  is  with  politics,  so  is  it  with  religion.  The  present  is  the  outgrowth 
of  the  past.  The  roots  of  the  tree  of  Christianity  lie  deep  in  the  soil  of 
Judaism.  The  New  Testament  comes  from  the  Old.  (J.  Fleming,  D.D.) 
These  last  days. — The  last  days : — It  hath  pleased  God  that  these  last  days  should 
be  many,  that  the  world  might  the  longer  enjoy  the  bright  light  of  the  gospel,  and 
that  all  that  are  ordained  to  life  might  in  their  due  time  be  called.  Why  are  they 
called  the  last  days  (as  here),  the  last  time  (1  John  ii.  18),  the  ends  of  the  world 
(1  Cor.  X.  11),  and  why  in  the  beginning  of  this  time  was  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
said  to  draw  nigh  (James  v.  8),  and  the  end  of  all  things  to  be  at  hand  ?  (1  Pet, 
iv,  7).  1.  By  the  exhibition  of  Christ  the  prophecies  and  promises  that  in  former 
times  were  maJe  of  Christ  were  accomplished,  therefore  as  the  days  wherein  these 
promises  and  prophecies  were  first  made  known  were  counted  the  first  days,  so 
these  wherein  they  were  accomplished  the  last.  2.  The  new  covenant  of  grace  is  in 
these  last  days  f uUy  revealed  by  the  gospel,  and  ratified  by  the  death  of  Christ ;  so 
as  no  clearer  revelation,  nor  former  ratification  can  be  expected,  and  in  this  respect 
also  they  are  fitly  styled  the  last  days.  3.  No  alteration  of  the  state  and  order  of 
God's  Church  is  to  be  expected  after  Christ  exhibited,  but  a  final  end  of  all  by 
Christ's  second  coming  unto  judgment ;  therefore  these  days  may  be  accounted  the 
ends  of  the  world,  and  the  end  of  all  things  to  be  at  hand.  4.  As  God  at  first  made 
all  things  in  six  days,  and  rested  the  seventh,  so  He  continueth  to  govern  the  world 
in  six  distinct  times,  which  may  be  accounted  as  six  days  of  the  great  week  of  the 
world,  and  eternity  following  an  everlasting  Sabbath.  The  first  of  these  days  was 
from  Adam  to  Noah ;  in  it  the  covenant  of  grace  was  first  made  to  man.  The 
second  was  from  Noah  to  Abraham ;  in  it  that  covenant  was  renewed.  The  third 
was  from  Abraham  to  David  ;  in  it  that  covenant  was  appropriated  to  Abraham  and 
his  seed.  The  fourth  was  from  David  to  the  captivity  of  Israel;  in  it  that  covenant 
was  established  in  a  royal  line.  The  fifth  was  from  their  captivity  to  Christ's 
eoming  in  the  flesh ;  in  it  as  the  brightness  of  that  covenant  was  eclipsed  by  the 


CHAP.  I.]  HEBREWS.  17 

captivity ;  so  it  was  revived  by  Israel's  return  out  of  the  captivity  and  re-edifying  the 
Temple.     The  sixth  was  and  still  is  and  shall  be  from  Christ's  first  coming  in  the 
flesb  to  Hia  secDnd  coming  in  glory;  even  to  ths  tnd  of  the  world.     In  it  that 
covenant  most  clearly  and  fully  laid  open,  was  most  nrmly  and  inviolably  ratified. 
Now  when  the  sixth  day,  which  is  the  last  day,  is  come,  then  the  end  of  tiie  week 
may  well  be  said  to  be  at  hand  ;  and  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  following  thereupon, 
to  draw  nigh.    (W.  Gouge.)       Our  cotidltion  under  the  gospel : — 1.  In  those  that  were 
the  first  days  some  new  doctrine  was  daily  to  be  expected,  but  in  these  last  days 
God  hath  opened  to  us  His  whole  counsel,  there  is  no  mint  of  any  new  doctrine  to 
be  looked  for.     If  an  angel  from  heaven  preach  any  other  doctrine  than  that  which 
we  have  received  in  these  last  days  let  him  be  accursed.   2.  In  the  last  days  there  is 
greatest  abundance  of  knowledge.     "  In  the  last  days  I  will  pour  out  My  Spirit  ott 
all  flesh."     God  then  was  sparing  of  His  Spirit,  He  sent  it  down  by  drops,  but  now 
He  pours  it  out  upon  the  Church.     They  had  the  moonlight,  we  have  the  sunlight. 
Therefore  if  we  be  ignorant  our  condemnation  shall  be  the  greater.     The  preaching 
of  the  Word  is  a  well  of  water,  but  we  will  not  come  with  our  buckets  to  fetch  water 
at  this  well,  or  if  we  do  we  come  with  riven  buckets,  the  water  runs  out  by  and  by. 
3.  These  last  days  wherein  we  hve  are  the  most  dangerous ;  sin  overfloweth  with 
a  fall  stream.     In  the  last  days  perilous  times  shall  come.     Never  did  sin  show 
herself  with  such  a  brazen  face  as  it  doth  now.     Men  now  stick  not  to  set  them- 
selves against  the  Word  of  God  itself,  to  call  the  authority  of  the  Scripture  in 
question,  whether  all  things  be  true  in  it  or  not.     4.  Seeing  they  be  the  last  days, 
let  us  not  be  so  much  in  love  with  them.     Will  any  be  bestowing  great  cost  on  hia 
house  the  last  day,  when  he  is  to  go  out  of  it?   In  the  first  days,  when  they  entered 
first  into  the  farm  of  the  world,  they  might  be  merry ;  we  live  in  the  last  days, 
when  we  cannot  have  long  to  tarry  in  it,  therefore  let  us  not  be  wedded  to  it ;  let 
us  use  this  world  as  if  we  used  it  not,  for  the  fashion  of  this  world  fadeth  away  in 
these  last  days  ;  let  us  so  live  that  whensoever  Christ  comes  to  judgment  we  may 
meet  Him  joyfully  in  the  air  and  be  translated  with  Him  into  His  kingdom  of 
glory.     (W.  Jones,  D.D.)        By  His  Son. — Christ  the  Son: — Two  critical  remarks. 
1.  "  Sundry  times  " — more  Uterally,  sundry  portions — sections,  not  of  time,  but  of 
the  matter  of  the  revelation.     God  gave  His  revelation  in  parts,  piecemeal,  as  you 
teach  a  child  to  spell  a  word — letter  by  letter,  syllable  by  syllable — adding  all  at 
last  together.     God  had  a  word  to  spell — His  own  Name.     By  degrees  He  did  it. 
At  last  it  came  entire.     The  Word  was  made  flesh.     2.  "  His  Son,"  more  correctly, 
"  a  Son  " — for  this  is  the  very  argument.     Not  that  God  now  spoke  by  Christ,  but 
that  whereas  once  He  spoke  by  prophets,  now  He  spoke  by  a  Son.     The  filial  dis- 
pensation was  the  last.    I  am  to  show,  then,  that  the  manifestation  of  God  through 
a  Sun  was  implied,  not  realised,  in  the  earlier  dispensation.     "  Sundry  portions  " 
of  this  truth  are  instanced  in  the  Epistle.    The  mediatorial  dispensation  of  Moses — 
the  gift  of  Canaan — the  Sabbath,  &c.     At  present  I  select  these  :  1.  The  prepara- 
tory dispensation.    2.  The  fihal  and  final  dispensation.    I.  It  was  implied,  not 
FULFILLED,  IN  THE  KINGLY  OFFICE.     Three  Psalms  are  quoted,  all  referring  to  king- 
ship.    In  Psalm  ii.  it  was  plain  that  the  true  idea  of  a  king  was  only  fulfilled  in 
One  who  was  a  Son  of  God.     In  the  110th  Psalm  a  new  idea  is  added.     The  true 
king  must  be  a  priest.    "  Thou  art  a  priest  for  ever,  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek." 
Further  still.    The  Epistle  extends  this  idea  to  man.    The  psalm  had  ascribed  (Psa. 
viii.  6)  kingly  qualities  and  rule  to  manhood — rule  over  the  creation.     Thus  the 
idea  of  a  king  belonged  properly  to  humanity  ;  to  the  Jewish  king  as  the  repre- 
sentative of  humanity.    In  Jesus  of  Nazareth  alone  all  these  fragments,  these 
sundry  portions  of  the  revealed  idea  of  royalty  met.     II.  Chkistianiiy  was  implied 
IN  THE  RACE  OF  PROPHETS.     Tbe  sccond  class  of  quotations  refer  to  the  prophets'  Ufa 
and  history  (chap.  ii.  11-14 ;  Psa.  xxii.  22,  xviii.  2 ;  Isa.  xii.  2,  viii.  18).   Eemember 
what  the  prophets  were.     They  were  not  merely  predictors  of  the  future.     Nothing 
destroys  the  true  conception  of  the  prophets'  office  more  than  those  popular  books 
in  which  their  mission  is  certified  by  curious  coincidences.     But  in  truth,  the  first 
ofl5ce  of  the  prophet  was  with  the  present.     He  read  eternal  principles  beneath  the 
present  and  the  transitory,  and  in  doing  this  of  course  he  prophesied  the  future  ; 
for  a  principle  true  to-day  is  true  for  ever.     But  this  was,  so  to  speak,  an  accident 
of  his  office  :  not  its  essential  feature.     A  philosopher  saying  in  the  present  tense 
the  law  by  which  comets  move,  predicts  all  possible  coaietary  movements.    Now  the 
prophet's  life  almost  more  than  his  words  was  predictive.     The  writer  of  thig 
Epistle  lays  down  a  great  principle  respecting  the  prophet,  "Both  he  that  sanctifietii 
and  they  who  are  saacti£ed  are  all  of  one."    It  was  the  very  condition  of  his 

2 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

isspiratioa  that  he  should  be  one  with  the  people.  He  burned  with  their  thoughts, 
and  expressed  them.  He  was  obliged  by  the  very  sensitiveness  of  Lis  humanity  to 
have  a  more  entire  dependence  and  a  more  perfect  sympathy  than  other  men.  The 
sanctifying  prophet  was  one  with  those  whom  he  sanctified.  Hence  he  uses  those 
expressions  quoted  from  Isaiah  and  the  Psalms  above.  He  was  more  man,  just 
because  more  Divine — more  a  son  of  man,  because  more  a  son  of  God.  He  was 
peculiarly  the  suffering  Israelite :  His  countenance  marred  more  than  the  sons  of 
men.  III.  The  peiesthood  continued  this  idea  latent.  1.  The  Jewish  priest  repre- 
sented the  holiness  of  the  nation  ;  he  went  into  the  holy  of  holies,  showing  it.  But 
this  great  idea  was  only  implied,  not  fulfilled  in  the  Jewish  priest.  He  was  only  by 
a  fiction  the  representative  of  holiness.  Holy  he  was  not.  He  only  entered  into  a 
fictitious  holy  of  holies.  If  the  idea  were  to  be  ever  real,  it  must  be  in  One  who 
should  be  actually  what  the  Jewish  priest  was  by  a  figment,  and  who  should  carry 
our  humanity  into  the  real  holy  of  holies — the  presence  of  God ;  thus  becoming 
our  invisible  and  eternal  Priest.  2.  Next  it  was  implied  that  his  call  must  be 
Divine.  But  in  the  110th  Psalm  a  higher  call  is  intimated  than  that  Divine  call 
which  was  made  to  the  Aarouic  priesthood  by  a  regular  succession,  or  as  it  is  called 
in  the  Epistle,  •'  the  law  of  a  carnal  commandment."  Melchizedek's  call  is  spoken 
of.  The  king  is  called  a  priest  after  his  order.  Not  a  derived  or  hereditary  priest- 
hood: not  one  transmissible,  beginning  and  ending  in  himself  (chap.  vii.  1-3),  but 
a  priesthood  in  other  words,  of  character,  of  inward  right :  a  call  internal,  hence 
more  Divine :  or,  as  the  writer  calls  it,  a  priest  "  after  the  power  of  an  endless 
life."  This  was  the  idea  for  which  the  Jewish  psalms  themselves  ought  to  have 
prepared  the  Jew.  3.  Again  the  priests  offered  gifts  and  sacrifices.  Only  Christ's 
all-perfect  sacrifice  of  Himself  can  avail  in  the  sight  of  God.  He  is  the  only  High 
Priest  of  the  universe.  {F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  God  hath  spoken  by  His  Son  : — 
I.  The  first  truth  which  God  has  made  known  to  us,  the  important  conclusion 
resulting  from  His  message  by  Christ,  is  the  infinite  value  of  the  soul,  and  the 
misery  to  which  it  is  reduced  by  sin  :  that  is,  by  a  thoughtless  neglect  of  God,  or  a 
practical  disobedience  to  His  will.  II.  The  second  truth  which  is  declared  to  us  in 
the  gospel  relates  to  the  way  of  salvation  ;  the  way  in  which  this  fearful  interest 
of  the  soul  may  be  secured.  III.  The  third  truth  which  I  mention  at  present  as 
brought  to  light  by  the  gospel,  is  the  need  of  the  renewal  of  the  soul  in 
BiGHTEOUBNESS,  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (Arclibp.  Sumner.)  God 
revealed  by  Christ : — Imagine  a  painter  who  loved  his  art,  and  who  had  a  son  he 
loved  so  well  that  he  would  not  do  a  bad  piece  of  art.  By  and  by  the  painter  dies, 
and  ote  day  the  son  enters  a  gallery  and  stands  and  hears  all  tLe  empty  talk  and 
idle  judgment  of  the  crowd,  as  they  stand  before  his  father's  great  masterpiece  and 
fail  to  understand  it.  How  would  that  son  say  to  himself,  "  These  do  not  know 
thee  ;  but  I  know  thee,  and  my  knowledge  shall  vanquish  their  ignorance."  What 
is  here  imagined  has  happened.  When  this  generation  was  young  the  greatest 
painter  of  the  day  was  unknown.  Turner  awaited  an  audience  ;  but  Buskin  arose, 
saw  and  interpreted  him,  and  the  world  suddenly  found  itself  enriched  not  simply 
by  the  works  of  a  great  painter,  but  also  of  a  great  writer  and  thinker  as  well.  So 
let  us  mark  that  if  we  are  to  reach  God  as  Christ  knew  Him  it  must  be  through  the 
Christ  who  knew.  (A.  M.  Fairbaim,  D.D.)  The  final  revelation:  its  helpful- 
ness : — Fathers,  mothers,  when  you  set  your  little  ones  some  task,  and  they  come 
and  ask  you  how  it  is  to  be  done,  very  Ukely  you  have  repeated  instructions  over 
and  over  again  ;  but  still  they  do  not  understand.  And  then  you  have  taken  it  in 
your  hands  and  worked  it  out  before  their  eyes,  and  shown  the  principles  that  you 
could  not  explain  or  define  embodied  in  actual  form  ;  and  they  had  then  to  study 
the  reahsed  product,  to  see  how  to  copy  it,  and  work  it  out  again  in  their  own  way. 
God  has  asked  from  His  earthly  children  the  task  of  the  true  life,  truly  lived ;  they 
have  asked  of  Him  its  principles  and  the  method  of  their  application  ;  and  by  the 
mouth  of  lawgiver,  and  prophet,  and  priest,  He  has  explained  and  defined.  But 
the  mind  of  man  could  not  comprehend.  There  remained  one  way,  and  only  one. 
It  was  that  God  Himself  should  take  in  hand  the  task  of  life,  and  liva  it  out  before 
the  world.  It  was  that  He  should  work  out  its  principles,  and  make  them  actual 
in  flesh  and  blood,  and  leave  to  men  the  will  of  God  embodied  for  all  time  in  the 
exemplary  and  redemptive  work  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  the  end  and  crown  of 
revelation.  From  the  study  of  that  life  it  is  possible  to  derive  all  guidance  in  aU 
difficulty.  It  is  the  law  of  every  nature.  It  is  the  commandment  of  God  for  us ; 
and  it  is  the  inspiration  and  potency  of  all  our  effort,  and  the  reward  of  all  our  life. 
For  as,  then,  Jesus  Christ  and  our  knowledge  of  Him  is  at  once  our  matchlesi 


cnA».  I.]  HEBREWS.  19 

inspiration,  and  the  measure  of  our  shortcoming  and  our  sin.  It  would  be  possible 
for  us  to  keep  the  Ten  Commandments  and  yet  to  live  lives  of  very  low  morality. 
The  standard  is  raised  ;  the  standard  is  rising.  The  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 
in  unfolding  the  holiness  of  Christ,  is  beginning  to  condemn  many  things  that  past 
generations  were  content  to  condone.  "  God  is  not  dumb  that  He  should  speak  no 
more."  The  holiness  of  Chiist  is  dawning  on  the  world.  There  is  the  world's 
hope.  (C.  S.  Home,  M.A.)  Revelation  by  Jesus;  its  certainty: — It  is  four 
hundred  years  since  the  lieroio  Columbus  sailed  over  the  Atlantic,  and  unveiled  to 
the  world  a  new  continent.  The  poets  had  sung  of  the  lost  island  Atlantis. 
Geographers  had  tried  to  guess  the  secrets  of  the  great  ocean.  Many  theories  had 
floated  about,  but  there  was  no  certainty.  But  when  the  brave  Genoese  landed  in 
Spain  with  his  trophies  and  his  wonderful  story  of  the  new  land,  his  words  were 
cot  as  other  men's.  He  had  seen  a  new  world,  and  men  crowded  to  hear  his  tale. 
There  was  not  such  another  man  in  Europe.  He  had  uncovered  or  discovered  a 
new  world,  and  his  achievement  made  him  a  unique  man.  Even  so  our  Lord 
discovered  to  us  the  great  spiritual  world — the  Eldorado  of  the  soul — the  world 
of  God,  of  perfect  life,  of  freedom  from  sin,  and  sickness,  and  death.  He  came 
from  that  world,  and  revealed  to  us  what  was  there.  He  was  not  as  other  men; 
He  had  unique  experiences,  and  so  was  empowered  to  tell  us  what  none  other  could. 
He  gave  us  not  waifs  from  an  unknown  world.  He  was  not  like  Isaac  Newton,  a 
learner  on  the  shore  of  an  unexplored  ocean  of  truth.  He  had  explored  that  ocean, 
and  mastered  its  secrets,  and  His  story  is  a  statement  of  facts.  (Archibald  Hadden.) 
If  Christiuiiiiy  is  Divine,  why  was  it  so  long  in  being  given  to  the  wnrld  f — A  teacher 
dare  not  plunge  a  child  all  at  once  in  medias  res.  He  begins  with  the  alphabet  and 
brings  him  on  little  by  little.  The  Hebrews,  not  less  than  the  heathens,  were 
unprepared  in  the  primitive  ages  for  the  full  blaze  of  gospel  day.  They  would  not 
have  been  prepared  to  understand  either  the  grandeur  of  Christ's  teaching,  or  the 
grandeur  of  His  life,  or  the  grandeur  of  His  death.  Let  the  boy  be  taught  his 
letters  and  his  grammar,  and  then  put  Milton  before  him.  And,  in  like  manner, 
God's  plan  seems  to  have  been  to  give  the  world  a  few  centuries  of  typical  teaching 
and  training  among  the  hills  of  Judah,  and  then  present  them  with  the  wondrous 
Logos,  the  Word  by  whom  all  things  were  made.  Besides,  it  seems  to  have  been 
the  purpose  of  the  Most  High  to  let  the  heathen  nations  find  out  the  vanity  of  their 
fal.-e  syst-ms  of  religion  and  philosophy.  Then,  when  the  mind  of  man  was  in  a 
sate  of  disquietude  and  unrest,  Jesus  came  to  whisper  His  heavenly  "Peace,  be 
still."  Paganism's  lords  many  and  gods  many  were  being  laughed  at  by  all  sensible 
men.  Even  in  the  hands  of  Plato  philosophy  had  declared  herself  to  be  only  a  tiny 
lamp;  whereas  surely  a  Sun  would  be  sent  to  illumine  our  darkness.  At  length  the 
fulness  of  time  arrived,  the  clock  struck  twelve  on  the  great  horologe  of  the  world, 
and  lol  "the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us."  (Evangelical  Re- 
pository.) Difficulties  in  the  Old  Testammt  do  not  warrant  the  r^ection  of  Chris- 
tianity: — It  is  a  logical  mistake  to  abandon  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  because  of 
difficulties,  insoluble  perhaps  to  us,  which  occur  in  the  books  of  the  Old  Testament. 
Look  at  the  block  of  marble  which  has  only  just  begun  to  feel  the  formative  hand 
of  the  sculptor,  and  you  may  be  uncertain  whetlier  or  no  the  great  master  has  really 
had  anything  to  do  with  the  rough  hewing  of  the  still  unshapely  mass;  but  because 
of  this  you  will  not  hesitate  when  the  idea  of  the  artist  is  perfected,  when  the 
marble  has  been  inspired  with  beauty,  majesty,  and  strength,  and  seems  to  have 
caught  an  immortal  life  from  the  imagination  of  genius.  And  so,  whatever  diffi- 
culty any  of  you  may  have  for  a  time — and  I  believe  it  will  only  be  for  a  time — in 
discovering  the  presence  of  God  in  His  primitive  revelations  to  the  human  race, 
this  should  be  no  reason  for  regarding  with  diminished  faith  the  fuU  revelation  He 
has  made  of  Himself  in  His  Sou.  (R.  W.  Dale,  LL.D.)  Jesiis  the  manifestation 
of  God  : — The  devout  heart  yearns  after  a  personal  God.  It  craves  for  something 
more  than  the  works  of  God,  however  replete  with  proofs  of  His  power  and  glory  ; 
it  wants  to  get  near  Himself.  Its  instinctive  desire  is  after  a  Father  and  a  Friend 
— a  loving  ear  into  which  its  sorrows  may  be  poured — a  loving  heart  on  which  its 
weaiiness  may  rest.  But  Omnipresence,  Omnipotence,  Being  without  form  or 
place.  Existence  without  beginning  or  end.  Eternal  Best  without  change  or  motion ; 
these,  in  their  very  sublimity,  constitute  a  notion  wliich  tends  to  repel  rather  than 
to  attract,  to  overwhelm  and  crush  rather  than  gently  to  raise  and  foster  our  human 
sympathies  and  desires.  Our  mortal  feebleness  shrinks  from  it  in  trembling  awe. 
The  heart  cannot  feed  on  sublimities.  We  cannot  make  a  home  of  this  cold  mag- 
nificence; we  cannot  take  Immensity  by  the  hand.    The  soul  lost  in  such  con- 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  ft 

templations,  like  a  trembling  child  wandering  on  some  mountain  solitudes,  longs, 
amidst  all  this  vastness  and  grandeur,  for  the  sound  of  some  famUiar  voice  to 
break  the  stillness,  or  the  sight  of  some  sheltered  spot  in  which  it  may  nestle  with 
the  sense  of  friendliness  and  security.  Now  that  which  is  thus  the  deep-felt  waut 
of  our  natures  is  most  fully  and  adequately  met  in  the  Person  of  Jesus  Christ.  For 
here  is  One  whom,  while  we  may  reverence  and  adore  as  God,  we  can  think  of  as 
clearly,  and  love  as  simply,  trustingly,  tenderly,  as  the  best  known  and  loved  of  our 
earthly  friends.  Here  is  a  point  which  our  shadowy  conceptions  may  condense,  » 
focus  towards  which  our  aimless  aspirations  may  tend.  Here  we  have  sot  before 
us  the  Boundless,  limited  in  form;  the  Eternal,  dwelling  in  time;  the  Invisible 
and  Spiritual  God  revealed  in  that  Word  of  Life  which  human  eyes  have  seen,  and 
human  hands  have  handled.  (J,  Caird,  D.D.)  Revelation  of  God  : — When  a 
prince,  affianced  to  the  heiress  of  some  distant  kingdom,  has  sent  his  portrait  to 
her  by  the  hand  of  his  vicegerent,  and  the  casket  comes,  it  is  so  glowing  with 
diamonds  and  with  sapphires  rare  that  it  seems  itself  to  be  priceless  ;  and  yet,  on- 
being  opened,  so  royal  is  the  face  within,  and  so  does  it  blaze  with  superior 
diamonds,  that  the  casket  becomes  forgotten.  So  God  is  revealed  as  a  world- 
builder  and  material  worker,  as  a  physical  governor,  as  grand  past  human  language; 
but  when  you  open  the  casket  and  behold  Jesus  Christ,  and  hear  His  voice  a9 
revealing  what  God  is  in  His  interior  disposition  and  mother  soul,  yon  forget  tha 
other.  [H.  W.  Beecher.)  Heathen  anticipations  of  the  Messiah : — ^From  the  remotest 
ages  prophetic  utterances,  announcing  better  times  and  a  coming  deliverance,  had 
pervaded  the  ancient  world.  Such  mutilated  and  ancient  prophecies  are  found 
amongst  the  most  widely  differing  nations.  It  was  the  hope  of  the  Persians  that 
a  time  would  come,  a  Messianic  time,  in  which  Ahriman  would  be  annihilated,  the 
world  renewed,  and  delivered  from  all  evil ;  in  which  all  mankind  would  be  con- 
verted to  a  state  of  obedience  to  law,  and  the  happy  condition  of  former  times 
restored.  The  Indians  expected,  at  the  end  of  the  present  age  of  sin,  the  tenth 
Avatar,  that  is,  incarnation.  That  of  Buddha  was  the  ninth,  and  this  would  be  ;ia 
incarnation  of  Vishnu,  who  would  appear  under  the  name  Kalki,  overthrow  all  evil, 
and  restore  the  happy  times  which  had  prevailed  at  the  beginning  of  the  world. 
Even  the  Chinese  were  not  without  such  Messianic  hopes.  The  advent  of  a  great 
and  Holy  One  in  the  West  is  frequently  announced  in  their  sacred  books — One  who 
was  not  only  to  lay  down  the  way  of  perfection,  but  also  to  destroy  the  ancient  idols. 
Nor  were  similar  expectations  less  familiar  to  other  Oriental  nations.  Among  the 
Greeks  they  were  profoundly  expressed  in  the  legend  of  Prometheus.  Prometheus 
chained  to  the  rock,  in  daily  torment,  utters  the  oracle,  known  to  himself  alone,  that 
the  dominion  of  the  false  god  Zeus  will  one  day  be  terminated  by  a  Son  of  God,  who 
will  be  mightier  than  Zeus,  while  he  himself  beholds  Hercules  as  his  deliverer  ia 
the  distant  future.  But  this  deliverance — as  Hermes  announces  to  him — is  not  to 
take  place  without  vicarious  suffering : — 

•♦  And  of  that  anguish,  look  not  for  the  end 
Before  some  god  shall  come  to  bear  thy  woea  t 
And  will  to  pass  to  Hades'  sunless  realm 
And  the  dark,  cloudy  depths  of  Tartarus." 

And  this  is  done  by  Chiron,  the  most  just  and  wise  of  the  Centaurs,  the  son  of 
ChronoB,  sacrificing  himself  for  him,  while  Hercules  kills  the  eagle  at  his  breast,  and 
so  delivers  him  from  his  torments,  ^schylus  made  this  significant  legend  the  subject 
of  a  dramatic  trilogy,  of  which,  indeed,  only  a  fragment,  the  "  Prometheus  Bound," 
remains.  Enough  has,  however,  been  preserved  to  show  us  how  the  deep  ideas  of 
the  Greek  world  concerning  guilt,  atonement,  and  the  redemption  of  mankind  are 
poetically  reflected  therein.  This  poetic  legend  is  indeed  almost  a  prediction  of  tha 
true  Redeemer.  {Prof.  Luthardt.)  The  gospel  of  the  Son: — 1.  As  the  Son  ia 
above  the  servants,  so  is  Christ  above  the  prophets.  And  no  reason,  that  the  Jews 
should  think  so  much  of  Moses,  and  the  prophets,  as  for  them  to  mis-regard  Christ's 
doctrine  and  stick  to  the  Levitical  service  under  pretence  of  estimation  of  the 
prophets.  2.  The  glory  of  the  gospel  is  greater  than  the  glory  of  the  law.  3.  Tho 
glory  of  the  ministerial  calling  of  preachers  of  the  gospel  is  by  so  much  the  greater, 
as  it  hath  the  Son  of  God  first  man  in  the  roll  thereof ;  as  first  preacher,  and 
prince  of  preachers.  4.  Christ's  sermons  are  all  of  them  directed  unto  us  :  and  so 
much  the  more  highly  should  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel  be  esteemed  of  by  us. 
(D.  Dickson,  M.A.)        Christ  explains  past  revelations  : — A  singer  will  sometime* 


CHAP.  I.]  HEBREWS.  21 

eit  down  to  an  instrument  and  strike  a  few  mysterious  chords,  or  pick  out  a  few 
ba.is  of  melody,  which  excite  only  vague  thoughts  and  vaguer  emotions  within 
us ;    but   soon   the   rich   sweet  voice  steals  in,   uttering   articulate   words,   and 
then    our    vague    thoughts    and    emotions    take    defiinite  forms,   and  we    com- 
prehend   what    it    was    that    touched    and    moved    us    in    the    prelude.      Not 
till    God    uttered    His   voice    in    Christ  could   men    understand    the    preluding 
notes  which  the    prophets  were  constrained    to   sound,  or  put  clear,   definite, 
authentic    meaning    into    these    yearning,    mysterious    tones.      {S.    Cox,    D.D.) 
Whom  He  hath  appointed  heir  of  all  thingB.— Christ  appointed  heir : — God  is  said  to 
appoint  His  Sou — 1.  By  ordaining  in  His  eternal  counsel  that  His  Son  should  be  heir. 
As  Christ  was  delivered  by  the  determinate  counsel  of  God  to  be  slain  (Acts  ii.  23) 
so  was  He  appointed  to  be  heir  (1  Pet.  i.  20).     2.  By  sending  Him  into  the  world, 
or  by  giving  Him  to  be  incarnate  for  that  very  end  (Phil.  ii.  7-9).     3.  By  raising 
Him  from  the  dead,  and  setting  Him  at  His  right  hand  in  heaven.  On  these  grounds 
St.  Peter  thus  saith,  "  God  hath  made  Him  both  Lord  and  Christ"  (Acts  ii.  36).  This 
word  "  appointed  "  showeth  the  right  that  Christ  hath  to  His  supreme  dignity.  That 
\shich  is  said  of  Christ's  being  Priest  (chap.  v.  5)  may  be  applied  to  this  dignity — 
"  Christ  glorified  not  Himself  to  be  an  heir ;  but  He  that  said  to  Him,  Thou  art  My 
Son,  to-day  have  I  begotten  Thee,"  appointed  Him  heir.     {W.  Gouge.)       Jesiu  heir 
of  all  things: — Be  married  to  this  heir,  and  have  all.     (J.  Trapp.)        The  heir  of  all 
things: — God  has  appointed  Christ  heir  of  all  things.     What,  then,  is  the  prepara- 
tion being  made  for  the  inheritance?     The  history  of  the  earth  is  carrying  the  pre- 
paration. How  slowly  this  history  unfolds  itself,  as  if  it  were  some  long  procession. 
And  as  we  think  of  that,  people  following  Jesus,  the  key  to  the  whole  situation  in 
the  world's  history  is  connected  with  their  combination  and  their  prospect.    The  his- 
tory of  the  world  is  preparing  the  inheritance  for  Jesus  Christ.    Now  take  a  glimpse 
of  the  inheritance  itself.    This  we  shall  gain  if  we  can  look  forward  with  the  eye  of 
faith  to  the  consummation  of  all  things.     If  we  can  pass  away  from  the  tumult,  the 
conflict,  the  iniquity,  the  disappointment,  the  woe,  all  belonging  to  us,  and  go  for- 
ward to  that  place  where  Christ  shall   stand  when  He  gathers  His  ransomed  to 
Himself,  not  one  wanting,  and  receives  the  inheritance  from  the  Father,  we  shall 
have  a  glimpse  of  that  which  He  is  providing  that  His  Son  may  be  glorified.    And 
towards  that  distant  yet  glorious  time  we  may  turn  with  something  of  the  feeling  of 
those  who,  after  they  have  been  battling  on  the  billows  for  long  months,  strain  the 
€ye  to  see  the  first  outline  of  the  native  land  to  which  they  are  returning ;  with 
something  of  a  gladness  like  that  we  may  contemplate  the  coming  glory  of  our  Ee- 
deemer  when  He  shall  receive  the  inheritance  provided  for  Him.    But  it  must  often 
be  with  us  as  with  a  master  of  a  ship  when  the  clouds  have  shut  out  from  him  the 
light  of  the  sun,  and  there  has  been  no  visible  token  by  which  reckoning  could  be 
made  for  days.     What  can  there  be  in  such  a  case  but  uncertainty?    And  yet  the 
course  is  fixed.    When  the  clouds  break  up  and  pass  away,  and  the  clear  smi  shiues 
once  more,  reckonings  will  be  simple,  adjustments  will  be  prompt,  and  the  haven 
will  be  secure.     So  it  must  be  with  us.    It  is  an  idle  expectation  which  we  cherish 
in  our  hearts  when  we  anticipate  that  all  our  diCQculties  are  thus  to  be  cleared  at 
once  from  our  path.     There  is  no  progress  made  by  us,  not  a  single  step  which  we 
do  not  claim  as  an  achievement  for  ever.    So  that  our  progress  must  be  onward  and 
upward  until  we  stand  on  the  level  where  Christ  is.    And  how  much  we  are  now 
turning  our  backs  upon  that  will  tell  us  how  steadily  things  are  moving  ;  how  we  are 
advancing  along  the  way  towards  coming  glory  !     For  what  are  these  things  left 
behind  ?    They  belong  to  the  scene  of  conflict,  and  as  such  they  must  vanish  away. 
The  time  for  ploughing  the  fields,  and  for  reaping  the  harvest  will  come  to  a  close ; 
we  shall  see  the  end  of  conflict,  and  of  all  the  weariness  it  brings ;  we  shall  see  a 
close  of  sin,  and  all  that  terrific  sorrow  which  has  kept  traihng  along  the  path  on 
account  of  our  transgression.    These  are  the  things  which  we  are  leaving  behind. 
The  progress  of  the  world  means  perfect  righteousness.     For  this  is  the  teaching  of 
the  Bible,  that  even  worlds  wear  out  and  pass  away,  as  a  scroll  which  has  been 
burnt  up,  and  we  look  for  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  ;  not  a  place  tarnished  by 
iniquity,  not  a  place  blurred  by  sorrows,  not  a  place  so  often  the  scene  of  temptation, 
where  wickedness  has  had  dominion — we  look  for  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth. 
This  inheritance,  then,  shall  include  all  the  guod  as  it  is  coming  towards  perfection. 
Christ's  inheritance  is  the  consummation  of  all  things.     If  this  be  so,  then  He  is 
teaching  us  that  man  is  destined  for  an  eternal  service.     And  this  is  the  faith  that 
moves  in  thfe  suul  of  the  human  race ;  this  is  the  faith  which  has  taken  possession 
of  it,  the  faith  which  dominates  it,  for  the  human  race  will  not  believe  that  its  life 


21  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  z. 

is  mere  bone  and  muscle.  Man  will  not  believe  it,  and  onght  not  to ;  if  he  has  a 
conscience  he  cannot.  He  will  rather  believe,  as  the  Bible  teaches,  that  he  is  "  & 
little  lower  than  the  angels."  For  Jesus  Christ  has  His  inheritance  in  the  souls  of 
men  made  perfect  in  the  fellowship  of  saints  and  angels.  In  drawing  our  meditation 
to  a  close,  let  me  ask  you  to  remember  that  as  we  think  of  progress  we  must  also 
place  alongside  of  it  the  lesson  concerning  deterioration.  Progress  is  a  thing  of  hfe; 
eternal  prof^ress,  that  which  belongs  to  a  life  which  can  never  die ;  yet  we  hear  of  a 
second  death.  (H.  Calderwood,  LL.D.)  The  superiority  of  Christianity  as  sJwwn 
in  the  glory  of  its  supreme  Head  as  Son  of  God : — I.  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God  the 
Prophet  of  Christianity.  1.  Notice  the  Divine  authority  of  the  Old  Testament 
Scriptures.  2,  Notice  God's  gracious  adaptations  in  qualifying  His  messengers  ta 
roeet  the  demands  of  each  age.  3.  Notice  the  transcendent  glory  of  Christiauity. 
II.  Christ,  as  Son  of  God,  universal  pboprietob.  1.  His  heirship  is  absolutely 
universal.  2.  Christ's  universal  ownership  is  used  by  Him  for  the  highest  moral 
and  spiritual  purposes.  3.  This  investment  of  Christ  with  all  power  is  the  al- 
snificient  encouragement  of  the  Church.  III.  Christ,  as  Son  of  God,  soPREraa 
Head  of  all  dispensations.  1.  Christ  has  been  the  leader  in  every  dispensation  of 
the  past.  2.  Christ  wiU  be  the  leader  of  future  dispensations  (chaps,  ii.  6,  vii.  24, 
28).  IV.  Christ,  as  Son  of  God,  the  revealeb  of  the  eternal  Father.  1.  Christ 
reveals  the  supreme  excellence  of  the  Divine  character  in  its  totality.  2.  Christ  re- 
veals the  infinite  perfections  of  the  Divine  nature  in  their  individuality.  V.  Christ, 
AS  Son  of  God,  is  the  almighty  sustaineb  of  the  whole  universe.  1.  The  abso- 
luteness of  His  omnipotence  is  here  set  forth.  2.  The  ultimate  triumph  of  Chris- 
tianity is  thus  assured  by  virtue  of  the  power  of  its  glorious  Head.  VI.  Christ,  as 
Son  of  God,  the  world's  Redeemer.  1.  Notice  the  personal  suffering  of  Christ  by 
which  redemption  was  wrought.  2.  The  perfect  character  of  the  work.  3.  The 
glorious  reward  received.  VII.  Christ,  as  Son  of  God,  infinitely  superior  to  thb 
angels.  1.  By  virtue  of  His  Sonship  (vers.  4-7).  2.  By  virtue  of  His  Kingship 
(vers.  8,  9).  3.  By  virtue  of  His  Creatorship  (vers.  10-12).  4.  By  virtue  of  His 
ultimate  Mastership  over  all  His  enemies  (vers.  13,  14).  Lessons  :  1.  The  unspeak- 
able glory  of  Christianity.  (1)  As  seen  in  its  being  God's  last  masterpiece.  (2)  Aa 
seen  in  the  glory  of  its  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.  (3)  As  seen  in  its  ultimate  object 
in  bringing  this  fallen  race  into  practical  relations  with  God.  2.  The  unspeakable 
obligation  the  world  is  under  to  Christ  through  Christianity.  (1)  In  giving  us  the 
only  true  conception  of  God.  (2)  In  giving  us  the  only  true  conception  of  the  value 
of  the  soul.  (3)  In  giving  us  the  only  true  conception  of  true  manhood  in  its  means 
and  nature.  3.  The  unspeakable  deadness  to  all  that  constitutes  true  moral  ex- 
cellence, seen  in  indifference  to  Christ,  to  Christianity,  and  to  the  privileges  it  offers. 
(D.  C.  Hughes,  M. A.)  The  supreme  glory  of  Christ : — I.  That  Christ  is  God.  1. 
The  Lordship  of  Christ.  2.  The  Creatorship  of  Christ.  3.  The  Governorship  of 
Christ.  H.  That  God  is  made  known  in  Christ.  1.  God  is  unknown  out  of  Christ. 
2.  God  is  revealed  in  Christ.  (1)  We  can  only  know  God  in  Christ.  (2)  In  Chi  i  at 
we  know  God  as  He  is.  Not  indeed  fully,  but  really,  truly,  blessedly.  III.  That 
God  is  made  known  in  Christ  as  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  (T/te  Metropolitan 
Pulpit.)  Of  the  Kingdom  or  Lordship  of  Christ  : — The  grant  of  dominion  in 

general  unto  the  Messiah,  is  intimated  in  the  first  promise  of  Him  (Gen.  iii.  15). 
His  victory  over  Satan  was  to  be  attended  with  rule,  power,  and  dominion  (Psa. 
Ixviii.  18 ;  Isa.  liii.  12;  Eph.  iv.  8,  9;  Col.  ii.  15),  and  confirmed  in  the  renewal  of 
that  promise  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xxii.  17,  18).  For  in  Him  it  was  that  Abraham 
was  to  be  heir  of  the  world  (Rom.  iv.  13).  His  kingdom  was  fully  revealed  unto 
David,  and  is  expressed  by  him  (Psa.  ii.,  xlv.  3-8,  Ixxxix.  19-24,  &c.,  Ixxii.  6-9,  <fec., 
ex.  1-3).  As  also  in  all  the  following  prophets :  see  Isa.  li.  1,  2,  ix.  6,  7,  liii.  12, 
Ixiii.  1-3 ;  Jer.  xxiii.  5,  6 ;  Dan.  vii.  13,  14,  &o.  As  this  was  foretold  in  the  Old 
Testament,  so  the  accomplishment  of  it  is  expressly  asserted  in  the  New.  Upon 
His  birth.  He  is  proclaimed  to  be  Christ  the  Lord  (Luke  ii.  11),  And  the  first  in- 
quiry after  Him  is,  "Where  is  He  that  is  born  Kiug?  "  (Matt.  ii.  2,  6).  And  this 
testimony  doth  He  give  concerning  Himself,  namely,  that  all  judgment  was  His, 
and  therefore  all  honour  was  due  unto  Him  (John  v.  22,  23).  And  that  all  things 
were  delivered  unto  Him,  or  given  into  His  hand  (Matt.  xi.  25),  yea,  all  power  in 
heaven  and  earth  (Matt,  xxviii.  18),  the  thing  pleaded  for.  Him  who  was  crucified 
did  God  make  both  Lord  and  Christ  (Acts  ii.  35,  36),  exalting  ffim  at  His  right 
hand  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour  (Acts  v.  31).  He  is  highly  exalted,  having  a 
name  given  Him  above  every  name  (Pnil.  ii.  9-11),  being  set  at  the  right  hand  of 
Qod  in  heavenly  places,  far  above,  &o,  (Eph.  i.  20-22),  where  He  reigns  lor  evei 


OHAf.  I. J  HEBREWS.  23 

(1  Cor.  XV.  25),  being  the  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords  (Rev.  v.  12-14),  for  Ha 
is  Lord  of  quick  and  dead  (Eom.  xiv.  7-9).  Thus  is  the  Son  made  heir  of  all  in 
general ;  we  shall  further  consider  His  dominion  in  a  distribution  of  the  chief  parts 
of  it,  and  manifest  His  power  severally  in  and  over  them  all.  He  is  Lord  or  Heir, 
vavTutv,  that  is,  of  all  persons  and  of  all  things.  Persons,  or  rational  subsistences 
here  intended,  are  either  angels  or  men;  for  it  is  evident  that  "He  is  exempted, 
who  hath  subjected  all  things  unto  Him  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  27).     Angels  are  of  two  sorts  : 

1.  Such  as  abide  doing  the  will  of  God,  retaining  that  name  by  way  of  eminence. 

2.  Such  as  by  sin  have  lost  their  first  habitation,  usually  called  evil  angels,  or 
devils.  The  Lord  Jesus  hath  dominion  over  all  of  both  sorts  of  them.  Men  may 
be  cast  under  one  common  distribution,  which  is  comprehensive  of  all  distinctions, 
either  elect  or  reprobates.  And  the  Lord  Jesus  hath  rule  and  dominion  over  them 
all.  Things  that  are  subject  unto  the  Lord  Jesus,  may  be  referred  unto  four  heads : 
for  they  are  either — 1.  Spiritual ;  or,  2.  Ecclesiastical;  or,  3.  Political;  or,  4.  Natural, 
Again,  Spiritual  are  either — (1)  Temporal,  as  Grace,  Gifts  ;  or,  (2)  Eternal,  as  Glory. 
Ecclesiastical,  or  Church  things,  are  either — 1.  Jiidaical,  or  Old  Testament  things  ; 
or,  2.  Christian,  or  things  of  the  New  Testament.  Political  and  civil  things  may  be 
considered  as  they  are  managed — 1.  By  His  friends;  2.  His  enemies.  Of  natural  things, 
we  shall  speak  in  a  production  of  some  particular  instances  to  prove  the  general 
assertion.  Those  in  the  first  place  assigned  as  part  of  the  inheritance  of  Christ  are  the 
angels,  and  the  good  angels  in  especial.  1.  His  pre-eminence  above  them  is  asserted 
by  the  apostle  in  ver.  4.  He  is  made  better,  more  excellent  than  the  angels.  2.  As  He 
is  exalted  abcive  them,  so  by  the  authority  of  God  the  Father  they  are  made  sub- 
ject unto  Him  (1  Pet.  iii.  22).  3.  They  adore  and  worship  Him;  the  highest  act 
of  obedience,  and  most  absolute  subjection.  This  they  have  in  command  (Heb.  i. 
6).  4.  They  always  attend  His  throne  (Isa.  vi.  1,  2).  Thus  His  lordship  ovei 
angels  is  univerKal  and  absolute,  and  their  subjection  unto  Him  answerable  there- 
nnto.  The  manner  of  the  grant  of  this  excellence,  power,  and  dignity  unto  Him, 
must  be  furthpr  cleared  in  the  opening  of  these  words  of  the  apostle  (ver.  4),  "being 
made  better  than  the  angels" ;  the  original  right  and  equity  of  this  grant,  with  the 
e'ids  of  it,  are  now  only  to  be  intimated.  1.  The  radical  fundamental  equity  of  this 
grant  lies  in  His  Divine  nature ;  and  in  His  creation  of  angels ;  over  whom,  as 
Meiliator,  He  is  made  Lord.  2.  It  is  founded  in  that  establishment  in  the  condition 
in  which  they  were  created,  which  they  received  by  His  interposition  to  recover 
what  was  lost  by  sin,  and  to  preserve  from  ruin  the  untainted  part  of  the  creation. 
And  as  this  act  of  God  in  appointing  Christ  Lord  of  angels  hath  these  equitable 
foundation!),  so  it  hath  also  sundry  glorious  ends.  1.  It  was  as  an  addition  unto 
that  glory  that  was  set  before  Him,  in  His  undertaking  to  redeem  sinners.  2.  God 
hereby  gatbtrs  up  His  whole  family,  at  first  distinguished  by  the  law  of  their 
creation  into  two  especial  kinds,  and  then  differenced  and  set  at  variance  by  sin, 
into  one  body  uu'ler  one  head,  reducing  them  that  originally  were  twain,  into  one 
entire  family  (Eph.  i.  10).  3.  The  Church  of  mankind  militant  on  the  earth,  whose 
conduct  unto  eternal  glory  is  committed  unto  Christ,  stands  in  need  of  the  ministry 
of  angels.  II.  There  is  another  sort  of  angels,  those  who  "  by  sin  left  their 
primitive  station,"  and  fell  off  from  God,  of  whom,  and  of  their  sin,  fall,  malice, 
business,  craft  in  evil,  and  final  judgment,  the  Scripture  treateth  at  large.  These 
belong  not  indeed  to  the  possession  of  Christ,  as  He  is  the  heir,  but  they  belong 
unto  His  doreSnion  as  He  is  Lord.  Though  He  be  not  a  King  and  Head  unto  them, 
yet  He  is  a  Judge  and  Ruler  over  them.  1.  As  before,  this  right  is  founded  in  His 
Divine  nature,  by  virtue  whereof  He  is  licavoc,  fit  for  this  dominion.  He  made  these 
angels  also,  and  therefore,  as  God,  hath  an  absolute  dominion  over  them.  2.  The 
immediate  and  peculiar  foundation  of  His  right  unto  rule  over  fallen  angels  render- 
ing the  special  grant  of  it  equal  and  righteous,  is  lawful  conquest.  This  gives  a 
special  right  (Gen.  xlviii.  22).  Now  that  Christ  should  conquer  fallen  angels  was 
promised  from  the  foundation  of  the  world  (Gen.  iii.  15).  The  ends  of  this  lordship 
of  Christ  are  various,  as— (1)  His  own  glory  (Psa.  ex.  1).  (2)  The  safety  of  the 
Church  (Matt.  xvi.  18;  Rev.  xii.  7-9).  (3)  Exercise  for  their  good— (a)  By  tempta- 
tion (1  Pet.  v.8-10).  (h)  Persecution  (Rev.  ii.  10,  xii.  10)  ;  both  which  He  directs  and 
regulates  to  their  eternal  advantage.  (4)  The  exercising  of  His  vengeance  on  Hia 
stubborn  enemies,  whom  these  slaves  to  His  righteous  power  seduce,  blind,  harden, 
provoke,  ruin,  and  destroy  (Rev.  xii.  15,  xvi.  13,  14 ;  Psa.  cvi.).  in.  All  mankind 
(the  second  sort  of  intellectual  creatures  or  rational  subsistences)  belong  to  the  lord- 
ship and  dominion  of  Christ.  1.  He  is  Lord  over  all  flesh  (John  xvii.  2),  both  living 
ftud  dead  (Rom.  xiv.  9  -,  Phil.  ii.  9,  10).     2.  Particularly  He  is  Lord  over  all  the 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t 

elect.  1.  They  were  given  to  Him  from  eternity  in  design  and  by  compact,  that 
they  should  be  His  peculiar  portion,  and  He  their  Saviour  (John  xvii.  2).  2.  His 
grant  is  strengthened  by  redemption,  purchase,  and  acquisition.  This  was  the  con- 
dition of  the  former  grant  (Isa.  liii.  10-12),  aud  this  condition  was  made  good  by 
Him  ;  so  that  His  lordship  is  frequently  asserted  on  this  very  account  (1  Cor.  vi.  20  ; 
1  Pet.  i.  18,  19 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  5,  6 ;  John  x.  15,  xi.  52 ;  Eph.  v.  25-27  ;  Bev.  v.  9).  3. 
Those  thus  given  Him  of  the  Father  and  redeemed  by  Him  are  of  two  sorts.  (1)  Such 
as  are  actually  called  to  faith  in  Him,  and  union  with  Him.  These  are  further  become 
His,  upon  many  other  especial  accounts.  They  are  His,  in  all  relations  of  subjection, 
His  children,  servants,  brethren,  disciples,  subjects.  His  house.  His  spouse.  (2) 
Some  of  them  are  always  uncalled,  and  shall  be  so,  until  the  whole  number  of  them 
be  completed  and  filled.  But  even  before  they  are  called  they  belong,  on  the  former 
accounts,  to  His  lot,  care,  and  rule  (John  x.  6).  2.  His  lordship  and  dominion  ex- 
tends to  the  other  sort  of  men  also,  namely,  reprobates,  and  men  finally  impenitent. 
They  are  not  exempted  from  that  "all  flesh"  which  He  hath  power  over  (John  xvii, 
2),  nor  from  those  "  quick  and  dead  "  over  whom  He  is  Lord  (Bom.  xiv.  9),  nor 
from  that  "  world  "  which  He  shall  judge  (Acts  xvii.  31).  And  there  are  two  special 
grouiid.s  that  are  peculiar  to  them  of  this  grant,  and  power,  and  authority  over  them. 
(1)  His  interposition  upon  the  entrance  of  sin  against  the  immediate  execution  of  the 
curse  due  to  it,  as  befell  the  angels.  This  fixed  the  world  under  a  dispensation  of — 
(a)  Forbearance  and  patience  (Bom.  ii.  4,  5  ;  Acts  xvii.  30;  Bom.  ix.  22  ;  Psa.  Ixxv. 
3).  (b)  Goodness  and  meicy  (Acts  xiv.  16,  17).  (2)  He  makes  a  conquest  over 
them.  It  was  promised  that  He  should  do  so  (Gen.  iii.  15),  and  though  the  work 
itself  prove  long  and  irksome,  though  the  ways  of  accomplishing  it  be  to  us  obscure 
and  oflentiiTies  invisible,  yet  He  hath  undertaken  it,  and  will  not  give  it  over,  until 
they  are  every  one  brought  to  be  His  footstool  (Psa.  ex.  1 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  25).  And  the 
dominion  granted  Him  on  these  grounds  is  —  (a)  Sovereign  and  absolute :  Hia 
enemies  are  His  footstool  (Psa.  ex.  2;  Matt.  xxii.  44;  Mark  xii.  36;  Luke  xx.  42; 
Acts  ii.  34  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  25 ;  Heb.  i.  13).  (b)  Judiciary  (John  v.  22,  23).  As  He  hath 
power  over  their  persons,  so  He  hath  regard  unto  their  sins  (Bom.  xiv.  9  ;  Acts  xvii. 
3  ;  Matt.  xxv.  31).  And  this  power  He  variously  exerciseth  over  them,  even  in  this 
world,  before  He  gloriously  exerts  it  in  their  eternal  ruin.  He  exerciseth  rule  and 
dominion  over  them  in  providential  dispensations  (Isa.  Ixiii.  1—4;  Bev.  vi.  15,  16, 
xix.  13).  By  all  which  He  makes  way  for  the  glory  of  His  final  judgment  of  them 
(Acts  xvii.  3;  Matt.  xxv.  31 ;  Bev.  xix.  20,  xx.  10-15).  And  all  this  will  He  do  to 
the  ends  (i.)  Of  His  own  glory,  (ii.)  The  good  exercise  and  safety  of  the  church. 
II.  The  second  part  of  the  heirship  and  dominion  of  Christ  consisteth  in  His  lord- 
ship over  all  things  besides,  which,  added  to  the  former,  comprises  the  whole  creation 
of  God.  In  the  distribution  of  these  premised,  the  first  that  occur  are  spiritual 
things,  which  also  are  of  two  sorts — 1.  Temporal,  or  such  as  in  this  life  we  are  made 
partakers  of ;  and — 2.  Eternal,  the  things  that  are  reserved  for  them  that  believe 
in  the  state  of  glory.  The  former  may  be  reduced  to  two  heads,  for  they  are  all  of 
them  either  grace  or  gifts,  and  Christ  is  Lord  of  them  all.  I.  All  that  which  comes 
under  the  name  of  grace  in  Scripture,  which,  flowing  from  the  free  and  special  love 
of  God  tends  directly  to  the  spiritual  and  eternal  good  of  them  on  whom  it  is  be- 
stowed, may  be  referred  to  four  heads.  Now  these  are — 1.  Pardon  of  sin,  and  the 
free  acceptance  of  the  persons  of  sinners,  in  a  way  of  mercy.  This  is  grace  (Eph. 
ii.  8  ;  Tit.  iii.  5,  7).  And  a  saving  effect  and  fruit  of  the  covenant  (Jer.  xxxi.  31-34  ; 
Heb.  viii.  12).  2.  The  regenerating  of  the  person  of  a  dead  sinner,  with  the  puri- 
fying and  sanctifying  of  his  nature  in  a  way  of  spiritual  power.  This  also  is  grace, 
and  is  promised  in  the  covenant,  and  there  are  three  parts  of  it — (1)  The  infusion 
of  a  quickening  principle  into  the  soul  of  a  dead  sinner  (Bom.  viii.  2 ;  Tit.  iii.  5  ;  John 
iii.  6  ;  Eph.  ii.  1-6).  (2)  The  habitual  furnishing  of  a  spiritually  quickened  soul, 
with  abiding  radical  principles  of  light,  love,  and  power,  fitting  it  for  spiritual 
obedience  (Gal.  v.  17).  (3)  Actual  assistance  in  a  communication  of  supplies  of 
strength  for  every  duty  and  work  (Phil.  i.  13 ;  John  xv.  3).  3.  Preservation  in  a 
condition  of  acceptance  with  God,  and  holy  obedience  to  Him  to  the  end,  is  also  of 
especial  grace.  It  is  the  grace  of  perseverance,  and  eminently  included  in  the  cove- 
nant. 4.  Adoption  as  a  privilege,  with  all  the  privileges  that  flow  from  it,  is  also 
grace  (Eph.  i.  5,  6).  All  these,  with  all  those  inexpressible  mercies  that  they  branch 
themselves  into,  giving  dehverance  to  sinners  from  evil,  temporal  and  eternal; 
raising  them  to  communion  with  God  here,  and  to  the  enjoyment  of  Him  for  ever 
hereafter,  are  called  grace  ;  and  do  belong  to  the  lordship  of  Christ,  as  He  is  Heir, 
Lord,  and  Possessor  of  them  all.    All  the  stores  of  this  grace  and  mercy  that  are  in 


CHAP.  1.]  HEBREWS.  26 

heaven  for  sinners,  are  given  into  His  hand,  and  resigned  up  to  His  sovereign  dis- 
posal, as  we  shall  intimate  in  general  and  particular.  1.  In  general  (Col.  i.  19). 
There  is  a  fourfold  fulness  in  Christ — (1)  Of  the  Deity  in  His  Divine  nature  (Uom. 
ix.  5).  (2)  Of  union  in  His  person  (Col.  ii.  9).  (3)  Of  grace  in  His  human  nature 
(John  i.  14,  iii.  34 ;  Luke  ii.  62,  iv.  1).  (4)  An  authoritative  fulness  to  communi- 
cate of  it  unto  others  ;  that  is  the  fulness  here  intended.  2.  In  particular — (1)  All 
pardoning  giace  for  the  acceptance  of  our  persons,  and  forgiveness  of  our  sins,  is 
His  :  He  is  the  Lord  of  it  (Acts  v.  31).  (2)  All  regenerating,  quickening,  sanctify- 
ing, assisting  grace  is  His  (John  v.  21).  (3)  The  grace  of  our  presei-vation  in  a  state 
of  acceptance  with  God,  and  obedience  unto  Him,  is  solely  His  (John  x.  28).  And 
flo  also  (4)  Are  all  the  gracious  privileges  whereof  we  are  made  partakers  in  our 
adoption  (John  i.  12 ;  Heb.  iii.  6).  He  is  so  Lord  over  the  whole  house  and  family 
of  God,  as  to  have  the  whole  inheritance  in  His  power,  and  the  absolute  disposal  of 
all  the  good  things  belonging  unto  ft.  II.  All  gifts  that  are  bestowed  on  any  of  the 
eons  of  men,  whereby  they  are  differenced  from  others,  or  made  useful  unto  others, 
belong  also  to  the  inheritance  and  kingdom  of  Christ.  Gifts  bestowed  on  men  are 
either  natural  or  spiritual.  Natural  gifts  are  special  endowments  of  the  persons  or 
minds  of  men,  in  relation  to  things  appertaining  to  this  life  ;  as  wisdom,  learning, 
fikill  and  cunning  in  arts  and  sciences.  I  design  only  to  show  that  even  they  also 
belong  (though  more  remotely)  to  the  lordship  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  they  do  on 
two  accounts — 1.  In  that  the  very  use  of  men's  reason,  and  their  natural  faculties, 
as  to  any  good  end  or  purpose,  is  continued  to  them  upon  the  account  of  His  inter- 
position, bringing  the  world  thereby  under  a  dispensation  of  patience  and  forbear- 
ance, as  was  declared  (John  i.  9).  2.  He  is  endued  with  power  and  authority  to  use 
them  in  whose  hand  soever  they  lie,  whether  of  His  friends  or  enemies,  to  the 
spei  ial  ends  of  His  gloi^,  in  doing  good  to  His  Church.  lU.  Spiritual  gifts,  which 
principally  come  under  that  denomination,  are  of  two  sorts — extraordinary  and 
ordinary.  The  tirst  are  immediate  endowments  of  the  minds  of  men  with  abilities 
exceeding  the  whole  system  of  nature,  in  the  exercise  whereof  they  are  mere  instru- 
ments of  Him  who  bestows  those  gifts  upon  them.  Such  of  old  were  the  gifts  of 
miracles,  tongues,  healing,  prediction,  and  infallible  inspiration,  given  out  by  the 
Lord  Christ,  unto  such  as  He  was  pleased  to  use  in  His  gospel  service  in  an  extra- 
ordinary manner.  The  ordinary  gifts  are  the  furniture  of  the  minds  of  men,  enabling 
them  to  comprehend  spiritual  things,  and  to  manage  them  for  spiritual  ends  and 
purposes.  The  end  also  why  all  these  gifts  are  given  into  His  power  and  disposal 
is  evident.  1.  The  propagation  of  His  gospel,  and  consequently  the  setting  up  of 
His  kingdom  in  the  world,  depends  upon  them.  2.  By  these  is  His  Church  edified; 
and  to  that  end  doth  He  continue  to  bestow  them  on  men,  and  will  do  so  to  the  end 
of  the  world  (1  Cor.  xii.  7-14  ;  Eph.  iv.  8-13  ;  Rom.  xii.  6-8;  1  Pet.  iu.  10,  11 ; 
Col.  ii.  19).  3.  And  by  these  means  and  ways  is  God  glorified  in  Him  and  by  Him, 
which  is  the  great  end  of  His  lordship  over  all  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit.  IV.  To  close 
our  consideration  of  this  part  of  the  lordship  of  Christ,  there  remains  only  that  we 
show  Him  to  be  the  Lord  of  all  spiritual  and  eternal  things,  which  in  one  word  we 
call  glory.  He  is  Himself  the  Lord  of  glory  (2  Cor.  ii.  4)  and  the  Judge  of  all  (John 
V.  25).  In  the  discharge  of  which  ofiSce  He  gives  out  glory  as  a  reward  unto  Hia 
followers  (Matt.  xxv.  32;  Kom.  xiv.  10).  Glory  is  the  reward  that  is  with  Him,  which 
He  will  give  out  at  the  last  day,  as  a  crown  (2  Tim.  iv.  8  ;  John  xvii.  2).  And  to  this 
end  that  He  might  be  Lord  of  it.  He  hath — 1.  Purchased  it  (Heb.  ii.  10,  ix.  12; 
Eph.  i.  14).  2.  Taken  actual  possession  of  it  in  His  own  person  (Luke  xxiv.  25 ; 
John  xvii.  5,  22,  24).  And  that— 3.  As  the  forerunner  on  whom  He  will  bestow  it 
(Heb.  ix.  20).  And  this  is  a  short  view  of  the  lordship  of  Christ  as  to  things  spiritual. 
V.  Ecclesiastical  things,  or  things  that  concern  Church  institutions,  rule,  and  power, 
belong  also  unto  His  rule  and  dominion.  He  is  the  only  Head,  Lord,  Ruler,  and 
Lawgiver  of  His  Church.  1.  He  was  the  Lord  of  the  Old  Testament  Church-state, 
and  He  exercised  His  power  and  lordship  towards  it  in  four  ways.  (1)  In,  and  by 
its  institution  and  erection ;  He  made,  framed,  set  up,  and  appointed  that  Church- 
state,  and  all  the  worship  of  God  therein  observed.  (2)  As  its  lawgiver,  by  prescrib- 
ing to  it  when  erected,  a  complete  rule  and  form  of  worship  and  obedience,  to  which 
nothing  might  be  added  (Deut.  vii.  4,  12,  32).  (3)  By  way  of  reformation,  when  it 
was  collapsed  and  decayed  (Zech.  ii.  8;  Mai.  iii.  13).  (4)  By  way  of  amotion,  or 
taking  down  what  He  Himsell  had  set  up,  because  it  was  so  framed  and  ordered  as 
to  continue  only  for  a  season  (Heb.  ix.  10 ;  Deut.  xviii.  16-18;  Hag.  ii.  6,  7;  Isa. 
Ixv.  17,  18  ;  2  Pet.  iii.  13).  2.  Of  the  New  Testament  evangelical  Church-state  also, 
Be  ia  the  obIj  Lord  and  Buler ;  yea,  this  is  His  proper  kingdom,  on  which  all  othef 


S6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

parts  of  His  dominion  do  depend ;  for  He  is  given  to  be  "  Head  over  all  things  unto 
the  Church  "  (Eph.  i.  22).  (1)  He  is  the  foundation  of  this  Church-state  (1  Cor.  iii. 
11),  the  whole  design  and  platform  of  it  being  laid  in  Him,  and  built  upon  Him. 
(2)  He  erects  this  Church-state  upon  Himself  (Matt.  xvi.  18).  (3)  He  gives  laws  and 
rules  of  worship  and  obedience  unto  it,  when  so  built  by  Himself  and  upon  Himself 
(Matt,  xxviii.  18  ;  Acts  i.  2;  Heb.  iii.  2-6).  (4)  Is  the  everlasting,  constant,  abiding 
Head,  Ruler,  King,  and  Governor  of  it  (Eph.  i.  22 ;  CoL  ii.  19 ;  Heb.  iii.  6 ;  Rev.  ii. 
3).  VI.  He  is  Lord  also  of  political  things.  All  the  governments  of  the  world  that 
aje  set  up  and  exercised  therein  for  the  good  of  mankind,  and  the  preservation  of 
society  according  to  rules  of  equity  and  righteousness  ;  over  all  these,  and  those  who 
in  and  by  them  exercise  rule  and  authority  amongst  men,  is  He  Lord  and  King. 
He  alone  is  the  absolute  potentate ;  the  highest  on  the  earth  are  in  a  subordination 
unto  Him.  That — 1.  He  was  designed  unto  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  27).  And  accordingly 
He  is — 2.  Made  Lord  of  lords  and  King  of  kings  (Rev.  xvii.  14,  xix.  16  ;  1  Tim.  vi, 
15).  And — 3.  He  exerciseth  dominion  answerable  unto  His  title  (Rev.  vi.  16,  xvii. 
14,  xviii.  16-20 ;  Psa.  ii.  8,  9 ;  Isa.  Ix.  ;  Mic.  v.  7-9).  And — 4.  Hath  hence  right 
to  send  His  gospel  into  all  nations  in  the  world,  attended  with  the  worship  by  Him 
prescribed  (Matt,  xxviii.  18  ;  Psa.  ii.  9-12),  which  none  of  the  rulers  or  governors 
of  the  world  have  any  right  to  refuse  or  oppose,  nor  can  so  do,  but  upon  their  utmost 
peril.  And — 5.  All  kingdoms  shall  at  length  be  brought  into  a  professed  subjection 
to  Him  and  His  gospel,  and  have  all  their  rule  disposed  of  unto  the  interest  of  His 
Church  and  saints  (Dan.  vii.  27 ;  Isa.  Ix.  12 ;  Rev.  xix.  16-19).  VH.  The  last  branch 
of  this  dominion  of  Christ  consists  in  the  residue  of  the  creation  of  God ;  heaven 
and  earth,  sea  and  land,  wind,  trees,  and  fruits  of  the  earth,  and  the  creatures  of 
sense,  as  they  are  all  put  under  His  feet  (Psa.  viii.  7,  8  ;  Eph.  i.  22 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  27), 
so  the  exercise  of  His  power  severally  over  them  is  known  from  the  story  of  the 
gospel.  (John  Owen,  D.D.)  Heir  of  all: — I.  The  highrst  possible  position. 
II.  Made  by  the  highest  possible  atjthobitt.  III.  A  tremendous  contrast  with 
Christ's  earthlv  condition.  IV.  The  possible  exaltation  of  human  nature.  V. 
The  ultimate  triumph  of  righteousness.  (Homilist.)  Of  Christ  the  heir : — The 
aporstle  here  sets  out  the  dignity  of  Christ  under  this  title  heir  rather  than  Lord,  as 
Acts  ii.  36.  1.  To  give  proof  of  that  relation  which  he  noted  before  that  Christ 
was  truly  and  properly  a  Son,  for  He  was  the  heir.  2.  To  show  the  perpetuity 
thereof ;  for  the  heir  ever  abideth  in  the  house  (Gen.  xxi.  10  ;  John  viii.  35).  3. 
To  manifest  the  right  that  we  have  to  be  adopted  sons  and  heirs  (John  viii.  86). 
"If  the  Son  shall  make  you  free  ye  shall  be  free  indeed."  In  this  respect  we  are 
styled  "  Joint-heirs  with  Christ."  This  dignity  of  Christ  to  be  heir  is  further  ampli- 
fied by  the  extent  thereof  in  these  words,  "  of  all  things."  (W.  Gouge.)  Heir  of  all 
things : — Christ  is  this  moment  Lord  of  all  the  laws  that  govern  material  things ; 
and  is  cogni.^ant  of  the  most  elaborate  as  well  as  the  most  simple  movements  in  the 
world  of  matter.  His  comprehensive  vision  surveys  the  whole,  from  the  migra- 
tions of  an  atom  to  the  swift  revolutions  of  the  most  magnificent  celestial  planets. 
And  He  is  Lord  of  all  the  principles  that  govern  men  and  all  rational  beings ;  there- 
fore He  is  heir  to  all  the  thoughts  of  men  and  angels.  He  has  already  received 
a  grand  return,  in  the  form  of  the  best  thoughts  and  imaginations  of  the 
noblest  and  most  illustrious  intellects  of  the  past  and  the  present ;  and  as  the  in- 
fluence of  the  fine  and  ennobling  thoughts  of  past  ages  grows  and  spreads  amongst 
men,  there  will  be  an  increase  in  the  measure  of  fruit  which  Christ,  as  "  heir  of  all 
things,"  will  receive  from  that  source.  He  is  heir  to  the  affections  of  all  men.  There 
is  not  a  heart  beating  at  this  instant  in  any  human  breast  but  should  be  setting  its 
affections  on  Christ  as  its  greatest,  truest,  and  best  friend.  And,  undoubtedly,  the 
day  is  known  to  Him  when  all  rational  beings  will  be  actuated  by  pure  gospel  prin- 
ciples; when  all  the  th^aights  and  affections  of  humanity  will  be  fixed  upon  Him- 
self as  the  true  heir  to  them  all.  The  spring  is  heir  to  all  the  wealth  of  foliage  in 
park,  grove,  and  forest,  when  "  all  the  trees  on  the  hills  open  their  thousand 
leaves."  How  charming  is  the  product  of  spring ;  its  fresh  inimitable  green,  so 
soothing  to  the  eye  and  refreshing  to  the  senses  generally,  after  the  darkness  and 
barrenness  of  winter.  Summer  is  heir  to  all  the  blossoms  of  the  valleys,  hills, 
meadows,  and  gardens  of  the  world.  What  riches  in  bewitching  colours,  in  forms  ol 
exquisite  beauty,  in  floating  fragrance,  belong  to  the  summer ;  its  riches  are  verily 
unsearchable,  suggestive  of  inexhaustible  wealth  in  the  Giver  of  them  all,  and  cer- 
tainly of  infinite  wisdom.  The  treasures  of  the  floral  world,  how  extensive  they 
are !  Autumn  is  heir  to  the  vast  wealth  of  fruit  that  is  found  in  every  part  of  the 
earth ;  its  splendid  thankoffering  for  the  sunshine,  rain,  and  dew  which  have  so  wx- 


CHAP.  I.]  HEBREWS.  27 

stintingly  been  given  to  it  daring  the  year ;  and  a  noble  offering  it  is.     How  very 
poor  is  the  richest  of  men  if  compared  with  a  rich  autumn.     Peter  says  that  when 
God  raised  Christ  from  the  dead,  He  made  Him  "both  Lord  and  Christ";  and  that 
*'  He  is  Lord  of  all."    He  is  "  heir  of  all  things  " ;  we  understand  "  all  things  "  to 
include  all  persons  and  things  in  the  most  unlimited  sense  (John  iii.  35 ;  Matt. 
xxviii.  18).     All  the  angels  of  God  are  subject  to  Him,  and  are  come  to  worship 
Him :  the  eaints  whom  He  hath  redeemed  are  His  special  heritage — His  peculiar 
people.    He  is  the  heir  and  the  dispenser  of  all  spiritual  blessings.      (D.  lihys 
Jenkint.)        Heir  of  all  things  : — A  great  king  once  said  to  a  favourite,  "  Ask  what 
thou  wilt,  and  I  will  give  it  thee."  He  thought,  "  If  I  ask  to  be  made  general  of  all  the 
army,  I  shall  get  it;  if  for  great  riches  of  half  the  kingdom,  I  will  gain  it;  but  I  will 
ask  for  what  will  give  me  all  these."     So  he  said  to  the  king,  "  Give  me  thy  daughter 
to  wife."  This  made  him  heir  to  all  the  wealth  and  honours  of  the  kingdom.  So  he  who 
chooses  Christ  becomes  an  heir  to  all  the  wealth  and  glory  of  the  Father's  kingdom. 
By  whom  also  He  made  tlie  worlds. — The  creation  of  the  ages: — "Created  the 
ages  " — not  the  "  worlds,"  which  gives  a  false  impression  of  the  author's  meaning; 
for  this  clause  does  not  describe  an  original  creation  of  the  material  world  of  space 
(Cosmos),  but  the  Divine  exercise  of  a  creative  energy  in  the  successive  worlds  of 
time  (jEons).    The  term  "  ages  "  includes  the  idea  of  time  and  of  the  action  that 
takes  place  in  time ;  and  the  power  by  which  God  through  the  Son  has  shaped  the 
coarse  of  life  and  action  in  the  successive  ages  of  man's  existence  is  regarded  as  a 
creation.     For  the  Scriptural  conception  of  creation  did  not  consist  in  bringing 
matter  into  existence  out  of  nothing,  but  in  the  infusion  of  hfe  and  motion  by  the 
moving  of  the  Spirit  of  God  on  the  face  of  tbe  waters  into  matter  which  had  pre- 
viously existed  as  a  waste  void.     (F.  Rendall,  M.A.)        The  agency  of  the  Divine 
Father  and  Son: — The  Father  is  said  to  do  this  and  that  by  the  Son  for  these 
reasons — 1.  To  give  proof  of  the  distinction  of  Persons.    2.  To  set  out  the  order  of 
the  Persons— the  Father  first,  the  Son  second.     3.  To  declare  their  manner  of 
working — the  Father  by  the  Son,  and  the  Son  from  the  Father  (Gen.  xix.  24).    4.  To 
show  the  consent  of  the  distinct  Persons,  Father  and  Son.     5.  To  demonstrate  the 
identity  of  the  essence  of  Father  and  Son  ;  that  both  are  one  Divine  nature  and 
essence,  in  that  the  same  Divine  work  is  ataibuted  to  both.     This  consequence  is 
inferred  upon  a  like  ground  (John  v.  17,  18).    As  the  Father  is  here  said  to  make 
the  worlds  by  His  Son,  so  of  God  in  reference  to  the  Son  indefinitely  it  is  said,  "By 
whom  are  all  things  "  (chap.  ii.  10).     The  Son  therefore  is  here  declared  to  be  true 
God.     (W.  Gouge).        Tlie  glory  of  the  Son: — And  who  may  be  this  Son,  who  in 
the  last  days  it  is  declared  hath  brought  us  speech  of  God  ?    Read  the  Scripture 
in  immediate  connection  (Heb.  i.  1,  3).     Possession — has  He  anything?    Achieve- 
ment— has  He  done  anything  ?     Character — is  He  anything  ?      Position — is    He 
where  He  can  do  anything  ? — these  are  the  four  great  and  universal  tests  of  worth 
and  power.     To  this  Son,  by  whom,  in  these  last  days,  God  hath  spoken  to  us,  our 
Scripture  applies  these  searching  and  settling  tests  of  possession,  achievement.     I. 
Behold  the  glory  of  this  Son  in  the  Hght  of  His  Possession.     "  Whom  He  h  th 
appointed  heir  of  all  things."    I  spent  a  very  interesting  day  in  rambling  through 
the  vast  naval  station  at  Portsmouth,  England.    There  were  huge  ironclads  floating 
in  the  harbour,  of  enormous  force  of  engines,  and  armament  of  thunderous  guns; 
there  were  huge  skeletons  of  iron  ships  upon  the  stocks  in  process  of  construction ; 
there  were  almost  miles  of  streets  of  anchors  so  strong  and  great  it  looked  as  though 
the  nethermost  rooks  must  give  before  their  mighty  flukes  would  break  ;  there  were 
circling  piles  of  iron  cables,  every  link  of  which  seemed  massive  enough  to  hold 
against  the  stoutest  storm  ;  there  were  pyramids  of  balls  and  shells,  and  long,  high 
armouries  bursting  with  weapons  ;  there  were  machine  shops  almost  innumerable, 
and  multitudinous  piles  of  cordage,  and  immensities  of  things  of  every  sort  needed 
for  a  naval  station  of  a  world-including  empire.     And  on  every  iron  plank,  and  ball, 
and  tool,  and  gate-post  even,  was  stamped  the  broad  arrow  ;  and  twisted  into  every 
bit  of  cordage  there  was  the  red  line,  marking  and  betokening  tbe  ownership  of  the 
sovereign.    Everything  was  hers,  and  the  sign  of  the  sovereign's  ownership  was 
written  open  everything.    It  may  not  be  so  plainly  seen;  it  may  look  dimtned 
sometimes  even  to  the  clearest  vision  of  our  faith,  but,  more  really,  deeply,  indes- 
tructibly there  is  stamped  upon  the  "  all  things  "which  go  to  makeup  this  uni- 
verse the  sign  of  their  possession  by  the  Son  of  God.     God  hath  appointed  Him 
heir  of  all  things.    1.  AH  the  moneyed  wealth  of  the  world  is  the  Son's.     In  a  real 
way  Jesus  Christ  ig  possessor  of  the  money  of  the  world.     2.  Of  the  mighty  enter- 
yiisea  oi  the  world  Jesus  Christ  is  f  usse&Bor.    Ihey  are  all  seen  to  hold  most  real 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  1. 

relation  to  the  advance  of  His  kingdom — the  invention  of  printing.  3.  To  the 
great  natural  forces  of  the  world,  already  discovered  and  to  be  discovered,  Jesus 
Christ  has  title — e.g.,  railroads,  telegraphs,  swift  communications  between  conti- 
nents— all  these  are  being  laid  hold  of  for  the  widening  of  Christ's  kingdom.  4. 
And  on  the  thinking  of  the  world  the  grasp  of  the  Son's  possession  is  also  placed. 
After  all,  the  thought  which  gets  its  inspiration  from  the  Bible  is  the  thought  that 
leads.  5.  Even  upon  the  wickedness  and  infidelity  of  the  world  Jesus  Christ  haa 
grasp.  Somehow  He  will  compel  these  to  lend  ministry  to  His  purpose.  6.  And 
of  all  the  unknown  forces  in  farthest  suns,  stars,  planets,  the  Son  is  in  possession, 
God  hath  appointed  Him  of  all  things  the  heir.  H.  Behold  the  glory  of  this  Son 
in  the  light  of  His  achievement.  Three  things,  the  Scripture  here  declares,  this 
Son,  by  whom  in  these  last  days  God  hath  spoken  onto  us,  has  achieved — 1.  Crea- 
tion. 2.  Upholding.  "And  upholding  aU  things  by  the  word  of  His  power." 
''  In  Him  all  things  consist  " — stand  together.  3.  Kedemption.  "  When  He  had 
by  Himself  purged  our  sins."  IH.  Behold  the  glory  of  this  Son  in  the  light  of  His 
CHARACTF.B.  "  Who,  being  the  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory  and  the  express 
image  of  His  person."  IV.  Behold  the  glory  of  this  Son  in  the  light  of  His  posi- 
tion. "  Sat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  High."  In  view  of  the  glory 
of  this  Son,  see — 1.  The  folly  of  expecting  a  further  revelation.  He  is  the 
Father's  utmost  revelation.  2.  The  folly  of  the  thought  of  any  other  way  of  salva- 
tion than  this  Son's  way.  3.  The  wonder  that  Christians  should  not  more  appre- 
ciate the  honour  of  confession  and  service  of  this  Son.  4.  The  certainty  of  this 
Son's  triumph.  He  who  by  faith  and  self-surrender  allies  himself  with  this  Son  is 
on  the  winning  side  of  things.  The  world  moderately  admired  as  God's  work- 
manship : — 1.  The  world  is  of  God's  making,  therefore  it  is  to  be  highly  esteemed 
of  us.  The  Tabernacle  was  of  Bezaleel's  making,  that  was  furnished  with  all  skill 
and  wisdom,  therefore  the  more  regarded  by  the  Israelites ;  the  Temple  was  of 
Solomon's  making,  the  wisest  man  that  ever  was,  therefore  in  that  respect  more 
honoured  by  the  Jews.  A  picture  of  Apelles'  making  would  be  in  great  request. 
The  world  is  the  glorious  workmanship  of  God  Almighty,  therefore  to  be  admired 
of  us  all.  If  a  stranger  be  in  a  boat  on  the  Thames  he  cannot  but  wonder  at  the 
brave  buildings  that  be  situate  on  it.  Shall  we  pass  through  this  famous  frame,  and 
Buper-excellent  building  of  this  world  set  up  by  God  Himself,  and  not  wonder  at  the 
wisdom,  power,  and  goodness  of  God  that  made  it  ?  We  see  what  a  goodly  coat  the 
earth  hath ;  Solomon  in  all  his  royalty  was  not  so  clothed  as  it.  We  see  the  sun 
in  the  firmament,  the  moon,  the  stars — God  Almighty's  candles — birds  of  the  air, 
beasts  of  the  field,  fishes  of  the  sea,  the  admirable  work  of  our  own  bodies,  yet  they 
do  not  make  us  almost  to  think  of  God.  The  Gentiles  had  no  book  but  this  to 
look  upon,  yet  it  left  tbem  without  excuse.  Let  us  all  behold  God,  even  in  the 
creation  of  the  world.  2.  Though  the  world  be  a  worthy  work,  and  that  of  God's 
making,  yet  let  us  not  admire  it  too  much  ;  as  there  was  a  time  when  it  was  set  up, 
BO  there  is  a  time  when  it  shall  be  pulled  down.  The  disciples  stood  gazing  on  the 
Temple,  wondering  at  the  workmanship  of  it;  but  Christ  told  them  that  one  stone 
should  not  be  left  upon  another.  This  world  is  but  an  inn,  wherein  we  take  up  a 
night's  lodging.  If  thou  comest  to  an  inn,  be  it  never  so  fair,  wilt  thou  always  con- 
tinue there?  Nay,  thou  wilt  leave  the  inn,  and  make  haste  to  thy  house,  though 
it  be  nothing  so  beautiful  as  the  inn.  Remember  that  this  world  is  but  an  inn,  be 
it  never  so  goodly  a  piece  of  work.  Hasten  to  that  house  that  is  made  without 
hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens.  (W.  Jones,  D.D.)  The  brightness  of  His  glory. 
— Deity  and  atonement  of  Christ : — I.  Consider  what  is  said  of  the  person  of  Christ, 
PKEVious  TO  His  becoming  odb  Saviotjb.  He  is  "  the  brightness  of  the  Father's 
glory,  the  express  image  of  His  person,  and  He  upholds  all  things  by  the  word 
of  His  power."  If  this  be  not  descriptive  of  His  being  truly  God,  it  is  not  in  the 
power  of  language  to  convey  such  an  idea.  The  antecedent  glory  of  Christ  is  a 
subject  on  which  the  Scriptures  delight  to  dwell,  as  may  be  seen  in  various  pas- 
sages (Mic.  V.  2 ;  John  i.  1-3  ;  1  John  i.  1,  2).  1.  Christ  is  here  called  the  bright- 
ness of  the  Father's  glory.  Christ  is  not  the  Father,  yet  there  is  such  an  equality 
that  He  is  emphatically  "  the  brightness  of  His  glory."  It  is  also  through  Him 
that  the  glory  of  the  Divine  nature  is  revealed  and  made  manifest.  God  made  the 
world  by  Him,  and  by  Him  He  saved  it ;  the  Lord  Jesus  is  therefore  the  shining 
forth  of  all  this  glory.  2.  He  is  the  express  image  of  His  person,  the  image  of  the 
invisible  God  (Col.  i.  15).  There  is  not  an  attribute  or  a  feature  in  the  character 
of  the  Father  but  what  is  also  in  the  Son.  Here  is  likewise  a  personal  distinction 
consisting  with  a  oneness  of  nature,  and  without  any  other  subordination  than  that 


CHAP.  I.]  HEBREWS.  29 

which  is  relative,  as  between  a  Father  and  a  Son.  8.  Christ  upholdeth  all  things 
by  the  word  of  His  power.  Nothing  can  be  more  expressive  of  His  Godhead,  for 
this  is  claimed  as  the  special  prerogative  of  God  alone  (Psa.  Ixxv.  3).  II.  Observe 
what  is  said  of  His  work  in  undektakino  the  office  of  a  priest.  "  He  by  Him. 
self  purged  our  sins."  1.  The  efficacy  of  His  sacrifice — "He  purged  our  sins." 
The  term  alludes  to  the  ceremonial  cleansings  under  the  law,  which  were  effected 
by  sacrificial  blood  (chap.  ix.  22).  Hence  David  prayed  (Psa.  li.  7).  Our  being 
cleansed  by  the  blood  of  Christ  is  the  substance  of  all  these  typical  purifications 
(1  John  i.  7, 9).  By  His  death  He  removed  the  penal  effects  of  sin,  and  through  the 
application  of  it  by  faith,  the  conscience  is  purified.  The  gospel  therefore  connects 
repentance  and  remission  of  sins,  and  proclaims  forgiveness  amongst  all  nations 
(Luke  xxiv.  47).  2.  The  ground  or  reason  of  this  efficacy — "  He  by  Himself  purged 
our  sins."  When  the  Scriptures  speak  of  Christ's  miracles,  they  usually  ascribe 
them  to  the  authority  of  the  Father,  rather  than  the  divinity  of  the  Son.  So  also 
in  His  sufferings  He  was  succoured  by  the  ministry  of  angels,  and  upheld  by  the 
power  of  God,  seeing  He  had  taken  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant,  which  required 
that  He  should  act  in  subordination  to  Him  that  sent  Him  (Isa.  xlii.  1 ;  xlix.  8). 
But  the  Scriptures  as  uniformly  ascribe  the  efficacy  of  His  sacrifice  to  the  divinity 
of  His  person,  as  giving  value  and  virtue  to  His  sufferings  (1  John  i.  7).  III.  The 
exaltation  which  followed  upon  His  offering  Himself  as  a  sacrifice  fob  us. 
"  He  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high."  1.  By  '*  right  hand  of 
God  "  is  meant  the  first  place  in  His  favour.  In  all  things  He  is  to  have  the  pre- 
eminence, for  He  is  before  all  things,  and  by  Him  all  things  consist  (Col.  i.  17,  18). 
2.  This  is  mentioned  as  an  honour  which  became  Him.  Conscious  that  He  had 
done  the  will  of  God,  and  finished  the  work  which  He  had  given  Him  to  do,  the 
Lord  Jesus  took  the  place  which  belonged  to  Him.  He  sat  down  on  the  right  hand 
of  God,  angels  and  authorities  and  powers  being  made  subject  unto  Him  (1  Peter 
iii.  22).  While  all  in  heaven  cry,  Thoa  art  worthy  to  receive  power,  and  riches, 
and  wisdom,  and  strength,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and  blessing  (Rev.  v.  12).  Im- 
provement. 1.  Seeing  that  God  hath  provided  for  us  an  all-sufficient  Saviour,  let 
us  learn  to  trust  Him,  and  to  call  upon  His  holy  name,  remembering  that  there  is 
salvation  in  no  other  (John  iii.  35  ;  Acts  ii.  21 ;  iv.  12).  2.  We  see  the  way  in 
which  our  sins  are  to  be  expiated  and  removed ;  not  by  tears  or  sufferings  of  our 
own,  but  by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  and  that  alone.  Nevertheless  sin  must 
be  confessed,  or  it  cannot  be  forgiven  (1  John  i.  9).  3.  The  exaltation  of  Christ, 
as  the  reward  of  His  humiliation,  is  to  as  a  source  of  great  encouragement.  He  is 
exalted  as  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repentance  and  the  remission  of  sins; 
and  is  able  to  save  all  that  come  unto  God  by  Him.  4.  The  conduct  of  Christ  in 
doing  and  suffering  the  will  of  God,  and  then  entering  into  His  glory,  is  given  as 
an  example  for  our  imitation  (Heb.  xii.  2).  {Theological  Sketch-Book.)  Christ 
the  brightness  of  God's  glory : — No  resemblance  taken  from  any  other  creature 
can  more  fully  set  out  the  mutual  relation  between  the  Father  and  the  Son.  For  — 
1.  The  brightness  issuing  from  the  sun  is  of  the  same  nature  that  the  sun  is.  2. 
It  is  of  as  long  continuance  as  the  sun  ;  never  was  the  sun  without  the  brightness 
of  it.  3.  This  brightness  cannot  be  separated  from  the  sun ;  the  sun  may  as  well 
be  made  no  sun  as  have  the  brightness  thereof  severed  from  it.  4.  This  bright- 
ness is  from  the  sun,  not  the  sun  from  it.  5.  This  brightness  cometh  naturally 
and  necessarily  from  the  sun,  not  voluntarily  and  at  pleasure.  6.  The  sun  aud 
the  brightness  are  distinct  each  from  other,  the  one  is  not  the  other.  7.  All  the 
glory  of  the  sun  is  in  this  brightness.  8.  The  light  which  the  sun  giveth  to  tlie 
world  is  by  this  brightness.  How  distinctly  doth  this  metaphor  set  out  the  great 
mysteries  of  our  Christian  faith  concerning  God  the  Father  and  Son.  For  they  are 
— 1.  Of  one  and  the  same  essence  (John  x.  30).  2.  Co-eternal  (John  i.  1).  8.  In- 
separable (Prov.  viii.  30).  4.  The  Son  is  from  the  Father;  God  of  God,  light  of 
light,  very  God  of  very  God.  6.  The  Son  is  begotten  of  the  Father,  by  nature,  not 
by  will,  favour,  or  good  pleasure  (Rom.  viii.  7,  32).  6.  The  person  of  the  one  is 
distinct  from  the  other ;  for  the  Father  is  not  the  Son,  nor  the  Son  the  Father 
(John  v.  17).  7.  The  incomprehensible  glory  of  the  Father  most  brightly  shine ih 
forth  in  the  Son  (John  xvii.  5).  8.  All  that  the  Father  doth  in  relation  to  creatures 
He  doth  by  the  Son.  As  in  these  respects  Christ  is  fitly  and  justly  styled  bright- 
ness, 80  in  regard  of  His  surpassing  excellency  He  is  said  to  be  the  brightness  of 
glory.  Of  the  Hebrew  and  Greek  words  translated  glory.  Glory  attributed  to  a 
thing  in  the  Hebrew  dialect  importeth  the  surpassing  excellency  th(  reof ;  as  a 
crown  of  glory  (Prov.  xvi.  31),  a  throne  of  glory  (Jer.  xvii.  12),  a  name  of  glory  (Isa. 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

Iziii.  14),  a  most  excellent  and  glorious  crown,  throne,  and  name.  Thas  to  set  oat 
the  surpassing  excellency,  and  most  glorious  majesty  of  God,  He  is  styled  the  God 
of  glory  (Acts  vii.  2),  the  Father  of  glory  (Eph.  i.  17).  And  His  Son,  the  Lord  of 
glory,  the  King  of  glory  (1  Cor.  ii.  8  ;  Psa.  xxiv.  7).  Never  was  any  brightness  like 
to  the  brightness  here  mentioned ;  well  therefore  might  it,  in  regard  of  the  excel- 
lency of  it,  be  styled  brightness  of  glory,  {W.  Gouge.)  The  glory  of  Christ: — 
The  apostle  hath  taught  that  our  Saviour  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  hath  been  once 
Bent  unto  us,  an  eternal  Prophet,  to  teach  us  all  things  which  God  hath  done  for 
our  salvation,  and  through  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  to  sanctify  us  all  unto 
Him ;  that  Him  alone  we  should  acknowledge  to  be  our  leader  unto  eternal  life. 
Now  the  apostle  beginneth  to  prove  this  singular  glory  to  belong  only  to  Christ, 
which  He  doth  by  setting  out  a  full  description  of  Him,  in  which,  as  I  said.  He 
proveth  Him  to  be  eternal  God.  1.  By  His  rule  over  all  creatures  (ver.  2).  2. 
By  the  glory  of  His  own  person.  3.  By  His  great  power.  4.  By  His  benefit  be- 
stowed upon  us.  6.  By  His  glory  purchased  to  Himself  (ver.  3).  6.  By  comparison 
with  angels  (ver.  4).  The  rule  of  Christ  over  all  creatures  He  showeth  in  this  : 
that  He  is  heir  of  all,  and  created  all.  By  heir  of  all,  meaning  how  in  the  person 
of  a  mediator  He  hath  restored  all,  as  in  the  person  of  the  Son  He  was  the  wisdom 
of  God  to  make  all.  And  therefore  called  the  heir,  because  He  restored  not  the 
world,  but  by  redeeming  it,  and  purchasing  it  unto  Himself,  according  as  God  the 
Father  had  given  it  to  be  a  recompense  unto  His  work ;  in  which  respect  it  is  said 
that  God  appointed  Him  heir  of  all  things.  This  our  Saviour  taught  us  (Matt 
xxviii.  28 ;  John  xvi.  15).  The  apostle  addeth  the  second  note  of  this  authority. 
That  by  Him  the  world  was  made ;  by  the  world  meaning  all  things  in  heaven, 
earth,  and  under  the  earth.  For  so  St.  John  addeth  to  this  testimony,  "And  with- 
out Him  nothing  was  made,  whatsoever  was  made."  Then  if  all  creatures  were  made 
by  Him,  Himself  was  uncreate,  and  only  Creator  of  all  that  is,  that  we  might  boldly 
give  Him  the  glory  of  the  Father  Almighty,  maker  of  heaven  and  earth.  2,  The 
second  thing  wherein  Christ  is  here  exalted  is  the  glory  of  His  person.  (1)  That 
He  is  the  brightness  of  His  Father's  glory,  which  title  is  absolutely  given  Him,  as 
essential  unto  the  Son  of  God,  not  only  before  us,  but  even  before  His  Father ;  that 
as  all  the  properties  of  the  Godhead  have  their  being  in  the  person  of  the  Father, 
so  the  brightness  and  beauty  of  them  is  in  the  person  of  the  Son,  and  so  this  name 
was  proper  to  Him  before  the  world  was  made  ;  noting  that  eternally  He  was  of  the 
Father.  In  which  sense  St.  John  caUeth  Him  the  word,  not  according  to  the  time 
in  which  creatures  have  been,  but  an  essential  word  before  all  creatures.  (2)  The 
second  thing  here  attributed  to  Him  is,  that  He  is  the  ingraven  form  of  the  person 
of  His  Father ;  noting  hereby  the  unity  of  substance,  as  in  whom  the  fulness  of 
the  Godhead  dwelt  bodily.  Even  as  St.  Paul  doth  also  call  Him  the  image  of  God, 
distinguishing  Him  by  this  name  from  all  shadows  and  figures,  like  as  this  apostle 
nseth  the  word  in  the  tenth  chapter.  And  here  expressly  he  addeth  ingraven, 
above  all  the  figures  in  the  law,  the  ephod,  the  Urim,  or  the  ark  itself,  showing  the 
excellency  that  is  in  Christ.  3.  The  third  title  of  honour  here  given  unto  Christ  is 
of  the  greatness  of  His  power,  and  that  is  that  He  beareth  up  all  things  with  His 
mighty  word.  In  this  also  it  is  assured  that  He  is  very  God,  the  stay  and  strength 
of  the  world,  without  whose  hand  all  things  would  fall  into  confusion.  4.  He 
extolleth  the  person  of  Christ  by  the  greatness  of  His  benefits  bestowed  upon  man, 
in  these  words,  "  By  HimseK  having  purged  our  sins,"  put  in  here  as  a  parenthesis, 
because  it  showeth  the  way  how  Christ  purchased  that  excellent  dignity  to  sit  at 
the  right  hand  of  His  Father,  whereof  after  he  sptaketh.  In  that  he  saith  purged 
our  sins  expressly  he  warranteth  His  Godhead,  for  what  creature  could  have  done 
BO  excellent  a  work  ?  5.  The  thing  wherein  Christ  is  here  extolled  is  the  high 
dignity  which  He  hath  gotten,  in  these  words.  He  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of 
high  majesty ;  noting  hereby  that  God  the  Father  hath  taken  Him  up  into  His 
glory,  so  that  He  sitteth  in  power  and  majesty  equal  with  His  Father ;  and  this  is 
plain,  in  that  He  calleth  it,  the  right  hand  of  highest  majesty.  And  the  Scripture 
showeth  this  end  of  it,  till  I  make  Thine  enemies  Thy  footstool ;  showing  that  this 
is  the  power  of  God  in  Him,  to  sit  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  Now  a  little  further 
we  will  examine  the  words  and  apply  them  more  particularly  to  our  instruction. 
In  that  it  is  said  first,  God  made  Him  heir  of  all,  so  that  we  see  how  these  words 
of  the  apostle  have  every  way  their  weight,  to  prove  that  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God, 
the  King  of  His  people,  God  and  man,  mediator  between  God  and  us.  We  must 
learn  of  ourselves  we  have  nothing,  but  being  ingrafted  in  Him  we  are  owners  of 
all  things.    I  may  have  from  man  my  warrant  here  in  earth  that  mj  house  is  mine, 


CHA».  I.]  HEBREWS.  81 

and  my  land  is  mine,  and  be  is  a  thief  and  a  robber  that  taketb  it  from  me.  But 
all  the  men  in  the  world  cannot  give  me  my  possession  before  the  living  God,  but 
only  His  Son  Christ,  who  is  heir  of  all ;  and  I  am  a  thief  and  a  robber  if  before 
God  I  claim  any  other  right  in  it.  Then,  that  our  lands  may  be  our  own,  our  goods 
our  own,  our  servants,  our  wives,  our  children  ours,  let  us  be  Christ's,  that  in  Him 
we  may  have  the  good  assurance  of  all  our  substance.  And  where  it  is  further 
said.  All  things  were  made  by  Christ,  we  may  boldly  conclude  that  no  man  hath 
power  over  His  creatures,  but  they  must  serve  their  Creator.  What  have  I  to  do 
with  another  man's  work?  God  hath  appointed  His  creatures  a  use ;  in  it  they  aie 
holy.  If  thou  wilt  set  them  another  law  thou  profanest  thyself  in  them.  Further, 
in  that  it  is  said,  that  Christ  is  the  brightness  of  glory,  and  ingraven  form  of  the 
substance  of  His  Father.  Let  us  mark  well  why  the  apostle  thus  magnifieth  the 
person  of  Christ.  For  no  other  cause  but  to  warrant  unto  us  the  truth  of  His 
word,  that  He  is  our  prophet  and  we  must  believe  Him.  Again  it  is  said,  He 
beareth  up  all  things  with  His  mighty  word.  Where,  we  must  mark,  he  attributeth 
to  God's  mighty  power  the  governance  of  all  things  in  our  sight,  either  great  or 
small,  that  we  should  learn  not  to  measure  the  power  of  God  by  our  weak  senses. 
It  is  His  mighty  power  that  upholdeth  the  earth,  that  stretcheth  out  the  heavens, 
that  sendeth  forth  the  winds,  that  raiseth  on  high  the  great  waves  of  the  sea,  and 
these  things  we  confess  are  great  and  mighty  ;  but  as  it  is  here,  so  everywhere  the 
mighty  power  of  God  maketh  the  feather  to  move,  and  His  strong  arm  leadeth  the 
fly  in  her  way,  and  the  same  force  which  now  shaketh  a  leaf,  if  He  had  sent  it 
against  a  mountain  it  would  have  turned  it  up  from  the  foundations ;  and  the  same 
strength  that  bloweth  up  the  dust,  if  it  came  against  the  earth,  it  would  shake  the 
bottoms  of  it.  And  this  should  make  us  fear  before  Him,  that  whatsoever  He  hath 
done,  whether  it  seem  great  or  little,  we  should  confess  His  handiwork,  and  accord- 
ing to  His  greatness  so  we  should  honour  Him,  that  whatsoever  He  hath  com- 
manded, whether  it  seem  weighty  or  light,  all  our  obedience  should  be  straight  unto 
it.  It  followeth,  by  Himself  He  hath  purged  our  sins.  I  do  not  doubt  but  you 
know  how  Christ  hath  purged  our  sins,  and  the  more  you  know  it  I  am  sure  you 
are  the  more  glad  to  hear  it.  And  because  He  saith  by  Himself  He  purged  our 
sins,  in  this  we  see  a  clear  discharge  given  to  the  tabernacle,  and  all  the  sacrifices 
at  the  door  of  it,  not  one  of  them  purged  sin.  Now  where  it  followeth  in  the 
apostle's  words,  "  That  He  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  high  majesty,"  we  must  first 
mark  the  change  of  words.  Where  it  is  usually  said,  He  sitteth  on  the  right  hand 
of  God ;  here  he  saith  on  the  right  hand  of  the  highest  majesty,  which  is,  as  it 
were,  an  interpretation  of  the  right  hand  of  God,  signifying  nothing  else  but  the 
power  and  glory  of  God,  given  unto  the  person  of  the  Mediator,  according  to  that 
saying  of  Paul,  "  God  hath  highly  exalted  Him,  and  given  Him  a  name  above  all 
names."  (E.  Deering,  B.D.)  The  glory  of  Christ:— It  is  of  the  incarnate  Son 
of  God  that  the  apostle  speaks ;  and  showing  unto  us  His  glory,  he  leads  us,  in  the 
first  place,  to  the  end  of  all  history.  1.  He  is  appointed  the  heir  of  all  things.  2. 
To  the  beginning  of  all  history,  in  Him  God  made  the  ages.  3.  Before  all  history, 
He  is  the  brightness  of  His  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His  being.  4.  Through- 
out all  history  He  upholdeth  all  things  by  the  word  of  His  power.  1.  The  end  of 
all  history.  The  Father  has  appointed  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  His  Son,  the  heir 
of  all  things.  Him,  the  Son  of  Abraham  and  the  Son  of  David,  the  theocratic  Son, 
the  Messiah  ;  not  in  His  abstract  Deity,  but  as  the  Son  who  became  man  ;  as  the 
Word  made  flesh  ;  as  the  Son  who  became  the  servant  to  fulfil  all  Jehovah's  good 
pleasure.  "  The  Father  loveth  the  Son,  and  hath  given  all  things  into  His  hands." 
According  to  His  deity  there  is  no  necessity  for  any  gift,  reward,  or  transfer.  Ac- 
cording to  His  deity  incarnate,  the  Messiah,  in  the  everlasting  covenant,  is  appointed 
heir,  and  all  things  are  given  into  His  hand.  What  are  these  "  all  things  "  ?  It 
is  clear  that  there  is  nothing  excepted  that  is  not  given  unto  Him.  So  said  the 
risen  Saviour — "All  power  is  given  unto  Me  in  heaven  and  on  earth."  In 
His  intercessory  prayer  before  His  sufferings  He  had  said,  "  Thou  hast  given 
Him  power  over  all  flesh."  This  is  the  first  thing.  The  whole  human  race  is 
given  unto  Him.  And  out  of  this  whole  human  race,  which  belongs  unto  Him  by 
eternal  right,  and  by  the  right  of  His  perfect  and  holy  humanity,  by  the  right  of 
His  unspeakable  love,  and  of  His  death,  God  has  chosen  in  Him  a  people,  that  the 
Son  should  give  eternal  life  to  *  as  many  as  Thou  hast  given  Him."  And  this 
Church  Jesus  Christ  has  obtained  as  the  first  and  central  part  of  His  inheritance. 
As  the  material  sun  is  placed  in  the  firmament  to  be  a  source  of  light  and  heat  and 
joy  unto  the  rest  of  the  creation  of  God,  so  God  appoints  the  Church  to  be  the  first- 


BS  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

fruits  of  HiB  creatures — the  body  of  Christ,  wherewith  He  influences  and  blesses, 
whereby  He  guides  and  controls  all  things.  And  the  material  creation  which  God 
hath  made  in  Jesus  Christ  He  hath  also  given  unto  His  Son,  that  Jesus,  through 
the  glorified  Church,  and  by  the  angels  in  heavenly  places,  as  well  as  through  Israel 
and  the  nations  dwelling  on  earth,  should  be  glorified  in  the  whole  realm,  which  i3 
His  portion  and  His  inheritance.  How  rich  is  our  adorable  Jesus  I  2.  All  things 
are  His.  And  this  is  so  natural ;  because,  in  the  second  place,  God  has  made  "  all 
ages,"  or  "  all  worlds,"  by  Him.  It  is  natural  that  He  who  is  the  Alpha  should 
also  be  the  Omega.  He  is  before  all  things  (not  merely  as  before  and  above  time, 
but)  as  the  idea  and  cause  of  all  things.  He  is  that  eternal  wisdom  of  which  we 
read  in  the  book  of  Proverbs,  wihch  was  with  God  before  the  foundations  of  the 
world  were  laid.  God  has  made  all  things  by  Christ  according  to  Christ,  and  for 
Christ.  What  more  natural,  then,  that  He  by  whom  and  in  whom  all  things  were 
made  should  be  also  the  inheritor  of  all  things  ?  3.  But  the  apostle  goes  still 
further.  Before  all  history  He  is  "  the  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,  and  the 
express  image  of  His  being."  Wherever  he  looks  he  sees  Christ,  the  light.  With- 
out Christ  there  is  darkness.  Think  of  the  end  of  history,  and  you  are  lost  in 
amazement ;  think  of  the  beginning  of  the  world,  and  you  are  lost  in  ignorance  ; 
think  of  before  the  beginning,  and  you  are  altogether  lost  in  an  element  transcen- 
ient  and  incomprehensible,  because  it  is  not  for  our  finite  minds  to  contemplate 
such  wondrous  heights  until  the  heavenly.  Divine  light  of  revelation  comes  to  our 
aid.  And  who  is  the  light  ?  Christ  is  the  light.  The  eternal,  infinite  God  reveala 
Himself  in  Christ.  The  Son  is  the  light,  which  maketh  manifest ;  God  is  manifest 
in  Him.  Christ  is  "  the  brightness  of  His  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His 
being."  In  Jesus  we  behold  infinite  power,  wisdom,  goodness,  holiness,  compassion, 
truth.  All  things  that  are  in  the  Father  are  in  the  Son.  It  is  as  the  Son  that  the 
eternal  life,  which  was  with  the  Father,  was  manifested  unto  us.  He  who  declares 
unto  us  God,  whom  none  hath  seen,  the  Word,  is  God  (John  i.).  He  is  truth,  sub- 
stance ;  and  the  beloved  disciple  testifies  of  Him  :  He  is  the  true  God  and  eternal 
life.  4.  And  as  the  Lord  Jesus  is  the  heir,  the  end  and  consummation  of  all  things 
and  the  beginning  of  all  things,  and  the  eternal  Word  before  all  things,  the  apostle 
tells  us  that  throughout  the  course  of  history,  in  providence,  He  beareth  all  things 
with  the  word  of  His  power.  He  is  the  inherent  energy,  truth  and  beauty  of  all 
things.  He  is  as  it  were  the  spirit,  the  symmetry,  the  logic  and  substance  of  all 
that  exists.  By  Him  princes  rule  and  senators  decree  justice.  In  Him  every  truth 
is  rooted.  By  Him  everything  that  is  firm  stands.  By  Him  all  things  are  con- 
tinued ;  for  He  is  the  Word  of  God — the  expression  of  the  eternal  thoughts  and 
truths  of  the  Most  High.  Christ  is  Lord  of  all.  The  whole  universe  centres  in 
Him.  There  shall  be  again  wonders  and  signs  in  the  heavens  when  the  Son  of 
man  shall  come  in  power.  And  both  science  and  revelation  teach  us  to  look  for- 
ward to  a  new  earth.  It  is  the  Lord  Jesus  who  shall  make  all  things  new.  And 
all  developments  are  borne  up  and  moved  by  the  word  of  His  power.  Now,  when 
the  apostle  has  given  us  this  idea  of  the  wonderful  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  he  con- 
tinues by  stating  something  still  more  marvellous.  Why  has  this  glorious  being, 
in  whom  all  things  are  summed  up,  and  who  is  before  all  things  the  Father's 
delight  and  the  Father's  glory,  come  down  to  our  poor  earth  ?  For  what  purpose  ? 
To  shine  ?  To  show  forth  the  splendour  of  His  majesty  ?  To  teach  heavenly  wis- 
dom ?  To  rule  by  His  just  and  holy  might  ?  No  1  He  came  to  purge  our  sins. 
What  height  of  glory  I  what  depth  of  abasement  1  What  a  glorious  Lord !  And 
what  an  awful  sacrifice  of  unspeakable  love,  to  purge  our  sins  by  Himself  1  The 
manner  and  power  of  this  purification  form  the  subject  of  this  whole  Epistle.  But 
in  this  short  expression,  "  By  Himself  He  purged  our  sins,"  aU  is  summed  up.  By 
Himself :  the  Son  of  God,  the  eternal  Word  in  humanity.  Himself :  the  priest 
who  is  sacrifice,  yea,  altar,  and  everything  that  is  needed  for  full  and  real  expiation 
and  reconciliation.  (A.  Saphir.)  Christ  the  sunbeam  of  the  Father^s  glory  : — 
The  sun  is  presented  to  us  here  as  the  emblem  of  the  Father  ;  the  railiation  pro- 
ceeding from  it,  the  emblem  of  Jesus  Christ.  Now  this  is  well  adapted  to  meet 
many  a  cavil  which  unbelief  may  call  up  against  the  absolute  Godhead  of  Christ. 
It  is  asked,  for  instance,  does  not  the  relationship  of  Father  and  Son  imply  that  the 
Father  existed  before  the  Son;  and  if  so,  is  the  Son  eternal?  Again:  was  the 
existence  of  the  Son  at  all  dependent  upon  the  will  of  the  Father  ?  and  if  so,  where 
is  the  self-existence,  the  "I  am,"  which  is  a  property  of  Godhead?  Now,  St. 
Paul's  words  in  the  text  teach  us,  first,  that  the  expressions,  Father  and  Son,  are 
emploj'ed,  in  consideration  of  oar  infirmities,  to  give  qb  some  idea  of  the  relation- 


CBAP.  I]  HEBREWS.  33 

ship  betwten  two  persons  in  the  Trinity,  but  that  we  are  to  lay  aside  everything 
that  is  gross  or  earthly  in  contemplating  this  heavenly  connection,  retaining'  only 
the  idea  of  the  one  being  identical  in  existence  an  I  proceeding  from  the  other. 
They  theu  put  before  ns  an  image,  calculated  to  enlarge  and  purify  our  view  of  this 
simple  truth.     There  is  the  sun  in  the  firmament,  no  unfitting  type  of  God  the 
Father;  the  sun  of  the  great  system  that  He  has  called  into  being,  the  author  of 
light  and  life,  both  physical  and  spiritual  I     But  in  what  way  does  the  sun  commu- 
nicate  with  the  dill'erent  parts  and  provinces  of  his  subject  system  ?  by  his  rays — 
the  avavyaafia  ri}c  ^o^tjf — the  brightness  of  his  glory,  the  radiation  proceeding  from 
the  central  and  substantial  mass  of  ligiit,  that  travels  far  and  wide  into  the  realms 
of  space,  and  floods  our  universe  with  beauty  and  brilliance.     And  what  are  the 
rays  ?     Now  mark  how  the  particular  truths  of  Christ's  Godhead  are  all  shut  up  in 
this  emblem.     The  rays  of  the  sun  are  of  the  very  same  substance  with  the  sun  ; 
thus  representing  to  ua  the  perfect  unity  of  substance  between  Christ  and  His 
Father.     The  rays  are  generated  by  the  sun,  and  yet  they  are  coeval  with  the  son  : 
the  first  moment  of  the  sun's  existence  saw  hiu>  scattering  his  rays  into  space  around 
him.     So  Christ  was  the  only-begottin  of  the  Father,  and  yet  co-eternal  with  the 
Father ;  tbe  everlasting  past,  that  has  never  been  without  the  presence  of  the 
Father,  having  never  likewise  been  without  the  radiated  efJulgence  of  Christ.     But 
we  have  not  yet  exhausted  our  emblem.     It  has  helped  us  to  gather  at  least  an  idea 
of  the  pre-existent  relationship  of  Christ  to  His  heavenly  Father.     Now  we  shall 
see  how  it  holds  good  in  reference  to,  and  illustration  of,  His  present  relationship 
to  ourselves.     The  sun  communicates,  by  its  rays,  with  various  other  worlds  be- 
sides our  own ;  but  in  the  case  of  ours  alone,  so  far  as  we  know,  does  it  experience 
anything  Uke  difiQculty  or   obstruction.     Thus  God  communicates,  by  His  Son, 
with  the  different  provinces  of  His  intellectual  dominions;  and  everywhere  He 
meets  with  a  welcome  worthy  of  the  character  He  bears  and  the  blessings  He  be- 
stows.    But  when  He  sought  to  make  His  way  to  this  earth  of  ours,  there  was  a 
cloud  to  be  peuttiated,  a  dark  and  dense  mass  of  noxi^ius  vapour  exhaled  from  the 
moral  corruption  below.     Yet  not  for  that  was  the  sunbeam  of  the  Divine  glory  to 
be  thwarttd  in  its  course.     It  had  undertaken  a  mission  to  earth  ;  it  had  under- 
taken to  burst  through  the  barrier,  make  the  homes  of  men  bright  with  a  visitation 
from  an  hitherto  offended  and  enclouded  God.     And  those  among  us  who  have,  on 
some  doubtful  day,  watched  the  battle  between  sun.shine  and  storm  for  the  mastery, 
will  surely  grant  that  it  affords  no  unapt  emblem  of  the  great  spiritual  conflict 
whicli  decided  whether  our  day  of  gloom  were  to  deepen  into  everlasting  night,  or 
be  followed  by  a  morning  of  "clear  shining  after  rain."    The  hosts  of  darkness 
marshalled  all  their  strength,  and  the  solitary  sunbeam  seemed  to  be  struggling, 
not  for  power,  but  for  existence  among  them ;  nay,  for  a  little  season  they  closed 
over  it,  and  it  was  hidden  from  the  view  of  man,  and,  to  all  appearance,  obliterated 
and  extinguished.     But  again  it  bursts  brightly  forth  ;  it  manifests  its  indestruc- 
tible nature ;  it  manifests  its  prevailing  power.    And  what  is  the  consequence  and 
the  result  to  earth?     Is  there  nothing  more  than  the  shedding  down  of  light,  thus 
revealing  more  clearly  the  barrenness  of  the  moral  landscape  ?     Oh  no  1     The  sun- 
beam of  the  Father's  glory  has  a  fertilising,  as  well  as  an  enlightening  power. 
"  The  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  are  glad  for  it ;  and  the  desert  rejoices  and 
blossoms  as  the  rose."    Yet,  obsei  ve.  He  has  not  altogether  chased  the  clouds  from 
our  sky.     He  might  have  done  it ;  but  in  our  peculiar  condition.  He  knew  them 
to  be  necessary  for  the  fulfilment  of  His  gracious  designs.     Sunshine  and  rain,  in 
due  proportions,  bring  to  maturity  the  natural  productions  of  the  soil.     And  some 
tears,  ay,  and  some  tomptations,  alternating,  with  bright  intervals  of  spiritual  joy 
and  consolation,  give  sweetness  and  ripeness  to  all  those  fruits  of  righteousness, 
which  are,  by  Jesus  Christ,  to  the  praise  and  glory  of  God.     Again,  observe  how 
strikitpgly  the  relative  condition  and  ofiice  of  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesua 
Christ  is  represented  by  this  emblem.     The  Father's  place,  like  that  of  the  celestial 
luminary,  is  in  the  highest  heavens.     Nothing  that  takes  place  below  affects  His 
condition.     He  sits  in  supreme  majesty,  in  the  midst  of  His  own  uncreated  bright- 
ness.    But  it  is  by  Jesus  Christ,  the  ray  proceeding  from  the  central  glory,  that  He 
visits  us.     Once  more.     The  rays  are  the  only  means  whereby  we  obtain  an  idea 
of  the  existence,  the  form,  or  the  nature  of  the  sun.     No  man  ever  saw  the  sun. 
We  see  a  picture  of  the  sun,  wrought  by  tlie  rays  upon  the  retina  of  the  eye.    Just 
in  the  same  manner,  "  no  man  hath  seen  God  at;  any  time;  the  only-begotten  Son, 
who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  He  hath  declared  Him."     It  is  only  in  His  light 
that  we  can  see  light.    The  infinitude  of  God  s  power,  the  pturity  of  His  holiness, 

8 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 

the  inflexibility  of  His  justice,  the  excellence  of  His  wisdom,  the  height,  and  length, 
and  breadth,  and  depth  of  His  love, — what  should  we  have  known  of  all,  or  any,  of 
these  attributes,  but  from  beholding  them  embodied  and  illustrated  in  the  person  and 
character  of  Christ  ?  And,  observe,  this  knowledge  is  not  purely  speculative;  for  as 
the  ray  throws  upon  the  human  eye  the  very  image  of  the  sun,  so  we,  "  beholding 
as  in  a  glass  {i.e.,  through  the  medium  of  Christ's  humanity)  the  glory  of  the  Lord, 
are  changed  into  the  same  image,  from  glory  to  glory."  {T.  E.  Hankinson,  M.A.) 
The  outftashing  glory  of  the  Son  of  God: — The  original  word  is  foi-med  from  a  word 
which  signihes"to  flashout."  It  may  be  interpreted  accordingly  as  an"  outflashing." 
The  glory  of  God  is  as  light,  and  the  Son  is  as  its  flash  forth  into  view.  You  will 
get  the  idea  if  you  conceive  an  intense  light  enclosed  in  a  dark  lantern,  which  is 
suddenly  opened  so  that  the  rays  dart  out  into  the  surrounding  blackness.  The 
flash  is  not  something  different  from  the  light,  but  the  light  let  out  of  limits  and 
acting  on  the  darkness.  The  Son  of  God  is  not  represented  as  uncovering  the  glory 
of  the  Father.  He  is  not  the  mere  hand  which  draws  the  slide  of  the  lantern  so 
that  the  light  breaks  through.  He  is  the  light.  It  is  not  said  of  Him,  "  who  "  dis- 
closing or  showing,  but  "  who  being  the  brightness  of  His  glory."  Expanding  the 
idea,  the  ancient  creed  declared  Him  "  light  of  light,"  "  very  God  of  very  God."  {J. 
T.  Duryea,  D.D.)  God  as  light : — 1.  God  is  often  called  Light,  because  this  bodily 
and  visible  light  is  glorious,  and  in  several  respects  resembles  that  eternal  glorious 
essence  of  God.  2.  Here  God  is  said  to  have  Ught  or  glory,  not  that  gloi-y  or  light 
is  an  accident  in  God,  but  because  He  is  said  to  have  that  which  He  is.  3.  The 
similitude  here  used  is  taken  not  from  accidental  but  substantial  hght,  as  the  same 
is  said  to  be  a  light.  Purity,  beauty,  delectabihty  in  hght  teach  us  something  of 
Him.  (G.  Lawson.)  The  dignity  of  Christ: — I.  The  dignity  of  His  nature.  1. 
"  The  brightness  of  His  glory."  The  figure  that  comes  to  our  minds  immediately — 
the  sun  in  firmament.  Flood  of  hght  that  pours  down  from  it.  All  the  dazzling 
glory  of  the  Father  pours  down  to  us  in  the  Son.  In  Him  you  may  find  all  that  is 
adorable  in  the  Divine  nature.  2.  "  Express  image  of  His  person."  Here  we  come 
to  a  deeper  mystery.  Just  as  I  know  something  of  hght  of  sun,  but  nothing  of 
hidden  nucleus.  So  I  may  know  something  of  the  glory  of  God.  But  what  do  I 
know  of  God  Himself  ? — substance,  essence,  being.  And  this  is  what  the  apostle  means 
by  the  word  translated  "  person."  Substance — essence — being  would  better  convey 
his  idea.  Take  the  words  if  you  will,  "  The  express  image  of  God's  substance." 
The  apostle  teaches — You  have  that  in  Christ.  Just  as  when  you  take  your  seal, 
and  press  it  carefully  on  yielding  wax.  There  on  the  wax  you  shah  find  the 
express  image  of  your  seal.  No  line,  however  deep  or  however  faint  or  graceful, 
but  see  its  likeness  there.  So  in  Christ  you  have  the  express  image — counter- 
part of  God.  No  attribute  of  the  Father  which  does  not  belong  to  the  Son. 
None  -that  does  not  belong  to  Him  in  equal  measure.  His  power  not  less 
mighty,  wisdom  not  less  keen,  love  not  less  tender.  H.  Dignity  of  His 
OFFICES.  1.  The  great  Sustainer.  "  Upholding  all  things."  Son  of  God  1  Thou 
art  the  Sustainer  1  With  Thy  hand ;  nay,  with  Thy  breath.  Just  as  at  the  begin- 
ning Thou  didst  say,  "  Let  Ught  be  .  .  .  and  light  was."  Just  as  earth  and  sea,  sun 
and  moon,  firmament  and  stars,  appeared  at  Thy  command.  So  at  Thy  command 
they  are  1  Aye,  and  all  the  living  things  upon  them.  All  breathing  lungs  and  beat- 
ing hearts  and  burning  souls.  "  Thou  upholdest  all  things."  2.  The  great  Sacrifice. 
Whatl  The  great  Sustainer  the  great  Sacrifice.  The  transition  is  so  sudden! 
Contrast  so  immense  I  Then  I  feel  nothing  more  is  needed — the  work  is  done  !  it  is 
finished.  "  By  Himself  He  has  purged  our  sins."  III.  Dignity  of  His  rewabd. 
"  Sat  down  on  right  hand  of  Majesty  on  high."  1,  What  a  place  for  Christ  1  For 
Him  who  sat  down  a  weary  traveller  on  well's  side.  Who  knelt  in  anguish  under 
oUves  of  Gethsemane.  Who  stood  a  criminal  at  the  bar  of  Pilate.  For  Him  who 
hung  in  blood  upon  cross,  and  lay  a  corpse  in  sepulchre.  2.  What  a  power  for 
Christ !  "  At  the  right  hand  of  the  King."  What  influence  He  will  have  on  the 
royal  counsels.  How  able  to  befriend  the  cause  of  all  He  loves.  And  to  promote 
all  holy  and  gracious  purposes.  3.  How  fitting  a  reward  hke  this  1  As  a  Divine 
Being  there  was  glory  He  had  with  the  Father  before  world  was.  How  meet  that  as 
Incarnate  Deity  exalted  to  equal  glory.  The  work  He  did  on  earth  was  done  in  obedi- 
ence to  His  Father.  How  meet  that  the  Father  should  thus  show  His  entire  approval. 
Yet  more  than  all.  His  work  is  not  yet  done.  He  was  here  a  sacrifice  for  sin,  now 
High  Priest  within  vail.  Here  He  poured  out  His  soul  unto  death,  there  pours  forth 
heart  in  prayer.  (J^.  Tucker,  B.A. )  The  dignity  of  Christ : — I.  In  His  relation  to  thb 
Fatheb.  "Brightness  in  express  image."  1.  He  is  essentially  Divine.  2.  Heisarevela- 


CHAP.  I.]  HEBREWS.  85 

tion  of  the  Divine.  II.  In  His  relation  to  the  univeksk.  He  sustains  and  governs  all 
things.  III.  In  His  relation  to  man.  1.  He  has  accomplished  an  effectual  atone- 
ment for  human  guilt.  2.  By  self-sacrifice.  IV.  In  His  relation  to  eternity. 
"  Silt  down,"  Ac.  1.  The  completion  of  His  work.  2.  The  acceptance  of  His  work. 
3.  The  recompense  of  His  work.  (T.Hughes.)  The  brightness  of  His  glory  : — In 
these  remarkable  words  there  are  two  ideas  presented  to  us,  which  we  will  consider 
in  oriler.  1.  The  first  is  that  of  a  luminous  body.  As  a  sample  of  such  bodies,  let 
us  take  the  sun.  Now  the  sun,  a  vast  luminous  mass,  at  a  great  distance  from  our 
earth,  is  made  visible  to  us  by  the  rays  of  hgbt  which  stream  incessantly  from  its 
Burface.  Tlie  rays  by  which  the  sun  becomes  visible  are  not  the  sun  itself.  The 
two  tbings  are  distinct ;  they  have,  if  we  may  so  express  it,  a  distinct  personality  ; 
but  in  point  of  fact  they  cannot  be  separated  from  one  another.  You  cannot  have 
the  sun  without  the  rays,  and  you  cannot  have  the  rays  without  the  sun  ;  they  are 
contemporaneous ;  and  if  one  should  happen  to  be  eternal,  the  other,  of  necessity, 
would  be  eternal  also.  This  imagery  then  represents,  as  far  as  such  imagery  can 
do,  the  relation  between  the  first  and  second  persons  of  the  ever-blessed  Trinity. 
The  Father  and  the  Son  are  co-existent  and  co-eternal.  As  with  the  luminous 
body,  and  the  rays  that  flow  from  it,  although  the  Father  and  the  Son  are  not  the 
same  Being,  although  there  is  a  distinctness  of  personality,  so  that  they  may  be 
conceived  of  and  spoken  of  apart,  yet  they  cannot  be  actually  sundered,  they  must 
have  existed  together  from  all  eternity.  And  yet  again — 2.  As  it  is  the  ray  which 
makes  the  luminous  body  visible,  so  it  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  His  pre-incarnate 
state,  who  is  the  expression  of  the  Father,  and  brings  God  within  the  reach  of  the 
finite  mind.  Scripture  tells  us  that  "  no  one  hath  seen  God  at  any  time  "  ;  and  it 
is  probably  intended  that  we  should  understand  by  the  statement,  that  God  in  His 
essence,  in  His  innermost  Being,  is  so  withdrawn  from  the  comprehension  of  a  finite 
mind,  that,  apart  from  the  Son  of  God,  it  would  have  been  impossible  for  the  highest 
archangel  to  have  understood  the  character  and  nature  of  Deity.  It  was  Jesus  in 
His  pre-existent  state  who  enabled  the  great  created  intelligences  to  grasp  the  con- 
ception of  the  Divine  Being;  just  as  it  is  Jesus,  in  His  incarnate  state,  who  makes 
God  known  to  us.  Thus,  as  we  understand,  the  Son,  in  His  pre  existent  and  pre- 
incarnate  condition,  is  "  the  brightness  of  God's  glory."  But  He  is  also,  we  read, 
the  "  express  image  of  His  substance."  Now  the  "  express  image  "  seems  to  be  the 
Ptamp  or  impression  produced  by  a  die.  The  impression  thus  produced  is,  of  course, 
the  exact  counterpart  of  the  implement  that  produced  it.  You  stamp  your  seal 
upon  the  melted  wax,  and  the  result  is  a  reproduction  of  every  feature  and  linea- 
ment of  the  seal ;  nay,  of  every  crack  and  flaw  that  may  happen  to  be  found  in  it. 
The  two  things  exactly  correspond.  Here,  then,  is  part  of  the  idea.  But  what  is 
the  "  substance  of  God  "  ?  The  substance  of  a  thing  is  that  which  lies  under  all 
appearances,  and  makes  the  thing  to  be  what  it  really  is.  For  mstance  :  among 
many  men,  taken  at  random,  you  will  find  very  great  difference  and  variety.  Some 
are  tall,  some  short ;  some  rich,  others  poor  ;  some  clever,  others  dull.  There  will 
be  much  diversity,  too,  of  character  and  disposition.  But  underneath  all  these  out- 
ward appearances  there  is  to  be  found  that  which  makes  each  of  these  a  man  ;  and 
this  is  their  "  substance."  Perhaps  you  may  prefer  to  call  it  *'  nature,"  or  "  essence," 
or  "  inner  being."  It  matters  little.  It  is  that  which  makes  the  person  to  be  what 
he  really  is.  And  so  the  "  substance  of  God  "  is  the  nature  or  inner  being  of  the 
great  Jehovah.  Now  we  are  told  in  the  passage  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  His 
pre-incarnate  state,  is  "  the  express  image,"  the  exact  counterpart  of  the  substance 
of  God ;  that  is  to  say,  not  of  the  external  attributes  of  God  (if  such  things  there  be), 
but  of  His  very  inmost  essence, — of  that  which  makes  Him  to  be  God.  What  lan- 
guage can  be  imagined  that  would  describe  a  closer  relationship,  or  a  more  complete 
identity  of  nature  ?  Whatever  constitutes  the  nature  of  God,  we  must  attribute  to 
the  pre-existent  Son.  (G.  Calthrop,  M.A.)  A  royal  Mediator  ;— Sometimes  there 
were  more  kings  than  one  at  Sparta,  who  governed  by  joint  authority.  A  king  was 
occasionally  sent  to  some  neighbouring  state  in  character  of  a  Spartan  ambassador. 
Did  he,  when  so  sent,  cease  to  be  a  king  of  Sparta,  because  he  was  also  an  ambassa- 
dor? No,  he  did  not  divest  himself  of  his  royal  dignity,  but  only  added  to  it  that 
of  public  deputation.  So  Christ,  in  becoming  man,  did  not  cease  to  be  God  ;  but 
though  He  ever  was,  and  still  continued  to  be,  King  of  the  whole  creation,  acted  as 
the  voluntary  Servant  and  Messenger  of  the  Father.  {Illustrations  of  Truth.)  The 
Saviour  is  God : — It  is  sometimes  idly  said  that  our  belief  in  our  Lord's  divinity 
rests  solely  on  the  teaching  of  St.  John.  Centuries  ago,  Julian,  the  apostate 
emperor,  exclaimed,  "  It  is  John,  who  with  his  remark,  '  And  the  Word  became 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t, 

flesh,'  has  done  all  the  mischief."  I  fear  that  in  these  days  some  at  least  of  the 
critical  attempts  to  disprove  the  genuineness  of  St.  John's  Go-pel  are  suggested  and 
stimulated  by  the  desire  to  overthrow  our  belief  in  the  divinity  of  Christ.  But 
should  the  vnritings  of  St.  John,  to  our  infinite  loss,  be  obliterated  altogether  from 
the  canon,  there  is  yet  not  a  single  book  in  the  New  Testament  in  which  the  revela- 
lation  of  God  in  Christ  is  not  directly  asserted,  or  absolutely  implied.  Set  aside  St. 
John  altogether  and  still  on  almost  every  page  of  revelation  the  truth  stands  out 
that  Christ  was  the  only  begotten  Son  of  the  Father,  the  effulgence  of  His  glory,  the 
express  image  of  His  substance,  God  of  God,  Light  of  light,  very  God  of  very  God. 
And  in  whatever  way  we  hold,  or  explain,  or  imagine  that  we  explain  the  blessed 
mystery  of  the  atonement,  this  is  certain,  that  its  entire  efficacy,  as  revealed  to  us 
in  Scripture — in  the  Old  Te^^tament,  where  alone  it  is  foreshadowed,  or  by  the  New 
Testament,  where  alone  it  is  fully  set  forth — rests  upon  the  truth  that  our  Lord- 
Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  No  man  can  redeem  his  brother,  or  make 
atonement  unto  God  for  him.  It  cost  more  to  redeem  our  souls,  therefore  he  must 
let  that  alone  for  ever.  (F.  W,  Farrar,  D.D.)  Express  Image  of  His  person. — 
Express  image : — For  the  phrase  "  express  image  "  there  is  a  single  word  in  the 
original,  a  word  transferred  and  familiar  in  our  own  lanf^uage,  viz.,  character.  It 
is  formed  from  a  word  signifying  to  sharpen,  then  to  scratch  or  furrow  with  a  shai-p 
instrument,  to  write,  to  engrave.  Our  term,  therefore,  means  a  writing  or  engraving, 
and  in  this  sense  we  often  use  it.  So,  also,  as  a  form  is  engraven  on  a  seal,  and 
then  stamped  upon  wax,  the  word  indicates  a  figure  enstamped  upon  wax  or  soft 
metal.  The  figure  impressed  is  precisely  like  the  graving  which  determines  it.  The 
word  accordingly  signifies  likeness.  Then,  from  the  notion  of  likeness,  it  extends 
to  that  of  sameness,  so  that  we  say  of  one's  combined  qualities,  they  constitute  his 
character,  and  more  emphatically  the  character  is  the  man.  It  is  the  man  revealed 
and  known.  The  Son  of  God  is,  then,  the  revelation  of  the  person  of  God.  And  to 
this  term  person,  in  the  language  of  the  New  Testament,  we  do  not  attach  the  later 
metaphysical  notion.  It  is  simply  equivalent  to  "  self."  We  have  now  the  whole 
thought  in  this  pregnant  phrase :  Jesus  Christ  is  God's  very  Self  revealed  and  known. 
He  could  say  of  Himself  tiuly,  as  He  said,  "  He  that  seeth  Me  seeth  Him  that  sent 
Me."     (J.  T.  Duryea,  D.D.)  Christ  the  revelation  of  God  : — To  make  religion 

possible,  we  must  have  a  revelation  from  God.  There  is  a  science  called  stellar 
chemistry,  the  romance  and  mystery  of  science.  We  are  able  to  estimate  the 
ponderosity  of  the  stars  and  the  elements  that  compose  them.  How  have  we  dis- 
covered these  things  ?  Not  by  crossing  the  separating  spaces,  but  because  the  stars- 
have  sent  their  revelation  to  us.  Abeam  of  light  plays  on  the  spectrum,  and  reveals 
the  contents  of  these  mysterious  bodies.  So  with  religion.  We  could  not  cross  the 
illimitable  space  and  find  out  God  for  ourselves,  but  in  His  Son  we  have  the  light 
t)iat  reveals  Him.  (W.  Pierce.)  Definition  of  God: — The  god  of  M.  Comte  was 
what  he  defined  as  "  the  continuous  resolutant  of  all  the  forces  capable  of  volun- 
tarily concurring  in  the  universal  perfectioning  of  the  world."  That  is  not  my  God. 
I  do  not  know  him.  I  don't  want  to  know  him.  My  God  is  Jesus  Christ,  who 
came  to  pardon  and.to  save  a  world.  (Joseph  Conk.)'  TJTiarteS'Ktntialey's  vTeicof 
'tJTirist  :• — Charles  Kingsley  is  writing  to  Thomas  Cooper,  a  man  sometime  Christian, 
in  the  stirring  time  of  that  agitation  Chartist,  then  captured  by  the  Strauss  mythical 
theory  and  wandering  in  the  dreary  wastes  of  unbelief,  then  coming  back — and 
largely  through  the  influence  of  Charles  Kingsley — to  the  most  hearty  and  joyful 
acceptance  of  Jesus  as  incarnate  God  and  Lord  and  only  Saviour.  Charles  Kingsley 
is  writing  to  this  Thomas  Cooper,  and  thus  he  writes :  '*  But  my  heart.  Cooper, 
demands  the  Trinity,  as  much  as  my  reason.  I  want  to  be  sure  that  God  cares  for 
ns,  that  God  is  our  Father,  that  God  has  interfered,  stooped,  sacrificed  Himself  for 
ns.  I  do  not  merely  want  to  love  Christ — a  Christ,  some  creation  or  emanation  of 
God's — whose  will  and  character  for  aught  I  know  maybe  different  from  God's.  I 
want  to  love  and  honour  the  absolute,  abysmal  God  Himself,  and  none  other  will 
satisfy  me — and  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ  being  co-equal  and  co-eternal,  sent  by, 
sacrificed  by.  His  Father,  that  He  might  do  His  Father's  will,  I  find  it — and  no 
puzzling  texts,  like  those  you  quote,  shall  rob  me  of  that  rest  for  my  heart,  that 
Christ  is  the  exact  counterpart  of  Him  in  whom  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our 
being.  I  say  boldly,  if  the  doctrine  be  not  in  the  Bible,  it  ought  to  be,  for  the  whole 
spiritual  nature  of  man  cries  out  for  it."  There  has  arisen  a  new  branch  of  the  science 
of  astronomy  called  sidereal  photography.  Until  lately  only  collodion  plates  could 
be  used  in  photography.  But  such  plates  must  be  used  wet.  They  could  suffer 
only  short  exposure.     They  must  be  immediately  developed.    And  so  when  exposed 


CHAP.  I.]  HEBREWS.  J7 

heavenward  but  a  momentary  flash  from  the  stars  could  be  caught  and  kept  on  their 
81'nsitive  surfaces.  But  recently  gelatine  plates  have  been  introduced.  These  are 
capable  of  long  exposure.  These  can  lie  beneath  the  stars  for  hours.  And  lying  thus, 
the  shyest  traits  of  the  most  distant  stars  can  fasten  themselves  in  pictures  accurate, 
and  gazing  into  them,  fresh  wonders  are  disclosing  and  a  new  door  is  opened  into 
heaven's  depths.  Like  the  gelatine  plates,  Charles  Kingsley  held  his  soul  in  such 
Bteady  and  long  openness  towards  the  incarnate  Christ  that  in  unusual  measure  the 
Christ  revealed  Himself  to  him,  was  seen  by  him  to  be  the  pre-eminent  and  luminous 
focus  of  the  Divine  revealing,  became  for  him  the  object  of  the  most  passionate 
personal  love.  (Wayland  Hoyt,  D.D.)  Upholding  all  things  by  the  word  of  His 
power. — Christ  tlie  universal  Upholder : — The  poets  write  much  of  one  Atlas  that 
bore  op  the  heavens  with  his  shoulders  ;  but  our  Saviour  Christ  is  the  true  Atlas 
that  beareth  up  heaven  and  earth.  As  He  made  the  world,  so  He  bears  up  the 
■world,  and  keepeth  it  up  from  falling.  If  it  were  not  for  Him,  the  sun,  moon,  stars, 
and  all  the  host  of  heaven  would  fall  to  the  ground ;  if  it  were  not  for  Him,  the 
birds  of  the  air,  the  fishes  of  the  sea,  the  beasts  of  the  field  would  drop  away  in  a 
moment ;  the  earth  would  sink  down  under  our  feet,  the  sea  would  overflow  its 
banks  and  drown  us  aU.  Our  Saviour  Christ  bears  up  all ;  in  regard  of  their  nature 
He  beartth  up  the  devils  themselves,  and  all  his  instruments  in  the  world ;  He  does 
not  bear  them  out  in  their  wickedness,  but  He  beareth  up  their  essence.  In  Him 
all  live,  breathe  and  have  their  being.  But  more  particularly,  in  love  and  mercy 
He  beareth  up  His  children,  and  the  members  of  Christ ;  as  a  father  beareth  his 
eon  and  taketh  him  up  into  his  arms,  so  doth  He  those  whom  He  hath  adopted  in 
Christ.  This  may  be  a  singular  comfort  to  us  all  wheresoever  we  be,  on  the  water 
or  on  the  land,  in  the  day  or  night,  though  we  be  among  the  thickest  of  our  enemies, 
nay,  among  devils ;  yet  the  Lord  Jesus  beareth  us  in  His  hands,  and  none  can  take 
U3  out  of  His  hands.  This  should  cause  us  all  to  stand  in  awe  of  Him,  to  be  afraid 
to  displease  Him,  Will  any  be  so  mad  as  to  make  holes  in  the  ship  that  beareth 
them  ?  Will  any  hew  down  the  pillars  that  bear  up  the  house  ?  Shall  a  child 
ecratch  out  the  eyes  of  the  nurse  that  beareth  him  ?  Our  Saviour  Christ  bears  us  up 
all :  therefore  let  us  not  Uke  rebels  fight  against  Him  by  our  sins  ;  let  us  please 
Him  all  that  we  can,  by  whom  we  are  borne  up.  They  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  sought 
Herod's  favour  because  their  land  was  nourished  by  him  ;  all  men  throughout  the 
vide  compass  of  the  world  are  nourished  by  our  Saviour  Christ.  The  breath  would 
quickly  be  out  of  the  nostrils  of  us  all  if  it  were  not  for  Him.  Kings,  princes, 
noblemen,  gentlemen,  merchants,  clothiers,  rich  and  poor  depend  upon  Him ;  if  He 
take  away  His  hand  we  are  all  goiie.  Therefore  let  us  serve  Him  with  all  our  might 
that  beareth  us  up  with  His  mighty  word.  (W.  Jones,  D.D.)  The  world's  sits- 
tainer: — The  "  word  of  His  power  "  is  the  word  that  expresses  and  conveys  His 
p  >wer.  He  "  upholds  all  things,"  i.e.,  sustains  the  organic  body  of  the  universe  in 
all  its  applications,  as  one  who  made  the  world  (ver.  2).  In  Col.  i.  17  the  idea  is 
elightly  different ;  there  the  Son  is  the  element  in  which  the  universe  holds  together, 
here  He  consciously  sustains  it.  {A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.)  Christ  upJtolding  the 
worlds  : — The  other  day,  on  one  of  the  London  streets,  I  saw  a  contrivance  to  judge 
a  man's  strength  by  the  power  of  his  breath.  You  breathe  into  the  machine,  and 
by  the  weight  you  lift  will  be  accurately  estimated  the  power  of  your  lungs.  And 
Jesus  Christ  keeps  the  stars  floating  by  the  power  of  His  breath  just  as  children 
keep  bubbles  on  a  summer  eve ;  He  breathes  and  the  planets  swim  as  feathers  in  a 
breeze.  (J.  G.  Jones,  D.D.)  The  word  of  power : — I.  The  UNrvERSAL  require- 
ment. The  nature  and  character  of  all  created  things  is  their  inability  to  sustain 
themselves.  1.  Material  things.  All  are  governed  by  law,  and  each  has  its  own 
laws,  by  which  all  its  actions  and  purposes  are  governed.  2.  Animal  life.  "  The 
eyes  of  all  wait  upon  Thee,"  &c.  3.  Human  existence.  Not  a  breath  is  drawn  but 
is  given  by  God.  Not  a  thought  passes  through  the  mind,  nor  a  throb  animates  the 
heart  without  His  Divine  direction  and  supervision.  H.  The  almighty  instrument. 
1.  The  Divine  power.  It  is  not  susceptible  of  failure.  Consider  its  vastness, 
different  developments,  continuity.  2.  The  method  of  manifesting  this  power.  No 
exertion.  No  manual  labour.  (Homilist.)  Purged  our  sins. — Expiation  in  order 
to  reconciliation: — The  purification  here  specified  is  not  the  sanctification  of  the 
sinner's  soul ;  for  the  work  is  said  to  have  been  realised  before  Christ  ascended  into 
heaven.  Atonement,  or  propitiation — an  end  attributed  in  so  many  other  texts  to 
the  death  of  Christ  (Isa.  liii.  5,  6,  10,  11 ;  Matt.  xx.  28 ;  Rom.  iii.  24-26  ;  1  Cor. 
XV.  3  ;  1  Tim.  ii.  6  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24  ;  Eev.  i.  5  ;  &c.) — is  certainly  what  is  meant.  The 
language  by  which  the  idea  is  here  denoted  probably  refers  to  the  purification 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  % 


by  sacrifice  under  the  Levitical  economy,  as  set  forth  in  Lev.  xiv.,  xvi.  The 
work  of  expiation  is  here  associated  with  human  "  sins  "  ;  atonement  having  an 
essential  reference  to  sin  as  what  requires  expiation  to  be  made  in  order  to  recon- 
ciliation  between  God  and  man.  Christ  is  represented  as  having  made  the  expia- 
tion "  by  Himself  " — a  view  which  both  indicates  the  greatness  of  His  condescending 
mercy  in  the  matter,  and  accounts  for  the  fact  that,  by  His  one  sacrifice,  such  a 
mighty  multitude  of  sins  are  pardoned,  and  such  a  mighty  multitude  of  sinners  are 
saved.  It  is  strange,  indeed,  that  "  the  brightness  of  God's  glory,  the  express  image 
of  God's  person  " — that  One  who  is  Himself  so  glorious  and  so  pure,  and  against 
whom  the  sins  of  men  are  acts  of  foul  rebellion — should  have  stooped  so  low,  and 
suffered  so  much,  and  that  for  the  very  purpose  of  securing  pardon  and  salvation  for 
His  foes.  But  the  fact  that  He  actually  did  so — here,  and  in  so  many  other  passages 
declared evolves  and  exhibits  magnificent  and  animating  views  alike  of  the  transcen- 
dent mercy  of  His  heart,  and  of  the  transcendent  virtue  of  His  work.  (A.  S.  Patterson.) 
Sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high. — The  justly  awarded  rcmunera- 
lion : — I.  The  manner  in  which  the  person  spoken  of  in  the  text  is  described. 

I.  As  "  the  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory  " — the  manifestation  of  all  that  i3 
essentially  excellent  in  the  Divinity.  2.  As  "the  express  image  of  His  person." 
Not  that  we  are  to  infer  that  there  either  is,  or  can  be,  in  the  universe  any 
image  of  the  Divinity  such  as  there  may  be  of  an  object  that  is  material; 
for  the  Divinity,  in  His  essential  character  being  absolutely  invisible,  because 
absolutely  spiritual,  cannot  be  materialised;  and  therefore,  to  think  of  Christ 
the  Son  of  God  as  being  the  image  of  the  Divinity  in  the  same  way  in  which  one 
material  object  may  be  the  image  of  another,  were  to  degrade  Him.  But  though 
in  this  respect  He  is  not  "  the  image "  of  the  Divinity,  yet  not  more  exactly 
does  an  impression  correspond  with  the  seal,  or  a  coin  with  the  die,  than  Christ 
the  Son  of  God  corresponds  with  the  Divinity.  Of  Him  He  is  the  image,  and  not  merely 
the  image,  but  the  express  image  ; — a  resemblance,  a  likeness  in  entire  conformity 
to  its  archetype;  a  clearly  expressed,  a  complete  likeness  of  the  person,  of  the 
substance,  of  the  essence  of  the  Divinity  ; — such  a  likeness,  such  a  resemblance,  as 
comports  with  personal  distinction  ;  yet  such  as  can  originate  only  in  sameness  of 
existence  or  mode  of  existence, — as  can  originate  on]y  in  perfect  identity  of  nature. 

II.  The  work  which  He  is  represented  as  having  pebfohmed.  "  Purged  our  sins." 
That  to  which  reference  is  here  made,  evidently  proceeds  on  the  principle  that  the 
circumstances  of  universal  man  by  nature,  were  circumstances  of  moral  degradation  ; 
and  not  only  of  moral  degradation,  but  of  moral  danger — the  sad  consequence  of  the 
apostasy  of  the  great  earthly  progenitor  of  man.  Nay,  more :  it  evidently  proceeds 
on  the  principle  that  it  lay  not  within  the  sphere  of  human  ability  to  make  repara- 
tion for  the  evil,  and  thus  to  remedy  the  one,  and  rescue  him  from  the  other.  No 
agency  was  adequate  but  the  agency  of  One  who  was  Divine.  For  what,  according 
to  Scripture,  is  the  expression  "  purged,"  but  another  phrase  for  atonement  by 
sacrifice  ?  And  what  is  this  but  what  was  required,  that  the  work  of  "  purging  our 
sins"  might  be  performed  ?  But  whilst,  in  order  to  this,  an  atonement  by  sacritice 
was  required,  it  was  not  an  atonement  by  sacrifice  of  any  description,  but  an  atone- 
ment by  sacrifice,  in  point  of  efficiency,  unassailable,  unquestionable.  And  is  not 
this  what  Christ's  sacrificial  atonement  was,  being  as  it  was,  (1)  superlative  in  its 
value,  (2)  vicarous  in  its  nature,  and  (3)  propitiatory  in  its  result  ?  III.  The  statb 
TO  WHICH,  BY  WAV  OF  REWARD,  He  HAS  BEEN  EXALTED.  It  is  morc  than  probable,  from 
the  lessons  taught  us  in  this  Epistle,  that  the  primary  idea  intended  to  be  conveyed 
is  the  oflicial  greatness  of  Christ  as  a  priest,  when  contrasted  with  the  priests  under 
the  law.  Even  the  high  priest,  the  chief  of  those  priests,  when  he  entered  within 
the  veil  with  the  blood  of  the  typical  sacrifice  which  he  had  offered  for  the  sins  of 
the  people,  never  sat  down  in  the  Holy  Place,  but,  having  stood  for  some  time 
before  the  mercy-seat  making  intercession,  he  retired  to  offer  a  new  sacrifice,  that 
he  might  return  anew  to  make  intercession ;  and  thus  never,  so  to  speak,  accom- 
plishing or  completing  the  design  of  his  office,  he  continued  to  go  the  round  of  his 
sacred  duties.  And  as  it  was  with  the  high  priest,  so.  it  was,  according  to  their 
order,  with  the  other  priests  who  were  subordinate  to  him.  "  Every  priest,"  says 
our  apostle,  "  stanJeth  daily  ministering,  and  offering  oftentimes  the  same  sacrifices, 
which  can  never  take  away  sins.  But  this  man,"  even  Christ,  "  after  He  had 
offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins,"  to  intimate  the  compU  tion  of  His  work,  "  for  ever  sat 
down  on  the  right  hand  of  God."  Although,  however,  this  idea  may  have  been  the 
primary,  yet  other  ideas,  doubtless,  are  conveyed  by  the  expression.  1.  It  conveys 
the  idea  of  honour  ;  and  if  of  honour,  of  glory  and  felicity.     "  Nothing  was  accounted 


OHAP.  I.]  HEBREWS.  89 

too  costly,  of  an  earthly  kind,  to  render  the  Jewish  temple  of  old  in  some  degree  a 
befitting  audience-chamber  for  Him  whose  immensity  pervades  all  space ;  and  is 
there  aught,  the  scope  of  infinite  wisdom  to  devise,  or  of  infinite  power  to  effect, 
which  we  may  not  imagine  to  be  brought  into  full  operation  in  elevating,  as  the 
reward  of  His  humiliation,  the  body  of  Christ — the  most  holy  shrine  of  the  Divinity 
— to  the  highest  perfection  of  which  that  which  is  material  is  capable?"    But 
Christ's  having  sat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  God  conveys  not  merely  the  idea  of 
honour,  and  glory,  and  felicity,  but  also— 2.  The  idea  of  power ;  and  if  of  power,  of 
authority  and  dominion.    {Alex.  Jack,  D.D.)         The  mediatorial  work,  glory,  and 
claivis  of  Christ: — I.  The  Lord  Jesds  has  performed  a  momentous  mediatoriaIi 
WORK.     With  regard  to  the  intrinsic  nature  of  the  work,  it  arose,  as  is  suggested,  by 
the  expression  of  our  text,  from  the  condition  of  the  human  race,  as  being  sinnera 
against  God,  rebels  agaiust  His  authority,  and  therefore  condemned  by  His  law. 
And  this  state  of  sinfulness  must  be  assumed  as  characterising  them  without  excep- 
tion and  universally.     The  manner  in  which  He  accomplished  the  office  was  by 
descending  from  the  altitude  of  His  primeval  dignity  to  the  assumption  of  human 
nature  by  miraculous  incarnation,  and  in  that  nature  which  had  sinned,  though 
K-Jusilf  unsullied,  and  holy,  enduring  agony  and  death  as  a  sacrifice  to  the  Divine 
justice  on  behalf  of  the  guilty.     The  sufficiency  of  His  expiation  is  frequently  brought 
before  us  in  S  rii)ture  contrasted  with  the  insufficiency  ol  tne  Jewish  offerings,  which 
were  typical  of  this.     No  matter  how  aggravated  and  complicated  ain  may  be,  it  at 
once  becomes  blotted  from  the  records  of  condemnation ;  and  the  transgressors  are 
made  inheritors  of  full  acceptance  and  everlasting  joy.     You  must  recognise  its 
sufficiency  also  in  relation  to  time.     It  is  permanent  and  inexhaustible.    But  then, 
while  we   remind  you  of  the  sufficiency  of  the  Saviour's  sacrifice  we  must  also 
remind  you  of  its  exclusiveness.     For  the  purpose  of   expiatory  redemption  the 
sacrifice  of  Christ  remains  exclusive  and  alone.     11.  The  Lord  Jesds  is  exalted  to 
a  splendid  mediatorlal  glory.     1.  Observe  the  station  which  He  holds — "  On  the 
right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high."     This  expression  is  intended  to  denote  the 
revelation  of  God  the  Father  as  He  displays  the  brightest  manifestations  of  His 
glorious  magnificence  in  heaven.     The  right  hand   of   the  sovereign   is  always 
esteemed  among  men  as  the  place  of  peculiar  honour ;  and  the  highest  honour  is 
offered  to  our  Lord  as  the  incarnate  Mediator.     2.  You  will  also  observe,  along  with 
the  station  He  holds,  the  posture  He  assumes.    It  is  said,  "  He  sat  down  at  the 
right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  hiuh  " — a  statement  of  attitude  by  no  means  insig- 
nificant.    (1)  He  had  a  season  of  calm  dignity  after  the  tremendous  struggles  He 
sustained  against  the  direct  adversaries  of  God  and  man.     He  sits  at  the  right 
hand  of  the  Father,  as  denoting  His  rest.     (2)  Here  also  is  denoted  His  authority. 
The  ruler  sits  while  those  around  him  stand  in  token  of  inferiority  and  of  reverence. 
The  Saviour,  we  know,  possesses  authority  and  sovereignty  with  the  Father,  as 
being  one  with  Him,  and  all  power  is  given  to  Him  in  heaven  and  in  earth.    In  the 
emphatic  expression  of  the  inspired  writer — "  He  sits  and  rules  upon  His  throne," 
as  the  sign  and  token  of  His  authority.     (3)  Again,  here  also  is  denoted  His  discon- 
tinuance.    The  attitude  before  us  is  the  sign  of  permanence.     In  heaven,  whither 
the  Saviour  has  gone,  is  His  permanent  abode.  His  home.    3.  Observe  also  the 
operations  He  conducts.    And  here  it  is  delightful  to  remember  that,  while  in 
heaven  the  Lord  is  glorified  and  while  in  heaven  He  reposes  from  the  toils  and 
labours  of  His  state  of  humiliation.  He  still  is  employed  in  avocations  of  incessant 
and  earnest  activity  in  order  to  secure  the  application  of  His  sacrifice  and  to  accom- 
plish the  results  for  which  it  was  designed.     "  At  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on 
high  "  He  intercedes — He  is  there  still  as  the  Priest  of  His  people.    There  Ha 
presents,  in  some  mode  we  cannot  conjecture,  the  memorials  of  the  sacrifice  which 
once  He  perfected  on  the  Cross  of  Calvary,  and  pleads  that  blessings  may  descend 
upon  men,  that  they  may  be  renewed,  that  they  may  be  perfected,  that  through  the 
power  of  the  gracious  Spirit  which  has  been  secured  by  His  sacrifice  they  may  be 
made  meet  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints.     "  He  is  gone,"  and  what  a  world  of 
poetry  as  well  as  sublime  truth  is  in  the  expression — "  He  is  gone  to  appear  in  the 
presence  of  God  for  us."    "  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us."    4.  "  At 
the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high  "  He  governs.     The  administration  of  the 
universe  is  committed  to  His  hand.     A  ccording  to  the  expression  of  the  earlier  part 
of  the  verse.  He  "  upholds  all  things  by  the  word  of  His  power."     There  is  not  a 
distant  star  but  is  sustained  and  guided  by  Him  ;  there  is  not  an  intelligent  being 
in  all  its  faculties  and  passions  but  is  controlled  by  Him  ;  thewre  is  not  a  material 
thing  vast  or  minute  bat  is  wielded  by  Him.    He  has  all  power.    The  universe 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  l 

from  its  utmost  limits  is  His  own.  In  relation  to  the  world  in  which  we  live,  while 
the  operations  of  Providence  are  at  His  bidding,  He  works  in  a  special  mode.  It  ia 
His  right  and  He  will  redeem  it  to  Himself.  He  employs  therefore  His  gospel,  the 
truth  which  discloses  and  explains  His  attributes  and  functions,  rendering  etiectual 
the  announcements  of  truth  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  secured  by  His  death  and 
intercession,  and  thus  accomplishing  the  recovery  and  conversion  of  individual  men, 
overturning  the  vast  combination  of  evils  which  have  existed  for  so  long  a  succession 
of  ages  and  crushed  millions  in  degradation  and  ruin,  and  finally  accomplishing  the 
triumph  of  His  own  dominion  of  peace,  righteousness,  purity,  and  happiness  until 
all  things  shall  be  subdued  unto  Himself ;  for  He  shall  have  dominion  and  glory 
and  the  kingdom,  the  people  of  all  nations  and  languages  shall  serve  Him.  III. 
The  Lord  Jesus  possesses  imperative  mediatorial  claims.  The  announcemt  nt 
in  the  text  is  for  the  purpose  of  vindicating  and  enforcing  His  claims ;  and 
men  should  do  homage  to  His  dignity ;  they  should  trust  to  His  merits  and  devote 
themselves  to  His  cause.     (J.  Parsons.)      The  greatness  and  glory  of  the  Redeemer : — 

1.  Excellency  of  His  Divine  Majesty  :  the  otjtbeaminq  of  His  Father's  glory. 
By  Him,  as  a  medium,  it  becomes  visible,  and  is  brought  within  the  range  of  our 
comprehension.  1.  He  is  the  Creator  of  all  things :  and,  therefore,  the  glory  of 
God,  displayed  in  the  creation,  is  through  Him.  2.  Displayed  in  His  character  as 
Mediator  and  Redeemer.  3.  In  Him  the  Divine  glory  essentially  resides,  and  has 
been  manifested  by  His  various  appearances  since  the  foundation  of  the  world.  It 
is  said  of  man,  indeed,  that  he  was  made  in  the  image  of  God,  but  Jesus  Christ  only 
is  the  express  image  of  the  substance  of  God,  the  exact  representation  of  that  in 
which  the  Divine  nature  differs  from  all  other  being.  II.  The  energy  of  His  all- 
controlling  power.  "  He  upholds  all  things  by  the  word  of  His  power."  All  things 
— whole  universe — things  visible  and  invisible,  small  and  great.  "  Upholds," 
sustains,  preserves,  and  regulates.  "  Word  of  His  power,"  powerful  word  I  "  He 
speaks,  and  it  is  done."  III.  "By  Himself  purged  odr  sins."  This  refers  to  the 
Jewish  ceremonies.  "By  Himself":  not  by  offering  the  greatest  among  men  or 
angels.  Such  would  not  have  been  adequate  to  the  occasion.  To  purge  our  sins  He 
ebed  His  blood.  IV.  "  Sat  down,"  &c.  This  expresses  His  exaltation.  1.  To  the 
exceeding  power  of  God,  2.  To  the  highest  dignity  and  honour.  3.  By  means  of 
the  right  hand  gifts  are  dispensed.  Gilts  are  the  source  of  happiness.  Therefore, 
the  right  hand  of  God  is  the  place  of  celestial  felicity.  {Thomas  Galland,  M.A.) 
Christ  sitting  in  heaven: — 1.  If  Christ  sitteth  above  in  the  highest  places,  ti  en  He 
beholdeth  all  things  here  below.  A  man  that  is  upon  the  top  of  some  high  tower 
may  see  far  :  and  Christ  being  in  the  high  steeple  and  tower  of  heaven,  can  see  all 
things  on  the  earth.  He  that  is  upon  the  top  of  an  high  tower,  may  see  men,  but 
he  cannot  discern  who  they  be  :  Christ  sees  them,  and  discerns  them  too.  If  the 
wicked  be  laying  of  plots  and  snares  against  His  children,  Christ  being  iu  heaven 
sees  them,  and  in  due  time  wiU  overthrow  them  :  and  He  that  sitteth  in  heaven 
laugheth  them  to  scorn.  This  is  a  singular  comfort,  that  our  Head,  King,  and 
Defender  is  in  heaven,  and  hath  equal  power,  glory,  and  majesty  with  God.  If  thou 
hast  a  friend  in  the  court  that  sits  daily  by  the  king,  and  is  in  favour  with  him,  wilt 
thou  care  for  any  in  England  ?  We  have  a  friend  that  sitteth  on  the  rigbt  hand  of 
God,  and  hath  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth ;  therefore  let  us  fear  notliing  ;  He 
will  keep  us,  none  shall  do  us  any  harm,  but  it  shall  aU  turn  to  our  good  in  the  end. 

2.  As  Christ  sitteth  in  the  heavens,  so  we  shall  one  day  sit  there  with  Him.  Let 
this  comfort  us  against  all  the  calamities  of  this  life  :  here  the  children  of  God  are 
oftentimes  made  the  wicked's  footstools,  they  sit  on  them,  and  tread  on  them  :  no 
reckoning  is  made  of  a  godly  man.  A  rich  man  that  is  a  common  drunkard  and 
whoremaster  shall  be  more  esteemed  of  by  many  than  a  godly  poor  man.  Here 
they  sit  weeping  and  wailing  for  their  sins,  for  their  children,  for  crosses  in  goods, 
in  bodies,  in  good  name;  the  wicked  deriding  tbem,  jesting  at  them:  but  let  this 
comfort  us  against  them  all ;  how  contemptible  soever  we  sit  here,  we  shall  sit 
with  Christ  Jesus,  though  not  in  that  degree  of  glory,  yet  in  the  same  kingdom  of 
glory  with  Him  for  ever.     {W.  Jones,  D.D.) 

Vers.  4-14.  Being  made  so  much  better  than  the  angels. — The  superiority  of 
Christ  to  the  angels : — I.  The  superiority  of  His  nature.  II.  The  superiority  of 
His  prerogative.  III.  The  superiority  of  His  office.  IV.  The  superiority 
of  His  unchanging  f.xi8Tencb.  Learn  :  1.  The  error  of  those  who  would  confound 
Christ  with  the  angels.  2.  The  error  of  those  who  would  hide  Christ  by  the  angels. 
d.  Thd  erroi'  of  those  who  would  expect  the  success  of  Christianity  from  the  inter. 


CHAP.  1,]  HEBREWS.  41 

vention  of  the  angels.  4.  The  error  of  those  who  thiuk  the  Christian  Church  weak 
because  it  lacks  angelic  phenomena.  We  have  the  Cross ;  we  have  Pentecost ;  we 
need  not  seraphs  or  archangels.  {}V.  L.  Watkimon.)  Christ's  excellencis  above 
ungels  I — 1.  Christ's  Divine  nature  is  infinitely  more  excellent  then  an  angelical 
spirit ;  yea,  His  human  nature,  by  the  hypostatical  union  of  it  with  the  Divine, 
bath  likewise  a  dignity  infinitely  surpassing  an  angel's  nature.  2.  Christ  is  the 
express  image  of  the  person  of  His  Father,  which  is  more  than  to  be  created,  as 
angels  were,  after  God's  image.  3.  Christ  is  the  brightness  of  God's  glory :  there- 
fore more  glorious  than  the  most  glorious  angels.  4.  Christ  is  in  heaven  at  the 
right  hand  of  the  throne  of  the  Majesty :  therefore  in  place  of  residency  higher 
than  angels.  Christ's  function,  to  be  a  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  is  greater 
than  any  of  the  functions  of  angels.  6.  Therefore  Christ  is  more  excellent  than 
angels  in  their  greatest  excellences.  Yet  there  is  a  greater  excellency,  wherein 
Christ  doth  further  excel  angels,  comprised  under  this  phrase,  "  a  more  excellent 
name."  This  is  that  name  which  is  above  every  name,  at  which  every  knee  should 
bow  (Phil.  ii.  9, 10).  By  virtue  of  this  name  He  became  a  fit  Mediator  between  God 
and  man,  and  fit  Saviour  and  Redeemer  of  man,  a  fit  King,  Priest,  and  Prophet  of 
His  Church ;  yea,  and  by  virtue  of  this  name,  absolute  dominion  over  all  creatures, 
infinite  majesty,  Divine  dignity,  and  all  honour  and  glory  is  His ;  all  worship, 
service,  subjection,  and  duty  is  due  unto  Him.  This  name  therefore  must  needs 
be  be\  ond  all  comparison  a  most  excellent  name :  aud  in  this  respect  Christ  may 
well  be  said  to  have  a  more  excellent  name  than  angels,  because  there  is  no  com- 
parison between  them.  The  comparative  epithet,  translated  "  more  excellent,"  is 
derived  from  a  compound  verb  that  signifieth  to  "differ  in  excellency,  or  to  excel  " 
(1  Cor.  XV.  41).  It  is  translated  "  to  be  better  "(Matt.  vi.  26],  or  "to  be  of  more  value  " 
(Matt.  X.  31).  The  positive  of  this  comparative,  signifieth  divers  or  different  (Kom.  xii. 
6).  Tiiis  word  of  comparison  "more  excellent,"  is  not  to  be  taken  of  an  exceeding  in  the 
same  nature  and  kind,  as  one  man  is  more  excellent  than  another,  but  in  different 
natures  and  kinds  for  Christ,  as  the  Son  of  God,  is  of  a  Divine  nature,  even  the 
Creator  of  all,  and  preferred  before  all  created  spirits ;  which  though  they  be  the 
most  excellent  of  created  substances,  yet  not  to  be  compared  with  the  Son  of  God. 
His  name  is  infinitely  more  excellent  then  theirs  ;  for  by  reason  of  this  name  He  is 
the  Lord  of  angels.  1.  As  He  is  the  true,  proper,  only  begotten  Son,  by  eternal 
generation.  For  the  Father  in  communicating  His  essence  to  Him,  communicated 
also  this  excellent  name  here  intended.  2.  As  His  human  nature  was  hypostatically 
united  to  His  Divine  nature.  For  though  according  to  the  flesh  He  was  not  born 
of  God  the  Father  (in  that  respect  He  was,  without  Father,  boin  of  a  Virgin),  yet 
that  flesh  being  personally  united  to  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God,  He  was  born  the 
Son  of  God  (Luke  1.  85).  He  was  not  then  by  grace  and  favour  of  no  Son  made 
the  Sou  of  God ;  but  as  God,  and  as  God-man,  He  was  the  true  begotten  Son  of 
God  ;  and  in  both  these  respects  the  name  here  spoken  of,  by  right  of  inheritance 
belonged  to  Him.  (W.  Gouge.)  The  angels: — Scripture  speaks  often  of  the 
angels.  Let  me  remind  you  of  some  of  the  doctrines  which  the  Bible  contains 
concerning  them.  In  the  first  place,  human  beings  know  nothing  about  angels 
except  what  God  pleases  to  tell  them.  Hence  all  that  human  poets  have  imagined 
about  them  is  of  no  value,  unless  it  agrees  with  the  Scripture.  With  regard  to 
the  angels,  I  may  notice  three  tendencies  to  eiTor.  The  first  tendency  to  error  we 
see  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians,  and  we  may  call  it  "  the  Gnostic  error,"  when 
men,  following  their  own  speculative  reason,  endeavour  to  penetrate  mysteries 
which  are  not  revealed,  and  form  erroneous  views  of  the  angels  as  to  their  nature, 
and  their  relation  to  God  and  to  Christ.  Secondly,  the  Romish  error,  according  to 
which  the  angels  are  placed  in  a  false  mediatory  position,  and  are  invoked,  when 
men  rely  upon  their  intercession,  or  call  upon  their  aid.  And  the  third  tendency 
is  what  I  may  call  the  Protestant  one — to  think  too  rarely  and  in  too  isolated  a 
manner  about  them,  and  not  to  remember  vividly  that  they  are  constantly  with 
us,  that  we  and  they  are  members  of  one  great  family.  1.  Notice  the  multitude 
of  angels  :  "  We  have  come  to  an  innumerable  company  of  angels."  2.  This  in- 
numerable multitude  is  a  polity,  a  state.  There  are  gradations  in  it,  groups,  orders, 
legions  of  angels.  There  is  a  kingdom  with  gradations,  with  order.  This  kingdom 
is  intimately  connected  with  the  kingdom  of  grace.  When  a  sinner  is  convertpd, 
the  angels  rejoice ;  and  when  Jesus  comes  again,  the  angels  will  come  with  Him. 
They  will  last  for  ever,  though  they  are  not  yet  seen  by  us;  and  when  all  that  is 
unreal  and  shadowy  shall  disappear,  then  they  shall  be  made  visible  at  the  appear- 
ing of  our  great  God  and  Saviour.     Whenever  there  is  a  crisis  in  the  history  of 


a  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [cmr.  u 

God's  kingdom  the  angels  appear,  as  at  the  giving  of  the  law,  and  at  the  incarna- 
tion of  the  Son  of  God.  When  He  comes  again  multitudes  of  angels  shall  come 
with  Him  and  separate  the  evil  from  the  good  ;  before  the  angels  Jesus  shall  con- 
fess His  people.  Angels  are  connected  not  merely  with  salvation  and  with  the 
spiritual  kingdom  of  God,  but  with  all  the  kingdom  of  God ;  with  all  physical 
phenomena.  God  does  not  move  and  rule  the  world  merely  bylaws  and  principles, 
by  unconscious  and  inanimate  powers,  but  by  Uving  beings  full  of  light  and  love. 
His  angels  are  like  flames  of  fire  ;  they  have  charge  over  the  winds,  and  the  earth, 
and  the  trees,  and  the  sea.  Through  the  angels  He  carries  on  the  government  of 
the  world.  Now,  glorious  as  the  angels  are,  they  are  in  subjection  to  Jesus  aa 
man  ;  for  in  His  human  nature  God  has  enthroned  Him  above  all  things.  Their 
relation  to  Jesus  fixes  also  their  relation  to  us.  We  know  they  love  us  ;  for  they  re- 
joice when  a  sinner  turns  from  ungodliness  and  takes  hold  of  salvation  as  it  is  in  Jesus. 
They  watch  us  in  our  dangers,  in  our  difl&culties.  And  after  having  ministered  unto 
God's  people  to  the  end  of  this  age,  they  shall  rejoice  when  they  hear  His  voice 
saying  unto  the  children,  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of  My  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom 
prepared  for  vou  from  the  foundation  of  the  world."  For  Jesus'  sake,  "  are  they 
not  all  ministering  spirits?  "  Oh,  how  great  is  Jesus  1  How  great  is  the  covenant 
of  grace  1  How  great  is  the  glory  of  the  Son,  and  how  wonderful  is  our  position  aa 
children  of  the  Father!  {A.  Saphir.)  Thou  art  My  Son. — The  eternal  Sonshipof 
Christ : — In  the  Divine  generation  these  distinct  pomts  following  are  observable — 1. 
God  as  a  Father,  even  the  first  Person  in  Trinity,  begetteth.  In  this  respect  the  Son 
of  God  is  called  the  begotten  of  the  Father  (John  i.  14).  2.  God  the  Father  begat  the 
Son  of  His  very  substance,  very  God  of  very  God.  The  title  God  properly  taken 
and  frequently  applied  to  this  Son,  gives  proof  hereto  (John  i.  1 ;  Eom.  ix.  5),  and 
especially  the  title  Jehovah,  wbich  is  given  to  none  but  the  true  God  (Gen.  xix.  24 ; 
Josh.  v.  14).  3.  God  the  Father  communicateth  His  whole  essence  to  the  Son.  He 
begat  another  self  of  Himself,  even  that  which  He  Himself  is.  In  which  respt-ct 
this  Son  of  God  saith,  "  I  and  My  Father  are  one.  The  Father  is  in  Me,  and  I  in 
Him  "  (John  x.  30, 38).  4.  God  the  Father's  begetting  His  Son  is  truly  and  properly 
eternal.  It  was  before  all  time,  it  continneth  throughout  all  times,  it  shall  never 
have  any  date,  or  end.  In  relation  hereunto  saith  this  Son  of  God,  "  I  was  set  up 
from  everlasting,  from  the  beginning,  or  ever  the  earth  was.  When  there  were  no 
depths,  I  was  brought  forth  :  before  the  hills  was  I  brought  forth,"  &c.  (Prov.  viii. 
23-25).  In  this  sense  He  was  called  the  firstborn  (CoL  i.  15).  Firstborn, 
because  He  was  begotten  before  all  things ;  and  only-begotten,  bcause  He  alone 
was  properly  begotten  of  God,  5.  God  the  Father's  begetting  His  Son,  mani- 
festeth  an  equality  of  Father  and  Son.  For  if  the  nature  of  both  be  inquired  after,  it 
will  hereby  be  found  to  be  God,  and  not  one  greater  than  another.  This  also  did 
the  Son  receive  of  the  Father.  He  did  not  beget  Him  equal,  and  then  add  to  Him, 
when  He  was  begotten,  equality,  but  in  begetting  Him  He  made  Him  equal.  For 
being  in  the  foim  of  God,  to  be  equal  with  God  was  no  robbery  (Phil.  ii.  6),  but 
nature  :  because  He  obtained  it  by  being  begotten.  He  did  not  usurp  it  by  a  proud 
advancing  of  Himself.  Where  equality  is,  there  is  the  same  nature,  and  one  sub- 
stance.  {W.  Gouge.)  This  day  have  I  begotten  Thee. — Sonship  in  the  resurrec- 
tion : — I.  The  sense  in  which  we  are  to  understand  the  Divine  affirmation.  "  I 
have  begotten  Thee."  Says  Meyer :  "  I  think  that  neither  His  eternal  generation 
alone,  as  He  is  God,  nor  His  temporary  generation,  as  He  is  man,  is  here  meant, 
but  both.  I  have  begotten  Thee  from  eternity,  in  respect  of  Thy  Divinity,  and  in 
time,  as  set  forth  by  the  term  'this  day.'  I  have,  by  the  overshadowing  of  My 
Spirit,  begotten  Thee  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  according  to  Thy  humanity,  so  as  it  may 
appear  to  all  the  world  that  Thou  art  both  God  and  man,  and  so  My  most  noble 
Son  and  the  Prince  of  heaven ;  this  being  made  evident  sundry  ways,  but  especially 
by  Thy  rising  again  from  death  to  life."  That  is,  the  resurrection  was  the  day  in 
which  God  made  manifest  that  He  had  begotten  the  Lord  Jesus  as  His  Son  ;  not 
that  He  was  that  particular  day  begotten,  but  the  fact  was  then  made  patent,  and 
proclaimed  as  the  grand  evidence  of  that  article  of  faith  which  teaches  us  to  say, 
"  I  beheve  in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead."  Thus  the  act  of  our  Lord's  resurrec- 
tion presents  the  proof  alike  of  His  natural  and  eternal  Sonship,  being  both 
divinely  begotten.  It  sheds  an  equal  lustre  upon  His  eternal  Deity  and  glorified 
humanity  ;  and  while  the  power  which  effected  His  resurrection  exhibits  Him  as 
truly  God,  His  condescension  to  the  flesh,  and  death  which  preceded  it,  discovers 
Him  as  really  Man ;  for  who  but  man  could  die  ?  and  who  but  God  could  rise 
again  t    Death  was  the  peculiar,  and  for  aught  I  know,  the  exclusive  sentf^ice 


CHAP.  I.]  HEBREWS.  43 

which  was  passed  on  man ;  life  which  could  triumph  over  death,  which  is  God'a 
ordiuance,  is  the  sr  le  prerogative  of  God.    II.  Why  we  think  thb  term  "  this 

DAY  "    EXCLUSIVELY    DISTINGUISHES    THE    DAY    OF     HiS     RESURRECTION.       1.     OuT   filSt 

reason  is,  the  position  which  the  words  occupy  in  the  second  Psahn,  and  the 
seveuth  verse,  from  which  they  are  quoted.  It  is  after  "  the  heathen  had  raged, 
and  the  people  had  imagined  a  vain  thing,"  namely,  that  they  could  annihilate 
the  pretensions  of  Jesus  by  His  death  ;  it  is  after  the  conspiring  of  the  kings  of  the 
earth  and  their  rulers  that  the  decree  is  uttered,  "Thou  art  My  Son;  this  day 
have  I  begotten  Thee."  That  is,  the  resurrection  which  succeeded  the  crucifixion 
manifested  in  the  most  signal  manner,  that  notwithstanding  the  enmity,  apparent 
success,  and  short-lived  triumph  of  the  Jews,  "Truly,"  after  all,  as  the  ctnturion 
confessed,  "this  man  was  the  Son  of  God."  2.  Our  second  reason  for  considering 
this  day  the  resurrection,  is  because  the  assembled  apof^tles  so  applied  the  Psalm 
in  the  fourth  chapter  of  Acts,  the  twenty-fifth  and  following  verses,  where,  having 
pointed  out  the  accomplishment  of  the  former  verses  of  the  second  Psalm,  in  the 
couspiracy  of  the  rulers  and  people  against  Christ,  it  is  added  in  the  thirty-third 
verse,  "  And  with  great  power  gave  the  apostles  witness  of  the  resurrection."  3. 
A  third  reason  we  find  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  the  first  chapter  and  the 
fourth  verse,  where  St.  Paul  draws  the  distinction  between  Christ's  "being  made 
of  the  seed  of  David,  according  to  the  flesh,  but  declared  (not  made)  to  be  the  Soa 
of  God,  according  to  the  Spirit  of  holiness,  by  His  resurrection  from  the  dead." 
The  word  '*  declared,"  in  this  place,  is  of  the  same  force  as  the  Hebrew  word  which 
is  translated  "  begotten,"  and  which  also  means  "  exhibited,  or  manifested  "  ;  or  as 
Paul  saith  "  declared."  "  Thou  art  My  Son  ;  this  day  have  I  declared  Thee  " — 
that  is,  this  day  of  Thy  resurrection,  I  have  owned  Thee,  manifested  Thee,  as  the 
Son  of  God.  4.  If  there  be  any  remaining  doubt  as  to  the  application  of  this  pas- 
sage, I  refer  you  fourthly,  to  the  thirteenth  chapter  of  Acts,  and  the  thirty-third 
verse,  where,  after  .>;peaking  of  the  promises  of  God  made  to  the  fathers,  Paul  adds, 
"  God  hath  fulfilled  the  same  unto  us,  their  children,  in  that  He  hath  raised  up 
Jesus  again  ;  as  it  is  also  written  in  the  second  Psalm — Thou  art  My  Son ;  this 
day  have  I  begotten  Thee  " ;  that  is,  the  raising  up  of  Jesus  was  the  evidence  ot 
His  Sonship,  and  His  Sonship  is  the  pledge  lur  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises.  5. 
Once  more :  in  the  fifth  chapter  of  Hebrews,  and  the  fifth  verse,  where  it  is 
asserted  that  Aaron,  the  first  high  priest  under  the  legal  dispensation,  and  Chiist 
the  first  High  Priest  of  the  gospel,  took  not  this  office  upon  Himself  till  He  was 
called,  the  calling  of  Christ  is  referred  to  the  same  event  and  in  the  same  terms  as 
in  the  text  are  employed  to  prove  the  superiority  of  His  nature  over  that  of  the 
angels.  Then  the  day  of  His  resurrection  was  the  day  of  His  ordination  to  the 
high  priesthood.  III.  What  was  the  office  and  commission  conferred  upon  the 
Lord  Jesus  by  the  Divine  testimony  ?  "  Thou  art  My  Son."  Angels  needed  not 
this  attestation.  They  had  often  heard  the  grand  acknowledgment  in  Leaven. 
The  eternal  Sonship  of  the  Christ  was  no  secret  there.  But  as  Jesus  said  of  the 
answer  which  mysteriously  reached  Him  from  the  clouds  at  the  raising  of  Lazarus, 
BO  might  He  have  said  of  the  testimony  which  accompanied  His  own  resurrection 
— "  Because  of  the  people  who  stand  by  I  said  it,  that  they  may  believe  that  Thou 
hast  sent  Me  "  ;  that  is,  God  condescended  visibly  and  audibly  to  acknowledge  His 
Son  on  earth,  that  man  might  believe  that  He  was  sent  from  heaven.  1.  The  title 
of  the  Son  of  God  imports  dignity.  Hence  the  apostle's  argument  in  the  text — • 
*'  Unto  which  of  the  angels  said  He  at  any  time,  Thou  art  My  Son  ?  "  2.  The  title 
of  the  Son  of  God  imports  office.  It  implies,  in  connection  with  His  other  title, 
••  the  Son  of  man  " — which  is  applied  to  Christ  about  eighty  times  by  the  evange- 
lists— a  mediatorial  office  ;  that  the  Son  of  man,  equally  as  the  Son  of  God,  is  the 
connecting  link  between  God  and  man,  both  natures  being  recf  nciled  by  His  office 
as  the  two  are  united  in  His  person.  3.  Again :  as  the  Son  of  God,  Christ  is  our 
Prince  and  Judge.  Henceforth,  said  He,  "  the  Father  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath 
committed  all  judgment  unto  the  Son  "  ;  and  Peter  adds,  "  He  is  exalted  to  be  a 
Prince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give  repentance  unto  Israel,  and  forgiveness  of  sins." 
This  is  His  present  office ;  His  sovereignty  is  now  wholly  exercised  in  grace.  It 
now  deals  in  love,  mercy,  and  foibearauce.  Now  He  pleads  at  the  throne — hereafter 
He  will  sentence  from  the  throne.  4.  Once  more :  as  the  Son  of  God,  Christ  is 
"  the  Firstborn  among  many  brethren."  The  term  "  firstborn  "  does  not  neces- 
sarily infer  that  the  person  to  whom  the  epithet  is  applied  is  a  creature ;  it  often 
imports  no  more  than  excellency,  or  supremac.v,  or  peculiar  favour.  Thus  Job 
speaks  of  "  the  firstborn  of  death" — that  is,  the  chief  strength  of  death ;  so  Christ 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

is  called  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Golossians,  and  the  fifteenth  verse, 
"  the  Firstborn  of  every  creature,"  "  the  Firstborn  from  the  dead  " — that  is,  the 
chief  and  supreme  of  all  the  creatures,  as  the  Eabbins  themselves  spoke  of  Jehovah 
as  "  the  Firstborn  of  the  creation,"  or  at  the  head  of  the  universe.  It  is  also  a  teim 
of  endearment  and  special  favour.  Thus  the  Lord  said  in  the  thirty -first  chapter 
of  Jeremiah,  and  the  ninth  verse— "  Ephraim  is  My  firstborn";  in  other  words, 
that  His  people  were  very  dear  to  Him.  In  all  these  senses  Christ  is  to  us  the 
Firstborn  of  God.  He  is  our  Strength  and  Excellency,  our  "Firstfruits  from  the 
dead  "  ;  and  '*  because  He  Hves,  we  shall  live  also  " ;  for  we  are  said  to  be  "  begot- 
ten again  onto  a  lively  hope  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead." 
And  further,  "  He  is  Head  over  all  things  to  His  Church  "  ;  and  as  there  is  a  name 
given  unto  Him  which  is  above  every  name,  so  that  name  is  ours.  Christ's  people  are 
called  Christians.  "  I  will  write  upon  you,"  said  He,  "  My  new  name" ;  aud  that 
is  "  the  everlasting  name  which  shall  not  be  cut  off."  (J.  B.  Owen,  M.A.)  The 
First-begotten. — Christ  the  First-hegotten  : — I.  We  understand  by  this  title,  the 
ETERNAL  GENERATION  AND  S0N8HIP  OF  OUR  Lobd;  His  possession  of  a  sccd  and  family 
made  like  nnto  Him  here  in  holiness  and  hereafter  in  glory ;  His  rule  aud  pre- 
eminence in  the  house  and  family  of  God ;  His  character,  as  head  over  all  things  to 
the  Church.    II.  We  understand  by  the  bringing  in  of  the  First-begotten  into  the 

world — THE  MANIFESTATION  OF  THE  ETERNAL   SON   OF  GOD    IN   OUB   FLESH — His    birth, 

according  to  the  prophet,  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  Great  indeed  is  this  mystery :  let 
us  adore  it  reverentially !  The  joy  which  should  pervade  our  hearts  must  be  a  holy 
joy;  the  feeUngs  that  should  possess  cur  minds  should  be  of  lively  gratitude  and 
leaily  obedience.  IH.  But  let  us  notice  what  is  to  be  inferred  from  the  adoration 
ENJOINED  UPON  THE  ANGELS '.  this  adoratioH  we  find  rendered  at  the  birth  of  this 
wondrous  personage ;  at  His  agony  in  the  garden  they  waited  on  Him  ;  at  His 
resurrection  and  ascension  they  were  in  attendance  upon  His  Majesty ;  and  still 
they  worship  and  adore.  What  can  we  conclude  from  the  adoration  of  angels,  but 
that  He  whom  angels  adore  is  God  and  Lord  ?  Again,  may  we  not  conclude  that 
the  work  of  our  redemption  has  been  undertaken  by  One  who  is  altogether  equal  to  the 
task  ?  May  we  not  thus  far  be  of  good  courage,  and  place  our  entire  confidence  in 
the  virtue  of  His  redemption  ?  Lessons :  1.  The  unspeakable  humiliation  of  our 
Lord.  How  low  has  He  stooped  to  do  us  service  !  Are  we  filled  with  the  opinion 
of  our  own  importance?  Let  us  turn  to  the  manger  and  the  stable;  let  us  dwell 
upon  the  matchless  humility  of  the  Lord  of  life  and  glory ;  let  us  learn  from  it  to  be 
lowly  in  our  own  eyes.  2.  Though  we  canuot  copy  the  act,  yet  we  can  copy  the 
motive,  the  spirit  which  brought  the  First-begotten  into  the  world.  By  love  we 
must  serve  one  another.  3.  Again,  we  are  instructed  hereby  to  deny  self.  (H.  J. 
Hastings^  M.A.)  Christ  the  First-begotten  : — That  which  the  apostle  here  in- 
teudeth  under  this  title  "first-begotten,"  is  to  set  forth  the  excellency  of  the  person 
of  Christ,  as  God-man,  and  that — 1.  In  His  priority,  which  is  eternity,  as  He  is  God 
(Prov.  viii.  24,  25).  2.  In  His  dignity,  being  the  most  excellent  of  all  (Gen.  xUx.  3). 
3.  In  regard  of  His  dominion  over  all  (Psa.  ii.  6,  7).  4.  In  regard  of  the  largeness 
of  His  inheritance  (Psa.  ii.  8).  (IF.  Gouge.)  And  let  all  the  angels  of  God 
worship  Him. — These  words  are  an  exact  quotation  from  Deut.  xxxii.  43,  as  it 
stands  in  the  LXX.  version,  but  are  not  found  in  the  original  The  use  of  that  pas- 
sage as  a  Jewish  liturgy  of  praise  probably  led  to  its  expansion  into  a  fuller  song  of 
triumph  by  additions  borrowed  from  other  parts  of  Scripture ;  and  these  words  may 
have  been  taken  from  Psa.  xcvii.  7,  as  it  stands  in  LXX.  version — "  Worship  Him 
all  ye  His  angels."  In  the  farewell  song  of  Moses,  the  verse  is  introduced  on 
occasion  of  a  majestic  prophecy  of  the  Lord's  appearance  to  judge  the  enemy  and 
avenge  His  people.  All  such  prophecies  were  interpreted  in  a  Messianic  sense ; 
therefore  the  Epistle  makes  the  reappearance  of  the  firstborn  the  occasion  for  that 
angelic  worship.  In  Deuteronomy  the  adoration  is  rendered  to  Jehovah ;  in  the 
Epistle  it  is  not  clear  whether  it  is  rendered  to  Him  or  to  the  firstborn  ;  it  is  there- 
fore right  to  follow  the  Old  Testament  meaning.  The  passage  is  quoted  by  way  of 
exhibiting  the  subordinate  position  of  angels  as  mere  worshippers.  (F.  Rendall, 
31. A.)  Christ  the  object  of  angelic  worship  : — I.  If  angels  worship  Christ,  His 
CLAIMS  TO  WORSHIP  ARE  DNDOUBTED.  There  are  only  two  conceivable  causes  for 
the  worshipping  of  false  gods  :  1.  The  want  of  intelhgence.  2.  The  want  of  right 
sympathies.  H.  If  angels  worship  Christ,  then  the  obligations  of  men  to  do 
80  Mi:sT  BE  IMMENSE.  Besidts  being  the  brightness  of  His  Father's  glory.  He  is 
the  expiator  of  human  sin,  &o.  III.  If  angels  worship  Christ,  then  a  presid- 
lua  SYikiPATax  WITH  Him  is  ibe  mecessa&x  uesxness  roB  beatsn.    It  ia  even  con- 


CHAP,  i.l  HEBREWS.  45 

nccted  with  two  things  :  1.  An  appreciative  knowledcre  of  Him.  2,  An  unreserved 
concarrence  with  Him.     (Homilist.)         Christworshippedby  angeh  : — I.  The  FinsT 

THING    WHICH     THK   TEXT    TEACHES    18    THAT     ChRIST     18   A    PROPER   OBJECT     OF     DiTINB 

WORSHIP.  We  know  who  has  said,  "  Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and 
Him  only  shalt  thou  serve  "  (Matt.  iv.  10),  and  we  know  also,  from  St.  John's 
description  in  the  Apocalypse,  of  the  worship  of  heaven,  that  the  Church  universal, 
saints  ami  angels,  will  pay  Divine  honours  to  Him  who  appeared  upon  earth  as  the 
gentle  J3abe  of  Betlileht  m  (Rev.  v.  13).  Thus  speaks  the  High  and  Holy  One  who 
inhabiteth  eternity  (Isa.  zlii.  8).  If  Ch'ist  Jesus  be  not  God,  how  can  the  Almiglity 
Fathf-r  contradict  Himself,  and  say  even  to  the  bright  intelligences  that  minister 
about  His  throne,  "  Let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship  Him  ?  "  If  Christ  be  not  a 
p/i  per  object  of  Divine  adoration,  how  is  it  that  we  hear  the  meek  and  lowly  Soa 
of  Mary  declare,  without  hesitation  or  reserve,  that  "  All  men  should  honour  the 
Son,  even  as  they  honour  the  Father"?  (John  v.  23).  If  Christ  Jesus  be  not 
one  with  the  Father  and  the  Blessed  Spirit,  in  the  glory  of  the  Eternal 
Trinity,  why  did  tlie  disciples  who  met  Him  after  the  resurrection  bow 
themselves  down  and  worship  Him  ?  (Matt,  xxviii.  9 ;  Luke  xxiv.  52). 
II.    The  test  suggests  another  point — that  the  Incarnation  aifords  a  8peciaIi 

CALL  upon  all  IN  EARTH  AND  HEAVEN  TO  ASCRIBE  UNTO  HlU  THE  HONOUR  WHICH    IS  DCS 

CNXO  His  NAME.  During  the  reign  of  Theodosius  the  Great,  in  the  fourth  century, 
the  Arians  put  forth  their  strongest  efforts  to  undermine  that  all-important  doctrine 
of  tlie  divinity  of  our  blessed  Lord.  The  interesting  event  of  making  his  son 
Arcadius  the  sharer  with  him  of  his  throne  was  happily  overruled  to  his  discover- 
ing the  fearful  error  which  was  thus  sapping  the  foundations  of  the  faith.  Among 
the  bishops  who  came  to  congratulate  Theodosius  on  the  occasion  was  Amphilochus, 
Bishop  of  Iconium,  a  man  most  highly  esteemed.  Approaching  the  emperor,  the 
bishop  addressed  him  in  fitting  words,  and  was  about  to  withdraw  from  the  presence- 
chamber,  when  the  angry  father  exclaimed,  "  Do  you  take  no  notice  of  my  son  T 
Have  you  not  heard  that  I  have  made  him  a  partner  with  me  in  the  empire."  The 
good  old  bishop  gave  no  direct  answer,  but  going  up  to  Arcadius,  a  lad  of  sixteen, 
he  laid  his  hands  upon  his  head,  saying,  "  The  Lord  bless  thee,  my  son  !  "  and 
oni-e  more  turned  to  depart.  Even  this  did  not  satisfy  the  emperor,  who  inquired, 
in  a  tone  of  surprise  and  displeasure,  "  Is  this  all  the  respect  you  pay  to  a  prince 
that  I  have  made  of  equal  dignity  with  myself  ?  "  The  bishop  indignantly 
answered,  "  Do  you  so  highly  resent  my  apparent  neglect  of  your  son,  because  I  do 
not  treat  him  with  equal  honour  vrith  j'ourself?  WTiat,  then,  must  the  eternal 
God  think  of  you,  who  have  allowed  His  co-equal  and  co-eternal  Son  to  be  degraded 
from  His  proper  divinity  in  every  part  of  your  empire  ?  "  Theodosius  felt  that  the 
withei  ing  rebuke  was  well  deserved,  and  he  ceased  from  that  moment  to  show  the 
least  indulgence  to  such  as  ventured  to  cast  dishonour  upon  the  Son  of  God.  It  is 
not  only  our  duty,  but  our  precious  privilege,  to  worship  our  Divine  Saviour.  {J.  N. 
Norton,  D.D.)  Worship  due  to  Christ  from  all: — If  the  angels  worship  Christ, 
shall  not  we  men  that  be  dust  and  ashes  worship  Him  f  If  the  lords  of  the  privy 
council  stand  bare  to  the  king,  shall  not  we  silly  men  of  the  country  do  it  ?  The 
angels  that  dwell  in  the  court  of  heaven  with  God  worship  Christ ;  and  shall  not  we 
on  earth  do  it  ?  Let  us  worship  Him,  and  Him  alone ;  let  ns  not  worship  our  gold 
and  silver  as  covetous  men  do,  and  come  within  compass  of  idolatry ;  let  us  not 
worship  our  pleasures  as  epicures  do,  but  let  us  worship  Christ  as  the  angels  do. 
We  worship  Christ  ^ith  our  hps,  we  have  His  name  in  our  mouth,  but  we  worship 
Him  not  with  our  hearts  and  lives.  A  great  number  of  Christians  are  like  the 
Boldiers  that  set  a  crown  of  thorns  on  Christ's  head,  put  a  reed  instead  of  a  sceptre 
into  His  hand,  clothed  Him  with  a  purple  garment,  and  in  the  end  did  nothing  but 
mock  Him.  So  we  talk  gloriously  of  Christ  and  of  His  kingdom  ;  in  words  we  pro- 
fess Him  to  be  our  King  ;  but  we  do  not  worship  Him  in  truth  and  sincerity,  and 
serve  Him  in  holiness  and  righteousness  as  we  ought  to  do.  (IF.  Jones,  D.D.) 
Who  maketh  His  angels  spirits. — Angelic  life  and  its  lessons : — It  is  true  there  are 
many  who  deny  the  existence  of  any  spiritual  beings  save  God  and  man.  The  wide 
universe  is  to  them  a  soUtary  land  without  inhabitants.  There  is  but  one  oasis 
filled  with  living  creatures.  There  is  something  pitiable  in  this  impertinence.  It 
is  a  drop  of  dew  in  the  lonely  cup  of  a  gentian,  which  imagines  itseU  to  be  all  the 
water  in  the  universe.  It  is  the  summer  midge  which  has  never  left  its  forest  pool, 
dreaming  that  it  and  its  companions  are  the  only  hving  creatures  in  earth  or  air. 
There  is  no  proof  of  the  existence  of  other  beings  than  ourselves,  but  there  is  also 
no  proof  of  the  contrary.    Apart  from  revelation,  we  can  think  about  the  subject  afl 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

we  please.  But  it  does  seem  incredible  that  we  alone  should  represent  in  the  uni- 
verse the  image  of  God ;  and  if  in  one  solitary  star  another  race  of  beings  dwell, 
if  we  concede  the  existence  of  a  single  spirit  other  than  ourselves,  we  have  allowed 
the  principle ;  the  angelic  world  of  which  the  Bible  speaks  is  possible  to  faith.  Our  life 
with  nature  has  lost  its  beauty,  its  joy,  its  reUgion.  It  was  different  with  the  ancient 
Jew  and  with  the  apostles  and  their  followers.  They  Uved  in  a  world  peopled  with 
spiritual  beings.  They  beheved  in  invisible  assistants,  who  were  doing  God's  pleasure 
and  sympathising  with  His  children.  The  hosts  of  heaven  moved  in  myriads  in  the 
sky.  The  messengers  of  God  went  to  and  fro  working  His  righteous  will.  The  sons  of 
God  shouted  for  joy  when  the  creation  leaped  to  light.  In  every  work  of  nature,  in  the 
summer  rain  and  the  winter  frost,  in  the  lifting  of  the  billow  on  the  sea  and  the 
growth  of  the  flower  on  the  plain,  there  were  holy  ones  concerned  who  sang  the 
hymn  of  continued  creation  to  the  Eternal  Love.  The  very  winds  themselves  were 
angels,  and  the  flaming  fires  ministers  of  God.  I.  Take  first,  the  relation  of  God 
TO  ANGELIC  LIFE.  1.  The  first  thing  we  understand  of  the  angels  is  that  in  distaut 
eternities  God  created  them.  God  gave  of  His  own  life  to  others,  and  filled  His 
silence  with  living  souls.  Here  we  have  the  principle  of  the  social  life  of  God.  He 
listened  with  pleasure  to  the  song  of  joy  which  Med  His  universe,  and  received 
and  gave  back  in  ceaseless  reciprocation  the  offered  love  of  the  spirits  He  had 
made.  And  in  that  thought  all  social  life  on  earth  should  be  hallowed  by  being 
made  like  to  that  of  God ;  we  should  be  as  gods  and  angels  one  to  another,  inter- 
changing ever  love  and  service.  Is  that  the  ideal  which  in  society  you  strive  to 
reach  ?  Again — 2.  The  angelic  creation  reveals  to  as  the  very  principle  of  God's 
proper  Ufe.  He  would  not  have  a  life  which  began  and  ended  in  Himself.  His  Ufe 
was  life  in  others.  In  giving  of  His  life  He  Uved.  II.  I  pass  on  to  the  relation 
OF  THE  ANGELio  LIFE  OF  GoD.  It  is  described  as  a  life  of  exalted  praise.  The  angels 
are  pictured  as  employed  in  ceaseless  adoration.  The  nearer  that  you  live  to  God 
here,  the  nearer  you  will  approach  the  angelic  life.  Our  state  of  imperfection  is 
characterised  by  prayer,  the  state  of  perfection  is  characterised  by  praise  ;  and  it  is 
curious  to  mark  in  the  history  of  some  of  the  noblest  of  God's  saints,  how,  as  they 
drew  near  the  close  of  life  and  entered  more  into  communion  with  the  heavenly 
existence,  prayer  seems  to  be  replaced  by  a  sacred  awe,  and  a  deeper  knowledge  of 
holiness  breaks  forth  into  continual  praise.  So  far  for  angelic  Ufe  in  connection 
with  God.  in.  We  pass  on  to  consider,  as  it  is  described  in  the  Bible,  angelic 
LIFE  IN  CONNECTION  WITH  NATURE.  The  Hebrew  religious  feeling  always  retained 
some  traces  of  its  connection  through  Abraham  with  ChaldaBa.  The  old  pastoral 
faith  which  was  born  on  the  wide  plains  of  the  East,  with  a  magnificent  arch  of 
sky  above,  in  which  the  sun  and  moon  and  stars  walked  cloudless  with  what  seemed 
the  stately  step  of  gods,  was  always  breaking  through  the  pure  monotheism  which 
God  revealed  to  the  patriarchs.  And  not  only  the  ordering  of  the  stars,  but  all  mani- 
festations of  the  forces  of  nature  were,  in  the  poetry  of  the  Hebrews,  directed  by 
the  angels.  Certain  masters  in  science  will  smile  at  all  this,  and  ask  if  that  be 
philosophy?  And  I  answer,  No,  not  philosophy,  but  something  higher — poetry; 
and  as  such,  not  disclosing  the  relations  of  phenomena,  but  revealing,  through  sym- 
bolic phrase,  a  principle.  It  matters  very  little  whether  the  angels  be  the  directing 
powers  of  the  elements  and  their  combinations  or  not ;  but  it  does  much 
matter  to  us  as  spiritual  beings  with  what  eyes  we  look  upon  the  universe — as  a 
living  whole  informed  and  supported  by  a  living  will,  or  as  dead  matter  drifting  on  in 
obedience  to  dead  laws.  So  do  we  grasp  the  truth  of  these  old  Hebrew  sayings  of 
the  angels — that  nature  in  essence,  or  rather,  in  that  actual  world  of  which  it  is  the 
witness,  is  not  inanimate,  but  living.  Then  the  universe  becomes  clothed  in  a  more 
glorious  form.  "  The  dead  heavy  mass  which  did  but  block  up  space  is  vanished, 
and  iu  its  place  there  flows  forward,  with  the  music  of  eternal  waters,  a  stream  of 
life  and  power  and  action  "  which  issues  from  the  source  of  all  Ufe — the  living  will 
of  God.  Then  it  happens  that  to  us  the  whole  course  of  nature,  and  each  separate 
thing  within  it,  give  up  to  us  the  secrets  they  half  conceal  and  half  express.  They 
Bpeak  not  to  intellect  only  or  to  feeling  only,  but  to  the  entirety  of  our  being.  All 
God's  hving  spirits  are  doing  within  the  sphere  of  His  life  a  portion  of  this  re- 
deeming work.  The  angels  do  it  perchance  as  He  performs  it,  fincUng  a  perfect  joy  in 
Bacrifice  ;  we  are  doing  it  in  agony,  finding  every  sacrifice  a  pain,  and  yet  learning 
through  the  very  pain  to  realise  the  sacrifice  as  joy ;  giving  up  our  life  with  strong 
crying  and  with  tears,  but  strangely  discovering  that  we  have  been  led  into  Ufe  :  till 
at  last  the  secret  smites  upon  our  heart  in  an  ineffable  Ught  which  transfigures  all 
our  being,  and  looking  up  to  where,  upon  the  cross  of  Calvary,  all  humanity  was 


CHAP.  I.]  HEBREWS.  4T 

sacrificed  and  all  life  given  away  in  infinite  love  that  the  life  of  the  world  might  be, 
we  know  at  last  in  Him  the  mystery  of  the  universe.     We  see  the  very  Life  itself 
in  the  love  which,  in  giving  His  Son,  gave  Himself.     (Stopford  A.  Brooke,  M.A.) 
Angels  and  tlieir  alliance  with  nature  : — His  angels  spirits ;    better.  His  angela 
winds.    The  quotation  is  from  Psa.  civ.  4,  according  to  the  Greek  translation.   Two 
things  are  expressed  :  first,  the  service  of  the  angels  ;  and  second,  their  alliance  in 
this  service  to  the  material  elements ;  under  God's  transforming  hand  they  suffer  a 
change  into  winds  and  a  fiame  of  fire.     This  idea  is  not  to  be  pressed  so  far  as  to 
imply  that  the  angelic  essence  undergoes  a  transformation  into  material  substance, 
but  only  that  the  angels  are  clothed  with  this  material  form,  and  in  their  service 
assume  this  shape  to  men.    Illustrations  of  the  idea  from  the  Rabbinical  writers 
are  not  wanting.     "  The  angel  said  unto  Manoah,  I  know  not  after  what  image  I 
am  made,  for  God  changes  us  every  hour  ;  why,  therefore,  dost  thou  ask  after  my 
name  ?      Sometimes  He  makes  us  fire,  at  other  times  wind ;  sometimes  men,  at 
other  times  again  angels."    God  is  named  God  of  hosts  because  He  does  with  His 
angels  as  He  pleases  ;  He  makes  them  sometimes  sitting  (Judg.  vi.  11),  sometimes 
standing  (Isa.  vi.  2),  sometimes  to  resemble  women  (Zech.  v.  9),  sometimes  men 
(Gen.   xviii.  2),  Ac.     "When  His  angels  are  sent  forth  as  messengers  they  are 
made  winds  (Psa.  civ.  4),  when  they  minister  before  the  throne  of  His  glory  they 
are  flames  of  fire  "  (c/.  Exod.  iii.  2).     {A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.)         A  flame  of 
fire. — Angels  likened  to  fire.     1.  Fire  is  lightsome  and  strikes  a  terror  into  men,  so 
do  the  angels  when  they  appear.     2.  Fire  is  of  a   subtle  and  piercing  nature: 
BO  are  the  angels,  they  are  quickly  here  and  there.     3.  Fire  consumes  and  burns 
up  ;  so  do  they  the  wicked,  our  enemies.     This  is  the  greatest  honour  of  the  angels 
to  be  God's  ministers  and  messengers ;  so  must  we  count  it  the  greatest  dignity  of 
all  men  on  the  face  of  the  earth.     Though  thou  beest  a  rich  tradesman,  a  wealthy 
merchant,  a  gentlemen  of  great  revenues,  a  knight,  a  lord,  or  a  king ;  yet  the  most 
magnificent  style  thou  canst  have  is  this,  to  be  God's  minister  and  servant,  to  be 
His  messenger  and  to  go  on  His  errands.     (W.  Jones,  D.D.)        Thy  throne,  0  God, 
1b  for  ever  and  ever. — Christ's  throne  and  sceptre  : — I.  The  thbone.   1.  It  is  a  mercy 
throne.     2.  It  is  a  rich  throne.    3.  It  is  a  throne  of  plenty.     II.  The  sceptbb.     1. 
Righteously  acquired.     2.  Christ  makes  war  in  righteousness.    3.  Christ  maintains 
the  rights  of  heaven.     {James  Wells.)        Messianic  regalia : — L  The  thbone  of 
Messiah.    The  power  of  Christ  is — 1.  Divine.    2.  Supreme.    (1)  Moral,  not  secular. 
(2)  Personal,  not  derived.      (3)  Universal,  not  local.      3.  Everlasting.     II.  The 
bceptre  of  Messiah.     The  righteousness  of  His — 1.  Character.      2.  Gospel.     3. 
Eeign.    III.  The  crown  of  Messiah.    (W.  L.  Watkinson.)         Divinity  of  Christ : — 
So  thoroughly  intermingled  with  the  whole  texture  of  New  Testament  Scripture  is 
the  Godhead  of  the  Saviour,  that  no  criticism  which  does  not  destroy  the  book  can 
altogether  extinguish  its  testimony.     We  have  seen  a  copy  of  the  Gospels  and 
Epistles  which  was  warranted  free  from  all  trace  of  the  Trinity,  but  it  was  not  the 
Testament  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.    We  beheld  it,  and  we  received 
instruction.     It  did  not  want  beauty ;  for  the  Parables  and  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount,  and  many  a  touching  passage,  still  were  there.    But  neither  would  a  garden 
want  beauty  if  the  grass  plats  and  green  bushes  still  remained,  though  you  had 
carefully  culled  out  every  blossoming  flower.     The  humanity  of  Jesus  still  is 
beautiful,  even  when  the  Godhead  is  forgotten  or  denied.  Or  rather  it  looked  like  a 
coronation  tapestry,  with  all  the  golden  threads  torn  out ;  or  an  exquisite  mosaic 
from  which  some  unscrupulous  finger  had  abstracted  the  gems  and  only  left  the 
common  stones  :  you  not  only  missed  the  gloiy  of  the  whole,  but  in  the  fractures  of 
the  piece  and  the  coarse  plaster  with  which  the  gaps  were  supplied,  you  saw  how 
rude  was  the  process  by  which  its  jewels  had  been  wrenched  away.  It  was  a  casket 
without  the  pearl.    It  was  a  shrine  without  the  Shekinah.    And  yet,  after  all,  it  was 
not  sufficiently  expurgated  ;  for,  after  reading  it,  the  thought  would  recur  —how  much 
easier  to  fabricate  a  Gnostic  Testament  exempt  from   all  trace  of  our  Lord's 
humanity,  than  a  Unitarian  Testament  ignoring  His  divinity  !    (Jag.  Hamilton,  D.L>.) 
Christ  is  God : — Think  of  all  that  is  represented  by  that  great  word  "  God  " ;  who  can 
fathom  it  ?     "  Nothing  is  easier  than  to  say  the  word  "  universe,"  and  yet  it  would 
take  us  milhons  of  millions  of  years  to  bestow  one  hasty  glance  upon  the  surface 
of  that  small  portion  of  it  which  lies  within  the  )ange  of  our  glasses.    But  what  are 
all  suns,  comets,  earths,  moons,  atmospheres,  seas,  rivers,  mountains,   valleys, 
plains,  woods,  cattle,  wild  beasts,  fish,  fowl,  grasses,  plants,  shrubs,  minerals,  and 
metals,  compared  with  the  meaning  of  the  one  name  God  1 "     (C.  Stanford,  D.D.) 
The  dominion  of  Jesus  Christ : — I.  The  conferring  and  coupabing  of  Scbiptoees  ib 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  l» 

kS  EXCELLENT   MEANS   OF   COMINO   TO   AN    ACQUAINTANCE   WITH   THE    MIND  AND   WILL   OP 

God  IN  THEM.  Thus  dealeth  the  apostle  in  this  place;  he  compareth  what  ia 
spoken  of  angels  in  one  place,  and  what  of  the  Son  in  another,  and  from  thence 
manifesteth  what  is  the  mind  of  God  concerning  them.    11.  It  is  the  dutt  of  all 

BELIEVERS   TO   REJOICE  IN    THE    GLORY,  HONODB,    AND    DOMINION   OF   JeS08    ChRIST.       1. 

Herein  God  is  glorified.  The  kingdom  of  Christ  is  the  glory  of  God ;  thereby  is  His 
name  and  praise  exalted  in  the  world  ;  and  therefore  upon  the  erection  and  setting 
of  it  up  are  all  His  people  so  earnestly  invited  to  rejoice  and  triumph  therein  (Psa. 
xcv.  1-3,  xcvi.  1-4,  xcvii.  1,  2).  2.  Herein  doth  the  honour  and  glory  of  Christ 
as  Mediator  consist,  which  is  a  matter  of  great  rejoicing  unto  all  that  love  Him  in 
sincerity.  3.  Our  own  concern,  safety,  present  and  future  happiness,  lie  herein  : 
our  all  depeu'ls  upon  the  kingdom  and  throne  of  Christ.  He  is  our  King,  if  we  are 
believers;  our  King  to  rule,  protect,  and  save  us  ;  to  uphold  us  aj^ainst  opposition, 
to  supply  us  with  strength,  to  guide  us  with  counsel,  to  subdue  our  eneuiies,  togive 
us  our  inheritance  and  reward,  and  therefore  our  principal  interest  lies  in  His 
throne,  and  in  the  glory  and  stability  thereof.  While  He  reigneth,  we  are  safe,  and 
in  our  way  to  glory.  4.  The  whole  world,  all  the  creation  of  God,  are  concerned  in 
this  kingdom  of  Ci^rist.  Except  His  enemies  in  hell,  the  whole  creation  is  benefited 
by  His  dominion  ;  for  as  some  men  are  made  partakers  of  saving  grace  thereby,  so 
the  residue  of  that  race,  by  and  with  them,  do  receive  unspeakable  advantages  in 
the  forbearance  of  God ;  and  the  very  creature  itself  is  raised,  as  it  were,  into  a  hope 
thereby  of  deliverance  from  that  state  of  vanity  whereunto  now  it  is  subjected 
(Rom.  viii.    20,  21).      lU.  It   is  the  Divine  nature  of  the  Lord  Christ  that 

GIVES    ETERNinr,    STABILITY,   AND    DNCHANOEABLENESS    TO   HiS   THRONE     AND    KINGDOM. 

IV.  All  the  laws,  and  the  whole  administration  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  by 
Hia  Word  and  Spirit,  are  all  equal,  righteous,  and  holy.  "  His  sceptre  is  the 
sceptre  of  righteousness."  The  world  indeed  likes  them  not ;  all  things  in  its  rule 
seem  to  it  weak  and  foolish  (1  Cor.  i.  20-23),  but  they  are  otherwise,  the  Holy 
Ghost  being  Judge,  and  such  they  appear  unto  them  tLat  do  believe  ;  yea,  whatever 
is  requisite  to  make  laws  and  administrations  righteous,  it  doth  all  concur  in  those 
of  tlie  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  1.  Christ  is  vested  with  sufficient  authority  for  the 
enacting  of  laws  and  rules  of  administration  in  His  kingdom.  2.  Christ  is  abun- 
dantly furnished  with  wisdom  for  this  purpose.  He  is  the  foundation-stone  of  tbe 
Church,  that  hath  seven  eyes  upon  Him  (Zech.  iii.  9).  A  perfection  of  wisdom 
and  understanding  in  all  affairs  of  it ;  bfing  anointed  with  the  Spirit  unto  that 
purpose  (Isa.  xi.  3,  4).  Yea,  in  Him  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge  (Col.  ii.  3),  it  having  pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him  all  fulness  should  dwell 
(Col.  i.  19),  so  that  there  can  be  no  defect  in  His  laws  and  administrations  on  this 
account.  3.  They  are  righteous,  because  they  are  easy,  gentle,  and  not  burdensome. 
(1)  His  commands  are  all  of  them  reasonable,  and  suited  unto  the  principles  of  that 
natural  obedience  we  owe  to  God  ;  and  so  not  grievous  unto  anything  in  us,  but  that 
principle  of  sin  and  darkness  which  is  to  be  destroyed.  (2)  His  commands  are  easy, 
because  all  of  them  are  suited  to  that  principle  of  the  new  nature,  or  new  creature, 
which  He  worketh  in  the  hearts  of  all  His  disciples.  (3)  His  commands  are  easy, 
because  He  continually  gives  out  supplies  of  His  Spirit,  to  make  His  subjects  to 
yield  obedience  to  them.  (4)  This  rule  and  administration  of  Christ's  kingdom  ia 
righteous,  because  useful  and  profitable  to  His  subjects.  They  make  them  holy, 
righteous,  such  as  please  God  and  are  useful  to  mankind.  (5)  Their  end  manifests 
them  to  be  righteous.  The  worth  and  equity  of  laws  are  taken  off  when  low  and 
unworthy  ends  are  proposed  to  induce  men  to  observe  them.  But  these  of  the  Lord 
Christ  direct  unto  the  highest  end,  propose  and  promise  the  most  glorious  rewards. 

V.  The  righteous  administrations  of  the  Lord  Christ  in  His  government  pro- 
ceed ALL  from  His  own  habitual  righteousness  and  love  thereunto  (see  Isa. 
xi.  1-7).  VI.  God  is  a  God  in  especial  covenant  with  the  Lord  Christ,  as  He 
18  Mediator,  God  Thy  God.  VII.  The  collation  of  the  Spirit  on  the  Lord 
Christ,  and  His  glorious  exaltation,  are  the  peculiar  works  of  God  the 
Father.  "  God,  Thy  God,  hath  anointed  Thee."  VIH.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
SINGULARLY  IN  THIS  UNCTION.  This  is  that  which  the  apostle  proves  in  sundry 
instances,  and  by  comparing  Him  with  others  who  in  the  most  eminent  manner 
were  partakers  of  it.  IX.  All  that  serve  God  in  the  work  of  building  the 
Church,  according  to  His  appointment,  are  anointed  by  His  Spirit,  and  shall 
BE  rewarded  by  His  power  (Dan.  xii.  3).  X.  The  disciples  of  Christ,  especially 
THOSE  who  serve  Him  IN  His  Church  faithfully,  are  His  companions  in  all  His 
brack  and  glory.    {John  Owen,  D,D.)        Christ't  kingdom : — Christ  is  an  eternal 


CHAP.  I.]  HEBREWS.  4& 

King,  BO  is  no  angel,  therefore  is  to  be  honoured  above  them.  Thus  having  made 
mention  of  His  kingdom,  then  He  describeth  it  more  at  large,  that  though  we  could 
imagine  easily  that  angels  in  honour  deserved  the  name  of  kings,  yet  such  a  kingdom 
no  angel  could  ever  have  ;  an  everlasting  throne,  a  righteous  sceptre,  exalting  truth, 
beating  down  iniquity :  in  worthiness  whereof  God  hath  anointed  this  king  with 
gladness  above  all  other,  and  hath  called  Him  by  the  name  of  God  Himself.  lu 
this  Scripture  there  are  four  special  things  spoken.  First,  He  is  called  God  alone, 
and  without  addiiions,  even  as  the  prophet  Isaiah  (Isa.  ix.  7)  also  calleth  Him  the 
mighty  God.  By  which  warrant  of  the  prophets  being  a  most  sure  word,  the 
apostles  are  bold  to  give  to  our  Saviour  Christ  the  name  and  power  of  the  living 
God  (John  i.  2,  xx. ;  1  John  v.  20;  Eom.  ix.  4;  Col.  ii.  6).  The  second  thing 
here  attributed  to  Christ  is,  that  His  kingdom  is  everlasting,  So  the  prophet  Isaiah 
had  said  (Isa.  ix.  7).  The  same  testimony  the  angel  gave  of  His  kingdom  when  he 
came  to  the  Virgin  Mary  (Luke  i.  33).  And  how  can  this  be  possibly  applied  unto 
Solomon  so  directly  against  the  Scripture,  that  the  sceptre  should  be  taken  once 
away,  not  only  from  the  house  of  Solomon,  but  from  all  the  tribe  of  Judah  ?  And 
how  could  they  not  see  with  their  eyes  the  ruin  of  that  kingdom  and  the  throne  of 
Solomon  quite  forgotten.  The  third  thing  attributed  here  to  Christ  is,  that  the 
sceptre  of  righteousness  is  the  sceptre  of  His  kingdom,  according  as  David  saitb 
(Psa.  xcvii.  2).  And  the  meaning  of  these  words  is  after  expressly  added — "Thou 
hast  loved  righteousness  and  hated  iniquity."  This  is  the  sceptre  of  righteousness 
which  He  speaketh  of,  that  is,  that  His  government  shall  be  without  all  respect  of 
persons,  a  ministry  of  justice,  and  true  judgment,  even  according  to  the  will  of  God 
His  Father,  with  whom  there  is  no  acceptation  oif  the  person  of  a  man.  And  how 
can  they  attribute  this  to  Solomon  ?  They  know  how  Solomon  did  fall  away  so  far 
from  righteousness,  and  hated  iniquity  so  Uttle  ere  he  died,  that  he  became  a  notable 
idolater.  And  how  was  his  government  in  such  justice  when  the  whole  people  came 
after  to  Rehoboam  his  son,  and  said :  "  Thy  father  did  make  our  yoke  giievous,  now 
therefore  make  thou  the  grievous  servitude  of  thy  father  lighter,  and  we  will  serve 
thee  "  (1  Kings  xii.  4).  The  fourth  thing  here  spoken  of  our  Saviour  Christ  is,  that 
for  this  cause  God  hath  anoiuted  Him  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  His  fellows. 
For  this  cause,  saith  the  Scripture,  because  Thou  lovedst  so  much  justice,  what  mean 
they  still  to  think  here  upon  Solomon,  and  of  such  reward  of  his  righteous  rule, 
except  they  would  have  the  Scriptures  false  that  bear  witness  of  Him.  "  He  had 
turned  [as  the  prophet  saith]  judgment  into  wormwood."  And  how  standeth  it  that 
he  was  anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness  ?  that  is,  with  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  above 
his  fellows,  when  many  kings  of  Judah  have  greater  praise  of  God  than  he  ?  and 
scarce  any  did  fall  from  God  so  giievously  as  he.  Now  one  refuge  behind,  which 
they  think  they  have,  is  nothing  at  all.  They  will  say  that  all  this  was  spoken  in 
respect  of  his  beginning,  in  which  he  was  famous,  with  this  oil  of  gladness  above  his 
fellows,  and  above  all  the  world.  True  it  is  in  respect  of  his  government  at  the  first ; 
but  are  not  the  words  plain  that  they  are  not  meant  of  any  that  should  begin  well 
and  then  fall  back  ?  For  saith  not  the  text,  that  this  sceptre  of  justice  shall  be  in 
His  kingdom  for  ever?  Now,  where  Christ  is  set  out  thus  a  King  for  ever,  we  are 
taught  not  by  days  and  times  to  measure  His  commandments,  but  to  hold  them 
without  change  as  the  government  for  ever  of  His  eternal  kingdom,  for  it  is  too  gross 
folly  for  us  to  say  He  is  still  our  King  if  we  dare  abrogate  His  laws,  for  He  is  our 
Ruler  for  ever,  and  yet  without  Him  we  will  make  laws  continually  7  Was  it  ever 
heard  among  earthly  kings  that  subjects  could  either  repeal  or  change  their  prince's 
laws  ?  or  make  laws  without  them  in  their  own  kingdom  ?  or  can  there  be  greater 
treason  than  to  conspire  for  such  a  lewd  liberty  ?  And  now  to  the  end  we  may  the 
more  willingly  do  this,  both  we  and  our  kings  whom  God  hath  set  over  us, 
let  us  mark  this  further  which  the  apostle  addeth  of  our  Saviour  Christ,  that 
"  His  sceptre  is  a  sceptre  of  righteousness  " ;  meaning  (as  I  said)  that  His  govern- 
ment is  all  in  truth  and  righteousness.  And  here  let  ua  also  mark  how  the 
apostle  setteth  out  this  righteousness  of  Christ.  "  Thou  hast  [saith  he]  loved 
righteousness,  and  hated  iniquity."  This  is  general  in  all  duty  which  we  do  unto 
God,  to  love  the  obedience  with  all  our  heart  and  soul,  and  to  hate  all  the  trans- 
gression and  sin.  So  the  prophet  David  saith  :  "  I  hate  vain  inventions,  bnt  Thy 
law  I  love."  And  again,  "  Thy  law  I  love,  but  I  hate  falsehood  and  abhor  it "  (Psa. 
cxix.  113,  163).  Even  so  must  we  hate  iniquity  if  we  love  righteousness,  and  abhor 
falsehood  if  we  love  the  truth.  And  this  is  that  eternal  law  which  God  gave  from 
the  beginning.  I  will,  saith  He,  set  enmity  between  thee  and  the  woman,  and 
between  thy  seed  and  her  seed.     It  foUoweth  in  the  end  of  this  seventh  verse,  "  Thj 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [chap.  i. 

God  hath  anointed  Thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  Thy  fellows."  In  this  we  may 
learn  another  notable  cause  why  we  should  acknowledge  Christ  our  only  King  and 
Lawgiver.      Because  He  is  thus  anointed,  that  is,  in  Him  dwelleth  all  fulness  of 
grace,  and  the  treasures  of  all  wisdom  and  Imowledge  are  hid  in  Him  ;  so  that  leave 
Him,  leave  His  laws,  leave  His  sceptre,  we  leave  instruction,  we  leave  righteousness, 
we  leave  eternal  life.   And  here  note  that  the  oil  of  gladness  is  the  gift  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  ;  gladness  to  ourselves,  because  it  filleth  us  with  joy  in  the  Lord,  and  glad- 
ness to  others  because  it  poureth  grace  into  our  hps,  to  comfort  the  weak-hearted, 
and  to  make  us  a  sweet  savour  of  life  onto  life,  to  all  that  hearken  unto  us.      (E. 
Deering,  B.D.)        The  Messiah's  throne : — I.  A  thbone  suggests  many  a  sad  and  yet 
many  a  brilliant  contrast.    When  one  thinks  of  thrones,  one  cannot  but  compare 
how  frail  have  been  the  noblest  thrones  that  emperors  and  kings  have  sat  on,  but 
how  enduring  that  throne  on  which  the  Lamb  is  enthroned  for  ever  and  ever. 
Alexander's  throne  is  a  mere  word  in  history  ;  the  throne  of  Ctesar  has  passed  into 
the  hands  of  a  miserable  superstitious  priest.     Thrones  that  once  awed  the  world  by 
their  majesty,  and  from  which  voices  came  that  shook  the  nations,  are  relics  stored 
in  museums,  or  studied  by  inquisitive  antiquaries.     The  occupant  of  this  throne,  we 
read  in  this  passage,  is  God.    If  Deity  were  not  the  occupant,  if  Omnipotence  were 
not  its  foundation,  the  past  history  of  this  throne  would  be  a  prophecy  of  its  ever- 
lasting duration.     Sin  rushed  against  it  at  the  Fall ;  Satan  predicted  its  overthrow  ; 
one  would  have  thought  it  could  scarcely  withstand  the  force  of  an  element  that  had 
thrust  itself  into  the  world  in  spite  apparently  of  God.  Infidelity  has  assailed  it  with 
all  its  might.     "  He  must  reign,"  it  is  truly  said,  "till  he  has  made  all  His  enemies 
His  footstool."    II.  But,  in  the  second  place,  let  me  notice  a  great  element  in  this 
throne — its  righteousness.     "A  sceptre  of  righteousness."     We  are  told  in  Scrip- 
ture that  all  the  laws  that  come  from  it  are  righteous  laws ;  that  its  mercy  is 
righteous,  that  its  blessings  are  righteous,  that  its  whole  economy  is  righteous.   And 
all  thrones  on  earth  partake  of  the  strength  of  this  just  in  the  ratio  in  which  they 
reflect  its  glorious  character.     Wlmt  a  great  truth,  that  just  in  proportion  as  true 
rehgion   saturates  the  masses  of  Great  Britain,  in  the  same  proportion  does  it 
become  strong,  united,  lasting !   Let  us  now  see  where  and  over  whom  Christ  reigns. 
1.    He  reigns  in  the  world ;  His  throne  is  in   the  midst  of  the  nations.     Over 
the  world  He  does  not  yet  reign,  for  it  is  not  yet  universally  reclaimed.  In  the  world 
He  does  reign,  or  the  world  would  go  absolutely  to  ruin.   Things  that  are  wrong  He 
restrains  ;  tilings  that  He  permits  He  oven  ules  to  His  own  glory.    Depend  upon  it, 
Christ  is  in  history  ;  Christ  is  in  its  every  chapter.  His  presence  in  its  every  winding. 
His  power  giving  direction  to  its  every  movement ;  and  the  explanation  of  all  that 
is  inexplicable  now.  He  tells  us  that  we  shall  know  hereafter.     2.  But  Christ's 
throne,  or  His  reigning  or  governing  presence,  is  not  only  in  the  world,  it  is  also  in 
the  Church.  What  is  good  in  it  He  inspires ;  what  is  evil  in  it  He  overrules.  Again, 
every  open  door  for  the  spread  of  the  gospel  in  the  visible  Church  results  from  the 
iijfluenca  of  the  throne.     The  free  course  that  is  given  to  the  Scripture  is  also  the 
creation  of  Him  who  watches  over  the  destinies  of  His  own,  and  provides  for  the 
spread  of  the  everlasting  gospel.  Because  Christ's  throne  is  in  that  Church,  we  expect 
the  increase  of  that  Church.      The  darkness  that  now  broods  over  the  magnificent 
lauds  of  the  East  shall  one  day  be  dissipated,  and  the  rays  of  a  rising  sun  of  Right- 
eousness  shall  be  reflected  from  mosque  and  minaret,  over  the  length  and  breadth 
of  Eastern  Christendom.  The  deadly  superstition  that  now  broods  over  the  Western 
nations  of  the  earth  is  soon  to  be  scattered.    3.  Let  me  ask  now,  in  conclusion,  is 
this  throne,  so  precious  in  the  world  and  in  the  Church — that  makes  us  see  all 
things  adverse  or  friendly,  co-operating  or  contributing  only  to  its  greater  grandeur 
and  magnificence— in  your  hearts?     Is  Christ  your  Prophet  that  teaches  you,  your 
Priest  that  pleads  for  yoa,  your  King  that  rules  over  you  ?    Do  you  see  Him  in  all 
that  betides  you  as  individuals,  present  in  the  tiniest  rivvulet  of  private  Ufe  as  truly 
as  in  the  great  cataracts  of  national  history  ;  in  the  individual  Christian's  heart  a 
presence  as  precious  as  in  the  government  of  the  world ;  in  the  development  of  the 
Church,  in  the  spread  of  His  kingdom  and  the  glory  among  all  nations?    Do  you 
find  your  afflictions  sanctified  to  you  ?  do  you  feel  your  losses  and  your  crosses 
weaning  you  from  earth  and  winning  you  to  God?     (J.  Gumming,  D.D.).         Hath 
anointed  Thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness. — Christ's  holiness  and  unction  : — Jesus  as 
mediator  is  advanced  by  God,  not  only  above  all  men,  but  also  above  all  angels. 
In  handling  of  this  point — 1.  I  shall  speak  of  the  hoUness  of  Christ ;  His  unction, 
which  is  the  consequent  and  fruit  of  it.     I.  The  holiness  of  Christ,  both  as  to 
Hia  PERSON  AND  OFFICE.     1.  As  to  His  person.     There  we  must  consider  the  original 


CHAP.  I.]  HEBREWS.  61 


Loliness  of  His  natures,  Divine  and  human.  Divine ;  He  is  called  "  A  just  God  and 
a  Saviour  "  (Isa.  xlv.  21).  Human ;  He  was  wholly  free  from  that  original  oon- 
tat;ion  wherewith  others  that  come  of  Adam  are  defiled  (Luke  i.  35).  Now  add  to 
this  His  perfect  actual  obedience  to  God  both  in  heart  and  life,  and  this  either  to  the 
common  law  of  duty  that  lieth  upon  all  mankind,  for  it  *'  became  Him  to  fulfil  all 
ligiiteousness"  (Matt.  iii.  15),  or  that  particular  law  of  mediation  which  was  proper 
to  Himself  (chap.  v.  8),  "  Though  He  were  a  Son,  yet  He  learned  obedience  by  the 
things  He  suffered  " ;  by  which  He  answered  the  end  of  the  law  which  we  have 
broken,  and  was  also  the  meritorious  cause  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  by  which  all 
blessings  are  conveyed  to  us  (2  Cor.  v.  21).  Well,  then.  His  personal  holiness  did 
make  Him  acceptable  to  God,  and  should  make  Him  amiable  to  us.  2.  Now  let  ua 
Fee  how  He  showetli  this  love  to  holiness  and  hatred  to  iniquity  in  His  office  as  well 
as  in  His  pirson.  The  general  term  whereby  this  office  is  expressed  is  mediator. 
The  three  particular  functions  are  those  of  prophet,  priest,  and  king.  (1)  As  to  the 
general  term  mediator,  whose  work  it  is  to  make  peace  between  God  and  man,  all 
that  He  did  therein  was  out  of  His  love  to  righteousness  and  hatred  of  iniquity.  So 
much  we  are  told  (Dan.  ix.  24).  Now,  because  His  heart  was  so  much  set  upon  this, 
God  "  anointed  Him  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  His  fellows."  (2)  Come  we  to 
tiiose  three  particular  functions  wherein  this  office  is  exercised,  those  of  prophet, 
priest,  and  king,  (a)  As  a  Prophet,  by  His  doctrine  He  showeth  that  He  loveth 
righteousness  and  hateth  iniquity,  for  the  whole  frame  of  it  discovereth  and  breatheth 
out  nothing  else  but  a  hatred  against  sin  and  a  love  to  holiness  (John  xvii.  17 ; 
Psa.  cxix.  140).  All  the  histories,  mysteries,  precepts,  promises,  threatenings,  aim 
at  this  one  business,  that  ^in  may  be  subdued  in  as,  and  brought  into  disrepute  in 
the  world.  (6)  His  priestly  office  consists  in  His  oblation  and  intercession,  as  the 
High  Priest  under  the  law  did  both  offer  sacrifice  and  intercede  for  the  people.  Now 
what  was  the  intent  of  Cbrist's  sacrifice  but  to  put  away  sin  ?  (chap.  ix.  26),  (3) 
The  next  thing  is  a  King.  He  is  one  whose  heart  was  so  set  upon  the  love  of 
righteousness,  and  the  hatred  of  all  iniquity,  that  He  would  come  as  a  prophet  Him- 
Belf  to  teach  the  lost  world  how  to  become  holy  again.  And  as  a  priest  to  die  for 
tiie  guilty  world  to  reconcile  them  to  God.  Surely  He  was  fit  also  to  rule  the  world. 
There  are  two  parts  of  government — laws  and  actual  administration.  His  laws  are 
all  good  and  equal,  the  same  with  His  doctrine.  As  He  giveth  notice  of  these  things 
as  a  Prophet,  so  He  giveth  charge  about  them  as  a  King.  Now  in  the  righteous 
ordering  the  affairs  of  His  kingdom  He  showeth  Himself  to  be  one  that  loveth 
righteousness  and  hateth  iniquity.  As  the  laws  are  good  and  equal,  so  the  admini- 
Btration  is  right  and  just.  Well,  then,  we  must  neither  rebel  against  His  govern- 
ment nor  distrust  His  defence ;  for  Chiist  administereth  justice  in  His  kingdom, 
defending  the  good,  and  destroying  the  wicked,  and  He  will  in  time  earnestly  espouse 
the  cause  of  all  holiness  and  righteousness.  II.  The  unction  of  Christ,  which  is 
the  consequent  fruit  of  the  former.  1.  The  author  of  this  unction — "  God,  even  Thy 
God."  Is  this  sp(iken  to  Him  as  God  or  man  J  It  may  be  true  in  both  senses. 
But  especially  is  this  spoken  of  Him  as  Mediator,  so  Christ  is  one  of  God's  con- 
federates. The  redemption  of  sinners  is  not  a  work  of  yesterday,  nor  a  business  of 
chance,  but  well  advised,  and  in  infinite  wisdom  contrived.  There  was  a  preparatory 
agreement  to  that  great  work  before  it  was  gone  about,  and  therefore  it  should  not 
be  slighted  by  us,  nor  lightly  passed  over.  2.  The  privilege  itself ;  to  be  anointed 
with  the  oil  of  gladness.  It  noteth  His  solemn  exaltation  and  admission  to  the 
exercise  of  His  office.  By  oil  all  agree  is  meant  the  Spirit,  by  which  Christ  was 
anointed.  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  upon  Me  because  He  hath  anointed  Me  " 
(Luke  iv.  18).  (1)  Christ  was  anointed  at  His  conception  in  His  mother's  womb, 
when  He  was  sanctified  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  (2)  Again,  Christ  may  be  said  to  be 
anointed  at  His  baptism,  which  was  the  visible  consecration  to  His  office,  when  the 
Holy  Ghost  descended  upon  Him  "in  the  form  of  a  dove"  (Matt.  iii.  16,  17, 
John  i.  33).  (3)  He  may  be  said  to  be  anointed  at  His  ascension,  when  He  received 
of  the  Father  the  promise  of  the  Spirit  to  pour  Him  forth  upon  His  disciples  (Acts 
ii.  33).  This  I  take  to  be  the  sense  here,  His  glorious  exaltation  at  the  right  hand 
of  God,  where,  being  possessed  of  all  power.  He  joyfully  expecteth  and  accomplisheth 
the  fruits  of  His  redemption.  I  am  the  more  confirmed  in  this — (a)  Because  the 
exaltation  of  Christ  is  as  it  were  His  welcome  to  heaven  after  all  the  sorrows  of  His 
humiliation,  (b)  The  term,  "the  oil  of  gladness,"  implieth  it;  for  that  was  the 
entertainment  of  honourable  guests  invited  to  a  feast.  3.  The  persons  anointed. 
(1)  One  singular  in  this  unction,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  There  are  two  sorts  of 
privileges — (a)  Some  things  only  given  to  Christ,  not  to  us  ;  as  the  name  above  all 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  u 

names  to  be  adored  (Phil.  ii.  9) ;  to  be  the  Head  of  the  renewed  State  (Eph.  L  21), 
the  Saviour  of  the  body  (Eph.  v.  23)  ;  to  have  power  to  dispense  the  Spirit,  to  ad- 
minister providences,  &c.  All  this  is  proper  to  Christ ;  neither  men  nor  angels  share 
with  Him  in  these  honours.  (6)  There  are  other  things  given  to  Christ  and  Hi& 
people  ;  as  the  sanctifying  and  comforting  Spirit,  the  heavenly  inheritance,  victory 
over  our  spiritual  enemies,  the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh ;  these  are  given  to  u& 
and  Him ;  only  God  doth  grace  His  Son  above  His  fellows.  "  That  He  might  be 
the  firstborn  among  many  brethren  "  (Rom.  viii.  29).  (2)  Others  are  admitted  to 
be  partakers  of  this  grace  in  a  lower  degree,  called  "  His  fellows."  They  are  also 
dignified  and  graced  by  God  above  the  rest  of  the  world,  but  not  as  Christ  was.  Two 
things  I  will  observe  here — (a)  They  must  be  His  consorts  and  fellows.  Sometimes 
they  are  called  "  His  brethren  "  (cbap.  ii.  11) ;  sometimes  members  of  His  mystical 
body)  Eph.  i.  22,  23),  sometimes  joint-heirs  with  Christ"  (Rom.  viii.  17) ;  meaning 
thereby  all  believers,  who  are  companions  with  Him  both  in  grace  and  glory,  (bj 
That  all  these  may  have  somewhat  of  this  imction  according  to  their  measure  and 
part  which  they  sustain  in  the  body  (1  John  ii.  20).  I  shall  exhort  you  to  two 
things.  1.  To  holiness.  If  there  were  no  more  than  that  it  is  pleasing  to  Christ, 
and  visibly  exemplified  in  His  own  person,  this  should  induce  us.  It  was  love  to 
holiness  and  hatred  of  sin  that  brought  Him  out  of  heaven,  and  put  Him  on  th& 
work  of  our  redemption.  Nothing  doth  more  urge  as  to  do  a  thing  than  love,  or  to 
forbear  it  than  hatred.  These  were  Christ's  motives  to  undertake  the  redemption 
of  sinners.  Now  we  should  love  what  He  loveth,  and  hate  what  He  hateth.  2.  To 
look  after  more  of  this  unction.  He  is  Christ  the  anointed  of  God ;  we  must  be 
Christians.  "The  disciples  were  called  Christians  first  at  Antioch  "  (Acts  xi.  26)  ; 
anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  power,  that  we  may  understand 
the  mind  of  God,  consecrate  ourselves  to  Him,  work  His  work,  and  engage 
in  His  warfare,  fighting  against  the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh,  till 
we  triumph  with  Christ  in  heaven.  All  must  be  anointed.  (1)  This 
is  the  fruit  of  Christ's  exaltation,  to  send  and  shed  abroad  the  Spii;t. 
(2)  Consider  the  necessity  of  this  grace.  Our  love  to  righteousness  and  hatred  of 
iniquity  is  the  fruit  of  this  unction,  for  affections  foUow  the  nature.  (3)  Consider 
the  utility  and  profit.  It  is  for  our  comfort.  The  Spirit  is  called  "  the  oil  of  glad- 
ness," because  the  benefits  whereof  we  are  partakers  are  matters  of  great  joy  (Acta 
xiii,  52).  {T.  Manton,  D.D.)  Christ's  superiority  to  all  created  beings  : — I.  Tub 
CHABACTEB  OF  Christ.  1.  He  lovcd  righteousncss.  He  loved  it  so  as  to  be  a  per- 
fect model  of  all  righteousness.  2.  But  not  only  did  Christ  love  righteousness.  He 
hated  iniquity.  A  man  may  admire  excellency  of  character,  and  yet  not  follow  in 
the  steps  in  which  it  walks;  he  has  not  the  moral  courage  to  forsake  hia  evil 
courses  ;  and  there  is  in  the  very  best  of  men  at  seasons  not  that  perfect  hatred  <'f 
sin  which  is  proper.  Not  so  our  Emmanuel.  He  hated  iniquity  with  as  much 
force  as  He  loved  righteousness ;  not  only  sometimes,  but  always.  II.  Christ's 
CONSEQUENT  EXALTATION.  1.  The  apostle  wishes  to  show  the  Hebrews  the  fact  of 
Christ's  unequalled  superiority  to  every  created  being  in  the  universe.  He  therefor© 
commences  by  showing  Christ's  superiority  to  men,  to  the  greatest  of  men  that 
have  ever  lived — such  as  the  patiiarchs  and  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament  dispen- 
sation. They  were  indeed  vastly  superior  to  the  men  of  the  age  in  which  they 
lived —superior  in  point  of  gifts  and  endowments  from  heaven,  superior  in  respect 
of  the  close  intercourse  they  held  with  God.  But  they  were  infinitely  inferior  to 
the  Son,  as  Christ  is  here  called  by  way  of  pre-eminence,  by  whom  God  has  spoken 
to  us  in  these  latter  days.  2.  But  not  only  does  Paul  here  prove  Christ's  superiority 
to  men,  he  proves  the  superiority  of  Christ  to  angels  also.  What  does  the  terra 
"  angel  "  mean  ?  It  signifies  messenger.  The  Son  is  greater  thcin  a  messenger. 
III.  Christ's  relationship  to  us.  We  are  Christ's  "  fellows."  This  singular 
expression  is  supposed  by  some  to  refer  to  the  angels ;  but  at  once  that  supposition 
is  rebutted  by  the  fact  that  Christ  took  not  on  Him  the  nature  of  angels ;  He 
assumed  the  nature  of  man,  and  assuming  the  same  nature  seems  to  be  the  mean- 
ing of  the  expression.  Man  has  a  fellowship  of  nature  with  Christ ;  all  men  have 
this  fellowship ;  but  the  redeemed — namely,  all  those  that  are  sanctified  by  Christ's 
Spirit — are  Christ's  fellows  in  the  highest  and  closest  sense.  (R.  Jones,  B.A.y 
Oil  of  gladness: — This  Hebraism  here  intendeth  two  things — 1.  The  excellency  of 
this  gladness.  No  external  joy  is  to  be  compared  to  it.  2.  The  quantity  of  that 
joy.  It  far  surpasseth  all  the  joy  that  ever  was  or  can  be,  which  is  manifested  in 
this  phrase  following — "  above  Thy  fellows."  This  epithet  "  gladness  "  is  attributed 
to  this  oil  in  relation  to  Christ  the  head,  and  to  all  believers  His  members.    It  hutb 


«HAP.  1.]  HEBREWS. 


relation  to  Christ  in  two  respects.  (1)  As  it  quickened  Him  up  and  made  Him 
joyful  in  all  His  undertakings  for  our  redemption,  Christ,  being  by  His  Father 
deputed  to  His  function,  most  willingly  and  joyfully  undertook  and  managed  it. 
*'  As  a  bridegroom  coming  out  of  his  chamber.  He  rejoiced  as  a  strong  man  to  run 
His  race  "  (Psa.  xix.  5).  When  He  cometh  into  the  world,  He  saith,  "  I  delight  to 
do  Thy  wDl,  0  My  God"  (Psa.  xl.  8).  When  He  was  in  the  world,  He  said,  "  My 
meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Me,  and  to  finish  His  work  "  (John  iv,  34). 
(2)  Gladness  hath  relation  to  Christ  by  reason  of  the  fruit  that  sprouted  out  from 
thence.  His  coming  into  the  world,  and  doing  and  enduring  what  He  did,  waa 
matter  of  rejoicing  to  others,  in  which  respect  the  prophet  exhorteth  the  daughter 
of  Zion  to  shout,  and  to  be  glad  and  rejoice  with  all  the  heart  (Zeph.  iii.  14 ;  Zech. 
ix.  9).  And  the  angels  that  brought  the  first  news  of  Christ's  birth  do  thus  pro- 
claim it:  "Behold,  I  bring  you  good  tidings  of  great  joy,  which  shall  be  to  all 
people"  (Luke  ii.  10).  This  epithet  "  gladness  "  hath  relation  to  the  members  of 
Christ  in  two  respects.  (1)  Aa  the  things  whereof  in  Christ  they  are  made  par- 
takers are  matters  of  great  joy  ;  for  so  many  and  so  great  are  the  benefits  which 
believers  receive  from  Christ  by  virtue  of  that  anointing,  as  they  very  much 
rejoice  their  hearts.  Many  of  these  benefits  are  expressly  set  down  (Isa.  Ixi  1-3). 
Other  benefits  are  in  other  places  distinctly  noted — as  redemption  from  sin,  recon- 
ciliation with  God,  justification  in  His  sight,  adoption,  regeneration,  sanctification, 
and  the  end  of  all,  eternal  salvation.  If  any  things  in  the  world  cause  true  joy 
and  gladness,  surely  these  effects  which  flow  from  the  anointing  of  Christ  will  do 
it.  (2)  As  the  members  of  Christ  are  quickened  up  by  that  Spirit  which  cometh 
from  Him,  do  and  eudure  readily,  willingly,  cheerfully,  jojfully  what  the 
Lord  calls  them  unto  (Psa.  cxxii.  1 ;  1  Chron.  xxix.  9,  17).  It  is  said  of  those  on 
whom  the  Spirit  rested,  that  "  they  received  the  Word  gladly,"  and  mutually  com- 
municated together  "  with  gladness."  On  a  like  ground  the  eunuch  whom  Philip 
baptized,  and  Paul's  jailor,  are  said  to  rejoice  (Acts  viii.  39 ;  xvi.  34).  This  fruit 
of  joy  gives  evidence  of  a  believer's  union  with  Christ,  and  of  the  abode  of  Christ's 
Spirit  in  him  ;  for  the  Spirit  is  as  oil,  of  a  diffusing  nature.  Hereby  we  may  gain 
assurance  to  our  own  souls,  and  give  evidence  to  others  of  the  Spirit  that  is  in  us. 
So  did  the  Jews  of  old  (1  Chron.  xxix.  9),  and  Christ's  disciples  (Luke  x.  17),  and 
Christians  in  the  primitive  Church  (Heb.  x.  34 ;  Phil.  ii.  17,  18).  (W.  Gouge.) 
The  gladsomeness  of  Jesus : — If  a  lighted  candle  be  brought  into  a  room,  we  know 
that  Ught  streams  from  it.  Lihes  bring  perfume,  and  spices  exhale  odours,  from 
their  very  nature.  The  whole  character  of  Jesus,  when  closely  examined,  is  one 
that  must  have  filled  any  dwelling  where  He  came  with  gladness  and  comfort. 
(H.  W.  Beecher.)  Eighteousness  and  gladness  : — Happiness  is  the  light  which 

flashes  from  the  glittering  armour  of  righteousness.  If  holiness  be  the  priest,  let 
happiness  be  the  ephod  of  blue,  and  scarlet,  and  fine-twined  linen,  hung  with  bells 
and  pomegranates,  which  be  wears  for  glory  and  for  beauty.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Thou,  Lord,  in  the  beginning  hast  laid  the  foundation. — Christian  cosmogony  : — I. 
Thb  universe  had  an  origin,  and  is  destined  to  have  a  dissolution,     n.  Both 

THE     origination    AND    THB    DISSOLUTION     OF     THB     UNIVERSE     ARE     ATTRIBUTABLE     TO 

Christ.  This  fact  serves — 1.  As  an  argument  for  His  Godhood.  2.  To  present 
nature  in  new  aspects  of  attraction.  III.  Christ  remains  unalterable,  from  the 
origin,  through  all  the  dissolutions,  of  the  universe.  No  change  in  His — 1. 
Being.  2.  Thoughts.  3.  Heart,  {Homilist)  Messiah  and  Nature  : — I.  Christ 
before  thb  creation.  1.  The  material  universe  is  not  eternal.  2.  The  universe 
was  created.  3.  The  universe  had  many  beginnings.  Earth,  sun,  stars,  &c. 
Christ  was  before  all  beginnings.  II.  Christ  at  the  creation.  He  was  the 
Creator,  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest ;  from  the  least  to  the  greatest ;  from  the 
first  to  the  last.  The  Kedeemer  was  the  Creator ;  therefore— 1.  There  are  no  con- 
tradictions between  Nature  and  Christianity.  2.  There  are  striking  corre- 
spondences between  Nature  and  Christianity.  IH.  Christ  within  the  creation. 
The  stars  are  the  jewels  on  His  brow ;  the  sky  His  flowing  train ;  the  flowering 
landscapes,  the  shining  seas,  the  gorgeous  clouds — the  fine  needlework  and  wrought 
gold  oS  His  imperial  raiment.  IV.  Christ  after  the  creation.  The  raiment  waxes 
old,  and  is  folded  up,  giving  place  to  robes  more  glorious  still ;  but  He  who  is  the 
fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever._  Lessons: 

1.  Bemember  that  in  the  gospel  we  come  nearer  to  Christ  than  we  do  in  nature. 

2.  Let  us  build  on  Christ.  {W.  L.  Watkimon.)  Jesus  Christ  the  came  and  the 
coiisumviator  of  all  things  .-—I.  The  substance  of  the  ascription.  We  are  trans- 
ported   to  a  distant  period,  ere  time  had,  in  its  stiictest  sense,  begun,  or  tha 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

mechanism  of  its  notations  had  received  shape  or  being.  The  revolutions  of  thia 
firmament  had  not  commenced,  nor  was  there  a  sign  for  seasons.  Nothing  is 
necessary  but  God.  All  else  is  but  an  effect  of  His  pleasure  and  power.  He  com- 
posed matter,  He  gave  life.  He  communicated  spirit.  Some  of  the  stages  in  this 
formative  process  may  be  traced.  He  "  laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth,"  a  figure 
which  signifies  His  stability.  That  stability  rests  on  certain  laws  which  He  has 
ordained.  "  The  heavens  are  the  works  of  His  hands."  He  garnished  them  with 
all  their  exquisite  furniture,  drew  their  orbits,  studded  their  stars.  His  "  fingers  " 
wove  that  splendid  web.  And  "  when  we  consider  His  heavens,"  with  what  admira- 
tion are  we  overwhelmedj  Magnitudes,  distances,  systems,  paralleUsms,  still  rise 
upon  us.  Did  He  " lay  the  foundations  of  the  earth"?  "He  was  in  the  world, 
and  the  world  was  made  by  Him,  and  the  world  knew  Him  not."  But  this  ascrip- 
tion not  only  predicates  His  creative  greatness,  and  how  He  produced  the  entire 
universe — it  proclaims  that  all  these  effects  are  now  at  His  disposal  and  under  His 
control.  1.  Observe  His  independence  of  them.  They  are  not  built  for  eternity. 
They  shall  •'  perish."  Their  perdition  and  change  shake  not  His  throne  nor  obscure 
His  glory.  2.  Mark  His  identity  among  them.  They  are  the  subjects  of  incessant 
revolution  and  variation.  There  is  a  constant  disturbance  in  the  natural  system  ; 
things  take  new  forms  and  circumstances ;  and  though  principles  are  unaltered, 
the  dispositions  under  them  are  often  the  most  strange  and  unexpected.  The  very 
elements  around  us  "  wax  old  as  doth  a  garment."  Only  Deity  can  say,  "  I  chaige 
not."  "  This  is  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life  " — essential  and  exhaustless,  "  the 
same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever  I  "  3.  Trace  His  power  over  them.  Nothing, 
once  dependent  and  derived,  can  exist  in  defiance  of  His  will.  And  what  is  there, 
or  can  there  be,  which  this  category  does  not  include  ?  Thus  is  the  Lord  Jesus 
exhibited  to  us !  He  "  lays  the  foundations  of  the  earth  "  ;  "the  heavens  are  the 
works  of  His  hands" :  amidst  their  change  and  portended  ruin  He  "  remains  " — He 
is  "  the  same " ;  with  Him  awaits  the  dissolution  of  all  things.  He  must  be 
greater  than  those  operations  wbith  He  commands.  He  must  be  apprist  d 
of  the  final  causes  of  those  operations  which  proceed  from  His  unaided  sLill, 
and  the  more  so,  as,  otherwise,  he  might  close  the  great  consummation  wiih 
their  imperfect  fulfilment.  Who,  then,  is  this?  " God  over  all."  H.  The  valdb 
OF  THE  ARGUMENT.  We  must,  at  this  point  of  the  projected  proof,  look  into  our 
mind.  There  we  behold  a  law,  or  a  certainty  of  mental  condition,  which  conducts 
us  back  from  any  result  to  a  causative  power.  1.  Every  effect  of  Divine  power 
must  be  inferior  to  that  power — that  is,  must  be  finite.  It  can  create  no  rival 
being.  2.  Upon  the  creative  claim  Gud  has  always  been  pleased  to  found  His 
challenge  of  supremacy  and  exaction  of  worship.  Then,  whoever  is  Jesus  Christ, 
since  the  heavens  are  works  of  His  hands.  He  is  supreme,  is  entitled  to  worship,  is 
authorised  to  require  our  service,  is  gloriously  independent,  and  will  pronounce  the 
sentence  of  our  endless  destiny  !  3.  The  works  of  creation  are  designed  to  be 
monumental  of  their  immediate  Author.  When  we  investigate  them,  they  speak  a 
splendid  panegyric  to  His  fame.  "  The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God,  the 
firmament  showeth  His  handywork."  They  are  the  signals  of  His  might,  and  skill, 
and  love.  HI.  The  enforcement  of  the  conclusion.  The  truth  of  the  theme 
being  once  allowed,  its  influence  will  be  instantaneous.  Not  for  a  moment  can  it 
remain  an  indifferent  sentiment.  Let  it  be  believed,  and  all  the  doctrines  of  the 
gospel  follow  in  a  necessary  order,  as  very  corollaries.  1.  It  is  supposed  by  the 
Incarnation  ;  but  what  illustrations  does  that  marvel  derive  from  the  descriptions 
of  the  text!  "  He  laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth,"  where  He  hath  not  a  place 
to  lay  His  head.  "  The  heavens  are  the  works  of  His  hands,"  though  they  beat  on 
Him  with  their  tempests  and  chill  Him  with  their  dews  ;  though  their  stars  hold 
watch  over  Him  when  His  soul  is  sorrowful  unto  death.  He  formed  the  instru- 
ments of  all  the  suffering  He  endured.  He  caused  the  thorns  to  grow  which  were 
knotted  round  His  brow ;  He  prepared  the  worm  that  spun  the  flaunting  attire 
which  mocked  His  person ;  He  sent  down  into  the  ground  the  fibres  of  the  trfie 
which  gave  the  wood  that  was  fashioned  for  His  cross ;  He  veined  the  mine  whose 
ore  was  converted  into  nail  and  spear-head  to  transfix  His  flesh  ;  He  withdrew  the 
restraints  from  our  fallen  nature,  and  let  loose  all  its  enmities  on  Himself !  2. 
The  character  of  that  expiation,  which  is  the  first  quality  and  intention  of  His 
death,  will  be  greatly  determined  by  a  representation  such  as  this.  The  merit  of 
an  atoning  act  will  altogether  depend  on  the  disposition  and  worthiness  of  the  party 
who  presents  it.  Nor  can  the  mediation  of  every  party  be  allowed.  Hi{,4»  attributes 
of  worthiness  must  inhere  in  him  who  taki.-s  up  the  qu.irrel  and  offers  the  vindica- 


CHA».  I.]  HEBREWS.  65 

tlon  of  it.  Who  shall  interpose  between  God  and  man,  between  the  dishonoured 
law  and  the  offender?  That  Surety  must  have  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  tremendous 
dilemma.  And  did  not  He,  who  "  laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth,"  understand 
the  moral  order  which  He  then  established,  the  holy  law  which  He  gave,  the  system 
of  good  which  He  instituted  ?  Who  could  be  equally  cognisant  of  its  excellence  ? 
Who  could  be  equally  intent  upon  its  restoration?  3.  He  who  has  dune  all  this 
achievement  of  power  and  goodness  in  creating  the  universe,  designed  our  redemp- 
tion to  be  the  great  object  and  glory  of  it.  Shall  a  sphere,  in  those  "  heavens  which 
are  the  works  of  His  hands,"  refuse  its  music  to  the  Saviour,  or  withhold  to  swell  the 
triumph  of  His  salvation  over  the  earth  whose  "foundations He  has  laid  "?  Again 
— ami  far  sweeter  and  more  majestic  than  that  natal  peal  which  floated  above  our 
new  created  world-  let  the  morning  stars  sing  together,  and  the  sons  of  God  shout 
for  joy  1  4.  This  Creator-Saviour  must  have  the  direction  of  all  mundane  affairs. 
He  knoweth  the  way  that  we  take.  He  telleth  our  wanderings.  He  seeth  of  what 
we  have  need.  He  is  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities.  He  is  able  to 
succour  us  when  we  are  tempted.  Neither  in  Ufe  nor  death  can  we  stray  out  of 
His  dominion  or  beyond  His  care.  To  the  verge  of  that  earth  whose  foundations 
he  has  laid  ;  to  the  bend  of  those  heavens  which  are  the  works  of  His  hands — how 
safe  are  His  disciples  I  This  is  your  triple  security,  ye  who  put  your  trust  in  this 
great  God  your  Saviour  !  All  things  are  for  your  sakes  1  All  things  work  together 
for  your  good  1  6.  An  immutability  most  tender  and  amiable  is  opposed  by  this 
subject  to  all  our  fluctuating  circumstances.  Who  has  never  found  occasion  of 
complaint  against  human  fickleness?  Wlio  has  never  known  a  mortifying  cold- 
ness where  his  heart  had  lavished  all  its  store  of  love?  Oh,  then,  to  take  these 
words  with  us,  and  looking  up  to  Him  who  loves  unto  the  end,  what  a  relief  our 
wrung  soul  finds  as  it  cries,  *•  Thou  art  the  same  I  "  Bereavement  is  one  of  the 
heavi- st  portions  of  our  lot.  What  sepulchres  lie  along  our  pathl  Oh,  then,  to 
speak  this  assurance,  and  in  it  to  feel  that  nothing  is  lost  while  this  is  left,  "  Thou 
remainest !  "  Age  brings  with  it  decay  and  infirmity,  misgiving  and  irresoluteness, 
slight  and  inattention,  physical  depressions  and  mournful  reviews.  Sense  has 
failed  in  its  varied  gratifications,  and  the  heart  is  smitten  with  a  desolateness.  Oh, 
then,  to  turn  from  all  beside,  to  clasp  our  feeble  hands,  to  raise  our  dimming  eyes, 
and  with  our  tremulous  accents  to  exclaim,  "  Thy  years  shall  not  fail  1  "  How 
sweet  are  these  supports  1  What  a  Saviour  is  ours  1  {R.  W.  Hamilton,  D.D.) 
Christ's  glory  in  creation: — Where  it  is  said  further,  "  God  laid  the  foundations  of 
the  earth,  and  the  heavens  are  the  works  of  His  hands."  We  must  consider  the 
creation  of  the  world  is  thus  attributed  to  God,  not  only  because  all  things  were  made 
by  Him,  but  because  He  hath  so  made  them  that  they  carry  a  mark  imprinted  in 
them  of  the  power  and  Godhead  of  the  Creator.  When  I  see  the  heavens  I  must 
see  His  greatness,  who  was  able  to  set  such  a  covering  over  the  earth.  When  I 
behold  the  earth,  I  must  behold  His  providence,  who  hath  ordained  such  a  place 
of  nourishment  for  all  creatures.  When  I  look  upon  the  unchangeable  course  in 
which  all  things  are  established,  I  must  look  upon  His  constant  wisdom  and  good- 
ness, who  in  a  steadfast  purpose  hath  extended  His  mercies  over  all  His  works.  In 
the  least  of  all  the  creatures  of  God,  when  I  see  wisdom,  power,  glory,  more  than 
all  the  world  can  reach  their  hands  unto,  let  me  humble  mys-elf  under  His  high 
majesty,  before  whom  no  king,  no  prince,  no  power  of  the  world  hath  any  account ; 
but  all  nations  before  Him  are  as  nothing,  and  they  are  accounted  unto  Him  less 
than  nothing,  and  lighter  than  vanity  itself.  Another  thing  here  we  have  to  con- 
eider,  that  tbe  apostle  teacheth  the  excellency  of  Christ  in  respect  of  His  con- 
tinuance, before  whom  the  heaven  and  earth  are  but  a  moment ;  for  so  in  this 
comparison  he  speaketh  of  their  age  as  a  thing  of  nothing — "  They  shall  perish, 
they  shall  wax  old  as  a  garment,  they  shall  be  folded  up  as  a  vesture  " — making  all 
the  continuance  of  the  heaven  to  be  vanity,  and  of  none  account ;  for  although  it 
may  seem  he  mif;ht  have  made  his  comparison  with  things  of  a  more  expressed 
show  of  vanity  than  a  garment,  as  to  have  compared  them  with  smoke,  with  the 
shadow  of  smoke,  with  the  dream  of  a  shadow,  or  such  like;  yet  in  comparing  the 
time  of  the  heavens,  which  are  so  many  ages,  with  a  gannent  which  is  scarce  a 
year,  it  is  as  clear  a  testimony  all  is  nothing  as  if  all  were  not  a  minute  of  an  hour. 
Besides  this,  the  cause  of  this  comparison  with  a  garment  was  the  similitude  in 
which  God  hath  set  the  heavens,  who  hath  spread  them  like  a  curtain,  and  mad« 
them  as  a  covering  to  all  His  creatures ;  it  was  not  to  make  the  comparison  less  in 
show  of  their  vanity.  Then  here  let  us  be  wise-hearted  as  the  prophet  was,  as  oft 
as  onr  hope  is  before  our  eyes,  to  see  our  Saviour  Christ  living  for  ever ;  let  us  not 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.i, 

only  confess  that  our  own  age  is  nothing  in  respect  of  Him,  but  let  as  boldly  con- 
tinue even  the  continuance  of  the  heavens,  and  account  all  things  nothing  that 
hath  an  end ;  for  let  the  days  be  never  so  many,  which  yon  can  call  into  account, 
and  multiply  years  into  the  longest  continuance  which  your  thoughts  can  compre- 
hend, that  thousand  thousands  be  before  you,  and  ten  thousand  thousands  are  in 
your  mind,  with  one  word  you  shall  confute  them  all,  and  with  the  breath  of  yoar 
mouth  yoo  may  blow  them  away,  and,  as  the  prophet  saith,  make  them  all  as  a 
garment  that  is  rent  and  worn ;  for  reckon  up  all  thy  thousands  that  thou  canst, 
and  put  this  word  "  past  "  unto  them,  and  where  are  they  now  become  ?  A  thou- 
sand thousand  thousand  years  past,  what  are  they  ?  And  if  time  be  such  a  tyrant, 
to  break  the  delight  of  the  long  age  of  the  very  heavens,  that  the  wise  heart  of  a 
man  doth  say  even  they  are  vanity,  and  wax  old  as  doth  a  garment,  what  foolish- 
ness hath  wrapped  up  all  our  understanding  ?  and  what  blindness  is  in  our  hearts, 
that  we  see  not  our  own  life  what  it  is  ?  And  shall  yet  this  life,  so  short,  so 
troublesome,  so  without  pleasure,  so  fast  hold  us  bound  with  blind  desire,  that  we 
neither  long  for  nor  look  after  Jesus  Chrisst,  who  liveth  ever,  and  bast  cast 
forth  of  His  presence  all  sin,  and  sorrow,  and  death  itself  ?  {E.  Leering,  B.D.) 
They  shall  perish  ;  but  Thou  remalnest. — The  world  as  a  garment : — As  Christ  had 
no  beginning,  so  He  shall  have  no  ending.  The  heavens  shall  decay,  but  not  He. 
He  is  immutable.  They  are  young  and  old  ;  so  is  not  Christ :  He  remains  always 
in  the  same  estate  and  condition.  All  garments  in  the  world  in  the  end  wax  old 
(Deut.  xxix.  5).  So  the  whole  fabric  of  the  world :  there  is  not  that  clearj.ess  of 
light  in  the  sun  and  moon  that  there  was,  not  that  force  and  strength  in  the  stars, 
the  earth  is  not  so  lusty  and  lively.  Old  things  are  not  wont  to  be  had  in  any 
price  or  estimation:  wbo  cares  for  an  old  pair  of  shoes  that  be  not  worth  the 
taking  up  ?  Who  regards  an  old  coat  that  hath  no  strength  in  it,  but  is  ready  to 
be  torn  in  pieces  ?  Who  will  give  much  for  an  old  house,  the  timber  whereof  is 
rotten,  and  it  is  ready  to  fall  on  his  head  ?  Now  is  the  last  age  of  the  world,  it 
hath  continued  many  thousand  years,  it  is  now  as  an  old  house,  an  old  garment 
that  cannot  last  long :  therefore  let  us  not  be  too  much  in  love  with  it.  There 
was  some  reason  why  in  former  times,  when  this  building  was  new  and  strong, 
when  the  coat  and  garment  of  the  world  was  fresh,  fair,  and  of  good  durance,  that 
men  should  set  their  affections  on  it :  but  now  when  the  beauty  and  strength  of 
it  is  gone,  why  should  we  be  enamoured  with  it?  Let  us  use  it  as  if  we  used  it 
not,  and  let  us  long  for  that  day  when  both  the  heavens  and  the  earth  and  we 
ourselves  likewise  shall  be  changed  and  be  translated  with  Christ  into  the  kingdom 
of  glory :  the  heavens  are  most  fitly  resembled  to  a  garment.  Observe  the 
similitude  and  dissimilitude.  1.  A  garment  covers  a  man :  so  do  the  heavens. 
2.  The  substance  of  a  garment  must  be  before,  as  silk,  velvet,  cloth,  else  you  can 
make  no  garment :  but  Christ  made  the  heavens  of  nothing.  3.  A  garment 
must  have  a  form  or  fashion :  so  has  this  an  excellent  one.  4.  A  garment  stands 
in  need  of  mending  :  we  need  be  at  no  cost  nor  labour  in  mending  of  this  garment; 
but  Christ  by  the  power  of  His  providence  upholds  it.  {W.  Jones,  D.D.)  Christ 
the  Creator : — We  Uve  in  a  world  of  change.  The  earth  is  not  the  same  to-day 
as  it  was  ages  ago,  and  shall  be  ages  on.  The  sun  is  radiating  off  its  heat.  The 
moon,  no  longer  as  of  yore,  burns  and  glows,  and  is  but  an  immense  opaque 
cinder,  rsflecting  the  sunlight  from  its  disc.  Stars  have  burnt  out,  and  will.  The 
universe  is  waxing  old,  as  garments  which  from  perpetual  use  become  threadbare. 
But  the  dilapidation  of  the  garment  is  no  proof  of  the  waning  strength  or  slack- 
ening energy  of  the  wearer.  Nay,  when  garments  wear  out  quickest,  it  is  generally 
the  time  of  robustest  youth  or  mankind.  You  wrap  up  and  lay  aside  your  clothes 
when  they  have  served  their  purpose,  but  you  are  the  same  in  the  new  suit  as  in 
the  old.  Creation  is  tlie  vesture  of  Christ.  He  wraps  Himself  about  in  its  ample 
folds.  Its  decay  affects  Him  not.  And,  when  He  shall  have  laid  it  all  aside,  and 
replaced  it  by  the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth.  He  will  be  the  same  for  ever- 
more. With  what  new  interest  may  we  not  now  turn  to  the  archaic  record,  which 
tells  how  God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth.  Those  subHme  syllables,  "Light 
be,"  were  spoken  by  the  voice  that  trembled  in  dying  anguish  on  the  cross.  Eolling 
rivers,  swelling  seas,  waving  woods,  bursting  flowers,  carolling  birds,  innumerable 
beasts,  stars  sparkling  like  diamonds  on  the  pavilion  of  night,  all  newly  made ; 
all  throbbing  with  God's  own  life  ;  and  all  very  good  ;  but,  mainly  and  gloriously 
all  the  work  of  those  hands  which  were  nailed  helplessly  to  the  cross,  which  itself, 
as  well  as  the  iron  that  pierced  Him,  was  the  result  of  His  creative  will.  {F. 
li.  Meyer,  B.A.)        God  ever  the  »ame: — On  every  Mohammedan  tombstone  the 


CHAP.  I.]  HEBREWS.  67 

inscription  begins  with  the  words,  "  He  remains."  This  applies  to  God,  and  gives 
Bweet  comfort  to  the  bereaved.  Friends  may  die,  fortune  fly  away,  but  God 
endures — He  remains.  (Perrine.)  Christ  is  everlasting  and  unchangeable  : — We 
may  learn  the  dignity  of  our  Lord  from  all  the  intermediate  changes  of  the  world 
between  its  creation  and  destruction.  1.  First,  then,  we  may  observe  that  our 
Lord  is  everlasting.  "  They  all  shall  wax  old  as  doth  a  garment,"  but  "  Thy  years 
shall  not  fail."  What  garments  are  to  a  man,  the  universe,  with  all  its  most 
glorious  objects  and  elements,  is  to  the  Lord.  These  His  glorious  garments,  then, 
in  time  shall  wax  old  ;  but  He  who  hath  hfe  in  Himself,  even  as  His  Father  hath 
lite  in  Himself,  shall  continue  still  glorious  as  He  was  in  His  own  glory,  before  He 
formed  them  and  put  them  on.  2.  And  He  is  not  only  everlasting,  but  unchange- 
able. "  As  a  vesture  shait  Thou  fold  them  up,  and  they  shall  be  changed ;  but 
Thou  art  the  same."  He  may  indeed  lay  aside  His  vesture.  But  as  a  sovereign, 
when  after  the  pomp  of  a  public  ceremonial  he  unrobes,  when  his  crown  and 
sceptre  are  deposited  in  their  caskets,  and  his  garments  of  state  are  folded  and  put 
away,  is  a  sovereign  still,  so  our  Lord,  when  He  puts  off  the  earth  and  heavens 
like  a  vesture,  shall  be  "  still  tbe  same."  ♦'  There  are  differences  of  administra- 
tions, but  the  same  Lord."  "Thou  art  the  same":  or,  if  we  closely  follow  the 
original,  "Thou  art  He  " — He,  the  ancient  of  days,  who  speaks  also  by  the  mouth 
of  Isaiah,  "  even  to  your  old  age,  I  am  He  "  :  "  yea,  before  the  day  was,  I  am  He." 
"The  world  passeih  away,  and  the  lust  thereof."  Time's  hurrying  tide  bears 
Bwift  along  our  hopes,  our  joys,  our  vanities;  ourselves,  prone  and  struggling 
upon  its  waters.  As  we  drive  down  upon  the  face  of  that  gloomy  stream,  all  our 
efforts  seem  vain,  nothing  is  firm  around,  on  whatever  we  lay  hold,  the  same 
current  is  carrying  it  away,  by  which  we  ourselves  are  hurried  on  ;  till  imminent 
danger  forces  from  our  souls  the  drowning  cry,  "  Save,  Lord,  we  perish."  The 
Lord  extends  His  hand,  and  sets  our  feet  upon  a  rock.  He  is  Himself  that  Kock. 
He  makes  us,  perishable  creatures  as  we  are,  partakers  of  His  stability.  The 
various  objects  are  carried  rapidly  by  us,  but  we  are  now  upon  solid  ground. 
♦'  The  world  passeth  away,  and  the  lust  thereof  ;  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God 
abideth  for  ever."  (T.  Boys.)  Destructive  agencies  at  workin  the  tcorld  : — Even 
now  agencies  are  at  work  in  God's  material  woiks  tending  towards  the  dissolution 
of  certain  of  them.  Water,  frost,  and  fire  are  all  eating  away  portions  of  the 
world.  But  to  these  will  be  added,  at  the  last,  some  swift  and  suilden  convulsion, 
telling  that  her  end  is  nigh  at  hand.  Probably  no  particle  of  matter  wiU  ever  be 
annihilated ;  and  out  of  the  ruins  of  the  world  it  seems,  from  2  Pet.  iii.  13,  as  if 
"  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth  "  were  to  emerge.  But  stiU,  the  present  world  is 
to  be  utterly  destroyed.  The  green  earth  and  the  azure  heavens  are  to  pass  away. 
Both  shall  be  consumed,  and  hurried  into  wi'eck  and  ruin,  by  the  devastating  fire 
that  shall  usher  in  "the  great  day  of  the  Lord."  But  even  at  this  stage  of  the 
passage  there  is  a  direct  testimony  to  the  surpassing  power  and  majesty  of  Christ. 
"  Thou,"  it  is  said  of  the  Son — "  Thou  shalt  fold  them  up."  Christ,  who,  "in  the 
beginning,"  was  the  Maker,  will,  in  the  end,  be  tbe  Destroyer,  of  the  world.  {A.  S. 
Patterson.)  The  solar  system  perishing  : — Change  is  necessarily  going  on  in 
earth,  sun,  moon,  and  stars.  It  cannot  possibly  be  avoided  where  there  is  motion. 
Day  by  day  the  alteration  progresses.  Millennium  after  millennium  it  advances. 
The  earth  is  not  now  what  it  was  miUermiums  ago.  It  will  not  be  to-morrow  what 
it  was  yesterday,  or  what  it  is  to-day.  The  sun  is  radiating  itself  off,  and  must 
by-aud-by  cease  to  burn.  "  It  is  simply,"  says  Sir  William  Thomson,  "  an  incan- 
descent mass  cooling."  Stars  have  already  burnt  out,  or  wiU.  The  moon  no 
longer,  aa  of  yore,  burns  and  glows.  It  is  now  an  immense  opaque  cinder,  only 
reflecting  the  sunlight  that  is  thrown  from  afar  upon  its  disc.  (J.  Mori^on,  D.D.) 
Thou  art  the  same. — The  immutability  of  Christ: — I.  What  Cheist  is  in  Him- 
SELP.  1.  As  to  His  person.  He  is  the  eternal  Son  of  God,  who  existed  from  ever- 
lasting (John  i.  1).  2.  As  to  His  ofiice.  He  is  Mediator  between  God  and  man, 
fitted  for  it  by  assuming  our  nature  into  a  personal  union  with  the  Divine,  that  aa 
God  and  man  in  one  person  He  might  transact  with  both.  II.  What  believebs 
HAVE  FOUND  HiM  TO  BE  UNTO  THEM.  1.  It  was  Christ  who  awakened  them  to  a 
sense  of  their  lost,  miserable  state  (Eph.  ii.  1).  2.  Who  received  them  upon 
their  applying  to  Him  for  mercy  and  salvation,  and  believing  on  Him,  Hepardo'ipd 
all  their  sins  (Col.  i.  14).  3.  Who  adopted  them  into  His  family,  and  gave  theui 
the  earnest  of  their  inheritance  (Eom.  viii.  15,  16).  4.  Thus  passing  into  th« 
number  of  His  children.  He  continues  to  bless  them,  by  subduing  their  corrup- 
tions, &o.    5,  At  death  He  receives  their  departing  spirits.     UI.  As  lo  all  xoia. 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I, 

THE  TEXT  IS  APPLICABLE  TO  Chkist.  "  Thou  ait  the  Bame,"  <feo.  1.  He  is  tha 
same  in  Himself,  as  to  His  person  and  offices.  2.  As  to  His  interest  in  Hia 
Father,  and  acceptance  with  Him  :  the  Beloved,  in  whom  He  is  always  well 
pleased  (Matt.  iii.  17).  3.  And  with  regard  to  us,  the  same  as  to  His  ability  and 
willingness  to  save  (chap.  vii.  25).  4.  The  merit  of  His  death  is  the  same  it  ever 
was  (Rev.  v.  6).  6.  And  He  is  the  same,  to  pardon,  justify,  sanctify,  and  glorify. 
Application :  1.  If  He  is  the  same,  let  every  Christless  sinner  seek  an  interest  in 
Christ  with  the  same  diligence  that  ever  any  did ;  such  have  the  same  necessity, 
and  the  same  encouragement.  2.  Despair,  under  the  gospel,  is  most  unreason- 
able ;  seeing  Christ  came  to  save  sinners,  assures  of  Hia  having  saved  the  chief 
of  sinners,  and  represents  Himself  as,  after  all,  the  same.  3.  Let  believers  rejoice 
in  Christ  as  unchangeable.  {J.Hannam.)  Of  GhrisVu  immutability : — Though 
all  these  three  phrases  in  general  intend  one  and  the  same  thing,  namely,  immu- 
tability, yet  to  show  that  there  is  no  vain  repetition,  they  may  be  distinguished 
one  from  another.  1.  "  Thou  remainest,"  pointeth  at  Christ's  eternity  before  all 
times ;  for  it  implieth  His  being  before,  in  which  He  still  abides.  2.  "  Thou  art 
the  same,"  declares  Christ's  constancy.  There  is  no  variableness  with  Him  ; 
thus  therefore  He  saith  of  Himself,  "I  am  the  Lord,  I  change  not"  (Mai.  iii. 
6).  3.  "  Thy  years  shall  not  fail,"  intendeth  Christ's  everlastingness ;  that  He 
who  was  before  all  times,  and  continueth  in  all  ages,  will  beyond  all  times  so 
continue.  Thus  these  three  phrases  do  distinctly  prove  the  three  branches  of  this 
description  of  Christ,  "  which  is,  and  which  was,  and  which  is  to  come  "  (Rev.  i. 
4).  This  name  that  Christ  assumeth  to  Himself,  "  I  AM,"  and  this,  "  I  AM  THAT 
I  AM  "  (Exod.  iii.  14),  and  this  also,  "JEHOVAH"  (Exod.  vi.  3),  do  demonstrate 
a  perpetual  continuing  to  be  the  same.  In  this  respect  He  thus  saith,  "  I  the 
Lord,  the  first,  and  with  the  last,  I  am  He  "  (Isa.  xh.  4).  This  immutable  con- 
stancy of  the  Lord  is  confirmed  by  tbis  testimony,  "with  whom  is  no  variable- 
ness nor  shadow  of  turning"  (James  iii.  17),  no  show  or  appearance  of  alteration. 
This  may  be  exemplified  in  all  the  things  that  are  Christ's.  1.  His  essence  and 
being.  This  is  especially  here  intended.  So  also  Exod.  iii.  14.  2.  His  counsel. 
Immutability  is  expressly  attributed  thereunto  (chap.  vi.  17).  "It  shall  stand" 
(Psa.  xxxiii.  11 ;  Prov.  xix.  21 ;  Isa.  xlviii.  10).  It  shall  stand  immutably, 
inviolably.  3.  His  attributes.  Sundry  attributes  for  teaching  sake,  by  way  of 
resemblance,  are  ascribed  to  the  Lord.  In  this  respect  it  is  said,  "  His  compassions 
fail  not"  (Lam.  iii.  22),  "  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever  "  (Psa.  cxviii.  1).  "Hia 
love  is  everlasting  "  (Jer.  xsxi.  3).  "His  righteousness  endureth  for  ever"  (Psa. 
cxi.  3).  So  His  "truth"  (Psa.  cxvii.  2).  So  His  "judgments"  (Psa.  cxix.  160). 
4,  His  "  Word  "  endurtth  for  ever  (1  Pet.  i.  25).  This  is  manifested  in  the  Law, 
whereof  "  not  one  tittle  shall  fail  "  (Luke  xvi.  17),  and  in  the  gospel,  which  is  an 
everlasting  gospel.  5.  His  "  bonds  "  whereby  He  binds  Himself  to  us  are  unalter- 
able as  "promises  "  and  "  oaths."  These  are  the  two  immutable  things  intended 
(chap.  vi.  18),  and  His  covenant  also  (Jer.  xxxiii.  20,  21).  (W.  Gouge.)  Oj  the 
uses  of  Christ's  immutability: — 1.  It  demonstrateth  Christ  to  be  true  God  (Mai. 
iii.  6).  2.  It  distinguisheth  Him  from  aU  creatures,  from  idols  especially  (Isa. 
xli.  4;  xliv.  6).  3.  It  strengtheneth  our  faith  in  all  His  Divine  properties, 
promises,  and  former  works  (Psa.  xliv.  1,  2,  xc.  1,  2;  Gen.  xxxii.  10-12  ;  Heb. 
xiii.  6,  6).  4.  It  instructeth  us  in  an  especial  use  of  God's  former  deahngs  with 
men ;  which  is  in  like  good  courses  to  expect  like  blessings,  and  in  like  evil  courses 
to  expect  like  judgments :  for  the  Lord  is  ever  the  same,  and  ever  of  the  same 
mind  ;  what  in  former  times  was  right  in  His  eyes  and  acceptable  unto  Him,  is  so 
BtUl  (Rom.  iv.  23,  24).  What  formerly  offended  Him  and  provoked  His  wrath, 
still  so  doth  (1  Cor.  x.  5,  6,  &c.).  5.  It  assureth  us  of  His  continual  and  perpetual 
care  of  His  Church  (Matt,  xxviii.  20),  yea,  and  of  the  Church's  perpetual  continu- 
ance (Matt.  xvi.  18).  6.  It  encourageth  us  against  all  attempts  of  enemies  present 
and  to  come  (Psa.  ex.  1 ;  Rev.  ii.  10).  7.  It  teacheth  us  to  do  what  in  us  lieth  for 
perpetuating  His  praise  ;  and  for  this  end  both  to  set  forth  His  praise  ourselves  all 
our  days  (Psa.  civ.  33),  and  also  to  teach  our  posterity  so  to  do  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  5,  6). 
8.  It  directeth  us  bow  to  be  like  to  Christ,  namely,  in  constancy  and  unchunge- 
ableness  in  our  lawful  promises,  oaths,  vows,  and  covenants  (Neh.  v.  12,  13  ;  Psa. 
XV.  4 ;  Eccles.  v.  4 ;  Jer.  xxxiv.  10,  18),  and  in  our  wan-antable  enterprises  (1  Cor. 
XV.  58).  9.  It  admonisheth  us  to  submit  ourselves  to  the  Lord's  ordermg  provi- 
dence  ;  all  our  strivings  against  the  same  cannot  alter  this  purpose  (1  Sam.  iii.  18). 
10.  It  establisheth  such  as  have  evidence  of  their  election  and  calling  against  all 
Satan's   assaults   and  fears  arising  from  our  weak  flesh  (2  Pet.  i.  10),     (Ibid.) 


CHAP.  L]  HEBREWS.  69 

The  unchangeablenest  of  Christ : — I,  Let  as  consider,  what  Christ  is  in  Himself, 
AND  THIS  AS  TO  His  PKBSOM  AND  OFFICE.  1.  As  to  His  persoH,  He  is  the  eternal 
Son  of  God — the  second  Person  in  the  glorious  Trinity — who  had  a  being,  and  a 
▼ery  glorious  one,  before  He  appeared  in  our  world,  even  from  everlasting.  2.  Aa 
to  His  office.  Though  He  was  not  incarnate  till  the  fulness  of  time,  the  office  of 
Mediator  was  what  He  was  early  appointed  to,  and  consented  to  undertake ;  and  so 
He  speaks  of  Himself  as  "set  up  from  everlasting,  from  the  beginning,  or  ever 
the  eaith  was  "  (Prov.  viii.  23).  II.  Let  us  see  what  His  people  have  found 
Him  to  be  unto  them.  III.  That  with  respect  to  both  these,  it  may  be  said 
OF  Him,  "  Thou  art  the  same,  and  Thy  years  shall  not  fail."  1.  He  is  the 
same  in  Himself,  as  to  His  person  and  office,  Qod  in  our  nature,  the  great 
Immanuel,  and  so  the  only  Mediator  between  God  and  man.  2.  The  same  as  to 
His  interest  in  His  Father,  and  acceptance  with  Him :  the  Beloved  in  whom  He 
is  always  well  pleased.  3.  And  with  respect  to  us,  the  same  as  to  His  ability  and 
willingness  to  save.  Application  :  1.  May  it  be  said  of  Christ,  that  "  He  is  the 
same,  and  His  years  fail  not  "  ?  Let  this  put  every  Christless  sinner  upon  looking 
out  after  an  interest  in  Him.  And  this  for  these  two  plain  reasons.  (1)  You  have 
the  same  need  of  Christ  and  interest  in  Him  with  any  that  are  gone  before.  (2) 
You  have  the  same  encouragement  to  come  to  Christ,  under  the  assurance  that  Ha 
is  the  same  as  to  His  person  and  office.  His  fitness  for  His  work,  and  delight  in  it. 
2.  Despair  is  most  unreasonable  in  such  as  sit  under  the  sound  of  the  gospel, 
which  tells  us  of  Christ's  coming  to  save  sinners,  assures  us  of  His  having  saved 
the  chief  of  sinners,  and  represents  Him  as  after  all  the  same.  3.  Let  believers 
rejoice  in  Christ  as  unchangeable.  (D.  Wilcox.)  Christ  immutable: — I.  An 
exalted  view  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  text  certainly  implies — 1.  The  Divinity  of 
His  nature.  To  be  "  the  same,"  is  to  be  unchangeable  ;  but  immutability  is  an 
attribute  of  Deity.  2.  The  immutability  of  His  perfections.  Such  are  the 
amazing  greatness  and  vast  variety  of  the  works  of  creation,  that  their  Author 
must  be  God.  3.  The  perpetuity  of  His  offices.  When  we  speak  of  the  offices  of 
Christ,  we  have  respect  always  to  His  character  as  Mediator,  and  His  great  under- 
taking as  the  Saviour  of  sinners.  (1)  He  assumed  the  office  of  a  Prophet.  In  this 
character  He  went  about  teaching  "  the  worvls  of  eternal  life."  And  He  teaches 
now  by  His  written  Word,  by  the  ministry  of  His  gospel,  and  by  His  Spirit  given 
to  men.  (2)  He  bore  the  office  of  a  Priest.  In  this  view  He  oCfered  Himself  a 
Sacrifice  of  atonement  to  God  the  Father,  for  the  sins  of  all  that  believe.  And  He 
wears  His  priesthood  stiU.  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  who  is  passed  into  the  heavens, 
is  our  "  great  High  Priest " :  as  such.  He  is  "  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our 
infirmities  "  ;  He  knows  the  trial  of  severe  temptation ;  He  bears  us  on  His  heart ; 
He  pleads  for  us  above  :  "  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession."  (3)  He  sustained 
the  office  of  a  King.  In  His  regal  capacity,  all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth  is 
is  given  to  Him.  He  is  constituted  Supreme  Euler.  He  presides  the  Head  of  the 
Church,  and  Head  over  all  things  to  the  Chuich.  He  now  reigns,  and  He  must 
reign,  till  the  tranquillity  of  all  His  friends  be  effectually  secured,  and  till  all  Hia 
enemies  be  subdued  under  His  feet.  II.  The  subject  furnishes  various  reflections, 
by  way  of  improvement.  Is  the  nature  of  Christ  Divine  ?  Are  His  perfections 
immutable,  and  His  offices  perpetual  ?  Is  He  uniformly  "  the  same,"  and  shall 
His  yccars  "not  fail"?  Then — 1.  All  is  well  respecting  the  government  of  the 
world.  Its  government  is  assuredly  wise,  perfectly  and  invariably  right ;  for  it  is 
committed  to  Him  who  ever  Uves,  and  who  lives  for  ever  *'  the  same  "  1  2.  We 
may  rest  assured  of  the  safety  of  the  Church.  Whatever  becomes  of  the  kingdoms 
of  the  earth,  the  Church  is  safe.  For  the  Church  the  world  stands  ;  and  all  events 
are  doubtless  under  the  direction  and  control  of  Him  who  is  "  King  of  nations," 
and  "King  of  saints."  3.  We  are  greatly  encouraged  as  sinners  to  apply  to  Christ 
for  salvation.  Behold  the  glorious  ability  and  fitness  of  the  Son  of  God.  What 
could  you  wish  to  find  in  a  Saviour  which  you  find  not  in  Him  T  4.  Believers 
are  hereby  relieved  under  the  pressure  of  their  trials.  Y'"ou  are  in  a  wilderness, 
among  briars  and  thorns ;  on  an  ocean,  tossed  with  waves  and  tempests.  You  are 
subject  to  painful  anxieties  from  various  quarters.  All  around  is  full  of  change ; 
and  there  is  nothing  beneath  the  sun  on  which  you  can  depend  with  confidence  for 
an  hour.  Be  it  so  ;  there  is  One  who  is  invariably  "  the  same" ;  a  Rock  that  never 
moves ;  a  Refuge  that  never  fails;  and  this  Rock,  this  Refuge,  is  Clirist.  (T.  KiJd.) 
Sit  on  My  rig'ht  hand. — The  exaltation  of  Christ : — I.  The  authority  of  God  thk 
Father  in  the  exaltation  of  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Head  and  Mediator  of  thb 
Church,  is  qreatly  to  be  beoarded  by  believers.     He  says  unto  Him,  "  Sit 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Ichap.  I. 

Thou  at  My  right  hand."  Much  of  the  consolation  and  security  of  the  Church 
depends  on  this  consideration.     II.    The    exaltation   of   Christ  is  the  gbeat 

PLEDGE    OF   THE   ACCEPTANCE    OF   THE    WOBK   OF    MEDIATION   PEEFORMED  IN  THE  BEHALF 

OF  THE  Church.  Now,  saith  God,  *•  Sit  Thou  at  My  right  hand  " ;  the  work  is 
done  wherein  My  soul  is  weU  pleased.  III.  Christ  hath  many  enemies  unto  His 
KINGDOM.  Saith  God,  "  I  wiU  deal  with  all  of  them."  IV.  The  kingdom  and  bulb 
OP  Christ  is  perpetual  and  abiding,  notwithstanding  all  the  opposition  that 
IS  made  against  it.  His  enemies  rage,  indeed,  as  though  they  would  pull  Him 
out  of  His  throne ;  but  it  is  altogether  in  vain.  He  hath  the  faithfulness  and 
power,  the  word  and  right  hand  of  God,  for  the  security  of  His  kingdom.    "V.  The 

END  WHEREnNTO    THE    LORD   JeSUS    ChRIST    WILL   ASSUREDLY   BRING  ALL  HiS  ENEMIiS, 

let  them  bluster  while  they  please,  shall  be  unto  them  miserable  and  shameful,  to 
the  saints  joyful,  to  Himseli  victorious  and  triumphant.  1.  God  hath  promised 
unto  the  Lord  Christ  from  the  foundation  of  the  world  that  so  it  should  be.  And 
it  cannot  be  that  this  word  of  God  should  be  of  none  effect.  2.  The  Lord  Christ 
expects  this  issue  and  event  of  all  things,  and  shall  not  be  frustrated  in  His  expec- 
tation. Having  received  the  engagement  of  His  Father,  He  rests  in  the  foresight 
of  its  accomplishment.  And  thence  it  is  that  He  bears  all  the  opposition  that  is 
made  unto  Him,  and  to  His  kingdom,  with  patience  and  forbearance.  3.  He  is 
Himself  furnished  with  authority  and  power  for  the  accomplishment  of  this  work 
when  and  as  He  pleaseth.  And  He  will  not  fail  to  put  forth  His  power  in  the 
appointed  season.  He  "  will  bruise  them  all  with  a  rod  of  iron,  and  dash  them  in 
pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel."  4.  His  glory  and  honour  require  that  it  should  be 
30.  This  is  a  thing  that  He  is  very  tender  in.  God  hath  raised  Him  up,  and  given 
Him  glory  and  honour,  and  care  must  be  taken  that  it  be  not  lost  or  impaired. 
Now,  if  His  enemies  should  go  free,  if  they  could  by  any  means  subduct  themselves 
from  under  His  power,  or  be  delivered  from  His  wrath,  where  would  be  His  glory, 
where  His  honour  ?  5.  His  saints  pray  that  it  may  be  so,  and  that  both  upon  His 
account  and  their  own.  Upon  His,  that  His  glory,  which  is  dearer  to  them  than 
their  lives,  may  be  vindicated  and  exalted.  Upon  their  own  account,  that  their 
miseries  may  be  ended,  that  the  blood  of  their  fellow-servants  may  be  revenged, 
that  the  whole  Church  may  be  deUvered,  and  all  their  promises  fulfilled.  Now  He 
will  not  disappoint  their  prayers,  nor  frustrate  their  expectations  in  anything, 
much  less  in  those  that  are  of  so  great  importance.  6.  His  enemies  deserve  it  unto 
the  utmost ;  so  that  as  well  Hia  justice  as  His  glory,  and  interest,  and  people,  are 
concerned  in  their  destruction.  In  the  most  of  them,  their  outrage  against  Him  is 
notorious,  and  visible  in  the  eyes  of  men  and  angels.  In  all  of  them  there  is  a 
cruel,  old,  lasting  enmity  and  hatred,  which  He  wiU  lay  open  and  discover  at  the 
last  day,  that  all  shall  see  the  righteousness  of  His  judgments  against  them.  (John 
Owen,  D.D.)  God's  setting  Christ  on  His  right  hand  : — God  was  pleased  thus 
highly  to  exalt  His  Son  in  sundry  respects.  1.  In  regard  of  that  entire  love  which 
as  a  Father  He  did  bear  to  a  Son  (John  iii.  35 ;  v.  20).  2.  In  regard  of  the  low 
degree  of  Christ's  humihation  (Phil.  ii.  8,  9  ;  Eph,  iv.  9,  10).  3.  In  regard  of  that 
charge  which  Christ  undertook  to  provide  for  His  Church,  and  to  protect  it.  Here- 
unto is  He  the  better  enabled  by  that  high  advancement  (Mat.  xxviii.  18-20 ;  John 
xvii.  2).  4.  In  regard  of  the  saints  who  are  Christ's  members,  that  they  might 
with  stronger  confidence  depend  on  Him  (Psa.  Ixxx.  17,  18  ;  2  Tim.  i.  12).  5.  In 
regard  of  His  enemies,  that  He  might  be  the  greater  terror  unto  them,  and  be  more 
able  to  subdue  them  (Psa.  ex.  2).  {W.  Gouge.)  Thine  enemies  Thy  footstool. — 
The  ChurcK's  enemies : — Tell  me,  which  of  us  having  a  long  journey,  by  many 
thieves  and  wild  beasts,  or  passing  the  rocky  seas  in  great  and  violent  storms, 
though  he  escape  a  place  or  two  where  no  thief  is,  nor  any  beast  hath  molested 
him,  yet  at  every  place  of  danger  his  fear  is  still  renewed.  And  though  he  have 
passed  many  high  surges,  and  deep  gulfs  of  water,  yet  at  every  wave  he  is  still 
afraid,  not  careless,  because  he  hath  passed  far,  but  still  careful,  because  there  is 
more  behind ;  and  this  wisdom  we  use  because  we  know  we  may  as  well  fall  toward 
our  journey's  end  and  as  well  be  drowned  before  the  haven's  mouth  as  when  we 
first  began  our  dangerous  voyage.  Even  so  with  .the  Church  of  Christ,  in  which 
this  day  we  confess  ourselves  to  have  our  portion,  from  the  first  day  of  her  pere- 
grination in  earth  till  her  last  entrance  into  glory,  there  is  a  perpetual  hatred 
between  the  serpent  and  her  Head  and  between  the  seed  of  the  serpent  and  her 
children,  in  which  strife  every  one  of  us  particularly  have  our  fight,  so  that  from 
our  mother's  womb  till  we  he  down  in  the  grave  our  hfe  is  a  warfare  upon  earth. 
No  age,  no  condition  of  life,  no  day,  no  light,  but  brings  his  enemy  with  him,  and 


CHAP.  I.]  HEBREWS.  61 

the  same  enemy  armed  with  sin  and  death,  as  well  against  the  man  of  an  hundred 
years  old  as  against  the  child  that  is  newborn,  and  as  well  we  may  fall  iuto  con- 
demnation throngh  apostasy  of  old  and  crooked  age  as  through  concupiscence  aud 
pride  of  youth.  And  as  the  peril  is  great  so  we  have  heard  the  enemies  are  strong, 
amd  such  as  before  whom  we  are  very  cowards  ;  for  be  we  otherwise  never  so 
valiant  to  endure  pain,  to  quarrel,  to  fight,  to  despise  any  danger,  as  it  is  the 
manner  of  a  great  many  ruffians,  indeed,  but  men  of  good  courage  they  would  be 
called.  Bring  me  one  of  them  in  battle  against  these  enemies  ;  we  have  to  strive 
against  pride,  against  concupiscence,  against  idle  games,  against  all  sin,  and  thou 
shalt  see  no  boy,  no  woman,  no  sick  man  so  very  a  coward.  He  hath  not  the  heart 
to  strike  one  blow,  but  jieldeth  himself  like  a  slave,  and  is  led  away  as  an  ox  to 
the  slaughter-house.  Let  us  therefore  watch,  let  us  pray ;  for  in  this  dangerous 
battle,  in  which  these  strong  men  are  very  cowards,  what  can  we  do  ?  Even  let  us 
deny  ourselves,  and  trust  unto  Him  that  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  His  Father, 
and  He  shall  make  all  our  enemies  our  footstool.  (E.  Leering,  B.D.)  Are  not 
they  all  ministering  spirits  7 — The  Church  and  the  angels.  I.  In  the  light  of  an 
ADMONITION.  1.  Whilst  Christ  is  one,  the  angels  are  many.  2.  Whilst  the  in- 
dividuality of  Christ  is  powerfully  brought  out  in  the  Scriptures, the  angels  flit  past 
us  in  vaguest  form.  3.  Whilst  Christ  is  supreme,  the  angels  are  ministiant.  II. 
In  the  light  of  a  pattern.  1.  The  universaUty  of  their  action.  None  idle.  2. 
The  characteristics  of  their  service.  (1)  Unselfish.  (2)  Unobtrusive.  (3)  Con- 
descending. S.  The  aim  of  their  mission.  They  help  the  saints  to  make  their 
calling  and  election  sure.  IIL  In  the  light  of  coNsoiiATioN.  Think  of  their 
number,  strength,  swiftness,  love.     {W.  L.  Watkinson.)  Ministering  spirits: — 

I.  They  are  spirits.  1.  The  features  in  which  they  differ  from  man.  Greater 
vitality,  power,  knowledge.  2.  Some  of  the  features  which  distinguish  them  from 
each  other.  They  differ  in  the  amount  of  faculty,  in  the  form  of  talent,  in  the 
date  of  their  existence,  in  the  sphere  of  their  agency.  II.  They  are  ministeriko 
spirits.  This  implies — 1.  Activity.  2.  Activity  for  others.  III.  They  are 
ministering  spirits  divinely  commissioned.  How  great  must  He  be  who  directs 
the  movements  of  these  countless  hosts,  at  whose  throne  the  loftiest  of  their 
number  bow  in  humblest  homage,  and  whose  behests  each  counts  it  his  highest 
honour  and  blessedness  to  obey.  IV.  They  are  ministering  spirits  divinely 
COMMISSIONED  TO  HELP  A  CLASS  OP  MANKIND.  1.  Their  ministry  to  man  implies 
that  there  is  some  method  by  which  they  can  help  us.  2.  It  implies  that  man^ 
salvation  is  of  paramount  importance.  3.  It  implies  that  service  to  the  lowest  is 
consonant  with  the  highest  greatness.  4.  It  argues  the  obligation  of  man  to  seek 
the  spiritual   good  of  his  fellows.      (Homilist.)  Ministering  spints:—!.  The 

BEINGS  introduced  TO  OUR  NOTICE.  1.  They  are  purely  spiritual  in  their  nature.  2. 
They  are  pure  and  holy  in  their  character.  II.  The  service  they  perform.  1. 
They  are  called  ministering  spirits  to  indicate  their  employment  in  God's  service, 
and  they  are  said  to  minister  to  those  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation — to  point  out 
the  service  and  assistance  they  render  to  the  saints.  2.  Angels  serve  the  saints 
for  Christ's  sake.  3.  They  sustain  in  time  of  depression.  They  avert  danger  in 
the  path  of  duty.  4.  They  deliver  from  evils  in  a  way  which  displays  the  omni- 
potence of  Him  whom  they  serve,  and  His  love  to  His  people.  5.  They  attend  the 
departing  scene  of  the  believer.  If  a  Lazarus  die,  angels  bear  his  spirit  to  the 
abodes  of  the  blessed.  As  Christ's  servants,  they  delight  to  wait  upon  those  whom 
He  loves,  and  to  conduct  them  to  His  presence.  6.  And  they  shall  at  last  gather 
together  the  elect  from  the  wicked  and  reprobate  at  the  last  day.  (The  Evangelical 
Preacher.)  Angels — ministers  : — 1.  Here  we  may  see  that  the  name  of  a  minister 
is  an  honourable  name.  The  magistrate  is  a  minister,  the  angels  are  ministers, 
Christ  Himself  was  a  minister  when  He  lived  on  the  earth.  We  that  be  the 
ministers  are  servants  to  Christ  the  King  of  kings  ;  therefoie,  think  highly  of  us 
because  of  our  office.  Is  it  a  grace  to  the  angels  to  be  called  ministers,  and  shall 
it  be  a  disgrace  to  us  ?  Nay,  we  will  glory  in  it,  and  shame  shall  light  on  them 
that  contemn  the  ministers  of  Christ.  2.  W^hose  ministers  are  the  angels  ?  They 
be  our  ministers,  they  minister  for  our  sakes,  and  what  be  we  in  comparison  of  the 
angels  ?  They  are  spirits,  we  flesh  and  blood ;  they  holy,  we  unholy ;  they  im- 
mortal, we  mortal ;  they  in  heaven,  we  on  earth  ;  yet  they  be  our  ministers.  They 
minister  to  Christ  as  to  their  Lord  and  Master ;  to  us  as  to  their  fellow-servants. 
But  what  an  honour  is  this  to  wretched  and  sinful  man !  As  if  the  King  should 
command  an  honourable  Lord  of  his  privy  council  to  wait  on  a  poor  man  in  the 
•ountry,  to  conduct  him  from  the  court  to  his  own  house.    The  angels  are  of  God's 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t 

Court  in  heaven,  and  see  His  face  continually.  We  are  silly  worms  on  earth,  yet 
the  Lord  hath  appointed  them  to  attend  on  as,  to  be  oar  nurses,  to  carry  us  in 
their  arms,  that  we  dash  not  our  foot  against  a  stone.  Let  us  praise  and  magnify 
God,  that  hath  provided  snch  keepers  for  as.  3.  What  an  unspeakable  comfort 
is  this  for  us  I  What  a  tower  of  defence  against  Satan  and  his  angels  I  As  there 
be  bad  angels  to  hurt  us,  so  there  be  good  angels  to  defend  us.  4.  Since  the  angels 
are  ever  present  with  us,  let  us  beware  of  grieving  them  by  sin.  {W.  Jones,  D.D.) 
Angels — ministering  spirits  : — Angels  are  spirits  which  serve  the  Lord  for  Hia 
Church's  safety.  If  yet  we  will  be  vain  still,  and  think ;  yea,  but  what  are  arch- 
angels, principalities,  powers,  rules,  thrones,  dominions  ?  What  are  Cherubim 
and  Seraphim  ?  All  these,  howsoever  they  be  called  in  divers  respects  diversely, 
they  are  all  angels  in  condition  and  nature,  as  they  are  here  so  defined.  For  if  any 
archangel,  throne,  or  dominion,  or  any  other  name  that  is  named,  were  any  way 
greater  than  an  angel,  all  this  disputation  of  the  apostle  were  nothing  worth  ;  for 
how  could  it  prove  the  excellency  of  Christ  above  all  creatures,  because  He  is 
greater  than  angels,  if  Cherubim  or  Seraphim  or  any  archangel  were  also  greater 
than  an  angel?  And,  therefore,  that  the  reason  of  the  apostle  may  be,  as  it  is, 
strong  and  unanswerable,  we  must  confess,  all  blessed  spirits  whatsoever  they  be, 
they  be  all  this,  and  this  is  their  glory,  that  they  be  God's  ministers  for  the  safety 
of  His  children.  This  doctrine  the  prophet  David  teacheth  also  very  plainly  (Psa. 
xxxiv.  8 ;  xci.  11).  And  according  as  this  is  God's  word  and  His  promise,  so  we 
have  many  examples  how  He  hath  at  all  times  justified  His  faith  in  the  perfor- 
mance of  it,  that  we  might  not  stagger  in  this  doctrine  of  angels.  The  patriarchs, 
the  people  of  Israel,  the  prophets,  the  apostles,  the  saints  of  the  New  Testament, 
our  Saviour  Christ  Himself ;  we  have  seen  how  the  angels  have  been  with  them 
in  dangerous  tiaies,  and  ministered  the  help  of^  God  unto  them.  Now,  touching 
the  manner  how  the  angels  of  God  execute  this  ministry,  even  as  it  is  not  hard 
unto  the  Lord  in  the  battles  of  men  to  save  with  many  or  with  few,  so  God  sendeth 
out  His  angels,  more  or  less,  even  as  He  will,  that  it  might  be  known  the  power  is 
the  Lord's.  When  Jacob  feared  before  his  brother  Esau,  God  sendeth  to  him  a 
host  of  angels  to  comfort  him.  When  Elisha  was  beset  with  the  great  host  of  the 
King  of  Syria,  and  his  servant  was  now  exceedingly  afraid,  Elisha  prayed  to  have 
his  eyes  opened,  that  he  might  see  the  help  of  God  which  was  present  with  tliem, 
and  he  saw  immediately  the  mountain  full  of  horses  and  chariots  round  about 
Elisha,  which  were  God's  angels  sent  for  the  prophet's  safeguard.  When  our 
Saviour  Christ  is  in  distress  and  anguish,  God  sendeth  many  angels  which  do 
minister  unto  Him.  And  so  He  testifieth  of  the  usual  work  of  God  common  to  all 
His  saints,  and  appUeth  it  particularly  unto  Himself  in  reproving  Peter,  who 
would  needs  draw  his  sword  to  maintain  His  cause.  *'  Thinkest  thou,"  saith  He, 
"  that  I  cannot  now  pray  unto  My  Father  and  He  will  give  Me  more  than  twelve 
legions  of  angels  ?  "  And  as  thus  God  sendeth  out  a  great  multitude  for  the  safety 
of  one,  so  contrariwise  sometimes  He  appointeth  but  one  for  the  safety  of  many. 
So  God  sent  an  angel  to  deliver  Israel  out  of  Egypt,  and  to  guide  them  through 
the  terrible  wilderness  ;  and  ever  after  in  all  their  troubles,  when  they  called  upon 
Him,  "  the  angel  of  His  presence,"  as  the  prophet  Isaiah  saith,  "  was  their 
Deliverer" ;  and  when  they  should  enter  the  land  of  promise,  God  sent  an  angel  to 
drive  out  the  Canaanites  before  them.  When  the  army  of  the  King  of  Ashur  came 
and  besieged  Jerusalem,  God  sent  an  angel  who  delivered  the  city,  and  in  one 
nij^ht  slew  185,000  of  the  Assyrians.  When  David  numbered  the  people  and 
procured  the  wrath  of  God,  God  sent  an  angel  into  Jerusalem,  who  slew  with  the 
pestilence  70,000  of  the  people.  So  we  have  many  examples,  where,  upon  occasion, 
to  one  man  God  sendeth  one  angel ;  even  as  it  is  said  of  one  that  He  came  to 
comfort  our  Saviour  Christ  in  the  garden.  To  Lot  God  sent  two  angels,  so  to  the 
women  that  came  to  the  grave  of  our  Saviour  Christ  two  angels  appeared,  and  told 
them  He  was  risen  again.  When  the  apostles  looked  after  our  Saviour  Christ  at 
His  ascension  into  heaven,  two  angels  appeared  unto  them,  to  teach  them  what 
they  had  to  do.  When  God  would  destroy  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  He  sent  three 
angels  to  Abraham  to  tell  him  of  it.  In  the  vision  that  Ezekiel  had  of  the  des- 
truction of  the  city,  God  sen^leth  out  six  angels  to  execute  that  judgment.  And 
why  is  all  this  diversity  ?  To  the  end,  no  doubt,  we  should  not  be  curious,  but 
rest  in  the  doctrine  which  the  Lord  taught  us,  that  the  angels  are  His  minisfceri, 
f.>r  their  safety  who  shall  inherit  His  kingdom.  The  angels,  of  whom  so  much  wo 
have  spoken,  and  whose  honour  is  such,  that  seeing  our  Saviour  Chri>t  exceedeth 
them,  the  apostle  here  proveth  He  is  the  God  of  glory.     In  that,  I  say,  these 


CHAP.  1.]  HEBREWS.  63 

angels  serve  for  our  safety,  how  great  is  our  safety,  and  what  shall  we  render 
unto  God  for  this  salvation  ?    It  were  exceeding  love  to  give  to  any  man  a  guard 
of  men  about  him.     It  were  more  to  give  him  a  guard  of  princes ;  but  what  are 
men,  what  are  princes,  what  are  kings  in  respect  of  angels,  which  God  hath  made 
to  pitch  above  us?   How  can  we  envy  earthly  blessings,  of  houses,  lands,  servants, 
to  abound  unto  our  brethren,  except  we  be  ignorant  what  God  hath  done  for  us  ? 
And  why  should  we  now  fear  to  be  shod  with  the  preparation  of  the  gospel  of  peace, 
and  go  boldly,  whither  truth,  faith,  holiness,duty  calleth  us?  What  if  the  world  break 
with  hatred,  or  men  swell  in  malice  against  us,  are  the  angels  driven  back  with 
vain  threatenings  ?     Or,  what  if  we  do  fall  before  the  enemy,  and  he  prevail 
against  us,  as  it  happened  to  our  Saviour  Christ  Himself,  is  this  a  want  in  angels 
that  watch  over  us?  or  is  it  not  rather  the  good  will  of  God  that  we  should  die 
with  Christ  the  sooner  to  reign  with  Him  ?    Last  of  all,  let  us  know  how  this 
glory  is  given  us,  not  of  ourselves,  but  as  we  are  members  of  Christ ;  for  to  Him 
it  doth  properly  belong,  who  is  our  Head.     He  is  the  ladder  which  Jacob  saw  in  a 
dream,  reaching  from  heaven  to  earth,  and  the  angels  ascending  and  descending 
by  it.     So  that  this  honour  is  ours,  as  we  be  Christ's  ;  to  Him  it  appertaineth,  and 
to  us  it  is  given,  as  we  be  made  members  of  His  body  by  faith.     (E.  Deering,  B.D.) 
Ministry  of  angels : — I.    Some  general  remabks   concerning  angels.      1.   They 
possess  high  natural  perfections.     (1)  Extensive  knowledge.     Said  to  be  full  of 
eyes.      Doubtless    have    distinguished   capacities    for    knowledge    and    wisdom. 
Dwell  in  the  clear,  cloudless  region  of  celestial  light.     (2)  Amazing  power.     Said 
to  "  excel  in  strength."    Scripture  presents  several  striking  proofs.     The  immense 
slaughter  of  the  firstborn  in  Egypt,  and  the  destruction  of   the  185,000  of   the 
Assyrian  army  were  effected  by  an  angel.     The  various  judgments  described  in 
the  revelations  are  to  be  executed  by  angels.    (3)  Astonishing  activity.     Doubt- 
less they  can  move  swifter  than  light ;   perhaps  as  rapidly  as  thought  (Dan.  ix. 
3;  XX.  23).     2.  They  possess  great  moral  perfections.     (1)  Spotless  purity.     Often 
called  holy  angels.    Compared  to  hght,  morning  stars.  Sons  of  God,  &g.  (Rev.  xiv. 
10).    (2)  Exalted  goodness.    They  love  God,  and  they  have  displayed  the  greatest 
interest  in  the  affairs  of  men.     (3)  They  are  all  perfectly  obedient.     They  rest 
not,  but  serve  God  inces-^antly.     They  do  His  work  perfectly.     3.  Let  us  notice 
some  general  things  connected  with    angels.      (1)    They  dwell  in   God's  holy 
presence.    The  highest  and  most  gracious  station  occupied  by  created  intelligences. 
(2)  They  are  evidently  diversified  in  rank  and  order.     Hence  we  read  of  angels, 
archangels,  seraphims,  cberubims,  thrones,  powers,  <fec.     (3)  They  are  exceedingly 
numerous  (Dan.  vii.  10 ;  Psa.  Ixviii.  17;  Heb.  xii.  22.)     (4)  They  are  all  glorious  and 
happy.    Possessed  of  perfect  harmony  of  powers,  of  moral  goodness,  and  of  resplen- 
dent beams  of  the  favour  of  God's  favour.    II.  The  objects  and  character  of  theib 
MINISTRY.     1.  Their  ministry  ia  by  Divine  appointment.     "  Sent  forth."    They 
stand  in  God's  presence,  ready  to  obey  His  commands.     They  go  at  His  bidding, 
and  are  entirely  subjected  to  His  wise  and  benevolent  appointments.     2.  The 
objects  of  their  ministry.     "Heirs  of  salvation."     The  children  of  God,  "who 
are  heirs  of  God,"  &o.  (Eom.  viii.  17 ;  1  Pet.  i.  2).     3.  The  character  of  their 
ministry.    To  minister  is  to  serve.     Hence  they  wait  upon  and  communicate  to 
these  heirs  according  to  the  Divine  will  and  pleasure.     They  have  sometimes — 1. 
Been  instructors  (Gen.  zvL  7,  xviii.  2 ;  2  Kings  i.  16 ;  Luke  i.  10 ;  Matt.  L  20 ; 
Acts  viii.   16,    x.    3).      (2)   As  deliverers  (Gen.  xxiL  12,  xix.  29;   Dan.  vi.  22; 
Acts  V.  19,  20,  xii.  7).     (3)  As  comforters  (Dan.  x.  19 ;  Acts  xxvii.  24).     (4)  They 
rejoice  at  the  conversion  of  sinners  (Luke  xv.  10).     (5)  They  bear  the  souls  of  the 
pious  to  glory  (Luke  xiv.  22).     (6)  Angels  wiU  assist  at  the  saints'  coronation,  and 
be  their  companions  for  ever  (Rev.  v.  9-13).    AppUcation. — 1.  How  dignified  and 
happy  are  believers.    2.  Let   us  be  circumspect,  on  account  of  the  presence  of 
angels.    3.  Let  as  try  to  imitate  them  as  far  as  possible  ;  be  as  wise,  holy,  good, 
and  humble  as  angels.     4.  Bless  Qui  for  the  service  of  angels.    5.  Not  trust  in 
them,  or  pray  to  them,  but  in  Jesus  and  in  God  only.     (J.  Burns,  D.D.)        The 
worship  of  God  and  the  service  of  man  : — What  the  text  affirms  is  that  the  angels 
are  at  once  the  worshippers  of  God  and  the  servants  of  men.     Our  Lord  sets  forth 
the  same  idea  when  He  says  that  the  angels  of  the  children  behold  the  face  of  the 
Father  in  heaven.    This  combination  of  worship  and  service  is  of  the  deepest 
interest,  not  only  because  it  exists  in  the  angel  life,  of  which  we  know  bo  little,  but 
because  it  is  what  we  ought  to  aim  at — the  rule  for  all  God's  servants  on  earth  as 
well  as  in   heaven.      I.    In  rendering  service  to  mankind  thet  obey  a  Divine 
COMMAND.    They  are  sent  forth.    The  particulars  of  the  command  we  don't  know. 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 

Their  service,  as  far  as  we  are  concerned,  is  secret  service.  It  might  give  rise  to 
superstition,  and  encourage  false  hopes,  if  we  knew  all  the  ways  in  which  they 
render  aid  to  men.  It  is  enough  to  know  that  their  errand  originates  in  a  word 
from  the  throne.  In  this  respect  their  case  does  not  differ  from  our  own.  There 
is  a  word  from  the  throne  for  us  to  obey.  When  God's  worshippers  on  earth  draw 
near  to  Him,  they  are  met  by  commands  which  point  out  the  duty  they  owe  to 
their  feUow-men.  II.  The  ministbt  of  angels  to  men  is  inspired  and  directed 
BY  A  Divine  example.  The  Being  they  adore  is  the  Infinite  Goodness,  the  Infinite 
Love.  In  watching  the  course  of  human  history  they  have  seen,  perhaps,  more 
clearly  than  we  can,  in  what  wonderful  ways  God  has  carried  out  His  merciful 
designs  towards  our  race.  It  is  said  that  our  Lord  was  "  seen  of  angels,"  as  though 
to  imply  that  in  a  very  special  sense  their  regard  was  fixed  upon  Him.  His  service 
was  a  pattern  for  theirs.  Even  if  they  had  no  special  regard  for  the  children 
before,  they  must  have  learnt  it  in  watching  their  King.  When  Marshal  McMahon 
entered  Milan,  after  the  battle  of  Solferino,  a  little  peasant  girl,  with  a  few  flowers 
in  her  hand,  stepped  out  of  the  crowd  and  offered  them  to  him.  Immediately 
he  reined  up  his  charger,  had  the  little  one  lifted  on  to  his  saddle-bow,  and 
rode  into  the  city  with  her  in  front  of  him.  The  child  was  at  once  the  idol 
of  the  army  and  the  populace.  When  the  King  of  Angels  was  here  they  saw 
Him  take  httle  children  up  in  His  arms,  put  His  hands  upon  them,  and  bless 
them.  Is  it  any  wonder  that  they  are  content  to  watch  over  the  little  ones?  What 
can  be  too  much  to  be  done  for  those  whom  the  King  delighted  to  honour  7  Is  it 
surprising  that  angels  should  rejoice  when  sinners  repent  when  they  know  how  He 
loved  them  ?  But  the  motive  which  operates  with  them  should  operate  with  us. 
Their  King  is  our  King.  To  us  His  love  has  been  revealed  in  bright  and  beautiful 
manifestations.  Indeed,  "  we  a  nearer  interest  claim."  It  is  a  most  flagrant  in- 
consistency that  a  man  should  profess  to  worship  a  loving  God,  a  self-denying 
Saviour,  yet  keep  a  selfish  heart  towards  his  fellow-men — careless  of  the  sins  and 
sorrows  of  the  world,  whilst  he  wraps  himself  round  with  religious  privileges,  and 
dreams  away  his  life  in  the  luxuries  of  spiritual  self-indulgence.  He  may  call  that 
indulgence  worship,  but  it  is  unworthy  of  the  name.  lU.  The  worship  of  the 
ANGELS  prepares  THEM  FOB  THE  SERVICE  OF  MEN.  They  "  cxccl  in  Strength,"  yet 
their  strength  is  not  inherent.  They  derive  their  might  from  the  Mighty  One. 
He  endows  them  with  the  energies  they  employ  for  the  benefit  of  mankind.  The 
sight  of  Him  keeps  fresh  in  them  every  gracious  and  loving  impulse  towards 
the  children  of  men.  So  with  those  who  serve  on  earth.  They  can  only 
maintain  their  capacity  for  service  by  communion  with  their  Lord.  {B.  Bird.) 
Ministration  of  angels : — I.  What  may  be  leabned  of  this  subject  fbou 
ScBiPTUEE.  1.  To  minister  for  our  good,  is  a  part  of  the  ordinary  employ- 
ment to  which  they  are  appointed.  2.  This  is  not  the  work  of  one  angel 
only,  but  "  they  are  all  sent  forth  to  minister  "  (Psa.  xxxiv.  7  ;  Heb.  i. 
14).  3.  They  have  had  distinct  employments  assigned  them  on  different 
occasions,  as  the  honour  of  God  and  necessities  of  His  Church  required  (Luke 
i.  13  ;  Acts  X.  3,  7 ;  xii.  7-11 ;  Dan.  iii.  28).  4.  In  this  office  they  are  servants 
of  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  grt  at  Head  of  the  Church.  5.  Much  of  their  work  is  to 
oppose  the  malice  of  evil  spirits,  who  seek  our  hurt :  and  to  defend  us  from  their 
rage  and  subtlety  (Rev.  xii.  7,  9  ;  Matt.  iv.  11 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  18).  6.  God  by  them 
suggests  good  motions  to  the  minds  of  His  saints.  If  it  be  asked,  how  these  good 
motions  from  angels  may  be  distinguished  from  the  motions  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  His  influence  on  the  minds  of  behevers?  it  is  answered — (1)  Angelic  motions 
are  from  without,  but  the  Spirit  of  our  Father  dwelleth  in  us.  (2)  They  consist 
in  occasional  impressions  ;  and  are  made  by  advantages  taken  from  outward  objects, 
and  the  present  dispositions  of  the  soul ;  whereas  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  His  operations, 
engages  all  the  faculties  of  the  soul,  really  and  immediately  citing  them  to  generous 
dctions,  according  to  their  nature  and  qualities.  (3)  Angels  in  their  suggestions 
communicate  no  strength  to  perform  good  actions ;  they  only  stir  us  up  to  use  the 
strength  we  have  already  in  possession ;  but  the  Holy  Ghost  strengthens  us  with  all 
might  by  His  glorious  power  in  our  inner  man,  and  effectually  works  every  good 
work  in  us.  (4)  Angelical  impressions  are  transient ;  but  the  gracious  influences 
o£  the  Holy  Ghost  are  continual  (John  iv.  13,  14).  7.  They  are  appointed  in 
their  ministry  to  be  witnesses  of  our  obedience,  sufferings,  &c.  (1  Cor.  iv.  9 ; 
1  Tim.  V.  21 ;  1  Cor.  xi.  10).  8.  They  will  attend  Christ  at  His  coming  to  judgment, 
to  deliver  His  friends  from  every  danger,  and  to  execute  the  vengeance  written  upon 
all  His  obstinate  enemies  (1  Thess.  iv.  16;  Matt.  xiii.  30,  41,  49).    n.  Why  God 


CHAP.  I.]  HEBREWS.  65 

0SE3   THE    MINISTRATION   OF   ANOELS    IN     BRINOINQ     BOMB     THE     HEIRS     OF     SALVATION  t 

Doubtless  the  principal  reason  is,  "Father,  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  Thy  sight"  ; 
yet  the  Scriptures  assign  several  others,  such  as — 1.  It  employs  and  manifests  tlie 
obedience  of  the  angels,  that  in  them  the  Church  militant  may  have  a  fair  example. 

2.  Hereby  a  blessed  intercourse  and  fellowship  is  maintained  between  the  several 
parts  of  the  family  of  God ;  consisting  of  saints  on  earth  and  angels  in  heaven 
(Heb.  xii.  22).  3.  To  reproach,  awe,  and  restrain  the  devil.  It  is  inconceivable 
what  mischief  might  be  done  by  this  arch  enemy,  were  it  not  for  the  constant 
vigilance  of  these  holy  watchers  (Kev.  ii.  10).  4.  That  the  saints  may  see  the 
greatness  and  glory  of  redemption,  which  even  the  angels  desire  to  look  into. 
Inferences :  1.  We  should  be  very  careful  to  use  great  sobriety  in  all  our  medi- 
tations  on  the  subject,  and  never  pretend  '*  to  be  wise  above  what  is  written."  2. 
Danger  should  not  deter  us  from  duty.  We  have  the  sacred  word  for  our  guide ; 
let  us  abide  by  that,  and  we  are  safe ;  whether  we  treat  of  angels,  who  are  still 
preserved  holy  and  happy,  or  of  such  as  have  dreadfully  fallen  into  sin  and  misery. 

3.  There  is  no  sufficient  reason  to  beheve  that  every  Christian  has  a  particular 
guardian  angel  appointed  to  take  care  of  him.  It  cannot  increase  our  consolation, 
but  has  a  dangerous  tendency  to  superstition.  4.  Such  is  the  love  and  care  of  God 
towards  His  saints  in  their  present  state  of  trial,  that  He  sends  the  glorious 
attendants  on  His  throne  to  minister  to  them  ;  He  who  gave  His  only  Son  to  die 
for  them,  will  certainly  send  His  holy  angels  to  bring,  them  safe  home  to  the 
purchased  possession.  5.  Let  us  always  remember,  that  in  all  our  approaches 
to  God  as  humble  worshippers,  we  join  with  the  holy  angels,  and  bear  our  part  in 
the  heavenly  concert.  (J.  Hannam.)  Nature  and  employment  of  angeU  : — I. 
Nature  of  anoels.  1.  That  they  are  the  highest  order  of  created  beings  that  we 
have  any  account  of.  They  are  represented,  in  respect  to  their  existence,  as  prior 
and  superior  to  men.  2.  Angels  are  beings  of  superior  power  and  wisdom.  They 
are  called  "  mighty  angels."  They  are  said  to  excel  in  strength.  3.  Angels  are 
fixed  in  a  state  of  permanent  and  superior  holiness.  They  were  once  in  a  state  of 
probation ;  but  what  was  the  test  of  their  obedience  we  are  nowhere  expressly 
informed.  It  is,  however,  very  probable  that  what  proved  the  occasion  of  Satan's 
falling,  was  the  occasion  of  their  establishment  in  holines^s.  They  are  called  the 
elect  angels.  4.  Angels  are  not  encumbered  with  such  gross  bodies  as  we  have. 
The  apostle  calls  them  "  ministering  spirits,"  and  God  says.  He  makes  "  His  angels 
spirits,  and  His  ministers  a  flaming  fire."  5.  That  there  are  various  grades  or  ranka 
of  angels.  Whether  the  distinction  in  the  orders  of  angels  arises  from  any  disparity 
in  their  powers,  or  from  any  distinct  offices  which  they  discharge,  it  is  not  easy  to 
determine.  It  is,  however,  most  agreeable  to  that  beautiful  variety  which  is  every- 
where to  be  seen  in  the  works  of  God,  to  suppose  there  is  a  real  diversity  in  the 
intellectual  powers  of  individual  angels.  And  they  may  be  appointed  to  different 
offices,  according  to  the  difference  in  their  mental  powers  and  capacities.  U.  Theik 
EMPLOYMENTS.  1.  Augels  havo  been  employed  in  bearing  the  messages  of  God  to 
the  Church.  This  was  probably  one  of  their  first  employments  after  the  fall  of 
man.  And  from  this  employment  it  seems  they  took  their  name.  2.  It  was  the 
business  of  singels  to  attend  upon  Christ,  from  the  time  He  came  into  the  world  to 
the  time  He  went  out  of  it.  They  were  devoted  to  His  service,  and  He  culd,  as 
He  intimated,  at  any  time  call  more  than  twelve  legions  of  them  to  His  aid.  3. 
Angels  are  employed  as  executioners  of  God's  wrath,  against  His  enemies  and  the 
enemies  of  the  Church.  4.  It  is  the  employment  of  angels  to  take  particular  care 
of  good  men.  "  Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits  sent  forth  to  minister  for  them 
who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation  ?  "  We  may  not  pretend  to  point  out  all  that  angek 
do  for  particular  saints ;  but  yet  the  Scripture  clearly  mentions  some  important 
services  which  they  perform  for  the  heirs  of  salvation.  (1)  They  often  protect 
them  from  danger.  Lot,  Jacob,  Peter  in  prison.  (2)  They  assist  good  men 
in  their  duties  and  devotions.  They  are  represented  as  present  in  the 
assemblies  of  the  saints.  Two  large  cherubim  were  carved  in  the  temple. 
"  And  within  the  oracle,"  we  read,  "  were  made  two  cherubim  of  olive  tree, 
each  ten  cubits  high."  These  emblems  signified  the  presence  of  angels  in  the 
temple.  Now  if  angels  are  present  with  good  men  in  duty,  they  may  have  the 
power  of  assisting  them  in  their  devotions.  (3)  There  is  reason  to  believe  that 
angels  miLiister  to  saints  in  their  dying  moments.  Improvement ;  1.  Since  angels 
were  created  an  order  of  beings  superior  to  mankind,  we  have  peculiar  reason  to 
admire  the  great  and  discriminating  grace  of  God  in  providing  salvation  for  fallnu 
men,  while  He  sullered  iallea  angels  to  perish  without  remedy.    2.  Since  all  th» 

6 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

angels  are  employed  in  promoting  the  work  of  redemption,  it  must  be  an  immensely 
great  and  important  work.  3.  Since  God  employs  all  the  angels  to  minister  for  the 
benefit  of  saints,  we  may  justly  conclude  that  they  are  very  precious  in  His  sight. 
They  are  His  children,  BUs  heirs,  EUs  jewels,  and  the  richest  treasure  He  has  on 
earth.  4.  Since  God  employs  all  His  angels  to  minister  for  them  who  shall  be 
heirs  of  salvation,  there  is  no  good  ground  to  believe  that  the  departed  spirits  of 
good  men  are  ever  present  in  this  world,  to  take  care  of  the  pious  friends  whom 
they  have  left  behind.  5.  Since  angels  are  ministering  spirits,  sent  forth  to 
minister  for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation,  we  may  justly  conclude  that 
there  is  a  great  change  in  the  circumstances  of  sinners,  as  well  as  in  their  character, 
when  they  become  saints.  6.  Since  angels  are  ministering  spirits,  sent  forth  to 
minister  for  them  who  are  heirs  of  salvation,  they  must  be  fully  acquainted  with 
this  world,  and  with  the  circumstances,  characters  and  conduct  of  mankind  in 
general.  7.  Are  all  the  angels  ministering  spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  to  them 
who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation?  Then  Christians  have  no  ground  to  fear  in 
appearing  on  the  Lord's  side,  and  in  performing  every  duty  He  has  enjoined  upon 
them.  Those  that  are  for  them  are  more  and  mightier  than  those  that  be  against 
them.  8.  Since  angels  are  such  great  and  amiable  beings  as  they  have  been 
represented,  saints  have  a  bright  prospect,  not  only  through  life,  but  through  death 
and  through  a  boundless  eternity.  9.  This  subject  shows  the  sinful  and  miserable 
state  of  all  incorrigible  sinners,  both  in  time  and  eternity.  They  have  no  holy  angels 
to  guide  and  guard  them  in  this  world ;  but  they  are  under  the  power  and  influence 
of  the  god  of  this  world,  the  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the  children  of  disobedience. 
They  are  constantly  growing  in  sin  and  guilt,  by  all  the  Ught  they  have,  and  by  all 
the  mercies  they  enjoy,  and  by  all  the  evils  they  suffer.  The  same  evil  spirits  that 
attend  them  in  life,  wiU  attend  them  at  death,  and  drag  their  unwilling  souls  down 
to  the  chambers  of  eternal  death.  (N,  Emmons,  D.D.)  Angelic  life  in  connection 
with  man  : — Angelic  beings  do  not  appear  now  to  our  eyes,  and  yet  I  do  not  doubt 
that  God  speaks  to  us  now  as  much  as  He  did  to  Abraham,  and  saves  men  now  from 
ruin  as  He  saved  Lot.  And  the  Bible  itself  confirms  this  view.  As  we  pass  on  from 
the  early  history  of  the  Jewish  nation  to  the  later,  the  physical  appearance  of  angels 
is  succeeded  by  the  visionary  appearance  of  angels,  the  conversation  at  the  tent- 
door  by  the  vision  of  Isaiah  and  Ezekiel.  It  is  the  tendency  of  men  in  early  times, 
when  feeUng  is  master  of  intellect,  to  represent  spiritual  impressions  as  sensuous 
impressions  ;  indeed  they  feel  so  strongly  that  they  see,  and  it  is  without  the 
slightest  want  of  truth  that  a  patriarch  would  say  that  he  heard  God's  voice 
speaking  to  him  when  in  fact  he  had  only  received  a  vivid  spiritual  impression. 
The  whole  account  of  Abraham's  intercession  with  the  Lord  is  probably  a  poetic 
account  of  a  real  spiritual  struggle  in  Abraham's  soul,  the  embodiment  in  words  of 
the  questions  and  replies  of  a  passionate  prayer.  1.  The  first  principle,  then, 
contained  in  the  stories  is  that  God  speaks  directly  to  man.  We  look  upon  these 
stories  as  isolated  and  preternatural.  In  this  way  we  take  all  the  comfort  and 
reality  out  of  the  Bible.  That  book  does  not  relate  what  God  did  once  for  men,  but 
what  God  is  always  doing.  If,  in  the  wilderness,  Hagar,  in  the  hour  of  her  bitterest 
desolation  found  that  the  Omnipresent  was  beside  her ;  we  know  now  and  for  ever 
that  wherever  a  mother  bends  in  misery  over  her  dying  child,  there  is  then  with 
her  God's  never-failing  Love.  The  child  may  die,  but  He  is  there  waiting  to  take 
it  to  His  fatherhood,  and  keep  it  for  her  coming.  Oh  1  take  these  Old  Testament 
stories  to  your  hearts.  Eealise  a  Uving  God,  who  penetrates  with  His  presence  and 
His  action  every  moment  of  your  being.  In  whatever  light  we  view  these  accounts 
of  angels,  this  they  suggest  at  least.  There  is  not  a  struggle  of  your  soul  which  is 
not  known  to  Him,  not  a  crisis  in  your  life  which  your  Father  does  not  hang  over 
with  intensest  eagerness,  waiting  for  the  fitting  moment  to  speak.  2.  And  if  this 
be  true  of  our  individual,  so  it  is  also  true  of  our  domestic,  social,  and  national  life. 
When  the  angel  came  to  Monoah's  altar,  the  truth  was  revealed  that  God  takes 
interest  in  each  man's  home ;  that  it  should  be  pure  and  happy,  a  sacred  altar  of 
love,  a  school  for  sympathy  and  forbearance  ;  a  centre  from  which  an  impulse  for 
wider  work  may  spring,  and  whence  self-sacrifice  in  daily  trifles  may  sweM  into  the 
self-sacrifice  of  a  life  for  universal  objects  :  a  place  where  warriors  may  be  trained 
for  the  army  of  Christ  against  the  evil,  a  place  where  the  heavenly  life  may  be 
imaged  forth  by  each  living  in  the  life  of  all.  3.  Nor  is  the  related  interference  of 
angelic  powers  with  social  and  national  movements  without  a  meaning  to  us  now. 
If  it  tells  us  in  the  form  of  certain  stories  that  God  was  watching  over  and  guiding 
Jewish  society  and  Jewish  national  life,  it  tells  us  that  God  ia  watching  over  and 


CHAP.  1-]  HEBREWS.  er 

directing  English  society  and  the  English  nation,  every  society  and  every  nation. 
And  God  knows  that  we  want  here  in  England  some  belief  of  that  sort  to  protect 
ns  from  despair  and  the  sloth  and  indifference  which  are  born  of  despair.  And  when 
God  has  thus  brought  by  strange  ways  the  body  of  English  society  into  a  more 
active  life  of  self-sacrifice,  a  higher  morality,  and  a  wider  love  of  the  race,  then  I 
cannot  but  think  that  men  will  turn  with  new  eyes  contemplate  the  life  of  Christ 
and  see  in  Him  the  true  King  of  the  new  society.  And  now,  to  sweep  back  for  a 
moment  to  our  first  subject,  we  have  found  a  ground  for  the  hope  that  the  future 
society  will  be  constituted  as  a  host  warring  against  evil,  under  the  leadership  of 
Christ.  If  that  be  so,  we  shall  not  be  devoid  of  the  sympathy,  nor  apart  from  the 
communion,  of  the  other  spiritual  beings  who  may  inhabit  God's  universe.  Their 
life  is  no  lazy  dream,  no  indolent  enjoyment.  The  spirit  of  the  battle  against  evil 
is  the  spirit  of  there  life.  For  "  there  was  war  in  heaven  ;  Michael  and  his  angels 
fought  against  the  dragon."  When  we  read  that  stanza  in  the  symbohcal  poem  o£ 
Apocalypse,  our  soul  kindles.  We  have  brother  warriors,  purer  than  we,  who  are 
waging  the  same  great  contest,  and  who  watch  us  with  faithful  and  sympathising 
eyes.  The  hosts  of  earth  and  heaven  are  bound  together  by  the  comrade  spirit,  by 
a  common  indignation,  by  a  common  devotion  to  the  same  Leader.  (Stopford  A. 
Brooke,  M.A.)  Tlie  ministry  of  angels  : — I.  Some  of  the  objects  fob  which  such 
MINISTRATIONS  ARE  EMPLOYED.  1.  In  imparting  direction  under  circumstances  of 
doubt  and  perplexity.  2.  In  affording  consolation  and  support  in  seasons  of 
distress  and  trial.  3.  To  defend  and  preserve  in  the  hour  of  danger  or  peril.  4.  As 
connected  with  the  introduction  of  the  beUever  to  his  final  blessedness.  6.  It  seems 
further  questionable  whether  angels  may  not  have  some  special  charge  over  the 
mortal  remains  of  the  believer  (Deut.  xxxiv.  5,  6).  6.  There  is  one  peculiarly  striking 
circumstance  noticed  in  the  text,  viz.,  that  believers  are  represented  as  having  been  the 
subjects  of  this  angelic  attention  prior  to  their  actual  possession  of  "  a  good  hope 
through  grace  "  : — they  are  "  sent  forth  to  minister  to  those  who  shall  be  heirs  of 
salvation,"  And  how  interesting  might  it  often  prove  for  the  believer  to  review  that 
part  of  his  hfe  in  which  he  lived  estranged  from  God,  with  the  remembrance  of  this 
fact.  Perhaps,  Christian,  you  have  been  once  and  again  held  back,  you  knew  not  how, 
when  upon  the  very  brink  of  ruin.  It  was  the  restraining  grace  of  God  that  held 
you,  but  of  that  grace  perhflps  an  angel  was  the  friendly  minister.  II.  Some  reasons 

FOR  WBICH    ANGELIC    MINISTRATION   MAY   PROBABLY  BE   EMPLOYED.        1.    To  display   the 

superior  honour  and  glory  of  the  Divine  Eedeemer.  2.  To  afford  to  angels  them- 
selves opportunity  of  contemplating  the  most  illustrious  display  of  the  Divine 
perfections.  3.  To  illustrate  the  Divine  tenderness  and  care  over  His  Church  and 
people.  III.  The  practical  reflections  the  subject  seems  naturally  to  suogest. 
1,  Let  an  apprehension  of  their  presence  make  us  watchful  over  the  correctness 
and  propriety  of  our  external  deportment.  2.  Let  the  dispositions  which  in  such 
conduct  they  evince,  be  studied  as  a  model  to  which  our  own  should  be  conformed. 
3.  Let  the  believer  rejoice  in  the  prospect  of  intimate  and  endeared  association  with 
these  ministering  spirits.  {E$sex  Congregational  Remembrancer.)  The  nature, 
office,  and  employment  of  good  angels : — I.  First,  For  their  nature,  they  abb 
spirits.  This  is  universally  agreed  by  all  that  acknowledge  such  an  order  of  beings ; 
but  whether  they  are  pure  spirits,  divested  of  matter,  and  all  kind  of  corporeal 
vehicle  (as  the  philosophers  term  it),  hath  been  a  great  controversy,  but  I  think  of 
no  great  consequence.  Not  only  the  ancient  philosophers,  but  some  of  the  ancient 
Christian  fathers,  did  believe  angels  to  be  clothed  with  some  kind  of  bodies,  con- 
sisting of  the  purest  and  finest  material ;  which  they  call  ethereal.  And  this 
opinion  seems  to  be  grounded  upon  a  pious  belief,  that  it  is  the  peculiar  excellency 
and  prerogative  of  the  Divine  nature,  to  be  a  pure  and  simple  spirit,  wholly  separate 
from  matter  ;  but  the  more  current  opinion  of  the  Christian  Church  (especially  of 
latter  times)  hath  been,  that  angels  are  mere  and  pure  spirits,  without  anything 
that  is  corporeal  belonging  to  them  ;  but  yet  so,  that  they  have  power  to  assume 
thin  and  airy  bodies,  and  can,  when  they  please,  appear  in  human  shape,  as  they 
a,re  frequently  in  Scripture  said  to  have  done.  II.  Secondly,  We  have  here  their 
general  office  and  employment;  they  are  " ministering  spirits";  they  are  (as  I 
may  say)  domestic  servants,  and  constant  attendants  upon  that  great  and  glorious 
King,  whose  throne  is  in  the  heavens,  and  whose  kingdom  ruleth  over  all ;  they 
stand  continually  before  Him,  to  behold  His  face,  expecting  His  commands,  and  in 
a  constant  readiness  to  do  His  will ;  for  though  the  Omnipotence  of  God  be  such, 
that  He  can  do  all  things  immediately  by  Himself,  "  whatever  He  pleaseth  in 
heaven  and  in  earth  "  ;  can  govern  the  world,  and  steer  the  affairs  of  it,  without 


68  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  % 

any  instruments  or  ministers ;  yet  His  wisdom  and  goodness  has  thought  fit  to 
honour  His  creatures,  especially  this  higher  and  more  perfect  rank  of  beings,  with 
His   commands;   and   to  make    them,  according  to    their   several   degrees  and 
capacities,  the  ordinary  ministers  of  His  affairs,  in  the  rule  and  government  of  this 
inferior  world ;  and  this  not  for  His  own  ease,  but  for  their  happiness ;  and  Ho 
therefore  employs  them  in  His  service,  that  they  may  be  capable  of  His  favour  and 
rewards.    IH.  The  speciai,  office  and  employment  of  good  angels  in  regabd  to  good 
MEN  ;    and  for  this  the  apostle  expressly  tells  us  that  "  they  are  sent  forth  ta 
minister  for  them  (that  is,  in  their  behalf  and  for  their  benefit)  who  shall  be  heirs 
of  salvation."    In  which  words  there  are  three  things  very  considerable  for  our 
instruction  and  comfort.     1.    Their  particular  designation  and  appointment  for 
this  employment,  expressed  in  these  words,  "  sent  forth,"  as  if  they  were  particu- 
larly commissioned  and  appointed  by  God  for  this  very  end.      God  Himself  doth 
superintend  all  affairs,  and  by  His  particular  designation,  the  angels  execute  the 
pleasure  of  His  goodwill  towards  us.     Hence  it  is  so  frequently  said  in  Scripture 
that  God  sent  His  angel  to  such  and  such  a  person  for  such  and  such  purposes. 
2.  You  have  here  the  general  end  of  their  employment — for  good  men ;  they  are 
sent  forth  on  our  behalf,  and  for  our  benefit ;  to  take  care  of  us  and  protect  us,  to 
succour  and  comfort,  to  direct  and  assist,  to  rescue  and  deliver  us.     3.  Here  is  the 
more  special  end  of  their  employment,  in  regard  to  good  men,  intended  in  those 
words,  "  f«5r  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation  "  ;  hereby  signifying,  that  the 
angels  are  employed  about  good  men,  with  regard  more  particularly  to  their  eternal 
happiness,    and  for  the  conducting  and  furthering  of  the   great  affair  of  their 
everlasting  salvation.     This  certainly  is  our  greatest  concernment ;  and  therefore 
they  have  a  more  particular  charge  and  care  of  us  in  regard  to  this.     It  has  been  a 
general  and,  I  think,  not  ill-grounded  opinion,  both  of  the  Jews  and  heathens,  th;it 
good  angels  are  more  especially  present  with  us,  and  observant  of  us,  and  assistant 
to  us,  in  the  performance  of  all  acts  of  religion  ;  that  they  are  particularly  present 
at  our  prayers ;  and  therefore  the  Jews  speak  of  a  particular  angel  for  this  purpu>  j, 
whom  they  call  "  the  ahgel  of  prayer  "  ;  that  they  observe  our  vows,  and  our  breach. 
or  performance  of  them.      So  Solomon  seems  to  intimate  (Eccles.  v.  4,  6).     But 
the  angels  are  yet  more  particularly  present  in  the  places,  and  at  the  times,  of  God's 
public  worship.     The  placing  of  the  cherubims  in  "  the  holy  of  holies,"  seems  to 
signify  the  presence  of  the  angels  in  our  most  religious  addresses  to  God.     And 
Plutarch  says  that  "  the  angels  are  the  overseers  of  Divine  service."   And  therefore 
we  ought  to  behave  ourselves  with  all  modesty,  reverence,  and  decency  in  the 
worship  of  God,  out  of  regard  to  the  angels  who  are  there  present,  and  observe  our 
carriage  and  behaviour  (1  Cor.  xi.  13).    Nay,  that  the  angels  have  some  charge 
and  care  of  the  bodies  of  good  men  after  death,  may  not  improbably  be  gathered 
from  the  passage  in  St.  Jude  (ver.  9).    But  to  proceed :  this  we  are  sure  of,  thai 
the  angels  shall  be  the  great  ministers  and  instruments  of  the  resurrection  of  our 
bodies,  and  the  reunion  of  them  to  our  souls :  for  so  our  blessed  Saviour  has  told 
ns  (Matt.  xxiv.  80,  31).    All  that  now  remains  is  to  draw  some  inferences  from  this 
discourse,  and  so  I  shall  conclude.     1.  What  hath  been  said  upon  this  argument, 
and  so  abundantly  proved  from  Scripture,  may  serve  to  establish  ns  in  the  belief 
of  this  truth,  and  to  awaken  us  to  a  due  consideration  of  it.     2.  We  should  with 
great  thankfulness  acknowledge  the  great  goodness  of  God  to  us,  who  takes  such 
care  of  us,  and  that,  not  only  some  inferior  spirits,  but  the  chief  ministers  of  this 
great  King,  those  that  "  stand  in  His  presence,  and  behold  His  face  "  ;  and  not  a 
few  of  these,  but  the  whole  order  of  them  are  employed  about  us.    3.  If  the  angels 
have  the  particular  charge  of  good  men,  we  should  take  heed  how  we  despise,  or  be 
any  way  injurious  to  them  ;  for  how  despicable  soever  they  may  appear  to  us,  they 
are  certainly  very  dear  to  God ;  since  He  deems  them  so  considerable  as  to  employ 
His  chief  ministers  about  them,  and  to  commit  the  charge  of  them  to  those  who, 
by  their  office,  do  more  immediately  attend  upon  Himself.    4.  If  God  appointed 
angels  to  be  ministering  spirits  on  our  behalf :   we  may  thence  very  reasonably 
conclude  that  God  did  not  intend  that  we  should  worship  them.    5.  We  should 
imitate  the  holy  angels  by  endeavouring  to  serve  God  as  they  do,  in  ministering 
to  the  good  of  others.      6.    And  we  should  learn  also    of  them  to  condescend 
to    the    meanest    services     for     the    good    of    others.       {Archbishop    Tillotson.) 
The  practical  side  of  the  doctrine  of  angels : — 1.  The  existence  of  angels  extends 
and  enlarges  our  views  regarding  the  city  of  God.     2.  Their  number  is  fitted  to 
encourage  us,  when  we  are  cast  down  by  the  spectacle  of  general  unbelief.     3.  The 
lively  part,  the  tender  interest  which  the  Holy  Scripture  assures  us  that  they  taka 


«HAP.  I.]  HEBREWS.  63 

in  the  triumph  of  the  Church  in  general,  and  in  the  progress  of  each  believer  in 
particular,  ought  to  be  a  precious  consolation  to  us.  4.  The  hope  of  being  one  day 
associated  with  these  glorious  inhabitants  of  heaven  presents  to  us  one  of  the  most 
ravishing  prospects.  5.  We  may  find  in  the  love  which  they  have  to  God  and  in 
the  zeal  with  which  these  perfectly  holy  beings  serve  Him,  a  very  effectual  stimu- 
lant to  lead  us  to  diligence  and  activity  in  the  service  of  the  Lord.  (Dr.  Grand- 
pierre.)  The  angelic  hierarchy  : — Casting  even  a  fugitive  look  on  material  nature, 
a  prodigious  diversity  is  perceived  among  the  creatures  which  God  has  called  into 
existence.  None  of  them  resemble  one  another ;  all  differ  either  in  their  essence, 
or  form,  or  structure,  or  organisation,  or  capacities ;  and  although  the  Supreme 
Author  of  everything  that  we  see  has  marked  all  of  them  with  that  stump  of  unity 
which  causes  us  to  recognise  the  Divine  Architect,  it  seems  nevertheless  that,  to 
reveal  His  inexhaustible  wisdom,  He  has  been  pleased  to  scatter  with  profusion 
variety  among  the  works  of  His  hands.  We  have  a  striking  illustration  in  the 
world  of  matter,  which,  in  its  present  constitution,  is  destined  one  day  to  perish. 
Kow,  can  we  believe  that  God,  who  has  shown  Himself  so  productive  and  so  rich  in 
creative  energy  in  the  world  of  bodies,  has  not  employed  the  same  liberality  in  the 
world  of  spirits  ?  That  that  God  who  has  fashioned  matter  with  so  much  intelli- 
gence and  care,  has  not  taken  an  equal  pleasure  in  creating  an  innumerable  multi- 
tuile  of  spiritual  intelligences  ?  Can  we  admit  that,  in  the  midst  of  those  creatures 
which  He  commands  as  master,  man  is  found  the  only  one  of  his  kind  that  has  not 
above  him  creatures  proportionally  greater  than  bimself,  that  he  is  himself  greater 
than  the  nature  of  which  he  is  chief  priest  ?  Therefore,  when  Scripture  affirms 
that  beyond  the  bounds  of  this  world  there  exist  spirits  superior  to  man  in  light, 
in  strength,  in  dignity,  and  that  they  are  called  thrones,  dominions,  principalities, 
powers,  angels  and  archangels,  seraphim  and  cherubim,  celestial  armies  of  the 
Most  High,  does  it  teach  us  anything  so  unreasonable,  so  difficult  to  receive  and 
to  comprehend  ?  This  is  a  first  consideration ;  here  is  a  second,  which  is  closely 
connected  with  the  first,  and  which  flows  immediately  from  it.  Not  only  does  the 
material  creation  present  to  us  a  great  variety  of  objects,  but  it  shows  them  to  us 
in  an  uninterrupted  series,  and  causes  us  to  see  them  appointed,  so  to  speak, 
according  to  the  laws  of  one  vast  and  magnificent  hierarchy.  From  the  stone  to 
the  plant,  from  the  plant  to  the  animal,  from  the  animal  to  man,  an  immortal 
spirit,  everything  is  in  succession,  everything  is  united,  everything  is  tied  by 
wonderful  knots,  bv  the  most  regular  transitions.  You  have  here  the  first  extremity 
of  a  chain,  of  which  all  links  are  united  one  to  the  other,  without  leaving  between 
them  any  interval.  Having  arrived  at  man,  would  you  abruptly  break  that  chain, 
BO  well  knit  together,  and  because  your  eyes  of  flesh  do  not  see  it  prolong  and 
extend  itself  in  the  invisible  world  up  to  the  highest  degrees  of  celestial  hierarchies, 
would  you  pretend  that  it  does  not  p  ".ss  beyond  this  earth,  and  that  the  most 
bca.'.tiful  works  of  God  are  shut  up  within  the  limits  of  the  globe  which  we  inhabit? 
Just  as  well  might  the  insect  which  creeps  under  the  herb,  and  has  but  some  inches 
of  horizon,  deny  the  existence  of  all  the  beings  which  people  the  vast  extent  of  the 
earth,  because  with  its  short  view  it  cannot  perceive  them.  Assuredly  it  would  not 
be  more  insensate  than  the  rash  man  who,  under  the  pretext  that  he  had  never 
seen  angels,  affirms  that  there  cannot  be  in  other  worlds  than  ours  intelligences 
superior  to  his  own.  {Ibid. )  Twofold  aspect  of  angelic  ministration  : — The  original 
Greek  here  expresses  to  separate  aspects  of  that  atigeUc  service  now  going  on  in  the 
Church.  The  angels  are  the  ministers  of  God,  giving  to  Him  always  their  constant 
adoration  and  worship,  and  they  are  tlierefore  sent  forth  by  Him  on  behalf  of  those 
who  are  about  to  inherit  salvation.  In  other  words,  because  of  the  Incarnation 
which  has  made  us  one  with  God,  and  of  our  incorporation  into  the  Body  of  Christ, 
they  both  worship  with  us  and  work  for  us.  In  the  first  place,  then,  their  ministiy 
in  heaven,  where  stands  the  one  Priest,  presenting  before  the  Father  that  sacrifice 
which  was  offered  once  for  all  on  earth,  their  celebration  with  Him  of  the  Eucha- 
rist on  high,  is  one  and  the  same  with  ours  when  we  present  to  the  same  Lord  and 
heavenly  Father  the  memorial  His  Son  hath  commanded  us  to  make.  And  so, 
though  our  souls  are  stained  with  sin,  while  they  are  spotless ;  though  we  are  fallen 
and  weak,  while  they  have  been  kept  upright  and  strong  by  the  constant  help  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  nevertheless  ours  is  the  blessed  though  solemn  privilege — an  honour 
to  which  our  adoptiou  in  Christ  has  raised  us — of  joining  with  them  in  their  worship 
of  Him  who  sitteth  upon  the  throne.  The  angels  have  their  work  also.  They 
are  ever  being  "sent  forth."  Yes,  into  the  ways,  the  dangerous  ways,  by  which 
even  the  children  of  the  kingdom  must  go,  thej  are  sent  to  minister  in  their  behalf. 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

No  doubt  they  joy  in  ministering  thus  unto  us,  in  guarding  us  amid  dangers,  and 
protecting  even  when  we  think  we  are  safe,  but  are  not.     And  they  joy  most  of  all 
because  we  bear  the  likeness  of  Him  to  whom  they  came  in  His  hours  of  tempta- 
tion.    {E.  E.  Johnson,  M. A.)        Angel  aid: — One  cannot  fail  to  take  a  hint  of 
spirit  ministry  in  material  nature  and  in  mortal  life.     By  arbitrary  habit  of  tradi- 
tion we  are  given  to  conceive  of  lofty  spirits,  as  absorbed  in  sacred  exercises,  and 
hold  them  to  have  no  other  function  than  that  of  teacher.    We  recognise  no  uses 
of  their  hands,  if  hands  they  have,  or  other  members.     They  have  been  esteemed 
as  the  clergymen  of  heaven,  the  seers  and  sages  of  a  spirit  land,  leading  in  worship 
and  dealing  only  with  the  souls  of  men,  and  the  moral  interests  of  beings.     Theo- 
logians have  set  them  thus  apart,  as  theologians  like  themselves,  to  abstractions 
and  speculations  of  a  grander  grade.    And  in  so  setting  them  apart,  have  set  them 
over  upon  the  outer  edges  of  the  material  realm,  even  as  in  a  lower  way  they  would 
set  off  and  set  apart  the  earthly  ministries  of  men,  to  a  sainthood  that  broaches  not 
nor  touches  their  secular  affairs.     It  may  surprise  us,  however,  to  discover  that 
there  is  no  warrant  for  this  notion  on  the  page  of  inspiration.     Angels  are  there 
considered  to  be  messengers,  that  often  carry  sublime  and  stately  truths.     But  they 
are  neither  unskilled  nor  unemployed  in  natural  processes.    It  might  not  be  too 
much  to  say  that  they  are  its  artisans  and  artists.    The  creative  acts  themselves 
are  spoken  of  as  commands.    At  the  Christ  coming,  they  were  eager  and  alert.     In 
the  Christ  consummation  they  are  neither  to  march  in  spectacle  of  mere  parade, 
nor  stand  inactive  as  observers  of  the  scene.     Meantime,  in  every  ransomed  and 
resuscitated  life  they  are  intrusted  with  material  ministries.     One  period  of  human 
extremity,  one  pass  of  human  flight  there  is  at  which  no  earthly  means  avail,  even 
as  means.    All  the  same,  God  works  by  means,  and  everywhere  employs  instru- 
ments at  hand.     There  is  no  life  which  is  not  replenished  and  refreshed  by  soma 
other  to  a  certain  point — no  human  creature  is  left  utterly  alone  in  helplessness. 
Up  to  a  certain  pass  of  destiny  it  can  scarcely  be  that  any  human  being  is  left 
utterly  alone,  or  goes  unprovided  with  a  means,  a  ministry  which,  if  it  may  not 
deliver  and  must  not  restore,  at  least  shall  soothe  and  serve.     But  every  human 
career  arrives  at  a  pitch  when  all  this  ceases,  when  it  is  not  only  rendered  futile, 
but  imperceptilile  and  unreal.     To  one  who  has  been  tenderly  cherished,  and  from 
infaacy  enclosed  by  assiduous  care  and  delicate  attention,  not  less  than  to  one  who 
has  known  hard  times  in  his  rugged  self-support,  or  his  lonely  isolation — not  less, 
~but  rather  more.    Not  less  to  one  who  has  been  beset  by  services,  or  encrowned 
with  honour,  reverence,  aud  love,  than  to  one  who  has  led  an  Arab  life  of  estrange- 
ment from  all  others.     Not  less,  but  rather  more,  to  one  who  has  been  waited  on 
and  greeted,  and  decorated,  and  endeared,  and  jealously  guarded  from  the  elements, 
the  world  of  chance  and  change.    Not  less,  but  more  to  such  an  one  it  comes  to  be 
at  last,  when  human  helpers  falter  and  fall  back,  and  all  appliances  alike  are 
powerless.    Then  will  the  all-gracious  Author  of  this  workmanship  leave   Hia 
creature  to  be  the  prey  of  nature  ?    You  might  as  well  allege  that  He  will  leave  the 
globe  itself  to  be  the  prey  of  its  own  forces,  and  explode  in  the  concussion  and 
convulsion  of  its  own  collisions,  the  dissolution  of  its  subsistence,  and  the  disinte- 
gration of  its  substance.    You  might  as  well  imply  that  the  mother  of  a  child  will 
desert  it  coldly  because  it  has  lost  its  way,  and  lost  its  footing,  and  has  fallen.    But 
what  aid  can  interpose  ?     Instrumentally,  what  is  tlie  recourse  ?     What  agency  can 
be  employed?    Who  shall  bear  a  message?    Who  shall  breathe  a  whisper  to  the 
retreating  spirit  ?     The  only  touch  that  can  be  felt  is  the  touch  of  kindred  on  the 
spirit,  the  voice  of  soul  to  soul.     Consciousness  opens  on  the  gaze  of  eyes  that  are 
not  made  of  flesh  and  blood.    In  that  supreme  experience  there  must  hover  round 
about  the  couch  some  band  of  those  who  shall  be  found  as  qualified  as  they  are 
willing.     God  sends  guards  to  welcome  their  brethren  within  His  glory ;  to  soothe 
the  while  the  parting  pangs.     The  hour  of  earth's  failure  is  the  hour  of  heaven's 
support.    Let  the  nurse  come  in  the  room,  Lord;  let  the  nurse  come  in  ;  let  the 
nurse  come  now,  before  the  undertaker.     Thou  who  didst  give  us  in  the  charge  of 
Thy  servants,  upon  the  earth  in  infancy,  give  us  in  nobler  trust  to  loftier  care;  and 
when  the  flesh  faints  and  fails  let  us  find  the  spirit  welcome  at  the  gate.     (H.  S. 
Carpenter.)        The  liturgy  of  angelic  service  : — This  liturgy  of  service  is  a  literal 
fact.     When  struggling  against  overwhelming  difficulties  ;  when  walking  the  dark, 
wild  mountain-pass  alone ;  when  in  peril  or  urgent  need ;  we  are  surrounded  by 
invisible  forms,  like  those  which  accompanied  the  path  of  Jesus,  ministering  to 
Him  in  the  desert,  strengthening  Him  in  the  garden,  hovering  around  His  cross, 
watching  His  grave,  and  accompanying  Him  to  His  home.    They  keep  pace  with 


CHAP.  I.]  HEBREWS.  71 

the  swiftest  trains  in  which  we  travel.  They  oome  unsoiled  through  the  murkiest 
air.  They  smooth  away  the  heaviest  difiBculties.  They  garrison  with  light  the 
darkest  sepulchres.  They  bear  us  up  in  their  hands,  lest  we  should  strike  our  foot 
against  a  stone.  Many  an  escape  from  imminent  peril,  many  an  unexpected  assist- 
ance, many  a  bright  and  holy  thought  whispered  in  the  ear,  we  know  not  whence  or 
how,  is  due  to  th  ise  bright  and  loving  spirits.  "  The  good  Lord  forgive  me,"  says 
Bishop  Hall,  "  for  that,  amongst  my  other  offences,  I  have  suffered  myself  so  much 
to  forget  the  presence  of  His  holy  angels."  But  valuable  as  their  office  is,  it  is  not 
to  be  mentioned  in  the  same  breath  as  Christ's.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Ministry 
of  angels: — I  went  once  to  see  a  dying  girl  whom  the  world  had  roughly  treated. 
She  never  had  a  father,  she  never  knew  her  mother.  Her  home  had  been  the 
poorhouse,  her  couch  a  hospital  cot,  and  yet  as  she  had  staggered  in  her  weakness 
there,  she  had  picked  up  a  little  of  the  alphabet,  enough  to  spell  out  the  New 
Testameut,  and  she  had  touched  the  hem  of  the  Master's  garment,  and  had  learned 
the  new  song.  And  I  never  trembled  in  the  presence  of  such  majesty  as  I  did  in 
the  maje-ty  of  her  pr^^sence  as  she  came  near  the  crossing.  "  Oh,  sir  I  "  she  said, 
"  God  sends  His  angels.  I  have  read  in  His  Word,  '  Are  they  not  ministering 
spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  to  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation  ?  '  And  when 
I  am  learning  in  my  cot  they  stand  about  me  on  this  floor ;  and  when  the  heavy 
darkness  comes,  and  this  poor  side  aches  so  severely.  He  comes,  for  He  says,  '  Lo, 
I  am  with  you,'  and  He  slips  His  soft  hand  under  my  aching  side,  and  I  sleep,  I 
rest."  (Dr.  Fowler.)  Ministry  of  angels  : — The  only  child  of  a  poor  woman  one 
day  fell  into  the  fire  by  accident,  and  was  so  badly  burned  that  he  died  after  a  few 
hours'  sufferiug.  The  clergyman,  as  soon  as  he  knew,  went  to  see  the  mother,  who 
was  known  to  be  dotingly  fond  of  the  child.  To  his  great  surprise  he  found  her 
calm,  patient,  and  resigned.  After  a  little  conversation  she  told  him  how  she  had 
been  weeping  bitterly  as  she  knelt  beside  her  child's  cot,  when  suddenly  he 
exclaimed,  '*  Mother,  dou't  you  see  the  beautiful  man  who  is  standing  there,  and 
waiting  for  me  ?  "  Again  and  again  the  child  persisted  in  saying  that,  "  the 
beautiful  man  "  was  waiting  for  him,  and  seemed  ready  and  even  anxious  to  go  to 
him.  And  as  a  natural  consequence,  the  mother's  heart  was  strangely  cheered. 
Heirs  of  salvation. — The  time  and  certainty  of  inheriting  salvation  : — Though  the 
possession  of  this  inheritance  be  to  come,  while  the  heirs  thereof  here  live,  yet  ia 
it  sure  and  certain.  What  title  so  sure  among  men  as  an  inheritance?  Much 
more  sure  is  this  inheritance  of  salvation  than  any  earthly  inheritance  can  be. 
For — 1.  It  is  prepared  for  us  from  the  foundation  of  the  world  (Matt.  xxv.  34).  2. 
It  is  pmxhased  by  the  greatest  price  that  can  be,  the  precious  blood  of  the  Son  of 
God  (Epb.  i.  14  ;  1  Pet.  i.  19).  3.  It  is  ratified  by  the  greatest  assurance  that  can 
be,  the  death  of  Him  that  gives  it  (Heb.  ix.  14).  4.  It  is  sealed  up  unto  us  by  that 
Holy  Spirit  of  promise,  which  is  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance  (Epb.  i.  13,  14).  6. 
God's  promise  is  engaged  for  it,  therefore  they  who  possess  it  are  said  to  iiiherit 
the  promises  (Heb.  vi.  12).  6.  The  faith  of  beUevers  addeth  another  seal  thereto 
(John  iii.  33).  7.  It  is  reserved  in  heaven  for  ns  (1  Pet.  i.  4).  In  heaven  "  neither 
moth  nor  mst  doth  corrupt,  nor  thieves  do  break  through  nor  steal "  (Matt.  vi.  20). 
{W.  Gouge.)  Instructions  and  directions  arising  from  the  inheritance  of  salvation : 
— Such  an  inheritance  as  salvation  made  sure  to  us,  affords  sundry  instructions 
and  directions.  Instructions  are  such  as  these  :  1.  It  commends  God's  philanthropy. 
His  peculiar  love  to  men,  who  by  nature  are  children  of  wrath  and  heirs  of  hell ; 
yet  made  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  salvation  (Eph.  ii.  2,  3 ;  Col.  i,  12 ; 
Tit.  iii.  3-5).  2.  It  takes  away  all  conceit  of  merit  by  man's  works.  For  an 
inheritance  is  the  free  gift  of  a  Father.  3.  It  is  enough  to  uphold  our  spirits 
against  penury,  ignominy,  and  all  manner  of  misery  in  this  world.  An  heir,  that 
as  long  as  he  is  a  child,  differeth  nothing  a  servant,  but  is  under  tutors  and  gover- 
nors ;  yet,  because  he  is  lord  of  all,  will  not  be  dejected ;  but  will  support  himself 
with  this,  that  he  hath  a  fair  inheritance  belonging  to  him.  4.  It  is  a  great 
encouragement  against  all  things  that  may  threaten  death  ;  yea,  and  against  death 
itself ;  in  that  death  brings  us  to  the  possession  of  this  excellent  inheritance. 
Directions  are  such  as  these  : — (1)  Subject  thyself  to  thy  Father's  will,  and  to  that 
government  under  which  He  sets  thee,  because  thou  art  His  heir  (Gal.  iv.  2).  (2) 
Raise  up  thy  affections  to  the  place  of  thine  inheritance,  and  set  thy  heart  thereon 
(Col.  iii.  1 ;  Matt.  vi.  21).  (3)  Love  not  the  world,  neither  the  things  that  are  in 
the  world  (1  John  ii.  15).  SaJvation  is  not  there  to  be  had.  (4)  Moderate  thy  care 
about  earthly  things ;  thou  hast  a  heavenly  inheritance  to  care  for.  (5)  Suffer 
with  joy  all  things  for  thy  profession  sake,  knowing  that  thou  hast  an  heavenly 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

inheritance  (Heb.  x.  64).  (6)  Search  thine  evidences  about  this  inheritance.  There 
is  great  reason  that  in  a  matter  of  so  great  consequence  thou  shouldst  be  sure  of 
thy  evidence  for  thy  right  hereto  (2  Pet.  i.  10).  (7)  Expect  with  patience  the  time 
appointed  for  the  enjoying  this  inheritance.  Through  faith  and  patience  the 
promises  are  inherited  (Heb.  vi.  12).  (8)  Walk  worthy  of  this  high  calling  (Eph. 
iv.  1),  and  of  God  who  hath  called  thee  to  His  kingdom  and  glory  (1  Thess.  ii  12). 
(9)  Be  ever  thankful  for  this  privilege  especially  (Col.  1.  12 ;  1  Pet.  i.  3,  4).  (10) 
Despise  not  any  of  these  heirs  because  they  are  here  poor  and  mean  (James  ii.  6). 
Ishmael  was  cast  oat  because  he  mocked  the  heir  (Gen.  xxi.  9, 10).  {Ibid.)  Being 
somebody  : — "What  is  the  use  of  being  in  the  world  unless  you  are  somebody?  " 
said  a  boy  to  his  friend.  "  Sure  enough,  and  I  mean  to  be,"  answered  the  other. 
"  I  began  this  very  day.  I  mean  to  be  somebody."  Ashton  looked  George  in  the 
face.  "  Began  to-day  I  how  f  What  do  you  mean  to  be  ?  "  "A  Christian 
boy,  and  so  grow  up  to  be  a  Christian  man,"  said  George.  "  I  believe  that  is  the 
greatest  somebody  for  us  to  be."  George  is  right.  There  is  no  higher  manhood 
than  Christian  manhood  ;  and  it  is  in  the  power  of  every  boy  to  reach  that.  Every 
boy  cannot  be  rich  ;  every  boy  cannot  be  President ;  every  boy  cannot  be  judge  :  but 
God  asks  yon  all  to  a  Christian  manhood — to  be  His  sons,  and  bo,  wiUi  HiB  Son 
Jesus  Christ  to  be  heirs  of  heaven. 


CHAPTEB  n. 

Vebs.  1-4.  Give  the  more  earnest  heed. — This  esliortatlon  reveals  the  purpose  of 
the  foregoing  comparison  between  Christ  and  the  angels.  It  is  to  estabhsh  Christ's 
superior  claim  to  be  heard  when  He  speaks  in  God's  name  to  men.  Law  and 
gospel  might  have  been  compared  on  their  own  merits,  as  is  done  by  Paul  in 
2  Corinthians  iii.  6  in  a  series  of  contrasts.  But  the  power  of  appreciating  the 
gospel  being  defective  in  the  Hebrew  Christians,  it  is  the  merit  of  the  speakers 
that  is  insisted  on,  though  the  incomparable  worth  of  the  gospel  is  implicitly 
asserted  in  the  phrase,  ♦'  so  great  salvation."  Kespecting  as  we  do  the  word  of 
angels,  let  us  respect  more  His  word.  Why  should  there  be  any  diflSculty  in  acting 
on  such  reasonable  counsel  ?  Because  the  word  of  Christ  is  new,  and  the  word  of 
angels  is  old,  and  has  the  force  of  venerable  custom  on  its  side.  This  difference  is 
hinted  at  in  the  words  "lest  at  any  time  (or  haply)  we  drift  away."  The  figure  is  a 
very  significant  one.  It  warns  the  Hebrews  to  beware  lest  they  be  carried  away 
from  the  salvation  preached  by  Christ,  the  blessings  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  a 
boat  is  carried  past  the  landing-place  by  the  strong  current  of  a  river.  The  current 
by  which  the  Hebrews  were  in  danger  of  being  carried  headlong  was  that  of 
established  religious  custom,  which  in  transition  times  is  specially  perilous.  By 
this  current  they  were  in  danger  of  being  carried  away  from  the  gospel  and  Christ 
and  the  eternal  hope  connected  with  faith  iu  Him  down  to  the  Dead  Sea  of  Judaism, 
and  so  of  being  involved  in  the  calamities  which  were  soon  to  overwhelm  in  ruin 
the  unbelieving  Jewish  nation.  The  exhortation  to  give  heed  to  Christ's  teaching 
is  enforced  by  three  reasons  r  It  is  the  teaching  of  the  Lord ;  the  penalty  of  neglect 
is  great ;  the  teaching  is  well  attested.  The  word  of  the  great  salvation  began  to  be 
spoken  "  by  the  Lord."  The  word  spoken  through  angels  may  appear  a  very 
solemn  matter.  Yet  after  all  it  was  a  word  at  second-hand.  The  law  was  given  by 
God  to  angels,  then  by  angels  to  Moses,  who  in  turn  gave  it  to  Israel.  The  gospel 
came  from  God  immediately,  for  Jesus  was  God  incarnate  speaking  to  men  in 
human  form.  The  penalty  of  neglecting  this  last  word  of  God  is  great.  "How 
shall  we  escape  ?  "  The  penalty  is  enhanced  by  the  nature  of  the  word.  It  is  a 
word  of  grace,  of  salvation.  The  old  word  was  a  word  of  duty.  But  it  is 
far  more  culpable  to  sin  against  love  than  against  law,  to  despise  God's 
mercy  than  to  break  His  commandments.  If  breaches  of  the  law  had  penalties 
attached,  what  must  be  the  consequence  of  despising  the  gospel?  For  those 
who  scorn  arguments  drawn  from  fear  of  consequences  a  more  genial  in- 
ducement is  added.  The  teaching  of  Christ  is  well  attested.  The  writer  means 
to  say  that  he  and  those  to  whom  he  writes,  though  not  enjoying  the  advantage  of 
having  heard  Jesus  Himself  speak  the  words  of  salvation,  are  put  practically  hj 


CHAP.  J?.]  HEBREWS.  73 

this  attestation  in  the  same  position  as  those  who  did  hear  Him.  It  is  obvious  that 
the  claim  thus  made  to  be  virtually  in  the  position  of  personal  hearers  of  Jesus 
implies  a  knowledge  of  His  teaching  such  as  we  possess  by  means  of  the  Synoptical 
Gospels.  The  impression  created  by  a  perusal  of  the  Epistle  bears  out  this  view. 
The  image  of  Christ  presented  therein  rests  on  a  solid  basis  of  fact.  The  writer 
knows  of  the  temptations  of  Jesus,  of  His  life  of  faith,  and  the  scope  that  His  ex- 
perience afforded  for  the  exercise  of  faith,  of  His  agony  in  the  garden,  of  the  con- 
tradictions He  endured  at  the  hands  of  ignorant,  evil-minded  men;  of  His 
compassionate  bearing  towards  the  erring  ;  of  the  fact  that  He  occupied  Himself  in 
preaching  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom  ;  and  also  of  the  fact  that  He  was  surrounded 
by  a  circle  of  friends  and  disciples,  whose  connection  with  Him  was  so  close  that 
they  could  be  trusted  to  give  a  reliable  account  of  His  public  ministry.  Of  course 
the  man  who  knew  so  much  had  the  means  of  knowing  much  more.  (A.  B.  Bruce, 
D.D.)  Watchfulness  : — Every  one  who  has  made  the  least  endeavour  to  live  for  " 
God,  will  know  by  experience  how  many  are  the  temptations  which  hiuder  his 
progress — temptations  to  acquiesce  in  some  secondary  end,  to  relax  the  streuuous- 
ness  of  labour,  to  follow  the  promptings  of  his  own  will  to  look  earthwards.  He 
will  know,  therefore,  tbat  the  spirit  of  the  Christian  towards  himself  must  be 
watchfulness — the  most  open-eyed  and  the  most  far-seeing.  I.  He  will  be  watch- 
ful OVER  HIS  AIM.  There  is,  indeed,  one  aim  for  all  men — to  grow  into  the  likeness 
of  God  ;  but  this  general  aim  becomes  individualised  for  every  man.  The  complete 
likeness,  so  to  speak,  belongs  to  humanity,  and  each  man  contributes  his  peculiar 
part  to  the  whole.  His  resemblance  to  others  lies  in  the  completeness  of  his 
consecration ;  and  his  difference  from  others  follows  directly  from  it.  Something 
he  has,  however  insignificant  it  may  seem,  which  belongs  to  himself  alone ;  and 
this  he  brings  to  Christ  in  sure  trust  that  it  represents  the  fulfilment  of  his  special 
office.  Few  temptations  are  more  subtle  and  perilous  thau  that  which  leads  us  to 
a  restless  search  for  some  task  which  is  more  fruitful,  as  we  think,  or  more  con- 
spicuous, or  more  attractive  than  that  which  Ues  ready  before  us;  and  it  may 
happen  that  a  self-chosen  path  will  bring  us  renown  and  gratitude.  But  no 
splendid  labours  in  other  fields  can  supply  the  defect  which  must  henceforth 
remain  for  ever  through  our  faithlessness,  if  we  leave  undone  just  that  little  thing 
which  God  has  prepared  for  us  to  do.  II.  The  Christian  will  be  watchful  also  y^ 
OVER  his  EFioETS.  It  is  as  true  that  God  gives  nothing,  as  it  is  that  He  gives  all. 
He  accords  to  man  the  privilege  of  making  his  own  that  which  He  bestows  freely, 
and  He  requires  man  to  use  the  privilege.  Nothing  avails  us  which  we  have  not 
actually  appropriated.  Life,  indeed,  brings  to  us  the  rudiments  of  spiritual  te.ich- 
ing ;  but  these  need  to  be  carefully  studied,  and,  above  all,  to  be  brought  into  the 
light  of  our  faith,  not  once  only  or  twice,  but  as  often  as  we  are  called  to  act  or  to 
judge;  for  though  every  attainment  which  is  conformed  to  our  ideal  partakes  of 
its  eternal  nobility,  no  solution  of  yesterday  can  be  used  directly  to-day.  Li  e,  with 
all  its  questions,  is  new  every  morning.  At  the  same  time,  the  solution  of  yesterday 
leaves  us  in  a  favourable  position  to  deal  with  the  novel  data.  The  Christian,  then, 
will  ask  himself  again  and  again  whether  his  work  costs  him  serious  exertion; 
whether  it  exercises  the  fulness  of  his  powers ;  whether  he  faces  fresh  duties  as 
they  arise  with  more  and  more  strenuous  endeavour  because  he  uses  the  experience 
of  the  past  to  assist  his  thought,  and  not  to  supersede  it ;  whether  at  every  point 
he  has  gained  the  highest  within  his  reach,  or  has  at  least  refused  to  rest  on  a  lower 
level ;  and  whether  he  has  taken  to  heart  day  by  day  the  words  of  the  psalm  which 
from  time  immemorial  has  given  the  keynote  of  pubUc  worship :  "  To-day,  if  ye 
will  hear  His  voice  "  ;  for  that  Voice  is  not,  as  we  are  too  ready  to  believe,  a 
tradition  only,  a  sweet  memorial  enshrined  in  sacred  books,  btit  a  living  voice 
sounding  in  our  ears  with  messages  of  truth,  which  earUer  generations  could  not 
hear,  and  calls  to  action  which  we  first  are  able  to  obey.  {Bp.  Westcott).  The 
true  attitude  of  the  goul  toward  Christ: — I.  The  duty  on  which  the  aposile 
INSISTS.  An  attitude  of  iudifierence  is  not  the  true  attitude  of  the  soul  to  Christ ; 
nor  of  mere  curiosity ;  nor  of  a  cold  professionalism.  It  is  only  by  earnest  thought 
that  we  can  understand,  realise,  and  retain  the  gospel  of  Christ.  II.  The  aegdjient 
BY  WHICH  the  eshoetation  IS  ENFORCED.  The  cxhortatiou  is  based  upon  a  twofold 
comparison  ;  i.e.,  between  the  heralds  of  the  two  covenants,  and  the  natures  of  the 
two  covenants.  III.  The  warning  by  which  the  apostle  seeks  to  arouse  attention' 
TO  HIS  exhortation.  1.  The  possibility  of  losing  our  hold.  2.  The  occasions  of 
losing  our  hold.  3.  The  manner  of  losing  our  hold.  The  idea  is  not  of  a  sudden  and  . 
total  renunciation  of  Christian  doctrine — we  are  not  in  much  danger  of  that ;  but 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

of  an  unconscious  giving  up  of  that  doctrine.  {TV.  L.  Watkinson.)  Diligent 
attention  to  the  gospel : — I.  Diligent  attention  unto  the  word  of  the  gospel  is  indis- 
pensably NECESSAKY  UNTO  PEKSEVEBANCE  IN  THE  PROFESSION  OF  IT.     Such  a  profeSSion 

I  mean  as  is  acceptable  unto  God,  or  will  be  useful  unto  our  own  souls.  1.  A  due 
valuation  of  the  grace  tendered  in  it,  and  of  the  word  itself  on  that  account.  2. 
Diligent  study  of  it,  and  searching  into  the  mind  of  God  in  it,  that  so  we  may  grow 
wise  in  the  mysteries  thereof.  3.  Mixing  the  word  with  faith  (see  chap.  iv.  2).  As  good 
not  hear  as  not  believe.  4.  Labouring  to  express  the  word  received  in  a  conformity 
of  heart  and  life  unto  it.  6.  Watchfulness  against  all  opposition  that  is  made 
either  against  the  truth  or  power  of  the  word  in  us.     II.  Theke  are  sundey  times 

AND  SEASONS  WHEBEIN,  AND  SEVEBAIi  WATS  AND  MEANS  WHEBEBY,  MEN  ABE  IN  DANOEB  TO 
LOSE    THE   WOBD   THAT    THEY  HAVE    HEABD,    IF  THEY   ATTEND  NOT   DILIGENTLY  UNTO  ITS 

pkesebvation.  1.  Some  lose  it  in  a  time  of  peace  and  prosperity.  That  is  a 
season  which  slays  the  foolish.  Jeshurun  waxes  fat  anoEcks.  According  to 
men's  pastures  they  are  filled,  and  forget  the  Lord.  They  feed  their  lusts  high, 
until  they  loathe  the  word.  2.  Some  lose  it  in  a  time  of  persecutioji.  "  When 
persecution  ariseth,"  saith  our  Saviour,  "they  fall  away."  Many  go  on  apace  in 
profession  until  they  come  to  see  the  cross  ;  this  sight  puts  them  to  a  stand,  and 
then  turns  them  quite  out  of  the  way.  3.  Some  lose  it  in  a  time  of  trial  by  temp- 
tation.  The  means  also  whereby  this  wretched  effect  is  produced  are  innurherable : 
soineot  them  only  I  shall  mention.  As  (1)  Love  of  this  present  world.  This  made 
Demas  a  leaking  vessel  (2  Tim.  iv.  10),  and  chokes  one-fourth  part  of  the  seed  in 
the  parable  (Matt.  xiii.).  (2)  Love  of  sin.  A  secret  lust  cherished  in  the  heart  will 
make  it  "  full  of  chinks,"  that  ft  will  never  retain  the  showers  of  the  word  ;  and  it 
will  assuredly  open  them  as  fast  as  convictions  stop  them.  (3)  False  doctrines, 
errors,  false  worship,  superstition,  and  idolatries  will  do  the  same.  III.  The  word 
heard  is  not  lost  without  the  gbeat  sin  as  well  as  the  inevitable  ruin  of  the 
SOULS  of  men.  The  word  of  its  own  nature  is  apt  to  abide,  and  to  take  root :  but 
we  pour  it  forth  from  us.  And  they  have  a  woeful  account  to  make  on  whose 
soul  the  guilt  thereof  shall  be  found  at  the  last  day.  IV.  It  is  in  the  nature  of  the 
word  of  the  gospel  to  water  baeben  heabts,  and  to  make  them  fbuitfdl  unto  God. 
Hence  it  is  compared  to  water,  dews,  and  rain.  Where  this  word  comes,  it  makes 
the  "  parched  ground  a  pool,  and  the  thirsty  land  springs  of  water  "  (Isa.  xxxv.  7). 
These  are  the  waters  of  the  sanctuary,  that  "  heal  the  barren  places  of  the  earth," 
and  make  them  fruitful  (Ezek.  xlvii.).  The  river  that  "  makes  glad  the  city  of 
God  "  (Psa.  xlvi.  7).  With  the  dew  thereof  doth  God  "  water  His  Church  every 
moment"  (Isa.  xxvii.  3).  And  then  doth  it  "grow  as  a  lily,  and  cast  forth  its 
roots  as  Lebanon  "  (Hos.  xiv.  5-7).  V.  The  consideration  of  the  revelation  of 
the  gospel  by  the  Son  of  God  is  a  powebful  motive  unto  that  diligent 
attendance  unto  it.  1.  And  this  is  most  reasonable  upon  many  accounts.  1. 
Because  of  the  authority  wherewith  He  spake  the  woid.  2.  Because  of  the  love  that 
is  in  it.  There  is  in  it  the  love  of  the  Father  in  sending  the  Son,  for  the  revealing 
of  Himself  and  His  mind  unto  the  children  of  men.  There  is  also  in  it  the  love  of 
the  Son  Himself,  condescending  to  instruct  the  sons  of  men,  who  by  their  own 
fault  were  cast  into  error  and  darkness.  3.  Th«  fulness  of  the  revelation  itself  by 
Him  made  unto  us  is  of  the  same  importance.  He  came  not  to  declare  a  parcel, 
but  the  whole  will  of  God,  all  that  we  are  to  know,  to  do,  to  beUeve  :  "  In  Him  are 
hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  "  (Col.  ii.  3).  4.  Because  it  is  final. 
No  farther  revelation  of  God  is  to  be  expected  in  this  world  but  what  is  made  by 
Jesus  Christ.    To  this  we  must  attend,  or  we  are  lost  for  ever.     VI.  The  tbue  and 

ONLY    WAY    OF    HONOURING     THE   LORD    ChBIST   AS   THE    SoN    OF     GoD    IS   BY   DILIGENT 

attendance  and  OBEDIENCE  UNTO  His  WORD.  (J.  Ou'eu,  D.D.)  faking  hee^l — In  this 
exhortation,  first  the  apostle  setteth  down  his  doctrine :  then  his  reasonoy  which 
he  will  persuade  us  anto  it :  his  doctrine  is  this.  I.  That  it  behoveth  us  now 
more  carefully  to  hearken  to  the  words  "OF  Christ,  than  aforetime  it  behoved 
OUB  FOREFATHERS  TO  HEARKEN  TO  THE  LAW  OF  MosEs.  And  here  we  must  cousider 
why  we  ought  to  be  more  careful  than  they ;  not  that  they  might  omit  any  care  to 
add  nothing,  to  take  away  nothing,  to  change  nothing,  not  to  depart  neither  to  the 
right  hand  nor  yet  to  the  left,  but  day  and  night,  at  home  and  abroad,  to  do  always 
this,  to  study  it  continually,  as  appeareth  in  Deut.  iv.  6,  v.  32,  vi.  6,  xi.  18,  xii.  32, 
xxviii.  14 ;  Josh.  i.  8,  xxxiii.  6,  Ac.  Nor  is  it  said  that  we  be  more  bound  than  they,  as 
though  the  authority  of  God  were  changed ;  but  because  now  Christ  hath  spoken 
by  Himself,  then  by  angels ;  now  plainly,  then  in  figures :  therefore  we  ought  more 
carefully  to  hearken,  but  because  our  punishment  shall  be  more  than  theirs,  even  a? 


CHAP.  II.]  HEBREWS  75 

'we  be  despisers  of  the  greatest  grace.     II.  After  this,  the  apostle  added  bis  beason 

TO  PERSUADE  US  TO  THIS  ESPECIAIj  CAREFULNESS  ABOVE  ALL  OTHER  PEOPLE,  tO  hearken 

to  the  voice  of  Christ;  and  that  is,  of  the  peril  that  ensueth,  lest,  saith  he,  we  run 
oat.  The  apostle  useth  a  metaphor,  taken  of  old  tubs,  which  run  out  at  the  joints, 
and  can  hold  no  liquor.  (E.  Deering,  B.D.)  The  gospel  requires  the  more  earnest 
attention  : — The  duty  here  intended  is  a  serious  and  fixed  setting  of  the  mind  upon 
that  which  we  hear :  a  bending  of  the  will  to  yield  unto  it :  an  applying  of  the  heart 
to  it,  a  placing  of  the  affections  upon  it,  and  bringing  the  whole  man  into  a  holy 
conformity  thereunto.  Thus  it  compriseth  knowledge  of  the  Word,  faith  therein, 
obedience  thereto,  and  all  other  due  respect  that  may  any  way  concern  it 
(2  Tim.  iu  7 ;  Matt.  xv.  10,  xiii,  23  ;  Acts  iv.  4,  xvi.  14).  The  comparative  degree 
addeth  much  emphasis,  and  intendeth  a  greater  care  and  endeavour  about  the 
matter  in  hand,  than  in  any  other  thing  ;  as  if  he  had  said,  More  heed  is  to  be 
given  to  the  gospel  than  to  the  law ;  more  to  the  Son  than  to  any  servant ;  for  he 
speaks  of  the  gospel  preached  by  Christ.  It  may  be  here  put  for  the  superlative 
degree,  and  imply  the  greatest  heed  that  may  possibly  be  given  ;  and  the  best  care 
and  diligence  that  can  be  used.  Thus  it  is  said  of  the  Scriptures,  "  We  have  a  more 
sure  word  " ;  that  is,  a  most  sure  word  (2  Pet.  ii.  19) ;  thus  this  very  word  in  my  text 
is  often  put  for  the  superlative  degree.  As  where  Paul  saith  of  himself,  "In  labours 
more  abundant,  in  prisons  more  frequent,"  that  is,  most  abundant,  most  frequent 
(2  Cor.  ii.  23).  Hereby  as  he  doth  incite  them  for  the  future,  to  make  the  best  use 
that  possibly  they  can  of  the  gospel  that  had  been  preached  unto  them,  so  he  gives 
a  secret  and  mild  check  to  their  former  negligence,  implying  that  they  had  not 
given  formerly  such  heed,  as  they  should  have  done,  to  so  precious  a  word  as  had 
been  preached  unto  them,  but  had  been  too  careless  thereabouts,  which  he 
would  have  them  redress  for  the  future.  {W.  Gouge.)  Eskp^est  attention  to 
salvation  : — To  "  give  earnest  heed  to  the  things  which  we  E^avTTearcT,"  "com- 
prehends several  particulars.  1.  There  is  the  earnestness  itself — that  state  of 
mind  which  is  so  graphically  described  (Prov.  ii.  3,  4).  Such  earnestness,  from 
the  nature  of  the  case,  has  much  to  do  with  the  attainment  of  the  object ;  and  the 
importance  of  that  object  requires  such  earnestness.  2.  There  must  be  the  decided 
and  vigorous  application  of  the  mind  to  the  things  propounded.  They  must  be 
understood,  if  they  are  to  be  cordially  embraced  and  practically  applied.  It  is 
needful,  accordingly,  that  the  thinking  powers  should  be  attentively  directed 
towards  them.  3.  By  being  believed  and  applied,  they  must  be  turned  to  practical 
account.  Without  this  they  will  miss  their  end.  Subservient  to  the  attainment 
of  this  threefold  object,  might  be  reckoned  such  rules  and  principles  as  the.se  :  1. 
That  the  "new  heart,"  the  "  Divine  nature,"  which  beats  in  sympathy  with  Christian 
truth,  should  be  sought.  2.  That  men  should  watch  against  inward  tendencies  and 
outward  influences,  which  are  in  danger  of  withholdiug  them  from  earnest  attention 
to  the  things  of  salvation.  3.  That  they  should  seriously  ponder  the  relations  of 
Divine  truth  to  God,  to  their  own  souls,  and  to  the  destinies  of  the  world  to  come. 
4.  That  they  should  implore  the  Father-Spirit  to  teach  and  incline  them  to  "give 
earnest  heed"  to  these  momentous  truths,  and  to  these  high  concerns.  {A,  S. 
Patterson.)  Fastening  the   impression: — Physiologists   say  that   the  retina   of 

the  eye  has  a  wash  which,  like  the  chemical  used  by  the  photographer,  prepares 
the  retina  to  receive  the  image  and  impress  it  for  a  moment,  and  then  the  image  is 
gone.  The  mind  must  catch  it  instantly.  So  we  must  photograph  the  Word,  and 
have  our  souls  aroused  to  fasten  the  impression  for  ever.  How  many  retain  no 
impression,  and  let  go  their  hold  upon  eternal  things !  {J.  B.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
To  the  things  which  we  have  heard. — For  the  evening  of  the  Lord's  Day  : — I.  The 
CAUSES  OP  FOBQETFULNESs.  1.  The  indifferent  maimer  in  which  we  too  often  resort 
to  the  House  of  God.  2.  The  indifference  which  precedes  is  often  carried  into  the 
House  of  God  itself.  II.  The  principal  beasons  why  the  gospel  above  EVEKYTHiNa 
SHOULD  BE  ATTENTIVELY  pjiMEMBEBED.  1.  It  is  the  messagc  of  heavea  to  mankind, 
and  therefore  well  deserves  a  place  in  the  memory.  2.  The  peculiar  character  of 
the  gospel.  •'  The  things"  are  of  no  common  import,  no  temporary  consequence, 
but  of  the  highest  possible  moment.  3.  The  advantages  which  flow  from  this  duty. 
Who  enjoy  the  consolations  of  the  gospel,  and  whose  conduct  is  regulated  by  its 
influence  ?  They,  undoubledly,  who  pay  the  greatest  attention  to  it,  and  whose 
minds  retain  its  instructions.  4.  If  we  slight  the  message  of  truth,  it  will  bear 
testimony  against  us,  and  aggravate  our  final  condemnation.  {Homilist.)  In- 
attentive hearers: — It  is  said  of  Demosthenes  that,  speaking  to  the  Athenians  on  a 
very  serious  subject,  and  finding  them  to  be  inattentive,  he  paused,  and  told  them 


7«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha*.  n. 

that  he  had  something  of  special  importance  to  relate,  which  he  Tvas  anxious  that 
they  should  aU  hear.  Silence  being  thus  obtained,  and  every  eje  fixed  upon  him, 
he  said  that  two  men,  having  bargained  for  the  hire  of  an  ass,  were  travelling  from 
Athens  to  Megara  on  a  very  hot  A^y  and  both  of  them  striving  to  enjoy  the  shadow 
of  the  ass,  one  of  them  said  that  he  hired  the  ass  and  the  shadow  too  ;  the  other 
eaid  that  he  hired  the  ass  only  and  not  the  shadow.  Having  made  this  grave 
statement,  Demosthenes  retired ;  when  the  people  pressed  him  with  great  eagerness 
to  return  and  finish  his  tale.  "  O  ye  Athenians,"  said  he,  '*  will  ye  attend  to  me 
when  speaking  about  the  shadow  of  an  ass ;  and  will  ye  not  attend  to  me  when  I 
address  you  on  the  most  important  affairs  ? "  This  reproof  does  not  apply 
exclusively  to  the  "men  of  Athens."  English  people  are  deeply  concerned  in  it ; 
and  the  ministers  of  Christ  who  are  accustomed  to  discourse  upon  subjects  im- 
mensely more  important  than  any  that  called  forth  the  eloquence  of  the  Athenian 
orator,  have  reason  to  urge  the  same  complaint.  Many  persons  have  an  ear  for 
va\)ity,  but  none  for  the  truth;  they  will  listen  to  folly,  but  not  to  the  words  of 
wis  lom.  To  the  things  of  this  world  they  will  pay  a  fixed  attention,  bat  to  Christ 
and  His  salvation  they  are  criminally  indifferent.  (J.  Thornton.)  Redemptive 
truths  : — I.  They  are  things  communicated.  "  We  have  heard  "  them  from  parents, 
teachers,  ministers.  II.  They  are  things  to  bb  betained.  Should  be  held,  not 
merely  in  memory  as  facts,  but  in  heart  as  forces.  III.  They  are  things  the  retain- 
m  nt  of  which  requires  most  detebmined  effort.  1.  The  loss  of  them  would  be 
the  greatest  calamity.  2.  A  possible  calamity.  Many  things  tend  to  relax  the  soul's 
hold  upon  them— remaining  depravity  within,  seductive  influences  without- 
(Homilist.)  The  gospel  demands  attention: — I.  By  "the  things  which  we  have 
heard,"  may  betairly  presumed  are  meant,  the  grand  doctrines  and  principles  op 
THE  GOSPEL.  IL  From  the  text  we  may  fairly  conclude  that  it  is  the  clear  duty  of 
all  who  have  the  dispensation  of  the  gospel  to  give  a  serious  and  fixed  attention 
to  it.  III.  From  the  text  we  may  fairly  conclud,e  that  the  consequences  of  con- 
tinuing TO  NEGLECT  THE  WORD  OF  GoD  wlU  be  distressing  and  awful.  (Essex  CoU' 
gregational  Remembrancer.)  An  attentive  hearing  to  he  given  to  the  gospel  of 
Christ : — Especially  now  in  the  time  of  the  gospel :  what  attention  is  there  in  the 
Star  Chamber  when  the  Lords  of  the  Privy  Council  speak?  But  if  either  the 
prince  or  the  king  himself  make  an  oration,  then  there  is  wonderful  attention.  In 
the  time  of  the  Law  the  prophets  spake,  which  indeed  were  of  God's  counsel,  by 
whom  God  revealed  His  will  to  the  people  :  but  now  the  Prince  of  peace,  the  Ever- 
lasting Counsellor,  the  King's  own  Son,  that  lay  in  His  own  bosom,  in  whom  all  the 
treasures  of  wisdom  are  hid,  speaketh  to  us.  Therefore  let  us  listen  with  all  dili- 
gence to  the  things  which  He  speaketh.  And  how  doth  Christ  now  speak  ?  Not 
daily  from  heaven,  as  He  did  to  Saul,  but  by  the  mouth  of  His  ambassadors.  •'  He 
that  heareth  you  heareth  Me."  Will  ye  have  an  experience  of  Christ  that  speaketh 
in  me  ?  Christ  spake  in  Paul  when  he  preached  ;  and  He  speaks  in  us  when  we 
preach.  The  pearl  is  precious  though  it  be  an  earthen  vessel  that  brings  it  to  yo^u : 
therefore  receive  it  with  all  reverence.  (W.  Jozies,  D.D.)  Lest  at  any  time  we 
should  let  them  slip, — Letting  the  truth  slip  : — I.  The  great  things  we  have  heard. 
There  are  no  words  of  so  profound  moment  as  the  truths  of  the  gospel.  They  warn 
of  hell,  thuy  welcome  to  heaven  ;  they  take  from  eternity  its  terror,  and  use  it  to 
measure  their  benefit.  II.  The  easy  peril  of  their  loss.  No  better  word  for  easy 
getting  away  than  "  slip."  "  He  gave  the  officers  the  slip."  "  His  foot  slipped, 
and  he  sustained  a  fatal  fall."  "  The  whole  company  of  travellers  suddenly  slipped 
into  the  deceptive,  snow-filled  precipice."  "The  hour  slipped  away  so  rapidly  in 
easy  conversation,  that  I  missed  my  train  and  lost  the  opportunity  of  a  lifetime." 
"  While  shipwrecked  on  a  desert  island,  we  saw  a  vessel.  Supposing  it  was  coming 
directly  to  us  we  went  away  after  our  treasure,  and  quickly  returning,  found  it  had 
slipped  away  far  past  the  hearing  of  our  wild  outcries."  We  read  every  day  sen- 
tences hke  the  above.  How  easily  are  the  most  valuable  things  in  this  world's  life 
lost  by  reason  of  neglect !  III.  The  intense  attention  demanded.  It  is  wonderful 
that  we  can  see  every  day  the  utmost  pains  taken  to  keep  earth's  valuables  from 
slipping  away,  and  can  yet  treat  the  pearl  of  great  price  so  recklessly  I  We  see  the 
careful  cooper  tightening  his  casks  ;  the  miner  watching  his  ores  as  they  pass  the 
smelting  furnace ;  the  farmer  in  his  cultivation ;  the  vigilant  policeman ;  the 
anxious  physician  ;  the  scholar  strengthening  his  memory  so  as  to  keep  knowledge 
from  slipping  aw%j».  And  yet  we  "  cram  "  for  the  great  "  examination  "  of  eternity. 
(C.  .1/.  Jones.)  [Drifting  from  Chri.<t7^1.  Moored  to  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  a  long 
vhile  now  since  men  began  to  represent  their  life  as  a  running  stream.    It  waa 


CHAP,  ii-l  HEBREWS.  7t 

inevitable  the  figure  should  suggest  itself  to  them  as  soon  as  they  began  to  think — 
^^e  all  feel  its  appropriateness  as  often  as  we  reflect  upon  the  ceuseless  vicissituda 
that  laps  our  own  lives  round,  and  that  is  bearing  us  so  quickly  away.  How 
remorseless  the  current  is  that  flows  beneath  ns,  sometimes  so  noiseless,  sometimes 
rippling  in  laughter  against  the  Bides  of  our  bark,  sometimes  rising  in  foam  and 
wrath  and  threatening  our  destruction,  yet  always  beaxing  us  onward  upon  its 
bosom,  steadily  onward  to  the  unknown  I  And,  when  we  consider  it,  not  only  how 
remorseless  but  also  how  rapid  the  movement  is  I  How  many  scenes  we  pass 
through  on  our  way  I  How  many  new  reaches  of  experience  we  discover,  then 
leave  behind  !  How  many  faces  flit  and  fade  around  us  1  How  fast  we  all  live  ! 
Of  wurse,  it  would  be  sinful  to  think  of  this  ceaseless  movement  in  which  we  are 
all  involved  as  if  it  were  a  mere  brute  fate  to  wbich  we  must  perforce  submit. 
This  constant  change  to  which  we  are  all  committed  is,  for  one  thing,  the  condition 
of  progress.  Without  it  life  would  not  become  the  deeper,  broader,  larger  thing 
which  somehow  it  does  become  as  our  years  go  on.  And,  besides,  how  flat  and  stale 
it  would  otherwise  be  I  And  yet  every  one  must  feel  that  were  there  only  ceaseless 
change  in  our  earthly  lot — no  anchor  sure  and  steadfast  for  us  anywhere — life  would 
be  terrible  indeed.  It  is  only  children  that  seek  perpetual  novelty — children,  and 
those  who,  though  the.y  have  become  men,  have  not  laid  aside  childish  things. 
Wiser  men  begin  to  perceive  ere  long  that  life  is  not  a  pleasure  nail  after  all,  that 
the  currents  are  stronger  than  they  think,  and  may  carry  them  away.  Only  Christ 
abides  I  Christ — the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever  !  Christ — who  outlives 
the  seeming  changeless  heavens  themselves.  Christ  the  True,  the  Unalterable 
Love,  the  Immovable  Friend.  II.  DBiFTiNO  from  Christ.  1.  A  storm  may  have 
broken  out  in  your  life,  and  driven  you  away  from  Christ.  (1)  It  may  have  been  a 
storm  of  doubt.  There  are  always  some  minds  for  whom  it  is  peculiarly  difficult 
to  hold^on  to  Jesus  Christ.  They  find  it  hard  to  accept  implicitly  those  half -revealed 
truths,  like  the  Incarnation,  and  the  Cross,  and  the  working  of  God's  Spirit  in  the 
heart  of  man,  much  harder  than  others  find  it.  They  cannot  help  themselves. 
Their  mind  works  speculatively.  They  must  peer  over  the  edge  of  the  known 
truth  into  the  unknown  abysses  beneath,  and  there  they  stand  amazed,  affrighted. 
Also,  perhaps,  in  our  own  time  it  is  more  difficult  than  ever  for  such  persons  to 
believe.  A  vast  number  of  new  ideas  have  been  thrown  lately  into  the  general 
mind  which  there  has  hardly  been  time  as  yet  to  estimate  and  assign  to  their  proper 
place;  and  then,  perhaps,  men,  becoming  acquainted  with  these  ideas,  as  they 
must,  are  at  a  loss  to  know  how  exactly  to  adjust  the  old  view  of  things  to  them. 
(2)  Or  the  storm  may  have  been  a  storm  of  trouble.  Sometimes,  I  know,  a  storm 
of  this  kind  may  drive  men  to  Christ  rather  than  away  from  Him.  But  sometimes, 
too,  it  happens  that  the  tempest  that  sends  one  man  to  Jesus  Christ  drives  another 
away.  He  cannot  see  the  meaning  of  a  visitation  so  sore,  or  the  rigbteousneBS  of 
it,  or  any  light  upon  it  at  all.  Existence  darkens  round  the  man,  and  everything 
he  once  was  sure  of  slips  away  from  him — everything,  including  Christ.  2.  Or, 
again,  it  may  be  an  influence  less  obvious  that  does  it.  I  question  very  much 
whether  we  make  as  much  allowance  as  we  should  for  what  you  may  call  the  ebb 
and  flow  of  the  ti'le  of  Ufe  in  as  all.  Perhaps  it  is  because  we  understand  so  little 
about  it.  The  fact  appears  to  be  that  It  is  with  man  as  with  Nature.  We  know 
how  the  heart  of  Nature  beats  time  to  a  mysterious  mighty  rhythm,  and  how 
regularly  recurring  are  those  deep  respirations  of  her  life  which  we  name  summer 
and  winter,  and  night  and  day.  But  we  forget  how  our  ovm  tiny  being  seems  to 
share  in  this  hidden  law.  Our  very  body  is  attuned  to  it ;  there  are  periods  in  our 
hfe  at  which  our  vitality  is  greater;  others  at  which  it  is  less  ;  nay,  in  every  twenty- 
four  hours  a  wave  of  life-force  rises  within  us,  then  falls  again — so  that  a  doctor 
will  tell  you  beforehand  at  what  hour  the  sufferer's  strength  will  flicker  up  most 
brightly,  when  it  will  be  spent  and  die.  Now,  on  this  physical  basis  I  believe  more 
of  the  moral  phenomena  of  our  lives  depend  than  we  are  aware.  Our  temptations 
mix  themselves  up  stmngely  with  this  ebb  and  flow  that  ceaselessly  goes  on  within. 
Our  animalism  takes  advantage  of  the  flowing  tide  of  lustihood  in  youth  to  come 
in  upon  us  like  a  flood.  With  the  ebb  of  manhood's  early  vigour  enthusiasm  and 
the  capacity  of  an  ardent  faith  and  love  are  apt  to  ebb  also.  And  even  at  intervals 
much  more  frequent  the  same  sort  of  thing  occurs.  If  you  will  watch  your  tempta- 
tions— especially  the  more  notable  of  them — carefully  you  will  find  they  almost 
obey  a  law  of  periodicity.  As  hunger  and  thirst  assert  themselves  (roughly  speaking) 
at  regularly  recurring  intervals,  so  do  our  temptations.  Our  sins,  like  ourselves,  if 
they  slumber  for  a  time,  awake  with  renewed  energy.    3.  If  it  has  been  neither  of 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tt 

these,  then  it  may  have  been  something  more  slow  and  subtle  and  secret  still.  You 
have  seen  a  vessel,  owing  to  no  storm  or  the  rise  of  any  tide,  but  simply  through 
the  restlessness  of  the  element  in  which  it  floats,  gradually  loosen  from  its  moorings, 
and  little  by  httle  be  borne  out  to  sea.  And  even  when  no  more  powerful  currents 
are  passing  around  us  there  is  this  infinite  restlessness  in  all  our  lives  which  may 
of  itself  be  fatal.  Repose  is  an  impossibihty  here.  A  thousand  varying  cares  and 
moods  and  occupations  agitate  the  surface  of  our  lives.  And  with  this  there  comes 
a  chafing  which  may  by  slow  degrees  wear  out  the  strands  of  loyalty  that  bind  us 
to  our  Lord.  Indeed,  when  Christians  drift  from  Christ  it  is  probably,  in  the  vast 
majority  of  cases,  due  to  this  very  cause.  III.  Begaining  one's  moobings.  You  will 
observe  that  tbe  counsel  the  writer  gives  is  with  a  view  rather  to  prevent  so  sad  a 
lapsing.  It  is  the  same  prescription  that  applies  here,  whether  the  case  be  one  of 
prevention  or  of  cure.  And  certainly  no  prescription  could  well  be  simpler.  It  is 
by  no  violent  efforts,  no  beating  up  against  the  adverse  forces  of  his  life,  that  any 
man  will  regain  his  old  attachment  to  Jesus  Christ,  but  just  by  giving  "earnest  heed 
— tbe  more  earnest  heed  to  things  he  has  heard  about  Him."  It  is  contemplation  of 
the  truth  that  brings  him  back  again,  and  contemplation,  not  so  much  of  any  new 
discoveries  he  may  make  concerning  Jesus  Christ,  but  just  of  those  familiar  aspects 
of  His  person  and  His  work  that  first  won  his  trust.  There  is  that  in  Jesus  Christ 
which,  if  He  is  pondered  humbly,  has  the  power  to  draw  the  heart  as  with  the  force 
of  gravity  to  centre  and  stay  itself  once  more  on  Him.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  keep 
near  the  old  familiar  truths — to  keep  near  the  old  familiar  Christ  1  The  stable 
Christian  is  always  the  simple  Christian.  Think  of  the  staunchest  believer  you 
know,  the  least  moved  by  any  storms ;  how,  you  ask,  has  this  steadfastness  come  to 
him  ?  Infallibly  thus :  through  going  much  apart  with  God  to  muse  and  pray ; 
through  often  saying  within  his  heart,  "Jesus,  my  Friend,  is  God'';  through 
kneeling  at  the  cross  till  the  conviction  has  begun  to  stir  within  him,  "  He  loved 
me,  He  gave  Himself  for  me  " ;  through  pondering  the  vastness  of  forgiveness ; 
through  much  looking  in  the  Spirit  towards  that  crown  of  righteousness  which  is 
laid  up  for  him  against  that  day.  Such  a  believer  has  many  an  anchor  to  hold  him. 
Neither  things  present  nor  things  to  come  will  separate  him  from  the  love  of  God 
which  is  in  Chiist  Jesus  our  Lord.  {Alex.  Martin,  M. A.)  Soul  drifting: — I. 
What  is  this  dbift  ?  It  is  the  dying  out  of  impression,  the  decay  of  faith,  the 
gradual  loss  of  force.  The  writer  is  not  contemplating  a  change  of  attitude 
towards  the  gospel  brought  about  by  a  previous  intellectual  movement  to  which  the 
man  himself  had  been  a  party,  but  one  which  very  slowly,  but  very  certainly,  reflects 
the  silent  action  of  unseen  and  unrecognised  forces  which  are  at  work  within  and 
around  him,  and  the  ultimate  effect  of  which  may  be  an  utter  loss  of  all  which 
once  he  most  valued,  and  an  abandonment  to  influences  which  once  he  regarded 
with  mingled  hatred  and  dread.  1.  There  is  here  clearly  an  anticipation  of  drift 
both  in  doctrine  and  practice.  The  two  are  regarded  as  so  united  that  the  one  can- 
not suffer  and  the  other  be  uninjured.  The  truth  which  holds  a  man  rules  his  life, 
and  the  only  way  of  getting  rid  of  the  effect  is  to  remove  the  cause.  2.  The  sur- 
vival of  Christian  life  after  the  loss  of  Christian  faith  is  a  contingency  the  sacred 
writer  does  not  contemplate.  The  drift  is  a  drift  of  the  entire  man — affections, 
aims,  motives,  as  well  as  principles.  3.  Drift  is  always  to  evil.  It  is  by  struggle 
that  we  advance  heavenward ;  but  there  are  countless  influences  inclining  us  to  a 
retrograde  course.  Without  a  strong  force  within,  and  without  constant  communi- 
cations of  Divine  grace  to  maintain  and  strengthen  it,  we  shall  infallibly  go  back. 
II.  Mask  the  sources  of  this  evil.  1.  It  is  not  easy — if  it  be  not  impossible — for 
a  Christian  to  live  in  the  world  without  being  exposed  to  influences  unfriendly  to 
his  faith  and  loyalty.  2.  It  is  in  the  tendencies  of  the  age — tendencies  which  may 
have  much  in  tbem  that  is  beautiful  and  admirable — that  this  peril  lies.  They 
assail  us  on  the  side  where  we  least  expect  danger,  and  they  have  so  fair  and  winning 
an  aspect  that  it  is  hard  to  meet  them  with  stern  resistance,  3.  These  tendencies 
often,  in  their  more  exaggerated  form,  shape  public  sentiment,  and  the  fear  is  lest 
we  yield  to  the  influence  which  they  unconsciously  exercise  without  sufficient  dis- 
crimination between  the  good  and  the  evil  which  may  be  in  them.  The  spirit  of 
the  age  is  against  severity,  whether  in  doctrine  or  practice ;  is  easily  moved  by  ar» 
appe^  for  Christian  charity,  and,  with  equal  readiness,  is  excited  to  a  righteous 
indignation  against  bigotry,  and  if  it  can  itself  be  guilty  of  any  approach  to  intole- 
rance, is  intolerant  only  of  intolerance.  The  drift  is  to  change ;  to  greater  breadth 
of  thought,  sympathy,  and  action ;  to  creeds  less  elaborate  and  minute  ;  to  laws  of 
conduct  less  exacting  «"id  severe,  to  enlarged  freedom   everywhere.     III.   Is  it 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  79 

necessary  to  point  out  the  possible  and  even  pkobable  consequences.  A  little 
vessel  which  has  been  torn  from  its  moorings,  and  is  being  carried  far  out  to  sea  by 
the  strong  currents  which  are  bearing  it  whithersoever  they  will,  may  be  engulfed 
in  some  hidden  quicksand,  dashed  to  pieces  on  some  rugged  rock,  carried  thousands 
of  miles  away  and  stranded  on  a  distant  shore.  The  possibilities  of  evil  are  limit- 
less to  the  ship  which  has  iost  helm  and  rudder,  or  has  no  one  capable  of  using 
them  wisely,  and  is  at  the  mercy  of  wild  winds  and  waves.  There  need  be  no  truer 
picture  of  a  soul  that  is  drifting.  It  has  escaped  from  the  truths  which  once  held 
it  with  a  certain  degree  of  force,  which  was  a  restraint  from  evil  and  a  stimulus  to 
good.  Day  by  day  they  are  receding  into  the  distance,  and  becoming  more  dim  and 
uncertain,  while  the  soul,  acted  upon  by  all  varieties  of  influence,  is  borne  hither 
ftn  i  thither,  uncertain  in  its  aims,  unstable  in  its  course,  unconscious  of  the  t&tn  to 
which  it  may  be  hastening.  One  thing  only  is  sure  about  it — it  is  every  day  being 
carried  further  and  further  from  all  which  once  it  loved  and  valued.  Bocks  of 
barren  unbelief,  or  whirlpools  of  seductive  pleasure  and  indulgence,  may  be  in  the 
path  on  which  it  is  advancing,  but  there  seems  no  power  to  arrest  its  course.  The 
man  has  left  himself  to  be  the  sport  and  plaything  of  outside  circumstances  or  influ- 
ences harmonising  only  too  well  with  inclinations  within,  and  now  he  is  drifting  before 
them  to  a  miserable  shipwreck  of  faith  and  of  a  good  conscience.  (<7.  G.  Rogers,  B.A.) 
Drifting  from  Christ  • — I.  This  represents  a  state  which  is  fearfully  possible 
(Uosea  VI.  4;  TTim.  v.  15).  1.  This  is  so  in  part  because  we  are  not  always 
moored  to  Christ  when  we  are  brought  to  Him.  A  ship  may  be  skilfully  guided  into 
the  harbour,  her  crew  may  be  able  to  leap  ashore,  and  there  she  will  remain  till  the 
tide  turns ;  but  then,  unless  her  cables  are  thrown  out  and  she  is  fastened  there, 
she  will  drift  to  sea  again.  So  we  may  be  brought  to  Christ,  a  number  of  influences 
may  lead  us  to  Him,  we  may  be  so  affected  by  religious  emotion  and  reverence  for 
Him,  and  even  a  beUef  in  our  personal  salvation  as  to  be  ready  to  endure  "  re- 
proaches and  afflictions,"  and  we  may  seem  to  be  Christians,  yet  we  may  not  have 
joined  ourselves  to  the  Redeemer  by  an  act  of  Uving  faith.  Whilst  the  tide  runs 
that  way  (aud  that  may  be  for  years)  our  safety  is  unsuspected  even  by  ourselves ; 
but  let  a  change  come,  and  slowly  we  slip  away,  and  at  length  on  some  distant 
coast  others  come  across  the  fragment  of  a  wreck  that  bears  our  name.  We  may 
be  close  to  Christ  for  long  without  the  cable  of  faith  binding  us  to  Him,  and  thus 
the  soul  may  drift  away  even  from  Him  and  be  lost.  2.  Besides  which  there  are 
powerful  adverse  currents  which  tend  to  carry  us  from  the  Saviour.  DiiSculties 
occur,  the  fear  of  man  begins  to  tell,  the  winds  of  temptation  blow,  the  current  of 
worldly  custom  runs  strong,  the  unseen  force  of  old  habits  and  depraved  inclination 
increases,  and  then  1  well,  however  strong  the  cable,  it  will  creak  and  strain,  and 
every  fibre  of  it  be  needed  to  hold  the  ship.  But  what  if  there  be  no  cable — no  vital 
faith  ?  Why,  then  the  soul  will  inevitably  part  company  with  Christ.  3.  And  this 
drifting  away  is  more  likely,  because  our  departure  from  Chiist  may  be  for  some 
time  imperceptible.  How  many  Christians  there  are  whose  religion  once  a  delight- 
ful reality  has  become  poor,  who  think  distressingly,  "Oh,  that  I  were  as  in  days 
that  are  past !  "  who  can  see  how  far  they  have  drifted,  but  did  not  know  they  were 
drifting  at  the  time,  and  who  scourge  themselves  because  of  it !  H.  To  drift  away 
from  Christ  is  to  drift  to  ruin.  1.  To  drift  away  from  Christ  is  to  forsake  the 
only  refuge  for  sinful  men.  The  blessings  we  so  sorely  need  are  there  alone,  away 
from  Hun  is  but  the  wintry  shoreless  sea  of  doom.  2.  To  drift  away  from  Christ  is 
to  disregard  the  supreme  claims  of  Christ.  For  there  is  another  aspect  of  drifting 
away  from  the  Saviour  ;  it  is  not  simply  how  it  affects  us,  but  how  it  affects  Him. 
Oh,  conld  we  have  but  a  glimpse  of  Him  and  of  His  authority,  great  horror  would 
Beizo  as  at  the  thought  of  departing  from  Him.  But  when  we  further  see  this 
glorious  One  for  us  men  pour  out  His  soul  in  the  anguish  of  the  cross,  and  still 
cleave  to  us  notwithstanding  our  worthlessness  and  sin,  we  are  self -condemned  to 
the  lowest  perdition  if  we  suffer  anything  to  let  us  drift  away  from  Him,  aud  may 
weU  ask  in  awe,  "How  shall  we  escape?"  3.  To  drift  away  from  Christ  is  to  resist 
the  grace  that  has  brought  us  close  to  Him.  HI.  This,  then,  is  a  loud  call  to 
EARNEST  heed  lebt  WE  DRIFT  AWAT.  1.  If  ws  are  moored  to  Christ  our  blessedness 
consists  in  the  maintenance  of  close  fellowship  with  Him.  2.  Though  we  are 
close  to  Christ,  we  are  in  gi-eat  peril  till  we  are  anchored  there.  3.  If  we  are  drifting 
away  from  Christ,  everything  depends  on  our  returning  before  we  get  further  off. 
(C  New.)  Drifting: — I  prefer  the  rendering  given  by  the  revisers:  "lest  we 
should  drift  away  from  them  "  ;  it  is  a  more  exact  translation  of  the  Greek  term, 
and  brings  into  prominence  a  truth  which  is  almost  entirely  concealed   by  the 


80  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii» 

common  version.  The  writer  is  anxious  to  warn  his  readers  of  something  which 
might  happen  to  them  before  they  were  aware.  On  my  first  tour  through  Switzer- 
land I  visited  the  quaint  old  city  of  Thun,  along  with  three  intimate  friends.  We 
stayed  at  a  hotel  built  on  the  side  of  the  lake,  just  at  the  place  where  the  Aar  runs 
rapidly  out  of  it,  and  we  went  to  amuse  ourselves  for  a  season  by  rowing  about  in  a 
little  boat.  After  awhile  a  difference  of  opinion  sprang  up  among  us  as  to  the 
direction  we  should  take.  One  said,  "Let  us  go  yonder  "  ;  another  answered,  "  No ; 
let  us  rather  make  for  that  other  point " ;  a  third  had  another  suggestion,  and  wa 
ceased  rowing  until  we  should  make  up  our  minds  ;  but  meanwhile  the  current  was 
settling  the  question  for  us,  and  unless  we  had  speedily  bent  to  the  oars  with  all 
our  might,  we  should  have  been  hurried  along  into  a  dangerous  place,  out  of  which 
we  could  only  have  been  rescued,  if  rescued  at  all,  by  the  assistance  of  others. 
The  influences,  therefore,  against  which  we  are  warned  by  the  text  are  those  of 
currents  which  are  flo\^ing  just  where  we  are,  and  which  may  operate  so  insidiously 
that  we  may  not  know  of  their  effect  until  perhaps  it  is  too  late  to  resist  their 
power.  I.  Take  then,  first,  that  which  I  may  call  the  aoe-cukbent,  or  what  a 
recent  English  essayist,  borrowing  from  the  German,  has  called  the  "Time-spirit." 
A  physical  science  which  has  taken  up  with  the  doctrine  of  development,  and  has 
insisted  that  what  is  at  best  an  ingenious  hypothesis  shall  be  accepted  as  a  demon- 
strated fact,  has  prepared  the  way  for  an  agnostic  philosophy  which  refuses  to 
believe  that  anything  can  be  known  save  that  which  can  be  perceived  by  the  bodily 
senses,  aided  by  the  scalpel  and  the  microscope,  and  that,  in  its  turn,  has  given 
birth  to  a  rank  atheism,  which  has  adopted  as  its  creed  the  terrible  negation.  No 
God.  If  it  be  true  that  the  standard  of  piety  and  morality  is  lower  among  Chris- 
tians than  it  was  formerly ;  if  it  be  the  case  that  the  Church  is  less  of  an  aggressive 
force  in  our  large  centres  of  population  than  it  was  a  generation  ago ;  if  the  num- 
bers of  those  enrolling  themselves  in  its  ranks  are  smaller  than  they  have  been  in 
other  days,  may  it  not  be  owing  to  the  fact  that  we  have  not  beep  taking  heed  to 
guard  against  this  age-drift  which  has  been  flowing  beneath  us  ?  Let  us  get  back 
to  Christ,  and  anchor  fast  on  Him.  II.  The  second  current  to  which  I  would  refer 
ifl  that  of  THE  PLACE  IN  WHICH  WE  DWELL.  Evcry  city  has  its  own  peculiar 
influence.  We  must  guard  against  the  slightest  backsliding  ;  and  to  succeed  in 
that  we  must  constantly  test  ourselves  by  the  things  which  we  have  heard  from 
Jesus.  The  navigator  is  saved  from  danger  from  unknown  currents  by  his  daily 
observations.  The  tides  of  ocean  do  not  ajBEect  the  heavenly  bodies  ;  and  by  testing 
himself  by  these  he  knows  precisely  where  he  is.  So  the  principles  of  the  gospel 
are  not  shifted  by  the  tendencies  of  any  place ;  and  when  we  measure  ourselves 
by  them,  we  may  discover  how  it  is  with  us.  Let  us  not  take  it  for  granted  that 
because  we  are  making  some  effort  in  the  right  direction,  therefore  we  must  ba 
going  forward.  For  these  efforts  may  not  be  enough  to  resist  the  force  of  the 
current,  and  we  may  be  drifting  backward  after  all.  You  remember  the  case  of  Sir 
Edward  Parry's  crew  in  the  Arctic  regions.  They  set  out  one  day  to  draw  a  boat 
over  the  ice,  expecting  thereby  to  get  farther  northward  and  in  the  open  water,  but 
after  they  had  journeyed  thus  far,  if  I  remember  rightly,  a  day  and  a  half  or  two 
days,  they  took  an  observation,  which  revealed  to  their  surprise  that  they  were 
farther  south  than  they  had  been  when  they  set  out,  because  while  they  had  been 
going  toward  the  pole,  the  ice  on  which  they  were  had  been  carried  by  the  drift  of 
an  under-current  in  the  opposite  direction.  I  fear  that  in  this  great  business  mart, 
where  we  are  so  exclusively  occupied  in  buying  and  selling,  and  getting  gain,  many 
Christians  among  us  are  like  these  northern  voyagers :  they  make  exertions,  and  they 
seem,  too,  to  be  making  progress  ;  but,  alas  !  the  drift  that  carries  the  whole  place 
has  carried  them  with  it,  and  in  reahty  they  are  not  so  far  advanced  as  they  were, 
it  may  be,  years  ago.  III.  A  third  current,  to  the  influence  of  which  we  are 
exposed,  I  would  call  the  personal  drift,  the  drift  in  each  of  us  inuividually. 
In  making  astronomical  observations,  one  operator  is  never  precisely  the  same  as 
another.  Some  are  quick,  others  are  slow ;  some  are  exceedingly  precise,  and 
others  not  so  perfectly  exact ;  and  these  differences,  of  course,  affect  the  results  at 
which  they  arrive.  Therefore,  to  neutralise,  as  far  as  possible,  any  error  which 
may  be  thereby  occasioned,  there  is  what  is  known  as  a  "  personal  equation  "  for 
each,  and  by  that  his  conclusions  are  rectified  before  they  are  sent  forth  for  general 
acceptance.  Now,  in  a  similar  way,  spiritually,  each  man  has  his  individual  ten- 
dencies, which  easily  carry  him  in  one  direction  or  another.  This  personal  drift, 
as  I  have  named  it,  is  the  same  thing  as  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  from  which  my 
text  is  taken  calls  in  another  place  the  "  sin  that  doth  most  easily  beset  us,"  and  by 


CHAP,  n-l  HEBREWS.  81 

yielding  to  that  many  are  carried  at  last  into  perdition.     How  easy  it  is  to  acquire 
BQ  evil  habit!  [W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)         How  to  keep  the  Word  from  sUpi>ini}  j'ruia 
tis^issWe  must  let  the  Word  slip  at  no  time,  though  we  have  never  such  weighty 
""business  :   one  thing  is  necessary.      Tliis  one  thing  necessary  is  to  be  p. ef erred 
before  all  others :  never  let  a  sermon  slip  from  you   without   some  profit.     But 
how  shall  we  keep  them  from  slipping  away  ?     There  be  four  things  to  hold  the 
Word  from  slipping   from  us — 1.  A  meditation  in    that  which  we  have  heard : 
blessed  is  the  man  that  meditateth  in  tfii  law  of  God.     When  thou  hast  heard  a 
sermon,  take  some  time  to  meditate  on  it,  that  thou  mayest  imprint  it  on  thy 
memory.     This  is  a  common  fault  among  ua.     The  Word  of  God  preached  to  us 
passeth  away.    When  we  are  once  out  of  the  Church,  we  never  think  on  it  again, 
therefore  no  marvel  though  it  slip  away  from  us.     2.  Conferenfifi^ijth others.     The 
disciples  that  travelled  to  Emniaus  conferred  together  ;'tEerBereans  that  came  from 
St.  Paul's  sermon,  took  their  Bibles  and  conferred  together  of  the  sermon.     Many 
eyes  see  more  than  one ;  that  which  one  hath  forgotten,  another  may  remember. 
Therefore  let  Christiana  recount  the  things  they  have  heard,  and  that  repetition 
will  be  as  a  nail  to  fasten  the  things  they  heard.     3.  Prayey.     4.  A  care  to  pi  actise 
that  which  we  have  heard.     This  is  the  digesting  of  our  spiritual  meat,  and  the  con- 
verting of  it  into  our  substance.     Many  hear,  but  few  care  to  practise  that  which  tliey 
hear;  it  is  never  our  own  truly  and  indeed,  till  it  be  practised  ;  that  will  make  ua 
grow  up  as  perfect  men  in  Christ  Jesus.     We  hear  swearing  reproved,  yet  we  swear 
still ;  drunkenness  inveighed   against,  yet  we  are  drunk  still ;   envy  and    malice 
controlled,  yet  malicious  still,  yea,  against  the  preachers,  that  are  as  God's  arm  to 
pull  us  out  of  our  sins :  a  manifest  argument  that  we  hold  not  that  which  we  hear, 
but  suffer  it  without  fruit  to  slip  from  us.     (IF.  Jones,  D.D.)        Sleji^jniijed  by 
^^JJMRJ  -' — Life's  ocean  is  full  of  currents,  any  ono  of  which  will  sweep  us  past  the 
Kfroour  mouth  even  when  we  seem  nearest  to  it,  and  cari'y  us  far  out  to  sea.     It  ia 
the  drift  that  ruins  men  :  the  drift  of  the  religious  world  ;  the  drift  of  old  habita 
and  associations ;  the  drift  of  one's  own  evil  nature ;  the  drift  of  the  pressure  of 
temptation.    The  young  man  coming  from  a  pious  home  does  not  distinctly  and 
deliberately  say,  "  I  renounce  my  father's  God."    But  he  finds  himself  in  a  set  of 
business  associates  who  have  no  care  for  religion  ;  and,  after  a  brief  struggle,  ha 
relaxes  his  efforts  and  begins  to  drift,  until  the  coastline  of  heaven  receles  so  far 
into  the  dim  distance  that  he  is  doubtful  if  he  ever  really  saw  it.    The  business  man, 
who  now  shamelessly  follows  the  lowest  maxims  of  his  trade,  was  once  upright  and 
high-minded.    But  he  began  by  yielding  in  very  trivial  points  to  the  strong  pressure 
of  competition  ;  and  when  once  he  had  allowed  himseli  to  be  caught  by  the  tide, 
it  bore  him  far  beyond  his  first  intention.     The  professing  Christian,  who  now 
scarcely  pretends  to  open  the  Bible  or  pray,  came  to  so  terrible  a  position,  not  at  a 
single  leap,  but  by  yielding  to  the  pressure  of  the  constant  waywardness  of  the  old 
nature,    and  thus   drifted   into   an   Arctic   region,  where  he  is  likely  to  perish, 
benumbed  and  frozen,  unless  rescued,  and  launched  on  the  warm  Gulf  Stream  of 
the  love  of  God.     It  is  so  easy,  and  so  much  pleasanter  to  drift.    Just  to  lie  back, 
and  renounce  effort,  and  let  yourself  go  whither  the  waters  will,  as  they  break 
musically  on  the  sides  of  the  rocking  boat.     But,  ah,  how  ineffable  the  remorse, 
how  disastrous  the  result!     Are  you  drifting?     You  can  easily  tell.     Are  you  con- 
scious of  effort,  of  daily,  hourly  resistance  to  the  stream  around  you,  and  within  ? 
Do  the  things  of  God  and  heaven  loom  more  clearly  on  your  vision?     Do  the  waters 
foam  angrily  at  your  prow  as  you  force  your  way  through  themf     If  so,  rejoice; 
but  remember  that  only  Divine  strength  can  suffice  to  maintain  the  conflict,  and 
keep  the  boat's  head  against  the  stream.    If  not,  you  are  drifting.    Hail  the  strong 
Son  of  God.     Ask  Him  to  come  on  board,  and  stay  you,  and  bring  you  into  port. 
(F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)         The  injiiieiices  that  cause  men  to_  drift  from  Ghrut: — The 
forces  that  with  a  continuous  action  tend  to  move  men  away  from  the  faith  of 
Christ,  and  were  especially  strong  in  the  case  of  the  Hebrews,  are — the   many 
influences  of  life ;  the  feehng  of  isolation  in  the  world,  or,  the  other  side  of  this, 
sympathy  with  national  sentiment  and  thought ;  the  hardships  and  shghts  under- 
gone at  the  hands  of  those  without ;  and  the  monotonous  uniformity  of  the  world, 
where  all  things  continue  as  they  were  and  give  no  signs  of  the  Lord's  coming : 
while  the  resistance  offered  to  such  forces  is  but  feeble,  owing  to  the  sluggishness  of 
the  mind  which  permits  it  to  take  but  a  loose  hold  of  truth,  and  the  weakness  of 
faith  which  makes  it  but  dimly  present  to  itself  the  hope  of  our  calling.     (A.  B. 
Davidson,  LL.D.)        Slji^jying  hack  prevented  : — It  would  produce  a  wonderful  change 
if  men  did  ail  they  knew  they  ought  lo  do'^ "  There  would  then  be  a  new  encouragement 

6 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

to  labour.  The  preaching  of  the  Word  would  then  make  steady  progress.  I  have 
seen  tbe  waggons  of  Pennsylvania  armed  with  a  stout,  iron-shod  stake  trailing 
behind.  Whenever  in  ascending  a  hill  the  horses  stopped,  the  stake  at  once  held 
the  waggon  fast  and  prevented  it  from  slipping  back.  A  device  worthy  of  imitation 
in  spiritual  things  1  It  is  discouraging  to  press  up  the  hill  on  the  Sabbath-day  and 
then  keep  slipping  back  through  the  week ;  to  make  large  advance  in  a  time  of 
religious  interest,  and  then  slip  downward  through  long  succeeding  months  of 
deadness  in  the  Church.  Cannot  this  be  prevented  ?  Yes,  by  obedience  to  the 
suggestion  before  us  we  may  hold  ourselves  firm.  If  each  deed  of  life  is  faithfully 
performed  according  to  our  knowledge  of  duty,  then  are  we  going  steadily  on  in 
spiritual  blessing,  losing  no  ground  in  our  advance.  We  shall  at  last  reach  the 
summit  of  our  hopes  and  stand  in  Christ's  presence  "  complete  in  Him." 

Ver.  2.  The  Word  epoken  by  angels : — The  ministry  of  angels  in  the  delivery  of 
the  law  is  directly  asserted  by  St.  Paul  (Gal.  iii.  19),  and  by  Stephen  (Acts.  vii.  53), 
as  well  as  here.  It  was  an  article  of  faith  amongst  the  later  Jews,  but  the  mention 
of  their  agency  is  less  distinct  in  the  Pentateuch.  The  preseuee  of  the  heavenly 
host  is  proclaimed  in  Deut.  zxxiii.  2,  and  Psa.  Ixviii.  17,  and  an  importaut  function 
in  the  guidance  and  government  of  Israel  was  assigned  to  the  angel  of  the  covenant 
(Exod.  xxiii.  20,  23);  but  the  Divine  presence  and  heavenly  voice  manifested  at  Sinai 
are  not  identified  with  angelic  agency,  as  they  are  by  Stephen  in  the  case  of  the 
burning  bush  and  of  Sinai  (Acts  vii.  30,38).  The'Pentateuch  is  content  to  give  the 
voice  as  an  utterance  of  God,  as  does  also  this  Epistle  in  xii.  26,  without  associating 
any  angel  with  the  utterance.  And  this  mode  of  speaking  agrees  with  the  ordinary 
language  of  this  Epistle,  which  attributes  the  words  of  the  prophets  to  God  speak- 
ing in  them.  But  the  simple  language  of  Exodus  was  open  to  misinterpretation  ; 
men  inferred  from  it  a  visible  presence  of  God,  and  a  strong  protest  agaiust  this 
idolatrous  tendency  was  pronounced  in  Deut.  iv.  12.  Hence  the  expediency  of 
explaining  the  material  voice  that  spoke  from  heaven  by  the  definite  introduction  of 
angelic  mediators,  m  whom  God  made  His  revelation  to  man.  (F.  Rendall,  M.A.) 
The  difference  between  transgression  and  disobedience : — The  verb  from  whence  the 
first  word  in  Greek  is  derived,  properly  signifieth  "  to  pass  over  a  thing" :  metaphori- 
cally having  reference  to  a  law,  or  any  other  rule,  it  signifieth  to  swerve  from 
that  rule,  or  to  violate  and  break  that  law  (Matt.  xv.  3).  In  this  metaphorical  sense 
this  word  is  often  used  in  relation  to  the  law  of  God,  and  put  for  any  breach  thereof 
(Rom.  iv.  15;  Gal.  iii.  19).  It  is  put  for  the  first  sin  of  Adam  (Rom.  v.  14), 
and  for  Eve's  special  sin  (1  Tim.  ii.  14).  The  other  word  according  to  the  notation 
of  it  in  Greek,  intimateth  a  turning  of  the  ear  from  that  which  is  spoken ;  and 
that  with  a  kind  of  obstinacy  and  contumacy,  as  where  Christ  saith  of  an  obsti- 
nate brother  if  he  neglect  to  hear  (Matt,  xviii.  7),  or  obstinately  refuse  to  hear.  I 
find  the  word  here  translated  disobedience,  twice  opposed  to  a  wilUng  and  ready 
obedience,  namely,  of  true  saints  (2  Cor.  x.  6),  and  of  Christ  (Eom.  v.  19).  This 
opposition  importeth  a  wilful  disobedience,  or  a  contumacy  as  some  here  translate 
the  word.  Others  under  the  former  word  "  transgression,"  comprise  sins  of  commis- 
sion, and  under  the  latter  word  "disobedience,"  sins  of  omission.  For  the  verb 
from  whence  the  latter  word  is  derived  signifieth  to  neglect  or  refuse  to  hear  (Matt, 
xviii.  17).  There  is,  beyond  question,  a  difference  betwixt  these  two  words,  either  in 
the  degrees  or  in  the  kinds  of  disobedience,  in  which  respect  the  universal,  or  (as  it  is 
here  used),  distributive  particle  "every"  is  premised,  to  show  that  no  transgression, 
great  or  mean,  in  one  or  other  kind  passed  unpunished.  Let  not  any  think,  by 
mincing  his  sin,  to  escape  punishment.  A  prophet  having  reckoned  up  a  cata- 
logue of  sins,  some  greater,  some  lighter,  maketh  this  inference — "  If  a  man  do  the 
like  to  any  one  of  these  things  ...  he  shall  surely  die"  {Ezek.  xviii.  10,  13).  Every 
particular  branch  of  God's  law  is  as  a  distinct  link  of  a  chain  ;  if  any  one  link  fail, 
the  whole  chain  is  broken.  The  will  of  the  Law-maker  is  disobeyed  in  every 
transgression  (James  ii.  10,  11).  Herein  lieth  a  main  difference  betwixt  a  faithful 
servant  of  God  and  a  formal  professor  :  the  former  makes  conscience  of  every  sin, 
the  latter  of  such  only  as  are  less  agreeable  to  his  own  corrupt  humour,  or  such  as 
he  conceiveth  most  damageable  to  himself.  (W.  Gouge.)  God's  retributive 
jtistice : — If  men  trifle  with  the  law  of  God,  the  law  will  not  trifle  with  them ;  it  has 
taken  hold  of  the  sinners  of  former  ages,  and  will  take  hold  of  them  in  all  ages. 
(M.  Henry.)  The  equity  of  retribution : — The  severest  punishment  God  ever 
inflicted  upon  sinners  is  no  more  than  what  sin  deserves ;  it  is  "  just  recompense  of 
reward."    Punishments  are  as  just,  and  as  much  due  to  sin  as  rewards  are  to 


«HAP.  n.]  HEBREWS.  tS 

obedience ;  yea,  more  due  than  rewards  are  to  imperfect  obedience.  (Ibid.)  Warn' 
ing$ : — A  very  skilful  bowman  went  to  the  mountains  in  search  of  game.  All  the 
beasts  of  the  forest  fled  at  his  approach.  The  lion  alone  challenged  him  to  combat. 
The  bowman  immediately  let  fly  an  arrow,  and  said  to  the  lion,  "  I  send  thee  my 
messenger,  that  from  him  thou  mayst  learn  what  I  myself  shall  be  when  I 
a»sail  thee."  The  lion  thus  wounded  rushed  away  in  great  fear,  and  on  a  fox 
exhorting  him  to  be  of  good  courage,  and  not  to  run  away  at  the  first  attack :  "  You 
counsel  me  in  vain,  for  if  he  sends  bo  fearful  a  messenger,  how  shall  I  abide  the 
attack  of  the  man  himself?"  If  the  warning  admonitions  of  God's  ministers  fill 
the  conscience  with  terror,  what  must  it  be  to  face  the  Lord  Himself  ?  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  3.  How  shall  we  escape,  If  we  neglect. — The  sinfulness  and  the  danger  of 
neglecting  the  gospel : — The  great  salvation  of  which  the  apostle  testifies  is  not  the 
salvation  which  the  gospel  reveals,  but  the  gospel  itself,  even  the  good  news  of  the 
kingdom,  which,  by  His  Son,  God  in  these  last  days  hath  spoken  unto  us  (chap.  i.  2). 
The  salvation  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  may,  with  the  most  obvious  propriety,  be 
denominated  great,  if  we  compare  it  with  the  deUverance  which  was  wrought  for 
the  house  of  Israel,  when  the  Lord  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt.  The 
former  was  a  temporal  deliverance,  the  latter  is  a  spiritual  salvation,  including  de- 
liverance from  sin  and  wrath — from  everlasting  destruction ;  and  not  only  deliverance 
from  all  evil,  but  also  the  enjoyment  of  eternal  life.  What  is  it  to  neglect  so  great 
salvation  7  •*  All  things  are  ready,  come  unto  the  marriage,"  is  the  intimation 
which  the  servants  of  the  King,  according  to  His  commandment,  gave  to  those  who 
were  bidden  to  the  marriage  of  His  Son,  Did  they  regard  this  kind,  this  generous 
invitation  as  duty  and  interest  required  ?  No.  '*  They  made  light  of  it,  and  went 
their  ways,  one  to  his  farm,  another  to  his  merchandise."  They  who  neglect  so 
great  salvation,  make  lipht  of  the  gospel.  They  do  not  regard  it  as  the  way  of 
eternal  life ;  they  do  not  give  to  it  that  cordial  reception  to  which  it  is  entitled. 
The  great  salvation  is  neglected  by  all  who  enjoy  the  means  of  religious  knowledge, 
and  yet  remain  ignorant  of  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints  ;  by  all  who  do  not 
with  the  heart  believe  unto  righteousness,  how  much  knowledge  soever  they  may 
have  attained  ;  by  all  who  continue  in  the  love  and  practice  of  sin,  who  profess  to 
knew  God,  but  in  works  deny  Him — who  do  not  give  to  the  salvation  of  their  souls 
the  preference  to  every  other  object  of  pursuit.  I.  To  neglect  so  great  salvation 
IS  A  VERY  HEINOUS  SIN.  1.  The  dignity  of  Him  by  whom  the  great  salvation  has 
been  made  known  to  us,  illustrates  the  wickedness  of  neglecting  it.  2.  The  wickedness 
which  is  included  in  rejecting  the  gospel  of  the  blessed  God  our  Saviour,  is  illus- 
trated by  the  clear  and  full  revelation  which  it  makes  of  the  way  of  eternal  Ufe. 
The  mystery  of  salvation  by  the  obedience  and  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God,  which 
was  hid  from  ages  and  generations,  is  clearly  revealed,  and  hath  appeared  unto  all 
men.  The  gospel  proclaims  tidings  bo  good  and  so  interesting,  that,  on  the  ac- 
knowledged principles  of  human  nature,  it  seems  at  first  view  reasonable  to  conclude, 
that  to  a  very  faint  discovery  of  them,  all  whom  they  concern  must  give  the  most 
earnest  heed.  How  inexcusable,  then,  must  be  they  who  turn  away  from  Him  who 
now  speaketh  from  heaven,  proclaiming  in  the  clearest  manner,  "Peace  on  earth, 
and  good-will  to  men  I  "  3.  The  wickedness  of  neglecting  so  great  salvation  is 
illustrated  by  the  infallible  proofs  of  its  Divine  origin  by  which  it  is  recommended 
to  our  acceptance.  That  the  gospel  is  indeed  the  Word  of  the  living  God  is 
established  by  the  most  abundant  evidence.  Do  yoa  require  evidence  to  convince 
you  that  the  gospel  which  the  apostles  preached,  is,  indeed,  the  great  salvation 
■which,  at  the  first,  began  to  be  spoken  by  the  Lord?  What  you  require,  the  text 
supplies  in  rich  abundance.  "  So,  then,  after  the  Lord  had  spoken  unto  them.  He 
was  received  up  into  heaven,  and  sat  on  the  right  hand  of  God ;  and  they  went 
forth  and  preached  everywhere,  the  Lord  working  with  them,  and  confirming  the 
Word  by  signs  following."  That  the  God  who  cannot  lie  will  not  attest  what  is 
false,  is  a  self-evident  truth.  He  cannot  be  deceived,  and  He  will  not,  He  cannot 
deceive.  If,  therefore,  the  God  of  heaven  bears  testimony  to  the  doctrine  which 
the  apostles  published,  it  must  be  the  great  salvation  which,  at  the  first,  began  to  be 
spoken  by  the  Lord.      II.  The  just  recompense  of  reward  which  awaits  those 

WHO    REJECT    the    COUNSEL   OF    GOD    AGAINST    THEMSELVES.       1.    The  righteOUSneSS  Of 

God  renders  it  necessary  that,  on  them  who  make  light  of  that  mercy  which  the 
gospel  reveals,  judgment  shall  be  executed.  2.  The  condemnation  of  those  who 
neglect  so  great  salvation  must  be  dreadful  beyond  conception.     3,  The  condenma- 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a 

tion  of  those  who  neglect  so  great  salvation  is  most  certain.  {W.  Kidston,  D.D.V 
The  inexcusahleness  of  rejecting  the  gospel : — 1.  Here  is  the  intrinsic  goodness  and 
excellency  of  the  thing  itself,  which  wicked  men  reject ;  intimated  as  a  just  ground 
why  they  should  not  escape  unpunished.  2.  This  further  consideration,  that  the 
gospel  is  an  express  and  positive  revelation  of  the  will  of  God,  is  a  very  high  aggra- 
vation of  the  sin  of  neglecting  so  great  a  salvation.  3.  The  dignity  and  excellency  of 
the  Person,  by  and  through  whom  this  great  salvation  is  proposed  to  us,  is  a  further 
aggravation  of  the  sin  of  rejecting  it.  4.  The  strength  and  clearness  of  the  evidence, 
and  the  number  and  greatness  of  the  proofs,  made  use  of  to  assure  us  of  the  truth, 
of  the  gospel,  is  the  highest  aggravation  of  the  guilt  of  those  who  neglect  or  disobey 
it,  and  that  which  of  all  other  things  renders  them  the  most  absolutely  inexcusable, 
(S.  Clarke,  D.D.)  The  guilt  of  the  unconverted  in  neglecting  the  offered  salvation : 
— L  The  gkeatness  of  the  salvation,  which  every  unconverted  person  despises. 
It  is  a  deliverance  from  the  eternal  ruin  due  to  our  sins ;  from  the  dominion  of  sii> 
and  Satan  on  earth,  and  from  the  doom  of  Satan  after  death  ;  from  present  terror 
and  from  eternal  remorse ;  from  the  wrath  of  an  infiuite  Avenger  ;  from  a  sorrow, 
which  is  near  at  hand,  inevitable,  intolerable,  eternal;  from  all  that  thought  shrinks 
to  contemplate,  and  more  than  the  imagination  ever  conceived.  It  is,  on  the  other 
hand,  an  admission  to  blessings  as  vast.  To  adoption  into  the  family  of  God  ;  to 
all  the  privileges  of  His  believing  people  ;  to  be  loved  by  Him,  watched  over,  pro- 
vided for,  cheered,  consoled,  sustained,  and  guided  to  glory.  It  is  an  invitation  to  ac- 
cept the  blessings,  given  after  the  greatest  provocation — a  guilt  which  is  incalculable. 
It  is  a  salvation  offered  to  those,  who  by  the  obduracy  of  their  hearts  and  the  un- 
godliness of  their  lives,  persevered  in  through  long  years,  have  deserved  that  tha 
Lord  should  exclude  them  from  His  favour  for  ever.  It  is  a  salvation  provided  for 
such  rebellious  transgressors  at  the  cost  of  the  death  of  Christ.  IL  What  is  it  to 
NEGLECT  IT  ?  It  might  seem  that  it  was  impossible  to  neglect  a  mercy  such  as  this. 
The  traveller,  when  he  is  dying  of  thirst  in  the  desert,  does  not  reject  the  gushing 
spring,  which,  bubbling  at  his  feet,  offers  him  refreshment  and  lite.  The  prisoiit-r 
does  not  bug  his  chain,  and  draw  back  from  the  sunshine  and  Uberty  offered  him, 
to  the  damps  and  darkness  of  his  dungeon.  The  sick  man  never  scorns  healtii. 
The  poor  dejected  and  homeless  wanderer  would  never  refuse  proffered  wealth.  Yet 
it  is  not  only  possible  to  neglect  this  salvation,  but  it  is  too  certain  that  it  is  very 
generally  neglected — that  while  the  road  to  perdition  is  crowded  by  multitudes,  tbo 
road  to  glory  is  straight  and  narrow  "  and  few  there  be  that  find  it"  To  neglect 
this  great  salvation  is,  evidently,  not  to  obtain  the  blessings  which  it  proposes  ;  by 
whatever  mode  that  neglect  is  manifested,  in  whatever  way  those  blessings  are  lost,, 
to  lose  them  is  to  neglect  this  "  great  salvation."  God  has  offered  them  to  sinnera 
freely ;  He  has  set  before  you  plainly  the  way  in  which  they  may  be  made  yours  ; 
He  has  offered  them  only  in  that  one  way;  and  therefore  if  either  another  way  of 
obtaining  them  is  preferred,  or  if  they  are  not  sought  in  this  way,  then  is  such  & 
person  chargeable  with  neglecting  this  great  salvation.  III.  The  guilt  of  neo- 
LECTiNO  n.  That  gnilt  is  clearly  impUed  in  the  expression  in  our  text,  "  How  shall 
we  escape  "  if  we  neglect  it  ?  "  How  shall  we  escape  ?  " — it  evidently  implies,  that 
there  is  in  it  such  a  guilt  as  must  provoke  the  severest  punishment.  1.  In  the  first 
place,  you  despise  these  blessings.  Heaven,  and  the  pardon  of  your  sins,  and  the 
renewal  of  your  hearts,  and  the  indwelling  Spirit,  the  love  of  God,  a  holy  and  a  blame- 
less Ufe,  a  glorious  crown,  an  immortality  of  hohness  and  happiness — all  this  you 
despise.  But  I  have  a  heavier  charge  to  bring  against  you.  2.  It  is  evil  enough  to 
disregard  these  mercies,  but  every  unconverted  person  is  also  guilty  of  inconceivable 
ingratitude  towards  God.  {B.  W.  Noel,  M.A.)  The  danger  of  neglecting  Christ 
and  salvation: — I.  Tgg.  gospjx  au.VATiON  la  great.  1.  The  deliverance  of  Noah 
from  the  general  destruction  brought  upon  the  old  world  was  wonderful;  but  the 
deliverance  of  our  souls  from  the  deluge  of  God's  wrath,  by  the  gospel,  is  greater. 
The  preservation  of  Lot  from  the  destruction  of  Sodom  was  great ;  but  the  salvation 
we  obtain  by  the  gospel,  from  the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire,  is  greater.  2.  The 
Author  of  this  salvation  (Isa.  ix.  6),  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  (1  Tim.  iii.  16 ; 
Isa.  lix.  16).  3.  The  means  (Rom.  viii.  3 ;  Isa.  liii.  3 ;  Heb.  ix.  22).  4.  The 
salvation  itself,  or  the  benefits  that  accrue  to  believers  through  Jesus  Christ.  (1) 
We  are  saved  from  the  guilt  of  all  our  sins  (Rom.  viii.  1 ;  Acts  xiiL  89).  (2)  Be- 
lievers are  saved  from  the  power  of  sin  (Rom.  vi.  6,  14).  (3)  Believers  are  saved 
from  the  contagion  of  sin  (1  John  iii.  9 ;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25,  29).  (4)  They  that  are- 
delivered  from  the  body  of  sin  and  death,  are  saved,  likewise,  from  fear ;  from  all  fear 
that  hath  torment  (1  John  iv.  18 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  55 ;  Isa.  xii.  1).  (5)  Believers  are  saved  from> 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  (<■( 

the  power  of  the  grave  (1  Cor.  xv,  53 ;  PhU.  iii.  21).  (6)  The  saints  shall  be  saved 
Irom  hell  and  all  misery  (Eev.  vii.  17 ;  Psa.  xvi.  11).  II.  Who  abe  they  that 
KEQLECT  IT  ?  1.  Those  who  live  in  any  known  sin.  2.  Those  who  trust  in  their 
own  righteousness  (Bom.  x.  3.)  3.  Those  who  do  not  seek  this  salvation  more  than 
other  objects.  III.  Thosk  who  persist  in  the  neoleot  of  this  salvation  cannot 
KSOAPB  PDNI8HMENT.  1.  In  this  life  conscience  condemns  them  ;  therefore  are  they 
like  the  troubled  sea  (Isa.  Ivii.  20,  21).  There  is  a  curse  on  tbem,  and  on  whatso- 
ever they  do.  2.  At  judgment  justice  will  seize  upon  them  (Kev.  vi.  15,  16 ;  Kom. 
xiv.  12 ;  Prov.  ii.  22).  3.  In  heU  the  vengeance  of  God  will  still  pursue  them  (Psa. 
ix.  17,  xi.  6  ;  Rev.  xxi.  8).  Application  :  1.  How  glorious  is  the  gospel-scheme  of 
«alvation,  how  far  superior  to  all  those  wonderful  deliverances  which  God  wrought 
in  old  times  I  Christ  is  our  only  refuge  (Isa.  xxxii.  2).  2.  It  is  easy  to  see  how 
heinous  a  thing  sin  is  in  the  sight  of  God ;  how  infinite  and  inconceivable  the  love 
of  God  is  towards  sinners  (John  iii.  16 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  18).  3.  Consider  the  great,  the 
glorious  salvation,  which  is  offered  to  you  by  the  gospel.  Seek  it  while  it  may  be 
found  (Isa.  Iv.  7 ;  Heb.  iii.  7,  8  ;  2  Cor.  vi.  2).  4.  Remember  how  it  shall  happen 
to  all  those  who  forget  God  (Rom.  ii.  8,  9 ;  Psa.  1.  22).  Speedily  give  up  all  for 
Christ  (Phil.  iii.  8).  6.  Though  you  may  have  neglected  this  great  salvation  to  the 
present  moment,  God  is  wiUing  and  ready  to  pardon.  Great  salvation  f  >r  great 
sinners  (1  Tim.  i.  15 ;  John  vi.  37).  6.  Never  rest  till  you  rest  in  Christ.  (J.  Han- 
nam.)  The  certainty  that  pu7iishment  in  eteimity  awaits  the  unconverted : — I.  The 
Word  of  God  expressly  declares  that  God  will  pdnish  sinners.  II.  The  attri- 
butes OP  God,  His  revealed  perfections,  no  less  certainly  secdbe  the  punish- 
ment OF  THE  SINNER  HEREAFTER.  III.  We  have  another  and  an  independent  proof 
that  the  impenitent  sinner  must  look  for  a  severe  retribution  when  he  comes  before 
the  judgment  of  his  Maker,  derived  from  the  past  judgments  wdich  He  has  in- 
flicted ON  ACCOUNT  OF  SIN.  1.  Often  have  individuals  been  made  to  experience  the 
instant  vengeance  that  God  takes  upon  iniquity.  Under  the  Mosaic  law  the  pro- 
■visions  were  exceedingly  severe,  to  mark  to  that  people  that  God  abhors  transgression. 
2.  On  many  occasions  God  has  manifested  His  anger  against  sin,  towards  multitudes 
at  once.  3.  Once  again  ;  contemplate  a  more  awful  wreck,  and  a  worse  disaster 
yet.  Think  of  those  angelic  beings,  that  once  were  in  the  presence  of  God,  loving, 
holy,  happy  beyond  fear,  who  seemed  in  their  Maker's  favour  to  have  a  shield  that 
would  secure  them  to  eternity.  Those  angels  transgressed  the  will  of  God.  And 
"  keeping  not  their  first  estate  "  they  are  now  visited  by  no  mercy,  reserved  to  an 
eternity  of  horror.  What  God  has  done,  why,  sinner  1  should  He  not  do  again  ? 
How  can  you  plead  an  exemption  from  the  curse  that  has  rested  upon  so  many  ? 
IV.  But  there  is  another  fact,  still  more  awful  than  all — another  argument  still  more 
potent  than  these.  If  every  other  proof  that  God  will  visit  iniquity  were  lost,  if 
His  Word  were  silent,  if  we  otherwise  knew  not  His  attributes,  if  there  were  no  past 
judgments  to  point  at,  still  in  the  cross  of  Christ  you  would  read  a  manifestation 
of  the  wrath  of  God  against  iniquity,  which  must  reduce  to  hopelessness  every  con- 
siderate person  still  living  in  sin,  or  must  reduce  to  silence  at  the  last  day  every 
sinner  that  will  cling  to  delusive  hope.  For  why  did  Christ  die?  Because  God  will 
manifest  how  He  hates  iniquity ;  because  He  must — because  holiness,  justice,  truth, 
goodness,  and  mercy  require  that  He  must — show  that  He  hales  sin.  (B.  W.  Noel,  M.A .) 
The  danger  of  neglecting  the  great  salvation.  I.  The  only  way  of  salvation  foe  sinners 
IS  REVEALED  BY  THE  GOSPEL  (2  Tim.  i.  10).  1.  They  must  needs  be  strangers  to  the  great 
salvation,  who  slight  the  gospel  that  brings  the  good  tidings  of  it.  2.  If  the  gospel 
alone  brings  the  tidings  of  salvation  for  lost  sinners,  how  thankful  should  you  be  to 
God  for  this  revelation.  3.  If  the  gospel  alone  brings  you  the  tidings  of  salvation 
for  lost  sinners — a  salvation  we  all  needed  to  hear  of  and  be  interested  in — then 
how  worthy  is  it  of  all  acceptation.    II.  What  the  salvation  is,  which  the  oospkl 

ALONE    reveals.        III.     WhY    THE     SALVATION    REVEALED    BY    THE     GOSPEL    IS    CALLED 

*'  GREAT."  1.  It  is  great  salvation,  as  it  is  the  product  of  infinite  wisdom  and 
unerring  counsel.  2.  From  the  dignity  of  the  Person  that  wrought  it  out.  3.  It 
is  a  fruit  of  a  great  price,  even  of  the  obrdience  and  death  of  Jesus  Christ.  4.  It 
is  applied  by  almighty  power,  against  all  the  opposition  of  Satan,  of  an  evil  world, 
and  even  of  the  very  soul  itself  who  is  made  partaker  of  it.  5.  It  deUvers  the  soul 
from  everything  that  is  evil.  6.  It  brings  the  soul  from  darkness  to  light,  from 
death  to  life,  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God.  7.  It  is  a  fruit  of  great  grace. 
IV.  Some  under  the  gospel  neglect  the  great  salvation.  1.  Notice  how  the 
greatest  and  most  dangerous  sin  under  the  gospel  is  described.  "  Neglect "  not  the 
only  remedy,  the  true  riches.    It  is  an  injury  to  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit.    It  is  a 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

high  affront  offered  to  the  wisdom  of  God,  and  to  His  goodness  and  grace  in  Christ. 
2.  Notice  the  misery  of  those  that  neglect  the  great  salvation.  They  aie  condemned 
already  (John  iii.  18).  3.  Who  are  they,  among  all  the  hearers  of  the  gospel,  that 
neglect  the  great  salvation?  (1)  Such  as  satisfy  themselves  with  notions  of  the 
gospel,  and  take  no  care  about  the  transforming  virtue  of  the  Word  of  God  upon 
their  souls  (1  Thesa.  i.  5).  (2)  Such  as  have  often  heard  of  the  danger  of  sin,  yet 
hve  in  the  love  and  practice  of  it.  (3)  Such  as  hear  of  the  necessity  of  an  interest 
in  Jesus  Christ,  but  take  no  care  to  win  Christ  and  be  found  in  Him.  (4)  Such  as 
know  their  Master's  will,  and  have  no  heart  to  do  it.  (5)  Such  as  have  but  a  low 
esteem  of  the  gospel  of  Christ,  and  the  ordinances  of  it.  (6)  Such  as  never  inquire 
what  they  shall  do  to  be  saved,  how  they  may  escape  the  wrath  to  come.  4.  Whence 
is  it  that  some,  who  are  placed  by  kind  Providence  under  the  gospel  and  ministry, 
neglect  the  great  salvation  ?  (1)  From  the  blindness  of  their  minds,  and  ignorance 
of  their  hearts.  They  are  not  sensible  of  their  misery,  the  guilt,  bondage,  defile- 
ment,  and  poverty  that  sin  has  brought  them  to.  (2)  From  the  atheism  of  their 
hearts.     (3)  From  their  natural  aversion  to  the  Word  and  ways  of  God.     V.  There 

IB  NO   POSSIBLE    WAY  FOB  THEIB    ESCAPINO   ETERNAL  MISERY   WHO    CONTINUE  TO    NEGLECT 

THE  GREAT  SALVATION.  1.  Some  impenitent  sinners  hope  to  escape  the  wrath  of 
God,  though  they  neglect  the  great  salvation.  2.  Every  one  under  the  gospel  should 
exercise  their  own  judgment,  reason,  and  conscience  about  their  present  behaviour, 
under  their  present  trusts,  and  seriously  think  what  will  be  the  issue  of  their 
present  carriage.  3.  There  is  no  mercy  to  be  shown  to  impenitent  sinners  after 
this  life,  if  they  die  in  their  sins.  4.  Neglecting  the  great  salvation  is  the  only 
damning  sin.  (1)  It  is  a  high  affront  to  each  of  the  Persons  in  the  Holy  Trinity.  (2) 
It  is  a  slight  of  the  only  remedy.  5.  The  punishment  that  shall  be  inflicted,  at 
last,  upon  impenitent  sinners,  for  their  neglect  of  the  great  salvation,  will  be  found 
to  be  just.  (1)  God  has  given  them  fair  warning  by  His  word.  (2)  They  will  re- 
ceive nothing  at  the  great  day  but  the  just  fruit  of  their  rebellion  against  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  (3)  They  will  receive  nothing  but  their  own  wishes  and  a  retaliation 
of  their  own  language  (Job  xxi.  14).  Uses:  1.  Inferences.  (1)  Hence  we  see  how 
wonderfully  rich  the  goodness  of  God  is  to  poor  lost  mankind,  in  providing  thia 
great  salvation  for  them.  (2)  The  goodness  of  God  is  further  displayed  in  revealing 
this  great  salvation  to  us  by  the  gospel.  (3)  We  learn  hence  the  sin  and  folly,  the 
danger  and  misery  of  such  as  sit  under  the  gospel  and  yet  neglect  the  great  salva- 
tion. (4)  Such  as  neglect  the  great  salvation  will  be  found  the  greatest  losers ;  a 
greater  loss  never  was  or  can  be  sustained.  (5)  Those  of  you  who  are  partakers  of 
this  great  salvation,  you  see  where  your  treasure  hes,  and  there  your  hearts  should 
be  also.  2.  Examination  :  Ask  your  own  souls  what  entertainment  the  gospel  and 
its  salvation  have  with  you.  It  has  been  brought  to  your  door ;  has  it  been  brought 
to  your  heart  ?  3.  Exhortations  :  (1)  Give  yourselves  time,  closely  and  seriously,  to 
consider  the  state  and  wants  of  your  own  souls.  (2)  Take  care  and  pains  to  clear  up 
your  interest  in  the  great  salvation,  by  the  power  of  the  Word  of  God  upon  the  heart, 
and  by  the  esteem  of  the  Word  of  God  upon  your  souls ;  by  your  hatred  of  sin  and 
love  of  holiness,  and  by  your  hungering  and  thirsting  after  God  the  hving  God,  and 
hearty  concern  for  the  salvation  of  others.  (3)  Attend  the  ministry  of  the  gospel 
with  your  affectionate  prayers,  that  God  would  reveal  His  arm  therewith,  and 
powerfully  apply  His  great  salvation  to  the  souls  of  your  poor  relations  and  neigh- 
bours. (4)  If  you  can  make  out  to  yourselves  that  you  are  partakers  of  the  great 
salvation,  then — (")  Give  God  the  glory  of  what  He  has  wrought.  (6)  Take  care  to 
hve  agreeably  to  this  great  grace,  (c)  Commend  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  His 
salvation  to  others  ;  endeavour  to  show  them  the  necessity  of  it.  {d)  Put  this  great 
salvation  into  the  balance  against  all  the  great  afflictions,  losses,  disappointments, 
and  unkindnesses  that  you  may  meet  with  in  the  world  (2  Cor.  iv.  17 ;  Eom.  viii.  18). 
(W.  Notcutt.)  The  danger  of  neglect : — I.  Cub  dangerous  condition,  1.  The  in- 
quiry, "  How  shall  we  escape ?  "  implies  it :  bitten,  depraved,  dead,  lost.  2.  We  need 
relief — salvation  (Isa.  liii.  6  ;  Ezek.  xxxvii.  11).  3.  We  cannot  relieve  or  save  our- 
selves (Job  xxxvi.  18,  19  ;  Psa.  xlix.  7).  4.  Christ  brings  salvation  to  us  (John  iii. 
16;  Matt.  i.  21;  Luke  ix.  56;  1  Tim.  ii.  6).  II.  It  is  a  great  salvation.  1.  God 
in  Christ  is  its  Author.  2.  Jesus  is  its  Finisher.  3.  It  is  plenteous  and  fuU 
(Psa.  cxxx.  7).  4.  It  saves  from  great  sins.  5.  It  saves  from  greatest  dangers.  6. 
It  is  free.  7.  It  is  the  only  salvation.  "  None  other  name."  8.  It  is  great  in 
heaven.  Infinite  honours,  eternal  crown.  "  Kings  and  priests."  9.  It  is  ever- 
lasting (Isa.  xlv.  17).  HI.  There  is  danger  of  losing  it.  Not  great  sinfulness 
alone,  but  simple  neglect  will  destroy  your  soul.    The  man  in  business  has  but  to 


CHAP.  n.l  HEBREWS.  87 

neglect  it  to  be  ruined.  The  sick  man  neglecta  the  means  of  recovery,  and  he 
dies.  The  man  on  Niagara  neglects  at  the  proper  time  to  use  the  oar,  and  he 
plunges  over  the  cataract.  Ah,  ruinous  neglect !  Let  no  one  infer  because  he  is 
moral  and  truthful,  is  not  a  drunkard,  an  adulterer,  a  murderer,  or  some  red- 
handed,  black-hearted  criminal,  that  he  is  safe.  Why,  if  your  own  morality  and 
goodness  were  enough  to  save  you,  then  Jesus  need  not  have  suffered  and  died. 
Salvation  is  not  forced  upon  us.  We  must  make  an  effort  to  secure  it.  We  may 
neglect  to  make  that  effort,  and  be  lost.  (B.  F.  Whittemore.)  Neglect  of  the 
great  salvation : — I.  The  important  subject  couched  in  the  few  but  expressive 
WORDS,  "  80  GREAT  SALVATION."  1.  Its  hcaveuly  Origin.  2.  The  extraordinary  means 
by  which  it  is  effected.  3.  Its  boundless  fulness  and  freeness.  4.  Its  deliverances 
from  evils.     5.  Its  choice  and  extensive  blessings.    II.  The  neglect  supposed, 

AND     VIRTUALLY     CHARGED     UPON     US.       III.    ThE     AWFUL     CONSEQUENCES     THAT     MUST 

ENSUE  TO  ALL  FOUND  GUILTY  OF  NEGLECTING  SO  GREAT  SALVATION.  (Essex  Con- 
gregational Remembrancer.)  Do  not  neglect  the  great  salvation: — I.  The  word 
of  tbe  gospel  which  is  preached  to  us,  is  the  word  of  salvation.  1.  It  reveals 
and  announces  salvation.  It  tells  us  of  God's  method  of  recovery  for  lost,  guilty, 
sinful  man.  The  gospel  is  the  only  revelation  of  saving  mercy.  Eeason  could 
never  have  discovered  it.  Philosophy  never  could  have  descried  a  scheme  like 
this.  Nature  could  never  have  given  us  any  just  conceptions  of  this  subject.  We 
see  much  of  the  goodness  of  God  in  the  brightness  of  the  sun,  and  in  the  descent 
of  the  shower  ;  in  the  flowers  which  cover  the  earth  ;  but  not  one  word  of  salvation  ; 
not  a  syllable  which  relates  to  the  restoration  of  man,  and  bis  deliverance  from  the 
deserved  wrath  which  his  apostasy  has  incurred.  2.  Instrumentally  it  effects 
salvation.  It  brings  salvation  near,  both  to  the  understanding  and  to  the  heart. 
3.  It  is  the  ordained  means  of  perfecting  and  preparing  the  soul  for  the  enjoyment 
of  consummate  bliss.  II.  This  salvation,  announced  and  revealed  and  brought 
near  in  the  gospel,  is  inconceivably  great.  The  apostle  does  not  attempt  to  describe 
its  greatness ;  but  he  wraps  up  the  whole  magnificence  of  his  theme  in  this  ex- 
pression, "so  great  salvation."  1.  Think  of  the  stupendous  contrivance  in  which 
it  originated ;  and  it  will  be  found  a  great  salvation.  2.  Look  at  the  methods  which 
have  been  adopted  in  order  to  render  this  salvation  sure.  Nothing  less  than  the 
achievements  of  the  eternal  Son.  3.  Think  of  the  agency  employed  in  securing 
the  application  and  saving  efficacy  of  this  salvation — the  Holy  Spirit.  4.  Think  of 
the  all-sufficient  credentials  and  Divine  attestations,  by  which  the  gospel  is  recom- 
mended to  us ;  and  you  will  easily  perceive  that  it  is,  in  my  text,  most  justly 
described.  5.  Consider  the  richness  and  amphtude  of  its  provisions.  6.  I  only 
refer,  finally,  to  the  ultimate  end  which  it  proposes  to  effect  on  behalf  of  all  who 
are  interested  iu  its  benefits.  That  end  is  the  resurrection  of  the  body  from  the 
dust ;  tbe  glorification  of  the  entire  Church ;  the  subjugation  of  all  evil ;  an 
eternity  of  unimaginable  bliss.  III.  I  am  to  prove  to  you  that  those  who  neglect 
it  have  not  the  remotest  prospect  of  escape  from  the  entire  and  hopeless  ruin  which 
such  neglect  inevitably  involves.  1.  Everything  in  the  reason  of  the  case  forbids 
the  hope  of  escape.  Because  God  Himself  has  devised  this  method  of  recovery ; 
He  has  revealed  it ;  He  has  offered  it ;  He  has  told  us  plainly,  "  Neither  is  there 
salvation  iu  auy  other"  than  Christ.  They  who  neglect  this  salvation,  then,  must 
perish,  upon  every  principle  of  equity,  and  upon  every  princii-l'?  of  reason.  There 
is  a  storm  gathering.  Divine  mercy  has  provided  a  shelter.  You  neglect  it ;  and 
the  thunderbolt  strikes  you  prostrate  to  the  ground.  2.  Everything  in  the  character 
of  God  forbids  the  hope  of  an  escape.  He  is  a  God  of  justice ;  and  will  never 
compromise  the  claims  of  equity  in  complaisance  to  the  negligence  and  unbelief  of 
His  creatures.  8.  There  is,  moreover,  nothing  in  the  Word  of  God  which  affords 
the  slightest  ground  of  expectation  that  this  method  of  salvation  discarded  any 
other  will  be  provided.  (Heb.  x.  26.)  Lessons  :  1.  Admire  and  adore  the  riches  of 
Divine  grace  in  having  provided  such  a  salvation  for  lost  man.  2.  How  full  of 
terror  is  this  subject  to  you  who  are  neglecting  this  salvation.  3.  How  happy  are 
they  who  have  reached  the  final  end  and  ultimate  enjoyment  of  that  salvation  of 
which  we  have  been  hearing;  who  have  "believed  to  the  salvation  of  the  soul." 
(6.  Clayton.)  The  superiority  of  Christianity  as  seen  in  its  claims : — I.  The 
nature  of  Cheistianitt's  claims.  1.  Their  imperativeness.  2.  Their  persona' 
character.  II.  The  irretrievable  consequences  of  neglecting  the  claims  of 
Christianity.  1.  These  consequences  are  suggested  analogically.  2.  These  con- 
sequences  are  based  on  the  intrinsic  excellence  of  Christianity.  3.  The  character 
of  the  sin  on  account  of   which  these  consequences  will  be  inevitably  inflicted. 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  n. 

4.  That  such  a  sin  as  neglect  must  inevitably  be  followed  by  serious  consequences 
is  very  obvious  from  the  laws  of  our  nature.  (1)  That  of  relation  between  moral 
appreciation  and  moral  advantage.  (2)  That  of  free  agency.  5.  That  these  con- 
sequences will  follow  this  sin  is  seen  from  the  veracity  of  God.  Lessons :  1.  We 
Itearn  that  there  are  two  sides  to  salvation.  (1)  The  Divine  side,  viz.,  the  providing 
salvation  for  a  lost  world.  (2)  The  human  side,  viz. ,  the  personal  acceptance  by 
faith  of  the  salvation  thus  divinely  provided.  2.  We  learn  that,  for  all  practical 
purposes,  the  human  side  is  as  important  as  the  Divine.  3.  We  learn  that,  infinitely 
great  and  glorious  as  salvation  is,  there  is  no  manifestation  of  the  goodness  of  God 
more  easily  sacrificed.  4.  We  learn  the  unspeakable  importance  of  giving  practical 
heed  to  the  voice  of  God's  Spirit  as  He  speaks  in  His  Word.  (1)  Because  neglect 
is  followed  by  such  sad  and  irretrievable  consequences.  (2)  Because  of  the  law  ol 
habit,  (a)  Birds  which  build  their  nests  in  a  belfry  become  habituated  to  the 
loudest  and  longest  clangour.  (6)  Those  who  live  in  the  vicinity  of  Niagara  and 
cataracts  of  the  Nile  become  so  habituated  to  the  roar  of  their  waters  that  they  do 
not  mind  it  at  all.  (c)  Alas  1  is  not  this  the  explanation  of  the  heedlessness  to  the 
gospel  of  thousands  in  Christendom — they  have  become  too  familiar  with  its 
sound,  (3)  Because  of  this  life  being  our  probationary  sphere,  (a)  If  we  die  in  a 
state  of  unbelief  we  cannot  hope  for  another  opportunity.  (6)  As  we  are  liable  to 
die  any  hour,  to  neglect  salvntion  is  of  all  follies  the  greatest.  (D.C  Hughes,  M.A.) 
The  sin  and  danger  of  neglecting  the  great  salvation  of  the  gospel : — Whether  we 
look  at  the  source  from  which  salvation  originates,  or  the  objects  to  whom  it  is 
extended  ;  at  the  depth  of  misery  from  which  it  delivers,  or  at  the  height  of  glory 
to  which  it  exalts ;  at  the  long  train  of  prophecies  by  which  it  was  introduced,  or 
at  the  stupendous  display  of  miracles  by  which  it  was  established,  we  cannot  but 
be  deeply  impressed  with  its  magnitude  and  importance.  There  is  one  circumstance, 
however,  which  wonderfully  augments  these  impressions,  the  unparalleled  excellence 
and  dignity  of  the  Person  by  whom  this  salvation  was  perfected.  I.  The  first 
argument  which  I  shall  adduce  results  from  the  vert  nature  and  constitution  of 
THINGS.  They  who  neglect  the  great  salvation  of  the  gospel  must,  from  the 
necessary  connection  between  causes  and  effects,  be  involved  in  everlasting  destruc- 
tion. For  what  is  the  salvation  of  the  gospel  ?  It  is  salvation  from  sin.  Should 
the  drowning  man  neglect  to  lay  hold  of  the  only  hand  stretched  out  to  save  him  ; 
should  the  sick  man  neglect  to  follow  the  only  prescription  which  can  administer  a 
cure :  wbat,  in  all  these  several  instances,  must  be  the  inevitable  consequence  f 
Death.  Neglecting  to  improve  the  only  opportunity  vouchtafed  to  them  of  pro- 
curing the  removal  of  their  guilt,  they  must  sink  down  for  ever  under  the  curse 
aud  burden  of  unpardoned  sin.     II.  Another  argument  arises  from  the  peculiab 

AND   AGGRAVATED    GUn.T  OF  NEGLECTING  SO  GREAT  SALVATION.       The  gOSpel  is  a  remedy 

which  we  are  constrained  by  the  most  powerful  obligations  to  apply  :  a  remedy, 
the  neglect  of  which  argues  not  only  the  most  dariag  folly,  but  the  most  malignant 
wickedness,  and  consequently  involves  a  degree  of  criminality  which  exhibits  in 
a  siill  stronger  light  the  impossibility  of  escaping.  To  neglect  the  salvation  of  the 
gospel  is  to  violate  a  positive  command  of  God.  It  is  also  to  pour  contempt  on 
His  most  glorious  perfections.  The  gospel  is  the  richest  display  of  mercy  to  fallen 
man,  the  consummation  of  the  Divine  wisdom  and  love.  {E.  Cooper,  M.A.)  Huw 
shall  we  escape  ? — I.  "  Salvation  "  is  the  grand  thought.  1.  Consider  salvation  in  its 
origin.  May  it  not  be  termed  "  so  great  salvation  "  ?  God  is  its  Author.  It  was 
planned  in  the  councils  of  eternity  ;  it  is  the  fruit  of  infinite  wisdom.  Great,  we  own, 
is  creation  ;  greater  far  is  redemption.  God  creates  by  the  word  of  His  power ;  He 
redeems  by  the  blood  of  His  Son ;  new-creates  by  the  power  of  His  Spu'it.  2.  SrUvation 
is  "  so  great  "  when  we  remember  its  nature.  It  saves  from  great  sins.  Christ  is 
"  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost."  3.  It  saves  from  great  dangers.  4.  There  is 
salvation  from  great  euemies.  But  we  have  given  only  one  side  of  salvation — 
deliverance.  Positive  blessings  belong  to  it.  Salvation  might  be  termed  "  so  great," 
if  it  were  only  for  the  blessedness  it  brings  to  the  heart  now ;  in  this  life  ;  Christ's 
peace,  Christ's  joy,  Christ's  wondrous  love.  But  man  has  a  destiny  reaching  away 
into  the  great  eternity.  When  we  think  of  man  as  he  is,  what  he  deserves,  what 
he  well  may  fear,  guilty,  depraved,  condemned — as  he  shall  be,  when  purified, 
glorified — is  not  salvation  rightly  styled  "so  great"?  II.  Think  now  of  the  word 
"  neglect."  Easy  were  it  to  show  that  such  "  neglect "  is  a  great  calamity,  aiid  a 
great  crime.  1.  This  neglect  is  common.  Alas  I  how  many  show  their  neglect  in 
tlieir  Uves — by  open  sin,  by  contempt  of  God's  Word,  God's  day,  God's  house. 
2.  It  is  inexcusable.    Vain  and  flimsy  as  a  spider's  web  are  aU  excuses.     The  real 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS,  89 

reason  why  men  neglfct  so  great  salvation  is  because  they  love  this  world  more 
than  God;  time  more  than  eternity;  their  sins  more  than  their  souls.  3.  Neglect 
is  foolish.  What  should  we  think  of  a  prisoner  who  should  hug  the  chains  that 
bind  him  ?  4.  Neglect  is  easy.  In  one  sense,  it  is  hard  for  sinners  to  perish. 
God  in  mercy  sets  bairiers  in  the  way.  In  another  sense,  it  is  an  easy  thing. 
"  Neglect  I  "  The  m.in  in  business  does  not  need  to  Ramble  in  order  to  go  bank- 
rupt ;  all  he  needs  is  to  neglect  his  business.  5.  When  we  add  it  is  fatal,  this 
brings  us  to  the  third  word— III.  "  Escapb."  "  How  shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect  so 
great  salvation?"  (D.  S.  Brunton.)  Tlie  vital  question: — L  Consider  thb 
CHABACTEB  DESCRIBED.  The  man  who,  amidst  the  multitude  of  other  anxieties, 
sets  the  invitation  to  a  banquet  aside,  and  altogether  neglects  it,  is  just  as  sure  of 
being  found  absent  as  the  man  who  distinctly  rejects  it.  There  are  many  who  idle 
A  whole  lifetime  away  in  a  sort  of  passive  indiJBference  to  the  gospel,  and  go  down 
to  the  grave  utter  strangers  to  its  saving  power.  The  man  who  is  not  diligent  in 
the  prosecution  of  his  worldly  business  is  said  to  neglect  it;  and  so,  in  like  manner, 
if  you  do  not  esteem  the  salvation  of  the  soul  as  the  one  thing  needful ;  if  you  do 
not  strive  to  enter  in  at  the  straight  gate,  and  give  diligence  to  make  your  calling 
and  election  sure,  then  know,  of  a  truth,  that  you  are  found  among  those  who  are 
guilty  of  neglecting  it.  II.  Consider  the  question  here  put.  More  evil  is  done, 
and  more  injury  sustained,  through  neglect  than  from  any  other  cause.  Escape 
is  utterly  and  altogether  impossible.  1.  From  the  very  nature  of  the  case  ;  for  the 
neglect  of  salvation  is  just  the  rejection  of  the  remedy,  and  if  the  remedy  b« 
rejected,  what  but  ruin  can  await  us  ?  2.  From  the  history  of  the  Divine  dealings. 
If  God  brought  in  the  flood  upon  the  world  of  the  ungodly,  so  that  they  escaped 
not,  how  shall  we  escape  ?  Say  not  that  God  is  too  merciful  to  inflict  the  penalty 
He  has  threatened;  for  was  God  not  merciful  then,  and  yet  He  did  not  permit  them 
to  escape?  3.  From  the  very  means  employed  for  our  deliverance.  If  sin  were 
trivial,  if  the  law  were  flexible,  if  God  were  changeable,  Christ  would  never  have 
suffered,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  He  might  bring  us  unto  God.  III.  Consider 
THB  ouOiT  OF  NEGLECTING  THIS  GREAT  SALVATION.  The  mariner  who  refuses  to  cast 
his  anchor  on  the  rock  deserves  to  suffer  shipwreck.  The  man  who  declines  to 
accept  the  bread  that  is  offered  to  him  deserves  to  die  of  famine.  God  has  not 
provided  this  great  salvation  at  such  a  mighty  expenditure,  and  left  men  to  sport 
and  trifle  with  it  at  their  pleasure.  {'Dtos.  Mair,  D.D.)  Neglect: — I.  The 
MISERY  ARISING  FROM  NEGLECT.  1.  In  the  lower  or  material  realm,  e.g.,  industrial, 
sanitary,  commercial.  2.  In  the  higher  or  mental  and  moral  realm,  e.g.,  education, 
religion,  (1)  The  signs  of  neglect.  Listlessness  and  dulness,  or  profligacy  and 
obduracy.  (2)  The  temptation  to  neglect.  Example,  spirit  of  procrastination, 
pressure  of  other  claims.  II.  The  guilt  of  neglect.  1.  It  is  spiritual  suicide. 
2.  It  is  ruinous  in  its  influence  on  others.  You  say,  "No  danger,"  when  the  peril  is 
terrific.  3.  It  is  practical  atheism.  4.  It  is  ingratitude  to  the  Kedeemer.  (Homilist.) 
The  only  plan : — I.  God  has  made  abundant  provision  tor  the  welfare  of  the 
WORLD.  "  So" — the  descriptive  word  of  a  child  when  failing  to  set  forth  in  detail 
an  ubject  beyond  its  ability.  1.  Salvation  is  God's  highest  achievement.  2. 
Supplies  all  the  wants  of  mankind.  3.  Is  all-powerful  in  its  influence.  4.  Is 
de>tined  to  be  universal  in  its  success.  5.  Is  everlasting  in  its  duration.  II.  God's 
abundant  provision  for  the  welfare  of  the  world  mat  be  ignored.  "  If  we 
neglect"  iuiplies— 1.  The  freedom  of  the  human  will.  2.  The  deluding  power 
of  sin.  3.  The  futility  of  mere  knowledge.  4.  The  evil  of  contempt.  6.  The 
power  of  self-righteousness.  6.  The  actual  prevalence  of  carelessness.  (1)  Some 
are  totally  indifferent.  (2)  Some  are  idly  procrastinating.  (3)  Some  by  hoping  for 
the  best.  (4)  Some  because  others  do.  III.  God's  abundant  provision  for  the 
welfare  of  the  world,  if  ignored,  leaves  man  hopeless.  "  How  shall  we 
escape?"  1.  Man  bears  in  himself  the  elements  of  destruction.  Born  a  sinner. 
Sin  will  never  destroy  itself.  Powder  train  laid.  2.  Salvation  the  only  remedy. 
Ark,  Brazen  Serpent,  Cities  of  Eefuge.  "No  other  name."  "Jesus  only."  3. 
Man's  effort  to  appropriate  the  appointed  means  is  essentially  necessary.  Wrecked 
sailor  must  enter  lifeboat ;  manslayer  flee  to  city  of  refuge  ;  patient  take  prescribed 
medicine.  4.  Non-compliance  on  man's  part  will  result  in  endless  misery.  {B.  D. 
Johns.)  The  regret  of  lost  souls: — In  the  palace  at  Versailles,  as  if  by  the  irony 
of  fate,  is  a  famous  statue  of  Napoleon  in  exile.  His  noble  brow  is  lowered  ui 
thought,  his  mouth  is  compressed,  his  chin  is  resting  upon  his  breast,  and  his 
grand  eye  gazes  into  space  as  if  fixed  on  some  distant  scene.  There  is  something 
inexpressibly  sad  in  that  strong,  pale  face.    It  is  said  that  the  sculptor  represented 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Napoleon  at  St.  Helena,  just  before  his  death.  He  is  looking  back  apon  the  field 
of  Waterloo,  and  thinking  how  its  fatal  issue  was  the  result  of  three  hours'  delay. 
Those  three  short  hours  seem  ever  to  write  on  the  walls  of  his  memory — "  The 
summer  is  ended,  tbe  harvest  is  past  1 "  Tears  rolled  on,  but  the  memory  of  that 
neglected  opportunity  follows  the  great  emperor  through  his  life,  and  haunta 
him  through  midnight  hours  in  his  sea-girt  home.  I  have  sometimes  imagined 
that  I  could  see  on  some  remote  and  lonely  shore  of  the  Lake  Avernus  a  soul 
haunted  by  its  memories.  The  battle  of  life  is  long  past,  centuries  have  rolled 
away,  but  memory  lives.  Some  lost  soul  wanders  from  the  rest,  where  the  wavea 
of  that  gulf  beat  hopelessly  on  the  far-off  shore.  The  absent  eye  that  gazes  over 
the  starless  deep,  is  looking  with  longing  unutterable  to  the  precious  time  when 
those  who  are  now  in  glory  held  up  the  blood-stained  cross  and  pointed  to  the  joys 
of  heaven,  then  so  near,  now  so  far.  And  a  bitter  sigh,  and  a  sob  as  bitter 
as  despairing  love,  fills  the  solitude  ;  but  it  reaches  no  ear,  touches  no  sympathy, 
awakes  no  echo.  Such  is  the  vengeance  of  neglected  opportunity.  (R.  S.  Barrett.) 
How  shall  we  escape  ? — By  our  wealth  ?  Its  currency  is  condemned  at  the 
judgment-seat.  By  our  own  good  deeds?  Those  deeds  have  been  weighed  in 
the  balance,  and  found  wanting.  Then  how  shall  we  escape  ?  By  concealing 
ourselves?  God's  eye  penetrates,  with  its  burning  glance,  all  space.  Shall  we 
escape  in  the  crowd?  Each  individual  shall  be  so  insulated,  as  if  there  were 
no  other  creature  besides  at  the  judgment-seat.  Then  how  shall  we  escape? 
There  is  but  one  way,  and  that  escape  is  incompatible  with  neglecting  the  great 
salvation.  Thus  he  says  the  gospel  is  the  great  salvation.  "  How  shall  we 
escape " — not,  mark  you,  if  we  reject  so  great  salvation,  but  if  we  neglect 
so  great  salvation  ?  The  sceptic  rejects  Christianity  ;  the  nominal  believer 
neglects  Christianity.  Now,  I  very  much  question  if  it  be  not  a  greater  insult 
to  God  to  neglect  religion  than  it  is  to  reject  it.  I  can  understand  that  man 
who  says,  I  have  examined  all  the  evidence,  and  I  have  come  to  the  con- 
clusion that  the  Bible  is  a  fable,  that  Christianity  is  a  romance ;  eternity,  and 
death,  and  judgment  the  visions  of  a  mere  baseless  dream.  I  pity  him,  I  deplore 
his  conclusion,  but  I  can  understand  it ;  there  is  consistency  about  it.  But  tha 
man  that  neglects  such  a  religion,  if  it  be  true  that  God  has  spoken,  if  it  be  true 
that  Christ  has  died  for  us,  if  it  be  true  that  we  must  stand  at  the  judgment-seat, 
if  it  be  true  that  by  His  righteousness  alone  we  are  justified,  is  guilty  indeed. 
Such  neglect  is  in  the  sight  of  God  and  man  altogether  inexcusable.  (J.  Cnmviinrf, 
D.D.)  The  danger  of  neglect : — During  the  terrible  fire  in  the  Ring  Theatre  at 

Vienna,  a  large  crowd  striving  to  reach  one  of  the  exits  saw  a  sideway  marked 
"  Emergency  Door,  in  case  of  Fire."  This  was  just  what  they  needed.  They 
turned  aside  from  the  main  passages,  and  rushed  to  use  this  special  way.  But  the 
bolts  could  not  be  drawn,  the  locks  could  not  be  turned,  and  the  hinges  were  choked 
with  rust ;  because  the  door  had  never  been  used,  it  could  not  now  be  suddenly 
put  into  requisition  when  urgently  needed.  A  heap  of  dead  soon  lay  before  that 
gate.  So,  lips  which  never  pray  on  earth  will  be  speechless  in  the  great  day ;  the 
^jrayer  for  mercy  will  die  unuttered,  and  the  excuse  which  has  been  framed  on  earth 
will  never  be  offered,  when  the  King  asks,  "  How  art  thou  come  in  hither  all  unpre- 
pared ?  '^  An  unanswerable  question : — Many  years  ago  a  Welsh  minister,  a  man 
of  God,  beginning  his  sermon,  leaned  over  the  pulpit,  and  said  with  a  solemn  air, 
"  Friends,  I  have  a  question  to  ask.  I  cannot  answer  it.  You  cannot  answer  it. 
If  an  angel  from  heaven  were  here  he  could  not  answer  it.  If  a  devil  fi-om  hell 
were  here  he  could  not  answer  it."  Death-like  silence  reigned.  Every  eye  was 
fixed  on  the  speaker.  He  proceeded,  "  The  question  is  this,  How  shall  we  escape 
if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  "  Folly  of  neglect : — A  certain  man  had  a 

long  journey  before  him,  which  must  needs  be  made  in  one  day,  for  it  would  be 
impossible  for  him  to  journey  a  mile  in  that  country  after  nightfall,  neither  was 
there  any  place  wherein  he  could  lodge  on  the  road.  He  knew  right  well  that  this 
journey  was  appointed  him,  and  that  it  was  his  duty  to  perform  it ;  and,  moreover, 
he  told  his  best  friends  that  he  was  fnlly  determined  to  set  out  thereon  ;  but  he 
thought  the  matter  was  easier  than  they  seemed  to  imagine.  In  his  stable  there 
was  a  fine  stud  of  strong  and  swift  horses  suitable  for  the  road,  and  a  carriage 
stood  ready  for  his  riding.  The  traveller  did  not  set  out  in  the  early  morning,  for 
he  said  that  thpre  was  time  enough.  Meanwhile,  by  a  certain  custom  of  the 
country,  two  of  his  best  horses  were  taken  for  the  king's  service,  and  this  caused 
the  traveller  to  look  about  him  ;  but  he  soon  quieted  down,  sat  down  to  his  dishes 
and  his  cups,  and  cried,  "  What's  the  good  of  haste  ?  "  While  thus  engaged,  more  of 


CHA».  n.]  HEBREWS.  91 

his  horses  were  lost,  or  stolen,  or  else  they  strayed,  and  had  he  then  set  out  and  kept 
well  to  his  journey,  he  had  scarce  the  means  left  to  accomplish  it.  Still  he  waited 
with  his  boon  companions  till  one  way  or  another  his  horses  were  gone,  and  he 
had  nothing  left  to  ride  upon  but  a  single  wretched  jade.  Then  he  made  much  ado 
about  setting  out,  and  meant  to  fly  along  the  road  at  a  great  rate ;  only  it  so 
happened  that  while  he  was  resolving  the  sun  went  down,  and  he  never  readied 
the  place  where  he  would  have  been  rewarded  with  honour  and  profit.  The 
explanation  of  the  riddle  is  easy.  A  man  in  his  early  days,  with  his  best  years 
before  him,  is  so  foolish  as  to  put  off  the  concerns  of  his  soul  tUl  he  is  older. 
Years  follow  years,  and  yet  he  delays — delays  even  when  his  last,  worn,  and  feeble 
age  is  all  that  remains  to  him,  and  death  comes  before  it  is  welcome.  Alas,  that 
men  should  think  to  perform  the  most  important  business  of  all  at  a  time  when  all 
their  powers  and  faculties  are  failing  1  God's  service  requires  all  our  abilities 
in  the  prime  of  their  strength,  and  it  is  wicked  as  well  as  foolish  to  put  Him  off 
with  our  leavings,  and  endeavour  to  reach  heaven  on  a  worn-out  steed  at  the  fag- 
end  of  the  day.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  NegUct: — A  traveller  always  provided 
himself  with  a  life-preserver,  which  he  kept  in  constant  readiness  for  use.  On  the 
Mississippi  an  accident  occurred  which  led  him  to  dream  of  the  advantages 
of  precaution.  He  dreamed  that  the  vessel  was  disabled,  and  rushing  upon 
a  lee-shore.  The  passengers,  in  different  moods,  awaited  the  result.  Those 
who  had  hfe- preservers  were  composed ;  while  those  who  bad  none  rushed  to 
and  fro  in  terror  and  dismay.  Some  cursed  themselves  because  they  did  not 
buy  them  before  they  started ;  others  did  not  apprehend  danger ;  others  had  them 
laid  away  in  their  trunks,  but  found  them  useless  through  long  neglect ;  others 
found  themselves  cheated  with  a  counterfeit  article ;  others  were  uselessly  trying 
to  escape  by  resting  on  the  hfe-preservers  of  others,  which  could  barely  support 
their  owners.  The  scene  is  one  only  too  common  in  hfe.  When  the  storms  come, 
and  the  frail  vessel  is  a  wreck,  how  many  have  secured  the  true  hfe-preserver,  and 
wait  the  result  in  good  confidence  ?  How  many  are  dismayed  because  unready  ? 
(New  Cyclopmdia  of  Illustrations.)  Opportunity  must  he  grasped  : — Some  years 

ago  a  large  river  in  America  became  greatly  swollen,  and  a  rapid  current  was  thus 
produced  which  was  very  dangerous  to  venture  on,  as  a  terrible  fall  was  only  a  few 
miles  distant.  A  man  who  had  some  valuable  timber  in  the  stream  got  into  a  boat 
to  rescue  it.  He  was,  however,  soon  drawn  into  the  rushing  tide.  He  had  not  the 
shghtest  power  to  stop  or  turn  tbe  boat,  but  rapidly  it  floated  down  the  stream, 
hurrying  him  on  to  a  certain  destruction.  A  friend  saw  his  peril,  and  mounting 
a  fleet  horse  started  for  a  bridge  a  few  miles  below  as  the  only  chance  to  rescue 
him.  Reaching  the  bridge  before  the  skiff,  which  came  like  an  arrow  towards  the 
arch,  he  dropped  a  rope  over  the  surface  of  the  stream  and  called  to  the  imperilled 
man  to  seize  it  as  his  only  chance  of  escape.  The  trembling  hand  was  extended, 
and  with  the  firmness  of  a  death-grasp  clutched  the  rope  as  the  boat  shot  by,  and 
soon  he  was  in  the  arms  of  his  deliverer.  This  was  the  arch  of  mercy  to  him, 
which,  if  once  passed,  it  would  have  been  certain  death.  How  shall  %oe  escape  ? — 
It  is  an  appeal  to  universal  reason,  to  the  consciences  of  sinners  themselves  ;  it 
is  a  challenge  to  all  their  power  and  policy,  to  all  their  interest  and  alliances, 
whether  they,  or  any  of  them,  can  find  out,  or  can  force  out,  a  way  of  escape  from 
the  vindictive  justice  and  wrath  of  God.  It  intimates  that  the  neglecters  of  this 
great  salvation  will  be  left  not  only  without  power,  but  without  plea  and  excuse 
at  the  judgment-day.      {M.  Henry.)  Neglect   leads  to   deterioration : — Let  a 

certain  number  of  pigeons,  of  different  colours  and  varieties,  be  collected  and 
carried  to  a  desert  island.  Let  them  fly  wild  in  the  woods  and  found  a  colony 
there.  After  the  lapse  of  many  years  let  the  collector  return  to  the  island,  when 
he  will  find  the  pigeons  all  of  one  colour — a  black  and  white  dun,  or  a  dark  slaty 
hue.  All  the  beautiful  colours  will  have  vanished.  Why  ?  Because  they  have 
been  neglected.  The  variations  and  improvements  had  been  the  result  of  care, 
nurture,  and  domestication  :  neglect  has  simply  had  the  effect  of  letting  them  drop 
into  their  original  state.  So  with  plants — a  rose — a  stra'vberry ;  it  is  a  natural 
law.  So  with  man.  By  neglect  his  body  will  lapse  into  a  savage  state ;  his  mind 
to  imbecility ;  his  conscience  to  lawlessness  and  vice ;  his  soul  to  atrophy,  ruin, 
and  decay.  "  Let  him  alone,"  and  all  the  rest  will  follow.  (Proctor's  Gems  of 
Thought.)  Unconscious  of  peril : — As  the  inhabitants  of  a  little,  narrow  street 

in  Paris  looked  out  at  their  doors  one  morning,  they  were  astonished  to  see  a  yonng 
woman  pacing  backward  and  forward  on  the  top  of  a  six-story  house.  Their 
Astonishment  was  changed    into  alarm  when  it   was  discovered   that   she   was 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

unconscious  of  her  perU,  and  was  walMng  in  her  deep  I     The  young  creature 
Beemed  to  be  dreaming  of  an  approaching  gala  day,  and  was  humming  a  lively  air. 
Again  and  again  she  drew  near  to  the  very  verge  of  the  parapet,  and  again  and 
again  crossed  over  to  the  other  side  of  the  roof,  always  smiling,  and  unconscious  of 
danger.     Suddenly  her  eye  was  attracted  by  a  light  in  the  house  opposite.     She 
awoke  instantly  ;  there  was  a  piercing  cry,  a  heavy  fall,  and  all  was  over.     Alas  I 
that  this  sad  incident  should  have  a  counterpart  in  things  spiritual  still  more 
appalling.    The  despisers  of  God's  mercy,  who  are  now  dreaming  away  the  brief 
remaining  portion  of  their  existence,  will  be  aroused  suddenly  fiom  their  guilty 
slumber  by  the  light  which  bursts  in  upon  them  from  the  other  world,  but  only  to 
discover  the  fearful  precipice  on  which  they  have  so  long  been  standing,  and  when 
escape  from  ruin  will  be  impossible.     {J.  N.  Norton,D.D,)       Neglect — not  gatheiing 
up: — Bear   in  mind  the  teaching  that  lies  hid  in  the  derivation  of  the  word 
•'  neglect."    It  signifies  "  not  to  gather  up."    It  paints  to  us  the  blind  man  walking 
through  a  valley  of  diamonds,  and  in  his  ignorance  gathering  up  none.    And  when, 
in  their  ignorance,  men  do  not  avail  themselves  of  "  the  riches  of  God's  grace," 
placed  within  their  reach,  how  can  they  "escape"   the  results  of  their  folly? 
Danger  of  delay : — A  lady  had  a  very  important  lawsuit  on  hand  for  which  she 
needed  the  services  of  an  advocate.     She  was  strongly  urged  to  secure  the  help  of 
a  very  eminent  and  well-known  lawyer,  but  she  could  not  make  up  her  mind  to 
entrust  her  case  to  any  one.     Time  passed  on,  and  at  last  she  was  compelled 
to  take  steps  to  secure  an  advocate,  and  called  upon  the  great  lawyer  who  had  been 
mentioned  to  her.     He  listened  whilst  she  expressed  her  wish  to  engage  his  help, 
but  in  a  few  minutes  he  said  with  a  grave  face,  "  Madam,  you  are  too  late ;  had 
you  come  to  me  before,  I  would  gladly  have  been  your  advocate,  but  now  I  have 
been  called  to  the  bench,  and  am  a  judge,  and  all  I  can  do  is  to  pass  judgment  upon 
your  case."    Now  is  the  day  of  grace,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  our  Advocate, 
ever  pleading  the  merits  of  His  precious  blood  (1  John  ii.  1,  2),  but  the  day  will 
come  when  He  will  be  the  Judge  of  sinners,  and  must  pass  sentence  upon  them 
(2  Tim.  iv.  1).        Neglect : — It  is  the  neglected  wheel  that  capsizes  the  vehicle,  and 
maims  for  life  the  passengers.      It  is  the  neglected  leak  that  sinks  the  ship.     It  ia 
the  neglected  field  that  yields  briers  instead  of  bread.    It  is  the  neglected  spark 
near  the  magazine  whose  tremendous  explosion  sends  its  hundreds  of  mangled 
wretches  into  eternity.     The  neglect  of  an  officer  to  throw  up  a  rocket  on  a  certain 
night  caused  the  fall  of  Antwerp,  and  postponed  the  deliverance  of  Holland  for 
twenty  or  more  years.     The  neglect  of  a  sentinel  to  give  an  alarm  hindered 
the  fall    of    Sebastopol,   and    resulted    in    the    loss  of    many    thousand    lives. 
So  great  salvation. — Great  salvation — an  appeal : — I.  As  sinnees  tou  abe  exposed 
TO  IMMENSE  DANGER — 1.  Evcr  augmenting.     2.  Self-created.     3.  For  ever  unavoid- 
able after  death.     II.  To  delfveb  yod  from  this  danger  Heaven  has  introduced 
A  GLORIOUS  expedient.    "  Great,"  because  of — 1.  The  great  facts  it  involves.     2. 
The  immense  iufluence  it  exerts  upon  the  universe.     3.  The  infinite  blessings  it 
secures  to  those  who  will  accept  it.     III.  The  neglect  of  this  glorious  expedient 
benders  salvation  impossible.     1.  Because  it  is  the  ouly  expedient  now  on  earth 
that  can  effect  your  deliverance.     2.  Because  it  is  the  only  expedient  that  wiU  ever 
be  presented  to  you  by  Heaven  for  the  purpose.     (Homilist.)        The  gospel  and  its 
rejectors : — I.  The  absurdity  of  neglecting  the  gospel  salvation.    This  appears 
if  we  consider — 1.  Its  gratuity.    2.  Its  greatness.     3.  Its  endurance.    4.  Its  rela- 
tion to  us.     5.  Its  singleness.     II.  The  impossibility  fob  gospel  bejectobs  to 
escape   eternal   punishment.      1.  The  inseparable  connection  between  sin  and 
punishment.     2.  God's  veracity.     3.  God's  almightiness.     4.  God's  justice.     5. 
The  nature  of  Heaven.     (Ibid.)        Great  salvation : — 1.  It  was  a  great  thought  in 
;  the  heart  of  God.     2,  It  required  a  great  preparation.     3.  It  exhibited  great  con- 
descension.   4.  It  gives  occasion  to  study  a  great  mystery.    5.  It  exacted  great 
sufferings.    6.  It  ensures  a  revenue  of  great  glory.     (H,  T.  Miller.)        The  great- 
ness of  salvation  : — Tiie  word  "salvation"  occurs  in  the  Bible  under  a  variety  of 
significations.    When  the  children  of  Israel  had  just  been  deUvered  out  of  Egypt, 
and  were  brought  to  a  stand-still  before  the  Eed  Sea,  Moses  said  to  them — "  Stand 
still,  and  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord."     Now,  in  what  did  that  salvation  consist? 
It  consisted  in  this — in  a  temporary  delivering  of  them  out  of  tbeir  trouble,  by 
making  a  path  through  the  depths  of  the  sea.     The  Lord  delivered  them  then  with 
a  great  salvation.    Further,  you  remember  that  our  Lord,  on  His  visit  to  Zacchseus, 
seeing  how  he  was  escaping  from  the  bonds  of  that  passion  for  ill-gotten  lucre, 
exclaims,  "  This  day  is  salvation  come  onto  this  house."    That  was  a  great  salva- 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  95 

tion — a  deliverance  from  the  thraldom  of  sin,  by  the  introduction  of  the  freedom 
wherewith  Christ  makes  His  people  free.  And  there  remains  another  appropriate 
ose  of  the  term.  We  are  kept  by  faith  unto  salvation :  to  be  redeemed  and  brought 
into  that  glorious  state,  where  the  white-robed  ones  stand — that  city,  in  which  we 
ghail  not  only  be  saved,  as  we  are  now,  but  in  a  perfect  state  of  salvation.  That, 
also,  is  meant  at  times  in  the  Scripture,  when  the  word  salvation  is  employed. 
Now,  it  becomes  us  to  inquire  which  of  these  three  senses  are  here  conveyed  by  the 
words  of  our  text.  It  seems  to  me  that  it  comprehends  all  three  ;  that  is  to  say, 
all  that  is  needed  for  the  first  liberation  of  man  from  sin  ;  all  that  is  needed  of 
temporal  deliverance  to  keep  him  from  falling,  and  to  enable  him  to  persevere  unto 
the  end ;  and  all  that  is  comprehended  in  the  hereafter,  and  not-to-be-revealed 
glory  that  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God.  Each  of  the  three  are  great  salvation, 
and,  combined,  they  make  the  so  great  salvation.  "  How  shall  we  escape,  if  we 
neglect  this  so  great  salvation  T  "  Now,  I  think  there  are  several  things  which  will 
plainly  prove  that  this  is  a  great  salvation.  I.  First  of  all — as  a  scheme,  a  plan,  to 
work  out  a  Divine  purpose — as  a  Divine  scheme  and  plan,  I  maintain  it  is  a  great  salva- 
tion. 1.  If  I  examine  the  wisdom  of  the  scheme — the  plan  of  the  scheme — here  I  come 
in  contact  with  a  wisdom  of  no  finite  being :  it  is  the  wisdom  of  the  Divine  Being  Him- 
self ;  it  is  infinite  wisdom ;  the  mint-mark  has  Heaven's  royal  stamp,  and  the  image 
and  superscription  are  more  than  Casar's ;  they  are  those  of  the  King  of  kings 
Himself.  Now  this  wisdom  is  displayed  in  a  threefold  manner.  (1)  First,  in 
grappling  with  a  difficulty  in  which  no  man  can  succeed.  We  can  deal  with  our 
fellow-creatures'  bodies ;  we  can  deal  with  their  minds ;  but  their  souls  are  encased 
as  in  triple  steel;  and  whenever  man  has  begun  to  touch  sin,  the  only  thing  he  has 
done  has  been  to  burn  his  own  fingers,  without  putting  that  firebrand  out  of  the 
world.  Sin  is  everywhere,  and  man  has  never  been  able  to  cast  it  out.  It  stands, 
and  ever  will  stand,  till  a  Divine  power  shall  come  to  cast  it  out.  Now  God  has 
found  out  the  way  of  accomplishing  this,  and  He  has  devised  a  scheme  which,  in 
His  hand,  shall  make  this  wide  world  to  be  covered  with  His  glory,  even  as  the 
waters  cover  the  deep.  That  is  one  thing  in  which  I  detect  the  wisdom  of  God  ; 
He  has  accomplished  that  which  has  ever  defied  the  wisdom  of  the  wisest,  and  the 
might  of  the  mightiest.  (2)  Something  further  is  to  be  noticed — God  has  done 
this  with  a  wisdom  so  great,  that  He  has  foreseen  all  that  He  has  purposed  to  do, 
and  everything  He  has  done,  and  has  not  left  undone  anything  that  He  has  pur- 
posed. (3)  Let  me  observe,  again,  that  the  wisdom  of  this  scheme  is  something 
80  great,  tnat  not  a  single  wrong  is  done  to  any  one.  God  has  restored  the  false 
note  in  the  great  organ  of  the  universe,  without  staying  its  tune,  or  hindering  the 
harmony  of  the  music  of  the  spheres ;  and  He  has  done  it  all  with  a  wisdom  so 
infinite,  that  we  must  exclaim,  "  This  is  indeed  a  so  great  salvation."  2.  But  now, 
join  that  wisdom  with  love — think  of  the  love,  as  well  as  the  wisdom,  and  then 
you  will  have  further  heightened  the  thought.  II.  Now,  it  is  a  great  salvation,  not 
only  because  of  the  scheme,  but  also  because  of  the  aim  in  view,  and  the  objects 
which  it  purposes  to  perform.  Christ  came,  not  merely  to  save  man  from  sin,  and 
from  Satan — not  merely  to  save  man  from  going  down  to  the  pit  without  ransom, 
though  that  would  have  been  a  great  salvation.  Christ  comes,  we  sav,  to  destroy 
sin  ;  but  how  ?  By  bringing  in  a  righteousness  that  shall  far  surpass  tne  righteous- 
ness of  men.  He  comes  to  destroy  death;  but  how?  By  bringing  life  and  immor- 
tality to  light.  He  comes  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil ;  and  how?  By  doing 
the  works  of  Him  that  sent  Him,  and  the  great  salvation  He  brings  in,  has,  for  its 
end  and  aim,  not  merely  the  putting  of  man  into  the  garden  of  Eden,  where  he  was 
before  the  Fall,  but  to  put  him  in  possession  of  life  and  immortality  itse'f.  III. 
We  exclaim  again,  *'  It  is  a  great  salvation,"  from  the  means  that  have  beau  used 
for  the  working-out  of  the  scheme,  and  from  the  original  end  and  aim  proposed. 
And  here  I  might  begin  at  the  beginning,  but  how  can  we  go  back  to  the  countless 
ages  of  eternity  ?  and  time  would  certainly  fail  us,  if  I  were  to  begin  at  the  creation 
of  the  world,  for  it  all  has  been  but  the  theatre  for  the  working-out  of  this  great 
salvation.  I  would  come  down  to  the  time  of  the  Jews,  and  would  see  there  all 
the  wonders  of  the  life  of  Abraham,  and  of  Abraham's  descendants.  All  these 
things  formed  part  of  the  working-out  of  the  scheme,  for  the  Jews  were  like  the 
scaffolding  which  needed  to  be  erected,  that  there  might  be  raised,  inside  of  it,  a 
true  and  living  structure,  which  is  to  abide  for  ever.  The  Jewish  race,  with  ita 
wondrous  history,  has  but  served  as  the  pinnacle  for  the  erection  and  for  the  dis- 
play of  the  cross  thereupon.  But  we  must  narrow  our  limits  again.  Let  us  now 
start  from  Bethlehem ;   and  there,  in  the  stable  of  a  lowly  inn,  we  see  a  babe  ; 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chat.  U. 

Bmall  it  is,  but  yet  great ;  the  Son  of  Mary,  and  the  Son  of  the  Highest.  He  whom 
even  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain,  is  there,  wrapped  in  that  veil  of  our 
inferior  clay.  As  I  look  upon  that  deep  mystery,  and  see  there  that  Child  of  God, 
I  see  also  and  adore  "  the  man  my  fellow  " — Christ  in  the  flesh — God  incarnate. 
I  see  there  a  mighty  deed  that  stamps  this  salvation  with  a  greatness  of  its  own. 
I  pass  by  all  the  after-wonders  of  His  life,  and  come  to  the  closing  scene,  when  He 
haugs  upon  the  cross.  I  look  at  that  bleeding  man,  and  I  exclaim,  "  How  is  it? — 
it  is  the  blood  of  God" — ^for  I  find  the  Scripture  saying,  "The  Church  of  God, 
which  He  has  purchased  with  His  blood."  How  it  is  I  cannot  tell ;  but  there  is 
a  Divine  efficacy  in  the  death  and  blood  of  Christ.  IV.  Fourthly,  let  us  look  at 
these  facts  taken  as  a  whole,  and  as  lying  at  the  foundation  of  oub  religion. 
Now  reason  could  never  discover  a  religion  ;  I  say  that  reason  does  teU  us  this — it 
is  the  best  religion  the  world  ever  has  seen,  or  can  see.  There  are  three  things 
that  we  must  find  in  every  religion  to  make  it  great.  It  must  reveal  a  God,  worthy 
of  the  highest  honour  ;  it  must  give  benefits  to  the  worshippers ;  and  it  must  estab- 
lish a  connection  between  the  two.  If  it  does  not  reveal  a  God,  it  is  worthless.  If 
it  reveals  a  God,  but  He  is  not  worthy  of  the  highest  honour,  I  say  it  is  a  weak 
religion — away  with  it.  Now  our  religion  is  this:  "Glory  unto  God  in  the  highest" 
— glory  in  the  scheme,  glory  in  the  working-out,  glory  in  the  end  proposed.  (J.  A. 
Spurgeon.)  The  great  salvation: — I.  The  chabacteb  of  this  salvation.  1.  It 
is  worthy  of  the  character  given  to  it,  if  you  consider  the  method  of  its  contrivance. 
2.  It  is  a  great  salvation  in  the  manner  of  its  execution.  Amazing  love  I  3.  It  is 
a  great  salvation  in  the  blessing  it  secures.  4.  In  the  manner  of  its  bestowment. 
It  regards  us  as  we  really  are,  "  poor  and  vrretched  "  ;  and  without  insulting  us  in 
our  poverty,  it  invites  us — nay  more,  it  commands  us — to  "come  and  take  of  the 
water  of  life  freely."  Were  the  smallest  good  required  of  you  in  exchange  for  this 
blessing,  we  might  then  calculate  on  your  neglecting  this  great  salvation,  on  the 
plea  that  you  were  destitute  of  what  you  were  required  to  give  for  it.  But  you  are 
invited  to  receive  it  "without  money  and  without  price."  5.  In  the  countless 
multitudes  who  shall  be  brought  to  participate  in  it.  II.  Considee  its  reference 
TO  us.  1.  It  demands  great  attention.  2.  It  should  be  embraced  with  great  thank- 
fulness. 3.  Its  rejection  will  be  accompanied  with  great  condemnation.  God  could 
devise  no  method  more  safe,  more  honourable,  more  glorious  for  a  sinner's  salva- 
tion, than  the  method  exhibited  in  the  gospel.  Grace  in  its  richest  character,  mercy 
in  its  brightest  form  are  here  displayed.  But  the  greater  the  grace,  the  richer  the 
mercy,  and  the  more  free  and  generous  the  invitation,  the  greater  will  be  the  guilt 
of  him  who  rejects  it.  {Essex  Congregational  Remembrancer.)  The  great  salva- 
tion:— I.  Salvation.  Now,  suppose  that  I  were  on  the  bank  of  a  river,  and  were 
to  see  some  child  or  some  f eUow-man  struggling  in  the  stream ;  if  I  were  to  use  my 
best  endeavour  to  help  that  fellow-creature  out  of  the  water,  and  if  I  were  success- 
ful in  that  attempt,  it  would  be  a  salvation.  Or,  if  I  were  to  find  some  fellow-man 
suffering  from  a  dreadful  disease  for  which  I  had  a  specific,  and  I  were  to  come 
and  administer  this  specific  to  that  man,  and  he  were  to  recover  from  that  disease, 
that  would  be  a  salvation.  I  am  about  to  speak  to  you  of  a  salvation  of  a  different 
kind — not  of  a  salvation  from  mere  bodily  death — not  of  a  salvation  from  bodily 
disease — but  of  a  salvation  from  all  the  ills  which  soul,  and  spirit,  aud  body  are 
heirs  to — a  salvation  from  everything  that  blights  and  blasts  our  fallen  human 
nature.  1.  The  salvation  upon  which  I  speak  is  the  deliverance  from  ignorance  of 
the  true  God.  That  ignorance,  you  know,  is  just  like  a  dense  darkness  at  a  time 
when  a  man  wants  light,  and  in  the  place  where  a  man  wants  light,  and  under 
circumstances  where  the  shining  of  light  is  essential  to  a  man.  The  man  who  is 
saved  knows  something  of  God,  of  our  Father  in  heaven :  he  knows  enough  of  God 
for  his  present  well-being,  and  for  his  present  well-doing.  That  is  one  part  of 
salvation.  Now  there  is  another.  2.  I  do  not  know  how  it  is,  but  so  it  is,  as  we 
believe,  that  every  one  bom  into  this  world  is  inclined  to  do  wrong.  God  made 
such  an  arrangement  when  He  created  our  first  parents,  that  if  they  had  done  right, 
right  dispositions  would  have  been  communicated.  Tou  sometimes  see  a  very 
amiable  mother  and  a  very  amiable  daughter  ;  there  is  a  disposition  communicated 
the  one  from  the  other.  Now,  on  account  of  that  arrangement,  when  our  first 
parents  went  wrong  and  they  had  children,  the  children  received  from  them  a 
wrong  disposition — a  disposition  to  do  that  which  is  bad — that  which  is  evil.  And 
it  is  within  us  all.  Is  there  anything  more  common  than  to  hear  people  say,  "  I 
shall  do  as  I  like ;  don't  meddle  with  me,  I  shall  do  as  I  please  "  ?  Now  that  is 
the  very  essence  of  sin.    Any  creatm-e  who  begins  to  say,  "I  will  do  as  I  like,"  ialla 


CHA».  n.]  HEBREWS.  95 

immediately.  If  the  brightest  and  best  of  the  angels  from  aroand  God's  throne 
were  at  this  moment  to  say,  "  I  will  do  as  I  like,"  and  were  to  begin  to  turn  to  hia 
own  way  and  to  carry  out  liie  desired  devices  of  his  own  heart,  he  would  be  imme- 
diately a  fallen  angel,  and  heaven  would  be  no  paradise  to  that  being.  What  is 
this  salvation?  It  is  a  salvation  from  the  "I'll  do  as  I  like"  principle — from  the 
"  I'll  do  what  I  please  "  principle.  It  is  deliverance  from  that.  It  is  the  creation 
within  us  of  another  spirit,  and  of  a  new  heart  in  that  matter,  and  the  question 
then  is,  "  Saviour,  what  shall  I  do  ?  Saviour,  how  shall  I  speak  ?  Saviour,  how 
shall  I  live?  Saviour,  what  shall  I  work  at?  Saviour,  where  shall  I  abide? 
"U  here  shall  I  travel  ?  What  will  be  my  occupation  ?  Saviour,  in  all  things  what 
shall  I  do?  "  That  also  is  part  of  salvation.  Some  people,  you  know,  especially 
some  people  with  a  profession  of  religion,  think  that  their  consciences  always  are 
right.  You  see  such  an  one  doing  something  that  you  think  is  very  bad,  something 
that  the  Bible  condemns.  You  open  the  Bible  and  point  to  a  text,  and  say  to  him, 
"  There,  that  passage  says  you  are  wrong."  But  he  will  probably  reply,  "  I  cannot 
be  very  wrong,  for  I  did  such  and  such  a  thing  conscientiously."  Now,  suppose  I 
were  in  the  position  of  some  of  you  who  have  places  of  business,  and  that  I  employed 
errand-boys  to  assist  me  in  that  business,  and  I  required  of  a  lad  that  he  should 
always  be  at  the  shop  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning;  and  suppose  he  had  a  miserable 
sort  of  time-piece  that  was  always  two  hours  behind  the  time  of  day.  I  chide  the  lad 
for  being  two  hours  behind  time,  and  he  brings  forth  to  me  his  old  wretched  thing  of 
a  watch,  and  shows  me  that  its  hands  point  to  the  hour  of  six,  but  I  tell  him  that, 
according  to  the  position  of  the  sun  in  the  skies,  it  is  eight  o'clock.  He  argues 
with  me,  "But  my  watch  says  it  is  six!  "  Then,  what  I  should  say  to  him  would 
be,  "  Unless  you  are  mocking  me  I  require  that  you  get  your  watch  regulated,  and 
take  care  that  on  the  face  of  that  watch  there  is  always  a  correct  index  of  the  true 
time."  Just  so  I  say  to  people  who  do  wrong,  and  justify  their  wrong-doing  by 
reference  to  their  conscience.  Conscience  is  a  thing  amongst  mankind  which  is  as 
often  wiong  as  a  bad  clock  or  as  a  bad  watch,  and  consciences  need  mending — need 
rectifying.  Now,  salvation  is  to  put  a  man's  conscience  right,  so  that  it  answers  to 
the  will  of  God,  and  to  the  pleasure  of  God,  and  is  an  index  of  what  is  right  and  of 
what  is  wrong.  That  is  another  part  of  salvation.  I  need  not  say  to  you  that  we 
are  all  hurrying  onward  to  the  grave,  and  that  after  death  comes  the  judgment. 
Now,  we  carry  with  us,  unless  we  are  saved  the  guilt  of  the  first  sin  we  com- 
mitted when  we  began  to  say  "  I  will "  and  "  I  won't,"  and  the  guilt  of  all 
the  sins  committed  throughout  hfe.  If  wo  pass  unsaved  into  the  future  state, 
we  carry  the  guilt  of  all  the  transgressions  with  us  to  the  bar  of  God.  Now, 
you  know  that  God  must  do  one  of  two  things  :  He  must  eitber  forgive  sin 
or  punish  it.  He  cannot  pass  it  by.  Oh,  what  must  be  the  weight  of  His 
arm  when  it  strikes  the  transgressor  to  punish  I  We  cannot  wonder  that  in 
the  place  of  punishment  there  is  "  weeping  and  wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth." 
3.  Now,  this  salvation  is  deUverance  from  such  punishment.  A  man  who  is  saved 
not  only  knows  God,  not  only  obeys  God,  but  is  free  from  all  danger  of  future 
misery.  God  has  cast  his  transgressions  into  the  depths  of  the  sea.  They  are 
beyond  the  arm  and  beyond  the  sight  of  any  creature.  That  is  salvation.  There 
are  fifty  other  things  that  might  be  said  about  the  salvation  if  we  were  professing 
to  speak  of  it  fully,  but  we  only  intend  to  give  you  two  or  three  illustrations  of  what 
it  is.  Now  observe  it  is  great.  Why  ?  1.  First,  because  it  comes  from  a  great 
God  ;  because  it  comes  from  that  great  God's  great  heart ;  because  it  comes  from' 
the  great  grace  of  the  great  heart  of  that  great  God.  That  is  why  it  is  great.  2. 
It  is  brought  down  to  us  from  that  great  God's  great  heart  and  from  His  great  grace 
by  a  great  and  personal  Saviour.  3.  It  is  a  great  salvation  because  it  compasses 
all  our  wants,  all  our  woes,  all  our  trials,  all  our  temptations,  all  the  ills  to  which 
we  are  heir.  11.  Neglect.  Suppose  we  were  to-night  in  an  excursion  train  instead 
of  being  here,  and  suppose  a  train  were  just  behind  us — an  express  train.  And 
euppose  that  the  man  at  the  last  station  had  forgotten  to  stop  that  train,  to  signal 
it,  or  to  tell  the  driver  that  the  excursion  train  was  before  him  and  that  he  must  go 
gently.  Suppose  he  forgot  it — that  he  was  occupied  with  other  matters  so  entirely 
as  to  forget  it.  What  would  be  the  effect  of  that  neglect  ?  Into  our  train  would 
come  dashing  the  express  train.  And  what  would  be  the  consequence  ?  Terrific 
loss  of  life.  Or  say  that  I  am  suffering  from  high  fever.  My  medical  attendant 
sends  me  medicine  which  he  requires  to  be  taken  to  me  immediately.  Say  that 
some  person  in  my  house  neglects  to  give  me  that  medicine  and  I  remain  being 
consumed  by  the  fever  through  the  night.    That  person  might  not  intend  to  injure 


99  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha?.  n; 

me ;  it  might  be  very  far  from  his  wish ;  but  the  neglect  does  the  injury.  My  fever 
rages,  burns,  and  consumes,  and  before  morning  light,  I  am  upon  the  very  brink 
of  the  grave.  We  see  what  mischievous  consequences  may  flow  from  neglect.  If 
a  person  were  to  put  a  bar  of  iron  across  the  metals  of  the  line  upon  which  we  were 
travelling,  and  do  it  with  the  purpose  of  upsetting  the  train,  that  would  involve  the 
most  serious  consequences.  But  we  have  seen  that  neglect  does  it  without  any  bad 
intention.  If  a  person  were  to  administer  poison  intentionally,  that  would  destroy 
life ;  but  we  have  seen  that  the  neglect  in  not  giving  the  medicine  might  be  the 
means  of  terminating  life  quite  as  really  and  effectually  as  the  administering  poisoa 
itself.  Now  I  want  your  attention  to  this,  for  the  text  says,  "  How  shall  we  escape 
if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  "  III.  Any  day  may  bring  forth  such  a  change  in 
your  circumstances,  as  that  you  shall  see  no  way  of  escape.  To-day  shows  you  a 
WAY  OF  ESCAPE,  a  place  of  repentance.  To-day  exhibits  to  you  the  great  salvation. 
To-morrow  may  see  you  in  such  a  position  as  that  no  way  of  escape  can  ever  exist 
for  you,  and  you  may  say  in  the  agony  of  despair,  "  How  can  I  escape,  for  I  have 
neglected  God's  great  salvation  ?  "  {S.  Martin,  D.D.)  Neglectful  of  salvation : — 
L  Those  persons  may  certainly  be  numbered  among  this  class  who  are  blumbebino 
OVER  THEIR  IMMORTAL  INTERESTS,  and  who  are  satisfied  to  be  indifferent  to  the 
claims  of  the  gospel,  so  long  as  they  can  be  accused  of  no  outrageous  offence  against 
it.  On  every  principle  of  equity,  great  benefits  deserve  great  and  anxious  labours 
and  struggles  to  possess  ourselves  of  them.  The  man  would  be  accounted  guilty  of 
egregious  folly,  who,  having  the  opportunity  to  send  forward  his  goods  to  their 
destiuation  on  strong  and  fleet  horses,  should  insist  on  engaging  for  the  purpose 
such  as  were  worn  out  and  helpless  ;  but  not  so  foolish  as  those  who  are  wasting 
the  days  of  health  and  vigour  in  indecision  and  idleness,  and  who  are  expecting 
to  work  out  their  everlasting  salvation  in  the  season  of  sickness  and  decrepitude. 
II.  The  charge  of  neglecting  this  "  great  salvation  "  must  also  be  brought  against 
those  WHO  ABE  MERELY  NEUTRALS  in  the  cause  of  God.  ni.  All  those  living  in 
Christian  lands  may  be  said  to  neglect  salvation  who  fail  to  make  it  their  first 
AND  greatest  concern.  IV.  Those  persons  are  neglecting  this  "  great  salvation  " 
who  do  not  use  God's  own  appointed  means  for  securing  it.  (J.  N.  Norton,  D.D.) 
The  great  salvation  by  Jesus  Christ: — I.  What  is  meant  by  "  the  word  spoken  by 
ANGELS  "  ?  1.  The  law,  unquestionably,  as  contradistinguished  from  the  gospel. 
2.  When  in  this  connection  we  speak  of  law  as  contradistinguished  from  gospel,  we 
mean  that  rule  of  moral  conduct,  of  both  heart  and  life,  to  which  God  exacts 
perfect  obedience  from  all  His  intelligent  creatures.  3.  The  law  has  not  been 
abrogated  by  the  introduction  of  the  gospel ;  nor  have  its  claims  been  alienated,  or  its 
sanctions  abolished.  4.  To  perceive  the  force  of  the  apostle's  argument  it  is  neces- 
sary to  notice  the  prominence  he  gives  to  the  penal  character  of  the  law.  "  Every 
transgression  and  disobedience  received  a  just  recompense  of  reward."  6.  The 
"  just  recompense  of  reward  "  is  this  penalty.  "  A  recompense,"  says  Mr.  Benson, 
"  proportionable  to  the  crime,  according  to  the  judgment  of  God,  which  is  infinitely 
just  and  equal,  and  implies  that  they  who  commit  sin  '  are  worthy  of  death.' " 
Death  is  the  penalty  of  the  law  :  "  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."    II.  What 

18   MEANT   BY   THE    EXPRESSION,    "  So    GREAT    SALVATION  "  ?       1.    The    whole    System    of 

Christianity.  2.  The  theme  of  the  gospel  is  salvation  by  Jesus  Christ.  It  is 
founded  in  Him.  ••  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid,  which  is 
Jesus  Christ."  He  is  "  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  our  faith  " ; — '•  the  Author  of 
eternal  salvation  to  all  them  that  obey  Him."  Of  the  whole  system  of  the  gospel, 
he  is  "  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega."  The  gospel  is  a  remedial  system.  It  proposes 
satisfaction  to  the  claims  of  justice  by  a  propitiatory  offering  for  sin.  By  this 
offering  we  were  redeemed,  bought  back  from  the  bondage  of  sin  and  the  penal 
eentenoe  of  the  law.  3.  Eternal  life,  with  all  the  means  and  provisions  necessary 
to  its  attainment,  is  ascribed  to  the  atonement.  4.  To  be  thus  saved,  we  must 
come  to  God  through  Christ.  "  Whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  name,"  &c.  We 
must  receive  Him  by  faith :  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  &c.  All  who 
slight  these  requirements,  neglect  this  great  salvation.  5.  All  this,  remember,  upon 
which  eternal  life  is  offered  to  sinful  man,  is  through  the  atonement  by  Jesus  Christ ; 
and  is  the  only  remedy  God  has  provided  against  the  penalty  of  the  law.  6.  But 
the  text  asserts  the  possibility  and  danger  of  failing  to  receive  this  gracious  gift  of 
God,  "  everlasting  life  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,"  by  neglecting  the  gospel. 
Eternal  life  is  suspended  upon  terms  and  conditions  set  forth  in  the  gospel ;  and,  to 
Insure  it.  intense  application  to  these  is  necessary,  lest  anything  essential  to  that 
end  should  be  permitted  to  slip,  and  the  soul  be  left  under  the  power  of  eternal 


CHA».  11.]  HEBREWS.  97 

death.  How  tremendous  the  motive  "  to  give  the  more  earnest  heed  "  1  They 
neglect  this  great  salvation  who  are  indifferent  to  its  terms  and  provisions,  and 
slight  the  offer  of  pardon  it  makes  to  the  guilty.  Their  inilifference  shows  that 
they  are  not  influenced  by  that  sense  of  the  guilt  of  sin,  without  which  th^y  cannot 
be  fit  subjects  for  pardon,  in  any  way  consistent  with  the  purity  and  integrity  of  the 
moral  government  of  God.     IIL  The  conclusion  deduced  from  the  relation  ih 

WHICH    THE    gospel   OF   THE    GRACE    OF    GoD    STANDS   TO   THE    LAW,    which    is    Steadfast 

in  its  claims  of  justice,  strikjs  us  with  all  the  force  of  moral  demonstration. 
1.  From  what  has  been  said,  it  is  evident  that  everlasting  life,  as  the  gift  of  G'.d 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  is  the  only  remedy  against  eternal  death,  which  is 
the  penalty  of  the  law.  2.  "  Do  we  then  make  void  the  law  through  faith  ?  God 
forbid:  yea,  we  establish  the  law."  In  the  terms  of  both  the  law  and  the  gospel, 
God  deals  with  man  as  a  moral  agent.  (S.  Luckey,  D.D.)  The  elements  of  per- 
suasion in  the  gospel  salvation  : — The  apostle  does  not  attempt  to  tell  us  just  how 
great  salvation  is.  He  probably  felt  respecting  it  much  as  he  did  in  regard  to  tbe 
love  of  Christ,  that  it  has  a  breadth  and  length  and  depth  and  height,  which  passeth 
knowledge.  He  could  therefore  express  his  views  of  it  no  better  than  by  giving 
utterance  to  the  words — so  great  salvation.  Great  it  certainly  is  ;  so  great,  that  we 
can  conceive  of  none  greater.  I  wish  now  to  direct  attention  to  some  of  the  ele- 
ments of  impression  and  persuasion  contained  in  it.  1.  The  salvation  of  the  gospel 
commends  itself,  by  the  fact  that  it  comes  to  you  as  a  direct  personal  concern.  You 
need  this  salvation,  and  your  immortal  all  is  involved  in  your  acceptance  of  it  in 
faith  and  love.  2.  The  salvation  of  the  gospel  embodies  great  and  affecting  truths  ; 
and  this  is  another  element  of  persuasion  which  it  brings  to  bear  on  the  mind  and 
heart  of  man.  First  of  all  it  unveils  the  character  of  God  to  your  view  in  a  new 
and  most  affecting  Ught.  It  calls  you  to  look  to  Him,  not  meiely  in  the  character 
of  a  righteous  lawgiver,  moral  governor,  and  just  judge,  but  of  a  kind  and  merciful 
father,  calling  you  to  His  love,  and  proffering  you  pardon  and  everlasting  happii  esa 
in  Christ  the  Mediator.  It  holds  up  to  your  view  the  great  truth  that  this  Christ, 
the  Son  of  God,  has  interposed  in  your  behalf,  has  been  in  the  world  on  your 
account,  has  by  His  sufferings  and  death  made  atonement  for  sin,  and  opened  a 
way  whereby  God  can  justify  and  save  you  consistently  with  His  holiness,  Hia 
justice  and  His  truth.  And  while  thus  the  great  salvation  reminds  you  of  the 
everlasting  love  of  God,  and  of  the  infinite  grace  and  kindness  of  the  Saviour,  it  seta 
before  you  another  truth  in  the  most  impressive  light— I  mean  the  truth  of  your 
own  lost  and  utterly  helpless  condition  as  a  sinner.  In  the  very  fact  of  offering  you 
mercy  it  proclaims  you  condemned,  and  in  seeking  to  raise  you  to  life  and  heaven  it 
shows  you  to  be  exposed  to  death  and  hell.  It  also  presses  on  your  attention 
another  great  truth — that  of  the  helping  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  whose  office  it 
is  to  take  of  the  things  of  Christ  and  show  them  unto  men  ;  who  visits  the  heart  and 
the  conscience  with  His  tender,  awakening  influence,  and  mercifully  guides  to  peace 
and  hope  all  who  listen  to  His  voice  and  yield  to  the  drawings  of  His  love.  3.  It  is 
another  element  of  impression  and  persuasion  in  the  salvation  of  the  gospel  that  it 
is  perfectly  free  and  gratuitous.  If  you  were  confined  in  hopeless  bondage  in  a 
strange  land,  with  no  hope  of  self-deliverance,  and  one  unsoUcited,  a  pnnce  of  royal 
blood,  should,  at  a  great  expense  of  treasure  and  toil,  procure  your  release  and  send 
you  a  document  to  that  etfect,  the  transaction  would  strike  you  as  one  of  great 
kindness,  and  you  could  not  fail,  unless  you  had  a  heart  of  stone,  to  be  deep  y 
affected  with  a  sense  of  indebtedness  to  so  generous  a  benefactor.  Now  it  is  on  tiua 
wise  that  the  salvation  of  Christ  comes  to  yoi^  It  is  an  unsolicited  favour  ;  it  waa 
procured  at  an  infinite  price  ;  it  offers  you  deliverance,  complete  and  eternal,  fro. a 
the  most  terrible  form  of  bondage — the  bondage  of  sin  and  death — and  all  as  a 
gratuity.  4.  The  salvation  of  the  gospel  has  great  power  of  appeal  to  the  heart  and 
mind  of  man.  5.  Let  us  notice  next  the  results  at  which  the  salvation  of  the  gospel 
aims.  Pardon,  peace,  joy  in  believing,  reconciliation  to  God,  adoption  into  ilia 
family,  d'c,  in  this  present  life.  But  who  can  speak  of  the  results  of  salvation,  aa 
they  will  be  developed  in  the  kingdom  of  everlasting  glory  and  blessedness  ?  Salva- 
tion completed  is  everlasting  happiness ;  happiness  in  the  presence  of  God  and  the 
Lamb — pure,  perfect,  all- satisfying ;  an  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory; 
fulness  of  joy  and  pleasures  for  evermore  in  the  presence  of  the  infinite  Father,  in 
the  society  of  angels,  and  of  just  men  made  perfect.  6,  Another  element  of  impres- 
sion and  persuasion  in  this  salvation  lies  in  the  f  ct  that  the  offer  of  it  is  made  to 
you  only  for  a  short  time ;  and  when  withdi'awn  there  is  no  more  hope  for  eternity. 
{J.  Huwes,  D.D.)        The  greatness  of  the  gospel  salvation: — I.  God  has  bx  Xiia 

7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

GOSPEIi  MADE  80  EFFECTUAL  PB0VI3I0N  FOB  OUR  HAPPINESS,  THAT  NOTHING  BUT  OUB  OWN 

NEGLECT  CAN  BENDER  IT  MI8EEABLE.  1.  How  great,  how  glorious  a  felicity,  how 
adequate  to  the  desires  of  a  reasonable  nature,  is  revealed  to  our  hopes  in  the  gospel. 
2.  What  care  and  solicitude  God  has  expressed  for  our  attainment  of  it.  3.  Upon 
how  gracious  terms  of  duty  it  is  promised  to  us.     II.  Since  God  has  taken  so  great 

CARE  for  OUB  SALVATION,  IT  IS  MOST  REASONABLE  THAT  MEN  SHOULD  BE  CABEFUL  TO 
PERFORM  THEIE  PABT  OF  THIS  WOEK,  AND  NOT  NEGLECT  IT  THEMSELVES.  III.  ThEY  WHO 
NEGLECT  IT,  HAVE  NO  EXCUSE  FOE  THE  CRIME,  BUT  MUST  EXPECT  THE  SEVEREST  RESENT- 
MENTS OF  Divine  justice.  The  direction,  then,  is  sufficently  clear,  and  the  duty 
required  by  it  adjusted  to  the  powers  of  our  nature ;  neither  ignorance,  nor  inability 
can  be  pretended  ;  and  what  plea  can  we  offer  to  Divine  justice  to  prevent  condem- 
nation? {J.  Rogers,  D.D.)  Of  the  means  of  salvation  : — A  sinner  having  heard 
that  sin  deserves  God's  wrath  and  curse,  the  question  that  natively  follows  is.  What 
■way  one  may  escape  them ?  This  is  answered  by  the  weighty  question  in  the  text. 
How  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  Which  we  may  take  up  in 
these  two  things.  (1)  There  is  no  escaping  for  sinners,  if  they  neglect  the  great 
salvation ;  they  perish  without  remedy.  (2)  They  that  do  not  neglect  it,  shall 
surely  escape.  Here  let  us  consider — 1.  The  danger  sinners  are  in  by  their  sin. 
2.  The  way  how  they  may  escape ;  namely,  by  not  neglecting,  but  falhng  in  with 
the  great  salvation.  The  words  intimate — (1)  That  there  is  a  possibility  of  escaping ; 
sinners  are  not  shut  up  hopeless  under  the  curse.  (2)  The  way  of  escape  is  not  by 
fleeing  from  the  Judge,  and  the  execution  of  His  sentence  :  nay,  He  is  omniscient 
and  omnipresent ;  one  cannot  outwit  EUm,  or  get  away  from  His  sight,  or  out  of 
His  reach.  Nor  is  it  by  resisting,  for  He  is  omnipotent,  and  none  can  outbrave  Him, 
nor  make  bead  against  Him.  But  he  may  escape  by  falling  in  with  the  means  of 
escape  appointed  by  Himself,  and  required  by  Him  to  be  made  use  of  by  us.  It  is 
neglected  by  unbelief,  impenitency,  and  not  using  the  means  prescribed.  On  the 
contrary,  then,  He  requires  of  us  faith  and  repentance,  which  are  the  substance  of 
the  gospel  (Acts  xx.  21) ;  and  He  requires  of  us  the  use  of  the  means  by  which 
the  salvation  held  forth  in  the  gospel  is  obtained  (Prov.  viii.  34) ;  for  surely  they 
neglect  and  slight  the  gospel,  who  do  not  believe,  repent,  or  use  the  ordinary  means 
of  obtaining  the  salvation.  I.  The  necessity  of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  in  order  to 
escape  the  wrath  and  curse  of  God  due  for  sin.  1.  There  is  no  pleasing  God 
without  it  (Heb.  xi.  6).  2.  It  is  the  great  duty  of  the  gospel,  whereby  one  is  made 
partaker  of  the  remedy  provided,  and  without  which  neither  your  persons  nor 
performances  can  be  accepted.  3.  It  is  that  which  enters  one  into  the  covenant  of 
peace  ;  unites  him  with  Christ :  and  by  which  he  comes  to  partake  of  all  saving 
benefits.  4.  Salvation  and  damnation  turn  upon  this  very  point  (Mark  xvi.  16). 
II.  The  necessity  of  repentance.  1.  The  Word  of  God  certifies  us,  that  whoso- 
ever does  not  repent  shall  perish  (Luke  xiii.  6).  Your  souls,  then,  lie  at  stake.  2. 
Heaven's  door  is  bolted  against  all  impenitent  sinners  ;  it  is  not  so  wide  as  to  let 
in  a  sinner  with  a  burden  of  unrepented-of  guilt  upon  his  back  (Rev.  xxi.  27).  3. 
Repentance  is  the  other  duty  of  the  gospel;  thereby  signifying  that  without 
repentance  there  is  no  possibility  but  we  must  perish  under  God's  wrath  and  corse. 
John  Baptist  preached  repentance,  so  did  Christ  Himself,  the  apostles,  &o.  How 
can  one  think  then  to  escape  without  it  ?  4.  True  faith  does  always  bring  along 
with  it  true  repentance  (Zech.  xii.  10).  IH.  Are  faith  and  repentance  in  men's 
POWER,  SINCE  God  bequibes  them  of  them  ?  They  are  not.  For  God's  demands  of 
us  are  the  measure  of  our  duty,  but  not  of  our  strength,  which  reaches  not  to  these. 

For 1.  They  are  the  gifts  of  God,  and  the  operations  of  His  special  grace  (Eph.  i.  19  ; 

Acts  v.  31).  2.  Sinners  by  nature,  and  in  themselves,  can  do  nothing  which  is 
good,  and  therefore  cannot  believe  nor  repent  (John  xv.  5).  IV.  The  connection 
betwixt  faith  and  eepentance,  and  escaping  the  wrath  and  curse  of  God  due  to 
us  FOR  sin.  Those  who  believe  and  repent  shall  certainly  escape  (John  v.  24; 
Ezek.  xviii.  30  ;  Rom.  viii.  1).  In  the  moment  the  sinner  comes  into  Christ,  he  is 
no  more  liable  to  eternal  wrath,  nor  to  the  curse ;  for  he  is  not  under  the  law,  but 
nnder  grace  :  and  the  utmost  he  is  liable  to,  is  fatherly  chastisements  (Psa.  Ixxxix. 
30-33).  Thus  faith  and  repentance  have  the  connection  of  appointed  means  pre- 
scribed by  God  Himself,  which,  by  His  blessing,  are  rendered  subservient  to  this 
great  end  of  obtaining  salvation.     V.  The  necessity  of  using  all  the  outward 

MEANS  WHEBEBY  ChEIST  COMMUNICATETH  TO  HiS  PEOPLE  THE  BENEFITS  OF  BEDEMPTION. 

1.  God  has  peremptorily  required  this  (Luke  xiii.  24).  2.  We  have  no  ground  to 
expect  grace  or  s^vation  but  in  the  use  of  the  means  (Prov.  viii.  34).  3.  The 
neglect  of  the  means  is  a  contempt  o.  the  thing.    If  we  would  be  htjaled,  we  would 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS. 


lie  at  the  pool.  If  not,  we  say  we  care  not  for  cure.  And  there  is  required  here, 
not  a  careless  or  merely  superficial  use  of  the  outward  means,  but  a  diligent  one ; 
that  is  an  embracing  of  every  opportunity  that  God  in  His  providence  gives  us  for 
attending  upon  them,  a  careful  improvement  of  them,  and  a  looking  earnestly  to 
Him  for  His  blessing  upon  them.  (T.  Boston,  D.D.)  God's  scheme  of  salvation 
as  a  great  harbour : — After  a  wild  night,  we  have  gone  down  to  the  harbour,  over 
whose  arms  the  angry  waves  have  been  dashing  with  boom  of  thunder  and  in  clouds 
of  spray.  Outside  the  sea  has  been  tossing  and  churning;  cloudwrack  driving 
hun  ieil/  across  the  sky ;  the  winds  howling  like  the  furies  of  olden  fable.  But 
witliin  those  glorious  walls,  the  barks  which  had  put  in  during  the  night  were 
riding  in  safety ;  the  sailors  resting,  or  repairing  rents  in  sail  and  tackle,  whilst  the 
waters  were  unstirred  by  the  storm  raging  without.  Such  n  refuge  or  harbour  is  a 
fit  emblem  of  salvation,  where  tempest-driven  souls  find  shelter  and  peace.  1.  It  is 
great  in  its  sweep. — Sufficient  to  embrace  a  ruined  world.  Boom  in  it  for  whole 
navies  of  souls  to  ride  at  anchor.  Space  enough  for  every  ship  of  Adam's  race 
launched  from  the  shores  of  time.  "  He  is  the  propitiation  for  the  whole  world." 
"  Whosoever  will."  Already  it  is  becoming  filled.  There  a  vessel,  once  manned  by 
eeven  devils,  a  pirate  ship,  but  captured  by  our  Emmanuel,  and  at  her  stern  the 
name,  Mary  of  Magdala.  And  here  one  dismasted,  and  almost  shattered,  rescued 
from  the  fury  of  the  Maelstrom  at  the  last  hour ;  on  her  stern  the  words,  The 
Dying  Thief.  And  there  another,  long  employed  in  efforts  to  sap  the  very  walls  of 
the  harbour,  and  now  flying  a  pennon  from  the  masthead.  Chief  of  Sinners  and 
Least  of  Saints.  2.  It  is  great  in  its  foundations.  The  chief  requisite  in  con- 
structing a  sea-wall  is  to  get  a  foundation  which  can  stand  unmoved  amid  the  heaviest 
eeas.  The  shifting  sand  must  be  pierced  down  to  the  granite  rock.  But  this 
harbour  has  foundations  mighty  enough  to  inspire  strong  consolation  in  those  who 
have  fled  to  it  for  refuge  (Heb.  vi.  18).  The  promise,  and  as  if  that  were  not  enough, 
the  oath  of  God.  3.  It  was  great  in  its  cost.  By  the  tubular  bridge  on  the  Menai 
Straits  stands  a  column,  which  records  the  names  of  those  who  perished  during  the 
construction  of  that  great  triumph  of  engineering  skill.  Nothing  is  said  of  the 
money  spent,  only  of  the  lives  sacriOced.  And  so,  beside  the  harbour  of  our 
salvation,  near  to  its  mouth,  so  as  to  be  read  by  every  ship  entering  its  enclosure, 
rises  another  column,  with  this  as  its  inscription:  "Sacred  to  the  memory  of  the 
Son  of  God,  who  gave  His  life  a  sacrifice  for  the  sin  of  the  world."  4.  It  has  been 
great  in  its  announcement.  The  announcement  of  the  law  was  by  angels.  The 
eunouncemeut  of  the  gospel  was  by  the  Son.  If  the  one  were  august,  what  must 
not  the  other  have  been?  If  the  one  were  made  sure  by  the  most  tremendous 
sanctions,  what  fehould  not  be  said  of  the  other  ?  Proclaimed  by  the  Lord ;  con- 
firmed by  apostles  and  eye-witnesses  ;  testified  to  by  the  Almighty  Himself,  in  signs 
end  wonders,  and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  How  dare  we  treat  it  with  contumely 
or  neglect?  5.  It  will  be  great  in  its  penalties. — The  tendency  of  our  age  is  to 
minimise  God's  rightaeus  judgment  on  sin.  It  seems  to  be  prevalently  thought  that, 
because  our  dispensation  is  one  of  love  and  mercy,  therefore  there  is  the  less  need  to 
dread  the  results  of  sin.  But  the  inspired  writer  here  argues  in  precisely  a  contrary 
sense.  Just  because  this  age  is  one  of  such  tender  mercy,  therefore  sins  against  its 
King  are  more  deadly,  and  the  penalties  heavier.  In  the  old  days  no  transgression, 
positive,  and  no  disobedience,  negative,  escaped  its  just  recompense  of  reward  ; 
and  in  these  days  there  is  even  less  likelihood.  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Confirmed 
unto  us. — Of  confirming  the  Word: — Though  Christ's  own  publishing  of  the  gospel 
were  sufficient  to  make  it  worthy  of  aU  acceptation,  yet  it  is  said  to  be  confirmed. 
That  is  confirmed  which  is  further  proved,  or  fulfilled,  or  made  more  sure  and 
certain.  Thus  Christ  is  said  to  confirm  the  word  of  His  apostles  with  signs  (Mark 
xvi.  20),  and  G'>d  by  sending  His  Son  to  confirm  the  promises  made  to  the  fathers 
(Rom.  XV.  8).  That  also  which  is  kept  from  failing  or  from  being  altered,  is  said  to 
be  confirmed.  So  God  doth  confirm  His  unto  the  end  (1  Cor.  i.  8),  and  establish 
them  (1  Cor.  L  21),  and  we  are  called  upon  to  be  established  with  grace  (chap.  xiii.  3). 
But  that  which  Christ  spake  needed  not  in  any  such  respect  to  be  confirmed.  He 
is  a  faithful  and  true  witness  (Eev.  iii.  14).  He  is  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life 
(John  xiv.  6),  that  only  true  way  that  leadeth  unto  hfe.  So  there  was  no  fear  of 
any  uncertainty,  or  of  any  failing  in  His  Word.  Christ's  Word,  therefore,  was  con- 
firmed for  these  and  other  like  reasons.  1.  Because  He  was  not  at  all  times,  in  all 
places  prenent  with  His  Church,  to  urge  and  press  His  Word  upon  them.  For  this 
end  He  sent  forth  in  His  life-time  disciples  to  preach  (Luke  ix.  2,  z.  1).  And  after 
His  ascension  He  gave  apostles  and  others  for  the  perfecting  of  the  saints  (£ph.  ir. 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

11,  12).  2.  Because  of  our  weakness,  Christ  confirmed  His  Word,  to  support  us, 
that  we  might  have  strong  consolations.  For  this  end  God  coufiimed  His  promise 
by  an  oath  (chap.  vi.  17,  18).  3.  Because  of  the  commendable  custom  of  men,  who 
used  to  confirm  their  own  words  by  the  consent  and  testimony  of  others.  Thus 
St.  Paul  in  the  inscriptions  of  his  epistles  joins  with  himself  Sosthenes  (1  Cor.  i.  1), 
Timothy  (2  Cor.  i.  1),  Silvanus  and  Timothy  (1  Thess.  i.  1),  Timothy  with  the 
bishops  and  deacons  (Phil.  i.  1),  all  the  brethren  which  were  with  him  (GaL  i.  2). 
4.  Because  by  God's  law  and  man's,  at  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses  every 
word  shall  be  established  (Deut.  xix.  15).  Thus  Christ's  Word  was  confirmed  :  (1) 
In  that  there  were  many  witnesses  of  the  same  truth  wherein  they  all  agreed 
(Luke  xxiv.  48 ;  Acts  ii.  32).  (2)  In  that  such  as  despised  Him  in  His  life-time, 
after  His  resurrection  and  ascension  were  wrought  upon  (Acts  ii.  37).  (3)  In  that 
by  reason  of  the  power  of  the  Spirit  in  them,  tbey  who  preacLed  the  gospel  of 
Christ  after  Him,  "  were  received  as  an  angel  of  God,  even  as  Christ  Jesus ''  (Gal.  iv. 
14).  (4)  In  that  many  who  never  heard  Christ  themselves,  believed  that  Word  wLich 
Christ  had  preached,  but  was  made  known  to  them  by  others  (1  Pet.  i.  8).  Thus 
it  appears  that  this  confirming  of  Christ's  Word  added  nothing  to  the  authority 
thereof.  The  Church  may  confirm  the  sacred  Scriptures  to  be  the  Word  of  God : 
yet  confirm  nothing  to  their  authority.  Divine  mysteries  may  be  confirmed  by 
human  testimonies :  yet  no  authority  brought  thereby  to  those  mysteries.  God 
being  pleased  thus  to  confirm  the  gospel  to  us,  it  ought  to  be  a  steadfast  word  to  us, 
we  ought  with  all  steadfastness  of  faith  to  receive  it,  and  to  continue  steadfastly 
therein,  as  the  Christians  of  the  primitive  Church  did  in  the  apostles'  doctrine 
(Acts  ii.  42).  (W.  Qouge.)  A  confirmed  testimony : — Confirmed  is  "made  stead- 
fast "  (ver.  2),  as  the  law  was  to  Israel.  The  word  confirmed  does  not  mean,  added 
their  own  testimony  to  the  redemptive  truth  of  what  they  heard  and  preached. 
This  they  no  doubt  did,  and  to  men  the  testimony  of  other  men  founded  on  their 
ovra  experience  is  very  weighty  and  convincing ;  and  of  course  we  have  it,  not  orly 
in  the  iaith  of  those  around  us,  but  in  the  unbroken  life  of  the  Church  up  to  csr 
time.  The  point  here,  however,  is  rather  the  accuracy  and  trustworthiness  with 
which  the  salvation  has  been  handed  on  even  unto  us,  by  ear-witnesses  of  the 
Lord,  combined  perhaps  with  a  certain  authority  which  belonged  to  them  as  His 
personal  hearers,  and  the  accompanying  signs  attesting  their  preaching.  {A.  B. 
Davidson,  LL.D.)  Christ  historical : — It  is  of  no  use  to  say  that  Christ,  as 
exhibited  in  the  Gospels,  is  not  historical.  Who  among  His  disciples  or  among  their 
proselytes  was  capable  of  inventing  the  sayings  ascribed  to  Jesus,  or  imagining 
the  hfe  and  character  revealed  in  the  Gospels?  Certainly  not  the  fishermen  of 
Galilee;  as  certainly  not  St.  Paul,  whose  character  and  idiosyncrasies  were  of  a 
totally  different  sort ;  still  less  the  early  Christian  writers,  in  whom  nothing  is  more 
evident  than  that  the  good  which  was  in  them  was  derived,  as  they  always  professed 
that  it  was  derived,  from  a  higher  source.  (J.  Stuart  Mill.)  Value  of  testi- 
tnony  : — Bishop  Young  says  :  "  The  conviction  produced  by  testimony  is  capable  of 
being  carried  much  higher  than  the  conviction  produced  by  experience,  and  the 
reason  is  this,  because  there  may  be  concurrent  testimonies  to  the  truth  of  one 
individual  fact ;  whereas  there  can  be  no  concurrent  experiments  with  regard  to  an 
individual  experiment."     (Smith's  "  Dictionary  of  the  Bible"  Art.  "  Resurrection.") 

Ver.  4.  With  signs  and  wonders,  and  with  divers  miracles. — Signs,  wonders,  and 
miracles ; — 1.  Signs,  according  to  the  notation  of  the  word,  imply  such  external 
visible  tilings  as  signify  and  declare  some  memorable  matter  which  otherwise 
could  not  be  so  well  discerned,  nor  would  be  believed.  "  We  would  see  a  sign  from 
Thee,"  say  the  Pharisees  to  Christ  (Matt.  xii.  38).  And  they  desired  Him  that  He 
would  "  show  them  asign  "  (Matt.  xvi.  1).  These  two  words, "  see,"  "  show,"  imply  that 
a  sign  is  of  some  external  visible  thing  that  may  be  showed  and  seen.  And  extra- 
ordinary it  must  be,  because  it  useth  to  be  for  confirmation  of  some  secret  and 
Divine  matter.  Thus  the  Pharisees  would  have  a  sign  from  heaven  (Matt.  xvi.  1), 
which  must  needs  be  extraordinary.  Thereupon  signs  and  wonders  are  oft  joined 
together  (John  iv.  48  ;  Acts  ii.  43,  iv.  30,  vii.  36).  2.  The  word  translated 
"  wonders  "  is  used  by  all  sorts  of  authors  for  some  strange  thing,  that  may  seem  to 
foretell  some  other  thing  to  come.  "  I  will  shew  wonders  in  heaven,"  saith  the  Lord 
(Acts  ii.  19).  Those  strange  things  which  by  the  ministry  of  Moses  were  done  in 
Egypt,  in  the  Ked  Sea,  and  in  the  wilderness,  are  set  out  under  this  word  "  wonders  " 
(Acts  vii.  36).  Our  English  doth  fitly  translate  the  (ireek  word  "wonders,"  by  reason 
of  the  effect,  they  CAUse  woider ;  and  by  reason  of  the  strangeness  of  them,  they  are 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  101 

wonderful  (Matt.  xv.  31 ;  Mark  vi.  51 ;  Acts  iii.  10).  Our  English  word  "  miracle," 
according  to  the  notation  of  the  Latin  word,  whence  it  is  taken,  siynifieth  a  matter 
of  wonder.  3.  The  Greek  word  here  translated  "miracles,"  properly  signifieth  powers. 
It  is  derived  from  a  verb  that  signifieth  to  be  able.  This  word  in  the  singular 
number  is  put  for  a  man's  ability  (Matt.  xxv.  15) ;  for  his  strength  (2  Cor.  i.  8) ; 
and  also  for  strength  in  the  sun  (Rev.  i.  16) ;  and  in  sin  (1  Cor.  xv.  56).  It  is 
also  put  for  virtue  in  one  (Mark  v.  30) ;  and  for  the  power  of  man  (1  Cor.  iv.  19)  ; 
of  a  prophet  (Luke  i.  17) ;  of  the  Spirit  (Eph.  iii.  16) ;  of  Christ  (2  Cor.  xii.  9) ; 
and  of  God  (Matt.  xxii.  29).  In  the  plural  number  it  is  put  for  angels  (Rom. 
viii.  38  ;  1  Peter  iii.  32),  which  excel  in  strength  (Psa.  ciii.  20).  And  for  the  firm 
and  stable  things  in  heaven  (Matt.  xxiv.  29) ;  and  for  extraordinary  works.  Here- 
upon they  are  styled  in  our  English,  "mighty  deeds"  (2  Cor.  xii.  12) ;  "  mighty  works  " 
(Matt.  xi.  20,  21,  23);  "wonderful  works"  (Matt.  vii.  21);  and  frequently, as  here  in 
this  text  "  miracles  "  (Acts  ii.  22,  xix.  11 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  10,  28,  29).  For  miraclea 
cannot  be  wrought  but  by  an  extraordinary  power,  even  the  power  of  God  Himself. 
Fitly,  therefore,  is  this  word  "powers"  used  to  set  out  miracles,  and  fitly  is  it  here, 
and  in  other  places,  translated  "miracles."  ( W.  Gouge.)  Of  the  miracles  wrought  in 
confirmation  of  Christianity : — Miracles  are  a  Divine  testimony  given  to  a  person 
or  doctrine.  I.  What  a  miracle  is.  The  shortest  and  plainest  description  I  can 
give  of  it  is  this  :  that  it  is  a  supernatural  effect,  evident  and  wonderful  to  sense. 
1.  That  it  be  a  supernatural  effect.  By  a  supernatural  effect  I  mean  such  an  effect 
as  either  in  itself  or  iu  its  own  nature,  or  in  the  manner  and  circumstances  of  it, 
exceeds  any  natural  power  that  we  know  of  to  produce  it.  2.  There  is  another 
condition  also  required  to  a  miracle,  that  it  be  an  effect  evident  and  wonderful  to 
sense ;  for  if  we  do  not  see  it,  it  is  to  us  as  if  it  were  not,  and  can  be  no  testimony 
or  proof  of  anything,  because  itself  stands  in  need  of  another  miracle  to  give 
testimony  to  it,  and  to  prove  that  it  was  wrought ;  and  neither  in  Scripture,  nor 
profane  authors,  nor  in  common  use  of  speech,  is  anything  called  a  miracle,  but 
what  falls  under  the  notice  of  our  senses ;  a  miracle  being  nothing  else  but  a  thing 
wonderful  to  sense  ;  and  the  very  end  and  design  of  it  is  to  be  a  sensible  proof  and 
conviction  to  us  of  something  which  we  do  not  see.    II.  In  what  circumstances, 

AND     WITH     WHAT     CAUTIONS     AND     LIMITATIONS,    MIRACLES    GIVE     TESTIMONY     TO     THE 

TRUTH  AND  DTViNiTY  OP  ANY  DOCTRINE.  1.  The  entire  proof  of  the  Christian 
doctrine  or  religion,  consisting  of  many  considerations,  when  taken  together,  make 
up  a  full  demonstration  of  the  truth  of  it,  when  perhaps  no  one  of  them,  taken 
singly  and  by  itself,  is  a  convincing  and  undeniable  proof.  2.  But  yet  miracles  are 
the  principal  external  proof  and  confirmation  of  the  divinity  of  a  doctrine.  3. 
Especially  if  miracles  have  all  the  circumstances  of  advantage  given  to  them  which 
they  are  capable  of ;  if  they  be  many  and  great,  public  and  unquestionable,  and 
universal  and  of  long  continuance.  4.  It  cannot  be  denied,  but  that  God  doth 
sometimes  permit  miracles  to  be  wrought  for  the  countenancing  of  a  false  doc*rine. 
So  our  Saviour  tells  us  that  the  elect,  that  is,  the  true  and  sincere  Christians,  should 
not  be  deceived  by  the  "  signs  and  wonders  of  the  false  Christs  and  false  prophets." 
And  therefore  He  was  not  afraid  of  having  the  credit  of  His  doctrine  weakened  by 
foretelling  that  false  prophets  should  work  miracles ;  because  He  knew  when  the 
devil  had  done  his  utmost,  the  difference  would  be  apparent  enough  between  the 
confirmation  which  He  had  given  to  the  Christian  doctrine,  and  what  the  devil 
should  be  able  to  give  to  his  instruments.  As — (1)  Either  the  doctrine  would  be 
abaurd  in  itself,  and  such  as  no  miracles  can  confirm.  Or — (2)  It  would  be  contrary 
to  that  doctrine  which  had  already  bad  a  far  greater  and  more  Divine  confirmation. 
Or — (3)  The  miracles  which  false  prophets  work  are  presently  confuted,  and  upon 
the  spot.  Thus  Moses  confuted  and  conquered  Pharaoh's  magicians,  by  working 
miracles  which  they  could  not  work,  which  forced  them  to  yield  the  cause,  and 
acknowledge  that  it  was  "  the  finger  of  God."  And  so  hkewise  Simon  Magus. 
Or  else — (4)  The  miracles  wrought,  or  pretended  to  be  wrought,  to  confiiTu  false 
doctrines,  are  such  as  do,  some  way  or  other,  confute  themselves ;  or  if  they  be  real, 
are  sufficiently  detected  to  be  the  pranks  of  the  devil,  and  not  the  great  and  glorious 
works  of  God.  Such  were  the  miracles  of  the  heathen  Jeities,  wrought  so  privately 
and  obscurely,  and  confessedly  mixed  with  so  much  of  imposture,  as  to  bring  a  jusi 
suspicion  upon  them,  that,  when  they  were  real,  the  devil  was  the  author  of  them. 
And  such  were  the  miracles  which  are  attributed  to  Mahomet.  1.  What  hath  bi^en 
said  may  satisfy  us  of  the  truth  and  divinity  of  the  Christian  doctrine,  which  haf] 
BO  eminent  a  testimony  given  t  >  it  from  he^iven,  and  did  at  first  so  strangely  prevail 
in  the  world,  contrary  to  all  human  probabihty,  "  not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOB.  [chap,  n, 

by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord."  2.  From  hence  we  may  judge  how  groundless  the 
pretencas  are,  which  men  nowadays  make  to  inspiration  and  infallibihty,  because 
this  is  not  to  be  proved  and  made  out  any  other  way  but  by  miracles.  For  either 
we  must  believe  every  pretence  of  this  kind ;  and  then  we  are  at  the  mercy  of  every 
crafty  and  confident  man,  to  be  led  by  him  into  what  delusions  he  pleases ;  or  we 
must  only  beUeve  those  who  give  some  testimony  of  their  inspiration;  but  the 
evidence  of  inspiration  was  always  miracles.  3.  You  see  what  an  immediate 
testimony  from  heaven  God  was  pleased  to  give  to  the  first  preachers  of  the 
Christian  doctrine,  to  quaUfy  them  with  any  probability  of  success,  to  contest  with 
violent  and  almost  invincible  prejudices  of  men  educated  in  a  contrary  religion,  and 
which  had  the  secular  authority  and  laws  on  its  side.  For  having  this  Divine  seal 
given  to  their  commission,  they  did  as  it  were  carry  the  letters-patents  of  heaven 
in  their  hands,  and  an  authority  paramount  to  that  of  human  laws.  4.  The  con- 
sideration of  what  has  been  said,  doth  justly  upbraid  us,  that  our  religion,  which 
hath  such  evident  marks  of  divinity  upon  it,  and  comes  down  to  us  confirmed  by  so 
many  miracles,  should  yet  have  so  little  efficacy  upon  the  lives  of  the  greatest  part 
of  those  who  call  themselves  Christians.  Secondly,  that  God  gave  testimony  to  the 
apostles  and  first  publishers  of  Christianity,  in  a  very  eminent  manner.  1.  At  this 
time  the  Holy  Ghost  descended  upon  the  apostles  in  miraculous  powers  and  gifts ; 
when  this  new  law  was  '*  to  come  forth  out  of  Zion,  and  the  Word  of  the  Lord  from 
Jerusalem."  And  among  these  gifts,  the  first  we  find  mentioned  was  the  gift  of 
tongues,  without  which  the  gospel  must  of  necessity  have  been  very  slowly 
propagated  in  the  world.  2.  The  next  miraculous  gift  I  shall  mention  after  the 
gift  of  tongues,  is  the  gift  of  prophecy,  or  foretelling  things  future,  which  was 
always  looked  upon  as  an  evidence  of  inspiration.  3.  The  next  gift  is  that  of  heal- 
ing all  manner  of  diseases.  4.  The  power  of  raising  the  dead,  which  hath  always 
been  esteemed  one  of  the  greatest  and  most  unquestionable  miracles  of  all  other. 
5.  Another  miraculous  gift  was  that  of  discerning  spirits,  the  principal  use  of  which 
was  to  try  and  judge  who  were  true  prophets.  6.  And,  besides  these  which  I  have 
mentioned,  there  was  likewise  a  power  of  inflicting  corporal  punishments  and 
diseases  upon  scandalous  and  obstinate  Christians,  which  in  Scripture  is  called,  "  a 
delivering  men  up  to  Satan,  for  the  destroying  or  tormenting  of  their  bodies,  that 
their  souls  might  be  saved  at  last."  And  of  this  kind  were  those  diseases  which 
befel  the  Christians  for  their  disorderly  and  irregular  carriage  at  the  sacrament,  of 
which  the  apostle  speaks  (1  Cor.  xi.  30).  7.  There  was  the  power  of  casting  out 
devils  in  the  name  of  Christ,  which  was  common  to  the  meanest  Christian,  and 
continued  in  the  Church  a  long  time  after  most  of  the  other  gifts  were  ceased,  as 
TertuUian,  Minucius  Felix,  and  Arnobius,  do  most  expressly  testify  concerning 
their  times.  III.  The  reason  why  these  miracles  are  now  ceased  in  the 
Christian  Church,  and  have  been  for  a  long  time,  so  that  there  have  been  no 
footsteps  of  this  miraculous  power  for  many  ages.    I.  These  miraculous  powers 

AND  GIFTS  HAVE  CEASED  IN  THE  ChURCH  FOR  SEVERAL  AGES.  II.  ThERE  13  NOT  THE 
LIKE    NECESSITY   AND    OCCASION    FOB    THEM   THAT   THERE    WAS    BEFORE.       They    Were    at 

first  in  a  great  degree  necessary  to  introduce  the  gospel  into  the  world,  which  was 
destitute  of  all  other  helps  and  advantages,  to  recommend  it  to  the  esteem  and  liking 
of  mankind;  to  give  credit  to  a  new  doctrine  and  rehgion,  so  contrary  to  the 
inveterate  prejudices  of  men,  bred  up  in  another  religion  very  different  from  this, 
and  so  opposite  to  the  lusts  and  interests  of  men.  III.  I  come  now  to  answer  that 
OBJECTION  from  the  innumerable  miracles  which  have  been,  and  still  are  pretended 
to  be,  wrought  in  the  Church  of  Eome.  And  so  indeed  we  find  that  the  Arians  and 
other  heretics  in  former  times  pretended  to  miracles,  for  the  confirmation  of  their 
errors,  a  good  while  after  miracles  were  generally  ceased  in  the  Chiistian  Church, 
which  shows  that  this  is  no  new  or  strange  thing.  1.  The  most  learned  and 
judicious  writers  of  the  Eoman  Church  do  acknowledge  that  there  is  no  necessity 
of  miracles  now,  and  that  Christianity  is  sufficiently  established  by  the  miracles 
which  were  wrought  at  first  to  give  testimony  to  it ;  and  therefore,  not  being 
necessary,  without  manifest  evidence  of  fact,  it  is  not  necessary  to  beheve  that  they 
are  continued.  2.  The  miracles  pretended  to  by  the  Church  of  Eome  are  of  very 
doubtful  and  suspected  credit,  even  among  the  wisest  persons  of  their  own 
communion.  3.  The  miracles  of  the  Church  of  Eome,  supposing  several  of  them 
to  be  true,  have  such  marks  and  characters  upon  them,  as  render  it  very  suspicious 
that  they  are  not  operations  of  God,  or  good  spirits,  but  the  working  of  Satan.  4. 
The  miracles  of  the  Church  of  Eome,  taking  them  for  true,  are  very  impertinently 
aad  unseasonably  wrought.    When  and  where  there  is  no  need  and  occasion  for 


CHAP.  n.l  HEBREWS.  103 

them,  they  are  very  rife  and  frequent ;  bat  where  there  is  greatest  occasion  for  them 
and  most  reason  to  expect  them,  they  are  either  not  at  all,  or  very  rarely  so  much 
as  pretended  to.  5.  He  from  whom  of  all  persons  in  that  Church  we  might  expect 
the  most  and  greatest  miracles,  does  not,  so  far  as  I  can  learn,  pretend  at  all  to 
that  gift ;  I  mean  the  head  of  their  church,  the  Pope.  6.  Most  of  the  doctrines  in 
difference  between  us  and  the  Church  of  Rome,  which  they  chiefly  pretend  to  con- 
firm by  these  miracles,  are  not  capable  of  being  confirmed  by  th«m.  There  are  three 
sorts  of  doctrines,  two  of  which  are  in  their  own  nature  incapable  of  being  confirmed 
by  a  miracle,  and  a  third  upon  supposition  of  its  contrariety  to  the  Christian 
doctrine,  which  hath  already  had  an  unquestionable  Divine  confirmation.  (1) 
No  doctrine  which  is  contrary  to  sense,  is  capable  of  being  confirmed  by 
a  miracle,  as  transubstantiation.  (2)  No  doctrine  that  does  countenance  or 
enjoin  idolatry  is  capable  of  being  confirmed  by  a  miracle.  This  is  evident 
from  Deut.  xiii.  (3)  No  doctrine  contrary  to  any  part  of  the  Christian 
doctrine,  which  hath  already  received  an  unquestionable  Divine  confirmation, 
is  capable  of  being  confirmed  by  the  miracles  pretended  to  in  the  Church  of 
Rome,  if  they  were  real.  7.  The  chief  prophecies  of  the  New  Testament,  which 
are  concerning  false  prophets,  and  concering  antichrist,  have  marked  Him  out 
by  this  character,  that  He  should  be  a  great  worker  of  miracles  and  magnify 
Himself  upon  this  pretence  (Matt.  xxiv.  24).  {Archbp.  Tillotson.)  Miracles  not 
needed  now  : — Now  that  the  use  of  miracles  is  performed  unto  us  and  we  do  believe 
the  gospel,  in  token  that  our  faith  is  accepted  of  God,  now  He  hath  taken  signs 
from  us  which  served  us  before  when  we  were  unbelieving.  And  surely  our  faith  is 
never  so  honourable,  nor  God  so  well  pleased  with  us,  as  when  we  have  said  both  to 
heaven  and  earth,  we  seek  no  signs  from  them  :  when  the  Word  of  God  hath  such 
a  persuasion  in  our  hearts,  that  we  have  now  taken  hold  of  all  the  good  promises  of 
God,  and  said  unto  miracles,  get  you  hence.  The  Jews  siek  a  sign,  saith  St.  Paul ; 
surely  we  that  be  Christians  seek  for  none ;  when  they  were  offered  of  God,  He 
showed  His  compassion  upon  our  infirmity;  now  He  hath  taken  them  away.  He 
showed  greater  mercy  that  He  accepteth  our  faith,  and  let  us  hearken  to  the  Word 
of  Christ ;  by  it  we  shall  live  ;  if  we  beheve  it  not,  we  would  not  believe  all  miracles 
in  the  world,  no,  though  dead  men  should  rise  to  preach  unto  us.  For  great  miracles 
have  been  already  done,  not  only  by  the  apostles,  but  by  Christ  Himself,  to  confirm 
His  word.  If  we  believe  not  them  it  is  too  much  childishness  to  think  we  would 
believe  other.  Signs  were  when  doctrine  was  more  obscure  ;  now  it  is  so  clear  the 
signs  are  gone.  The  Son  of  God  once  revenged  the  transgression  of  His  law  with 
the  earth  opening,  with  waters,  with  fire,  with  whirlwinds,  that  the  people  might 
fear.  He  doth  not  so  now,  because  His  threatenings  have  been  heard  of  all  flesh  : 
Go  ye  cursed  into  eternal  fire — a  voice  that  pierceth  between  the  marrow  and  the 
bones,  with  greater  fear  tlian  the  rage  of  earth  or  water.  And  Christ  once  showed 
loving  pigns  to  make  His  people  put  their  trust  in  Him,  but  now  He  hath  spoken  in 
our  hearts  :  Come  ye  blessed  of  My  Father  into  everlasting  life — a  voice  that  goeth 
deeper  into  the  soul  and  spirit  than  the  hearing  of  all  the  miracles,  by  which  Israel 
was  led  into  the  land  of  Canaan.  And  we  shall  do  injury  to  our  Saviour  Christ  il 
now  we  will  ask  that  to  these  words  He  should  add  miracles,  for  if  we  bring  faith 
to  that  which  is  spoken,  it  will  fill  our  hearts  with  all  fulnes^s,  and  will  sell  the  sight 
of  all  the  miracles  in  the  world  to  buy  but  one  grain  of  a  constant  faith  in  Christ ; 
wherein  whosoever  shall  stumble,  let  him  accuse  himself  if  God  give  him  over  to 
his  own  blindness,  that  because  he  had  no  love  to  believe  the  truth,  therefore  he 
should  be  led  with  lies  and  deceivabia  things.  (E.  Deering,  B.D.)  Gifts  of  the 
Holy  Ghost. — The  gifU  of  tlie  Holy  Ghost : — Gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  were  extra- 
ordinary qualities  and  powers  given  to  such  as  heard  the  apostles'  doctrine  and 
beheved  it ;  as  power  to  heal,  to  speak  iu  strange  languages,  to  prophecy,  to  do 
miracles.  They  are  said  to  be  gifts  and  effects  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  because  they  had 
them  dot  by  nature,  or  industry,  or  instruction  by  man,  but  from  the  power  of  God- 
Redeemer,  and  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  They  are  called  in  the  original,  "  distributions" 
or  "  divisions,"  because  they  were — 1.  Communicated  to  divers  persons.  2.  Were 
many  of  different  kinds.  3.  Were  given  in  several  degrees.  They  were  distributed 
according  to  His  own  will.  (1)  Freely.  (2)  To  whom  He  will.  (3)  What  gifts  He 
will.  (4)  In  what  measure  He  vtUI.  For  there  are  diversities  of  gifts  (1  Cor.  xii.  4). 
But  all  these  worketh  that  one  and  the  self-same  Spirit,  dividing  to  every  man 
severally  as  He  will  (ver.  11).  The  effect  of  these  miracles  and  gifts  was  the  con- 
firmation of  the  doctrine  of  the  apostles,  which  they  did  confirm  by  word  and  deed. 
For — 1.  They  did  most  certainly  affirm  and  ass  rt  this  doctrine,  as  Laving  heard 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chajp.  n. 


it  immediately  of  Christ,  and  as  having  received  the  immediate  knowledge  thereof 
from  Him.  2.  They  did  these  signs,  wonders,  and  mighty  deeds,  and  upon  the 
imposition  of  their  hands,  believers  received  the  extraordinary  gifts  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  yet  they  neither  did  these  miracles,  nor  gave  these  gifts  by  their  own  power 
or  holiness.  But  the  works  were  done,  and  the  graces  given  by  them  aa 
instruments,  in  the  name  of  Christ  as  risen  and  glorified  and  from  God.  So  that 
the  power  of  God,  the  merit  of  Christ,  their  ministration,  did  all  concur  to  the 
production  of  these  glorious  effects.  God  was  the  principal  cause,  therefore  is  it 
said,  that  by  these  God  did  bear  them  witness  and  attest  their  doctrine  to  be  true, 
and  from  Him ;  so  that  this  confirmation  was  a  giving  credibility  to  the  doctrine 
of  the  gospel,  so  far  as  it  was  new,  and  delivered  the  positive  truths  concerning 
Jesus  of  Nazareth,  dying  for  our  sins,  rising  again,  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  and  the  dependence  of  justification  before  the  tribunal  of  God,  and  eternal 
glory  upon  faith  in  Him  making  intercession  in  heaven.  For  there  was  no  need 
thus  to  coufirm  the  ceremonials  of  Moses,  and  the  covenant  of  God  with  Israel 
before  Mount  Sinai  to  the  Jew ;  for  these  things  He  made  no  dcubt  of,  nor  was 
this  confirmation  needful  for  to  persuade  the  GentUe  of  the  equity  and  justice  of 
the  morals  of  the  Scripture,  for  the  natural  light  of  reason  did  approve  them. 
These  miracles  and  gifts  were  proofs  very  strong  and  powerful,  for  they  were  no 
juggling  impostures  or  delusions,  but  real  demonstrations  of  the  Divine  will,  and 
clear  to  the  senses.  {G.  Lawson.)  According  to  His  own  wilL — Of  God's  will  in 
ordering  icorks  and  gifts : — The  forementioned  diversity  of  miracles  and  distribution 
of  gifts,  were  ordered  and  disposed  according  to  the  will  of  God.  This  act  of 
distributing  is  attributed  to  God  (1  Cor.  vii.  17) ;  to  His  Son  (Eph.  iv.  7) ;  and  to 
His  Spirit  (1  Cor.  xii.  11).  And  for  kind,  number,  and  measure  of  gifts,  all 
are  ordered  by  the  will  of  this  one  God,  according  to  His  own  will,  not  another's ; 
the  Greek  word  intends  as  much.  The  will  of  God  is  that  rule  whereby  all 
things  are  ordered  that  He  Himself  doth,  and  whereby  all  things  ought  to  be 
ordered  that  creatures  do.  Hereupon  God's  will  is  distinguished  into  His  secret 
and  revealed  will  (Deut.  xxix.  29).  The  secret  will  of  God  is  called  His  counsel 
(Jsa.  xlvi.  10);  the  counsel  of  His  wiU  (Eph.  i.  11);  His  purpose  (Rom  viii.  28); 
His  pleasure  (Isa.  xlvi.  10) ;  His  good  pleasure  (Eph.  i.  9) ;  the  good  pleasure  of 
His  will  (Eph.  i.  5).  The  other  is  commonly  called  God's  Word,  and  that  after 
the  manner  of  men,  because  the  ordinary  means  whereby  men  make  known  their 
minds  is  the  word  of  their  mouth,  therefore  the  revelation  of  God's  will  is  called 
God's  Word,  whether  it  be  by  an  audible  voice  from  God  Himself  (Matt.  iii.  17), 
or  by  the  ministry  of  angels  (ver.  2),  or  by  the  ministry  of  men  (Hos.  i.  2). 
This  is  also  called  the  good  and  acceptable  and  perfect  will  of  God  (Rom.  xii.  2). 
This  revealed  will  of  God  is  that  which  is  principally  intended  in  the  second 
petition  of  the  Lord's  prayer.  Here  God's  secret  will  is  meant.  This  is  that 
supreme  and  absolute  will  of  God,  by  which  all  things  are,  and  without  which 
nothing  can  be  (Psa.  cxv.  3 ;  Eph.  i.  11 ;  Rom.  xL  34).  This  is  God's  only  rule ; 
He  hath  nothing  else  to  regulate  any  purpose  or  act  of  His  but  His  own  will.  As 
therefore  He  disposeth  all  things,  so  in  special  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  accord- 
ing to  His  will.  The  grounds  following  do  demonstrate  the  equity  hereof.  1. 
God  is  the  fountain  whence  all  gifts  flow  (James  i.  17).  All  are  His  ;  hereupon  He 
thus  presseth  His  right  against  such  as  were  not  contented  with  that  portion  which 
He  gave  them  (Matt.  xx.  15).  2.  God  is  the  most  supreme  Sovereign  over  all.  Ho 
is  the  Lord  and  Master  of  all;  He  therefore  hath  power  to  order  the  places  and 
duties  and  parts  of  all  as  He  pleaseth,  according  to  His  own  will  (1  Chron.  xxviii. 
4,  5).  3.  God  is  the  wisest  of  all.  He  is  wise  in  heart  (Job  Lx.  4) ;  yea,  mighty  in 
wisdom  (Job.  xxxvi.  5) ;  His  understanding  is  infinite  (Psa.  cxlvii.  5) ;  He  is  only 
wise  (Rom  xvi.  27).  He  therefore  best  knowetb  what  is  fittest  for  every  one,  and 
He  is  fittest  to  order  it  according  to  His  will.  4.  God's  will  is  tbe  rule  of 
righteousness.  Whatsoever  is  ordered  thereby  and  agreeable  thereto  is  righteous, 
and  whatsoever  cometh  from  it  is  altogether  righteous.  The  Lord  is  righteous  in 
all  His  ways.  His  ordering  therefore  of  matters  must  needs  be  according  to  right 
and  equity.  5.  The  Lord  fitteth  gifts  and  functions  one  to  another.  Such  gifts 
as  are  needful  for  such  a  function  and  such  a  function  as  is  fittest  for  such  gifts 
(Matt.  XXV.  15 ;  Exod.  xxxi,  2,  3).  This  teacheth  us  every  one  to  be  content  with 
our  own  measure  which  God  hath  proportioned  to  us,  for  we  may  be  assured 
thereupon  that  it  is  the  fittest  and  best  for  us.  Hast  thou  a  small  measure?  bear 
it  patiently,  that  measure  is  fittest  for  thee.  Hast  thou  a  great  measure  ?  use  it 
conscionably,  that  is  fittest  for  thee.    We  are  exhorted  earnestly  to  covet  the  best 


i/.  r 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  105 

gifta  (1  Cor.  xii.  31),  and  to  seek  to  excel  (1  Cor.  xiv.  12),  and  to  grow  up  in  aQ 
things  (Eph.  iv.  15).  None  of  these,  nor  any  such  like  exhortations  are  contrary  to 
Christian  contentedness.  For — 1.  Though  a  man  covet  a  more  excellent  gift  than 
God  hath  ordained  for  him,  yet  when  he  seeth  that  God  hath  bestowed  such  and 
such  a  gift  upon  him  less  than  his  desire,  he  may  quietly  subject  Limself  to  God'a 
wise  disposition  and  rest  contented  therewith.  For  the  will  of  God  being  now  made 
known  unto  him,  he  may  persuade  himself  that  the  gift  he  hath  is  best  for  him. 
2.  Seeking  to  excel  is  not  ambitiously  to  strive  for  the  highest  places  and  greatest 
offices  in  the  Church  (as  Diotrephes  did,  3  John  9),  but  every  one  to  strive 
in  his  one  place  to  do  most  good  in  God's  Church.  This,  therefore,  is  the  full 
exhortation  :  "  Seek  that  you  may  excel  to  the  edifying  of  the  Church  "  (1  Cor.  xiv. 
12).  So  as  this  teacheth  us  how  to  make  the  best  use  of  the  place  wherein  God 
hath  set  us,  and  of  the  parts  which  He  hath  given  us.  3.  A  continual  growth  in 
grace  is  no  more  opposite  to  Christian  contentedness  than  the  growth  of  the  little 
linger  is  to  the  place  wherein  it  is  set.  Growth  and  contentedness  may  well  stand 
together,  yea,  they  always  go  together.  Growth  in  grace  received  showeth  our 
good  liking  thereof,  and  that  we  think  it  the  fittest  for  us ;  and  are  thereupon 
stirred  up  to  nourish  and  cherish  it,  to  keep  it  from  decay,  and  to  increase  it  more 
and  more.    {W.  Gouge.) 

Ver.  6.  Put  in  subjection  the  world  to  come. — The  tovereignty  of  the  future  : — 
I.  I»  Chbist  is  the  sovereign  of  thb  future,  we  should  hold  strong  faith  in 
THE  universal  TRIUMPHS  OF  His  STSTEM.  1.  He  has  pleutitude  of  power  for  the 
accomplishment  of   His  promises.     2.    Plenty  of  time.     II.    If  Christ  is  the 

SOVEREIGN    OF    THE    FUTURE,  WE    MAY    INFER    THAT    OUB    FUTURE    WELL-BEING    IS    EVER 

DEPENDENT  UPON  PRESENT  WELL-DOING.  Otherwise — 1.  The  good  would  have  no 
guarantee  that  present  obedience  would  ensure  future  well-being.  2.  And  the  evil 
might  hope  for  approval  hereafter.  III.  If  Christ  is  the  sovereign  of  the  future, 
His  loyal  subjects  should  be  reconciled  to  the  events  of  the  present,  and  calmly 
await  those  of  the  future.  rV.  If  Christ  is  the  sovereign  of  the  future,  thb 
OBVIOUS  interest  of  every  human  being  is  to  cultivate  His  friendship  now.  1, 
Because,  without  this  friendship.  His  control  will  run  contrary  to  all  the  feelings, 
aspirations,  and  pui-poses  of  the  soul.  2.  Because,  without  this  friendship.  His  con- 
trol in  the  future  will  be  exercised  with  positive  refereuce  to  punishment.  (Homilist.) 
The  world  to  come  : — The  greatest  difficulty  is  to  know  what  is  meant  by  "  the  world 
to  come,"  which  many  think  refers  to  the  state  of  glory,  and  the  world  which 
follows  the  resurrection.  Thus  Lapide,  and  some  of  the  ancients.  Kivera  under- 
stands the  Church-Christian  as  opposed  to  the  Church  of  former  times,  especially 
under  the  law.  This  is  the  more  probable  sense  ;  for  the  apostle  speaks  of  these 
last  times,  wherein  God  spake  unto  men  by  His  Son  ;  and  it  is  opposed  to  the  times 
wherein  He  spake  by  His  prophets  and  angels.  Yet  we  must  not  understand  it  of  the 
Church  exclusively,  as  though  God  had  not  subjected  other  things,  even  angels,  for 
the  good  of  the  Church.  That  world  and  those  times  whereof  the  apostle  speaka 
are  here  meant,  but  he  speaks  of  the  times  of  the  gospel.  The  proposition  is 
negative.  God  subjected  not  the  world  to  come  to  angels.  In  former  times  God 
had  used  very  much  the  ministry  of  angels  in  ordering  the  Church,  and  put  much 
power  in  their  hands  to  that  end.  Yet  now  in  this  last  time  He  made  Ctirist  His 
Son  (who  by  reason  of  His  suffering  was  a  little  lower  then  the  angels)  to  be  the 
administrator-general  of  His  kingdom,  the  universal  Lord,  and  subjected  the 
very  angels  unto  Him.  The  expression  seems  to  be  taken  from  Isa.  ix.  6,  for 
whereas  there,  amongst  other  titles  given  to  Christ,  one  is,  everlasting  Father ; 
the  Septuagint  turn  it,  the  Father  or  Governor  of  the  world  to  come,  which  seems 
to  be  the  genuine  sense  of  the  Hebrew  words.  The  sum  is,  that  God  did  not  sub- 
ject the  Church  in  the  times  of  the  gospel,  nor  the  world  of  those  times  to 
angels  but  to  Christ.  The  words  thus  understood  may  inform  us — 1.  That  Christ 
is  more  excellent  than  the  angels.  2.  If  the  law  and  Word  spoken  by  angels,  when 
neglected  and  disobeyed,  was  so  severely  punished,  much  more  severely  shall  they 
who  neglect  the  gospel  spoken  by  Christ  be  punished.  3.  That  if  it  was  the  duty  of 
the  fathers  and  those  who  Uved  in  former  times  to  hearken  to  the  Word  spoken  by 
angels,  which  are  but  servants,  then  it  is  much  more  the  duty  of  us,  who  live  in 
these  last  times,  to  hearken  unto  the  Word  of  so  great  salvation  spoken  by  Christ, 
made  Lord  of  aU.  From  hence  we  may  understand  the  scope  of  the  words  to  be 
the  same  with  that  of  the  former,  and  that  may  be  considered  either  as  part  of  the 
former  reason  why  we  should  hearken  to  Christ  and  not  neglect  tiie  gospel ;  or  they 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CHA?.  n. 

may,  with  the  latter  words  following,  contain  another  distinct  reason,  and  in  this 
manner,  that  seeing  God  hath  not  to  the  angels  subjected  the  world  to  come,  but  to 
Christ,  who,  by  His  suffering  and  death,  was  for  a  little  time  made  lower  than  the 
angels,  and  for  that  suffering,  afterwards  made  Lord  of  all,  even  of  angels, 
then  we  ought  to  give  the  more  earnest  heed  to  His  doctrine.  (G.  Lawson.)  Th» 
world  to  come: — The  phrase  "  to  come  "  does  not  seem  here  merely  to  express  the 
antithesis  between  "  this  world  "  and  the  new  order  of  things  introduced  through 
Christ ;  with  this  there  is  at  least  included  the  idea  that  this  new  ordfer  is  still 
future :  compare  city  to  come  (xiii.  14 ;  vi.  5).  Throughout  the  Epistle  the  great 
antithesis  is  "  this  world"  and  the  "world  to  come."  The  former,  visible,  material, 
transient,  to  which  belongs,  as  part  of  it,  the  first  covenant ;  the  other,  real, 
heavenly,  and  eternal,  access  into  which  is  through  the  new  covenant.  The  first  ia 
subjected  to  angels,  particularly  as  revealers  of  the  law  ;  but  under  their  rule  seema 
embraced  the  whole  pre-Christian  condition  of  things,  embracing  man  in  his  earthly 
and  mortal  coudition.  Salvation  is  escape  from  this  and  possession  of  the  heavenly 
world.  In  this  world  to  come  the  angels  have  no  more  rule,  all  things  without 
exception  are  put  in  subjection  to  man  (ver  8).  From  the  Old  Testament  point  of 
view,  the  world  to  come  is  the  world  from  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  for  the  Old 
Testament  drew  no  lines  in  the  Messianic  salvation,  the  Messianic  world  was  perfect 
from  the  moment  of  Messiah's  coming.  But  in  the  view  of  this  Christian  writer, 
though  powers  from  the  world  to  come  made  themselves  felt  here  (ii.  4  ;  vi.  5),  and 
though  through  hope  (vi.  19)  and  faith  behevers  might  be  said  to  be  come  to  it 
(xii.  22),  it  was  stiU  no  more  than  ready  to  be  revealed.  It  belonged  to  a  sphere 
transcending  this  earth,  out  of  which  it  would  be  revealed  and  descend,  and  then 
all  that  was  promised  by  God's  holy  prophets  would  be  fulfilled,  when  the  meek 
should  inherit  the  earth  (Psa.  xxxvii.  11 ;  Matt.  v.  5  ;  Eom.  iv.  13),  and  the  domin- 
ion under  the  whole  heaven  should  be  given  to  the  people  of  the  saints  of  the 
Most  High  (Dan.  vii.  27) — for  then  earth  and  heaven  would  be  one.  This  "  world 
to  come  "  is  identical  with  the  "  all  things  "  of  the  Psalm  (ver.  8),  being  "  all  things  " 
m  their  final  and  eternal  condition — whereof  we  speak  means,  which  is  the  subject  of 
my  writing,  rather  than,  which  is  the  theme  of  hope  and  converse  among  us  Chris- 
tians. (A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.)  Christ  the  Genius  of  tlie  future : — Strauss,  iu 
writing  of  the  Emperor  Julian's  attempt  to  restore  the  old  paganism,  and  to  put 
away  the  new  Christianity,  says :  "  Every  Julian,  i.e.,  every  great  and  powerful 
man  who  would  attempt  to  resuscitate  a  state  of  society  which  has  died,  will  in- 
fallibly be  vanquished  by  the  Galilean,  for  the  Galilean  is  nothing  less  than  the 
genius  of  the  future."  To  say  that  "  the  Gahlean  is  nothing  less  than  the  genius  ol 
the  future,"  is  to  say  of  Him  what  it  would  be  ridiculous  to  say  of  any  one  else. 
Strauss  felt  that  the  spirit  of  the  Galilean  was  so  great  and  good,  so  rich,  as  to  give 
to  the  future  its  noblest  inspirations.  {T.  Sherwood.)  The  world  to  eortie : — As  a 
man  plants  his  estate,  and  plants  for  far-off  years,  and  gives  to  each  tree  the  soil 
and  situation  it  requires — so  has  the  Lord  planted  this  earth,  and  certainly  with 
reference  to  a  time  not  yet  fulfilled.  (Miss  S.  F.  Smiley.)  The  hope  of  a  golden 
age : — The  hope  of  a  future  golden  age,  when  the  whole  world  should  be  renewed 
and  evil  banished,  is  very  plainly  expressed  in  the  old  German  legends  of  the  gods. 
Baldr,  the  good,  the  holy  and  the  wise,  the  favourite  of  the  gods  and  of  men,  is  slain 
through  the  crafty  stratagem  of  the  wicked  Loki.  The  gods  and  all  creatures 
lament ;  men  and  beasts,  trees  and  rocks  weep.  Evil  times  afterwards  come  upon 
the  earth  ;  strife  and  bloodshed  increase  ;  and  in  the  fight  between  the  giants  and 
the  gods,  Odin  and  the  Ases  (the  good  gods)  are  subdued,  and  the  world  destroyed 
by  fire.  But  Vidar  the  victorious  will  restore  the  golden  age ;  a  new  world  is  to 
arise,  clothed  with  perpetual  spring  and  plenty  ;  there  will  no  longer  be  any  Loki, 
and  Baldr  will  return  from  the  dead :  while  gods  and  men,  recovering  from  their 
overthrow,  will  dwell  peacefully  together.  Kindred  traditions  are  familiar  also  in 
/» Mexico  and  the  South  Sea  Islands.  In  short,  everywhere  in  the  heathen  world,  the 
prediction  and  the  hope  are  indigenous,  that  when  evil  shall  have  reached  its 
climax,  these  iron  times  of  sin  and  misery  will  come  to  an  end,  and  even  the  goda 
who  have  ruled  during  this  age  of  the  world  will  be  overthrown.  For  this  purpose 
a  royal  hero,  of  heavenly  descent,  will  appear  to  crush  the  head  of  the  demon 
and  to  bring  back  the  primitive  age  of  happiness  and  innocence.  (Fro/.  C.  E. 
Luthardt.) 

Ver.  6.  What  Is  man  7 — What  is  mant — To  answer  this  question  with  anything 
like  completeness  it  would  be  necessary  to  discourse  upon  it  in  much  detaiL    Befer« 


CHAP,  n,]  HEBREWS.  107 

ence  would  have  to  be  made  to  varions  sciences — psychology,  physiology,  anthro- 
pology, sociology ;  and  even  then  the  answer  would  be  inadequate,  for  all  the 
Bcientists  together  are  unable  to  take  the  full  measure  of  man.  It  is  possible,  how- 
ever,  to  ponder  the  question  with  reference  to  one  or  two  of  the  more  salient  points 
that  it  suggests,  in  such  a  way  as  to  arrive  briefly  at  an  answer  that  may  suffice  for 
a  moral  purpose.  Naturally,  the  question  at  the  outset  throws  us  back  on  history 
and  the  records  of  the  past.  What  has  man  been  ?  what  was  his  beginning  ?  It 
is  almost  lost  in  the  dimness  of  remote  antiquity.  All  we  can  say  is,  that,  liko 
every  other  hving  thing,  his  course  has  been  upward  and  onward  from  a  lower  fonn, 
that -in  strength,  in  beauty,  in  intellect,  in  moral  power,  he  has  progressed  by  a  slow 
development.  On  any  supposition  there  must  have  been  a  period  when  he  first 
acquired  personality,  when,  to  his  sensuous  and  instinctive  impulses,  there  were 
superadded  reason  and  will,  and  those  higher  emotions  and  faculties  which  we 
commonly  speak  of  as  pertaining  to  the  soul.  There  must  have  been  a  time  when 
man  first  knew  what  right  and  wrong  were,  and  what  sin  was ;  and  there  must  have 
been  a  time  when  man  first  committed  sin  and  experienced  the  sense  of  shame.  So 
that  whether  chaps,  ii.  or  iiL  of  Genesis  are  historical  or  not,  they  are  spiritually 
true.  Tbey  furnish  an  exact  description  of  what  man  was,  and  what  he  did,  in  that 
early  stage  of  his  being,  when  he  acquired  the  power  of  choosing  between  good  and 
evil.  They  narrate  that  change  in  the  evolution  of  the  race  which  corresponds  to 
the  change  in  the  evolution  of  the  man  when  he  arrives  at  years  of  discretion,  and 
can  be  treated  as  a  moral  being,  having  a  sense  of  moral  responsibility.  And  it 
does  not  require  the  slightest  remission  of  candour,  or  fancy  of  interpretation,  to 
read  the  Biblical  description  of  man's  origin  in  correspondence  with  the  suggestions 
of  science :  "  And  the  Lord  God  formed  man  of  the  dust  .  .  .  and  man  became  a 
living  soul."  Here  we  have  a  statement  of  the  lowest  possible  origin  of  man,  from 
"  the  dust  of  the  ground,"  with  the  addition  that  there  was  infused  into  him  after- 
wards by  the  Almighty  that  quality  of  his  nature  which  made  him  Uke  the  Almighty, 
and  capable  of  what  the  best  men  have  attained.  It  existed  only  in  the  germ  at 
first,  this  principle  of  the  higher  life  ;  but  it  was  a  germ  having  a  power  of  develop- 
ment which  was  almost  inexhaustible — a  germ  that  has  gone  on  working  marvel- 
lously ever  since ;  so  that,  from  the  teaching  of  experience  only,  we  do  not  know 
what  limits  to  set  to  the  possible  development  of  man.  There  was  once  a  wise  king, 
as  Jeremy  Taylor  tells  us,  ^ho  was  raised  to  the  throne  from  the  position  of  a 
ploughman,  and  kept  his  country  shoes  always  by  him  to  remind  him  from  whence 
he  had  sprung.  It  would  be  well  ii  we  would  in  Uke  manner  often  think  of  what 
we  were,  and  what,  in  many  respects,  we  still  are,  with  the  traces  of  our  lower  birth 
stiU  about  us.  We  should  be  less  disposed  to  think  that  all  things  exist  for  man, 
and  that  "  man  is  the  measure  of  all  things."  We  should  assume  an  attitude  of 
more  reverent  and  waiting  humihty  towards  Him  from  whom  we  and  all  things  are 
sprung.  Again,  the  recollection  of  our  low  beginning  would  tend  to  produce  a 
salutary  effect  on  our  moral  conduct.  What  more  common  pretext  for  their  mode 
of  life  is  offered  by  the  sensual  and  incemperate  than  that  they  are  following  the 
dictates  of  their  nature?  Yes;  but  which  nature?  The  lower?  that  which  they 
share  with  the  brute,  and  have  perhaps  inherited  from  the  brute  ?  Does  ever 
humanity  fall  so  low  as  when  it  makes  such  an  appeal  ?  Eemember,  then,  from 
whence  you  have  sprung,  or  at  any  rate  what  you  have  been,  and  you  will  not  be 
forward  to  plead  for  liberty  to  do  what  "  your  nature  "  dictates.  For  man  only  be- 
came man,  and  deserved  to  be  styled  man,  when  he  learnt  how  to  control  his 
appetites.  But  further,  for  those  even  who  are  cognisant  of  the  higher  nature  ia 
man,  and  who  are  striving  to  hve  according  to  that  nature,  it  is  useful  to  remember 
the  other  side  of  their  being.  The  higher  nature  has  been  evolved  out  of  the  lower. 
We  are  the  products  of  evolution  from  various  ancestors ;  we  have  inherited  our 
several  dispositions,  whether  good  or  bad ;  we  are,  to  a  large  extent,  the  creatures 
of  our  circumstances  ;  our  higher  life  is  governed  by  precisely  the  same  laws  which 
control  the  lives  of  plants  and  animals ;  we  are  subject  in  our  higher  nature  to 
similar  conditions  of  degeneration  and  mortification.  We  caimot,  then,  be  what  we 
like  to  be  without  regard  to  the  environment  in  which  we  are  placed.  *  Though  wa 
boast  of  our  free-will,  we  act  on  the  greatest  number  of  occasions  simply  on  the 
impulse  of  the  strongest  motive.  And  therefore  it  is  absolutely  needful  for  our 
spiritual  well-being  that  we  place  ourselves  in  a  favourable  environment,  that  we  put 
ourselves  in  the  way  of  being  actuated  by  good  motives,  that  we  cultivate  habits  of 
prayer  and  watchfulness.  Thus  we  are  admonished  by  the  laws  of  the  animal  life, 
which  we  share  with  the  brutes.  And,  moreover,  the  higher  nature  of  man  is  not  only 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a 

subject  to  the  laws  which  govern  the  animal  life,  bat  it  is  inextricably  interwoven 
with  the  animal  nature  in  himself.  His  goodness  from  day  to  day  depends  on  what 
use  he  makes  of  his  lower  nature.  Bodily  ill-health  will  weaken  his  self-control, 
and  curtail  his  spiritual  powers  ;  bodily  indulgence  will  enervate  his  will,  and  expose 
him  to  special  temptations.  So  that  a  great  part  of  the  activity  of  the  higher 
nature  depends  on  a  proper  treatment  of  the  lower.  Hence  the  necessity  for  exer- 
cising self-discipline,  in  order  to  keep  the  lower  passions  under  proper  control.  It 
needs  no  asceticism,  no  going  out  into  the  wilderness  to  feed  on  locusts  and  wild 
honey  to  accomplish  this.  It  needs  not  that  the  lower  feelings  should  be  crushed, 
but  rather  that  they  should  be  made  sublime  by  becoming  the  ready  instruments  of 
the  higher  self.  And  then  the  man  becomes  a  harmonious,  a  dignified,  a  noble 
being,  armed  and  fully  equipped  to  do  God's  bidding  at  all  times.  Then  he  can 
indeed  hft  up  his  head  above  the  animal  creation,  and  feel  that  he  is  a  being  of  a 
different  mould  from  them.  Then  he  can  find  in  himself  the  working  of  a  spirit  of  life 
to  whose  continuance  the  destruction  of  the  body  is  no  impediment.  Then  he  can 
even  dare  to  claim  kindred  with  God  Himself  (Bom.  viii.  13,  14).  (IF.  L.  Paige  Cox, 
M.A.)  Wiiatis  man  ? — The  question  of  all  antiquity,  and  perhaps  the  question 
around  which  for  years  to  come  the  greatest  theological  and  scientific  strife  will  take 
place,  is  this  :  What  is  man  ?  The  answer  that  the  Christian  Church  will  give  will 
not  of  course  accord  in  all  points  with  the  answer  of  the  scientist  who  denies  the 
revelation  which  comes  from  God.  Yet,  strange  to  say,  though  by  different  paths, 
and  for  every  different  purposes,  we  come  in  one  sense  to  the  same  conclusion  as  the 
scientist :  that  there  are  possibilities  in  man  which,  if  only  they  be  evolved,  wiU 
raise  him  to  an  infinite  height,  and  bestow  upon  him  a  power  that  is  possessed  by 
no  other  creature  in  the  universe.  We  hold  that  man  is  intended  by  God  to  be 
elevated  step  by  step  by  the  power  of  the  gospel,  until  he  becomes  a  partaker  of  the 
very  glory  of  God.  The  scientist  holds — if  he  denies  revelation,  I  mean — that  man 
is  gradually,  by  a  process  of  evolution,  and  by  the  development  of  the  species,  to  be 
BO  elevated  that  at  last  all  that  is  called  God  shall  be  found  in  bim,  and  that  man 
thus  becomes  a  God  to  himself  and  to  creation.  But  there  is  little  question  that 
the  answer  will  be  that  "  the  earth  is  the  Lord's  and  the  fulness  thereof  "  ;  that  man 
is  but  the  deputy  or  vicegerent  of  his  God ;  and  that  if  man  can  be  elevated  to  the 
position  to  which  Almighty  God  intended  him  to  attain,  he  shall  be  one  with  God  in 
the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  he  shall  be  elevated,  step  by  step,  by  the  gospel 
power,  until  he  shall  attain  to  the  highest  glory  of  God :  "  The  glory  that  Thou 
gavest  Me  I  have  given  them,  that  they  may  be  one,  even  as  We  are  one :  I  in  them 
and  Thou  in  Me,  that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in  one."  I  know  no  motive  power 
that  can  touch  man's  nature  when  it  be  elevated  above  the  self-consciousness  of 
self-seeking,  so  much  as  the  inquiry  wliat  God  meant  man  to  be,  what  God  made 
man  for  originally,  what  He  considers  him  to  be  now,  and  what  are  the  possibilities 
God  has  put  before  man  in  and  through  the  glorious  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 
My  purpose,  therefore,  is  to  inquire  whether,  if  God's  revelation  be  the  power  by 
which  manliind  cau  be  elevated  to  its  highest  possible  destiny,  we  are  prepared  to 
carry  out  that  purpose,  and  to  glorify  God  as  our  Saviour  in  all  things,  by  giving  up 
ourselves  to  His  service,  to  Uve  the  devoted  hfe  that  the  Church  should  live,  and  to 
rise  above  the  selfishness  of  mere  personal  salvation ;  remembering  that  there  is 
a  still  more  glorious  aim  than  merely  to  be  saved,  and  to  enter  personally  into  the 
glory  of  God,  and  it  is  this — that  in  her  corporate  capacity,  the  Church  should  see 
that  the  individual  life  and  personality  is  in  one  sense  to  be  lost,  and  that  when  the 
individual  soul  forgets  even  its  own  personal  salvation  and  its  aspirations  to  ever- 
lasting happiness,  then,  and  then  only,  does  it  really  attain  to  the  highest  possible 
dignity  of  man  ;  and  that  when  the  Church  as  a  whole  becomes,  as  she  should  ba 
greatly  thoughtful  on  behalf  of  the  individuals  or  units  that  one  by  one  make  up 
the  perfection  of  the  body  of  Christ  which  is  His  Church,  then  only  will  she  fulfil 
her  high  destiny  upon  earth.  Now  let  us  proceed  to  the  inquiry,  taking  our  answer 
from  God's  own  Word.  What  is  man?  Can  anything  more  magnificent  be  con- 
ceived  than  the  dignity  wherewith  God  originally  endowed  him  ?  While  step  by 
step  God  evolved  the  glories  and  beauties  of  creation,  one  and  one  only  purpose  was 
in  the  Master-Mind,  and  that  was  to  prepare  the  wonderful  sphere  in  which  man  as 
the  top  stune  of  all  should  be  happy  and  blessed,  and  should  glorify  his  Maker.  And 
when  that  wonderful  series  of  preparations  was  completed,  we  find  that  even  the 
Almighty  Maker,  the  great  Creator,  has  to  pause  as  it  were,  in  order  that  He  may 
give  gi-eater  dignity  and  greater  glory  to  the  creation  of  the  creature  which  is  to  be 
posse&aor  of  all  1 — and  instead  of  that  mere  fiat,  "  Let  there  be  "  and  "  there  was,'* 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  109 

we  hear  the  Triune  God  saying,  "  Let  Us  make  man  in  Our  own  image  and  after 
Our  own  Ukeness."  And  then  "  God  maJe  man,"  as  the  apostle  Paul  says,  "  the 
image  and  glory  of  God  "  1  Surely  from  that  moment  we  should  expect  the  sphere 
of  man  to  be  great.  But  suddenly  all  the  glory  is  swept  away,  and  the  creature  for 
whom  God  had  worked  so  long  ceases  to  enjoy  his  original  position  ;  for  by  one  act 
of  folly  he  has  severed  himself  from  God,  and,  sin  entering  into  the  world,  and 
death  by  sin,  all  the  greatness  of  man  would  seem  to  be  lost  for  ever.  Nor,  from 
that  time  forward,  as  far  as  physical  manifestation  goes,  has  there  ever  been  a  re- 
covery of  the  creature's  lost  dignity ;  and  if  now  (however'  much  modern  science 
rejects  the  doctrine  of  the  fall)  the  inquiry  rings  through  the  vault  of  heaven  "  What 
is  man  f  "  the  answer  would  appear  to  be  that  man  has  become  a  thing  of  naught. 
Yea,  "  verily  every  man  at  his  best  state  is  altogether  vanity."  Man  is  even  "  like  a 
vapour  that  appeareth  for  a  little  time,  and  then  vanisheth  away."  Yet,  though 
this  his  fallen  condition  urges  one  to  think  with  pain  of  the  creature,  let  me  invite 
you  to  pause  before  you  condemn  humanity  after  that  modem  fashion  which  is  at 
the  opposite  extreme  to  that  which  speaks  of  man  rising  upwards  and  becoming 
God.  Let  me  ask  you  to  look  at  the  fallen  creature  and  see  how,  even  after  the  fall, 
there  are  magnificent  proofs  in  him  of  the  original  power  of  God,  and  that  he  is  by 
no  means  to  be  condemned  as  a  hopeless  cripple.  We  gaze  upon  the  ruins  of  a  city 
and,  from  these  ruins  we  gather  its  former  magnificence  and  greatness  ;  and  it  is  by 
the  style  of  these  ruins  that  we  judge  of  the  city.  So  let  me  ask  you  to  look  at 
man  for  a  moment,  and  as  you  see  in  this  fallen  creature  powers  that  never  wore 
found  in  any  other,  you  shall  be  compelled  to  give  him  your  admiration,  and  honour 
him  for  the  possibilities  that  lie  buried  beneath  the  surface,  and  which  may  elevate 
him  into  something  almost  Divine  if  only  he  can  be  delivered  from  the  dominion  of 
sin.  Look,  for  instance,  at  the  power  of  revenge  as  inherited  in  the  vilest  and  worst 
of  men.  We  find  no  other  creature  in  the  world  who,  for  the  mere  sake  of  obtain- 
ing vengeance  on  its  own  behalf,  will  determine  to  sacrifice  its  own  life.  Look  at 
the  power  of  covetousness — that  ambition  and  yearning  after  money  and  place, 
which  the  apostle  describes  as  idolatry ;  and  observe  the  wondrous  powers  there  are 
in  the  creature  who,  for  the  mere  sake  of  advancing  himself,  will  slave  and  toU  in 
order  that  he  may  be  elevated  above  his  fellows.  Look  again  on  that  awful  power 
of  remorse,  which  comes  over  those  who  have  fallen  and  sunk  into  despair.  Can 
anything  prove  more  clearly  than  the  workings  of  remorse  the  very  magnificence  of 
the  creature  who  is  capable  of  such  conditions  and  emotions  ?  It  would  seem,  if  we 
watch  a  man  in  the  activities  of  remorse,  as  if  we  were  able  to  stand  on  a  height 
within  himself  and  so  contemplate  the  utter  misery  of  his  own  ruined,  fallen  state. 
Surely  there  is  no  other  creature  in  the  world  such  as  this.  Therefore,  as  we  look 
at  man  in  his  fall,  again  we  are  compelled  to  say,  What  is  man  ?  and  to  answer 
back,  Man  is  not  merely  the  wreck  of  his  former  self — though  that  we  believe  most 
solemnly — but  a  wonderful  creature,  a  marvellous  being,  fitted,  if  only  liberated  from 
his  fallen  condition,  to  stand  once  more  in  the  presence  of  God.  At  length,  after 
four  thousand  years,  during  which  God  had  from  time  to  time  been  essaying  to  re- 
veal Himself  unto  men,  the  oracle  would  seem  to  have  become  altogether  dumb, 
when  an  angel  appears  to  a  virgin  in  Nazareth,  and  tells  that  a  "  holy  thing  shall  be 
bom  of  her  which  shall  be  called  the  Son  of  God  "  ;  and  there  bursts  from  the  inspired 
lips  of  Zacharias  the  cry  that  "God  hath  visited  and  redeemed  His  people,"  and  that 
"  the  Dayspiing  from  on  high  hath  visited  us  " ;  and  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  the  true  "  Word 
made  flesh,"  appears  among  men.  And  now,  what  see  we  as  the  result  of  Jehovah 
deigning  to  appear  in  the  flesh  ?  First,  the  manifestation  of  what  man  should  be 
and  could  be  if  only  the  purpose  of  God  was  fulfilled ;  secondly,  the  manifestation 
of  what  God  still  determined  to  accompUsh  in  man,  because  in  Christ  Jesus  He 
would  purchase  humanity  to  Himself ;  and,  thirdly,  the  manifestation  of  what  may 
be  done  by  those  brought  into  personal  contact  and  nnion  with  Him,  being  made 
one  with  the  Son  of  God,  by  the  faith  which  He  requires  us  to  exercise.  We  also 
see  that  in  place  of  hmitation,  which  had  appeared  to  be  working  for  so  many 
centuries,  expansion  commenced,  and  has  been  wondrously  proceeding  from  the  day 
that  the  Lord  Jesus  returned  to  His  Father  in  heaven.  For  when  about  to  pasa 
back  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  to  be  hidden  from  men's  eyes  for  a  little  while,  we 
hear  from  His  lips  the  blessed  truth  that  "  Ye  shall  receive  power  "  and  "  Ye  shall 
be  witnesses  unto  Me,"  and  in  ten  days  from  that  time  a  third  great  series  of  mani- 
festations commences.  No  longer  do  men  see  the  form  of  the  Son  of  God,  but  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  sons  of  God.  Jehovah-Elohim  had  appeared  unto 
man  ;  Jehovah  Jesus  had  appeared  for  man ;  and  now,  in  the  Church  of  God,  and  in 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

the  fulness  of  His  power,  the  Jehovah  Spirit  would  appear  m  man.  From  that  day 
forward  the  work  of  expansion  commences,  and  for  eighteen  hundred  years  the 
great  power  of  the  Lord,  the  Holy  Ghost,  has  been  exhibited  in  this  world  working 
out  the  complete  man  (Eph.  iv.  13,  and  v.  25,  &c.).  The  Second  Man,  who  is  the 
Lord  from  heaven,  will  not  be  complete  until  His  Bride  be  brought  unto  Him,  His 
glorious  Church,  without  spot  or  wrinkle  or  any  such  thing ;  and  so  each  sinner  that 
is  joined  to  Jesus  Christ  by  His  Spirit  is  made  a  member  of  His  body,  of  His  flesh, 
and  of  His  bones,  and  we  live  in  Him,  we  live  by  Him,  and  we  may  now  live  for 
Him,  in  order  that  hereafter  we  may  live  with  Him  in  the  manifested  glory  that 
awaits  God's  Son.  And  now  when  we  see  "the  Man  Christ  Jesus  "  made  perfect 
through  suffering,  and  then  lifted  up  to  the  throne  of  God  that  by  His  Spirit  He  may 
draw  men  into  absolute  unity  with  Himself,  say,  oh  say,  ••  What  is  man  ?  "  What 
is  man,  as  we  see  him  in  the  person  of  God's  Son?  What  is  man,  as  we  see  him  in 
the  purpose  of  God,  which  is  to  be  carried  out  in  soul  after  soul  of  those  that  are 
redeemed  and  united  vitally  unto  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  And  "  what  is  man  " 
when  we  consider  the  triumphs  of  this  gospel?  What  but  this  truth,  as  the  truth 
is  in  Jesus,  has  made  man  such  as  he  has  occasionally  been  seen  ?  What  but  this 
could  have  made  a  Paul,  a  Peter,  or  a  John?  What  but  this  could  have 
given  us  an  Augustine,  a  Wycliffe,  a  Huss,  a  Savonarola,  a  Luther?  What 
but  this  in  these  latter  days  could  give  us  those  blessed  missionaries  who  have 
stood  before  the  world  as  witnesses  for  the  power  of  Christ  ?  What  but  this,  the 
purpose  of  God,  to  glorify  man,  the  purpose  of  God  that  man  should  have  dominion 
in  and  through  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  that  all  may  become  workers  together 
with  Him,  if  only  they  be  vitally  united  to  the  Man  ?  (H.  W.  Webb  Peploe,  M.A.) 
What  is  man?  — We  need  not  only  a  true  philosophy  of  God  but  a  true  philosophy  of 
man,  in  order  to  right  thinking  of  the  gospel.  The  idolater  tbinks  man  inferior  to 
birds  and  beasts  and  creeping  things,  before  which  he  prostrates  himself.  The 
materialist  reckons  him  to  Le  the  chance  product  of  natural  forces  which  have 
evolved  him,  and  before  which  he  is  therefore  likely  to  pass  away.  The  pseudo- 
science  of  the  time  makes  him  of  one  blood  with  ape  and  gorilla,  and  assigns  him 
a  common  origin  with  the  beasts.  See  what  gigantic  systems  of  error  have 
developed  from  mistaken  conceptions  of  the  true  nature  and  dignity  of  man  I 
L  Mas  as  God  made  him. — 1.  The  Divine  likeness  (Gen.  i.  27).  Our  mental  and 
moral  nature  is  made  on  the  same  plan  as  God's  :  the  Divine  in  miniature.  Truth, 
love,  and  purity,  like  the  piinciples  of  mathematics,  are  the  same  in  us  as  in  Him. 
If  it  were  not  so,  we  could  not  know  or  understand  Him.  But  since  it  is  so,  it  haa 
been  possible  for  Him  to  take  on  Himself  our  nature,  and  that  we  should  be  one 
day  transformed  to  the  perfect  image  of  His  beauty.  2.  Royal  supremacy  (Gen.  i.  28). 
Man  was  intended  to  be  God's  vicegerent  and  representative.  King  in  a  palace 
Btored  with  all  to  please  him,  monarch  and  sovereign  of  all  the  lower  orders  of 
creation.  The  sun  to  labour  for  him  as  a  very  Hercules ;  the  moon  to  light  his 
nights,  or  lead  the  waters  round  the  earth  in  tides,  cleansing  his  coasts;  elements 
of  nature  to  be  his  slaves  and  messengers ;  flowers  to  scent  his  path  ;  fruits  to 
please  his  taste ;  birds  to  siug  for  Lim  ;  fish  to  feed  him  ;  beasts  to  toil  for  him  and 
carry  him.  Not  a  clinging  slave,  but  a  king,  crowned  with  the  glory  of  rule,  and 
with  the  honour  of  universal  supremacy.  Only  a  little  lower  than  angels,  because 
they  are  not,  Uke  Lim,  entangled  with  flesh  and  blood.  This  is  man  as  God  made 
him  to  be.  H.  Man-ab  sin  has  made  him  (Ver.  8). — His  crown  is  rolled  in  the  dust, 
his  honour  tarnished.  His  sovereignty  is  strongly  disputed  by  the  lower  orders  of 
creation.  If  trees  nourish  hira,  it  is  after  strenuous  care,  and  they  often  disappoint. 
If  the  earth  supplies  him  with  food,  it  is  in  tardy  response  to  exhausting  toil.  If 
the  beasts  serve  him,  it  is  because  they  have  been  laboriously  tamed  and  trained, 
whilst  vast  numbers  roam  the  forest  glades,  setting  him  at  defiance.  If  he  catch 
the  fish  of  the  sea,  or  the  bird  of  the  air,  he  must  wait  long  in  cunning  concealment. 
Some  traces  of  the  old  lordship  are  stiU  apparent  in  the  terror  which  the  sound  of 
the  human  voice  and  the  glance  of  the  eye  still  inspire  into  the  lower  orders,  in  the 
feats  of  lion-tamer  or  snake-charmer.  But  for  the  most  part  anarchy  and  rebeUioa 
have  laid  waste  his  fair  realm.  So  degraded  has  man  become  that  he  has  bowed 
before  the  objects  that  he  was  to  command,  and  has  prostrated  his  royal  form  in 
ehrines  dedicated  to  birds,  and  four-footed  beasts,  and  creeping  things.  IH.  Man 
AS  Chhibt  can  makb  him  (Ver.  9). — "  What  help  is  that  ?  "  cries  an  objector  ;  •'  of 
course  He  is  crowned  with  glory  and  honour,  since  He  is  the  Son  of  God."  But, 
notice,  the  glory  and  honour  mentioned  here  are  altogether  different  from  the  glory 
of  Heb.  i.  3.   That  was  the  incommunicable  glory  of  His  Deitj.    Tliis  is  the  acquired 


CHA*.  n.]  HEBREWS.  Ill 

glory  of  His  humanity.  1.  "We  behold  Him." — Behold  Him,  Christian.  The 
wreaths  of  empire  are  on  His  brow.  The  keys  of  death  and  Hades  swing  at  Hia 
girdle.  The  mysterious  living  creatures,  representatives  of  creation,  attest  that  He 
is  worthy.  All  things  in  heaven,  and  earth,  and  under  the  earth,  and  in  the  seaa 
worship  Him ;  so  do  the  bands  of  angels,  beneath  whom  He  stooped  for  a  little 
season,  on  our  behalf.  2.  And  as  He  is,  we  too  shall  be.  He  is  there  as  the  type 
and  representative  of  redeemed  men.  We  are  linked  with  Him  in  indissoluble 
union.  Through  Him  we  shall  got  back  our  lost  empire.  We  too  shall  be  crowned 
with  glory  and  honour.  The  day  is  not  far  distant  when  we  shall  sit  at  His  side  ; 
joint  heirs  in  His  empire  ;  comrades  in  His  glory,  as  we  have  been  comrades  in  His 
sorrows  ;  beneath  our  feet  all  things  visible  and  invisible,  thrones  and  principalities 
and  powers ;  whilst  above  us  shall  be  the  unclouded  empyrean  of  our  Father's  love, 
for  ever  and  for  ever.  Oh,  destiny  of  surpassing  bliss  1  Oh,  rapture  of  saintly 
hearts  1  Oh,  miracle  of  Divine  Omnipotence  I  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  QocCs  special 
care  of  man : — 1.  God's  special  care  of  man,  and  His  singular  love  towards  him. 
2.  The  same  manifested  in  a  most  glorious  manner,  in  the  humiliation  and  exalta- 
tion of  Christ.  3.  The  admiration,  or  rather  amazement  at  such  a  stupendous 
manifestation  of  such  stupendous  love.  All  the  works  of  God  are  in  themselves 
excellent  and  wonderful,  but  the  work  of  redemption  by  Christ  is  matter  of  greatest 
wonder  and  astonishment  even  to  the  angels.  (G.  Lawson.)  What-it  man* — 
He  doth  not  speak  of  man  in  his  fiist  creation — he  retained  that  estate  but  a  while 
— therefore  he  would  rather  have  deplored  than  admired  it.  He  doth  not  speak  of 
man  as  he  is  after  his  fall,  for  in  that  respect  he  is  most  miserable,  not  glorious ; 
therefore  he  must  needs  speak  of  man  as  he  is  ingrafted  into  Christ,  by  whom  he  is 
advanced  to  wonderful  and  unspeakable  glory.  What  is  man  ?  Not  only  considered 
in  his  first  creation,  but  even  in  his  renovation,  what  is  the  best  man  that  ever 
was,  that  God  should  have  any  respect  to  him  ?  By  creation  indeed  he  is  the  work- 
manship of  God,  the  image  of  God  Almighty ;  yet  for  all  that,  in  respect  of  hia 
original,  he  was  taken  out  of  the  ground.  He  is  but  a  piece  of  earth  ;  since  the  Fall 
he  is  a  mass  of  sin ;  though  he  be  regenerate,  and  by  faith  ingrafted  into  Christ, 
yet  still  he  hath  sin  in  him  and  must  die.  Therefore  what  is  this  man,  that  Thou 
shouldest  pour  down  so  many  blessings  on  him?  that  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars, 
should  give  him  light?  that  the  birds  of  the  air,  fishes  of  the  sea,  the  1  casts  of  the 
field  should  be  his  meat  ?  that  he  should  walk  as  a  king  on  earth  ?  especially  that 
Thou  shouldest  send  Thy  only  Son  to  die  for  him,  make  him  a  member  of  His  body, 
and  provide  an  everlasting  kingdom  for  him  in  the  life  to  come  ?  What  is  vile, 
wretched,  sinful,  corrupted  mau,  that  Thou  shouldest  be  so  far  mindful  of  him? 
protect  him  with  the  shield  of  Thy  favours  from  all  dangers?  That  Thou  shouldest 
vouchsafe  him  Thy  Word  and  sacraments  ?  That  Thou  shouldest  give  him  Thy 
Holy  Spirit  to  help  him  to  pray,  and  to  comfort  him  in  all  miseries  ?  We  should 
not  be  Uke  the  peacock  spreading  forth  our  golden  feathers,  and  say  within  our- 
selves. What  goodly  men  be  we  1  We  ought  to  think  basely  of  ourselves — what  are 
we  that  God  should  regard  us?  "  What  am  I  and  my  father's  house,"  said  that 
regal  prophet,  "  that  Thou  hast  brought  me  hitherto  ?  "  What  are  we  miserable 
wretches,  that  God  Almighty  should  do  anything  for  as  ?  we  are  less  than  the 
least  of  all  His  mercies.  Yet  we  are  wont  to  vaunt  of  ourselves,  do  ye  not  know 
who  I  am  ?  Dost  thou  not  consider  to  whom  thou  speakest  ?  yes,  very  well. 
I  speak  to  dust  and  ashes.  Let  no  high  conceit  of  ourselves  enter  into  our  minds, 
let  us  think  basely  of  ourselves.  What  am  I,  0  Lord,  that  Thou  shouldest  give  me 
the  least  thing  in  the  world  ?  A  drop  of  drink,  a  crust  of  bread,  a  hole  to  hide  my 
head  in,  especially  that  Thou  shouldest  give  me  Thine  only  Son,  and  together  with 
Him  all  things  that  be  good  ?  What  is  any  man  in  the  world  ?  Art  thou  a  rich 
man  ?  God  can  puff  away  thy  riches  and  make  thee  poor.  Art  thou  a  wise  man  ? 
God  can  take  away  thy  senses  and  make  thee  a  fool.  Art  thou  a  beautiful  man? 
God  can  send  the  pox  and  many  diseases  to  take  away  thy  beauty.  Art  thou  a  strong 
man  ?  God  can  send  sickness  and  make  thee  weak.  Art  thou  a  gentleman,  a  knight,  a 
lord  ?  yet  thy  breath  is  in  God's  hand.  This  night  He  can  take  away  thy  soul  from 
thee,  and  what  art  thou  then  ?  Therefore  let  us  all  have  an  humble  opinon  of  our- 
selves,  let  us  cast  down  ourselves  at  God's  feet,  and  say.  What  are  we,  0  Lord,  that 
Thou  art  mindful  of  us,  that  Thou  so  graciously  visitest  us,  especially  with  Thy 
everlasting  mercies  in  Christ  Jesus.  ( W.  Jones,  D.D.)  The  littleness  of  man : — 
The  intense  beauty  of  the  Arctic  firmament  can  hardly  be  imagined.  It  looked  close  1 
above  our  heads,  with  its  stars  magnified  in  glory  and  the  very  planets  twinkling  so  > 
much  as  to  baffle  the  observations  of  our  astronomer.   I  am  airaid  to  speak  of  some     \ 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  o, 

of  these  night-scenes.  I  have  trodden  the  deck  and  its  floes  when  the  life  of  earth 
seemed  suspended,  its  movements,  its  sounds,  its  colouring,  its  companionships  ; 
and  as  I  looked  on  the  radiant  hemisphere  circUng  above,  as  if  rendering  worship 
to  the  unseen  Centre  of  light,  I  have  ejaculated  in  humility  of  spirit,  "  Lord,  wliak 
is  man,  that  Thou  art  mindful  of  him  ?  "  And  then  I  have  thought  of  the  kindly 
world  we  had  left,  with  its  revolving  sunshine  and  shadow  and  the  other  stars  that 
gladden  it  in  their  changes,  and  the  hearts  that  warmed  to  us  there,  till  I  lost 
myself  in  memories  of  those  who  are  not,  and  they  bore  me  back  to  the  stars 
again.    {Dr.  Kane's  Arctic  Explorations.) 

Ver.  7.  A  little  lower  than  the  angels. — Humiliatimt  the  way  to  exaltation:— 
All  the  foremeutioned  branches  of  Christ's  advancement,  which  are  here,  and 
Isa.  liii.  12 ;  Eph.  iv.  10;  Phil.  ii.  10,  and  in  sundry  other  places  inferred  upon  Hi  a 
humiliation,  afford  unto  us  sundry  considerable  observations,  as — 1.  That  workiug 
and  suffering  are  the  way  to  glory  and  honour.  2.  That  works  of  service  and 
suffering  were  requisite  for  man's  redemption  and  salvation  (ver.  10).  3.  That  God 
was  mindful  of  His  Son  in  His  meanest  and  lowest  estate,  according  to  that  which 
is  written  of  the  Son  in  relation  to  His  Father, "  Thou  wilt  not  leave  My  soul  in  hell : 
neither  wUt  Thou  suffer  Thy  Holy  One  to  see  corruption.  Thou  wilt  show  Me  the 
path  of  life,"  &c.  (Psa.  xvi.  10, 11).  4.  That  all  the  members  of  Christ's  botiy  have 
good  ground  to  be  confident,  that  after  they  have  done  and  endured  what  God  shall 
call  them  unto,  they  shall  be  recompensed  with  a  crown  of  glory  (1  Pet.  v.  4). 
Christ  therefore  is  to  be  looked  on,  as  well  advanced  as  debased ;  in  His  exaltation 
and  in  His  humiUation ;  in  heaven  at  His  Father's  right  hand,  as  well  as  on  the 
cross,  or  in  the  grave ;  crowned  with  glory,  as  well  as  with  thorns  (Heb,  xii.  1). 
Thus  will  our  faith  be  better  settled  and  more  strengthened,  as  Stephen's  was,  when 
he  "  saw  the  Son  of  Man  standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God  "  (Acts  vii.  66).  Thus 
shall  we  with  much  patience,  contentedness  and  cheerfulness,  do  and  endure  what 
God  by  His  providence  calleth  us  unto,  knowing  that  if  we  suffer  with  Christ,  we 
shall  also  reign  with  Him  (2  Tim.  ii.  12).  {W.  Gouge.)  Christ  for  a  little  time 
made  lower  tJian  tlie  angels : — It  is  not  material,  whether  we  understand  by  little,  a 
little  measure  of  inferiority,  or  little  time ;  for  both  are  true.  But  the  principal 
thing  in  these  words  is,  wherein  He  was  made  lower  than  the  angels  ;  and  that  was 
in  this,  that  He  was  man  and  mortal.  Man  is  inferior  to  an  angel  as  man  ;  and 
much  more  as  mortal,  because  the  angels  never  die.  Now  Christ  had  the  body  of  a 
man,  and  a  soul  separable  from  His  body  till  the  resurrection  ;  and  that  was  the 
little  time  here  meant,  the  time  of  His  mortality.  Both  might  be  joined  in  one 
divine  axiom  thus.  We  see,  for  the  suffering  of  death,  crowned  with  glory  and 
honour,  that  Jesus  who  for  a  Ultle  time  was  made  lower  than  the  angels. 
(G.  Lawson.)  Dignity  of  man  : — Science  may  prove  the  insignificance  of  this 
globe  in  the  scale  of  creation,  but  it  cannot  prove  the  insignificance  of  man. 
{B.  D'Israeli.)  Descent  of  man  .-—The  subject  of  a  conversation  at  which  Carlyle 
was  present,  but  took  no  part,  was  the  theory  of  evolution.  At  length  a  pause 
occurring,  Carlyle  emphatically  and  with  solemnity  observed,  ♦'  Gentlemen,  you  are 
well  pleased  to  trace  your  descent  from  a  tadpole  and  an  ape,  but  I  would  say  with 
David,  'Lord,  Thou  hast  made  me  but  a  little  lower  than  the  angels.'  "  {Leisure 
Hour.)  Greatness  of  man  :— Bat  how  is  man  "little"?  He  has  competent 
knowledge  of  the  character  of  God  ;  he  is  only  "  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,"  and 
has  dominion  over  aU  the  works  of  God.  He  can  comprehend  the  starry  heavens  ; 
he  is  Godlike  in  his  original  nature;  for  "in  the  image  of  God  made  He  him." 
The  sublime  truths  which  God  has  revealed  to  man  show  what  estimate  God  has  of 
man's  capacity  and  responsibility.  A  finite  creature  can  insult  the  majesty  of 
heaven  as  deliberately  and  intelligently  as  the  archangel ;  he  can  annihilate  the 
authority  of  God  in  his  own  soul,  and  wherever  he  has  influence ;  if  all  finite 
creatures  should  do  this — and  there  are  no  creatures  who  are  not  finite — there  would 
be  no  moral  universe,  no  Divine  government.  {N.  Adams.)  Man's  greatness : — 
I  cannot  reach  the  stars  with  my  hands  but  I  pierce  beyond  them  with  my  thoughts, 
and  if  things  go  on  in  the  illimitable  depths  of  the  skies  which  would  shrivel  up 
the  imagination  like  a  dead  leaf,  I  am  greater  than  they,  for  I  ask  "  Why,"  and 
look  before  and  after,  and  draw  all  things  into  the  tumult  of  my  personal  hfe — the 
stars  in  their  courses,  and  the  whole  past  and  future  of  the  universe,  all  things  as  they 
move  in  their  eternal  paths,  even  as  the  tiniest  pool  reflects  the  sun  and  the  ever- 
lasting hills.  {Arnold  Toynbee.)  Dignity  of  man: — Man  would  not  be  the  most 
distinguished  being  upon  the  earth  if  he  were  not  too  distinguished  for  it.    {Goethe.) 


OHAP.  n.]  HEBREWS.  113 

Man\t  tuperiority  : — Too  much  stress  has  been  laid  upon  the  proud  upright  position 
of  man,  and  a  great  deal  has  been  said  and  written  concerning  the  sublime  aspect 
of  his  countenance,  and  the  Godlike  dignity  of  his  carriage.  A  moment's  considera- 
tion will  be  sufficient  to  show  that  though  he  looks  upwards  with  ease  and  faoihty, 
he  cannot,  in  this  respect,  claim  any  superiority.  The  eagle,  which  gazes  on  the 
sun  with  undazzled  eye,  and  makes  his  pathway  among  the  clouds,  yields  not  in 
dignity  of  appearance  or  power  of  locomotion  to  man,  who  merely  walks  upon  the 
ground.  Can  man  measure  his  beauty  with  the  antelope,  his  speed  with  the  horse, 
or  his  strength  with  the  elephant  ?  It  is  in  virtue  of  his  intellect,  of  his  reason,  and 
not  of  his  bodily  form,  that  he  ranks  above  his  fellows.  It  was  in  mind,  not  in 
body,  that  "  God  made  man  in  His  own  image."  (Scientific  Illustrations  and 
Symbols.)  Frtparation  for  man : — How  in  the  household  are  garments  quilted 
and  wrought,  and  curiously  embroidered,  and  the  softest  things  laid  aside,  and  the 
cradle  prepared  to  greet  the  Uttle  pilgrim  of  love  when  it  comes  from  distant  regions 
we  know  not  whence  1  Now,  no  cradle  for  an  emperor's  chUd  was  ever  prepared 
with  such  magnificence  as  this  world  has  been  for  man.  It  is  God's  cradle  for  the 
race,  curiously  carved  and  decorated,  flower-strewn  and  star-curtained.  (H.  W. 
Beecher.)  AM  things  in  subjeotimi. — The  rulership  of  man: — I.  God  was  MiNDrui. 
OF  THB  LIMITS  IN  WHICH  MAN  WOULD  EXERCISE  DOMINION.  All  God's  inanimate 
creatures  serve  Him  and  us  by  keeping  within  the  limits  prescribed  for  them.  The 
planets  have  their  orbits,  the  sea  its  boundary.  The  Umits  in  which  man  was  to 
exercise  dominion  over  nature  were  love  and  obedience  to  God.  So  long  as  he 
could  say :  "  0  Lord,  how  excellent  is  Thy  name  in  all  the  earth  "  and  render  the 
service  flowing  from  such  a  homage,  so  long  could  it  be  said  of  him  :  "  Thou  hast 
put  aU  things  under  his  feet."  II.  When  man  stepped  out  of  these  limits,  the 
WORLD  REFUSED  TO  BE  LIMITED  BY  HIM.  Truly,  we  SCO  uot  yet,  or  "  not  now,"  all  things 
under  him.  The  physician  dies  of  the  disease  which  he  studies  to  cure ;  the  seaman 
finds  his  grave  in  the  ocean  he  has  spent  his  hfe  in  learning  to  rule.  Even  the 
body  of  the  Christian  is  subject  to  the  laws  of  death  and  decay.     III.  One  Man  has 

kept    within    the    LIMITS    OF  LOVE    AND    OBEDIENCE    TO    THE    FaTHER    AND    GoD,    AND 

NATURE  THEREFORE  OWNS  HiM  AS  HER  LoRD.  He  could  Say  I  "  My  meat  is  to  do  the 
will  of  Him  that  sent  Me,"  and  therefore  He  could  move  amongst  disease  without 
danger  of  contamination,  navigate  the  sea  as  its  Master,  and  suspend  old  laws,  or 
create  new  ones,  at  His  will.  The  grave  could  not  hold  Him  ;  but,  from  dominion 
over  this  world,  He  ascended  to  the  throne  of  the  universe,  even  the  "right  hand  of 
the  Majesty  on  high."  How  true  of  Him :  "  Thou  hast  set  Thy  glory  above  the 
heavens."  Lessons  : — 1.  If  we  would  rule,  we  must  be  ruled.  2.  All  may  find  their 
way  back  to  their  lost  limits  by  the  generous  love  of  Christ.  "  He  tasted  death  for 
every  man."  3.  Every  Christian,  in  his  glorified  condition,  will  have  dominion 
according  to  his  abihty  to  exercise  it  for  his  own  good,  and  that  of  others 
(Matt,  xxvi.  21).  (W.  Harris.)  Christ  the  chief  Lm-d  of  the  world:— Thia 
agreeth  to  aU  men  in  general,  to  the  faithful  in  special,  whom  God  hath 
made  kings  and  lords  over  all  His  creatures  by  Christ.  But  principally  it  is  to 
be  understood  of  our  Saviour  Christ,  who  is  the  chief  Lord  of  the  world,  the 
King  and  the  Mediator  of  the  Church ;  He  hath  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth. 
All  things,  yea,  even  the  devils  themselves,  are  put  in  subjection  under  His  feet. 
God  hath  given  Him  a  name  above  every  name,  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every 
knee  should  bow  (Phil.  ii.  9).  We  also  by  Him ;  because  we  are  members  of  His  body 
and  His  brethren,  we  have  an  interest  to  all  creatures :  all  things  throughout  the 
wide  world  are  ours.  The  heaven,  the  earth,  the  burds,  the  beasts,  the  fishes,  the 
trees,  the  flowers  are  ours  ;  death  is  ours  ;  the  very  devil  himself  is  our  slave  and 
subject ;  God  hath  put  him  under  our  feet.  1.  Here  we  may  behold  the  dignity  of 
Christians  ;  all  things  by  Jesus  Christ  are  under  cur  dominion.  Oh,  what  a  bountiful 
God  is  this,  that  hath  given  us  so  large  a  posseasion  1  Let  us  sound  forth  His 
praises  for  it,  and  use  His  liberahty  to  His  glory.  As  God  said  to  Peter,  "  Arise, 
kill,  and  eat " ;  when  the  sheet  full  of  all  kind  of  creatures  was  let  down  to  him 
from  heaven ;  so  doth  He  say  to  us  all,  we  may  freely  eat  of  all  creatures  whatso- 
ever ;  but  let  us  not  abuse  God's  creatures  to  His  dishonour  and  our  destruction. 
Let  us  use  them  soberly,  religiously,  to  make  us  more  cheerful  in  the  service  of  our 
God.  2.  Let  us  not  stand  in  a  slavish  scare  of  any  creature ;  of  the  stars,  the 
wmds,  no,  not  of  the  devils  themselves  ;  for  all  are  put  in  subjection  under  our  fpet 
by  Jesus  Christ  that  loved  us,  and  hath  given  us  a  superiority  over  all ;  we  shall  be 
conquerors  over  them  all ;  a  singular  comfort  to  the  faithful  1  Satan  may  tempt 
and  assault  us,  but  God  will  tread  him  under  our  feet.    3.  For  this  dominion  let  us 

8 


/.  7 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

thank  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Of  ourselves  we  are  worth  nothing,  stark  beggars ; 
in  Christ  and  by  Christ  we  have  all  that  we  have.  Let  us  magnify  Him  for  it. 
{W.  Jones,  D.D.) 

Ver.  9.  But  we  see  Jesus. — The  eoming  tovtreignty  of  man : — I.  "  Wb  beb  not 

YET  ALL  TDiNQS  IN  SUBJECTION  TO  MAN."  "  Not  jet "  ;  but  wc  are  to  See  it.  It  has 
to  come,  this  sway  of  man  over  "  things,"  over  all  things — over  the  material  forces 
of  the  world,  the  powers  that  largely  affect,  if  they  do  not  actually  make,  hfe  and 
progress.  The  key  of  the  energies  of  the  universe  hangs  at  his  girdle,  and  he  will 
one  day  "be  so  learned  in  love  "  as  to  know  how  to  use  it  to  open  all  the  doors 
of  all  the  mansions  of  nature,  and  make  their  treasures  supplements  to,  and  con- 
tinuations of,  the  spiritual  creation.  It  has  to  come,  this  rule  of  the  Spirit  over 
sense  and  sin  and  Satan,  over  all  that  touches  the  invisible  essence  that  constitutes 
the  true  man,  and  therefore  over  Satan,  who  works  through  "  things  "  to  deceive 
the  nations  and  destroy  souls.  This  supremacy  is  the  final  goal  of  humanity. 
II.  "  Not  ONTO  angels  has  God  subjected  the  coming  world."  Angels  filled  and 
crowded  Hebrew  thought  for  a  long  time,  as  God's  "mighty  ones,"  the  swift-winged 
mes.~enger3  who  delighted  to  do  His  will ;  agents  of  deliverance,  as  for  the  iia- 
prisoned  Peter,  and  of  punishment,  as  for  Sennacherib.  But  not  to  these  "  men  in 
lighter  habit  clad  "  had  God  subjected  the  coming  world  of  manhood,  the  advancing 
goodness  and  perfecting  character  and  service  of  the  sons  of  God.  Not  to  them, 
but  to  men  like  ourselves,  who  have  to  do  with  sheep  and  oxen  and  the  beasts  of 
the  field,  with  cotton  and  calicoes,  with  science  and  art ;  whose  life  is  as  "  fragile 
as  the  dewdrop  on  its  perilous  way  from  a  tree's  summit,"  and  yet  so  strong  that 
it  destroys  itself  by  sin;  men  "  made  a  little  lower  than  God,  and  crowned  witli  the 
glory  "  of  a  present  participation  in  His  nature,  and  therefore  by  and  by  to  be 
invested  with  the  "  honour  "  of  sharing  His  rule.  III.  But  if  to  man,  to  what  man 
IS  this  sceptbe  of  dominion  finally  granted  ?  To  all  and  sundry,  and  to  them  all 
alike,  simply  as  men,  or  to  particular  races  or  one  race  of  men  ?  To  whom  is  the 
ultimate  leadership  of  the  world  to  be  given  ?  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons  or  of 
nations.  Colour  of  skin  is  nothing  to  Him.  Geography  does  not  determine  His 
choices.  The  conquering  race  is  the  godly  race,  of  any  colour,  or  country,  or  time. 
It  is  the  "  new  man,  which  is  being  renewed  unto  knowledge  after  the  image  of 
Him  tbat  created  him ;  where  there  cannot  be  " — it  is  rulfri  out  for  evermore — 
**  where  there  cannot  be  Greek  and  Jew,  circumcision  and  uncircumcision,  bar- 
barian," African,  Hindoo,  Chinaman,  Briton  ;  "  but  Christ  is  all  and  in  all."  It 
is  the  manhood  of  "kind  hearts,"  not  of  "  coronets,"  of  "  simple  faith,"  and  not 
of  "Norman  blood."  IV.  Though  eighteen  centuries  have  elapsed  since  that 
forecast  of  the  destiny  of  man  was  quoted,  endorsed,  and  explained  by  the  writer 
to  the  Hebrews,  amid  the  wreck  and  overthrow  of  Judaism,  we  have,  alas!  to  adopt 

THE  writer's  lament,  AND  SAT,  AS  WE  LOOK  ON  MAN  AND  HIS  WORLD  TO-DAY,    "  NOT    YET 

DO  WE  SEE  ALL  THINGS  SUBJECTED  UNTO  HIM."  Indeed,  his  mastery  "of  things," 
though  advanced  and  advancing,  is  woefully  incomplete.  He  is  only  slowly  learning 
that  he  is  a  spirit,  and  is  for  large  breadths  of  his  time  aud  in  wide  areas  of  his  life 
the  slave  of  "  things."  The  animal  is  in  command.  Prometheus  is  still  bound. 
"  The  mystery  of  waste  "  and  suffering  and  wrong  confronts  us  day  and  night  with 
its  terrible  menace,  and  the  self-multiplying  and  intensifying  power  of  sin  drives  us 
to  carry  our  despair  into  our  facts,  until  there  is  neither  faith  nor  hope  left  in  us, 
and,  like  the  Hebrews,  "we  fall  away  from  the  Uving  God,"  and  find  it  impossible 
"to  hold  fast  the  beginning  of  our  confidence  firm  unto  the  end."  V.  But  surely 
that  is  not  all  we  see  I  There  is  more,  much  more.  On  this  earth  and  amongst 
men — "  wb  sebJebus";  and  though,  in  seeing  Him,  our  first  glimpse  may  only 
confirm  the  impression  that  man  has  not  yet  fuUy  entered  on  his  inheritance  ;  yet 
the  deeper  look  assures  us  that  he  is  on  his  way  to  it,  has  already  been  anointed 
with  the  oil  of  joy  above  his  predecessors  and  contemporaries,  and,  though  suffering, 
is  really  ascending  by  suffering  to  the  throne  from  which  He  shall  rule  for  evermore. 
That  sight  explains  the  ages'  long  delay ;  the  dissolution  and  disappearance  of  the 
ancient  and  illustrious  Jewish  religion,  aud  is  the  indefeasible  pledge  and  guarantee 
that  the  sovereignty  of  man  shall  yet  be  realised,  and  all  things  be  put  under  His 
feet.  Seeing  Jesus,  we  see  these  four  paths  to  the  sovereignty  of  the  Christian 
race,  and  of  the  Christian  religion  through  that  race  ;  the  path  of  history,  of  Divine 
revelation,  of  saintly  character,  and  of  self-suppressing  enthusiasm  for  the  welfare 
of  the  world.  1.  The  past  rules.  It  is  alive  ;  for  many  people  more  alive  than  the 
present.    In  Jesus  that  past  is  interpreted ;  its  religious  yearning  and  hope,  effort 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  115 

and  failure,  explained  ;  its  programme  in  law  and  prophecy  filled  out ;  its  long  and 
painful  discipline  vindicated.  Now,  the  case  being  so,  I  maintain  that  the  ex- 
perience the  world  ha^  had  of  Christianity  forms  a  piece  of  logic  of  irresistible 
cogency ;  an  argument  compact,  four-square,  fixed  deep  and  for  ever  in  the  solid 
fastnesses  of  fact,  in  favour  of  the  success  of  our  present  endeavour  to  save  the 
world  by  the  gospel  of  Christ;  that  indeed,  as  Christ  in  the  conscience  is  the  strong- 
hold of  missions,  so  Christ  in  the  experience  of  men  of  like  passions  and  hopes, 
faiths  and  fears  with  ourselves,  all  tljrough  the  ages,  is  an  unimpeachable  voucher 
for  the  trmmph  of  the  missionary  enterprise;  a  witness  that  cannot  be  denied  that 
the  movement  is  a  living,  saving,  and  conquering  one,  and  destined  to  end  in 
nothing  sh -rt  of  the  universal  establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth. 
2.  Ideas  r«»ie.  Thinkers  make  and  mould  the  ages.  Eeligious  revolutions  are 
effected  by  ideas.  In  Jesus  we  see  the  simplest  and  highest  thought  on  the 
highest  and  most  absorbingly  vital  themes:  God  and  salvation,  sin  and  forgiveness, 
duty  and  holiness.  Great  is  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  and  it  shall  prevail  through 
and  over  Moses  and  Isaiah,  over  Buddha  and  Mahomet,  and  make  all  men  free  and 
good.  We  know  the  gospel  to  be  the  right  and  conquering  message  for  India  and 
the  world.  Judging  man  according  to  the  spiritual  necessities  of  his  nature,  we 
are  sure  this  is  the  only  message  he  can  abidingly  accept.  Treating  him,  not 
simply  as  a  keen  intellectual  thinker,  eager  to  frame  a  definition  of  the  Divine,  and 
reduce  his  notions  of  the  Godhead  to  the  cramping  boundaries  of  a  four-page 
catechism — not  as  a  clever  and  ingenious  artist  flinging  the  pictures  of  his  fancy 
on  the  ciinvas,  and  creating  things  of  perennial  beauty  and  joy — not  as  a  cleverly- 
constructed  money-making  machine,  but  as  a  man  with  a  fevered  restlessness  born 
of  sin,  and  an  irrepressible;  aspiration  for  righteousness  and  goodness  born  of  the 
God  that  is  in  him ;  taking  him  thus,  I  declare  that  no  message  can  soothe  him  but 
Christ's,  no  medicine  heal  but  the  great  Physician's,  no  good  satisfy  but  that  which 
mi.kes  him  a  partaker  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  enables  him  to  escape  the  corrup- 
tion that  is  in  the  world  by  lust.  3.  This  is  a  moral  world  ;  and  no  rule  lasts  that 
is  not  b;ised  on  holy  character.  It  is  not  enough  to  have  the  right  message;  we  need 
also  the  rij.;ht  method,  the  method  that  has  conquered  from  the  beginning.  Jesus 
Christ  wrote  no  books.  He  made  men,  filled  them  with  His  Spirit,  and  trained 
them  in  His  service,  and  trusted  the  founding  of  His  kingdom  to  them.  All  the 
great  epochs  of  revived  life  and  extended  power  in  the  history  of  the  Church  have 
b.  en  intro<iuced  by  men  of  signal  goodness,  of  massive  power,  of  radiant  holine-s, 
of  unusual  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  When  Dr.  Judson  went  amongst  the  poor 
and  benighted  Karens,  and  passed  through  their  villages  and  jungles,  he  was  called 
by  the  natives  "  Jesus  Christ's  man  "  I  That  is  it.  Nothing  can  resist  that  power.  A 
Woolwich  steam-hammer  is  not  better  adapted  for  making  iron-plated  ships  than 
Christ  in  men  as  a  living  experience,  and  at  work  in  the  rescue  of  the  perishing,  is 
fitted  for  the  regeneration  of  the  world.  4.  The  earliest  sovereignty  we  know  is  that 
of  love.  No  monarchy  is  so  sure  as  a  mother's,  none  so  inward  and  lasting. 
"  Love  never  fails."  It  is  the  power  that  keeps  your  Christian  man  fres'n,  earnest, 
eager,  real,  enthusiastic,  and  hopeful ;  sustains  him  at  high-pressure  in  spite  of 
df  feat ;  gives  him  the  power  of  content,  and  the  victory  of  joy  in  his  work  though, 
instead  of  obtaining  the  common  rewards  of  labour,  he  suffer  the  heaped-np  scorns 
and  bitter  hates  of  men.  David  Hume  is  reported  to  have  said,  "  Fifty  years  hence, 
where  will  your  Christianity  be?  "  Well,  where  is  it?  Contrast  the  dominion  of 
Jesus  at  this  hour,  and  in  the  days  when  the  great  sceptic  spoke.  Note  our  Lord's 
conquest  since  that  tannt  was  flung  at  His  chariot  1  Where  has  He  not  gone? 
Into  what  province  has  He  not  penetrated?  What  evils  has  He  not  attacked? 
Assuredly  our  survey  of  the  past  warrants  the  largest  hopefulness  and  the  strongest 
faith.  Now,  "  Fifty  years  hence,"  we  may  ask,  "  where  wUl  Christianity  not  be  ?  " 
VI.  Disraeli  said,  "  The  young  do  the  real  work  of  the  world."  Ruskin  writes, 
*'  The  most  beautiful  works  of  all  art  were  done  in  youth."  Home  was  founded  by 
Romulus  before  he  was  twenty.  Lord  Shaftesbury  began  his  fight  with  social 
misery  in  the  freshness  of  his  young  manhood.  William  Lloyd  Garrison  girt  him- 
self with  the  sword  of  freedom  whilst  the  hot  blood  of  youth  was  conrsing  through 
his  veins.  Moffat  and  Livingstone,  Comber  and  Hannington,  and  an  exceeling 
great  army  of  missionaries  said,  like  young  I-aiah  in  response  to  God's  summons, 
"  Here  aui  I,  send  me."  The  messenger  of  the  Highest,  John  the  Baptist,  finished 
his  work  as  a  young  man,  and  the  Christ  whom  he  pioneered  was  six  months  his 
junior.  Wherefore,  seeing  that  you  are  compassed  about  with  so  great  a  cloud  of 
witnesses,  shirk  no  task,  seize  every  opportunity  of  helping  the  needy,  and  run 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tu 

with  patience  the  race  of  missionary  service,  *'  looking  unto  Jesas,  the  author  and 
finisher  of  the  faith."  Hear  Carey's  wish,  and  help  to  reahse  it.  ••  I  hope,"  said 
he,  in  1793,  "  the  Society  will  go  on  and  increase,  and  that  the  multitudes  of 
heathen  in  the  world  may  hear  the  glorious  words  of  truth.  Africa  is  but  a  little 
way  from  India,  Madagascar  but  a  little  way  further  ;  South  America,  and  all  the 
numerous  and  large  islands  in  the  Indian  and  China  Seas,  I  hope  will  not  be  passed 
over.  A  large  field  opens  on  every  side,  millions  of  perishing  heathens  are 
pleading  .  .  .  with  every  heart  that  loves  God,  and  with  all  the  churches  of  the 
living  God."  Heed  that  prophetic  message,  and  give  to  the  work  of  saving  the  world 
a  daily,  definite,  and  large  place  in  the  thought  and  prayer  and  work  of  your  life  t 
(J.  Clifford,  D.D. )  Manhood  crowned  in  Jesxis  : — One  of  our  celebrated  astronomers 
is  said  to  have  taught  himself  the  rudiments  of  his  starry  science  when  lying  on  the 
hill-side,  keeping  his  father's  sheep.  Perhaps  the  grand  psalm  to  which  these 
words  refer  had  a  similar  origin,  and  may  have  come  from  the  early  days  of  the 
shepherd  king,  when,  like  those  others  of  a  later  day,  he  abode  in  the  field  ol 
Bethlehem,  keeping  watch  over  his  flock  by  night.  The  magnificence  of  the  Eastern 
heavens,  with  their  "  larger  constellations  burning,"  filled  his  soul  with  two  opposite 
thoughts — man's  smallness  and  man's  greatness.  I  suppose  that  in  a  mind  apt  to 
pensive  reflections,  alive  to  moral  truths,  and  responsive  to  the  impressions  of 
God's  great  universe,  the  unscientific  contemplation  of  any  of  the  grander  fomia 
of  nature  produces  that  double  effect.  Thus  David  felt  man's  littleness.  And  yet — 
and  yet,  bigness  is  not  greatness,  and  duration  is  not  life,  and  the  creature  that 
knows  God  is  highest.  So  the  consciousness  of  man's  separation  from,  and 
superiority  to,  these  silent  stars,  springs  up  strong  and  victorious  over  the  other 
thought.  These  great  lights  are  not  rulers,  but  servants ;  we  are  more  than  they, 
because  we  have  spirits  which  link  us  with  God.  The  text,  then,  brings  before  u3 
a  threefold  sight.  I.  Look  at  the  sioht  abound  ds.  "  We  see  not  yet  all  things 
put  under  man."  Where  are  the  men  of  whom  any  portion  of  the  Psalmist's  wo.  da 
is  true  ?  Look  at  them — are  these  the  men  of  whom  he  sings  ?  Visited  by  Go)  t 
crowned  with  glory  and  honour!  having  dominion  over  the  works  of  His  hands  t 
Is  this  irony  or  fact  ?  Let  consciousness  speak.  Look  at  ourselves.  If  that  psalm 
be  God's  thought  of  man,  the  plan  that  He  hangs  up  for  us  His  workmen  to  build 
by,  what  a  wretched  thing  my  copy  of  it  has  turned  out  to  be  1  Is  this  a  picture  of 
me  ?  How  seldom  I  am  conscious  of  the  visits  of  God ;  how  full  I  am  of  weak- 
nesses and  imperfections — the  solemn  voice  within  me  tells  me  at  intervals  when 
I  listen  to  its  tones.  On  my  brow  there  gleams  no  diadem ;  from  my  life,  alas  ! 
there  shines  at  the  best  but  a  fitful  splendour  of  purity,  all  striped  with  sohd 
masses  of  blackness.  And  as  for  dominion  over  creatures,  how  superficial  my  rule 
over  them,  how  real  their  rule  over  me  I  I  can  make  machinery,  and  bid  the 
lightning  do  my  errands,  and  carry  messages,  the  burden  of  which  is  mostly  money, 
or  power,  or  sorrow.  But  all  these,  and  the  whole  set  of  things  like  them,  are  not 
ruhng  over  God's  creation.  That  consists  in  using  all  for  God,  and  for  our  own 
growth  in  wisdom,  strength,  and  goodness  ;  and  he  only  is  master  of  all  things  who 
is  servant  of  God.  If  so,  what  are  most  of  us  but  servants,  not  lords,  of  earth  and  its 
goods  ?  And  so  against  all  the  theories  of  the  desperate  school,  and  against  all  our  owa 
despondent  thoughts,  we  have  to  oppose  the  sunny  hopes  which  come  from  such  words 
as  those  of  oar  text.  Looking  around  us,  we  have  indeed  to  acknowledge  with  plaintive 
emphasis, "  we  see  not  yetall  things  put  under  Him  " — but, looking  up,  wehaveto  add 
with  triumphant  confidence  that  we  speak  of  a  fact  which  has  a  real  bearing  on  our 
hopes  for  men — "  we  see  Jesus."  II.  So,  secondly,  look  upwabds  to  Jesub.  Christ 
is  the  power  to  conform  us  to  Himself,  as  well  as  the  pattern  of  what  we  may  be. 
He  and  none  lower.  He  and  none  beside,  is  the  pattern  man.  Not  the  great  con- 
queror, nor  the  great  statesman,  nor  the  great  thinker,  but  the  great  lover,  the  per- 
fectly good — is  the  man  as  God  meant  him  to  be.  But  turn  now  to  the  contemplation 
of  Cflirist  in  the  heavens,  '*  crowned  with  glory  and  bonour,"  as  the  true  type  of 
man.  What  does  Scripture  teach  us  to  see  in  the  exalted  Lord  ?  1.  It  sets  before 
us,  first,  a  perpetual  manhood.  Grasp  firmly  the  essential,  perpetual  manhood 
of  Jesus  Christ,  and  then  to  see  Him  crowned  with  glory  and  honour  gives  the 
triumphant  answer  to  the  despairing  question  that  rises  often  to  the  lips  of  every 
one  who  knows  the  facts  of  life,  "  Wherefore  hast  Thou  made  all  men  in  vain  ?  " 
2.  Again,  we  sec  in  Jesus,  exalted  in  the  heavens,  a  corporeal  manhood.  Heaven 
is  a  place  as  well  as  a  state ;  and,  however,  for  the  present,  the  souls  that  sleep  ia 
Jesus  may  have  to  "  wait  for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption  of  the  body,"  and^ 
being  unclothed,  may  be  wrapped  about  with  Him,  and  rest  in  His  bosom,  yet  the- 


CHIP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  117 

p3rfect  men  who  shall  one  day  stand  before  the  Lord,  shall  have  bodj,  and  soul., 
«nd  spirit — like  Him  who  is  a  man  for  ever,  and  for  ever  wears  a  human  frame. 
3.  Further,  we  see  in  Jesus  transfigured  manhood.    For  Him,  as  for  us,  flesh  here 
means  weakness  and  dishonour.     For  us,  thout,'h  not  for  Him,  flesh  means  cor- 
ruption and  death.     For  Him,  as  for  us,  that  natural  body,  which  was  adequate  to 
ihe  needs  and  adapted  to  the  material  constitution  of  this  earth,  must  be  chauf^ed 
into  the  spiritual  body  correspondent  to  the  conditions  of  that  kingdom  of  God 
^'hich  flesh  and  blood  cannot  enter.    For  us,  through  Him,  the  body  of  humiliation 
shall  be  changed  into  likeness  of  the  body  of  His  glory.    We  see  Jesus,  and  iu  Him 
manhood  transfigured  and  perfected.     4.  Finally,  we  see  iu  Jesus  sovereign  man- 
hood.    He  directs  the  history  of  the  world,  and  presides  among  the  nations.     He 
is  the  prince  of  all  the  kings  of  the  earth.    He  wields  the  forces  of  nature,  He 
directs  the  march  of  providence.  He  is  Lord  of  the  unseen  worlds,  and  holds  the 
keys  of  death  and  the  grave.     "  The  government  is  upon  His  shoulders, "  and  upon 
Him  hangs  "  all  the  glory  of  His  Father's  house."     IIL  Finally,  look  foeward. 
•Christ  is  the  measure  of  man's  capacities.    He  is  the  true  pattern  of  human  nature. 
Christ  is  the  prophecy  and  pledge  of  man's  dominion.     It  were  a  poor  consolation 
to  poiut  to  Christ  and  say,  "Look  what  man  has  become,  and  may  become,"  unless 
we  could  also  say,  "  A  real  and  living  oneness  exists  between  Him  and  all  who 
cleave  to  Him,  so  that  their  characters  are  changed,  their  natures  cle msed,  their 
future  altered,  their  immortal  beauty  secured."    He  is  more  than  pattern,  He  is 
power;  more  than  specimen.  He  is  source;  more  tban  exami^le,  He  is  redeemer. 
He   has   been   made  in   the  likeness  of   sinful   flesh,   that   we   may   be  in  the 
likeness  of  His  body  of  glory.   He  has  been  made  "  sin  for  us,  that  we  might  be  made 
the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him."    The  fact  we  know,  the  conteuts  of  the  fact 
we  wait  to  prove.     "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."     Enough  that  we 
shall  reign  with  Him,  and  that  in  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  dominion  means 
service,  and  the  least  is  the  greatest.    Nearness  to  God,  knowledge  of  His  heart  and 
will,  likeness  to-Chriat,  determine  superiority  among  pure  and  spiritual   beings. 
(A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)         The  vision  of  Jesus  in  tlie  Church  through  all  ages  : — Did 
jou  ever  know  the  power  of  a  picture,  the  portrait  of  some  beloved  friend,  over  the 
life  and  the  heart  ?     Did  you  ever  hang  the  portrait  of  some  cherished  darling  in 
the  household  room — a  departed  friend,  a  mother,  a  wife,  a  husband,  or  a  child — 
some  friend  especially  related  to  your  sympathies  and  affections  ?    And  have  you 
not  noticed  and  felt  what  a  character  that  portrait  gives  to  the  room?    If  the 
memory  is  especially  prized,  how  the  eye  turns  to  it  as  it  enters  the  room,  and  how 
the  eye  out  of  the  portrait  seems  to  follow  you,  not  so  much  spectrally  as  spiritually, 
while  in  the  room  1     That  portrait  will  quiet  the  heart  when  it  is  in  its  state  of 
fever,  heat,  and  impulse.   Mighty  over  the  heart  is  the  portrait  of  the  loved  departed 
friend.    But  what  is  that  compared  with  the  power  of  the  portrait  of  Jesus  hung 
ap  in  the  human  soul?     For  is  not  the  soul,  too,  a  mighty  chamber — a  room 
through  which  the  powers  and  faculties  wander  and  stray  ?     There  are  some  men 
whose  souls  are  exchanges,  money  markets,  or  shops;   but  holy  souls  hang  up 
within,  the  charmed  and  charming  portrait  of  Jesus,  and  then  the  spirit  of  the 
portrait  turns  the  chamber  into  a  palace — say  rather  into  a  dear  household  room. 
"  We  see  Jesus."    I.  The  whole  of  this  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  is  a  tribute  of 
HOMAGE  TO  THE  DiTiNisED  HUMANITY  OF  ODB  LoRD.     How  richly  it  abouuds   in 
"  strong  consolations  "  to  believing  souls,  founded  on  the  sympathy  of  His  nature 
and  character  1    How  it  meets  our  human  necessities  !     For,  while  it  is  true  that 
we  could  not  do  without  the  strength  of  the  eternal  Divinity  of  our  Lord,  we  feel 
it  to  be  no  less  true  that  we  could  not  do  without  the  tenderness  of  His  humanity ; 
and  this  is  the  relation  which,  throughout  the  whole  of  this  Epistle,  is  put  by  the 
apostle  with  such  forcible  beauty — "Seeing  then   that  we   have   a  great   High 
Priest "   (chap.  iv.    14-16 ;    again,  chap.  vii.  24-26  ;   again,   in   that  magnificent 
peroration  to  the  whole,  chap.  xii.  1-3).    II.  And  this  consolation  pressed  out  of 
THE  SIGHT  OF  Jesus  ARISES  FROM  THE  VARIETIES  OF  His  POWER.     It  is  Very  beautif ul 
to  divide  His  character  in  His  relation  to  us  as  it  has  been  divided  by  Scripture, 
and  by  the  experience  of  Christians  of  all  ages  into  Jesus  the  Prophet,  Jesus  the 
Priest,  and  Jesus  the  King.     And  we  receive  Him  in  this  order.    We  see  Jesus  the 
J&ecq^«3t  in  all  the  actions  of  His  life  as  He  went  about  doing  good.     "  Eabbi,  I 
know  Thou  art  a  teacher  sent  from  God."     "  We  see  Jesus."     He  is  our  Priest — 
"  Harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from  sinners."    At  once  Priest  and  Sacrifice.    "On 
Him  is  laid  the  iniquity  of  us  all."     I  see  Him  standing  vested  in  the  beauties  of 
His  own  holiness — nor  have  I  any  desire  to  own  a  righieousness  which  is  not  Hia ; 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tt. 

it  is  not  less  happy  than  safe  to  hide  in  the  foldings  of  Etis  robe,  and  to  feel  that 
in  His  purity  there  is  power — power  to  make  "the  scarlet  crime  whiter  than  snow." 
"  We  Bee  Jesus"  as  our  King.    It  is  our  privilege  and  pride  to  see  Him  moving 
among  and  over  the  affairs  of  the  world,  "  walking  in  the   midst  of  the  seven 
golden  candlesticks,"  and  proclaiming,"!  am  He  that  liveth  and  was  dead,  and 
behold  I  am  alive  for  evermore,  Amen ;  and  have  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  death." 
Thus  everywhere,  and  in  all  ages,  Jesus  is  power.    Oh !  what  a  chronicle  is  that, 
the  history  of  things  and  deeds  wrought  in  "  the  name  of  Jesus."    All  beings  know 
Jesus.     "Jesus  we  know,  and  Paul  we  know,  but  who  are  ye  ?  "    There  is  power 
in  the  name  of  Jesus.     There  is  power  in  the  vision  of  Jesus.    The  value  of  all 
Christian  service  is  there.     The  value  of  all  worship  rendered  is  in  this :  "  We  see 
Jesus."     in.  The  ever-pbesent  possessiveness  of  the  text,  "  We  see  Jesus" — 
"  Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever."     "  We  see  Jesus," 
says  Paul,  perhaps,  in  prison  at  Eome.     There  is  something  very  striking  in  the 
contempt  expressed  by  Festus  on  the  trial  of  Paul:  "one  Jesus"!  said  he.     Ah, 
how  little  a  person  to  poor  Festus  seemed  "  one  Jesus  "  ;  but  this  "  one  Festus" 
bas  quite  passed  away  from  the  world's  knowledge,  and  his  name  would  not  b9 
known,  his  shadow  would  not  be  seen  if  it  were  not  for  this  "  one  Jesus  "  saving  it 
from  utter  obscurity.     Names  are  the  signs  of  things,  and  the  name  of  Jes'is  ha,9 
survived  all  shocks ;  it  has  passed  almost  unchanged  into  all  languages.     All  else 
seems  to  perish,  it  never;  like  a  conservative  element  it  leavens  all  languages  with- 
out  losing  its  own  identity.     (£.  Paxton  Hood.)         Seeing  Jesus:—!.   Why  faith 
IS  COMPARED  to  THE  SIGHT.     Is  not  Sight,  in  many  respects,  the  noblest  of  all  the 
senses?    To  be  deprived  of  any  of  our  senses  is  a  great  loss,  but  perhaps  the 
greatest  deprivation  of  all  is  the  loss  of  sight.     They  who  lose  sight  lose  the 
noblest  of  human  faculties.      1.  For  observe  that  sight  is   marvellously  quick. 
How  wondronsly  fast  and  far  it  travels  I     We  know  not  where  heaven  may  be, 
but  faith  takes  us  there  in  contemplation  in  a  single  moment.     We  cannot  tell 
when  the  Lord  may  come  ;  it  may  not  be  for  centuries  yet,  but  faith  steps  over  tlia 
distance  in  a  moment,  and  sees  Him  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  and  hears  the 
trump  of  resurrection.     It  would  be  very  difficult,  indeed  it  would  be  impossible  for 
us  to  travel  backward  in  any  other  chariot  than  that  of  faith,  for  it  is  faith  which 
helps  us  to  see  the  creation  of  the  world,  when  the  morning  stars  sang  together, 
and  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy.     Faith  takes  us  to  Calvary's  summit,  and  we 
stand  and  see  our  Saviour  as  plainly  as  did  His  mother  when  she  stood  sorrowfully 
at  the  cross-foot.     2.  Is  not  faith  like  sight,  too,  for  its  largeness  ?    What  a  faculty 
faith  has  for  grasping  everything,  for  it  layeth  hold  upon  the  past,  the  present,  and 
the  future.     It  pierceth  through  most  intricate  things,  and  seeth  God  producing 
good  out  of  all  the  tortuous  circumstances  of  providence.     And  what  is  more,  faith 
does  what  the  eye  cannot  do — it  sees  the  infinite ;  it  beholds  the  invisible ;  it  looks 
upon  that  which  eye  hath  not  seen,  which  ear  hath  not  heard.     3.   Is  not  faith 
wondronsly  like  sight  from  its  power  to  affect  the  mind  and  enable  a  man  to  realise 
a  thing?    If  it  is  real  faith,  it  makes  the  Christian  man  in  deahng  with  God  feel 
towards  God  as  though  he  saw  Him  ;  it  gives  him  the  same  awe,  and  yet  the  same 
joyous  confidence  which  he  would  have  if  he  were  capable  of  actually  beholding  the 
Lord.     Faith,  when  it  takes  a  stand  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  makes   us  hate 
sin  and   love  the  Saviour  just  as  much  as  though  we  had  seen  our  sins  placed 
to  Christ's  account,  and  had  seen  the  nails  driven  through  His  hands  and  feet, 
and  seen  the  bloody  scourges   as  they  made  the  sacred  drops   of   blood  to  fall. 
II.  Faith,  the  sight   of  thb  boul,  is  herb  spoken  of  as  a  continuous  thing. 
"  We  see  Jesus."    It  does  not  say,  "  We  can  see  Jesus  " — that  is  true  enough  :  the 
spiritual  eye  can  see  the  Saviour ;  nor  does  it  say,  "  We  have  seen  Him  " ;  that  also 
is  a  delightful  fact,  we  have  seen  the  Lord,  and  we  have  rejoiced  in  seeing  Him  ; 
nor  does  the  text  say,  "We  shall  see  Him,"  though  this  is  our  pride  and  our 
hope,  that  "when  He  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him 
as  He  is";    but  the  text   says,   "We   see    Jesus";  we   do   see   Him  now   and 
continually.     This  is  the  common  habit  of  the  Christian;  it  is  the  element  of 
his  spiritual  life ;  it  is  his  most  delightful  occupation  ;  it  is  his  constant  practice. 
'  We   see    Jesus."    I   am   afraid  some   of  us  forget  this.     1.  For  instance,  we 
see  Jesus  Christ  as  our  Saviour,  we  being  sinners  still.    And  is  it  not  a  delightful 
thing  always  to  feel  one's  self  a  sinner,  and  always  to  stand  looking  to  Christ 
as  one's  Saviour,  thus  beholding  Him  evermore  ?    2,  Should  not  this,  also,  be 
the  mode  of  our  life  in  another  respect  ?    We  are  now  disciples.    Beint?  saved 
from  oar  former  conversation,  we  are  now  become  the  disciples  of  the  Lord  Jesus ; 


OHAP.n.]  HEBREWS.  110 

and  onght  we  not,  as  disciples,  to  be  constantly  with  oar  Master  ?  Ought  not  this 
to  be  the  motto  of  our  life,  "We  see  Jesus  "?  Let  us  carry  Christ  on  our  heart, 
still  thinking  of  Jesus,  seeing  Him  at  all  times.  3.  Would  it  not  also  be  very  much 
for  our  comfort  if  we  were  to  see  Jesus  always  as  our  Frieud  in  our  sojourn  here  ? 
We  should  never  be  alone  if  we  could  see  Jesus  ;  or  at  least,  if  we  were  it  would  ba 
a  blessed  solitude.  We  should  never  feel  deserted  if  we  could  see  Jesus  ;  we  should 
have  the  best  of  helpers.  I  know  not  if  we  should  feel  weak  if  we  always  saw  Him, 
for  He  would  be  our  strength  and  our  song,  He  would  become  our  salvation.  4. 
Would  it  not  be  much  better  for  us  if  we  were  to  see  Jesus  as  our  Forerunner  ?  If 
our  faith  could  see  Jesus  as  making  our  bed  in  our  sickness,  and  then  standing  by 
our  side  in  the  last  solemn  article,  to  conduct  us  safely  through  the  iron  gates, 
should  we  not  tlien  look  upon  death  in  a  very  different  light?  5.  If  we  see  Jesus, 
beiug  always  with  us,  from  morn  till  eve,  in  life  and  in  death,  what  noble  Christiana 
it  will  make  us !  Now  we  shall  not  get  angry  with  each  other  so  quickly.  We 
shall  see  Jesus ;  and  we  cannot  be  angry  when  that  dear  loving  face  is  in  view. 
And  when  we  have  been  affronted,  we  shall  be  very  ready  to  forgive  when  we  see 
Jesus.  Who  can  hate  his  brother  when  he  sees  that  face,  that  tender  face,  more 
marred  than  that  of  any  man?  When  we  see  Jesus,  do  you  think  we  shall  get 
worldly  ?  III.  Sometimes  oub  faith,  like  our  sight,  is  not  quite  clear. 
Everything  that  has  life  has  variatiuns.  A  block  of  wood  is  not  affected  by  the 
weather,  but  a  living  man  is.  You  may  drive  a  stake  into  the  ground,  and  it  will 
feel  no  influence  of  spring,  summer,  autumn,  or  winter  ;  but  if  the  stake  be  alive, 
and  you  drive  it  into  the  soil  where  there  is  moisture,  it  will  soon  begin  to  sprcrt, 
and  you  will  be  able  to  tell  when  spring  and  winter  are  coming  by  the  changes  that 
take  place  in  the  living  tree.  Life  is  full  of  these  changes  ;  do  not  wonder,  then,  if 
you  expeiience  them.  IV.  Faith,  like  siout,  has  great  growth.  Our  children, 
in  a  certain  sense,  see  as  truly  when  they  are  a  day  old  as  when  they  are  grov\n  up 
to  be  twenty  years  old  ;  but  we  must  not  suppose  that  they  see  as  accurately,  for 
they  do  not.  I  think  observations  would  teach  us  that  little  children  see  all  thinga 
as  on  a  level  surface,  and  that  distant  objects  seem  to  them  to  be  near,  for  they 
have  not  yet  received  experience  enough  to  judge  of  the  relative  position  of  thii)gs. 
That  is  an  acquired  knowledge,  and  no  doubt  very  early  acquired,  but  still  it  ia 
learned  as  a  matter  of  mental  experience.  And  let  me  say,  though  you  may  not 
have  noticed  it,  all  our  measures  of  distance  by  the  eye  are  matters  which  have  to 
be  gained  by  habit  and  observation.  When  I  first  went  to  Switzerland,  with  a  frieud, 
from  Lucerne  we  saw  a  mountain  in  the  distance  which  we  were  going  to  climb.  I 
pointed  out  a  place  where  we  should  stop  half-way  up,  and  I  said,  "  We  shall  ba 
there  in  about  four  hours  and  a  half."  "Four  hours  and  a  half !  "  my  friend  said, 
"  I'd  undertake  to  waJk  it  in  ten  minutes."  "No,  not  you."  "  Well,  but  half  aa 
hour  1  "  He  looked  again  and  said,  "  Anybody  could  get  there  in  half  an  hour!  " 
It  seemed  no  distance  at  all.  And  yet  when  we  came  to  toil  up,  the  four  hours  and 
a  half  turned  into  five  or  six  before  we  reached  the  place.  Our  eyes  were  not  ac- 
customed to  mountains,  and  we  were  not  able  to  measure  them  ;  and  it  is  only  by 
considerable  experience  that  you  get  to  understand  what  a  mountain  is,  and  how  a 
long  distance  appears.  You  are  altogether  deceived,  and  do  not  know  the  position 
of  things  till  you  become  wiser.  And  it  is  just  so  with  faith.  Faith  in  the  Chris- 
tian when  he  first  gets  it,  is  true  and  saving ;  but  it  is  not  in  proportion.  Let  ua 
ask,  then,  of  the  Lord,  that  He  wUl  increase  our  faith  till  the  mental  eye  shall 
become  clear  and  bright,  and  we  shall  be  made  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheri- 
tance of  the  saints  in  light,  to  be  with  Christ,  and  to  see  Him  as  He  is.  If  you 
have  but  little  faith,  remember  that  that  will  save  you.  The  Uttle  diamond  is  aa 
much  a  diamond  as  the  Koh-i-noor.  So  little  faith  is  as  truly  the  faith  of  God'a 
elect  as  the  greatest  faith.  If  yon  do  but  see  Jesus,  though  it  be  but  by  the  corner 
of  your  eye,  yet  if  you  see  Him,  you  shall  be  saved  ;  and  though  you  may  not  sea 
as  much  of  Christ  aa  advanced  saints  do,  yet  if  you  see  enough  of  Him  to  trust 
Him,  to  rely  on  Him  entirely,  your  sins  which  are  many  are  forgiven,  and  you  shall 
yet  receive  grace  for  grace,  until  you  shall  see  Him  in  His  glory.  V-  It  is  at 
all  times  a  very  simple  thing  to  look.  If  there  be  life  in  a  look,  glory  be  to 
God  for  such  a  provision,  because  it  is  available  for  each  one  of  us  1  Sinner,  if 
thou  wouldst  be  saved,  there  is  nothing  for  thee  to  think  upon  but  Christ.  Do  thy 
sins  trouble  thee  ?  Go  to  Him,  and  trust  in  Him,  and  the  moment  thou  lookest  to 
Him  thou  art  saved.  "Oh,"  says  one,  "but  I  cannot  do  that;  my  faith  is  so 
weak."  Well,  when  I  walk  about  and  see  a  beautiful  sight,  very  seldom  do  I  think 
about  my  own  sight ;  my  mind  is  occupied  with  the  sight,  and  so  let  it  be  with  you. 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  ^chap.  n. 

Never  mind  that  eye ;  think  more  aboat  the  vision  to  be  seen.     Think  of  Christ. 
It  wotdd  be  a  pitiful  thing  if,  when  there  were  some  great  procession  in  the  streets, 
all  yon  thought  about  was  your  own  eye ;  you  would  see  but  very  httle.     Think  less 
about  your  faith,  and  more  about  Jesus.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.)        The  best  of  all 
sights : — I.  Regard  the  glorious  sight  of  Jesus  as  a  compensation.     We  do  not  yet 
see  Him  acknowledged  as  King  of  kings  by  all  mankind,  and  this  causes  us  great 
Borrow.     "  But,"  saith  the  apostle,  "  we  see  Jesus,"  and  this  sight  compensates  for 
all  others,  for  we  see  Him  now,  no  longer  made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,  and 
tasting  the  bitterness  of  death,  but  "  crowned  with  glory  and  honour."     We  see 
Him  no  more  after  the  flesh,  in  shame  and  anguish ;  far  more  ravishing  is  the 
sight,  for  we  see  His  work  accomphshed,  His  victory  complete.  His  empire  secure. 
He  sits  as  a  priest  upon  the  throne  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  from  henceforth 
expecting  till  His  enemies  are  made  His  footstool.     1.  This  is  a  Divine  compensa- 
tion for  the  tarrying  of  His  visible  kingdom,  because  it  is  the  major  part  of  it.    The 
main  battle  is  won.     2.  The  compensation  is  all  the  greater  because  our  Lord's 
enthronement  is  the  pledge  of  aU  the  rest.    The  putting  of  all  things  under  Him, 
which  as  yet  we  see  not,  is  guaranteed  to  us  by  what  we  do  see.     This  is  the  antidote 
to  all  depression  of  spirit,  the  stimulus  to  hopeful  perseverance,  the  assurance  of 
joy  unspeakable.    II.  Nor  is  this  sight  a  mere  compensation  for  others  which  as 
yet  are  denied  us,  it  is  in  itself  the  cause  of  present  exultation.     This  is  true  in 
60  many  ways  that  time  would  fail  us  to  attempt  to  enumerate  them.     1.  "  We  see 
Jesus,"  and  in  Him  we  see  our  former  unhappy  condition  for  ever  ended.   We  were 
fallen  in  Adam,  but  we  see  in  Jesus  our  ruin  retrieved  by  the  second  Adam.     We 
weep  as  we  coufess  our  transgressions,  but  we  see  Jesus,  and  sing  for  joy  of  heart, 
since  He  hath  finished  transgression,  made  an  end  of  sin,  and  brought  in  ever- 
lasting righteousness.     2.  The  same  is  sweetly  true  of  the  present,  for  we  see  our 
present  condition  to  be  thrice  blessed  by  virtue  of  our  union  with  Him.    3.  We  see 
self,  and  blush  and  are  ashamed  and  dismayed;  "but  we  see  Jesus,"  and  His  joy 
is  in  us,  and  our  joy  is  full.     What  a  vision  is  this  for  you,  when  you  see  Jesus,  and 
see  yourself  complete  in  Him,  perfect  in  Christ  Jesus  I     4.  Such  a  sight  effectually 
clears   our  earthly  future  of  all  apprehension.     It  is  true  we  may  yet  be  sorely 
tempted,  and  the  battle  may  go  hard  with  us,  but  we  see  Jesus  triumphant,  and  by 
this  sign  we  grasp  the  victory.    III.  "  We  see  Jesus  "  with  gladdest  expectation.  1. 
His  glorious  person  is  to  us  the  picture  and  the  pledge  of  what  we  shall  be ;  for  "  it 
doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be :  but  we  know  that,  when  He  shall  appear,  we 
shall  be  like  Him  ;  for  we  h^hall  see  Him  as  He  is."    2.  Nor  may  we  alone  derive 
comfort  as  to  our  future  from  His  person,  we  may  also  be  made  glad  by  a  hope  as 
to  His  place.     Where  we  see  Jesus  to  be,  there  shall  we  also  be.     His  heaven  is  our 
heaven.     His  prayer  secures  that  we  shall  be  with  Him,  where  He  is,  that  we  may 
behold  His  glory.     3.  The  glory  of  Jesus  strikes  the  eye  at  once,  and  thus  we  are 
made  to  exult  in  His  position,  for  it,  too,  is  ours.    He  will  give  to  us  to  sit  upon 
His  throne,  even  as  He  sits  upon  the  Father's  throne.     He  hath  made  us  kings 
and    priests    unto    God,  and  we  shall  reign  for   ever  and  ever.     {Ibid.)        Of 
the   title    Jesus: — The   apostle   had   before  called   Christ  the   Son   of   God,   the 
first  begotten,   God,   Loid,   which   are  titles  proper  to  His  Divine  nature.     But 
here    he    speaketh    of    His    excellency    as    man,    and    thereupon    giveth    Him 
that  title  which   setteth   out  the  distinct  reason  why,  being  God,  He  assumed 
man's    nature :    namely,   that   He   might   be   a   fit   and   able    Saviour  of  man. 
Fit,   as  He  was   man  ;  able,   as   He  was  God.     Well  may  this  title  Jesus,   in 
regard  of  the  signification  of  it,  be   given  unto  Christ.    For — 1.  He  was  a  true 
Saviour  (chap.  viii.  2),  not  a  typical  Saviour,  as  Joshua  and  other  like  saviouis 
(Neh.  ix.  27).    2.  He  was  a  most  free  Saviour.     According  to  His  mercy  He  saved 
us  (Titus  iii.  6).     Not  for  price  (1  Pet.  i.  18).     3.  He  was  an  all-suflScient  Saviour. 
He  satisfieth  Divine  justice,  endured  the  infinite  curse  of  the  law,  overcame  death, 
hell,  and  him  that  had  the  power  of  them  (ver.  14 ;  Eev.  i.  18),    4.  He  was  an 
universal  Saviour.     The  Saviour  of  all  that  are  or  shall  be  saved  (1  Tim.  iv.  10). 
5.  He  was  a  total  Saviour.     He  saveth  soul  and  body  (1  Cor.  vi.  20).     6.  He  was 
an  everlasting  Saviour.     He  brings  all  that  believe  in  Him  to  everlasting  hfe,     Aa 
He  is,  so  He  was  from  the  beginning,  and  ever  will  continue  so  (chap.  xiii.  8  ;  Eev. 
xiii.  8 ;   chap.  vii.  24).     7.  He  was  a  perfect  Saviour  (chap.  vii.  25).  _  He  leaves 
nothing  simply  in  the  case  of  salvation  for  any  other  to  do,     8.  He  is  the  only 
Saviour  (Acts  iv.  12  ;  Isa.  Ixiii,  6),     On  these  gi-ounds  it  becomes  us — 1.  To  consider 
the  need  that  we  have  of  a  Saviour,     This  wiU  make  us  inquire  how  we  may  be  saved 
(Acta  xvi.  30).     2.  To  fly  to  Christ  for  salvation.    He  invites  all  so  to  do  (John  vii. 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  121 


87).  He  casts  away  none  that  come  unto  Him  (John  vi.  37).  3.  To  trust  on  Him 
<Act8  xvi  31 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  10).  4.  To  rejoice  in  Him  (Luke  1.47).  6.  To  bless  God 
for  Him  (Luke  i.  68).  6.  To  serve  Him  who  saveth  us  (Luke  i.  74,  75).  7.  To  do 
all  in  His  name  (Col.  iii.  17).  (W.  Gouge.)  Christ's  condescension: — In  the 
history  of  Moravian  missions  we  read  of  a  missionary  who  undertook  to  make 
known  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ  to  the  suffering,  despised,  and  down-trodden 
slaves  of  the  West  Indies.  So  cruelly  were  they  treated,  so  hard  were  they  worked, 
80  mercilessly  were  they  flogyed,  that  their  spirits  rankled  with  bitterest  hostility 
to  the  more  favoured  race  WLiich  doomed  them  to  this  hopeless  condition.  Under 
these  unhappy  circumstances  the  missionary  could  not  get  a  hearing.  It  was  a 
grave  problem  how  to  reach  their  hearts,  win  their  sympathies,  and  thus  fulfil  the 
purposes  of  his  mission.  At  last  he  saw  a  way  to  overcome  the  difficulty.  How? 
By  selhng  himself  into  servitude.  He  became  a  slave,  he  shared  the  same  fare, 
and  endured  the  same  privations  as  his  dusky  brethren.  Thus  he  won  his  way 
to  their  hearts.  Even  so,  it  was  needful  that  God  should  show  sympathy  by  stoop- 
ing to  our  low  estate,  and  making  Himself  one  with  us.  So  Christ  the  Eternal 
Word  was  born  in  helplessness  like  us.  He  hungered  and  thirsted  like  us,  He  toiled 
and  suffered  like  us,  He  was  tempted  and  tried  like  us.  He  wept  and  prayed  like  us. 
^F.  Marrs.)  Ciwriat's  eondesceusion : — That  He  might  be  in  a  condition  to  suffer 
death,  this  Sun  of  Righteousness  went  ten  degrees  backward,  not  only  below  His 
Father  (John  xiv.  28),  but  below  the  angels ;  for  man  (as  man)  is  inferior  to  the 
angels.  {J.  Trapp.)  For  tli«  Buffering'  of  death  crowned.— -J( sus  crowned  for 
death: — It  is  Jesus,  Son  of  Mary,  Child  of  man,  whose  appearance  we  hail;  not 
cow,  as  in  chap,  i.,  the  Son  of  God,  resplendent  in  His  Father's  glory  with  Hie 
holy  angels,  sustaining  creation  by  His  word.  The  writer  is  approaching  the  Re- 
deemer's person  from  the  opposite  side,  and  adopting  quite  a  different  line  of 
reflection  from  that  with  which  the  Epistle  commenced.  He  will  afterwards 
onite  both  conceptions  in  his  definition  of  "  our  great  High  Priest,  Jesus  the  Son  of 
God."  We  must  allow  him  to  work  out  his  argument  in  his  own  way.  Here  is 
a  Man,  then,  in  whom  humanity  is  lifted  from  the  dust,  and  once  more  grows 
conscious  of  its  primal  dignity.  The  advent  of  Jesus  raises  immeasurably  our  con- 
ception of  the  possibilities  of  human  nature,  and  supplies  a  new  and  magnificent 
answer  to  the  old  question,  "  What  is  man  ?  "  Prophecy  is  outdone  by  what  we 
eee  in  Jesus  of  man's  greatness  as  the  object  of  the  Divine  regard.  And  this 
Leader  of  our  salvation  is  "  forerunner  "  of  His  brethren's  exaltation,  both  in  earth 
and  heaven.  On  every  ground  we  find  ourselves  compelled  to  refer  the  predicate 
•'  crowned  with  glory  and  honour,"  to  the  earthly  life  and  human  relationship  of 
our  Saviour.  Surely  it  is  in  this  environment  that  we  see  Jesus.  We  to-day  "  see 
Jesus"  in  the  story  of  the  Four,  as  the  readers  of  this  letter  saw  Him  in  the 
living  words  of  His  eye-witnesses  and  ministers.  And  "  we  see  Him  for  the 
Buffering  of  death  crowned  with  glory  and  honour."  No  words  could  more  filily 
express  the  strange  blending  of  glory  and  suffering  visible  throughout  the  earthly 
•course  of  Jesus, — glory  ever  leading  on  to  suffering,  and  finding  in  death  its  climax 
and  hidden  purpose.  If  man's  ideal  greatness  is  the  starting-point  of  the  writer's 
thought,  the  death  of  the  cross  is  always  its  centre.  The  former,  for  sinful  (chap. 
i.  3)  and  death-bound  man,  can  only  win  its  realisation  through  the  latter.  Jesus 
is  crowned  for  death.  Willingly  wuuld  Israel  have  given  Him  in  life  the  Messiah's 
crown.  They  could  not  understand  why  One  so  high  in  the  grace  of  God,  so  rich  in 
kingly  qualities  and  powers,  did  not  take  the  last  remaining  step  and  mount  to  David's 
throne.  Their  fury  against  Him  at  the  last  was,  in  the  breasts  of  many  who  cried, 
"  Away  with  Him  1 "  the  rage  of  a  bitter  disappointment.  They  did  not  see  that  the 
Ligher  He  was  raised  in  favour  with  God  and  men,  the  nearer  and  the  more  needful 
became  His  death.  It  is  enough  to  refer  to  tlie  scene  of  the  transfiguration,  and 
of  the  royal  entry  into  Jerusalem,  to  show  the  profound  connection  which  existed 
alike  in  the  mind  of  Jesus,  in  the  purpose  of  God,  and  in  the  sequence  of  history 
between  Christ's  human  glorification  and  His  sacrificial  death.  (G.  G.  Findlay.) 
Exaltation  in  humiliation : — The  plain  meaning  of  the  text  seems  to  be  that  Jesus 
was  crowned  with  glory  and  honour  with  reference  to  the  suffering  of  death,  in 
order  that  by  the  grace  or  favour  of  God  He  might  taste  death  for  men.  This 
rendering  makes  the  crowning  antecedent  to  death,  a  fact  occurring  in  the  eartlily 
life  of  Jesus,  an  exaltation  in  the  humiliation,  a  higher  even  in  the  lower,  a  glory 
eonsummated  in  heaven  but  begun  even  on  earth.  If  I  am  met  with  the  sceptical 
question,  With  what  glory  and  honour  can  the  man  Jesus  be  said  to  have  been 
orowned  on  earth  7  I  replj,  With  just  such  glorj  and  honour  as  are  spoken  of  in 


IM  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat,  to, 

the  third  and  fifth  chapters  of  this  same  Epistle;  with  the  glory  of  a  Moses  and  the 
honour  of  an  Aaron  ;  the  glory  of  being  the  leader  of  the  people  out  of  Egypt  into 
the  promised  land,  that  is,  of  being  the  "  Captain  of  Salvation  " ;  the  honour  of 
being  the  High  Priest  of  men,  procuring  for  them,  through  the  sacrifice  of  Himself, 
life  and  blesBeduess.  The  glory  and  honour  spoken  of  as  conferred  by  Jesus  may 
thus  quite  well  be  those  connected  with  His  appointment  to  the  honourable  and 
glorious  ofiice  of  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  our  profession.  This,  accordingly,  ia 
the  thought  I  find  in  this  text:  Jesus,  "crowned  for  death,"  by  being  appointed  to 
an  office  whereby  His  death,  instead  of  being  a  mere  personal  experience  of  the 
common  lot,  became  a  death  for  others,  and  a  humiliation,  was  transmuted  into  a 
signal  mark  of  Divine  favour.  This  crowning  had  a  twofold  aspect  and  relation  ;  a 
subjective  and  an  objective  side,  a  relation  to  the  will  of  Christ  and  a  relation  to 
the  will  of  God.  It  would  not  have  been  complete  unless  there  had  been  both  an 
act  of  self-devotion  on  the  part  of  Christ  and  an  act  of  sovereign  appointment  on 
the  part  of  God.  The  subjective  aspect  is  in  abeyance  here,  though  it  is  not  for- 
gotten in  tbe  Epistle  ;  it  receives  full  recognition  in  those  places  where  it  is  taught 
that  Christ's  priestly  offering  was  Himself.  Here  it  is  the  objective  Godward  aspect 
that  ie  emphasised,  as  appears  from  the  remarkable  exprest-ion,  "  by  the  grace  of 
God,"  and  from  the  line  of  thought  contained  in  the  following  verse,  to  be  here- 
after considered.  There  was  a  subjective  grace  in  Christ  which  made  Him  willing 
to  sacrifice  His  individual  life  for  the  good  of  the  whole,  but  there  was  also  con- 
ferred on  Him  by  His  Father  the  signal  favour  that  His  life,  freely  given  in  self- 
sacrifice,  had  universal  significance  and  value.  Kindred  to  this  famous  text, 
understood  as  explained,  is  Christ's  beatitude  pronouncing  the  persecuted  for 
righteousness  happy ;  Paul's  statement  to  the  Philippian  Church,  "  Unto  you  it  ia 
given  as  a  favour  (ixapi(fSf})  in  the  behalf  of  Christ,  not  only  to  believe  on  Him,  but 
also  to  suffer  for  His  sake  " ;  and  Peter's  declnration  to  the  strangers  scattered 
abroad,  "  If  ye  be  reproached  for  the  name  of  Christ,  happy  are  ye,  for  the  Spirit 
of  glory  and  of  God  resteth  on  you."  Elindred  also  in  import  are  all  the  texts  in 
which  Christ  speaks  of  His  approaching  passion  as  His  glorification,  a  mode  of 
viewing  the  Passion  very  common  in  the  Johannine  report  of  our  Lord's  sayings. 
I  only  add  to  these  citations  a  mere  reference  to  the  voices  from  heaven  pronoun- 
cing Jesus  God's  beloved  Son  when  He  manifested  at  the  Jordan  and  on  the  Mount 
of  Transfiguration  His  willingness  to  endure  suffering  in  connection  with  Hia 
Messianic  vocation,  and  in  connection  therewith  to  the  reflection  occurring  in  the 
Second  Epistle  of  Peter  relating  to  the  latter  event,  "  He  received  from  God  the 
Father  honour  and  glory,  when  there  came  such  a  voice  to  Him  from  the  excelhnt 
glory.  This  is  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  With  these  Divine 
voices  stand  in  contrast  the  voices  from  hell  uttered  by  Satan  in  the  temptation. 
The  God-sent  voices  say  in  effect,  "  Thou  art  My  beloved  Son  because  Thou  de- 
v3test  Thyself  to  the  arduous  career  of  a  Saviour,  and  I  show  My  favour  unto  Thee 
by  solemnly  setting  Thee  apart  to  Thy  high  an<i  holy  office."  The  Satanic  voices 
say,  "  Thou  art  the  Son  of  God,  it  seems ;  use  Thy  privilege,  then,  for  Thine  own 
advantage."  God  shows  His  grace  unto  His  Son  by  appointing  Him  to  an  office  in 
which  He  will  have  an  opportunity  of  doiig  a  signal  service  to  men  at  a  great  cost 
of  suffering  to  Himself.  Satan  cannot  conceive  of  Jesus  being  the  Son  of  God  at 
all  unless  sonship  carry  along  with  it  exemption  from  all  arduous  tasks  and  irk- 
some hardships,  privations,  and  pains.  God  puts  a  stamp  of  Divinity  on  self- 
sacrifice,  Satan  associates  Divinity  with  selfishness.  There  can  be  no  doubt, 
therefore,  that  the  crowning,  as  I  conceive  it,  is  an  idea  familiar  to  the  New  Tes- 
tament writers.  The  only  question  that  may  legitimately  be  asked  is,  whether  tl.'e 
thought  I  find  in  the  text  is  relevant  to  the  connection  of  thought  in  the  passage, 
and  serviceable  to  the  purpose  of  the  Epistle,  that  of  instructing  in  Christian  truth 
readers  who  needed  to  be  again  taught  the  merest  elements  of  the  Christian  faith. 
To  this  question  I  can  have  little  hesitation  in  giving  an  affirmative  answer.  Was 
it  not  desirable  to  show  to  men  who  stumbled  at  the  humiliating  circumstances  of 
Christ's  earthly  lot,  that  there  was  not  merely  a  glory  coming  after  the  humilia- 
tion, compensating  for  it,  but  a  glory  in  the  humiliation  itself?  This  ethical 
instruction  was  much  mnre  urgently  needed  than  a  merely  theological  instruction 
as  to  the  purpose  and  effect  of  Christ's  exaltation  to  heaven,  viz.,  that  it  made 
His  death  already  endured  have  universal  significance  and  value.  The  exaltation 
needed  no  apolof^y,  it  spoke  for  itself ;  what  was  needed  was  to  remove  the  stiuma 
from  the  state  of  humiliation,  and  such,  I  cannot  but  think,  is  one  of  the  leading 
aims  of  the  Epistle.     The  bUnded  Jew  said,   "  How  dishonourable  and  shameful 


CHIP.  n.  HEBREWS.  123 

that  death  of  Jesus ;  how  hard  to  believe  that  He  who  endured  it  could  be  Mes- 
siah and  God's  well-beloved  Son  I  "  The  writer  replies,  "  Not  disgrace,  but  grace, 
favour,  honour,  and  filory  do  I  see  there ;  this  career  of  sufferiug  is  one  which  it 
was  honourable  for  Christ  to  pass  through,  and  to  which  it  well  became  the 
Bovereign  Lord  to  subject  His  Son.  For  while  to  taste  death  in  itself  was  a 
humiliation  to  the  Son  of  God,  to  taste  it  for  others  was  indeed  most  glorious." 
It  is  a  recommendation  of  the  interpretation  here  advocated,  that  under  it  the 
crowning  is  not  subsequent  to  the  being  made  lower  than  angels,  but,  as  in  the 
Psalm,  contemporaneous  with  it.  It  scarcely  requires  to  be  added  that  the  glory 
in  the  humiliation  is  not  exclusive  of  the  glory  after  it.  The  full  thesis  of  the 
Epistle  on  this  theme  is:  "First  lower,  then  higher;  nay,  a  higher  in  the  lower." 
{A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.)  Crowned  with  glory  and  honour. — On  the  ascension  of 
Christ: — Who  is  it  that,  "for  the  suffering  of  death,  is  crowned  with  glory  and 
honour  "  ?  Undoubtedly  the  Being  in  whom  existed  the  wonderful  union  of  the 
human  and  the  Divine  natures.  It  was  not  solely  the  Divinity  of  the  Son  returning 
to  its  pristine  abode.  That  was  never  "  made  lower  than  the  angels."  That  being 
incapable  of  passion,  never  tasted  "  the  suffering  of  death."  Of  the  place  aud 
Btate,  to  which  our  Eedeemer  is  exalted,  we  can  form  no  adequate  conceptions. 
Here  let  us  pause  and  reflect ;  what  glory  to  the  fallen  nature  of  man,  that  the 
Eternal  Son  should  assume  it,  even  to  dwell  in  it  on  earth,  and  say  of  its  humble 
offspring,  "  My  brethren  are  these  "  1  How  immeasurably  great,  then,  its  honour 
and  advancement  when  He  is  exalted  in  it  to  the  right  hand  of  the  Father ; 
"  angels  and  authorities  and  powers  being  made  subject  unto  Him  "  I  While  we 
perceive  that  it  was  in  our  nature  our  Saviour  passed  into  His  glory,  our  advance- 
ment hereby  will  be  more  impressive  if  we  consider  that  in  entering  upon  His  joy 
He  "  opened  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers."  What  surer  pledge  of  our 
inheritance  in  heaven  can  we  have  than  the  exaltation  of  Him,  in  our  nature,  to 
the  possession  of  "all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth"?  But  of  this  interesting 
and  stupendous  event  of  the  Ascension,  where  are  the  evidences  ?  How  shall  we 
believe  that  this  great  thing  hath  been  done  for  us  ;  this  thing  so  wonderful,  and 
of  such  amazing  consequences?  1.  Behold,  I  bring  to  you  the  types  which  "at 
sundry  times,  and  in  divers  manners,"  God  vouchsafed  to  give  of  what  He  would 
accomplish  in  the  great  Redeemer.  See  Enoch  translated  to  heaven  under  the 
Patriarchal  dispensation,  and  Elijah  under  the  Mosaic.  See  the  lenders  of  Israel, 
after  the  sojourning  of  the  people  in  the  wilderness,  conducting  them  through  the 
flood  of  Jordan  to  tbe  Canaan  of  rest  and  felicity.  See  the  high  priest  passing 
through  the  vail  into  the  holy  of  holies,  after  having  made  the  great  expiation  with 
the  blood  of  the  sacrifice,  there  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God  in  behalf  of  the 
people.  2.  Again  :  I  bring  to  you  that  venerable  evidence  which  the  Almighty  hath 
80  often  employed  in  the  service  of  truth — prophecy  (see  Dan.  vii.  13,  14 ;  Psa. 
xxiv.  7,  Ixviii.  18).  What  is  this  but  prophecy  on  one  side  of  the  event,  as  Mstory 
on  the  other,  giving  evidence  to  times  past,  present,  and  future,  of  the  ascension 
of  men's  Saviour  into  heaven?  3.  This  brings  me  to  observe  that  we  have  the 
historical  evidence  of  those  who  were  eye-witnesses  of  the  fact.  These  were  not  a 
few  men  ;  they  were  the  whole  company  of  the  apostles  ;  these  were  men  worthy  of 
all  credit,  for  they  were  eminently  honest,  consistent,  scrupulous,  explicit,  and  un- 
varying. (1)  Our  first  emotion  upon  contemplating  the  ascension  of  our  Lord  is 
amazement.  The  lustre  of  His  virtue  in  life,  and  His  sublime  equanimity  in  death, 
transport  us  with  the  perfectibility  of  our  nature.  (2)  But  from  amazement  at  this 
precious  part  of  the  Christian  dispensation  let  us  rouse  ourselves  to  consider  our 
obligations  to  respect  a  nature  which  God  has  so  highly  exalted  and  destined  for  such 
noble  felicity.  Are  we  members  of  a  body  of  which  the  Son  of  God  is  the  head,  and 
shall  we  not  fear  to  pollute  so  illustrious  a  fellowship  ?  Have  we  a  representative 
in  the  inmost  presence  chamber  of  heaven,  and  shall  we  sink  into  a  mean  commerce 
with  vice,  or  debase,  by  folly  and  wickedness,  the  nature  He  has  exalted  ?  (3)  Wo 
may  further  observe  the  wisdom  and  propriety  of  raising  our  affections,  and  directing 
our  pursuits,  to  the  great  realities  of  the  future  existence.  {Bp.  Dehon.)  The 
coronation  of  our  King : — It  was  long  ago  predicted  that  the  Lord  Jesus  should 
reign  in  Zion.  Of  the  greatness  of  His  power,  of  the  glory  of  His  majesty,  of  the 
extension  of  His  kingdom,  of  the  perpetuity  of  His  government,  prophets  spake  and 
poets  sang.  They  saw  the  days  of  the  exalted  Messiah  afar  off,  and  were  glad.  I. 
The  begal  chaiucteb  of  oub  exalted  Lobd.  Much  of  the  happiness  of  a  nation, 
especially  if  the  authority  of  a  monarch  be  absolute  and  his  will  is  the  law,  depends 
upon  his  intellectual  aud  moral  character.    Let  this  sentiment  be  applied  with  all 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  n. 

reverence  and  humility  to  our  exalted  Redeemer,  and  we  shall  instantly  exclaim, 
"  Blessed  is  the  nation  whose  God  is  the  Lord  of  the  people,  whom  He  hath  chosen 
for  His  own  inheritance."  To  sway  the  sceptre  of  universal  dominion,  the  King  of 
Zion  possesses  every  perfection  in  an  eminent  degree.  1.  "In  Him  are  hid  all  the 
treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge."  At  one  comprehensive  glance  He  beholds 
every  creature  and  every  event,  past,  present,  and  to  come,  and  can  either  permit 
or  prevent,  excite  or  restrain,  according  to  the  counsel  of  His  unerring  will.  2.  He 
is  also  the  Lord  of  all  power  and  might,  whose  kingdom  cannot  be  moved,  and 
whose  dominions  are  the  unlimited  expanse  of  universal  nature.  3.  His  goodness 
is  equal  to  His  greatness,  and  forms  a  material  part  of  it.  How  unnumbered  are 
its  manifestations,  how  numerous  and  various  its  recipients.  "The  Lord  is  good 
to  all,  and  His  tender  mercies  are  over  all  His  works."  4.  And  what  shall  we  say 
of  His  grace  and  love?  What  king  has  ever  been  so  ill-requited  by  his  ungrateful 
subjects  ?  And  yet,  instead  of  laying  righteousness  to  the  line,  and  truth  to  the 
plummet,  instead  of  exerting  His  authority,  and  putting  forth  the  thunder  of  His 
power  in  the  execution  of  His  justice,  and  the  fulfilment  of  His  threatenings,  He 
laid  down  His  life  for  us.  5.  Nor  can  we  forget  His  mercy.  What  crimes  it  has  par- 
doned, what  insults  it  has  endured.  6.  And  is  He  not  the  faithful,  compassionate, 
and  unchangeable  friend  of  His  people  ?  How  near  are  they  to  His  heart  1  How 
tenderly  does  He  pity  their  afiiictions,  and  sympathise  with  their  sorrows  I  7.  And 
who  has  not  been  impressed  with  the  Lord's  condescension  ?  Although  He  is  "  the 
high  and  lofty  one  that  inhabiteth  eternity,"  He  is  nigh  unto  all  that  call  upon  Him 
in  truth.  "  He  dwells  with  the  humble."  H.  The  kingdom  oveb  which  He  pre- 
BIDES.  In  one  sense  the  entire  universe  is  His  vast  domain,  comprehending  the 
numerous  worlds  which  shine  in  yonder  firmament.  But  we  speak  now  not  of  His 
essential  government,  but  rather  of  His  mediatorial  authority,  as  our  Redeemer 
and  Saviour,  who,  having  purged  our  sins,  sat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the  throne 
of  God.  This  is  a  spiritual,  not  a  temporal,  jurisdiction,  unless  it  be  so  far  as  the 
latter  is  subservient  to  the  former.  It  is  a  religious  dominion  iu  the  soul  and 
among  the  society  of  good  men,  which  our  Lord  came  from  heaven  to  estabhsh, 
and  which  appears  when  the  enmity  of  the  carnal  mind  is  subdued,  and  when 
"grace  reigns  through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life"  in  the  conversion  of  sinners, 
and  in  the  establishment  of  the  saints  upon  their  holy  faith.  In  this  spiritual  and 
restricted  sense  the  regal  authority  of  our  Lord  includes  the  church  on  earth,  com- 
posed of  all  His  devoted  followeis  of  every  period  of  time,  of  every  part  of  the  world, 
of  every  name  and  denomiiation,  of  every  age  and  condition — and  the  church  in 
heaven,  constituted  of  "  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect."  To  govern  this 
spiritual  empire  "  our  Lord  hath  established  His  throne  in  the  heavens,  and  His 
kingdom  ruleth  over  all."  Upon  that  throne  He  sits,  receiving  the  homage  of 
angels,  archangels,  and  glorified  spirits,  accepting  the  prayers  and  praises  of  Hia 
saints  on  earth;  supplying  all  our  wants,  guarding,  guiding,  and  governing  His 
people,  both  in  their  individual,  domestic,  and  religious  capacity ;  extending  and 
upholding  His  cause  in  the  world  by  the  agency  of  His  Spirit,  His  providence,  and 
His  servants ;  and  overruling  all  the  movements  of  nature,  all  the  revolutions  of 
nations,  all  the  occurrences  of  individuals,  families,  and  churches,  for  His  own 
glory,  for  the  welfare  of  the  soul,  for  the  success  of  His  gospel,  for  the  subjugation 
of  sin  and  Satan,  and  for  the  accomplishment  of  His  purposes  which  are  all  in 
verity  and  faithfulness.  III.  His  coronation.  1.  The  period  selected  for  Jesus  to 
be  "  crowned  with  glory  and  honour  "  was  the  termination  of  His  Messiahship  upon 
earth  and  His  ascension  to  heaven.  2.  But  how  shall  we  describe  the  diadem 
which  He  wears  ?  It  is  not  a  wreath  of  laurels,  it  is  not  a  garland  of  flowers  which 
encircled  the  brow  of  the  heroes  of  antiquity ;  nor  does  it  resemble  the  crowns  worn 
by  the  monarchs  of  modern  times.  These,  though  costly  and  splendid,  are  bat 
corruptible  and  fading,  composed  only  of  burnished  metal  and  polished  stones 
extracted  from  the  recesses  of  the  earth  which  we  tread  beneath  our  feet,  whereas 
the  Redeemer's  crown  is  a  beautiful  circle  of  celestial  light,  a  concentration  of 
luminous  beams  above  the  brightness  of  the  sun,  a  crown  of  glory  which  fadeth  not 
away.  3.  A  part  of  the  ceremony  of  coronation  consists  of  anointing  the  monarch 
with  holy  oil.  In  concert  with  this  ancient  usage,  we  read  prophetically  of  Jesus 
being  "  anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  His  feUows  ";  in  alladon  to  His 
mediatorial  superiority,  and  to  the  unmeasured  unction  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which 
descended  upon  Him,  for  "  God  giveth  not  the  Spirit  by  measure  unto  Him."  4. 
How  exalted  is  His  throne:  the  seat  of  happiness  and  glory  (see  Isa.  vL  1-3;  Rev. 
It.  2-4).     5.  How  untarnished  is  His  sceptre,  emphatically  called  "  a  right  sceptre," 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  125 

rightly  obtained  and  rightly  employed,  the  rod  of  universal  authority,  the  staff  of 
mercy  surmounted  by  the  dove,  and  held  forth  to  encourage  our  approach.  6. 
Much  has  been  said  of  the  attire  of  kings  at  their  coronation,  but  Christ's  are  not 
formed  of  the  frail  and  lowly  produce  of  the  ermine  and  the  silkworm,  nor  adorned 
with  gUttering  stars  of  burnished  metal ;  nor  made  by  human  art,  nor  assailable 
by  the  moth  or  the  rust,  nor  likely  to  survive  the  wearer ;  no,  Christ's  robes  are 
vestments  of  unsullied  purity  and  uncreated  light.  7.  The  last  particular  to  be 
noticed  is  the  attendants — the  spectators  of  His  glory.  They  are  described  as  a 
number  that  no  man  can  enumerate.  In  improving  this  subject — 1.  Let  us  join 
the  hallelujahs  of  the  heavenly  Lost,  and  hail  the  exaltation  and  coronation  of  our 
Lord.  2.  Let  us  recollect  the  peculiar  privileges  of  His  subjects.  They  are  "  fellow 
citizens  of  the  saints  and  of  the  household  of  God."  As  such  they  have  a  share  in 
their  Lord's  affection,  they  have  constant  access  to  His  throne,  to  His  house,  to  His 
table  ;  He  protects  them,  He  communes  with  them,  suppUes  their  wants,  and  will 
make  them  happy.  3.  Let  us  not  forget  the  duty  of  His  people.  It  is  incumbent 
on  us,  if  we  sustain  tbis  honourable  appellation,  to  be  very  observant  of  His  com- 
mands, to  be  very  zealous  for  His  honour,  and  for  the  extension  of  His  kingdom 
upon  the  earth,  and  to  be  very  devoted  to  His  fear.  4.  What  shall  we  say  of  the 
enemies  of  our  Lord  the  King  ?  What  1  has  He  enemies?  Is  it  possible  that  the 
Son  of  God  can  have  a  foe  ?  Can  He  be  opposed  who  laid  down  His  life  for  us  ? 
Yes,  there  are  thousands  of  adversaries  averse  to  the  peaceful  and  holy  reign  of  the 
Redeemer.  Who  are  they  ?  I  see  them,  not  merely  in  the  ranks  of  avowed  infidels 
and  scoffers,  but  in  the  character  of  drunkards,  sabbath-breakers,  swearers,  bars, 
the  lewd,  lovers  of  pleasure  more  than  of  God,  self-righteous  Pharisees,  and  the  like. 
Oh,  throw  aside  the  weapons  of  jour  rebellion,  come  as  penitents  to  His  footstool. 
{W.  B.  Leach.)  Crowned  with  glory  of  saving  life  : — This  crown  of  Jesus  is  no 
glittering  gilt  rim ;  this  glory  is  no  glare  and  splendour  of  a  palace,  and  tbe  honour 
is  no  mere  courtliness  of  courtiers  and  subordinates  and  pomp  of  a  heavenly  state. 
The  great  break  into  cries  of  praise  to  Him  because  He  is  greater ;  the  grand,  be- 
cause He  had  done  more  grandly  than  they  all.  Now  come  with  me  and  let  us 
understand  what  is  Divine  glory  and  honour.  Come  with  me  to  a  great  hall  in 
London.  It  is  the  anniversary  of  Homes  and  Refuges  for  Boys.  Sweeping  circles 
of  seats  rise  on  the  platform  one  above  another,  all  full  of  boys.  Before  the  plat- 
form is  the  hall  crossed  by  multitudes  of  seats,  all  filled,  crowded  with  people.  In 
the  centre  of  the  great  circles  of  the  boys  yonder,  and  right  in  the  front  of  the  plat- 
form, is  ahttle  table,  behind  the  table  is  a  chair,  and  in  it  sits  a  peer  of  the  realm. 
My  story  begins  at  the  moment  when  the  prizes  are  given.  Now  fancy  the  scene. 
The  earl  rises.  The  table  is  piled  up  with  articles,  and  certain  boys  approach  one 
by  one.  First  comes  the  winner  of  the  prize  for  punctuality.  Then  comes  the 
prize  for  writing.  Its  winner  advances  to  the  front  and  receives  it.  Next  came  the 
thrift  prize  for  the  boy  who  had  spent  the  least  of  his  pocket  money,  and  saved  the 
ruost  in  his  box.  His  thrift  might  have  been  the  act  of  self-denial,  but  I  fear  it 
had  in  it  some  element  of  meanness,  for  the  cheers  lost  a  little  of  their  swing. 
Others  came,  and  as  each  carried  off  his  prize  hands  and  voices  fell  to  clapping  and 
shouting,  and  hearts  seemed  to  bound  and  sing.  Then  the  next  boy  came.  Sud- 
denly all  the  joy  went  out  of  the  place  as  light  goes  when  the  gas  is  put  out.  And 
there  was  a  dead  silence.  To  everybody  it  seemed  as  if  something  was  going  to 
happen.  What  was  the  matter  ?  What  we  saw  was  a  little  figure  standing  at  one 
end  of  the  table,  evidently  timid,  and  screwing  up  his  courage,  for  he  was  very  pale, 
and  had  put  out  his  fingers  on  to  the  edge  of  the  table,  as  it  would  seem  to  steady 

himself.     The  earl  said,  "  I  have  now  the  honour "  and  he  paused,  and  drew 

himself  up,  as  if  making  room  for  a  great  swell  of  feeling,  at  the  same  time  lifting 
something  up  from  the  table  almost  reverently  (it  was  a  little  box).  He  opened  it, 
and  took  into  his  hand  a  small  round  medal.  The  earl  continued  in  a  subdued 
tone,  "  This  boy  has  saved  life  1  "  That  boy  ?  A  something  went  right  through 
the  place.  The  audience  could  restrain  itself  no  longer,  and  broke  out  in  tumul- 
tuous cheers  again  and  again,  hands  and  feet  and  voice.  Handkerchiefs  were 
waved,  and  hundreds  of  strong  men  were  in  tears.  Meanwhile  the  earl  was  pin- 
ning a  medal  on  the  child's  jacket,  and  the  child  himself  was  lifting  the  hand  he 
had  put  out  to  the  table,  and  drawing  the  back  of  it  across  his  eyes.  He  could  save 
life,  it  seemed,  but  he  could  not  stand  praise,  and  he  quietly  sidled  away.  But  his 
comrades  behind  the  chair  would  not  allow  t  at.  They  gave  great  cries  of 
"  hurrahs,"  which  quivered  with  feelings  that  had  been  in  no  shouts  before,  stand- 
ing on  the  seats,  and  looking  over  one  another's  heads.    And  the  boys  who  had 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

won  the  writing-desks  and  accordions,  as  he  went  by,  put  them  down  and  clapped 
him  on  the  back.  He  had  undoubtedly  done  better  than  they  all.  Now  those 
lads  felt  something  of  the  grand  sacred  feeling  with  which  all  heaven  casts  down 
its  crowns,  and  shouts  the  supreme  triumphant  glory  of  Jesus;  for  that  boy  had 
in  him  some  of  the  glory  sacred  with  the  sanctity  of  God,  and  which  all  creatures 
were  made  to  do  homage  to,  the  glory  which  is  the  especial  glory  of  the  Saviour 
of  the  world.  {B.  Waugh.)  Crowning  Jesus : — The  ancient  story  runs  that  when 
Eoman  ambassadors  paid  a  visit  of  ceremony  to  Ptolemy,  king  of  Egypt,  he  pre- 
sented each  of  his  visitors  with  a  crown  of  gold.  But  on  the  morrow  the  crowna 
were  found  on  the  heads  of  the  various  statues  of  the  king  which  adorned  the 
royal  city.  The  ambassadors  thus  at  once  refused  personal  reward  and  did  Lonour 
to  the  monarch.  The  dearest  joy  we  have  is  to  put  the  crown  of  our  ministry 
on  the  head  of  Jesus.  The  best  event  that  can  befall  heaven's  promised  crown 
will  be  that  it  be  accepted  of  Him.  (W.  B,  Haynes.)  Taste  death  for  every  man. 
— Christ  tasted  death  for  all : — I.  Let  us  consider  that  the  Lord  tasted  death.  A 
man  may  die  in  a  moment,  and  then  he  does  not  taste  death.  Men  may  die  in  a 
moment  of  excitement,  and,  as  extremes  meet,  almost  in  unconsciousness,  or  with 
calmness  and  intrepidity,  with  lion-like  courage,  as  many  a  warrior ;  but  that  is  not 
tasting  death.  The  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  a  slow  and  painful  death ; 
He  was  "  roasted  with  fire,"  as  was  prefigured  by  the  Paschal  Lamb.  Moreover 
He  came,  as  no  other  finite  creature  can  come,  into  contact  with  death.  He  tasted 
death  ;  all  that  was  in  death  was  concentrated  in  that  cup  which  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  emptied  on  the  Cross.  During  His  lifetime  He  felt  a  burden,  sorrow,  grief; 
He  saw  the  sins  and  sorrows  of  the  people  ;  He  had  compassion,  and  wept.  There 
is  no  substitution  and  expiation  in  the  garden — the  anticipation  of  the  substitution 
was  the  cause  of  His  agony  ;  but  on  the  Cross  He  paid  the  penalty  for  the  sins  of 
men  in  His  own  death.  But  what  was  it  that  He  tasted  in  death?  Death  is 
the  curse  which  sin  brings,  the  penalty  of  the  broken  law,  the  manifestation  of  the 
power  of  the  devil,  the  expression  of  the  wrath  of  God ;  and  in  all  these  aspects 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  came  into  contact  with  death,  and  tasted  it  to  the  very  last. 
II.  And  notice.  He  tasted  death  by  the  grace  of  God  for  evebt  one.  We  speak 
about  the  pardon  of  sins.  We  are  pardoned,  but  all  our  sins  have  been  punished. 
All  our  sins  were  laid  upon  Jesus,  every  one  was  punished.  "  God  condemned  sin 
in  the  flesh."  He  executed  judgment  upon  all  our  sins,  for  every  one  of  us,  for  all 
the  children  of  God.  For  each  of  them  Jesus  tasted  death.  Here  there  is  not 
merely  the  forgiveness  of  sin,  but  there  is  the  actual  putting  away  of  all  our  sins  ; 
and  the  apostle  explains  to  us  that  this  great  and  marvellous  mystery  of  the  death  of 
Jesus  as  our  substitute,  bearing  our  sins,  bearing  our  curse,  enduring  the  penalty  of 
our  sins,  and  overcoming  all  our  enemies  (that  is  the  law,  and  Satan,  and  death),  that 
this  is  in  order  to  manifest  unto  us  the  fulness  of  the  perfection  of  God.  (A.  Sapliir.) 
The  humiliation  and  subsequent  glory  of  Christ : — I.  The  humiliation  of  Jesds 
Cheist. — 1.  Presupposes  that,  in  one  respect.  He  was  higher  than  the  angels.  He 
is  BO,  as  the  Son  of  God  (chap.  i.  5,  6).  2.  He  was  made  a  little  lower  than  the 
angels  as  to  His  condition  :  a  man,  a  servant  (Isa.  xlii.  1) ;  possessed  a  true  body 
and  a  reasonable  soul :  was  the  child  born  (Isa.  ix.  6 ;  John  i.  14 ;  Gal.  iv.  4) ;  and 
but  for  a  httle  while,  living  thirty-three  years  in  the  form  of  a  servant ;  and  whs 
three  da.vs  subject  to  the  power  of  the  grave.  3.  And  this  "  for  the  suffering  of 
death."  The  Godhead  could  not  suffer,  hence  "  made  lower  than  the  angels  "  ;  made 
man,  in  both  parts,  body  and  soul,  that  He  might  suffer  in  both  for  man.  This  He 
has  done,  and  His  sufferings  were  great;  for — (1)  His  sufferings  were  universal, 
affecting  every  part  of  His  frame ;  all  His  members  and  senses.  (2)  They  were 
continual;  eveiy  moment  on  the  rack  till  He  died.  (3)  They  were  without  help, 
without  comfort.  And  as  He  suffered  in  His  body,  so  He  suffered  in  His  soul. 
He  suffered — (a)  The  wrath  of  God,  which  was  awfully  impressed  on  His  soul,  (//) 
It  was  pure  wrath,  not  any  contrary  mixture  to  allay  it :  no  comfort  from  heaven 
or  earth.  "He  spared  Him  not"  (Eom.  viii.  32;  Isa.  Ixiii.  3).  (3)  It  was  the 
whole  of  His  wrath.  It  was  poured  out  upon  Him  to  the  last  drop  (Rev.  xix.  15). 
And  He  suffered  to  "death";  "tasted  death,"  that  is,  actually  died.  His  death 
was — (i.)  Violent,  not  natural,  through  old  age,  but  in  the  prime  of  life.  He  was 
"  cut  oS  "  (Isa.  liii.  8).  He  is  said  to  "  suffer  death,"  and  to  be  "  put  to  death  " 
(1  Pet.  iii.  18).  (ii.)  Painful,  It  was  many  deaths  contrived  in  one.  The  Cross 
was  a  rack  as  well  as  a  gibbet.  He  was  "  poured  out  as  water,  and  His  bones  were 
out  of  joint"  (Psa.  xxii.  14-18).  (iii.)  Shameful.  Inflicted  only  on  the  basest  and 
vilest  of  men  ;  upon  slaves  ;  and  thus  He  was  numbered  with  transgressors  (Isa. 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  127 

liiL  12).  (iv.)  Cursed.  Hence  He  is  said  to  be  a  curse  for  us;  "cursed  is  every 
one,"  &c.  (Gal.  iii.  13,  referring  to  Deut.  xxi.  23).  (v.)  Lingering.  Not  despatched 
at  once,  or  after  a  few  minutes'  suffering ;  but  endured  hours  of  the  most  excru- 
ciating agony  all  the  time  He  hung  upon  the  Cross  (Luke  xxiii.  33).  (vi.)  And  all 
this  suffering  for  "  every  man  " ;  He  being  the  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the 
whole  world  (1  John  ii.  1).  IL  The  rewabd  of  His  merit  as  it  respects  Himself. 
"  Crowned,"  &c.  1.  This  was  done  in  His  resurrection  from  the  dead,  in  which 
He  was  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  Ac.  (Rom.  i.  3,  4).  2.  In  His  ascension  : 
this  was  glorious  and  honourable  (Psa  xlvii.  5,  6  ;  Eph.  iv.  8).  3.  In  His  being  set 
down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high  (Heb.  i.  3) ;  has  obtained  a  name 
above  every  name  (Phil.  ii.  9) ;  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth  is  committed  to 
Him  (Matt,  xxviii.  18 ;  Isa.  ix.  6 ;  John  v.  22,  23).  III.  The  grand  source  and 
BPRiNQ  OF  THE  WHOLE  ;  the  "  grHcc  of  God."  Our  salvation  is  wholly  owing  to  the 
free  mercy  and  grace  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus ;  not  to  any  deserving  of  ours.  It  is 
altogether  the  effect  of  Divine  love  (John  iii.  16 ;  1  John  iv.  9,  10).  It  is  in  the 
way  of  mere  grace  and  favour — 1.  That  Jesus  humbled  Himself  to  death  for  us 
(2  Cor.  viii.  9).  2.  That  we  are  called  to  repentance,  faith,  holiness,  and  usefulness 
in  the  world,  and  in  the  Church  (Gal.  i.  15).  3.  That  we  are  enabled  to  believe,  in 
order  to  our  ^alvatiou  (Acts  xviii.  27).  4.  That  we  are  pardoned  and  justified 
according  to  the  "  riches  of  His  grace"  (Horn.  iii.  24  ;  Eph.  i.  7).  5.  That  we  are 
finally  saved,  and  put  into  possession  of  the  heavenly  inheritance  (Eph.  ii.  5 ; 
Zech.  iv.  7).  To  conclude :  1.  Let  us  cherish  humbling  and  contrite  views  of  our- 
selves, on  account  of  our  sins,  which  led  Jesus  to  endure  such  dreadful  sufferings 
on  our  account  (Zech.  xii.  10).  2.  While  we  entertain  the  most  adoring  thoughts 
of  His  love  to  us,  let  us  yield  to  Him  the  most  entire  obedience  and  love  (1  John  iv. 
19).  (/.  Hamiam.)  Our  franchise: — God,  in  Christ,  forgives  sin,  and  restores 
the  prodigal.  In  our  country  at  the  present  time,  it  is  the  lot  of  a  favoured 
few  to  possess  the  franchise,  or  in  other  words,  the  freedom  of  being  recog- 
nised citizens  of  our  empire:  but  Jesus  Christ  tasted  death  to  give  the  fran- 
chise of  heaven's  freedom  to  every  man.  He  tasted  death  to  make  every  man  a 
citizen  of  the  Heavenly  Jerusalem.  1.  Jesus  Christ  tasted  death  to  give  every 
man  the  franchise  of  pabdon.  It  is  the  pardon  of  all  sin — full  pardon.  A  young 
man  in  an  office  stole  his  master's  money,  and  injured  his  business  very  consider- 
ably ;  and  the  youth,  being  convicted,  was  brought  before  his  employer,  when  he 
said,  *'  Oh,  sir,  do  forgive  me  !  "  The  master  replied,  "  Well,  I  will  forgive  you  as 
much  as  I  can."  But  our  good  Father  has  no  nt  ed  to  say  He  forgives  us  as  much 
as  He  can.  He  has  power  of  love  to  forgive  us  fully,  and  blots  out  our  sin  from 
His  memory  as  if  it  had  never  happened.  II.  Jesus  Christ  by  the  grace  of  God 
tasted  death  to  extend  to  every  man  the  franchise  of  nobility.  We  say  of 
the  ancient  aristocracy  of  our  land  that  they  possess  the  blue  blood  of  nobility. 
The  blood  of  Christ,  when  spoken  of  in  the  New  Testament,  often  means  the  life- 
power  of  our  Saviour.  He  tasted  death  that  every  man  might  receive  His  life-force. 
What  a  splendid  position,  what  a  glorious  inheritance!  And  "for  every  man  "I 
You,  perhaps,  may  say,  "  It  is  impossible  for  every  man  to  become  noble  1 "  An 
ignorant  person  may  tell  a  gardener  that  it  is  impossible  to  make  a  red  rose  grow 
on  that  white  rose  bush ;  but  in  two  years  afterwards,  when  the  gardener  has  grafted 
a  slip  into  it,  the  red  rose  appears.  People  may  say  that  it  is  impossibe  to  make  a  red 
rose  grow  upon  a  white  rose  bush.  The  gardener  replies,  "  Impossible  I  It  is  done  ; 
it  is  there  I  "  If  you  wish  to  prove  whether  Christ's  words  be  true  or  not,  try  them 
by  the  test  of  yourself.  Believe,  and  do,  what  Christ  tells  you  ;  and  if  yon  do  not 
become  noble,  if  you  do  not  possess  the  spirit  of  godliness,  then  believe,  but  not  till 
then,  that  true  nobility  is  impossible.  III.  Jesus  also  tasted  death  to  give  every 
man  the  franchise  of  priesthood.  Jesus  has  given  every  man  the  right  of  a  free 
access  unto  God.  Jesus  Christ  has  tasted  death  in  order  that  the  sun  of  our  Father's 
love  might  shine  direct  upon  the  heart  of  every  man.  IV.  Jesus  Christ  has  tasted 
death  io  give  us  the  franchise  of  royalty.  We  are  joint-heirs  with  Christ  of  the 
Kingdom  of  God.  It  is  a  common  saying  when  we  see  anybody  very  cheerful,  "He 
is  as  happy  as  a  king."  Jesus  has  tasted  death  that  every  man  might  be  happy  as 
only  kings  unto  God  can  be.  He  has  given  us  all  that  is  necessary  for  our  enjoy- 
ment. Christ  has  given  us  power  to  act  kingly.  {W.  Birch.)  Tasting  death  for 
every  man : — Have  you  ever  remarked  how  the  greatest  efforts  of  the  world's  genius 
seem  to  have  been  called  out  by  the  recognition  of  this  tasting  death  for  every  man  ? 
Shall  I  speak  of  poetry?  There  are  times — I  do  not  know  whether  it  is  an 
improper  thing  to  say— but  there  are  times,  it  seems  to  me,  that  the  exquisite 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

music  of  Milton  touches  the  deeper  springs  of  my  spiritual  life.  I  turn  to 
"  Paradise  Begained  "  again  and  again.  It  puts  me  into  a  meditative  mood  as  I 
see  the  features  of  the  life  of  the  Redeemer  steadily  unfolding ;  they  seem,  too,  by 
their  exquisite  simplicity  of  utterance,  to  put  me  to  a  quiet  and  calm  mood.  True, 
the  poet  does  not  hold  the  views  that  I  hold  about  Jesus.  True,  he  seems  to  mar 
much  that  he  has  to  say  by  his  Unitarian  conception.  Nevertheless,  as  I  come 
under  the  spell  of  his  words  it  seems  to  me  that  the  very  noblest  and  best  that  was 
ever  called  forth  even  from  Milton  was  called  forth  as  he  stands  before  this  Cross  of 
the  Redeemer.  I  would  turn  to  the  one  that  might  be  called  the  German  Milton,  I 
mean  Klopstock  As  I  have  read  his  "  Messias  "  I  have  seen  how  the  best  he  could 
write  has  been  invoked  from  him  as  he  comes  face  to  face  with  the  Cross  where 
Jesus  is  tasting  death  for  every  man.  He  represents  for  us  those  three  crosses  on 
the  hillside.  We  see  the  soldier  as  he  rises  forth  with  his  spear  to  pierce  the  side  ; 
we  hear  the  clank  of  the  armour  as  the  soldiers  go  away  after  their  deed  is  done ; 
our  eyes  fall  upon  the  circle  of  the  weeping  women,  and  then  for  a  season  one  is  left 
alone  with  the  three  crosses  ;  and  then  as  I  read  these  words  of  Klopstock's  again, 
there  is  in  them  the  highest  poetry;  and  I  am  perfectly  sure  of  this,  that  the 
highest  and  best  thing  that  Klopstock  did,  he  did  as  his  eye  fell  upon  this  Cross  of 
the  Redeemer.  And  of  painting  is  not  the  same  thing  true  ?  Will  not  great  picture 
after  great  picture  rise  before  your  minds  ?  Perhaps  some  of  you  may  have  heard 
that  touching  story  in  the  plains  of  Lombardy.  You  step  a  little  out  of  the  ordinary 
track  to  a  common  monastery  by  the  roadside,  and  there  you  find  it  has  its  little 
portion  of  history.  You  turn  within,  and  you  are  shown  a  somewhat  faded  picture 
of  the  crucifixion,  and  its  story  is  more  interesting  than  the  picture.  A  monk, 
towards  the  close  of  his  hfe,  had  come  to  feel  that  he  had  a  gift  of  painting,  and  an 
order  comes  to  him  from  his  Superior,  that  after  having  embellished  cell  after  cell 
of  his  brethren,  he  should  paint  a  crucifixion  for  the  altar.  "  No,"  he  says,  "  it  is 
beyond  my  faculty."  However,  the  order  is  supreme,  and  he  obeys.  He  feels  it 
impossible  to  get  the  sort  of  face  that  he  requires,  and  he  finishes  the  altar- 
picture — finishes  it  in  unusual  form,  leaving  the  face  out.  In  the  interval  the  man 
becomes  seized  with  epilepsy  ;  so  terrible  is  the  thought  upon  him  that  one  night 
he  was  found  in  the  chapel  with  the  picture  unfinished,  and  in  the  morning  he  lay 
dead,  and  the  face  looks  out  there  from  the  canvas.  Do  you  not  see  how,  by  the 
very  presence  of  this  great  thought  of  the  death  of  Jesus,  man  is  laid  under  a 
tremendous  spell?  Should  I  speak  of  music?  You  know  Bach's  Passion  music, 
decidedly  the  grandest  thing  that  Bach  himself  ever  wrote.  I  shall  never  forget 
hearing  Handel's  "  Messiah  "  for  the  first  time.  And  to-day  is  not  the  same  fact 
true  that  the  one  thing  that  exercises  a  spell  over  humanity  in  connection  with  our 
preaching  is  this  tasting  death  for  every  man  ?  For  a  little  season  it  may  be  that 
the  great  truth  of  the  Atonement  has  been  receding  from  public  view.  But  I  am 
perfectly  sure  that  in  the  heart  of  men  there  is  nothing  that  it  finds  so  effective 
about  this  gospel  as  this  truth  of  tasting  death  for  every  man.  It  must  come  to 
the  front,  we  shall  see  a  further  coronation  of  Jesus  as  the  world  recognises  that 
He  tasted  death  for  every  man.  The  ground  of  His  kingship  is  His  tasting  of  death. 
(A.  Cave,  D.D.)  Christ  tasting  death  : — Thus  the  tasting  of  death  was  no  dishonour, 
but  an  honour  to  Christ.  By  it  He  brought  many  to  eternal  hfe  :  for  all  that  He  is 
above  the  angels  and  all  other  creatures  whatsoever.  Christ  hath  tasted  of  death 
before  us,  therefore  let  not  us  that  be  Christians  be  too  much  afraid  of  death. 
There  is  a  potion  brought  to  a  sick  patient  which  the  eye  loathes  and  the  mouth 
distastes.  The  poor  sick  man  is  loath  to  drink  of  it,  the  physician  takes  it  into 
his  hand,  tastes  of  it  before  his  eyes  ;  by  that  he  is  encouraged  to  receive  it ;  so  ia 
it  with  us,  death  is  a  sour  cup  which  nature  abhorreth ;  we  are  all  unwilling 
naturally  to  drink  of  it ;  but  for  so  much  as  Christ  our  loving  and  heavenly 
Physician  hath  tasted  of  it  beforehand,  let  us  not  be  afraid  of  it.  The  godliest  men 
in  the  world  cannot  but  in  some  measure  fear  death  ;  Christ  feared  it :  yet  let  this 
be  as  sugar  to  sweeten  this  bitter  cup  to  us ;  Christ  tasted  of  it  and  overcame  it, 
60  shall  we  do  by  His  virtue  and  power.  Oh,  the  wonderful  and  unspeakable  love 
of  Christ  1  as  if  a  company  of  traitors  were  going  to  the  scaffold  to  be  executed  ;  the 
king's  son  should  step  forth  to  die  for  them ;  what  an  admirable  thing  were  that  I 
We,  by  nature,  are  enemies  to  God,  traitors  to  His  majesty  :  the  Son  of  the  King 
of  kings  comes  from  heaven  and  dies  for  us.  Is  not  this  to  be  admired  of  us  all  ? 
scarce  will  any  die  for  a  righteous  man;  we  were  unholy,  unrighteous,  defiled  with 
the  scab  of  sin  in  soul  and  body,  yet  the  Lord  Jesus  died  for  us.  Life  is  sweet : 
who  wUl  die  for  his  friend;  but  will  any  die  for  his  enemy?     (TF.  Jones,  D.D.) 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  129 

Christ  died  for  every  man : — 1.  It  is  said,  He  tasted  of  death  ;  we  need  not  play  the 
critic  in  the  explication  of  the  word  "  taste  "  ;  for  the  plain  meaning  is,  that  He 
Buffered  death  ;  and  by  this  is  signified  all  His  sufferings,  which  were  many  and 
bitter;  the  principal  and  consummation  whereof  was  death,  wherein  they  all  ended, 
and  without  which  there  had  been  no  expiation,      2.  He  suffered  death  for  every 
man ;  not  that  every  man  should  absolutely  enjoy  the  ultimate  benefit  thereof,  for 
every  one  doth  not :  yet  every  man,  as  a  sinner,  hath  some  benefit  by  it,  because 
tLe  immediate  effect  of  this  death  v^as,  that  every  man's  sin  in  respect  of  this 
death   is   remissable,  and  every  man   savable,  because   Christ   by  it  made  God 
propitious  and  placable,  in  that  He  had  punished  man's  sin  in  Him,  and  laid  on 
Him  the  iniquities  of  us  all.     And  the  reason   why  every  man  is  not  actually 
justified  and  saved,  is  not  for  want  of  sufficient  propitiation,  but  upon  another 
account.     3.  That  which  moved  God  to  transfer  the  punishment  due  to  oar  sina 
upon  Christ,  His  only  begotten  Son,  was  His  grace  and  free  love.   The  end,  therefore, 
why  Christ  was  made  lower  than  the  angels  was,  that  He  being  man  and  mortal, 
yet  holy  and  innocent  without  sin,  might  suffer  death,  that  our  sins  might  be 
expiated,  Divine  justice  satisfied,  and  a  way  made  for  mercy  to  save  us.  (G.  Lawson.) 
The  Saviour  tasting  death  for  sinners  : — Tasting  death  1      A  bitter  draught  indeed  I 
When  Socrates^,  the  wise  and  good,  dwelling  amidst  the  immoralities  of  Athens,  waa 
Ofuelly  condemned  to  death,  he  conversed   cheerfully  with  his  weeping  friends, 
during  the  gray  and  misty  hours  of  morn,  concerning  the  glorious  hopes  which 
even  he,  a  poor  benighted  pagan,  had  of  the  soul's  long  life,  and  of  coming  bliss  ; 
and  then,  with  nntrembling  hand,  he  took  the  cup  of  poisonous  hemlock,  and  drank, 
and  died.    The  figurative  language  of  the  text  is  borrowed  from  this  common  mode 
of  execution  in  ancient  times.     But  we  read  of  another  who  "  tasted  death,"  in 
comparison  with  whose  simple  grandeur,  Socrates,  and  all  the  philosophers  and 
sages  who  have  ever  lived,  must  hide  their  diminished  heads — the  incarnate  Son  of 
God,  who,  out  of  pity  and  compassion  for  our  condemned  and  suffering  race,  of  His 
own  free-will  and  goodness,  "  tasted  death  for  every  man."     How  can  any  sinner 
remain  unmoved  at  the  contemplation  of  such  a  spectacle  ?     *'  Who  tasted  death 
for  every  man  I  "     Will  all,  then,  be  saved  ?    A  benevolent  individual  builds  a  large 
and  comfortable  abode  for  the  poor,  and  the  sick,  and  the  helpless,  and  freely  invites 
everybody  who  needs  to  go  in  at  the  open  gate.     The  offer  of  assistance  is  quite 
as  extensive  as  the  wants  of  the  suffeiing.    But,  suppose  that  some  should  be  too 
proud  to  accept  of  this  free  mercy,  and  others  should  express  a  doubt  whether  the 
physician  in  the  hospital  could  do  any  more  than  might  be  accomplished  by  their 
own  silly  quackeries  at  home,  will  the  benefits  of  the  good  man's  liberality  be 
enjoyed  by  the  proud  and  the  unbelieving  ?     No  more  will  those  be  saved  who  do 
not  go  to  Christ,  even  though  He  has  died  for  all.     We  must  love  Him  for  Hia 
goodness,  and  gladly  obey  His   commandments,  if   we  hope  for  a  share  in  the 
blessings  purchased  by  His  precious  death.     (</.  N.  Norton,  D.D.)        Christ's  title 
to  kingship  : — The  supreme  thought  in  these  chapters  is  the  superiority  of  Jesna 
Christ.     Jesus  the  Mediator  is  greater  than  any  angel  of  the  old  covenant  who 
had  acted  as  mediator.     The  angels  serve,  and  serve  Jesus.     They  worship,  and 
worship  Jesus.    Jesus  is  the  King  of  the  new  age  ;  the  angels  are  only  minister- 
ing   servants    in    the   age.      1.    What   is   meant   by   thb    wokds   "  He   tasted 
DEATH  fob  eveby  MAN "  ?    The  more   we  think  of  the  Atonement,  the  more  we 
see  its  greatness.    We  are  only  spelling  out  the  A  B  C  of  its  meaning.    But  the 
thinking  man  finds  out,  in  every  region  besides  that  of  religion,  his  incapacity 
of  thought.     Yet  incapacity  is  no  plea  or  reason  for  giving  np  thinking.     Though 
the  ocean  be  infinite  in  depth,  yet  I  will  dredge.    One  thought  of  Christ  stands  out 
prominently  in  this  generation:  that  He  is  to  us  a  new  Ufe.    There  may  be  a 
danger  of  accentuating  this  thought  to  the  exclusion  of  the  "  tasting  of  death."     1. 
Death  is  the  penalty  of  human  sin.    2,  The  penalty  of  death  is  pronounced  by 
the  pre-existent  Christ.     The  whole  Trinity  assure  us  that  death  is  the  penalty 
of  sin.      3.  Death  is   more  than  decease — more  than   shuffling  off   this  mortal 
coil.     The  Biblical  idea  of  death   is  an  evolution  of  penalty.    It  begins  when 
the  soul  turns  away  from  God  ;  it  intensifies  as  the  tragic  Ufe  unfolds,  till  we  come 
to  decease ;  then  it  follows  on  where  we  cannot  interpret — face  to  face  with  the 
second  death.   4.  The  real  cause  of  the  penalty — the  centre  of  it — is  the  withdrawal 
from  man  of  the  Spirit  of  God.    Man  chooses  to  sin,  and  He  whose  ermine  must 
not  be  sullied  removes  far  from  him.     This  eternal  withdrawal  of  God  is  the  second 
death.     In  the  light  of  this  truth  think  of  Jesus'  death.     He  tasted  to  the  full  the 
bitterness  of  the  penalty — withdrawal  of  His  Father's  face.    For  a  time  there  is  a 

9 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [uhap,  n. 

chasm  between  God  the  Father  and  God  the  Son :  "  "Why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me  ?  " 
n.  This  tasting  of  death  has  become  Chbist's  title  to  kingship.  "  Crowned  with 
glory  and  honour."  The  coronation  of  Jesus  is  a  royal  progress — not  a  clime  nor  • 
century  but  brings  its  tribute  to  Him  whose  claim  is  that  He  tasted  death  for 
every  man.  Literature,  music,  painting,  all  crown  Him.  It  is  a  march  of  victory. 
If  we  would  see  His  coming  in  power  before  He  comes  in  glory,  this  truth  must 
be  brought  to  the  front — that  He  tasted  death — and  thus  we  shall  see  Him  crowned 
with  glory  and  honour.  In  these  days  we  see  the  coronation  of  Jesus  going  on  apace. 
I  rejoice  in  the  spirit  of  the  times.  What  if  we  lose  our  hold  on  a  creed  here  and 
there,  we  need  neither  star  nor  moon  when  the  Sun  is  up.  Better  anything  than 
stagnation  ;  and  on  all  sides  this  question  raises  itself :  "  What  think  ye  of  Christ  ?  " 
Let  us  rejoice  that  God  is  calhng  out  from  this  age  a  new  reverence  for  Jesus,  aiid 
by  and  by  we  shall  hear  from  it  the  verdict,  "I  find  no  fault  in  this  man,"  until  it 
advances  to  "My  Lord  and  my  God."  (Principal  Cave.)  Extent  of  the  Atone- 
ment : — It  is  not  like  a  banquet,  accommodated  to  the  tastes  and  wants  of  so  many 
and  no  more.  Like  a  masterpiece  of  music,  its  virtues  are  independent  of  numbers. 
(D.  Thomas,  D.D.)  Human  thought  contracted: — We  are  limited  by  our  creeds; 
like  a  beetle  crawling  on  a  cabbage  leaf  and  thinking  it  is  the  whole  world.  (Proctor's 
Gemn  of  Thought.)  Extent  of  the  Atonement: — The  apostles  understood  their 

commissions  to  he  general  and  indiscriminate  for  "  every  creature  "  :  so  they  received 
it  from  Him  who  laid  the  foundation  of  such  an  extensive  ministration  by  tasting 
death  for  every  man.  Accordingly,  they  went  forth  on  their  commission,  to  preach 
the  gospel  to  "  all  the  world."  They  did  not  square  their  message  by  any  human 
system  of  theology,  nor  measure  their  language  to  the  lines  of  Procrustean  creeds. 
They  employed  a  dialect  that  traverses  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  world.  They  did 
not  tremble  for  such  an  unreserved  exhibition  of  the  ark  and  the  mercy-seat.  They 
could  not  bring  themselves  to  stint  the  remedy  which  was  prepared  and  intended  to 
restore  a  dying  world ;  nor  would  they  cramp  the  bow  which  God  had  lighted 
up  in  the  storm  that  threatened  aU  mankind.  (Dr.  T.  W.  Jenkyn.)  God's 
abundant  grace : — So  1  Tim.  i.  14:  The  grace  of  God  not  simply  abundant,  but 
"  exceedingly  abundant."  If  sin  flowed  like  a  bottomless  pit,  an  abyss  never  satisfied, 
then  grace — a  stronger  and  a  fuller  current,  exceeding  it  in  measure — prevailing  like 
the  waters  of  the  Flo.'d  until  the  very  tops  of  the  highest  mountains  were  covered ; 
it  fills  a  greater  sea  than  the  sea  of  iniquity  ;  more  than  enough  to  pardon  the  sins 
of  the  world  or  of  other  worlds.  This  is  the  salvation  which  God's  free  grace  hath 
brought  unto  all  men.  (Proctor's  Gems  of  Thought.)  The  sufferings  of  Christ  should 
inspire  Christians  with  fortitude : — He  "  endured  the  Cross,"  it  is  written,  "  despising 
the  shame " ;  and  can  we  do  less  ?  Nay,  can  we  complain  in  the  midst  of  our 
troubles  ?  "When  Guatimozin,  the  Mexican  emperor,  was  tortured  by  the  Spaniards, 
he  bore  the  torment  with  more  than  human  fortitude.  One  of  his  fellow-sufferers 
of  weaker  constitution  turned  his  eyes  upon  the  prince  and  uttered  aery  of  angiiish. 
"  Thinkest  thou,"  said  Guatimozin,  "  that  I  am  laid  upon  a  bed  of  roses  ?  " 
"  SUenced  by  this  reproof,"  says  the  historian,  "  the  sufferer  stifled  his  complaints, 
and  expired  in  an  act  of  obedience  to  his  sovereign."  The  universality  of  the 
Atonement: — "He  tasted  death  for  every  man."  "  He  gave  Himself  a  ransom  for 
all."  "  He  is  a  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world."  That  all  are  not 
saved  is  no  objection.  It  is  suggested  by  a  popular  expositor  that  in  material  nature 
much  goodness  seems  wasted.  Kain  and  dew  descend  upon  flinty  rocks  and  sterile 
sands  ;  floods  of  genial  light  come  tiding  down  eveiy  morning  from  the  sun  on  scenes 
where  no  human  foot  has  trod  ;  flowers  bloom  in  beauty  and  emit  their  fragrance,  trees 
rise  in  majesty  and  throw  away  their  clustering  fruit,  on  spots  where  as  yet  there 
has  never  been  a  man.  Wealth  sufficient  to  enrich  whole  nations  is  buried  beneath 
the  mountains  and  the  seas,  while  millions  are  in  want.  Medicine  for  half  the  ills 
of  life  is  shut  up  in  minerals  and  plants,  while  generations  die  without  knowing  of 
the  remedy  which  nature  has  provided.  It  is  no  objection,  therefore,  to  the 
universality  of  the  Atonement,  that  all  are  not  benefited  by  it.  Its  benefits  one  day 
will  be  universally  enjoyed.  There  are  men  coming  after  us  who  shall  hve  in  those 
Bolitary  wastes,  enjoy  the  beauty  and  the  hght  which  now  seem  wasted,  appropriate 
the  fruits,  the  wealth,  and  the  medicine,  which  for  ages  have  been  of  no  avail.  It 
•wiU  be  even  so  with  the  death  of  Christ.  There  are  men  coming  after  us  that  shall 
participate  of  the  blessings  of  that  Atonement,  which  generations  have  either 
ignorantly  rejected  or  wickedly  despised.     (D.  TJiomas,  D.D.) 

Yet.  10.  For  it  became  Trim — The  scheme  of  redemption  hy  a  sufferin-g  Saviour, 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  181 

worthy  of  God  : — I.  It  is  proposed  to  illustrate  the  character  of  Jesus  Christ 
AS  THE  PjirTtra  nr  nfttiTrtTioN  This  word  in  the  sacred  language  signifies  Prince, 
Captain,  or  Chief  Leader,  and  is  highly  expressive  of  that  distinguishing  character 
which  our  Eedeemer  sustains,  and  of  His  gracious  and  powerful  agency  in  the 
scheme  of  salvation.  1.  He  was  chosen  and  appointed  to  be  the  Captain  of 
Biilvation,  and  to  be  the  head  and  chief  conductor  of  this  glorious  scheme.  2.  As  the 
Captain  of  salvation.  He  purchased  salvation  for  His  people,  and  overcame  their 
spiritual  enemies.  3.  Christ  is  the  Captain  of  salvation,  as  He  heads  His  people 
iu  the  spiritual  warfare,  and  conducts  them  to  victory  and  triumph.  He  possesses 
infinite  siiill  to  devise  the  most  advantageous  plans,  to  discern  all  the  strategems  of 
His  enemies,  and  infinite  power  to  defeat  them,  and  make  them  recoil  with  redoubled 
vengeance  upon  their  heads.  He  knows  the  weakness  and  timidity  of  those  who 
fight  under  his  banner  and  conduct,  and  will  afford  them  strength  and  courage. 
He  knows  their  doubts,  and  can  dispel  them.  He  Jknows  their  dangers,  and  can 
deliver  from  them,  and  can  enable  them  to  resist  the  attacks  of  an  host  of  adversaries. 
He  furnishes  them  with  the  various  pieces  of  the  spiritual  armour — the  shield  of 
faith,  the  helmet  of  hope,  the  breast-plate  of  righteousness,  prayer,  watchfulness, 
and  the  sword  of  the  Sjiivit,  which  is  the  Word  of  God.  When  thus  clad  in  the 
whole  armour  of  God,  He  enables  them  to  manage  it  with  spiritual  dexterity,  so  as 
most  effectually  to  wound  their  enemies,  and  defend  themselves  from  their  attacks. 
II.  TiiAT  THE  Captain  of  salvation  was  made  perfect  TnRoooH  sufferings.  In 
treating  this  part  of  the  subject  it  will  be  proper  first  to  speak  a  little  concerniug  the 
BUtTeringa  of  Christ,  and  then  show  how  He  was  made  perfect  through  His  sufferings. 
1.  Concerning  His  sufferings,  the  following  observations  may  be  useful.  (1)  He 
suffered,  as  the  surety  of  His  spiritual  seed,  the  proper  punishment  of  their  sins. 
{2)  Though  Jesus  Christ  endured  the  proper  punishment  of  His  people's  sins,  the 
mode  of  this  punishment,  and  the  dm-ation  of  it,  belonged  to  God  the  righteous 
Judge.  (3)  The  Redeemer  suffered  an  awful  suspension  of  the  light  of  the  Father's 
countenance,  and  of  the  formtr  sweet  and  endearing  sense  of  His  love.  (4)  Besides 
being  forsaken  by  God,  and  the  extreme  sufferings  of  His  outward  man.  He  was,  in 
another  respect,  brought  into  deep  waters,  where  there  was  no  standing.  He 
endured  much  positive  punishment,  arising  from  the  awful  views  wliich  He  had 
of  the  sins  of  His  people,  and  of  the  wrath  which  they  deserved,  and  felt  all  those 
inward  and  painful  sensations  which  such  views  communicated.  In  these  things, 
more  especially,  the  sufferings  of  His  soul  consisted,  and  they  far  exceeded  His 
bodily  agonies  on  the  Cross,  tliough  these  also,  from  the  nature  of  His  death,  must 
have  been  very  gre  >t.  2.  We  shall  now  show  how  the  Captain  of  salvation  was  made 
perfect  through  sufferings.  (1)  Jesus  Christ  was  made  peifect  through  sufferings, 
as  by  them  He  became  a  perfect  Saviour,  having  finished  the  work  which  the  Father 
gave  Him  to  do.  It  was  by  fulfilling  all  righteousness,  and  perfectly  performing  the 
stipulated  condition  of  the  new  covenant,  that  He  purchased  all  the  blessings  of  it, 
acquired  a  right  to  hold  the  possession  of  them,  and  to  convey  them  to  His  spiritual 
B-'ed.  (2)  The  Captain  of  salvation  was  made  perfect  through  sufferings,  as  under 
them  His  human  graces  and  virtues  grew  up  to  perfection,  and  shone  forth  with  the 
most  amiable  lustre  and  glory.  (3)  The  Captain  of  salvation  was  made  perfect 
through  sufferings,  as  these  were  the  perfect  antitype  of  all  that  typified  them,  and 
as  all  the  predictions  concerning  them  were  perfectly  fulfilled.  Lessons  :  1.  Here  is 
a  glorious  person  presented  to  our  view,  a  Saviour  made  perfect  through  sufferings ; 
to  whom  both  saints  and  sinners  may  commit  their  salvation,  with  the  fullest 
assurance  that  they  shall  not  be  disappointed.  2.  Believers  may  be  inspired  with 
courage  to  persevere  in  the  spiritual  warfare,  because  they  fight  under  the  conduct 
of  the  Captain  of  salvation.  He  possesses  every  possible  accompUshment  as  a  Leader 
and  Commander  of  His  people.  3.  Let  us  study  to  become  more  perfect  in  holiness, 
under  all  those  sufferings  and  tribulations  appointed  for  us  in  the  adorable  providence 
of  God.  The  Captain  of  salvation  was  made  perfect  through  His  sufferings.  In  this  He 
has  furnished  us  with  a  noble  and  excellent  pattern  for  our  imitation.  (P.  Hutchison, 
M.A.)  Bringing  many  sons  unto  glory  : — I.  A  few  observations  concernino  the  many 

SONS  THAT     ABB     TO    BB    BROUGHT    TO    GLORY,     THROUGH     THE     SUFFERINGS   AND    DEATH 

OF  Jesus  Christ.  1.  They  are  sons  who  obtain  this  great  privilege.  The  relation 
here  mentioned  is  not  that  natural  relation  in  which  men  stand  to  God  as  their 
Creator,  for  that  is  common  to  the  human  race,  as  they  are  all  His  offspring. 
Neither  is  it  a  mere  external  relation  to  God,  as  the  members  of  the  visible  Church, 
for  this  exterior  and  visible  adoption  belongs  to  all  baptized  and  professing  Chris- 
tians, and  equally  belonged  to  the  Jewish  Church,  as  a  visible  body,  or  nation  oi 


139  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap,  m 

men  professing  the  true  religion.     But  the  character  of  sons  specified  in  the  text  ia 
expressive  of  a  spiritual  and  saving  relation  which  ia  peculiar  to  true  believers. 
This  great  privilege,  like  the  other  blessings  of  the  glorious  gospel,  lays  a  founda- 
tion for  humility  and  gratitude  in  all  on  whom  it  is  bestowed.     They  can  never  be 
too  grateful  to  God  for  such  an  honour  and  blessing,  or  sufficiently  humble  under  a 
deep  conviction  that  they  do  not  deserve  it.    2.  In  connection  with  the  privilfge 
they  possess  the  Spirit  of  adoption.    By  His  saving  operations  upon  them  they  are 
endowed  with  all  the  graces  and  tempers  which  become  the  children  of  God,  and 
correspond  to  their  privilege  of  adoption.    They  are  habitually  prepared  for  all 
gracious  exercises  and  the  acceptable  performance  of  all  holy  duties.    3.  The  sons 
of  God  to  be  brought  to  glory  form  a  vast  number.     This  is  a  great  and  consolatory 
truth ;  and  it  should  be  the  concern  of  all  men  to  have  this  glorious  truth  realised  in 
their  own  persons.  4.  All  the  adopted  and  regenerated  sons  of  God  shall  be  brought 
to  glory.     The  various  griefs  and  afflictions  of  believers  in  the  present  state  ot 
discipline  and  mortality  shall  terminate   in   the  felicity  of  the  heavenly   state. 
There  the  redeemed  shall  not  only  be  entirely  freed  from  all  those  sins  and  tempta- 
tions, griefs  and  afflictions,  to  wluch  they  are  subjected  in  this  life,  but  they  shall- 
attain  perfection  in  knowledge,  holiness,  glory,  and  immortality,  together  with  the 
full  and  eternal  enjoyment  of  God.     II.  The  bringing  of  many  sons  to  glory,, 
through  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  is  woetht  of  God,  and  becoming  His  charactek. 
1.  The  redemption  of  sinners  of  mankind,  through  Jesus  Christ,  is  worthy  of 
Jehovah,  as  it  illustrates,  in  the  highest  degree,  the  glory  of  His  moral  perfections. 
How  brightly  shines  the  Divine  wisdom  in  the  plan  of  redemption  I     In  devising 
this  great  plan,  in  connecting  and  harmonising  all  its  parts,  Divine  wisdom  excels 
in  glory.    Here  the  holiness  and  justice  of  God  shine  forth  in  the  most  resplendent 
glory.    His  hatred  of  sin,  and  the  punishment  of  it  in  the  Cross  of  Christ,  are  a  far 
more  glorious  display  of  the  justice  and  holiness  of  His  nature  than  could  have 
been  given  if  mankind  had  never  sinned,  or,  having  sinned,  had  never  been  re- 
deemed.   Here  the  love  of  God  is  displayed  in  a  manner  the  most  amiable  and 
engaging,  in  the  gift  of  His  only-begotten  Son,  and  in  subjecting  a  person  so  dear 
to  Him  to  unparalleled  grief,  ignominy,  and  affliction.  Here  is  displayed  the  Divine 
goodness  in  supplying  the  natural  and  spiritual  wants  of   good  men.      Here  is 
exhibited  the  Divine  mercy  in  the  full,  free,  and  everlasting  remission  of  sins.     2. 
The  scheme  of  redempt  on,  through  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  is  worthy  of  God,  and 
becoming  His  character  as  the  moral  governor  of  the  world.   The  Eedeemer,  in  Hia 
whole  mediation,  acted  in  a  subserviency  to  the  holy  law  of  God ;  He  magnified 
and  made  it  honourable  by  rendering  to  it  perfect  obedience,  as  a  covenant  of 
works,  and  by  enduring  its  awful  penalty.     He  furnished  His  disciples  with  an 
amiable  and  perfect  example  of  that  obedience  which  the  law  requires  of  them.  He 
hath  also  procured  and  promised  the  aid  and  energies  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  qualify 
them  for  every  part  of  Christian  obedience.   3.  It  was  worthy  of  God,  and  becoming 
His  character,  not  to  suffer  Himself  to  be  deprived  of  worship  and  obedience  fiom 
the  whole  human  race ;  nor  them  to  be  cut  off  from  a  participation  of  Hia  goodness 
and  the  enjoyment  of  Him  as  their  portion.     4.   The  scheme  of  redemption  ia 
worthy  of  God  because  it  reflects  the  highest  honour  on  His  adored  Son  Jesus 
Christ.    He  has  the  honour  of  repairing  the  breach  which  sin  had  made  between 
God  and  men,  and  hath  reconciled  them  to  Him  by  the  blood  of  His  Cross.    He  has 
the  honour  of  performing  the  condition  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  whereby  all  the 
blessings  of  it  were  purchased,  and  the  promises  of  it  ratified  and  made  sure  to  the 
heirs  of  promise.  He  has  the  honour  of  being  the  grand  repository  of  the  covenant- 
blessings,  the  administrator  of  them,  and  of  sending  down  the  Holy  Spirit  to  apply 
them.    He  has  the  honour  of  being  the  Head  of  the  Church,  and  of  administering 
the  whole  affairs  of  Divine  providence  for  the  good  of  the  Church.    He  has  the 
honour  of  beholding  a  numerous  seed  as  the  fruit  of  His  unparalleled  labours  and 
Bufferings.     He  will  have  the  honour  of  presiding  in  the  final  judgrnent,  and  of 
awarding  the  retributions  of  that  solemn  and  eventful  day,  both  to  the  righteous  and 
the  wicked.     And  He  will  be  the  honoured  medium  through  which  all  the  blessed- 
ness of  the  heavenly  state  will  be  communicated  to  the  redeemed  for  evermore. 
5.  The  method  of  redemption,  by  the  death  of  Christ,  is  worthy  of  G>  d,  because  it 
is,  in  a  variety  of  respects,  more  excellent  than  the  constitution  established  vdth 
the  first  Adam  for  obtaining  life  to  himself  and  his  posterity.     The  perfections  of 
God  are  more  glorified  by  the  gospel-method  of  salvation,  and  particularly  His^ 
mercy,  for  which  there  was  no  place  under  the  first  covenant.     According  to  that 
constitution  the  goodness  oi  God  might  have  free  egress  towards  men  while  innocent' 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  138 

and  obedient;  but  no  provision  was  made  in  it  for  the  remission  of  sin,  or  for 
purification  from  it,  when  he  became  guilty  and  polluted.  By  the  constitution  of 
grace  His  law  is  more  magnified ;  for  Adam  could  only  obey  it  as  a  mere  man,  but 
Ciirist  obeyed  it  as  the  Lord  from  heaven.  The  sinner's  title  to  life  by  the  gospel 
stands  upon  a  more  glorious  foundation.  Though  the  covenant  of  works  had  been 
kept,  man's  title  to  life  would  only  have  been  founded  upon  a  perfect  human 
obedience ;  but  according  to  the  gospel-scheme  it  rests  upon  the  divinely  perfect 
righteousness  of  the  Son  of  God.  Gospel-holiness  is  also  conveyed  into  tho  souls 
of  men  in  a  more  excellent  channel.  Adam  received  the  principles  of  holiness  in 
the  channel  of  creating  goodness ;  but  gospel-holiness  is  communicated  as  the  fruit 
of  the  Redeemer's  purchase,  in  the  channel  of  redeeming  love.  The  worship  of  the 
redeemed  has  something  in  it  more  excellent.  In  the  state  of  innocence  man  could 
adore  God  as  his  creator,  preserver,  benefactor,  and  governor ;  but  the  redeemed 
can  worship  the  adorable  Trinity,  not  only  in  the  above  respects,  but  also  in  their 
economical  character,  in  the  plan  of  redemption,  as  a  reconciled  Father,  a  Saviour 
from  guilt  aud  misery,  and  a  Spirit  of  sanctification  and  comfort,  whose  ofiSce  it  ia 
to  apply  the  blessings  of  redemption  and  put  the  chosen  of  God  in  possession  of 
them.  To  all  these  ideas  add  that  the  future  happiness  of  the  redeemed  will  be 
greater  than  man's  happiness  could  have  been  by  the  original  covenant.  For  not 
only  will  it  be  conveyed  to  them  through  the  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  pur- 
chased by  His  blood,  but  they  will  have  more  enlarged  and  endearing  discoveries  of 
the  perfections  of  the  Godhead  as  displayed  in  the  scheme  of  redemption,  which 
will  prove  an  inexhaustible  and  everlasting  source  of  enjoyment ;  while  they  will 
have  the  additional  felicity  of  reflecting,  that  though  once  they  were  sinners  and 
sunk  in  perdition  and  misery,  yet  they  were  rescued  from  the  jaws  of  destruction  by 
the  power  and  grace  of  the  great  Redeemer,  and  raised  to  unmerited  and  undecaying 
honours  and  enjoyments.  This  consideration  will  sweeten  and  accent  the  song  of 
the  redeemed,  and  fill  them  with  joy  unutterable,  and  full  of  glory.  Lessons  :  1. 
Since  the  method  of  salvation,  through  the  sufferings  of  Jesus  Christ,  is  so  worthy 
of  God,  it  must  be  worthy  of  us  to  embrace  it  as  all  our  salvation  and  all  our  desire. 

2.  Our  hearts  should  be  deeply  impressed  with  this  important  truth,  that  the  only 
way  of  salvation  for  sinners  is  through  the  mediation  and  sufferings  of  Jesus  Christ. 

3.  If  sinners  of  mankind  can  be  saved  only  by  the  death  of  Christ,  how  aggra^ated 
is  the  guilt  and  how  deplorable  is  the  condition  of  our  modern  infidels,  who  with 
profane  mockery  and  insolent  contempt  reject  the  gospel-method  of  salvation, 
together  with  the  inspired  oracles  by  which  it  is  revealed  and  proposed  to  the 
acceptance  of  men  1  4.  This  subject  shows  us  that  in  subordination  to  the  glory  of 
God  it  is  the  great  end  of  the  gospel  and  of  the  death  of  Christ  to  perfect  the  state, 
character,  and  felicity  of  good  men.  5.  Let  sinners  and  saints  be  careful  to  improve 
the  method  of  salvation  set  before  them  in  the  gospel.  6.  To  conclude :  Let  me 
call  you  who  are  the  children  of  the  Most  High  to  adore  and  admire  that  unsearchable 
■wisdom  which  devised  a  scheme  of  salvation  so  worthy  of  God  in  all  the  possible  atti- 
tudes in  which  it  can  be  viewed,  and  so  happUy  adapted  to  your  character  and  circum- 
stances. (Ibid.)  Christ  appointed  Captain  of  salvation : — I.  A  reason  is  rendered  in 
the  words  of  what  he  had  asserted  in  the  foregoing  verse,  namely,  that  Jesus  the 
Messiah  was  to  suffer  death,  and  by  the  grace  of  God  to  taste  of  death  for  all.  Wht 
He  should  do  thus,  on  what  account,  what  ground,  necessity,  and  reason  therb 
WAS  FOB  IT  18  HERE  DECLARED — it  was  SO  to  be,  "  For  it  became  Him,"  Ac.  II. 
The  design  of  God  is  expressed  in  this  whole  matter,  and  that  was — to  bring 
MANY  SONS  UNTO  GLORY.  1.  The  eternal  designation  of  them  to  that  glory  where- 
unto  they  are  to  be  brought  is  peculiarly  assigned  to  Him.  "  He  predestinates 
them  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  His  Son  "  (Rom.  viii.  28-30).  2.  He  was  the 
spring  and  fountain  of  that  covenant  (as  in  other  operations  of  the  Deity)  that  was 
of  old  between  Himself  and  His  Son,  about  the  salvation  and  glory  of  the  elect  (see 
Zech.  vi.  13 ;  Isa.  xhi.  1 ;  Prov.  viii.  20-30 ;  Isa.  L  4,  liii.  11,  12  ;  Psa.  xvi.  10,  ex. 
1,  6).  3.  He  signally  gave  out  the  first  promise,  that  great  foundation  of  the 
covenant  of  grace,  and  afterwards  declared,  confirmed,  and  ratified  by  His  oath, 
that  covenant  wherein  all  the  means  of  bringing  the  elf  ct  to  glory  are  contained 
(Gen.  iii.  15  ;  Jer.  xxxi.  32-34  ;  Heb.  viii.  8).  4.  He  gave  and  sent  His  Son  to  be  a 
Saviour  and  Redeemer  for  them  and  to  them ;  so  that  in  His  whole  work,  in  all 
that  He  did  and  suffered,  He  obeyed  the  command  and  fulfilled  the  will  of  the 
Father.  5.  He  draws  His  elect,  and  enables  them  to  come  to  the  Son,  to  believe  in 
Him,  and  so  to  obtain  life,  salvation  and  glory  by  Him.  6.  Being  "reconciled  to 
thorn  by  the  blood  of  His  Son,"  He  reconciles  them  to  Himself  by  giving  them 


184  THE  BIBJ IGAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a 

pardon  and  forgiveness  of  sins  in  and  by  the  piomises  of  the  gospel,  without  which 
they  cannot  come  to  glory  (2  Cor.  v.  18-21).  7.  He  quickens  them  and  sanctifies 
them  by  His  Spirit,  to  "  make  them  meet  for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light," 
that  is  f'T  the  enjoyment  of  glory.  8.  As  the  great  Father  of  the  family  He  adopts 
them,  and  makes  them  His  sons,  that  so  He  may  bring  them  to  glory.  He  gives 
them  the  power  or  privilege  to  become  the  sons  of  God  (John  i.  12),  making  them 
heirs  and  co-heirs  with  Christ  (Rom.  viii.  14-17),  sending  withal  ••into  their  hearts 
the  Spirit  of  adoption,  enabling  them  to  cry  Abba  Father  "  (Gal.  iv.  6).  9.  He  con- 
firms them  in  faith,  estahlisheth  them  in  obedience,  preserveth  them  from  dangers 
and  oppositions  of  all  sorts,  and  in  manifold  wisdom  keeps  them  through  His 
power  to  the  glory  prepared  for  them  {2  Cor.  i.  21,  22;  Eph.  iii.  20,  21 ;  1  Pet. 
1.  5 ;  John  xvii.  11.  10.  He  gives  them  the  Holy  Ghost  as  their  Comforter,  with  all 
those  blessed  and  unspeakable  benefits  which  attend  that  gift  of  His  (Matt.  vii.  11 ; 
Luke  xi.  13  ;  John  xiv.  16,  17 ;  Gal.  iv.  6).  III.  There  is  in  these  words  inti- 
mated  THE   PRINCIPAL  MEANS   THAT   GOD   FIXED   ON   FOR  THE   ACCOMPLISHMENT   OF  THIS 

design  of  His,  fob  the  bringing  of  many  sons  to  globy;  it  was  by  appointino 
A  Captain  of  theib  salvation.    All  the  sons  of  God  are  put  under  His  conduct 
and  (guidance,  as  the  people  of  old  were  under  the  rule  of  Joshua,  to  bring  theia 
into  the  glory  designed  for  them,  and  promised  to  them  in  the  covenant  made  with 
Abraham.     And  He  is  called  their  ApxJjyoe,  *'  Prince,  Euler,  and  Captain,  or  Author 
of  their  salvation,"  on  several  accounts.    1.  Of  His  authority  and  right  to  rule  over 
them  in  order  to  their  salvation.    2.  Of  His  actual  leading  and  conduct  of  them  by 
His  example,  spirit,  and  grace,  through  all  the  difficulties  of  their  warfare.    3.  As 
He  is  to  them  "  the  Author  or  cause  of  eternal  salvation,"  He  procured  and  pur- 
chased it  for  them.     IV.  There  is  expressed  in  the  words,  the  especial  way  wheee- 
by  God  fitted  or  designed  the  Lord  Christ  unto  this  office,  of  being  a  Captain 
OF   salvation   unto   the   sons  to   be   brought  to  globy.      To  understand   this 
aright  we  must  observe  that  the  apostle  speaks  not  here  of  the  redemption  of  the 
elect  absolutely,  but  of  the  bringing  them  to  glory,  when  they  are  made  sons  in  an 
especial  manner.    And  therefore  he  treats  not  absolutely  of  the  designation,  con- 
sf  cration,  or  fitting  of  the  Lord  Christ  unto  His  office  of  Mediator  in  general,  but  as 
unto  that  part,  and  the  execution  of  it,  which  especially  concerns  the  leading  of  the 
sons  unto  glory,  as  Joshua  led  the  Israelites  into  Canaan.  By  all  the  sufferings  of  the 
Lord  Christ  in  His  life  and  death,  by  which  sufferings  He  wrought  out  the  salvation 
of  the  elect,  did  God  consecrate  and  dedicate  Him  to  be  a  Prince,  a  Leader,  and 
Captain  of  salvation  unto  His  people,  as  Peter  declares  the  whole  matter  (Acts  v, 
30,  31,  ii.  36).     1.  The  whole  work  of  saving  the  sons  of  God  from  first  to  last,  their 
guidance  and  conduct  through  sins  and  sufferings  unto  glory,  is  committed  unto  the 
Lord  Jesus ;  whence  He  is  constantly  to  be  eyed  by  believers  in  all  the  concern- 
ments of  their  faith,  obedience,  and  consolation.     (1)  With  care  and  watchfulness 
(Psa.  cxxi.  4).     (2)  With  tenderness  and  love  (Isa.  xl.  11).     (3)  He  leads  them  with 
power,  authority,  and  majesty  (Micah  v.  4).    2.  As  the  manner  how,  so  the  acts 
wherein  and  whereby  this  Antecessor  and  Captain  of  salvation  leads  on  the  sons  of 
God,  may  be  considered  ;  and  He  doth  it  variously.    (1)  He  goes  before  them  in  the 
whole  way  unto  the  end.     (2)  He  guides  them  and  directs  them  in  their  way.     (3) 
He  supplies  them  with  strength  by  His  grace,  that  they  may  be  able  to  pass  on  ia 
their  way.     (4)  He  subdues  their  enemies.     (5)  He  doth  not  only  conquer  all  their 
enemies,  but  He  avenges  their  sufferings  on  them,  and  punisheth  them  for  their 
enmity.     (6)  He  provides  a  reward,  a  crown  for  them,  and  in  the  bestowing  thereof 
accomplishes  this  His  blessed  office  of  the  Captain  of  our  salvation.    And  all  this 
should  teach  us — (a)  To  betake  ourselves  unto  Him,  and  to  rely  upon  Him  in  the 
whole  course  of  our  obedience,  and  all  the  passages  thereof,     (b)  To  look  for  direc- 
tion and  guidance  from  Him.     {John  Owen,  D.D.)        The  expediency  and  propriety 
of  appointing  a  suffering  Captain  of  our  salvation: — When  Christianity  was  first 
published  to  the  world,  the  earliest  objection  that  was  raised  against  it  arose  from 
the  low  and  suffering  state  in  which  its  Author  appeared.    It  is  then  a  subject 
worthy  of  our  contemplation  to  inquire  into  the  reasons  that  might  move  Almighty 
God  thus,  in  direct  opposition  to  the  prejudices  and  expectations  of  both  Jews  and 
Greeks,  to  appoint  the  Captain  of  our  salvation  to  be  made  perfect  by  a  state  ol 
Bufferings.    I.  If  we  consider  our  Saviour  as  the  author  of  a  new  religion.  His 
appearance  in  a  suffering  state  frees  His  religion  from  an  objection  which  appUea 
with  full  force  to  every  other  religion  in  the  world.     Had  our  Saviour  appeared  in 
the  pomp  of  a  temporal  prince,  as  the  Jews  expected  Him ;  had  He  appeared  in  the 
character  of  a  great  philosopher,  as  th  e  Greeks  would  have  wished  Him,  often  had 


CHAP.  11.]  HEBREWS.  135 

we  heard  of  His  power  and  of  His  policy,  and  been  told  that  our  religion  was  mora 
nearly  allied  to  this  world  than  to  the  other.  But  when  we  hear  the  Author  of  our 
faith  declaring  from  the  beginning  that  He  must  suffer  many  things  in  His  life,  and 
be  put  to  an  ignominious  and  tormenting  death,  these  suspicions  must  for  ever 
vanish  from  our  mind.  Thus  our  religion  stands  clear  of  an  objection,  from  which 
nothing,  perhaps,  could  have  purged  it  but  the  blood  of  its  Divine  Author.  11.  If 
we  consider  our  Saviour  as  a  pattern  of  virtue  and  all  perfection,  the  expediency 
of  His  appearing  in  a  suffering  state  will  further  be  evident.  One  great  end  of  our 
Saviour's  coming  into  the  world  was  to  set  us  an  example,  that  we  might  follow  His 
Bteps.  But,  unless  His  life  had  been  diversified  with  sufferings,  the  utility  of  His 
example  iiad  been  in  a  great  measure  defeated.  It  is  observed  by  an  historian,  in 
relating  the  life  of  Cyrus  the  Great,  that  there  was  one  circumstance  wanting  to  the 
glory  of  that  illustrious  prince  ;  and  that  was,  the  having  his  virtue  tried  by  some 
sudden  reverse  of  fortune,  and  struggling  for  a  time  under  some  grievous  calamity. 
The  observation  is  jnst.  Men  are  made  for  sufferings  as  well  as  for  action.  Many 
faculties  of  our  frame,  the  most  respectable  attributes  of  the  mind,  as  well  as  the 
most  amiable  qualities  of  the  heart,  carry  a  manifest  reference  to  a  state  of 
adversity,  to  the  dangers  which  we  are  destined  to  combat,  and  the  distresses  we 
are  appointed  to  bear.  Who  are  the  personages  in  history  that  we  admire  the  most? 
Those  who  have  suffered  some  signal  distress,  and  from  a  host  of  evils  have  come 
forth  conquerors.  III.  If  we  consider  our  Saviour  as  a  priest,  who  was  to  make 
an  atonement  for  the  sins  of  men,  the  expediency  of  His  making  this  atonement  by 
Bufferings  and  death  will  be  manifest.  It  is  one  of  the  doctrines  revealed  in  the 
New  Testament  that  the  Son  of  God  was  the  Creator  of  the  world.  As  therefore  He 
was  our  immediate  Creator,  and  as  His  design  in  our  creation  was  defeated  by  sin, 
there  was  an  evident  propriety  that  He  Himself  should  interpose  in  our  behalf,  and 
retrieve  the  affairs  of  a  world  which  He  had  created  with  His  own  hands.  In  the  work 
of  redemption,  thi-refore,  it  was  expedient  that  there  should  be  a  brighter  display 
of  the  Divine  perfections,  and  a  greater  exertion  of  benevolence  than  was  exhibited 
in  the  work  of  creation.  IV.  If  we  consider  our  Saviour  in  that  state  of  glory  to 
which  He  is  now  ascended,  the  propriety  of  His  being  made  perfect  by  sufferings 
will  more  fully  appear.  Because  He  humbled  Himself,  and  became  obedient  unto 
death,  therefore  hath  God  highly  exalted  Him,  hath  given  Him  a  name  above  every 
name,  and  committed  to  Him  all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  (John  Logan.) 
The  expediency  of  Christ' s  sufferings : — I.  To  leave  no  room  for  suspecting  the  truth 
OF  His  mission.  1.  Had  the  Messiah  appeared  as  a  powerful  and  illustrious  prince, 
the  bulk  of  mankind  could  not  have  had  an  opportunity  of  freely  examining  Hia 
credentials.  Almost  none,  but  the  great  and  the  mighty,  would  have  dared  to  come 
into  His  presence  ;  or  if  they  did  venture  to  approach  Him,  they  would  undoubtedly 
have  been  filled  with  dread  and  perturbation.  Dazzled  with  His  splendour  and  Hia 
glory,  they  could  not  have  maintained  that  calm  dispassionate  state  of  mind  which  is 
necessary  for  judging  of  the  pretentions  of  a  messenger  from  heaven.  2.  And  had 
the  gospel  been  ushered  into  the  world  in  this  splendid  manner,  what  a  ground  o£ 
exultation  would  it  have  afforded  to  the  infidel  and  profane  1  Would  they  not  have 
long  since  triumphantly  said  the  Christian  faith  was  not  a  rational  homage  to  the 
truth,  but  a  blind  submission  to  earthly  influence  and  authority.  3.  But  besides, 
while  the  mean,  afflicted  condition  of  our  Lord  thus  strongly  evidences  the  truth 
of  His  religion,  it  also  renders  that  evidence  more  palpable  and  striking  by  the 
glory  and  success  with  which  the  religion  was  afterwards  attended.  II.  To  exhibit 
Him  as  a  perfect  pattern  of  virtue  to  His  followers.  1.  When  we  behold 
the  Saviour  of  men  placed  in  like  circumstances  with  ourselves,  subject  to  all  our 
sinless  infirmities,  submitting  to  the  most  unmerited  indignities,  exposed  to  the 
most  bitter  and  unrelenting  persecution,  and  even  patiently  enduring  the  Cross, 
despising  the  shame,  acquitting  Himself  so  gloriously,  we  dwell  with  delight  upon 
the  at  once  lovely  and  admirable  character,  and  feel  ourselves  naturally  prompted 
to  give  all  diligence  to  make  it  the  pattern  of  our  conduct.  2.  And  as  the  sufferings 
of  Christ  were  thus  necessary  to  make  the  virtues  of  His  Hfe  appear  fitted  for  our 
imitation,  so  without  these  sufferings  there  would  have  been  many  Divine  and 
heavenly  graces,  which  His  life  could  not  have  exhibited.  Those  which  are 
commonly  denominated  the  passive  virtues,  and  which  we  account  the  most 
hard  to  practise,  could  then  have  had  no  place  in  His  character.  3.  But  not 
only  were  the  sufferings  of  the  Messiah  requisite  to  make  Hia  example  both 
of  sufficient  influence  and  extent,  they  were  requisite  also  to  render  that  example 
more  exalted  and  illustrious  than  it  could  otherwise  have  been.    They  ennobled  and 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

perfected  the  graces  of  His  character;  they  called  forth  to  public  view,  in  a 
substantial  and  living  form,  that  consummate  and  unshaken  integrity  which,  never 
before  nor  since,  appeared  among  men.  III.  To  make  Him  a  propeb  propitiation 
FOB  OUB  SINS.  Had  not  Christ  suffered  and  died,  we  could  never  have  reasonably 
hoped  for  the  remission  of  sins.  For  had  pardon  been  dispensed  by  the  Almighty 
to  His  offending  creatures,  without  exacting  the  penalty  due  to  their  crimes,  how 
would  the  glory  of  the  Divine  perfections  have  been  displayed,  and  the  majesty  of 
the  Divine  government  maintained?  Who  would  have  regarded  its  authority, 
or  feared  to  violate  its  commands?  Sinners  would  have  been  emboldened 
to  multiply  their  transgressions,  and  tempted  to  suppose  that  the  God  of 
unspotted  purity  —  the  God  of  unchangeable  veracity,  was  altogether  suck 
a  one  as  themselves.  IV.  To  make  room  fob  His  bringing  more  fully 
TO  light  a  fctorb  state  op  immortality  and  glory.  1.  Let  us  consider 
their  expediency,  in  order  to  prepare  the  way  for  a  fuller  demonstration  of  its 
existence.  What  so  proper  to  convince  us  that  the  promises  of  eternal  life  are 
true,  as  to  behold  Him,  who  deUvered  them.  Himself  coming  forth  triumphant  from 
the  grave,  and  visibly  ascending  into  heaven  before  us  ?  Were  the  most  stubborn 
infidel  left  to  choose  for  himself  a  proof  of  his  future  existence,  would  it  be  possible 
for  him  to  desire  a  plainer  and  a  more  perfect  demonstration?  But  it  is  evident, 
that  had  not  Jesus  suffered  and  expired,  this  visible,  striking  demonstration  could 
not  have  been  afforded.  For  without  first  dying,  how  could  He  have  risen  from  the 
dead  ?  And  had  He  not  risen  from  the  dead,  what  indubitable  security  could  we 
have  had  of  life  and  immortality  ?  2.  But  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ  were 
not  only  expedient  to  prepare  the  way  for  a  fuU  demonstration  of  the  existence 
of  a  future  slate  of  glory,  they  were  expedient  also  to  point  out  in  a  more  striking 
manner  the  way  by  which  that  glory  is  obtained.  The  object  of  the  Deity  seems 
to  be  not  merely  to  communicate  happiness,  but  to  form  His  creatures  to  moral 
excellence.  He  hath  designed  them  for  a  state  of  immortal  felicity ;  but  before 
they  enter  upon  that  state,  He  hath  made  it  necessary  that  they  shall  have  acquired 
virtuous  habits ;  and  to  acquire  again  their  virtuous  habits,  He  hath  ordained  them 
to  pass  through  a  painful  course  of  discipline.  And  the  more  painful  and  difficult 
this  course  becomes,  the  purer  will  be  their  virtue  and  the  richer  their  reward. 
V.  To  give  us  full  assurance  He  knows  and  sympathises  with  our  frailties 

AND   our   sorrows,    AND    WILL  THEREFORE    MERCIFULLY   INTERCEDE    WITH   THE    FaTHEB 

IN  OUR  BEHALF.  To  whom  do  wc  in  the  day  of  affliction  look  up  for  such  mercy 
and  compassion,  as  from  those  who  have  been  afflicted  themselves  ?  From  His 
experience  of  our  trials,  we  are  assured  He  hath  not  only  the  power,  but  the 
inclination  to  succour  us.  He  knows  well  where  our  weakness  lies,  where  our 
burden  presses,  and  what  will  prove  most  proper  for  supporting  and  relieving  ua. 
Lessons :  1.  From  the  doctrine  which  we  have  now  illustrated,  what  reason  have 
we  to  admire  the  wisdom  of  God  1  We  see  that  it  is  admirably  adapted  to  confirm 
our  faith,  to  improve  our  nature,  to  comfort  our  souls,  and,  in  a  consistency 
with  the  honour  of  Thy  perfections,  to  bring  many  returning  sinners  unto 
glory.  2.  But  this  subject,  while  it  leads  us  to  admire  the  wisdom  of 
God,  demonstrates  to  us  also  in  a  most  striking  manner,  the  deep  malignity 
of  sin.  For  if  such  a  remedy  as  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ  was, 
in  the  councils  of  heaven,  deemed  necessary  to  be  employed  against  it,  how 
evil  and  pernicious  must  its  nature  be  ! — how  odious  in  the  sight  of  God, 
and  how  destructive  of  the  order  and  happiness  of  the  whole  creation!  Let  us 
then  hate  sin  with  a  perfect  hatred.  3.  Did  it  behove  Jesus  to  be  made  perfect 
through  sufferings.then  let  us  who  are  His  disciples  learn  to  submit  to  our  sufferings 
with  pati«nce,  and  consider  them  as  a  requisite  part  of  our  education  for  heaven. 
{A.  Savile,  M.A.)         The  refuting  power  of  truth : — L  It  refutes  the  error  that 

THE    UNIVERSE    IS   EITHER   ETERNAL   OB   THE    WORK    OF    CHANCE.        The    tCXt     Speaks    of 

One  who  is  the  Cause  and  End  of  all  things.  II.  It  refutes  the  error  that 
Christ's  sufferings  are  incompatible  with  the  Divine  character.  III.  It 
refutes  the  error  that  great  sufferings,  in  the  case  of  individuals,  imply  great 
bins.  IV.  It  refutes  the  error  that  great  honours  can  be  obtained  without 
great  trial.  There  is  no  kingdom  for  man  worth  having  that  is  not  reached 
"through  much  tribulation."  V.  It  refutes  the  eeeob  that  the  grand  end 
op  Christianity  is  to  connect  man  with  dogmatic  systems  of  ecclesiasticaii 
constitutions.  The  end  is  higher ;  to  bring  men  not  to  creeds  or  churches,  but 
to   "glory" — a  glory  spiritual,   divine,   ever  progressive.      VI.    It  refutes  ihe 

EfillOB     THAT     THERE     ABE     BUT     FEW    THAT     SHALL     BB     SAVED.         {IlomUiSt.)  Tlie 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  137 

discipline  of  suffering: — When  we  ponder  these  words  we  shall  all  come  to  feel, 
I  think,  that  they  have  a  message  for  us  on  which  we  have  not  yet  dwelt  with  the 
patient  thought  that  it  requires,  though  we  greatly  need  its  teaching.  The  currents 
of  theological  speculation  have  led  us  to  consider  the  sufferings  of  Christ  in  relation 
to  God  as  a  propitiation  for  sin,  rather  than  in  relation  to  man  as  a  discipline, 
a  consummation  of  humanity.  The  two  lines  of  reflection  may  be  indeed,  as 
I  believe  they  are,  more  closely  connected  than  we  have  at  present  been  brought  to 
acknowledge.  I  do  not  however  wish  now  to  discuss  the  propitiatory  aspect  of  the 
sacrifice  of  Christ's  life.  It  is  enough  for  us  to  remember  with  devout  thankfulness 
that  Christ  is  the  propitiation  not  for  our  sins  only,  but  for  the  whole  world,  without 
further  attempting  to  define  how  His  sacrifice  was  efficacious.  And  we  move 
on  surer  ground,  when  we  endeavour  to  regard  that  perfect  sacrifice  from  the  other 
Bide,  as  the  hallowing  of  every  power  of  man  under  the  circumstances  of  a  sin- 
stained  world,  as  the  revelation  of  the  mystery  of  sorrow  and  pain.  Yes,  Christ, 
though  He  was  Son,  and  therefore  endowed  with  right  of  access  for  Himself  to  the 
Father,  being  of  one  essence  with  the  Father,  for  man's  sake,  as  man,  won  the  right 
of  access  to  the  throne  of  God  for  perfected  humanity.  He  learnt  obedience,  not 
as  if  the  lesson  were  forced  upon  Him  by  stern  necessity,  but  by  choosing,  through 
insight  into  the  Father's  will,  that  self-surrender  even  to  the  death  upon  the  Cross 
which  was  required  for  the  complete  reconciliation  of  man  with  God.  And  the 
absolute  union  of  human  nature,  in  its  fullest  maturity,  with  the  Divine  in  the  one 
Person  of  our  Creator  and  Redeemer,  was  wrought  out  in  the  very  school  of  life  in 
which  we  are  trained.  When  once  we  grasp  this  truth  the  records  of  the 
Evangelists  are  filled  with  a  new  light.  Every  work  of  Christ  is  seen  to  be 
a  sacrifice  and  a  victory.  Dimly,  feebly,  imperfectly,  we  can  see  in  this  way 
how  it  became  God  to  make  the  Author  of  our  salvation  perfect  through  sufferings; 
how  every  pain  which  answered  to  the  Father's  will,  became  to  Him  the  occasion 
of  a  triumph,  the  disciplining  of  some  human  power  which  needed  to  be  brought 
into  God's  service,  the  advance  one  degree  farther  towards  the  Divine  likeness 
to  gain  which  man  was  made ;  how,  in  the  actual  condition  of  the  world.  His  love 
and  His  righteousness  were  displayed  in  tenderer  grace  and  grander  authority 
through  the  gainsaying  of  enemies  ;  how,  in  this  sense,  even  within  the  range  of  our 
imagination,  He  saw  of  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  was  satisfied.  Dimly,  feebly, 
imperfectly  we  can  see  how  also  Christ,  Himself  perfected  through  suffering,  has 
made  known  to  us  once  for  all  the  meaning  and  the  value  of  suffering ;  how 
He  has  interpreted  it  as  a  Divine  discipline,  the  provision  of  a  Father's  love ;  how 
He  has  enabled  us  to  perceive  that  at  each  step  in  the  progress  of  life  it  is  an 
opportunity  ;  how  He  has  left  to  us  to  realise  "  in  Him  "  little  by  little  the  virtue 
of  His  work ;  to  fill  up  on  our  part  that  which  is  lacking  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ 
in  our  sufferings,  not  as  if  His  work  were  incomplete  or  our  efforts  meritorious,  but 
as  being  living  members  of  His  Body  through  which  He  is  pleased  to  manifest  that 
which  He  has  wrought  for  men.  For  we  shall  observe  that  it  was  because  He 
brought  many  sons  to  glory,  that  it  became  God  to  make  perfect  through  sufferings 
the  Author  of  their  salvation.  The  fitness  lay  in  the  correspondence  between  the 
outward  circumstances  of  His  life  and  of  their  lives.  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  tlie 
way  of  His  servants.  He  enlightened  the  path  which  they  must  tread,  and  showed 
its  end.  And  so  it  is  that  whenever  the  example  of  Christ  is  offered  to  us  in  Scripture 
for  our  imitation,  it  is  His  example  in  suffering.  So  far,  in  His  strength,  we  can 
follow  Him,  learning  obedience  as  He  learned  it,  bringing  our  wills  into  conformity 
with  the  Father's  will,  and  thereby  attaining  to  a  wider  view  of  His  counsel  in 
which    we   can   find    rest    and   joy.      (Bp.    Westcott.)  The    Godworthiness   of 

salvation  : — It  might  be  presumptuous  to  say  that  God  was  hound  to  become 
a  Saviour,  but  it  may  confidently  be  asserted  that  to  save  becomes  Him.  The  work 
He  undertook  was  congruous  to  His  position  and  character.  It  was  worthy  of  God 
the  Creator,  by  whom  all  things  were  made  at  the  first,  that  He  should  not  allow 
His  workmanship  in  man  to  be  utterly  marred  and  frustrated  by  sin.  The 
irretrievable  ruin  of  man  would  have  seriously  compromised  the  Creator's  honour 
and  glory.  It  would  have  made  it  possible  to  charge  the  Divine  BeinK  with 
failure,  to  represent  Him  as  overreached  by  the  tempter  of  man,  to  suspect  Him 
of  want  of  power  or  of  will  to  remedy  the  mischief  done  by  the  fall.  On  tliia 
subject  Athanasius,  in  his  discourse  on  the  Incarnation  of  the  Word,  well  remarks : 
"  It  would  have  been  an  indecency  if  those  who  had  been  once  created  rational 
had  been  allowed  to  perish  through  corruption.  For  that  would  have  been 
onwurthy  of  the  goodness  of  God,  if  the  beings  He  had  Himself  created  had  been 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a, 

allowed  to  perish  through  the  fraud  of  the  devil  against  man.  Nay,  it  would 
have  been  most  indecent  that  the  skill  of  God  displayed  in  man  should  be  destroyed 
either  through  their  carelessness  or  through  the  devil's  craftiness."  The  God- 
worthiness  of  the  end  becomes  still  more  apparent  when  the  subjects  of  the  Divine 
operation  are  thought  of  as,  what  they  are  here  called,  sons.  What  more  worthy 
of  God  than  to  lead  His  own  sons  to  the  glory  for  which  man  was  originally  fitted 
and  destined,  when  he  was  made  in  God's  image,  and  set  at  the  head  of  the 
creation?  The  title  "sons"  was  possibly  suggested  by  the  creation  stoiy,  but 
it  arises  immediately  out  of  the  nature  of  salvation  as  indicated  in  the  quotation 
from  the  eighth  Psalm — lordsLip  in  the  world  to  be.  This  high  destiny  places 
man  alongside  of  the  Son  whom  God  " appointed  heir  of  all  things."  "If  sons, 
then  heirs,"  reasoned  Paul;  "  if  heirs,  then  sons,"  argues  inversely  the  author  of 
oar  epistle.  Both  reason  legitimately,  for  sonship  and  heirship  imply  each 
other.  Those  who  are  appointed  to  lordship  in  the  new  world  of  redemp- 
tion are  sons  of  G<  d,  for  what  higher  privilege  or  glory  can  God  bestow 
upon  His  sons?  And  on  those  who  stand  in  a  filial  relation  to  God  He  may 
worthily  bestow  so  great  a  boon.  To  lead  His  sons  to  their  glorious  inheritance 
is  the  appropriate  thing  for  God  to  do.      {A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.)  God^s  glory 

in  giving  His  Son  to  die : — If  we  take  a  view  of  God's  special  properties,  we 
shall  find  the  glory  of  them  so  set  forth  in  Christ's  Incarnation  and  Passion,  aud 
the  red.  mption  of  man  thereby,  as  in  nothing  more.  I  will  exemplify  this  in  five 
of  them.  1.  The  power  of  God  hath  been  manifested  by  many  wonderful  works  of 
His  since  the  beginning  of  the  world.  The  book  of  Job  and  book  of  Psalms  do 
reckon  up  catalogues  of  God's  powerful  and  mighty  works ;  but  they  are  all  inferior 
to  those  works  which  were  done  by  the  Son  of  God  becoming  man  and  dying  ;  for 
hereby  was  the  curse  of  the  law  removed,  the  bonds  of  death  broken,  the  devil  and 
his  whole  host  vanquished.  The  Son  of  God  did  this,  and  much  more,  not  by 
arraying  Himself  with  majesty  and  power,  but  by  putting  on  Him  weak  and  frail 
flesh,  and  by  subjecting  Himself  to  death.  Herein  was  strength  made  perfect  in 
weakness  (2  Cor.  xii.  9).  2.  The  wisdom  of  God  was  greatly  set  forth  in  the  first 
creation  of  all  things  in  their  excellent  order  and  beauty,  and  in  the  wise  govern- 
ment of  them  ;  but  after  that  by  sin  they  were  put  out  of  order,  to  bring  them  into 
a  comely  frame  again  was  an  argument  of  much  more  wisdom,  especially  if  we 
duly  weigh  how,  by  the  creature's  transgression,  the  just  Creator  was  provoked  to 
wrath.  To  find  out  a  means,  in  this  case,  of  atonement  betwixt  God  and  man  must 
needs  imply  much  more  wisdom.  For  who  should  make  this  atonement  ?  Not 
man,  because  he  was  the  transgressor;  not  God,  because  He  was  offended  and 
incensed  :  yet  God,  by  taking  man's  nature  upon  Him,  God-man,  by  suffering,  did 
this  deed ;  He  made  the  atonement.  God  having  revealed  this  mystery  unto  Hia 
Church,  every  one  that  is  instructed  in  the  Christian  faith  can  say.  Thus,  and  thus 
it  is  done.  But  had  not  God  by  His  infinite  wisdom  found  out  and  made  known 
this  means  of  reconciliation,  though  all  the  heads  of  all  creatures  had  consulted 
thereabout,  their  counsels  would  have  been  altogether  in  vain.  We  have,  therefore, 
just  cause  with  an  holy  admiration  to  break  out  and  say,  "  Oh  the  depth  of  the 
riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God  1  "  (Rom.  xi.  33).  3.  The  justice 
of  God  hath  been  made  known  in  all  ages  by  judgments  executed  on  wicked  sinners, 
as  the  punishment  of  our  first  parents,  the  drowning  of  the  old  world,  the  destroying 
of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  with  fire  and  brimstone,  the  casting  off  the  Jews,  the 
casting  of  wicked  angels  and  reprobate  men  into  hell  fire ;  but  to  exact  the  uttermost 
of  the  Son  of  God,  who  became  a  surety  for  man,  and  so  to  exact  it  as  in  our  nature 
He  must  bear  the  infinite  wrath  of  His  Father  and  satisfy  His  justice  to  the  full,  is 
an  instance  of  more  exact  justice  than  ever  was  manifested.  4.  The  truth  of  God 
is  exceedingly  cleared  by  God's  giving  His  Son  to  die,  and  that  in  accomplishment 
of  His  threatening  and  promises.  (1)  For  threatening  God  had  said  to  man,  "  In 
the  day  thou  eatest  of  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  thou  shalt  surely 
die  "  (Gen.  ii.  17).  How  could  God's  truth  have  been  accomplished  in  this  threat- 
ening, and  man  not  utterly  destroyed,  if  Christ  had  not  died  in  our  nature  ?  (2) 
For  promise,  the  first  that  ever  was  made  after  man's  fall  was  this,  "  The  seed  of 
the  woman  shall  bruise  the  serpent's  head  "  (Gen.  iii.  15).  As  this  was  the  first 
promise,  so  was  it  the  ground  of  all  other  promises  made  to  God's  elect  in  Christ. 
Now  God  having  accomplished  this  promise  by  giving  His  Son  to  death,  how  can 
we  doubt  of  His  truth  in  any  other  promise  whatsoever  *  The  accomplishn;ent  of 
no  other  promise  could  so  set  out  God'o  truth  as  of  this;  for  other  promises  do 
depend  on  this,  and  not  this  on  any  of  them.     Besides,  this  is  the  greatest  of  all 


OHAP.  n.]  HEBREWS.  189 

other  promises.    We  may  therefore  on  this  ground  say,  "  He  that  spared  not  His 
own  Son,  but  delivered  Him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  He  not  with  Him  also  freely 
give  us  all  things?  "  (Kom.  viii.  32),    6.  God's  mercy  is  most  magnified  by  sending 
His  Son  into  the  world  to  die  for  man.    "  The  mercies  of  God  are  over  all  Hia 
works  "  (Pea.  cxlv.  9).    But  the  glass  wherein  they  are  most  perspicuously  seen  ia 
Jesus  Christ  made  man,  and  made  a  sacrifice  for  man's  sin.     (IF.  Gouge.)       *'Just  ^ 
like  Him  "  : — A  missionary,  addressing  a  pious  negro  woman,  said,  "  Mary,  is  not 
the  love  of  God  wonderful  ?  "  and  then,  enlarging  on  its  manifestation  in  the  atone- 
ment of  Christ,  he  made  the  appeal,  "  Is  it  not  wonderful  ?  "     Mary  simply,  but  we 
may  add  sublimely,  replied,  "  Massa,  massa,  me  no  tink  it  so  wonderful,  'cause  it  ia 
just  like  Him."        In  bringing*  many  sons  to  glory. — The  test  of  sonship : — I.  A 
DEFINITION  OF  GoD.     We  are  told  that  for  Him,  and  by  Him,  are  all  things ;  for 
Him — on  His  account — to  manifest  His  glory — to  display  Hia  perfections.    God 
hath  created  all  things  for  Himself.     "  Well,  does  not  that  look  selfish  ?    Is  that 
worthy  of  God?  "    If  we  do  anything  for  ourselves,  and  to  show  forth  ourselves, 
we  do  it  to  show  forth  something  that  is  finite  and  imperfect ;  and  in  attempting 
to  show  forth  ourselves,  and  seek  our  own  ends,  we  are  overlooking  the  interests  of 
other  people.    Therefore  it  is  most  improper  for  a  creature  to  do  anything  chiefly 
to  promote  his  own  glory.    But  it  is  otherwise  with  God,  for  He  is  perfect,  and  the 
manifestation  of  Himself  is  the  manifestation  of  perfection.     Would  you  wish  any- 
thing else  ?   Shall  creation  be  for  any  lower  end  than  the  exhibition  of  the  Creator? 
Nor  is  the  manifestation  of  Himself  apart  from  the  highest  hope  of  the  universe, 
for  God  is  love ;   the  manifestation  of  love  and  beneficence  is,  therefore,  the 
diffusion  of  happiness.     There  is  no  greater,  more  benevolent  purpose  than  the 
creation  of  all  things  for  Himself.    All  things  in  the  universe,  however  great,  are 
subservient  to  an  end  infinitely  greater  than  themselves.    However  small,  they  are 
not  so  insignificant  as  not  to  be  employed  for  the  greatest  of  all  ends — for  the 
manifestation  of   God  the  infinite.    H.  The  gracious  design  of  this  glorious, 
THIS  INFINITE  Being.     It  is  to  bring  many  sons  unto  glory.    These  many  sons  are 
to  be  brought  unto  glory  from  among  a  rebellious  and  condemned  race.    1.  The  first 
step  towards  this  is  to  make  them  sons — to  convert,  to  change  them  from  foes  to 
children  ;  for  by  nature  and  by  practice  we  aie  enemies  to  God,  and  not  subject  to 
the  will  of  God.     We  are  thus  constituted  sons  through  an  act  of  God's  free, 
sovereign,  tmmerited  favour.     He  pardons  all  our  sins.     He  puts  the  spirit  of 
adoption  into  us,  and  as  He  manifests  Himself  to  us  as  our  loving  Father,  He 
enables  us  to  feel  to  Him  as  loving  and  trusting  children.    We  seek  Him  whom  we 
avoided ;  we  trust  Him  whom  we  dreaded  ;  we  serve  Him  against  whom  we  rebelled ; 
we  are  sons.    2.  And,  having  made  us  sons,  He  then  brings  us  to  glory.     God  does 
not  form  children  for  Himself  and  then  forsake  them.   III.  But  what  is  His  method? 
By  a  Mediator,  called  in  the  text  the  Captain  of  Salvation.     The  same  word  ia 
translated  in  other  passages,  the  Prince  of  Life — in  others,  "  the  Author  and  Fmisher 
of  faith."  Here  it  is  translated  "  Captain."   He  is  our  Captain.   He  goes  in  advance. 
He  acts  as  our  Champion.     He  fights  our  great  adversary  the  devil  for  us — defeats 
him — "  destroys  him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  even  the  devil."    We  can  do  all 
things  through  our  Captain  strengthening  us.    But  we  go  on  to  observe  that  this 
Captain  of  Salvation  was  to  be  qualified  for  His  office  by  suffering.    He  was  to  be 
made  perfect  by  suffering.    Emphatically  He  was  a  man  of  sorrows.     By  those  sor- 
rows He  was  made  perfect,  not  as  to  His  Divinity,  for  that  could  not  be  made  more 
perfect,  cor  as  to  his  moral  purity,  for  that  was  perfect  necessarily ;  but  made  perfect 
— that  is,  qualified  for  His  office.    The  suffering  was  sacrificial.    He  had  to  atone 
for  our  sins.    He  had  not  merely  to  go  before  us  as  otir  Captain,  but  to  bear  the 
cross.     So  He  was  made  a  sacrifice  for  us.    And  He  was  to  be  made  an  example 
as  well  as  a  sacrifice.     Men  suffer.    This  is  a  world  of  trouble,  and  He  could  not 
have  been  an  adequate  example  if  He  had  not  been  an  example  in  that  which  we 
are  called  to  endure.    He  was  to  be  a  sympathising  friend  on  whom  we  could  look 
as  understanding  our  case,  as  able  to  feel  with  us  and  for  us,  and  this  would  be 
impossible  except  by  suffering.  And,  therefore.  He  was  fitted  to  be  the  Captain  and 
Leader  of  our  Salvation  by  suffering.    IV.  The  great  proposition.    It  was  befitting 
in  Him  for  whom  and  by  whom  are  all  things,  in  thus  bringing  many  sons  into 
glory  through  the  mediation  of  the  Captain  of  Salvation,  to  make  the  Captain  of 
Salvation  fitted  for  His  work  through  suffering.     It  was  befitting  the  Eternal  God 
that  His  designs  should  be  accomplished  ;  and  as  suffering  was  essential  to  the  end 
He  had  in  view,  was  it  not  befitting  that  God  should  not  spare  even  His  own  Son 
in  order  that  He  might  be  qualified  for  the  work  of  bringing  many  sons  to  glory  f 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  n. 


(Newman  Hall,  LL.B.)        The  bringing  of  many  sons  to  glory : — I.  The  object  to 

BE    ACCOMPLISHED   WAS    THE    BBINGING    OF    MANY   SONS    TO    GLORY.      A  parent  deals   HOt 

with  hia  children  on  selfish  and  mercenary  principles.  He  does  not,  like  a  law- 
giver, merely  protect  them,  and  dispense  to  them  according  to  their  merits ;  or, 
like  a  master,  merely  remunerate  their  work.  He  deals  with  them  in  love.  "  Son, 
thou  art  ever  with  me,  and  all  that  I  have  is  thine,"  is  the  language  of  parental 
affection.  The  riches  of  Divine  all-sufficiency  are  not,  like  the  possessions  of  an 
earthly  parent,  diminished  by  being  shared,  affording  the  less  for  each  that  many 
partake.  No ;  like  the  light  of  the  sun,  each  receives  the  full  enjoyment.  "  He 
that  overcometh  shall  inherit  all  things,  and  I  will  be  his  God  and  he  shall  be  My 
son."  The  abode  destined  to  receive  them  is  the  heaven  of  glory,  where  every 
object  and  scene  is  resplendent  with  the  glory  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb;  their 
inheritance,  the  kingdom  of  glory;  their  portion  the  God  of  glory;  their  associatps. 
His  glorious  family;  their  employments  and  enjoyments  are  all  glorious:  and, 
what  is  essential  to  their  enjoyment  of  all  is,  that  they  are  for  ever  perfected  in 
personal  glory — the  plory  not  merely  of  celestial  splendour,  but  the  moral  glory  ot 
unsullied  holiness — the  noblest  glory  in  the  eyes  of  God  and  of  all  holy  intelligences. 
II.  The  plan  adopted  for  this  end.  A  leader  to  glory  is  appointed,  and  He  is 
made  "  perfect  through  sufferings."  We  have  a  country  to  possess,  a  journey  and 
a  waifare  to  accomplish,  an  enemy  to  conquer,  and  a  victory  to  win.  Christ  is  the 
breaker-up  of  the  way,  the  leader  and  commauder  of  the  people.  In  order  that  the 
Son  of  God  might  fulfil  the  offices  of  our  Eedeemer — in  order  that  He  might  have 
a  banner  to  lift  up  in  this  character,  and  a  willing  host  ranged  under  it — it  was 
necessary  that  He  Himself  should  pass  through  the  last  extremity  of  conflict  and 
death,  and  be  thus  made  perfect  through  suffering.  Let  us  inquire  in  what  respects, 
and  for  what  ends,  this  was  necessary.  1.  To  make  an  atonement  for  our  sins,  and 
redeem  our  souls.  2.  His  sufferings  were  requisite  in  order  to  His  perfect  adapta- 
tion as  our  pattern  and  example.  3.  His  sufferings  were  endured  also  in  order  to 
His  more  perfectly  identifying  Himself  by  sympathy  with  Hia  people,  and  engaging 
their  absolute  confidence.  {Alex  McNaughton.)  Eternal  redemption : — There  is, 
perhaps,  nothing  we  understand  better,  in  the  conduct  of  others,  than  what  la 
becoming  or  unbecoming  in  their  spirit  and  deportment.  We  are  almost  eagle-eyed 
to  discover  whatever  is  worthy  or  unworthy  of  a  man's  rank  and  character.  This 
almost  instinctive  sense  of  propriety  in  human  conduct  might,  if  wisely  employed, 
enable  us  to  judge  wisely  of  what  is  becoming  in  the  Divine  conduct.  For,  if  we 
expect  wise,  good,  and  great  men  to  act  up  to  their  character  and  avowed  principles, 
we  may  well  expect  that  the  infinitely  wise,  great,  and  good  God  will  do  nothing 
unbecoming  His  character  and  supremacy.  When,  therefore,  it  is  said  that  it 
"became"  Him  to  save  sinners,  only  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  it  surely  becomes 
us  to  search  in  His  character  and  salvation,  not  for  reasons  why  redemption  could 
not,  or  should  not,  be  by  atonement,  but  for  reasons  why  it  is  so.  Now,  upon  the 
very  surface  of  the  case,  it  is  self-evident  that  an  infinitely  wise  God  would  neither 
do  too  much  nor  too  little  for  the  salvation  of  man.  Less  than  enough  would  not 
become  His  love  ;  more  than  enough  would  not  become  His  wisdom.     I.  Bringing 

MANY  SONS  TO  GLORY  IS  God'S  CHIEF  AND  FINAL  OBJECT,  IN   ALL   THE    MERCY   AND   ORACH 

wHtcH  He  EXEiicisEs  TOWARDS  MAN.  1.  Now  glory,  as  a  {Jace,  is  the  heaven  where 
God  Himself  dwells  and  reigns,  visibly  and  eternally.  It  is  His  own  special  temple, 
resplendent  with  His  presence,  and  vocal  with  His  worship.  It  is  His  own  central 
throne,  from  which  He  surveys  and  rules  the  universe.  2.  Again,  glory,  as  a  state 
of  character,  is  likeness  to  the  God  of  heaven ; — it  is  to  bear  the  image  of  His  spot- 
less holiness,  and  to  breathe  the  spirit  of  His  perfect  love.  This  is  the  glory  to 
which  God  proposes  to  bring  many  sons.  Now  this  heaven  is  so  unlike  our  earth — 
where  God  is  altogether  so  invisible,  and  man  so  unholy  and  unloving — that,  to 
say  the  least,  a  very  great  change  for  the  better  must  take  place  in  men  before  they 
can  be  fit  for  such  glory.  There  are  some  things  in  this  heaven  which  are  not  very 
agreeable  to  the  naturad  mind  of  man,  such  as  universal  and  everlasting  spirituality 
and  harmony.  Such  being  the  sober  facts  of  the  case,  it  surely  "  becomes  "  God  to 
take  care  that  this  heaven,  which  is  to  be  His  own  eternal  temple  and  throne, 
shall  not  be  disgraced  nor  disturbed  by  the  presence  of  unholy  or  alienated  inhabi- 
tants. II.  The  SUFFERINGS  OF  Christ  are  declared  to  be  the  way  in  which  it 
BECAME  God  TO  bring  man  TO  GLORY.  III.  It  is  declared  that,  in  saving  man  by 
the  sufferings  of  Christ,  God  had  a  regard  to  the  relation  in  which  all  things  in 
THE  universe  STOOD  TO  HiMSELF.  What  He  did  in  making  Christ  a  sacrifice  for  our 
BIOS  was  what  " became"  Him  to  do  as  the  author  and  end  of  all  things  visible  and 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  141 

Invisible.  Now — 1.  It  certainly  became  God  to  save  man  in  a  way  that  should  not 
endanger  the  safety  of  angels.  But  this  could  not  have  been  done  by  penitential 
Bulvation.  That  would  have  been  to  tell  all  the  unfallen  universe  that  tears  would 
repair  any  injury  they  might  ever  do  to  the  honour  of  God  or  their  own  interests. 
A  fine  lesson  in  a  universe  where  even  innocence  is  no  safeguard  from  temptation  ! 
2.  It  certainly  became  God  to  save  man  in  a  way  which  should  not  impeach  Hia 
character  for  not  saving  fallen  angels.  But  could  they  have  felt  thus  if  the  next 
race  of  sinners  had  been  pardoned  on  mere  repentance  ?  Eternal  happiness  offered 
to  one  race  of  sinners,  and  eternal  misery  inflicted  on  another  race  of  sinners, 
would  be  an  eternal  anomaly  in  the  moral  government  of  God  but  for  the  atonement 
made  by  Christ  on  our  behalf.  But  now  no  holy  nor  wise  being  can  wimder  that 
grace  reigns  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  of  God.  Nor  can  they  wonder  that  Satan 
and  his  angels  are  not  redeemed,  seeing  it  was  by  opposing  this  scheme  of 
redemption  they  sinned  and  fell.  3.  It  became  God  to  redeem  man,  and  confirm 
angels,  in  such  a  way  as  to  leave  no  possibility  of  imagining  that  any  higher  happi- 
ness could  be  found  out  than  the  voluntary  gift  of  God  conferred.  4.  It  became 
God  to  redeem  man,  and  to  confirm  angels,  in  such  a  way  as  to  render  the  impar- 
tiality of  His  love  to  both  for  ever  unquestionable.  Accordingly,  it  is  as  sons  that 
He  will  bring  men  to  glory — the  very  rank  which  all  the  unfallen  spirits  in  all 
worlds  hold.  (R.  Philip.)  The  road  to  glory: — The  text  seems  to  represent 
Almighty  God  as  looking  down  upon  His  sinful  and  rebellious  creatures,  and  taking 
counsel  for  their  instruction,  as  we  might  imagine  some  father,  like  him  in  the 
parable,  made  acquainted  with  the  wretchedness  of  his  prodigal  son,  and  devising 
within  himself  a  way  in  which  he  might  recover  him  to  goodness  and  to  happiness. 
Do  you  observe  what  is  here  implied  ?  1.  They  who  were  to  be  brought  to  glory 
were  not  yet  in  a  fit  state  for  glory.  It  was  a  work  to  be  done ;  something  for  which 
provision  was  to  be  made— something  wLich  was  intended,  planned,  and  gradually 
to  be  perfected.  Alas  !  it  is  too  true,  man  in  his  natural  state  is  not  prepared  for  a 
world  of  which  the  description  is,  that  "therein  dwelletb  righteousness."  2.  Yet 
are  they  capable  of  becoming  so.  Like  the  ore  not  yet  cleansed  from  the  worthless 
earth  with  which  it  is  mingled,  or  like  the  precious  stone  covered  with  rust  or  clay, 
but  of  which  the  skilful  eye  perceives  that  it  may  be  purified,  and  refined,  and 
polished,  and  "fitted  for  the  master's  use,"  even  hereafter  to  bear  a  place  among 
his  treasures.  Such  was  the  being  for  whom  God  had  a  design  of  mercy.  3.  But 
how  to  accomplish  it?  4.  Here  we  perceive  a  reason  why  "the  Captain  of  our 
salvation"  was  "made  perfect  through  suffering."  Man,  who  was  to  be  hereafter 
glorified,  was  now  lying  under  the  penalty  of  sin ;  he  was  in  a  state  of  condemna- 
tion, as  a  transgressor  of  the  laws  which  God  has  appointed  for  His  creatures. 
Like  the  heir  of  a  vast  estate,  but  found  guilty  of  some  crime,  by  which  that  estate 
is  forfeited,  his  condemnation  lies  between  him  and  the  inheritance  assigned  to 
him.  "Wby,"  perhaps  you  ask,  "might  not  the  Lord  freely  pardon  these  Hia 
guilty  creatures,  these  His  offtnding  sons?"  Verily,  ''the  secret  things  belong 
unto  the  Lord  our  God  "  ;  but  this  we  know — the  judge  here  on  earth,  the  magis- 
trate, cannot  freely  pardon  the  offender  against  human  laws  ;  they  cannot  set  him 
free  without  endangering  the  whole  fabric  of  society.  Therefore  was  "  the  Captain 
of  our  salvation  made  perfect  through  suffering  " ;  therefore  through  suffering  did 
He  accomplish  our  salvation.  Christ  died,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  He  might 
bring  us  to  God.  5.  Now,  then,  consider  man  in  this  stage  of  his  progress  towards 
glory.  Much  has  been  done,  but  much  remains  to  do.  The  slave  may  be  emanci- 
pated from  chains,  but  he  is  not  emancipated  from  base  and  servile  ways,  and  is 
altogether  unfit  for  the  glories  of  a  throne  or  the  presence  of  a  king.  God,  there- 
fore, in  "  bringing  many  sons  to  glory,"  has  other  plans  of  mercy  beyond  the 
atonement  made.  Their  corruptions  must  be  purified;  the  evil  of  their  nature  cured. 
How,  then,  is  this  to  be  effected  in  a  way  consistent  with  that  Being  with  whom  we 
have  to  do  ?  What  must  be  done  if  a  benefactor  were  to  approach  the  slave  and 
show  him  how  a  price  was  paid  for  his  redemption,  and  that  the  moment  he  claims 
freedom  an  estate  is  prepared  for  him  to  enjoy,  if  he  were  once  fitted  for  the  inheri- 
tance. He  must  be  first  persuaded  of  his  present  wretchedness,  willing  to  be  released 
from  it,  and  to  receive  the  benefit  proposed.  And  in  the  case  of  earthly  bondage 
there  is  no  dilficulty  ;  the  e\  ils  of  such  a  state  are  felt  and  acknowledged.  Not  so 
in  the  case  of  Satan's  bondmen  ;  they  are  too  often  willing  slaves.  And  this  Ha 
does  for  the  sons  whom  He  leads  to  glory.  He  "  convinces  them  of  sin,"  that  it  is 
their  guilt — "  of  righteousness,"  that  it  is  to  be  found  in  Christ — "  of  judgment,  the 
prince  of  this  world  is  judged  " — that  this  world  must  be  overcome,  or  they  must 


149  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  n. 

share  its  doom.  When  God  was  leading  the  Israelites  into  the  land  of  Canaan  He 
did  not  rid  the  land  at  once  of  its  inhabitants,  but  put  them  out  little  by  little.  And 
60  no  doubt  He  has  a  merciful  purpose  in  all  the  difficulties  which  His  people  meet 
with  in  their  progress  towards  the  heavenly  Canaan.  Here,  too,  we  see — here  at 
least  we  believe  we  see — the  reason  of  those  troubles  which  many  of  God's  faithful 
people  pass  through.  Is  the  Christian  harassed  by  the  remainder  of  sin,  so  that 
"  when  he  would  do  good  evil  is  present  with  him  "  ?  Or  is  it  the  straitness  of 
poverty  which  weighs  him  down  ?  In  all  those  secret  trials  which  the  world 
sees  not,  as  well  as  all  those  which  are  evident  to  all,  there  is  one  intent 
which  we  cannot  but  see:  God  is  weaning  the  heart  from  the  present  world, 
and  drawing  it    to    Himself.       (Archbp.    Sumner.)  Brmging^   many  sons    to 

glory : — God  is  here  represented  as  executing  a  great  work — that  of  "  bringing 
many  sons  unto  glory."  "Glory"  is  a  grand  word — one  of  the  grandest  in  the 
vocabulary  of  human  speech  ;  aod  it  is  habitually  employed  in  Scripture  to 
denote  the  "  great  recompence  of  reward "  which  awaits  the  righteous  in  the 
world  to  come.  In  the  Old  Testament  it  is  said  :  •'  The  Lord  will  give  grace  and 
glory "  (Psa.  Ixxxiv.  11) ;  "  Thou  shall  guide  me  with  Thy  counsel,  and  after- 
wards receive  me  to  glory  "  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  24) ;  and  in  the  New  :  "  I  reckon  that  the 
sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  which 
shall  be  revealed  in  us  "  (Rom.  viii.  18) ;  "  Our  light  affliction,  which  is  but  for  a 
moment,  worketh  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory  "  (2  Cor. 
iv.  17) ;  "  Christ  in  you,  the  hope  of  glory  "  (Col.  i.  27) ;  "  The  salvation  which  is 
in  Christ,  vrith  eternal  glory"  (2  Tim.  ii.  10).  Well  does  heaven  realise  the  brilliant 
and  impressive  name  of  "  glory."  The  place — the  pursuits — the  pleasures — the 
inhabitants — all  are  glorious.  1.  The  place  is  glorious.  Paradise — to  which  the 
departing  spirits  of  the  righteous  pass — is  certainly  a  locality.  As  the  residence  of 
Clu'ist,  that  region  of  the  universe  must  needs  be  glorious,  having  objects  adapted 
to  the  organisation,  and  aptitudes,  and  tastes  of  his  fine  humanity.  And  who  can 
tell  but,  even  when  the  pure  spirit  is  dissevered  from  its  sister-frame,  these  objects 
let  in  their  glory  on  the  soul?  But  at  last,  in  admirable  and  exquisite  adaptation 
to  the  complete  humanity  of  believers,  the  "new  heavens  and  new  earth"  will 
come.  It  may  seem  sentimentalism,  but  it  is  sober  sense,  to  say :  If  earth  be  so 
fair,  how  beautiful  must  heaven  bel  if  the  azure  skies  be  so  resplendent,  how 
majestic  must  be  that  sublimer  world  1  2.  The  pursuits  are  glorious.  The  inhabi- 
tants of  heaven  shall  "  see  God."  His  Divine  Essence,  indeed,  can  never  be  beheld 
by  human  eye  (1  Tim.  vi.  16).  But  there  will  probably  be  an  outburst  of  visible 
glory  from  His  eternal  throne,  significant  of  His  presence  and  His  majesty.  At 
any  rate,  the  soul  will  realise  His  infinite  wisdom,  and  might,  and  purity,  and  love, 
with  such  clearness,  and  vividness,  and  power,  as,  in  a  sublime  sense,  to  behold  the 
invisible  God.  In  heaven  they  will  literally  behold  His  glorious  person— they  will 
have  Him  for  their  associate  and  friend — they  will  gaze  into  the  deep  recesses  of 
His  love.  3.  The  pleasures  are  glorious.  Deep  and  strong,  no  doubt,  they  are, 
like  the  mighty  and  majestic  sea — yet,  probably,  calm  and  placid,  as  the  bosom  of 
the  lake  in  the  sunshine  of  the  summer-sky.  4,  The  iiihabitants  themselves  are 
glorious.  What  an  expressive  phrase — "  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect !  " 
To  the  scenes,  the  pursuits,  and  the  pleasures,  of  the  heavenly  world,  the  constitu- 
tions and  characters  of  its  inhabitants  will  completely  correspond.  Such  is  the 
glory  of  heaven.  It  is  summarily  denoted  by  St.  Paul  in  the  expression — an  "  ex- 
ceeding and  eternal  weight  of  glory  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  17).  There  is  a  glory  of  the  flowers 
— there  is  a  glory  of  the  stars — there  is  a  glory  of  the  sun.  But  each,  and  all,  is 
far  exceeded  and  outshone  by  the  glory  of  the  heavens.  And  what  is  so  bright,  and 
beautiful,  and  precious,  is  "  eternal ;"  it  shall  last  for  ever — it  shall  never  pass 
away.  And  whom  does  Jehovah  bring  to  this  celestial  glory?  "  Sons" — "  many 
sous."  1.  The  filial  relation  of  believers  to  God  is  often  set  forth  in  Scripture. 
There  are  two  ways  in  which  one  person  may  become  another  person's  child — birth 
and  adoption.  In  the  writings  of  St.  John  and  St.  1  e.er,  the  former — in  those  of 
St.  Paul,  the  latter  is  propounded  as  the  fundamental  idea  of  the  believer's  sonship. 
Starting  from  either  of  the  two  conceptions,  we  are  free  to  carry  out  the  figure  into 
the  collateral  and  kindred  ideas  of  protection,  guidance,  instruction,  discipline, 
comfort,  pity,  and  tenderest  love,  as  bestowed  by  God  on  His  believing  people.  It 
is  as  children  that  they  are  brought  to  glory.  2.  The  statement  that  "  many  sons" 
are  brought  to  glory  is  quite  consistent  with  the  passages  which  indicate  that  com: 
parativeiy  few  of  the  inhabitants  of  earth  are  in  a  state  of  salvation.  Already,  a 
mighty  multitude  of  souls  have  been  ransomed  and  renewed.     In  future  times  fore- 


eHAP.  n.]  HEBREWS.  143 

told  in  prophecy,  "a  nation  shall  be  born  in  a  day,"  and  tribes  and  tongues  shall 
shout,  "  Gome  and  let  us  go  up  to  Jehovah's  house."  3.  These  "  many  sons  "  God 
is  "  bringing  to  glory."  He  chose  them  to  this  bright  inheritance  in  the  depths  of 
the  past  eternity  (Ephes.  i.  4-6 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  13).  He  sent  His  Son  to  win  and 
work  out  "  an  eternal  redemption  "  for  them  (John  iii.  16 ;  Kom.  v.  8 ;  viii.  32). 
He  arrests  them,  by  His  Spirit,  amidst  the  wildness  of  their  wanderings,  and 
adopts  them  into  His  cherished  family  (Eom.  v.  17 ;  viii.  29,  80 ;  2  Cor.  v.  18 ; 
Ephes.  ii.  1-10;  Col.  i.  12).  He  "guides  them  by  His  counsel"  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  24). 
He  "will  never  leave  them  nor  forsake  them  "  (Heb.  xiii.  5).  He  "  keeps  them  by 
His  power,  through  faith,  unto  salvation  "  (1  Pet.  i.  5).  At  last,  He  receives  them 
to  glory  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  24).  He  introduces,  and  bids  them  welcome,  to  their  paternal 
home.  4.  The  "  many  sons  "  whom  the  Father  brings  to  glory  are  here  repre- 
eeuted  as  standing  in  a  very  intimate  relation  to  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  "  the  Captain 
of  their  salvation."  Glorious  Captain!  who  would  not  follow  Thee?  Yet  this 
Captain  had  "  His  sufferings."  From  His  cradle  to  His  grave.  He  was  "  a  man 
of  sorrows."  In  body,  in  soul,  in  circumstances,  He  suffered  grievously  (Isa.  liii. 
2-6,  10;  Zech.  xiii.  7;  Mttt.  iv,  1,  viii.  20,  xi.  19,  xxvi.  36— xxvii.  50;  Luke  xix. 
41 ;  John  iv.  6  ;  Gal.  iii.  13 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  21,  iii.  18,  iv.  1).  5.  But  He  is  also  repre- 
sented as  "made  perfect  through  sufferings."  (A.  S.  Patterson,  M. A.)  Make 
theiiaptaln  of  their  salvation  perfect  through  Buffering's. — The  Captainvf  salta- 
tion : — He  might  conceivably  have  saved  men  by  a  direct  act  of  sovereign  power 
and  mercy.  But  He  chose  to  save  by  mediation.  And  this  method,  if  not  the 
only  possible  one,  is  at  least  fitting.  It  became  Him  for  whom  are  all  things,  and 
by  whom  are  all  things,  to  bring  His  sons  to  glory  in  this  way.  1.  Because  He 
was  thereby  following  the  analogy  of  providence,  doing  this  work  of  deliverance  in 
the  manner  in  which  we  see  Him  performing  all  works  of  deliverance  recorded  in 
history :  e.g.  the  deliverance  of  Israel  out  of  Egypt.  God  led  His  ancieut  people 
from  Egypt  to  Canaan,  Hke  a  flock,  "  by  the  hand  of  Moses  and  Aaron."  2.  The 
method  involves  that  salvation  is  a  gradual  process.  It  is  a  march  under  the 
guidance  of  a  LeaJer  to  the  promised  land.  The  sons  of  God  are  led  to  glory  step 
by  step.  The  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth  are  not  brought  in  per  saltum,  but 
as  the  result  of  a  development  during  which  the  word  and  history  and  passion  of 
Christ  work  as  a  leaven.  Redemption  has  a  history  alike  in  the  Leader  and  in  the 
led.  Eelemption  after  this  fashion  became  Him  for  whom  are  all  things,  and  by 
whom  are  all  things,  better  than  an  instantaneous  deliverance.  The  latter  might 
reveal  Divine  omnipotence,  but  the  former  affords  scope  for  the  display  of  all 
Divine  attributes :  power,  wisdom,  patience,  faithfulness,  unwearied  loving  care. 
The  method  of  salvation  by  a  Leader  involves  certain  things  with  reference  to  the 
Leader  Himself.  1.  He  must,  of  course,  be  a  Man  visible  to  men,  whom  He 
has  to  lead ;  so  that  they  can  look  unto  Him  as  the  Leader  and  Perfecter  of  faith, 
and,  inspired  by  His  example,  follow  Him  on  the  path  which  leads  to  glory.  2.  Out 
of  this  primary  requirement  naturally  springs  another.  He  who  in  person  is  to 
lead  the  people  out  of  the  house  of  bondage  into  the  promised  land  must,  in  the 
di>charge  of  his  duty,  encounter  hardship  and  suffering.  He  must  share  the  lot 
of  those  whom  he  has  to  deUver.  Neither  Moses  nor  Joshua  had  an  easy  time  of 
it.  The  leadership  of  Israel  was  for  neither  a  dilettante  business,  bnt  a  sore, 
perilous,  often  thankless  toil  and  warfare.  And  there  never  was  any  real  leader  or 
captain  of  men  whose  life  was  anything  else  than  a  yoke  of  care,  and  a  burden  of 
toil  and  sorrow.  They  have  all  had  to  suffer  with  those  they  led,  and  more  than 
any  of  the  led.  What  wonder  then  if  the  Captain  or  Leader  of  the  great  salvation 
was  acquainted  with  suffering  ?  Must  He  be  the  solitary  exception  to  the  rule 
which  connects  leadership  with  suffering?  If  out  of  regard  to  His  dignity  as  the 
Son  He  must  be  exempted  from  suffering,  then  for  the  same  reason  He  must  forfeit 
the  position  of  leader.  To  exempt  from  suffering  is  to  disable  for  leadership.  Com- 
panionship in  suffeiing  is  one  of  the  links  that  connect  a  leader  with  those  he  leads 
and  gives  him  power  over  them.  This  brings  us  to  a  third  implicate  of  the  method 
of  salvation  by  a  captain  for  the  Captain  Himself.  3.  It  is,  that  experience  of 
suffering  is  not  merely  inseparable  from  His  office  as  the  Captain  of  salvation,  but 
useful  to  Him  in  that  capacity.  It  perfects  Him  as  Captain.  Here  at  length  we 
reach  the  chmax  of  the  apologetic  argument ;  the  final  truth  in  which,  wlien  under- 
stood, the  mind  finds  perfect  rest.  If  this  be  indeed  tme,  then  beyond  all  doubt  it 
became  God  to  subject  His  Son  to  a  varied  experience  of  suffering.  To  proclaim 
its  truth  is  the  real  aim  of  the  writer.  For  though  his  direct  affirmation  is  that  it 
became  God  to  perfect  His  Son  by  suffering,  the  really  important  thing  ia  the  in- 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

direct  affirmation  that  the  Son  was  perfected  hy  suffering.  The  writer  means  to 
Bay  that  Christ  was  perfected  by  suffering,  in  the  sense  that  He  was  thereby  made 
a  perfect  leader.  The  perfecting  of  Christ  was  a  process  resulting  in  His  becoming 
a  consummate  Captain  of  salvation.  It  was  a  process  carried  on  through  sufferings, 
taking  place  contemporaneously  with  these.  It  was  a  process  begun  on  earth, 
carried  on  throughout  Christ's  whole  earthly  life,  reaching  its  goal  in  heaven ;  just 
as  the  crowning  with  glory  and  honour  began  on  earth  and  was  completed  in 
heaven.  The  crowning  was  the  appointment  of  Jesus  to  the  vocation  of  Saviour, 
the  perfecting  was  the  process  through  which  he  became  skilled  in  the  art  of 
saving.  The  theatre  or  school  of  His  training  was  His  human  history,  and  the 
training  consisted  in  His  acquiring,  or  having  opportunity  of  exercising,  the  quali- 
ties and  virtues  which  go  to  make  a  good  leader  of  salvation.  Foremost  among 
these  are  sympathy,  patience,  obedience,  faith,  all  of  which  are  mentioned  in  the 
course  of  the  epistle.  The  official  perfecting  of  every  ordinary  man  includes  an 
ethical  element.  An  apprentice  during  the  course  of  his  apprenticeship  not  only 
goes  through  all  the  departments  of  his  craft  and  acquires  gradually  skill  in  each 
branch,  but  all  along  undergoes  a  discipline  of  character,  which  tends  to  make  him 
a  better  man  as  well  as  a  good  tradesman.  The  supreme  qualification  for  a 
leader  of  salvation  is  the  possession  and  exercise  of  hifjh  heroic  virtues,  such  as 
those  already  enumerated.  He  leads  by  inspiring  admiration  and  trust ;  that  is, 
by  being  a  moral  hero.  But  a  moral  hero  means  one  whose  life  is  hard,  tragic. 
Heroes  are  produced  by  passing  through  a  severe,  protracted  curriculum  of  trial. 
They  are  perfected  by  sufferings — sufferings  of  all  sorts,  the  more  numerous,  varied, 
and  severe  the  better ;  the  more  complete  the  training,  the  more  perfect  the  result, 
when  the  discipline  has  been  successfully  passed  through.  Hence  the  fitness,  nay, 
the  necessity,  that  one  having  Christ's  vocation  should  live  such  a  life  as  the  gos- 
pels depict;  full  of  temptations,  privations,  contradictions  of  unbelief,  ending  with 
death  on  the  cross ;  calling  into  play  to  the  uttermost  the  virtue  of  fortitude, 
affording  ample  scope  for  the  display  at  all  costs  of  fidelity  to  duty  and  obedience  to 
God,  and  in  the  most  desperate  situations  of  implicit  filial  trust  in  a  heavenly 
Father ;  and  through  all  these  combined  furnishing  most  satisfactory  guarantees 
for  the  possession  of  unlimited  capacity  to  sympathise  with  all  exposed  to  the  temp- 
tations and  tribulations  of  this  world.  How  can  any  son  of  God  who  is  being  led 
through  fire  and  blood  to  his  inheritance  doubt  the  value  of  a  Leader  so  trained  and 
equipped?  {A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.)  A  captain  xoortha  whole  brigade  : — Our  Leader 
inspires  confidence.  He  has  never  been  defeated.  Mark  you  1  how  He  conquered  the 
weaknesses  of  humanity,  pride,  self-seeking,  avarice,  and  resentment — how  he  con- 
quered the  Tempter  on  the  Mount ;  how  He  conquered  death  and  the  powers  of  hell ! 
We  know  whom  we  trust,  and  that  He  will  lead  us  to  victory.  In  one  of  the  Napoleonic 
battles  on  the  Peninsula,  a  corps  of  British  troops  were  sorely  pressed  and  began  to 
waver.  Just  then  the  Duke  of  Wellington  rode  in  among  them.  A  veteran  soldier 
cried  out:  "  Here  comes  the  Duke,  God  bless  him  !  the  sight  of  him  is  worth  a 
whole  brigade !  "  So  to  the  equipped  warrior  under  the  ensign  of  the  cross,  a  sight 
of  Jesus,  our  leader,  is  a  new  inspiration.  He  who  is  for  us  is  mightier  than  all 
that  be  against  us.  Jesus  is  able  to  assure  the  victory  to  every  redeemed  soul  who 
is  loyal  to  Him.  {T.  L,  Cuyler,  D.D.)  Christ  perfect  through  gttfferivgs  : — I 
The  Lobd  Jestjs  is  a  perfect  Saviodb.  1.  For.  first.  He  is  perfectly  adapted  for 
the  work  of  saving.  (1)  The  singular  constitution  of  His  nature  adapts  Him  to  His 
office.  He  is  God.  He  is  also  man.  No  nature  but  one  so  complex  as  that  of 
Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  Son  of  God,  would  have  been  perfectly  adapted  for  the  work 
of  salvation.  (2)  And  as  He  was  adapted  in  His  nature,  so  it  is  very  clear  to 
us  that  He  was  also  adapted  by  His  experience.  A  physician  should  have  some 
acquaintance  with  disease;  how  shall  he  know  the  remedy  if  he  be  ignorant  of  the 
malady.  Our  Saviour  knew  all  because  "  He  took  our  infirmities,"  &c.  (3)  If  you 
will  add  to  His  perfect  experience  His  marvellous  character,  you  will  see  how  com- 
pletely adapted  He  was  to  the  work.  For  a  Saviour,  we  need  one  who  is  full  of  love, 
whose  love  will  make  him  firm  to  his  purpose.  We  want  one  with  zeal  so  flaming, 
that  it  will  eat  him  up  ;  of  courage  so  indomitable,  that  he  will  face  every  adver- 
sary rather  than  forego  his  end  ;  we  want  one,  at  the  same  time,  who  will  blend 
with  this  brass  of  courage  the  gold  of  meekness  and  of  gentleness  ;  we  want  one 
who  will  be  determined  to  deal  fearlessly  with  his  adversaries — such  an  one  we  have 
In  Christ.  2.  Furthermore,  as  Christ  is  thus  per  ectly  adapted,  so  He  is  perfectly 
able  to  be  a  Saviour.  He  is  a  perfect  Saviour  by  reason  of  ability.  (1)  He  is  now 
able  to  meet  all  the  needs  of  sinners.    That  need  is  very  great.    The  sinner  needs 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  US 

everything.  "More  than  all  in  Christ  we  find  "  ;  pardon  in  His  blood ;  justification 
in  His  righteousness  ;  wisdom  in  His  teaching  ;  sanctification  in  His  Spirit.  He  ia 
the  God  of  all  grace  to  us.  (2)  As  He  has  this  power  to  meet  all  needs,  so  Ha 
can  meet  all  need  in  all  cases.  There  has  never  been  brought  to  Christ  a  man 
whom  He  could  not  heal.  (3)  As  He  can  meet  all  cases,  so  He  can  meet  all  cases 
at  all  times.  3.  Once  more,  let  me  remind  you  that  Christ  is  a  perfectly  successful 
Saviour.  (1)  I  mean  by  this  that,  in  one  sense,  He  has  alrendy  finished  the  work 
of  salvation.  All  that  has  to  be  done  to  save  a  soul  Christ  has  done  already.  (2) 
And,  as  He  has  been  successful  in  doing  aJl  the  work  for  us,  to,  in  every  case  where 
that  work  has  been  applied,  perfect  success  has  followed.  II.  Christ  was  made  a. 
PERFECT  Saviour  through  suffering.  1.  By  His  sufferings  He  became  perfect  as 
a  Saviour  from  having  offered  a  complete  expiation  for  sin.  Sin  could  not  have 
been  put  away  by  holiness.  The  best  performance  of  an  unsufferiug  being  could 
not  have  removed  the  guilt  of  man.  Suffering  was  absolutely  necessary,  for  suffer- 
ing was  the  penalty  of  sin.  2.  Again,  if  Christ  had  not  sufft^red  He  could  not  have 
been  perfect  as  a  Saviour,  because  He  could  not  have  brought  in  a  perfect  righteous- 
ness. It  is  not  enough  to  expiate  sin.  God  requires  of  man  perfect  obedience.  If 
man  would  be  in  heaven  he  must  be  perfectly  obedient.  Christ,  as  He  took  away 
our  guilt,  has  supplied  us  with  a  matchless  righteousness.  3.  Yet,  thirdly,  it  was 
necessary  that  Christ  should  suffer  to  make  Him  a  perfect  Saviour  so  far  as  His 
sympathy  goes.  4.  Finally,  upon  this  point ;  He  thus  became  perfect  as  oar 
exemplar.  III.  Christ's  having  been  made  perfect  through  suffering  will  en- 
noble THE  whole  work  OF  GRACE.  •'  It  became  Him  for  whom  are  all  things  and  by 
whom  are  all  things,  in  bringing  many  sons  unto  glory  " — that  is  the  grent  work — 
*•  to  make  the  captain  of  their  salvation  perfect  through  suffering."  The  whole 
thing  will  work  for  His  glory.  Oh,  how  this  will  glorify  God  at  the  last,  that  Christ, 
the  man,  should  have  been  perfect  through  suffering  I  1.  How  this  will  glorify 
Him  in  the  eyes  of  devils  I  It  was  in  man  that  they  defeated  God;  in  man 
God  destroys  them.  2.  How  greatly  will  God  be  exalted  that  day  in  the  eyes  of  lost 
spirits.  You  will  not  be  able  to  say,  ♦'  My  damnation  lies  at  God's  door,"  for  you 
will  see  in  Christ  a  suitable  Saviour.  3.  Oh,  what  delight  and  transport  will  seize 
the  minds  of  those  who  are  redeemed  I  How  will  God  be  glorified  then  I  Why, 
every  wound  of  Christ  will  cause  an  everlasting  song.  (C.  II.  Spur g eon.)  JEw- 
fection  throufih  mfering : — The  presence  of  evil  in  this  earth,  and  of  all  the  sorrow 
and  suffering  that  flows  from  evil,  naturally  appears  to  be  the  one  great  imperfection 
that  mars  the  economy  of  the  world.  Here,  however,  the  sacred  writer  boldly  faces 
the  mystery,  and  dares  to  speak  of  this  great  and  aU-pervading  imperfection  as  the 
necessary  condition  of  a  higher  perfection — a  perfection  so  high  and  glorious  as  to 
justify  all  that  has  seemed  inexplicable  in  bringing  it  about.  We  cannot  for  a 
moment  doubt  that  God,  being  omnipotent,  could  if  He  willed  bring  evil  to  a  sum- 
mary end.  But  if  He  could  crush  out  all  evil,  and  yet  does  not  do  so,  it  is  clear 
that  some  purpose  of  benevolence  and  love  higher  than  would  be  answered  by  this 
procedure  must  actuate  Him  to  adopt  the  course  that  He  does.  Now  we  ourselves 
are  in  a  position  to  notice  that  the  presence  and  operation  of  evil  in  one  form  or 
another  calls  forth,  or  perhaps  we  should  say  contributes  to  form,  qualities  and 
characteristics  such  as  are  not  within  our  own  observation  and  experience  otherwise 
produced.  If  a  man's  temper  should  never  be  tried,  we  cannot  see  how  he  can  learn 
self-control;  unless  a  man  be  exposed  to  danger  or  to  opposition,  how  shall  ha 
develop  courage?  If  he  never  has  a  trial  or  a  pain,  how  can  he  become  patient? 
Or  we  might  illustrate  the  subject  thus :  Mere  exclusion  from  the  conditions  of 
trial  and  temptation  will  not  transform  human  character,  although  it  may 
change  human  conduct.  Suppose  that  an  habitual  drunkard  migrated  to  a 
locaUty  where  intoxicants  could  not  be  obtained,  he  would  become  outwardly 
sober  certainly,  but  would  he  be  a  sober  man  in  the  moral  sense  of  the 
word?  Supposing  that  a  quarrelsome  man  were  banished  to  a  Juan  Fernandez, 
he  would  certainly  live  in  peace  because  he  had  no  one  to  quarrel  with;  but 
are  you  sure  he  would  not  pick  a  quarrel  with  the  captain  of  the  ship  that  carried 
him  back  to  England  ?  No ;  our  observation  shows  us  that  something  more  is 
needed  than  mere  seclusion  from  evil  to  make  us  truly  good.  Indeed,  it  teaches  us 
more  than  this.  It  would  lead  us  to  conclude  that  contact  with  evil  in  some  form 
or  another  would  seem  to  be  necessary  in  order  to  develop  the  highest  form  of  cha- 
racter. Are  any  of  us  disposed  to  ask.  Why  cannot  the  highest  form  of  good  be 
otherwise  produced  ?  It  is  enough  to  answer  that  God,  so  far  as  we  know,  invari- 
ably works  througn  means.    Further,  we  obserr    in  Nature  that  each  end  ig  the 

10 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  n. 

product  of  certain  particular  means,  or  specific  combinations  of  means,  and  of  no 
other,  and  reverence  and  piety  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  in  each  case  the  means 
are  the  best  that  could  be  chosen.  But  if  this  be  so  in  the  physical  world,  why 
should  it  not  be  so  in  the  moral?  And  there  rises  up  before  the  Divine  considera- 
tion the  vision  of  the  One  absolutely  perfect  Man,  who  was,  in  the  Father's  fore- 
knowledge, the  Lamb  slain  from  before  the  foimdation  of  the  world.  And  this 
highest  type  is  the  product  of  the  triumph  of  militant  good  over  opposing  evil ;  the 
ideal  Man  is  perfected  by  suffering.  Here,  at  any  rate,  the  means  have  produced 
the  end.  Hence  our  text,  we  observe,  speaks  of  something  that  we  might  almost 
call  a  Divine  necessity ;  at  any  rate,  it  contains  a  distioct  reference  to  the  eternal 
fitness  of  things,  to  the  fixed  operation  of  the  laws  of  causation  in  the  spiritual  as 
in  the  natural  world.  And  yet,  lest  this  should  be  taken  to  imply  the  existence  of 
some  superior  necessity  to  which  even  God  Himself  is  subject--lest  we  should  fall 
into  the  old  Pagan  notion  that  fate  is  stronger  than  Deity,  and  that  God  is  the 
creature  rather  than  the  Creator  of  universal  law,  the  writer  attaches  to  this  very 
reference  to  the  ettmal  fitness  of  things  one  of  the  most  sublime  declarations  in  all 
literature  of  the  place  that  God  holds  in  the  universe  He  has  made.  '•  It  became 
Him,  for  whom  are  all  things,  and  by  whom  are  all  things,  in  bringing  many  sons 
unto  glory,  to  make  the  Captain  of  their  salvation  perfect  through  suffering."  Let 
us  dwell  upon  these  two  revelations  of  the  Divine.  All  things  are  for  God.  He  is 
the  great  final  cause  cf  all  that  is.  "  Thou  bast  created  all  things,"  cry  the  blessed 
spirits  in  the  Land  of  Vision,  "and  for  Thy  pleasure  they  are  and  were  created." 
It  is  manifest  that  if  God  Himself  existed  antecedently  to  all  creation,  all  creation 
must  exist  for  Him.  And  this  implies  that  the  potentialities,  as  well  as  the 
original  actualities,  of  life  were  for  Him.  He  must  surely  have  known  what  He 
was  calling  into  existence,  and  what  possibihties  would  be  involved  for  good  or  evil 
when  He  said,  "  Let  us  make  man."  And  we  ourselves  are  for  Him.  The  prime 
object  of  our  existence  is  not  to  obtain  gratification  for  ourselves,  but  to  answer  Ilis 
purpose  concerning  us.  I  am  persuaded  that  one  great  secret  of  holiness  hes  in  the 
recognition  of  this  truth,  and  of  all  that  is  implied  in  it — I  exist  for  God.  In  this 
new  view  of  life,  and  in  the  acceptance  of  God  instead  of  self  as  our  centre  of  refer- 
ence, lies  the  very  essence  of  self-denial.  We  deny  ourselves  when,  instead  of 
asking,  What  do  I  like,  we  inquire,  "  Lord,  what  wouldest  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  " 
Anil  the  second  revelation  is  scarcely  less  important.  "By  Him  are  all  things." 
He  is  the  efficient  as  well  as  the  final  cause  in  His  great  universe  of  all  that  He 
designs  to  be  eternal,  and  of  all  that  contributes  to  what  is  eternal.  This  suggests 
to  our  minds  the  thought,  that  not  only  are  the  ages  bound  together  by  one  great 
purpose,  but  more  than  this,  God  must  be  the  best  judge  of  the  means  by  which 
that  great  purpose  is  to  be  subserved.  And  if  He  employs  suffering  as  a  means 
towards  this  end  (and  no  doubt  He  is  most  reluctant  to  employ  such  a  means),  it 
must  be  because  He  sees  this  to  be  the  means  most  suited  to  the  end  aimed  at,  in- 
deed the  only  means  that  can  bring  about  the  specific  results  desired.  Now  it  is 
obviously  of  the  greatest  practical  moment  that  we  should  bear  in  mind  that  "  of 
Him  are  all  things  "  in  our  own  personal  experience.  It  is  not  the  devil  that  is 
allowed  to  shape  the  features  of  the  Christian's  lot.  Though  he  may  be  the  agent 
in  inflicting  such  sufferings,  there  is  a  deeper  love  underneath  that  permits  them 
all  for  the  promotion  of  a  higher  good.  But  if  all  things  are  for  God,  and  we  our- 
seLves  are  for  Him — if  He  is  to  derive  a  special  gratification  and  satisfaction  from 
our  perfection — then  may  we  not  boldly  affinn  that  all  things  are  for  us  ?  and  may 
we  not  confidently  trust  Him  with  the  selection  of  means  towards  the  great  end 
th  it  He  has  in  view  ?  It  is  this  thought  that  will  arm  us  to  face  trials  without 
apprehension,  and  keep  us  from  forfeiting  the  blessings  of  suffering  by  yielding  to 
a  murmuring  spirit.  Stoics  might  teach  us  to  endure  tribulation,  and  Epicureans 
might  adv-ise  us  to  do  our  best  to  escape  tribulation;  but  who  had  ever  before 
thought  of  the  possibility  of  glorying  in  tribulation  ?  But  the  true  Christian 
glories  in  it.  He  glories  in  it  because  it  is  a  means  towards  an  end.  It  is 
one  of  the  "  all  things "  that  are  of  God,  and  that  contribute  to  what  God 
designs.  We  glory  in  that  triumphant  power  of  Divine  grace  which  renders  even 
evil  the  minister  of  good,  and  converts  what  we  most  shrink  from  mto  the  means  of 
inducing  what  we  most  desire.  But  the  most  surprising  part  of  the  text  certainly  is 
that  in  which  Christ  is  represented  as  being  submitted  to  the  same  meansof  develop- 
ment as  ourselves  in  this  respect.  And  our  text  affirms  that  it  was  in  accordance 
with  the  eternal  fitness  of  things  that  He  should  be  perfected  by  suffering  like  the 
resi.    If  God's  method  of  operation  is  this,  that  He  produces  ends  by  definite  and 


CHAP.  n.J  HEBREWS.  147 

appropriate  means,  why  should  we  expect  Him  to  depart  from  it  in  a  particular 
case  ?  If  the  very  highest  form  of  human  perfection  could  be  induced,  without  any 
employmeut  of  means — and  painful  and  unpleasant  moans — such  as  we  are  sub- 
jected to,  would  there  not  have  been  ground  for  the  conclusion  that  these  means 
were  in  themselves  unnecessary  ?  Surely  with  such  premises,  it  would  be  difficult 
for  us  to  draw  any  other  conclusion  than  that  the  infliction  of  all  this  suffering  waa 
gratuitous,  and  therefore  unkind.  But  Christ  came  to  vindicate  the  Father's  cha- 
racter and  ways.  Above  all  He  came  to  deepen  our  sense  of  the  Father's  love  and 
benevolence,  and  therefore  it  behoved  Him  to  submit  to  the  established  law,  and  to 
make  the  highest  use  of  the  means  which  a  Father's  love  has  appointed  for  the 
training  and  perfecting  of  man.  Jesus  Christ  is  not  any  grander,  any  more  glorious, 
in  the  moral  sense  of  the  word,  even  when  He  sits  ou  the  throne,  than  He  was 
when  He  hung  in  anguish,  faint  and  dying,  on  a  felon's  cross.  We  can  guess  at 
His  perfection  up  yonder  in  the  glory  ;  we  can  see  it  on  the  cross.  And  it  is  just 
the  sort  of  perfection  that  sanctified  sorrow  and  suffering  amongst  ourselves  is 
known,  in  some  degree  at  any  ra'.e,  to  proituce.  Self-control  in  its  highest  form; 
self-effacement  that  se  jms  wonderful  in  its  completeness,  even  in  Him  of  whom  we 
have  learnt  to  expect  whatever  is  highest  and  noblest ;  courage  that  took  measure 
beforehand  of  all  that  was  to  come,  and  yet  never  flinched  ;  obedience  that  would 
not,  that  did  not,  fail  when  the  consequence  was  torture  and  death ;  patience  that 
continued  to  endure  when  relief  at  any  moment  was  within  His  reach  ;  faith  that 
would  not  doubt  the  Father's  love,  though  all  that  He  was  suffering  seemed  to  con- 
tradict it ;  hope  that  looked  on  through  the  horrors  of  the  present  to  the  joy  that 
was  set  before  Him  ;  magnanimity  that  despised  the  shume  ;  benignant  pity  that 
pleaded  for  His  very  murderers;  and,  above  all,  changeless  and  unconquerable 
love  that  many  waters  could  not  quench  nor  floods  drown — these  were  amongst  the 
characteristic  perfections  that  have  shone  upon  the  world  from  Calvary,  and  are 
shining  still.  And  these  are  all  of  them  such  as  sorrow  and  suffering  contribute  to 
form;  indeed,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  some  of  these  characteristics  could  not  have 
existed,  otherwise  than  p  tentially,  even  in  the  perfect  Man,  had  He  not  been  ex- 
posed to  suffering.  But  it  may  be  asked.  How  could  Jesus  Christ  be  perfected  when 
He  was  never  imperfect?  Perfection  may  be  regarded  as  either  relative  or  absolute. 
Absolute  perfection  is  the  attribute  of  God,  and  belonged  to  Christ  in  His  eternal 
Godhead  from  all  eternity.  But,  again,  there  is  such  a  thing  as  relative  perfection 
— a  perfection,  that  is  to  say,  that  is  relative  not  only  to  the  object  and  its  ideal, 
but  to  the  conditions  to  which  it  is  for  the  time  being  submitted.  There  never  was 
a  time,  then,  when  Jesus  Christ  was  relatively  imperfect.  As  a  mere  child  no 
doubt  He  was  all  that  a  child  could  be ;  and  as  a  young  man  I  question  not,  though 
we  know  actually  nothing  of  His  youth.  He  presented  to  His  contemporaries  a  per- 
fect model  of  youthful  manhood.  But,  as  we  have  seen,  there  are  certain  forms  of 
manly  and,  perhaps  I  should  say,  Godlike  virtue  that  are  only  brought  forth  to 
perfection,  so  far  as  we  know,  by  trial  and  suffering ;  and  Jesus  Christ  could  not  be 
the  absolutely  Perfect  Man  until  these  characteristics  had  been  by  suffering  acquired. 
For  example,  we  are  taught  that  He  learned  obedience  by  the  things  that  He  suffered. 
Now  there  never  was  a  time  when  Jesus  Christ  was  disobedient ;  but  obedience,  to 
be  perfect,  must  be  submitted  to  test.  You  cannot  call  a  child  obedient  if  his 
obedience  has  never  cost  him  anything,  nor  do  you  know  that  he  will  obey  when  the 
trial  comes  unless  he  has  been  already  put  to  the  test.  In  this  sense,  and  in  this 
sense  only,  Christ  learnt  obedience  by  the  things  that  He  suffered.  Alas !  the  words 
apply  very  differently  to  many  of  us  !  We  disobey,  and  we  suffer  for  it,  and  perhaps 
suffer  severely,  and  then  we  begin  to  think  that  perh  ips  obedience  is  the  truer  wis- 
dom. But  He,  on  the  other  hand,  learned  the  habit  of  obedience  without  ever  tast- 
ing the  bitter  fruits  of  disobedience.  His  sufferings  came  in  the  path  of  obedience, 
and  instead  of  deflecting  Him  from  it  confirmed  Him  in  it.  His  own  brethren  did 
not  believe  on  Him.  Here  were  trials  at  home  harder  to  bear  than  poverty  and 
want.  But  from  this  form  of  suffering  He  learned  to  stand  alone,  to  be  the  less 
dependent  on  man,  and  the  more  in  the  society  of  His  Father ;  while  instead  of 
His  affections  and  sympathies  being  shrivelled  and  blighted  by  this  unfavourable 
atmosphere  they  seem  to  have  flowed  forth  all  the  more  freely  towards  all  who  felt 
their  value  and  responded  to  their  advances.  Yet  another  sorrow  sprang  from  the 
attitude  assumed  towards  Him  by  the  religious  world.  It  is  never  pleasant  to  be 
regarded  as  a  heretic  by  those  who  represent  a  dominant  and  intolerant  orthodoxy. 
I  have  known  cases  in  which  men  have  become  embittered  against  and  estranged 
from  their  fellow -Christians  for  life  because  of  what  they  have  suffered  through  practi- 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  ib 

cal  excommunication.  But  where  we  may  miss  the  lesson,  Christ  learned  it.  On  the 
one  hand,  He  learnt  from  all  this  how  little  trust  was  to  be  reposed  in  the  theories 
and  systems  of  men.  But  look  again,  and  observe  how  all  through  His  ministry  Ho 
suffered  from  the  contradiction  of  sinners  against  Himself,  and  this  suffering  coutri- 
buted  to  His  perfection  in  two  ways.  It  seems  to  have  deepened  and  strengthened 
the  intensity  of  His  hatred  against  sin,  and  to  have  taught  Him  the  necessity  ol 
using  great  plainness,  and  even  in  some  cases  severity  of  speech  in  convicting  sin- 
ners, while  it  also  produced  in  Him  a  wonderful  patience  in  dealing  with  sinners. 
Did  He,  could  He,  suffer  from  temptation,  and  was  He  perfected  by  this  also  ?  The 
writer  of  this  Epistle  says  so  in  so  many  words.  We  kuow  how  much  of  severe  paia 
temptation  often  causes  ;  how  it  sometimes  seems  as  if  we  were  so  circumstanced 
that  it  must  needs  be  pain  to  resist,  and  probably  not  less  but  greater  pain  to  yield. 
He  never  had,  it  is  true,  a  fallen  nature,  and  a  bias  towards  evil  such  as  we  have ; 
and  many  feel  as  if  that  must  needs  have  rendered  it  impossible  for  Him  to  be 
tempted  as  we  are.  But  are  we  able  to  judge  how  much  this  advantage  may  have 
been  compensated  by  the  special  trials  that  belonged  to  the  unique  position  that  He 
occupied  ?  Who  shall  afhrm  that  the  urgent  demands  of  such  an  appetite  aa 
hunger,  aggravated  to  a  scarcely  conceivable  intensity  by  the  pains  of  a  forty  days' 
fast,  were  more  easy  to  deny  than  the  cravings  of  abnormally-developed  lust  in  the 
manhood  of  a  confirmed  sensualist?  And  this  is  only  one  example  out  of  many 
that  should  suffice  to  prove  the  reality  of  the  sufferings  to  which  He  was  exposed 
by  temptation.  Where  is  there  another  in  human  history  whose  temptation  was  so 
severe  as  to  wring  blood-drops  from  the  agonising  body  ?  Never  say  that  Jesus's 
temptations  were  nothing  to  yours,  because  He  was  innocent  when  you  are  impure, 
unless  you  have  passed  through  such  an  agony  and  bloody  sweat  as  fell  to  His  lot 
in  Gethsemane.  But  here  as  elsewhere  suffering  perfected  the  Man,  He  learnt 
how  Divine  power — the  power  of  the  Eternal  Spirit — can  master  and  triumph  over 
the  strongest  claims  of  nature ;  and  thus  through  suffering  He  rose  to  the  very 
culminating-point  of  true  self-mastery,  and  was  able  to  lay  Himself  upon  the  aluir 
a  whole  burnt  sacrifice.  Yes,  the  seli-control  of  Jesus  Christ  differs  from  all  otLer 
instances  of  it  in  these  particulars  :  First,  He  seems  to  have  been  able  to  take  the 
measure  of  His  sufferings  before  they  occurred — an  experience  which  is  happily 
impossible  to  us  ;  and,  second,  all  the  while  that  He  was  enduring  them  He  knevsr 
perfectly  well  that  He  had  only  to  express  a  wish  and  His  sufferings  would  have 
been  at  an  end.  Thus  His  obedience  was  made  perfect,  and  with  His  obedience 
His  human  character.  The  means  produced  the  end  with  Him  that  it  might  pro- 
duce the  self-same  end  with  us  ;  and  from  the  moment  of  His  perfection  by  suffer- 
ing He  consecrated  suffering  as  a  minister  of  the  Divine  purpose,  so  that  His 
followers  might  no  longer  shrink  from  it  and  tremble  at  it,  but  rather  glory  in  it 
as  a  conquered  foe  that  has  become  our  friend.  (W.  U.  M.  H.  Aitken,  M.A.y 
Perfect  through  Buffering : — L  Jesds  was  made  perfect  through  suffering.  1. 
Not  (1)  Physically.  (2)  Intellectually.  (3)  Morally.  2.  But  in  His  Saviourhood. 
(1)  Example.  (2)  Expiation.  IL  The  follower  op  Jesus  is  made  perfect 
THROUGH  SUFFERING.  1.  It  dcepcus  his  humiUty.  2.  It  increases  his  power 
of  endurance.  3.  It  stimulates  his  sympathy  toward  those  who  suffer.  4. 
It  awakens  within  him  stronger  yearnings  after  a  better  world.  {J.  K.  Jackson.} 
Christ't  perfecting  by  suffering : — I.  The  great  sweep  of  the  Divine  action  in  the 
orFT  op  Christ  as  it  is  bet  forth  here.  It  is  "  bringing  many  sons  unto  glory," 
wherein  there  lies,  of  course,  a  metaphor  of  a  great  filial  procession,  being  led  on' 
through  all  changes  of  this  lower  life,  steadily  upwards  into  the  possession  of  what 
is  here  called  "  glory."  The  same  metaphor  colours  the  other  expression  of  our 
text,  "  the  Captain  of  our  salvation."  This  great  procession  of  sons  up  into  glory, 
which  is  the  object  and  aim  of  God's  work,  is  all  under  the  leadership  of  Him  who 
is  the  Captain,  the  foremost,  the  Originator,  and,  in  a  profound  sense,  the  Cause  of 
their  salvation.  So,  then,  we  have  before  us  the  thought  that  God  brings,  and  yet 
Christ  leads,  and  God's  bringing  is  effected  through  Christ's  leadership.  Look  at 
the  extent  of  the  Divine  act.  "  Many  "  is  used  not  in  contrast  to  '*  all,"  as  if  there 
was  proclaimed  here  a  restricted  application  of  Christ's  work  in  the  Divine  idea ;  but 
"  many  "  is  in  opposition  to  "  few,"  or,  perhaps  in  opposition  to  the  One.  There 
is  One  Leader,  and  there  is  an  indefinite  number  of  followers.  Then,  note,  the 
relationship  which  the  members  of  that  great  company  possess.  The  many  are 
being  brought  as  "sons";  under  the  leadership  of  the  one  Son.  Then  note  further, 
the  end  of  the  march.  This  great  company  stretching  numberless  away  beyond  the 
rftD^e  of  vision,  and,  all  exalted  into  the  dignity  of  sons,  is  steadfastly  pressing- 


CHAP.    I.  J  BE  DREWS.  149 

onwards  to  the  aim  of  fulfilling  that  Divine  ideal  of  humanity,  long  since  spoken 
in  the  psalm  which,  in  its  exuberant  promises,  sounds  liker  irony  than  hope.  "  Thou 
crownest  Him  with  glory  and  honour."  They  are  not  only  steadily  marching 
ouwards  to  the  realisation  of  that  Divine  ideal,  but  also  to  the  participation  of  the  glory 
of  the  Captain  who  is  the  "  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,"  as  well  as  "  the  express 
image  of  His  person."  So  again,  the  underlv  ing  thought  is  the  identity,  as  in  fate 
here,  so  in  destiny  hereafter,  of  the  army  with  its  Leader.  He  is  the  Son,  and  the 
Divine  purpose  is  to  make  the  "  many  "  partakers  of  His  Sonship.  He  is  the  reali- 
eation  of  the  Divine  ideal.  We  see  not  yet  all  things  put  under  man,  but  we  see 
Jesus,  and  so  we  know  that  the  ancient  hope  is  not  the  baseless  fabric  of  a  vision, 
nor  a  dream  which  will  pass  when  we  awake  to  the  realities,  but  is  to  be  fulfilled  in 
every  one,  down  to  the  humblest  private  in  that  great  army,  all  of  whom  shall 
p  irtake  in  their  measure  and  degree,  in  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  This,  then,  being 
the  purpose — the  leading  up  out  of  the  world  into  the  glory,  of  a  great  company  of 
eons  who  are  conformed  to  the  image  of  the  Son — we  attain  the  point  from  which 
we  may  judge  of  the  adaptation  of  the  means  to  the  end.  The  Cross  is  surplusage 
if  Ch)ist  be  a  prophet  only ;  it  is  surplusage  and  an  incongruity  if  Christ  be  simply 
the  foremost  of  the  pure  natures  that  have  walked  the  earth,  and  shown  the  beauty 
of  goodness.  But  if  Christ  have  come  to  make  men  sons  of  God,  by  participation 
of  His  Sonship,  and  to  blanch  and  irradiate  their  blackness  by  the  reflection  and  im- 
pavtation  of  His  own  flashing  glory,  then  it  "  became  Him,  in  bringing  many  sons 
unto  glory,  to  make  the  Captain  of  their  salvation  perfect  through  sufferings. "  II.  The 
Paradox  of  the  method  adopted  to  cabry  odt  this  Divine  purpose.  The  leader  must 
have  no  exemption  from  the  hardships  of  the  company.  If  He  is  to  be  a  leader.  He 
Bnd  we  must  go  by  the  same  road.  He  must  tramp  along  all  the  weary  path  that 
we  have  to  tread.  He  must  experience  all  the  conflicts  and  diSiculties  that  we  have 
to  experience.  He  cannot  lift  us  up  into  a  share  of  His  glory  unless  He  stoops  to 
the  companionship  of  our  grief.  Again,  we  learn  the  necessity  of  His  suffering  in 
order  to  His  sympathy.  Before  He  suffers.  He  has  the  pity  of  a  God ;  after  He 
Buffers,  He  has  learnt  the  compassion  of  a  man.  Then  we  learn,  further,  the 
necessity  of  the  Captain's  suffering  in  order  to  emancipate  us  from  the  dominion  of 
the  evil  that  He  bears.  No  Christ  is  enough  for  me  a  siimer  except  a  Christ  whose 
Cross  takes  away  the  burden  and  the  penalty  of  my  transgression.  And  thus  "  it 
became  Him  to  make  the  Captain  of  salvation  perfect  through  suffering,"  else  the 
design  of  making  men  His  sons  and  sharers  of  His  glory  could  never  come  to  pass. 
III.  The  harmony  between  the  loftiest  conception  of  the  Divine  character 
AND  NATURE  AND  THESE  SUFFERINGS  OF  Jesds.  The  Writer  dwcUs  upon  two  aspects 
of  God's  relation  to  the  universe.  "  It  became  Him /or  whom  are  all  things,  and  by 
or  through  whom  are  all  things."  That  is  to  say,  the  sufferings  and  death  of  the 
Christ,  in  whom  is  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  are  worthy  of  that  lofty  nature  to  the 
praise  and  glory  of  which  all  things  contribute.  The  Cross  is  the  highest  manifesta- 
tion of  the  Divine  nature.  Another  aspect,  closely  connected  with  this,  lies  in  that 
other  clause.  Christ's  sufferings  and  death  are  congruous  with  that  Almighty  power 
by  which  the  universe  has  sprung  into  being  and  is  sustained.  His  creative  agency 
is  not  the  highest  exhibition  of  His  power.  Creation  is  effected  by  a  word.  The 
bare  utterance  of  the  Divine  will  is  all  that  is  needed  to  make  the  heavens  and  the 
earth,  and  to  "preserve  the  stars  from  wrong."  Tiiis  work  needs  the  humiliation, 
the  suffering,  the  death,  resurrection,  ascension,  and  session  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  of  the  Captain  of  our  salvation  and  the  Prince  of  our  life.  So,  though  by  Him 
are  all  things,  if  we  would  know  the  full  sweep  and  omnipotence  of  His  power.  He 
points  us  away  from  creation,  and  its  ineffectual  fires  that  pale  before  this  blighter 
Light  in  which  His  whole  self  is  embodied,  and  says,  '♦  There,  that  is  the  arm  of  the 
Lord  made  bare  in  the  sight  of  all  the  nations."  Omnipotence  has  made  the  world, 
the  Cross  has  redeemed  it.  (A.  3Iaclaren,  D.D.)  Pgff€H-^krmigh  sufferings  : — 1. 
The  first  qualification  for  such  a  commander  is  that  he  be  one  we  can  wholly  trust. 
In  order  to  this  he  must  not  only  have  knowledge  but  experience.  To  win  our  faith 
our  Captain  had  to  fight  our  battle.  2.  But  more  than  this:  He  bas  to  change  our 
whole  characters  :  to  wean  us  from  all  evil  and  win  us  to  all  good,  to  change  our 
hearts  so  that  we  should  seek  to  be  holy.  He  could  not  do  so  without  suffering.  I 
have  known  a  motlier,  tender  and  pure,  with  a  son  once  her  joy  but  now  her  heart- 
bi'eak,  a  prodiggl,  wilful,  scornful,  and  seemingly  to  all  good  reprobute.  On  a  certain 
night  she  knew  he  was  in  an  evil  place  and  company.  She  went  forth  with  the 
biting  sleet  and  snow  drifting  upon  her.  With  prayer  she  closed  her  ears  to  foul 
•nd  ribald  speech,  with  prayer  she  closed  her  eyes  to  shameless  sights,  with  prajet 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

through  insult  and  blasphemy  and  blows  she  made  her  way  and  stood  before  her  son, 
torn  and  bleeding,  to  plead  with  his  better  heart,  if  any  better  heart  remained  in 
him.  A  sorrowful  and  yet  a  noble  sight  I  As  he  looked  on  her,  bitter,  remorseful 
thoughts  and  tender  memories  of  good  filled  his  heart.  Never  had  he  seen  his  sins 
as  he  saw  them  now  written  on  her  crushed,  broken  heart,  and  it  touched  and 
startled  him  into  a  new  feeling  of  glory  and  virtue.  That  mother's  love  became 
her,  and  her  sorrow  perfected  her  for  the  work  of  redeeming  her  son  from  the  evil 
of  his  ways.  Even  so  the  Lord  Jesus  yearned  to  save  His  lost  ones,  and  came  forth  in 
His  purity  into  the  haunts  of  our  sin  and  degradation,  and  walked  among  us,  despised 
and  rejected  and  blasphemed  and  crucified.  If  the  human  heart  is  not  rotted  out, 
if  there  is  truth  or  ruth  left  in  us,  the  thought  of  that  sorrowful  love  should  fill  us 
with  contrition  and  touch  us  with  a  feeling  of  Divine  things  again.  He  was  perfected 
by  suffering  to  make  this  last  appeal  to  us.  If  there  is  anything  that  will  reach  and 
touch  and  change  and  melt  our  hearts,  it  is  the  sight  of  that  sorrowing  love,  wounded 
for  our  iniquities,  and  bruised  for  our  transgressions.  (W,  C.  Smith,  D.D.) 
Perfect  through  sufferings : — How  was  it  that  the  discipline  of  suffering  improved 
the  unimprovable  Saviour  ?  Not  in  the  way  of  pruning  off  tendencies  to  anything 
bad :  for  in  Him  there  never  were  any.  There  was  no  self-conceit  there  to  be  purged 
out :  no  arrogance  to  be  taken  down :  no  hardness  to  be  softened  by  experience  of 
pain.  No  higher  degree  was  possible,  in  the  scale  of  moral  escelleuce — of  purity, 
kindness,  unselfishness,  truthfulness.  But  round  this  central  core  of  unimprovable 
perfection,  there  might  gather  special  qualifications  fitting  for  the  fulfilment  of  Hia 
gieat  atoning  work,  such  as  not  even  He  could  have  without  passing  through  that 
baptism  of  suffering  which  was  implied  by  His  life  and  death.  Christ  was  "  ma  ia 
perfect  through  sufferings,"  in  the  sense  that  He  was  made  more  completely 
equipped  and  prepared  for  the  work  He  came  to  do,  by  the  sufferings  He  underwent. 

1.  By  His  sufferings,  Hb  atoned  fob  bin,  and  took  it  away.  II.  Another  respect 
in  which  Christ  became  through  sufferings  the  Saviour  we  know  Him  for — is  in  thb 

MATTER   OF   Hl8    BEING    AN   EXAMPLE   FOB   US     IN    OUR   DATS     OP    SORROW.         III.     TllCn, 

again,  sufferings  perfected  our  blessed  Saviour  and  made  Him  what  we  know  Him 
for,  IN  THE  MATTER  OF  SYMPATHY  WITH  VB.  "He  has  fclt  the  Same":  how  thnt 
brings  the  Divine  Redeemer  close  to  us  ;  as  nothing  else  could  I  IV.  Now,  does  the 
text  mean  more  ?  Is  there  an  uncomfortable  feeling  in  any  mind,  that  in  all  this 
we  have  been  evading  a  plain  statement  of  God's  Word,  because  it  seems  as  thoug'i 
it  would  not  fit  in  with  our  theology  ?  Does  any  one  think  that  if  we  really  read  the 
text  honestly,  it  would  convey  that  suffering  improved  Christ  morally,  made 
Him  better,  just  in  the  same  sense  in  which  suffering  improves  us,  and  makes  us 
better?  The  idea  is  startling.  Yet  good  men  and  wise  men  have  held  it  and 
delighted  in  it.  One  such  (Archer  Butler),  a  firm  believer  in  our  Lord's  Divinity, 
has  maintained  that  all  those  long  nights  of  prayer,  all  that  endurance  of  contra- 
diction, the  agony  in  the  Garden,  the  final  struggle  on  the  Cross,  had  power  (I  quote 
his  words)  "  to  raise  and  refine  the  human  element  of  His  Being  beyond  the  sim  )e 
purity  of  its  original  innocence  ;  so  that,  though  ever  and  equally  vrithout  sin,  the 
dying  Christ  was  something  more  consummate  still  than  the  Christ  baptized  in 
Jordan."  I  confess  at  once,  I  cannot  venture  to  say  so.  The  Best  could  never  grow 
better.  One  cannot  bear  to  exalt  even  the  dying  Eedeemer  by  saying  what  seems 
to  cast  a  slight  on  Him  who  preached  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  And  veil  it  as  you 
may  in  more  skilful  phrases,  it  comes  to  that,  when  you  speak  of  sorrow  as  working 
"  a  refining  and  exalting  change  "  upon  Christ  I  Yet  perhaps  without  irreverence  it 
may  be  said  that  the  human  in  Him  must  have  learnt,  daily,  intellectually  :  and  (so 
joined  are  they  together)  in  some  sense,  thus  learning,  have  morally  grown.  And 
true  it  is,  doubtless,  that  "  Virtue  tried  and  triumphant  ranks  above  untried  inno- 
cence." {A.  K.  H.  Boyd,  D.D.)  Christ made  perfect  tiir&ugh  mffering : — I.  A 
DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  DiviNE  MAJESTY.     1.  His  absolute  Superiority  and  authority. 

2.  His  infinite  power  and  skill.  By  Him  the  world  was  planned,  constructed,  and  is 
sustained.  II.  The  blessed  work  which  the  Divine  Being  has  undertaken  to 
PERFORM.  1.  The  object:  "glory."  2.  The  means  :  "being  made  sons."  3.  The 
number :  "  many,"  III.  The  method  by  which  the  Divine  Being  will  accom- 
plish this  work.  1.  He  has  appointed  Jesus  "  the  Captain  of  their  salvation."  i. 
For  this  work  Christ  was  prepared.  '«  Perfect  through  suffering."  17.  The  appro- 
priateness  OF   BOTH   THE  WORK   AND  THE  METHOD   UNDERTAKEN  BY  THE  DiVINE  BkING, 

1.  It  became  His  truth  and  faithfulness.  2.  It  became  His  holiness  and  justice.  3. 
It  became  His  wisdom.  (J.  Bums,  D.D.)  The  ministry  of  svffering : — There  are  few 
things  less  understood,  or  more  misrepresented,  than  human  suffering.  In  too  many 


OHAP.  n.]  HEBREWS.  151 

cases  it  is  regarded  as  the  penal  scourge,  rather  than  as  the  kindly  rod  that  chastens 
and  corrects.  Let  us  inquire — I.  How  the  ministry  op  suffering  contributed  to 
THE  perfection  OF  Christ.  The  Scriptures  teach  us  that  in  Christ  there  was  no 
moral  or  spiritual  deficiency.  How  then  could  a  Being  so  holy  be  made  "  perfect 
through  sufferings  "  ?  1.  The  perfection  of  sacrifice.  The  work  of  human  reilenip- 
tion  required  not  only  a  sinless,  but  a  suffering  agent.  The  victim  must  not  only 
be  unspotted,  but  laid  on  the  altar  and  subjected  to  the  fire  of  suffering,  in  order  to 
become  a  valid  offering.  2.  The  perfection  of  moral  development.  The  perfection 
of  Christ's  character  in  later  life  must  have  been  of  a  higher  description  than  that  of 
His  younger  days :  the  one  was  the  perfection  of  innocence,  the  other  the  perfec- 
tion of  a  tested  and  experienced  virtue.  His  character  was  always  like  a  piece  of 
pure,  unalloyed  gold,  but  it  shone  with  a  brighter  lustre  at  the  last,  because  it  had 
been  submitted  to  the  friction  of  pain  and  sorrow.  3.  The  perfection  of  sympathy. 
One  thing  necessary  to  the  exercise  of  true  sympathy  is  the  power  to  forget  self. 
Selfishness  must  sink  before  sympathy  can  rise.  Another  thing  necessary  is  the 
personal  knowledge  of  sorrow.  IL  The  ministry  op  sdfferino  as  it  contributes 
to  thje  perfection  of  believers.  1.  Suffering  to  be  a  blessing,  must  be  rightly 
borne.  In  the  temper  in  which  we  submit  to  it  depends  whether  it  is  to  be  the  angel 
that  sweetens  or  the  demon  that  sours  us.  2.  There  is  much  unreality  often 
about  the  best  of  men.  In  speech  and  action  we  are  not  always  true.  There 
is  often  a  smattering  of  half- unconscious,  half- wilful  misrepresentation  about 
our  conduct.  We  sometimes  deceive  ourselves,  and  sometimes  half-unwittingly 
try  to  deceive  our  God.  The  ministry  of  suffering  strips  us  of  all  this.  (IVie  Lay 
Preacher.)  Fulfilling  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord  : — I.  A  work  intended.     1.  A 

relationship  was  to  be  established:  "sons."  2.  A  leadership  is  undeita,ken  : 
"  bringing;."  3.  A  goal  is  assigned  :  "  glory."  God's  revelations  to  His  people  will 
be  Id  everlasting  crescendo.  II.  A  method  adopted.  1.  It  was  the  Divine  appoint- 
ment that  those  led  to  "  glory  "  should  have  a  captain  or  prince  over  them.  2. 
This  great  Forerunner  was  perfected  as  a  Captain  of  salvation  through  suffering. 

11)  Jesus  Christ,  by  atoning  for  sin,  had  a  righteous  basis  for  undertaking  the 
eadership  of  souls.  (2)  In  suffering,  Jesus  Christ  grappled  with  His  enemies  and 
ours  and  laid  them  low,  (3)  In  His  suffering,  Jesus  passed  through  the  various 
phases  of  human  experience,  and  thus  became  qualified  to  succour  those  who  were 
following  Him.  (4)  In  Him  all  conceivable  qualities  fora  perfect  Captain  of  salvation 
are  found.  (5)  Nor  will  the  host  He  leads  to  glory  be  smalL  III,  The  reason? 
ASSIGNED.  "For  it  became  Him,"  &c. — i.e.,  it  was  suitable  for  Him,  becoming  to 
Him.  1.  This  plan  accords  with  the  yearnings  of  Infinite  Love.  2.  This  plan  accords 
with  God's  righteousness.  For  thereby  He  has  condemned  sin  that  He  might  conquer 
it.  3,  God  magnifies  His  wisdom.  The  Leader  adequate  to  all  emergencies.  4.  This 
plan  will  disclose  God's  faithfulness.  5.  And  manifest  His  power.  {C.Clemance,D.D.) 
Fer/eet  throuflh  suffering  :— "  Unaccountable  this !  "  said  the  Wax,  as  from  the  flame 
it  dropped  melting  upon  the  Paper  beneath,  "  Do  not  grieve,"  said  the  Paper  ;  "  I 
am  sure  it  is  all  right."  "I  was  never  in  such  agony  1  "  exclaimed  the  Wax,  still 
dropping.  "  It  is  not  Virithout  a  good  design,  and  will  end  well,"  replied  the  Paper. 
The  Wax  was  unable  to  reply  at  once,  owing  to  a  strong  pressure  ;  and  when  it  agaia 
looked  up  it  bore  a  beautiful  impression,  the  counterpart  of  the  seal  which  had  beea 
applied  to  it.  "Ah  1  I  comprehend  now,"  said  the  Wax,  no  longer  in  suU'eriug. 
"  I  was  softened  in  order  to  receive  this  lovely  durable  impress.  Yes ;  I  see  now  it 
was  all  right,  because  it  has  given  to  me  the  beautiful  likeness  which  I  could  not 
otherwise  have  obtained."  Adversity  a  di»c>pline : — James  Douglas,  son  of  the 
banished  Earl  of  Angus,  afterwards  well  known  by  the  title  of  Earl  of  Morton,  lurked 
during  the  exile  of  his  family  in  the  north  of  Scotland,  under  the  assumed  name  of 
James  Innes,  otherwise  "  James  the  Grieve"  (i.e.,  Keve  or  Bailiff).  "And  as  he 
bore  the  name,"  says  Godscroft,  '*  so  did  he  also  execute  the  office  of  a  grieve  or 
overseer  of  the  lands  and  rents,  the  corn  and  cattle,  of  him  with  whom  he  lived." 
From  the  habits  of  frugality  and  observation  which  he  acquired  in  his  humble 
situation,  the  historian  traces  that  intimate  acquaintance  with  popular  character 
which  enabled  him  to  rise  so  high  in  the  State,  and  that  honourable  economy  by 
which  he  repaired  and  established  the  shattered  estates  of  Angus  and  Morion. 
(Sir  Walter  Scott.)  Perfect  through  suffering  :— The  people  of  Verona,  when 
they  saw  Dante  in  the  streets,  used  to  say,  "  See,  there  is  the  man  that  was  in 
hell  I  "  Ah,  yes,  he  had  been  in  hell ; — in  hell  enough,  in  long  severe  sorrow  and 
struggle  ;  as  the  like  of  him  is  pretty  sure  to  have  been.  Commedias  that  come  out 
divine,  are  not  accomplished  otherwise.    Thought,  true  labour  of  anj  kind,  highest 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

virtue  itself,  is  it  not  the  daughter  of  Pain  ?  Bom  as  oat  of  the  black  whirlwind  ; — 
true  effort,  in  fact,  as  of  a  captive  struggling  to  free  himself :  that  is  Thought. 
In  all  ways  we  are  "  to  become  perfect  through  suffering."     (T,  Carlyle.) 

Vers.  11-13.   He  that  sanctlfleth  and  they  who  are  sanctified  are  all  of  one. — 
Tlie  unity  of  Christ  and  His  people : — 1.  A  description  of  the  work  which  Christ 
has  come  to  accomplish  for  His  people.     He  is  described  as  "  He  that  sanctifieth," 
and  His  people  as  "  they  who  are  sanctified."    Jesus  sanctifies  both  Himself  and 
His  people  with  His  own  blood,  expiating  and  purging  away  their  sins,  and  fitting 
them,  and  Himself  as  their  Surety,  for  coming  with  acceptance  into  the  presence 
of  the  holy  God.     This  is  the  great  end  of  the  Saviour's  mighty  undertaking,  to 
bring  His  people  near  to  God.     To  a  creature  with  a  moral  nature  like  man, 
distance  from  God  is  misery — it  is  death.     Thus  He  is  in  our  text  most  compre- 
hensively, as  well  as  appropriately,  described  as  "  He  that  sanctifieth."     We  say, 
most  comprehensively ;  for  this  is  the  sum  of  all  that  He  accomplishes  as  the 
Saviour  of  His  people— most  appropriately,  for  the  word  as  here  used  carries  us 
back  to  the  shedding  of  blood  needful  for  sanctification  under  the  law,  and  suggests 
the  necessity  of  the  fact  which  the  apostle  is  expounding,  that  Jesus,  in  sanctifying 
Himself  and  His  people,  should  in  common  with  them  both  suffer  and  die.     2.  The 
declaration  of  the  reason  why  the  Son  of  God,  in  sanctifying  His  people,  must 
Himself  of  necessity  be  a  sufferer.     The  ordinance  of  consecration  for  the  priest- 
hood under  the  law  suggests  this  necessity ;  yet  the  question  remains,  whence  the 
necessity  of  the  shedding  of  blood?     Our  text  answers  this  question — "  He  that 
sanctifieth  and  they  who  are  sanctified  are  all  of  one."     Here  is  the  essence  of  the 
Divine  scheme  for  sinners'  redemption.     I.  Whatsoever  is  theibs  is  made  His. 
1.  Their  sin.     One  man  may  spontaneously  make  himself  liable  for  his  neighbour's 
debt,  but  a  husband  is  necessarily  liable  for  the  debts  of  his  wife,  because  they  are 
*•  all  of  one."     This  is  only  a  shadow  of  Christ's  liability  for  the  sin  of  His  people. 
Like  the  husband,  Christ  may  be  regarded  as  having  spontaneously  assumed  the 
relation  of  unity  with  His  spouse,  but  having  become  one  flesh  with  her.  He  is, 
voluntarily  indeed,  yet  necessarily,  liable  for  her  debts.    2.  Jesus  having  thus 
become  chargeable  with  the  guilt  of  His  people's  sin,  became  subject  to  its  penal 
effects.     With  their  sin  their  suffering  also  is  made  His.     3.  With  their  sin  their 
death  also  is  made  His.    Death  was  from  the  beginning  the  appointed  penalty  of 
sin.     II.  What  is  Christ's  is  teakseerred  to  His  people.     1.  His  righteousness 
is  made  theirs  (2  Cor.  v.  21).     Thus  the  holy  God  can  look  with  complacency  on 
"  the  ungodly  "  believing  in  Jesus.     Not  that  He  esteems  less  hateful  their  sin. 
Not  that  He  esteems  less  honourable  His  own  law,  but  He  accepts  them  "  in  the 
beloved,"  and  He  is  "  the  end  of  the  law   for  righteousness  to  every  one  that 
believeth."    2.  His  death  is  made  theirs.     He  had  obeyed  as  His  people's  surety 
and  head.     In  the  same  capacity  He  died.     Thus,  when  He  died  on  the  Cross,  His 
people  died  in  Him.     "If  one  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead,"  or  "then  have 
all  died."     This  is  the  glorious  security  of  His  people,  that  having  died  in  their 
surety,  their  salvation,  in  the  most  important  sense  of  the  word,  is  already  ac- 
complished.    3.  Christ's  resurrection,  as  well  as  His  death,  is  made  theirs.     In  the 
person  of  their  Head  they  have  akeady  risen  and  taken  possession  of  their  in- 
heritance.    (Alex.  Anderso7i.)         Sanctification: — I.    Sanctification  consists  of 
TWO  ACTIONS.     1.  Separation.     2.  Renovation.     II.  Sanctification  is  carried  on 
BY  TWO  AGENTS.    1.  "He  that  sanctifieth."     The  Holy  Spirit  works  in  man  to  will 
and  to  do.    2.  "  They  who  are  sanctified."    There  must  be  acquiescence  on  Dur 
part.      The   Spirit  influences:   we  act.     He  teaches:   we  believe.      (HomiUst.) 
Man's  Redeemer — Ilis  humanity ,  function,  and  fraternalness : — I.  The  humanity  of 
Christ.      "  All  of  one  " — one  nature.      His  humanity  serves  to — 1.   Enlist  our 
sympathies.    2,  Encourage  our  hopes.     II,  The  function  of  Christ.     To  make 
man  holy.     *•  He  that  sanctifieth."     This  work  of  His — 1.  He  has  undertaken  in 
sovereign  love.    2,  Is  indispensable  to  our  well-being,    HI.  The  fraternalness  of 
Christ.     "Not  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren."     Then — 1.  Let  us  not  be  afraid  to 
approach  Him.    2.  Let  us  not  be  ashamed  of  His  followers,  however  humlile. 
(Ibid.)     Christ  and  His  brethren: — This  word  "for  "  noteth  a  cause  of  that  which 
was  said  before ;  and  he  had  said  this.     He  that  leadeth  other  into  the  glory  of 
God  by  the  same  way  he  must  enter  also  hinitelf.     He  addeth  now  the  cause  and 
ground  of  that  saying,  because  they  must  be  of  one  nature,  both  He  that  leadeth 
and  they  that  are  led  into  this  salvation.    A  proof  and  declaration  that  it  is  so  ia 
added  by  the  apostle  in  the  residue  of  the  verse,  "  And  for  this  cau&e  He  is  not 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS,  153 

ashamed  io  call  ns  brethren  " :  whereunto  is  straight  added  the  testimony  of 
Psalm  xxii.,  out  of  which  he  proveth  it,  "I  will  show  forth  Thy  name  unto  My 
brethren :  in  the  midst  of  the  congregation  I  will  praise  Thee."  Now  where  i\i  is 
said  here,  '•  He  that  sanctifieth  and  they  that  are  sanctified  are  all  of  one,"  we 
have  to  consider  that  even  in  the  manhood  of  our  Saviour  Christ  is  virtue  and 
grace,  in  which  He  doth  sanctify  us.  For  not  only  as  He  is  God  He  sanctifieth  us, 
but  also  in  His  human  nature  He  hath  this  virtue  and  power  to  make  us  huly ; 
not  taking  His  nature  such  from  the  Virgin  Mary,  but  making  it  such  by  pouring 
into  it  the  fulness  of  His  Spirit.  The  holiness  which  the  apostles  had  in  their 
calling  they  had  it  from  Jesus  Christ,  made  man,  and  walking  in  that  vocation 
before  them.  Even  so  it  is  with  us.  All  that  is  good  in  us,  and  all  the  righteous- 
ness that  can  be  in  us,  we  have  it  neither  out  of  the  east,  nor  west,  but  from  the 
body  of  Jesus  Christ,  neither  is  there  in  the  world  any  other  sanctification.  Even 
as  our  hands  and  arms  and  other  members  are  not  nourished  but  only  by  the  meat 
received  of  the  head,  so  our  spiritual  meat  of  righteousness  and  Ufe  is  not  given 
us  but  from  our  Head,  Jesus  Christ.  And  as  the  veins  are  means  by  which  nourish- 
ment is  conveyed  to  every  part,  so  faith  is  the  means  by  which  we  receive  from 
Christ  all  that  ia  healthful  unto  us.  And  as  by  joints  and  sinews  our  members  are 
really  knit  and  made  a  body  unto  the  head,  so  really,  by  one  Spirit  we  be  knit  unto 
Christ  as  perfectly  one  with  Him  as  our  members  are  one  with  our  head.  And 
where  it  is  said  here.  He  that  doth  sanctify,  showing  the  present  time  and  the  work 
still  doing,  it  teacheth  us  that  our  sanctification  hath  a  daily  increase,  and  when  it 
is  fully  accomplished,  then  God  calleth  and  our  days  are  at  an  end.  And  let  us 
note  this  well,  if  we  be  Christians  we  are  still  sanctitied  by  tbe  Spirit  of  Christ,  for 
so  it  was  in  Him.  He  grew  still  in  grace  before  God  and  men.  If  thou  be  grafted 
into  His  body  thou  hast  His  Spirit,  and  it  will  have  His  work  in  thee.  Thou  shalt 
not  be  weary  of  well-doing,  nor  cease  to  rejoice  in  God  thy  Saviour,  but  still  increase 
'in  spiritual  grace  till  thou  come  to  the  age  of  the  fulness  of  Christ.  It  followeth, 
*'  For  this  cause  He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren."  Upon  good  cause  the 
apostle  saiih,  "  He  is  not  ashamed,"  for  if  He  humbled  not  Himself  in  great  love 
of  us,  how  justly  might  He  account  it  shame  to  be  as  we  are  ?  He  that  made 
heaven  and  earth.  He  that  is  the  immortal  and  glorious  God,  one  with  His  Father, 
before  whom  all  angels  do  obey  and  all  princes  are  earth  and  ashes ;  ought  we  not 
to  say,  seeing  it  pleaseth  Him  to  acknowledge  us,  that  are  but  poor  creatures,  that 
He  is  not  ashamed  of  us  ?  And  if  His  highness  abased  itself  to  our  low  estate,  and 
was  not  ashamed,  let  us  learn  to  be  wise  and  know  what  the  Lord  requireth  of  us 
for  all  the  good  which  He  hath  done  unto  us.  He  saith  in  the  gospel,  "  He  that  is 
ashamed  of  Me  and  My  words  before  men,  I  will  be  ashamed  of  him  before  My 
Father  which  is  in  heaven.  Pride,  or  flattery,  or  covetousness,  or  vanity,  or  fear, 
or  what  you  will,  may  make  us  now  ashamed  to  confess  him,  or  to  dissemble  that 
ever  we  knew  Him  ;  but  when  all  this  corruption  is  taken  from  us,  and  the  grave 
and  death  shall  take  their  own,  our  former  foolishness  will  make  us  so  afraid  that 
we  will  pray  unto  the  hills  to  hide  us,  but  vows  and  wishes  shall  be  but  foolish 
thoughts.  It  followeth,  "I  will  declare  Thy  name  unto  My  brethren."  We  are 
called  the  brethren  of  Christ,  not  in  society  of  flesh  and  blood,  for  that  the  wicked 
have  with  Him  as  well  as  we,  who  are  yet  no  brethren,  but  strangers  even  from  the 
womb.  But  as  they  are  natural  brethren,  which  are  born  of  the  same  parents,  so 
we  are  brethren  with  Christ,  that  are  born  of  God,  through  the  same  Spirit,  by 
which  we  cry,  "Abba,  Father,"  the  fruit  whereof  is  in  glorifying  His  name,  even 
as  our  Saviour  Christ  saith,  "  He  that  doeth  the  will  of  My  Father  which  is  in 
heaven,  he  is  My  brother"  (Matt.  xii.  48).  And  when  it  is  further  said,  "  In  the 
midst  of  the  congregation  I  will  praise  Thee. "  First,  here  we  must  needs  confess 
what  duty  is  among  men,  even  that  they  edify  one  another;  for  as  many  as  are  of 
Christ  are  called  in  this  covenant :  "  I  will  declare  Thy  name  unto  my  brethren,  in 
the  midst  of  the  congregation  I  will  praise  Thee."  The  graces  of  God  are  not 
such  that  they  can  be  locked  up  in  our  hearts  or  kept  secret,  but  they  will  burn 
within  like  fire,  and  make  us  speak  with  our  tongues,  that  we  may  make  many 
brethren  partakers  of  our  joy.  And  tell  me,  I  beseech  you,  what  man  excelleth  in 
anything,  and  hath  not  a  delight  to  speak  of  his  cunning  ?  Doth  not  the  shipman 
talk  of  the  winds,  the  ploughman  of  his  oxen  ?  Will  not  the  soldier  be  reckoning 
up  his  wounds,  and  the  shepherd  telling  of  his  sheep  ?  So  it  is  with  us  if  we  ho 
the  brethren  of  Christ.  The  covenant  of  our  kindred  is,  "I  will  declare  Thy  name 
unto  my  brethren,  in  the  midst  of  the  congregation  I  will  praise  Thee."  Let  them 
know  this,  all  to  whom  it  is  spoken,  and  let  them  discern  between  hypocrites  and 


154  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  ICHiv.  n. 

trne  Christians.  Some  think  it  a  praise  to  be  close  men,  secret  to  themselves,  that 
by  their  words  you  shall  never  know  them,  of  what  religion  they  be.  Those  men, 
where  they  think  they  hide  themselves  most,  there  they  lay  widest  open  their 
shame,  and  while  they  think  to  keep  it  secret  of  what  religion  they  are,  this  their 
dissimulation  proclaimeth  it  louder  than  the  blast  of  a  trumpet  that  they  be  of  no 
religion  at  all ;  at  all,  I  say,  touching  any  religion  of  God  ;  for  if  it  were  of  Him  it 
would  show  forth  His  piaise,  and  what  their  heart  beUeved  their  mouth  would 
confess  it.  We  are  ashamed  to  exhort  men  to  do  well ;  we  are  not  ashamed  to 
provoke  them  to  sin.  We  are  ashamed  to  minister  talk  of  faith  and  religion ;  we 
are  not  ashamed  of  rotten  and  unclean  works  of  wantonness.  We  are  ashamed  to 
speak  to  the  praise  of  God  ;  we  are  not  ashamed  to  blaspheme  His  name.  We  are 
ashamed  of  Christ ;  we  are  not  ashamed  of  the  devil.  The  prophet  David  was  a 
good  scholar  in  this  doctrine.  When  he  opened  his  mouth  unto  God  and  vowed, 
*'  I  wiU  speak  of  Thy  name  before  kings,  and  will  not  be  ashamed  "  (Psa.  cxlv.  21, 
cxix.  46).  Pray,  dearly  beloved,  that  we  may  be  partakers  of  the  same  giace. 
It  followeth  now  in  the  13th  verse,  "  And  again,  I  will  put  my  trust  in  Him."  This 
psalm  the  prophet  made  when  he  was  delivered  from  the  layings  of  wait  of  Saul 
and  from  all  his  enemies ;  wherein,  as  he  was  a  figure  of  Christ,  so  it  is  most 
properly  and  truly  verified  in  Christ  that  be  said  of  himself.  Now,  because  the 
apostle  allegeth  this  to  prove  our  Saviour  Christ  to  be  man  like  unto  us,  mark 
how  the  argument  foUoweth.  Christ  saith,  "  I  will  put  My  trust  in  God  "  ;  but  it 
were  a  very  improper  speech,  and  such  as  the  Scripture  never  useth  to  say,  God 
will  trust  in  God.  1  herefore  there  must  be  a  nature  in  our  Saviour  Christ  inferior 
to  His  Godhead,  in  which  he  speaketh  thus :  "  I  will  trust  in  Him,"  and  that  was 
His  perfect  humanity  like  unto  ours,  in  which  we  saw  Him  subject  to  peril,  and 
how,  according  to  His  trust,  God  His  Father  delivered  Him.  And  here  the  apostle 
allegeth  such  Scripture  for  proof  of  the  manhood  of  Christ,  as  also  proveth  that 
He  is  our  King  ;  for  where  he  saith,  •'  I  will  trust  in  Him,"  it  noteth  that  Christ  was 
not  weak  in  faith,  but  assuredly  trusted  in  the  power  of  God  His  Father,  that  He 
should  overcome  the  devil.  And  let  us  here  learn  for  our  instruction  when  we  have 
had  experience  of  God's  benefits,  as  the  prophet  had,  let  us  vow  as  he  did — we  will 
put  our  trust  in  Him.  When  David  remembered  how  God  had  (ielivered  him  from 
a  lion  and  a  bear,  he  was  not  afraid  of  the  uncircumcised  Philistine.  When  St. 
Paul  had  reckoned  so  many  calamities  out  of  which  God  had  delivered  him,  he 
boasted  of  a  holy  hope,  and  said  he  was  sure  that  ever  God  would  deliver  him. 
Another  testimony  yet  followeth  to  prove  the  humanity  of  our  Saviour  Christ,  aud 
it  is  this:  "Behold  Me,  and  the  children  which  Thou  hast  given  Me."  This  is 
written  in  the  eighth  of  Isaiah,  in  which  chapter  the  prophet  foretclleth  the 
captivity  of  the  Israelites  by  the  kiug  of  Ashur,  how  it  is  determined  of  God  that 
the  people,  for  all  their  rebellions,  should  surely  perish  ;  but  yet  so  that  God,  for 
His  Church's  sake,  would  bridle  their  raj^e,  and  save  some  who  might  praise  His 
name.  These  threatenings  and  promises  both,  while  the  people  contemptuously 
reject,  the  Lord  biddeth  the  prophet  cease,  and  bind  up  these  promises  for 
another  people  that  should  believe  ;  and  then  the  prophet  answering  again  to  God, 
in  acknowledging  all  His  truth  and  goodness,  saith  thus :  "  Behold,  I  and  the 
children  that  God  hath  given  me."  Now,  here  we  must  learn  as  the  apostle 
teaeheth.  Was  the  prophet  Isaiah  a  man  like  unto  his  children,  that  is,  like  unto 
those  which  obeyed  his  word  ?  Then  was  our  Saviour  Christ  perfect  man,  like  unto 
ns,  whom  He  hath  delivered  from  sin  and  death.  And  if  He  have  saved  us  He  hath 
saved  those  whom  God  hath  given  Him,  flesh  of  His  flesh,  and  bone  of  His  bone  ; 
for  this  is  His  intercession  unto  His  Father,  "  Behold  Me  and  My  children."  One 
other  thing  we  must  learn  in  this.  There  was  an  apostasy  of  all  men,  so  that  they 
which  beUeved  were  made  as  signs  and  wonders  ;  yet  howsoever  the  world  was  the 
prophet  saith,  "  Behold  me  and  my  children."  Such  shall  be  the  days  of  Christ, 
many  shall  fall  away,  religion  and  faith  shall  be  persecuted,  iniquity  shall  abound. 
What,  then  ?  Our  Saviour  Christ  saith,  "  Lo,  1  and  My  children."  If  the  whole 
world  fall  away,  we  would  not  regard  their  multitude  to  follow  them  to  do  evil, 
but  we  would  alone  stand  with  the  Lord  our  God.  We  must  further  mark  in 
these  words  that  the  prophet  saith,  "  Behold  the  children  which  Thou  hast  given 
me."  In  that  it  is  said,  God  hath  given  us  to  His  Son  Christ,  it  teaeheth  us  to 
acknowledge  His  free  gift  and  grace ;  and  let  none  of  us  think  there  was  any 
wisdom  in  ourselves  why  we  would  choose  Him,  nor  any  constancy  in  us,  by  which 
we  could  cleave  unto  Him ;  but  God  in  His  grace  drew  us,  that  we  might  come 
unto  Him,  and  with  His  power  He  strengtheutd  us,  that  we  should  abide  with 


CHAP.  n.J  HEBREWS.  165 

Him.  {E.  Deering,  B.D.)  Unity  of  Sanctifier  and  sanctified: — The  assertion 
that  the  Sanctifier  and  the  sanctified  are  all  of  one  may  be  conceived  of  as 
answering  two  questions  naturally  arising  out  of  ver.  10,  to  which  it  furnishes  no 
explicit  answer.  First,  Christ  is  called  the  Captain  or  Leader  of  salvation ;  how 
does  He  contribute  to  salvation?  Is  He  simply  the  first  of  a  series  who  pass 
through  suffering  to  glory  ?  or  does  He  influence  all  the  sons  whom  God  brings  to 
glory  so  as  to  contrib;ite  very  materially  to  the  great  end  in  view,  their  reaching 
the  promised  land  ?  Second,  what  is  the  condition  of  His  influence  ?  what  is  the 
nexus  between  Him  and  them,  the  Leader  and  the  led,  that  enables  Him  to  exert 
over  them  this  power  ?  The  answer  to  the  former  question  is,  Christ  saves  by 
sanctifying ;  the  answer  to  the  latter,  that  He  and  the  sanctified  are  one.  The 
answer  in  the  first  case  is  given  indirectly  by  the  substitution  of  one  title  for 
another,  the  "Leader  of  salvation"  being  replaced  by  the  "Sanctifier";  the 
answer  in  the  second  case  is  given  directly,  and  forms  the  doctrine  of  the  text : 
the  Sanctifier  and  tlie  sanctified  are  all  of  one.  This  statement  I  regard  as  the 
enunciation  of  a  principle ;  by  which  is  meant  that  the  unity  asserted  is  involved 
in  the  relation  of  Sanctifier  to  sanctified.  Whether  there  be  only  one  or  many 
exemplifications  of  the  relation  is  immaterial.  Though  only  one  Sanctifier  were 
in  view  or  possible,  the  proposition  would  still  continue  to  be  of  the  nature  of  a 
principle.  The  point  is,  that  Christ,  as  Sanctifier,  must  be  one  with  those  whom 
He  sanctifies,  could  not  otherwise  perform  for  them  that  function.  The  Sanctifier 
is  holy,  the  sanctified  when  He  takes  them  in  hand  are  unholy.  That  being  so,  it 
needs  to  be  said  that,  notwithstanding  the  separation  between  the  parties,  there  is 
a  unity  between  them  surmounting  the  difference.  And  that  can  be  said  with 
truth,  for  otherwise  the  two  parties  could  not  stand  in  the  relation  of  Sanctifier  to 
sanctified  ;  they  could  only  stand  permanently  apart  as  holy  and  unholy.  Unity 
is  involved  in  the  nature  of  the  case.  That  is  precisely  what  the  writer  means  to 
say.  He  states  the  truth  as  an  axiom,  which  he  expects  even  his  dull-minded 
readers  to  accept  immediately  as  true  ;  and  he  means  to  use  it  as  a  key  to  the 
cardinal  facts  of  Christ's  human  experience.  Unity  to  some  extent  or  in  some 
sense  is  involved,  that  is  clear.  But  in  what  sense,  to  what  exteut  ?  This  is  not 
plainly  indicated.  The  style  at  this  point  becomes  noticeably  laconic  ;  the  sentence 
lacks  a  verb,  and  is  worn  down  to  the  fewest  words  possible,  after  the  manner 
of  a  proverb,  "  For  the  Sanctifier  and  the  sanctified  of  one  all."  Does  it  not  look 
as  if  his  purpose  were  to  lay  stress,  not  on  descent  from  one  God,  one  Divine 
Father,  but  rather  on  the  result,  the  brotherhood  or  comradeship  existing  between 
the  two  parties ?  Is  not  his  idea  that  Sanctifier  and  sanctified  are  all  "of  one 
piece,  one  whole,"  two  parties  welded  into  one,  having  everything  in  common 
except  character?  From  whatever  point  of  view,  the  ritual  or  the  ethical,  we 
regard  the  Sanctifier's  function,  this  becomes  apparent  on  reflection.  Conceive 
Christ  first  as  Sanctifier  in  the  ethical  sense,  as  Captain  or  Leader  of  salvation  ;  it 
is  evident  that  in  that  capacity  it  behoved  Him  to  be  in  all  possible  respects  one 
with  those  He  took  in  hand  to  sanctify.  For  in  this  case  the  sanctifying  power  of 
Jesus  lies  in  His  example.  His  character.  His  history  as  a  man.  He  makes  men 
believing  in  Him  holy  by  reproducing  in  His  own  life  the  lost  ideal  of  human 
character,  and  bringing  that  ideal  to  bear  on  their  minds ;  by  living  a  true,  godly 
life  amid  the  same  conditions  of  trial  as  those  by  which  they  are  surrounded,  and 
helping  them  to  be  faithful  by  inspiration  and  sympathy.  The  more  genuinely 
human  He  is,  and  the  more  closely  the  conditions  of  His  human  life  resemble  ours, 
the  greater  His  influence  over  as.  His  power  to  sanctify  depends  on  likeness  in 
nature,  position,  and  experience.  Conceive  Christ  next  as  Sanctifier  in  the  ritual 
sense,  as  a  Priest,  consecrating  as  for  the  service  of  God  by  the  sacrifice  of  Him- 
self ;  and  the  same  need  for  a  pervading,  many-sided  unity  is  apparent.  The 
Priest  must  be  one  with  His  clients  in  God's  sight,  their  accepted  representative ; 
so  that  what  He  does  is  done  in  their  name  and  avails  for  their  benefit.  He  must 
be  one  with  them  in  death,  for  it  is  by  His  death  in  sacrifice  that  He  makes  pro- 
pitiation for  their  sins.  He  must  be  one  with  them  in  the  possession  of  humanity, 
for  unless  He  become  partaker  of  human  nature  He  cannot  die.  Finally,  He  must 
be  one  with  them  in  experience  of  trial  and  temptation,  for  thereby  is  demonstrated 
the  sympathy  which  wins  trust,  and  unless  the  Priest  be  trusted  it  is  in  vain  that 
He  transacts.  (A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.)  All  men  are  brethren  in  Christ: — If  Christ 
and  we  are  all  of  one,  much  more  are  we  among  ourselves.  A  king  and  a  beggar 
are  of  one ;  a  rich  man  and  a  poor  man  are  of  one  ;  a  fair  and  beautiful  man  or 
woman  and  they  that  want  beauty  are  of  one.    We  descended  all  of  Adam,  and 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha».  n. 

were  taken  out  of  the  dust  of  the  ground ;  therefore  let  us  not  insult  one  over 
another.  The  wax  that  hath  the  print  of  the  king's  seal  on  it  is  the  same  in  sub- 
stance with  the  wax  that  hath  the  print  of  the  seal  of  a  mean  man ;  yet  it  ia 
honoured  in  that  the  king's  seal  is  set  on  it.  So  we  are  all  of  one  weak  and  waxy 
nature,  save  that  it  pleaseth  God  to  set  a  more  honourable  print  upon  one  than 
on  another.  Therefore,  let  us  not  think  highly  of  ourselves,  and  condemn  our 
brethren,  but  submit  to  them  of  low  degree,  using  the  greatness  that  God  hath 
given  us,  to  the  glory  of  the  Giver.  (W.  Jones,  D.D.)  Christ  not  ashamed  to  call 
tis  brethren : — 1.  As  Christ  is  not  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren,  so  let  us  do  nothing 
so  near  as  we  can  that  may  shame  this  our  Brother.  Is  it  not  a  shame  that  the 
king's  brother  should  be  a  common  drunkard,  whoremaster,  or  such  like  ?  Doth 
not  the  king  take  himself  disgraced  by  it  ?  And  shall  we  that  are  brethren  to  the 
King  of  kings  take  such  courses  as  that  great  ignominy  should  redound  to  Christ  by 
it  ?  As  He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren,  so  let  us  do  nothing  that  may  puU 
a  shame  on  Him  and  His  gospel.  2.  Can  a  brother  that  is  a  wealthy  man,  of  fair 
revenues,  and  ample  possessions,  see  any  of  his  brethren  go  begging  ?  Will  he  not 
rather  receive  him  to  his  own  house,  and  set  him  at  his  table  ?  Christ,  which  ia 
the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  is  our  brother ;  therefore  let  us  fear  no  want,  so 
long  as  we  fear  Him.  This  may  be  a  comfort  to  us  in  all  our  calamities,  that 
Christ  and  we  are  brethren.  (Ibid.)  Christ  the  Restorer  of  the  Divine  ideal  oj 
humanity : — As  some  noble  ruin  can  be  best  restored  by  one  who  possesses  the 
original  model  or  some  other  key  to  the  builder's  design,  so  the  Saviour's  fitness 
for  His  office  is  partly  found  in  the  fact  that  He  has  in  Himself  the  perfect  type  of 
regenerated  humanity.  The  presentation  of  His  life  at  once  shows  men  what  they 
ought  to  become,  and  summons  and  incites  them  to  its  attainment.  (W.  Landels, 
D.D.)  Not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren. — Christ  not  ashamed  to  call  us 
brethren  : — I.  Chbist  ooe  Bbother.  "  In  all  things  it  behoved  Him  to  be  made 
like  unto  His  brethren."  Human  nature  was  divided  by  the  ancients  into  body, 
soul,  and  spirit.  Take  this  tripartite  nature  of  man  and  see  how  like  He  is  to  ua 
in  all  things.  1.  The  body.  "  He  was  an  hungered."  All  the  pains  and  anguish 
of  intense  hunger  were  felt  by  Him— Brother  then  to  all  the  poor  and  hungry  1 
He  thirsted.  On  the  Cross  He  said,  "  I  thirst  " — Brother  then  to  all  who  in  any 
way  thirst  I  He  knew  what  tbe  pleasures  of  life  were.  He  was  a  guest  at  feasts — 
Brother  then  of  those  who  know  the  dangers  of  plenty  I  He  was  weary.  He  was 
asleep  in  the  boat  after  His  long  toil.  He  sat  weary  with  travel  and  heat  by  the 
well — Brother  then  to  all  who  are  weary !  He  suffered  bodily  pain — Brother  then 
of  every  sufferer  1  He  died — Brother  then  to  each  of  us  in  that  He  died  1  2.  The 
BouL  He  was  our  Brother  in  experiencing  a  shrinking  from  death  ;  in  manifesting 
human  benevolence,  compassion,  and  sympathy;  in  associating  with  humanity ;  in 
displaying  love  for  children ;  in  having  private  and  special  friendship  for  a  few; 
in  knowing  the  anguish  of  unrequited  affection  ;  and  in  manifesting  human  self- 
respect.  3.  The  spirit.  There  was  that  wonderful  depression  that  came  upon 
Him  at  different  times.  We  have  the  agony  of  spirit  in  Gethsemane  and  on  the 
Cross.  He  felt  what  it  is  to  seem  to  be  forsaken  of  God  and  all  we  can  com- 
prehend by  being  apprehensive  of  spiritual  gloom,  and  the  fear  of  being  deserted 
by  God.  Again,  He  was  tempted,  and  He  had  all  the  faculties  and  capacities 
to  which  temptations  are  applied  and  adapted.  Once  more.  He  "  was  made 
perfect  through  sufferings."  "For  both  He  that  sanctifieth" — Jesus — "and  they 
who  are  sanctified  " — the  followers  of  Jesus — "  are  all  of  one."  He  was  a  sharer 
with  us  in  discipline  by  the  same  Father,  and  in  sanctification  by  the  same  Spirit, 
journeying  to  the  same  heavenly  glory.  Thus  "  in  all  points  He  was  made  like 
unto  His  brethren."  II.  Christ  is  not  ashamed  of  the  eelationbhip. — Two 
brothers  may  be  born  in  the  same  cottage,  fed  from  the  same  breast  and  trencher, 
trained  at  the  same  school,  and  one  of  them  may  rise  in  social  position,  but  with 
seeming  greatness  nnite  real  Uttleness  and  be  ashamed  of  his  brother  who  con- 
tinues a  humble  cottager.  Or  one  may  live  a  Ufe  of  sensuality  and  bring  disgrace 
on  the  family  name,  and  the  other  be  distinguished  for  virtue  and  benevolence, 
and  the  virtuous  man  may  be  ashamed  of  his  brother.  Or,  one  may  have  shown 
kindness  continually  to  his  brother  and  the  other  have  repelled  it  by  constant 
hostility  and  ingratitude,  so  that  at  last  the  other  may  be  ashamed  of  him. 
Judging  after  the  manner  of  men  might  not  Christ  be  ashamed  of  us  ?  But  He 
is  not.  1.  Because  of  His  mighty  disinterested  love.  He  loved  us  when  we 
were  unlovely  and  had  no  love  to  Him.  Human  love,  when  deep  and  true,  ia 
never  ashamed  of  the  lowliness  of  its  object.     A  truly  noble  nature  recognises 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  157 

a  friend  the  more  he  needs  help.  S.  Because  He  knows  us  thoroughly.  Nothing 
is  hidden  from  Him.  He  knows  all  our  imperfections,  anJ  is  not  ashamed  of 
us.  3.  Because  He  knows  what  good  is  in  ns,  for  He  put  it  there.  He  knows 
that  at  the  bottom  of  our  hearts,  in  spite  of  infirmities  and  shortcomings,  we  do 
love  Him.  Beneath  the  faded  exterior  and  withered  blossom  and  leaf  He  sees  the 
living  germ  that  shall  bud  and  blossom  and  bear  fruit.  He  sees  the  first  home- 
ward step  of  the  prodigal,  the  first  tear,  and  hears  the  first  stammermg  prayer. 
And  is  this  the  Jesus  that  some  of  you  are  rejecting?  Is  this  the  Christ 
that  some  of  you  are  ashamed  to  own  ?  Surely  you  do  not  know  who  it  is  you 
thus  treat  with  neglect.  He  is  man's  best  friend,  our  true  Brother. 
Accept  His  salvation  and  rejoice  in  His  love.  What  an  honour  it  is  to 
have  such  a  Brother  1  We  may  be  obscure  in  the  world,  but  we  may  look  up 
and  say,  •'  The  King  of  kings  upon  the  throne  of  the  heavenly  Majesty  is  one  who  is 
not  ashamed  of  me  ;  He  calls  me  His  brother.  How  safe  we  are  1  What  harm  cau 
come  to  us  when  He  who  rules  the  universe  is  our  Brother?  "  (Newman  Hall,  LL.B.) 
Christians  joint-heirs  with  Christ : — Jesus,  the  elder  Brother,  gets  nothing  apart 
from  those  whom  He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  His  brethren.  *'  The  law  of  primo- 
geniture does  not  appear  in  the  statute-book  of  heaven."  We,  the  rightful  heirs  of 
wrath,  are  made  heirs  in  common  with  Jesus.  He  will  have  nothing  that  He  will 
not  share  with  us.  We  are  even  now  highly  exalted  with  Him,  "far  above  all 
principality,  and  power,  and  might,  and  dominion,  and  every  name  that  is  named, 
not  only  in  this  world,  but  also  in  that  which  is  to  come";  for  we  are  "the  Church, 
which  is  His  body."  (r.  IF.  Medhmt.)  The  Brother  born  for  adversity : — One 
main  work  of  the  gospel  is  to  give  men  the  right  to  claim  the  sympathy,  the  care, 
and  the  help  of  God.  A  right.  God  has  brought  Himself  by  His  own  act  within 
the  region  of  rights  and  obligations.  The  relation  of  Creator  and  creature  is  super- 
seded ;  that  of  Father  and  child.  Saviour  and  saved,  is  substituted  in  its  room. 
And  into  these  relations  new  obligations  enter,  based  upon  purposes,  promises,  and 
hopes  which  God  has  announced  or  inspired.  It  now  becomes  Him  to  do  that 
which,  under  no  conception  of  His  rectoral  duty  as  Creator,  could  be  claimed  from 
Him.  God  has  set  forth  Christ  as  the  Man  with  whom  He  treats;  the  perfect  Man, 
who  explains  the  mauward  thoughts  and  hopes  of  God.  It  is  the  Son  of  His  love 
who  is  concerned  in  the  fulfilmeut  of  our  hope.  The  Son  of  His  love  has  interests 
profounder  even  than  our  own  in  our  forgiveness,  renewal,  and  growth  to  perfection. 
Realising  what  we  are  in  Christ,  we  dare  to  use  great  boldness  of  access,  we  dare  to 
plead  rights  and  claims,  which  yet  are  not  ours,  save  through  a  love  which  humbles 
while  it  exalts  us,  and  chastens  while  it  inspires.  I.  Thb  relation  of  a  brother. 
There  is  a  oneness  which  precludes  the  idea  of  separate  interests.  II.  It  is  pre- 
cisely  THIS   RELATIONSHIP   WHICH     BY    HiS   INCARNATION     AND    PASSION    THB    SaTIOOB 

CLAIMS.  He  seeks  to  give  us  a  relation  that  we  can  rest  upon ;  which  will  draw  as 
by  the  bands  of  fraternal  sympathy  to  His  strength  when  we  are  weak,  to  His  bosom 
when  we  are  weary  and  long  for  rest.  IH.  It  is  said  in  a  passage  of  the  Book  of 
Proverbs  that  "  a  brother  is  born  fob  adversities."  That  He  might  know  our 
souls  in  adversities  surely,  the  elder  Brother  of  the  great  human  family  was  born 
in  the  human  home,  tasted  aU  pure  human  experiences,  and  made  Himself  familiar 
with  all  forms  of  human  pain.  God  is  born  unto  us,  a  Saviour.  We  are  of  His 
kindred,  the  brethren  of  His  Christ.  It  is  no  pity  that  moves  Him  to  us  ;  it  is  pure 
and  perfect  love.  God  is  pleading  His  own  cause  in  pleading  against  our  sins  ;  He 
is  striving  against  His  own  enemies  in  striving  against  our  tempters  and  lusts. 
{,J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.)  Brotherhood  with  Christ: — I.  There  are  three  particulars 
which  require  to  be  stated  ;  the  first  of  which  is,  that  they  who  are  brethren  par- 
take or  one  nature.  Thus,  then,  it  is  said  of  Christ.  "  Forasmuch,  then,  as  the 
children  " — that  is,  God's  children,  the  family  in  heaven  and  earth — •'  are  partakers 
of  flesh  and  blood.  He  also  Himself  likewise  took  part  of  the  same ;  that  through 
death  " — or  through  dying — "He  might  destroy  him  that  had  the  power  of  death," 
&c.  It  is  also  said  of  Christ,  that  "  He  was  made  in  the  Ukeness  of  men ;  and 
being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  He  humbled  Himself  and  became  obedient  unto 
death,  even  the  death  of  the  Cross."  And  further  :  "  What  the  law  could  not  do 
in  that  it  was  weak  through  the  flesh,  God  sending  His  own  Son  in  the  hkeness  of 
sinful  flesh,"  &c.  Thus,  then,  we  have  the  fact  clearly  revealed  to  ns,  that  Christ 
laid  the  foundation  of  brotherhood  by  actually  assuming  the  nature  of  those  whom 
He  now  condescends  to  call  brethren.  The  next  particular  to  be  mentioned  is,  that 
they  who  are  brethren  are  so  by  natural  birth,  or  they  become  so  by  adoption  into 
a  family.    Now,  no  sinful  descendant  of  Adam  can,  by  virtue  of  his  birth  in  the 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a 

flesh,  become  a  member  of  God's  family ;  it  is  utterly  impossible.  Nor  can  he  be 
adopted  into  God's  family  unless  born  again — born  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit.  He 
partakes  of  the  spirituality  of  Christ,  as  Christ  possesses  his  human  flesh.  The 
iiext  particular  is,  that  between  those  who  are  brethren  in  heart,  as  well  as  in  fact, 
there  is  a  family  likeness  and  sympathy.  Hence  believers  are  enjoined  to  '*  let  this 
mind  be  in  them  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus  " ;  and  are  said  also  to  have  put  on 
the  "  new  man,  which  is  renewed  in  knowledge  after  the  image  of  Him  who  created 
him."  Thus,  also,  Christ  is  revealed  to  us  as  One  who  "  can  have  compassion  on 
us,"  and  as  One  "touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,"  II.  From  these 
three  particulars  we  may  infer  that  Christ,  becoming  our  Brother,  by  taking  on 
Him  our  nature,  and  linking  that  nature  on  to  His  deity,  had  power  oveb  that 
NATUEE,  first,  to  redeem,  and  then,  by  His  Spirit,  to  infuse  life — His  own  spiritual 
life — into  it.  Next,  that,  as  the  Elder  Brother,  He  had  the  disposition,  as  well  as 
the  power,  to  put  aside  every  obstacle  in  the  way  of  our  full  and  free  adoption  into 
His  Father's  family ;  so  that,  knowing  Him  as  their  Brother,  they  might  exercise 
the  spirit  of  adoption  when  received,  and  at  once  look  up  and  call  God  Father. 
And  lastly  that,  as  a  sympathising  Brother,  communicating  His  likeness  to  all  the 
members  of  the  household  of  faith,  He  must  be  the  great  object  of  our  faith  and 
the  foundation  of  all  our  hopes  as  members  of  the  family  of  God.  Thus,  then,  is 
Christ  set  before  us,  under  this  symbol,  in  that  very  aspect  which  is  most  attractive; 
but  when  we  see  all  His  offices  proceeding  out  of  this  central  fact  of  brotherhood — 
when  we  spirituallv  know  that  the  great  Prophet  of  the  Church  is  our  Brother,  that 
the  great  "  High  Priest  of  our  profession  "  is  our  Brother,  that  the  King  of  an 
unspeakably  glorious  kingdom  is  our  Brother — when  we  are  assured  that  the  teach- 
ing of  the  Prophet  is  the  teaching  of  our  Brother,  that  the  sacrifice  offered  by  the 
Priest  was  the  Brother  Himself,  that  the  blood  which  is  shed  for  us  was  the  blood 
of  our  Brother,  that  the  prave  wherein  death  became  powerless,  and  from  which 
emerged  life  and  immortality,  was  the  grave  of  our  Brother ;  oh  1  what  a  ground  do 
we  then  stand  on  for  the  realisation  and  enjoyment  of  the  blessings  of  salvation, 
and  for  looking  forward  to  the  coming  of  the  glorious  King,  who,  with  all  the  ten- 
derness of  a  brother's  faithful  love,  shall  gather  together  the  whole  family  of 
heaven  in  manifested  union  with  Himself.  (G.  Fisk,  LL.B.)  Some  reasons  why 
the  Word  became  Jlesh: — "  Ashamed  to  call  them  brethren."  Why  should  He  be? 
It  is  no  condescension  to  acknowledge  the  fact  of  brotherhood  with  humanity,  any 
more  than  it  is  humiliation  to  be  born.  But  there  was  a  Man  who  emptied  and 
humbled  Himself  by  being  "  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,"  and  for  whom  it  was 
infinite  condescension  to  call  us  His  brethren.  We  can  say  of  a  prince  that  he  ia 
not  ashamed  to  call  his  subjects  friends,  and  to  sit  down  to  eat  with  them  ;  but  it 
would  be  absurd  to  say  so  of  one  of  the  subjects  in  reference  to  his  fellows.  The 
full,  lofty  truth  of  Heb.  i.  undeilies  that  word  "ashamed,"  which  is  meaningless 
unless  Jesus  was  "  the  effulgence  of  the  Father's  glory,  and  the  very  image  of  His 
substance."  The  writer  quotes  three  Old  Testament  passages  which  he  regards  as 
proplietic  of  our  Lord's  identifying  Himself  with  humanity.  These  three  cited 
saynigB  deal  with  three  different  aspects  of  Christ's  manhood  and  of  the  purpose  of 
His  incarnation  ;  and  they  unitedly  give,  if  not  a  complete,  yet  a  comprehensive 
answer  to  the  question.  Why  did  God  become  Man?  I.  Jesus  is  Man, that  He  mat 
DECLABE  God  to  men.  All  other  sources  of  knowledge  of  God  fail  in  eeitainty. 
They  yield  only  assertions  which  may  or  may  not  be  true.  At  the  best,  we  are 
relegated  to  peradventures  and  theories  if  we  turn  away  from  Jesus  Christ.  Men 
said  that  there  was  land  away  across  the  Atlantic  for  centuries  before  Columbus 
u  ent  and  brought  back  its  products.  He  discovers  who  proves.  Christ  has  not 
merely  spoken  to  us  beautiful  and  sacred  things  about  God,  as  saint,  philosopher, 
or  poet  might  do,  but  He  has  shown  us  God ;  and  henceforward,  to  those  who  receive 
Him,  the  Unknown  Root  of  all  being  is  not  a  hypothe^is,  a  great  Perhaps,  a  dread  or  a 
hope,  as  the  case  may  be,  but  the  most  certain  of  all  facts,  of  whom  and  of  whose  love 
we  may  be  surer  than  we  can  be  of  aught  besides  but  our  own  being.  II.  Jesus  is 
Man,  that  He  way  show  to  men  the  life  of  devout  tbust.  Perfect  manhood 
is  dependent  manhood.  A  reasonable  creature  who  does  not  live  by  faith  is  a 
monster  arrogating  the  prerogative  of  God.  Christ's  perfect  manhood  did  not 
release  Him  from,  but  bound  Him  to,  the  exercise  of  faith.  Nor  di>i  His  true  deity 
make  faith  impossible  to  His  manhood.  Christ's  perfect  manhood  perfected  Hia 
faith,  and  in  sooie  aspects  modified  it.  His  trust  had  no  relation  to  the  conscious- 
ness of  An,  and  no  element  either  of  repentance  or  of  longing  for  pardon.  But  i» 
had  relation  to  the  consciousness  of  need,  and  was  in  Him,  as  in  us,  the  condiiioo 


CHAP,  n.3  HEBREWS.  159* 

of  continual  derivation  of  life  and  power  from  the  Father.  Christ's  perfect  faith 
brought  forth  perfect  fruits  in  His  life,  issuing,  as  it  did,  in  obedience  which  was 
perfect  in  purity  of  motive,  in  gladness  of  submission,  and  in  completeness  of  the 
resulting  deeds  as  well  as  in  its  continuity  through  His  life.  Out  of  His  example 
we  may  take  both  shame  and  eucouragement :  shame,  when  we  measure  our  poor, 
purblind,  feeble,  and  interrupted  faith  against  His ;  and  encouragement  when  we 
raise  our  hopes  to  the  height  of  the  revelation  in  it  of  what  ours  may  become.  HI. 
Jesus  is  Man,  that  He  may  bbino  men  into  the  family  of  sons  of  God.  1. 
That  through  Him  men  may  receive  a  new  life  which  is  His  own.  He  can  only 
impart  His  hfe  on  condition  of  His  death.  The  alabaster  box  must  be  broken, 
though  so  precious,  and  though  the  light  of  the  pure  spirit  within  shone  lustrous 
»nd  softened  thiough  it,  in  order  that  the  house  may  be  filled  with  the  odour  of 
the  ointment.  2.  That  men  may,  by  the  communication  of  His  life,  become  sons 
of  God.  They  are  God's  children,  being  Christ's  brethren.  They  are  brought  into 
a  new  unity,  and,  being  members  of  one  family,  are  one  by  a  sacreder  oneness  than 
the  possession  of  a  common  humanity.  3.  That  men  may  become  sharers  in  Hia 
prerogatives  and  offices.  He  becomes  like  us  in  our  lowhness  and  flesh  of  sin,  that 
we  may  become  like  Him  in  His  glory  and  perfection.  4.  That  He  may  present 
His  family  at  last  to  God.  If  we  love  and  trust  Him,  He  will  hold  us  in  His 
strong  and  tender  grasp,  and  never  part  from  us  till  He  presents  us  at  last,  fault- 
less and  joyful,  before  the  presence  of  His  and  our  Father.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  graciousness  of  Christ : — In  the  verses  immediately  preceding,  the  writer  had 
set  forth  the  incarnation,  suffering,  and  death  of  Christ  Jesus,  as  an  indispensable 
condition  of  the  great  woik  of  lifting  the  race  of  man  into  the  Divine  nature.  Then 
he  identifies  and  unites  the  two  parties.  Those  for  whom  Christ  suffered,  for  whom 
he  became  perfect  through  suffering,  are  lifted  into  His  household,  and  are  become 
one  with  Him.  This  idea  runs  through  the  whole  New  Testament.  Men  are 
adopted,  we  are  told.  They  are  of  God's  household.  And  that  meant  more  in 
those  days  than  it  now  means,  by  a  difference  of  social  arrangements  in  life.  They 
are  sons ;  they  are  heirs ;  they  are  Christ's  brethren  ;  they  are  united  to  Him  as 
the  branch  to  the  vine.  Now,  the  absolute  inferiority  of  the  human  soul  and  mind 
to  the  Divine  would  lead  one,  in  his  meditations,  to  suppose  that  God  could  not 
well  other  than  be  ashamed.  Adult  companionship  does  not  demand  equality.  It 
demands,  however,  some  moral  proportion.  The  Divine  nature  is  illustrated  here 
in  this — that  the  feeling  of  God  toward  men,  in  their  inferiority,  is  apparently 
feeling  without  regard  to  the  coming  character.  God  sustains  toward  the  whole 
human  race,  we  may  believe,  just  the  feeling  which  a  true  parent  sustains  toward 
a  new-born  child,  while  it  is  as  yet  neither  good  or  bad,  but  is  certainly  feeble, 
weak,  infinitely  out  of  proportion  to  the  parent.  The  feeble,  the  ignoiant,  the  low 
—  God  loves  them,  and  has  infinite  compassion  for  them,  and  is  not  ashamed  of 
them.  But  quite  beyond  and  different  from  this,  are  presumptive  reasons  why 
God  should  be  ashamed — namely,  in  moral  delinquency.  The  child,  when  it  knows 
it  has  done  unworthily,  imputes  to  the  parent  a  sense  of  shame  in  its  behalf.  And 
every  Christian  has  times  of  despondency,  not  only,  but  of  sober  conviction  that  he 
has  dishonoured  himself,  and  that  he  has  brought  scandal  upon  the  name  of  his 
Master.  And  in  these  hours  one  goes  to  Christ  with  the  feelmg  that  He  must  be 
ashamed  too.  We  are  ashamed  to  pray,  and  afraid  to  commune.  And  yet  it  is  of 
just  such  that  Christ  says  He  is  not  ashamed.  He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them 
brethren,  as  we  shall  see.  The  shame  spoken  of  is  not  simply  a  generous  feeling. 
It  is  to  be  interpreted  by  its  relation  to  the  idea  of  personal  communion.  Christ  is 
not  ashamed  to  caU  men  even  brethren.  Conceive  of  the  most  advanced  and  noble 
Christians  that  ever  have  Uved  in  this  world — of  Martyn  and  Brainerd,  as  mis- 
sionary martyrs ;  of  F6nelon  and  Pascal,  as  contemplative  Christians — and  com- 
pare these,  not  with  their  own  kind,  but  with  the  character  and  condition  of  the 
just  made  perfect.  Compare  the  most  peerless  saint  that  walks  among  men  with 
your  ideal  of  the  just  and  the  perfect  before  God.  "Hardly,"  one  would  say, 
"  would  God  be  willing  to  identify  Himself  with  any  human  being — with  even  the 
highest  and  best."  Yet  so  it  is.  He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren.  If 
you  consider,  now,  how  far  below  these  ordinary  Christians  hve ;  how  little  there 
is  that  enters  into  the  Christian  experience  ;  how  the  Divine  life  is,  as  it  were,  but 
in  the  germ  ;  if  you  reflect  how  far  from  that  ideal  which  Christ  set  before  us  the 
ordinary,  average  Christian  experience  is,  men  might  well  express  surprise  that  Christ 
should  be  wiUing  to  call  such  Christi  ns  brethren.  And  yet  He  points  to  those  that 
stand  in  the  ordinary  lot  of  life,  the  ordinary  Christian  experience,  and  says,  "  I 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOB.  [chap.  a. 

am  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren."    Far  below  this  level  there  is  a  throng 
who  can  scarcely  be  thought  to  have  even  a  beginning ;  and  yet  there  is  a  single 
spark.     There  are  occasional  impulses  as  if  their  souls  would  turn  toward  God. 
Bold  are  they  for  the  world,  but  timid  for  righteousness,  and  hardly  daring  to  say 
to  their  fellow-men,  "  I  am  a  Christian."    Ah  1  can  it  be  that  Christ  is  not  ashamed 
to  call  them  brethren  ?    He  is  not.    He  has  been  made  in  the  liieness  of  men,  and 
has  entered  into  the  full  temptation  of  men,  that  He  might  know  to  the  uttermost, 
and  to  the  very  bottom,  what  man  suffers.     The  lowest,  poorest,  meanest  of  Christian 
attainments  find  in  Christ  Jesus  a  spirit  that  is  not  ashamed.     Banish  from  your 
minds  an  oriental  monarchy.     Banish  the  conception  of  such  glory  as  lies  in  external 
appearances  and  external  adjuncts.    Consider  what  it  is  for  God  to  be  glorious.     It  is 
the  glory  of  pity  unfathomable.    He  considers  glory  to  lie  in  long-suffering  love.    It  is 
because  He  knows  how  to  work  for  men  that  are  ungrateful,  that  His  heart  swells  with 
consciousness  of  its  power.  Look,  then,  upon  the  work  to  be  done  in  this  world.   We 
can  understand,  if  we  consider  it  in  its  entirety,  that  this  world  is  a  school ;  that  it 
is  a  healing  hospital ;  that  it  is  a  training  ground ;  that  the  Divine  problem  is, 
how  to  take  the  germ  of  life  and  bring  it  steadily  up  through  all  its  transmuta- 
tions, from  age  to  age,  until  it  becomes  Divine ;  and  to  do  it  through  suffering, 
through  long-suffering,  and  through  patience  ;  to  do  it  by  inspiration  ;  to  do  it  by 
pain  and  by  joy,  by  sorrow  and  by  gladness,  by  all  means.     So  to  teach  the  human 
Boul,  and  lift  upon  it  the  light  of  Divine  glory,  that  it  shall  become  like  God — that  is 
the  work  to  be  done  in  this  world.     Christ  is  not  ashamed  of  this  work.     He  is  not 
ashamed  of  His  scholars,  neither  of  those  in  the  lowest,  the  intermediate,  or  the 
highest  form.     He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren.    Not  because  there  is  not 
much  that  is  repulsive  to  a  pure  and  high  nature ;  but  for  His  own  reasons  {Eph. 
V.  25-27).     Without  further  unfolding  this   great,  this   wonderful   truth,  I  ask 
whether  any  one  need  fear  to  begin  a  new  Christian  life  with  such  a  Saviour.     If, 
when  his  prayers  go  up,  they  go  into  the  hands  of  such  an  One  ;  if  all  the  invita- 
tions to  a  Christian  life  are  those  that  come  from  a  Brother's  lips — from  the  lips  of 
One  who  is  not  ashamed  of  our  poorness,  our  vileness,  our  dullness,  or  our  remiss- 
ness— then  any  man  can  be  a  Christian.    Need  any  one  be  discouraged  who  has 
begun  to  live  a  Christian  life,  because  so  often  he  has  failed  and  fallen  into  back- 
sliding ?    Is  a  true  pupil  discouraged  because  so  many  of  his  lessons  are  imperfect? 
There  is  encouragement,  since  we  have  One  that  is  not  ashamed  of  us,  in  spite  of 
our  many  defections  and  inferiorities.    Why  should  we  not,  therefore,  gird  up  our 
loins,  and  take  a  fresh  hold,  with  new  consecration,  on  the  Christian  life  ?     Will 
not  every  day's  experience  give  reason  and  argument  for  gratitude  to  such  a  Lord 
as  this  ?    I  think  I  have  learned  more  of  the  nature  of  my  Master  from  my  bad 
than  from  my  good.    We  learn  both  ways.    But  it  is  the  sense  of  God's  graciousnesa 
that  impresses  me.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)    In  the  midst  of  the  Church  will  I  sing  praise. — 
Christ  singing : — We  have  the  record  of  Christ's  use  of  some  words  of  this  psalm  on  the 
Cross ;  the  author  of  this  Epistle  affirms  that  these  words  were  also  adopted  by  the 
Saviour.    They  illustrate — I.  Christ's  engagement  in  God's  service.     In  all  ages, 
Christ  is  serving  God  in  the  midst  of  the  Church,  by  His  precepts,  example,  spirit. 
II.  Christ's  social  engagement  in  God's  service.     In  fellowship  with  the  whole 
ussembly  of  the  good,  whom  He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  brethren,  Christ  serves  God. 
But  if  their  brother.  He  is  their  Leader  in  this  praise.     III.  Christ's  voluntabt 
engagement  in  God's  service.     Singing  is  no  slavish  act ;  real  singing  is  not  even 
perfunctory ;  probably,  ideal  song  is  spontaneous.     Such  is  Christ's  service.     IV. 
Christ's  joyous  engagement  in  God's  service.    As  soon  as  ever  we  can  sing  of 
our  sadness,  even  the  sadness  is  sweetened,  and  song  is  the  very  symbol  of  joy. 
Lessons :   1.  The  highest  engagement  of  our  life  is  serving  God.     2.  The  true 
method  of  serving  God  is  socially,  willingly,  joyfully.     (U.  R,  Thomas.)  The 

children  which  God  hath  given  Me. — Children  to  be  brought  to  heaven: — There 
was  a  mother  lay  dying  some  time  ago,  and  she  requested  her  children  to  be  brought 
to  her  bedside.  The  eldest  one  came  in  first,  and  putting  her  loving  hands  on  his 
head,  she  gave  him  a  mother's  parting  message.  Then  came  another,  and  then 
another.  To  all  of  them  she  gave  her  parting  message,  until  the  last — the  seventh 
one,  an  infant — was  brought  in.  She  was  so  young  she  could  not  understand  the 
message  of  love ;  so  the  mother  gave  it  to  her  husband  for  her  ;  and  then  she  took 
the  child  to  her  bosom,  and  kissed  it,  and  caressed  it,  until  her  time  was  almost  up. 
Then,  turning  to  her  husband,  she  said :  •'  I  charge  you  to  bring  all  these  children 
home  to  heaven  with  you."  {D.  L.  Moody.)  Children  a  life-work: — I  was  in  the 
company  of  a  talented  Christian  lady,  when  a  friend  said  to  her,  "  Why  have  you 


CHIP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  IGl 

never  written  a  book  ?  "  "I  am  writing  two,"  was  the  quiet  reply.  "  Have  been 
engaged  on  one  for  ten  years,  the  other  five."  "  You  surprise  me,"  cried  the  friend ; 
"what  profound  works  they  must  be  1 "  "It  doth  not  appear  yet  what  we  shidi 
be,"  was  her  reply;  "  but  when  He  makes  np  His  jewels,  my  great  ambition  is  lo 
find  them  there."  "  Your  children  ?  "  I  said.  "  Yes,  my  two  children ;  they  are 
my  lile  work."     {Christian  Age.) 

Ver.  14.  Himself  likewise  took  part  of  the  same. — Tfie  mystery  of  godliness  .- — 
Our  Saviour's  birth  in  the  fiesh  is  an  earnest,  and,  as  it  were,  beginning  of  our 
iHrth  in  the  Spirit.    It  is  a  figure,  promise,  or  pledge  of  ooi  new  birth,  and  it  effects 
what  it  promises.     As  He  was  born,  so  are  we  bom  also;  and  since  He  was  born, 
therefore  we  too  are  born.    As  He  is  the  Son  of  God  by  nature,  so  are  we  sons  of 
God   by  grace ;  and  it  is  He  who  has  made  us  such.     1.  This  is  the  wondtrful 
economy  of  grace,  or  mystery  of  godliness,  which  should  be  before  our  minds  at  all 
times,  but  especially  at  this  season,  when  the  Most  Holy  took  upon  Him  our  flesh 
of  **  a  pure  Virgin,"  "  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  without  spot  of  sin, 
to  make  us  clean  from  all  sin."    He  it  was  who  created  the  worlds  ;  He  it  was  who 
interposed  of  old  time  in  the  affairs  of  the  world,  and  showed  Himself  to  be  a  living 
and  observant  God,  whether  men  thought  of  him  or  not.     Yet  this  great  God  con- 
descended to  come  down  on  earth  from  His  heavenly  throne,  and  to  be  born  into 
His  own  world ;  showing  Himself  as  the  Son  of  God  in  a  new  and  second  sense,  in 
a  created  nature,  as  well  aa  in  His  eternal  substance.     2.  And  next,  observe,  that 
since  He  was  the  All-holy  Son  of  God,  though  He  condescended  to  be  born  into  the 
world.  He  necessarily  came  into  it  in  a  way  suitable  to  the  All-holy,  and  different 
from  that  of  other  men.     He  took  our  nature  apon  Him,  but  not  our  sin  ;  taking 
our  nature  in  a  way  above  nature.     It  was  ordained,  indeed,  that  the  Eternal  Word 
should  come  into  the  world  by  the  ministration  of  a  woman ;  but  born  in  the  way  of 
the  flesh  He  could  not  be.    How  could  He  have  atoned  for  our  sins,  who  Himself 
had  guilt  ?  or  cleansed  our  hearts,  who  was  impure  Himself?  or  raised  up  our  heads, 
who  was  Himself  the  son  of  shame  ?    Priests  among  men  are  they  who  have  to 
offer  "  first  for  their  own  sins,  and  then  for  the  people's  "  ;  but  He,  coming  as  the 
immaculate  Lamb  of  God,  and  the  all-prevailing  Priest,  could  not  come  in  the  way 
which  those  fond  persons  anticipated.     He  came  by  a  new  and  living  way,  by  whicli 
He  alone  has  come,  and  which  alone  became  Him.  Because  He  was"  incarnate  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  of  the  Virgin  Mary,"  therefore  He  was  "  Jesus,"  a  *'  Saviour  from  sin." 
Because  God  the  Holy  Ghost  wrought  miraculously,  therefore  was  her  Son  a  "Holy 
Thing,"  "  the  Son  of  God,"  and  "  Jesus,"  and  the  heir  of  an  everlasting  kingdom. 
3.  This  is  the  great  mystery  which  we  are  now  celebrating,  of  width  mercy  is  the 
beginning,  and  sanctity  the  end:  according  to  the  Psalm,  "Righteousness  and 
peace  have  kissed  each  other."    He  who  is  all  purity  came  to  an  impure  race  to 
raise  them  to  His  purity.    He,  the  brightness  of  God's  glory,  came  in  a  body  of 
flesh,  which  was  pure  and  holy  as  Himself,  "  without  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such 
thing,  but  holy  and  without  blemish";  and  this  He  did  for  our  sake,  "  that  we 
might  be  partakers  of  His  holiness."   He  who  "hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations 
of  men,"  so  tbat  in  the  sin  of  one  all  sinned,  and  in  the  death  of  one  all  died.  He 
came  in  that  very  nature  of  Adam,  in  order  to  commanicate  to  ns  that  nature  as  it 
is  in  His  person,  that  "  our  sinful  bodies  might  be  made  clean  by  His  body,  and  our 
souls  washed  through  His  most  piecious  blood  "  ;   to  make  us  partakers  of  the 
Divine  nature ;  to  sow  the  seed  of  eternal  hfe  in  our  hearts  ;  and  to  raise  us  from 
"  the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world  through  lust,"  to  that  immaculate  purity  and 
that  fulness  of  grace  which  is  in  Him.    4.  And  when  He  came  into  the  world,  lie 
was  a  pattern  of  sanctity  in  the  circumstances  of  His  hfe,  as  well  as  in  His  birth. 
He  did  not  implicate  and  contaminate  Himself  with  sinners.     He  came  into  the 
world,  and  He  speedily  left  the  world  ;  as  if  to  teach  us  how  little  He  Himself,  how 
little  we  His  followers,  have  to  do  with  the  world.    And  while  He  was  here,  since 
He  could  not  acquiesce  or  pleasure  Himself  in  the  earth,  so  He  would  none  of  its 
vaunted  goods.     He  would  not  accept  lodging  or  entertainment,  acknowledgment, 
or  blandishment,  from  the  kingdom  of  darkness.    He  would  not  be  made  a  king  ; 
He  would  not  be  called  Good  Master;  He  would  not  accept  where  He  might  lay  His 
head.     His  life  lay  not  in  man's  breath,  or  man's  smile ;  it  was  hid  in  Him  from 
whom  He  came  and  to  whom  He  returned.    Now  all  this  is  quite  independent  of 
the  special  objects  of  mercy  which  brought  Him  upon  earth.     Though  He  had  still 
submitted  Himself  by  an  incomprehensible  condescension  to  the  death  on  the  Cross 
at  length,  yet  why  did  He  from  the  first  so  spurn  this  world,  when  He  was  not 

11 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

atoning  for  its  sins  ?  He  might  at  least  have  had  the  blessedness  of  brethren  who 
believed  in  Him ;  He  might  have  been  happy  and  revered  at  home  ;  He  miglit  have 
had  the  honour  in  His  own  country ;  He  might  have  submitted  but  at  last  to  what 
He  chose  from  the  first ;  He  might  have  delayed  His  voluntary  sufl'eiinga  till  that 
hour  when  His  Father's  and  His  own  will  made  Him  the  sacrifice  for  sin.  But  He 
did  otherwise ;  aud  thus  He  becomes  a  lesson  to  as  who  are  His  disciples.  He, 
who  was  so  separate  from  the  world,  so  present  with  the  Father  even  in  the 
d-ays  of  His  fiesh,  calls  upon  us,  His  brethren,  as  we  are  in  Him  and  He  in  the 
Father,  to  show  that  we  really  are  what  we  have  been  made,  by  renouncing  the 
world  while  in  the  world,  and  living  as  in  the  presence  of  God.  {J.  H.  Newman,  D.D.) 
The  moral  significance  of  Christ's  humanity: — I.  Thb  humanity  of  Christ  was 
BEiiF-AssuMED.  1.  His  antecedent  existence.  2.  His  power  over  existence.  3. 
His  interest  in  human  existence.  II.  It  was  self-assumed  in  order  to  deb. 
1.  This  fact  is  as  wonderful  as  the  former.  2.  This  fact  can  only  be  justified  by  the 
former.  III.  He  died  in  order  to  destroy  the  terror  of  death  in  humanity. 
1.  The  terror  of  death  is  an  idea.  2.  Christ's  death  is  suited  to  remove  all  painful 
ideas.  (1)  It  shows  that  death  is  not  the  end  of  existence.  (2)  It  shows  that 
death  might  become  the  greatest  blessing  of  existence.  {Homilist. )  God  translated  : — 
He  "  took  "  —he  did  not  inherit,  or  receive — a  body.  It  is  not  the  language  that 
describes  the  ordinary  birth  of  a  common  man.  How  strange  it  would  sound  if  we 
were  to  speak  of  our  children  as  if  they  had  a  thought  or  volition  respecting  their 
nature,  and  as  if  they  were  pleased  to  take  on  them  such  and  such  a  body,  when 
they  were  born  I  It  describes  voluntary  action.  It  was  an  act  contemplated  before- 
hand. It  implies  not  only  pre-existence,  but  power,  dignity,  and  condescension. 
But  the  language  clearly  indicates  a  choice  of  one  raised  higher  than  all  merely 
creatt  d  beiijgs.  "  He  took  not  on  Him  the  nature  of  angels,  but  He  took  on  Him 
the  seed  of  Abraham."  That  is,  He  is  more  than  man.  He  is  more  than  angel. 
He  refused,  when  turning  in  His  mind  the  course  He  should  pursue,  to  take  on  Him 
the  nature  of  angels,  but  concluded,  for  a  good  and  sufficient  reason,  to  assume  even 
a  lower  place,  and  become  a  man.  Is  He  less  than  God,  that  is  more  than  man  and 
more  than  angel?  Did  He  create,  and  does  He  sustain,  the  world  in  which  we 
dwell  ?  The  first  chapter  of  John's  Gospel  unequivocally  declares  that  fact.  It  is 
tlao  unequivocally  declared  in  the  Hebrews.  The  practical  result,  then,  of  this 
exposition  is  this:  Christ  is  presented  to  us  as  the  comprehensible  form  of  God. 
He  is  God  translated.  They  that  worship  God  as  a  mere  spirit  worship  under  the 
most  difficult  circumstances  in  which  it  is  possible  for  the  human  mind  to  worship. 
It  is  the  Scriptural  remedy  to  worship  the  Father  through  Christ.  And  they  that 
worship  Christ  as  very  God  are  enabled  to  worship  under  circumstances  which  make 
it  very  easy.  For  Christ  is  God  present  to  as  in  such  a  way  that  our  senses,  our 
reason,  and  our  a&ections,  are  able  to  take  a  personal  hold  upon  Him.  It  is  just 
the  diiJerence  between  a  God  afar  off  and  a  God  near  at  hand  ;  between  a  God  that 
the  heart  can  reach,  and  by  its  common  sympathies  understand  and  interpret,  and 
a  God  which  only  the  head  and  imagination  can  at  all  reach  or  descry — and  even 
these  only  as  astronomers'  glasses  descry  nebulous  worlds  at  so  vast  a  distance  that 
the  highest  powers  cannot  resolve  them,  or  make  them  less  than  mere  luminous 
mist.  Why,  then,  did  Christ  come  into  the  world,  and  take  the  form  of  man  ? 
Because  men  were  His  children,  because  He  loved  them,  and  because  the  way  to  take 
hold  of  them  was  to  bring  Himself  down  into  their  condition,  so  that  they  should 
be  able  to  see  Him  and  feel  Him,  and  that  by  the  power  of  sympathy  God  might 
have  access  to  every  human  soul.  That  is  the  reason  of  the  incarnation  of  Christ. 
He  did  the  same  as  we  do,  in  faint  analogies.  A  Moravian  missionary  once  went 
to  the  West  Indies  to  preach  to  the  slaves.  He  found  it  in  pj-sible  for  him  to 
carry  out  his  design  so  long  as  he  bore  to  them  the  relation  of  a  mere  missionary. 
They  were  driven  into  the  field  very  early  in  the  morning,  and  returned  late  at 
night,  with  scarcely  strength  to  roll  themselves  into  their  cabins,  and  in  no  con- 
dition to  be  profited  by  instruction.  They  were  savage  towards  all  of  the  race  and 
rank  of  their  masters.  He  determined  to  reach  the  slaves  by  becoming  himself  a 
elave.  He  was  sold,  that  he  might  have  the  privilege  of  working  by  their  side,  and 
preaching  to  them  as  he  worked  with  them.  Do  you  suppose  the  master  or  the 
pastor  could  have  touched  the  hearts  of  those  miserable  slaves  as  did  that  man 
who  placed  himself  in  their  condition?  This  missionary  was  but  following  the 
example  of  the  Loid  Jesus  Christ,  who  took  on  Him  the  nature  of  men,  and 
came  among  them,  and  lived  as  they  lived,  that  He  might  save  thfm  from  their 
gins.    Do   any   think   that    this   view   of   God  is  degrading?    If  your  God  were 


CBLKt.  n.]  HEBREWS.  163 

Jupiter,  it  would   be ;  but   if  He  la  the  Father  of  the  aniverse,  it  is  ennobling 
and  full  of    grandeur.     The  grandest  deeds  in  this  world  are  the  loving  con- 
de?censions  of  great  natures  to  the  help  of  weak  ones.     No  crown  so  becomes  a 
king   as  the   service   of   low   and   suffering  natures  by  those  that  are  high  and 
happy.     1.  In  view  of  this,  I  remark  that,  as  it  is  by  the  personal  power  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  upon  the  hearts  of  His  children,  that  He  works  all  goodness  in 
them,  so  all  attempts  to  live  a  religious  life  which  leave  out  this  Uving,  personal, 
present  sympathy  of  the  Christ-heart  with  our  human  heart,  will  be  relatively  im- 
perfect.   Men's  lives  will  be  imperfect  enough,  at  any  rate  ;  but  when  they  neglect 
this  vital  inspiration,  it  seems  scarcely  possible  to  live  at  all  with  religious  comfort. 
Our  religious  joy  never  springs  from  the  conception  of  what  we  are,  but  of  what 
God  is.    No  man's  life,  attainments,  purposes,  or  virtues  can  yield  him  full  peace. 
It  is  the  conviction  that  we  are  loved  of  God,  personally  by  name  and  nature,  with 
a  full  Divine  insight  of  our  real  weakness,  wickedness,  and  inferiority  that  brings 
peace.    Nor  will  this  become  settled  and  immovable  until  men  know  and  feel  that 
God  loves  them  from  a  nature  in  Himself,  from  a  Divine  tendency  to  love  the  poor 
and  sinful,  that  He  may  rescue  and  heal  them.     God  is  called  a  sun.    His  heart, 
always  warm,  brings  summer  to  the  most  barren  places.    He  is  inexhaustible  in 
goodness,  and  His  patience  beyond  all  human  conception.    2.  All  those  views  of 
God  wliich  lead  you  to  go  to  Him  for  help  and  strength  are  presumptively  true 
views,  and  all  those  views  of  God  which  tend  to  repress  and  drive  you  away  from 
Him  are  presumptively  false  views.     Any  view  which  presents  God  as  a  being  whose 
justice  shall  make  sinners,  who  wish  to  return  to  Him,  unable  to  do  so,  is  a  false 
view.     If  we  have  done  wrong,  in  Him  is  the  remedy.    He  is  the  Sun  that  shows 
ns,  when  we  are  in  darkness,  where  to  go ;  He  is  the  bright  and  morning  Star  that 
makes  our  dawn  and  twilight  come  to  us  ;  He  is  our  Way ;  He  is  our  Staff ;  He  is 
our  Shepherd ;  he  is  our  sceptred  King,  to  defend  us,  from  our  adversaries :  He  is 
all  in  all,  to  all !     3.  Those  states  of  mind,  then,  in  us,  which  bring  as  nearest  to 
God,  and  which  bring  ns  to  Him  most  confidingly,  are  such  as  honour  Him  most 
and  please  Him  most.     There  are  a  great  many  who  wish  they  could  please  God, 
and  would  give  anything  if  they  could  only  be  prepared  to  please  Him.    Most  will 
you  please  Him  when  you  confide  in  Him  1  If  earthly  parents  can  lift  themselves  up 
iuto  feelings  of  holy  sympathy  for  a  repentant  child,  what  must  be  the  feelings  of 
God  when  His  children  come  to  Him  for  help  to  break  away  from  sin,  and  to  lead 
lives  of  rectitude  ?    Eead  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  Luke,  and  find  out  what  God's 
feelings  are  ;  and  then  say,  "  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  Father."     (H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Christ's  assumption  of  human  nature: — I.    An    important   fact   m  beference  to 
THE  Saviour.     1.  He  assumed  true  human  nature.     2.  He  did  this  for  the  welfare 
of  mankind.    II.    The   great   object   and  design   connected    with   this   fact. 
1.  Death  is  that  to  which  all  mankind  are  subject.  2.  Death  is  placed  in  the  power 
of  the  great  adversary  of  man.    3.  The  prospect  of  death  exposes  men  to  a  fear 
amountmg  to  mental  bondage.     4.  Christ  delivers  mankind  from  this  bondage. 
Because  Christ  has  made  an  atonement,  Satan  has  no  longer  power  over  men  to 
keep  them  in  bondage.     It  only  remains  that  we  make  an  application  of  this  atone- 
ment by  faith,  and  then  over  us  death  has  no  more  power.     (J,  Parsons,  M.A.) 
The  Christiaii's  protector : — In  a  sermon  from  this  text  the  Kev.  Evan  Harris,  of 
M nth yr,  makes  the  following  divisions.      1.   "The    children."     2.    "He  also." 
S.  "  The  devil."    I  hear  some  timid  disciple  say,  "Ah,  I  see  the  devil  lurks  in 
that  text."    Yes,  he  does;  but  remember  that  " He  also "  is  there  too.     Fear  not, 
timid  one,  for  it  cannot  fare  badly  with  "  the  children"  if  "He  also"  Himself  is 
between  them  and  the  devU.     The  secret  of  safety  is  in  beiog  near  Him.     Destroy 
him  that  had  the  power  of  death. — The  deviVs  possession  of  the  pmcer  of  death  : — 
Sundry  are  the  respects  wherein  the  devil  may  be  said  to  have  the  power  of  death. 
1.  As  he  is  the  executioner  of  God's  just  judgment.     He  is  in  this  regard  as  an 
hangman,  who  may  be  said  to  have  the  power  of  the  gallows  because  he  hangeth 
men  thereon.     2.  As  he  is  like  an  hunter,  fisher,  fowler  or  falconer.      He  hunteth, 
fisheth,  and  fowleth  for  the  life,  not  of  unreasonable  creatures  only,  but  also  of 
reasonable  men.    8.  As  he  is  a  thief  and  continually  layeth  wait  for  blood,  and 
seeks  the  precious  life  of  man's  body  and  soul.     4.  As  a  continual  tempter  to  allure 
or  drive  men  into  sin,  and  thereby  to  death.     Herein  he  spared  not  Christ  Himself 
(Matt.  iv.  1,  &c.).  5.  As  he  is  an  accuser  of  men  and  as  an  adversary  to  press  God's 
just  law  against  men,  and  to  call  for  judgment  against  them.  6.  As  he  is  a  tormentor : 
for  M  hen  he  hath  drawn  men  to  sin  he  affrighteth  them  with  the  terror  of  death 
and  damnation.     In  general  nothing  is  more  terrible  than  death.    In  this  respect 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

death  is  called  the  king  of  terrors  (Job  xviii.  14).  This  kind  of  power,  namely  of  death, 
attributed  to  the  devil — (1)  Showeth  wherein  his  strength  especially  lieth  :  even  in- 
doing  mischief  and  bringing  men  to  destruction.  His  power  is  to  hurt  men.  In 
this  respect  he  hath  names  of  destruction  given  unto  him — as  in  Hebrew  Abaddon, 
and  in  Greek  Apollyon  (Rev.  ix.  11),  and  he  is  styled  a  mu/derer  (John  viii.  44). 
(2)  It  manifestetb  the  vile  slavery  and  woful  bondage  of  the  devil's  vassals.  They 
serve  him  who  hath  the  power  of  death,  and  doth  what  he  can  to  bring  all  to  death. 
What  can  any  expect  from  him  but  death  ?  The  task  that  he  puts  on  them  is  sin  : 
the  wages  that  he  gives  is  death  (Rom.  vi.  23).  (3)  It  is  an  incitation  unto  those 
to  whom  this  kind  of  power  is  made  known  to  be  more  watchful  against  Satan, 
more  manful  in  resisting  him,  and  the  better  prepared  against  his  assaults.  (4)  It 
wameth  all  of  all  sorts  to  renounce  the  devil  and  all  his  works,  to  come  out  of  hia 
Babel :  to  come  into  and  abide  in  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God,  which 
Christ  has  purchased  for  us  :  and  to  renounce  Satan's  service.  As  the  devil  hatb 
the  power  of  death,  so  Christ  hath  the  power  of  Ufe  (John  vi.  39,  40).  (5)  It 
amplifieth  both  the  glory  and  also  the  benefit  of  that  conquest  which  Christ  hath 
gotten  over  him  that  hath  the  power  of  death.  The  glory  of  that  victory  appearetb 
herein,  that  he  hath  overcome  so  potent  an  enemy  as  had  the  power  of  death.  The 
benefit  thereof  herein  appears  that  he  hath  overcome  so  malicious  and  mischievous 
an  enemy  as  exercised  his  power  by  all  manner  of  death.  Hence  ariseth  the  ground 
of  this  holy  insultation,  "  O  death,  where  is  thy  sting?  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  65).  He  who 
had  the  power  of  death,  being  destroyed,  death  now  can  have  no  more  power  over 
them  that  are  redeemed  by  Christ.  (IF.  Gouge.)  The  death  of  death: — We 
fear  death  with  a  double  fear.  There  is,  first,  the  instinctive  fear,  shared  also  by 
the  animal  creation,  for  the  very  brutes  tremble  as  the  moment  of  death  draw» 
near.  Surely  this  fear  is  not  wiong.  It  is  often  congenital  and  involuntary,  and 
afflicts  some  of  God's  noblest  saints  ;  though  doubtless  these  will  some  day  confess 
that  it  was  most  unwarrantable,  and  that  the  moment  of  dissolution  was  calra, 
and  sweet,  and  blessed.  The  child  whose  eyes  feast  upon  a  glowing  vista  of 
flower  and  fruit,  beckoning  it  through  the  garden  gate,  hardly  notices  the  rouj^h 
woodwork  of  the  gate  itself  as  it  bounds  through;  and  probably  the  8oul,becomii!g 
aware  of  the  beauty  of  the  King  and  the  glories  of  its  home,  is  too  absorbed  to 
notice  the  act  of  death,  till  it  suddenly  finds  itself  free  to  mount,  and  soar,  and 
revel  in  the  dawning  light.  But  there  is  another  fear  of  death,  which  is  spiritual. 
1.  We  dread  its  mystery.  What  is  it?  Whither  does  it  lead?  Why  does  it  coma 
just  now?  What  is  the  nature  of  the  life  beyond?  2.  We  dread  its  leave-taking. 
The  heathen  poet  sang  sadly  of  leaving  earth,  and  home,  and  family.  Long  habit 
endears  the  homeliest  lot,  and  the  roughest  comrades  ;  how  much  more  the  true- 
hearted  and  congenial ;  and  it  is  hard  to  part  from  them.  3.  Men  dread  tbe  after- 
death.  •'  The  sting  of  death  is  sin."  How  can  mortal  man  be  just  with  God  7 
How  can  he  escape  hell,  and  find  his  place  amid  the  happy,  festal  throngs  of  the 
Golden  City?  All  these  fears  were  known  to  Christ.  And  He  knew  that  they 
would  be  felt  by  many  who  were  to  be  closely  related  to  Him  as  brethren.  If,  then, 
He  was  prompted  by  ordinary  feelings  of  compassion  to  the  great  masses  of  man- 
kind. He  would  be  especially  moved  to  relieve  those  with  whom  He  had  so  close  aa 
affinity,  as  these  marvellous  verses  unfold.  But  in  order  to  do  it.  He  must  die. 
He  could  not  be  the  death  of  death,  unless  He  had  personally  tasted  death.  H& 
needed  to  fulfil  the  law  of  death,  by  dying,  before  He  could  abolish  death.  But  He 
could  only  have  died  by  becoming  man.  Perhaps  there  is  no  race  ia  the  nniverse 
that  can  die  but  our  own.  Others  die  because  they  are  born  ;  Christ  was  bom  that 
He  might  die.  I.  By  death  Christ  destroyed  thk  power  of  death.  Scripture 
has  no  doubt  as  to  the  existence  of  the  devil.  And  those  who  know  much  of  their 
own  inner  life,  and  of  the  sudden  assaults  of  evil  to  which  we  are  liable,  cannot 
but  realise  his  terrible  power.  And  from  this  passage  we  infer  that  that  power  waa 
even  greater  before  Jesus  died.  "He  bad  the  power  of  death."  It  was  a  chitf 
weapon  in  his  infernal  armoury.  The  dread  of  it  was  so  great  as  to  drive  men  to 
yield  to  any  demands  made  by  the  priests  of  false  religions,  with  their  dark 
impurities  and  hideous  rites.  Thus  timid  sheep  are  scared  by  horrid  shouts  and 
blows  into  the  butcher's  shambles.  But  since  Jesus  died,  the  devil  and  his  power 
are  destroyed.  Destroyed !  Certainly.  Not  in  the  sense  of  being  extinct.  Still 
he  assails  the  Christian  warrior,  tbough  armed  from  head  to  foot ;  and  goes  about 
seeking  whom  he  may  devour,  and  deceives  men  to  ruin.  Yet  he  is  destroyed. 
Are  we  not  all  familiar  with  objects  which  are  destroyed  without  being  actually 
ended.    Destroyed  as  objects  of  dread,  though  they  linger  in  an  attenuated  and 


CHA*.  II.J  HEBREWS.  165 

impotent  existence.  Satan  exists  as  a  strong  man ;  he  is  no  longer  armed,  and  is 
the  attenuated  shadow  of  his  former  self.  II.  By  death  Christ  DELrvERS  from 
THE  FEAB  OF  DEATH.  A  child  was  in  the  habit  of  playing  in  a  large  and  beautiful 
garden,  with  sunny  lawns  ;  but  there  was  one  part  of  it,  a  long  and  winding  path, 
down  which  he  never  ventured  ;  indeed  he  dreaded  to  go  near  it,  because  some  silly 
nurse  had  told  Lim  that  ogres  and  goblins  dwelt  within  its  darksome  gloom. 
At  last  his  eldest  brother  heard  of  his  fear,  and  after  playing  one  day 
with  him,  went  with  him  to  the  embowered  entrance  of  the  grove,  and, 
leaving  him  there  terror-stricken,  went  singing  through  its  length,  and  re- 
turned and  reasoned  with  the  child,  proving  his  fears  were  groundless.  At 
last  he  took  the  lad's  hand,  and  they  went  through  it  together,  and  from 
that  moment  the  fear  which  had  haunted  the  place  fled.  And  the  memory  of 
(hat  brother's  presence  took  its  place.  So  has  Jesus  done  for  us.  {F,  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
'file  destroyer  destroyed : — In  God's  original  empire  eveijthing  was  happiness,  and 
joy,  and  peace.  If  there  be  any  evil,  any  suffering  and  pain,  that  is  not  God's 
work.  God  may  permit  it,  overrule  it,  and  out  of  it  educe  much  good ;  but  the 
evil  Cometh  not  of  God.  The  devil's  reign,  on  the  contrary,  containeth  nought  of 
good ;  "  the  devil  sinneth  from  the  beginning,"  and  his  dominion  has  been  one 
uniform  course  of  temptation  to  evil  and  infliction  of  misery.  Death  is  a  part  of 
Satan's  dominion,  he  brought  sin  into  the  world  when  he  tempted  our  mother  Eve 
to  eat  of  the  forbidden  fruit,  and  with  sin  he  brought  also  death  into  the  world, 
with  all  its  train  of  woes.  Since  that  time  Satan  hath  ever  gloated  over  the  death 
of  the  human  race,  and  he  hath  had  some  cause  of  glory,  for  that  death  has  been 
uuiversal.  There  is  something  fearful  in  death.  It  is  frightful  even  to  him  that 
hath  the  most  of  faith.  It  is  only  the  gildings  of  death,  the  afterwards,  the  heaven, 
the  glory,  that  maketh  death  bearable  even  to  the  Christian.  Death  in  itself  must 
ever  be  an  unutterably  fearful  thing  to  the  sons  of  men.  And  oh  1  what  ruin  doth 
it  work  1  Now,  this  is  Satan's  delight.  He  conceives  death  to  be  his  masterpiece, 
lecause  of  its  terror,  and  because  of  the  ruin  which  it  works.  The  greater  the 
evil,  the  better  doth  he  delight  in  it.  And  death  is  very  lovely  to  the  devil  for 
another  reason — not  only  because  it  is  his  chief  work  on  earth,  but  because  it  gives 
him  the  finest  opportunity  in  the  world  for  the  display  of  his  malice  and  his  craft. 
Usually  with  many  of  the  saints,  if  not  in  the  last  article  of  death,  yet  some  little 
time  before  it,  there  is  a  ferocious  onslaught  made  by  the  great  enemy  of  souls. 
And  then  he  loves  death,  because  death  weakens  the  mind.  The  approach  of  death 
destroys  some  of  the  mental  power,  and  takes  away  from  us  for  a  season  some  of 
those  spirits  by  which  we  have  been  cheered  in  better  days.  It  makes  us  lie  there, 
languid  and  faint  and  weary.  •'  Now  is  my  opportunity,"  says  the  evil  one ;  and 
he  steals  in  upon  us.  Hence  I  believe  for  this  reason  he  is  said  to  have  the  power 
of  death ;  for  I  cannot  conceive  that  the  devil  hath  the  power  of  death  in  any  other 
sense  but  this,  that  it  was  originated  by  him,  and  that  he  at  such  time  generally 
displays  the  most  of  his  malice  and  of  his  power.  I.  By  the  death  of  Christ  the 
devil's  power  over  death  is  to  the  Christian  utterly  destroyed.  The  devil's 
power  over  death  Ues  in  three  places,  and  we  must  look  at  it  in  three  aspects. 

1.  Sometimes  the  devil  hath  power  in  death  over  the  Christian,  by  tempting  him 
to  doubt  his  resurrection,  and  leading  him  to  look  into  the  black  future  with  the 
dread  of  annihilation.  But  by  the  death  of  Christ  all  this  is  taken  away. 
If  I  lie  a-dying,  and  Satan  comes  to  me  and  says,  "  Thou  art  to  be  annihilated, 
thou  ait  now  sinking  beneath  the  waves  of  time,  and  thou  shalt  lie  in  the  caverns 
of  nothingness  for  ever  ;  thy  living  spirit  is  to  cease  for  ever  and  be  not,"  1  reply  to 
him,  "  No,  not  so  ;  I  have  no  fear  of  that ;  O  Satan,  thy  power  to  tempt  me  here 
faileth  utterly  and  entirely.  See  there  my  Saviour  1  He  died,  for  His  heart  was 
pierced ;  He  was  buried  ;  but,  0  devil,  He  was  not  annihilated,  for  He  rose  again 
from  the  tomb.  And  now,  O  Satan,  I  tell  thee,  thou  canst  not  put  an  end  to  my 
existence,  for  thou  couldst  not  put  an  end  to  the  existence  of  my  Lord.  But  now 
for  a  more  common  temptation — another  phase   of    the  devil's  power  in  death. 

2.  Full  often  the  devil  comes  to  us  in  our  life-time,  and  he  tempts  us  by  telling  us 
that  our  guilt  will  certainly  prevail  against  us,  that  the  sins  of  our  youth  and  owr 
former  transgressions  are  still  in  our  bones,  and  that  when  we  sleep  in  the  grave 
our  sins  shall  rise  up  against  us.  Thou  pretendest  that  thou  art  one  of  the  Lord's 
beloved :  now  look  back  upon  thy  sins :  remember  on  such  a  day  how  thy  rebellious 
lusts  arose,  and  thou  wast  led  if  not  quite  to  indulge  in  a  transgression,  yet  to  long 
after  it.  Eecollect  how  often  thou  hast  provoked  Him  in  the  wilderness,  how 
fretjuently  thou  hast  made  His  anger  wax  hot  against  thee."    But  now  see  how 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

through  death  Chript  has  taken  away  the  devil's  power.  We  reply,  "  In  truth,  O 
Satan,  thou  art  right;  I  have  rebelled,  I  will  not  belie  my  conscience  and  my 
memory ;  I  own  I  have  transgressed.  0  Satan,  turn  to  the  blackest  page  of  my 
history,  I  confess  all.  But  0  fiend,  let  me  tell  thee  my  sins  were  numbered  on  the 
Bcape-goat's  head  of  old.  Go  thou,  0  Satan,  to  Calvary's  Cross,  and  see  my  Substi- 
tute  bleeding  there.  Behold ,  my  sins  are  not  mine ;  they  are  laid  on  His  eternal 
shoulders,  and  He  has  cast  them  from  His  own  shoulders  into  the  depths  of  the  sea.'* 
Once  more,  you  may  suppose  a  Christian  who  has  firm  confidence  in  a  future  state. 
The  evil  one  has  another  temptation  for  him.  3.  "  It  may  be  very  true,"  saith  he» 
"  that  you  are  to  live  for  ever  and  that  your  sins  have  been  pardoned;  but  you  have 
hitherto  found  it  very  hard  work  to  persevere,  and  now  you  are  about  to  die  you  will 
be  sure  to  fail."  •*  0  fiend,  thou  temptest  us  to  think  that  thou  wilt  conquer  us  j 
remember,  Satan,  that  the  strength  that  has  preserved  us  against  thee  has  not  been 
our  own :  the  arm  that  has  deUvered  us  has  not  been  the  arm  of  flesh  and  blood, 
else  we  had  long  since  been  overcome.  Look  thou  there,  fiend,  at  Him  that  is 
Omnipotent.  His  Almightiness  is  the  power  that  preserves  us  to  the  end;  and 
therefore,  be  we  never  so  weak,  when  we  are  weak  then  we  are  strong,  and  in  our  last 
hour  of  peril  we  shall  yet  overcome  thee."  II.  But  now  I  want  to  show  you  that  not 
only  has  Christ  by  His  death  taken  away  the  devil's  power  in  death,  but  He  has 

TAKEN    AWAY    THK    DEVIL'S    POWER   EVERYWHERE   ELSE    OVER    A    CHRISTIAN.       "He   hath 

destroyed,"  or  overcome,  "  him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil." 
Death  was  the  devil's  chief  intrenchment :  Christ  bearded  the  lion  in  his  den,  and 
fought  him  in  his  own  territory ;  and  when  He  took  death  from  him,  and  dis- 
mantled that  once  impregnable  fortress.  He  took  away  from  him  not  only  that,  but 
every  other  advantage  that  he  had  over  the  saint.  And  now  Satan  is  a  conquered 
foe,  not  only  in  the  hour  of  death,  but  in  every  other  hour  and  in  every  other  place. 
He  is  an  enemy,  both  cruel  and  mighty;  but  he  is  a  foe  who  quakes  and  quails  when 
a  Christian  gets  into  the  Usts  with  him ;  for  he  knows  that  though  the  fight  may 
waver  for  a  little  while  in  the  scale,  the  balance  of  victory  must  fall  on  the  side  of  the 
saint,  because  Christ  by  His  death  destroyed  the  devil's  power.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Christ,  the  destroyer  of  the  devil : — We  take  as  the  works  of  the  devil  those  which 
this  malignant  spirit  hath  performed  in  order  to  the  overthrow  of  the  holiness  and 
the  happiness  of  mankind ;  and  we  must  endeavour  to  consider  or  to  ascertain  how 
the  effects  of  the  atonement  so  counterbalanced  the  effects  of  the  apostacy,  that  our 
Eedeemer,  in  dying,  may  actually  be  said  to  have  "destroyed  the  devil  and  hia 
works."  Now,  the  effects  of  the  apostacy  may  justly  be  considered  under  two 
divisions ;  physical  and  moral  effects:  those  whose  subject  is  matter,  and  those  whose 
subject  is  spirit;  and  if  the  Son  of  God  destroyed  the  works  of  the  devil,  He  must, 
in  some  way  or  other,  have  nullified  both  these  effects,  so  that,  physically  and 
morally,  He  provided  a  full  remedy  for  a  disorganised  creation.  I.  Look  first  at 
THE  PUY8ICAI,  EFFECTS  OF  Adam's  SIN.  Every  pain  to  which  flesh  is  heir,  every 
sickness — the  decay,  and  the  dissolution  of  the  body,  are  to  be  referred  to  sin  aa 
their  first  origin  ;  and  the  temptation  to  sin  having  been  of  Satan,  they  are  to  be 
classed  among  the  works  of  the  deviL  And  above  these  consequences  existing  in 
ourselves,  there  are  others  to  be  observed  in  creation  around  us,  whether  inanimate 
or  animate.  We  admit  that  death  is  not  yet  destroyed  in  the  sense  of  having  ceased 
to  possess  power;  but  death  no  longer  reigns  by  right;  it  reigns  only  by  sufferance. 
It  is  allowed  to  remain  as  an  instrument  for  the  advancement  of  certain  purpo  es 
of  the  Almighty ;  but  not  as  a  tyrant  in  whom  is  vested  an  undisputed  authority. 
Nay,  death  succeeded  by  a  resurrection,  is  not  in  truth  to  be  designated  death.  We 
can  gaze  on  that  spectacle  of  the  grave — not  the  proprietor,  not  the  consumer,  not 
the  destroyer,  but  just  simply  the  guardian  of  the  dust,  of  human  kind,  and  confess 
that  the  resurrection  will  give  overwhelming  attestation  to  the  annihilation  of 
death.  And  if  this  resurrection  is  referred  to  the  energies  of  the  atonement  it  will 
demonstrate  to  the  conviction  of  all  orders  of  being  that  the  Son  of  God  effected  in 
dying  what  the  text  announces  as  the  great  end  proposed — "that  through  death 
He  might  destroy  him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil."  We  go  oa 
to  observe,  that  similar  statements  may  be  applied  to  all  those  other  effects  which 
we  designate  the  physical  effects  of  rebellion.  It  is  quite  true  that  pain  and  sorrow 
are  allowed  to  continue.  But  it  is  true  that  evil  is  at  length  to  be  wholly  extirpated 
from  the  earth  ;  and  that  not  in  consequence  of  any  fresh  interposition  of  God,  or 
any  new  mediation  of  Christ,  but  simply  through  the  effects  of  that  expiatory 
sacrifice  which  was  offered  ages  back  upon  CaWary.  Then,  when  righteousness 
Bhall  clothe  every  province  of   the  globe,  and   happiness,  the  purest  and  most 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  167 

elevated,  shall  circulate  through  the  hearts  and  homes  of  all  the  world's  families, 
and  the  lustre  of  an  untarnished  loveliness  shall  gild  the  face  of  every  landscape, 
then  shall  our  text  be  accomphshed ;  then  shall  it  be  put  beyond  doubt  that  there 
was  a  virtue  in  the  atonement  to  counteract  all  the  physical  effects  of  apostacy. 
II.  We  have  now  to  consider  what  we  term  the  morai,  consequences  of  apostacy, 
and  we  own  it  more  difiBcult  to  prove  their  destruction  than  that  of  the  physical. 
We  shall  fasten  at  once  on  the  hard  point  of  the  question.  Beyond  all  doubt  the 
grand  work  of  the  devil  is  the  everlasting  destruction  of  the  human  soul.  If  it 
were  the  work  of  the  devil  to  bring  mankind  to  share  his  own  heritage  of  woe ;  and 
if,  in  spite  of  the  interposition  of  Christ,  a  vast  multitude  of  our  race  shall  be 
actually  his  companions  iu  anguish,  can  it  fairly  be  contended  that  there  has  been 
any  direct  counteraction  of  the  works  of  the  devil,  or  that  the  effects  of  redemption 
are  at  all  commensurate  with  the  effects  of  apostacy  ?  May  we  not  exclaim  in  the 
language  of  the  prophet — "Is  there  no  balm  in  Gilead;  is  there  no  physician  there? 
Why,  then,  is  not  the  health  of  the  daughter  of  my  people  recovered  ?  "  We  desire 
to  meet  this  question  fairly.  We  observe,  then,  that  it  is  quite  possible  to  charge 
too  much  on  the  devil,  and  to  make  excuses  for  men  by  throwing  blam^  on  the 
tempter.  You  say,  if  a  man  perish,  his  perdition  is  the  work  of  the  devil ;  but  we 
are  at  issue  with  you  here.  The  man  is  a  redeemed  man,  and  can  be  destroyed  only 
through  destroying  himself.  The  devil  does  not  destroy  him.  The  devil,  indeed, 
may  put  engines  of  destruction  in  his  way ;  it  is  the  man  himself  who  makes  use  of 
those  engines,  and  when  he  dies  it  is  by  suicide,  and  not  by  the  blow  of  another. 
After  all,  it  was  not  the  devil  that  destroyed  Adam.  The  devil  tempted  him ;  he 
could  do  nothing  more.  He  did  as  much  to  Christ ;  and  the  destruction  lay  not  ia 
the  being  tempted,  but  in  the  yielding  to  temptation.  And  though  Satan  tempts, 
it  is  man  who  yields.  Unless  men  perish  through  their  own  act,  they  are  punished 
for  what  was  unavoidable,  and  then  their  punishment  is  unjust.  We  contend, 
therefore,  that  it  is  far  from  essential  to  the  complete  destruction  of  the  devil  and  all 
his  works  that  all  men  should  be  saved.  We  will  take  this  case  first.  We  will  call  a 
fallen  mim  Satan's  work,  and  we  think  to  show  you,  by  a  few  brief  remarks,  that  thia 
work  is  far  more  than  destroyed  by  the  redemption,  without  the  salvation  of  alL 
Satan's  work  is  twofold — he  has  fastened  on  me  death  for  original  sin,  and  corrupt 
propensities  which  are  sure  to  issue  in  actual  sin.  Hence,  the  devil's  work  is 
destroyed,  if  arrangements  have  been  made  by  which  I  may  escape  the  death,  and 
resist  the  propensities.  But  as  interested  in  the  obedience  and  sacrifice  of  Christ — 
••  The  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world  " — life,  eternal  life,  is 
within  my  reach  ;  and  this  destroys  the  first  part  of  the  work.  The  Holy  Spirit  is 
given  me  for  overcoming  evil,  and  this  destroys  the  second  part  of  the  work.  Satan's 
work  made  death  inevitable,  and  rendered  me  at  one  and  the  same  time  certain  to 
sin  and  hopeless  of  pardon.  Christ's  work,  on  the  contrary,  made  death  avoidable, 
and  rendered  me,  though  not  proof  against  sin,  yet  sure  through  repentance  and 
faith  of  forgiveness.  Does  not  then  the  one  work  actually  destroy  the  other  ?  What 
has  Satan  done  in  procuring  my  fall  which  has  not  been  balanced  by  what  Christ 
did  in  effecting  my  redemption  ?     (JH".  Melvill,  B.D.)  Christ  overcoming  the  devil 

by  death : — This  God  ordered — 1.  To  accomplish  that  ancient  promise  to  the  seed 
of  the  woman,  which  was  Christ ;  and  threatening  against  the  serpent,  which  was 
the  devil  (Gen.  iii.  15).  "  It  shall  bruise  thy  head,"  that  is,  Christ  should  utterly 
vanquish  the  devil.  2.  To  deliver  man  by  satisfying  justice.  Had  the  devil  been 
by  an  almighty  power  vanquished,  justice  had  not  thereby  been  satisfied,  3.  To 
magnify  the  power  of  the  conquest  the  more  ;  for  Divine  power  is  made  perfect  in 
weakness  (1  Cor.  xii.  9).  4.  To  bring  the  greater  shame  upon  the  devil;  for  what 
greater  ignominy  than  for  an  enemy  to  be  vanquished  in  his  own  kingdom,  and  that 
with  his  own  weapon.  The  strongest  and  sharpest  weapon  that  Satan  had  was 
death,  and  by  it  he  did  most  hurt.  Christ  dealt  in  this  ease  as  Benaiah  did  with 
an  Egyptian;  he  plucked  the  spear  out  of  his  hand,  and  slew  him  with  his  own 
spear  (2  Sara,  xxiii.  21).  5.  To  take  away  the  ignominy  of  the  Cross  of  Christ,  Jews, 
Pagans,  and  all  infidels  scoff  at  our  crucified  God,  but  this  glorious  victory  which 
Christ  by  His  death  obtained,  showeth  that  it  is  a  matter  of  much  glory  and  much 
rejoicing.  The  apostle  apprehended  so  much  hereof,  as  comparatively  he  would 
glory  in  nothing  saviug  the  Cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (Gal.  vi.  14).  6.  To  put 
a  difference  betwixt  Christ's  death  and  the  death  of  all  others,  even  of  the  best  of 
men.  The  death  of  others  is  only  a  freedom  from  troubles  of  soul  and  body,  and 
an  attaining  unto  rest  and  glory,  which  is  by  virtue  of  Christ's  death.  Christ's 
death  is  a  eonquering  death,  a  death  that  tends  to  the  advantage  of  all  that  believt 


168  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

in  Chiist.  7.  To  take  the  old  wily  serpent  in  his  own  craft,  Satan  laboured  at 
nothing  more  than  to  bring  Christ  to  death :  he  used  Scribes,  Pharisees,  priests, 
rulers,  and  people  of  the  Jews,  yea,  Judas,  Pilate  and  his  soldiers,  as  his  instru- 
meuts  herein.  They  thought  all  sure  if  Christ  might  be  put  to  death ;  but  Christ's 
death  proved  Satan's  destruction.  (W.  Gouge.)  Power  of  death — not  of  life: — 
When  CoeciUawas  brought  before  the  judge  Almachius,  he  said,  "Knowest  thou  not 
that  I  have  power  of  life  and  death  ?  "  "  Not  of  life,"  she  said,  "  but  thou  canst 
indeed  be  a  minister  of  death."  Thepower  of  death  destroyed  : — Archbishop  Laud 
on  the  scaffold  thus  addressed  his  Saviour :  "  Lord,  I  am  coming  as  fast  as  I  can. 
I  know  I  must  pass  through  the  shadow  of  death  before  I  can  see  Thee.  But  it  is 
but  umbra  mortis,  a  shadow  of  death,  a  little  darkness  upon  nature  ;  but  Thou,  Lord, 
by  Thy  goodness,  hast  broken  the  jaws  and  the  power  of  death."  As  Dr.  Neale 
remarks  on  this,  "  Yes,  our  Lord  passed  through  the  valley  of  death  ;  we  through 
the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death.  He  tasted  of  death  that  we  might  never  taste 
it ;  He  died  that  we  might  fall  asleep."  Through  fear  of  death  .  .  .  subject  to 
bondage. — The  only  effectual  antidote  to  tlie  dread  of  dissolution: — Of  all  the 
passions  that  have  place  in  the  human  mind,  there  is  not  one  that  takes  a  stronger 
hold  of  it  than  fear;  and  of  all  the  objects  that  operate  on  that  passion,  there  is 
not  one  that  does  so  more  strikingly  and  more  impressively  than  death.  Nor  is 
this  to  be  wondered  at.  For  what  is  death  ?  That  from  which  there  is  no  escape. 
That  which  not  unfrequently  comes  when  least  expected.  That  which  terminates 
every  earthly  relationship,  acquisition,  anticipation,  enjoyment.  Not  only  does  it 
do  what  it  does  with  all  the  eagerness  of  wiUinghood,  but  also  with  all  the  callous- 
ness of  insensibility.  Dwellings  it  disinhabits,  families  it  scatters,  and  ties  the 
most  endearing  it  dissolves,  without  any  compunction  or  regret.  But  much  though 
death  be  the  object  of  natural  fear,  the  fear  of  it  is  in  no  slight  measure  increased 
when  that  which  is  natural  has  superadded  to  it  that  which  is  slavish.  For  though, 
like  others,  sinners  fear  death  on  account  of  what  death  is  in  itself,  yet  their  fear 
of  death,  arising  as  it  does  from  a  consciousness  of  ill-desert,  is  rendered  trebly 
fearful  by  the  inward  bitings  of  remorse,  and  by  a  sense  of  merited  wrath.  Is 
there  no  remedy  for  their  dismay  ?  The  text  answers  the  question.  It  were 
a  mistake  to  infer  that  the  power  of  the  devil  in  reference  to  death  is  absolute. 
Such  power,  whether  in  reference  to  death  or  in  reference  to  anything  else,  is  not 
possessed  by  any  finite  being.  It  is  the  exclusive,  the  incommunicable  prerogative — 
of  Him,  and  of  Him  alone,  who  is  infinite ;  of  Him  who,  as  occupying  in  His  own 
right  the  throne  of  the  universe,  has  the  "  keys  of  death."  The  power  of  the  devil 
in  reference  to  death  is  simply  permitted  power.  But  though  the  power  of  the 
devil  in  reference  to  death  be  simply  permitted  power,  it  is  not  limited  to  temporal 
death.  It  extends  to,  and,  as  here  spoken  of  by  the  apostle,  embraces  more 
particularly,  eternal  death ;  in  other  words,  the  state  of  misery  to  which  the  term 
is  applicable  in  its  most  aggravated  signification.  It  is  awful  to  think  that  there  is 
in  the  universe  a  being  possessed  of  such  power  as  "the  power  of  death  "  ;  of  power 
not  only  to  tempt  to  sin,  "  the  wages  of  which  is  death,"  but  to  render  the  sinner 
the  instrument  of  his  own  exposure  to  misery  through  all  everlasting  1  It  would  be 
still  more  awful  were  that  being  invincible,  indestructible.  And  how  by  His  death 
has  Jesus  done  this,  in  order  that  His  death  might  be  an  antidote  to  the  fear  of 
death  ?  I.  Because  bt  His  death  He  triumphed  over  him  who  had  the  power  of 
DEATH.  For  this  He  became  incarnate ;  for  had  He  not  become  incarnate,  He 
could  not  have  been  the  surety  of  the  guilty,  nor  as  their  surety  could  He  have 
died.  By  it  the  violated  law  was  magnified  and  made  honourable;  for  the  obedience 
of  which  it  was  the  consequence  was  the  obedience  not  only  of  a  Divine  Person,  but 
of  a  Person  absolutely  faultless.  Such  was  the  result  of  the  death  of  Jesus,  because 
by  His  death  sin  was  snbstitutionally  expiated,  by  the  expiation  of  which  the  devil 
lost  his  power  of  death,  the  loss  of  which  was  his  own  destruction.  What  a 
triumph  1  Never  was  triumph  like  it ;  for  though  He  who  conquered  fell,  by  His 
fall  He  conquered.  What,  then,  have  they  to  fear  from  death  who  trust  in  Jesus, 
the  destroyer  by  death  of  the  destroyer  ?  II.  Because  by  His  death  He  diverted 
death  itself  of  its  sting.  Death  has  been  represented  as  coming  in  the  order  of 
nature ;  and  hence  it  has  been  called  the  debt  of  nature,  as  if  our  original  destiny 
could  not  have  been  carried  into  effect  without  its  payment.  For  what  is  the  fact, 
and  therefore  the  teaching  on  this  subject,  that  is  credible?  Is  it  that  death  is  the 
work  of  nature?  On  the  contrary,  is  it  not  that  death  is  not  the  work  of  nature, 
but  the  work  of  sin?  While  he  was  sinless,  was  not  man  deathless?  And 
is  sin   merely   the  procuring  cause   of   death — that   to   which   death    owes   its 


<3HA».  n.J  HEBREWS  169 

existence  and  prevalence?  Were  this  all,  it  would  be  evidential  in  no  slight 
degree  of  the  deadly  tendency  of  sin.  But  this  is  not  all.  Not  only  in  haviug 
-originated  it  does  sin  lead  to  death  as  its  moral  consequence ;  but  it  is  that  from 
which  death  derives  all  its  painfulness,  all  its  hatefulness.  Well,  then,  may  sin  be 
denominated  not  only  the  cause,  but  the  sting  of  death.  If  this,  then,  be  what  sin 
really  is ;  if  it  be  that  which  renders  death  indescribably  deadly,  can  language  too 
strong  be  employed  to  express  our  sense  of  obligation  to  Him  who  died  for  sin  ? 
His  death  being  sacrificial  and  propitiatory,  by  the  stroke  which  slew  Him,  death 
lost  its  sting.  The  last  arrow  in  the  quiver  of  death  was  spent.  The  very  dregs  of 
the  cup  of  trembling  were  wrung  out.  The  malignant  fury  of  the  curse  of  the 
broken  law  was  exhausted.  So  that  now  death  may  be  a  blessing,  but  can  never 
be  a  curse,  to  those  who  trust  in  Him  who  died  for  sin.  What,  then,  have  they  to 
fear  from  death  ?  "  The  waters  of  Jordan  "  have  applied  to  them  a  misnomer  when 
they  are  called  by  the  name  Marah,  for  the  bitterness  of  the  curse  is  removed. 
There  is  "  no  lion  "  in  the  dark  valley,  neither  does  "  any  ravenous  beast "  walk 
therein.  The  "dart"  of  death  is  pointless,  its  wound  must  be  harmless.  HI. 
Because  by  His  death  He  purchased  the  right  to  redeem  from  death  those  to 

WHOM  death  would  OTHERWISE    HAVE  BEEN   THE   PATHWAY  TO   ETERNAL   MISERY.      It    is 

much  that  Jesus  should  have  stooped  to  combat  with  him  who  had  the  power  of 
death,  it  is  still  more  that  He  should  have  submitted  to  the  endurance  of  the  sting 
of  death  itself  ;  but  His  experience  of  the  one,  and  His  triumphing  over  the  other, 
would  have  failed  to  accomplish  the  object  He  had  in  view,  were  the  beetowment  of 
the  good  problematical  or  uncertain,  which  He  thus  sought  and  gained  for  those 
whom  He  represented.  Their  enjoyment,  however,  of  that  good  depends  not  on  a 
peradventure  ;  their  being  put  into  possession  of  it  is  exposed  to  no  jeopardy,  and 
can  be  hindered  by  no  casualty.  As  indicative  of  the  high  authority  with  which  as 
their  successful  surety  He  is  invested,  He  says,  "  I  will  redeem  them  from  death." 
Having  been  the  originator  of  the  life  that  has  been  taken  away,  is  there  anything 
incredible  in  His  being  its  restorer  ?  If  not,  then,  instead  of  having  uncertainty 
attached  to  it,  the  future  resurrection  of  the  body  is  considered  aright,  when 
it  is  considered  not  as  questionable,  but  as  positively  certain.  What,  then,  have 
they  to  fear  from  death  who  trust  in  Jesus  ?  To  them,  death  is  not  to  be  the 
entire  extinction  of  their  corporeal,  any  more  than  it  is  to  be  a  cessation  of  their 
spiritual  being.  What,  then,  have  they  to  fear  from  death  ?  Trusting  in  Jesus, 
they  trust  in  Him  who  is  the  resurrection  and  the  life.  In  short,  trusting  in  Jesus, 
they  trust  in  Him  who  died  that  they  might  live,  and  who  lives  that  they  may  never 
die,  but  live.  Where  ?  Where  there  shall  be  "no  death,"  where  the  darkness  of 
the  tomb  shall  be  for  ever  excluded  by  the  light  of  life,  where  the  night  of  the  grave 
shall  be  for  ever  lost  in  the  day  of  immortality.  {Alex.  Jack,  D.D,)  The  fear  of 
death  : — Of  a  sentiment  so  powerful  and  so  general,  it  is  natural  to  inquire  the  use 
and  object.  Of  a  terror  bo  painful  it  is  desirable  to  know  the  origin  and  the  remedy. 
I.  One  beneficial  effect,  which  the  fear  of  death  extensively  produces,  is  industry 
jN  OUR  respective  OCCUPATIONS.  II.  Another  beneficial  effect  of  the  fear  of  death  is 
TEMPERANCE.  III.  Another  beneficial  effect  of  the  fear  of  death  is  the  prevention 
OF  MURDER.  IV.  If  the  love  of  life  restrain  us  from  doing  violence  to  others,  it 
must  restrain  us  still  more  forcibly  from  doing  violence  to  ourselves  ;  and  the 
prevention  of  self-murder  will  be  another  beneficial  effect  of  the  fear  of  death. 
V.  The  fear  of  death  produces  its  beneficial  effects  still  more  extensively,  as  rr 

RESTRAINS   THE   VICIOUS    PROPENSITIES  OF   THE   HEART  IN  GENERAL,  AND  PROMOTES  THE 

BENTrMENTS  AND  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  RELIGION.  VI.  The  fear  of  death,  however,  pro- 
duces the  most  important  of  its  beneficial  effects,  and  indeed,  lays  the  foundation 
of  all  the  rest,  by  suggesting  on  various  occasions  the  most  interesting  and 
USEFUL  reflections  TO  THE  MIND.  (IF.  Sparroio,  LL.D.)  Why~menf ear  death : — 
I.  It  is  one  reason  why  we  are  so  much  afraid  of  death,  that  we  expect  it  will  be 
GAINFUL.  We  see  the  dissolution  of  our  fellow-creatures  attended  with  paroxysms 
of  pain.  But  these  torments  it  is,  in  agr^-at  measure,  in  our  own  power  to  prevent. 
The  common  parent  of  disease  is  intemperance.  H.  Death,  again,  is  rendered 
awful  BY  the  GLOOMY  CEREMONIES  THAT  ATTEND  IT.  Take  away  the  pomp  of  death, 
and  you  take  away  half  its  terrors.  III.  Death  might  be  considered  as  the  means 
OF  GRATIFYING  THAT  INCESSANT  DESIRE  OF  NEW  INFORMATION,  which  nature  implanted 
in  the  human  mind ;  which  is  always  innocent  and  laudable,  while  directed  Ly 
prudence  and  moderation ;  and  which,  in  the  present  instance,  ought  to  be  united 
with  humiUty  and  reverence,  in  proportion  to  the  solemnity  of  the  subject.  IV.  It 
is  another  obvious  reason  why  we  are  bo  much  affected  by  the  scenes  of  death,  that 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

WE  DO  NOT  FEEQUENTLT  BEHOLD  THEM.  Were  we  daily  to  witness  the  dissolution  of 
a  neighbour,  we  should  soon  lose  those  powerful  emotions  of  fear.  V.  Upon  the 
same  principle  we  may  be  assured  that  death  would  lose  a  lakge  proportion  of 
ITS  terrors,  dh)  we  make  it,  as  we  ought,  the  frequent  subject  of  odr  meditations. 
Not  only  every  instance  of  mortality,  but  every  appearance  of  nature,  might  suggest 
the  subject  to  our  thoughts.  Scarcely  a  day  passes  over  us,  but  an  animal  or  a 
vegetable  perishes  before  our  eyes.    VI.  Lastly,  and  above  all,  death  would  be  no 

LONGER  FEARED,  WERE  IT  CONSIDERED   ONLY  AS  THE  END  OF  OUR   LABOURS.      The   gTaVO 

would  appear  no  longer  gloomy,  could  we  but  look  upon  it  as  our  passage  to  eternal 
glory.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  basis  on  which  we  must  build  our  virtues  and  our 
courage.  The  shield  that  must  defend  us  against  all  the  terrors  that  death  can 
assume.  (Ibid.)  How  Christ  takes  away  fear  of  death: — I.  Christ  teaches  us 
that  death  is  not  the  snd  of  our  being,  ii.  Christ  teaches  us  that  the  soul 
does  not  wait  in  the  grave  for  the  resurrection  of  the  body.  III.  Christ 
takes  away  our  fear  of  death,  by  teaching  us,  if  we  are  willing  to  be  taught  of 
Him,  how  we  may  meet  our  Maker  without  fear,  in  the  great  day  when  He  will 

JUDGE   THE  WORLD.       IV.    ChRIST  REVEALS  TO  THOSE   WHO  ABE    WILLING   TO   BE  TAUGHT 

OF   Him,  the  best  and  the  blessedness   of  heaven,  and  gives  to  each  soul  an 

INWARD  ASSURANCE  THAT  IT   SHALL    ETERNALLY    SHARE  IN   THEM.       (R.  S.   S.  DickinsOv). 

Deliverance  by  Christ  from  the  fear  of  death: — I.  What  of  death  it  is,  by  which 

THE    PERSONS    SPOKEN   OF   IN   THE    TEXT    ARE    KEPT     IN     FEAR    AND     BONDAGE.        1.    Siu, 

the  cause  of  death,  operates  in  producing  this  effect.  2.  The  law  which  threatens 
death.  3.  Afflictions,  the  harbingers  of  death.  4.  Satan,  who  had  the  power  oi 
death.  5.  Death  itself.  He  knows  not  how  rudely  the  last,  enemy  may  handle 
him,  when  he  arrives.  He  is  well  aware  that  he  is  a  merciless  tyrant,  that  he 
knows  not  how  to  show  pity.  II.  How  does  Christ  deliver  them  from  this  feab 
AND  BONDAGE?  1.  By  assuiing  them  that  He  has  made  satisfaction  for  their  sin, 
and  will  preserve  them  from  its  guilt  and  power.  2.  By  making  known  to  them 
their  deliveratice  from  the  law  as  a  covenant.  3.  By  giving  them  to  uuderstand 
that  their  afflictions  are  all,  to  their  souls,  blessings  in  disguise.  4.  By  reminding 
them  of  the  glorious  victories  which  He  hath  obtained  over  Satan,  their  great  enemy. 
5.  By  promising  them  His  presence  at  the  hour  of  death.    III.  A  few  thoughts 

CALCULATED  TO   GUIDE   AND    ENCOURAGE    BELIEVERS    WHEN    SUFFERING    AND   DYING.       1. 

Keep  a  steady  eye  on  the  rod  with  which  God  corrects  you,  and  you  will  see  that  He 
never  gives  it  wholly  out  of  His  own  hand.  2.  Rest  assured  that  all  the  afflictions 
measured  out  to  you  are  the  fruits  of  your  heavenly  Father's  love.  3.  Remember, 
that  in  being  visited  with  affliction  you  are  not  singular.  This  is  the  discipline  of 
your  heavenly  Father's  house.  4.  Live  under  the  firm  persuasion  that  your  trials 
shall  all  issue  well.  They  may,  indeed,  be  numerous  and  horrific ;  but  so  soon  as 
they  cease  to  be  necessary,  they  shall  cease  to  be  administered.  5.  Submit  to  the 
will  of  God  in  all  things.  Sharp  may  be  the  stroke  of  His  hand,  but  the  way  of 
duty  is  plain  and  obvious.  EnJeavour,  in  His  strength,  and  spirit,  and  grace,  to 
exercise  patient  resignation,  and  quiet  submission.  (John  Jardine.)  Deliverance 
from  the  fear  of  death  : — I.  Consider  the  fear  of  death,  which  is  mentioned  as  one 
great  evil  froni  which  we  are  delivered  by  Christ.  1.  What  is  that  fear  of  death 
from  which  Christ  delivers  ?  Fear  in  the  general  is  a  flight  from  evil,  or  tlie 
aversion  of  the  mind  from  what  we  apprehend  hurtful.  The  fear  of  death  may  be 
distinguished  into  two  sorts — (1)  Th^e  is^it  na^jciral  feax -of  death.  Death  is  an 
enemy  to  nature,  a  rending  asunder  the  two  parts  of  our  constitution,  so  closely 
united  and  long  continued  together.  This  is  not  a  sinful  fear  and  is  useful.  It  is 
planted  in  our  nature  by  the  God  of  nature,  and  is  the  necessary  consequence  of 
self-love,  and  self-preservation.  It  is  the  rising  of  nature  against  its  mortal  enemy  ; 
the  reluctance  of  sense  against  what  would  hurt  and  destroy  it,  without  any  reason- 
ing or  consideration  about  it.  It  is  universal,  and  common  to  all  men :  it  is  fixed 
in  human  nature.  From  this  fear  Christ  does  not  deliver  us  ;  for  that  would  be  to 
divest  us  of  our  sensible  nature,  and  love  of  ourselves ;  though  there  is  a  great 
difference  of  degrees  in  different  persons  very  much  according  to  their  natural 
temper,  as  some  have  greater  natural  courage,  and  others  are  more  tender  and 
easily  impressed.  Or  according  to  their  more  eminent  attainments  in  the  Divine 
life,  or  more  lively  exercise  of  their  faith,  which  very  much  weakens  their  natural 
fear,  and  sometimes  carries  them  much  above  it.  (2),  Xher«  is  a  •morai,~«r  rtttional  few 
of  death.  Death,  in  the  moral  consideration  of  it,  is  a  change  of  our  state,  a  passage 
out  of  one  world  into  another.  It  is  a  final  determination  of  our  main  state,  and  a  de- 
cisive torn  for  eternity.  In  this  consideration  oi  it,  death  appears  more  terrible,  and  ia 


•HAP.  n.]  HEBREWS.  171 

apt  to  raise  a  greater  fear.  Wherever  there  is  a  just  apprehension  of  the  evil  of  sin, 
and  of  the  Divine  displeasure  upon  the  account  of  it,  it  cannot  but  make  the  thoughts 
of  death  more  terrible,  and  add  weight  to  the  natural  fear  of  it.  Besides,  there  is 
the  love  of  this  world.  And  wherever  the  love  of  the  world  prevails  above  the  love 
of  the  Father  ;  wherever  there  is  an  inordinate  desire  of  life,  and  a  carnal  frame  of 
mind  ;  there  the  thoughts  of  death  will  be  most  uneasy.  Besides,  there  are  tlifl 
certain  consequences  of  dying.  Death  transmits  them  to  the  other  world,  and 
consigns  them  over  to  judgment.  Add  to  this  the  uncertainty  of  their  minds 
about  their  future  state.  2.  What  is  that  bondage  to  which  the  fear  of  death  does 
subject  7  It  is  a  servile  spirit,  under  the  constant  awes  of  displeasure  and  dread 
of  punishment ;  when  the  natural  fear  prevails,  and  the  rational  fear  is  heightened, 
and  both  concur  in  all  their  circumstances  to  give  a  dread  to  the  mind,  and  fix  it 
in  a  state  of  slavish  bondage.  Now  here  it  will  be  proper  to  consider  the  evil  of 
this  temper  of  mind,  which  the  apostle  represents  by  bondage,  to  be  the  more 
sensible  of  our  deliverance  from  it  by  Christ.  (I)  It  is  a  disparagement  to  the 
gospel-state,  and  unsuitable  to  the  genius  and  design  of  it.  The  gospel  is  a  state  of 
Uberty  and  freedom,  in  distinction  from  that  of  the  law.  (2)  It  is  highly  injurious 
and  hurtful  to  ourselves.  For  example,  it  destroys  the  peace  and  comfort  of  our 
minds.  It  gives  a  sting  to  all  the  miseries  of  life,  and  renders  them  doubly 
grievous.  The  sickness  and  disorders  of  nature  are  more  burdensome  ;  it  gives  an 
accent  to  every  groan,  and  quickens  the  sense  of  the  sharpest  pain.  It  makes  the 
heart  sick,  under  all  the  sickness  of  the  body.  It  abates  the  relish  of  the  best 
enjoyments,  and  damps  the  joy  of  the  most  prosperous  state.  The  fear  of  death 
disturbs  the  mind  in  the  performance  of  holy  duties,  and  affects  every  service  of 
life,  as  well  as  every  enjoyment  of  it.  It  is  an  enemy  to  gladness  of  heart,  and 
flatly  inconsistent  with  the  noble  exercises  of  love,  and  joy  and  praise.  Besides, 
it  brings  us  into  slavery  to  the  devil,  and  is  a  powerful  snare  of  sin.  It  gives  the 
devil  a  great  advantage  over  us.  It  is  certain  no  man  will  be  a  martyr  for  Christ 
or  love  Him  more  than  his  own  life,  which  yet  the  gospel  requires  of  every  disciple 
of  Christ,  who  is  under  the  servitude  of  the  fear  of  death.  To  conclude  with  one 
instance  more,  it  sometimes  leads  to  despair.  A  strange  contrast  this,  that  though 
they  are  afraid  to  die,  their  fear  makes  them  unwilling  to  Uve,  and  the  torment  of 
fear  makes  them  unable  to  bear  the  burden  of  hfe.  II.  Consider  our  deliverance 
BY  Christ  from  the  fear  of  death.  How  far,  and  by  what  means,  we  are  delivered 
from  it.  There  is  a  fundamental  deliverance,  when  the  foundation  of  it  is  laid, 
and  the  just  ground  of  our  fear  is  removed,  so  that  if  we  are  not  actually  delivered, 
yet  there  is  a  sufficient  foundation  laid  for  it  in  due  time,  and  in  a  proper  way. 
And  our  actual  deliverance  is  bpgun  in  this  world,  and  commences  with  our  faith, 
or  hearty  subjection  to  the  gospel  of  Christ.  The  dominion  of  fear  is  broken  at  the  same 
time  with  the  dominion  of  siu,  and  it  is  no  longer  a  governing  principle  or  prevailin;» 
temper.  1.  He  lays  the  foundation  of  our  deliverance  in  His  own  person,  and  by  what 
He  has  done  Himself  for  us.  (1)  By  His  death.  This  is  directly  referred  to  in  the  con- 
text. The  influence  of  the  death  of  Christ  to  this  purpose  is  variously  represented  in 
the  Scripture.  For  example,  by  His  death  He  made  atonement  for  sin,  and  procured 
the  forgiveness  of  it  (Isa.  liii.  10,  11 ;  1  John  ii.  2  ;  Heb.  ii.  17).  Besides,  by  His 
death  He  destroyed  the  devil,  who  had  the  power  of  death.  When  God  the 
supreme  judge  is  satisfied  and  reconciled,  the  devil  loses  his  power  to  hurt  them. 
Again,  He  has  conquered  death  itself,  and  destroyed  the  power  of  it.  It  is  no  longer 
to  be  considered  as  a  victorious  conqueror,  which  lays  waste  all  about  it,  and 
defies  all  control;  it  is  a  conquered  enemy,  though  it  is  an  enemy  still.  So  the 
apostle  says,  "  He  has  abolished  death."  When  He  rose  from  the  dead,  He  visibly 
triumphed  over  all  the  power  of  death,  and  gave  a  sensible  evidence  of  the  accep- 
tance of  His  performance  and  His  complete  victory  over  all  His  enemies.  And  as 
He  conquered  it  in  His  own  person,  so  He  will  utterly  destroy  it  at  last,  for  the 
"  last  enemy  which  shall  be  destroyed  is  death."  The  whole  empire  of  death  will 
cease,  and  there  will  be  "  no  more  any  death."  Add  to  all  this,  that  He  has  changed 
the  nature  of  it,  and  make  it  quite  another  thing.  It  was  the  execution  of  the 
Divine  vengeance  upon  guilty  rebels,  but  it  is  now  a  mespenger  of  peace,  and  fore- 
runner of  the  greatest  good.  It  was  a  gloomy  vale,  which  led  down  to  the  blackness 
of  darkness ;  but  it  is  now  a  passage  to  glory.  (2)  He  lays  the  foundation  of  our 
deliverance  by  the  gospel  revelation,  which  was  confinned  by  His  death.  This  is 
one  of  the  peculiar  glories  of  the  gospel  doctrine.  It  reveals  the  glorious  resurrec- 
tion of  the  body  at  last.  It  reveals  the  immortal  life  of  the  other  world.  2.  He 
actually  delivers  from  the  fear  of  death  by  the  influence  of  His  grace,  or  the  assis- 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

tance  and  reliefs  of  the  gospel  dispensation.  When  we  are  sanctified  by  His  spirit, 
we  are  justified  by  His  blood,  and  there  is  "  no  condemnation  to  them  who  are  in 
Christ  Jesus."  If  we  are  reconciled  to  God,  and  in  a  state  of  favour,  we  are  delivered 
from  the  curse  of  the  law,  and  have  nothing  to  fear  from  the  power  of  death. 
Besides,  it  is  by  subduing  the  inordinate  love  of  life,  and  of  all  present  and  sensible 
good.  So  we  are  "crucified  to  the  world  by  the  Cross  of  Christ,"  and  "  the  world  is 
crucified  unto  us."  It  loses  the  charms  and  influence  it  had  before ;  and  no  more 
affects  us  than  two  dead  bodies  lying  together  affect  one  another.  Further,  it  is 
by  working  suitable  dispositions  of  mind  to  the  heavenly  state;  or  making  ua 
spiritually  and  heavenly  minded.  A  prevailing  love  to  God  and  heaven  will  expel 
the  torment  of  fear  ;  for  "  perfect  love  casteth  out  fear,"  and  so  in  a  proportionable 
degree  to  the  measure  of  our  love.  The  love  of  Christ  will  make  us  willing  to  die  that 
we  may  be  with  Him,  and  inspire  a  noble  confidence  of  mind  under  the  gi-eatest 
dangers  and  terrors  of  death.  To  conclude  this  matter,  it  is  by  clearer  prospects,  and 
present  foretastes  of  the  future  blessedness.  Lessons:  1.  How  unreasonable  are 
the  fears  of  good  men.  Art  thou  afraid  of  the  dissolution  of  nature  ?  It  argues 
great  weakness  of  mind,  and  involves  great  absurdity  to  fear  that  which  we  know 
beforehand  cannot  be  avoided,  which  is  the  condition  of  our  nature,  and  settled  by 
a  Divine  decree.  Or  art  thou  afraid  of  changing  worlds?  But  why,  if  it  be  to  a 
better  world,  ai^d  to  a  state  of  blessedness,  should  we  fear  a  change  to  so  great 
advantage  ?  or  leaving  a  state  of  guilt  and  imperfection.  2.  How  great  are  our 
obligations  to  Chi'ist  1  How  admirable  was  the  love  of  our  Kedeemer  to  "  partake  of 
our  flesh  and  blood,"  and  submit  to  die  for  us,  that  He  might  deliver  us  from  the 
fear  of  death  1  How  should  this  endear  Him  to  us,  and  recommend  the  gospel  to 
our  value  and  esteem?  {W.  Harris,  D.D.)  Deliverance  from  the  fear  of  death: 
— I.  From  what  fear  of  death  are  the  children  of  God  delfvered  by  Jesub 
Christ.  1.  Not  from  the  natural  fear  of  death,  which  in  itself  is  a  sinless  infirmity, 
like  sickness  or  weariness.  Our  Lord  Himself  sometimes  expressed  an  aversion 
to  death  (John  xii.  27  ;  Matt.  xiv.  35).  2.  From  a  slavish  fear  of  death,  which 
"hath  torment"  in  it  (1  John  iv.  18),  and  unfits  them  for  the  duties  of  their 
particular  callings,  and  disables  them  from  prosecuting  the  things  that  belong  to 
their  peace  and  welfare.  II.  By  what  means  and  methods  are  the  children  of 
God  delivered  by  Christ  from  the  fear  op  death  ?  1.  I  shall  show  you  what 
Christ  hath  already  done  to  deliver  or  free  the  children  of  God  from  the  fear  of 
death.  The  death  of  Christ  hath  made  death  to  look  with  another  face  than 
formerly  it  had.  The  death  of  Christ  must  needs  sweeten  the  forethoughts  of  death 
to  the  chosen  of  God,  because  that  He  died  in  their  stead  :  He  did  not  only  die  in 
their  nature,  but  in  their  room ;  not  only  for  their  good,  but  also  in  tbeir  stead. 
(1)  Christ  by  His  death  hath  taken  away  the  true  reason  of  the  fear  of  death  ;  that 
is,  the  curse  and  condemnation  of  the  law  of  God  (1  Cor.  xv.  66).  (2)  Christ  by 
His  death  hath  deprived  the  devil  of  the  power  of  death  ;  and  by  this  means  also 
He  hath  delivered  the  chUdren  from  a  servile  fear  of  death.  2.  Let  me  proceed  to 
show  you  what  He  continues  still  to  do,  in  order  to  the  freeing  and  delivering  the 
children  of  God  from  the  fear  of  death,  and  the  bondage  that  ensues  thereon.  (1) 
He  worketh  and  increaseth  those  graces  of  His  Spirit  in  them  which  are  destruc- 
tive hereof,  and  opposite  hereunto.  (2)  He  delivers  them  from  it  by  convincing 
{  nd  persuading  them  that  they  shall  not  be  losers,  but  gainers,  yea,  great  gainers, 
thereby,  (a)  It  consists  in  a  freedom  from  all  evil.  Which  is  subdivided  into 
the  evil  of  sorrow,  and  the  evil  of  sin.  (b)  It  consists  in  the  fruition  of  all  good. 
Believers,  when  they  die,  they  enjoy  God  Himself,  who  is  the  chiefest  good.  (3) 
Christ  delivers  believers  from  the  slavish  fear  of  death,  by  giving  them  some  real 
foretastes  of  heaven  and  of  eternal  life.  Application :  I  would  exhort  you  to  prize 
and  improve  this  great  privilege.  1.  You  must  be  earnest  with  God,  that  He  would 
apply  to  :^-ou  this  benefit  of  His  Son's  death  by  His  blessed  Spirit.  2.  You  must 
give  all  diligence  to  the  attaining  of  a  greater  measure  of  faith,  love,  and  hope.  3. 
You  must  *'  resist  the  devil,"  and  withstand  His  temptations,  not  only  to  other 
eins,  but  to  the  sin  of  despondency  in  particular.  {R.  Mayo,  M.A.)  Deliverance 
from  the  fear  of  death : — I.  Those  whom  Christ  came  to  deliver  are  represented 
in  the  text  as  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  as  OBNoxions  TO  death  and  in  bond- 
age through  fear  of  it  all  their  lives.  Let  us  contemplate  the  feelings  of  a  man 
approaching  death  with  no  well  grounded  hope  of  salvation  through  Christ.  1.  In 
the  first  place,  he  experiences  great  losses,  and  finds  no  alleviations  under  thera. 
Deat);  comes  to  him  in  the  character  of  an  unmixed  evil;  to  take  from  him  all  his 
eailhly  enjoyments,  and  to  send  him  destitute  into  the  invisible  world.     2.  This 


flHAP.n.)  HEBREWS.  173 

man  approaching  death  with  no  hope  in  Christ  is  surroanded  with  fearful  dark- 
ness, and  sees  no  light  before  him.  Tiie  ocean  spreads  before  him  vast  and 
dark,  but  he  knows  not  to  what  shore  it  is  bearing  him.  3.  The  man 
approaching  death  with  no  hope  in  Christ  anticipates  terrible  evils,  and  sees 
no  way  of  escape.  II.  Thb  deliverance  wrought  odt  by  Christ  for  those  who 
ARE  HELD  IN  THIS  FEARFDL  BONDAGE.  This  is  of  a  nature  exactly  adapted  to  the 
condition  of  those  whom  Christ  came  to  deliver,  and  is  comprised  in  three  particu- 
lars. 1.  Christ  the  Redeemer,  mighty  to  save,  furnishes  for  the  children  of  His 
giace  the  most  abundant  alleviations  under  the  losses  of  death.  The  Saviour  is 
with  them,  their  light  and  their  salvation.  2.  Christ  having  Himself  risen  fiom 
the  dead,  has  poured  the  light  of  immortality  over  the  darkness  of  the  grave,  and 
given  assurance — that  all  who  die  in  Him  shall  also  rise  to  eternal  life  and  blessed- 
ness. 3.  Christ  delivers  His  people  from  all  the  anticipated  evils  of  death  in  the 
future  world.  III.  The  means  by  which  this  OBLrvERANCB  is  effkcted.  The  text 
declares  that  it  is  by  death.  In  conclusion,  I  am  led  to  remark — 1.  That  infidelity 
is  not  more  to  be  rejected  on  account  of  its  falseness,  than  abhorred  on  account  of 
its  hostility  to  the  dearest  hopes  of  man.  What  does  it  do  for  its  disciples  in  that 
hour  wheu  the  soul  most  needs  support?  2.  BeUevers  in  Christ  ought  to  enter 
more  experimentally  and  practically  into  the  design  of  His  mediation  and  death. 
3.  In  view  of  this  subject  let  all  be  persuaded  to  take  refuge  in  Him  who  alone  can 
deliver  them  from  the  fear  of  death  and  the  bondage  of  condemnation.  (J.  Hawes, 
D.D.)        Deliverance  from  the  slavish  fear  of  death  : — I.  What  there  la  in  death 

TO  EXCITE  SUCH  FEAR  AS  MAY  JUSTLY  BE  TERMED  A  BONDAGE.       1.    Death   is  an  object  of 

fear,  from  the  bodily  pains  with  which  it  is  preceded  and  attended.  2.  Death  is  an 
object  of  fear,  because  of  the  consequences  which  it  visibly  produces.  3.  Death  is 
an  object  of  fear,  because  it  is  an  event,  the  precise  nature  of  which  is  unknown  to 
us.  4.  Death  is  a  change  which  we  undergo  alone ;  that  is,  without  the  company  of 
earthly  friends.  6.  Death  is  an  object  of  fear,  inasmuch  as  it  separates  the  worldly 
man  from  all  the  present  sources  of  his  happiness.  6.  Death  is  an  object  of  fear, 
chiefly  because  we  are  sinners,  and  because  by  it  we  are  introduced  into  the  more 
immediate  presence  of  the  God  whom  we  have  offended.  II.  The  deliverance 
WHICH  Chkist  has  ACCOMPLISHED  FOB  Hi8  PEOPLE.  {Jas.  Clasou.)  The  fear  of 
death  removed : — This  text  represents  unto  us  two  things  : — I.  The  sad  conditiok 
OF  SUCH  AS  ABE  UNDER  THE  PowEB  OF  Satan.  The  sad  conditioH  is  an  estate  of  per- 
petual slavery  and  fear  of  death.  1.  And  this  is  a  grievous  slavery  and  bondage^ 
not  only  because  it  is  perpetual,  but  because  of  the  great  danger.  For  by  fear  of 
death  may,  by  a  metonymy,  be  meant  the  danger  of  death.  For  the  proper  cauSH 
of  fear  is  danger  once  apprehended ;  for  it  is  true  that  man  may  be  in  danger,  and 
yet  v/ithout  fear,  because  the  danger  is  not  seen.  2.  And  the  bondage  of  perpetual 
fear  is  wof  ul,  if  not  intolerable.    II.  Though  this  be  a  sad  condition,  yet  there  is 

DELIVERANCE    FROM    THIS    CONTINUAL    DANGER,    THIS    PERPETUAL    FEAR    WHICH     IS     THE 

GREATEST  SLAVERY  OF  ALL  OTHER.  1.  The  beginning  of  comfort  is  to  know  that  there 
is  a  possibility  of  freedom,  and  that  the  danger  is  avoidable  or  removable.  The 
first  degree  of  this  deliverance  is  in  Christ's  death,  whereby  Divine  justice  was  satis- 
fied and  freedom  merited.  2.  That  the  power  of  the  devil  was  destroyed;  for 
whilst  it  continued,  the  fear  could  not  be  removed.  3.  This  freedom  and  liberty  is 
more  complete,  when  upon  faith  in  Christ's  death  sin  is  pardoned,  and  the  cause  of 
this  fear  is  taken  away.  Then  this  slavery  is  changed  into  a  blessed  liberty, 
fear  into  hope,  and  the  sorrow  of  death  into  the  joy  of  life.  {G.  Lawson.) 
Boudageikrowffkfear  ef  death  : — It  is  not  meant  by  the  inspired  writer,  that  when 
men  are  not  thinking  of  death,  they  are  still  pressed  down  by  its  yoke.  Death  as 
yet  is  only  in  the  future,  and  to  oppress  and  harass  it  must  of  course  occupy  the 
thoughts.  Those  are  no  exception  to  the  remark  who  fear  not  death  because  they 
do  not  allow  themselves  to  dwell  upon  it :  such  persons  it  does  not  contemplate. 
And  yet  after  all,  perhaps,  on  closer  examination  the  persons  thus  denied  to  be 
exceptions  to  the  sentiment  of  the  text  may  be  fairly  considered  not  exceptions  to 
it,  but  examples  of  it.  How  comes  it,  it  is  reasonable  to  ask,  that  these  men  da 
not  think  of  death?  Are  there  not  mementoes  enough  all  around  them?  With 
these  aids  to  reflection,  if  they  still  think  little  about  the  subject,  is  it  not  natural 
to  infer  that  the  subject  has  been  so  long  avoided  that  the  habit  is  complete,  and 
the  mind  turns  from  it  with  an  acquired  as  well  as  natural  instinct?  But  sup- 
posing this  the  case,  how  forcibly  does  it  prove  the  doctrine  of  the  text  T  Does 
the  mind  fear  death  so  much,  that  it  dare  not  look  it  in  the  face,  and  hold  free 
tommunion  with  it  ?    Beyond  all  doubt,  that  mind  is  in  bondage.    Without  running 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

iuto  the  extravagances  of  Stoicism,  others  have  made  representations  of  death, 
which  might  lead  us  to  suppose  that  they  did  not  regard  it  as  an  evil.  With  a  kind 
of  poetical  philosophy,  they  vfould  represent  it  as  the  glorious  sunset  of  hfe,  as 
needed  repose  after  sublunary  toils,  as  the  retiring  of  the  satisfied  guest  from  the 
banquet  1  Now  in  answer  to  this  it  is  freely  admitted  that  all  the  circumstances  of 
our  dissolution  are  not  unfavourable.  Death  does  not  wear,  always  or  even 
generally,  the  most  fearful  aspect  that  it  might  put  on.  Nature  in  many  respects 
makes  a  way  for  us,  and  smooths  our  passage  to  the  other  world.  But  after  all 
allowances,  the  truth  returns  again  with  a  force  which  nothing  can  resist,  that 
death  is  the  greatest  of  all  evils.  Instinct,  reason,  observation,  all  tell  us  this ;  and 
we  are  aware  also  that  it  is  the  Scripture  representation.  In  Scripture  it  is  called 
"  the  wages  of  sin,"  the  "  curse,"  "  the  king  of  terrors"  ;  and  because  it  is  the  most 
dread  calamity  which  man  here  witnesses,  it  is  put  by  a  common  figure  of  upeech 
for  all  the  misery  which  he  inherits,  or  bring  upon  himself  in  this  world  or  the 
next.  To  this  decisive  authority  may  be  added,  if  not  for  confirmation,  yet  for  the 
impression  which  it  is  calculated  to  make,  the  acknowledgment  of  Eochefoucault. 
This  man,  who  might  not  unaptly  be  called  the  priest  of  godlessness,  freely  admits 
that  "  death  and  the  sun  are  not  to  be  looked  at  steadily."  "  The  glory  of  dying 
resolutely,"  he  remarks,  "  the  hopes  of  being  regretted,  the  desire  of  leaving  a  fair 
reputation,  the  assurance  of  being  delivered  from  present  miseries  and  freed  from 
the  caprice  of  fortune,  are  alleviating  reflections,  but  by  no  means  infallible.  All," 
adds  he,  "  which  reason  can  do  for  us  is  to  teach  as  to  avert  our  eyes  and  fix  them 
on  some  other  object."  But  let  us  come  home  to  our  own  selves.  On  what 
principle  can  we  justify  attention  to  any  thing,  if  not  to  this  ?  Of  all  the  interests 
of  man  the  highest  are  involved  in  death,  and  the  most  reasonable  self-love  requires 
us  to  weigh  it  well.  The  question  therefore  recurs  again,  why  is  it  that  we 
think  of  it  so  seldom  and  so  slightly  ?  I  know  of  no  satisfactory  answer, 
but  that  furnished  by  the  text.  It  is  the  fear  of  death  which  banishes  it 
from  our  thoughts.  The  subject  is  obvious,  meeting  us  at  every  turn.  It  is 
-important,  for  eternity  hangs  upon  it.  It  is  personal,  for  it  is  appointed  unto 
all  men  once  to  die.  It  is  interesting — full  of  thrilling  interest,  of  tragic  interest, 
in  its  circumstances,  nature  and  consequences.  Now,  whether  this  is  a  correct 
representation  we  all  can  determine  for  ourselves.  If  I  mistake  not  we  shall  find 
on  examination,  that  our  minds  recoil  from  death  because  it  is  a  subject  associated 
with  no  good  to  us,  on  the  contrary  connected  with  much  evil.  But  it  is  vain,  as 
already  intimated,  merely  to  avert  the  eyes.  The  wise  man  will  seek  reUef  some 
other  way.  Do  we  desire  peace  at  the  last?  Would  we  count  it  a  privilege  to  be 
able  to  take  a  near  view  of  death,  looking  fully  at  all  its  horrors  without  dismay  ? 
Do  we  covet  the  feelings  of  St.  Paul,  when,  after  a  survey  of  death,  he  criod  out, 
"  Oh,  grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ?  "  There  is  no  way  of  reaching  them,  but  by  the 
faith  of  tbe  Son  of  God.  Present  thoughtlessness  and  folly  will  not  do  it :  they 
will  only  aggravate  the  evil  when  at  last  it  comes.  And,  as  to  philosophy,  alas ! 
it  may  answer  some  of  tbe  lighter  purposes  of  Ufe  but  can  never  pillow  the  soul  in 
death.  Most  truly  has  it  been  said,  that  "  the  necessity  of  dying  constitutes  the 
whole  of  philosophic  fortitude."  It  is  a  sullen,  dogged  silence,  which  utters  no 
Borrow  but  feels  much.  It  knows  nothing  of  cheerful  resignation,  of  lively  hope. 
Oh,  how  far  beyond  its  reach  the  spirit  of  the  apostle  on  the  eve  of  martyrdom :  "  I 
am  now  ready  to  be  offered."  This  is  exclusively  Christian  privilege.  None  can 
bestow  it  but  He  who  gives  the  Christian  his  name,  his  character,  his  all.  (W. 
Sparrow,  LL.D.)  Fear  of  death: — That  king  of  terrors,  as  Job  calls  death;  that 
terrible  of  all  terribles,  as  Aristotle.  Nature  will  have  a  bout  with  the  best  when 
they  come  to  die.  But  I  wonder  (says  a  grave  divine)  how  the  souls  of  wicked 
men  go  not  out  of  their  bodies,  as  the  devils  did  out  of  the  demoniacs,  rending, 
raging,  tearing,  foaming.  I  wonder  how  any  can  die  in  their  wits,  that  die  not  in 
the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ.  Appius  Claudius  loved  not  the  Greek  Zeta.  because  when 
pronounced,  it  represents  tlie  gnashing  teeth  of  a  dying  man.  Sigismund,  the 
emperor,  being  ready  to  die,  commanded  his  servants  not  to  name  death  in  his 
hearing.  {John  Trapp.)  Death  near ; — Let  us  not  stand  in  an  immoderate  fear 
of  death.  Death  is  a  strpent  without  a  sting.  Though  he  grip  us,  yet  he  cannot 
hurt  us.  Damocles  the  Parasite  extolled  the  magnificence  of  Dionysius,  affirming 
that  there  was  not  an  happier  man  in  the  world  thtin  he  ;  wilt  thou  have  a  taste  of 
my  happiness?  He  caused  him  to  be  set  in  a  chair  of  state,  the  table  furnished 
with  all  delicacies,  singing-men  and  women  making  melody  with  voices  and  instru- 
C^iitfif  Boble  attendants  to  wait  on  him  ;  but  therewithal  he  commanded  a  sharp 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  175 

naked  sword  to  be  hung  over  his  head  by  a  slender  horse-hair ;  the  which  he  espy- 
ing, took  no  pleasure  in  that  paradise,  but  besought  him  earnestly  to  take  bim  out 
of  his  happiness  again.  So  though  we  have  the  world  at  will,  though  we  be  gentle- 
men, &c.,  yet  the  sword  of  death  hanging  over  our  heads  continually  must  needa 
quail  the  courage  of  the  greatest  gallant.  {W.  Jones,  D.D.)  How  tUd  Christ 
through  death  free  from  the  fear  of  death  ?— We,  steeped  in  theology,  would  naturally 
reply.  By  offering  Himself  an  atoning  sacrifice  for  sin.  But  that  is  certainly  not 
the  writer's  thought  here.  He  reserves  the  great  thought  of  Christ's  priestly  self- 
sacriiice  for  a  more  advanced  stage  in  the  development  of  his  doctrine.  What  then 
is  his  thought  ?  Simply  this.  Christ  delivers  from  the  fear  of  death  by  dying  as  a 
Binless  one.  Death  and  sin  are  connected  very  intimately  in  our  minds,  hence  fear. 
But  lo,  here  is  one  who  knows  no  sin  dying.  The  bare  fact  breaks  the  association 
between  sin  and  death.  But  more  than  that :  He  who  dies  is  our  brother,  has 
entered  into  our  mortal  state  in  a  fraternal  spirit  for  the  very  purpose  of  lending  ua 
a  helping  hand.  We  may  not  fully  kuow  how  His  death  avails  to  help  us.  But 
we  know  that  the  Sanctifier  in  a  spirit  of  brotherhood  became  one  with  us,  even  in 
death ;  and  the  knowledge  enables  us  to  realise  our  unity  with  Him  in  death,  and 
60  emancipates  us  from  fear.  "  Sinners  may  die,  for  the  Sinless  has  died."  The 
benefit  thus  derived  from  the  death  of  the  sinless  One  is  but  the  other  side  of  the 
great  principle,  Sanctifier  and  sanctified  all  one.  For  it  has  two  sides,  it  applies 
both  ways.  The  Sanctifier  becomes  one  with  the  sanctified  in  brotherly  love;  the 
sanctified  become  one  with  the  Sanctifier  in  privilege.  They  are  mutually  one  in 
both  directions  in  God's  sight ;  they  are  mutually  one  in  both  directions  for  the 
epiritual  instincts  of  the  believer,  even  before  he  knows  what  the  twofold  validity 
for  God  means.  In  proportion  as  we  realise  the  one  aspect  of  the  principle,  the 
Sanctifier  one  with  us,  we  are  ei^abled  to  realise  and  get  benefit  from  the  other. 
While  the  Holy  One  stands  apart  from  us  in  the  isolation  of  His  sinlessness,  we, 
einuers,  fear  to  die  ;  when  we  see  Him  by  our  side,  even  in  death,  which  we  have 
been  accustomed  to  regard  as  the  penalty  of  sin,  death  ceases  to  appear  as  penalty, 
end  becomes  the  gate  of  heaven.  [A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.)  Delivered  from  the  fear  of 
death  : — The  following  testimony  was  delivered  by  the  Rev.  Edward  Deering,  B.D. 
(author  of  some  excellent  lectures  on  this  Epistle),  shortly  before  his  death  in  1576. 
"There  is  but  one  sun  thatgivetb  light  to  the  world;  there  is  but  one  righteousness; 
there  is  but  one  communion  of  saints.  If  I  were  the  most  excellent  creature  in  the 
world ;  if  I  were  as  righteous  as  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  (for  they  were  excellent 
men  in  the  world),  yet  we  must  all  confess  that  we  are  great  sinners,  and  that  there 
is  no  salvation  but  in  the  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ.  And  we  have  all  need  of 
the  grace  of  God.  And  for  my  part,  as  concerning  death,  I  feel  such  joy  of  spirit, 
that  if  I  should  have  the  sentence  of  life  on  the  one  side,  and  the  sentence  of  death 
on  the  other  side,  I  had  rather  choose  a  thousand  times  (seeing  God  hath  appointed 
the  separation)  the  sentence  of  death  than  the  sentence  of  life."  The  joy  of  death 
to  the  Chri»lian : — Concerning  death,  to  them  that  be  God's  dear  children,  what 
other  thing  is  it  than  the  despatcher  of  all  displeasure,  the  end  of  all  travail,  the 
door  of  desires,  the  gate  of  gladness,  the  port  of  paradise,  the  haven  of  heaven,  the  \ 
rail  of  rest  and  quietness,  the  entrance  to  felicity,  the  beginning  of  all  blissfulness?  J 
It  is  the  very  bed  of  down  (and,  therefore,  well  compared  to  a  sleep)  for  the  doleful 
bodies  of  God's  people  to  rest  in,  out  of  the  which  they  shall  rise  and  awake,  most 
fresh  and  lusty,  to  life  everlasting.  It  is  a  passage  to  the  Father,  a  chariot  to  heaven, 
the  Lord's  messenger,  a  leader  unto  Christ,  a  going  to  our  home,  a  deliverance  from 
bondage  and  prison,  a  dismission  from  war,  a  security  frcm  all  sorrow?,  and  a 
manumission  from  all  misery.  So  that  the  very  heathen  did  in  some  places  cause 
the  day  of  their  death  to  be  celebrated  with  mirth,  melody,  and  minstrelsy.  And 
should  we  be  dismayed  at  it,  should  we  be  afraid  of  it,  should  we  tremble  to  hear  of 
it  ?  Should  such  a  friend  as  it  is  be  unwelcomed  ?  Should  the  foulness  of  his  face 
scare  us  from  his  good  conditions  ?  Should  the  hardness  of  his  husk  hinder  us 
from  his  sweet  kernel  ?  Should  the  roughness  of  the  tide  tie  us  to  the  bank  and 
shore,  there  to  be  drowned,  rather  than  the  desire  of  our  home  drive  us  to  go  aboard  ? 
Should  the  hardness  of  the  saddle  set  us  on  our  feet  to  perish  by  the  way,  rather 
than  to  leap  up  and  endure  the  same  a  little,  and  so  to  be  where  we  would  be  ? 
(John  Bradford.)  Fear  of  death  prophetic : — Do  not  the  wicked  themselves 
prophesy  by  their  fear  of  death  a  worse  condition  of  some  dreadful  judgment  after 
this  life,  prepared  for  sinners,  when  none  but  they  stand  in  such  fear  of  death? 
Why  doth  one  wish  for  it,  and  another  tremble  to  hear  of  it  ?  If  it  were  but  a 
■leep,  no  man  would  fear  it  at  all ;  for  who  feareth  to  take  his  rest  when  the  night 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  a. 

approacheth  ?  If  it  did  take  away  sense  and  feeling,  and  make  men  trees  or  stones, 
no  man  would  fear  it  at  all ;  for  who  would  fear  strokes,  if  he  conld  feel  no  more 
than  a  stone  ?  Or  who  would  care  for  anything,  if  he  had  not  sense  of  anything  T 
Therefore  this  fear  of  death  which  you  see  in  all  but  the  faithful,  doth  presage  some 
strange  torment  to  those  meu  which  they  begin  to  taste  already  before  they  die ; 
like  the  spirit  which  persecuted  Saul  before  his  end.  They  desire  not  to  be  dis- 
solved, but  tbey  fear  to  be  dissolved ;  they  go  not  to  Christ,  but  their  departure  ia 
an  everlasting  departure  from  Christ,  to  the  devils,  to  hell,  without  either  end  or 
ease,  or  any  patience  to  endure  it.  (Henry  Smith.)  Jesus  the  conquerur  of 
Death : — He  did  not  vanquish  Death  from  afar,  like  some  god  of  the  ancient  Olympus ; 
He  did  not  strike  down  the  foe  by  arrows  shot  from  heights  of  the  empyrean.  No ; 
He  Himself  came  down,  Himself  wrestled  with  Death  ;  for  a  moment  its  cold  hand 
was  laid  upon  His  heart,  and  then  He  arose,  feUed  it  to  the  ground  by  His  glance  ; 
and  walked  our  earth,  as  He  had  done  before.  (Madame  de  Gasparin.)  Christ's 
victory  : — I  have  often  asked  myself  what  was  the  effect  in  hell  when  Christ  gained 
the  victory  over  sin  and  death.  There  is  a  striking  picture  in  the  "  Apocryphal 
Gospels  "  of  what  it  might  have  been.  At  the  moment  Christ  died  the  tidings 
reached  Beelzebub,  "  Jesus  hath  died,  and  hath  overthrown  thy  kingdom  on  earth." 
Then  David  with  his  harp  of  gold,  and  Isaiah,  the  prophet,  are  heard  singing  and 
shouting  with  joy,  "  Lift  up  your  heads,  oh  ye  gates,  and  be  ye  lift  up  ye  ever- 
lasting doors,  and  the  King  of  Glory  shall  come  in  "  (Psa.  xxiv.).  Beelzebub  replies 
with  the  haughty  question,  "  Who  is  this  King  of  Glory  ?  "  And  the  answer  comes : 
•*  The  Lord  strong  and  mighty:  the  Lord  mighty  in  battle."  Again  in  trembling 
tones  Beelzebub  asks  :  "  Who  is  the  King  of  Glory  ?  "  And  again  rings  out  the  paean 
of  triumph,  "  The  Lord  of  Hosts,  He  is  the  King  of  Glory."  Then  just  as  the 
Philistines  fled  before  David,  so  all  the  devils  flee  when  they  hear  what  Christ  has 
done.  That  is  figure,  but  this  is  fact,  that  through  death  Christ  overcame  him 
that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devU.  (H.  W.  Webb-Peploe,  M.A.)  "  He 
also  Himself  "  : — "  Have  you  ever  noticed,"  wrote  a  beloved  friend  who  was  near 
death,  "  the  glorious  redundancy  of  the  apostle's  words,  '  He  also — Himself — like- 
wise took  part  of  the  same  ?  '"  This  friend  had  death  before  him  for  many  months, 
and  he  found  in  these  words  the  richest  Divine  comforts.  We  want  a  Christ  that 
can  Uve  like  us,  and  when  we  come  to  die  we  shall  want  a  Christ  that  oould  die 
like  us.  (C.  Clemunce,  D.D.)  Jewish  conception  of  death : — How  strongly  this 
argument  would  appeal  to  the  Hebrew  readers  of  the  Epistle  is  clear  from  the  Rab- 
binical theology,  which  often  speaks  of  the  fear  of  death  and  the  accuser  as  a 
constant  companion  of  man's  life.  In  every  dangerous  crisis  of  life,  on  a  lonely 
journey,  or  on  the  high  seas,  the  Jew  seemed  to  see  the  accuser  pleading  for  his 
death.    "  In  this  life,"  says  the  "  Madrash  Punchuma,"  "  death  never  suffers  man  to 

be  glad."     (W.  Robertson  Smith,  M.A.)        Fear  of  death  : — Mr.  B mentioning 

to  Dr.  Johnson  that  he  had  seen  the  execution  of  several  convicts  at  Tyburn,  two 
days  before,  and  that  none  of  them  seemed  to  be  under  any  concern,  "  Most  of 
them,  sir,"  said  Johnson,  '•  have  never  thougiit  at  all."     "  But  is  not  the  fear  of 

death  natural  to  man?  "  said  B .    "  So  much  so,  sir,"  said  Johnson,  "  that  the 

whole  of  life  is  but  keeping  away  the  thoughts  of  it."  (Baxendale's  Anecdotes.) 
Fear  of  death  the  means  of  conversion : — The  fear  of  death  seldom  leads  to  conver- 
sion, but  it  did  in  the  case  of  Henry  Townley,  afterwards  minister  of  Union  Chapel, 
Calcutta.  As  a  young  man  he  was  threatened  with  pulmonary  consumption,  and 
thought  not  to  have  long  to  live.  Dissatisfaction  with  his  own  life  and  opinions  le-i 
him  to  a  thorough  investigation  of  the  evidences  of  Christianity,  and  then  came  not 
only  intellectual  belief,  but  the  consecration  of  his  entire  nature  to  God.  Hia 
distress  of  mind  was  great,  and  he  had  not  in  the  circle  of  his  acquaintance  a  single 
religious  person  to  assist  him  towards  right.  After  much  mental  conflict  it  came 
"thus.  He  was  looking  on  Blackfriars  Bridge  at  the  setting  sun,  on  a  bright,  calm 
evening,  and  prayed  that  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness  might  shine  on  his  dark, 
pei-plexed  state,  and  immediately  the  answer  came  in  the  melting  of  his  soul 
towards  God  and  the  possession  of  unspeakable  peace.  (Ibid.)  Deliverance  from 
the  fear  of  death: — As  far  as  my  experience  hiis  gone,  I  have  found  that  young 
Christians  and  timorous  Christians  really  die  more  triumphantly.  There  are 
exceptions,  however.  I  will  tell  you  how  this  is.  It  is  the  Lord's  kindness.  He 
does  not  let  the  devil  have  a  shot  at  them  at  the  last,  because  they  could  not  bear 
it.  Do  you  remember  how  John  Bunyan  describes  this?  He  says  that  when  Mr. 
Fearing  went  to  cross  the  river  of  death,  "  the  water  was  lower  than  ever  it  was 
knovm."    80  U  is  with  those  who  are  like  Mr.  Fearing ;  bat  when  you  see  that 


€H1P.  n.J  HEBREWS.  177 

there  is  a  fight  when  old  people  come  to  die,  you  may  conclude  that  they  are  getting 
their  last  victory.  They  are  getting  the  serpent's  head  under  their  heel ;  and  they 
will  take  their  last  leap  from  the  serpent's  head  to  the  throne.  (S.  Col>'y.)  Draih 
like  going  hito  another  room : — In  the  quiet  watches  of  the  night  Dr.  Busnnell's  wife 
asked  him  how  death  looked  to  him.  "  Very  much  like  going  into  another  room," 
was  the  answer.  (Dr.  Bushiell's  Life.)  Why  fear  death  : — When  Sir  Henry 
Vane  was  condemned  and  awaiting  execution,  a  friend  spoke  of  prayer  that  for  the 
present  the  cup  of  death  might  be  averted.  "  Why  should  we  fear  death  ?  " 
answered  Vane.  "  I  find  it  rather  shrinks  from  me  than  I  from  it."  {Little's 
Historical  Lights.)  Fear  of  death : — There  are  some  that  are  Uke  what  is  fabled  of 
the  swan.  The  ancients  said  the  swan  never  sang  in  his  lifetime,  but  always  sang 
just  when  he  died.  Now,  there  are  many  of  God's  desponding  children,  who  seem 
to  go  all  their  life  under  a  cloud  ;  but  they  get  a  swan's  song  before  they  die.  The 
river  of  their  life  comes  running  down,  perhaps  black  and  miry  with  troubles  ;  and, 
when  it  be^ans  to  touch  the  white  foam  of  the  sea,  there  comes  a  little  glistening 
In  its  waters.  So,  though  we  may  have  been  very  much  dispirited  by  reason 
of  the  burden  of  the  way,  when  we  get  to  the  end,  we  shall  have  sweet  songs.  Are 
you  afraid  of  dying  ?  Oh !  never  be  afraid  of  that :  be  afraid  of  living.  Living  is 
the  only  thing  which  can  do  any  mischief ;  dying  can  never  hurt  a  Christian. 
Afraid  of  the  grave  ?  It  is  like  the  bath  of  Esther,  in  which  she  lay  for  a  time  to 
purify  herself  with  spices,  that  she  might  be  fit  for  her  lord.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
No  fear  in  death  : — Among  the  few  remains  of  Sir  John  Franklin  that  were  found 
far  up  in  the  Polar  regions  there  was  a  leaf  of  the  "  Student's  Manual,"  by  Dr.  John 
Todd — the  only  relic  of  a  book.  From  the  way  in  which  the  leaf  was  turned 
down,  the  following  portion  of  a  dialogue  was  prominent : — "  Are  you  not  afraid 
to  die?"  "No."  "No I  Why  does  the  uncertainty  of  another  state  give  you  no 
concern  ?  "  "  Because  God  has  said  to  me,  '  Fear  not.  When  thou  passest  through 
the  waters  I  will  be  with  thee ;  and  through  the  rivers,  they  shall  not  overflow 
thee.' "  This  leaf  is  preserved  in  the  Museum  of  Greenwich  Hospital,  among  the 
relics  of  Sir  John  Franklin.  (BaxendaWt  Anecdotes.)  Death  of  a  bdiever  : — 
Old  Mr.  Lyford  being  desired,  a  little  before  his  death,  to  let  his  friends  know  in 
what  condition  his  soul  was,  and  what  his  thoughts  were  about  that  eternity  to 
which  he  seemed  very  near,  he  answered  with  a  cheerfulness  suitable  to  a  believer 
and  a  minister,  "  I  will  let  you  know  how  it  is  with  me  "  ;  and  then,  stretching  out 
a  hand  that  was  withered  and  consumed  with  age  and  sickness — "  Here  is,"  said  he, 
"  the  grave,  the  wrath  of  God,  and  devouring  flames,  the  just  punishment  of  sin, 
on  the  one  side ;  and  here  am  I,  a  poor  sinful  soul,  on  the  other  side ;  but  this  is 
my  comfort,  the  covenant  of  grace  which  is  established  on  so  many  sure  promises, 
has  saved  me  from  all.  There  is  an  act  of  oblivion  passed  in  heaven.  I  will  forgive 
their  iniquities,  and  their  sins  will  I  remember  no  more.  This  is  the  blessed 
privilege  of  all  within  the  covenant,  among  whom  I  am  one.''  (T.  Roger$.)  Peace 
in  death  : — The  late  Mr.  Young,  of  Jedburgh,  was  once  visiting  the  death-bed  of  an 
aged  member  of  his  congregation,  who  was  hourly  looking  for  his  last  change. 
"  Well,  my  friend,"  said  the  minister,  "  how  do  you  feel  yourself  to-day  ?  "  *'  Very 
weel,  sir,"  was  the  calm  and  solemn  answer,  "  very  weel,  but  just  a  wee  confused 
wi'  the  flittin."  (Children's  Missionary  Record.)  No  death  for  the  Christian: — 
Shall  we  ever  quite  fully  realise  the  mighty  and  joyful  truth  Ihat  there  is  no  death 
for  the  Christian?  In  his  beautiful  tribute  to  the  quaint  old  town  of  Narembnr^', 
Mr.  Longfellow  makes  this  meution  of  its  peerless  artist : 

•*  Emigravit  is  the  inscription  on  the  tombstone  where  he  lies : 
Dead  he  is  not,  but  departed — for  the  artist  never  dies." 

Bat  how  much  grander  the  thought  that  "  Emigravit "  may  most  fittingly  be  th« 
inscription  on  every  Christian's  tombstone  I — not  dead,  but  only  gone  before  to  that 
blessed  land  of  peerless  beauty,  where  blossom  unfading  flowers,  and  everlasting 
fountains  flow.  Why  should  we  not  give  up  the  use  of  the  word  death  as  applied 
to  the  Christian  ? — for  death  is  the  alienation  of  the  soul  from  God,  not  the 
quitting  of  earth  for  heaven.  No  danger  in  death  for  the  good : — "  I  want  to  talk 
to  you  about  heaven,"  said  a  dying  parent  to  a  member  of  his  family ;  "  we  may 
not  be  spared  to  each  other  long  ;  may  we  meet  around  the  throne  of  glory,  one 
family  in  heaven  I  "  Overpowered  at  the  though  ,  his  beloved  daughter  exclaimed, 
"  Surely  you  do  not  think  there  is  any  danger  ?  "  Calmly  and  beautifully  he  replied, 
"  Danger  1  my  darling.    Oh  I  do  not  use  that  word.    There  can  be  no  danger  to  the 

12 


V 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Christian,  whatever  may  happen.  All  is  right.  All  is  well.  God  is  love.  All  is  well — 
everlastingly  well — everlastingly  well."  (J.  Stevenson.)  Which  death : — "  Are  yoa 
afraid  of  death  ?  "  said  a  friend  to  a  German  pastor.  "  Which  death  do  you  mean  ?  " 
replied  the  dyingman.  "  Jesus  my  Saviour  saith, '  He  that  believeth  inMe  hath  eternal 
life.  He  that  believeth  in  Me  shall  not  see  death.'  Why  should  I  be  afraid  oJ 
what  I  shall  not  even  see  ?  The  real  death  is  past.  Outward  death,  separation  of 
body  and  soul,  we  have  to  endure,  and  God  gives  us  grace  and  strength  in  this  last 
trial;  but  the  sting  of  death  has  been  taken  away."  (A.  Saphir.)  A  death 
scene : — The  late  Rev.  Mr.  Innes,  of  GifEord,  after  a  life  prolonged  beyond  the  days 
of  most  men,  literally  fell  asleep ;  through  life  a  truly  peaceful  man,  his  latter  end 
was  peculiarly  so ;  without  the  suffering  of  disease  or  any  acute  pain,  the  pins  of  his 
tabernacle  seem  to  have  beengently  loosed.  Some  days  before,  one  of  his  parishioners, 
a  farmer,  called,  and  seeing  him  cheerful,  said  he  was  glad  to  see  him  so  well,  and 
that,  as  mild  weather  was  at  hand,  he  would  soon  get  better,  and  be  visiting  them 
again.  He  replied,  "No;  I  wish  no  such  flattery.  You  see  here  a  poor  old  man 
on  his  deatb-bed,  but  without  alarm :  I  tell  you  that.  Hear,  and  tell  all  your 
neighbours,  my  parishioners,  that  my  comfort  now,  and  hope  for  eternity,  is  just  the 
gospel  of  Christ  I  have  preached  to  them  sixty  years,  and  there  is  no  other."  He 
was  wonderfully  composed  at  all  times.  But  a  week  before  his  death  one  called, 
and,  seeing  a  book  of  small  type  before  him,  asked  him  if  he  saw  to  read  without 
his  glasses.  He  said,  "  Oh,  no;  I  cannot  read  even  my  Bible  without  glasses  :  but," 
strengthening  his  voice,  "  I  am  thankful  tbat  I  have  a  Bible  that  I  have  read;  and 
I  can  mind  some  texts  that  I  can  see  and  feel  now  as  I  never  did  before.  Oh,  it 
is  a  precious  book  1  " 

Ver.  16.  The  nature  of  angels. — Angel* : — It  must  be  a  spiritual  one, — for  "  He 
maketh  His  angels  spirits."  It  must  be  very  pure, — for  they  are  ''  the  holy  ones." 
Very  lofty, — for  they  "stand  before  the  throne,  and  always  behold  God's  face." 
Very  powerful,  too,  they  must  be, — for  "  they  excel  in  strength."  And  very  busy 
they  must  be,  and  very  humble,—  for  "  each  has  six  wings,  and  with  twain  he  covers 
his  face,  with  twain  he  covers  his  feet,  and  with  twain  he  does  fly."  And  very 
accurate  they  must  be, — for  they  bear  their  messages  so  faithfully.  And  very  un- 
selfish,— for  they  always  give  all  the  glory  to  God  alone.  They  are  not  entirely 
spotless, — for  "He  chargeth  His  angels  with  folly" ;  and  some  did  once  faJl.  And 
they  never  seem  to  originate  anything— they  go  where  they  are  sent,  they  say 
what  tbey  are  instructed,  they  do  whatever  they  are  told.  Neither  does  their  love 
appear  to  be  so  much  their  own  love,  as  a  love  with  which  they  are  commissioned. 
And  their  office  is  not,  for  the  most  part,  so  much  with  the  souls  of  men,  to  con- 
vert, or  to  influence,  or  to  comfort  them,  as  with  the  outer  circumstances  of  men — 
to  minister  to  them  in  their  dangers,  in  their  wants,  in  their  difficulties.  And 
how  does  "  the  nature  of  angels"  stand  related  to  our  own  ?  Is  it  higher  or  lower? 
Originally,  in  Eden,  I  do  not  know ;  but  I  should  say  the  angelic  nature  was  then 
the  lower,  because  that  is  said  of  man  which  is  never  said  of  angels,  that  he  was 
"  made  in  the  likeness  of  God,"  and  because  to  man  was  given  what  was  never 
given  to  angels — supremacy  and  sovereignty  over  all  the  works  of  God.  The  fallen 
nature  of  man  is,  on  the  whole,  lower.  But  only  a  little — "  a  little  lower  than  the 
angels."  But  how  is  it  with  man's  redeemed  and  renewed  nature?  Beyond  a 
doubt,  it  is  above  angels ;  for  such  as  Christ's  present  glorified  nature  is,  such  is 
that.  The  angels  never  sing  our  song — theirs  is  jubilant,  but  ours  is  triumphant, 
their  theme  is  creation,  ours  is  grace;  they  praise  God  in  His  works,  we  adore 
and  love  Him  in  His  Son.  And  do  not  you  know  that  we  shall  "  judge  angels," 
and  that  we  shall  reign  with  Christ  for  ever  and  ever.  We  bless  God  for  His  holy 
angels  1  We  bless  Him  that  there  is  anything  so  pure  and  beautiful  in  His  creation 
for  as  to  think  of  and  to  love.  We  bless  Him  that  we  have  such  presences,  so 
stilling,  so  assuring,  so  restful.  We  bless  Him  for  that  incentive  to  all  propriety 
in  our  solitary  hours — an  angel's  ear,  and  an  angel's  eye.  We  bless  Him  for  the 
debts  we  owe  to  those  ethereal  beings,  of  which  we  are  yet  but  dimly  conscious. 
We  bless  Him  that  tbey  take  charge  of  our  daily  walk,  and  our  midnight  slumbers. 
We  bless  Him  that  He  commits  it  to  creatures  so  lovely  to  exercise  His  merciful 
providences.  We  bless  Him  that  they  ministered  so  tenderly  to  their  and  our  dear 
Lord  in  the  days  of  His  sojourn  here,  and  that  now  they  do  all  they  do  for  us  for 
that  Jesus's  l  ike.  We  bless  Him  that  they  take  such  pious  interest  in  our  spiritual 
welfare,  and  rejoice  in  the  tears  of  which  they  know  that  the  sadness  is  joy.  We 
bless  TTin)  that  those  who  look  on  us  so  kindly  do  also  behold  His  face.     We  bleaa 


HEBREWS.  179 


Bim  that  when  we  come  to  die,  it  is  they,  those  heavenly  watchers,  who  shall  waft 
our  spirits  on  their  wings  to  heaven.  We  bless  Him  that  we  with  them,  and  they 
with  us,  we  shall  mingle  our  songs  and  our  services,  and  encircle  the  throne 
together  with  our  common  praise.  We  bless  Him  that  when  Christ,  and  we  with 
Christ,  shall  come  back  again  to  this  earth,  we  shall  be  attended  by  the  glory  of 
the  holy  angels.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  He  took  on  Him  the  seed  of  Abraham. — 
Christian  sympathy  : — We  are  all  of  one  nature,  because  we  are  sons  of  Adam  ;  we 
are  all  of  one  nature,  because  we  are  brethren  of  Christ.  All  those  common  feel- 
ings, which  we  have  by  birth,  are  far  more  intimately  common  to  us,  now  that  we 
have  obtained  the  second  birth.  Our  hopes  and  fears,  likes  and  dislikes,  pleasures 
and  pains,  have  been  moulded  upon  one  model,  have  been  wrought  into  one  image, 
blended  and  combined  unto  "the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ," 
Yes,  and  one  thing  needful ;  one  narrow  way;  one  business  on  earth ;  one  and  the 
same  enemy ;  the  same  dangers  ;  the  same  temptations  ;  the  same  afflictions  ;  the 
same  course  of  life ;  the  same  death ;  the  same  resurrection ;  the  same  judgment. 
All  these  things  being  the  same,  and  the  new  nature  being  the  same,  and  from  the 
same,  no  wonder  that  Christiana  can  sympathise  with  each  other,  even  as  by  the 
power  of  Christ's  sympathising  in  and  with  each  of  them.  Nay,  and  further,  they 
sympathise  together  in  those  respects  too,  in  which  Christ  has  not,  could  not  have, 
gone  before  them ;  I  mean  in  their  common  sins.  This  is  the  difference  between 
Christ's  temptation  and  ours:  His  temptations  were  without  sin,  but  ours  with  sin. 
Temptation  with  us  almost  certainly  involves  sin.  We  have  still  earthly  principles 
in  our  sonls,  though  we  have  heavenly  ones,  and  these  so  sympathise  with  tempta- 
tion, that,  as  a  mirror  reflects  promptly  and  of  necessity  what  is  presented  to  it,  so 
the  Ijody  of  death  which  infects  us,  when  the  temptations  of  this  world  assail  it — 
when  honour,  pomp,  glory,  the  world's  praise,  power,  ease,  indulgence,  sensual 
pleasure,  revenge  are  offered  to  it — involuntarily  responds  to  them,  and  sins — sins 
because  it  is  sin;  sins  before  the  better  mind  can  control  it,  because  it  exists, 
because  its  life  is  sin  ;  sins  till  it  is  utterly  subdued  and  expelled  from  the  soul  by 
the  gradual  growth  of  holiness  and  the  power  of  the  Spirit.  Of  all  this,  Christ  had 
nothing.  He  was  "  born  of  a  pure  Virgin,"  the  immaculate  Lamb  of  God  ;  and 
though  He  was  tempted,  yet  it  was  by  what  was  good  in  the  world's  offers,  though 
unseason  ble  and  unsuitable,  and  not  by  what  was  evil  in  them.  He  overcame 
what  it  had  been  unbecoming  to  yield  to,  while  He  felt  the  temptation.  He  over- 
came also  what  was  sinful,  but  He  felt  no  temptation  to  it.  And  yet  it  stands  to 
reason,  that  though  His  temptations  differed  from  ours  in  this  main  respect,  yet 
His  presence  in  us  makes  us  sympathise  one  with  another,  even  in  our  sins  and 
faults,  in  a  way  which  is  impossible  without  it ;  because,  whereas  the  grace  in  us 
is  common  to  us  all,  the  sins  against  that  grace  are  common  to  us  all  also.  We 
have  the  same  gifts  to  sin  against,  and  therefore  the  same  powers,  the  same  re- 
sponsibilities, the  same  fears,  the  same  struggles,  the  same  guilt,  the  same  repent- 
ance, and  such  as  none  can  have  but  we.  I  do  not  of  course  mean  to  say  that  we 
are  one  and  all  at  the  same  point  in  our  Christian  course,  or  have  one  and  all  had 
the  same  religious  history  in  times  past ;  but  that,  even  taking  a  man  who  has 
never  fallen  from  grace,  and  one  who  has  fallen  most  grievously  and  repented,  even 
they  will  be  found  to  be  very  much  like  each  other  in  their  view  of  themselves,  in 
their  temptations,  and  feelings  upon  those  temptations,  than  they  might  fancy 
beforehand.  This  we  see  most  strikingly  instanced  when  holy  men  set  about  to 
describe  their  real  state.  Even  bad  men  at  once  cry  out,  "  This  is  just  our  case," 
and  argue  from  it  that  there  is  no  difference  between  bad  and  good.  They  impute 
all  their  own  sins  to  the  holiest  of  men,  as  making  their  own  lives  a  sort  of  com- 
ment upon  the  text  which  his  words  furnish,  and  appealing  to  the  appositeness  of 
their  own  interpretation  in  proof  of  its  correctness.  And  I  suppose  it  cannot  be 
denied,  concerning  all  of  us,  that  we  are  generally  surprised  to  hear  the  strong 
language  which  good  men  use  of  themselves,  as  if  such  confessions  showed  them 
to  be  more  like  ourselves,  and  much  less  holy  than  we  had  fancied  them  to  be. 
And  on  the  other  hand,  I  suppose,  any  man  of  tolerably  correct  life,  whatever  his 
positive  advancement  in  grace,  will  seldom  read  accounts  of  notoriously  bad  men, 
in  which  their  ways  and  feelings  are  described,  without  being  shocked  to  find  that 
these  more  or  less  cast  a  meaning  upon  his  own  heart,  and  bring  out  into  light  and 
colour  lines  and  shapes  of  thought  within  him,  which,  till  then,  were  almost  in 
visible.  Now  this  does  not  show  that  bad  and  good  men  are  on  a  level,  but  it 
shows  this,  that  they  are  of  the  same  nature.  They  have  common  ground ;  and 
as  they  have  one  faith  and  hope,  and  one  Spirit,  so  also  they  have  one  and  th« 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chaf.  i& 

same  circle  of  temptations,  and  one  and  the  same  confession.     (J.  H.  Newmauy 
D.D.)        On  the  Incarnation  of  GhrUt : — I.  What  is  naturally  inferbed  from 
Christ's  "taking  on  Him  the  seed  of  Abraham."     1.  The  Divine  nature  of  Christ. 
2.  The  reality  of  Christ's  human  nature.     3.  The  truth  of  His  office,  and  the 
divinity  of  His  mission.    4.  His  voluntary  choice  and  design,  to  assume  a  condition 
here   upon  earth  low  and  contemptible.     II.  Why  Christ  took  upon  Him  thb 
NATURE  OF  MAN,  AND  NOT  OF  ANGELS.     1.  The  transcendent  greatness  and  malignity 
of  the  sin  of  the  angels  above  that  of  men.    (1)  As  being  committed  against  a  much, 
greater  light,  which  is  to  be  the  proper  guide  and  ruler  of  the  will  in  all  its  choices. 
(2)  The  sm  of  the  angels  commenced  upon  a  greater  liberty  of  will  and  freedom  of 
choice.    There  was  no  devil  to  tempt  them  to  become  devils ;  no  seducer  of  a- 
stronger  reason  to  impose  upon  theirs ;  they  moved  entirely  upon  the  motives  of 
an  intrinsic  maUce.    2.  The  next,   and  perhaps  the  grand  cause,  that  induced 
Christ  to  take  upon  Him  the  nature  and  mediation  of  men,  and  not  of  angels, 
might  be  this  ;  that  without  such  a  Redeemer,  the  whole  race  and  species  of  man- 
kind had  perished,  as  being  all  involved  in  the  sin  of  their  representative  ;  whereas, 
though  many  of  the  angels  sinned,  yet  as  many,  if  not  more,  persisted  in  their 
innocence  ;  so  that  the  whole  kind  was  not  cashiered  by  a  universal  ruin,  nor  mado 
unserviceable  to  their  Creator,  in  the  nobler  instances  of  active  obedience.     {R. 
South,  D.D.)        The  Incarnation: — I.  The  general  scope  of  this  passage  you  will 
ali  apprehend  to  be  this,  that  the  children  of  Adam,  being  now  aU  children  of 
wrath,  ALL  NEEDED  A  Savioue  ;  and  the  Saviour  they  needed  must  not  be  in  the 
form  of  God,  or  of  an  angel ;  He  must  be  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh ;  whatever 
else  He  is,  He  must  be  man.     Accordingly,  Jesus  Christ,  the  Mediator,  who  was 
God  from  eternity,  became  man,  in  the  fulness  of  time.     Concerning  God,  even  the 
Father,  we  know  something  from  other  sources  than  Revelation.    Nature  and 
Providence  declare  His  eternal  power  and  Godhead ;  whereas  our  acquaintance 
with  the  Son  of  God  is  derived  from  Revelation  alone.    But  the  Bible  assures 
as  that  Jesus  Christ  is  God — and  it  assures  us  also  that  He  is  man  ;  and  the  asbvr- 
tion  of  His  Godhead  is  equally  positive  as  that  of  His  manhood.    As  we  are  tol  1,^ 
the  Word  was  made  flesh — that  the  Divine,  and  not  any  angelic  nature,  was  incar- 
nate ;  BO,  we  may  confidently  infer,  that  the  assumption  of  manhood  by  any  inferior, 
or  created  spirit,  would  not  have  answered  the  mighty  purposes  of  God's  mercy  in 
our  redemption.    For  the  Divine  wisdom  will  never  employ  a  mightier  agency  than 
the  occasion  demands.    Having  thus  stated  the  necessity,  as  this  is  evidently 
.asserted  in  the  Word  of  God,  that  our  Saviour  should  unite  in  His  person  the 
nature  of  God  and  the  nature  of  man,  I  would  proceed — II.  To  inquire,  wherein 
THAT  necessity  CONSISTED  ?     1.  I  do  not  propose  to  inquire  into  the  propriety  of 
this  dispensation,  as  it  regards  the  Divine  nature  or  the  Divine  government.    We 
are,  indeed,  assured  of  the  fact,  that  the  incarnation  of  the  divinity,  and  the  atone- 
ment made  by  the  God-man,  were  requisite,  in  order  that  the  expression  of  mercy 
to  sinners  might  not  be  inconsistent  with  the  glorious  character,  which  unitea 
perfect  holiness  and  rectitude  with  boundless  love  and  compassion.     God  reveals 
these  things  to  us  only  as  far  as  our  present  necessities  require ;  and  further,  with 
certainty  of  truth,  we  cannot  go.     2.  But,  as  regards  ourselves,  and  their  bearing 
on  our  interests,  our  Father  in  heaven  is  as  liberal  in  His  communications,  as  Ha 
is  reserved  in  the  other  case.    And  I  propose  to  suggest  a  few  of  the  reasons  which 
make  it  apparent,  that,  in  order  to  perform  the  part  of  a  Saviour  to  us,  it  behoved 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  to  take  on  Him  the  nature  of  man.     What  are  our  wants, 
our  miseries,  as  sinners  ?    We  have  broken  the  Divine  law ;  and  of  course  we  are 
condemned.    We  need,  therefore,  pardon  or  justification.     This  can  be  obtained 
only  by  a  sacrifice.    Therefore,  we  need  a  priest  who  may  offer  the  sacrifice  and 
reconcile  us.     Then,  we  are  very  weak  ;  we  need  support.    We  are  very  stubborn  ; 
and  therefore  we  need  to  have  our  hard  hearts  broken.    We  cannot  regulate  our 
actions ;  therefore,  we  need  a  law  and  a  lawgiver  :  and  we  are  exposed  to  powerful 
enemies,  from  whom,  unless  protected,  we  perish ;  and  for  all  these  reasons,  it  is 
manifest  we  need  One  who  has  the  authority  and  power  of  a  King.     And  yet 
further,  we  are  most  ignorant  of  that  which  we  are  infinitely  concerned  to  know, 
which  we  are  most  unwilling  to  learn,  and  most  ready  to  forget ;  which  needs  to 
be  demonstrated  to  us,  and  impressed  upon  us  with  the  most  striking  evidence ; 
and  so  Christ  is  our  Prophet.    What  is  necessary  to  be  shown  is,  that  our  Redeemer 
must  be  both  Divine  and  human,  otherwise  He  could  not  discharge  any  one  of  these 
three  offices.'    (1)  It  was  needful  that,  in  order  to  be  a  Priest,  our  Redeemer  should 
be  both  God  and  man.    If  the  Word  had  not  become  man.  He  could  not  have  died> 


CHAF.  n.]  HEBREWS.  181 

Ke  could  not  have  offered  up  a  Bacrifice,  nor  made  expiation.     A  priest  implies 

a  sacrifice,  as  a  father  implies  a  child,  a  master  a  servant,  a  governor  subjects. 
■Wherefore  He  took  human  nature,  and  made  it  part  of  Himself,  that  He  might 
have  something  to  offer  up  to  God.  We  need  to  advert  here  to  two  distinct  and 
important  considerations  :  the  essence  of  a  sacrifice,  a  real  sacrifice,  is  obedience, 
contrary  to  the  natural  inclination  or  will  of  that  which  is  sacrificed.  The  Divine 
nature  of  the  Son  could  not  be  a  sacrifice  to  God,  having  the  very  will  of  God  itself. 
But  every  man  has  that  distinct  will  which  is  of  the  essence  of  freedom  and 
responsibility.  The  man  Jesus  had  that  will.  It  is  impossible  those  sufferings  He 
needed  to  endure  that  He  might  make  His  soul  an  offering  for  sin,  should  have 
been  inflicted  on  our  Priest,  had  He  appeared  to  the  world  in  the  form  of  God. 
But  that  He  might  suffer  from  man  whatever  was  necessary  for  man's  redemption. 
He  hid  Himself  under  their  own  form,  so  that  nothing  of  God  might  be  visible  but 
His  moral  glory,  His  hoUness,  His  power,  His  rectitude,  His  unspeakable  love.  His 
unfathomable  mercy :  and  men  dared  to  inflict  upon  the  Son  of  God  so  disguised, 
whatever  the  Divine  government  and  their  eternal  salvation  requited.  Our  Priest, 
then,  must  be  man.  That  He  must  be  God,  is  too  plain  to  need  proof.  A  Divine 
sufferer  alone  could  be  a  worthy  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  world.  And  now,  oh, 
sinners,  this  wonderful  Person  is  your  Priest.  The  God-man  made  atonement,  the 
God-man  maketh  intercession  for  you.  Cling  to  His  sacrifice  ;  accept  His  media- 
tion ;  plead  His  obedience  with  the  Father.  2.  But,  secondly,  because  we  are  weak 
and  wayward,  and  exposed  to  many  foes,  and  powerful,  therefore,  we  need  a  King. 
And  none  can  be  such  a  King  as  we  need,  but  One  who  is  both  God  and  man. 
Almighty  is  His  power,  infinite  His  knowledge  and  wisdom,  immeasurable  His  love, 
unfailing  His  rectitude  ;  and  He  is  "  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh."  In 
all  your  frailties  and  ignorances  and  temptations  manifold,  remember  that  He  your 
Divine  Sovereign  is  man,  and  has  suffered  being  tempted,  and  ia  qualified  to 
fiuccour  you  when  ye  are  tempted.  Let  the  almightiness  and  infinite  love  of  your 
most  gracious  King,  God's  Son,  your  Brother,  assure  your  hearts  that  following 
Him,  ye  shall  be  conquerors,  yea,  more  than  conquerors.  3.  It  was  necessary  that 
our  JProphet,  He  who  should  effectually  teach  us,  should  be  not  simply  God,  or 
mere  man,  but  both  :  and  none  could  so  teach  us  who  was  not  both  God  and  man. 
It  is  a  gross  mistake  to  suppose  that  what  mankind  needed  most  was  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil ;  or  that  the  possession  of  this  knowledge,  in  even  the  highest  perfec- 
tion, is  sufficient  of  itself  to  subdue  the  heart  to  the  obedience  and  love  of  God. 
The  Jews  possessed  this  knowledge  as  much  as  we  do.  Even  regarding  the 
heathens  themselves,  I  will  make  bold  to  afiirm,  there  is  scarcely  a  duty  or  rule 
of  morality,  laid  down  in  the  New  Testament,  but  may  be  found  expressed,  with 
more  or  less  clearness,  in  the  writings  of  some  one  or  more  of  their  poets  or 
philosophers.  It  was  not  necessary,  therefore,  that  another  temple  of  God  should 
be  reared  of  stones,  or  that,  from  that  dead  temple,  the  same  dead  law,  the  mere 
letter  of  outward  and  verbal  instruction,  should  be  promulgated.  But  when 
righteousness  had  grown  a  stranger  upon  earth,  then  God  sent  that  Teacher,  Hia 
Bon,  who  should  found  a  new,  a  Uving  temple,  of  which  He  was  the  Foundation  ; 
and  should  be  Himself  a  Living  Law,  not  only  informing  men,  but  showing  them, 
in  Hia  own  life,  what  they  should  be ;  and  overturning  the  notion  that  what  He 
enjoined  was  impossible,  by  the  undeniable  performance  of  it  by  Himself  in  their 
own  nature.  He  is  an  effectual  Teacher,  for  He  has  power  not  only  Himself  to 
work  the  works  of  God,  but  to  communicate  that  to  others  whereby  they  also  may 
vork  them.  His  instruction  is  quickening  and  saving :  He  is  the  true  light,  for  it 
is  light  which  is  the  hfe  of  men.  A  perfect  teacher  of  righteousness  could  neither 
he  mere  man,  nor  in  the  form  of  God.  A  mere  man  could  not,  as  is  evident  from 
two  plain  reasons.  He  could  not  exemplify  His  own  precepts — He  could  not  prove 
that  obedience  was  possible,  and  He  could  not  give  the  Spirit,  for  the  Spirit  is 
<3od,  and  how  could  a  man,  a  creature,  communicate  God  the  Creator?  And  yet, 
without  the  Spirit  of  God,  no  man  can  be  taught  of  God.  And  now,  let  us  suppose 
that  Christ,  the  Prophet  of  the  Church,  had  delivered  His  teaching  to  us  in  the 
form  of  God,  that  He  tauj-'ht  us  without  being  in-^arnate :  might  not  the  human 
heart  have  raised  these  plausible  objections?  "Thou  commandest  me  to  keep 
Thy  law,  but  Thou  art  God,  and  I  am  dust  and  ashes.  Thou  dost  promise  me  the 
aid  of  Thy  Spirit ;  but  I  have  not  seen  or  heard  of  any  one  in  whom,  by  that  aid, 
this  end  was  accomplished."  To  prevent  this  murmur,  and  the  reasons  on  which 
it  might  have  rested,  God  became  man,  and,  as  man  spoke  to  men  from  the  same 
level  on  which  they  stood.    We  saw  Him  in  humiliation,  in  sorrow,  in  the  struggle* 


IW  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  n. 

of  temptation,  in  the  fears  and  agonies  of  death,  "  ever  in  the  battle,  bnt  eve? 
aloft  "  ;  and  then  finally  victorious,  when  He  seemed  for  ever  vanquished,  for,  by 
yielding  to  death  He  conquered  him  and  his  ruler,  in  the  irresistible  might  of 
weakness  quelling  all  the  powers  of  hell.  This  is  our  Eedeemer,  this  our  Saviour. 
This  is  He  announced  from  of  old,  the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world.  How  wonderful,  how  glorious  His  person ;  uniting  the  majesty  of  the 
eternal  God  with  the  meanness  of  mortal  man ;  qualified  to  do  whatever  was 
necessary  to  be  done,  to  suffer  whatever  needed  to  be  endured  for  the  honour  of 
God  aud  the  salvation  of  man  1  How  mysterious  is  His  condescension,  how 
sublime  His  hijmi.lity — the  pure  streams  of  His  mercy  overflowing  the  world,  while 
the  flames  of  His  zeal  consumed  Himself.  (R.  Lee,  D.D.)  On  passing  by  anyeh 
to  redeem  men : — If  He  who  made  all  things  took  upon  Him  man's  nature,  we  may 
feel  sure  that  there  is  in  tbat  nature  some  intrinsic  excellence  and  greatness,  one 
proof  of  which  is  that  it  is  capable  of  being  united  with  the  Person  of  the  Word 
who  was  in  the  beginning  with  God,  and  was  God.  But  so,  unquestionably,  was 
the  angels'  nature ;  for  man  is  a  little  lower  than  the  angels.  Here  were  two  fallen 
races  before  the  eye  of  the  Eedeemer,  and  we  cannot  doubt  that  it  was  optional 
with  Him  to  redeem  either  of  them,  or  both.  Why  He  did  not  redeem  both  must 
be  left  to  sovereign  wisdom.    I.  Fallen  angels,  u  redeemed,  would  no  doubt 

BECOME    AS    OREAT    AND    GLORIOUS    AS    BEFORE.        Wc    SCO    in     this    WOrld    CnOUgh     of 

degradation  made  by  sin  to  keep  us  from  doubting  the  power  of  sin  to  degrade 
fallen  angels  into  devils,  and  devils  into  alliance  with  swine.  But  the  memory  of 
innocence  and  of  bliss  in  heaven  no  doubt  remains  in  them.  What  a  good  work  it 
would  have  been  to  redeem  that  memory  and  restore  that  angel.  How  sad,  one 
might  say,  to  think  that  Christ  would  not  redeem  him,  but  went  after  South  Sea 
Islanders  and  the  aborigines  of  the  British  Isles,  than  whom  none  was  ever  more 
lost  to  shame,  or  more  distant  from  God.  And  what  a  wicked  world  this,  which 
He  redeemed,  has  proved.  Thus  far  the  few  are  saved ;  the  many  hate  God.  II. 
But  in  reply  it  may  be  said.  His  success  might  have  been  no  better  had  Christ 
MADE  redemption  FOR  ANGELS  INSTEAD  OF  FOR  MEN.  Augcls  might  havo  invented 
objections  to  Him  as  men  did;  some  might  go  so  far  as  to  deny  His  Godhead  and 
incarnation,  and  ask  whether  a  good  God  would  let  His  innocent  Son  visit  such  an 
abode,  to  suffer  and  die  for  devils  ;  and  what  virtue  there  could  be  in  the  sufferings 
of  one  for  the  sins  of  others ;  and  whether  it  is  just  to  substitute  an  innocent  being 
for  the  guilty?  It  is  the  great  mystery  of  wisdom  that  while  God  does  His  plea- 
sure, it  is  in  such  a  way  that  every  man  exercises  his  free  choice.    III.  Those  w;  o 

DO  NOT  ACCEPT  REDEMPTION  PROVIDED  FOR  THEM  BY  THE  SoN  OP  GOD  ARE  TO  B3 
ASSOCIATED    HEREAFTER    WITH    A    RACE     OF    SINNERS    WHOM    ChRIST    DID    NOT    REDEEM. 

Nothing  surely  is  better  adapted  to  make  us  accept  the  offers  of  the  gospel ;  for  if 
Christ  passed  them  by  and  came  to  save  us,  no  fancy  can  picture  what  it  must  be 
to  receive  from  His  lips  a  consignment  to  their  abode  and  to  their  society.  IV. 
The  subject  opens  to  us  a  view  of  human  happiness  for  .all  who  accept  of  salva- 
tion. If  the  Redeemer  sought  the  greater  amount  of  happiness  in  those  for  whom 
He  decided  to  make  atonement,  He  surely  will  find  it  in  us  who  enter  heaven,  not 
as  a  recovered  seat  from  which  we  were  ignominiously  expelled,  but  a  world  new, 
untried,  awakening  in  us  sensations  of  wonder  and  joy  whioh  now  it  doth  not  enter 
into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive.  There  will  be  a  quality  in  our  joy  which  could 
never  be  known  to  those  who  fell  from  heaven.  And  shall  we  lose  it  ?  Are  we 
looking  diligently  lest  any  man  fail  of  the  grace  of  God?  (N.  Adams,  D.D.} 
Fallen  humanity  elected  to  redemption  in  preference  to  fallen  angels: — I.  There  are 

STRONG  REASONS  WHICH  MIGHT  HAVE  LED  US  TO  SUPPOSE   THAT  GoD  WOULD   HAVE   GIVEN 

the  PREFERENCE  TO  FALLEN  ANGELS.  1.  The  Superiority  of  angelic  natures.  2. 
The  probability  of  their  greater  misery.  3.  Their  greater  competency  of  appre- 
ciating the  redemptive  act.    II.  Although  there  might  appeab  strong  reasons 

FOR  the   choice   OF  FALLEN  ANGELS,  WE  CAN  DISCOVER  MOST  SATISFACTORY  REASONS  FOR 

THE  ELECTION  OF  FALLEN  MEN.  1.  The  clectiou  of  mcu  in  preference  to  fallen 
angels  furnishes  a  more  striking  manifestation  of  Divine  justice.  2.  A  more  striking 
manifestation  of  Divine  independence.  3.  A  more  striking  manifestation  of  Divine 
condescension.  Lessons :  1.  How  cautious  should  we  be  in  pronouncing  judgment 
upon  the  conduct  of  God.  2.  How  devoutly  earnest  should  man's  acceptance  of 
this  redemption  be.  3.  How  zealously  should  those  who  have  become  partici- 
pators of  this  redemption  seek  to  extend  it  to  others.  {Homilist.)  Men  chosen — 
fallen  angelt  rejected: — I.  In  the  first  place,  the  translation  of  our  authorised 
Teision  rung  thus:    "He  took  kot  on  Him  the  nature  of  angels."    Our  Lord 


CHAP,  n.)  HEBREWS.  183 

and  Saviour  Jebus  Christ  did  not  take  upon  Himself  the  nature  of  angels.  His  con- 
descension dictated  to  Him,  that  if  He  did  stoop,  He  would  descend  to  the  very 
lowest  degree ;  that  if  He  did  become  a  creature,  He  would  become,  not  the  noblest 
creature,  but  one  of  the  most  iguoble  of  rational  beings,  that  is  to  say,  man,  there- 
fore. He  did  not  etoop  to  the  intermediate  step  of  angelship,  but  He  stooped  right 
down  and  became  a  man.  Let  us  notice  the  wisdom  and  the  love  of  this,  and  I 
think  there  will  be  something  to  cause  us  to  glorify  God  for  so  doing.  1.  If  Christ 
had  taken  upon  Himself  the  nature  of  angels,  He  could  never  have  made  an  atone- 
ment for  man.  2.  Had  our  Saviour  become  an  angel.  He  would  never  have  been  a 
fitting  example  for  us.  I  cannot  imitate  an  angelic  example.  If  you  would  give 
me  something  to  imitate,  give  me  a  man  like  m\  self,  then  I  may  attempt  to  follow 
him.  3.  Sweetly,  also,  let  us  remember  that  if  Christ  had  been  an  angel,  He  could 
not  have  sympathised  with  us.  In  order  to  sympathise  with  our  fellow  creatures 
we  must  be  something  like  them.  Suppose  a  man  made  of  iron,  or  of  brass,  could 
he  sympathise  with  our  wearied  lungs,  or  with  our  aching  bones?  4.  Once  more, 
Christ  became  a  man,  and  not  an  angel,  because  He  desired  to  be  one  with  His 
dear  Church.  5.  Again,  if  Christ  had  not  taken  upon  Him  the  nature  of  man, 
then  manhood  would  not  have  been  so  honourable  or  so  comfortable  as  it  is.  II. 
The  literal  translation,  according  to  the  marginal  reading,  is,  "He  took  not  dp 
ANGELS,  BOT  He  TOOK  u?  THE  SEED  OF  ABRAHAM,"  by  which  is  meant,  that  Christ 
did  not  die  to  save  angels,  though  many  of  them  needed  salvation,  but  He  died  to 
save  fallen  man.  1.  I  do  not  think  it  is  because  of  any  difference  in  the  sin. 
When  two  crimiuals  are  brought  before  a  judge,  if  one  of  them  is  to  be  saved,  and 
the  other  punished,  very  likely  the  judge  will  say,  "Let  the  greatest  offender  die, 
and  let  the  less  offender  be  saved,"  Now,  I  do  not  know  that  Satan  was  a  greater 
offender  than  man  ;  I  am  not  sure  that  the  fallen  angels  sinned  more  than  man 
did.  •'  Why,  sir,"  you  say,  "man's  sin  was  a  very  little  one;  he  only  stole  some 
of  his  Master's  fruit."  Aye,  but  if  it  was  such  a  little  thing  to  do,  what  a  little 
thing  it  would  have  been  not  to  do  itl  If  it  were  so  little  a  thing,  how  easily  he 
might  have  avoided  it  1  and,  therefore,  because  he  did  it,  it  became  all  the  greater 
sin.  2.  But  suppose  there  is  not  much  difference  in  their  sin,  the  next  question  is, 
which  of  those  two  beings  is  the  most  worth  saving?  Which  would  serve  his 
Mrtker  most,  if  his  Maker  should  spare  him?  And  I  defy  any  of  you  to  hold  that 
a  sinful  man  is  a  more  valuable  creature  than  an  angel.  3.  Sometimes  the  govern- 
ment will  say,  "  Well,  here  are  two  persons  to  be  executed ;  we  desire  to  save  one ; 
which  of  the  two  would  be  the  most  dangerous  character  to  allow  to  continue  an 
enemy  ?  "  Now,  which  could  hurt  God  the  most,  speaking  as  man  would  speak,  a 
fallen  angel,  or  a  man  7  I  answer,  that  fallen  man  can  do  but  little  injury  to 
Divine  government,  compared  to  a  fallen  angel.  4.  Perhaps  it  would  be  said,  if 
one  is  to  be  saved,  let  tliat  one  be  saved  who  would  take  the  least  troiihle  to  save. 
Now,  which  could  be  saved  with  the  gieatest  ease,  should  you  suppose  a  fallen 
angel,  or  a  fallen  man  ?  For  my  part,  I  can  see  no  difference ;  but  if  there  be  any, 
it  strikes  me  that  a  restoration  does  not  put  things  one-half  so  much  out  of  order 
as  a  revolution  ;  and  to  have  restored  the  angels  to  the  place  from  which  they  had 
fallen,  speaking  as  a  man  must  speak,  would  not  have  been  so  hard  as  to  have 
taken  fallen  man  out  of  the  place  from  which  he  had  fallen,  and  placed  him  where 
fallen  angels  had  once  stood.  6.  But,  you  may  say,  God  saved  man  because  He 
pitied  him.  But  then  why  did  not  He  pity  the  devils  t  I  know  two  men  Uving  on 
three  or  four  shillings  a  week.  I  pity  one  of  them  very  much,  indeed ;  but  the 
other,  who  is  no  belter  off,  I  pity  him  the  most,  for  he  once  knew  better  times. 
Man,  it  is  true,  fell  out  of  Eden  ;  but  Satan  fell  out  of  heaven,  and  is  the  more  to 
be  pitied  on  account  of  the  greatness  of  his  fall ;  and,  therefore,  if  pity  had  ruled 
the  day,  God  would  have  decided  for  the  fallen  angels,  and  not  for  fallen  men. 
(C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Kindred  aids  rescue: — There  is  no  sympathy  like  that  of 
those  who  are  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh.  Let  some  stranger  see  a 
child  fall  into  yonder  river,  and  his  irresistible  impulse  is  to  plunge  in  and  rescue 
that  child.  But  his  zeal  to  do  so  is  mere  indifference  compared  with  the  heart- 
rending agony  that  tears  the  soul  of  the  child's  mother.  Some  years  since,  in  a 
wild  valley  of  Dauphin6,  in  France,  an  eagle,  we  are  told,  swooped  down  from  its 
lofty  eyrie,  clutched  a  helpless  infant  in  its  sharp  talons,  and  soared  aloft  with  it 
to  the  peak  of  an  almost  inaccessible  mountain.  The  peasants,  looking  on  with 
horror  at  the  sight,  in  confusion  and  excitement,  knew  not  what  to  do.  But  not  so 
the  mother.  Hearing  of  the  disaster,  love  gave  wings  to  her  feet,  and  so  she  leaped, 
cay,  flew  almost,  from  crag  to  crag,  until,  mounting  higher  and  higher,  she  reached 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  a. 

the  Bummit  and  clasped  the  nninjured  captive  to  her  bosom.  Kinship  intensifies 
sympathy.  It  is  just  of  that  the  apostle  would  have  us  to  gather  a  clear  and  strong 
idea.  Christ  is  bone  of  our  bone,  flesh  of  our  flesh,  one  of  ourselves ;  bound  up 
with  us  in  the  bundle  of  life,  bound  to  us  by  ten  thousand  close  and  tender  ties,  along 
which  there  thrill  and  throb  the  vibrations  of  a  strength — a  Divine,  a  supernatural 
strength,  that  flows  down  indeed  to  the  heart  of  even  the  feeblest  and  lowliest  of  His 
sufferers  upon  earth.  {Bp.  of  Algoma. )  Humiliation  of  Jesus : — The  founder  of  the 
Russian  empire  left  his  palace  and  capital,  the  seductive  pleasures  and  all  the  pomp  and 
royalty,  to  acquire  the  art  of  ship-building  in  the  dockyard  of  a  Dutch  sea-port.  He 
learned  it  that  he  might  teach  it  to  his  subjects ;  he  became  a  servant,  that  he  might  be 
the  better  master,  and  lay  in  Russia  the  foundations  of  a  great  naval  power.  Nor 
has  bis  country  been  ungrateful ;  her  capital,  which  bears  his  name,  is  adorned 
vnth  a  monument  to  his  memory,  massive  as  his  mind  ;  and  she  has  embalmed  his 
deathless  name  in  her  heart  and  in  her  victories.  Yet,  little  as  men  think  of 
Jesus,  lightly  as  they  esteem  Him,  a  far  greater  sight  is  here.  There,  in  a  king 
becoming  a  subject  that  his  subjects  might  find  in  him  a  king,  there  was  much  for 
men ;  but  here  there  is  much  both  for  men  and  angels  to  wonder  at,  and  praise 
through  all  eternity.  The  Son  of  God  stoops  to  toil.  What  an  amazing  scene  \ 
(T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  The  secret  of  true  philanthropy  : — Great  philanthropic  pro 
grammes  must  begin  at  Bethlehem,  and  comprehend  the  mysteries  of  Golgotha,  if 
ever  they  would  ascend  from  Bethany  into  the  heavens.  He  who  would  make  life 
a  redemptive  mission  must  go  to  the  very  base  of  society,  and  begin  his  work  there. 
Men  invariably  fail  when  they  begin  at  the  high  twig  rather  than  the  buried  root. 
To  serve  man,  Christ  became  man.  So  in  serving  others  we  must  identify  our- 
selves with  them.  Christ  was  in  the  darkness,  but  the  darkness  was  not  in  Him. 
This  identification  of  Himself  with  the  human  race  made  Christ  accessible  to  all 
classes.  Man  needed  for  a  season — only  for  a  season,  as  one  summer  in  the  year 
is  enough — a  visible  manifestation  of  God.  So  by  coming  to  us,  and  being  like  us, 
and  humbling  Himself  to  the  death  of  the  Cross,  He  saved  us.  We,  too,  in  our 
philanthropic  work  must  go  down.  Kings  are  only  the  blossomings  of  the  great 
communal  tree.  "  Down  to  the  roots  "  is  the  cry  of  the  true  philanthropy.  (<7. 
Farker,  D.D.)  Christ's  close  contact  with  humanity  : — You  remember  that  happy 
story  of  the  wild  negro  child  who  could  never  be  won  till  the  little  lady  sat  down  by 
her,  and  laid  her  hand  upon  her.  Eva  won  poor  Topsy  by  that  tender  touch.  The 
tongue  failed,  but  the  hand  achieved  the  victory.  So  was  it  with  our  adorable  Lord. 
He  showed  us  that  He  was  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh  ;  He  brought  Him- 
self into  contact  with  us,  and  made  us  perceive  the  reahty  of  His  love  to  us,  and  then 
He  became  more  than  a  conqueror  over  us.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  "  Ha^wos  one  of  us  "  ; — 
On  the  centenary  of  the  birth  of  Robert  Stephenson  there  was  a  very  large  demonstra- 
tion at  Newcastle.  The  town  was  paraded  by  a  vast  procession  who  carried  banners  in 
honour  of  the  distinguished  engineer.  In  the  procession  there  was  a  band  of  peasants, 
who  carried  a  little  banner  of  very  ordinaiy  appearance,  but  bearing  the  words, 
"  He  was  one  of  us."  They  were  inhabitants  of  the  small  village  in  which  Robert 
Stephenson  had  been  born,  and  had  come  to  do  him  honour.  They  had  a  right  to 
a  prominent  position  in  that  day's  proceedings,  because  h<8  to  whom  so  many  thou- 
sands did  honour  was  cue  of  them.  Even  so,  whatever  praise  the  thrones,  do- 
minions, principalities,  and  powers  can  ascribe  to  Christ  in  that  grand  celebration 
when  men  shall  be  no  more,  we  from  earth  can  wave  our  banners  with  the  words 
written  upon  it,  "  He  was  one  of  us." 

Ver.  17.  Made  like  unto  His  brethren. — A  sermon  preached  on  Christmas  Day : — 
This  high  feast  of  the  nativity  of  our  blessed  Saviour  is  called  by  St.  Chrysostom 
"  the  great  metropolitan  feast."  For,  as  to  the  chief  city  the  whole  country  resorts 
(Psa.  csxii.  4) ;  so  all  the  feast-days  of  the  whole  year  meet  and  are  concentred  in 
the  joy  of  this  feast.  If  we  will  draw  them  into  a  perfect  circle,  we  must  set  the 
foot  of  the  compass  upon  this,  "  God  was  made  like  unto  man."  My  text  is  laid 
down  unto  us  in  the  form  of  a  model  proposition ;  which  consists  of  two  parts,  the 
dictum  and  the  modus.  Here  is,  first,  the  proposition,  "Christ  is  made  like  us." 
Secondly,  the  modification  or  qualification  of  it,  "It  behoved  Him  po  to  be."  First, 
in  the  proposition,  our  meditations  are  directed  to  Christ  and  to  His  brethren. 
And  we  consider  "  what  Christ  is,  and  what  we  were."  God  He  was  from  all 
eternity,  but  in  the  fulness  of  time  "  made  like  unto  us."  But  we  were  miserable 
sinners,  enemies  to  God.  But  now,  by  Christ's  assimilation  to  us,  we  are  made  like 
unto  God.     Secondly,  the  modification  carries  out  thoughts  to  those  two  common 


CHAP,  u.)  HEBREWS,  185 

headB — the  convenience,  and  the  necessity  of  it.    Now  this  again  looks  eqimlly  on 

both on  Christ,  and  on  His  brethren.    If  "  in  all  things  it  behoved  Christ  to  be 

like  unto  His  brethren,"  which  is  the  benefit,  heaven  and  earth  will  conclude,  men 
and  angels  will  infer,  that  it  behoveth  ub  to  be  made  like  unto  Christ,  which  is  the 
duty.  My  text,  ye  see,  is  divided  equally  between  these  two  terms,  "  Christ,"  and 
*'  His  brethren,"  That  which  our  devotion  must  contemplate  in  Christ  is,  first, 
His  divine;  secondly,  His  human,  nature;  thirdly,  the  union  of  them  both.  First, 
His  divine  nature  ;  for  we  cannot  but  make  a  stand,  and  inquire  who  He  was  who 
ought  to  do  this.  Secondly,  His  human  nature ;  for  we  find  Him  here  "  flesh  of 
our  flesh,  and  bone  of  our  bones,"  made  Uke  unto  us  m  our  flesh,  in  our  souls. 
"What  can  we  say  more?"  Our  apostle  tells  us,  "in  all  things."  And  then, 
thirdly,  will  follow  the  union,  expressed  in  the  passive  "  to  be  made."  in  His 
assimilation,  and  the  assumption  of  our  nature.  Ml  these  fill  us  with  admiration  ; 
but  the  last  raiseth  it  yet  higher.  Fourthly,  the  end  of  all  is  the  end  of  all— our 
salvation  ;  the  end  of  our  creation,  of  our  redemption,  of  this  assimilation ;  and 
the  last  end  of  all,  the  glory  of  God.  Then  "  His  brethren  "  and  He  will  |'  dwell 
together  in  unity."  I.  In  the  first  place,  in  an  holy  ecstasy  we  cry  out  with  the 
prophet,  '*  Who  is  He  that  cometh?  "  (Isa.  Ixiii.  1).  "  Who  is  He  that  must  be 
made  Uke  unto  us  ?  "  "  What  is  done  ?  "  and,  "  Who  did  it?  "  are  of  so  near  rela- 
tion that  we  can  hardly  abstract  one  from  the  other.  We,  who  are  children  of  time, 
have  need  of  a  captain  who  must  be  bom  in  time.  We  were  sick  of  a  bold  and 
foolish  ambition  to  be  gods.  And  this  disease  became  epidemical :  we  all  would  be 
independent,  our  own  lawgivers,  our  own  God.  Pride  threw  us  down ;  and  nothing 
but  humility,  the  exinanition  of  the  Son  of  God,  could  raise  us.  II.  Therefore,  in 
the  next  place,  as  Christ  is  "  God  of  His  Father,"  so  He  is  "  man  of  His  mother  " ; 
the  Son  of  God,  and  the  Son  of  Mary.  That  He  appeareth  in  the  likeness  of  our 
flesh,  that  He  appeareth  andspeaketh  and  snffereth  in  our  flesh,  is  the  high  prero- 
gative of  the  gospel.  And  here  He  publisheth  Himself  in  every  way  of  representa- 
tion. 1.  "  In  our  image  or  likeness,"  '•  in  the  form  "  of  a  servant,  our  very  picture, 
a  living  picture,  such  a  picture  as  one  man  is  of  another.  2.  "By  way  of  compari- 
eon."  For  how  hath  He  dilated  Himself  by  a  world  of  comparisons!  He  is  a 
"Shepherd,"  to  guide  and  feed  us;  a  "Captain,"  to  lead  ub;  a  "Prophet,"  to  teach 
us.  He  is  a  "Priest,"  and  He  is  "the  Sacrifice"  for  us.  He  is  "Bread,"  to 
strengthen  us;  a  "Vine,"  to  refresh  us;  a  "Lamb,"  that  we  may  be  meek;  a 
••  Lion,"  that  we  may  be  valiant ;  a  "Door,"  to  let  us  in ;  and  "  the  Way,"  through 
which  we  pass  into  life.  He  is  anything  that  will  make  us  like  Him.  Sin  and 
error  and  the  devil  have  not  appeared  in  more  shapes  to  deceive  and  destroy  us 
than  Christ  hath  to  save  us.  3.  By  His  "  exemplary  "  virtues  ;  and  those  raised 
to  such  a  high  pitch  of  perfection,  that  neither  the  heretic,  nor  the  Turk,  nor  the 
devil  himself  could  reach  and  blemish  it.  III.  We  must  now,  with  a  reverent  and 
fearful  hand,  but  touch  at  the  passive  "to  be  made,"  which  pointeth  out  the  union 
of  both  the  natures  in  one  person.  The  apostle  telleth  us  that  "it  behoved  Him 
to  be  made  like  unto  His  brethren."  And  "  to  the  apprehension  of  this  union  "  (as 
to  the  knowledge  of  God),  as  Ambrose  saith,  "  we  are  led  by  weak  and  faint  repre- 
sentations drawn  from  sensible  things,"  and  by  negations.  "  Not  after  this 
manner."  He  was  made  like  unto  us,  it  is  true :  but  not  so  as  flesh  and  blood 
may  imagine,  or  a  wanton  and  busy  wit  conceive.  His  glory  did  not  take  from 
Him  the  form  of  a  servant,  nor  did  this  assimilation  lessen  or  alter  Him  in  that  by 
which  He  v/as  equal  to  His  Father.  This  is  "  a  great  mystery  "  (1  Tim.  iii.  16) ; 
and  mysteries  cannot  be  searched  nor  sounded  to  the  depth.  It  farelh  with  us  iu 
the  pursuit  of  profound  mysteries  as  with  those  who  labour  in  rich  mines.  When 
we  dig  too  deep,  we  meet  with  poisonous  fugs  and  damps  instead  of  treasure ;  whfn 
we  labour  above,  we  find  less  metal,  but  more  safety.  Humility  aud  purity  of  soul 
are  the  best  convoys  in  the  ways  of  knowledge.  Be  not  then  too  inquisitive  to  find 
out  the  manner  of  this  union.  That  Christ  "  was  made  like  unto  us,"  is  the  joy 
of  this  feast;  but  that  He  ought  to  be  so,  is  the  wonder  and  ecstasy  of  our  joy. 
That  He  would  descend,  is  mercy;  but  that  He  must  descend, is  our  astonishment. 
Had  the  apostle  said,  "It  behoved  us  that  He  should  be  made  like  unto  us,"  it  i^ad 
found  an  easy  belief;  the  "  it  behoved"  had  been  placed  "  in  its  proper  place.'"  on 
the  face  of  a  captive.  All  will  say,  "  It  behoved  us  much."  But  to  put  a  dehet 
upon  the  Son  of  God,  and  make  it  a  beseeming  thing  for  Him  to  become  flesh,  "  to 
be  made  like  unto  us,"  is  as  if  one  should  set  a  ruby  in  clay,  a  diamond  in  brass,  a 
chrysolite  in  baser  metal,  and  say  they  axe  placed  well  there.  To  give  a  gift,  and 
call  it  a  debt,  is  not  our  usual  language.    On  earth  it  is  not ;  but  in  heaven  it  Ib 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  flU 

the  proper  dialect,  fixed  in  capital  letters  on  the  mercy-seat.  It  is  the  joy  of  thia 
feast,  the  angels'  anthem,  "  A  Saviour  is  born  1 "  And  if  He  will  be  a  Saviour,  an 
Undertaker,  a  Surety,  such  is  the  nature  of  fidejussion  and  suretyship,  debet,  "  He 
must,"  "  it  behoveth  Him  "  ;  He  is  as  deeply  engaged  as  the  party  whose  Surety 
He  is.  1.  Let  us  look  on  the  aptness  of  the  means,  and  we  shall  soon  find  that 
this  "foolishness  of  God  "  (1  Cor.  i.  25),  as  the  apostle  calls  it,  "is  wiser  than  msn, 
and  this  weakness  of  God  is  stronger  than  men  " ;  and  that  the  debiiit  is  right  set. 
For  "  if  you  will  have  extremes  meet,  you  must  have  a  middle  line  to  draw  them 
together  " :  and,  behold,  here  they  meet,  and  are  made  one  1  The  properties  of 
either  nature  being  entire,  yet  meet  and  concentre  as  it  were  in  one  person.  Majesty 
putteth  on  humility;  Power,  infirmity ;  Eternity,  mortality.  By  the  one  our  Saviour 
dieth  for  us,  by  the  other  He  riseth  again  ;  by  the  one  He  suffereth  as  man,  by  the 
other  He  conquereth  as  God ;  by  both  He  perfecteth  and  consummateth  the  great 
work  of  our  redemption.  2.  So  then  here  is  an  aptness  and  conveniency:  but  the 
words,  ••  It  behoved  Him,"  imply  also  a  kind  of  necessity.  That  God  could  be 
made  like  mortal  man,  is  a  strange  contemplation ;  that  He  would,  is  a  rise  and 
exaltation  of  that ;  that  He  ought,  super-exalteth,  and  sets  it  at  a  higher  pitch ; 
but  that  He  must  be  so,  that  necessity  in  a  manner  should  bring  Him  down,  were 
not  His  love  infinite  as  well  as  His  power,  would  stagger  and  amaze  the  strongest 
faith.  It  is  true,  this  condescension  of  His,  this  assimilation,  was  free  and  volun- 
tary, with  more  cheerfulness  and  earnestness  undertaken  by  Him  than  received 
now  by  us.  But  if  we  look  back  upon  the  precontract  which  passed  between  His 
Father  and  Him,  we  shall  then  see  a  debuit,  "a  kind  of  necessity," laid  upon  Him. 
Our  Saviour  Himself  speaketh  it  to  His  blessed  mother,  "  I  must  go  about  My 
Father's  business  "  (Luke  ii.  49).  We  may  measure  His  love  by  the  decree  ;  that 
is,  we  cannot  measure  it :  for  the  decree  is  eternal.  Application  : — 1.  If  Christ  be 
like  unto  us,  then  we  also  ought  to  be  like  unto  Him,  and  to  have  our  assimilation, 
our  nativity,  by  analogy  and  rules  of  proportion  answerable  unto  His.  To  be  like 
onto  Him  1  Why,  who  would  not  be  like  unto  Him  ?  "  Like  Him  "  we  all  would 
be  in  His  glory.  But  to  be  like  Him  in  the  wilderness,  like  Him  in  His  daily 
converse  with  men,  like  Him  in  the  high-priest's  hall,  like  Him  in  the  garden,  like 
Him  on  the  Cross :  this  we  like  not ;  here  we  start  back,  and  are  afraid  of  His 
countenance.  But  if  we  will  be  His  brethren,  this  is  the  copy  we  must  take  out, 
these  be  our  postures,  these  our  colours :  bathed  in  His  blood,  it  is  true  ;  but, 
withal,  bathed  in  the  waters  of  affliction,  bathed  in  our  tears,  bathed  in  our  own 
blood.  2.  As  He  was  made  like  unto  us,  so  are  we  made  like  unto  Him.  We  are 
not  bom  so,  nor  so  by  chance.  This  resemblance  is  not  drawn  out  with  a  thouRht 
or  a  word.  How  many  be  there  who  bear  Christ's  name,  yet  are  not  like  unto  Him, 
because  they  will  not  be  made  so!  3.  As  theie  was  a  debuit  upon  Christ,  so  there  is 
upon  us.  As  "  it  behoved  Him  "  to  be  made  like  unto  us,  so  it  behoveth  us  to  be 
made  like  unto  Him.  A  humble  Christ,  and  a  proud  Christian;  a  meek  Christ,  and 
a  bloody  Christian ;  an  obedient  Christ,  and  a  traitorous  Christian ;  Christ  in  an 
agony,  and  a  Christian  in  pleasure  ;  Christ  fasting,  and  a  Christian  rioting ;  Christ 
on  the  Cross,  and  a  Christian  in  a  Mahometical  Paradise,  there  is  no  decorum  in  it, 
nothing  but  solecism  and  absurdity.  4.  This  duty  is  not  only  becoming,  but 
necessary.  For  if  a  kind  of  necessity  lay  upon  Christ,  by  His  contract  with  His 
Father,  "to  be  made  like  unto  us";  a  great  necessity  will  lie  upon  us,  by  our 
covenant  with  Him,  to  be  Uke  unto  Him ;  and  woe  unto  us,  if  we  be  not  I  It  is 
"  that  one  thing  necessary  " :  there  is  nothing  necessary  for  us  but  it.  {R.  Farin- 
don,  B.D.)  Like  to  Hit  brethren: — I.  The  details  of  this  confoemitt.  1. 
Similarity  of  natures.  2.  Similarity  of  circumstances.  He  took  His  place  as  one 
item  in  the  great  mass  of  humanity,  and  assumed  no  position  inconsistent  with 
manhood.  II.  The  expediekcy  op  this  conformity.  •' It  behoved  Him."  Even 
sovereignty  is  bound  by  law.  1.  We  must  not  deny  or  dispute  the  fact  because  we 
cannot  understand  the  reasons  on  which  it  is  founded.  2.  Can  we,  who  are  less 
than  God,  complain  if  we  also  are  under  restraints  of  law?  III.  The  object  op 
THIS  urgent  and  IMPORTANT  PURPOSE  OF  GoD.  1.  "  Meiciful "  Sympathy  can  only 
flow  from  experience.  2.  "Faithful."  (1)  To  all  the  types  and  promises  that 
had  gone  before.  (2)  To  the  work  He  undertook.  (3)  In  His  character.  {Homi- 
list.)  What  behoved  Christ : — I.  Note,  first  of  a!l,  the  emphasis  of  that  expres- 
sion *•  it  behoved  Him  to  be  made  in  all  things  like  unto  His  brethren."  And 
observe  that  the  "all  things  "  here,  concerning  which  our  Lord's  likeness  to  man- 
kind is  predicated,  are  not  the  ordinary  properties  of  human  nature,  but  emphati- 
cally and  specifically  man's  sorrows.     That  wiU  appear,  I  think,  if  you  notice  that 


CHAP,  a]  HEBREWS  187 

my  text  ia  regarded  as  being  a  consequence  of  our  Lord's  incarnation  for  the  help 
of  His  fellows.  "  He  laid  not  hold  upon  angels,  but  He  laid  hold  upon  the  seed  of 
Abraham."  Wherefore,  "  in  all  things  it  behoved  Him  to  be  made  like  unto  His 
brethren."  Now,  if  the  likeness  here  be  the  possession  of  true  manhood,  then  my 
text  is  mere  tautology,  and  it  would  himply  be  saying,  "  He  became  a  man,  where- 
fore it  behoved  Him  to  become  a  man."  The  same  conclusion  is,  I  think,  fairly 
to  be  deduced  from  the  last  words  of  our  chapter,  where  the  fact  of  His  suffering 
being  tempted,  is  stated  as  His  preparation  to  help,  and  as  His  qualification  as 
a  merciful  and  faithful  High  Priest.  That  is  to  say,  the  "  aH  things  "  of  which 
our  Lord  became  partaker  like  us  His  brethren,  are  here  the  whole  mass — in  all 
its  variety  of  pressure  and  diversity  of  nauseousness  and  bitterness — the  whole 
mass  of  human  sorrow  which  has  ever  made  men's  hearts  bleed  and  men's  eyes 
run.  Christ,  in  His  single  Manhood,  says  the  writer,  gathered  unto  Himself  every 
form  of  pain.  All  the  miseries  of  all  men  forced  themselves  into,  and  filled  His 
heart.  You  and  I  have  but  a  drop  given  to  us ;  He  drank  the  whole  cup.  Our 
natures  are  not  capable  of  sorrow  as  varied,  as  deep,  as  the  sorrow  of  Jesus  Christ ; 
but  for  each  of  us  surely  the  assurance  comes  with  some  subtle  power  of  consola- 
tion and  strength.  H.  So  that  brings  me  to  the  next  point  suggested  here,  viz., 
OOB  Lord's  vakied,  all-compeehensive  sorrow  was  a  necessity  imposed  upon  Him 
BY  THE  purpose  WHICH  He  HAD  IN  VIEW.  "  He  takcth  hold,  not  of  angels,  but  of 
the  seed  of  Abraham  "  ;  and  iherefore  He  must  have  a  hand  like  theirs,  that  can 
grasp  theirs,  and  which  theirs  can  grasp.  Unless  the  Master  had  Himself  been 
standing  on  the  heaving  surges,  and  Himself  been  subjected  to  the  beating  of  the 
storm.  He  could  not  revive  and  hold  up  the  sinking  disciple.  And  so  our  Lord's 
bitter  suffering,  diffused  through  life  and  concentrated  on  the  Cross,  was  no  mere 
necessary  result  of  His  humanity ;  was  not  simply  borne  because,  being  a  Teacher, 
He  must  stand  to  His  principles  whatever  befell  Him  because  of  them  ;  but  it  was 
a  direct  result  of  the  purpose  He  had  in  view,  that  purpose  being  our  redemption. 
Therefore  to  say,  "  It  behoved  Him  to  be  made  in  all  things  like  unto  His  brethren," 
is  but  to  declare  that  Christ's  sutTerings  were  no  matter  of  physical  necessity,  but 
a  matter  of  moral  obligation.  We  know  not  by  what  m}  sterious  process  the  Son 
learned  obedience  by  the  things  which  He  suflered,  nor  can  we  understand  how  it 
was  that  the  High  Priest  who  would  never  have  become  the  High  Priest  had  He 
not  been  merciful,  became  yet  more  merciful  by  His  own  experience  of  human 
sorrow.  But  this  we  know,  that  somehow  the  pity,  the  sympathy  of  Christ,  was 
deepened  by  His  own  life ;  and  we  can  feel  that  it  is  easier  for  men  to  lay  hold  of 
His  sympathy  when  they  think  of  His  sufferings,  and  to  be  sure  that  because  in  all 
points  He  was  tempted  like  as  we  are  "  He  is  abie  to  succour  them  that  are  tempted." 
Comfort  drops  but  coldly  from  lips  that  have  never  uttered  a  sigh  or  a  groan;  and 
for  our  poor  human  hearts  it  is  not  enough  to  have  a  merciful  God  far  off  in  the 
heavens.  We  need  a  Christ  that  can  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities 
ere  we  can  come  boldly  to  the  Throne  of  Grace,  assured  of  finding  there  grace  in 
time  of  need.  IH.  Lastly,  we  have  here  the  specification  of  the  main  purpose 
OF  our  Lord's  sorrows — "  that  He  might  be  a  merciful  and  faithful  High  Priest." 
Christ's  help  is  not  merely  the  help  of  a  wise  Teacher.  Men  do  not  want  only 
teaching.  Their  need  goes  far  deeper  than  that.  Christ  is  not  the  Helper  whose 
help  goes  down  to  the  depths  and  the  roots  of  men's  necessity,  unless  He  is  Priest 
as  well  as  Prophet  and  King.  He  comes  to  do  something  as  well  as  to  say  some- 
thing ;  comes  to  alter  our  relations  to  God,  as  well  as  to  declare  God's  heart  to  us. 
And  then,  notice  again  how  here  we  have  Christ's  priestly  office  extended  over 
His  whole  life  of  suffermg.  The  popular  representations  of  the  gospel,  and  the 
superficial  grasp  of  it,  which  many  good  people  have,  are  accustomed  to  draw  a 
broad  line  of  demarcation  between  Christ's  life  and  Christ's  death,  and  to  concen- 
trate the  whole  of  the  sacrificial  and  expiatory  character  of  His  work  in  His  death 
only.  My  text  goes  in  the  other  direction.  It  says  that  all  that  long-drawn  sorrow 
which  ran  through  the  whole  life  of  Jesus  Christ,  whilst  it  culminated  in  His  death, 
was  His  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  world.  For  all  sorrow,  according  to  Scriptural 
teaching,  is  the  fruit  of  sin ;  and  the  sinless  Christ,  who  bore  the  sorrows  which 
He  had  not  earned,  in  bearing  them  bore  them  away.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
Christ's  likeness  unto  His  brethren: — Likeness  is  asserted  without  qualification,  and  ' 
yet  there  are  limits  arising  out  of  the  nature  of  the  case.  One  limit  of  course  is 
that  there  can  be  no  likeness  in  moral  character.  This  limit  is  implied  in  the  very 
titles  applied  to  the  two  parties,  Sanctifier  and  sanctified,  and  it  is  expressly  stated 
in  the  place  where  Christ  is  represented  aa  "tempted  in  all  respects  similarly,  apart 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  chap.  a. 

from  Bin  "  (chap.  iv.  15).  Another  limit,  nowhere  referred  to  in  words,  but  tacitly 
assumed  is,  that  the  likeness  is  in  those  respects  only  in  which  our  life  on  earth  is 
affected  by  the  curse  pronounced  on  man  for  sin.  Overlooking  this  principle,  wo 
might  fail  to  be  impressed  with  the  likeness  of  Jesus  to  other  men  in  His  experi- 
ence ;  we  might  even  be  impressed  with  a  sense  of  unlikeness.  There  are  respects 
in  which  Christ's  hfe  was  unlike  the  common  life  of  men.  He  was  a  celibate  ;  He 
died  young,  and  had  no  experience  of  the  temptations  of  middle  life,  or  the  infir- 
mities of  old  age ;  in  outward  lot  He  was  the  brother  of  the  poor,  and  was  well 
acquainted  with  their  griefs,  but  of  the  joys  and  temptatioas  of  wealth  He  had  no 
experience.  But  these  features  of  difference  do  not  fall  under  the  category  of  the 
curse.  Family  ties  date  from  before  the  fall.  The  doom  pronounced  on  man  waa 
death  immediate,  and  prolonged  life  is  a  mitigation  of  the  curse.  Wealth  too  la 
a  mitigating  feature,  another  evidence  that  the  curse  has  not  been  executed 
in  rigour,  but  has  remained  to  a  considerable  extent  an  unrealised  ideal,  because 
counteracted  by  an  underlying  redemptive  economy.  It  will  be  found  that 
Christ's  likeness  to  His  brethren  is  closest  just  where  the  traces  of  the  curse  are 
most  apparent :  in  so  far  as  this  life  is  (1)  afiQicted  with  poverty,  (2)  exposed 
to  temptations  to  ungodliness,  (3)  subject  to  death  under  its  more  manifestly 
penal  forms,  as  when  it  comes  as  a  blight  in  early  hfe,  or  as  the  judicial 
penalty  of  crime.  Jesus  was  like  His  brethren  in  proportion  as  they  need  His  sym- 
pathy and  succour,  like  the  poor,  the  tempted,  the  criminal.  (A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.) 
Advantages  of  ChrisVs  manifestation  in  the  flesh: — Let  us  consider  the  design  of  our 
Saviour's  mission,  that  He  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners  by  turning  us  away 
from  our  iniquities,  and  thereby  purifying  to  Himself  a  people  zealous  of  good  works; 
and  we  shall  find  that  the  manifestation  of  Christ  in  the  flesh  did  more  effectually 
answer  this  end  than  any  other  means  could.  1.  The  first  advantage  that  occurs 
is  the  simplicity  of  the  character  which  the  Deity  assumed  from  whom  the  precepts 
of  eternal  life  might  issue  with  all  the  sanction  of  the  Godhead,  without  the  terror 
of  its  majesty.  2.  As  the  end  of  Christ's  coming  was  to  turn  us  to  the  Lord,  and  as 
no  obedience  to  His  laws  can  be  truly  acceptable,  but  that  which  springs  from  love, 
BO  no  scheme  could  possibly  engage  so  strongly  our  gratitude  as  that  which  so 
manifestly  declared  His  abundant  love  to  us  in  sending  His  Son  to  take  our  nature 
upon  Him.  (H.  Usher,  D.D.)  Christ  like  His  brethren: — I.  It  is  an  act  op 
Divine  condescension  to  human  weakness.  Our  thoughts  of  God  are  imperfect  and 
obscure,  because  He  is  invisible  and  cannot  be  perceived  by  any  of  the  senses.  The 
incarnation  of  Christ  conducts  man  to  the  knowledge  of  God  and  to  communion  with 
Him.  Let  it  awaken  our  gratitude,  that  the  new  and  living  way  is  open  to  us;  that 
we  are  not  assembled  before  a  lifeless  image,  practising  vain  impure  and  cruel  rites ; 
that  the  purpose  of  our  solemn  assembly  is  to  celebrate  the  love  of  our  Creator.  II. 
Christ's  being  made  in  aU  things  Uke  His  brethren  renders  Him  A  fit  example  fob 
THEM  TO  IMITATE.  It  is  by  beholding  the  glory  of  the  Lord  that  we  are  changed  into 
the  same  image,  and  this  is  agreeable  to  the  principles  of  human  nature.  Imitation 
is  one  of  our  first  and  strongest  principles.  The  example  of  Christ  is  every  way 
fitted  for  our  instruction.  From  His  humility  we  learn  that  pride  was  not  made 
for  man.  From  His  meekness  towards  those  who  injured  Him  we  learn  to  repress 
anger  and  revenge.  The  young  may  learn  from  Him  subjection  to  their  parents; 
the  wise  may  learn  to  employ  their  wisdom  in  instructing  the  ignorant ;  the  great 
may  learn  to  be  good ;  the  poor  may  learn  contentment,  and  the  afflicted  resignation. 
In  imitating  His  devout  retirement  we  perceive  that  man  is  made  for  devotion,  and 
that  in  the  exercise  of  it  our  souls  return  unto  their  rest.  III.  Christ  was  made  in 
all  things  like  His  brethren  that  He  might  sympathise  with  them.  He  took  not 
upon  Him  the  nature  of  angels,  for  then  He  could  not  have  sympathised  with  men. 
As  in  circumstances  of  distress  and  danger  we  most  need  the  sympathy  of  a  friend, 
BO  Christ  became  "a  Man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  gi-ief."  {S.  Charters.) 
The  Father's  pity  and  the  Son's  sympathy  (in  conjunction  with  Psa.  ciii.  13) : — The 
thought  which  I  desire,  by  the  comparison  of  these  texts,  to  suggest  is  this — How 
the  compassion  of  God  for  men,  disclosed  in  the  Old  Testament,  has  grown  in  the 
New  into  the  fellow-feeling  of  Christ.  We  have  not  lost  our  Father's  pity ;  we  have 
gained  a  brother's  sympathy.  1.  Both  halves  of  revelation  agree  in  giving  impartial 
prominence  to  two  aspects  of  God's  moral  attitude  towards  us — to  His  aspect  of 
displeasure  towards  the  sinner  as  identified  with  his  sin,  and  His  aspect  of  grace 
towards  the  sinner  as  separable  from  his  sin.  Whatever  the  Old  Testament  discloses 
of  Divine  kindness  to  men,  of  gentle  forbearance,  and  enduring  watchful  care,  and 
abundunt  forgiveness,  and  healing  helpfulness,  seems  all  of  it  to  be  the  condescen- 


CHAT,  n.]  HEBREWS.  i69 

sion  of  One  who  is  too  great  to  be  anything  else  than  nobly  pitiful.  2.  There  is  no 
doubt  whatever  that  some  souls,  fed  on  such  views  of  God  as  these,  did  grow  up  to  a 
spiritual  stature  quite  heroical.  Long  and  close  meditation  on  the  greatness  and  on  the 
pity  of  Jehovah  produced  very  noble  men  of  God.  Abraham,  Moses,  Samuel,  David, 
Elijah,  Daniel,  were  men  in  whom  was  united  rare  spiritual  strength  with  rare- 
spiritual  tenderness.  To  grow  familiar  with  the  vastness  and  unimaginableness  of 
the  Divine  nature  through  the  habit  of  laying  one's  soul  alongside  the  lofly  One  who 
iuhabiteth  eternity  makes  the  soul  wax  great  For  true  greatness  of  soul  is  near  of 
kin  to  a  manly  lowliness  of  soul ;  and  he  who  frankly  and  profoundly  worships  Hira 
who  is  alone  noble  enough  for  worship  will  find  himself  ennobled.  3.  At  the  same 
time,  the  characteristic  tendency  of  Old  Testament  saints  to  look  at  the  Divine 
goodness  as  coloured  by  His  pity  and  as  baving  a  constant  reference  to  His  distance 
above  His  creatures  implied  an  imperfect  appreciation  of  His  love.  Compassion  is 
not  the  perfection  of  love.  Love,  when  it  is  perfect,  vanquishes  what  it  cannot 
obliterate,  the  distinctions  of  high  and  low,  of  great  and  small.  It  refuses  to  be 
separated  from  its  loved  one.  It  can  no  longer  be  at  ease  while  he  suffers,  or  rich 
while  he  is  poor,  but  bridges  the  gulf  of  difference,  identifies  itself  with  its  object, 
and  forgets  to  pity  that  it  may  learn  to  sympathise.  By  doing  this  new  thing,  which 
no  Old  Testament  believer  had  dared  to  credit  Him  with  doing,  God  disclosed  a 
manner  of  love  for  men  for  which  the  name  of  pity  is  too  weak.  The  Creator  has 
become  also  a  creature ;  and  with  as  He  has  henceforth  in  Jesus  Christ  one  nature, 
common ;  a  common  history ;  one  life,  one  death.  In  brief,  to  the  paternity  of  God 
has  been  added  the  fraternal  tie.  4.  Now,  what  is  the  worth  to  us  of  this  new  rela- 
tion which  God  has  acquired  to  man  t  There  are  three  directions  at  least  in  which 
actual  experience  must  be  held  to  modify  even  the  compassions  of  the  Must 
Merciful.  (1)  For  one  thing,  it  gives  such  knowledge  of  every  similar  sufferer's  case 
as  no  mere  spectator  can  have.  (2)  If  anything  could  induce  us  thus  to  make  God 
the  confidant  of  our  life,  it  would  be  this  further  result  of  His  incarnation,  that  in 
this  respect  at  least,  so  far  as  human  experience  goes.  He  has  put  Himself  on  our 
own  level.  He  has  abolished  at  His  own  choice  the  gulf  which  parted  us.  He  is 
our  equal ;  He  is  our  Fellow.  (3)  There  is  still  another  fruit  of  the  incarnation 
more  striking  than  all.  A  chord  which  has  been  once  set  in  unison  with  another 
vibrates  when  its  fellow  is  sharply  struck.  God  has  set  His  heart  through  human 
suffering  into  perpetual  concord  with  human  hearts.  Strike  them,  and  the  heart  of 
God  quivers  for  fellowship.  If  this  is  compassion,  it  is  so  in  a  more  hteral  sense 
than  when  we  use  the  word  as  a  mere  synonym  for  pity.  It  is  sympathy,  in  the 
Greek  and  New  Testament  sense;  it  is,  as  our  version  has  it,  being  "  touched"  with 
the  same  feeling.  It  is  the  remembrance  of  His  own  human  past  which  stirs  within 
the  soul  of  Christ  when,  now,  from  His  high  seat,  He  sees  what  mortal  men  endure. 
Ah  !  that  a  world  of  weary  sufferers  only  knew  what  beatings  of  heart  are  answering 
back  from  within  the  unseen  where  the  Eternal  hides  1  (J.  0.  Dykes,  D.D.) 
Human  nature  of  Christ: — Suipose  a  number  of  prisoners  confined  in  one  of  our 
old  gaols,  and  there  is  a  person  desirous  to  do  them  good  ;  imagine  that  he  cannot 
be  admitted  unless  his  name  is  put  down  in  the  calendar.  Well,  out  of  his  abundant 
love  to  these  prisoners  he  consents  to  it,  and  when  he  enters  to  talk  with  them  they 
perhaps  think  that  he  will  come  in  with  cold  dignity  ;  but  he  says, "  Now,  let  me  say 
to  you  first  of  all  that  I  am  one  of  yourselves."  '•  Well,"  they  say,  "  but  have  you 
done  aught  that  is  wrong ? "  "I  will  not  answer  you  that,"  saith  he  ;  "  but  if  you 
will  just  refer  to  the  calendar,  yon  will  find  my  name  there.  I  am  written  down 
there  among  you  as  a  criminal."  Oh,  how  they  open  their  hearts  now  !  They 
opened  their  eyes  with  wonder  first,  but  now  they  open  their  hearts,  and  they  say, 
"  Art  thou  become  like  one  of  us?  Then  we  will  talk  with  thee."  And  he  begins 
to  plead  with  them.  Sinner,  dost  thou  see  this  ?  Christ  put  Himself  as  near  on  a. 
level  with  thee  as  He  could.  {C.  II.  Spurgeon.)  A  merciful  and  faithful  High 
Priest. — Christ's  priestly  office : — Christ  as  God  could  have  been  merciful  unto  us, 
although  He  had  not  been  made  like  unto  us ;  but  not  as  our  High  Priest.  There 
is  an  ability  of  sufficiency,  and  of  power ;  and  so  Christ  as  God  was  able  to  succour 
those  that  are  tempted,  although  Himself  had  never  been  tempted.  But  there  is  an 
ability  of  idoneity  or  fitness,  or  aptness  and  disposition ;  and  so  the  apostle  says 
here,  "For  in  that  Himself  hath  suffered  being  tempted.  He  is  able  to  succour  them 
that  are  templed."  The  priestly  ofi&ce  of  Christ  is  the  great  storehouse  of  all  that 
grace  and  comfort  which  we  have  on  this  side  heaven  :  it  is  that  whereby  we  are 
reconciled  to  God  the  Father  and  relieved  against  temptation.     I.  When  the  Lord 

JfiSUS  ChBISI  died  upon  the  CBOSS,  Hb  did  OffSS  UP  HlMBELT  i.  SACBIflCE  CMZO  Goo 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

THE  Fatheb.  Yea,  as  if  all  sacrifices  were  met  in  Him ;  all  those  titles  that  are 
given  unto  other  sacrifices,  they  are  given  unto  Him.  There  are  three  sorts  of 
sacrifices :  some  were  living ;  others  were  not  living,  and  those  were  either  solid,  as 
bread  and  the  like ;  or  else  they  were  liquid,  as  wine  aud  oiL  There  was  always  a 
destroying  of  the  thing  offered.     II.  When  this  sacritick  was  dpon  the  altab, 

THEN     THE    SINS     OP     ALL    BELIEVEBS,    PAST,    PRESENT,   AND    TO    COME,    WERE   ALL   LAID 

UPON  Jesds  Christ  (Isa.  liii.  6).  IH.  When  these  sins  were  thds  laid  upon 
Christ,  He  did  thebebt  give  POTiL  satisfaction  unto  God  the  Father,  unto 
Divine  justice.  IV.  All  this  Hb  did  as  oub  obeat  Hioh  Priest,  and  in  a 
more  transcendent  and  eminent  manner  than  eveb  any  hioh  priest  did  before 
Him.  v.  How  does  all  this  conduob  to  oub  comfobt  ob  holiness  ?  1.  Is  it 
not  a  comfortable  thing  in  the  ears  of  a  poor  sinner  that  there  is  a  storehouse  of 
mercy  set  up  ?  that  the  Lord  hath  erected  an  office  of  love,  and  of  mere  compassion 
for  poor  sinners  ?  Is  it  not  a  comfortable  thing  that  God  the  Father  is  satisfied,  and 
so  your  sins  pardoned  ?  2.  But  you  wiU  say,  "  Does  it  not  much  conduce  to  our 
grace  or  holiness  too  ?  "  Yes,  this  truth  does  conduce  -much  to  our  holiness  too. 
The  new  covenant  of  grace  is  founded  upon  the  satisfaction  of  Jesus  Christ  upon 
the  cross,  upon  that  oblation  (see  chap.  ix.  13-15).  But  again,  that  we  may  see  how 
this  doth  conduce  to  our  holiness :  strengthen  faith,  and  we  strengthen  all.  If  faith 
be  weakened,  all  grace  is  weakened :  strengthen  your  faith,  and  you  strengthen  all 
your  holiness  and  all  your  graces.  3.  The  more  a  man  does  deny  his  own  righteous- 
ness, the  more  holy  he  is  with  gospel  holiness.  {W.  Bridge,  M.A.)  The  work  of  our 
High  Priest : — If  we  now  inquire  further  what  the  work  of  the  nigh  priest  was  and 
is,  that  accordingly  we  may  address  ourselves  unto  Jesus  Christ  for  succour,  we 
shall  find  that  it  is  also  to  pray  and  intercede  for  the  people.  J.  Wherein  consisteth 
this  intercession  of  Jesus  Christ  ?  1.  It  consists  in  this :  His  appearing  for  us 
in  heaven,  His  owning  of  our  cause  and  of  our  souls  to  God  the  Father  (chap.  ix.  24). 
2.  He  doth  not  only  appear  for  us,  but  by  virtue  of  His  priestly  office  he  does  carry 
the  power,  merit,  and  virtue  of  His  blood  into  the  presence  of  God  the  Father  in 
heaven,  and  sprinkles  the  mercy-seat  with  it  seven  times.  Seven  is  a  note  of  perfec- 
tion. Those  that  Christ  suffered  for  He  does  intercede  for.  He  takes  all  their 
bonds,  and  He  carries  them  in  unto  God  the  Father,  and  He  says,  "  Father,  I  have 
paid  these  bonds,  I  have  satisfied  Thy  justice  for  these  poor  sinners,  and  now 
My  desire  is  that  they  may  be  acquitted  from  these  debts  "  (chap.  ix.  11,  12).  3. 
He  doth  not  only  carry  the  power  and  virtue  of  His  blood  and  present  it  to  God 
the  Father  for  our  discharge,  but  He  does  also  plead  our  cause  in  heaven,  answer- 
ing unto  all  those  accusations  that  are  brought  against  us  (Eom.  viii.  33).  4.  He 
doth  not  only  plead  our  cause  and  take  off  accusations  that  are  brought  against  us, 
but  He  does  also  caU  for  absolution  and  pardon  of  poor  sinners  at  the  hand  of 
God  the  Father  in  a  way  of  justice  and  equity ;  and  therefore  He  is  called  our 
Advocate  (1  John  ii.  1).  II.  The  prevalency  of  Christ's  intercession  with  the 
Father  will  appear  if  we  consider  the  inclination  and  disposition  that  God  the 
Father  hath  unto  the  same  things  that  Christ  intercedeth  for.  If  a  child  should 
come  and  iutreat  his  father  in  a  matter  that  the  father  hath  no  mind  to,  or  that  the 
father  is  set  against,  possibly  he  might  not  prevail ;  but  if  a  beloved  child  shall 
come  and  pray  the  father  in  a  business  that  the  father  likes  as  well  as  the  child, 
surely  then  the  child  is  very  like  to  speed.  We  have  a  notable  expression  to  this 
end  in  John  x.  17 :  "  Therefore  doth  My  Father  love  Me,  because  I  lay  down  My 
life,  that  I  may  take  it  again."  "I  lay  down  My  life":  here  is  His  suffering  and 
His  satisfaction.  "  That  I  may  take  it  again  " :  go  up  to  heaven  and  take  :t 
again  and  intercede.  The  Father  loves  the  world  in  giving  Christ;  the  Son 
loves  the  world  in  dying  for  us ;  and  the  Father  loves  Christ  again  for  loving  us. 
in.  Does  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  intercede  for  us  in  heaven  as  oub  great 
High  Priest?  Yes,  and  He  does  do  this  in  a  more  eminent  way  than  ever  any  high 
priest  did  before  Him.  1.  He  hath  gone  through  more  temptations  than  ever  any 
high  priest  did.  2.  In  sympathy  and  compassion  He  goes  beyond  all  the  high 
priests  that  ever  were  before  Him.  3.  He  is  more  faithful  in  His  office  and  place 
than  ever  any  high  priest  was.     IV.  How  doth  all  this  conduce  now  to  our 

COMFORT   OB   OUR   HOLINESS,    TO   OUR   GRACE   OB   PEACE  ?        1.    To    OUr    COmfort.        Is    it 

not  a  comfort  to  a  poor  man  to  have  a  Friend  above,  near  the  King,  that  may  be 
able  to  do  him  kindness?  A  man  sometimes  says,  "I  had  a  friend  indeed  in  the 
court,  but  now  he  is  dead."  Aye,  but  here  is  a  JFriend  that  never  dies  :  He  ever 
lives  to  make  intercession.  Friends  may  alter  and  turn  enemies ;  but  He  changeth 
not.     But  you  will  say  unto  me,  "  This  is  exceeding  good,  and  veiy  comfortable 


«IAP.  n.]  HEBREWS.  191 

in  itself;  but  what  is  this  to  me  ?  for  I  am  afraid  that  the  Lord  Christ  does 
not  intercede  for  me."  (1)  It  is  no  presumption  for  us  to  bear  ourselves  upon 
the  intercession  of  Jesus  Christ  (see  Matt.  xv.  22-28).  (2)  Who  those  are 
that  the  Lord  Christ  does  intercede  for  in  heaven  (see  1  John  ii.  1).  (3) 
How  willing,  how  infinitely  wUUng  He  is  to  intercede  for  us  1  Now  if  a 
man  do  receive  money  for  to  lay  out  for  the  benefit  of  others,  poor  orphans,  or 
the  like;  if  a  man  be  faithful,  certainly  he  will  lay  out  the  money  for  them, 
eccording  to  the  intention  of  him  that  did  trust  him  with  the  money.  The  Lord 
Jesas  Christ  is  anointed  as  our  great  High  Priest,  to  do  the  work  of  the  priestly 
offica :  and  this  is  one  work,  to  intercede,  and  therefore  He  must  needs  be  very 
willing  to  do  it.  Again,  the  more  anything  is  the  work  of  a  man's  relation,  where- 
withal he  is  clothed,  the  more  (if  he  be  faithful)  is  he  willing  to  do  the  work. 
When  men  are  exalted  and  come  to  greatness  or  honour,  then  they  give  down  the 
comforts  of  their  relation  unto  those  that  depend  upon  them  :  if  a  father  come  to 
any  great  preferment,  the  comfort  of  the  relation  of  Uie  father  then  falls  down  upon 
the  children.  And  so,  if  one  friend  do  come  unto  preferment,  the  comfort  of  the 
relation  (or  friendship)  falls  down.  Now  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  He  is  our  High 
Priest ;  and  He  is  now  exalted,  He  is  gone  to  heaven  :  and  therefore  all  the  com- 
fortp  of  all  the  relations  that  He  stands  in  towards  us  do  now  fall  upon  us.  And 
therefore  He  is  very  willing,  because  this  is  the  work  of  His  relation.  And  further. 
It  is  the  work  of  His  office.  What  a  man  does  by  ofiSce,  that  he  does  willingly ; 
what  a  man  does  by  office,  he  does  industriously ;  what  a  man  does  by  office,  he 
does  it  readily ;  according  unto  a  man's  place,  or  office,  so  will  his  interpretation  be. 
2.  This  intercession  of  Jesus  Christ ;  this  work  of  the  priestly  office  of  Christ,  and 
the  consideration  thereof,  it  does  conduce  exceedingly  unto  our  grace  and  holiness. 
For — (1)  What  a  mighty  encouragement  is  here  unto  all  poor  sinners  for  to  come 
unto  Jesus  Christ.  (2)  The  more  I  see  that  the  Lord  Jesus  appears  in  heaven  for 
me,  the  more  am  I  engaged  to  appear  on  earth  for  Him.  (3)  The  more  I  consiiler 
or  apprehend  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  does  lay  out  Himself  for  me,  the  more  am 
I  engaged  to  lay  out  myself  for  Him.  (Ibid.)  Our  High  Prit'sfs  offering  : — Now 
if  we  inquire  further,  we  shall  find  also  that  the  work  of  the  High  Priest  was  and 
now  is  to  offer  up  the  gifts  of  the  people  unto  God ;  to  present  our  prayers, 
praises,  duties,  services,  and  all  spiritual  performances  unto  God  the  Father,  and  to 
procure  acceptance  of  Him.  I.  What  doth  oub  Lord  and  Saviour  Christ,  our 
GRKAT  High  Priest,  when  He  ofi-erb  up  oub  gifts  unto  God  the  Father?  1. 
He  doth  take  our  persons,  and  carries  them  in  unto  God  the  Father  in  a  most 
unperceivable  way  to  us.  He  knows  that  if  our  persons  be  not  first  accepted  our 
duty  cannot  be  accepted :  Love  me,  and  love  my  duty ;  love  me,  and  love  my 
service :  hate  me,  and  hate  my  service.  2.  As  He  doth  take  our  persons,  and  lead 
and  carry  us  into  the  presence  of  God  the  Father,  so,  when  we  perform  any  duty. 
He  doth  observe  what  evil  or  failing  there  is  in  that  duty,  and  draws  it  out,  takes  it 
away  before  He  presents  the  duty  to  God  the  Father.  3.  As  He  takes  away  the 
iniquity  of  our  holy  things,  so  He  observes  what  good  there  is  in  any  of  our  duties 
or  performances ;  and  with  that  He  mingles  his  own  prayers  and  intercessions.  His 
own  incense,  and  presents  all  as  one  work  mingled  together  unto  God  the  Father. 
II.  What  abundance  of  favour  and  acceptance  this  our  great  High  Priest  Him- 
BELF  HATH  IN  HEAVEN.  1.  It  was  an  agreement  between  God  the  Father  and  Christ, 
the  second  Person,  before  the  world  was,  that  in  due  time  He  should  come  into  the 
world,  take  flesh  upon  Him,  and  die  for  sinners  :  and  He  did  so.  But  before  Christ 
came  into  the  world  there  were  tbonsands  of  souls  saved ;  how  came  they  to  be 
saved  ?  They  came  to  be  saved  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  before  Christ  died.  So 
then,  God  the  Father  saved  them  upon  Christ's  bare  word,  that  He  would  come  into 
the  world  and  die  for  them.  What  a  mighty  trust  was  here  1  2.  Again,  the  trust 
appears  in  this :  that  He  was  made,  when  He  came  into  the  world,  the  great  Lord 
Treasurer  of  all  the  grace  and  comfort  that  should  be  given  out  unto  the  children  of 
men.  3.  But  yet  further,  when  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Christ  died,  and  ascended 
unto  God  the  Father  to  heaven,  as  soon  as  ever  He  came  into  heaven,  saith  the 
Father  to  Him,  Thou  hast  now  suffered,  "  Ask  of  Me,  and  I  will  give  Thee  the 
heathen  for  Thine  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  Thy  posses- 
sion " ;  all  the  world  at  one  word.  It  was  a  mighty  and  a  great  trust  that  the 
Father  did  put  upon  Him.  4.  Yea,  as  if  all  this  were  not  enough,  the  Father  did 
put  the  keys  of  heaven  and  of  hell  into  His  hand  :  the  keys  of  heaven  and  hell  into 
the  hand  of  Christ  (Rev.  i.  18).     III.  He  doth  improve  all  that  His  own  acceptance, 

FOB  OUB  ACCEFEANCE  ;   PLANTING  AIiL  OUB  DUTIES  UPON  HiS  OWN  ACCEPTANCE,  UPON  THAT 


ISa  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

ACCEPTANCE  THAT  He  HATH  WITH  THE  Fatheb.  The  favouT  and  acceptance  which 
the  high  priest  had,  in  the  time  of  Moses,  was  not  for  himself  :  he  did  improve  it 
all  for  the  people  :  he  was  to  lay  it  out  all  for  the  people,  and  not  for  himself.  0::^ 
High  Priest  goes  beyond  all  other  high  priests  in  this  particular  also :  for  now,  as 
for  other  high  priests,  though  they  went  in  with  their  incense,  and  covered  the 
mercy-seat  with  a  cloud,  yet  it  was  but  once  in  the  year ;  but  our  High  Priest  is 
always  in  the  holy  of  holiest,  and  never  goes  out  of  it,  ever  covering  the  mercy-seat 
with  His  intercessions.  Take  their  high  priest,  and  though  he  was  very  holy  as 
Aaron  was,  yet  sometimes  he  made  the  people  naked  unacceptable ;  but  our  great 
High  Priest  never  makes  His  people  naked,  but  always  clothes  them  with  His  own 
righteousness.  Take  their  high  priest,  and  though  he  did  go  into  the  holy  of  holiest 
for  the  people,  yet  he  never  led  the  people  into  the  holy  of  hoUest,  they  stood  with- 
out ;  but  our  great  High  Priest  is  not  only  gone  into  the  hoj^  of  holiest  HimseU 
but  doth  also  lead  every  poor  beUever  into  the  holy  of  holiest  (c^p.  x.  19).  IV.  What 

ABUNDANCE  OF  ACCEPTANCE  THEREFORE  WE  HAVE  IN  ALL   OUR   DUTIE8   BY  HlM.       YcS,  We 

know  that  the  pair  of  turtles  were  accepted  in  the  time  of  the  law  by  those  that 
could  offer  no  more.  Surely  much  more  now  wiU  a  poor  turtle  be  accepted  in  the 
time  of  the  gospel,  and  those  that  could  but  bring  goats-hair  towards  the  making  of 
the  Tabernacle,  they  were  welcome  :  and  shall  it  not  be  so  now  much  more  in  the 
times  of  the  gospel  ?  That  which  is  little  in  regard  to  quantity,  it  may  be  great  in 
regard  of  proportion;  as  the  widow's  mite  was.  Christ  takes  that  lovingly  that 
comes  from  love,  whatever  it  be,  though  it  be  never  so  weak.  Well,  but  supposa 
that  a  man's  duty  or  service  be  performed  vrith  many  failings,  infirmities,  hardness 
of  heart,  straitness  of  spirit,  distracting  thoughts ;  this  is  my  case :  Oh !  is  there 
any  acceptance  for  such  a  duty  as  this  is  ?  We  know  how  it  was  with  Nicodemus, 
and  the  woman  that  came  trembling  and  touched  the  hem  of  Christ's  garment. 
And  we  must  know  that  in  every  duty  that  we  do  perform  there  are  two  things : 
there  is  the  sacrifice,  and  there  is  the  obedience  in  offering  the  sacrifice.  Though 
the  sacrifice  may  be  imperfect,  yet  your  obedience  in  offering  the  sacrifice  may  be 
perfect,  with  gospel-perfection.  V.  But  how  doth  all  this  make  fob  oob  comfort, 
OR  fob  oitb  grace  ?  1.  Surely,  we  carmot  but  see  already  how  it  doth  make  for  our 
comfort.  Is  it  not  a  comfortable  thing  for  a  man  to  know  that  his  duties  are  not 
lost?  that  his  prayer  is  not  lost?  that  his  hearing  the  Word  is  not  lost?  that  his 
searching  the  Scriptures  is  not  lost  ?  that  his  communion  is  not  lost  ?  A  man  is 
unwilling  to  lose  anything :  and  the  more  precious  it  is  the  more  unwilling  to  lose 
it.  Further,  is  it  not  a  comfort  for  a  man  to  have  liberty  to  go  unto  the  mercy-seat 
and  there  for  to  meet  with  God  ?  Besides,  is  it  not  a  great  comfort  to  a  man  for 
to  know  how  it  shall  go  with  him  at  the  day  of  judgment  ?  Once  more ;  is  it  not  a 
comfort  for  a  poor  beggar  to  be  relieved  at  a  rich  man's  door  t  2.  But  how  doth 
this  make  unto  our  holiness,  unto  holiness  of  life  ?  Much  every  way :  1.  In  case  I 
be  ungodly,  here  is  that  that  may  for  ever  keep  me  from  opposition  to  the  good 
ways  of  God.  I  have  said  sometimes  (may  a  wicked  man  say)  concerning  godly 
men's  daties,  that  it  was  their  hypocrisy ;  and  I  have  said  concerning  such  and  such 
professors,  this  is  your  pride,  and  this  is  your  singularity ;  and  I  have  opposed, 
with  all  earnestness,  the  prayings  of  some  of  God's  people ;  but  is  this  true,  fliat  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  takes  every  prayer  of  the  meanest  of  God's  children  and  carries 
it  into  the  bosom  of  God  the  Father  ?  and  shall  I  dare  to  oppose  that  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  presents  unto  His  Father  ?  The  Lord  in  mercy  pardon  me.  I  will  never 
speak  one  word  against  the  persons,  meetings,  or  supplications  of  the  godly  again. 
2.  In  case  a  man  be  a  wicked  man,  here  is  mighty  encouragement  for  to  come  unto 
Jesus  Christ ;  aye,  and  to  come  presently.  For  is  Jesus  Christ  the  ladder  that 
Jacob  saw,  by  whom  we  go  up  to  heaven  ?  Then,  till  I  do  come  to  Christ,  all  is 
nothing,  all  is  lost.  8.  In  case  a  man  be  godly,  this  truth  doth  conduce  to  our 
further  holiness  and  growth  in  grace.  If  I  be  godly,  then  here  I  see  infinite 
reason  why  I  should  be  much  in  duty ;  not  only  pray,  but  be  much  in  prayer. 
Why  ?  for  the  Lord  Christ  taketh  all,  and  carries  all  into  the  bosom  of  the  Father, 
mingles  His  own  odours,  intercessions  with  it,  although  it  be  but  a  sigh  and  a  groan. 
Further,  the  more  evangelical  you  are  in  your  obedience,  the  more  holy  ye  are  in 
your  Uves.  I  conclude  all  with  this,  if  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  our  great  High 
Priest,  offers  up  all  our  gifts  unto  God  the  Father,  whereby  we  have  acceptance, 
what  infinite  cause  have  we  all  to  be  thankful  to  God  for  Christ,  and  to  love  Jesus 
Christ  for  ever  1  {Ibid.)  Our  High  Priest's  blessing  : — I  shall  speak  of  one  work 
more  of  our  great  High  Priest,  and  that  is,  to  bless  the  people.     I.  What  thb 

BLESSING  OF  ChRIST  OUB  HiGH  PbEEST  18,  WHEREIN  IT  CONSISTS,  AND  WHAT  ChBIST  DOTB, 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  193 

WHEN  He  doth  bTjEss  the  people.  I  answer  in  the  general,  that  the  blessing  of  the 
gospel,  and  of  Christ,  consisteth  in  spiritual  things  especially,  and  not  in  tempoiaJ 
(Eph.  i.  3).  But  more  particularly,  if  ye  ask  me  wherein  this  consisteth,  I  shall 
name  but  two  things  ;  1.  First,  This  blessing  of  the  gospel,  or  of  Christ,  it  consists 
in  a  supernatural  and  spiritual  enjoyment  of  God  in  Christ :  the  love  and  fav;)ur  of 
God  in  Christ.  Again,  it  consists  also  in  the  inhabitation  of  the  Holy  GLost  in 
our  hearts :  the  giving  out  of  the  Holy  Ghost  unto  the  hearts  of  men.  And  therefore 
it  is  added :  "  And  the  communion  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  be  with  you  all.  Amen." 
II.  Does  this  blessing  properly  or  specially  belong  unto  Jesus  Christ  ?  Yes, 
for  He  and  none  else  was  made  a  curse  for  sin  ;  and  therefore  it  belongs  unto  Him 
above  all  the  world  for  to  bless.  III.  Is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  willing  for  to 
BLESS  poor  sinners  AND  INCLINED  ONTO  IT?  Yes,  He  is  Very  willing  :  this  blessing  ot 
the  people,  it  is  a  work  whereunto  He  is  most  delighted.  Ye  shall  observe,  there- 
fore, what  abundance  of  blessings  Christ  scattered  among  the  people  when  He  was 
here  upon  the  earth.  IV.  But  doth  He  do  it  T  Yes,  He  doth  do  it,  and  doth  it 
fully.  "  Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  blessed 
us  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ."  Not  only  meritoriously 
but  by  the  hand  of  Christ.  And,  saith  he,  He  hith  done  it  with  all  spiritual 
blessings,  and  He  hath  done  it  by  Jesus  Christ.  1.  When  Christ  our  High  Priest 
doth  see  that  a  man  is  weak  in  grace  or  weak  in  gifts,  and  hath  some  work  or 
service  for  him  to  do,  then  the  Lord  doth  bless  him.  Oh,  soul,  increase  and  multiply, 
increase  in  thy  gifts;  and  graces.  2.  As  the  Lord  doth  bless  weak  gifts  and  graces 
when  He  intends  to  use  them,  so  also  when  as  He  hath  made  use  of  a  man,  wtien 
a  man  hath  done  the  work  of  God,  then  the  Lord  blesses  that  man.  3.  As  He  does 
bless  at  this  time,  when  a  man  hath  done  His  work,  so  also  when  a  man  is  willing 
for  to  leave  all  His  relations  and  natural  engagements  for  to  follow  Him,  to  cleave 
close  unto  Him,  and  to  His  ways  and  ordinances.  4.  The  Lord  Christ,  our  High 
Priest,  does  bless  when  the  woild  curses;  a  special  time  of  Chribt's  blessing  is  wliea 
the  world  cuises.  5.  In  the  fifth  place,  the  Lord  Christ  does  also  bless  when  His 
people  do  graciously  enjoy  the  ordinances  purely  and  evangelically  administered. 

V.    How  DOES   ALL   THIS    CONDUCE    UNTO    OUR    COMFORT    AND    UNTO    OUR    HOLINESS?       1. 

First  for  comfort :  is  it  not  a  comfortable  thing  to  be  blessed  by  Jesus  Christ  ?  Is 
it  not  a  comfortable  thing  for  a  man  to  have  all  his  cursors  to  be  blessers?  2, 
How  does  this  make  unto  our  holiness  ?  Very  much :  this  holds  forth  great 
e'lcouragement  unto  all  poor  sinners  for  to  come  to  Christ  without  delay.  But  yet 
further,  as  there  is  an  encouragement  for  to  come  unto  CLirist,  so  this  argument 
does  also  encourage  us  to  go  on  in  the  good  ways  of  Christ,  notwithstanding  all 
opposition  that  we  meet.  Times  of  opposition  are  Christ's  blessing  time.  3.  Again, 
this  argument  does  not  only  speak  encouragement  against  all  opposition,  but  it 
does  also  encourage  us  to  go  on  in  the  good  ways  of  God  when  we  are  called  unto  it, 
though  we  have  but  httle  strength  and  weak  parts.  Though  there  be  but  little  oil 
in  the  cruse,  though  there  be  but  little  meal  in  the  barrel,  if  Christ  call  to  the  work 
He  will  bless  a  man  in  it :  and  when  Christ  blesses,  He  does  multiply  and  increase 
a  man's  parts  in  the  using  of  them.  4.  And  yet  further,  if  all  this  be  true,  why 
should  not  a  man  be  contented  with  his  condition,  though  he  be  never  so  mean  ? 
Truly  he  is  too  covetous,  whom  the  blessing  of  Christ  will  not  satisfy.  Well,  what- 
ever my  condition  be,  yet  I  may  be  blessed  by  Jesus  Christ ;  and  hath  the  Lord 
blessed  me  ?  then  will  I  be  contented  with  my  condition,  though  it  be  never 
BO  mean,  I  have  all,  as  Jacob  once  said,  I  have  all.  5.  Yea,  in  the  fifth 
and  last  place :  Here  is  that,  which  if  well  studied  and  considered,  will 
provoke  us  all  for  to  bless  the  Lord,  and  continually  to  bless  the  Lord  I 
What  is  the  hfe  of  a  Christian  here  but  a  continual  blessing  of  God?  {Ibid.) 
Our  High  Priest : — The  strong  point  in  the  Hebrew  economy  was  the  high  priest. 
His  whole  office  and  function  was  mercy,  compassion.  He  stood  between  weakness, 
or  sinfulness,  or  want,  and  the  remedy ;  and  mercy  was  the  appointed  channel 
through  which  to  the  imagination  and  the  affection  of  the  people  God's  grace  flowed 
down  to  them  ;  so  that  all  their  associations  with  him  were  those  of  lenity,  of  com- 
passsion,  of  mercy.  He  was  the  one  great  benefactor.  He  was  an  emancipator. 
He  was,  in  the  Jewish  system,  a  central  point  out  of  which  came  light,  and  never 
scowls  nor  darkness.  No  other  name,  therefore,  whether  of  king  or  of  prophet, 
would  be  likely  to  strike  the  Israelite  with  such  a  feeli  g  of  rehgiousness,  with  such 
an  elevating  influence,  or  with  such  welcomeness,  as  that  of  high  priest ;  and  that  is 
the  reason  why  it  was  planted  on  the  Saviour.  It  was  a  heart  reason.  How  different 
was  this  mode  of  presenting  the  function  of  Christ  Jesus  from  that  which  came  up. 

13 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

in  after  times  !  The  view  of  an  executive  God;  the  view  of  a  law-giving  and  law- 
executing  God,  that  repels  men  by  fear  more  than  it  draws  them  by  love  ;  the  view 
of  an  abstract  God,  epitomised  in  philosophy — how  few  there  are  that  can  accept 
such  views  1  It  was  a  historical  person,  a  personal  person,  a  national  person,  that 
the  Jews  were  prepared  to  accept ;  and  when  Jesus  Ciirist  was  presented  to  them 
as  really  their  Redeemer,  under  the  figure  of  the  high  priest,  it  brought  round  about 
Him  all  those  romantic,  enthusiastic,  and  national  feelings  for  which  they  were  so 
famous.  The  whole  function  of  the  Saviour  was  founded  upon  the  ignorance,  the 
sinfulness,  and  the  helplessness  of  men ;  and  no  revelation  was  needed  to  make 
these  known.  There  is  not  a  man  who  is  not  satisfied  that  he  sins  with  every 
part  of  his  being  ;  and  there  is  a  concatenation  of  sinfulness  running  through  his 
whole  life.  There  is  not  a  man  who,  when  he  undertakes  to  do  anything  in  the 
direction  of  purity,  is  not  conscious  of  his  helplessness.  There  is  not  a  man 
who,  when  he  strives  to  be  true  and  noble  in  his  better  nature,  is  not  conscious  that 
everything  goes  against  him.  And  it  was  on  this  consciousness  that  high  priest- 
ship  was  founded.  Sin,  then,  is  a  matter  of  universal  consciousness  ;  and  the  only 
question  is,  is  there  any  belief,  any  remedy  for  mankind  who  are  subject  to  it?  By 
way  of  preface,  I  may  say  first,  that  the  human  race  has  come  to  its  ideal  of  God 
through  growth.  In  the  earUer  period  men  came  in  conflict,  first  with  the  natural 
law  of  the  globe ;  and  fate  and  force  were  the  more  useful  interpretations  of  that 
great  law.  When  men  developed  near  the  animal  line,  the  qualities  of  nature 
transcendently  filled  the  heavens  to  their  conception.  The  earlier  thought  of  God 
as  something  separable  from  nature  was  that  He  was  a  Being  that  thundered  and 
smote  ;  that  He  was  a  Being  possessed  of  great  power ;  that  He  was  a  Being  of 
tremendous  avenging  ability  and  force.  Such  were  the  elements  that  were  earliest 
appreciable  to  the  human  race  in  their  conception  of  the  Divine  Being.  But  as 
men  grew  civilised,  and  enlarged  their  experience,  their  capacities  and  their  civic 
life,  there  grew  up  in  them  what  I  might  almost  call  physical  qualities  of  the  Divine 
Being — namely,  the  moral  elements.  The  warrior,  more  nearly  than  the  brute 
giant,  began  to  take  on  qualities  which  attracted  admiration.  Out  of  the  warrior 
grew  the  king ;  and  he  represented  the  sense  of  public  justice  and  of  restraint  for 
the  benefit  of  his  kingdom.  Then  came  in  the  notion  of  the  judge.  Joined 
closely,  also,  with  the  idea  of  the  executive,  was  the  idea  of  the  executioner  to 
carry  out  his  edicts.  And  all  these  elements  were  tinged  somewhat  with  the  con- 
ception of  a  king.  It  was  not  until  we  came  down  to  as  late  a  time  as  the  earlier 
periods  of  the  Old  Testament  history  that  the  disclosures  of  the  Divine  nature 
began  to  be  more  ample.  There  was  a  state  of  receptivity,  at  last,  in  the  human 
race  by  which  you  could  bring  to  the  conception  of  men,  though  very  imperfectly, 
a  larger  notion  of  God.  Then  came  the  revelation  of  God  as  a  universal  Father. 
But  when  we  come  to  the  latest  disclosure,  even  the  fatherhood  of  God  stood  asiJe, 
as  it  were,  that  it  might  be  represented  to  men  by  an  intermediate  conception. 
Christ  came  to  give  to  the  word  "  Father  "  its  true  and  full  meaning.  Christ  took 
on  the  human  body,  and  He  took  it  on  with  all  its  relations  to  matter.  He  came 
into  the  world  to  represent  the  Divine  humility,  the  Divine  helpfulness,  the 
Divine  sympathy  with  infirmity  and  sin.  He  came  into  life  at  the  very  lowest 
point ;  and  He  understood  from  the  standpoint  of  compassion  every  conceivable 
human  experience.  There  was  not  a  thought  or  a  feeling  possible  to  human 
nature,  that  our  Saviour  did  not  have  a  knowledge  of  it,  so  that  He  is  able  to 
succour  those  who  are  tempted  in  those  respects.  There  is  not  a  single  passion, 
a  single  inclination,  a  single  hunger,  a  single  fear,  a  single  bitterness,  a  single 
experience  of  the  human  mind,  in  which  He  has  not  been  schooled.  He  so  gave 
Himself  to  human  nature  that  it  might  be  said  that  from  the  crown  to  the  lowest 
dungeon,  from  the  rich  man's  mansion  to  the  ditch  of  the  beggar,  there  is  not  a 
faculty  with  whose  workings  He  was  not  familiar.  In  order  to  be  a  good  artist  I 
do  not  need  to  play  every  tune :  I  simply  need  to  know  each  string,  and  what  its 
possible  combinations  are,  and  how  to  make  them  ;  and  although  our  Saviour  did 
not  go  through  all  the  various  phases  of  experience  which  men  go  through.  His 
education  in  tho  knowledge  of  humanity  was  perfect.  Now,  this  very  conception 
is  itself  Divine.  Divinity  stands  not  in  the  red  right-hand  of  power ;  it  is  not 
omnipotence  and  omniscience :  it  is  goodness;  and  goodness  centres  in  love.  So, 
then,  we  are  to  find  the  Divine  nature  manifested  in  goodness,  which  is  the  very 
l:igliest  conception  of  Divinity.  I  do  not  want  any  man  to  explain  to  me  how 
Christ  is  equal  to  the  Father :  all  I  waut  is  to  know  that  His  character  is  a  dis- 
cLsure  of  character  of   God.     We  should  bear  in  mind  that,  according  to  the 


CHAP.  II.]  HEBREWS.  196 

teaching  of  the  New  Testament,  Christ  is  the  High  Priest  that  has  ascended  into 
heaven.  He  is  close  to  every  one.  The  man  who  is  murmuring  his  last  prayer  in 
a  dungeon  can  think  himself  mto  the  very  presence  of  the  High  Priest  in  heaven. 
He  who  is  wounded  on  the  battle-field  thinks,  as  the  army  thunders  away,  and  his 
companions  leave  him,  "  The  High  Priest  is  close  at  hand."  The  poor  miserable 
creature  of  degraded  conditions  can,  by  thinking,  bring  himself  into  Christ's 
presence.  He  is  accessible  to  all ;  and  there  is  no  need  of  any  one's  saying,  "  Who 
shall  ascend  up  into  the  heavens  and  bring  the  Saviour  down  ?  "  He  is  near  to  each 
man.  I'he  central  force  of  the  universe,  then,  according  to  this  representation,  is 
compsrsion ;  it  is  helpfulness,  and  over  those  who  have  run  through  the  whole 
range  of  wrong-doing,  and  who  are  seeking  to  rise  out  of  cruelty,  and  lust,  and 
pride,  and  selfishness,  and  every  sort  of  degradation,  there  bmoda — what? 
Wrath?  No.  There  broods  over  them  the  High-Priesthood  of  Christ  Jesus 
— the  compassion  of  One  who  knows  how  to  feel  for  those  that  are  out  of 
the  way ;  the  enriching  power  of  Christ's  heart.  That  is  the  tractive  power 
of  the  universe.  If  it  be  in  your  power,  conceive  of  Christ  as  such  a 
High  Priest  as  He  was  to  the  Jewish  imagination,  as  a  being  set  apart  from 
among  mankind  because  He  had  compassion  on  those  who  were  out  of  the  way, 
who  was  tried  and  condemned,  and  who  suffered  like  His  fellow-men  so  that  He 
could  have  compassion  on  them.  He  descended  from  heaven  and  took  upon  Him- 
self the  nature  of  man,  and  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  man.  He  came  into  life 
at  the  bottom  and  partook  of  the  experiences  of  men,  and  passed  through  every 
conceivable  state  of  the  human  mind  in  order  that  He  might  stand  and  say,  "  Oh, 
fallen,  weak,  si  ;ful,  guilty,  wretched  creatures,  I  am  your  brother  ;  and  lam  clothed 
with  God's  nature ;  I  am  in  the  Father  and  He  is  in  Me  ;  and  I  bring  to  you  the 
tidings  of  summer  on  yonr  winter.  The  God  whose  I  am,  and  whom  I  represent, 
who  abides  in  Me  and  in  whom  I  abide,  is  a  God  of  tender  love,  who  would  not 
that  any  should  perish,  but  would  that  all  should  live."  That  is  the  message  which 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  brings  to  men.  If  there  be  men  who  are  afraid  to  worship 
Christ,  I  have  two  things  to  say.  In  the  first  place,  when  you  worship  the  Father 
jou  worship  exaotly  the  same  being  that  I  do  when  I  worship  Christ.  Men  had  no 
knowledge  of  what  to  put  into  the  fatherhood  of  God  until  it  was  proclaimed  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Therefore,  really  what  you  call  "Father"  and  wtiat  I  call 
"  Jesus  "  are  just  the  same  thing.  In  the  next  place,  if  there  were  a  difference,  do 
you  suppose  God  would  be  angry  if  yon  made  u  little  mistake  and  worsliipped  the 
Son  instead  of  the  Father  ?  If  a  postman  handed  to  my  wife  a  letter  which  was 
directed  to  me,  do  you  suppose  there  would  be  a  scene  ?  Would  we  scold  him 
because  he  hand'-d  it  to  the  wrong  person  when  he  thought  he  was  handing  it  to 
the  right  one  ?  Where  two  are  united  in  perfect  love  a  mistake  like  that  does  not 
make  any  difference.  Another  thing.  When  you  say  that  you  cannot  worship 
Christ  as  you  do  the  Father,  what  do  you  mean  by  worship  ?  What  is  it  but 
giving  to  anoth<^r  all  the  enthusiasm  which  you  are  capable  of  feeling?  You 
cannot  love  supremely  without  worshipping;  for  love  is  the  highest  worship ;  and 
all  this  riddle  about  dynastic  notions  vanishes  into  space.  When  you  worship 
Christ  and  pray  to  Him,  you  worship  and  pray  to  the  Father ;  and  when  you  wor- 
sl  ip  the  Father  and  pray  to  Him,  you  worship  and  pray  to  Christ.  Then,  there 
a:e  those  whom  a  consciousness  of  guilt  and  imperfection  keeps  back  from  ventur- 
ing upon  one  who  is  set  forth  in  the  Scriptures  as  their  God.  Many  persons  feel, 
"  Oh,  if  I  were  not  living  in  the  way  that  I  am,  I  would  be  willing  to  pray  to 
God  " ;  but  as  represented  by  the  High  Priest  Christ  Jesus,  God  stands  before  you 
and  recognises  you ;  and  the  foundation  of  His  recognition  of  you  is  that  you  are 
weak,  guilty,  out  of  the  way,  and  continually  sinning.  He  came  to  call  sinners. 
There  were  none  so  wicked  that  He  was  not  willing  to  minister  to  them.  The 
worse  a  man  is  the  more  he  needs  a  Saviour,  and  the  more  the  heart  of  Christ 
yearns  towards  him.  Not  only  so,  but  He  is  gentle  and  tender  in  His  dealings 
toward  those  who  are  out  of  the  way.  He  says,  "  A  bruised  reed  I  will  not  break, 
and  the  smoking  flax  I  will  not  quench,  until  I  bring  forth  judgment  unto  victory." 
You  know  that  when  you  first  kindle  a  lamp  there  is  just  a  little  bit  of  ai)lue  flame  ; 
that  it  quivers  on  the  wick  as  if  to  see  whether  it  can  expand  into  a  full  flame ; 
and  that  it  is  not  safe  for  you  even  to  breathe  upon  it,  so  that  you  must  turn 
your  face  as'de  lest  you  blow  it  out ;  but  Christ  says  that  when  a  man  has  fallen 
80  low  that  the  spiritual  hfe  in  him  is  as  feeble  as  the  flame  of  a  newly-lighted 
lamp.  He  will  not  put  it  out.  The  all-merciful  love  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the 
atonement  of  the  world,  and  who  reveals  in  Himself  the  nature  of  the  Diviot 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Father,  is  curative  by  its  very  moral  character.  It  represents  the  love  of  Him  who 
is  for  ever  giving  His  life  to  make  life  in  those  whom  He  has  created.  (H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Christ  a  merciful  and  faithful  High  Priest : — 1.  He  must  be  merciful ; 
for  He  must  deal  with  God  for  sinful  and  miserable  man,  for  to  relieve  him.  And 
He  is  then  merciful,  when  He  doth  not  only  know  man's  misery,  but  is  inwardly 
sensible  of  it,  so  as  to  be  moved  and  that  effectually  to  succour  him.  This  merci- 
fulness  is  opposed  not  only  to  ignorance  of  others'  misery,  and  senselessness,  but 
also  to  harshness,  severity,  cruelty.  And  Christ  was  more  merciful  than  ever  any 
man  or  angel  was,  and  there  was  great  need  He  should  be  so;  for  if  every 
offence,  nay,  if  many  and  great  offences,  should  move  Him  to  passion,  and  enrage 
Him  60  as  to  reject  them  and  their  cause,  or  proceed  to  plead  against  them,  or  con- 
demn them,  how  many  thousands  should  perish  everlastingly?  2.  As  He  ia 
merciful,  so  He  must  be  faithful,  and  such  as  poor  sinners  may  safely  trust  unto, 
and  depend  upon,  when  they  commit  their  cause  concerning  their  eternal  estate 
into  His  hands.  Christ  may  be  said  to  be  faithful,  either  to  God,  who  hath  given 
the  office  of  high  priest,  and  a  command  to  discharge  it,  or  unto  man,  who,  ac- 
cording to  the  rules  of  God's  Word,  believes  in  Him,  and  commits  Himself  and  all 
that  he  hath  unto  Him.  And  then  He  is  actually  faithful,  when  He  performs 
all  things  belonging  to  His  sacerdotal  office,  and  goes  through  with  His  work  until 
He  hath  perfectly  finished,  and  sinful  man  attains  that  for  which  he  trusted 
Him.  Man  may  be  merciful  and  not  faithful ;  Christ  is  both,  and  will  be  sensible 
of  our  case  and  cause,  will  mind  it,  and  do  it  as  His  own.  In  this  respect  our 
hope  is  firm  and  our  comfort  is  unspeakable.  Blessed  are  all  they  that  trust  Him. 
This  is  His  qualification,  the  best  that  ever  was  or  can  be  in  any  priest.  3.  The 
work,  the  principal  work  is,  to  make  reconciliation  for  the  sius  of  His  people- 

(1)  He  hath  His   people,  and  they  are  such  as  know  Him  and  trust  in  Him. 

(2)  These  have  their  sins  and  are  guilty.  (3)  Reconciliation  therefore  is  neces- 
sary ;  otherwise  they  die,  they  perish  everlastingly.  (4)  There  must  be  some 
one,  and  the  same  a  priest  both  merciful  and  faithful,  to  make  this  reconciliatioM, 
and  this  is  Christ.  (G.  Lawson.)  The  generosity  of  our  kinsman: — The  chuf 
of  the  Koreish  were  prostrate  at  his  (Mahomet's)  feet  (after  the  conquest  of 
Mecca).  "  What  mercy  can  you  expect  from  the  man  whom  yon  have  wronged  ?  " 
"  We  confide  in  the  generosity  of  our  kinsman."  "  And  you  shall  not  confide  in 
vain :  begone  1  you  are  safe,  you  are  free."  (Gibbon.)  Christ's  intercession 
compassionate  : — How  a  tender-hearted  mother  would  plead  with  a  judge  for  her 
child  ready  to  be  condemned  1  Oh,  how  would  her  bowels  work;  how  would  her 
tears  trickle  down  ;  what  weeping  rhetoric  would  she  use  to  the  judge  for  mercy  I 
Thus  the  Lord  Jesus  is  full  of  sympathy  and  tenderness  that  He  might  be  a 
merciful  High  Priest.  Though  He  hath  left  His  passion,  yet  not  His  compassion. 
An  ordinary  lawyer  is  not  affected  with  the  cause  he  pleads,  nor  doth  he  care 
which  way  it  goes;  profit  makes  him  plead,  not  affection.  But  Christ  intercedes 
feelingly,  and  that  which  makes  Him  intercede  with  affection  is,  it  is  His  own 
cause  which  He  pleads  in  the  cause  of  His  people.  {Thomas  Watson.)  To  make 
reconciliation  for  the  sins  of  the  people. — The  reconciliation  of  sinners  by  the  death 
of  Christ : — I.  It  is  said  here,  it  became  oub  Savioub,  ob  He  made  Himself  a 
DEBTOR,  TO  DO  WHAT  He  DID.  1.  Though  He  acted  willingly,  and  laid  down  His 
life  freely,  yet  this  became  Him  in  respect  of  His  compassion  and  great  good-will 
to  men.  2.  It  became  Him  in  respect  of  His  Father's  will,  and  the  pursuit  of  that 
business  in  which  He  was  engaged.  3.  It  behoved  Him  in  all  things  to  be  mnde 
Uke  unto  us.  What,  sin  and  all?  No;  God  forbid  ;  that  is  excepted  (chap.  iv.  5). 
Our  Saviour  was  made  hke  unto  us.  (1)  In  our  limitation,  contraction,  bodily 
shape.     He  was  as  we  are,  confined  to  time,  place,  bodily  weakness  and  infirmity. 

(2)  In  passions,  affections  and  sensitive  apprehensions.  Only  there  is  this  differ- 
ence ;  in  us  they  ebb  and  flow,  but  in  our  Saviour  they  were  exactly  governed.- 

(3)  In  our  necessities  of  relief  and  support,  as  eating,  drinking,  sleeping,  cessation 
Irom  action.  Therefore,  we  read,  that  He  was  weary,  hungry,  aid  the  like.  II.  Irv 
the  next  place  it  follows  that  He  was  like  onto  us,  that  He  might  be  a  merciful. 
AND  FAITHFUL  HIGH  PRIEST.  This  was  donc  with  respect  to  us ;  in  a  way  of  com- 
passion and  pure  good-will.  Two  things  evidence  this  unto  us.  That  the  state 
which  our  Saviour  submitted  to,  the  principle  that  moved  Him,  was  pure  good- 
will. (1)  The  motive  of  God's  sending  Him,  and  of  His  coming.  (2)  The  end 
and  business  of  His  coming  was  all  from  good-wiU.  (3)  In  respect  of  God,  it  i» 
said,  that  God  "  so  loved  the  world,  that  He  gave  His  only-begotten  Son,  that  who- 
soever believes  in  Him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."     And  then  (4), 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  197 

The  basiness  that  He  came  about:  which  doth  give  as  a  full  account  of  our 
Saviour's  intention,  and  doth  justify  our  Saviour's  work.  For  He  came  about  a 
work  as  certainly  Divine  as  the  very  Creation  itself  was.  III.  In  the  next  place 
it  follows  THAT  008  INFIRMITIES  ARK  coMPASsioNABLK.  These  three  things  put 
together,  do  something  lessen  the  sins  of  man,  and  procure  him  pity  with 
God.  1.  That  he  is  liable  to  fail  and  be  mistaken.  2.  'That  in  his  constitution 
he  doth  consist  of  body  and  spirit.  3.  That  he  is  exposed  to  all  sorts  of  tempta- 
tions from  without  in  this  dangerous  world.  So  that  through  the  grace  of  God 
it  is  not  so  much  what  sin  is  as  what  the  demeanour  of  a  person  is  after  sin. 
The  same  goodness  that  doth  pardon  penitents  doth  punish  obstinacy.  Infer- 
ences :  1.  Though  we  are  under  guilt,  yet  let  us  not  despair :  for  if  we  do  submit, 
and  turn  to  God,  it  is  a  case  of  mercy,  and  God  will  forgive.  2.  Let  us  have  no 
hard  thoughts  of  God  upon  occasion  of  His  present  judgments,  or  future  denun- 
ciations. Let  us  consider  the  temper  that  is  in  obstinate  sinners.  God  may  give 
repentance  to  the  sinner,  but  He  cannot  give  pardon  to  the  impenitent.  3.  Take 
notice,  that  to  be  tempted,  and  to  sin,  are  two  things.  None  can  hinder  an  oSer 
to  be  made  ;  but  it  Ues  in  our  power  to  resist  it.  Satan  may  tempt,  but  he  cannot 
force.  Neither  are  we  alone ;  for  God  will  assist  us,  and  will  not  be  wanting  to 
those  that  are  willing  to  make  use  of  His  strength.  4.  Let  us  counterwork  the 
Evil  Que,  by  frequent  proposals  of  good.  If  there  be  evil  thoughts  suggested,  put 
yourselves  upon  good  thoughts  and  motions.  Live  not  carelessly  in  the  world,  since 
the  world  is  a  place  of  so  much  danger.  5.  Do  not  run  away  with  eveiy  report, 
nor  bite  at  every  bait ;  since  we  live  among  our  enemies  in  a  place  of  danger, 
difficulty,  ill  representations.  {B.  Whiclicote,  D.D. )  Christ  our  High  Priest, 
merciful  and  faithful : — 1.  The  high  priest  was  in  the  Jewish  Church  an  eminent 
instrument  of  God,  the  most  visible  and  eminent  type  of  Christ  that  was.  And 
truly,  were  not  the  high  priest  in  the  Jewish  state  transcendently  supplied,  he 
would  be  greatly  missed.  But,  thanks  be  to  God,  whereas  they  had  the  shadow,  we 
have  the  substance.  The  high  priest  was  always  a  middle  person  between  Qod 
and  the  people,  to  be  in  readiness  to  make  approaches  to  God,  whatsoever  the  neces- 
sity was.  2.  And  then  He  was  merciful,  viz.,  to  make  the  best  of  our  case ;  to 
compassionate  us  in  misery,  and  to  help  us  out.  3.  Not  only  merciful  but  faith- 
ful ;  true  to  our  cause,  will  make  the  best  of  our  case.  One  that  is  trusted  by  God 
for  us.  4.  Next,  in  things  pertaining  to  God.  Where  I  observe  that  the  business 
of  Christ  is  wholly  spiritual.  Christ's  government  is  in  the  miud,  understanding 
and  conscience.  Christ  did  not  come  into  the  world  for  worldly  ends  and  purposes ; 
these  are  things  far  below  His  intentions.  The  notion  of  Christ's  government  is 
for  mental  illumination,  delivery  from  sin,  moral  refinement,  sanctification  here, 
and  glorification  hereafter.  They  do  act  in  the  spirit  of  Christ,  who  are  preachers 
of  righteousness  by  words  and  by  practice;  what  is  not  spiritual  is  wholly 
foreign  to  Christ's  kingdom,  and  to  His  government.  And  then  again,  Christianity 
lays  a  foundation  of  no  enmity,  but  only  to  unrighteousness  and  to  wickedness. 
For  if  we  be  in  a  true  Christian  spirit,  we  will  endeavour  to  reconcile,  and  we 
must  be  in  reconciliation  with  everything  that  holds  of  God  and  that  God  doth 
uphold.  5.  Whatsoever  is  declared  concerning  Christ ;  whatsoever  the  excellency 
oi  His  person :  this  is  the  advantage  that  we  have  by  it ;  that  He  makes  use  of 
all  His  power  and  interest  for  our  benefit ;  and  He  was  appointed  of  God  to  this 
end,  that  He  might  make  reconciliation  for  the  sins  of  the  people.  I  am  now  from 
these  words  to  give  you  an  account  of  the  business  of  reconciliation,  which  is  the 
great  undertaking  of  our  Saviour ;  which  is  the  product  of  infinite  wisdom  and 
goodness,  and  which  is  our  greatest  concernment,  as  being  fundamentally  neces- 
sary to  happiness.  For  it  is  not  possible  we  should  be  made  happy  by  God  Him- 
self, if  not  reconciled  to  Him ;  we  are  eternally  undone  if  this  be  not  done. 
1.  "This  Eeconciler  goes  in  a  way  of  moral  motion.  2.  He  treats  with  both 
parties  a,t  variance.  3,  He  doth  equally  consider  the  right  of  both  sides.  4.  Re- 
conciUation  must  be  mutual.  5.  It  is  acceptable  every  way  to  each  party:  the 
work  of  reconciliation  is  acceptable  to  God  and  man.  To  God,  because  God's 
honour  is  maintained,  and  because  infinite  wisdom  and  goodness  have  therein 
exercised  themselves.  And  to  man,  because  man  is  put  upon  nothing  but  what  is 
best  in  itself;  that  a  man  if  he  did  but  consider,  he  would  not  be  saved  in  another 
vay.  And  man  now  is  out  of  danger,  and  looks  upon  God  as  his  Friend.  And 
God  delights  in  this  His  product,  infinite  wisdom  aud  goodness  together.  This  is 
the  representation  I  make  you  concerning  the  matter  of  reconciliation.  I  will 
now  speak  of  the  manner  of  reconciUation,  and  show  you  what  our  Saviour  in 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

our  behalf  did  undertake,  that  was  highly  satisfactory  to  the  mind  of  God,  and 
according  to  His  will ;  and  therefore  it  was  the  true  manner  of  reconciliation. 
1.  Concerning  the  quality  of  sin.  Here  is  a  declaration  of  its  unworthiness,  its 
odiousness  in  the  sight  of  God,  its  ill  demerit,  its  hurtfulness  to  the  creature; 
for  it  destroys  the  subject,  and  is  a  pernicious  example.  Now  it  is  fit  that  the 
person  to  be  restored  be  made  sensible  of  his  condition,  and  what  the  physician 
hath  done  for  him.  2.  In  respect  of  the  law,  four  things  were  done  by  Christ's 
undertaking.  (1)  God's  unquestionable  right  to  make  laws  depending  on  His  own 
will  and  pleasure.  (2)  The  necessity  of  such  laws  that  are  in  themselves  good 
and  founded  in  the  relation  the  creature  stands  in  to  God.  (3)  The  reason  and 
equity  of  all  these  laws.  (4)  Man  is  bound  in  subjection  to  them.  All  these 
things  are  acknowledged  by  our  Saviour's  undertaking.  3.  An  open  condemna- 
tion of  sin  is  requisite  and  fitting  in  this  case  of  the  creatures  wilful  practice 
upon  Gofl ;  and  to  be  for  ever  hereafter  a  check  upon  all  lusts.  And  this  is  re- 
markably done  by  our  Saviour,  since  He  died  for  sin.  This  arrogant  practice  of 
the  creature  is  sufficiently  witnessed  against ;  since  an  innocent  person  hath  died 
for  it.  And  doth  not  this  look  backward,  and  condemn  wbat  man  hath  done  ; 
and  look  forward,  and  restrain  lust  and  sin,  for  all  time  to  come  ?  So  that  this 
being  in  itself  worthy,  is  satisfactory  to  God,  and  the  pardon  of  sin  is  thereby 
facilitated.  4.  Owning  God  as  supreme  and  sovereign,  and  owning  the  rule  of 
right,  is  dene  in  the  very  nature  that  had  transgressed.  5.  There  is  demonstra- 
tion of  God's  veracity  and  holiness.  He  had  given  out  prohibition  under  the 
penalty  of  death.  "  In  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof,  thou  shalt  die  the  death." 
And  this  is  fulfilled  in  the  very  letter.  God's  holiness  and  impartiality  is  declared, 
and  this  is  according  to  the  mind  and  will  of  God  ;  and  a  matter  that  is  accepta'clo 
is  always  matter  of  satisfaction.  6.  He  brings  things  to  rights  again.  That  is 
done  by  our  Saviour's  undertaking.  The  curse  was  taken  off,  and  God  returns  to 
blessing,  and  He  hath  blessed  man  ever  since.  The  passage  is  open  to  our  free 
communication  with  God.  (Ibid.)  Reconciliation  with  God : — To  effect  this,  aU 
that  is  necessary  is  to  persuade  the  sinner  to  cease  his  rebellion  and  submit  to 
Him.  In  Christ  God  is  reconciled  to  the  sinner,  and  there  is  no  need  to  persuade 
Him.  He  is  love,  the  sinner  is  enmity.  He  is  light,  the  sinner  is  darkness.  Ho 
is  nigh  unto  the  sinner,  but  the  sinner  is  afar  off  from  Him.  The  great  object 
then  to  be  accomplished  is,  to  destroy  the  sinner's  enmity,  that  he  may  have 
Divine  love ;  bring  him  from  his  darkness  into  Divine  light ;  bring  him  from  his 
evil  works  nigh  unto  God,  and  reconciliation  is  the  result.     {John  Bate.) 

Ver.  18.  Himself  hath  suffered,  being  tempted. — A  tempted  Saviour,  our  best 
tuccour : — I.  Many  souls  abe  tempted — Christ  was  tempted.  1.  They  are  tempted 
from  all  quarters.  2.  They  are  tempted  in  all  positions.  3.  Every  age  has  its  tempta- 
tions. II.  As  the  tempted  often  suffer,  Christ  also  suffered-  Temptation, 
even  when  overcome,  brings  with  it  to  the  true  child  of  God  a  great  degree  of  suffer- 
ing. The  suffering  consists  in  two  or  three  things.  1.  It  hes,  mainly,  in  the  shock 
which  sin  gives  to  the  sensitive,  regenerate  nature.  A  man  who  is  clothed  in 
armour  may  walk  through  the  mi<ist  of  tearing  thorns  and  brambles  without  being 
hurt ;  but  let  the  man  be  stripped  of  his  garments,  and  how  sadly  will  he  be  torn. 
Sin,  to  the  man  who  is  used  to  it,  is  no  suffering ;  if  he  be  tempted,  it  is  no  pain  to 
him ;  in  fact,  frequently  temptation  yields  pleasure  to  the  sinner.  To  look  at  the 
bait  is  sweet  to  the  fish  which  means  to  swallow  it  by  and  by.  But  to  the  child  of 
God,  who  is  new-made  and  quickened,  the  very  thought  of  sin  makes  him  shudder ; 
he  cannot  look  at  it  without  detestation.  Now,  in  this  case,  Christ  indeed  has 
fellowship,  and  far  outruns  us.  2.  Suffering,  too,  arises  to  the  people  of  God  from 
a  dread  of  the  temptation  when  its  shadow  falls  upon  us  ere  it  comes.  At  times 
there  is  more  dread  in  the  prospect  of  a  trial  than  there  is  in  the  trial  itself.  We 
feel  a  thousand  temptations  in  fearing  one.  Christ  knew  this.  What  an  awful 
dread  was  that  which  came  over  Him  in  the  black  night  of  Gethsemane  1  3.  The 
suffering  of  temptation  also  lies  often  in  the  source  of  it.  Have  you  not  often  felt  that 
you  would  not  mind  the  temptation  if  it  had  not  come  from  where  it  did  ?  "  Oh  ! " 
say  you,  "  to  think  that  my  own  friend,  my  dearly  beloved  friend,  should  try  me  !  '* 
Ah  !  but  the  Man  of  Sorrows  knew  all  this,  since  it  was  one  of  the  chosen  twelve 
who  betra.^ed  Him.  And,  besides,  "it  pleased  the  Father  to  bruise  Him."  4.  I 
have  no  doubt,  too,  that  a  portion  of  the  sorrow  and  suffering  of  temptation  may 
also  lie  in  the  fact  that  God's  name  and  honour  are  often  involved  in  our  tempta- 
tion.   HI.  They  that  are  tempted  have  great  need  of  succour,  and  Christ  is 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  199 

ABLE,    HAVING    H1M8ELF   BEEN    TEMPTED,    TO    SUCCOUR    THEM    THAT   ARE    TEMPTED.        Of 

coarse  this  is  true  of  Christ  as  God.  The  Christos,  the  anointed  One,  the  High 
Priest  of  our  profession,  is  in  His  complex  character  able  to  succour  them  that  are 
tempted.  Hoi??  1.  Why,  first,  the  very  fact  that  He  was  tempted  has  some  suc- 
cour in  it  to  us.  If  we  had  to  walk  through  the  darkness  aloue,  we  should  know 
the  very  extremity  of  misery ;  but  having  a  companion,  we  have  comfort ;  having 
Buch  a  companion,  we  have  joy.  2.  But,  further,  the  fact  that  He  has  suffered 
without  being  destroyed  is  inestimably  comforting  to  us.  K  you  could  see  a  block 
of  ore  just  ready  to  be  put  into  the  furnace,  if  that  block  of  ore  could  look  into  the 
flames,  and  could  mark  the  blast  as  it  blows  the  coals  to  a  vehement  heat,  if  it 
could  sjieak  it  would  say,  "  Ah !  woe  is  me  that  ever  I  should  bo  put  into  such  a 
blazing  furnace  as  that  I  I  shall  be  burnt  up ;  I  shall  be  melted  with  the  slag ;  I 
shall  be  utterly  consumed  I "  But  suppose  another  lump,  all  bright  and  glistening, 
could  he  by  its  side,  and  say,  "  No,  no,  you  are  just  like  I  was,  but  I  went  through 
tbe  fire  and  I  lost  nothing  thereby ;  see  how  bright  I  am  ;  how  I  have  survived  all 
the  tiames."  Why,  then,  that  piece  of  ore  would  rather  anticipate  than  dread  the 
season  when  it  too  should  be  exposed  to  the  purifying  heat,  and  come  out,  all 
bright  and  lustrous,  like  its  companion.  3.  And  you  will  remember,  too,  that 
Christ,  in  going  through  the  suffering  of  temptation,  was  not  simply  no  loser,  but 
He  was  a  great  gainer ;  for  it  is  written,  it  pleased  God  "  to  make  tbe  Captain  of 
their  salvation  perfect  through  sufferings."  It  was  through  His  suffering  that  He 
obtained  the  meuiatorial  glory  which  now  crowns  His  head.  4.  But  more,  in  that 
Christ  hath  suffered,  being  tempted.  He  is  able  to  succour  us  who  are  tempted  by 
sending  His  grace  to  help  us.  He  was  always  able  to  send  grace,  but  now  as  God 
and  man  He  is  able  to  send  just  the  right  grace  at  the  right  time,  and  in  the  right 
place.  You  know  a  doctor  may  have  all  the  drugs  that  can  be  gathered,  but  an 
abundance  of  medicine  does  not  make  him  a  qualified  practitioner ;  if,  however,  he 
has  been  himself  and  seen  the  case,  then  he  knows  just  at  what  crisis  of  the  disease 
such  and  such  a  medicine  is  wanted.  The  stores  are  good,  but  the  wisdom  to  use 
the  stoies — this  is  even  more  precious.  Now  it  pleased  the  Father  that  in  Christ 
should  all  fulness  dwell ;  but  where  should  the  Son  of  Man  earn  His  diploma  and 
gain  the  skill  with  which  to  use  the  fulness  aright  ?  Beloved,  He  won  it  by 
experience.  5.  Having  suffered  Himself,  being  tempted,  Christ  knows  how  to 
succour  us  by  His  prayers  for  us.  There  are  some  people  whose  prayers  are  of  no 
use  to  us,  because  they  do  not  know  what  to  ask  for  us.  Christ  is  the  Intercessor 
for  His  people  ;  He  has  prevalence  in  His  intercession,  but  how  shall  He  learn  what 
to  ask  for  ?  How  can  He  know  this  better  than  by  His  own  trials  ?  He  hath 
suffered,  being  tempted.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  ClirisVs  temptability  : — We  could 

not  have  a  more  unmistakable  declaration  than  that  respecting  the  reality  of  our 
Lord's  temptations  on  earth.  His  conflict  in  the  wilderness,  and  His  agony  in  the 
garden,  were  not  dramas  acted  on  the  stage  of  life  by  one  who  assumed  our  role, 
but  facts  in  the  real  experience  of  One  who  was  true  to  the  core.  His  life  was  our 
life  in  its  surroundings  and  in  its  conflicts,  and  therefore,  when  He  ascended  to 
heaven  victorious  over  death.  He  appeared  there  for  us  as  our  representative,  as  a 
Man  in  whom,  once  and  for  ever,  God's  ideal  of  human  nature  was  absolutely 
realised  and  fulfilled.  Hence,  in  this  passage,  He  is  spoken  of  as  our  High  Priest, 
who  was  taken  from  among  the  people ;  although  being  without  sin.  He  was  able 
to  stand  on  their  behalf  as  the  holiest  of  all,  nearer  to  God  than  they.  From  the 
wilderness  to  the  Cross — nay,  from  the  cradle  to  the  Cross — Jesus  suffered,  being 
tempted.  I.  Now  the  use  we  may  make  of  that  for  our  encouragement  appears 
in  many  forms.  1.  For  example,  a  tempted  yet  triumphant  leader  implies  future 
victory  for  those  who  follow  Him.  It  is  not  always  easy  to  believe  in  the  coming 
triumph  of  good  over  evil.  There  is  a  sort  of  backwater  of  temptation  which  some 
of  us  have  experienced,  which  is  more  dangerous  than  the  direct  current  of  evil 
which  we  breasted  so  bravely  at  first.  We  seem  to  get  the  better  of  some  sin  ;  but 
then,  when  the  strain  of  vigilance  relaxes,  a  stream  of  evil  tendency  comes  from 
another  direction  and  takes  us  unawares.  Thus  some  of  our  best  moments  have 
appeared  afterwards  to  be  the  precursors  of  our  worst ;  and  it  is  at  such  a  time 
that  we  lose  heart  and  think  of  giving  up  the  struggle,  till  we  learn  to  look  beyond 
ourselves  to  Him,  who  Himself  suffered  being  tempted — who  was  content  to  fight 
with  our  weapons,  and  with  them  won  the  victory.  Then  the  hope  is  aroused  that 
even  yet  we  shall  come  off  more  than  conquerors,  through  Him  that  loved  us.  2. 
Besides  this,  another  difficulty  of  ours  is  swept  away  by  the  inflowing  of  our  thought 
about  this  temptable  yet  victorious  Saviour — namely,  the  difiBculty  that  arises  from 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

the  notion  that  the  higher  the  life  the  freer  it  mast  be  from  assault.  If  that  were 
true,  Christ  Jesus  would  never  have  been  tempted  at  aU,  The  wind  blows  strongest 
on  the  hiU-tops.  Our  Lord  was  on  loftier  heights  than  we  ever  reach,  yet  from 
the  beginning  to  the  end  of  His  career  on  earth  "  He  Himself  suffered,  being 
tempted."  3.  There  is  yet  another  message  of  comfort  from  this  verse  to  tempted 
Christians — namely,  that  they  may  be  quite  sure  of  their  Lord's  sympathy.  It  is 
this  which  is  specially  insisted  upon  in  the  passage  before  us,  and  it  was  partly 
with  a  view  to  make  Divine  sympathy  manifest  and  appreciable  to  us  that  "  the 
Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us."  I  remember  reading  somewhere  of  a 
little  child  whose  dead  body  was  washed  up  on  the  shore  during  a  gale.  It  was 
taken  by  loving,  reverent  hands,  and  buried  amid  the  tears  of  strangers  in  the 
village  churchyard.  There  was  no  clue  to  the  birth,  or  to  the  name,  or  to  the 
parentage  of  that  little  waif — it  was  just  "  somebody's  darling,"  that  was  all ; 
and  when  they  put  up  a  tombstone,  they  did  not  know  what  inscription  to 
choose,  till  at  last  they  thought  of  two  words,  which  were  carved  on  the 
marble  slab — "  God  knows."  Aye,  and  there  is  no  wreck  of  your  hopes,  no 
struggle  amid  the  blasts  of  temptation,  about  which  you  may  not  say  to  your- 
self "  God  knows,"  and  the  assurance  of  His  sympathy  will  be  to  you  as  life 
from  the  dead.  II.  Turning  now  from  the  encouragements  which  we  may  hope 
to  gain  from  the  truth  here  enunciated,  let  us  try  to  look  more  closely  into  thb 
NATURE  OF  THESE  TEMPTATIONS.  About  many  of  thcm  we  probably  know  nothing. 
They  are  out  of  our  range,  as  in  some  respect  Jesus  Himself  was.  A  sensualist 
cannot  understand  the  more  subtle  suggestions  of  the  Evil  One,  and  ordinary 
Christians  have  no  conception  of  Paul's  consciousness  of  sin  when  he  cried,  "  Of 
sinners  I  am  the  chief."  StUl  more  unsearchable  are  certain  temptations  which 
came  to  the  Saviour  of  sinners — for  they  were  too  keen  and  subtle  for  us — just  as 
there  are  sounds  in  the  world  which  our  gross  hearing  cannot  catch,  and  sights  our 
dull  eyes  cannot  see.  But  though  temptations  are  the  more  subtle  in  proportion  to 
the  holiness  of  the  one  who  is  tempted,  and  vary  in  form  according  to  his  circum- 
stances and  conditions,  it  may  be  taken  as  approximately  true  that  the  three  avenues 
by  which  evil  approaches  human  nature  are  summed  up  in  these  words  :  "  the  lust 
of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life."  This  summary,  indeed,  is 
the  revelation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  leads  us  into  all  truth ;  and  it  is  complete  in 
itself.  1.  Take  an  example  or  two  of  His  own  Inward  struggles  to  illustrate  the 
first  of  these.  No  doubt  Jesus  was  free  from  some  of  the  baser  and  more  animal 
suggestions  of  the  adversary,  but  His  physical  frame  laid  Him  open  to  others.  (1) 
We  read  that  after  He  had  fasted  forty  days.  He  was  hungiy;  and  at  once  a  tempta- 
tion to  supply  His  wants  addressed  itself  to  His  weakness.  Who  of  us  would 
have  hesitated  to  do  what  was  thus  suggested  ?  Jesus  did  hesitate  and  decisively 
refused,  because  it  would  be  using  for  self  power  which  He  had  come  on  eai  th  to 
use  for  others.  But  cannot  our  Lord  understand,  from  that  experience  of  His, 
those  numberless  temptations  which  address  themselves  now  to  such  a  sense  of 
want  in  us  ?  The  miserable  Uttle  starveling  who  hves  like  an  Isbmael  amid  our 
boasted  civilisation,  seeing  and  smelling  abundance  of  good  things  in  shops,  with 
only  a  pane  of  glass  between  his  hunger  and  its  satisfaction  ;  the  unfortunate  man 
who  is  out  of  work  because  trade  is  bad  or  has  changed  its  locality,  and  who  comes 
home  after  a  weary,  useless,  all-day  tramp,  to  see  a  starving  wife  and  pale,  pinched 
children,  till  he  curses  the  injustice  which  he  cannot  despise  or  defy  ;  and  the  still 
more  wretched  woman  left  with  children  dependent  on  her,  who  even  when  in  work 
cannot  get  them  bread,  and  is  tempted  to  do  anything  for  food.  These,  whom  we 
forget,  Jesus  remembers,  while  we,  who  never  had  a  day  without  food  in  all  our 
lives,  cannot  understand  that  conflict.  He  does  understand  the  desperate  tempta- 
tion, and  the  glorious  triumph  over  it,  (2)  But  there  are  other  temptations  which 
assail  us  through  the  physical  life.  We  read  that  Jesus  was  weary  with  His  journey ; 
that  He  slept  heavily  from  sheer  fatigue  directly  the  boat  set  sail ;  and  we  find  in 
the  Gospels  other  indications  that  He  shared  our  experiences  of  tiredness  and  weak- 
ness. Sorae  of  you  are  often  oppressed  by  a  sense  of  this.  It  not  infrequently 
brings  about  spiritual  depression,  which  you  seem  powerless  to  shake  off.  Tired 
ones,  look  up  to  your  Lord  1  He  knows  all  about  this,  and  stands  beside  you  in  it ; 
and  it  may  be  that  in  answer  to  your  prayer  He  will  give  you  such  a  sense  of  His 
presence  that  you  will  be  able  to  say  with  Paul,  "  ^^  hen  I  am  weak,  then  am  I 
strong.  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ,  which  strengtheneth  me."  2.  There 
is  a  second  set  of  temptations  which  our  Lord  well  understands — I  allude  to  those 
which  come  through  the  distastefuiness  of  our  surroundings.     The  patience  of  our 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS,  801 

Lord  appears  the  more  marvellous  when  we  think  of  the  absolute  repulsiveness  to 
His  holy  nature  of  much  that  He  was  in  contact  with  every  day.  3.  Now,  we  are 
taught  by  our  Lord's  example  that  it  is  not  always  God's  will  that  we  should  seek 
to  escape  uncongenial  suiTOundings.  Jesus  could  have  doue  so  at  any  moment ; 
but  although  He  sighed  deeply  in  spirit  and  said,  "  0  faithless  generation,  how  long 
ehall  I  be  with  you,  how  long  shall  I  suffer  you,"  yet  He  did  not  leave  the  world, 
and  would  not  leave  it  till  His  mission  was  fulfilled.  It  may  be  that  you  have  to 
bear  witness  for  Christ  just  where  you  are  ;  that  if  you  retreat  from  your  post,  no 
voice  will  there  be  uplifted  for  Him,  and  no  life  will  silently  check  the  growth  and 
spread  of  evil.  4.  We  have  not  time  now  to  speak  at  any  length  of  other  tempta- 
tions which  came  to  our  Lord  through  His  energies  and  capacities.  Whenever  yoa 
forego  the  opportunity  you  have  to  take  a  thing  wrongly  when  it  is  easy  to  take  it, 
you  are  in  fellowship  with  Christ,  who  resisted  that  temptation  victoriously  over 
and  over  again.     (A.  Rowland,  LL.B.)  The  trials  of  Christ  the  trials  of  the 

terious  : — I.  We  learn  from  these  words  one  important  end  of  the  temptation  op 
ODB  Divine  Eedeemeb.  It  was  to  give  us  an  assurance  of  sympathy  and  aid  under 
the  pressure  of  such  trials  as  we  must  all  of  us  expect.  1.  Now  I  am  speaking 
only  to  those  who  believe  in  the  Divinity  of  the  Saviour,  and  that  what  He  took 
upon  Him  was  "  human  nature."  Now,  the  nature  which  our  Divine  Redeemer 
took  upon  Him  was  not  that  nature  which  Adam  had  after  his  fall.  It  was  not  a 
nature  in  which  the  higher  principles  were  in  bondage,  and  from  which  the  light  of 
the  Divine  presence  was  withdrawn,  but  the  origiual  human  nature  which  Adam 
had  in  the  early  days  before  his  fatal  disobedience.  2.  The  trials  He  underwent 
were  the  trials  incident  to  such  a  nature.  There  are,  you  know,  some  circumstances 
which  we  cannot  imagine  to  present  temptation  to  any  but  a  very  badly  constituted 
being.  Tbere  are  other  circumstances  which  cause  trial  quite  independently  of 
such  considerations,  and  others,  again,  which  can  be  afflicting  only  in  proportion 
to  the  completeness  of  the  subordination  of  the  rest  of  the  principles  to  the  con- 
ficience,  and  of  the  whole  to  Divine  influence.  For  instance,  to  say  that  a  man  was 
severely  tried  by  being  placed  in  circumstances  in  which  he  would  have  to  abstain 
from  theft,  would  be  to  express  a  low  opinion  of  him.  But  to  say  that  he  was 
severely  tried  by  being  placed  in  a  position  where  he  should  do  without  food,  would 
imply  no  such  estimate  of  his  character.  Why  not  ?  Because  it  would  be  natural 
to  him  to  desire  food.    II.  From  what  has  been  said,  it  will  appear  that  our  trials 

BE8EMBLB   ChRIST's,   JUST   IN   THE    SAME    DEGREE   THAT   OUB    NATURE     RESEMBLES    HiS. 

Our  Divine  Redeemer  came  to  do  very  much  more  than  save  us  from  the  punish- 
ment of  sin.  He  came  to  save  as  from  its  power.  He  came  to  renew  our  nature 
by  restoring  to  it  what  it  had  lost.  We  Christians  are  spoken  of  as  "  renewed  in 
the  spirit  of  our  mind" — as  "  having  put  on  the  new  man,  which  after  God  ia 
created  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness."  St.  Paul  exhorts  the  Colossians  to 
the  abandonment  of  certain  sins  on  this  distinct  ground — "  seeing  that  ye  have 
put  off  the  old  man  with  his  deeds,"  &c.  Now,  it  is  just  in  proportion  to  our  pro- 
gress towards  this  ideal  of  a  Christian  that  our  trials  will  resemble  those  o£  our 
Lord  and  Master.  In  a  word,  the  trials  of  the  serious  are  those  which  resemble 
Christ's.  These  trials  are  principally  of  two  kinds.  One  kind  is  that  which  con- 
sists in  the  patient  endurance  of  afflictions,  which  must,  from  the  nature  of  the 
case,  cause  pain  and  sorrow — afflictions  which  no  degree  of  holiness  could  prevent 
as  from  feeling  while  they  last.  In  cases  of  this  kind  the  Saviour's  example  cer- 
tainly teaches  us  the  power  of  endurance  with  which  man  is  endowed.  The  other 
class  of  trials  peculiar  to  the  serious  are  those  which  address  themselves  to  their 
zeal  for  the  service  of  the  Most  High.  In  trials  of  this  kind,  where  serious  men 
fear  that  they  may  be  hindering  the  spread  of  God's  dominion  among  men — by  not . 
"  going  with  the  times  "  (as  men  say)  in  religious  matters  of  doctrine  or  worship — 
the  history  of  our  Redeemer's  temptation  is  peculiarly  instructive.  Every  one  of 
the  proposals  of  Satan  seemed  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  furtherance  of  the  ends 
the  Redeemer  had  in  view.  To  work  a  miracle  was  not  merely  to  appease  the 
pangs  of  hunger,  but  to  prove  Himself  the  Son  of  God.  To  cast  Himself  from  a 
pinnacle  of  the  temple  was  at  once  to  give  evidence  of  His  reliance  upon  the  Most  High 
and  to  impress  the  assembled  Jews  with  the  belief  that  their  Messiah  had  appeared 
among  them,  as  they  expected,  from  heaven,  and  had  "  suddenly,"  as  was  pre- 
dicted, •'  come  to  His  Temple."  To  secure  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  was  an  end 
which  might  for  a  moment  seem  to  justify  the  use  of  almost  any  means.  And 
yet  it  was  in  this  proposal — the  proposal  to  secure  the  greatest  ends  by  the  adoption 
of  unlawful  means — that  the  tempter  was  unmasked.    In  a  word,  we  are  supported 


209  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  n. 

by  the  remembrance  of  the  Eedeemer's  trials  in  all  cases  where  we  have  declined  to 
"  make  the  end  sanctify  the  means  " — where  we  have  declined  to  •'  do  evil  that 
good  may  come."  We  are  taught  that  when  God  has  appointed  means  to  an  end, 
we  cannot  gain  that  end — His  end— by  other  means ;  that  when  He  has  ordained  a 
time,  we  must  not — while  acting  in  accordance  with  His  regular  appointments — 
be  impatient  of  delay.  We  are  taught  to  endure  the  constant  taunts — the  utter- 
ances of  zeal  without  knowledge,  or  of  thoughtlessness  without  either — to  endure 
being  called  indifferent  to  our  Master's  cause  !  We  are  taught  to  hope  on,  and  to 
be  firm,  amid  all  the  clamorous  calls  to  encourage  disorder,  ecclesiastical  lawless- 
ness, heresy,  schism,  to  promote  what  we  think  wrong — or  else,  forsooth,  see  "  cin 
triumphant  and  Jehovah  conquered !  "  We  are  taught,  I  say,  to  reject  the  tempta- 
tion, as  we  hear  the  voice  of  our  Divine  Kedeemer  saying  to  us  through  the  record 
of  His  trials,  "  Be  still,  then,  and  know  that  I  am  God.  I  will  be  exalted  among 
the  heathen  ;  aud  I  will  be  exalted  in  the  earth."     (J.  C.  Coghlan,  D.D.)  The 

higher  the  life,  the  more  open  to  assault : — The  wind  blows  strongest  on  the  hill- 
tops. As  you  climb  some  mountain  you  may  find  that  for  a  time  you  lose  the 
breeze  which  hindered  you  lower  down,  because  you  are  sheltered  by  the  mountain 
itself ;  but  when  you  have  climbed  higher,  and  peered  over  the  jagged  edge,  you  can 
hardly  keep  your  feot  or  gain  your  breath,  for  the  awful  wind  howls  and  screams 
across  the  ravine  below  to  buffet  you  remorselessly.  Our  Lord  was  on  loftier  heights 
than  we  ever  reach ;  yet  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  His  career  on  earth  "  He 
Himself  suffered,  being  tempted."  (A.  Rowland,  LL.B.)  Able  to  succour  them 
that  are  tempted. — Tlie  efficient  sympathy  of  Christ: — I.  The  suffering.  1.  It 
was  personal  suffering.  2.  It  was  positive  and  most  painful  suffering.  3.  In  all 
its  reality,  variety,  and  extent,  it  bore  the  special  character  of  temptation.  II. 
The  succour.  1.  This  succour  is  accompanied  with  the  truest  sympathy.  "  If 
ever  I  fall  into  a  surgeon's  hands  with  broken  bones,"  is  a  remark  which  has  become 
almost  proverbial,  "  give  me  one  whose  own  bones  have  been  broken."  How  can 
those  who  have  never  known  what  illness  is  enter  with  the  tenderness  of  a  perfect 
fellowship  into  the  chambers  of  the  sick?  or  how  can  those  who  have  never  known 
a  want  understand  with  a  matter-of-fact  experience  the  anxi<  ties  of  the  poor  and 
needy  ?  2.  This  succour  is  imparted  with  the  utmost  promptitude.  3.  This  suc- 
cour is  conveyed  in  the  form  of  actual  deliverance  or  effective  relief,  or  at  least 
adequate  support.     {E.  A.   Thomson.)  The  suffering  Saviour^s  sympathy: — I. 

Jesus  suffering.  1.  The  feeling.  It  was  a  trying  thing  to  Him  even  to  dwell 
here  among  men.  He  suffered  in  being  placed  where  He  could  be  tempted.  2. 
The  fact  that  He  was  tempted — tempted  up  to  the  suffering  point.  3.  The  fruit. 
He  was  made  perfect  through  His  sufferings,  and  fitted  for  His  solemn  ofiSce  of 
High  Priest  to  His  people.  (1)  Temptation  to  sin  is  no  sin.  (2)  Temptation  does 
not  show  any  displeasure  on  God's  part.  (3)  Temptation  really  iniplies  no  doubt 
of  your  being  a  son  of  God.  (4)  Temptation  need  not  lead  to  any  evil  consequences 
in  any  case.  (5)  Do  not  make  it  any  cause  of  complaint  that  you  are  tempted. 
(6)  Far  from  your  hearts  be  the  idea  that  any  temptation  should  lead  you  to  despair. 
Jesus  triumphed,  and  so  shall  you.  H.  Jesus  succouring.  "  He  is  able  to  succour 
them  that  are  tempted."  1.  In  this  we  note  His  pity,  that  He  should  give  Himself 
up  to  this  business  of  succouring  them  that  are  tempted.  He  lays  Himself  out  to 
succour  them  that  are  tempted,  and  therefore  He  does  not  hide  Himself  from  them, 
nor  pass  them  by  on  the  other  side.  What  an  example  is  this  for  us  1  He  devotes 
Himself  to  this  Divine  business  of  comforting  all  such  as  mourn.  He  is  Lord  of 
all,  yet  makes  Himself  the  servant  of  the  weakest.  Whatever  He  may  do  with  the 
strongest.  He  succours  "  them  that  are  tempted."  He  does  not  throw  up  the  busi- 
ness in  disgust ;  He  does  not  grow  cross  or  angry  with  them  because  they  are  so 
foolish  as  to  give  way  to  idle  fears.  2.  The  text  treats  of  His  fitness  also.  (!)  He 
has  the  right,  acquired  by  His  suffering,  to  enter  in  among  sufferers,  and  deal  with 
them.  (2)  He  has  also  the  disposition  to  succour  them.  He  obtained  that  tender 
temper  through  suffering,  by  being  Himself  tempted.  (3)  And  then  He  has  the 
special  ability.  Our  Blessed  Master,  having  lived  a  life  of  suffering,  understands 
the  condition  of  a  sufferer  so  well  that  He  knows  how  to  make  a  be  I  for  him  (Psa. 
xli.  3).  3.  His  methods  of  succouring  them  that  are  tempted.  (1)  Usually  by 
giving  a  sense  of  His  sympathy.  (2)  Sometimes  by  suggesting  precious  truths, 
which  are  the  sweet  antidote  for  the  poison  of  sorrow.  (3)  Sometimes  He  succoura 
His  people  by  inwardly  strengthening  them.  (4)  I  have  known  the  Lord  bless  His 
people  by  making  them  very  weak.  The  next  best  thing  to  being  strong  in  the 
Lord  is  to  be  extremely  weak  in  yourself.    They  go  together,  but  sometimes  they 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  203 

are  divided  in  experience.  It  is  grand  to  feel,  "  I  will  not  struggle  any  more ;  I 
will  give  all  up,  and  lie  passive  in  the  Lord's  hand."  III.  Jerdb  souohx  afteb. 
1.  Where  else  can  yen  go?  2.  Where  better  can  you  go?  (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  suffering  Succourer  : — 1.  His  sufferings  were  many  and  cruel,  and  such  as  never 
any  did  endure ;  yet  His  greatest  sufferings  were  reserved  to  the  last.  And  though 
He  never  sinned,  yet  He  knew  and  felt  the  woeful  consequences  of  sin,  and  the 
punishments  it  deserves.  2.  He  was  tempted ;  for  no  sooner  was  He  baptized,  and 
publicly  initiated  and  declared  in  the  sight  of  heaven  and  earth  to  be  the  Son  of  God, 
but  Satan,  the  great  enemy,  set  upon  Him,  and  attempted  His  ruin;  yea,  all  His 
sufferings,  as  from  Satan,  were  temptations ;  and  it  is  very  Ukely  he  did  assault 
Him  most  violently  in  the  end.  By  both  these  He  knew  what  a  sad  and  woeful 
thing  suffering  for  sin  is,  and  how  hard  a  thing  it  is  to  be  tempted  ami  not  to  siu, 
and  how  much  such  as  being  violently  tempted  do  sin  are  to  be  pitied.  For  if  He,  who 
had  the  greatest  power  that  ever  was  to  overcome  temptations,  was  hardly  put  to  it,  He 
could  not  be  ignorant  how  dangerous  man's  condition  is,  and  how  easily  a  frail 
sinner  may  be  foiled.  3.  This  suffering  and  temptation  made  Him  more  merciful 
and  faithful,  and  able  to  succour.  To  succour  is  to  do  all  things  for  the  procuring 
the  reconciliation  of  His  people ;  and  His  ability  to  succour  is  His  mercifulness  and 
fidelity,  whereby  He  is  every  way  fitted,  powerfully  inclined,  and  effectually  moved 
to  succour  them.  To  be  able  sometimes  is  to  be  fit,  as  Varinus  observeth  ;  and  so 
it  may  be  here  taken.  And  the  more  fit,  the  more  able.  The  saying  is,  "  None  so 
merciful  as  those  who  have  been  miserable " ;  and  they  who  have  not  only  known 
misery,  but  felt  it,  are  most  powerfully  inclined,  not  only  to  inward  compassion, 
but  to  the  real  relieving  of  others  miserable.  And  this  was  a  contrivance  of  the 
profound  wisdom  of  that  God,  who  is  infinitely  knowing  and  merciful,  to  find  a 
way  how  to  feel  misery  and  be  merciful  another  way.  This  was  by  His  Word 
assuming  fiesh,  tliat  in  that  fiesh  He  might  be  tempted  violently  and  suffer  most 
grievously ;  and  all  this  that  He  might  be  more  merciful  and  effectually  succour 
sinful  man.  (G.  Lawson.)  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  a  succouring  Christ  to  tempted  souls : 
— I.  Jesus  Christ  is  able  to  sdccodb  tempted  bodlb.  I  will  say  nothing  of  the 
great  power  that  He  hath  with  the  Father,  or  in  His  own  hands.  He  is  able  by 
conquest  for  to  succour  you  that  are  tempted  ;  He  is  able  by  conquest  for  to  raise 
the  siege  that  is  laid  against  our  souls ;  He  hath  beaten  through  the  enemy — as  now, 
if  a  town  be  besieged  by  an  enemy,  and  the  enemy  abroad  in  the  field,  having  an  army 
in  the  field,  if  any  one  will  come  to  raise  the  siege,  they  must  fight  through  the  army, 
they  must  beat  through  the  army  before  they  can  raise  the  siege.  Never  a  tempted  soul 
but  is  thus  besieged  with  temptation,  closely  begirt,  and  the  devils  were  abroad  in  the 
field,  were  masters  of  the  field  till  Christ  came,  and  no  man  nor  angel  was  able  to 
beat  through ;  but  Jesus  Christ  beat  up  the  quarters  all  along,  beat  through  the 
enemy,  cast  out  devils  all  along,  overcame,  II.  But  you  will  say.  We  will  grant 
Christ  is  able  to  succour  tempted  souls  ;  but  is  He  willing  ?  Yes,  He  is  infiaiitely 
willing  to  succour  poor  tempted  souls.  Our  great  succour  Ues  in  reconciliation  with 
God  the  Father,  as  by  comparing  these  two  verses  together  doth  appear.  God  the 
Father  hath  set  Him  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  ;  it  was  the  will  of  God  the  Father 
that  Jesus  Ci-rist  %bould  come  and  make  propitiation ;  ft  was  His  will.  Now,  look 
into  the  fortieth  Psalm,  and  see  what  Christ  saith  concerning  the  will  of  the  Father 
(Psa.  xl.  7).  Again,  it  argues  that  He  is  very  willing  to  succour  poor  tempted  souls, 
because  He  was  so  willing  to  cure  diseased  bodies ;  when  He  was  upon  the  earth  He 
was  willing  to  cure  them,  so  willing,  as  though  it  did  cost  a  miracle,  yet  He  would  do  it. 
lU.  But  though  He  be  able  and  willing,  yet  it  may  be  He  is  not  faithful.  Yes, 
saith  the  former  verse,  faithful ;  merciful  and  faithful  High  Priest.  Faithful  in  all 
His  house  as  Moses  was.  What  honest  man  will  break  his  word,  go  contrary  to  his 
oath  ?  He  is  sworn  into  this  office  of  the  High  Priest.  Yea,  we  have  not  only  His 
promise  and  His  oath,  but  the  Father's  bond  for  the  Son's  performance  :  "  The  seed 
of  the  woman  shall  break  the  serpent's  head";  it  shall  bruise  his  heel ;  she  shall 
break  his  head.  The  pleasure  of  the  Lord  shall  prosper  in  His  hand.  This  is  the 
work  that  is  in  His  hand,  to  succour  tempted  ones :  it  shall  prosper  in  His  hand. 
IV.  But  suppose  He  is  faithful,  how  doth  He  succour  those  that  are  tempted  in  the 
day  and  time  of  their  temptation?  1.  Christ  succours  tempted  souls  before  the 
temptation  comes  sometimes,  by  a  special  manifestation  of  Himself,  His  love  and 
fulness,  to  them.  Again,  He  succours  before  the  tenjptation  by  filling  the  heart 
with  the  Holy  Ghost.  When  the  vessel  is  filled  with  one  liquor,  it  keeps  out 
another.  2.  He  succours  also  under  temptation  by  opening  the  eyes  of  him  that  ia 
tempted  to  see  that  it  is  but  a  temptation.    A  temptation  is  half-cured  when  a 


204  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  a 

man  knows  that  it  is  but  a  temptation  :  when  a  man's  eyes  are  open  to  see 
the  tempter  and  the  temptation.  Therefore  men  are  so  hardly  cured,  because 
they  are  hardly  persuaded  that  it  is  a  temptation.  When  they  see  that,  then  they 
say,  "  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan."  Christ  opens  their  eyes.  Again,  He  succours 
under  temptation,  by  letting  fall  some  glimpse  of  His  love,  some  love-look  upon  a 
tempted  soul.  And  so,  when  Peter  was  in  the  high  priest* s  hall,  Christ  looks  upon 
him,  and  he  went  out  and  wept  bitterly.  3.  After  temptation  He  succours  i  by 
filling  the  heart  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory ;  by  sending  the  angels  to 
minister:  as  when  the  devil  left  Christ,  had  tempted  Him  and  left  Him,  then 
came  the  angels  and  ministered  to  Him.  Every  way — before  temptation,  and 
in  temptation,  and  after  temptation — the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  a  succouring 
Christ  to  tempted  souls.  He  was  a  Man  of  Sorrows  that  He  might  be  a  God 
of  succours ;  His  heart  is  full  of  succours.  V.  Application.  1.  Whilst  I  stand 
upon  this  truth,  methinks  I  hear  a  solemn  and  gracious  invitation  to  all  poor 
tempted  souls  to  come  unto  Jesus  Christ,  to  come  for  succour.  (1)  He  will  succour 
tempted  sinners  most  when  they  are  most  tempted.  (2)  He  will  not  only  succour 
thus,  but  He  will  succour  you  that  are  tempted  when  you  cannot  succour  yourselves ; 
when  your  own  thoughts  cannot  succour  yon,  when  your  own  thoughts  dare  not 
succour  you,  or  when  your  own  thoughts  trample  upon  your  evidences,  and  when 
your  own  thoughts  shall  make  a  mutiny  in  your  hearts,  and  set  all  on  fire :  "  In  the 
multitude  of  my  thoughts  Thy  Word  comforts  my  soul."  (3)  He  will  not  only 
succour  thus,  but  He  will  succour  poor  tempted  souls  with  a  notwithstanding : 
notwithstanding  all  their  failings  and  infirmities.  2.  If  this  doctrine  be  true,  what 
ground  of  strong  consolation  is  here  unto  all  the  saints  1  3.  If  Jesus  Christ  be  a 
succouring  Christ,  then  let  us  be  succouring  Christians.  Shall  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  carry  a  poor  tempted  soul  upon  His  shoulder,  by  way  of  succour,  and  shall  I 
carry  him  upon  my  shoulder  as  a  burden  ?  4.  If  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  a  succour- 
ing Christ,  then  why  should  we  yield  unto  our  sins  and  to  our  temptations  ?  5.  If 
there  be  a  truth  in  this — Christ  is  a  succouring  Christ — let  us  all  labour  to  answer 
Christ.  It  is  the  duty  and  the  property  of  the  people  of  God  to  observe  what  God 
is  doing  upon  their  hearts,  and  to  help  on  that  work.  If  Jesus  Christ  be  succouring 
of  any  of  your  souls  against  your  temptations,  oh  I  help  on  the  work  ;  it  is  your 
duty  to  help  it  on,  and  to  answer  Him.  ( W.  Bridge,  31.  A.)  Of  experience  of  suffering 
causing  succour  to  others  tkat  suffer : — This  effect  following  upon  Christ's  suffering, 
being  tempted,  namely,  that  He  is  fit  and  ready  to  succour  others  that  are  tempted, 
giveth  evidence  of  an  especial  benefit  of  God's  providence  in  suffering  His  only- 
begotten  Son  and  also  His  adopted  children  to  be  so  far  tempted  as  to  suffer  thereby. 
By  this  means  they  are  brought  to  afford  mutual  succour  one  to  another  in  like  case. 
Thus  saith  the  apostle,  "  God  comforteth  us  in  all  our  tribulations,  that  we  may  be 
able  to  comfort  them  which  are  in  any  trouble  by  the  comfort  wherewith  we  our- 
selves are  comforted  of  God  "  (2  Cor.  i.  4).  The  Lord,  to  stir  op  the  Israelites  to 
succour  strangers,  rendereth  this  reason,  "  Ye  know  the  heart  of  a  stranger,  seeing 
ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt "  (Exod.  xxiii.  9)  A  like  reason  is  rendered 
of  showing  mercy  to  servants  (Dent.  v.  15). .  It  is  found  by  experience  that  child- 
bearing  women  are  more  pitiful  to  others  in  their  travails  than  such  women  as  are 
barren.  The  like  may  be  said  of  such  as  are  afflicted  with  any  painful  malady. 
Much  more  humanity  used  to  be  shown  in  the  city  to  such  as  are  visited  with  the 
plague  than  in  the  country,  because  in  the  city  more  used  to  be  infected  therewith, 

1.  From  hence  it  appears  that  it  is  expedient  that  ministers  of  God's  Word  be  men 
of  like  passions  with  others  (as  the  apostles  say  of  themselves,  Acts  xiv.  15),  that  so 
they  may  more  commiserate  others.  If  ministers  themselves  had  never  been  in  a 
natural  state,  but  always  entire,  they  could  not  so  pity  others  as  now  they  do.  The 
like  may  be  sail  of  magistrates,  and  of  all  that  have  power  and  authority  over  others. 

2.  God's  wisdom  is  herein  manifested,  in  that  He  suffers  flesh  to  remain  in  the  best, 
that  thereby  they  may  be  moved  the  more  to  bear  with  others.  Christ  suffered  Satan 
to  sift  Peter,  that  when  he  was  converted  he  might  strengthen  his  brethren  (Luke 
xxii.  31,  32).  This  is  a  good  use  which  saints  may  make  of  their  slips.  3.  Oh  !  how 
great  is  the  inhumanity  of  such  as,  having  tasted  misery,  and  being  delivered  from 
the  same,  are  hard-hearted  to  those  that  fall  into  the  like  misery  and  refuse  to  succour 
them  ;  yea,  rather  deal  hardly  with  them,  and  add  to  their  affliction.  This  was  it 
which  Nehemiah  upbraided  to  the  Jews  after  their  return  from  captivity  (Neh.  v. 
7,  &c.).  The  like  doth  Jeremiah  while  the  Jews  were  besieged  (Jer.  xxxiv.  13,  A'c). 
The  like  may  be  upbraided  to  such  as  have  power  among  us,  in  commonwealth. 
Church,  or  family.     4.  Eor  our  parts,  as  God  by  His  providence  hath  made  us  able 


OHAJ.  n.J  HEBREWS.  205 

and  fit  to  sncconr  others,  let  as  herein  show  ourselves  like  unto  Christ.  Let  us  open 
our  bowels  to  such  as  are  in  distress  (note  Gal.  vi.  1 ;  Tit.  iii.  3).  Let  all  of  all 
sorts — magistrates,  ministers,  masters,  rich  men,  old  men,  men  in  health,  and  such 
as  have  been  tempted  or  afflicted — learn  to  succour  others.  (W.  Gouge.)  The 
Succourer  of  tlie  tempted : — L  The  holy  Sdffebeb  Himself.  Who  is  He  ?  It  is 
the  co-equal,  co-eternal  Son  of  the  Father,  assuming  the  nature  of  His  brethren 
upon  earth  ;  a  human  nature  in  the  covenant  line,  on  purpose  to  bear  our  sins,  and 
bring  in  everlasting  salvation  for  our  rejoicing.  Our  text  holds  forth  His  being 
"  tempted,"  as  a  peculiar  feature  of  His  sufferings :  •'  He  suffered,  being  tempted  " ; 
and  it  may  not  be  unprofitable  if  I  advert  to  the  temptations  that  He  endured. 
Temptation,  you  know,  was  addressed  to  Him  in  a  tLreefold  form  ;  and  in  all  these 
we  are  called  to  tread  in  His  steps.  The  first  was  care,  the  se.-ond  was  covetonsness, 
and  the  third  was  piesumption.  Now,  before  I  go  to  other  parts  of  the  subject,  I 
think  the  prominent  point  of  Christ's  sufferings  in  consequence  of  temptation  was 
its  contrast  to  the  holiness  of  His  nature.  The  nearer  a  Christian  lives  to  God,  the 
more  his  soul  thus  aspires  after  spiritual  and  holy  things,  the  more  hateful  and 
distressing  is  every  temptation.  And  this,  I  think,  is  the  only  fair  way  of  answering 
all  objection  upon  the  point :  that  the  suffering  in  consequence  of  temptation  arose 
from  the  contrast  of  temptation  with  holiness — the  hatefulness  of  sin  to  the  mind 
that  is  bent  on  the  holiness  of  God.  "  He  suffered,  being  tempted,"  because 
temptation  was  the  very  antipodes  to  the  holiness  of  His  nature.  But  we  pass  on  to 
remark  yet  further  upon  His  unparalleled  sufferings ;  and  whether  we  glance  at  the 
sufferings  of  His  body  or  the  sufferings  of  His  soul,  or  unite  them  in  one  contem- 
plation, we  may  utter  the  exclamation  of  the  prophet,  personating  Christ,  "Behold 
and  see,  all  ye  that  pass  by,  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto  My  sorrow,  which  is 
done  unto  Me,  wherewith  the  Lord  hath  afflicted  Me  in  the  day  of  His  fierce  anger." 
Unparalleled  sorrows  were  sustained  by  Christ.  And  oh  !  how  did  He  suffer  ?  We 
do  not  hear  one  word  of  complaint  while  He  is  suffering  only  from  creatures ;  the 
malice  of  Pharisees  He  braves  silently ;  the  temptations  of  the  devil  He  vanquishes 
with  "  Get  thee  hence";  but  when  He  at  length  feels  the  curse  of  a  broken  law 
entering  His  very  soul,  then  He  opens  His  mouth  :  "  0  My  Father,  if  it  be  possible, 
let  this  cup  pass  from  Me."  *'  He  suffered,  being  tempted."  And  all  this  as 
covenant  Head,  as  the  Representative  of  His  Church ;  all  this  in  His  Suretyship 
character.  H.  His  exercised  followers.  And  really  I  am  quite  ashamed  that 
you  and  I  should  make  any  complaints  about  it  at  all.  It  is  true  His  people  have 
to  endure  the  malice  of  the  same  enemies  now ;  but  then  they  have  an  indemnity  ; 
they  have  a  holy  security  that  they  cannot  perish,  that  they  shall  none  of  them  "  be 
tempted  above  that  they  are  able,"  and  that  "  with  the  temptation  also  He  will 
make  a  way  of  escape."  Why,  I  wonder  what  they  are  to  do  without  temptations, 
without  trials.  They  are  expressly  designed  for  the  purpose  of  calling  out  the 
graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  giving  occasion  for  the  triumphs  of  Christian  experi- 
ence, to  the  consummation  of  time.  But  look  we,  further,  to  the  position  of  the 
real  child  of  God  when  the  tempter  aims  at  the  very  same  point  that  he  did  all  along 
with  Christ.  "  If  Thou  be  the  Son  of  God  "  :  if  tby  Christianity  be  real.  I  like,  if 
he  brings  me  an  "  if,"  to  meet  him  with  one  of  God's  "  shalls  "  and  "  wills  " ; 
and  they  are  always  more  powerful  and  impressive  than  ••  ifs."  There  are  no 
"  ifs"  in  Scripture  respecting  the  children  of  God,  except  they  be  "  ifs  "  of  demon- 
stration ;  they  are  all  "  shalls  "  and  "  wills  "  there.  *'  I  will  be  their  God,  and  they 
shall  be  My  people."  If  Jehovah  has  put  a  cry  in  your  heart  for  mercy  and 
pardon  and  peace  wholly  in  Christ,  under  a  consciousness  of  your  need,  be  assured 
of  this,  that  He  will  never  abandon  the  work  of  His  own  hands.  He  will  go  on  to 
be  gracious.  Now  shall  I  tell  you  how  our  Lord  "  is  able  to  succour"  you?  It  is 
just  simply  by  revealing  Himself.  "  I  am  thy  salvation  "  ;  "  It  is  I ;  be  not  afraid." 
It  comforts,  it  cheers,  it  upholds.  Just  observe  what  encouragement  here  is  for 
faith  to  the  followers  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Having  Himself  '*  suffered,  being 
tempted.  He  is  able  to  succour  them  that  are  tempted."  He  has  the  fulness  of  grace ; 
"  all  power  is  given  to  Him  in  heaven  and  in  earth  " ;  it  is  in  His  own  hands,  and 
he  is  "  full  of  grace  and  truth."  "  He  is  able  to  succour  them  that  are  tempted." 
"  Well,"  say  you, "  is  He  willing?  "  Suppose  I  reverse  the  question :  Are  you  willing 
that  He  should  ?  or  are  you  looking  somewhere  else  for  succour?  Are  you  willing 
that  He  should  do  it  in  His  own  way?  (J.  Irons.)  Christ's  succour  to  the 
tempted : — I.  Having  suffered  ondeb  temptation,  Christ  b^v'ows  the  force  of 
TEMPTATION,  AND  CAN  SYMPATHISE  WITH  ouB  ENDTiBANCE  OF  IT.  He  knows  by  expe- 
rience— the  most  thorough,  realistic  kind  of  knowledge.     1.  He  has  seen  the  nature 


20fl  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 


of  the  evil.    2.  He  has  suffered  from  the  assaults  of  temptation.    11.  Knowinq 

THE     FOKCE     OP     TEMPTATION,     AND     SYMPATHISINO     WITH     THE     BUFFEEINO     IT     CAUSES, 

Christ  is  able  to  succour  the  tempted.  1.  His  sympathy  is  itself  succour.  2. 
By  His  knowledge  and  sympathy  He  can  give  just  such  grace  as  is  needed. 
Pathology  must  precede  therapeutics.  The  diagnosis  of  disease  is  the  first  duty 
of  the  physician,  and  it  is  the  most  difficult ;  when  that  is  successfully  accomplished, 
the  prescription  follows  almost  as  a  matter  of  course.  3.  His  knowledge  and 
sympathy  encourage  our  trust.  III.  Being  thus  able  to  succour  the  tempted, 
Christ  is  a  fit  mediator  between  God  and  man.  This  is  not  stated  in  the  text, 
but  it  is  the  inference  towards  which  the  writer  is  leading  us.  And  the  connection 
of  thought  is  apparent.  The  Mediator  has  a  twofold  relationship.  He  represents 
God  to  man  and  man  to  God  as  "  Apostle"  and  as  "  Hi<,'h  Priest "  (chap.  iii.  1).  1. 
The  ability  to  succour  is,  of  course,  of  primary  importance  in  the  representative  of 
God  to  man ;  for  He  comes  not  merely  as  an  ambassador  to  declare  the  mind  of 
God,  but  as  a  Saviour  to  redeem  the  world  to  God  and  preserve  the  redeemed  from 
falling  into  further  sin.  2.  It  is  also  important  in  the  representative  of  man  to 
God.  (W.  F.  Adeney,  M.A.)  Succour  in  Christ  for  the  tempted: — The  Divine 
Son  of  God,  before  His  incarnation  in  our  flesh,  was,  in  His  own  personal  being, 
eeparate  from  the  sons  of  men.  He  knew.  He  felt,  as  a  Creator,  all  that  we  suffer. 
But  one  link  was  wanting  to  bind  Him  to  us  ;  in  fact,  a  gulf  of  vast  extent  lay  yet 
between  ub.  He  had  not  undergone  these  things — we  had  undergone  them.  No  cry 
of  suffering  had  ever  arisen  from  Him ;  from  man,  every  hour  since  the  Fall  had 
sent  up  its  utterance  of  woe.  This  distinction  no  Divine  knowledge  can  overstep  ; 
this  gulf  no  tender  love  of  the  Creator  for  His  creature  can  ever  bridge  over.  Personal 
experience  is  the  prerogative  of  personal  being,  with  which  none  can  intermeddle, 
and  which  God  Himself  infringes  not.  Ever  since  the  dawn  of  thought  its  exercise 
has  been  enriching  each  one  of  us.  Its  fruits  are  our  own,  in  a  manner  in  which 
nought  else  is  our  own.  Ask  the  poor  victim  of  suffering  and  pain  where  lies  the 
charm  in  that  one  face,  pale  and  wan,  and  with  no  outward  charm,  which  above  all 
others  he  loves  to  see  bending  over  his  bed  and  ministering  to  him  ?  Others  bring 
gifts ;  she,  it  may  be,  can  bring  none :  others  speak  many  words  of  studied  kindness ; 
she,  perhaps,  speaks  but  Uttle  and  seldom  ;  but  there  is  that  in  the  calm  usual  face, 
the  ordinary  casual  word,  the  help,  better  and  more  precious,  and  more  powerful,  and 
more  beloved  than  all  on  earth  besides.  Yes ;  because  that  face  has  known  sorrow — 
that  sympathy,  flowing  so  still,  comes  from  the  deep  fountains  of  personal  suffering ; 
because  tbat  one,  having  suffered,  knows  how  to  succour  them  that  suffer.  Thus, 
then,  Christ's  temptation  was  His  training ;  and  we  have  now  to  consider  how  it 
may  be  our  help.  The  question  for  us  is.  How  may  we,  dwelling  in  the  midst  of 
temptation  day  by  day,  make  use  of  our  Lord's  temptation,  as  an  element  in  His 
course  for  our  redemption,  to  help  us  in  our  conflict  ?  I  would  say,  then,  to  the 
tempted,  first — Strive  to  understand  Christ;  not  in  the  self-sufficient,  lower  sense 
of  the  word  "  understand,"  but  in  its  higher  and  humbler  sense — to  take  in  a  living 
idea  of  the  length  and  depth  and  brcarlth  and  height  of  that  marvellous  sympathising 
humanity  which  Christ  bears  about  Him  now,  as  He  did  then.  Watch  it  growing 
broader  and  deeper  by  sorrow  and  suffering  and  temptation ;  watch  it  taking  into 
itself,  as  a  great  world-wide  stream,  all  those  lesser  drops,  those  tributary  rills,  of 
thy  sorrows  and  mine,  thy  sufferings  and  mine,  thy  temptations  and  mine.  Nay, 
more ;  follow  in  the  wonderful  gospel  record  day  by  day  the  onward  course  of  the  Son 
of  God.  Bear  in  mind  who  He  was  and  whence  He  came.  See  the  calm  surface  of  the 
ocean  of  Divine  love  and  Divine  wisdom  becoming  ruffled  by  the  disturbing  forces 
of  our  troubled  humanity,  till  at  length  His  whole  being  is  torn  into  the  fierce  waves 
of  the  tempest,  and  He  cries,  "  My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto  death," 
and  claims  the  sympathy  of  those  who  were  so  unequal  to  console  Him  :  "  Tarry 
ye  here  and  watch  with  Me."  And  all  this  for  the  very  purpose  that  He  might  be 
touched  with  a  feeUng  of  thine  infirmities — all  this  that  He  might  in  His  present 
ascended  state  bear  every  temptation  and  suffering  of  every  man  on  earth  in  His 
heart.  (Dean  Alford.)  On  temptation  : — 1.  There  is  a  vexing,  corroding,  afBictive 
disposition  in  every  temptation,  when  it  takes  least,  though  it  do  not  prevail.  These 
fire-balls,  fire-darts  of  Satan  have  a  danger  with  them ;  though  they  do  not  burn 
down  our  spiritual  building  to  the  ground,  there  is  somewhat  of  a  suffering  with 
them.  Paul  calls  his  buffetings  a  thorn,  or  a  prick  in  the  flesh,  and  therefore 
atflictive  (see  also  Luke  xxii.  31).  Satan  comes  to  meet  us,  and  though  we  do  not 
consent  to  him,  yet  a  gracious  heart  cannot  but  look  upon  it  as  an  affliction  to  be 
thus  followed  and  hunted  with  a  temptation.     And  the  Holy  Ghost  alludes  to  this 


CHAP   in.]  HEBREWS.  207 

practice  when  He  saith  here  in  the  text,  Jesus  Christ  is  able  to  sacconr.  The 
word  succour  signifies  such  a  succouring  as  brings  in  help  unto  those  that  cr}' 
out.  2.  Doth  God  suffer  His  own  children  thus  to  suffer  ?  Yes,  and  many  times 
the  best  are  most  tempted;  those  that  are  most  eminently  godly  are  most  foully 
assaulted.  David,  Job,  Peter,  Paul,  and  Christ  Himself  was.  Yea,  God  doth  not 
only  suffer  Satan  to  come  and  present  evil  objects  before  His  servants,  but  suffers 
him  to  go  so  far  as  to  solicit,  to  follow  on  his  temptation.  Yea,  God  doth  not  only 
suffer  this,  but  at  that  very  time  when  the  saints  have  had  most  of  God  then  they 
have  suffered  by  the  hand  of  temptation.  When  Paul  had  been  taken  up  into  the 
third  heaven,  then  a  messenger  (Satan)  was  sent  to  buffet  him.  And  would  you 
know  the  reason  ?  Good  authors  say  that  God  suffers  His  own  dear  children  to  be 
tempted  that  they  may  be  more  enlightened.  Temptation  enlightens  the  tempted  ; 
thereby  they  are  more  experienced.  God  suffers  His  children  thus  to  be  tempted 
that  they  may  be  cleansed.  These  are  God's  scullions  to  make  His  golden  pots  of  the 
saoctuaiy  ihe  brighter;  God  suffers  His  own  children  to  be  tempted  that  they  may 
be  conserved  or  kept :  He  preserves  them  from  one  sin  by  being  tempted  to  another. 
And  Paul  says  that  he  received  that  messenger  of  Satan  twice,  that  he  might  not  be 
exalted.  God  suffers  His  children  to  be  tempted  that  their  graces  may  be  increased. 
As  the  fire  is  blown  up  by  the  wind  of  the  bellows,  and  the  strength  of  an  argument 
draws  out  the  strength  of  the  answerer,  so  do  these  temptations  draw  out  the 
strength  of  the  tempted.  God  suffers  His  children  to  be  tempted  that  they  may  be 
discovered  to  themselves  and  others,  what  their  sins  and  graces  are.  You  do  not 
know  what  the  liquor  is  until  the  vessel  be  bored ;  then  you  know  it.  And  the 
word  tbat  is  here  used  for  temptation  originally  signifies  to  bore,  as  a  vessel  is 
bored.  God  suffers  His  children  to  be  tempted  that  occasionally  they  may  be  made 
more  fit  to  receive  the  fulness  of  Christ  as  a  Saviour.  A  man  not  tempted  may 
receive  the  fulness  of  Christ  as  the  head ;  but  unless  a  man  be  tempted  he  is  not  fit 
to  receive  the  fulness  of  Christ  as  a  Saviour.  Hereby  they  are  made  like  unto  Jesus 
Christ.  Christ  was  made  like  to  us,  that  He  might  be  tempted  ;  and  we  are  tempted 
that  we  may  be  made  Uke  to  Him.  3.  But  you  will  say,  "  If  God's  own  people,  His 
children,  be  sorely  tempted,  how  is  that  true  which  yon  have  in  1  John  v.  18  :  "  Who- 
soever is  born  of  God  sins  not :  he  that  is  begotten  of  God  keeps  himself,  and  that 
wicked  one  toucheth  him  not"?  The  devil  toucheth  him  not;  and  if  the  devil 
does  not  so  much  as  touch  him,  how  can  this  be  true  that  he  suffers  thus  by  the 
hand  of  his  temptation  ?  For  answer  hereunto  ye  must  know  that  this  word 
touching,  in  Scripture  phrase,  besides  the  literal  sense,  sometimes  notes  an  hurting 
or  harming  of  one.  So  in  Psa.  cv.  15 :  "  Touch  not  Mine  anointed  " ;  which  is  explained 
in  the  following  words:  "and  do  My  prophets  no  harm."  Again  this  same  word 
touching,  in  Scripture  phrase,  sometimes  notes  communion;  and  so  when  the 
apostle  forbids  the  Corinthians  fellowship  and  communion  with  idolaters,  saith  he, 
"Be  ye  separate,  and  touch  no  andean  thing"  ;  touching  there  noting  communion 
and  fellowship  with  them  in  their  worship :  do  not  in  the  least  measure  have  anj 
communion  with  them.  So  now,  although  it  pleases  God  to  suffer  Satan  thus  to  vex 
His  children  with  temptation,  yet  notwithstanding  they  have  not  fellowship  or 
communion  with  him.  (TF.  Bridge,  M.A.)  Sympathy  the  fruit  of  suffering : — 
Leopold,  Grand  Duke  of  Baden,  in  the  midst  of  the  suffering  caused  by  his  com- 
plaint, said  to  his  physician,  "  Teil  me,  doctor,  are  there  any  who  suffer  as  much 
as  I  do?"  "Yes,  your  highness,"  replied  the  doctor;  "I  have  a  patient  aflQioted 
with  the  same  disease,  and  lying  on  a  bed  of  straw."  "  On  straw  1"  cried  Leopold. 
With  a  trembling  band  he  rang  the  bell,  and  ordered  his  servants  to  have  the  best 
bed  in  the  castle  taken  to  the  sick  man,  as  well  as  all  other  necessaries. 


CHAPTER  m. 

Vkb.  1.  Wherefore,  holy  brethren. — The  heavenly  calling : — "  Wherefore  "  eonnects 
generally  with  chaps,  i.,  ii.,  where  Christ  is  Apostle  (chap.  i.  1-3)  and  High  Priest 
(chap.  ii.  9,  &c.),  though  immediately  with  "  faithful"  (chap.  ii.  17)  and  the  closing 
words  of  chap.  ii.  The  author  had  in  view  this  comparison  with  Moses,  and 
prepared  the  way  for  it  by  using  "  faithful "  in  chap.  ii.  17.  The  author  had  called 
believers  "sanctified  "  and  "  sons"  (chap.  ii.  11-13);  recalling  this,  and  realising 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m; 

what  it  implied,  he  addresses  the  Hebrews  as  "  holy  brethren."  Farther,  he  had 
set  before  them  what  the  great  salvation  was  to  which  they  were  destined  (chap,  iu 
3),  and  to  which  the  Captain  of  their  salvation  had  attained,  even  lordship  over  all 
things  in  the  world  to  come  (chap.  ii.  5,  &c.) ;  and  as  called  to  this  heavenly  world 
and  already  tasting  its  powers  (chap.  vi.  5,  ii.  4),  he  addresses  them  as  partakers  of 
"  a  heavenly  calling  "  ;  that  is,  sharing  in  a  call  to  the  possession  of  the  heavenly 
world  to  come.  In  the  word  "  heavenly  "  there  is  struck  for  the  first  time,  in  words 
at  least,  an  antithesis  of  great  importance  in  the  Epistle,  that  of  this  world  and 
heaven ;  in  other  words,  that  of  the  merely  material  and  transient  and  the  ideal 
and  abiding.  The  things  of  this  world  are  material,  unreal,  transient ;  those  of 
heaven  are  ideal,  true,  and  eternaL  Heaven  is  the  world  of  realities,  of  things 
themselves  (chap.  ix.  23),  of  which  the  things  here  are  but  "  copies."  There  is  the 
true  Tabernacle  (chap.  viii.  2) ;  the  city  that  hath  the  foundations  (chap.  xi.  10) ; 
the  heavenly  Jerusalem  and  Mount  Zion  (chap.  xii.  22) ;  the  kingdom  that  cannot 
be  shaken  (chap.  xii.  27,  28) ;  the  true  "  country "  which  the  patriarchs  sought 
(chap.  xi.  16) — all  the  eternal  real  things  of  which  the  things  of  this  world  are  but 
shadows  (chap.  x.  1) ;  and  to  these  things  we  are  called  and  are  come,  for  this 
heavenly  world  projects  itself  into  this  present  life  like  headlands  of  a  new  world 
into  the  ocean.  This  world  of  realities  has  been  revealed,  for  Christ,  who  belongs 
to  it,  has  come  from  it,  and  has  opened  up  the  way  to  it  by  entering  it  through 
death  as  our  Forerunner  (chap.  vi.  20)  and  High  Priest  (chap.  x.  19).  This  real 
world  is  the  abode  of  God,  where  He  is  as  He  is  in  Himself.  It  is  that  which  He 
has  destined  to  be  put  in  subjection  to  man  as  his  final  possession  (chap.  ii.  5-8). 
Being  true  and  consisting  of  things  themselves,  it  cannot  be  shaken,  but  remains 
after  the  great  convulsions  under  which  things  that  are  made  pass  away  (chap,  xii, 
27).  Then  it  may  be  called  earth  or  heaven,  for  earth  and  heaven  coincide.  {A. 
B.  Davidson,  LL.D.)  The  causes  of  men's  being  holy,  and  of  calling  them  so: — 
This  excellent  prerogative  of  being  holy  cannot  arise  from  men's  selves.  "  Who 
can  bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean?  not  one"  (Job  xiv.  4).  "  But  every 
good  and  every  perfect  gift  is  from  above,  and  cometh  down  from  the  Father  of 
lights  "  (James  i.  17).  This  Father  of  lights  communicateth  holiness  to  men  two 
ways.  1.  By  imputing  unto  them  the  righteousness  of  His  Son.  Thus  we  are  said 
to  be  "  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Christ "  (2  Cor.  v.  21),  and  Christ  is  said 
to  "  be  made  of  God  righteousness  unto  us  "  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  2.  By  conveying  His 
Spirit  into  us,  who  altereth  our  nature  and  disposition,  and  enableth  us  to  perform 
the  works  of  righteousness.  In  this  respect  He  is  not  only  called  the  Holy  Ghost, 
but  also  the  Spirit  of  holiness  (Rom.  i.  4) ;  and  sanctification  is  said  to  be  of  the 
Spirit  (2  Thess.  ii.  13),  because  it  is  wrought  in  us  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  Thus  this 
excellent  title  "  Holy  "  gives  no  matter  of  boasting  unto  man  (2  Cor.  iv.  7)  ;  but  it 
pveth  great  cause  of  glorying  in  God.  The  apostle  here  giveth  these  Hebrews  this 
title  not  so  much  in  regard  of  their  parentage,  because  the  root  from  whence  they 
sprouted  was  holy  (Rom.  xi.  16) ;  for  the  partition  wall  betwixt  Jew  and  Gentile 
was  now  broken  down,  and  all  that  were  of  the  faith  of  Abraham  were  counted  to 
be  of  Abraham's  seed  (Gal.  iii.  7).  The  apostle  therefore  here  gives  them  this  title — 
1.  In  regard  to  their  profession,  whereby  they  were  distinguished  from  profane 
persons.  2.  In  regard  of  his  opinion  of  them  ;  for  he  judged  them  to  be  true 
members  of  the  holy  Church  (1  Cor.  vi.  11).  Thus  he  usually  styleth  all  to  whom 
he  wrote  "  saints"  ;  that  is,  holy  ones.  How  did  the  apostle  know  that  they  were 
holy  ?  By  their  holy  profession ;  for  the  ground  of  judging  others  is  not  certainty 
of  knowledge,  but  the  rule  of  love  (1  Cor.  xiii.  7).  (IF.  Gouge.)  Directions  to  he 
holy: — That  we  maybe  such  "holy  brethren"  as  are  here  set  down — 1.  Be  well 
informed  in  the  nature  of  holinei?s.  If  the  mark  be  mistaken,  the  more  diligence 
we  use,  the  further  we  shall  be  off  from  it.  The  faster  a  traveller  goes  in  a  wrong 
way,  the  farther  he  may  be  from  the  place  to  which  he  desires  to  go.  The  Jews, 
being  ignorant  of  God's  righteousness,  and  going  about  to  establish  their  own 
righteousness,  were  farthest  off  from  true  holiness.  2.  "  Cleanse  yourselves  from 
all  filthiness  of  the  flesh  and  spirit."  Thus  may  you  "  perfect  holiness  in  the  fear 
of  God  "  (2  Cor.  vii.  1).  It  is  a  course  which  all  of  all  sorts  observe  for  perfecting 
a  thing,  namely,  first  to  remove  the  impediments  ;  thus  physicians  purge  out 
peccant  humours,  chirurgians  draw  out  festering  matter,  husbandmen  stock  up 
broom,  briars,  thorns,  and  all  noisome  weeds.  3.  Have  special  care  of  your 
company.  Avoid  the  society  of  unholy  ones  (Psa.  xvi.  3).  That  this  means 
is  very  powerful  is  evident  (Prov.  xiii.  20,  xxii.  24,  25).  4.  Be  constant  in 
using  such  means  as  God  hath  sanctified  for  attaining  holiness ;  for  God  will 


CHAP,  in.]  HEBREWS.  209 


be  found  in  His  ovm  way.  The  means  are— (1)  Public ;  (2 )  private ;  (3)  seeret. 
Public  means  are  the  Word  and  Sacraments.  5.  Be  instant  and  constant 
in  prayer,  and  that  for  the  Holy  Spirit  which  is  promised  to  those  that  a^k 
Him  (Luke  xi.  13).  This  Spirit  it  is  which  makes  us  holy.  6.  Be  patient 
under  crosses ;  for  God  doth  chasten  His,  that  they  might  be  "  partakers  of  His 
holiness"  (chap.  xii.  10).  (Ibid.)  Partakers  of  the  heavenly  cailhig.—The 
heavenly  calling : — The  calling  of  saints  is  here  commended  unto  us  by  this  attri- 
bute  "heavenly."  It  is  here  in  this  place  attributed  to  saints'  calling — 1.  To 
distinguish  it  from  earthly  calliugs.  2.  To  show  the  excellency  thereof ;  for  excel- 
lent things  are  called  heavenly ;  great,  deep,  excellent  mysteries  are  called  heavenly 
(John  iii.  12).  3.  To  declare  the  end  of  this  calling,  which  is  to  briog  us  to  a 
heavenly  kingdom  (1  Thess.  ii.  12),  namely,  an  inheritance  incorruptible,  reserved 
in  heaven  (1  Pet.  i.  4).  This  particular  excellency  here  mentioned  by  the  apostle  ia 
of  force  to  raise  up  our  hearts  unto  heaven,  seeking  the  things  that  are  above.  It 
doth  also  instruct  us  how  to  walk  worthy  of  this  calling,  namely,  by  an  inward 
heavenly  disposition   and   an   outward    heavenly   conversation.      (Ibid.)  The 

tuperiority  of  Christianity  :  —  I.  The  distinction  between  the  Jewish  and 
Christian  dispensations  in  bespect  to  their  natuhe.  1.  This  distinction  of 
nature  is  set  forth  in  the  word  by  which  the  apostle  designates  the  Christian's 
vocation.  He  terms  it  "the  heavenly  calling."  (1)  The  word  rendered  here 
"  oalUng  "  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  gospel's  general  invitation  to  salva- 
tion, but  refers  to  that  to  which  beheveis  are  entitled  through  Christ  Jesus.  (2)  It 
is  termed  "  heavenly,"  not  in  respect  to  its  source,  for  Judaism  and  Christianity 
have  a  common  orij^in.  Both  are  of  God,  in  respect  to  the  nature  of  the  blessing3 
proffered  and  the  sphere  where  the  blessings  are  to  be  enjoyed.  (3)  The  intimate 
and  exalted  fellowship  of  those  united  under  the  banner  of  this  "  heavenly  calling  " 
is  here  noticeable  :  "  Holy  brethren,  partakers  of  the  heavenly  calling."  (a) 
"  Brethren  "  by  kinship  closer  and  more  enduring  than  that  formed  by  natural 
bonds,  {b)  "  Holy,"  in  the  sense  of  being  set  apart  by  God  the  Father,  through 
Christ  His  Son,  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  one  heavenly  and  sacred  aim — the  service  of 
God  alone,  (c)  "  Partakers  "  ;  literally,  "  holding  things  in  common."  Sh  irers 
together  of  the  privileges  of  the  "  heavenly  calling."  (4)  Noticeable  also  are  the 
terms  applied  to  the  Lord  in  connection  with  the  heavenly  calling,  and  the  earnest 
exhortation  of  the  apostle  to  due  consideration  of  Christ  in  these  offices.  "  Consider 
the  Apostle  and  Higii  Priest  of  our  profession,  Christ  Jesus."  (a)  The  word  rendered 
"  consider  "  means  to  observe  well,  to  consider  attentively,  to  ponder  thoughtfully. 
(b)  The  word  "apostle"  (literally,  "one  sent"),  as  applied  to  our  Lord  here,  i3 
peculiar,  this  being  the  only  place  where  this  special  term  is  applied  to  Him.  We 
may  regard  the  word  "  apostle  "  as  used  to  avoid  ambiguity,  and  also  at  the  same 
time  to  set  forth  our  Lord  as  having  been  "  sent "  of  God,  and  therefore  divinely 
authorised,  as  was  Moses,  (c)  The  expression  "  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession," 
suggestively  represents  the  Divine  authority,  and  also  the  redemptive  feature  so 
prominent  in  the  Christian  system.  II.  The  distinction  between  Christ  and 
Moses  in  the  relation  thbt  sustained  to  their  respective  dispensations.  1. 
Christ  is  here  represented  as  being  the  owner  of  the  "  house  "  He  served,  Moses 
being  only  servant  of  the  "  house  "  he  served.  (1)  Notice  the  significance  of  the 
term  "  house."  Its  meaning,  as  applied  to  Christ's  house,  is  given  in  ver.  6, 
(2)  The  sense  in  which  Christ  is,  and  Moses  was  not,  owner  of  the  "  house  "  each 
respectively  served  thus  becomes  obvious.  The  apostle,  however,  even  here,  holds 
still  prominently  before  us  that  it  was  in  His  capacity  as  "  Son  "  He  also  redeemed. 
2.  This  ownership  in  the  "  household  of  faith  "  sustains  the  apostle  in  his  next 
position — that  Christ  has  a  higher  claim  to  homage  and  honour  than  Moses.  3. 
The  prominent  and  practical  characteristic  here  mentioned  should  not  be  lost  sight 
of  in  connection  with  Christ's  superiority  to  Moses,  namely.  His  faithfulness.  III. 
Practical  and  solemn  inferences  from  the  preceding  positions.  1.  An  earnest 
lesson  from  the  history  of  the  past  (vers.  7-12).  2.  Practical  counsel  as  to  what  they 
should  do  (ver.  13).  3.  The  only  reliable  evidence  of  our  union  with  Christ  (ver.  14).  4. 
The  essential  importance  of  every-day  religion  (vers.  15-18).  (1)  To  prevent  hardness 
of  heart.  Heedlessness  is  the  beginning  and  the  sure  evidence  of  hardness  (ver.  16). 
(2)  To  avoid  that  grieving  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  is  inevitably  followed  by  Divine 
judgment  (vers.  16, 17).  5.  The  fearful  cause  of  all  defection  from  God  and  of  all  sin 
against  God — '•  unbelief  "  (ver.  19).  (1)  It  was  the  cause  of  the  first  sin  of  our  first 
parents  in  Eden.  (2)  It  was  the  cause  of  the  first  murder  on  record.  (3)  It  was 
the  prolific  cause  of  all  those  terrible  effects  which  culminated  in  the  destruction  of 

14 


210  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHA*.  m. 

all  religions  life  in  the  antediluvians,  with  the  exception  of  one  man,  and  led  to  the 
destruction  of  the  whole  race  of  mankind  save  Noah  and  his  family.    Oh,  what  a 
hvdra-headed,  destructive  monster  is  unbelief  I    (D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.)        Consider 
>  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession,  Christ  Jesus. — Christ  to  be  appreciated  : — A  young 
I  lady,  a  novice  in  art,  said  to  her  father,  who  was  an  accomplished  man  of  taste, 
\    "  Father,  I  cannot  enjoy  the  works  of  the  old  masters."    "  Then,"  said  he  "  look  at 
J  them  till  you  can."    Even  so,  if  one  were  to  say,  "  I  cannot  appreciate  the  Cross," 
j    our  earnest  reply  would  be,  "  Study  it  till  you  can."     (C.  Clemance,  D.D.)        Christ 
\  should  he  contemplated  : — It  is  recorded  of  a  celebrated  philosopher  that,  pursuing 
his  investigations  on  the  subject  of  light,  he  ventured  on  a  bold  experiment.   With- 
out the  protection  of  smoked  glass,  he  turned  his  naked  eye  on  the  sun,  and  kept  it 
fixed  there  for  awhile.     When  he  removed  it,  such  was  the  impression  made  upon 
his  eyes,  that  whichever  way  he  looked,  upwards,  downwards,  right  or  left,  he  saw 
nothing  but  the  sun.     The  last  thing  he  saw  at  night,  the  first  thing  he  saw  in  the 
morning,  was  the  sun.     What  a  blessed  thing  it  would  be  for  us  if  we  had  some 
J    such  view  of  Christ,  if  the  glory  and  love  of  Him  who  died,  and  was  buried,  and 
!    rose  again  for  us,  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  was  thus  impressed  upon  our  souls  1     (A. 
C.  Price,  B.A.)        Consider  Jesus : — Hazlitt  once  copied  a  painting  of  Titian's,  and 
showed  it  one  evening  to  his  friends,  Charles  and  Mary  Cowden  Clarke.  It  was  fine, 
but  as  he  held  the  light  to  it,  and  thus  unconsciously  showed  his  own  intellectual 
head,  square  "  potential  forehead,"  and  eyes  full  of  earnest  fire,  they  felt  that  he 
was  really  the  picture  to  gaze  at.     In  like  manner,  Jesus  Ufts  the  light  of  truth  to 
the  picture  of  duty,  but  He  also  grandly  embodied  it  in  His  daily  life.     (T.  R. 
Stevenson.)         Consider  Jesus  and  banish  frivolity: — The  wise  picture-dealer  at 
Oxford  was  right,  who,  handing  to  an  undergraduate  the  fine  engraving  of  an 
ancient  master,  said,  "  Hang  this  on  your  walls,  sir,  and  it  will  soon  banish  all  the 
pictures  of  jockeys  and   ballet-girls."      (F.   W.   Farrar,  D.D.)  Priesthood   of 

Christ : — About  a  hundred  years  ago  a  Welsh  boy  heard  a  sermon  upon  the  priest- 
hood of  Jesus  Christ.  It  was  a  new  idea  to  the  boy,  filling  him  with  astonishment 
and  delight.  The  doctrine  was  so  excellent  and  sweet  to  him,  that  without  delay 
he  opened  his  heart  to  it.  To  this  day  all  the  Welsh  revere  his  memory,  for  that 
boy  became  the  Eev.  Thomas  Charles  of  Bala,  the  apostle  of  his  native  land,  the 
founder  of  day  and  Sabbath  schools  and  of  the  Bible  Society.  And  such  a  faith  in 
Christ  will  give  you,  too,  a  true  and  fruitful  life.  {J.  Wells,  M.A.)  The  advan- 
tages derived  from  considering  Jesus  : — I.  The  solemn  consideration  of  Jesus  Christ 
xnay  well  reconcile  iou  to  any  difficult  or  trying  circumstances  in  which  you  may 
be  placed.  Compared  to  His  what  are  all  the  duties  which  we  have  to  perform,  or 
any  sufferings  which  we  have  to  endure  ?  How  few  have  to  "  resist  unto  blood, 
Btriving  against  sin.*'  Every  repining  thought  must  be  subdued.  II.  "  Consider 
the  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  your  profession,"  and  you  will  see  in  Him  a  modbl 
FOR  YOUR  conduct,  and  will  learn  how  to  act  in  circumstances  of  difiBculty  or 
distress.  Amid  injustice  and  ill-treatment,  which  so  easily  discompose  the  mind 
and  render  one's  duty  so  peculiarly  difficult,  Jesus  has  taught  us  how  wisdom, 
integrity,  and  goodness  would  act.  Now  the  principles  which  formed  the  character 
and  governed  the  whole  conduct  of  Jesus  are  evidently  these  two — faith  in  God  and 
love  to  mankind.  Clearly  discovering  in  His  character  and  conduct  the  wonderful 
efficacy  of  these  principles,  we  must  fix  them  in  our  souls  if  we  wish  to  fulfil  the 
more  difficult  duties  of  life  or  rest  in  composure  and  peace  of  mind  amid  its  various 
ills.  III.  To  consider  Jesus  will  animate  and  encourage  you  amid  the  difficulties 
AND  ILLS  OF  life.  He  foTcsaw  all  the  extent  of  His  sufferings,  and  "  in  all  things 
made  like  unto  His  brethren,"  He  felt  all  the  depression  natural  to  the  human  mind 
in  such  disheartening  prospects  ;  but  declining  any  exertion  of  supemaiural  powers. 
He  resigns  Himself  to  the  violence  of  wicked  men,  with  no  other  defence  but  that 
Divine  grace  and  those  heavenly  principles  which  the  humblest  of  His  followers 
may  through  His  mediation  attain.  And  can  His  admirable  conduct  be  exhibited 
to  us  in  vain  ?  Can  it  be  contemplated  without  exciting  our  efforts  and  prompting 
our  imitation  ?      (R.   Boog,  D.D.)  The   Christian  and  his  Redeemer  : — I.  A 

description  of  TRUE  CHRISTIANS.  1.  A  common  character  :  "  Holy."  2.  A  common 
relationship  :  "  Brethren."  3.  A  common  privilege :  "  Partakers,"  &c.  A  call  from 
heaven  and  to  heaven.  H.  A  description  of  the  great  Redeemer.  1.  The 
Apostle  of  our  profession.  Sent  from  God  to  us.  2.  The  High  Priest  of  our 
profession.  By  Him  we  draw  near  to  God,  even  as  by  Him  God  draws  near  to 
us.  3.  The  Christ  Jesus— the  anointed  Deliverer.  III.  The  obligations  of  true 
Christians-  to  tile  great  Redeemer.     "  Consider."     Men's  chaiactera  are  formed 


CHAP,  m.]  HEBREWS.  211 

by  their  thinkings.     Meditation  is  the  most  constant  and  influential  operation  of 
our  nature.     (U.  R.  Thomas.)         The  Advent  call: — "Consider,"  then,  it  is  here 
directed,  "the  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  our  profession,  Christ  Jesus."     Seeing 
what  He  is,  according  to  the  statements  of  the  two  previous  chapters  ;  how  great, 
how  Divine,  how  human,  how  merciful,  and  how  faithful ;  how  suiBoient  in  His 
atonement  for  siu,  how  experienced  in  His  sympathy  with  the  tempted ;  consider 
Him,  fix  your  thoughts  upon  Him.    Now  in  what  aspects  are  we  here  charged  to  con- 
eider  Christ  ?     1.  As  "  the  Apostle  of  our  profession  "  ;  that  is,  of  our  confession,  or 
common  faith.    An  apostle  means  an  emissary,  or  ambassador,  or  representative — 
one  who  comes  to  us  with  a  message  or  commission,  in  this  case  from  God  Himself. 
We  ought  to  be  transactmg  business  with  Him,  if  I  might  so  express  it,  every  day ; 
dealing  with  Him  as  to  the  concerns  of  our  life,  inward  and  outward,  and  conscious 
that,   in  so  doing,   we  are  dealing  also  with  God  Himself.     2.  Again,  the  High 
Priest  of  our  confession.     You  know  how  large  a  part  of  this  Epistle  is  occupied 
with  the  subject  thus  introduced  :  the  priesthood  of  Jesus  Christ  as  satisfying  all 
those  wants  which  any  other  priesthood  could  only  indicate  and  impress.     "  Hark 
the  glad  sound  !  the  Saviour  comes" — why  is  it  a  glad  sound?    It  is  not  because 
we  wanted  an  Apostle,  and  because  we  wanted  a  High  Priest  ?     Put  Christ   out  of 
sight  altogether  for  a  moment,  and  then  see  how  dark  life  is,  the  present  and  the 
future.     See  what  it  is  to  be  conscious  of  sin,  aud  then  suppose  tliat  there  were  no 
Christ,  no  Saviour,  uo  Propitiation,  and  no  Intercessor  1     Yes,  we  know  that  we 
slmll  all  want  Him ;   as  our  Apostle,  as  God's  representative,  that  is ;  as  our 
all-wise  Teacher,    our  Revealer   of   God    as    He    is,    as    the    Person  in  whom 
as    well    as    by  whom    God    deals    with    our    souls,  and  bids   us  also  to  deal 
with  Him ;  want  Him  also  as  our  High  Priest,  our    Sacrifice  and  Propitiation 
for    sin,    our    merciful    Intercessor,    our    faithful    Advocate   with    God.     {Dean 
Vaurihan.)       Christians  invited  to  consider  Christ: — I.  The  characters  addressed: 
"  Holy  brethren."     1.  All  real  Christians  are — (1)  Partakers  of  the  same  spiritual 
nature.     (2)  Members  of  the  same  family.     (3)  Interested  in  each  other's  welfare. 
2.  Christians  are  "  holy" — (1)  By  the  dedication  which  tbey  have  made  of  them- 
selves to  God.     (2)  By  the  purification  of  their  minds,     3.  They  are  partakers  of 
a  calling — (1)  Heavenly  in  its  origin.     (2)  Heavenly  in  its  end.     II.  The  advicb 
GIVEN.     1.  Christ  was   a  Divine  Messenger.     He  is  a  Divine  Person.     He  was 
divinely  sent   (John   iv.   34,   v.   23,  and  vii.  16).      2.    Christ  was    a    voluntary 
messenger.     He  came  willingly  (Heb.  x.  5-9).     The  undertaking  was  arduous,  but 
"  He  gave  Himself  for  us."    3.  Christ  was  a  merciful  messenger.     He  came  not  to 
destroy,  but  to  save  ;  and  it  was  all  free,  unparalleled  mercy.    4.  He  is  "  the  High 
Priest   of    our   profession."     (1)  He   made   an   atonement   for  sin  (Heb.  ix.  28). 
(2)  The  Jewish  high  priest  blessed  the  people  (Numb.  vi.  23-27).      (3)  The  Jewish 
high  priest  interceded  for  the  people  ;  and  Christ  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession 
for  us.    5.  Tiie  advice  given  is,  "  Consider  the  apostle,"  &o.     Consideration  is  the 
exercise  of  thought,  not  a  hasty  glance  at  an  object,  but  a  deliberate  exercise  of 
the  mind.     Hence  we  should  consider  Christ.      (1)  That  we  know  Him.    The 
knowledge  of  Christ  is  the  most  beneficial  we  can  possess  ;  but  no  man  can  know 
Christ  who  will  not  consider  Him.     (2)  That  we  may  be  grateful  to  Him.    Our 
obligations  to  Christ  should  bind  us  to  be  grateful  to  Him  ;  but  these  obligations  can 
be  known  only  by  consideration.  (3)  That  we  may  keep  His  commandments.  No  man 
can  keep  Christ's  commandments  who  neglects  the  advice  in  the  text.    (4)  That  we 
may  emulate  His  example.    (Sketches  of  Sermons. )      The  consideration  of  the  apostle- 
ship  and  priesthood  of  Christ  inculcated: — I.    The  characters  here  pecdliarlt 
ADDRESSED.     1.  "  Holy  brethren."     Every  one  must  possess  holiness,  not  indeed  in 
peifection  :  but,  as  it  were,  the  Christian's  element,  where  he  breathes  with  freedom 
and  with  peace.     Sin  is  the  Christian's  aversion,  and  therefore  he  looks  forward 
with  joy  to  that  period  when  he  shall  put  off  this  body  of  sin,  and  be  in  possession 
of  a  holy  and  blessed  state  in  heaven.     2.  The  characters  here  addressed  are  des- 
cribed as  "  Partakers  of  the  heavenly  calling,"     Here  we  speak  of  the  manner  in 
which  such  are  brought  to  this  brotherly  love.      II.  The  high  character  given  in 
THE  text  of  Christ  Jesds,     1.  "  Apostle."     The  Redeemer  of  mankind,  though 
one  with  the  Fattier  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  declared  to  have  come  out  from  God  in 
the  capacity  of  a  servant.     In  His  commission  to  His  disciples  after  the  Resurrec- 
tion, He  acknowledged  His  own  apostleship.    He  says,  "  As  My  Father  hath  sent 
Me,  BO  send  I  you."      2.  '*High  Priest,"     The  high  priest  was  to  offer  up  the 
evening  sacrifice  and  prayer.      Christ   Jesus  appears  offering  Himself  a   perfect 
sacrifice  for  sin.     III.  Ths  dvty  becommended.    "  Consider."    As  if  he  had  said. 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nx. 

do  not  turn  away  from  Him,  as  though  you  had  no  interest  in  this  great  subject ; 
but  let  your  attention  be  drawn  off  from  everything  else,  that  your  soul  may  be 
found  resting  here.  {F.  H.  Fell,  M.A.)  The  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  our 
profession : — I.  The  Agents.  Who  are  exhorted  to  consider  Christ  ?  The  "  holy 
brethren,  partakers  of  the  heavenly  calling."  "  Holy  brethren."  The  terms 
define  sufficiently  the  class  of  persons  to  whom  this  exhortation  is  directly  ad- 
dressed. It  is  a  word,  not  for  those  who  are  without,  but  for  those  who  are  within. 
The  two  terms  are  interesting  separately,  and  in  their  union.  If  they  do  not 
certify  what  all  the  worshippers  are,  they  certainly  declare  what  each  ought  to  be. 
You  may  detect  here  the  twofold  division  of  duty,  which  from  its  fountain  in  the 
decalogue  flows  down,  and  penetrates  all  the  moral  teaching  of  the  Scriptures. 
Christians  get  both  the  first  and  the  second  commandments  printed  on  their  life. 
They  love  the  Lord  with  all  their  heart,  and  their  neighbour  as  themselves.  They 
are  '•  holy  "  to  God,  and  "  brethren  "  to  men.  Further,  they  are  "  partakers  of  the 
heavenly  calling."  It  comes  from  above,  and  invites  them  thither.  II.  The 
OBJECT.  Whom  should  the  holy  brethren  regard  ?  "  The  Apostle  and  High  Priest 
of  our  profession,  Christ  Jt  sus."  •'  Our  profession  "  is  the  religious  system  which 
we  adopt— the  confession  which  we  make  and  maintain.  It  indicates  prof  ession  to 
God,  and  confession  one  with  another.  We  hold  the  truth,  and  we  hold  it 
together.  We  hold  to  God  by  faith,  and  to  our  brethren  in  love.  It  is  not  the 
truth  in  type  and  shadow,  but  the  truth  Himself  unveiled — God  manifest  in  tbe 
flesh.  Our  profession,  finally,  is  not  self-righteousness,  but  faith.  It  is  not  what 
I  am  able  to  do,  but  what  God  is  willing  to  give.  Our  plea  is,  not  that  our  sins  are 
small,  but  that  our  Saviour  is  great.  "  By  grace  are  ye  saved  through  faith."  Of 
this  profession,  the  Apostle  aud  High  Priest  is  Christ  Jesus.  Either  ofSce  is  im- 
portant in  itself  ;  and  the  union  of  both  in  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  has  a  dis- 
tinct and  peculiar  importance  of  its  own.  An  apostle  is  one  sent  oat.  Missionary, 
with  which  we  have  become  so  familiar  in  our  days,  is  the  same  word  in  another 
language.  An  inexpressible  dignity  is  connected  with  the  mission  of  this  Aposii.\ 
The  sender,  the  sent,  and  the  errand,  are  all  great.  All  our  missions  are  copies  if 
this  great  original.  He  is  High  Priest  too.  It  is  His  office  to  go  into  the  holiest 
with  atoning  blood,  and  there  plead  for  the  rebelUous.  With  His  own  blood  our 
High  Priest  has  entered  into  the  heavens,  where  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession 
for  us.  In  His  own  personal  ministry  He  was  first  Apostle  and  then  High  Priest. 
In  the  order  of  time  His  mission  as  God's  representative  sent  out  to  us  was  first 
accomplished,  and  thereafter  His  mission  as  our  representative  sent  in  to  God. 
Throughout  His  personal  ministry  in  the  body  He  acted  as  Apostle  ;  at  His  death 
and  resurrection  and  ascension  He  became  High  Priest.  When  Jesus  as  our  High 
Priest  passed  into  the  heavens,  His  personal  ministry  as  our  Apostle  ceased  ;  but 
He  has  not  left  Himself  without  a  witness.  He  has  left  that  work  to  His  servants. 
He  prescribed  their  task,  and  promised  them  aid  (Matt,  xxviii.  20).  Not  only  every 
preaclier,  but  every  believer  of  the  Word,  is  an  apostle,  charged  and  qualified  to  make 
it  known.  When  He  ascended  He  left  on  earth  a  multitudinous  ministry.  Nor  is 
Divine  commission  wanting  to  the  meanest :  "  Let  him  that  heareth  say.  Come." 
In  a  similar  manner  the  intercession  of  the  High  Priest  in  heaven  is  reduplicated 
on  the  earth.  "  Brethren,  pray  for  us,"  expresses  the  true  instinct  of  the  new 
creature  in  a  time  of  need.  AH  who  preach  in  any  form  to  men  also  pray  for 
them  ;  and,  besides  these,  a  great  number  of  the  Lord's  little  ones,  who  lack 
courage  or  skill  to  speak  a  word  for  Christ,  speak  in  secret  to  Him,  for  their 
neighbours  and  for  the  world.  In  view  of  both  these  offices  He  said  to  His 
disciples,  "It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away."  His  ascension  into  heavea 
spreads  both  the  apostleship  and  the  priesthood  over  the  world.  In  contact  with 
the  earth's  surface  the  sun  would  be  only  a  consuming  fire;  from  the  height  of 
heaven  it  sheds  down  light  and  heat  on  every  land.  So  Christ,  after  the  days  of 
His  humiliation  were  done,  was  a  "Light  inaccessible  and  full  of  glory."  III.  The 
Act.  How  the  holy  brethren  should  regard  Christ :  "  Consider  Him."  Consider 
Him  the  Apostle.  Well  we  may.  When  the  heavens  must  open,  and  a  messenger 
come  forth  bearing  the  mind  of  God  to  men,  we  have  cause  to  rejoice  that  the 
mission  is  intrusted  to  a  partaker  of  our  nature.  It  was  necessary  that  we  should 
meet  God;  to  make  the  meeting  possible,  God  became  man  and  dwelt  among  us. 
Consider  Him  who  has  brought  out  the  message,  for  He  is  "  gentle  and  easy  to  be 
entreated."  Consider  Him  the  High  Priest.  He  is  before  the  throne,  charging 
Ri'ii^elf  with  all  the  interests  of  His  people.  He  has  power  with  God,  and  pity  for 
mau.    {W.  Amot.)        Consider    Christ: — I.  We    have    here  one  great  compre- 


CHAP,  m.]  HEBREWS.  211 

HENSiTE  COMMAND.    The  word  "  consider"  implies  in  the  original  an  earnest,  fixed, 
prolonged  attention  of  mind.    1.  The  first  remark  that  I  would  make  is  that 
a  Christian  man's  thoughts  should  be  occupied  with  his  Saviour.     How  do  you 
Christian  people  expect  to  get  any  blessing  from  Jesus  Christ  ?    Does  He  not  work 
by  His  truth  ?    And  can  that  truth  which  sanctifies  and  saves  produce  effects  if  it 
is  not  appropriated  by  the  meditative  occupation  of  our  minds  with  it  ?    What  ia 
all  the  gospel  to  you  unless  it  is  consciously  present  to  your  understanding,  and 
through  your  understanding  is  ruling  your  affections,  and  moulding  your  will,  and 
shaping  the  outgoings  of  your  life  ?    2.  Then,  that  being  premised,  note  how  much 
practical  direction  as  to  the  manner  of  that  occupation  of  mind  and  spirit  with 
Christ  lies  in  that  single  emphatic  word  "  consider."     (1)  There  is  surely  implied, 
to  begin  with,  that  such  occupation  must  be  the  result  of  conscious  effort.     Why, 
you  cannot  even  make  money  until,  as  you  say,  "you  give  your  minds  to  business." 
A  man  sitting  at  a  desk  cannot  even  add  up  a  column  of  figures  correctly  if  he  is 
thinking  about  a  hundred  other  things.     And  do  you  think  that  the  Divine  glories 
of  Christ  are  to  fiow  into  a  man's  soul  on  condition  of  less  concentration  and 
attention  ?    (2)  But,  still  further,  our  gaze  on  Him  must  be  the  look  of   eager 
interest ;  it  must  be  intense  as  well  as  fixed.    I  do  not  wonder  at  so  many  people 
thinking  that  there  is  nothing  to  interest  them  in  the  gospeL      There  is  nothing — 
and  that  because  they  do  not  come  to  it  with  awakened  eagerness,  and  so  because 
they  have  no  hunger  it  is  tasteless.     If  we  would  hear  Christ,  we  must  keep  our  ear 
attent  unto  His  voice.    To  superficial  investigation  no  treasures  are  disclosed,  we 
must  dig  deep  if  we  would  find  the  vein  where  the  gold  lies.     Still  further,  another 
requisite  of  this  occupation  of  mind  with  Christ  and  His  work  may  be  suggested  as 
included  in  the  word.     (3)  Our  consideration  must  be  resolute,  eager,  and,  also, 
steady  or  continuous.     A  hurried  glance  is  as  profitless  as  a  careless  one.     You  do 
not  see  much  on  first  going  into  a  dark  room  out  of  the  light ;  nor  do  you  see  much 
on  first  going  into  the  light  out  of  the  dark.    It  was  Newton,  I  think,  who,  when 
asked  as  to  his  method  of  working  in  attacking  complicated  problems,  had  only  the  / 
simple  answer  to  give,  "  I  keep  it  before  me."     Yes,  that  is  the  way  to  master  any  « 
subject  of  thought.     The  steady  gaze  will,  by  slow  degrees,  see  order  where  the  \ 
random  glance  saw  only  chaos.     And  we  shall  never  see  the  glory  of  that  light  "^ 
■which  dwells  between  the  Cherubim  if  our  visits  to  the  shrine  are  brief  and  inter- 
rupted, and  the  bulk  of  our  time  is  spent  outside  the  tabernncle  amidst  the  glaring 
sand  and  the  blazing  sunshine.     Let  us  fix  our  eyes  on  Him,  our  Lord.     Surely 
there  is  enough  there  to  draw  and  satisfy  the  most  prolonged  eager  gaze.    He  is  our 
Example,  our  EeJeemer,  our  Prophet.     In  Him  we  see  all  of  God  that  man  can 
apprehend,  and  all  of  man.    In  Him  we  behold  our  wisdom,  our  strength,  our 
righteousness.    II.  The  geeat  aspects  of  Christ's  work  which  should  fix  oub 
GAZE.    We  have  Himself  proposed  as  the  object  of  our  thoughts.     1.  He  is  the 
Apostle  of  our  profession.     No  declaration  was  more  common  on  our  Lord's  lips 
when  on  earth  than  that  He  was  "  sent  of  God."    He  is  the  sent  of  God.    And  our 
loving  thoughts  are  to  lay  hold  upon  this  aspect  of  His  nature  and  work,  not  to 
tarry  in  the  simple  manhood,  fair  and  blessed  as  that  is,  but  to  discern  in  Him  the 
complete  expression  of  the  Divine  Will,  the    complete  fulfilment    of    the    slow 
marching  revelations  of  God,  the  perfect,  final,  eternal  word  spoken  of  God  among 
men.    2.  Then  we  are  to  think  of  Him  as  our  High  Priest.     "  As  Apostle,"  it  has 
been  well  said,  "  He  pleads  God's  cause  with  us  :   as  Hi^h  Priest  He  pleads  our 
cause  with  God.    The  Apostolate  and  the  Priesthood  of  Christ  are  both  included  in 
the  one  word — Mediator."    III.  The  great  Reasons  for  this  occdpation  of  mind 
AND  HEART  WITH  Christ,  OUB  MEDITATOR.     Thesc  are  to  be  found  in  the  remaining 
portion  of  this  verse.     1.  Our  relation  to  Christ  and  the  benefit  we  derive  from  it 
should  impel  us  to  loving  meditation  on  Him.    "  Holy  brethren."     2.  Thecalhngof 
which  we  are  partakers  should  impel  us  to  loving  meditation.    God  in  Christ  calls 
us  to  His  service,  to  His  love,  to  His  heaven.    Of  this  call  all  Christian  souls  are 
recipients.     Therefore  it  becomes  them  to  set  their  thoughts  and  love  on  that 
Saviour,  through  whom  they  receive  it  at  the  first,  and  continue  to  feel  its  quicken- 
ing impulse  and  its  immortal  hopes.     3.  Further,  the  avowal  which  we  have  made 
concerning  Him  should  impel  us  to  loving,  steadfast  contemplation.     He  is  "  the 
Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  our  profewsion,"  or,  perhsips,  more  accurately,  *'  of  our 
confession."     Our  creed  avows  that  Christ  is  everything  to  us.     Alas !  alas  I  how 
many  of  us  proclaim  in  our  lives  that  He  is  nothing.     If  these  tremendous  sentences 
are  believed  at  all  by  us,  what  means  this  languid,  occasional  half-hearted  gaze  upon 
Him?    Smely,  If  we  believe  them,  we  should  never  turn  away  from  beholding  that 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

face,  80  gentle  and  so  Divine,  radiant  with  the  brightness  of  God,  and  soft  with  tht 
dewy  pity  of  a  brother  and  a  priest  I  Is  your  life  in  accordance  with  your  confes- 
sion ?  If  not,  what  is  the  confession  but  a  blasphemy  or  a  hypocrisy  ?  And  what 
does  it  avail  except  to  make  the  life  more  criminal  in  its  forgetfulness  of  yonr 
Saviour?  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Consider  Christ : — When  a  traveller  passes  very 
rapidly  through  a  country,  the  eye  has  no  time  to  rest  upon  the  different  objects  in 
it,  so  tbat,  when  he  comes  to  the  end  of  his  journey,  no  distinct  impressions  have 
been  made  upon  his  mind.  This  explains  how  it  is  that  death,  judgment,  eternity 
make  so  little  impression  upon  most  men's  minds.  More  souls  are  lost  throng 
want  of  consideration  than  in  any  other  way.  The  reason  why  men  are  no 
awakened  is,  that  the  devil  never  gives  them  time  to  consider.  He  beguiles  them 
away  from  simply  looking  to  Jesus :  he  hurries  them  away  to  look  at  a  thousand 
ether  things.  But  God  says,  Look  here,  consider  the  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of 
your  profession;  look  unto  Me,  and  be  je  saved.     I.  Believers  should  live  in 

DAILY    consideration  OF   THE    GREATNESS  AND  GLORY  OF    ChRIST.       Oh,  Could  I  lift  yOU 

away  back  to  that  wonderful  day,  and  show  you  Jesus  calling  all  the  angels  kito 
being,  hanging  the  earth  upon  nothing ;  consider  Him,  and  see  if  you  think  He  will 
be  a  sufficient  Saviour.  I  can  as  little  doubt  the  sureness  and  completeness  of  my 
salvation  as  I  can  doubt  the  sureness  of  the  solid  earth  beneath  my  feet.  And 
where  is  Jesus  now  ?  All  power  is  given  to  Him  in  heaven  and  on  earth.  Oh, 
could  you  and  I  pass  this  day  through  these  heavens,  and  see  what  is  now  going  on 
in  the  sanctuary  above — could  you  see  the  Lamb,  surrounded  by  all  the  redeemed, 
the  many  angels  round  about  the  throne,  and  were  one  of  these  angels  to  tell  you, 
"  This  is  He  that  undertook  the  cause  of  lost  sinners — consider  Him — look  long 
and  earnestly  upon  His  wounds — upon  His  glory — and  tell  me  do  you  think  it  would 
be  safe  to  trust  Him  ?  Do  you  think  His  suiJerings  and  obedience  will  have  been 
enough?"  Yes,  yes,  every  soul  exclaims,  Lord,  it  is  enough  1  Oh,  rather  let  me 
ever  stand  and  gaze  upon  the  Almighty,  all-worthy,  all-Divine  Saviour,  till  my  soul 
drinks  in  complete  assurance  that  His  work  undertaken  for  sinners  is  a  finished 
work.  II,  Consider  Christ  as  the  Apostle,  or  Messenger  of  God.  Now  Christ 
is  an  Apostle,  for  God  ordained  and  sent  Him  into  the  world.  Oh,  could  I  lift  you 
away  to  tbe  eternity  that  is  past; — could  I  bring  you  into  the  council  of  the  Eternal 
Three  ;  and  as  it  was  once  said  "  Let  Us  make  man  "  ; — could  I  show  you  how  God 
from  all  etemiiy  designed  His  Son  to  undertake  for  poor  sinners ; — could  I  show  you 
the  intense  interest  with  which  the  eye  of  God  followed  Jesus  through  His  whole 
course  of  sorrow,  and  suffering,  and  death.  Oh,  sinner,  will  you  ever  doubt  any 
more  whether  God  the  Father  be  seeking  thy  salvation  ?  III.  Consider  Christ  as 
the  High  Priest  of  our  profession.  1.  Consider  Him  making  atonement.  Now 
the  atonement  has  been  made,  Christ  has  died.  His  sufferings  are  all  past.  And 
how  is  it  that  you  do  not  enjoy  peace  ?  It  is  because  you  do  not  consider.  2.  Con- 
sider Christ  as  making  intercession.  (R.  M.  AlcChfyne.)  The  Apostle  and  High 
Priest : — I.  The  apostleship  of  Christ.  In  its  exact  and  original  signification  an 
apostle  is  "  one  who  is  sent,"  i.e.,  the  bearer  of  a  message  from  some  one.  There 
have  been  many  revelations  of  God,  differing  in  kind,  differing  in  degree  and  com- 
pleteness. The  greatest  and  most  complete  revelation  of  God  is  in  Jesus  Christ. 
In  the  teaching  of  Christ,  in  pregnant  saying,  or  parable,  or  discourse,  we  have  a 
revelation  concerning  God  which  it  had  not  entered  the  nlind  of  man  to  conceive. 
II.  The  high-priesthood  of  Christ.  The  essential  idea  of  a  priest  is  that  he 
comes  between  man  and  God ;  and  the  essential  idea  of  a  priesthood  is  that  of  & 
class  of  men  who  act  as  mediators  between  God  and  men.  Tlie  priest  offered  sacri- 
fices, or  conducted  religious  ceremonies,  but  he  did  these  things  not  for  himself,  but 
for  the  worshippers.  If  it  be  true  that  without  blood  there  is  no  remission  of  sin?, 
it  is  also  true  that  without  an  intervening  priest,  there  was  no  shedding  of  sacrificial 
blood,  and  therefore  no  remission.  Carry  these  thoughts  with  you  then,  and  you 
will  see  why  Christ  is  called  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession.  High  Priest, 
because  He  stands  for  mankind  before  God  :  High  Priest,  because  He  has  made  one 
all-sufficient  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  men :  High  Priest,  because  He  does  for  men 
what  they  could  not  and  cannot  do  for  themselves.  Christ's  priesthood  means  that 
we  have  a  way  by  which  we  may  approach  the  eternal  and  all-holy  Father.  They 
who  are  conscious  of  their  own  unworthiness  may  plead  the  worthiness  of  Christ, 
may  rest  with  confidence  on  the  sympathy  of  Him  who  wore  our  humanity  as  a 
brother-man.  Christ's  priesthood  further  means  that  a  sacrifice  has  been  made  by 
which  the  defilement  of  sin  is  removed,  and  a  new  relation  begun  between  men  and 
God.     Christ's  priesthood  means  that  in  His  crucifixion,  from  which  He  did  not 


CHAP,  ni.]  HEBREWS.  815 


shrink,  there  was  given  to  men  a  means  of  reconciliation  with  God.  And,  once 
more,  Christ's  priesthood  means  that  there  is  in  heaven  One  who  pleads  continually 
for  pardon  for  sinful  men.  To  what  now,  I  ask,  should  these  considerations  of  the 
apostleship  and  priesthood  of  Christ  tend  ?  The  writer  of  this  Epistle  uses  them  to 
add  point  to  his  exhortation,  and  to  warn  against  unbehef.  I  know  that  some 
among  you  are  fully  aware  of  the  responsibilities  of  belief,  and  shrink  fiom  doing 
or  professii  g  anything  which  seems  to  go  beyond  your  power  to  practise.  Have  you 
ever  thought  of  the  responsibilities  in  which  the  want  of  belief  may  involve  you  ? 
Have  you  ever,  amid  your  doubts  and  hesitations,  considered  this,  that  by  your 
doubts  and  hesitations  you  are  practically  denying  that  the  revelation  of  God  in 
Christ  is  a  revelation  to  you ;  that  you  are  practically  saying,  "  Christ's  sacrifice 
was  no  sacrifice,  so  far  as  I  am  concerned."  True  it  is  that  they  who  enter  into  the 
temple,  have  their  responsibilities  ;  but  are  they  free  from  responsibihty  who  stand 
at  the  threshold  and  will  not  enter  in  ?  And  the  same  considerations  may  be  used 
to  quicken  and  sustain  our  faith.  Christ  is  our  Apostle;  therefore  we  have  a  sure 
knowledge  of  God.  Christ  is  our  High  Priest;  therefore,  we  have  in  our  hearts 
the  assurance  of  Divine  love,  and  the  abiding  hope  of  Divine  forgiveness.  (D. 
Hunter,  B.D.)  The  study  of  Jesiis  : — I.  The  subject  fob  study.  1.  Consider 
the  person  of  Jesus.  Christianity  is  Christ ;  and  if  Christ  be  not  God-Man  our 
religion  is  the  dream  of  sanguine  enthusiasts  or  the  fraud  of  ingenious  impostors. 
2.  Consider  the  offices  of  Jesus.  (1)  In  His  Divine-human  capacity  Jesus  is  the 
Apostle  of  our  confession.  (2)  As  Apostle  Jesus  has  a  mission.  He  is  High 
Priest.  II.  The  students.  1.  Confessors.  Practical  confession  is  the  living  up 
to  all  we  believe,  and  the  carrying  out  of  all  that  that  belief  involves.  2.  Holy 
brethren.  Christ  was  born  and  died  that  He  might  communicate  His  Holy^Spirit,  by 
wbose  regenerating,  adopting,  and  sanctifying  work  we  are  made  holy,  the  sons  of 
God,  and  His  brethren,  3.  Partakers  of  a  heavenly  calling.  (1)  Walk  worthy  of  it. 
(2)  Make  it  sure.  HI.  The  method  of  study  and  the  spikit  in  which  it  is  to  be 
PURSUED.  1.  As  for  the  method,  tHe  word  '^"consider  "  is  descriptive  of  the  posture 
of  the  earnest  student  who  abstracts  his  attention  from  every  other  object,  and  pores 
over  the  thing  in  hand  with  unflagging  industry  until  he  has  mastered  it.  (1)  To 
our  study  of  Jesus  we  must  give  undivided  attention.  We  know  so  Uttle  of  Christ, 
in  spite  of  all  our  prayer  and  medftation,  because  we  think  of  so  much  else  while  we 
are  trjing  to  think  of  Him.  (2)  Our  study  must  be^eep.  Just  as  nature  is 
grand  or  commonplace  according  as  our  reading  is  profound  or  superficial,  so  is  it 
with  the  great  subject  of  Christian  study.  (3)  Our  study  must  be  patient  and  per- 
sistent. That  knowledge  is  not  worth  much,  and  is  often  worth  les3~than  nothing, 
which  is  acquired  in  a  few  weeks'  scamper  over  a  mighty  continent.  2.  The  spirit. 
(1)  Reverential.  (2)  Humble  boldness.  {J.  W.  Burn.)  Consider  Christ  fully  : — 
If  you  wii-h  to  look  at  a  portrait  of  Raphael's,  what  would  you  think  to  see  only  the 
forehead  uncovered,  and  then  only  the  eyes,  and  so  on,  until  all  the  features  had  been 
separately  seen  ?  Could  you  gain  a  true  idea  of  the  picture  as  a  whole  ?  Yet  this 
is  the  way  men  look  at  the  picture  of  Christ  in  the  Gospels,  reading  a  few  verses  and 
mottoes  here  and  there,  and  never  considering  the  life  in  its  wholeness  and  harmony. 
{H.  W.  Beecher.)  Consider  Christ  intently  : — Consider  not  lightly,  as  they  that 

do  not  mind  the  thing  they  look  upon.  Their  eyes  are  upon  it,  but  their  mind  is  on 
another  matter.  Look  on  Him  with  the  sharp  eye  of  your  mind.  Consider  that  in 
Him  all  tLie  treasures  of  wisdom  lie  hid.  He  is  a  rich  storehouse,  in  whom  ye  may 
find  all  the  pearls  and  jewels  of  wholesome  doctrine.  In  Him  there  is  salvation, 
and  in  no  other  ;  therefore  all  other  teachers  set  aside,  listen  to  Him.  When  the 
judge  of  assizes  gives  the  charge,  all  that  be  in  the  shire-house,  especially  they  that 
be  of  the  great  inquest,  consider  seriously  what  is  spoken.  When  the  king  makes  a 
speech  in  the  Parliament-house,  the  whole  House  considers  earnestly  what  he  says. 
Christ  Jesus,  the  King  of  kings,  speaks  to  us  in  the  ministry  of  the  Word,  yet  few 
consider  the  excellent  things  that  be  spoken.  The  Queen  of  Sheba  considered 
Solomon  well,  all  that  he  spake  or  did.  Behold,  here  is  a  greater  than  Solomon. 
Therefore  let  us  diligently  consider  what  He  says.  If  they  were  matters  of  no 
moment,  we  were  not  to  be  blamed,  though  we  did  not  consider  them  ;  but  being 
of  such  weight,  touching  the  eternal  salvation  of  our  souls,  what  madmen  be  we,  that 
we  consider  them  no  better.  If  one  should  talk  to  us  of  gold  and  sUver,  we  would 
consider  what  he  says.  Christ  speaks  to  us  of  that  which  surpasseth  all  the  silver 
in  the  world,  yet  we  regard  Him  not.  Let  us  consider  Him  now,  that  He  may  con- 
sider us  hereafter  when  He  comes  with  His  holy  angels.  {W.  Jones,  D.D.)  Of 
Christ  as  an  Apostle : — I.  The  general  function  of  Christ,  as  a  Prophet,  Apostle, 


My 

216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

and  Minister  of  the  Word  of  God,  was  to  make  known  the  will  of  the  Father  onto 
His  people.  II.  His  special  call  to  that  function  was  immediate  from  the  Father. 
Christ  thus  saith  of  Himself  (John  xx.  21).  Oft  does  Christ  make  mention  of  thia 
that  His  Father  sent  Him.  Where  Christ  saith  to  the  Jews  (John  v.  37,  vi.  46,  i.  18). 
III.  The  privileoes  which  belonged  to  an  apostolical  function,  and  in  a  most 
eminent  manner  appertained  unto  Christ,  were  these.  1.  Christ  laid  the  founda- 
tion, for  He  first  preached  the  gospel  (Gen.  iii.  15).  Yea,  Christ  Himself  was  the 
very  foundation  (1  Cor.  iii.  11).  He  is  also  the  chief  comer-stone  (Eph.  ii.  20).  2. 
The  whole  world  was  Christ's  jurisdiction.  No  limits  were  set  to  His  function 
(Psa.  ii.  8 ;  Eph.  ii.  17).  3.  He  had  His  gifts  immediately  by  the  Spirit  (Isa.  xi.  2 ; 
Luke  ii.  20).  4.  He  received  the  Spirit  more  abundantly  than  any  other  (John  iii. 
34;  Col.  ii.  3,  9;  John  i.  16).  5.  He  could  not  but  have  infallible  assistance  in 
that  He  was  the  very  truth  itself  (John  xiv.  16;  Luke  iv.  18).  6.  He  also  must 
neeiis  have  power  of  giving  gifts,  in  that  He  was  the  prime  Author  of  all  gifta 
(Eph.  iv.  7  ;  John  xx.  22).  7.  About  miracles  He  had  more  power  than  ever  any 
other.  8.  Vengeance  especially  belongeth  unto  Christ  (Rom.  xii.  19).  When  the 
apostle  delivered  the  incestuous  person  over  to  Satan,  he  did  it  in  the  name  and 
with  the  power  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (1  Cor.  v.  4).  (W.  Gouge.)  Christ  the 
only  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  our  profession : — Where  Christ  is  said  here  to  be 
the  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  our  profession,  we  must  learn  this :  that  we  that  be 
Christians  profess  no  other  teacher,  nor  no  other  Saviour,  but  that  Christ  is  both 
our  wisdom  and  our  justification ;  His  word  is  ours,  His  doctrine  is  ours,  His  wisdom 
is  ours,  we  profess  not  one  jot  whereof  He  hath  not  been  an  Apostle  unto  us  ;  and 
whosoever  he  be  that  teacheth  us  other  things  than  what  Christ  hath  taught  ua 
already,  he  is  not  of  our  profession  nor  of  our  brotherhood.  And  more  than  this, 
we  are  sure  be  teacheth  nothing  but  vain  illusions  and  imaginations  of  men  ;  for 
all  treasures  of  wisdom  and  true  knowledge  are  hii  vu  Christ.  And  seeing  it  hath 
pleased  Him  to  be  our  Apostle,  who  is  the  Son  of  God,  the  brightness  of  His  glory, 
the  ingraven  form  of  His  substance,  the  Heir  of  all  things,  the  Maker  of  heaven  and 
earth,  far  greater  than  angels,  how  unthankful  be  we  if  His  doctrine  be  not  our 
profession ;  nay,  how  mad  be  we,  if  we  will  change  Him  for  any  other  or  for  all 
other.  Whatsoever  glorious  names  they  bring,  of  fathers,  doctors,  councils,  we  neither 
know  them  nor  their  names.  If  they  be  ministers  of  Christ  unto  us,  their  feet  are 
beautiful,  and  their  names  are  honourable.  It  they  be  their  own  ministers,  we  know 
them  not,  nor  all  their  glory.  Now  where  the  apostle  calleth  Christ  the  High  Priest 
of  our  profession,  as  we  have  learned  before,  if  He  be  our  Apostle,  we  have  no  other 
teacher.  So  we  learn  here,  if  He  be  the  Priest  of  our  profession,  no  part  of  the 
ofi&ce  of  His  Priesthood  we  may  give  to  another,  but  profess  it  clearly  that  He  ie 
our  priest  alone.  And  as  the  priest  is  ordained  to  make  sacrifice  for  sin,  and  to  be 
a  mediator  between  God  and  man,  so  all  this  work  we  must  leave  wholly  unto  Him, 
receive  no  other,  upon  whom  we  will  lay  this  reconciliation,  to  purge  our  sins,  and 
to  bring  us  to  God,  but  Christ  alone.     {E.  Leering,  B.D.)  Open  Christian  pro- 

fession : — Let  us  look  at  the  word  "  profession."  We  are  very  apt  to  undervalue 
things  with  which  abuse  and  danger  are  connected,  and  which  may  be  easily 
counterfeited.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  a  mere  outward  hypocritical  profession ; 
but  is  that  a  reason  why  we  should  not  attach  importance  to  confessing  Christ  ? 
With  the  heart  we  are  to  believe  unto  righteousness,  and  with  the  mouth  we  are  to 
confess  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord.  It  may  be  a  mere  lip-utterance  to  say,  "  I  believe  in 
JesuB  " ;  it  may  be  only  a  form  to  sit  down  at  the  Lord's  table ;  but  as  the  outward 
e^cpression  of  an  inward  reality,  it  is  a  great  and  blessed  fact.  Let  us  not  be  secret 
disciples  ;  let  us  not  come  to  Jesus  merely  by  night,  ashamed  to  bear  testimony  to 
the  gospel.  Our  confession  of  Christ  in  the  outward  Church,  in  the  congregation  of 
professed  disciples,  in  the  ordinances  of  Christ's  institution,  let  us  not  undervalue 
it  I  Remember  with  gratitude  that  you  have  publicly  professed  Christ ;  that  into 
the  Church  of  Christ  you  have  been  received  by  baptism,  and  acknowledged  at  the 
Lord's  Supper  as  a  brother  and  partaker  of  the  heavenly  calling.  Let  the  remem- 
brance of  this  be  to  us  continually  helpful,  and  stimulate  us  to  adorn  the  doctrine 
of  the  gospel  by  a  Christ-Uke  life  and  walk.     {A,  Saphir.) 

Ver.  2.  Faithful  to  Him  that  appointed  Him. — Fidelity  in  personal  duties : — The 
general  prosperity  of  human  life  and  the  peace  and  comfort  of  individuals  greatly 
depend  on  the  diligence,  the  cheerfulness,  and  the  spirit  with  which  our  personal 
duties  are  fulfilled.     I.  I  mention  as  the  first,  an  habitual  and  practical  bemem- 

BBANCE  that  GoD    HATH    APPOINTED  OS  OUB   DIFFERENT  CONDITIONS,  and  that  8  prOpCJC 


CHAP,  in.]  HEBREWS,  21T 

discharge  of  the  duties  resulting  from  them,  from  a  regard  to  His  authority,  is 
service  due  and  done  to  God.  Christianity  thus  brings  religion  home  to  the  most 
minute  departments  of  human  life,  to  the  house  and  to  the  field,  to  the  shop  and  to 
the  farm ;  and  intimately  unites  earth  to  heaven.    II.  Personal  fidelity  includes 

HONE9T  AND  ASSIDUOUS  ENDEAVOURS  TO  UNDERSTAND  THE  DIFFERENT  DUTIES  OF  OUB 
SEVERAL   CALLINGS   OR   CONDITIONS,  AND  TO   ACQUIRE    THE    TALENTS   NECESSARY    TO  PEB- 

FOBM  THEu  WELL.  But  I  must  observo  that  a  knowledge  of  the  duties  of  a  calling, 
and  even  the  best  talents  for  discharging  them,  are  not  sufficient.  Personal  fidelity 
chiefly  consists  in  the  diligence,  animated  by  religious  motives,  which  produces  the 
activity  which  our  separate  duties  require;  and  therefore  I  remark — III.  That  men 
discover  their  fidelity  when  they  make  conscience  of  the  more  difficult  and 
BURDENSOME,  as  Well  as  of  the  more  easy  duties  of  their  particular  callings.  IV. 
Men  show  their  fidelity  in  their  personal  duties,  when  they  do  not  neglect,  fob 

THE    SAKE   of  PLEASURES,   THEIB    PROPEE    BUSINESS    OR    EMPLOYMENTS.       V.    Fidelity  tO 

Him  who  hath  appointed  men  their  respective  callings,  requires  that  they  shall  do 
AS  much  good  in  them  as  they  have  the  means  OB  opportunity  TO  DO  ;  and  that 
they  shall  manage  them  to  the  best  advantage,  for  which  their  knowledge  or  abilities 
have  quahfied  them.     VI.  Personal  fidelity  requires  that  men  regard  and  fulfil 

ALL  the  duties  OF  THEIB  CALLINGS   OB  SITUATIONS,  AND   NOT  MERELY  A  PART  OP  THEM. 

VII.  Personal  fidelity  requires  that  men  shall  do  the  duties  of  their  proper  stations, 

ALTHOUGH  EVERY  WORLDLY  MOTIVE  SHOULD  TEMPT  THEM  TO  NEGLECT  OR  TO  VIOLATE 

THEM.  VIII.  Fidelity  in  the  duties  of  our  proper  callings  ought  ever  to  be  accom- 
panied WITH  PRAYER  TO  GOD,  AND  AN   HABITUAL  AND  DEVOUT   DEPENDENCE   ON  HiM   FOB 

His  blessing.  I  conclude  with  observing,  that  if  a  faithful  discharge  of  social 
duties  were  the  whole  of  reUgion,  even  on  such  terms  no  man  could  be  justified  by 
works.  In  fioelity  to  conscience,  and  in  zealous  endeavours  for  promoting  the  glory 
of  God  and  the  good  of  mankind.  Archbishop  Usher  was  perhaps  exceeded  by  few 
of  his  own,  or  of  any  other  order.  Yet  we  find  among  his  last,  what  were  certainly 
none  of  his  worst  words,  "  Lord,  forgive  my  sins  of  omission."  Even  in  the  dis- 
charge of  their  secular  callings,  men  of  the  worthiest  cl  aracters  are  far  from  being 
already  perfect,  and  after  all  their  best  attainments  have  need  to  prav,  "  Lord,  enter 
not  into  judgment  with  Thy  servants."     {John  Erskine,  D.D.)  Christ  the  Son 

and  Mo»e$  the  servant: — 1.  And  here  that  it  is  said,  "  God  appointed  Him,"  we  see 
the  root  of  this  love,  that  Christ  should  come  a  Saviour  among  us.  And  as  we  must 
give  unto  our  Saviour  Christ  tbe  glory  of  our  redemption,  in  the  sacrifice  of  His 
body,  so  we  must  give  unto  the  Father  the  praise  of  His  mercy,  that  hath  freely 
loved  us,  and  predestinated  us  eternally  unto  life ;  for  as  tbis  is  our  profession,  that 
Christ  hath  done  the  deed,  so  this  is  our  profession,  that  God  the  Father  hath  ap- 
pointed Him  unto  it.  2.  The  second  thing  here  witnessed  of  Christ,  and  in  which 
■^e  are  assured  He  is  our  only  Prophet,  and  are  pre  voked  to  hearken  unto  Him,  is 
"that  He  was  faithful  in  all  the  house  of  God."  This  faithfulness  is  truth  and 
integrity  in  discharge  of  this  office  committed  to  Him,  wherein  He  set  all  His  care 
and  industry,  that  He  might  be  found  faultless,  that  like  as  He  was  sent  of  God  to 
be  a  Prophet  to  reveal  His  will,  so  He  did  faithfully  perform  it,  teaching  only 
doctrine  and  ordinances  of  His  Father  (John  vii.  16,  viii.  28,  xvii.  8).  How 
diligently  then  ought  we  to  hear  such  a  Prophet  as  hath  so  faithfully  spoken.  And 
here  we  have  all  a  very  good  lesson  taught  us,  in  the  person  of  Christ,  to  what 
calling  soever  we  be  called  of  God,  in  the  same  let  us  be  faithful ;  if  we  be  preachers, 
faithful  preachers ;  if  we  be  princes,  faithful  princes ;  if  we  be  judges,  faithful 
judges  ;  if  we  be  treasurers,  faithful  treasurers ;  if  we  be  merchants,  faithful  mer- 
chants ;  whatsoever  we  be,  faithfulness  must  be  our  praise.  3.  It  fulloweth,  "  He 
was  faithful  as  Moses  in  all  His  house."  What  was  the  faithfulness  commended  in 
Moses  ?  That  he  did  in  every  point  according  to  that  which  God  had  commanded. 
This  was  then  the  faithfulness  of  Christ,  to  do  nothing  but  at  the  will  of  His 
Fathei ;  and  this  St.  John  witnesseth  expressly  in  many  places.  Here  is  the  image 
of  this  faithful  minister,  hke  unto  Christ,  one  that  preacheth  nothing  but  the  Word 
of  God,  nor  for  any  cause  but  God's  glory.  Now,  more  touching  this  comparison 
here  made  between  Christ  and  Moses,  there  is  no  doubt  but  the  apostle  useth  it  to 
join  the  Hebrews  unto  Christ ;  for  how  they  accounted  of  Moses  he  knew  well, 
and  whatsoever  was  spoken  of  him  they  did  willingly  apply  themselves  to  mark, 
and  his  praise  did  win  their  affections  to  be  more  equally  bent  to  learn  Chrit;;. 
Taking  this  occasion,  he  beginneth  his  comparison,  making  tbis  as  common  both 
to  Christ  and  Moses  :  that  either  of  them  ruled  in  the  house  of  God,  and  either  of 
them  was  faithful  in  his  charge,  but  yet  so,  as  Christ  was  much  more  honourable, 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai.  ni. 

and  therefore  to  be  of  us  acknowledged  our  only  Prophet.     Now,  lest  the  com- 
parison should  seem  equal,  or  Moses  sbould  be  accounted  as  great  as  Christ,  ha 
ehoweth  the  great  excellence  of  Christ  above  Moses,  that  the  Jews  may  also  learn 
to  honour  their  Messias  as  it  becometh  them.    It  foUoweth  now.  in  the  fifth  verse, 
••  And  Moses  was  faithful  in  all  His  house,  as  a  servant  for  the  testimony  of  the 
things  which  should  be  spoken,  but  Christ  as  the  Son  is  Ruler  of  His  house."   Now, 
bow  much  more  honour  the  son  hath  in  his  father's  house  than  he  that  is  a  servant, 
BO  far  Christ  is  above  Moses,  and  above  all.    And  in  this  the  apostle  needed  not  use 
many  words,  for  that  Moses  was  a  servant,  all  confessed  that  God  calleth  him  oft 
His  servant  Moses.  And  that  Christ  was  the  Son  no  man  doubted,  and  the  Scripture 
giveth  Him  plainly  the  title  of  the  Son  of  God.  Here  we  have  all  taught  us  a  lesson 
of  good  humility,  and  how  to  know  ourselves,  and  what  place  we  have  in  the  Church 
of   God.     It  foUoweth,  "For  a  testimony  of  the  things  which  should  after  be 
spoken."    For  this  purpose  Moses  was  a  servant,  and  in  the  performance  of  thia 
duty  was  faithful :  he  was  a  servant  to  bear  witness  unto  the  people  of  all  the 
words  which  God  should  speak  unto  them,  that  is,  a  servant  faithfully  declaring  all 
the  law  of  God.     And  Moses  also  himself  did  bear  witness  of  Christ.    And  Moses, 
the  most  renowned  of  all  prophets,  what  was  he  ?  a  servant  to  declare  unto  the 
people  all  that  the  Lord  had  spoken.     Who  is  he  now  will  presume  above  Moses, 
to  speak  of  his  own  head,  ordinances,  and  laws  ?     Who  will  establish  decrees  of  his 
own  in  the  house  of  God  ?     Whosoever  he  be  he  shall  carry  his  judgments.     He  is 
uot  a  servant,  as  Moses  was ;  but  he  exalteth  himself  to  be  a  master ;  for  if  he  were 
a  servant  he  would  do  the  work  of  a  servant,  and  bear  witness  what  Lis  Master  had 
said.     It  foUoweth,  "  But  Christ  as  the  Son  is  over  His  house."     So  that,  being  the 
Son  of  God,  who  is  heir  of  aU  things,  He  ruleth  in  this  house  as  Lord  and  Governor, 
whose  commandment  alone  doth  stand.       And  again,  being  the  Son  of   God, 
eternally  begotten  of  His  Father,  He  ever  did,  and  shall  do  to  the  end,  rule  and 
have  the  sovereignty  in  His  own  house.     Therefore,  even  as  before  the  apostle 
made  his  exhortation,  that  they  would  consider  this  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of 
their  profession,  even  so  let  us  humble  ourselves  under  this  High  Lord  in  the  House 
of  God  ;  let  us  obey  His  voice,  let  us  be  all  faithful  in  our  calling,  that  before  Him 
we  may  have  a  good  account,  especially  the  minister,  that  he  will  be  a  faithful 
servant,  keeping  his  ffUow.^hip  in  the  Church  of  God,  and  bearing  witn^  of  all 
that  the  Lord  hath  spoken.     (E.  Deering,  B.I).)     j  Christ  and  Moses  ^^E very 
word  here  is  an  echo  of  something  going  before,  ana~is  instinct  with  pefsuasive 
virtue.       •'Brethren"  of  Him  who  in  a   fraternal  spirit  identified  Himself  with 
the  unholy,  and  for  their  sakes  took  flesh  and  tasted  death.     "  Holy,"  at  least 
in  standing,  in  virtue  of  the  priestly  action  of  the  Sanctifier;  and  because  holy 
in  this  sense,  under  obligation  to  make  their  consecration  to  God  a  reality  by 
living  a  truly  Christian  Ufe.     "  Partakers  of  a  heavenly  calling  " — thus  described, 
at  once  with  truth  and  with  rhetorical  skill,  with  a  backward  glance  at  the  greatness 
of  the  Christian's  hope  as  the  destined  lord  of  the  future  world,  and  with  a  mental 
reference  to  the  contrast  between  that  glorious  prospect  and  the  present  state  of 
beUevers  as  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  and  subject  to  death  and  the  fear  thereof ; 
reminding  them  at  the  same  time  of  the  blessed  truth  that  as  Christ  became  par- 
taker of  their  present  lot,  so  they  were  destined  to  be  partakers  of  His  glorious  in- 
heritance, the  unity  and  fellowship  between  Him  and  His  people  being  on  both  sides 
perfect  and  complete.    The  titles  here  ascribed  to  Jesus  also  arise  out  of  the  previous 
context,  and  are  fuU  of  significance.     Specially  noteworthy  is  the  former  of  the  two, 
"  Apostle,"  here  only  applied  to  Christ.    The  basis  for  the  title  is  such  a  text  as 
Exodus  iii.  10:   "Come  now  therefore,  and  I  will  send  thee  [dTroarftXw,  Sept.] 
unto  Pharaoh,  that  thou  mayest  bring  forth  My  people  the  children  of  Israel  out  of 
Egypt."     Moses  was  an  apostle,  as  one  sent  by  God  on  the  important  mission  of 
leading  the  enslaved  race  of  Israel  out  of  Egypt  into  Cmaau.     Christ  was  our 
Apostle,  as  one  sent  by  God  to  be  the  Leader  in  the  gr»  at  salvation.     The  Apostle 
of  our  Christian  confession  and  the  "  Captain  of  salvation  "  are  synonymous  desig- 
nations.    "  Consider  the  Apostle  "  means,  consider  for  practical  purposes  a  subject 
already  sufficiently  understood ;  "  consider  the  High  Priest "  means,  consider  the 
doctrine  of  Christ's  priesthood,  that  ye  may  first  understand  it,  and  then  prove  its 
practical  value.    Christ  the  Apostle  is  the  immediate  subject  of  contemplation. 
That  aspect  is  in  view  throughout  the  third  and  fourth  chapters,  the  priestly  aspect 
being  presented  at  the  close  of  the  latter,  as  an  introduction  to  the  long  discussion 
which  commences  with  the  fifth  chapter  and  extends  to  the  tenth.     "  Consider  the 
Apostle  of  our  confession  "  is  the  rubric  cf  this  new  section.  To  guide  consideration, 


CHAP,  m,]  HEBREWS.  819 

a  point  of  view  is  suggested  congruous  to  the  practical  aim.  The  aim  being  to  pro- 
mote steadfastness  in  the  Christian  faith  and  life,  the  selected  point  of  view  is  the 
fidelity  of  Jesus  our  Apostle.  God  made  Jesus  by  giving  Him  His  unique  place  in 
the  world's  history,  as  the  chief  agent  in  the  work  of  redemption.  And  Jesus  was 
faithful  to  God  by  discharging  faithfuUy  the  high  duties  entrusted  to  Him.  What 
the  Hebrews  are  invited  to  do,  therefore,  is  to  consider  Jesus  as  the  faithful  Captain 
of  salvation,  who  never  betrayed  His  trust,  shirked  His  responsibilities,  or  neglected 
duty  to  escape  personal  suffering,  and  who  at  the  last  great  crisis  said,  *'  Not  My 
will,  but  Thine  be  done."  For  of  course  the  theatre  in  which  Christ's  fidelity  was 
displayed  was  His  earthly  life  of  trial  and  temptation.  He  has  already  held  up 
Jesus  as  Priest,  as  one  who  is  faithful  to  the  interests  of  those  for  whom  He  tran- 
sacts  before  God,  and  therefore  entitled  to  their  confidence.  The  two  views  supple- 
ment each  other,  and  complete  the  picture  of  the  Faithful  One.  Faithful  as  Priest 
to  men  in  virtue  of  sympathies  learned  on  earth,  faithful  as  Apostle  to  God  in  the 
execution  of  the  arduous  mission  on  which  He  was  sent  to  the  world;  in  the  one 
aspect  inspiring  trust,  in  the  other  exciting  admiration  and  inciting  to  imitation. 
The  following  comparison  between  Christ  and  Moses  at  once  serves  the  general  end 
of  the  Epistle  by  contributing  to  the  proof  of  the  superiority  of  Christianity  to 
Judaism,  and  the  special  end  of  the  present  exhortation  by  affording  the  opportunity 
of  extracting  wholesome  lessons  from  the  fate  of  the  people  whom  Moses  led  out  of 
Egypt.  In  doing  this,  he  simply  does  justice  to  the  familiar  historical  record  of  the 
Jewish  hero's  hfe,  and  to  God's  own  testimony  borne  on  a  memorable  occasion,  the 
substance  of  which  he  repeats  in  the  words,  "as  also  Moses  [was  faithful]  in  His 
house."  "  My  servant  Moses,  faithful  in  all  My  house,  he,"  God  had  said  emphati- 
cally, to  silence  murmuring  against  him  on  the  part  of  his  brother  Aaron  and  his 
sister  Miriam.  He  lays  hold  of  the  suggestive  words  "  house  "  and  "  servant,"  and 
turns  them  to  account  for  his  purpose,  saying  in  effect,  "  Moses  was  as  faithful  as 
any  servant  in  a  house  can  be  :  still  he  was  only  a  servant,  while  He  of  whom  I 
now  speak  was  not  a  mere  servant  in  the  house,  but  a  Son ;  and  that  makes  all  the 
difference."  Verses  3  to  6  are  substantially  just  the  working  out  of  this  thought. 
But  it  may  be  asked,  the  subject  of  comparison  being  the  respective  fidelities  of  the 
two  apostles,  is  not  a  reference  to  their  positions  irrelevant?  What  does  it  matter 
whether  Moses  was  son  or  servant,  if  he  was  faithful  in  all  God's  house,  in  all  parts 
of  his  work  as  the  leader  of  Israel  ?  If  one  were  comparing  two  commanders  in  re- 
spect of  bravery  and  military  genius,  would  it  not  be  an  irrelevance  to  say  of  one  of 
them,  he  was  the  better  man,  for  he  was  the  king's  son  ?  The  question  is  pertinent, 
but  it  admits  of  a  satisfactory  answer.  Reference  to  the  superior  dignity  of  Christ 
is  relevant,  if  His  position  as  Son  tended  to  enhance  His  fidelity.  That  it  did  the 
writer  doubtless  meant  to  suggest.  Farther  on  we  find  him  saying.  •'  Though  He 
was  a  Son,  yet  learned  He  obedience."  Similarly  he  says  here  in  effect :  "  Christ, 
though  a  Son,  was  faithful  to  His  vocation  amid  trial."  It  is  a  just  thought.  Be- 
yond doubt  we  have  in  Christ  as  Son  a  more  sublime  moral  spectacle  of  fidelity  than 
Ie  ary  ordinary  man  called  to  play  a  great  and  responsible  part  in  history.  To  the 
fidehties  which  He  has  in  common  with  other  men,  the  Son  adds  this  other :  resolute 
resistance  to  the  temptation  to  use  His  sonship  as  an  excuse  for  declining  arduous 
heroic  tasks.  But  there  is  more  than  this  to  be  said.  The  reference  to  the  dignity 
of  Christ  looks  beyond  the  immediate  parenetic  purpose  to  the  ultimate  aim  of  the 
whole  Epistle  It  is  designed  to  insinuate  the  great  truth  that  Christianity  is  the 
absolute,  eternal  religion.  This  idea  casts  its  shadow  on  the  page  at  three  different 
points — 1.  In  the  contrast  between  Moses  and  Jesus  as  respectively  servant  and 
Son.  2.  In  the  representation  of  the  Ministry  of  Moses  as  being  for  a  testimony 
of  things  to  be  spoken  afterwards  (ver.  5).  3.  In  the  representation  of  Christians 
as  pre-eminently  though  not  exclusively  God's,  Christ's,  house  (ver.  6).  The  as- 
sertion manifestly  implies  the  transiency  of  the  Mosaic  system.  It  suggests  the 
thought  that  the  house  as  it  stood  in  the  time  of  Moses  was  but  a  rude,  temporary 
model  of  the  true,  eternal  house  of  God  ;  good  enough  to  furnish  shelter  from  the 
elements,  so  to  speak,  but  unfit  to  be  the  everlasting  dwelling  place  of  the  children 
of  the  Most  High,  therefore  destined  to  be  superseded  by  a  more  glorious  structure, 
having  the  Spirit  of  God  for  its  architect,  which  should  be  to  the  old  fabric  as  was 
the  "  magnifical  "  temple  of  Solomon  to  the  puny  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness.  At 
verse  6  transition  is  naturally  made  from  Moses  to  the  lessons  of  the  wilderness 
life  of  Israel.  The  writer  is  haunted  by  the  fear  lest  the  tragic  fate  of  the  generation 
of  the  Exodus  should  be  repeated  in  the  experience  of  the  Hebrew  Christians.  Ha 
hopes  that  the  powerful  motives  arising  out  of  the  truths  he  has  stated  may  bring 


\l.^ 


220  TRE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

about  a  better  result.  But  he  cannot  hide  from  himself  that  another  issue  ii 
possible.  For  the  future  fortunes  of  Christiiinity  he  has  no  anxiety ;  he  is  firmly 
persuaded  that  it  will  prosper,  though  the  Hebrew  Church,  or  even  the  whole 
Hebrew  nation,  should  perish.  That  fatal  catastrophe  he  dreads ;  therefore  with 
great  solemnity  he  proceeds  to  represent  retention  of  their  position  in  the  house  of 
God  as  conditional :  "  Whose  house  are  we,  if  we  hold  fast  the  confidence  and  the 
boasting  of  the  hope."  (A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.)  Faithful  services  :— "What  God  re- 
quires is  faithfulness  to  that  which  He  has  entrusted  to  us.  A  poor  man  is  respon- 
sible for  the  little  of  his  poverty,  and  sins  if  he  withhold  his  mite.  The  Church 
needs  the  gifts  of  the  poor  ;  the  gifts  of  the  industrial  and  labouring  classes.  She 
needs  the  influence  of  those  who  think  they  have  no  influence.  She  needs  the 
sympathies  and  prayers  of  those  who  can  only  stammer  out  of  their  sin-burdened 
hearts,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  The  most  fertile  summer  showers  are 
composed  of  unpretending  little  drops.  Water-spouts  are  far  less  beneficial  than  the 
steady,  soaking,  noiseless  rain.  Importance  of  fidelity  in  the  Christian  life: — 
Though  in  the  life  and  character  of  Moses  there  are  many  striking  excellencies,  the 
faithfulness  of  Moses  is  the  feature  on  which  the  apostle  dwells.  It  is,  indeed,  the 
most  important  feature  in  our  character  as  servants  of  God.  And  well  were  it  for 
ns  if  we  laid  more  stress  on  faithfulness,  and  thought  less  of  gifts  and  talents,  or  of 
success  and  results.  For  while  it  belongs  to  God  to  appoint  unto  each  of  us  severally 
our  positions,  to  distribute  gifts  according  to  His  wisdom,  and  to  reward  us  with 
results  hundredfold,  sixtyfold,  or  thirtyfold,  it  belongs  to  us  to  be  faithful  to  God 
wherever  He  has  placed  us,  and  in  the  gift  and  task  which  His  love  assigns.  We 
Bee  the  summary  and  result  of  the  true  disciple's  life  in  the  decisive  words  of  the 
Master  (Matt.  xxv.  21).  (A.  Saphir.)  Moses  and  the  Jews :— More  than  Luther 
is  to  Germany,  more  than  Napoleon  is  to  France,  more  than  Alfred,  or  Elizabeth, 
or  Cromwell,  or  William  HI.  is  to  England,  Moses  was  to  the  Jewish  people — 
prophet,   patriot,  warrior,   lawgiver,   all  in    one.      (R.   W.  Dale,   LL.D.)  A 

faithful  mother  .-—The  Bishop  of  Manchester  was  giving  the  prizes  one  day  to 
the  scholars,  in  a  school  with  which  he  is  connected.  A  large  number  of  the 
parents  and  friends  of  the  scholars  were  present.  They  all  knew  and  loved  the 
bishop,  as  a  good,  and  learned,  and  very  useful  man.  In  the  midst  of  their  exercises, 
as  he  stood  surrounded  by  the  scholars,  the  good  bishop  was  led  to  speak  of  his 
mother.  "  She  was  a  widow,"  said  he,  "  with  some  children  to  support  and  educate. 
God  helped  her  to  be  faithful.  She  sacrificed  her  own  ease  and  comfort  for  the  good 
of  her  children.  Her  home  was  a  poor  one.  She  had  to  struggle  hard  for  our  sup- 
port. But  she  managed  to  make  that  home  the  brightest  and  the  happiest  place  to 
us.  Her  children  through  her  faithful  efforts  have  since  risen  to  positions  of  honour 
and  usefulness,  where  they  are  helping  to  make  the  world  better.  She  is  now," 
said  the  bishop,  and  here  his  voice  was  broken  with  deep  feeling — "  She  is  now 
living  in  my  house,  paralysed,  speechless,  helpless,  but  every  time  I  look  at  her 
dear  face,  I  thank  God  for  giving  me  such  a  mother.  All  that  I  am,  and  all  that  I 
have  I  owe  to  her."  Faithful  to  duty : — In  the  terrible  April  gale  of  1851,  the  light- 
house on  Minot's  Ledge,  near  Boston,  was  destroyed.  Two  men  were  in  it  at  the 
time,  and  a  vast  multitude  were  gathered  upon  the  shore,  waiting  in  anxious  distress 
for  the  expected  catastrophe.  Every  hour,  however,  the  bell  tolled  the  time,  and 
ever  the  liglit  pierced  the  dark  raging  storm,  and  bid  the  sailor  beware.  No  howling 
blast  could  silence  the  one  nor  rising  wave  extinguish  the  other.  At  last  one  giant 
wave,  mightier  than  the  rest,  rose  up  and  threw  its  arms  around  the  tower,  and  laid 
it  low  in  the  waves.  Then  alone  was  the  bell  silent,  then  alone  did  the  light  cease 
to  shine.     (J.  M,  Reid.) 

Vers.  3-6.  He  that  hath  bnllt  all  things  Is  God. — Divine  socialism : — 1.  "  He 
that  built  all  things  is  God."  He  began  in  the  undated  past,  and  He  keeps 
on  in  sundry  ways  and  with  diverse  materials  from  generation  to  generation. 
To-day  is  built  up  out  of  yesterday  and  all  its  predecessors,  and  the  vast  and 
prohfic  morrow  will  be  constructed  out  of  the  incomprehensible  and  mighty  to-day. 
2.  "  Know  ye  that  the  Lord,  He  is  God.  It  is  He  who  hath  made  us  and  not  w« 
ourselves."  "We  are  His  workmanship,"  created  of  old,  with  a  body  that  is 
a  finely  built  machine,  opulent  in  resources,  and  apt  for  our  uses ;  with  a  mind 
of  surprising  capacities  ;  perception  and  reason,  memory  and  conscience,  hope  and 
trust,  reverence  and  love,  and  above  all  with  a  spirit  that  links  us  with  the  Infinite, 
makes  us  susceptible  of  being  "  created  anew  in  Christ  Jesus,"  after  the  type  of  His 
hoJy  life.      The  home  is  His  work,  built  as  the  primary  institution  for  choking 


CHAP,  m,]  HEBREWS.  821 

in  the  germ  the  destructive  self-seeking  of  the  human  race,  and  developing  that 
love  which  forgets  self,  considers  all,  and  creates  an  atmosphere  of  domestio 
and  social  ozone  that  refreshes  and  exhilarates  everybody  who  breathes  it,  3.  But 
God's  supreme  building  work  goes  very  far  beyond  that  unit  of  civilisation, 
the  home,  and  seeks  to  construct  out  of  the  individuals  of  which  the  world  is 
composed  one  vast  moral  commonwealth,  a  spiritual  republic,  a  divine  "  house," 
in  which  selfishness  shall  be  killed  outright,  and  God  and  freedom,  righteousness 
and  love,  reign  for  ever  and  ever ;  a  "  house  "  with  servants  hke  Moses,  sons  like 
Jesus,  faithful  in  all  things ;  a  free,  aggressive,  and  holy  spiritual  community  ; 
a  perfect  form  of  society,  into  which  nothing  enters  that  defiles,  or  makes  a  lie. 
This  is  the  Divine  ideal,  the  sum  and  crown  of  the  long  and  patient  labours  of 
God  upon  men,  the  image  and  pattern  of  the  things,  towards  the  realisation  of 
whicli  all  the  pulling  down  and  plucking  up  of  nations,  and  states,  and  churches, 
and  all  the  reconstructing  of  systems  and  societies,  stedfastly  and  assuredly  tend. 
4.  "  Whose  house  are  we  " — we  Hebrews  recently  become  followers  of  Jesus,  but 
not  the  less  belonging  to  God's  building;  for  He  goes  forward  amid  the  wreck 
of  systems,  the  sacking  of  Jerusalem,  with  unbroken  persistence,  calm  and  sure, 
though  not  swift,  towards  the  eternally  pre-ordained  top-stone.  The  fires  of  God 
(Heb.  xii.  29)  sweep  through  the  structure  with  a  tierce  and  cleansing  blast, 
not  a  grain  of  gold  is  lost ;  but  lo  1  here !  an  ampler  edifice,  on  a  wider  foundation, 
richer  in  its  architectural  beauty,  rises  into  sight  as  the  dwelling-place  of  the  sons 
of  men.  5.  Whence  it  follows,  if  you  are  able  to  hear  it,  that  in  the  truest  sense 
God  is  the  first  Soci-tlist;  the  Author  of  that  gospel  which  has  done  more  to  create 
motive  and  inspire  practical  enthusiasm  for  the  real  welfare  of  men,  than  all  other 
systems  and  agencies  and  persons  put  together.  6.  Two  workers  of  unapproachable 
greatness  stand  out  with  decisive  significance  as  social  creators  and  organisers. 
Many  builders  have  done  excellently,  but  Moses,  a  faithful  servant  in  the  house 
of  the  Father,  and  Jesus,  a  faithful  Son,  have  excelled  them  all.  The  making 
of  Israel  was  in  the  hands  of  Moses.  The  making  "  of  all  things  new  "  is  the  work 
of  Christ.  7.  Moses,  indeed,  was  faithful  in  all  His  hoase  as  a  servant,  and  built 
op,  as  Ewald  says,  "  for  the  first  time  in  all  human  history  a  whole  nation, 
prepared  to  pat  itself  under  obligation  to  live  hereafter  only  in  accordance  with 
true  religion  and  her  requirements,  and  to  look  for  salvation  in  all  time  to  oome 
only  from  loyalty  in  its  religious  life,  and  the  love  of  the  true  God,  which  this 
loyalty  pre-supposes."  Better  foundation  than  that  can  no  man  lay — God,  free- 
dom,  righteousness,  love  ;  and  on  every  part  of  it  is  prophetically  written 
the  name  of  the  coming  Christ.  8.  But  the  chief  purpose  of  the  writer  of  the 
letter  to  the  Hebrews  is  to  show  that  Christ  is  a  greater  Builder  tlian  Moses.  In 
what,  then,  was  Jesus  greater  than  Moses  ?  In  the  basis  on  which  He  built  ?  No  ; 
for  both  built  on  the  same.  In  the  spirit  in  which  He  did  His  work  7  No ;  for 
both  could  say,  "  It  is  my  meat  to  do  the  will  of  my  Father,  and  to  finish  His 
work."  In  fidelity  to  His  trust  ?  Yes ;  but  this  is  not  in  the  vsrriter's  mind  :  but 
rather  the  fact  that  Christ  proves  Himself  to  be  nearer  the  founts  and  sources 
of  spiritual  power.  (1)  Did  Moses  speak  of  a  "  definite  Deity "  ?  Christ's  view 
of  God  as  the  Father  and  Saviour  of  all  men,  and  of  all  alike,  is  the  fullest  gospel 
men  have  yet  seen,  and  makes  the  amplest  provision  for  all  the  needs  of  the 
individual  and  social  life  of  mankind.  (2)  Did  Moses  build  on  the  heights  of 
freedom  ?  Christ  much  more !  It  is  to  His  incarnation  and  sacrifice  we  owe  the 
knowledge  of  the  unutterable  worth  of  one  soul,  the  marvellous  possibilities  of  one 
corrupted  and  lost  human  being !  From  him  comes  the  impulse  to  liberty.  (3)  Is 
Moses  a  legislator  ?  so  also  is  Christ.  He  did  not  come  to  destroy  the  law  and  the 
prophets,  but  to  fill  out  and  realise  their  plan ;  not  to  demolish  their  often-dropped 
ideal,  but  to  take  it  up  and  embody  it  in  the  life  of  men.  He  leads  to  higher  ways 
of  action ;  to  patience,  forbearance,  forgiveness  and  self-devotion,  for  the  sake 
of  the  weakest  and  worst ;  and  what  men  could  not  do  or  suffer  under  "  the  law" 
they  accomplish  with  ease  and  grace  under  the  gospel.  (4)  Since  Jesn»  Christ,  the 
Son  of  the  Father,  is  greater  than  Moses  the  servant  of  God,  in  that  He  furnishes 
the  one  thing  that  was  lacking,  viz.,  motive-power;  and  furnishes  it  on  a  scale 
of  limitless  magnitude,  and  with  a  fitness  for  human  need  that  leaves  nothing 
to  desire,  "  let  us  hold  fast  our  boldness  and  the  glorying  of  our  hope  to  the  end," 
and  so  prove  that  we  are  of  this  Divine  house.  God's  commonwealth  is  as  sure 
to  be  established  as  the  heavens  and  earth  are  built.  Only  let  us  give  His  gospel 
free  play  ;  treat  it  as  containing  the  key  to  all  our  social  problems  as  well  as  to  our 
individual  uses,  and  it  will   prove  itself  as  victorious  over  the  difficulties  of 


2M  THE  BILLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

hnmanity  as  it  has  signally  triumphed  in  the  experience  of  numberless  individuals. 
(5)  But  recollect,  we  only  belong  to  that  "house"  in  so  far  as  "  we  hold  fast  oui 
boldness "  and  do  not  fail  in  brave  deeds,  in  bold  initiative,  in  courageous 
persistence,  in  the  speech  and  work  that  vindicate  and  back  our  confidence.  God 
has  no  room  for  cowards  and  idlers.  (6)  Partnership  in  that  "  house  "  requires 
another  quality,  viz.,  that  of  holding  fast  *'  the  glorying  of  our  hope,"  i.e.,  our 
exulting  hopefulness.  "In  social  things,"  says  John  Morley,  "we  may  be  sar« 
undying  hope  is  the  secret  of  vision,"  and  it  is  also  the  secret  of  patient  work. 
"  We  are  saved  *  socially '  by  hope."  Amid  all  this  conflict  of  human  passion  and 
opinion,  God's  work  of  salvation  and  regeneration  goes  on,  "  without  haste 
and  without  rest,"  towards  its  long  since  predicted  consummation.  {John  Clifford, 
D.D.)  The  being  and  attributes  of  God  proved  from  His  works : — I.  This  world 
MIGHT  HAVE  HAD  A  BEGINNING.  There  is  nothing  absurd  in  this  supposition.  We 
can  easily  conceive  that  there  was  a  time  when  the  heavens  and  earth  did  not 
exist ;  and  consequently  that  there  was  a  time  when  they  first  came  into  existence. 
Now,  if  tbe  world  existed  of  necessity,  it  would  be  absolutely  immutable,  or 
incapable  of  change.  II.  If  this  world  might  have  begun  to  exist,  then  it  might 
HAVE  HAD  A  CAUSE  OF  ITS  EXISTENCE.  Upon  this  principle  the  apostle  supposes  that 
"  every  house  is  builded  by  some  man,"  or  owes  its  existence  to  some  cause.  And 
this  mode  of  reasoning  from  the  effect  to  the  cause,  is  perfectly  agreeable  to 
common  sense.  Should  the  greatest  sceptic  travel  two  or  three  hundred  miles 
into  a  wild  wilderness,  and  there  discover  a  very  ancient  and  elegant  house,  he 
would  instantaneously  draw  the  conclusion  in  his  own  mind  that  that  house  waa 
built  by  some  man.  III.  If  the  world  might  have  had  a  cause,  then  it  must  havh 
HAD  A  cause.  When  a  number  of  men  walk  in  procession,  they  bear  the  relation 
of  antecedent  and  consefjuent  to  each  other,  but  not  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect. 
The  motion  of  those  who  walk  before  is  no  cause  of  the  motion  of  those  who  walk 
behind.  The  operation  of  our  own  minds  gives  us  a  clear  and  distinct  perception 
of  cause  and  effect.  When  we  walk,  we  are  conscious  of  a  power  to  produce 
motion.  Our  idea  of  cause  and  effect  is  as  clear  and  distinct  as  our  idea  of  heat 
and  cold,  and  is  as  truly  correspondent  to  an  original  impression.  This  being 
established,  the  way  is  prepared  to  show,  that  if  the  world  might  have  had 
a  cause,  it  must  have  had  a  cause.  IV.  The  cause  which  produced  this 
WORLD  must  be  EQUAL  TO  THE  EFFECT  PRODUCED.  No  causc  Can  prodnce  an  effect 
superior  to  itself.  For  just  so  far  as  an  effect  surpasses  the  cause,  it  ceases 
to  be  an  effect,  and  exists  of  itself.  1.  The  Creator  of  all  things  must  be  possessed 
of  almighty  power.  This  is  the  first  attribute  of  the  first  cause  which  His  great 
and  marvellous  works  impress  upon  the  mind.  2.  The  Author  and  Framer 
of  the  world  must  be  supremely  wise  and  intelligent.  Mankind  have  always 
admired  the  beauty  of  the  world.  Uniformity  amidst  variety  appears  through 
every  part  of  creation.  3.  The  builder  and  upholder  of  the  world  must  be  every- 
where present.  It  is  the  nature  of  all  created  beings  and  objects  to  be  constantly 
and  absolutely  dependent  upon  their  Creator.  4.  The  Maker  and  Governor  of  the 
world  must  be  a  being  of  boundless  knowledge.  He  must  necessarily  know 
Himself,  and  be  intuitively  acquainted  with  all  His  natural  and  moral  perfections. 
And  by  knowing  these,  He  must  necessarily  know  all  possibles  ;  that  is,  all  things 
which  lie  within  the  limits  of  omnipotence.  6.  The  first,  supreme  and  intelligeut 
Cause  of  all  things  must  be  eternal.  To  suppose  the  first  Cause  had  a  cause 
of  His  existence,  is  to  suppose  there  was  a  cause  before  the  first  Cause ;  or  tc 
suppose  He  was  the  cause  of  His  own  existence,  is  to  suppose  that  He  existed  and 
operated  before  He  did  exist;  or  to  suppose  that  He  came  into  existence  without 
any  cause,  is  to  suppose  what  has  been  proved  to  be  impossible.  6.  The  Framer  oi 
our  bodies  and  the  Father  of  our  spirits  must  be  a  being  of  moral  rectitude.  The 
moral  faculty  of  man  carries  in  it  a  clear  demonstration  of  the  moral  rectitude 
of  his  Maker,  Besides,  the  whole  world  bears  innumerable  marks  of  the  Divine 
goodness.  Deductions : — 1.  If  it  be  true  that  the  visible  world  displays  the  being 
and  perfections  of  the  Deity,  then  all  who  reason  themselves  into  atheism  are  guilty 
of  extreme  folly.  2.  If  there  be  a  being  of  supreme  power  and  intelligence,  who 
is  the  Creator  and  Proprietor  of  the  world,  then  there  is  great  reason  to  think  that 
He  will  dispose  of  all  things  to  His  own  glory.  3.  If  there  be  a  being  who  hath 
made  us,  and  who  will  absolutely  dispose  of  us,  then  it  is  very  desirable  to  receive 
a  revelation  of  His  will.  4.  If  there  be  a  God  who  is  possessed  of  every  natural 
and  moral  perfection,  then  it  is  fruitless  for  those  who  believe  and  acknowledge 
His  existence  to  deny  the  divinity  of  the  Scriptuies  in  order  to  get  rid  of  theii 


CHAP,  m.]  HEBREWS.  223 

disagreeable  doctrines.    5.  If  there  be  a  God,  then  all  His  reasonable  creatures  are 
bound  to  be  religious.    Our  capacity  to  know  God  obliges  us  to  glorify  Him  as  God. 
[N.  Emmons,  D.D.)        God  in  History  : — There  is  a  God  in  history.     The  undevout 
historian,  like  the  undevout  astronomer,  is  mad.    Every  house  is  built  by  some 
one,  but  He  that  built  all  things  is  God.    There  is  a  house,  a  structure  that 
fills   the   ages,   its  foundations   laid    millenniums  ago.     Great    events  are  like 
columns  in  their   structure,  like  arches,  like   graceful   pinnacles,  and  a  glorious 
dome  shall   complete  it  by  and  by.      And  it  must  be  a  fool  that  can  look  en 
the  structure  of   history,  with  all  its  marvellous  adjustments   and  adaptations, 
its  many  and  varied   apartments,  its  evidence  of  architecture,   symmetry,  and 
beauty,   and    say  there   is    no  Architect    in    history.       (A.    T.    Fierson,    D.D.) 
Christ  as  a  Son  over  His  own  house. — Christ  the  Lord,  UTid  Moses  the  servant : — 
To  speak  of  Moses  to  the  Jews  was  always  a  very  difficult  and  delicate  matter.    It 
is  hardly  possible  for  Gentiles  to  understand  or  realise  the  veneration  with  which 
the  Jews  regard  Moses,  the  servant  of  God,     Think  of  the  history  of  Moses.     It 
vaa  wonderful  from  the  very  commencement.    His  whole  life  was  a  sacrifice  of 
love  and  of  obedience  to  the  God  of  His  fathers  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob  ;  a 
life  of  self-denial  and  affection  to  the  people  of  his  choice.    Look  at  his  peculiar 
position.    He  was  mediator  of  the  covenant,  the  ambassador  (apostle)  and  plenipo- 
tentiary (as  it  were)  of  God.    All  God's  dealings  with  Israel  were  transacted  through 
him.     Look,  again,  at  the  work  Moses  accomplished ;  at  the  great  things  which  the 
grace  of  God  performed  through  him.    Through  him  God  brought  Israel  out  of 
Egypt,  and  led  them  through  the  Red  Sea ;  He  gave  the  ten  commandments  and 
the  whole  law  by  him ;  by  him  the  whole  national  hfe  of  Israel  was  organised.     But 
after  admitting  fuUy  the  excellence  of  Moses,  the  apostle  proceeds  to  show  the  still 
greater  glory  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     It  must  have  struck  you  that  in  many 
respects  Moses  was  a  type  of  Jesus.    But  yet,  what  a.  difference  I     The  zeal  of 
Moses  was  not  free  from  earth-bom  elements,  and  had  to  be  purified.     But  there 
was  nothing  in  Jesus  that  was  of  the  earth  earthy;  no  sinful  weakness  of  the  flesh 
was  in  Him  who  condescended  to  come  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh.     But  notice 
the  imperfection  of  Moses  as  a  servant.     How  different  was  Jesuc !     He  declared 
the  full,  perfect,  and  free  love  of  God.    The  house,  the  building,  means  the  children 
of  God,  who  by  faith,  as  lively  stones,  are  built  upon  Christ  Jesus  the  Foundation, 
and  who  are  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost;  in  whom  God  dwells,  as  in  His  temple, 
and  in  whom  God  is  praised  and  manifested  in  glory.    A  Christian  is  like  the 
tabernacle  ;  he  is  a  sanctuary.    There  is  the  holy  of  holies,  the  holy  place,  and  the 
outer  court.     But  in  all  the  glory  of  God  is  to  be  revealed  ;  the  holiness  of  God  to  be 
sLown  forth.    His  body  is  the  Lord's  ;  the  members  of  his  body  are  Christ's  mem- 
bers.    God  is  to  walk  in  it,  to  dwell  in  it,  to  rest  in  it.    He  is  to  be  not  merely  a 
visitor,  but  an  indwelUng  guest,  "  abiding  in  him."    How  manifold  are  the  man- 
sions in  which  He  dwells !    As  there  are  many  mansions  in  the  Father's  house 
above,  as  there  are  many  mansions  in  His  Church  below,  so  also  are  there  many 
rooms  in  the  spiritual  house  of  the  individual  behever ;   in  various  manifesta- 
tions of  grace,  strength,  and  love,  does  God  dwell  in  us.    But  the  apostle  adds — 
shall  I  call  it  a  condition?  shall  I  call  it  an  encouragement?    "If  you  hold  fast 
the  confidence  and  the  rejoicing  of  your  hope  unto  the  end."     And  with  the 
exhortation  is  the  word  of  promise :  "  Being  confident  of  this  very  thing,  that  He 
which  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  you  wiU  perform  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ." 
"  They  that  trust  in  the  Lord  shall  be  like  Mount  Sion,  which  cannot  be  moved, 
but  Etandeth  fast  for  ever."    Oh,  blessed  word  and  promise  of  God,  that  He  will 
keep  aa  unto  the  end  1     "  Hold  fast  the  confidence  and  rejoicing  of  your  hope  firm 
ante  the  end."     Faith  is  the  mother  of  Hope;    but  how  often  is  the  mother 
strengthened  and  cheered  by  the  daughter  I     Cherish  the  hope  which  in  Christ 
Jesus  is  given  unto  you  who  beheve  in  the  Saviour.    (A.  Saphir.)        Christ  as  a  Son 
over  His  own  house: — I.   As  a  Son  oveb  His  own  house,  Chkist  exercises  the 

PREEOOAXrVES   OF   EXCLUSIVE   SUPREMACY.      II.    ChRIST  AS  A  SoN    OVEB   HiS   OWN  H0U8H 

18  ITS  ONLY  Redeemer.      III.    The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ab  a  Son  over   His   own 

HOUSE    HAS   PROCURED    FOB   IT   THE    GIFTS   AND   THE    GRACES   OF   HiS    HOLY    SpIRIT.       1. 

Paring  His  personal  ministry,  our  Lord  instructed  "  His  own  house  "  in  the  things 
which  pertained  to  the  kingdom  of  God.  As  the  Prophet  of  the  Church,  He  mada 
known  the  whole  counsel  of  God  for  the  obedience  of  faith.  2.  Our  Lord  was, 
moreover,  even  in  His  estate  of  humiliation,  "  a  Son  over  His  own  house,"  as  ita 
Sovereign  from  whom  emanate  all  the  laws  which  regulate  both  its  internal 
econoiuy  and  "  the  outward  business  of  the  house  of  God,"    3.  Christ  is  no  loogex 


824  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOIt.  [chap,  m, 

visibly  present  in  that  house  over  which  He  presides  as  a  Son.  '•  The  heavens 
mast  retain  Him  until  the  times  of  the  restitution  of  all  things."  Still,  He  is  truly 
and  ever  present  by  His  Spirit,  whom  He  sends  f  >rth  in  every  age  to  carry  forwsid 
_jnany  of  the  sublime  designs  of  His  mission  into  the  world.  (John  Smyth,  D.D.) 
\The  spiritual  house^-i-I.  First  of  all,  the  house  :  what  house  is  this ?  "  Whose 
liouse  are  we."  It  Is  a  house  composed  of  all  true  believers.  It  is  a  spiritual 
edifice.  Only  look  at  the  contrast ;  the  house  of  bondage  and  the  house  of  light 
and  liberty ;  the  former  under  Moses  as  a  servant,  and  yet  a  master — the  latter 
under  Jesus  the  Son,  and  He  also  the  Master.  Oh  !  what  a  precious  truth  it  is, 
that  the  believer  passes  from  the  one  to  the  other.    II.  Now,  let  us  consider  thbs 

PROOF    THE     TEXT   GIVES   TO    US   WHEREBY    A     MAN     MAT     KNOW     WHETHER    HB     REALLY 

BELONGS  TO  THIS  HOUSEHOLD.  It  docs  Hot  Say,  "  If  you  hold  fast  your  confi  dence 
and  the  rejoicing  of  the  hope,"  you  shall  belong  to  this  house;  but  it  says,  "  Whose 
house  we  are  "if  we  do  so  and  so.  That  is  the  proof  of  my  being  a  member  of  that 
house.  Observe  here  the  contrast  is  not  between  belonging  to  the  house  of  Christ 
and  no  house.  Observe,  it  is  not  between  having  religion  and  no  religion.  It  does 
not  say,  '•  If  you  have  confidence,  and  if  you  have  hope,  you  prove  that  you  are 
religious,  as  contrasted  with  those  who  have  no  religion  " ;  but  you  pro?e  that  you 
belong  to  the  house  of  Christ,  as  contrasted  with  the  house  of  Moses.  That  shows 
ns  that  whatever  a  man  may  say  about  his  religion,  yet  if  he  has  not  confidence,  he 
has  gone  back  to  the  Mosaic  dispensation.  Now  I  do  say  to  you,  this  house  of 
Christ,  as  contrasted  with  the  house  of  Moses,  is  a  glorious  house.  It  has  no 
parallel  in  the  universe.  There  is  nothing  like  the  household  of  God,  belonging  to 
Christ ;  even  angelic  intelligences,  though  a  part  of  that  household,  are  eventually 
not  to  be  compared  to  the  members  of  Christ's  household.  The  believer  is  brought 
into  such  a  union  with  God's  own  Son,  as  communicates  to  him  a  blessedness 
unknown  to  any  other  creature.  Even  now,  look  at  the  wonderful  privileges  to 
which  believers  are  called — fellowship  with  the  Father  and  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ, 
and  community  of  nature  with  Chiist ;  Christ  having  humanity,  we  having  the 
Divine  nature  I  Only  conceive  what  is  held  out  to  us— the  glorious  promise  that 
we  shall  behold  the  glory  that  He  had  with  the  Father  before  the  world  was  I  The 
apostle  says,  "  whose  house  are  we,  if  we  hold  this  fast" ;  if  this  is  manifest  in  our 
feelings  and  deportment.  We  must  get  that  kind  of  confidence  that  neither  hell 
nor  earth  can  shake,  and  that  is  to  be  got  by  implicit  trust  in  the  promises  of  the 
Lord.  So  again  the  expectation :  you  are  to  hold  fast  the  confidence  "  and  the 
rejoicing  of  the  hope."  What  hope  7  That  He  will  come  again ;  •'  the  glorious 
appearing  of  the  great  God  and  our  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ " ;  that  is  the  hope. 
There  is  a  rejoicing  of  common  expectation ;  but  the  expectation  of  the  Christian 
must  be  definite.  Let  me  give  you  two  or  three  important  practical  rules  for 
retaining  this  confidence  and  hope.  1.  First  of  all,  thoroughly  understand  the 
relationship  into  which  you  enter  when  you  enter  the  house  of  Christ.  Understand 
thoroughly  your  relation  to  God  the  Father.  It  is  in  proportion  as  you  see  that, 
together  with  your  relationship  to  the  Son  and  Holy  Ghost,  that  you  feel  confidence 
that  you  shall  hold  fast.  Feel  this :  if  God  be  my  Father,  will  He  give  me  a  stone 
if  I  ask  Him  for  bread  ?  Certainly  not.  Thep  how  much  more  will  He  not  give 
me  His  own  Spirit  if  Christ  be  my  own  Saviour  ?  Will  He  withhold  the  robe  of 
righteousness  in  which  I  may  stand  before  Him  ?  Certainly  not,  if  Christ  died  that 
I  might  have  it.  If  the  Holy  Ghost  be  an  indweUer  of  my  soul,  will  He  quit  me  ? 
Certainly  not.  2.  Then  another  thing  bear  in  mind  that  you  should  hold  fast ; 
that  this  work  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  through  whatever  instrumentality  the 
Holy  Ghost  may  operate  on  you.  Learn,  therefore,  to  exercise  an  unqualified 
dependence  on  the  Holy  Ghost.  While  you  are  using  every  possible  means,  learn 
to  be  always  dependent  on  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  completely  as  though  you  did 
nothing,  at  the  same  time  remembering  that  the  Holy  Ghost  does  work  by  means. 
8.  Another  thing :  remember  that  the  path  of  duty  is  the  path  in  which  all  these 
things  are  met  with  and  enjoyed.     (C.  Molyneux,  M.A.)  The  Church  Chrisfg 

house : — No  less  power  was  requisite  to  make  the  Church  than  to  make  the  world. 
The  world  was  made  out  of  nothing,  the  Church  made  out  of  materials  altogether 
unfit  for  such  a  building.  Christ,  who  is  God,  drew  the  platform  of  the  Church, 
provided  the  materials,  and  by  almighty  power  disposed  them  to  receive  the  reform. 
He  has  compacted  and  united  this  His  house,  and  has  settled  the  orders  of  it,  and 
crowned  all  with  His  own  presence,  which  is  the  true  glory  of  this  house  of  God. 
{M.  Henry.)  Christ  in  relation  to  the  true  Church: — I.  Hb  owns  it.  1.  This 
proprietorship  is  founded  on  His  creative  work.     2.  His  redemptive  work.     IL  Ha 


CHAP,  m.]  HEBREWS.  225 

OCCCP1E8  IT.  1.  As  a  permanent  Resident.  2.  Aa  a  hospitable  Host.  3.  As  a 
Master.  (Homilist.)  Wliose  house  are  we. — Christians  are  God' s  hoiise : — What 
a  singular  honour  is  this,  that  we  should  be  God's  house — yea,  His  dwelling  houae. 
1.  A  nobleman  hath  many  houses,  which  he  dwells  not  in  himself,  but  letteth  thorn 
forth  to  other  men.  We  are  not  houses  to  let,  but  God  Himself  dwelletli  in  us  ; 
we  are  His  mansion-house.  It  pleaseth  Him  of  His  infinite  mercy  to  dwell  in  such 
base  houses  as  we  are.  2.  If  God  dwell  in  us,  and  we  be  His  house,  then  bow  neat 
and  handsome  should  it  be  kept.  Shall  a  king's  house  be  overgrown  with  weeds  ? 
Shall  there  be  filthy  corners  in  a  king's  palace  ?  And  shall  we  that  profess  our- 
selves to  be  God's  house  be  full  of  pride,  envy,  and  malice  ?  The  devil  found  hia 
house  swept  and  garnished  to  hia  mind,  and  shall  not  God's  house  be  swept  for 
the  entertaining  of  Him  7  Let  ua  garnish  ourselves,  which  are  God's  house,  with 
the  sweet  flowers  of  faith,  love,  hope,  zeal,  humility,  temperance,  patience,  sobriety, 
that  God  may  take  delight  to  dwell  in  us.  3.  There  is  no  man,  especially  if  h« 
dwell  in  a  house,  and  it  be  his  own,  but  will  bestow  needful  reparations  on  it;  and 
do  you  think  God  will  suffer  His  house  to  lie  unrepaired?  Nay,  being  God's  house, 
we  shall  want  nothing  for  soul  or  body.  If  we  decay  in  faith,  zeal,  and  other  graces 
of  His  Spirit,  He  will  in  due  season  repair  them  again  ;  He  will  keep  His  house 
wind-tight  and  water-tight ;  He  will  preserve  it  from  wind  and  weather — yea,  the 
gates  of  hell  shall  never  prevail  against  His  house.  4.  A  man  may  have  a  house 
and  be  defeated  of  it :  some  wrangling  lawyer  may  wring  it  out  of  his  hand,  or  he 
may  be  weary  of  his  house,  and  make  it  away.  None  can  snatch  God's  house  out 
of  Hia  hand  ;  He  is  no  changeling ;  He  will  keep  His  house  for  ever.  What  ?  are 
we  the  house  of  God  simply?  Live  as  we  list,  and  do  what  we  will?  No,  verily  ; 
but  if  we  hold  fast  the  confidence,  <fec.  One  special  qaahty  of  a  good  house  is  to  be 
firm  and  stable.  If  it  be  a  tottering  house,  ready  to  shake  in  every  wind  and 
tempest,  a  man  will  have  small  joy  to  dwell  in  it ;  even  so,  we  that  be  the  house  of 
God  Almighty  must  not  be  wavering  and  inconstant,  but  we  must  stand  sure,  and 
hold  fast  the  graces  we  have  received.  There  be  two  things  which  we  must  huld 
fast :  faith  and  hope  ;  the  boldness  that  we  have  by  faith  to  come  into  the  presence 
of  God,  to  whom  we  have  access  by  Christ,  apprehended  by  faith,  and  by  virtue 
whereof  we  may  boldly  call  God  Father,  and  open  our  minds  freely  to  Him — that  is 
the  nature  of  the  word.  (W.  Jones,  DJ).)  Of  those  wlw  are  the  house  of  ChrUt : 
— This  pronoun  (we)  may  be  taken  two  ways — 1.  Jointly,  for  the  whole  Catholio 
Church,  which  is  the  society  of  all  that  ever  did  or  shall  believe  in  Jesus  Christ. 
2.  Distinctly,  for  every  particular  believer.  For  the  body  of  a  particular  professor 
is  said  to  be  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (1  Cor.  vi.  19).  Fitly  are  saints  styled 
a  house.  For — 1.  As  stones  and  timber,  they  are  brought  together  and-  fitly  laid, 
and  that  for  God  to  dwell  among  them  (2  Cor.  vi.  16).  2.  As  a  house  is  set  upon  a 
foundation  (Luke  vi.  48),  so  are  saints  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and 
prophets,  Jesus  Christ  Himself  being  the  chief  Corner-stone  (Eph.  ii.  20).  3.  As 
Solomon's  temple  was  beautified  and  adorned  with  silver,  gold,  variety  of  pictures, 
and  other  ornaments  (2  Chron.  iii.  4;  1  Kings  vi.  29),  so  saints  are  decked  and 
adorned  with  the  various  graces  of  God's  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22,  23).  4.  As  a  house 
inhabited  hath  a  governor  over  them,  so  the  society  of  saints  have  one  over  the^i 
who  is  called  the  Master  of  the  house  (Matt.  x.  25).  5.  As  in  a  house  there  is  a 
household  which  consisteth  of  children,  servants,  and  others,  so  in  the  Church  of 
God  (Matt.  XV.  26  ;  Luke  xi.  7).  6.  As  in  a  great  house  there  are  variety  of  officers, 
BO  in  the  Church  there  are  stewards,  ministers,  and  others  (2  Cor.  xii.  28).  7.  As 
in  a  house  all  needful  provision  useth  to  be  stored  up,  so  in  this  house  of  Christ 
there  is  bread  of  Ufe,  water  of  life,  and  needful  food  and  refreshing.  Singular  com- 
forts must  needs  hence  arise  to  those  that  are  parts  and  members  of  this  house  ; 
and  that  by  reason  of — 1.  The  sure  foundation  whereon  it  is  settled  (1  Cor.  iii.  11). 
2.  The  fast  knitting  of  the  parts  of  the  house  together  (Eph.  ii.  21).  3.  The  excel- 
lent ornaments  thereof,  which  are  the  glorious  graces  of  God's  Spirit.  4.  The  good 
laws  and  constitutions  for  better  governing  the  same,  being  all  contained  in  the 
Word  of  God.  5.  The  wise  Governor  thereof.  6.  The  excellent  household.  7. 
The  useful  offices  in  it.  8.  The  variety  and  sufficiency  of  provisions  appertaining 
thereto.  That  which  is  expected  of  such  as  are  of  this  house  is — 1.  That  they 
cleanse  themselves  from  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh  and  spirit  (2  Cor.  vii.  1;  vi.  16- 
18).  Otherwise  this  house  of  Christ  may  prove  the  devil's  stye.  2.  That  they  deck 
and  adorn  themselves  with  the  graces  of  God's  Spirit  (Col.  iii.  12).  3.  That  they 
be  subject  to  their  Governor,  and  to  the  good  ore  ers  that  He  establisheth  among 
them.    4.  That  they  be  content  with  the  place  and  portion  which  the  Master  of  the 

15 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

household  allots  unto  them.    5.  That  they  maintam  unity  amongst  themselves ; 
for  a  house  divided  against  itself  shall  not  stand  (Matt.  xii.  25).      {W.  Gouge.) 
If  -we  hold  fast  the  confidence. — This  conditional  speech  importeth— 1.  That  some 
professors  in  the  visible  Church  may  make  defection,  and  not  persevere  to  the 
end.     2.  That  such  as  shall  make  final  defection  hereafter  are  not  a  part  of  God's 
house  for  the  present,  howsoever  they  be  esteemed.    3.  That  true  believers  must 
take  warning,  from  the  possibility  of  some  professors'  apostasy,  to  look  the  better 
to  themselves,  and  to  take  a  better  gripe  of  Christ,  who  is  able  to  keep  them.     4. 
That  true  believers  both  may  and  should  hold  fast  their  confidence  unto  the  end  ; 
yea,  and  must  aim  to  do  so,  if  they  would  persevere.    6.  That  true  believers  have 
ground  and  warrant,  in  the  promises  of  the  gospel,  both  to  hope  for  salvation, 
and  to   rejoice  and  glory  in  that  hope,  as  3   it   were   present  possession.     6. 
That  the  more  a  man  aimeth  at  this  solid  confidence  and  gloriation  of  hope,  the 
more  evidence  he  giveth  that  he  is  of  the  true  house  of  God.     (D.  Dickson,  M.A.) 
Holding  fast  .-—The  word  which  is  rendered  "  confidence  "  in  this  verse  is  not  the 
same  as  that  which  appears  in  other  places  in  the  same  chapter.     "  We  are  made 
partakers  of  Christ  if  we  hold  the  beginning  of  our  confidence  steadfast  unto  the 
end,"  says  the  fourteenth  verse.     "  We  are  His  house  if  we  hold  fast  the  confidence 
and  the  rejoicing  of  the  hope  firm  unto  the  end."    The  two  things  are  substantially 
the  same,  and  yet  there  is  a  shade  of  difference  in  the  meaning  of  each  of  them. 
The  word  in  my  text  translated  "  confidence  "  Uterally  means  "frank  speech  " — 
saying  everything  is  Uterally  the  renderingof  the  expressioii.    And  the  thought  is 
just  this,  when  you  are  upon  terms  of  perfect  confidence  with  anybody,  as  we  say, 
we  "  know  him,"  or  "  I  can  say  anything  I  like  to  him."    And  that  is  the  sort  of 
thing  this  writer  enjoins  as  the  essential  of  the  Christian  man's  relationship  to 
God.     Two  friends,  two  lovers,  a  parent  and  a  child,  that  understand  each  other, 
it  does  not  matter  much  what  they  are  talking  about ;  anything  will  serve,  because 
each  knows  that  down  to  the  very  bottom  of  the  other  heart  it  is  joy  to  that  other 
heart  to  make  itself  manifest.    But  if  there  be  the  slightest  tinge  of  distrust  or 
alienation,  like  a  sensitive  plant,  the  leaves  all  fold  themselves  together,  and  so 
shut  themselves  up,  and  constraining  silence  comes.     So,  says  my  text,  this  marks 
the  true  relation  to  God,  that  there  is  such  perfect  trust  that  there  is  perfect  frank- 
ness.   And  so  you  get,  you  know,  such  other  words  as  these  in  this  same  Epistle, 
about  "  having  access  with  confidence,"  about  "  coming  boldly  to  the  Throne  of 
grace,"  and  the  Uke,  aU  of  them  carrying  the  same  suggestion  of  intimacy.     Hold 
fast  the  frank  speech,  which  is  a  child  of  trust,  and  the  trust  which  is  the  parent 
of  the  frank  speech.    And  my  text  gives  us  a  practical  hint  when  it  calls  this 
temper  and  disposition  the  confidence  of  hope.     It  is  precisely  in  the  measure  in 
which  we  cherish  the  Christian  hope  with  regard  to  that  future—that  guilt,  and 
with  gnilt  anxiety,  and  with  anxiety  fear,  being  all  done  away  with,  there  comes 
this  full  and  free  communication.    The  child  that  doubts  the  father's  favour,  and 
is  conscious  of  its  own  faults,  sulks  in  the  corner  and  says  nothing.    The  child 
that  is  sure  of  its  Father's  forgiveness,  and  is  conscious  of  its  own  faults,  has  no 
rest  till  it  tells  its  faults.    And  so  the  frankness  which  comes  of  confidence  is 
based  upon  that  assurance  which  covers  all  the  future  with  a  great  light  of  hope, 
and  all  the  past  with  a  great  light  of  pardon  and  oblivion.    And  then  the  other 
Bide  of  this  disposition  is  conveyed  by  that  other  significant  word,  "  Hold  fast," 
not  only  the  confidence,  but  the  "  glorying,"  which  is  more  nearly  the  meaning 
of  the  word  than  the  "  rejoicing  "  of  our  version,  the  "  glorying,"  which  likewise 
is  the  fruit  of  hope.    Now,  this  •'  glorying  "  does  not  mean  an  act  of  glorying, 
but  it  means  the  subject  matter,  or  the  occasion.    That  is  to  say,  it  does  not  de- 
scribe  a  man's  disposition  or  notion,  but  it  describes  something  outside  of  him, 
■which  excites  that  emotion,  and  on  which  it  is  fixed.     So  you  see  my  text  has  two 
horns  to  it,  as  it  were;  the  one  lays  hold  of  something  in  me,  and  says  to  me, 
«•  Tou  see  to  it  that  you  hold  fast  your  confidence,"  and  the  other  points  to  some- 
thing without  me,  and  says,  "  In  order  that  you  may  see  that  you  keep  hold  of 
the  thing  which  entitles  you  to  rejoice,  to  triumph,  to  glory,  to  boast  yourselves." 
That  is  to  say,  we  have  here  set  forth  the  great  facts  of  the  gospel,  all  gathered 
up  into  that  one  word,  the  matter  for  our  boasting,  and  that  boasting  which  is  no 
eelf-complacent  bragging  of  our  own  strength,  but  a  certain  triumphant  exultation 
in  a  thing  that  lies  outside  of  us,  and  with  which  we  have  nothing  to  do  but  accept 
it,  that  glorying,  the  confidence  of  which  I  have  been  speaking,  is,  in  a  certain 
sense,  the  child  of  hope.    For  the  more  we  are  familiar  with  tbe  great  issues  to 
^s'hich  GoJ  is  leading  us,  if  we  will,  the  more  we  shall  keep  fiim  hold  of  th« 


CHAP,  ni.]  HEBREWS.  J27 

ground  for  rejoicing  and  triumph  which  lies  in  the  message  of  His  love.  And  all 
life,  with  all  its  bitterness,  with  its  changes,  and  defeats,  and  sorrows,  it  will  all, 
smitten,  as  it  were,  into  beauty  by  this  light  of  the  future  that  falls  upon  it,  it  too 
will  all  become  material  for  triumph,  for  exultation,  for  gladness.  And  now  let 
me  say  a  word  as  to  the  effort  that  is  required  to  keep  this  hold  of  which  my  text 
speaks.  The  word  is  a  very  vivid  and  very  natural  one,  the  metaphor  strong  but 
most  familiar,  the  grasp  of  a  muscular  hand  which  tightens  itself  round  something 
that  it  will  not  part  \yith,  is  set  before  us  as  the  analogue  to  which  our  Christian 
disposition  and  temper  is  to  be  conformed.  And  so  we  come  just  to  these  two 
practical  advices — "  Hold  fast  the  inward  emotion ;  and  hold  fast  the  outward 
Object  upon  which  it  rests."  How  do  you  hold  fast  an  inward  emotion  ?  How  can 
we  stsreotype  and  make  permanent  the  flowing  currents  of  our  inward  life  ?  Per- 
haps not  absolutely  is  it  possible  for  us  to  do  so.  All  emotion  is  evanescent.  Well 
then,  swiftly  renew  it  as  it  dies.  The  carbon  points  in  the  electric  lamp  burn  away 
with  tremendous  rapidity,  but  there  is  a  little  mechanical  action  behind  them  which 
keeps  pushing  them  forward  with  proportionate  swiftness,  so  that  there  is  always  a 
fresh  surface  presented  to  be  consumed  and  to  be  illuminated.  And  so  you  and  I  can 
do,  day  by  day  renewing  the  temper  which  day  by  day  is  dropping  away,  as  it  were, 
burnt  out,  we  can  cultivate  the  habit  of  frank  speech  to  God.  If  you  want  to  hold 
fast  your  confidence,  cultivate  as  you  can  the  habit  of  coming  near  to  God,  and 
telling  Him  everything.  And  that  we  may,  let  us  beware  of  dropping  into  the  evila 
which  certainly  wiU  break  that  communion  and  will  darken  that  confidence.  For 
no  man  will  be  on  frank  terms  with  God  that  has  not  got  coiled  in  his  heart  soma 
evil  which  he  knows  to  be  a  devU,  and  yet  will  not  cast  out.  And  then,  on  the 
other  hand,  as  we  have  to  cultivate  the  inward  emotion,  so  we  have  to  cultivate 
our  firm  grasp  of  the  outward  thing,  the  material  and  ground  of  our  glorying  and 
of  our  hope.  All  muscular  effort  tends  to  relaxation.  That  is  to  say,  if  a  man  lays 
hold  of  a  rope  ever  so  tightly,  unless  there  is  a  continual  renewal  of  the  muscular 
impulse  the  grasp  will  slacken  by  degrees.  There  are  three  ways  by  which  you 
lose  your  hold  of  God's  truth.  Some  of  you  let  it  be  dragged  out  of  your  hands 
by  violence  ;  some  of  you  let  it  drop  out  of  your  hands  by  carelessness  ;  and  soma 
of  you  fling  it  away  out  of  your  hands  because  you  want  to  clutch  something  else. 
And  so  for  aU  three  ways  by  which  men  lose  their  Christianity  here  comes  the 
exbortation:  hold  fast  the  ground  of  your  glorying,  and  keep  a  tight  grip  of  Jesua 
Christ.  Those  whose  slack  hands  let  Him  go  generally  open  their  hands  a  finger 
at  a  time,  or  a  joint  at  a  time,  and  do  not  know  what  they  are  doing  until  the  paJm 
is  op<-n-and  empty.  {A,  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Markt  of  the  Church  of  God: — Here 
the  apostle  setteth  down  three  especial  marks  by  which  the  children  of  God  are 
known :  the  first  is  the  joy  of  their  hope ;  the  second,  the  assurance  of  it ;  the 
third,  the  constancy  and  perseverance  unto  the  end.  And  let  us  not  think  but  that 
God  hath  done  thus  with  us,  whom  He  hath  chosen  to  eternal  life.  He  hath  pre- 
pared our  hearts  to  know  and  feel  His  unspeakable  gift  which  He  hath  given  us ; 
for  if  we  should  bestow  any  gift  upon  men,  we  are  not  so  unwise  to  give  a  precious 
thing  unto  him  that  knows  not  what  it  is  ;  we  would  not  give  him  a  diamond  that 
would  think  it  to  be  a  piece  of  glass,  nor  we  would  not  give  him  a  pearl  that  would 
think  it  to  be  a  grain  of  salt,  for  we  should  lose  both  our  labour  and  our  thanks. 
And  shall  we  think  the  Lord  will  so  bestow  His  heavenly  blessings  ?  Will  He  give 
His  gifts  to  those  that  know  them  not,  who  cannot  give  Him  again  the  praise 
of  His  goodness  ?  No,  He  will  never  do  it ;  but,  as  Peter  saith.  He  hath 
taken  us  for  His  own  people  to  the  end  we  should  show  forth  His  virtuea 
that  hath  called  us  out  of  darkness  into  His  marvellous  light ;  and  there- 
fore, if  we  be  in  the  covenant  of  His  grace,  appointed  to  the  inheritance  of  His 
glory,  it  is  impossible  we  should  not  feel  the  comiort  of  it,  and  know  the  height  and 
breadth  of  His  great  mercy  and  grace.  Another  thing  here  to  be  learned,  if  we 
will  know  ourselves  to  be  this  house  and  Church  of  God,  is,  that  as  we  hold  thia 
hope,  so  we  must  hold  it  steadfast  and  without  wavering  unto  the  end,  for  so,  the 
apostle  saith,  we  must  have  steadfast  assurance  of  our  hope ;  he  calleth  it  in  the 
sixth  chapter  "a  fuU  persuasion  of  hope."  St.  Paul  calleth  it  his  intentive  hope, 
a  hope  in  which  he  shall  never  be  frustrate.  So  that  this  assurance  is  in  a  true 
end  living  hope,  and  it  casteth  out  mistrust  and  wavering,  even  as  faith  doth,  for 
faith  and  hope  cannot  be  separate,  neither  in  nature  nor  property;  but  if  you  have 
faith,  you  have  hope,  and  as  your  faith  is,  so  is  your  hope — a  sure  faith,  a  lively 
h>>pe ;  a  wavering  faith,  a  blind  hope  ;  for  our  faith  is  a  persuasion  of  the  love  of 
Ood  in  Christ,  and  our  hope  is  an  apprehension  of  the  glory  which  by  that  love  if 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  m 

given  unto  us.  It  cannot  be  that  we  should  know  the  love  and  grace  of  God,  which 
is  our  faith,  but  we  must  know  the  fruit  of  His  love,  that  is,  His  glory  and  eternal 
life,  which  is  our  hope  ;  if  therefore  we  be  sure  that  God  doth  love  as  in  Jesus 
Christ,  we  are  also  sure  that  God  will  glorify  us  through  Jesus  Christ ;  and  as  our 
faith  rejoiceth  in  God's  favour,  bo  our  hope  rejoiceth  in  God's  glory ;  and  as  oar 
faith  is  sure  that  nothing  shall  separate  the  love  of  God  from  us,  so  our  hope  long-tb 
after  the  incorruptible  inheritance  which  we  feel  and  know  is  laid  up  in  heaven. 
So  this  constancy  and  boldness  of  our  hope,  without  wavering,  laid  up  in  our 
breasts,  and  crying  still  within  as,  '•  Come,  Lord  Je?u,"  this  hope  is  our  warrant 
we  be  the  house  of  God.  Now,  the  third  thing  which  we  must  here  mark  for  our 
instruction  is  perseverance,  for  so  he  saich,  "We  must  hold  our  rejoicing  continual 
nnto  the  end."  A  most  necessary  thing,  and  such  as  without  which  all  our  labour 
is  lost,  but  a  thing  hard  to  attain  unto,  know  it  by  the  experience  of  it,  for  scarce  on& 
of  a  great  many  dot-h  grow  up  into  fervency  of  zeal,  and  so  continueth  anto  the 
end.  And  therefore  the  more  danger  is  onto  us  in  this  behalf,  the  more  watchful 
we  must  be  to  avoid  the  peril.  The  greatest  enemy  we  have  to  make  us  fall,  that 
we  should  not  hold  this  constancy  to  the  end,  is  our  own  flesh.  And  if  it  may  have 
any  rule  in  this  work  we  are  undone,  for  flesh  will  like  of  nothing  long.  Even  as 
Solomon  saith,  the  eye  is  not  satisfied  with  seeing,  nor  the  ear  with  hearing  ;  but 
be  the  tune  never  so  sweet,  at  last  we  desire  another.  {E.  Deering,  B.D.)  The 
nature  and  advantages  of  the  believer's  confidence : — I.  On  what  the  stkesgtb 
AND  PERMANENCY  OF  THIS  FEELING  OF  CONFIDENCE  DEPENDS.  It  depends  on  a  Con- 
tinued realisation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  great  object  of  our  faith,  and  an 
enlargement  of  our  views  concerning  His  glory  and  excellency.  No  desire  or 
resoluteness  on  our  part  to  retain  the  sentiment  of  confidence  will  avail,  without 
presentation  to  the  mind  of  the  object  by  which  it  is  excited  (see  vers.  1,  2).  lu 
the  construction  of  this  sentence,  as  well  as  in  what  follows,  it  is  remarkable  how 
the  inspired  writer  always  keeps  in  view  the  connection  of  those  whom  he  addresses 
with  Him  of  whom  He  speaks.  Is  He  an  Apostle  or  High  Piiest? — it  is  "  of  i  .r 
profession."  Is  He  a  Son  over  His  own  house? — it  is  added,  "whose  house  b.,a 
we."  This  appropriation  of  Him  to  us  gives  us  a  peculiar  interest  in  all  that  is 
said  of  Him.  H.  The  advantages  of  this  feeling  of  confidence  as  promoting 
THE  MORAL  GOOD  OF  THE  SOUL.  Whilst  the  great  question  of  our  peace  with  God 
remains  undecided,  th »  prevailing  motive  under  which  any  religious  effort  can  be 
put  forth  is  fear ;  itself  not  the  legitimate  motive,  bat  leagued  as  it  must  be  with 
the  paralysing  influence  of  uncertainty  on  so  momentous  a  concern,  it  can  have  no 
steady  or  permanent  efiQcacy  in  producing  efforts  for  good.  Therefore,  the  apostle 
Bays,  "  Ye  have  not  received  the  spirit  of  bondage  again  to  fear,  but  the  spirit  of 
adoption."  Unquestionably  a  spirit  of  fear  is  not  a  spirit  of  power ;  and  those 
moralists  who  expect  great  results  by  exciting  fear  in  the  minds  of  men  must  be 
disappointed  ;  it  is  as  if  a  general  should  expect  to  achieve  a  great  victory  by  filling 
the  minds  of  his  soldiers  with  fear  when  entering  on  the  contest.  We  know  how 
easy,  and  in  many  cases  how  successful,  an  enterprise  is  made  by  having  the  mind 
supported  by  confidence  in  matters  of  this  world ;  the  same  principle  holds  in 
religion,  that  a  spirit  of  confidence  in  God  is  a  spirit  of  power  for  enduring  and 
accomplishing  what  His  holy  will  requires.  There  is,  no  doubt,  a  material  difference 
between  the  confidence  of  the  men  of  this  world,  connected  as  it  is  with  high  self- 
estimation,  and  leading  to  presumption  &rA  insolence  which  often  defeat  itself,  and 
that  confidence  of  the  beUever  in  God,  which  is  connected  with  the  lowest  estimate 
of  himself,  and  with  the  most  entire  meekness  and  humiliation  of  spirit,  and  which 
is  seen,  as  often  exercised  in  the  patient  endurance  of  reproaches  and  trials,  as  in 
the  atrenuousness  of  the  soul  for  religious  objects.  But  as  human  nature  is  con- 
Btituted,  peace  of  mind,  with  the  hope  of  support,  and  enterprise,  and  success  from 
God,  all  entering  into  the  idea  of  a  beUever's  confidence,  give  him  a  spirit  of  power 
In  the  great  undertaking  of  his  soul's  salvation,  by  which  he  pursues  a  resistless 
course,  utterly  unknown  to  minds  under  the  vacillating  influence  of  uncertainty 
and  fear — difficulties  yield,  and  enemies  are  repelled  before  him ;  and  there  is  a 
moral  influence  and  dignity  in  his  character  to  which  the  consciences  of  others  give 
the  secret  homage  due  to  power.  But  tbe  main  strength  of  the  feeling  of  confidence 
towards  God  which  faith  begets  consists  in  its  exciting  love  to  God,  which  is  the 
great  legitimate  principle  of  moral  obedience.  Fai'ther,  the  effect  upon  the  under- 
Ftanding  is  no  less  striking  or  deserving  of  notice  in  forming  an  estimate  of  the 
moral  efficacy  of  beUeving  confidence  in  the  truth  of  God.  The  apostle  says  that 
God  hath  given  as  "  the  spirit  of  a  sound  mind,"  by  which  we  are  oertaialy  ta 


CBAP.  ni.]  HEBREWS.  229 

understand  a  greater  degree  of  rationality,  and  of  the  influence  of  our  reason  on 
our  heart  and  habits.  It  is  easy  to  account  for  uncultivated  men  becoming 
intellecttual,  by  having  their  minds  strongly  excited  by  the  weight  of  an  eternal 
interest  to  study,  and  reason  from  day  to  night  upon  the  most  profound  of  all  sub- 
jects. And  it  is  no  less  easy  to  determine  why  intellectual  irreligious  men  cannot 
reason  soundly  upon  religion — they  have  not  been  impelled  to  inquiry  by  the  same 
pressure ;  they  have  not  learned  the  views  nor  imbibed  the  principles  which  would 
enable  them  to  reason,  either  with  sense  or  safety,  on  this  momentous  subject.  It 
is  not  the  mere  exercise  of  the  understanding,  but  the  nature  of  the  subjects  about 
which  it  is  conversant,  that  gives  it  force  as  a  moral  engine ;  the  greatest  meta- 
physician maybe  completely  outdone  in  judging  of  matters  of  common  life  by  a  man 
of  plain  common  sense,  and  in  matters  connected  with  the  soul's  salvation  his 
judgment  may  be  completely  outdone  by  a  plain  Bible  Christian.  But  even  when 
the  mind  has  been  employed  with  the  utmost  attention  on  the  truth,  and  comes  to 
its  conclusions,  their  etficacy  is  small  and  unabiding  until  the  confidence  of  faith  in 
the  Divine  testimony  becomes  a  fixed  sentiment  in  the  mind.  A  conclusion 
depending  on  a  process  of  reasoning  may  strongly  impress  us  whilst  we  retain  the 
recollection  of  the  process  by  which  we  arrived  at  it ;  but  wben  that  is  lost,  ita 
impression  is  weak,  and  utterly  fails  before  an  opposing  temptation.  How  often  ia 
it  the  case  with  men  that  they  feel  httle  confidence  in  their  own  conclusions,  how- 
ever legitimately  they  may  appear  to  have  arrived  at  them,  unless  they  are  fortified 
by  the  concurring  opinions  of  those  who  are  reputed  wise.  This  observation  leads 
to  the  conclusion  to  which  we  desire  you  to  come  on  this  subject — that  it  is  not  the 
mere  cultivation  of  the  faculty  of  reason,  nor  its  exercise  on  the  appropriate  sub- 
jects, that  give  it  real  force  and  steadiness  for  habitually  influencing  our  moral 
character,  but  the  distinct  apprehension  of  the  Divine  testimony  concurring  with 
and  sanctioning  the  different  positions  to  which  the  mind  has  assented,  lieason 
and  faith  in  the  Christian  are  closely  allied  in  that  exercise,  for  though  the  Christian 
must,  on  the  testimony  of  God,  receive  some  things  as  true  which  are  above  the 
comprehension  of  his  reason  in  the  present  state,  God  does  not  propose  to  him  what 
is  contrary  to  it;  and  in  the  peculiar  points,  the  faith  of  which  ia  essential  to 
ealvation,  God  leads  the  human  mind  to  an  understanding  of  that  which  He 
requires  it  to  believe.  III.  The  influence  this  confidence  has  on  happiness. 
In  its  lowest  degree  it  produces  a  repose  of  the  soul,  to  which  the  gay  and  thought- 
less of  this  world  are  utter  strangers.  It  is  equally  obvious  that  the  state  of  mind 
in  which  it  possesses  energy  to  pursue  the  dictates  of  the  higher  faculties,  wherein 
it  is  exempted  from  the  control  of  degrading  passions,  and  especially  has  its  leading 
affection,  its  chief  desire,  toward  that  great  Source  of  all  good,  to  which,  by  its 
original  relations,  it  was  allied,  and  for  enjoying  which  its  capacities  were  framed, 
must  be  the  happiest  state  of  the  soul ;  and  that  all  apparent  happiness,  in  a 
different  state,  is  as  delusive  in  its  nature  as  it  is  transitory  in  its  duration. 
Recourse  to  God,  considered  in  itself,  is  at  all  times  an  unf&iling  source  of  joy  to 
the  soul  that  has  confidence  in  Him.  It  is  inward,  and  independent  of  outward 
combinations,  which  he  could  not  command  ;  it  accords  with  stillness  and  retire- 
ment, which  are  so  irksome  to  the  children  of  pleasure ;  it  purifies  and  ennobles 
the  soul ;  nor  is  there  in  it,  when  rightly  understood,  the  least  vestige  of  delusive- 
ness or  enthusiasm  ;  for,  though  not  depending  upon  sense,  or  carried  on  through 
its  medium,  its  evidence  of  reality  is  quite  as  satisfactory.  He  whose  soul  goes  out 
in  confidence  to  God  knows  God's  existence — His  attention  to  his  desires — His 
approbation  of  the  confidence  which  the  soul  cherishes  in  Him  from  the  testimony 
of  His  written  Word — of  that  Record  of  Truth  which  will  survive  and  prove  ita 
reality  when  all  the  objects  of  time  and  sense  shall  have  passed  away  for  ever. 
{Donald  Franer,  D.D.)  Means  for  perseverance  : — To  help  us  on  in  holding  out,  these 
graces  following,  among  others,  are  very  useful.  1.  Humility.  This  is  the  basis 
and  foundation  when  the  fore-mentioned  house  is  settled.  Christ  saith  that  a  man 
who  builds  a  sure  house  digs  deep  (Luke  vi.  48).  God  giveth  grace  to  the  humble 
(Prov.  iii.  34).  For  this  very  end  we  are  forbidden  to  be  high-minded,  lest  we  fall 
(Rom.  xi.  20).  Self-conceitedness  and  pride  make  men  careless  (Rev.  iii.  17).  2. 
Sincerity.  This  is  an  inward  soundness.  If  the  foundation  be  not  sound,  the 
edifice  cannot  be  well  settled  on  it.  Soundness  is  tliat  which  maketh  last  and 
endure.  Sappy,  rotten  timber  will  quickly  fail.  Counterfeit  grace  will  not  last. 
3.  A  settled  resolution  to  hold  out  to  the  end  (Psa.  cxix.  106).  4.  Jealousy. 
Jealousy,  I  say,  in  regard  of  the  temptations  whereunto  we  are  subject,  and  of  oui 
own  weakness.    Satan  is  suLtle  (1  Pet.  v.  8).    Sin  is  deceitful  (Heb.  iii.  13) ;  and 


230  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

we  are  of  ourselves  foolish,  and  prone  to  yield  to  sin  and  Satan.  If  we  be  securt 
or  careless,  we  may  be  soon  taken  as  birds  in  a  net.  5.  Prudence.  For  the  mani- 
festation hereof  avoid  occasions  which  may  draw  thee  out  of  thy  Christian  course. 
6.  Growth  in  grace.  By  this  we  shall  be  the  more  strengthened  and  the  better 
enabled  to  hold  out.  7.  Walking  with  God.  By  this  he  that  never  saw  death  pleased 
God  all  the  days  of  his  life  (compare  Gen.  v.  24  with  Heb.  xi.  5).  8.  Stedfast 
expectation  of  the  prize  or  reward  that  is  set  before  thee.  It  is  said  of  Moses  that 
he  had  respect  unto  the  recompense  of  the  reward  (Heb.  xi.  26).  9.  Prayer — 
faithful,  fervent,  constant  prayer.  Christ  used  this  means  for  Himself  (Heb.  v.  7). 
This  means  He  also  used  that  Peter's  faith  might  not  fail.  By  the  foresaid  means 
we  may  continue  to  enjoy  our  spiritual  strength,  as  Caleb  did  his  bodily  strength 
(Jtsh.  xiv.  11),  and  as  Moses,  whose  natural  force  abated  not  (Deut.  xxxiv.  7),  we 
shall  still  bring  forth  fruit  in  old  age  (Psa.  xcii.  14).  (W.  Gouge.)  Christian 
stability  ; — An  estabhshed,  experienced,  hopeful  Christian  is,  in  the  world,  like  an 
'  iceberg  in  a  swelling  sea.  The  waves  rise  and  fall.  Ships  strain  and  shiver,  and 
nod  on  the  agitated  waters.  But  the  iceberg  may  be  seen  from  far,  receiving  tije 
breakers  on  its  snow-white  side,  casting  them  off  unmoved,  and,  where  all  else  is 
rocking  to  and  fro,  standing  stable  like  the  everlasting  hills.  The  cause  of  its 
steadiness  is  its  depth.  Its  bulk  is  bedded  in  calm  water  beneath  the  tumult  that 
rages  on  the  surface.  Although,  like  the  ships,  it  is  floating  in  the  water,  it  receives 
and  throws  off  the  angry  waves  like  the  rocks  that  gird  the  shores.  Behold  the 
condition  and  attitude  of  Christians  1  They  float  in  the  same  sea  of  life  with  other 
men,  and  bear  the  same  buffetings ;  but  they  are  not  driven  hither  and  thither,  the 
sport  of  wind  and  water.  The  wave  strikes  them,  breaks  over  them,  and  hisses 
past  in  foam ;  but  they  remain  unmoved.  They  were  not  caught  by  surprise  while 
they  had  a  slight  hold  of  the  surface.  The  chief  part  of  their  being  lies  deep 
beyond  the  reach  of  these  superficial  commotions.  Their  life,  "hid  with  Christ  in  God," 
bears  without  breaking  all  the  strain  of  the  storm,  (W.  Arnot,  D.D.)  Example 
of  stability  : — The  Macrocystis  pyrifera  is  a  marine  plant,  rising  from  a  depth  of 
one  hundred  and  fifty  or  two  hundred  feet,  and  floating  for  many  fathoms  on  the 
surface  of  the  sea.  Darwin  says,  "  I  know  few  things  more  surprising  than  to  see 
this  plant  growing  and  thriving  amid  the  great  breakers  of  the  Western  Ocean, 
which  no  masses  of  rock,  however  hard,  can  long  resist.  The  stem  is  round, 
slimy,  and  smooth,  and  seldom  has  a  diameter  of  so  much  as  an  inch."  How 
great  its  resistance  to  withstand  the  strain  of  such  a  sea  !  In  spite  of  storm  and 
breakers,  the  species  maintains  itself  from  century  to  century ;  for  the  strength 
with  which  it  clings  to  the  naked  rock,  and  faces  the  fury  of  the  elements,  has 
been  poised  by  the  wisdom  of  God.  (J.  Hartwig.)  Means  of  stability : — As  we 
tie  a  tender  tree  to  some  other  tree  that  it  may  not  be  broken  by  the  winds,  and 
cast  anchor  in  a  storm  to  fix  the  ship  that  it  may  not  be  driven  by  the  tempest ;  so 
ought  we  to  join  and  apply  our  weak  and  faint  hearts  to  the  firm  pillar  of  God's 
word,  and  fix  the  ship  of  our  souls  by  the  anchor  of  hope,  that  it  sink  not.  {John 
Arndt.)  Confidence  in  death  : — Donald  Cargill,  on  the  scaffold,  July  27,  1681,  as 
he  handed  his  well-used  Bible  to  one  of  his  friends  that  stood  near,  gave  this  testi- 
mony :  *'  I  bless  the  Lord  that  these  thirty  years  and  more  I  have  been  at  peace 
with  God,  and  was  never  shaken  loose  of  it.  And  now  I  am  as  sure  of  my  interest 
in  Christ,  and  peace  with  God,  as  all  within  this  Bible  and  the  Spirit  of  God  can 
make  me.  And  I  am  no  more  terrified  at  death,  or  afraid  of  hell  because  of  sin, 
than  if  I  had  never  had  sin :  for  all  my  sins  are  freely  pardoned  and  washed 
thoroughly  away  through  the  precious  blood  and  intercession  of  Jesus  Christ." 
Confidence  to  the  end : — The  time  came  when  Luther  was  to  write  no  more.  He 
was  at  Eisleben,  attending  a  Protestant  svnod.  It  was  the  17th  February,  1546. 
He  felt  that  he  was  dying.  "  Pray,  brethren ;  oh  1  pray  for  the  spread  of  the 
gospel,"  he  said  to  his  fellow-labourers.  Then  he  took  a  turn  or  two  in  the  room, 
and  lay  down.  "  Friends,  I  am  dying.  Into  Thy  hands,  0  Lord,  I  commit  my 
spirit."  "  Reverend  father,"  said  Dr.  Jonas,  "  do  j-ou  die  firm  in  the  faith  you  have 
taught  ?  "  Luther  opened  his  eyes,  which  were  half-closed,  looked  fixedly  at  Jonas, 
and  replied,  firmly  and  distinctly,  "Yes."  That  was  the  last  word  he  uttered; 
then  his  great  spirit  went  home. 

Vers.  7,  8.  As  the  Holy  Ghost  salth. — Scripture : — 1.  The  authority  of  the  Scrip- 
ture is  not  of  man,  but  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  The  Scriptures  are  no  dumb  letter, 
but  the  voice  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  by  them  speaketh.  3.  The  Holy  Ghost  is 
God,  the  Inspirer  of  the  prophets  that  wrote  the  Scripture.     4.  The  Holy  Ghost  la 


CHAP.  III.]  HEBREWS.  831 

a  distinct  person  of  the  Godhead  from  the  Father  and  the  Son,  exercising  the 
proper  actions  of  a  person  inspiring  the  prophets,  inditing  the  Scriptures,  and 
epeaking  to  the  Church.  (D.  Dickson,  M.A.)  Today,  if  ye  will  hear  His  voice. — 
The  voice  of  Jesus : — Numerous  are  the  voices  audible  to  man  throughout  this 
terrestrial  sphere.  As  he  joiuneys  on  the  pathway  of  life,  they  salute  his  ears  at 
every  step.  In  the  busy  city,  the  secluded  hamlet,  the  open  field ;  in  the  arid 
desert,  and  on  glassy  ocean,  their  words  are  heard.  These  voices  are  vastly  dis- 
similar in  their  utterances  and  in  their  tones,  and  are  fraught  with  moruentoua 
consequences  to  man.  There  is  creation's  voice,  and  they  who  lend  an  attentive 
ear  will  find  "  tongues  in  trees,  books  in  the  running  brooks,  sermons  in  tones,  and 
good  in  every  thing."  Then  there  is  the  voice  of  conscience,  which  proclaims  sin 
and  guilt,  warns  of  misdoing,  and  harasses  with  fears.  Then  there  are  a  multi- 
tude of  human  voices  which  mnke  glad  the  heart.  The  voice  of  a  mother,  resonant 
with  ineffable  tenderness.  The  voice  of  friendship,  how  it  brighti  ns  the  eye, 
awakens  sympathy,  cheers  in  the  hour  of  adversity.  How  welcome  the  voice  of 
meicy,  as  it  announces  pardon  to  the  transgressor,  or  utters  a  gracious  reprieve  to 
the  condemned.  Then  there  are  other  voices,  the  object  of  whose  utterance  is  to 
lure  man  from  the  path  of  virtue,  degrade,  and  destroy.  But  amid  these  multi- 
farious voices,  the  one  referred  to  in  our  text  ever  sounds  distinct.  Like  sweetest 
music  it  falls  upon  the  ear  of  the  soul,  and,  when  listened  to,  makes  melody  in  the 
heart.  It  is  the  voice  of  Divine  love,  compared  with  which  human  affection  sinks  into 
insignificance.  It  sounds  in  the  ear  of  the  sinner  and  tells  of  liberty,  comfort, 
strength.  Sometimes  this  voice  is  preceded  by  manifestations  of  Almighty  power 
such  as  occurred  to  Elijah  on  Horeb's  mount.  The  destructive  wind  of  adversity 
may  break  in  pieces  the  mountain  of  earthly  prospects;  the  fire  of  personal 
afllictions  may  threaten  to  consume  our  bodies;  and  then  follows  the  siill,  small 
voice,  proclaiming  the  illusive  character  of  the  fleeting  things  of  time.  This  voice 
is  constantly  asking  admission  to  tlie  human  heart  (Rev.  iii.  20).  The  saints  of 
old  heard  it,  and  were  filled  with  joy ;  the  disciples,  journeying,  heard  it,  and  Iheir 
hearts  burned  within  them.  Saul  of  Tarsus  heard  it,  and  it  cru-shed  out  all  his 
pride,  laid  him  low  in  the  dust,  subdued  his  rebellious  spirit,  and  evoked  the  prayer 
— "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  do  ?  "  But  how  many  close  their  ears  to  that 
voice,  and  turn  away  from  the  loving  Saviour  1  The  hue  of  health  flushes  the 
cheek,  vigorous  physical  life  is  theirs,  easy  circumstances  surround  them,  and  all  will 
be  well.  The  period  when  we  are  to  hear  that  voice  is  to-day  ;  now  is  the  accepted 
time,  this  is  the  day  of  salvation.  By  to-morrow  the  pulse  may  cease  its  beating. 
"  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  His  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts."  He  asks  your  atten- 
tion, your  heart,  your  soul,  your  all ;  but  He  uses  no  compulsion.  If  ye  will  hear  I 
{R.  Kingshott.)  An  admoniiory  address  ; — I.  The  greatness  of  the  speaker.  1. 
He  who  addresses  you  is  Christ  the  Redeemer.  This  calls  for  serious  consideration. 
2.  It  is  He  who  has  witnessed  all  your  past  life  and  behaviour.  3.  It  is  He  who 
will  judge  you  at  last,  as  having  a  perfect  knowledge  of  your  whole  life.  4.  His 
judgment  is  "  upright."  Then  there  will  be  no  mercy,  but  all  will  be  judgment. 
II.  The  things  which  Christ  says.  1.  He  says  that  your  time  is  gone !  This  is  a 
serious  address.  2.  He  says  that  eternity  is  at  hand  1 — a  long,  a  never-ending 
eternity  !  3.  Christ  farther  sajs.  What  have  you  doue  with  your  privileges,  and  how 
have  you  improved  the  means  of  grace  in  past  time?  4.  Christ  still  farther  says. 
When  will  you  be  ready,  and  what  would  make  you  ready  to  enter  into  glory  ?  III. 
The  time  set  fob  yodr  hearing  these  things  is  mentioned  in  our  text  as  being  "  to- 
day"— not  to-morrow.  IV.  The  consequences  of  attending  to  or  neglecting 
these  things.  If  repentance  be  obtained,  heaven  will  be  your  everlasting  happy 
home.  If  sin  continues,  hell  will  be  your  doom.  {Jos.  Kidd,  D.D.)  A  dis- 
suasive from  procrastination : — I.  There  is  a  voice  which  may,  with  emphatic 
propriety,  be  termed  the  voice  of  God.  1.  The  providences  of  God,  particularly 
those  of  an  afflictive  nature.  2.  The  sacred  Word— both  law  and  gospel.  II.  The 
voice  of  God  demands  our  sERions  attention.  1.  Should  a  sei-vant  decline  the 
reasonable  commands  of  his  master — a  son,  the  gentle  authority  of  his  father — or 
a  subject  turn  his  back  upon  his  prince,  who  might  condescend  to  address  him?  2. 
The  nature  of  the  subject  upon  which  He  deigns  to  address  us  is.another  reason  for 
our  attention  to  His  voice.  He  calls  us  to  no  hard  service.  He  invites  us  to 
approach  that  we  may  receive  those  blessings  which  constitute  the  happiness  of 
man.  III.  Yodb  attention  to  the  voice  of  God  should  be  without  delay.  IV. 
If  we  would  listen  to  the  voice  of  God  we  should  be  cautious  not  to  adopt  a 
conduct  which  will  prevent  our  attention  to  its  admonitions.     1.  You  must 


23S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

avoid  that  state  of  insensibility  into  which  so  many  nominal  Christians  have  fallen. 
2.  It  will  be  of  equal  importance  that  yon  also  studiously  avoid  the  inordinate  caret 
of  life,  which  first  this  obstruct  and  then  close  up  the  avenues  to  the  soul,  and  so 
produce  a  fatal  insensibility,  3.  Moreover,  it  will  be  of  vast  consequence  that  yoa 
avoid  temptation ;  for  the  mind  is  rendered  insensible  in  proportion  as  it  becomes 
familiar  with  sin.  4,  Finally,  beware  of  the  whirlpool  of  scepticism — the  dangerous 
shoals  and  fatal  rocks  of  infidelity.  {S.  Lowell.)  Peril  of  delaying  repentance : — 
Not  to  listen  to  God's  voice  (evil  and  perilous  thouph  it  be)  is  a  far  lesser  evil  than 
to  will  not  to  listen  to  it.  Men  fail  to  listen  through  the  impulse  of  passion ;  they 
will  not  to  listen  through  deliberate  choice.  A  single  sin,  grave  though  it  be,  is  of 
human  infirmity ;  to  defer  repentance,  when  called,  is  deliberately  to  reject  God. 

1.  He  does  not  promise  you  time.  One  time  is  our's,  now.  The  past  is  gone  ;  the 
future  is  not  yet.  One  time  we  ever  have,  a  time  fleeting  by,  an  ever-passing 
present.  God  renews  to  us  this  present  again  and  again,  in  every  moment  of  our 
being.  You  can  attend,  or  pray,  or  resolve  at  this  moment.  When  the  next  is 
come,  you  may,  if  God's  grace  continues,  do  the  same.  But  you  cannot  efface  what 
you  have  done ;  you  cannot  replace  what  you  have  left  undone.  But  there  will  be 
a  morrow  which  will  have  no  to-morrow  except  eternity.  God  has  promised  par- 
don to  the  penitent,  but  where  has  He  promised  a  morrow  to  the  piocrastinator  ? 

2.  He  bas  not  promised  thee  grace.  He  gives  His  grace  at  all  times  freely.  We 
have  no  claim  upon  it ;  else  it  were  not  grace,  but  debt.  He  gives  it  overflowing, 
without,  beyond,  against  our  deserts.  But  He  gives  it  with  wisdom  also.  He  gives 
it  al  though  it  is  abused  ;  but  He  does  not  give  it  in  order  that  it  should  be  abused, 
or  to  encourage  man's  abuse  of  it.  But  it  would  be  to  encourage  man's  abuse  of  it, 
to  store  it  up  for  those  who  not  only  again  and  again  refuse  it,  but  who  refuse  Yi 
now  because  they  may  have  it  hereafter  (Rom.  ii.  4,  6).  What  is  it  but  to  make 
the  mercy  of  God  the  occasion  of  sin,  to  sin  on  now,  because  God  is  so  good,  that 
thou  thinkest  that  He  will  give  thee  grace  to  repent  hereafter?  And  when  wishest  thou 
that  He  should  give  thee  grace  to  amend  ?  Next  year  ?  or  the  next?  or  the  next  ?  No! 
In  none  of  these,  if  thou  art  even  thus  far  honest  with  thyself,  dost  thou  wish  to 
amend.  No,  not  yet.  How  is  this  ?  Because  thou  knowest  full  well,  that  even  in 
these  six  years,  thy  passions  will  not  be  exhausted,  thy  desires  will  not  be  weakened  ; 
the  wants  which  thou  suppliest  unlawfully  will  stiU  be  craving;  the  evil  habits 
which  thou  nurturest  will  be  even  strengthened;  the  embers  of  thy  earthly  fires 
will  not  have  died  out.  "  When,  then,"  God  may  ask,  "  wilt  thou  choose  Me  ?  " 
Alas,  if  thou  speakest  truly,  thou  wilt  say,  "  When  I  have  nothing  else  to  prefer  to 
Thee."  God  is  nothing  to  thee.  Thou  wantest,  wiliest,  wishest  nothing  of  God, 
but  to  escape  Him.  It  is  not  God  thou  choosest,  but  thyself  still.  One  thing  alone 
thou  really  choosest,  impunity  in  sin.  Those  who  picture  to  themselves  future  re- 
pentance, picture  to  themselves  at  best  only  the  exchange  of  pleasure  for  pleasure, 
unlawful  pleasure,  it  may  be,  for  lawful ;  but  mostly  they  picture  to  themselves  a  time 
when  they  shall  be  worn  out  to  the  world  and  the  world  to  them,  in  sickness  or  death. 
Then  they  would  give  up  what  they  cannot  keep ;  they  would  part  with  what  has 
parted  with  them  ;  and  they  would  receive  in  exchange — not  God  whom  thoy  know 
not,  but — in  some  way,  they  know  not  how,  escape  from  hell.  '6.  But  wilt  thou 
then  have  the  will  to  repent  ?  Judge  of  the  future  from  the  past.  Think  of  the 
time  when  thou  wert  just  hesitating  on  the  borders  of  sin,  when  it  first  looked 
pleasant  to  thee,  when  first  tLou  was  tempted  to  some  slight  forbidden  gain  to  take 
some  httle  thing  that  was  n  t  thine,  to  give  way  to  some  childish  or  youthful 
vnnity,  to  taste  some  eUght  fort'-^'len  pleasure.  If  thou  hast  not  repented  yet,  hast 
thou  more  or  less  mastery  over  tu^self  now  than  then?  Is  it  easier  to  thee  to  ab- 
stain from  greater  sin  now  than  from  lesser  sin  then  ?  Too  surely,  thy  bands  have 
been  bound  faster  around  thee ;  thy  desires  have  become  stronger ;  thy  will  weaker. 
People  sin,  out  of  the  very  habit  of  sinning.  Sin  wears  out  the  heart,  the  mind, 
the  soul,  the  strength  ;  not  itself.  It  lives  on  upon  the  Hfe  of  soul  and  body,  it 
lives  upon  their  destruction  ;  but  itself  thrives  and  is  vigorous  in  their  decay.  You 
have  seen  the  fungus,  unsubstantial,  putrid,  stinking,  disgusting,  poisonous,  fed 
from  the  yet  living  tree.  You  know  it  to  be  the  token  of  decaying  hfe  on  which  it 
feeds.  Such  is  sin.  Its  seat  is  in  the  wiU.  It  corrupts  the  will.  The  corrupted 
will  anticipates  the  sin  in  act ;  it  survives  the  power  to  enact.  Avarice,  falsehood, 
hatred,  censoriousneps,  vanity,  hypocrisy,  love  of  ill-gotten  goods,  impurity,  will  live 
on  in  the  aged  sinner's  soul ;  they  will  accompany  him  to  the  last ;  they  will  pass 
out  of  this  world  with  him  and  in  him;  but  whither  will  they  accompany  him  ? 
Will  they  escort  him,  as  an  angel-tiain,  guarding  him  from  the  evil  spirits,  who 


CHAP,  m.]  HEBREWS.  233 

wait  for  the  departure  of  the  disembodied  soul,  to  seize  on  their  lawful  prey? 
Will  they  carry  him  to  Abraham's  bosom,  into  the  realms  of  peace  and  truth  and 
love,  where  nothing  defiled  shall  enter?  Will  they  present  him  before  the  judg- 
ment-seat of  Christ,  who  bids  us  to  love  one  another  as  He  has  loved  us,  to  purify  our- 
selves as  He  is  pure,  to  deny  ourselves  as  He  denicl  Himself  and  emptied  Himself  of 
His  glory  that  He  might  take  our  shame,  and  thereby  bring  us  to  partake  of  His  glory 
and  His  love?  (E.  B.  Pusey,D.D.)  Taking  the  first  opportunity  of  grace: — 1.  It 
is  God  which  worketh  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do  (Phil.  ii.  13).  And  no  man  can 
come  to  Christ  except  the  Father  draw  him  (John  vi.  44).  Is  it  not  then  a  point  of 
wifdom  to  yield  when  God  draws  ?  2.  Thou  knowest  not  what  a  day  may  bring 
forth ;  therefore  put  not  off  the  grace  that  is  offered  thee  to-day.  Boast  not  thyself 
of  to-m>rrow  (Prov.  xxvii.  1).  3.  By  putting  off  an  opportunity  men  make  them- 
selves more  unfit  for  another  opportunity  ;  for  sin,  the  longer  it  groweth  the  stronger 
it  groweth,  and  the  heart  useth  to  be  more  hardened  by  putting  off  means  of  soften- 
ing. As  they  who  had  received  grace  were  exhorted  to  persevere  therein,  pat  not 
off  to-day,  much  less  let  childhood  put  off  to  youth,  or  youth  to  man-age,  or  man- 
age to  old-age,  or  old-age  to  death-bed.  {W.  Gouge.)  The  offer  of  salvation: — 
1.  That  while  men  have  the  offer  of  salvation  and  the  word  preached  unto  them, 
it  is  their  day.  2.  That  by  the  outward  hearing,  God  requireth  the  heart  to  be  brought 
down  and  mollified.  3.  That  He  requireth  present  yielding,  to-day,  while  he  calleth, 
without  delay,  because  we  cannot  be  sure  how  long  God  will  spare  or  continue  his 
offer  beyond  this  present.  4.  He  that  studieth  not  to  yield  his  heart  to  beHeve  and 
obey  God's  word,  sounding  in  his  ears,  hardeiieth  his  heart.  For  what  is  it  else  not  to 
harden  their  heart,  but  heartily  to  believe  and  give  obedience?  (D.  Dickson,  M.A.) 
Beligion  "  today  " ; — I.  The  voice  that  speaks.  "  To-day  if  ye  will  hear  His  voice  " : 
whose  voice  ?  The  voice  of  God.  It  is  the  Holy  Ghost  that  speaks,  the  source  of 
all  inspiration  ;  so  that  all  Scripture  may  be  regarded  as  "  His  voice."  And  if  it 
be  the  voice  of  God,  does  it  not  demand  your  deep  attention,  your  prompt  obedience  ? 
Shall  God  speak,  and  man  refuse  to  hear  ?  Nor  does  He  speak  to  you  in  vengeance, 
but  in  love.  He  does  not  make  His  appeal  to-day  to  the  sword  of  justice,  but  He 
makes  His  appeal  to  the  blood  of  His  Cross.  And  oh  I  can  there  be  any  subject 
more  momentous — involving,  as  it  does,  your  highest  interests  for  time  and  for 
eternity  ?  "To-day  if  ye  will  hear  His  voice."  But  how  does  He  speak?  Most 
impressively,  most  earnestly  :  by  His  Word,  by  His  Gospel,  by  His  providence,  by 
your  reason,  by  your  conscience.  But  what  does  He  say?  There  are  two  subjects, 
on  which  He  addresses  you :  your  own  condition  as  a  sinner  in  His  sight — your 
guilt,  pollution,  and  depravity;  and  the  rich  provision  of  His  mercy  in  the  media- 
torial character  and  work  of  His  beloved  Son.  II.  The  prompt  and  immediate 
ATTENTION  XT  DEMANDS.  "  To-day  if  ye  wiU  hear  His  voice."  Why  "to-day"? 
Because  to-day  all  is  ready.  The  great  salvation  is  ready ;  the  way  of  access  to  the 
throne  is  ready ;  the  great  Intercessor  there  is  ready ;  the  angels  that  hover  over 
this  assembly  are  ready ;  and  the  Church  on  earth  is  ready,  to  bid  you  welcome  to 
its  communiotl,  Why  "  to-day  "  ?  why  "  to-day  "  ?  Because  you  will  never  have  a 
more  suitable  season  than  to-day.  Be  assured,  that  the  longer  you  delay,  the  more 
deep  and  firm  will  be  the  hold  which  the  world  will  get  of  your  heart ;  "  the  cares 
of  the  world  and  the  deceitfulness  of  riches,"  like  the  thorns  in  the  parable,  will 
have  grown  up  to  choke  every  good  resolution.  Why  •'  to-day  "  ?  why  "  to-day  "  ? 
Because  you  have  delayed  long  enough.  Ah  !  too  long — too  long.  You  should  have 
heard  His  voice  long  ago  ;  you  should  have  heard  His  voice  in  the  days  of  your  youth ; 
you  should  have  heard  His  voice  in  early  childhood.  You  should  have  heard  His 
voice  the  first  time  He  spoke  to  you.  You  should  have  heard  His  voice  in  the 
advantages  which  you  enjoyed ;  in  parental  instruction — in  the  Sabbath  School — 
under  a  faithful  ministry.  Why  "to-day"?  why  "to-day"?  Because  you  may 
not  see  to-morrow.  Amid  the  stillness  of  "  this  night,"  death  may  enter  in  at  your 
window.  Or  to-morrow  may  come,  and  this  voice  not  speak  to  you  to-morrow.  Or 
if  the  voice  speak  to  you  to-morrow,  you  may  not  be  in  circumstances  to  profit  by  it. 
Kow,  it  convinces  of  sin  ;  to-morrow  it  may  not  convince.  Now,  conscience  speaks; 
but  to-morrow  conscience  may  be  seared.  IH.  The  solemn  warning,  the  admoni- 
tion, the  remonstrance,  by  which  a  prompt  and  immediate  attention  to  the  voice 
that  speaks  to  you  is  enforced.  "  To-day  if  ye  will  hear  His  voice,  harden  not  ynr 
hearts."  1.  "  Harden  not  your  heart  "  with  infidel  objections.  Do  not  say — "  The 
Scripture  is  not  true."  Have  you  proved  it?  Can  you  stake  eternity  upon  it  ?  You 
know  you  cannot.  2.  Do  not  "harden  your  heart"  by  saying  you  cannot  believe. 
You  will  not.    It  is  not  for  want  of  evidence,  but  for  want  of  inclination.    3.  Do  not 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  va. 

Bay,  "  I  am  not  responsible  for  my  belief."  It  is  fal-e.  You  are  responsible  for  yonr 
belief ;  the  great  God  holds  you  responsible  for  your  belief ;  and  so  far  from  your  not 
being  responsible  for  your  behef,  your  destiny  will  turn  upon  it.  It  is  upon  that 
very  thing  it  will  hinge.  '•  He  that  believeth,  shall  be  saved  ;  and  he  that  believeth 
not,  shall  be  damned."  4.  "  Harden  not  your  heart."  Oh  1  think  of  the  con- 
sequences if  you  do.  The  result  is  inevitable;  the  consequence  is  infallible.  He 
will  turn  upon  you  in  indignation,  who  now  bends  to  you  in  condescension  and  love. 
The  cup  of  salvation  is  handed  round  amongst  you ;  dash  it  not  untasted  from  your 
lips.  The  sceptre  of  His  grace  is  stretched  out  to  you;  touch  it  and  live.  {T. 
Raffles,  D.D.)        histant  consideration  of  religion  recommended : —    I.  The  excel- 

I.ENCE     OF     RELIGION,   AND    YOOB     INTEREST     IN    THE   PRACTICE   OF   IT.     Both    thcSC    8X6 

indisputable.  What  do  you  set  your  thoughts  on,  when  you  take  the  affairs  of 
religion  under  your  consideration  ?  Is  it  not  the  glory  of  God,  and  your  own  salva- 
tion from  sin  and  wrath  ?  Now  what  is  so  excellent  in  itself,  so  honourable,  so 
suitable  to  the  capacities  of  thinking  beings,  as  these  pursuits  which  form  the 
nature  of  practical  religion?  II.  The  uncertainty  of  life,  and  the  danger  op 
DYING  unprepared  FOR  ETERNITY.  What  is  humau  life  ?  A  vapour,  appearing  a 
little  while,  and  then  vanishing.  IH.  The  immutability  of  God's  present 
DEMANDS.  Whatever  He  requires  of  you  now,  He  will  require  twenty  or  thirty  years 
hence,  should  you  live  so  long.  The  method  of  pardon  is  already  fixed.  The 
Uncbangeable  wUl  never  alter  it.  And  if  He  will  not,  men  cannot.  If  you  dislike 
at  present  humiliation  ;  if  you  feel  now  an  aversion  at  a  dependence  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  for  justification  ;  if  the  duties  of  holiness  seem  hard  and  disagreeable  at 
this  instant,  they  will  for  ever  be  so,  in  relation  to  depraved  dispositions.    IV.  Thb 

LONGER    IT     is     DELAYED,    YOUR   AVERSION    AND    INABILITY   TO    IT   WILL   INCREASE.      WaS 

your  life  threatened  with  some  distemper,  how  would  you  reason,  and  how  would 
you  act  ?  Would  you  say,  I  will  stay  tiU  I  be  a  Uttle  worse,  and  then  I  will  apply 
to  a  physician  ?  Would  it  not  be  reckoned  madness  to  sport  in  this  manner  with 
life  and  health  ?  V.  The  necessity  of  an  operation  of  Divine  grace  on  youb 
SOULS.  God  is  now  striving  with  you.  But  what  if  these  are  the  last  touches  He 
will  ever  give  a  heart  so  long  hardened  against  Him?  (Alex.  Shanks.)  The 
solemn  caution  : — I.  The  voice  referred  to.  1.  It  is  the  voice  of  mercy.  2.  It 
is  the  voice  of  Divine  authority.  3.  It  is  the  only  voice  directly  connected  with  the 
sinner's  salvation.  4.  This  voice  addresses  us  through  various  mediums  of  com- 
munication. II.  The  attention  demanded.  1.  That  we  hear  so  as  to  understand 
it.  2.  That  we  hear  so  as  to  believe  it.  3.  That  we  hear  so  as  to  obey  it.  III. 
The  specified  period  for  hearing  Christ's  voice.  1.  Short.  2.  Uncertain.  3. 
Succeeded  by  the  darkness  of  the  grave.  IV.  The  important  caution  annexed. 
"  Harden  not  your  hearts  " — 1.  By  inattention  to  the  concerns  of  the  soul.  2.  By 
pursuing  the  works  of  darkness.  3.  By  yielding  to  the  influences  of  unbelief. 
4.  By  a  sordid  attachment  to  the  present  world.  Application.  (1)  You  are 
all  responsible,  for  the  voice  of  Christ  has  repeatedly  sounded  in  your  ears.  (2) 
You  have  all  your  daj' — a  period  given  for  the  improvement  of  your  privileges  and 
mercies.  (3)  How  necessary,  then,  to  hear  His  voice  I  How  important  that  you 
harden  not  your  hearts  !  (4)  Let  our  influence  be  laid  out  in  bringing  the  ignorant 
and  perishing  of  our  race  to  hear  the  joyful  sound,  that  they  may  not  perish  for 
lack  of  knowledge  I  (5)  Let  us  be  watching  and  preparing  for  the  second  advent  of 
the  Saviour,  when  they  that  are  in  their  graves  shall  hear  His  voice  and  live.  (J. 
Burns,  D.D.)  Sinners  entreated  to  hear  God's  voice : — 1.  The  first  motive  which 
I  shall  set  before  you  with  this  view,  is  the  shortness  and  uncertainty  of  life.  I 
nrge  you  to  become  religious  to-day,  because  you  are  not  sure  of  to-morrow.  Need 
I  tell  you,  that  you  are  frail  as  well  as  mortal ;  that  you  must  not  only  die,  but  may 
die  soon  and  suddenly  ?  Who,  let  me  ask,  are  the  persons  that  die  suddenly  and 
unexpectedly?  Are  they  the  feeble,  the  infirm  ?  No,  observation  will  tell  you,  that 
they  are  the  youthful,  the  vigorous,  the  strong.  She  will  tell  you  that  whUe  the 
former,  like  a  reed,  bend  before  the  blast  and  escape,  the  latter,  like  the  stubborn 
oak,  brave  its  fury,  and  are  prostrated.  2.  This  remark  suggests  a  second  reason, 
why  you  should  not  postpone  religion  to  another  day.  You  cannot  properly,  or 
even  lawfully,  promise  to  give  what  is  not  your  own.  Now  to-morrow  is  not  yours; 
and  It  is  yet  uncertain  whether  it  ever  will  be.  To-day,  then,  is  the  only  time  which 
you  can  properly  or  lawfully  give  to  God.  3.  A  third  reason  why  you  should  com- 
mence a  religious  life  to-day,  is,  that  if  you  defer  it,  though  but  till  to-morrow,  yoa 
must  harden  your  hearts  against  the  voice  of  God.  God  commands  you  to  com- 
mence immediately  a  religious  life.     Now  if  you  do  not  comply,  you  must  refuse. 


OHAP.m.]  HEBREWS.  233 

for  there  is  no  medium.  Here  then  is  a  direct,  wilful  act  of  disobedience  to  God'a 
commands ;  and  this  act  tends  most  powerfully  to  harden  the  heart ;  for  after  we 
have  once  disobeyed,  it  becomes  more  easy  to  repeat  the  disobedience.  But  this  is 
not  all.  If  you  disobey,  you  must  assign  some  excuse  to  justify  your  disobedience, 
or  your  consciences  will  reproach  and  render  you  uneasy ;  if  no  plausible  excuse 
occurs,  you  will  seek  one.  If  none  can  readUy  be  found,  you  will  invent  one.  This 
also  tends  most  powerfully  to  harden  the  heart.  A  man  who  is  frequently  employed 
in  seeking  arguments  and  excuses  to  justify  his  neglect  of  religion,  soon  becomes 
expert  in  the  work  of  self-justification.  He  is,  if  I  may  so  express  it,  armed  at  all 
points  against  the  truth  ;  so  that  in  a  little  time  nothing  affects  bim,  no  arrow  from 
the  quiver  of  revelation  can  reach  bis  conscience.  But  if,  as  is  sometimes  the  case, 
his  excuses  prove  insuCBoient,  and  his  understanding  and  conscience  become  con- 
vinced, he  can  avoid  compliance  only  by  taking  refuge  in  an  obstinate  refusal,  or 
by  resolutely  diverting  his  attention  to  some  other  object,  till  God's  commands  are 
forgotten,  or  by  a  vague  kind  of  promise  that  he  will  become  religious  at  some  future 
period.  Whichsoever  of  these  methods  he  adopts,  the  present  impression  is  effaced, 
and  his  heart  is  hardened.  He  has  resisted  the  force  of  truth,  and  thus  rendered  it 
more  easy  for  him  to  resist  it  again.  In  a  word,  he  has  less  religious  sensibility ; 
he  has  become  more  inaccessible  to  conviction,  and  less  disposed  to  yield  to  it,  than 
before.  Now  this  is  precisely  what  the  Sciptures  mean  by  hardening  the  heart 
to-day.  {E,  Pay  son,  D.D.)  The  Holy  Ghost  saith  "  to-day"  : — It  is  the  mistake 
and  ruin  of  many,  both  young  and  old,  that  they  believe  and  obey  Satan  rather 
than  God.  The  one  motto  is  "  to-day  I"  the  other  is  "  to-morrow  1  "  I.  A  great 
SPEAKER.  Much  depends,  for  the  way  in  which  we  regard  and  treat  what  is  said,  on 
the  person  who  says  it.  In  connection  with  the  Holy  Ghost  being  the  speaker  here 
I  have  three  remarks  to  make.  In  regard  to  what  is  said,  you  may  be  sure  that — 
1.  It  is  important — for  "  the  Holy  Ghost  saith  "  it.  Much  importance  is  attached 
to  what  great  men  say.  A  man's  position  gives  importance  to  what  he  says — a 
king,  for  instance,  or  a  statesman,  or  a  master,  or  a  judge.  How  much  more  im- 
portant is  the  word  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  whether  it  be  in  the  way  of  warning,  or 
encouragement,  or  command,  or  reproof  I  When  He  comes  to  you,  you  may  be 
sure  it  is  some  momentous  errand  that  has  brought  Him ;  and  while  all  Scripture 
is  His  Word,  such  a  saying  as  that  in  our  text  is  His,  in  a  special  sense,  and  is  of 
peculiar  significance.  And  as,  when  a  king  speaks,  every  voice  is  hushed,  so  when 
the  Holy  Spirit  speaks,  there  may  weU  be  the  deepest  interest,  attention,  and 
reverence.  "  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith."  2.  It  ia 
true — for  "  the  Holy  Ghost  saith  "  it.  Sometimes  the  word  of  the  wisest  and 
greatest  is  not  to  be  trusted,  and  even  the  truest  and  best  may  mistake.  Here  ia 
One  who  never  deceived,  never  mistook,  never  was  untrue,  whose  word  never  was 
broken — the  Holy  Ghost.  He  is  the  •'  Spirit  of  truth."  His  is  the  "  Scripture 
which  cannot  be  broken."  3.  It  is  kind — for  "  the  Holy  Ghost  saith  "  it.  He  is 
the  Spirit  of  Love  as  well  as  of  Truth.  With  what  a  gentle  voice  He  speaks.  I 
dare  say  you  have  seen  people  in  anxiety  about  their  souls.  Their  happiness  was 
gone.  And  in  regard  to  all  this,  you  have  heard  it  said  that  it  was  the  Holy  Spirit's 
doing  ;  and  you  Lave  thought  hardly  of  Him  in  consequence.  And  yet  never  was 
He  more  kind  than  when  He  did  this  very  thing.  When  He  awakens  and  alarms,  it 
is  to  warn  of  coming  danger,  and  lead  to  flight  and  safety.  Will  you  not  listen  to 
Him  as  a  loving  Friend  ?  H.  A  momentous  word. — "  To-day  1 "  This  is  what 
the  Holy  Ghost  says.  It  is  a  little  word,  but  it  has  a  world  of  meaning  in  it.  It 
may  be  said  to  be  at  once  a  warning  and  an  invitation.  1.  It  sets  before  us  the 
time  for  repenting.  Sin  is  rebellion  against  God,  and  each  new  sin  is  another  act 
of  rebellion  still  further  endangering  the  rebel's  head.  What  is  to  be  done  ?  The 
Bin  must  have  an  immediate  arrest  laid  upon  it — must  be  forsaken.  Here  is  a  boy 
who  has  begun  to  be  in  earnest  about  his  soul.  He  knows  he  is  lost.  He  would  like 
to  be  saved.  But  he  would  like  to  keep  his  sins  too,  at  least  for  a  while.  He  is  just 
like  that  lad,  who,  while  working  among  the  waggons  on  a  railway,  has  had  his  leg  so 
bruised  and  crushed  that  there  is  nothing  for  it  but  to  have  the  limb  taken  off.  But  he 
cannot  make  up  his  mind  to  part  with  it.  Day  after  day  he  asks  to  have  the  operation 
deferred,  each  day  thinking  it  will  not  be  so  difficult  the  next ;  though  his  whole 
experience  has  proved  that  it  would  have  been  easier  at  first,  and  that  the  longer 
the  delay,  the  more  diflQcult  it  will  always  become.  At  length  the  surgeon,  if  he  is 
wise  and  kind,  will  break  in  on  this  state  of  things,  and  say,  *'  We  cannot  tamper 
with  a  matter  of  this  kind  any  longer.  It  is  as  much  as  your  life  is  worth,  to  put 
off  another  day.    The  choice  lies  between  your  limb  and  your  life ;  which  are  yoa 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  cha*.  in. 

prepared  to  lose?  Whatever  is  to  be  done,  must  be  done  at  once.  It  must  be  now 
or  never."  And  even  so  it  must  be  with  sin,  with  the  evil  habit,  the  forbidden 
indulgence — it  must  go  at  once.  I  know  how  difficult  it  is.  It  is  compared  to 
cutting  off  a  right  hand,  or  plucking  out  a  right  eye.  "  I'll  repent  one  of  these 
days.  I'll  repent  to-morrow."  And  thus  it  goes  on  from  day  to  day,  till  at  length 
the  Holy  Ghost  breaks  in  with  His  great  word,  and  says,  "  To-day !  "  There  must 
be  no  more  putting  off.  You  have  lost  too  much  time  already.  It  is  as  much  as 
your  soul  is  worth  to  wait  longer.  Or  is  there  a  girl  who  has  got  a  sense  of  her  sin, 
but  fears  she  is  too  far  gone  to  be  saved.  She  has  put  off  so  long,  that  she  believes 
she  is  now  past  hope.  "  Except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish."  She  is 
like  to  give  way  to  utter  despair.  Nay,  but  the  Holy  Ghost  saith,  "  To-day  1  "  It 
is  not  too  late  yet.  It  may  be  too  late  to-morrow.  2.  It  sets  before  us  the  time  for 
believing.  But  here,  too,  what  delay  1  Here  is  one  trying  to  make  himself  better 
firbt.  He  says  be  is  not  fit  to  come  to  Jesus  as  he  is.  His  heart  is  too  hard  :  bis 
sin  is  too  great.  He  is  like  that  diseased  boy  who  can  hardly  walk,  and  yet  refuses 
to  see  the  doctor,  or  to  knock  at  the  infirmary  door,  because  he  is  too  ill,  or  does 
not  yet  sufficiently  feel  his  need  of  help.  He  hopes  to  go  by  and  by.  He  might 
not  be  received  as  he  is.  His  case  is  too  desperate.  He  must  try  to  improve  him- 
self a  little  first.  He  does  not  see  that  the  worse  he  is,  the  greater  is  the  necessity 
for  getting  help  at  once.  And  when  the  Holy  Ghost  saith  "  To-day,"  it  is  as  if  He 
said,  "  Now  is  the  time  to  flee  to  Jesus,  whatever  you  may  be.  Now  is  the  time  to 
come  to  Him,  all  as  you  are."  What  a  happy  day  it  would  be  if  we  heard  some  of 
you  saying,  "Lord  we  take  Thee  at  Thy  word  to-day  I  we  come  to  Thee  to-day  I  " 
3.  It  sets  before  us  the  time  for  working.  It  is  good  for  ourselves  to  work.  Idle- 
ness of  eve^y  kind  is  evil, — unhealthy  for  the  body,  for  the  spirits,  for  the  soul. 
And  so.  Christian  workers  get  personal  benefit  from  their  work.  We  need  to  be 
doing  some  work  for  Christ  and  for  others,  to  keep  our  own  souls  healthy  and  lively 
and  right.  It  is  good  for  others.  There  are  few  for  whom  the  youngest  of  ua 
could  not  do  something.  It  is  pleasing  and  honouring  to  God.  God  likes  to  see 
His  people  working.  It  is  one  proof  of  their  love  to  Himself.  But  where  is 
all  this  to  be  done?  Here  on  earth.  And  by  whom?  Not  only  by  the  old,  but 
by  the  young  also.  And  when  ?  Now.  Perhaps  some  of  you  are  purposing  to  be 
workers  when  you  are  grown  up.  You  think  of  doing  nothing  meanwhile.  But 
"  the  Holy  Ghost  saith,  To-day  "  ; — not  when  you  are  older,  but  now  while  you  are 
yet  young.  The  kind  of  work  which  the  Lord  now  asks  of  you  can  only  be  done 
here — not  in  heaven.  Can  you  think  of  so  many  perishing  all  around  you,  without 
your  doing  anything  for  them  ?  Can  you  do  or  give  nothing  for  the  heathen  now  ? 
And  so  it  is  as  regards  giving  for  Christ.  I  fear  we  are  far  behind  in  this  respect. 
What  a  sad  thought  it  will  be,  "  I  might  have  done  something  for  Christ,  if  I  had 
only  begun  in  time  !  "  4.  It  sets  before  us  the  best  time  for  repenting,  for  believing, 
for  working — "  to-day."  Not  when  you  are  older,  not  when  you  are  better  qualified, 
but  just  now,  immediately — to-day.  You  must  have  noticed  the  tide  gradually 
coming  in  till  the  shore  was  covered ;  and  when  it  was  at  its  full,  how  eager  the 
fishermen  were  to  get  their  boats  afloat ;  and  how  easy  it  was  then  as  compared 
with  what  it  was  when  the  tide  was  back.  The  tide  may  be  said  to  be  in  with  you 
now :  it  is  full  tide ;  it  is  the  time  for  getting  your  own  boat  afloat,  and  helping 
others  with  theirs  :  and  for  your  encouragement,  and  for  your  warning,  ere  it  go 
back,  "  the  Holy  Ghost  saith.  To-day  !  "  6.  It  sets  forth  the  time  for  repenting, 
for  believing,  for  working,  as  very  short :  a  day — this  day — to-day.  You  say  you 
must  enjoy  yourselves,  and  see  what  the  world  can  do  for  you.  Or  you  must  learn 
your  business  first.  Nay;  but  here  again,  "  the  Holy  Ghost  saith.  To-day  I  "  It 
is  slipping  past,  and  will  soon  be  over.  6.  It  sets  forth  what  may  be  the  only 
time  for  repenting,  for  believing,  for  working.  ♦'  Oh  that  thou  hadst  heard,  even 
thou,  in  this  thy  day  1  "  As  if  every  one  had  his  "  day  " — and  when  that  is  lost,  it 
is  lost  for  ever.  "  Thou  knewest  not  the  time  of  thy  visitation."  This  may  be  the 
only  "  today "  we  shall  ever  see.  III.  The  lesson.  1.  Value  to-day.  Kegard 
it  and  treat  it  as  you  do  other  precious  things.  We  may  well  sny  what  a  daughter 
told  me  she  heard  her  dying  mother,  a  Christian  woman,  saying  a  few  days  ago.  It 
was  Sabbath  morning,  and  when  the  early  sunshine  lighted  up  her  room,  after  a 
long  night  of  restlessness  and  suffering,  she  was  overheard  saying,  "Dear  day !" 
Oh  yes,  it  should  be  a  "  dear  day  "  to  us  all,  for  it  is  the  "  day  of  grace,"  the  "  day  of 
salvation."  2.  Improve  to-day.  •'  Make  hay  when  the  sun  shines."  If  the  day  ia 
60  precious  and  so  short,  then  surely  we  should  make  the  very  most  of  it.  Do  not 
waste  it.    Lay  it  out  as  a  steward  of  God.     3.  Bemember  that  the  night  cometh. 


chapAl]  HEBREWS.  237 

— Every  day  has  its  night,  and  so  has  this  one.  Whether  yoa  are  improving 
it  or  not,  it  ia  going  away,  and  the  nig';t  will  soon  be  on.  (J.  H.  Wilton,  D.D.) 
The  entreaty  of  the  Holy  Ghost: — I.  The  special  voice  op  the  Holy  Ghost. 
1.  How  does  the  Holy  Ghost  thus  speak  ?  (1)  He  saith  this  first,  in  the  Scriptures. 
Eveiy  command  of  Scripture  calls  for  immediate  obedience.  (2)  Further,  while 
the  Holy  Ghost  speaks  in  Scripture  on  this  wise.  He  speaks  in  the  same  manner  in 
the  heartE  of  His  people,  for  he  is  a  living  and  active  agent.  (3)  The  like  is  also 
true  when  the  Holy  Ghost  speaks  in  the  awakened.  (4)  Once  more,  the  Holy 
Ghost  speaks  thus  by  His  deeds  as  well  as  by  His  words.  We  have  a  common 
proverb  that  actions  speak  more  loudly  than  words.  Now  the  acts  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  the  leading  of  many  to  the  Saviour  are  so  many  practical  invitations,  en- 
couragements, and  commands  to  others.  2.  But  why  so  urgent,  blessed  Spirit,  why 
60  urgent?  It  is  because  the  Holy  Ghost  is  in  sympathy  with  God  ;  in  sympathy 
with  the  Father  who  longs  to  press  the  prodigal  to  his  bosom  ;  in  sympathy  with 
the  Son  who  is  watching  to  see  of  the  travail  of  His  ooul.  II.  A  special  ddtt. 
"  Hear  His  voice" — that  is,  hear  it  obediently,  eager  to  do  what  he  bids  you,  as  he 
f-nables  you.  Do  not  hear  and  forget.  Retain  the  truth  in  your  memories,  and, 
better  still,  practise  it  in  your  lives.  1.  Hear  ye  the  Lord  when  He  instructs  you. 
How  often  are  men's  ears  stopped  up  with  the  wax  of  prejudice,  so  that  they  are 
dull  of  hearing.  They  have  made  up  their  minds  as  to  what  the  gospel  ought  to 
be,  and  will  not  hear  what  it  is.  2.  But  the  Lord  does  more  than  instruct  you,  He 
commands ;  for  let  men  say  what  they  will,  the  Gospel  to  be  preached  to  the  un- 
godly is  not  merely  warnings  and  teachings,  it  has  its  solemn,  positive  commands. 
3.  But  the  Lord  does  more  than  command.  He  graciously  invites ;  with  tenderness 
He  bids  sinners  to  His  banquet  of  mercy.  Shall  His  love  be  slighted,  and  His 
bounty  treated  with  scorn  ?  4.  But  the  Lord  does  more  than  invite,  He  adds  His 
promises.  Oh  do  not  count  yourselves  unworthy  of  them.  5.  The  Lord  also  threatens, 
as  well  as  entreats.  He  declares  tuat  the  despisers  shall  wonder  and  perish.  If  Christ 
be  rejected,  eternal  wrath  is  certain.  IH.  A  special  time  emphasised.  1.  To-day, 
that  is  while  God  speaks.  Oh,  if  we  were  as  we  should  be,  the  moment  God  said 
"  Seek  ye  My  face,"  we  should  reply,  "  Thy  face.  Lord,  will  I  seek"  :  as  soon  as 
the  invitations  of  mercy  were  heard  there  would  be  an  echo  in  our  souls  to  them. 
Hear  God  to-day,  for  to-day  He  speaks.  2.  The  apostle  says  in  the  next  chapter, 
"  To-day — after  so  long  a  time."  I  see  that  some  of  you  have  bald  heads,  or  grey 
hairs  lie  thick  upon  them.  Is  it  not  long  enough  to  Lave  provoked  your  God  these 
sixty  years  ?  "  To-day,"  that  is,  especially  while  the  Holy  Ghost  is  leading  others 
to  hear  and  to  find  mercy ;  to-day,  while  the  showers  are  falling,  receive  ye  the 
iirops  of  grace;  to-day,  while  there  are  prayers  offered  up  for  you;  to-day,  lest 
the  preaching  of  the  Word  of  God  should  come  to  be  a  matter  of  routine,  and  the 
preacher  himself,  discouraged,  should  lose  all  zeal  for  your  soul;  to-day,  while 
everything  is  peculiarly  propitious,  hear  ye  the  voice  of  God.  While  the  wind 
blows,  hoist  the  sail  ;  while  God  is  abroad  on  errands  of  love,  go  forth  to  meet 
Him.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  To-day  : — From  first  to  last,  salvation  is  the  product 
of  the  mighty  energies  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  is  brought  about  by  His  voice 
speaking  to  our  hearts.  We  shall  never  be  disposed  to  seek  for  salvation  until  the 
Holy  Spirit  of  God  in  one  way  or  another  begins  to  stir  our  desires.  Further,  we 
may  say  that,  although  we  are  distinctly  commanded  to  repent  and  believe  the 
gospel,  we  never  shall  repent  without  His  first  having  convicted  us  of  sin  ;  so  that 
from  first  to  last,  on  our  side  as  well  as  His,  salvation  is  of  the  Lord.  All  this  is 
true  ;  but  it  is  only  one  side  of  the  truth,  though  it  is  a  side  we  must  not  ignore. 
I  can  imagine  a  man  saying  or  feeling,  "  If  that  be  so,  I  am  not  responsible  for  my 
conduct.  If  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  is  not  pleased  to  strive  with  me  it  is  impossible 
for  me  to  come  to  Christ ;  th(  refore,  unless  He  make  me  willing  I  can  do  nothing. 
I  do  not  distinctly  feel  that  He  is  drawing  me  now,  and  therefore  there  is  nothing 
for  It  but  to  go  on  living  in  sin  until  my  call  comes,  if  it  ever  do  come  at  all."  1. 
First,  are  you  quite  sure  that  God  has  not  spoken  to  you,  and  that  you  may  not 
have  failed  to  hear  His  voice,  either  because  in  your  sin  you  did  not  wish  to  hear  it, 
or  because  in  your  perversity  and  ignorance  you  had  made  up  your  mind  that  Hia 
voice  must  speak  iu  a  certain  particular  way,  while  God  has  seen  fit  to  speak  after 
quite  a  different  manner  ?  2.  And,  second,  is  your  conscience  quite  clear  that  He 
never  has  spoken  to  you,  and  you  have  known  it,  and  been  convinced  of  it,  acd 
yet  have  hardened  your  heart  against  His  call  ?  It  is  quite  true  that  you  cannot 
come  unless  the  Spirit  draw,  but  is  it  equally  true  that  He  has  never  drawn  ?  It  is 
not  too  much  to  say,  that  whatever  moves  you  in  the  right  direction,  whatever  in- 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 


fluences  you  to  forsake  sin  and  turn  to  God,  is  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The 
fervent  desire  after  better  things,  the  iuvvard  restlessness,  the  sense  of  guilt,  the 
feeling  of  shame,  the  fear  of  punishment,  the  longing  for  purity  and  moral  freedom 
— all  these  are  the  effects  of  the  influence  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  You  shall  never 
be  able  to  say,  "  I  would,  but  God  would  not."  Oh  that  God  might  never  have  to 
bring  the  opposite  charge  against  you  1  I  have  spoken  of  one  great  danger  against 
which  we  have  to  guard,  if  we  would  benefit  by  the  Divine  voice,  the  danger  of 
ignoring  it,  and  failing  to  recognize  it ;  but  remember  there  is  yet  another  danger, 
and  to  it  our  text  more  particularly  alludes  ;  it  is  the  danger  of  hearing  God's  voice  so 
plainly  that  we  can  entertain  no  reasonable  doubt  but  that  it  is  God's  voice,  and 
yet  while  He  is  speaking  hardening  our  hearts  against  Him.  ••  Harden  not  your 
heart."  These  words  bring  before  us  the  thought  of  a  capacity  that  we 
all  possess.  We  all  possess  the  power  to  harden  our  hearts  against  the 
gracious  influences  of  God.  It  is  a  dangerous  thing  to  do  under  any  circum- 
stances, even  when  our  relations  with  God  are  not  concerned.  I  once 
heard  a  man  say,  "  I  used  to  think  it  manly  to  repress  my  feelings,  and  so  I  set 
myself  to  steel  my  heart  against  them,  and  now  I  cannot  feel  when  I  would. 
Happen  what  may,  I  might  offer  my  fortune  for  a  tear,  and  offer  it  in  vain."  This 
may  be  a  serious  matter.  We  have  no  more  right  to  murder  our  feelings  than  any 
other  element  in  our  manhood,  but  that  is  a  small  thing  as  compared  with  the  folly 
and  the  sin  of  hardening  our  heart  against  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  And  remember 
this  is  a  sin  which  we  all  remain  capable  of  committing,  however  strong  the  in- 
fluences of  God  the  Holy  Spirit  may  be.  He  never  so  influences  us  that  it  is  im- 
possible for  us  to  resist  Him.  What  shall  we  say  of  the  folly  of  him  who  mutilates 
his  own  moral  nature  of  all  its  higher  sensibilities  and  capacities  of  spiritual 
apprehension,  and  of  his  own  accord  elects  to  be  "  past  feeling  " — "  twice  dead, 
plucked  up  by  the  roots,  and  withered  "  ?  But  remember,  there  is  only  one  way 
of  avoiding  this  terrible  issuf,  and  that  is  by  yielding  at  once.  But  when  the  Holy 
Ghost  speaks,  and  you  hear  His  voice,  there  is  always  a  "  now  "  in  it.  He  takes  care 
to  put  before  you  something  to  be  done  then  and  there.  "  To-day  harden  not  your 
heart."  You  are  responsible  for  this  winged  moment  that  is^even  now  flying  from 
you.  The  Holy  Ghost  saith,  "  To-day  if  ye  shall  Lear  His  voice,  harden  not  your 
hearts."  Oh,  think  of  all  the  possibilities,  the  glorious  possibiUties  of  to-day  1  {W. 
Hay  Aitken,  M.A.)  To-day — a  voice  for  the  opening  year : — I.  The  Holy  Ghost 
co:.  ANDS  IT,  AND  THEREFORE  IT  IS  BiNDiNO.  The  obligation  is  founded  on — 1. 
Absolute  proprietoi  ship.      2.  Mediatorial    interposition.     H.    The   Holt   Ghost 

COMMANDS    IT,    AND  THEREFORE  IT  IS   PRACTICABLE.       IH.    ThE    HoLT  GhOST   COMMANDS 

IT,  AND  THEREFORE  IT  IS  URGENT.  1.  The  Holy  Ghost  thoroughly  understands  the 
transcendent  in^ortance  of  the  work.  The  Holy  Ghost  knows  exactly  the  portion 
of  time  allottecf  you  for  the  work.  {Homilist.)  The  right  time  : — You  admit  that 
it  would  be  the  right  time  to  start  on  a  certain  journey  when  the  following  four  con- 
ditions were  all  combined.  First,  a  clear  duty  to  undertake  the  journey ;  secondly, 
a  safe  route  ;  thirdly,  a  suitable  conveyance  waiting  for  you;  fourthly,  the  danger 
that  you  could  not  go  on  a  later  day.  To  these  might  be  added  that  your  Ufe 
depended  on  your  starting  at  once  (as  happened  to  myself  years  ago,  when  I  found 
myself  in  a  villnge  where  cholera  was  raging  fearfully).  Now  all  these  five  con- 
ditions meet,  and  press  you  to  betake  yourself  to  the  Lord  Jesus  for  immediate 
salvation.  Add  now  to  these  undeniable  arguments  the  other  one — that  every  day 
you  postpone  makes  it  harder  for  you  to  come.  Many  years  ago  the  merchant-ship 
Lowell  went  ashore  on  the  New  England  coast  in  a  terrific  gale.  Her  bows  projected 
so  far  up  towards  the  shore  that  the  crew  leaped  off  the  bowsprit  and  were  rescued, 
one  by  one,  by  the  keeper  of  a  neighbouring  lighthouse.  AU  leaped  off  except  the 
first  mate,  who  had  been  in  feeble  health;  he  continued  to  walk  the  deck  and  give 
orders  to  the  men.  The  keeper  shouted  to  him,  "  Jump  ashore  this  tide  or  you 
are  lost  I "  The  poor  man  continued  to  tramp  the  deck,  which  soon  crashed  to 
fragments,  and  he  was  swallowed  up  in  the  wreck.  What  was  the  matter?  The 
terrors  of  the  scene  had  so  deranged  his  weak  nerves,  that  he  had  become  insane 
and  laughed  at  the  idea  of  danger.  Yet  that  unhappy  officer  of  the  sinking  ship 
did  not  act  more  insanely  than  you  do  in  persisting  in  risking  the  life  of  your 
precious  soul.  When  Jesus  calls,  your  salvation  depends  on  prompt  obedience.  It 
was  short  work  with  Peter  when  Christ  said  to  him,  "  Follow  Me."  Again  was 
it  short  work  with  him  when  he  was  sinking  in  the  waves  and  cried  out,  *'  Lord, 
save  me."  It  was  short  woik  with  the  Philippian  jailer  when  he  heard  Paul's 
directions  and  threw  himself  into  the  Saviour's  arms  on  the  spot.    All  the  Bible 


CHAP.  m.J  HEBREWS,  839 

narratives  (except  that  of  Nicodemus)  describe  a  prompt  action  where  salvation 
was  secured.  Prompt  obedience  saves !  (T.  Christlieb,  D.D.)  Only  to-day  it 
yours : — To-day  only,  to-day  is  yours ;  to-morrow  belongs  to  God,  and  you  have  no 
right  to  take  it  for  granted  that  He  will  certainly  give  it  you.  What  if  He  does 
not?  An  incident  occurred  some  years  ago  which  illustrates  this  point  in  a  manner 
60  exceptionally  startling  that  I  should  not  venture  to  relate  it  to  you  if  it  had 
only  come  to  me  by  hearsay.  I  am  able  to  relate  it  as  a  fact  on  the  authority  of 
a  gentleman  who  was  acquainted  with  the  person  referred  to.  A  young  lady  of 
good  family,  a  woman  of  the  world,  and  a  devotee  of  fashion,  came  home  from 
a  religious  service,  which  she  had  been  induced  to  attend,  evidently  profoundly  im- 
pressed. On  returning  to  her  chamber,  and  turning  over  in  her  mind  all  she  had 
heard,  I  suppose  she  felt  under  the  force  of  a  mighty  influence  that  was  drawing 
her  towards  better  things.  Moved  no  doubt  by  a  spiritual  impulse,  she  sat  down 
by  her  table,  and  took  pen,  ink,  and  paper,  and  wrote  down  these  words :  "  If  God 
spare  my  Ufe  for  six  months  from  this  time,  I  will  give  my  heart  to  Him."  She 
signed  her  name,  and  then  I  suppose  a  misgiving  must  have  crossed  her  mind,  for 
she  drew  her  pen  through  what  she  had  written,  and  she  wrote  again  underneath, 
"  If  God  spares  me  for  three  months  from  this  time,  I  will  give  my  heart  to  Him." 
Once  again  the  voice  within,  I  apprehend,  urged  the  danger  of  delay.  *•  Are  yoa 
sure  that  you  will  live  three  months  longer  ?  "  And  a  second  time  she  drew  her 
pen  through  what  she  had  written,  and  once  more  she  wrote,  "  If  God  spare  me 
for  one  month  from  the  present  date,  this  day  month  I  will  give  my  heart  to  Him." 
The  day  before  that  date  there  was  to  be  a  great  fancy  dress  ball,  and  she  had  made 
up  her  mind  she  must  go  to  that  ball  at  all  costs ;  something,  I  conclude,  told  her 
that  it  would  not  be  consistent  to  go  if  she  were  a  real  Christian,  so  she  fixed  the 
date  just  one  day  beyoud  this  last  scene  of  dissipation.  "  If  God  spare  me  one 
month  from  this  time,  I  will  give  my  heart  to  Him  "  ;  and  she  signed  her  name, 
and  she  went  to  her  bed.  The  next  morning  her  lady's  maid  came  to  call  her  as 
usual.  She  tapped  at  the  door,  but  there  was  no  answer.  She  threw  it  open, 
entered  the  room,  looked  at  the  bed.  There  upon  the  bed  lay  her  young  mistress, 
a  cold  corpse,  and  by  ber  side  was  a  sheet  of  paper,  and  on  this  sheet  of  paper  were 
writtenthe  words,  "  If  God  spare  me  for  one  month,  I  will  give  my  heart  to  Him." 
God  did  not  spar j  her  for  one  night.  She  had  heard  God's  voice,  but,  alas  1  there 
would  seem  to  be  too  much  reason  to  fear  that  she  had  done  what  I  entreat  you 
not  to  do.  "  To-day  if  ye  shall  hear  His  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts."  One 
more  illustration,  and  it  shall  be  on  the  brighter  side.  Some  years  ago,  at  the 
close  of  an  evangelistic  service,  a  rouf,'h  sort  of  man — a  collier  he  was — came  up  to 
the  minister  who  had  preached.  "  Sir,"  he  said,  "  do  you  mean  what  you  told  ua 
in  your  address  to-night  ?  "  "  What  did  I  tell  you  ?  "  "  Why,  sir,  you  said  that 
if  we  were  determined  to  seek  and  find  salvation,  we  might  have  it  to-night." 
"Yes,"  said  the  preacher,  "I  did  mean  thai"  "Very  well,  sir;  then  I  want  to 
find  it.  It  must  be  settled  to-night  with  me;  it  must  be  settled  now."  "Thank 
God,"  said  the  preacher,  "  I  am  glad  to  hear  you  say  tliat.  Now  let  me  try  and 
show  you  how  you  may  get  it."  Well,  they  had  a  long  talk  together.  The  preacher 
set  before  the  poor  ignorant  man  as  plainly  as  ever  he  could  the  way  of  salvation  ; 
and  then  they  got  to  their  knees,  and  there  they  knelt  praying  and  crying  to  God 
together,  while  the  preacher  sought  to  direct  the  seeking  soul  to  Christ.  Time  was 
creeping  on,  and  at  last  the  clock  struck  eleven.  The  preacher  was  very  weary, 
and  naturally  enough,  having  his  own  home  duties  to  care  for,  he  said  to  the 
collier,  ••  My  dear  fellow,  I  think  now  that  perhaps  you  had  better  go  home  and 
consider  what  I  have  been  saying .  I  don't  see  that  we  can  get  very  much  further 
to-night  " ;  for  the  poor  man  was  very  ignorant  and  full  of  unbelief.  "  Sir,  didn't 
you  tell  me  that  it  might  be  settled  to-night  ?  "  "Yes,"  said  the  preacher.  "Very 
well,"  then  he  said  ;  "  I  have  made  up  my  mind  if  it  can  be  settled  to-night  it  shall 
be  settled  to-night;  I  don't  rise  from  my  knees  until  it  is  settled."  "  Very  good, 
then,"  said  the  preacher,  "  if  that  is  so  we  will  stay  together."  The  clock  struck 
twelve,  still  they  were  kneeling  together ;  one,  and  still  they  we»s  kneeling  together ; 
two,  and  still  they  were  there.  The  summer's  sun  was  just  rising,  daylight  was 
just  beginning  to  dawn,  the  poor  man  was  thoroughly  worn  out.  Like  Jacob 
wrestling  with  the  angel,  he  had  no  strength  left.  The  moment  of  our  weakness 
is  the  moment  of  God's  power.  Fairly  exhausted  and  wearied  out,  at  last  he  was 
fain  to  trust  himself  in  the  arms  of  Christ.  He  might  have  done  so  at  first  as  well 
as  at  last,  but  it  was  only  after  these  hours  of  anguish  that  he  was  brought  to  the 
point  of  utter  helplessness  and  self-despair,  and  so  at  length  he  just  rested  hl4 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

weary  soul  on  Jesus,  and  in  a  moment  the  burden  was  gone.  He  sprang  to  his  feei 
with  a  joyful  shout.  "  Glory  be  to  God,"  he  cried,  '•  it  is  settled  at  last ;  it  is  settled 
at  last  I  "  With  a  happy  heart  he  went  on  his  way  rejoicing.  In  the  middle  of  that 
day  there  was  a  hue  and  cry  raised  in  the  neighbourhood  that  there  had  been  an 
accident  down  in  the  coal-pit,  and,  as  is  the  custom  in  colliery  districts,  everybody 
rushed  to  the  pit  to  know  what  had  happened.  The  tidings  soon  spread  that  a 
portion  of  the  earth  in  the  pit  had  fallen  in,  and  there  was  every  reason  to  fear 
that  a  man  was  buried  under  the  rubbish.  Half  a  dozen  stalwart  colliers  were  soon 
at  work,  working  with  all  that  heroic  determination  which  distinguishes  those 
men  under  such  circumstances.  For  many  a  long  hour  they  continued  their  toil, 
until  at  last  they  got  near  to  the  place  where  the  unfortunate  man  was  imprisoned. 
Gently  and  carefully  they  prised  up  the  superincumbent  mass,  and  freed  one 
shattered  limb  after  another,  and  at  last  lifting  the  weight  off  the  man's  breast, 
they  dragged  him  out  all  crushed  and  shattered  as  he  was.  As  he  felt  the  load  taken 
off  him,  he  opened  his  eyes  for  the  last  time.  A  smile  came  over  his  begrimed 
countenance  as  he  gasped  out,  "  Thank  God  it  was  settled  last  night  1 "  and 
he  fell  back  and  died.  To-day,  to-day,  to-day!  {W.  Hay  Aitket,  M.A.) 
The  folly  of  procrastination : — It  is  recorded  of  Archias,  a  chief  magistrate,  in  one 
of  the  Grecian  states,  that  he  was  unpopular  in  his  government,  and  excited  the 
hatred  of  many  of  the  people,  who  conspired  against  his  life.  The  day  was  arrived 
when  a  fatal  plot  was  to  be  executed.  Archias  was  more  than  half  dissolved  in 
wine  and  pleasure,  when  a  courier  from  Athens  arrived  in  great  haste  with  a 
packet,  which  contained,  as  it  afterwards  appeared,  a  circumstantial  account  of  the 
whole  conspiracy.  The  messenger  being  admitted  into  the  presence  of  the  prince, 
said,  "  My  lord,  the  person  who  writes  you  these  letters  conjures  you  to  read  them 
immediately ;  they  contain  serious  affairs."  Archias  replied,  laughing,  "  Serious 
affairs  to-morrow"  ;  and  so  continued  his  revel.  On  the  same  night,  in  the  midst 
of  that  noisy  "  mirth,  the  end  of  which  is  heaviness,"  the  assailants  rushed  into 
the  palace,  and  murdered  Archias,  with  his  associates;  leaving  to  the  world  a 
striking  example  of  the  evil  of  procrastination.  In  ten  thousand  affecting  instances, 
something  like  this  has  been  the  conduct  and  the  fate  of  men  respecting  the 
concerns  of  eternity.  They  have  been  warned,  but,  like  the  unhappy  prince  whose 
case  we  have  recited,  they  have  said,  "  Serious  things  to-morrow,"  and  when  in  aa 
unexpected  hour  their  souls  have  been  "  required,"  they  have  left  the  world  ex- 
claiming, "  How  have  I  hated  instruction,  and  my  heart  despised  reproof  I  "  (S. 
Lowell.)  The  importance  of  the  present  moment : — The  old  sun-dial  at  Alfric,  iit 
Worcestershire,  has  lately  been  repaired,  and  its  motto  regilt.  Now  all  eyes  may 
read  the  weighty  words  inscribed  on  it  by  a  vanished  hand  of  long  ago — "  On  this 
moment  hangs  eternity."  Is  this  statement  true?  Assuredly  it  is.  As  we  live 
and  act  at  the  present  moment  we  decide  our  future  :  living  for  God,  we  shall  live 
for  ever  with  God ;  living  for  this  world,  we  perish  vrith  it.  Come  while  the  lamp- 
burns  : — There  is  a  story  told  in  ancient  history  of  a  certain  king  who  lighted  a 
lamp,  and  had  it  hung  in  his  palace :  he  then  sent  heralds  forth  to  bring  every 
criminal  and  rebel  to  his  presence,  that  they  might  obtain  pardon.  Those  wha 
came  while  the  lamp  was  burning  were  set  free;  but  those  who  delayed  till  the 
lamp  had  gone  out,  or  who  altogether  neglected  the  invitation,  met  with  a  terrible 
death.  The  folly  of  increasing  the  burden  of  sin  by  delay  : — A  hermit  was  con- 
ducted by  an  angel  into  a  wood,  where  he  saw  an  old  man  cutting  down  boughs  to 
make  op  a  burden.  When  it  was  large  be  tied  it  up,  and  attempted  to  lift  it 
on  his  shoulder,  end  carry  it  away;  but,  finding  it  very  heavy,  he  laid  it  down 
again,  cut  more  wood,  and  heaped  more  on;  and  then  tried  again  to  carry  it 
off.  This  he  repeated  several  times;  always  adding  something  to  the  load,  after 
trying  in  vain  to  raise  it  from  the  ground.  In  the  meantime,  the  hermit,  as- 
tonished at  the  old  man's  folly,  desired  the  angel  to  explain  what  this  meant. 
"You  behold,"  said  he,  "in  the  foolish  old  man  an  exact  representation  of 
those  who,  being  made  sensible  of  the  burden  of  their  sins,  resolve  to  repent, 
but  soon  grow  weary,  and,  instead  of  lessening  their  burden,  increase  it  every 
day.  At  each  trial  they  find  the  task  heavier  than  before,  and  so  put  it  off  a 
little  longer,  in  the  vain  hope  that  they  will  by  and  by  be  more  able  to  accom- 
plish it.  Thus  they  go  on  adding  to  their  burden  till  it  grows  too  heavy  to  be 
borne ;  and  then,  in  despair  of  God's  mercy,  and  with  their  sins  unrepented  of, 
they  lie  down  and  die.  Turn  again,  my  son,  and  behold  the  end  of  the  old 
man  whom  thou  sawest  heaping  up  a  load  of  boughs."  The  hermit  looked,  and 
saw  him  in  vain  attempting  to  remove  the   pile,  which  was  now  accumulated 


CHAP,  m.]  HEBREWS.  S41 

far  beyond  his  strength  to  raise.  His  feeble  limbs  tottered  over  their  burden  ; 
the  poor  remains  of  his  strength  were  fast  ebbing  away;  the  darkness  of  death 
was  gathering  around  him  ;  and,  after  a  convulsive  and  impotent  attempt  to 
lift  the  pile,  he  fell  down  and  expired.  Harden  not  your  hearts. — Hardening 
the  heart : — I.  To  hakden  the  heabt  is  to  chebish  a  voluntary  iNSENsmiLrry 
TO  God  and  DrviNE  objects.  II.  How  the  heart  is  hardened.  1.  By  fixing  its 
affections  supremely  on  the  world.  A  striking  exemplification  of  this  was  fur- 
nished by  that  miser  whose  hand,  cold  in  death,  still  held  its  firm  grasp  upon 
his  gold,  when  his  spirit  had  gone  to  the  bar  of  God.  2.  By  refusing  to  turn 
the  attention  to  Divine  things.  No  truth  is  plainer  than  this ;  that  a  man  will 
not  feel  what  he  does  not  think  of.  God  unthought  of,  must  leave  the  heart 
as  hard  and  unmoved  as  it  would  be  were  there  no  God,  no  Chiist,  and  no 
heaven.  3.  By  excusing  sin.  The  object  of  every  excuse  formed  by  the  mind 
is  to  impair  or  destroy  a  sense  of  obligation  and  guilt.  4.  By  presumptuous 
hopes  and  expectations  from  futurity.  The  very  language  of  such  hopes  is,  the 
authority  and  glory  of  God  shall  not  be  felt  now ;  the  evil  of  sin  and  the  awful 
realities  of  a  future  world  shall  not  be  felt  now ;  all  sensibility  shall  be  deadened 
by  hopes  from  futurity.  These  hopes  of  a  future  repentance,  fellow-sinner,  are 
a  shield  to  your  heart,  which  the  arrows  of  the  Almighty  will  never  penetrate. 

III.  To  ENFORCE  the  EXHORTATION  NO  LONGER  TO  HABDEN  THE  HEAET,  BY  THE  CON- 
SIDERATIONS IMPLIED  IN  THE  TEXT,  "  To-day  if  yo  will  hear  His  voice."  The  de- 
claration implies — 1.  That  to  harden  the  heart  is  a  fatal  obstacle  to  hearing  and 
obeying  the  gospel.  2.  To  harden  the  heart  is  the  only  obstacle  to  an  immediate 
compliance  with  the  demands  of  the  gospel.  8.  To  abstain  from  hardening  the 
heart  is  as  easily  done  at  the  present  as  any  future  time.  4.  The  last  considera- 
tion is  that  those  who  now  harden  their  heart  may  never  hear  and  obey  the  gospel. 
This  appears,  if  we  consider,  in  all  such  cases,  the  increase  of  guilt.  To  harden 
the  heart  against  the  voice  of  God  once  is  a  high  measure  of  provocation  ;  and  if 
it  be  the  tendency  of  sin,  of  accumulated  guilt,  to  exhaust  the  patience  of  God  and 
to  provoke  His  speedy  vengeance,  what  must  be  the  effect  of  hardening  the  heart 
with  the  formal  design  of  continuing  to  rebel  ageinst  Him  ?  When  in  its  own 
nature  it  involves  every  act  of  future  sin;  when  its  whole  strength— strength,  too, 
thus  to  offend  God — is  derived  from  the  fact  that  God  is  good  and  long-sul!ering  7 
What  purpose  embodies  baser  ingratitude,  a  more  direct  insult  to  God,  greater 
hardihood  in  rebellion,  and  a  greater  amount  of  crime ;  and  what  purpose  could 
the  sinner  form  to  provoke  God's  instant  vengeance  if  this  does  not?  Again,  there 
is  a  fearful  principle  of  God's  administration  which  arrays  all  its  alarms  before 
such  persons.  "  Ephraim  is  joined  to  idols,  let  him  alone."  {N.  W.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
Soul  insensibility  : — I.  How  this  habdness  op  heaet  is  evidenced.  1.  One  of 
these  signs  is  dulness  of  conscience.  A  sensitive  conscience  is  only  the  possession 
of  those  whose  hearts  have  not  been  hardened,  or  have  been  softened.  But  where 
there  is  religious  insensibility  the  hearing  of  the  conscience  is  confused,  its  sight 
perplexed,  its  voice  low  and  weak.  This  is  the  state  of  the  moral  nature  of  which 
Paul  speaks  when  he  describes  a  "  conscience  seared  with  a  hot  iron  " — an  allusion, 
evidently,  to  the  custom,  that  was  very  prevalent  among  ancient  Eastern  doctors, 
of  cauterising  any  affected  flesh.  Sin  is  indted  a  terrible  caustic  to  the  conscience. 
At  first  it  burns  the  living  moral  tissue  very  painfully,  but  at  last  it  leaves  it  in- 
sensitive, almost  destroyed.  2.  Another  sign  of  a  hardened  heart  is  poverty  of 
love.  No  tale  of  human  want  or  woe  stirs  their  pity  or  prompts  their  help ;  no 
statement  of  God's  great  bounty  or  wondrous  love  awakens  their  praise.  3.  Another 
sign — comprising  those  we  have  mentioned,  and  suggesting  several  more — is  in- 
ability to  be  moved  by  the  gospel  truth.  II.  How  this  hardness  op  heart  is 
attained.  1.  By  familiarity  with  the  mere  theory  of  religion.  It  is  well  enough 
to  have  true  ideas,  to  accept  a  correct  creed ;  but  if  those  ideas  linger  only  in  the 
intellect,  are  merely  themes  for  memory,  imagination,  logic,  and  do  not  send  down 
into  the  affections  an  influence  that  will  permeate  the  entire  being  ;  if  that  correct 
creed  is  a  mere  mental  property,  held  and  defended  jealously  by  the  mind,  but  not 
colouring  and  controlling  the  plans  and  loves  and  whole  scope  of  the  daily  life, 
then  those  ideas,  that  creed,  however  true,  produce  hardness  of  heart.  They  lose 
their  freshness,  and  thus  much  of  their  force.  The  soul  becomes  accustomed  to 
them,  as  the  forester  to  the  rustUng  of  the  foliage,  or  the  mariner  to  the  murmur 
of  the  waves.  And  that  familiarity  intercepts  every  effort  to  arouse,  and  startle, 
and  awaken.  2.  By  a  neglect  of  religious  claims.  Some  by  procrastination. 
Others  by  stolid  indifference,  refuse  to  come  face  to  face  with  such  aaestions  as 

16 


243  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

*•  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved?  "  The  capacity  for  religion  diminishes,  and  almost 
dies  out  through  disuse.  Is  it  not  thus  with  every  power  we  possess  ?  3.  By  con- 
scious indulgence  of  any  sin.  The  man  who  continues,  perhaps,  in  a  very  studied 
secrecy,  to  carry  on  some  business  scheme  that  he  knows  to  be  fraudulent,  to  cherish 
some  desire  that  he  knows  to  be  impure,  to  maintain  a  habit  that  he  knows  is  stamped 
with  meanness,  or  uncharitableness.is  doing  the  very  best  he  can  to  become  insensible 
to  sincerity,  holiness,  nobility,  and  love.  III.  How  this  hardness  of  heart  is  to  bb 
PREVENTED.  1.  Be  eamcst.  Triflers  petrify  with  terrible  rapidity.  2.  Be  real. 
They  who  simultaneously  live  two  lives — the  outward,  upright,  pious,  irreproach- 
able ;  the  inward,  false,  godless,  corrupt  are,  by  all  the  restraiot  and  repression 
that  their  hypocrisy  involves,  hardening  their  hearts,  becoming  in  heart  "  as  hard 
as  a  piece  of  nether  millstone."  3.  Be  watchful.  Not  only  to  avoid  trifling  and  to 
keep  wide  of  all  hypocrisy,  but  because  of  the  insidious  influence  of  familiarity 
with  holy  things,  there  is  need  in  every  one  for  watchfulness.  Often  introspect 
yourself  to  see  if  you  are  getting  less  tender-hearted ;  and  if  you  are,  use  every 
means  that  can  soften  and  quicken  you  again.  IV.  How  this  hardness  of  heart 
IS  TO  BE  REMOVED.  1.  How  can  the  hard  heart  be  broken  ?  God  has  provided 
the  means.  (1)  The  dispensations  of  His  providence,  such  as  the  loneliness  of 
Jacob,  the  manifold  sorrows  of  Job,  the  sickness  of  Hezekiah,  are  designed  to 
quicken  our  spiritual  nature.  (2)  God's  Word  is  a  hammer  that  has  crushed  the 
pride,  shivered  the  self-righteousness,  broken  the  "  stony  heart  "  of  many  a  sinner. 
(3)  The  Cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  all  that  cross  signifies  of  a  life  of  love, 
of  sacrificial  suffering,  and  of  atoning  death,  is  the  great  power  for  melting  and 
subduing  human  hearts.  (4)  The  Spirit  of  God,  sometimes  using  these  means, 
sometimes  acting  directly  upon  the  human  spirit,  is  the  power  that  takes  away 
"  the  stony  heart,  and  gives  a  heart  of  flesh."  2.  What  are  the  signs  that  the 
heart  is  rightly  broken  ?  (1)  There  is  consciousness  of  sin.  As  in  broken  stones 
we  find  fossils  of  the  reptile  or  the  fern,  telling  of  the  time  when  it  was  a  soft, 
clay  Like  substance,  easily  impressible ;  so  in  the  process  of  breaking  the  hard 
heart,  there  is  revealed  the  reptile  of  actual  sin,  as  well  as  the  fern  of  fair  promise. 
"  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  siimer  !  "  "  Father,  I  have  sinned."  (2)  There  is  the 
sense  of  God's  gracious  presence.  When  the  heart  is  rightly  broken.  He  who  was 
•'  sent  to  heal  the  broken-hearted  "  is  there.  "The  Lord  is  nigh  unto  them  that 
are  of  a  broken  heart,  and  saveth  such  as  be  of  a  contrite  spirit."  {U.  R.  Thomas.) 
Tlie  response  of  the  heart : — I.  When  we  hear  God's  voice  the  heart  must  respond. 
The  assent  of  the  intellect,  the  admiration  of  the  understanding,  the  fervour  of  the 
imagination,  and  even  the  conviction  of  the  conscience,  do  not  suffice.  God  speaks 
to  the  heart.  Oh  that  Christ  may  dwell  there  1  God's  voice  is  to  soften  the  heart. 
Alas  1  by  nature  we  are  hard-hearted  ;  and  what  we  call  good  and  soft-hearted  is 
not  so  in  reaUty  and  in  God's  sight.  God  wishes  us  to  be  delivered  from  hardness 
of  heart,  that  is,  from  dulness  of  perception  of  His  love  and  beauty,  from  ingrati- 
tude and  lukewarmness  towards  Him,  from  pride  and  impenitence,  from  self- 
seeking  and  unrest.  When  we  receive  God's  Word  in  the  heart,  when  we  acknow- 
ledge our  sin,  when  we  adore  God's  mercy,  when  we  desire  God's  fellowship,  when 
we  see  Jesus,  who  came  to  serve  us,  the  heart  becomes  soft  and  tender.  For  re- 
pentance, faith,  prayer,  patience,  hope  of  heaven,  all  these  things  make  the  heart 
tender.  Can  we  be  hard — thinking  much  of  ourselves,  discontented  with  our  lot, 
envious  or  unforgiving,  worldly  and  restless — when  we  hear  the  voice  of  God — "  I 
am  the  Lord  thy  God  ;  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love  ;  thou  art  Mine." 
"  As  I  have  loved  you,  love  one  another."  II.  All  sin  begins  in  the  heart. 
And  what  is  the  error  of  the  heart  ?  What  else  but  unbelief  ?  God  speaks,  and 
the  heart  is  to  believe.  If  the  heart  is  hardened,  it  believes  not ;  and  regarding 
neither  the  threatenings  nor  the  promises,  it  leans  not  on  the  strength  and  love  of 
God :  unbelief  is  the  mother  of  all  sin  and  sorrow.  III.  Unbelief  is  departcre 
from  the  living  God.  How  simple  is  this  1  As  long  as  you  trust  God  you  are 
near  Him.  The  moment  you  doubt  Him  your  soul  has  departed  into  the  strange 
country.  Faith  is  the  link  between  God's  fulness  and  strength  and  our  emptiness 
and  weakness.  If  the  soul  cries  out.  Abide  with  me,  or  Nearer  to  Thee,  the  answer 
of  Jesus  is,  Only  believe  1      (A.  Saphir.)  Of  the  causes  of  hardness  of  heart : — 1. 

Natural  hardness.  This  is  the  original  cause  of  habitual  hardness.  If  that  be  not 
taken  away  this  will  accompany  it ;  both  will  be  mixed  together.  2.  Unbelief. 
This  makes  men  disrespect  promises,  threatenings,  mercies,  judgments,  and  all 
other  means  which  are  of  use  to  soften,  or  break  men's  hearts  (Deut.  i.  32,  ii.  25  ; 
Pea.  lixviii.  22,  32).     3  Hypocrisy.    By  this  men  cover  and  hide  their  sin,  whereby 


CHAP,  ra.]  HEBREWS.  243 

they  wax  boM  in  Binning.  4.  Pride.  For  this  is  ordinarily  joined  with  scorn, 
disdain,  and  such  like  vices  as  make  men  refuse  and  reject  the  means  which  might 
mollify  their  hearts.  5.  Presumption.  When  sins  are  committed  against  know- 
ledge, conscience,  light  of  nature,  and  motions  of  the  Spirit,  they  are  as  heavy 
weifi;hts  that  press  out  all  spiritual  sense  and  life.  6.  Of  comraittiDg  or  long  lying 
in  the  same  sin.  Many  sraull  knocks  or  blows,  long  continued,  do  in  time  as  much 
as  a  great  blow  at  once.  7.  Relapse.  8.  Lewd  company.  Lewd  companions  will 
by  evil  counsel,  bad  example,  bold  encouragement,  make  men  impudent  and 
obsiinate  in  sinning  (Prov.  i.  10,  &c.).  9.  Superfluity  of  the  things  of  this  world  ; 
2.S  of  wealth,  honour,  ense,  pleasure,  applause,  and  other  such  things  as  men  by 
nature  delight  in.  10.  Multitude  of  crosses  not  sanctified.  There  are  as  many 
blows  upon  the  smith's  anvil  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  22 ;  Psa.  Ixxviii.  31,  32).  {W.  Gouge.) 
Remedies  for  preventing  or  redressing  hardness  of  Jieart : — I.  Take  keed  op  all  and 

EVERY    OF   THOSE    CAUSES    WHENCE    HARDNESS    OF     HEART   ARI8ETH.       1.     Regeneration. 

Hereby  natural  hardness  is  removed.  2.  Faith.  Hereby  unbelief  is  redressed.  3. 
Sincerity.  This  keeps  out  hypocrisy.  4.  Humility.  Hereby  pride  and  other  like 
vices  are  kept  down.  5.  A  fear  of  God.  This  will  withhold  us  from  gross  sins. 
6.  Christian  prudence.  This  will  make  men  weary  of  multiplying  sins  and  long 
lying  therein.  7.  Spiritual  watchfulness.  This  will  uphold  in  such  a  course  as 
will  preserve  us  from  relapse.  8.  Holy  jealousy,  lest  we  should  by  company  be 
drawn  aside.  9.  Contempt  of  this  world  and  of  the  things  thereof,  that  we  lie  not 
ensnared  and  overcome  thereby.  10.  Patience  under  all  crosses,  as  laid  on  us  by 
our  heavenly  Father  for  our  good.  II.  Labour  to  feel  the  heavy  burthen  op  sin 
(Psa.    xxxviii.    4).      (Ibid.)  Hardtn   not    your  hearts : — The    metal    of   the 

human  soul,  so  to  speak,  is  like  some  material  substances.  If  the  force  yoa  lay 
upon  it  do  not  break  it,  or  dissolve  it,  it  will  beat  into  hardness.  If  the  mor^ 
argument  by  which  it  is  plied  now,  do  not  so  soften  the  mind  as  to  carry  and  to 
overpower  its  purposes,  then  on  another  day  the  argument  may  be  put  forth  in 
terms  as  impressive,  but  it  falls  on  a  harder  heart,  and  therefore  with  a  more 
slender  efficiency.  You  have  resisted  to-day,  and  by  that  resistance  you  have  ac- 
quired a  firmer  metal  of  resistance  against  the  power  of  every  future  warning  that 
may  be  brought  to  bear  upon  you.  You  have  stood  your  ground  against  the 
urgency  of  the  most  earnest  admonition,  and  against  the  dreadfulness  of  the  most 
terrifying  menaces.  On  that  ground  you  have  fixed  yourself  more  immovealily 
than  before ;  and  thnigh  on  some  future  day  the  same  spiritual  thunder  be  made 
to  play  around  you,  it  will  not  shake  you  out  of  the  obstinacy  of  your  determined 
rebellion.      (T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)  Obduracy    of   heart: — There   is  a  striking 

image  employed  by  one  of  the  old  divines  to  illustrate  the  obduracy  and  insensi- 
bility of  the  human  heart.  He  compares  a  man  in  this  condition  to  the  bin  k- 
smith's  dog,  who,  although  lying  at  the  foot  of  the  anvil,  is  either  not  moved  at  ali 
by  the  sparks  which  are  continually  falling  about  him,  or  only  disturbed  for  an 
instant ;  while  he  returns  again  and  again  to  his  old  position,  and  sleeps  as  sound 
as  ever.  Hardening  the  heart : — The  pirate  Gibbs,  whose  name  for  many  years 
was  a  terror  to  commerce,  was  finally  captured  and  executed  in  the  city  of  New 
York.  He  acknowledged  before  his  death  that  when  he  committed  the  first  murder 
his  conscience  made  a  hell  within  his  bosom ;  but,  after  he  had  sailed  for  years 
under  the  black  flag,  his  conscience  became  so  blunted  he  could  rob  a  vessel, 
murder  all  its  cn^w,  and  then  lie  down  as  peacefully  to  rest  as  an  infant  in  its 
cradle.  Hardness  of  the  heart : — Stones  are  charged  with  the  worst  species  of 
hardness :  "  As  stubborn  as  a  stone."  And  yet  the  hardest  stones  submit  to  be 
smoothed  and  rounded  under  the  soft  friction  of  water.  Ask  the  mvriads  of  stones 
on  the  seashore  what  has  become  of  all  their  angles,  once  so  sharp,  and  of  the 
roughness  and  uucouthness  of  their  whole  appearance.  Their  simple  reply  is, 
"  Water  wrought  with  us,  nothing  but  water  ;  and  none  of  us  resisted."  If  they 
yield  to  be  fashioned  by  the  water,  and  you  do  not  to  be  fashioned  by  God,  what 
wonder  if  the  very  stones  cry  against  you  ?  (J.  Pulsford.)  The  liardening  of  the 
heart  has  its  gradations  of — 1.  Carnal  security,  which  comforts  itself  with  the 
outward  possession  of  the  means  of  grace;  and  from — 2.  Natural  indifference  and 
insensibility  to  the  Word,  proceeds  on  through — 3.  Unbelieving  disparagement. 
4.  Faithless  neglect,  and— 5.  Reckless  transgi-ession  of  the  Word — 6.  To  rejection, 
contempt,  and  denial  of  it;  and  thence  to  a — 7.  Permanent  embittering  of  the 
wicked  heart;  to  a — 8.  Conscious  stubbornness  of  the  wicked  will ;  to  the — 9.  Bold 
tempting  of  the  living  God  Himself,  until  in — 10.  Complete  obduracy,  judicial 
retribution  begins  the  fulfilment  of  its  terrible  work.     (J.  P.  Lange.)         Hardening 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

the  heart : — On  a  winter  evening,  when  the  frost  is  setting  in  with  growing  in- 
tensity, and  when  the  sun  is  now  far  past  the  meridian,  and  gradually  sinking  in 
the  western  sky,  there  is  a  double  reason  why  the  ground  grows  every  moment 
harder  and  more  impenetrable  to  the  plough.  On  the  one  hand,  the  frost  of 
evening,  with  ever-increasing  intensity,  is  indurating  the  stiffening  clods.  On  the- 
other  hand,  the  genial  rays,  which  alone  can  soften  them,  are  every  moment  with- 
drawing and  losing  their  enlivening  posver.  Take  heed  that  it  be  not  so  with  you. 
As  long  as  you  are  unconverted  you  are  under  a  double  process  of  hardening.  The 
frosts  of  an  eternal  night  are  settling  down  upon  your  souls ;  and  the  Sun  of 
Righteousness,  with  westering  wheel  is  hastening  to  set  upon  you  for  evermore. 
If,  then,  the  plough  of  grace  cannot  force  its  way  into  your  ice-bound  heart  to-day^ 
what  likelihood  is  there  that  it  will  enter  to-moriow  ?  {R.  M.  McCheyne.)  Hard- 
ness of  heart : — Known,  discovered,  and  revealed  sins,  that  are  against  the  con- 
science, (are)  to  be  avoided  as  most  dangerous  preparatives  to  hardness  of  heart. 
(S.  Rutherford. )  Harden  not  your  hearts  : — "  Harden  not  your  hearts  "  ;  there 
is  no  need,  they  are  hard  enough  already.  "  Harden  not  your  hearts  " ;  there  ia 
no  excuse,  for  why  should  you  resist  love?  "Harden  not  your  hearts";  there 
can  be  no  good  in  it — a  man  is  the  less  a  man  in  proportion  to  his  loss  of  tender- 
ness of  heart.  (Christian  World  Pulpit.)  Sin  hardens  the  heart : — The  effects 
of  sin  may  be  compared  to  those  of  the  river  north  of  Quito,  petrifying,  according 
to  Kirwin's  account,  the  wood  and  leaves  cast  into  its  waters ;  or  to  those  of  the 
busy  feet  of  passers-by  causing  the  crowded  thoroughfare  to  grow  hard.     (0.  Neil, 

Ver.  9.  When  your  fathers  tempted  Me. — How  men  can  tempt  God : — 1.  If  having 
means  we  neglect  them,  fondly  flying  to  the  supposed  providence  of  God ;  if  Christ, 
having  a  pair  of  stairs  to  come  down  by,  should  have  cast  Himself  down  from  the 
pinnacle  of  the  Temple,  He  had  tempted  God.  2.  Men  tempt  God  when,  having 
had  evident  proof  and  manifest  experience  of  His  wisdom,  power,  mercy,  and 
goodness,  yet  if  they  be  driven  into  any  straits,  and  see  no  present  means  to  come 
out,  then  they  murmur  against  God,  despair  of  His  providence,  and  are  ready  to 
exclaim  against  God.  This  was  the  Israelites'  fault,  and  thus  often  times  ihey 
tempted  God  in  the  wilderness.  They  had  seen  with  what  a  strong  hand  God  had 
brought  them  out  of  Egypt,  yet  for  all  that  when  they  were  in  any  difficulty  then 
God  was  of  no  power  or  willingness  to  do  for  them.  This  was  a  tempting  of  God 
which  highly  displeased  Him,  Therefore  in  all  distresses  let  us  trust  in  Him, 
though  all  worMly  means  fail  us;  in  sickness  and  health,  in  poverty  and  wealth, 
in  death  and  life  let  Him  be  our  pillar  to  lean  upon.  (W.  Jones,  D.D.)  Israel 
in  the  wilderness  : — The  thought  of  Moses  naturally  suggests  the  Israelites  in  the 
wilderness.  Faithful  was  the  Mediator,  through  whom  God  dealt  with  them  :  but 
was  Israel  faithful?  God  spake:  did  they  obey?  God  showed  them  wonderful 
signs :  did  they  trust  and  follow  in  faith  ?  And  if  Israel  was  not  faithful  under 
Moses,  and  their  unbelief  brought  ruin  upon  them,  how  much  more  guilty  shall  we 
be,  and  how  much  greater  our  danger,  if  we  are  not  faithful  unto  the  Lord  Jesus  ? 
The  history  of  the  wanderings  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  is  most  instructive 
(1  Cor,  X.).  According  to  the  solemn  words  addressed  by  the  glorified  Saviour  to 
the  Church  of  Thyatira,  Israel's  experience  is  to  be  a  warning  to  aU  the  Churches. 
1.  It  is  a  marvellous  history  from  beginning  to  end.  The  exodus  out  of  Egypt,  the 
passage  through  the  Eed  Sea,  the  giving  of  the  Law  at  Mount  Sinai,  the  manna, 
the  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire,  the  victory  over  Amelek,  the  rock  that  followed  them, 
the  garments  that  never  became  old  ;  all  is  miracle,  full  of  the  wondrous  love  and 
power  of  God .  who  is  Israel's  Redeemer.  Consider  the  Messenger,  the  Angel  of  the 
Covenant,  Christ,  who  led  them.  Their  whole  life  and  history  was  a  life  and 
history  by  the  word  of  Gud.  Do  you  know  this  as  a  present  experience  ?  2.  It 
was  a  history  of  solemn  and  glorious  privilege.  God  separated  Israel  unto  Himself. 
Their  daily  need,  their  absolute  dependence  on  Divine  help,  the  constant  gift  uf 
manna,  guidance  and  defence,  the  daily  beholding  of  God's  mighty  and  gracious 
works — all  this  was  a  marvellous  privilege,  the  life  of  faith  was  made  near  and 
easy.  Is  this  not  a  picture  of  the  Christian's  life  ?  3.  It  is  a  sad  history  from 
begiiming  to  end :  continual  murmuring,  doubt,  ingratitude,  idolatry,  sin ;  looking 
back  unto  Egypt  and  its  pleasures,  forgetting  its  degradation  and  bondage,  doubting 
God's  goodness  and  power,  yielding  to  the  temptations  of  lust  and  tempting  the 
Lord  Jehovah,  the  faithful  and  merciful  Christ.  It  is  a  sad  history,  full  of  fearful 
judgments.     And  yet  the  Lord  was  with  them  all  the  days,  and  every  day,  ready 


OHAF.  m.]  HEBREWS.  US 

4o  bless  and  to  gladden  them.  Do  you  understand  the  parable  f  Yet  was  there  in 
Israel  also  faith  and  love  ;  and  God  remembers  the  time  of  their  espousals,  when 
they  followed  Him  in  a  land  that  was  not  sown.  There  were  not  merely  mur- 
murings,  but  hymns  of  thanksgiving ;  there  were  willing  offerings  unto  the  Lord 
of  gold  and  silver,  there  was  victory  over  the  enemies,  there  were  Joshua  and  Caleb, 
who  followed  the  Lord  fully.    {A.  Saphir.) 

Vers.  10,  11.  They  do  always  err  In  their  heart.— rft«  errors  of  the  heart ;— I. 
The  conduct  of  mankind  upon  eaeth  ib  a  matter  of  great  anxiety  to  oub  Fatheb 
WHICH  IS  IN  HEAVEN.  Men  are  apt  to  think  it  a  matter  of  indifference  how  they 
behave  themselves,  so  that  they  do  not  involve  their  temporal  prospects.  Little 
do  they  reflect  upon  the  grief  that  their  impiety  occasions  to  the  best  of  benefactors. 
A  lamentable  thing  it  is  for  them  and  for  others,  that  they  forego  the  privilege  of 
living  in  the  fear  of  God ;  for  it  is  impossible  to  Uve  so  happily  in  any  other  way 
as  in  that  which  God  lays  down  for  the  guidance  of  His  people.  But  it  is  not  only 
in  this  way  that  God  shows  His  sohcitude  for  the  welfare  of  His  creatures—  He 
makes  great  efforts  to  restrain  men  from  ill-doing  by  the  operation  of  His  Spirit. 
In  the  minds  of  wicked  men  His  Spirit  strives.  And  one  result  of  this  benevolent 
intervention  is,  that  men  cannot  do  wrong  without  feeling  uneasy  about  it.  The 
man  that  leads  a  life  of  injustice  is  seldom  in  a  happy,  quiet  state  of  uJnd;  mis- 
givings torment  him,  fear  agitaies  him,  and  anxiety  about  the  future  makes  him 
restless  and  miserable.  This  uneasiness  and  misery  is  intended  by  his  heavenly 
Father  to  drive  him  from  sin  into  the  ways  of  righteousness  and  peace.  II.  Errors 
IN  THE  UNDERSTANDING  ARE  NOT  UNCOMMON.  Mcu  take  up  wioug  Hotions  and  act 
upon  them  as  if  they  were  right.  But  for  all  this,  they  are  right  at  heart,  and  the 
goodness  and  the  purity  of  their  intentions  (humanly  speaking)  guide  them  safely 
through  the  shoals  and  quicksands  around  them.  I  do  not  tay  without  damage 
to  their  reputation,  nor  without  impairing  their  usefulness,  but  their  real  singleness 
of  intention  and  uprightness  in  motive  leads  them  far  away  from  those  dangers 
that  otherwise  would  environ  them.  Now  things  are  not  so  when  a  man  has  what 
is  called  a  bad  heart.  Beyond  such  in  depravity  are  others  who  have  no  sort  of 
conscience  respecting  the  injuries  they  inflict  on  their  fellow-creatures.  Men  may 
be  met  with,  and  mere  children  also,  who  would  rob  a  widow  of  her  last  penny  and 
care  not  about  her  misery.  HI.  What  the  remedy  for  such  a  state  of  things 
EEALLY  IS.  "  They  do  err  in  their  hearts,  for  they  have  not  known  My  ways  " :  the 
proper  remedy  for  crime  is,  therefore,  the  knowledge  of  God's  ways.  But  we  must 
not  fall  into  the  mistake  of  supposing  that  the  knowledge  of  the  ways  of  God  sig- 
nifies the  being  informed  as  to  the  purport  of  these  laws.  Here,  as  in  many  other 
parts  of  Scripture,  the  word  deuotes  approval  by  experience,  as  well  as  knowledge 
in  the  ordinary  sense.  The  ways  of  God  are  excellent,  and  commend  themselves 
to  such  as  keep  them.  In  every  case  these  are  united  in  the  ways  of  God.  If 
prayer  be  enjoined  as  a  duty,  it  is  that  we  may  receive  the  blessing  when  we  rightly 
draw  nigh  to  Him.  Devotion  has  many  mercies  attached  to  it ;  and  light,  grace, 
comfort,  or  peace  are  given  according  to  our  wants.  Without  the  duty  we  could 
not  have  the  blessing,  and  men  who  slight  the  one  lose  the  other.  Our  happiness 
never  can  be  separated  from  our  duties.  {John  Davis,  B.A.)  Heart  corrup- 
tion : — Methodius  compares  the  inbred  corruptions  of  man's  heart  to  a  wild  fig  tree 
growing  upon  the  wall  of  some  goodly  temple  or  stately  palace,  whereof,  although 
the  main  trunk  of  the  stem  be  broken  off  and  stump  of  the  root  be  plucked  up,  yet 
the  fibrous  strings  of  it  piercing  into  the  joints  of  the  stone  work  will  not  be  utterly 
extracted,  but  will  ever  and  anon  be  shooting  and  sprouting  out  until  the  whole 
frame  of  the  building  be  dissolved  and  the  stonework  thereof  be  disjointed  and 
pulled  in  pieces.  (T.  Brooks.)  Heart  error: — Error  is  insidious  in  its  ap- 
proaches. It  flatters  by  liberality  and  betrays  by  sophism.  We  are  not  reconciled 
to  it  at  once.  There  are  disgusts  to  be  allayed  and  fears  to  be  vanquished.  Little 
hv  little  are  we  allured.  Of  none,  perhaps,  is  the  equivocal  character  more  certain 
than  of  this.  We  believe  it  always  originates  in  an  undue  conception  of  sin.  This 
may  be  greatly  modified.  It  does  not  "  appear  sin."  Often,  we  believe,  is  it 
strengthened  by  the  forgetfulness  that  our  facts  and  faculties  are  alike  limited,  and 
by  a  pretension  to  knowledge  far  beyond  our  actual  attainment.  Let  us  beware  of 
the  tirst  wrong  direction  of  thought  and  fpeling,  however  minute  the  degree; 
fearful  may  be  the  after  deviations.  The  voyager  enters  a  current  which  seems 
propitious,  there  is  no  apparent  diversion  from  his  course,  his  bark  speeds  well,  his 
oar  does  not  toil  nor  his  sail  strain.    In  hii  confidence  all  promises  success.    But 


S4S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

while  he  examines,  scarcely  does  it  seem  that  he  has  advanced.  Much  again  and 
again  reminds  him  of  what  he  has  noticed  just  before.  A  strange  familiarity 
impresses  his  sense.  Still  current  flowB  into  current,  while  onward  and  buoyant 
is  his  track.  Soon  he  feels  an  unnatural  vibration.  Where  he  glided,  he  now 
whirls  along.  The  truth  seizes  upon  him.  He  is  sweeping  a  whirlpool.  Long 
since  he  has  entered  the  vetge  of  a  maelstrom,  and  he  is  now  the  sport  of  its  gyra- 
tions. No  power  is  left  his  helm  or  mast ;  he  is  the  trembling,  unresisting  prey. 
He  hears  the  roar ;  he  is  drawn  into  the  suck  of  the  vortex.  Not  only  the  circle 
lessens,  the  very  circle  slopes.  The  central  funnel  and  abyss,  dark-heaving, 
smooth,  vitreous,  yawns.  The  mariner  shrieks,  the  skiff  is  swallowed  up,  where 
the  waters  only  separate  to  close,  where  the  outermost  attraction  was  but  the 
minister  to  the  famine  of  this  devouring  maw.  {Dr.  R.  W^ Hamilton.)  The  root 
of  sin  in  the  heart : — In  every  man's  heart  there  is  this  triple  root  of  sin  ;  no  one 
who  knows  his  own  heart  will  dispute  it ;  the  root  of  selfishness,  from  which  spring 
self-indulgence,  eelf-will,  sel/  esteem,  and  the  whole  brood  of  vanity  and  pride;  the 
root  of  worldly-mindedness,  which  issues  in  ambition,  in  covetousness,  in  the  love 
of  money,  in  the  desire  of  advancement,  of  honour,  of  power ;  and  the  root  of 
carnal-mindedness,  from  which,  if  it  be  not  cut  down  betimes,  and  kept  diligently 
from  shooting  up  again,  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  will  sprout  rankly,  and  overrun  and 
stide  the  soul.  {Archdeacon  Hare.)  They  have  not  known  My  ways.— Goti'a 
ivays  : — Here  we  are  to  consider  two  points.  1.  What  are  the  ways  of  God.  2. 
How  their  not  knowing  of  them  was  an  aggravation  of  their  sin.  A  way  is  that 
course  wherein  one  walketh.  It  is  attributed  unto  God  metaphorically,  and  that 
in  two  respects — 1.  Actively;   setting  out  that  way  wherein  God  Himself  walks. 

2.  Relatively ;  intending  that  way  wherein  He  would  have  us  to  walk.  Of  the 
former  kind  there  are  two  sorts.  1.  God's  secret  way.  This  is  His  unsearchable 
council  (Rom.  xi.  33  ;  Isa.  Iv.  9).  2.  His  manifest  way.  Under  this  in  special  are 
contained  His  works,  whereby  He  declares  Himself  and  His  Divine  properties  unto 
us,  as  power,  wisdom,  truth,  mercy,  justice,  wrath,  Ac.  (Deut.  xxxii.  4;  Psa. 
cxlv.  17).  The  ways  wherein  God  would  have  us  to  walk  are  His  precepts  (Psa. 
XXV.  4,  8,  9  ;  Ixxxi.  13  ;  Isa.  ii.  3).  The  two  latter  kind  of  ways  are  here  especially 
meant,  namely.  His  works  and  His  precepts.  The  works  of  God  are  styled  His 
ways,  because  we  may  see  Him  as  it  were  walking  therein.  For  by  His  works  we 
may  discern  the  footsteps  of  His  properties  and  providence  (Psa.  Ixviii.  24).  By 
the  goings  of  God  are  meant  the  distinct  acts  of  the  Divine  providence.  Where 
it  is  said  to  God,  "  Thy  way  is  in  the  pea,  and  Thy  path  in  the  great  waters," 
reference  is  had  to  God's  manifestation  of  His  power,  wisdom,  mercy,  and  justice 
in  dividing  the  Red  Sea  for  the  Israelites  to  pass  through  it,  and  overwhelming 
their  enemies  thereby  (Psa.  Ixxvii.  19).  In  this  respect  that  God's  works  are  ways 
wherein  He  may  be  seen  walking,  it  is  our  duty — 1.  To  understand  the  ways  of 
God,  so  far  as  He  is  pleased  to  walk  in  tliem,  and  to  make  them  known  to  us. 
Thereby  He  shows  Himself  to  be  such  a  God  as  none  can  be  imagined  to  be  like 
unto  Him  (Psa.  Ixvi.  3,  Ixxxvi.  8).  2.  To  acknowledge  the  equity  and  righteousness 
of  God's  ways  (Psa.  cxlv.  17).  This  is  it  whereabout  God  makes  with  the  Israelites 
this  vehement  expostulation,  and  that  again  and  again  (Ezek.  xviii.  25,  29,  and 
xxxiii.  17,  20).     To  impeach  God's  ways  of  iniquity  is  a  high  degree  of  blasphemy. 

3.  To  admire  and  magnify  the  Lord  in  His  ways  (Psa.  cxxxviii.  4,  5).  Much  is  this 
duty  pressed  in,  and  under  the  title  of  God's  works  (Psa.  ix.  1,  xl.  5).  God's 
f  recepts  are  frequently  styled  His  ways.  To  demonstrate  this  more  clearly  this 
epithet  way  is  often  joined  with  God's  precepts  and  commandments  (Psa.  cxix.  27, 
32,  33,  35).  God  by  His  precepts  doth  declare  unto  men  how  they  should  carry 
themselves  towards  Him  and  towards  one  another,  so  as  they  are  as  a  way  for  them 
to  walk  in,  to  observe  and  to  do  them.  God's  precepts  are  not  for  mere  specula- 
tion, but  fur  practice.    It  is  the  proper  use  of  a  way  to  walk  in  it.     {W.  Gouge.) 

Ver,  12.  An  evil  heart  of  unbelief. — Unbelief'. — How  does  unbelief  show  itself? 
What  are  some  of  the  evidences  of  unbelief  ?  It  shows  itself  in  positive  rejection 
of  the  gospel.  There  can  be  no  difficulty  in  detecting  that  form  of  unbelief  which 
says  "  There  is  no  God."  Perhaps  none  of  you  belong  to  that  class.  You  would 
shrink  from  such  a  creed,  whose  air  is  the  dungeon,  whose  element  is  darkness, 
whose  hope  is  disappointment,  whose  doom  is  everlasting  and  clearly-declared 
banishment  from  God.  It  shows  itself  in  another  shape,  namely,  in  a  theoretical 
acceptance  of  Christianity,  but  in  practically  living  without  it.  You  are  a  Christian 
just  in  as  far  as  the  grace  of  God  transforms  your  heart.     This  unbelief  shows 


CHIP,  m.]  HEBREWS  247 

itself  very  often  in  refusing  certain  parts  of  the  Bible  as  inspired — accepting  by  all 
means  some  books,  but  doubting  others.    I  do  not  complain  that  you  doubt,  but 
I  complain  that  you  are  satisfied  with  your  doubts.     The  most  upright  and  honest 
mind  may  doubt  about  a  book  in  the  Bible,  but  a  thoroughly  sincere  mind  will  never 
rest  satisfied  with  a  doubt.   He  will  resolve  to  find  reasons  conclusive  either  to  accept 
or  reject.  Another  evidence  of  such  unbelief  is  often  shown  in  rejecting,  or  rather  under- 
valuing, the  great  and  distinctive  peculiarities  of  evangelical  religion.     You  must, 
if  you  believe  the  gospel  at  all,  accept  it  in  its  fulness,  or  reject  it  altogether. 
Nature  accepts  the  existence  of  a  God;  grace  alone,  living  faith,  believes  that  He 
is  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.    Another  proof  of  this  unbelief  is  seen  in  disliking 
a  spiritual  and  a  pure#worship.     Whenever  unbelief  begins  to  incrust  itself  on 
man's  heart  he  begins  less  to  like  a  pure  and  spiritual  worship,  and  more  and 
more  to  be  ensnared  and  charmed  with  a  pompous  and  gorgeous  ritual.     This 
unbelief  develops  itself  in  pride.     Wherever  there  is  a  proud  man  there  is  an 
unbelieving   man.     What  is  pride  ?    It  is  just  the  passion   that   exudes  from 
unbelief.   Wherever  there  is  pride  there  is  a  man  at  a  distance  from  God;  wherever 
there  is  d;  ep  humility,  there  is  a  man  who  feels  that  he  is  living  near  to  God. 
This  unbelief  shows  itself  in  presumption.     Many  men  think  God  is  all  mercy; 
then  sin  again,  and  draw  upon  His  mercy  again;  whereas  the  idea  of  the  Bible 
teaches  us  that  the  very  mercy  that  has  to-day  forgiven  the  sin  committed  yester- 
day is  the  strongest  motive,  and  the  likeliest  and  most  constraining  influence  for 
avoiding  all  sin  for  the  future.     Another  evidence  of  such  unbelief  is  despair.    In 
fact,  these  t>vo,  presumption  and  despair,  alternate.    The  man  that  presumes  to-day 
will  generally  be  found  in  despair  to-morrow.     Presumption  looks  to  God's  mercy 
alone;  despair  looks  at  justice  alone.    Faith  looks  at  mercy  and  truth  met  together; 
righteousness  and  peace  embracing  and  kissing  each  other.     (J.  Guviining,  D.D.) 
071  the  heart  of  unbelief :— I.   What  is  implied  in  unbelief,  or  what  we  are  to 
understand  by  a  heart  of  unbelief.     It  implies — 1.  Ignorance.     We  mean  not  that 
which  is  occasioned  by  a  deficiency  of  means,  nor  that  which  is  owing  to  want 
of  instruction  in  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel.     That  in  view  is,  in  Scripture,  some- 
times denominated  blinduess  of  heart.     It  is  that  gross  darkness  which  hangs  over 
the  minds  of  those  who  are  not  united  to  Christ,  by  reason  of  which  they  do  not 
spiritualiy  understand  the  great  truths  which  they  notionally  credit.     One  may 
have  all  knowledge  and  yet  be  deplorably  ignorant  in  a  spiritual  respect.     There- 
fore the  character  of  all  unbelievers,  the  most  knowing  as  well  as  the  most  ignorant, 
is  that  they  know  not  God,  and  obey  not  the  gospel.      2.  The  rejection  of,  or 
refusal  of  a  proper  assent  to  the  testimony  of  God.     Many  pretend  to  assent  to  the 
Divine  testimony  who  do  it  not  in  a  right  manner  or  on  proper  grounds.     They 
believe  the  truth  of  Revelation,  and  of  particular  doctrines.    But  for  what  reasons? 
Iheir  fathers  had  the  same  persuasion.     These  things  are  believed  by  the  church 
of  which  they  are  members,  and  it  requires  the  same  of  them.     Or,  perhaps,  they 
find  no  sufficient  reason  for  calling  in  question  the  proofs  of  the  inspiration  of 
Scripture  which  are  ordinarily  brought.     But  such  an  assent  is  not  that  which 
accompanies  salvation.     For  this  is  founded  on  the  authority  of  God  impressed  on 
the  word  and  manifesting  itself  powerfully  to  the  conscience  and  heart.     3.  Ob- 
duracy.    It  is  not  only  essential  to  saving  faith  that  the  understanding  be  super- 
natuially  enlightened,  but  that  the  heart  be  graciously  mollified.     For  "with  the 
heart  man  believeth  unto  righteousness."    This  is  the  most  secure  fortress  of 
unbelief.    Though  rational  considerations  and  common  operations  may  produce 
a  great  change  in  the  understanding,  conscience,  and  affections,  yet  these  are  only 
the  outworks  of  the  soul.     The  will,  as  to  any  saving  change,  remains  absolutely 
impregnable  till  the  Holy  Spirit  makes  a  breach  in  it  by  that  fire,  and  by  that 
"  hammer  that  breakcth  the  rock  in  pieces."     4.  A  rejection  of  the  person  and 
mediation  of  Christ.     This  is  the  crowning  point  of  unbelief  in  all.     As  it  hath 
been  often  said  that  the  formal  act  of  faith  consists  in  receiving  Christ,  it  may  be 
also  asserted  thit  the  rejection  of  Him  constitutes  the  formal  act  of  unbelief.    As 
submission  to  the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  the  greatest  act  of  faith,  the  rejection 
of  His  righteousness  is  the  greatest  act  of  unbelief.   This  is  sometimes  done  openly, 
as  when  the  very  profession  of  His  name  is  treated  with  scorn.     Others  do  it  more 
secretly  by  maintaining  a  profession  while  they  make  it  only  a  cloak  for  their  sin. 
There  is  still  a  more  secret  way  of  rejecting  Him.    For  many  apprehend  that  they 
have  given  their  hearts  to  Christ,  while  some  hidden  lust  still  keeps  firm  hold  of 
tliem.    6.  A  refusal  on  the  part  of  those  who  hear  the  gospel  to  believe  the  record 
of  God  with  particular  application  to  themselves.     6.  Distrust  of  God  in  Christ. 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ra. 

In  faith  there  is  a  resting  on  Christ  alone  for  salvation  as  well  as  a  cordial  recep. 
tion  of  Him.    But  unbelief  refuses  this  exercise.     Faith  depends  on  His  righteous- 
ness as  the  only  ground  of  justification   before  God,  but  unbelief  either  con- 
temptuously rejects  this,  or  vainly  endeavours  to  join  it  with  the  works  of  the  law, 
or  refuses  it  under  the  pretence  of  personal  unworthiness.    7.  Disobedience.    There 
is  the  greatest  contumacy  in  unbelief.     "  This  is  the  commandment  of  God,  that 
we  should  believe  on  the  name  of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ."    Now,  unbelief  spurns  at 
this  commandment  and  tramples  it  under  foot.     It  denies  salvation  through  free 
grace  to  be  practicable,  reasonable,  or  comfortable.     It  says  in  effect,  "  Who  is  the 
Lord,  that  I  should  obey  Him  ?  "    All  may  be  exhorted  to  try  themselves,  by  what 
hath  been  now  observed,  that  they  may  know  whether  the^  really  believe  in  Christ, 
or  continue  under  the  power  of  unbelief  ?     1.  Try  your  knowledge.    If  it  be  super- 
natural and  saving  yon  will  be  convinced  of  your  natural  ignorance  and  of  your 
absolute  need  of  Christ,  as  of  God,  made  unto  you  of  wisdom.    It  will  warm  your 
heart  with  love  to  the  unseen  Eedeemer.    2.  Try  the  nature  of  your  assent  to  the 
Divine  testimony.    Do  you  assent  to  its  truth  just  because  of  the  authority  of  God 
manifested  in  it?    Do  you  trust  the  promise  just  because  you  judge  Him  faithful 
who  hath  promised?    This  is  the  only  true  foundation  of  faith.     3.  Hath  the 
obduracy  of  your  heart  been  broken  ?    If  this  be  the  case,  you  have  learned  that 
it  is  naturally  a  stony  heart.     The  remaining  obduracy  of  your  heart  is  your  daily 
grief,  and  you  are  still  claiming  His  promise,  "  A  new  heart  will  I  give  you." 
4.  Have  you  received  the  Saviour,  or  do  you  still  reject  Him  ?    If  the  former,  then 
you  have  received  Him  in  all  His  offices— as  a  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King.    5.  Do 
you  claim  a  particular  and  personal  interest  in  God's  promise,  in  Christ  exhibited 
therein,  and  in  all  the  blessings  presented  to  you  through  Him  ?    It  is  the  attain- 
ment of  true  believers  alone  really  to  appropriate  Christ  to  themselves.     6.  Do  you 
rely  on  God  in  Christ  ?    If  so,  you  despise  every  other  confidence,  and  are  fully 
satisfied  that  your  own  righteousness  is  only  a  refuge  of  lies,  and  your  own  strength 
absolute  weakness.    7.  If  you  be  delivered  from  the  power  of  that  disobedience 
which  is  in  unbelief,  you  will  obey  from  the  heart,  and  habitually  delight  in  the 
ways  of  God.     If  you  know  the  obedience  of  faith  .you  will  constantly  aim  at  the 
obedience  of  holiness.     II.  The  causes  of  that  posiiryE  unbelief  which  consists 
IN  A.  REJECTION  OF  THE  Saviour.    The  corruptioH  of  human  nature  is  the  primary 
cause  of  all  the  particular  evils  that  prevail  in  the  heart  or  life.     To  tbis  polluted 
fountain  all  the  streams  of  iniquity  must  be  traced.     It  is  the  ocean  of  depravity 
in  the  heart  that,  by  its  swelling  tides,  fills  so  many  distinct  channels.     All  men 
are  naturally  disposed  to  reject  the  testimony  of  God  because  they  are  born  in  sin. 
Therefore  all  without  distinction  are  called  children  of  disobedience,  or  of  unbelief. 
There  are  several  things  within  the  sinner  himself,  and  some  also  of  an  outward 
nature,  that  operate  on  his  mind  as  causes  of  that  unbelief  which  is  called  positive 
or  acquired,  or  of  the  continuance  and  increase  of  the  natural  unbelief  of  the  heart, 
especially  as  manifested  in  the  rejection  of  salvation  through  Christ,  to  illustrate 
some  of  which  is  our  piesent  design.    Amongst  these  are — 1.  Ignorance.     This 
hath  been  akeady  viewed  as  an  ingredient  in  unbehef.     But  it  may  be  also  con- 
sidered in  the  light  of  a  cause.     Acquired  unbelief  proceeds  especially  from  wilful 
ignorance.     Of  this  sin  Peter  accuses  the  hearers  of  the  gospel.     For  this,  he  says, 
"  they  are  willingly  ignorant  of."    The  same  complaint  is  made  by  the  Psalmist, 
"  They  know  not,   neither  will  they  understand  ;    they  walk  on  in  darkness." 
2.  The  love  of  sin.     This  is  naturally  supreme  in  the  heart.    It  must  be  so  indeed, 
because  sin  reigns  in  us.     It  is  impossible  that  a  supreme  love  of  sin  and  faith  in 
the  Saviour  should  subsist  in  the  same  heart,  for  where  faith  is  it  purifies  the 
heart.    3.  Attachment  to  the  objects  of  sense.     Man,  even  according  to  his  original 
state,  from  the  very  frame  of  his  nature,  hath  a  great  and  intimate  connection 
with  these.     But  this  is  unspeakably  augmented  by  sin.     In  the  state  of  innocence 
the  senses  were  subjected  to  reason,  but  now  reason  is  subjected  to  tbem.     There- 
fore the  whole  man,  as  unrenewed,  is  denominated  from  these.     He  is  called  the 
natural,  animal,  or  sensual  man.    4.  Inconsideration  and  indifference  about  the 
grace  exhibited  in  the  gospel.    It  is  given  as  the  character  of  sinners  that  they  turn 
back  from  God,  and  will  not  consider  any  of  His  ways.     Men  presumptuously  give 
the  sacrifice  of  fools  because  they  consivler  not  that  they  do  evil.     5.  The  agency 
of  Satan.     He  works  on  the  root  of  unbelief  in  the  heart,  and  prompts  men  actually 
to  reject  eternal  life.     Therefore,  he  is  called  the  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the 
children  of  disobedience.     He  makes  them  view  tbe  concerns  of  eternity  as  of  little 
moment  compared  with  those  of  time,  and  so  entangles  their  minds  with  the  affairs 


CHAP,  m.]  BE  BREWS.  t4| 

of  this  life  as  to  make  them  suspend  all  serioas  attention  to  those  of  that  which  is 
to  come.  He  likewise  represents  sin  as  a  small  matter,  that  tbey  may  give  them- 
Eelves  no  trouble  about  salvation.  6.  The  love  of  the  world.  The  pleasures, 
riches,  and  honours  of  this  world  swell  so  much  in  the  sinner's  eye  that  he  views 
all  eternal  objects  in  a  diminished  hght ;  he  considers  them  as  of  no  consequence, 
as  unworthy  of  his  pursuit.  7.  The  fear  of  suffering.  Tliis  hath  often  proved 
a  snare.  We  have  frequently  perceived  its  influence  in  preventing  a  confession  of 
Christ,  and  where  it  continues  to  overpower  the  mind  it  as  really  prevents  a  genuine 
faith  in  Him.  8.  Lastly,  perhaps  the  most  powerful  cause  of  unbelief  is  the 
pride  of  man.  This  natural  principle  in  its  influence  in  the  heart  directly  opposes 
faith.  It  discovers  itself  in  a  variety  of  ways.  It  appears  as  a  pride  of  reason, 
of  wisdom  or  learning,  of  will,  of  righteousness,  and  of  strength.  Are  these,  then, 
the  causes  of  that  unbelief  which  consists  in  a  rejection  of  the  Saviour  ?  It  must 
undoubtedly  be  your  duty,  depending  on  Divine  grace,  to  give  all  diligence  to 
counteract  their  operation.  For  this  purpose — 1.  Labour  to  attain  a  real  ac- 
quaintance with  the  truths  of  God.  While  yon  are  assiduous  in  acquiring  a 
doctrinal  knowledge  of  them  let  it  be  your  special  aim  to  know  them  experimentally 
and  practically  in  their  power  on  the  heart  and  life.  2.  Supplicate  the  power  of 
Divine  grace  for  destroying  the  reign  of  sin  in  your  hearts.  It  is  the  work  of  the 
Spirit  to  accomplish  this  by  creating  you  again  in  Christ  Jesus.  3.  Endeavour  to 
get  your  hearts  loosed  from  sensible  objects.  Consider  their  insignificance,  and 
the  unspeakable  value  of  those  that  are  spiritual.  4.  Despise  not  the  grace  that  is 
in  your  offer.  To  recommend  it  to  your  attention  you  are  assured  that  it  is 
abundant,  for  "  where  sin  hath  abounded,  grace  did  much  more  abound."  You  know 
not  how  soon  you  may  be  deprived  of  the  offer.  Consider  the  danger  of  continuing 
to  refuse  it.  There  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sin.  5.  Beware  of  hstening  to  the 
suggestions  of  Satan.  His  name  tells  you  what  he  is — an  adversary.  Be  not  ignorant 
of  his  devices.  And  this  is  his  great  device  to  keep  men  at  a  distance  from  Christ. 
Some  he  prevails  with  one  way,  some  another.  But  whatever  method  he  take,  if 
he  can  effect  this,  his  great  object  is  gained.  The  more  that  Satan  instigates  you 
to  reject  Christ,  the  more  earnest  ought  yon  to  be  to  embrace  Him,  for  he  desires 
nothing  so  vehemently  as  to  deprive  God  of  His  glory  and  you  of  salvation. 
6.  Pray  for  deliverance  from  this  present  evil  world,  from  the  love  and  from  the 
fear  of  it.  It  does  not  merit  your  love,  for  it  makes  no  worthy  return.  Why  should 
you  fear  the  world  ?  It  cannot  really  hurt  you.  The  utmost  it  can  do  is  to  kill 
the  body.  7.  Be  denied  to  yourselves.  How  dangerous  is  it  for  a  professed  dis- 
ciple to  deny  his  Master?  But  whence  are  any  chargeable  with  this  aggravated  sin  ? 
It  is  just  because  they  have  not  learned  to  deny  themselves.  (Jolui  Jamieson,  M.A.) 
On  the  evil  and  aggravations  of  unbelief: — 1.  It  strikes  against  all  the  perfections 
of  the  Divine  nature.  All  these  are  illustriously  displayed  and  infinitely  glorified 
in  the  work  of  man's  salvation.  If  you  reject  the  Son  of  God,  you  are  chargeable 
with  practical  blasphemy  against  each  of  the  Divine  attributes.  You  in  effect 
call  the  wisdom  of  God  foolishness.  It  is  not  to  you  the  wisdom  of  God.  Nor  is 
it  the  power  of  God.  For  by  your  unbehef  you  say  that  it  was  exetted,  even  in  this 
great  salvation,  for  no  great  end.  You  also  insult  His  holiness,  as  if  it  were  a 
needless  regard  to  trifling  offences.  By  rejecting  the  Saviour  you  materially  say 
that  sin  is  a  light  matter,  and  that  Christ  died  in  vain.  You  brand  His  justice 
as  if  it  were  a  groundless  severity;  for  by  refusing  to  accept  of  the  obedience  and 
sufferings  of  Christ,  as  in  your  stead,  you  practically  declare  that  He  obeyed  and 
suffered  without  any  real  necessity.  You  virtually  deny  His  faithfulness;  for  he 
that  beiieveth  not  in  God  hath  made  Him  a  liar.  His  very  love,  which  is  the 
great  source  of  salvation,  you  dare  to  treat  as  if  it  were  unmeaning  compassion ; 
as  being  exercised  about  those  who  have  no  need  of  it ;  mercy  extended  to  those 
who  are  not  miserable,  offering  salvation  to  those  who  can  easily  save  themselves. 
2,  It  does  injury  to  all  the  Persons  of  the  adorable  Trinity,  The  Father  declares 
Christ  to  be  His  beloved  Son ;  and  this  is  His  record,  that  in  Him  there  is  eternal  life  : 
yet  sinners  by  their  unbelief  refuse  to  give  it  credit.  The  Son  testifies  concerning 
Himself ;  yet  they  reject  His  testimony.  They  will  not  allow  Him  to  be  the 
faithful  and  true  witness.  The  Holy  Spirit  hath  attested  the  excellency  of  that 
salvation  exhibited  in  the  gospel,  not  only  as  the  Spirit  of  inspiration,  but  by  signs, 
and  wonders,  aud  divers  mkacles.  He  still  attests  it  by  common  and  saviiig 
operations  on  the  hearts  of  men.  Though  God  reveals  Himself  in  the  gospel  under 
the  endearing  character  of  love,  and  though  He  describes  the  scheme  of  redemption 
as  the  most  glorious  of  all  the  Divine  councils,  yet  unbelief  refuses  Him  all  honour 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  to 

in  this  gracious  revelation.  3.  The  great  evil  of  this  sin  appears  from  the  dignity 
of  the  person  of  Christ,  and  especially  from  the  truth  of  His  Divine  nature.  He 
is  the  more  immediate  object  of  faith ;  for  by  Him  we  believe  in  God :  therefore 
anbelief  is  more  immediately  committed  against  Him.  4.  Unbelief  is  greatly 
aggravated  from  Christ's  relation  to  us  as  our  Einsman-Bedeemer.  The  greater  the 
condescension  of  any  person,  the  greater  is  the  evidence  of  his  love,  and  the  more 
inexcusable  is  our  ingratitude  if  we  make  not  a  proper  return.  And  behold  I  what 
infinite  condescension  is  here.  5.  The  atrocious  nature  of  this  sin  appears  from 
the  dignity  of  the  mediatory  office  of  Christ.  The  honour  conferred  on  Him  by  Hia 
mission,  as  well  as  that  essentially  belonging  to  Him  in  His  person,  is  often  men- 
tioned as  a  valid  reason  of  faith,  and  as  a  striking  proof  of  the  evU  of  unbelief. 
This  is  the  work  of  God,  a  work  of  the  greatest  importance,  that  work  in  the  suc- 
cess of  which  He  is  especially  concerned,  "  that  ye  believe  on  Him  whom  He  hath 
sent."  6.  The  sin  of  unbelief  is  greatly  aggravated  by  the  reason  of  various  relations 
in  which  the  Son  of  God  offers  Himself  in  the  gospel  to  sinners.  That  no  person 
whatsoever  may  have  excuse  for  rejecting  Him  from  a  pretended  unsuitableness  to 
his  necessities  in  the  character  that  Christ  bears,  in  unspeakable  love  He  reveals 
Himself  in  every  character  with  which  the  necessity,  nay,  the  misery  of  man,  can 
in  any  respect  correspond.  Is  the  sinner  in  a  widowed  state,  is  he  desolate  and 
forsaken  like  a  wife  of  youth  ?  In  great  mercy  this  Kinsman-Redeemer  saith, 
'•Thy  Maker  is  thy  Husband."  Is  he,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  an  orphan?  Ha 
reveals  Himself  as  a  Father  to  the  fatherless,  in  His  holy  habitation.  And  in 
Him,  indeed,  the  fatherless  findeth  mercy.  Is  he  friendless  and  destitute?  Here 
is  "  a  Friend  born  for  adversity,  a  Friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother,"  a 
Friend  who  hath  laid  down  His  life  for  His  enemies.  Is  he  foolish  and  ignorant  f 
Christ  proclaims  Himself  as  the  Counsellor.  Hath  he  gone  astray,  and  is  he 
altogether  unable  to  recover  himself  ?  He  appears  as  a  compassionate  Shepherd, 
who  "  gathers  the  lambs  with  His  arm,  carries  them  in  His  bosom,"  and  ♦•  brings 
back  the  hundredth  sheep  that  was  lost,  on  His  shoulders,  rejoicing."  Is  he  weak  ? 
He  is  the  Strength  of  Israel.  Is  he  in  a  starving  condition  ?  Then  Christ  declares 
that  He  is  the  Bread  of  Life.  Is  be  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  ?  The  God-man  is 
the  Resurrection  and  the  Life.  Where  then  is  thy  excuse,  0  unbelieving  man  ? 
There  is  no  want  in  thyself  but  may  be  amply  supplied  in  Christ,  and  will  be 
amply  supplied  by  a  believing  application  to  Him.  7.  This  sin  is  greatly  aggra- 
vated from  the  work  which  Christ  hath  performed,  and  the  blessings  that  He 
hath  purchased.  8.  A  consideration  of  the  variety  of  means  and  ordinances  with 
which  the  hearers  of  the  gospel  are  favoured  tends  to  illustrate  the  great  guilt  of 
this  sin.  The  greater  the  tenderness  of  a  parent,  and  the  more  various  the  plans 
he  pursues  in  order  to  reclaim  a  rebellious  child,  the  greater  is  his  guilt  if  he 
persists  in  rebellion.  And  how  various  are  the  means  of  grace  which  sinners 
enjoy — means  of  conviction,  illumination,  conversion,  comfort,  confirmation,  and 
edification  I  9.  Under  the  power  of  this  sin  men  refuse  the  influence  of  every 
consideration  that  hath  weight  with  them  in  other  things.  In  human  affairs 
they  are  gener illy  engaged  by  the  reasonableness  of  any  proposal.  The  proposals 
which  God  makes  to  us,  in  the  Word,  are  highly  reasonable.  He  offers  eternal 
life,  through  Jesus  Christ,  without  money  and  without  price.  Ho  assures  us 
that  we  cannot  save  ourselves.  Yet  the  sinner  prefers  death  to  life.  10.  This 
is  a  sin  that  can  never  be  committed  by  heathens.  For  "  how  shall  they  beheve 
in  Him  of  whom  they  have  not  heard  ?  **  Although  their  sin  is  declared  to  be 
inexcusable,  yet  their  doom  is  more  tolerable.  11.  This  is  a  sin  that  could  never 
be  committed  by  devils.  Unspeakable  is  their  guilt  indeed.  But  they  have  never 
added,  and  never  can  add,  to  their  other  sins  that  of  rejecting  salvation  through 
Jesus  Christ.  12.  This  is  a  sin  against  the  very  remedy.  "If  ye  believe  not," 
saith  Christ,  "  that  I  am  He,  ye  shall  die  in  your  sins."  13.  This  sin,  in  some 
sense,  lays  bonds  on  Omnipotence.  It  does  not  so  absolutely.  It  is  impossible 
that  the  creature  can  ever  defeat  the  purpose  of  the  Creator,  whatever  it  be,  for 
He  wiU  do  all  His  pleasure.  But  sinners  may,  and  often,  do  counteract  the  operations 
of  God  as  to  their  tendency  in  themselves.  Thus  they  oppose  their  natural 
tendency,  though  they  do  not  defeat  the  immutable  purpose  of  God,  but  actually 
accomplish  it.  From  these  considerations  we  learn — 1.  That  unbelief  attempts  a 
second  time  to  undo  all  that  God  hath  done  for  His  own  glory  and  for  the  hap- 
piness of  man.  According  to  its  nature,  it  is  determined  to  war  against  God  in 
all  His  works,  though  at  the  dreadful  expense  of  warring  against  the  soul.  2.  The 
source  of  the  ruin  of  many  hearers  of  the  gospel.    Whatever  attention  they  pay 


CHl».  m.]  HEBREWS,  951 

to  the  sins  of  their  conversation,  they  are  under  no  apprehensions  about  those  of 
the  heart.  They  endeavour  to  reform  their  lives,  to  deliver  themselves  from  the 
more  gross  pollutions  of  the  world.  But  oh !  consider,  that  this  is  only  to  wash 
the  outside  of  the  cup,  and  of  the  platter ;  and  that  how  much  soever  it  please 
men,  however  beneficial  it  be  to  society,  it  comes  far  short  of  pleasing  God. 
{Ibid.)  On    the  prevalence    of  unbelief  in    believers: — Though    its    power 

ia  broken  like  a  tree  that  is  blasted  by  lightning,  or  felled  by  the  axe,  there 
is  still  a  corrupt  root  in  the  heart  which  retaius  a  principle  of  life,  and  is  con- 
tinually sending  forth  its  bitter  scions,  which  is  perpetually  springing  up,  and 
often  greatly  troubles  the  Christian,  so  that  he  is  thereby  defiled.  1.  It  dis- 
covers itself  by  suggesting  doubts  about  the  reality  of  religion,  or  the  truth  of 
fundamental  doctrines.  2.  It  appears  in  seeking  sensible  manifestations  as  the 
foundation  of  faith.  Faith  and  sense  are  two  things  entirely  different.  Faith  is 
the  life  of  the  Christian  on  earth.  Sense  is  the  hfe  of  saints  in  glory.  Faith  ia 
a  persuasion  of  the  truth  of  God's  testimony,  on  His  own  faithfulness  pledged  in 
the  Word.  Sense  is  the  enjoyment  of  those  blessings  which  are  the  subject  of 
this  testimony.  We  must  first  believe  and  then  see  ;  for  it  is  not  sense,  but  faith, 
which  must  be  our  support  in  this  life.  But  Christians  are  often  disposed  to 
invert  this  order.  They  would  first  see,  and  then  believe.  8.  It  appears  in  dis- 
believing the  promise  of  God  when  providence  seems  to  oppose  its  fulfilment.  It 
is  no  small  measure  of  faith  that  can  bring  a  Christian  to  the  samj  exercise  with 
Job :  "  Though  He  shall  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  Him."  4.  Unbelief  dis- 
covers itself  in  unbelievers  by  mailing  them  doubt  of  God's  love  to  them  because  of 
their  unworthiness,  or  when  their  love  to  Him  is  weak.  They  measure  the  extent 
and  duration  of  Divine  love  by  their  own  variable  exercise ;  though  they  may  be 
well  assured,  that  as  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,  so  are  His  ways  higher 
than  their  ways,  and  His  thoughts  than  their  thoughts.  The  love  of  God  to  thee, 
weak  Christian,  is  eternal.  For  He  hath  said — yea.  He  is  presently  saying,  ••  I  have 
loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love."  It  is  unchangeable  ;  for  the  Lord  thy  God  in 
the  midst  of  thee — rest  in  His  love.  Can  anything,  then,  be  more  unjust  to  thy 
God  than  to  doubt  the  truth  of  His  lovo  to  thee  because  of  the  weakness  of  thy 
love  to  Him  ;  when  He  hath  at  first  extend^fl  loving-kindness  over  thee,  and  hath 
ever  since  been  compassing  thee  about  with  mercy?  5.  It  often  prompts  the 
Christian  to  deny  the  whole  of  his  experience  because  he  is  at  times  assaulted  with 
terrors  of  conscience  on  account  of  sin.  To  conclude  from  these  that  all  former 
experience  has  been  a  mere  delusion  proceeds  from  a  mistaken  apprehension  of 
the  Christian  life ;  as  if  it  were  impossible  that  any  who  are  savingly  converted 
could  feel  a  work  of  the  law  on  their  consciences.  True  it  is  that  one  of  the 
blessings  of  the  covenant  of  grace,  and  one  of  the  most  eminent  fruits  of  justifi- 
cation, is  peace  of  conscience.  But  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  this  peace  is 
altogether  uninterrupted.  As  it  admits  of  different  degrees  in  different  believers, 
BO  also  of  different  degrees  in  the  same  person,  according  to  the  sovereignty  of 
God's  dispensation,  or  the  variation  of  circumstances.  6.  Unbelief  takes  advan- 
tage when  matters  exceed  expectation.  We  have  a  striking  example  of  this  in  the 
conduct  of  the  disciples  when  Christ  appeared  to  them  after  His  resurrection. 
"  They  believed  not  for  joy,  but  wondered."  7.  Unbelief  exerts  its  influence  in  dis- 
posing him  to  yield  to  corruption  or  temptation  from  a  doubt  of  God's  willingness 
to  deUver.  It  is  as  if  a  soldier  in  the  field  of  battle  were  to  assure  himself  that 
he  should  be  overcome  ;  and  under  the  influence  of  this  apprehension  should  at 
the  very  first  onset  throw  down  his  arms  and  desert  his  standard.  How  unlike  is 
this  to  the  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  must  endure  hardness,  who  ought  to 
stand  fast,  quit  themselves  like  men,  and  be  strong.  There  is  no  sin  or  danger 
in  doubting  our  own  sufiiciency.  All  is  wrong  with  us,  till  we  despair  of  it,  till 
we  see  our  greatest  strength  to  be  mere  weakness.  But  to  doubt  of  the  strength 
of  our  Head  is  absolute  unbelief ;  nay,  to  doubt  of  it  as  ours.  This  is  the  great 
reason  of  our  falling.  8.  In  neglecting  duty  from  an  apprehension  of  danger. 
Fear  is  the  child  of  unbelief;  and  where  there  is  a  persuasion  of  the  Divine  call, 
and  yet  disobedience  to  it  from  the  fear  of  danger,  it  is  a  greater  act  of  unbelief 
than  the  disbelief  of  the  call  itself.  The  rejection  of  God's  call  discovers  ignor- 
ance and  blindness  of  heart ;  but  a  refusal  of  obedience  when  conscience  feels  the 
force  and  authority  of  the  call  is  more  dishonouring  to  God  because  it  is  a  gross 
abuse  of  light.  9.  It  uses  every  effort  to  drive  Christians  away  from  the  exercise 
of  prayer  when  it  is  not  irainediately  answered.  God  could  as  easily  answer  the 
prayer  of  His  people  at  first  as  afterwards;  but  it  is  His  pleasure  that  th^y  should 


252  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

join  hope  and  patience  with  their  faith.  They  mnst  be  taught  submission  to  His 
will  as  to  the  season.  He  delights  in  their  holy  importunity,  and  will  thus 
enhance  the  value  of  His  blessings  before  He  bestows  them.  10.  Unbelief 
breaks  out  in  anxious  thoughts  about  temporal  subsistence.  Like  Asaph,  they  are 
in  danger  of  fretting  when  they  see  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked.  But  there  can 
be  nothing  more  unreasonable.  For  this  prosperity  is  nowise  enviable,  as  it  often 
proves  their  destruction.  11.  This  corruption  often  discovers  itself  in  fears  of 
death.  It  is  one  of  the  glorious  fruits  of  the  death  of  Christ  to  deliver  His  people 
not  only  from  the  power  but  from  the  fear  of  death.  But  many  real  Christians 
are  so  weak  in  faith,  that  all  their  life,  through  fear  of  it,  they  are  subject  to 
bondage.  These  fears  also  discover  the  strength  of  unbelief.  For  by  indulging 
them  they  deny  and  deprive  themselves  of  one  blessed  fruit  of  the  purchase  of 
Christ — a  deliverance  from  the  fear  of  death.  Lessons  :  1.  Judge  not  of  the  love 
of  God  to  you  by  the  course  of  providence.  If  you  take  a  just  and  comprehensive 
view  of  this  it  will  prove  a  powerful  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  His  Word.  But 
a  partial  view  can  only  tend  to  fill  you  with  perplexity.  2.  Beware  of  interpreting 
the  designs  of  providence  by  its  external  aspect.  It  is  denying  providence  and 
deceiving  ourselves  to  explain  it  in  this  manner.  For  nothing  can  be  a  more  un- 
certain evidence  of  the  real  design  of  God's  procedure  than  its  outward  appear- 
ance.  In  general  its  intention  is  the  very  reverse  of  what  carnal  reason  would 
suppose.  3.  Do  not  imagine  that  there  is  any  real  humility  in  doubting  or 
denying  what  God  hath  done  for  your  souls,  whatever  evidence  you  have  of  His 
love  in  a  work  of  progressive  sanetifi cation.  There  is  a  great  ingratitude  in  such 
conduct :  for  whatever  self-abasing  thoughts  you  entertain,  you  ought  always  to 
acknowledge  the  truth  of  God's  loving-kindness  towards  you.  4.  Amidst  all 
doubts,  fears,  and  disquietudes,  endeavour  to  present  exercise  of  faith  in  Christ. 
This  is  the  most  effectual  and  confounding  reply  to  all  the  reasonings  of  unbelief 
and  temptations  of  Satan.  This  is  a  mean  of  comfort  which  has  been  often 
blessed  to  doubting  saints  when  their  Christian  experience  hath  been  of  little  use 
to  them,  when  every  other  mean  hath  failed.  To  one  groping  in  darkness  there 
cannot  be  so  convincing  an  evidence  of  the  reality  of  light  as  to  get  a  view  of  the 
sun  shining  in  his  strength.  (Ibid.)  On  vigilance  ax  to  a  heart  of  unbelief: — 
1.  This  exhortation  by  no  means  implies  that  it  is  either  in  our  will  or  in  our 
power  to  change  our  hearts.  For,  although  it  is  otherwise  with  respect  to  conver- 
sion, regeneration  is  everywhere  represented  as  a  real  change  aiJected  on  the  heart 
of  the  sinner,  wherein  he  is  entirely  passive,  as  a  new  creation,  a  calling  of  things 
that  be  not,  a  quickening  of  those  who  are  dead,  a  transformation  into  the  image 
of  God;  in  a  word,  as  a  work  of  such  a  nature,  that  it  requires  an  exceeding 
greatness  of  Divine  power.  2.  This  exhortation  implies  that  we  are  in  great 
danger  of  being  negligent.  The  power  of  sin  in  our  hearts,  the  temptations  of 
Satan,  and  the  influence  of  the  world,  are  all  evidences  of  the  danger  we  are 
in  of  rejecting  Christ.  3.  It  implies  the  necessity  of  watchfulness  and  jealousy  of 
ourselves.  Take  heed,  look  around  you,  lest  ye  be  misled  as  to  the  great  interests 
of  salvation.  We  are  called  to  such  vigilance  as  become  a  watchman  appointed 
for  the  very  purpose  of  observing  the  motions  of  an  enemy.  4.  These  words 
denote  the  necessity  of  knowing  our  natural  state  as  under  the  dominion  of  sin. 
It  is  not  said,  Take  heed  *'  lest  there  enter  into  your  hearts  any  motion  of  unbelief," 
as  if  it  were  a  thing  that  had  no  root  within  us,  a  habit  to  be  contracted  by 
imitation,  or  by  a  course  of  iniquity.  But,  take  heed  lest  there  be  in  any  of  ycu 
a  heart  of  unbelief;  as  plainly  declaring  that  this  is  natural  to  every  man,  and 
that  it  is  so  as  denominating  his  whole  heart.  6.  It  implies  the  possibility  of 
knowing  our  present  state.  6.  It  expresses  the  necessity  and  importance  of  the 
knowledge  of  our  state.  Were  not  this  knowledge  of  the  greatest  consequence 
to  us,  the  Holy  Spirit  would  not  press  us  so  earnestly  to  take  heed  tbat  we 
deceive  not  ourselves.  The  importance  of  this  knowledge  appears  from  that  of 
its  subject ;  as  the  glory  of  God  and  our  eternal  comfort  are  inseparably  connected 
with  it.  On  this  question,  whether  we  be  in  Christ  ?  depends  another  of  the 
greatest  moment,  whether  God's  highest  end,  not  only  in  the  works  of  creation 
and  providence,  but  in  redemption,  and  the  highest  end  of  our  being  be  accom- 
plished ?  This  is  the  one  thing  needful,  compared  with  which  everything  else 
that  requires  our  attention  is  less  than  nothing  and  vanity.  7.  It  implies  that  it 
is  highly  incumbent  on  us  to  examine  ourselves  for  discovering  our  state.  The 
phrase  here  used  signifies  a  looking  not  only  about  us  but  into  ourselves,  a  trying 
of  our  own  hearts:  for  thus  alone  can  we  discover  the  dominion  or  prevalence  ol 


CHAP,  m.]  HEBREWS.  S5f 

unbelief.  8.  This  injunction  declares  the  necessity  of  a  diligent  use  and  improve- 
ment of  all  the  means  of  grace.  We  are  not  to  confine  our  attention  merely  to  what 
passes  within  us  for  attaining  a  knowledge  of  our  state,  but  diligently  to  attend  to 
ordinances  as  the  means  instituted  by  God  for  rectifying  our  state,  if  it  be  bad, 
and  for  giving  us  a  greater  degree  of  certainty.  9.  It  implies  that  Christians 
ought  not  only  to  know  their  real  state  but  to  attend  to  their  present  exercise. 
10.  This  injunction  further  implies  that  the  sin  of  believers,  in  itself  considered, 
hath  no  less  guilt,  and  is  attended  with  no  less  danger  than  that  of  the  unregene- 
rate.  11.  It  also  implies  that  our  preservation  in  a  state  of  grace  is  inseparably 
connected  with  the  use  of  means  on  oar  part.  From  the  foregoing  obsei  vations, 
those  who  are  still  negligent  about  the  state  of  their  hearts  may  be  exhorted — 
1.  To  the  exercise  of  self-examination.  2.  Beware  of  spiritual  sloth.  This  is  the 
ruin  of  many  hearers  of  the  gospel.  They  will  not  give  themselves  so  much 
trouble  as  to  make  a  diligent  inquiry  into  their  state  for  eternity.  3.  Earnestly 
apply  to  God  Himself  that  He  may  open  and  incline  your  hearts.  He  alone  can 
perform  this  woik.  It  is  His  prerogative.  It  is  entirely  a  supernatural  work.  It 
is  not  bestowed  on  men  like  any  natural  gift,  such  as  wisdom  or  prudence.  It 
must  be  communicated  by  the  effectual  operation  of  the  spirit,  implanting 
a  new  nature.  For  God  saith,  "  Behold  I  make  all  things  new."  {Ibid.\ 
On  the  necessity  of  vigilance  as  to  unbelief: — The  necessity  of  taking  heed  to  the 
gospel,  of  embracing  Christ,  and  adhering  to  Him  in  the  exercise  of  genuine  faith, 
appears — 1.  From  the  impossibility  of  escape  to  final  unbelievers.  2.  From  tlie 
severity  of  the  punishment  awaiting  unbelievers.  3.  The  dignity  of  Christ's 
prophetical  character.  The  chapter  in  which  our  text  lies  begins  with  this  argu- 
ment: "  Wherefore  .  .  .  consider  the  Apostle  ...  of  our  profession,  Christ  Jesus." 
How  are  we  to  consider  Him?  We  are  so  to  devote  our  minds  to  the  contempla- 
tion of  all  His  excellencies  as  fully  to  satisfy  ourselves  that  He  is  every  way  worthy 
to  be  the  object  of  our  faith.  We  must  consider  Him  as  "the  Apostle  of  our  pro- 
fession "  ;  for  He  is  that  great  Prophet  whom  God  hath  sent,  after  having  promised 
Him  so  often  and  so  long.  4.  The  hocour  put  on  those  who  steadfastly  adhere  to 
Christ.  TLey  are  His  house  I  He  occupies  their  hearts,  their  whole  persons,  as 
His  constant  dwelling;  for  He  hath  said,  "I  will  dwell  in  them."  They  are 
"  builded  up  for  an  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit."  If  so,  we  ought  surely 
to  be  extremely  vigilant,  lest,  by  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief,  we  exclude  this  blessed 
inhabitant.  5.  The  authority  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  argument  is  proposed 
(vers.  7,  8).  Unbelief,  when  described  as  a  tempting  of  God,  is  held  up  to  view  as 
committed  against  each  Person  of  the  adorable  Godhead.  It  is  spoken  of  as  a 
tempting  of  the  Father  (Psa.  xcv.  7).  It  is  viewed  as  committed  against  Christ 
(1  Cor.  X.  9).  And  here  it  is  considered  as  directed  against  the  Spirit.  Unbelief 
is  thus  described,  because  it  is  a  rejection  of  that  salvation  in  which  each  Person 
of  the  Trinity  hath  a  peculiar  and  distinct  operation.  It  is  especially  a  tempting 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  because  it  is  more  immediately  opposed  to  His  work  in  applying 
this  salvation  to  the  hearts  of  men.  By  unbelief  He  is  peculiarly  resisted,  as  He, 
according  to  the  order  of  subsistence,  is  the  Finisher  of  all  the  external  works  of 
God.  Therefore  unbelievers  are  not  said  to  resist  the  Father,  or  the  Son,  but  the 
Spirit.  Two  things  are  mentioned  in  the  passage,  in  which  the  authority  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  interposed.  First,  He  enjoins  on  us  the  exercise  of  faith  in  hearing 
the  voice  of  God,  the  present  exercise  of  faith,  without  admitting  of  any  delay — 
"  To-day,  if  ye  will  bear."  Then  He  warns  us  against  unbelief  and  activity  in 
hardening  ourselves  and  tempting  Him,  like  the  ancient  Jews.  It  is,  therefore, 
necessary  that  we  take  heed,  lest  we  be  found  chargeable  with  resisting  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  promise  by  a  rejection  of  that  which  is  the  great  subject  of  His  testimony 
and  ground  of  His  operation  in  the  Church,  the  salvation  purchased  by  the  blood  of 
Christ.  6.  The  danger  of  being  unexpectedly  deprived  of  our  day  of  grace.  This 
argument  is  urged  by  the  apostle,  from  the  example  of  God's  procedure  with  the 
Israelites  (ver.  11).  The  day  of  grace  is  never  extended  beyond  the  day  of  life.  But 
the  latter  sometimes  continues  after  the  former  is  gone.  7.  The  unspeakable 
blessedness  necessarily  connected  with  genuine  faith.  "  For  we  are  made  partakers 
of  Christ,  if  we  hold  tbe  beginning  of  our  confidence  steadfast  unto  the  end"  (ver.  14). 
The  great  privilege  which  the  apostle  seems  especially  to  have  in  his  eye  is  union 
to  Christ.  He,  in  His  incarnation,  was  made  a  partaker  of  us :  "Forasmuch  as  the 
children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  He  Himself  likewise  took  part  of  the 
same."  Now,  this  participation  is  mutual ;  for  being  joined  to  the  Lord,  we  are 
one  spirit  with  Him.   The  apostle  seems  especially  to  describe  faith  as  the  erident  e 


254  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

of  our  real  participation  of  Christ.  He  exhibits  it  under  one  character,  which  is  a 
certain  proof  of  its  sincerity.  It  is  of  a  permanent  nature.  It  is  not  a  transient 
notion  in  the  head,  or  affection  in  the  heart,  which  we  have  to-day,  and  lose  to- 
morrow, but  a  fixed  principle,  making  us  to  abide  in  Christ  to  the  end  of  our  course. 
8.  The  danger  of  exclusion  from  God's  rest.  This  argument  is  urged  by  the  apostle 
in  the  last  verse  of  this  chapter,  connected  with  the  first  of  the  following  :  "  So  we 
Bee  that  they  could  not  enter  in  because  of  unbelief.  Let  us  therefore  fear,  lest  a 
promise  being  left  us  of  entering  into  His  rest,  any  of  you  should  seem  to  come 
short  of  it."  This  argument  is  intimately  connected  with  one  already  considered, 
arising  from  the  danger  of  our  day  of  grace  coming  to  an  end.  9.  The  all-penetra. 
ting  nature  of  the  Word  of  God.  This  argument  is  adduced  (chap.  iv.  12,  13).  From 
the  foregoing  observations  we  infer — (1)  That  God  deals  with  us  in  the  gospel  as 
rational  creatures.  He  proposes  innumerable  motives,  which  have  a  natural 
tendency  to  affect  the  will.  He  works  on  the  affections  by  the  most  pressing 
entreaties,  tender  expostulations,  and  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises.  As 
man  is  naturally  swayed  by  hopes  of  honour,  pleasure  or  interest.  He  shows  that 
all  these  in  their  true  value  and  perfect  essence  are  engaged  solely  on  His  side. 
Thus  He  "  draws  with  the  cords  of  a  man  "  (Hosea  xi.  4).  (2)  The  necessity  of 
having  the  heart  right  with  God.  Did  the  priests  under  the  law  examine  the 
sacrifices,  not  only  outwardly,  but  inwardly,  to  discover  if  there  was  any  blemish  ? 
Bo  doth  our  great  High  Priest.  He  looks  not  only  to  the  conduct,  but  to  the  heart, 
to  see  if  there  be  any  such  blemish  there,  as  would  render  the  sacrifice  a  corrupt 
thing.  For  all  things  are  naked  and  opened  to  Him.  (3)  One  mark  by  which  the 
voice  of  Christ  may  be  known.  It  is  of  a  heart-penetrating  nature.  "  The  sheep," 
Baith  the  Great  Shepherd,  speaking  of  Himself,  "hear  His  voice:  ...  for  they  know 
it.  And  a  stranger  will  they  not  foUow,  but  will  flee  from  him  :  for  they  know  not 
the  voice  of  strangers."  Many  flee  from  a  searching  ministry.  But  surely  this  is 
the  greatest  folly,  and  a  certain  evidence  that  the  heart  is  bad.  For  "  he  that  is  of 
the  truth,  cometh  to  the  light."  What  is  this  but,  as  far  as  possible,  to  flee  from 
the  presence  of  the  Lord,  to  flee  from  the  Word  of  God,  who,  by  the  means  of  His 
own  appointment,  is  quick  and  powerful  ?  (4)  Christians  may  learn  the  danger  of 
grieving  the  Holy  Ghost.  You  do  so  by  not  improving  His  gracious  motions  within 
you  when  stirring  you  up  to  duty,  and  by  committing  sin.  (5)  Those  who  are 
habitually  careless  may  be  warned  from  this  branch  of  the  subject  not  to  tempt 
and   resist   the   Holy   Spirit.      {Ibid.)  On  the   tendency  of  unbelief: — From 

the?e  words  we  are  therefore  to  illustrate  the  natural  tendency  of  unbelief, 
or  its  influence  in  producing  a  departure  from  the  living  God.  1.  This  expression 
implies  a  rejection  of  spiritual  and  eternal  hfe,  through  Jesus  Christ.  Ttiis  sin,  as 
persisted  in,  issues  in  a  total  separation  from  the  blissful  enjoyment  of  God  aa 
reconciled,  an  eternal  banishment  "  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  from  the 
glory  of  His  power  "  (2,  Thess.  i.  9).  2.  It  often  produces  a  secret  apostasy  from 
Christ.  Many  retain  the  form  of  godliness,  while  they  practically  deny  the  power 
thereof.  They  indulge  sin  in  the  chamber  of  imagery,  or  practise  it  so  secretly  that 
their  characters  are  not  blasted.  3.  Unbelief  induces  to  a  departure  from  all  purity 
and  strictness  of  profession.  4.  Unbelief  drives  others  so  far  that  they  entirely 
renounce  a  religious  profession.  5.  Unbelief  often  issues  in  confirmed,  or  in  judicial 
obduracy.  6.  It  tends  to  the  commission  of  the  unpardonable  sin.  This  evil  heart 
is  a  sluice  which,  if  once  opened,  knows  no  restraint  but  what  is  imposed  on  it  by 
the  restraining,  preventing,  renewing,  or  preserving  grace  of  God.  It  is  a  torrent 
that  would  soon  burst  through  all  the  fences  of  reason,  natural  dictates  of  con- 
Bcience,  common  light,  and  strong  convictions — nay,  of  saving  grace  already  re- 
ceived, were  not  believers  kept  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith  as  the  mean, 
kept  by  continual  supplies  from  the  fulness  of  Christ,  and  thus  preserved  from 
perishing.  It  is  naturally  a  rejection  of  the  living  God,  and  of  that  life  of  God, 
which  can  alone  preserve  from  total  apostasy  and  eternal  death.  7.  It  tends  to  the 
indulgence  of  all  sin.  As  unbelief  is  itself  the  departure  of  the  heart  from  God,  it 
continually  impels  to  an  universal  departure  from  Him  in  the  life.  He  who  is 
under  the  power  of  unbelief  never  views  sin  as  sin.  Unbelief,  which  rejects  Christ 
and  salvation  through  Him,  must  necessarily  give  a  preference  to  sin,  his  enemy. 
Kay,  that  very  preference  which  the  unbeliever  gives  to  sin  is  the  immediate  cause 
of  his  rejection  of  the  Saviour.  The  character  of  evil  here  given  to  the  heart  seems, 
indeed,  especially  to  refer  to  the  great  efficacy  of  positive  or  acquired  unbelief ;  for 
it  makes  the  heart  a  great  deal  more  wicked  than  it  was  before.  Nor  is  it  merely 
called  evil,  but  the  word  used  denotes  great  activity  in  evil,  a  labour  in  increasing 


cms.  m.)  HEBREWS.  S58 

its  own  corruption  and  that  of  the  life,  in  strengthening  itself  in  its  own  wicked- 
ness. 8,  It  tends  to  eternal  death.  If,  as  hath  been  said,  it  be  a  rejection  of 
spiritual  and  eternal  life,  this  must  be  the  inevitable  consequence.  (Ibid.)  On 
the  improvement  of  the  doctrine  of  unbelief : — I.  We  may  improve  it  for  instbijction. 

I.  We  may  learn,  in  general,  the  great  reason  of  the  unprofitableness  of  the  hearers 
of  the  gospel.  It  is  their  want  of  faith.  2.  It  may  be  inferred  that  we  ought  to 
view  every  sin  in  its  natural  tendency.  This  particularly  applies  to  unbelief. 
Therefore  the  apostle  holds  up  this  sin  in  its  genuine  scope,  in  departing  from  the 
living  God.  This  is  one  great  object  of  the  deceitfulness  of  sin  to  conceal  its  true 
spirit,  design,  and  end.  But  we  ought  to  tear  off  the  veil,  and  then  shall  we  see 
that  its  ways  lead  down  to  death.  3.  A  departure  from  the  ordinances  of  the 
gospel  is  a  departure  from  God.  The  Hebrews  might  be  apt  to  excuse  themselves 
for  renouncing  the  gospel  dispensation  in  the  hour  of  trial  by  pretending  that  they 
BtiU  secretly  adhered  in  heart  to  God,  trusted  in  the  Messiah,  and  retained  a  respect 
to  ordinances  formerly  enjoined.  But  the  apostle  shows  that,  by  departing  from 
the  gospel,  they  really  apostatised  from  the  living  God.  Others  may  endeavour  to 
excuse  themselves  in  like  manner  from  their  inward  respect  to  God,  while  they 
refuse  attnndance  on  the  means  of  grace.  But  all  who  habitually  do  so  renounce 
the  authority  of  God,  who  hath  an  undoubted  right  to  appoint  what  religious  ordi- 
nances soever  He  pleases.  Unless  we  acknowledge  His  authority  in  this  respect, 
our  hearts  do  not  submit  to  Him  ;  we  rise  up  in  actual  rebellion  against  Him.  4. 
The  great  danger  of  speaking  irreverently  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  either  as  to  His 
person  or  operations.  5.  We  may  learn  that  even  the  partial  exercise  of  unbelief 
in  the  hearts  of  God's  people  is  highly  provoking  to  Him.  Therefore  we  are  so 
earnestly  dehorted  from  it.  We  have  an  instance  of  His  displeasure  in  this  respect 
with  two  eminent  saints,  Moses  and  Aaron,  although  Moses  was  the  principal  actor. 

II.  This  subject  aiifords  ground  of  trial.  Let  every  one  put  this  important  question 
to  his  own  heart,  "  Do  I  really  believe  in  Christ,  or  am  I  still  under  the  power  of 
this  evil  hi-art  of  unbelief  ?  "  1 .  If  your  faith  be  saving,  you  are  convinced  that  it 
is  the  work  of  God.  2.  It  is  attended  with  evangelical  repentance.  "  They  shall 
look  on  Me  whom  they  have  pierced,  and  shall  mourn."  Have  you  never  been 
made  to  abhor  yourselves  ?  Has  all  your  sorrow  for  sin  been  confined  to  its  conse- 
quences ?  If  so,  you  are  yet  strangers  to  the  faith  of  God's  elect.  3.  The  heart  is 
purified  by  means  of  it.  This  grace  always  produces  holiness.  It  instigates  to,  and 
is  instrumental  in,  the  mortification  of  all  known  sin.  4.  It  worketh  by  love.  It 
produces  a  supreme  love  to  God.  For  "  he  that  loveth  not,  knoweth  not  God."  It 
works  by  love  to  the  brethren.  For  "  hereby  do  we  know  that  we  are  passed  from 
death  to  life,"  &e.  5,  It  overcometh  the  world.  The  Church  is  represented  as 
having  the  moon  under  her  feet.  This  may  be  understood  of  the  present  world,  of 
which,  because  of  the  uncertainty  of  all  its  enjoyments,  the  moon  in  her  many 
waxings  and  wanings,  in  her  constant  changes,  is  a  very  proper  emblem.  Faith 
overcomes  the  world  in  its  allurements.  6.  It  produces  a  high  esteem  of  Christ ; 
for  to  them  that  believe  He  is  precious.  7.  Faith  receives  and  improves  Christ  in 
every  respect  in  which  He  is  revealed.  It  embraces  Him  in  His  person  as  God- 
man.  Therefore  believing  is  called  receiving  Him.  Indeed,  faith  is,  on  our  part, 
the  great  instrument  of  union  to  Christ.  Faith  embraces  His  righteousness. 
Therefore  it  is  called  the  righte  ousness  of  faith,  and  said  to  be  unto  all  and  upon 
all  them  that  believe  It  receives  Him  in  all  His  offices,  as  made  of  God  to  as 
wisdom,  righteousness,  and  sanctification.  8.  Faith  purifies  the  life.  "As  the 
body  without  the  si^irit  is  dead,  even  so  faith  without  works  is  dead  also."  That 
faith  which  does  not  influence  the  practice  is  deceitful  and  destructive.  {Ibid.) 
To  all,  faith : — In  Scripture  the  "  heart  "  expresses  the  whole  spiritual  nature  of 
man — his  mind  or  understanding,  his  feelings  and  passions,  his  spiritual  being,  his 
wilL  Under  sin  the  heart's  thoughts  are  darkened,  its  passions  degraded,  its  will 
perverted  (Jer.  xvii.  9 ;  Ezek.  xi.  19 ;  Eccles.  viii.  2).  Accordingly,  the  gospel  deals 
first  and  above  all  with  the  heart.  Mere  change  of  life,  while  a  deceitful  heart 
remains,  will  avail  nothing.  The  gospel's  first  promise,  therefore,  is  (Ezek.  zxxvii. 
26,  27).  The  renewed  heart  implies  everything — new  light  to  the  darkened  mind, 
a  renewed  will,  a  new  life.  The  root  of  all  the  evils  that  afflict  our  race  is  the 
unbelieving  heart.  You  will  find  many  urge  in  those  days  that,  as  faith  is  simply 
belief  in  testimony,  as  to  whose  value  people  may  differ,  unbelief  is  no  sin.  For 
instance,  you  may  hear  that  a  certain  event  took  place  in  London  last  week,  and 
the  evidence  seems  to  you  so  good  that  you  believe  the  report ;  a  friend  of  yours, 
however,  does  not  believe  it,  because  he  thinks  the  evidence  untrustworthy.    In 


25€  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  o^ 

neither  case  does  moral  blame  attach  to  the  person  ;  all  that  can  hd  said  is,  thai 
the  two  friends  differ.  Now  any  one  who  reads  Holy  Scripture  will  soon  discover 
that,  as  to  the  great  truths  of  religion,  Scripture  treats  faith  in  them,  or  unbelief, 
in  no  such  easy  temper  as  this.  Faith,  according  to  the  Bible,  is  our  first  duty, 
and  unbelief  a  damning  crime  (Mark  xvi.  16;  John  vi.  29,  iii.  18).  What, 
then,  is  the  essence  of  saving  faith?  (Rom.  x.  9,  10).  It  is  believing  God's 
testimony  concerning  His  Son,  concerning  our  doom  as  sinners.  His  love  as  our 
Saviour,  His  death  for  us,  His  resurrection.  His  reign  over  us,  and  His  Spirit'a 
work  in  us.  As  to  God,  it  is  our  taking  Him  at  His  word,  in  all  He  tells  us  of  our 
emptiness,  and  of  Christ's  fulness.  As  to  ourselves,  it  is  the  assertion  and  triumph 
of  the  higher  nature  within  us  over  the  lower,  of  the  unseen  and  eternal  over  the 
world  of  sense  about  us  and  within  us.  We  see,  then,  why  faith  saves.  It  laya 
hold  upon  God ;  it  overcomes  the  world.  The  believer  lives  as  seeing  Him  who  is 
invisible,  as  in  presence  of  things  eternal.  God  has  clearly  revealed  to  us  this 
unseen  life,  and  established  by  many  infallible  proofs  both  its  existence  and  its 
awful  character.  Reason  deals  with  the  evidence,  and  then,  assured  of  the  facts, 
faith's  eye  gazes  upon  them  as  though  they  were  visible,  and  the  believer  lives 
under  the  abiding  sense  and  power  of  them.  What  this  power  is,  we  see  in  Heb. 
xi.  Whereas,  where  an  evil,  unbelieving  heart  is,  there  will  be  found  the  victory 
not  of  ffiith,  but  of  the  world — evil  thoughts,  evil  desires,  evil  words,  evil  acts,  th© 
deceitful  heart  desperately  wicked.  In  Eom.  i.  2&-32  we  have  one  of  the  reasons 
why  unbelief  is  condemned.  It  is  a  sin  against  knowledge.  It  may  be  said, 
indeed,  that  many  live  in  ignorance  of  unseen  realities  ;  but  whence  springs  this  ? 
With  multitudes,  from  indifference.  They  care  for  none  of  the  things  that  make 
for  their  soul's  peace,  and  hence  take  no  pains  to  know  God's  way  of  peace  for 
guilty  sinners.  Multitudes,  again,  are  lost  by  procrastination.  The  longer  the 
delay,  the  less  the  hope.  Worldliness  grows  upon  one,  deadness  of  heart  spreads 
and  deepens ;  ossification,  stoniness  of  heart — the  truest  and  most  awful  mortifica- 
tion known  to  us;  the  conscience  becomes  dulled,  the  eye  of  sense  opfus,  the 
objects  of  sense  allures,  faith's  eye  closes,  and  unseen  things  become  dim,  shadowy, 
unsubstantial.  Luxuries  become,  from  habit,  necessities;  the  lust  of  the  flesh, 
&c.,  grow  by  indulgence ;  and  the  desires  after  better  things  unseen  dwindle  by 
disuse.  Faint  wisLes  after  heavenly  things,  and  these  but  seldom  take  the  place 
of  settled  purpose  ;  while  the  strong  will,  every  day  stronger,  drags  down  the 
captive  spirit  to  earth,  and  sense,  and  sin.  Pride  unites  with  careless  indolence  in 
making  the  unbeliever  reject  the  gospel.  He  rebels  against  its  simplicity.  His 
good  name,  good  works,  good  character — something  of  self  as  are  equivalent  for 
salvation  ;  whereas,  all  the  while,  eternal  life  is  God's  free  gift,  which  can  neither 
be  bright  nor  bribed,  but  must  come  of  God's  own  rich,  undeserved  grace,  for  His 
Son  s  sake.  Strange,  too,  as  it  may  seem,  the  evil  heart  betrays  its  presence  as 
K'jfh  by  shame  as  by  pride ;  but  it  is  the  false  shame,  which  springs  not  from  sin 
but  from  fear  of  the  opinion  of  the  world  about  us.  There  is  but  one  way  to  God, 
but  tbere  are  a  thousand  ways  of  departing  from  Him.  He  who  is  the  slave  of 
impure  thought,  of  anger,  hatred,  maiice,  envy,  or  covetousness,  will  find  that  his 
evil  heart  will  soon  open  up  a  way  by  which  he  may  depart  still  further  from  the 
living  God.  To  each  and  all  the  gospel  says — Return.  The  test  of  faith  is 
obedience.  {W.  McLean.)  The  evil  of  unbelief: — 1.  Unbelief  hardens  men's 
baxrt?  -i^ainst  means  afforded  for  their  good  (2  Kings  xvii.  14;  Exod.  ix.  19,  21). 
2.  It  keeps  them  from  being  established  in  the  way  of  God  (Isa.  viL  9).  3.  It 
makes  them  reject  those  whom  God  sends  (John  v.  38  ;  Matt.  xxi.  32).  4.  It  takes 
away  the  profit  of  God's  word  (Heb.  iv.  2).  5.  It  perverts  the  plainest  manner  of 
teaching  (John  iii.  12  ;  x.  25).  6.  It  makes  miracles  not  to  be  regarded  (John  xii. 
37).  7.  It  enragpth  men's  minds  against  the  truth  (Acts  xvii.  5).  8.  It  moved 
the  apostles  to  depart  from  people  (Acts  xix.  9).  9.  It  makes  men  unfit  to  call 
on  God  (Rom.  x,  4).  10.  Unbelievers  can  in  nothing  please  God  (Heb.  xi.  6).  11. 
They  are  no  sheep  of  Christ  (John  x.  26).  12.  They  are  under  Satan's  power  (2 
Cor.  iv.  4).  13.  To  unbelievers  nothing  is  pure  (Titus  i.  15).  14.  The  gifts  which 
Christ  bestows  upon  them  are  fruitless  and  without  power  (Matt.  xvii.  20).  15. 
Christ's  own  power  is  stinted  to  them  (Matt.  xiii.  58).  16.  Unbehef  makes  men  do 
detestable  acts  (1  Tim.  i.  13).  17.  It  was  an  especial  cause  of  the  rejection  of  the 
Jews  (Eom.  xi.  20).  18.  It  was  the  cause  of  many  external  judgments  (Heb.  iii. 
19 ;  xi.  31).  For  it  makes  men  run  headlong  into  danger  (Exod.  xiv.  23).  19.  It 
excludes  from  heaven  (Heb.  iv.  11).  20.  It  thrusts  down  to  hell  (Luke  xiL  46 ; 
Mark  xvi.  16 ;  John  iii.  18 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  12 ;  Rev.  xxi.  8).    Can  that  which  is  ia 


CHAP,  in.]  HEBREWS.  257 

itself  so  heinous  a  uin,  and  that  which  has  so  many  fearful  effects  following  upon 
it,  be  accounted  an  infirmity?  If  we  would  judge  it  as  indeed  it  is  a  true,  proper 
sin,  a  cause  of  many  other  gross  sins:  a  sin  most  dishonourable  to  God,  and 
damagable  to  our  own  souls:  we  should  take  more  heed  of  it,  and  be  more  watchful 
against  it.  {W.  Gauge.)  Duties  due  to  Christ,  as  He  is  the  living  Ood : — Sundry 
duties  are  to  be  performed  onto  Christ  in  this  respect,  that  He  is  the  living  God. 
1.  Acknowledge  Him  to  be  the  true  God  (Josh.  iii.  10;  Jer.  x.  10).  2.  Be  zealoua 
of  His  honour  (1  Sam.  xvii.  26;  2  Kings  xix.  4,  16).  3.  Fear  Him  that  hath  the 
absolute  power  of  life  (Luke  xii.  5  ;  Heb.  x.  31).  4.  Tremble  before  Him  (Dan.  vi. 
26 ;  Deut.  v.  26).  5.  Adore  Him  (Rom.  xiv.  11).  6.  Serve  Him  (1  Thess.  i.  9 ; 
Heb.  ix.  14).  7.  Turn  to  Him  (Acts  xiv.  15).  8.  Long  after  Him  (Psa.  xlii.  2 ; 
Ixxxiv.  2).  9.  Hold  close  to  Him  (John  vi.  68,  69).  10.  Seek  life  of  Him  (John 
vi.  33  ;  V.  40).  11.  Trust  in  Him  (1  Tim.  iv.  10;  vi.  17).  12.  Account  it  a  great 
privilege  to  be  His  son  (Hos.  i.  10;  Rom.  ix.  26;  Heb.  xii.  22).  13.  Pervert  not 
His  word  (Jer.  xxiii.  36).  14.  Never  depart  from  Him  (Heb.  iii.  12).  {[bid.) 
Dishonest  doubt: — I.  The  EvrL  in  unbelief.  1.  Distrust  is  born  of  evil  experience. 
The  innocent  child  is  credulous.  Its  confidence  is  destroyed  by  what  it  comes  to 
see  of  dishonesty,  falsehood,  and  selfishness.  But  this  product  of  sin  ought  not  to 
become  the  principle  by  which  to  weigh  the  truth  of  higher  things.  2.  Infidelity 
has  dishonoured  our  nobler  nature.  Its  philosophy  is  materialistic.  Its  theory  of 
human  origin  is  degrading.  The  unbelievers  of  every  age  neglect  the  human  spirit 
and  pamper  the  lower  nature  of  man.  3.  Scepticism  is  a  covert  for  sinners. 
Infidel  eras  in  all  human  history  have  been  connected  with  selfish  luxury  and 
license.  II.  The  inherent  damnation.  The  miser  has  no  faith  in  kindness. 
The  seducer  no  faith  in  woman's  virtue.  The  trader  in  souls  no  faith  in  any 
rights  of  the  weak.  The  traitor  no  faith  in  loyalty.  And  so  such  men  as  Nabal, 
and  Aaron  Burr,  and  Benedict  Arnold,  carry  about  inherent  damnation.  Yet  the 
principle  of  evil  unbelief,  run  to  extreme  in  their  cases,  is  the  same,  in  only  less 
degree,  in  every  unbeliever's  heart.  III.  Toe  tbeatment  of  doubt.  Do  not 
denounce  or  debate.  Give  kind,  clear,  truthful,  positive  argument;  but  do  not 
argue  in  a  strife  of  wits.  Raise  the  standard  of  Christian  living,  promote  revivals. 
For  "  if  any  man  will  do  His  will,  he  shall  know."  The  gospel  is  a  mystery;  then 
an  experience,  then  a  growth  in  knowledge,  under  true  conditions.  (The  Homiletic 
Monthly.)  An  evil  heart  of  unbelief: — We  are  prone  to  lay  the  stress  of  religion 
on  the  head  and  the  outward  conduct — on  an  orthodox  faith  and  a  correct  life. 
But  we  make  a  grave  mistake.  Not  with  the  head,  but  "  with  the  heart  man 
believeth  unto  rigliteousness."  It  is  "  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief"  that  is  our  greatest 
danger.  1.  Because  of  the  insidious  character  of  such  a  moral  state.  An  overt 
act  we  cannot  hide  from  view,  but  an  evil  heart  may  have  seduced  us  far  away  from 
God  before  we  are  conscious  of  it.  2.  Because  of  the  radical  character  of  such  a 
condition — a  bad  heart  vitiates  every  moral  act.  8.  Because  the  danger  arising  from 
such  a  spirital  state  is  most  imminent.  (J.  M.  Sherwood,  D.D.)  The  rejection 
of  revealed  truth  referable  to  moral  depravity : — I.  Unbelief  in  the  revelation  of 
Jesus  Christ  is  evil  in  its  nature.  Unbelief  is  not  a  mere  error  in  judgment;  a 
mere  miscalculation  of  the  amount  and  force  of  testimony : — but  a  state  of  the 
heart  involving  disobedience  to  God  ;  aversion  to  His  truth.  And  is  not  the  heart 
that  is  capable  of  all  this,  an  "  evil  heart  " ; — a  rebellious  heart ; — a  hard,  ungrate- 
ful heart  ?  Yes,  unbelief,  so  far  from  being  no  sin,  or  a  small  sin,  is  the  radical 
principle,  the  most  noxious  element  of  all  sin.  And  if  all  unbehef  be  thus  evil, 
how  pre-eminently  evil  is  that  unbeUef  which  not  only  refuses  to  hear  and  to  yield 
assent  whsn  God  speaks,  but  which  sets  at  naught  such  a  message  as  the  glorious 
gospel — a  message  of  love  and  mercy,  of  peace  and  pardon  and  life.  H.  Proceed 
to  show  that  the  heart  of  unbelief  is  •'  an  evil  heart,"  by  tracing  this  unhappy  state 
of  mind  to  some  of  its  chief  causes.  That  which  is  always  and  essentially  evil  in  its 
NATURE  cannot  be  imagined  to  have  any  other  than  an  evil  source.  1.  And  on  this 
point  the  Word  of  (iod  is  clear  and  decisive.  It  uniformly  traces  unbelief,  in  all  its 
forms,  to  a  corrupt  source.  It  represents  it  as  generated  and  nourished  by  pride, 
by  prejudice,  by  unhallowed  appetite  and  passion,  by  corrupt  habits  of  living,  by  a 
desire  to  be  ifree  from  all  the  restraints  which  the  faith  of  the  gospel  imposes.  If 
the  children  of  unbelief  were  really  actuated  by  that  spirit  of  candid  inquiry ;  can 
it  he  imagined  that  their  manner  of  investigating  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ  could 
be  such  as  it  too  commonly  is?  Can  it  be  believed  that  levity,  sneer,  habitual 
ridicule,  and  profane  scofiing  become  the  discussion  of  matters  so  infinitely  impor- 
tant ?    2.  The  same  charge  of  unhallowed  origin  is  still  further  estabhshed  against 

17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ni. 

the  spirit  of  unbelief,  by  the  undoubted  fact,  that  while  its  votaries  are  unceasing 
and  ardent  in  their  efforts  to  draw  those  around  them  from  the  religion  of  Christ ; 
thej  discover  no  serious  desire  either  to  practise  themselves,  or  to  inculcate  on 
others  that  which  they  profess  to  beUeve.  3.  Again,  the  history  of  the  rise  and 
progress  of  many  of  the  most  common  cases  of  infidelity,  plainly  demonstrates  that 
its  source,  no  less  than  its  nature,  is  evil.  Thousands  of  the  young,  as  well  as  of 
the  aged,  have  been,  manifestly,  drawn  into  infidelity  by  their  evil  passions  and 
their  vices.  III.  No  less  evil  are  its  eftects.  Our  blessed  Saviour  has  taught  us 
to  judge  of  all  moral  professions  and  claims  by  this  test.  "  Therefore,"  said  He, 
"  by  their  fruits  shall  ye  know  ihem."  With  regard  to  the  doctrineb  which  un- 
belief inculcates,  they  are,  notoriously,  as  to  the  great  mass  of  them,  radically  and 
essentially  corrupt.  It  has,  indeed,  been  often  remarked,  and  with  great  justice, 
that  INFIDELITY  HAS  NO  PRINCIPLES.  In  truth,  there  was  scarcely  the  smallest 
exaggeration  in  the  charge  of  the  satirist  when  be  said  that  the  sum  of  their 
creed  is  "  to  believe  in  all  unbelief."  Now,  is  it  possible  to  conceive  that  such 
principles,  or  rather  such  absence  of  all  principle,  can  tend  to  promote  the  order, 
purity,  and  happiness  of  society  ?  As  well  might  we  dream  of  darkness  begetting 
light,  or  of  committing  men  to  the  school  of  Satan  and  his  angels,  to  be  trained 
up  for  the  heavenly  paradise.  And  as  the  speculative  opinions  of  the  votaries  of 
unbelief  are  generally  and  essentially  corrupt ;  so  their  practice  has  been,  in  all 
a;;es,  worthy  of  their  creed.  Who,  let  me  ask,  ever  since  the  religion  of  Jesus 
Christ  has  existed  in  the  world,  have  been  most  conspicuous  for  the  regularity, 
purity,  and  benevolence  of  their  lives — infidels  or  Christians  ?  That  the  effect  of 
unbelief  in  revealed  truth  has  ever  been  to  generate  moral  corruption  is  attested 
by  all  history.  Kead,  for  example,  the  "  Confessions  of  Eousseau,"  that  wonderful 
monument  of  perverted  genius,  who  undertook  to  paint  his  own  likeness,  and  you 
will  behold  the  portrait  of  one  of  the  most  polluted  and  miserable  of  men.  Read 
what  Voltaire  and  his  royal  patron  and  companion  in  unbelief,  the  Prussian 
monarch,  say  of  each  other,  and  you  will  find  one  of  the  most  revolting 
and  loathsome  pictures  of  moral  baseness  ever  presented  by  men  claiming  a 
decent  place  in  society.  But  further ;  who,  let  me  ask,  have  ever  been 
found  throughout  Christendom  most  zealous  and  active  in  forming  and  exe- 
cuting plans  for  the  benefit  of  mankind?  What  class,  I  say,  have  ever  been 
found  most  ready  for  every  such  good  work — infidels  or  Christians?  On  the 
other  hand,  by  what  class  of  persons  are  the  great  mass  of  the  crimes  which 
pollute  and  disturb  society  committed?  They  are  infidels,  either  open  or  secret. 
Further,  was  it  ever  known  that  any  son  or  daughter  of  Adam  was  reformed  from 
a  wicked  life  by  embracing  infidel  opinions?  But  oh,  how  often  has  the  dying 
culprit  been  heard  to  confess  with  anguish  and  tears  that  infidel  senuments  led 
him  asiray;  that  the  rejection  of  the  Bible  gradually  led  to  profaneness,  to 
intemperance,  to  lewdness,  to  fraud,  to  robbery,  perhaps  to  murder, — and  at  length 
to  the  infamy  of  a  felon's  death  1  I  am  aware  that  it  will  be  said  by  those  who 
are  determined  to  resist  all  evidence  on  this  subject,  that  many  professing  Chris- 
tians have  been  as  immoral  as  other  men.  This  is,  no  doubt,  a  fact ;  and  yet  it 
does  notln  the  least  degree  weaken  our  argument,  or  militate  agaiust  the  doctrine 
of  our  text.  On  the  contrary,  it  rather  confirms  every  word  which  has  been  uttered. 
Were  these  persons  real,  or  only  nominal  Christians  ?  Nay,  infidels  theselves 
are  witnesses  that  they  were  nominal  Christians  only.  Why  else  have  they,  with 
few  dissenting  voices,  acknowledged  that  the  morality  of  the  Bible  is  the  best  in 
the  world  ?  Practical  inferences  :  1.  We  may  see  the  reason  why  Christian  faith 
is  so  constantly  in  Scripture  enjoined  as  a  duty,  and  the  absence  of  it  condemned 
and  threatened  as  a  sin.  The  fact  is — as  you  have  heard — faith  is  so  essentially 
connected  with  the  state  of  the  heart  and  the  current  of  the  affections ;  its  very 
nature  so  inseparably  involves  moral  feeling,  practical  choice,  and  the  spirit  of 
obedience  ;  that  where  it  is  present  it  is  the  gem  of  all  that  is  good  in  the  soul ; 
and  where  it  is  absent,  there  is  the  es-ence  of  rebellion.  2.  We  may  learn  how 
many  and  great  are  the  evils  which  must  necessarily  flow  from  the  decline  and  the 
weakness  of  faith  in  the  real  Christian.  The  "  evil  heart  of  unbelief"  is  not  son- 
fined  to  that  infidelity  which  is  speculative  and  entire.  It  exists,  and  exerts  a 
pestiferous  influence,  in  the  case  of  many  a  sincere  believer.  This  is  the  worm  at 
the  root  of  all  spiritual  duty,  prosperity,  and  comfort.  In  short,  faith,  among  the 
Christian  graces,  is  like  the  main-spring  in  a  well-adjusted  machine.  Its  charac- 
ter affects  everything.  3.  We  may  infer  that  infidelity  is,  in  every  respect,  hostile 
to  the  best  interests  of  civil  society.    An  infidel  peo^jle  will  ever  be  an  immoral, 


CHAP,  in.]  HEBREWS.  259 

profligate  people ;  and  a  people  characteristically  immoral  and  profligate  cannot 
long  continue  to  be  a  free  and  happy  people.  4.  We  are  taught,  by  what  has  been 
faid,  that  if  we  desire  to  bring  our  children  and  others  committed  to  our  care  to 
the  knowlerige  and  love  of  the  truth,  we  must  not  content  ourselves  with  mere 
frigid  instruction,  with  mere  addresses  to  the  intellectual  powers.  We  must  take 
measures  to  enlist  the  wliole  man  in  the  great  subject.  6.  We  may  learn  from  this 
subject  the  reason  why  the  great,  the  rich,  the  philosophical,  and  the  honourable 
among  men  so  seldom  embrace  the  genuine  gospel ;  and  also  why,  when  they  do 
profess  to  embrace  it,  they  so  rarely  appear  to  enter  heartily  and  thoroughly  into 
its  spirit.  The  reason  ia — not  that  there  is  any  deficiency  of  evidence  in  the 
gospel ;  the  real  and  principal  reason  is,  that  men  '*  cannot  serve  God  and  mam- 
mon." 6.  We  may  see,  in  the  light  of  this  subject,  the  alarming  situation  of 
infidels.  7.  Finally,  this  subject  teaches  us  the  unspeakable  iiuportance  of 
Christians  showing  forth  their  faith  by  their  works.  It  was  once  said  by  a  female 
martyr,  of  feeble  body,  but  of  firm  and  undaunted  spirit — when  standing  before 
her  merciless  persecutors,  who  endeavoured  to  perplex  and  confound  her  by  their 
learned  subtleties — "  I  cannot  meet  you  in  argument  for  CJhrist,  but  I  can  die  for 
Him."  My  dear  fellow  professors,  we  may  not  be  called  to  "  die  for  Christ " ;  but 
we  can  all  live  for  Him.  (S.  Miller,  D.D.)  The  necessity  of  a  believing  heart : — 
I.  The  trde  notion  of  faith.  Faith,  which  is  the  principle  of  the  gospel,  respects 
the  promises  and  declarations  of  God,  and  includes  a  sure  trust  and  reliance  on 
Him  for  the  performance.  Beyond  this  there  is  no  further  act  of  faith.  Eeligion 
is  a  struggle  between  sense  and  faith.  The  temptations  to  sin  are  the  pleasures 
of  this  life ;  the  incitements  to  virtue  are  the  pleasures  of  the  next. 
These  are  only  seen  by  faith  ;  those  are  the  objt  cts  of  every  sense.  On  the 
Bide  of  virtue  all  the  motives,  all  the  objects  of  faith  engage.  On  the  side  of 
vice  stand  the  formidable  powers  of  sense,  passion  and  aSection.  If  this  be  the 
case,  if  religion  has  notliing  to  oppose  to  the  present  allurements  of  the  world  but 
tlie  hopes  and  glories  of  futurity,  which  are  seen  only  by  faith — it  is  no  more  absurd 
to  say  men  are  saved  by  faith  than  it  is  to  say  they  are  ruined  by  sense  and  pas- 
sion, which  we  all  know  has  so  much  of  truth  in  it,  that  it  can  have  nothing  of 
absurdity.  II.  The  character  given  in  the  text  of  an  unbelieving  heart — namely, 
that  it  makes  us  depart  from  the  living  God.  1.  That  it  is  for  want  of  faith,  con- 
sidered as  a  principle  of  religion,  that  men  depart  from  the  living  God.  The 
knowledge  of  God  is  but  like  other  natural  knowledge,  as  long  as  it  has  it  residence 
in  the  head  only.  To  become  a  principle  of  religion  it  must  descend  into  the  heart, 
and  teach  us  to  love  the  Lord  with  all  our  minds,  with  all  our  souls,  and  with  all 
our  strength.  The  faith  then  of  the  gospel,  and  which  the  wicked  man  is  an  utter 
stranger  to,  is  that  faith  which  makes  us  cleave  steadfastly  to  the  Lord  with  full 
purpose  of  heart.  2.  That  faith  cannot  be  a  principle  of  religion  till  it  has  its 
effect  and  operation  in  the  heart.  Even  sense  works  in  the  same  manner,  and, 
powerful  as  it  is,  has  no  effect  till  it  has  made  its  way  to  the  heart,  the  seat  of  all 
our  passions  and  affections.  There,  and  there  only,  it  prevails  as  a  principle  of 
action.  Sense  produces  no  sensuality  till  it  warms  the  affections  with  the 
pleasures  of  the  world ;  and  faith  produces  no  religion  till  it  raises  the  heart  to 
love  and  to  embrace  its  Maker.  The  great  advantage  the  world  has  over  religion 
lies  in  the  certainty  and  reality  of  its  objects,  which  flow  in  upon  us  at  every  sense. 
To  supply  this  defect  on  the  part  of  religion,  Revelation  was  given  to  assure  us  of  the 
certainty  and  reality  of  things  future ;  without  which  assurance  thpy  couJd  have  no 
effect  or  influence  on  our  affections.  3,  That  the  motions  and  operations  of  the 
heart  are  in  great  measure  under  our  own  power  and  government.  We  find  daily 
that  we  can  check  our  passions  and  inclinations  to  serve  the  purposes  of  this  life, 
and  if  we  would  do  as  much  for  that  which  is  to  come,  we  shall  answer  all  that  the 
apostle  in  the  text  requires  of  us,  when  he  exhorts  us  to  take  heed  of  an  evil  heart 
of    unbelief.      {Bp.    Sheilock.)  IVartiing    against    backsliding: — I.    Thekb   is 

MUCH  UNCONSCIOUS  BACKSLIDING.  In  &  petrifying  spring  articles  are  often  placed 
under  the  dropping  water,  and  as  it  trickles  down  upon  them  they  are  gradually 
hardened  till  they  become  like  the  very  stone.  So  is  it  with  sin.  Gently  and  slowly 
it  seeks  its  way  into  the  heart,  and  hardens  it  day  by  day,  even  while  the  possessor 
of  that  heart  may  be  more  or  less  unconscious  of  the  change  that  is  going  on. 
This  is  backsliding.  Sin  permitted,  the  heart  gradually  hardened,  unbelief  taking 
his  place  on  the  throne,  and  then,  departure  from  the  Uving  God.  II.  This  un- 
conscious BACKSLIDING  MAT   EXIST  IN   QUAKTEKS    WHERE    WE    LEAST    SUSPECT   IT.      The 

word  of  the  text  is,  "  lest  there  be  in  any  of  you."     "  Any  of  you,"  what  a  search- 


360  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chat,  m 

ing  word  1  "  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  "  It  is  always  dangerous  to  stay  ourselves  upon  our 
strength,  our  knowledge,  our  experience ;  upon  anything,  in  fact,  but  the  sustaining 
grace  of  God  supplied  to  us  through  faith  from  moment  to  moment.  It  is  worthy  of 
note,  and  has  often  been  remarked,  that  in  the  accounts  of  backsliding  furnished  in 
Scripture,  men  seem  to  have  failed  just  in  those  points  of  character  where  they  were 
supposed  to  be  strongest.  III.  The  tbub  saiegoard  against  this  unconscious 
DECLENSION.  "  Consider  .  .  .  Christ  Jesus."  As  the  devout  Jew  was  encouraged 
to  walk  about  the  holy  city,  and  note  her  strength  and  beauty,  so  are  we  urged  to 
consider  the  Lord  Jesus  in  every  aspect  of  His  blessed  character,  offices,  and  work. 
Only  with  the  eye  of  faith  fixed  on  a  full-orbed  Christ,  and  a  heart  occupied  in  the 
consideration  of  Him,  shall  we  be  able  to  comply  with  the  exhortation  of  the  text. 
(W.  P.  Lockhart.)  The  evil  heart  of  unbelief: — Anybody  who  has  common 
power  of  observation,  must  be  struck  by  the  wonderful  things  which  are  constantly 
attributed  in  Holy  Writ  to  faith,  or  believing  in  the  word  of  God — be  it  what  it  will 
— and  especially  in  that  revelation  of  Himself  which  He  has  made  in  Christ  Jesus 
(see  Rom.  iv.  5 ;  Gal.  iii.  11 ;  Mark  ix.  23 ;  Matt.  xvii.  20 ;  Luke  viii.  48,  Ac). 
But  a  second  thing,  equally  beyond  doubt,  is  universally  asserted  of  this  Divine 
grace :  that  from  a  true  faith  springs  of  necessity,  like  a  tree  from  its  root,  a  cor- 
responding obedience,  a  bringing  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  To  be  a  believer 
and  a  doer  of  the  Word  are  the  very  same  thing.  Faith  or  belief  is  holy  living,  and 
holy  living  is  faith,  being  one  and  indivisible ;  so  that  the  inward  principle,  denoted 
by  the  term  faith,  comprehends  all  things  which,  whether  in  our  justification  or 
sanctification,  are  made  by  the  word  of  God  essential  to  our  everlasting  salvation. 
Now,  then,  this  nature  of  ours,  which  makes  us  what  we  are — men,  and  not  angela 
or  brutes — is  not  a  single  or  a  simple  thing,  but  is  made  up  of  at  least  two  parts, 
what  we  call  our  heart  and  our  head,  or  our  understanding.  The  first,  that  by 
which  we  feel,  and  love,  and  hate,  and  have  a  choice  or  will ;  and  the  other,  that  by 
which  we  see  what  is  right  and  true,  and  in  a  lower  form  of  it,  reason  about  the 
things  of  the  world  in  which  we  hve,  and  which  our  senses  present  to  us.  Sou.e 
things  belong  only  to  the  head,  and  if  that  consents  to  them,  it  is  enough  ;  it  is  the 
belief  which  belongs  to  that  kind  of  truths.  Such  are  many  things  in  numbers,^ 
and  what  is  called  science,  and  many  matters  ol  fact ;  men  and  people,  for  instance, 
mentioned  in  books,  and  many  concerns  of  this  life;  the  heart  or  will  has  nothing 
to  do  with  them  one  way  or  other.  But  other  things  have  not  only  a  tru«  and  a 
false,  but  a  right  and  wrong  about  them,  and  when  admitted  as  true,  make  it 
absolutely  necessary  for  us  to  approve  them  and  to  act  upon  them,  and  by  reason 
of  them  ;  and  since,  therefore,  they  touch  at  once  the  heart  and  the  head,  they  can- 
not be  really  believed,  unless  those  two  parts  of  our  nature  go  together.  When, 
they  do  so,  then,  and  then  only  can  we,  indeed,  and  in  truth,  be  said  to  believe 
them.  And  when  anything  is  thus  admitted,  and  beats  down  all  opposition  before 
it,  and  occupies  all  our  nature,  all  the  spiritual  being,  whatever  of  it  by  which  we 
think  and  feel,  is  made  to  act  as  God  intended  it  to  do.  As  a  wheel  rolls  when  the 
needful  force  pushes  it  in  a  particular  direction,  or  any  other  machine  moves  when 
the  spring  is  touched,  so  does  the  man.  He  is  agitated,  he  is  moved  ;  thought  and 
feeling  go  forth  into  visible  actions  he  does  and  acts  accordingly ;  his  nature  is  at 
unity  with  itself,  and  all  obstacles  being  overpowered,  impels  him  in  one  way. 
Now,  the  solemn  thing  for  us  to  consider  is  this,  that  such  is  the  case  with  all  that 
God  has  revealed  to  us  in  the  glorious  gospel  of  His  Son.  It  is  not  made  up  of' 
things  to  be  received  into  the  head,  only  as  part  of  us,  and  to  be  kept  like  book- 
knowledge,  outside  of  the  soul,  but  it  is  to  be  accepted  by  our  whole  and  entire  soul. 
You  see,  then,  in  an  instant,  what  a  number  of  powerful  enemies  there  are  witliin 
ns,  to  divide,  even  in  things  of  themselves  most  clear,  the  heart  and  will  from  the 
head,  and  to  prevent  that  living  and  true  belief  in  Christ,  and  in  His  gospel  without 
which  no  soul  of  man  can  be  saved.  What  a  feaiful  alienation  from  God,  as  a 
spiritual  God,  there  is  in  the  heart,  whatever  natural  graces  may  adorn  it  1  What 
an  iron  stubbornness  of  will  and  resolution  to  conform  all  thiugs  to  itself,  and  not 
itself  to  the  eternal  law  I  Yet  God,  if  He  is  God,  is  not  a  word,  or  a  fancy,  but  an 
awful  King,  who  must  in  all  things  be  obeyed.  Flowing  from  the  same  evil  source, 
what  an  unspeakable  repugnance  there  is  to  such  a  love  of  Christ,  as  shall  have 
power  over  us.  What  vanities,  what  idolatries,  what  coldnesses  1  What  an  evil 
ally  in  the  world  about  ns,  and  the  enemies — not  of  flesh  and  blood,  but 
princedoms,  dominations,  and  powers,  even  all  the  hosts  of  Satan — who  rest 
not  day  or  night,  but  toil  to  harden  up  the  evil  heart  within  us,  to  the 
destruction  of  all  living  faith,  and  the  ruin   of   the   soul.      {J,  Garbett.)        Of 


CHAP.  Ill,]  HEBREWS.  261 

infidelity : — I.  In  its  nature  it  doth  involve  ah  affected  blindness  and  ionor 
ANCE  OF  THE  NOBLEST  AND  MOST  USEFUL  TRUTHS;  a  bad  use  of  reason,  and  most 
culpable  imprudence ;  disregard  of  God's  providence  or  despite  thereto ;  abuse  of 
His  grace  ;  bad  opinions  of  Him,  and  bad  affections  towards  Him,  II.  The  causes 
AND  SOURCES  FROM  WHENCE  IT  SPRINGETH.  1.  Negligence,  Of  drowsy  inobservance 
and  carelessness ;  when  men  being  possessed  with  a  "  spirit  of  slumber,"  or  being 
amused  with  secular  entertainments,  do  not  mind  the  concerns  of  their  soul,  or 
regard  the  means  by  God's  merciful  care  presented  for  their  conversion  ;  being  in 
regard  to  religious  matters  of  Gallio's  humour,  "  caring  for  none  of  those  things." 
■2.  Sloth,  which  indisposeth  men  to  undergo  the  fatigue  of  seriously  attending  to 
the  doctrine  propounded,  of  examining  its  grounds,  of  weighing  the  reasons  induc- 
ing to  believe ;  whence  at  first  hearing,  if  the  notions  hap  not  to  hit  their  fancy, 
they  do  slight  it  before  they  fully  understand  it,  or  know  its  grounds ;  thence  at 
least  they  must  needs  fail  of  a  firm  and  steady  belief,  the  which  can  alone  be 
founded  on  a  clear  apprehension  of  the  matter,  and  perception  of  its  agree- 
ableuess  to  reason.  3.  Stupidity,  or  dulness  of  apprehension,  contracted 
by  voluntary  indispositions  and  defects ;  a  stupidity  rising  from  mists  of 
prejudice,  from  streams  of  lust  and  passion,  from  rust  grown  on  the  mind 
by  want  of  exercising  it  in  observing  and  comparing  things;  whence  men  cannot 
apprehend  the  clearest  notions  plainly  represented  to  them,  nor  discern  the 
force  of  arguments,  however  evident  and  cogent ;  but  are  like  those  wizards  in 
Job,  who  "  meet  with  darkness  in  the  daytime,  and  grope  at  noonday,  as  in  the 
night"  4.  Bad  judgment;  corrupted  with  prejudicate  notions,  and  partial  inclina- 
tions to  falsehood.  5.  Perverseness  of  will,  which  liindereth  men  from  entertaining 
Jiotions  disagreeable  to  their  fond  or  froward  humour.  6.  This  is  that  hardness  of 
heart  which  is  so  often  represented  as  an  obstruction  of  belief.  7.  Of  kin  to  that 
perverseness  of  heart  is  that  squeamish  dehcacy  and  niceness  of  humour  which  will 
not  let  men  entertain  or  savour  anything  anywise  seeming  hard  or  harsh  to  them, 
if  they  cannot  presently  comprehend  all  that  is  said,  if  they  can  frame  any  cavil  or 
little  exception  against  it,  if  every  scruple  be  not  voidel,  if  anything  be  required 
distasteful  to  their  sense ;  they  are  offended,  and  their  faith  is  choked.  8.  With 
these  dispositions  is  connected  a  want  of  love  to  truth,  the  which  if  a. man  hath 
not,  he  cannot  well  entertain  such  notions  as  the  gospel  propoundeth,  being  nowise 
prateful  to  carnal  sense  and  appetite,  9.  A  grand  cause  of  infidelity  is  pride,  the 
which  doth  interpose  various  bars  to  the  admission  of  Christian  truth  ;  for  before  a 
man  can  believe  "  every  height  [every  towering  imagination  and  conceit]  that  ex- 
alteth  itself  against  the  knowledge  of  God,  must  be  cast  down."  Pride  fills  a  man 
with  vanity  and  an  affectation  of  seeming  wise  in  special  manner  above  others, 
thereby  disposing  him  to  maintain  paradoxes,  and  to  nauseate  common  truths 
received  and  believed  by  the  generality  of  mankind.  A  proud  man  is  ever  avert e 
from  renouncing  his  prejudices  and  correcting  his  errors,  doing  which  implieth  a 
confession  of  weakness,  ignorance,  and  folly.  He  that  is  wise  in  his  own  conceit, 
will  hug  that  conceit,  and  thence  is  incapable  to  learn.  A  proud  man,  that  is  big 
and  swollen  with  haughty  conceit,  cannot  stoop  down  so  low,  cannot  shrink  in  him- 
self so  much,  as  to  "  enter  into  the  strait  gate,  or  to  walk  in  the  narrow  way, 
which  leadeth  to  life  "  :  he  will  be  apt  to  contemn  wisdom  and  instruction.  10. 
Another  spring  of  infidelity  is  pusillanimity,  or  want  of  good  resolution  and  courage. 
Christianity  is  a  warfare ;  living  after  its  rules  is  called  "  fighting  the  good  fight  of 
faith";  every  true  Christian  is  a  "good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ";  the  state  of 
Christians  must  be  sometimes  like  that  of  the  apostles,  who  were  '•  troubled  on 
every  side ;  without  were  fightings,  within  were  fears " ;  great  courage  therefore, 
and  undaunted  resolution,  are  required  toward  the  undertaking  this  religion,  and 
the  persisting  in  it  cordially.  11.  Infidelity  doth  also  rise  from  sturdiness,  fierce- 
ness, wildness,  untamed  animosity  of  spirit ;  so  that  a  man  will  not  endure  to  have 
his  will  crossed,  to  be  under  any  law,  to  be  curbed  from  anything  which  he  is  prone 
to  affect.  12.  Blind  zeal,  grounded  on  prejudice,  disposing  men  to  stiff  adherence 
unto  that  which  they  have  once  been  addicted  and  accustomed  to,  is  in  the  Scripture 
frequently  represented  as  a  cause  of  infidelity.  So  the  Jews,  being  "  filled  with  zeal, 
contradicted  the  things  spoken  by  St.  Paul "  ;  flying  at  his  doctrine,  without  weigh- 
ing it :  so  "  by  instinct  of  zeal  "  did  St.  Paul  himself  persecute  the  Church  ;  being 
*'  exceedingly  zealous  for  the  traditions  delivered  by  his  fathers."  13.  In  fine, 
infidelity  doth  issue  from  corruption  of  mind  by  any  kind  of  brutish  lust,  any 
irregular  passion,  any  bad  inclination  or  habit;  any  such  evil  disposition  of  soul 
doth  obstruct  the  admission  or  entertainment  of  that  doctrine,  which  doth  prohibit 


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

and  check  it ;  doth  condemn  it,  and  brand  it  with  infamy ;  doth  denounce  punish- 
ment and  woe  to  it :  whence  "  men  of  corrupt  minds,  and  reprobate  concerning  the 
faith";  and  ••  men  of  corrupt  minds,  destitute  of  the  truth,"  are  attributes  well 
conjoined  by  St.  Paul,  as  commonly  jumping  together  in  practice;  and  "  to  them," 
saith  he, "  that  are  defiled  and  unbelieving  is  nothing  pure,  but  even  their  mind  and 
conscience  is  defiled  " ;  such  pollution  is  not  only  consequent  to,  and  connected 
with,  but  antecedent  to  infidelity,  blinding  the  mind  so  as  not  to  see  the  truth,  and 
perverting  the  will  so  as  not  to  close  with  it.  HI.  The  naughtiness  of  infidelity 
WILL  APPEAB  BY  CONSIDERING  ITS  EFFECTS  AND  CONSEQUENCES ;  which  are  plainly  a 
spawn  of  all  vices  and  villainies,  a  deluge  of  all  mischiefs,  and  outrages  on  the  earth : 
for  faith  being  removed,  together  with  it  all  conscience  goeth  ;  no  virtue  can  remain  ; 
all  sobriety  of  mind,  all  justice  in  dealing,  all  security  in  conversation  are  packed 
away  ;  nothing  resteth  to  encourage  men  unto  any  good,  or  restrain  them  from  any 
evil ;  all  hopes  of  reward  from  God,  all  fears  of  punishment  from  Him  being  dis- 
carded. No  principle  or  rule  of  practice  is  left,  beside  brutish  sensuality,  fond 
self-love,  private  interest,  in  their  highest  pitch,  without  any  bound  or  curb  ;  which 
therefore  will  dispose  men  to  do  nothing  but  to  prey  on  each  other  with  all  cruel 
violence  and  base  treachery.  Every  man  thenoe  will  be  a  god  to  himself,  a  fiend  to 
each  other ;  so  that  necessarily  the  world  will  thence  be  turned  into  a  chaos  and  a 
hell,  full  of  iniquity  and  impurity,  of  spite  and  rage,  of  misery  and  torment.  {I. 
Barrow,  D.D.)  Unbelief: — 1.  The  great  reigning  sin.  2.  The  great  ruining  sin. 
8.  That  which  is  at  the  bottom  of  all  sin.  (J.  P.  Lange.)  Unbelief  and  faith  : — 
Of  Duncan  Matheson,  the  Scottish  evangelist,  it  is  said  that  the  most  diificult 
people  he  had  to  deal  with  were  those  who  "  concealed  a  hard  heart  under  a 
thick  coat  of  Evangelical  varnish."  To  extend  his  usefulness,  he  secured  a 
printing  press,  and  wrote  upon  it,  for  a  motto,  "  For  God  and  Eternity."  Depart- 
iag  from  the  Uvlng  God. — Apostasy  from  the  living  God : — I.  God  is  a  living  God. 
1.  Not  a  mere  historical  God ;  a  God  that  has  been  and  is  no  more.  2.  Not  a 
theoretical  God — a  Being  made  up  of  abstract  propositions  which  we  call  theologies, 

3.  Not  a  dormant  God — impassive,  sluggish,  inactive.  4.  "Living" — always, 
everywhere,  intensely.  II.  Departing  from  the  living  God  is  an  immense  evil. 
1.  The  greatest  insult  to  Him.  2.  The  greatest  calamity  to  self.  Cut  the  stream 
from  the  fountain,  and  it  dries  up ;  hew  down  the  branch  from  the  tree,  and  it 
withers  to  death ;  detach  the  planet  from  the  sun,  and  it  rushes  into  darkness  and 
ruin ;  separate  the  soul  from  God,  its  fountain,  root,  sun — and  ruin  is  its  destiny. 
III.  Unbelief  is  evermore  the  cause  of  this  departing.  Had  men  an  undoubting, 
strong,  abiding,  and  practical  faith  in  the  living  God,  and  their  obligations  to  Him, 
they  would  cling  to  Him  with  all  the  tenacity  of  their  existence.     {Homilist.) 

Ver.  13.  Exhort  one  another. — Restraining  of  spiritual  intercourse  in  families : — 
I,  The  evil  of  the  restraining  among  near  relatives  of  free  intercourse  about 
their  souls,  is  evident  from  this,  first  of  all — 1.  That  it  is  a  breach  of  God's  express 
command  in  the  text,  "  Exhort  one  another  daily."  If  this  duty  lies  on  professing 
Christians  simply  as  such,  much  more  must  it  be  obligatory  on  husband  and  wife, 
brother  and  sister,  parent  and  child.  2.  The  evil  of  it  appears  in  that  it  involves, 
I  suspect  to  a  very  large  extent,  the  sin  of  being  ashamed  of  Christ  and  of  Hia 
words,  '^'hence  that  strange  silence,  that  awe-struck  air  in  the  presence  of  a 
brother?  If  it  were  before  a  stranger,  one  might  tiy  to  account  for  it  in  different 
ways.  But  this  will  not  do  among  persons  accustomed  to  open  their  minds  freely 
on  every  other  subject.  3.  This  restraint  cuts  off  all  the  precious  innumerable 
benefits  which  God  intended  to  arise  from  the  exhortation  enjoined  in  the  text, 
and  which  in  families  were  all  the  greater,  in  virtue  of  the  constant  opportunities 
and  peculiar  facilities  there  afforded  for  it.  What  daily  consolation,  what  instruc- 
tion, what  warning,  what  encouragement,  what  direction,  are  thus  lost  for  ever  I 

4.  There  is  a  specially  mischievous  effect  produced  by  it  on  the  children  of  a  family. 
The  absence  of  it  throws  a  fearful  stumbling-block  in  their  way.  Is  heaven  a 
reality?  Is  Christ  indeed  beloved ?  Is  the  soul  imperishable ?  The  faith  of  the 
child,  such  as  it  is,  is  gradually  sapped  and  undermined.  5.  Near  relatives  are,  by 
this  restraint,  deprived  of  one  of  the  mightiest  incentives  to  a  holy  Ufe,  II.  The 
CAUSES  of  this.  1.  The  unregenerate  condition  of  too  many  parents,  and  other 
near  relatives,  professing  religion.  They  cannot  speak  of  Christ,  because  they  are 
ignorant  of  Him.  They  cannot  commend  Him  to  others,  because  they  have  never 
themselves  embraced  Him.  The  world  is  their  theme,  because  it  is  their  treasure, 
their  god.      2.  Careless,  inconsistent  walking  before  God  and  each  other,  among 


OHAF.  ni.]  HEBREWS.  263 

near  relatives,  is  one  painful  and  powerful  cause.  Persons  professing  godliness, 
anited  in  very  endearing  ties,  are  not  careful  to  order  their  lives  in  each  other's  sight, 
entirely  as  becomes  the  gospel.  Honesty  forbids  it.  It  is  felt  that  it  were  hypocrisy 
to  talk  of  Christ's  love  and  of  His  law,  unless,  at  least,  it  were  with  the  avowed 
design  of  committing  the  parties  to  an  immediate  change.  But  still  farther — 3. 
And  in  close  connection  with  inconsistent  walking,  yet  distinct  from  it,  I  believe 
tbat  the  chief  cause  of  the  restraint  in  question  among  the  people  of  God  is  to  be 
found  in  the  want  of  soul-prosperity,  and  of  a  close  and  habitual  intercourse  in 
secret  with  God  and  His  blessed  Word.  The  want,  in  short,  of  religion,  or  the  low 
state  of  it,  are  the  real  causes  of  this  evil.  III.  There  can  be  little  difficulty  in 
discovering  and  noticing  the  remedies,  under  God,  for  the  evil.  These  must  take 
their  character  from  the  causes.  1.  I  besought  you  to  ask  yourselves,  as  in  God's 
sight,  whether  ye  were  Christ's  indeed.  2.  If  the  cause  lie  with  you  in  careless  and 
inconsistent  walking,  whatever  other  remedies  you  may  employ,  let  that  command 
be  heard,  "  Put  away  the  strange  gods  which  are  among  you,  and  prepare  your 
hearts  unto  the  Lord,  and  serve  Him  only."  And  especially — 3.  In  tbe  third  place, 
seek  the  remtdy  for  this  evil  in  a  closer  walk  with  God,  in  a  more  habitual,  living 
fellowship  with  the  Father,  and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  (G.  J.  Brown.) 
Model  exhortation : — I  would  h^ve  every  minister  of  the  gospel  address  his 
audience  with  the  zeal  of  a  friend,  with  the  generous  energy  of  a  father, 
and   with   the   exuberant  affection   of   a   mother.       (Fenelon.)  Lest  any  of 

you  be  hardened. — Soul-fossilisation  : — I.  The  evil  itself.  1.  It  is  from  an 
obstinate  refusal  to  attend  to  Divine  things,  which  are  irksome  and  painful,  and 
the  soul  is  better  pleased  with  those  things  which  are  congenial,  and  afford  pleasure 
and  satisfaction.  2.  It  is  from  the  natural  character  of  the  heart,  which,  unless 
renewed,  refuses  to  bend  to  the  teachings  of  grace  and  the  leadings  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  n.  The  prevalence  of  the  evil.  It  exists  everywhere  that  human  nature 
exists.  It  is  both  natural  and  acquired.  The  heart,  though  naturally  hard,  is 
made  harder  by  the  circumstances  by  which  it  is  surrounded.  III.  The  end  and 
consequence  of  tue  evil.  It  is  like  thf>  fossilisation  of  an  object  which  we  some- 
times see.  A  piece  of  wood  or  cotton  is  placed  under  the  drip  of  a  waterfall ;  in  a 
shurt  time  it  is  encrusted,  and  becomes,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  a  stone.  It  is 
hard,  unimpressionable,  will  neither  melt  nor  burn.  So  the  heart  of  man  may 
become  a  fossil,  incapable  of  good  actions,  tender  thoughts,  holy  feelings.  (Homilist.) 
The  danger  of  heart-Iiardening  through  sin: — I,  The  sooece  of  great  and  alarm- 
iNO  danger.  1.  Sin  is  deceitful.  (1)  In  its  appearances.  (2)  In  its  promises. 
(3)  In  its  influences.  2.  Sin  prevails  through  its  deceitfulness.  In  the  time  of 
temptation  its  deformity  is  hid ;  its  real  character  is  veiled.  Many  a  man  on  a 
dying  bed  has  been  compelled  to  feel  the  difference  of  the  views  he  has  entertained 
in  health  and  in  a  state  of  sickness.  But  when  sin  presents  itself  to  the  objects  of 
its  temptation,  it  suggests  itself  as  easy  to  be  avoided  :  "  Oh,  you  are  not  the  slaves 
of  sin ;  you  may  avoid  it,  or  you  may  limit  your  progress  in  it ;  yield  to  the  temp- 
tation, and  stop  when  you  please."  So  the  devil  deceives  the  human  mind.  It 
often  changes  its  tone,  and  it  is  equally  deceitful  in  both  cases.  It  is  sometimes 
represented  as  irresistible  ;  the  man  says,  "  I  have  no  power  to  resist  it."  This  la 
the  way  the  mind  is  operated  upon  by  the  tempter.  Oh,  how  great  is  the  deceit- 
fulness  of  sin  !  3.  Sin  hardens  through  its  deceitfulness.  (1)  Hardness  of  heart 
implies  a  state  of  moral  insensibility,  the  moral  susceptibility  of  the  heart  being 
removed,  the  soul  becoming  callous,  so  that  spiritual  things  do  not  impress.  (2) 
In  hardness  of  heart  there  is  a  principle  of  inflexibility  and  rebelhon  in  the  heart. 
It  is  not  merely  hard  like  stone  ;  there  is  something  like  a  reaction :  the  hardness 
is  manifested  in  its  resistance  to  the  claims  of  truth — an  inward  principle  of  rebel- 
lion against  God.  (3)  Sin  hardens  the  heart  by  strengthening  the  principles  and 
habits  of  iniquity  in  us.  The  restraints  of  conscience  in  this  way  are  overcome. 
II.  The  conduct  that  is  to  be  pursued  under  these  circumstances.  We  must 
"exhort  one  another."  1.  Now  exhortation  implies  instruction.  We  are  to 
endeavour  to  diffuse  "  the  savour  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord."  2. 
This  exhortation  implies  warning  and  reproof ;  where  it  is  necessary  to  warn  our 
fellow-creatures  that  are  in  danger  of  "  being  hardened  through  the  deceitfulness 
of  sin  "  ;  to  set  the  danger  before  them,  and  affectionately  to  point  out  to  them  the 
dreadful  consequences  which  must  ensue.  3.  But  this  implies  also  encouragement. 
We  ought  to  encourage  one  another  to  look  to  God,  to  seek  much  grace  to  enable 
us  to  counteract  the  influence  of  sin.  4.  But  this  exhortation  to  which  we  are 
admonished  is  private  exhortation.    Now  let  me  remind  you  that  the  discharge  of 


264  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  ■  [chap.  m. 

this  duty  does  necessarily  imply  a  disposition  to  receive  exhortation  as  well  as  to 
give  it.  5.  But  this  is  a  serious  and  a  very  difficult  duty  to  discharge  successfully. 
(1)  If  you  exhort  one  another  let  it  be  seriously,  then ;  do  not  affect  to  give  reUgioua 
instruction  in  a  spirit  of  levity.  Let  us  remember  that  the  soul  is  the  object  con- 
cerued.  (2)  And  let  it  be  with  a  right  spirit;  do  not  assume  superiority  ;  do  not 
pretend  to  dictate  like  masters.  (3)  In  love.  (4)  Seasonably.  Watch  for  oppor- 
tunities. (5)  Prayerfully.  All  our  effort  will  be  unavailing  without  God's  blessing. 
(6)  Frequently.  "Daily,"  i.e.,  as  often  as  you  can  seasonably.  (7)  Urgently. 
Whatever  we  do  we  must  do  now,  or  perhaps  we  shall  not  do  it  at  all :  we  know  not 
what  another  hour  may  bring  forth.  (Josiah  Hill.)  Private  exhortation : — 1. 
Private  Christians  not  only  may,  but  should,  keep  Christian  communion  amongst 
themselves,  and  mutually  exhort  and  stir  up  one  another.  2.  This  is  a  necessary 
means  of  preserving  people  from  defection.  3.  And  a  duty  daily  to  be  discharged 
while  it  is  to-day ;  that  is,  as  oft,  and  as  long,  as  God  giveth  present  occasion  and 
opportunity  for  it,  lest  a  scattering  come.  {D.  Dickson,  M.A.)  A  warning  against 
hardness  of  heart: — I.  The  haedeninq  chaeacteb  of  sin.  1.  There  is  no  doubt 
whatever  that  living  among  sinners  has  a  hardening  tendency  upon  men.  You 
cannot  walk  about  in  this  great  lazar-house  without  receiving  some  contagion.  2. 
Let  me  here  remark  that  the  sins  of  Gods  people  are  peculiarly  operative  in  this 
manner.  If  I  see  a  drunkard  intoxicated,  I  am  simply  shocked  at  him,  but  I  am 
not  likely  to  imitate  his  example ;  but  if  I  see  the  same  vice  in  a  man  whom  I 
respect,  and  whose  example  has  hitherto  been  to  me  the  guide  of  my  life,  I  may  be 
greatly  grieved  at  first,  but  the  tendency  of  my  mind  will  be  to  make  an  excuse  for 
him ;  and  when  one  has  succeeded  in  framing  a  plausible  excuse  for  the  sin  of 
another,  it  is  very  natural  to  use  it  on  one's  own  behalf.  Association  with  incon- 
sistent Christians  has  been  the  downfall  of  many  young  believers.  The  devil 
delights  to  use  God's  own  birds  as  a  decoy  for  his  nets.  3.  It  is  often  a  long  and 
laborious  process  by  which  conscience  is  completely  seared.  It  usually  begins  thus  : 
the  man's  first  carefulness  and  tenderness  departs.  It  may  not  seem  a  great  evil 
to  have  less  abhorrence  of  evil,  but  this  truly  is  the  egg  from  which  the  worst  mis- 
chief may  come.  The  next  distressing  sign  of  growing  hardness  is  increasing 
neglect  or  laxity  of  private  devotion,  without  any  corresponding  shock  of  the 
spiritual  sensibilities  on  account  of  it.  Anotber  symptom  of  increasing  callousness 
of  heart  is  the  fact  that  hidings  of  the  Saviour's  face  do  not  cause  that  acute  and 
poignant  sorrow  which  they  produced  in  former  times.  Still  further,  when  the 
soul  is  hardened  to  this  extent,  it  is  probable  that  sin  will  no  longer  cause  such 
grief  as  it  once  did.  It  is  a  sad  sign  of  coming  declension  when  we  can  talk  of  sin 
lightly,  make  excuses  for  it,  or  make  jokes  about  it.  The  next  step  in  this  ladder, 
down,  down,  down  to  destruction,  is  that  sin  thus  causing  less  grief  is  indulged  in 
more  freely.  After  this  there  is  still  a  greater  hardening  of  heart — the  man  cornea 
to  dislike  rebukes.  II.  The  peculiab  power  which  lies  in  sin  to  harden  the 
HEART.  It  is  the  deceitfulness  of  sin.  The  heart  is  deceitful,  and  sin  is  deceitful ; 
and  when  these  two  deceitful  ones  lay  their  heads  together  to  make  up  a  case, 
there  is  no  wonder  if  man,  like  a  silly  dove,  is  taken  in  their  net.  One  of  the  first 
ways  in  which  sin  deceives  the  professor  is  by  saying,  "  You  see  no  hurt  has  come 
of  it."  Forgetting  that  the  immediate  results  of  sin  are  not  always  apparent  in 
this  world,  and  that  if  hardness  of  heart  be  not  apparent  it  is  all  the  more  real. 
Then  sin  wiU  whisper  next,  "  This  would  be  sin  in  other  people,  but  it  is  not  in 
you.  You  see  you  were  placed  in  a  peculiar  position  ;  there  is  indulgence  for  you 
which  could  not  be  accorded  to  other  men :  you  are  young,"  says  sin,  "  nobody 
could  accuse  you  if  you  did  go  a  little  rashly  to  work — if  you  were  an  older  pro- 
fessor it  would  be  very  wrong."  Then  if  it  is  an  old  man  who  is  to  be  deceived, 
sin  will  cry,  "  You  must  take  care  of  yourself;  you  need  more  indulgence  than 
others."  If  a  man  be  in  private  life,  sin  will  then  suggest,  "  It  does  not  matter  in 
you :  it  would  be  wrong  in  a  church-officer,  but  nobody  knows  it  in  your  case."  If 
it  be  some  person  in  high  repute,  then  sin  whispers,  "  Your  character  is  so  well 
established  it  will  bear  it."  Again,  sin  will  sometimes  have  the  impudence  to  say, 
"  It  is  very  easy  to  repent  of  it."  This  vile  traitor  is  even  dastardly  enough  to  take 
the  doctrines  of  grace  and  turn  them  into  a  reason  for  sin.     III.  The  remedx 

WHICH    tS   PROVIDED    IN     THE     TEXT     FOR     US     TO     USE    WITH     OTHERS.         "  Exhort     Ona 

another."  Doubtless  many  professors  would  be  saved  from  gross  sins  if  mutual 
exhortation  were  more  commonly  practised  in  the  churches  of  God  in  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  All  of  you,  without  exception,  whether  you  be  rich  or  poor,  sea 
to  each  other's  souls ;  say  not,  "  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  5  "     It  is  so  pleasant 


OHAP.  m.]  HEBREWS.  2Gi 

to  restore  a  brother  from  the  error  of  his  ways,  that  I  can  offer  yon  no  greater 
reward  than  these  two,  to  screen  the  name  of  Christ  from  shame,  and  to  have  the 
pleasure  of  saving  a  soul  from  death  and  covering  a  multitude  of  sins.     IV.  Sdp- 

POSB   THIS   TO   BE    THE    CASE   WITH   ANT   ONE   OF   US,    WHAT   THEN  ?      Some  of  US    are    in 

fiuch  a  position  that  we  are  not  very  likely  to  be  exhorted,  we  are  keepers  of  the 
vineyard,  and  have  none  who  would  take  upon  themselves  to  admonish  us.  Our 
enemies,  however,  very  ably  supply  the  lack,  for  they  often  tell  us  very  profitable, 
but  very  unpleasant  troths.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.^  Hardness  of  heart : — Hardness 
scarcely  needs  an  explanation.  It  is  that  which,  taking  it  from  the  armoury  or 
from  the  smithery,  gives  the  power  to  any  metal  to  resist  a  weapon  thrown  against 
it ;  to  turn  the  edge  of  the  sword,  to  blunt  the  point  of  the  spear,  to  quench  the 
fiery  dart,  as  it  were:  and  in  that  sense  of  course  it  would  be  auspicious  to  have 
something  that  was  hardened.  But  to  render  insensitive  that  which  is  carried 
within,  and  which  ought  to  be  sensitive ;  to  have  a  disposition  which  has  the  power 
of  turning  away  an  appeal,  of  dismissing  an  argument,  and  of  making  vital  truth  a 
matter  of  indifference — that  kind  of  hardening  is  much  to  be  deplored.  And  it  is 
just  that  which  we  are  cautioned  against.  Every  physician  knows  that  a  medicine 
is  worn  out  by  continuous  u^^e.  As  it  were,  the  system  adapts  itself  to  it,  and  it 
ceases  to  be  remedial.  So  there  is  a  power  in  repetitious  truth  to  become  unre- 
medial  to  men.  This  hardening  is  not  brought  about  on  purpose  in  those  to  whom 
I  refer.  I  am  not  speaking  to  that  class  of  persons  who  deliberately  set  themselves 
against  the  truth  ;  I  am  speaking  to  that  very  much  larger  class  of  persons  who 
first  become  indifferent  to  truth,  and  then  are  deceived  in  regard  to  it,  and  at  last 
are  snared  by  its  enemies.  One  of  the  circumstances  which  tend  to  deceive  men, 
and  to  wear  out  the  power  of  truth  upon  their  conscience  and  upon  their  under- 
standing, is  the  attempt  to  make  truth  merely  the  cause  of  susceptibility,  or  of 
mere  emotions.  Men  want  to  be  stirred  up ;  they  want  to  feel ;  but  feeling  con- 
stantly stirred  up  and  never  employed  loses  tone.  It  is  bad  for  any  man  to  have 
feeling  that  abides  as  feeling.  Now  it  is  the  pecuhar  nature  of  religious  truth  that 
it  plays  upon  excitability.  Of  truth  there  is  much  that  touches  hope,  much  that 
touches  fear,  and  much  that  touches  conscience,  on  every  side ;  but  it  is  a  very 
dangerous  thing  for  a  man  to  hear  more  truth  preached  than  he  cares  to  practise. 
You  may  say  that  so  much  of  that  which  he  hears  as  he  does  not  practise  goes 
over  to  the  account  of  instruction  ;  and  that  may  be  so  in  regard  to  truth  set  forth 
in  a  didactic  form  ;  but  to  accustom  oneself  to  hearing  truth  merely  for  the  sake  of 
having  it  play  upon  the  susceptibilities  is  very  dangerous,  because  it  is  a  very 
deceitful  experience ;  and  yet  there  are  multitudes  of  persons  that  do  it.  Then, 
next,  there  are  a  great  many  who  hear  the  teaching  of  the  Word  of  God,  who 
receive  it  into  good  ground — that  is,  into  their  reason — who  approve  it,  who  feel 
as  though  they  ought  to  give  heed  to  it,  and  who  wish  to  profit  by  it,  but  in  whom 
the  impulse  dies  with  that  wish,  and  does  not  convert  itself  into  a  choice.  They 
say,  "  I  think  that  view  was  just :  it  commends  itself  to  my  mind  as  truth,  and  I 
really  have  been  taking  it  home  to  myself ;  I  am  thinking  about  it ;  the  time  has 
come  when  I  should  be  a  better  man,  and  take  some  steps  in  advance ;  if  I  am  ever 
going  to  be  a  Christian  man  I  ought  to  become  one  now  " — and  that  is  about  the 
extent  to  which  they  go.  Now,  when  a  man  has  done  that  through  the  first  year, 
when  he  has  done  it  through  the  second  year,  and  when  he  has  done  it  through 
the  third  year,  he  begins  to  be  tattooed,  as  it  were.  Constnnt  iteration  and  tritura- 
tion harden  the  skin,  and  the  sensibility  of  his  mind  becomes  like  the  sensibility 
of  the  palm  of  his  hand,  and  grows  leather-like.  By  reason  of  the  continual  hand- 
ling of  a  man's  judgment  his  power  of  choosing  becomes  inert  and  inoperative. 
The  perpetual  raining  of  truth  upon  a  man  may  be  kept  up  without  developing  in 
him  either  character,  as  I  said  in  the  first  instance,  or  choice,  as  I  say  in  the  second 
instance.  Then,  when  the  truth  is  being  preached  to  men  of  their  own  sinfulness, 
and  of  their  great  need  of  a  transformed  nature,  so  that  they  shall  rise  from  the 
flesh  life  to  the  spirit  life,  a  great  many  persons  feel  as  though  this  were  a  thing 
that  ought  to  be  pondered.  They  feel  as  though  time  should  be  taken  to  think  of 
it.  They  are  afraid  they  shall  commit  themselves  without  having  reckoned  whether, 
beginning  a  Christian  life,  they  can  complete  it.  So  they  take  it  into  account. 
And  there  are  two  points  to  be  made  on  that  subject.  In  the  first  place,  there  ia 
one  class  who  take  it  into  account,  not  by  meditation  and  thought,  but  by  revei  is. 
It  is  one  thing  for  a  man  to  say,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me,  a  sinner ;  without  the 
interposition  of  Divine  grace  I  am  lost ;  and  I  will  cry  immediately  to  God  for 
help ,  I  will  begin  a  Christian  life  to-day."    That  is  effectual     But,  on  the  other 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  va. 

hand,  a  man,  coming  home  from  listening  to  a  strong  sermon,  says,  "That 
was  well  put.  What  if  I  should  go  to  church  next  Sunday  night,  and  the 
minister  should  preach  on  Lazarus?  And  what  if  I  should  be  awakened? 
And  what  if  I  should  have  one  of  those  terrible  experiences  which  I  have 
heard  of?  And  what  if  all  the  sins  of  my  life  should  be  brought  before  me? 
And  what  if  I  should  roll  all  night  in  distress?  Then  the  minister  wovdd  cone 
and  see  me,  and  friends  would  gather  around  me,  and  I  would  pray  and  wrestle,  and 
by-and-by  there  would  suddenly  come  a  burst  of  light,  and  I  should  be  converted, 
and  everything  would  be  new  to  me;  and  I  would  join  the  Church,  and  what  a 
happy  day  it  would  be  for  father  and  mother  when  they  saw  me  do  that  1  And  I 
would  be  a  real  Christian — not  a  lean,  skinny  Christian,  like  some  that  I  have 
seen."  Thus  a  man  weaves  the  fabric  of  an  imaginary  life,  and  it  is  all  reverie. 
He  supposes  he  is  thinking  aboutrehgion.  He  says,  •'  I  am  taking  it  into  considera- 
tion." Oh,  fool !  you  are  taking  it  into  consideration  very  much  as  a  spider 
weaves  silk  when  he  makes  cobwebs  to  catch  flies  on.  It  is  all  in  the  air.  It  ia 
vacuous.  There  are  other  persons  who  have  a  very  salutary  horror  of  insincerity. 
They  say  to  themselves,  "  This  matter  of  religion  is  of  transcendent  importance, 
and  if  a  man  is  going  to  be  a  Christian  he  ought  to  consider  it  well."  And  there 
is  a  certain  sort  of  comeliness  in  this.  No  man  ought  to  go  tumbling  headlong 
into  a  profession  of  religion.  But  it  is  not  necessary  that  a  man  should  have  a 
theological  education  before  he  can  become  a  Christian.  And,  besides,  no  man 
can  wait.  No  man  does  wait.  There  is  not  a  man  of  you  who,  when  the  way  of 
manhood  is  pointed  out  to  him,  does  not  choose.  You  go  one  way  or  the  other. 
You  know  what  truth  is,  and  jou  either  take  the  way  of  truth  or  the  way  of  false- 
hood. Ten  thousand  influences  upon  every  side  Lave  been  pressing  home  the  truth 
upon  you.  And  what  is  the  result  ?  You  say,  "  Yes,  religion  is  a  profoundly  im- 
portant thing ;  and  yet  it  is  one  that  ought  to  be  much  thought  of."  But  this 
ought  not  so  to  be.  It  is  not  for  you,  hke  a  ship  in  a  harbour,  to  cast  anchor  now, 
and  swing  with  every  tide  that  carries  you  first  north  and  then  south,  for  ever 
changing  and  never  travelling.  It  is  not  for  you  to  stand  still  and  talk  about 
thinking.  A  long  time  ago  you  ought  to  have  been  doing.  You  ought  before  now 
to  have  chosen,  and  to  have  converted  sensibility  into  conduct  and  character.  And 
if  all  the  excuse  you  have  for  not  entering  upon  a  Christian  Ufe  is  that  you  do  not 
want  to  do  it  until  you  have  laid  the  foundations  of  thought ;  if  you  excuse  your- 
self by  saying,  "  I  do  not  want  to  go  into  a  Christian  life  until  I  have  made  sure 
that  I  will  not  come  out  of  it,"  then  let  me  warn  you  lest  you  harden  your  heart 
through  the  deceitfulness  of  sin  in  this  most  guileful  and  specious  form.  At  last, 
when  men  have  got  past  these  stages,  there  comes  the  stage  of  easy  acquiescen^.-e 
and  of  mild  criticism  from  the  standpoint  of  mere  taste.  They  make  such  a 
voyage  as  boys  make  who  take  their  whittled-out  miniature  boats  over  to  the  park 
and  sail  them  across  the  lake  and  back  again.  There  is  as  much  in  one  of  these 
voyages  as  in  the  other.  There  are  others  who  criticise  the  truth  from  a  logical 
and  instructive  standpoint.  They  have  intellectual  acumen,  they  have  critical 
sensibility,  they  are  good  critics  :  a  great  deal  better  critics  than  they  are  Chris- 
tians. The  truth  may  be  as  weighty  as  eternity ;  it  may  be  a  truth  that  reaches  to 
the  very  heart  of  Christ;  it  may  be  the  whole  theme  of  salvation  by  faith  in  the 
Saviour :  and  all  that  it  does  to  them  is  to  excite  in  them  a  momentary  pleasure  of 
the  taste,  a  transient  gratification  of  the  intellect,  and  a  generous  criticism  as  to 
its  ability  or  inability,  as  the  case  may  be.  And  what  is  the  condition  of  a  man 
upon  whom  the  presentation  of  the  weightiest  truths  no  longer  awakens  sensibility, 
nor  stimulates  a  disposition  to  choose,  nor  creates  an  impulse  in  the  right  direc- 
tion ?  These  are  not  bad  men — that  is,  in  the  sense  of  being  vicious,  or  in  the 
sense  of  being  guilty  of  outrageousness  in  any  way.  Often  their  conduct  is  con- 
formable to  all  the  best  rules  of  social  life.  But  they  have  sealed  themselves 
against  the  higher  forms  of  spiritual  growth  which  translate  one  from  the  life  of 
the  body  to  the  life  of  the  Spirit.  And  their  chances  for  development  in  true  man- 
hood as  it  is  in  Christ  Jesus  grow  less  and  less  every  day  through  the  deceitfulness 
of  sin  which  is  hardening  their  hearts.  And  so  as  men  grow  old,  as  age  creeps  on 
them,  upon  natural  decay  is  superinduced  this  waste  which  arises  from  the  con- 
stant hearing  of  the  truth  and  from  non-action,  and  which  results  in  men's  coming 
into  that  di"y  and  arid  state  in  which  the  harvest  is  past,  and  the  summ<^r  is  ended, 
and  they  are  not  saved.  And  now,  what  is  to  be  done  ?  Consider  the  guilt  of  every 
man  who  thus  practises  upon  himself.  It  was  only  as  early  as  1400,  I  think,  in 
the  war  between  the  Turks  and  the  Greeks,  that  that  magnificent  structure,  the 


OHAP   m.]  HEBREWS.  267 

Acropolis,  and  the  temple  of  Minerva,  and  the  statue  of  Minerva,  and  that  wonder- 
ful frieze,  the  work  of  Phidias,  whose  very  fragment  has  been  the  despair  of  the 
art  of  modern  days,  were  destroyed.  Into  the  magnificent  temple  of  Mint^rva,  which 
was  the  glory  of  Athens,  the  Turks  threw  bombs,  which  exploded  and  shattered  the 
temple  into  a  mass  of  shapeless  ruins ;  and  tliat  which  adorned  the  ripest  age  of 
the  world  in  beauty  and  art  perished,  as  it  were,  in  an  hour.  To  have  demolished 
an  old  granite  fort,  to  have  battered  down  an  old  earthwork,  would  have  caused 
sorrow  to  no  one  ;  but  to  have  blotted  out  the  grandest  and  most  exquisite  achieve- 
ments of  human  taste,  human  thought,  and  human  hand-skill,  must  have  filled 
with  regret  every  heart  that  loved  what  was  beautiful.  But  what  is  any  statue, 
even  from  the  chisel  of  Phidias,  or  what  is  any  temple,  compared  with  man,  who  is 
the  temple  of  God  ?  and  what  was  ever  wrought  in  ivory  or  marble  that  was  to  be 
compared  with  the  humanity  that  is  in  every  man  ?  and  for  you  to  destroy  that 
humanity  in  yourself,  to  turn  it  into  courses  of  evil,  in  spite  of  the  influences  that 
are  tending  to  draw  it  the  other  way;  and  so  to  trample  under  foot  and  extinguish 
your  higher  nature — that  is  wanton.  It  is  wicked  beyond  the  power  of  language 
to  express  its  degree  of  wickedness.  Woe  be  to  the  man  who  corrupts  his  spiritual 
nature,  or  overlays  it  with  animalism,  or  beats  it  down  in  spite  of  its  crying,  and 
destroys  it.  Consider,  too,  what  is  the  nature  of  the  truth  that  men  resist.  If  the 
gospel  of  Christ  had  simply  disclosed  to  men  the  infamy  of  their  condition,  if  it 
had  merely  poured  out  upon  them  warnings  and  threateuings,  if  it  had  withheld 
from  them  all  promises  of  mercy,  then  there  would  have  been  little  to  attract  them 
to  it,  and  there  would  have  been  some  reason  for  their  revulsion  from  it;  but  the 
whole  presentation  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Christ  is  charming  to  the  reason,  to  every 
noble  sensibility,  to  every  feeling  of  honour,  and  to  every  elevated  taste,  however 
exacting.  The  whole  tone  and  the  whole  sphere  of  the  New  Testament  is  as  sweet 
as  music,  and  ought  to  vibrate  upon  every  unperverted  heart,  and  ought  to  make 
every  soul  desire  to  have  that  commerce  with  God  and  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
by  which  it  shall  rise  and  take  hold  upon  its  immortal  destiny.  And  now,  suffer 
me  not  to  preach  to  you ;  suffer  me  to  beseech  you.  If  there  are  any  here  who 
have  serious  thoughts,  let  me  say  to  them.  Serious  thoughts  are  very  well  if  you 
make  something  out  of  them.  In  summer,  when  drought  has  long  prevailed,  clouds 
come  trooping  through  the  sky,  and  the  farmer  says,  "  Ah  I  at  last  the  weary, 
parched  earth  will  be  refreshed  ";  but  no,  the  clouds  have  no  rain  in  them,  they 
pass  on,  and  the  ground  is  as  dry  as  it  was  before.  To-morrow  other  clouds  sail  in 
caravans  through  the  heavens,  and  give  promise  of  refreshing  showers ;  but  the 
showers  do  not  come.  Thoughts  that  produce  no  results  are  of  little  account.  To 
be  worth  anything  they  must  be  condensed  into  forms  of  active  life.  And  while  I 
urge  you  to  heed  and  ponder  the  Word  of  God,  I  bid  you  to  beware  of  taking  it  so 
that  it  shall  not  lead  to  the  production  of  fruit  in  your  Christian  hfe.  (H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Hardened  by  being  melted: — When  the  cloud  isdried  up  off  the  mountain's 
brow,  and  the  dew  off  the  rock,  the  mountain  is  as  great  as  before,  and  the  rock  as 
hard ;  but  when  convictions  fade  away  from  the  heart  of  a  natural  man,  they  leave 
the  mountain  of  his  sins  much  greater,  and  his  rocky  heart  much  harder.  It  ia 
less  likely  that  that  man  will  ever  be  saved.  Just  as  iron  is  hardened  by  being 
melted  and  cooled  again ;  just  as  a  person  recovering  from  fever  relapses,  and  is 
worse  than  before.  (R.  M.  McCheyne.)  Character  tends  to  fixity: — The  Bible 
Bays  nothing  about  how  an  old  man  can  cleanse  his  way.  When  a  man  reaches 
the  age  of  forty  or  fifty  he  cannot  change  the  shape  of  his  collar,  how  much  less 
that  of  his  character  1  {Prof.  H.  Drummond.)  Past  feeling: — It  is  not  necessary 
for  a  man  to  die  out  of  the  world  in  order  that  his  spiritual  salvation  may  be 
closed.  There  are  many  who  are  doomed  before  they  die.  They  reject  the  offers 
of  salvation  until  they  become  hardened  and  encased  as  it  were  in  steel,  beaten 
hard  Uke  steel,  and  at  last  they  become  so  hardened  that  they  resist  all  impres 
sion,  they  will  not  listen,  and  their  insensibility  grows  upon  them.  It  is  a  fact 
which  cannot  be  denied,  that  the  more  we  resist  the  offers  of  mercy  the  more 
insensible  we  become  to  them  ;  all  spiritual  sensibility  in  the  case  of  some  people 
seems  to  have  died  out  before  they  quit  this  world,  and  it  is  against  this  that  I 
warn  you.     {J.  Stoughton,  D.D.)  Spiritual  insensibility  : — ^A  minister  of  the 

gospel  on  one  occasion  made  a  solemn  appeal  to  the  young  to  seek  God  without 
delay,  urging  as  a  motive  that,  should  they  live  to  be  old,  difficulties  would  mul- 
tiply, and  their  reluctance  to  attend  to  the  subject  would  increase  with  their  years. 
As  the  preacher  descended  from  the  pulpit  at  ihe  close  of  the  service,  an  aged  man 
came  forward,  and  extending  his  hand  to  him,  with  much  emotion  remarked,  *'  Sir, 


268  ■  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

what  you  said  just  now  is  unquestionably  true.  I  know  it  from  my  own  experience. 
When  I  was  young  I  said  to  myself,  I  cannot  give  up  the  world  now,  but  I  will  by- 
and-by  when  I  have  passed  the  meridian  of  life  and  begin  to  sink  into  the  vale  of 
years ;  then  I  will  become  a  Christian  ;  then  I  shall  be  ready  to  attend  to  the  con- 
cerns of  my  soul.  But  here  I  am,  an  old  man,  and  not  yet  a  Christian.  I  feel  no 
readiness  nor  disposition  to  enter  upon  the  work  of  my  salvation.  In  looking  back, 
I  often  feel  as  though  I  would  give  worlds  if  I  could  be  placed  where  I  was  when  I 
was  twenty  years  old,  for  there  were  not  half  as  many  difficulties  in  my  path  then 
as  there  are  now."  Though  tears  coursed  down  his  cheeks  as  he  gave  utterance 
to  these  truths,  the  emotions  that  were  stirred  up  within  him,  like  the  early  dew, 
soon  passed  away :  he  did  not  turn  to  God.  Heart-hardening  : — On  a  winter 
evening,  when  the  frost  is  setting  in  with  growing  intensity,  and  when  the  sun 
is  now  far  past  the  meridian,  and  gradually  sinking  in  the  western  sky,  there  is 
a  double  reason  why  the  ground  grows  every  moment  harder  and  more  impene- 
trable to  the  plough.  On  the  one  hand,  the  frost  of  evening,  with  ever-increasing 
intensity,  is  indurating  the  stiffening  clods.  On  the  other  hand,  the  genial  rays, 
which  alone  can  soften  them,  are  every  moment  withdiawing  and  losing  their  en- 
livening power.  Take  heed  that  it  be  not  so  with  you.  As  long  as  you  are  uncon- 
verted, you  are  under  a  double  process  of  hardening.  The  frosts  of  an  eternal 
night  are  settling  down  upon  your  souls ;  and  the  Sun  of  Eighteousness  with 
westering  wheel,  is  hastening  to  set  upon  you  for  evermore.  If,  then,  the  plough 
of  grace  cannot  force  its  way  into  your  ice-bound  heart  to-day,  what  likelihood  is 
there  that  it  will  enter  to-morrow  ?  (R.  M.  MeClieyne.)  A  hardened  heart : — 
An  old  man,  one  day  taking  a  child  on  his  knee,  entreated  him  to  seek  God 
now — to  pray  to  Him — and  to  love  Him ;  when  the  child,  looking  up  at  him, 
asked,  "But  why  do  you  not  seek  God?"  The  old  man,  deeply  affected, 
answered,  "  I  would,  child :  but  my  heart  is  hard — my  heart  is  hard." 
The  deceitfulness  of  sin. — The  deceitfulness  of  sin : — Our  vital  energy  finds  issue  in 
three  great  regions  :  those  of  thought,  of  word,  of  deed.  In  each  one  of  these  there 
is  duty,  and  there  is  fault.  In  each  of  them  there  is  the  voice  of  God  speaking  in 
our  consciences,  there  is  the  written  law  of  God  guiding,  confirming,  furthering,  that 
inward  voice ;  in  each  of  them  there  is  in  us  the  constant  disposition  to  set  con- 
Bcience  and  to  set  God  aside,  and  to  become  our  own  guides,  our  own  masters.  Let 
us  then  take  each  one  of  these  in  turn,  and  show  in  each  how  manifold  sin  is,  how 
deceitful.  I.  Sins  of  thotjght.  Nothing  is  so  deceitful  as  the  taking  account  of 
our  own  thoughts  and  feelings.  Memory  cannot  copy  faithfully  the  picture  which 
has  faded  away,  but  overlays  and  tricks  it  out  with  fresh  and  unreal  colours.  Still, 
there  is  no  question  that  our  real  thoughts  can  be  got  at,  and  their  liability  to  sin 
justly  measured,  if  we  will  spend  time  and  trouble  over  it.  We  may  venture  to  say 
that  the  great  burden  of  our  sins  of  thought  will  be  found  to  consist  in  a  want  of 
honest,  conscientious  adoption  and  following  of  what  we  know  to  be  real  and  true. 
WTaen  selfish  views  spread  before  us  in  all  their  attractiveness,  the  fertile  plains  of 
Sodom  tempting  us  to  dwell  in  them,  does  the  course  of  self-denial  to  which  we  are 
pledged  instantly  assert  its  claim  ?  When  the  temper  is  roused  by  insult,  when  the 
pride  is  stung  by  contumely,  when  the  self-opinion  is  buffeted  by  designed  shght, 
and  the  tyrant  fiend  of  revenge  springs  to  his  feet  in  a  moment,— do  our  eyes  see, 
or  do  they  refuse  to  see,  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  lifting  His  standard  against  him  ? 
II.  Sins  of  WORD.  And  here  I  shall  not  speak  of  bad  and  unholy  and  impure  words, 
of  evil  speaking,  lying,  and  slandering :  these  are  manifest :  if  we  fall  into  these, 
we  know  it,  we  repent  of  it ;  but  I  shaU  speak  of  sins  of  word  more  beneath  the  sur- 
face, into  which  when  we  fall,  we  do  not  know  it,  of  which,  when  we  have  fallen  into 
them,  we  are  little  accustomed  to  repent.  And  I  believe  such  sins  will  mainly  be 
found,  as  regards  our  dealings  with  men,  in  stating  or  not  stating  the  very  truth  of 
onr  sentiments  and  feelings  and  beliefs.  I  am  not  now  speaking  of  hypocrisy,  nor 
of  any  wilful  and  conscious  disingenuousness,  but  of  a  general  want  of  clear  and 
fearless  truthfulness.  When  will  men  come  to  feel  that  the  blessed  gospel  of  Christ 
never  was  and  never  can  be  the  gainer  by  any  false  statement,  any  equivocation, 
any  shrinking  from  dangerous  truth  or  unwelcome  fact  ?  If  again  the  effect  of  this 
timid  untruthful  religion  be  bad  on  a  man's  self,  much  more  is  it  hurtful  and  fatal 
on  others.  III.  Sins  of  act  and  deed  :  doing  what  we  ought  not  to  do,  leaving  un- 
done what  we  ought  to  do.  Oh  that  there  were  in  any  of  us  the  habit  of  referring  our 
questioning  thoughts  at  once  to  His  verdict  whom  we  profess  to  serve  ;  of  guiding 
our  actions  simply,  humbly,  fearlessly,  by  His  precept  and  His  example  1  If  we  were 
earnest  like  Him,  humble  like  Him,  wise  like  Him,  we  should  recommend  and  adorn 


CHAP,  m.]  HEBREWS.  J69 

our  unflinching  course  of  Christian  duty  by  quietness.by  unobtrusiveness,  by  considera- 
tion for  others,  by  knowledge  what  to  say,  and  when,  and  to  whom.  It  is  not  the  busy 
protester  against  what  other  men  do,  it  is  not  the  man  who  is  ever  found  up  in  arms 
against  the  usages  of  society,  who  does  the  good ;  but  he  who  is  gifted  with  sound 
judgment  enough  to  overlook  things  indifferent,  to  join  in  practices  which  he  him- 
self would  perchance  not  have  chosen,  if  by  so  doing  he  may  cheer,  and  bless,  and 
hallow,  and  leaven,  the  society  in  which  God  has  cast  his  lot.  An  unsocial,  uncom- 
plying, individualising  life  may  be  very  flattering  to  pride  ;  may  serve  as  a  salve  to 
the  conscience,  and  make  a  man  fancy  himself  very  good  and  pure  ;  but  there  can  be 
no  doubt  tbat  such  a  course  is  a  life-long  sin,  bringing  dishonour  on  the  blessed  gospel 
of  Christ,  and  hardening  men's  hearts  against  its  influence.  (Dean  Alford.)  The 
deceitfulness  of  gin: — Sin,  we  must  remember,  has,  properly  speaking,  no  separate 
independent  being  of  its  own.  It  is  the  spiritual  and  moral  quality  either  of  some 
act,  or  of  the  habitual  inward  tone  of  mind  and  spirit,  of  a  moral  agent;  and  it  is  a 
diseased  and  unnatural  quality  and  state  in  such  an  agent  which  is  descritied.  But 
to  this  horrible  work  of  sin  men  are,  as  the  apostle's  word  imply,  lured  on  by  the 
deceitfulness  of  sin.  What  then  is  this  ?  Sin  being  that  disordered  acting  of  the 
spiritual  nature  in  which  the  will  chooses  that  whicb  is  against  the  will  of  God,  the 
deceitfulness  of  sin  must  mean  that  there  is  a  tendency  in  this  disease  to  conceal  its 
own  presence,  and  so  to  shut  out  from  the  sight  of  him  in  whom  it  is  acting  the 
evil  which  is  being  accomplished  within  him.  That  there  is  this  attribute  about  it 
the  very  smallest  acquaintance  with  our  nature  and  its  actings  may  easily  convince 
us.  For  what  else  are  all  those  fair  names  for  evil,  those  easy  judgments  concern- 
ing it,  which  are  everywhere  conventionally  carrent,  but  the  working  of  this  its 
deceitful  power  ?  Why  is  it  that  the  fondness  of  lust  is  termed  gallantry  or  pleasure? 
Why  is  it  that  the  cold  and  heedless  selfishness  of  debauchery  is  talked  about  as 
spirit  and  gaiety,  but  because  sin's  common  working  is  thus  utterly  deceitful  and 
untrue  ?  But  above  all,  this  deceitfulness  of  bId  may  be  seen  in  the  false  estimate 
which  it  leads  men  to  form  of  their  own  moral  and  spiritual  condition.  And  this 
in  all  ways.  For,  first,  how  does  it  blind  men's  eyes  to  their  own  actual  condition. 
Most  men  would  be  marvellously  startled  if  they  suddenly  learned  what  was  the 
clear  view  which  their  daily  intimates  possessed  of  their  weaknesses  and  faults. 
And  why  ?  Surely  for  no  other  reason  than  because  they  habitually  judge  them- 
selves so  partially,  and  shut  their  eyes  so  weakly  to  iheir  own  besetting  sins.  And 
as  this  first  deceit  as  to  the  actual  presence  of  evil  in  their  characters  is  thus  prac- 
tised upon  most  men,  so  too  plainly  are  they  deceived  also  as  to  its  growth  within 
themselves  I  How  little  do  men  who  give  themselves  up  to  it  perceive  the  increase 
of  sin  within  themselves.  And  this  must  be  so.  For  every  allowance  of  evil 
weakens  in  its  own  degree  that  special  power  of  conscience  by  which  it  passes  sen- 
tence on  our  actions.  But  once  more,  it  is  not  only  the  actual  presence  of  the  evil, 
or  the  increase  of  the  work  of  evil  within  them,  which  is  hidden  from  those  on 
whom  it  is  passing,  but  they  perceive  nothing  whatever  of  its  deep  spiritual  signifi- 
cance. It  is  altogether  altering  their  relation  to  the  unseen  world  around  them, 
and  they  know  not  of  it.  The  adopting  love  of  Christ  had  gathered  them  into  His 
family:  His  heart  yearned  over  them ;  for  His  sake  tbe  Eternal  Spirit  wrought  in 
them.  He  was  ever  beside  them.  But  the  deceitfulness  of  sin  veils  to  them  all 
these  blessings.  The  heavenly  world  seema  to  withdraw  itself.  Nor  is  it  only 
peace  and  joy  that  this  man  thus  loses.  This,  again,  increases  in  another  way  his 
own  inability  to  see  the  evil  of  the  sin  which  possesses  him.  For  only  under 
Christ's  Cross,  only  in  the  full  sight  of  His  love  and  holiness,  and  bitter  agony  for 
OS,  can  we  see  anything  of  the  true  evil  and  hatefulness  of  sin  ;  and  so  its  deceit- 
fulness, which  prevents  his  seeing  those,  deludes  him  wholly  till  it  robs  him  of  his 
Boul.  If  these  things  are  happening  around,  and  it  may  be  among  us,  what  practi- 
cal lessons  should  they  enforce  ou  us?  1.  Surely,  the  need  of  a  resolute  watchful- 
ness against  these  seductions.  They  who  would  walk  safely  amidst  the  deceitful 
whispers  of  an  enchanted  land,  or  bold  on  their  course  in  spite  of  sounds  so  falsely 
sweet  that  they  have  lured  every  listener  to  destruction,  find  no  escape  save  in  stop- 
ping their  ears  to  the  voice  of  the  enchanter.  And  so  must  it  be  now  with  those 
who  would  escape  from  the  deceitfulness  of  sin  within  them.  They  must  ♦'  watch 
and  be  sober."  2.  But  farther,  this  should  be  a  time  not  only  for  self-searching, 
but  for  beginning  resolutely  in  some  particular  actions  a  course  of  more  eame-t 
service  of  God.  And  this  course  of  more  earnest  service  should  not  be  any  new 
way  devised  f»jr  ourselves,  but  the  doing  more  completely  and  conscientiously,  and 
*»8  to  God  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  our  own  appointed  duty.  (Bp.  S.  WiUierforce.) 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

The  deeeitfulness  of  tin  : — Though  sin  admits  of  no  definition  in  itself,  any  more 
than  sound  or  colour  or  odour,  being,  all  four  alike,  primary  ideas ;  it  may  be 
defined,  i.e.,  indicated,  by  pointing  out  its  relation  to  other  things  with  which  it  is 
essentially  connected.     1.  St.  Paul  defines  sin  by  comparing  it  with  law :  "  Sin,"  he 
says,  '*  is  the  transgression  of  the  law."    He  means  the  law  of  God,  the  supreme 
Being,  the  sovereign  power  of  the  universe.     God  has  prescribed  us  laws,  which  we 
may  or  may  not  observe.     Sin  is  in  man  what  deviation  from  their  orbits  would  be 
in  the  heavenly  bodies,  if  they  were  endowed  with  a  will  and  a  power  of  disobedi- 
ence, and  should  shoot  off  from  the  paths  in  which  they  now  move  with  so  much  order, 
beauty,  and  beneficence.     2.  So  again  we  may  define  tin  by  its  effects,  its  "  fruits," 
its  "  wages,"  as  the  apostle  calls  them ;  and  how  easy  and  how  melancholy  the 
definition.     It  is  enough  to  fix  the  thoughts  on  one  particular,  and  that  is,  death. 
How  wide  the  sweep  of  its  scythe  1  how  universal  the  havoc  which  it  makes  I    3. 
Ouce  more  let  us  look  at  sin  in  relation  to  the  process  by  which  it  accomplishes 
these  dendly  effects.     How  comes  it,  we  ask,  that  while  sin  is  acknowledged  to  be 
the  prolific  source  of  all  misery,  still  men  make  light  of  aud  rush  into  it  ?     Sin  has 
undoubtedly  made  passion  strong,  the  imagination  wild,  the  conscience  weak ;  and 
these  are  parts  of  the  explanation;  but  not  the  whole.     In  addition  to  this,  sin 
deceives  them  all  through,  and  in  connection  with,  the  understanding,  to  which 
deception  properly  belongs.     Men  cheat  themselves,  or  allow  themselves  to  be 
cheated  out  of  eternal  life.    With  the  strength  of  passion,  and  the  stupor  of  con- 
science,  and  the  weakness  of  will,  has  been  united,  in  marvellous  sympathy,  a  sad 
hallucination  of  the  judgment;  and  so  we  have  done,  and  practised,  it  may  be, 
what  we  should  have  thought  perfectly  impossible,  as  long  as  our  reason  remained 
with  us,  and  what  has  ever  t-ince  been  a  matter  of  painful  and  self-condemning  re- 
collection.   And  now,  what  is  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter  ?     We  have  seen 
what  sin  is  in  relation  to  God  and  His  law ;  what  it  is  in  its  effects,  and  what  it  is 
in  the  process  of  its  working.     What  now  are  the  natural  inferences  from  these 
points  ?    Two  at  least  present  themselves,  viz.,  that  it  is  the  greatest  of  all  evils, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  that  it  is  the  most  insidious.    The  law,  of  which  it  is  the 
transgression,  is  tbe  prime  law,  the  parent  law,  the  law  which  makes  all  others  pos- 
sible, the  law  which  develops  moral  agency,  and  binds  the  moral  universe  together. 
It  is  to  the  ethical,  what  gravitation  is  to  the  physical  world.    If  sin  were  perfectly 
and  completely  triumphant,  it  would  overthrow  society  as  by  an  earthquake,  shaking 
the  deepest  foundation  of  all  things  ;  and  not  all  things  in  our  world  merely,  but 
every  other  world  also,  where  the  distinction  between  right  and  wrong  is  known .   If 
the  Divine  law  is  so  comprehensive,  fundamental,  and  absolutely  necessary,  then 
sin  is  a  tremendous,  and,  in  relation  to  all  others,  an  incommensurable  evil.     The 
same  conclusion  is  inevitable,  when  we  look  at  it  in  its  bearing,  not  on  our  moral 
but  our  sentient  nature,  our  susceptibility  to  pleasure  and  pain,  happiness  and 
misery.     All  the  suffering  this  moment  in  the  world,  whether  of  mind  or  body, 
whether  open  or  secret,  whether  social  or  individual,  whether  from  the  recollection 
of  the  past,  or  the  anticipation  of  the  future,  or  the  pressure  of  the  present,  springs 
from  the  root  of  sin.     Oh,  what  fully  to  be  fleeing  from  other  evils — poverty,  sick- 
ness, obscurity,  shame,  bereavement — and  yet  take  no  measures,  while  opportunity 
is  afforded,  to  escape  from  the  consequences  of  sin  and  its  intrinsic  evil  1     Oh,  my 
friends,  sin  is  a  great  evil ;  and  it  is  as  deceitful  as  it  is  great.     It  beguiles  the  soul 
it  ruins.    It  is  like  those  diseases  which  put  the  patient  asleep,  so  that  he  slumbers 
into  the  very  grave  ;  or  those  which  cause  him  to  indulge  fond  hopes  of  life,  up  to 
the  moment  Death  throws  his  unerring  dart.     It  deceives  in  regard  to  a  man's  par- 
ticular acts,   and  in  regard  to   his  whole  moral  state.      {W.   Sparrow,   LL.D.) 
Deeeitfulness  of  sin : — 1.  It  assumes  false  names.     2.  It  prefers  false  claims.    3.  It 
offers  false  excuses.     4.    It  makes   false  resolutions.      (J.  Burns.)         Religion 
the  great  security  against  the  delusions  of  tin: — It  is  an  old  and  just  obser- 
vation,  «*that    no   man  ever  became  completely   wicked    at  once."     But,   not- 
withstanding all  the  kind  restraints  of  conscience,  of  shame,  aud  the  terrors  of 
futurity,  which  Providence  has  mercifully  opposed  to  the  progress  of  sin,  it  does, 
however,  make  wonderful  advances  in  the  world.    I.  A  man   cannot   entirely 

ABANDON    HIMSELF   TO    THE   COMMISSION    OP   EVIIi,    TILL   HE    HAS   ABSOLUTELY   EXCLUDED 

THE  APPREHENSION  OF  GoD  FROM  HIS  THOUGHTS.  It  is  not  usual  evcrfor  bad  minda 
to  put  their  dark  workings  in  execution  till  every  eye  be  closed ;  they  shun  the 
light  they  hate,  because  their  deeds  are  evil.  And  is  it  possible  that  they  shoubJ 
fly  from  tbe  presence  of  a  man  fallible  as  themselves,  and  j  et  dare  to  stand  the 
inspection  of  that  Eye,  to  which  the  very  darkness  is  no  darkness  at  all ;  before 


CHAP,  m,]  HEBREWS.  871 

which  all  hearts  are  open,  and  to  which  no  secrets  are  hid  ?  Again,  it  is  observable 
that  when  a  man  has  once  begun  to  indulge  the  dispositions  and  habits  of  vice,  he 
gradually  withdraws  himself  from  every  object  which  may  infer  a  reproach  upon  his 
conduct,  or  suggest  to  him  the  necessity  of  reforming  it.  He  deserts  the  places  of 
public  adoration ;  he  declines  the  society  of  pious  and  good  men ;  and  suppresses 
the  exertion  of  every  thought  that  bears  upon  it  any  visible  stamp  of  virtue  and 
religion.  He  guards  himself  against  the  apprehension  of  God,  as  against  a  dangerous 
companion.  He  finds  himself  incapable  of  advancing  one  step,  while  this  stands  in 
his  way ;  it  opposes  his  progress,  as  the  armed  angel  did  that  of  the  ambitious 
prophet,  and  obstructs  the  accomplishment  of  his  wicked  views.  II.  When  the 
apprehension  of  the  Deity  is  once  suppressed,  a  man  may  be  liEo,  imperceptibly,  by 
THB  DELUsrvB  ATTRACTION  OF  ERROR,  through  cach  succcssive  degree  of  impiety, 
till  he  arrive  at  last  at  a  state  of  absolute  insensibility  and  final  impenitence. 
The  bad  affections,  which  were  before  chained  down,  are  now  let  loose ;  and  sin, 
deceitful  enough  in  itself,  gains  an  easy  ascendant  upon  a  mind  which  is  willing  to 
be  deceived,  and  which  dreads  nothing  so  much  as  the  necessity  of  subscribing  to 
conviction.  By  what  shallow  reasonings,  by  what  poor  pretences,  men  suffer  them- 
selves to  be  cheated  out  of  their  virtue  I  1.  One  pretence  that  is  generally  made  is, 
"  That  religion  contracts  our  faculties  into  narrow  bounds ;  that,  in  order  to  enlarge 
tbem,  it  is  necessary  to  burst  her  bands  asunder,  and  cast  away  her  cords  from  us  ; 
that  every  passion  has  its  natural  object,  and  that  it  is  an  infringement  on  natural 
liberty  to  restrain  the  indulgence  of  them ;  that,  since  life  is  at  best  so  short,  the 
best  method  of  making  it  longer  is  to  enjoy  it;  that  the  severities  and  rigours  which 
are  imposed  by  religious  ordinance  are  only  the  inflictions  of  politic  priest?,  who 
(being  disabled  by  age  and  infirmity)  would  willingly  make  atonement  for  their  own 
transgressions,  by  laying  the  severest  restrictions  on  the  liberties  of  others ;  that 
religion,  in  short,  is  the  merest  slavery  ;  and  that  a  man  denies  himself  a  pleasure 
which  nature  has  allowed  him,  who  does  not  give  a  full  scope  to  the  indulgence  of 
every  passion."  This  method  of  arguing  is  attended  by  two  very  great  and  very 
evident  defects.  (1)  It  is  by  no  means  evident  (though  it  has  been  sometimes 
in?inuated)  that  religion  forbids  the  enjoyment  of  any  delight  which  nature  and 
reason  allow ;  and  whoever  presumes  to  exceed  the  bounds  prescribed  by  reason 
and  nature,  will  be  sure  to  meet  the  disappointment  his  presumption  deserves.  And 
it  is  notorious  to  a  degree,  that  those  who  pretend  to  a  greater  latitude  of  enjoyment 
than  the  rest  of  mankind,  have  in  fact  the  least  real  enjoym-  nt  of  all.  (2)  The 
austerities  which  are  charged  upon  religion  are  trifling,  in  comparison  of  the 
repeated  penances,  mortifications,  to  which  the  libertine  is  reduced,  bv  disappointed 
passions,  a  distempered  constitution,  and  au  unquiet  mind.  2.  Another  deceit  that 
men  are  apt  to  put  upon  themselves  is,  "  That  the  sins  they  commit  are  so  incon- 
siderable, that  they  will  certainly  be  overlooked  by  the  eye  of  infinite  mercy  ;  that 
they  make  such  short  incursions  into  the  ways  of  wickedness,  as  to  leave  their 
retreat  secure  whenever  they  please  ;  and  that  they  are  in  no  danger  of  falling  into 
any  flagrant  or  presumptuous  act  of  eviL"  This  is  so  fatal  a  deceit,  that  one  would 
almost  be  induced  to  think  that  it  had  been  better  for  some  men  to  have  fallen 
immediately  into  a  flagrant  breach  of  duty  (upon  their  first  revolt  from  virtue)  than 
to  have  crept  on  in  the  commission  of  what  are  usually  called  inconsiderable  sins. 
And  for  this  reason  there  is  something  so  shocking  to  a  mind  that  retains  any  sense 
of  God  and  goodness  in  the  reflections  which  succeed  the  commission  of  any  greater 
crime,  that  a  man  renoils  from  it  with  the  utmost  horror  and  detestation,  and  is 
often  carried  backward  to  greater  degrees  of  virtue  by  the  very  violence  with  which 
he  fell  from  it.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  while  a  man  continues  to  flatter  himself 
that  the  sins  he  commits  are  trifling,  he  is  gradually  amused  into  an  increase  of 
wickedness  and  guilt.  He  goes  on  step  by  step,  without  perceiving  the  progres- 
sion, and  is  deluded  into  his  destruction  by  an  opinion  of  his  security.  3.  And  this 
brings  on  the  last  illusion  in  which  sin  is  apt  to  involve  the  human  mind  ;  which  is 
this — when  the  persons  who  hare  thought  themselves  so  secure  begin  to  look  calmly 
back,  and  discover  the  unthouglit-of  advances  they  have  made  in  vice,  they  stand 
amazed  ;  and  conclude  it  as  impossible  for  them  now  to  return,  as  they  did  before 
to  have  proceeded  so  far.  (T.  Ashton,  D.D.)  The  deceitfidness  of  sin: — I.  Sim 
HAS  a  singular  POWER  TO  DECEIVE.  1.  Its  dcceit  maj'  be  seen  in  the  manner  of  its 
approaches  to  us.  It  comes  in  a  very  subtle  way,  offering  us  advantage.  Intel- 
lectually, it  comes  with  a  question,  or  an  inquiry.  Ought  we  not  to  qui  stion  and 
to  inquire?  Are  we  to  receive  everything  implicitly?  The  question  is,  however, 
full  often  the  thin  end  of  the  wedge,  which  Satan  drives  home  in  the  form  of  carnal 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

wisdom,  doubt,  infidelity,  and  practical  atheism.  How  tiny  a  drop  of  sinful  distrust 
of  God's  Word  will  poison  all  the  thoughts  of  the  soul!  Sin  frequently  comes 
as  a  bare  suggestion,  or  an  imagination ;  an  airy  thing,  spun  of  such  stuff  as  dreams 
are  made  of.  The  thought  fascinates,  and  then  the  spell  of  evil  begins  its  deadly 
work ;  thought  condenses  into  desire,  and  desire  grows  to  purpose,  and  purpose 
ripens  into  act.  I  have  known  a  sin  insinuate  itself  by  the  way  of  the  repulsion  of 
another  sin.  A  man  will  fly  from  pride  to  meanness,  from  moroseness  to  joUity, 
from  obstinacy  to  laxity.  Thus  the  shutting  of  one  gate  may  open  another,  and 
one  sin  may  ciawl  in  as  another  creeps  out.  2.  Sin  is  deceitful  in  its  object,  for 
the  object  which  it  puts  before  us  is  not  that  which  is  its  actual  result.  We  are  not 
tempted  to  provoke  our  Maker,  or  wilfully  cast  off  the  authority  of  righteousness. 
No,  no  ;  we  are  moved  to  do  evil  under  the  idea  that  some  present  good  will  come 
of  it.  Thus  are  we  lured  and  bird-limed  like  the  silly  fowls  of  the  air.  The  object 
set  before  us  is  delusive  :  the  reward  of  sin  may  glitter,  but  it  is  not  gold,  and  yet 
as  gold  it  thrusts  itself  upon  our  erring  judgment.  3.  Sin  is  deceitful,  next,  in  the 
name  it  wears.  It  is  very  apt  to  change  its  title  :  it  seldom  cares  for  its  own  true 
description.  Almost  every  sin,  nowadays,  has  a  pretty  name  to  be  called  by  on 
Sumiays,  and  silver  slippers  to  wear  in  fine  society.  4.  Sin  also  shows  its  special 
deceitfulness  in  the  arguments  which  it  uses  with  men.  Have  you  never  heard  its 
voice  whispering  to  you,  "Do  not  make  much  ado  about  nothing.  Is  it  not  a  little 
one  ?  "  The  point  of  the  rapier  is  small,  and  for  that  reason  the  more  deadly.  Then 
will  sin  raise  the  question,  and  say,  "  Is  this  really  wrong  ?  May  we  not  be  too 
precise  ?  Are  not  the  times  changed  ?  Do  not  circumstances  alter  the  command  ?  " 
Sin  is  great  at  raising  difficult  points  of  casuistry.  He  that  wills  to  do  wrong  is 
eager  to  find  a  loophole  for  himselL  5.  This  deceivableness  is  further  seen  in  the 
excuses  which  it  frames  afterwards.  6.  The  deceitfulness  of  sin  is  seen  again  in 
its  promises ;  for  we  shall  not  go  far  into  sin  without  finding  out  how  greatly  it 
lies  unto  ns.  7.  Sin  is  deceitful  in  the  influence  which  it  carries  with  it.  When 
yielded  to,  it  tries  to  shut  off  the  door  of  repentance.  II.  This  deceitfulness  has 
A  HABDKNiNO  powEB  ovEB  THE  HEABT.  1.  Partly  through  OUT  familiarity  with  sin. 
We  may  look  at  hateful  sin  till  we  love  it.  2.  Then  there  follows  on  the  back  of 
this  iusensibiUty  to  sin  an  insensibihty  to  the  gospel.     UI.  This  deceitfolness  or 

SIN,  AND  this  TENDENCT  TO  BECOME  HABDENED,  NEED  TO  BE  TOUGHT  AGAINST.   1. 

The  way  to  keep  from  hardness  of  heart,  and  from  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  is  to 
believe.  You  shall  find  that,  just  in  proportion  as  faith  grows  strong,  the  deceit  of 
sin  will  be  baffled.  2.  H  you  would  be  saved  from  the  deceitfulness  of  sin  confess 
it  honestly  before  God.  Pray  that  sin  may  appear  sin  :  it  cannot  appear  in  a  worse 
light.  Thus  thou  shalt  not  so  readily  be  caught  in  its  traps  and  lures.  3.  Cultivate 
gieat  tenderness  of  heart.  Do  not  beheve  that  to  grieve  over  sin  is  lowering  to 
manhood;  indulge  thyself  largely  in  sweet  repentance.  {C.  H.  Spur g eon.)  The 
lies  of  the  temptreti : — There  is  a  possible  reference  here,  in  this  personification  of 
sin,  as  leading  men  away  by  lies,  to  the  story  of  the  First  Temptation.  There,  the 
weapons  of  the  Tempter  were  falsehoods.  I.  Fiest,  then,  my  text  suggests  to 
ME  sin's  lies  ABOUT  THE  BAIT.  The  old  story  is  typical,  and  may  stand  as  a  well- 
developed  specimen  of  the  whole  set  of  evil  deeds.  Either  for  the  sake  of  winning 
a  desirable  object,  or  for  the  sake  of  avoiding  some  undesirable  issue  ;  we  never  do 
the  wrong  thing,  and  go  away  from  God,  except  under  a  delusion  that  we  shall  be 
better  and  happier  when  we  have  got  the  desired  thing  than  we  should  be  without 
it.  Now  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  there  is  not  a  very  solid  reality  in  the  pleasurable 
results  of  a  great  many  wrong  things.  If  a  man  chooses  to  sin  to  gratify  sense,  he 
does  get  the  sensuous  enjoyment  out  of  it.  But  there  is  another  question  to  be 
asked.  You  have  got  the  thing  you  wanted;  have  you, — what  then?  Are  you 
much  the  better  for  it  ?  Are  you  satisfied  with  it  ?  Was  it  as  good  as  it  looked 
when  it  was  not  yours  ?  Is  not  the  giant  painted  on  the  canvas  outside  the  caravan 
a  great  deal  bigger  than  the  reality  inside,  when  you  go  in  to  look  at  him  ?  Is  there 
anything  that  we  have  got  by  doing  wrong  for  it,  howsoever  it  may  have  satisfied 
the  immediate  impulse  in  obedience  to  whose  tyrannous  requirements  we  were 
stirred  up  to  grasp  it,  which  is  worth,  in  solid  enjoyment,  what  we  gave  for  it  ? 
Having  attained  the  desire,  do  we  not  find  that  it  satisfies  not  us,  but  only  some 
stuall  part  of  us?  If  I  might  so  say,  we  are  like  those  men  that  old  stories  used  to 
tell  about  that  had  swallowed  some  loathly  worm.  We  feed  the  foul  creeping  thing 
within  ns,  but  ourselves  continue  hungry.  Besides,  sin's  pleasures  are  false,  because 
along  with  them  all  comes  an  after  tang  that  takes  the  sweetness  out  of  them. 
There  is  only  one  thing  that  promises  less  than  it  performs,  and  which  can  satisfy 


CHAP,  ni.1  HEBREWS.  873 

a  man's  soul ;  and  that  is  cleaving  to  God.  II.  Again,  note  the  lies  about  thb 
HOOK.  "  Ye  shall  not  surely  die."  I  suppose  that  if  any  man  had  clear  before  him 
at  the  momeut  of  any  temptation,  howsoever  fiery  and  strong,  the  whole  sweep  of 
the  cousequences  that  are  certainly  involved  in  his  yielding  to  it,  he  would  pause 
on  the  edge,  and  durst  not  do  it.  But  sin  suppresses  facts ;  and  here  are  a  few  of 
the  barbed  points  that  she  hides.  She  does  not  tell  you  anything  about  outward 
consequences.  Every  year  there  come  into  Manchester  young  men  who  fancy  they 
can  play  the  game  and  not  pay  the  stakes.  She  suppresses  the  action  of  conscience. 
There  is  nothing  more  awful  than  the  occasional  swiftness  and  completeness  of  the 
revulsion  of  feeling  between  the  moment  before  and  the  moment  after.  She  sup- 
presses the  action  of  sin  upon  character.  You  cannot  do  a  wrong  thing,  "  departing 
from  the  living  God,"  without  thereby  leaving  an  indelible  mark  upon  your  whole 
spiritual  and  moral  nature.  Loftier  aspirations  die  out  of  you,  the  incapacity  for 
better  actions  is  confirmed,  and  that  awful  m\sterious  thing  that  we  call  "  habit" 
comes  in  to  ensure  that  once  done,  twice  will  be  probable,  and  twice  done,  thrice 
and  innumerable  times  will  be  almost  certain.  There  is  nothing  more  mystical  and 
solemn  about  our  lives  than  the  way  in  which  unthought-of  and  trilling  deeds 
harden  themselves  into  habits,  and  dominate  us,  whether  we  will  or  no.  And  so 
the  sin  which  once  stood  in  front  of  us  with  a  smile  and  tempted  us,  because  it  was 
desirable,  afterwards  comes  behind  us  with  a  frown,  and  is  a  taskmaster  with  a 
whip.  The  flowery  fetters  become  iron,  and  the  thing  once  done  gets  to  be  our 
master,  and  we  are  held  and  bound  in  the  chain  of  our  sins.  And  more  than  that, 
there  is  the  npcessity  for  perpetual  increase,  heavier  doses,  more  pungent  forms  of 
evil,  in  order  to  titillate  the  increasing  insensitiveness  of  the  nature.  You  take  a. 
tiger  cub  into  your  house  when  it  is  little ;  it  is  prettily  striped,  graceful  in  ita 
motions,  playful  and  affectionate ;  and  it  grows  up,  and  when  it  is  big,  it  is  tha 
master  of  you,  if  it  is  not  the  murderer  of  you  I  Do  not  you  take  the  little  sin  into 
your  hearts.  It  will  grow,  and  its  claws  will  grow,  and  its  ferocity  will  grow.  And 
now  all  these  consequences  suggest  the  last  of  sin's  suppressions  that  I  would 
specify.  They  all  make  a  future  retribution  a  probable  thing.  And  that  future 
retribution  is  a  plain  and  necessary  inference  from  any  belief  at  all  in  a  God,  and 
in  a  future  life.  But  the  tempting  sm  has  nothing  to  say  about  that  future  judg- 
ment, or  if  it  has,  has  only  this  to  say :  "  Ye  shall  not  die."  You  are  like  sailors 
that  get  into  the  spirit  room  in  a  ship  when  she  is  driving  on  the  rocks,  and,  as 
long  as  you  can  get  the  momentary  indulgence,  never  mind  about  what  is  coming. 
III.  Then  notice  again,  the  lies  as  to  the  ceiminality  of  the  deed.  "  Hath 
God  said.  Ye  shall  not  eat  ?  "  is  the  insinuated  suggestion  that  creeps  into  most 
men's  minds.  Just  as  housebreakers  carry  some  drugged  meat  for  the  house-dogs, 
when  they  intend  to  break  into  some  lonely  farmhouse,  so  we  are  all  adepts  in 
applying  gentle  phrases  to  our  own  evil,  while,  if  the  same  thing  is  done  by  anybody 
else,  we  shall  flame  up  in  indignation,  as  David  did  when  Nathan  told  hun  about  the 
man  and  his  one  ewe  lamb.  Therefore,  it  comes  to  this — do  not  you  trust  to 
instinctive  utterances  of  inclination  calling  itself  conscience.  Eemember  that  you 
can  bribe  conscience  to  say  anything  but  that  it  is  right  to  do  wrong.  You  will  get 
it  to  say  anything  that  you  teach  it  about  what  is  wrong  and  what  is  not.  And 
therefore  you  must  find  a  better  guide  than  conscience.  You  have  to  enlighten  it 
and  educate  it  and  check  it,  and  keep  it  wakeful  and  suspicious,  as  the  price  pf 
purity.  The  same  set  of  lies  about  the  criminality  of  our  actions  operates  with 
still  greater  effect  after  the  commission.  I  was  speaking  a  moment  or  two  ago 
about  the  sudden  waking  of  conscience  when  the  deed  is  done.  But  there  is  a  woioa 
thing   than  that,   and  that  is  when  conscience  does  not  wake.      IV.  The  last 

WORD    that    I    wish   TO   BAY    IS   IN    BEFERENCE    TO    THE    FALSEHOODS    OF   SIN    IN    BF.GAUD 

TO  THE  DELiVEEANCE  THEREFROM.  Thcso  othcr  lics,  like  bubblcs,  sometimes  burst. 
The  first  of  them,  about  the  pleasures,  generally  bursts  as  soon  as  the  thing  is  done. 
The  others  about  the  pains  and  the  criminality  often  disappear,  when  pricked  by 
some  thought  of  God  and  contact  with  Him.  But  the  repertory  of  the  deceiver  is 
not  empty  yet.  And  she  can  turn  her  hand  and  bring  out  another  set  of  lies,  in 
order  to  retain  her  dominion.  For  the  sin  that  said  to  you  before  you  did  it : 
I'  There  is  no  harm  in  it ;  you  do  not  need  to  do  it  again ;  it  is  only  just  once  and 
it  will  be  done  with,"  says  to  you,  after  you  have  done  it,  when  you  begin  to  feel 
that  it  was  wrong,  and  try  to  shike  off  its  guilt  and  power :  "  You  have  done  it 
now  I  You  never  can  get  away  any  more.  The  thing  is  past,  and  neither  in 
regard  of  its  consequences  nor  in  regard  of  its  power  will  you  ever  escape 
from  it.    What  jou   bave   written   joa  have  wri  ten.    Yoa  are  mine ! "    And 

18 


274  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m, 

BO  she  lays  her  iron  claw  upon  the  man  and  holds  him.    So  sin  lies  to  us 
just  as  she  lied  before.     And  I  have  to  come   with  the   message  that,  of  all 
her  falsehoods  none  is  more  false  and  fatal  than  the  falsehood  that  a  sinful  man 
cannot  turn  from  his  evil ;  conquer  all  his  transgression ;  begin  a  new  happy,  clean 
life;  and  be  sure  of  forgiveness  from  his  Father  in  heaven.     "Jesus  Christ,  the 
faithful  and  true  witness,"  has  died  that  it  may  be  possible  to  bring  to  us  pure  and 
true  promises  of  lasting  and  satisfying  blessedness,  and  to  avert  from  each  of  us,  if 
we  will  trust  in  the  power  of  ffis  blood,  the  worst  and  penal  consequences  of  our 
transgression,  and,  if  we  will  trust  in  the  power  of  His  imparted  Spirit,  to  make  our 
future  altogether  unlike  our  past,  and  deliver  us  from  the  habit  and  entail  of  our 
sins.    {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        The  devices  by  lohich  sin  beguiles  : — I.  One  of  the 
most  obvious  ways  in  which  it  works  this  mischief  is,  by  diverting  the  attention 
from  that  to  which  it  ought  to  be  directed.     Man's  power  of  attention  is  limited ; 
it  cannot  be  directed  to  all  things  at  the  same  time ;  it  must  take  them  in  succes- 
sion.    Neither  should  it  bestow  itself  equally  upon  all  things,  but  graduate  its  time 
and  earnestness  according  to  circumstance.     Of  this  feature  of  onr  constitution  sin, 
taking  advantage,  so  fills  the  mind  with  other  things,  that  no  room  is  left  for  the 
things  of  religion.     A  man  is  thus  made  to  forget  God,  by  the  simple  obtrusion  of 
other  things  upon  his  attention.     2.  Sin  deceives  also  by  the  false  and  captivating 
colours  in  which  it  decks  out  things  forbidden.     Their  beauty  was  not  their  own. 
They  wore  a  mask.    It  is  no  very  uncommon  thing  for  certain  visions  and  appear- 
ances to  pass  before  the  mind,  under  the  influence  of  disease,  which  wear  all  the 
lineaments  of  persons  and  things  with  which  we  are  familiar,  and  yet  possess  no 
reaUty  whatever.     But  not  to  take  so  violent  a  case  for  illustration  ;  let  us  simply 
reflect  how  depression  or  hilarity  of  animal  spirits  affects  all  our  views  of  things. 
The  one  will  hang  the  brightest  heaven  with  mourning;  the  other  will  shed  an  air 
of  cheerfulness  over  the  deepest  gloom.    Now  it  is  somewhat  in  this  way  that  sin 
deludes.     It  causes  things  to  appear  in  unreal  colours.    3.  A  third  way,  in  which 
sin  deceives,  is  by  makiug  us  miscalculate  time.    What  is  our  life  ?    It  is  compared 
to  a  "  watch  in  the  night,"  to  a  "  tale  that  is  told,"  to  a  "  vapour  which  appeareih 
for  a  Uttle  time,  and  then  vanisheth  away,"  to  a  "  race  that  is  run,"  to  a  "  battle 
that  is  fought,"  to  the  "  labour  of  the  day,"  to  the  dimensions  of  a  "  span."    Yet, 
notwithstanding,  may  I  not  with  aU  confidence  ask  whether  his  own  feelings  have 
not  often  virtually  given  the  lie  to  these  statements?    Thus  does  sin  deceive  the 
young.     To  say  nothing  of  the  uncertainty  of  life,  they  are  in  »rror  in  regard  to  the 
length  of  it.    4.  This  property,  wliich  is  specially  named  in  the  text,  arises  from 
our  being  creatures  of  habit.    By  the  law  of  habit,  the  doing  of  a  thing  once, 
makes  it  easier  to  do  it  again,  and  creates  an  inclination  towards  the  repetition 
of  the  act.    Notice  the  manner  in  which  the  spider  endeavours  to  secure  the  un- 
wary insect,  which  has  fallen  into  its  web,  and  you  have  a  pretty  accurate  repre- 
sentation of  the  process.    One  attenuated  thread  aft  r  another  is  woven  round  it, 
each  easily  broken,  each  in  itself  too  trifling  to  be  regarded  or  felt,  but  all,  in  their 
united  strength,  beyond  its  ability  to  break.    There  the  victim  Ues,  making  mighty 
efforts  to  escape,  but  more  aud  more  hopelessly  each  successive  moment.    Thus 
it  is,  that  sinful  habit  insensibly  weaves  around  us  its  meshes.   (W.  Sparrow,  LL.D.) 
The  dangerous  decntfulness  of  sin: — I.  How  sin  is  to  be  taken  as  said  to  be 
DECEITFUL,  AND  WHEREIN  ITS  DECEITFDLNES3  LIES.      1.    With  reference    to  the 
external  object  and  act  about  it,  sin's  deceitfulness  lies  in  false  appearances  and 
delusive  promises.    2.  Aa  to  indwelling  corruption,  who  can  tell  the  many  ways 
it  has  to  deceive  and  destroy?     Sin  here  is  the  man  sinful,  proving  a  tempter  to 
himself.      (1)  In  enticing  to  it:  What  pains  does  the  sinner  take  to  justify  or 
extenuate  the  evil  he  is  bent  upon  ?    desirous  by  a  deceitful  varnish  to  take  off 
from  its  horrid  appearance,  that  it  may  give  as  httle  disturbance  to  conscience  as 
possible.     All  endeavours  are  used,  not  only  to  colour  the  object,  but  to  corrupt 
the  eye  by  a  disguising  tincture,  that  the  sight  of  things  may  not  be  according  to 
truth,  but  according  to  his  desire.     (2)  In  confirming  in  it ;  drawing  on  its  servants 
even  to  final  obduracy  and  destruction.     To  this  end  false  principles  are  admitted, 
or  perverse  inference  drawn  from  true  ones  :  the  Scriptures  are  wrested,  precious 
promises,  instances  of  grace  abounding  to  the  chief  of  sinners,  &c.,  and  arguments 
fetched  from  all,  whereby  sinners  encourage  themselves  to  add  sin  to  sin.     II.  Thb 

POWZB    AND    PKEVALENCT    OP    THE    DECEITFULNESS    THAT    BELONGS    TO     SIN.       1.    HoW 

Btrangely  powerful  is  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  with  reference  to  the  many  who  love 
and  Uve  therein,  though  they  are  told  of  its  present  deceit  and  destructive  issue  ? 
3.  How  powerful  is  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  that  can  persuade  men  that  are  made 


CHAP,  m.]  HEBREWS,  t75 

for  another  world,  to  look  no  farther  than  this  ;  and  so  seek  for  happiness  where 
it  is  never  to  be  found,  or  call  that  so,  that  is  bounded  by  sense  and  time,  as  if 
they  had  nothing  higher  to  mind.  8.  How  powerful  is  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  as 
to  the  numbers  over  whom  it  stUl  reigns,  though  all  its  servants  sooner  or  later 
confess  the  delusion?  III.  What  hardness  this  tends  to  as  hatteb  of  feab  and 
ri-iOHT.  1.  Habitual.  This  is  the  result  of  repeated  acts  of  sin,  strengthening  the 
natural  depravity,  aud  confirming  in  it.  Hereby  the  sinner  is  emboldened  in  his 
way,  and  becomes  a  stranger  to  much  of  that  shame  and  sorrow,  reluctanoy  and 
remorse,  which  he  was  sometimes  wont  to  feel.  2.  Judicial,  or  inflicted  from 
heaven.  Lessons :  1.  Heuce  learn  the  reason  of  that  mighty  storm  that  is 
ordinarily  felt  in  the  breasts  of  true  penitents  upon  their  first  becoming  such. 
2.  How  adorable  is  the  giace  of  God,  as  to  all  that  get  safe  to  heaven  ;  what  joy 
will  there  be  upon  tbeir  arrival!  8.  It  need  not  seem  strange  that  holy  men  are 
afraid  of  nothing  so  much  as  sin,  and  cannot  allow  themselves  to  follow  a  multitude 
to  do  evil  (Exod.  xxiii.  2),  it  being  too  dear  a  compliment  to  be  paid  to  any,  to  run 
the  hazard  of  being  hardened  hrst,  and  so  of  perishing  for  company.  4.  How 
dangerous  is  their  mistake,  who  whilst  under  the  power  of  sin,  think  their  case 
good,  because  their  consciences  are  quiet  ?  And  with  how  many  is  it  thus  ?  5. 
How  great  is  our  advantage  in  having  the  Bible  and  living  under  the  gospel?  By 
which  we  are  warned  of  sm's  deceitfulness  and  armed  against  it.  6.  How  desirable 
is  the  state  of  such  as  are  in  covenant  with  God,  having  chosen  Him  in  Christ  for 
theirs,  and  given  up  themselves  unto  Him.  They  are  hereby  become  His  special 
charge,  as  well  as  His  peculiar  delight.  7.  Is  the  case  so  sad  of  being  hardened 
in  sin  ?  Let  the  dread  of  this  awaken  a  present  and  perpetual  opposition  to  it  in 
every  one  that  would  be  safe.  (1)  Begin  at  the  root:  see  that  corruption,  as  to  its 
power  and  reign,  be  mortified  within.  Get  by  faith  into  union  with  Christ.  (2) 
Let  conscience  be  instructed  from  the  Word  of  God,  and  charge  it  to  be  faithful, 
and  hearken  to  its  voice.  (3)  Beware  of  running  upon  temptation  in  a  vain 
presumption  you  may  come  off  safe.  Your  strength  hes  not  in  yourselves,  but 
must  come  from  heaven  ;  and  you  have  no  promise  of  protection  out  of  God's  way. 
(4)  Keep  the  cross  of  Christ  as  much  as  possible  in  vie«,  and  remember  it  was  sin 
that  nailed  Him  to  it.  (5)  Solemnly  renew  your  covenant  with  God,  and  often 
reflect  upon  it  with  approbation  ;  that  whenever  tempted  to  sin,  yoQ  may  be  able 
readily  to  answer,  I  have  opened  my  mouth  unto  the  Lord  and  I  cannot  go  back 
(Judges  xi.  35).  Thy  vows  are  upon  me,  O  God  (Psa.  Ivi.  12).  (6)  Live  under  an 
awful  sense  of  God's  presence  with  you,  and  plead  it  with  yourselves,  that  you  may 
act  accordingly.  (7)  Frequently  call  yourselves  to  account  The  beginnings  of 
sin  may  be  most  hopefully  resisted ;  but  like  a  slight  disease,  may  prove  dangerous 
in  the  neglect,  and  threaten  death.  (8)  Use  yourselves  to  a  life  of  self-denial 
as  to  the  flesh  and  the  world.  (9)  Keep  up  lively  apprehensions  of  death  and 
judgment  approaching.  (10)  Make  your  constant,  serious  application  to  heaven, 
for  wisdom  to  discern,  and  grace  to  withstand  the  deceitfulness  of  sin.  (D.  Wilcox.) 
The  deceitfulness  of  sin  : — I.  What  is  sin.  To  love  God  and  to  love  our  fellow- 
creatures  with  a  pure  heart  fervently  is  the  gospel  law,  and  our  own  conscience 
witnesses  that  it  is  holy,  just,  and  good.  Whatever  is  the  contrary  to,  whatever 
comes  short  of  this  law  is  sin.  Now,  if  we  trace  up  sin  to  its  fountain,  then  we 
call  it  birth  sin — derived  from  our  first  father  Adam.  But,  if  we  trace  sin  to 
the  streams  that  flow  from  this  unclean  fountain,  then  we  call  it  actual  sin,  done 
by  om*  own  will.  Then  sin  is  everything  we  do  which  we  ought  not  to  do,  and 
everytbiug  we  leave  undone  which  we  ought  to  do.  If  we  trace  it  to  its  different 
kinds  we  find  some  sins  done  against  God  only,  others  against  God  and  man  too. 
There  are  sins  of  the  thought,  sins  of  the  heart,  sins  of  the  tongue,  sins  of  the 
hand,  sins  of  the  whole  boJy.  II.  The  deceitfulness  of  sin.  1.  Sin  draws  us 
away  from  the  thought  of  God  and  of  His  grace ;  of  what  He  has  done  for  us,  and  of 
what  we  owe  to  Him.  2.  Then  unbelief  slips  in ;  unbelief  of  God's  Word.  So 
Satan  tempted  Eve.  3.  If  only  we  disbelieve  God's  Word,  then  we  are  ready  to  be 
caught  with  the  bait  which  sin  offers,  fair  and  tempting  to  the  sight,  hiding  under 
it  danger  and  death.  4.  Be  not  misled  by  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  to  go  on  with- 
out repentance,  without  conversion  of  heart  to  God,  Is  not  delay  the  devil's 
favourite  word  t  5.  Nor  let  sin  beguile  yon  to  misuse  the  doctrine  of  the 
grace  of  God.  III.  The  effect  of  sin.  It  hardens  the  heart.  {E.  BleTicowe, 
M.A.)  The  deceitfulness  of  sin: — I.  My  business  shaij:.  be  to  show  too  thb 
deoeitfolness  of  sin  and  how  much  thereby  we  are  in  danger.  1.  Evil  takes 
another  name  though  it  doth  always  retain  its  nature.   Coveteousness  passetb 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  im 

for  a  thrifty  temper  and  good  husbandry.  Prodigality  for  being  generous. 
Vanity  is  reputed  necessary  remission  of  mind,  and  foolish  talking  to  be  affable 
conversation.  Lavish  expense  of  time  goes  for  exercise  and  recreation  due  to  the 
body.  Finding  fault  with  others  is  reckoned  to  be  reproof  of  sin.  Sharpness  and 
severity  to  be  strictness  of  conscience.  Backbiting  is  accounted  an  endeavour  for 
reformation.  Jealousy  and  suspicion  to  be  care  for  right  and  truth.  Busy 
meddling  with  other  men's  affairs,  lives,  and  judgments,  is  said  to  be  activity  for 
the  advancement  of  religion.  And  to  control  others'  Uberty,  a  care  for  their  souls. 
Presumption  is  thought  to  be  faith  in  God.  Curious  determinations  beyond 
Scripture,  to  be  the  improvement  of  faith,  and  inconsiderate  dulness  to  be  the  denial 
of  our  reason.  Malcontent  to  be  sorrow  for  sin.  Excessive  use  of  the  creatmres, 
to  be  Christian  Uberty.  Sometimes  evil  suggesteth  to  us  pleasure  and  delight,  and 
sometimes  gain  and  profit.  2.  Evil  holds  us  in  hand  that  it  is  a  matter  of  our 
right,  and  that  which  we  may  do  in  the  use  of  our  liberty.  Whereas  it  is  not 
power  to  be  able  to  do  that  which  is  not  fit  to  be  done,  this  is  not  liberty,  but 
licentiousness.  3.  Evil  covers  itself  with  some  probable  notion  or  circumstance. 
Nothing  in  this  vain  world  is  more  usual  than  colours,  pretences,  representations,, 
excuses,  appearances  contrary  to  reality  and  truth.  4.  Evil  warrants  itself  some- 
times by  the  difference  of  time  and  place,  sometimes  by  measure  and  degree, 
sometimes  by  mode  and  manner.  6.  Evil  pleads  sometimes  the  necessity  of  the 
case,  and  that  it  is  unavoidable.  6.  When  evil  hath  once  entangled  us  there  la 
another  evil  (and  it  may  be  a  greater)  though  necessary  to  hide  or  extenuate  it. 
For  evil,  if  it  be  looked  into,  will  be  ashamed  of  itself.  Upon  this  account  it  i» 
that  men  are  ashamed  to  own  it,  and  sometimes  with  a  lie  deny  it.  Cain,  Gehazi, 
Ananias,  and  Sapphira.  7.  Evil  justifies  itself  by  prescription  and  general 
practice.  So  it  was  formerly,  and  so  it  is  still.  And  this  is  taken  for  a  justi- 
fication. 8.  I  shall  observe  in  the  last  place  that  which  is  most  dangerous 
of  all  others,  and  that  is  this :  when  the  first  motion  towards  repentance  and 
conversion  is  looked  upon  as  if  it  were  the  sovereign  remedy  of  repentance 
itself.  As  if  sorrow  for  sin  were  the  whole  product  of  repentance,  whereas, 
indeed,  that  which  is  true  repentance  must  be  accompanied  with  the  forsaking  of 
sin  and  bringing  forth  the  fruits  of  righteousness.     II.  How  gbeat  beason  we 

HAVE,  ACCOBDING   TO   THE   ADVICH    OF   THE   APOSTLE,  TO   TAKE   HEED   THAT   WB   ARE   NOT 

DECEIVED.  1.  Because  in  this  state  we  run  all  manner  of  hazards  and  dangers. 
2.  Our  several  faculties  have  different  inclinations,  and  some  of  them  are  not  at  all 
capable  of  reason,  therefore  not  to  be  governed  by  any  moral  considerations,  which 
make  it  a  very  hard  province  that  we  are  to  act  in.  3.  Things  without  us,  and 
round  about  us,  presented  with  their  several  advantages,  do  many  times  provoke 
and  allure  ns,  and  are  hardly  to  be  denied.  4.  That  which  should  be  for  our 
security,  viz.,  company  and  converse,  often  becomes  a  snare  to  us.  5.  He  that  is 
officious  to  bring  us  into  his  oondemnation,  he  is  forward  to  fit  us  with  suitable 
objects  that  shall  raise  our  apprehensions  and  draw  ns  into  evil.  6.  There  are 
many  things  impure  and  contrary  to  religion  to  which  we  are  tempted  that  the 
world  do  not  reckon  among  the  greatest  crimes.  7.  Man  is  such  a  compound  that 
heaven  and  earth,  as  it  were,  meet  in  him,  terms  that  are  extremely  distant.  Man 
in  respect  of  his  mind  is  qualified  to  converse  with  angels  and  to  attend  upon  God. 
And  in  respect  of  these  noble  faculties  he  is  liable  to  be  tempted  to  insolency, 
arrogancy,  and  great  presumption,  and  self-exaltation.  8.  If  we  do  not  use  self- 
government,  and  moderate  our  powers  by  subduing  the  inferior  to  the  superior,  we 
fail  in  that  which  is  our  proper  work  and  province.  9.  If  God  be  not  understood 
and  acknowledged  in  our  worldly  enjoyments  and  recommended  to  us  by  them  ;  if 
He  be  not  intended  in  all  our  actions,  then  do  we  not  comply  with  the  relation  we 
stand  in  to  God,  nor  act  according  to  our  highest  principles,  nor  answer  our 
capacity,  nor  are  true  to  our  own  interest.  For  our  highest  faculties  are  God's 
peculiar,  God's  reserve,  made  for  God,  and  fit  to  attend  upon  Him,  and  to  receive 
from  Him.  Since,  therefore,  there  is  this  danger — (1)  Let  us  act  with  caution  and 
with  good  advice,  by  conversation  with  the  best  and  wisest  men.  For  it  is  an  easy 
matter  to  be  deceived  without  great  care  and  diligence.  (2)  But  chiefly  let  us 
make  application  to  God,  by  meditation  and  prayer,  who  wiU  not  be  wanting  to  us. 
Let  us  carefully  avoid  all  presumption,  pride,  arrogancy,  and  self-assuming.  Do 
not  on  the  sudden,  but  see  before  you  do ;  and  understand  well  before  you  act. 
{B.  Whichcote,  D.D.)  On  the  danger  and  deceitfulness  of  sin  : — I.  First,  I  shalt 
en  leavour  to  represent  to  you  the  gbowinq  danger  of  sin,  and  by  what  steps  and 
<iegrees  bad  habits  do  insensibly  gain  upon  men  and  harden  them  in  an  evil  course. 


CHA?.  in.J  HEBREWS.  277 

All  the  actions  of  men  which  are  not  natural,  bnt  proceed  from  deliberation  and 
choice,  have  something  of  difficulty  in  them  when  we  first  practise  them,  because, 
at  first,  we  are  exercised  in  that  way ;  bat  after  we  have  practised  them  awhile  they 
become  more  easy,  and  when  they  are  easy,  we  begin  to  take  pleasure  in  them ; 
and  when  they  please  us  we  do  them  frequently,  and  think  we  cannot  repeat  them 
too  often ;  and,  by  frequency  of  acts  a  thing  grows  into  a  habit,  and  a  confirmed 
habit  is  a  second  kind  of  nature :  and  so  far  as  anything  is  natural,  so  far  it  is 
necessary,  and  we  can  hardly  do  otherwise ;  nay,  we  do  it  many  times  when  we  do 
not  think  of  it.  1.  Men  begin  with  lesser  sins.  No  man  is  perfectly  wicked  on  the 
sudden.  2.  After  men  have  been  sometime  initiated  in  these  lesser  sins  they  are  pre- 
pared for  greater ;  such  as  lay  waste  the  conscience  and  offer  more  violence  to  the  light 
and  reason  of  their  minds.  8.  When  a  man  hath  proceeded  thus  far  he  begins  to 
put  off  shame,  one  of  the  greatest  restraints  from  sin  which  God  hath  laid  upon  human 
nature.  And  when  this  curb  once  falls  off,  there  is  then  but  little  left  to  restrain 
and  hold  us  in.  4.  After  this  it  is  possible  men  may  come  to  approve  their  vices. 
For  if  men's  judgments  do  not  command  their  wills  and  restrain  their  lusts,  it  is 
great  odds,  in  process  of  time,  the  vicious  inchnations  of  their  wills  will  put  a  false 
bias  upon  their  judgments  ;  and  then  it  is  no  wonder,  if  men  come  to  boast  of  their 
sins  and  to  glory  in  their  vices,  when  they  are  half  persuaded  that  they  are 
generous  and  commendable  qualities.  6.  From  this  pitch  of  wickedness,  men 
•commonly  proceed  to  draw  in  others,  and  to  make  proselytes  to  their 
vices.  But  that  which  renders  the  condition  of  such  persons  much  more 
•deplorable  is,  that  all  this  while  God  is  withdrawing  His  grace  from  them. 
For  every  degree  of  sin  causeth  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  with  all  His  blessed 
Assistances  to  retire  farther  from  them.  And  thus,  by  passing  from  one 
degree  of  sin  to  another,  the  sinner  becomes  hardened  in  his  wickedness.  For 
the  mind  of  man,  after  it  hath  long  been  accustomed  to  evil,  and  is  once  grown  old 
in  vice,  is  almost  as  hard  to  be  rectified  as  it  is  to  recover  a  body  bowed  down  with 
age  to  its  first  straightness.    II.  I  shall,  from  this  consideration,  take  occasion  to 

show  WHAT  GREAT  BEASON  AND   NEED    THERE  18  TO  WARN    MEN    OF   THIS    DANGER,  and  tO 

endeavour  to  rescue  them  out  of  it.  If  we  believe  the  threatenings  of  God  which 
we  declare  to  others,  if  we  have  any  sense  of  our  own  duty  and  safety,  we  cannot 
but  be  earnest  with  sinners  to  break  off  their  sins,  and  to  give  glory  to  God  by 
repentance  before  darkness  come.  IIL  I  apply  myself  to  this  work  of  exhortation — 
the  duty  commanded  here  in  the  text.  1.  To  persuade  those  who  are  yet  in  some 
measure  innocent,  to  resist  the  beginnings  of  sin,  lest  it  gain  upon  them  by  degrees. 
Vice  may  easily  be  discouraged  at  first.  It  is  like  a  slight  disease,  which  is  easy  to 
be  cured,  but  dangerous  to  be  neglected.  As  there  is  a  connection  of  one  virtue  with 
another,  so  vices  are  linked  together,  and  one  sin  draws  many  after  it.  When  the 
devil  tempts  a  man  to  commit  any  wickedness,  he  does  as  it  were  lay  a  long  train 
of  sins,  and  if  the  first  temptation  take,  they  give  fire  to  one  another.  2.  To 
persuade  those  who  are  already  engaged  in  a  wicked  course,  to  make  haste  out  of 
this  dangerous  state.  And  there  is  no  other  way  to  get  out  of  it  but  by  repentance ; 
that  is,  by  a  real  change  and  reformation  of  our  lives.  {Archbishop  Tillotson.) 
The  deceitfvlnefs  of  sin: — Who  is  it  that  is  deceived?  It  is  the  sinner  himself. 
Does  he  need  to  be  deceived  ?  Is  there  not  in  us  all  a  strong  enough  direct  inclina- 
tion to  that  which  is  evil?  There  is  also  a  deceit  which  over-reaches  and 
•ensnares  us  into  the  commission  of  what,  but  for  that  mistake,  we  would  hate 
avoided  or  abhorred.  Again,  if  the  sinner  is  deceived,  who  is  it,  or  what  is  it  that 
deceives  him  ?  Here  we  must  observe  that  when  we  speak  of  sin's  being  dtceitful, 
it  is  not  so  much  anything  without  us,  taking  the  advantage  of  our  weakness,  but 
it  is  the  corruption  within,  which  makes  us  see  things  in  a  wrong  light,  and  draw 
unjust  and  pernicious  consequences  from  them.  I.  I  shall  endeavour  to  open  a 
little  the  chief  branches  of  the  deceitfulness  op  sin.  1.  Its  disguising 
itself  and  wholly  concealing  its  nature.  2.  Its  forming  excuses  for  itself,  and 
thereby  extenuating  its  guilt.  3.  Its  insinuating  itself  by  degrees,  and  leading  men 
on  from  the  voluntary  commission  of  some  sins  to  the  necessity  of  committing 
more.  II.  I  proceed  now  to  consider  the  dutt  which  is  founded  by  the 
apostle  on  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  viz.,  mutual  exhortation.  1.  As  to  the 
persons  who  are  obliged  to  exhort  others.  It  seems  in  this  passage  to  be  laid  upon 
<3hristians  in  general,  without  any  exception.  This  is  perfectly  consonant  to  the 
spirit  of  true  religion,  and  to  our  relation  one  to  another.  There  is  also  a  particular 
obligation  upon  superiors  of  all  sorts,  whether  in  office,  as  magistrates ;  in  station, 
as  persona  of  wealth  and  opulence ;  in  years,  as  those  whom  time  and  experience 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

ehoald  have  enriched  with  solid  wisdom  ;  in  relation,  as  parents  and  masters  of 
families.  But  it  is  also  plainly  a  part  of  Christian  friendship,  even  for  equals  to 
exhort  one  another,  and  kindly  to  communicate  their  mutual  experience  in  the 
spiritual  hfe.  We  all  stand  in  need  of  it ;  we  may  all  be  the  better  for  it.  I  do 
not  remember  anything  recorded  more  truly  glorious  for  a  monarch  than  what  we 
are  told  of  Philip  of  Macedon,  that  he  heard  reproofs  not  only  with  patience,  but 
with  pleasure ;  and  I  am  sure  there  is  nothing  more  like  a  Christian  than  to  profit, 
not  only  by  the  admonitions  of  friends,  but  by  the  reproaches  of  enemies.  If  they 
are  just,  reform  what  is  amiss ;  if  they  are  probable,  abstain  from  the  appearance 
of  evil ;  if  they  are  neither  the  one  nor  the  other,  submit  to  them  with  patience,  as 
a  part  of  the  will  of  God.  2.  The  season  in  which  the  duty  of  mutual  exhortation 
is  to  be  performed.  Exhort  one  another  daily,  while  it  is  called  to-day ;  by  which 
we  are  to  understand  that  it  is  to  be  done  frequently,  and  without  delay.  3.  The 
manner  in  which  this  exhortation  must  be  given,  if  we  hope  to  do  it  with  success. 

(1)  You  ought  not  to  reprove  at  an  uncertainty,  upon  bare  rumour  and  suspicion. 

(2)  It  ought  not  to  be  done  when  the  offending  person  is  in  an  ill  temper  to  receive 
it.     (3)  We  are  not  to  reprove  those  whom  we  have  reason  to  beUeve  to  be  such 
desperate  wretches,  that  they  would  be  but  the  more  exasperated,  and  sin  in  the 
more  daring  manner,  on  account  of  the  reproof  (Prov.  ix.  7 ;  Matt.  vii.  6).      On  the 
other   hand,  positively,  when  reproof  or   exhortation  are  administered — (1)    It 
should  be  made  appear,  as  much  as  possible,  to  flow  from  love  and  affection  as  its 
principle.     (2)  As  it  ought  to  flow  from  love  as  the  principle,  so  it  ought  to  be 
conducted  with  meekness  in  the  manner  ;  no  railing  or  reviling  expressions,  which 
will  look  like  the  wounds  of  an  enemy  to  destroy,  and  not  the  balm  of  a  ph.\sician 
to  cure.    (3)  Reproof  should  be  given  with  some  degree  of  zeal  as  well  as  meekness ; 
we  should  avoid  the  extreme  of  remissness  as  well  as  severity.     A  slight  careless 
reproof  is  often  worse  than  none ;  for  it  is  ready  to  make  the  offender  think  lightly 
of  his  own  offence.    I  shall  give  an  instance  of  this.     Swearing,  and  taking  the 
name  of  God  in  vain,  is  sometimes  ridiculed,  instead  of  being  reproved.      This 
seldom  has  a  good  effect.     It  ought,  indeed,  to  be  despised  for  its  folly ;  but,  at  the 
same  time,  it  ought  to  be  deeply  abhorred  for  its  guilt.     (4)  In  admonishing  olo 
another  for  particular  sins,  we  should  still  keep  in  view  the  source  of  all  sin,  a 
polluted  nature,  and  the  great  danger  of  the  sinner,  as  in  a  sinful  state.     (5)  Let 
those  who  would  acquit  themselves  of  this  duty  in  a  proper  manner  be  particularly 
watchful  and  circumspect  in  their  own  conduct.      Lessons  :    1.  From  what  has 
been  said,  you  may  see  the  great  corruption  and  depravity  of  our  nature.     2.  From 
what  has  been  said,  let  us  be  led  to  strictness  and  frequency  in  self-examination. 
If  sin  is  so  deceitful,  it  may  easily  lurk  unobserved.     Self-knowledge  is  a  study  of 
as  gieat  difficulty  as  importance.    3.  From  what  hath  been  said,  let  me  beseech  all, 
but  especially  young  persons,  to  beware  of  the  beginnings  of  sin.     4.  I  shall  close 
the  subject,  by  addressing  an  exhortation  to  those  who  have  been  long  and  hardened 
sinners ;  who  have  many  habits  of  vice  cleaving  to  them  ;    who   have  hitherto 
despised  the  gospel,  and  even  sat  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful.     Why  will  you  longer 
continue  at  enmity  with  Him,  while  He  is  offering  you  mercy?     (J.  Witherspoon.) 
Tlie  deceitfulness  of  sin  : — I.  The  caution.     In  the  text  sin  is,  by  a  bold  figure  of 
speech,  personified,  as  it  is  in  several  other  parts  of  Scripture.    But  we  are  not  to 
suppose  that  there  is  a  being  called  sin  ;  but  an  evil  principle  that  is  at  work  in  the 
world  and  in  aU  our  hearts.  We  will  now  notice  some  of  the  means  adopted  by  sin  to 
deceive  the  ungodly.      1.  It  assumes  to  itself  soft  and  specious  names.      Sin,  not- 
withstanding the  exalted  place  it  holds  in  the  affections  of  men,  is  an  abominable 
thing.    Professors  of  religion,  be  you  aware  that  you  endeavour  not  to  lessen  the 
enormity  of  sin.     2.  Sin  deceives  by  promising  pleasure,  while  it  conceals  the  evils 
connected  with  it.    It  promises  pleasures  it  can  never  give.    Absalom  hstened  to 
sin,  and  was  stimulated  in  his  rebellion  by  the  hope  of  raising  himself  to  his  father's 
throne.    The  event  showed  he  was  deceived,   and  lost  his  life  beside.     David 
listened  to  sin,  when  he  thought  of  the  pleasure  of  Bathsheba's  company,  and 
thought,  '•  No  eye  will  see,  no  one  would  know."    He,  too,  was  deceived,  for  his  sin 
became  patent  to  all  Israel,  and  peace  fled  from  his  house  for  ever.   There  is  one  case 
recorded  in  Scripture  which  shows  how  sin  deceives,  and  hardens,  and  finally  damns 
the  soul — Judas,   3.  Sin  deceives  by  misrepresenting  the  revelations  of  God's  Word. 
Instructed  by  that  Word,  we  are  taught  to  think  of  God  as  a  being  of  infinite  perfec- 
tion, and  that  all  His  attributes  being  perfect,  they  cannot  clash  one  with  another— 
that  all  are  holy,  wise  and  good.    But  sin  suggests  to  man's  mind  a  God  all  mercy : 
it  puts  out  of  sight  the  fact  that  God  is  a  God  of  holiness.      Again,  sin  leads  mes 


CHAP,  ni.]  HEBREWS.  279 

to  reason  thus :  God  is  too  lofty  to  behold  the  things  done  npon  earth ;  it  is  in- 
conceivable that  He  will  take  knowledge  of  men's  actions  ;  He  has  worlds  to  guide 
and  direct.  4.  Sin  deceives,  by  persuading  the  man  that  there  is  time  yet  to  seek 
pardon,  and  persuades  him  to  defer  the  season  of  repentance  till  a  later  period  of 
life.  Now,  there  is  no  want  of  good  intention  on  the  part  of  many.  Sinners  are 
deceived  by  sin,  and  flatter  themselves  that  because  they  know  what  is  right,  there 
must  be  some  good  in  them,  though  they  practise  it  not.  They  comfort  themselves, 
that  though  at  this  particular  moment  they  do  not  put  their  good  resolutions  into 
effect,  they  intend  to  do  it,  and  they  think  there  is  some  virtue  in  that.  II.  Thk 
MEANS  PRESCRIBED. — "  Exhort  oue  another."  Those  who  undertake  to  give  advice 
should  themselves  be  endued  with  wisdom  and  understanding.  An  ignorant  or  pre- 
sumptuous person  will  be  likely  to  do  more  harm  than  good.  That  wisdom  which 
is  gained  by  experience  is  most  likely  to  prove  useful  to  othei'S.  Intimate  friends 
may  exhort  and  counsel  one  another,  and  admonish  one  another  of  tLeir  faults. 
But  even  here  a  caution  is  needful.  Some  do  this  in  such  a  censorious  sort  of  way, 
such  a  "  Stand  by,  I  am  holier  than  thou  "  sort  of  air,  that  the  advice  they  give, 
however  good,  is  certain  to  be  rejected.  Men  are  never  to  be  scolded  into  doing 
that  which  is  right.  In  reference  to  this  part  of  onr  subject  I  would  say,  never 
engage  in  this  duty  except  with  much  prayer  for  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit ; 
and  then  between  your  exhortation  and  example  there  must  be  a  consistency.  If 
not,  it  will  render  any  effort  altogether  vain.  III.  The  time  when  this  duty  is  to  be 
performed — "  Daily,  while  it  is  called  to-day."  The  present  may  be  the  only 
opportunity.  Christians  are  daily  going  astray;  every  day  they  need  exhorting. 
By  way  of  application,  I  would  entreat  you  all  to  watch  well  your  heart,  and  resist 
the  beginnings  of  sin,  lest  it  should  end  in  ruin.  A  spark  is  easily  put  out,  but  how 
difficult  to  extinguish  a  oouflagration  !  Kesist  the  unholy  thought  before  it  becomes 
the  unholy  deed,  and  pray  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation.  I  will  illustrate  by 
an  anecdote  what  sin  does.  There  was  a  little  boat  floating  near  the  bank  in  the 
river  a  few  miles  above  the  falls  of  Niagara ;  a  mother  was  working  in  a  field  near 
by.  She  had  cautioned  her  little  daughter  not  to  go  to  the  water  ;  but  thither  the 
child  strolled.  She  saw  the  boat,  jumped  into  it,  which  moved  with  her  weight. 
She  was  pleased  with  the  feeling.  The  boat  slipped  from  its  moorings,  and  began 
softly  to  float  down  the  stream.  More  and  more  pleased  was  the  child.  The  sun 
glittered  on  the  tiny  waves ;  everything  was  pleasant  and  delightful  to  the  child. 
Quicker,  and  more  quick,  but  yet  softly  and  silently,  that  vessel  shot  down  the  river 
with  its  unconscious  and  joyous  freight.  The  mother  looked,  and  saw  her  child 
carried  quickly  to  the  current  towards  the  fall.  She  screamed  and  ran — she  plunged 
into  the  water ;  she  ventured  far,  and  failed.  The  boat  is  caught  in  the  foaming 
rapids  ;  it  is  carried  over  the  precipice  ;  the  child  is  lost.  Something  like  this  may 
be  seen  daily.  We  warn  you.  (W.  Jarbo,  D.D.)  Deceptive  nature  of  sin  : — I  heard  a 
minister  not  long  since,  while  preaching  on  the  nature  and  deceptive  influence  of  sin, 
make  use  of  the  ifollowing  illustration : — "  Suppose,"  said  the  preacher,  "an  individual 
should  go  to  a  blacksmith  and  say  to  him,  'Sir,  I  wish  you  to  make  me  a  very  long 
and  heavy  chain ;  here  are  the  dimensions.  Have  it  done  at  such  a  time,  and  I 
will  pay  you  the  cash  for  it.'  The  blacksmith  is  pressed  with  other  and  mora 
important  work,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  money  he  commences  the  chain,  and  after 
toiUng  hard  many  days,  finishes  it.  The  indi\adual  calls.  '  Have  you  made  that 
chain  ?  '  •  Yes,  sir  ;  here  it  is.*  '  That  is  very  well  done.  A  good  chain  ;  but  it  is 
not  long  enough."  •  Not  long  enough  1  Why,  it  is  just  the  length  you  told  me  to 
make  it.'  '  Oh  yes,  yes;  but  I  have  concluded  to  have  it  much  longer  than  at  first ; 
work  on  it  another  week.  I  will  then  call  and  pay  you  for  it.'  And  thus,  flattered 
with  praise  and  encouraged  with  the  promise  of  full  reward  for  his  labour,  he  toils 
on,  adding  hnk  to  link,  till  the  appointed  time  when  his  employer  calls  again,  and, 
as  before,  praises  his  work  ;  but  still  he  insists  that '  the  chain  is  too  short.'  '  But,' 
says  the  blacksmith,  •  I  can  do  no  more.  My  iron  is  expended,  and  so  is  my 
strength.  I  need  the  pay  for  what  I  have  done,  and  can  do  no  more  till  I  have  it  1 ' 
'  Oh,  never  mind  ;  I  think  you  have  the  means  of  adding  a  few  links  more;  the 
chain  will  then  answer  the  purpose  for  which  it  is  intended,  and  you  shall  be  fully 
rewarded  for  all  your  labour.'  With  his  remaining  strength  and  a  few  scraps  of 
iron,  he  adds  the  last  link  of  which  he  is  capable  ;  then  says  the  man  to  him, '  The 
chain  is  a  good  one ;  you  have  toiled  long  and  hard  to  make  it.  I  see  that  you  can 
do  no  more,  and  now  you  shall  have  your  reward.'  But,  instead  of  paying  the 
money,  he  takes  the  chain,  binds  the  labourer  hand  and  foot,  and  casts  him  into  a 
furnace  of  fire.     '  Such,'  "  said  the  preacher  "  is  a  course  of  sin.      It  promises 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

much,  but  its  reward  is  death."  (C.  Field.)  Sin: — It  appears  fair,  but  is  filthy; 
it  appears  pleasant,  but  is  pernicious;  it  promises  much,  but  performs  nothing. 
{M.  Henry.)  The  deceitfulness  of  sin: — There  was  an  abbot  who  desired  a 
piece  of  ground  that  lay  conveniently  for  him.  The  owner  refused  to  sell  it, 
yet,  with  much  persuasion,  was  contented  to  let  it.  The  abbot  hired  it  for  his 
rent,  and  covenanted  only  to  farm  it  for  one  crop.  He  had  his  bargain,  and  sowed 
it  with  acorns,  a  crop  that  lasted  three  hundred  years.  Thus,  Satan  begs  but  for  the 
first  crop  :  let  him  sow  thy  youth  with  acorns,  they  will  grow  up  with  thy  years  to 
sturdy  oaks,  so  big-bulked  and  deep  rooted,  that  tiiey  shall  last  all  thy  life.  Sin 
hath  a  shrewd  title  when  it  can  plead  prescription,  and  Satan  thinks  his  evidence  aa 
good  as  eleven  points  at  law  when  he  hath  once  got  possession.  Let  him  be  sure 
of  thy  youth,  he  will  be  confident  of  thy  age.  The  charge  sin  works  in  the 
conscience  :—Sott  sponges  become  flints  oftentimes  by  a  peculiar  process.  There 
are  in  sponges  particles  of  flint  or  silex ;  these  are  ever  attracting  particles  to  them- 
selves, until  in  process  of  time  the  whole  mass  is  an  aggregate  of  silicious  matter, 
and  the  softness  of  the  sponge  has  disappeared.  It  is  exactly  thus  with  your 
conscience:  its  sensibilities  are  gradually  giving  way  to  the  hardening  particles  that 
are  introduced  by  every  sin  you  commit.  TJie  fatal  chain : — Professor  Drummond 
tells  of  an  over-laden  coal  barge  which  stood  in  the  river  :  "  A  sailor  reported  to  the 
captain  that  the  water  was  gaining  upon  the  vessel.  The  captain  drove  him  away 
with  scoffs.  Twice,  thrice,  the  warning  was  repeated.  Each  time  the  warning 
voice  was  unheeded.  At  last  the  barge  began  to  give  evidence  of  sinking.  The 
captain  ordered  the  men  to  the  boats.  They  took  their  places.  He  then  said:  •! 
told  you  there  was  plenty  of  time.'  Then  he  took  out  his  knife  to  cut  the  cable 
which  bound  the  boat  to  the  barge.  He  fell  back  with  a  cry  of  horror.  The  cable 
was  an  iron  chain  !  "  The  eleventh  hour  is  an  hour  of  haste  and  danger  and 
disappointment.  The  thread  becomes  a  cord,  the  cord  a  cable,  the  cable  a  chain. 
The  time  to  get  clear  of  a  sinking  craft  is  now.  The  accelerating  progress  of  an 
ungodly  course : — A  denier  of  the  original  taint  of  sin  once  stood  before  two  pictures 
which  hung  side  by  side  upon  a  wall.  The  first  was  the  portrait  of  a  boy  with  open 
brow,  and  curls  that  looked  golden  in  the  sunshine,  and  cheeks  whose  damask 
beauty  shamed  the  ripened  fruit,  wearing  that  happy  smile  which  can  be  worn  but 
once  in  life — a  smile  whose  rippling  waves  are  poisoned  by  no  weeds  of  suspicion, 
and  break  upon  no  strand  of  doubt,  looking  gaily  up  from  the  flowered  earth  into 
the  azure  heaven  without  the  slightest  misgiving.  From  the  canvas  of  the  second 
picture  there  glared  out  a  wolfish  eye — the  home  of  all  subtlety  and  malice  ;  and 
in  the  gloom  of  the  dim  lighted  cell  you  might  perceive  the  matted  hair,  and 
garments  stained  with  blood ;  chains  clank,  or  seemed  to  clank,  upon  his  fettered 
limbs.  AU  tell  of  the  desperate  character  of  the  man.  On  these  two  pictures 
hanging  side  by  side,  the  denier  of  the  original  sin  fixed  his  gaze,  until  the  exclama- 
tion burst  out  at  length  in  a  tone  of  half  concealed  triumph,  "  What  1  do  jou  mean 
to  say  that  these  two  beings  were  originally  and  radically  the  same  ?  Do  you  mean 
to  tell  me  that  any  amount  of  evil  teaching  could  ever  develop  that  guileless  child 
into  that  debased  and  godless  man  ?  "  The  artist  volunteered  the  information  that 
the  portraits  were  taken  from  the  hfe  of  the  self-same  individual  at  different  stages 
of  his  history.  You  know  the  moral  of  the  tale.  There  is  an  accelerating  progress 
in  an  ungodly  course,  increasing  with  the  momentum  of  an  avalanche  when  the  first 
stages  of  its  course  have  run.  The  descent  into  perdition  is  easy,  when  the  strivings 
of  tha  passions  are  seconded  by  the  dictates  of  the  will.  Sinner,  I  charge  thee, 
bewa  e  lest  thy  sin  become  habit.  {W.  M.  Punshon,  D.D.)  Habits : — Like  flakes 
of  snow  that  fall  unperceived  upon  the  earth,  the  seemingly  unimpoitant  events  of 
life  succeed  one  another.  As  the  snow  gathers  together,  so  are  our  habits  formed. 
No  single  flake  added  to  the  pile  produces  a  sensible  change — no  single  action  creates, 
however  it  may  exhibit,  a  man's  character  ;  but  as  the  tempest  hurls  the  avalanche 
down  the  mountain,  and  overwhelms  the  inhabitant  and  his  habitation,  so  passion, 
acting  upon  the  elements  of  mischief  which  pernicious  habits  have  brought  together 
by  imperceptible  accumulation,  may  overthrow  the  edifice  of  truth  and  viitue. 

Ver.  14.  We  are  made  partakers  of  Christ. — Partners  of  Christ  : — There  is 
nothing  that  Christ  hath,  but  we  have  part  of  it.  His  wisdom,  holiness,  Hia 
righteousness  is  ours ;  yea.  His  kingdom  is  ours.  We  are  heirs,  yea,  co-heirs  with 
Him  of  His  kingdom.  As  the  man  at  the  day  of  marriage  says  to  his  wife,  "  With 
all  my  worldly  goods  I  thee  endow,"  so  the  Lord  Jesus  endoweth  us  with  all  Hia 
goods  ;  by  reason  whereof,  being  poor  and  v,oith  nothing,  we  become  exceeding  rich. 


CHAF.  m.]  HEBREWS.  S81 

Christ  is  oura,  death,  life,  the  world  is  oura.  Oh,  unspeakable  prerogative  vouch- 
safed to  dust  and  ashes  1  Let  us  walk  worthy  of  this  honour  whereunto  we  are 
advanced :  being  Christ's  partners,  let  us  not  be  the  devil's  partners.  Let  us  be 
boly  as  He  is  holy,  humble  as  He  is  humble  ;  let  us  contemn  this  world  with  all  the 
vain  pleasures  that  be  in  it  as  He  did.  What  fellowship  is  there  between  Christ  and 
Belial?  {W.  Jones,  D.D.)  Fellows  of  CArist .—What  does  this  mean?  The 
first  idea  that  suggests  itself  is  that  *•  Christ "  stands  as  a  synonym  and  com- 
pendium of  salvation,  just  as  "  Moses  "  in  the  above-quoted  words  of  Paul  is  a 
synonym  for  the  redemption  he  was  God's  instrument  in  achieving.  An  alternative 
course  is  open  to  the  interpreter  :  to  render,  "  partakers  with  Christ,"  and  to  find 
in  the  words  the  thought  that  only  such  as  persevere  in  faith  share  in  the  glory  and 
the  joy  conferred  on  Him  at  the  close  of  His  earthly  career  as  God's  faithful 
aposde.  This  view,  however,  though  true  in  itself,  attains  to  its  full  heights  only 
when  we  adopt  a  bolder  course,  and  take  niroxoi  as  meaning  here,  as  in  chap.  i.  9, 
**  companions  "  or  "fellows."  We  then  get  the  striking  thought  that  by  persistent 
loyalty  to  the  Christian  vocation  we  become  fellows  of  Jesus.  It  is  intrinsically 
likely  that  the  passage  about  the  Messiah  quoted  from  the  forty-fifth  Psalm  in  the 
first  cbapter  was  present  to  the  writer's  mind  at  this  point.  It  speaks  of  the 
Messiah  as  anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  His  fellows,  implying  that  they 
too,  in  their  measure,  have  a  cup  full  of  joy.  In  the  present  connection  of  thought 
mentiun  is  made  of  a  "  boasting  of  hope,"  a  hope  rismg  into  exultation,  implying 
a  still  higher  measure  of  triumphant  joy  when  hope  reaches  its  consummation. 
The  idea,  •'  the  faithful  the  fellows  of  Christ,"  is  also  in  full  sympathy  with  the 
thought  expressed  in  ver.  6,  •*  whose  house  are  we."  The  faithful  are  God's  house, 
at  the  head  of  which  is  Christ,  God's  Son.  They  are  God's  house  not  as  Moses 
was,  as  l^ervants,  but  as  sons,  therefore  the  brethren  of  Christ.  But  brotherhood 
is  a  thing  of  degrees.  There  is  an  initial  brotherhood,  in  which,  as  Paul  says,  a 
Eon  differs  nothing  from  a  servant;  and  there  is  a  brotherhood,  the  result  of  a 
normal  moral  development,  in  which  a  younger  son,  at  length  arrived  at  maturity, 
becomes  the  companion  of  the  elder  brother.  We  are  brethren  to  begin  with,  but 
if  we  are  faithful  we  shall  end  in  becoming  fellows.  And  so  our  author,  having 
already  said  of  those  who  persevere  that  they  are  the  house  of  God,  now  takes  a 
step  in  advance,  and  in  renewing  his  exhortation  to  steadfastness  says,  '*  The 
faithful  are  not  only  the  house  of  God  and  the  brethren  of  Christ,  they  are  His 
fellows,  sharing  His  joy  and  having  perfect  communion  with  Him  in  spirit."  (A. 
B.  Bruce,  D.D.)  A  persuasive  to  steadfastness: — I.  First,  then,  here  is  a  very 
HIGH  PBivmEOE.  "  Wc  are  made  partakers  of  Christ."  Observe  that  the  text  does 
not  say  we  are  made  partakers  of  rich  spiritual  benefits.  There  is  more  than  that 
here.  To  be  partakers  of  pardoning  mercy,  of  renewing  grace,  of  the  adoption, 
of  sanctification,  preservation,  and  of  all  the  other  covenant  blessings,  is  to  possess 
an  endowment  of  unspeakable  value  :  but  to  be  made  "  partakers  of  Christ,"  is  to 
have  all  in  one.  You  have  all  the  flowers  in  one  posy,  all  the  gems  in  one  necklace, 
all  the  sweet  spices  in  one  delicious  compound.  "  We  are  made  partakers  of  Christ " 
—of  Himself.  "  It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  Him  should  all  fulness  dwell,"  and 
we  are  made  partakers  with  Him  of  all  that  He  is  ordained  to  be  of  God  unto  us — 
*•  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption."  We  are  made  partakers 
of  Christ,  when  first  of  all  by  faith  in  Him  we  procure  a  share  in  His 
merits.  Moreover,  we  are  partakers  of  Christ,  inasmuch  as  His  righteousness  also 
becomes  ours  by  imputation.  We  further  become  partakers  of  Christ  by  living  and 
feeding  on  Him.  The  sacramental  table  represents  our  fellowship.  Partakers  of 
Christ  I  Yes,  and  therefore  with  Him  partakers  in  destiny.  The  language  of  the 
text  reminds  us  that  none  of  us  have  any  title  to  this  privilege  by  nature.  "  We 
are  made  partakers  of  Christ."  From  our  first  parentage  we  derived  a  very 
different  entail.  "  We  are  made  partak  rs  of  Christ."  This  is  the  Holy  Ghost's 
work  in  us,  to  rend  us  away  from  the  old  wild  olive,  and  to  graft  us  into  the  good 
ohve ;  to  dissolve  the  union  between  us  and  sin,  and  to  cement  a  union  between  our 
souls  and  Christ.  This  is  work  as  grand  and  godlike  as  to  create  a  world.  11.  The 
privilege  of  which  we  have  spoken  suggests  a  solemn,  searching  question.  Are 
we  made  partakers  of  Christ  ?  There  is  nothing  more  to  be  dreaded  than  a 
counterfeit  justification,  a  spurious  hope.  III.  Now  we  come  to  the  unerring  tkst. 
Patience  comes  to  the  aid  of  faith  here.  Evidences  accumulate  till  the  issue  is  con- 
clusive. *'  We  are  made  partakers  of  Christ  Lf  we  hold  the  beginning  of  our  confi- 
dence stearlfast  unto  the  end."  This  passage  may  be  read  in  two  ways,  neither  of 
which  violates  the  Uteral  meaning  of  the  original  as  we  have  it  in  our  version,  "  the 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  m. 

beginning  of  onr  confidence,"  or,  as  I  would  rather  translate  it,  "  the  foundation  o! 
our  confidence,"  the  basis  on  which  our  confidence  rests.  Take  your  choice.  We 
will  expound  both.  That  man  is  a  partaker  of  Christ  who  holds  fast  the  faith  he 
had  at  first,  having  received  it,  not  as  an  education,  but  as  an  intuition  of  his 
spiritual  life ;  not  as  an  argument,  but  as  an  axiom  he  could  not  challenge,  or 
rather  as  an  oracle  he  received  joyfully  and  bowed  to  submissively.  The  confidence 
which  is  based  upon  the  true  foundation,  even  Christ  Jesus,  is  simple  and  clear  as 
one's  own  consciousness.  It  asks  no  proof  because  it  admits  no  doubt.  Now  what 
was  the  beginning  of  our  confidence  f  Well,  the  beginning  of  my  confidence  was,  ^ 
"I  am  a  sinn-r,  Christ  is  a  Saviour;  and  I  rest  on  Him  to  save  me."  We  were 
nothing  at  all,  and  Jesus  Christ  was  all  in  all.  We  are  not  made  partakers  of 
Chiist  unless  we  hold  this  fast  to  the  end.    (C.  H,  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  15.  To-day  If  ye  will  hear  His  voice. — To-day  : — I.  To-dat  :  how  belated 

TO  YESTERDAY  AND  To-MOHBOW.     We  are  putting  yesterday  to  its  noblest  use  when  we 

are  using  its  experience  to  make  the  life  of  to-day  better.    We  are  preparing  for  the 

morrow  in  the  truest  way  when  we  are  striving  with  all  our  might  to  be  faithful  to 

the  opportunity  of  to-day.    II.  To-dat:  its  importance.     To-day  is  the  critical 

moment  of  life.     Our  vital  concern  is  with  to-day.     Life  in  to-day  is  an  impressive 

feature  of  Biblical  teaching.    The   emphasis  of   both  Testaments  is  on  to-day. 

"  We  must  work  while  it  is  day."    To  look  back  is,  in  the  judgment  of  the  Master 

of  our  life,  to  unfit  ourselves  for  the  work  of  the  kingdom  of  God.    To  be  loyal  to 

the  Christian  idea  and  order  of  life,  we  must  be  ready  to  break  with  the  old  for  the 

Bake  of  the  new.    There  is  little  need,  then,  to  dwell  on  the  past.     It  is  not  behind 

us.    In  a  very  real  sense  it  goes  with  us.    The  new  continues,  it  does  not  efface  the 

old.    There  is  no  "  dead  past  " ;  the  past  is  living  in  the  present.     Our  present 

character  is  the  Divine  judgment  upon  our  past  conduct.    But  to-day  is  not  only  a 

history  of  the  past,  it  is  also  a  prophecy  of  the  future.    It  is  by  watching  to-day  we 

can  tell  what  will  be  on  the  morrow.    Foresight  is  truly  insight.     There  is  no 

violent  break  between  yesterday  and  to-day.     Whatever  is  to  come  out  of  to-day 

exists  in  to-day.    The  future  is  not  a  revolution  but  an  evolution.     To-day  is  the 

child  and  heir  of  yesterday ;  to-morrow  will  be  the  child  and  heir  of  to-day.     III. 

The  blessing  and  oppoetuxity  of  a  day.     It  comes  to  us  laden  with  blessing  and 

promise,  full  of  history  and  full  of  prophecy.    It  has  taken  many  thousands  c£ 

years  to  prepare  it  for  us.     In  the  very  fuel  that  feeds  its  fires  is  the  vegetation  ot 

primeval  years.    Every  day  that  dawns  has  countless  relations  with  things  far  and 

wide.     Ancient  Egypt  and  Israel,  Greece  and  Eome,  Scandinavia  and  primitive 

Germany,  priests  and  philosophers,  prophets  and  poets,  discoverers  and  inventors, 

innumerable  thinkers  and  workers,  known  and  unknown,  have  helped  to  prepare 

the  materials  out  of  which  to-day's  opportunity  has  been  made.     We  inherit  the 

good,  material  and  moral,  wrought  out  through  the  experiences  of  many  men  and 

many  races  of  men  through  many  centuries.     In  the  life  of  to-day  are  the  results 

of  the  labour  and  struggle  of  all  the  yesterdays.    No  day  is  poor  and  commonplace. 

To  the  prepared  soul  every  day  is  full  of  marvel  and  joy.     Every  day  has  its 

comedies  and  tragedies.     Genius  does  not  invent,  it  discovers  and  interprets.    To 

find  examples  of  heroism  we  need  not  turn  to  classic  pages,  nor  search  the  annals 

of  martyrdom.     Heroism  is  as  unfailing  a  reality  as  the  daily  dawn.    Around  and 

in  each  day  are  all  the  great  marvels  of  creation,  all  the  moral  forces  and  splendours 

of  hfe,  and  all  the  sacred  realities  to  which  the  deeply  moved  soul  has  witnessed 

in  every  age.    It  is  a  famiUar  saying  that  life  is  but  a  day.    It  is  said  to  express 

the  awful  and  pathetic  brevity  of  our  existence  upon  this  earth.    But  when  we  say 

each  day  is  a  life,  we  are  giving  expression  to  a  truth  of  deeper  importance  and  of 

greater  practical  value  and  use.     There  is  nothing  small.     In  the  smallest  things 

are  the  elements  of  the  greatest.     One  day  of  life  has  in  it  the  quality  of  the  whole. 

In  its  acts  and  relations  we  see  God  making  history,  and  man  making  his  own 

future — making  the  character  which  creates  condition  and  decides  de^^tiny.    Are  we 

making  the  most  and  the  best  of  the  opportunities  of  to-day?    One  of  our  older 

poets  has  represented  the  days  as  coming  to  us  with  their  faces  veiled  ;  but  when 

they  have  passed  beyond  our  reach  and  call,  the  draped  figures  become  radiant,  and 

the  gifts  we  slighted  are  seen  to  be  right  royal  treasures.    Let  us  make  the  most 

and  the  best  of  each  day's  opportunity  for  pure  and  noble  enjoyment.     The  lesson 

of  joy  is  as  Divine  a  lesson  to  learn  as  that  of  obedience  and  sacrifice.    Let  us 

make  the  most  and  the  best  of  each  day's  opportunity  for  thought  and  meditation. 

The  inner  hfe  constantly  needs  deepening.    The  mind  closed  against  new  truth  is 


CHAP,  m.]  HEBREWS.  883 

already  dying.  Let  as  make  the  most  and  the  best  of  the  opportunity  for  moral 
and  spiritual  growth  and  beneficent  service  which  is  afforded  by  the  daily  task.  It 
is  in  the  sphere  of  every-day  duties  most  men  must  win  the  discipline  which  our 
earthly  life  is  meant  to  yield,  must  form  the  character  which  is  the  crown  of  life, 
and  prepare  themselves  for  wider  usefulness.  It  is  only  by  living  up  to  the  ideal 
and  duty  of  making  each  day  perfect  in  itself  we  can  make  life  a  spiritual  triumph. 
There  are  only  **  twelve  hours  in  a  day,"  yet  how  much  can  be  done  in  and  with  a 
day.  If  we  throw  away  a  day  no  miracle  will  bring  it  back  to  us.  There  is  no 
to-morrow  for  the  work  that  ought  to  be  done  to-day.  The  cry,  •*  Too  late,"  is  not 
false.  The  mercy  of  God  is  infinite  every  way,  but  an  opportunity  lost  is  lost  for 
ever.  Other  doors  may  open,  but  that  door  is  for  ever  shut.  The  exhortation, 
*•  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God,"  is,  indeed,  an  exhortation  to  prepare  for  life,  not  death. 
Every  day  we  meet  God  ;  every  day  we  need  to  be  prepared  to  meet  Him.  We  pre- 
pare for  what  we  suppose  to  be  great  days.  But  every  day  may  be  a  great  day,  a 
Divine  day.  To-day  all  good  and  great  things  are  possible.  Let  us  by  our  faith 
and  faithfulness,  by  our  obedience  to  all  best  visions  and  impulses,  turn  it  into  a 
day  of  salvation,  a  day  of  God,  one  of  the  days  of  the  Son  of  Man,  one  of  tha 
days  of  heaven  upon  earth.  {John  Hunter.)  To-day  : — 1.  Let  me  ask  those  who 
believe  the  truths  of  the  gospel,  but  who  put  off  the  renunciation  of  the  sins  they 
condemn,  and  the  consideration  of  the  truths  themselves  to  a  future  period,  have 
you  a  reliable  guarantee  that  you  will  Lave  a  future  in  which  to  consider,  pray  over, 
and  meditate  on  these  things  ?  There  is  no  such  thing.  The  space  between  life 
and  death  is  quickly  traversed.  2.  But,  in  the  next  place,  addressing  those  who  are 
thus  procrastinating,  let  me  suppose  that  you  reach  the  remotest  horizon  of  human 
age ;  is  it  not  true  that  every  day  you  neglect  Divine  truths  the  probability  of  your 
ever  accepting  them  diminishes  ?  In  this  world  you  require  time  to  grow  in  know- 
ledge ;  why  should  you  argue  that  what  God  recognises  in  His  providence  Ha 
should  not  recognise  in  grace ;  but  that  He  should  leave  you  to  a  lifetime  of  igno- 
rance, indifference,  apathy,  and  then  should  give  you  light  enough  to  guide  you  to 
heaven  in  your  last  moments  ?  3.  Bu<^^  there  is  a  third  argument  against  all  such 
delay.  It  is  that  whilst  you  are  delaying  the  salvation  of  the  soul,  your  heart  ia 
not  all  the  while  remaining  empty.  Your  lioart  is  being  coloured  by  all  it  cornea 
into  contact  with  in  the  world.  Now,  if  your  soul  has  for  forty,  fifty  or  sixty  yearg 
been  absorbed  about  what  you  shall  eat,  what  you  shall  drink,  wherewithal  you 
shall  be  clothed  ;  or  about  the  world's  wealth,  or  the  world's  ambition,  or  the  world's 
cares,  will  it  be  very  easy  to  disengage  it  from  its  old  routine  upon  a  dying  bed  ? 
Will  it  be  very  easy  to  alter  the  currents,  change  the  channels,  and  empty  the 
springs  of  such  a  heart  when  its  beating  becomes  feebler,  and  life's  sandglass  ia 
almost  run  out?  4.  There  is  another  fact,  let  me  mention,  one  suggested  to  me  by 
conversation  with  a  physician,  and  I  think  it  is  a  very  just  one,  namely,  the  very 
structure  of  the  brain,  which  is  the  hand  of  the  mind,  adapts  itself  to  the  action  o£ 
the  thoughts  that  have  constantly  passed  through  it.  Now,  if  your  thoughts  have 
been  ceaselessly  absorbed  with  the  things  of  this  world,  your  brain  is  just 
adapting  itself  to  the  things  of  this  world,  and  becoming  unfit  for  others. 
A  blacksmith's  arm  would  never  do  for  the  most  exquisite  handwriting  ;  his 
arm  has  been  accustomed  to  other  work ;  and  that  is  only  a  coarser  illustration 
of  what  is  true  of  the  brain,  that  it  becomes  adapted  and  physically  fitted  to  the 
trains  of  thought  that  have  ceaselessly  rushed  through  it ;  till,  when  you  come  to 
speak  to  a  dying  man  who  has  never  had  Divine  thoughts  in  his  heart  and  head, 
you  have  to  deal  with  the  most  intractable  of  all  materials ;  till,  almost  despairing, 
you  must  cease  to  teach,  and  begin  only  to  pray.  But  I  take  another  view  of  tha 
danger  of  such  a  course.  5.  As  people  grow  older,  on  the  supposition  that  they  live 
to  a  protracted  age,  the  impressibility  of  the  mind  becomes  less,  the  blood  chills 
with  age,  it  runs  more  sluggishly  through  the  arteries  and  veins ;  the  memory  ia 
old  age,  you  know  quite  well,  becomes  less  retentive.  Then  is  not  that  another 
evidence  that  it  must  be  very  difficult  to  impress  Divine  truths.everlasting  motives, 
upon  memories  that  scarcely  recollect  next  day  what  was  said  on  this ;  upon  hearts 
that  Mammon  has  trodden  into  the  hardness  of  iron,  and  in  which  passions  have 
Bcorched  every  fair  and  fragrant  blossom  ?  6.  Let  me  notice  another  reason  and 
explanation  of  the  danger  of  this  procrastination  :  you  are  creating  and  strengthen. 
ing  every  day  a  refuge  to  which  you  have  recourse.  It  is  a  singular  law  in  human 
nature,  that  what  becomes  your  habit  becomes  almost  your  very  nature ;  and  as 
you  are  making  to-day  a  refuge  from  conviction,  a  refuge  from  what  you  feel  to  be 
duty,  that  procrastination  becomes  a  habit ;  and  every  time  that  you  do  so,  the  next 


284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

time  you  will  be  abler  to  do  so.  7.  But  now  the  final  result  of  not  hearing  God's  voice, 
and  of  thus  procrastinating  to  a  future,  is  what  is  here  called  the  hardening  of  the 
heart.  Love  degenerates  to  zero ;  the  enthusiasm  of  your  spring  is  all  frozen  hard 
in  the  winter  of  old  age ;  what  once  awakened  you  to  joy,  to  hope,  to  fear,  to  alarm, 
fails  to  awaken  you  any  more ;  and  it  is  possible  that  God  may  say,  as  he  said  of 
one  of  old,  "  Let  him  alone  ;  My  Spirit  wiU  not  strive  with  man  any  more  "  ;  like 
Pharaoh,  He  gives  him  up  to  the  hardness  he  himself  has  originated,  an  evil  heart 
of  unbelief  in  departing  from  the  living  God.  Some  of  you  will  say,  "  But  is  not 
the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  able  to  change  any  heart,  however  hard  ?  la  He  not  able 
to  convert  a  man  in  his  last  gasp  ?  "  The  Holy  Spirit's  work  is  always  exercised  on 
a  system  that  promotes  holiness,  that  glorifies  Himself,  that  honours  His  holy 
Word ;  and  your  acting  on  the  pleas  that  I  now  quote  for  you  is  simply  sinning 
because  grace  abounds,  and  making  the  Holy  Spirit's  omnipotence  an  excuse  for 
your  worldliness.  And,  in  the  next  place,  let  me  remind  you,  that  while  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  able  to  do  all  this,  He  will  not,  and  it  is  unreasonable  to  expect  that  He 
will,  dishonour  the  means  that  He  has  instituted.  But  perhaps  you  will  argue, 
"  But  we  know  that  men  have  been  converted  on  their  deathbeds ;  very  frequently 
we  read  of  instances  the  most  remarkable  of  deathbed  conversions ;  and  this  ought 
to  cheer  us  in  the  prospect  of  a  deathbed  conversion."  First  of  all,  art  you  per- 
fectly sure  that  your  case  is  parallel  in  all  points  with  the  cases  that  you  read  ? 
And  then,  in  the  next  place,  are  you  quite  sure  that  such  cases  are  not  exceptional? 
I  admit  at  once  grace  has  its  trophies  in  every  age.  But  if  this  be  exceptional,  not 
the  general  rule,  would  you  act  in  this  way  in  common  life  ?  Would  you  plunge 
into  the  roaring  cataract  because  one  man,  half  a  century  ago,  did  so,  and  escaped  ? 
And  then,  let  me  add,  those  remarkable  cases  that  you  quote  had  not  the  oppor- 
tunities that  you  have  had.  Now  that  is  a  very  modifying  element.  The  dying 
thief  never  heard  of  a  Saviour  till  he  saw  Him  nailed  to  the  Cross.  In  none  of 
these  cases — here  is  the  striking  fact — was  tbere  a  previous  hardening  process 
under  the  knowledge  and  the  preaching  of  the  truth.  But  some  encourage  them- 
selves with  this  :  "  But  you  know  the  scenes  of  a  deathbed  are  very  solemn."  They 
are  very  solemn  indeed.  "And  may  it  not  be  true,"  you  will  say,  "that  when 
eternity  envelops  us  like  an  ocean,  that  then  we  shall  think,  and  pray,  and  believe, 
and  be  saved?  "  When  the  house  is  tumbling  to  ruins  about  the  tenant,  when  life 
is  ebbing  from  all  tbe  shores  of  the  senses,  when  you  are  distracted  by  hopes  to-day, 
by  depression  to-morrow ;  when  cares  in  this  world  that  you  have  left  unsettled, 
pains  and  agonies  within,  separations,  tears,  sympathies,  and  sorrows  are  about  you 
— oh  !  let  me  ask,  is  that  an  hour  for  thinking  about  the  soul,  of  God,  of  the 
judgment-peat,  a  Saviour,  an  eternity  ?  You  may  disguise  it  as  you  like,  but  you 
may  depend  upon  it  it  is  not.  It  is  so  easy  in  health  to  speculate  what  you  will  do ; 
it  is  so  difficult  in  a  dying  hour  to  settle  what  was  unsettled  before.  The  following 
illustration  is  by  an  American  traveller :  "  In  my  to  and  fro  rambles  in  foreign 
lands  I  once  met  with  a  party  of  young  Englishmen,  one  of  whom  had  lost  his 
passport.  By  one  dodge  and  another  he  continued  to  get  on  without  it  at  the 
stations  of  secondary  importance,  but  at  length  he  came  to  the  frontiers :  the 
demand  to  see  and  examine  the  document  was  stern  and  imperative ;  his  lack  of  it, 
as  well  as  the  artifices  by  which  he  had  heretofore  concealed  it,  was  detected,  and 
his  further  progress  disgractfully  arrested."  How  many  will  come  to  the  frontiers 
of  that  eternal  world  towards  which  we  are  all  journeying  without  a  passport  ? 
We  may  evade  all  scrutinies  at  the  way-stations.  We  may  be  admitted  into  reput- 
able and  virtuous  society.  We  may  enter  the  Church.  We  may  eat  and  drink  in 
the  presence  of  Christ.  But  all  this  does  not  constitute  a  passport  into  the  ever- 
lasting kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour.  •'  Except  a  man  be  bom  again,  he 
cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  "  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord." 
Only  learn  wisdom  from  the  children  of  this  world,  and  do  not  delay  to  get 
your  passport  till  you  reach  the  very  station  where  it  will  be  demanded. 
It  wiU  then  be  too  late.  Now  is  the  accepted  time.  {J.  Cumming,  D.D.) 
The  voice  of  God  and  the  hard-heart cdness  of  man  : — I.  The  voice  of  God  1  Ah  ! 
it  is  a  wonderful  thing  that  the  High  and  Holy  One  should  condescend  to  speak 
to  a  rebelUous  and  apostate  race  for  their  good.  1.  And  if  you  ask  how  He  utters 
His  voice  to  man,  I  answer,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  uttered  through  the  medium  of 
external  nature.  By  those  who  will  listen  to  it,  the  voice  is  heard  above,  below,  and 
around  them.  And  yet  there  are  men  in  this  age  of  science  and  education,  who  can 
tread  upon  the  green  carpet  of  the  earth,  bespread  with  fruit  and  flower,  without 
any  responding  emotions  to  the  Giver  of  them  all ;  who  appear  deaf  to  the  count* 


CHAP,  m.]  HEBREWS.  fSSf 

less  notes  by  which  His  voice  is  uttered,  and  His  wisdom,  power  and  love  pro- 
claimed, and  to  whom  it  is  requisite  now  as  of  old  to  say,  "  If  ye  will  hear  His 
voice,  harden  not  your  heart."  2.  I  next  observe,  that  the  voice  of  God  is  uttered 
through  the  medium  of  passing  events.  Whatever  occurrence  takes  place,  the  really 
wise  man  hears  in  it  a  message  from  the  throne  of  the  Eternal.  When  affluence 
and  power  are  bestowed,  he  hears  the  voice  of  God  declaring, "  Here  are  means  and 
opportunities  for  promoting  My  glory  and  advancing  the  welfare  of  My  creatures. 
Make  a  right  use  of  them.  Be  a  wise  steward  over  them."  When,  on  the  other 
hand,  poverty  comes,  he  hears  the  voice  of  God  admonishing,  "  Learn  the  perishable 
nature  of  earthly  wealth,  and  lay  up  for  thyself  treasures  in  heaven."  When  sick- 
nesa  and  bereavement  come  with  their  desponding  and  painful  associations,  he  hears 
the  voice  of  God  declaring,  '♦  It  is  good  for  thee  to  be  afflicted ;  before  thon  wast 
afflicted  thou  wentest  wrong ;  but  now  thou  shalt  learn  my  statutes."  3.  I  next 
observe,  that  the  voice  of  God  is  uttered  through  the  medium  of  human  instruction 
and  example.  Here  a  believing  husband  seeks  to  impress  his  wife  with  the  truths 
of  the  gospel ;  there  a  wife,  whose  affections  are  set  "  on  things  above,"  deplores 
the  excessive  worldliness  of  her  husband's  mind.  4.  I  observe,  further,  that  the 
voice  of  God  is  uttered  through  the  medium  of  His  inspired   Word.    II.  The 

NATURE,  OK  THE  MANNER  AND  CHARACTER  OF  THE  RESISTANCE  MADE  BY  MAN  TO  THE 

VOICE  OF  God.  The  resistance  commonly  offered  to  the  Divine  appeals  is  not  that 
of  *'  the  fool,  who  saith  in  his  heart,  there  is  no  God,"  nor  that  of  the  recklessly 
worldly  or  the  profoundly  infidel,  who  cry  out, "  What  is  the  Almiyhty,  that  we  should 
serve  Him  ?  and  what  profit  should  we  have,  if  we  pray  unto  Him  ?  "  The  resist- 
ance offered  by  the  bulk  of  the  impenitent,  is  that  described  by  the  expression , 
"  hardening  the  heart  as  in  the  provocation  ";  a  delay  and  a  disinclination  to  act  up  tv> 
the  convictions  of  conscience  from  a  deep  rooted  love  of  sin,  like  that  of  the  peopl*^ 
in  the  wilderness,  than  which  nothing  can  be  more  provoking  to  the  Holy  One  of 
Israel.  When  men  disobey  what  they  beheve  to  be  the  voice  of  God,  they  must  try 
to  find  some  plausible  excuse  for  their  disobedience,  or  they  must  be  most  uncom- 
fortable and  uneasy  in  their  minds.  The  individual  who  is  frequently  employed  in 
gathering  pleas  for  the  neglect  of  religion  soon  becomes  an  adept  in  the  work  of 
self-justiffcation.  Having  engaged  in  a  warfare  with  his  reason,  his  judgment 
and  the  best  affections  of  his  nature,  he  has  nearly  gained  the  victory,  and  the 
consequence  is  that  he  feels  less  religious  responsibility  than  before,  and  is  become 
almost  inaccessible  to  any  means  of  conviction.  Now  this  is  precisely  what  the 
Scripture  means  by  •'  hardening  the  heart  "  ;  and  this  is  the  very  thing  that  is  done 
by  those  in  a  Christian  land,  who  refuse  to  become  Christians  indeed  and  in  truth. 
{H.  Hughes,  B.D.)  Neglecting  the  day  of  grace  : — An  artist  solicited  permission 
to  paint  a  portrait  of  the  queen.  The  favour  was  granted ;  and  the  favour  was 
great,  for  it  would  make  the  fortune  of  the  man.  A  place  was  fixed,  and  the  time. 
At  the  fixed  place  and  time  the  queen  appeared :  but  the  artist  was  not  there ;  he 
was  not  ready  yet.  When  he  did  arrive,  a  message  was  communicated  to  him,  that 
her  majesty  had  departed,  and  would  not  return.  Such  is  the  tale.  The  King  eternal 
consented  to  meet  man.  He  fixed  in  His  covenant  and  promised  in  His  Word,  the 
object,  place,  and  time  of  the  meeting :  it  is  for  salvation ;  it  is  in  Christ ;  it  is  now.  He 
has  been  true  to  His  own  appointment ;  but  how  often  is  it  otherwise  with  man  I 
{W.  Arnot.)  Now  is  the  time  : — When  I  think  of  opportunities,  I  think  I  may 
liken  us  here  to-night  to  a  number  of  men  in  the  Arctic  regions.  They  have  been 
frozen  up  for  a  long  time,  and  the  ship  is  high  and  dry  on  great  masses  of  ice. 
The  thaw  comes  on  ;  but  the  thaw,  however,  will  last  but  for  a  very  short  time. 
They  set  their  saws  to  work  ;  they  see  a  split  in  the  ice  ;  there  is  a  long  and  very 
narrow  lane  of  water.  If  they  can  get  the  ship  along  there  before  the  water  freezes 
it  up  ag  lin  they  may  yet  reach  the  shores  of  dear  old  England,  and  be  safe  ;  but  if 
not  they  are  frozen  in  for  another  winter,  and  very  hkely  will  be  frozen  in  for  ever. 
Well,  now,  to-night  it  seems  just  so  with  us.  It  seems  as  if  the  Spirit  of  God  had 
purposely  brought  some  of  you  here ;  and  I  do  trust  He  is  opening,  as  it  were,  the 
lane  of  mercy  for  you — causing  your  sins  for  a  little  time  to  loose  their  frosty  hold, 
and  opening  your  heart  a  little  to  the  genial  influences  of  the  gospaL  But,  oh  1  if 
it  should  be  frozen  up  again.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  IG.  Some,  when  they  had  heard,  did  provoke. — Some  but  notaU  bad : — I.  Man* 

HEAR  THE  WoRD  OB  VOICE  OF  GoD  TO  NO  ADVANTAGE,  BUT  ONLY  TO  AGGRAVATE  THEIR  SIH. 

Their  hearing  renders  their  sin  provoking  unto  God,  and  destructive  to  their  own  souls. 
It  is,  I  confess,  a  great  privilege  for  men  to  have  the  Word  preached  onto  them,  and 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

to  hear  it  (Psa.  cxlvii.  19,  20).  Bat  privileges  are  as  men  nse  them.  In  them- 
selves, they  are  of  worth,  and  to  be  prized.  But  unto  us,  they  are  as  they  are  used. 
Hence  the  gospel  comes  unto  some  "  a  savour  of  death  unto  death  "  (2  Cor.  ii.  16). 
Yea,  Christ  Himself,  in  His  whole  ministry  was  a  stone  of  stumbling,  and  a  rock  of 
offence  to  both  the  houses  of  Israel,  a  gin  and  a  snare  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
(Isa.  viii.  14  ;  Luke  ii.  34).  And  the  enjoyment  of  any  part  of  the  means  of  grace 
is  but  a  trial.  H.  In  the  most  general  and  visible  apostasies  of  the  Chubch, 
God  still  reserves  a  remnant  unto  Himself,  to  bear  witness  unto  Him  and 
FOB  Him,  by  their  faith  and  obedience.  This  He  hath  done,  and  this  He  will 
do.  1.  To  maintain  His  own  kingdom  in  the  world.  2.  Should  all  faith  utterly 
fail  in  the  earth,  should  all  professors  provoke  God  and  apostatise  from  Him,  all 
gracious  intercourse  between  the  Holy  Spirit  and  mankind  in  the  world  would  be  at 
an  end.  3.  God  will  do  this  for  the  work  that  He  hath  for  some  of  His  in  all  ages 
and  seasons  to  do  in  the  world.  And  this  is  great  and  various.  He  will  have  some 
always  to  conflict  with  His  adversaries  and  overcome  them,  and  therein  give  testi- 
mony to  the  power  of  His  grace  and  truth.  4.  God  will  always  have  a  testimony 
given  to  His  goodness,  grace,  and  mercy.  5.  God  will  always  have  a  revenue  of 
especial  glory  out  of  the  world,  in  and  by  His  worship.  HI.  God  lays  a  few,  oft- 
times  A  very  few,  of  His  secret  ones  in  the  balance  against  the  greatest 
MULTITUDE  OF  REBELS  AND  TRANSGRESSORS.  They  are  His  portiou,  His  inheritance, 
His  jewels,  dear  to  Him  as  the  apple  of  His  eye,  and  deservedly  preferred  unto  the 
greatest  heap  of  chaff  and  rubbish.     (John  Owen,  D.D.) 

Vera.  17-19.  With  whom  was  He  grieved. — Go^i  long -suffering : — Now  where 
he  saith,  "  With  whom  He  was  angry  forty  years,"  we  have  here  to  learn  what  is 
the  long-suffering  of  the  Lord,  who  doth  not  straight  punish  the  sinner,  but  as  Ha 
endured  the  manners  of  the  people  of  Israel  forty  years,  so  He  beareth  with  us  in 
all  our  transgressions.  If  thus  we  consider  this  example  and  such  like,  we  are  no 
idle  hearers,  but  profitably  exercise  ourselves  in  His  judgments  ;  and  as  we  ought 
to  give  Him  this  praise,  that  He  is  long-suffering,  so  let  us  know  what  duty  we  ought 
again  to  render  unto  God  for  all  His  goodness ;  for  a  great  many  of  us  cry  with  loud 
voices,  the  Lord  is  merciful,  but  we  be  dumb  and  deaf,  and  have  no  hearts,  when 
we  should  learn  what  His  mercy  requireth  of  us.  For,  tell  me,  what  wouldst  thou 
think  of  such  a  child,  who,  because  his  father  is  loving  and  kind,  would  therefore 
be  rebellions  and  riotous  ?  What  wouldst  thou  think  of  a  servant,  that  because  his 
master  is  gentle  and  courteous,  would  therefore  be  careless  in  his  work,  and  not 
regard  him  ?  What  subject,  think  we,  were  he,  that  because  his  prince  is  good  and 
favourable,  would  therefore  be  traitorous  and  conspire  against  him  ?  Would  we  not 
give  speedy  sentence  against  such  monstrous  and  unnatural  men?  And  what 
hearts  then  have  we  that  be  here  this  day,  if  we  will  confess  this  great  goodness  of 
God,  our  King  and  Father,  and  yet  walk  in  our  sins  before  Him?  Thus  let  us 
answer  the  long-suffering  of  our  God  :  and  howsoever  He  be  angry  with  many,  as 
with  the  Israelite?  in  the  wilderness,  He  will  be  pleased  with  us,  as  with  Caleb,  or 
Moses,  and  we  shall  enter  into  His  rest.  How  can  we  have  a  better  rule  than  to 
see  in  the  Word  how  God  is  said  to  be  angry  with  His  people.  He  is  angry  here 
because  they  refused  wisdom  and  embraced  folly,  because  they  forsook  the  word  of 
truth  and  followed  vain  devices,  because  they  would  not  enter  into  the  rest  promised 
them,  but  had  more  desire  to  return  to  the  heavy  labour  and  bondage  of  Egypt. 
This  madness  of  the  people  the  Lord  is  angry  with,  as  a  loving  Father  that  had 
care  over  them.  So,  if  we  will  have  holy  anger,  let  it  be  free  from  aU  hatred  and 
reveige,  and  arise  only  for  the  profit  and  well-doing  of  our  brethren  (Mark  iii.  5  ; 
2  Tim.  iv.  4;  Jude  23).  {E,  Deering,  B.D.)  Sin  and  its  punishment: — I.  God 
18  not  displeased  with  anything  in  His  people  but  sin  ;   or,  bin  is  the  only 

PROPER  object  of  God'S  DISPLEASURE,  AND  THE  SINNER  FOB  8IN*8  SAKE.  II.  POBLIO 
SINS,  SINS  IN  SOCIETIES,  ARE  GREAT  PROVOCATIONS  OF  GoD.  III.  GoD  SOMETIMES  WILL 
MASE    MEN    WHO   HAVE    BEEN    WICKEDLY    EXEMPLARY   IN    SIN,    RIGHTEOUSLY    EXEMPLARY 

IN  THEIR  PUNISHMENT.  "They  sinncd,"  saith  the  apostle,  "and  provoked  God, 
and  their  carcases  fell  in  the  wilderness."  To  what  end  is  this  reported  ?  It  ia 
that  we  might  take  heed,  that  we  fall  not  after  the  same  example  of  unbelief  (chap, 
iv.  11).  1.  The  first  use  hereof  is  that  which  Hannah  proposeth  (1  Sam.  ii.  3).  Let 
men  take  heed  how  they  arrogantly  boast  themselves  in  their  sin  and  wickedness, 
which  is  too  common  with  provoking  sinners ;  for  God  is  a  God  of  knowledge  and 
judgment.  2.  Let  us  learn  to  glorify  God  because  of  His  righteous  judgments. 
The  saints  in  heaven  go  before  us  in  this  work  and  dut>  (liev.  xL  ld-18,  sv. 


CHAP,  in.]  HEBREWS,  287 

S,  4,  xix.  1,  2).  Not  that  we  should  rejoice  in  the  misery  of  men,  but  we  should  do 
BO  in  the  vindication  of  the  glory  of  God,  which  is  infinitely  to  be  preferred  before 
the  impunity  of  profligate  sinners.    IV.  Great  DESTRncxioNB  in  a  way  of  jddo- 

MENT   AND    VENGEANCE,    ARE     INSTITUTED     REPRESENTATIONS     OF     THE     JUDGMENT     AND 

TENQEANCE  TO  COME  (scc  Isa.  xxxiv.  1-5 ;  Dan.  vii.  9-11 ;  Matt.  xxiv.  29 ;  Heb.  x. 
26,  27;  2  Pet.  iii.  5-7;  Rev.  vi.  13-17).     (John  Owen,  D.D.)        Sin  viewed  in  con- 
nection with  its  temporal  results  : — It  cannot,  indeed,  be  contended  that  the  wicked 
are  openly,  in  this  world,  rendered  invariable  victims  of  Divine  wrath ;  nor  does 
subjection  to  misfortune  prove  previous  subjection  to  vice.   Providential  visitations 
do  not  necessarily  presuppose  extraordinary  impiety ;  and  must  not,  therefore,  be 
continually  identified  with  judicial  strokes.     On  the  other  hand,  worldly  prosperity 
is  not  an  unfailing  accompaniment  to  holiness — frequently  very  far  otherwise.     It 
is  true,  that  in  times  of  persecution,  those  will  suffer  who  avow  that  they  are  "  not 
ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  "  ;  but  still,  at  other  periods,  and  even  then,  it  will 
not  be  needful  that  they  should  be  visited  with  such  woes  as  are  sent  to  correct  the 
rebelliousness  of  the  ungodly.     If,  therefore,  we  were  called  upon  to  point  out  a 
mode  whereby  man  might  ofUimes  mitigate  the  rigours  of  his  earthly  pilgrimage, 
we  would  not  hesitate  to  recommend  to  him  the  practice  of  holiness.  Never  forgetting 
that  his  first  object  in  endeavouring  to  conform  to  the  Divine  will  must,  of  course,  be 
God's  glory,  in  conjunction  with  bis  own  salvation,  we  find,  at  the  same  time, 
ample  reason  to  conclude,  that  his ' '  peace  on  earth,"  no  less  than  his  bliss  in  heaven, 
will  be  advanced  by  his  steadfast  adherence  to  the  ways  of  righteousness.    You  may 
have  been  accustomed  to  consider,  that  it  is  solely  in  reference  to  your  spiritual 
concerns  that  your  faith  can  be  made  available ;  but,  surely,  if  the  want  of  faith  is 
liable,  as  in  the  instance  referred  to  in  the  text,  to  become  an  occasion  of  teruporal 
disappointment  and  failure,  it  may  fairly  be  expected  that  its  presence,  which  we 
know  to  be  well-pleasing  in  the  sight  of  God,  will  lead,  in  unnumbered  cases,  to 
results  of  a  precisely  opposite  character.     Our  Almighty  Father  displays  far  more 
readiness  to  recognise  the  faith  and  love,  than  to  punish  the  distrust  and  alienation, 
of  His  children.     Though  the  murmuring  Israelites  were  doomed  for  weary  years 
to  wander  through  the  wilderness,  and  were  even  destined  never  to  behold  the  fair 
and  fertile  land  which  lay  beyond  its  bleak  and  barren  regions,  yet  would  it,  think 
you,  have  been  God's  determination  to  exclude  them  from  the  country  which  they 
60  desired  to  reach,  had  they  firmly  relied  on  His  power  and  constantly  respected 
His  precepts  ?   Already  had  He  furnished  them  with  evidences  in  abundance  of  His 
anxiety  to  promote  their  well-being.    But  no  :  they  counted  as  nothing  all  previous 
demonstrations  of  His  affection  and  His  power ;  their  sensibilities  were  unawakened, 
and  their  minds  unconvinced,  by  any  reasonable  appreciation  of  the  evidencewhich 
foregoing  occurrences  had  supplied  ;  and  their  tongues  were  as  ready  to  murmur, 
and  their  hearts  to  faint,  at  every  obstacle  met  with  in  their  path,  at  every  incon- 
venience experienced  throughout  their  journey,  as  though  no  practical  assurances 
had  been  given  of  God's  readiness  still  to  act  as  their  Protector  and  Guide ;  as  though 
no  stupendous  wonders  had  been  wrought,  and  no  providential  kindness  had  been 
displayed.     We  marvel  greatly  at  their  obstinacy  and  blindness  ;  but  I  question 
much   whether,  after  all,   we   recognise,   generally   speaking,   that   principle   in 
the  Divine   procedure   with   our  race   which  was  exemplified  in  the  retributive 
treatment  with  which  they  met.     They  were  losers,  in  a  temporal  point  of  view, 
thiough  their  unbelief.    Had  they  trusted  in  God  in  seasons  of  apparent  danger  or 
real  distress,  they  would  speedily,  doubtless,  have  been  enabled  to  surmount  all  the 
difliculties  of  their  pilgrimage,  and  have  been  happily  and  safely  located  in  the  land 
of  promise.    The  world  at  large  may  ridicule  the  idea  that  a  man's  spiritual  stand- 
ing can  have  the  remotest  connection  with  the  success  or  failure  which  may  attend 
his  pursuit  of  any  temporal  objects ;  and  we  are  far  enough  from  alleging  that  the 
maintenance  of  religious  principle  will  necessarily  ensure  the  prosperous  issue  of 
every  enterprise ;  but  its  absence  may,  at  any  time,  throw  obstacles  in  the  way 
which  might  not,  under  other  circumstances,  require  to  be  encountered  ;  and  when 
we  find  that  unbelief,  and  nothing  else,  was  the  cause  of  the  exclusion  of  so  many 
of  the  Israelitish  wanderers  from  the  choice  and  productive  land  of  Canaan,  we  seem 
to  read,  in  characters  so  plain  that  only  wilful  error  can  mistake  their  meaning,  the 
great  truth,  that  the  earthly  prospects  of  all  may  be  materially  and  even  vitally 
effected  by  the  possession  or  the  want  of  faith.     We  do  not  say  that  brilUancy  of 
renown,  that  stores  of  earthly  treasures,  that  high  and  commanding  influence  will 
belong  to  those  who  consistently  repose  faith  in  the  wisdom  and  continual  workings 
of  the  providence  of  God :  these  appertain  but  to  few,  nor  can  they  fairly  be jsmtad— ^— -*,,^^^ 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

amongst  such  acquisitions  as  are  intrinsically  adapted  to  produce  felicity.  But  we  say 
that  when  a  man  conducts  each  of  his  undertakings,  from  its  commencement  to  its 
conclusion,  with  express  reference  to  the  will  and  watchfulness  of  the  Almighty 
Governor ;  looking  to  Him  as  the  Source  of  aid  in  all  his  difficulties,  and  regarding 
Him  as  the  Author  of  aU  his  success ;  we  say  that  the  man  lives  in  the  habitual 
exercise  of  such  faith  as  wiU  remove  the  most  formidable  obstacles  out  of  his  path  ; 
and  that  thus,  while  he  is  journeying  towards  a  happier  land,  brighter  sunshine^ 
and  unclouded  skies,  ho  is  also  engaged  in  the  promotion  of  his  own  welfare  mean- 
while here  below — in  procuring,  to  a  large  extent,  an  increase  to  his  happiness,  even 
ere  he  is  released  from  the  infirmities  of  the  earthly  tabernacle.  {H.  B.  Moffat^ 
M.A.)  Because  of  unbelief. — The  sin  of  unbelief: — Why  did  they  not  enter  into 
rest  ?  Because  they  believed  not.  He  does  not  single  out  the  sin  of  making  and 
worshipping  the  golden  calf  ;  he  does  not  bring  before  us  the  flagrant  transgressiona 
into  which  they  fell  at  Baal-peor.  Many  much  more  striking  and  to  our  mind  more 
fearful  sins  could  have  been  pointed  out ;  but  God  thinks  the  one  sin  greater  than 
ail  is  unbelief.  We  are  saved  by  faith  ;  we  are  lost  through  unbelief.  The  heart  is 
purified  by  faith ;  the  heart  is  hardened  by  unbelief.  Faith  brings  us  nigh  to  God, 
unbelief  is  departure  from  God.  Does  it  seem  strange  ?  By  faith  we  draw  near  and 
worship  God ;  by  faith  we  receive  God's  love ;  through  faith  the  Holy  Ghost  is  given 
unto  us ;  by  faith  we  obey  and  follow  Christ.  Yet  it  is  so  natural  and  so  like  the 
goodness  of  God  that  all  should  be  by  faith.  For  the  Lord  is  our  God  ;  He  is  all. 
He  is  willing  to  be,  to  give,  to  do  all ;  to  be  God  for  us,  to  us,  in  us.  By  grace  ar© 
we  saved  through  faith,  and  even  this  trust  is  the  gift  of  His  blessed  Spirit  (Eph. 
ii.).  Unbelief  prevented  Israel's  entering  into  the  promised  land.  Then  it  follows 
that  faith  enters  into  rest.  If  we  trust  in  God,  then  the  wilderness  will  be  converted 
into  the  garden  of  the  Lord.  See  the  true  Israel,  Jesus  our  Lord,  who  was  tested 
in  the  wilderness.  He  entered  into  rest,  He  enjoyed  peace  with  God  ;  and  there  was 
given  Him  power  to  tread  upon  the  lion  and  adder,  and  to  trample  the  dragon  under 
His  feet.  Worshipping  the  Father  He  conquered  ;  and  the  angels  of  God  refreshed 
and  gladdened  His  heart  with  their  heavenly  converse.  Such  is  to  be  your  Ufe. 
Only  believe,  only  worship,  only  harden  not  your  heart,  when  in  the  Scripture  and 
in  the  Spirit's  teaching  and  in  God's  daily  deaUngs  you  hear  God's  voice,  and  though 
wild  beasts,  hunger  and  privation,  weakness  and  temptation  beset  you,  you  are  safe, 
you  are  blessed.  God  is  with  you,  who  can  be  against  you  ?  {A.  SapJdr.)  The 
bar  to  progress : — The  words  of  our  text  are  now  perpetually  being  fulfilled  in  people 
who  have  missed  their  aim,  who  have  not  reached  success.  They  belong  to  a  crisis, 
a  turning-point  in  the  ancient  history  of  God's  people,  and  they  suit  the  present 
modern  condition  of  the  world.  They  refer  to  those  who  were  marching  onward  to 
a  distinct  end,  but  could  not  enter  in  because  of  unbelief.  Thus  they  may  fit  na  and 
our  ways.  This  generation  is  enterprising  and  ambitious.  It  looks  down  every 
road,  and  tries  every  gate.  Multitudes  are  seeking  to  go  forward  in  divers  ways. 
And  the  success  of  their  advance  depends  upon  their  belief.  I  mean  trust  in  the 
living  power  of  righteousness,  truth,  and  love,  which  is  God's.  No  one  can  really 
enter  into  and  enjoy  any  new  work,  state,  or  position ;  no  one  can  really  advance 
without  reliance  upon  this.  Look  at  education.  What  an  impulse  it  has  lately  re- 
ceived I  But  what  might  be,  what  often  is,  the  bar  to  its  wholesome  effect — to  its 
success?  Not  merely  the  omission  of  the  Scriptural  or  religious  lesson  from  the 
time-table,  but  a  misbelief  in  the  great  aims  of  education  itseLf.  Without  an  incnl- 
cation  of  righteousness,  without  trust  in  the  great  principles  of  law  and  order,  and 
without  an  appeal  to  the  spiritual  capacities  of  the  scholar,  education  may  result 
in  the  scraping  together  of  the  worst  ancient  and  modern  moral  mud  into  the  cess- 
pool of  his  mind,  and  in  his  alliance  or  union  with  that  which  is  most  actively  mis- 
chievous in  the  world.  We  might  see,  moreover,  how  the  law  of  our  text  governs 
many  other  movements.  It  specially  rules  such  as  are  akin  to  that  which  originally 
called  it  forth.  It  was  first  spoken  of  those  who  migrated  from  Egypt  to  Canaan, 
but  could  not  enter  into  the  Promised  Land  because  of  unbelief.  This  makes  us 
think  of  another  great  movement  of  these  days — emigration.  The  overflow  of 
crowded  Europe  is  filling  North  America,  and  other  great  half -empty  regions  of  tbe 
world.  It  is  true  that  some  of  the  conditions  attending  this  transfer  did  not  exist 
in  any  previous  settlement  of  a  new  land.  But  one  condition  holds — for  ever.  The 
emigrant  is  sure  to  fail  if  he  goes  frivolously,  if  he  fails  to  realise  the  severe  con- 
ditions of  migration,  il  he  does  not  go  with  a  steadfast  heart,  trusting — though  he 
may  not  always  define  this  process  to  himself — in  the  great  eternal  and  Divine  laws 
of  life  and  growth,  which  always  govern  victory.    The  genuine  spirit  of  enterprise 


CHAJ.  m.]  HEBREWS.  289 


•nd  energy  begets  success.     It  is  a  possessioa  which  increases  to  the  holder,  while 
the  half-hearted  loses  the  little  that  he  hoUls.     It  slips  from  his  feeble  hand.     Un- 
questionably,  a  successful  act  of  migration  demands  much  energy  and  perseverance 
on  the  part  of  those  who  move.     We  may  be  sure  that  the  great  laws  of  Go.l  over- 
rule  all  adventure ;  and  that  the  keepmg  of  a  good  courage,  the  spirit  of  wisdom 
and  understanding,  thi  spirit  of  counsel,  and  the  like  Divine  gifts,  really  lead  to 
victory.    These  ever  have  entrance  and  dominion.    I  have  said  that  the  note  of  our 
text  is  in  good  tune  with  many  of  the  greatest  movements  of  our  day.   No  true  pro- 
gress is  made  in  anything  except  in  accordance  with  the  great  laws  of  God.     More- 
over, it  holds,  no't  only  in  the  advances  which  are  being  made  into  the  freshly- 
opened  regions  of  the  earth,  but  in  the  revision  of  ancient  home  institutions,  and 
the  promotion  of  any  social  or  political  progress.     Take,  for  instance,  the  giving  of 
larger  power  in  the  State  to  the  peasantry  in  our  land.     This  is  exercising  both  the 
legislature  and  society.    And  we  are  specially  reminded  of  it  by  that  period  in  the 
history  of  the  Hebrews  to  which  our  text  belongs.    We  are  there  told  of  a  race 
which  for  hundreds  of  years  had  been  in  bondage  along  with  their  flocks  and  herds. 
We  hear  of  the  partial  probation  these  people  had  gone  through,  of  the  education 
which  they  had  received  since  they  left  the  place  of  subjection.  Wlien  they  crossed 
the  border  into  their  new  land  they  faced  new  conditions  of  life,  they  incurred 
greater  responsibilities.     They  had  to  exercise  more  of  that  political  power  which 
belongs  to  a  civilised  country.    In  the  pastoral  desert,  where  these  people  had  been 
sojourning,  their  chief  concern  had  been  to  supplement  God's  gifts  of  food  with 
such  produce  of  nature  as  they  could  raise  or  gather  from  the  soil  or  the  flock. 
While  thus  living  they  were  uuder  such  Divine  or  religious  instruction  as  they  had 
not  received  before.  It  is  especially  notable  that  they  had  to  read,  mark,  learn,  and 
inwardly  digest  the  Ten  Commandments ;  learning  thus  their  duty  toward  God  and 
towards  their  neighbour.     In  the  keeping  of  the  great  moral  laws  of  God  may  be 
seen  the  assurance  of  national  success.  None  can  enter  into  or  enjoy  the  real  bless- 
ings of  civilised  society  without  a  belief  in  these.     This  truth  touches  each,  and  as 
we  are  all  members  one  of  another,  we  do  not  merely  watch  spectacles  of  enfran- 
chisement and  the  like,  but  by  our  loyal  keeping  of  the  great  principle  of  righteous- 
ness shown  in  commonplace  uprightness  of  life  rising  out  of  honest  Christian  faith, 
we  welcome  and  assist  any  new-comers  into  the  fuller  rights  of  the  national  family, 
however  little  we  may  be  brought  into  personal  contact  with  them.  Every  Christian 
life  is  an  active  centre  of  goodness  and  influence  reaching  far  beyond  our  sight. 
These  words,  "  beyond  our  sight,"  might  lead  us  to  the  thought  of  that  unseen  rest 
into  which  we  cannot  enter  without  belief.     The  true  rest  of  the  Land  of  Promise 
is  not  that  craved  by  the  sole  of  the  foot,  the  sinew,  and  the  brain  ;  it  is  rather  a 
sense  of  spiritual  repose  along  with,  or  after,  any  work  done  as  before  God ;  though 
human  results  may  not  be  seen  to  follow  it.     It  marks  a  shelter  from  the  strain  of 
life  which  may  be  felt  even  in  the  whirl  and  pressure  of  its  business.     We  all  some- 
times feel  or  yearn  for  this.  It  remains  for  the  people  of  God — for  such  as  put  theit 
trust  in  Him.    It  is  occasionally,  but  most  certainly,  touched  by  them,  even  in  thia 
life.     It  survives  disappointment,  and  arrives  even  in  confusion.    But  we  do  not 
enter  into  it  without  belief.    Let  those  who  stand  outside  be  invited  and  helped  by 
the  thought  that  the  belief  which  leads  to  salvation  is  not  begun  by  an  assent  to  a 
current  or  formulated  creed,  but  in  the  receiving  of  the  influence  of  the  living  God 
who  is  revealed  to  us,  and  to  whom  we  are  joined  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     Thia 
living  faith  gives  life  and  meaning  to  the  creed.     {H.  Jones,  M.A.)         Unbelief: — 
A  man  in  prison,  with  a  signed  and  sealed  permission  to  leave  it  and  walk  at  liberty 
lying  on  the  table  beside  him,  untouched,  unopened,  yet  bemoaning  himself  and 
unhappy  in  his  cell,  is  just  the  image  of  us  believers  who  have  even  a  fragment  of 
unhappiness  about  us.    I  think  I  can  trace  every  scrap  of  sorrow  in  my  own  life  to 
this  simple  unbelief.    How  could  I  be  anything  but  quite  happy  if  I  believed  always 
that  all  the  past  is  forgiven  and  all  the  present  furnished  with  power,  and  all  the 
future  bright  with  hope,  because  of  the  same  abiding  facts,  which  don't  change  with 
my  mood,  do  not  crumble,  because  I  totter  and  stagger  at  the  promise  through  un- 
belief, but  stand  firm  and  clear  with  their  peaks  of  pearl  cleaving  the  air  of  eternity, 
and  the  bases  of  their  hills  rooted  unfathomably  in  the  rock  of   God.     (Jamea 
Smetham.)         Unbelief: — "  Unbehef  among  sins,"  says  an  old  writer,  "is  as  the 
plague  among  diseases,  the  most  dangerous  ;  but  when  it  riseth  to  despair,  then  it 
is  as  the  plague  with  the  tokens  appearing  tha   bring  the  certain  message  of  death 
with  them.    Unbelief  is  despair  in  the  bud  ;     espair  is  unbeUef  at  its  full  growth." 
Warnings  from  the  fate  of  othert : — When,      few  years  ago,  a  steamer  was  burned 

1 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  it. 

on  Long  Island  Sound,  and  the  hulk  of  the  vessel  was  afterwards  beached,  it  waa 
said  that  the  bell  of  that  steamer  kept  tolling  through  the  day  and  through  the 
night  for  weeks,  solemnly  and  impressively,  to  those  who  passed  by  on  the  waters. 
And  I  have  to  tell  you  that  God  has  so  arranged  it  that  right  over  the  place  where 
the  soul  goes  down,  or  there  is  a  moral  shipwreck  or  awful  spiritual  catastrophe — 
that  right  over  it  there  is  a  warning  that  rings  through  the  day,  and  through  the 
night,  and  through  the  years,  saying,  ••  Beware  1  beware  I  "  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 
Profiting  by  the  disasters  of  others  : — Oh,  that  we  could  make  that  use  of  their  dis- 
aster that  Walden,  the  French  merchant  (father  and  founder  of  the  Waldenses), 
did  of  that  sad  sight  that  befell  him.  For  walking  in  the  streets,  and  seeing  one 
fall  suddenly  dead,  he  went  home  and  repented  of  his  Popish  errors  and  profane 
courses.    {J,  Trapp.) 


CHAPTER  IV. 
Veks.  1,  2.  let  VLB  therefore  fear. — Fearful  of  coming  short: — I.  With  what  does 

*HE    FEAB   ENJOINED  IN  THE  TEXT  MAINLY  CONCERN    ITSEU  ?       NoW,  the  apOStlc  Cannot 

mean  that  we  are  to  fear  lest  we  should  come  short  of  heaven  for  want  of  merit. 
There  is  not  a  man  living  who  will  not  come  short  of  heaven  if  he  tries  that  road. 
1.  The  great  point  is  lest  we  come  short  of  the  heavenly  rest  by  failing  in  the  faith 
which  will  give  us  rest.  Note,  then,  that  it  becomes  us  to  be  peculiarly  anxious 
that  we  do  not  come  short  of  fully  realising  the  spirituality  of  faith.  Many  are 
content  with  the  shells  of  religion,  whereas  it  is  the  kernel  only  which  can  feed  the 
Boul.  2.  The  exhortation  of  our  text  leads  us  to  say  that  we  must  take  heed  lest 
we  fail  to  discern  the  fact  that  the  whole  way  of  salvation  is  of  faith.     11.  What 

CIRCUMSTANCES   MAY  SOOOEST   THE   NECESSITY   FOR   THIS  FEAR  ?      1.   FilSt,  it  is  Certain 

that  many  professors  apostatise.     Now,  if  others  apostatise,  may  not  we  also  7     2. 
Note,  again,  that  we  ourselves  know  others  who  are,  we  fear,  much  deceived,  and 
fall  short  of  true  salvation.     Though  we  have  very  much  that  is  morally  excellent, 
it  may  be  that  we  are  destitute  of  the  real  work  of  grace,  and  so  come  short  of  the 
rest  which  is  given  to  faith.     3,  Yet  more,  remember  there  are  some  professors  who 
know  that  they  are  not  at  rest.     "  We  that  have  believed  do  enter  into  rest,"  but 
you  know  you  have  no  peace.    III.  What  solemn  truths  demand  the  fear  sug- 
gested IN  the  text?    If  we  should  really  come  short  of  heaven  we  shall  have  lost 
all  its  bliss  and  glory  for  ever.    And  we  shall  have  lost  heaven  with  this  aggrava- 
tion, that  we   did  begin  to   build,  but  were  not  able   to   finish.     Oh,  fear  lest 
ye  come  short  of  it.     Nay,  begin  sooner,  fear  lest  ye  seem  to  come  short  of  it, 
for  he  that  is  afraid  of  the  seeming  will  be  delivered  from  the  reality.    IV.  How 
DOES  OUR  FEAB  EXERCISE  ITSELF  ?     Oui  fear  of  comiug  short  of  the  rest  must  not 
lead  us  to  unbelief,  because  in  that  case  it  would  make  us  come  short  at  once. 
(C  H.  Spurgeon.)        A  check  to  presumption: — I.  The  gospel  is  not  only  a  revela- 
tion, but  A  PROMISE,  and  a  promise  exceeding  great  and  precious.    It  not  only  holds 
forth  to  our  view,  but  it  proposes  to  our  hope  eternal  life,  and  whatever  is  previously 
necessary  to  the  acquisition  of  it.     The  promise  was  early  made,  and  was  often 
renewed  with  enlargements.    Yes,  in  this  blessed  Book  we  have  "  a  promise  left  us 
of  entering  into  His  rest."    But  what  is  this  rest  ?     We  may  view  it  as  it  is  begun 
upon  earth,  or  completed  in  heaven.     Even  while  the  believer  is  upon  earth,  this 
rest  is  not  only  ensured,  but  begun.     1.  View  him  with  regard  to  his  understanding, 
and  you  will  find  that  he  has  rest.     2.  View  him  with  regard  to  his  conscience,  and 
you  will  find  that  he  has  rest.     He  is  freed  from  the  torment  of  fear  and  the  horrors 
of  guilt.    3.  View  him  with  regard  to  his  passions  and  appetites,  and  you  find  he 
has  rest.     While  pride,  and  envy,  and  malice,  and  avarice,  and  sensual  affections, 
reigned  within,  often  striving  with  each  other,  and  always  fighting  against  the  con- 
victions of  his  judgment,  the  man's  breast  was  nothing  but  a  scene  of  tumult ;  he 
was  "  like  the  troubled  sea,  when  it  cannot  rest."     4.  View  him  once  more  with 
regard  to  his  "  condition  and  circumstances,"  and  you  will  find  that  he  has  rest. 
He  is  freed  from  those  anxieties  which  devour  others,  who  make  the  world  their 
portion,  and  have  no  confidence  in  God,     With  all  his  advantages  here,  a  voice 
perpetually  cries  in  his  ears,  "  Arise  and  depart,  for  this  is  not  your  rest."    How- 


<JHAP.  rr.]  HEBREWS.  291 

ever  favourable  the  voyage,  they  are  now  on  the  treacherous  ocean ;  and  by  and  by 
they  will  enter  the  harbour — "  then  are  they  glad  because  they  are  quiet ;  so  He 
bringeth  them  unto  their  desired  haven."  At  death  we  are  told  the  righteous  enter 
into  rest.  And  this  rest  is  pure,  undisturbed,  and  everlasting.  They  shall  rest 
from  "  their  labours."  Though  all  activity,  they  shall  be  incapable  of  fatigue,  for 
thsir  powers  will  be  fully  equal  to  their  work.  II,  The  state  of  mind  in  which  we 
SHOULD  BEOARD  IT — "  Let  US  therefore  fear,"  &c.  The  fear  here  enjoined  is  not 
that  of  the  sluggr.rd  dismayed  by  diCficulties,  or  of  the  unbeliever  who  suspects  that 
the  promise  shall  not  be  accomplished ;  but  a  fear  of  caution,  vigilance ;  a  fear 
which  leads  us  to  examine  ourselves,  and  allows  us,  in  this  awful  concern,  to  be 
satisfied  with  nothing  less  than  evidence  whether  we  have  a  title  to  heaven  and 
are  in  a  fair  way  to  obtain  this  blessedness.  1.  To  excite  in  you  this  fear,  remem- 
ber the  possibility  of  your  coming  short.  Bemember  that  out  of  six  hundred  thou- 
sand Israelites  who  came  out  of  Egypt  to  possess  the  land  of  Canaan,  two  only 
entered  I  2.  Consider  the  consequence  of  coming  short.  Is  it  not  dreadful 
to  be  deprived  of  that  "  fulness  of  joy "  which  God  hath  promised  to  them 
that  love  Him  1  What  would  it  be  to  lose  your  business,  your  health,  your  friends, 
compared  with  the  loss  of  the  soul  t  And  remember,  there  is  no  medium  between 
heaven  and  hell ;  if  you  miss  the  one,  the  other  is  unavoidable.  And  remember 
also  the  aggravations  which  will  attend  the  misery  of  those  who  perish  in  your  cir- 
cumstances. There  is  nothing  so  healing,  so  soothing,  as  the  expectation  of  hope  ; 
and  of  course  there  is  nothing  so  tormenting  as  the  disappointment  of  it,  especially 
where  the  object  is  vastly  important.  Yea,  remember  also  that  you  will  not  only 
be  disappointed  in  coming  short,  but  you  will  be  punished  for  it.  (1)  Let  us 
observe,  first,  how  thankful  we  should  be  for  such  a  promise  left  us  of  entering  into 
His  rest!  For  surely  we  could  not  have  reasonably  expected  it.  (2)  Let  us, 
secondly,  see  how  necessary  it  is  in  religion  to  avoid  passing  from  one  extreme  into 
another.  The  gospel  encourages  our  hope  ;  but  then  it  enlightens  it  and  guards  it. 
"  Pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear.  Be  not  highminded,  but  fear. 
Work  out  your  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling."  (3)  What  are  we  to  say  of 
those  of  you  who  know  nothing  oi  this  salutary  concern?  (The  Congregational 
Pulpit.)  Necessity  for  religious  caution: — I.  We  have  actually  a  pbomise  made 
TO  us  OF  an  eternal  REST.  Christianity  is  no  cunningly  devised  fable,  but  a  certain 
offer  of  inconceivable  felicity.  It  finds  us  wretched,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and 
miserable.  It  finds  us  exposed  to  the  inflictions  of  Divine  wrath ;  it  brings  near 
to  us  the  good  news  of  pardon,  grace,  and  mticy  through  the  mediation  of  Jesus 
Christ.  The  adaptation  of  this  rest  to  the  weariness  of  man  is  very  striking.  II. 
This  best  is  promised  to  the  people  of  God,  and  to  them  alone.  Into  that 
world  of  light  and  of  love  nothing  enters  that  defiles.  No  revolt,  no  alienation,  no 
reluctance,  no  coldness  towards  God  is  felt  in  heaven ;  God  is  love,  and  all  who 
dwell  near  Him  '*  dwell  in  love  " ;  love  to  Him  and  to  each  other.    HI.  The  pos- 

BIBILITT   OF  COMING  SHORT  OF  THE   BLESSEDNESS  OF  HEAVEN  IS  AN  IDEA  SO  TBEMENDOUS, 

THAT  IT  MAT  WELL  AFFECT  THE  MIND  WITH  AWE.  The  apostle  says,  "  Let  US  there- 
fore fear,"  &c.  The  apparent  improbability  of  retrieving  error  after  death  is  so 
plainly  stated,  that  the  supposition  of  carelessness  in  so  great  a  matter,  is  a  sup- 
position fearful  in  the  extreme.  All  human  evils  are  tolerable,  because  they  are 
momsntary.  Earthquake,  shipwreck,  loss  of  property,  death  of  friends — these 
calami«:9s  are  limited ;  but  the  loss  of  salvation  is  an  intolerable  evil,  because  it  is 
an  evil  vrhich  seems  to  admit  of  no  termination.  There  is  no  object  more 
pitiable  than  that  of  an  immortal  being  wasting  the  few  precious  hours  of  life  in 
the  frivolous  occupations  of  pleasure,  or  in  the  severer  pursuits  of  gain,  while  yet 
he  is  reckless  of  the  pains  and  pleasures,  the  gains  and  losses  of  eternity  I  {G.  T. 
Noel,  M.A.)  Fear  and  rest : — The  two  words  which  claim  our  special  considera- 
tion in  this  section  are  "  fear"  and  "  rest."  I.  We  know  only  in  part,  in  fragment. 
It  is  difficult  for  us  to  combine  different  aspects  of  truth.  The  earnest  counsel  of 
the  apostle  in  this  chapter,  "  Let  us  fear,"  may  seem  to  be  incompatible  with  his 
emphatic  teaching  that  we  have  not  received  the  spirit  of  bondage  again  to  fear ; 
that  he  is  persuaded  that  nothing  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God 
that  is  in  Christ  J^'sus  ;  that  we  are  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway.  Yet  a  superficial 
glance  at  the  Epistles,  and  at  the  Scriptures  in  general,  will  show  that  fear  is  an 
essential  feature  of  the  Christian.  When  Christ  is  accepted,  there  is  peace ;  but  is 
there  not  also  fear?  "  With  Thee  is  forgiveness  of  sin,  that  Thou  mayest  be  feared." 
Where  do  we  see  God's  holiness  and  the  awful  majesty  of  the  law,  our  own  sin  and 
nnworthiness,  as  in  the  atonement  of  the  Lord  Jesus  7     We  rejoice  with  fear  and 


293  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ITS 

trembling.  It  is  because  we  know  the  Father ;  it  is  because  we  are  redeemed  by 
the  precious  blood  of  the  Saviour;  it  is  as  the  children  of  God  that  we  are  to  pass 
our  earthly  pilgrimage  in  fear.  This  is  not  the  fear  of  bondage,  but  the  fear  of 
adoption.  Looking  to  God,  our  loving  Father,  our  gracious  Saviour,  our  gentle  and 
indwelling  Comforter,  we  have  no  reason  to  be  afraid.  The  only  fear  that  we  can 
cherish  is  that  of  reverence  and  awe,  and  a  dread  lest  we  displease  and  wound  Him 
who  is  our  Lord.  But  when  we  look  at  ourselves,  our  weakness,  our  blindness ; 
when  we  think  of  our  path  and  our  work,  of  our  dangers,  we  may  well  feel  that  tha 
time  for  repose  and  unmixed  enjoyment  has  not  come  yet ;  we  must  dread  our  own 
sinfulness  and  our  temptations ;  we  must  fear  worldly  influences.     II.  But  thb 

BELIEVER   HAS   REST    NOW    ON    EARTH,   AND    HEREAFTER    IN    OLORT.       Bcsting   in    Christ, 

he  labours  to  enter  into  the  perfect  rest  of  eternity.  But  what  did  God  mean  by 
calHng  it  His  rest  ?  Not  they  enter  not  into  their  rest,  but  His  own.  Oh,  blessed 
distinction  I  God  gives  us  Himself,  and  in  all  His  gifts  He  gives  us  Himself.  Does 
God  give  us  righteousness  ?  He  Himself  is  our  righteousness,  Jehovah-tsidkenu. 
Does  God  give  us  peace  ?  Christ  is  our  peace.  Does  God  give  us  light  ?  He  is 
our  light.  Does  God  give  us  bread  ?  He  is  the  bread  we  eat ;  as  the  Son  liveth  by 
the  Father,  so  he  that  eateth  Me  shall  live  by  Me  (John  vi.).  God  Himself  is  our 
strength.  God  is  ours,  and  in  all  His  gifts  and  blessings  He  gives  Himself.  By 
the  Holy  Ghost  we  are  one  with  Christ,  and  Christ  the  Son  of  God  is  our  righteous- 
ness -nay,  our  life.  "  I  live ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  Or  again,  "  I  can 
do  all  things  through  Christ,  which  strengtheneth  me."  Or  as  the  Lord  Himself, 
in  His  last  prayer  before  His  crucifixion,  said  to  the  Father,  "  I  in  them,  and  Thou 
in  Me."  Thus  God  gives  us  His  rest  as  our  rest.  Our  souls  long  for  rest.  "  Oh, 
that  I  had  the  wings  of  a  dove  1  Then  would  I  fly  away  and  be  at  rest  1 "  is  the 
sigh  of  every  soul.  And  this  rest  is  only  in  God's  rest.  Death  brings  no  rest  to 
our  souls.  It  is  Jesus  Christ  who  alone  can  give  rest  to  man  ;  for  only  in  Him  we 
are  restored  and  brought  into  communion  with  God.  The  great  promise  of  Christ 
is  rest.  For  He  is  the  Restorer.  We  enjoy  rest  in  Christ  by  faith.  But  the  pt  r- 
feet  enjoyment  of  rest  is  still  in  the  future.  There  remaineth  a  sabbatism  for  the 
people  of  God.  Believers  will  enter  into  rest  after  their  earthly  pilgrimage,  labour, 
and  conflict,  and  the  whole  creation  will  share  in  the  liberty  and  joy  of  the  children 
of  God.  The  substance  and  foretaste  of  this  rest  we  have  even  now  in  Christ.  . 
(A.  Saphir.)  Use  of  fear : — God  planted  fear  in  the  soul  as  truly  as  He  planted  i/ 

hope  or  courage.  Fear  is  a  kind  of  bell,  or  gong,  which  rings  the  mind  into  quick, 
life  and  avoidance  upon  the  approach  of  danger ;  it  is  the  soul's  signal  for  rallying. 
{H.  W.  Beecher.)  A  promise  ...  of  entering  into  His  rest. — The  promise  of  enter' 
ing  into  God^s  rest : — Man  from  the  first  has  been  a  restless  creature.  He  Uves  by 
hope.  His  best  pleasures  are  not  in  the  things  he  actually  possesses,  but  in  the 
things  he  hopes  for.  He  is  always  looking  forward  to  tomorrow.  Man's  true  life 
is  the  heavenly,  and  his  earthly  life  is  true  only  as  it  tends  towards  that.  I.  Thb 
BEST  THAT  GoD  HAS  PROMISED  TO  MAN.  It  is  the  uudisturbed  peace,  the  holy  joy  of 
the  Divine  nature,  which  nothing  but  likeness  to  the  Divine  can  bring.  II.  Thh 
POSSIBILITY  OP  COMING  SHORT  OF  God's  REST.  1.  A  man  may  come  short  of  the 
rest  of  the  Sabbath.  2.  Many  of  the  Jews,  to  whom  the  rest  of  Canaan  was  pro- 
mised, came  short  of  it.  3.  Man  will  never  enter  fully  into  the  ideal  life  until  he 
beUeves  in  God  fully,  trusts  God  with  all  his  heart,  ceases  from  his  own  self-will  to 
be  and  do  in  harmony  with  the  will  Divine.  III.  How  to  ocakd  against  the  possibilitt 
OF  COMING  SHORT  OF  THE  DiviNE  REST.  1.  Guard  agaiust  unbelief.  2.  Guard  against 
presumption.  3.  Cling  to  the  great  hope  itself,  and  rejoice  in  it  evermore.  Think 
about  it  often,  and  all  other  hopes  will  pale  when  placed  beside  this.  \E.  D.  Solomon.) 
The  promised  rest: — I.  God  has  left  us  a  promise  of  entering  into  His  best;  a 
promise  enough  to  satisfy  all  our  desires,  and  to  engage  our  heartiest  endeavours  after 
it.  1.  The  greatness  of  that  reward  which  God  has  promised  to  us  in  the  gospeU 
2.  Of  this  rest  we  should  most  certainly  be  made  partakers,  if  we  live  so  as  we  ought 
to  do.  II.  It  is  as  certain  that  we  may  by  our  own  fault  come  short  of  it. 
For  the  promise  of  this  rest  is  not  absolute,  but  conditional.  It  depends  upon  a 
covenant  in  which  there  are  duties  to  be  fulfilled  on  our  part,  as  well  as  a  reward 
to  be  made  good  on  God's.  And  if  we  fail  in  the  one,  there  is  no  reason  to  expect 
that  He  should  perform  the  other.  III.  Let  us  take  the  advice  of  the  text,  and  feab 
LEST  WE  should  CHANCE  SO  TO  DO.  One  might  justly  think  that  instead  of  arguing 
with  men  upon  this  subject,  we  ought  rather  to  apologise  for  the  absurdity  of  making 
that  an  exhortation  which  all  men  desire,  and  therefore  must  needs  endeavour  to 
attain  unto.     What  is  this  bat  as  il  one  should  go  about  to  argue  with  a  oovetous- 


CHAP.  IV.]  HEBREWS,  293 

wretch  not  to  neglect  a  fair  opportunity  of  growing  rich.  IV.  The  best  wat  to 
SECURE  TO  0UB6ELVE8  THE  PROMISE  OF  THIS  REST,  is  to  live  in  a  continuol  fsar  of 
coming  short  of  it.  1.  This  will  be  the  most  likely  to  engage  our  own  care.  2.  It 
will  also  be  the  best  means  to  entitle  us  to  God's  favour.  (1)  This  will  above  any- 
thing qualify  us  for  the  gracious  assistance  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  to  enable  us  to 
discharge  that  duty  which  is  required  of  us.  (2)  It  will  the  best  dispose  us  for  the 
pardon  of  those  sins  which,  when  we  have  done  all  that  we  can,  we  shall  still  con- 
tinue more  or  less  to  commit.  Because  he  who  thus  fears  will  either  never 
willingly  fall  into  any  sins,  and  then  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  shall  find  a  very 
ready  pardon  of  his  involuntary  offences.  Or  if  he  should  be  at  any  time  led  away 
by  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  yet  this  fear  will  soon  awaken  him,  and  bring  him  both 
to  a  sense  and  a  deep  abhorrence  of  it.  (Abp.  Wake.)  The  fear  of  losing  tli« 
promised  rest : — I.  The  rest  which  is  here  spoken  of.  Union  with  Christ.  II. 
The  effect  which  it  should  produce  upon  our  minds.  We  must  fear — 1.  Because 
we  have  numerous  enemies  who  would  rob  us  of  this  rest.  2.  Because  we  have 
great  interests  at  stake.  3.  Because  we  have  but  a  short  and  uncertain  period  to 
secure  an  interest  in  Christ,  and  be  washed  from  the  stains  of  sin.  III.  Thb 
dreadful  consequences  of  coming  short  of  this  rest.  To  mistake  the  way  to 
heaven  is  to  sink  into  hell.  {Neville  Jones.)  Fear  of  perisldng : — 1.  A  race  must 
be  run  ere  we  come  to  our  full  rest.  2.  The  constant  runner  to  the  end  getteth  rest 
from  sin  and  misery,  and  a  quiet  possession  of  happiness  at  the  races  end.  3.  The 
apostate,  and  he  who  by  misbelief  breaketh  off  his  course,  and  runneth  not  on,  as 
luay  be,  cometh  short,  and  attaineth  not  unto  it.  4.  The  apostasy  of  some,  and 
possibility  of  apostasy  of  mere  professors,  should  not  weaken  any  man's  faith  ;  but 
rather  terrify  him  from  misbelief.  5.  There  is  a  right  kind  of  fear  of  perishing ; 
to  wit,  such  as  hindereth  not  assurance  of  faith ;  but  rather  serveth  to  guard  it, 
aud  spurreth  on  a  man  to  perseverance.  6.  We  must  not  only  fear,  by  misbelieving 
to  come  short ;  but  to  seem  or  give  any  appearance  of  coming  short.  (D.  Dickson, 
M.A.)  The    Christian's   privilege,    danger    and    duty  : — I.   The     Chkistlan's 

PRIVILEGE :  promised  rest.  1.  The  character  supposed.  The  promise  of  entering 
into  the  heavenly  Canaan  peculiarly  belongs  to  those  who  have  turned  their  backs 
on  spiritual  Egypt,  and  are  journeying  under  Divine  direction  towards  the  "  better 
couutry."  2,  The  blessing  promised:  "His  rest."  In  the  present  we  may  have 
rest  from  the  tyranny  of  sm  (Rom.  vi.  12-14) ;  and  from  the  distraction  of  anxious 
care,  whether  it  precede  our  justification,  and  refer  to  our  soul's  safety  (see  ver.  3), 
or  follow  it  (Isa.  xxvi.  3 ;  Eom.  viii.  88,  39),  Yet,  however,  the  Christian  may  have 
rest  now  from  the  clamours  of  conscience,  painful  forebodings,  &c.,  it  is  to  heaven 
that  he  must  look  for — (1)  A  rest  from  toil.  (2)  A  rest  from  pain.  Glorified 
bodies  are  "safe  from  disease  and  decline."  (3)  A  rest  from  sorrow.  3.  The 
security  offered  is  that  of  Almighty  God.  Men  may  promise  largely,  but  not  be 
able  to  fulfil.  He  is  all-sufficient.  11.  The  Christian's  danger:  "Lest  any  of 
you  should  seem  to  come  short  of  it."  Unbelief  the  principle  of  rum,  hence  so 
earnest  (chap  iii.  11,  12,  18,  19,  and  chap.  iv.  3,  11).  Nor  is  this  without  reason, 
for  unbelief  may  operate  destructively.  1.  By  means  of  open  transgression.  In 
these  passages  we  are  cautioned  against  the  principle.  In  1  Cor.  x.  1-12,  its  sad 
effects  are  exhibited.  2.  By  means  of  secret  wickedness.  Hence  lusting  after  evil 
things  is  deprecated  (1  Cor.  x.  6  ;  see  also  Matt.  v.  28  ;  Psa.  Ixvi.  18).  3.  By  means 
of  worldly  mindedness.  Faith  apprehends  invisible  realities,  and  influences  and 
saves  us  accordingly.  But  unbelief  is  the  soul's  bliudness.  4,  By  means  of 
indolence.  Faith  prompts  us  to  do,  and  sustains  us  in  suffering.  Unbelief  leads  to 
negligence ;  and  neglect  is  ruin  (chap.  ii.  3).  III.  The  Christian's  duty  :  "  Let  us 
therefore  fear."  If  the  apostle  feared  for  the  Hebrews,  it  equally  bC'^ame  them  to 
fear.  1.  Because  of  the  shame,  the  personal  disgrace  of  coming  short.  Not  to 
pursue  a  worthy  object  when  it  is  proposed  is  sufficiently  disgraceful.  To  relinquish 
the  pursuit  is  doubly  so.  Even  sinners  despise  such  inconsistency.  2.  Because  of 
the  mischief  of  coming  short.  He  is  like  one  of  the  unbelieving  spies  who  tempted 
Israel  into  sin  and  suffering  (Numb.  xiv.  4,  23).  3.  Because  of  the  ruin  of  coming 
short.  Apostates  sin  against  greater  advantages,  have  gained  a  greater  enlargement 
of  capacity,  fall  from  a  greater  elevation  ;  therefore  their  punishment  will  be  more 
severe.  But  how?  Not  with  a  desponding  paralysing  fear.  (1)  With  a  fear  of 
caution,  that  properly  estimates  difficulty  and  danger,  and  induces  circumspection 

Jihap.  xii.  12-15).      (2)  With  a  fear  of  vigilance;    that  narrowly  watches  first 
ieclensions,  and  promptly  opposes  the  first  advances  of  the  enemy.     (3)  With 
a  provident  fear ;  that  leads  to  husband  our  resources,  to  avail  ourselves  of  th« 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  it. 

assistance  of  onr  fellow  Christians,  and  to  cry  to  the  strong  for  strength.  And  lei 
it  be  an  abiding  fear.  "  Blessed  is  the  man  that  feareth  always."  Improvement : 
1.  God  hath  promised  a  rest.  2.  In  prospect  of  the  promised  rest,  let  saints 
sustain  the  hallowed  cross:  *'  rejoicing  in  hope,  patient  in  tribulation,"  &o.  3.  Let 
us  exhort  one  another  daily  ;  both  by  the  example  of  those  who  have  halted,  and  of 
those  who  "inherit  the  promises  "  (chap.  iii.  13,  vi.  11, 12),  (Sketches  of  Sermons.) 
The  gospel  of  rest : — The  Christian  salvation  is  here  presented  under  a  third  aspect 
as  a  rest,  a  sabbatism,  a  participation  in  the  rest  of  God ;  the  new  view,  like  the 
two  preceding,  in  which  the  great  salvation  was  identified  with  lordship  in  tha 
world  to  come  and  with  deliverance  from  the  power  of  the  deiril  and  the  fear  of 
death,  being  taken  from  the  beginning  of  human  history  as  narrated  in  the  early 
chapters  of  Genesis.  One  aim  of  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  in  this  part  of  his  work 
was  doubtless  to  enunciate  this  thought,  and  so  to  identify  the  gospel  of  Christ  with 
the  Old  Testament  gospel  of  rest.  But  his  aim  is  not  purely  didactic,  but  partly 
also,  and  even  chiefly,  parenetic.  Doctrine  rises  out  of  and  serves  the  purpose  of 
exhortation.  In  so  far  as  the  section  (vers.  1-10)  has  a  didactic  drift,  its  object  is 
to  confirm  the  hope  ;  in  so  far  as  it  is  hortatory,  its  leading  purpose  is  to  enforce 
the  warning,  "let  us  fear."  The  parenetic  interest  predominates  at  the  commence- 
ment (vers.  1,  2),  which  may  be  thus  paraphrased :  "  Now  with  reference  to  this 
rest  I  have  been  speaking  of  (chap.  iii.  18,  19),  let  us  fear  lest  we  miss  it.  For  it  ia 
in  our  power  to  gain  it,  seeing  the  promise  still  remains  over  unfulfilled  or  but 
partially  fulfilled.  Let  us  fear,  I  say ;  for  if  we  have  a  share  in  the  promise,  we 
have  also  in  the  threat  of  forfeiture :  it  too  stands  over.  We  certainly  have  a  share 
in  the  promise ;  we  have  been  evangelised,  not  merely  in  general,  but  with  the 
specific  gospel  of  rest.  But  those  who  first  heard  this  gospel  of  rest  failed  through 
unbelief.  So  may  we :  therefore  let  us  fear."  To  be  noted  is  the  freedom  with  which, 
as  in  the  case  of  the  word  "  apostle  "  (chap.  iii.  1),  the  writer  uses  the  term  ivr\yye' 
\i(jfi'ivoi,  which  might  have  been  supposed  to  have  borne  in  his  time  a  stereotyped 
meaning.  Any  promise  of  God,  any  announcement  of  good  tidings,  ia  for  him  a 
gospel.  Doubtless  all  God's  promises  are  associated  in  bis  mind  with  the  great 
final  salvation,  nevertheless  they  are  formally  distinct  from  the  historical  Christian 
gospel.  The  gospel  he  has  in  view  is  not  that  which  "  begun  to  be  spoken  by  the 
Lord,"  but  that  spoken  by  the  Psalmist  when  he  said,  "To-day  if  ye  will  Lear  Hia 
voice,  harden  not  your  hearts."  Not  less  noteworthy  is  the  way  in  which  the 
abortive  result  of  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  of  rest  to  the  fathers  is  accounted  for. 
"  The  word  preached  did  not  profit  them,  not  being  mixed  with  faith  in  them  that 
heard  it."  Is  the  word  mixed  with  faith  in  the  hearer,  or  by  faith  with  the  hearer  ? 
and  what  natural  analogy  is  suggested  in  either  case  ?  The  one  thing  certain  is, 
that  he  deemed  faith  indispensable  to  profitable  hearing:  a  truth,  happily,  taught 
with  equal  clearness  in  the  text,  whatever  reading  we  adopt.  At  ver.  8  the  didactio 
interest  comes  to  the  front.  The  new  thought  grafted  into  ver.  1  by  the  paren- 
thetical clause,  "  a  promise  being  still  left,"  now  becomes  the  leading  affirmation. 
The  assertion  of  ver.  2,  *'  we  have  been  evangelised,"  is  repeated,  with  the 
emphasis  this  time  on  the  "we."  "We  do  enter  into  rest,  we  believers  in 
Christ."  A  rest  is  left  over  for  the  New  Testament  people  of  God.  The  sequel  as 
far  as  ver.  10  contains  the  proof  of  this  thesis.  The  salient  points  are  these  two  : 
1.  God  spoke  of  a  rest  to  Israel  by  Moses,  though  He  Himself  rested  from  His  works 
when  the  creation  of  the  world  was  finished  ;  therefore  the  creation-rest  does  not 
exhaust  the  idea  and  promise  of  rest.  2.  The  rest  of  Israel  in  Canaan  under 
Joshua  did  not  realise  the  Divine  idea  of  rest,  any  more  than  did  the  personal  rest 
of  God  at  the  Creation,  for  we  find  the  rest  spoken  of  again  in  the  Psalter  as  still 
remaining  to  be  entered  upon,  which  implies  that  the  Canaan-rest  was]^an  inadequate 
fulfilment.  The  former  of  these  two  points  contains  the  substance  of  what  is  said 
in  vers.  3-5,  the  latter  gives  the  gist  of  vers.  7,  8  ;  whereupon  follows  the  inference 
in  ver.  9,  a  rest  is  left  over.  A  third  step  in  the  argument  by  which  the  inference 
is  justified  is  passed  over  in  silence.  It  is,  that  neither  in  the  Psalmist's  day  nor  at 
any  subsequent  period  in  Israel's  history  had  the  promise  of  rest  been  adequately 
fulfilled,  any  more  than  at  the  Creation  or  in  the  days  of  Joshua.  Our  author  takes 
the  oracle  in  the  Psalter  as  the  final  word  of  the  Old  Testament  on  the  subject  of 
rest,  and  therefore  as  a  word  which  concerns  the  New  Testament  people  of  God. 
God  spake  of  rest  through  David,  implying  that  up  till  that  time  the  long  promised 
rest  had  not  come,  at  least,  in  satisfying  measure.  Therefore  a  rest  remains  for 
Christians.  He  beUeved  that  all  Divine  promises,  that  the  promise  of  rest  Lo 
particular,  shall  be  fulfilled  with  ideal  completeness.     "  Some  must  enter  in  " ;  and 


CHAP.  IV.]  HEBREWS.  29S 

BB  none  have  yet  entered  in  perfectly,  this  bliss  must  be  reserved  for  those  on  whom 
the  ends  of  the  world  are  come,  even  those  who  believe  in  Jesus.  "  There  remaineth 
therefore  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God."  A  sabbatism  our  author  calls  the  rest,  so  at 
the  conclusion  of  his  argument  introducing  a  new  name  for  it,  after  using  another 
all  through.  It  embodies  an  idea.  It  felicitously  connects  the  end  of  the  world 
with  the  beginning,  the  consummation  of  all  things  with  the  primal  state  of  the 
creation.  It  denotes  the  ideal  rest,  and  so  teaches  by  implication  that  Christians 
not  only  have  an  interest  in  the  gospel  of  rest,  but  for  the  first  time  enter  into  a  rest 
which  is  worthy  of  the  name,  a  rest  correspouding  to  and  fully  realising  the  Divine 
idea.  This  final  name  for  the  rest  thus  supplements  the  defect  of  the  preceding 
argument,  which  understates  the  case  for  Christians.  It  further  hints,  though  only 
hints,  the  nature  of  the  ideal  rest.  It  teaches  that  it  is  not  merely  a  rest  which 
God  gives,  but  the  rest  which  God  Himself  enjoys.  It  is  God's  own  rest  for  God's 
own  true  people,  an  ideal  rest  for  an  ideal  community,  embracing  all  believers,  all 
believing  Israelites  of  all  ages,  and  many  more ;  for  God's  rest  began  long  before 
there  was  an  Israel,  and  the  gospel  in  the  early  chapters  of  Genesis  is  a  gospel  for 
man.  We  have  seen  that  our  author  borrows  three  distinct  conceptions  of  the  great 
salvation  from  the  primitive  history  of  man.  It  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  they 
were  all  connected  together  in  his  mind,''and  formed  one  picture  of  the  highest  good. 
They  suggest  the  idea  of  paradise  restored  :  the  Divine  ideal  of  man  and  the  world 
and  their  mutual  relations  realised  in  perpetuity;  man  made  veritably  lord  of 
creation,  delivered  from  the  fear  of  death,  nay,  death  itself  for  ever  left  behind,  and 
no  longer  subject  to  servile  tasks,  but  occupied  only  with  work  worthy  of  a  king  and 
a  son  of  God,  and  compatible  with  perfect  repose  and  undisturbed  enjoyment.  It 
is  Eui  apocalyptic  vision :  fruition  lies  in  the  beyond.  The  dominion  and  deathless- 
ness  and  sabbatism  are  reserved  for  the  world  to  come,  objects  of  hope  for  those 
who  believe.  The  perfect  rest  will  come,  and  a  people  of  God  will  enter  into  it,  of 
these  things  our  author  is  well  assured ;  but  he  fears  lest  the  Hebrew  Christiana 
should  forfeit  their  share  in  the  felicity  of  that  people :  therefore  he  ends  hia 
discourse  on  the  gospel  of  rest  as  he  began,  with  solemn  admonition.  "  Let  us  fear 
lest  we  enter  not  in,"  he  said  at  'he  beginning;  "  let  us  give  diligence  to  enter  in," 
he  says  now  at  the  close.  Then  to  enforce  the  exhortation  he  appends  two  words 
of  a  practical  character,  one  fitted  to  inspire  awe,  the  other  to  cheer  Christians  of 
desponding  temper.  The  former  of  these  passages  (vers.  12,  13)  describes  the 
attributes  of  the  Divine  word,  the  general  import  of  the  statement  being  that  the 
word  of  God,  like  God  Himself,  is  not  to  be  trifled  with  ;  the  word  referred  to  being, 
in  the  first  place,  the  word  of  threatening  which  doomed  unbelieving,  disobedient 
Israelites  to  perish  in  the  wilderness,  and  by  implication,  every  word  of  God.  The 
account  given  of  the  Divine  word  is  impressive,  almost  appalling.  It  is  endowed  in 
succession  with  the  qualities  of  the  hghtning,  which  moves  with  incredible  swift- 
ness like  a  living  spirit,  and  hath  force  enough  to  shiver  to  atoms  the  forest  trees ; 
of  a  two-edged  sword,  whose  keen,  glancing  blade  cuts  clean  through  everything, 
flesh,  bone,  sinew ;  of  the  sun  in  the  firmament,  from  whose  great  piercing  eye,  aa 
he  circles  round  the  globe,  nothing  on  earth  is  hid.  (A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.)  Christ's 
legacy  of  rest : — This  promise  of  spiritual  rest  is  a  promise  left  us  by  the  Lord  Jesua 
Christ  in  His  last  will  and  testament,  as  a  precious  legacy.  Our  business  is  to  sea 
to  it  that  we  be  the  legatees  ;  that  we  lay  our  claim  to  that  rest  and  freedom  from 
the  dominion  of  sin,  Satan,  and  the  flesh  by  which  the  souls  of  men  are  kept  in 
servitude,  and  deprived  of  the  true  rest  of  the  soul,  and  may  be  also  set  free  from 
the  yoke  of  the  law,  and  all  the  toilsome  ceremonies  and  services  of  it,  and  may 
enjoy  peace  with  God,  in  His  ordinances,  providences  and  in  our  own  consciences, 
and  so  have  the  prospect  and  earnest  of  perfect  and  everlasting  rest  in  heaven. 
{M.  Henry.)  Seem  to  come  short  of  it. — The  appearance  of  failure : — It  is  a  great 
principle  under  the  Christian  dispensation,  that  "  none  of  us  liveth  to  himself,  and 
no  man  dieth  to  himself."  Wears  "members  one  of  another,"  so  associated  by 
intimate  and  indissoluble  ties,  that  we  ought  never  to  consider  our  actions  as  having 
a  bearing  only  on  ourselves ;  we  should  rather  regard  them  as  likely  to  affect 
numbers,  and  sure  to  affect  some,  of  our  fellow  men,  to  affect  them  in  their  eternal 
interests,  and  not  only  in  their  temporal.  We  have  again  the  same  principle,  the 
principle  that  membership  should  influence  actions,  involved  in  a  precept  of  St. 
Paul  to  the  Thessalonians,  "  Abstain  from  all  appearance  of  eviL"  There  is  some< 
thing  of  a  fine  sound  in  advice  which  is  often  given,  "  Do  what  you  know  to  b« 
right,  and  care  not  what  others  may  think"  ;  but,  after  all,  it  is  not  universally,  nor 
perhaps  even  generally,  good  and  Christian  advice.    A  Christian  shoold  conBidei 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha».  iv. 

the  opinion  of  his  fellow  Christians.  Be  not  engrossed  with  securing  your  own 
salvation  ;  see  to  it  that  ye  be  not,  at  the  same  time,  endangering  the  salvation  of 
others.  In  the  chapter  preceding  that  which  is  opened  by  our  text,  St.  Paul  had 
been  speaking  of  those  Israelites  who,  though  delivered  by  Moses  from  Egypt,  never 
reached  the  Promised  Land,  but  perished,  through  unbelief,  in  the  wilderness.  From 
this  the  apostle  took  occasion  to  warn  Christians  that  they  might  have  some  pro- 
gress towards  heaven,  and  still  be  in  danger  of  missing  its  possession.  And  if  this 
had  been  the  whole  tenor  of  our  text,  it  would  have  afforded  but  little  place  for 
commentary,  though  much  for  private  and  personal  meditation.  But  you  will 
observe  that  St.  Paul  does  not  speak  of  "  coming  short,"  but  of  "  seeming  to  come 
short."  He  "seems  to  come  short  "  of  the  promised  rest,  who,  in  the  judgment  of 
his  fellow  men,  is  deficient  in  those  outward  evidences  by  which  they  are  wont  to  try 
the  genuineness  of  religion.  But  surely,  all  the  while,  he  may  not  actually  *•  come 
short " :  human  judgment  is  faUible,  and  can  in  no  case  be  guided  by  inspecting 
the  heart,  which  alone  can  furnish  grounds  for  certain  decision ;  and,  doubtless, 
many  may  be  found  in  heaven  at  last,  of  which  entrance  thither  survivors  could 
entertain  nothing  more  than  a  charitable  hope.  And  is  it  not  enough,  if  we  do  not 
"  come  short  "  ?  why  should  we  further  concern  ourselves  as  to  the  not  '*  seeming 
to  come  short"?  We  might  answer,  as  we  did  in  regard  of  the  "appearance  of 
evil,"  that  it  is  a  dangerous  thing  to  approach  danger.  He  who  "  seems  to  come 
short "  must  almost  necessarily  be  in  some  peril  of  failure  ;  and  where  heaven  is  at 
stake,  no  wise  man,  if  he  could  help  it,  would  run  the  least  risk.  Besides,  it  can 
hardly  be  that  he,  who  seems  to  others  to  come  short,  should  possess  decisive  and 
Scriptural  evidences  of  his  acceptance  with  God.  But  whilst  there  may  thus  be 
many  reasons  given  why  we  should  fear  the  seeming  to  come  short,  even  were  our 
personal  well-being  alone  to  be  considered,  the  full  force  of  the  text,  as  with  that 
which  enjoins  abstinence  from  the  appearance  of  evil,  is  only  to  be  brought  out 
through  reference  to  our  being  members  the  one  of  the  other.  We  shall,  therefore, 
take  the  passage  under  this  point  of  view.  In  other  words,  we  will  examine  what 
there  is,  in  an  appearance  of  failure,  to  do  injury  to  the  cause  of  Christianity,  and 
therefore  to  justify  the  apostle  in  so  emphatically  calling  upon  you  to  fear,  "  lest,  a 
promise  being  left  us  of  entering  into  his  rest,  any  of  you  should  seem  to  come 
short  of  it."  Now  as  there  are  undoubtedly  many  ways  in  which  we  may  actually 
come  short,  so  jnust  there  be  many  in  which  we  may  apparently  come  short :  who 
can  tell  up  the  methods  in  which  the  soul  may  be  lost  ?  neither  can  any  one 
enumerate  those  in  which  it  may  seem  to  be  lost.  1.  And  it  must,  we  think,  com- 
mend itself  to  you  in  the  first  place,  that  none  will  more  "  seem  to  come  short," 
than  those  whose  practice  is  in  any  way  inconsistent  with  their  profession,  so  that 
lookers-on  can  decide  that  their  conduct  is  not  strictly  accordant  with  the  principles 
by  which  they  declare  themselves  actuated.  He  who  professes  to  "  walk  in  the 
light  as  God  is  in  the  light,"  may  occasionally  wander  into  dark  paths,  and  yet  be 
mercifully  restored ;  but  it  can  hardly  fail  but  that  the  impression  produced  on 
observers,  especially  on  men  of  the  world,  will  be  one  as  to  the  weakness  of  his 
principle.,,  or  a  want  of  power  in  that  religion  which  professes  itself  adequate  to 
the  renewing  the  world.  And  who  will  pretend  to  compute  the  amount  of  damage 
done  to  the  cause  of  vital  Christianity  by  the  inconsistencies  of  those  who  profess 
themselves  subjected  to  its  laws,  and  animated  by  its  hopes  ?  2.  But  there  ia 
another,  if  a  less  obvious  mode  of  "seeming  to  come  short."  It  should  be  observed 
that,  though  the  apostle,  when  speaking  of  rest,  must  be  considered  as  referring 
mainly  to  that  rest  which  is  future,  there  is  a  degree  of  present  rest  which  is 
attainable  by  the  Christian,  and  which  is  both  the  type  and  foretaste  of  that  which 
is  to  come.  Thus  St.  Paul,  in  a  verse  which  follows  almost  immediately  on  our 
text,  says  of  Christians,  "  We  which  have  believed  do  enter  into  rest "  ;  and  after- 
wards, "  He  that  is  entered  into  His  rest,  he  also  hath  ceased  from  his  own  works, 
as  God  did  from  His,"  evidently  making  the  entering  into  rest, a  present  thing,  as  well 
as  a  future.  Our  blessed  Saviour  bequeathed  His  own  peace,  as  a  legacy  to  Hig 
Church ;  and  what  Christ  entailed  on  us,  may  surely  be  enjoyed  by  us.  The 
religion  of  the  Bible  is  a  cheerful,  happy -making  religion  :  the  very  word  "gospel" 
signifies  "  glad  tidings  "  ;  and  he  who  has  received  good  news  into  his  heart  may 
justly  be  expected  to  exhibit  in  his  demeanour,  if  not  much  of  the  rapture  of  joy, 
yet  something  of  the  quietness  of  peace.  But  it  is  in  this  that  righteous  persons 
are  often  grievously  deficient.  Hence,  in  place  of  struggling  with  doubts  and 
endeavouring  to  extinguish  them,  they  may  be  said  actually  to  encourage  them,  aa 
ii  they  befitted  their  state,  and  either  betokened  or  cherished  humility.    A  great 


CHAT,  rr.]  HEBREWS.  897 

mistake  this.  There  is  commonly  more  of  pride  than  of  humility  in  donbts ;  he 
who  is  always  doubting  is  generally  searching  in  himself  for  some  ground  or  reason 
of  assurance ;  whereas,  true,  genuine  humility,  looks  wholly  out  of  self,  not  as 
forgetting  the  corruption  which  is  there,  but  as  fastening  on  the  sufiQciency  which 
is  in  Christ,  But,  without  dissecting  more  narrowly  the  character  of  the  always 
doubting  Christian,  we  cannot  hesitate  to  say  of  him,  that  he  is  one  of  those  who 
"  seem  to  come  short."  If  a  present,  as  well  as  a  future,  rest  be  promised  to  the 
righteous — and  what  else  can  be  denoted  by  such  words  as  these,  •*  Thou  wilt  keep 
him  in  perfect  peace  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  Thee"? — certainly  he,  at  least, 
"  seems  to  come  short "  of  that  rest,  who  is  continually  the  prey  of  fear  and 
disquietude,  who  has  never  anything  to  express  but  apprehensions  as  to  his 
deceiving  himself,  or  who  wears  always  the  appearance  of  one  ill  at  ease  in  regard 
of  his  spiritual  interests.  It  could  hardly  fail  to  be  a  strong  motive  with  religious 
persons  to  the  cultivating  cheerfulness  of  deportment,  if  they  carefully  rem*  mbered 
that  others  will  judge  religion  by  its  apparent  effects,  and  that,  if  they  see  it  pro- 
duce only  sadness,  they  will  be  likely  to  shun  it  as  opposed  to  all  joy.  A  gloomy 
Christian  may  not  be  always  able  to  help  his  gloom  ;  but  he  should  lament  it,  and 
strive  with  it ;  for  what  will  a  generous  leader  say  of  a  soldier,  who,  commissioned 
to  enlist  others  under  the  same  banner  with  himself,  makes  his  appearance  in  the 
world  as  a  terrified  and  half-famished  prisoner  ?  3.  But  now,  having  thus  illus- 
trated the  text  from  inconsistency  of  conduct,  and  from  the  harbouring  of  doubts, 
either  of  which  will  cause  a  Christian  to  "seem  to  come  short,"  let  us  take  one 
other  case,  one  which  is  not  perhaps  indeed  as  much  under  our  own  power,  but  one 
against  which  we  may  be  always  endeavouring  to  provide.  The  great  business  of 
life,  as  we  all  confess,  is  preparation  for  death.  And  a  Christian's  hope,  a  Christian's 
desire,  should  be  that  he  may  be  enabled  to  meet  death  triumphantly.  It  should 
not  content  him  that  he  may  pass  in  safety  through  the  dark  valley,  though  with 
little  of  that  firm  sense  of  victory  which  discovers  itself  in  the  exulting  tone,  or  the 
burning  vision.  This  indeed  is  much — oh  1  that  we  might  believe  that  none  of 
OS  would  have  less  than  this.  But,  in  having  only  this,  a  Christian  may 
"  seem  to  come  short."  And  there  is  often  a  mighty  discouragement  from  the 
death-beds  of  the  righteous,  when,  as  the  darkness  thickens,  there  is  apparently  but 
httle  consolation  from  the  prospect  of  eternity.  Even  as,  on  the  other  hand,  when 
a  righteous  man  is  enabled  to  meet  death  exultingly,  as  thougii  he  had  to  step  into 
the  car  of  fire,  and  be  wafted  almost  visibly  to  the  heavenly  city,  there  is  diffused 
over  a  neighbourhood  a  sort  of  animating  influence ;  the  tidings  of  the  victory 
spread  rapidly  from  house  to  house :  the  boldness  of  infidelity  quails  before  them ; 
meek  piety  takes  new  courage,  and  attempts  new  toils.  And  it  ought  not,  therefore, 
to  satisfy  us  that  we  may  so  die  as  not  to  come  short  of  heaven :  we  ought  to  labour 
that  we  may  so  die  as  not  even  to  "  seem  to  come  short  of  it."  It  is  doubly  dying, 
if,  in  dying,  we  work  an  injury  to  our  brethren ;  it  is  scarcely  dying,  if  we  strengthen 
them  for  their  departure  out  of  life.  This  is,  in  its  measure,  the  doing  what  was 
done  by  the  Eedeemer  Himself,  who,  "  through  death,  destroyed  him  that  had 
the  power  of  death  " :  the  believer,  as  he  enters  the  grave,  deals  a  blow  at  the 
tyrant,  which  renders  him  less  terrible  to  those  who  have  yet  to  meet  him  in  the 
final  encounter.  And  by  continued  preparation  for  death,  by  accustoming  our- 
selves to  the  anticipation  of  death,  that,  through  God's  help,  our  passage  through 
the  valley  shall  be  rather  with  the  tread  of  the  conqueror,  than  with  the  painful 
step  of  the  timid  pilgrim.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  danger  of  falling  short  of  the 
heavenly  rest : — L  The  nature  of  this  rest.  1.  A  rest  from  sin.  2.  A  rest  from 
temptation.  3.  A  rest  from  trouble.  II.  To  whom  the  promise  of  it  is  made.  It 
is  made,  it  is  left  to  us  ;  yes,  wherever  the  gospel  is  preached,  this  inestimable  prize 
is  offered  to  those  who  believe  in  its  life-giving  doctrines.  III.  The  danger  of 
FALLING  SHORT  OF  IT.  Let  me  ask  you,  or  rather  ask  your  own  consciences,  Have  you 
ever  had  any  fears  on  the  subject  ?  If  you  have  not,  it  can  never  have  been  an 
object  of  intense  desire ;  it  is  impossible  to  be  really  in  earnest  about  seeking  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  without  being  anxious  and  fearful  about  it.  Many  who  die  with 
heaven  in  anticipation,  it  is  to  be  feaied  will  hft  up  their  eyes  in  hell.  Tremendous 
discovery  this  of  their  real  state,  when  it  is  irretrievable,  bitter  knowledge  of  the 
truth,  when  it  is  too  late  to  profit  by  it  !  I  want  you  to  fear  now  ;  now,  when  thoro 
is  time  and  opportunity  for  repentance  ;  now,  when  God  waits  to  be  gracious  ;  now, 
when  the  atonement  of  Christ  is  available  for  your  salvation :  and  mark  the  words 
of  the  text,  for  they  are  very  explicit ;  hke  almost  every  thing  in  Scripture,  they 
require  minute  inspection,  in  order  to  get  their  full  force  and  meaning.    "Fear, 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  nt 

lest,  a  promise  being  left  us  of  entering  into  his  rest,  any  of  yon  should  seem  to 
come  short  of  it."  You  are  cautioned  to  startle,  as  it  were,  at  the  very  appearance 
of  failure — to  be  alarmed  at  the  least  indication  of  it.  {J.  P.  Wright,  M.A.)  Coming 
thort  of  the  promised  rest : — I.  A  theeefold  cebtainty.  1.  There  is  a  rest.  (1)  A 
rest  resulting  from  the  inward  assurance  of  God's  pardoning  love.  (2)  A  rest  from 
sin  as  a  ruling  and  tyrannising  power.  (3)  A  rest  of  adoption.  2.  There  is  a 
promise  of  this  rest.  3.  The  promise  is  to  believers.  II.  An  awful  uncertainti. 
Thus  though  the  promise  is  made,  there  is  in  the  case  of  many  an  awful  uncertainty 
hanging  over  its  issue.  And  how  so  ?  There  is  no  accusation  against  God  in  the 
economy  of  His  spiritual  government;  He  does  not  arbitrarily  unfold  and  withhold 
— no,  God  is  our  Father,  full  of  compassion  and  tender  in  mercy.  The  accusation 
is  proved  against  man  himself.  He  wilfully  shuts  the  open  means  of  grace; 
he  is  the  self-excluding  and  self-excluded  from  the  pale  of  the  promise.  He 
comes  short  of  it — it  does  not  come  short  of  him.  (T.  J.  Judkin,  M.A.) 
The  gospel  preached. — The  gospel  preached  wider  the  Old  Testament : — I.  1.  They 
had  the  same  gospel  blessings  and  mercies  that  we  have.  That  God  would  be  their 
God.  This  includes — (1)  Regeneration,  or  the  new  heart,  the  heart  of  flesh,  the 
writing  of  God's  law  in  the  heart  (Jer.  xxxi.  33 ;  Dent.  xxx.  6 ;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25-27). 

(2)  Reconciliation  and  remission  of  sins  (Isa.  i.  18 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  34 ;  Lev.  v.  6,  10). 

(3)  Everlasting  life  and  salvation  in  heaven  (Psa.  xvii.  15  ;  Ixxiii.  24  ;  xvi,  11).  2. 
They  had  these  blessings  upon  the  same  account,  and  in  the  same  way,  as  we  have 
them  now.  We  receive  all  from  the  mere  mercy  and  free  grace  of  God  in  Christ ; 
and  so  did  they  (Psa.  li.  1 ;  Dan.  ix.  8,  9,  18,  19).  II.  A  second  argument  might 
be  taken  from  an  historical  induction  of  all  those  former  times,  and  the  several 
gospel  discoveries  which  the  Lord  vouchsafed  to  them  all  along  from  time  to  time. 
III.  Either  the  gospel  was  preached  unto  them  of  old,  or  else  it  will  follow  that 
they  were  all  condemned,  or  else  that  they  were  saved  without  Christ ;  which  to 
imagine  were  infinitely  dishonourable  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (Acts  iv.  12 ;  Rom. 
iii.  20  ;  Gal.  ii.  16 ;  Heb.  xiii.  8).  Objections :  1.  Why  do  we  call  it  the  Old 
Testament,  if  it  was  gospel  ?  This  is  only  in  regard  of  the  manner  of  dispensation. 
2.  That  the  apostle  often  speaks  of  it  as  "  that  ancient  dispensation,"  as  if  it  waa 
law  and  not  gospel.  We  must  distinguish  between  the  thing  preached,  and  the 
manner  of  preaching,  between  the  shell  and  the  kernel,  the  shadow  and  the  sub- 
stance. The  thing  preached  was  the  gospel,  though  the  manner  of  preaching  it 
was  legaL  (1)  It  was  dark,  but  the  gospel  is  clear.  (2)  It  was  weak,  but  the 
gospel  is  powerful.  (3)  There  was  much  of  external  splendour,  but  little  of  that 
power  and  spirituality  that  is  in  gospel  worship.  (4)  It  was  a  burdensome  dis- 
pensation. (5)  The  manner  of  administration  was  legal,  in  regard  of  the  bondage 
and  tenor  of  it.  Uses :  1.  Encouragement  to  study  the  Old  Testament,  and  the 
types  and  shadows  of  the  Law.  2.  Direction  how  to  attain  to  the  understanding  of 
those  mysteries.  Study  the  gospel.  3.  There  is  no  part  of  the  Scripture  but  is  of 
use.  We  might  see  much  of  God  and  of  the  gospel  in  the  chapters  of  the  Levitical 
law,  if  we  had  the  skill  to  search  out  the  meaning  and  mystery  of  them.  4.  En- 
couragement to  believe  and  receive  the  gospel.  (S.  Mather.)  The  preached 
gospel : — I.  It  18  a  signal  parviLEOE  to  have  the  gospel  pbeached  unto  us  ;  to  bb 
Kv.iNGEiiisED. — As  such  it  is  here  proposed  by  the  apostle;  and  it  is  made  a 
foundation  of  inferring  a  necessity  of  all  sorts  of  duties.  This  the  prophet 
emphatically  expresseth  (Isa.  ix.  1,  2).  II.  Barely  to  be  evangelised,  to  have  the 
gospel  preached  unto  any,  is  a  privilege  of  a  dubious  issue  and  event.  All 
privileges  depend  as  to  their  advantage  on  the  use  of  them.  If  herein  we  fail,  that 
which  should  have  been  for  our  good  will  be  our  snare.  III.  The  gospel  is  no 
NEW  DocTBiNE,  NO  NEW  LAW.  It  was  preached  unto  the  people  of  old.  In  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself  and  His  apostles,  it  was  new  in 
respect  of  the  manner  of  its  administration,  with  sundry  circumstances  of  light, 
evidence,  and  power,  wherewith  it  is  accompanied.  So  it  is  in  all  ages  in  respect 
of  any  fresh  discovery  of  truth  from  the  word,  formally  hidden  or  eclipsed.  But  as 
to  the  substance  of  it,  the  gospel  is  that  "  which  was  from  the  beginning  "  (1  Jphn  i. 
1).  It  is  the  first  great  original  transaction  of  God  with  sinners,  from  the  foundation 
of  the  world.    IV.  God  hath  graciously  ordered  the  word  of  the  gospel  to  bb 

PREACHED  TO  MEN,  WHEREON    DEPENDS   THEIR   WELFARE   OR   THEIR   RUIN,       The  WOrd  iS 

like  the  sun  in  the  firmament.  It  hath  virtually  in  it  all  spiritual  light  and  heat. 
But  the  preaching  of  the  word  is  as  the  motion  and  beams  of  the  sun,  which 
actually  and  effectually  communicate  to  all  creatures  that  Ught  and  heat  which  ia 
virtually  in  the  son  itself.     Y.  Ths  sole  cause  of  thb  fbouisb  bbimq  imbffbotuaii 


BHAP.  IT.]  HEBREWS.  299 

10  SALVATION  IN  AND  TOWAKDS  THEM  TO  WHOM  IT  IS  PREACHED,  IS  IN  THEMSELVES  AND 
THEIB  OWN  UNBELIEF.  VI.  ThERE  IS  A  FAILING,  TEMPORARY  FAITH,  WITH  RESPECT 
10  THE  PROMISES  OF  GoD,  WHICH  WILL  NOT  ADVANTAGE  THEM  IN  WHOM  IT  IS.  VII.  ThB 
OBEAT  MTSTERX  OF  USEFUL  AND  PROFITABLE  BELIEVING,  CONSISTS  IN  THB  MIXING  OB 
IN  OORPORATINOOF  TRUTH  AND  FAITH  IN  THE  SOULS  OR  MINDS  OF  BELIEVERS.       1.    There 

is  a  great  respect,  relation,  and  union,  between  the  faculties  of  the  soul,  and  their 
proper  objects,  as  they  act  themselves.  Thus  truth,  as  truth,  is  the  proper  object 
of  the  understanding.  2.  The  truth  of  the  gospel,  of  the  promise  now  under 
especial  consideration,  is  peculiar,  divine,  supernatural ;  and,  therefore,  for  the 
receiving  of  it,  God  reqaireth  in  us,  and  bestoweth  upon  us  a  peculiar,  divine, 
supernatural  habit,  by  which  our  minds  may  be  enabled  to  receive  it.  This  ia 
faith,  which  is  "not  of  ourselves;  it  is  the  gift  of  God."  {John  Owen,  D.D.) 
On  hearing  the  Word  preached  ; — Ever  since  these  words  were  written  the  unprofit- 
ableness of  preaching  has  been  a  subject  of  compLiiut  to  some,  and  of  lameutatioa 
to  others.  On  one  side  it  has  been  alleged  by  the  hearers  that  the  word  preached 
is  unprofitable,  not  so  much  from  want  of  faith  or  piety  in  themselves,  as  from 
want  of  zeal,  of  ability,  of  energy,  or  even  of  originality  in  the  preacher.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  person  thus  unsparingly  assailed  is  led,  perhaps  unwillingly,  to 
remark,  that  faults  in  hearers  may  be  as  numerous  and  as  frequent  as  in  him  who 
speaks :  and  that  the  very  best  preaching  has,  in  cases  without  number,  beea 
ineffectual  through  perverseness,  inattention,  or  unbelief  in  the  auditory.  1.  A 
very  common  impediment  to  edification,  and  one  of  which  every  Christian  mind, 
alive  to  the  importance  of  social  ordinances,  must  be  peculiarly  sensible,  is  the 
practice  of  irregular  attendance  at  the  house  of  God.  2.  I  have  already  remarked 
upon  those  who  have  created  obstacles  to  their  religious  welfare  by  being  absent  in 
body  from  the  house  of  God,  I  now  come  to  those,  who,  by  being  abseut  in  mind 
and  spirit,  make  their  bodily  presence  of  no  avaiL  3.  I  now  proceed  to  the  fault 
of  those  who  are  present,  and  who  attend  to  the  Word  preached,  but  who  attend  with 
improper  dispositions,  either  in  regard  to  their  minister  or  their  fellow-hearers. 
With  respect  to  their  minister,  they  are  apt  to  be  arbitrary  and  dictitorial ;  with 
respect  to  their  fellow-hearers  they  are  apt  to  be  censorious  in  their  application  of 
the  truth  or  duties  inculcated.  (J.  Sinclair,  M.A.)  Not  toeing  mixed  with  faith.— 
Profitable  mixture: — I.  Israel's  hearing  op  the  gospel.  1.  We  shall  notice,  first, 
that  the  good  news  brought  to  Israel  was  a  gospel  of  rest  for  slaves,  a  promise  of 
deliverance  for  men  who  cried  by  reason  of  sore  bondage.  This  was  a  fit  emblem 
of  that  news  which  comes  to  us  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  The  good  tidings 
to  Israel  was  a  gospel  of  redemption  in  order  to  their  entering  into  the  promised 
rest.  You  have  heard  the  word  of  reconciliation,  and  you  know  its  meaning. 
Have  you  rested  in  it  ?  3.  Furthermore,  it  was  a  gospel  of  separation.  When  you 
read  the  words  of  the  Lord  to  His  chosen  ones,  you  are  compelled  to  see  that  He 
means  them  to  be  a  people  set  apart  for  His  own  purposes.  The  Lord  has  of  old 
separated  to  Himself,  in  His  eternal  purposes,  a  people  who  are  His ;  and  His  they 
shall  still  be,  even  till  that  day  in  which  He  shall  make  up  His  jewels.  Tiiese 
belong  to  the  Lord  Jesus  in  a  special  way.  These  have  a  destiny  before  them,  even 
in  this  world,  of  separation  from  the  rest  of  mankind ;  for  Jesus  saith,  *'  they  are 
not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world."  4.  Still  further,  the  gospel 
preached  to  the  Israelites  told  them  of  a  glorious  heritage  which  was  provided  for 
them.  5.  They  had  also  preached  to  them  the  gospel  of  a  Divine  calling ;  for 
they  were  informed  that  they  were  not  to  enter  into  this  land  to  be  idlers  in  it,  but 
they  were  to  be  a  nation  of  priests.  This,  even  this,  is  the  gospel  preached  unto 
you.  Count  not  yourselves  unworthy  of  this  high  honour.  6.  Once  more :  they 
had  a  gospel  which  promised  them  help  to  obtain  all  this.  It  is  a  poor  gospel  which 
sets  heaven  before  us,  but  does  not  help  us  to  enter  it.  "  The  Spirit  helpeth  our 
infirmities."  "  God  shall  bruise  Satan  under  your  feet  shortly."  "  Thanks  be  unto 
God,  who  giveth  us  the  victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  II.  Israel's 
FAILURE  to  profit  BY  THE  GOSPEL  WHICH  THEY  HEARD.  1.  Though  they  heard  it  from 
many,  they  clung  to  Egypt.  2.  Worse  still,  they  provoked  the  Lord  by  their 
murmurings  and  their  idolatry.  3.  Moreover,  they  were  always  mistrustful.  4. 
They  went  so  far  as  to  despise  the  Promised  Land.  5.  When  the  time  came  when 
they  might  have  advanced  against  the  foe,  tbey  were  afraid  to  go  up.  6.  The  end 
of  it  was,  they  died  in  the  wilderness.  A  whole  nation  missed  the  rest  of  God :  it 
will  not  be  a  wonder  if  you  and  I  miss  it,  who  are  but  one  or  two,  unless  we  take 
earnest  heed  and  are  filled  with  fear  "  lest,  a  promise  being  left  us  of  entering  into 
Sis  rest,  an;  of  w  should  seem  to  come  short  of  ii."    III.  The  fatal  cause  of  this 


800  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

DntEFOL  CALAMITY.  Why  WES  it  the  gospel  that  they  heard  did  not  profit  them  ? 
••  Not  being  mixed  with  faith,"  1.  Where  there  is  no  faith,  men  remain  slaves  to 
the  present.  If  they  did  not  believe  in  the  milk  and  honey  of  Canaan,  you  see  why 
they  hankered  for  the  cucumbers  of  Egypt.  An  onion  is  nothing  comparable  to  an 
estate  beyond  Jordon ;  yet  as  they  think  they  cannot  get  the  estate,  they  pine  for 
the  onions.  When  men  do  not  believe  in  eternal  life,  they  naturally  enough  cry, 
•'  Give  me  bread  and  cheese.  Let  me  have  a  fortune  here,"  2.  If  a  man  hears 
and  has  no  faith,  he  learns  nothing.  What  would  be  the  use  of  your  listening  to 
lectures  upon  science  if  you  disbelieved  what  the  professor  set  forth  ?  You  are  no 
pupil,  you  are  a  critic ;  and  you  cannot  learn.  Many  professors  have  no  faith,  anci, 
consequently,  whoever  may  teach  them,  they  will  never  come  to  a  knowledge  of  the 
truth.  3.  The  truth  did  not  affect  the  hearts  of  Israel,  as  it  does  not  affect  any 
man's  heart  till  he  has  believed  it.  A  man's  soul  touched  by  the  finger  of  the 
gospel  resounds  the  music  of  God.  If  the  gospel  is  not  believed,  those  fingers  touch 
mute  strings,  and  no  response  is  heard.  4.  A  man  that  has  no  faith  in  what  he 
hears  does  not  appropriate  it.  There  is  gold  I  Eagerly  one  crieth,  "  Let  me  go 
and  get  it."  Unbelief  restrains  him,  as  it  whispers,  "  There  is  no  gold,  or  it  is 
beyond  reach."  He  does  not  go  to  get  it,  for  he  does  not  believe.  A  hungry  man 
passeth  by  where  there  is  entertainment  for  needy  travellers.  Beheving  that  there 
is  food  for  his  hunger,  he  tarries  at  the  door  ;  but  if  unbelief  mutters,  "  There  is  a 
bare  table  within,  you  might  as  soon  break  your  neck  as  break  your  fast  in  that 
place,"  then  the  traveller  hurries  on.  Unbelief  palsies  the  hand,  and  it  appropriates 
nothing.  That  which  is  not  appropriated  can  be  of  no  use  to  you.  5.  Lastly, 
these  people  could  not  enter  in,  because  they  had  no  faith.  They  could  go  to 
the  border  of  the  land,  but  they  must  die  even  there.  They  could  send  their  spies 
into  the  country  ;  but  they  could  not  see  the  fertile  valleys  themselves.  Without 
faith  they  could  not  enter  Canaan.  Shall  it  be  so  with  us,  that,  for  want  of  faith, 
we  shall  hear  the  gospel,  know  something  about  its  power,  and  yet  miss  its  glories, 
and  never  enter  into  possession  of  the  life  eternal  which  it  reveals  ?  (C7.  II.  Spurgeon.) 
Not  being  mixed  with  faith : — There  is  always  a  pathetic  interest,  made  up  of  sad- 
ness and  hope  together,  in  the  sight  of  any  good  thing  which  fails  of  power  and  of 
its  fullest  life  because  it  is  a  fragment,  and  does  not  meet  the  other  part  which  is 
needed  to  complete  the  whole.  A  seed  that  lies  upon  the  rock,  and  finds  no  ground ; 
an  instrument  which  stands  complete  in  all  its  mechanism,  but  with  no  player's 
hand  to  call  its  music  forth  ;  a  man  who  might  do  brave  and  useful  things  under 
the  summons  of  a  friend's  enthusiasm,  but  goes  through  life  alone,  a  nature  with 
fine  and  noble  qualities  that  need  the  complement  of  other  qualities  which  the  man 
lacks  to  make  a  fruitful  life ;  a  community  rich  in  certain  elements  of  character — 
as,  for  instance,  energy,  hopefulness,  self-confidence,  but  wanting  just  that  profound 
conscientiousness,  that  scrupulous  integrity  which  should  be  the  rudder  to  those 
broad  and  eager  sails ;  a  Church  devout  without  thoughtfulness  or  liberal  without 
deep  convictions — where  would  the  long  list  of  illustrations  end  ?  Everywhere  the 
most  pathetic  sights  are  these  in  which  possibility  and  failure  meet.  Indeed,  herein 
lies  the  general  pathos  which  belongs  to  the  great  human  history  as  a  whole  and  to 
each  man's  single  life.  One  of  these  failures  is  described  in  the  text.  Truth  fails 
because  it  does  not  meet  what  the  Scripture  calls  faith.  This  is  evidently  something 
more  than  mere  assent  that  the  truth  is  true.  The  essential  relations  between  truth 
and  the  nature  of  man  are  evidently  comprehended  in  their  whole  completeness. 
All  that  the  hearer  might  have  done  to  truth,  all  the  welcomi^  that  he  might  have 
extended,  all  the  cordial  and  manifold  relationship  into  which  he  might  have 
entered  with  the  Word  that  was  preached  unto  him — all  this  is  in  the  writer's  mind. 
All  this  is  summed  up  in  the  faith  which  the  truth  has  not  found.  Faith  is  simply 
the  full  welcome  which  the  human  soul  can  give  to  anything  with  which  it  has 
essential  and  natural  relationship.  It  will  vary  for  everything  according  to  that 
thing's  nature,  as  the  hand  will  shape  itself  differently  according  to  the  different 
shapes  of  things  it  has  to  grasp.  Faith  is  simply  the  soul's  grasp,  a  larger  or  a 
smaller  act  according  to  the  largeness  or  smallness  of  the  object  grasped  ;  of  one 
size  for  a  fact,  of  another  for  a  friend,  or  another  for  a  principle ;  but  always  the 
soul's  grasp,  the  entrance  of  the  soul  into  its  true  and  healthy  relationship  to  tha 
object  which  is  offered  to  it.  As  soon  as  we  understand  what  the  faith  is  which  any 
object  or  truth  must  find  and  mix  itself  with  before  it  can  put  on  its  fullest  life  and 
power,  we  are  impressed  with  this  :  that  men  are  always  making  attempts  which 
never  can  succeed  to  give  to  objects  and  truths  a  value  which  in  themselves  they 
never  can  possess,  which  can  only  oome  to  them  as  they  are  taken  home  by  faith 


CHAP.  XV.]  HEBREWS.  801 

Into  the  characters  of  men.  We  hear  men  talk  about  the  progress  of  oar  conntry, 
and  by  and  by  we  find  tbey  mean  the  increase  of  its  wealth,  the  development  of  ita 
resources,  the  opening  of  its  communications,  the  growth  of  its  commerce.  These 
do  not  make  a  country  great.  They  are  powerless  until  they  are  mixed  with  faith ; 
until  they  give  themselves  to  the  improvement  of  the  human  qualities  which  any 
real  national  life,  like  any  real  personal  life,  is  made,  and  make  the  nation  more 
generous,  more  upright,  and  more  free.  They  may  do  that.  It  is  in  the  power  of 
a  nation  as  of  a  man  to  grow  greater  by  every  added  dollar  of  its  wealth,  but  a 
dollar  is  powerless  until  it  mixes  itself  with  faith  and  passes  into  character.  And 
so  of  far  more  spiritual  things  than  dollars.  You  say :  "  How  headlong  my  boy  is ! 
Let  me  give  him  a  wise  friend,  and  so  he  shall  get  wisdom."  You  say  :  *'  Here  is 
my  brother,  who  has  been  frivolous.  Behold,  a  blessed  sorrow  is  gathering  about 
him,  and  out  of  the  darkness  he  will  come  with  a  sober  heart!  "  You  say:  "  This 
man  is  coarse  and  brutish  ;  let  me  set  him  among  fine  things,  and  he  will  become 
delicate  and  gentle."  You  say:  "This  selfish  creature,  who  has  not  cared  for  his 
country  in  what  seemed  her  soft  and  easy  days,  let  the  storm  come,  let  the  war  burst 
out,  or  the  critical  election  rise  up  like  a  sudden  rock  out  of  the  calm  sea,  and 
patriotism  will  gather  at  his  heart  and  set  his  brain  to  lofty  thoughts  and  strengthea 
his  arm  for  heroic  deeds."  For  ever  the  same  anticipations  from  mere  circum- 
stances, the  same  trust  in  mere  emergencies,  in  facts  and  things,  and  for  ever  the 
same  disappointment — no  crisis,  event,  fact,  person  is  of  real  value  to  the  soul 
unless  it  really  gets  into  that  soul,  compels  or  wins  its  welcome,  and  passes  by  the 
mixture  of  faith  into  character.  So,  and  so  only,  does  a  wise  friend  make  your  boy 
wise,  or  sorrow  make  your  brother  noble,  or  fine  and  gentle  circumstances  make  the 
coarse  man  fine,  or  the  need  of  his  country  make  the  selfish  man  a  patriot.  Now, 
all  this  is  peculiarly  true  with  reference  to  religion.  We  put  confidence  in  our 
organisations  :  let  us  plant  our  church  in  this  remote  village ;  let  our  beloved  liturgy 
be  heard  among  these  unfamiliar  scenes  ;  and  so  men  shall  be  saved.  It  is  not  so 
much  that  we  have  too  much  confidence,  as  that  we  have  the  wrong  kind  of  con- 
fidence in  the  objective  truth.  "Let  this  which  I  know  is  verity  come  to  this  bad 
man's  life,  and  be  must  turn."  There  is  all  about  us  vhis  faith  in  the  efficacy  of 
ideas  over  character.  The  orthodox  man  believes  that  if  you  could  silence  all 
dissent  from  the  old  venerated  creed  the  world  would  shine  with  holioess.  How 
like  it  all  sounds  to  the  cry  we  hear  in  the  parable  coming  forth  from  the  still  unen- 
lightened ruin  of  a  wasted  life :  "  Nay,  father  Abraham  ;  but  if  one  went  unto  them 
from  the  dead  they  will  repent  I "  Ideas  are  mighty.  There  is  no  real  strength  in 
the  world  that  has  not  an  idea  at  its  heart.  To  declare  trae  ideas,  to  speak  the 
truth  to  men,  is  the  noblest  work  that  any  man  can  covet  or  try  to  do.  To  attempt 
to  gain  power  over  men  which  shall  not  be  the  power  of  an  idea  is  poor,  ignoble 
work.  But  yet  it  is  none  the  less  certain  that  no  man  really  does  tell  the  truth  to 
other  men  who  docs  not  always  go  about  remembering  that  truth  is  not  profitable 
till  it  is  mixed  with  faith,  that  the  final  power  of  acceptance  or  rejection  lies  in  the 
soul.  But  we  must  go  farther  than  this.  The  mind  of  man  is  far  too  delicate  and 
sensitive  for  anything  unappropriated  and  not  made  a  part  of  itself  to  be  in  it  with- 
out doing  it  harm.  The  book  which  you  have  studied,  but  whose  heart  you  have 
not  taken  into  your  heart,  makes  you  not  a  wise  man,  but  a  pedant.  And  so  it  ia 
with  institutions.  The  government  under  which  you  live,  but  with  whose  ideas  you 
are  not  in  loyal  sympathy,  chafes  and  worries  you,  and  makes  yoa  often  all  the 
more  rebellious  in  your  heart  the  more  punctiliously  obedient  you  are  in  outward 
action.  And  so  especially  it  is  in  all  that  pertains  to  religion.  What  is  the  root 
and  source  of  bigotry,  and  of  that  which  goes  with  bigotry — partisanship?  Is  not 
the  real  reason  of  these  morbid  substitutes  for  healthy  belief  always  this — that  truth 
has  been  received  but  not  "  mixed  with  faith,"  not  deeply  taken  into  the  very  nature 
of  the  man  who  has  received  it  ?  Take  any  truth — the  truth,  for  instance,  of  the 
Lcrd's  incarnation.  Let  it  be  simply  a  proved  fact  to  a  man,  and  how  easily  he 
makes  it  the  rallying  cry  of  a  sect ;  how  easily  he  comes  to  hate  with  personal 
hatred  the  men  who  do  not  hold  it ;  how  ready  he  is  to  seek  out  and  magnify  the 
shades  of  difiference  in  the  statements  which  men  make  of  it  who  do  hold  the  great 
truth  along  with  him  I  But  let  that  same  truth  be  "  mixed  with  faith,"  let  it  enter 
into  the  depth  of  a  man's  nature  where  it  is  capable  of  going,  let  it  awaken  in  him 
the  deep,  clear  sense  of  the  unutterable  love  of  God,  let  it  reveal  to  him  his  human 
dignity,  his  human  responsibility,  his  human  need,  and  then  how  impossible  it  will 
be  for  him  to  be  a  bigot  I  What  the  bigot  needs  is  not  to  be  freed  from  the  tyranny 
of  his  belief,  but  to  be  taught  what  it  is  really  to  be' leva     The  partisan's  partisan* 


S03  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r». 

ship  is  a  sign,  not  of  his  faith,  but  of  his  infidelity.  This  is  what  we  all  need  to 
keep  always  in  our  minds  as  we  read  religious  history,  or  look  around  us  at  the 
imperfect  religious  life  of  to-day.  It  is  possible  for  us  to  believe  the  same  ever- 
lasting truth  which  the  bigots  and  the  persecutors  believed  and  yet  escape  theii 
bigotry  and  terrible  intolerance.  But  we  must  do  it  not  by  believing  less  deeply, 
but  by  believing  more  deeply  than  they  did.  The  path  to  charity  lies  not  away  from 
faith,  but  into  the  very  heart  of  faith,  for  only  there  true,  reasonable,  permanent 
charity  abides.  How  vast  a  future  this  idea  of  faith  opens  to  humanity!  We  think 
sometimes  that  we  have  come  in  sight  of  the  end  of  progress,  that  we  live  where  we 
can  at  least  foresee  an  enchanted  world.  Our  ships  have  sailed  the  sphere  around  ; 
our  curiosity  has  searched  to  the  roots  of  the  mountains  and  swept  the  bottoms  of 
the  seas.  Men  have  played  every  role  before  us  which  imagination  and  ambition 
could  suggest.  What  can  there  be  before  the  eyes  that  are  to  come  when  we  are 
gone  but  endless  reiteration  of  old  things?  Is  not  the  interest  of  life  almost  used 
up  ?  No  I  The  interest  of  life  is  not  in  the  things  that  happen,  but  in  the  men 
who  see.  If  man  be  capable  of  perpetual  renewal  by  ever-increasing  faith,  then  to 
the  ever  new  man  the  old  world  shall  be  for  ever  new.  What  a  light,  too,  this 
throws  upon  the  life  which  many  a  fellow-man  is  living  now  close  by  our  side.  How 
much  richer  than  we  can  begin  to  know  the  world  must  be  to  our  brother  who  has 
a  faith  which  we  have  not  1  The  world  is  more  to  every  true,  unselfish  man  when 
he  knows  that  his  perception  is  no  measure  of  its  wealth,  but  that  the  deeper  souls 
are  all  the  time  finding  it  rich  beyond  all  that  he  has  imagined.  This  same  truth 
gives  us  some  light  upon  the  everlasting  life,  the  life  beyond  the  grave.  Let  us  be 
sure  that  the  new  name  in  the  forehead  is  what  makes  the  reality  of  heaven  far 
more  than  the  gold  under  the  feet.  The  new  circumstances  shall  be  much,  but  the 
new  man  shall  be  more.  We  can  do  nothing  now  to  build  the  streets  and  gates, 
but  by  God's  grace  we  can  do  much  now  to  begin  to  become  the  men  and  women  to 
whom  one  day  heaven  shall  be  possible.  Thea  heaven  when  it  comes  will  not  be 
strange.  Only  a  deepening  of  the  faith  by  which  we  sought  it  shall  we  receive  and 
absorb,  and  grow  in  and  by  its  richness  for  ever  and  for  ever.  (Bp.  Phillips  Brooks.) 
Cause  of  the  unprofitable  hearing  of  the  Word : — I.  In  vindication  of  the  principle, 

that  NO  UNBELIEVER  CAN  BE  PROFITED  BY  THE  PRIVILEGE  AND  BLESSINGS  OF  THE  GOSPEL, 
IT  WILL  NOT  REQUIRE   MUCH  PAINS   TO   SHOW  THAT   SUCH  AN  APPOINTMENT    IS    PERFECTLY 

CONSISTENT  WITH  God's  FAITHFULNESS  AND  TRUTH.  God,  HO  doubt,  promised  that  He 
would  confer  upon  His  ancient  people  the  heritage  of  Canaan ;  but  surely  He  is 
Himself  the  best  interpreter  of  His  own  will ;  and  if  we  find  that  many,  to  whom 
the  promise  was  given,  entered  not  in  because  of  unbelief,  it  is  only  reasonable  to 
conclude  that  the  giving  of  the  promise  at  first  was  not  irrespective  of,  but 
dependent  on,  the  character  and  conduct  of  those  to  whom  it  was  given.  Jehovah 
was  sincere,  but  for  that  very  reason  He  required  sincerity.  He  was  willing  to 
fulfil  the  promise,  but  His  rebellious  people  were  unwilling  to  receive  it.  God's 
promises  are  all  sovereign.  If  they  be  laid  hold  of,  they  will  and  must  be  enjoyed. 
If,  however,  they  be  not  laid  hold  of,  if  they  be  disbelieved,  then  they  are  void  ;  for 
this  reason,  that  they  are  revealed  in  such  a  shape  that  they  become  our  property 
only  when  we  believe  them.  The  gospel  will  not  enrich  us  unless  we  receive  it  with 
faith.  The  two  truths,  therefore,  are  quite  compatible  and  harmonious,  that  salva- 
tion is  absolutely  gratuitous,  while  we  can  get  it  only  by  vigorously  acting  in  faith 
upon  Jesus  Christ.  To  illustrate  the  matter  by  a  comparison :  When  we  walk,  it  is 
not  the  material  and  tangible  substance  of  which  our  limbs  are  composed,  it  is  not 
the  bones  and  sinews  which  are  the  cause  of  motion.  They  are  mere  instruments 
or  secondary  agents  which  move  only  as  they  are  impelled.  Taken  by  themselves, 
or  viewed  in  their  component  parts,  they  are  mere  masses  of  organic  matter,  devoid 
of  all  power  or  energy,  "and  subject  only  to  changes  or  motions  that  may  be  im- 
pressed on  them.  The  real  cause  of  motion  in  the  limbs  is  the  vital  principle, 
which,  unseen  and  incomprehensible,  controls  every  function,  effects  every  move- 
ment, operates  every  change.  It  is  not  the  limbs,  then,  that  cause  the  motion ; 
they  only  perform  the  motion  :  the  cause  of  the  motion  is  the  element  of  life,  the 
spiritual  and  nervous  energy  which  pervades  the  limbs  and  qualifies  them  for  the 
task  they  have  to  perform.  Now,  in  like  manner,  it  is  not  the  sinner  that  effect! 
his  own  redemption,  but  the  grace  of  God  that  has  appeared  unto  us  and  to  all  men^ 
bringing  salvation.  This  is  the  sole  and  the  omnipotent  agent.  No  other  agent 
could  perform  the  work.  But  this  agent  does  not  work  without  means,  and  these 
means  are  just  the  faculties  and  powers  of  the  human  mind.  God's  grace  operates 
through  the  instrumentality  of  our  faculties,  and  if  we  chain  up  these  faculties  in 


CHIP.  IT.I  HEBREWS.  803 

indolent  inaction,  we  virtually  resist  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  say  we  will  not  have 
the  Lord  to  reign  over  us.      II.  Explain  and  illustiute  the  grodnds  of  thb 

DOCTBINE,  THAT  WANT   OF    FAITH    VITIATES  AND    NEOTRALISES   THE    EFFECT    OF   SPIRITUAIj 

PBIVILEOE8.  Faith  is,  if  we  may  so  speak,  the  power  of  spiritual  digestion.  And 
as  it  does  not  discredit  the  excellence  of  wine  or  any  other  nourishing  substance, 
that  it  is  incapable  of  strengthening  the  sick  and  exhausted  invalid  whose  constitu- 
tion is  irreparably  injured  ;  so  the  promises  of  Divine  grace  are  no  way  dishonoured 
when  persons  who  want  faith  are  found  to  derive  from  these  promises  no  spiritual 
or  solid  advantage.  The  Word  preached  cannot  profit  when  it  is  not  mingled  with 
faith  in  the  hearer,  for  there  can  be  no  nutrition  where  there  is  no  appropriation  of 
food.  There  can  be  no  vital  circulation  in  the  severed  twig  unless  that  twig  be 
engrafted.  The  Word  may  be  read,  heard,  studied,  loved;  but  it  is  only  the 
engiafted  Word  that  is  able  to  save  our  souls.  It  is  only  when  believed  that  the 
gospel  message  is  profitable.  Faith,  then,  is  necessary — 1.  Because,  according  to 
God's  own  appointment,  it  is  the  preliminary  step  of  our  being  received  into  His 
favour.  It  is  the  coustituted  deed  of  entitlement.  2.  Faith  alone  can  secure  ua 
victory  over  our  spiritual  enemies.  Here,  again,  the  value  of  faith  depends 
on  its  being  on  God's  will  and  promise  linked  in  connection  with  spiritual 
conquest.  Our  foes,  Satan,  sin,  the  world,  and  the  flesh,  are  all  mightier 
than  our  wills.  But  God  has  said  this  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  them 
all,  even  our  faith.  Nothing  else  has  such  a  promise.  3.  Faith  alone  can 
impart  peace  to  the  soul.  Such  is  its  nature.  For  it  is  in  fact  just  the  belief 
that  God  is  reconciled,  attached  to  us,  our  Friend,  our  Father,  even  the  God  and 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Unless  we  be  persuaded  of  this  we  cannot  love 
Him.  4.  Lastly,  faith  alone  can  make  us  holy.  If  we  believe  Christ  died  for  our 
Bins,  we  shall  feel  the  constraining  influence  of  a  motive  that  more  than  any  other 
will  excite  us  to  obey  the  Divine  will.  And  then  the  spirit  of  sanctification  accom- 
pauies  the  exercise  of  faith,  and  purifies  the  soul  in  obeying  the  truth.  Faith, 
therefore,  is  universally  profitable.  It  is  the  harbinger  of  every  other  grace.  {A  lex. 
liisbet.)  The  mercy  of  the  gospel : — 1.  It's  a  great  mercy  in  God  to  vouchsafe  ua 
the  gospel,  and  to  have  it  faithfully  and  constantly  preached  unto  us  so  that  we 
may  hear  it.  2.  In  this  gospel  there  are  precious  promises,  the  chiefest  whereof  is 
that  of  entering  into  God's  rest.  3.  Men  may  hear  the  gospel  preached,  and  yet 
receive  no  benefit  by  it  through  their  own  fault.  4.  Therefore  it  concerns  us  all  to 
fear  this  sin  of  apostasy  as  we  fear  loss  of  heavenly  rest,  God's  eternal  displeasure, 
hell,  death,  and  eternal  punishments.  (G.  Lawson.)  Profitless  hearing  : — The 
gospel  is  a  precious  pearl,  an  unspeakable  blessing  of  God,  yet  all  that  are  partakers 
of  it  are  not  saved.  Judas  had  the  gospel,  yet  it  profited  him  not.  Simon  Magus, 
Jerusalem,  &o.  The  sun  is  not  comfortable  to  alL  The  most  delicate  fare  doth 
not  make  all  bodies  fat.  The  rain  doth  not  make  all  grounds  fruitful,  neither  doth 
the  Word  of  God,  though  it  be  mighty  in  operation,  profit  all  that  partake  of  it 
(Luke  xiii.  26 ;  Matt.  viii.  12) ;  nay,  it  is  the  heaping  up  of  a  greater  measure  of 
condemnation  to  some  through  their  own  default  (John  xv.  22,  ix.  ult.).  Why  did 
the  gospel  do  them  no  good  ?  Because  it  was  not  mixed  with  faith  in  them  that 
heard  it.  It  is  a  metaphor  borrowed  from  liquid  things.  A  physician  prescribes 
to  a  man  a  cup  of  strong  wine,  but  he  wills  him  to  mingle  it  with  sugar,  lest  it  fume 
into  bia  Irain  and  make  him  sick ;  if  he  mingle  it  not  and  temper  it  well  with  sugar, 
he  huria  himself.  So  because  they  mingled  not  the  wine  of  the  Word  with  the  sweet 
Bugar  of  faith  it  was  their  destruction,  it  turned  them  over  even  into  hell.  It  is 
faith  that  makes  the  Word  profitable.  For  the  procuring  of  an  harvest  it  is  not 
enough  to  have  ground,  and  seed  cast  into  the  ground,  but  rain  must  fall  from 
heaven  and  he  mingled  with  the  ground.  So  it  is  not  sufficient  to  bring  ourselves  as 
the  ground  to  a  sermon,  to  have  the  immortal  seed  of  the  Word  sown  in  our  hearts 
by  God's  husbandmen,  but  there  must  be  the  drops  of  faith  mingled  with  this  seed 
to  make  it  fruitful.  (W.  Jones,  D.D.)  The  Word  preached,  yet  profitless  .-—There 
are  few  things  more  perplexing  than  the  contrast  between  the  vastness  and  variety 
of  the  means  employed  for  the  creation  of  religious  impression,  and  the  scantiness 
of  the  results  arising  from  their  employment.  For  all  this  there  must  necessarily 
be  a  cause.  Does  the  fault  lie  in  the  instrument  employed  ?  Is  the  Word  itself 
defective,  either  from  style,  topic,  or  tone,  to  meet  the  indifference  of  man's  nature  f 
Something  there  is  in  man's  nature  that  stands  out  against  the  power  of  Scri^iture, 
that  counteracts  the  medicine  which  would  restore  as  to  health.  And  this  is  the 
assertion  that  the  apostle  makes  with  regard  to  Israel.  Affirming  elsewhere  the 
power  of  the  Word,  he  affirms  here  the  deficiency  of  man's  faith.    I.  Goo  dd 


B04  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  it, 

PBEACH  THE    GOSPEL  TO  ISRAEL   JTJST  AS   GOD  HAS   PREACHED   THE    GOSPEL   TO   US.      In 

popular  thought  and  in  popular  language,  it  is  oftentimes  supposed  that  the  gospel 
belongs  rather  to  the  Christian  than  to  the  Jewish  dispensation.  The  truth  is,  that 
never  was  a  moment  in  this  world's  history  since  the  fall  of  man  in  which  the 
gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  has  not  been  proclaimed.    We  grant  you  this,  that  it  may 
have  been  announced  sometimes  with  more  of  power,  and  more  of  expansion,  and 
more  of  fulness  than  at  other  times.    But  no  sooner  did  the  necessity  commence 
than  the  blessed  remedy  was  proposed  by  God.     Nay,  more  than  this — so  anxioua 
does  it  appear  that  God  was  to  make  that  instrument  effective  in  bringing  back 
wayward  sinners  to  Himself,  that  we  find  God  has  so  planned  His  gospel  as  to 
make  it  speak  to  the  three  great  departments  of  man's  nature.     He  has  made  that 
gospel  speak,  in  the  first  place,  to  man's  hopes  ;  in  the  second  place,  to  man's 
senses  ;  and  lastly,  to  man's  understanding.  So,  you  see,  that  by  enlisting  all  these 
faculties  of  man  in  His  service,  by  telling  man  to  look  hopefully,  by  telling  man  to 
look  intelligently  upon  this  system,  the  Lord  has  grappled  with  the  obduracy  of 
man's  nature,  as  it  were  fulfilling  in  all  this  His  own  declaration,  "  I  wiU  not  let  thee 
go  until  I  bless  thee."  .  .  .    And,  as  if  to  make  it  clear  that  nothing  was  left  undone 
>^hich  ooald  give  God's  truth  a  hold,  a  lodgment  on  the  human  soul,  our  blessed 
Master  condescended  to  clothe  His  appeals  in   every  possible  variety  of  form. 
Affectionate  expostulation,  calm  appeal,  tender  invitation,  stem  admonition — the 
attraction  of  promises,  the  thunders  of  threats — parable,  illustration,  allegory — the 
incidental  remark,   the   studied   discourse — the   historical   allusion,  the   original 
thought — the  informal  address  at  the  sea-side,  the  deliberate  comment  in  the  syna- 
gogue.    And  yet,  though  thus  the  gospel  was  preached  to  them  as  to  us,  "  the 
Word  preached  did  not  profit  them,  not  being  mixed  with  faith  in  them  that  heard 
It."      II.  The  CAUSE  which  prevented  Israel,  and  probably  prevents  us,  fb'iM 
BXCEiviNO  THE  GOSPEL.     And,  if  we  are  to  apprehend  this  point  aright,  we  must 
carry  our  thoughts  into  two  channels,  for  it  is  necessary  to  determine  what  is 
meant  by  the  reception  of  the  gospel  before  we  are  in  a  position  to  admit  the  reason 
why  the  gospel  is  not  received.     Now,  in  reference  to  the  former  of  these  points,  we 
are  bold  to  express  our  belief  that  there  exist  most  imperfect  views  respecting  the 
reception  of  the  gospel.   Multitudes  there  are  who  conceive  that  they  have  accepted 
it  because  they  Usten  to  its  truths  and  assent  to  its  propositions.     But  we  pray  you 
to  understand  this,  that  if  that  were  simply  all  that  Scripture  intends  by  receiving 
the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  we  should  find  that  there  was  no  work  for  faith  whatso- 
ever.   We  grant  there  is  all  the  difference  in  the  world  in  some  respects  between  a 
man  who  receives  the  truths  of  the  New  Testament  and  a  man  who  rejects  those 
truths.  You  have,  so  far  as  the  understanding  goes,  that  which  a  man  has  accepted, 
and  80  far  he  may  be  admitted  into  the  ranks  of  Christian  discipleship.    But,  after 
all,  what  is  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  meant  for  ?    It  is  not  meant  to  be  simply  a 
system  of  instruction.    If  so  it  would  apply  itself  to  man's  mind.    It  was  not  meant 
simply  to  be  a  system  of  illustration.     If  so  it  would  apply  itself  simply  to  man's 
fancy.    It  was  not  intended  like  abstract  rules  in  scientific  matters,  as  in  mathe- 
matics for  instance,  to  lay  down  dry  and  abstract  propositions  to  be  taken  up  and  to 
be  believed  by  men  simply  because  they  could  not  gainsay  the  system.    No,  the 
gospel  was  intended  for  more  than  this.     It  was  intentTed  doubtless  to  enlighten  us  ; 
doubtless  to  instruct  us;  doubtless  to  edify  us.     But  the  great  use  of  our  Master's 
gospel  is  this :  to  win  the  whole  man — the  man  of  understanding,  the  man  of  intel- 
ligence, the  man  of  religion — to  win  the  whole  man  into  a  state  of  subjection  to 
Christ  Jesus.     If  there  be  amongst  us  any  whose  reception  of  the  gospel  is  simply 
of  that  scientific  kind  that  I  have  attempted  to  describe,  it  were  not  too  much  to  say 
that  that  man  has  never  received  the  gospel  yet.     "  Not  being  mixed  with  faith  in 
ihose  that  heard  it."     Suffer  me  to  expostulate  with  you,  and  to  ask  you  honestly 
ihis  question,  what  has  the  gospel  done  in  the  way  of  profit  with  you  ?  Has  it  come 
lown  with  a  power  greater  than  mortal  power  to  your  souls,  and  made  you  feel  that 
(oa  were  sinners?     Has  it  made  you  feel  your  own  utterly  impotent  powerlessnfss 
S)  restore  yourselves  back  to  God's  favour?    Has  it  made  you  feel  this,  that  none 
3ut  Jesus  can  stand  between  you  and  God  as  the  effectual  Atoner  and  the  effectual 
Mediator?  Has  it  come  down  into  your  conscience,  makiug  you  to  writhe  under  the 
Bense  of  transgression?    Has  it  done  more  than  this,  altered  your  habits?    Is  it 
builJing  you  up  into  conformity  with  the  laws  that  are  Christ  Jesus'?  If  the  gospel 
has  been  doing  aught  of  this  kind  it  has  brought  profit  with  it.     But  if  it  has  only 
brought  new  ideas  to  your  understanding,  if  it  has  only  brought  new  thoughts  to 
your  intelligence,  if  it  has  qualified  you,  so  to  speak,  to  sit  down  and  be  catechised* 


Oiup.  IT.)  HEBREWS.  305 

then  has  this  gospel  not  done  God's  intention  with  regard  to  it,  for  it  has  not  re- 
claimed the  whole  man  and  made  that  rebel  a  subject  of  Christ  Jesus,  {A.  Boyd, 
M.A.)  Faith  not  to  be  mixed  with  fancies  : — 1.  Faith  can  stand  with  nothiu^^, 
nor  be  mixed  with  truth  but  the  Word  ;  and  the  Word  will  not  join,  nor  stand,  nor 
mix  with  conceits,  opinions,  presumptions,  but  with  faith ;  that  is,  it  will  be 
received,  not  as  a  conjecture,  or  possible  truth,  but  for  Divine  and  infallible  truth ; 
else  it  profiteth  not.  2.  Hearers  of  the  Word  may  blame  their  misbelief  if  they  g<'t 
not  profit.  3.  Albeit  a  man  get  light  by  the  Word,  and  some  tasting  of  temporary 
joy  and  honour,  and  riches  also,  by  professing  or  preaching  of  it,  yet  he  receiveih 
not  profit,  except  to  get  entry  into  God's  rest  thereby ;  for  all  these  turn  to  con- 
viction, {D.  Dickson,  M.A.)  Preaching  and  practising  : — It  is  a  popular  error 
to  mistake  that  length  is  the  only  dimension  of  a  sermon,  A  man  said  to  a 
minister,  "  Your  sermons  are  too  short."  Said  the  minister,  "  If  you  will  practise 
all  I  preach  you  vsrill  find  them  quite  long  enough."  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Unprofit- 
able hearing : — A  person  whose  hfe  was  immoral  urged  his  sister  to  go  with  him  to 
hear  his  minister ;  but  she  smartly  replied,  "  Brother,  what  are  you  the  better  for 
his  preaching?"  {Baxendale's  Anecdotes.)  The  gospel  must  be  believed: — A 
lady,  travelling  through  the  Southern  States  of  America  in  a  private  carriage,  one 
or  two  years  after  the  Proclamation  of  Emancipation  had  been  issued,  chanced  to 
be  detained  for  the  night  in  a  Uttle  country  inn,  which  stood  so  far  off  from  the 
usual  lines  of  travel,  that  it  was  evident  a  guest  was  very  seldom  entertained  there. 
She  was  shown  into  a  room,  to  prepare  for  tea,  which  was  as  full  of  dust  as  though 
it  had  not  been  entered  or  disturbed  for  years.  She  requested  some  attendance, 
and  a  poor,  wretched-looking  coloured  woman  was  sent  to  her,  with  no  apparent 
life  or  energy ;  nothiug  but  utter  listlessness  and  indifference  expressed  in  every 
movement.  After  watching  ber  useless  performance  for  a  few  minutes,  the  lady 
said :  "  Auntie,  I  am  from  the  North,  and  I  am  not  used  to  having  things  this  way 
at  all.  Now,  you  know,  we  Northerners  set  your  people  free,  and  I  think  you  ought 
to  try  and  make  thmgs  comfortable  for  us  when  we  come  among  you.  Just  see  if 
you  cannot  make  this  room  a  little  cleaner  while  I  go  down  to  tea."  Saying  this, 
the  lady  left  the  room.  She  returned  in  about  an  hour,  and  found,  to  her  astonish- 
ment, the  dusty  room  transformed  into  a  picture  of  neatness.  But  more  astonish- 
ing even  than  the  transft)rmation  in  the  room  was  the  transformation  in  the  woman 
herself.  She  stood  there  looking  inches  taller.  Life  and  energy  were  in  every 
muscle  and  every  movement.  Her  eyes  flashed  fire.  She  looked  like  a  new 
creature.  The  lady  began  to  thank  her  for  the  change  she  had  made  in  the  room ; 
but  the  woman  interrupted  her  with  the  eager  question  :  "  Oh,  missus,  is  we  free  f  " 
"Of  course  you  are,"  replied  the  lady.  "  Oh,  missus,  is  you  sure?"  urged  the 
woman,  with  intense  eagerness,  "  Certainly  I  am  sure,"  answered  the  lady. 
"  Did  you  not  know  it  ?  "  "  Well,"  said  the  woman,  *'  we  heerd  tell  as  how  we  was 
free,  and  we  asked  master,  and  he  'lowed  we  wasn't,  and  so  we  was  afraid  to  go. 
And  then  we  heered  tell  again,  and  we  went  to  the  Gunnel,  and  he  'loved  we'd  better 
stay  with  ole  massa.  And  so  we's  just  beei:  off  and  on.  Sometimes  we'd  hope  we 
was  free,  and  then  agin  we'd  think  we  wasn't.  But  now,  missus,  if  you  is  sure  we 
is  free,  won't  you  tell  me  all  about  it  7  "  Seeing  that  this  was  a  case  of  real  need, 
the  lady  took  the  pains  to  explain  the  whole  thing  to  the  poor  woman — all  about 
the  war,  and  the  Proclamation  of  Emancipation,  and  the  present  freedom.  The 
poor  woman  hstened  with  the  most  intense  eagerness.  She  heard  the  good  news. 
She  believed  it ;  and  when  the  story  was  ended,  she  walked  out  of  the  room  with 
an  air  of  the  utmost  independence,  saying,  as  she  went:  "  I'se  free!  I  ain't 
a-going  to  stay  with  ole  massa  any  longer  1 "  She  had  at  last  received  her  freedom, 
and  she  had  received  it  by  faith.  The  Government  had  declared  her  to  be  free  long 
before,  but  this  had  not  availed  her,  because  she  had  never  yet  believed  in  the 
declaration.  The  good  news  had  not  profited  her,  not  being  mixed  with  faith  in 
the  one  who  heard  it.  But  now  she  believed,  and,  believing,  she  dared  to  reckon 
herself  to  be  free.  (The  Church.)  Faith  increased  by  faith : — Faith  is  learnt  by 
faith ;  that  is,  it  is  maintained,  increased,  and  strengthened  by  exercise,  just  aa 
walking,  speaking,  writing,  &c.,  are  learnt  by  walking,  speaking,  and  writing. 
{A.  J.  Bengel.)  Hearing  btU   not  profiting  : — Jedediah   Buxton,   the    famous 

peasant,  who  could  multiply  nine  figures  by  nine  in  his  head,  was  once  taken  to  see 
Garrick  act.  When  he  went  back  to  his  own  village,  he  was  asked  what  he  thought 
of  the  great  actor  and  his  doings.  "  Oh  I  "  he  said,  "he  did  not  know;  he  had 
only  seen  a  little  man  strut  about  the  stage,  and  repeat  7,956  words."  Here  was  a 
want  of  the  ability  to  appreciate  what  he  saw,  and  the  exercise  of  the  reigning 

20 


S06  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap  it. 

faculty  to  the  exclusion  of  every  other.  Similarly,  our  hearers,  if  destitute  of  the 
spiritual  powers  by  which  the  gospel  is  discerned,  fix  their  thoughts  on  our  words, 
tones,  gestures,  or  countenance,  and  make  remarks  upon  us  which,  from  a  spiritual 
point  of  view,  are  utterly  absurd.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Faith,  the  necessary  grace ; — 
There  must  be  an  union  and  closing  with  Christ  by  faith  before  there  can  be  any 
communication  from  Him  of  the  graces  of  the  Spirit.  There  must  be  an  ingrafting 
into  the  root  before  there  can  be  a  communication  of  sap  from  the  root  to  the 
branches.  The  grace  of  faith  enlargeth  the  heart  to  receive  Christ,  and  after  it  hath 
received  Him  it  retains  Him.  I  found  Him  whom  my  soul  loveth — I  held  Him,  and 
•would  not  let  Him  go.  The  grace  of  lore  entertains  Him  with  the  embracements 
of  the  will  and  affections.  Faith,  like  Martha,  goeth  out  for  Him,  and  brings  Him 
along  vrith  the  promise  to  the  soul.  Love,  like  Mary,  sits  down  at  His  feet,  to 
attend  what  is  His  will,  and  execute  His  commands.  Faith  is  the  only  grace  where- 
by a  soul  properly  receives  Christ ;  for  to  receive  Him  and  to  believe  in  His  name 
are  eqnipollents.     {William  Colvill.) 

Vers.  3-6.   We  which  have  believed  do   enter  Into  rest. — The  distinguishing 
characters  of  true  believers : — 1.  A  sweet  experience  declared,  "  We  do  enter  into 
rest."     It  is  an  experience  of  a  spiritual  and  heavenly  benefit ;  whereof  Caleb  and 
Joshua's  experience  was  the  type  (Josh.  xix.).    And  here  consider— (1)  The  benefit 
experienced  ;  that  is,  rest.      Eest  is  a  sweet  thing,  as  all  weary  labourers  do  know. 
But  of  all  rest  soul-rest  is  the  sweetest,  and  such  is  this.     The  rest  here  meant 
is  the  rest  held  forth  in  the  promise  of  the  gospel  (vers.  1,2).    And  if  ye  ask  where 
it  is  found  ?  it  is  not  in  heaven  only,  for  the  believer  enters  into  it  now  ;  but  it  is 
in  Christ,  whether  in  earth  or  heaven.     (2)  The  experience  of  that  benefit,  "We 
do  enter."    He  says  not  we  shall  enter,  viz.,  at  death,  but  in  the  present  time, 
we  do  enter.    The  believer's  rest  is  not  altogether  put  off  to  another  life.    It  is 
not  complete,  indeed,  till  we  come  to  heaven ;  but  it  is  begun  here,  we  are  entering 
into  it,  and  do  enter  ;  and  the  very  entrance  of  the  rest  is  sweet.     2.  The  parties  in 
•whose  name  this  experience  is  declared,  "  We  which  have  believed,"  -viz.,  in  Christ. 
Unbelievers  still  remain  in  their  restless  condition,  but  faith  in  Christ  lays  the 
Boul  to  rest.     I.  Who  they  abe  that  have  tbdly  BELrEVEo.      1.  They  who  have 
beheved,  have  believed  the  grace  and  goodwill  of  Christ  to  them  in  particular,  held 
forth  in  His  word  of  grace  to  them,  ■viz.,  a  good-'will  to  save  them  from  sin  and 
wrath.     (1)  They  have  believed  Christ's  grace  and  good-wiU  to  them,  notwith- 
Btanding  felt  unworthiness  (Luke  xv.  18).      (2)    They  have  believed   His  grace 
and  good-will  towards  the  dra-wing  them  out  of  the  miry  clay  of  their  sinfulness, 
as  well  as  out  from  the  rolling  waves  of  guilt,  the  curse  and  eternal  wrath.     For 
this  is  the  good-will  of  Christ  testified  in  the  gospel  (Matt.  i.  21).     (3)  The  only 
foundation  of  their  belief  of  it  is  the  faithfulness  of  God  in  His  word  of  grace 
(Gal.  iii.  2).     (4)  They  have  betaken  themselves  to  the  grace  and  good-will  of 
Christ  in  His  word  of  grace,  and  laid  all  their  weight  upon  it.    2.  They  who  have 
believed,  have  believed  on  Christ  as  their  own  Saviour  for  life   and    salvation 
to  them  (Acts  xv.  11).    The  sinner  belie'ving  on  Christ  betakes  himself  to  Him 
only,  wholly  and  for  ever.     (1)   He  renounces   utterly  all  expectations   of  rest 
to  his  conscience  from  the  law,  and  betakes  himself  to  a  Crucified  Christ  for  it 
(Phil.  iii.  3).     (2)  He  renounces  utterly  all  expectations  of  rest  to  his  heart  from  the 
world,  and  his  lusts,  and  betakes  himself  to  a  full  Christ  for  it  (Jer.  xvi.   19). 
II.   The  entekino  of  those  who  have   believed  into  best   in  Jesds   Cheist. 
1.  I  am  to  show  what  is  supposed  in  that  those  who  have  believed  do  enter  into 
rest.     (1)  Those  who  have  not  believed  are  in  a  state  of  restlessness  (Isa.  Ivii.  20). 
TiU  the  soul  comes  to  Christ  it  can  never  get  true  rest :  one  may  take  rest  as  well 
on  the  top  of  a  mast   as  get  it  in  an  ungodly,  unregenerate,  unconverted  state. 
Those  out  of   Christ  have — [a)   A  restless  station,  an  insecure   standing   (Dout. 
xxviii.  65,  66).     (b)  A  restless  labouring  (Matt.  xi.  28).     (c)  A  restless  wandering. 
(d)  A  restless  burden-bearing,     (e)  A  restless  eternal  state  abiding  them  (2  Thess. 
i.   7-9).      (2)  Restless  souls  may  be  laid  to  rest  in  Jesus  Christ.      (3)  It  is  by 
faith  the  restless  soul  is  laid  to  rest  in  Christ  (Eom.  xv.  13).    2.  I  proceed  to  show 
what  is  that  rest  in  Christ  which  they  who  do  believe  enter  into.     It  is  twofold, 
spiritual   and  heavenly,  initial  and  complete.     (1)  They  who  have  believed  do 
enter  into  spiritual  rest,  which  is  their  initial  or  begun  rest.    Though  they  should 
get  Uttle  more  rest  for  their  bodies  till  they  rest  in  the  grave,  they  enter  into 
Bonl-rest  (Matt.  xi.  29);  they  get  rest  for  their  souls  in  Christ.    And  none  that 
know  what  soul-trouble  is,  but  they  will  value  it  more  than  any  rest  out  of  heaven. 


CHAP.  IT.]  HEBREWS.  80T 

(2)  Those  who  have  believed  do  enter  into  heavenly  rest  at  length.  This  is  the 
rest  completed.  The  grave  is  made  a  resting-place  for  their  bodies  for  awhile,  but 
th-^  soul  rests  in  Abraham's  bosom  at  death  till  the  resurrection.  And  then  the 
Boul  and  body  together  will  have  an  everlasting  complete  rest  together.  3.  What 
is  ihe  import  of  their  entering  into  that  rest  in  Christ.  (1)  Sinners  before  they 
believe  have  a  toiled,  restless,  uneasy  life  of  it  (Matt.  xi.  28),  No  wonder,  for  they 
are  God's  enemies,  the  law's  criminals,  sin's  slaves,  and  Satan's  drudges.  (2)  All 
that  believe  are  wearied  people,  that  find  they  need  rest,  and  would  fain 
have  it  (Isa.  xxviii.  12).  (3)  They  see  and  believe  there  is  a  rest  in  Christ 
for  them.  (4)  They  come  to  Him  as  a  resting-place  by  believing  on  Him.  (5) 
They  compose  themselves  for,  and  set  themselves  to  rest  in  Him  (Psa,  cxvi.  7). 
(6)  They  are  active  to  get  rest  in  Christ.  Entering  speaks  activity,  and  that  lies 
in  the  exercise  of  faith.  (7)  They  find  a  begun  rest,  but  not  complete ;  they  are 
entered  into  it ;  though  they  are  not  yet  come  to  the  perfection  of  it,  yet  they  are 
In  the  way  to  it.  (8)  The  believer  all  his  life  long  here  is  but  entering  into  that 
rest :  we  do  enter.  The  Israelites  were  forty  years  entering  into  Canaan,  after  they 
came  out  of  Egypt,  And  from  the  moment  of  the  first  believing  till  the  soul 
comes  to  glory,  it  is  but  entering  into  rest;  entering  being  but  an  initial 
and  imperfect  action.  Hence  they  that  have  come  to  Christ  are  still  said  to 
be  coming  (1  Pet.  ii.  4).  But  at  length  they  shall  have  it  full  and  complete. 
4.  I  come  now  to  show  how  the  soul  is  entered  into  rest  in  the  way  of  believing, 
or  the  infiuence  of  faith  to  bring  and  lay  the  soul  to  rest.  This  is  a  mystery  to  the 
blind  world :  nobody  can  truly  know  the  rest  of  the  soul  in  Christ  but  those  that 
have  experienced  it ;  nor  the  influence  of  faith  that  way,  but  those  that  have  felt 
it,  though  they  may  talk  rationally  about  it  and  preach  it,  (1)  Faith  discovers 
Christ  as  the  only  object  commensurable  to  the  desires  of  the  soul  (Psa,  Ixxiii.  25). 
(2)  Faith  takes  possession  of  Christ  as  such  an  object  offered  to  the  soul :  knits 
with  Him  in  a  marriage  covenant  by  trusting  on  Him  for  all  to  itself  (John 
i.  12).  So  it  enters  the  soul  to  rest,  as  a  wife  in  the  house  of  her  husband 
who  has  now  made  her  final  choice.  (3)  Faith  draws  the  sting  of  guilt  out  of  the 
conscience,  and  so  enters  the  soul  to  rest  (Kom.  iii.  24,  251,  (4)  Faith  sets 
the  soul  in  safety  (Prov,  i,  33).  (5)  Faith  mortifies  and  breaks  the  power 
of  reigning  lusts  (Acts  xv.  9).  (6)  Faith  cures  the  soul  of  the  dog-like  appetite, 
that  painful  hunger  and  thirst  which  the  eating  of  the  forbidden  fruit  left  in 
all  mankind.  Lay  one  never  so  soft,  if  hunger  be  gnawing  him,  and  thirst 
scorching  him,  he  cannot  rest.  Such  is  the  case  of  all  unbelievers,  they  are 
hungering  and  thirsting  for  satisfaction  from  the  creature :  they  eat  of  the  husks, 
but  are  never  satisfied.  (7)  Faith  contracts  the  desires  of  the  soul  into  one  point 
(Psa.  xxvii.  4).  (8)  Faith  sees  it  hath  a  fulness  in  Christ  enough  to  answer  aU  its 
needs  :  and  hence  the  language  thereof  is,  "I  have  all,  and  abound"  (Phil.  iv.  18). 
(9)  Faith  leaves  all  on  Christ  (Psa.  x.  14).  Use  I.  Of  information.  1.  Jesus  Christ 
is  a  resting  place  for  the  weary  (Matt.  zi.  28).  2.  True  faith  is  an  active  and 
efficacious  thing.  It  lays  the  restless  soul  to  rest.  3.  The  way  of  oelieving  is  the 
way  to  solid  rest.  4.  Those  who  have  believed  may  see  what  course  to  take  at  any 
time  when  their  rest  is  disturbed.  They  must  renew  the  actings  of  faith  on  Christ. 
Use  II.  Of  trial.  Hereby  ye  may  try  whether  ye  have  truly  believed  in  Christ 
or  not ;  for  they  who  have  beheved  do  enter  into  rest  in  him.  Use  III.  Of  exhorta- 
tion. Ye  who  profess  to  have  believed  in  Christ,  rest  in  Him,  and  so  evidence  your 
faith.  For  motives  consider — 1.  There  is  no  need  ye  should  go  to  any  other 
quarter  for  what  ye  need ;  "  For  it  pleased  the  Father,  that  in  Him  should  all  fulness 
dwell"  (Col.  i.  19),  2.  There  is  no  true  rest  to  be  found  out  of  Christ  (John  vi.  67, 
68).  8,  It  dishonours  Him  highly  not  to  rest  in  Him.  It  gives  out  an  ill  report 
of  Him  to  the  world,  whereby  His  name  may  be  blasphemed,  as  if  there  were  not 
enough  in  Him  to  satisfy  in  all  cases.  4.  Tour  not  resting  in  Him  will  evidence 
your  hypocrisy  (Job,  xxvii,  10),  5.  Rest  in  Him  now,  and  ye  shall  rest  with  Him 
for  ever ;  but  if  ye  forsake  Him,  He  will  cast  you  off,  and  ye  will  fall  there  where 
there  is  no  rest  for  ihe  ages  of  eternity.  And  it  will  aggravate  your  condemnation, 
that  ye  might  have  been  well  if  ye  could  but  have  rested  in  Christ,  (T,  Boston, 
D.D.)  Beit  for  the  true: — 1.  Under  all  dispensations  God  has  been  holding  out 
to  mankind  the  promise  of  a  glorious  rest.  2.  This  glorious  rest  is  something 
independent  of  all  times,  places,  and  privileges.  3.  The  enjoyment  of  this 
glorious  rest  is  dependent  upon  a  certain  believing  state  of  the  soul.  4.  This 
believing  state  of  soul  gives  the  enjoyment  of  this  rest  now.    I.  Faith  m  thb 

MePSL  IBTOLTKS   CONFISS^iCB    ZM  IBS  FAXEBHAL  PSOVISSNCB  OF  GoD,  AKD  THIS  QITEa 


808  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

THE  VXKD  BEST  FBOM  ALL  8E0CLAB  ANXIETIES.  II.  FaITH  IN  THB  OOSPEL  INYOLTES 
AN  ASSXTKANCB  OF  Goo'S  WILLINONE6S  TO  RECEIVE  TJS  AS  SINNERS,  AND  THIS  0ITE9 
OS  REST  FROM  ALL  DISTRESSING  D0DBT8  ABOUT  OCR  SALVATION.  III.  FaTTH  111  THB 
GOSPEL  INVOLVES  A  TRANSFORMING  IMPRESSION  OF  God's  BENEVOLENCE,  AND  THIS  OITES 
OB  REST  FROM  ALL  THE  DISTRESSING  FEELINGS  OF  A  SELFISH  LIFE.  IV.  FaITH  IK 
THE  GOSPEL  INVOLVES  THE  CENTRING  OF  THE  SOUL  UPON  ONE  OBJECT  OF  LOVE  AND  ONB 
C0DB8E  OF  ACTION,  AND  THIS  GIVES  REST  FROM  ALL  THE  PAINS  OF  DISTRACTION.  V.  FaITH 
IN  THE  GOSPEL  INVOLVES  AN  ASSURANCE  IN  A  BLESSED  IMMORTALITY,  AND  THIS  OIVEB  US 
BEST  FROM  ALL  DISTURBING  THOUGHTS  ABOUT  OUR  OWN  DEATH  AND  THAT  OF  OUBFRCBNDB. 

(Homilist.)  The  rest  of  God's  people : — I.  What  is  the  best  ?  1.  A  rest,  from 
sin.  2.  A  rest  from  sorrow.  3.  It  ooDsists  of  what  is  positive  also.  (1)  It 
is  a  bestowment  of  eternal  life.  (2)  It  is  being  with  Christ.  (3)  It  is  working  for 
God  without  weariness,  and  with  full  power  to  do  so.  II.  When  is  the  rebt? 
It  commences  with  the  renewed  soul  when  it  first  "  looks  not  at  the  things  which 
are  seen,  but  at  the  things  which  are  not  seen."  It  brightens  upon  as  more  and 
more  as  we  rise  from  the  lower,  the  temporal,  to  the  higher,  the  eternal  life. 
It  is  fully  revealed  to  us  when  we  have  done  with  mortality  and  sin.  III.  Fob 
whom  is  the  rest  7  Only  for  those  who  love  holiness,  and  hate  iniquity  and  sin. 
(Ibid.)  Rest : — It  appears  from  the  text  that  even  now  persons  of  a  certain 
character  enjoy  rest.  I.  Of  the  nature  of  this  rest.  It  is  not  a  rest  merely 
to  hear  of,  to  speak  of,  and  to  desire,  but  a  rest  in  actual  enjoyment.  "  We  who 
have  believed  do  enter  into  rest."  1.  That  rest  is  pictured  in  some  degree 
by  its  types — Canaan — the  Sabbath — the  Sabbatic  year.  2.  If  the  types  may 
help  us  to  a  guess  at  the  peace  of  the  Christian,  we  may,  perhaps,  come  at  it  a 
little  more  clearly  by  remembering  the  oppositions  to  peace  which  in  the  believer 
are  removed.  The  believer  rests  from  the  guilt  of  sin  because  he  has  seen  his  sins 
laid  upon  Christ,  his  scape-goat,  and  he  concludes  that  if  sin  were  laid  on  Christ 
it  is  not  on  him.  3.  Some  conception  of  this  rest  may  be  gathered  from  the  gracfis 
which  a  true  faith  begets  and  fosters  in  the  Christian  mind.  After  all,  a  m..a 
makes  his  own  condition.  It  is  not  the  dungeon  or  the  palace  that  can  make 
misery  or  happiness.  We  carry  palaces  and  dungeons  within  ourselves,  according 
to  the  constitution  of  our  natures.  Now,  faith  makes  a  man  heavenly  in  mind  ;  it 
makes  him  care  more  for  the  world  to  come  than  for  that  which  now  is  ;  it  makes 
the  invisible  precious  to  him,  and  the  visible  comparatively  contemptible.  Do  yoa 
not  see,  therefore,  what  rest  a  true  faith  gives  us  amidst  the  distresses  of  this 
mortal  life  ?  Who  cries  for  pebbles  when  he  possesses  pearls  ?  The  grace  of  faith, 
moreover,  works  in  us  resignation.  He  who  fully  trusts  his  God  becomes  perfectly 
resigned  to  his  Father's  will.  The  habit  of  resignation  is  the  root  of  peace.  Faith, 
furthermore,  promotes  unselfishness  by  kindling  worthier  affections ;  and  so  much 
is  this  for  our  peace,  that  it  is  most  true  that  were  a  man  perfectly  unselfish  it  would 
be  impossible  for  him  to  be  disturbed  with  discontent.  All  our  unrest  lies  at  the 
root  of  self.  II.  How  does  the  Christian  obtain  this  rest?  "  We  which  have 
believed. "  Do  notice  this,  that  the  way  in  which  the  believer  comes  to  his  rest 
is  entirely  through  belief  or  trust.  And  what  is  this  believing  ?  Why  it  is  a  simple 
trust ;  it  is  a  trusting  upon  Christ  as  God's  appointed  Saviour ;  it  is  trusting  the 
Father  and  believing  in  His  infinite  love  to  us;  it  is  trusting  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
giving  up  ourselves  to  the  sway  of  His  Divine  indwelling.  Trusting  brings  rest, 
ni.  What  is  the  ground  and  reason  of  a  Christian's  rest  ?  It  is  a  dreadfui 
thing  to  be  at  rest  in  extreme  peril,  lulled  by  false  security.  It  is  perilous  to  sleep 
in  a  house  built  on  a  foundation  of  sand,  when  the  floods  are  out,  and  the  winds  are 
about,  to  sweep  all  away;  it  is  horrible  to  be  at  peace  in  a  condemned  cell,  when 
already  the  scaffold  has  been  put  up,  and  the  hour  of  execution  is  hastening  on  1 
But  the  believer  has  good  reason  for  being  at  peace,  and  why  ?  He  has  these 
reasons  amongst  others.  He  trusts  to  be  saved  by  a  way  which  God  has  appointed. 
Here  is  a  firm  rock  to  rest  on.  What  better  person  can  we  depend  upon  than 
Jesus,  the  Son  of  God  ?  The  believer,  moreover,  knows  that  all  things  which  were 
necessary  to  save  him  and  all  the  elect  are  already  performed.  In  conclusion :  1. 
To  the  man  who  never  has  rested.  Try  God's  way  of  rest.  Trust,  and  you  shall 
rest.  2.  The  next  word  is  to  those  of  you  who  once  did  rest,  but  do  not  now. 
You  backslider,  this  is  your  word,  return  unto  thy  rest.  You  never  will  find  rest 
out  of  Christ— especially  you.  3.  Lastly,  to  you  who  are  at  rest  now,  endeavour 
to  keep  it ;  and  the  way  to  keep  it  is  the  way  you  first  gained  it.  (C.  H,  Spurgeon.) 
A  delicious  experience: — In  the  text  we  have  a  declaration  of  experience,  "We 
which  have  believed  do  enter  into  rest,"  to  which  is  very  singularly  added,  "  As  He 


CHAP.  IV.]  HEBREWS.  809 

said,  As  I  have  sworn  in  my  wrath,  if  they  shall  enter  into  my  rest."  The  happy 
declaration  is  supported  by  the  tremendous  oath  of  judgment,  which  shut  out  the 
unbelieving  race.  There  is  usually  a  promise  embedded  in  a  threatening,  like  gold 
in  quartz ;  just  as  there  is  generally  a  threatening  as  the  reverse  of  the  golden  coin 
of  promise.  I  venture  to  say  that  the  threatening  in  this  case  even  gives  a  touch 
of  rose  colour  to  the  promise,  for  it  runs  thus,  "  If  they  shall  enter  into  My  rest." 
Whereas  the  declaration  only  says,  "rest":  "we  which  have  believed  do  enter 
into  rest,"  the  word  "  My  "  is  added.  That  little  word  is  like  a  bright  gleam  amidst 
the  blackness  of  the  tempest.     Oh,  the  glory  of  that  which  God  calls  "  My  rest "  I 

1.  Thb  people  to  whom  this  expekiencb  13  CONFINED.  They  rest,  and  no  one 
else :  they  rest,  because  they  have  beUeved.  As  surely  as  unbelief  shuts  out,  so 
surely  does  faith  shut  in.  What  is  to  beUeve  ?  1.  To  believe  is,  firs*  of  all,  to 
accept  as  true  the  revelation  of  God  ;  to  give  unfeigned  assent  and  consent  to  all 
that  God  has  made  known  in  His  Word,  and  especially  to  believe  that  He  was,  •*  in 
Christ  Jesus,  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself,  not  imputing  their  trespasses 
unto  tbem."  2.  The  operative  point  of  faith  is  the  next  one:  we  trust  ourselves 
with  Him  who  is  revealed ;  thus  we  carry  our  belief  of  truth  to  its  practical  con- 
clusion. 3.  Out  of  this  trust  must  come  action  agreeable  thereunto.  II.  Thb 
EiPEBEENCE  ITSELF  I  "We  which  have  beheved  do  enter  into  rest."  We  will 
propound  no  theory,  and  indulge  no  imagination,  but  keep  to  matters  of  fact.  1. 
Wherein  do  we  rest?  (1)  We  rest  where  God  rests:  that  is,  in  the  person  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  What  a  wondrous  personality  we  see  in  Him  1  As  God,  He  ia 
the  infinite  delight  of  the  Father.  As  personified  Wisdom,  our  Lord  Jesus  says, 
"  I  was  by  Him,  as  one  brought  up  with  Him ;  and  I  was  daily  His  delight, 
rejoicing  always  before  Him."  We  cannot  tell  how  much  the  Father  loves  Hun, 
and  how  perfectly  He  rests  in  Hitn.  (2)  We  rest  in  His  work.  Full  atonement, 
perfect  righteousness,  glorious  victory  1  2.  What  is  comprehended  in  this  rest  ? 
All  things.  Here  we  lay  every  burden  down.  3.  What  are  the  excellencies  of  thia 
rest?  (1)  Honour.  (2)  A  wonderful  source  of  strength.  (3)  An  incentive  to 
diligence.  (4)  This  rest  also  brightens  Ufe.  4.  What  are  the  limits  of  this  rest  ? 
We  may  place  them  where  we  will.  "  According  to  your  faith,  so  be  it  unto  you." 
"  We  which  have  believed  do  enter  into  rest"  It  is  an  entrance,  and  no  more,  aa 
yet.  But  when  an  Israelite  had  an  entrance  into  Canaan,  it  was  his  own  fault  il 
he  did  not  penetrate  the  interior,  and  traverse  the  land  from  Dan  to  Beersheba. 
"Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive."  "All  things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth." 
III.  The  peesonal  assertion  of  this  experience  :  "  We  which  have  believed  do 
enter  into  rest"  I  hke  the  positive  speech  of  the  apostle  for  himself  and  hia 
friends.  I  do  not  invite  any  of  you  to  say  that  faith  gives  you  peace  unless  it  doea 
60.  1.  It  must  be  a  matter  of  fact.  We  want  no  empty  profession.  2.  Thia 
declaration,  that  we  have  rest,  should  always  be  made  with  a  holy  purpose.  We 
must  not  go  about  boasting  of  our  peace.  3.  If  you  can  say  as  much  as  this — 
"  By  believing  I  have  entered  into  rest,"  be  thankful ;  for  this  privilege  is  a  gift  of 
love.  It  is  a  wonderful  instance  of  sovereign  grace  that  such  unwortny  ones  as  we 
are  should  enter  into  God's  rest.  But  if  you  cannot  say  it,  do  not  despair.  Make  it 
a  point  of  question  with  yourself.  Why  have  I  not  entered  into  rest  ?  Is  it 
because  I  have  not  beUeved  ?  Oh,  that  all  the  way  between  here  and  heaven  we 
may  journey  on  with  restful  hearts,  led  beside  the  still  waters  1  I  have  seen,  in 
an  old  book,  a  portrait  of  Mr.  Sibbes,  the  famius  Puritan,  and  it  says  at  the  bottom 
of  the  likeness,  "  Heaven  was  in  him  before  he  was  in  heaven,"  Now,  that  must 
be  so  with  us,  for  nobody  gets  into  heaven  who  does  not  get  heaven  into  himself 
first.  Oh,  to  get  heaven  into  us  this  moruing,  and  keep  it  there  for  ever  !  (Ibid.) 
The  state  of  believers  under  the  gospel : — I.  The  state  of  believebs  under  the 
«K)SPEL  IS  A  state  OF  BLESSED  REST.  It  is  God's  rcst  and  theirs.  God  created  man 
in  a  state  of  present  rest.     This  rest  consisted  in  three  things.   1.  Peace  with  God. 

2.  Satisfaction  and  acquiescency  in  God.  3.  Means  of  communion  with  God.  All 
these  were  lost  by  the  entrance  of  sin,  and  all  mankind  was  brought  thereby  into 
an  estate  of  disquietment.  In  the  restoration  of  these,  and  that  in  a  better  and 
more  secure  way  doth  this  gospel-state  of  believers  consist  (1)  Without  it  our 
moral  state  in  respect  of  God  is  an  estate  of  enmity  and  trouble.  (2)  There  is  in 
all  men  before  the  coming  of  the  gospel  a  want  of  an  acquiescency  and  satisfaction 
in  God.  3.  Unto  peace  with  God,  and  acquiescency  in  Him,  a  way  of  intercourse 
and  communion  with  Him  is  required,  to  complete  a  state  of  spiritual  rest.  And 
this  also,  as  it  was  lost  by  sin,  so  it  is  restored  unto  us  in  and  by  the  gospel.      II, 

IX  18  FAITH  ALONE  WHICH  IS  THE  ONLY  WAY  AND  MEANS  OF  ENTERING    INTO    THIS   BLESSBB 


•10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha».  it. 


STATE  OF  BEST.  And  that  both  negatively  so  that  without  it  no  entrance  is  to  be 
obtained,  whatever  else  men  may  plead  to  obtain  it  by  ;  and  positively,  in  tbat  it 
alone  effects  it,  without  a  contribution  of  aid  and  strength  in  its  so  doing,  from  any 
other  grace  or  duty  whatever.    III.  There  is  a.  mutual  inbeimo  of  the  promises  and 

THREATENINOS  OF  THE    COVENANT,  SO  THAT   tN   OUR  FAITH  AND  CONSIDERATION  OF  THEM, 

THEY  OUGHT  NOT  UTTERLY  TO  BE  SEPARATED.  1.  Because  they  havo  both  of  them  the 
same  rise  and  spring.  They  do  both  of  them  but  declare  the  actings  of  the  one 
holy  Ood  according  to  the  distinct  properties  of  His  nature  upon  distinct 
objects.  2.  Both  of  them,  as  annexed  to  the  covenant,  or  as  the  covenant 
is  administered  by  them,  have  the  same  end.  God  doth  not  design  one  eud 
by  a  promise,  and  another  by  a  threatening  ;  but  only  different  ways  dt 
compassing  or  effecting  the  same  end.  The  end  of  both  is,  to  increase  in  us  faith 
and  obedience.  3.  Threatenings  are  conditional;  and  the  nature  of  such  con- 
ditions is,  not  only  somewhat  is  affirmed  upon  their  supposal,  and  denied  upon 
their  denial ;  but  the  contrary  unto  it,  is  affirmed  upon  their  denial ;  and  that 
because  the  denial  of  them  doth  assert  acontrary  coudition.  4.  The  same  grace  i3 
administered  in  the  covenant  to  make  the  one  and  the  other  effectual.  {John  Owen, 
D.D.)  The  Christianas  rest : — Comparing  the  Sabbath  of  God's  rest  at  Creatioa 
with  the  Sabbath  that  is  left  to  the  people  of  God,  he  justifies  the  comparison  by 
urging  that  "  he  that  is  entered  into  His  rest,  he  also  hath  ceased  from  his 
own  works,  as  God  did  from  His."  This,  surely,  would  seem  to  show  that  when 
we  cease  from  "  our  own  works,"  the  sacred  rest  commences.  What,  then,  are 
••  our  own  works  "  ?  By  these  I  would  understand  all  those  wretched  and  laborious 
ways  of  life  which  have  their  origin  and  end  in  the  corrupted  principles  of  our  own 
hearts,  as  contrasted  with  those  ways  of  life  and  happiness  which  at  once  become 
ours,  and  with  them  a  Sabbath-rest  of  spirit,  when  (and  this  is  surely  before  the 
grave),  abandoning  all  the  miserable  devices  with  which  the  wisdom  of  this  world 
endeavours  to  delude  itself  into  fictitious  happiness,  we  cast  our  sins  upon  the 
sacrificed  Lamb  of  God,  our  cares  upon  the  Father  of  mercies,  and,  in  the  bright 
confidence  of  faith,  walk  humbly  on  to  heaven,  feeling  already  within  us  the 
dawnings  of  the  heaven  we  are  approaching.  (Prof.  Ardier  Butler.)  My  rest. — 
The  rest  of  God : — The  great  and  outstanding  characteristic  of  it  is,  that  it  is 
Jehovah's  rest.  It  is,  in  the  first  instance,  God's  own  rest  before  it  becomes  ours ; 
and  it  becomes  ours,  only  because  it,  in  the  first  place,  is  God's.  The  repose  and 
blessedness  of  Jehovah  Himself  must  be  not  only  the  model  for,  but  identical  with, 
the  repose  and  blessedness  of  the  creature,  in  so  far  as  their  capacities  permit  of  it. 
But  the  history  of  God's  dealings  with  our  race  presents  us  with  several  and  some- 
what different  examples  of  that  Divine  resting,  which  is  the  source  and  the 
foundation  of  the  rest  of  His  Church.  I.  We  have  the  rest  of  God  the  Creator  in 
the  beginning,  when  He  ceased  from  the  work  of  creation,  and  rested  on  the  seventh 
day  from  all  His  works  which  He  had  made.  In  that  rest  which  Jehovah  Himself 
found  in  a  sinless  and  unfallen  world,  when  the  days'  work  was  finished,  and  He 
kept  and  blessed  the  Sabbath  day  of  creation,  there  was  the  foundation  laid  for  the 
rest  and  blessedness  of  the  unfallen  creature.  H.  We  have  another  Divine  rest 
spoken  of  in  Scripture — the  rest  of  God  the  son,  when  He  rose  from  the  dead, 

HAVING  finished  THE  REDEMPTION  OF  HiS  PEOPLE    AND    CEASED  FBOM    ALL    THE    WORKS 

THAT  He  wrought.  He  rejoiced  in  His  finished  woik,  calling  upon  His  people  to 
rejoice  in  it  likewise.  And  there,  where  the  Saviour  found  rest,  will  the  soul  of  the 
sinner  find  rest  also.  III.  There  is  yet  another  rest  of  the  glorious  Godhead 
referred  to  in  Scripture — the  rest  of  God  the  Spirit,  when  He  too  shall  havb 
FINISHED  His  labour,  and  ceased  from  His  works,  and  entered  into  His  rest.  The 
rest  of  the  Spirit  is  yet  to  come.  Nor  can  it  dawn  until  the  new  creation,  with  all 
its  glory,  shall  be  finished,  until  the  remaining  power  of  sin  in  the  elect  creatures 
of  God  shall  be  destroyed,  and  until  the  Church  of  Christ,  gathered  out  of  every 
people,  shall  be  complete  in  its  members  and  perfect  in  their  holiness,  and  so 
made  ready  to  be  presented  unto  God  "  a  glorious  Church,"  &o.  And  have  the 
people  of  the  election  no  share  in  this  third  and  final  rest  of  the  Godhead,  which 
shall  sum  up  and  include  every  other  ?  Assuredly  yes  ;  for  "  there  remaineth  " 
still  ••  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God."  The  unfallen  creature  of  God  was  at  the 
creation  called  npon  to  join  in  the  Creator's  rest ;  and  there,  even  amid  the  gladness 
of  Paradise,  he  found  his  chief  happiness  and  joy.  The  redeemed  sinner  was  at 
the  redemption  invited  to  share  his  Redeemer's  rest ;  and  there  he  found  for  his 
guilty  soul  pardon  and  peace.  And  the  believer,  at  the  dawn  of  the  last  and 
eternal  Sabbath,  shall  be  invited  to  share  in  the  rest  of  the  Spirit ;  and  then  b« 


CHAP.  IV.]  HEBREWS.  311 

ehall  find  himself  made  perfect  both  in  holiness  and  happiness.  Heaven  is  now 
gathering  within  its  ample  arms  all  the  good  and  true  upon  earth — the  lights  of 
this  world,  of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy,  the  prophets,  the  righteous  men 
and  the  witnesses  for  God — all  those  that  have  been  born  of  the  Spirit.  And 
earth,  too,  is  ripening  its  fruit  in  expectation  of  the  coming  day  of  the  manifestation 
of  the  sons  of  God.  And  those  that  have  been  quickened  from  above,  the  children 
of  God  here,  are  growing  in  grace  and  holiness,  and  preparing  for  the  rest  on  high. 
And  when  that  harvest  shall  be  all  gathered,  the  Spirit  shall  cease  from  His  work, 
even  as  the  Father  and  the  Son  ceased  from  Theirs  before ;  and  with  Him  the  saints, 
wbom  He  has  called,  and  chosen,  and  perfected,  shall  enter  upon  the  last  and  the 
highest  rest  of  God.     (J.  Baimerman,  D.D.)  The  rest  of  God  and  of  man: — 

What,  then,  is  the  rest  of  God  ?  The  "rest  "  which  Genesis  speaks  about  was,  of 
course,  not  repose  that  recruited  exhausted  strength,  but  the  cessation  of  work 
because  the  work  was  complete,  the  repose  of  satisfaction  in  what  we  should  call 
an  accomplished  ideal.  And,  further,  in  that  august  conception  of  the  rest  of  God 
is  included,  not  only  the  completion  of  all  His  purpose,  and  the  full  corre- 
spondence of  effect  with  cause,  but  likewise  the  indisturbance  and  inward  harmony 
of  that  infiuite  nature  whereof  all  the  parts  co-operant  to  an  end  move  in  a  motion 
which  is  rest.  And,  further,  the  rest  of  God  is  incompatible  with,  and,  indeed,  but 
another  form  of,  unceasing  activity.  "  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work," 
said  the  Master;  though  the  works  were,  in  one  sense,  finished  from  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world.  Now  can  we  dare  to  dream  that  in  any  fashion  that  solemn, 
Divine  repose  and  tranquillity  of  perfection  can  be  reproduced  in  us  ?  Yes  I  The 
dewdrop  is  a  sphere,  as  truly  as  the  sun  ;  the  rainbow  in  the  smallest  drop  of  rain 
has  all  the  prismatic  colours  blended  in  the  same  harmony  as  when  the  great  iris 
strides  acrot^s  the  sky.  And  if  man  be  made  in  the  image  of  God,  man  perfected 
shall  be  deiform,  even  in  the  matter  of  his  apparently  incommunicable  repose. 
For  they  who  are  exalted  to  that  final  future  participation  in  His  Ufe  will  have 
to  look  back,  too,  upon  work  which,  stained  as  it  has  been  in  the  doing,  yet,  in  its 
being  accepted  upon  the  altar  on  which  it  was  humbly  laid,  has  been  sanctified  and 
greatened,  and  will  be  an  element  in  their  joy  in  the  days  that  are  to  come.  "They 
rest  from  their  labours,  and  their  works  do  follow  them  " — not  for  accusation,  nor 
to  read  to  them  bitter  memories  of  incompleteness,  but  rather  that  they  may  con- 
tribute to  the  deep  repose  and  rest  of  the  heavens.  In  a  modified  form,  but  yet  in 
reality,  the  rest  of  God  may  be  possessed  even  by  the  imperfect  workers  here  upon 
earth.  Aud,  in  like  manner,  that  other  aspect  of  the  Divine  repose,  in  the  tran- 
quillity of  a  perfectly  harmonious  nature,  is  altogether,  and  without  restriction, 
capable  of  being  reproduced,  and  certain  in  the  future  to  be  reproduced  in  all 
them  that  love  and  trust  Him,  when  the  whole  being  shall  be  settled  and  centred 
upon  Him,  and  will,  aud  desires,  and  duty,  and  conscience  shall  no  more  conflict. 
"  Unite  my  heart  to  fear  Thy  name,"  is  a  prayer  even  for  earth.  It  shall  be  fully 
answered  in  Heaven,  and  the  souls  made  one  through  all  their  parts  shall  rest  in 
God,  and  shall  rest  like  God.  And  further,  the  human  participation  in  that 
Divine  repose  will  have,  like  its  pattern,  tho  blending  without  disturbance  of  rest 
with  motion.  The  highest  activity  is  the  intensest  repose.  Just  as  a  light, 
whirled  with  sufiicient  rapidity,  will  seem  to  make  a  still  circle;  just  as  the 
faster  a  wheel  moves  the  more  moveless  it  seems  to  stand  ;  just  as  the  rapidity  of 
the  earth's  flight  through  space,  and  the  universality  with  which  all  the  parts  of  it 
participate  in  the  flight,  produce  the  sensation  of  absolute  immobility.  It  is  not 
motion,  but  effort  and  friction,  that  break  repose ;  and  when  there  is  neither  the 
one  nor  the  other,  there  will  be  no  contrariety  between  activity  and  rest ;  but  we 
shall  enjoy  at  once  the  delights  of  both  without  the  wear  and  tear  and  disturbance 
of  the  one  or  the  languor  of  the  other.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Sabbath  days  :— 
Maurice  speaks  of  learning  to  keep  Sabbath  days  in  the  midst  of  the  world's  din. 
Why  God  rested: — An  architect  who  has  built  a  majestic  cathedral,  a  painter  who 
has  finished  a  glorious  picture,  a  sculptor  who  has  carved  a  noble  statue,  rests — 
not  because  his  genius  has  been  sxhausted ;  it  may  even  have  been  developed 
and  exalted  by  his  labour, — but  because  he  rejoices  when  his  idea  has 
assumed  a  permanent  form  of  grandeur  or  beauty.  And  so  God  rested — 
found  delight  in  His  material  and  spiritual  creation.  (J?.  W.  Dale,  LL.D.) 
Faith  and  rest : — Rev.  T.  Collins  said  to  a  man  whom  he  visited,  "  Here,  reaa 
this."  "  Bound  thee  and  beneath  are  spread  the  everlasting  arms."  "  Whose 
arms?"  "God's."  "Where  spread?"  "  Around  my  soul  and  underneath." 
"  Why  man,  say  you  so  ?      Sink  down  upon  them,  then,  and  rest."     "  I  will  try." 


812  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap. ilk 

•♦  James,  James !  there  you  are  again,  trying  instead  of  trusting.  Suppose  you 
placed  your  child  in  the  cradle  and  said,  '  Now,  dear  one,  rest ' ;  would  you  expect 
the  little  one  to  set  itself  shaking  the  cradle  and  to  say, '  I  am  trying '?  Would  he 
rest  so  ?  "  "  No,  sir,  he  must  be  still  to  rest."  "  And  so  must  you,  James.  Tell 
God,  •  Thou  art  mine  and  I  am  Thine  ' ;  cast  thyself  on  His  fidelity  ;  sink  down 
upon  Him,  and  on  an  arm  firmer  than  rock,  tenderer  than  a  mother's  thou  shalt 
rest."  (S.  Coley.)  Rest  in  God : — The  nearer  a  thing  is  to  its  centre,  the  less  ia 
the  motion  experienced.  You  do  not  feel  the  pitching  and  rolling  of  a  steamer  or 
a  saiUng  vessel  midships  as  you  do  elsswhere.  Pin  a  bit  of  paper  to  the  rim  of  a 
carriage  wheel,  and  how  swiftly  it  is  whirled  round  when  the  vehicle  moves. 
Fasten  it  on  the  axle  and  it  revolves  very  slowly.  God  is  the  centre  of  the  universe, 
especially  the  centre  of  aU  created  beings.  Live  near  Him,  and  you  will  feel 
less  the  shocks  of  trouble  and  the  vibrations  of  sin.  (T.  R.  Stevenson.)  Perfect 
rest : — Those  whose  hearts  are  not  at  perfect  rest  resemble  a  bottle  but  partly  filled 
with  water,  which  is  agitated  by  the  least  motion  ;  those  whose  hearts  are  at  ease 
are  like  the  same  bottle  filled  to  the  brim  which  cannot  be  disturbed. 

Ver.  7.  To-day. — The  present : — ^Let  us  take  that  short  division  of  time — to-day 
— the  now — and  consider  what  is  the  duty,  the  preciousness  of  each  passing  hour 
and  day.  1.  Let  us  notice  that  each  day  has  its  own  gifts.  A  writer  speaks  of  the 
hours  passing  by  him  like  solemn  virgins  in  long  and  silent  procession.  He  sits  in 
his  garden  and  sees  them  pass.  Their  faces  are  veiled  in  their  hands,  they  bear 
caskets  full  of  various  gifts,  some  tridal,  some  of  inestimable  value.  Among  these 
gifts  are  stores  of  brilliant  diadems  and  fruits  and  faded  flowers.  He  forgets  his 
morning  wishes,  he  lets  the  day  pass  by  idly  and  neglectfully.  At  last,  just  as  the 
evening  is  about  to  fall,  he  hastily  snatches  some  of  their  sUghtest  gifts,  some  harsh 
apple  or  withering  rose,  and  as  they  turn  and  pass  away  in  silence  into  the  evening 
shadows,  the  veils  slip  from  their  faces,  and  he  sees  the  look  of  scorn  which  their 
faces  wear.  Yes,  every  day  has  its  gifts,  but  all  good  gifts  are  exactly  what  we 
make  of  them.  Let  us  pray  that  God  will  teach  us  rightly  to  use  His  gifts  of  every 
day.  2.  Each  day  has  not  only  its  own  immediate  gifts,  but  also  its  immediate 
opportunities.  When  the  Roman  emperor  sadly  lamented  to  his  friends,  "  I  have 
lost  a  day,"  he  meant  that  on  that  day  he  had  not  conferred  a  kindness  upon  any 
one.  How  often  by  selfishness  and  temper,  by  egotism,  by  vanity  and  want  of 
thought,  we  miss  those  opportunities  of  helping  others  in  little  ways  which  the 
angels  in  heaven  might  envy  us.  We  may  see  men  and  women  on  every  side  of 
us,  not  by  any  means  only  among  the  poor,  but  among  our  social  equals,  staggering 
along  under  heavy  burdens,  which  it  does  not  even  occur  to  us  to  put  out  even  so 
much  as  our  fingers  to  help.  A  word  spoken  in  due  season,  how  good  it  is !  When 
good  John  Newton  saw  a  little  child  crying  over  the  loss  of  a  halfpenny,  and  by 
giving  it  another  dried  its  tears,  he  felt  that  he  had  not  spent  a  day  in  vain.  But 
it  is  not  only  by  our  daily  neglect  of  a  thousand  little  kindnesses  and  courtesies  of 
daily  life  that  we  so  lightly  regard  as  mere  grains  of  coarse  sand  in  the  hour-glass 
— moments  as  precious  as  if  they  were  grains  of  gold.  We  lose  them  in  a  thousand 
other  ways — not  only  lose,  but  squander  and  fling  them  away,  and,  worse  than  all, 
pervert  them  into  opportunities  of  unkindness.  Li  the  words  of  the  man  of  busi- 
ness. Time  for  us  is  money.  But  that  is  the  least  thing  it  is — for  time  is  eternity. 
3.  Again,  every  day  has  its  own  stores  of  pure  and  innocent  happiness.  To  those 
who  walk  through  the  world  with  open  eyes  every  day  reveals  something  beautiful. 
We  are  self -tormentors  only  because  we  are  selfish  and  egotistical  and  vain.  Our 
taste  is  corrupted  ;  there  are  few  of  us  to  whom  God  wholly  denies  the  grassy  field 
of  contentment,  the  simple  wild  flowers  of  innocent  gladness,  the  limpid  spring  of 
the  river  of  the  water  of  life.  That  was  a  true  saying  of  the  ancients, "  Carpe  diem  " 
— pluck  the  blossom  of  to-day.  Our  best  hopes,  our  richest  treasures,  our  destiny 
on  earth,  yes,  even  our  heaven  itself,  lie  not  in  the  visionary  future,  but  in  the  here 
and  in  the  now.  4.  And  again,  every  day  has  its  duties.  What  a  special  gift  of 
God  is  this  1  Biches  may  fly  away,  fame  may  vanish,  friends  may  die,  but  duty 
never  ceases.  This  saves  our  poor  Uttle  lives  from  most  of  their  perplexities.  Are 
we  happy  ?  Let  not  our  feUcity  make  us  falter  in  the  performance  of  a  single  duty, 
for  on  these  duties  that  happiness  itself  depends.  Are  we  unhappy  ?  Strenuously 
try  not  to  grieve  over  the  bitterness,  for  action  is  the  surest  of  solaces.  Li  every 
case  we  cannot  do  better  than  obey  the  brave  old  rule,  "Do  the  next  thing." 
While  we  are  doing  our  duty,  it  is  always  ours  to  say  that  we  are  doing  the  very 
thing  for  which  God  made  us.    One  of  the  most  chamiing  of  the  Greek  idylls  tellt 


CHAP.  IT.]  HEBREWS.  813 

OS  how  two  poor  fishermen,  weary  and  cold,  before  the  earliest  dawn,  while  the 
tnooD  still  rides  high  in  the  heavens,  rise  from  their  beds  of  dried  seaweed  in  their 
miserable  hut,  and  while  the  waves  dash  fiercely  on  the  shore  hard  by,  repair  their 
nets  by  the  dim  and  uncertain  twilight ;  and  while  they  repair  them,  one  of  the  men 
tells  ihe  other  the  story  of  how  on  the  evening  before  he  had  fallen  asleep  very 
hungry  and  weaiy,  and  had  dreamed  that  he  stood  on  the  rock  where  he  was  used 
to  fish,  and  had  thrown  bis  line  and  caught  a  huge  fish.  When,  with  straining  rod 
and  line,  he  drew  it  to  land,  he  found  the  fish  to  be  made  of  pure  and  solid  gold. 
And  in  his  dream  he  thereupon  took  a  solemn  oath  that  he  would  sell  his  prize, 
and  get  wealth,  and  never  dip  line  in  the  waves  again.  And  now  his  poor  ignorant 
thoughts  were  troubled  with  his  oath,  and  he  doubted  whether  he  should  renew  his 
fishing.  "  Cheer  up,"  says  bis  old  comrade,  "  you  may  fish.  You  did  not  take  the 
oath,  for  you  see  you  have  not  caught  the  fish  of  gold.  What  are  dreams  ?  But  if 
not  in  a  dream,  in  broad  waking  if  you  toil  and  watch,  some  good  may  perhaps 
come  to  your  vision.  Look  out  for  the  real  vision,  lest  you  die  of  hunger  with  your 
golden  dreams."  Is  not  the  moral  of  this  Greek  idyll  to  be  found  even  in  Scrip- 
ture 7  When  the  apostles  waiting  through  those  great  forty  days  after  the  resur- 
rection, when  the  appearance  of  the  risen  Lord  seemed  for  a  time  to  be  hopeless, 
conscious  of  the  pressure  of  their  want  and  waiting,  when  it  lay  heavily  upon  them, 
what  was  to  be  done  ?  Thank  God,  there  is  always  something  to  be  done.  Each 
day  has  its  duty,  and  He  who  gave  the  day  and  the  duty  gives  abo  the  debue  to 
fulfil  it.  But  not  only  has  each  day  its  duty,  but  each  day  has  its  one  supreme  duty 
before  which  all  others  sink  into  insignificance — the  duty  of  repentance  if  we  are 
living  Uves  of  sin ;  the  duty  of  getting  nearer  to  God  and  seeing  His  face  if  by  our 
Saviour's  mercy  we  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  grsicious.  Oh,  if  this  duty  be  left 
neglected,  no  other  duty  can  be  a  substitute  for  it.  Every  day  is  but  a  single  spoke 
in  the  swift  wheel  of  the  revolving  week,  and  the  weeks  flash  into  the  months,  and 
the  months  into  the  years,  and  the  years  roll  on  into  the  world  beyond  the  grave. 
How  many  days  are  there  even  in  a  long  life  ?  How  very  few  may  be  left  to  us  1 
If,  then,  as  we  have  seen  first,  every  day  Las  its  gifts  which  we  often  despise ;  and 
secondly,  every  day  ha^  opportunities  which  we  often  waste ;  and  thirdly,  every  day 
has  its  sources  of  happiness  which  we  often  forget ;  and  fourthly,  every  day  has  its 
duties  which  the  best  so  imperfectly  accomplish ;  and  fifthly,  every  day  has  its  one 
thing  needful  which  if  left  unaccomplished  is  utter  ruin — ought  we  not  to  thank 
God  that  every  day  has  also  its  gracious  help.  There  is  One  of  infinite  help  always 
at  hand — God  is  our  help  and  strength.  He  loves  us.  He  will  not  forsake  us.  He 
who  gave  His  own  Son  for  our  sins,  shall  He  not  with  Him  also  freely  give  us  all 
things  T  And  is  it  not  the  Son  who  shall  be  our  Judge  ?  Is  He  not  standing  in 
heaven  to  make  intercession  for  us  at  God's  right  hand  ?  Is  not  conscience  His 
voice  within  us  ?  Has  He  not  given  us  His  Holy  Spirit  ?  Is  not  duty  which  He 
makes  bo  clear  to  us  His  eternal  law  ?  and  though  He  is  infinitely  far  above  us.  He 
has  given  us  a  ladder  between  heaven  and  earth,  so  that  we  may  ascend  heavenward 
in  our  suppUcations,  and  His  answer  will  fall  back  in  blessings.  (Archdeacon 
Farrar.)  Tlie  immediate  claims  of  religion  : — I.  The  proposal.  *'  If  ye  will 
hear  His  voice."  1.  By  acknowledging  His  authority.  2.  By  considering  His 
words.  3.  By  accepting  the  benefits  which  He  offers.  4.  By  obeying  His  com- 
mands. II.  The  means  of  accepting  it.  "  Harden  not  your  heart."  Beware  of 
cruelty  to  your  own  souls.  Beware  of  impenitence  amidst  the  means  and  caUs  of 
religion.  lU.  The  period  to  which  it  refers.  "  To-day."  1.  To-morrow  you 
may  be  indisposed  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  God.  2.  To-morrow  you  may  be  in- 
capable of  hearing  His  voice.  IV.  The  end  to  be  secured  by  accepting  it. 
This  the  connection  leads  us  to  consider  as  "  Best."  The  heavenly  rest.  1.  Best 
from  sin.  2.  Best  from  sorrow.  (Essex  Congregational  Rememhrancer.)  To- 
day : — We  have  two  brief  clauses  to  dwell  upon  :  "  If  ye  will  hear  His  voice  " ; 
"Harden  not  your  hearts."  1.  The  word  "wiH"  is  not  in  the  original.  The 
apostle  is  not  speaking  at  present  of  a  willingness  on  the  part  of  man,  but  of  a 
grace  on  the  part  of  God.  The  exercise  of  the  human  will  does  not  come  into  view 
till  the  next  clause.  This  says  merely,  "  If  ye  hear,"  or  "  shall  hear,"  God'a 
voice  speaking.  It  is  the  recognition  of  the  Divine  freedom  to  speak  or  not  to 
epeak.  "  If  ye  should  hear  God  speaking,  Usten."  It  is  conceivable  that  God  may 
not  speak.  We  may  have  wearied  Him  out  by  our  inattention.  He  may  say,  "  My 
Spirit  shall  no  longer  strive."  "If  ye  should  hear  His  voice."  This  awakens 
ihought,  quickens  interest,  arouses  anxiety.  What  if  I  should  have  silenced  that 
voice?     Often  have  I  heard  without  hearing.     Often  has  the  voice  pleaded. 


814  THE   BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  W. 


entreated,  besought,  and  there  was  nothing  in  me  that  regarded.  Neither  hope  nor 
fear,  neither  love  nor  dread,  neither  interest,  nor  apprehension,  no,  nor  curiosity. 
"  If  ye  hear  "  says,  "which  haply  ye  may  not."  2.  "Harden  not  your  hearts." 
The  figure  is  taken  from  that  process  of  drying  and  stiSenLng  which  is  fatal  to  the 
free  play  of  a  limb  or  the  further  growth  of  a  vegetable.  The  "  heart,"  in  Scrip- 
ture phrase,  is  that  life-centre,  that  innermost  being,  out  of  which  are  the  issues 
of  thought  and  action,  and  upon  the  condition  of  which  depend  alike  the  decisions 
of  the  will  and  the  habits  of  the  living  and  moving  man.  When  the  heart  is 
hardened,  there  is  an  end  of  all  those  influences  of  grace  which  till  then  can  touch 
and  stir,  control  and  guide,  inspire  the  quickening  motive  and  apply  the  heaven- 
ward impulse.  Sometimes  this  hardening  is  ascribed  in  Scripture  to  the  operation 
of  God.  That  is  when  the  voice  ceases  to  speak,  and  the  will  to  disobey  has  become 
at  last  an  incapacity  to  obey.  But  this  we  say.  Never  does  the  hardening  begin 
on  God's  side  ;  and  never  does  the  Divine  hardening  preclude  the  human  softening. 
*'  Whosoever  wiU  " — that  is  the  condition :  and  without  the  willing  salvation  cannot 
be  even  if  it  would.  These  are  deep  as  weU  as  sorrowful  mysteries.  The  text  of 
this  day  lets  them  alone.  It  addresses  itself  to  the  will,  which  is  the  man,  and 
says,  "  Harden  not  your  heart."  If  you  will  not  harden  it,  certainly  God  will  not. 
"  Why  will  ye  die,  when  He  hath  no  pleasure  in  it  ?  "  If  you  hear,  any  one  of  you, 
the  voice  speaking — hear  it  say,  "  This  is  not  your  rest  "  ;  hear  it  say,  "  I  am  Thy 
salvation — come  unto  Me — abide  in  Me — I  will  refresh — in  Me  ye  shall  bave  peace' 
— harden  not  your  heart.  If  the  deceitfulness  of  sin  should  say  within  any  of  yon, 
"  The  voice  can  wait — let  it  plead  outside  you  till  you  have  taken  your  fill  of  that 
which  it  cannot  tolerate  and  cannot  dwell  with — then,  when  age  comes,  or  sickness, 
or  sorrow,  or  some  shadow  cast  before  of  death  or  eternity,  then  hearken,  then 
obey" — harden  not  your  heart.  3.  "To-day,  if  ye  shall  hear  His  voice."  The 
Epistle  returns  again  and  again  to  that  word.  What  is  "  To-diy."  It  is  the 
opposite  of  two  times  and  two  eternities.  It  is  the  opposite  of  yesterday  and 
to-morrow  in  time ;  it  is  the  opposite  of  an  immeasurable  past,  an  inconceivable 
future,  in  the  eternity  which  God  inhabits.  "  To-day  "  is  at  once  the  dividing  line 
and  the  meeting  point  of  the  two — the  barrier  between  the  two  finites,  and  the  link 
between  the  two  infinites.  "To-day."  What  a  word  of  reproof  and  of  admonition 
— of  thanksgiving  and  of  hope — of  opportunity  and  of  blessing.  Is  not  each  To-day 
the  very  epitome  and  abstract  of  a  life  ?  It  has  its  morning  and  its  evening ;  it  haa 
its  waking  and  its  falling  on  sleep  ;  it  has  its  tvpical  birth  and  death ;  it  has  its 
hours  marked  out  and  counted  ;  it  has  its  duties  assigned  and  distributed  ;  it  haa 
its  alternations  of  light  and  shade ;  it  has  its  worship  and  its  service,  its  going  forth 
to  labour  and  its  coming  back  to  reckon.  Within  these  twelve  or  these  sixteen 
hours  a  life  may  be  Uved,  a  soul  lost  or  won.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  Opportunity  to 
be  seized  : — Opportunity  is  the  flower  of  time,  and  as  the  stalk  may  remain  when  the 
flower  is  cut  oS,  so  time  may  remain  with  us  when  opportunity  is  gone.  {J.  Bond.) 
To-day  : — How  much  the  Bible  has  to  say  about  "  to-day  '' — time  present  1  This 
is  really  all  we  can  crtU  our  own.  It  says  very  little  about  "yesterday"  or  "to- 
morrow." "  Yesterday  "  is  like  a  closed  book ;  its  record  is  finished.  As  "  the 
miU  cannot  grind  with  the  water  that  is  past,"  so  our  work  cannot  be  done  with  the 
strength  and  opportunities  of  yesterday.  Of  "  to-morrow  "  we  may  repeat  the  old 
and  significant  saying,  "  It  may  never  come  ! "  Opportunity  : — Opportunity  has 
hair  in  front ;  behind  she  is  bald.  If  you  seize  her  by  the  forelock,  you  may  hold 
her ;  but  if  suffered  to  escape,  not  Jupiter  himself  can  catch  her  again.  Harden 
not  your  hearts. — Hardening  the  heart : — I.  The  meaning  of  the  word  "heart," 
AS  HEKE  USED.  Parents  sometimes  have  the  mortification  of  seeing  their  own 
children  become  stubborn  against  parental  authority,  and  of  seeing  their  require- 
ments resisted  and  their  counsels  set  at  nought.  Parents  often  see  children,  when 
they  undertake  to  press  them  to  do  anything,  instead  of  obeying,  wax  stubborn  and 
rebellious.  They  stand  and  resist,  and  manifest  a  cool  determination  to  persevere 
in  their  disobedience ;  and,  so  far  as  the  philosophy  of  the  act  is  concerned, 
resistance  to  God  is  just  the  same.  The  mind  resisting  truth  "is  hardening  the 
heart,"  in  the  sense  of  the  text.  II.  How  is  it  that  sinners  do  harden  their 
HEARTS  ?  1.  This  leads  me  to  say  that  persons  are  very  much  in  danger  of  hardening 
themselves,  by  holding  fast  to  some  erroneous  opinion  or  improper  practice  to  which 
they  are  committed.  All  their  prejudices  are  in  favour  of  it,  and  they  are  very 
jealous  lest  anything  should  disturb  it.  What  danger  such  persons  are  in  of 
assigning  to  themselves,  as  a  reason  for  resisting  the  truth,  that  it  clashes  with 
■ome  of  their  favourite  notions  1    When  they  see  its  practical  results  contradict 


CHAP.  IT.]  HEBREWS.  814 

gome  pet  theory  of  theirs,  they  will  strengthen  themselves  against  it.  I  recollect 
an  instance  of  this  kind.  One  evening,  in  the  city  of  New  York,  I  found  among 
the  inquirers  a  very  anxious  lady,  who  was  exceedingly  convicted  of  her  sins,  and 
pressed  her  strongly  to  submit  to  God.  ••  Ah  I  "  she  said,  •'  if  I  were  sure  I  am  in 
the  right  Church,  I  would."  "  The  right  Church  1 "  said  I ;  "  I  care  not  what 
Church  you  are  in,  if  you  will  only  submit  yourself  to  ChriBt."  "But,"  she 
replied,  "  I  am  not  in  the  Catholic  Church,  I  am  not  in  the  right  Church ;  if  I 
were,  I  would  yield."  So  that  her  anxiety  about  the  "  right  -Church  "  prevented 
her  yielding  at  all,  and  she  continued  to  harden  her  heart  against  Christ.  2.  Others 
harden  themselves  by  indidging  in  a  spirit  of  procrastination.  "I  will  follow 
Thee,"  is  their  language,  "  but  not  now."  3.  I  remark,  again,  that  many  persons 
strengthen  themselves  and  harden  their  hearts  by  refusing,  wherever  they  can 
refuse,  to  be  convicted  of  their  sins.  They  have  a  multitude  of  ways  of  avoiding 
the  point,  and  force  away  the  truth,  and  hardening  themselves  against  it.  Take 
care,  for  instance,  of  the  practice  of  excusing  sin.  4.  But,  again  :  Another  way  in 
which  men  harden  themselves  is  that  they  are  unwilling  to  come  and  do  what  ia 
implied  in  becoming  Christians.  But  a  short  time  since,  I  was  pressing  an  indi- 
vidual to  yield  up  certain  forms  of  sin  of  which  I  knew  him  to  be  guilty.  "All," 
said  he,  "  if  I  begin  to  yield  this  and  that,  where  will  it  all  end  ?  I  must  be  con- 
sistent," said  he,  "  and  where  shall  I  stop?  "  Where  should  he  "  stop  "?  It  was 
clear  that  the  cost  was  too  great,  and  that  he  was  therefore  disposed  to  harden 
himself  and  resist  God's  claims,  because  he  considered  God  required  too  much. 
This  is  a  very  common  practice.  If  you  ask  persons  in  a  general  way,  they  are 
willing  to  be  Christians ;  but  "  what  will  be  expected  of  them  J "  Ah !  that  ia 
quite  a  different  thing  !  Now  you  have  set  them  to  count  the  cost,  and  they  find 
it  will  involve  too  great  a  sacrifice.  They  are  wholly  unwilling  to  renounce  them- 
selves and  their  idols ;  and  accordingly  they  betake  themselves  to  hardening  their 
hearts,  and  strengthening  themselves  in  unbelief.  I  will  cite  the  case  just  referred 
to  for  a  moment.  The  conversation  respected  at  that  time  a  particular  form  of 
Bin.  Now,  why  did  he  not  yield  at  once  ?  He  saw  that  the  principle  on  which  ha 
yielded  this  point  would  compel  him  to  give  up  others;  and  therefore  he  said, 
•'  If  I  begin  this,  where  shall  I  stop  ?  "  He  gathered  up  all  the  reasons  he  could, 
and  strengthened  himself  in  his  position.  Thus  he  was  hardening  his  heart ;  this 
was  just  what  the  Jews  did  when  Christ  preached.  III.  Why  hen  should  not 
HARDEN  THEiB  HEARTS  IN  THIS  WAT.  1.  Perhaps  the  first  thing  that  I  shall  notice 
will  startle  some  of  you.  It  is  this :  you  should  not  harden  your  hearts,  "  because, 
if  you  do  not  do  so,  you  will  be  converted,"  God  has  so  constituted  the  mind  that, 
as  everybody  knows,  truth  is  a  most  powerful  stimulant,  which  invites  and  draws 
the  mind  in  a  given  direction.  Truth  induces  it  to  act  in  conformity  with  ita 
dictates.  Now,  to  do  this,  to  obey  the  truth,  that  is  conversion.  If  you  do  not 
obey  it,  it  ia  because  you  harden  yourself  against  it ;  for  it  is  an  utter  impossi- 
bility to  be  indifferent  to  the  presentation  of  truth,  and  especially  ia  it  utterly 
impossible  to  maintain  a  blank  indifference  to  the  presentation  of  the  great  practical 
truths  of  Christianity.  2.  Another  reason  why  you  should  not  harden  your  hearts 
is  that  you  will  not  be  converted  if  you  do.  In  other  words,  if  you  resist  the  Spirit, 
God  never  forces  you  against  your  will.  If  He  cannot  persuade  you  to  embrace  the 
truth.  He  cannot  save  yoo  by  a  physical  act  of  omnipotence,  as,  for  instance.  Ha 
could  create  a  world.  You  are  a  free  moral  agent,  and  He  can  save  you  only  in  Hia 
own  way.  In  other  words,  if  He  cannot  gain  your  own  consent  to  be  saved  in  Hia 
own  way.  He  cannot  possibly  save  you  at  all.  3.  Another  reason  why  you  should 
not  harden  your  hearts  is  that  you  may  be  given  up  !  God  may  give  you  up  to  the 
hardness  of  your  hearts.  The  Bible  shows  that  this  is  not  uncommon.  Whole 
generations  of  the  Jews  were  thus  given  up.  Some  think  there  is  not  so  much 
danger  of  this  now  ;  but  the  fact  is  there  is  more,  because  there  is  more  light.  He 
gives  them  up  because  they  resist  the  light  of  the  truth  with  regard  to  His  claims. 
IV.  Whose  "voice"  is  herb  referred  to?  Is  it  the  voice  of  a  tyrant,  who 
comes  out  with  his  omnipotent  arm  to  crush  you  ?  "  If  you  will  hear  His  voice, 
harden  not  your  hearts."  Whose  voice  is  it  ?  In  the  first  place,  it  is  the  voice  of 
God ;  but,  more  than  this,  it  is  the  voice  of  your  Father  1  But  is  it  the  voice  of 
your  Father,  with  the  rod  of  correction,  pursuing  you,  to  subdue  you  by  force  ?  Oh, 
no  1  it  is  the  voice  of  His  mercy — of  His  deepest  compassion.  A  few  further 
remarks  must  close  what  I  have  to  say  ;  and  the  first  remark  is  this  :  persons  often 
mistake  the  tiue  nature  of  hardness  of  heart.  Supposing  it  to  be  involuntary,  they 
lament  it  as  a  misfortune,  rather  than  regret  it  as  a  crime.    They  suppose  that  the 


816  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  nr. 

state  of  apathy  which  results  from  the  resistance  of  their  will  is  hardness  of  heart. 
It  is  true  that  the  mind  apologises  to  itself  for  resistance  to  the  claims  of  God,  and, 
as  a  natural  consequence,  there  is  very  little  feeling  in  the  mind,  because  it  is  under 
the  necessity  of  making  such  a  use  of  its  powers  as  to  cause  great  destitution  oi 
feeling.  This  is  hardening  the  heart — that  act  of  the  mind  in  resisting  the  claims 
of  God.  For  persons  to  excuse  themselves  by  complaining  that  their  hearts  are 
hard  is  only  to  add  insult  to  injury.  I  remark,  once  more,  it  is  worthy  of  notice 
that  the  claims,  commands,  promises,  and  invitations  of  God  are  all  in  the  present 
tense.  Turn  to  the  Bible,  and  from  end  to  end  you  will  find  it  is,  "  To-day  "  if  ye 
will  hear  His  voice.  "  Now "  is  the  accepted  time.  God  says  nothing  of  to- 
morrow ;  He  does  not  even  guarantee  that  we  shall  live  till  then.  Again :  the 
plea  of  inability  is  one  of  the  most  paltry,  abusive,  and  blasphemous  of  all.  What  1 
Are  men  not  able  to  refrain  from  hardening  themselves?  I  have  already  said,  and 
you  all  know,  that  it  is  the  nature  of  truth  to  influence  the  mind  when  it  receives 
it ;  and,  when  the  Spirit  does  convert  a  man,  it  is  by  so  presenting  the  truth  as  to 
gain  his  consent.  Now,  if  there  was  not  something  in  the  truth  itself  adapted  to 
influence  the  mind.  He  might  continue  to  present  the  truth  for  ever,  without  your 
ever  being  converted.  It  is  because  there  is  an  adaptedness  in  truth — something 
in  the  very  nature  of  it,  which  tends  to  influence  the  mind  of  man.  Now,  when 
persons  complain  of  their  inabiUty  to  embrace  the  truth,  what  an  infinite  mistake  I 
God  approaches  with  offers  of  mercy,  and  with  the  cup  of  salvation  in  His  hand, 
saying,  "  Sinner  1  I  am  coming  1  Beware  not  to  harden  yourself.  Do  not  cavil. 
Do  not  hide  behind  professors  of  reUgion.  Do  not  procrastinate  1  for  I  am  coming 
to  win  you."  Now,  what  does  the  sinner  do  ?  Why,  he  falls  to  hardening  hia 
heart,  procrastinating,  making  all  manner  of  excuses,  and  pleading  his  inability. 
Inability  1  What  1  Is  not  a  man  able  to  refrain  from  surrounding  himself  witii 
considerations  which  make  him  stubborn  ?  Once  more :  I  said  this  is  a  most 
abusive  way  of  treating  God.  Why,  just  think.  Here  is  God  endeavouring  to  gain 
the  sinner's  consent — to  what  ?  Not  to  be  sent  to  hell.  Oh,  no  I  He  is  not  trying 
to  persuade  you  to  do  anything,  or  to  consent  to  anything,  that  will  injure  you. 
Oh,  no  1  He  is  not  trying  to  persuade  you  to  give  up  anything  that  ia  really  good 
— the  relinquishment  of  which  will  make  you  wretched  or  unhappy — to  give  up  all 
joy  and  everything  that  is  pleasant — to  give  up  things  that  tend  to  peace — He  ia 
not  endeavouring  to  persuade  a  ou  to  do  any  such  thing  as  this.  With  regard  to  all 
such  things.  He  is  not  only  willing  that  you  should  have  them,  but  would  bring 
you  into  a  state  in  which  you  could  really  enjoy  them.    (C  G.  Finney.) 

Yet.  8.  If  Jesus  [Joshua]  had  given  them  rest. — Disparity  between  Josktta  and 
Jesus : — 1.  The  first  is  in  this  difference,  that  Joshua  conquered  Canaan  not  only 
for  the  people  of  Israel,  but  also  for  himself,  that  he  might  have  his  part  and 
portion  with  them  for  him  and  his  posterity  (Josh,  xviii.  49,  50).  But  our  Lord 
Jesus  hath  purchased  that  heavenly  Canaan  only  for  our  sakes,  having  had  the 
possession  of  it  before  His  incarnation  Himself  by  the  right  of  inheritance.  He 
had  a  glory  with  God  before  the  world  was  (John  xvii.  5).  2.  The  second  difference 
is,  Joshua  did  not  conquer  Canaan  by  himself  alone,  but  had  all  the  tribes  of  Israel 
to  assist  as  his  auxiliaries  in  his  conquest ;  but  our  Lord  Jesus  hath  by  Himself 
alone  purchased  that  heavenly  inheritance.  He  saith,  "I  have  trodden  the  wine- 
press alone,  and  none  were  with  Me  "  (Isa.  Ixiii.  3).  3.  The  third  disparity  is,  the 
conquest  of  Canaan  did  not  cost  Joshua  bloodshed  or  death ;  but  our  eternal  inheri- 
tance cost  Christ  both  His  bloodshed  and  death  (Heb.  ix.  26 ;  1  Pet.  i.  18,  19).  4. 
The  fourth  is,  Joshua  could  not  quite  expel  the  Canaanites  out  of  Canaan  (Josh. 
XV.  63;  xvi.  10,  &c.).  But  our  blessed  Jesus  hath  perfectly  subdued  Satan,  Bin,ani 
death  to  os,  that  nothing  shall  eternally  harm  us  (John  xvi.  33  ;  1  John  v.  4 :  Rev, 
xii.  11).  {C.  Ness.)  Rest : — We  are  told  in  a  certain  legend  that  one  day  Rabbi 
Judah  and  his  brethren,  the  seven  pillars  of  wisdom,  sat  in  the  Temple  on  a  feast" 
day,  disputing  about  rest.  One  said  that  it  was  to  have  attained  sufficient  wealth, 
yet  without  sin.  The  second,  that  it  was  fame  and  praise  of  all  men.  The  third, 
that  it  was  the  possession  of  power  to  rule  the  state.  The  fourth,  that  it  consisted 
only  in  a  happy  home.  The  fifth,  that  it  must  be  in  the  old  age  of  one  who  is  rich, 
powerful,  famous,  surrounded  by  children's  children.  The  sixth  said  that  all  that 
were  vain,  unless  a  man  kept  all  the  ritual  law  of  Moses.  And  Rabbi  Judah,  the 
venerable,  the  tallest  of  the  brothers,  said,  "  Ye  have  all  spoken  wisely,  but  one  thing 
more  is  necessary  :  he  can  only  find  rest  who  to  all  these  things  addeth  this,  thai 
be  keepeth  the  tradition  of  the  elders."    There  sat  in  the  court  a  fair-haired  hoy. 


CHiF.  IT.]  HEBREWS.  817 

playing  with  his  lilies  in  his  lap,  and  hearing  the  talk,  dropped  them  with  astonish- 
ment from  his  hands  and  looked  up — that  boy  of  twelve,  and  said,  "  Nay,  nay, 
fathers,  he  only  loveth  rest  who  loves  his  brother  as  himself,  and  Ood  with  his 
whole  heart  and  soul  I  He  is  greater  than  wealth  and  fame  and  power,  happier 
than  a  happy  home,  happy  without  it,  better  than  honoured  age,  he  is  a  law  to 
himself,  and  above  all  tradition."  The  doctors  were  astonished.  They  said,  When 
Christ  Cometh,  shall  He  tell  us  greater  things  ?  And  they  thanked  God  ;  for,  they 
said,  old  men  are  not  always  wise  ;  yet  God  be  praised,  that  out  of  the  raouth  of 
this  young  suckling  has  His  praise  become  perfect.  {T.  Parker.)  Wanting 
rest : — There  is  a  rebelliousness  against  himself  in  man — a  disgust  with  himself. 
"  We  are  weary  :  give  us  rest,"  said  a  tribe  to  one  of  their  missionaries;  and  that 
tribe  expresses  the  feeling  of  every  human  being. 

Yer.  9.  There  remalneth  therefore  a  rest  to  the  people  of  Go<L — Therettfor 
OocCs  people: — I.  Thk  persons  fob  whom  this  rest  is  desioked.  "The  people 
of  God."  1.  By  their  eternal  election  of  the  Father  (Bom.  xi.  5).  2.  By  complete 
and  final  redemption  (John  i.  29).  3.  By  perfect  righteousness  imputed  (Isa.  xlv. 
24,  25).     4.  By  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (Col.  iii.  10).    II.  The  manifested 

DIFFERENCE    IN    God's   PEOPLE    FROM    THE    BEPROBATB,    AFTER   THEY   ABE  CONVERTED  TO 

GoD  BY  THE  Holy  Ghost.  1.  In  a  deep  sense  of  divine  things  (1  Cor.  ii.  10).  2. 
Of  their  miserable  state  as  sinners  (Luke  v.  31).  3.  Of  creature-iiisuflBciency  (Isa. 
Ixiv.  6).  4.  Of  Christ's  fulness  (Phil.  iii.  8).  5.  In  a  change  of  will  and  purpose 
(Cant.  i.  4).  6.  A  cordial  covenanting  with  Christ  (Jer.  1.  5).  7.  Persevering 
grace  (Mio.  vii.  8).  III.  The  excellent  nature  of  this  best.  Its  excellency  is 
beyond  the  power  of  language  to  describe.  1,  Purchased  rest  (Eph.  i.  14).  2. 
Gratuitous  rest  (Isa.  Iv.  1).  3.  Peculiar  rest  (John  xiv.  22).  4.  Divine  rest  (Rev. 
xxi.  23).  5.  Seasonable  rest  (Gal.  vi.  9).  6.  Suitable  rest  (John  xjv.  2).  7. 
Perfect  rest  (Rev.  xxi.  4).  8.  Eternal  rest  (1  Pet.  v.  10).  9.  Of  body  and  soul 
(1  Cor.  XV.  57).  It  is  a  rest  from  pain,  sorrow,  disappointment,  persecution,  sin, 
lust,  and  infirmity ;  a  rest  of  peace,  joy,  love,  knowledge,  freedom,  and  a  rest  in 
God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God  the  Holy  Ghott.  (T.  B.  Baker.)  Earnests 
of  ultimate  rest : — The  earnests  of  this  rest  which  are  given  to  the  saints  in  the 
present  dispensation.  There  is  a  threefold  earnest — an  earnest  of  joy,  an  earnest 
of  holiness,  and  an  earnest  of  power.  This  threefold  earnest  corresponds  with  the 
character  of  the  inheritance  itself — it  is  an  inheritance  of  joy,  an  inheritance  of 
holiness,  and  an  inheritance  of  power,  of  dominion.  The  earnest  corresponds  with 
the  blessings  to  be  enjoyed ;  the  earnest  corresponds  with  the  salvation  to  be 
enjoyed.  Now,  what  is  the  salvation  to  be  enjoyed  ?  Salvation  means  the  recovery 
of  all  we  lost  in  Adam  in  a  more  glorious  way  than  he  had  it.  What  did  we  lose 
in  Adam  ?  We  lost  the  presence  of  God  first ;  we  lost  the  image  of  God  secondly ; 
and  we  lost  the  power  of  exercising  dominion  under  God.  These  three  things  we 
lost  in  Adam ;  these  three  things  we  gain  in  Christ.  We  shall  have  the  joy  of  God, 
going  into  His  presence  where  there  is  fulness  of  joy.  We  shall  have  the  likeness 
of  God — we  shall  awake,  and  shall  be  satisfied  when  we  awake  in  His  likeness ; 
we  shall  be  conformed  to  Him  who  is  the  image  of  God,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 
shall  change  our  vile  bodies,  and  fashion  them  after  His  own  glorious  body — we 
shall  see  Him  as  He  is.  We  shall  have  dominion ;  for  the  saints  shall  reign  with 
Christ;  the  bridegroom  and  the  bride  shall  reign  together.  (N.  Armstrong.)  The 
connection  hettoeen  the  Sabbath  of  earth  and  the  engagements  of  heaven : — Heaven 
may  be  denominated  a  Sabbath,  if  the  following  reflections  be  seriously  considered. 
1.  It  may  be  so  called  for  its  repose.  An  eternal  rest !  Oh,  happy  thought,  amidst 
the  toils  of  the  wilderness,  amidst  the  fears  with  which  we  are  now  agitated,  that 
we  shall  soon  find  rest;  like  the  comhig  of  eventide  to  the  labourer,  like  the  appear- 
ance of  home  to  the  traveller  as  he  is  advancing  to  repose  amidst  his  household,  so 
shall  heaven  be  to  the  soul  1  2.  Heaven  may  well  be  called  an  eternal  Sabbath  for 
its  sanctity.  Holiness  is  its  character,  not  hohness  which  arises  merely  from  the 
absence  of  sin,  but  holiness  which  is  inherent ;  that  holiness  whereby  we  are 
prepared  in  all  we  do,  and  all  we  enjoy,  to  possess  more  and  more  felicity,  in  pro- 
portion as  we  accomplish  more  and  more  the  will  of  the  great  Creator,  so  that  we 
are  absolutely  a  living  sacrifice  to  God  throughout  ceaseless  ages.  3.  Heaven  may 
be  denominated  an  eternal  Sabbath  for  its  services.  4.  Heaven  may  be  called  an 
eternal  Sabbath  for  its  society.  Never  would  the  Church  of  Christ  realise  a  fulness 
of  fellowship  but  for  the  engagements  of  the  Sabbath.  6.  Heaven  may  be  called 
an  eternal  Sabbath  for  its  delights.    6.  Heaven  may  be  called  an  eternal  Sabbath 


318  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

because  of  the  termination  of  all  secular  eras  and  events.  Just  as  the  Sabhath 
crowns  and  hallows  the  week,  so  heaven  comes  at  the  close  of  time  to  crovra  and 
hallow  the  whole.  7.  Heaven  may  be  called  an  eternal  Sabbath  for  the 
perpetual  commemoration  of  the  history  of  all  things.  (R.  S.  McAll,  LL.D.) 
The  rest  of  God's  people  : — I.  It  is  a  future  best.  It  is  not  on  this  side  the  grave. 
This — it  is  emphatically  said — this  is  not  your  rest.  Te  have  not  yet  come  to  the 
rest  and  to  the  inheritance  which  the  Lord  your  God  giveth  you.  We  must  go  over 
Jordan — we  must  cross  the  river  of  death  before  we  can  reach  our  home.  But  till 
then,  while  we  continue  in  the  world,  it  is  vain  and  fruitless  to  expect  rest.  There 
may  be  seasons  of  refreshment:  pauses,  like  the  Sabbath's  pause,  for  recruiting  our 
tired  spirits  ;  but  these  seasons  and  pauses  are  but  for  an  instant.  Work — work  of 
one  kind  or  other  presses  upon  us,  and  we  cannot,  if  we  would,  be  long  at  rest.  II. 
Heaven,  whatever  other  notions  we  may  have  about  it,  will  be,  befobe  all  things, 
A  PLACE  TO  BEST.  (R.  D.  B.  Rawusley,  M.A.)  The  rest  of  the  saints : — Scripture 
allows  us  to  know  so  much  of  the  future  state  as  to  satisfy  us  that  it  is  a  state  of 
continual  exalted  employment.  I.  They  rest  from  the  toils  and  pubsuits  of  the 
PBESENT  life.  Toils  and  pursuits  of  various  kinds,  and  in  different  degrees,  neces- 
sarily occupy  much  of  our  attention.  We  are  animated  with  a  strong  desire  of 
preserving  ourselves  and  those  who  depend  upon  us  in  life  and  comfort,  hence 
much  labour  and  exertion  fall  to  the  lot  of  the  generality  of  mankind ;  it  is  also  a 
part  of  the  curse  denounced  against  our  apostate  race  :  "  In  the  sweat  of  thy  face 
shalt  thou  eat  bread."  Of  the  small  proportion  of  men  who  do  not  procure  their 
subsistence  by  bodily  labour,  exertion  of  another  kind  is  required ;  they  have  to 
undergo  the  labours  of  the  mind,  study,  and  reflection,  and  extensive  research  in 
managing  the  religious  and  the  civil  concerns  of  their  fellow-creatures.  To  those 
•who  exert  themselves  vigorously  and  conscientiously  in  the  one  or  the  other  of 
these  kinds  of  labour,  it  is  no  unpleasant  view  of  heaven  that  it  yields  a  relief  from 
such  toils  and  pursuits.  II.  In  heaven  there  is  rest  from  the  troubles  of  life. 
These  are  inseparable  from  our  present  condition,  being  the  natural  and  penal 
consequences  of  sin.  "  Although  affliction  cometh  not  forth  of  the  dust,  neither 
doth  trouble  spring  out  of  the  ground,  yet  man  is  born  unto  trouble  as  the  sparks 
fly  upward."  It  arises  from  what  we  feel  in  ourselves,  from  disease,  and  pain,  and 
weakness,  and  from  "  the  fear  of  death  " ;  it  arises  also  from  our  connection  with 
fellow-creatures  :  those  with  whom  we  are  united  by  the  most  tender  and  endearing 
ties  are  subject,  like  ourselves,  to  a  variety  of  distresses.  How  soothing  in  such 
situations  the  belief,  the  hope,  and  the  prospect  of  that  "  rest  which  remaiueth  for 
the  people  of  God  " — a  state  where  disease  and  pain  are  wholly  unknown,  or  remem- 
bered as  *'  former  things  which  have  passed  away ; "  "a  land,  the  inhabitants 
whereof  shall  no  more  say,  I  am  sick  " ;  and  where  those  whom  death  had  separated 
shall  meet  to  part  no  more !  HI.  "  There  remaineth  a  rest  to  the  people  of  God  " 
FROM  sin  and  temptation.  The  former  views  which  have  been  presented  of  this 
"  rest "  may  engage  the  attention  and  please  the  imagination  of  all  men,  whatever 
be  their  state  and  character.  It  is  natural  to  human  beings  to  desire  exemption 
from  toil  and  from  trouble.  Too  many,  it  is  feared,  wish  for  heaven  chiefly  or 
wholly  on  these  accounts ;  they  have  little  or  no  desire  of  heaven  as  a  deliverance 
from  sin  and  from  temptations  to  sin ;  they  are  the  justified  and  sanctified  alone 
who  delight  chiefly  in  this  view  of  a  future  state.  Besides  this  painful  contest 
with  inward  corruption,  there  is  also  a  conflict  to  be  maintained  with  Satan,  the 
great  spiritual  adversary.  The  world  also  in  which  they  live,  both  the  men  of  the 
world  and  "  the  things  that  are  in  the  world,"  present  many  powerful  temptations ; 
snares  beset  them  on  every  side ;  prosperity  and  adversity  have  each  their  several 
dangers  to  Christians.  It  is,  therefore,  to  them  the  most  pleasing  view  of  heaven  that 
it  is  a  rest  from  sin  and  from  all  temptations  to  sin.  {J.  Bums,  D.D.)  Rest : — Have 
we  not  all  seen  a  Sunday  which  was  a  Sunday  indeed — a  day  of  calm  and  of  cheerful- 
ness, a  day  of  thankful  repose,  a  day  of  quiet  devotion,  a  day  in  which  God  was 
present  as  the  Father  of  mercies  and  the  God  of  all  comfort  ?  Witness,  you  who 
have  known  such  a  day  yourselves  or  seen  it  in  another,  what  a  look  it  wore !  how 
bright  it  was  with  a  light  not  of  this  world  1  how  it  seemed  at  once  to  refresh  and 
to  invigorate,  to  soothe  without  relaxing  and  to  animate  without  exciting,  every 
part  of  that  complex  being  which  man  is  1  And  then  say  to  yourselves,  *'  Such, 
even  such,  only  tenfold  more  perfect  and  more  glorious,  is  the  rest  which  remaineth 
in  heaven  for  the  people  of  God !  "  No  day  of  wearisome  forms,  of  gloomy  bondaga 
and  austere  observance,  of  lifeless  monotonous  worship,  or  listless  irksome  vacancy, 
but  one  instinct  with  peace,  with  life,  and  with  happiness.     There  remaineth  a  rest 


CHAP.  nr.J  HEBREWS.  819 

— a  rest  like  the  most  deligLtful  of  Sabbaths,  even  because  it  is  long  waited  for, 
and  because,  when  it  comes,  it  is  a  day  better  than  a  thousand.  I.  A  rest  FnoM 
what  ?  1.  From  our  own  works.  Ye  who  have  known  what  it  was  to  have  reached 
the  end  of  a  six  days'  or  a  six  months'  toil,  and  to  awaken  the  next  morning  to  the 
rest  of  an  earthly  Sabbath,  where  there  was  no  duty  before  you  for  twelve  hours 
but  that  of  thanliing  and  praising  God,  and  enjoying  to  the  full  His  gifts  and  His 
revelations — judge  ye  what  that  morning  will  be  when  you  awake  in  heaven,  never 
a^ain  to  toil  unto  weariness  1  2.  But  who  has  not  felt  that  there  is  a  weariness  far 
greater  than  that  of  simple  work,  and,  by  consequence,  a  rest  far  more  desirable 
than  that  from  mere  labour  ?  In  heaven  there  will  be  rest  from  all  anxiety  and 
care.  3.  And  shall  I  mention  yet  another  weariness  of  life,  one  which  besets  in 
these  days  some  of  every  condition  and  every  rank  of  men  ?  I  speak  of  doubt — of 
religious  doubt — doubt  as  to  the  reality  of  truth,  or  doubt  as  to  its  application  to 
ourselves.  Of  all  the  joys  of  the  first  morning  of  heaven,  to  many  souls  in  our 
generation,  surely  this  will  be  the  greatest — that  doubt  is  no  more ;  that  Christ 
Himself  is  there,  seen  face  to  face,  and  the  truth  which  was  dim  upon  earth  is 
there  irradiated  by  His  presence.  4.  Lastly,  the  rest  which  remaineth  is  a  rest 
from  sin.  "Grieved  and  wearied  with  the  burden  of  our  sins:"  that  is  the 
account  which  we  all  give  of  ourselves  when  we  kneel  at  Christ's  holy  table.  Wher- 
ever Christ  is  sought  in  humble  faith,  the  pilgrim's  burden  unties  itself  at  the 
sight  of  the  Cross,  and  falls  off  from  him,  to  his  great  comfort.  But  old  infirmities 
continue,  and  lead  to  new  transgressions.  Only  in  heaven  will  the  power  of  sin  be 
ended.  II.  Best  in  what?  1.  In  thankfulness.  Dangers  escaped — infirmities 
healed — sins  forgiven — sorrows  cheered  on  earth  or  explained  in  heaven — an 
arresting,  controlling,  guiding,  and  supporting  hand,  now  believed  and  then  seen 
to  have  been  over  us  all  our  life  long — the  forbearance  of  God — the  map  of  our 
pilgrimage,  inward  and  outward,  at  last  spread  out  before  us,  and  the  light  of 
heaven  thrown  upon  its  windings  and  its  wanderings ;  in  all  this  there  will  be 
matter  for  an  eternity  of  thankfulness.  2.  In  occupation.  3.  In  contemplation. 
The  contemplation  of  God  Himself.  The  understanding,  as  never  before,  of  His 
works,  of  His  ways,  of  His  perfections.  4.  In  Christ'ii  presence.  This  completes, 
this  embraces  all  heaven.  {Dean  Vaughan.)  Heavenly  rest : — I.  I  shall  try  to 
EXHIBIT  the  rest  of  heaven ;  and  in  doing  so  I  shall  exhibit  it,  first  by  way  of 
contrast,  and  then  by  way  of  comparison.  1.  The  rest  of  the  righteous  in  glory  is 
now  to  be  contrasted  with  certain  other  things.  (1)  We  will  contrast  it  with  the 
best  estate  of  the  worldling  and  the  sinner.  The  worldling,  when  his  corn  and  his 
wine  are  increased,  has  a  glad  eye  ani  a  joyous  heart :  but  even  then  he  has  the 
direful  thought  that  he  may  soon  leave  his  wealth.  Not  so  the  righteous  man  :  he 
has  obtained  an  inheritance  which  is  "  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away."  (2) 
Now  let  me  put  it  in  more  pleasing  contrast.  I  shall  contrast  the  rest  of  the 
believer  above  with  the  miserable  estate  of  the  beUever  sometimes  here  below. 
Christians  have  their  sorrows.  Suns  have  their  spots,  skies  have  their  clouds,  and 
Christians  have  their  sorrows  too.  But  oh !  how  different  will  the  state  of  the 
righteous  be  up  there,  from  the  state  of  the  believer  here  1  Sheathed  is  the  sword, 
the  banner  is  furled,  the  fight  is  over,  the  victory  won  ;  and  they  rest  from  their 
labours.  Here,  too,  the  Christian  is  always  sailing  onward,  he  is  always  in  motion, 
he  feels  that  he  has  not  yet  attained.  Like  Paul,  he  can  say,  "  Forgetting  the 
things  that  are  behind,  I  press  forward  to  that  which  is  before."  But  there  his 
weary  head  shall  be  crowned  with  unfading  Ught.  There  the  ship  that  has  been 
speeding  onward  shall  furl  its  sails  in  the  port  of  eternal  bhss.  Here,  too,  the 
believer  is  often  the  subject  of  doubt  and  fear.  Hill  Difficulty  often  affrights  him  ; 
going  dowL  into  the  valley  of  humiliation  is  often  troublesome  work  to  him  ;  but 
there,  there  are  no  hills  to  climb,  no  dragons  to  fight,  no  foes  to  conquer,  no  dangers 
to  dread.  Eeady-to-halt,  when  he  dies,  will  buiy  his  crutches,  and  Feeble-mind 
will  leave  his  feebleness  behind  him  ;  Fearing  will  never  fear  again  ;  poor  Doubting- 
heart  will  learn  confidently  to  believe.  Oh,  joy  above  all  joys !  Here,  too,  on 
«arth,  the  Christian  has  to  suffer ;  here  he  has  the  aching  head  and  the  pained 
body.  Or  if  his  body  be  sound,  yet  what  suffering  he  has  in  his  mind  t  Conflicts 
between  depravity  and  gross  temptations  from  the  evil  one,  assaults  of  hell,  perpetual 
attacks  of  divers  kinds  from  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil.  But  there,  no  aching 
head,  no  weary  heart ;  old  age  shall  find  itself  endowed  with  perpetual  youth ; 
there  the  infirmities  of  the  flesh  shall  be  left  behind,  given  to  the  worm  and 
devoured  by  corruption.  There,  too,  they  shall  be  free  from  persecution.  Here 
Sicilian  Vespers,  and  St.  Bartholomew,  and  Smithfield  are  well-known  words  ;  but 


820  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ir. 

there  sball  be  none  to  tannt  them  with  a  cruel  word,  or  touch  them  with  a  cruel 
hand.  There  emperors  and  kings  are  not  known,  and  those  who  had  power  to 
torture  them  cease  to  be.  They  are  in  the  society  of  saints ;  they  shall  be  free  from 
all  the  idle  converse  of  the  wicked,  and  from  their  cruel  jeers  set  free  for  ever.  Alas  I 
In  this  mortal  state  the  child  of  God  is  also  subject  to  sin ;  even  he  faileth  in  his 
duty  and  wandereth  from  his  God  ;  even  he  doth  not  walk  in  all  the  law  of  his  God 
blameless,  though  he  desireth  to  do  it.  And  last  of  all,  here,  the  child  of  God  hus 
to  wet  the  cold  ashes  of  his  relatives  with  tears ;  here  he  has  to  bid  adieu  to  all  that 
is  lovely  and  fair  of  mortal  race.  But  there  never  once  shall  be  heard  the  toll  of  the 
funeral  bell.  2.  And  now  I  shall  try  very  briefly  to  exhibit  this  contrast  in  the  way 
of  comparison.  The  Christian  hath  some  rest  here,  but  nothing  compared  with  the 
rest  which  is  to  come.  (1)  There  is  the  rest  of  the  Church.  The  Church-member 
at  the  Lord's  table  has  a  sweet  enjoyment  of  rest  in  fellowship  with  the  saints ; 
but  ah  I  up  there  the  rest  of  Church  fellowship  far  surpasses  anything  that  is 
known  here  ;  for  there  are  no  divisions  there,  no  angry  words,  no  harsh  thoughts 
of  one  another,  no  bickerings  about  doctrine,  no  fightings  about  practice.  (2) 
There  is,  again,  a  rest  of  faith  which  a  Christian  enjoys ;  a  sweet  rest.  Many 
of  us  have  known  it.  We  have  known  what  it  is,  when  the  billows  of  trouble 
have  run  high,  to  hide  ourselves  in  the  breast  of  Christ  and  feel  secure.  But 
the  rest  up  there  is  better  still,  more  unruffled,  more  sweet,  more  perfectly  calm, 
more  enduring,  and  more  lasting  than  even  the  rest  of  faith.  (3)  And,  agaiu, 
the  Christian  sometimes  has  the  blessed  rest  of  communion.  There  are  happy 
momeuts  when  he  puts  his  head  on  the  Saviour's  breast — when,  like  John,  be 
feels  that  he  is  close  to  the  Saviour's  heart,  and  there  he  sleeps.  II.  I  am 
to  endeavour  to  extol  this  rest,  as  I  have  tried  to  exhibit  it.  Oh  I  for  the 
lip  of  angel  to  talk  now  of  the  bliss  of  the  sanctified  and  of  the  rest  of  God's 
people  1  1.  It  is  a  perfect  rest.  They  are  wholly  at  rest  in  heaven.  2.  Again,  it 
is  a  seasonable  rest.  3.  This  rest  ought  to  be  extolled  because  it  is  eternal. 
4.  And  then,  lastly,  this  glorious  rest  is  to  be  best  of  all  commended  for  its  certainty. 
"  There  remaineth  a  rest  to  the  people  of  God."  Doubting  one,  thou  hast  often 
said,  "  I  fear  I  shall  never  enter  heaven."  Fear  not ;  all  the  people  of  God  shall 
enter  there  ;  there  is  no  fear  about  it.  I  love  the  quaint  saying  of  a  dying  man, 
who  exclaimed,  **  I  have  no  fear  of  going  home ;  I  have  sent  all  before  me ; 
God's  finger  is  on  the  latch  of  my  door  and  I  am  ready  for  Him  to  enter." 
"  But,"  said  one,  ♦'  are  you  not  afraid  lest  you  should  miss  your  inheritance  ?  " 
"  Nay,"  said  he,  "  nay;  there  is  one  crown  in  heaven  that  the  angel  Gabriel  could 
not  wear ;  it  will  fit  no  head  but  mine.  There  is  one  throne  in  heaven  that  Paul 
the  apostle  could  not  fill ;  it  was  made  for  me,  and  I  shall  have  it.  There  is  one 
dish  at  the  banquet  that  I  must  eat,  or  else  it  will  be  untasted,  for  God  has  set  it 
apart  for  me."      {G.   H.  Spurgeon.)         Divine  rest: — I.  What  man  sdpbkmelt 

NEEDS   IS   MOT   BEST   FBOM   WOBE   BUT  BEST   FBOM  CABE.      1.    What  is  CarC  ?      It  is  the 

experience  of  the  man  who  is  bent  on  being  his  own  providence ;  who  takes  on 
himself  the  whole  responsibihty,  not  of  the  conduct  of  Ufe  only,  but  of  the  condi- 
tions and  results  which  are  absolutely  beyond  his  power  of  regulation,  and  which 
God  keeps  calmly  under  His  own  hand.  2.  This  rest  from  care  has  been  the  great 
aim  and  desire  of  man  through  all  his  generations.  The  problem  of  man's  higher 
Ufe  has  always  been  how  to  secure  emancipation.  3.  But  the  sad  part  of  the  matter 
is,  that  man  does  not  and  cannot  rest  in  mere  renunciations  and  denials.  There  is 
a  question  in  the  background  which  has  its  origin  in  every  conscience.  How,  on 
this  principle,  can  the  world's  business  be  carried  on  ?  No  1  there  is  no  rest  for 
the  human  spirit  in  this  burying  the  head  in  the  sand  when  troubles  throng  around. 
n.  The  only  possible  best  fob  man  is  the  best  that  he  finds  in  God.  1. 
The  lowest,  but  by  no  means  the  least  burdensome  and  distracting  class  of  our 
cares  concerns  "  the  great  bread-and-cheese  question  "  and  its  surroundings.  2.  A 
nobler  form  of  care  is  that  which  has  to  do  with  persons,  that  which  springs  out  of 
our  affections,  sympathies  and  loves.  3.  The  same  faith  lifts  the  burden  from  the 
heart  of  the  Christian  lover  of  mankind.  In  truth  we  are  always  calling  for  the 
twelve  legions  of  angels  to  finish  the  work  swiftly  and  usher  in  Messiah's  reign. 
And  God  answers,  "  Patience,"  and  points  us  to  the  redemptive  purpose  which 
stamped  its  impress  on  the  first  page  of  revelation  and  sets  its  seal  on  the  last ;  and 
bids  us  wait  His  time.  The  man  who  trusts  most  perfectly,  works  most  heartily. 
Christ,  while  He  lifts  the  burdens,  braces  the  energies,  inspires  the  will,  and  parades 
all  the  faculties  of  man  in  their  noblest  form  for  service.  The  man  who  beUeves, 
onderstands  perfectly  that  the  most  strenuous  use  of  all  the  powers  of  his  being  is 


CHAP.  IT.]  HEBREWS.  821 

one  of  the  high  conditions  by  which  God  is  seeking  to  work  out  blessing  for  him 
Belt,  for  his  dear  ones,  and  for  the  great  world.  (<7.  Baldivin  Brown,  B.A.)  Tlie 
true  rest  of  heaven: — Our  notions  of  bodily  rest  rarely  extend  beyond  mere  cessa- 
tion from  muscular  exertion.  Our  ideas  also  of  mental  rest  are  commonly  limited  to 
a  similar  period  put  to  the  labours  of  the  mind.  It  is  easy,  and  perhaps  not  always 
displeasing,  to  apply  similar  expectations  to  spiritual  as  well  as  bodily  and  mental 
relaxation,  and  to  regard  the  promised  Sabbath  in  heaven  as  a  compete  termination 
of  every  spiritual  effort.  Hope  is  a  work  ;  faith  is  a  work ;  love  we  look  upon  as  an 
emotion.  The  two  former  will  not  be  called  into  action  in  the  mansion-;  of  eternity. 
The  latter,  we  are  apt  to  conceive,  will  fill  our  breast  with  infused  delight.  There 
are  indeed  agreeable  views  of  the  saints'  everlasting  rest ;  but  are  they  also  in 
accordance  with  the  revelations  of  Scripture  ?  You  will  find  not :  you  will  see  that 
the  people  of  God  in  an  after-state  will  truly  rest  from  their  pilgrimage  through 
this  weary  world ;  but  from  the  worship  of  God  His  saints  will  rest  no  more  ;  with 
kindred  spirits  they  \vill  day  and  night  for  ever  cry,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy,  Lord  God 
of  hosts,  who  wert,  and  art,  and  art  to  come,"  Now,  while  heaven  is  the  abode  of 
love,  that  love  will  have  utterance  ;  while  the  object  of  our  love  and  gratitude  and 
joy  is  before  the  glorified,  the  tongue  of  love  and  gratitude  and  joy  will  never  fail. 
No  rest  for  happiness  ;  no  rest  for  worship,  uo  more  than  we  should  desire  now  a 
rest  from  breathing.  And  we  have  glimpses  here  of  the  true  character  of  happy 
rest.  Were  the  father  of  a  family  to  return  to  his  home  after  a  tedious  and  toil- 
some journey  and  long  absence,  and  instantly,  without  saluting  wife  or  children, 
to  cast  himself  upon  his  bed  and  fall  asleep,  this  would  be  rest  certainly, 
but  of  what  a  low,  animal  character  I  And  were  another  father  under  like 
circumstances  to  embrace  wife  and  children  with  fondest  affections,  and  to 
assemble  them  around  him  to  narrate  the  adventures  he  had  met  with,  and  ask 
of  them  a  similar  return,  whether,  think  you,  would  be  the  preferable  rest?  I 
anticipate  but  one  answer.  But  it  may  be  said  that  extreme  fatigue  might  over- 
come even  the  strongest  regard,  and  that  the  most  loving  parent  might  be  unable 
to  enjoy  the  society  of  his  household.  Do  you  suppose  that  this,  which  is  quite 
in  accordance  with  earthly  experience,  could  be  so  in  heaven  ?  Would  God 
receive  us  into  those  blessed  abodes,  and  leave  us  destitute  of  the  faculty  of 
enjoying  them  ?  You  well  know  that  that  would  be  far  from  Him.  No ;  they 
who  are  brought  into  that  future  world  will  be  gifted  with  every  capacity  suit- 
able to  the  most  perfect  use  of  it.  And  as  this  life  is  a  training  for  the  next 
— a  probation  wherein  is  practised  the  conduct  and  temper  which  shall  endure 
for  ever — does  it  not  follow  that  you  should  now  cultivate  those  habits 
and  feelings  which  alone  will  find  admittance  there?  {J.  S.  Knox,  M.A.) 
The  rest  of  God's  people  in  heaven : — 1.  We  shall  rest  from  the  labours  of  onr  call- 
ing, wherewith  we  are  turmoiled.  The  husbandman  shall  follow  the  plough  no 
longer,  the  weaver  shall  sit  no  longer  in  the  cold  in  his  loom,  the  clothier  not  ride 
up  and  down  in  the  rain,  frost  and  snow,  about  his  wool  and  cloth  ;  the  preacher 
shall  no  longer  be  turning  over  books  and  taking  pains  in  his  study  and  pulpit ;  we 
shall  ride  no  more  to  market  to  buy  com,  to  make  provision  for  our  houses ;  we 
shall  no  longer  take  thought  for  ourselves,  our  wives  and  children  ;  we  shall  have  all 
things  provided  to  our  hands,  and  eat  of  the  hidden  manna  and  of  the  tree  of  life 
in  the  paradise  of  God  for  ever.  2.  We  shall  rest  even  from  the  works  of  religion, 
which  are  now  chariots  to  carry  us  to  heaven.  We  shall  no  longer  be  turning  over 
the  Bible  in  our  houses,  catechising  and  instructing  of  our  families ;  no  more  go 
many  a  mile  in  the  dirt  and  wind  to  the  church,  shall  no  more  be  praying  %vith 
cries,  sighs,  and  tears ;  thanksgiving  shall  remain  in  heaven.  It  shall  be  all 
our  work  to  be  praising  of  God,  but  petitions  shall  then  cease ;  no  need 
of  the  ship  when  we  be  in  heaven.  3.  We  shall  rest  from  the  works  of  sin ;  here  in 
many  things  we  sin  all.  Noah  is  sometimes  overtaken  with  wine,  David  falls  into 
adultery  and  murder,  Peter  into  the  denial  of  Christ,  Paul  and  Barnabas  are  at 
jars  between  themselves.  "  The  good  that  we  would  do,  that  do  we  not,  and  the 
evil  we  would  not,  that  do  we."  Sin  makes  us  to  cry  out  like  tired  porters,  "  O 
miserable  men  that  we  are,"  &c.  Then  we  shall  rest  from  all  sin,  and  be  like  the 
angels  in  heaven  for  ever.  4.  We  shall  rest  fro  all  the  crosses  and  calamities  of 
this  life.  5.  We  shall  rest  from  death.  It  is  a  work  to  die ;  it  is  a  main  enemy 
with  whom  we  struggle.  But  then  this  last  enemy  shall  be  put  under  our  feet, 
death  shall  be  swallowed  up  into  victory.  0  what  an  excellent  rest  is  this  1  {W. 
Jones,  D.D.)  The  world  not  a  fit  place  for  rest : — 1.  This  world  is  not  a  fit  place, 
nor  this  life  a  fit  time  to  enjoy  such  a  rest  as  is  reserved  in  heaven.    2.  Best  here 

21 


322  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

would  glue  our  hearts  too  much  to  this  world,  and  make  us  say,  "  It  is  good  to  be 
here  "  (Matt.  xvii.  4).  It  would  slack  our  longing  desire  after  Christ  in  heaven. 
Death  would  be  more  irksome,  and  heaven  the  less  welcome.  3.  There  would  be 
no  proof  or  trial  of  our  spiritual  armour,  and  of  the  several  graces  of  God  bestowed 
on  us.  4.  God's  providence,  prudence,  power,  mercy  and  other  like  properties 
could  not  be  so  well  discerned  if  here  we  enjoyed  that  rest.  {W.  Oouge.)  Rest 
ehetchere: — "Rest  elsewhere,"  was  the  motto  of  Philip  de  Mamix,  Lord 
Sainte-Aldegonde,  one  of  the  most  efficient  leaders  in  that  great  Nether- 
lands revolt  against  despotism  in  the  sixteenth  century  which  supplied  material 
for  perhaps  the  most  momentous  chapter  in  the  civil  and  religious  history 
of  the  world.  For  a  man  such  as  he,  living  in  such  a  time,  no  motto  could  well 
mean  more.  A  friend  of  freedom  and  of  truth,  in  that  age,  could  never  hope  to 
find  rest  in  this  world.  A  good  motto,  also,  is  it  for  the  Christian  worker.  When 
there  is  so  much  to  be  done,  who  would  be  inactive  here  ?  "  Weary  not  in  well 
doing."  There  is  rest  elsewhere.  Retire  not  from  your  labour.  Work  on  I  There 
will  be  rest  hereafter.  Rest  in  eternity : — Amauld's  (of  the  Port  Royal  Society), 
remarkable  reply  to  NicoUe,  when  they  were  hunted  from  place  to  place,  can  never 
be  forgotten.  Amauld  wished  Nicolle  to  assist  him  in  a  new  work,  when  the  latter 
observed,  "  We  are  now  old,  is  it  not  time  to  rest  ?  "  "  Rest  I  "  returned  Amauld  ; 
" have  we  not  all  eternity  to  rest  in?  "  The  weariness  of  life : — For  the  young, 
this  is  fresh,  beautiful,  sunlit  life  ;  to  the  old,  it  is  often  what  Talleyrand  found  it, 
who  in  the  journal  of  his  eighty-third  birthday  wrote,  "  Life  is  a  long  fatigue." 
Weary  eyes  droop,  weary  shoulders  bend,  weary  hands  tremble,  weary  feet 
drag  heavily  along,  weary  brows  burn,  weary  hearts  faint  everywhere. 
The  primary  cause  of  the  universal  weariness  is  universal  sin.  The  needle 
forced  from  its  centre  is  in  a  state  of  tremulous  motion ;  man  wandered 
from  his  God  is  in  a  state  of  weariness.  Though  now  on  the  way  back, 
he  will  never  be  perfectly  at  rest  until  finally  at  home.  (C.  Stanford,  D.D.) 
The  final  Sabbath: — The  final  Sabbath  will  not,  therefore,  be  realised  till  time  is 
swallowed  up  of  eternity,  and  mortality  of  life.  It  will  be  the  eternal  conclusion  of 
the  week  of  time,  as  seven  is  the  numeric  symbol  of  perfection  and  rest.  (F. 
Dclitzsch.)  Rest  in  heaven : — Once  I  dreamed  of  being  transported  to  heaven  ; 
and  being  surprised  to  find  myself  so  calm  and  tranquil  in  the  midst  of  my  happi- 
ness, I  inquired  the  cause.  The  reply  was,  "  When  you  were  on  earth,  you 
resembled  a  bottle  but  partly  filled  with  water,  which  was  agitated  by  the  least 
motion, — now  you  are  like  the  same  bottle  filled  to  the  brim,  which  cannot  be  dis- 
turbed. (E,  Payson,  D.D.)  Image  of  heaven  .-—A  sorrowing  mother,  bending 
over  her  dying  child,  was  trying  to  soothe  it  by  talking  about  heaven.  She  spoke 
of  the  glory  there,  of  the  brightness,  of  the  shining  countenances  of  the  angels  ;  but 
a  little  voice  stopped  her,  saying,  "  I  should  not  like  to  be  there,  mother,  for  the 
light  hurts  my  eyes."  Then  she  changed  her  word-picture,  and  spoke  of  the  songs 
above,  of  the  harpers,  of  the  voice  of  many  waters,  of  the  new  song  which  they  sang 
before  the  throne  ;  but  the  child  said,  "  Mother,  I  cannot  bear  any  noise."  Grieved 
and  disappointed  at  her  failure,  she  took  the  little  one  in  her  arms  with  all  the 
tenderness  of  a  mother's  love.  Tben,  as  the  little  sufferer  lay  there,  near  to  all  it 
loved  best  in  the  world,  conscious  only  of  the  nearness  of  love  and  care,  the  whisper 
came,  "Mother,  if  heaven  is  like  this,  may  Jesus  take  me  there  I"  (Baxendale'$ 
Anecdotes.)  Heaven  the  place  to  rest  in : — The  earth  is  our  workhouse,  but  heaven 
is  our  storehouse.  This  is  a  place  to  run  in,  and  that  is  a  place  to  rest  in.  (T. 
Seeker.)  The  work  over: — Mr.  Mead,  an  aged  Christian,  when  asked  how  he 
did,  answered,  "  I  am  going  home  as  fast  as  I  can,  as  every  honest  man  ought  to  do 
when  his  day's  work  is  over;  and  I  bless  God  I  have  a  good  home  to  go  to." 
The  people  of  God. — The  people  of  God : — I.  The  great  fact  which  is  herb 
ntPLiED.  That  God  has  a  people — a  people  who  are  peculiarly  His  own  and  devoted 
to  His  service.  1.  Let  us  look  into  the  past  history  of  the  Church.  What  illustri- 
ous examples  of  faith,  and  piety,  and  real  devotedness  to  God  do  we  discover  I  2. 
In  the  present  day  there  are  many  such.  3.  If  we  look  at  prophecy,  we  shall  find 
that  the  number  of  God's  people  are  numerous  indeed.  II.  Some  trials  in  theib 
CHARACTER.  1.  The  real  servant  of  God,  to  whatever  community  or  church  he  may 
belong,  is  deeply  convinced  of  the  value  and  importance  of  personal  religion.  2. 
The  true  servant  of  God  renounces  self  and  all  else  as  a  ground  of  dependence  in 
the  sight  of  God,  and  depends  entirely  on  the  atonement,  sacrifice,  blool,  and 
righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  3.  He  cultivates  universal  holiness  of 
heart  and  life.    HI.  Tbb  futubb  delightful  aitd  olobiocs   prospects   or  rsa 


I 


CHAP.  IT.]  HEBREWS.  821 

TRUE  Chkistian.  LessoDs :  1.  The  awful  state  of  those  who  do  not  come  np  to  this 
character.  2.  How  great  are  the  obligations  of  real  Christians  to  serve  God.  3. 
How  amiable  is  the  character  of  the  real  Christian  I  (D.  Ruell,  M.A.)  The 
people  of  Ood  : — All  nations  in  the  world  are  His  people  by  creation,  but  these  are 
lis  people  by  adoption.  1.  Every  people  is  gathered  together  by  some  means  or 
other ;  a  people  is  a  collection  of  many  men.  So  we  that  are  the  people  of  Ood,  are 
gathered  togethar  with  the  trumpet  of  the  Word.  2.  A  people  gathered  together 
must  have  laws  to  rule  them  by,  otherwise  they  will  soon  be  out  of  order,  otherwise 
they  will  range  beyond  limits,  even  so  God's  people  have  God's  laws  set  down  in 
His  Word.  3.  Every  people  must  have  a  king  or  ruler.  Even  so  the  ruler  of  God'a 
people  is  Jesus  Christ.  4.  A  people  must  have  some  country  to  dwell  in.  So  the 
country  where  this  people  dwell  is  the  Church  militant  in  this  life,  and  triumphant 
in  the  Ufe  to  come.  5.  All  people  are  distinguished  by  some  outward  habit  and 
attive.  So  God's  people  have  the  sacraments  to  distinguish  them.  Baptism  is 
Christ's  mark,  and  the  Holy  Supper  His  seal.  6.  People  must  live  in  obedience  to 
the  laws  of  their  king,     (IP*.  Jonei,  D.D.) 

Ver.  10.  He  that  Is  entered  Into  His  rest.— Entrance  into  God'g  rest ;— We 
lose  much  of  the  meaning  of  this  passage  by  our  superficial  habit  of  transferring  it 
to  a  future  state.  The  gmund  of  the  mistake  is  in  the  misinterpretation  of  the 
word  "  remaineth  "  ;  which  is  taken  to  point  to  the  "  rest,"  after  tho  sorrows  of  this 
life  are  all  done  with.  Of  course  there  is  such  a  rest ;  but  the  truth  taught  here  is 
that  faith,  and  not  death,  is  the  gate  to  participation  in  Christ's  rest ;  that  the  rest 
remained  over  after  Moses  and  Judaism,  but  came  into  possession  under  and  by 
Christ.  I.  The  Divine  best.  It  is  the  deep  tranquilUty  of  a  nature  self-sufficing 
in  its  infinite  beauty,  calm  in  its  everlasting  strength,  placid  in  its  deepest  joy,  still 
in  its  mightiest  energy,  loving  without  passion,  wUling  without  decision  or  change, 
acting  without  effort,  quiet,  and  moving  everything ;  making  all  things  new,  and 
itself  everlasting ;  creating,  and  knowing  no  diminution  by  the  act;  annihilating, 
and  knowing  no  loss  though  the  universe  were  barren  and  unpeopled.  God  is,  God 
is  everywhere,  God  is  everywhere  the  same,  God  is  everywhere  the  same  infinite, 
God  is  everywhere  the  same  infinite  love  and  the  same  infinite  self-sufficiency ; 
therefore  His  very  Being  is  rest.  And  yet  that  image  that  rises  before  us,  statu- 
esque, still  in  its  placid  tranquillity,  is  not  repellent  nor  cold,  is  no  dead  marble 
likeness  of  life.  God  is  changeless  and  ever  tranquil,  and  yet  He  loves — wills — 
acts.  Mystery  of  mysteries,  passing  all  understanding  I  Then  there  is  the  other 
thought  which  perhaps  comes  more  markedly  out  in  the  passage  before  as — 
that  of  a  rest  which  is  God's  tranquil  ceasing  from  His  work,  because  God  has  per- 
fected His  work.  Still  further :  this  Divine  tranquillity — inseparable  from  the 
Divine  nature,  the  token  of  the  sufficiency  and  completeness  of  the  Divine  work — 
is  also  a  rest  that  is  full  of  work.  God  rests,  and  in  His  rest,  up  to  the  present 
hour  and  for  ever,  Ood  works.  And,  in  like  manner,  Christ's  work  of  redemption, 
finished  upon  the  Cross,  is  perpetually  going  on.  Christ's  glorious  repose  is  full  of 
energy  for  His  people.  He  intercedes  above.  He  works  on  them,  He  works  through 
them.  He  works  for  them,  H.  The  best  of  God  and  of  Cheist  is  the  patteen  of  what 
OUB  earthly  life  mat  become.  We  cannot  possess  that  changeless  tranquillity  which 
knows  no  variations  of  purpose  or  of  desire,  but  we  can  possess  the  stable  repose  of 
that  fixed  nature  which  knows  one  object,  and  one  alone.  We  cannot  possess  that 
energy  which,  after  all  work,  is  fresh  and  unbroken  ;  but  we  can  possess  that  tran- 
quillity which  in  all  toil  is  not  troubled,  and  after  all  work  is  ready  for  double 
service.  We  cannot  possess  that  unwavering  fire  of  a  Divine  nature  which  burns 
in  love  without  flickering,  which  knows  without  learning,  which  wills  without 
irresolution  and  without  the  act  of  decision  ;  but  we  can  come  to  love  deeply,  tran- 
quilly, perpetually,  we  can  come  to  know  without  questioning,  without  doubts, 
without  darkness,  in  firm  confidence  of  stable  assurance,  and  so  know  with  some- 
thing Uke  the  knowledge  of  Him  who  knows  things  as  they  are  ;  and  we  can  come 
to  will  and  resolve  so  strongly,  so  fixedly,  so  wisely,  that  there  shall  be  no  change 
of  purpose,  nor  any  vacillation  of  desire.  In  these  ways,  in  shadow  and  copy,  we 
«an  be  like  even  the  apparently  incommunicable  tranquillity  which,  like  an  atmo- 
sphere that  knows  no  tempests,  belongs  to  and  encircles  the  throne  of  God.  But, 
etill  further :  Faith,  which  is  the  means  of  entering  into  rest,  will — if  only  yon 
cherish  it — make  your  Ufe  no  unworthy  resemblance  of  His  who,  triumphant  above, 
works  for  us,  and,  working  for  us,  rests  from  all  His  toil.  Trust  Christ  1  is  the 
4eaching  here.    IIL  This  Divine  best   is   a   prophecy   of   what   oub   heavbnli 


824  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (ohap.  m 

iitFB  SHALL  BUBBLY  BE.    Then  is  s  basis  of  likeness  between  the  Christian  life  on 
earth  and  the  Christian  life  in  heaven,  so  great  as  that  the  blessings  which  ar» 
predicated  of  the  one  belong  to  the  other.     Only  here  they  are  in  blossom,  sickly, 
often,  putting  out  very  feeble  shoots  and  tendrils ;  and  yonder  transplanted  into 
their  right  soil,  and  in  their  native  air  with  heaven's  sun  upon  them,  they  burst 
into  richer  beauty,  and  bring  forth  fruits  of  immortal  life.     The  heaven  of  all 
spiritual  aatures  is  not  idleness.     Man's  delight  is  activity.    The  loving  heart's 
delight  is  obedience.    The  saved  heart's  delight  is  grateful  service.    The  joys  of 
heaven  are  not  the  joys  of  passive  contemplation,  of  dreamy  remembrance,  of  perfect 
repose ;  but  they  are  described   thus,  "  They  rest   not  day  nor  nighi"    ••  His 
servants  serve  Him,  and  see  His  face."    Yes,  heaven  is  perfect  "rest."    God  be 
thanked  for  all  the  depth  of  unspeakable  sweetness  which  lies  in  that  one  little 
word,  to  the  ears  of  all  the  weary  and  the  heavy  laden.    {A,  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
The  Christianas  rest : — I.  The  persons — "  The  people  of  God."    1.  He  purchased 
them.    2.  He  has  prepared  them.    3.  He  has  watched  over  and  guarded  them.    4. 
They  have  been  enlightened.    IL  The  promise — "There  remaineth  a  rest."    !► 
Already  in  existence.     2.  Not  yet  manifested.     HI.  The  expectation — "Best.**^ 
1.  Chiefly  negative.     Denoting  an  absence  of  what  is  painful,  laborious,  disagree- 
able.     2.    Not  necessarily  inaction.     The  brain-toiler   rests   in    taking  manual 
exercise.     The  muscle-worker  rests  in  reading  and  writing.     The  teacher  rests  in 
games,  such  as  cricket,  &o.     So  the  Christian  shall  not  fear  the  toils  of  earth  in 
the  occupation  of  heaven.     3.  Blessed.     The  absence  of  all  evil  will  give  opportu- 
nity for  the  exercise  of  all  that  is  good.     (Homilist.)        Rest  in  the  rest  of  Ood : — 
The  one  want  of  our  nature  is  rest.    We  want  it  in  each  part  of  our  nature.     The 
body  wants  rest.    Toil,  toil  of  hand  and  foot  and  brain,  demands  alternations  of 
rest,  if  it  is  not  to  kill.    The  mind  wants  rest.     The  thinking,  understanding, 
reasoning,  reflecting  mind.    And  certainly  the  soul  wants  it.    That  wonderful,  thai 
immortal  thing  within  each  of  us — which  we  can  distinguish  not  only  from  the 
material  body,  but  even  from  the  thinking  mind — that  soul  which  comes  straig  t 
to  each  man  from  his  God,  and  (strange  to  add)  must  return  straight  out  of  this 
life  to  the  God  who  gave  it — the  soul  has  its  toils  and  its  journeyings  and  its 
wearinesses — distinguishable  easily  from  a  mere  earthly  solicitude  on  the  one  side, 
and  from  a  mere  intellectual  unrest  on  the  other.     The  soul  is  worn  and  weary  for 
want  of  some  rest  of  its  own  in  a  strong,  delightful,  imperishable  heart  of  Love  t 
In  their  different  ways  all  are  seeking  rest.     Oh,  it  is  a  sorrowful  thought,  when  you 
are  thrown  into  the  midst  of  a  multitude,  gathered  for  business,  for  amusement, 
even  for  worship,  how  few,  how  very  few,  of  all  these  have  yet  found  their  rest  I 
One  is  heaping  up  riches,  ignorant  who  shall  gather,  knowing  only  this,  that  he 
can  carry  nothing  away  with  him  when  he  dieth  1    But  he  wants  rest,  and  partly  , 
he  puts  out  of  sight  the  sordidness  and  the  shortlivedness  of  this  particular  rest ; 
and  partly,  with  his  eyes  open,  he  says,  Twenty  years,  or  twenty  hours,  or  even  so 
base  a  rest,  are  better  than  none  I     And  so  he  goes  after  this.     Another,  far  higher 
and  nobler  in  his  aspiration,  cannot  live  without  affection.    That,  he  sees,  is  rest, 
could  he  but  have  it — could  he  but  know  indeed  what  it  is  I    And  then,  eluded  and 
bafiQed,  at  last  desperate,  in  this  pursuit  of  his  rest,  he  falls  into  evil  courses,  and 
would  fain  fill  himself  with  such  husks  of  love  as  swine  scarcely  eat  I    Best  in  the 
rest  of  God.     •'  My  rest,"  God  says  in  the  95th  Psalm,  and  speaks  of  man  entering 
it.    This  rest,  the  context  tells  us,  is  partly  present,  partly  future.     1.  There  is  a 
present  rest  in  the  rest  of  God.     That  can  only  be  found  in  an  entire,  absolute  trust 
in  the  atonement,  made  once  for  aU  upon  the  cross  of  Jesus.     Once  apprehend 
that,  and  then  there  will  enter  your  soul  a  peace  and  a  rest  indeed  passing  all 
understanding.     You  will  work  afterwards  as  never  before,  because  you  will  work 
from,  not  for  acceptance,  because  in  working  you  will  be  resting.     You  will  count 
all  your  work  as  needing,  yet  having,  forgiveness.    2.  From  this  soul's  rest  there  is 
bat  one  step  into  the  saint's  rest — into  tbat  calm,  that  reposeful  existence  which 
lies  beyond  death  for  such  as  shall  be  counted  worthy.    Not  entirely  separate,  as 
some  would  represent,  from  the  life  that  is  now,  and  from  the  stage  of  present 
action ;  for  if  we  rest  not  now,  in  God's  sense  of  resting,  from  sin,  from  self,  from 
vanity,  from  feverish  haste,  from  human  praise,  in  the  sense  of  our  littleness  and 
of  God's  might,  of  our  sinfulness  and  of  Christ's  atonement,  we  shall  never  rest 
then  where  God  is  all  in  all :  not  entirely  separate  from  earth — for,  after  all,  heaven 
is  but  the  Spirit's  presence,  is  but  the  consciousness  of  God  as  our  God,  is  but  the 
love  of  Christ  filling  and  constraining;  and  where  these  are  below,  there  is  heaven 
began — not  entirely  separate,  yet  severed  from  the  life  that  now  is,  even  for  the 


Ohap.it.]  ■      HEBREWS.  82S 

chief  of  saints,  by  two  definite  differences— by  the  removal  of  this  body  of  earth 
now  enchaining  the  soul,  and  by  the  experience  of  that  nearer,  more  direct  com- 
munion, of  which  it  is  written  that  there  they  shall  see  God.  (Dean  Vaughan.) 
Ceasing  from  self: — The  writer  makes  a  distinction  between  soul  and  spirit  in 
ver.  12.  Your  soul  is  you,  the  part  that  thinks,  wills,  reasons,  loves,  forms 
plans,  purposes,  the  age,  the  I  life.  Beyond  that,  deeper,  deeper  down,  is  the 
spirit,  the  part  that  holds  fellowship  with  God.  God  consciousness.  Good  people, 
converted  people,  regenerated  people,  live  too  much  from  the  soul  centre,  self-con- 
Bciousness,  and  in  proportion  to  our  doing  this  we  lose  God's  rest.  As  "  I  "  comes 
in,  rest  goes  out  and  restlessness  enters.     {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 

Ver.  11.  Let  us  labour  therefore  to  enter. — Believers  labouring  for  their  reward : — 
In  these  words  there  is,  first,  an  exhortation  ;  second,  a  motive  pressing  it.  In 
the  exhortation  we  may  consider — 1.  The  dependence  of  it  upon  what  goes  before, 
intimated  in  the  particle  "  therefore  ;  "  showing  that  it  is  an  inference  from  some 
preceding  doctrine.  In  the  latter  part  of  the  third  chapter,  he  shows  that  unbelief 
kept  the  disobedient  Israelites  out  of  God's  rest ;  both  out  of  Canaan,  and  heaven 
typified  thereby  (chap.  iv.).  (1)  He  lets  them  see  that  they  had  an  offer  of  that 
eternal  rest  as  well  as  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness  had  ;  because  both  had  the 
gospel,  only  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness  did  not  believe  it.  (2)  The  great  thing 
•which  we  are  to  have  in  our  eye,  that  rest,  namely,  of  which  David  speaks  (Psa. 
xcv.  11);  that  rest  which  remains  (ver.  9).  (3)  What  we  are  to  aim  at  in  reference 
to  that  rest;  "  to  enter  into  it,"  that  is,  to  be  partakers  of  it.  (4)  The  means  to  be 
used,  in  order  to  our  entering,  is  labouring.  Heaven  will  not  fall  down  into  our 
mouths  while  lying  on  the  bed  of  sloth.  (5)  Observe  the  order  of  the  labour  and 
the  rest.  In  the  way  of  God's  appointment,  and  of  godly  choice,  the  labour  ia 
first,  then  comes  the  rest.  It  is  quite  contrary  with  the  wicked.  They  begin  with 
a  day  of  rest,  and  end  with  eternal  toil ;  the  godly  begin  with  a  night  of  toil,  and 
end,  or  rather  continue  in  eternal  rest.  Oh,  that  we  may  follow  God's  order  I  (6) 
Observe  the  end  and  design  of  this  labour :  it  is  rest.  Men  work  in  their  young 
days,  and  lay  up  that  they  may  rest  in  old  age.  So  does  the  Christian.  The 
wicked  also  labour  that  they  may  rest ;  but  there  is  a  vast  difference  both  betwixt 
their  labour  and  rest.  Their  labour  is  in  sin,  and  their  rest  is  there ;  but  sought 
in  vain,  '*  for  in  the  fulness  of  their  sufficiency  they  are  in  straits."  But  the 
godly  have  their  labour  in  grace,  their  rest  in  glory,  and  between  these  there  is  an 
infallible  connection  ;  who,  then,  would  refuse  that  labour  which  ends  in  that  rest. 
(7)  The  persons  exhorted  to  labour ;  us,  which  includes  the  apostle  and  all  the 
Hebrews,  whom  he  exhorts  to-day  to  hear  God's  voice,  so  that  this  exhortation 
belongs  to  all  the  visible  Church,  godly  and  ungodly.  Some  have  entered  the 
avenue  leading  to  glory,  some  have  not;  both  are  called  to  labour  to  enter.  2.  The 
motive  pressing  the  exhortation.  It  is  taken  from  the  danger  of  not  labouring. 
Consider  here — (1)  That  of  which  people  are  in  danger,  and  which  will  come  upon 
them,  if  they  labour  not  to  enter,  falling ;  that  is,  falling  short  of  heaven,  and 
missing  salvation.  (2)  The  great  cause  of  ruin,  that  is,  unbelief  or  unpersuasible- 
ness.  Unbelief  is  the  great  cause  of  the  ruin  of  the  hearers  of  the  gospel,  and  that 
which  cuts  the  sinews  of  true  diligence,  so  as  people  under  the  power  of  it  cannot 
labour.  (3)  A  confirmation  of  the  certainty  of  their  ruin :  "  after  the  same  example 
of  unbelief."  (4)  The  universality  of  the  danger :  "  any  man."  I.  In  what  the 
Christian's  labodb  consists.  1.  The  mind  must  be  intent  on  the  business  of 
Ralvation.  This  imports — (1)  An  impression  of  the  weight  of  that  matter  upon  the 
spirit.  No  wise  man  will  labour  for  a  trifle.  (2)  An  habitual  minding  of  that 
business.  Beligion  is  the  believer's  trade — hence  his  conversation  is  in  heaven. 
(3)  The  heart's  being  set  upon  salvation  (2  Cor.  v.  9).  The  scattered  affections  of 
the  soul  are  gathered  together  from  off  the  variety  of  objects  which  the  world 
affords  us,  and  are  fixed  here  (Psa.  xxvii.  4).  2.  In  this  labour  there  is  painfulnesa 
and  diligence.  The  man  labours  for  salvation,  as  working  for  his  hfe  itself,  for 
indeed  he  sees  his  all  is  at  stake.  No  opposition  will  make  him  give  over.  There 
is  such  a  faintness  in  all  the  endeavours  of  many  for  heaven,  that  with  the  fearful 
who  have  no  heart,  they  are  excluded  (Rev.  xxi.  8).  3.  In  this  labour  there  is  haste. 
Our  work  must  be  done  speedily,  for  the  time  proposed  for  our  labouring  is  but 
"  to-day."  There  is  an  unbelieving  haste,  that  will  not  wait  God's  time ;  but  this 
true  haste  is  not  to  let  his  time  slip.  4.  There  is  this  labour  carefulness  and  holy 
anxiety  about  salvation,  in  the  managing  of  the  work  (Philip,  ii.  12).  Now  this 
imphes — (1)  The  turning  of  the  soul  from  anxious  cares  about  the  world,  to  a  holj 


826  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj.  in. 

solicitude  aboat  the  salvation  of  the  soul.  (2)  A  fear  of  falling  short  of  heaven. 
(3)  An  earnest  desire  to  be  set  and  kept  on  the  way  to  heaven.  (4)  A  fear  of  mis- 
management in  his  work.  The  labourer  for  heaven  should  work,  and  doth  best 
work  with  a  trembling  hand.  It  was  the  fundamental  maxim  of  the  heathen 
moralists,  Have  confidence  in  yourself.  But  I  may  say  the  Christian  maxim  is» 
Have  no  confidence  in  yourself.  He  that  trusteth  in  his  own  heart  is  a  fool. 
II.  For  what  we  aee  to  labour.  To  enter  into  the  heavenly  rest.  This  is  that 
which  we  are  to  have  in  our  eye,  and  to  which  our  endeavours  are  to  be  directed. 
We  are  not  called  to  work  for  nought ;  but  as  heaven  is  attainable,  we  are  to  labour 
that  we  may  enter  into  it.  1.  Show  some  Scriptural  notions  of  heaven,  to  which 
this  of  entering  doth  agree.  (1)  Heaven  is  held  out  under  the  notion  of  a  garden 
or  paradise.  (2)  A  house.  (3)  The  temple  typified  by  that  at  Jerusalem.  (4)  A 
city  glorious  for  manguificence  and  beauty  (Rev.  xxi.).  (5)  A  country ;  even  a 
better  country  than  the  best  here  below  (Heb.  xi.  16).  (6)  A  kingdom  (Matt.  xxv. 
84) ;  a  kingdom  that  cannot  be  moved  (Heb.  xi.  28).  2.  Show  what  it  is  to  enter 
into  the  heavenly  rest.  (1)  There  is  an  entering  into  heaven  by  the  covenant. 
The  covenant  of  grace  is  the  outer  court  of  heaven.  Of  this  everlasting  covenant^ 
ordered  in  all  things  and  sure,  David  says,  "  this  is  all  my  salvation  and  all  my 
desire."  Surely,  then,  heaven  was  in  it.  (2)  There  is  an  entering  by  faith, 
(a)  In  BO  far  as  faith  lays  hold  upon  Christ,  and  unites  us  to  Him  (John  vi.  54). 
{b)  In  so  far  as  faith  lays  hold  on  the  promise  in  which  heaven  is  wrapped  up. 
(3)  There  is  an  entering  by  hope  (Eom.  viii.  24).  Faith  goes  out  as  a  conqueror, 
and  hope  divides  the  spoil.  (4)  There  is  an  entering  by  obedience.  "  I  know," 
said  Jesus,  "  that  His  commandment  is  life  everlasting."  There  is  a  personal  way 
to  heaven,  that  is,  Christ.  "  I  am,"  saith  He,  "  the  Way."  Also  a  real  way  to 
heaven,  that  is,  the  commands  of  God,  called  everlasting  life,  because  they  certainly 
land  the  soul  in  heaven,  and  there  is  an  infallible  connection  betwixt  true  obedience 
and  glory.  (5)  There  is  an  entering  into  heaven  by  actual  possession,  which  in 
respect  of  our  souls  is  at  death,  and  in  respect  of  our  bodies  will  be  at  the  resurrec- 
tion, which  is  the  full  and  final  entry,  to  which  all  the  rest  are  subservient.  This 
entrance  is  that  solemn  entering  into  the  king's  palace  (Psa.  xlv.  15),  which  shall 
also  be  most  joyful.  3.  Mention  acme  steps  in  the  way  by  which  we  must  labour 
to  enter.  (1)  We  must  labour  to  get  grace ;  this  is  the  first  step.  "  Let  us  have 
grace,"  says  Paul,  "  whereby  we  may  serve  God  acceptably,  with  reverence  and 
godly  fear."  (2)  We  must  labour  to  exercise  grace  in  the  gracious  performance  of 
duties.  (3)  Growing  in  grace.  (4)  Assurance  of  grace  and  glory.  (5)  Perseverance 
in  grace  to  the  end.  4.  Consider  this  labouring  to  enter,  as  it  has  a  respect  to  our 
preparation  for  that  eternal  rest  in  heaven.  The  man  that  is  to  go  abroad  is  a  busy 
man,  putting  all  things  in  order  for  his  voyage ;  and  he  that  is  making  for  his 
night's  rest  in  bed,  is  not  idle ;  and  he  that  is  to  enter  into  the  possession  of  eternal 
rest,  has  much  work  on  his  hand  preparatory  thereto.  And  thus  to  labour  to  enter 
into  the  heavenly  rest  implies — (1)  The  solid  faith  of  eternal  life,  even  of  this 
truth,  that  "  there  remaineth  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God."  (2)  A  sincere  desire  to 
be  partaker  of  that  rest,  after  this  troublesome  life  is  over.  (3)  Resolute  endeavours 
to  enter  there,  by  God's  own  way,  which  has  already  been  described.  (4)  Frequent 
thoughts  of  that  eternal  rest.  Ill,  How  we  should  labour.  1.  We  should  labour 
willingly  and  cheerfully.  2.  Diligently.  3.  With  all  your  might.  4,  Resolutely. 
5.  Constantly.  6.  With  fear  and  trembling.  7.  Quickly.  8.  Refusing  no  piece  of 
work  God  puts  into  your  hands.  9.  Evangelically.  IV,  That  we  must  labdub 
IN  ORDER  TO  OUR  ENTERING  INTO  THAT  REST.  1.  Consider  the  several  notions 
under  which  the  Christian's  hfe  and  the  way  to  heaven  is  held  forth,  all  of  them 
implying  true  pains  and  labours.  It  is  a  working,  •'  Labour  not  for  the  meat  that 
perisheth  "  (Greek,  ••  work  "),  (John  vi.  27).  Here  he  that  works  not  shall  not 
eat.  Yea,  it  is  a  working  out  of  our  own  salvation ;  a  bringing  the  work  to  perfec- 
tion, otherwise  what  is  done  will  be  lost  (2  John  8).  It  is  compared  to  the  work  ol 
the  husbandman,  which  you  know  is  not  easy,  ploughing,  sowing,  reaping  (Hon.  x. 
12),  especially  considering  that  they  are  both  the  labourers,  and  the  ground  that  is 
laboured.  The  Christian  is  a  spiritual  soldier,  he  must  fight  (2  Tim.  iv.  7) ;  yea, 
and  overcome  (Rev.  iii,  21).  Heaven  has  a  strait  gate  by  which  to  enter  in,  and 
therefore  cannot  be  entered  with  ease.  Men  must  press  into  it  (Luke  xvi,  16) ;  and 
take  it  by  storm;  yea,  put  forth  their  utmost  strength  as  they  that  are  agonising. 
The  apostle  says  (2  Cor.  v.  9),  "we  labour";  the  word  signifies  to  labour  most 
earnestly,  as  an  ambitions  man  for  honour;  and  what  will  not  such  do,  to  gain 
their  point?     2.   Consider  how  the  way  to  heaven  was  typified  under  the   Old 


caif .  IT.]  HEBREWS.  827 

Testament.     Canaan  was  a  type  of  heaven,  and  to  what  labour  were  the  Israelitea 
put  before  thej  could  reach  that  land,  though  it  was  promised  to  them.     Another 
eminent  type  of  it,  was  the  ascent  into  the  temple,  which  was  seated  upon  a  hill, 
even  Mount  Moriah  (1  Kings  x.  6).    Many  a  weai-y  step  had  some  of  them  ere  they 
got  to  Jerusalem  (Psa.  Ixxxiv.  6, 7) ;  and  when  they  came  there,  they  had  to  ascend 
unto  the  hill  of  God  (Psa.  xxiv.  3),  the  mount  of  the  Lord's  house,  a  type  of  heaven. 
3.  Consider  how  the  Scripture  supposeth  this  labour  (Eom.  vii.  24 ;  Gal.  vi.  5).     4. 
Consider  how  the  Scripture  represents  the  sluggard  and  his  temper  to  us,  as  most 
hateful  to  God,  and  as  one  that  is  lost  by  his  sloth  (Prov.  xiii.  4,  xx.  4,    and  xxi. 
25).     The  sluggard  is  the  unprofitable  servant  (Matt.   26-34).     6.  Whom   God 
intends  for  heaven,  in  them  He  puts  an  active  principle  of  grace.     It  is  as  natural 
for  grace  to  bring  forth  good  works,  as  for  a  good  fruit  tree  to  bring  forth  good  fruit. 
6.  To  enter  heaven  without  labour  is  a  contradiction ;  and  so  impossible.     Heaven 
is  a  reward,  and  necessarily  pre-supposeth  working.    Moreover,  it  is  a  rest  which  is 
a  relative  term,  and  has  necessarily  labour  pre-supposed  to  it.     V.  Why  we  must 
LABOUR  IN  THIS  SPIRITUAL  woBK,  in  Order  to  our  entering  heaven.    Negatively ;  not 
because  by  works  we  must  merit  heaven,  for  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.    Our  working  is  the  way  to  the  kingdom  ;  not  the  cause  of 
our  reiguing ;  Christ's  working  was  that.     But  we  must  labour,  because — 1.  It  is 
the  command  of  our  great  Lord  and  Master,  whose  command  we  are  not  to  dispute, 
but  to  obey.    2.  The  glory  of  God  requires  it.     3.  Because  there  is  an  infaUible 
connection  betwixt  labouring  and  the  rest.  Labouring  is  the  only  way  we  can  attain 
it.     There  is  no  reaching  the  treasure  of  glory  without  digging  for  it.    4.  Becausa 
otherwise  we  pour  contempt  on  the  heavenly  rest.    It  was  the  sin  of  the  Israelites 
(Psa.  cvi.  24,  25).    5.  Because  it  is  difficult  work  you  have  to  do,  aud  therefore  we 
should  set  ourselves  to  labouring,  for  it  is  heart  work.     Motives :  1.  Consider  that 
in  other  things  you  do  not  refuse  to  labour.    You  are  not  such  as  live  idle  and  at 
ease.  Now  God  is  putting  a  piece  of  work  in  your  hands ;  will  you  labour  for  others, 
but  not  for  Him  ?    2.  Your  profession  and  your  vows  call  upon  you  to  labour  to 
^■nter.     8.  Your  time  is  short ;  ere  long  all  of  us  shall  be  in  an  unalterable  state. 
4.  Your  time  is  uncertain,  as  well  as  short.    5.  The  devil  is  busy  to  keep  you  out 
of   that  rest.       6.  You  have  weighty  calls  to  this  work  and  labour.      Lessons : 
1.  You  have  the  call  of  the  Word  and  ordinances.   Wherefore  has  the  Lord  sent  you 
His  gospel,  but  for  this  end.     2.  You  have  the  call  of  providence.    3.  The  call  of 
couscieuce.     4.  If  you  labour  not,  you  will  never  see  heaven.     Now  to  make  this 
labour  easy  to  you,  I  would  recommend — 1.  To  keep  the  encouragements  to  the 
work  in  your  eye;  particularly  such  as  these,  the  example  of  those  that  have  gone 
before  you,  and  have  got  safe  to  the  journey's  end.    These  have  made  it  appear  the 
work  is  possible,  and  the  reward  certain.     2.  Live  by  faith.    3.  Labour  to  get  and 
keep  up  love  to  Christ.    4.  Look  upon  that  labouring  as  your  interest  as  well  as 
your  duty.    5.  Be  constant  in  that  labour.     (T.  Boston,  D.D.)      Labour  to  enter 
into  eternal  rest : — How  calm  and  beautiful  to  the  servant  of  God  is  the  close  of  a 
Sabbath  day  1    It  has,  if  he  has  used  it  aright,  helped  to  allay  all  his  cares  and 
soothe  all  his  woes  ;  to  brighten  earth  by  the  reflection  of  heaven.    How  endearing 
and  animating,  then,  the  blessed  link,  that  knits  the  passing  Sabbath  of  earth  with 
the  interminable  Sabbath  of  heaven  1 — that  makes  the  best  and  brightest  day  in 
the  seven,  to  be  to  the  child  of  God  at  once  the  pledge  and  the  antepast  of  the  ever- 
lasting "  rest  that  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God  I "     I.  "  Let  us  labour  to  enter 
into  that  rest " ;  fob  laboub  is  needful,  if  we  would  enter.     Most  true  it  is, 
that  eternal  life  is  from  first  to  last  '*  the  gift  of  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord."    Death  we  win — it  is  the  wages  of  our  service ;  life  we  receive — it  is  the  free 
boon  of  boundless  grace.     Purchased,  but  by  the  blood  of  God ;  given  to  us  "  with- 
out money  and  without  price."    But  it  is  not  less  true,  that  though  it  be  the  gift  of 
God,  it  is  given  to  as  in  order  to,  and  in  connection  with,  toil,  struggle,  self-denial, 
self-subjugation,  a  warfare  unremitting,  a  perpetual  maintenance  of  "  the  good 
fight  of  faith,  against  the  flesh,  the  world,  and  the  devil."     We  see,  in  the  history 
of  God's  saints  in  every  age,  that  to  enter  the  glorious  "rest"  was  a  task  of 
stupendous  difficulty — was  a  pursuit  for  unremitting  earnestness  and  energy — and 
called  for  and  cost  them  all  their  devoted  powers.     Says  not  the  Scripture  every- 
where the  same  ?    "  Strive,"  said  the  Saviour — agonise — "  to  enter  in  at  the  strait 
gate;  for  many,  I  say  unto  you,  will  seek  to  enter  in,  and  shall  not  be  able." 
II.  We  must  "  labour  to  enter  into  that  rest,"  because  if  we  fail  op  that  best, 
WE  fail  of  all  rest  for  ever.     III.  "  Let  us  labour  to  enter  into  that  rest " ;  for  it 
IS  WORTH  ouB  utmost  LABOUB.    It  was  beautifully  said  hj  a  heathen  wise  man, 


828  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  •  [chap.  it. 


that  the  noblest  thing  on  earth  is  a  noble  object  nobly  pursued.    That  man,  in  hia 
sentiment,  was  "not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God."     Ohl  had  he  possessed  tbe 
lamp  that  lights  us,  to  reveal  to  him  the  glories  prepared  for  them  that  love  God, 
he  would  have  seen  at  once,  that  the  only  noble  object  for  immortal,  responsible, 
rational  man — the  only  noble  object  to  be  nobly  pursued,  in  faith,  in  love,  in  self- 
denial,  in  holiness,  in  obedience,  in  patience,  in  indomitable  resolution — is  the 
kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son,    IV.  "  Let  us  labour,  therefore,  to  enter  into  that 
rest " ;  for  even  heee  how  much  of  this  best  may  be  ours,  while  we  toil  and  travel 
AND  coNTLiCT  BELOW  1     The  apostlo  bcautifully  says  in  the  preceding  context,  "  We 
which  have  believed  do  enter  into  rest."  There  are  first-fruits  brought  from  heaven 
to  the  wilderness,  as  there  were  first-fruits  brought  from  Canaan  to  the  desert.     V. 
•'  Let  us,  therefore,  labour  to  enter  into  that  rest " ;  for  our  labour  is  "  not  in  vain 
IN  the  Lord."    In  this  race  none  fails  through  inveterate  ignorance,  if  that 
ignorance  be  not  of  choice  and  of  obstinacy ;  none  comes  short  through  want  of 
talent  or  opportunity  or  advantage,  if  he  makes  the  most  of  such  as  God  gives 
him ;  none  fails  because  of  extremity  of  poverty  or  misery  or  desolation  of  earthly 
circumstances ;  none  comes  short  because  there  was  not  mercy  in  God,  there  was  not 
efficacy  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  there  was  not  freeness  and  fulness  in  the  Spirit  of 
grace,  there  was  not  room  in  heaven,  there  was  not  amplitude  in  the  gospel  of 
peace.    Every  man  that  fails  and  comes  short,  "  cannot  enter  in   because  of 
unbelief "  ;    because    he    "  would    not    come    to    Christ    that    he    might    have 
Hfe,"  or,  coming  to  Christ,  he  would  not   have   life  in  the  way  of   "working 
out    his    own    salvation    with    fear    and    trembling,    because    it  was  God  that 
worked   in   him  to  will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure."      {H.  Stowell,    M.A.) 
The  need  of  labour  before  rest : — We  may  properly  regard  this  as  an  intimation  that 
care  and  trouble  are  absolutely  necessary  on  our  part,  in  order  to  the  procurement 
and  enjoyment  of  those  things  "  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  Him." 
We  should  never  fail  to  consider  this  hfe  as  a  state  of  trial.  In  order  to  the  attainment 
of  human  perfection,  we  perceive  much  labour  to  be  necessary ;  there  is  no  science, 
there  is  scarcely  any  art  or  employment  in  our  several  vocations  in  which  we  can 
arrive  at  eminence  without  industry  and  toil :  exceptions  there  doubtless  are,  but 
this  is  the  rule.      We  may  further  observe,  that  the  greatest  delight  which  we  ex- 
perience upon  earth  is  frequently  obtained  by  previous  exertion  or  privation.     As 
it  is  with  the  body,  and  with  the  attainment  of  natural  blessings,  so  we  have  much 
greater  reason  to  expect  that  it  should  be  with  the  soul,  with  the  attainment  of 
those  pure  and  spiritual  blessings  to  which  the  natural  man  is  averse.     We  could 
not  expect  them  to  be  enjoyed  without  a  previous  discipline,  without  an  anxious 
seeking,  without  a  determined  conflict.    Not  that  such  discipline  and  duty,  on  our 
part,  are  to  be  regarded  as  effectual  in  themselves ;  stiU  less  as  entitling  us  to  the 
benefits  of  the  gospel  on  the  ground  of  desert:  we  can  have  no  such  title  but 
through  the  merits  and  for  the  sake  of  our  blessed  Bedeemer.     Whatever  the  labour 
might  be — however  severe,  however  unassisted  and  unrelieved — every  wise  man, 
every  man  who  exercised  a  common  judgment  and  prudence,  would  thankfully 
submit  to  it  for  a  few  years  as  the  appointed  means  of  a  happy  eternity;  just  upon 
the  same  principle  as  he  would  gladly  submit  to  the  trouble  or  toil   of  a  day 
for  the  sake  of  procuring  riches  and  comfort  and  honour  during  the  remainder  of 
his  existence  upon  earth.     But  the  work  of  the  Christian,  in  the  preparation  of  hia 
soul  for  rest,  is  not  a  labour  unassisted  and  unrelieved ;  not  a  gloomy  period  vt 
service  without  the  hght  of  the  sun.   There  is  a  heaven-born  spirit,  an  all-sufficient 
grace,  a  holy  energy  and  animation  imparted,  affording  much  more  than  a  recom- 
pense even  at  present,  and  making  the  believer  thankful  that  he  has  struggled  and 
endured.     Nevertheless,  the  mainstay  of  the  children  of  God  in  their  infirmities, 
the  refreshment  of  their  spirit  in  the  vale  below,  is  the  promise  of  a  heavenly  rest 
at  the  end  of  their  short  pilgrimage,  towards  which  they  have  the  comfort  of  making 
a  daily  advancement ;  the  promise  of  a  final  and  blissful  consummation.    An  aged 
Christian,  now  near  this  end,  commonly  says,  at  every  striking  of  the  clock  upon 
his  ear,  thank  God  I  am  an  hour  nearer  to  my  home  and  my  rest.     Such  thankful- 
ness may  every  one  of  us  be  able  heartily  to  express  !     {J.  Slade,  M.A.)        Labour 
and  study  necessary  for  reaching  heaven  : — We  must  not  think  to  go  to  heaven  with- 
out study,  bare  wishing  will  not  serve  the  turn.    It  is  not  enough  to  say  with 
Balaam,  "  Oh,  that  my  soul  might  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  my  last  end 
be  like  his  "  (Numb,  xxiii.  10).   It  is  not  sufficient  to  say,  ob,  that  I  were  in  ht-aven, 
but  we  must  study  to  go  to  heaven.     Now  in  all  studying  these  things  must  concur. 
1.  There  must  be  the  party  that  studieth,  and  that  is  every  Christian — high  ajid 


«HAP.  IT.]  HEBREWS.  821 

low,  rich  and  poor,  of  what  entate  or  condition  soever.  The  king  and  the  subject, 
the  ministers  and  their  people,  the  master  and  the  servant,  the  father  and  the  child, 
the  husband  and  the  wife,  the  merchant  and  the  clothier,  the  gentleman  and  the 
yeoman,  the  divines,  lawyers,  phjsicians,  husbandmen,  &c.,  all  must  study  to  enter 
into  this  rest.  2.  There  must  be  a  closet,  or  a  place  to  study  in,  that  is,  the 
chamber  of  our  own  hearts.  3.  There  must  be  a  book  to  study  on.  Every  student 
must  have  his  books.  There  can  be  no  workman  without  his  tools,  nor  a  scholar 
without  a  library.  Now  the  Lord  will  not  trouble  us  with  many  books.  As  Christ 
said,  one  thing  is  necessary.  So  one  book  is  necessary,  the  book  of  books — 
the  Holy  Scriptures.  Let  us  study  that  thoroughly,  and  learn  the  way  to  heaven. 
4.  There  must  be  a  light  to  study  by.  No  man  can  study  in  the  dark ;  either  he 
must  have  daylight  or  candlelight.  The  light  whereby  we  study  is  the  light  of  God's 
Spirit,  who  must  enlighten  our  eyes  that  we  may  see  the  wonders  of  God's  laws  and 
direct  us  to  this  heavenly  rest.  5.  There  must  be  diligence  in  study.  Every  student 
must  be  diligent.  Learning  is  not  gotten  without  pains.  We  must  not  study  by  fits, 
a  start  and  away,  but  we  must  lie  at  it,  if  by  any  means  we  may  come  to  this  rest. 
6.  There  must  be  a  time  to  study  in.  Now  this  time  is  the  terui  of  our  life.  7.  And 
it  is  worth  our  study.  {W.Jones,  D.D.)  Heaven  a  place  of  rest : — Heaven  is  a 
place,  or  state,  of  rest.  What  kind  of  rest  ?  The  rest  of  inactivity,  of  absence  of 
occupation,  of  listlessness,  dreams,  and  luxurious  vacuity  ?  Certainly  not.  This  is 
evidently  not  the  kind  of  happiness  that  dignifies,  improves,  satisfies,  or  suits  mau, 
even  here ;  far  less  therefore  can  it  harmonise  with  his  exalted  nature  hereafter, 
which  would  only  be  cramped,  imprisoned  and  dishonoured  by  such  uncongenial  in- 
activity. 1.  A  REST  FROM  DISTRACTING  DOUBT.  Here  there  is  much  sophism  which 
is  hardly  to  be  distinguished  from  truth  ;  in  heaven  all  is  truth.  Here  there  is  a 
great  battle  between  truth  and  error ;  in  heaven  the  victory  is  decided,  and  peace  is 
eternal.  Here  we  know  in  part,  and  therefore  we  can  prophesy  but  in  part ;  there 
we  shall  know  even  as  we  are  known.  There  we  shall  rest;  rest  from  the  tides  and 
fluctuations  of  uncertainty,  and  find  a  calm  shore  and  a  secure  haven.  Nothing 
there  can  excite  in  us  the  least  suspicion  of  the  care,  the  justice,  or  the  goodness  of 
our  Maker,  for  these  w^U  be  the  visible  support  of  our  immortal  life.  II.  A  rest  from 
ANXIOUS  CARES.  In  heaveu  these  instruments  of  our  earthly  discipline  will  be 
laid  aside.    There  will  be  no  thorns  in  the  pillow  of  that  rest.     III.  A  place,  or 

STATE,  of   best    FROM     PAIN.        IV.    A    REST    FRuM    CONTENTION    AND   STRIFE.      DisCOrd, 

divisions,  and  fightings  shall  cease,  and  the  confused  noise  of  the  warrior  shall  no 
more  be  heard  there.  Such  things  must  not  come  where  the  Priuce  of  Peace  sits 
on  the  right  hand  of  His  Father.  All  rivalry  and  hate  will  be  extinguished, 
"  There  no  friend  goes  out,  nor  enemy  comes  in."  V.  A  place,  or  state  of  best 
FROM  BIN.  (F.  W.  p.  Greenwood,  D.D.)  Labouring  for  rest : — That  is  a  singular 
paradox  and  bringing  together  of  opposing  ideas,  is  it  not  ?  Let  us  labour  to  enter 
into  rest.  The  paradox  is  not  so  strong  in  the  Greek  as  here  ;  but  it  still  is  there. 
For  the  word  translated  "  labour  "  carries  with  it  the  two  ideas  of  earnestness  and 
of  diligence.  And  this  is  the  condition  on  which  alone  we  can  secure  the  ent:ance, 
either  into  the  full  heaveu  above,  or  into  the  incipient  heaven  here.  But  note, 
we  distinctly  understand  what  sort  of  toil  it  is  that  is  required  to  secure  it,  that 
settles  the  nature  of  the  diligence.  The  main  effort  of  every  Christian  life,  in  view 
of  the  possibilities  of  repose  that  are  open  to  it  here  and  now,  and  yonder  in  their 
perfection,  ought  to  be  directed  to  this  one  point  of  (deepening  and  strengthening  their 
faith  and  its  consequent  obe^Iience.  You  can  cultivate  your  faith,  it  is  within  your 
own  power.  You  can  make  it  strong  or  weak,  operative  through  your  life,  or  only 
partially,  by  fits  and  starts.  And  what  is  required  is  that  Christian  people  should 
make  a  business  of  their  godliness,  and  give  themselves  to  it  as  carefully,  smA  as 
consciously,  and  as  constantly,  as  they  give  themselves  to  their  daily  pursuits.  The 
men  that  are  diligent  in  the  Christian  life,  that  exercise  that  commonplace,  prosaic, 
pedestrian,  homely  virtue  of  earnest  effort,  are  sure  to  succeed  ;  and  there  is  no  other 
■way  to  succeed.  And  how  are  we  to  cultivate  our  faith  ?  By  contemplating  the 
great  object  which  kindles  it.  By  averting  our  eyes  from  the  distracting  competitors 
for  our  interest  and  attention,  in  so  far  as  these  might  enfeeble  our  confidence.  Do 
you  do  that?  Diligence  ;  that  is  the  secret — a  diligence  which  focusses  our  powers, 
and  binds  onr  vagrant  wills  into  one  strong,  sohd  mass,  and  delivers  us  from  languor 
and  indolence,  and  stirs  us  up  to  seek  the  increase  of  faith,  as  well  as  of  hope  anj 
charity.  Then,  too,  obedience  is  to  be  cultivated.  How  do  you  cultivate  obedience? 
By  obeying — by  contemplating  the  great  motives  that  should  sway  and  melt,  and 
sweetly  subdue  the  will,  which  are  aJl  shrined  in  that  one  saying,  '•  Ye  are  not  your 


330  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaf.  it, 

awn  ;  ye  are  bought  with  a  price,"  and  by  rigidly  confining  our  desire3  and  wishes 
within  the  limits  of  God's  appointment,  and  religiously  referring  all  things  to  Hia 
aupreme  will.  If  thus  we  do,  we  shall  enter  into  rest.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Dili- 
gence  explained: — Diligence  comprises  both  the  impulse  of  the  bowstring  that 
despatches  the  arrow,  and  the  feather  that  keeps  it  true  to  its  aim.  Diligio,  the 
Latin  word  from  which  diligence  is  derived,  means  I  choose,  select,  or  love.  To  be 
diligent,  therefore,  is  to  resemble  an  eager  hunter,  who  selects  the  fattest  of  the 
herd,  and,  leaving  the  rest,  pursues  and  captures  that  one.  Napoleon  the  First  won 
his  victories  chiefly  by  rapid  concentration  of  his  forces  on  one  point  of  theenemy'3 
line.  A  burning-glass  is  powerful  because  it  focalises  a  mass  of  sunbeams  on  one 
point.  So  in  all  departments  of  activity,  to  have  one  thing  to  do,  and  then  to  do  it, 
is  the  secret  of  success.  The  need  for  diligence : — God  does  not  give  thee  the 
flower  and  the  fruit  of  salvation,  but  the  seed,  the  sunshine,  and  the  rain.  He  doea 
not  give  houses,  nor  yet  beams  and  squared  stones,  but  trees,  and  rocks,  and  lime- 
stone, and  says :  Now  build  thyself  a  house.  Eegard  not  God's  work  within  thee 
as  an  anchor  to  hold  thy  bark  firmly  to  the  shore,  but  as  a  sail  which  shall  carry  it 
to  its  post.  (J.  P.  Lange.)  Diligence: — Its  root  meaning  is  to  love,  and  hence  it 
signifies  attachment  to  work.  Thehabitsof  literary  men  illustrate  this.  LordMacaulay 
loved  order,  accuracy,  and  precision.  He  corrected  his  MS.  remorselessly.  So  with 
his  proof-sheets.  "  He  could  not  rest  till  the  lines  were  level  to  a  hair's  breadth, 
and  the  punctuation  correct  to  a  comma ;  until  every  paragraph  concluded  with  a 
telling  sentence,  and  every  sentence  flowed  like  running  water."  (Thwing's  Preacher'n 
Cabinet.)  Christianity  requires  doing  as  well  as  believing  : — The  other  day  I  met 
a  friend  noted  for  a  fretful  and  anxious  disposition ;  and  seeing  that  his  face  waa 
cheerful  and  his  step  elastic,  I  said,  "  Well,  old  friend,  you  look  as  if  things  were 
going  pleasantly."    He  replied,  "Oh  yes;  my  relatives  have  bought  an  annuity 

for  me  in  the Assurance  office,  and  until  I  die  I  shall  have  £200  a  year  to  live 

on.  You  see,  my  future  is  provided  for,  and  I  have  no  need  to  worry  myself  about 
it  as  I  used  to  do  1 "  Like  that  man,  some  people  imagine  that  when  they  believe 
in  Jesus,  there  is  a  something  done  which  makes  them  safe  for  ever,  without  any 
further  trouble  to  themselves.  A  man  who  buys  a  railway  ticket,  gets  into  the  train, 
and  feels  he  has  nothing  more  to  do  except  sit  there  comfortably  until  the  train 
arrives  at  the  journey's  end.  But  the  Christian  life  is  much  more  difficult.  It  ia 
true  that  through  Jesus  Christ  is  preached  unto  men  the  forgiveness  of  all  their 
sins ;  but  it  is  an  error  to  preach  that  Christians  have  nothing  to  do  except  believe, 
Jesus  demands  a  faith  in  Him  which  shall  constrain  us  to  do.  {W.  Birch.)  Labour 
till  the  last : — Calvin,  even  in  his  dying  illness,  would  not  refrain  from  his  labours  ; 
but  when  his  friends  endeavoured  to  persuade  him  to  moderate  his  exertions,  he 
replied,  "  What  I  shall  my  Lord  come  and  find  me  idle  f  "  Labour  necessary  for 
our  salvation  : — Never  think  that  God  is  going  to  make  a  Christian  out  of  you  with- 
out effort  of  your  own.  When  the  lion  crouches  down  before  you,  and  his  eyes  glare 
upon  you,  and  he  is  about  to  spring,  you  need  not  expect  Providence  to  fire  your 
gun  for  you ;  you  must  do  it  yourself  or  die.  'Tis  kill  or  be  killed  with  you  then. 
God  has  already  done  His  part  in  the  work  of  your  salvation.  If  you  don't  choose 
to  do  your  part,  you  will  perish.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Fall  after  the  same  example 
of  unbelief. — The  use  of  examples  of  punishment : — This  implies — 1.  There  is  danger 
and  an  evil  to  be  feared.  2.  The  evil  is  falling.  3.  All  and  every  one  is  in  this  danger — 
* '  Lest  any  fall."  4.  Lest  any  should  slight  the  danger,  he  instanceth  in  the  Israelites, 
whu  fell  by  unbelief.  To  fall  may  be  a  sin  or  a  punishment.  If  a  sin,  it  is  apostasy. 
If  a  punishment,  it  is  exclusion  out  of  God's  rest,  with  all  the  miseries  that  accom- 
pany it.  So  it  seems  here  to  be  taken.  By  this,  as  by  many  other  places,  we  easily 
understand  how  we  must  conceive  of  examples,  and  what  use  we  must  make  o£ 
them.  If  they  be  examples  of  punishments,  we  must  account  them  as  executions 
of  God's  laws,  and  especially  of  His  comminations.  The  use  that  we  must  make  of 
them  is,  to  avoid  those  sins  for  which  they  were  inflicted,  and  to  be  the  more  careful 
in  this  particular  because  by  them  we  may  easily  know  that  God's  laws  are  not  only 
words  and  His  threats  only  wind.  It  is  not  with  God  as  it  is  often  with  men,  who  will 
threaten  more  than  they  will  or  can  do.  Thence  the  saying,  "  Threatened  men  live 
long."  But  here  it  ia  otherwise.  God's  word  is  His  deed,  and  His  punishraenta 
threatened  against  apostates  aro  unavoidable.  They  are  not  made  unadvisedly,  and 
out  of  rash  passion,  but  according  to  the  eternal  rules  of  wisdom  and  justice.  And 
let  every  one  know  that  that  God  that  spareth  neither  men,  nor  angels,  nor  His  own 
chosen  and  beloved  people,  will  not  spare  us.  Therefore,  as  we  desire  to  osc  ^pe  this 
fearful  punishment,  lot  us  labour  to  enter  into  that  rest  which  God  hath  promised. 


CHAP.  ly.]  HEBREWS.  831 

iO.  Lawson.)  Disobedience  and  unbelief: — Disobedience  is  the  root  of  unbe'ief. 
Unbelief  is  tne  mother  of  further  disobedience.  Faith  is  submission,  voluntary,  withiu 
a  man's  own  power.  If  it  be  not  exercised  the  true  cause  lies  deeper  than  all  intel- 
lectual ones,  lies  in  the  moral  aversion  of  his  will  and  in  the  pride  of  independence 
which  says,  "  Who  is  the  Lord  over  us  ?  "  Why  should  we  have  to  depend  upon 
Jesus  Christ  f  And  as  faith  is  obedience  and  submission,  so  faith  breeds  obedience, 
and  unbelief  leads  on  to  higher-handed  rebellion.  The  two  interlock  each  other, 
foul  mother  and  fouler  child ;  and  with  dreadful  reciprocity  of  influence  the  less  a 
man  trusts  the  more  he  disobeys ;  the  more  he  disobeys  the  less  he  trusts.  (A. 
Maclaren,  D.D.)  Unbelief  incompatible  with  salvation: — People  say  that  it  ia 

arbitrary  to  connect  salvation  with  faith,  and  talk  to  us  about  the  "injustice  "  of 
men  being  saved  and  damned  because  of  their  creeds.  We  are  not  saved  foi 
our  faith,  nor  condemned  for  our  unbelief,  but  we  are  saved  in  our  faith,  and 
condemned  in  our  unbelief.     Suppose  a  man  did  not  believe  that  prussic  acid  was  a 

Eoison,  and  took  a  spoonful  of  it  and  died.  You  might  say  that  Lis  opinion  killed 
im,  but  that  would  only  be  a  shorthand  way  of  saying  that  his  opinion  led  him  to 
take  the  thing  that  did  kill  him.  Suppose  a  man  beheves  that  a  medicine  will  cure 
him,  and  takes  it,  and  gets  well.  Is  it  the  drug  or  his  opinion  thai,  cures  him  ?  If  a 
certain  mental  state  tends  to  produce  certain  emotions,  you  cannot  have  the  emotions 
if  you  will  not  have  the  state.  Suppose  you  do  not  rely  on  the  promised  friendship 
and  help  of  some  one,  you  cannot  have  the  joy  of  confidence  or  the  gifts  that  you  do 
not  believe  in  and  do  not  care  for.  And  so  faith  is  no  arbitrary  appointment,  but 
the  necessary  condition,  the  only  condition  possible,  in  the  nature  of  things,  by 
which  a  man  can  enter  into  the  rest  of  God.  If  we  will  not  let  Christ  heal  our 
wounds,  they  must  keep  on  bleeding  ;  if  we  will  not  let  Him  soothe  our  conscience, 
it  must  keep  on  pricking;  if  we  will  not  have  Him  to  bring  us  nigh,  we  must  con- 
tinue far  off ;  if  we  will  not  open  the  door  of  our  hearts  to  let  him  in,  He  must  stop 
without.  Faith  is  the  condition  of  entrance ;  unbelief  bars  the  door  of  heaven 
against  us,  because  it  bars  the  door  of  our  hearts  against  Him  who  is  in  heaven. 
(Ibid.) 

Vers.  12,  13.  The  Word  of  God  is  quick  and  powerful. — The  Word  a  sword  : — It 
may  be  most  accurate  to  interpret  this  passage  as  relating  both  to  the  Word  of  God 
incarnate,  and  the  Word  of  God  inspired.  Christ  and  His  Word  must  go  together. 
What  is  true  of  the  Cbrist  is  here  predicated  both  of  Him  and  of  His  Word.  I. 
First  let  me  speak  concerning  the  qualities  of  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  •'  quick 
and  powerful,  and  sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword."  1.  The  Word  of  God  is 
said  to  be  "  quick."  It  is  a  hving  Book.  Take  up  any  other  book  except  the 
Bible,  and  there  may  be  a  measure  of  power  in  it,  butttiere  is  not  that  indescrii  able 
vitality  in  it  which  breatlies,  and  speaks,  and  pleads,  and  conquers  in  the  case  of 
this  sacred  volume.  It  is  a  living  and  incorruptible  seed.  It  moves,  it  stirs  itself, 
it  lives,  it  communes  with  living  men  as  a  hving  Word.  That  human  system  which 
was  once  vigorous  may  grow  old,  and  lose  aU  vitality ;  but  the  vVord  of  God  is 
always  fresh,  and  new,  and  full  of  force.  Here,  in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  wa 
have  at  once  the  oldest  and  the  newest  of  books.  2.  The  Word  is  said  to  be  "  power- 
ful," or  "  active."  The  Word  of  God  is  powerful  for  all  sacred  ends.  How  powerful 
it  is  to  convince  men  of  sinl  How  powerful  it  is  for  conversion  1  3.  Next,  the 
apostle  tells  us  that  this  Word  is  cutting.  A  sword  with  two  edges  has  no  blunt 
Bide :  it  cuts  both  this  way  and  that.  The  revelation  of  God  given  us  in  Holy 
Scripture  is  edge  all  over.  It  is  alive  in  every  part,  and  in  every  part  keen  to  cut 
the  conscience,  and  wound  the  heart.  Depend  upon  it,  there  is  not  a  superfluous 
verse  in  the  Bible,  nor  a  chapter  which  is  useless.  Doctors  say  of  certain  drugs 
that  they  are  inert — they  have  no  effect  upon  the  system  one  way  or  the  other. 
Now,  there  is  not  an  inert  passage  in  the  Scriptures ;  every  line  has  its  virtues.  4. 
It  is  piercing.  W^hile  it  has  an  edge  like  a  sword,  it  has  also  a  point  like  a  rapier. 
The  difficulty  with  some  men's  hearts  is  to  get  at  them.  In  fact,  there  is  no 
spiritually  penetrating  the  heart  of  any  natural  man  except  by  this  piercing  instru- 
ment, the  Word  of  God.  Into  the  very  marrow  of  the  man  the  t^acred  truth  ^ill 
pass,  and  find  him  out  in  a  way  in  which  he  cannot  even  find'himssK  out.  5.  The 
Word  of  God  is  discriminating.  It  divides  asunder  soul  and  spirit.  Nothing  else 
could  do  that,  for  the  division  is  difficult.  6.  Once  more,  the  Word  of  God  ia 
marvellously  revealing  to  the  inner  self.  It  pierces  between  the  joints  and  marrow, 
and  marrow  is  a  thing  not  to  be  got  at  very  leadily.  The  Word  of  God  gets  at  the 
very  marrow  of  our  manhood ;  it  lays  bare  the  secret  thoughts  of  the  soul.     II, 


332  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i?. 

Some  lessons.  1.  Let  us  greatly  reverence  the  Word  of  God.  2.  Let  us,  whenevej 
we  feel  ourselves  dead,  and  especially  in  prayer,  get  close  to  the  Word,  for  the  Word 
of  God  is  alive.  3.  Whenever  we  feel  weak  in  our  duties,  let  us  go  to  tfee  Word  of 
God,  and  the  Christ  in  the  Word,  for  power  ;  and  this  will  be  the  best  of  power. 
4.  If  you  need  as  a  minister,  or  a  worker,  anything  that  will  cut  your  hearers  to 
the  heart,  go  to  this  Book  for  it.  5.  If  we  want  to  discriminate  at  any  time 
between  the  soul  and  the  spirit,  and  the  joints  and  marrow,  let  us  go  to  the 
Word  of  God  for  discrimination.  6.  And  lastly,  since  this  Book  is  meant  to  be  a 
discerner  or  critic  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart,  let  the  Book  criticise  us. 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  power  of  the  Word  of  God: — I.  Its  judging  poweb.  1. 
It  is  living  and  energetic.  2.  It  cuts  both  ways.  (1)  With  the  one  edge  it  corrects 
and  converts.  (2)  With  the  other  it  condemns  and  destroys  adversaries.  II.  Itb 
DtviDiNG  powEB.  1.  It  dividcs  the  soul  from  the  spirit,  i.e.,  the  lower  animal 
nature  from  the  higher,  spiritual  and  eternal.  2.  It  divides  so  closely  as  to  lay  bare 
everything  in  man's  composite  nature.  III.  Its  discebning  poweb.  1.  It  shows 
the  moral  nature  of  what  is  interior  and  hidden  in  mental  operations.  2.  It  shows 
the  moral  nature  of  what  is  revolving  in  desire,  and  forming  itself  into  volition  and 
action.  IV.  Reflections.  1.  The  Word  of  God  enters  the  conscience  to  convert  or 
to  smite.  2.  It  searches  out  what  has  hitherto  lain  buried  in  the  heart,  and 
uncovers  the  false  and  transient  from  what  is  true  and  eternal.  3.  It  opens  a  man 
to  himself,  so  that  he  may  know  himself  in  his  moral  actions  and  accountabih'ty. 
4.  Since  its  powers  are  so  peculiar,  let  us  not  resist  the  Word  of  God.  5.  No  one 
can  for  ever  despise  it  with  impunity.  (L.  0.  Thompson.)  The  self-evidencing  power 
of  the  Bible : — We  may  affirm  of  the  Bible,  that  he  who  reads  it  with  attention,  will 
find  his  own  portrait  given  with  so  much  accuracy,  his  heart  so  dissected  and  laid 
bare  for  his  inspection,  that  there  will  be  nothing  left  for  him  but  to  confess  that 
the  Author  of  the  Bible  knew  him  better  than  he  knew  himself ;  knew  him  better 
than  he  would  have  been  known  by  any  being  who  could  not  read  the  thoughts  and 
search  the  spirit.  Is  there  any  one  of  you  who  has  read  so  httle  of  the  Bible,  or 
read  it  with  so  little  attention,  that  he  has  never  found  his  own  case  described — 
described  with  so  surprising  an  accuracy,  that  he  felt  as  though  he  himself  must 
have  sat  for  the  portrait  ?  When  Scripture  insists  on  the  radical  corruption  of  the 
heart,  on  its  native  enmity  to  God,  and  on  all  its  deceitf  alness,  is  there  any  one  of 
us  who  will  fail  to  allow  that  the  affirmations  are  every  way  just,  supposing  his  own 
heart  to  be  that  of  which  the  affirmations  are  made  ?  And  when  over  and  above 
its  more  general  statsraents  the  Bible  descends,  as  it  often  does,  into  particulars ; 
when  it  speaks  of  the  proneness  of  man  to  prefer  a  transient  good  to  an  enduring ; 
the  objects  in  si  .'ht,  however  inconsiderable,  to  those  of  faith,  however  magnificent  ; 
when  it  mentions  the  subterfuges  of  those  whose  conscience  has  been  disquieted ; 
when  it  shows  the  vain  hopes,  the  false  theories,  the  lying  visions  with  which  men 
suffer  themselves  to  be  cheated,  or,  rather,  with  which  they  cheat  themselves,  who 
is  there  amongst  us  who  will  venture  to  deny  that  the  representation  tallies  most 
nicely  either  with  what  he  is,  or  with  what  he  was — with  what  he  is,  if  he  have 
never  repented  and  sought  forgiveness  of  sin  ;  with  what  he  was  if  his  nature  has 
been  renewed  by  the  operations  of  God's  Spirit  ?  If  there  be  anything  like  honesty 
in  the  mind  of  the  student  of  Scripture,  he  must,  we  are  persuaded,  be  continually 
startled  in  his  pursuit,  in  finding  his  own  thoughts  and  motives  and  designs  set  in 
order  before  him.  And  if  this  be  true,  then,  as  is  very  evident,  there  belongs  to  the 
Bible  the  character  x\  hich  is  assigned  to  it  in  the  words  of  our  text.  And  though  it 
may  seem  somewhat  extraordinary  that  notwithstanding  the  coufessed  diversity  in 
human  character,  we  should  thus  make  a  simple  description  serve  as  the  moral 
portrait  of  countless  individuals,  you  will  remember,  that  practically,  all  men  are 
alike;  the  differences  are  only  superficial,  so  that  Solomon  could  affirm  that — "as 
in  water  face  answers  to  face,  so  the  heart  of  man  to  man."  The  face  in  the  water 
is  not  a  more  accurate  copy  of  the  face  of  the  beholder,  than  is  the  heart  of  one 
man  a  copy  of  any  other  man's.  And,  therefore,  with  all  the  differences  which  there 
may  be  amongst  men,  differences  in  dispositions  and  tempers,  partly  from  nature 
and  partly  from  education,  we  still  take  the  Scriptural  characteristic  as  actually 
belonging  to  every  one  ;  and  holding  up  this  characteristic,  we  affirm  that 
we  hold  up  the  perfect  image  or  likeness  of  each  man  or  each  woman,  without 
a  solitary  exception ;  and  we  boldly  make  our  appeal  to  every  hearer  of  the 
Word,  and  demand  of  him  whether  the  preacher  do  not  morally  affect  snch  an 
exhibition  of  him  to  himself,  that  that  Word  may  most  justly  be  described  as — "  a 
discerner  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart  "  ?     But,  now,  there  remains  a 


CHAP,  rv.]  HEBREWS.  83S 

most  important  question — how  comes  it  to  pass  that  if  the  Word  of  God  possess 
this  dissecting  power,  so  that  it  lays  man  bare  and  exposes  to  his  own  eye  all  the 
secrecies  of  his  soul — how  comes  it  to  pass  that  so  little  effect  is  actually  produced  ? 
This  is  only  because  the  hearers  are  utterly  inattentive ;  because  they  give  no  heed 
whatever  to  the  statements  of  the  preacher ;  but  go  through  the  business  of  the 
sanctuary  as  a  matter  of  form,  in  which  they  have  no  interest.  It  is  bo  marvel  if 
to  such  as  these  the  Word  of  God  should  not  be  as  a  "  sword."  They  may  be  said 
to  clothe  themselves  in  that  thick  armour,  the  armour  of  indifference,  and  though 
dissection  may  be  going  on  all  around,  they  ward  off  from  themselves  the  knife  of  the 
anatomist.  But  there  is  another  class  of  hearers  on  whom  considerable  impressioa 
is  often  made  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  who,  while  they  remain  in  church, 
and  are  actually  hearkening  to  the  solemn  truths  of  religion,  feel  an  interest  in 
what  is  said,  feel  its  power,  and  wish  to  use  it  for  their  guidance ;  and  in  whom 
there  seems  the  best  moral  promise  presented  of  such  an  attempt  at  amendment  o£ 
life,  as  would  issue  in  genuine  converfiion.  Are  there  not  some  who  would  bo 
ready  to  own  that  sermons  have  occasionally  had  on  them  a  mighty  and  almost 
overcoming  effect ;  so  that  they  have  felt  constrained  to  give  full  assent  to  the 
truths  uttered  in  their  hearing,  though  these  truths  have  convicted  them  of  heinous 
offences,  and  proved  them  placed  in  terrible  danger.  If  the  man  thus  exhibited  to 
himself,  startled  with  the  moral  deformity  which  he  has  been  forced  to  behold, 
would  strive  at  once  to  act  on  the  disclosure,  and  set  about  procuring  a  renovation 
of  his  nature,  he  would  be  immeasurably  advantaged  by  the  spectacle  of  his  own 
sinfulness — soul  and  spirit  will  have  been  divided  by  conviction  of  sin,  only  to 
the  becoming  united  in  the  blessed  hope  of  forgiveness  through  Christ.  But  if  he 
contents  himself  with  having  heard,  and  do  not  immediately  and  intently  strive  to 
act  on  its  requirements,  what  is  to  be  looked  for,  but  that  he  will  speedily  lose  all 
those  feelings  which  have  been  excited  within  him,  as  the  process  went  forward  of 
dissectiug  the  inner  man  ?  And  then  there  will  be  no  conversion,  though  there 
have  been  conviction,  and  that,  too,  through  his  own  listlessness,  his  own  indiffer- 
ence, and  not  through  any  want  of  truth  in  this  emphatic  declaration — "  The  Word 
of  Goii  is  quick  and  powerful,"  &c.  Now,  let  us  recur  again  to  that  very  important 
and  interesting  matter,  the  self -evidencing  power  of  the  Bible.  We  send  a  missionary 
to  a  barbarous  tribe;  he  settles  down  amongst  the  savages;  but  he  can  employ  no 
miracle  ;  he  can  work  no  wonders  to  ffx  the  attention,  and  win  the  confidence  of  his 
wild  auditory.  You  would  think  there  was  no  chance  of  his  making  any  way  with 
these  barbarians.  He  seems  to  have  nothing  at  his  disposal  by  which  the  preten- 
sions of  Christianity  may  be  substantiated.  If  he  could  heal  the  sick  ;  if  he  could 
hush  the  elements  ;  if  he  could  raise  the  dead ;  then,  indeed,  the  wild  denizens  of 
the  distant  land  might  be  expected  to  give  ear  to  him  as  a  messenger  from  heaven ; 
but  just  standing  as  a  defenceless  stranger  on  their  shores,  what  probability  is  there 
of  success  when  he  proceeds  to  denounce  their  ancestral  superstitions,  summoning 
them  away  from  idols  that  they  had  invested  with  all  the  sacredness  of  Divine,  and 
declaring  as  the  alone  Saviour  of  mankind,  a  Being  who  died  centuries  back  as  a 
malefactor?  But  experience  is  all  against  you  when  you  would  conclude  that 
Christianity  cannot  make  way  without  miracle.  The  simple  preaching  of  the 
sinfulness  of  man,  and  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  has  proved  a  mighty  engine  in  the 
hands  of  the  missionary  ;  and  though  he  have  done  nothing  but  faithfully  deliver 
his  message,  making  no  attempt  at  supporting  its  authority  by  an  appeal  to  external 
evidence,  yet  have  converts  flocked  in  from  the  mass  of  idolaters,  and  a  moral 
regeneration  has  gone  out  over  the  long  degraded  territory.  And  what  account  do 
we  give  of  this  phenomenon  ?  Shall  we  say  that  Christianity  has  been  admitted 
without  proof  ?  The  matter  of  fact  is,  that  the  gospel  of  Christ  carries  with  it  its 
own  credentials.  Wherever  it  is  preached,  there  is  a  conscience  to  act  upon  ;  amid 
all  the  derangements  of  humanity,  a  sense  of  right  and  wrong  is  never  wholly 
extinguished,  but  even  where  that  nature  is  most  sunken,  the  principle  is  in  action 
which  applauds  the  cause  of  virtue  and  utters  a  protest  against  vice ;  and  which, 
stirring  up  forebodings  when  the  mind  looks  onward  to  death,  witnesses  powerfully 
to  our  living  under  a  retributive  government.  Conscience  is  everywhere  man'a 
attribute ;  therefore  Christianity  has  everywhere  an  evidence.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.) 
The  Word  of  God  : — The  Word  of  God  may  here  mean  the  gospel  revelation  in  all 
its  fulness,  especially  as  contrasted  with  that  under  the  law  ;  the  grace  and  truth 
which  came  by  Jesus  Christ.  1.  "  The  Word  of  God  is  quick."  This  is  an  ancient 
expression  that  signifies  living:  it  occurs  in  our  Creed  and  in  our  Advent  Collect, 
■'ttie  quick  and  the  dead."    This  use  of  the  word  is  frequent  in  Scripture  (se« 


334  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.it. 

John  V.  21 ;  vi.  63  ;  Rom.  viii.  11).  Stephen,  in  Acts  viL,  describes  the  ancient 
Scriptures  as  "  the  lively  (or  living)  oracles,"  those  testimonies  from  God,  by  which 
at  that  time  the  means  of  life  were  communicated.  We  now  inquire,  what  is  the 
meaning  of  the  Word  of  God  giving  life.  And  clearly  it  relates  to  an  operation 
upon  the  soul  of  man,  to  some  new  state  of  being  generated  and  produced.  A  new 
store  of  knowledge  is  brought  to  the  understanding ;  a  flood  of  light  is  poured  in 
which  arrays  every  object  in  a  new  colour  ;  an  influence  works  upon  the  affections 
by  which  they  are  refined  and  changed,  made  to  delight  in  new  purposes  and 
pursuits,  to  flow  in  a  new  channel,  and  raised  from  earth  to  heaven.  The  Word 
and  its  accompanying  grace,  with  its  doctrines,  and  promises,  and  ordinances,  with 
the  manifold  ministrations  of  the  Spirit,  brings  the  mind  altogether  into  a  new 
condition.  And  by  the  hearing  of  the  Word,  and  the  deep  study  of  the  Word,  and 
by  the  wilhng  and  faithful  acceptance  of  all  that  it  reveals,  this  life  of  God  in  the 
soul  is  maintained ;  renewed  as  it  languishes  from  its  corrupt  communication  with 
earth,  and  daily  carried  on  to  further  advancement  and  strength.  The  Word  is 
"  quick  and  powerful " :  energetic,  active.  It  has  the  power  because  it  has  life. 
The  Ufe  is  such  as  to  exert  a  perpetual  energy  within  us  :  we  might  say,  powerfully 
alive.  It  will  move  upon  the  mass  of  corruption  ;  it  will  convince  of  sin  ;  it  will 
change  the  love  of  sin  into  the  love  of  holiness  ;  and  will,  if  applied  and  caiTied  out 
by  the  Church's  wisdom,  bring  the  wayward  and  ungodly  affections  into  a  state  of 
self-denying  discipline,  into  humble  submission  to  the  Divine  will.  2.  The  text 
moreover  declares  that  the  Word  "is  sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword."  This 
figure  seems  to  be  borrowed  from  the  prophets  (Isa.  xlix.  2;  Hos.  vi.  5).  St.  Paul 
in  Ephesians  vi.  speaks  of  "  the  sword  of  the  Spirit  which  is  the  Word  of  God." 
The  Word  of  God  has  always  been  found,  from  the  beginning,  capable  of  penetrating 
deeply  into  the  heart  of  a  sinner ;  of  producing  a  sudden  and  terrible  alarm  in  the 
conscience,  of  striking  conviction  into  the  trembling  frame,  and  lowering  the  rebel 
to  the  dust.  To  the  humble,  pious,  faithful  disciple  also  the  Word  of  God  is  a  sharp 
instructor,  a  penetrating  sword ;  often  bringing  truths  to  remembrance,  which  in 
mortal  weakness  had  been  forgotten  ;  often  giving  a  new  colour  and  force  to  truths 
already  in  the  mind.  And  how  quick,  and  mighty,  and  prevailing  are  the  truths 
of  the'  gospel  for  the  furtherance  of  grace,  and  the  increase  of  heavenly  comfort 
in  the  soul ;  depths  of  wisdom  newly  discovered ;  rays  of  consolation  beaming  forth  ; 
/lights  of  unearthly  brightness  successively  rising  to  the  eye  of  faith.  (J.  Slade,  M.A. ) 
\  The  sword  of  the  Lord  : — I.  The  qualities  of  the  Word.     1.  Divine.     2.  Living. 

3.  Effectual.  4.  Cutting.  6.  Piercing.  6.  Discriminating.  7.  Revealing.  II. 
The  lessons  which  we  should  leakn  thebefrom.  1.  That  we  do  greatly  reverence 
the  Word,  as  truly  spoken  of  God.  2.  That  we  come  to  it  for  quickening  for  our 
own  souls.     3.  That  we  come  to  it  for  power  when  fighting  the  battles  of  truth. 

4.  That  we  come  to  it  for  cutting  force  to  kill  our  own  sins  and  to  help  us  in 
destroying  the  evils  of  the  day.  5.  That  we  come  to  it  for  piercing  force  when 
men's  consciences  and  hearts  are  hard  to  reach.  6.  That  we  use  it  to  the  most 
obstinate,  to  arouse  their  consciences  and  convict  them  of  sin.  7.  That  we  dis- 
criminate by  its  means  between  truth  and  falsehood.  8.  That  we  let  it  criticise  us, 
and  our  opinions,  and  projects,  and  acts,  and  all  about  us.  (C.  U.  Spurgeon.) 
The  power  of  the  Divine  Word : — I.  The  mighty  effects  of  the  Divine  Word  as 
they  are  here  described.  1.  The  characteristics  of  the  Divine  Word,  as  "  quick 
and  powerful,  and  sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword,"  are  illustrated  by  its  effects 
upon  the  intellect  of  man.  The  carnal  mind  rebels  against,  and,  by  subtle  sophistries, 
attempts  to  deny  its  truth  ;  but  it  has  a  powerful  influence  upon  the  understanding, 
spiritualising  tliat  understanding,  and  enabling  it  to  discern  spiritual  things.  It 
carries  with  it  undoubtable  credence,  and  forces  the  reluctant  will  and  judgment. 
Its  doctrines,  how  heavenly  I  its  precepts,  how  holy  1  2.  The  effect  of  this  Word 
upon  the  conscience,  in  convincing  of  sin  and  producing  godly  sorrow,  is  an  illus- 
tration of  the  description  in  this  passage.  It  is  common  to  view  sin,  even  when  it 
is  acknowledged  and  condemned  by  the  transgressor,  in  the  light  simply  of  its 
effncts  on  society,  or  the  injury  it  inflicts  on  a  man's  own  reputation,  property,  or 
health ;  but  when  the  Divine  Word  penetrates  the  soul  with  a  converting  power,  it 
is  no  longer  regarded  with  reference  only  to  its  personal  or  temporal  consequences, 
but  as  an  atrocious  violation  of  the  law  and  an  insult  to  the  glory  of  God.  "  Against 
Thee,  and  Thee  only,  have  I  sinned  and  done  this  evil  in  Thy  sight."  Then 
again,  with  regard  to  the  conscience,  the  Word  of  God  is  quick  and  power- 
ful, for  it  annihilates  the  spirit  of  self-defence,  extenuation,  and  apology,  together 
with  those  self-righteous  principles  which  exist  in  the  uuregenerate  man.     3.  The 


CHAT.  IV.)  HEBREWS.  835 

characteristics  of  this  Divine  Word  are  manifested  in  the  effects  of  it  upon  the 
heart,  in  producing  sanctification.  This,  too,  is  a  severe  process,  involving  much 
struggle  and  self-denial.  Hence  the  Word  of  God  is  not  only  a  two  edited  sword  in 
respect  to  conviction,  but  in  respect  to  its  operations  in  perfecting  religion  and  pre- 
paring as  for  eternal  glory.  4.  The  opfration  of  truth  is  sometimes  remarkably 
*'  quick  "  as  well  as  "  powerful."  A  remarkable  instance  of  its  quick  and  mighty 
operation  is  recorded  in  the  conversion  of  Paul.  5.  The  potent  influence  of  the 
Word  is  often  for  a  long  period  concealed  from  the  outward  world  in  the  depths  of 
the  soul.  It  is  thus  a  "  discerner  of  the  thoughts."  II.  The  conclusions  to  bb 
DRAWN  FBOM  THESE  STATEMENTS.  1.  The  representation  of  the  text  ought  to  enhance 
our  estimation  of  the  Divine  Word.  It  is  doing  what  all  the  philosophy  in  the 
world  could  never  do.  How  ought  we  then  to  estimate  it?  2.  We  should  be 
induced  to  employ  the  most  zealous  efforts  for  the  circulation  of  the  Divine  Word 
by  means  of  printed  copie-i,  and  the  support  of  Christian  ministrations,  both  at 
home  and  abroad.  3.  The  characteristics  of  the  Divine  Word  as  given  in  the  text, 
which  we  have  endeavoured  to  illustrate,  should  induce  the  individual  inquiry. 
What  am  I  doing  to  obstruct  or  to  sustain  its  influence  in  my  own  soul  ?  You  must 
by  the  very  necessity  of  the  case,  having  heard  the  Word,  either  receive  or  reject  it. 
(F,  A.  Cox,  D.D.)  The  Word  of  God  likened  to  a  sword: — The  same  illustra- 
tion is  used  by  St.  Paul,  by  Philo,  and  in  the  Book  of  Wisdom,  but  with  a  different 
application  in  each  case.  St.  Paul  likens  the  Word  of  God  to  the  sword  of  the 
warrior,  used  as  a  weapon  of  the  faith  (Eph.  vi.  17) ;  the  Book  of  Wisdom  compares 
the  almighty  Word  of  God  to  a  sharp  sword,  but  uses  a  different  word  for  "  sword," 
evidently  designating  the  sword  of  the  destroying  angel,  which  executed  God's  man- 
date on  the  first-born  of  Egypt  (Wisd.  xviii.  16).  Philo  dwells  on  the  searching 
and  penetrative  power  of  the  Word  as  that  which  severs  all  things.  In  this  passage 
the  ideas  of  tbe  two  last  authors  are  combined  by  way  of  warning  to  the  disobedient ; 
the  Word  of  God  is  compared  to  the  sword  of  the  executioner,  piercing  with  its 
double  edge  the  very  heart  of  the  victim.  Like  the  sword,  it  searches  out  evil  and 
destroys  it ;  but  it  is  sharper  than  the  sword,  because  it  penetrates  into  the  region 
of  spiritual  life,  whereas  the  sword  can  only  divide  joints  and  marrow,  and  its 
power  is  limited  to  the  animal  life.  The  images  are  borrowed  from  a  court  of 
justice,  where  the  guilty  is  brought  before  his  judge,  convicted,  and  executed. 
{F.  Rendall,  M.A.)  Quick  and  powerful: — The  latter  word  explains  the  former; 
for  those  things  that  are  living  are  said  to  be  active  in  opposition  to  such  things 
which  are  dead,  which  have  lost  their  power;  and  to  be  lively  and  very  active  are 
many  times  the  same  ;  and  this  signifies  the  efficacy  and  active  power  of  this  law. 
This  active  vigour  and  efficacy  is  illustrated  by  a  similitude.  For  the  law  is  com- 
pared to  a  two-edged  sword,  which,  being  used  by  a  powerful  and  skilful  hand,  doth 
manifest  how  sharp  and  cutting  it  is ;  for  it  pierceth  quickly  iuto  the  inward  paits, 
and  divideth  between  soul  and  spirit,  and  the  bones  and  marrow,  which  are  most 
nearly  united,  and  more  hidden  and  secret  in  living  bodies.  So  that  in  the  similitude 
we  have  two  acts  of  a  sword,  or  any  such  cutting  instrument.  The  first  is,  dividing 
things  most  nearly  united.  The  second,  discovering  things  most  secret.  There 
cannot  be  any  more  perfect  division  or  discovery  in  any  dissection  or  anatomy  than 
is  here  expressed.  (G.  Laicson.)  The  living  Word  of  God: — "The  Word  of 
God  is  living,"  because  He  who  speaks  the  Word  is  the  living  God.  It  acts  with 
mighty  energy,  like  the  silent  laws  of  nature,  which  destroy  or  save  alive,  according 
as  men  obey  or  disobey  them.  It  cuts  like  a  sword  whetted  on  each  side  of  the 
blade,  piercing  through  to  the  place  where  the  natural  life  of  the  soul  divides  from, 
or  passes  into,  the  supernatural  life  of  the  spirit.  For  it  is  revelation  that  his 
made  kuown  to  man  his  possession  of  the  spiritual  faculty.  The  word  "  spirit "  is 
used  by  heathen  writers.  But  in  their  books  it  means  only  the  air  we  breathe. 
The  very  conception  of  the  spiritual  is  enshrined  in  the  bosom  of  God's  Word. 
Further,  the  Word  of  God  pierces  to  the  joints  that  connect  the  natural  and  the 
Bupsrnatural.  It  does  not  ignore  the  former.  On  the  contrary,  it  addresses  itself 
to  man's  reason  and  conscience,  in  order  to  erect  the  supernatural  upon  nature. 
Where  reason  stops  short,  the  Word  of  God  appeals  to  the  supernatural  faculty  of 
faith ;  and  when  conscience  grows  blunt,  the  Word  makes  conscience,  like  itself, 
sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword.  Once  more,  the  Word  of  God  pierces  to  the 
marrow.  It  reveals  to  man  the  innermost  meaning  of  his  own  nature  and  of  the 
supernatural  planted  within  him.  The  truest  morality  and  the  highest  spirituality 
are  both  the  direct  product  of  God's  revelation.  But  all  this  is  true  in  its  practical 
application  to  every  man  individually.     The  power  of  the  Word  of  God  to  create 


336  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  m 

distinct  dispensations  and  yet  maintain  their  fundamental  unity,  to  distinguish 
between  mosses  of  men  and  yet  cause  all  the  separate  threads  of  human  history  to 
converge  and  at  last  meet,  is  the  same  power  which  judges  the  inmost  thoughts  and 
inmost  purposes  of  the  heart.  These  it  surveys  with  critical  judgment.  If  its  eye 
is  keen,  its  range  of  vision  is  also  wide.  No  created  thing  but  is  seen  and  manifest. 
The  surface  is  bared,  and  the  depth  within  is  opened  up  before  it.  As  the  upturned 
neck  of  the  sacrificial  beast  lay  bare  to  the  eye  of  God,  so  are  we  exposed  to  the  eye 
of  Him  to  whom  we  have  to  give  our  account.     (T.  C.  Edwards,  D.D.)  God's 

Word  to  us,  and  our  word  to  God : — We  are  here  at  the  end  of  a  long  argument. 
Close  attention  is  required  to  follow  the  steps  of  it.  But  the  general  idea  is  simple. 
There  is  a  rest  of  God  which  is  the  goal  of  the  long  race  of  the  human  creation. 
It  has  been  so  from  the  beginning.  It  was  realised  by  the  old  patriarchs  as  their 
true  city  and  country,  while  they  lived  the  tent-life  here.  It  was  typified  in  the 
promise  of  Canaan — typified,  but  certainly  not  fulfilled — more  certainly  not  ex- 
hausted. Lnng  ages  after  the  entrance  of  Israel  into  Canaan,  a  psalmist  speaks 
(by  clear  implication)  of  God's  rest  as  still  open,  still  Uable  to  be  forfeited,  therefore 
still  capable  of  being  attained.  Nothing  certainly  has  occurred  since  the  psalmist's 
day  which  could  be  supposed  to  have  cancelled  promise  by  performance.  The  rest 
of  God  is  still  in  reserve  for  His  true  people.  Let  us  give  diligence  to  enter  into  it. 
Let  us  not  forfeit  it,  as  one  whole  generation  forfeited  Canaan,  by  unbelief.  Thus 
we  reach  the  double  text,  which  tells  of  the  impossibility  of  eluding  God's  judg- 
ment by  any  differences  of  circumstance,  or  by  any  counterfeits  of  character.  "  The 
Word  of  God,"  His  utterance  in  judging,  His  discernment  of  character.  His  estimate 
of  conduct,  is  no  dead  or  dormant  thing  ;  it  is  living  and  active  ;  it  is  sharper  than 
any  two-edged  sword;  it  divides  and  discriminates  where  man  sees  only  the  insepar- 
able; "soul  and  spirit,"  the  immaterial  part  of  us  in  one  aspect  and  the  same 
immaterial  part  of  us  in  another  aspect,  it  can  cleave  in  twain  ;  thoughts  and  feel- 
ings, exercises  of  intellect  and  exercises  of  ailection,  it  is  apt  and  quick  to  distinguish 
between  and  to  pronounce  upon.  No  created  being  can  wear  mask  or  veil  in  that 
Presence;  all  things  are  bare  and  naked,  all  things  are  exposed  and  opened;  the 
head  that  would  bend  and  bow  itself,  in  conscious  guilt  and  shame,  before  the 
fierce  light  of  the  Presence,  is  lifted  (such  perhaps  is  the  figure)  and  thrown  back 
in  full  exposure  beiore  the  eye  of  the  Examiner  and  the  Judge,  "  unto  whom,"  so 
the  sentence  ends,  "our  word  is";  "with  whom" — according  to  the  beautiful 
paraphrase  which  no  later  version  will  wish  or  dare  to  improve  away — "  with  whom 
we  have  to  do."  I.  "The  Word  of  God."  There  are  many  such  words.  There 
is  a  Word  of  God  in  Nature.  Order  diversified,  which  is  a  true  description  of 
Nature,  tells  of  a  power  which  is  no  brute  force  ;  in  other  words,  of  a  mind  at  work 
in  its  exercise.  There  is  a  Word  of  God  in  Providence.  Consequence  modified, 
which  is  a  true  description  of  Providence,  tells  of  a  power  working  which  is  no 
mechanical  agency ;  in  other  words,  of  a  mind  purposing,  and  realising  that  pur- 
pose in  ceaseless  processes  of  adaptation.  There  is  not  sound  only,  but  voice  in 
both  these — a  voice  implying  a  personality,  and  a  voice  presupposing  an  auditor. 
The  Epistle  from  which  the  texts  come  carries  us  beyond  this  vaguer  and  more 
general  Divine  utterance  to  another  of  which  the  very  "  differentia"  is  the  person- 
ality. God,  it  says,  having  of  old  time  spoken  in  the  prophets — utterers  of  His  truth 
in  sundry  modes  and  manifold  particulars — spoke  to  us  at  the  end  of  "  these  days  " 
— at  the  dividing  line,  as  it  were,  of  present  and  future,  of  time  and  eternity — in 
One,  of  whom  the  title — the  unique,  incommunicable  title — is  ••  Son. "  "  The  Word 
of  God,"  if  not  a  person,  is  yet  a  personal  communication,  as  much  in  the  voice 
that  utters  as  in  the  ear  that  hears.  This  Word  was  a  voice  before  it  was  a  Book. 
The  living  Life  wrote  itself  upon  other  Uves ;  they  in  their  turn  wrote  it  upon  others, 
ere  yet  a  page  of  Gospel  Scripture  was  written — on  purpose  that  the  distinction 
between  "letter  "and  "spirit"  might  be  kept  ever  fresh  and  vital,  on  purpose  that  the 
characteristic  of  the  new  revelation  might  never  fade  or  be  lost  sight  of,  how  that 
it  is  God  speaking  in  His  Son,  God  speaking,  and  God  bidding  man  to  make  reply. 
But  where  would  the  Word  have  been  by  this  time,  left  to  itself — left,  I  mean,  to 
echo  and  tradition  ?  It  pleased  God  by  His  holy  inspiration  to  move  and  to  guide 
the  pen  of  Uving  men  ;  and  it  pleased  Him  by  His  Providence  wonderfully  to  watch 
over  the  thing  written  ;  and  it  pleased  Him  in  days  when  there  was  neither  scholar- 
Bhip  to  revise  nor  machinery  to  multiply  the  writing,  to  put  such  love  into  hearts 
for  those  perishable  fugitive  scrolls  of  rude,  almost  hieroglyphic,  manuscript,  that 
they  were  treasured  up  in  cells  and  churches  as  the  most  precious  of  heirlooms  ; 
aud  it  pleased  Him  at  last  to  stimulate  into  a  marvellous  inventiveness  His  own 


CHIP.  IV.]  HEBREWS.  837 


gift grace  we  might  well  ctill  it — of  human  reason,  so  that  the  completed  volume 

of  the  once  scattered  "  Biblia  "  was  multiplied  by  the  new  miracle  of  the  printing 
press  into  the  myriad  "Bibles,"  which  are  now  sown  broadcast  over  the  surface  of 
the  inhabited  globe.  "  There  are,"  St.  Paul  says,  "  so  mauy  kinds  of  voices  in  the 
world  "—say  a  hundred,  say  a  thousand — "  and  no  one  of  them  is  without  significa- 
tion." Even  the  Divine  voices  are  many.  There  is  a  word  of  God  in  nature,  and 
there  is  a  word  of  God  in  providence  ;  there  is  a  word  of  God  in  science,  and  there 
is  a  word  of  God  in  history ;  there  is  a  word  of  God  in  the  Church,  and  there  is  a 
word  of  God  in  the  Bible.  And  yet  all  these  are  external,  as  such,  to  the  very 
•'  spirit  of  the  man  that  is  in  him."  The  Word  of  God,  which  is  the  real  speech 
and  utterance  of  all  these  voices,  comes  at  last  to  the  man  himself  in  conscience. 
I  speak  not  now  of  that  more  limited  sense  of  conscience  in  which  it  is  the  guiding 
and  warning  voice  within,  saying,  "This  is  the  way  of  duty,  walk  thou  in  it."  Tlie 
word  of  God  in  conscience  is  more,  much  more,  than  this.  It  is  that  of  which  our 
Lord  said,  in  reference  to  the  volume  of  His  own  evidences,  "  Yea,  and  why  even 
of  yourselves,"  without  waiting  for  sign  or  portent,  "  judge  ye  not  what  is  right  ?  " 
You  can  discern  the  face  of  the  earth  and  of  the  sky  ;  you  can  infer  from  certain 
indications  the  approacti  of  shower  or  heat.  How  is  it  that  ye  cannot  infer  Deity 
from  the  Divine — the  Emmanuel  presence  from  the  Emmanuel  character  ?  The 
appeal  was  to  conscience,  not  so  much  in  its  sensitiveness  to  right  and  wrong,  as  in 
its  appreciativeness  of  the  false  and  the  true,  of  God  speaking  this  and  God  not 
speakiug  that.  Thus  it  is  that  the  Word  of  God,  as  it  at  last  reaches  the  spirit  and 
Boul  of  the  man,  is  the  net  result  of  a  thousand  separate  sayinus,  no  one  of  which 
by  itself  is  the  absolute  arbiter  of  the  being.  It  cannot  become  this  till  it  has  made 
itself  audible  to  the  conscience.  Till  then  it  is  suggestive,  it  is  contributory,  it  ia 
evidential,  it  is  not  the  verdict,  nor  the  judgment,  nor  the  sentence,  nor  the  "  Word." 
There  is  no  encouragement  to  the  dallying,  to  the  procrastinating,  to  the  fastidious- 
ness and  the  waywardness,  which  is  characteristic  of  the  generation.  On  the  con- 
trary, it  is  a  trumpet  call  to  decision.  It  says,  there  is  a  word  of  God  somewhere. 
The  Word  of  God  is  a  personal  word — it  speaks  to  the  personal  being,  as  God  made 
and  as  God  sees  him.  We  seem  yet  to  luck  one  thing.  The  Word  speaks  in  con- 
science— speaks  to  the  con.'-ciousness — but  who  spetiks  it  ?  The  "  Word  "  itself,  to 
be  audible  as  such,  must  have  become  the  Spirit's  voice;  then  it  takes  of  the  things 
of  God  and  speaks  them  into  the  conscience,  which  is  the  consciousness  of  the 
man.  II.  There  is  also  a  word  of  ours  to  God.  "  Unto  Him  our  word  is." 
The  particular  point  in  tlie  view  of  the  holy  writer  was  that  of  accountability.  God 
speaks  in  judgment,  and  we  speak  to  give  account.  The  first  readers  were  on  the 
eve  of  a  terrible  crisis.  They  had  to  choose  between  Christianity  and  Judaism, 
between  religion  and  patriotism,  almost  therefore  between  duty  and  duty.  It  was 
reasonable  to  speak  to  them  of  the  Word  which  is  a  two-edged  sword  in  discriminat- 
ing, and  of  the  word  which  pleads  guilty  or  not  guilty  at  the  bar  of  judgment. 
We  also  are  passing  through  a  great  crisis.  You  will  think  that  I  speak  of 
some  political  or  national  crisis.  But  I  do  not.  I  speak  of  a  crisis  greater  even 
than  those — greater  (shall  I  dare  the  paradox?)  because  less  great — greater  because 
individual.  The  crisis  of  which  I  speak  is  that  Ufe  long  trial,  in  which  each  one  of 
us  is  standing  before  God's  judgment-seat,  and  upon  the  decision  of  which  depends 
for  each  one  a  future  not  to  be  measured  by  years,  and  not  to  be  told  in  terms  of 
human  speech.  The  text  says  of  this  crisis,  of  this  trial,  that  it  is  tJje  inteixhange, 
so  to  speak,  of  two  "  words  " — the  dialogue,  I  had  almost  said,  of  two  speakers — 
the  word  of  God  judging,  and  the  word  of  the  man  making  answer  and  givii'g 
account.  "  With  whom  we  have  to  do."  Our  word  of  account  is  to  God.  Oh,  if 
we  could  take  the  thought  home,  what  an  effect  would  it  have  upon  the  life!  What 
an  independence,  what  a  dignity  would  it  give  to  it  I  How  would  it  put  an  end  to 
that  running  to  and  fro  to  give  in  our  account,  which  makes  so  many  lives  so 
servile  and  so  contemptible  ?  What  pains  do  we  take  to  please,  to  give  satisfaction, 
to  win  applause,  to  be  admired  if  it  may  be  so,  at  all  events  to  avoid  censure  one  of 
another.  What  haste  do  we  make  to  explain,  to  excuse,  to  apologise  for,  to  daub 
with  obtrusive  whitewash,  our  little  dubious  acts,  our  little  unfortunate  speeches. 
What  a  forgetfulness  do  we  see  everywhere,  and  first  of  all  in  ourselves,  of  the 
great  principle  of  the  "  Godward  Word,"  of  the  "  with  whom  we  have  to  do  "  of 
this  text.  ^Vhat  a  weight,  what  an  influence,  what  a  sanctity,  what  an  inspiration^ 
would  be  given  to  our  common  words,  to  our  every-day  remarks  and  comments  upoa 
men  and  things,  if  we  carried  about  us  that  indefinable  something,  which  says,  in 
tones  more  persuasive  in  proportion  as  they  are  less  obtrusive,  "  This  man  know* 

2 


338  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

and  feels  that  he  has  to  do  with  God  !  "    And  all  this  sets  in  strong  light  the  duty 
of  doing  it.     It  shows  us  what  is  meant  by  self-examination,  what  is  meant  by  con- 
fession.    "  With  Him,"  directly  and  personally,  "  we  have  to  do."    Just  to  carry  to 
God  Himself,  in  the  nightly  confessional  where  we  meet  the  one  Judge,  just  the 
very  thing  itself  which  we  did  wrong,  which  we  said  wrong,  just  in  so  many  words, 
that  very  day  which  is  now  being  gathered  to  its  parent  days — that  is  the  Christian 
evensong.     So  judging  ourselves,  we  shall  not  be  judged.   The  "Word  "  of  account 
was  the  first  thought  of  the  text.    But  it  is  not  the  only  one.    It  is  not  perhaps 
the  most  beautiful  or  the  most  attractive.    The  spirit  of  the  man  has  other  words 
besides  this  to  utter  in  the  ear  with  which  it  has  to  do.     The  speech  of  God  is  to 
me,  and  my  speech  is  to  Him.     Might  we  but  enter  into  this  conception,  what  an 
elevation,  what  a  grandeur  would  it  give  to  the  life !     The  speech  of  God  is  to  thee 
— His  discourse,  His  self-disclosure,  His  mind  uttering  itself.  His  Spirit  breathing 
itself  in  converse.    And  my  speech  is  to  Him — my  discourse,  my  self-disclosure, 
my  uttered  mind,  my  soul  expressing  itself  in  audible  thought.     What  is  this  but 
to  give  to  the  life  itself  a  new  Christian  name,  at  the  font  of  a  spiritual  baptism, 
and  to  send  it  forth  afresh  into  all  the  relationships  and  all  the  occupations  of  the 
being,  having  this  for  its  title — Conversation  with  God  ?     "As  a  man  talketh  with 
his  friend,"  was  God's  own  account  of  His  communication  with  the  hero-saint  of 
Israel — then  it  was  the  privilege  of  the  one  or  two,  now  it  is  the  very  birthright 
and  citizenship  of  the  promiscuous  world  of  the  redeemed.     There  is  yet  one  con- 
dition more — we  will  end  with  it.     The  speech  of  the  man  to  his  God  must  presup- 
pose and  proceed  upon  the  speech  of  God  to  the  man.     The  two  "words"  of  which 
tlie  texts  tell  are  not  independent  words.     The  conversation  is  not  between  two 
equals,  either  of  whom  must  contribute  his  share  to  the  instruction  and  enjoyment 
of  the  meeting.     The  incommensureahleness,  in  nature  and  dignity,  of  the  two 
speakers,  while  it  forbids  not  freedom  in  the  inferior,  forbids  presumption ;  nay, 
precludes  it  as  a  tone  and  a  feeling  which  would  jar  upon,  and  jangle  out  of  tune, 
the  very  melody  and  harmony  of  the  converse.     God  speaks,  and  man  makes  reply. 
It  is  not  that  on  equal  terms  and  with  equal  rights  God  and  the  man  meet  together 
to  think  out  and  to  talk  out  the  thing  that  was,  and  that  is,  and  that  shall  be. 
"  The  world  by  its  wisdom  knew  not  God."    "  Thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the 
•wise  and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed  them  unto  babes."     The  Word  of  God  carne, 
and  the  word  of  man  made  reply  on  the  strength  of  it.     This  consecrates  for  him 
the  new  and  living  way,  by  which,  not  in  hesitation,  not  as  a  peradventure,  but  in 
calm  faith  and  trust — not  forgetting  the  reaUties  of  sin  and  the  Fall,  but  seeing 
them  at  once  recognised  and  overborne  by  a  mightier  revelation  of  love  —  the 
••  word  "  of  the  man  meets  the  "  Word  "  of  his  God,  on  the  strength  of  that  "  Word 
j  made  flesh,"  which  is  the  reconciler  and  the   harmoniser   of   the  two.     (Dean 
i  Vaitghan.)      The  mighty  power  of  the  Word  .-—Goliath's  sword  not  hke  to  this.  David 
said  of  that,  none  to  it ;  but  none  to  this.    Lord  give  it  to  us.     This  sword  can 
hew  in  pieces  the  most  stony  heart  in  the  world ;  to  see  what  bUndness  in  the 
understanding,  what  frowardness  in  the  affections.     It  will  lay  the  heart  open,  and 
bewray  the  secret  filthiness,  and  all  the  sluttish  corners  of  sin  that  be  in  it.     When 
the  preacher  is  speaking,  the  Word  doth  so  pierce  the  hearts  of  the  hearers,  as 
that  many  in  the  church  imagine  that  the  preacher  is  acquainted  with  their  sins. 
You  shall  find  it  to  be  a  lively  and  mighty  Word,  one  way  or  other,  either  to  save 
yon  or  to  condemn  you.    It  is  lively  and  mighty  in  the  godly,  to  kill  sin  within 
them,  to  raise  them  up  unto  newness  of  life.     Was  it  not  mighty  in  David,  making 
him  cry,  "  Peccavi  "  ?  in  Josiah,  making  his  heart  to  melt  ?  in  Manasseh,  when,  of 
the  most  horrible  idolator  that  was  ever  heard  of,  it  made  him  a  zealous  worshipper 
of  the  true  God  ?  in  Zaccheus,  when  it  made  him  to  forsake  his  oppression  and  to 
restore  fourfold  ?  in  Mary  Magdalen,  when  it  cast  out  seven  devils  out  of  her  ?  in 
those  three  thousand  souls,  when,  pricked  in  their  hearts,  they  went  to  the  apostles? 
in  the  city  of  Samaria,  when  it  made  them  to  abjure  Simon  Magns  and  to  listen  to 
St.  Philip  ?    Was  it  not  mighty  by  twelve  men,  over  all  the  world,  when  it  subdued 
by  their  ministry  all  nations  to  Christ  ?    There  may  be  a  dark  and  misty  morning ; 
the  sun  comes,  scatters  the  mist,  clears  the  air,  and  makes  it  a  bright  day.     So  the 
■whole  world  was  shadowed  with  the  mist  of  blindness,  and  the  fog  of  sin.    The 
Word  comes  forth  hke  the  sun,  and  introduces  the  knowledge  of  Christ  and  of  His 
gospel  into  all  the  world.     0  mighty  Word  I     Let  us  all  acknowledge  the  power  of 
this  wonderful  Word.     Who  is  able  to  stand  before  this  mighty  Word?     It  is  lively 
and  mighty  too,  even  in  the  very  reprobate.     Sometimes  they  may  be  senseless,  and 
have  no  feeUng  of  the  cutting  of  the  Word,  as  those  in  Jeremiah  ;  nay,  they  may 


CHAP.  IT.]  HEBREWS.  889 

even  scoff  at  the  Word  preached,  as  the  Pharisoes  did  (Luke  xvi.  14) ;  their  con- 
sciences may  be  seared  up,  and  feel  not  the  sword  when  it  cutteth  ;  as  they  that  be 
in  %  letharpy,  they  may  inwardly  fret  and  fume,  be  in  a  pelting  chafe  with  the 
p'evher  for  reproving  sins,  as  Ahab  with  Micaiah,  and  Jezebel  with  Elias,  yet  but 
liko  mad  dogs,  tliat  sit  biting  of  the  chain  wherewith  they  are  tied,  but  not  break 
the  chain.  So  they  may  snap  at  the  prea.her  and  the  Word,  but  they  themselves 
b  ive  the  hurt ;  yet  for  all  that,  at  one  time  or  other,  God  will  make  them  to  feel 
the  power  of  His  Word  and  the  strength  of  this  mighty  arm  of  His.  (IF.  Jones, 
D.D.)  The  Divine  Word  : — We  are  familiar  with  the  Word  of  God.  Like  Israel, 
we  possess  this  treasure  in  our  country,  in  our  families.  But,  thankful  as  we  ought 
to  be  for  this  great  privilege,  do  we  know  also  the  majesty  and  the  power  of  the 
Word  of  God?  Do  we  know  that,  in  possessing,  reading,  and  knowing  the  Scripture, 
we  are  under  a  mighty,  solemn,  and  decisive  influeuce,  and  that  this  Word  judges 
us  now,  and  will  judge  us  at  the  last  day  ?  The  expressions  which  are  used  here  of 
the  Word  of  God  are  all  applicable  to  Christ  Himself ;  for  He  is  living.  He  is  the 
power  of  God,  He  came  for  judgment  into  the  world.  He  is  the  Searcher  of  hearts. 
His  eyes  are  like  a  flame  of  fire.  But  the  reference  is  to  the  spoken  and  written 
Word.  The  Scripture,  as  the  written  Word,  is  according  to  Christ  and  of  Christ ; 
and  by  it  Christ  is  heard,  received,  and  formed  in  the  soul.  Of  this  written  Word, 
of  which  Christ  is  centre  and  end,  as  well  as  author  and  method,  which  is  inspired 
by  the  Holy  Ghost  and  sent  by  God,  the  gospel  message  is  the  kernel.  And  hence 
it  is  this  gospel  which  especially  is  called  the  Word.  1.  The  Word  is  living  (Eev.  i. 
18,  Greek ;  John  v.  21,  24,  26 ;  vi.  63,  68).  God  is  called  the  Livmg  One ;  and 
Christ  the  Lord  calls  Himself  the  Living  One.  He  is  the  life.  He  hns  life  in  Him- 
self, and  He  came  to  quicken  and  to  give  us  life  abundantly.  And  the  Word  which 
proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  and  heart  of  God,  the  Word  of  which  Christ  is  the 
substance,  and  wljich  is  given  and  watched  over  by  the  Spirit,  is  also  living;  for 
God's  words  are  spirit  and  life.  The  Word  is  the  seed,  which  appears  insignificant, 
but  which  if  received  in  good  ground  shows  its  vitality.  Hence  it  is  by  this  Word 
that  souls  are  born  again  unto  eternal  life.  2.  The  living  Word  is  powerful  or 
energetic.  It  is  compared  to  the  seed  which  possesses  vitality  and  power.  We  can 
see  the  power  or  energy  of  the  Word  when  it  tills  those  that  hear  and  receive  it  with 
Ktrong  emotions,  tilling  them  with  fear  and  terror,  with  grief  and  contrition ;  we 
can  see  its  power  in  the  sudden  and  striking  changes  it  produces,  when  the  thought- 
less and  worldly,  the  selfish  and  depraved,  are  arrested  and  quickened  by  its  mighty 
power.  But  while  the  earthquake  and  the  fire  declare  the  approach  of  the  Lord,  it 
is  in  the  still  small  voice  that  the  Lord  at  last  appears  to  take  up  His  permanent 
abode.  There  are  the  hidden  flowers  of  humility,  of  forgiving  love,  of  patience 
and  meekness  ;  there  are  the  unseen  and  unknown  daily  conflicts  and  victories ; 
there  is  the  crucifixion  of  the  old  man,  and  the  constant  renewal  of  the  resurrection- 
iiie ;  and  these  are  especially  the  triumphs  of  the  power  of  the  Word.  3.  The  Word 
cannot  be  living  and  energetic  without  being  also  a  sword,  dividing  and  separating, 
with  piercing  and  often  painful  sharpness,  that  which  in  our  natural  state  lies 
toget^ier  mixed  and  confused.  It  comes  not  to  flatter  and  to  soothe;  it  comes  not 
to  cicourage  us  with  half-true,  half-false  encomiums  ;  it  does  not  call  the  flesh 
Spirit,  but  condemns  it  as  flesh  and  enmity  against  God.  It  leads  you  into  the 
lower  Christian  life  (John  iii.  30) ;  it  discerns  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart, 
the  hidden  self-complacency,  the  hidden  ambition  and  self-will;  it  enters  into  the 
very  joints  and  marrow,  the  energies  and  sentiments,  the  motives  and  springs  of  our 
actions,  the  true  character  of  our  rejoicing  and  mourning,  oar  elevations  and 
depressions  ;  and  then  you  say  with  the  apostle :  I  have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh,  in 
my  old  nature,  in  me,  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  as  I  am  of  Adam.  I  dare  not  trust  the 
BWfietest  frame,  I  cannot  call  my  "  holy  things  "  holy,  for  they  are  full  of  sin. 
The  Word  of  God  enters  into  my  inmost  soul  and  heart-life,  and  as  a  judge  both 
unveils  and  condemns ;  what  hitherto  was  hidden,  is  uncovered ;  what  was  dis- 
guised, unveiled ;  what  was  falsely  called  good  and  spiritual,  appears  now  in  the 
bright  light  of  God's  countenance;  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  hearts  are 
discerned.  Thns  am  I  brought  into  God's  presence,  as  when  I  first  was  convinced 
of  my  sin  and  my  guilt ;  but  I  feel  more  abased,  and  with  a  deeper  knowledge  and 
sorrow  I  exclaim  :  I  am  vile,  and  abhor  myself  in  dust  and  ashes.  Oh,  where  is 
Christ  ?  I  wish  to  be  found  in  Him.  I  wish  Him  to  live  in  me.  What  is  there  in 
me  pleasing  to  God?  Oh  that  Christ  would  sing,  pray,  love,  hve  in  me  1  When 
the  Word  thus  dwells  in  us,  we  give  glory  to  God,  and  we  are  spiritn ally-minded. 
We  live  not  on  mere  notions  and  impressions;    we  begin  to  apply  our  know- 


340  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

ledge  to  our  actual  state  and  to  our  daily  walk :  we  are  delivered  from  hypocrisy, 
which  is  since  the  Fall  the  great  disease  of  mankind.  {A.  Saphir.)  It  finds 
me: — It  was  Coleridge,  if  we  remember  aright,  who,  in  giving  one  of  the 
grand  internal  evidences  of  the  inspiration  of  the  Bible,  as  derived  from  his  own 
experience,  used  the  idiomatic  and  significant  expression,  "  It  finds  me."  Effects 
of  the  Bible : — A  dealer  in  low  publications  taunted  me  about  the  Bible.  I  begged  her 
to  take  a  copy  and  read  it.  She  said,  "  I  shall  sell  it."  "  That  is  your  affair,"  I  re- 
plied. I  lost  sight  of  her  for  three  weeks.  When  I  returned  to  her  kiosk  all  her 
immoral  publications  had  disappeared.  "Ohl  "  she  cried,  on  seeing  me,  "I  am 
delivered ;  this  book  has  saved  me  from  dishonour.  No,  no,  I  will  not  sell  it.  I 
and  my  husband  now  read  it  together,  and  with  the  children."  This  morning  thio 
dear  old  woman  told  me  that  in  two  neighbouring  famiUes  the  Holy  Bible  is  read, 
"  And,"  says  she,  "  it  has  absolutely  had  the  same  effect  with  them  as  with  us.'* 
{Pasteur  Hirsch.)  The  Word  self-revealing  : — The  Word  will  turn  the  inside  of  % 
sinner  out,  and  let  him  see  all  that  is  in  his  heart,  (ill.  Henry.)  Conviction  by 
the  Word: — The  Bechuanas  are  excellent  patients.  There  is  no  wincing.  In  any 
operation  even  the  women  sit  unmoved.  I  have  been  quite  astonished,  again  and 
again,  at  their  calmness.  In  cutting  out  a  tumour,  an  inch  in  diameter,  they  sit 
and  talk  as  if  they  felt  nothing.  '•  A  man  like  me  never  cries,"  they  say  ;  "  they 
are  children  that  cry. "  And  it  is  a  fact  that  the  men  never  cry.  But  when  the  Spirit 
of  God  works  on  their  minds  they  cry  most  piteously.  Sometimes  in  church  they 
endeavoured  to  screen  themselves  from  the  eyes  of  the  preacher  by  hiding  under  the 
forms,  or  covering  their  heads  with  their  karosses,  as  a  remedy  against  their  convic- 
tions. And  when  they  find  that  won't  do  they  rush  out  of  the  church  and  run  with  all 
their  might,  crying  as  if  the  hand  of  death  were  behind  tliem.  (D.  Livingstone.) 
The  Word  of  God  : — The  Word  of  God  is  too  sacred  a  thing,  and  preaching  too  solemn 
a  work  to  be  toyed  and  played  with,  as  is  the  usage  of  some  who  make  a  sermon 
but  matter  of  wit  and  fine  oratory.  If  we  mean  to  do  good  we  must  come  UTito 
men's  hearts,  not  in  word  only,  but  with  power.  Satan  moves  not  for  a  thousai  id 
squibs  and  wit-cracks  of  rhetoric.  Draw,  therefore,  this  sword  out  of  your  scab- 
bard and  strike  with  its  naked  edge ;  this  you  will  find  the  only  way  to  pierce  your 
people's  consciences  and  fetch  blood  of  their  sins.  (William  Gurnall.)  The  eyes 
of  Him  with  whom  we  have  to  do. — God  over  all : — I.  We  have  to  do  with  God 
fundamontly  and  pre-eminently  as  our  Creatob.  Whence  came  we  ?  How  are  we  ? 
What  are  we?  Who  made  us?  "  He  made  us,  and  not  we  ourselves  ;  we  are  Hia 
people,  and  the  sheep  of  His  pasture."  Now,  if  God  made  us,  and  not  we  ourselves, 
if  the  faculties  of  our  mind,  if  the  energies  of  our  heart,  if  the  wondrous  propor- 
tions  of  our  body,  are  all  from  Him,  then  can  we  ever  be  separate  from  God  ?  can 
we  ever  cease  to  have  that  relationship  to  Him  that  the  creature  has  to  the  Creator, 
the  relationship  that  a  child  has  to  a  parent  ?  A  parent  has  a  claim  upon  a  child 
as  long  as  it  lives.  We  have  to  do,  then,  with  a  God  of  love  as  our  Creator.  II.  We 
have  to  do  with  God  as  our  Preserveb.  Strange  that  men  live  on  year  after  year 
and  go  up  and  down,  sleeping  and  waking,  toiling  and  resting,  mourning  and 
rejoicing,  and  yet  they  can  forget  how  it  is  that  they  live  and  continue  in  life ; 
how  it  is  that  reason  still  holds  its  seat ;  how  it  is  that  the  heart  still  throbs ;  how 
it  is  that  the  harp  strings  are  kept  in  tune ;  how  it  is  they  are  not  continually 
tormented  with  anguish,  distemper,  and  distress :  can  any  man  account  for  this  ? 
If  we  did  not  make  ourselves,  if  we  did  not  string  the  harp,  we  cannot  keep  it 
attuned ;  if  we  did  not  form  the  mechanism  we  cannot  keep  it  from  decay  and  dis- 
solution. There  is  no  independent  Ufe  but  in  the  one  Fountain  of  all  life,  and  all 
other  life  is  a  life  of  dependence — a  dependence  of  the  creature  on  the  Creator,  of 
the  thing  made  upon  the  Maker,  of  the  thing  living  on  Him  that  gave  it  life.  We 
have  to  do  with  Him  as  our  Creator ;  we  must  have  to  do  with  Him  in  sickness  and 
health,  in  peril  and  in  safety,  in  life  and  in  death,  in  madness  and  in  reason,  in  thj 
lunatic  asylum  or  the  house  of  prayer ;  we  must  have  to  do  with  Him  as  our 
Creator.  "  Sir,"  said  a  poor  maniac,  that  had  escaped  from  bedlam,  and  was  pas- 
sing along  the  streets  of  London,  to  a  gentleman  he  met  at  the  angle  of  one  of  the 
streets,  "  did  you  ever  thank  God  for  reason  ?  "  The  man  stared,  and  said,  "  I  can- 
not say  that  I  ever  did."  "  Then  do  so  now,  for  I  have  lost  mine  I  "  said  the  poor 
man.  And  well  I  remember,  when  attending  the  deathbed  of  one  who  died  of  that 
most  fearful  disease,  hydrophobia,  as,  in  the  agony  of  the  spasms  of  disease,  she 
grasped  my  hand  until  it  ached,  I  rt-peated  to  her  many  of  those  beautiful  prayers  of 
ours,  in  one  of  which  y.-m  have,  or  ought  to  Lave  been  joining,  the  thanksgiving, 
"  We  bless  Tliec  for  our  creation,  preservation  "  ;  and  she  said,  with  a  shriek,  "  Ob 


CHAP,  nr.]  HEBREWS.  841 

f reservation,  preservation,  how  we  forget  it;  look  at  me,  and  let  none  who  know  it 
ever  forget  it  again  I  "  Yes,  preservation.  III.  We  have  to  do  with  Him  as  our 
bounteous  Benefactob,  our  giacious  Attender,  and  the  Fatherly  Provider  of  all  we 
have.  Whether  a  man  is  racked  with  pain  all  his  life,  or  disordered,  as  some  are, 
from  their  mother's  womb  ;  whether  he  is  blessed  with  health  and  a  cheerful  mind, 
or  if  he  has  anything  that  reUeves  him  in  this  vale  of  tears,  any  flower  that  blooms 
in  the  desert,  any  star  that  brightens  the  dark  sky  of  our  fallen  lot;  is  it  not  all  from 
God  f  It  is  a  terrible  thought  that  men  Lave  to  do  with  GoJ  in  all  that  they  have, 
and  abuse,  and  prostrate  to  their  own  destruction ;  it  is  all  from  God,  and  they  can- 
not Bay  in  one  thing  they  have  that  it  is  not  from  Him.  How  this  should  make  us 
Teoonciled,  however  He  may  deprive  us ;  how  we  should  be  grateful  for  anything  we 
have,  for  anything  short  of  hell  is  the  gift  of  his  grace,  to  us  who  are  deserving  of 
hell ;  and,  therefore,  we  ought  to  say,  oh  I  how  often,  "  Bless  the  Lord,  O  my 
soul :  and  all  that  is  within  me,  bless  His  holy  name."  IV.  We  have  to  do  with 
God  as  oar  Bdleb  and  Govebnob.  Does  any  man  suppose  that,  because  we  talk  of 
laws,  there  is  no  lawgiver?  What  is  law  without  the  power  of  enforcing  it?  What 
is  government  without  a  governor?  Without  the  Divine  and  mighty  Iluler  of  all, 
what  would  take  place  ?  Universal  anarchy,  chaos,  and  desolation.  V.  Ah  I  we 
have  to  do  with  Him  as  our  Lawoiveb.  He  has  given  a  law  ;  and  all  things — the 
sun,  the  moon,  the  planets,  the  stars — have  laws  ;  summer  and  winter,  autumn  and 
spring,  have  all  their  laws  and  appointed  times — the  clouds  have  their  laws,  and 
the  light  above — everything  has  its  laws  ;  and  do  you  suppose  the  moral  world  hath 
no  law,  that  the  great  God  hath  left  the  mind  and  spirit  without  anything  to  con- 
trol or  guide  it  ?  I  tell  you  no.  In  man,  at  the  first,  there  was  a  perfect  law  en- 
graven on  the  tablet  of  his  heart,  and  it  is  there  still ;  and  though  shattered 
the  tablet,  and  blotted  is  the  writing,  man  knows  far  more  than  he  fancies ; 
he  knows  more  what  he  ought  to  do,  and  what  he  ought  not  to  do,  than  he 
will  admit;  he  has  a  conscience  within  him,  and  this  is  from  God.  And  then 
we  Christians — professing  Christians — we  have  the  law  of  God  written  again,  re- 
published by  the  Div'ne  Eegistrar;  the  law  so  plain  and  so  simple  that  any  man 
that  has  a  heart  can  understand  it,  and  so  beautiful,  and  bountiful,  and  benevolent, 
and  perfect,  that  no  man  with  any  right  moral  sense  can  find  fault  with  it  or  deny 
it.  It  is  diversified  according  to  circumstances,  but  the  whole  is  based  upon  this 
principle — love  to  God  and  love  to  man.  VI.  We  have  yet  further  to  do  with  this 
great  God  as  our  Judge.  A  man  may  refuse  to  have  to  do  with  God  in  obedience 
and  submission  to  His  will ;  he  may  set  it  at  nought  and  forget  it ;  he  may  lose  all 
sense  of  it,  by  imbruting  his  moral  being  and  becoming  seared  as  with  a  hot  iron, 
but  Ik  cannot  refuse  to  have  to  do  with  his  Judge.  And  judgment  is  not  all  in  a 
future^  world — it  begins  here  ;  the  conscience  of  a  man  passes  a  kind  of  judgment 
upon  him  as  long  as  he  reads  it  imtil  he  blots  it  out,  or  drowns  it  in  mirth,  in  un- 
belief, in  crime,  in  debauchery,  in  drunkenness,  aud  so  seals  it.  Not  only  so,  judg- 
ment has  begun  in  this  world  in  present  punishment,  often  in  present  comfort  and 
joy  and  peace.  VII.  We  have  all  of  us  to  do  with  God  as  Savioub — "  a  just 
God  and  a  Saviour."  I  believe  in  the  beautiful  summary  of  our  Creed,  and  in  the 
Bcriptural  voice  of  our  Church,  "  first,  I  learn  to  believe  in  God  the  Father,  who 
made  me  and  all  the  world  ;  secondly,  in  God  the  Son,  who  hath  redeemed  me,  and 
all  mankind  ;  thirdly,  in  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  sanctifieth  me,  and  all  the  elect 
people  of  God."  I  believe,  therefore,  that  God  laid  on  His  own  Son  "  the  iniquity 
of  us  all."  He  did  not  become  simply  the  Son  of  man,  but  the  Son  of  men — the 
Son  of  mankind.  He  did  not  take  the  nature  of  one  race,  or  of  one  people,  or  of 
one  colour,  or  of  one  clime ;  but  He  took  upon  Him  the  seed  of  Abraham  :  He  took 
upon  Him  our  nature  and  became  the  Son  of  man,  so  that  none  can  claim  Him  ex- 
clusively, and  say,  "  He  did  not  die  for  you  "  ;  nor  can  any  one  say,  "  He  died  for 
me  alone."  He  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  and  especially  of  them  that  belong  "  to 
the  household  of  faith."  If  any  of  you  perish,  you  perish,  not  as  heathen,  but  aa 
professed  and  baptized  Christians  ;  and  how  this  will  turn  into  a  source  of  remorse 
and  "  the  worm  that  never  dies,"  if  you  perish  with  the  name  of  Christian,  with 
the  Cross  of  Christ,  upon  your  brow  I  See  to  it,  "  for  to  whom  much  is  given,  of  him 
shall  be  much  required."  VIII.  We  have  to  do  with  God,  or,  at  least,  we  may  have 
to  do  with  Him — we  have  if  we  are  wise,  we  have  if  we  are  saved — as  oub 
EECONCILED  Fatheb,  "  the  Lord  our  Righteousness,"  in  whom  we  are  chosen,  in 
whom  we  are  sealed,  in  whom  we  are  at  peace  with  God.  Oh  1  to  have  to  do  with 
God  in  peace,  aud  reconciliation,  and  adoption ;  to  have  to  do  with  God,  not  bo" 
cause  we  must,  but  because  we  would  be  "  made  willing  in  the  day  of  His  power," 


342  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it, 

to  have  His  love  constraining  us  so  that  we  yield  ourselves  to  Him  as  *'  those  that 
are  alive  from  the  dead,  and  our  poor  members  as  instruments  of  righteousnesa 
unto  God."  We  have  to  do  with  Him,  "  groaning  within  ourselves,  and  waiting  for 
the  adoption  :  to  wit,  the  rclemption  of  our  bodies  "  ;  and  we  are  able  to  testify  that 
it  is  through  His  grace  that  He  has  made  us  His  children.  IX,  Then  how  sweet  to 
have  to  do  with  Him  as  our  Sanctifier — our  portion  for  ever ;  our  Sanctifier, 
restoring  us  from  the  ruins  of  our  fallen  race,  and  raising  us  again  to  be  a  temple 
meet  for  His  own  habitation ;  beautifying  us  with  grace  that  shines  in  the  Adam 
here,  and  that  will  shine  more  brightly  in  the  Second  Adam.  We  have  to  do  with 
Him  in  anticipaiion,  that  we  may  be  like  Him  for  ever.  (H.  Stowell,  M.A.)  Our 
relation  to  God  : — I.  With  God  we  pbe-eminently  "  have  to  do."  We  stand  in  a 
very  intimate  connection  with  Him.  To  the  Being  who,  in  Himself,  is  infinitely 
great  and  glorious,  we  bear  a  very  close  and  momentous  re'ation.  He  is  our  Creator, 
Proprietor,  Governor,  Benefactor,  and  Judge,  and  therefore  has  claims  upon  us 
manifold  and  mighty.  In  the  services  of  religion,  the  common  business  of  life,  the 
mysteries  of  death,  the  solemnities  of  judgment,  and  the  issues  of  eternity,  we 
"  have  to  do  with  "  him.  We  must  have  to  do  with  Him,  whether  we  will  or  not. 
And  oh,  surely,  we  should  transact  with  Him  as  a  Saviour  since  we  shall  have  to 
transact  with  Him  as  a  Judge.  II.  There  is  "  no  creature  that  is  not  manifest 
IN  His  sight  "  ;  yea,  "  all  things  are  naked  and  open  to  His  eyes."  Angels  and  men 
— saints  and  sinners — are  alike  the  objects  of  His  scrutiny.  To  Him  the  actions 
of  all  hands  and  the  secrets  of  all  souls  are  intimately  known.  The  phrase  "  all 
things  "  indicates  the  univercal  range  which  the  eye  of  Jehovah  takes.  The  words 
"manifest,"  "naked,"  "opened,"  express  the  intensity  and  clearness  of  the  vision 
which  He  exerts  throughout  the  vast  and  varied  sphere.  With  what  reverence 
should  we  think  of  Him  whose  eyes  are  ever  fixed  on  us,  and  with  whom,  far  more 
than  with  father,  husband,  brother,  bosom-friend,  "  we  have  to  do  I  "  With  what 
vigilance  should  we  guard  our  hearts  1  and  with  what  circumspection  should  we 
regulate  our  lives !  (A.  S.  Patterson.)  Watched  by  God : — Can  we  indulge  in  sin 
since  the  eye  of  God  is  ever  resting  upon  us  ?  It  was  enough  to  cause  the  ancient 
Roman  to  be  circumspect,  if  the  words  "  Cato  sees  you  "  were  whispered  in  his  ear.  It 
is  said  that  when  the  Uoges  of  Venice  had  degenerated  into  imperious  and  oppressive 
rulers,  if  only  four  of  the  inquisitors  whom  the  State  secretly  employed  were  present  at 
any  of  the  great  processions  or  festivals  for  which  that  city  was  famous,  it  was  sufS- 
cient  to  overawe  the  mighty  throng  of  people  present.  How  much  more  guarded  and 
serious  should  our  deportment  be,  seemg  that  we  are  ever  watched  by  Him  whose  eyes 
are  like  a  flame  of  fire  1  (C.  Hewitt.)  God  knows  all : — "  Mother,"  asked  a  child, 
"  since  nothing  is  ever  lost,  where  do  all  thoughts  go  ?  "  "  To  God,"  answered  the 
mother,  gravely,  "  who  remembers  them  for  ever,"  "  For  ever  I  "  said  the  child ;  he 
leaned  his  head,  and  drawing  closer  to  his  mother,  murmured,  "  I  am  frightened  I  " 
{Gold  Du.^t.)  God  with  us : — Horace  Bushnell  woke  up  in  the  night  and  said,  "Oh, 
God  is  a  wonderful  Being  !  "  And  when  his  daughter  replied,  "  Yes  ;  is  He  with 
you  ?  "  the  old  man  replied,  "  Yes,  in  a  certain  sense  He  is  with  me ;  and  I  have 
no  doubt  He  is  with  me  in  a  sense  I  do  not  imagine,"  {Baxendale's  Anecdotes.) 
Omniscience  illustrated : — A  few  years  ago  a  gentleman  in  Ireland  had  a  farm  there, 
about  a  mile  and  a  half  from  his  house.  It  was  situated  on  the  side  of  a  hill,  and 
from  his  attic  window  he  could  get  a  view  of  every  portion  of  the  land.  He  would 
often  go  to  this  window  with  a  powerful  telescope,  and  about  five  minutes  every 
day  he  would  spend  in  this  way,  examining  what  his  workpeople  were  doing,  and 
whether  the  work  of  the  farm  was  bemg  carried  on  properly  or  not.  The  men 
happened  to  know  this,  and  it  often  quickened  them  in  their  various  duties  to 
know  that  the  master's  eye  from  the  little  attic  window  might  possibly  at  that  very 
moment  be  resting  upon  them.  Our  Master's  eye  is  always  resting  upon  us.  He 
sees  and  knows  all  we  think  or  do  or  say,  and  yet  how  many  people  act  as  though 
God  were  both  blind  and  deaf.  (Preacher's  Promptuary  of  Anecdote.)  God  is 
present : — The  celebrated  Linnteus  always  testified,  in  his  conversations,  writings, 
and  actions,  the  greatest  sense  of  God's  omniscience  ;  yea,  he  was  so  strongly  im- 
pressed with  the  idea  that  he  wrote  over  the  door  of  his  library,  Itmocui  vivite, 
Numen  adest — "Live  innocently,  God  is  present."  (K.  Arvine.)  God  a  Person: — 
Do  not  preach  about  Providence ;  preach  about  God.  There  is  no  objection  to  the 
word  "providence"  when  used  in  connection  with  God.  But  when  a  man  says,  "  I 
am  very  thankful  to  Providence,"  "Providence  has  been  very  good  to  me,"  I 
always  feel  disposed  to  say,  "You  coward!  why  don't  you  say  God?  You  know 
you  mean  God  all  the  time."    (J.  C.  Miller,  D.D.)      The  cry  of  the  human  heart  for 


CHAP.  IT.]  EEBEEWS.  843 

a  personal  God: — A  leader  of  thought  in  Germany,  famous  as  a  poet,  famous  as  a 
man  of  letters — who  had  through  his  long  literary  career  fought  against  the  idea  of 
a  personal  God — when  poor  in  purse,  paralytic  in  body,  and  in  his  last  week  of  life 
wrote  thus  to  one  of  his  old  class-mates,  and  under  its  style  of  banter  I  detect  a 
pathetic  minor  of  earnest  feeling.  *' A  religious  reaction  has  set  in  upon  me  for 
some  time.  God  knows  whether  the  morphine  or  the  poultices  have  anything  to  do 
with  it.  It  is  so.  I  believe  in  a  personal  God.  To  tliis  we  come  when  we  are  sick 
to  death  and  broken  down.  Do  not  make  a  crime  of  it.  If  the  German  people 
accept  the  personal  King  of  Prussia  in  their  need,  why  should  nut  I  accept  a  per- 
sonal God?  My  friend,  here  is  a  great  truth.  When  health  is  used  up,  money 
used  up,  and  sound  human  senses  used  up,  Christianity  begins."  (C.  Stanford, 
D.D.)  An  all-seeing  God:-  If  you  believe  that  God  is  about  your  bed,  and  about  your 
path,  and  spieth  out  all  your  ways,  then  take  care  not  to  do  the  least  thing,  nor  to 
speak  the  least  word,  nor  to  indulge  the  least  thought,  which  you  have  reason  to 
think  would  offend  Him.  Suppose  that  a  messei)ger  of  God,  an  angel,  were  now 
standing  at  your  right  liand  and  fixing  his  eyes  upon  you,  would  you  not  take  care 
to  abstain  from  every  word  or  action  that  you  knew  would  offend  hira  ?  Yea,  sup- 
pose one  of  your  mortal  fellow  servants,  suppose  only  a  holy  man  stood  by  you, 
would  you  not  be  extremely  anxious  how  you  conducted  yourself  both  in  word  and 
action?  How  much  more  cautious  ou^^ht  you  to  be  when  you  know,  not  a  holy  man,  not 
an  angel  of  God,  but  GodHimself.theHoly  One,  is  inspecting  your  heart,  your  tongue, 
your  himd,  every  moment,  and  that  He  Iliiaself  will  surely  call  you  to  an  account 
for  all  you  think,  speak,  or  act  I  {J.  Wesley.)  God  sees  all : — A  man  who  wag 
in  the  habit  of  going  into  a  neighbour's  corn-field  to  steal  the  ears,  one  day  took  his 
son  with  him,  a  boy  of  eight  years  of  age.  The  father  told  him  to  hold  the  bag 
while  he  loukc'l  if  any  one  was  near  to  see  him.  After  standing  on  the  fence,  and 
peeping  through  all  the  corn  rows,  he  returned  and  took  the  bag  from  the  child,  and 
began  his  guilts  work.  "Father,"  said  the  boy,  "you  forgot  to  look  somewhere 
else."  The  man  dropped  the  bag  in  a  fright,  and  said,  "  Which  way,  child  ?  "  sup- 
posing he  had  seen  snme  one.  "  You  forgot  to  look  up  to  the  sky  to  see  if  God  waa 
noticing  you. "  The  father  felt  this  reproof  of  the  child  so  much,  that  he  left  the 
com,  returned  home,  and  never  again  ventured  to  steal,  remembering  the  truth 
his  child  had  taught  him,  that  the  eye  of  God  always  beholds  us.  God  seeing  all 
ihi)igs : — When  we  perceive  that  a  vast  number  of  objects  enter  in  at  our  eye  by  a  very 
small  passagp,  and  yet  are  so  little  jumbled  in  that  crowd  that  they  open  themselves 
regularly,  though  there  is  no  great  space  for  that  either,  and  that  they  give  us  a  dis- 
tinct apprehension  of  many  objects  that  lie  before  us,  some  even  at  a  vast  distance  from 
ns,  both  of  their  nature,  colour,  and  size,  and  by  a  secret  geometry,  from  the  anglea 
that  they  make  in  our  eye,  we  judge  of  the  distance  of  all  objects,  both  from  us  and 
from  one  another — if  to  this  we  add  the  vast  number  of  figures  that  we  receive  and 
retain  long,  and  with  great  order,  in  our  brains,  which  we  easily  fetch  up  either  in  our 
thoughts  or  in  our  discourses,  we  shall  find  it  less  difficult  to  apprehend  how  an 
Infinite  Mind  should  have  the  universal  viow  of  all  things  ever  present  before  it. 
(W.  Burnet.) 

Vers.  14-16.  A  great  High  Priest.— O/tr  great  High  Priest : — I.  Practicai, 
FEATURES  OF  ouB  Lord's  PRIESTHOOD.  1.  It  is  an  argument  for  steadfastness  in  the 
Christian  life.  (1)  The  fact  that  Christ  is  our  Priest  (ver.  14).  (2)  That  heaven  ia 
the  sphere  of  the  exercise  of  His  priesthood.  2.  It  is  an  encouagement  to  the 
faith  of  the  believer,  (1)  Because  of  the  sympathy  of  our  great  High  Priest  (ver. 
15).  (2)  Because  of  His  personal  experience  of  temptations.  (3)  Because  of  His 
sinlessness.  (4)  Believing  prayer  under  such  circumstances  cannot  be  denied.  II. 
Odb  Lord's  priesthood  conformed  to  the  OENER.Oi  laws  op  priesthood.  1.  The 
priest  must  be  taken  from  among  men  (chap.  v.  1).  2.  The  priest  was  ordained  to 
offer  sacrifices  to  God.  3.  The  priest  was  ordained  to  be  ready  to  sympathise  with 
the  unfortunate  and  wretched  (chap,  y.  2).  4.  The  priest  was  not  self-appointed 
(chap.v.  4).  5.  But  the  change  in  the  order  of  priestiiood  in  our  Lord's  case  ia 
most  suggestive  and  significant.  It  implies — (1)  Perfection  (chap.  vii.  11-19).  2) 
Perpetuity  (chap,  vii.  20-25).  (3)  That  Christ  alone  could  meet  such  requirements 
(chap,  vii.  26).    Lessons :   1.  The  priesthood  of  Christ  implies  Divine  qualities. 

2.  The  sphere  of  the  priesthood  of  Christ  ensures  the  finished  work  as  Redeemer. 

3.  The  priesthood  of  Christ  guarantees  all-sufficient  sympathy,  assistance,  and 
nltimate  salvation.  (D,  C.  Hughes,  M.A.)  Jesus  Christ,  the  Mediator  betioeen 
God  and  man ; — ^I.  The  necessity  there  is  fob  a  mediatob  between   God  ano 


844  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

MAN.  1.  This  is  clear,  il  we  consider  the  circumstances  in  which  our  first  parents 
placed  themselves.  2.  It  is  implied  in  the  Divine  institution  of  sacrifices  and  of 
the  order  of  priesthood.  3.  It  is  expressly  taught  in  Holy  Scripture.  4.  It  is  con- 
finned  by  the  almost  universal  practice  of  heathen  nations.  II.  The  sufticiency 
OF  Jesus  Christ  to  sustain  this  important  chabacteb.  1.  His  greatness.  2. 
His  goodness.    III.  The  pabticular  manner  in  which  we,  as  mcrviDDALs,  abb  to 

DEBIVE  THE  BENEFITS  DESIGNED    TO    BE    CONVEYED    BY    THE    MEDIATION    OF    OXJB    LOBD. 

"  Let  US  come  to  the  throne  " — in  other  words,  let  us  come  to  God — to  Him  who 
sits  upon  the  throne.  This  implies,  of  course,  a  previous  conviction  of  our  being 
separated  from  God,  and  of  the  necessity  of  our  return.  (/.  Crowther.)  En- 
couragement to  holdfast : — 1.  He  giveth  them  a  direction  for  entering  into  their  rest ; 
to  hold  fast  their  profession ;  that  is,  in  faith  and  love  to  avow  the  doctrine  of 
Christ.  (1)  Then  he  that  would  enter  into  rest  must  be  steadfast  in  maintaining 
and  avowing  the  true  religion  of  Christ.  (2)  He  who  quitteth  the  profession  of  the 
truth  of  Christ  taketh  courses  to  cut  off  himself  from  God's  rest.  For  if  we  denv 
Christ  He  will  deny  us.  2.  He  commandeth  to  hold  fast  our  profession.  Then — (1) 
God  will  not  be  pleased  with  backsliding,  or  coldness,  or  indifference  in  matters  of 
religion,  because  this  is  not  to  hold  it  fast ;  but  to  take  a  loose  hold,  which  is  the 
ready  way  to  defection.  (2)  There  is  danger  lest  our  adversaries  pull  the  truth  from 
us.  (3)  The  more  danger  we  foresee,  the  more  strongly  must  we  hold  the  truth. 
3.  The  encounigement  which  He  giveth  to  hold  fast  is,  We  have  Christ  a  great 
High  Priest,  &o.  Then — (1)  As  we  have  need  of  threatening,  to  drive  us  to  enter 
into  God's  rest,  so  have  we  need  of  encouragements  to  draw  us  thereunto.  (2) 
All  our  encouragement  is  from  the  help  which  we  shall  have  in  Christ,  and  that  is 
sufficient.  (3)  Christ  is  always  for  us  in  His  office,  albeit  we  do  not  always  feel  Him 
sensibly  in  us.  4.  He  calleth  Christ  a  great  High  Priest,  to  put  difference  betwixt 
the  t.^  pical  high  priest  and  Him  in  whom  the  truth  of  the  priesthood  is  found. 
Then  what  the  typical  high  priest  did  in  show  for  the  people,  that  the  great  High 
Priest  doth  in  substance  for  us  ;  that  is,  reconcileth  us  to  God  perfectly,  blesseth 
us  with  all  blessings  solidly,  and  intercedeth  for  us  perpetually.  5.  He  affirmeth 
of  Christ,  that  He  is  passed  into  heaven  ;  to  wit,  in  regard  of  His  manhood, 
to  take  possession  thereof  in  our  name.  Then  —  (1)  Christ's  corporal  pre- 
sence is  in  heaven  only,  and  not  on  earth,  from  whence  He  is  passed.  (2) 
Christ's  corporal  presence  in  heaven,  and  absence  from  us  in  that  respect, 
hindereth  not  our  right  unto  Him,  and  spiritual  having  or  possessing  of  Him. 
(3)  Yea,  it  is  our  ei.couragement  to  seek  entry  into  heaven,  that  He  is  there 
before  us.  6.  He  calleth  Him  Jesus  the  Son  of  God ;  to  lead  us  through  His 
humanity  unto  His  Godhead.  Then  no  rest  on  the  Mediator  till  we  go  to  the 
rock  of  His  Godhead,  where  is  strength  and  satisfaction  to  faith.  (D.  Dickson,  M.A.) 
Our  High  Priest :  —We  know  how  one  man  sometimes  controls  great  masses  of 
men.  We  know  how  the  soldiers  of  Napoleon,  not  only  in  the  day  of  battle,  but  to 
the  end  of  their  lives,  carried  in  them  a  worshipping  conception  of  that  great  hero 
of  battles.  We  know  that  everywhere  it  is  the  habit  of  men  to  cling  to  some  great 
nature  and  attempt  to  pattern  their  life  after  his  life  and  to  Uve  by  his  power.  Such 
is  the  genius  of  the  New  Testament.  It  holds  up  before  the  mind  of  the  Jews  the 
pattern  which  is  most  heroic  to  them — the  high  priest.  It  holds  up  Jesus  Christ 
as  the  Exemplar,  the  Leader,  the  Deliverer,  the  God  imminent  to  their  imagination, 
and  attempts  to  draw  men  not  only  through  all  those  endeavours  which  they  make 
to  grow,  but  through  all  those  experiences  which  befall  them  as  residents  of  thia 
lower  sphere,  without  diminishing  their  faith,  their  hope,  their  joy,  their  courage, 
or  their  strength.  This  is  the  way  in  which  Christ  is  presented  to  men.  It  is  quite 
possible  for  an  army  to  be  enthusiastic  for  their  king ;  but  then,  he  is  a  different 
sort  of  being  from  themselves ;  and  they  mutter,  "  He  is  a  king,  and  has  a  good 
time.  He  does  not  know  what  it  is  to  be  wet,  and  half  starved,  and  wearied  with 
marching  through  the  mud.  He  has  no  idea  of  what  we  poor  privates  have  to  en- 
dure." But  if  the  general  of  an  army  has  been  a  private  soldier,  and  has  gone 
through  weary,  dragging  marches,  and  has  been  hungry  and  sick,  and  if  he  remem- 
bers it  all,  and  if  when  his  men  go  into  camp  he  makes  his  round,  and  sits 
down  by  the  side  of  one  and  another,  the  soldiers  say,  "  Though  our  general  is  re- 
garded as  the  best  general  in  Europe,  yet  he  is  not  above  thinking  of  us  and  feeling 
for  us  poor  fellows  in  the  ranks  ;  he  has  been  situated  just  as  we  are,  and  he  ha» 
sympathy  for  us" — what  an  inconceivable  power  that  sympathy  shown  to  those 
soldiers  gives  to  that  general !  Now,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  identifies  Himself  with 
the  whole  universe  in  ^uch  a  way  that  we  are  sure  that  He  knows  us,  and  iveij 


CHAP.  ly.J  HEBREWS.  US 

possible  experience  that  we  can  go  through.  Then  He  is  lifted  up,  and  is  declared 
to  be  at  the  head  of  power  in  the  universe.  And  both  of  these  things — the  humili- 
ation  by  which  He  gets  hold  of  our  confidence  and  the  elevation  by  which  we  are 
filled  with  enthusiasm  for  Him — makes  Him  one  who  is  our  inspiration  and  our 
encouragement.  Now  this  conception  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  unfolded  in  many 
different  ways,  as  if  there  were  not  enough  syllables  in  the  world  to  describe  it  I 
Now  there  is  a  double  connection  between  men  and  their  Leader,  Jesus  Christ.  Li 
the  first  place,  He  is  united  to  us  by  that  which  we  need  and  lack.  That  which 
brings  a  physician  to  the  side  of  the  afflicted  man's  bed  in  his  disease,  his  wounds, 
his  putrefying  sores.  And  we  are  in  some  respects  in  the  same  way  related  to  Christ. 
He  looks  upon  our  sins  as  things  to  be  healed.  He  looks  upon  us,  in  our  unfortu- 
nate condition,  as  objects  to  be  sorrowed  over,  and  to  be  saved.  We  have,  then,  a 
ground  for  concluding  that  it  is  possible  for  us  to  Uve  upon  a  higher  plane  than 
that  which  we  find  ourselves  upon.  All  men  cannot  rise  to  the  attainments  of  some. 
And,  generally  speaking,  there  is,  I  think,  an  element  of  discouragement  among 
men  iu  attempting  to  form  a  high  religious  life  in  themselves.  "It  is  of  no  use," 
they  say.  "  The  temptations  and  the  besetments  are  too  many. "  But  one  is  hopeful 
and  courageous  who  has  a  conception  of  being  folded  in  and  guided  by  the  watchful 
care  and  love  of  Jesus,  who  is  at  the  source  and  centre  of  power,  and  who  works, 
not  on  the  principle  of  justice  and  equity,  but  on  the  principle  of  love,  doing  not 
that  which  we  deserve  to  have  done,  but  that  which  will  rescue  us,  relieve  us,  build 
us  up,  instituting  new  measures  instead  of  those  which  prevail  in  courts  of  justice. 
If  a  man  wants  to  be  a  Christian ;  if  he  wants  to  be  Godlike  in  his  character  and 
conduct ;  if  he  wants  to  practice  benevolence  and  self-denial ;  if  he  wants  to  culti- 
vate humility  and  gentleness ;  then  he  has  encouragement  in  the  life  and  power  ol 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  has  been  through  the  experiences  of  this  life,  and  who 
knows  what  trials  men  are  beset  with  here,  who  knows  what  inward  strivings  we 
have,  and  who,  notwithstanding  his  knowledge  of  these  things,  loves  us,  and  is 
willing  to  watch  over  us  from  day  to  day  in  order  to  build  us  up  in  spiritual  things. 
With  that  inspiration.  I  think  a  man  may  well  enter  with  courage  and  confidence 
upon  the  Christian  life — a  courage  and  a  confidence  w'aich  he  could  not  feel  if  there 
were  not  this  thought  of  his  God,  his  Saviour,  his  Leader,  who  has  given  a  concrete, 
practical  example  which  he  can  follow,  and  following  which  he  can  attain  to  the 
Christian  character  upon  a  higher  plane.  Then,  consider  the  experiences  which 
men  are  obliged  to  go  through  in  this  life  on  account  of  the  inequalities  of  condition. 
Men  do  not  walk  abreast.  They  are  scattered  up  and  down  through  the  earth  with 
every  conceivable  variation  of  circumstance  and  opportunity.  Some  men  are  rich, 
and  some  men  are  poor.  Some  men  are  educated,  and  some  men  wake  up  in  mid- 
life to  see  what  education  would  have  been  to  them,  but  to  find  that  it  is  too  late 
for  them  to  acquire  it.  If  a  man  looks  about  and  compares  himself  with  those  who 
are  around  him,  if  he  compares  his  condition,  his  felicities  or  infelicities,  with  theirs, 
he  may  easily  become  discouraged  and  fall  into  complainings.  Hear  what  the  Master 
says  when  He  speaks  on  that  subject:  "The  disciple  is  not  above  his  master,  norths 
servant  above  his  lord.  It  is  enough  for  the  disciple  that  he  be  as  his  master,  and 
the  servant  as  his  lord."  Is  there  one  single  privation  known  to  human  life  that 
your  Leader  has  not  experienced  ?  Is  there  one  single  circumstance  of  position,  of 
hindrance,  which  you  have  been  subject  to  that  your  Lord  has  not  felt  in  its  full 
weight  ?  The  disciple  ought  not  to  complain  of  treatment  which  he  sees  his  own 
Master  bear  with  equanimity  and  meekness.  What  if  every  iU-fortune  be  yours  ? 
What  if  you  are  emptied  of  everything  ?  What  if  you  are  overthrown  ?  What  if 
your  health  is  broken  down  in  mid-life?  What  if  your  affections  are  blighted? 
What  if  your  name  is  traduced  ?  So  then,  in  the  midst  of  the  great  deficiencies  of 
life,  its  alterations,  its  trials,  you  have  the  leadership  of  this  personal  Christ,  who 
is  your  Friend,  your  Guide,  who  is  your  Inspiration  to  patience,  and  who  is  your 
Joy  and  Triumph  in  the  midst  of  sorrow  and  defeat.  You  cannot  tell,  by  the  way  a 
cup  looks  when  it  goes  into  the  furnace,  what  it  will  look  like  when  it  comes  out. 
When,  in  the  pottery,  the  colours  are  laid  on,  they  do  not  appear  as  they  will  after 
they  have  gone  through  the  burning  process.  Many  a  cup  whose  rim  shines  with  gold 
after  it  comes  out,  goes  in  black  as  a  negro's  face,  such  is  the  nature  of  the  gold  when 
it  is  prepared  for  the  furnace.  Even  when  it  comes  out  it  is  but  little  changed  in 
appearance ;  and  yet  the  colour  is  the  same  that  it  was  when  it  went  in.  It  is  burnt  in 
now,  however,  while  then  it  was  simply  laid  on.  But  there  is  another  process  that  it 
goes  through.  By  and  by  it  is  burnished ;  and  the  moment  attrition  is  brought  to  beat 
on  it,  that  moment  the  black  begins  to  fall  off,  and  the  gold  begins  tv  come  out  in  iti 


846  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  it. 

perfect  colour.  Many  a  man  says,  "  I  have  endured  and  suffered  year  after  year,  and  I 
am  willing  to  be  painted,  and  to  go  into  the  furnace,  if  I  can  come  out  anything  comely 
and  beautiful ;  but  I  am  as  black  and  homely  as  ever."  Yes ;  but  time  is  going  to 
reveal  what  you  have  become.  You  do  not  know  what  you  are.  You  do  not  know 
how  much  of  what  appears  on  the  surface  is  cineration  or  charcoal  which  will  fall 
away  in  death.  You  do  not  know  what  effects  are  being  wrought  by  the  strifes  that 
are  going  on  in  the  inner  chamber  of  your  soul.  But  God  knows  ;  and  you  should 
have  faith  that  all  will  be  well  at  last.  He  is  dealing  with  you,  and  He  says  to  jou, 
•'  You  do  not  know  what  I  am  doing,  but  you  shall  know  hereafter."  No  man  is 
just  what  he  seems  to  be.  Everybody  is  being  changed.  God  is  preparing  us  for  a 
higher  state  of  existence.  By  the  things  which  we  suffer  or  endure,  by  yokes  and 
burdens,  by  wounds  and  sickness,  by  failures,  by  all  manner  of  overwhelmings  in 
this  life,  He  is  working  out  in  us  that  stature  which  shall  yet  appear  in  glory.  {H. 
W.  Beecher.)  Christ  a  great  High  Priest : — I,  The  peiestly  moNiTT  of  Jesus. 
"  Seeing,  then,  that  we  have  a  great  High  Priest."  1.  Christ  is  a  Priest.  The 
term  signifies  one  who  ministers  in  holy  things.  The  priests  under  the  law  were 
distinguished  as  follows — (1)  They  were  appointed  of  God.  (2)  Separated  to  their 
office  and  work  at  a  peculiar  time.  (3)  Consecrated  with  the  washing  of  water  and 
anointing  oil.  (4)  Had  peculiar  apparel  and  ornaments ;  the  robe,  the  mitre,  and  the 
breast-plate.  (5)  They  taught  the  people.  (6)  Offered  sacrifices.  (7)  And  burned 
incense  before  the  Lord.  It  will  easily  be  seen  how  strikingly  all  these  exhibited 
the  character  and  work  of  Jesus.  2.  Christ  is  a  High  Priest.  Now  the  high  priest 
was  distinguished  from  the  other  priests — (1)  As  he  was  appealed  to  on  all  impor- 
tant occasions,  and  decided  all  controversies.  (2)  He  offered  the  great  annual  sacri- 
fice. (3)  He  only  entered  into  the  holiest  of  all  once  a  year.  (4)  He  offered  the 
annual  intercessory  prayer,  and  came  forth  and  blessed  the  people  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord.  3.  Christ  is  the  Great  High  Priest.  Now  Jesus  is  infinitely  greater  than 
the  high  priests  of  old.  (1)  In  the  dignity  of  His  person.  He  is  the  Son  of  God, 
Heir  of  all  things.  Lord  of  all.  (2)  In  the  purity  of  His  nature.  "  Holy,  harmless,  and 
separate  from  sinners."  "  Without  spot."  (3)  In  the  value  and  efficacy  of  His  sacri- 
fice. An  equivalent  for  the  world's  guilt.  Only  once  offered,  and  for  all  sins.  (4)  In 
the  unchangeable  perpetuity  of  His  office.  "  A  priest  for  ever."  "  An  unchangeable 
priesthood  "  (chap.  vii.  24).  He  had  no  direct  predecessor,  and  He  shall  have  no  suc- 
cessor. "Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever."  II.  His  high  ex- 
/UiTATioN.  "  Who  is  passed  into  the  heavens."  1.  The  place  into  which  He  is  exalted. 
*'  The  heavens."  Represented  of  old  by  the  holiest  of  all.  Described  by  Jesus  as  His 
Father's  house.     2.  The  manner  of  His  exaltation.   "  He  passed  into  the  heavens." 

(1)  According  to  His  own  predictions,  (2)  While  in  the  act  of  blessing  His  disciples. 
(3)  Visibly,  and  with  great  splendour.  3.  The  great  end  of  His  exaltation.  (1) 
To  enjoy  the  rewards  of  His  sufferings  and  toils  (Phil.  ii.  6,  8,  9).  (2)  To  appear 
before  God  as  the  intercessor  of  His  Church.  (3)  To  carry  on  His  mediatorial  de- 
signs. Hence  He  is  to  subdue  His  foes,  prolong  His  days,  see  His  seed,  and  witness 
the  travail  of  His  soul  until  He  is  satisfied.  (4)  To  abide  as  the  Mediator  between 
God  and  men  to  the  end  of  the  Christian  state.  Now  God  only  treats  with  us  by 
and  through  Jesus.  And  He  is  the  only  way  of  access  to  the  Father  (John  xiv.  6 ; 
Heb.  ix.  28).  III.  The  practical  influence  this  subject  should  have  upon  us. 
"Let  us  hold  fast  our  profession."  1.  The  profession  referred  to.  It  isa  profes- 
sion of  faith  and  hope  in  Christ,  and  of  love  and  obedience  to  Him.  2.  This  pro- 
fession must  be  maintained.  Held  fast,  not  abandoned.  We  shall  be  tempted, 
tried,  persecuted.  Our  profession  may  cost  us  our  property,  liberty,  lives.  This 
profession  must  be  held  fast  by  the  exercise  of  vigorous  faith,  constant  love,  and 
cheerful  obedience.     (1)  For  Christ's  ?ake.     Whose  we  are,  and  whom  we  serve. 

(2)  For  the  profession's  sake  ;  that  Christ's  cause  may  not  be  injured,  and  His  people 
cast  down.  (3)  Especially  for  our  own  sake.  It  is  only  thus  we  can  retain  Divine 
acceptance,  peace,  joy,  and  the  sure  prospect  of  eternal  life.  Application :  1.  Christ's 
example  is  the  model  of  our  steadfastness.  2.  Christ's  exaltation  should  be  the 
exciting  attraction  to  steadfastness.  3.  Christ's  intercession  will  always  provide 
the  grace  necessary  to  "  our  holding  fast  our  profession."  (J.  Burns,  D.D.)  Christ 
the  Reconciler  : — This  book  presents  an  ideal  of  Christ  as  a  reconciler.  Of  what  ? 
It  has  b.^en  said  that  man  was  reconciled  to  God.  That  is  correct.  Men  are  recon- 
ciled to  the  law  of  God,  but  that  is  vagueness  itself.  Christ  is  a  reconciler  by  re- 
vealing to  us  what  is  the  real  interior  nature  of  perfectness,  and  what  bearing  it  has 
npou  imperfectness.  The  experience  of  noble  souls  is  that  discord  prevails,  and 
that  with  the  struggle  there  can  be  no  peace.     There  may  be  peace  by  lowering  the 


CHAP,  rv.]  HEBREWS.  847 

ideal  of  our  range  of  attainment,  or  by  indifference  and  discouragement,  but  not  by 
vital  stress  and  strife  can  men  have  peace,  when  they  are  obliged  every  day  to  see 
that  they  come  short,  not  of  the  law  in  its  entirety  and  purity,  but  in  their  own 
conceptions  in  regard  to  single  lines  of  conduct.  Men  all  around  are  resolving  to 
do  the  right  and  are  eternally  coming  short  of  it,  and  then  they  say :  "  How  under 
the  sun  am  I  going  to  face  God  I  I  cannot  face  my  neighbour."  The  reason  is, 
that  your  neighbour  is  not  God.  There  is  a  view  of  God  that  while  it  intensifies 
the  motives  for  righteousness,  encourages  men  who  are  unrighteous,  and  brings 
about  a  reconciliation  between  these  constantly  antagonising  experiences  in  the 
human  bosom.  It  is  to  such  that  this  experience  of  Christ  is  presented,  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  spotless  High  Priest  who  offered  Himself  once  for  all  mankind.  He 
came  forth  and  lived  among  men,  and  He  knows  what  their  tears  and  struggles  are, 
what  their  temptations  and  diflSculties.  Every  faculty  that  is  found  in  a  human 
being  was  found  in  Christ,  and  yet  He  was  without  sin.  "  Let  us  therefore  come 
boldly  unto  the  throne  of  grace  that  we  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help 
in  time  of  need."  Do  not  come  to  a  man  who  is  conscious  of  his  own  infirmities, 
for  he  would  not  help  you ;  but  come  to  that  Being  who  is  conscious  of  absolute 
purity,  and  from  whom  you  will  get  higher  sympathy  and  a  quicker  succour.  The 
moral  perfectness  of  Christ  develops  sympathy  for  the  sinful.  It  needed  something 
like  this  in  that  age  ^hen  the  better  men  were  the  worst  men,  men  whose  righteous, 
ness  was  finished  off  by  an  enamel  of  seltishness,  the  men  whose  temperance  made 
them  hate  drunkards,  the  men  whose  honesty  made  them  hate  men  of  slippery 
fingers,  the  men  whose  dried  up  passions  made  them  scorn  the  harlot,  the  men  who 
had  money  enough  and  abominated  the  tax-gatherers.  Christ  does  not  set  Himself 
up  on  a  throne  apart,  and  say,  "  I  am  pure,"  but  says  that  because  He  is  perfect 
fie  has  an  infinite  sympathy  with  and  compassion  for  the  sinful  and  fallen.  The 
supreme  truth  that  we  need  to  know  is  that  God  is  determined  to  bring  the  human 
race  on  and  up  out  of  animalism  and  the  lowest  forms  of  barbarism  to  the  highest 
degree  of  intellectual  and  spiritual  development.  That  is  the  eternal  purpose  of 
God,  and  in  that  great  work  He  will  deal  with  the  human  family  with  such  tender- 
ness and  gentleness  that  He  will  not  break  the  bruised  reed,  nor  quench  the  smoking 
flax,  nor  blow  out  the  wick  which  He  has  just  kindled,  and  He  will  not  stop  until 
He  brings  forth  judgment  unto  victory.  I  think  sometimes  that  the  greatest  attri- 
bute of  God  is  patience,  and  one  of  the  greatest  illustrations  of  patience  of  the  same 
kind  in  men  is  that  of  the  music  teacher,  who  takes  a  boy  to  teach  him  the  violin, 
and  hears  him  and  bears  with  him  through  days,  and  through  weeks,  and  through 
months  and  through  years,  and  then  has  to  take  another  and  go  right  on  the  same 
way  again.  Or  the  artist  who  sees  his  pupil  smudging  a  canvas,  and  tries  to  teach 
him  the  whole  theory  of  colour,  and  tries  to  develop  his  ideality.  Any  parent, 
teacher,  musician,  artist,  or  any  one  else  is  obliged  to  go  upon  the  theory  God  acts 
on — namely,  that  the  higher  you  are  the  more  you  owe,  and  can  give,  to  those  who 
are  lower  ;  and  if  you  are  going  to  be  instrumental  in  bringing  them  up,  you  have 
got  to  carry  their  burthens  and  their  sorro\/s  and  to  wait  for  them,  and  be  patient 
with  them.  It  is  the  law  of  creation,  and  if  it  is  the  law  of  creation  in  all  its  minor 
and  ruder  developments  among  mankind,  its  supreme  strength  and  scope  for  beauty 
is  in  the  nature  of  Himself.  Look  at  the  sun,  the  symbol  of  God.  It  carries  in  it- 
self all  trees  and  all  bushes,  and  all  vines,  and  all  orchards,  and  all  gardens.  It 
BOWS  the  seed  and  brings  the  summer ;  and  the  outpouring  of  the  vital  light  and 
heat  of  the  sun  makes  it  the  father  of  all  husbandmen  and  all  pomologists.  And 
yet  God's  nature  is  greater  than  that.  He  is  the  life  of  life ;  He  is  the  heart  of 
nearts  ;  He  is  the  soul  of  souls ;  and  the  grandeur  of  His  endowments  is  the  life  of 
mankind.  Cast  away  all  the  old  mediaeval  notions  of  reconciliation,  the  mechanical 
scheme  of  atonement  and  plan  of  salvation,  and  all  those  lower  forms.  They  stand 
between  you  and  the  bright  light  of  the  God  revealed  in  Jesus  Christ,  a  God  who 
has  patience  with  sin  because  He  is  sinless,  who  has  patience  with  infirmity 
because  He  has  no  infirmities,  who  has  patience  with  weakness  and  ignorance 
because  He  is  supremely  wise  and  supremely  strong.  Our  hope  is  in  God, 
and  our  life  ought  to  be  godly.  Though  we  be  faint  or  feeble.  He  will 
revive  our  courage  and  will  give  us  His  strength,  and  it  will  not  be  in  vain 
that  we  endeavour  to  serve  the  Lord.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Our  great  High  Priest : 
— The  first  important  word  is  the  epithet  "great"  prefixed  to  the  title  High 
Priest.  It  is  introduced  to  make  the  priestly  office  of  Christ  assume  due  importance 
in  the  minds  of  the  Hebrews.  As  an  author  writing  a  treatise  on  an  important 
theme  writes  the  title  of  the  theme  in  letters  fitted  to  attract  notice,  so  this  writer 


848  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  {chap.  iv. 

places  at  the  head  of  the  ensuing  portion  this  title,  "  Jesus  the  Son  of  Gtod  the 
Great  High  Priest,"  insinuating  thereby  that  He  of  whom  he  speaks  is  the  greatest 
of  all  priests,  the  only  real  priest,  the  very  ideal  of  priesthood  realised.  The  ex- 
pression "  passed  through  the  heavens  "  is  also  very  suggestive.  It  hints  at  the 
right  construction  to  be  put  upon  Christ's  departure  from  the  earth.  There  is  an 
obvious  allusion  to  the  entering  of  the  high  priest  of  Israel  within  the  veil  on  the 
great  day  of  atonement ;  and  the  idea  suggested  is,  that  the  ascension  of  Christ  was 
the  passing  of  the  great  High  Priest  through  the  veil  into  the  celestial  sanctuary, 
as  our  representative  and  in  our  interest.  The  name  given  to  the  great  High  Priest, 
•'  Jesus  the  Son  of  God,"  contributes  to  the  argument.  Jesus  is  the  historical  per- 
son, the  tempted  Man ;  and  this  part  of  the  name  lays  the  foundation  for  what  is  to 
be  said  in  the  following  sentence  concerning  His  power  to  sympathise.  The 
title,  "  Son  of  God,"  on  the  other  hand,  justifies  what  has  been  already  said 
of  the  High  Priest  of  our  confession.  If  our  High  Priest  be  the  Son  of  God, 
He  may  well  be  called  the  Great,  and  moreover  there  can  be  no  doubt  whither  He 
has  gone.  Whither  but  to  His  native  abode.  His  Father's  house?  Having  thus  by 
brief,  pregnant  phrase  hinted  the  thoughts  he  means  to  prove,  our  author  proceeds 
to  address  to  his  readers  an  exhortation,  which  is  repeated  at  the  close  of  the  long 
discussion  on  thft  priesthood  of  Christ  to  which  these  sentences  are  the  prelude 
(chap.  X.  19-23).  In  doing  so  he  gives  prominence  to  that  feature  of  Christ's 
priestly  character  of  which  alone  he  has  as  yet  spoken  explicitly :  His  power  to 
sympathise,  acquired  and  guaranteed  by  His  experience  of  temptation  (chap,  ii.  17, 
18).  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  sympathy  is  here  stated  in  a 
defensive,  apologetic  manner,  "  We  have  not  a  High  Priest  who  cannot  be  touched," 
as  if  there  were  some  one  maintaining  the  contrary.  This  defensive  attitude  may 
be  conceived  of  as  assumed  over  against  two  possible  objections  to  the  reality  of 
Christ's  sympathy,  one  drawn  from  His  dignity  as  the  Son  of  God,  the  other  from 
His  sinlessness.  Both  objections  are  dealt  with  in  the  only  way  open  to  one  who 
addresses  weak  faith — viz.,  not  by  elaborate  or  philosophical  argument,  but  by 
strong  assertion.  As  the  Psalmist  said  to  the  desponding,  "  Wait,  I  say,  on  the 
Lord,"  and  as  Jesus  said  to  disciples  doubting  the  utility  of  prayer,  "I  say  unto 
yon.  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive,"  so  our  author  says  to  dispirited  Christians,  "  We 
have  not  a  High  Priest  who  cannot  be  touched  with  sympathy  " — this  part  of  hia 
assertion  disposing  of  doubt  engendered  by  Christ's  dignity — "  but  one  who  has  been 
tempted  in  all  respects  as  we  are,  apart  from  sin  " — this  part  of  the  assertion  meet- 
ing doubt  based  on  Christ's  sinlessness.  To  this  strong  assertion  of  Christ's  power 
to  sympathise  is  fitly  appended  the  final  exhortation.  Specially  noteworthy  are  the 
words,  "  Let  us  approach  confidently."  They  have  more  than  practical  import : 
they  are  of  theoretic  significance ;  they  strike  the  doctrinal  keynote  of  the  Epistle  : 
Christianity  the  religion  of  free  access.  There  is  a  latent  contrast  between  Chris- 
tianity and  Leviticalism.  The  contrast  is  none  the  less  real  that  the  expression  "  to 
draw  near  "  was  applied  to  acts  of  worship  under  the  Levitical  system.  Every  act 
of  worship  in  any  religion  whatever  may  be  called  an  approach  to  Deity.  Never- 
theless religions  may  be  wide  apart  as  the  poles  in  respect  to  the  measure  in  which 
they  draw  near  to  God.  In  one  religion  the  approach  may  be  ceremonial  only, 
while  the  spirit  stands  afar  off  in  fear.  In  another,  the  approach  may  be  spiritual, 
with  mind  and  heart,  in  intelligence,  trust,  and  love,  and  with  the  confidence  which 
these  inspire.  Such  an  approach  alone  is  real,  and  deserves  to  be  called  a  drawing 
near  to  God.  Such  an  approach  was  first  made  possible  by  Christ,  and  on  this  ac- 
count it  is  that  the  religion  which  bears  His  name  is  the  perfect,  final,  perennial 
religion.  (A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.)  Hold  fast  our  profession. — Holding  fast  the 
Christian  prof ession  : — I.  The  natube  of  the  Christun  profession.  1.  A  cordial 
assent  to  the  whole  of  Scripture  truth,  and  especially  the  testimony  which  God  has 
given  of  His  Son  Christ  Jesus.  2.  A  profession  of  practical  conformity  to  the  whole 
of  God's  revealed  will  3.  The  hope  of  eternal  hfe  and  glory  in  heaven.  II.  What 
IS  IMPLIED  IN  HOLDING  FAST  OUR  PROFESSION  ?  1.  That  WO  actually  havo  this  pro- 
fession. 2.  A  just  sense  of  its  high  value.  3.  That  we  may  be  tempted  to  forsake 
it.  4.  That  we  are  called  to  the  regular,  uniform,  constant  exercise  of  it.  5. 
Perseverance  to  the  end.  III.  The  motives  to  this  duty.  1.  The  person  and 
character  of  Him  who  is  its  object.  2.  Christ's  office  and  relation  to  us.  3.  The 
security  afforded  against  our  own  weakness,  and  the  malice  of  spiritual  foes.  {H. 
Hunter.)  Holding  fast  our  profession : — I.  What  is  our  profession?  1.  Attach- 
ment to  the  person  of  Christ.  2.  Dependence  on  the  work  of  Christ.  3.  Devoted- 
ness  to  the  service  of  Christ,  n.  How  is  this  to  be  done  ?    1.  By  avowing  in  God'i 


CHAP.  IV.]  HEBREWS.  849 

ordinances  your  attachment  to  the  person,  reliance  on  the  work,  and  devotedneaa 
to  the  service  of  Christ.  2.  By  a  consistent  life.  {W.  Cadtnan,  M.A.)  Exhortation  to 
iteadfastness : — I.  The  exhobtation  to  steadfastness  in  our  Christian  profession. 
By  "  onr  profession  "  we  are  sometimes  to  understand  that  which  we  profess,  or  the 
subject  of  our  profession.  In  chap.  iii.  1,  the  term  evidently  means  the  holy  religion 
which  we  profess.  But  the  term  applies  to  the  act  also.  This  is  its  import  in  that 
other  passage,  "  let  us  hold  fast  the  profession  of  our  faith  without  wavering." 
There  are  in  what  is  called  "  the  Christian  world  "  two  kinds  of  professors.  1.  All 
nominal  Christians.  All  who  say  that  they  are  disciples  of  Christ ;  all  who  wish  it 
to  be  understood  that  they  have  embraced  the  faith.  Such  persons  may  with  pro- 
priety be  exhorted  to  hold  their  profession  fast :  it  is  worthy  of  being  held  fast.  And 
yet,  if  we  do  venture  to  remind  such  persons  of  the  obligation  arising  from  the  very 
name  they  bear ;  if  we  point  out  any  inconsistency  in  their  conduct,  the  accusation 
is  repelled  with  indignation,  and  they  tell  us  they  make  no  profession  of  religion. 
Now  this  —  (1)  Is  singularly  impudent  and  wicked.  What  would  you  think 
if  the  expression  were  applied  to  social  life,  to  the  duties  which  belong  to  a  parent, 
B  husband,  a  child,  a  subject,  an  honest  man  ?  (2)  It  is  in  most  cases  not  true. 
They  themselves,  at  other  times,  deny  it ;  and  they  would  be  highly  affronted  if 
they  thought  any  one  supposed  that  they  deny  the  Lord  who  bought  them.  They 
do  call  themselves  Christians,  and  hence  they  ought  to  be  careful  to  live  and  act  as 
such.  But  there  are  in  the  world — 2.  Those  who  profess  to  be  Christians  indeed. 
Now  the  profession  of  real  Christians  is  distinguished  from  that  which  is  nominal 
by  thfse  three  marks.  (1)  It  is  Scriptural.  He  founds  his  belief  on  having  dis- 
covered  tliat  it  is  the  infallible  Word  of  God ;  and  he  receives  nothing  but  what  in 
his  conscience  he  believes  to  have  this  sanction,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  (2)  It  is 
experimental.  I  mean  to  say  that  every  Christian  has,  in  his  own  experience,  an 
evidence  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  He  has  put  its  truths  to  the  test :  he  has  tried 
them  in  his  own  case,  and  found  them  to  be  sanctifying  and  saving.  (3)  It  is  prac- 
tical. That  is,  the  truth  professed  is  not  belied,  but  is  borne  out  and  appealed  to 
by  their  conduct.  Put  these  things  together,  and  yoo  will  see  how  a  real  profession 
is  distinguished  from  *hat  which  is  merely  nominal.  It  is  scriptural,  experimental, 
and  practical :  it  is  manifested  by  cheerfully  doing,  and  patiently  suffering  the  will 
of  God.  Such  a  profession  as  this  we  are  commanded  to  "  hold  fast."  3.  This 
command  implies  that  we  are  in  danger  of  renouncing  onr  profession.  And  thia 
danger  arises  from  various  causes.  Satan,  the  great  foe  of  God  and  the  gospel, 
"  goes  about  as  a  roaring  lion,  seeking  whom  he  may  devour."  Infidels  and  their 
associates  having  apostatised  from  the  faith  are  aiming  to  seduce  others  to  their 
guilt.  The  world  too  is  a  foe :  by  its  smiles  it  would  often  allure,  by  its  frowns  it 
would  often  deter  from  steadfastness.  Last,  but  not  least,  are  the  foes  of  our  own 
household  ;  a  heart  that  is  deceitful,  and  which  is  not  fully  renewed,  will  betray  ua 
into  the  hands  of  our  outward  enemies,  so  that  we  shall  lose  our  peace  at  the  last. 
4.  "  Let  us  hold  fast  our  profession,"  says  the  apostle.  Be  valiant  for  the  truth. 
(1)  Hold  fast  the  simplicity  of  evangelical  doctrine.  Stand  fast  in  one  spirit, 
"  earnestly  contending  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints."  (2)  Hold  it  fast 
in  an  evangelical  experience  of  its  blessings.  (3)  Hold  it  fast  by  the  pracUce  of  all 
that  is  true,  honest,  just,  pure,  lovely,  and  of  good  report.  (4)  Hold  fast  by  a  publio 
profession  of  the  gospel,  the  truths  in  which  you  thus  believe — the  privileges  you 
thus  profess  to  enjoy — the  duties  you  profess  to  exempUfy.  Thus  give  to  every 
man  "  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you."  II.  The  motive  to  this  debivbd  froii 
5HE  priesthood  OF  Christ.  "  Wo  havo  a  great  High  Priest,"  greater  than  any 
tt»der  the  law.  Many  grounds  of  superiority  to  any  who  went  before  Him  might  be 
ftddosed.  1.  Because  of  the  place  in  which  He  ministers.  He  is  at  the  right  hand 
of  the  Majesty  on  high.  He  who  is  our  Friend,  the  best  Friend  we  ever  had,  who  haa 
given  us  such  tokens  of  His  love  and  kindness,  is  in  that  place  where  best  of  all  He 
can  serve  our  cause !  Our  High  Priest  can  never  be  at  a  loss  for  a  place  in  which 
to  minister ;  He  can  never  be  at  a  loss  for  want  of  access  to  His  Father  and  our 
Father,  to  His  God  and  our  God.  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  where  He 
can  make  it  with  the  greatest  certainty  of  success.  2.  Because  of  the  more  sub- 
Btatitial  benefits  derived  from  the  exercise  of  His  office.  Aaron  was  God's  high 
priest,  but  he  was  not  a  Saviour  ;  his  successors  were  God's  high  priests,  but  they 
were  not  Jesus ;  they  could  not  save  from  sin.  But  Jesus  our  great  High  Priest  can 
redeem  from  all  iniquity  ;  and  "  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  that  come 
nnto  God  by  Him."  Greater — 3.  Because  of  the  superior  dignity  of  His  original 
nature  and  character,  "The  Son  of  God."     As  the  Son  of  God  He  was  sinless. 


850  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

There  was  no  guilty  spot  upon  His  soul,  though  He  was  made  a  sacrifice  for  sin. 
He,  therefore,  is  all  our  own  ;  He  was  cut  off  for  us,  to  finish  our  transgression,  to 
maie  reconciliation  for  our  iniquity.  As  the  Son  of  God  He  is  also  necessarily 
immortal.  Death  could  never  have  had  any  claim  on  Him  after  He  took  our  nature 
into  conjunction  with  the  Divine,  but  by  His  own  consent ;  He  willingly  laid  it  down, 
as  an  act  of  infinite  benevolence  to  that  world,  whose  cause  He  sustained.  As  the 
Son  of  God  He  can  die  no  more,  but  liveth  for  ever.  And  oh,  what  a  mercy  in  such 
a  dying  world  as  this,  where  so  many  are  taken  away  from  us,  to  be  able  to  lift  up 
our  eyes  to  heaven,  and  be  able  to  commit  our  concerns  to  this  immortal  and  ntver- 
dying  Redeemer  !  But  wherein  consists  the  force  of  all  this  as  a  motive  to  stead- 
fastness in  the  Christian  profession?  Why — (1)  For  this  reason  we  ought  to  hold 
fast  the  profession  of  Christianity.  It  is  the  priesthood  of  Christ  that  confers  the 
crowning  excellence  on  Christianity.  (2)  But  perhaps  you  say  you  have  no  intention 
to  relinquish  it ;  your  only  fear  is  that  you  shall  not  be  able  to  hold  it  fast.  You  feel 
Buch  powerful  temptations,  you  are  surrounded  by  so  many  adversaries,  that  you  fear 
that  in  some  dark  and  cloudy  day  you  shall  become  their  prey.  And  so  you  would  if 
you  were  left  to  yourselves,  if  you  depended  on  your  own  power.  But  you  are  not  left 
to  yourselves,  the  Gospel  tells  you  that  you  have  a  great  High  Priest.  You  can 
hold  fast  your  profession :  the  priesthood  of  Christ  renders  this  practicable.  {J. 
Bunting,  M.A.)  Let  us  hold  fast  our  profession  : — Our  High  Priest  is  a  mighty 
one,  able  to  punish  us  if  we  shrink  from  our  profession,  and  of  power  to  protect  ua 
from  all  our  enemies  if  we  stick  to  Him  ;  therefore  let  us  hold  fast  our  profession. 
The  doctrine  professed  by  ua  ;  let  no  enemies  drive  us  from  our  profession,  neither 
Satan,  nor  any  of  his  instruments.  The  Pharisees  held  fast  the  traditions  of  their 
elders  and  would  not  be  removed  from  them  (Mark  vii.  3).  The  Turks  are  wonder- 
fully addicted  to  Mahomet,  he  is  a  great  prophet  among  them,  they  will  not  let  him 
go.  And  shall  not  we  hold  the  profession  of  the  Lord  Jesus  f  They  hold  errora 
fast,  and  shall  not  we  the  truth  ?  The  subject  of  their  profession,  counterfeit  things, 
mere  inventions  of  men,  lies  and  fables.  The  subject  of  our  profession  is  Jesua 
Christ  the  Son  of  God.  Therefore  let  us  hold  it  fast ;  let  neither  the  syrenical  songs 
of  heretics  and  schismatics  in  the  time  of  peace,  nor  the  blustering  wind  of  perse- 
cution in  the  time  of  war  pull  us  from  our  confession.  Let  us  be  faithful  to  the 
death  as  the  martyrs  were  ;  let  house  and  land,  wives  and  children,  hberty  and 
country  —yea,  our  Uves — go  before  our  profession.  But  this  is  a  hard  matter ;  we  have 
no  strength  of  ourselves  to  hold  it  against  so  many  strong  aud  mighty  enemies. 
Therefore  let  as  all  fear  ourselves  and  fly  to  God  for  strength,  that  it  would  please 
Him  so  to  strengthen  us  by  His  Holy  Spirit,  that  we  may  hold  fast  the  profession 
of  Christ  and  His  gospel  to  the  end  :  "  Hold  that  which  thou  hast,  lest  another  take 
thy  crown."  We  will  hold  our  money  fast  though  it  be  to  good  uses,  we  will  not  part 
with  that;  but  as  for  religion,  a  number  are  at  this  pass,  thev  care  not  what  becomes 
of  it ;  let  that  go  whither  it  will,  so  we  may  sleep  in  a  whole  skin  and  keep  that 
which  we  have  ;  let  come  what  religion  there  will,  we  can  be  of  any  religion.  Such 
turncoats  and  timeservers  shall  never  set  a  foot  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  If  we 
hold  not  our  profession  fast  we  shall  miss  of  the  crown  of  eternal  life.  ( W.  Jones, 
D.D.) 

Ver.  16.  Touched  with  the  feeling'  of  our  Infirmities. — The  sympathetic 
Saviour : — I.  Christ's  poweb  of  bympathy  assebted.  Differences  of  position  and 
circumstances  among  men  materially  affect  their  power  to  sympathise  with  one 
another.  It  is  a  difficult  matter,  for  instance,  for  those  born  in  palaces  and 
nurtured  in  afBuence  to  enter  into  the  difficulties  and  understand  the  hardships 
endured  by  those  to  whom  life  is  a  perpetual  struggle  for  the  barest  necessaries ; 
or  for  those  who  are  hale  and  strong  to  sympathise  with  those  whose  very  existence, 
by  reason  of  their  bodily  infirmities,  is  a  burden  to  them.  It  was  not  unnatural, 
then,  that  persons  who,  judged  by  human  analogies,  should  suppose  that  He  who 
was  the  Son  of  God  and  had  passed  into  the  heavens  would  be  indisposed  to 
sympathise  with  wretched,  sin-benighted  men  on  earth.  The  text  assures  us  of 
the  contrary.  Christ  exchanged  earth  for  heaven,  the  weakness  and  infirmities  of 
an  earthly  existence  for  the  everlasting  vigour  of  a  heavenly  state,  degradation  for 
exaltation,  the  Cross  and  the  thorns  for  a  throne  and  a  crown  ;  but  He  never  ex- 
changed His  power  of  warm,  glowing  sympathy  for  men  for  coldness  and  in- 
difference. Sympathy  was  the  heritage  which  earth  gave  Him  to  enrich  Hig 
heavenly  state.  II.  The  conditions  gdakanteeing  this  power.  1.  His  exposure 
to  temptation.     Just  as  the  Ught   becomes  tinged  with  the  hues  of  the  glass 


CHAP.  IV.]  HEBREWS,  851 

it  passes  through,  so  the  unfathomable  love  of  the  Son  of  God  becomea 
sympathetic  towards  men  as  it  passes  to  them  through  the  human  heart,  steeped 
in  sorrow  ^nd  agonised  with  suffering,  of  the  Son  of  Man.  Egypt  has  its  two 
great  watercourses,  its  river  and  its  sweet-water  canal.  The  canal  conveys  the 
sweet  waters  of  the  river  where  the  river  itself  cannot  take  them.  The  human 
heart  of  Jesus  is  the  canal  which  conducts  the  sweet  waters  of  the  Divine  love  in 
streams  of  sympathy  to  the  parched  souls  of  men.  2.  The  other  condition  of  Hia 
power  of  sympathy  was  His  freedom  from  sin,  notwithstanding  His  exposure  to  its 
temptations.  Flame  will  not  pass  through  wire  gauze  of  a  certain  texture.  This 
is  the  principle  of  the  safety-lamp.  This  useful  and  ingenious  contrivance  is  un- 
affected  by  any  amount  of  explosive  gases  external  to  it.  Under  ordinary  circum- 
stances,  the  flame  of  the  lamp  would  set  any  atmosphere,  strongly  charged  with 
explosive  gases,  into  a  devouring  blaze,  but,  protected  by  the  wire  gauze,  the  lamp- 
flame  merely  glows  within  a  little  more  brilliantly.  Such  was  Christ  as  He  lived 
among  men.  The  moral  atmosphere  in  which  He  Uved,  surcharged  as  it  was  with 
explosive  temptations  and  provocations  to  sin,  did  not  penetrate  the  amiability  of 
His  sinless  nature  and  cause  it  to  shoot  forth  into  consuming  resentment.  It 
merely  caused  it  to  burn  with  a  livelier  glow  of  holy  anger  against  hypocrisy  and 
false  pretence.  Just  as  the  rays  of  the  sun  pass  over  the  foulest  paths  and  among 
heaps  of  filth  untainted,  so  He  passed  along  the  ways  and  paths  of  human  life  un- 
touched by  the  foulness  that  surrounded  him  on  all  sides.  It  is  a  belief  with  the 
people  of  the  distiict  that  the  River  Dee  passes  throrgh  the  whole  length  of  Bala 
Lake  without  mingling  with  its  waters.  Its  current,  they  afiSrm,  can  be  clearly 
traced,  marked  off  by  its  clearer,  brighter  waters.  So  Christ's  life,  passing  through 
the  lake,  so  to  speak,  of  earthly  existence,  is  clearly  defined.  It  is  one  bright, 
holy,  spotless  stream  from  its  beginning  to  its  end — a  life  without  sin.  Now,  this 
freedom  from  sin  is  no  hindrance  to  His  power  of  sympathy ;  in  fact,  it  is  an 
additional  qualification  to  Him  in  this  respect.  Temptation  yielded  to  makes  the 
heart  callous  and  cruel,  and  dries  up  the  fountains  of  feeling.  Temptation  resisted 
and  overcome  mellows  the  feelings,  and  quickens  their  sensitiveness  towards  the 
tried  and  tempted.  IH.  Christ's  power  of  sympathy  used  as  an  encooragement 
TO  SEEK  the  blessings  PROVIDED  FOR  US.  1.  The  blfcssings  we  are  urged  to  seek. 
Mercy  represents  the  new  life ;  grace,  all  that  may  be  needed  to  sustain  and 
nourish  it  until  its  consummation  in  everlasting  glory.  And  here  we  may  note  the 
bearing  of  this  promise  of  "  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need  "  upon  the  case  of  a 
certain  class  of  persons  whom  we  believe  to  be  Christians,  true  disciples  of  the 
Eedeemer,  but  who  stand  aloof  from  the  fellowship  of  His  people,  and  shrink  from 
a  public  avowal  of  their  discipleship.  Their  reluctance  in  this  direction,  they  tell 
us,  arises  from  the  sense  of  their  infirmities,  and  their  dread  of  bringing  dishonour 
on  Christ's  Church.  But  such  a  plea  is  essentially  unbelief.  It  arises  from  a 
failure  to  apprehend  God's  power  to  keep  from  falling  those  whom  He  has  graciously 
converted.  They  forget  that  He  promises  to  His  children  "  grace  to  help  in  time 
of  need."  It  is  as  reasonable  to  suppose  that  God  will  preserve  the  new  life  He 
has  quickened  in  the  heart  of  His  people,  is  that  the  mother  will  do  all  in  her 
power  to  strengthen  the  infant  that  owes  its  life  to  her.  2.  The  place  whence  these 
blessings  are  dispensed.  Christ  occupies  the  throne — the  place  of  power  and 
authority.  That  He  is  a  King  as  well  as  a  Priest  is  one  of  the  great  truths  of  this 
Epistle.  And  His  kingly  oflSce  becomes  the  instrument  of  His  priestly  sympathies 
and  functions.  3.  The  spirit  of  confidence  in  which,  in  view  of  the  assurance 
furnished  to  us  of  Christ's  power  of  sympathy,  these  blessings  should  be  sought. 
The  word  rendered  "  boldly  "  here  may,  with  equal  propriety,  be  rendered  "  joyfully. " 
The  very  fact  that  such  blessings  as  mercy  and  grace,  blessings  so  inexpressibly 
precious  to  sinful  men  awakened  to  a  sense  of  their  guilt,  are  procurable,  should 
fill  the  seeker  with  the  joy  of  gratitude.  To  seek  them  in  this  spirit  is  to  cany  out 
the  prophetic  injunction,  "  Therefore,  with  joy  shall  ye  draw  water  out  of  the  wells 
of  salvation."  The  allusion,  no  doubt,  is  to  the  desert  traveller,  after  days  of 
wanderings  in  the  arid  waste,  coming  parched  with  thirst  upon  a  well.  We  can 
well  imagine  with  what  grateful  joy  he  would  draw  therefrom  the  refreshing  ele- 
ment to  quench  his  consuming  thirst.  With  some  such  joy,  yea,  with  much 
deeper  and  intenser  joy,  should  the  Christian  man  come  to  the  throne  of  grace  to 
draw  the  grace  which  is  to  quench  his  soul-consuming  thirst,  and  sustain  the 
Divine  life  quickened  by  the  Divine  mercy  in  his  soul.  {A.  J.  Parry.)  Christ 
touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities  : — The  compassion  of  the  Son  of  God  was 
a  subject  of  joyful  contemplation  to  the  holy  men  of  old,  who  saw  His  day  afar  offj 


85a  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ly, 

and  were  glad.  With  delight  they  celebrated  the  comfort  which  He  should  bring 
to  the  mourners  in  Zion ;  the  care  which  He  should  take  of  the  lambs  of  His 
flock ;  His  sympathy  with  the  afflicted ;  His  condescension  to  the  weatc ;  and  the 
concern  with  which  He  should  bring  them  through  their  difficulties  to  safety  and 
peace,  and  everlasting  gladness.  Hence  it  is,  also,  that  in  their  sacred  hymns  and 
songs  of  triumph  they  delight  to  present  Htm  under  all  those  images  which  are 
fitted  to  convey  ideas  of  the  gentlest  and  most  engaging  order.  The  design  for 
which  the  Son  of  God  appeared  on  earth,  and  which  He  voluntarily  undertook  to 
accomplish,  was  a  design  of  the  highest  compassion.  And  as  the  design  on  which 
He  came  was  that  of  unutterable  love,  so  the  tenderest  compassion  distinguished 
the  fulfilment  of  every  part  of  His  great  undertaking.  He  went  about  doing  good, 
and  His  Divine  power  was  ever  exercised  in  works  of  mercy.  And  with  these  mani- 
festations of  Divine  power,  how  mild  and  gentle  is  His  demeanour  to  the  humble 
and  the  weak  I  How  tender  and  condescending  His  addresses  to  the  poor  and  the 
contrite  I  Observe  also  His  sympathy  with  His  disciples  in  the  season  of  affliction, 
and  the  anxiety  with  which  He  seeks  to  give  them  comfort.  But  to  seek  and  to 
save  that  which  was  lost  Christ  came  into  the  world,  and  all  His  discourses  are  full 
of  earnest  desire  for  the  welfare  of  men— of  pity  for  sinners,  and  of  consolation  for 
the  miserable.  His  compassion  was  manifested  even  to  those  who  rejected  Him. 
But  a  view  of  compassion  yet  remains  to  be  noticed,  which  in  vain  our  ideas 
attempt  to  reach,  or  language  to  describe.  He  pays  the  price  of  human  guilt,  and 
gives  His  life  a  ransom  for  many.  Having  thus  directed  our  attention  to  the 
compassion  of  that  great  High  Priest,  who  is  passed  into  the  heaven — Jesus,  the 
Son  of  God,  let  as  apply  these  views  to  our  condition,  and  consider  the  encourage- 
ment which  they  are  fitted  to  afford  when  we  approach  to  the  throne  of  grace. 
The  gracious  office  which  Christ  sustains,  and  the  compassion  of  His  character, 
are  fitted  to  give  to  as  encouragement  in  ajl  our  services,  and  through  the  whole  of 
life.  But  there  are  special  seasons  which  the  apostle  describes  as  "  the  time  of 
need,"  in  which  we  are  particularly  called,  in  the  exercise  of  hope  and  trust,  to 
come  to  the  throne  of  grace.    I.  Among  these  we  abe  naturaujY  directed  in  the 

FIRST  PLACE  TO  THAT  OF  A  SINNER  DNDEB  DEEP  CONVICTIONS   OF  QUILT.      HoW  Suited  iS 

the  gospel  of  Christ  to  bring  back  to  God  and  give  peace  to  the  troubled  soul  1  And 
how  admirably  does  the  view  of  such  a  High  Priest,  touched  with  the  feeling  of 
our  infirmities,  harmonise  with  every  part  of  the  gracious  plan  for  our  recovery 
and  salvation !  In  Him  we  see  every  quality  which  is  calculated  to  insure  the 
confidence,  and  to  dissipate  the  fears  of  the  humble  and  the  contrite,  and  through 
Him,  who  is  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life,  they  seek  the  offered  mercy,  and 
find  the  promised  rest.    II.  And  are  not  the  same  views  calculated  to  encourage 

U8  TO  approach   THE   THRONE  OF  OBACE,  UNDER  A  SENSE  OF  OUR  WEAKNESS,  AND  OF  OUB 

DANOERS  FROM  A  WORLD  LYING  IN  WICKEDNESS?  In  a  State  SO  surrounded  with 
dangers,  and  especially  in  those  seasons  when  we  are  made  to  feel  how  weak  we 
are,  or  when  wearied  with  the  struggles  and  difficulties  which  we  encounter  on  the 
path  of  duty,  we  are  tempted  to  retire  from  the  contest,  and  to  leave  the  post  as- 
signed us,  hopeless  of  success — how  fitted  to  inspire  us  with  courage  and  persever- 
ance is  the  view  of  that  provision  which  the  Father  of  mercies  hath  made  for  our 
support  and  direction,  in  the  mediation  of  Him  who  loved  us  and  gave  Himself  for 
US.  He  is  the  same  Divine  Master  who  has  passed  before  us  through  the  scene  of 
Buffering  and  temptation,  and  has  shown  Himself  to  be  so  unspeakably  our  Friend. 
He  knows  the  difficulties  with  which  we  have  to  struggle,  and  by  proofs  the  most 
affecting  He  has  taught  us  to  place  confidence  in  His  care.  III.  And  as  the  com- 
passion OF  OUR  GREAT  HiGH  PrIEST  GIVES  COURAGE  AND  SUPPORT  AMIDST  THE  DANGERS 
AND  TRIALS  OP  LIFE,  SO   IT    GIVES    US    COMFORT   AND    PEACE   AT  THE  APPROACH  OF  DEATH. 

The  Son  of  God  changes  the  darkness  into  light.  The  glory  of  that  state  He  hath 
prepared  for  us,  sheds  far  its  light,  and  illumines  every  prospect,  and  the  voice  of 
the  Saviour  is  heard  conducting  and  welcoming  us  to  the  mansions  of  His  Father. 
How  suited  to  the  fallen  state  of  man  is  the  dispensation  of  the  gospel !  (<S. 
MacGill,  D.D.)  The  srjmpathy  of  Christ : — 1.  In  attempting  to  describe  the  human 
sympathy  »f  this  Divine  Being,  I  will  first  refer  to  His  wonderful  keenness  of  feel- 
ing. Intensely  sensitive  to  nature,  and  drinking  in  illustration  of  highest  truth 
from  her  homeliest  appearances.  He  felt  most  keenly  anything  that  could  touch 
the  feelings  of  His  fellow -men.  Unlike  many  people  who,  because  they  do  not  feel 
their  own  trials  very  keenly,  nor  crave  for  much  sympathy  amidst  them,  cannot 
understand  the  sufferings  and  cravings  of  more  sensitive  natures,  Jesus  was  so 
touched  by  His  own  troubles,  and  had  such  a  longing  for  the  Divine  and  humaa 


CHAP.  IV.]  HEBREWS.  353 

sympathy  in  the  midst  of  them,  that  He  is  marvellously  quick  to  understand,  and 
ready  to  sympathise  with  the  most  insignificant  sorrows  of  the  most  sensitive  souls. 
2.  But  the  sympathy  of  Jesus  is  as  wide  as  it  is  ready.  He  whose  exquisitely  sensi- 
tive soul  was  thrilled  by  the  beauty  of  a  lily,  and  moved  by  the  fall  of  a  wounded 
sparrow,  is  keenly  touched  by  whatever  can  touch  a  human  heart,  whether  high  or 
low,  good  or  bad,  a  friend  or  an  enemy.  No  man  can  be  beyond  the  reach  of  His 
all-comprehending  sympathy,  because  no  man  can  be  beyond  the  embrace  of  His 
all-comprehending  love.  3.  And  His  sympathy  is  as  deep  and  tender  as  it  is  ready 
and  comprehensive.  And  the  reason  of  ihis  is  two-fold.  He  has  been  tempted  in 
aU  points  like  as  we  are ;  and  yet  He  is  without  sin.  He  can  sympathise  with  the 
poor  because  He  has  been  poor ;  with  the  weary  and  heavy  laden,  because  He  has 
been  tired  and  worn  ;  with  the  lonely,  misrepresented,  and  persecuted,  because  He 
has  been  in  their  position.  And  because  He  was  also  tried,  tried  in  mind  as  well 
as  heart,  by  fear,  by  sad  surprise,  by  mental  perplexity,  with  the  hard  conflict  with 
evil,  and  great  spiritual  depression,  He  is  able  to  feel  to  the  uttermost  for  those 
keenest  sorrows  of  our  earthly  lot.  And  then  this  tried  One  was  without  sin. 
That  was  what  enabled  Him  to  drink  in  sympathy,  and  nothing  but  sympathy  from 
all  His  sorrows.  That  is  why  He  received  all  tbe  sweetness  from  His  sorrows  and 
none  of  the  bitterness,  so  that  He  is  able  out  of  the  pure  and  exhaustless  treasures 
of  His  sympathy  to  sweeten  all  our  bitter  cups.  4.  For  let  us  also  remember  that 
His  sympathy  is  as  practical  as  it  is  ready,  deep,  and  comprehensive.  Sympathis- 
ing with  the  fond  feeling  which  led  the  mothers  to  bring  their  children  to  Him, 
He  at  once  took  the  little  ones  up  in  His  arms,  and  blessed  them ;  feeUng  for  the 
hungry  multitude  He  delayed  not  to  spread  a  table  for  them  in  the  wilderness. 
His  comi>a-.iionate  soul  melted  with  tenderness  when  He  saw  the  widow  weeping 
beside  the  bier  ;  but  at  that  very  moment  He  stopped  the  bier  and  restored  her  only 
son  to  his  mother's  arms.  How  deep  the  sympathy  which  caused  Him  to  burst 
into  tears  among  the  weeping  ones  He  loved,  before  the  grave  of  Lazarus  ;  but  how 
prompt  the  power  to  help  which  caused  the  dead  man  to  come  forth.  It  is  the 
knowledge  that  now  as  then  He  is  ready  and  able  to  help  us  as  He  is  to  feel  for  us, 
that  emboldens  us  to  oome  with  all  assurance  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and  confide  to 
Him  our  every  trouble.  And  if  His  sympathy  is  to  be  to  us  anything  more  than  a 
beautiful  dream,  we  must  there  come  into  personal  contact  with  Him  amidst  our 
own  sorrows,  and  sound  the  depths  of  His  sympathy  by  proving  the  fulness  of  His 
help.  (P.  J.  Rollo.)  Touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  ivjirmities : — There  is  no 
warmer  Bible  phrase  than  this.  We  might  have  never  so  many  mishaps,  the 
Government  at  Washington  would  not  hear  of  them  ;  and  there  are  multitudes  in 
Britain  whose  troubles  Victoria  never  knows ;  but  there  is  a  throne  ngainst  which 
strike  our  most  insignificant  perplexities.  What  touches  ns  touches  Christ.  What 
robs  us  robs  Christ.  He  is  the  great  nerve-centre  to  which  thrill  all  sensations  which 
touch  us  who  are  His  members.  I.  He  is  touched  with  our  phtsicai.  infirmities.  U.  He 
is  touched  with  the  infirmities  of  our  pbayees.  He  will  pick  out  the  one  earnest  petition 
from  the  rubbish,  and  answer  it.  IH.  He  is  touched  with  the  infirmity  of  our  temper. 
IV,  He  sympathises  with  our  poor  efforts  at  doing  good.  (Christian  at  Work.) 
The  tenderness  of  Jesus : — I.  He  has  assumed  a  veby  tendeb  office.  A  king  may 
render  great  aid  to  the  unhappy ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  he  is  a  terror  to  evil-doers :  a 
high  priest  is  in  the  highest  sense  "  ordained  for  men,"  and  he  is  the  friend  and 
Buccourer  of  the  most  wretched.  1.  It  was  intended,  first,  that  by  the  high  priest 
God  should  commune  with  men.  That  needs  a  person  of  great  tenderness.  A 
mind  that  is  capable  of  listening  to  God,  and  understanding,  in  a  measure,  what  He 
teaches,  had  need  b«  very  tender,  so  as  to  interpret  the  lofty  sense  into  the  lowly 
language  of  humanity.  2.  But  a  high  priest  took  the  other  side  also :  he  was  to 
communicate  with  God  from  men.  Here,  also,  he  needed  the  tenderest  spirit  to 
rule  his  faculties  and  to  move  his  affections.  But  if  I  understand  the  high  priest's 
ofiSce  aright,  he  had  many  things  to  do  which  come  under  this  general  description, 
but  which  might  not  suggest  themselves,  if  you  did  not  have  the  items  set  before 
you.  3.  The  high  priest  was  one  who  had  to  deal  with  sin  and  judgment  for  the 
people.  We  have  a  High  Priest  into  whose  ear  we  may  pour  all  the  confessions  of 
our  penitence  without  fear.  It  is  a  wonderful  eas  ment  to  the  mind  to  tell  Jesus 
all.  No  doubt  the  high  priest  was  resorted  to,  th  t  he  might  console  the  sorrowful. 
Go  to  Jesus,  if  a  sharp  grief  is  gnawing  at  your  heart.  4.  The  high  priest  would 
hear,  also,  the  desires  and  wishes  of  the  people.  When  men  in  Israel  had  some 
great  longing,  some  overwhelming  desire,  they  not  only  prayed  in  private,  but  they 
would  make  a  journey  up  to  the  temple  to  ask  the  high  priest  to  present  their 

23 


854  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.it. 

petitions  before  the  Lord.    You  may  have  some  very  peculiar,  delicate  desire  as  to 
spiritual  things  that  only  God  and  your  own  soul  may  know;  but  fear  not  to 
mention  it  to  your  tender  High  Priest,  who  will  know  your  meaning,  and  deal 
graciously  with  you.   6.  It  was  the  high  priest's  business  to  instruct  and  to  reprove 
the  people.     To  instruct  is  delightful ;  but  to  reprove  is  difficult.      Only  a  tender 
spirit  can  wisely  utter  rebuke.    Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  tells  us  our  faults  in  tunes  of 
love.    His  rebukes  never  break  the  heart,     IL  He  has  a  tendeb  feelino.    It  is 
not  merely  true  that  He  is  apprised  of  our  infirmities,  since  the  Lord  has  said,  "  I 
know  their  sorows  "  ;  but  He  "  is  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities."  The 
sense  of  feeling  is  more  intense,  vivid,  and  acute  than  the  sense  of  sight.    It  is  one 
thing  to  see  pain,  but  another  thing  to  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  it.    Treasure 
up  this  view  of  your  Lord's  sympathy,  for  it  may  be  a  great  support  in  the  hour  of 
agony,  and  a  grand  restorative  in  the  day  of  weakness.     Note  again,  "  The  feeling 
of  our  infirmities."    Whose  infirmities ?   Does  not  " our  "  mean  yours  and  mine? 
Note  well  that  word  "  infirmities  " — "  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities.*' 
He  sympathises  with  those  of  you  who  are  no  heroes,  but  can  only  plead,  "  the 
spirit  indeed  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak."     As  the  mother  feels  with  the 
weakness  of  her  babe,  so  does  Jesus  feel  with  the  poorest,  saddest,  and  weakest  of 
His  chosen.    How  comes  this  about  ?     1.  Let  us  think  of  it  a  while  1     Onr  Lord 
has  a  tender  nature.    His  innate  tenderness  brought  Him  from  the  throne  to  the 
manger,  from  the  manger  to  the  Cross.     2.  Our  Lord  is  not  only  tender  of  nature, 
but  quick  of  understanding  as  to  the  infirmities  of  men.     III.  He  had  a  tendeb 
TRAiNiNQ.     1.  He  was  tried  as  we  are — in  body,  mind,  spirit.    2.  But  the  text  says, 
*'  tempted,"  and  that  bears  a  darker  meaning  than  "  tried."    Our  Lord  could  never 
have  fallen  the  victim  of  temptation,  but  through  Ufe  He  was  the  object  of  it.    IV. 
He  has  a  tender  peefectness.  Do  not  imagine  that  if  the  Lord  Jesus  had  sinned  He 
would  have  been  any  more  tender  toward  you  ;  for  sin  is  always  of  a  hardening 
nature.     If  the  Christ  of  God  could  have  sinned,  He  would  have  lost  the  perfection 
of  His  sympathetic  nature.     It  needs  p^rfectness  of  heart  to  lay  self  all  aside,  and 
to  be  touched  with  a  feeling  of  the  infirmities  of  others.     Hearken  again  :  do  you 
not  think  that  sympathy  in  sin  would  be  a  poisonous  sweet  ?    A  child,  for  instance, 
has  done  wrong,  and  he  has  been  wisely  chastened  by  his  father ;  I  have  known 
cases  in  which  a  foolish  mother  has  sympathised  with  the  child.     This  may  seem 
affectionate,  but  it  is  wickedly  injurious  to  the  child.     Such  conduct  would  lead  the 
child  to  love  the  evil  which  it  is  needful  he  should  hate.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        The 
sympathy  of  Christ : — The  word  "  tempted"  here  includes,  of  course,  all  trials  of 
eoul  and  body,  such  as  sorrow,  pain,  anguish,  as  well  as  what  we  commonly  call 
temptation ;  but  it  is  to  this  last  that  we  will  now  confine  ourselves.     We  can 
readily  understand  how  our  Lord's  perfect  humanity  should  sympathise  with  ours, 
because  both  are  of  one  nature;  but  how  He  who  is  sinless  should  sympathise  with 
ns  sinners — this  is  the  difficulty.    How,  it  may  be  asked,  can  He  sympathise  in 
repentance,  deserved  shame,  and  guilt  of  conscience?     It  may  be  said,  that  this 
difficulty  carries   its  own  answer ;    for  His  sympathy  with  penitents  is  perfect, 
because  He  is  sinless ;  its  perfection  is  the  consequence  of  His  perfect  holiness. 
And  for  these  reasons  :  1.  First,  because  we  find,  even  among  men,  that  sympathy 
is  more  or  less  perfect,  as  the  holiness  of  the  person  is  more  or  less  so.    The  living 
compassion,  with  which  the  holiest  men  have  ever  dealt  with  the  sinful,  is  a  proof 
that  in  proportion  as  sin  loses  its  power  over  them,  their  sympathy  with  those  that 
are  afflicted  by  its  oppressive  yoke  becomes  more  perfect.     2.  And  from  this  our 
thoughts  ascend  to  Him  who  is  all-perfect ;  who  being  from  everlasting  very  God, 
was  for  our  sakes  made  very  Man,  that  He  might  unite  us  wholly  to  Himself. 
Above  and  beyond  all  sympathy  is  that  of  our  High  Priest.  None  hate  sin  but  those 
who  are  holy,  and  that  in  the  measure  of  their  holiness ;  and  therefore  in  the 
Person  of  our  blessed  Lord  there  must  exist  the  two  great  conditions  of  perfect 
sympathy :  first,  He  has  suffered  all  the  sorrows  which  are  consequent  upon  sin 
and  distinct  from  it ;  next,  He  has,  because  of  His  perfect  holiness,  a  perfect  hatred 
of  evil.     And  these  properties  of  His  human  nature  unite  themselves  to  the  pity, 
omniscience,  and  love,  which  are  the  perfections  of  His  Divine.      Now  we  may  see 
in  what  it  is  that  our  Lord,  by  the  experience  of  humiliation  in  our  flesh,  has 
learned  to  sympathise  with  us.      Not  in  any  motion  of  evil  in  the  affections  or 
thoughts  of  the  heart ;  not  in  any  inclination  of  the  will :   not,  if  we  dare  so 
much  as  utter  it,  in  any  taint  or  soil  upon  the  soul.     Upon  all  such  as  are  destroying 
themselves  in  wilful  commerce  with  evil.  He  loi'ks  down  with  a  Divine  pity;  but 
Ihey  have  withdrawn  themselves  from  the  range  of  His  sympathy.     This  can  only 


CHA».  IV.]  HEBREWS.  855 

be  with  those  who  are  in  sonow  un-ler  sin  ;  that  is,  with  penitents.      It  is  in  the 
suffering  of  those  that  would  be  cleansed  and  made  holy  that  He  partakes.     I.  Wi 

MAY   PLEAD    WITH  HiM    ON    HlS  OWN  EXPEKIENCE  OF   THE  WKAKNESS   OP  ODR  HUMANITY. 

None  knows  it  better  than  He,  not  only  as  our  Maker,  who  "  knoweth  our  frame,  and 
remembereth  that  we  are  but  dust,"  but  as  Man,  wbo  made  full  trial  of  our  nature 
"  in  the  days  of  His  flesh."      He  knows  its  fearful  susceptibility  of  temptation — 
how,  in  its  most  perfect  state,  as  in  His   own  person,  it  may  be  solicited  by  the 
allurements  of  the  evil  one.     And  if  in  Him  it  could  be  tempted  to  sin,  how  much 
more  in  us  !     When  we  confess  our  sins  before  Him,  we  may  lay  open  all.      Things 
we  hardly  dare  to  speak  to  any  man,  to  any  imperfect  being,  we  do  not  sbrink  from 
confessing   before  Him — things  which  men  would  not  believe,  inward  struggles, 
distinctions  in  intention,  extenuating  causes,  errors  of   belief — all    the  manifold 
working  of  the  inward  life  which  g^)es  before  a  fall.     With  all  His  awful  holiness, 
there  is  something  that  draws  us  to  Him.    Though  His  eyes  be  •«  as  a  flame  of  fire," 
and  the  act  of  laying  ourselves  open  to  Him  is  terrible,  yet  He  is  "meek  and  lowly 
of  heart,"  knowing  nil  our  case,  "  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities."     II. 
We  may  appeal  to  His  experience  of  the  sorrow  and  shame  which  come  by  sin 
DPON  MANKIND.     He  suffeicd  both  as  keenly  and  as  fully  as  it  was  possible  for  one 
that  was  without  sin  (see  Psa.  xxii.  1,  2,  6-8, 14,  15 ;  Isa.  liii.  3,  4 ;  Psa.  Ixix.  1-3, 
7,  10-12,  20,  21  ;  Ixxxviii.  1,  2,  6-9,  14-16 ;  Lam.  i.  12,  13).     All  that  sin  could 
inflict  on  the  guiltless  He  endu/ed  ;  and  to  that  experience  of  shame  and  sorrow 
we  guilty  may  appeal.     Though  we  suffer  indeed  justly,  yet  can  He  feel  with  ua 
though  He  did  nothing  amiss.     Though  in  the  bitterness  of  soul  which  flows  from 
consciousness  of  guilt  He  has  no  part,  yet  when  we  take  revenge  upon  ourselves 
in  humiliation,  and  oiier  ourselves  to  suffer  all  He  wills  for  our  abasement,  He 
pities  us  while  He  permits  the  chastisemf  nt  to  break  us  down  at  His  feet.    *'  When 
our  heart  is  smitten  down  within  us,  and  withered  like  grass,  so  that  we  forget  to 
eat  our  bread,"  it  is  a  thoutiht  full  of  consolation,  "  that  we  have  not  an  High  Priest 
which  cannot  be  tuuched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities."     Therefore  let  us  ask 
for  consolation  from  no  other.  Let  us  not  go,  I  will  not  say  to  the  world,  and  its  fair 
words,  smooth  persua'^ions,  shallow  comforts,  for  to  these  no  man  whose  repentance 
has  any  depth  or  reality  in  it  can  bear  to  go;  they  are  miserable,  falsifying  stimu- 
lants, which  beat  and  bewilder  the  heart,  and  leave  it  open  to  terrible  recoils  of 
Borrow ;  but  let  us  not  go  to  books  or  to  employment ;  no,  nor  even  to  the  con- 
solation and  tender  love  of  friend,  brother,  wife,  husband,  spiritual  guide  ;  no,  nor 
to  the  most  perfect  saint  and  tiearest  to  Himself;  but  to  Him  for  whose  sake  all 
these  must  be  forsaken,  in  wbom  are  all  the  fresh  springs  of  solace  which  distil 
in  scanty  drops  through  the  tenderest  and  fondest  hearts.     Let  us  go  at  once  to 
Him.     There  is  nothing  can  separate  us  from  His  sympathy  but  our  own  wilful 
eins.    Let  us  fear  and  hate  these,  as  for  all  other  reasons,  so  above  all  for  this, 
that  they  cut  off  the  streams  of  His  pure  and  pitiful  consolation,  and  leave  our  soula 
to  wither  up  in  their  own  drought  and  darkness.     So  long  as  we  are  fully  in  Hia 
sympathy,  let  our  sorrows,  shame,  trials,  temptations,  be  what  they  may,  we  are 
safe.     He  is  purifying  us  by  them ;  teaching  us  to  die  to  the  world  and  to  our- 
selves, that    He  only  may  live  in  us,  and  that  our   life  may    be   "  hid   with 
Christ  in   Qod."     Axid  again,   that  we  may  so  shelter  ourselves  in  Him,  let 
ua  make  to  Him  a  confession,   detailed,  particular,  and  unsparing,  of  all  our 
eins.      And  lastly,  let  us  so  live  as  not  to  forfeit  His  sympathy.      It  is  oura 
only  BO  long  as  we  strive  and  pray  to  be  made  like  Him.     If  we  turn  again 
to  evil,  or  to  the  world,  we  sever  ourselves  from  Him.     {Archdeacon  Manning.) 
The  sympathy  of  Christ: — Our  subject  is  the  priestly  sympathies  of  Christ.    But 
we  make  three  preliminary  observations.    The  perfection  of  Christ's  humanity 
impUes  that  He  was  possessed  of  a  human  soul  as  well  as  a  human  body.     Accord- 
ingly in  the  life  of  Christ  we  find  two  distinct  classes  of  feehng.  When  He  hungered 
in  the  wilderness — when  He  thirsted  on  the  Cross — when  He  was  weary  by  the  well 
at  Sychar — He  experienced  sensations  which  belong  to  the  bodily  department  of 
human  nature.    But  when  out  of  twelve  He  selected  one  to  be  His  bosom  friend  ; 
when  He  looked  round  upon  the  crowd  in  anger ;  when  the  tears  streamed  down 
His  cheeks  at  Bethany ;  and  when  He  recoiled  from  the  thought  of  approaching 
dissolution ;  these — grief,  friendship,  fear — were  not  the  sensations  of  the  body, 
much  less  were  they  the  attributes  of  Godhead,     They  were  the  affections  of  an 
aoutely  sensitive  human  soul,  alive  to  all  the  tenderness,  and  hopes,  and  anguish 
with  which  hmnan  life  is  filled,  qualifying  Him  to  be  tempted  in  all  points  like  as 
we  are.    The  second  thought  which  presents  itself  is  that  the  Eedeemer  net  only 


856  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  iv   ' 

was  bnt  is  Man.  He  was  tempted  in  all  points  like  ns.  He  is  a  high  priest  whicb 
can  be  touched.  The  present  manhood  of  Christ  conveys  this  deeply  important 
truth,  that  the  Divine  heart  is  human  in  its  sympathies.  The  third  observatioa 
upon  these  verses  is,  that  there  is  a  connection  between  what  Jesus  was  and  what 
Jesus  is.  He  can  be  touched  now  because  He  was  tempted  then.  His  past  experi- 
ence has  left  certain  effects  durable  in  His  nature  as  it  is  now.  It  has  endued  Him 
with  certain  qualifications  and  certain  susceptibilities,  which  He  would  not  have  had 
but  for  that  experience.  Just  as  the  results  remained  upon  His  body,  the  prints  of 
the  nails  in  His  palms,  and  the  spear-gash  in  His  side,  so  do  the  results  remain 
upon  His  soul,  enduing  Him  with  a  certain  susceptibility,  for  "  He  can  be  touched 
with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities  "  ;  with  certain  qualifications,  for  "  He  is  able  to 
show  mercy,  and  to  impart  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need."  To  turn  now  to  the 
subject  itself.  It  has  two  branches.  1.  The  Redeemer's  preparation  for  His  priest- 
hood. 2.  The  Redeemer's  priestly  qualifications.  I.  His  prepabation.  The  pre- 
paration consisted  in  being  tempted.  But  here  a  difficulty  arises.  Temptation,  as 
applied  to  a  Being  perfectly  free  from  tendencies  to  evil,  is  not  easy  to  understand. 
See  what  the  difficulty  is.  Temptation  has  two  senses,  it  means  test  or  probation  ; 
it  means  also  trial,  involving  the  idea  of  pain  or  danger.  A  weight  hung  from  a  bar 
of  iron  only  tests  its  strength;  the  same,  depending  from  a  human  arm,  is  a  trial, 
involving  it  may  be  the  risk  of  pain  or  fracture.  Now  trial  placed  before  a  sinless 
being  is  intelligible  enough  in  the  sense  of  probation ;  it  is  a  test  of  excellence;  but 
it  is  not  easy  to  see  how  it  can  be  temptation  in  the  sense  of  pain,  if  there  be  no 
inclination  to  do  wrong.  However,  Scripture  plainly  asserts  this  as  the  character 
of  Christ's  temptation.  Not  merely  test,  but  trial.  First  you  have  passages  declar- 
ing the  immaculate  nature  of  His  mind ;  as  here,  "  without  sin."  Again,  He  was 
"  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from  sinners."  But  then  we  find  another  class 
of  passages,  such  as  this  :  "  He  suffered,  being  tempted."  There  was  not  merely 
test  in  the  temptation,  but  there  was  also  palnfulness  in  the  victory.  How  could 
this  be  without  any  tendency  to  evil?  To  answer  this,  let  us  analyse  sin.  In  evtry 
act  of  sin  there  are  two  distinct  steps.  There  is  the  rising  of  a  desire  which  is 
natural,  and,  being  natural,  is  not  wrong — there  is  the  indulgence  of  that  desire  in 
forbidden  circumstances,  and  that  is  sin.  Sin  is  not  a  real  thing.  It  is  rather  the 
absence  of  a  something,  the  will  to  do  right.  It  is  not  a  disease  or  taint,  an  actual 
Bubstance  projected  into  the  constitution.  It  is  the  absence  of  the  spirit  which 
orders  and  harmonises  the  whole ;  so  that  what  we  mean  when  we  say  the  natural 
man  must  sin  inevitably,  is  this,  that  he  has  strong  natural  appetites,  and  that  he 
has  no  bias  from  above  to  counteract  those  appetites ;  exactly  as  if  a  ship  wero' 
deserted  by  her  crew,  and  left  on  the  bosom  of  the  Atlantic  with  every  sail  set  and 
the  wind  blowing.  No  one  forces  her  to  destruction — yet  on  the  rocks  she  will 
surely  go,  just  because  there  is  no  pilot  at  the  helm.  Such  is  the  state  of  ordinary 
men.  Temptation  leads  to  fall.  The  gusts  of  instincts,  which  rightly  guided,  would 
have  carried  safely  into  port,  dash  them  on  the  rocks.  No  one  forces  them  to  sin ; 
but  the  spirit-pilot  has  left  the  helm.  Sin,  therefore,  is  not  in  the  appetites,  but  in 
the  absence  of  a  controlling  will.  Now  contrast  this  state  with  the  state  of  Christ, 
There  were  in  Him  all  the  natural  appetites  of  mind  and  body.  Relaxation  and: 
friendship  were  dear  to  Him — so  were  sunlight  and  life.  Hunger,  pain,  death.  He 
could  feel  all,  and  shrunk  from  them.  Conceive  then  a  case  in  which  the  gratifica- 
tion of  any  one  of  these  inclinations  was  inconsistent  with  His  Father's  will.  At  one 
moment  it  was  unlawful  to  eat,  though  hungry  ;  and  without  one  tendency  to  dis- 
obey, did  fasting  cease  to  be  severe  ?  It  was  demanded  that  He  should  endure 
anguish;  and,  willingly  as  He  subdued  Himself,  did  pain  cease  to  be  pain?  Could 
the  spirit  of  obedience  reverse  every  feeling  in  human  nature  ?  It  seems  to  have 
been  in  this  way  that  the  temptation  of  Christ  caused  suffering.  He  suffered  from 
the  force  of  desire.  Though  there  was  no  hesitation  whether  to  obey  or  not,  no  strife 
in  the  will,  in  the  act  of  mastery  there  was  pain.  There  was  self-denial — there  was 
obedience  at  the  expense  of  torture!  natural  feeling.  II.  The  second  point  we  take 
is  THB  Redeemer's  priesthood.  Priesthood  is  that  office  by  which  He  is  the  medium 
of  union  between  man  and  God.  The  capacity  for  this  has  been  indelibly  engraven 
on  His  nature  by  His  experience  here.  All  this  capacity  is  based  on  His  sympathy 
— He  can  be  *'  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities."  Till  we  have  reflected 
on  it,  we  are  scarcely  aware  how  much  the  sum  of  human  happiness  in  the  world  is 
indebted  to  this  one  feeling — sympathy.  The  child's  smile  and  laugh  are  mighty 
powers  in  this  world.  When  bereavement  has  left  you  desolate,  what  substantial 
benefit  is  there  which  makes  condolence  acceptable  ?    It  cannot  replace  the  loved> 


CHAP.  IT.]  HEBREWS.  85T 

ones  you  have  lost.  It  can  bestow  upon  you  nothing  permanent.  But  a  warm  hand 
has  touched  yours,  and  its  thrill  told  you  that  there  was  a  living  response  there  to 
your  emotion.  One  look — one  human  sigh  has  done  more  for  you  than  the  costliest 
present  could  convey.  And  it  is  for  want  of  remarking  this,  that  the  effect  of  publio 
charity  falls  often  so  far  short  of  the  expectations  of  those  who  give.  Love  is  not 
bought  by  money,  but  by  love.  There  has  been  all  the  machinery  of  a  publio  dis- 
tribution; but  there  has  been  no  exhibition  of  individual,  personal  interest.  Again, 
when  the  electric  touch  of  sympathetic  feeling  has  gone  among  a  mass  of  men,  it 
communicates  itself,  and  is  reflected  back  from  every  individual  in  the  crowd,  with  a 
force  exactly  proportioned  to  their  numbers.  It  is  on  record  that  the  hard  heart  of 
an  oriental  conqueror  was  unmanned  by  the  sight  of  a  dense  mass  of  living  million  a 
engaged  in  one  enterprise.  He  accounted  for  it  by  saying,  that  it  suggested  to  him 
that  within  a  single  century  not  one  of  those  millions  would  be  alive.  But  the  hard- 
hearted bosom  of  the  tyrant  mistook  its  own  emotions ;  his  tears  came  from  no  such 
far-fetched  inference  of  reflection ;  they  rose  spontaneously,  as  they  will  rise  in  a 
dense  crowd,  you  cannot  tell  why.  It  is  the  thrilling  thought  of  numbers  engaged 
in  the  same  object.  It  is  the  idea  of  our  own  feelings  reciprocated  back  to  us,  and 
reflected  from  many  hearts.  And  again,  it  seems  partly  to  avail  itself  of  this 
tendency  within  us,  that  such  stress  is  laid  on  the  injunction  of  united  prayer. 
Solitary  prayer  is  feeble  in  comparison  with  that  which  rises  before  the  throne 
echoed  by  the  hearts  of  hundreds,  and  strengthened  by  the  feeling  that  other  aspira- 
tions are  mingling  with  our  own.  And  whether  it  be  the  chanted  litany,  or  the  more 
simple  read  service,  or  the  anthem  producing  one  emotion  at  the  same  moment  in 
many  bosoms,  the  value  and  the  power  of  pubUc  prayer  seem  chiefly  to  depend  on 
this  mysterious  affection  of  our  nature — sympathy.  And  now,  having  endeavoured 
to  illustrate  this  power  of  sympathy,  it  is  for  us  to  remember  that  of  this  in  its  ful- 
ness He  is  susceptible.  Observe  how  He  is  touched  by  our  infirmities — with  a 
separate,  special,  discriminating  love.  There  is  not  a  single  throb,  in  a  single  human 
bosom,  that  does  not  thrill  at  once  with  more  than  electric  speed  up  to  the  mighty 
heart  of  God.  You  have  not  shed  a  tear  or  sighed  a  sigh,  that  did  not  come  back 
to  you  exalted  and  purified  by  having  passed  through  the  Eternal  bosom.  1.  We 
may  boldly  expect  mercy  from  Him  w)io  has  learned  to  sympathise.  He  learned 
sympathy  by  being  tempted ;  but  it  is  by  being  tempted,  yet  without  sin,  that  He  ia 
specially  able  to  show  mercy.  2.  The  other  priestly  power  is  the  grace  of  showing 
"  help  in  time  of  need."  We  must  not  make  too  much  of  sympathy,  as  mere  feel- 
ing. We  do  in  things  spiritual  as  we  do  with  the  hothouse  plants.  The  feeble 
exotic,  beautiful  to  look  at,  but  useless,  has  costly  sums  spent  on  it.  The  hardy 
oak,  a  nation's  strength,  is  permitted  to  grow,  scarcely  observed,  in  the  fence  and 
copses.  We  prize  feeling  and  praise  its  possessor.  But  feeling  is  only  a  sickly 
exotic  in  itself — a  passive  quality,  having  in  it  nothing  moral,  no  temptation  and  no 
victory.  A  man  is  no  more  a  good  man  for  having  feeling,  than  he  is  for  having  a 
delicate  ear  for  music,  or  a  far-seeing  optic  nerve.  The  Son  of  Man  had  feeling — 
He  could  be  "  touched."  The  tear  would  start  from  His  eyes  at  the  sight  of  human 
sorrow.  But  that  sympathy  was  no  exotic  in  His  soul,  beautiful  to  look  at,  too  deli- 
cate for  use.  Feeling  with  Him  led  to  this,  "  He  went  about  doing  good."  Sym- 
pathy with  Him  was  this,  "  Grace  to  help  in  time  of  need."  And  this  is  the  bless- 
ing of  the  thought  of  Divine  sympathy.  By  the  sympathy  of  man,  after  all,  the 
wound  is  not  healed  ;  it  is  only  stanched  for  a  time.  It  can  make  the  tear  flow  less 
bitterly,  it  cannot  dry  it  up.  So  far  as  permanent  good  goes,  who  has  not  felt  the 
deep  truth  which  Job  taught  his  friends — *'  Miserable  comforters  are  ye  all  "  ?  The 
sympathy  of  the  Divine  Human  1  He  knows  what  strength  is  needed.  He  gives 
grace  to  help.  From  this  subject  I  draw,  in  concluding,  two  inferences.  1.  He 
who  would  sympathise  must  be  content  to  be  tried  and  tempted.  There  is  a  hard 
and  boisterous  rudeness  in  our  hearts  by  nature,  which  requires  to  be  softened  down. 
Therefore,  if  you  aspire  to  be  a  son  of  consolation — if  you  would  partake  of  the 
priestly  gift  of  sympathy — if  you  would  pour  something  beyond  common-place  con- 
solation into  a  tempted  heart — if  you  would  pass  through  the  intercourse  of  daily 
life,  with  the  delicate  tact  which  never  inflicts  pain — if  to  that  most  acute  of  humac 
ailments,  mental  doubt,  you  are  ever  to  give  effectual  succour,  you  must  be  content 
to  pay  the  price  of  the  costly  education.  Like  Him,  vou  must  suffer — being  tempted. 
But  remember,  it  is  being  tempted  in  all  points,  yet  without  sin,  that  makes  sym- 
pathy  real,  manly,  perfect,  instead  of  a  mere  sentimental  tenderness.  Sin  will  teacb 
you  to  feel  for  trials.  It  will  not  enable  you  to  judge  them  ;  to  be  merciful  to  them 
— nor  to  help  them  in  time  of  need  with  any  certainty.    2.  It  is  this  same  humtin 


858  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

Bympathy  which  qnalifies  Christ  for  judgment.  It  is  written  that  the  Father  hath 
committed  all  judgment  to  Him,  because  He  is  the  Son  of  Man.  The  sympathy  o£ 
Christ  extends  to  the  frailties  of  human  nature  ;  not  to  its  hardened  guilt :  He  is 
"  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities."  There  is  nothing  in  His  bosom  which 
oan  harmonise  with  malice — He  cannot  feel  for  envy — He  has  no  fellow-feeling  for 
cruelty,  oppression,  hypocrisy,  bitter  censorious  judgments.  Remember,  He  could 
look  round  about  Him  with  anger.  The  sympathy  of  Christ  is  a  comforting  subject. 
It  is  besides  a  tremendous  subject ;  for  on  sympathy  the  awards  of  heaven  and  hell 
are  built.  "Except  a  man  be  bom  again" — not  he  shall  not,  but — "he  cannot 
enter  into  heaven."  There  is  nothing  in  him  which  has  afiQnity  to  anything  in  the 
Judge's  bosom.  {F.  W.  Robertson,  M.A.)  The  sympathy  of  Christ: — 1.  In  its 
NATURE.  The  words  "  touched,"  &c.,  mean  "  to  have  compassion,"  "  to  condole 
with."  It  is  something  more  than  pity.  Sympathy  cannot  properly  belong  to  God, 
the  perfection  of  His  nature  raises  Him  above  it.  But  it  is  different  with  Christ. 
Being  man  He  had  all  the  real  affection  of  human  nature.  II.  In  its  objects. 
These  are  all  His  people  on  earth,  and  it  is  manifested  more  particularly  in  their 
infirmities  and  aflflictions.  III.  In  its  reality.  The  sympathy  of  Christ  is  no  ideal 
thing.     It  is  no  mere  intellectual  or  ideal  supposition.     It  is  one  which  has  been 

Eut  to  a  most  serious  and  solemn  test.  He  took  away  with  Him  all  the  meekness, 
oliness,  compassion,  and  love,  which  He  had  when  on  earth.  It  is  further  manifest 
from  the  relationship  which  exists  between  Him  and  His  people.  Again,  it  is 
manifest  from  the  offices  which  He  retains  in  heaven.  Can  an  High  Priest  whose 
love  was  stronger  than  death  be  unmindful  of  those  whom  He  has  redeemed  ?  It 
urges — 1.  Affection  towards  our  Redeemer.  Shall  we  sympathise  with  one  another 
in  the  common  calamities  of  Ufe,  and  not  be  affected  by  the  sufferings  of  Jesus  for 
US?  2.  It  incites  encouragement  to  repentance.  Repentance  is  going  to  Christ. 
Surely  His  sympathetic  nature  and  gracious  disposition  should  be  sufficient  induce- 
ment to  draw  us  to  His  arms.  3.  It  should  make  us  willing  patiently  to  live  for 
God  and  employ  ourselves  in  His  service.  If  we  suffer,  or  if  we  toil,  He  knows  our 
condition,  and  is  acquainted  with  our  needs.  4.  It  ought  to  cause  Christians  to 
sympathise  one  with  another.  We  need  sympathy  ourselves ;  we  cannot  justly 
withhold  it  from  others.  5.  How  can  any  man  go  on  day  after  day  sinning  against 
love  and  compassion  so  great  ?  (The  Preacher's  Analyst.)  Christ's  sympathy  with 
the  infirm : — There  is  much  to  wonder  at  here.  We  wonder  that  He  should  care 
for  us  at  all,  but  still  more  that  that  care  should  be  for  those  of  our  experiences 
apparently  least  likely  to  move  Him.  Men  are  interested  in  our  successes,  in  those 
points  where  we  are  strong  and  brave,  for  the  most  part  they  care  little  for  our  weak- 
ness. The  dull  child,  who  for  all  his  trying  makes  no  progress,  has  not  a  tithe  of 
the  kindly  thought  lavsihed  on  another.  In  society  the  timid  and  nervous  are  over- 
looked and  fall  into  the  background ;  the  strong,  the  self-reliant,  the  well-to-do  have 
friends,  but  the  weak  are  parsed  by.  Now  it  is  just  these,  it  is  just  those  points 
where  we  are  low — our  infirinities — that  our  Lord  thinks  about,  and  feels  for,  and 
longs  to  help.  And  in  this  He  who  is  farther  off  than  any  comes  closer  than  any. 
Human  friends  can  understand  sickness,  and  suffering,  and  loss,  and  care,  but  how 
little  they  understand  mere  infirmity !  They  think  we  could  be  cheerful  if  we  would, 
or  that  infirmity  at  the  worst  is  not  hard  to  bear,  and  they  do  not  attach  much 
weight  to  it,  and  know  not  its  sore  need  of  thoughtfulness,  or  of  how  much  it 
deprives  us.  But,  says  the  text,  Christ  does.  He  comes  nearer  to  us  than  man. 
He  is  the  friend  "  closer  than  a  brother,"  "  He  knoweth  our  frame."  Nor  does  that 
exhaust  the  wonder  of  His  sympathy,  for  many  of  our  infirmities  are  more  or  less 
due  to  sin.  Yet  He  does  not  scorn  us,  or  say  it  serves  us  right ;  but  is  sorry  for  us, 
and  would  help  us,  and  make  us  what  we  should  have  been.  I.  First,  then,  consider 
THE  fact  of  this  srMPATHT  OF  THE  LoRD  Jesus.  1.  It  is  assurcd  by  His  personal 
human  experience.  2.  And  this  sympathy  is  assured  by  His  perfect  knowledge  and 
love.  3.  But  is  there  not,  I  had  almost  said,  a  still  stronger  assurance  of  our  Lord's 
sympathy  in  His  union  with  His  people  ?  For  that  union  is  not  merely  one  of  love, 
nor  of  similarity  of  taste ;  it  is  that  of  a  common  life.  II.  Consider  this  sympathy 
IN  ITS  connection  WITH  His  HIGH-PRIESTLY  WORK.  He  is  the  medium  by  which  we 
can  approach  God  with  our  sin  and  need,  and  by  which  God  can  approach  us  with 
His  blessings.  Now  it  is  easy  to  see  how  priceless  is  the  assurance  that  this 
Mediator  "  is  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,"  that  He  feels  for  us  and 
is  drawn  to  us  by  most  tender  sympathy.  1.  As  High  Priest  He  has  direct  inter- 
course with  us.  The  glory  of  God  places  Him  at  an  infinite  distance,  but  He  has 
appointed  Christ  as  His  representative  to  us,  and  ours  to  Him,     If  a  king  appoints 


CHAP.  IV.]  HEBREWS,  369 

one  to  represent  him  to  a  prisoner  who  is  not  worthy  to  approach  him,  or  to  a  poor 
man  who  is  afraid,  it  is  part  of  that  representative's  work  to  come  into  close  inter- 
course with  them ;  whoever  else  is  barred  from  that  prisoner's  cell,  or  free  to  keep 
away  from  that  poor  man's  house,  that  representative  is  not.  So  the  Lord  Jesus, 
in  accepting  His  high-priesthood,  undertook  thus  to  come  close  to  us,  and  He  fulfils 
what  He  undertakes.  2.  As  High  Priest  He  prays  for  the  supply  of  our  need. 
What  they  want  is  ever  profoundly  sure  to  His  people  since  His  prayer  for  them  is 
influenced  by  His  sympathy,  and  "  Him  the  father  heareth  always."  3.  As  High 
Priest  He  brings  us  to  the  Father.  We  read  of  "  those  who  come  unto  God  by 
Him  " ;  He  said  "  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  Me."  Does  that  only 
mean  that  His  sacrifice  is  the  ground  on  which  God  receives  us  and  refer  to  those 
who  go  to  Him  trusting  that  for  acceptance,  and  not  also  that  His  is  the  help  by 
which  we  tread  the  new  and  living  way  He  is  I  Yes,  Jesus  brings  us  to  God  both 
by  the  merits  of  His  sacrifice  and  by  the  aid  of  His  Spirit.     III.  Then  consider, 

THIS     SYMPATHY   WITH     INFIRMITY     THE     PATTERN     FOB    HiS    PEOPIjE,        Christ-UkeneSS 

includes  sympsitby.  1.  Thus  our  Lord's  sympathy  rebukes  our  hardness.  2.  His 
sympathy  shuws  one  of  the  great  needs  of  the  world.  It  is  part  of  His  saving  work 
as  His  atonement  is ;  it  is  to  save  that  He  sympathises.  What  saving  power  was  in 
His  kindness  on  earth !  And  that  is  what  the  world  wants  still  for  its  regeneration. 
(C.  New.)  The  sympathy  of  Christ : — It  has  been  well  said,  "  Though  the  lower 
animals  have  feeling,  they  have  no  fellow-feeUng,  it  only  belongs  to  man  to  weep 
with  them  that  weep,  and,  by  sympathy,  to  divide  another's  sorrows  and  double 
another's  joys."  I  have  read  that  the  wounded  stag  sheds  tears  as  its  life  blood 
Sows  fast  upon  the  purple  heatber,  but  never  that  its  pangs  and  agonies  drew  tears 
from  its  fellows  in  the  herd.  That  finer  touch  of  nature  belongs  to  man  alone. 
Sympathy  ia  the  echo  that  a  heart  gives  to  another's  cry  of  anguish.  But  a  few 
weeks  since  I  was  in  the  land  of  mountains,  crags,  and  rocks,  and  there,  at  different 
well- selected  spots,  I  heard  the  blast  of  the  Swiss  horn.  Grand  were  the  echoes  as 
they  rolled  among  the  mountain  gorges,  giving  every  snowy  peak  a  voice,  and  every 
pine-clad  hill  a  tongue.  Marvellous  was  it  to  have  the  sound  that  first  came  from 
our  very  feet  flung  back  upon  our  ears  from  distant  ranges,  that  looked  the  very 
embodiment  of  silence.  But  more  musical  by  far,  because  more  heavenly,  is  the 
response  given  by  a  heart  touched  with  the  feeling  of  another's  grief,  and  that  grief, 
the  grief  of  one  who  has  no  legal  claim  upon  its  sympathy.  But  be  it  remembered, 
the  best  of  human  sympathy  is  but  human  sympathy  at  best.  To  see  it  in  all  its 
exquisite  perfections  of  tenderness,  we  have  to  turn  from  man  to  his  Maker — from 
the  saint  to  his  Saviour — from  earth  to  heaven.  I.  The  sympathy  of  Jesus  flows 
THROUGH  KNOWLEDQB.  Ten  thousaud  springs  of  earthly  sympathy  are  sealed 
through  ignorance.  Child  of  God,  the  sympathy  of  your  Saviour  is  never  lacking 
through  want  of  knowledge.  There  is  no  wall  of  separation,  however  thin,  that 
hides  from  His  eyes  the  sorrow  and  the  misery  within.  Jesus  knows  the  every  care 
of  every  saint.  Poor  troubled  one,  thou  mayest  venture  nigh.  Thou  canst  not 
tell  Him  that  He  knew  not  long  before.  Are  you  trying  to  carry  your  cares  in 
your  own  bosom  ?  Like  the  Spartan  youth  who  stole  a  fox  and  hid  it  in  his 
coat ;  are  you  letting  it  eat  its  way  into  your  very  vitals  rather  than  it  should 
be  discovered  ?  For  pity's  sake  forbear.  Go  cast  yourselves  upon  the  sympathy 
of  Him  who  not  only  reads  the  sorrow  of  the  face,  but  the  deeper  anguish  of 
the  heart.  II.  The  sympathy  of  Jesus  ib  prompted  by  His  nature.  With  Jesus 
to  know  is  to  be  touched.  If  His  knowledge  cuts  the  channel.  His  nature  at 
the  same  moment  fills  it  with  the  stream  of  compassionate  love.  Would  yoa 
know  what  Jesus  is?  Then  you  have  but  to  find  out  what  Jesus  was.  III. 
The  sympathy  of  Jesus  is  deepened  by  kxpebiencb.  This  is  very  beautifully 
taught  in  the  closing  sentence  of  the  verse,  "  But  was  in  all  points  tempted 
like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin."  There  can  after  all  be  but  little  true  sym- 
pathy, however  loving  the  heart,  where  there  has  been  no  similar  experience. 
It  is  the  widow  who  knows  best  how  to  speak  words  of  comfort  to  the  one  from 
whose  side  an  affectionate  husband  has  been  torn.  It  is  the  man  who  has  him- 
self passed  through  the  agonies  of  a  financial  difficulty  that  knows  best  how  to  cheer 
the  one  who,  after  every  desperate  effort  to  retrieve  his  fortune,  yet  finds  himself 
going  to  the  wall  step  by  step.  It  is  in  the  school  of  experience  that  thelanguage  of  sym- 
pathy  is  best  taught,  Christ's  knowledge  of  our  trials  is  not  a  theoretical  but  an  experi- 
mental one.  He  knows  what  the  weight  of  a  burden  is  by  having  carried  it.  {A.G.  Brown.) 
The  sympathy  of  the  Saviour  : — The  doctrine  of  my  text  is.  Able  to  save  is  also  able 
to  feel.    I.  Take  the  wonderful  consolation  of  the  text.    Look  at  the  expressive 


860  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  hl 

word  "  TOUCHED  "  ;  but  is  it  not  a  weak,  poor,  or  cold  word?  No  I  touched !  That 
is,  His  sympathy  does  not  overwhelm  His  power.  Too  great  sympathy  is  death  to 
power ;  the  Saviour  knows,  helps,  heals.  Touched !  He  is  not  possessed  by  our 
infirmities.  He  always  possessed  them.  As  He  said,  "I  have  power  to  lay  down 
My  Ufe,  and  I  have  power  to  take  it  again."  Walk  with  me  through  an  infirmary ; 
let  us  step  from  bed  to  bed — we  are  able  to  see,  not  to  save — alas,  what  spectacles 
are  here !  Can  you  walk  from  bed  to  bed  ?  can  you  feel  for  all  that  and  this  ? 
Then,  would  your  hand  be  strong  enough  to  minister  the  skill  of  the  surgeon  and 
the  tenderness  of  the  nurse  ?  It  is  difficult  to  walk  through  this,  and  to  be  touched 
with  tenderness,  and  not  lose  the  skUfulness.  Hence  it  is  said  of  our  Lord,  "  He 
was  touched  " ;  that  is.  He  holds  our  infirmities  ;  on  the  contrary  they  hold  us — our 
infirmities  do  not  overwhelm  His  power.  "Touched  by  the  feeling  of  our  infirmi- 
ties," He  was  untouched  by  the  power  of  our  infirmities.  It  was  the  last  lesson 
necessary  "  to  make  Him  a  merciful  and  faithful  High  Priest  "  ;  it  only  proved  His 
human  abiUty  to  feel,  and  gives  us  confidence  in  His  infinite  abiUty  to  save.  II. 
Extend  this  illustration  into  doctrine.  And  now  from  this  shall  we,  after 
thus  dwelling  on  the  sympathy  of  the  Saviour,  proceed  to  see  how  it  illustrates  the 
principle  of  Divine  Providence.  The  suffering  of  the  world  is  the  great  mystery  of 
the  world ;  but  what  is  the  suffering  of  the  world,  compared  with  the  greater 
mystery  of  the  suffering  of  Christ  ?  Can  pure  being  know  pain  ?  Can  God  condi- 
tion  Himself  in  infirmity  ?  Can  eternity  be  touched  by  time  ?  WeU,  Christ  says, 
I  cannot  save  you  from  suffering,  but  I  can  suffer  for  you  ;  nay,  I  can  attest  Myself 
to  your  hearts  as  perpetually  suffering  with  you.  III.  Let  us  narrow  the  text 
TO  the  application.  I  repeat,  the  doctrine  of  the  text  is.  Able  to  save  is  able  to 
feel.  We  find  even  among  men  that  sympathy  is  more  or  less  perfect  as  the  holi- 
ness of  the  person  is  more  or  less  so.  There  is  no  real  sympathy  among  men  of 
sensual,  worldly,  unspiritual  life,  unless  we  are  to  call  the  mere  operations  of  natural 
instinct  sympathy ;  it  is  not  natural  pity,  it  is  consciousness,  it  differs  little  from 
our  feUow-perception  of  heat  and  cold.  Sin  kills  sympathy ;  as  a  man  becomes 
infected  with  the  power  of  evil,  he  ceases  to  sympathise  with  others,  all  his  feelings 
centre  in  himself.  Sin  is  self -centring ;  sinners  put  all  worst  constructions  on 
each  other's  words  and  acts — they  have  no  consideration,  no  forbearance.  Sanctity 
and  charity  are  one  ;  gentleness,  compassion,  tenderness,  ripens — personal  holiness 
grows  more  and  more  mature,  and  sympathy  becomes  more  perfect  as  repentance 
becomes  more  perfect.  May  I  venture  a  word  on  thoughts  beyond  our  probation  ? 
They  only  have  true  sympathy  who  are  dead  to  themselves,  they  must  most  truly 
sympathise  who  are  most  fi-ee  from  the  taints  of  evil.  Now,  does  not  this  give 
light  to  the  nature  of  His  sympathy  who  was  God  of  very  God,  was  maile  Man  that 
He  might  unite  us  wholly  to  Himself  ?  Above  and  beyond  all  sympathy  is  that  of 
our  High  Priest.  {E.  Paxton  Hood.)  Christ  touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infir- 
mities : — For  the  explaining  of  this  let  me  show — 1.  What  it  is  to  be  our  High 
Priest.  2.  What  those  infirmities  are,  with  the  feeling  of  which  He  is  touched.  3. 
What  it  is  to  be  touched  with  the  feehng  of  them.  1.  For  the  first.  His  office,  as 
High  Priest,  may  be  best  known  by  the  acts  of  it.  The  acts  of  His  office  are 
principally  two.  (1)  Sacrificing  for  us  to  make  reconciliation  (chap.  ii.  17).  (2) 
By  interceding.  2.  What  those  infirmities  are,  with  the  feeling  of  which  He  is 
touched.  Infirmities  here  are  whatever  our  frail  condition  makes  us  subject  to 
suffer  by.  3.  What  is  it  to  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities?  (1)  He 
knows  all  our  infirmities.  None  of  them  escape  His  notice.  (2)  He  knows  them 
experimentally.  Has  Himself  been  exercised  with  tbem.  (3)  He  is  affected  with 
our  infirmities.  He  feels  them.  He  is  touched  with  the  feeling  of  them.  He  has  a 
sense  thereof  which  touches  His  soul,  and  makes  some  impression  on  it ;  as  one 
who  not  only  has  suffered  what  others  feel,  but  suffers  with  them  in  what  they  feel. 
As  when  one  member  is  under  some  grievance,  not  only  the  other  members  suffer 
with  it,  but  the  soul  is  affected  with  grief  arising  out  of  love,  attended  with  desire 
to  give  or  get  rehef,  and  anger  and  indignation  against  that  which  brought  the 
grievance,  or  continues  it,  and  hinders  relief.  In  like  manner  is  Christ  affected 
with  the  infirmities  of  His  people,  (a)  He  pities,  has  compassion  on  them,  (b) 
And  this  pity  and  compassion  is  not  without  the  motions  and  acts  of  love. 
Indeed,  this  is  the  rise  of  it.  It  is  out  of  such  a  love  as  made  Him  willing  to 
humble  Himself  so  low  as  to  take  our  weaknesses  and  infirmities  upon  Him.  (c) 
This  is  attended  with  desire,  accompanied  with  an  inclination  to  succour,  relieve 
such,  whose  condition  is  to  be  pitied ;  to  do  that  which  is  best  for  them  in  such  a 
condition.     That  which  wants  this  is  no  pity  indeed.     It  is  that  which  is  most 


CHAP.  IV.]  HEBREWS.  86i 

advantageous  and  desirable  in  this  affection  ;  it  is  all  that  we  must  understand  by 
compassion,  when  the  Scripture  ascribes  it  to  the  Lord  ;  and  when  we  conceive  it 
to  be  in  Christ  as  God,  in  the  Divine  nature,  it  is  not  in  Him  a  troublesome  or 
passionate  grief.  That  is  an  imperfection  not  to  be  ascribed  to  Him  ;  nor  would  it 
be  any  advantage  to  us  if  He  were  Mable  to  it.  But  it  is  a  willingness  in  Him  to 
help  and  succour  those  whose  state  calls  for  pity  or  commiseration,  (d)  This  is 
accompanied  with  zeal  and  anger,  or  indignation,  against  those  who  occasion  the 
grievance,  or  would  make  it  worse  and  heavier.  (4)  He  is  affected  with  our  infir- 
mities as  a  man.  As  He  has  a  human  nature,  so  He  has  human  affections.  (5) 
He  is  affected  with  our  infirmities  as  one  concerned  in  us  very  much  and  nearly. 
As  a  friend  (John  xv.  14,  15) ;  as  a  brother  (Heb.  xii.  11,  12)  ;  as  a  father,  with  the 
grievances  of  His  children  (Heb.  ii.  13) ;  as  a  husband,  with  the  wants  or  sufferings 
of  the  wife  of  His  own  bosom  (2  Cor.  xi.  2);  as  one  united  to  us,  as  counting  Him- 
self one  with  us  (Eph.  i.  22,  23).  (6)  He  is  affecte.l  with  them  really  and  to  purpose. 
He  has  a  more  effectual  sense  of  them  than  any  other,  men  or  angels,  yea,  or  we 
ourselves  have  ;  for  He  has  such  a  sense  thereof  as  will  assuredly  bring  relief,  which 
neither  we  ourselves,  nor  men  or  angels  for  us,  can  do  in  many  cases.  (7)  It  is  an 
extensive  sympathy,  it  reaches  all  our  infirmities.  He  has  compassion  on  us  in 
all  our  weaknesses,  all  that  we  suffer  by,  in  all  that  has  anything  of  miseiy  or 
activeness  in  it.  This  is  plain  by  the  latter  end  of  this  verse :  He  "  was  in  all 
points  tempted,"  &c.  Oh  but,  it  may  be  said,  this  exception  does  exclude  the 
greatest  part  of  our  infirmities  from  this  sympathy,  and  us  from  the  comfort  and 
advantage  of  it,  in  those  points  too  which  stand  in  most  need  of  it ;  for  those  infir- 
mities which  proceed  from  sin,  or  are  mixed  with  it,  and  sin  itself  especially,  are 
our  greatest  misery,  make  our  present  state  most  lamentable,  and  so  stand  in  most 
need  of  pity  and  relief.  If  Christ  be  not  touched  with  the  feeling  of  these  (which 
are  worst  of  all),  so  as  to  have  compassion  on  us,  and  be  ready  to  succour  us,  we 
are  to  seek  in  our  greatest  pressures  and  grievance?,  where  we  have  most  necessity 
of  relief  and  pity ;  as  e.g.,  (a)  In  those  infirmities  which  are  from  sin,  the  effects  of 
gin,  which  are  many  and  great,  is  He  not  touched  with  the  feeling,  &c.  ?  I  answer. 
Yes,  He  is  touched,  &c.  These  are  not  excluded  by  the  expression.  He  Himself 
laboured  under  these ;  for  such  infirmities  as  are  from  sin  may  be  sinless,  though 
they  be  the  effects  of  sin,  yet  they  may  be  innocent  in  themselves,  and  without  sin  ; 
and  all  that  are  without  sin  He  Himself  was  exercised  with.  He  was  tempted  in 
all  points,  exercised  with  all  infirmities,  even  those  which  are  the  effects  of  sin,  as 
we  are ;  only  they  were  in  Him  without  sin,  as  Ihey  are  not  in  us.  For  He  t0(jk  the 
nature  of  fallen  man,  as  it  was  bruised  and  rendered  infirm  by  tbe  fall ;  He  took 
our  nature  as  weakened  by  sin,  though  not  as  defiled  by  it ;  there  was  no  sin  in  His 
human  nature,  but  there  were  those  weaknesses  and  infirmities  which  were  the  sad 
issues  of  sin.  These  He  laboured  under,  and  so  knows  how  to  pity  and  sympathise 
effectually  with  those  that  are  yet  under  theaa.  (6)  But  in  sinful  infirmities,  what 
relief  is  there  hereby  for  them  ?  Christ  was  not  touched  with  any  that  were  sinful, 
and  how  can  He  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  them  ?  e.g.,  the  people  of  Christ 
have  much  ignorance  and  darkness,  and  many  spiritual  wants;  they  are  sinfully 
defective,  both  in  knowledge  and  holiness  ;  and  these  are  in  themselves,  and  to 
those  that  are  duly  sensible  of  them,  greater  miseries  than  poverty,  or  sickness,  or 
other  outward  afdictions  and  sufferings.  I  answer,  Christ  had  something  of  these, 
though  nothing  of  the  sinfulness  of  them ;  so  much  of  these,  as  that  He  can  sym- 
pathise with  His  people  under  them.  He  wanted  much  knowledge  of  many  things ; 
He  wanted  some  spiritual  gifts,  yea,  and  some  exercise  of  grace,  in  some  parts  of 
His  hfe,  while  He  was  upon  earth.  He  came  not  to  perfection  in  these,  but  by 
degrees,  and  till  then  was  under  some  defect  and  imperfection,  though  not  any  that 
was  sinful.  For  He  wanted  none  that  He  onght  to  have  had,  or  that  His  present 
state  was  capable  of ;  yet,  wants,  defects,  and  inward  weaknesses,  without  sin.  He 
was  really  under  (Luke  ii.  40,  52).  Hereby  it  seems  plain,  that  He  had  not  at  first 
that  measure  of  knowledge,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  afterwards.  He  knew  not 
80  much,  nor  had  that  exercise  of  grace  m  His  infancy  or  childhood,  as  at  perfect 
age.  His  faculties  were  not  capable  of  full  perfection  herein  till  they  came  to  full 
maturity.  So  that  He  knows  by  experience  what  it  is  to  be  under  defects  and 
wants,  and  so  knows  how  to  pity  those  who  labour  under  them.  In  this  the  com- 
parison holds  betwixt  Him  and  the  Levitical  high  priest  (chap.  v.  2).  (c)  Oh,  but 
He  was  never  touched  with  sin  (chap.  i.  16),  and  this  is  our  greatest  misery,  the 
eting  of  all  grievances,  that  which  makes  all  other  to  be  heavy  and  grievous.  II 
He  be  not  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  sin,  we  are  at  a  loss  where  we  have 


362  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap,  ir, 

most  need.  I  answer,  There  are  four  things  considerable  about  sin,  the  offence, 
temptation  to  it,  guilt  of  it,  punishment  for  it.  Now  there  are  none  of  these  but 
Christ  was  touched  with  them,  but  the  first  only.  So  that  He  had  a  greater  sens© 
of  sin  thau  any  of  His  people  ever  had.  We  may  hear  Him  cry  out  under  the 
weight  of  it  (Lam.  i.  12).  The  whole  penalty  and  curse  was  upon  Him,  part  of 
which  made  His  soul  heavy  unto  death.  So  that,  though  He  was  without  sin,  yet 
He  was  touched,  or  rather  oppressed  with  such  a  sense  of  sin,  as  is  enough 
abundantly  to  move  Him  to  all  compassionateness  to  any  of  His  people  under  the 
burden.  It  is  an  extensive  sympathy ;  such  as  reaches  not  only  infirmities  that 
have  no  respect  to  sin,  but  those  that  are  from  sin,  as  its  effects,  and  those  that  are 
sinful  formally,  yea,  sin  itself ;  He  is  touched  with  the  feeling  of  all.  (8)  It  is  a 
proportionable  sympathy  ;  a  compassion  which  is  exactly  answerable  to  the  nature 
and  quality  of  every  iufirmity  ;  fully  commensurable  to  it,  whatever  it  be.  As  it  is 
not  more  than  it  needs,  so  it  is  not  less  than  it  requires,  how  much  compassion  and 
relief  soever  it  calls  for.  (9)  A  constant  and  perpetual  sympathy.  It  continues 
without  any  intermission  so  long  as  He  is  High  Priest,  or  so  long  as  our  infirmities 
continue ;  so  long  as  we  are  under  any  weakness,  inward  or  outward ;  so  long  aa 
we  are  in  any  danger  or  peril ;  so  long  as  we  are  exposed  to  any  trouble  or  suffer- 
ing. This  is  one  thing  wherein  the  faithful  discharge  of  His  priestly  office 
consists.  And  He  is  a  priest  for  ever  (Psa.  ex.  4),  repeated  often  in  this  Epistle 
(chap.  v.  6,  and  vii.  17,  21).  Use  I.  For  instruction.  This  truth  leads  the  people 
of  Ch'ist  to  many  duties,  and  strongly  obliges  to  the  performance  of  them.  1.  To 
admire  Christ;  to  employ  your  minds  in  high,  adoring,  admiring  thoughts  of 
Christ,  in  His  persoa,  natures,  offices,  and  the  execution  of  them;  but  especially 
wonderful  iu  this,  that  He  would  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities.  2. 
To  love  Christ.  There  is  no  greater  attractive  of  love  to  an  ingenious  temper  than 
love.  Now  in  that  Christ  is  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  you  have 
a  most  evident  demonstration  that  He  loves  you.  For  hereby  it  is  very  clear  what 
His  love  to  you  is.  (1)  A  great  love,  and  most  extensive  ;  that  can  reach  all  condi- 
tions and  circumstances  which  you  are  or  may  be  in,  even  such  as  the  love  of  others 
will  not  touch,  will  not  come  near :  a  love  that  will  show  itself  in  all  cases,  even 
where  it  could  be  least  expected ;  a  love  that  will  surmount  and  overflow  all  dis- 
couragements. (2)  A  free  love.  This  is  an  evidence  He  can  love  freely ;  He  can 
love  those  who  are  all  made  up  of  defects  and  imp<^rfections.  (3)  A  lasting,  a 
constant  love,  such  as  all  the  waters  cannot  quench,  nor  the  floods  drown.  It 
cannot  be  nonplussed,  it  abides  the  sorest  trials.  (4)  A  peerless  love.  It  cannot 
be  matched.  There  is  no  such  thing  to  be  found  in  heaven  or  earth,  but  in  Christ 
only.  Now,  as  He  is  High  Priest,  He  is  both  God  and  man ;  and  so  His  love  to 
us  is  both  the  love  of  God  and  also  the  love  of  man  in  one  person.  No  instance 
of  such  a  love  can  be  given  in  the  whole  world.  (5)  It  is  a  cordial  love,  not  in 
show  or  appearance  only,  not  in  outward  acts  and  expressions,  but  such  as  springs 
from  His  heart  and  affects  that.  He  is  touched,  i.e.,  His  heart  is  touched  with  the 
concerns  of  His  people.  (6)  An  all-sufficient  love.  II.  For  comfort  to  the  people  of 
Christ.  Here  is  ground  of  great  consolation  in  every  condition ;  in  the  worst,  the  most 
grievous  circumstances  that  you  can  be  compassed  with  in  this  world.  (X).  ClaTkson, 
B.D.)  Our  sympathising  and  sinless  High  Priest : — I.  We  have  an  High  Pbiest. 

It  is  in  no  figurative  sense  that  Christ  is  called  a  High  Priest.  II.  We  have  a  sympa- 
thising High  Priest.  1.  His  nature  secures  us  of  Hissympathy.  And  thissyrapathy 
is  of  that  intimate  and  tender  kind  of  which  He  may  be  supposed  capable  who  was 
in  all  respects  like  His  brethren — that  is,  in  all  things  requisite  to  constitute  a 
perfect  human  nature.  If,  indeed,  we  make  a  distinction  between  sinless  and 
sinful  infirmities,  we  must  also  make  a  distinction  between  the  kinds  of  feeling 
with  which  our  High  Priest  can  be  touched.  He  is  capable  of  feeling  for  both,  but 
not  certainly  in  the  same  manner.  Those  infirmities  which  we  call  sinless,  and 
which  are  rather  the  painful  consequences  of  siu  than  in  themselves  sinful.  He  felt 
Himself,  as  being  inseparable  now  from  human  nature;  and,  consequently,  He  feels 
a  sympathy  of  love  for  these  unmingled  with  any  emotions  of  disapprobation. 
But  those  infirmities,  again,  which  are  sinful,  He  could  not  Himself  be  conscious 
of ;  nay,  they  must  have  been,  however  palliated  by  circumstances,  the  subjects  of 
His  disapprobation.  And  yet  as  an  High  Priest  or  Mediator  would  not  be  required 
but  on  account  of  sin  ;  an'i  as  it  is  in  the  work  of  receiving  the  confessions,  pre- 
fprring  the  supplications,  and  offering  the  gifts  of  sinners,  through  the  merits  of 
His  atoning  sacrifice,  that  He  is  expressly  engaged,  He  must  also  feel  the  sympathy 
of  compassion  for  those  who  are  erring  and  out  of  the  way,  however  much  it  ba 


CHAP.  IT.]  HEBREWS.  363 

mingled  with  displeasure  and  pain.  2.  But,  lest  any  distressing  doubts  should 
Btili  remain  in  your  minds  that,  although  a  partaker  of  our  nature,  He  may  yet 
never  have  had  our  experience,  without  which  He  might  still  be  regarded  as  not 
capable  of  being  touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  the  apostle  to  this 
negative  adds  a  positive  assertion — He  "was  in  all  respects  tempted  as  we  are." 
His  experience,  as  well  as  His  constitution,  fits  Him  for  our  compassionate  High 
Priest,  and  assures  us  of  His  sympathy.  Human  life  is  a  state  of  suffering,  and 
a  period  of  temptation.  All  ranks  and  conditions  of  men  have  their  peculiar 
trials ;  but  to  the  human  family  many  afflictions  are  common ;  and  both  the 
peculiar  and  the  general  sorrows  of  our  race  the  Saviour  knew  by  experience. 
Thus,  with  good  intentions,  He  was  subjected  to  trials  by  God.  But  He  was  also 
solicited  to  sin,  for  the  worst  of  purposes,  both  by  unprincipled  men  and  malig- 
nant fiends,  ni.  We  have  a  sinless  High  Pbiest.  It  is  a  curious  speculation 
in  the  science  of  mind,  and  it  has  been  made  a  dangerous  one  in  that  of  divinity, 
how  far  solicitation  to  sin  could  assail  the  mind  of  the  Holy  One  without  His 
becoming  sinful ;  and  how  an  infallible,  impeccable  being,  could  possibly  be  sub- 
jected to  real  temptations.  It  is  perhaps  safe  to  establish  no  dogmas  upon  such 
subjects,  and  safer  altogether  to  avoid  their  agitation.  It  is  sufEcient  for  religious 
ends,  at  least,  to  know,  that  the  angels  who  kept  not  their  first  estate,  Adam  and 
Eve  who  lost  paradise,  end  Christ  Jesus  who  regained  it,  were  all  tempted  by  the 
BoUcitations  of  sin  while  yet  in  innocence.  It  is  stiU  more  delightful  to  know  that 
this  untainted  Saviour,  having  come  out  of  the  fiery  furnace  of  temptation 
victorious,  is  able,  in  consequence  of  His  subjection  to  trials,  more  feelingly  and 
effectually  to  succour  those  who  are  tempted.  (James  Jarvie.)  Priestly 
sympathy  for  fellow -sufferers : — I.  The  fodndation  of  the  sympathy  of  Christ 
Jesds — WHAT  18  IT  ?  1.  The  similarity  of  His  circumstances.  "  In  all  points 
tempted  like  as  we  are.''  As  we,  Jesus  Christ  was  tried  in  the  body,  tried  by  toil, 
exhaustion,  hunger,  thirst,  pain,  and  death.  As  we,  Jesus  Christ  was  tried  in  His 
estate  or  condition,  tried  by  poverty,  persecution,  contempt,  misrepresentation, 
desertion,  tried  by  friendlessness,  and  tried  by  solitude.  As  we,  Jesus  Christ  was 
tried  in  mind,  by  fear,  perplexity,  and  sorrow.  And  as  we,  Jesus  Christ  was  tiied 
by  the  presentation  of  seducements  to  evil.  Now  in  all  this  we  see  a  similarity  of 
condidon.  2.  But  now,  mark,  the  dissimilarity  of  character.  •'  He  was  tried  in  all 
points  as  we,  but  without  sin."  He  never  transgressed  any  law.  He  left  nothing 
undone  that  he  ought  to  have  done.  No  defilement  of  sin  ever  entered  His  spirit. 
We  would  here  remark  that  "  without  sin,"  Jesus  Christ  would  be  more  sensitive 
towards  all  kinds  of  suffering.  It  is  true  that  He  never  could  experience  remorse. 
But  all  such  feelings  as  sadness  and  fear  would  be  stronger  in  Him  than  in  us, 
because  He  was  without  sin.  Sin  hardens  the  soul.  Holiness  keeps  every  pore  of 
the  spirit  open.  "Without  sin,"  Christ  Jesus  would,  in  a  world  of  sin,  suffer 
that  which  no  sinner  in  such  a  world  could  endure.  "  Without  sin,"  Jesus  Christ 
would  see  forms  of  moral  temptation  more  quickly  and  completely.  II.  The 
sphere  in  which  the  sympathy  or  Christ  is  here  said  to  be  displayed.  He 
appears  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us  as  our  great  High  Priest,  and  in  the  presence 
of  God  for  us,  appearing  as  our  great  High  Priest,  He  is  "  touched  with  the  feeling 
of  our  infirmities."  As  He  represents  us  with  all  our  infirmities.  He  is  "  touclied 
with  the  feeling  of  those  infirmities."  He  offers,  as  our  great  High  Priest,  in  the 
sense  of  application,  the  sacrifice  for  sin.  So  far  as  the  provision  of  the  atone- 
ment was  concerned,  that  was  finished  when  He  gave  up  the  ghost.  He  does  not, 
in  that  sense,  offer  Himself  often,  but  so  far  as  the  application  of  His  sacrifice  is 
concerned,  this  is  perpetual.  And  thus  offering,  in  the  sense  of  the  application. 
His  own  sacrifice  for  sin,  as  He  does  this.  He  is  "  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our 
infirmities."  Then,  as  our  Priest,  He  cleanses  us  and  purifies  us.  This  is  one  of 
the  functions  of  the  priesthood,  to  sprinkle  clean  water  upon  us  that  we  may  be 
clean ;  and  as  He  purifies  us,  He  is  "  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities." 
It  is  also  part  of  His  work,  in  the  name  of  Jehovah  to  bless  us,  to  say  to  us,  as  the 
priest  of  old,  "  Jehovah  bless  thee,  and  keep  thee."  And  as  He  pronounces  upon  us 
this  Divine  benediction  "  He  is  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities."  It  is 
also  His  to  make  intercession  for  us.  And  as  He  mentions  our  name,  and  records 
our  circumstances,  He  is  "  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,"  "  touched 
with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities  "  as  we  exhibit  them.  Some  of  our  infirmities 
may  be  down  in  the  dark  depths  of  our  spiritual  nature,  but  when  we  present  our- 
selves, we  present  even  these  infirmities  to  His  eye,  and  as  we  exhibit  them  He  ia 
"touched"  by  them.    As  we  become  conscious  of  them  He  is  "  touched'  with  TTi> 


364  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

fellow-feeling — hence  He  does  not  deal  with  them  with  rough,  but  gentle  hand. 
He  is  "  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,"  as  in  various  ways  He  recog- 
nises them ;   "  tonched  "  because  of  His  goodness,  because  as  God  He  is  love,  and 
"  touched  "  because  of  His  past  experience.    But  what  shall  we  do  with  this  fact  7 
"  Let  us,  therefore,  come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace,  that  we  may  obtain  mercy, 
and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need."     Some  are  inclined  to  stay  away  from  the 
throne  of  grace  because  of  their  sorrows.     This  sacred  writer  forbids  our  keeping 
at  a  distance  from  the  throne  of  grace,  because  of  these  infirmities  and  troubles, 
and  in  the  name  of  God  he  bids  us  come  just  as  we  are.     The  greater  your  sorrows, 
the  greater  ne(  d  is  there  for  your  coming.    The  more  fierce  your  temptations,  the 
greater  necessity  is  there  for  your  comiug.    And,  I  may  say,  the  more  you  need  to 
have  doue  for  you,  the  more  welcome  you  will  be.     {S.  Martin,  D.D.)        ChrlsVa 
sympatliy  : — They  teU  us  that,  in  some  trackless  lands,  when  one  friend  passes 
through  the  pathless  forests,  he  breaks  a  twig  ever  and  anon  as  he  goes,  that  those 
who  come  after  may  see  the  traces  of  his  having  been  there,  and  may  know  that 
they  are  not  out  of  the  road.     Oh,  when  we  are  journeying  through  the  murky 
night  aud  the  dark  woods  of  affliction  and  sorrow,  it  is  something  to  find  here  and 
there  a  spray  broken  or  a  leafy  stem  bent  down  with  the  tread  of  Christ's  foot  and 
the  brush  of  His  hand  as  He  passed,  and  to  remember  that  the  path  He  trod  He  has 
hallowed,  and  that  there  are  lingering  fragrances  and  hidden  strengths  in  the  re- 
mimbrauce,  "  in  all  points  tempted  as  we  are,"  bearing  grief  for  us,  bearing  grief 
with  us,  bearing  grief  like  us.     (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)        Touched  with  the  feeling : 
— Don't  you  sometimes  find  it  very  hard  to  make  even  your  doctor  understand  w/iat 
the  pain  is  like  ?     Words  don't  seem  to  convey  it.    And  after  you  have  explained 
the  trying  and  wearying  sensation  as  best  you  can,  you  are  convinced  those  who 
have  not  felt  it  do  not  understand  it.     Now,  think  of  Jesus  not  merely  entering  into 
the  fact,  but  into  the  feeling  of  what  you  are  going  through.     "  Touched  with  the 
feeling'^ — how    deep    that    goes  I      (F.    R.    Havergal.)        Faithfulness    bom    of 
symp  ithy  : — Mr.  Howells  tells  of  a  cab-driver  in  Florence,  in  whose  cab  at  night- 
fall he  sent  home  a  child  to  the  hotel  from  a  distance.    Being  persistent  in  securing 
the  driver's  number,  the  cabman  began  to  divine  his  reason,  and  so  he  replied  to 
Mr.  Howells,  "  Oh  I  rest  easy,  I,  too,  am  a  father  1 "     {H.  0.  Mackey.)         Christ't 
sytyipatliy  ;— Our  gracious  Queen,  during  her  long  and  chequered  reign,  has  been 
permitted  to  send  many  a  letter  of  condolence  to  crowned  heads  in  foreign  lands, 
when  they  have  been  called,  in  the  providence  of  God,  to  exchange  their  crowna 
and  coronets  for  tokens  of  mourning.     Amongst  them  all  there  never  was  one  that 
carried  with  it  and  in  it  such  a  deep,  sweet  grace  of  tenderness  as  that  which  she 
wrote  with  her  own  hand  some  time  since  to  the  widow  of  the  late  President  of  the 
great  republic   of  America.    And  why  did  it  bring  such  a  depth    of    comfort? 
Because  its  pages  were  stained  with  the  tears  of  a  kindred  widowhood.     {Bp.  of 
Algoma.)        St/mpathy  with    the    tempted: — Having    been    tempted — or   pierced 
through,  Luther  was  a  piercing  preacher,  and  met  with  every  man's  temptation ; 
and  being  once  demanded  how  he  could  do  so  ?     "  Mine  own  manifold  temptations," 
eaid  he,  "  and  experiences  are  the  cause  thereof  " ;  for  from  his  tender  years  he  w^aa 
much  beaten  and  exercised  with  spiritual  conflicts.     (J.  Trapp.)        Christ's  abiding 
sympathy  : — Trajan,  the  Emperor,  being  blamed  by  his  friends  for  being  too  gentle 
towards  all,  answered  that  being  an  Emperor  he  would  now  be  such  toward  private 
men,  as  he  oucp,  when  he  was  a  private  man,  wished  that  the  Emperor  should  be 
towards  him.     Christ  hath  lost  nothing  of  His  wonted  pity  by  His  exaltation  in 
heaven.     {Ibid. )        Christ's  temptation  like  ours  : — Christ  was  "  tempted  like  as  we 
are."    Are  we  tempted  through  the  senses?    So  was  He.     Are  we  tempted  by 
opportunities  of  carnal  honour  and  carnal  power  ?     So  was  He.     Are  we  tempted 
through  our  human  affections  ?     So  was  He.    Are  we  tempted  to  deflection  from 
the  path  of  obedience  by  the  infirmities  of  the  good,  or  the  crafty  questioning  of  the 
worldly  wise  ?     So  was  He.     Every  testing  process  to  which  we  are  subjected  He 
went  through.     Satan  omitted  no  conceivable  mode,  and  withheld  no  possible  in- 
tensity of  trial  from  the  holy  soul  of  Emmanuel.     All  the  magic  prospects  and  all 
the  soothing  illusions  that  externalism  could  give,  all  its  joyful  or  mournful  in- 
fluences, all  its  power  of  tenderness  or  terror,  he  employed  to  enchant  or  to  assail 
the  Son  of  Man.     So  He  was  tempted  in  all  points  as  we  are,  as  to  the  instrumenta 
of  temptation,  though  He  had  not  all  our  susceptibilities  to  their  touch.     In  all 
points  in  which  He  could  innocently.  He  did  actually  resemble  us.     He  was  ever 
tempted  as  we  are ;  though  ever  victorious,  as  we  are  not.  {C.Stanford,  D.D.)     Chrirt 
tempted  in  all  the  faculties  of  humanUy  : — A  geographer  may  be  a  competent  repre- 


CHAP.  IT.]  HEBREWS.  865 

sentative  of  the  laud  through  which  he  travels,  without  having  stood  on  every 
single  foot  of  ground  which  he  describes.  Robinson  did  not  need  to  tread  every 
square  inch  of  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  in  order  to  understand  the  topography  of 
that  city,  and  represent  it  accurately  to  us.  It  was  not  necessary  that  Christ  should 
pass  through  every  shade  and  every  inflection  of  human  experience  in  order  to 
understand  them.  For  all  experience  issues  from  certain  definite  foundations  of 
faculty  ;  and  it  is  enough  if  every  faculty  which  works  in  us  was  proved,  pained, 
tempted,  and  tried  in  Him,  and  tried  up  to  this  measure,  that  no  man  should  there- 
after Uve  who  should  have  any  temptation  or  trial  that  should  make  against  any 
given  faculty  such  a  pressure  as  was  made  against  our  Saviour.  Pride — is  it 
tempted  among  men  ?  All  that  I  require  is,  that  Christ  should  have  felt  a  tempta- 
tion of  pride  that  sbould  more  than  equal  it ;  that  should  swell  immeasurably  above 
and  overmatch  any  trial  that  befals  His  followers  below — in  other  words,  enough 
put  to  proof  in  that  particular  faculty  of  the  human  soul,  to  understand  what  that 
faculty  can  suffer ;  how  it  can  be  tempted  ;  what  course  is  needed  to  sustain  one 
under  such  temptation.  It  is  not  needful,  therefore,  that  Christ  should  sustain  the 
relationship  of  husband,  for  He  never  was  in  wedlock  ;  or  of  father.  It  only  requires 
that  He  should  sustain  such  a  relation  to  universal  human  nature  or  life  that  there 
should  be  no  faculty,  no  passion,  no  sentiment  that  is  tempted  in  us,  that  should 
not  also  be  tempted  in  Him ;  and  that  there  should  be  no  such  pressure  brought  to 
bear  upon  us  that  our  temptation  should  ever  be  greater  than  His  knowledge  of 
temptation  through  His  own  suffering.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  The  tempted  High 
Priest: — I.  We  have  to  stddy  the  apostle's  assertion.  1.  "He  was  tempted." 
*'  God  is  not  tempted  of  evil  "  ;  but  the  Saviour  was.  It  is  obvious  that  temptation 
can  be  a  possibility  only  to  a  created  spirit.  On  this  account  the  Hebrews  felt  the 
idea  of  a  tempted  Saviour  to  be  one  most  discordant  to  their  tastes,  repulsive  to 
their  pride.  But  Paul  in  this  letter,  which  was  written  for  the  very  purpose  of  con- 
firming their  faith,  mikes  no  attempt  to  soften  or  qualify  that  truth  which  so  much 
tried  it ;  he  advances  considerations  which  prove  that  what  seemed  to  be  the  shame 
of  the  gospel  was  its  glory,  and  that  what  seemed  to  be  its  weakness  was  one  of  the 
secrets  of  its  power.  He  reiterates  the  statement  that  Christ  was  in  reality 
tempted.  2.  Yes,  not  only  was  He  tempted,  but  the  apostle  adds,  He  was  tempted 
in  all  points  like  as  we  are.  He  was  tempted  by  all  the  powers,  all  the  arts,  all  the 
devices,  and  all  the  instruments  which  are  brought  to  bear  upon  us.  In  all  points 
in  which  He  could  innocently,  He  did  actually  resemble  us ;  He  was  ever 
tempted  as  we  are,  though  ever  victorious  as  we  are  not.  3.  When  the 
sacred  writer  has  said  of  Jesus,  "  He  was  in  all  points  tempted  as 
we  are,"  he  adds  the  remarkable  qualification- "yet  without  sin."  That 
is,  the  tempter  found  Him  without  sin,  and  left  Him  without  sin. 
Imagine  s  father,  in  some  dreary  days  of  poverty,  having  the  chance  of  taking, 
undetected,  gold  belonging  to  another  man.  He  is  without  the  sin  of  dishonesty, 
but  the  thought  of  his  starving  child,  and  the  possibility  by  this  one  secret  act 
of  saving  it  from  death  will  surely  be  a  real  trial ;  and,  though  he  shakes  off  the 
thought  like  fire,  does  he  not  feel  the  temptation?  Imagine  some  saint  sentenced 
to  perish  at  the  stake  for  Christ.  The  authorities  say,  "Recant  and  live,  or  confess 
and  die  !  "  He  is  without  the  sin  of  spiritual  disloyalty,  but  as  he  looks  through 
the  prison-bars  on  the  green  of  the  spring,  and  the  blue  glory  of  the  sky,  as  in  contrast 
to  all  this  comes  the  thoufiht,  that  if  he  should  be  constant  to  his  Saviour  he  must 
shiver  in  the  shaded  cell  through  months  of  weariness  and  only  be  brought  forth 
at  last  into  the  glare  of  day  to  die;  although  he  may  say,  "  0  Jesus,  though  all  men 
should  deny  Thee,  yet  will  not  1 1 " — do  not  all  these  things  combine  to  make  that 
offer  of  dear  life  a  temptation  hard  to  overcome  ?  It  is  therefore  conceivable  that 
although  Christ  was  without  sin.  He  was  not  without  the  susceptibihty  of  being 
tempted.  He  appropriated  our  nature  with  all  its  weakness.  II.  Let  us  now  with 
profound  reverence  endeavour  to  ascertain  the  ends  of  the  Saviour's  temptatioits. 
1.  He  was  tempted  that  He  might  be  perfected.  The  Divine  nature  could  not 
be  perfected ;  tliat,  indeed,  was  perfect  already,  for  that  which  is  not  always  perfect 
is  not  always  God.  But  human  nature  is  born  we,.k  and  undeveloped ;  it  has 
to  grow  in  mind  and  in  body ;  one  of  its  essential  laws  is  its  capability  of  improve- 
ment. Thus  it  was  that  even  Jesus  had  to  be  educated.  He  did  not  start  into  full 
stature  in  the  flash  of  a  moment.  True,  the  Saviour  was  always  perfect  even 
as  to  His  human  nature,  but  perfection  is  a  relative  thing;  the  perfection  of  a 
child  is  something  lower  than  the  perfection  of  a  man — as  negative  excellence 
differs  from  positive  excellence,  and  as  the  perfect  bud  is  inferior  to  "  the  bright 


366  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ceup.  iv. 

consummate  flower."  2.  He  was  tempted  that  He  might  destroy  the  dominioa 
of  the  tempter.  3.  He  was  tempted  that  His  peculiar  and  characteristic  experience 
of  temptation  might  lead  His  followers  also  to  expect  the  same.  4.  He  was 
tempted  that  He  might  teach  us  by  His  example  how  to  meet  and  sustain 
temptation.  He  was  "  led  "  not  by  the  action  of  His  own  choice,  but  "  by  the 
Spirit  into  the  wilderness,  to  be  tempted  of  the  devil " ;  and  in  all  subsequent 
instances  you  may  trace  the  rule  of  the  same  principle.  If  you  dwell  in  the  jungle 
you  are  likely  to  take  the  jungle  fever.  If  you  "  dally  with  the  crested  worm,"  you 
are  likely  to  be  smitten  with  his  deadly  fang ;  and  so,  if  you  pitch  your  tent  in 
Vanity  Fair,  you  are  likely  to  catch  the  vain  spirit  of  the  scene.  •'  To  grapple 
with  temptation  is  a  venture;  to  fly  from  it  is  a  victory."  5.  He  was  tempted, 
to  afford  His  tempted  people  the  assurance  of  His  sympathy.  Even  under  ordinary 
circumstances  we  yearn  for  sympathy.  Without  it  the  heart  will  contract  and 
droop,  and  shut  like  a  flower  in  an  unkindly  atmosphere,  but  will  open  aguin 
amidst  the  sound  of  frankness  and  the  scenes  of  love.  When  we  are  in  trouble, 
this  want  is  in  proportion  still  more  pressing ;  and  for  the  sorrowful  heart  to  feel 
alone  is  a  grief  greater  than  nature  can  sustain.  A  glance  of  sympathy  seems  to  help 
it  more  than  the  gift  of  untold  riches.  Let  it  be  remembered  that  it  is  suffering, 
and  not  necessarily  similarity  in  other  respects,  that  gives  the  power  of  sympathy. 
And  did  not  Jesus  "suffer,  being  tempted"?  His  infinitely  holy  nature,  brought 
in  contact  with  sin  by  temptation,  must  have  passed  through  depths  of  shame  and 
sorrow  that  we,  the  sinful,  can  never  sound.  C.  He  was  tempted  that  we  might 
be  encouraged  to  boldness  in  prayer  for  help.  The  dispensation  of  help  is  lodged 
in  the  hands  of  Jesus.  We  may  infer,  therefore,  with  what  wisdom,  delicacy,  and 
promptitude  it  will  be  brought  to  us  when  we  seek  it.  (C.  Stanford,  D.D.)  The 
temptation  of  our  Lord : — In  reflecting  on  our  Lord's  temptations,  and  on  the 
sympathy  which  He  now  feels  for  those  who  are  tempted,  it  is  very  necessary 
to  remember  the  difference  between  temptation  and  sin,  or  the  propensity  to  sin. 
Many  persons  cannot  comprehend  how  any  one  can  be  tempted  to  sin  who  haa 
no  sinful  propensity.  It  seems  to  these  petsons  that  an  object  presented  to  such 
an  one  with  a  view  to  temptation  can,  in  fact,  be  no  temptation  at  all ;  and  that 
it  can  exert  as  little  influence  on  his  mind  as  it  can  upon  a  rock  or  a  tree.  Hence, 
as  Christ  was  tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  are  ;  as  He  is  our  example  in  resisting 
temptations ;  and  as  He  sympathises  with  us  in  all  our  temptations,  they  think 
that  He  must  have  had  a  sinful  tendency  in  His  human  nature.  In  order  that  we 
may  not  confound  temptation  with  sin,  or  with  a  sinful  tendency,  let  us  consider 
what  sin  is  an  1  what  temptation  is.  We  cannot  have  a  better  definition  of  sin 
than  that  which  the  Apostle  John  gives  us,  '  *  Sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  law  " 
(1  John  iii.  4).  Man  is  the  subject  of  numerous  desires  and  affections  which  are 
essential  to  human  nature.  All  man's  natural  desires — I  mean  his  desires  as  man, 
not  as  fallen  man — were  intended  to  be  gratified  and  were  implanted  for  that 
very  purpose.  But  they  were  intended  to  be  gratified  only  in  a  certain  way ;  only 
in  that  way  which  God  should  appoint,  and  which  should  be  conducive  to  His  glory 
and  to  the  welfare  and  happiness  of  all  His  holy  creatures.  And  this  way  He  traced 
out  in  His  law,  and  delineated  upon  the  hearts  and  consciences  of  His  creatures. 
Sin,  then,  as  the  apostle  tells  us,  is  the  transgression  of  the  law.  It  is  the  wish  or 
attempt  to  gratify  these  natural  desires,  indifferent  in  themselves,  in  a  way  which 
God  has  forbidden.  Next,  what  is  temptation  ?  Temptation  is  trial.  Temptation 
is  that  which  serves  to  show  us  what  we  are,  and  what  is  in  us.  It  brings  to  light 
the  strength  or  weakness  of  our  faith,  our  love  to  God,  and  our  regard  to  His  law. 
There  are  two  ways  in  which  a  man  may  be  tempted,  or  tried,  or  examined.  First 
— When  search  is  made  into  his  heart  and  conduct  by  simple  inquiry.  In  this  way 
we  are  commanded  to  tempt  or  examine  ourselves.  Secondly — A  man  is  tempted 
when  he  is  exposed  to  the  influence  of  some  object  of  natural  desire,  or  fear,  or 
aversion,  whose  tendency,  if  it  were  not  regulated  by  the  fear  of  God,  would  be  to 
draw  or  drive  him  out  of  the  path  of  duty.  God,  we  are  told,  did  tempt  Abraham 
thus,  when  He  commanded  him  to  offer  up  Isaac.  This  is  the  mode  of  trial  which 
we  usually  understand  by  the  word  temptation.  In  this  mode  it  is  the  prerogative 
of  God  alone  to  tempt  us,  or  to  lead  us  into  temptation.  It  is  of  temptation  iu  thia 
latter  sense  only  that  I  at  present  speak.  In  order  that  there  should  be  temptation 
it  is  necessary  that  there  should  be  a  certain  natural  adaptation  or  affinity  in  the 
mind  to  the  object  of  temptation;  but  if  higher  principles  so  rule  and  govern  the 
Boul  that  they  entirely  neutralise  that  aOinity,  so  that  not  the  slightest  inclination 
or  desire  for  sinful  gratification  is  exci;eJ,  then  there  is  neither  sin  nor  propensity 


CHA*.  IV.]  HEBREWS.  867 

to  Bin.    So  far  is  there  from  being  any  propensity  to  sin,  that  the  very  temptation 
proves  that  there  is  the  strongest  propensity  towards  holiness.    It  puts  to  the  test 
and  proves  the  existence  and  strength   of  the  positively  holy  principles  vrhich 
regulate  all  the  motions  of  the  mind  and  of  the  heart.    Two  substances,  suppose, 
are  chemically  combined  by  a  mutual  affinity  or  attraction.     The  strength  of  this 
affinity  is  tested  by  introducing  another  substance  which  has  an  affinity  to  one  and 
not  to  the  other  of  the  substances  in  combination.    If  one  of  these  substances 
has  a  stronger  affinity  for  the  test  than  it  has  for  the    substance  with  which 
it  is  combined,  it  will  disengage  itself  and  unite  with  the  test.    Bat  if  its  affinity 
for  the  substance  with  which  it  is  combined  be  stronger  it  will  remain  as  before. 
And  if  the  most  powerful  tests  are  applied  without  producing  any  change,  this 
proves  that  the  affinity  of  the  two  substances  in  combination  is  too  strong  to 
be  overcome  by  any  other  which  is  known  to  exist.     Thus,  in  a  perfectly  holy 
being,  the  principle  of  love  to  God  and  His  law  ib  an  affinity  too  powerful  to  be 
overcome  by  the  most  powerful  of  all  desires,  or  the  most  painful  of  all  sufFerings. 
No  temptation  can  excite  even  a  single  momentary  inclination  to  disobey  God  and 
to  sacrifice  the  principles  of  eternal  righteousness  and  tmth.      Our  Lord  was 
perfect  Man,  and  possessed  all  those  affections  which  naturally  belong  to  a  perfect 
man.    Had  He  not  possessed  them  He  could  not  have  been  the  subject  of  tempta- 
tion.   But  not  only  so.  He  was  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  griefs.    He 
was  made  subject  to  all  the  trials,  sorrows,  and  snfferings  which  belong  to  man 
in  his  fallen  state,  save  and  except  those  which  are  inseparably  connected  with  the 
ignorance,  the  alienation  from  God,  and  the  habits  of  sin,  which  adhere  to  every 
other  child  of  Adam.     He  always  perfectly  knew  His  Father's  character  and  will, 
and  was  always,  even  from  the  womb,  perfectly  incUned  to  obedience,  and  filled 
with  a  perfect  abhorrence   of  sin.      He,  therefore,  could  have  no  ignorance  to 
mislead  Him  ;  no  alienation  of  heart  from  God  to  overcome ;  no  force  of  evil  habit 
to  subdue.    In  Him  the  love  of  God  reigned  supreme,  and  was  in  constant  and 
uninterrupted  exercise.     No  tendency  to  sin  ever  existed  in  His  holy  mind.     He 
experienced  none  of  that  warfare  between  the  flesh  and  the  spirit  which   exists 
in  us,  because  in  Him  the  love  of  God  was  perfect,  and  the  Spirit  dwelt  in  Him 
without  measure.     Yet  His  temptations  infinitely  exceeded  ours,  both  in  power, 
variety,  and  number;  and  therefore  He  is  able  to  sympathise  with  us  in  all  our 
temptations  far  more  perfectly,  and  to  enter  far  more  fully  into  aU  the  difficulties 
and  trials  of  each  individual  among  us,  than  it  is  possible  for  any  other  hmnau 
being  to  do.    He  does  not,  indeed,  sympathise  with  us  from  experience  in  the 
warfare  between  the  flesh  and  the  spirit,  for  that  were  to  sympathise  with  us  in 
our  sin,  in  our  want  of  love  to  God,  and  in  the  weakness  of  our  faith.    And  God 
forbid  that  we  should  ever  desire  any  one  to  sympathise  with  us  in  sin.  Yet  tliough 
He  does  not  sympathise  with  us  in  this  warfare,  yet  He  has  compassion  on  us,  and 
is  ever  ready  to  look  with  a  pitying  eye  on  our  weakness.     {J.  Rate,  M. A.)      Christ 
the  strength  of  the  tempted : — The  first  thought  is  suggested  by  the  position  of  the 
words.     They  come  just  after  the  most  solemn  warnings  and  threatenings  to  be 
found  in  the  Bible.   If  they  listened  only  to  the  warnings  from  the  disastrous  history 
of  their  forefathers,  who  perished  in  the  wilderness  ag  the  penalty  of  their  back- 
sliding from  God,  they  would  be  driven  to  despair  lest  they  should  fall  after  the 
same  example  of  unbelief;  but  he  points  them  to  the  Saviour,  who  is  stronger  than 
all  their  enemies,  and  to  the  love  and  grace  that  can  redeem  them  from  all  their 
sins.    The  Bible  revelation  of  God  is  a  combination  throughout  of  these  contrasted 
elements  of  the  Divine  nature.    Eighteousness  and  mercy,  justice  and  love,  are 
the  revelations  of  God's  character  in  Christ.    Our  characters  as  Christians  must  lay 
hold  of,  and  grow  upon  these  foundations.    Our  faith  in  its  fulness  is  like  the  tree 
whose  roots  grapple  the  rocks,  and  twine  themselves  around  the  foundations 
of  the  hills  far  below  the  surface  in  the  hidden  recesses  ;  but  the  branches  wave  in 
the  breezes,  and  clothe  themselves  in  the  beauty  of  foliage,  and  echo  with  the  glad 
song  of  birds,  and  climb  up  ever  towards  the  light  and  the  sky.     So  our  faith  must 
have  roots  in  the  conviction  of  sin  and  the  justice  of  God,  but  it  must  climb  up  to 
the  light  of  God's  forgiveness  and  love  in  Christ.     It  must  be  strong  and  tender — 
a  combination  of  awe  and  childlike  trust.      Now  let  us   try  to  understand  the 
meaning  of  the  text  itself.      Jesus  Christ  is  touched  with  a  feeling  of  all  our 
infirmities,  because  He  was  tempted  as  we  are.     He  was  without  sin,  and  therefore 
He  was  not  tempted  by  evil  designs.    He  was  not  tempted  by  the  hereditary  pro- 
clivities.    But  temptations  may  come  from  perfectly  sinless  desires.      The  motive 
to  violate  a  law  mav  come  from  the  noblest  affections  of  the  human  soul.     During 


368  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [Chap.  it. 

the  late  war,  thousands  of  men  deserted  from  the  army  on  both  sides,  from 
cowardice,  and  from  ignoble  treachery  to  the  cause  in  which  they  were  enlisted. 
There  was  one  soldier  who  entered  the  army  at  twenty- three,  leaving  a  young  wife 
at  home.  His  record  as  a  soldier  had  no  stain  upon  it.  He  had  borne  the  colours 
of  his  regiment  in  a  hundred  battles.  In  the  last  terrible  days  of  suffering  in  the 
winter  around  Petersburg,  he  stood  to  his  post  without  flinching  for  a  moment. 
A  letter  comes  to  him  from  his  home.  A  poor  neighbour  writes  to  him  that 
his  wife  is  dying  and  his  children  arej  starving.  He  applies  for  a  furlough,  but 
it  cannot  be  granted.  Again  a  pitiful  appeal  comes  from  the  same  hand.  He  goea 
to  his  home,  buries  his  dead  wife,  cares  for  his  children,  comes  back  to  the  army, 
and  is  arrested  for  desertion  in  the  face  of  the  enemy.  Before  the  court-martial 
that  tries  Lim,  he  has  nothing  to  say  why  the  sentence  should  not  be  passed  upon 
him.  He  knew  it  was  death  and  he  was  ready  to  take  it ;  but  he  asks  them, 
as  a  favour  to  him,  to  read  a  letter,  that  they  might  know  he  was  not  a  coward. 
The  judge  advocate  begins  to  read  the  letter  aloud,  but  his  voice  trembles  and 
breaks.  It  is  handed  from  one  to  the  other  and  read  in  silence ;  and  not  a  man 
in  court  could  keep  back  the  tears  of  sympathy  for  a  brave  comrade.  The  sentence 
is  passed  with  a  recommendation  for  pardon,  and  the  pardon  is  given  by  the 
commanding  general.  He  was  tempted  to  violate  his  duty  as  a  soldier  by  fidelity 
to  his  wife  and  children.  We  can  be  tempted  by  the  noblest  impulses  of  which  the 
human  heart  is  capable.  A  good  man  suffers  more  in  the  presence  of  temptation 
than  the  bad  man.  The  good  man  resists ;  and  the  resistance  involves  a  struggle 
which  strains  every  nerve,  and  puts  every  principle  to  the  test.  A  distinguished 
writer  illustrates  this  psychological  principle.  There  are  two  men  in  business : 
one  is  conscientious  and  honourable ;  the  other,  a  trickster  ready  for  any  sharp 
practice.  Both  are  under  the  pressure  of  financial  difBculties.  An  opportunity 
is  offered  to  each  to  make  a  fortune  by  fraud.  The  conscientious  man  has  seen 
disaster  coming.  His  wife  was  reared  in  affluence;  she  has  parted  with  her 
luxuries,  and  is  doing  the  work  of  servants.  He  says  to  himself,  "  I  might  take 
the  care  and  the  burden  from  her,  and  save  the  children  from  poverty  by  this  single 
stroke.  But  no,  so  help  me  God,  I  will  see  them  starve  before  I  sell  my 
honour  and  conscience."  The  trickster,  on  the  other  hand,  welcomes  the  oppor- 
tunity. He  argues,  "  Others  do  it,  why  may  not  I  ?  "  With  him  there  is  no  moral 
struggle.  His  weakened  conscience  offers  no  barrier  against  which  the  temptation 
frets  and  rages.  He  and  the  tempter  are  of  one  mind.  The  wicked  fall  into 
temptation,  the  good  resist  it.  But  the  resistance  involves  suffering  as  the  price 
of  the  victory.  We  are  told  that  Christ  suffered,  being  tempted.  The  difference 
between  our  temptation  and  that  of  the  Saviour  is  this:  the  will  of  His  flesh  waa 
pure  and  innocent ;  the  will  of  our  flesh  is  impure  and  sinful ;  and  these  render 
us  more  liable  to  fall,  but  they  do  not  increase  the  pain  of  the  conflict,  but  rather 
diminish  it.  Christ  suffered,  being  tempted,  and  His  suffering  was  greater  in 
proportion  to  His  moral  antagonism  to  evil.  This  principle  takes  His  temptation 
out  of  the  region  of  unreality  and  appearance,  and  unites  Him  to  us  in  a  living 
bond  of  human  brotherhood.  Human  sympathy  is  too  dull  to  comprehend  the 
deeper  struggles  of  a  sensitive  conscience  with  hidden  temptation.  But  He 
who  was  tempted  in  all  points  as  we  are  knows  it  all,  and  can  give  you  grace 
for  your  hour  of  need.  Yon  may  confess  all  these  sins  to  Him.  He  triumphed 
over  them,  and  you  have  yielded  to  them.  Yet  He  has  measured  the  strength  of 
each  of  these  temptations ;  and  that  experience  has  qualified  Him  to  redeem 
you  from  their  power,  and  to  save  you  by  His  grace.  (Bp.  A.  M.  Randolph.) 
Yet  without  sin. — Of  Christ  being  without  sin  : — Christ  was  pure,  without  sin,  upon 
these  grounds  :  1.  That  His  human  nature  might  be  fit  to  be  united  to  the  Divine 
nature.  2.  That  He  might  be  a  sufficient  Saviour  of  others.  "  For  such  an  High 
Priest  became  us,  who  is  holy,  undefiled,  separate  from  sinners"  (chap.  vii.  26).  3. 
That  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him  (2  Cor.  v.  21).  4.  That 
we  might  be  saved,  and  yet  the  law  not  frustrated  (Eom.  viii.  3,  x.  4).  5.  That 
Satan  might  have  nothing  to  object  against  Him.  6.  That  death,  grave,  and  devil 
might  lose  their  power  by  seizing  on  Him  that  was  without  sin.  (1)  The  aforesaid 
purity  of  Christ,  to  be  without  sin,  puts  a  difference  betwixt  Christ  and  other  priests, 
who  "offered  for  themselves  and  for  the  errors  of  the  people"  (chap.  ix.  7).  (2) 
It  hence  appeareth  that  no  other  man  could  have  been  a  sufficient  priest ;  for 
"  there  is  none  righteous ;  no,  not  one."  "  All  have  sinned  "  (Rom.  iii.  10,  23). 
(3)  This  affordeth  much  comfort  to  us  against  our  manifold  sins ;  for  when  we 
appear  before  God  He  beholds  us  in  our  Surety.     God's  eye  is  especially  cast  upon 


CHAP.  IV.]  HEBREWS.  369 

Him  who  is  without  sin.  (4)  This  may  be  a  good  incitement  unto  ns  to  cleanse 
ourselves  from  all  sin  as  far  as  possibly  we  can,  that  we  may  be  like  unto  Him 
(1  John  iii.  3).  (IF.  Gouge.)  Sin  no  aid  to  symp  ithy  : — It  might  be  supposed 
that  to  sinful  men  a  high  priest  who  had  known  sin  would  be  fuller  of  fsympalhy. 
But  the  apostle  is  not  writing  to  men  as  sinners,  to  men  who  have  fallen,  but  to 
men  in  danger  of  falling.  And  to  the  condition  of  such  men  Christ's  history  appeals 
with  powerT  He  knew  all  temptation,  and  can  sympathise  with  those  tempteil ; 
He  overcame  it,  and  this  gives  Him  skill  and  power  in  opening  up  a  way  of  escnpf>. 
And  even  of  sin  a  sinner  is  an  ill  judge  ;  he  will  either  regard  it  with  umiue 
abhorrence,  or  with  mawkish  sentiment,  or  with  a  callousness  that  comes  of 
thinking  it  a  matter  of  course  among  men.  A  clear,  uncoloured  view  of  it,  and 
of  those  liable  to  it,  can  only  be  found  in  the  mind  tempted  but  unfallen.  (A.  11. 
Davidson,  LL.D.)  Come  boldly  unto  the  throne  of  grace. — Boldness  at  the 
throne : — I.  Hebe  is  our  great  resort  DEscRinEo :  "  The  throne  of  grace."  In 
drawing  near  to  God  in  prayer  we  come — 1.  To  God  as  a  King,  with  reverence, 
confidence,  and  submission.  2.  To  one  who  gives  as  a  King ;  therefore  we  ask 
largely  and  expectantly.  3.  To  one  who  sits  upon  a  throne  "  of  grace  "  on  purpose 
to  dispense  grace.  4.  To  one  who  in  hearing  prayer  is  enthroned  and  glorified.  5. 
To  one  who  even  in  hearing  prayer  acts  as  a  sovereign,  but  whose  sovereignty  is  all 
of  grace.  H.  Here  is  a  lovino  exhortation:  "Let  us  come."  It  is  the  voice  of 
one  who  goes  with  us.  It  is  an  invitation — 1.  From  Paul,  a  man  like  ourselves, 
bat  an  experienced  believer  who  had  much  tried  the  power  of  prayer.  2.  From 
the  whole  Church  speaking  in  him.  8.  From  the  Holy  Spirit.  III.  Here  is  a 
QOALiFYiNQ  ADVERB  :  "  Boldly."  1.  Constantly,  at  all  times.  2.  Unreservedly, 
with  all  sorts  of  petitions.  3.  Freely,  with  simple  words.  4.  Hopefully,  with  full 
confidence  of  being  beard.  5.  Fervently,  with  importunity  of  pleading.  IV.  Here 
IS  A  REASON  GIVEN  FOB  BOLDNESS.  "  Therefore."  1.  "  That  we  may  obtain  mercy, 
and  find  grace " ;  not  that  we  may  utter  good  words,  but  may  actually  obtain 
blessings.  (1)  We  may  come  when  we  need  great  mercy  because  of  our  Kin.  (2) 
We  may  come  when  we  have  little  grace.  (3)  We  may  come  when  we  are  in  need  of 
more  grace.  2.  There  are  many  other  reasons  for  coming  at  once,  and  boldly.  (1) 
Our  character  may  urge  us.  We  are  invited  to  come  for  "  mercy,"  and  therefore 
undeserving  sinners  may  come.  (2)  The  character  of  God  encourages  us  to  he 
bold.  (3)  Our  relation  to  Him  as  children  gives  us  great  freedom.  (4)  The  Holy 
Spirit's  guidance  draws  us  near  the  throne.  (5)  The  promises  invite  us  by  their 
greatness,  freeness,  sureness,  &c.  (6)  Christ  is  already  given  to  us,  and  therefore 
God  will  deny  us  nothing.  (7)  Our  former  successes  at  the  throne  give  us  solid 
confiience.  3.  The  great  reason  of  all  for  bold  approach  is  in  Jesus.  (1)  He  once 
was  slaiu,  and  the  mercy-seat  is  sprinkled  with  His  blood.  (2)  He  is  risen,  and  has 
justified  us  by  His  righteousness.  (3)  He  has  ascended  and  taken  possession  of  all 
covenant  blessings  on  our  behalf.  Let  us  ask  for  that  which  is  our  own.  (4)  He  is 
sympathetic,  tender,  and  careful  for  us ;  we  must  be  heard.  Conclusion  :  1.  Let 
us  come  to  the  throne,  when  we  are  sinful,  to  find  mercy.  2.  Let  us  come  to  the 
throne,  when  we  are  weak,  to  find  help.  3.  Let  us  come  to  the  throne,  'vhen  we 
are  tempted,  to  find  grace.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  On  coning  boldly  to  the  throne  of 
grace : — 1.  Let  us  see  what  it  declares  the  Lord  to  be  in  Himself.  His  throne 
of  grace  signifies — 1.  That  He  is  a  God  of  glory,  of  a  glorious  majesty.  Here  was 
the  most  glorious  and  majestic  appearance  of  God  amongst  His  people  of  old. 
Upon  the  mercy-seat  He  appeared  in  glory.  The  ark,  whereof  this  very  mercy-seat 
was  a  part,  the  most  rich  and  splendid  part,  is  called  His  glory  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  HI). 
Here  He  vouchsafed  His  special  presence,  as  upon  His  throne.  2.  That  He  is  a 
God  of  dominion  and  sovereignty,  that  He  rules  and  reigns  and  is  supreme  governor 
(Psa.  xcix.  1,  2).  He  reigns ;  that  appears  by  His  throne.  He  sits  between  the 
cherubims.  As  so  represented,  the  mercy-seat  was  His  throne.  Upon  this  account; 
greatness,  supremacy  is  ascribed  to  Him  (ver.  2),  and  from  hence  Hezekiah  declares 
His  sovereignty  over  all  kingdoms  (2  Kings  xix.  15).  3.  That  He  is  a  God  of  power 
and  might,  of  almighty  power.  When  He  is  spoken  of  as  upon  His  throne,  the 
mercy-seat.  He  is  called  the  Lord  of  hosts,  one  who  has  all  the  power  in  the  world 
(1  Sam.  iv.  4,  2  Sam.  vi.  2) ;  and  the  ark,  whereof  the  mercy-seat  was  a  principal 
part,  is  called  the  strength  of  God  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  61,  cxxxii.  8),  because,  as  it  was  a 
testimony  of  His  presence,  so  a  symbol  of  His  strength  and  power,  ready  to  b© 
engaged  for  His  people.  4.  That  He  is  a  God  of  holiness  (Psa.  xcix.  5).  To  worship 
at  His  footstool  is  to  worship  towards  the  mercy-seat  (ver.  1),  between  the  cherubim. 
There  He  resided  as  a  God  of  holiness.    And  upon  that  account  every  pait  of  tli© 

24 


370  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

temple,  yea,  the  hill  where  it  was  seated,  was  counted  holy  (ver.  9).  But  above  all, 
that  part  where  the  mercy-seat  was,  that  was  the  most  holy  place,  or,  as  it  is  in 
Hebrew,  the  holiness  of  holinesses  (Exod.  zxviL  23).  The  mercy-seat  was  the 
throne  of  His  holiness  (Psa.  zlvii.  8)  ;  and  giving  oracles  from  thence,  it  is  called 
the  oracle  of  holiness  (Pea.  xxviii.  2).  5.  That  He  is  a  God  of  wisdom,  who  see^ 
and  knows  all  things,  to  whom  nothing  is  hid,  or  obscure,  or  difficult.  From  the 
mercy-seat  He  gave  oracles ;  He  made  discoveries  to  His  people  of  such  things 
which  otherwise  they  could  not  come  to  the  knowledge  of.  6.  In  fine,  the  mention 
of  the  throne  of  grace  minds  us  of  the  wisdom  of  God,  that  we  should  draw  near 
Him  as  one  who  knows  our  state,  yea,  our  hearts,  and  understands  all  the  ways  and 
means  how  to  help  us  and  do  us  good.  II.  What  the  throne  of  gbace  declabes 
IHB  LoBD  TO  BE  UNTO  US.  1.  A  God  in  Christ.  The  throne  of  grace  is  "  the  throne 
of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  "  (Eev.  xxii.  3).  The  throne  of  God  alone  is  not  to 
be  approached  by  us ;  but  the  throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb  is  the  seat  of  mercy, 
the  throne  of  grace.  He  not  only  gives  law  to  His  people,  but  makes  provision  for 
them,  that  their  souls  may  have  plenty  (ver.  1  with  Ezek.  xlvii.),  and  he  protects 
His  subjects  too.  As  the  wings  of  the  cherubims  (parts  of  the  mercy-seat)  over- 
Bhadowed  and  covered  the  holy  things,  so  does  He  cover  and  overshadow  His  holy 
ones.  2.  A  God  reconciled.  It  signifies  that  His  justice  is  satisfied,  His  wrath 
appeased ;  not  now  incensed  against  His  people,  but  well  pleased  and  propitious. 
The  name  of  the  mercy-seat  declares  this.  It  is  tkatjTTjpwv,  a  propitiatory.  3.  A 
God  of  forgiveness.  As  graciously  pardoning  the  sins  of  His  people.  When  He  is 
represented  to  us  upon  the  mercy-seat,  He  is  set  forth  as  a  God  that  has  found 
out  a  way  to  hide  our  sins  out  of  His  sight.  4.  A  God  in  covenant  (Numb.  x.  83 ; 
chap.  ix.  4).  6.  A  God  that  will  have  communion  with  His  people ;  one  who  will 
admit  dust  and  ashes  to  have  fellowship  with  Him.  He  offers  there  to  meet  them, 
to  commune  with  them,  to  discover  and  communicate  Himself  to  them.  He  admits 
His  servants  to  communion  with  Him  when  He  vouchsafes  to  meet  them.  And  the 
mercy-seat  was  the  place  of  meeting  which  the  Lord  appointed  for  Moses  (Exod. 
XXX.  36).  He  will  meet  with  him  as  we  meet  with  a  friend  whom  we  desire  and 
delight  to  converse  with.  He  would  meet  His  servants  there  to  discover  Himself 
to  them.  The  LXX  render  it,  "  I  will  be  known  to  thee  from  thence."  He  did 
make  known  Himself  as  a  man  to  his  friend.  There  He  did  commune  with  them 
(Exod.  XXV.  22).  6.  A  God  that  hears  prayer,  and  will  answer  the  petitions  and 
supplications  of  His  people.  The  Lord  gave  answers  from  the  mercy-seat ;  and  this 
may  be  the  reason  why  their  posture  of  old  in  worshipping  and  praying  was  towards 
the  mercy-seat  (Psa.  xxviii.  2).  That  was  the  place  where  the  mercy-seat  was. 
Called  the  oracle,  because  the  Lord  from  the  mercy-seat  gave  answers  ;  and  so  it  is 
rendered  by  some  "  the  answering  place  "  (so  Psa.  v.  7).  7.  A  God  that  is  present 
with  His  people.  More  particularly  this  denotes — (1)  An  intimate  presence.  He  is 
in  the  midst  of  His  people.  So  He  was  while  He  was  on  the  mercy-seat,  so  He  will 
be  while  that  remains,  which  this  did  but  typify ;  while  the  throne  of  grace,  while 
the  mediation  of  Christ  continues,  who  is  King  and  Priest  for  ever.  (2)  A  special, 
a  gracious  presence.  He  was  not  present  here  only  as  He  is  in  the  rest  of  the  world, 
but  in  a  more  special  way,  as  upon  a  mercy-seat,  from  which  others  were  far 
removed,  so  as  they  could  have  no  access  to  the  propitiatory,  no  advantages  by  it. 
(3)  A  glorious  presence.  As  the  mercy-seat  upon  which  the  Lord  appears  is  a 
throne  of  grace,  so  is  it  a  throne  of  gloiy  (Jer,  xvii.  12,  xiv.  21).  (4)  An  all-sufficient 
presence — sufficient  to  secure  them  from  all  things  dreadful  and  to  supply  them 
with  all  things  desirable.  This  is  the  security  of  His  people  (Psa.  xlvi.  5).  (5)  A 
continuing  presence.  He  is  said  to  dwell  on  the  mercy-seat.  In  reference  thereto 
is  His  promise  (1  Kings  vi.  13).  The  throne  of  grace  denotes  no  less  (Eev.  vii.  15). 
Here  He  is,  and  here  He  abides.  We  need  never  suffer  through  His  absence. 
Have  recourse  to  Him  on  the  throne  of  grace,  and  we  need  never  be  at  a  loss.  8. 
A  God  that  will  show  Himself  merciful  and  gracious  to  His  people,  that  will  deal 
mercifully  and  graciously  with  them.  Now,  when  He  thus  represents  Himself, 
they  may  find  grace  and  mercy.     (D.  Clarkson,  B.B.)  The  Christian  at  the 

throne  of  grace : — I.  The  Chbistian's  wants.  1.  Pardon.  2.  Strength.  II.  The 
Cheistian's  PBivrLEGE.  We  may  obtain  all  we  require.  1.  We  may  approach  the 
throne  of  grace.  2.  Boldly,  not  with  a  feeling  of  terror,  but  as  unto  a  loving  God, 
a  reconciled  Father.  III.  The  Christian's  encouragements.  We  need  an  advo- 
cate— Christ  is  the  sinner's  Advocate.  We  need  an  experienced  advocate — Jesua 
was  a  tempted  and  exiierienced  Saviour.  We  need  a  compassionate  advocate — 
Jesus  was  an  experienced,  and  therefore  a  compassionate  Advocate.   (11.  M.  ViUier$t 


CHA».  IT.]  HEBREWS.  871 

JU.A.)  The  throne  of  grace  : — I.  It  will  be  well — nay,  it  is  all-important — that 
fre  understand  the  meaning  of  the  apostle  when  he  bids  us  "  come  boldly  to  the 
throne  of  gtace."  We  are  not,  then,  to  approach  the  throne  of  grace  doubting ;  we 
are  not  to  draw  near  as  if  we  thought  that  we  should  not  be  received  there  gladly ; 
we  are  not  to  come  as  though  we  expected  to  be  sent  away  without  being  heard,  for 
then  the  weakness  of  our  faith  in  Christ  is  at  once  made  manifest.  In  short,  to 
draw  near  with  the  persuasion  that  God  will  not  hear  our  prayer  is  to  insult  rather 
tlian  to  respect  and  honour  Him.  We  must  guard  likewise  against  a  rash,  pre- 
fumptuous  approach,  because,  as  sinners  guilty  and  polluted,  it  is  impossible  that 
we  can  have  anything  wherewith  to  appear  before  the  Lord.  Such  boldness  as  this 
can  never  become  those  who  come  to  obtain  mercy  and  grace.  The  boldness  which 
we  are  authorised  to  use  is  that  which  arises  from  a  knowledge  of  our  own  vileness 
and  the  sufficiency  there  is  in  Christ  to  His  people's  wants.  Here  is  our  confidence, 
here  is  our  hope  ;  in  Christ  and  in  Him  crucilied  we  find  both  power  and  willingness 
to  help.  II.  The  reasons  why  we  are  to  come  to  the  throne  of  grace  are  two, 
namely,  that  we  may  obtain  mei  cy,  and  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need.  And  oh ! 
what  need  have  we  to  pray  for  mercy  I  Let  us  for  one  moment  call  to  mind  the 
many  and  grievous  sins  which  we  have  committed  against  a  pure  and  holy  God. 
Let  us  remember  also  that  we  must  very  shortly  give  an  account  to  God  for  every 
word  we  have  spoken,  every  thought  we  have  conceived,  every  deed  we  have  done. 
Let  us  think  for  one  moment  of  these  things,  and  surely  we  shall  not  delay  to  cry 
for  mercy;  surely  we  shall  earnestly  and  at  once  cry  out  with  the  publican,  "  God 
be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  We  are  to  come  also  for  "grace  to  help  in  time  of 
need."  Although  salvation  is  not  of  debt  but  of  grace,  although  it  is  the  free  gift 
of  God  through  Christ  Jesus,  nevertheless  we  must  be  made  meet  to  receive  it. 
Holiness,  be  it  remembered,  will  not  entitle  us  to  heaven  ;  it  will  only  make  us  like 
those  who  are  accounted  worthy  of  it.  Every  moment,  therefore,  of  our  lives  must 
be  under  the  guidance  of  Divine  grace.     III.  And  nuw  let  me  remind  you  of  a  few 

SEASONS    WHEN    WE    GREATLY    STAND    IN    NEED    OF    Gou'S   ASSISTANCE.       1.    The    time    of 

prosperity  is  a  "  time  of  need."  When  the  world  smiles  upon  us  we  are  in  a 
situation  of  great  diffi'^ulty  and  danger.  We  are  then  apt  to  put  our  confidence 
more  in  the  cieature  and  less  in  the  Creator.  2.  The  time  of  adversity  is  a  "time 
of  need."  When  the  hand  of  God  presses  heavy  upon  us,  how  ready  are  we  to 
question  His  loving-kindness  1  how  disposed  are  we  to  give  way  to  despair  and  to 
indulge  in  immoderate  grief  !  to  doubt  those  gracious  words,  "  All  things  shall  work 
together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God  "  1  3.  The  time  of  death  is  a  "  time  of 
need."  It  is  an  awful  thing  to  contend  with  the  prince  of  this  world  for  the  last 
time.  It  is  an  awful  thing  to  know  that  we  are  about  to  enter  upon  eternity  and  to 
appear  in  the  presence  of  the  living  God.  {John  Wright,  M.A.)  The  throne  oj 
grace : — We  are  here  directed  to  a  throne  with  its  character  :  it  Ib  said  to  be  a 
throne  of  grace.  We  are  here  led  to  coutemplate  our  Kedeemer  in  His  most  exalted 
character ;  we  are  here  called  to  view  Him  as  a  Priest  upon  a  throne.  Priests  are 
seldom  advanced  to  a  throne,  or  have  the  opportunity  of  exercising  influence 
wound  them  without  evil  to  themselves  anu  mischief  to  society.  We  have  here, 
however,  a  Priest  on  a  throne — from  whom  we  have  everything  to  hope  and  nothing 
to  fear.  1.  Some  thrones,  you  know,  are  hereditary ;  and  ^o  is  this,  for  He  that 
occupieth  it  is  the  Son,  the  only-begotten  Son  of  God,  the  Fiistborn  of  every 
creature,  the  brightness  of  His  Father's  glory  and  the  express  image  of  His 
person — the  Heir  of  all  things,  and  consequently  the  Heir  of  this  throne.  2.  Some 
thrones,  you  know,  have  been  secured  by  conquest ;  and  so  has  this.  He  came  up 
from  the  conflict.  His  garments  dyed  in  His  own  blood  and  the  blood  of  His 
enemies ;  and  through  the  ranks  of  fiends  and  death  He  pushed  His  triumphant 
course  to  the  possession  of  that  kingdom,  and  gained  the  glorious  victory.  3. 
Soma  thrones  are  elective ;  so  is  this  also.  '*  The  Lord  said  unto  my  Lord,  Sit 
Thou  at  M.y  right  hand  until  I  make  Thine  enemies  Thy  footstool."  "Him  hath 
God  exalted  at  His  right  hand  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour."  But  it  is  termed  "  the 
throne  of  grace  " — not  a  throne  of  grace,  as  we  often  hear  talked  about,  as  though 
there  were  a  great  many  of  that  character :  no  such  thing ;  there  is  only  one.  1. 
"  Tke  throne  of  gra^e  " — to  distinguish  it  from  that  throne  of  the  Redeemer  on 
which  He  sits  as  the  Ruler  of  the  universe,  the  Governor  of  earth  and  heaven  and 
hell.  2.  It  is  distinguished,  again,  from  that  throne  of  equity  on  wbich  He  sits  aa 
the  Moral  Governor  of  the  world  ;  in  which  capacity  He  exercises  a  judicial 
influence  which  extends  to  aU  minds  and  to  all  consciences.  3.  Th>  n,  again,  it  ia 
distinguished  from  the  throne  of  judgment,  on  which  He  will  sit  by  and  by.    This 


378  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 


is  "  the  throne  of  grace."  Here  we  are  called  to  view  the  Eedeemer  as  sitting  on 
the  mercy-seat,  between  the  cherubim,  as  He  did  when  He  gave  audience  to  the 
high  priest  and  issued  His  commands.  Here  He  opens  an  audience-chamber  to 
His  people  ;  here  He  receives  the  applications  made  in  prayer  by  the  needy,  humble^ 
desiring  children  of  God.  Here  He  listens  to  their  diversified  cases  and  necessities, 
and  imparts  suitable,  sustaining,  and  abundant  assistance.  1.  It  is  the  "throne 
of  grace,"  because  grace,  unmerited  love  and  goodness,  designed  and  erected  it. 
We  had  neither  claim  nor  right  to  any  such  privilege.  It  is  gi-ace  continues  it;  and 
it  is  very  difficult  to  say  whether  grace  abounds  most  in  erecting  this  throne,  or  in 
continuing  it  to  the  children  of  men.  2,  It  is  the  "  throne  of  grace,"  because  grace 
is  here  given.  Here  He  gives  giace  to  instruct  the  ignorant,  to  direct  the  doubting, 
to  enliven  the  mild  spirit,  to  sustain  the  feeble  heart,  to  strengthen  its  weaknesses, 
to  comfort  its  distresses,  to  supply  its  needs.  Here  He  gives  grace  to  save  to  the 
uttermost ;  for  every  good  and  perfect  gift  which  comes  from  the  Father  of  light  is 
here  dispensed.  3.  Now,  to  this  "  throne  of  grace  "  we  have  all  errands.  In  the 
first  place,  we  have  errands  because  we  need  mercy.  We  need  the  mercy  of  God  to 
forgive  our  every  offence  and  to  remit  the  punishment  to  which  we  are  exposed.  4. 
We  not  only  need  mercy,  but  we  need  an  assurance  that  God  has  given  us  mercy. 
We  know  and  feel  that  we  are  guilty;  why  may  we  not  know  and  feel  that  we  are 
pardoned  ?  A  consciousness  of  guilt  brings  alarm,  and  while  this  is  the  case  there 
can  be  no  comfort,  no  peace,  till  such  time  as  the  guilt  is  removed  and  taken  away. 
And  what  a  mercy  is  this  1  What  a  heaven  of  bliss  to  be  pardoned  and  to  know  it  I 
But  we  are  unprofitable,  short-coming  creatuies.  We  need  mercy  to  bear  with  ua 
like  the  barren  fig-tree.  Oar  precious  time,  for  instance,  has  not  always  been 
profitably  improved;  our  talents  have  not  always  been  usefully  employed;  our 
duties  to  God,  in  gratitude,  in  faith,  in  affection — our  duties  to  men,  in  kindness, 
charity,  and  love — have  not  been  strictly  discharged.  We  need  God's  mercy  to 
pardon  all  this ;  we  need  the  mercy  of  God  to  bear  with  us  and  forgive  us  all  our 
transgressions.  We  are  necessitous  pensioners  on  the  Divine  bounty,  and  nn  d 
supplies  of  grace.  We  are  every  moment  dependent  upon  God,  and  we  can  only 
live  through  that  dependence  ;  we  can  live  only  so  long  as  His  bounty  is  exercised. 
We  are  dependent  upon  Him  for  life,  which  is  perpetually  exposed  to  danger ;  we 
are  dependent  upon  Him  for  help,  which  is  only  to  be  obtained  from  His  hand.  We 
are  dependent  upon  Him  for  temporal  supplies — day  by  day  for  our  daily  bread.  We 
are  dependent  upon  Him  for  delivering  our  souls  from  the  power  of  sin,  the  world, 
the  flesh,  and  the  devil.  In  short,  wo  need  the  mercy  of  God  in  every  period  of 
life,  in  the  article  of  death,  and  even  at  the  day  of  judgment :  we  shall  need  to 
"  look  for  the  mercy  of  God  unto  eternal  life."  We  have  errands  at  this  throne  that 
we  may  obtain  mercy.  6.  But  we  not  only  need  mercy  to  pardon  our  sins,  to  bear 
with  our  unprofitableness,  and  to  supply  our  need,  but  we  need  grace  to  renew  us. 
We  need  renewing  grace — grace  to  enUghten  our  minds,  grace  to  renew  our  hearts, 
grace  to  regenerate  our  heart's  nature,  grace  to  conform  our  will  to  the  will  of  God — 
grace  that  we  may  approve,  desire,  and  relish  spiritual  enjoyment,  and  thus  be 
prepared  for  all  the  service  of  God.  6.  We  need  also  grace  to  keep  us  in  thi» 
renewed  state.  The  life  of  God  imparted  to  human  nature  placed  in  circumstances 
like  these  would  be  like  dropping  a  spark  of  fixe  upon  an  ocean  of  ice.  How  it 
should  be  kept  alive,  how  it  should  burst  into  a  flame,  how  it  shoald  illuminate 
with  its  light  the  darkness  and  melt  the  hardness  of  the  world,  can  only  be  by 
receiving  grace.  And  though  God  has  promised  to  impart  this  life,  and  is  delighted 
to  impart  it,  yet  He  will  not  give  it  without  being  inquired  of  :  we  must  go  for  grace 
to  the  throne  of  grnn«.  7.  But  we  need  grace  inasmuch  as  we  have  duties  to 
perform.  Our  duties  "'  numerous  ;  they  pertain  to  God,  to  man,  and  to  ourselves. 
The  text  adverts  to  :.  special  season,  which  the  apostle  calls  "time  of  need": 
"that  we  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need."  Speaking 
generally,  every  time  is  a  "  time  of  need  " ;  for  when  is  it  that  no  enemy,  like  a 
cunning,  wily  beast  of  prey,  is  not  watching  for  a  moment  of  unguardedness  to 
seize  and  to  devour  ?  Yet  there  are  certain  ascertained  seasons  which  may  more 
emphatically  be  called  a  "  time  of  need."  We  are  living  in  a  state  of  uncertainty ; 
we  know  not  at  all  what  is  before  as.  I  am  aware  that  it  may  be  said  that  if  we 
have  grace  to  live  to  God  now,  suffering  grace  will  be  given  for  suffering  times  ;  and 
if  we  have  grace  to  live  to  God  now,  when  God  changes  the  work  from  doing  to 
suffering,  from  living  to  dying,  He  will  change  the  grace  too.  Yes,  He  will;  bni 
only  in  answer  to  prayer :  He  wUl  be  "  inquired  of."  What  is  the  use  that  we  mayt 
make  of  this  subject  ?    1.  The  apostle  says,  "  Come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace  " — 


CHAP.  IV.]  HEBREWS.  87$ 

not  irreverently.  "We  should  never  forget  the  justice,  holiness,  dignity,  and  mystery 
of  nim  whom  we  address  :  we  should  have  grace  to  "  serve  Him  with  reverence  and 
godly  fear;  for  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire."  2.  When  it  is  said,  '•  Come  boldly 
unto  the  throne  of  grace,"  the  apostle  does  not  mean  vou  are  to  come  presumptuously, 
as  if  you  would  command  God.  3.  WTien  the  apostle  says,  "  Come  boldly  to  the 
throne  of  grace,"  we  understand  that  we  are  to  come  readily.  We  are  to  have  a 
knowledge  of  our  state,  to  feel  our  wants,  to  entertain  desires  after  holiness.  We 
are  not  to  pore  over  our  unworthiness ;  we  are  not  to  parley  with  the  enemy ;  we 
are  not  to  wait  till  we  are  better;  we  are  not  to  expect  a  more  convenient  season. 
4.  When  it  is  said,  "  Come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace,"  we  understand  that  we 
are  to  come  near.  It  is  not  enough  to  catch  God's  eye  at  a  distance,  but  to  get  His 
beart,  and  the  very  fulness  of  His  heart.  "  Come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace," 
and  expect  to  find  Him  near  to  save.  5.  *'  Come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace  "  ; 
come  cheerfully.  And  in  order  to  do  this  we  should  con'.emplate  God  in  all  the 
encouraging  aspects  of  His  character.  Wben  we  come  to  the  throne  we  should  look 
on  Him  in  all  the  friendly,  brotherly.  Scriptural  relations  in  which  He  has  dis- 
covered Himself  to  us.  6.  "  Come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace  " — come  with 
liberty ;  not  straitened  in  your  own  souls,  not  contracted  in  your  desires,  not 
limited  in  your  aspirations.  7.  "  Come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace  " — come 
confidently,  with  the  confidence  that  you  shall  receive.  8.  "  Come  boldly  to  the 
throne  of  grace  " — come  frequently.  The  path  leading  to  this  throne  should  be 
trampled,  well  used,  such  a  beaten  path  as  to  be  as  bare  as  the  street.  9.  We 
should  come  importunately — like  Jacob  when  he  grasped  the  angel  and  said,  "  I 
will  not  let  Thee  go  except  Thou  bless  me  " ;  like  the  Canaanitisb  woman  when  she 
Baid,  "  Is  it  meet  to  take  the  children's  bread,  and  to  cast  it  to  the  dogs  ?  "  like  the 
widow  who,  by  her  continued  coming  to  the  unjust  judge,  wearied  him ;  like  the 
person  who  applied  to  his  neighbour  at  night  for  the  loan  of  bread  to  entertain  big 
friend,  and  would  take  no  denial.  10.  The  apostle  suggests  encouragement.  We 
ere  encouraged  to  come  because  we  have  a  High  Priest  who  is  great  in  all  the 
attributes  of  mercy  and  love,  who  hath  finished  His  work  to  His  Father's  satisfac- 
tion, and  hath  entered  within  the  veil.  "  Seeing  that  wp  have  such  a  High  Priest." 
When  you  come  to  the  throne,  He  takes  you  by  the  hand,  and  introduces  you  to  God  ; 
He  takes  your  prayers,  and  perfumes  them  with  the  incense  of  His  merit,  and  urges 
your  feeble  requests.  (IF.  Atherton.)     Timely  succour: — I.  There  is,  there  will  be, 

A  SEASON,  UANY  A  SEASON,  IN  THE  COURSE  OF  ODB  PROFESSION  AND  WALKING  BEFORE  GoD, 
WHEREIN    WE  DO   OR    SHALL   STAND   IN    NEED    OF    ESPECIAL  AID  AND  ASSISTANCE.       This  is 

included  in  the  last  words,  "  help  in  time  of  need  " — help  that  is  suitable  and 
seasonable  for  and  unto  such  a  condition  wherein  we  are  found  earnestly  to  cry  out 
for  it.  1.  A  time  of  affliction  is  such  a  season.  God  is  an  help  (Psa.  xlvi.  1)  in  all 
sorts  of  straits  and  afflictions.  2.  A  time  of  persecution  is  such  a  season ;  yea,  it 
may  be  tho  principal  season  here  intended  (see  chap.  x.).  And  this  is  the  greatest 
trial  that  in  general  God  exerciseth  His  Ciiurch  withaL  In  such  a  season  some 
seed  quite  deoayeth,  some  stars  fall  from  heaven,  some  prove  feariul  and  un- 
believing, to  their  eternal  ruin ;  and  few  there  are  but  that  where  persecution  is 
urgent,  it  hath  some  impression  upon  them  to  their  disadvantage.  Carnal  fears, 
with  carnal  wisdom  and  counsels,  are  apt  to  be  at  work  in  such  a  season  ;  and  all 
the  fruit  that  comes  from  those  evil  roots  is  bitter.  3.  A  time  of  temptation  is  such 
a  season.  St.  Paul  found  it  so  when  he  had  the  messenger  of  Satan  sent  to  buiYet 
him.  4.  A  time  of  spiritual  desertion  is  such  a  season.  When  God  in  any  way 
withdraws  Himself  from  us,  we  shall  stand  in  need  of  special  assistance.  5.  A 
time  wherein  we  are  called  unto  the  performance  of  any  great  and  signal  duty  is  such  a 
season  also.  So  was  it  with  Abraham  when  he  was  called  first  to  leave  his  country 
and  afterwards  to  sacrifice  his  son.  Such  was  the  call  of  Joshua  to  enter  into 
Canaan,  proposed  to  our  example  (chap.  xiii.  5),  and  of  the  apostles  to  preach  the 
gospel  when  they  were  sent  out  as  she*  p  among  wolves.  6.  Times  of  changes  and 
the  difficulties  wh'rewith  they  are  attended  introduce  such  a  season.  "  Changes 
and  war,"  saith  Job,  "  are  against  me  "  (Job  x.  17).  There  is  in  all  changes  a  war 
against  us,  wherein  we  may  be  foiled  if  we  are  not  the  more  watchful  and  have  not 
the  better  assistance.  7.  The  time  of  death  is  such  a  season.  To  let  go  all  hold  of 
present  things  and  present  hopes,  to  give  up  a  departing  soul,  entering  into  the 
invisible  world,  and  an  unchangeable  eternity  therein,  into  the  hands  of  a  sovereign 
Lord,  is  a  thing  which  requires  a  strength  above  our  own  for  the  right,  and  com- 
fortable performance  of.     II.  That  there  is  with  God  in  Christ,  God  on  Hi? 

THRONE    OF   QKACE,    A   SFRINO   OF   SUITABLE   AND    SEASONABLE    HELP   FOB   ALL    TOIKS   AND 


374  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

OCCASIONS  OF  DiTFicuLTT.  He  is  the  God  of  all  grace,  and  a  fountain  of  living 
waters  is  with  Him  for  the  refreshment  of  every  weary  and  thirsty  soul.     IH.  Auci 

HELP,  SOCCtitlE,  OR  8PIBITUAL  ASSISTANCE  IN  OUB  STRAITS  AND  DIFFICULTIES  PROCEEDS 
FROM  MERE  MERCT  AND  GRACE,  OR  THE  GOOI'NESS,  KINDNESS,  AND  BENIGNITT   OF    GOD  IN 

Christ.    IV.  When  we  have  throdgh  Christ  obtained  mercy  and  grace  fob  odb 

PERSONS,    WE    need    NOT    FEAR  BUT    THAT    WE    SHALL    HAVE    SUITABLE    AND    SEASONABLE 

HELP  FOR  OCR  DUTIES.  If  we  find  mercy  and  obtain  grace,  we  shall  have  help.  V. 
The  way  to  obtain  help  from  God  is  by  a  due  gospel-application  of  our  souls  fob 
IT  to  the  throne  of  grace.  VI.  Great  discouragements  often  interpose  them- 
selves  IN   our  minds,  and  against  our   faith,  when   we    stand  in  need  of  ESPECIAIj 

help  from  God  and  would  make  our  application  unto  Him  fob  relief.  It  is 
included  in  the  exhortation  to  come  with  boldness ;  that  is,  to  cast  off  and  conquer 
all  those  discou'tagements,  and  to  use  confidence  of  acceptance  and  liberty  of  speech 
before  Him,  VH.  Faith's  consideration  of  the  interposition  of  Christ  in  our 
behalf,  as  our  High  Priest,  is  the  only  way  to  remove  discouragements  and 
to  give  us  boldness  in  our  access  to  God.  Let  us  come,  therefore,  with  boldness  ; 
that  is,  on  the  account  of  the  care,  love,  and  faithfulness  of  Christ  as  our  High 
Priest,  before  discoursed  on.  VIII.  In  all  our  approaches  unto  God  we  are  to 
consider  Him  as  on  a  throne.  Though  it  be  a  throne  of  grace,  yet  it  is  still  a 
throne,  the  consideration  whereof  should  influence  our  minds  with  reverence  and 
godly  fear  in  all  things  wherein  we  have  to  do  with  Him.  {John  Owen,  D.D.) 
The  sinner  at  the  throne  of  grace  : — L  The  throne  of  grace.  1.  It  is  set  up  for 
those  who  have  been  ruined  by  sin.  2.  None  will  come  to  it  but  those  who  feel  sin 
to  be  a  burden.  3.  It  is  also  a  kind  of  holy  retirement,  where  the  true  followers  of 
Jesus  may  meet  their  Lord,  H.  What  gives  the  sinner  his  boldness  when  hb 
COMES  with  his  PETITIONS  TO  THIS  THRONE  ?  1.  His  entire  reliance  on  Christ. 
2.  His  experimental  knowleclge  of  the  eternal  priesthood  of  Christ.  3.  His  own 
experience.     III.  The  fittest  season  foe  drawing  near  to  the  throne  of  grace. 

1.  A  time  of  national  lukewarmness  is  a  time  of  need.  2.  The  time  when  the 
Lord  is  arming  Himself  with  judgment  is  a  time  of  need.  3.  A  time  of  prosperity 
is  a  time  of  need.  4.  A  time  of  spiritual  warfare  is  a  time  of  need.  {F.  G.  Cross- 
viiin.)  The  throne  of  grace  : — I.  The  seat  of  power.  1.  A  throne — the  symbol  of 
(loniinion — where  God  manifests  His  glory  (Isa.  vi.  1 ;  Rev.  xix.  4 ;  Matt.  vi.  13). 

2.  Power  may  be  taken  in  two  senses-  authority  and  ability.  Christ  possesses  both 
(chap.  viii.  1).  3.  He  has  authority  to  pardon,  to  bestow  the  gift  of  sonship,  to 
exercise  supreme  control  (Matt.  ix.  6 ;  John  i.  12,  xvii.  2).  4.  The  secret  of  our 
power  over  evil  lies  in  onr  being  under  Christ's  control  (Luke  vii.  8  ;  Eccles.  viii.  4). 
II.  The  place  of  worship.  1.  The  distinction  between  the  Cross  and  the  throne. 
2.  The  place  of  atonement  and  the  place  of  worship  (Exod.  xxv.  22),  3.  The  pro- 
visions for  worship  in  Christ.  Access  (Eph.  ii.  18,  iii.  12;  chap.  x.  19,  20).  Pardon 
and  acceptance  (chap.  x.  23).  III.  The  source  of  supply.  1.  To  meet  our  un- 
worthiness.  "Mercy."  2.  To  meet  our  insufficiency.  "Grace."  "My  grace" — 
"for  thee  "  (2  Cor.  xii.  9).  3.  A  river  proceeding  out  of  the  throne  (Rev.  xxii.  1), 
4.  The  exhortation:  "Let  us  come  boldly,"  "Let  us  draw  near"  —  "with 
a  true  heart" — "in  full  assurance  of  faith"  (chap.  x.  22).  {E.  H.  Hopkins.) 
Boldness  at  the  throne  of  grace : — I,  What  this  boldness  is.  It  is  not  audacity, 
rudeness  or  trifling  freedom.  Pra.yer  and  insolence  ill  accord  together.  This  bold- 
ne^^s  arises  from  nothing  in  ourselves,  but  purely  from  the  goodness  of  the  Being  we 
address  :  and  it  consists  princip;illy  in  a  persuasion  that  we  are  freely  authorised  to 
come,  and  may  confidently  hope  to  succeed.  II.  The  purposes  for  which  wb 
ARE  TO  come  to  THE  THRONE  OF  GRACE.  To  "  obtain  mcicy  "  and  to  "  find  grace." 
The  blessings  are  wisely  connected  together  by  the  apostle,  because  there  are  too 
many  people  who  try  to  separate  them.  They  would  be  saved  from  hell,  but  not 
from  sin.  They  wished  to  be  pardoned,  but  not  renewed.  They  would  have  mercy, 
but  not  grace.  But  be  not  deceived.  Whom  God  forgives  He  sanctifies  and  pre- 
pares for  His  service.  And  both  these  blessinfi;s  are  equally  important  and  necessary 
to  our  salvation.  Let  us  therefore  pray  for  both.  1.  Pray  for  mercy.  And  pray 
like  those  who  know  they  greatly  need  it.  You  are  very  guilty.  2.  Pray  for  "  grace 
to  help  in  time  of  need,"  But  is  not  every  time  a  time  (<  need  with  us?  It  is. 
And  there  is  not  a  moment  in  our  existence  in  which  we  can  live  as  we  ought, 
independently  of  Divine  grace.  We  need  this  grace,  to  mortify  our  corruptions ;  to 
sanctify  our  affections  ;  to  resist  temptations  :  to  overcome  the  world.  But  there  are 
some  seasons  in  which  we  peculiarly  require  the  aid  of  Divine  grace.  Now  if  we 
are  to  pray  "  that  we  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need,* 


OHAP.  lY.]  HEBREWS.  175 

does  it  not  follow,  as  a  fair  inference,  that  a  prayerless  person  is  destitute  both  of 
the  mercy  and  grace  of  God  ?  1.  Have  you  come  to  this  throne  ?  You  are  fond  of 
hearing  sermons — but  while  you  so  often  hear  from  God,  does  God  ever  hear  from 
you  ?  2.  Do  you  design  to  come  ?  or  have  you  resolved  to  "  restrain  prayer  before 
Him  "  ?  Do  you  imagine  you  can  acquire  these  blessings  in  any  other  way  than 
by  prayer  ?  Or  do  you  imagine  these  blessings  are  not  worthy  of  your  pursuit  ? 
If  you  could  gain  a  fortune  by  prayer — would  you  not  pray  ?  Or  health — wouli 
you  not  pray  ?  But  what  are  these  to  mercy  and  grace  ?  Or  do  you  imagine  they 
are  not  to  be  gained  ?  There  is  no  ground  for  such  despair  :  He  "  waiteth  to  be 
gracious;  and  is  exalted  to  have  mercy."     (IF.  Jay.)        The  throne  of  grace: — 

1.  Our  text  speaks  of  a  throne, — '♦  The  Throne  of  Grace."  God  is  to  be  viewed  in 
prayer  as  our  Father ;  that  is  the  aspect  which  is  dearest  to  us  ;  but  still  we  are  not 
to  regard  Him  as  though  He  were  such  as  we  are ;  for  our  Saviour  baa  qualified  the 
expression  "Our  Father,"  with  the  words  "who  art  in  heaven."  In  order  to 
remind  us  that  our  Father  is  still  infinitely  greater  than  ourselves,  He  has  bidden 
us  say,  "  Hallowed  be  Thy  name ;  Thy  kingdom  come  "  ;  so  that  our  Father  is  still 
to  be  regarded  as  a  King,  and  in  prayer  we  come,  not  only  to  our  Father's  feet,  but 
we  come  also  to  the  throne  of  the  Great  Monarch  of  the  universe.  If 
prayer  should  always  be  regarded  by  us  as  an  entrance  into  the  courts  of  the  royalty 
of  heaven  ;  if  we  are  to  behave  ourselves  as  courtiers  should  in  the  presence  of  an 
illustrious  majesty,  then  we  are  not  at  a  loss  to  know  the  right  spirit  in  which  to 
pray.  1.  If  in  prayer  we  come  to  a  throne,  it  is  clear  that  our  spirit  should,  in  the 
first  place,  be  one  of  lowly  reverence.  It  is  expected  that  the  subject  in  approach- 
ing to  the  king  should  pay  him  homage  and  honour.  2.  A  throne,  and,  therefore, 
to  be  approached  with  devout  joyfulness.  If  I  find  myself  favoured  by  Divine  grace 
to  stand  amongst  those  favoured  ones  who  frequent  His  courts,  shall  I  not  feel 
g'ad  ?  3.  It  is  a  throne,  and  therefore,  whenever  it  is  approached,  it  should  be 
with  complete  submission.  We  do  not  pray  to  God  to  instruct  Him  as  to  what  He 
ought  to  do,  neither  for  a  moment  must  we  presume  to  dictate  the  line  of  the  Divine 
procedure.  4.  If  it  be  a  throne,  it  ought  to  be  approached  with  enlarged  expecta- 
tions. 6.  The  right  spuit  in  which  to  approach  the  throne  of  grace  is  that  of 
unstaggering  confidence.  Who  shall  doubt  the  King?  Who  dares  impugn  the 
Imperial  word?  6.  If  prayer  be  a  coming  before  the  throne  of  God,  it  ought  always 
to  be  conducted  with  the  deepest  sincerity,  and  in  the  spirit  which  makes  everything 
real.  If  you  are  disloyal  enough  to  despise  the  King,  at  least,  for  your  own  sake,  do 
not  mock  Him  to  His  face,  and  when  He  is  upon  His  throne.  If  anywhere  you  dare 
repeat  holy  words  without  heart,  let  it  not  be  in  Jehovah's  palace.  II.  Lest  the 
glow  and  brilliance  of  the  word  "  throne  "  should  be  too  much  for  mortal  vision, 
our  text  now  presents  us  with  the  soft,  gentle  radiance  of  that  deUghtful  word — 
"grace."  We  are  called  to  the  throne  of  grace,  not  to  the  throne  of  law.  It  is 
a  throne  set  up  on  purpose  for  the  dispensation  of  grace ;  a  throne  from  which 
every  utterance  is  an  utterance  of  grace ;  the  sceptre  that  is  stretched  out  from  it 
is  the  silver  sceptre  of  grace  :  the  decrees  proclaimed  from  it  are  purposes  of  grace ; 
the  gifts  that  are  scattered  adown  its  golden  steps  are  gifts  of  grace  ;  and  He  that 
sits  upon  the  throne  is  grace  itself.  1.  If  in  prayer  I  come  before  a  throne  of  grace, 
then  the  faults  of  my  prayer  will  be  overlooked.  2.  Inasmuch  as  it  is  a  throne  -of 
grace,  the  faults  of  the  petitioner  himself  shall  not  prevent  the  success  of  his  prayer. 
3.  If  it  be  a  throne  of  grace,  then  the  desires  of  the  pleader  will  be  interpreted. 
If  I  cannot  find  words  in  which  to  utter  ray  desires,  God  in  His  grace  wUl  read  my 
desix-es  without  the  words.  4.  If  it  be  a  throne  of  grace,  then  all  the  wants  of  those 
who  come  to  it  will  be  supplied,  5.  And  so  all  the  petitioner's  miseries  shall  be 
compassionated.  III.  But  now  regarding  the  text  as  a  whole,  it  conveys  to  us  the 
idea  of  grace  enthroned.  It  is  a  throne,  and  who  sits  on  it  ?  It  is  grace  personi- 
fied that  is  here  installed  in  dignity.  And,  truly,  to-day  grace  is  on  a  throne.  In 
the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  grace  is  the  most  predominant  attribute  of  God.  How 
comes  it  to  be  so  exalted?     1.  We  reply,  well,  grace  has  a  throne  by  conquest. 

2.  Grace,  moreover,  sits  on  the  throne  because  it  has  established  itself  there  by 
right.  There  is  no  injustice  in  the  grace  of  God.  3.  Grace  is  enthroned  because 
Christ  has  finished  His  work  and  gone  into  the  heavens.  It  is  enthroned  in  power. 
IV.  Lastly,  our  text,  if  rightly  read,  has  in  it  sovereignty  RESPiiENDENT  in  olort? 
— THE  glory  of  grace.  The  mercy  seat  is  a  throne ;  though  grace  is  there,  it  is 
still  a  throne.  Grace  does  not  displace  sovereignty.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
throne  of  grace : — I.  The  blessings  spoken  of.  1.  Mercy,  pardoning  mercy,  recon- 
ciling mercy,  saving  mercy.      The  brightest  saint  needs  it,  as  well  as  the  greatest 


876  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  (chap.  it. 


sinner.  We  need  it  every  hour  of  our  life,  and  in  every  action  of  our  life.  3. 
Grace :  supporting,  helping  grace,  "  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need."  It  is  grace 
only  that  can  subdue  our  corruptions,  resist  temptation,  warm  our  hearts,  and 
bring  strength,  comfort,  and  hope  to  our  troubled  souls.      II.  Where  this  mercy 

iND  THIS  HELPING  GRACE  ARE   TO   BE   OBTAINED.        1.    The  apOStlo  teUs  US  tO  SCCk  them 

at  a  throne :  he  sends  us  therefore  to  a  God  of  majesty.  A  throne  impHes  also  that 
He  is  a  God  of  infinite,  almighty  power,  in  the  universe  over  which  He  reigns.  2. 
Yet  it  is  a  throne  of  grace.  He  who  sits  upon  it  has  removed  out  of  the  way  all 
impediments  that  He  can  now  be  gracious  to  a  world  of  sinners  in  a  way  con- 
sistent with  His  honour,  and  show  Himself  a  God  of  mercy  without  tarnishing  the 
glory  of  His  other  perfections.  HI.  How  are  we  to  seek  of  Him  mercy  and  grace  ? 
"  Let  us  come  boldly  unto  the  throne  of  grace."  1.  It  is  plain  that  if  God  is  seated 
on  a  throne  as  a  God  of  majesty  and  power,  this  boldness  must  be  altogether 
different  from  fearless  presumption  or  irreverent  freedom.  2.  The  boldness  ot 
which  the  apostle  speaks  is  opposed  to  self-will,  and  must  consequently  include  in 
it  submission  to  the  will  of  God.  3.  This  boldness  is  opposed  to  restraint  in  prayer, 
and  implies  an  humble  and  holy  freedom  in  our  addresses  to  God.  If  we  are  habi- 
tually living  in  His  faith  and  fear,  we  may  come  to  His  throne,  not  as  strangers  and 
foreigners,  but  as  those  who  are  of  His  household.  4.  This  boldness  is  opposed  to 
distrust  and  unbelief,  and  includes  a  persuasion  that  God  has  grace  to  bestow  and 
is  willing  to  bestow  it,  and  that  we  are  authorised  to  ask  for  and  expect  it.  It  is 
the  boldnt  ss  of  faith  which  the  apostle  recommends ;  a  confidence,  not  in  our  own 
merits  but  in  sovereign  mercy :  a  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  such  a  faith  in  Him 
as  triumphs  over  fears  and  suspicions,  and  rises  to  the  confidence  of  hope.  This 
confidence  is  quite  consistent  with  that  humility  which  becomes  us  as  sinners ; 
indeed  it  is  closely  connected  with  it.     (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)     The  throne  of  grace  : — 

1.  Whire  we  are  to  come.  "  Unto  the  throne  of  grace."  Not  the  throne  of  terror, 
but  the  throne  of  grace  ;  not  enshrouded  in  the  gloomy  darkness  of  repulsion,  but 
radiant  with  the  sunshine  of  invitation  :  not  sending  forth  lightnings  and  thunders 
to  alarm,  but  extending  the  olive-branch  of  peace ;  and  from  that  throne  of  grace 
are  heard  the  sweet  tones  of  mercy,  beseeching  sinners  to  be  reconciled  unto  God. 
Do  you  ask  where  you  are  to  come?  We  tell  you  that  wherever  is  found  apenitent 
and  contrite  heart,  broken  on  account  of  its  sins,  the  throne  of  grace  is  there; 
wherever  is  found  a  praying  soul,  the  throne  of  grace  is  there.  In  your  closets  ; 
when  you  offer  your  daily  sacrifice  of  prayer  and  praise  beneath  the  domestic  roof 
at  the  family  altar;  wLen  you  come  to  the  house  of  God  as  sincere  worshippers,  in 
the  hallowed  services  of  tbe  Church,  in  the  sacraments  of  Christ's  holy  institution, 
the  throne  of  grace  is  here !  And  to  this  throne  of  grace  you  are  ever  welcome. 
But  observe,  we  must  come  each  one  for  ourselves.  11.  How  wb  are  to  come. 
"Boldly."  Fear  not,  thou  trembling  soul;  give  despondency  to  the  winds. 
Is  your  heart  sincere  ?  Then  come  with  confidence  to  the  throne  of  grace, 
in.  Why  we  are  to  come.  "  That  we  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help 
in  time  of  need."  Your  only  sure  refuge  is  the  throne  of  grace.  Here  you  may 
find  at  all  times  the  seasonable  help  you  need,  a  balm  for  every  wound,  counsel 
for  every  difiiculty,  comfort  for  every  sorrow.  But  the  word  used  by  the  apostle 
has  even  a  deeper  signification  than  this.  It  means  help  rendered  in  answer  to 
a  call  for  assistance.  If  we  would  have  God's  help,  we  must  ask  Him  for  it  with 
importunate  earnestness,  as  those  who  feel  their  destitute  need.  (W,  J.  Brock,  B.A.) 
The  throne  of  grace : — I.  The  magnificent  object  to  which  our  attention  is 
directed.     II.  The  manner  of  approach   specified.      1.  With  liberty  of  access. 

2.  With  freedom  of  speech.  Need  not  be  overawed  by  the  greatness  of  the  Being 
we  address.     We  may  freely  and  fuUy  state  our  case,  and  make  known  our  need. 

3.  With  assurance  of  success.  Need  not  fear  a  repulse.  4.  With  frequency  of 
application.  Original  mercy-seat  could  only  be  approached  annually.  5.  We 
must  come  just  as  we  are.  No  ceremony  is  required.  Now  we  may  thus  come 
boldly,  because  (1)  This  is  the  way  expressly  laid  down.  (2)  Because  all  ancient 
saints  came  in  this  way.  (3)  God's  great  goodness  and  graciousness  should  induce 
us  thus  to  come.  (4)  The  intercession  of  Christ  for  us,  and  the  Spirit  within  us, 
should  encourage  us  thus  to  draw  near.  III.  The  great  ends  to  be  kept  iv 
VIEW  IN  ooMiNO  to  THE  THRONE  OF  GRACE.  1.  That  we  may  obtain  mercy. 
(1)  Mercy  to  pardon  our  guilt.  (2)  Sparing  mercy.  (3)  Daily  mercy.  2.  To  find 
grace  to  help  in  time  of  need.  Grace  includes  all  the  blessings  of  the  Divine 
favour.  All  we  need  for  body,  soul,  time,  and  eternity.  Grace  to  "  help  "  us. 
(1)  To  pray  and  serve  God.     (2)  To  labour  in  His  cause.     (3)  To  suffer  for  Hia 


CHAP.  IV.]  HEBREWS.  a?! 

Bake.  (4)  And  to  triumph  over  onr  foes.  Application :  1.  Learn  to  what  we 
come  in  prayer.  2.  How  we  should  come.  3.  What  we  should  seek — mercy,  &c. 
(J.  Burns,  D.D.)  The  throne  of  grace  {a  sermon  to  children) : — Suppose  you 
were  with  me  in  one  of  the  palaces  at  the  west  end  of  the  town — St.  James's 
Palace,  or  Buckingham  Palace.  We  ascend  in  Buckingham  Palace  a  noble  stair- 
case, as  white  as  snow,  made  of  white  marble.  Then  we  are  admitted  by  servants 
in  royal  livery  to  a  large  gallery ;  and  you  say,  "  What  a  beautiful  place  1  I  never 
saw  the  like  of  this  before.  Oh  I  what  lovely  pictures  1  Oh  I  what  wonderful 
chairs  and  tables,  sparkling  with  gold  I  "  Then  I  take  you  into  another  apartment, 
and  I  say,  "  What  is  that  in  the  upper  part  of  this  great  grand  room,  this  large 
gallery?  Do  you  see  it?"  "Oh!  yes,"  you  say;  "that  appears  to  me  to  be  a 
seat."  Tee,  it  is  a  seat ;  but  it  is  a  throne.  That  is  where  the  Queen  sits  some- 
times. That  is  Britain's  throne — the  most  wonderful  throne  on  the  face  of  the 
earth.  But  I  have  to  tell  you  of  a  throne  to-day,  the  like  of  which  was  never 
Been  by  mortal  eyes.  Angels  never  saw  it.  What  is  the  name  of  it?  "The 
throne  of  grace."  I.  The  throne.  1.  What  is  the  throne  of  grace?  The 
mercy  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  2.  Why  is  it  called  the  throne  of  grace? 
(1)  Grace  contrived  the  throne  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  2).  (2)  Grace  shines  upon  the  throne 
(Exod.  xxxiv.  6,  7).  (3)  Grace  is  given  from  the  throne.  Pardon.  Purity. 
Healing.  3.  The  excellencies  of  this  throne.  (1)  It  is  a  costly  throne.  (2)  It  is 
a  lovely  throne.  (3)  It  is  a  throne  of  great  height  (Psa.  ciiL  9).  (4)  It  is  a  throne 
near  at  hand.  (5)  It  is  a  free  throne.  II.  The  Einq  who  is  seated  on  this 
THRONE.  1.  King  of  grace.  2.  King  of  kings.  3.  King  of  glory.  III.  Oub  duty 
AND  PRFViLEOE  TO  COME  TO  THE  THKONB.  {A.  Fletcher,  D.D.)  Come  boldly  to 
the  throne  of  grace: — Gather  up  what  you  see  of  tenderness  and  great-heartedness 
aud  generousness  of  men,  and  imagine  them  to  be  grouped  into  the  character  of  a 
perfect  being,  and  put  it  in  the  sphere  of  almightiness,  and  give  it  the  sweep  of 
eternity,  and  call  it  God,  or  the  Son  of  God,  as  you  please;  and  then  you  have  a 
conception  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  standing  over  the  poor  in  this  world,  and 
saying  to  them,  in  a  voice  that  never  dies  till  the  last  human  soal  is  redeemed, 
"  Come  to  Me,  and  obtaia  help  in  time  of  need."  Well,  what  kind  of  help  ?  No 
matter  what  kind.  At  what  time  of  need  ?  At  any  time  of  need.  If  it  is  bodily 
ailment,  may  one  go  to  God  with  it  t  Certainly  ;  because  He  supplies  the  wants  of 
the  body.  If  you  have  domestic  trouble,  or  trouble  in  your  secular  affairs,  or  dis- 
positional trouble  in  its  lower  forms,  go  to  Him  with  it.  If  you  may  go  to  Him 
for  higher  things,  you  may  for  the  lower.  A  man  says,  "  Here  are  thousand  dollar 
bills;  take  as  many  as  you  please."  "But,"  say  I,  "there  are  hundreds,  and 
fifties,  and  tens,  and  fives,  and  ones ;  may  I  take  them  instead  of  the  thousands  ?  " 
If  he  says  I  may  have  the  thousands,  he  will  not  refuse  to  give  me  the  ones.  If 
he  gives  me  the  larger,  he  will  not  refuse  to  give  me  the  smaller.  Now,  God  has 
given  His  own  Son  to  us  ;  He  hath  given  Himself  to  us ;  He  has  made  overtures  of 
personal  friendship  to  us  ;  He  has  said,  •'  I  am  your  Father,  and  ye  are  My  sons  "  ; 
He  has  granted  us  the  blessing  of  direct  communion  with  Himself ;  and  since  He  has 
given  us  higher  and  larger  things,  is  there  anything  that  we  need,  all  the  way  down 
to  the  very  sandals  with  which  we  tread  the  earth,  that  He  will  not  give  us?  In 
praying  to  God  we  begin  by  saying,  "  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread  "  ;  but,  ah, 
there  are  different  sorts  of  bread.  There  is  one  kind  of  bread  for  the  body,  and 
God  will  give  that ;  but  there  is  also  another  kind  of  bread  for  the  mind — for  taste, 
and  benevolence,  and  conscience,  and  veneration,  and  love — and  He  will  give  that. 
God  Himself  is  the  bread  of  life  by  which  the  many  mouths  of  the  soul  are  sup- 
plied. He  gives  os  in  rich  abundance  all  the  things  that  we  need.  {H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Boldness  in  'prayer : — A  holy  boldness,  a  chastened  familiarity,  is 
the  true  spirit  of  right  prayer.  It  was  said  of  Luther  that,  when  he  prayed,  it 
was  with  as  much  reverence  as  if  he  were  praying  to  an  infinite  God,  and  with  as 
much  familiarity  as  if  he  were  speaking  to  his  nearest  friend.  (G.  S.  Bowes.) 
Unrestraint  in  prayer : — This  word  "  boldly  "  signifies  liberty  without  restraint.  You 
may  be  free,  for  you  are  welcome.  You  may  use  freedom  of  speech.  The  word  is 
60  used  (Acts  ii.  29 ;  iv.  13).  You  have  liberty  to  speak  your  minds  freely ;  to 
speak  all  your  heart,  your  ails,  and  wants,  and  fears,  and  grievances.  As  others 
may  not  fetter  you  in  speaking  to  God  by  prescribing  what  words  you  should  upe  ; 
so  you  need  not  restrain  yourselves,  but  freely  speak  all  that  your  conditioa 
requires.  (D.  Clarkson,  B.D.)  Fearlessness  in  prayer : — A  petitioner  once  ap- 
proached Augustus  with  so  much  fear  and  trembling  that  the  emperor  cried, 
*'  Wiiat,  man  1  do  you  think  you  are  giving  a  sop  to  an  elephant  ?  "     He  did  not 


379  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  m 

care  to  be  thought  a  hard  and  cruel  ruler.  When  men  pray  with  a  slavish  bon- 
dage  upon  them,  with  cold,  set  phrases,  and  a  crouching  solemnity,  the  free  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  may  well  rebuke  them.  Art  thou  coming  to  a  tyrant?  Holy  bold- 
ness, or  at  least  a  childlike  hope,  is  most  becoming  in  a  Christian.  Access  to  God 
in  prayer : — The  Aediles  among  the  Romans  had  their  doors  ahvays  standing  open, 
that  all  who  had  petitions  might  have  free  access  to  them.  The  door  of  htaven 
is  always  open  for  the  prayers  of  God's  people.  (T.  Watson.)  All  may  come : — 
"  Seeing  that  we  have  a  great  High  Priest  that  is  passed  into  the  heavens ;  let 
as  therefore  come  boldly  to  the  throne."  So  that  the  "  us"  of  our  text  is  just  aa 
broad  as  the  "  we"  in  the  fomteenth  verse.  Do  we  ask  how  broad  that  is?  We 
shall  soon  see.  The  reference  here  evidently  is  to  the  great  day  of  atonement, 
when  the  high  priest  entered  into  the  holy  place  with  the  blood  of  atonement. 
When  that  great  event  took  place,  whom  did  the  priest  represent  ?  The  priests, 
or  the  elders,  or  the  God-fearing  part  of  the  Israelites  ?  Certainly  not ;  but  every 
Jew.  There  wasn't  one  of  the  vast  multitude  but  could  say,  He  is  gone  in  as  my 
representative,  and  I  am  accepted  in  him.  Now  the  apostle  says  Christ  is  a  great 
High  Priest,  of  whom  the  other  was  but  the  type.  Whom,  then,  did  He  represent  ? 
The  answer  of  the  Book  is,  all  mankind.  If  you  want  to  measure  the  "  us " 
whom  Christ  represents,  you  can  easily  do  it  1  His  favourite  name  was  not,  "  I 
the  Jew,"  but  "I  the   Son  of  Man."    {G.Garrett.)  The  infinite  Friend  before 

the  throne  : — During  the  cotton  famine  I  went  to  many  a  man  in  need,  and  said, 
"  Why  don't  you  go  to  the  committee  and  get  what  you  require?"  and  the  reply 
was,  "  I  can't,  I  have  never  asked  for  help  in  my  life.  It  has  been  my  joy  to  give 
and  not  to  get.  If  I  were  to  try  to  speak  for  myself  I  should  be  choked ;  I  can't 
do  it,  I'll  starve  first."  And  I  have  said,  "  I  don't  want  yoa  to  speak ;  I  only  want 
you  to  come,  I  will  do  all  the  talking."  And  at  the  appointed  time  he  has  come 
and  I  have  said,  "  This  is  the  person  of  whom  I  spoke " ;  and  they  at  once 
relieved  his  wants,  and  sent  him  home  rejoicing.  And  so,  poor  sinner,  it  shall  be 
with  thee.  Thou  art  saying,  "  I  am  such  a  guilty  wretch.  My  sins  have  been  so 
many,  and  so  aggravated  that  I  dare  not  speak  to  God  "  ;  and  I  point  to  One  who 
"  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  "  for  thee,  and  who  is  waiting  this  moment  to 
plead  for  thee.  {Ibid.)  Whither  hivited  : — It  is  not  to  the  throne  of  judgment, 
but  the  throne  of  grace.  When  the  cotton  famine  visited  Lancashire,  and  the 
generosity  of  the  people  of  this  land  was  shown  as  it  never  had  been  shown  before, 
and  the  railways  were  burdened  with  the  generous  gifts  of  all  classes,  we  didn't 
leave  these  treasures  in  the  streets  for  any  passer-by  to  take.  Large  warehouses 
were  procured,  and  committees  appointed  to  see  that  they  were  given  to  the  proper 
persons.  Now,  suppose  I  had  gone  into  the  street  at  Preston,  and  met  a  poor 
operative  looking  thin,  and  poorly  clad,  and  had  asked  bim  if  he  was  out  of  work, 
and  he  had  replied,  "  Yes,  sir ;  and  have  been  for  two  years."  I  say,  "  Then  I 
suppose  your  resources  are  exhausted,  and  you  can  hardly  find  food  for  your 
family  ?  "  He  answers,  "  No  ;  I  have  neither  clothes  nor  food  for  myself  or  them, 
and  I  don't  know  what  to  do."  I  say,  ''Why  don't  you  go  to  the  depot  and  get 
what  you  want?  There  is  abundance  there."  He  says,  "Ah  I  but,  sir,  I  haven't 
a  farthing  left."  I  answer,  "I  know  it ;  and  if  you  had,  there  are  a  hundred  shops 
in  Preston  that  would  be  glad  to  see  you ;  but  this  is  a  place  opened  for  those 
who  have  no  money,  and  there  is  nobody  in  the  world  more  welcome  to  the 
treasures  there  than  yourself."  And  so  with  thee,  poor  sinner.  This  place  is  opened 
on  pux^pose  for  thee.     {Ibid.)         The  transcendent  worth  of  pardon : — Go  to-night 

to  poor  E who  lies  under  sentence  of  death.     Enter  his  cell,  and  tell  him  yoa 

have  brought  him  good  news.  How  eagerly  he  turns  to  you  and  asks,  "  What  ?  " 
You  reply,  "  Baron  Rothschild  is  dead,  and  has  left  you  heir  to  all  his  vast 
wealth."  Oh,  with  what  disappointment  he  turns  away  I  You  tell  him  that  in 
addition  to  this  you  are  come  to  give  him  the  highest  of  earth's  honours.  He  heeds 
you  not.  He  says,  "  What  is  all  this  to  me,  when  I  have  to  die  on  Thursday  ?  " 
You  say,  "  Man,  do  you  turn  away  from  boundless  wealth,  from  broad  acres,  from 
glittering  gems  and  jewels  ?  What  do  you  want  ?  "  And  with  eager,  bloodshot  eyes, 
he  turns  to  yon,  and  hisses  from  his  clenched  teeth,  "Pardon!  Give  me  that  and 
I'll  bless  you  :  without  that,  all  the  rest  is  but  mockery."  {Ibid.)  Appeal  for 
mercy : — A  woman  arraigned  before  Alexander  the  Great,  and  coademned,  said, 
"  I  appeal  from  thee,  0  king  1  "  Alexander  said,  "  Thou  art  a  mad  woman  I  Dost 
thou  not  know  that  every  appeal  is  from  a  lower  judge  to  a  higher  ?  But  who  is 
above  me?"  She  answered,  "I  know  thee  to  be  above  thy  laws,  and  that  thou 
Jaaayest  give  pardon ;  and  therefore  I  appeal  from  justice  to  mercy,  imd  for  my 


CHAP.  IT.]  HEBREWS.  879 

faults  crave  pardon."  So  mast  sinners  do.  (Cawdray.)  Encouragement  to 
come  boldly : — When  our  prince  brought  his  fair  bride  to  England,  they  arrived  at 
Portsmouth  too  late  in  the  evening  to  land.  Her  heart  was  throbbing  with  many 
bewildering  emotions.  What  would  be  the  reception  she  should  have  ?  Would 
her  husband's  people  welcome  a  stranger?  and  a  host  of  other  questions.  As  she 
couldn't  sleep,  she  went  out  on  the  deck  of  the  vessel  she  was  in ;  and  turning  her 
eyes  towards  the  shore,  saw  at  every  masthead  in  letters  of  light,  "  Welcome  I 
Welcome  to  Alexandra  !  Welcome  to  our  princess  1  "  And  who  can  wonder  that, 
as  she  looked  her  fears  fled  away,  and  her  eyes  filled  with  tears  of  joy.  There  waa 
no  room  for  a  single  doubt  as  to  the  character  of  her  reception.  And  so  with  thee, 
poor  sinner.  Bowed  down  under  a  sense  of  thy  enormous  guilt,  thou  art  afraid 
to  lift  thy  eyes  towards  heaven,  or  to  think  of  God.  But  I  bring  thee  glad  tidings  of 
great  joy.  There  is  mercy  for  thee.  God  invites  thee  to  His  throne.  Lift  thy 
eyes,  and  where  thou  didst  expect  to  see  the  blackness  of  darkness,  thou  sbalt 
see  a  thousand  stars  of  promise  cheering  thee  on.  Look  1  There  is  one,  "  Come." 
There  is  another,  "  Whosoever."  There  is  another,  "  Nowise."  See  how  they 
come  out,  like  stars  at  eventide,  brighter  and  yet  brighter,  and  every  one  has  a 
message  of  mercy  for  thee.  (C  Garrett.)  The  throne  of  grace : — When  God 
enacts  laws,  He  is  on  a  throne  of  legislation :  when  He  administers  these  laws, 
He  is  on  a  throne  of  government:  when  He  tries  His  creatures  by  these  laws. 
He  is  on  a  throne  of  judgment:  but  when  He  receives  petitions,  and  dispenses 
favours.  He  is  on  a  throne  of  grace.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  distinction  between 
mercy  and  grace: — The  distinction  between  the  two  words  "  mercy"  and  "  grace," 
in  the  place  before  us,  seems  to  consist  in  this — that  the  former  describes  the 
emotion  of  kindness  and  compassion  with  which  the  application  for  assistance  is 
met,  while  the  latter  describes  the  actual  communications  of  celestial  influence 
with  which,  in  answer  to  prayer,  He  replenishes  the  soul  for  the  time  of  need — 
a  distinction  with  which  the  original  terms  are  very  consistent,  and  which  seems 
farther  countenanced  by  the  different  verbs  with  which  they  are  conjoined  in  the 
expressions,  "  find  mer«y,"  and  •'  obtain  grace."  In  the  hour  of  your  necessity, 
therefore,  yon  are  here  assured  that,  on  making  dub  application,  you  shall  be 
received  with  paternal  pity  and  regard,  nor  merely  with  compassion  and  regard — a 
compassion  that  may  soothe  but  cannot  help — a  regard  that  is  the  source  more  of 
sentimental  refreshment  than  of  practical  and  availing  strength,  but  also  with  the 
promptest  and  most  benignant  readiness  to  open  to  you  all  the  treasures  of  His 
grace — to  pour  out  upon  you  all  the  sevenfold  graces  of  His  Almighty  Spirit — to 
"  lift  up  the  hands  which  hang  down,  and  to  confirm  the  feeble  knees  " — that  "  as 
your  day  is,  so  your  strength "  may  be,  and  that,  when  called  to  glorify  Him, 
and  vindicate  your  Christian  profession,  whether  by  the  resistance  of  temptation, 
or  the  conquest  of  diflBculty,  or  the  endurance  of  affliction,  or  the  defeat  of  "  the 
last  enemy,"  His  grace  may  be  sufficient  for  you.  His  strength  may  be  perfected  in 
your  weakness,  and  over  all  temptations,  difficulties,  affiictions,  deaths,  ye  may 
be  made  "  more  than  conquerors  through  Hin  that  loved  "  you.  {J.  B.  Patterson, 
M.A.)  First  mercy,  then  grace: — Obtaining  merey  comes  first;  then  finding 
grace  to  help  in  time  of  need.  You  cannot  reverse  God's  order.  You  will  not  find 
grace  to  help  in  time  of  need  till  you  have  sought  and  found  mercy  to  save.  You 
have  no  right  to  reckon  on  God's  help  and  protection  and  guidance,  and  all 
the  other  splendid  privileges  which  He  promises  to  "  the  children  of  God  by 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ,"  until  you  have  this  first  blessing,  the  mercy  of  God  in 
Christ  Jesus ;  for  it  is  "  in  "  Jesus  Christ  that  all  the  promises  of  God  are  Yea 
and  Amen.  {F.  R.  Haver  gal.)  Help  in  time  of  need. — Help  in  time  of  need: — 
The  other  day,  during  the  fierce  storm  which  raged  on  the  west  coast  of  England, 
I  saw  a  schooner  driven  on  the  sands  near  Waterloo,  la  a  short  time,  a  steam- 
tug  came  to  her  assistance ;  but  the  heavily-laden  ship  was  fast  in  the  sand-bank, 
and  it  was  found  impossible  to  drag  her  into  deeper  water.  They  waited  a  few 
hours  until  the  tide  came  in,  and,  then,  when  the  deeper  water  about  the 
schooner  had  lifted  a  portion  of  her  hull  from  the  bank,  the  steam-tug  again 
came  near,  and  the  ship  was  towed  into  the  safe  water  of  the  channel  to  Liver- 
pool. Like  the  schooner,  which  had  drifted  on  the  sand-bank,  many  of  us  have 
drifted  in  the  storms  of  life  on  the  sands  of  trouble,  where  we  have  lain  helpless. 
At  such  times,  friends  may  have  drawn  near  to  try  to  bring  us  back  to  our  old 
power  peace  and  hope ;  but  we  were  too  firmly  held  by  our  trouble  for  any  human 
being  to  help  us.  It  was  only  when  the  tide  of  God's  love  came  flowing  into  our  heart 
that  there  was  any  chance  of  cheering  away  our  despair.     Until  we  felt  His  love 


880  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ifi 

Bbed  abroad  in  our  heart,  it  was  impossible  for  anybody  to  lift  ns  from  the  miry 
clay  of  our  despair.  We  were  like  the  heavily-laden  ship  on  the  sand-bank;  we 
had  to  wait  for  the  flowing  of  God's  love ;  and  when  that  came,  we  were  lifted 
from  the  grip  which  held  us.  When,  like  the  overflowing  tide,  the  Lord  moves 
in  and  about  us,  giving  our  heavily-laden  heart  the  support  and  comfort  of  His 
love,  the  grasp  of  the  hand  and  the  cheering  words  of  a  friend  are  then  powerful 
to  help  us.  If,  therefore,  this  be  your  time  of  need,  I  pray  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
may  first  fill  your  heart  with  His  presence.  The  text  clearly  reveals  that  our  God 
is  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities.  Like  a  leaf  in  autumn,  blown  hither 
and  tbither  at  the  mercy  of  the  wind,  so  there  are  times  when  a  storm  of  sorrow 
separates  us  from  the  branch  on  which  we  flourish,  and  we  become  the  sport  of 
fear  and  unbelief.  The  text  shows  that  the  weary  soul,  which  is  like  that  helpless 
leaf,  may  find  help  at  the  throne  of  grace.  As  a  shuttle-cock,  in  the  midst  of  a 
crowd  of  children,  is  continually  knocked  into  the  air,  never  resting  a  moment 
except  when  it  turns  to  fall,  so  there  are  many  who  are  continually  buffeted  by 
adversity.  The  failure  of  their  hope  gives  them  a  blow,  sickness  another,  bereave- 
ment strikes  hard,  and  the  vicissitudes  of  an  up-hill  hfe  worry  them  when  they 
would  rest.  Is  your  soul  one  that  suffers  like  that  toy  ?  If  so,  the  text  shows 
that  God  is  touched  with  your  griefs,  and  that  He  wishes  to  give  you  grace  to  help 
in  your  time  of  need.  I  happened  to  be  walking  along  a  country  lane,  near  Dun- 
ham, and  stopped  to  rest  on  the  bank  of  the  hedge,  when  a  bird,  with  a  scream 
of  fear,  flew  from  above  my  head.  Feehng  sure  that  its  nest  must  be  in  the 
hedge  behind  me,  I  hoped  the  poor  bird  would  soon  return,  and  sat  still  watching 
for  it.  In  a  few  minutes  the  bird  flew  towards  a  tree  opposite  to  me,  when  my 
dog  made  a  bound  after  it.  I  called  him  back,  and  held  him  securely  by  his 
neck.  I  suppose  the  bird  saw  that  I  was  friendly,  for  in  another  minute  it  came 
nearer,  and  perched  on  the  hedge  in  front  of  me.  In  a  short  time,  it  flew  towards 
me,  but  at  the  same  instant  turned  back  to  the  hedge.  Though  it  yearned  to 
return  to  its  little  ones  in  the  nest,  yet,  no  doubt,  its  heaii;  beat  with  fear  ;  because 
it  might  not  be  certain  that  I  was  a  friend ;  and  then,  though  I  held  the  dog,  his 
sharp  eyes  kept  up  a  keen  look  on  that  sweet  bird,  and  it  may  have  thought,  "  If 
I  go  nearer,  the  dog  may  pounce  on  me  I "  While  I  watched,  I  wished  heartily 
for  power  to  speak  to  the  bird,  to  tell  it  that  I  would  not  allow  the  dog  to  stir  an 
inch  to  injure  it.  The  dog  might  look,  but  it  sbould  not  harm.  Perhaps  the  bird 
saw  what  I  meant,  for  growing  more  bold,  it  flew  over  my  head  into  the  hedge 
behind  me  ;  and  while  I  held  the  dog  with  a  firmer  grasp,  it  made  tbe  water  come 
into  my  eyes,  to  think  how  our  heavenly  Father  held  trouble  from  hurting  the 
souls  of  His  people.  Like  the  bird,  we  are  often  afraid,  and  with  good  reason  too  ; 
but  everything  that  can  hurt  us  is  held  in  the  firm  grasp  of  our  God.  I  remember 
standing  on  the  pier-head  at  Douglas,  Isle  of  Man,  when  I  saw  an  old  friend  of 
mine,  who  appeared  very  miserable.  As  the  sun  shone  brightly,  and  there  was 
sufficient  wind  to  make  the  waves  leap  up  and  dash  against  the  pier,  sending 
golden  spray  in  our  faces,  I  thought  everybody  ought  to  be  glad  ;  and  clapping 
my  friend  on  the  back  exclaimel,  "  What  is  to  do?  Why,  you  look  as  if  you 
were  going  to  drown  yourself  ! "  He  replied,  "  You  would  not  be  so  cheerful  if 
you  had  my  troubles.  See ;  you  observe  that  cork,  there,  which  is  being  pitched 
about  by  the  waves  1  Well,  I  am  like  that  cork."  To  his  surprise,  I  laughed  and 
exclaimed,  "Well;  I  am  very  glad  to  hear  that  you  are  hke  that  cork  1 "  He 
turned  on  me  a  look  of  reproach,  as  if  I  were  mocking  him.  I  said  again,  "It  is 
true ;  I  am  very  glad  you  are  like  that  cork !  "  Then,  with  an  injured  air  he 
turned,  saying,  "  Why  are  you  glad?  "  I  replied,  "  Just  because  the  cork  does  not 
sink !  It  is  true  that  the  waves  knock  it  about ;  but,  see,  it  does  not  sink !  " 
Then,  he  grasped  my  hand  saying,  "  Thank  God,  though  I  am  in  a  terrible  mess, 
yet,  like  that  cork,  I  Lave  not  been  allowed  to  sink !  "  Do  not  get  down-hearted ; 
and  though  the  future  may  appear  black,  do  not  let  despair  enter  your  soul.  A 
doctor  once  said  to  me,  "  I  am  so  nervous  as  to  be  much  afraid  when  my  coach- 
man is  driving  me  through  the  streets,  and  often  shut  my  eyes  or  try  to  read  the 
newspaper,  to  hide  what  is  in  front  from  my  view,"  The  doctor  added,  "  I  know 
it  is  foolish ;  for  my  man  is  a  most  careful  driver,  and  I  ought  to  feel  safe  ;  but 
it  is  my  weak  nerves  !  "  Perhaps  your  spiritual  nerves  are  unstrung,  and  you  are 
afraid  of  a  something  happening,  which  will  hurt  you.  If  so,  you  need  help  from 
the  throne  of  grace  in  this  your  time  of  need.  Come  boldly  ;  for  God  is  touched 
with  your  fear  and  anxiety,  and  He  can  help  you.  The  text  tells  us  that  Christ 
is  our  High  Priest.    The  high  priest  of  the  Jews  was  an  official   persorvage,  who 


CHAP.  IT.]  HEBREWS.  881 

prayed  for  them  on  the  annual  day  of  atonement,  and  appeared  on  their  behalf 
before  God.  He  did  this  officially,  and  may  not  have  felt  extreme  sorrow  on 
account  of  the  sins  of  the  people,  as  if  those  sins  had  been  his  own.  He  did  it  as 
an  oHicial  act.  But  when  Jesus  Christ,  the  High  Priest  of  humanity,  made  atone- 
ment for  our  sins,  He  felt  the  sorrow  of  the  agony  of  death.  You  may  engage 
counsel  to  take  up  the  case  of  a  friend  of  yours  who  is  to  be  tried  for  his  life ;  and 
he  may  do  it  officially  without  throwing  his  heart  into  the  case;  but  if  the 
barrister  look  upon  the  prisoner  and  see  him  with  a  face  of  agony ;  if  he  notice 
tears  of  sorrow  and  shame  trickle  down  his  cheeks ;  if  he  see  his  body  trembling 
in  the  agitation  of  terror,  the  advocate  shall  be  touched  with  sympathy  with  the 
prisoner,  and  will  plead  as  if  his  own  life  depended  on  his  efforts.  Likewise, 
Jesus  was  so  touched  with  the  feeling  in  Himself  of  the  sins,  sorrows,  and  afflic- 
tions of  mankind,  that  when  He  represented  them  on  the  Cross  of  Calvary,  Hia 
heart  broke  !  Can  you  keep  at  a  distance  from  such  a  God  ?  The  other  night 
I  sheltered  from  the  rain  for  a  few  minutes  in  a  doorway.  A  little  bare-footed  girl 
came  up,  and  seating  herself  on  the  doorstep  began  to  cry.  I  thought  she  had 
been  sent  there  to  raise  my  compassion,  but  found  afterwards  that  this  was  not  the 
case.  Soou  a  hulking  boy  came  up,  saying,  "Polly,  what's  up?"  The  little  girl 
replied,  "I  can't  sell  my  papers — I  haven't  sold  one!"  The  boy  bent  down  upon 
her ;  I  could  barely  see  his  face,  but,  from  the  gentleness  of  his  words,  fancied  his 
look  must  have  expressed  much  sympathy.  He  said — "  Here ;  give  me  thy 
papers;  I'll  sell  'em  for  thee!"  Then  he  drew  them  from  the  girl,  and  the  lad 
went  up  and  down  otfering  them  for  sale.  I  suppose  I  could  not  have  been  there 
more  than  three  or  four  minutes  before  he  came  running  with  five  pence  for  the 
papers,  saying,  "  Here,  one  of  'em  gave  me  a  threepenny  bit,  and  thou  sbalt  have 
it  1  "  Poor  little  lass  I  She  was  faint-hearted  because  of  the  rain ;  and  as  she 
had  not  the  courage  to  go  up  to  people  to  offer  them  papers,  she  sat  there  with 
her  little  heart  breaking,  until  the  noble  lad  came  forward  to  help  her.  He  was 
touched  with  the  feeling  of  her  helplessness,  and  did  what  he  could  to  cheer  her. 
Likewise,  Jesus  is  touched  with  jour  disappointment,  and  does  all  that  He  can  to 
help  you.  He  comes  to  you  saying,  "  Be  of  good  cheer ;  I  am  with  you ;  don't 
be  downhearted  I  I  vrill  give  you  patience  to  bear  it,  and  courage  to  overcome  it." 
About  six  or  seven  years  ago  an  Indian  prince  was  riding  in  a  carnage  in  the 
streets  of  London,  when  he  saw  a  ragged  Indian  standing  at  the  kerbstone  with  a 
brush  in  his  hand :  he  was  a  orossiug-sweeper.  The  prince  immediately  ordered 
the  carriage  to  stop,  and  then  beckoned  to  the  man.  Finding  that  he  was  of  his  own 
country,  the  prince  opened  the  door  of  the  carriage  saying,  "  My  countryman,  come 
up."  The  ragged  Indian  thought  he  most  be  in  a  dream  and  stood  back  ;  but  the 
prince  said,  "  Come,  come  up  to  me,  my  countryman  "  ;  and  the  poor  fellow  then 
sat  beside  the  prince,  and  was  taken  into  his  service.  The  prince  was  "  touched  " 
when  he  saw  his  poor  countryman  standing  in  his  rags,  and  helped  him.  Jesus  in 
the  Prince  of  troubled  souls,  and  every  man  is  bone  of  His  bone  and  flesh  of 
His  flesh.  He  is  touched  with  your  friendlessness  and  sorrow.  When  you  were 
on  a  steamboat,  and  a  child  fell  overboard,  did  yon  net  wring  your  hands  in  an 
agony  ?  What  did  yon  say  ?  Why,  you  exclaimed,  "  Oh,  that  I  could  swim,  that 
I  might  leap  in  and  rescue  the  drowning  child  I  "  And  when  a  brave  sailor 
leaped  into  the  sea  and  saved  the  child,  did  you  not  weep  and  shout  for  joy  ? 
Perhaps,  now,  you  may  be  drowning  in  the  depths  of  sin,  you  may  be  suffering  in 
the  floods  of  sorrow,  or  may  be  overwhelmed  by  an  ocean  of  trouble  ;  but  Jesus  is 
touched.  Like  a  man  who  cannot  swim,  I  may  feel  for,  though  I  cannot 
help  you ;  but  Jesus  not  only  feels  for  you,  but  He  is  like  the  brave 
sailor  who  leaps  into  the  depths  to  save  you.  {W.  Birch.)  The  reality 
and  the  symbol : — I  think  it  may  be  demonstrated  from  human  experience 
that  the  human  race  can  never  ascend  toward  civilisation,  and  that  it  can 
still  less  ascend  toward  the  higher  ranges  of  civilisation,  which  include  moral 
and  spiritual  development,  without  the  real  or  fancied  help  of  a  superior  intelli- 
gence in  the  invisible  world.  What  we  need  is  a  priest,  and  a  high  priest,  that  is 
sensibly,  intimately  affected  and  concerned  with  our — what  ?  virtues  ?  dignities  ? 
attainments  ?  No,  with  our  "  infirmities."  Our  virtues,  dignities,  and  attain- 
ments, such  as  they  are,  get  along  very  well ;  but  our  infirmities  and  transgressions 
need  succour.  We  need  a  God  whose  attributes  and  dispositions  lead  Him  to  be 
helpful  just  at  the  time  of  our  need — not  a  God  that  simply  acts  according  to  His 
own  will  abstractly,  as  He  is  represented  to  do,  thinking  of  things  according  to  His 
pleasure  as  it  is  said  in  the  old  formulas.    To  be  a  good  teacher,  one  must  come 


882  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  w. 

down  to  the  level  of  the  scholar,  and  know  his  difficulties.  He  must  adapt  hit 
training  to  the  hardness  of  the  task  and  the  limitations  of  the  faculties  of  the 
Bcholar.  And  what,  we  need  is  the  conception  of  a  God  who  is  personal  in  the 
Bame  sense  in  which  our  father  and  our  mother  were  personal  to  us — namely,  iu 
adapting  themselves  to  our  want,  that  by  and  by  we  might  be  raised  up  to  them, 
conforming  to  the  universal  law  of  education.  There  are  great  difficulties  in  this 
conception,  and  there  are  some  hindrances  to  it.  It  is  intrinsically  a  thing  of  not 
a  little  perplexity  for  men  to  form  a  definite  idea  of  invisible  spiritual  existence. 
We  do  it  by  transferring,  through  the  influence  of  the  imagination  and  the  reason, 
the  familiar  facts  of  our  mental  experience  to  the  Being  whom  we  call  God.  There 
are  two  great  difficulties  in  this  matter.  Que  is,  that  we  have  been  trained  80 
largely  to  use  our  senses  that  when  we  undertake  to  move  in  the  higher  realm  of 
life  we  find  it  hard  to  fashion  ideas  that  are  not  sensuous — that  are  impalpable  and 
immeasurable.  The  other  is,  that  goodness  and  fineness  in  us  are  so  small, 
that  magnanimity  in  us  is  so  difficult  to  be  distinguished  from  minanimity,  that 
we  are  so  little  sensitive  to  the  various  excellences  of  moral  character,  that  Ufe 
requires  knives  with  such  a  hard  and  cutting  edge,  and  that  our  training  is  such 
that  we  are  not  apt  to  have  the  material  out  of  which  to  create  our  God,  unless  we 
return  to  the  mother,  the  father,  the  brother  and  the  sister  in  our  own  households. 
It  is  mainly  to  expound  these  difficulties  that  I  have  selected  this  subject.  I  shall 
find  it  difficult  to  make  a  Btatement  of  the  matter  which  shall  not  lead  to  miscon- 
ception, but  I  shall  not  on  that  account  any  the  less  endeavour  to  state  it.  First, 
there  has  been  an  unfortunate  substitute  for  a  personal  God  of  theologic  ideas  which 
just  as  effectually  takes  away  personality  from  Him  in  the  conceptions  of  men  as 
pantheistic  doctrines.  The  use  of  symbols  has  been  such,  they  have  been  so 
unwisely  or  ignorantly  employed,  that  they  have  led  people  into  substantial  idola- 
try. In  books  and  sermons  and  exhortations  innumerable  men  are  urged  to 
•«  come  to  the  Cross  " ;  to  "  hold  on  to  the  Cross  "  ;  "  to  forget  not  the  Cross,"  to 
*•  weep  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross."  "What  idolatry  1  Is  there  no  Jesus  Christ  that 
is  a  Uving  God  ?  Do  we  now,  after  two  thousand  years,  need  to  have  Him  inter- 
preted by  a  symbol  of  two  thousand  years  ago  ?  Is  not  the  thing  signified  a 
hundred  times  more  desirable  than  any  symbol  of  it?  In  ancient  times,  right  under 
the  eaves  of  the  crucifixion,  it  had  a  function  that  cannot  be  overestimated  ;  but  it 
has  performed  that  function ;  and  by  the  use  of  the  Cross  men  interpret  to  the 
world  the  thing  that  it  was  set  to  interpret :  and  I  say  that  to  attempt  to  represent 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  any  longer  by  that  symbol  is  unwise  in  the  preacher,  and 
bewildering  and  misleading  to  the  hearer.  Instead  of  bringing  us  to  a  personal 
God,  a  present  Help  in  time  of  need,  it  hinders  our  access  to  Him,  and  we  find  our- 
selves wandering  on  Calvary  when  we  have  a  living  Saviour  in  the  New  Jerusalem. 
Another  thing  that  hinders  the  access  of  men  to  a  living,  personal  God  is  the  pre- 
sentation that  is  continually  made  of  the  atonement  of  Christ.  I  do  not  under- 
take to  rail  at  the  doctrine  of  the  atonement,  nor  to  say  that  it  is  an  unnecessary 
doctrine;  but  I  resist  vehemently  the  substitution  of  a  "plan  of  salvation,"  as  it 
is  sometimes  called,  or  the  term  "atonement,"  for  the  phrase,  "the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ " — for,  really,  in  preaching,  men  are  urged  to  accept  Christ's  atonement, 
instead  of  accepting  Christ.  They  are  asked  to  be  saved  through  the  atonement, 
instead  of  being  asked  to  be  saved  by  the  loving  power  and  loving  influence  of 
Christ.  What  the  sick  man  wants  to  know  is,  not  how  the  pill  which  he  takes  was 
compounded,  but  whether,  taking  it,  the  chills  and  fever  will  stop.  If  they  do,  he 
does  not  care  what  is  in  it ;  and  if  they  do  not,  he  does  not  care  what  is  in  it. 
What  mankind  want  is  salvation ;  and  it  is  brought  to  them  through  the  presenta- 
tion of  Jesus  Christ,  who  attempts  to  save  them,  not  by  buoying  them  up  by  a 
system  of  physical  laws  and  mechanical  observances,  or  by  abstract  conceptions  of 
right  and  duty,  but  by  bringing  them  on  to  a  new  ground  of  personal  liberty.  The 
Lord  stands  to  you  and  to  me  as  a  living  Saviour.  He  is  your  personal  Saviour  and 
my  personal  Saviour  ;  He  is  your  Kedeemer  and  my  Bedeemer ;  He  is  your  Brother 
and  my  Brother.  I  do  not  come  to  Him  any  longer  through  the  atonement ;  that 
is  His  look-out.  I  do  not  come  to  Him  by  the  way  of  the  Cross  ;  that  is  history's 
business.  I  come  directly  to  Him.  I  come  to  Him  because  every  throb  of  my 
nature  tells  me  that  I  need  elevation  and  spiritualisation,  and  because  I  have  faith 
that  these  are  to  be  found  in  Him.  I  come  to  Him  because  I  am  impelled  to  by 
the  whole  volume  of  my  wants.  I  come  to  Him  because  I  am  drawn  toward  Him 
by  all  the  ardour  of  my  confidence  and  love.  There  is  one  more  point  which  ia 
even  more  exceptionable.    I  refer  to  the  use  of  blood.    There  vras  a  time  when  thai 


CHAP.  XV. J  HEBREWS.  t83 

symbol  was  needed.  In  the  Old  Testament  dispensation  blood  waa  significant  of 
moral  qualities.  But  what  possible  use,  in  modern  association,  has  blood  ?  Here 
and  there  a  man  sheds  his  blood  for  his  country,  in  which  case  blood  represents  his 
willingness  to  sacrifice  himself  for  his  country.  It  may  be  necessary  under  certain 
circumstances  to  take  blood  as  an  emblem  of  self-denial,  heroism  and  suffering  as 
they  exist  in  God,  in  order  to  give  a  conception  of  them  to  low-minded  people  ;  but 
when  it  has  been  employed  for  a  certain  time,  and  these  conceptions  have  been 
involved  and  enfolded  to  a  given  point,  they  become  stronger  than  the  symbol:  and 
the  symbol,  instead  of  benefiting  them,  stands  in  their  way,  and  constantly  tends 
to  draw  them  back  from  the  spiritual  truth  to  the  carnal  representation  of  it.  If 
these  criticisims  are  valid,  the  question  naturally  comes  back,  How  would  you  pro- 
ceed ?  What  would  you  do  ?  In  the  first  place,  I  will  say  that  I  do  not  believe  you 
could  collect  an  audience  so  ignorant  and  degraded  as  to  be  incompetent  to  under- 
stand the  revelation  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  as  a  personal  Saviour.  The  thing 
itself  is  simpler  than  any  figure  by  which  you  can  represent  it.  And  the  great  want 
of  the  Church  to-day,  it  seems  to  me,  is  such  a  presentation  of  Christ  to  men  as 
that  every  man  and  every  woman  shall  feel  that  they  have  a  living  Friend  in  heaven 
who  thinks  of  them,  who  knows  them  by  name,  and  who  understands  their  birth, 
their  parentage,  their  education,  their  liabilities,  the  various  influences  which  operate 
upon  them,  but  which  they  are  not  responsible  for,  their  culture,  their  surroundings, 
everything  that  belongs  to  them ;  that  they  have  a  Brother  who  has  gone  there  to  take 
all  power  into  His  hands  and  exercise  it  in  their  behalf.  What  every  person  needs  is 
the  sense  of  a  living  Jesus  Christ,  to  whom  in  trial  or  in  want  he  can  turn  and  be 
conscious  that  He  hears,  and  is  present  to  help.  In  time  of  need,  when  your 
expectations  are  disappointed,  when  your  plans  are  broken  up,  when  your  life  seems 
a  wreck,  and  when  despair  has  taken  possession  of  you,  and  you  know  not  which 
way  to  turn  for  succour — then  you  need  to  have  a  faith  that  there  is  One  in  heaven 
who  knows  you,  who  loves  you,  and  who  will  stand  by  you,  and  will  stand  by  you 
to  the  end,  whatever  may  befall  you.  Such  a  Saviour  you  have  in  Christ  Jesus  ; 
and  nothing  shall  separate  you  from  His  love.  And  he  who  has  such  a  Saviour  as 
that  need  not  ask  philosophers  anything.  He  will  have  written  in  his  own  soul  the 
philosophy  of  his  own  experience ;  and  buoyed  up  by  the  joy  and  gladness  which 
are  ministered  to  him,  he  will  have  the  wherewith  to  draw  other  men  upward, 
saying,  "  This  has  Christ  been  to  me,  and  this  will  Christ  be  to  you  if  you  will 
accept  Him."  I  beseech  of  you  now — and  above  all  in  times  of  depression  and 
trouble — see  to  it  that  you  have  a  hold  upon  the  living  Christ:  not  upon  a  doctrine, 
not  upon  a  symbol,  but  upon  a  Person,  throbbing,  vital,  near,  and  overflowing  with 
generous  love.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Times  of  need :  — If  God  is  a  merciful  High  Priest 
to  all,  in  all  circumstances,  and  according  to  the  law  of  humanity,  then  He  must 
needs  have  sympathy  aud  tender  regard  for  man,  not  in  those  sufferings  alone  which 
are  brought  upon  them  without  their  own  fault,  but  in  that  vast  flow  of  daily  f oUiea, 
and  sins,  and  prejudices,  and  stumblings,  and  slidings,  that  go  to  make  up  human 
life.  Divine  sympathy  for  mere  misfortune  we  have,  and  it  is  a  great  mercy  ;  and 
if  there  were  no  other  s}  mpathy  than  that,  it  would  still  be  a  great  mercy  ;  but  it 
would  go  only  a  little  way  towards  alleviating  human  suffering.  The  want  of  the 
hsart  does  not  lie  chiefly  in  the  things  that  are  brought  upon  us  without  any 
agency  of  our  own.  Hence,  sympathy,  to  be  eflicacious,  and  to  meet  the  wants  of 
human  life,  must  take  man  in  his  sinful  nature,  and  in  his  actual  experience. 
That  which  Christ  came  to  do  was  to  seek  and  to  save  the  lost ;  not  those  simply 
that  were  lost  by  others'  fault,  but  those  that  were  lost  by  their  own  fault.  God  in 
Christ  is  a  Father  with  plenary  paternal  attributes  rfnd  feelings.  Consider  what  a 
parent — a  being  infinitely  lower,  less  sensitive,  and  less  capable  of  moral  greatness 
— will  do  for  a  child.  How  much  he  will  bear  1  how  much  he  will  forget  I  how 
much  he  will  forgive  1  And  shall  God  be  thought  to  be  less  than  a  man?  Shall 
He  who  is  greater  than  man  in  the  direction  of  goodness,  of  patience,  of  glorious 
lovingkindness,  be  capable  of  less  forbearance  towards  His  children  than  an  earthly 
father  manifests  towards  his  ?  God's  tender  thought,  and  His  compassionate  sym- 
pathy, are  a  refuge  into  which  every  man  may  run— and  then  most  when  most  he 
needs  some  refuge  and  some  strength.  Let  us  select  a  few  occasions  that  shall 
bring  us  to  God.  In  general,  it  may  be  said  that  all  emergencies  in  which  the 
heart  can  find  no  rest  and  comfort  in  the  use  of  the  ordinary  instruments  of  conso- 
lation are  among  those  occasions.  There  are  times  of  great  physical  suffering,  in 
which  men  are  justified  in  appropriating  this  promise  and  this  exhortation,  and 
going  directly  for  help  to  God.     There  is  a  cold  physical  philosophy,  a  stoical 


384  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  iw 

indifference,  or  stoical  strength,  upon  which  one  may  lean  in  suffering ;  but  thia 
is  not  to  be  compared  with  that  glowing  faith  which  one  may  have,  that  God, 
although  for  wise  purposes  of  His  own  He  does  not  remove  paiu,  yet  looks  upon  us, 
and  understands  our  wants,  feels  with  us  and  for  as,  and  works  in  us  submission, 
and  patience,  and  fortitude.  Physical  suffering,  long  continued,  ordinarily  tends  to 
degradation ;  but  where  it  is  accepted  in  the  right  spirit,  it  builds  men  up  in 
qualities  that  are  godly — and  through  suffering  many  men  have  become  heroic. 
Times  of  great  perplexity,  in  which  there  are  doubts  and  uncertainties  that  prey 
like  wolves  upon  the  fears  of  men ;  which  bring  pressure,  and  care,  and  soul- 
suffering — these  are  times  of  need  that  justify  you  in  going  to  God  for  sympathy. 
You  have  His  thought  and  His  regard  ;  and  why  should  you  not  take  the  comfort  of 
it  ?  You  would  carry  your  fears  to  a  friend's  bosom ;  why  wiU  you  not  carry  tbem 
to  the  bosom  of  the  best  of  friends  ?  Times  of  religious  depression  are  peculiarly 
times  of  need,  in  which  men  are  justified  in  going  to  God,  where  they  arise  from 
a  doubt  of  any  one's  own  piety,  or  from  what  is  even  more  painful — scepticism  of 
the  whole  nature  and  web  of  the  truth  itself,  which,  as  it  were,  unsettles  and  sets 
adrift  the  whole  religious  nature.  There  are  two  kinds  of  sceptics.  Some  are 
sceptical  from  the  force  of  malign  passions,  which  lead  tbem  to  seek  to  destroy, 
that  they  may  have  a  larger  license,  and  be  wicked  with  impunity.  Others  are 
sceptical  from  the  force  of  moral  feelings.  They  have  their  thought-doubts  and 
their  heart-doubts ;  and  it  is  the  best  part  of  their  nature,  oftentimes,  that  strives 
within  them,  seeking  to  solve  many  of  these  insoluble  questions;  seeking  to 
appease  many  aspirations  and  hungers  of  the  soul ;  seeking  to  put  partial  truths 
into  their  full  light.  Hunger  and  thirst  they  do  for  faith.  They  long  for  it  with 
an  unutterable  longing.  And  where,  not  because  they  seek  to,  and  not  because 
they  wish  to,  men  dishonour  God,  and  separate  themselves  from  right  conduct ; 
where  they  do  this,  notwithstanding  they  endeavour  to  conform  their  life  to  the 
ethical  principles  of  the  gospel,  do  you  say  that  they  ought  to  be  shut  up  to  them- 
selves, and  ought  not  to  go  to  any  friend  for  sympathy  and  medicament  ?  And, 
above  all,  should  they  not  go  to  God  1  And  may  they  not  suppose  that,  in  such 
times  of  need  as  theirs,  God  will  sympathise  with  them  ?  There  are  times  of  need, 
too,  when  men  are  led  to  suffering  from  the  development  in  them  of  philanthropic 
tendencies.  There  be  many  persons  who  look  out  upon  human  life  with  most 
melancholy  feelings.  The  condition  of  society  at  large ;  the  state  of  mankind  that 
is  everywhere  apparent ;  the  laws  that  are  at  work  among  men ;  the  problems  of 
the  destiny  of  the  race — these  things,  to  a  thoughtful  and  generous  nature,  are 
productive,  frequently,  of  exceeding  great  pain.  An  indifferent,  unsympathising, 
selfish  nature  will  look  upon  them  without  the  least  trouble  ;  but  there  are  many 
who  are  made  sad  by  pondering  upon  such  insoluble  mysteries.  And  those  times  of 
sadness  that  they  experience  are  times  of  need  in  which  they  are  justified  in  laying 
their  anxieties  and  solicitudes  at  the  feet  of  Christ,  and  finding  rest  in  Him. 
Against  all  these  views,  the  atheistic  tendencies  of  the  heart  will  often  rise  up. 
Men  know  the  truth  ;  but  often  in  these  times  of  exigency  they  have  a  conscious- 
ness of  their  own  unworthiness,  and  they  dare  not  leave  their  fate  to  Jehovah  or 
to  Jesus ;  and  their  remorse  and  sense  of  guilt  keep  them  from  acting.  There  are 
very  many  persons  who  will  not  go  to  God  just  when  they  need  Him,  but  who 
undertake  first  to  do  a  work  of  righteousness,  and  so  to  make  a  preparation. 
When  they  shall  have  overcome  their  temptation  or  sin,  or  when  they  shall  have 
brought  some  degree  of  peace  and  complacency  into  their  hesjt,  then  they  mean  to 
go  to  God  for  a  ratification,  as  it  were,  of  the  work  that  is  accomplished  in 
them.  But  this  is  not  wise.  It  is  when  most  you  feel  the  dart  that  Satan 
casts ;  it  is  when  most  you  feel  the  poison  that  rankles  in  the  soul ;  it 
is  when  most  you  feel  the  pang  which  the  heart  suffers — it  is  then  that  you 
most  need  God.  Do  not  wait  till  you  feel  willing.  Do  not  wait  till  you 
are  conscious  that  all  fear  is  gone.  Take  your  fear,  your  guilt,  your  re- 
morse, and  go  with  these,  because  you  are  in  need.  There  is  no  other  argument 
like  this,  "  Lord,  save,  or  I  perish."  There  is  another  difficulty  which  leads  men 
not  to  use  these  views  when  presented ;  and  that  is  the  unresponsiveness  of  God, 
Well,  you  have  a  High  Priest  that  was  tempted  in  all  points  as  you  are,  and  ye* 
without  sin.  Your  own  Christ,  who  calls  you  to  Him,  suffered  in  just  precisely  tne 
way  in  which  you  complain  of  suffering.  And  the  time  when  you  experience  an 
inability  to  go  to  God  is  itself  one  of  the  times  of  need  that  should  bring  you  to 
Him.  You  have  a  God  that  has  had  the  same  experience  in  His  earthly  and  liruited 
condition.     He,  too,  was  brought  into  these  emergencies  that  try  you,  and  He  pitie> 


«HAP.  T.]  HEBREWS.  886 

you,  and  sorrows  with  yoa,  on  account  of  them.  There  is  no  time  of  need 
in  which  you  cannot  find  a  preparation  in  the  heart  of  CJhrist  for  you.  You 
will  ask,  perhaps,  "How,  then,  under  such  circumstances,  will  God  give  oa 
help  in  such  times  of  need  ?  "  I  do  not  know.  It  is  not  written.  But  this  I 
know :  that  He  has  the  control  of  all  natural  forces,  of  all  physical  laws,  of  all 
social  and  moral  influences.  I  know  that  He  is  the  Governor  of  the  universe,  and 
that  all  things  shall  work  together  in  due  time  for  the  good  of  those  that  love  and 
trust  Him.  And  because  I  do  not  know  of  the  secrets  by  which  He  succours  men, 
shall  I,  therefore,  not  trust  in  Him  t    (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  V. 

Vbbs.  1-8.  Bvery  high  priest  taken  firom  amoni:  men.— The  high  prietthood  of 
Christ : — I.  Chbist's  participation  op  our  natube,  as  nbobssaby  to  Him  fob  dis- 

CHABOINa  OF  THB  OFFIOK  OF  A  HIGH  PBIBST  ON  OUB  BEHALF,  IS  A  OBBAT  OBOUND  OF  CON- 
SOLATION UNTO  BELIEVERS,  A  MANIFEST  EVIDENCE  THAT  Hb  IS,  AND  WILL  BE,  TENDEB 
AND  COMPASSIONATE  TOWARDS  THEM.  II.  It  WAS  THE  ENTBANCE  OF  SIN  THAT  MADE  THB 
OFFICE  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD  NECESSARY.      III.    It   WAS   OF  INFINITE  OBAOE  THAT  SUCH  AN 

APPOINTMENT  WAS  MADE.  Without  it  all  holy  intercourse  between  God  and  man 
must  have  ceased.  For  neither — 1.  Were  the  persons  of  sinners  meet  to  approach 
unto  God  ;  nor — 2.  Was  any  service  which  they  could  perform,  or  were  instructed 
how  to  perform,  suited  unto  the  great  end  which  man  was  now  to  look  after ; 
namely,  peace  with  God.  For  the  persons  of  all  men  being  defiled,  and  obnoxious 
unto  the  curse  of  the  law,  how  should  they  appear  in  the  presence  of  the  righteous 
and  holy  God  (Isa.  xxxiii.  14  ;  Mieah  vi.  8).     IV.  The  priest  is  descbibed  by  thb 

ESPECIAL  DISCHARGE  OF  HIS  DUTY,  OB  EXERCISE  OP  HIS  OFFICE  ;  WHICH  IS  HIS  OFFERING 
BOTH   GIFTS  AND   SACRIFICEE   FOB   SIN.      V.    WhERB   THERE  IS   NO  PROPEB  PEOPITIATORY 

SACBiFicB  THERE  IS  NO  PROPEB  PRIEST.  Evcry  priest  is  to  offer  sacrifices  for  sin ; 
that  is,  to  make  atonement.  VI.  Jesus  Christ  alone  is  the  High  Pbiest  of  His 
PEOPLE.  For  He  alone  could  offer  a  sacrifice  for  our  sins  to  make  atonement.  VII. 
It  was  a  great  privilege  which  the  Church  enjoyed  of  old,  in  the  representa- 
tion which  it  had  by  God's  appointment,  of  the  priesthood  and  sacrifiob  of 
Christ,  in  their  own  typical  pbiests  and  sacrifices.  VIII.  Much  more  glorious 
IS  OUR  privilege  under  the  gospel  since  our  Lord  Jesus  hath  taken  upon  Hoc, 

AND  actually  DISCHARGED  THIS  PART  OF  HiS  OFFICE,  IN   OFFERING  AN  ABSOLUTELY  PEB- 

fect  and  COMPLETE  SACRIFICE  FOR  SIN.  Here  is  the  foundation  laid  of  all  our  peace 
and  happiness.     IX.  What  is  to  bb  done  with  God  on  the  account  op  sin,  that  it 

MAY  BE  EXPIATED  AND  PARDONED,  AND  THAT  THE  PEOPLE  OF  GoD  WHO  HAVE  SINNED  MAT 

BB  accepted  with  Him  and  blessed,  is  all  actually  done  for  them  by  Jesus 
Chbist  theib  High  Pbiest,  in  the  sacrifice  FO^t  sin  which  He  offebed  on  theib 
behalf.  (John  Owen,  D.D.)  Compassion  on  the  Ignorant. — Divine  compassion : 
— There  was  no  person  in  the  Hebrew  economy  that  was  so  revered  as  their  high 
priest.  He  bpcame  more  corrupt  in  the  political  times  preceding  Christ ;  but  the 
name  high  priest,  as  interpreted  by  the  whole  history  of  the  Hebrew  people,  waa 
one  that  was  not  only  reverenced,  but  loved.  He  was  ordained,  it  is  said,  to  have 
compassion ;  he  was  their  highest  ideal  of  purity ;  he  stood  in  the  grandeur  of  a 
supposed  inspiration;  he  represented  God,  or,  still  better,  he  represented  the  people 
to  God ;  he  was  their  advocate ;  he  stood  in  their  place  officially,  and  in  every  way 
helped  to  bring  men  up  without  any  oppression  ;  he  was  a  minister  of  mercy  to 
them  ;  and  you  could  not  have  struck  a  bell  that  would  roll  through  the  air  with 
such  melodious  sound  as  by  saying  that  Jesus  Christ  stood  as  a  high  priest  to  the 
people,  and  that  compassion  was  the  great  attribute  of  Jesus ;  that  He  not  only  re- 
presented the  people  in  their  wants,  but  that  He  was  a  forthcomer  of  the  very  God 
Himself,  and  represented  God  to  mankind  as  far  as  men  obscured  by  the  flesh  are 
capable  of  understanding  God.  You  cannot  measure  the  infinite  wisdom,  and  yoa 
cannot  measure  the  eternal  glow  and  glory  of  love,  and  you  cannot  in  the  infirmities 
of  human  life  in  all  its  relationships  have  any  satisfying  representation  of  the  rich* 
ness  and  infinite  element  of  the  Divine  nature.  So,  in  searching  for  some  emblem 
the  apostle  strikes  through  to  the  centre,  and  says  that  Jesus  Christ  is  a  High  Priest 
iM  represent — what  ?    On  the  one  side  to  represent  the  infirmities  of  men.    He  i» 

25 


386  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

clothed  with  them  Himself ;  He  is  touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities ;  He 
knows  the  height,  and  depth,  and  length  and  breadth  of  human  experience  and 
human  need,  and  He  is  gone  up  to  stand  before  God,  our  High  Priest  there  ;  and  not 
only  to  represent  the  wants  of  mankind,  but  in  doing  that  He  represents  to  us  what 
is  the  interior  character  of  God  Himself,  and  what  is  the  economy  of  the  Divine  love. 
In  the  earlier  periods  of  the  world's  history  God  was  revealed  in  those  aspects  that 
would  be  most  powerful  to  restrain  animalism.  The  revelation  of  God's  motive 
power  was  toward  the  part  that  the  man  could  understand ;  it  was  a  physical  mani- 
festation of  God  as  a  God  that  governs  the  material  world,  which  has  certain  fixed 
laws  that  cannot  be  broken  without  penalty  immediate  or  remote  ;  and  so  He  was 
represented  in  the  earlier  periods  of  the  world  as  the  all-compelling  Governor  of  the 
world.  Pain  in  this  world  and  suffering  are  God's  merciful  ministers  to  keep  men 
in  the  road.  "  So,"  says  God,  "  I  will  by  no  means  count  it  a  matter  of  indifference 
whether  a  man  lives  right  or  wrong.  He  shall  live  right  or  he  shall  suffer,  because 
I  am  a  God  of  mercy  and  love."  So  the  Old  Testament  had  a  sublime  conception 
of  God,  but  when  you  come  down  to  the  prophets,  when  lust  immeasurable 
threatened  to  overwhelm  society,  when  the  great  curse  of  idolatry  was  licentious- 
ness, then  God  says  :  "  I  will  not  relax  one  particle  of  My  eternal  law  ;  I  will  wait 
till  the  crooked  grows  straight,  till  the  inferior  is  exalted,  I  will  have  compas- 
sion on  men ;  when  they  are  transgressing  their  own  nature  and  My  moral  law  and 
all  things  pure  and  holy,  I  will  still  have  patience,  that  I  may  bring  them  back 
again."  There  is  the  ideal  of  the  Old  Testament.  But,  coming  down  to  a  later 
period,  when  men  were  brutal  they  needed  a  little  thunder,  and  the  prophets  gave 
it  to  them.  They  developed  the  regent  character  of  God,  "  I  abhor  wickedness 
and  My  fury  shall  burn  to  the  lowest  hell,  I  will  not  tolerate  it ;  I  have  not  built 
the  world  for  this :  wicked  men  and  devils  shall  not  desecrate  it ;  I  will  put  forth  a 
hand  of  strength,  and  I  will  clothe  Myself  in  garments  of  blood  !  I  will  walk  forth 
so  that  the  land  shall  tremble  in  My  indignation ;  wickedness  shall  not  prevail ; 
purity  in  manhood  and  Divine  excellence  shall  prevail."  And  so  the  thunder  of 
God's  justice  and  the  threatenings  of  God's  law  were  sounded  out  continually 
because  men  were  on  so  low  a  plane  that  they  needed  just  that  development 
«f  the  Divine  nature.  But  that  has  given  a  disproportionate  idea  of  God's 
xjharacter.  Men  have  been  taught  that  He  is  the  implacable  thunderer.  Another 
reason  is  that  it  is  easier  for  us  to  thunder  than  it  is  to  love.  But  it  was  not  until 
the  sun  rose  at  the  Advent  that  there  came  a  morning  outburst  that  gave  us  sight, 
not  of  the  administration  of  God's  government  among  men,  but  of  the  heart  of  God 
Himself  in  Jesus  Christ.  There  we  see  the  inside  of  God ;  and  what  was  that  ? 
If  Calvary  does  not  teach  it,  if  His  walk  among  the  poor  and  needy  does  not 
teach  it,  if  all  the  acts  of  mercy  do  not  inspire  you  with  the  knowledge,  if  you 
need  it  shaped  into  a  doctrine,  then  hear  it  here.  He  represents  that  the  inner 
nature  of  God,  as  represented  by  Jesns  Christ  acting  in  place  of  the  high  priest,  was 
one  that  could  "  have  compassion  on  the  ignorant  and  on  those  that  are  out  of  the 
way" — all  error,  all  stumbling,  all  sin,  aU  violation  of  the  ideal  of  duty.  The 
infinite  bounty  of  Divine  love  is  not  savage  nor  partial,  it  is  universal,  it  is  intense 
beyond  description.  What  is  infinite  ?  That  beyond  which  the  thought  of  man 
cannot  go ;  that  that  has,  to  our  thought,  no  boundary,  extent  beyond  ending.  What 
is  infinite  compassion  ?  That  that  would  wrap  this  globe  round  and  round  a  thou- 
sand times,  like  the  folds  of  a  garment  round  the  body,  with  Divine  thoughtfulness, 
Divine  mercy,  Divine  love.  What  is  infinite  love  ?  What  is  a  mother's  love  ?  The 
purest  and  tenderest  thing  that  is  known  on  earth  is  the  overhanging  heart  of  a 
mother  upon  the  cradle  that  has  in  it  that  little  nothing  which  we  call  a  babe,  that 
«an  give  nothing  back,  that  receives  everything  and  returns  nothing.  Yet  the  love 
of  the  mother  is  but  one  drop  of  the  ocean  as  compared  with  the  love  of  the  great 
Father  of  mankind — infinite,  infinite  1  (H,  W.  Beecher.)  Compassion  on  the 
ignorant : — I.  Compassion  and  foebeakance  ake  two  things  which  ant  man  who 
wotJiiD  do  good  to  his  fellow-men  ought  to  possess  to  a  very  laege  degree.  1. 
You  will  have  plenty  of  use  for  all  the  compassion  and  all  the  tenderness  that  you 
can  possibly  command,  for  this  will  help  to  draw  around  you  those  who  are  ignorant 
and  out  of  the  way.  Love  is  the  queen  bee,  and  where  she  is  you  will  find  the 
centre  of  the  hive.  2.  By  this  same  spell  you  will  hold  those  whom  you  gather,  for 
men  will  not  long  remain  with  an  unloving  leader,  even  little  children  in  our  classes 
will  not  long  listen  to  an  unsympathetic  teacher.  The  earth  is  held  together  by  the 
force  of  attraction,  and  to  the  men  upon  it  that  same  power  is  exercised  by  love  and 
oompassiou.    3.  Compassion  in  your  heart  will  be  greatly  useful  in  moving  sinnerg 


CBXP.  ▼.]  HEBREWS.  887 

to  care  for  themselves.  Mr.  Knill  at  one  time  was  distributing  tracts  at  Chester, 
and  went  out  where  there  was  a  company  of  soldiers.  Many  received  the  tracts,  but 
one  man  tore  the  little  book  in  pieces  before  the  good  man's  eyes  ;  and  on  another 
occasion  the  same  individual  said  to  the  soldiers,  "  Now  make  a  ring  round  him." 
The  men  stood  round  the  preacher,  and  then  the  wicked  fellow  cursed  him  in  such 
a  frightful  manner  that  Mr.  Knill  burst  into  tears  to  hear  such  awful  sounds.  The 
Bight  of  Knill's  tsars  broke  the  heart  of  the  bla«phemer :  nothing  else  could  have 
touched  him,  but  he  could  not  bear  to  see  a  strong  man  who  was  at  least  his  equal, 
and,  probably,  his  superior,  weeping  over  him.  Years  after  he  came  forward  to  own 
that  the  tender  emotion  displayed  by  Mr.  Knill  had  touched  his  inmost  soul,  and 
led  him  to  repentance.  4.  You  want  great  compassion  to  insure  your  own  perse- 
verance, for  if  you  do  not  love  the  children  of  your  class,  if  you  do  not  love  the 
people  whom  you  try  to  benefit  as  you  go  from  house  to  house,  if  you  have  no  com- 
passion on  the  dying  sinners  around  you,  you  will  soon  give  up  your  mission,  or  go 
about  it  in  a  merely  formal  manner.  5.  Compassion  of  heart  can  alone  teach  you 
how  to  speak  to  others.  6.  Now,  there  are  many  reasons  why  we  should  have  a 
great  deal  of  compassion  and  forbearance.  Think  what  patience  God  had  with  you, 
all  those  years  before  your  conversion,  and  multitudes  of  times  since ;  and  if  He 
has  had  patience  with  ]/ou,  should  not  yon  have  patience  with  your  fellow  sinner 
even  to  the  end?  There  is  one  reflection  which  may  help  you.  Remember  that 
these  poor  souls  who  sin  as  they  do  should  be  looked  upon  by  you  as  persons  who 
are  deranged,  for  sin  is  madness.  And  do  recollect  this — if  you  do  not  have  com- 
passion you  cannot  do  them  good.  If  yon  become  weary  of  them,  and  speak  sharply, 
you  cannot  bless  them ;  and,  perhaps,  if  you  are  not  the  means  of  blessing  them, 
nobody  else  may  be.  Ah,  is  it  your  own  husband?  Wife,  win  him.  Do  not  drive 
him  from  bad  to  worse  by  scolding.  Sister,  is  it  your  brother  ?  Woo  him  and  win 
him  to  Christ.  Do  not  vex  him  by  becoming  acid  and  sour.  11.  Compassion  and 
F0KBEAP.ANCE  PKE-EMiNENTLT  DWELL  IN  Jesus  Christ.  1.  He  has  compassion  OH  the 
ignorant.  Very  many  persons  are  wilfully  ignorant  of  Christ.  Is  not  this  enough 
to  move  the  Lord  to  anger  ?  And  yet  His  patience  continues.  Come  to  Him  just 
as  you  are,  and  confess  your  wilful  blindness,  and  He  will  put  it  away,  and  enable 
you  to  understand  the  things  which  make  for  your  peace.  Some  are  ignorant,  how- 
ever, because  they  have  been  cast  where  they  could  not  well  know ;  they  were  born 
in  an  ungodly  family,  or,  what  is  much  the  same,  among  those  who  have  only  a 
mere  formal  religion.  They  do  not  know  the  truth,  but  they  can  scarcely  be  blamed 
for  it.  Well,  Christ  is  able  to  teach  you.  Come  and  sit  at  His  feet,  for  He  will 
have  compassion  on  your  ignorance.  2.  He  will  have  compassion  upon  those  that 
are  out  of  the  way.  Who  are  these  people  ?  Some  are  out  of  the  way  bet^ause  they 
never  were  in  it  and  never  knew  it.  Many  are  in  a  very  emphatic  sense  out-of-the- 
way  sinners.  They  have  gone  to  such  extravagances  that  they  are  out  of  the  way 
of  common  morality,  and  quite  startle  tlieir  careless  comrades.  Well,  my  Lord 
Jesus  will  have  compassion  on  you  out-of-the-way  sinners.  However  far  you  have 
gone,  only  turn  to  Him,  for  pardon  is  freely  pubiished.  {0.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
human  sympathies  of  Christianity : — Every  religion  professes  to  reveal  to  us  the 
Bupernataral ;  every  philosophy  professes  to  teach  us  moral  duty ;  but  Christianity 
ilone  has,  together  with  these,  approached  man  with  tender  and  helpful  sympathy. 
Even  Judaism  did  not.  Assuredly  infidelity  does  not ;  it  may  be  very  philosophical, 
it  may  inculcate  a  very  pretentious  morality,  but  it  has  no  tenderness  and  sym- 
pathy;  it  has  nothing  like  the  Christian  ideas  of  human  brotherhood,  and  Divine 
Fatherhood.  And  yet,  is  not  this  precisely  what  we  need  ?  Not  stern  injunctions 
to  be  good,  but  sympathy  and  help  in  trying  to  be  good.  What  is  it,  think  you, 
that  makes  your  destitute  neighbour,  who  lives  in  a  garret,  and  dines  upon  a  crust, 
and  shivers  in  the  cold,  and  writhes  in  his  pain,  talk  calmly  of  his  condition,  utter- 
ing no  word  of  complaint,  looking  rather  at  the  alleviations  of  his  sorrow,  than  at 
his  sorrow  itself ;  speaking  of  mercies  even  where  you  can  hardly  discover  them.  Is 
it  religious  cant,  think  you  ?  If  it  be,  this  cant  is  a  very  wonderful  thing.  It  can 
do  what  nothing  else  save  Christianity  can  do  :  it  can  make  a  suffering  and  poverty- 
stricken  man  patient  through  long  weary  years.  What  is  it,  again,  that  enables 
the  tradesman  when  misfortune  comes  upon  him,  or  the  husband,  when  the  mother 
of  his  children  is  smitten  down,  and  his  house  is  darkened,  to  kneel  down  before 
God  with  a  breaking  heart,  and  to  rise  up  calm  and  comforted  ;  what  is  it,  but  this 
very  Christianity  teaching  him,  not  only  that  his  sins  are  forgiven,  but  that  God, 
even  while  he  lives  on  earth,  is  his  Heavenly  Father ;  watching  over  his  life,  and 
.appointing  every  experience  of  it,  solely  intent  upon  doing  him  the  greatest  possibI« 


888  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

good  ?  Let  us  look  a  little,  then,  at  these  human  sympathies  of  Christ  and  Chris- 
tianity. You  -will  see  from  the  chapter  that  the  apostle  is  speaking  of  the  necessary 
qualifications  of  a  high  priest ;  and  he  says  that  one  of  these  is,  that  he  should  be 
full  of  human  sympathies — "  Who  can  have  compassion  on  the  ignorant,  and  on 
them  that  are  out  of  the  way."  And  these  requisites,  he  goes  on  to  say,  are  very 
eminently  found  in  Christ.  Here,  then,  we  encounter  "  the  great  mystery  of  godli- 
ness," the  great  fundamental  fact  of  Christianity,  upon  which  all  its  cardinal  doc- 
trines rest,  that  "  God  was  manifest  in  the  flesh  "  ;  that  He  was  essentially  Divine, 
became  also  properly  human — the  "  Emmanuel,  God  with  us."  I  call  this  the  most 
wonderful,  the  most  practical,  and  the  most  powerful  thought  that  the  world  has 
ever  conceived.  Why  did  He  become  Incarnate  ?  The  general  answer  is — that  by 
"  compassing  Himself  with  infirmity  He  might  have  compassion  on  the  ignorant, 
and  on  them  that  are  out  of  the  way."  Let  me  show  you  this  in  three  things.  We 
are  ignorant  of  God's  righteousness,  and  out  of  the  way  through  our  guilt.  We  are 
ignorant  of  God's  holiness,  and  out  of  the  way  through  our  sinfulness.  We  are 
ignorant  of  God's  happiness,  and  out  of  the  way  through  our  misery.  And  to  have 
compassion  on  us  in  each  of  these  respects,  Christ  became  incarnate — compassed 
Himself  with  infirmities  ;  for  our  pardon,  for  our  purity,  and  for  our  peace.  And 
these  are  our  three  great  human  necessities.  1.  First,  the  apostle  tells  that  He  be- 
came incarnate  to  procure  our  pardon.  "He  was  made  a  little  lower  than  the  angela 
for  the  suffering  of  death  " — that  He  might  be  capable,  that  is,  of  suffering  death. 
A  wonderful  thought  that — the  express  purpose  for  which  the  Divine  Son  took  our 
nature  was  that  He  might  die  for  us  1  "  Herein  is  love."  "  In  this  the  love  of  God 
is  manifested."  Other  persons  come  into  the  world  to  live ;  Jesus  Christ  came  into 
the  world  to  die.  In  the  very  midst  of  His  transfiguration  glory  "  He  spake  of  the 
decease  which  He  was  to  accomphsh  at  Jerusalem."  In  the  very  midst  of  His 
resurrection  triumph.  He  told  His  disciples  that  "  thus  it  was  written,  and  thus  it 
behoved  Him  to  suffer."  And  so  perfectly  were  they  filled  with  the  idea  of  His 
death,  that  they  described  themselves  as  preachers,  not  of  Christ's  teaching,  although 
He  "  spake  as  never  man  spake  " — not  of  Christ's  life,  although  He  was  "  holy, 
harmless,  undefiled,  separate  from  sinners  " — but  of  Christ's  death  :  •*  We  preach 
Christ  crucified."  And  why  this  strange  and  exclusive  theme  of  preaching? 
Plato's  disciples  preach  his  doctrine — Moses'  followers  preached  his  laws.  Why  do 
Christian  preachers  preach  only  Christ's  death? — glory  in  a  cross  ?  Why,  just  be- 
cause we  are  "  ignorant  and  out  of  the  way,"  and  this  Cross  precisely  meets  our 
first  great  need  as  transgressors ;  it  is  Christ's  first  great  proof  of  redeeming  com- 
passion, the  first  great  reason  for  which  He  compassed  Himself  with  human  in- 
firmity— that  He  might  have  compassion  upon  our  guilt.  It  was  not  merely  that 
He  humbled  Himself,  but  that  He  humbled  Himself  in  this  manner,  did  for  us  by 
taking  our  nature  what  He  could  not  have  done  in  any  other  way,  and  laid  down 
His  life  for  us.  2.  And  then  Christ,  as  our  merciful  High  Priest,  has  compassion 
upon  us  in  our  impurity,  and  takes  upon  Him  our  nature  that  He  may  set  us  an 
example  of  holiness.  Here  is  a  second  great  reason  for  His  being  "  compassed  with 
infirmities " — a  man  like  ourselves.  He  shows  us  how  pure,  and  perfect,  and 
obedient,  and  patient  a  human  life  may  be.  "  He  learned  obedience  by  the  things 
that  He  suffered."  "  He  was  in  all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin." 
He  did  not  permit  either  temptation  or  suffering  to  sway  Him  in  His  obedience  : 
He  would  fast  in  the  wilderness  rather  than  sin ,  He  would  endure  the  bitter  anguish 
of  Gethsemane  rather  than  oppose  His  Father's  will.  And  having  such  experience 
of  duty  and  temptation  and  suffering.  He  learned  how  arduous  human  virtue  is — 
how  much  grace  and  strength  it  requires.  Do  you  not  see,  then,  how  great  and 
precious  a  purpose  of  His  incarnation  this  is,  to  set  us  a  perfect  human  example  ? 
He  does  not  enjoin  hohness  merely,  or  describe  it  in  a  book — He  embodies  it  in  His 
life;  He  comes  into  our  sinful  world  and  homes,  not  as  a  holy  God,  but  a  holy  Man ; 
BO  that  if  we  would  be  holy,  we  have  only  to  "  consider  Him,"  to  "  walk  even  as  He 
walked,"  to  "  follow  His  steps."  We  learn  duty  from  His  obedience ;  love  from  His 
tenderness.  We  clasp  His  hand,  we  walk  by  His  side,  we  witness  His  hfe,  the 
beautiful  and  perfect  exhibition  in  Him  of  the  moral  possibilities  of  a  sanctified 
manhood.  3.  He  can  have  compassion  upon  us  in  our  sorrows.  And  for  this  again 
He  was  "  compassed  with  infirmities."  It  is  not  without  deep  significance  that  He 
is  called  "  the  Man  of  sorrows,"  and  said  to  be  "  acquainted  with  grief,"  as  if  grief 
were  His  familiar  acquaintance.  Emphatically  is  He  "  the  Man  Christ  Jesus," 
"  bone  of  onr  bone,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh  " ;  "  both  He  that  sanctifieth  and  they 
that  are  sanctified  are  all  of  one,  for  which  cause  He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them 


OBAP.T.]  HEBREWS.  889 

brethren."  In  all  His  earthly  experience  of  duty,  and  temptation  and  sorrow  He 
is  never  less,  He  is  never  more  than  a  proper  Man,  "  A  Brother  born  for  the  day  of 
adversity."  Oh  I  how  wonderful  this  is,  and  yet  how  precious,  that  He  "  the 
Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  earth,  who  fainteth  not  neither  is  weary,"  should  incar- 
nate Himself  in  the  weakness  of  a  little  child  and  in  the  woes  of  a  sorrowful  man  I 
And  yet  this  is  precisely  what  we  needed ;  it  is  an  assurance  that  comes  home  to  our 
deepest  hearts.  Do  you  not  often  feel  the  unspeakable  worth  of  a  friend  who  under- 
stands your  trials  and  difficulties  and  sorrows,  who  can  lovingly  enter  into  all  your 
experiences,  and  give  you  counsel  and  sympathy?  Then  must  it  not  be  infinitely  more 
precious  to  go  to  One,  who,  while  on  the  Luman  side  of  His  nature  He  can  thus  be 
"  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  because  in  all  points  tempted  as  we  are," 
is  also  on  the  Divine  side  Almighty  to  help,  and  loving  to  pity?  (if.  Allan,  D.D.) 
Our  compassionate  High  Priest : — Often,  when  we  are  trying  to  do  good  to  others, 
we  get  more  good  ourselves.  When  I  was  here  one  day  this  week,  seeing  friends 
whacame  to  join  the  church,  there  came  among  the  rest  a  very  diffident,  tender- 
hearted woman,  who  said  many  sweet  things  to  me  about  her  Lord,  though  she 
did  not  think  that  they  were  any  good,  I  know.  She  was  afraid  that  I  should  not 
have  patience  with  her  and  her  poor  talk  ;  but  she  said  one  thing  which  I  specially 
remember :  "  I  have  to-day  put  four  things  together,  from  which  I  have  derived  a 
great  deal  of  comfort,"  she  told  me.  "  And  what  are  they,  my  sister?  "  I  asked. 
"  Well,"  she  said,  "they  are  those  four  classes — 'the  unthankful  and  the  evil,  the 
ignorant  and  those  that  are  out  of  the  way.*  Jesus  •  is  kind  unto  the  unthankful 
and  to  the  evil,'  and  '  He  can  have  compassion  on  the  ignorant,  and  on  them  that 
are  out  of  the  way,'  and  I  think  that  I  can  get  in  through  those  four  descriptions. 
Though  I  am  a  great  sinner,  I  believe  that  He  will  be  kind  to  me,  and  have  com- 
passion upon  me."  I  stored  that  up ;  for  I  thought  that  one  of  these  days  I  might 
want  it  myself ;  I  tell  it  to  you,  for  if  you  do  not  want  it  now,  you  may  need  it  one 
of  these  days ;  you  may  yet  have  to  think  that  you  have  been  unthankful  and  evil, 
ignorant  and  out  of  the  way,  and  it  will  give  you  comfort  to  remember  that  our 
Lord  Jesus  is  kind  to  the  unthankful  and  to  the  evil,  and  that  He  "  can  have  com- 
passion on  the  ignorant,  and  on  them  that  are  out  of  the  way."  I.  The  sort  of 
BiNNEES  FOR  WHOM  OUR  HiGH  Priest  IB  CONCERNED.  1.  The  people  who  claim 
Christ's  aid  are  generally  those  who  have  a  very  low  opinion  of  themselves.  The 
proud  and  self-satisfied  cannot  know  His  love ;  but  the  poor  and  distressed  may 
ever  find  in  Him  comfort  and  joy,  because  of  His  nature,  and  by  means  of  His 
intercession,  2.  As  with  the  high  priest  of  old,  amongst  those  who  come  to  our 
High  Priest  are  many  whose  fear  and  distress  arise  from  ignorance.  (1)  There  is  a 
universal  ignorance.  As  compared  with  the  light  of  God,  we  are  in  the  dim  twilight. 
He  that  seeth  best  only  seeth  men  as  trees  walking.  (2)  But,  in  addition  to  the 
ignorance  that  is  universal,  there  is  also  a  comparative  ignorance  on  the  part  of 
some ;  and  because  of  this,  the  compassion  of  Christ  flows  forth  to  them.  There 
are,  first,  the  recent  converts — young  people  whose  years  are  few,  and  who  probably 
think  that  they  know  more  than  they  do ;  but  who,  if  they  are  wise,  will  recognise 
that  their  senses  have  not  been  fully  exercised  to  discern  between  good  and  evil.. 
Others  there  are  who  are  ignorant  because  of  their  little  opportunity  of  getting 
instruction.  Upon  these  our  great  High  Priest  has  compassion,  and  often  with 
their  slight  knowledge  they  show  more  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  than  some  of  us 
produce  even  with  our  more  abundant  hght.  There  are  many  that  are  of  a  very 
feeble  mind.  They  could  never  explain  how  they  were  saved;  but  they  are  saved. 
(3)  There  is  also  a  sinful  ignorance.  Now  comes  another  description  of  the  sort  of 
sinners  for  whom  our  High  Priest  is  concerned.  There  are  many  whose  fears  arise 
from  being  out  of  the  way.  The  Lord  '*  can  have  compassion  on  the  ignorant,  and 
on  them  that  are  out  of  the  way."  I  remember  that,  when  I  felt  myself  to  be 
a  very  great  sinner,  these  words  were  very,  very  much  blessed  to  me.  I  read  them, 
•*  and  on  them  that  are  out  of  the  way  "  ;  and  I  knew  that  I  was  an  out-of-the-way 
sinner.  I  was  then,  and  I  am  afraid  that  I  am  now,  somewhat  like  a  lot  out  of  the 
catalogue,  an  odd  person  who  must  go  by  himself.  Very  well ;  our  High  Priest  can 
have  compassion  on  those  that  are  odd,  and  on  those  that  are  out  of  the  way,  on 
those  who  do  not  seem  to  be  in  the  common  run  of  people,  but  who  must  be  dealt 
with  individually,  and  by  themselves.  He  can  have  compassion  upon  such.  But  now 
let  us  look  at  the  more  exact  meaning  of  the  text.  (1)  To  be  out  of  the  way  is,  in 
the  case  of  all  men,  their  natural  state.  (2)  Li  addition  to  that,  men  have  gone  out 
of  their  way  by  their  own  personal  folly.  We  had  enough  original  sin ;  but  we  have 
added  to  tiiat  another  kind  of  originality  in  evil.    (3)  Some  are  oat  of  the  waj 


890  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  (chap.  v. 

because  of  their  seduction  from  the  way  by  others.     False  teachers  have  taught 
them,  and  they  have  taken  up  with  the  error  brought  before  them  by  a  stronger 
mind  than  their  own.   In  some  cases  persons  of  evil  life  have  had  a  fascination  over 
them.     (4)  Many  are  out  of  the  way  because  of  their  backslidings  after  grace  has 
come  to  them.    (5)  Others  are  out  of  the  way  bec?jUse  of  their  consciousness  of 
special  sin.     Come  to  this  compassionate  High  Priest,  and  trust  your  case  in  His 
hands ;  they  were  pierced  because  of  your  sin.     II.  The  soet  of  High  Prfest  with 
WHOM  sinners  have  TO  DEAL.     1.  He  is  One  who  can  bear  with  ignorance,  forget- 
fulness,  and  provocation.     2.  He  is  One  who  can  feel  for  grief,  because  He  has  felt 
the  same.    3.  He  is  One  who  lays  Himself  out  tenderly  to  help  such  as  come  to 
Him.     4.  He  is  One  who  never  repelled  a  single  person.     III.  Now,  I  want  to  speak 
to  those  of  you  who  are  the  people  of  God.     I  want  to  remind  you  that  there  may 
be  a  blessing  even  in  your  weakness ;  and  that  this  may  be  the  more  clearly  seen 
we  will  look,  in  the  third  place,  at  the  sort  of  infirmity  which  mat  be  sanctified 
AND  made  useful.     The  high  priest  of  old  was  compassed  with  infirmities,  and  this 
was  part  of  his  qualification.     "  Yes,"  says  one,  "  but  he  was  compassed  with  sinful 
infirmities ;  but  our  Lord  Jesus  had  no  sin."    That  is  quite  true,  but  remember 
that  this  does  not  make  Christ  less  tender,  but  more  so.     Anything  that  is  sinful 
hardens ;  and  inasmuch  as  He  was  without  sin,  He  was  without  the  hardening 
influence  that  sin  would  bring  to  bear  upon  a  man.     He  was  all  the  more  tender 
when  compassed  with  infirmities,  because  sin  was  excluded  from  the  list.    We  will 
not,  then,  reckon  sin  in  any  form  as  an  infirmity  likely  to  be  turned  to  a  great  use, 
even  though  the  grace  of  God  abounds  over  the  sin ;  but  let  me  speak  to  some  of 
you  who  wish  to  do  good,  and  set  forth  some  of  the  things  which  were  sore  to  bear 
at  the  time,  and  yet  have  been  rich  in  blessing  since.     1.  First  think  of  our  struggles 
in  finding  mercy.    If  you  have  not  had  a  certain  experience,  you  cannot  so  well  help 
others  who  have  ;  but  if  you  were  compassed  with  infirmity  at  your  first  coming  to 
Christ,  you  may  use  that  in  helping  others  to  come  to  Him.     2.  Again,  our  grievous 
temptations  may  be  infirmities  which  shall  be  largely  used  in  our  service.    You  can- 
not be  unto  others  a  helper  unless  you  have  been  compassed  with  infirmities.  There- 
fore accept  the  temptations  which  trouble  you  so  much,  as  a  part  of  your  education  to 
make  you  useful  to  others.  3.  Our  sickness  may  turn  out  to  be  in  the  same  category. 
4.  Our  trials,  too,  may  thus  be  sanctified.     5.  Our  depressions  may  also  tend  to  our 
fruitfulness.     A  heart  bowed  down  with  despair  is  a  dreadful  thing.     "  A  wounded 
spirit  who  can  bear  ?  "     But  if  you  have  never  had  such  an  experience  you  will  not 
be  worth  a  pin  as  a  preacher.     You  cannot  help  others  who  are  depressed  unless  you 
have  been  down  in  the  depths  yourself.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)         The  compassionate 
High  Priest: — I.  Compassion  and  forbearance,  with  meekness,  in  those  from 
whom  we  expect  help  and  relief,  is  the  great  motive  and  encouragement  unto 
faith,  affiance,  and  expectation  of  them.     ii.  we  livc,  the  life  of  our  souls  is 
principally  maintained,  upon  THIS  COMPASSIONATENESS  OF  OUR  HiGH  Pbiest  ;  namely, 
that  He  is  able  to  bear  with  us  in  our  provocations,  and  to  pity  us  in  our  weaknesses 
and  distresses.   To  this  pui-pose  is  the  promise  concerning  Him  (Isa.  xl.  11).  There 
are  three  things  that  are  apt  to  give  great  provocations  unto  them  that  are  concerned 
-  in  ns.     1.  Frequency  in  offending.     2.  Greatness  of  offences.     3.  Instability  in 
promises  and  engagements.     These  are  things  apt  to  give  provocations,  beyond  what 
ordinary  moderation  and  meekness  can  bear  vnthal ;  especially  where  they  are 
accompanied  with  a  disregard  of  the  greatest  love  and  kindness.     And  all  these  are 
found  in  believers,  some  in  one,  and  some  in  another,  and  some  in  all.  III.  Though 
every  sin  hath  in  it  the  whole  nature  of  sin,  rendering  the  sinners  obnoxious  unto 
the  curse  of  the  law;  yet  as  there  are  several  kinds  of  sins,  so  there  are  severaj; 
DEGREES  OF  SIN,  some  being  accompanied  with  a  greater  guilt  than  others.  1.  There 
is  a  distinction  of  sins  with  respect  unto  the  persons  that  commit  them.     But  this 
distinction  ariseth  from  the  event,  and  not  from  the  nature  of  the  sin  itself  intended. 
Begenerate  persons  will,  through  the  grace  of  God,  certainly  use  the  means  of  faith 
and  repentance  for  the  obtaining  of  pardon,  which  the  other  will  not ;  and  if  they 
are  assisted  also  so  to  do,  even  they  in  like  manner  shall  obtain  forgiveness.     No 
man  therefore  can  take  a  relief  against  the  guilt  of  sin  from  his  state  and  condition, 
which  may  be  an  aggravation,  and  can  be  no  alleviation  of  it.    2.  There  are  degrees 
of  sin  amongst  men  unregenerate,  who  live  in  a  course  of  sin  all  their  days.    All  do 
not  sin  equally,  nor  shall  all  be  equally  punished.     3.  In  the  sins  of  believers  there 
are  different  degrees,  both  in  divers,  and  in  the  same  persons.     And  although  they 
shall  be  all  pardoned,  yet  have  they  different  effects  ;  with  respect — (1)  Unto  peaca 
of  conscience.     (2)  Sense  of  the  love  of  God.     (3)  Growth  in  grace  and  holmess. 


CHAP,  v.]  HEBREWS.  891 

(4)  Usefulness  or  scandal  in  the  Church  or  the  world.  (5)  Terapcral  afflictions. 
(C)  A  quiet  cr  troublesome  departure  out  of  this  world ;  but  in  all,  a  reserve  is  still 
to  be  made  for  the  sovereignty  of  God  and  His  grace.    IV.  Our  ignorance  is  both 

ODE  CALAMITY,  ODB  SIN,  AND  AN  OCCASION  OF  MANT  SINS  UNTO  US.  V.  SiN  IS  A  WANDERING 
I'ROM  THE  WAT.  VI.  No  SORT  OF  SINNERS  ARE  EXCLUDED  FROM  AN  INTEREST  IN  THE 
CARE  \ND  LOVE  OF  OUB  COMPASSIONATE  HlOH  PriEST,  BUT  ONLY  THOSE  WHO  EXCLUDE 
TUEJIbKLVES  BY  THEIB  UNBELIEF.  VII.  It  WAS  WELL  FOR  US,  AND  ENOUGH  FOR  US, 
THAT   THE    Lord     ChBIST   was    encompassed     WITH     THE    SINLESS     INFIRMITIES     OF    OUR 

NATURE.  VIII.  God  can  teach  a  sanctified  use  of  sinful  INFIRMITIES,  AS  He  did 
IN  AND  TO  THE  PRIESTS  UNDER  THE  LAW.     {Johu  Owefi,  D.D.)  Tcndemess  : — Our 

relation  to  the  things  under  us  is  the  most  certain  touchstone  of  our  character. 
Here  we  display  quite  freely  what  we  are.  We  embody,  on  a  small  scale,  as  it  may 
be,  the  spirit  of  fathers  or  the  spirit  of  despot.  We  employ  our  superiority  of 
power,  whatever  it  is,  either  to  bring  to  a  clearer  light  the  signs  of  God's  counsel  in 
external  nature  which  wait  for  our  interpretation,  or  to  asstrt  ourselves  in  the 
impotence  of  caprice  as  able  to  preserve,  or  to  deface,  or  to  destroy  that  which  is, 
indeed,  God'a  work.  We  either  use  that  which  is  at  our  disposal  arbitrarily  for  our 
own  pleasure,  or  we  deal  with  it  as  representing  some  fragment  of  a  complicated 
order  of  life.  We  depress  our  dependents  and  our  subordinates,  the  weaker  men 
who  come  within  our  influence,  that  we  may  be  isolated  in  the  splendour  of  a  lonely 
tyranny,  or  we  strive  to  hft  them  little  by  little  towards  our  own  level,  that  in  the 
great  day  of  revelation  we  may  be  seen  standing  by  the  throne  in  tbe  midst  of  many 
brethren  ;  for,  when  we  speak  of  the  things  under  us,  we  must  give  to  the  phrase  a 
nmch  larger  meaning  than  we  commonly  attach  to  it.  It  reaches  far  beyond  the 
men  who  are  under  us.  The  revelation  which  has  been  made  to  us  of  the  Divine 
plan  of  creation  shows  that  we  are  placed  in  a  world  over  the  whole  of  which  we 
have  to  exercise  dominion,  charged,  as  the  true  ruler  must  be  charged,  with  a  re- 
sponsioility  towards  every  part  of  it.  We  have  from  the  first  a  responsibility  towards 
the  material  fabric  of  the  world,  no  less  than  towards  the  hosts  oi  sentient  beings  by 
which  this  mateiial  fabric  is  peopled.  And  then,  as  the  ages  go  forward,  our  re- 
bponsibility  increases.  The  feebler  races  which  fail  behind  in  the  development  of 
lite  become  subject  to  the  strongt^r,  and  the  feebler  men  to  those  who  in  any  respect 
have  been  endowed  with  the  prerogative  of  command.  Thus  the  sphere  of  the  re- 
sponsibility of  those  to  whom  power  is  given  becomes  indefinitely  varied,  but  in  each 
case  the  position  of  authority  brings  with  it  the  burden  of  noble  cares.  We  all  must 
and  do  exercise  dominion  for  good  or  for  evil,  and  we  all  need  the  spirit  of  tender- 
uess  that  our  dominion  may  be  a  blessing.  Tenderness  is  for  dominion  what 
sympathy  is  for  fellowship.  Tenderness  pierces  through  tlie  surface  to  the  heart  of 
thiutjs.  It  is  true  of  tenderness,  in  every  application  of  the  pregnant  figure,  that 
it  "  will  not  break  the  bruised  reed  or  quench  the  smoking  flax."  It  discerns  the 
element  of  strength  in  that  which  is  most  frail,  and  the  element  of  life  in  that 
which  id  darkest.  It  sees  in  forms  transitory  and  common  Divine  gifts  to  be  handled 
reverently.  It  sees  in  simple  and  subject  types  of  life  memories,  as  it  were,  the  pro- 
mists  of  a  great  plan  slowly  fulfilled  from  stage  to  stage.  It  sees  in  the  rudest  human 
mind  a  mirror  for  reflecting,  however  imperfectly,  the  image  of  a  Father  in  heaven ; 
and,  as  we  trust  the  varied  vision,  new  thoughts  pass  into  our  own  souls,  and  we 
become  consciojis  of  hidden  forces  about  us  which  are  able  to  still  the  sorrowful 
impatience  of  our  eager  desires.  Tenderness  in  each  direction  quickens  our  spiritual 
sensibility,  and  under  inspired  teaching,  nature  and  creaturely  life  and  even  man's 
failures  disclose  mysteries  of  hope.  It  springs  out  of  our  Christian  faith.  It  is  the 
obvious  expression  of  our  Christian  faith  in  regard  to  the  things  under  us.  There 
is,  I  say,  a  tenderness  towards  material  things  which  belongs  to  the  Christian 
character.  And  this  tenderness,  born  from  the  recognition  of  God  in  His  creatures, 
shows  itself  both  in  use  and  in  contemplation.  There  is  something  of  touching 
solemnity  in  the  form  of  the  Jewish  thanksgiving  over  bread  and  wine,  which  may 
go  back  even  to  the  apostolic  age,  "  Blessed  art  Thou,  0  Lord  our  God,  King  of  the 
universe."  The  words  remind  us  that  the  least  and  commonest  comes  from  Him 
who  sways  the  whole.  He  Himself  is  seen  in  His  gifts,  and  in  that  presence  there 
can  be  no  wastefulness,  no  carelessness,  no  ungrateful  discontent  Even  Ught  and 
food  may  be  dishonoured  by  reckless  indifference ;  and  we  may  miss,  by  blind 
prodigality,  the  teachings  which  come  through  trivial  acts  to  tender  souls.  It  is, 
perhaps,  yet  more  obvious  how  tenderness  finds  a  place  in  the  contemplation  of 
material  things.  To  the  hard  and  the  impatient  there  is  no  sanctity  in  the  purple 
mountain-side,  no  beauty  born  of  munnunng  sounds,  no  majesty  in  the  light  of 


892  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t, 

setting  suns.  The  silence  that  is  in  the  starry  sky,  the  sleep  that  is  among  the 
lonely  hills,  have  for  them  no  articular  message ;  but,  none  the  less,  sanctity,  beauty, 
majesty,  tidings  of  great  truths  are  there,  and  the  quiet  eye  can  gather  the  spiritual 
harvest.  Thus  we  can  see  how  tenderness  has  its  scope  and  blessing  in  mute,  in- 
sensate things;  but  perhaps  it  is  most  called  for  in  our  dealings  with  animals.  These 
lie  in  our  power  in  a  peculiar  sense,  and  we  need  to  school  ourselves  that  we  may 
fulfil  our  duty  towards  them,  for  we  have  a  duty  towards  them.  They  are  not  only 
for  our  service  or  for  our  amusement,  they  are  committed  by  God  to  our  sovereignty, 
and  we  owe  to  them  a  considerate  regard  for  their  rights.  Our  responsibility  in 
this  respect  is  easily  forgotten.  We  have  all  felt,  I  fancy,  something  of  that  irra- 
tional pleasure  in  the  capricious  use  of  power  which  Browning  has  analysed  in  his 
portraiture  of  Caliban.  The  boy  strikes  down  the  butterfly,  the  man  shoots  the 
swallow  on  the  wing,  simply  because  he  can  and  because  he  chooses.  But  these 
wanton  acts  are  not  indifferent.  They  tend  to  reveal  and  to  mould  character.  They 
break  the  righteous  conditions  of  our  sovereignty.  The  thought  has  a  wide  and  a 
pleasant  appUcation,  for,  looking  at  the  question  from  this  light,  I  do  not  see  how 
the  pursuit  of  amusement  can  justify  the  slaughter  of  animals,  or  how  the  pursuit 
of  knowledge  can  justify  their  torture.  Neither  amusement  nor  knowledge  is  an  end 
for  man.  Both  must  be  followed  in  full  view  of  the  supreme  aim  of  Ufe,  and  in 
remembrance  of  the  abiding  character  on  which  each  action  leaves  its  mark.  But 
it  may  be  said  we  shall  gain  an  insight  into  the  hidden  causes  of  disease,  and  a 
mastery  over  them,  through  the  sufferings  which  we  delibeiately  inflict  on  the  crea- 
tures which  are  within  our  control.  So  far  as  I  can  ascertain,  the  expectation  has 
not  been  justified  by  facts,  nor  can  I  discover  the  least  reasonable  ground  for  sup- 
posing that  we  shall  learn  any  secrets  of  life  which  it  is  good  for  us  to  know  by  the 
way  of  calculated  cruelty.  If  the  world  were  the  work  of  an  evil  power,  or  if  it  were 
the  result  of  a  chance  interaction  of  force  and  matter,  it  would  be  at  least  possible 
that  we  might  have  gained  results  physically  beneficial  to  ourselves  by  the  unsparing 
sacrifice  of  lower  lives.  But  if  He  who  made  us  made  all  other  creatures  also — il 
they  fiind  a  place  in  His  providential  plan — if  His  tender  mercies  reach  to  them — 
and  this  we  Christians  most  certainly  believe — then  I  find  it  absolutely  inconceiv- 
able that  He  should  have  so  arranged  the  avenues  of  knowledge  that  we  can  attain 
to  truths  which  it  is  His  will  that  we  should  master  only  through  the  unutterable 
agonies  of  beings  which  trust  in  us.  If  we  have  guarded  the  spirit  of  tenderness 
in  our  bearing  towards  the  material  world  and  the  animal  world,  we  shall  be  pre- 
pared to  apply  it  also  towards  weaker  races  and  weaker  men  who  are  in  a  greater  or 
less  degree  brought  within  oar  influence.  Every  one  holds  a  position  of  superiority 
as  parent  or  employer,  as  richer  than  others  in  experience  or  knowledge,  as  endowed 
with  authority  by  years  or  position ;  and  every  one  knows  the  daily  vexations  which 
come  through  the  thoughtlessness,  or  ignorance,  or  indifference,  as  it  seems  to  us, 
of  those  whom  we  wish  to  help  in  the  fulfilment  of  their  duty.  Every  one,  again, 
has  suffered  from  the  temptation  which  bids  the  stronger  assert  his  will  by  his 
strength,  and  overbear  what  he  thinks  to  be  an  uninteUigent  opposition,  and  claim 
deference  as  an  unquestionable  right.  At  such  times  we  are  on  our  trial,  and  sym- 
pathetic tenderness  alone  will  save  us  from  falling ;  for  tenderness  will  trace  back  • 
the  wayward  act  to  some  trait  of  natural  character  which  gentle  disciphne  can 
mould  to  good.  It  will  discern  that  involuntary  ignorance  is  to  be  dealt  with  as  a 
form  of  intellectual  distress.  It  will  win  respect  before  it  claims  deference  for  the 
authority  with  which  it  is  entrusted.  It  will,  in  a  word,  turn  stumbling-blocks  into 
stepping-stones,  and  find,  by  them,  the  way  into  many  hearts.  But  it  is  in  dealing 
with  the  poorest  that  tenderness  will  help  us  most ;  and  when  I  speak  of  the  poorest, 
I  mvan  those  who  are  poorest  in  thought,  in  feeling,  in  aspiration  even  more  than 
those  who  are  poorest  in  earthly  things.  The  poor  man  needs  reUef — the  poor  in 
virtue  no  less  than  the  poor  in  money.  The  bankrupt  in  noble  thoughts  is  set  up 
again  only  when  he  sees  the  good  for  which  he  was  made,  and  sees  that  it  is  still 
within  his  reach.  This  prospect  tenderness  can  disclose  to  him — a  tenderness  which 
in  view  of  the  saddest  spectacles  of  human  failure,  kindles  in  the  beUever  a  fire  of 
piety,  a  light  of  natural  affection,  and  ieveals  in  the  brother  for  whom  Christ  died 
the  possibiUty  and  the  hope  of  service ;  for  tenderness,  no  less  than  reverence  and 
sympathy,  flows  from  Christ  only  as  an  inexhaustible  source.  (Bishop  Westcott.) 
Compassion  qualijies  for  helpful  service  amongst  men : — The  following  beautiful  tradi- 
tion about  Moses  is  handed  down  to  posterity: — He  led  the  flock  of  his  father-in- 
1  iw.  One  day  while  he  was  contemplating  hia  flock  in  tlie  desert,  he  saw  a  lamb 
kave  the  herd,  and  run  further  and  further  away.     The  tender  shepherd  not  onlj 


OHi*.  v.]  HEBREWS.  898 

followed  it  with  his  eyes,  but  went  after  it.  The  lamb  quickened  hia  step,  hopped 
over  hill,  sprang  over  ditches,  hastening  through  valley  and  plain ;  the  shepherd 
nnweariedly  followed  its  track.  At  last  the  lamb  stopped  by  a  spring  at  which  it 
eagerly  quenched  its  thirst.  Moses  hastened  to  the  spot,  looked  sadly  at  the  drink- 
ing lamb,  and  said  :  "  It  was  thirst,  then,  my  poor  beast,  which  tormented  thee,  and 
drove  thee  from  me,  and  I  didn't  understand ;  now  thou  art  faint  and  weary  from  the 
long,  hard  way,  thy  powers  are  exhausted ;  how  then  couldst  thou  return  to  thy 
comrades?  "  After  the  lamb  had  quenched  his  thirst  and  seemed  undecided  what 
eourse  to  take,  Moses  lifted  it  to  his  shoulder,  and,  bending  under  the  heavy  burden, 
Btrode  back  to  the  flock.  Then  he  heard  the  voice  of  God  calling  to  him,  saying :  "  Thou 
hast  a  tender  heart  for  My  creatures,  thou  art  a  kind,  gentle  shepherd  to  the  flocks 
of  man — thou  art  now  called  to  feed  the  flocks  of  God."  (Jewish  Messenger.) 
Our  Lord'x  sympathy  : — Ei man  sympathy,  v,e  must  remember,  may,  and  in  many 
cases  does,  from  its  very  iaiuess  becouie  wcakuess.  The  Eym^^athy  cf  ^  mother  for 
a  child  will  too  often  prevent  her  from  inflicting  necessary  punishment.  The  sym- 
pathy of  the  benevolent  for  the  poor  and  suffering  may,  without  caution,  tend  to 
the  encouragement  of  vice.  Sympathy  is  essentially  a  woman's  virtue,  but  the 
quickness  of  feeling  which  overpowers  judgment  is  also  a  woman's  infirmity. 
There  is,  in  fact,  no  virtue  which  more  powerfully  demands  law  and  limitation 
before  it  can  safely  be  yielded  to.  But  the  dignity  of  our  blessed  Lord's  sympathy 
is  as  remarkable  as  its  depth.  He  sympathised  with  the  shame  of  the  sinner  whom 
He  pardoned,  but  He  uovur  tscused  the  ofTeLce.  "  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee  ;  go, 
and  sin  no  more,"  are  the  words  which  have  touched  the  human  heart,  and  worked 
repentance  and  amendment  of  life  in  thousands  since  the  days  when  they  were 
first  spoken  ;  but  no  one  could  ever  claim  them  as  an  encouragement  to  sin.  The 
dignity  of  our  Lord's  sympathy  was,  in  fact,  shown  by  His  obedience  to  the  law 
which  bade  Him  exhibit  God's  perfection.  He  never  allowed  one  virtue  to  interfere 
with  another.  Mercy  and  truth  might  meet  together,  righteousness  and  peace 
might  kiss  each  other,  but  the  one  never  entrenched  upon  the  province  of  the 
other ;  if  it  bad  there  v/ould  have  been  no  perfection.  And  if  we,  like  Christ,  would 
rightly  sympathise ;  if  we  would  in  our  degree  bear  the  griefs  of  our  feUow-creatures, 
without  any  weakness  of  judgment  or  absence  of  due  proportion,  we  must  view 
those  sorrows  as  Christ  viewed  them,  and  soothe  them  in  His  spirit.  To  relieve  all 
anguish,  to  remove  all  pain,  that  is  not  to  be  our  object.  If  it  were,  we  might  well 
in  sorrow  close  our  doors  to  the  suffering,  and,  shutting  out  their  misery  from  our 
view,  give  ourselves  up  to  our  own  enjoyment.  For  sympathy  is  pain.  When  we 
feel  with  and  for  another,  we  must  in  a  measure  suffer ;  and,  looking  at  the  sad 
amount  of  wretchedness  in  this  fallen  world,  we  may,  perhaps,  at  first  sight  be 
pardoned  if  we  deem  it  better  to  be  without  sympathy — neither  to  require  it  for 
ourselves,  nor  to  offer  it  to  others.  The  loss  on  the  one  side  may,  we  may  well 
think,  be  counterbalanced  by  the  gain  on  the  other.  Compassion    on    the 

ignorant : — Men  who  are  ignorant  should  not  be  met  with  scorn,  nor  fault-finding, 
nor  neglect,  for  they  need  compassion.  We  bhould  lay  ourselves  out  to  bear  with 
such  for  their  good.  A  disciple  who  has  been  taught  all  that  he  knows  by  a  graciouo 
Saviour  should  have  compassion  on  "the  ignorant."  A  wanderer  who  has  been 
restored  should  have  compassion  on  "  them  that  are  out  of  the  way."  A  priest 
should  have  compassion  on  the  people  with  whom  he  is  one  flesh  and  blood,  and 
assuredly  our  Lord,  who  is  our  great  High  Priest,  has  abundant  compassion  upon 
the  ignorant.  I.  What  is  this  ignorance?  It  is  moral  and  spiritual,  and  deals 
with  eternal  things.  1.  It  is  fearfully  common  among  all  ranks.  2.  It  leaves  them 
strangers  to  themselves.  (1)  They  know  not  their  own  ignorance.  (2)  They  are 
unaware  of  the  heart's  depravity.  (3)  They  are  unconscious  of  the  heinousness  of 
their  actual  sin.  (4)  They  dream  not  of  their  present  and  eternal  danger.  (5) 
They  have  not  discovered  their  inability  for  all  that  is  good.  3.  It  leaves  them 
unacquainted  with  the  way  of  salvation.  (1)  They  choose  other  ways.  (2)  They 
have  a  mixed  and  injurious  notion  of  the  one  way.  (3)  They  often  question  and 
cavil  at  this  one  and  only  way.  4.  It  leaves  them  without  the  knowledge  of 
Jesus.  They  know  not  His  person,  offices,  work,  character,  ability,  readiness  to 
save.  5.  It  leaves  them  strangers  to  the  Holy  Spirit.  (1)  They  perceive  not  Hia 
inward  strivings.  (2)  They  are  ignorant  of  regeneration.  (3)  They  cannot  com- 
prehend the  truth  which  He  teaches.  (4)  They  cannot  receive  His  sanctification. 
6.  It  is  most  ruinous  in  its  consequences.  (1)  It  keeps  men  out  of  Christ.  (2)  It 
does  not  excuse  them  when  it  is  wilful,  as  it  usually  is.    U.  What  is  thebb  in  this 

MKOBANCB  WHICH   IB  LIABLE   TO  PBOVOEE   US,  AND  THEREFOBE   DBUANDS  OOUPASSION? 


894  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

1.  Its  folly.  Wisdom  is  worried  with  the  absurdities  of  ignorance.  2.  Its  pride. 
Anger  is  excited  by  the  vanity  of  self-conceit.  3.  Its  prejudice.  It  will  not  hear 
nor  learn  ;  and  this  is  vexatious.  4.  Its  obstinacy.  It  refuses  reason  ;  and  this  is 
very  exasperating.  5.  Its  opposition.  It  contends  against  plain  truth  ;  and  this  is 
trying.  6.  Its  density.  It  cannot  be  enlightened ;  it  is  profoundly  foolish.  7.  Its 
unbelief.  Witnesses  to  Divine  truth  are  denied  credence.  8.  Its  wilfulness.  It 
chooses  not  to  know.  It  is  hard  teaching  such.  9.  Its  relapses.  It  returns  to 
folly,  forgets  and  refuses  wisdom,  and  this  is  a  sore  affliction  to  true  love.  III. 
How  OCR  Lord's  compassion  towards  the  ignorant  is  shown.  1.  By  offering  to 
teach  them.  2.  By  actually  receiving  them  as  disciples.  3.  By  instructing  them 
little  by  little,  most  condescendingly.  4.  By  teaching  them  the  same  things  over 
again,  patiently.  5.  By  never  despising  them  notwithstanding  their  dulness.  6. 
By  never  casting  them  off  through  weariness  of  their  stupidity.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Ignorance: — It  is  a  sad  thing  for  the  blind  man  who  has  to  read  the  raised  type 
when  the  tips  of  his  fingers  harden,  for  then  he  cannot  read  the  thoughts  of  men 
which  stand  out  upon  the  page  ;  but  it  is  far  worse  to  lose  sensibihty  of  soul,  for 
then  you  cannot  peruse  the  book  of  human  nature,  but  must  remain  untaught  in 
the  sacred  literature  of  the  heart.  You  have  heard  of  the  "  iron  duke,"  but  an  iron 
Christian  would  be  a  very  terrible  person :  a  heart  of  flesh  is  the  gift  of  Divine 
grace,  and  one  of  its  sure  results  is  the  power  to  be  very  pitiful,  tender,  and  full  of 
compassion.  (Ibid.)  Ignorance  is  the  devil's  college.  (Christmas  Evans.) 
The  sin  of  ignorance: — In  that  the  ignorant  are  here  brought  in  as  an  instance  of 
Buch  sinners  as  were  to  have  sacrifices  offered  up  for  their  sins,  the  apostle  giveth 
us  to  understand,  that  ignorance  is  a  sin.  It  is  expressly  said,  "  That  if  any  soul 
sin  through  ignorance,  he  sbaU  bring  a  sin-offering"  (Numb.  xv.  27,  28).  1. 
Ignorance  is  a  transgression  of  the  law  of  God,  for  it  is  contrary  to  that  knowledge 
which  the  law  requireth  :  but  every  transgression  is  sin  (1  John  iii.  4).  2.  Ignorance 
is  a  defect  of  that  image  of  God,  after  which  God  at  first  created  man ;  for  know- 
ledge was  a  part  of  that  image  (Col.  iii.  10).  3.  Ignorance  is  an  especial  branch 
of  that  natural  corruption  which  seized  upon  the  principal  part  of  man,  namely, 
his  understanding.  4.  Ignorance  is  the  cause  of  many  other  sins  (Gal.  iv.  8; 
1  Tim.  i.  13).  Therefore  it  must  needs  be  a  sin  itself.  5.  Judgments  are 
denounced  against  ignorance,  as  against  a  sin  (Hos.  iv.  6 ;  2  Thess.  i.  8).  6. 
Ignorance  is  a  punishment  of  other  sins  (Isa.  vi.  10 ;  John  xii.  40).  Though 
ignorance  be  a  sin,  yet  ignorant  persons  are  here  brought  in  as  a  fit  object  of  com- 
passion. Christ  renders  this  ground  of  His  praying  for  the  Jews  that  had  a  hand 
in  crucifying  Him  (Luke  xxiii.  34).  And  Peter  allegeth  it  as  a  ground  of  His 
tendering  mercy  unto  them  (Acts  iii.  17).  Ignorance  is  a  spiritual  blindness,  so  as 
they  see  not  the  dangerous  course  wherein  they  walk,  and  in  that  respect  are  the 
more  to  be  pitied.  {W.  Gouge.)  Ignorance  causes  neglect  of  religion: — It's 
ignorance  of  the  price  of  pearls  that  makes  the  idiot  slight  them.  It's  ignorance 
of  the  worth  of  diamonds  that  makes  the  fool  choose  a  pebble  before  them.  It's 
ignorance  of  the  satisfaction  learmug  affords  that  makes  the  peasant  despise  and 
laugh  at  it ;  and  we  very  ordinarily  see  how  men  tread  and  trample  on  those  plants 
which  are  the  greatest  restoratives,  because  they  know  not  the  virtue  of  them ;  and 
the  same  may  justly  be  affirmed  of  religion,  the  reason  why  men  meddle  no  more 
with  it  is — because  they  are  not  acquainted  with  the  pleasantness  of  it.  (Anthomj 
Horneck.)  Ministers  must  remember  the  ignorant : — When  I  preach  I  sink  myself 
deep  down.  I  regard  neither  doctors  nor  magistrates,  of  whom  are  here  in  this 
church  above  forty;  but  I  have  an  eye  to  the  multitude  of  young  people,  children, 
and  servants,  of  whom  are  more  than  two  thousand.  I  preach  to  those,  directing 
myself  to  them  that  have  need  thereof.  Will  not  the  rest  hear  me  ?  The  door 
stands  open  unto  them;  they  may  begone.  (M.  Luther.)  Offer  for  sins. — The 
great  sacrifice : — I.  The  absolute  holiness  and  spotless  innocence  of  the  Lord 
Christ,  in  His  offering  of  Himself,  had  a  signal  influence  unto  the  efficacy  op 
His  sacbifice,  and  is  a  great  encouragement  unto  our  faith  and  consolation. 
No  other  sort  uf  high  priest  could  have  done  what  was  to  be  done  for  us.  Had  He 
had  any  sin  of  His  own  He  ooold  never  have  taken  all  sin  from  us.  From  hence 
it  was  that  what  He  did  was  so  acceptable  with  God,  and  that  what  He  suffered 
was  justly  imputed  unto  us,  seeing  there  was  no  cause  in  Himself  why  He  should 
suffer  at  all.  And  we  may  see  herein — 1.  Pure  unmixed  love  and  grace.  He  had 
not  the  least  concern  in  what  He  did  or  suffered  herein  for  Himself.  This  was  the 
grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  being  rich,  for  our  sakes  He  became  poor. 
And  will  He  not  pursue  the  same  love  unto  the  end  ?    2.  The  efficacy  and  merit  of 


OEAP.  v.]  HEBREWS.  895 

His  oblation,  that  was  animated  by  the  life  and  quintessence  of  obedience.  There 
was  in  it  the  highest  sufferings,  and  the  most  absolute  innocency,  knit  together  by 
an  act  of  most  inexpressible  obedience.  3.  The  perfection  of  the  example  that  ia 
Bet  before  us  (1  Pet.  ii.  21,  22).     II.  Whosoeveb  dealeth  with  God  ob  man  about 

THE    SINS    OF    OTHERS,  SHOULD  LOOK  WELL  IK  THE  FIRST  PLACE    UNTO    HIS    OWN.       There 

are  four  ways  whereby  some  may  act  with  respect  unto  the  sins  of  others,  and  not 
one  of  them  wherein  they  can  discharge  their  duty  aright,  if  in  the  same  kind  they 
take  not  care  of  themselves  in  the  first  place.  1.  It  is  the  duty  of  some  to  endeavour 
the  conversion  of  others  from  a  state  of  sin.  How  can  they  press  that  on  others, 
which  they  neither  know  what  it  is,  nor  whether  it  be  or  not,  any  otherwise  than 
as  blind  men  know  there  are  colours?  By  such  persons  are  the  souls  of  men 
ruined,  who  undertake  the  dispensation  of  the  gospel  unto  them,  for  their  conver- 
sion unto  God,  knowing  nothing  of  it  themselves.  2.  It  is  our  duty  to  keep  those 
in  whom  we  are  concerned,  as  much  as  in  us  lieth,  from  sinning,  or  from  actual 
sin.  With  what  confidence,  with  what  conscience  can  we  endeavour  this  towards 
others,  if  we  do  not  first  take  the  highest  care  herein  of  ourselves  ?  3.  To  direct 
and  assist  others  in  the  obtaining  pardon  for  sin  is  also  the  duty  of  some.  And 
this  they  may  do  two  ways — (1)  By  directing  them  in  their  application  imto  God 
by  Jesus  Christ  for  grace  and  mercy.  (2)  By  earnest  supplications  with  them  and 
for  them.  And  what  will  they  do,  what  can  they  do,  in  these  things  sincerely  for 
others,  who  make  not  use  of  them  for  themselves  ?  4.  To  administer  consolation 
nnder  sinning,  or  surprisals  with  sin,  unto  such  as  God  would  have  to  be  comforted, 
is  another  duty  of  the  like  kind.  And  how  shall  this  be  done  by  such  as  were  never 
cast  down  for  sin  themselves,  nor  ever  spiritually  comforted  of  God?    III.  No 

DIGNITY  OF  PERSON  OB  PLACE,  NO  DUTY,  NO  UEBtT,  CAN  DELIVEB  SINNEBS  FEOM  STANDING 
IN  NEED  OF  A  SACBITICE  FOB  SIN.  ThE  HIGH  PBIEST,  BEING  A  SINNER,  WAS  TO  OFFEB 
HIMSELF.       IV.    It  WAS  A  PART  OF  THE   DABKNE88  AND  BONDAGE   OF  THE  ChURCH  UNDER 

THE  Old  Testament,  that  their  high  peiests  had  need  to  offeb  sacrifices  fob 
THEMSELVES  AND  THEIR  OWN  SINS.  It  is  a  relief  to  sinners  that  the  word  of  recon- 
ciliation is  administered  unto  them,  and  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  proposed,  by  men 
subject  unto  the  like  infirmities  with  themselves.  For  there  is  a  testimony  therein, 
how  that  they  also  may  find  acceptance  with  God,  seeing  He  deals  with  them  by 
those  who  are  sinners  also.  But  these  are  not  the  persons  who  procure  the  remis- 
sion, or  have  made  the  atonement  which  they  declare.  Were  it  so,  who  could  with 
any  confidence  acquiesce  therein  ?  But  this  is  the  holy  way  of  God.  Those  who 
are  sinners  declare  the  atonement  which  was  made  by  Him  who  had  no  sin.  {John 
Owen,  D.D.) 

Vers.  4-6.  No  man  taketh  this  honour  unto  himself.  The  ministerial  calling 
from  God  : — A  calling  is  most  requisite  in  all  things  we  take  in  hand,  especially  in 
the  ministry.  Who  will  meddle  with  the  sheep  of  a  man  unless  he  be  c^ed  to  it  ? 
and  shall  we  meddle  with  Christ's  sheep  without  a  calling  ?  As  for  our  calling.  1. 
It  is  of  God.  We  have  God's  seal  to  our  calling,  because  He  hath  furnished  us  in 
some  measure  with  gifts  for  it.  2.  We  are  called  by  the  Church,  which,  by  imposi- 
tion of  hands  representing  God's  hand,  hath  separated  us  to  this  office.  Let  every 
one  be  assured  of  his  calling.  A  lamentable  thing  to  consider,  what  a  number  of 
intruders  there  be  that  have  thruot  themselves  into  this  holy  calling.  In  Jero- 
boam's time  every  one  that  would  consecrate  himself  became  one  of  the  priests  of 
the  high  places.  Shall  we  have  them  to  make  cloth  that  have.no  skill  in  clothing? 
WUl  any  make  him  his  shepherd  that  knows  not  what  belongs  to  sheep  ?  And  wilt 
thon  deliver  Christ's  sheep  into  the  hands  of  a  blind  and  ignorant  shepherd?  Wilt 
thou  have  him  to  build  thy  house  that  hath  no  skill  in  building  ?  Wilt  thou  make 
him  the  schoolmaster  of  thy  child  that  hath  no  learning  ?  But  any  is  good  enough 
for  the  ministry.  If  men  did  look  as  well  to  the  charge  as  to  the  dignity  of  the 
oflSce ;  if  Onus  werd^je  well  considered  as  Bonus,  men  would  not  make  such  haste 
to  it  as  they  do.  'Efeey  watch  over  the  souls  of  the  people,  as  they  that  must  give 
an  account.  The  day  of  taking  in  our  profits  is  sweet,  but  the  counting  day  will  be 
terrible,  when  Christ  will  require  every  lost  sheep  at  our  hands.  Therefore  let 
none  take  this  honour  to  himself,  but  see  that  he  be  called  of  God,  as  Aaron  was. 
(W.  Jones,  D.D.)  Order  in  ecclesiastical  institution : — In  human  doings  and 
human  productions  we  see  everywhere  manifestations  of  order.  WeU-ordered 
stones  make  architecture ;  well-ordered  social  regulations  make  a  constitution  and 
a  police ;  weU-ordered  ideas  make  good  logic ;  well-ordered  words  make  good 
writing;  well-ordered  imaginations  and  emotions  make  good  poetry ;  well  ordered 


896  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  t 

facts  make  science.  Disorder,  on  the  other  hand,  makes  nothiug  at  all,  but  un- 
makes everything.  Stones  in  disorder  produce  ruins ;  an  ill-ordered  social  condi- 
tion is  decline,  revolution,  or  anarchy ;  ill-ordered  ideas  are  absurdity ;  ill-ordeied 
words  are  neither  sense  nor  grammar  ;  ill-ordered  imaginations  and  emotions  are 
madness;  ill-ordered  facts  are  chaos.  (J.  S.  Blackie.)  The  ministerial  office: — 
I.  Here  let  us  first  learn  that  both  it  is  unlawful  fob  ant  man  without  a  callino 
TO  take  upon  him  the  ministry  ;  neitheb  yet  ant  calling  ought  to  be,  which  18 
not  according  to  the  will  of  God  :  for,  seeing  the  ministry  is  honourable,  and  he 
is  justly  honoured  that  executeth  it  faithfully,  how  can  I  exalt  myself,  but  of  right 
I  ought  again  to  be  brought  low,  and  instead  of  glory,  have  shame  ?  For  what  do 
I  in  this  but  rob  Christ  of  His  glory,  who  is  Head  of  His  Church,  and  appointeth 
ministers  whom  He  will,  who  ruleth  in  the  house  of  Jacob,  and  ordaineth  officers 
at  His  own  pleasure?  If  in  an  earthly  kingdom  subjects  would  presume  to  take 
ofiSces  at  their  own  choice,  were  it  not  extreme  confusion,  utter  reproach  and 
shame  unto  the  prince  ?  How  much  more  to  bring  this  confusion  into  the  Church 
of  Christ  ?    II.  The  second  thing  to  be  leabned  in  these  words  is  that  we  have 

ALL   SUCH   a   calling    AS  WE    MAY    BE    SURE    IT    IS   OF    GoD  ;    FOR  WE  MUST  BE  CALLED  OF 

God,  AS  Aaron  was.  No  minister  ought  to  be  called  in  the  Church  but  he  whose 
calling  may  be  known  to  be  of  God.  Hereof  I  may  first  conclude,  touching  the 
person  of  the  minister :  that  because  in  all  places,  by  the  prophets,  by  the  apostles, 
by  our  Saviour  Christ,  God  always  requireth  that  His  ministers  be  of  good  report, 
well  grounded  in  faith,  able  to  teach  His  people ;  therefore  if  ignorant  men,  and 
not  able  to  teach,  be  chosen  unto  this  office,  I  dare  boldly  affirm  it,  their  calling  is 
not  allowed  of  God.  Now,  touching  the  office  whereunto  God  appointeth  the 
ministers  of  His  gospel,  is  it  not  this :  to  preach  His  Word,  and  minister  Sacra- 
ments ?  Other  governors  of  His  Church,  are  they  not  for  the  people's  obedience 
unto  this  Word,  and  for  provision  of  the  poor?  {E.Deering,  B.D.)  Of  the 
honour  and  function  of  the  high  priest : — It  here  declareth  that  the  high  priest's 
function  was  an  honourable  function,  which  is  thus  manifested.  1.  The  solemn 
manner  of  inaugurating,  or  setting  them  apart  thereto  (Exod.  xxix.  1).  2.  His 
glorious  apparel  (Exod.  xxviii.).  3.  The  great  retinue  that  attended  him  :  as  all 
sorts  of  Levites,  together  with  sundry  inferior  priests  (Numb.  iii.  9,  viii.  19).  4. 
The  hberal  provision  made  for  him  out  of  the  meat-offerings,  sacrifices,  firstfruits, 
tenths,  and  other  oblations  (Lev.  ii.  3,  v.  18,  vii.  6 ;  Deut.  xviii.  3).  5.  The 
difficult  cases  that  were  referred  to  him.  6.  The  obedience  that  was  to  be  yielded 
to  him.  7.  The  punishment  to  be  inflicted  on  such  as  rebelled  against  him  (Deut. 
xvii.  8-10,  cfec).  8.  The  sacred  services  which  they  performed,  as  to  be  for  men  in 
things  pertaining  to  God:  to  offer  up  what  was  brought  to  God  (ver.  1),  and  to  do 
other  particulars  set  down  (chap.  ii.  11).  In  such  honourable  esteem  were  high 
priests,  as  kings  thought  them  fit  matches  for  their  daughters  (2  Chron.  xxii.  11). 
9.  The  most  principal  honour  intended  under  this  word  was  that  the  high  priest, 
by  virtue  of  his  calling,  was  a  kind  of  mediator  between  God  and  man.  For  he 
declared  the  answer  of  the  Lord  to  man,  and  offered  up  sacrifices  to  God  for  man. 
(TF.  Gouge.)  Of  the  honour  of  the  ministerial  calling  : — 1.  Their  Master  is  the 
great  Lord  of  heaven  and  of  earth.  If  it  be  an  honour  to  be  an  especial  minister  of 
a  mortal  king,  what  is  it  to  be  the  minister  of  such  a  Lord  ?  2.  Their  place  is  to  be 
in  the  room  of  God,  even  in  His  stead — ambassadors  for  Him  (2  Cor.  v.  20).  8. 
Their  work  is  to  declare  God's  counsel  (Acts  xx.  17).  4.  Their  end  is  to  perfect 
the  saints  (Eph.  iv.  12).  6.  Their  reward  is  greater  than  of  others  (Dan.  xii.  3). 
Thus  hath  the  Lord  honoured  this  function  that  it  might  be  the  better  respected, 
and  prove  more  profitable.  Ministers  in  regard  of  their  persons  are  as  other 
men,  of  hke  passions  with  them,  and  subject  to  manifold  infirmities,  which 
would  cause  disrespect  were  it  not  for  the  honour  of  their  function.  (Ibid.) 
Divine  designation: — I.  It  is  an  act  of  sovereignty  in  God,  to  call  whom  He 

PLEASETH    UNTO   HiS   WORK   AND     ESPECIAL     SERVICE  ;    AND   EMINENTLT   80   WHEN   IT   18 

UNTO  ANT  PLACE  OP  HONOUB  AND  DiGNiTT  IN  His  HOUSE.  1.  BecEuse  every  caU  is 
accompanied  with  choice  and  distinction.  2.  Because,  antecedently  unto  their 
caU,  there  is  nothing  of  merit  in  any  to  be  so  called,  nor  of  ability  in  the  most,  for 
the  work  whereunto  they  are  called.  WTiat  merit  was  there,  what  previous  disposi- 
tion onto  their  work,  in  a  few  fishermen  about  the  Lake  of  Tiberias,  or  Sea  of 
Galilee,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  should  call  them  to  be  His  apostles,  disposing  them 
into  that  state  and  condition,  wherein  they  sit  on  twelve  thrones,  judging  the  twelve 
tribes  of  Israel?  So  was  it  ever  with  all  that  God  called  in  an  extraordinary  manner 
(see  Exod.  iv.  10, 11 ;  Jer.  i.  6 ;  Amos.  vii.  15, 16).    In  EQs  ordinary  calls  there  ii 


CHAP  v.]  HEBREWS.  897 


the  same  Bovereignty,  though  somewhat  otherwise  exercised.  For  in  saoh  a  call 
there  are  three  things — (1)  A  providential  designation  of  such  a  person  to  such  an 
office,  work,  or  employment.  (2)  It  is  a  part  of  this  call  of  God  when  He  blesseth 
the  endeavours  of  men  to  prepare  themselves  with  those  previous  dispositions  and 
qualifications  which  are  necessary  unto  the  actual  call  and  susception  of  this  office. 
And  hereof  also  there  are  three  parts — (a)  An  inclination  of  their  hearts,  in  com- 
pliance with  His  designation  of  them  unto  their  office.  (6)  An  especial  blessing 
of  their  endeavours  for  the  due  improvement  of  their  natural  faculties  and  abilities, 
in  study  and  learning,  for  the  necessary  aids  and  instruments  of  knowledge  and 
wisdom,  (c)  The  communications  of  peculiar  gifts  unto  them,  rendering  them 
meet  and  able  unto  the  discharge  of  the  duty  of  their  office,  which  in  an  ordinary 
call  is  indispensably  required  as  previous  to  an  actual  separation  unto  the  office 
itself.  3.  He  ordereth  things  so  as  that  a  person  whom  He  will  employ  in  the 
service  of  His  house  shall  have  an  outward  call,  according  unto  rule,  for  his  admis- 
sion thereinto.  And  in  all  these  things  God  acts  according  to  His  own  sovereign 
will  and  pleasure.  And  many  things  might  hence  be  insisted  on.  As — (1)  That 
we  should  have  an  awful  reverence  of,  and  a  holy  readiness  to  comply  with,  the 
call  of  God ;  not  to  run  away  from  it,  or  the  work  called  unto,  as  did  Jonah,  nor  to 
be  weary  of  it  because  of  difficulty  and  opposition  which  we  meet  withal  in  the 
discharge  of  our  duty,  as  it  sundry  times  was  ready  to  befall  Jeremiah  (Jer.  sv.  10, 
XX.  7-9),  much  less  to  desert  or  give  it  over,  on  any  eai-thly  account  whatever ;  see- 
ing that  he  who  sets  his  hand  to  this  plough  and  takes  it  back  again  is  unworthy 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  (2)  That  we  should  not  envy  nor  repine  at  one  another, 
whatever  God  is  pleased  to  call  any  unto.  (3)  That  we  engage  into  no  work  wherein 
the  name  of  God  is  concerned  without  His  call ;  which  gives  a  second  observation, 
namely,  that — II.  The  highest  excbllency  and  utmost  necessitt  of  ant  wobk 

TO  BE  DONE  FOB  GOD  IN  THIS  WOBLD  WILL  NOT  WABBANT  OUB  DNDEETAKING  OF  IT, 
OB  ENQAGINO  IN  IT,  UNIjESS  WE  ABE  CAIiLED  THEBEUNTO.  HI.  The  MOBE  EXCELLENT 
ANT  WOBS  OF  GoD  IS,  THE  MOBE  EXPBESS  OUGHT  OUB  CALL  UNTO  IT  TO  BE.  lY.  It  13 
A   GBEAT  DIQNITT  AND   HONOUB    TO     BE    DULT     CALLED     UNTO    ANT     WOBK,    8EEVICE,    OB 

OFFICE  IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  GoD.  (John  OwcTi,  D.D.)  Chilst  glorified  not  Him- 
self to  be  made  an  High  Priest. — Christ,  as  Son  of  Man,  called  and  perfected  to  be 
our  High  Priest : — Twice  already  the  apostle  has  referred  to  Christ  as  our  High 
Priest,  and  he  now  enters  on  the  development  of  the  central  theme  of  his  Epistle — 
Christ  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek.  But  in  order  to  explain  the 
priesthood  on  which  Christ  entered  after  His  death  and  resurrection,  and  of  which 
not  Aaron  but  Melchizedek  was  the  type,  it  is  necessary  for  him  to  show  how  the 
Lord  Jesus  fulfilled  all  that  was  typified  of  Him  in  the  Levitical  dispensation,  and 
possessed  in  perfection  all  the  requirements  which,  according  to  Divine  appoint- 
ment, were  needed  in  the  high  priest,  and  which  could  not  be  possessed  in  perfec- 
tion by  sinful  men  like  the  Aaronic  priests.  In  the  first  place,  the  priests  were  as 
sinful  as  the  people  whom  they  represented.  It  was  on  account  of  sin  that  Israel 
felt  the  need  of  a  mediator.  But  Aaron  and  the  priests  were  only  officially  holy ; 
they  were  not  in  reality  spotless  and  pure.  Hence  they  had  to  offer  sacrifices  for 
their  own  sins  and  infirmities,  as  well  as  for  those  of  the  people.  Secondly,  the 
mediator  ought  not  merely  to  be  perfect  and  sinless  man,  he  ought  also  to  be 
Divine,  in  perfect  and  full  communion  with  God,  so  that  he  can  impart  Divine  for- 
giveness and  blessing.  Only  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  therefore,  is  the  true  mediation. 
He  who  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  His  own  blood,  hath  made  us 
kings  and  priests  unto  God.  The  two  qualifications  of  the  Aaronic  high  priest, 
that  he  was  fronx,among_men  and  that  he  was  appointed  by  God,  were  fulfilled  in 
a  perfect  maimer  in  tfieLord  Jesus.  But  in  coESidering  these  two  points,  we  are 
struck  not  merely  by  the  resemblance  between  the  type  and  the  fulfilment,  but  also 
by  the  contrast.  1.  Aaron  was  chosen  from  among  men  to  offer  gifts  and  sacrifices 
for  sins.  Jesus  was  true  man,  born  of  a  woman  and  made  under  the  law ;  He 
became  in  all  things  like  unto  His  brethren.  But  whereas  the  Jewish  high  priest 
h»d  to  offer  for  himself,  as  he  was  a  sinner,  the  Lord  was  harmless  and  xmdefiled, 
pure  and  spotless.  His  mediation  was  therefore  perfect.  The  Aaronio  high  priest 
was  able  to  have  compassion  on  the  ignorant  and  on  them  that  were  out  of  the 
way,  knowing  and  feeling  his  own  infirmities  and  transgressions,  and  knowing  also 
the  love  of  God,  who  desireth  not  the  death  of  the  sinner,  but  that  he  should  turn 
and  live.  But  this  compassionate  regard  for  the  sinner  can  exist  in  perfection  only 
in  a  sinless  one.  This  appears  at  first  sight  paradoxical ;  for  we  es^pect  the  perfect 
Btan  to  be  the  severest  judge.    And  with  regard  to  sin,  this  is  doubtless  true.    God 


898  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohaj.  f. 

chargeth  even  His  angels  with  folly.  He  beholds  sin  where  we  do  not  discover  it. 
He  setteth  our  secret  sins  in  the  light  of  His  countenance.  And  Jesus,  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel,  like  the  Father,  has  eyes  like  a  flame  of  fire,  and  discerns  everything 
that  is  contrary  to  God's  mind  and  will.  But  with  regard  to  the  sinner,  Jesus,  by 
virtue  of  His  perfect  holiness,  is  the  most  merciful,  compassionate,  and  considerate 
Judge.  Beholding  the  sinful  heart  in  all,  estimating  sin  according  to  the  Divine 
standard,  according  to  its  real  inward  character,  and  not  the  human,  conventional, 
and  outward  measure,  Jesus,  infinitely  holy  and  sensitive  as  He  was,  saw  often  less 
.■to  shock  and  pain  Him  in  the  drunkard  and  profligate  than  in  the  respectable, 
iselfish,  and  ungodly  religionists.  Again,  He  had  come  to  heal  the  sick,  to  restore 
'the  erring,  to  bring  the  sinner  to  repentance.  He  looked  upon  sin  as  the  greatest 
■and  most  fearful  evil,  but  on  the  sinner  as  poor,  suffering,  lost,  and  helpless.  He 
felt  as  the  Shepherd  towards  the  erring.  Again,  He  fastened  in  a  moment  on  any 
indications  of  the  Father's  dra'wing  the  heart,  of  the  Spirit's  work.  2.  The  high 
priest  is  appointed  by  God.  No  man  taketh  this  honour  unto  himself,  but  he  that 
is  called  of  God,  as  was  Aaron.  The  high  priesthood  of  Christ  is  identified  here 
with  His  glory.  "Christ  glorified  not  Himself  to  be  made  an  High  Priest."  Blessed 
truth,  that  the  glory  of  Christ  and  our  salvation  are  so  intimately  connected,  that 
Christ  regards  it  as  His  glory  to  be  our  Mediator  and  Intercessor  1  This  is  Christ's 
glory,  even  as  it  is  the  reward  of  His  suffering,  that  in  Him  we  draw  near  to  the 
Father,  and  that  from  Him  we  receive  the  blessings  of  the  everlasting  covenant. 
He  rejoices  to  be  our  High  Priest.  God  called  Him  to  the  priesthood.  The  calling 
of  Jesus  to  the  high  priestly  dignity  is  based  on  His  Sonship.  Because  Jesus  ia 
Son,  He  is  the  Prophet,  perfectly  revealing  God ;  because  He  is  Son,  He  is  the  true 
Sacrifice  and  Priest ;  for  only  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God  can  cleanse  from  all  sin, 
and  bring  us  nigh  unto  God  ;  and  only  through  Christ  crucified  and  exalted  can  the 
Father's  love  and  the  Spirit's  power  descend  into  our  hearts.  Here  the  comparison 
and  contrast  between  the  Lord  and  Aaron  ends.  The  apostle  now  enters  on  that 
which  is  peculiar  to  our  Saviour  Jesus.  The  types  and  figures  of  the  old  covenant 
could  not  be  perfect  and  adequate  ;  for  that  which  is  united  in  Christ  had  neces- 
sarily to  be  severed  and  set  forth  by  a  variety  of  figures.  The  priests  offered  not 
themselves,  but  animals.  Now  the  obedience,  the  conflict,  the  faith,  the  offering 
of  the  will  as  the  true,  real,  and  effective  Sacrifice  could  not  possibly  be  symbolised. 
Nor  could  any  single  symbol  represent  how  Jesus,  by  being  first  the  Sacrifice, 
became  thereby  the  perfect,  compassionate,  and  merciful  High  Priest.  Christ  was 
the  victim  on  the  Cross.  The  Son  of  God,  according  to  the  eternal  counsel,  came 
into  the  world  to  be  obedient  even  unto  death.  "Lo,  I  come  to  do  Thy  will."  His 
obedience  was  characterised  throughout  by  such  continuity,  liberty,  and  inward 
delight,  that  we  are  apt  to  forget  that  aspect  of  His  lite  on  which  the  apostle  dwells 
when  he  says,  that  though  Christ  was  a  Son,  yet  learned  He  obedience  by  the 
things  which  He  suffered.  Real  and  great  were  His  difficulties,  temptations,  and 
sorrows ;  and  from  the  prayers  and  complaints  ascribed  to  Messiah  in  the  psalms 
and  prophets,  we  can  understand  somewhat  of  the  burden  which  weighed  on  His 
loving  and  sensitive  heart,  and  the  constant  dependence  with  which  He  leaned  on 
the  Father,  and  obtained  from  Him  light  and  strength.  Jesus  believed  ;  He  lived 
not  merely  before,  but  by  the  Father.  Thus  is  Jesus  the  Author  and  Finisher  of 
faith.  He  went  before  the  sheep.  He  is  the  forerunner.  He  has  experienced 
every  difficulty,  and  tasted  every  sorrow.  He  knows  the  path  in  all  its  narrowness. 
{A.  Saphir.)  Christ  glorified  not  Himself : — As  the  Pope  doth,  who  will  needs  be  styled 
Pontifex  Maximm,  the  greatest  high  priest.  Pope  Hildebrand  especially,  whom, 
when  no  man  would  advance  to  Peter's  chair,  he  gat  up  himself.  Said  he,  "  Who 
can  better  judge  of  me  than  myself  ?  "      (J.  Trapp.)  The  difference  between  the 

priesthood  and  the  high  priesthood  of  Christ : — I.  The  priest  and  the  high  priest  did 
not  minister  in  the  same  place.  As  a  priest,  Christ  ministered  on  earth  ;  as  high 
priest.  He  ministers  in  heaven.  II.  The  priest  and  the  high  priest  did  not  per- 
form the  same  work.  1.  As  priest,  Christ  sacrificed  Himself.  2.  As  high  priest. 
He  (1)  entered  heaven  by  His  own  blood;  (2)  intercedes  on  our  behalf  with  the 
Father.  III.  The  priest  and  the  high  priest  did  not  appear  in  the  same  dress. 
Christ  as  a  priest  was  made  like  unto  His  brethren :  wore  the  simple  dress  of 
hnmanity.  Christ  as  high  priest  of  eternity  is  clothed  with  all  the  glories  of 
immortal  life.  IV.  The  priest  and  the  high  priest  did  not  occupy  the  same  position. 
The  one  was  a  sub-officer,  the  other  the  supreme  judge  of  the  land  and  the  president 
of  the  Sanhedrin.  Christ  as  High  Priest  is  the  highest  officer  in  the  kingdom  ol 
God.    {H.  Harries.)         Christ  not  a  self-elected,  but  a  God-appointed  priest : — At 


CHAP,  v.]  HEBREWS.  899 

length  the  priesthood  of  Christ,  ahready  three  times  alluded  to,  is  taken  up  ia 
earnest,  and  made  the  subject  of  an  elaborate  discussion,  extending  from  this  point 
to  chap.  X.  18.  The  writer  begins  at  the  beginning,  setting  forth  first  of  all  that 
Christ  is  a  legitimate  priest,  not  a  usurper ;  one  solemnly  called  to  the  oflSce  by 
God,  not  self -elected.  The  chief  thing  in  his  mind  here  is  the  call  or  appointment; 
the  sympathy  is  referred  to,  in  connection  with  its  source,  personal  infirmity,  as 
explaining  the  need  for  a  call,  so  as  to  suggest  the  question.  Who,  conBcious  of  the 
infirmity  which  is  the  secret  of  sacerdotal  mildness,  would  dream  of  undertaking 
Buch  an  office  without  a  Divine  call  ?  Jesus  assuredly  undertook  the  office  only  as 
called  of  God.  He  was  called  to  the  priesthood  before  His  incarnation.  He  came 
to  the  world  under  a  Diviue  call.  And  during  the  days  of  Hie  earthly  life  Hia 
behaviour  was  such  as  utterly  to  exclude  the  idea  of  His  being  a  usurper  of  sacer- 
dotal honours.  All  through  His  incarnate  experiences,  and  especially  in  those  of 
the  closing  scene.  He  was  simply  submitting  to  God's  will  that  He  should  be  a  priest. 
And  when  He  returned  to  heaven  He  was  saluted  High  Priest  in  recognition  of  Hia 
lojalty.  Thus  from  first  to  last  He  was  emphatically  One  called  of  God.  What  is 
said  of  the  sympathy  that  becomes  a  high  priest,  though  subordinate  to  the  state- 
ment concerning  his  call,  is  important  and  interesting.  First,  a  description  is 
given  of  the  office  which  in  every  clause  suggests  the  reflection.  How  congruous 
sympathy  to  the  sacerdotal  character !  The  high  priest  is  described  as  taken  from 
among  men,  and  the  suggestion  is  that,  being  a  man  of  like  nature  with  those  for 
whom  he  transacts,  he  may  be  expected  to  have  fellow-feeling  with  them.  Then 
he  is  further  described  as  ordained  for  men  in  things  pertaining  to  God,  the  implied 
thought  being  that  he  cannot  acquit  himself  satisfactorily  in  that  capacity  unless 
he  sympathise  with  those  whom  he  represents  before  God.  Lastly,  it  is  declared 
to  be  his  special  duty  to  offer  sacrifices  of  various  sorts  for  sin,  the  latent  idea 
being  that  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  to  perform  that  duty  with  any  earnestness 
or  efficiency  who  has  not  genuine  compassion  for  the  sinful.  Very  remarkable  is 
the  word  employed  to  describe  priestly  compassion.  It  does  not  signify  to  feel 
with  another,  but  rather  to  abstain  from  feeling  against  him ;  to  be  able  to  restrain 
antipathy.  It  is  carefully  selected  to  represent  the  spirit  which  becomes  a  high 
priest  as  a  mean  between  two  extremes.  On  the  one  hand,  he  should  be  able  to 
control  the  passions  provoked  by  error  and  ignorance,  anger,  impatience,  disgust, 
contempt.  On  the  other  hand,  he  must  not  be  so  amiable  as  not  even  to  be  tempted 
to  give  way  to  these  passions.  Ignorance  and  misconduct  he  must  not  regard  with 
unruffled  equanimity.  It  is  plainly  implied  that  it  is  possible  to  be  too  sympathetic, 
and  so  to  become  the  slave  or  tool  of  men's  ignorance  or  prejudices,  and  even  par- 
taker of  their  sins — a  possibility  illustrated  by  the  histories  of  Aaron  and  of  Eh, 
two  high  priests  of  Israel.  The  model  high  priest  is  not  like  either.  He  hates 
ignorance  and  sin,  but  he  pities  the  ignorant  and  sinful.  The  ignorant  for  him  are 
persons  to  be  taught,  the  erring  sheep  to  be  brought  back  to  the  fold.  He  remembers 
that  sin  is  not  only  an  evil  thing  in  God's  sight,  but  also  a  bitter  thing  for  the 
offender ;  realises  the  misery  of  an  accusing  conscience,  the  shame  and  fear  which 
are  the  ghostly  shadows  of  gnilt.  The  character  thus  drawn  is  obviously  con- 
genial to  the  priestly  office.  The  priest's  duty  is  to  offer  gifts  and  sacrifices  for 
sin.  The  performance  of  this  duty  habituates  the  priestly  mind  to  a  certain  way 
of  viewing  sin :  as  an  offence  deserving  punishment,  yet  pardonable  on  the  pre- 
sentation of  the  appropriate  offering.  The  priest's  relation  to  the  offender  is  also 
such  as  demands  a  sympathetic  spirit.  He  is  not  a  legislator,  enacting  laws  with 
rigid  penalties  attached.  Neither  is  he  a  judge,  but  rather  an  advocate  pleading 
for  his  client  at  the  bar.  Neither  is  he  a  prophet,  giving  utterances  in  vehement 
language  to  the  Divine  displeasure  against  transgression,  but  rather  an  intercessor 
imploring  mercy,  appeasing  anger,  striving  to  awaken  Divine  pity.  But  the  special 
source  to  which  sacerdotal  sympathy  is  traced  is  the  consciousness  of  personal 
infirmity.  "  For  that  he  himself  also  is  compassed  with  infirmity."  The  explana- 
tion seems  to  labour  under  the  defect  of  too  great  generality.  A  high  priest  is  no 
more  human  in  his  nature  and  experience  than  other  men — why,  then,  should  he 
be  exceptionally  humane  ?  Two  reasons  suggest  themselves.  The  high  priest  was 
officially  a  very  holy  person,  begirt  on  all  sides  with  the  emblems  of  holiness, 
copiously  anointed  with  oil,  whose  exquisite  aroma  typified  the  odour  of  sanctity, 
arrayed  in  gorgeous  robes,  significant  of  the  beauty  of  holiness,  required  to  be  so 
devoted  to  his  sacred  calling  and  so  dead  to  the  world  that  he  might  not  mourn  for 
the  death  of  his  nearest  kin.  How  oppressive  the  burden  of  this  official  sanctity 
must  have  been  to  a  thoughtful,  humble  man,  conscious  of  personal  infirmity,  and 


400  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

knowing  himself  to  be  of  like  passions  and  sinful  tendencies  with  bis  fellow-wor- 
shippers I  Another  source  of  priestly  benignity  was,  I  imagine,  habitual  converse 
in  the  discharge  of  duty  with  the  erring  and  the  ignorant.  The  high  priest  had 
officially  much  to  do  with  men,  and  that  not  with  picked  samples,  but  with  men  in 
the  mass ;  the  greater  number  probably  being  inferior  specimens  of  humanity,  and 
all  presenting  to  his  view  their  weak  side.  He  learned  in  the  discharge  of  hi& 
functions  to  take  a  kindly  interest  in  all  sorts  of  people,  even  the  most  erratic,  and 
to  bear  with  inconsistency  even  in  the  best.  The  account  given  of  priestly  sym- 
pathy prepares  us  for  appreciating  the  statement  which  follows  concerning  the 
need  for  a  Divine  call  to  the  priestly  office  (ver.  4).  No  one,  duly  impressed  with 
his  own  infirmities,  would  ever  think  of  taking  unto  himself  so  sacred  an  office, 
A  need  for  a  Divine  call  is  felt  by  all  devout  men  in  connection  with  all  sacred 
offices  involving  a  ministry  on  men's  behalf  in  things  pertaining  to  God.  The 
tendency  is  to  shrink  from  such  offices,  rather  than  to  covet  and  ambitiously  appro- 
priate them.  Having  stated  the  general  principle  that  a  Divine  call  is  necessary 
as  an  inducement  to  the  assumption  of  the  priestly  office,  the  writer  passes  to  the 
case  of  Jesus  Christ,  whom  be  emphatically  declares  to  have  been  utterly  free  from 
the  spirit  of  ambition,  and  to  have  been  made  a  high  priest,  not  by  self-election, 
but  by  Divine  appointment.  It  is  difficult  to  understand,  at  first,  why  the  text 
from  the  second  Psabn,  "  My  Son  art  Thou,"  is  introduced  here  at  all,  the  thing  to 
be  proved  being,  not  that  Messiah  was  made  by  God  a  Son,  but  that  He  was  made 
a  Priest.  But  on  reflection  we  perceive  that  it  is  a  preliminary  hint  as  to  what  sort 
of  priesthood  is  signified  by  the  order  of  Melchizedec,  a  first  attempt  to  insinuate 
into  the  minds  of  readers  the  idea  of  a  priesthood  belonging  to  Christ  altogether 
distinct  in  character  from  the  Levitical,  yet  the  highest  possible,  that  of  one  at 
once  a  Divine  Son  and  a  Divine  King.  On  further  consideration,  it  dawns  on  us 
that  a  still  deeper  truth  is  meant  to  be  taught ;  that  Christ's  priesthood  is  coeval 
with  His  Bonship,  and  inherent  in  it.  From  the  pre-incarnate  state,  to  which  the 
quotations  from  the  Psalter  refer,  the  writer  proceeds  to  speak  of  Christ's  earthly 
history :  "  Who,  in  the  days  of  His  flesh."  He  here  conceives,  as  in  a  later  part  of 
the  Epistle  he  expressly  represents,  the  Christ  as  coming  into  the  world  under  a 
Divine  call  to  be  a  priest,  and  conscious  of  His  vocation.  He  represents  Christ  as 
under  training  for  the  priesthood,  but  training  implies  previous  destination ;  as  an 
obedient  learner,  but  obedience  impHes  consciousness  of  His  calling.  In  the  verses 
which  follow  (7,  8)  his  purpose  is  to  exhibit  the  behaviour  of  Jesus  during  His 
life  on  earth  in  such  a  light  that  the  idea  of  usurpation  shall  appear  an  absurdity. 
The  general  import  is :  "  Jesus  ever  loyal,  but  never  ambitious ;  so  far  from 
arrogating,  rather  shrinking  from  priestly  office,  at  most  simply  submitting  to  God's 
will,  and  enabled  to  do  that  by  special  grace  in  answer  to  prayer."  Reference  is 
made  to  Christ's  Sonship  to  enhance  the  impression  of  difficulty.  Though  He  was 
a  Son  full  of  love  and  devotion  to  His  Father,  intensely,  enthusiastically  loyal  to 
the  Divine  interest,  ever  accounting  it  His  meat  and  drink  to  do  His  Father's  will, 
yet  even  for  Him  so  minded  it  was  a  matter  of  arduous  learning  to  comply  with 
the  Father's  will  in  connection  with  His  priestly  vocation.  For  it  must  be  under- 
stood that  the  obedience  here  spoken  of  has  that  specific  reference.  The  aim  is 
not  to  state  didactically  that  in  His  earthly  life  Jesus  was  a  learner  in  the  virtue  of 
obedience  all  round,  but  especially  to  predicate  of  Him  learning  obedience  in  con- 
nection with  His  priestly  calling — obedience  to  God's  will  that  He  should  be  a 
priest.  But  why  should  obedience  be  so  difficult  in  this  connection  ?  The  full 
answer  comes  later  on,  but  it  is  hinted  at  even  here.  It  is  because  priesthood 
Involves  for  the  priest  death  (ver.  7),  mortal  suffering  (ver.  8) ;  because  the  priest 
is  at  the  same  time  victim.  And  it  is  in  the  light  of  this  fact  that  we  clearly  see 
how  impossible  it  was  that  the  spirit  of  ambition  should  come  into  play  with 
reference  to  the  priestly  office  in  the  case  of  Christ.  Self-glorification  was  excluded 
by  the  nature  of  the  service.  The  verses  which  follow  (9,  10)  show  the  other  side 
of  the  picture  :  how  He  who  glorified  not  Himself  to  be  made  a  priest  was  glorified 
by  God ;  became  a  priest  indeed,  efficient  in  the  highest  degree,  acknowledged  as 
such  by  His  Father,  whose  will  He  had  loyally  obeyed.  "Being  perfected,"  how? 
In  obedience,  and  by  obedience  even  unto  death,  perfected  for  the  office  of  priest, 
death  being  the  fintJ  stage  in  His  training,  through  which  He  became  a  Pontifex 
eonsummatus.  Being  made  perfect  in  and  through  death,  Jesus  became  ipso  facto 
author  of  eternal  salvation,  the  final  experience  of  suffering,  by  which  His  training 
for  the  priestly  office  was  completed,  being  at  the  same  time  His  great  priestly 
Aohicvement.    The  statement  that  through  death  Jesus  became  ipso  facto  author 


CHAP,  v.]  HEBREWS.  401 

of  salvation,  is  not  falsified  by  the  fact  that  the  essential  point  in  a  sacrifice  was  itg 
presentation  before  God  in  the  sanctuary,  which  in  the  Levitical  system  took  place 
subsequently  to  the  slaughtering  of  the  victim,  when  the  priest  took  the  blood 
within  the  tabernacle  and  sprinkled  it  on  the  altar  of  incense  or  on  the  mercy-seat. 
The  death  of  our  High  Priest  is  to  be  conceived  of  as  including  all  the  steps  of  the 
sacrificial  process  within  itsell  Lapse  of  time  or  change  of  place  is  not  necessary 
to  the  accomplishment  of  the  work.  The  death  of  the  victim,  the  presentation  of 
the  sacrificial  blood — all  was  performed  when  Christ  cried  TtTeXtartu  Translated 
into  abstract  language,  ver.  10  supplies  the  rationale  of  the  fact  stated  in  ver.  9. 
Its  efiect  is  to  tell  us  that  Christ  became  author  of  eternal  salvation  becanse  He 
was  a  true  High  Priest  after  the  order  of  Melchizedeo :  author  of  salvation  in  viiiiue 
of  His  being  a  priest,  author  of  eternal  salvation  because  His  priesthood  was  of  the 
Melchizedeo  type— never  ending.     {A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.) 

Vers.  7-11.  With  strong  crytng  and  teaxa.— The  exercise  of  the  Son  of  Qod  in 

Hit  agony : — L  In  the  first  place  we  shall  illustrate  the  definition  of  thb  beabom 
OF  THE  AQONT  OF  THB  SoN  OF  (JoD  in  these  words :  "  The  days  of  His  flesh."  In 
general,  it  may  be  observed  that  the  application  of  the  term  "  flesh  "  to  the  mystery 
of  His  incarnation  is  remarkable.  By  the  application  of  this  term  something 
more  is  expressed  than  the  subsistence  of  our  nature  in  His  person.  1.  The 
beginning  of  these  days  is  at  His  birth.  In  His  birth  the  Son  of  Qod  entered  into 
the  infirmities  of  our  fiesh,  and,  for  our  sakes,  exposed  Himself  not  only  to  suf  wr- 
ings attending  ordinary  births,  but  onto  hardships  peculiar  to  the  circumstances  of 
His  own  extraordinary  birth.  2.  These  days  ended  at  His  resurrection.  The 
haman  nature  subsisting  in  the  person  of  the  Son  of  God,  was  the  same  nature 
after  His  resurrection  that  it  had  been  before  His  death.  But  the  likeness,  or 
appearance,  was  different.  Before  His  death  it  had  "  the  likeness  of  sinful  fiesh  "  ; 
after  His  resurrection  it  appeared  in  the  original  glory  of  human  nature  subsisting 
still  in  His  person.  3.  The  number  of  these  days  is  not  exactly  known.  The 
Author  of  revelation  is  the  Judge  of  what  is  proper  to  appear  in  the  witness  which 
He  hath  testified  of  His  Son,  and  what  is  proper  to  be  conceaJed.  4.  These  were 
the  days  of  His  soSerings  and  temptations.  At  their  beginning,  the  Son  of  God 
entered  into  His  sufferings,  and  suffered  every  day  until  their  end.  5.  Toward  the 
close  of  these  days  He  suffered  an  agony.  Day  after  day,  all  the  days  of  His  flesh, 
He  waded  deeper  and  deeper  in  the  ocean  of  sorrow,  and  toward  the  last  the  waves 
rose  high  and  broke  over  Him  in  the  fury  and  vengeance  of  the  curse.  6.  These 
were  the  days  of  His  supplication,  prayers,  and  tears.  II.  But  in  regard  our  text 
refers  unto  the  pratebs  and  supplications  which  in  the  close  of  thb  days  of  His 
FLESH  He  offebed  up,  under  His  agony,  we  proceed  to  the  second  head  of  our 
general  method,  and  shall  illustrate  these  words  of  the  text :  "  When  He  had  offered 
np  prayers  and  supplications,  with  strong  crying  and  tears,  unto  Him  who  was  able 
to  save  Him  from  death."  1.  "  Offering  up  prayers  and  supplications"  is  the  action 
of  the  Son  of  God  under  His  agony  in  the  close  of  the  days  of  His  flesh.  In  our 
nature,  He  is  "  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession  "  ;  and  His  suffering  and  dying 
for  our  sins  are  represented  in  many  texts  of  Scripture  as  actions  of  a  priest  offer- 
ing sacrifice,  and  making  atonement  and  reconcihation  for  sins.  2.  "  To  Him  who 
was  able  to  save  EUm  from  death,"  is  the  description  of  the  object  onto  whom  the 
Bon  of  God,  under  His  agony,  in  the  days  of  His  flesh,  offered  up  prayers  and 
supplications.  In  our  nature,  and  in  that  station  wherein  the  Son  of  God  stood. 
He  considered  His  righteous  and  holy  Father  as  possessing  sovereign  power  over 
Him  with  respect  to  life  and  death,  and  executing  the  curse  upon  Him  according  to 
the  penalty  of  the  law  ;  He  considered  Him  as  able,  not  to  deliver  Him  from  dying — 
this  is  not  the  object  of  His  prayers — but  to  uphold  His  suffering  nature  in  conflict- 
ing with  the  pangs  and  sorrows  of  death,  and  to  save  Him  from  the  mouth  of  the 
lion,  and  from  the  horns  of  the  unicorn,  or  from  being  overcome  by  the  piince  of 
this  world  who  had  the  power  of  death  ;  and  He  considered  Him  as  able  to  loose 
the  cords  and  pains  of  death,  and,  through  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant,  to 
bring  Him  again  from  the  dead  by  a  glorious  resurrection  on  the  third  day.  3. 
"  Strong  crying  and  tears  "  are  expressions  of  the  fervency  with  which  the  Son  of 
God,  under  His  agony,  in  the  close  of  the  days  of  His  flesh,  offered  up  prayers  and 
supplications  to  His  righteous  Father,  who  was  able  to  save  Him  from  death.  III. 
We  proceed  to  illustrate  His  acceptance,  which  is  affirmed  by  the  apostle  in  the  latter 
part  of  our  text :  "  Heard  in  that  He  feared."  1.  The  nature  of  that  fear,  which  is 
ascribed  to  the  Son  of  God  under  His  agony,  is  to  be  ascertained.    Xh«  term  osed 

26 


403  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai.t. 

by  the  apostle,  and  translated  "  fear,"  signifies  godly  fear,  accompanied  with  weak- 
ness  and  feelings  in  the  present  frame  of  our  nature.  Impressions  of  the  holiness 
of  His  Father,  together  with  sensations  of  His  displeasure,  sunk  deep  into  His  soul, 
and  affected  every  member  of  His  body,  exciting  that  fear  which  is  the  sum  of 
obedience  and  the  essence  of  adoration,  and  which,  in  His  state,  was  accompanied 
with  infirmities  and  feelings  of  flesh  and  blood.  Obedience  and  adoration  were  ia 
His  prayer;  and  His  agony  itself,  in  one  consideration,  was  suffering  affliction,  anu, 
in  another,  subjection  to  the  will  and  obedience  to  the  commandment  of  His  Father. 
2.  We  shall  collect  several  principles  which  gave  force  to  the  operation  of  fear  in  the 
Son  of  God  under  His  agony  in  the  days  of  His  flesh.  (1)  ffis  apprehensions  of 
the  glory  and  majesty  of  His  Father  were  clear  and  sublime.  (2)  His  burden  was 
heavy  and  pressed  His  suffering  nature  to  the  ground.  (3)  His  sensations  of  the 
wrath  and  curse  of  God  were  deep  and  piercing.  (4)  His  temptations  were  violent 
and  extraordinary.  (5)  The  sorrows  of  death  drew  up  and  stood  before  Him  in 
battle  array.  But  while  His  soul  was  offering  for  sin,  and  sorrowing  even  unto 
death,  every  desponding  and  gloomy  apprehension  which  attacked  His  faith  was  re- 
sisted and  broken,  and  full  assurance  of  His  hope  of  a  resurrection  by  the  glory  of 
the  Father  held  firm  unto  the  end.  Thy  right  hand,  triumphant  Sufferer,  doth  ever 
valiantly  1  3.  The  sense  in  which  the  Son  of  God  under  His  agony,  in  the  days  of 
His  flesh,  was  heard  is  to  be  ascertained  and  illustrated.  (1)  The  prayers  and  suppli- 
cations, which  in  the  days  of  His  flesh  the  Son  of  God  offered  up  unto  Him  who 
was  able  to  save  Him  from  death,  were  answered.  (2)  His  fatigued  and  dyiug  nature 
was  strengthened.  (3)  His  sacrifice  was  accepted  ;  and,  in  the  odour  of  perfection, 
came  up  before  His  Father  with  a  sweet-smelling  savour.  (4)  His  body  was  raised 
from  the  dead  and  saw  no  corruption.  (5)  He  was  received  up  into  heaven,  crowned 
with  glory  and  honour,  and  made  Captain  of  salvation,  to  bring  unto  glory  the  multi- 
tude of  sons.  IV.  After  illustrating  the  several  parts  of  our  text,  some  applica- 
tions are  proper  for  reproof,  correction,  and  instruction,  unto  the  peculiar  people 
who  are  in  the  fellowship  of  God's  dear  Son  in  the  first  place  ;  and,  in  the  second, 
unto  the  children  of  disobedience  who  will  not  enter  into  this  holy  fellowship.  1. 
"  Holy  brethren,  consider  the  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  our  prof ession. "  Con- 
sider His  infirmities,  consider  His  temptations,  consider  His  conflict,  consider  His 
example,  consider  His  acceptance,  and  consider  His  divinity.  2.  After  these  con- 
siderations which  have  been  addressed  unto  the  peculiar  people  who  are  in  the 
fellowship  of  the  mystery  of  godliness,  we  would  have  the  children  of  disobedience 
to  consider  the  existence  and  holiness  of  God ;  the  provocation  which  they  have 
given  Him ;  the  necessity  of  reconciliation ;  the  access  to  the  benefit  of  the  reconci- 
liation which  the  merciful  and  faithful  High  Priest  of  our  profession  made  for  the 
sins  of  the  people  ;  and  the  penal  and  certain  consequences  of  refusing  the  benefit 
of  this  reconciliation.     [Alex.  Shanks.)        The  mental  sadness  of  Christ : — I.  His 

MIND  WAS  THE  SUBJECT  OF  INTENSE  EMOTIONS.  II.  A  DREAD  OF  DEATH  SEEMS  TO  HAVK 
BEEN  ONE  OF  HiS  MOST  DISTRESSING  EMOTIONS.  HI.  UnDER  THIS  MOST  INTENSE  EMO- 
TION He  sought  RELIEF  IN  PRAYER.  FV.  HiS  PRAYERS  WERE  ANSWERED  IN  CONSE- 
QUENCE OF  His  piety.  The  dread  was  taken  away  and  strength  given  to  bear  it. 
(Homilist.)  'The   benejit  arising  to   Christ  from  His  own  sufferings: — 1.  His 

conduct  UNDER  His  SUFFERINGS.  Never  were  the  sufferings  of  any  creature  com- 
parable with  those  of  Christ.  His  bodily  sufferings  perhaps  were  less  than  mauy 
of  His  followers  have  been  called  to  endure — but  those  of  His  soul  were  infinitely 
beyond  our  conception  (Psa.  xxii.  14,  15  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  38  ;  Luke  xxii.  44).  Under 
them  He  poured  out  His  heart  in  prayer  unto  His  heavenly  Father.  He  never  lost 
Bight  of  God  as  His  Father,  but  addressed  Him  with  the  greater  earnestness  under 
that  endearing  title  (Mark  xiv.  36).  Not  that  He  repented  of  the  work  He  had 
undertaken  ;  but  only  desired  such  a  mitigation  of  His  sufferings  as  might  consist 
with  His  Father's  glory  and  the  salvation  of  men.  Nor  did  He  desist  from  prayer 
till  He  had  obtained  His  request.  Him  the  Father  always  heard;  nor  was  an 
answer  now  denied  Him.  Though  the  cup  was  not  removed.  He  was  not  suffered  to 
faint  in  drinking  it.  His  sufferings  indeed  could  not  be  dispensed  with  ;  but  tLey 
were  amply  recompensed  by — H.  The  benefit  He  derived  from  them.  1.  Per- 
sonal. It  was  necessary  for  Him,  as  our  High  Priest,  to  experience  everything 
which  His  people  are  called  to  endure  in  their  conflicts  with  sin  and  Satan  (chap. 
iL  17).  Now  the  difficulty  of  abiding  faithful  to  God  in  arduous  circumstances  is 
exceeding  great.  This  is  a  trial  which  all  His  people  are  called  to  sustain- 
Though  as  the  Son  of  God  He  knew  all  things  in  a  speculative  manner,  yet  He 
eould  not  know  this  experimentally,  but  by  being  reduced  to  a  suffering  condition. 


CHIP.  T.]  HEBREWS. 


This  therefore  was  one  benefit  which  He  derived  from  His  sufferings.  He  learned 
by  them  more  tenderly  to  sympatliise  with  His  afflicted  people,  and  more  speedily 
to  succour  them  when  imploring  His  help  with  strong  crying  and  tears  (ver.  18). 
2.  OlBcial.  As  the  priests  were  consecrated  to  their  office  by  the  blood  of  their 
sacrificaa,  so  was  Jesus  by  His  own  blood.  From  that  time  He  had  a  right  to  impart 
saiTation.  lU.  Leakn — 1.  What  we  should  do  under  sufferings,  or  a  dread  of  God'a 
displeasure.  We  should  not  hastily  conclude  that  we  are  not  His  children  (chap, 
xii.  6).  We  should  rather  go  with  humble  boldness  to  God  as  our  Father  (Luke  xv. 
17,  18).  We  should  plead  His  gracious  promises  (Psa.  1.  15).  2.  Whither  to  go 
fcr  salvation.  The  Father  was  "  able  to  save  His  Son  from  death."  And  doubt- 
less He  can  save  us  also.  But  He  has  exalted  His  Son  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour 
(Acts  V.  31).  To  Christ  therefore  we  are  to  go,  and  to  the  Father  through  Christ 
(Eph.  11.  18).  In  this  way  we  shall  find  Him  to  be  the  author  of  eternal  salvation 
to  us  (chap.  vii.  25).  3.  What  is  to  be  our  conduct  when  He  has  saved  us  ?  Jesus 
died  "  to  purchase  to  Himself  a  peculiar  people  zealous  of  good  works."  We  must 
therefore  obey  Him,  and  that  too  as  wilhngly  in  seasons  of  severe  trial  as  in  times 
of  peace.  We  must  be  content  to  be  conformed  to  the  likeness  of  our  Lord  and 
Master.  Let  us  be  faithful  unto  death  (Kev.  ii.  10).  (Theological  Sketch-Book.) 
Our  sympathising  High  Priest : — L  First,  that  we  may  see  the  suitability  of  our  Lord 
to  deal  with  us  in  our  cares  and  sorrows,  we  shall  view  Him  as  a  suppliant.  1. 
The  text  begins  with  a  word  which  reveals  His  weakuess :  "  Who  in  the  days  of  His 
flesh."  Our  blessed  Lord  was  in  such  a  condition  that  He  pleaded  out  of  weakness 
with  the  God  who  was  able  to  save.  When  our  Lord  was  compassed  wilh  the  weak- 
ness of  flesh  He  was  much  in  prayer.  2.  In  the  days  of  His  flesh  our  Divine  Lord 
felt  His  necessities.  The  words,  "  He  offered  up  prayers  and  supplications,"  proved 
that  He  had  many  needs.  Men  do  not  pray  and  supplicate  unless  they  have  greater 
need  than  this  world  can  satisfy.  The  Saviour  offered  no  petitions  by  way  of  mere 
form ;  His  supphcations  arose  out  of  an  urgent  sense  of  His  need  of  heavenly  aid. 
S.  Further,  let  us  see  bow  like  the  Son  of  God  was  to  us  in  His  intensity  of  prayer. 
The  intensity  of  His  prayer  was  such  that  our  Lord  expressed  HimseK  in  "crymg 
and  tears."  Since  from  His  lips  you  hear  strong  crying,  and  from  His  eyes  you  see 
showers  of  tears,  you  may  well  feel  that  His  is  a  sympathetic  spirit,  to  whom  you 
may  run  in  the  hour  of  danger,  even  as  the  chicks  seek  the  wings  of  the  hen.  4. 
We  have  seen  our  Lord's  needs  and  the  intensity  of  His  prayer ;  now  note  His 
understanding  in  prayer.  He  prayed  "  unto  Him  that  was  able  to  save  Him  from 
death."  The  expression  is  startling  ;  the  Saviour  prayed  to  be  saved.  In  His 
direst  woe  He  prayed  thoughtfully,  and  with  a  clear  apprehension  of  the  character 
of  Him  to  whom  He  prayed.  It  is  a  great  help  in  devotion  to  pray  intelligently, 
knowing  well  the  character  of  God  to  whom  you  are  speaking.  Jesus  was  about  to 
die,  and  therefore  the  aspect  under  which  He  viewed  the  great  Father  was  as  "  Him 
that  was  able  to  save  Him  from  death."  This  passage  may  be  reaci  in  two  ways  : 
it  maj  mean  that  He  would  be  saved  from  actually  dying  if  it  could  be  done  con- 
sistently with  the  glorifying  of  the  Father  ;  or  it  may  mean  that  He  pleaded  to  be 
saved  out  of  death,  though  He  actually  descended  into  it.  The  word  may  be 
rendered  either  from  or  out  of.  The  Saviour  viewed  the  great  Father  as  able  to 
preserve  Him  in  death  from  the  power  of  death,  so  that  He  should  triumph  on  the 
Cross  ;  and  also  as  able  to  bring  Him  up  again  from  among  the  dead.  5.  It  will 
further  help  3  ou  if  I  now  call  your  attention  to  His  fear.  I  beUeve  our  old  Bibles 
give  us  a  correct  translation,  much  better  than  the  Pievised  Version,  although  much 
can  be  said  for  the  latter,  "  With  strong  crying  and  tears  unto  Him  that  was  able 
to  save  Him  from  death,  and  was  heard  in  that  He  feared."  That  is  to  say,  He  bad  a 
fear,  a  natural  and  not  a  sinful  fear ;  and  from  this  fear  He  was  delivered  by  the 
strength  brought  to  Him  from  heaven  by  the  angel.  God  has  implanted  in  all  of 
us  the  love  of  life,  and  we  cannot  part  from  it  without  a  pang :  our  Lord  felt  a 
natural  dread  of  death.  6.  But  then  notice  another  thing  in  the  text,  namely,  His 
success  in  prayer,  which  also  brings  Him  near  to  us.  He  was  heard  "  in  that  He 
feared."  0  my  soul  1  to  think  that  it  should  be  said  of  thy  Lord  that  He  was  heard, 
even  as  thou,  a  poor  suppliant,  art  heard.  Yet  the  cup  did  not  pass  from  Him, 
neither  was  the  bitterness  thereof  in  the  least  abated.  II.  Behold  our  Lord  as  A  Son. 
His  prayers  and  pleadings  were  those  of  a  son  with  a  father.  1.  The  Sonship  of 
our  Saviour  is  well  attested.  The  Lord  declared  this  in  the  second  Psalm  :  "  Thou 
art  My  Son ;  this  day  have  I  begotten  Thee."  Thrice  did  the  voice  out  of  the 
excellent  glory  proclaim  this  truth,  and  He  was  "  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God 
with  power,  according  to  the  spirit  of  holiness,  by  the  resurrection  from  the  dead." 


404  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼, 

So,  when  you  are  put  to  great  grief,  do  not  doubt  your  sonship.  2.  Being  a  Son, 
the  text  goes  on  to  tell  us  that  He  had  to  learn  obedience.  How  near  this  brings 
our  Lord  to  us,  that  He  should  be  a  Son  and  should  have  to  learn !  We  go  to 
school  to  Christ  and  with  Christ,  and  so  we  feel  His  fitness  to  be  our  compassionate 
High  Priest.  3.  Jesus  must  needs  learn  by  suffering.  As  swimming  is  only  to  be 
learned  in  the  water,  so  is  obedience  only  learned  by  actually  doing  and  suffering 
the  Divine  will.  4.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  learned  this  obedience  to  perfection.  5.  Our 
Lord  learned  by  suffering  mixed  with  prayer  and  supplication.  His  was  no  un  sancti- 
fied sorrow.  His  griefs  were  baptised  in  prayer.  It  cost  Him  cries  and  tears  to  learn 
the  lesson  of  His  sufferings.  He  never  suffered  without  prayer,  nor  prayed  without 
suffering.  III.  Behold  the  Lord  Jesus  as  a  Savioub.  1.  As  a  Saviour  He  is  per- 
fect. Nothing  is  lacking  in  Him  in  any  one  point.  However  difficult  your  case 
may  seem,  He  is  equal  to  it.  Made  perfect  by  suffering,  He  is  able  to  meet  the  in- 
tricacies of  your  trials,  and  to  deliver  you  in  the  most  complicated  emergency.  2. 
Henceforth  He  is  the  author  of  salvation.  Author  I  How  expressive  1  He  is  the 
cause  of  salvation  ;  the  originator,  the  worker,  the  producer  of  salvation.  Salva- 
tion begins  with  Christ ;  salvation  is  carried  on  by  Christ ;  salvation  is  completed 
by  Christ.  He  has  finished  it,  and  you  cannot  add  to  it ;  it  only  remains  for  yoa 
to  receive  it.  3.  Observe  that  it  is  eternal  salvation  :  "  the  author  of  eternal  sal- 
vation." Jesus  does  not  save  us  to-day  and  leave  ns  to  perish  to-morrow ;  He 
knows  what  is  in  man,  and  so  He  has  prepared  nothing  less  than  eternal  salvation 
for  man.  4.  Furthermore,  inasmuch  as  He  has  learned  obedience  and  become  a 
perfect  High  Priest,  His  salvation  is  wide  in  its  range,  for  it  is  unto  "  all  them  that 
obey  Him."  5.  Note,  that  He  is  all  this  for  ever,  for  He  is  "  a  priest  for  ever." 
If  you  could  have  seen  Him  when  He  came  from  Gethsemane,  you  think 
you  could  have  trusted  Him.  Oh !  trust  Him  to-day,  for  He  is  "  called  of 
God  to  be  an  High  Priest  after  the  order  of  Melchizedec,"  and  that  order 
of  Melchizedec  is  an  everlasting  and  perpetual  priesthood.  He  is  able  to- 
day to  plead  for  you,  able  to-day  to  put  away  your  sins.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Christ  in  the  infirmity  of  the  flesh: — I.  The  Lobd  Jesus  Christ  Himself  had  a  timb 
OF  iNFiEMiTY  IN  THIS  WORLD.  It  is  f  rue  His  infirmities  were  all  sinless,  but  all  trouble- 
some and  grievous.  By  them  was  He  exposed  unto  all  sorts  of  temptations  and 
Bufferings,  which  are  the  two  springs  of  aU  that  is  evil  and  dolorous  unto  our  uatr.re. 
And  thus  it  was  with  Him  not  a  few  days,  nor  a  short  season  only,  but  during  His 
whole  course  in  this  world.  1.  It  was  out  of  infinite  condescension  and  love  unto  our 
Bouls,  that  Christ  took  on  Himself  this  condition  (Phil.  ii.  6-8).  2.  As  He  had  other 
ends  herein,  for  these  things  were  indispensably  required  unto  the  discharge  of  the 
sacerdotal  office,  so  He  designed  to  set  us  an  example,  that  we  should  not  faint 
under  our  infirmities  and  sufferings  on  their  account  (Heb.  xii.  2,  3  ;  1  Pet.  iv.  1). 
(1)  His  patience,  unconquerable  and  unmovable  in  all  things  that  befell  Him  in 
the  days  of  His  flesh  (Isa.  xlii.  2).  Whatever  befell  Him,  He  bore  it  quietly  and 
patiently.  (2)  His  trust  in  God.  By  this  testimony  that  it  is  said  of  Him,  "  I  will 
put  My  trust  in  God,"  doth  our  apostle  prove  that  He  had  the  same  nature  with  us, 
subject  to  the  same  weakness  and  infirmities  (chap.  ii.  13).  And  this  we  are  taught 
thereby,  that  there  is  no  management  of  our  human  nature,  as  now  beset  with  in- 
firmities, but  by  a  constant  trust  in  God.  (3)  His  earnest,  fervent  prayers  and 
supplications,  which  are  here  expressed  by  our  apostle,  and  accommodated  unto  the 
days  of  His  flesh.  II.  A  lite  of  glory  mat  ensue  after  a  life  of  infirmity.  We 
see  that  it  hath  done  so  with  Jesus  Christ.  His  season  of  infiimity  issued  in 
eternal  glory.  And  nothing  but  unbelief  and  sin  can  hinder  ours  from  doing  so 
also.  III.  The  Lord  Christ  is  no  more  now  in  a  state  of  weakness  and  tempta- 
tion ;  THE  DAYS  OP  His  FLESH  ABE  PAST  AND  GONE.  With  His  death,  ended  the  days 
of  His  flesh.  His  revival  or  return  unto  Ufe,  was  into  absolute,  eternal,  unchange- 
able glory.  IV.  The  Lord  Christ  filled  up  every  season  with  duty,  with 
THB  proper  duty  OF  IT.  The  days  of  His  flesh,  were  the  only  season  wherein 
He  could  offer  to  God ;  and  He  missed  it  not,  He  did  so  accordingly.  It  is  true, 
in  His  glorified  state,  He  continually  represents  in  heaven,  the  offering  that  He 
made  of  Himself  on  the  earth,  in  an  effectual  application  of  it  unto  the  advantage 
of  the  elect.  But  the  offering  itself  was  in  the  days  of  ELis  flesh.  Then  was  Hia 
body  capable  of  pain,  His  soul  of  sorrow.  His  nature  of  dissolution,  all  which  were 
necessary  unto  this  duty.    V.  The  Lord  Christ,  in  His  offering  dp  Himself  fob 

US,  laboured  and  travailed  in  soul,  to  bring  THE  WORK  UNTO  A  GOOD  AlO)  HOLY  ISSUE. 

A  hard  labour  it  was,  and  as  such,  it  is  here  expressed.  He  went  through  it 
with  fears,  sorrows,  tears,  outcries,  prayers,   and   humble   supphcations.    1.  All 


CHAP,  v.]  HEBREWS.  405 

•  -16  holy,  natural  affections  of  His  sonl  were  filled,  taken  ap,  and  extended  to  the 
utmost  capacity,  in  acting  and  suffering.    2.  All  His  graces,  the  gracious  qualifica- 
tions of  His  mind  and  aSections  were,  in  a  like  manner,  in  the  height  of  their 
exercise.    Both  those  whose  immediate  object  was  God  Himself,  and  those  which 
respected  the  Church,  were  all  of  them  excited,  drawn  forth,  and  engaged.     As — 
(1)  Faith  and  trust  in  God.    These  Himself  expresseth,  in  His  greatest  trial,  as 
those  which  He  betook  Himself  unto  (Isa.  1.  7,  8 ;  Psa.  xxii.  9, 10 ;  Heb.  ii.  13). 
These  graces  in  Him  were  now  tried  to  the  utmost.    All  their  strength,  all  their 
elHcacy  was  exercised  and  proved.    (2)  Loye  to  mankind.     As  this  in  His  Divine 
nature  was  the  peculiar  spring  of  that  infinite  condescension,  whereby  He  took  our 
nature  on  Him,  for  the  work  of  mediation  (Phil.  ii.  6-8) ;  so  it  wrought  mightily 
and  effectually  in  His  human  nature,  in  the  whole  course  of  His  obedience,  but 
especially  in  the  offering  of  Himself  unto  God  for  us.    (3)  Zeal  to  the  glory  of  God. 
This  was  committed  unto  Him,  and  concerning  this,  He  took  care  that  it  might  not 
miscarry.     (4)  He  was  now  in  the  highest  exercise  of  obedience  unto  God,  and  that 
in  such  a  peculiar  manner  as  before  He  had  no  occasion  for.    3.  He  did  so  also 
with  respect  to  that  confluence  of  calamities,  distresses,  pains,  and  miseries,  which 
was  upon  His  whole  nature.    And  that  in  these  consisted  no  small  part  of  His 
trials,  wherein  He  underwent  and  suffered  the  utmost  which  human  nature  is 
capable  to  undergo,  is  evident  from  the  description  given  of  His  dolorous  sufferings 
both  in  prophecy  (Psa.  xxii. ;  Isa.  liii.),  and  in  the  story  of  what  befell  Him  in  the 
evangelists.     And  in  this  manner  of  His  death,  there  were  sundry  things  concur- 
ring.    (1)  A  natural  sign  of  His  readiness  to  embrace  all  sinners  that  should  coma 
nnto  Him,  His  arms  being,  as  it  were,  stretched  out  to  receive  them  (Isa.  xlv.  22, 
xlv.  1).  (2)  A  moral  token  of  His  condition,  being  left  as  one  rejected  of  all  between 
heaven  and  earth  for  a  season ;  but  in  Himself  interposing  between  heaven  and 
earth  for  the  justice  of  God  and  sins  of  men,  to  make  reconciliation  and  peace  (Eph. 
ii.  16, 17).     (3)  The  accomplishment  of  sundry  types ;  as— (a)  Of  that  of  him  who 
was  hanged  on  a  tree,  as  cursed  of  the  Lord  (Deut.  xxi.  22).      (b)  Of  the  brazen 
serpent  which  was  lifted  np  in  the  wilderness  (John  ii.  14),  with  respect  whereunto 
He  says,  that  when  He  is  lifted  up.  He  would  draw  all  men  to  Him  (John  xii.  32). 
(c)  Of  the  wave-offering,  which  was  moved,  shaken,  and  turned  several  ways,  to 
declare  that  the  Lord  Christ  in  this  offering  of  Himself,  should  have  respect  unto  all 
parts  of  the  world,  and  all  sorts  of  men  (Exod.  xxix.  26).   (4)  The  conflict  He  had  with 
Satan,  and  all  the  powers  of  darkness,  was  another  part  of  His  travail.    And  herein 
He  laboured  for  that  victory  and  success  which  in  the  issue  He  did  obtain  (Col.  ii. 
13,  14;  Heb.  ii.  14;  1  John  iii.  18).     (5)  His  inward  conflict,  in  the  making  His 
soul  an  offering  for  sin,  in  His  apprehensions,  and  undergoing  of  the  wrath  of  God 
due  unto  sin,  hath  been  already  spoken  unto,  so  far  as  is  necessary  unto  our  present 
purpose.     (6)  In,  and  during  all  these  things,  there  was  in  His  eye  continually  that 
unspeakable  glory  that  was  set  before  Him,  of  being  the  repairer  of  the  breaches  of 
the  creation,  the  recoverer  of  mankind,  the  captain  of  salvation  unto  all  that  obey 
Him,  the  destruction  of  Satan,  with  his  kingdora  of  sin  and  darkness,  and  in  all  the 
great  restorer  of  Divine  glory,  to  the  eternal  praise  of  God.   Whilst  all  these  things 
were  in  the  height  of  their  transaction,  is  it  any  wonder  if  the  Lord  Christ  laboured 
and  travailed  in  soul,  according  to  the  description  here  given  of  Him  ?    VI.  The 
Lord  Christ,  in  the  time  of  His  offering  and  suffering,  considering  Goo  with 
WHOM  He  had  to  do,  a.s  the  Sovereign  Lord  op  life  and  death,  as  the  supreme 
Eector  and  Judge  of  all,  casts  Himself  before  Him  with  most  fervent  praters 
foe  deliverance,  from  the  sentence  of  death  and  the  curse  of  the  law.     1.  How 
great  a  matter  it  was,  to  make  peace  with  God  for  sinners,  to  make  atonement  and 
reconciliation  for  sin.     This  is  the  life  and  spirit  of  our  religion,  the  centre  wherein 
all  the  lines  of  it  do  meet  (Phil.  iii.  8-10  ;  1  Cor.  ii.  2  ;  Gal.  vi.  14).     2.  A  sight  and 
sense  of  the  wrath  of  God  due  unto  sin,  will  be  full  of  dread  and  terror  for  the  souls 
of  men,  and  will  put  them  to  a  great  conflict  with  wrestling  for  deliverance.    VII. 
In  all  the  pressures  that  were  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  all  the  distresses 
He  had  to  conflict  withal  in  His  suffering,  His  faith  for  deliveranob  and  suc- 
cess WAS  FiBM  AND  UNCONQUERABLE.    This  was  the  ground  He  stood  upon  in  all  His 
prayers  and  supplications.     VIH.  The  success  of  oub  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  His 

TRIALS,  AS  OUB  HeAD  AND  SUBETY,  13  A  PLEDGE  AND  ASSURANCE  OF  SUCCESS   UNTO   US  IN 

ALL  OUB  SPIRITUAL  CONFLICTS,  {John  Oioeii,  D.D.)  Christ's  sufferings : — In  this 
one  sentence  there  is  more  for  us  to  learn  than  either  eye  hath  seen  or  ear  hath 
heard  or  all  flesh  in  this  life  shall  attain  unto :  it  is  the  depth  of  the  glorious 
gospel  which  the  angels  do  desire  to  behold.    I.  We  have  to  learn  by  the  example  of 


406  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.  ▼. 

our  Saviour  Christ  in  this  place,  that  in  all  temptations  we  should  approach  unto 
OUB  God,  and  make  our  complaints  unto  Him,  who  is  only  able  and  ready  for  to  help 
us.  In  all  miseries  we  are  not  sunken  so  deep  in  sorrow  as  He  that  for  our  sakes  made 
prayers  and  supplications,  with  strong  cryings  and  with  tears,  and  was  delivered 
from  His  fear.    II.  The  second  point  that  we  have  here  to  learn  in  this  example 
of  our  Saviour  Christ  is,  to  know  unto  whom  we  should  mark  oub  peayees  in  thb 
DAY  OF  trouble,  which  the  apostle  testifieth  in  these  words :  that  Christ  made  His 
prayers  unto  Him  that  was  able  to  deliver  Him  from  death.     It  followeth  in. 
the  text :  with  great  crying  and  with  tears.     IH.  Here  we  have  to  note,  in  what 
measure  oub  Savioub  Christ  was  afflicted,  even  so  far,  that  He  cried  out  in 
the  bitterness  of  His  soul.    Who  hath  been  ever  so  full  of  woe,  and  who  hath 
been  brought  so  low  into  the  dust  of  death  ?    His  virtues  were  unspeakable,  and 
righteous  above  all  measure,  yet  was  He  accounted  among  the  wicked.     And  if 
these  were  the  causes  that  Christ  had  to  complain,  then  think  not  that  His  cryings 
were  above  His  sorrow ;  to  see  so  near  unto  Etis  heart,  even  in  His  own  person, 
innocence  blamed,  virtue  defaced,  righteousness  trodden  down,  holiness  profaned, 
love  despised,   glory  contemned,  honour  reviled,   all  goodness    ashamed,    faith 
oppugned,  and  life  wounded  to  death  ;  how  could  He  yet  abstain  from  strong  crying 
and  tears,  when  the  malice  of  Satan  had  gotten  so  great  a  conquest  ?   His  grief  was 
exceeding  to  see  all  virtue  and  godliness  so  trodden  under  feet  and  Satan  to  pre- 
vail against  man,  to  his  everlasting  condemnation.    No  creature  could  ever  bear 
such  a  perfect  image  of  a  man  of  sorrow.     But  the  height  and  depth  of  all  miseries 
was  yet  behind :  the  sin  that  He  hated  He  must  take  it  upon  His  own  body,  and 
bear  the  wrath  of  His  Father,  that  was  poured  out  against  it.     This  is  the  fulness 
of  all  pain  that  compassed  Him  round  about,  which  no  tongue  is  able  to  utter,  and 
no  heart  can  conceive.    IV.  But  let  us  now  see  what  the  apostle  further  teacheth 
us,  and  while  our  Saviour  Christ  is  in  these  great  extremities,  what  fruit  of  well- 
doing He  hath  learned  by  it.    It  followeth,  and  although  He  were  the  Son,  yet 
learned  He  obedience  by  the  things  He  suffered.     Lo,  this  was  no  little  profit  of  all 
His  troubles ;  He  learned  thereby,  how  and  what  it  was  to  obey  His  Father ;  Ha 
might  have  great  boldness  that  His  obedience  was  perfect.  The  shame  of  the  world, 
the  afflictions  of  the  flesh,  the  vexations  of  the  mind,  the  pains  of  hell,  when  these 
could  make  Him  utter  no  other  words  but,  "  Father,  as  Thou  wilt,  so  let  it  be  done," 
what  hope,  what  faith  did  He  surely  build  on,  that  His  obedience  was  precious  in 
the  sight  of  His  Father  ?    This  example  is  our  instruction.    We  know  then  best 
how  we  love  the  Lord,  when  we  feel  by  experience  what  we  will  suffer  for  His  sake. 
So  faint  not  in  your  mournings,  but  endure  patiently ;  you  know  not  the  happiness 
of  that  which  seemeth  your  misery  ;  let  this  be  the  first  cause  why  we  should  be 
glad  of  temptations.    Lo,  these  are  the  healthful  counsels  of  the  Lord  toward  us, 
that  we  should  be  made  like  unto  His  Son  Christ  in  many  afflictions,  that  at  the 
last  we  might  be  also  Uke  Him  in  eternal  glory.     Thus  far  we  have  heard  two 
special  causes  why  we  ought  to  rejoice  in  all  temptations :  the  one,  that  so  we  leara 
true  obedience ;  the  other,  that  by  them  we  be  made  like  unto  Christ.     The  third 
cause  at  this  time  which  I  will  touch,  is  this :  God  sendeth  us  sundry  chastise- 
ments, and  especially  that  which  is  most  grievous  of  all  other,  the  anguish  of 
spirit,  and  affliction  of  the  soul ;  for  this  purpose,  that  we  should  be  warned  in  time 
how  to  turn  unto  Him  and  be  free  from  the  plague  when  it  cometh.     It  foUoweth 
in  the  apostle  :  "  And  being  consecrate.  He  was  made  the  author  of  salvation  to  all 
them  that  obey  Him."    V.  In  these  words  we  are  taught,  what  fruit  and  coumo- 

DITY  WE  HAVE  THROUGH  THESE  BITTER  BUFFERINGS   OF  OUR   SaVIOUB   ChRIST,  AND  ALSO 

BY  WHAT  MEANS  WE  ABE  MADE  PARTAKERS  OF  IT.  The  fruit  is  eternal  salvation,  the 
means  to  go  unto  it  is  obedience.  In  the  fijrst  we  learn  that  all  promise  and  hope  of 
life  is  in  Christ  alone  ;  He  hath  alone  the  words  of  life,  and  he  that  dwelleth  not 
in  Him,  shall  see  no  hfe :  but  tbe  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him.  Take  hold  of 
Christ,  and  take  hold  of  life;  reach  forth  thine  hand  to  any  other  thing,  and 
thou  reachest  unto  vanity  which  cannot  help.  {E.  Deering,  B.D.)  Distractions 
in  prayer : — Such  is  the  pattern  which  He,  who  is  our  pattern,  gives  us  of  accept- 
able effectual  prayer.  What  are  our  prayers?  Heavy,  for  the  most  part,  and 
earthly ;  often  we  are  unwilling  to  begin  them,  readily  falling  in  with  some  plea, 
why  we  should  not  pray  now,  readily  ceasing.  And  well  may  we  have  no  pleasure 
in  prayers  such  as  we  too  often  offer.  Or  of  those  who  really  desire  to  pray,  how 
many  have  their  minds  so  little  controlled  at  other  times,  or  so  thronged  with  the 
things  of  this  life,  that  the  thoughts  of  the  world  pour  in  upon  them,  when  they 
would  pray.    Step  by  step,  we  sunk  auaid  the  distr&ctions  of  ihe  world,  and  step  by 


CHAP,  y.]  HEBREWS.  407 

step  only  may  we  hope  that  onr  Father  will  raise  as  out  of  the  mire  wherein  we 
plunged  ourselves.  But  oar  first  step,  the  very  beginning  and  condition  of  our 
restoration,  is  to  unlearn  the  distractions  whereby  we  have  been  beset.  In  seeking  to 
remedy  our  distractions,  our  first  labour  must  be  to  amend  ourselves.  Such  as  we 
are  at  other  times,  such  will  our  prayers  be.  A  person  cannot  be  full  of  cares,  and 
riches,  and  pleasures,  and  enjoyments,  and  vanities  of  this  life,  up  to  the  very 
moment  when  he  falls  down  at  God's  footstool,  and  leave  these  companions  of  his 
ether  hours  behind  him,  so  that  they  will  not  thrust  themselves  in  with  him  into 
the  holy  presence.  We  cannot  keep  our  thoughts  disengaged  at  prayer,  if  they  are 
through  the  day  engaged ;  we  cannot  keep  out  vain  thoughts  then,  if  at  other  times 
we  yield  to  them.  We  must  live  more  to  God,  if  we  would  pray  more  to  God  ;  we 
must  be  less  engrossed  with  the  world,  if  we  would  not  have  the  world  thrust  itself 
in  upon  our  prayers  and  stifle  them.  But  still  further,  even  when  we  would  serve 
God,  or  do  our  duty  in  this  life,  we  must  see  that  we  do  our  very  duties  calmly. 
There  is  a  religious,  as  well  as  a  worldly,  distraction.  We  may  mix  up  self  in 
doing  duty,  as  well  as  when  we  make  self  our  end.  Eeligious  excitement,  or 
excitement  about  things  of  rehgion,  may  as  effectually  bar  our  praying  as 
eagerness  about  worldly  things.  We  may  be  engaged  about  the  things  of 
God,  yet  our  mind  may  all  the  while  centre  in  these  things,  not  in 
God.  Holy  Scripture  joins  these  two  together,  calmness  or  sobriety  and  prayer  ; 
"  Be  ye  therefore  sober,  and  watch  unto  prayer."  Feaoe  is  the  beginning  and  end 
of  prayer ;  its  condition  and  its  reward.  Kesign  yourselves,  that  ye  may  pray,  and 
God  will  guard  your  thoughts,  and  hold  them  to  Himself.  If,  also,  you  would  guard 
against  wandering  in  prayer,  you  must  practise  yourself  in  keeping  a  check  upon 
your  thoughts  at  other  times.  In  this  busy  age,  in  which  every  one  would  know 
about  everything,  and,  like  the  Athenians,  our  occupation  seems  to  be  to  know 
some  new  thing,  and  what  conveys  news  is  thought  the  instrument  of  knowledge, 
and  knowledge  of  every  sort  is  thought  a  good,  it  is  not  a  light  matter,  but  one  to 
which  we  must  take  great  heed ;  what  we  hear,  and  admit  into  our  minds.  Our 
minds  are  holy  things:  they  are  the  temples  of  God;  and  so,  for  His  honour's  sake 
who  has  so  hallowed  them,  we  should  be  on  our  guard  what  we  allow  to  enter  there. 
Be  not  curious  about  things  which  concern  you  not :  what  happens  in  the  street,  or 
passes  by  you,  or  befalls  a  neighbour,  unless  charity  requires  it  of  you.  These 
things  waste  the  mind  more  than  you  can  well  think.  Bather  recollect  that  your 
concern  is  not  with  the  world ;  your  home,  your  hopes,  your  abiding-place,  is  not 
here,  but  in  God  ;  your  citizenship  is  not  on  earth,  but  in  the  heavens  ;  your  places 
here  shall  shortly  know  you  no  more  ;  the  earth  shall  contain  no  more  of  you  than 
the  dust  of  your  bodies,  in  keeping  for  you  against  the  resurrection.  Then,  on  the 
other  hand,  as  we  seek,  during  the  day,  to  weaken  the  hold  which  the  world  has 
upon  us  and  our  thoughts,  so  must  we  by  His  grace  to  strengthen  our  own  capacity 
of  turning  to  God.  Away  from  the  world  and  to  God  I  Commit  to  Him  thoughts, 
words,  and  works,  to  be  '*  ordered  by  His  governance,  to  do  that  is  righteous  in  Hia 
eight " ;  to  be  "  begun,  continued,  and  ended  "  in  Him.  So  when  you  come  to  your 
fuller  and  more  set  devotions,  you  may  hope  that  He,  whom  you  serve  continually, 
will  keep  you  then  also,  and  will  vouchsafe  Himself  to  visit  you,  and  be  in  your 
thoughts,  which  you  would  fain  make  His,  and  will  shut  out  the  world  by  fiUing 
your  thoughts  with  Himself.  It  is  the  infrequency  of  prayer  which  makes  prayer 
BO  difficult.  It  is  not  a  great  effort  now  and  then,  which  makes  the  things  even  of 
this  life  easy  to  us;  it  is  their  being  the  habit  of  our  bodies  or  our  minds.  It  was 
by  continued  exercise  which  we  were  not  aware  of,  that  our  bodies,  as  children, 
were  strengthened ;  it  was  by  continued  practice  that  we  learnt  anything.  By  con- 
tinued gazing  at  far-off  objects,  the  eye  sees  further  than  others  ;  by  continued 
practice  the  hand  becomes  steadied  and  obeys  the  motions  of  our  mind.  So  and 
much  more  must  the  mind,  by  continual  exercise,  be  steadied,  to  fix  itself  on  Him 
whom  it  cannot  grasp,  and  look  up  to  Him  whom  it  cannot  see.  Yea,  so  much  the 
more  exceedingly  must  it  with  strong  effort  fix  itself  by  His  grace  on  Him,  because 
we  cannot  see  Him  or  approach  to  Him,  but  by  His  revealing  Himself  and  coming 
down  to  us,  and  giving  us  eyes  to  see  and  hearts  to  comprehend ;  and  this  He  will 
do  only  to  the  earnest  and  persevering,  and  to  us  severally,  as  we  are  such.  They 
then  will  pray  best,  who,  praying  truly,  pray  oftenest.  This,  also,  is  one  great 
blessing  of  the  practice  of  ejaoulatory  prayer,  that  is,  prayer  which  is  darted  up 
from  the  mind  in  the  little  intervals  which  occur,  whatever  we  are  doing.  Nothing 
goes  on  without  breaks,  to  leave  us  space  to  turn  to  God.  Amid  conversation  there 
u  silence  ;  in  the  busiest  life  there  are  moments,  if  we  would  mark  them,  when  w« 


408  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

must  remain  idle.  We  are  kept  waiting,  or  we  must  bear  what  is  wearisome ;  let 
prayer  take  the  place  of  impatience.  In  preparing  for  business,  let  prayer  take  the 
place  of  eagerness ;  in  closing  it,  of  self-satisfaction.  Are  we  weary  ?  be  it  our 
refreshment!  Are  we  strong?  let  us  hallow  our  strength  by  thanksgiving  1  The 
very  preparation  or  close  of  any  business  brings  with  it  of  necessity  a  pause,  teach- 
ing us  by  this  very  respite  to  begin  and  end  with  prayer ;  with  prayer  beforehand 
for  BUs  help,  or  at  the  end  thanksgiving  to  Him  who  carried  us  through  it,  or  for 
pardon  for  what  has  been  amiss  in  it.  Such  are  some  of  the  more  distant  preparations 
for  prayer,  such  as  it  should  be,  fixed  and  earnest ;  to  strive  to  make  God,  not  the 
world,  the  end  of  our  lives  ;  not  to  be  taken  up  even  with  our  duties  in  the  world, 
but  amid  them  to  seek  Him ;  to  subdue  self,  and  put  a  restraint  upon  our  senses  at 
other  times,  that  we  may  have  the  control  over  them  then  ;  to  lift  our  thoughts  to 
Him  at  other  times,  so  will  they  rise  more  readily  then.  These  are,  in  their  very 
nature,  slowly  learnt.  Yet  as,  if  wholly  learnt,  it  were  heaven  itself,  so  is  each  step, 
a  step  heavenwards.  Yet  there  are  many  more  immediate  helps,  at  the  very  time 
of  prayer.  Neglect  nothing  which  can  produce  reverence.  Pass  not  at  once  from 
the  things  of  this  world  to  prayer,  but  collect  thyself.  Think  what  thou  art,  what 
God  is;  thyself  a  child,  and  God  thy  Father ;  but  also  thyself  dust  and  ashes,  God, 
a  consuming  fire,  before  whom  angels  hide  their  faces :  thyself  unholy,  God  holy  ; 
thyself  a  sinner,  God  thy  Judge.  Then  forget  not  that  of  thyself  thou  canst  not 
pray.  We  come  before  Him,  as  helpless  creatures,  who  need  to  be  taught  what  to 
ask  for,  and  knowing,  to  be  enabled  to  ask,  and  asking,  to  be  enabled  to  persevere  to 
ask.  Then  watch  thyself,  what  helps  or  hinders  thee  to  fix  thy  mind  on  God.  Then 
as  to  the  words  of  our  prayer :  we  should  beware  how  we  pass  hastily  over  any  of 
our  prayers.  It  is  not  how  much  we  say,  but  what  we  pray,  which  is  of  real 
moment.  Then,  the  best  models  of  prayer  consist  of  brief  petitions,  as  suited  to 
men  in  need ;  for  when  they  really  feel  their  need,  they  use  not  many  words. 
•'  Lord,  save  us,  we  perish,"  is  the  cry  of  need.  And  so  the  petitions  of  the  pattern 
of  all  prayer,  our  Lord's,  are  very  short,  but  each  containing  manifold  prayers.  So 
are  the  Psalms  in  prayer  or  praise :  "  Blot  out  all  mine  iniquities,"  "  Create  in  me  a 
new  heart,"  '•  Cast  me  not  away  from  Thy  presence,"  "  Save  me  by  Thy  Name."  In 
this  way  we  may  collect  our  strength  and  attention  for  each  petition,  and  so  pray 
on,  step  by  step,  through  the  whole,  resting  at  each  step  on  Him,  who  alone  can 
carry  us  to  the  end,  and  if,  by  human  frailty,  we  be  distracted,  sum  up  briefly  with 
one  strong  concentrated  effort  what  we  have  lost  by  wandering.  In  pubUc  prayer 
the  case  is  different.  For  here,  if  we  wander,  the  prayers  meanwhile  go  on,  and  we 
find  that  we  have  lost  a  portion  of  our  daily  bread  ;  that  God's  Church  on  earth  has 
been  praising  with  angels  and  archangels  and  the  Church  in  heaven,  while  we  have 
been  bringing  our  sheep  and  our  oxen  and  our  money-changing,  the  things  of  this 
life,  into  God's  presence  and  the  court  of  heaven.  Yet  the  remedies  are  the  same, 
and  we  have  even  greater  helps.  The  majesty  of  the  place  may  well  awe  us  with 
devotion,  and  will  aid  us  to  it,  if  we  waste  not  its  impressiveness  by  our  negligence 
or  frivohty.  Come  we  then  calmly  to  this  holy  place,  not  thinking  or  speaking,  up 
to  its  very  threshold,  of  things  of  earth,  but  as  men  bent  on  a  great  service,  where 
much  is  at  stake;  coming  to  a  holy  presence,  from  whom  depends  our  all.  Pray 
we,  as  we  enter  it,  that  God  would  guard  our  thoughts  and  compose  our  minds  and 
fix  them  on  Him.  Employ  we  any  leisure  before  the  service  begins,  in  thought  or 
private  prayer ;  guard  we  our  eyes  from  straying  to  those  around  us ;  listen  we 
reverently  to  His  holy  word ;  use  the  pause  before  each  prayer  to  ask  God  to  enable 
us  to  pray  this  prayer  also  ;  and  so  pray  each  separate  prayer,  as  far  as  we  can, 
relying  on  His  gracious  aid.  Yet  we  are  not  to  think  that  by  these  or  any  other 
remedies  distraction  is  to  be  cured  at  once.  We  cannot  undo  at  once  the  habit,  it 
may  be,  of  years.  Distraction  will  come  through  weakness,  ill-health,  fatigue : 
only  pray,  guard,  strive  against  it ;  humble  yourselves  under  it,  and  for  the  past 
neghgences,  of  which  it  is  mostly  the  sad  fruit ;  rely  less  upon  yourself,  cast  your- 
self more  upon  God,  hang  more  whoUy  upon  Him,  and  long  the  more  for  that 
blessed  time,  when  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  shall  serve  Him  day  and  night  without 
distraction.  (E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Begging  prayers  .•—A  little  boy,  one  of  the 
Sunday-school  children  in  Jamaica,  called  upon  the  missionary  and  stated  that  he 
had  lately  been  very  HI,  and  in  his  sickness  often  wished  his  minister  had  been 
present  to  pray  with  him.  "But  Thomas,"  said  the  missionary,  "I  hope  you 
prayed."  "  Oh  yes,  sir."  "  Well,  how  did  you  pray  ?  "  •'  Why,  sir,  I  btgged." 
(Henry  T.  Williams.)  The  grace  of  tears  : — "Lord  Jesus,  give  me  the  giaoe  of 
tears."      (Augustine.)         Tears  i    safety-valve : — The  safety-valve  of  the  heart 


CHAP.  v.J  HEBREWS.  409 

whun  too  much  pressure  is  laid  on.    {Albert  Smith.)       Yet  learned  He  obedience 
by  the  tilings  whlcli  He  suffered.     Suffering  the  $chool  of  obedience : — I.  God 

HAS   LAID    EVEN   UPON    SORROW   THE    DESTINT   OF   FULFILLING    HiS    PURPOSES   OF   MEBOT. 

In  the  beginning,  sorrow  was  the  wages  of  sin,  penal  and  working  death ;  by 
the  law  of  Christ's  redemption,  it  is  become  a  disciphne  of  cleansing  and 
perfection.  To  the  impenitent,  and  such  as  will  not  obey  the  truth,  it  is  still, 
as  ever,  a  dark  and  crushing  penalty;  to  the  contrite  and  obedient  it  is  as  the 
refiner's  fire,  keen  and  searching,  purging  out  the  soils,  and  perfecting  the 
lenewal  of  our  spiritual  nature.  It  is  the  discipline  of  saints,  and  the  safest, 
though  the  austerest,  school  of  sanctity ;  and  that  because  suffering,  or,  as  we 
are  wont  to  say,  trial,  turns  our  knowledge  into  reality.  There  is  laid  upon  ua 
a  mighty  hand,  from  whose  shadow  we  cannot  flee.  All  general  truths  teem  with  a 
particular  meaning,  and  speak  to  us  with  a  piercing  emphasis.  EquiUy  true  thia 
is,  also,  of  all  bright  and  blessed  truths:  they  also  are  qnickentd  with  a  living 
energy.  The  promises  of  heaven,  and  the  times  of  refreshing,  and  the  rest  of  the 
saints,  and  the  love  of  God,  and  the  presence  of  Christ,  which  we  have  so  long 
thought  of,  and  talked  about,  and  felt  after,  and  yet  never  seemed  to  grasp — all 
these  likewise  become  realities.  They  seem  to  gather  round  us,  and  shed  sensible 
influences  of  peace  upon  our  suffering  hearts  ;  and  this  is  what  we  mean  when  we 
say,  "  I  have  long  known  these  things  to  be  true,  but  now  I  feel  them  to  be  true." 
II.  And,  in  the  next  place,  sufferings  so  put  oub  faith  on  trial  as  to  strengthen.. 
AND  coNjriRM  IT.  Thej  develop  what  was  lying  hid  in  us,  unknown  even  to  ourselves. 
And  therefore  we  often  see  persons,  who  have  shown  no  very  great  tokens  of  high 
devotion,  come  out,  under  the  pressure  of  trials,  into  a  more  elevated  bearing.  Thia 
is  especially  true  of  sickness  and  affliction.  Not  only  are  persons  of  a  holy  life 
made  to  shine  with  a  more  radiant  briglitness,  but  common  Christians,  of  no  note 
or  visibleness,  are  changed  to  a  saintly  character.  They  wrestle  with  their  trial,  as 
the  patriarch  with  his  unknown  companion,  and  will  not  let  it  go  without  a  bless- 
ing ;  and  thereby  the  gifts  which  lie  enwrapped  in  a  regenerate  nature  are  unfolded 
into  life  and  energy.  III.  Once  more :  nothing  so  likens  us  to  the  example  of 
Christ  as  suffering.  All  that  suffer  are  not  therefore  saints ;  alas  !  far  from  it,  for 
many  suffer  without  the  fruits  of  sanctity  ;  but  all  saints  at  some  time,  and  in  some 
way  and  measure,  have  entered  into  the  mystery  of  suffering.  And  this  throws 
light  on  a  very  perplexing  thought  in  which  we  sometimes  (entangle  ourselves ;  I 
mean,  on  the  wonderful  fact  that  oftentimes  the  same  persons  are  as  visibly 
marked  by  sorrows  as  by  sanctity.  They  seem  never  to  pass  out  of  the 
shadow  of  affliction ;  they  seem  to  be  a  mark  for  all  the  storms  and  arrows  of 
adversity,  the  world  esteems  them  to  be  "  stricken,  smitten  of  God,  and 
afflicted";  even  religious  people  are  perplexed  at  their  trials.  When  we 
see  eminently  holy  persons  suddenly  bereaved,  or  suffering  sharp  bodily  anguish, 
and  their  trials  long  drawn  out,  or  multiplied  by  succession,  we  often  say.  How 
strange  and  dark  is  this  dispensation  1  Who  would  have  thought  that  one  so 
poor,  so  patient,  and  resigned,  should  have  been  so  visited  and  overwhelmed  by 
Btrokes  ?  And  yet  all  this  shows  how  shallow  and  blind  our  faith  is,  for  we  know 
Uttle  even  of  those  we  know  best ;  we  readily  overrate  their  character,  at  all 
events  they  are  far  otherwise  in  the  esteem  of  God  than  in  our  judgment ;  our 
thoughts  are  not  His  thoughts  :  we  set  up  a  poor,  dim,  depressed  standard  of 
perfection  and  we  should  miserably  defraud  even  those  we  love  most  if  it  were  in 
our  power  to  mete  out  their  trials  by  our  measures ;  we  little  know  what  God  is 
doing,  and  how  can  we  know  the  way?  And  we  often  think  that  the  sorrows  of 
the  saints  are  sent  for  their  punishment,  when  they  are  sent  for  their  perfection. 
We  forget  that  Christ  suffered,  and  why;  and  how  He  learned  obedience,  and  what 
that  obedience  was.  He  was  made  "perfect"  by  sufferings,  and  that  "perfec- 
tion," whatsoever  it  be,  has  an  ineffable  depth  of  meaning.  It  was  not  only  a 
sacerdotal  perfection  by  consecration  to  the  priesthood  of  Melohisedec,  but  some- 
thing of  which  that  was  the  formal  expression  and  manifestation  of  a  great 
spiritual  reality,  a  perfection  of  holiness,  knowledge,  obedience,  sympathy, 
and  will.  And  of  this  perfection,  after  the  measures  of  a  creature,  and  the  pro- 
portions of  our  mere  manhood,  are  the  saints  made  to  partake  ;  they  are  purified, 
that  they  may  be  made  perfect.  [Archdeacon  H.  E.  Manning.)  Learning 
obedii-nce : — "Though  He  was  a  Son,  He  learned."  Though  a  Son,  i.e.,  though  He 
was  so  exnlted  a  being,  not  a  mere  servant  like  the  angels,  but  One  whom  the 
angels  worship.  Not  a  servant  like  Moses  or  like  Aaron,  but  the  Son  by  whom  God 
made  the  worlds,  yet  even  He  had  something  to  learn,  and  learned  it  in  the  days 


410  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOB.  [chap.  T. 

of  His  flesh.  There  is  a  mystery  here,  yet  if  we  are  content  to  inquire  instead  of 
speculate  we  shall  find  sufficient  answer.  There  is  Ught  in  the  word  "  obedience." 
He  learned  not  the  art  and  wisdom  of  commanding,  this  belonged  to  His  Eternal 
Nature.  But  obedience  is  an  art  which  belongs  of  right  to  lower  ranks  of  being. 
The  Highest  cannot,  as  the  Highest,  obey,  for  there  is  no  authority  above  His  own. 
Obedience  may  be  taught  from  a  throne,  but  it  cannot  be  learned  by  one  who 
occupies  it.  Thus,  even  the  Son  of  God  might  learn  obedience  if  He  saw  fit  to 
empty  Himself  of  Divine  prerogative  and  take  upon  Him  the  form  of  a  servant, 
wearing  our  human  nature  and  accepting  our  duties  and  temptations.  Therefore 
because  obedience  is  so  foreign  to  the  Divine  nature,  it  is  a  thing  which  the  Son 
of  God  could  learn  by  becoming  incarnate,  and  could  only  learn  by  stooping  to 
share  our  discipline  and  bear  the  Divine  will  as  a  yoke  instead  of  wield  it  as  a 
sceptre.  Viewing  the  Sonship  of  Christ  under  another  aspect,  it  might  have  been 
thought  that  a  perfect  Son  would  have  needed  no  more  teacLiug,  and  that  when 
found  in  fashion  as  man.  His  filial  spirit,  His  perfect  readiness  to  obey  would  have 
sufficed.  But  this  is  denied.  Having  become  a  servant,  having  come  down  under 
the  yoke  of  commandments,  it  ia  insisted  that  the  Son  went  right  through  the 
actual  course  of  human  discipline,  evading  nothing,  missing  nothing,  until  He 
crowned  His  obedience  by  submission,  even  unto  death.  Though  a  Son  He  learnt 
obedience  by  suffering.  Could  He  not  learn  it  otherwise?  We  know  that  suffering 
is  needful  in  our  case  because  our  spirits  are  so  faulty,  because  we  are  so  prone  to 
err  and  go  astray.  But  a  Son,  a  perfect  Son  I  surely  such  an  One  having  no  share 
in  our  defects  might  have  learnt  obedience  without  pain  1  Can  we  be  wrong  in 
such  a  view  ?  Perhaps  not.  If  a  faultless  Son  began  life  in  a  faultless  world ;  if 
He  were  born  into  a  sinless  family,  or  were  created  in  a  paradise  where  no  fall  had 
taken  place,  He  might  possibly  have  learned  obedience  by  a  painless  and  unfailing 
life  of  conformity  to  the  Father's  will.  But  whatever  might  have  been  possible  in 
heaven  or  in  paradise,  painless  obedience  was  not  possible  in  the  moral  wilderijess. 
In  a  world  where  sin  abounded  Christ  had  constantly  to  choose  between  affliction 
and  iniquity.  Without  using  miraculous  powers  to  screen  Himself  from  the 
natural  consequences  of  His  actions,  He  was  obhged  to  suffer.  The  suffering  was 
at  once  tbe  measure  and  test  of  His  obedience,  and  thus  it  was  He  passed  through 
pain  to  perfectuess  as  a  learner  in  the  school  of  human  life.  This  must  be  so, 
yet  stiU  our  hearts  cry  out  in  pity  for  One  so  holy  and  true— surely  it  was  not 
needful  for  Him  to  suffer  so  much !  Could  not  the  Father  have  spared  His  weU- 
beloved  Son  such  extreme  agonies  while  obedience  was  being  learned?  The 
answer  is  clear.  This  mi{4ht  have  been  possible  under  some  circumstances.  An 
easier  life  might  have  been  laid  out  for  Jesus  as  it  is  laid  out  for  most  of  us.  He 
might  have  lived  obediently  in  the  midst  of  plenty.  Why  then  should  the  Father 
be  pleased  to  set  His  well-beloved  Son  such  agonising  tasks,  why  be  pleased  to 
bruise  and  put  to  grief  the  Son  who  always  did  His  will  ?  That  is  a  question 
which  admits  of  many  answers.  It  is  one  which  none  but  the  Father  Himself  can 
answer  altogether,  yet  part  of  His  answer  shines  before  us  here.  The  Sou  of  God 
came  not  to  learn  obedience  for  Himself,  but  for  our  sakes.  He  came  not  merely 
to  become  perfect  as  a  man  before  God  who  reads  the  heart,  but  to  be  visibly  per- 
fect before  men  who  can  only  read  actions.  He  came  to  be  made  thus  visibly 
perfect  not  only  as  a  man,  but  as  a  Saviour  and  as  the  Author  of  obedience  in  us. 
Look  at  a  few  reasons  why  death,  the  death  of  the  Cross,  was  needful  to  this  end. 
Christ  came  to  set  us  an  example.  He  came  to  do  much  more  than  this,  but  that 
was  one  great  object  of  His  incarnation.  But  if  He  had  stopped  short  of  obedieuce 
unto  death,  He  would  have  left  no  example  how  we  ought  to  act  when  shut  up  to 
the  dilemma  of  being  obliged  to  either  sin  or  die.  Christ  came  to  magnify  Divine 
law,  to  make  it  venerable  in  our  sight,  and  to  declare  the  entire  rightness  of  God's 
wUl.  While  God's  will  appoints  us  a  path  of  flowers,  and  while  duty  brings 
honour  and  reward,  gratitude  and  trust  are  easy.  But  when  duty  runs  straight 
into  a  Red  Sea  1  When  it  leads  to  a  fiery  furnace  1  When  the  soul,  intent  on 
doing  right,  finds  itself  alone,  misunderstood,  and  persecuted,  then  is  the  time 
when  the  enemy  finds  a  listening  ear  for  his  slander,  "  God  is  careless,"  "  God  is 
cruel,"  "  God  is  unfaithful  to  those  who  are  most  faithful  to  Himself."  Where 
then  would  be  the  value  of  Christ's  testimony  to  the  goodness  of  God's  will  when 
most  in  danger  of  being  doubted,  if  He  Himself  had  been  spared  this  terribla 
temptation  ?  "  Be  thou  faithful  onto  death  " ;  we  can  hear  that  from  Christ. 
Christ  came  to  reveal  the  Divine  sympathy  with  us  in  all  our  afflictions,  but  that 
cevelatiou  would  have  been  very  partial  if  destitute  of  any  kindly  light  to  t^hed  c:i 


OHAP.  v.]  HEBREWS.  411 

dying  eyes.  We  are  not  all  called  to  martyrdom,  but  we  have  all  to  die.  Bat 
where  could  we  have  seen  the  sympathy  of  Christ  with  ourselves  as  mortal, 
ii  He  had  left  the  world  by  a  private  door  of  rapture?  Wherefore  to  be 
oar  sympathetic  Friend  in  the  dark  valley,  Jesus  was  obedient  even  unto 
death.  Christ  came  to  preach  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  to  declare  the 
rigbteousuess  of  God  in  the  act  of  forgiveness,  to  commend  the  love  of  God 
to  aU  men,  including  the  very  chief  of  sinners  and  the  most  malignant 
of  His  foes ;  and  in  all  these  things  He  must  have  failed  had  His  obedience 
stopped  short  of  death.  Wherefore  Jesus  was  obedient  unto  death.  Christ 
came  to  bring  life  and  immortality  to  light,  and  for  this  end  it  was  needful  He 
should  die  and  rise  again.  The  mere  continuance  of  His  life  would  have  had  no 
revelation  of  a  future  Ufe  to  as.  But  an  emptied  grave  visibly  spoils  death, 
breaks  the  bars  of  Hades,  preaches  resurrection  to  as,  who  have  to  die,  and  reveals 
Jesus  as  the  first-fruits  of  them  that  slept.  Wherefore  that  He  might  be  the 
Author  of  an  eternal  salvation  and  bring  Ufe  and  immortahty  to  light,  the  Son 
was  obedient  unto  death.     (T.  V.  Tymma.)        Christ  a  learner: — L  Thb  Divinb 

EXAI.TATION   OF   THB    CHABAOTEB    OF    HiM   WHO   IS  THB    BeDEEMEB  OF   MEM.      A    SoU. 

"  Though  He  were  a  Son,"  •'  The  Son  of  God,"  as  in  the  previous  context.  We 
understand  this  expression  as  in  the  first  place  presenting  the  Eedeemer  in  the 
nature,  and  with  the  attributes  of  Deity.  H.  His  gracious  conbesoension. 
"  Though  He  were  a  Son,  yet  learned  He  obedience,"  *o.  Here  we  behold  the  Son 
of  God,  He  who  was  irifiuite  in  excellency  and  in  working,  condescending  to 
become  a  learner,  placing  Himself  in  circumstances  in  which  He  might  receive 
instruction.  No  doubt  the  Spirit  of  God  that  was  in  Him  taught  Him  better  than 
the  scribe,  or  priest,  or  ruler,  or  parent  could  ;  but  the  child  Jesus,  growing  up  to 
manhood,  learned,  received  the  wisdom,  the  counsel,  the  instruction  that  is  from 
God.  But,  "though  He  were  a  Son,"  He  learned  something  more  than  knowledge. 
He  learned  how  to  obey.  What  affections  were  involved  in  obedience  I  What  satis- 
faction resulted  to  the  obedient  mind  1  What  intimate  and  fervent  communion 
existed  between  Him  that  was  obeyed  and  Him  that  did  obey  !  But  the  lowliest 
condescension  that  we  mark  is,  that  He  learned  obedience  by  suffering.  There  are 
many  who  are  willing  to  obey,  and  who  find  pleasure  in  obedience,  when  there  ia 
only  joy,  when  there  is  the  reward  of  obedience ;  but  to  go  through  the  deep  flood, 
to  pass  under  the  dark  cloud,  to  penetrate  the  fiery  furnace,  and  to  endure  all  that 
could  be  heaped  in  the  shape  of  sorrows,  and  woes,  and  to  do  this  that  He  might 
"  learn  obedience  " — this  was  Christ's  condescension.  Ah  1  but  He  suffered  more 
than  this.  "  The  contradiction  of  sinners  against  Himself "  He  suffered.  He 
"  learned  obedience  "  by  suffering  ingratitude  from  those  to  whom  He  showed 
mercy.  He  suffered  contumely  and  reproach,  He  entered  into  our  sorrows.  He 
Himself  "  took  our  griefs  and  carried  our  sorrows."  Still  farther,  and  even  more 
painful,  was  EUs  humihation.  We  know  what  it  is  to  be  convinced  of  sin ;  we 
know  what  it  is  to  be  overwhelmed  with  shame  for  sin.  I  know  that  Jesus  knew 
no  sin ;  but  oh,  in  this  I  see  the  poignancy  of  His  grief,  when  all  our  sins  were 
made  to  meet  on  Him.  And  He  was  "  made  perfect " — He  condescended  to  bo 
made  perfect  *'  by  the  things  which  He  suffered,"  that  He  should  be  a  perfectly 
righteous  person  in  the  midst  of  the  most  trying  circumstances — that  He  should 
love  even  unto  death,  though  death  was  heaped  upon  Him  for  His  love.  HI.  The 
END  TO  BE  ACCOMPLISHED  BY  His  HUMILIATION.  "  That  He  might  bocome  the  author 
of  eternal  salvation  unto  all  them  that  obey  Him."  How  much  there  is  in  those 
words  !  There  would  have  been  no  salvation  for  guilty  men  if  Jesus  had  not  come 
to  die.  It  is  in  Christ's  excellencies  originally;  it  is  in  Christ  as  the  perfect 
Saviour  that  we  can  alone  have  confidence  towards  God.  He  is  the  author  of 
salvation,  inasmuch  as  He  has  "  taken  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself  " ;  He 
is  the  author  of  salvation,  inasmuch  as  He  has  endured  the  curse  of  the  broken 
law,  and  delivered  us  from  the  sentence  of  condemnation ;  He  is  the  author  of 
salvation,  inasmuch  as  He  has  received  from  His  Father  the  promised  Spirit,  by 
which  poor  guilty  sinners  are  regenerated,  and  faith  wrought  in  them,  to  trust  in 
Jesus  and  His  finished  work ;  He  is  the  author  of  salvation,  inasmuch  as  He  has 
gone  to  heaven  to  carry  on  the  work,  and  He  ever  lives  to  make  intercession  for 
His  people,  and  is  "  able  to  save  to  the  very  uttermost  all  that  come  unto  God  by 
Him."  He  is  the  author  of  salvation,  for  it  is  the  gospel  that  produces  the  happy 
change,  that  translates  from  the  kingdom  of  darkness  into  the  kingdom  of  light  and 
glory.  But  it  is  "  eternal  salvation."  It  is  a  salvation  that,  having  been  begun, 
will  never  be  interrupted ;  it  is  a  salvation  that  will  be  unto  the  end ;  it  is  a  salva- 


41f  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ▼. 

tion  that  will  be  found,  in  its  consummation,  in  the  presence  of  God,  where  "  there 
is  fulness  of  joy,"  and  at  His  right  hand,  where  "  there  are  pleasures  for  evermore." 
"Unto  all  them  that  obey  Him."  You  will  mark  what  the  obedience  ia  which 
Christ  requires.  If  He  be  a  Son,  He  has  authority.  In  His  character  of  Son  He 
is  "set  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high."  Now,  to  obey  Christ  is  to  fulfil 
that  which  He  has  enjoined  :  in  the  first  place,  to  accept  of  Him  as  He  is  offered ; 
in  the  next  place,  to  come  to  Him  as  He  invites;  in  the  third  place,  to  trust  in  Him 
as  He  warrants ;  in  the  fourth  place,  to  plead  His  finished  work,  and  to  seek 
the  enjoyment  of  forgiveness  through  His  continual  intercession.  Bowing  to 
His  sceptre,  taking  up  His  cross,  uniting  ourselves  to  His  people,  giving  our- 
selves, first  to  the  Lord,  and  then  to  one  another,  according  to  His  will.  All 
those  that  thus  obey  Him  have  the  assurance  that  He  is  "the  author  of  eternal 
t^alvation  unto  them."  Not  by  works  of  righteousness  that  they  have  done,  but 
they  are  saved  for  His  sake,  and  the  work  is  wrought  in  them  for  His  glory,  and 
they  are  obedient  to  Him,  having  been  "  made  willing  in  the  day  of  Hia 
power,"  (J.  W.  Massie,  D.D.)  The  suffering  Son : — I.  Infinitk  love  prevailed 
WITH  THE  Son  of  God,  to  lay  aside  the  pbivilege  of  His  infinite  dignity, 
TEAT  He  might  suffer  fob  us  and  our  redemption,  "  Although  He  was  a 
Son,  yet  He  learned,"  &c.  1.  The  name  of  "  Son "  carrieth  with  it  infinite 
dignity,  as  our  apostle  proves  at  large  (chap.  i.  3,  4,  &c.).  2.  He  voluntarily  laid 
aside  the  consideration,  advantage,  and  exercise  of  it,  that  He  might  suffer  for  us. 
This  our  apostle  fully  expresseth  (Phil.  ii.  5-8).  Concerning  which  we  must 
observe,  that  the  Son  of  God  could  not  absolutely  and  reaUy  part  with  His  eternal 
glory.  Whatever  He  did.  He  was  the  Son  of  God,  and  God  still.  But  He  is  said 
to  empty  Himself  of  His  Divine  glory— (1)  With  respect  to  the  infinite  condescension 
of  His  person,  (2)  With  respect  to  the  manifestations  of  it  in  this  world.  11.  In 
His  sufferings,  and  notwithstanding  them  all,  the  Lord  Christ  was  the  Son 
STILL,  the  Son  of  God.  He  was  so  both  as  to  real  relation  and  as  to  suitable 
affection.  He  had  in  them  all  the  state  of  a  Son,  and  the  love  of  a  Son.  HI.  A 
practical  experience  of  obedience  to  God  in  some  cases  will  cost  us  dear.  We 
cannot  learn  it  but  through  the  suffering  of  those  things  which  will  assuredly  befall 
us  on  the  account  thereof.  So  was  it  with  the  Lord  Christ,  I  intend  not  here  the 
difiBculties  we  meet  withal  in  mortifying  the  internal  lusts  and  corruptions  of  nature, 
for  these  had  no  place  in  the  example  here  proposed  to  us.  Those  only  are  respected 
which  come  on  us  from  without.  And  it  is  an  especial  kind  of  obedience  also, 
namely,  that  which  holds  some  conformity  to  the  obedience  of  Christ,  that  ia 
intended.  Wherefore — 1.  It  must  be  singular ;  it  must  have  somewhat  in  it,  that 
may,  in  an  especial  manner,  turn  the  eyes  of  others  towards  it.  2.  It  is  required 
that  this  obedience  be  universal.  Sufferings  will  attend  it.  They  that  live  godly 
in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  persecution.  For  this  kind  of  obedience  will  be  observed 
in  the  world.  It  cannot  escape  observation,  because  it  is  singular ;  and  it  provokes 
the  world,  because  it  will  admit  of  no  compliance  with  it.  And  where  tbe  world  is 
first  awakened  and  then  enraged,  suffering  of  one  kind  or  another  will  ensue.  If 
it  do  not  bite  and  tear,  it  will  bark  and  rage.  IV.  Sufferings  undergone  according 
TO  the  will  of  god  are  highly  instructive.  Even  Christ  Himself  learned  by  the 
things  which  He  suffered,  and  much  more  may  we  who  have  so  much  more  to 
learn.  God  designs  our  sufferings  to  this  end,  and  to  this  end  He  blesseth  them. 
V.  In  all  these  things,  both  as  to  suffering,  and  learning,  or  profiting  thereby, 
WE  have  a  great  example  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  As  such  is  He  proposed  unto 
us  in  all  His  course  of  obedience,  especially  in  His  sufferings  (1  Pet.  ii.  21).  For 
He  would  leave  nothing  undone  which  was  any  way  needful,  that  His  great  work 
of  sanctifying  and  saving  His  church  to  the  utmost  might  be  perfect.  VI.  The 
love  of  God  towards  any,  the  relation  of  any  unto  God,  hinders  not  but  that 

THEY  MAY  UNDERGO  GREAT  SUFFERINGS  AND  TRIALS.     The  Loid  ChriSt  did  SO,  "  although 

He  were  a  Son."  And  this  instance  irrefragably  confirms  our  position.  For  iJae 
love  of  God  to  Jesus  Christ  was  singular  and  supereminent.  And  yet  His  sufferings 
and  trials  were  singular  also.  And  in  the  whole  course  of  the  Scripture  we  may 
observe  that  the  nearer  any  have  been  unto  God,  the  greater  have  been  their  trials. 
For — 1.  There  is  not  in  such  trials  and  exercises  anything  that  is  absolutely  evil, 
but  they  are  all  such  as  may  be  rendered  good,  useful,  honourable  to  the  sufferers. 
2.  The  love  of  God  and  the  gracious  emanations  of  it  can,  and  do,  abundantly 
compensate  the  temporary  evils  which  any  do  undergo  according  to  His  wUL  3. 
The  glory  of  God,  which  is  the  end  designed  unto,  and  which  shall  infaUibly  ensue 
upon  all  the  sufferings  of  the  people  of  God,  and  that  so  much  the  greater  as  any 


CHAP,  v.]  HEBREWS.  41S 

ol  them,  on  any  account,  are  nearer  than  others  unto  Him,  is  such  a  good  onto 
them  which  suffer,  as  that  their  sufferings  neither  are,  nor  are  esteemed  by  them 
to  be  evil.  (John  Owen,  D.D.)  The  education  of  sons  of  God : — I.  Sonship  does 
NOT  EXEMPT  FBOM  suFFEBiNO.  1.  Not  even  Jesus,  as  a  Son,  escaped  suffering.  2. 
No  honour  put  upon  sons  of  God  will  exempt  them  from  suffering.  3.  No  hohness 
of  character,  nor  completeness  of  obedience,  can  exempt  the  children  of  God  from 
the  school  of  suffering.  4.  No  prayer  of  God's  sons,  however  earnest,  will  remove 
every  thorn  in  the  flesh  from  them.  5.  No  love  in  God's  child,  however  fervent, 
will  prevent  his  being  tried.  II.  Suffering  does  not  mab  sonshtp.  The  case  of 
our  Lord  is  set  forth  as  a  model  for  all  the  sons  of  God.  1.  His  poverty  did  not 
disprove  His  Sonship  (Luke  ii.  12).    2.  His  temptations  did  not  shaJie  His  Sonship 

glatt.  iv.  3).  3.  His  endurance  of  slander  did  not  jeopardise  it  (John  x.  36).  4. 
is  fear  and  sorrow  did  not  put  it  in  dispute  (Matt.  xxvi.  39).  6.  His  desertion  by 
men  did  not  invalidate  it  (John  xvi.  32).  6.  His  being  forsaken  of  God  did  not 
alter  it  (Luke  xxiii.  46).  7.  His  death  cast  no  doubt  thereon  (Mark  xv.  39).  He 
rose  agam,  and  thus  proved  His  Father's  pleasure  in  Him  (John  xx.  17).  HI.  Obe- 
dience HAS  TO  BE  LEARNED  EVEN  BY  SONS.  1.  It  must  be  learned  experimentally.  2. 
It  must  be  learned  by  suffering.  3.  It  must  be  learned  for  use  in  earth  and  in  heaven. 
(1)  On  earth  by  sympathy  with  others.  (2)  In  heaven  by  perfect  prair.e  to  God 
growing  out  of  experience.  IV  Suffering  has  a  peculiar  power  to  teach  true 
BONS.  It  is  a  better  tutor  than  all  else,  because — 1.  It  touches  the  man's  self ;  hia 
bone,  his  flesh,  his  heart.  2.  It  tests  his  graces,  and  sweeps  away  those  shams 
which  are  not  proofs  of  obedience,  but  pretences  of  self-will.  3.  It  goes  to  the  root, 
and  tests  the  truth  of  our  new  nature.  It  shows  whether  repentance,  faith, 
prayer,  &c. ,  are  mere  importations,  or  home-grown  fruits.  4.  It  tests  our  endu- 
rance, and  makes  us  see  how  far  we  are  established  in  the  obedience  which  we 
think  we  possess.  Can  we  say,  '*  Though  He  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  Him  "  ? 
(1)  The  anxious  question — Am  I  a  son  ?  (2)  The  aspiring  desire — Let  me  learn 
obedience.  (3)  The  accepted  discipline — I  submit  to  suffer.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Instructed  by  suffering  : — I  beajr  my  willing  witness  that  I  owe  more  to  the  fire,  and 
the  hammer,  and  the  file,  than  to  anything  else  in  my  Lord's  workshop.  I  some- 
times question  whether  I  have  ever  learned  anything  except  through  the  rod. 
When  my  school-room  is  darkened,  I  see  most.  (Ibid.)  Suffering  a  good  teacher 
of  divinity  : — A  minister  was  recovering  from  a  dangerous  illness,  when  one  of  hia 
friends  addressed  him  thus,  "  Sir,  though  God  seems  to  be  bringing  you  up  from 
the  gates  of  death,  yet  it  will  be  a  long  time  before  you  will  sufiicieutly  retrieve 
your  strength,  and  regain  vigour  enough  of  mind  to  preach  as  usual."  The  good 
man  answered, "  You  are  mistaken,  my  friend :  for  this  six  weeks'  illness  has  taught 
me  more  divinity  than  all  my  past  studies  and  aU  my  ten  years'  ministry  put 
together."  Christ's  experience  of  obedience: — Obedience  belongs  to  a  servant, 
but  accordance,  concurrence,  co-operation,  are  the  characteristics  of  a  son.  In  His 
eternal  union  with  God  there  was  no  distinction  of  will  and  work  between  Him  and 
His  Father;  as  the  Father's  life  was  the  Son's  hfe,  and  the  Father's  glory  the  Son's 
also,  so  the  Son  was  the  very  Word  and  Wisdom  of  the  Father,  His  Power  and 
Co-equal  Minister  in  all  things,  the  same  and  not  the  same  as  He  Himself.  But  in 
the  days  of  His  flesh,  when  He  had  humbled  Himself  to  "  the  form  of  a  servant," 
taking  on  Himself  a  separate  wiU  and  a  separate  work,  and  the  toil  and  sufferinga 
incident  to  a  creature,  then  what  had  been  mere  concurrence  became  obedience. 
This,  then,  is  the  force  of  the  words,  '*  Though  He  was  a  Son,  yet  had  He  experi- 
ence of  obedience."  He  took  on  Him  a  lower  nature,  and  wrought  in  it  towards 
a  Will  higher  and  more  perfect  than  it.  Further,  "He  learned  obedience  amid 
suffering,"  and  therefore  amid  temptation.  Before  He  came  on  earth  He  waa 
infinitely  above  joy  and  grief,  fear  and  anger,  pain  and  heaviness  ;  but  afterwarda 
all  these  properties  and  many  more  were  His  as  fully  as  they  are  ours.  Before  He 
came  on  earth  He  had  but  the  perfections  of  God,  but  afterwards  He  had  also  the 
virtues  of  a  creature,  such  as  faith,  meekness,  self-denial.  Before  He  came  on  earth 
He  could  not  be  tempted  of  evil,  but  afterwards  He  had  a  man's  heart,  a  man's 
tears,  and  a  man's  wants  and  infirmities.  His  Divine  nature  indeed  pervaded  Hia 
manhood,  so  that  every  deed  and  word  of  His  in  the  flesh  savoured  of  eternity  and 
infinity  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  from  the  time  He  was  bom  of  the  Virgin  Mary, 
He  had  a  natural  fear  of  danger,  a  natural  shrinking  from  pain,  though  ever  subject 
to  the  ruling  influence  of  that  Holy  and  Eternal  Essence  which  was  in  Him.  Thua 
He  possessed  at  once  a  double  assemblage  of  attributes,  Divine  and  human.  Still 
He  was  all-powerful,  though  in  the  form  of  a  servant ;  stiU  He  was  all-knowing. 


414  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

thongh  seemingly  ignorant;  still  incapable  of  temptation,  though  exposed  to  it. 
{J.  H.  Newman,  D.D.)  Made  perfect. — The  perfect  Son: — L  The  perfection  op 
THE  CHABACTEB  OF  Cheist.  Of  the  manner  of  His  life  before  He  assumed  the  office  of 
a  public  teacher  we  know  almost  nothing,  except  that  He  was  not  addicted  to  studious 
retirement,  nor  to  the  acquisition  of  human  science,  which  have  been  employed  by 
teachers  of  false  religions  to  dazzle  the  ignorant ;  but  that,  living  in  the  common  in- 
tercourse of  society,  He  laboured  in  the  occupation  of  His  reputed  father,  increasing 
in  mind  as  in  stature.  When  He  appeared  as  the  Messenger  of  Heaven  He  was  already 
complete  in  the  graces  which  His  high  character  demanded,  and  that  knowledge 
which  was  requisite  for  a  teacher  of  righteousness.  His  pure  life  is  the  best  illus- 
tration of  His  moral  precepts.  His  doctrines  were,  literally,  tidings  of  joy,  for  He 
disclosed  the  mercy  and  grace  of  the  Divine  nature  towards  penitent  offenders, 
which  all  the  efforts  of  the  human  understanding  could  never  perfectly  ascertain. 
He  disclosed  the  high  destination  of  man ;  He  brought  life  and  immortality  clearly 
to  light  through  His  gospel.  His  precepts,  also,  were  good  tidings;  He  spake 
wholesome  words,  prescribing  a  doctrine  according  to  godliness ;  His  aim  was  to 
purify  the  heart  and  mind,  and  to  teach  us  to  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly, 
to  qualify  us  for  the  glory  and  immortality  which  He  had  unfolded.  In  His  temper 
and  manners  Christ  exhibited  a  perfect  model  of  all  that  can  adorn  and  dignify 
human  nature ;  '*  He  did  no  sin,  nor  was  guile  found  in  His  mouth."  But  it  was 
not  innocence  nor  purity  only  that  were  found  in  His  character;  the  highest  virtues 
of  our  nature  were  peculiarly  His ;  He  exhibited  a  life,  not  only  of  strict  justice, 
but  of  overflowing  benignity  and  mercy,  of  the  most  tender  compassion,  and  the 
most  ardent  piety.  These  viitues  were  so  mingled,  tempered,  and  contrasted,  as  to 
render  the  whole  assemblage  delightful,  graceful,  and  perfect.  The  whole  life  of 
Christ  was  a  pattern  of  the  sanctity  and  beauty  which  He  portrayed  in  His  dis- 
courses. Christ  was  perfect  in  His  manner  of  communicating  and  enjoining  His 
instructions ;  He  spake  with  authority,  yet  with  an  admirable  modesty  and  sim- 
plicity, beautifully  calculated  to  inform  and  to  impress  the  mind  and  the  heart ; 
He  inculcates  the  most  important  lessons  with  simplicity  and  plainness  adapted 
to  human  capacity ;  preferring  use  to  the  glare  of  ornament,  no  quaint  play  of 
words  weakens  the  force  of  His  emphatic  language  ;  all  is  chaste  and  pure  alike — 
full  of  energy  and  of  grace.  Considered,  then,  even  as  a  man,  the  character  of 
Christ  is  perfect — nowhere  can  we  find  another  so  resplendent  and  so  pleasing — so 
amiable  and  so  venerable — one  which  presents  so  much  for  our  admiration  and  our 
love  ;  its  beauties  are  peculiar,  its  awful  greatness  and  dignity  are  relieved  by  the 
most  conciliating  tenderness.  "Christ  was  made  perfect."  This  expression,  be- 
sides the  meaning  in  which  we  have  hitherto  taken  it,  has  a  special  reference  to  the 
subject  which  is  described  in  this  chapter  ;  that  subject  is  the  priesthood  and  the 
sacrifice  of  Christ.  Christ  was  made  perfect  by  possessing  the  natural  qualifications 
of  the  High  Priest.  He  was  able  to  have  compassion  on  the  ignorant,  the  sinning, 
the  weak,  and  the  afflicted,  because  He  Himself  was  compassed  with  infirmity.  In 
proof  of  this  the  apostle  appeals  to  facts  well  known  in  the  days  of  His  flesh.  He 
offered  up  prayers  and  supplications  with  strong  crying  and  tears.  If  sympathy 
arises  from  the  experience  of  suffering,  and  fellowship  in  affliction,  we  may  well 
rely  on  the  f  eUow  feeling  of  the  High  Priest,  who  was  made  perfect  through  suffering. 
Whether,  then,  we  view  Christ  as  a  teacher  of  righteousness,  or  as  a  High  Priest  of 
good  things  to  come,  the  perfection  of  His  nature  is  evident.    II.  The  complete 

SALVATION   OF   WHICH   He   IS   THE   AUTHOR.      III.   ThE   CHARACTER   OF   THOSE   TO   WHOM 

THIS  SALVATION  IS  IMPARTED.  When  we  considcr  the  high  benefits  procured  for  us 
by  Christ,  our  hearts  are  naturally  animated  with  the  most  grateful  affection ;  and 
the  natural  expression  of  that  affection  is  obedience  to  the  will  of  our  benefactor. 
What  a  good  and  ingenuous  mind  naturally  dictates  as  our  right  conduct  on  such 
occasions  is  the  very  conduct  which  our  Redeemer  requires — that  we  may  be  made 
meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  blessings  He  hath  purchased.  1.  What  you  have  heard 
now  affords  a  most  delightful  subject  of  contemplation.  What  can  be  more  pleasant 
to  the  human  mind  than  to  consider  the  mercy  of  our  Heavenly  Father,  who  hath 
sent  His  Son  into  the  world  to  save  us — the  unsullied  purity  of  the  Eedeemer's 
character — the  glorious  privileges  which  He  has  conferred  on  this  state  of  beiug, 
and  the  unfading  joys  He  hath  promised  in  the  world  to  come?  2.  It  affords  a 
Bubject  of  devout  gratitude.  What  can  warm  the  heart  with  lively  and  pious  affec- 
tion more  than  the  display  of  that  love  of  God,  who  sent  His  Son  to  die  for  us 
while  we  were  yet  sinners  ?  3.  It  affords  a  subject  for  watchful  attention.  WhUe 
kbe  pardon  of  sin  has  been  purchased  by  Christ,  and  the  hope  of  heaven  offered  to 


OHAP.  v.]  BEBBEW8.  415 

our  view,  we  are  not  released  from  the  obligations  to  duty.  (L.  Adanuon,  D.D.) 
Jesus,  the  model  of  p  rfection : — I.  In  the  first  place,  we  see  the  perfection  of  Jeaus 
as  our  Saviour — in  the  perfect  example  He  sets  us.  He  is  an  example  not  of 
one  point  of  character  only,  but  of  every  point.  And  He  is  perfect  in  them  all. 
He  never  failed  in  any  of  them.  A  young  man  had  a  situation  as  clerk  in  a  mer- 
cantile house  in  one  of  our  large  cities.  La  writing  home  to  his  mother  one  day  he 
said,  "  I  have  been  connected  in  business,  at  different  times,  with  a  number  of 
merchants,  all  of  them  members  of  Christian  churches ;  but  I  must  say  that  Mr. 
Johnson,  with  whom  I  am  now  employed,  is  the  best  of  them  all,  in  the  way  in 
which  he  governs  himself  by  his  religion,  in  all  his  business  affairs.  I  take  great 
pleasure  in  watching  how  faithfully  he  does  this.  I  must  say  of  him  that  he  is  a 
Christian  all  over."  It  was  a  great  honour  to  this  good  merchant  that  one  of  his 
clerks  should  feel  obliged  to  speak  thus  of  him.  Now  let  us  remember  these  last 
two  illustrations ;  and  let  us  all  try  to  follow  the  example  which  Jesus  sets  us,  in 
such  a  way  that  we  may  be  Christians  in  little  things — and  Christians  all  over. 
n.  Jesus  is  a  perfect  Saviour,  in  the  second  place,  because  He  gives  na  perfect 
HELP.  There  are  three  things  about  Jesus  which  make  Him  a  perfect  Helper.  1. 
He  is — a  near  helper.  Many  persons,  when  they  are  in  need  of  help,  can  think  of 
their  friends  at  home,  who  would  be  glad  to  help  them.  But  they  are  far  away, 
and  it  is  impossible  for  them  to  do  anything  in  the  way  of  helping.  But  how 
different  it  is  with  Jesus  1  He  is  in  every  place.  He  is  always  near.  •'  He  is  a 
God  " — a  helper — "  at  hand,  and  not  afar  off."  And  this  is  one  thing  that  makes 
Him  a  perfect  Helper.  2.  He  is — able  to  help.  It  sometimes  happens  that  though 
our  friends  are  near  us  in  our  trouble,  yet  they  are  not  able  to  help  as.  But  it  is 
not  so  with  Jesus.  Nothing  is  impossible  with  Him.  His  abiUty  to  help  is  perfect. 
St.  Paul  tells  us  that — "  He  is  able  to  save,"  and  to  help — "  unto  the  uttermost." 
"  He  is  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  can  ask  or  think."  3. 
He  is  willing  to  help.  As  one  of  our  beautiful  collects  says,  "  He  is  more  ready  to 
hear  than  we  to  pray,  and  is  wont  to  give  more  than  either  we  desire  or  deserve." 
III.  But,  in  the  third  place.  He  is  a  perfect  Saviour,  because  He  prepares  for 
His  people  a  perfect  home  in  heaven.  He  will  make  their  bodies  perfect, 
after  the  pattern  of  His  own  glorious  body,  as  it  appeared  on  the  Mount  of 
Transfiguration.  He  will  make  their  souls  perfect.  They  will  be  entirely  free 
from  sin  for  ever.  He  will  put  them  in  a  perfect  home.  (U.  Newton,  D.D.) 
The  author  of  eternal  salvation. — Eternal  salvation  in  Christ : — In  what  respects  is 
He  called  "  the  author  of  eternal  salvation"?  I  answer.  He  is  the  author  of  it,  first 
in  this  sense.  He  rendered  it  possible  for  the  justice,  the  boUness,  and  the  truth  of 
God,  to  bestow  salvation  on  whom  these  attributes  could  not  bestow  it,  and  would  not 
suffer  it  to  be  bestowed  on  other  terms — that  is,  inconsistently  with  the  glory  and  the 
honour  of  God.  He  could  not  save  but  by  suffering  ;  He  could  not  ransom  us  at  a 
less  price  than  His  death ;  and  rather  than  see  a  world  perish,  He  would  not  save 
Himself  from  being  perfected  by  suffering,  that  we  might  be  saved  from  irretrievable 
perdition.  Again,  He  is  the  author  of  salvatioj  in  this  sense,  that  He  bestows  it. 
He  is  exalted,  "  a  Prince  and  a  SaWour  to  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins." 
Moreover,  Christ  is  the  sole  author  of  eternal  salvation  to  all  them  that  obey  Him. 
He  says  to  you,  "  Take  all  the  benefit,  and  the  only  tribute  I  exact  is  a  tribute 
which  honours  me  and  does  not  impoverish  you — the  tribute  of  praise  and  thanks- 
giving; "  in  heart,  in  lip,  in  life.  Having  seen  the  exclusiveness  of  His  work,  and 
the  exclusiveness  of  His  jurisdiction  and  of  His  claims  to  the  glory  and  honour, 
let  us  now  inquire  what  salvation  is,  and  what  salvation  means.  He  is  the  author 
of  eternal  salvation  to  all  them  that  obey  Him.  His  greatest  glory  is,  not  that  He 
made  the  universe,  nor  yet  that  He  rules  the  universe,  but  that  He  has  redeemed  a 
lost  world ;  lost.^not  by  His  oversight,  but  by  our  sin ;  and  by  His  Cross  has  brought 
it  back  to  Himself  a  redeemed,  a  reinstated,  and  a  renovated  orb.  What  is  this 
salvation  which  is  so  precious  ?  It  is  a  twofold  thing,  very  easily  explained  and 
understood.  Two  great  calamities  have  struck  us  from  the  Fall ;  namely,  that  we 
have  lost  a  right  to  heaven  by  having  justly  forfeited  it,  and  that  if  we  had  the 
right  we  have  lost  all  fitness  for  it  and  desire  for  it  by  having  become  polluted, 
unholy,  impure,  corrupt.  What  will  be  to  us  salvation  must  be  a  provision  that 
will  put  us  right  in  both  respects.  The  gr^nel  does  so,  or  rather  our  great  High 
Priest  does  so.  He  gives  us,  first  of  all,  by  His  sacrifice.  His  death,  a  recovery 
from  the  curse  which  we  had  earned  ;  and  by  His  obedience  or  righteousness, 
imputed  to  us,  He  entitles  us  to  the  inheritance  which  we  had  forfeited ;  and  by 
the  gift  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  "  whom,"  He  says, "  I  wiU  send  unto  yoa,"  He  regenerates 


416  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

our  hearts,  gives  us  new  tastes,  new  sympathies,  new  thoughts,  new  life — ^in  short, 
a  new  nature.  And  then  one  single  epithet  bestowed  upon  this  salvation  marks 
its  character  ;  it  is  "  eternal  salvation."  Now  Adam's  standing  was  not  eternal ;  it 
was  hable  to  forfeiture.  But  our  recovered  standing  in  heaven  is  eternal,  and  never 
liable  to  any  forfeiture.  Having  seen  this,  let  me  notice,  in  the  next  place,  the 
character  of  them  for  whom  it  is  provided.  He  became  by  His  consecration  the 
author  of  eternal  salvation  to  all  them  that  obey  Him.  First,  I  observe  here  there 
is  no  national  monopoly.  It  is  not  said  to  the  Jews,  and  not  to  the  Gentiles, 
but  it  is  "to  all  them  that  obey  Him."  In  other  words,  Christianity  is  not  the 
peculiarity  of  an  age,  not  the  monopoly  of  a  nation,  nor  the  restriction  of  a  sect ; 
it  is  not  only  offered  to  the  election,  but  it  is  for  all  them  that  obey  Him,  But,  you 
ask,  in  the  next  place,  and  very  justly,  What  do  you  mean  by  obeying  ?  My  answer 
is,  that  the  word  "  obey  "  is  not  the  just  expression.  The  Greek  word  means,  first, 
"  to  listen,"  "to  hear,"  "to  hearken  "  ;  secondly,  to  submit  to,  to  acquiesce  ;  and 
thirdly,  not  its  strict  meaning,  but  its  intrinsic  meaning,  to  obey,  or  render  obedience 
to.  Salvation  is  not  like  a  gleam  of  sunshine  that  falls  upon  the  evil  and  the 
good,  but  something  that  is  given  only  to  them  that  intelligently  accept  it,  submit 
to  it— receive  it  just  as  Christ  reveals  it  to  them.  The  patient  only  that  takes  the 
prescription  makes  a  step  towards  recovery  from  his  illness.  In  order  to  be  benefited 
by  the  gospel  you  must  take  it  just  as  it  is  offered,  not  upon  your  own  terms,  but 
upon  the  terms  of  the  offerer,  and  thus  alone  do  you  receive  eternal  salvation. 
(J.  Cumming,  D.D.)  The  Saviour  you  need: — I.  The  undoubted  willingness 
OP  Jesus  CnnsT  to  save.  "  Being  made  perfect.  He  became  the  author  of  eternal 
salvation."  Now,  if  we  find  that  He  was  willing  to  undergo  the  process  which 
made  Him  completely  fit  for  the  office  of  a  Saviour,  we  may  certainly  conclude 
that  He  is  willing  enough  to  exercise  the  qualifications  which  He  has  obtained. 
II.  The  perfect  fitness  of  the  Saviour  for  His  work.  We  will  view  the  fitness 
both  Godward  and  manward.  1.  View  it  Godward.  Sinner,  if  any  one  is  to  deal 
with  God  for  you  so  as  to  avail  on  your  behalf,  he  must  be  one  of  God's  choosing, 
for  "  no  man  taketh  this  honour  upon  himself,  but  he  that  was  called  of  God,  as 
was  Aaron.  So  also  Christ  glorified  not  Himself  to  be  made  an  high  priest,  but 
He  that  said  unto  Him,  Thou  art  My  Son,  to-day  have  I  begotten  Thee."  What 
God  appoints  it  must  be  safe  for  us  to  accept.  In  order  that  Jesus  Christ,  being 
appointed,  should  be  fit  for  His  office,  it  was  necessary  that  He  should  become 
man.  Surely  it  is  the  sin  of  sins  if  we  reject  a  Saviour  who  has  made  such  a 
Btoop  in  order  to  be  perfectly  qualified  to  save.  "  Being  found  in  fashion  as  a 
man,"  it  was  necessary  towards  God  that  Jesus  should  fulfil  the  law,  and  work  oat 
a  perfect  obedience.  The  High  Priest  who  is  to  intercede  for  us  must  wear  upon 
his  forehead  "  Holiness  unto  the  Lord"  ;  and  truly  such  a  High  Priest  we  have, 
for  Jesus  is  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners."  Nor  was  this 
all  towards  God.  The  High  Priest  who  should  save  us  must  be  able  to  offer  a 
Bufficient  sacrifice,  efficacious  to  make  atonement,  so  as  to  vindicate  eternal  justice 
and  make  an  end  of  sin.  2.  Christ  Jesus,  as  our  High  Priest,  needed  to  be  per- 
fected manward.  0  sinner,  consider  His  perfections  as  they  concern  yourself. 
That  He  might  save  us  He  must  have  power  to  pardon,  and  to  renew  our  hearts ; 
these  He  has  to  the  full,  for  all  power  is  given  unto  Him  in  heaven  and  in  earth  ; 
He  both  gives  repentance  and  remission.  There  is  one  delightful  thing  in  Christ's 
perfect  qualification  to  save,  namely,  that  He  "  ever  Uveth  to  make  intercession  for 
us."  If  Jesus  Christ  were  dead  and  had  left  us  the  boon  of  salvation  that  we 
might  freely  help  ourselves  to  it,  we  should  have  much  to  praise  Him  for  ;  but  He 
is  not  dead.  He  is  aUve.  He  left  us  a  legacy,  but  many  a  legacy  is  left  which  never 
gets  to  the  legatee  :  lo,  the  great  Maker  of  the  will  is  alive  to  carry  out  His  own 
intentions.  He  died,  and  so  made  the  legacy  good  ;  He  rose  again  and  lives  to  see 
that  none  shall  rob  any  one  of  His  beloved  of  the  portion  He  has  left.  What 
think  you  of  Christ  pleading  in  heaven  ?  Have  you  ever  estimated  the  power  of 
that  plea?  IH.  The  high  position  which  our  Lord  Jesus  takes  in  beferenck 
TO  SAiiVATiON.  According  to  the  text,  "  He  became  the  author  of  eternal  salvation." 
He  is  the  designer,  creator,  worker,  and  cause  of  salvation.  IV.  The  remarkable 
character  or  the  salvation  which  Christ  has  wrought  out.  He  is  the  author 
of  eternal  salvation.  Oh,  how  I  love  that  word  "  eternal "  !  "  Eternal  salvation  1  " 
1.  It  is  an  eternal  salvation  as  opposed  to  every  other  kind  of  deliverance.  2.  It 
is  eternal  salvation  in  this  sense,  that  it  rescues  from  eternal  condemnation  and 
everlasting  punishment.  3.  It  is  eternal  salvation  as  opposed  to  the  risk  of  falling 
awa^  and  perishing.    4.  It  will  ripen  into  eternal  bUss.    V.  The  persons  ooa^ 


CHAP.  T.]  HEBREWS.  417 

CEBNED  IN  THIS  SALTATION.  "  To  all  them  that  obey  Him."  The  word  "  obey  " 
Bignifies  "  obedience  upon  hearing,"  and  this  indicates  faith.  To  obey  Christ  is  in 
its  very  essence  to  trust  Him ;  and  we  might  read  our  text  as  if  it  said,  "  The 
author  of  eternal  salvation  to  all  them  that  believe  in  Him."  If  you  would  be 
saved  your  first  act  of  obedience  must  be  to  trust  Jesus  wholly,  simply,  heartily, 
and  alone.  Becline  your  soul  wholly  on  Jesus  and  you  are  saved  now.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Jesua  Christ  the  author  of  eternal  salvation: — I.  The  oftioe  of 
Chbist.  "  He  is  the  author  of  eternal  salvation."  He  has  undertaken  to  give 
back  to  us  a  title  to  heaven  and  a  fitness  for  it.  He  has  undertaken  to 
save  us  from  the  dominion  of  sin,  from  the  power  of  the  devil,  from  the  pains  of 
hell.  He  has  undertaken  to  make  us  the  children  of  God,  and  heirs  of  eternal 
glory.  II.  His  fitness  fob  siscHABoma  this  office.  1.  He  was  appointed  of 
God  to  be  our  High  Priest.  This  appointment  was  absolutely  nccessnry  to  make 
Him  duly  fitted  for  the  discharge  of  His  office.  Without  it  we  could  have  had  no 
certainty  that  God  would  accept  His  mediation.  2.  He  had  wherewith  to  offer 
for  the  sins  of  the  people.  He  was  able  "  to  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity" ;  to 
offer  such  a  sacrifice  for  sin  as  would  take  it  away ;  and  to  deliver  sinners  from 
tbe  punishment  due  to  them  by  taking  it  upon  Himself.  Thus  was  "  the  Captain 
of  our  salvation  made  perfect  through  suffering."  3.  Christ  is  able  effectually  to 
intercede  for  His  people.  First,  in  that  "  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for 
us."  Secondly,  in  that  He  has  something  available  to  plead  in  our  behalf,  even 
the  infinite  merits  of  His  own  sufferings.  4.  He  is  not  only  a  priest,  but  a  king. 
"  The  government  is  upon  His  shoulders."  Whatever  happens  in  nature  and  in 
providence  is  under  His  control.  The  gift  of  the  Spirit  itself  is  at  His  disposal. 
He  is  "  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords " ;  and  "  shall  reign "  as  Mediator, 
"  till  He  hath  put  all  enemies  under  His  feet."  III.  The  peksons  to  whom  the 
benefit  of  His  mediation  will  beach.  Christ  "  died  for  all."  He  "  tasted  death 
for  every  man."  His  mediation  is  suflicient  for  all.  All  are  invited  to  share  the 
benefits  of  it.  Christ  is  "  the  author  of  eternal  salvation  to  all  them,"  but  to 
them  only  "  who  obey  Him."  This  obedience  has  respect  to  His  whole  mediatorial 
ofSce.  Those  who  would  be  saved  by  Him  must  obey  Him  as  their  Priest  and  as 
their  King.  As  their  Priest  they  must  humbly  trust  in  His  sacrifice  and  inter- 
cession, and  place  all  their  spiritual  concerns  in  His  hands.  As  their  Eang  they 
must  submit  to  His  government,  and  keep  His  commandments.  (E.  Cooper,  M.A.) 
Christ  the  author,  and  obedience  the  condition,  of  salvation  : — I.  How  and  by  what 
means  Chbist  is  the  author  of  oub  salvation  ;  and  this  is  contained  in  these  words, 
"  Being  made  perfect.  He  became  the  author  of  eternal  salvation  "  ;  that  is,  having 
finished  His  course,  which  was  accomplished  in  His  last  sufferings ;  and  having 
received  the  reward  of  them,  being  exalted  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  "  He  became 
the  author  of  eternal  salvation"  to  us;  so  that,  by  all  He  did  and  suffered  for  us, 
in  the  days  of  His  fiesh,  and  in  the  state  of  His  humiliation,  and  by  all  that  He 
still  continues  to  do  for  us  now  that  He  is  in  heaven  at  the  right  hand  of  God  ; 
He  hath  effected  and  brought  about  the  great  work  of  our  salvation.  1.  By  the 
holiness  and  purity  of  His  doctrine,  whereby  we  are  perfectly  instructed  in  the 
will  of  God  and  our  duty,  and  powerfully  excited  and  persuaded  to  the  practice  of 
it.  2.  The  example  of  our  Saviour's  life  is  likewise  another  excellent  means  to 
this  end.  The  law  lays  an  obligation  upon  us ;  but  a  pattern  gives  life  and 
encouragement,  and  renders  our  duty  more  easy,  and  practicable,  and  familiar  to 
us  ;  for  here  we  see  obedience  to  the  Divine  law  practised  in  oar  own  nature,  and 
performed  by  a  man  like  ourselves,  '•  in  all  things  like  imto  us,  sin  only  excepted." 
3.  He  is  "  the  author  of  eternal  salvation,"  as  He  hath  purchased  it  for  us,  by  the 
"merit  of  His  obedience  and  sufferings,"  by  which  He  hath  obtained  eternal 
redemption  for  us  ;  not  only  deliverance  from  the  wrath  to  come,  but  eternal  Ufe 
and  happiness.  4.  Christ  is  said  to  be  the  author  of  our  salvation,  in  respect  of 
His  powerful  and  perpetual  intercession  for  us  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  And 
this  seems  to  be  more  especially  intimated  and  intended,  in  that  expression  here  in 
the  text,  that  "  being  made  perfect  He  became  tbe  author  of  eternal  salvation  to 
them  that  obey  Him."  II.  What  obedience  tee  gospel  bequiees  as  a  con- 
dition, AND    IS    pleased    TO    ACCEPT    AS    A    QUALIFICATION,  IN  THOSE  WHO  HOPE  FOB 

ETERNAL  SALVATION.  1.  Negatively.  It  is  not  a  mere  outward  profession  of  the 
Christian  religion,  and  owning  of  Christ  for  our  Lord  and  lawgiver,  that  will  be 
accepted  in  this  case.  2.  Positively.  That  which  God  requires  as  a  condition  and 
will  accept  as  a  qualification,  in  those  who  hope  for  eternal  life,  is  faith  in  Christ 
and  a  sincere  and  universal  obedience  to  the  precepts  of  His  holy  gospel.    1.  There 

27 


418  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chat.  ▼. 

is  a  virtual  and  there  is  an  actual  obedience  to  the  laws  of  God.  By  an  actnal 
obedience  I  mean  the  practice  of  the  several  graces  of  Christianity  in  the  course 
of  a  holy  life  ;  when  "  out  of  a  good  conversation  men  do  show  forth  their  works  "  ; 
and,  by  the  outward  actions  of  their  lives,  do  give  real  testimony  of  their  piety, 
justice,  sobriety,  humility,  meekness,  and  charity,  and  all  other  Christian  graces 
and  virtues,  as  occasion  is  ministered  for  the  exercise  of  them.  By  a  virtual 
obedience  I  mean  a  sincere  belief  of  the  gospel,  of  the  holiness  and  equity  of  its 
precepts,  of  the  truth  of  its  promises,  and  the  terror  of  its  threatenings,  and  a  true 
repentance  for  all  our  sins.  This  is  obedience  in  the  root  and  principle ;  for  ha 
who  sincerely  believes  the  gospel,  and  does  truly  repent  of  the  errors  and  mis- 
carriages of  his  life,  is  firmly  resolved  to  obey  the  commandments  of  God,  and  to 
walk  before  Him  in  hohness  and  righteousness  all  the  days  of  his  life ;  so  that 
there  is  nothing  that  prevents  or  hinders  this  man's  actual  obedience  to  the  laws  of 
God,  in  the  course  of  a  holy  and  good  Ufe,  but  only  the  want  of  time  and  oppor- 
tunity for  it.  _  2.  There  is  a  perfect,  and  there  is  a  sincere  obedience.  Perfect 
obedience  consists  in  the  exact  conformity  of  our  hearts  and  lives  to  the  law  of 
God,  without  the  least  imperfection,  and  without  faihng  in  any  point  or  degree  of 
our  duty.  And  this  obedience,  as  it  is  not  consistent  With  the  frailty  of  corrupt 
nature,  and  the  imperfection  of  our  present  state,  so  neither  doth  God  require  it  of 
as  as  a  necessary  condition  of  eternal  life.  We  are,  indeed,  commanded  to  be 
•'  perfect,  as  our  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfect."  But  the  plain  meaning  of 
this  precept  is  that  we  should  imitate  those  Divine  perfections  of  goodness,  and 
mercy,  and  patience,  and  purity,  and  endeavour  to  be  as  like  God  in  all  these  as 
we  can,  and  be  still  aspiring  after  a  nearer  resemblance  of  Him,  as  may  be  evident 
to  any  one  who  considers  the  connection  and  occasion  of  these  words.  By  a 
sincere  obedience  I  mean  such  a  conformity  of  our  lives  and  actions  to  the  law  of 
God,  as  to  the  general  course  and  tenor  of  them,  that  we  do  not  live  in  the  habitual 
practice  of  any  known  sin,  or  in  the  customary  neglect  of  any  material  or  con- 
siderable part  of  our  known  duty ;  and  that  we  be  not  wUfully  and  deliberately 
guilty  of  the  single  act  of  notorious  sins.  And  this  obedience,  even  in  the  best 
of  men,  is  mixed  with  great  frailty  and  imperfection ;  but  yet,  because  it  is  the 
utmost  that  we  can  do  in  this  state  of  infirmity  and  imperfection,  the  terms  of  the 
gospel  are  so  merciful  and  gracious,  as  that  God  is  pleased,  for  the  sake  of  the 
meritorious  obedience  and  sufferings  of  our  blessed  Saviour,  to  accept  this  sincere 
though  imperfect  obedience,  and  to  reward  it  with  eternal  life.  {Archbishop 
Tillotson.)  Author  of  eternal  salvation  : — 1.  By  salvation  is  meant  deliverance 
from  sin  and  all  the  consequences  thereof,  so  as  the  party  saved  is  made  ever 
happy.  There  be  both  bodily  and  spiritual,  temporal  and  eternal  dangers  where- 
unto  man  by  sin  is  Uable  ;  and  this  salvation  is  a  deliverance  from  all.  There  is 
deliverance  as  from  some  evils,  and  not  all ;  so  deliverance  only  for  a  time,  and 
not  for  ever ;  but  this  salvation  is  a  total  deliverance  from  aU  evil^  and  that  for 
ever.  Eternal  peace,  safety,  fehcity,  is  the  issue  and  consequence  thereof.  2. 
This  salvation  being  so  noble  and  glorious  an  effect,  must  have  some  cause, 
■ome  author  and  efficient;  and  this  efficient  was  Christ;  jet  Christ  as  perfected 
and  consecrated.  For  by  His  blood  and  purest  sacrifice  of  Himself  (1)  He 
satisfied  Divine  justice  and  merited  this  salvation.  (2)  Being  upon  His  resm-- 
rection  constituted  and  made  an  High  Priest  and  King,  and  fit  to  minister  and 
officiate  as  a  priest  and  reign  as  king  in  heaven.  He  ascends  into  that  glorious 
'  temple  and  palace,  and  is  set  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  (3)  Being  there  established, 
He  begins  as  King  to  send  down  the  Holy  Ghost,  reveal  the  gospel,  and  by  both  to 
work  faith  in  the  hearts  of  men,  and  qualify  them  for  justification  and  salvation. 
(4)  When  men  are  once  qualified  and  prepared  so  as  to  sue  for  pardon  in  Hig 
name  before  the  throne  of  God,  He,  as  Priest,  begins  His  intercession,  and  by  th« 
plea  of  His  own  blood  for  them  procures  their  pardon  and  eternal  salvation  ;  so 
that,  as  consecrated  and  perfect.  He  becomes  the  great  efficient  cause  of  this  sal- 
vation, by  way  of  merit,  intercession,  and  actual  communication.  3.  If  it  be  com- 
municated from  and  by  Him,  it  must  be  received  in  some  subject ;  and  if  in  Him 
there  be  an  eternal  saving  virtue,  and  He  exercise  it,  there  must  be  some  subject 
and  persons  in  whom  this  saving  power  shall  produce  this  effect,  so  as  that 
they  shaU  be  saved.  And  though  this  power  be  able  to  save  all,  yet  only  they 
and  all  who  obey  Him  shall  be  saved :  efficient  causes  work  most  effectually  in 
subjects  united  and  disposed  aright.  And  so  it  is  in  this  case ;  for  though  the 
mercies  of  God,  merited  by  Christ,  may  be  so  far  communicable  to  all,  as  that 
'.all  may  become  savable,  which   is   a  great  and  universal  benefit,  yet  tbey  aro 


CHAP.  T.]  HEBREWS.  419 

not  actually  communicated  to  all,  because  all  are  not  obedient.    Hia  laws  require 
sincere  submission  and  obedience  in  reuoilncing  all  others,  and  a  total  dependence 
upon  Him,   and  Him  alone,    n  repenting  of  our  sins  and  believing  upon  Him. 
And  this  sincere  faith  is  the  fundamental  virtue,  and  potentially  all  obedience. 
(G.  Lawson.)        Salvation  in  Christ : — Having  Christ  we  have  salvation  also,  while 
witiiout  receiving  Christ  Himself    we  cannot  have  the  salvation.      Having  the 
fountain,  we  have  its  issuing  streams.    Cut  off  from  the  fountain  the  streams  will 
not  flow  to   us.    Christ  offers  Himself  to  be  the  Bridegroom  of  the  soul.     He 
offers  to  endow  His  bride  with  all    the  riches   of   His   own  inheritance  in   the 
heirship  of  His  Father.     Taking  Him  as  our  Bridegroom,  and  giving  ourselves 
to  Him  as  the  bride  espouses  her  husband,  with  Him  we  have   all   He   has   as 
well   as   all   He   is,  while   without   Him   we  can  have  neither.     The  mistake  is 
that  oi  seeking  the   salvation  instead   of   seeking   the   Saviour.     Just  the  same 
mistake  that  the  affianced  would  make  if  she  should  seek  to  have  the  posses- 
sions of  him  to  whom  she  was  engaged  made  over  to  her  from  him,  without  their 
union  in  wedlock,  instead  of  accepting  his  offer  of  himself,  and  having  the  hymeneal 
bond  completed  by  which  he  and  all  he  has  would  become  hers.  {W.  E.  Boardman.) 
Salvation,  not  compulsion : — "Well,  then,"  said  a  sceptic  to  me  on  one  occasion, 
"why  is  the  world  not  saved  ?  "     "  My  friend,"  said  I,  "  you  misconceive  the  power 
required  to  convert  souls."     There  was  a  little  boy  in  the  room ;  and  I  illustrated 
my  meaning  by  saving,  "  Suppose  I  mill  that  that  little  boy  leave  the  room.    There 
are  two  waj  s  in  which  I  could  give  effect  to  that  will.     I  could  take  him  in  my 
arms,  and  by  superior  muscular  force  remove  him  ;  or  I  could  take  him  on  my 
knee,  speak  lovingly  and  persuasively  to  him  in  order  to  induce  him  to  leave  the 
room  himself.    If  I  adopted  the  former,  I  should  merely  have  removed  his  body : 
his  volition  would  be  against  me,  and  he  would  feel  that  I  had  done  him  violence. 
If  I   succeed  in  the  latter,  I  should  have  influenced  his  mind ;  and  he  himself 
would  use  his  own  limbs,  and  with  a  happy  smile  depart."    (D.  Thomas,  D.D.) 
Unto  all  them  that  obey  Kim. — Obedience  due  to  Christ : — Let  us  examine  our  obedi- 
ence.    Christ  wills  us  to  avoid  sins  that  cause  His  gospel  to  be  ill  spoken  of,  by 
good  works  to  adorn  it,  to  stop  the  mouths  of  the  adversaries,  &c.     Do  we  so  ? 
Doth  not  drunkenness,  covetousness,  pride,  malice,  and  uncleanness  abound?    Ag 
they  said  and  promised  to  Joshua,  so  let  us  to  Christ — "  Whatsoever  Thou  com- 
mandest  us  we  will  do,  and  whithersoever  Thou  sendest  us  we  will  go."    How 
must  we  obey  Him?     1.  Fully.     The  young   man  in  the  gospel  most   proudly 
vaunted  that    he   had    kept  all  the   commandments    from    his    youth;    let    ua 
endeavour  that  we  may  say  so  in  truth  and  sincere  heart,  and  as  Zacharias  and 
Elisabeth,  "let  us  walk  in  all  the  commandments  and  ordinances  of  the  Lord, 
blameless."  2.  Cheerfully.  God  loves  a  cheerful  giver.   "  I  was  glad,"  says  the  Psalm, 
"  when  they  said,  Let  us  go  up  into  the  house  of  the  Lord  "  (Psa.  cxxii.  1).     3,  Con- 
stantly.   A  runner  hath  not  the  prize  till  he  come  to  the  goal.     A  tailor  hath  not 
his  wagea  till  the  garment  be  finished.     A  traveller  hath  not  his  money  tiU  he 
come  to  hia  journey's  end.     Here  we  are  as  children  (1  Cor.  xiii.),  growing  higher 
and  higher  iu  knowledge,  faith,  love,  obedience,  &c.     {W.  Jones,  D.D.)        The 
vosdidlity  and  necessity  of  gospel  obedience,  and  its  consistence  with  free  graxe : — 
I.  The  possibility  of  our  pekforming  this  condition.     1.  We  are  not  sufficient 
of  ourselves,  and  by  any  power  in  us,  to  perform  the  conditions  of  the  gospel.     The 
grace  of  God  doth  clearly  appear  in  the  whole  business  of  our  salvation  :  "  By  grace 
ye  are  saved,"  says  the  apostle,  "  and  that  not  of  yourselves,  it  is  the  gift  of  God." 
Faith  is  the  gift  of  God,  and  so  is  repentance.     2.  The  grace  of  God  is  ready  to 
assist  and  enable  us  to  the  performance  of  these  conditions ;  that  is,  to  faith  and 
repentance,  and  all  the  purposes  of  obedience  and  a  holy  life ;  if  we  be  not  wanting 
to  ourselves,  and  do  not  reject  or  neglect  to  make  use  of  that  grace  which  God 
offers  us,  and  is  ready  to  afford  us  in  a  very  plentiful  manner.     3.  What  the  grace 
of  God  is  ready  to  enable  us  to  do,  if  we  be  not  wanting  to  ourselves,  may  properly 
be  said  to  be  possible  to  us,  and  in  some  sense  in  our  power.     IL  The  necessity  op 

THIS    obedience     IN    OBDEB    TO    OOB      OBTAINING     OF    ETERNAL    LIFE    AND    HAPPINESS. 

"  Christ  ia  the  author  of  eternal  salvation  to  them  that  obey  Him  " ;  that  is,  to 
such,  and  only  to  such,  as  live  in  obedience  to  the  precepts  of  His  holy  gospel,  to 
them  who  frame  the  general  course  of  their  lives  according  to  His  laws.  Now  the 
necessity  of  obedience,  in  order  to  eternal  life  and  happiness,  relies  upon  these  three 
grounds :  1.  The  constitution  and  appointment  of  God.  2.  The  general  reason 
of  rewards.  3.  The  particular  nature  of  that  reward  which  God  will  confer  upon 
us  for  our  obedience.    III.  This  method  and  joeans  of  oub  salvation  is  no  pbbTO" 


420  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼, 

DICB  TO  THE  LAW  OF  FAITH,  AND  TO  THE  FBEE  ORACE   AND   MEKCT  OF   GoD   DECLARED   V» 

THE  aosPEL.  For  SO  long  as  these  three  things  are  but  asserted  and  secured — 1. 
That  faith  is  the  root  and  principle  of  obedience  and  a  holy  life,  and  that  without 
it  "it  ia  impossible  to  please  God."  2.  That  we  stand  continually  in  need  of  the 
Divine  grace  and  assistance  to  enable  us  to  perform  that  obedience  which  the  gospel 
requires  of  us,  and  is  pleased  to  accept  in  order  to  eternal  life.  And — 3.  That  the 
forgiveness  of  our  sins,  and  the  reward  of  eternal  Ufe,  are  founded  in  the  free  grace 
and  mercy  of  God,  conferring  these  blessings  upon  us,  not  for  the  merit  of  our 
obedience,  but  only  for  the  merit  and  satisfaction  of  the  obedience  and  sufferings 
of  our  blessed  Saviour  and  Eedeemer ;  I  say,  so  long  as  we  assert  these  three  things, 
we  give  all  that  the  gospel  anywhere  ascribes  to  faith,  and  to  the  grace  of  God 
revealed  in  the  gospel.  Inferences  :  1.  To  convince  us  that  an  empty  profession  of 
the  Christian  religion,  how  specious  and  glorious  soever  it  be,  if  it  be  destitute  of 
the  fruits  of  obedience  and  a  holy  life,  will  by  no  means  avail  to  bring  us  to  heaven. 
2.  The  consideration  of  what  hath  been  said  should  stir  us  up  to  a  thankful 
acknowledgment  of  what  the  author  of  our  salvation  hath  done  for  us  ;  and  there 
is  great  reason  for  thankfulness  whether  we  consider  the  greatness  of  the  benefit 
conferred  upon  us,  or  the  way  and  manner  in  which  it  was  purchased,  or  the  easy 
and  reasonable  terms  upon  which  it  may  be  obtained.  3.  Here  is  abundant 
encouragement  given  to  our  obedience  ;  we  have  the  Divine  assistance  promised  to 
us,  to  enable  us  to  the  performance  of  the  most  difficult  parts  of  our  duty  ;  we  have 
the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  to  help  our  infirmities,  to  excite  us  to  that  which  is  good, 
and  to  help  and  strengthen  us  in  the  doing  of  it.  For  our  further  encouragement 
we  are  assured  of  the  Divine  acceptance  in  case  of  our  sincere  obedience,  notwithstand- 
ing the  manifold  failings  and  imperfections  of  it,  for  the  sake  of  the  perfect  right- 
eousness and  obedience  and  the  meiitorious  sufferings  of  our  blessed  Saviour.  4. 
The  consideration  of  what  hath  been  said  upon  this  argument  may  serve  severely 
to  rebuke  the  groundless  presumption  of  those  who  rely  with  so  much  confidence 
upon  Christ  for  eternal  salvation,  without  any  conscience  or  care  to  keep  His  com- 
mandments ;  as  if  salvation  lay  upon  His  hands,  and  He  knew  not  how  to  dispose 
of  it,  and  were  glad  of  any  one  that  would  come  and  take  it  off  upon  any  terms. 
No,  "He came  to  save  us  from  our  sins,  to  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  to 
purify  to  Himself  a  pecuhar  people,  zealous  of  good  works."  (Archbishop  Tillotson.) 
Oospel  obedience: — It  is  reported  of  the  old  kings  of  Peru,  that  tney  were  wont  to  use  a 
tassel,  or  fringe,  made  of  red  wool,  which  they  wore  upon  their  heads,  and  when  they 
sent  any  governor  to  rule  as  viceroy  in  any  part  of  their  country,  they  delivered 
unto  him  one  of  the  threads  of  their  tassel,  and,  for  one  of  those  simple  threads,  he 
was  as  much  obeyed  as  if  he  had  been  the  king  himself — yea,  it  hath  so  happened 
that  the  king  hath  sent  a  governor  only  with  this  thread  to  slay  men  and  women  of 
a  whole  province,  without  any  further  commission ;  for  of  such  power  and 
authority  was  the  king's  tassel  with  them,  that  they  willingly  submitted  thereunto, 
even  at  the  sight  of  one  thread  of  it.  Now,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that,  if  one  thread 
shall  be  so  forcible  to  draw  heathen  obedience,  there  will  be  no  need  of  cart-ropes 
to  haul  on  that  which  is  Christian.  Exemplary  was  that  obedience  of  the  Romans 
which  was  said  to  have  come  abroad  to  all  men.  And  certainly  gospel  obedience 
is  a  grace  of  much  worth,  and  of  great  force  upon  the  whole  man ;  for  when  it  is 
once  wrought  in  the  heart,  it  worketh  a  conformity  to  all  God's  will.  Be  it  for  life 
or  death,  one  word  from  God  will  command  the  whole  soul  as  soon  as  obedience 
hath  found  admittance  into  the  heart.  (J.  Spencer.)  Faith  nnd  works : — 'Twas 
an  unhappy  division  that  has  been  made  between  faith  and  work  .  Though  in  my 
intellect  I  may  divide  them,  just  as  in  the  candle  I  know  there  is  both  light  and 
heat,  but  yet  put  out  the  candle,  and  they  are  both  gone  ;  one  remains  not  without 
the  other ;  so  it  is  betwixt  faith  and  works.  Nay,  in  a  right  conception  Jides  est 
opus :  if  I  beheve  a  thing  because  I  am  commanded,  that  is  opus.    {John  Selden.) 

Vers.  10, 12.  Of  whom  we  have  many  things  to  say,  and  hard  to  he  uttered. — D  iffi- 
cult  truths : — I.  There  are  revealed  in  the  Scripture  sundry  deep  and  mysterious 

TRUTHS  WHICH  REQUIRE  A  PECULIAR  DILIGENCE  IN  OUR  ATTENDANCE  UNTO  THEIR  DECLARA- 
TION, that  we  may  rightly  understand  them,  or  receive  them  in  a  due  manner.  1.  There 
are  some  things  or  truths  revealed  in  the  Scripture  which  have  a  peculiar  remark  put 
upon  them,  as  those  which  are  deep  and  mysterious  (see  1  Tim.  iii.  16 ;  Eph.  v.  32 ; 
1  Cor.  ii.  6-8  ;  xv.  51 ;  Eph.  iii.  4, 5).  2,  The  doctrines  concerning  these  things  are 
not  dark  and  obscure,  but  clear,  evident,  and  perspicuous.  There  are  two  practices 
fcbout  these  things  that  are  equally  pernicious.    (1)  A  pretence  of  things  mysterious 


«BAP.  ▼.]  HEBREWS.  421 

that  are  not  clearly  revealed.  This  the  apostle  calls"a  curious  prying  or  intruding 
into  things  which  we  have  not  seen ;  they  who  do  so  are  "  vainly  puffed  up  by  their 
fleshly  mind  "  (Col.  ii.  18),  and  which  he  cautioneth  us  against  (Eom.  xii.  3).  (2)  A 
neglect  and  contempt  of  clear  open  revelations,  because  the  things  revealed  are 
mysterious.  3.  The  depths  and  mystery  of  the  things  intended,  lie  in  themselves 
and  their  own  nature.  They  are  effects  of  Divine  wisdom,  yea,  the  greatest  which 
ever  God  will  either  work  or  declare.  Hence  the  doctrine  of  them  is  called  "  Hia 
wisdom  "  (1  Cor.  ii.  7),  "  His  manifold  wisdom  "  (Eph.  iii.  10),  as  having  pat  the 
most  eminent  characters  of  infinite  wisdom  upon  them.  4.  The  principal  of  these 
mysteries  concern  the  person,  oflSces,  and  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  So  as 
to  His  person,  it  is  declared  by  our  apostle  (1  Tim.  iii.  16;  as  to  His  work  and 
office,  Phil.  ii.  7-10;  and  as  to  His  grace,  Eph.  iii.  8-11).  5.  Of  all  things 
which  we  are  to  learn  in  the  dispensation  of  the  Word,  these  are  we  with 
most  diligence  to  attend  unto  (Phil.  iii.  8-10),  as  those  wherein  the  glory 
of  God  and  our  own  obedience  are  most  conoemed.    II.  It  is  necessary  fob  the 

MINISTEBS  OP  THE  GOSPEL  SOMETIMES  TO  INSIST  ON  THE  MOST  ABSTRUSE  AND  DIFFICULT 
TRUTHS  THAT  ARE  REVEALED  FOB  OUR  EDIFICATION.      1.   It   OUght   tO   be   the    design    of 

every  faithful  minister  in  the  course  of  his  ministry  to  withhold  nothing  from 
those  committed  unto  his  charge  that  belongs  onto  their  edification,  a^  do  all 
things  that  are  written  in  the  Scripture,  but  to  declare  unto  them  the  whole  counsel 
of  God,  so  far  as  he  himself  hath  attained.  2.  His  duty  is,  as  much  as  in  him 
lieth,  to  carry  on  his  hearers  unto  perfection  (chap.  vi.  1).  3.  Whereas  the  greatest 
part  of  our  congregations,  it  may  be,  frequently  are  such  as  stand  in  need  of 
milk,  and  are  not  skilful,  as  yet,  in  the  word  of  righteousness,  it  is  our  duty  also  to 
insist  on  those  plainer  truths  which  are  suited  unto  their  edification.  4.  Those 
who  are  called  by  the  state  of  their  flocks  to  engage  sometimes  in  the  exposition  of 
abstruse  and  mysterious  passages  of  Scripture,  may  do  well  to  observe  the  ensuing 
rules,  all  which  may  be  evidently  gathered  from  the  way  and  manner  of  our 
apostle's  treating  concerning  Melchisedec  and  his  office.  (1)  That  their  interpre- 
tations be  openly  and  evidently  conformable  to  the  analogy  of  faith.  (2)  That  the 
exposition  of  them  be  necessary  from  present  circumstances,  which  are  principally 
two.  (a)  That  the  things  contained  in  them  do  belong  unto  some  important 
truth  which  is  plainly  declared  for  the  substance  of  it  in  other  places, 
although  from  them  it  may  receive  light  and  illustration,  (b)  When  they  offer 
themselves  in  the  course  of  our  work  or  ministry,  where  God  gives  hght  into  the 
sense  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  them,  they  are  not  to  be  waived,  as  we  would  be 
esteemed  faithful  in  our  work.  (3)  Always  to  remember,  that  what  is  so 
abstrusely  expressed,  is  so  on  purpose,  for  the  exercise  as  of  our  faith,  humility, 
and  subjection  of  mind  unto  the  authority  of  the  Holy  Ghost  speaking  in  the 
Scripture ;  so  of  our  diligence  and  dependence  on  Him  for  instruction,  which  calls 
for  an  especial  frame  of  spirit  in  the  work  we  undertake.  (4)  That  the  difficulty 
and  necessity  of  treating  concerning  such  things  be  intimated  unto  them  who  are 
to  be  instructed,  that  so  they  may  be  prepared  to  attend  with  diligence,  and  judge 
with  sobriety  of  what  is  delivered.    III.  There  is  a  glorious  light  and  evidence 

IN  ALL  divine  TRUTHS,  BUT  BY  REASON  OF  OUR  DARKNESS  AND  WEAKNESS  WE  ABE  NOT 
ALWAYS  ABLE  TO  COMPREHEND  THEM.  OUR  WANT  OF  THAT  ACQUAINTANCE  WITH  THEM, 
WHICH  IT  IS  OUR  DUTY  TO  HAVE,  AND  WHICH  IS  NEEDFUL  UNTO  OUR  EDIFICATION,  IS 
mOM  OURSELVES  ALONE,  AND  FOR  THE  MOST  PART  FROM  OUR  SINFUL  NEGLECT  OF 
WHAT  IS  REQUIRED  THEREUNTO.  IV.  MaNY  WHO  RECEIVE  THE  WORD  AT  FIRST  WITH 
SOME  READINESS,  DO  YET  AFTERWARDS  MAKE  BUT  SLOW  PROGRESS  EITHER  IN  KNOW- 
LEDGE OB  GRACE.  V.  It  is  men's  SLOTHFCLNESS  in  hearing  THAT  IS  THE  BOLE 
CAUSE  OP  THEIB  NOT  IMPBOVINO  THE  MEANS  OF  GRACE,  OB  NOT  THRIVING  UNDER  THE 
DISPENSATION  OF  THE  WOBD.  Or,  ALL  OUB  MISCARRIAGES,  WITH  RESPECT  UNTO  THE 
GOSPEL,   ARE   TO   BE     RESOLVED     INTO     OUB     OWN    SLOTH,    NEGLIGENCE,   AND    DEPRAVED 

AFFECTIONS.  (John  Oweti,  D.D.)  Te  are  dull  of  hearing. — Dull  of  hearing : — 
It  is  a  metaphor  taken  from  lazy  travellers  that  go  slowly.  As  men  are  slow  in 
going,  so  are  you  in  hearing  the  Word  of  God.  And  by  hearing  is  not  meant  the 
external  hearing  alone,  but  the  internal.  Slow  in  conceiving  and  learning,  as  is 
expounded  in  the  next  verse.  Hearing  is  put  for  learning,  because  knowledge  is 
conveyed  by  the  sense  of  hearing.  There  be  many  things  that  procure  this  dulness 
and  slowness.  1.  Carelessness  or  want  of  diligence  (Matt.  xiii.  19).  2.  A  mind 
possessed  with  other  things,  which  keep  the  gospel  out  of  the  doors,  as  these  were 
with  an  high  opinion  of  the  ceremonial  law  and  Levitical  priestJiood.  A  barrel 
fall  of  oorrupt  water  cannot  receive  wine.    8.  Want  of  meditation.    4.  Want  of 


422  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  r. 


reading  and  conierring  (Acts  xvii.).  5.  Want  of  prayer.  We  are  apt  scholars  for 
the  world,  swift  to  hear  news  and  tales,  but  slow  and  dull  in  hearing  of  the  Word 
of  God.  So  that  we  may  justly  suffer  that  check  of  our  Saviour's  (Luke  xxiv.  25). 
(W.  Jones,  D.D.)  Dull  of  hearing  .-—The  meaning  is  not  that  they  were  deal 
either  in  whole  or  part,  or  that  such  amongst  them  as  were  learned  could  not  read 
them,  if  written,  or  understand  the  language;  but  by  hearing  is  meant  nnder- 
Btanding.  There  are  outward  ears,  and  outward  hearing  of  the  body ;  inward  ears, 
and  inward  hearing  of  the  soul :  the  former  they  had,  the  latter  they  had  not,  so  as 
to  be  capable  of  such  things  as  he  had  to  say  of  this  priest  and  priesthood.  This 
was  no  obscurity  in  the  matter,  but  an  indisposition  in  the  soul  to  receive  this 
doctrine.  Dulness  was  this  indisposition,  which  in  general  is  a  defect  of  active 
power ;  in  particular,  in  this  place,  of  the  intellective  faculty,  as  not  able  to  perceive, 
discern,  apprehend,  and  judge  of  this  higher  doctrine.  It  is  opposed  to  that  we 
call  acumen,  the  sharpness,  quickness,  and  piercing  power  of  the  wit  and  intellect ; 
yet  here  this  dulness  is  restrained  to  a  certain  object,  for  in  other  things  they  might 
be  apprehensive  and  judicious  enough.  By  reason  of  this  defect  it  is  that  much 
excellent  and  Divine  doctrine  is  lost,  or  at  least  useless  to  the  greatest  part  of  the 
people,  who  are  no  whit  moved  with  doctrine,  though  excellent,  if  above  their 
capacity.  For  this  cause  the  meanest  teachers  are  most  popular ;  though  it  is  true  that 
all  wise  men  must  have  respect  unto  the  capacity  of  their  hearers,  and  condescend  unto 
them,  yet  men  shquld  not  be  always  babes  and  dunces  in  God's  school.  (G.  Lawson.) 
Dull  hearers  : — There  is  a  difficulty  in  the  things  themselves  (the  matter  of  preach- 
ing), and  there  may  be  a  weakness  in  the  ministers  of  the  gospel  to  speak  clearly 
about  these  things ;  but  generally  the  fault  is  in  the  hearers.  Dull  hearers  make 
the  preaching  of  the  gospel  a  difficult  thing:  and  even  those  that  have  some 
faith  may  be  dull  hearers,  duU  of  understanding,  and  slow  to  beheve;  the  under- 
standing is  weak  and  does  not  apprehend  these  spiritual  things ;  the  memory  is 
weak  and  does  not  retain  them.  The  apostle  insists  upon  the  faultiness  of  this 
infirmity  of  theirs.  It  was  not  a  mere  natural  infirmity,  but  it  was  a  sinful 
infirmity,  and  more  in  them  than  others,  by  reason  of  the  singular  advantages  they 
had  enjoyed  for  improving  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ  (ver.  12).    (M.  Henry.) 

Vers.  12-14.  Ye  ought  to  be  teachers.— T/ie  duty  of  teaching : — I.  You  ought  to 
have  KNOWN  enough  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel  to  enable  you  to  be  teachers.  IL 
You  ought  to  have  enough  xnteeest  in  others  to  impel  you  to  be  teachers.  III. 
You  ought  to  have  enough  loyalty  to  Christ  to  constrain  you  to  be  teachers. 
Whether  or  no  He  would  have  us  to  be  teachers,  we  may  gather  from— 1.  His 
commands,  "  Go,  teach,"  &c.  2.  His  spirit.  Ever  communicative.  3.  His  ex- 
ample. "Went  about  doing  good."  (17.  R.  Thomas.)  Improvement  in  know- 
ledge : I.  That  all  who  are  favoured  with  the  light  of  the  gospel  shall  bb 

UTTERLY  INEXCUSABLE  IF  THEIE  IMPROVEMENTS  IN  KNOWLEDGE  DO  NOT  BEAR  A  PRO- 
PORTION TO  THE  TIME  THEY  HAVE  CONTINUED  TO  ENJOY  IT.  II.  ThAT  THOSE  WHO  ABB 
NOT  CAREFUL  TO  ADD  TO  THEIR  KNOWLEDGE,  WILL  BE  IN  GREAT  DANGER  OF  LOSING 
WHAT  THEY  HAVE  FORMERLY  ACQUIRED.  III.  ThAT  WITHOUT  A  PROPER  ACQUAINTANCE 
WITH    THE  FIRST  PLAIN  PRINCIPLES  OF  RELIGION,  MEN  ARE  UNFIT  TO  RECEIVE   DOCTRINES 

OF  A  HIGHER  AND  MORE  SPECULATIVE  NATURE.  (R.  Walker.)  RcUgious  teackers : — 
None  should  take  upon  them  to  be  teachers  of  others  but  those  who  have  made  a 
good  improvement  in  spiritual  knowledge  themselves.  {M.  Henry.)  Blameworthy 
backwardness  : — SmaU  progress  under  great  privileges  is  a  grievous  fault.  The 
scholar  who  has  time,  and  books,  and  excellent  instructors,  and  yet  learns  nothing, 
is  soon  given  up  as  incorrigible.  He  soon  loses  caste,  is  degraded,  is  censured  by 
his  friends,  and  is  condemned  by  all.  The  man  of  business  who,  by  negUgence  or 
prodigality,  loses  his  customers,  and  so  suffers  his  business  to  run  down,  is  despised, 
and  when  the  pinching  hand  of  poverty  seizes  him,  is  unpitied.  {Geo.  Peck,  D.D.) 
Christian  growth: — They  are  blamed  for  being  babes,  and  not  "of  full  age,"  of 
perfect.  In  the  Church  of  Christ  there  are  little  children,  there  are  men,  there  are 
fathers.  It  is  evident  that  the  apostle  refers  in  our  passage  to  the  wisdom  of  the 
heart  and  of  life.  Christians  differ  in  their  measure  of  understanding  and  strength, 
as  well  as  in  the  gifts  of  grace,  which  by  the  Spirit  and  according  to  their  natural 
endowments  and  providential  position  are  bestowed  on  them.  Those  who  have 
only  recently  been  brought  into  the  fold  cannot  possess  the  experience  and  the 
wisdom  of  the  elder.  The  Lord,  who  is  the  Head  of  the  Church,  distributes  also 
gifts  and  talents  according  to  His  good  and  wise  will.  Some  members  of  the  Church 
are  called  to  be  teachers,  lights,  and  guides,  sons  of  consolation  and  fathers  in  th« 


CHAP,  v.]  HEBREWS.  42S 

goppel ;  whereas  others  will,  perhaps,  always  remain  weak,  and  in  need  of  constant 
help  and  guidance.    Now  the  Lord,  who  Himself  is  full  of  tenderness,  exhorts  the 
Church  to  be  gentle,  patient  toward  the  young  and  the  inexperienced.     They  that 
are  strong  ought  not  merely  to  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak,  but  exercise  self- 
denial  in  accommodating  themselves  to  their  less  enlightened  brethren.     We  must 
exfrcise  a  wise  and  patient  discretion,  even  as  Jesus  had  many  things  to  say  to  His 
disciples,  but  remembered  that  they  could  not  bear  them.     1.  The  comparison  be- 
tween a  newly-converted  man  and  a  babe  is,  like  all  comparisons,  imperfect.    For 
in  one  sense  a  Christian  is  born  by  the  Holy  Ghost  full-grown ;  as  Adam  came 
into  the  world  a  perfect  man,  full  of  light  and  insight,  who  gave  names  to  all  the 
living  creatures,  who  understood  and  spake.     The  newly-converted  man  is  born 
into  the  spiritual  world,  and  from  the  first  moment  he  sees  and  knows  Christ,  and 
has  the  mind  of  Christ,  the  Spirit,  so  that  he  can  immediately  understand  all 
spiritual  things.     The  milk  of  the  Word,  as  contrasted  with  strong  meat,  does  not 
refer  to  any  real  and  inherent  difference  between  the  gospel  first  preached  and 
afterwards  taught.    From  first  to  last  we  present  the  same  truth,  the  same  circle 
of  truths,  the  whole  truth.    The  babe  in  Christ  (I  mean  he  who  is  a  babe  naturally, 
and  not  nimaturally  through  his  own  worldliuess  and  indolence),  full  of  love  to 
Jesus,  and  impressed  with  the  importance  and  blessedness  of  heavenly  things, 
learns  very  easily  and  very  rapidly.     He  delights  in  the  Word  ;  he  is  humble  and 
tender ;  he  does  not  resist  truths  which  condemn  the  flesh  and  correct  our  way- 
wardness ;  he  is  unworldly,  heavenly-minded,  and  nine-tenths  of  the  Bible  becomes 
clear,  when  we  are  willing  to  deny  ourselves,  and  take  our  cross  and  follow  Jesus. 
Yes,  we  run  well  at  the  commencement.     It  is  apathy,  worldHness,  conceit,  which 
afterwards  render  Christians  slow  of  heart  to  understand  all  that  is  wrritten.    The 
lukewarm  church  must  needs  be  an  ignorant  church.     The  divided  heart  must 
needs  be  confused  and  dim-sighted.     It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  apostle  blames 
the  Hebrews  for  not  having  progressed  in  knowledge.     Their  senses  had  not  been 
exercised ;  that  is,  they  had  not  walked  closely  with  God.     They  had  not  con- 
scientiously applied  the  knowledge  which  they  had,  but  allowed  it  to  remain  dead 
and  unused.     2.  It  is  not  that  there  is  a  higher  truth  or  life  for  the  older  Christians. 
AU  our  progress  consists  in  learning  more  fully  the  doctrine  which  at  first  is  preached 
unto  us.     Let  us  beware  of  entertaining  erroneous  views  as  to  what  is  meant  by 
milk  and  meat.    "  Milk  "  designates  gospel  truth  preached  simply,  so  that  thereby 
true  nourishment  is  given,  and  faith  is  both  called  forth,  and  the  new  spiritual  life 
strengthened  and  increased.    Hence  there  is  nothing  in  the  term  meant  to  depre- 
ciate, but,  on  the  contrary,  to  exalt  the  first  declaration  of  saving  truth  in  Christ. 
The  strong  meat,  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  high  priesthood  in  heaven,  is  also  milk, 
pure  and  nourishing,  simple,  and  only  received  by  the  child-hke  heart;  whereas 
pride  and  ambition  often  call  speculative  and  unprofitable  discussions  strong  meat, 
thou'^h  they  are  of  no  use  to  the  spiritual  man,  but  minister  only  unto  strife  and 
the  exaltation  of  the  flesh.    The  Hebrews  had  become  as  babes.    Hence  the  word, 
which  elsewhere  is  the  sweetest  expression  of  Divine  love  and  favour,  is  a  term  of 
reproach  when  it  indicates  an  unnatural  and  dangerous  condition  of  spiritual  weak- 
ness, the  result  of  a  oulpable  and  habitual  inertness.     It  had  not  always  been  thus 
with  the  Hebrew  Christians.     For  we  read  that  when  they  were  first  enlightened 
they  endured  a  great  fight  of   affliction.     Then,  although  they  had  many  and 
grievous  sufferings,  they  were  strong,  and  rejoiced  in  Christ ;  and  why  ?    Because 
they  were  heavenly-minded.    Then,  though  young  in  the  faith,  they  were  more 
fervent,  and  therefore  more  spiritual,  possessed  of  clearer  knowledge  and  percep- 
tion.   And  therefore  the  apostle  is  so  anxious  to  lead  them  on  to  perfection,  that 
is,  to  fix  their  thoughts  on  Christ  in  heaven.    Their  earthly-mindedness  constitutes 
both  the  necessity  and  the  difficulty  of  his  task.    For  the  perfection  unto  which  the 
apostle  desires  to  go  is  not  an  esoteric  doctrine  or  method  of  holiness  peculiar  to 
an  imaginary  second  stage  of  faith.     It  has  nothing  to  do  directly  with  anything 
in  our  heart  and  conduct.    It  refers,  on  the  contrary,  to  heaven,  to  the  High  Priest 
above,  to  our  position  in  Him  who  is  seated  at  the  right  hand  of  God.    It  is  to 
know  that  we  are  priests,  worshippers  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  that,  being  reconciled 
to  God  by  the  death  of  Christ,  we  have  now  been  brought  nigh  to  the  Father ;  and 
our  citizenship,  the  source  of  our  life  and  strength,  the  things  which  we  seek,  the 
blessings  with  which  we  are  enriched,  are  no  longer  on  earth,  but  in  heaven. 
{A.  Saphir.)        Ye  have  need  that  one  teach  you. — The  need  of  catechising : — I. 
Weighty  keasons  mat  be  given  for  the  necessity  of  catechising.     1.  By  cate- 
chising a  good  and  sure  foundation  is  laid.    Now  it  is  necessary  that  in  all  bmldingf 


424  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip.  t. 

a  good  foundation  be  laid,  lest  for  want  of  it  the  building  come  to  ruin  (Matt.  vii. 
26,  27).  2.  By  catechising  people  are  by  degrees  made  capable  of  deeper  mysteries; 
as  children  by  learning  letters  and  syllables,  and  to  speU  them,  are  brought  on  to 
read  distinctly.  The  most  intelligent  hearers  are  such  as  have  been  well  instructed 
in  the  principles  of  religion.  3.  By  catechising  such  as  profess  the  faith  are  en- 
abled to  render  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  them  (1  Pet.  iii.  15).  For  a  catechism 
well  compiled  contains  the  sum  and  substance  of  all  that  a  Christian  is  to  believe. 
4.  By  catechising,  pastors  may  know  their  people's  capacity  and  understanding  ; 
and  this  is  requisite  in  two  respects — (1)  That  he  may  the  better  know  whom  to 
admit  to  the  Lord's  table.  (2)  That  he  may  the  better  discern  how  to  order  his 
preaching  both  for  matter  and  manner.  5.  The  fruits  of  catechising  have  ever 
been  observed  to  be  many  and  great.  Thereby  have  families  been  made  seminaries 
for  the  Church.  II.  If  the  question  be  demanded  wherein  the  difference  lieth 
BETWIXT  CATECHISING  AND  PREAOHiNQ,  I  auswer,  in  thcse  particulars  especially.  1. 
By  catechising,  a  foundation  is  laid  (chap.  vi.  1).  By  preaching,  the  building  is 
farther  reared  up,  beautified  and  perfected.  2.  By  catechising,  many  and  large 
points  are  contracted  into  brief  sums,  as  in  the  Ten  Commandments,  Creed,  and 
Lord's  Prayer.  By  preaching,  sundry  points  are  amplified,  enlarged,  and  sundry 
ways  applied.  3.  By  catechising,  weak  and  ignorant  ones  are  fed,  as  with  milk. 
By  preaching,  the  strong  are  further  nourished  with  strong  meat.  For  in  cate- 
chising the  most  necessary  principles  are  plainly  laid  down  ;  but  in  preaching  all 
sorts  of  points,  the  difficult  as  well  as  easy,  use  to  be  handled ;  yea,  and  contrary 
errors  refuted.  4.  By  catechising,  a  particular  account  is  taken  of  the  learners, 
which  is  not  so  done  by  preaching.  For  catechising  is  by  question  and  answer ;  so 
as  the  catechised  give  an  account  of  their  proficiency.  But  preaching  is  only  by 
a  minister's  declaring  his  mind.  5.  Catechising  is  for  such  as  are  newly  entered 
into  the  Church ;  and  that  for  a  time  till  they  may  be  fitted  for  the  sacrament. 
But  preaching  is  for  all,  of  all  sorts,  so  long  as  they  live.  For  though  a  man  had 
all  knowledge,  yet  is  preaching  requisite  to  work  upon  their  affections,  and  to  bring 
to  their  mind  and  memory  such  things  as  they  know.  Preaching  is  profitable  to 
all  those  uses  that  are  mentioned  (2  Tim.  iii.  16).  {W.  Gouge.)  The  lesson  of 
ripeness : — As  in  the  family,  the  child,  from  being  taught,  gradually  grows  into  a 
position  of  authority,  from  being  directed  by  others,  becomes  self-determining,  and 
has  a  voice  and  an  influence  in  the  counsels  of  men ;  so,  in  the  great  family  of 
God,  Christian  maturity  and  its  accompaniments  are  recognised  facts — attainments 
which  the  gospel  treats  not  merely  as  privileges,  but  as  obligations.  There  is  a 
Christian  manhood,  in  short,  which  is  expected  and  required  of  the  child  of  God, 
in  which,  from  being  a  recipient  of  gospel  influences,  he  is  to  become  their  defender, 
their  illustrator,  and  their  propagator.  This  is  the  truth  for  our  consideration.  It 
is  embodied  in  these  words  of  the  text,  addressed  to  those  who  had  been  for  a  good 
while  under  gospel  training:  "Ye  ought  to  be  teachers."  I.  Ye,  as  followers  and 
DISCIPLES  of  Christ,  ought  to  be  teachers.  One  reason  why  Christ  found  it 
expedient  to  go  away  in  person  from  the  world,  was  that  the  number  of  teaching- 
centres  might  be  multiplied.  As  plainly  as  words  could  speak,  He  laid  the  burden 
of  diffusing  the  gospel  upon  His  Church.  "  Ye,"  He  said  to  His  disciples,  "  ye  are 
the  salt  of  the  earth.  Ye  are  the  light  of  the  world."  Men  are  taught  by  the 
gosjjel  that  their  responsibility  does  not  cease  with  their  own  salvation  ;  that  they 
cannot  live  out  their  Christian  lives  simply  with  reference  to  God  and  to  themselves; 
that  from  the  fact  of  their  being  members  of  society,  they  exert  power  for  good  or 
for  evil  over  other  lives ;  that  they  cannot  be  Christians  and  not  teach.    II.  But 

THIS   duty   is    here   URGED  BY  ONE  CONSIDERATION  MERELY,  TO  WHICH  WE  MAY  CONFINE 

OURSELVES.  The  familiar  rendering,  "  for  the  time  ye  ought  to  be  teachers,"  en- 
tirely obscures  the  force  of  the  passage.  The  meaning  is,  rather,  "  by  reason  of  the 
time  " ;  that  is,  because  you  have  been  for  a  long  time  under  Christian  influence, 
listening  to  Christian  doctrine,  versed  in  Christian  experience :  by  reason  of  the 
time  which  has  passed  since  you  became  Christian  disciples,  you  ought  to  be 
teachers.  We  do  not  expect  the  apprenticed  mechanic  to  be  always  an  apprentice 
or  an  underling.  Time  is  needed  to  teach  him  how  to  handle  tools,  and  to  make 
him  acquainted  with  the  capacity  of  materials :  but,  with  the  time,  we  expect  to 
see  him  a  master-workman;  we  look  for  him  to  develop  new  resources  out  of  his 
material,  and  new  methods  of  treating  it,  and  thus  to  become  a  teacher  to  his  craft. 
The  man  who  through  all  his  years  is  merely  acquiring  knowledge,  and  does  not 
come  in  process  of  time  to  give  it  out,  may  be  a  prodigy  of  learning,  but  he  is  also 
a  piodigy  of  uselesiiness,  no  bette   than  so  much  lumber.     And  the  samt  principle 


•nir.  v.]  HEBREWS.  421 

rans  np  into  the  moral  and  spiritual  realm,  and  prevails  there.  We  have  a  right 
to  expect,  as  the  result  of  years,  larger  and  clearer  views  of  truth,  better  defined 
conviction,  more  self-mastery,  more  practical  efficiency,  and  more  consistency  of 
life.  It  is  a  sad  thing  when  a  man  has  been  before  the  world  for  long  years  as  a 
professed  disciple  of  Christ,  and  when  all  he  has  to  show  for  it  is  that  he  ia  very 
old.  Length  of  days,  be  it  remembered,  is  in  the  right  hand  of  wisdom.  III.  And 
now  let  us  look  at  a  few  of  the  pointb  in  which,  by  reason  of  time,  a  Chbistian 
OUGHT  TO  BB  A  TEACHEB.  1.  He  ought  to  be  a  teacher  by  reason  of  a  matured  faith, . 
and  that  under  three  aspects — (1)  In  respect  of  his  own  assurance  of  Christian 
truth.  The  instructive  power  of  the  gospel  resides  very  largely  in  the  lives  which 
it  shapes  and  pervades  and  propels.  The  life  is  the  light  of  men.  Te  ought  to  be 
teachers,  but  ye  will  not  be  if  the  gospel  is  still  an  open  question  to  you.  Te  will 
not  be  if  y' ur  rititudc  tcv.-ar's  its  foundation -trnths  is  that  of  sn^penpp.  (2)  Again, 
time  ought  to  develop  faith  i)i  the  sfn.se  of  sp'iitual  (liECc-rnu  ent — clearer  percep- 
tion of  the  things  of  the  unseen  world.  It  is  not  strange  if  a  young  Christian 
simply  believes  in  the  things  which  are  not  seen.  It  is  strange  if  the  older  Christian 
does  not  feel  the  power  of  the  world  to  come.  It  is  one  thing  to  assent  to  the  truth 
that  "  the  things  which  are  not  seen  are  eternal " ;  it  is  another  thing  to  apprehend 
that  truth,  and  to  take  it  into  life  as  a  working  principle  ;  to  realise  that  the  things 
on  which  heaven  stamps  a  value — love  and  faith  and  purity  and  truth  and  good 
conscience — are  the  paramount  things,  and  to  make  everything  give  way  to  these. 
That  1:in(l  of  spiritual  seeing  has  a  teaching  power.  It  is  oi  the  very  essence  of 
all  teaching  that  the  man  who  sees  what  we  do  not  see,  brings  us  to  his  feet  to 
learn.  When  we  want  to  know  about  the  stars  we  go  to  the  scholar  who  has  the 
telescope.  And  the  life  which  one  hves  by  faith  in  the  unseen,  teaches.  It  does 
what  all  true  teaching  must  do — it  excites  attention,  it  awakens  inquiry,  it  commu- 
nicates enthusiasm.  (3)  And  time  ought  to  have  ripened  faith  in  the  sense  of 
restfulness.  We  count  it  strange  if  natural  manhood  does  not  bring  with  it  in- 
creased composure,  tranquillity,  balance.  Shall  we  count  it  any  less  strange  if, 
with  the  lapse  of  time,  Christian  manhood  does  not  become  better  poised,  more 
restful  and  quiet,  less  easily  thrown  off  its  balance  ?  2.  By  reason  of  the  time  a 
Christian  ought  to  have  been  confirmed  in  the  habit  of  communion  with  God. 
Prayer  is  a  subject  of  discipline.  No  man  learns  all  its  resources  at  once.  I  have 
somewhere  seen  a  little  story  of  a  king  who  had  employed  some  people  to  weave 
for  him,  had  supplied  them  the  materials  and  the  patterns,  and  had  told  them,  that 
if  they  were  ever  in  trouble  about  their  work,  they  were  to  come  to  him  without 
fear.  Among  those  at  the  looms  was  a  child  ;  and  one  day,  when  all  the  rest  were 
distressed  at  the  sight  of  the  tangles  in  their  yam,  they  gathered  round  the  child, 
and  asked,  "Why  are  you  so  happy  at  your  work?  These  constant  tangles  are 
more  than  we  can  bear."  ••  Why  do  you  not  tell  the  king?  "  said  the  little  weaver. 
"  He  told  us  to,  and  that  he  would  help  us."  '•  We  do,"  replied  they,  "  at  night 
and  at  morning."  ''Ah!"  said  the  child,  "I  send  directly  whenever  I  have  a 
tangle."  We  ought  to  have  reached  that  point  by  reason  of  time — that  habit  of 
referring  everything  at  once  and  directly  to  God ;  just  as,  when  we  are  walking 
with  a  friend,  we  naturally  refer  to  him  every  matter  of  interest  as  it  comes  up. 
That  habit  of  communion  with  heaven  sets  its  mark  on  the  life  and  invests  it  with 
a  teaching-power.  3.  By  reason  of  time  a  Christian  should  have  become  a  teacher 
in  the  matter  of  habitual  consistency  of  life,  obedience,  and  docility.  It  is  strange, 
something  is  wrong,  if  we  are  still  committing  and  repenting  of  the  same  old  sing 
which  we  began  to  fight  long  ago.  As  the  lines  of  that  living  epistle  which  we 
began  writing  when  we  entered  Christ's  service  creep  farther  down  the  page,  they 
ought  to  be  more  fairly  and  evenly  written.  In  short,  though  we  shall  never  be 
perfect  men  and  women,  though  the  nearer  we  get  to  Christ,  the  less  we  shall  be 
pleased  with  ourselves — yet  we  ought  to  be  better  men  and  women  by  reason  of 
the  time,  and,  by  our  better  living  of  the  gospel,  be  teachers  to  those  about  us.  4. 
And,  by  reason  of  the  time,  we  ought  to  be  broader  in  our  charity.  Our  own  ex- 
perience ought  to  have  given  us  an  insight  into  our  own  weakness  and  fallibility, 
and  to  have  made  us  correspondingly  tolerant  of  the  weakness  and  fallibility  of  oui 
brother  men.  {M.  R.  Vincent,  D.D^  The  growth  of  the  spiritual  sense: — Philo  had 
already  emphasised  the  distinction  between  the  child  in  knowledge  and  the  man  of 
full  age  and  mature  judgment.  St.  Paul  had  said  more  than  once  that  such  a  distinc- 
tion holds  among  Christians.  Many  are  carnal;  some  are  spiritual.  In  his  writings 
ihe  difference  is  not  an  external  one,  nor  is  the  line  between  the  two  classes  broad  and 
clear.  The  one  shades  into  the  other.  But,  though  we  may  not  be  able  to  determine 


426  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  f. 

where  the  one  begins  and  the  other  ends,  both  are  tendencies,  and  move  in  opposite- 
directions.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  the  distinction  resembles  the  old 
doctrine  of  habit  taught  by  Aristotle.  Our  organs  of  sense  are  treiined  by  use  to 
distinguish  forms  and  colours.  In  like  manner,  there  are  inner  organs  of  the 
spirit,  which  distinguish  good  from  evil,  not  by  mathematical  demonstration,  but 
by  long-continued  exercise  in  hating  evil  and  in  loving  holiness.  The  growth 
of  this  spiritual  sense  is  connected  by  our  author  with  the  power  to  understand 
the  higher  doctrine.  He  only  who  discerns,  by  force  of  spiritual  insight, 
what  is  good  and  what  is  evil,  can  also  understand  spiritual  truths.  The 
difference  between  good  and  evil  is  not  identical  with  "the  word  of  righteous- 
ness." But  the  moral  elevation  of  character  that  clearly  discerns  the  former 
is  the  condition  of  understanding  also  the  latter,  (T.  C.  Edwards,  D.D.) 
The  oracles  of  God. — The  oracles  of  God : — ^An  oracle  is,  strictly  speaking,  an  instru- 
ment, a  mouthpiece  of  a  mighty  person  who  prefers  to  remain  unknown.  By  oracles 
future  events  were  declared,  perplexities  cleared,  and  doubts  solved.  Oracles,  there- 
fore, or  those  taken  as  such,  abounded  in  the  world,  they  especially  played  a  promi- 
nent part  in  Greek  society.  Celebrated  above  all  the  rest,  in  the  very  centre  of 
Greece,  was  the  renowned  one  of  Delphi,  whither  from  far  and  near  questioners 
betook  themselves,  and  went  away  with  perfect  faith  that  they  had  indeed  received 
answers  from  a  god,  to  whom  the  place  was  sacred,  and  at  whose  shrine  they  laid 
offerings  of  worship  and  gratitude.  What  then  the  heathen  fondly  flattered  them- 
selves to  have,  the  Jews  really  possessed.  If  the  great  work  of  man  here  is  to  know 
God  and  do  His  will,  the  Jews  were  indeed  blessed  above  all  others,  since  alone  of 
all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  they  were  acquainted  with  a  revelation  from  the 
Creator  to  creatures  of  His  hand,  of  which  no  power  on  earth  could  rob  them.  WTien 
the  ark  was  gone  for  ever,  and  when  not  one  stone  upon  another  of  the  Temple  was 
left,  when  the  glory  was  departed  from  Israel,  the  Jewish  children  could  still  read 
the  Old  Testament  stories,  the  Jewish  men  and  women  could  still  learn  to  do  God 
justice  by  His  Word.  Nothing  could  touch  this  priceless  treasure  they  had  retained 
unhurt  through  perils  of  wars  ;  it  would  have  taught  them  still  as  of  old,  if  they 
themselves  had  not  misused  it,  and  so  lost,  by  their  own  fault,  the  blessing  which 
no  outward  influence  was  ever  able  to  take  away.  Thus  are  all  God's  gifts  to  man 
abused.  He  chooses  to  place  Himself  at  such  disadvantage,  that  man  may  scorn 
what  He  is  pleased  to  send.  Nor  are  the  Jews,  alas  1  the  only  people  who  have  done 
BO.  Their  fate  may  well  cause  us  anxiety.  We  have  been  speaking  so  highly  of  the 
Jewish  privileges,  of  people  who  had  but  part, — what  of  us  who  have  the  whole 
truth  and  revelation  ?  (L.  T.  LochJe,  M.A.)  The  oracles  of  God  : — "  The  oracles 
of  God  "  is  a  very  arresting  and  illustrious  name.  And  yet  it  accurately  indicates 
the  real  character  of  what  prophets  and  apostles  teach.  Heaven's  inspiration  was 
poured  upon  their  minds,  and  guided,  as  well  as  animated,  their  voices  and  their 
pens.  What  they  declare  Jehovah  speaks.  Oh  with  what  reverence,  and  attention, 
and  faith,  and  obedience,  and  grateful  praises,  should  we  receive  and  study  the 
heavenly  message !  and  how  seriously  and  vividly,  as  both  a  motive  and  a  check  in 
dealing  with  the  Scriptures,  should  we  reaUse  the  thought :  these  are  "the  oracles 
of  God  "  1  They  are,  moreover,  "  the  word  of  righteousness."  The  Bible  clearly, 
comprehensively,  and  authoritatively  propounds  the  principles,  and  prescribes  the 
rules  of  piety  and  virtue ;  and,  in  the  hands  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  is  the  instrument 
of  producing  these  great  attainments  in  the  heart  and  character  of  men.  What  a 
noble  distinction  of  "  the  oracles  of  God  "  !  and  how  important  faithfully  to  use 
them  in  this  practical  relation  1  If  the  knowledge  and  attainment  of  "  righteous- 
ness "  be  momentous  and  valuable  things,  oh,  let  us  highly  esteem,  and  diligently 
use,  what  is  here  significantly  called  "  the  word  of  righteousness."  It  is  suggested 
in  this  passage  that  there  is  great  inequality  among  professing  Christians  to  whom 
"  the  oracles  of  God  "  have  come.  Some,  it  is  here  said,  are  "  babes,"  and  others, 
men ;  some,  such  as  can  digest  "  strong  meat,"  others,  such  as  "  have  need  of 
milk  " ;  some,  **  unskilful  in  the  word  of  righteousness,"  others,  "  by  reason  of  use 
having  their  senses  exercised  to  discern  both  good  and  evil."  In  other  words,  some 
are  comparatively  ignorant,  inexperienced,  and  unsettled  in  reUgion,  while  othera 
are  comparatively  intelligent,  vigorous,  and  accomplished  ;  and,  while  the  latter  can 
understand,  and  appreciate,  and  apply  the  more  ^fficult  and  abstruse  doctrines  of 
revelation,  the  former  are  more  exclusively  dependent,  for  the  sustentation  and  im- 
provement of  their  souls,  on  the  simpler  elements  of  religious  truth.  It  is  suggested 
still  further,  that  "  the  oracles  of  God  "  have  appHances  appropriate  for  both 
'glasses.     Eevelation,  as  some   one  has  graphically  said,  "  has  fords  which  a 


CHAP,  v.]  HEBREWS.  427 

lamb  can  wade  and  depths  which  an  elephant  can  swim."  (A.  S.  Patterson.) 
Unskilful  in  the  Word. — Unskilful  in  the  use  of  Scripture: — I.  The  characteb 
OF  THE  GOSPEL.  "  The  Word  of  righteousness."  1.  This  shows  the  quality  of  it. 
2.  The  Bubject  of  which  it  treats.  II.  The  fault  lamented.  1.  Some  are  un- 
skilful in — (1)  Finding,  (2)  Quoting,  (3)  Defending,  (4)  Applying,  (5)  Perusing  the 
Scriptures.  2.  They  use  Scripture  unskilfully,  when  they  do  not  use  it — (1)  Har- 
moniously, (2)  Impartially,  (3)  Practically.  Lessons  :  1.  Be  thankful  that  you  have 
this  Word  of  righteousness.  2.  Pity  those  who  are  destitute  of  it,  and  be  concerned 
to  supply  them.  {W.  Jay.)  The  best  thing  badly  used: — I.  The  best  thing  on 
EABTH.  The  gospel  is  called  "  the  word  of  righteousness  "  because  it  reveals — 1. 
The  true  standard  of  righteousness.  God's  character  is  the  foundation;  God's 
will  the  rule.  2.  The  highest  exemplar  of  righteousness — Christ.  3.  The  true  way 
to  righteousness — following  Christ.  II.  The  best  thing  on  eakth  badlt  nsED.  The 
word  is  "  unskilfully  "  used  when  used — 1.  Controversially.  Fighting  for  dogmas. 
2.  Sectarianly.  Fighting  for  sects.  3.  Mercenarily.  Fighting  for  money  and 
position.  4.  Unlovingly.  Lacking  the  unbounded  love  and  exquisite  tenderness 
of  the  system.  {Homilist.)  He  la  a  babe. — Spiritual  babyhood  : — We  have  the 
likenesses  of  our  boys  taken  on  every  birthday,  and  twelve  of  the  annual  portraits 
are  now  framed  in  one  picture,  so  that  we  see  them  at  a  glance  from  their  babyhood 
to  their  youth.  Suppose  such  photographic  memorials  of  our  own  spiritual  life  had 
been  taken  and  preserved,  would  there  be  a  regular  advance,  as  in  these  boys,  or 
should  we  still  have  been  exhibited  in  the  perambulator  ?  Have  not  some  grown 
awhile,  and  then  suddenly  dwarfed?  Have  not  others  gone  back  to  babyhood? 
{C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Strong  meat  belongeth  to  them  that  are  of  full  age. — The 
need  of  diversified  food : — There  are  persons,  even  in  Europe,  to  whom  a  mutton- 
chop  would  be  poisonous.  Cases  are  known  where  animal  food  has  been  poisonous 
to  people.  Some  persons  cannot  take  coffee  without  vomiting ;  others  are  thrown 
into  a  general  inflammation  if  they  eat  cherries  or  gooseberries.  Many  persona 
are  unable  to  eat  eggs,  and  cakes  or  puddings  having  eggs  in  their  composition 
produce  serious  disturbrnces  in  such  persons;  if  they  are  induced  to  eat  them 
imder  false  assurances  of  no  eggs  having  been  employed,  they  are  soon  undeceived 
by  the  unmistakable  effects.  Only  gross  ignorance  of  physiology,  an  ignorance 
unhappily  too  widely  spread,  can  argue  that  because  a  certain  article  is  wholesome 
to  many  it  must  necessarily  be  wholesome  to  all.  Each  individual  organism  is 
specially  different  from  every  other.  However  much  it  may  resemble  others,  it 
necessarily  in  some  points  differs  from  them,  and  the  amount  of  these  differences 
is  often  considerable.  If  the  same  wave  of  air  striking  upon  the  tympanum  of  two 
different  men  will  produce  sounds  to  the  one  which  to  the  other  are  inappreci- 
able ;  if  the  same  wave  of  light  wiU  affect  the  vision  of  one  man  as  that  of  red 
colour,  while  to  the  vision  of  another  it  is  no  colour  at  all,  how  unreasonable  is  it 
to  expect  that  the  same  substance  will  bear  precisely  the  same  relation  to  the 
alimentary  system  of  one  man  as  to  that  of  another!  Experience  tells  us  that 
it  is  not  so.     (Scientific  Illustrations  and  Symbols.)  "  The  simple  gospel": — I 

believe  that  if  many  Christian  people  of  the  present  day  had  lived  1800  years  ago, 
and  an  apostle  had  told  them  that  he  wanted  to  speak  to  them  about  Melchisedec, 
but  found  it  hard  to  present  the  truth  in  a  fonn  sufficiently  clear  to  be  quite 
intelligible,  they  would  have  said  that  they  would  greatly  prefer  that  he  should  leave 
the  whole  subject  untouched ;  that  they  Uked  the  simple  gospel — the  simpler  the 
better ;  that  what  they  wanted  was  '•  milk  "  ;  that  they  had  no  taste  for  different 
questions ;  that  they  liked  to  have  their  hearts  moved ;  that  this  doctrinal  teaching 
of  which,  unfortunately,  he  and  some  of  his  brethren  seemed  so  fond,  was  quite 
above  them,  and  did  them  no  good ;  that  there  were  many  things  in  his  sermons 
"  hard  to  be  understood  "  ;  that  they  wished  he  would  be  more  "  obvious  " ;  and 
that  a  Christian  teacher  was  bound  to  be  constantly  repeating  the  elementary 
facts  and  truths  of  the  Christian  faith.  (R.  W.  Dale,  LL.D.)  Meat  for 
men: — The  importance  of  cultivating  a  profound  knowledge  of  the  highest  and 
deepest  truths  may  be  brought  home  to  us  by  the  following  considerations — 1.  It  is 
ft  sin  to  neglect  any  part  of  God's  oracles.  To  select  portions  for  study  and  obedience 
is  to  be  disobedient,  as  it  is  setting  up  of  our  individual  private  judgment  against 
the  wisdom  and  the  will  of  the  infinite  Heavenly  Father.  It  furthermore  argues  a 
want  of  love  for  truth.  This  love  for  truth  it  is  indispensable  to  cultivate.  It  is 
really  more  important  than  a  nervous  carefulness  to  be  exact  in  all  our  statements, 
and  accurate  in  the  use  of  our  words.  2.  Profound  spiritual  knowledge  is  necessary, 
in  order  to  teach  others.    Every  man  is  a  teacher,  whether  he  will  be  or  not ;  but 


428  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [oha».  ▼. 

every  man  ought  to  feel  the  importance  and  privilege  of  being  able  to  give  his  fellow- 
man  some  help,  however  small,  out  of  the  darkness  into  the  light.  3.  It  is  necessary 
to  keep  us  in  times  when  false  doctrines  are  influential.  It  does  not  require  great 
acquisitions  of  worldly  learning  to  become  profoundly  versed  in  spiritual  things.  A 
simple,  obedient,  trusting  heart,  going  unaffectedly  to  the  Eternal  Spirit  of  troth, 
will  be  led  to  such  knowledge  of  the  key-truth  as  will  enable  him  to  unlock  all  the 
caskets  as  he  comes  to  them.  4.  The  profounder  one's  knowledge  of  the  greatest 
Divine  truths,  the  greater  one's  humility.  If  all  a  man  knows  of  the  Bible  is  the 
original  tongues  in  which  it  was  written,  its  history,  its  chronology,  its  literature, 
he  maybe  a  self- conceited  sciolist;  but  when  he  comes  to  know  Him  for  whom 
were  all  things  and  by  whom  are  all  things,  he  falls  naturally  into  his  place,  and 
the  things  that  are  seen  and  temporal  will  yield  in  his  estimation  to  the  things 
which  are  unseen  and  eternal,  and  he  becomes  simple  in  his  love  for  the  truth, 
especially  of  the  commanding  truth  of  the  universe.  5.  This  profound  knowledge 
of  Divine  truth  increases  the  lovingness  of  a  man's  nature.  Knowledge  and  love 
are  twins.  It  was  a  pagan  idea  that  love  should  be  a  blind  god.  No  eyes  quicker 
than  the  eyes  of  love  to  see  all  that  is  good  and  sweet  in  the  beloved.  6.  Sectari- 
anism owes  its  existence  to  a  want  of  knowledge  of  the  highest  central  truths. 
Deep  knowledge  of  the  highest  spiritual  things  is  to  all  Christians  a  law  of 
gravitation,  keeping  them  in  their  orbit.  7.  The  oracles  of  God  are  the 
instruments  of  our  personal  sanctification.  We  are,  through  the  Spirit,  to 
learn  the  truth;  and  this  truth  will  show  na  what  is  righteousness,  the  right; 
and  we  are  to  purify  our  spirits,  not  by  some  supposed  act  of  consecration  in 
a  moment  of  enthusiasm,  however  honest  and  good  that  enthusiasm  may  be,  but 
by  constant  obedience  to  the  truth,  by  the  aid  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  8.  Our  surest 
present  enjoyment,  and  our  happiest  views  of  the  future  of  the  Church,  depend  on 
our  knowledge  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  The  more  a  Christian  knows  of  the 
greatness,  and  goodness,  and  wisdom,  and  love  of  Jesus,  of  all  the  grace  that  is  to 
come  to  him  in  this  world,  and  all  the  glory  that  is  to  come  to  him  in  the  eternal 
world,  through  Jesus,  the  more  his  happiness  deepens.  (C.  F.  Deems,  D.D.) 
Wherein  it  is  a  grace  or  disgrace  to  be  like  children : — I.  The  fobmer  respects  abb 
THESE — 1.  Simplicity,  honesty,  plainness,  truth.  These  graces  are  implied  to  be  in 
children  (Isa.  xi.  8).  We  have  a  proverb  that  children  will  tell  truth.  2.  Humility 
and  meekness.  Herein  doth  Christ  set  forth  children  as  a  pattern  (Matt,  xviii.  4). 
So  doth  the  Psalmist  (Psa.  cxxxi.  2).  3.  Freedom  from  rancour,  malice,  envy,  and 
Buch  like  violent  and  evil  passions  (1  Cor.  xiv.  20).  4.  Desire  of  milk  whereby  they 
are  nourished  (1  Pet.  ii.  2).  5.  Growing  and  increasing  (IPet.  ii.  2).  Childhood  is 
a  growing  age.  When  men  come  to  man-age  they  use  to  stand  at  a  stay.  6.  Taking 
notice  of  their  parents,  and  depending  on  them.  Lambs,  calves,  and  other  young 
ones  know  their  own  dams,  and  will  quickly  find  them  out  in  a  great  flock  or  herd. 
The  prophet  showeth  that  the  ox  and  ass,  the  most  brutish  of  brutes,  know  where 
they  are  fed  (Isa.  L  3).  "  Your  Heavenly  Father  knoweth  that  you  have  need  of 
these  things  "  (Matt.  vi.  31).  Will  you  not  then  depend  on  Him?  7.  Subjection 
to  their  parents'  will,  which  is  a  law  to  children  (1  Pet.  i.  14),  and  seeking 
their  parents'  honour  (Mai.  i.  6).  Christ  hath  made  Himself  a  pattern  herein 
(Luke  ii.  51).  8.  Care  to  imitate  their  parents,  and  seeking  to  be  like  them 
(John  viii.  39 ;  Rom.  iv.  12 ;  1  Pet.  i.  16,  17 ;  Eph.  v.  1 ;  Matt.  v.  48)  9.  Retaining 
a  childlike  affection  to  their  parents,  and  reverencing  them,  though  they  correct 
them  (chap.  xii.  9).  10.  Returning  to  them  after  they  have  offended  them  (Luke 
XV.  18).  That  affection  which  a  child  conceiveth  to  be  in  his  parents  towards  him, 
will  be  in  him  towards  his  parents.  H.  The  respects  wherein  it  is  discomsiendable 
AND  DISGRACEFUL  TO  BE  AB  CHILDREN,  are  such  as  thcsc — 1.  Ignorauce  and  want  ol 
capacity  (1  Cor.  xiv.  20).  2.  Vanity  and  deUghting  in  toys,  as  painted  pears,  rattles, 
and  such  like.  "  When  I  became  a  man  I  put  away  childish  things  "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  11). 
3.  Levity,  inconstancy  (Eph.  iv.  14).  We  say  of  a  child  that  it  is  won  with  a  not, 
and  lost  with  the  shell.  4.  Disability  to  manage  weighty  affairs  (Eccles.  x.  16; 
Isa.  iii.  4 ;  Jer.  i.  6).  5.  Non-proficiency,  and  a  small  measure  of  knowledge,  faith, 
and  other  graces.  In  this  respect  children  are  here  opposed  to  men  well  grown ; 
and  babes  are  counted  carnal,  and  opposed  to  such  as  are  spiritual.  This  last  re* 
speot  is  here  especially  meant.  {W.  Gouge.)  Strong  meat: — In  most  large 
houses  we  shaU  find  humanity  in  all  its  stages.  We  shall  see  the  infant  in  its 
cradle,  children  laughing  in  their  play,  young  men  working  with  vigour,  and  the 
old  man  resting  in  peace.  In  such  a  mansion,  if  a  careful  Martha  be  in  charge, 
provision  will  be  made  for  all  the  different  ages.    Now  in  our  Father's  great  house 


OBAP.  v.]  HEBREWS.  429 

His  family  is  always  so  large  that  yon  will  always  find  lelievers  in  all  stages  of 
growth.  Now  it  were  unfitting  to  give  the  milk  to  the  man  of  full  age,  and  equally 
improper  to  present  the  strong  meat  to  those  who  are  but  infants ;  our  Lord  has, 
therefore,  been  pleased  to  dictate  directions  as  to  the  persons  for  whom  the  Tarioos 
previsions  of  His  table  are  intended.  I.  Let  us,  first  of  all,  bbino  fobth  sohx  or 
KHis  STBONO  HEAT  AND  SET  IT  UPON  THE  TABLE  BEFORB  YOTJ.  1.  A  caref  ol  examination 
of  the  context  will  inform  you  that  one  form  of  strong  meat  which  is  only  fit  for  full- 
grown  Christians  is  the  allegorical  exposition  of  Scriptural  history.  I  believe  that 
every  book  of  Scripture  has  some  special  lesson  beyond  its  historical  import;  and  per- 
haps when  the  history  of  the  world  shall  have  been  fully  wrought  out,  we  shall  see  that 
the  books  of  the  Bible  were  Uke  a  prophetic  roll  sealed  to  us,  but  yet  fulfilled  to  the 
letter.  2.  I  feel  persuaded  that  the  apostle  also  more  particularly  referred  to  those 
mysterious  truths  which  have  respect  to  the  relationships  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  to  His  complex  person.  The  very  simplest  believer  understands  that  Christ  is 
God  and  man,  that  Christ  stood  as  the  sinner's  surety  and  paid  his  debt.  But  His 
complex  person  suggests  a  thousand  thoughts,  all  of  which  are  too  high  for  compre- 
hension or  even  consideration  until  our  senses  have  been  exercised.  3.  The  doctrines 
of  grace  are  also  generally  esteemed  to  be  very  strong  meat.  Only  they  who  do 
business  upon  the  great  waters,  and  have  learned  the  need  of  solid  food,  can  usually 
feed  on  these  things  with  satisfaction.  4.  Scarcely  need  I  mention  that  other  dish 
— the  more  advanced  and  inwrought  forms  of  Christian  experience.  II.  Secondly, 
let  me  invite  the  QUAurrED  persons  to  come  to  the  feast.  Who  are  they  ?  They 
are  here  described  as  being  persons  of  fuU  age.  Understand  that  there  is  no 
reference  here  at  all  to  the  age  of  a  person  as  to  human  life.  Growth  in  grace  does 
not  run  side  by  side  with  growth  in  years.  As  old  Master  Brooks  says,  •'  There  are 
some  few  believers  who  seem  to  be  born  with  beards  " ;  they  are  ripe  Christians  at  a 
very  early  stage  of  their  spiritual  existence ;  and  there  are  some  who,  if  they  tarry 
at  Jericho  till  their  beards  be  grown,  will  be  long  in  seeing  the  King's  face.  They 
are  always  babes,  needing  the  spoon  and  the  rocking-chair,  even  in  old  age.  The 
expression  in  the  text,  then,  has  no  reference  to  age,  but  is  used  in  a  spiritual  and 
metaphorical  sense  But  what  is  meant  by  men  that  ure  full-grown  ?  Well,  yoa 
know,  a  babe  has  the  same  parts  as  a  man.  The  babe  is  perfect  in  its  measure,  but 
it  is  not  perfectly  perfect.  Those  limbs  must  expand ;  the  Httle  hand  must  get  a 
wider  grasp  ;  the  trembling  feet  must  become  strong  pillars  for  ripening  manhood ; 
the  man  must  swell,  and  grow,  and  expand,  and  enlarge,  and  be  consoUdated.  Now 
when  we  are  bom  to  God  we  have  all  the  parts  of  the  advanced  Christian.  Faith, 
hope,  love,  patience — they  are  all  there,  but  they  are  all  Uttle,  and  they  must  all 
grow  ;  and  he  is  of  full  age  whose  faith  is  vigorous,  whose  love  is  inflamed,  whose 
patience  is  constant,  whose  hope  is  bright,  who  has  every  grace,  in  fuU  fashion. 
Nor  is  it  only  development.  The  full-grown  man  is  stronger  than  the  babe.  His 
sinews  are  knit ;  his  bones  have  become  more  full  of  solid  material ;  they  are  no 
longer  soft  and  cartilaginous,  there  is  more  solid  matter  in  them.  So  with  the  ad- 
vanced Christian ;  he  is  no  longer  to  be  bent  (^bout  and  twisted ;  his  bones  are  as 
iron,  and  his  muscles  as  steel ;  he  moveth  himself  in  stately  paces,  neither  needeth 
he  any  upon  whom  to  lean.  He  can  plough  the  soil,  or  reap  the  corn  ;  deeds  that 
were  impossible  to  infancy  are  simpUcities  to  the  full-grown  man.  But  then  our 
text  tells  us  that  they  have  had  their  senses  exercised.  The  soul  has  senses  as  well 
as  the  body.  Men  who  have  had  their  senses  exercised  know  how  to  choose  be- 
tween good  and  evil.  Now,  what  are  these  senses  ?  Well,  there  are  our  spiritual 
eyes.  Travellers,  who  go  to  Switzerland  for  the  first  time,  soon  discover  that  they 
have  not  had  their  eyes  exercised.  You  think  that  you  can  reach  the  peak  of  yonder 
mountain  in  half-an-hour.  There  is  the  top  of  yonder  rock ;  you  dream  that  a  boy 
might  fly  his  kite  to  the  summit,  but  it  shall  take  you  hours  to  climb  there,  and 
weary  limbs  alone  can  bear  you  to  the  dizzy  height.  At  a  distance,  young  travellers 
scarcely  know  which  is  mountain  and  which  is  cloud.  All  this  is  the  result  of  not 
having  the  eyes  exercised  upon  such  glorious  objects.  It  is  just  precisely  so  in 
spiritual  things,  unless  Christians  have  their  eyes  exercised.  I  hope  you  know 
what  it  is  to  see  Christ ;  your  eyes,  by  faith,  have  looked  upon  the  King  in  His 
beauty.  You  know  what  it  is,  too,  to  see  self  ;  you  have  looked  into  the  depravity 
of  your  own  heart,  and  have  been  amazed.  Your  eyes  have  seen  the  rising  and  the 
falling  of  many  deceptions.  Your  eyes  have  been  tried  in  waiting  for  God  in  many 
a  dark  night,  or  in  beholding  Him  in  the  midst  of  many  a  bright  Providence.  Thus 
your  eyes  have  been  exercised.  Now,  when  a  doctrine  is  put  before  you,  a  strong 
doctrine,  you  look  at  it  and  say — "  Ah  1  yes ;  my  eye  of  faith  tells  me  from  what  I 


430  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [cha».  f. 

have  seen  before  that  that  is  healthy  food  upon  which  I  may  feed."  But  if  yea 
detect  something  in  it  that  is  too  high,  or  too  low,  you  at  once  say — "  No,  that 
won't  do  for  me,"  and  you  put  it  by.  Hence  it  is  that  the  man,  the  eye  of  whose 
faith  has  been  tried  with  bright  visions  and  dark  revelations,  is  qualified  to  discern 
between  good  and  evil  in  those  great  mysteries  which  would  be  too  high  for  unexer- 
cised believers.    Then  there  is  the  ear,  &c.     III.  I  think  our  apostle  meant  the  text 

to  be  a  GENTLE  REBDKE  TO  THOSE  WHO   AEE    NOT    FULL-GBOWN    MEN.       The  apOStle  SayS 

that  the  Hebrew  saints  ought  to  have  been  teachers,  but  that  they  still  remained 
infants.  It  is  very  pleasant  to  see  the  infant  in  the  house.  What  joy  there  is  in 
its  tender  cry.  But  suppose  that  our  children  were  always  to  remain  infants,  that 
would  be  no  happiness  to  the  parent.  How  long  have  you  been  converted  to  God  ? 
Why,  I  have  known  some  converts  that  have  been  in  long  clothes  for  thirty  years 
after  they  were  converted,  and  are  babies  still.  If  you  asked  them  to  speak  for 
Christ,  they  could  only  say  a  word  or  two  of  mere  babble ;  and  as  for  their  con- 
fession of  faith,  it  was  not  a  reason ;  they  did  declare  the  hope  that  was  in  them, 
but  they  did  not  give  a  reason  for  it,  for  they  could  not  give  one.  Then  there  are 
some  who  grow  so  slowly  that  their  faith  is  just  as  weak  now  as  it  was  twenty  years 
ago.  They  go  tottering  along,  and  cannot  run  alone  yet.  Have  I  not  seen  some 
who  ought  to  have  been  as  patient  as  Job  by  this  time,  as  fretful  as  they  can  well 
be.  Why  not  begin  to  search  the  Scriptures  ?  Why  not  try  to  live  nearer  to  God  ? 
Why  not  pant  after  a  greater  conformity  to  Christ's  image  ?  Why,  what  a  Christian 
you  might  then  be !  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  perfection  of  Christian  knowledge : — 
I.  It  is  evident  from  the  nature  of  Christianity  that  you   can  neither  bee   its 

BEAUTIES,  NOB  REAP  ITS  BENEFITS,  WHILE  YOU  ATTEND  ONLY  TO   SOME  LOOSE  PKIXCIPLES, 

AND  DO  NOT  CONSIDER  THE  WHOLE  SYSTEM  I  for  the  trutbs  of  religion  form  a  system,  a 
body  of  coherent  doctrines,  closely  connected,  and  in  perfect  harmony.  I  aai  aware 
that  this  grand  characteristic  of  Christianity  hath  occasioned  many  mistakes  among 
mankind.  Under  pretence  that  a  religion  proceeding  from  God  must  harmonise  in 
its  component  parts,  men  have  licentiously  contrived  a  chain  of  propositions  to 
please  themselves.  They  have  substituted  a  phantom  of  their  own  imagination, 
for  that  body  of  doctrine  which  God  Lath  given  us  in  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Henca 
so  much  obstinacy  in  maintaining,  after  so  much  rashness  and  presumption  in 
advancing  such  phantoms.  For  of  all  obstinate  people,  none  excel  more  in  their 
dreadful  kind  than  those  who  are  prejudiced  in  favour  of  certain  systems.  But  if 
infatuation  with  systems  hath  occasioned  so  many  disorders  in  the  Church,  the 
opposite  disposition,  I  mean,  the  obstinate  rejection  of  all,  or  the  careless  compo- 
sition of  some,  hath  been  equally  hurtful ;  for  it  is  no  less  dangerous,  in  a  system 
of  reUgion,  to  omit  what  really  belongs  to  it,  than  to  incoi-porate  anything  foreign 
from  it.  Let  us  be  more  explicit.  There  are  two  sorts  of  truths  in  reUgion :  truths 
of  speculation,  and  truths  of  practice.  E  ~ch  truth  is  connected  not  only  with  other 
truths  in  its  own  class,  but  truths  of  the  first  class  are  connected  with  those  of  the 
second,  and  of  these  parts  thus  united  is  composed  that  admirable  body  of  doctrine 
which  forms  the  system  of  religion.  There  are  in  religion  some  truths  of  specula- 
tion, there  is  a  chain  of  doctrines.  God  is  holy :  this  is  the  first  truth.  A  hcly  God 
can  have  no  intimate  communion  with  unholy  creatures :  this  is  a  second  truth 
which  follows  from  the  first.  God,  who  can  have  no  communion  with  unholy 
creatures,  can  have  no  communion  with  men  who  are  unholy  creatures  :  this  is  a 
third  truth  which  follows  from  the  second.  Thus  follow  the  thread  of  Jesus  Christ's 
theology,  and  you  will  find,  as  I  said,  each  part  that  composeth  it  depending  on 
another,  and  every  one  giving  another  the  hand.  For,  from  the  loving  and  merciful 
inclination  of  God  to  relieve  a  multitude  of  His  creatures  from  a  threatening  abyss 
of  the  deepest  miseries,  follows  the  mission  of  Jesus  Christ ;  because  it  was  fit  that 
the  remedy  chosen  of  God  to  relieve  the  miseries  of  men  should  bear  a  proportion 
to  the  causes  which  produced  it.  From  the  doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ's  mission 
follows  the  necessity  of  the  Spirit  of  God :  because  it  would  have  been  impossible 
for  men  to  have  discovered  by  their  own  speculations  the  way  of  salvation,  unless 
they  had  been  assisted  by  a  supernatural  revelation.  From  the  doctrines  of  the 
mission  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  of  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  follows  this  most 
comfortable  truth,  that  we  are  the  objects  of  the  love  of  God,  even  of  love  the  most 
vehement  and  sincere  that  can  be  imagined.  In  like  manner  there  is  a  connection 
between  practical  truths.  The  class  of  practical  truths  is  connected  with  the  class 
of  speculative  truths,  and  each  practical  truth  is  connected  with  another  practical 
truth.  The  class  of  practical  truths  is  connected  with  the  class  of  speculative  truths. 
As  soon  as  ever  we  are  convinced  of  the  truth  of  the  doctrines  just  now  mentioned, 


«HAP.  T.)  HEBREWS  481 

we  shall  be  thereby  convinced  that  we  are  under  an  indispensable  necessity  to  devote 
ourselves  to  holiness.  All  virtues  mutually  support  each  other,  and  there  is  no  in- 
validating one  part  of  our  morality  without,  on  that  very  account,  invalidating  the 
whole.  To  illustrate  this  we  may  compare  spiritual  with  natural  things.  The  more 
art  and  ingenuity  there  is  in  a  machine  composed  of  divers  wheels,  the  more 
necessary  it  is  to  consider  it  in  its  whole,  and  in  all  its  arrangements,  and  the  more 
does  its  beauty  escape  our  observation  when  we  confine  our  attention  to  a  single 
wheel :  because  the  more  art  there  is  in  a  machine  the  more  essential  is  the 
minutest  part  to  its  perfection.  Now  deprive  a  machine  of  an  essential  part  and 
you  deface  and  destroy  it.  Apply  this  to  spiritual  things.  In  a  compact  system, 
in  a  coherent  body  of  doctrine,  there  is  nothing  useless,  nothing  which  ought  npt 
to  occupy  the  very  place  that  the  genius  who  composed  the  whole  hath  given  it. 
What  will  become  of  religion  if  ye  consider  any  of  its  doctrines  separately  ?  What 
becomes  of  rehgion  if  ye  consider  the  holiness  of  God  without  His  justice,  or  His 
justice  without  His  mercy?    U.  Let  us  then  proceed  to  inquire  wht  so  many  op  tJS 

CONFINE  ODKSELVES  TO  A  SMALL  NUMBEB  OF  RELIGIOUS   TRUTHS,  AND   INCAPACITATB   OUR- 
SELVES FOR  EXAMINING  THE  WHOLE  SYSTEM.    1.  The  first  cause  is  a  party-spirit.    This 
is  8  disposition  that  cannot  be  easily  defined,  and  it  would  be  difficult  to  include  in 
a  definition  of  it  even  its  genus  and  species.    It  is  a  monstrous  composition  of  all 
bad  genuses  and  of  all  bad  species.    It  is  an  hydra  that  reproduceth  while  it 
seemeth  to  destroy  itself,  and  which,  when  one  head  hath  been  cut  off,  instantly 
produeeth  a  thousand  more.     This  spirit  must  naturally  incapacitate  a  man  for 
considering  the  whole  of  religion  ;  it  must  naturally  incline  him  to  take  it  only  by 
bits  and  shreds.     On  the  one  hand,  it  contracts  the  mind:  for  how  can  a  soul  that 
harboureth  and  cherisl;eth  all  the  phantoms  which  a  party-spirit  produeeth,  study 
and  meditate  as  rehgion  requires  ?    On  the  other  hand,  a  party -spirit  depraves  the 
heart  and  eradicates  the  desire  of  knowing  religion.    A  man  animated  with  the 
spirit  of  party  directeth  all  his  attention  to  such  propositions  of  religion  as  seem  to 
favour  his  erroneous  opinions,  and  irregular  passions,  and  diverts  it  from  all  that 
oppose  them;  his  system  includes  only  what  strengthens  his  party,  it  is  exclusive 
of  everything  that  weakens  or  opposes  it.     2.  The  secocd  cause  of  the  evil  that  we 
would  remove  is  the  choice  of  teachers.    In  general,  we  have  three  sorts  of  teachers. 
The  first  are  catechists,  who  teach  our  children  the  principles  of  rehgion.     The 
second  are  ministers.    The  third  prepare  the  minds  of  young  people  for  the  ministry 
itself.     The  carelessness  that  prevails  in  the  choice  of  the  first  sort  of  teachers  can- 
not be  sufficiently  lamented.     The  care  of  instructing  our  children  is  committed  to 
people  more  fit  for  disciples  than  masters,  and  the  meanest  talents  are  thought  more 
than  sufficient  to  teach  the  first  principles  of  religion.    And  yet  what  capacity  does 
it  not  require  to  lay  the  first  foundations  of  the  edifice  of  salvation  1    What  address 
to  take  the  different  forms  necessary  to  insinuate  into  the  minds  of  catechumens, 
and  to  conciliate  their  attention  and  love  I   What  dexterity  to  proportion  instruction 
to  the  different  ages  and  characters  of  learners  I     The  pastors  of  our  churches  are 
our  second  class  of  teachers.    What  precaution,  and,  in  some  sort,  what  dread 
ought  to  prevail  in  the  choice  of  an  office,  which  so  greatly  influences  the  salvation 
of  those  among  whom  it  is  exercised  I    There  needs  only  the  bad  system  of  a  pastor 
to  produce  and  preserve  thousands  of  false  notii  ns  of  religion  in  the  people's  minds, 
notions  which  fifty  years'  labour  of  a  more  wise  and  sensible  ministry  will  scarcely 
be  able  to  eradicate.    What  hath  been  said  on  the  choice  of  pastors  still  more  par- 
ticularly regards  the  election  of  tutors,  who  are  employed  to  form  pastors  themselves. 
Universities  are  pubhc  springs,  whence  rivulets  flow  into  all  the  Church.     On  the 
contrary,  place  men  of  evil  character  at  the  head  of  our  universities,  and  they  will 
send  out  impoisoned  ministers,  who  will  diffuse  through  the  whole  Church  the  fatal 
venom  which  themselves  have  imbibed.    3.  The  third  cause,  which  we  have  assigned, 
of  the  infancy  and  novitiate  of  most  Christians  in  religious  knowledge,  is  tbe  multi- 
tude of  their  secular  affairs.    Far  be  it  from  us  to  aim  at  inspiring  you  .with  super- 
stitious maxims.    We  do  not  mean  that  they  who  fill  eminent  posts  in  society 
should  devote  that  time  to  devotion  which  the  good  of  the  community  requires. 
Amidst  the  most  turbulent  sohcitudes  of  life,  a  Christian,  desirous  of  being  saved, 
will  devote  some  time  to  his  salvation.     4.  The  last  cause  of  the  incapacity  of  so 
many  Christians  for  seeing  the  whole  of  religion  in  its  connection  and  harmony ; 
the  last  cause  of  their  taking  it  only  by  bits  and  shreds,  is  their  love  of  sensual 
pleasure.    We  do  not  speak  here  of  those  gross  pleasures  at  which  heathens  would 
have  blushed,  and  which  are  incompatible  with  Christianity.    We  attack  pleasures 
more  refined,  maxims  for  which  reasonable  persons  become  sometimes  apologists ; 


432  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  ▼. 

persons  who,  on  more  accounts  than  one,  are  worthy  of  being  proposed  as  examples; 
persons  who  would  seem  to  be  the  salt  of  the  earth,  the  flower  of  society,  and  whom 
we  carmot  justly  accuse  of  not  loving  religion.  Recollect  here  that  general  notion 
of  religion  which  we  have  laid  down  :  it  contains  truths  of  speculation,  and  truths 
of  practice.  Such  sensual  pleasures,  as  we  have  just  now  mentioned,  form  in- 
vincible obstacles  to  the  knowledge  of  both.  (1)  To  the  knowledge  of  speculative 
iruths.  How  is  it  possible  for  a  man  to  obtain  a  complete  system  of  the  doctrines 
of  the  gospel  while  he  is  a  slave  to  sensual  pleasures  ?  To  obtain  a  complete  system 
of  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  there  must  be  a  certain  habit  of  thinking  and  medi- 
tating. This  habit  cannot  be  acquired  without  exercise,  it  is  unattainable  without 
serious  attention  and  profound  application.  But  how  can  people  devoted  to 
pleasure  acquire  such  a  habit?  To  counterbalance  the  difficulty  of  meditation 
and  study  ther*  must  be  a  relish  for  it.  But  nothing  is  more  capable  of  disgusting 
as  with  the  spiritual  pleasures  of  study  and  meditation  than  the  love  of  sensual 
pleasures.  To  acquire  a  complete  knowledge  of  religious  truths,  it  is  not  enough  to 
study  them  in  the  closet,  in  retirement  and  silence ;  we  must  converse  with  others 
who  study  them  too.  But  the  love  of  sensual  pleasure  indisposes  us  foi  such  con- 
versations. (2)  But,  secondly,  if  the  love  of  sensual  pleasure  raises  such  great 
obstacles  to  the  knowledge  of  speculative  truths,  it  raiseth  incomparably  greater 
still  to  the  truths  of  practice.  There  are  some  Scripture  maxims  which  are  never 
thought  of  by  the  persons  in  question,  except  it  be  to  destroy  them,  at  least  they 
maJke  no  part  of  their  system  of  morality.  In  your  system  of  morality,  what  becomes 
of  this  Scripture  maxim,  "  Evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners  "?  Nothing 
forms  connections  more  intimate,  and,  at  the  same  time,  more  extravagant,  than  an 
immoderate  love  of  pleasure.  In  your  system  of  morality,  what  becomes  of  those 
maxims  of  Scripture  which  say  that  we  must  "  confess  Jesus  Christ  before  men," 
that  •'  whosoever  shall  be  ashamed  of  Him  before  men,  of  him  will  He  be  ashamed 
when  He  cometh  in  the  glory  of  His  Father  "  ?  In  your  system  of  morality,  what 
become  of  those  Scripture  maxims  which  threaten  those  with  the  greatest  punish- 
ments who  injure  others  ?  The  love  of  sensual  pleasure  causeth  offences  of  the 
most  odious  kind  ;  I  mean,  it  betrays  your  partners  in  pleasure  into  vice.  Ye  do  not 
injure  your  families ;  but  do  ye  not  occasion  other  men  to  injure  theirs  ?  Ye  are 
guilty  of  no  fraud ;  but  do  ye  not  tempt  others  to  be  fraudulent  ?  What  become,  in 
your  moral  system,  of  those  maxims  of  Scripture  that  require  us  to  contribute  to 
the  excision  of  "  M.  wicked  doers  from  the  city  of  the  Lord  "  (Psa.  ci.  8) ;  to  dis- 
countenance those  who  commit  a  crime  as  well  as  to  renounce  it  ourselves  ?  The 
love  of  sensual  pleasure  makes  us  countenance  people  of  the  most  irregular  conduct. 
In  your  system  of  morality  what  become  of  those  maxims  of  Scripture  which  ex- 
postulate  with  us,  when  the  Lord  chastiseth  us,  to  "  be  afflicted  and  mourn,"  to 
"  humble  ourselves  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God  "  ;  to  "  enter  into  our  chambers, 
and  shut  the  door  about  us,  to  hide  ourselves  until  the  indignation  be  overpast "  ;  to 
"  examine  ourselves  before  the  decree  bring  forth  "  ;  to  "  prepare  ourselves  to  meet 
our  God"  ;  to  "  hear  the  rod  and  who  hath  app  inted  it"  ;  to  mourn  in  sackcloth 
and  ashes ;  and,  while  we  feel  present  miseries,  to  remember  those  that  are  past, 
tremble  for  those  that  are  to  come,  and  endeavour  by  extraordinary  efforts  to  avert 
the  anger  of  Heaven  ?  The  love  of  sensual  pleasure  turns  away  people's  attention 
from  all  these  maxims,  and  represents  those  who  preach  them  as  wild  visionaries 
or  dry  declaimers.  In  your  system  of  morality,  what  become  of  Scripture  ex- 
hortations to  redeem  the  time,  to  know  the  time  of  our  visitation,  to  do  all 
that  our  hands  find  to  do,  because  there  is  no  work,  nor  device,  nor  knowledge, 
nor  wisdom  in  the  grave  whither  we  go  ?  The  love  of  pleasure  inclines  mortals, 
who  have  so  short  a  time  to  live  and  so  great  a  task  to  perform,  to  waste 
a  considerable  part  of  this  fleeting  life  in  amusements,  that  obliterate  both 
the  shortness  of  life   and  the  necessity  of  death,      {J.   Saurin.)  The  focd 

that  makes  strong  men : — The  essence  of  Bible  makes  moral  and  spiritual  bone. 
I  saw  an  advertisement  the  other  day — "  Thirty  tons  of  bones  wanted  " — > 
and  I  said  to  myself,  "  Yes,  mostly  backbones."  Bibline  is  the  nutriment  v.hich 
makes  backbone,  muscle,  and,  above  all,  heart.  (C.  H,  Spurgeon.)  Senses 
exercised  to  discern  both  good  and  evlL — The  growth  of  the  conscience  : — This  verse, 
like  another  well-known  verse  in  the  same  Epistle,  seems  to  contain  in  few  words  the 
solution  of  a  difficulty  which  accompanies  us  throughout  the  writings  of  St.  Paul. 
For  all  through  St.  Paul's  teaching  a  prominent  doctrine  is  what  we  now  call  liberty 
of  conscience.  The  inner  principle  is  always  recognised  by  him  as  supreme  over 
the  man.     Now,  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  why  the  apostle  thus  puts  the  inner  voice 


CHAP,  v.]  HEBREWS.  4U 


above  all  outer  voices  whatever.  For  the  inner  voice,  and  that  voice  alone,  speaks 
personally  and  individually  to  the  soul.  A  man's  conscience  may  be  mistaken  ; 
but  if  so,  obedience  to  it  is  a  mistake  and  not  a  sin,  and  we  know  that  mistakes  are 
very  different  from  sins.  If  our  conscience  be  mistaken  because  we  have  not  taken 
due  trouble  to  enlighten  it,  then  for  that  neglect  of  cultivating  our  conscience  wa 
are  responsible.  But  even  then  the  conscience  claims  our  obedience,  and  if  to 
obey  is  a  mistaice,  to  disobey  is  a  sin.  Mistaken  or  not,  the  conscience  must  rule 
the  life.  To  do  right  in  disobedience  to  conscience  would  be  (if  it  could  ever  be 
done)  more  fatal  to  the  character  by  far  than  to  do  wrong  in  obedience  to  it.  But 
nevertheless  the  apostle  feels,  and  every  one  must  feel  in  reading  what  he  says, 
that  surely  here  is  a  serious  difficulty.  The  difference  between  making  conscience 
supreme,  and  making  any  outer  law  or  authority  supreme,  depends  in  fact  on  this. 
Which  is  it  that  God  would  have  here  on  earth,  good  actions  or  good  men  t  Doea 
His  gospel  propose  to  redeem  and  sanctify  men's  deeds  or  their  souls  ?  Does  Ha 
desire  to  see  a  series  of  good  acts — acts,  that  is,  regulated  in  their  outward  form  by 
His  holy  Law  ?  or  does  He  desire  to  see  a  number  of  His  servants  striving  to  obey 
His  will  ?  If  you  want  a  number  of  right  acts,  then  your  business  is  to  lay  down 
a  number  of  fixed  rules  and  get  men  to  obey  them.  But  if  you  desire  to  have  a 
number  of  good  men,  then  it  is  tolerably  plain  that  you  must  awake  within  them  a 
power  that  shall  guide  their  Uves  independently  of  mere  rules.  The  acts  of  such 
men  may  not  be  quite  as  good  as  those  of  the  men  who  are  compelled  to  walk  in  a 
more  defined  path.  But  the  men  are  men,  and  not  machines,  and  as  such  are 
truer  servants  of  God.  To  procure  such  men,  the  voice  within  themselves  must 
be  entrusted  with  the  absolute  dominion  over  all  their  lives.  The  difficulty  is,  how 
far  this  principle  is  to  apply.  Are  aU  consciences  in  a  state  to  claim  this  liberty  ? 
What  wUl  justify  a  man  in  relying  unreservedly  on  his  conscience  ?  The  answer  is 
supplied  by  the  verse  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  with  which  I  began.  Those 
who,  by  reason  of  use,  have  their  senses  exercised  to  discern  both  good  and  evil, 
are  fitted  to  use  strong  meat.  They  may  trust  themselves  to  decide  on  their  own 
conduct,  to  choose  their  ovn  opinions ;  not  certainly  in  confidence  that  they  cannot 
make  mistakes,  but  that  their  mistakes  will  not  be  ruinous  to  their  character,  and 
will,  on  the  contrary,  contain  ever  more  good  than  evil.  The  conscience,  like  the 
other  faculties  that  God  gives,  is  not  implanted  perfect  all  at  once.  It  has  its  infancy, 
its  age  of  weakness ;  and  it  ought  to  have  and  can  have  its  age  of  maturity.  When 
it  is  full  grown,  it  may  and  must  be  trusted  unreservedly.  This  is  its  claim  when  it 
has  grown  to  its  fuU  strength.  And  how,  then,  does  it  grow  ?  Will  it  grow  entirely 
of  itself,  or  does  it  depend  entirely  on  our  own  exertions  ?  Its  growth  is  hke  the 
growth  of  all  our  other  faculties,  the  result  of  a  combination  of  what  is  without 
with  what  is  within.  It  will  grow  partly,  on  the  one  hand,  by  the  experience  of  our 
Uves,  by  the  intercourse  of  our  fellows,  by  the  truth  that  we  learn  in  our  studies, 
by  the  new  thoughts  that  flash  upon  us  unbidden  we  know  not  whence,  by  the  mere 
lapse  of  time  and  growth  of  our  whole  framework,  both  of  body  and  soul,  but,  above 
aU  and  through  all,  by  the  constant  use  of  God's  Holy  Word,  without  which  it 
would  hardly  be  the  same  faculty ;  partly,  on  the  other  hand,  by  our  own  greater  or 
less  co-operation,  by  the  bent  which  we  have  given  to  our  wills,  by  the  purposes 
which  we  have  cherished  as  the  hope  of  our  future  days,  by  the  passions  and 
impulses  that  we  have  fostered  in  our  secret  hearts.  On  the  one  hand,  every  day 
will  probably  enable  us  to  see  more  distinctly  the  consequences  and  the  bearings  of 
every  separate  act,  the  extent  and  limits  of  every  rule  of  life,  the  true  meaning  of 
every  precept  in  the  Bible,  the  application  of  our  Lord's  commands,  the  various 
doctrines  of  the  gospel  of  God.  And  this,  to  a  great  extent,  without  any  co-opera- 
tion on  our  part  at  aU ;  simply  because  we  are  older  and  more  experienced,  and  our 
intellects  have  attained  to  gieater  power.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  power  of  the 
gospel,  the  true  nature  of  sin,  the  hatefulness  of  evil  in  God's  sight,  the  love  of 
Christ  which  passeth  knowledge, — these,  and  truths  like  these  are  quite  invisible, 
except  to  the  soul,  which  opens  to  receive  the  grace  that  flows  into  it  from  on  high, 
and  rises  to  meet  the  blessings  that  God  is  ever  giving.  The  true  condition  of  the 
growth  of  the  conscience  is  to  live  in  it.  To  obey  it  is  not  enough,  if,  by  obedience, 
is  meant  simply  doing  what  it  bids.  What  is  wanted  is  to  live  in  its  spirit.  That 
voice  is  ever  calling  us  to  Him  who  gave  it ;  to  God  the  Father  who  created  it ;  to 
Christ  whose  gospel  redeemed  it,  purifies  it,  fills  it  with  power ;  to  the  Holy  Spirit 
speaking  in  the  Word  of  God,  and  revealing  the  everlasting  tTuih.  The  constant 
habit  of  referring  our  lives  to  the  wiU  of  Christ,  the  habit  of  living  in  the  thought 
(^  His  presence,  of  trusting  entirely  to  His  love,  of  feeling  an  absolute  ooufideuoe 

28 


434  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

in  His  protection  and  care,  of  doing  His  will,  as  far  as  we  know  it,  cheerfully  and 
resolutely,  of  opening  our  hearts  for  Him  to  see,  of  filling  our  intellects  with  the 
lessons  which  He  has  written  for  our  learning — this  is  the  life  which  exercises  the 
senses  to  discern  both  good  and  evil.     [Bp.  Temple.)        Reason  in  religion: — 
This  is  a  chiding  for  want  of  intelligence.    It  is  a  reproach  for  an  indolent  use,  or 
rather  for  the  disuse,  of  reason  in  the  province  of  duty.    The  sacred  Scripture 
stands  almost  alone  as  a  book  of  religious  directions  in  exhortiug  to  a  full,  free, 
and  constant  use  of  the  reason.     The  Word  of  God  is  an  enlightener  ;  and  wherever 
it  has  been  a  free  Bible,  and  its  influence  has  really  entered  into  the  lives  and  hearts 
of  men,  there  intelligence  has  prevailed,  and  there  the  human  understanding  has 
unfolded  its  best  works,  and  developed  its  best  efforts.     So  that  the  Word  of  God  is 
not  a  tyrant  book.     It  imposes  no  manacles  and  no  restraints,  except  those  which 
belong  to  the  nature  of  the  human  mind,  and  the  nature  of  the  subjects  which  the 
human  mind  is  called  to  investigate.     So,  then,  it  is  indispensably  necessary  that 
men  should  think,  and  that  they  should  think  for  themselves.    It  is  necessary,  in 
repeated  instances,  that  they  should  make  their  own  deductions  and  conclusions, 
and  foUow  in  the  lines  of  conduct  which  flow  from  them.    But,  on  the  other  hand, 
men  cannot,  in  aU  things,  think  for  themselves.     It  is  right,  it  is  wise,  to  accept 
the  thoughts  of  others.     We  give  and  take.    In  one  place  a  man  thinks  for  you, 
and  in  another  place  you  think  for  him.    There  is  this  interchange  of  knowledge  on 
the  great  principle  of  the  faith  of  man  in  man.    When,  therefore,  men  insist  upon 
it  that  to  be  in  the  full  exercise  of  reason  one  must  throw  off  the  past  and  hf t  up 
his  head  into  an  independeut  sphere,  where  no  man  before  has  been,  and  think  out 
all  things,  to  him  may  be  applied  the  words  of  the  proverb  :  "  Seest  thou  a  man 
wise  in  his  own  conceit?    There  is  more  hope  of  a  fool  than  of  him."     Not  philo- 
sophy, but  folly,  inheres  there.    Let  us  look  a  little,  then,  at  the  elements  and  the 
proofs  of  that  reason  which  men  talk  so  much  about,  and  know  so  Utile  of.    First 
and  lowest,  is  that  which  we  possess  with  the  whole  range  of  the  lower  animals 
— perceptive  reason — that  part  of   the  human  understanding  which   takes   cog- 
nisance of  physical  facts  and  events  that  are  exterior  to  ourselves — which  perceives 
the  existence  of  things  and  their  various  quaUties — which  recognises  whatever 
belongs  to  the  framework  or  physical  structure  of  the  globe.    Now,  if  any  man 
supposes  that  there  is  certainty  in  this  reahn,  he  has  given  very  httle  consideration 
to  it.     Men  say,  "  Do  you  not  believe  the  sight  of  your  own  eyes  ?  "     I  have  nothing 
better,  I  admit,  by  which  to  see  things.    But  are  these  instruments  so  perfect  that 
men  may  rely  upon  them  implicitly?     No.    Evei-y  court  of  justice  shows  that  the 
same  event,  being  looked  at  by  two.,  by  four,  by  six  different  men,  is  not,  although 
they  are  honest,  and  mean  to  state  the  truth,  seen  by  any  two  of  them  alike.    The 
sense  of  seeing  in  each  one  acts  imperfectly,  and  each  sees  differently  from  the 
others,  and  makes  a  different  report  from  theirs.     The  same  is  true  of  the  sense  of 
hearing.     Men  do  not  hear  half  that  is  going  on,  to  begin  with.     Let  the  leader  of 
a  choir  or  a  band  hear  a  semi-tone  of  discord,  and  his  ear  will  detect  it  instantly. 
Mine  does  not.     That  belongs  only  to  the  musician,  and  comes  only  by  education. 
Hearing  is  not  very  accurate  as  between  one  man  and  another.     In  some  it  is  far 
better  than  in  others.    It  is  not  very  accurate  as  between  one  period  of  a  man's 
life  and  another.    Different  statements  are  given  where  men  Usten  carefully  and 
report  truly  what  they  have  heard.     The  same  is  true  in  respect  to  the  sense  of 
touch.     The  five  senses,  with  the  perceptive  intellect  back  of  them,  are  alike  in 
this  respect.     The  sense  of  colour,  the  sense  of  shape,  the  sense  of  quality,  all  the 
Benses,  when  you  apply  the  test  to  them,  and  measure  their  accuracy,  are  found  to 
be  very  unreliable.    Nothing  is  more  inaccurate  than  the  reports  of  a  man's  per- 
ceptive intellect.    The  genius  of  knowing  even  the  lowest  form  of  truth  is  a  rare 
genius  ;  and  in  respect  to  the  great  mass  of  men  the  senses  are  faUible.     Though 
they  answer  a  certain  rough  use  of  life,  and  afford  a  basis  for  general  confidence, 
yet,  after  all,  when  the  question  is  one  of  exactitude,  there  is  nothing  less  to  be 
trusted  than  the  senses,  until  they  have  been  trained.     And  there  are  not  many 
men  who  are  capable  of  being  trained  so  that  their  senses  shall  be  irreproachable. 
This  is  one  of  the  grounds  and  signs  of  the  scepticism  of  science.     Men  who  are 
scientific  investigators  apply  to  truth  the  tests  of  physical  investigation.     They  per- 
ceive the  mistakes  which  are  made  by  others  and  themselves,  and  they  come  to 
have  a  realising  sense,  as  the  old  ministers  used  to  say,  of  the  fallibihty  of  man's 
perceptive  reason.     When  they  hear  a  man  reasoning  from  the  Bible,  and  forming 
judgments  and  drawing  deductions  therefrom,  they  hold  these  judgments  and 
dedaotions  in  suspicion,  and  say,  "  That  man  is  not  using  his  understanding 


CHAP.  V.J  HEBREWS.  43S 

aooarately."  If  you  go  still  higher,  to  the  reflective  reason,  it  is  that  which  reoog- 
nises  the  relations  of  things  to  the  relations  of  truths.  Ordinarily  we  call  the  use  of 
this  reason  philosophy.  Where  it  exi:^ts  in  certain  forms,  and  considers  everything 
in  the  most  abstract  way,  we  call  it  metaphysics.  Now,  when  we  look  at  the 
reUableness  of  this  superior  reason,  has  it  proved  to  be  a  safe  ground  for  trust  ? 
Men  have  been  for  ages  reasoning,  drilling,  training,  accumulating  ;  and,  after  all, 
the  consciousness  of  mankind  is  that  the  reflective  reason,  while  it  has  vast  advan- 
tages, while  it  supplies  a  human  want  and  a  human  necessity,  is  as  far  from  being 
infaUible  as  anything  can  be.  No  man  can  aif ord  to  lean  his  whole  weight  upon  it 
without  suspicion,  without  test,  without  trial.  It  partakes  of  the  fallibility  of 
human  nature.  Nor  does  it  follow  because  a  great  many  different  minds,  in  different 
directions,  come  together  on  a  truth,  that  it  is  more  true  than  it  would  otherwise  be. 
The  fact  that  things  have  been  accepted  from  the  days  of  the  patriarchs  may  create 
a  presumption  or  probabiUty  that  they  are  true,  but  it  is  not  absolute  evidence  of 
their  truth ;  for  many  things  have  been  believed  from  the  days  of  the  patriarchs 
that  have  proved  not  to  be  true,  and  been  taken  out  of  the  category  of  truths. 
When,  then,  yoa  come  to  judge  of  the  action  of  the  understandings  of  men — their 
perceptive  reason  and  their  reflective  reason — you  will  find,  that  though  they  have 
practical  serviceableness,  they  are  so  crude,  so  untrained,  and  so  disturbed  by  the 
emotions  of  the  mind,  that  they  are  not  infallible,  nor  absolute,  nor  to  be  depended 
upon.  There  is  another  sphere  of  the  reason — that  one  in  which  truths  are  appre- 
hended in  their  social  and  moral  relations.  We  come  into  the  knowledge  of  truths 
of  fact  and  matter  by  the  mediation  of  our  senses  ;  but  there  is  a  higher  realm 
than  that  of  fact  and  matter.  There  is  an  invisible  reahn  where  emotion,  where 
sentiment,  where  spirituality  reside.  We  come  into  communion  with  that  realm 
by  the  understanding,  through  the  mediation  of  our  personal  emotions  and  feelings. 
I  will  illustrate  it.  Take  a  little  air,  or  strain,  which  an  organist  may  give  yoa. 
It  shall  be  some  famiUar  tune,  like  "  Dundee,"  or  some  old  carol.  Let  him, 
by-and-by,  after  playing  it  on  one  or  two  small  stops,  introduce  another  stop — 
a  hautbois  or  wood-flute,  for  instance ;  and  you  will  see  that  while  the  air  remains, 
there  is  a  new  quahty  la  it.  Now,  it  is  so  with  the  human  mind.  The  intellect 
is  looking  at  things ;  and  if  all  the  emotions  were  shut  off,  and  were  not  allowed  to 
colour  them,  how  barren,  how  unrich  they  would  be  1  But  you  draw  one  emotion, 
and  instantly  the  things  perceived  through  the  intellect  are  affected  by  that  emotion. 
As  in  playing  a  tune,  every  additional  stop  that  is  introduced  adds  a  new  quality  to 
the  sound,  so  the  understanding  is  modified,  changed,  enriched,  by  this  or  that 
emotion  which  is  let  on.  When  the  intellect  is  thus  electrified,  magnetised, 
polarised,  it  comes  to  a  recognition  of  the  greater  truths  of  affection  and  sentiment. 
Take  a  man  who  has  no  conscience  naturally,  and  let  him  stand  in  the  midst  of 
actions  and  presentations,  whatever  they  are,  and  he  will  perceive  no  sense  of 
equity  ;  he  will  have  no  fine  appreciation  of  honour,  no  intense  feeling  of  what  is 
right  or  wrong  ;  he  will  be  entirely  without  any  such  emotion  ;  but  others,  standing 
right  by  him,  and  highly  constituted  in  their  moral  nature,  will  be  sensible  to  what 
is  right,  and  true,  and  noble,  and  just.  Take  the  emotion  of  ideality,  which  we  call 
imagination,  fancy,  aspiration,  3  earning,  and  what  not.  Where  that  joins  itself  to 
the  understanding  it  makes  the  orator,  the  poet,  the  mystic,  the  dreamer.  It  makes 
moi;  that  see  truths  in  regions  where  they  do  not  outwardly  appear.  In  all  such 
caseb  the  understanding  is  magnetised  by  that  feeling  which  brings  them  in  rela- 
tion to  things  invisible — to  superior  truths.  Throughout  the  world  the  sentiment 
of  benevolence,  the  sentiment  of  hope,  the  sentiment  of  faith,  the  sentiment  of 
conscience,  the  sentiment  of  love,  bring  us  into  relation  to  spheres  of  truth 
which  are  infinite.  Divine,  transcendent.  When,  then,  you  come  to  look  at 
what  are  called  moral  intuitions  in  men,  what  are  they  but  the  results  of  such 
a  highly-organised,  sensitive  state  of  mind,  that  feeling,  flashing  upon  the  under- 
standing, brings  into  the  form  of  knowledge  or  perception  all  th  ■  truths  that 
belong  to  the  emotion  which  has  colom'ed,  or  magnetised,  or  polarised  the 
understanding  ?  Now,  in  this  realm  what  style  and  degree  of  certainty  is  there  ? 
I  think,  generally  speaking,  it  may  be  said  that  those  intuitions  which  are 
against  nature — using  nature  in  a  quahfied  sense — are  more  apt  to  be  true 
than  those  which  are  with  nature.  In  other  words,  the  spontaneous  feelings 
which  a  man  has  in  the  direction  of  the  animal  sphere — anger,  pride,  cruelty, 
and  the  like — are,  generally  speaking,  more  erroneous  than  those  intuitions  which 
go  oat  toward  the  generous,  the  noble,  the  pare,  the  self-denying.  It  is  more 
satoral  for  a  man  to  act  with  those  immense  swells  of  feeling  which  work  toward  tha 


436  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ^. 

animal,  than  to  act  with  those  emotions  which  work  toward  the  spiritual,  and  yet 
in  that  direction  he  most  often  acts  wrongly.  It  is  only  by  long  practice  with  reason 
and  feeling  that  we  have  learned  to  discern  the  right  from  the  wrong — the  good 
from  the  bad.  It  requires  education — that  is  to  say,  the  introduction  of  the  element 
of  habit  upon  this  joint  action  of  the  reason  and  the  emotions — to  enable  us  to 
make  just  moral  distiuctions.  So  far,  then,  as  to  the  fallibility  of  men's  reason. 
It  would  seem,  at  first  thought,  in  looking  over  this  subject,  as  though  there  was  a 
strong  argument  in  favour  of  having  the  Church  think  for  men,  and  tell  them  what 
is  right  and  what  is  wrong ;  but  there  is  always  this  fallacy,  that  where  the  Church 
thinks  out  a  truth,  and  tells  it  to  me,  I  have  to  think  of  it  before  I  can  understand 
it.  I  meet  the  same  liabilities  to  error  in  accepting  from  the  Church  what  it  says 
as  infalhble  that  I  do  in  the  exercise  of  my  own  thought  independent  of  the  Church. 
The  very  act  of  receiving  truths  from  other  persons,  or  from  bodies  of  persons,  is 
attended  with  as  many  risks  as  the  act  of  searching  for  truths  unaided  by  others. 
I  am  liable,  in  accepting  what  comes  to  me  from  others,  to  no  less  limitations  and 
mistakes  than  I  would  be  if  I  went  forth  and  gathered  my  own  materials  and  made 
my  own  deductions.  Moreover,  we  have  had  the  experience  of  ages,  which  shows 
us  that  the  truths  which  are  handed  down  to  us  by  corporate  bodies  are  not  any 
more  true  than  those  which  are  developed  by  our  own  individual  experiences.  Take 
the  household.  The  father  and  the  mother  can  think  for  the  children  until  they 
are  fifteen,  or  eighteen,  or  twenty  years  of  age  ;  but  then  they  must  think  for  them- 
selves. Why  ?  Because  no  chiJd  is  hke  its  father  and  mother.  All  truth  is  rela- 
tive to  the  person  by  whom  it  is  appUed.  Then,  next,  let  me  speak  of  the  arrogance 
of  those  who  are  throwing  aside  or  attempting  to  disesteem  or  to  disown  all  the 
deductions  of  the  spiritual  sense;  all  the  results  of  the  action  of  the  upper  under- 
standing. Shall  I  disown  the  sounds  that  fill  the  air,  because,  applying  my  eye  to 
them,  I  cannot  see  them?  Shall  I  disown  all  odours,  because,  putting  my  ear  to 
the  flower,  I  cannot  smell  them  ?  Shall  men  disown  truths  because  they  cannot 
taste  them  when  they  are  discoverable,  only  through  the  joint  action  of  passion  or 
affection  or  spiritual  emotion,  and  the  higher  understanding  ?  Shall  men  apply 
the  crucible,  or  the  mathematical  rule,  or  any  outward  measure  to  things  that,  if 
perceived  at  all,  must  be  perceived  through  the  channel  of  higher  thoughts  and 
feelings,  and  disown  them  because  they  cannot  stand  the  test  of  the  lower  reason  ? 
The  lower  reason  has  its  tests,  the  superior  unspirituaUsed  reason  has  its  tests,  and 
the  spirituahsed  reason  has  its  tests  ;  and  each  must  rest  on  its  own  ground.  One 
other  point.  In  view  of  the  carefulness  required  in  the  investigation  of  truth ;  in 
view  of  the  time  and  training  and  discipline  that  are  required  ;  in  view  of  the  nature 
of  the  mind  and  the  skill  required  to  judge  of  its  actions  rightly,  I  say  to  aU  those 
who  are  speaking  Ughtly  of  the  faith  of  their  fathers,  and  of  the  manners  and 
customs  of  their  childhood ;  I  say  to  all  those  who,  without  any  special  knowledge, 
are  talking  of  progress  and  emancipation,  and  of  the  glorious  era  of  reason ;  I  say 
to  all  those  who  are  curveting  in  physical  philosophy,  as  against  the  higher  modes 
of  arriving  at  the  truth,  "  You  are  going  too  fast  and  too  far.  No  man  is  wise  who 
leaves  his  head  behind  him  ;  and  you  are  travelling  faster  than  your  brain  can  go." 
To  bring  new  thought  to  the  balancing  of  truth ;  to  put  thoughts  to  thoughts, 
and  to  make  them  march  in  ranks  and  train  together  to  form  systematic  facts  and 
co-operating  truths — this  is  a  slow,  a  cautious,  and  a  difficult  process.  Knowledge, 
virtue,  morality,  spirituality,  manhood,  can  only  be  acquired  by  long  effort  and 
practice.  Men  gradually  find  new  elements  of  truth,  or  larger  proportions  of  old 
truths.  Be  willing  to  receive  new  light;  but  until  you  have  something  substantial 
and  clear  as  crystal  to  take  the  place  of  the  old,  hold  on  to  what  you  already  have. 
Nothing  is  so  bad  as  for  a  man  to  be  afloat ;  nothing  is  so  bad  as  for  a  man  to  lose 
faith  in  everything.  Put  in  a  skiff,  in  the  middle  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  a  babe 
that  knows  neither  the  stars,  nor  the  sea,  nor  storms,  nor  sail,  nor  compass,  nor 
rudder,  and  what  such  a  child  is,  that  is  the  young  man  who  drifts  through  life, 
contemning  all  faith,  aU  knowledge  of  the  past,  vet  without  having  acquired  any 
knowledge  of  the  present,  or  gained  any  intuitions  of  the  future.  {H,  W.  Beecher.) 
The  nature  of  conscience  : — It  is  clearly  imphed  in  the  context  that  ignorance  con- 
fines men  to  very  imperfect  guides  in  life,  and  that  a  true  religion  ought  to  develop 
growth  in  knowledge,  not  only,  but  skill  in  using  knowledge  as  a  means  of  rectitude ; 
and  still  more  clearly  in  the  closing  verse  is  it  declared  that  the  conscience  of  men 
requires  education,  in  order  Uiat  it  may,  "  by  reason  of  use,"  "  discern  both  good  and 
evil."  Using,  exercising,  disciplining  a  man's  conscience,  according  to  the  concep- 
tion of  this  passage,  is  the  method  by  which  it  may  be  made  to  discern  good  and^ 


CHAP,  v.]  HEBREWS.  437 

«vil.    First  as  to  the  nature  of  conscience.    It  is  a  moral  sentiment  or  emotion 
subject  to  all  the  conditions  of  all  other  emotions  in  the  mind  of  man.    It  does  not 
differ  in  that  regard  from  any  sentiment  or  any  emotion.    All  the  great  moral 
desires  or  sentiments  are  dependent  for  opportunity  and  for  incitement  upon  the  fore- 
going action  of  the  intellect.     The  intellect  thinks  and  perceives  for  the  conscience 
just  as  much  as  it  does  for  hope,  for  fear,  for  veneration,  or  for  love.    It  is  the 
precursor  of  these  elements.     Therefore  the  desires  or  sentiments  are  not,  in  and  of 
themselves,  intelligent.     There  is  not  a  sentiment  of  hope  with  a  little  intellect  of 
hope  in  it.     There  is  not  a  sentiment  of  veneration  with  a  little  thinking  power  in 
it.    There  is  not  a  sentiment  of  conscience  with  a  little  thinking  mind  belonging 
to  it.     The  intellect  belongs  to  all  sentiments.     Every  sentiment  draws  its  know- 
ledge, and  therefore  its  opportunity  and  incitement  for  action,  from  the  common 
understanding  that  overspreads  all  the  sentiments.     They  are  dependent  upon  the 
reason  for  light.     No  man  discerns  the  rightness  or  the  wrongness  of  anything 
through  his  conscience.    It  is  the  intellect  that  sees  the  agreement  or  disagreement 
of  conduct  with  the  rule  of  life.    It  is  conscience  that  experiences  pain  or  pleasure 
in  itself  at  this  disagreement  or  agreement.     The  action  of  conscience,  therefore,  is 
partnership  action.    What  some   term   "  the   moral  sense "  is  the  co-operative 
action  of  the  intellect  and  the  sentiment  of  conscience.    No  mind,  no  intelligent 
conscience.     The  reason,  therefore,  stands  related  to  all  sentiments — to  conscience 
and  the  rest — as  the  keys  on  the  keyboai'd  do  to  the  pipes  in  an  organ.    All  the 
pipes  have  the  potentiality  of  certain  sounds,  differing  one  from  another ;  but  they  do 
not  sound  themselves.     They  never  open  their  throat  to  speak  until  the  keys  are 
pressed.     We  open  them  with  our  hands.     The  whole  issuing  range  of  harmony 
from  the  instrument  is  determined  at  the  key-board  and  not  behind  it.     We  touch 
the  keys  first,  and  the  response  comes  afterward.     So  reason  is  the  key-board  of 
the  mind ;  and  when  it  pronounces  any  course  of  conduct,  or  any  action,  to  be 
right,  the  conscience  approves  it — that  is,  it  gives  forth  the  sentiment  of  pleasure 
to  itself ;  and  when  the  reason  condemns  any  course  of  conduct  or  action,  then  the 
conscience  gives  back  to  Hself  the  sentiment  of  pain.     But  while  on  the  one  side 
it  is  true  that  the  conscience  does  not  itself  think,  nor  perceive,  nor  discern,  it 
would  be  wrong  to  suppose  that  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  thinking,  perceiving,  and 
discerning.     Indirectly  it  has  much  to  do  with  them,  for,  while  the  emotions  of  the 
soul  have  incitement  and  opportunity  from  the  intellect,  the  intellect  is  not  un- 
affected by  them.     Strong  emotions  inspire  the  intellect  with  a  sensibility  peculiar 
to  the  truths  which  belong  to  those  emotions  that  are  acting.     Or,  if  I  may  so  say, 
figuratively,  a  feeling  gives  its  colour  to  the  intellect,  and  makes  it  susceptible  of 
the  kinds  of  truth  which  it  otherwise  would  not  discern.     For  example,  every  kind 
of  sorrow  produces  in  the  intellect  a  sensibility  to  the  pecuUar  class  of  truths 
which  are  concerned  in  sorrow.    If  one  be  overladen  with  sorrow,  everything  he  sees 
becomes  sad,  and  everything  he  thinks  of  has  a  colour  of  sadness  in  it.    But  if  the 
sorrow  be  cleared  away,  and  mirth  come  in  the  place  of  it,  the  intellect  no  longer 
sees  the  shades,  nor  the  low  tones  or  tints  of  trul.h.     It  sees,  dancing  on  every  side, 
all  the  variable  elements  of  the  truths  that  belong  to  mirth.     There  is,  then,  a  co- 
operative or  interchangeable  action  of  the  intellect  upon  the  emotions  ;  so  that  a 
perfect  education  of  either  one  requires  the  education  of  the  other.    They  work 
together ;  and  a  proportion  and  balance  between  thought  and  feeling  is  indispensable 
to  thought  and  indispensable  to  feeling.     Therefore,  so  far  from  the  intellect, 
devoid  of  emotion,  being  the  discerner  in  regard  to  the  greatest  sphere  of  truth,  it  is 
precisely  the  opposite ;  the  intellect  is  utterly  unable  to  discern  what  is  true  in  these 
higher  realms  except  by  the  force  of  underlying  feeling,  which  does  not  see,  but 
which  inspires  the  intellect  with  a  quality  that  enables  it  to  see,  the  truths  which 
belong  to  these  several  departments.     Secondly,  consider  the  function  and  scope  of 
conscience.    Its  function  relates,  properly,  to  reason,  or  intellect ;  to  sensibility, 
and  to  truths  of  rectitude.    It  inspires  the  reason  with  that  sensibility  by  which  it 
discerns  all  truth,  in  so  far  as  it  relates  to  the  moral  conduct  of  mankind.     When 
right  is  done,  the  conscience  gives  forth  pleasurable  emotions.    When  wrong  is  done, 
the  conscience  gives  back  pain.     Thus  it  approves  or  condemns.    It  presides  in  all 
the  spheres  of  men — in  the  household,  in  the  market,  in  the  forum,  in  government— 
and  makes  itself  felt  in  universal  law.    At  the  same  time  it  leavens  every  feeling  of 
the  soul,  inspiring  in  each  one  a  sense  of  truth  and  righteousness  and  rectitude  In 
his  own  sphere.     And  it  is  a  restraint  upon  unregulated  and  extravagant  thought 
and  emotion.    Thus  in  all  things  it  brings  itself  into  human  experience,  whether  it 
be  in  the  form  of  feeling,  or  whether  it  be  in  the  form  of  action.    With  thi«  foonda- 


488  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  r. 

tioD,  I  remark,  first,  that  we  discern  in  the  action  of  conscience,  practically,  in  a  very 
great  number  of  instances,  the  variety  and  intensity  of  our  own  judgment.  Thou- 
sands of  men  are  said  to  be  conscientious  simply  because  in  the  respects  in  which 
they  have  a  sense  of  right  and  wrong  they  are  intense,  though  they  are  not  intelli- 
gent. Men  who  have  a  profound  conscience  toward  God,  toward  His  Book,  toward 
His  Church,  toward  His  ministering  servants,  and  toward  truths  that  have  in  them 
something  of  the  element  of  eternity — those  men  often  have  almost  no  conscience 
in  regard  to  elements  which  relate  to  the  welfare  of  mankind.  So  you  shall  see  an 
Itahan  bandit  who  goes  to  bed  with  remorse  because  he  did  not  pay  his  vows  to  the 
statue  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  nor  say  the  prayers  that  he  had  vowed,  but  who  will 
wipe  the  dagger  with  which  he  had  stabbed  a  man  in  the  back  with  a  sense  of 
having  performed  a  virtuous  action  I  In  anything  which  relates  to  religion  many 
men  are  very  conscientious  ;  and  such  men  are  said  to  be  very  religious  ;  but  in 
the  things  which  relate  to  worldly  affairs  these  same  men  often  have  no  conscience. 
Envy,  jealousy,  anger,  hatred,  rivalry,  supersession,  all  such  things  they  indulge  in 
innocently,  without  the  least  idea  that  conscience  has  anything  to  do  with  them. 
They  have  not  a  conscience  for  truth  everywhere,  but  they  have  a  conscience  for 
truth  in  spots,  and  of  a  certain  kind.  They  have  a  conscience  for  truth  toward  the 
supernatural,  for  truth  toward  the  supernal,  but  not  for  truth  toward  the  human. 
Multitudes  of  persons  there  are  who  have  a  conscience  about  pins,  but  not  about 
crowbars.  They  have  a  conscience  about  nettles,  but  not  about  serpents'  teeth. 
That  is  to  say,  they  exalt  the  bottom  until  it  is  as  high  as  the  top,  and  the  top  can 
be  no  higher.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  those  who,  not  by  feebleness  of  intellect 
but  by  an  over-refined  process  or  habit  of  searching  and  researching  into  meta- 
physical  threads  and  films  and  gossamers,  are  perpetually  bringing  about  them 
insoluble  matters  and  tormenting  themselves  and  their  friends  with  questions  in 
life  which  have  no  practical  issue,  but  exist  in  the  bowels  of  their  brain  and  are 
being  spun  out.  They  weary  themselves  by  excessive  addiction  to  a  subtle  con- 
scientiousness which  works  in  such  channels.  Then,  next,  come  mechanical 
consciences,  or  consciences  that  act  entirely  by  rule  and  custom,  and  not  by  deter- 
mining right  or  wrong  through  the  reason.  A  mechanical  conscience  can  only  act 
in  reference  to  cases  which  have  been  already  determined ;  for  it  is  a  conscience 
which  acts  according  to  precedent  or  rule.  Now,  rules  are  the  indispensable  eyes 
of  ignorance,  as  principles  are  the  indispensable  eyes  of  intelligence.  They  are 
the  resultants  of  practical  experiments  in  right  and  wrong  through  ages,  and  are 
not  likely  to  be  set  aside  for  any  one.  It  is  far  more  likely  that  generations  of 
men,  as  the  result  of  continuous  trial,  will  be  right  in  practical  affairs  than  that  any 
single  man  wUl.  Where,  therefore,  we  are  prone  to  ignore  a  custom  because  we  are 
at  hberty  to  act  from  original  considerations  we  shall  be  very  likely  to  substitute 
conceit  for  wisdom.  For  the  great  mass  of  mankind,  then,  conscience  must  deter- 
mine right  and  wrong.  That  is,  their  intellect  must  ask,  "  "What  is  custom  ?  " 
"  What  is  rule  ?  "  And  they  must  go  by  that.  Yet  it  is  not  the  best  guide.  It  is 
the  very  thing  that  is  condemned  in  this  passage.  Wider  civilisation  and  a  higher 
life  are  fuU  of  things  that  must  of  necessity  be  outside  of  customs  and  rules,  and  for 
which  no  precedent  can  be  established ;  and  these  must  be  determined  by  the  applica- 
tion of  principles.  Hence  you  will  find  that  the  Word  of  God  constantly  recognises 
the  propriety  of  a  man  determining  right  and  wrong  by  referring  to  his  original 
moral  feelings.  Many  a  man  has  trained  his  conscience  to  an  interpretation 
of  sensibility — that  is  to  say,  conscience  and  the  understanding  together,  which 
form  the  moral  sense,  has  been  trained  in  such  a  way  that  they  interpret  right  and 
wrong  precisely  as  musicians  interpret  right  and  wrong  in  music,  not  as  the  result 
of  any  experience  by  which  they  say,  "  One,  two,  and  three  make  a  discord  ' ;  but 
as  the  result  of  feeling.  A  discord  hurts  the  ear  of  one  who  is  cultivated  in  music. 
Now,  there  is  such  a  training  of  a  man's  moral  sense  that  whatever  is  dishonour- 
able, whatever  is  coarse,  whatever  is  wrong  in  one  way  or  another,  hurts  him. 
First  comes  the  feeling  of  pain,  and  he  has  to  determine  the  cause  of  it  afterwards. 
The  intellect  and  conscience  working  together  are  so  sensitised  that  that  which  ia 
at  variance  with  or  unlike  moral  principles,  with  truth,  with  simphcity,  with  fair- 
ness, with  honour,  with  any  virtue,  is  offensive  to  them.  They  have  been  so 
drilled  in  things  right  that  the  first  appearance  of  a  thing  that  is  wrong  strikea 
oppngnance  into  them.  On  the  other  hand,  you  will  find  men  who  are  strict 
Sabbath-keepers,  who  are  strict  in  the  letter  of  honesty,  who  are  strict  in  a  thou- 
sand conventional  elements  of  right  and  wrong,  but  who  in  business  spljcres,  in 
ihe  development  of  a  campaign,  in  an  enterprise  where  there  is  rivalry,  whera 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  43S 

there  is  some  end  to  be  gained  by  combination,  or  where  there  is  pressure  in  one 
direction  or  another,  are  overreaching,  and  do  not  hesitate  to  do  wrong,  and  violate 
the  principles  of  humanity.  They  were  never  in  such  a  case  before  ;  they  have  had 
no  training  of  conscience  which  makes  them  feel  that  they  are  transgressing  the 
law  of  right ;  and  their  want  of  integrity  does  not  trouble  them.  But  there  are 
lome  men  who  shrink  back  instinctively  from  things  that  are  wrong,  and  do  not 
themselves  know  why  they  are  shocked  at  them.  There  are  many  things  that  we 
are  familiar  with,  but  that  we  are  unconscious  of.  There  are  many  things  that  we 
know  without  thinking  of  them.  I  know  the  surface  of  the  ground  on  which  I 
walk  without  knowing  it.  I  know  a  hill  or  a  level  without  knowing  it.  My  foot 
knows  more  than  my  head  in  these  matters.  It  has  been  trained  respecting  them. 
We  get  up  and  sit  down,  we  go  backwards  and  forwards,  we  do  a  great  many  things 
where  the  body  is  concerned  automatically.  We  have  come  to  that  point  where 
instantaneity  is  the  law  of  operation  in  many  physical  things.  Higher  than  that, 
men  may  come  to  that  state  of  mind  in  which,  without  any  conscious  intellectual 
operation,  by  instinct  or  moral  insight,  they  shall  abhor  that  which  is  evil,  and 
in  which  they  shall  instinctively  seek  that  which  is  good.  This  is  the  highest 
form  of  conscience.  I  must  add  one  or  two  remarks.  First,  I  think  our  times 
need  training  in  judicial  ethics  far  more  than  in  intensity  of  spirituality.  It  is 
morality  that  develops  spirituality,  and  not  spirituality  that  develops  morality. 
You  cannot  put  on  your  roof  until  yon  have  built  your  foundation.  The  lack  of 
training  in  the  principles  of  honesty  and  integrity  is  the  weaknesp  of  our  times. 
This  training,  like  all  real  training,  should  be  first  in  the  household.  I  only 
add  that  perhaps  more  than  any  other  single  thing  in  the  training  of  children, 
in  the  family,  in  the  school,  and  in  the  preliminary  stages  of  their  life,  are  needed, 
first,  training  in  what  is  right  and  wrong,  and  second,  the  development  of  an 
instantaneous  subjection  of  thought  and  action  to  that  which  is  determined  to 
be  right  and  wrong,  and  a  habit  of  doing  that  which  is  duty  instantly  without 
q^iestioning.  (Ibid.)  Necessity  of  discrimination  : — A  set  of  half-witted  people 
went  to  the  sea  to  gather  precious  stones.  Not  being  well  able  to  discriminate 
between  true  and  false  stones,  they  took  for  precious  a  lot  of  common  pebbles, 
thinking  they  must  be  good  because  they  were  of  bright  colour  and  heavy.  The 
really  precious  stones,  being  of  uncertain  colour  and  light  weight,  they  rejected 
as  worthless.  (J.  Oilmour,  M.A.)  Knowledge  by  use: — Practical  sciences 
are  not  to  be  learned  but  in  the  way  of  action.  It  is  experience  that  must 
give  knowledge  in  the  Christian  profession,  as  well  as  in  all  others.  And 
the  knowledge  drawn  from  experience  is  quite  of  another  kind  from  that  which 
flows  from  speculation  or  discourse.  It  is  not  the  opinion,  but  the  path  of  the  just, 
that  the  wisest  of  men  tells  us  shines  more  and  more  unto  a  perfect  day.  The 
obedient,  and  the  men  of  practice,  are  those  sons  of  light  that  shall  outgrow  all 
their  doubts  and  ignorances,  that  shall  ride  upon  these  clouds,  and  triumph  over 
their  present  imperfections,  till  persuasion  pass  into  knowledge,  and  knowledge 
advance  into  assurance,  and  all  come  at  length  to  be  completed  in  the  beatific 
vision  and  a  full  fruition  of  those  joys  which  God  has  in  reserve  fox  them  whom  by 
His  grace  He  shall  prepare  for  glory.     (22.  South,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  VL 
Vebs;.  1-3.  Leaving  the  principles. — Foundation-stones : — ^I.  Hebe  is  a  statement 

MADE    WITH     BEQABD     TO   THE    FIRST     PEINCIPLES   OF    THE    BELIGION   WE    PROFESS.        He 

tells  where  they  are  revealed,  and  what  they  are.  And,  first,  he  would  have  his 
readers  to  nnderstand  that  the  principles  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ  are  the  "  first 
principles  of  the  oracles  of  God  "  ;  he  uses  the  two  expressions  interchangeably,  as 
if  they  both  meant  the  same  thing.  His  immediate  object  was  to  assert  that  the 
"  doctrine  of  Christ,"  at  which  the  Hebrews  stumbled,  was  in  reality  no  fresh 
revelation,  but  that  all  its  rudiments  had  been  taught  in  their  own  Mosaic  Scrip- 
tures. A  deep  truth  was  contained  in  the  saying  of  the  ancient  Church,  «•  There 
were  Christians  on  earth  before  there  were  Jews."  Even  from  Paradise  to  Patmos, 
"  the  principles  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ  "  have  been  taught  with  increasing  grada- 
Mons  of  development,  as  "  the  first  principles  of  the  oracles  of  God  " — old,  as  well 


440  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOE.  [chap,  w 

as  new.  This  being  established,  Paul  proceeds  to  enumerate  these  principles ;  and 
he  appears  to  state  them  miscellaneously,  without  reference  to  their  natural  station 
or  logical  order.  1.  And,  first,  "  Eepentance  from  dead  works."  Dead  works  are 
works  performed  by  one  whose  life  is  separated  from  the  life  of  God.  Thus 
separated,  men  may  have  the  quaUty  of  manhness,  but  not  of  godliness ;  towards 
one  another  there  may  be  melting  love,  heroic  daring,  unbending  justice,  most 
magnificent  generosity ;  but  whatever  they  may  be  with  regard  to  men,  with  regard 
to  God  they  are  dead.  Alienated  from  His  life,  even  good  works  are  dead  works ;  . 
dead  while  they  live  ;  dead  as  the  dead  leaves  on  the  dead  bough,  parted  from  ita 
parent  stem.  It  is  the  doctrine  of  a  merely  human  religion,  that  while  we  should 
repent  of  our  evil  works,  we  should  trust  in  our  righteous  works  for  heaven.  But 
it  is  the  doctrine  of  Christ  that  we  should  repent  of  all  the  works  wrought  while  our 
souls  were  dead  in  sin  ;  and  when  we  feel  the  quickening  thrills  of  a  new  life,  this 
repentance  will  take  place.  2.  But,  secondly,  turning  from  sin  imphes  turning  to 
God.  We  shall  have  no  disposition  to  renounce  our  dead  works  until,  united  to  the 
living  God  by  faith,  we  are  partakers  of  His  life.  Faith  towards  God,  therefore,  is 
another  elementary  principle  of  the  oracles.  To  have  "  faith  towards  God  "  is  to 
feel  able  to  say,  "  I  think,  I  will,  I  speak,  I  act  as  I  do,  because  I  have  faith  towards 
God";  it  is  to  feel  His  Spirit  touch  us,  to  have  the  most  alfecting  sense  of  His 
society,  to  act  as  under  His  inspection,  to  be  alive  to  His  presence  as  the  most 
intense  of  all  reaUties,  giving  the  zest  to  every  pleasure,  the  light  to  every  beauty, 
the  soul  to  every  scene ;  to  trust  Him  for  the  food,  and  raiment,  and  home,  both  of 
our  mortal  and  immortal  nature ;  to  make  Him  the  confidant  of  every  weakness, 
and  want,  and  woe  ;  to  revive  beneath  the  sun-burst  of  His  smile,  and  to  mourn  at 
the  hiding  of  His  face.  3.  But  we  shall  never  have  faith  towards  God,  or  approach 
Him  in  the  way  that  has  been  just  described,  untQ  our  infected  spirits  have  applied  to 
a  fountain  of  cleansing.  So  another  essential  principle  is  "  the  doctrine  of  baptisms." 
Those  baptisms  told  not  only  of  sin,  but  of  a  fountain  opened  for  sin  ;  and  we  know 
where  that  precious  fountain  flows.  Rejoice  to  think  that  it  is  a  fountain,  and  not 
a  scanty  supply.  4.  But  the  doctrine,  or  the  true  meaning  of  the  laying  on  of 
hands,  was  another  principle  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ.  It  conveyed  a  doctrine,  and 
the  doctrine  was  that  he  who  would  be  saved  must,  by  his  own  personal  act  and  deed 
appropriate  tbe  work  of  Him  who  is  our  Saviour  by  being  our  substitute.  5.  The 
resurrection  of  the  dead  is  another  essential  article  of  faith,  and  one,  like  the  rest, 
peculiar  to  inspired  revelation.  Nature  does  not  teach  it.  It  never  dawned  on  the 
proud  thoughts  of  philosophy.  Even  those  beautiful  mysteries  of  the  spring,  which 
are  sometimes  thought  to  teach,  inferentially,  the  doctrine  of  a  resurrection,  con- 
vey no  teaching  sufficiently  defined  to  still  the  agonies  of  doubt  or  sorrow.  The 
changes  they  witness  and  the  charms  they  show  are  revivals,  not  resurrections. 
But  in  the  oracles  of  God  all  the  great  problems  that  affect  the  destiny  of  man 
receive  a  full  solution,  and  all  the  questions  that  come  from  his  breaking  heart  meet 
with  a  distinct  response.  The  resurrection  of  the  dead  is  a  "  doctrine  of  Christ." 
The  Emperor  Theodosius  having,  on  a  great  occasion,  opened  all  the  prisons  and 
released  his  prisoners,  is  reported  to  have  said,  *•  And  now,  would  to  God  I  could 
open  all  the  tombs  and  give  life  to  the  dead  1  "  But  there  is  no  limit  to  the  mighty 
power  and  royal  grace  of  Jesus.  He  opens  the  prisons  of  justice  and  the  prisons  of 
death  with  equal  and  infinite  ease  :  He  redeems  not  the  soul  only,  but  the  body. 
From  the  hour  of  the  "laying  on  of  hands,"  the  entire  man  has  been  saved.  6. 
But,  once  more :  the  eternal  judgment  has  ever  been  a  primary  article  of  revelation. 
Though  analogy,  intuition,  and  universal  opinion  may  have  furnished  grounds  to 
justify  belief  in  it  as  a  probable  event,  only  the  "  oracles  of  God  "  could  unfold  ita 
principles,  or  announce  its  absolute  certainty.  This  they  have  ever  done.  He, 
through  whose  sacrifice  our  souls  have  received  a  "  baptism  " — He  who  has  become 
our  substitute  by  "the  laying  on  of  hands," bearing  all  the  pressure  of  our  responsi- 
bility, and  binding  Himself  to  be  answerable  for  us  at  the  judgment-day — will  be 
Himself  our  Judge.  But  there  are  some  of  you  who  have  no  right  to  these  anticipa- 
tions. You  have  not  made  provision  for  the  great  hereafter.  By  that  tremendoug 
phrase,  ♦'  eternal  judgment,"  consider  your  ways  and  be  wise  1  II.  And  now, 
passing  from  the  doctrinal  statement,  let  us  give  attention  to  the  peactical  appeai.. 
1.  "  Not  laying  again  the  foundation."  The  teacher,  in  this  phrase,  at  once  indi- 
cates the  course  he  intends  to  adopt  in  his  own  instructiona,  and  the  conduct  h* 
would  prescribe  to  those  who  study  them.  •*  Not  laying  again  the  foundation." 
God  will  not  lay  it  again  in  His  purposes ;  you  are  not  to  be  for  ever  laying  it  again 
in  your  mind  and  memory ;  as  it  is  settled  in  the  heavens,  so  let  it  be  settled  here. 


CHAP.  Ti.]  HEBREWS.  441 

**  Not  laying  again  the  foundation."  You  are  not  to  forget  it,  so  as  to  have  to  learn 
H  again ;  you  are  not  to  doubt  it,  so  as  to  need  to  be  convinced  of  it  again  ;  jou  are 
not  to  forsake  it,  so  as  to  have  to  return  to  it  again.  "  Not  laying  again  the  founda- 
tion." You  are  not  to  be  like  an  insane  or  unskilful  builder,  who  excavates  the 
foundation  of  his  work,  tears  it  from  its  place,  and  takes  it  to  pieces,  being  doubtful 
of  its  materials,  or  uncertain  of  its  sufiBciency  to  sustain  the  superincumbent  weight ; 
and  who,  always  engaged  in  destroying  the  foundation,  and  laying  it  again,  makes 
no  progress  with  his  building.  2.  "Leaving  the  principles  of  the  doctrine  o< 
Christ."  At  first  sight  the  meaning  of  this  clause  is  not  obvious,  and  it  seems  to 
clash  with  those  connected  with  it.  There  are  different  ways  of  leaving  an  object. 
We  may  leave  it  as  the  spendthrift  son  leaves  his  father's  house,  never  to  return ; 
we  may  leave  it  as  the  deserter  leaves  the  shield  which  he  has  "  vilely  cast  away  " ; 
we  may  leave  it  as  education  and  refinement  leave  iguorance  and  rusticity  ;  but  not 
BO  are  we  to  ler.ve  these  iirst  principles  of  our  faith.  We  are  to  leave  them  as  the 
Bcholar  leaves  the  letters  of  the  alphabet — leaving  them  only  to  use  them ;  leaving 
them  that  he  may  bring  out  all  their  powers,  and  employ  them  in  startling  com- 
binations, as  the  instrument  for  acquiring  or  diffusing  thought.  We  are  to  leave 
them  as  the  plant  leaves  its  root,  when  it  towers  into  a  majestic  tree,  leaving  it 
only  that  it  may  the  more  depend  upon  it ;  and,  day  by  day,  drawing  from  it  those 
fresh  supplies  of  vital  sap  which  it  pours  into  the  fresh  leaves,  fresh  boughs,  ever 
fresh  and  ever  beautiful  formations  of  that  life  which  refreshes  the  hungry  with  its 
clusteis,  or  the  weary  with  its  sbade.  We  are  to  leave  th<  m  as  the  builder  leaves 
his  foundation,  that  he  may  carry  up  the  building,  stone  above  stone,  story  above 
Btory,  tower  above  tower,  from  the  dusky  basement  to  the  sun-lit  pinnacle  ;  always 
leaving  the  foundation,  yet  always  on  it,  and  on  it  with  the  most  massive  pressure, 
and  the  most  complete  dependence,  when  most  he  leaves  it.  3.  "  Let  us  go  on 
unto  perfection."  It  is  obvious  that  there  can  be  no  reference,  in  this  word  "  per- 
fection," to  the  justifying  work  of  Christ  on  our  behalf.  That  is  perfect  from  the 
first  moment  we  believe.  At  once  we  receive  perfect  forgiveness,  and  a  perfect  title 
to  the  "inheritance  in  light."  But,  although  justification  is  complete,  sanctifica- 
tion  has  yet  to  be  carried  on.  To  borrow  the  idea  of  a  transatlantic  writer :  *'  A 
perfect  title  to  a  piece  of  property  puts  a  man  in  possession  of  it  just  as  absolutely 
on  the  first  day  when  it  was  given  as  twenty  years  after.  When  a  man  gives 
a  flower,  it  is  a  perfect  gift ;  but  the  gift  of  grace  is  rather  the  gift  of  a  flower  seed." 
It  contains  within  it  all  the  Divine  germs  necessary  for  growtb.  And  we  are  asked 
to  cherish  it,  that  it  may  go  on  unto  perfection,  as  the  seed  goes  on  to  the  perfec- 
tion of  a  full-blown  flower,  4.  The  word  employed  to  indicate  the  manner  of 
arriving  at  this  end  is  richly  significant.  "  Let  us  go  on  to  perfection,"  should 
rather  be  rendered,  ' '  Let  us  be  carried  on."  "  The  word  is  emphatical,  intimating 
such  a  kind  of  progress  as  a  ship  makes  when  it  is  under  sail.  •  Let  us  be  carried 
on  '  with  the  full  bent  of  our  minds  and  affections,  with  the  utmost  endeavours  of 
our  whole  souls.  We  have  abode  long  enough  by  the  shore ;  let  us  now  hoist  our 
sails,  and  launch  into  the  deep."  Perhaps  we  feel  discouraged  by  the  labour,  and 
alarmed  by  the  very  glory  of  our  calling.  The  013  e  may  seem  too  much  for  us  to 
exercise,  and  the  other  too  gi'eat  for  us  to  hope  for.  Almost  despairing  of  our 
ability  to  go  forward,  we  may  even  now  be  thinking  of  going  back.  But  if  we  are 
unable  to  go  on,  we  are  surely  able  to  be  carried  on  to  perfection.  And  the  Eternal 
Almightiness  is  even  now  at  our  side.  (C.  Stanford,  D.D.)  Leaving  first 
principles : — We  must  leave  these  first  principles  as  the  pupil  leaves  the  alphabet 
when  he  is  brought  to  the  process  of  combining  letters  into  syllables,  and  syllables 
into  words,  and  of  words  constructing  sentences,  and  of  sentences  making  a  dis- 
course. We  must  leave  them  as  the  architect  leaves  the  foundation,  and  proceeds 
to  erect  upon  it  his  superstructure.  We  must  leave  them  as  the  mathematician 
leaves  his  axioms,  and  proceeds  to  the  construction  of  his  demonstration.  To  what 
purpose  would  the  pupil  have  learned  the  elements  of  language  if  he  should  rest  in 
them  ?  Where  the  use  of  continuing  to  con  them  over  without  proceeding  any 
further  ?  What  benefit  would  result  from  the  labour  and  expense  of  laying  the  best 
foundation  if  it  remain  unappropriated—  if  no  building  be  reared  upon  it  ?  How 
long  might  the  mathematician  occupy  himself  in  ascertaining  the  axioms  of  the 
Bcience  without  coming  at  a  single  valuable  result  ?  And  what  advantage  will  accrue 
to  us,  or  the  world,  from  our  acquiring  the  mere  elements  of  Christianity  without 
reducing  them  to  practice,  pushing  them  out  to  their  ulterior  results,  and  connect 
ing  them  with  the  higher  principles  of  a  spiritual  hfe?  (Geo.  Peck,  D.D.) 
Passing  from  elementary  principles : — ^How  ?    Not  casting  it  for  ever  behind  oiw 


442  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  Tt 

backs :  BoSering  it  qaite  to  slip  out  of  our  memories.  We  must  remember  even  the 
principles  of  religion  to  our  dying  day ;  but  we  must  not  insist  in  those,  and  set 
down  our  staff  here,  but  as  good  travellers  go  on  forward.  As  if  one  should  say  to 
a  grammar  scholar,  "Leave  thy  grammar,  and  go  to  logic,  rhetoric,  philosophy,  to 
more  profound  points  of  learning,"  his  meaning  is  not  that  he  should  leave  hia 
grammar  quite,  and  never  think  of  it  any  more,  but  that  he  should  pass  from  that 
to  greater  matters.  As  if  one  should  say  to  a  traveller  going  to  London,  that  sits 
eating  and  drinking  at  Colchester,  "Leave  Colchester,  and  go  on  to  London,'  so 
leave  this  doctrine  of  the  beginning  of  Christianity,  leave  your  A  B  C,  be  not  always 
beginners,  but  proceed  till  ye  come  to  some  maturity.  {W.  Jones,  D.D.)  Let  ua 
go  on. — Forward  I — I.  The  necessity  eob  this  exhobtation.  Do  not  old  habits, 
which  Christian  earnestness  should  have  obUterated,  begin  to  creep  into  the  Ught 
again  ?  Do  not  sins  and  temptations,  which  you  thought  you  had  mastered,  rise  up 
and  gain  power  over  you  once  more?  II.  The  meaning  of  this  exhobtation. 
Having  taken  Christ,  we  must  not  merely  receive  His  pardon,  but  we  must  live 
upon  Him.  III.  The  consequences  of  neglectino  this  exhobtation.  If  we  do 
not  yield  up  all  to  Christ,  we  shall  easily  drift  away  from  Him.  We  must  go  for- 
ward, or  we  shall  fall  farther  away,  till  we  sink  into  irremediable  ruin.  The  awful 
solemnity  of  this  passage  (vers.  4-6)  we  cannot  possibly  exaggerate.  (H.  Phillips, 
B.A.)  Progress  in  Divine  knowledge  : — Progression  marks  all  God's  works.  In 
nature  there  is  no  perfect  rest.  There  is  change  in  everything — change  which  par- 
takes of  the  character  of  progress  ;  for  even  that  which  we  regard  as  decay  is  but 
part  of  a  new  creative  process.  This  universal  law  of  progression  holds  good  in 
the  realm  of  truth;  there  is  a  going  on,  a  climbing  higher  and  yet  higher  iu 
knowledge  even  of  the  divinest  kind.  Indeed  we  may  say  that,  the  more  exalted 
the  subject,  the  more  absolute  is  the  necessity  that  knowledge  should  ever  be  pro- 
gressive— the  more  impossible  it  is  that  we  can  quickly  and  at  once  attain  to  the 
fulness  of  perfect  wisdom.  I.  There  abe  many  things  connected  with  Christ 
AND  His  tbdth  which  abe  not  communicated  to  the  soul  in  convebsion,  but 
which  must  be  aoquibed  from  time  to  time  thbouqhoux  oue  Christian  life. 
Great  truths  always  come  one  by  one.  They  are  not  discovered  but  by  those  who 
diligently  search  for  them,  and  they  are  often  the  product  of  laborious  toil.  The 
apostohc  injunction  bids  us  do  something  more  than  "  strike  out  blindly."  It  bids 
us  intelligently  and  deliberately  leave  the  elements  of  wisdom,  and  "  strike  out " 
towards  the  perfection  of  knowledge.  It  bids  us  break  away,  as  it  were,  from  our 
state  of  pupilage,  and  go  on  to  the  fulness  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  It  lifts  a 
corner  of  the  veil  which  hides  from  us  the  infinitude  of  Divine  wisdom,  and  urges 
as  to  press  onward  until  our  whole  soul  is  filled  with  His  love  and  grace.  H,  In 
this  "  going  on  unto  perfection  "  it  is  desirable  that  we  should  clearly  recognise  the 
fact  that  God  is  a  teacher  who  uses  many  books.  To  the  observing  eye  and  to  the 
teachable  heart  God  is  manifested  everywhere.  In  complying,  then,  with  this 
counsel  to  the  Hebrews,  let  us  seek  for  the  fuller  revelation  of  spiritual  truths 
wherever  God  has  written  them.  Let  us  regard  the  Bible,  not  merely  as  a  fruitful 
field  where  we  can  quickly  thrust  in  the  sickle  and  reap  upon  the  surface,  but  also 
as  a  rich  mine,  in  whose  deep  recesses  lie  hidden  many  a  costly  gem,  which  our 
labour  and  our  study,  under  the  Divine  blessing,  may  bring  to  the  light.  Let  us 
look  at  the  letter  as  the  case  which  encloses  the  spirit — remembering  that  while 
"  the  letter  killeth,  it  is  the  Spirit  that  giveth  life."  Let  us  also  look  for  and  dis- 
cover truths  of  deep  spiritual  meaning  in  the  incidents  of  daily  human  experience. 
III.  It  should  also  be  duly  borne  in  mind  that  all  truths  possess  a  mutuai 
relationship,  and  that  each  has  its  influence  in  the  work  of  perfecting  the  Christian 
character.  Truth  is  one,  though  it  may  possess  many  branches.  Walking  by  a 
wide  river,  bearing  on  its  bosom  the  mightiest  navies  of  the  earth,  it  would  be 
interesting  to  speculate  concerning  the  numerous  rills  and  brooklets  which,  milea 
away,  in  different  counties,  contributed  to  that  expanse  of  water.  From  mountain, 
moor,  and  glen  those  waters  have  been  flowing  day  after  day,  meeting  and  mingling 
with  others,  ever  growing  and  gathering  strength,  until  the  result  is  that  which  we 
see  at  our  feet.  So  are  truths  gathered  from  different  sources,  mingling  their 
powers  to  influence  the  soul  and  bear  it  to  the  ocean  of  perfect  wisdom  and  eternal 
love.  IV.  This  peogbess  in  Divine  knowledge  is  something  quite  distinct  from 
changeablenebs  in  doctrine.  To  leave  the  principles,  or  first  elements,  of  the 
doctrine  of  Christ  is  not  to  depart  from  the  soundness  of  the  faith.  It  is  to  leave 
the  first  few  miles  of  the  road  behind  as  we  press  forward  towards  the  end  of  our 
journey.    It  is  to  leave  the  foundation  which  has  been  laid  firmly  in  the  ground,  ia 


OHA?.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  448 

order  that  the  building  may  rise  higher  and  higher  in  beauty  and  majesty,  until  the 
topmost  stone  is  laid  in  its  place.  It  is  to  lay  aside  the  alphabet  of  the  language 
Ihat  we  may  devote  ourselves  to  the  riches  of  its  hterature,  and  add  to  our  supply 
of  knowledge  from  the  ample  stores  of  learning  of  which  that  alphabet  is  the  key. 
V.  Pbogbess  in  Divine  knowledob  is  essential  to  the  full  enjoyment  op  thb 
PKiviiiEGES  of  the  Chbistian  LIFE.  In  othci  words,  spiritual  knowledge  is  essential 
to  spiritual  health.  Digging  deep  into  the  riches  of  spiritual  truth,  we  discover 
that  which  not  only  stays  the  anxious  throbbing  of  the  heart,  but  which  lifts  the 
soul  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  Source  of  truth — to  God  Himself.  As  among  men  the 
possession  of  knowledge  operates  for  the  most  part  so  as  to  elevate  and  refine  the 
tastes,  BO  to  drink  deeper  at  the  stream  of  heavenly  wisdom  is  to  become  in  spirit 
more  heavenly,  and  in  character  more  Divine.  It  is  said  of  Christ,  that  "  in  Him 
dwelt  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily,"  and  that  He  was  "  the  express  image 
of  the  Father's  person."  What  Jesus  was  in  an  infinite  degree,  the  Christian  who 
is  full  of  Divine  wisdom  and  rich  in  knowledge  is  also  in  his  degree.  He,  too, 
reflects  the  image  of  the  heavenly.  He,  too,  gives  forth  rays  of  reflected  but  Divine 
light.  The  life  that  is  in  the  soul  of  bim  who  is  going  on  unto  perfection  is  Divine  in 
its  influence  as  well  as  its  nature.  It  is  of  that  man  the  world  takes  knowledge  that 
he  has  been  with  Jesus,  and  that  he  has  sat  at  His  feet  and  been  taught  in  His 
school.  {F,  Wagstaff.)  The  souVs  true  progress : — I.  The  btabting-place.  1. 
Evangelical  repentance.  2.  Godward  faith.  3.  Spiritual  cleansing.  4.  Helianca 
on  Christ.  5.  A  future  state.  6.  Eternal  retribution.  II.  The  resting-place. 
"Perfection."  1.  Accuracy  of  Divine  knowledge.  2.  Conformity  to  the  Divine 
will,  so  far  as  known.  3.  The  prospects  of  an  ever-brightening  future.  (Homilist.) 
Ever  onward : — It  is  an  interesting  thing  to  watch  an  ocean  ship  get  out  from 
London  docks.  How  helpless  she  is  !  She  cannot  use  her  machinery.  Her  sails 
aie  furled.  She  is  pushed  forward  and  backward.  She  is  pulled  along  by  pufling 
tugs.  She  stops  to  let  other  vessels  pass.  She  waits  through  weary  hours.  She 
moves  on  again.  But  she  is  hindered  and  limited  and  retarded.  But  some  progress 
is  rewarding  her  perseverance.  She  is  getting  more  room.  She  begins  to  ply  her 
engines.  But  she  must  go  slowly.  She  must  be  cautions.  Then  there  is  more 
libertj  ;  there  are  fewer  obstructions  and  fewer  conditions.  The  river  is  wider. 
The  city  is  being  left  behind,  with  its  din  and  its  sin.  The  fresh  air  revives  the 
sailor.  He  unfurls  his  canvas.  He  moves  steadily  on  to  the  line  where  river  fades 
into  sea.  He  hears  the  music  of  the  surf  beating  upon  the  sand.  He  sees  the 
white-caps  marching  across  the  blue  prairies  of  ocean.  And  at  last  the  gallant 
ship,  emancipated,  seems  to  stretch  herself  and  expand  herself,  and  swell  and  sway 
and  bow  in  ecstasy,  as  she  speeds  her  way  over  the  billowy  fields  of  her  native 
heath  and  boundless  home.  Thus  it  is  with  the  soul  that  is  escaping  from  the 
trammels  of  the  flesh,  and  the  limitations  and  the  conditions  imposed  upon  it  by 
the  world.  How  slow  its  progress  is  at  first  1  How  it  is  pushed  forward  and  falls 
backward  I  How  crippled  is  the  soul's  splendid  machinery  I  How  awkward  its 
movements  1  Its  sails  are  furled.  It  must  submit  to  be  helped  by  things  smaller 
than  itself — by  trivial  rules  and  puerile  helps.  It  stops  ;  it  waits.  It  stands  to  for 
obstructions.  But  it  moves  on.  It  makes  a  little  progress.  The  channel  is  getting 
wider.  The  shores  of  earth  are  getting  further  away.  There  is  more  room,  more 
fieedom.  The  engines  move.  The  sails  are  thrown  out.  The  fresh  air  of  grace 
gladdens  the  sailor,  and  tells  him  that  the  city  of  sin  is  fading  in  the  distance.  The 
ocean  of  liberty  is  reached  at  last.  The  Lord  takes  the  helm.  The  Spirit  of 
God  fills  the  sails,  and  then,  emancipated  and  free,  unloosed  from  the  devil's 
imprisonment,  unshackled  from  the  habits  and  slavery  of  flesh,  unlimited 
and  unconditioned  by  the  world's  conventionalities,  the  glad  soul  rejoices 
on  the  bosom  of  God,  which  is  the  soul's  ocean,  which  is  the  soul's  home. 
(jR.  S.  Barrett.)  A  "Dissatisfaction  Meeting": — At  Chicago  Mr.  Moody  held 
a  "Dissatisfaction  Meeting  "for  pastors  and  their  flocks  who  were  not  satisfied  with 
their  spiritual  condition.  It  was  said  to  be  overshadowed  with  the  presence  of 
God  as  few  assemblies  have  been  since  the  day  of  Pentecost.  {King's  Highway.) 
Perfection. — On  apostolic  perfection : — Here  we  may  see  the  germ  of  what  afterwards 
became  at  Alexandria  and  elsewhere  the  catechetical  system  of  the  primitive  Church. 
Wherever  converts  to  Christianity  were  the  rule,  it  was  necessary  to  protect  the 
sacrament  of  baptism  against  unworthy  reception  by  a  graduated  system  of  prepa- 
ration and  teaching,  each  stage  of  which  represented  an  advance  in  moral  and 
intellectual  ttuth.  Hence  the  several  classes  of  catechumens  or  hearers,  who  were 
allowed  to  listen  to  the  Scriptures  and  to  sermons  in  church ;  kneelers  who  might 


444  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

stay  and  join  in  certain  parts  of  the  divine  service  ;  and  the  elected  or  enlightened 
who  were  taught  the  Lord's  prayer,  the  language  of  the  regenerate,  and  the  creed, 
the  sacred  trust  committed  to  the  regenerate  saints.  They  were  now  on  the  point 
of  being  admitted  by  baptism  into  the  body  of  Christ.  Then  at  last  as  the  rtXttoi 
or  the  Perfect  they  entered  on  the  full  privileges  of  beUevers,  they  learned  in  all  their 
bearings  the  great  doctrines  of  the  Trinity,  the  Incarnation,  the  Atonement,  the 
Eucharist.  They  were  thus  placed  in  possession  of  the  truths  and  motives  which 
shaped  most  powerfully  Christian  thought  and  life.  The  Christians  who  are 
receiving  elementary  instruction  are  termed  babes.  They  cannot  understand,  mooh 
less  can  they  utter,  the  discourse  of  righteousness.  The  Christians  who  have 
received  the  higher  instruction  are  perfect.  They  can  digest  the  solid  food  of 
Christian  doctrine.  Their  spiritual  senses  have  been  trained  by  habit  to  appreciate 
the  distinction  between  the  good  and  the  evil,  which  in  this  connection  are  other 
names  for  the  true  and  the  false.  Therefore  leaving  the  principles  or  the  first  dis- 
course about  Christ,  let  us  go  or  be  borne  on  unto  perfection.  "  Perfection." 
What  does  he  mean  by  it  ?  Certainly  not  here  moral  perfection,  the  attainment  in 
general  character  and  conduct  of  conformity  to  the  will  of  God,  for  this  would  be 
no  such  contrast  to  the  first  principles  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ  as  the  sentence  of 
itself  implies.  The  perfection  itself  must  be  in  some  sense  doctrinal  perfection  ;  in 
other  words,  the  attainment  of  the  complete  or  perfect  truth  about  Christ,  as  dis- 
tinct from  its  first  principles :  of  these  first  or  foundation  principles  six  are  enumer- 
ated, and  they  are  selected  it  would  seem  for  the  practical  reason  that  they  were 
especially  neeJed  by  candidates  for  baptism  :  the  two  sides  of  the  great  inward 
change  implied  in  conversion  to  Christ,  repentance  from  dead  works — dead,  because 
destitute  of  religious  motive — and  faith  resting  upon  God  as  revealed  in  His  Son ; 
the  two  roads  whereby  the  converted  soul  enters  upon  the  privilege  of  fuU  com- 
munion with  Christ,  the  doctrine  about  baptism,  which  distinguishes  the  Christian 
Bacrament  from  the  mere  symbols  of  purification  insisted  upon  for  proselytes  by  the 
Baptist  and  by  the  law,  and  the  laying  on  of  hands  which  we  now  call  confirmation ; 
and  finally  the  two  tremendous  motives  which  from  the  first  cast  their  shadow 
across  the  light  of  the  believer — the  coming  resurrection,  and  the  judgment,  whose 
issues  are  eternal.  These  three  pairs  of  truths  are  precisely  what  the  writer  of  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  meant  by  the  first  principles  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  and 
therefore  by  perfection  he  must  have  meant  something  beyond  these  truths.  He 
meant,  no  doubt,  a  great  deal  else,  but  specifically  and  in  particular  he  meant  the 
doctrine  of  Christ's  Melchisedekian  priesthood,  in  its  majestic  contrast  to  the 
temporal  and  relatively  inefiicient  priesthood  of  Aaron,  and  with  its  vast  issues  in 
the  mediatorial  work,  whether  of  atonement  or  of  eanctificatiou  as  carried  out,  the 
latter  to  the  very  end  of  time,  by  the  great  High  Priest  of  Christendom.  Now  the 
point  on  which  the  text  insists  is  the  going  forward  from  the  fii'st  principles  to  the 
truths  beyond.  The  apostolic  writer  does  not  say,  "Let  us  go  on  unto  perfection." 
He  does  say,  "Let  us  be  borne  on" — (pipwfit9a.  He  does  not  say,  "  Be  courageous, 
be  logical,  push  your  premisses  well  till  you  have  reached  their  conclusions."  He 
does  say,  "Let  us  all" — teachers  and  taught — "let  us  all  yield  ourselves  to  the 
impulse  of  such  truth  as  we  already  hold  " — (pfpufieOa.  It  wUl  carry  us  on,  as  we 
try  to  make  it  really  our  own,  it  will  lead  us  to  fresh  truths  which  extend,  which 
expand,  which  support  it.  We  cannot  select  one  bit  of  this  organic  whole,  baptize 
it  by  some  such  names  as  '•  primary,"  or  "  fundamental,"  and  then  say,  "This,  and 
this  only,  shall  be  my  creed."  If  the  metaphor  be  permitted,  the  trunk,  all  of 
whose  limbs  are  cut  off  thus  arbitrarily,  will  bleed  to  death.  Where  everything 
depends  upon  spiritual  activity,  non  progredi  est  regredi.  They  who  shrink  from 
apostolic  perfection  will  forfeit  their  hold  sooner  or  later  on  apostolic  first  principles. 
Let  us  trace  this  somewhat  more  in  detail.  We  have  seen  what  were  the  first 
principles  insisted  upon  among  the  first  readers  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews. 
They  belong  to  a  disciplinary  system  of  the  Apostolical  Church.  They  were 
selected  on  practical  rather  than  on  theological  grounds.'  But  what  would 
probably  be  the  first  principles  of  an  inquirer  feeling  his  way  upwards  towards  the 
light,  under  the  circumstances  of  our  own  day  ?  What  would  be  the  truths  that 
would  greet  him  on  the  threshold  of  faith,  as  the  catechumen  of  our  times,  whom 
conscience  and  thought  are  training  with  hope  for  the  full  inheritance  of  the 
believer.'  They  would  be,  in  all  probability,  first,  belief  in  a  moral  God.  It  i> 
Bomething,  no  doubt,  to  believe  in  a  Cause  who  is  the  cause  of  all  besides  Himself ; 
it  is  more  to  beheve  in  an  IntelUgence  who  is  the  parent  of  all  created  intelligences. 
But  religion,  properly  speaking,  begins  when  man  bows  down  in  his  secret  heart 


CHAP.  Ti.]  HEBREWS.  445 

before  One  who,  being  bonndless  in  power  and  infinite  in  wisdom,  Ib  also  justice, 
Banctity,  love.  And  thus,  perhaps,  simultaneously,  the  modern  catechumen  would 
be  anested  by  the  character  of  Jesus  Christ  as  it  lies  on  the  surface  of  the  Gflspels. 
These,  we  will  suppose,  are  the  catechumen's  two  first  principles.  They  are  now 
beyond  controversy,  at  least  for  him.  They  seem  to  be  all  that  he  needs,  and  he 
Bays  to  himself  that  a  simple  faith  like  this  is  also  a  working  faith.  He  can  at 
least  limit,  or  try  to  hmit,  and  leave  the  spheres  of  abstract  and  metaphysical  dis- 
cussion to  those  who  will  explore  them,  but  after  all  this,  a  time  will  come  when  he 
finds  that  he  must  go  forward,  if  he  is  not  to  fall  back.  For  he  observes,  first  of 
all,  that  this  world,  the  scene  of  so  much  wickedness  and  so  much  suffering,  is  hard 
indeed  to  reconcile  with  the  idea  of  a  God  all-goodness  and  all-powerful,  if,  indeed, 
He  has  left,  or  is  leaving,  it  to  itself.  If  He  is  all-good,  He  surely  will  unveil  Himself 
further  to  His  reasonable  creatures.  Nay,  He  will  do  something  more.  His  reve- 
lation will  be,  in  some  sort  of  sense,  an  efficacious  cure.  Exactly  proportioned  to 
the  belief  in  the  morality  of  God  is  the  felt  strength  of  this  presumption  in  favour 
of  a  diviue  intervention  of  some  kind,  and  the  modern  catechumen  asks  himself  if 
the  Epicurean  deities  themselves  would  not  do  almost  as  well  as  some  moral  God, 
who  yet,  in  the  plenitude  of  His  power,  should  leave  creatures  framed  by  Himself 
to  think  and  to  struggle,  without  the  light,  without  the  aid,  they  so  sorely  need. 
This  is  the  first  observation,  and  the  second  is  that  the  character  of  Jesus  Christ,  if 
attentively  studied,  implies  that  His  life  cannot  be  supposed  to  fall  entirely  within 
the  limits,  or  under  the  laws,  of  what  we  call  "  Nature."  For  if  anything  is  certain 
about  Him,  this  is  certain,  that  He  invited  men  to  love  Him,  to  trust  Him,  to  obey 
Him,  even  to  death  ;  and  in  terms  which  would  be  intolerable  if,  after  all,  He  were 
merely  human.  Had  He  been  crucified  and  then  had  rotted  in  an  undistinguished 
or  in  a  celebrated  grave,  the  human  conscience  would  have  known  what  to  say  of 
Him.  It  would  have  traced  over  His  sepulchre  the  legend,  "Failure."  It  would 
have  forthwith  struck  a  significant  balance  between  the  attractive  elements  of  His 
character,  and  the  utterly  unwarranted  exaggeration  of  His  pretensions.  But  our 
modem  catechiomon's  reflections  should  not  end  here,  for  the  character  of  (Jod,  and 
of  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  Gospels  is,  in  one  respect,  like  the  old  Mosaic  Law,  which 
provokes  a  sense  of  guilt  in  man  by  its  revelation  of  what  righteousness  really  is. 
The  more  we  really  know  about  God  and  His  Son,  the  less  can  we  be  satisfied  with 
ourselves.  It  is  not  possible  for  a  man  whose  moral  sense  is  not  dead,  to  admire 
Jesus  Christ,  as  if  He  were  some  exquisite  creation  of  human  art — a  painting  in  a 
gallery,  or  a  statue  in  a  museum  of  antiquities— and  without  the  thought,  "  What 
do  His  perfections  say  to  me?  "  For  Jesus  Christ  shows  us  what  human  nature 
has  been,  what  it  might  be,  and  in  showing  us  this.  He  reveals  us  as  none  other.  He 
reveals  us  individually  to  ourselves.  Of  His  character,  we  may  say  what  St.  Paul 
says  of  the  law,  that  "  it  is  the  schoolmaster  to  bring  us  to  Himself,"  for  it  makes 
us  profoundly  dissatisfied  with  self — if  anything  can  possibly  do  so — it  forces  us  to 
recognise  the  worthlessness  and  the  poverty  of  our  natural  resources,  it  throws  a 
true,  though  it  may  be  an  unwelcome,  light  upon  the  history  of  our  past  existence, 
and  thus  it  disposes  us  to  listen  anxiously  and  attentively  for  any  fresh  disclosures 
of  the  Divine  mind  that  may  be  still  in  store  for  as,  or  already  within  our  reach. 
And  thus  it  is  that  the  first  principles  which  we  have  been  attributing  to  our 
catechumen  prepare  him  for  the  truths  beyond  these,  that  Divine  goodness,  those 
perfections  of  the  character  of  Christ,  which  bear  the  soul  onwards  and  upwards, 
towards  acceptance  of  Christ's  true  Divinity,  and,  as  a  consequence,  of  the  atoning 
virtue  of  His  death  upon  the  Cross.  These  momentous  realities  rest,  indeed,  on  other 
bases,  but  they  bring  satisfaction,  repose,  and  relief  to  souls  who  have  attentively 
considered  what  is  involved  in  the  truths  which  were  at  first  accepted.  They  pro- 
claim that  God  has  not  left  man  to  Himself,  that  God  does  not  despise  the  work  of 
His  own  hands,  they  unfold  His  heart  of  tenderness  for  man,  they  justify  by  the 
language  which  Jesus  Christ  used  about  Himself  and  about  His  claims,  the  faith 
and  the  obedience  of  mankind,  and  they  enable  us  to  bear  the  revelation  of  personal 
sin  in  which  His  character  makes  within  each  separate  conscience  that  understands 
it,  because  we  now  know  that  "  He  was  made  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin, 
that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him."  But  does  the  advance 
towards  perfection  stop  at  this  point  ?  Surely  not.  Where  so  much  has  been  done, 
there  is  a  presumption  in  favour  of  something  more,  if  more  be  needed.  The 
Divine  Christ  has  died  upon  the  Cross,  the  victim  for  the  sins  of  men.  What  is  He 
doing  now  ?  The  past  has  been  forgiven,  but  has  no  provision  been  made  for  the 
future  t    May  not  recovery  itself  be  almost  a  dubious  boon  if  it  be  followed  by  an 


446  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tl. 

almost  inevitable  relapse  ?  And  thus  it  is  that  the  soul  makes  a  further  stage  in  its 
advance  to  perfection.  The  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  conveying  to  men  the  gift 
of  the  new  humanity  exhibited  by  the  perfect  Christ,  and  this,  mainly  through  the 
Christian  sacraments,  opens  at  this  point  before  the  beUever's  eye.  It  is  by  a 
sequence  as  natural  as  that  from  Christ's  character  to  His  divinity  and  atonement, 
that  we  pass  on  from  His  atonement  to  the  sacramental  aspect  of  His  mediatorial 
work.  The  new  life  which  He  gives  in  baptism,  "As  many  as  have  been  baptized 
into  Christ,  have  put  on  Christ" — the  new  life  which  He  strengthens  in  the 
Eucharist,  "He  that  eateth  Me,  even  he  shall  live  by  Me" — these  great  gifts 
are  but  an  expansion  of  what  is  already  latent  in  the  recognised  perfection  of  His 
human  character ;  and  the  apostolic  ministry,  the  channel  and  the  guarantee  of 
their  reality,  is  not  less  a  part  of  that  perfection  of  truth  to  which  intelligent  faith 
conducts  the  soul.  And  the  Christian  creed  has  not  said  its  last  word  to  the  soul  of 
man  until,  besides  assuring  his  reconciliation  and  peace  with  God,  it  has  satisfied 
his  desire  for  union  with  the  Source  of  Hfe.  Who — let  me  say  it  once  more — who 
does  not  see  that  our  Lord's  human  character  can  only  be  described  as  perfect,  if 
His  right  to  draw  the  attention  of  men  in  terms  which  befit  only  a  superhuman 
person,  be  frankly  conceded  ?  Who  does  not  know  that  the  existence  of  a  moral 
God,  the  Maker  and  Ruler  of  this  universe,  is  more  clearly  and  forcibly  contested 
by  a  large  class  of  influential  writers  than  any  subordinate  or  derived  truths  what- 
ever— that  whatever  may  have  been  the  case  in  the  last  century,  atheism  is  even 
more  earnest  in  rejecting,  in  our  own  day,  the  specific  doctrines  and  the  creed 
which  comes  from  Jesus  Christ?  Surely,  then,  it  is  our  wisdom,  as  Chiistian 
believers,  while  the  day  of  life  lasts,  to  make  the  most,  and  not  the  least,  of  such 
religious  truths  as  we  know.  What  must  not  He,  who  is  their  object,  think — and 
surely  He  is  thinking  on  the  subject  now — what  must  He  not  think  of  those  many 
magnificent  intellects  which  He  has  endowed  so  richly,  unto  which  He  has  granted 
such  opportunities  of  exercise  and  development,  who  yet  know  almost  as  little  about 
Him  as  the  children  in  our  national  schools,  and  who  make  no  effort  to  know  more ; 
but  have  studied,  with  eager  enthusiasm,  all  forma  of  created  life,  all  the  resources 
of  nature,  all  the  intricacies  of  the  laws  of  human  thought,  while  He,  the  Author  of 
all.  He,  who  is  the  Infinite  and  the  Everlasting,  is,  as  it  would  seem,  forgotten.  It 
is  not  much  to  ask  of  a  serious  Christian  to  endeavour  to  make  his  own,  each  day, 
some  little  portion  of  that  knowledge  which  will  one  day  seem  incomparably  more 
precious  than  any  other.  Half  an  hour  a  day  costs  something  in  a  busy  life ;  but  it 
will  not  be  held  to  have  involved  a  very  great  sacrifice  when  hereafter  we  are  face 
to  face  with  the  unchanging  realities,  and  know  in  very  deed  what  is  meant  by 
perfection.     {Canon  Liddon.)  Christian  perfection : — We  have  two  things  here 

alluded  to — progress  and  attainment.  The  progress  is  a  walk,  a  journey,  a  contest. 
The  attainment  is  a  complete  state  of  Christian  character.  This  is  to  be  our  ideal 
at  which  we  are  to  aim.     I.  The  natube  op  the  peefeotion  here  alluded  to. 

1.  The  elements  of  the  Christian  life  are  not  to  absorb  our  attention  and  interest. 
The  alphabet  of  Christianity  is  all  very  beautiful  and  necessary.  If  a  professing 
Christian  were  to  leave  off  at  faith,   he  would  be  but  a  poor  Christian   indeed. 

2.  The  higher  elements  of  Christian  virtue  are  to  be  assiduously  cultivated.  We 
know  that  these  are  not  natural  to  the  human  mind.  Complete  control  over  the 
evil  passion  of  the  heart,  holiness  of  life,  restrained  temper,  perfect  forgiveness, 
perfect  love  to  man  and  God,  are  not  easy  to  be  acquired.  H.  Some  pabticdlabs  op 
THE  steps  to  be  TAKEN  IN  ATTAiNiNo  THIS  CONDITION.  1.  An  iucrcase  of  faith.  2. 
An  accession  of  light.    Without  more  light,  there  is  no  possibility  of  progress. 

3.  An  increase  of  knowledge.  HI.  Now,  to  abhive  at  this  state  of  pbogbession, 
THEEE  must  BE — 1.  An  unwcaricd  practice  of  the  details  of  Divine  truth.  2.  A 
constant  dependence  on  the  Holy  Spirit.  3.  An  unceasing  study  of  the  character 
of  Christ.  4.  Continuous  prayer.  {Preacher's  Analyst.)  On  progress  to  per- 
fection : — Man  is  endowed  with  a  capacity  of  intellectual,  religious,  moral  improve- 
ment ;  and  to  cultivate  knowledge,  piety,  and  virtue  is  the  chief  end  of  his  being. 
In  each  stage  of  the  awful  mysterious  career  of  human  existence  every  Christian 
may  conceive  his  Creator  addressing  him  as  He  did  an  ancient  patriarch,  ' '  I  am  the 
Almighty  God  :  walk  before  Me,  and  be  thou  perfect."  Progress  towards  perfection, 
it  is  next  to  be  noticed,  will  conduce  much  to  our  honour  and  our  happiness. 
Reflect,  Christians,  how  favourable  your  lot  is  to  improvement,  compared  with  that 
of  those  who  lived  in  days  of  pagan  darkness,  or  at  a  period  less  remote.  On  you 
the  glorious  light  of  revelation  shines.  Are  you  desirous  to  exalt  your  views,  to 
elevate  your  affections,  to  ennoble  your  characters?    Respect  and  attend  the  publi< 


HEBREWS.  44H 


institutions  ol  religion,  for  they  are  powerful  means  of  human  improvement. 
Further,  let  us  make  progress  in  virtue.  Flourishing  like  the  palm-tree,  human 
nature,  in  its  oareei  of  intellectual,  religious,  and  moral  improvement,  adorns  the 
terrestrial  globe.  "  Sin  is  a  reproach  to  any  people,  while  righteousness  exalteth  a 
nation."  Christians,  "  let  us  go  on  to  perfection  " ;  for  it  is  highly  conducive  to 
our  delight  as  well  as  to  our  dignity.  Does  not  every  one  feel  himself  happier  as 
he  grows  wiser  and  better  ?  A  passion  for  knowledge  has  added  much  indeed  to  the 
felicity  of  many  a  life  spent  in  security,  far  from  the  bustle  of  the  world,  and  with 
little  solicitude  about  literary  fame.  The  love  of  virtue  is  no  less  productive  of 
happiness.  "  Blessed  are  they  who  do  His  commandments."  Again,  to  prompt 
you  to  rise  by  progressive  steps  to  higher  and  higher  degrees  of  virtue,  think 
frequently  of  those  venerable  men  who  persevered  in  the  paths  of  rectitude,  and 
have  now  received  a  crown  of  hfe.  When  we  recollect  the  graces  of  the  faithful, 
let  us  study  also  to  act  a  consistent  part,  and  give  the  enemies  of  the  gospel  no 
cause  to  remark,  that  though  our  principles  may  be  orthodox,  our  conduct  is  wrong  j 
that  we  glow  with  benevolence  when  nothing  is  to  be  given,  and  are  only  captivated 
with  virtue  when  at  a  distance  from  temptation.  Further,  to  animate  our  progress 
towards  perfection,  let  us  think  of  them  who  are  to  succeed  us  in  the  scene  of  life. 
Will  not  posterity  record  with  delight  those  characters  which  excellence  adorned  ? 
Therefore  let  them  never  see  guilt  like  a  malignant  demon,  sitting  in  triumph  over 
the  ruins  of  their  fathers'  virtues.  As  an  additional  motive  to  comply  with  the 
exhortation  which  the  text  contains,  reflect  that  the  spirits  in  glory  will  mark  your 
progress  with  gladness  and  applause.  "Never  did  refined  Athens  exult  more 
in  diffusing  learning  and  the  liberal  arts  through  a  savage  world,  never  did  generous 
Borne  please  herself  more  with  the  view  of  order  established  by  her  victorious  arms," 
than  the  hosts  of  heaven  will  rejoice  at  the  improvement  of  men.  Finally,  I 
beseech  you  to  make  progress,  for  behold  the  angel  of  death  is  approaching  to  strike 
the  blow  which  shall  terminate  your  days.  (T.  Laurie,  D.D.)  Qo  on  vnto 
perfection: — I.  Form  a  just  notion  of  the  true  Christian  character.  View  it 
as  delineated  by  the  inspired  writers,  and  learn  from  them  what  the  Christian  ought 
to  be.  They  speak  of  Lim  as  the  child  of  God ;  not  only  as  "  born  of  God,"  but  as 
"  bearing  the  image  of  his  heavenly  Father."  But  not  confining  themselves  to  these 
general  representations,  the  inspired  writers  descend  to  enumerate  the  various 
excellences  in  temper  and  conduct,  which  combine  to  form  the  character  of  the 
Christian.  He  is  one  who  has  "laid  aside  all  malice,  and  all  guile,  and  hypocrisies, 
and  envies,  and  all  evil  speakings."  He  has  "  put  on  bowels  of  mercies,  kindness, 
humbleness  of  mind,  meekness,  long-suffering  "  ;  he  is  filled  with  the  fruits  of  the 
Spirit,  which  are  "  love,  joy,  peace,  longsuffering,  gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meek- 
ness, temperance."  U.  Guard  against  losing  any  attainments  you  may  have  already 
MADE.  Sinful  habits  once  laid  aside,  and  again  resumed,  adhere  more  closely  than 
ever,  and  will  baffle  all  ordinary  efforts  to  throw  them  off.  If  you  now  exercise  any 
grace,  or  practise  any  duty  in  which  you  were  formerly  deficient,  let  no  consideration 
tempt  you  to  relinquish  it.  IH.  Take  every  opportunity  to  exercise  the  graces 
AND  virtues  which  YOU  DO  IN  ANT  DEGREE  POSSESS.  Are  you  couscious  of  devout 
and  reverential  feelings  towards  God  ?  Cherish  and  strengthen  these  feelings  by 
habituating  yourselves  to  these  exercises  of  devotion.  In  your  dealings  with  man- 
kind are  you  just  and  honest  T  Do  men  fail  in  what  is  their  duty  towards  you  ? 
If3t  that  be  your  opportunity  of  cultivating  the  meek  and  quiet  spirit,  and  of 
practising  patience  and  gentleness  towards  them.     IV.  Frequently  review  your 

CHARACTER,   AND     EXAMINE    WHAT    PROGRESS   YOU    ARE    MAKING   IN    THE    GRACES    OF    THE 

Christian  life.  1.  For  our  aid  and  direction  in  acquiring  these  graces  we  have 
set  before  us  the  character  of  God,  the  conduct  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  laws  and  pre 
cepts  of  the  gospel.  2.  It  will  be  of  great  use  to  compare  your  character  as  it  now  is 
with  what  you  recollect  it  formerly  to  have  been.  V.  Let  all  your  efforts  after 
moral  improvement  be  made  in  humble  dependence  upon  God,  accompanied 
with  prayer  to  Him,  and  a  conscientious  attendance  on  the  op.dinances  op 
BELiGioN.  These  exercises  tend  in  the  most  direct  manner  to  cherish  the  pious 
and  Divine  affections  of  love,  of  gratitude,  of  faith,  of  hope.  (R.  Boog,  D.D.) 
Perfection  : — We  count  those  things  perfect  which  want  nothing  requisite  for  the 
end  wheretmto  they  were  instituted.  {J.  Hooker.)  The  instinct  of  perfection : — 
We  see  this  in  everything.  We  see  it  in  the  little  pastimes  of  children  playing  m 
the  market-place — practising  their  baby  games,  and  never  resting  till  they  can 
catch  upon  their  battledore  their  fifty  or  their  hundred.  We  see  it  in  the  cricket- 
field  and  on  the  rifle-ground — we  see  it  in  the  hunt  and  at  the  billiard  table :  what 


448  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  rt, 

time,  "what  toil,  what  patience,  what  disappoiatmeut,  is  grudged,  if  at  last  tlieie 
may  be  perfection  ?  We  see  it  in  the  young  scholar's  devotion  to  his  reading,  to 
his  composition.  Some  may  study,  some  may  compete,  for  the  sake  of  the  prize 
or  the  emolument,  for  the  fame  or  the  advancement.  But  we  do  a  great  injustice 
if  we  doubt  that  hundreds  of  the  nobler  youth  of  England  would  toil  equally,  and 
struggle  equally,  for  the  mere  sake  of  knowing  tind  of  being.  What  is  it  which 
makes  the  great  advocate,  the  eloquent  orator,  always  tremble  before  speaking,  and 
oftentimes  lash  himself  afterwards  ?  This,  too,  is  not  all  of  vanity  and  greed  of 
praise ;  this  is  not  all  of  eagerness  to  display  self  and  mortification  if  the  display 
be  unsuccessful ;  much  more  is  it,  in  real  men,  because  there  lives  and  glows  in 
them,  like  a  consuming  fire,  the  ambition  of  perfection — a  perfection  which  they 
never  feel  themselves  to  attain,  just  because  nothing  short  of  perfection  will  satisfy 
them.  So  it  is  with  every  painter,  sculptor,  writer,  poet,  who  has  in  him  that  spark 
of  genius  by  which  art  works  and  thought  breathes.  (C.  J.  Vaughan,  D.D.)  The 
impulse  of  perfection  : — What  else  is  it  which  gives  its  impulse  to  trade,  and  makes 
all  the  difference  in  that  occupation  of  the  million,  between  success  and  failure, 
between  eminence  and  stagnation  ?  The  bad  tradesman — you  may  know  him  by 
it — sees  nothing  insufferable  in  imperfection,  and  thinks  his  customer  unreasonable 
if  he  looks  for  the  absolute.  "  It  will  do,"  is  his  motto:  it  will  do  if  the  colour 
almost  matches,  if  the  dress  nearly  fits,  if  the  dropped  stitch,  if  the  accidental 
flaw,  can  scarcely  be  noticed.  You  know  that  that  workman  cannot  rise,  will 
always  be  outstripped,  must  come  to  want — why  ?  because  he  has  no  instinct  of 

Eerfeetion,  and  therefore  he  lacks  the  first  requisite  of  attainment.  On  the  other 
and,  so  strong  is  this  motive  in  the  body  of  human  life,  that  you  will  find  men 
engaged  in  large  transactions  willing  to  pay  almost  any  price  for  a  scarcely  appre- 
ciable improvement  in  the  screw  of  an  engine  or  the  catch  of  a  machine,  just 
because  it  is  an  approach,  next  to  imperceptible,  towards  a  perfection  which  real 
men  of  business  never  despise,  and  which  therefore  the  ingenious  never  find  unre- 
munerative.  (Ibid.)  Low  aims : — It  is  a  low  and  unworthy  strain  in  some  to 
labour  after  no  more  grace  than  will  keep  life  and  soul  together,  that  is,  hell  and 
soul  asunder.  {J.  Trapp.)  Spiritual  dwarfs : — There  was  once  in  London  a 
club  of  small  men,  whose  qualification  for  membership  lay  in  their  not  exceeding 
five  feet  in  height ;  these  dwarfs  held,  or  pretended  to  hold,  the  opinion  that  they 
were  nearer  the  perfection  of  manhood  than  others,  for  they  argued  that  primeval 
men  had  been  far  more  gigantic  than  the  present  race,  and  consequently  that  the 
way  of  progress  was  to  grow  less  and  less,  and  that  the  human  race  as  it  perfected 
itself  would  become  as  diminutive  as  ftiemselves.  Such  a  club  of  Christians  might 
be  established  in  most  cities,  and  without  any  difficulty  might  attain  to  an  enor- 
mously numerous  membership ;  for  the  notion  is  common  that  our  dwarfish 
Christianity  is,  after  all,  the  standard,  and  may  even  imagine  that  nobler  Chris- 
tians are  enthusiasts,  fanatical  and  hot-blooded,  while  they  themselves  are  cool 
because  they  are  wise,  and  indifferent  because  they  are  intelligent.  (C.  H.  Spur- 
geon.)  Is   perfection    attainable  ? — When  God  tells  us  that  we   are   to  be 

•'  holy,"  "  perfect,"  "  without  blemish,"  we  are  bound  to  believe  that  His 
command  can  be  obeyed,  and  we  ought  not  to  be  satisfied  until  we  make  the 
command  an  actuality.  Could  there  be  a  sadder  hindrance  than  that  teachers 
of  Divine  things  should  lead  men  to  suppose  that  God's  purpose  oaatiDt  be 
accomplished — that  these  words  are  mere  figures  of  speech?  Does  God  enpin 
on  us  what  is  impossible  ?  Convince  a  man  that  anything  is  impossible  and 
he  will  not  attempt  it.  A  strong  swimmer  may  plunge  into  the  Enghsh  Channel 
to  cross  to  France,  but  where  is  the  bravest  swimmer  who  would  plunge  into 
the  Atlantic  to  swim  to  America?  Brave  explorers  do  track  the  Greenland 
snows  to  explore  the  North  Pole,  but  do  we  attempt  to  explore  the  North  Star  ? 
Convince  a  man  that  the  thing  is  possible,  and  sacrifice  will  be  as  meat  to  the 
noble  soul,  but  impossibility  dashes  all  effort  to  the  ground.  (R.  F.  Horton, 
M.A.)  Forward  : — Brave  soldiers  die  with  their  face  to  the  foe.  Looking  back 
never  conquered  a  city,  nor  achieved  a  work  of  art,  nor  wrote  a  book,  nor  amassed 
a  fortune.  The  silent  inward  cry  of  the  world's  great  men  has  ever  been  :  On,  my 
soul,  right  on.  Perfection  gradual : — The  acorn  does  not  become  an  oak  in  a 
day.  The  ripened  scholar  was  not  made  such  by  a  single  lesson.  The  well-trained 
soldier  was  not  a  raw  recruit  yesterday.  It  is  not  one  touch  of  the  artist's  pencil 
that  produces  a  finished  painting.  There  are  always  months  between  seed-time 
and  harvest.  Even  so  the  path  of  the  just  is  Uke  the  shining  light,  which  shineth 
more  and  more  onto  the  perfect  day.    {B.  B.  Nichol.)        Perfection  aids  perfee^ 


CHAP.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  44» 

tion : — We  may  not  only  say,  in  general  terms,  that  there  may  be  a  growth  in  per- 
fection, but  may  assert  farther,  that  the  thing  which  is  most  perfect,  if  it  be 
susceptible  of  growth  at  all,  will  have  the  most  sure  and  rapid  growth.  Which 
grows  most  and  in  the  best  manner — the  flower  which  is  whole  and  perfect  in  its 
incipient  state,  or  that  which  has  a  canker  in  it,  or  is  otherwise  injured  or  defective 
in  some  of  its  parts?  Which  will  grow  the  most  rapidly  and  symmetrically — the 
child  which  is  perfect  in  its  infancy,  or  one  which  is  afflicted  with  some  malforma- 
tion ?  Illustrations  and  facts  of  this  kind  seem  to  make  it  clear  that  the  spiritually 
renovated  state  of  mind,  which  is  variously  called  holiness,  assurance  of  faith, 
perfect  love,  and  sanotiflcation,  may  be  susceptible  of  growth  or  increase.  It  is 
not  only  evident  that  there  is  no  natural  or  physical  impossibility  in  it,  bat,  as  has 
been  intimated,  we  may  go  farther,  and  lay  it  down  as  a  general  truth  that  perfec- 
tion in  the  nature  of  a  thing  is  requisite  to  perfection  in  degree.  And  taccordingly, 
although  it  is  possible  for  a  person  who  is  partially  holy  to  grow  m  holiness,  a  per- 
son who  is  entirely  holy,  altiiough  he  may  be  assailed  by  unfavourable  influences 
outwardly,  will  grow  much  more.  (J.  Vpham.)  Not  laying  again  the  founda- 
tloii  of  repentance  from  dead  works. — Of  the  fundamentals  of  Christianity : — 1. 
The  first,  in  order  of  nature,  is  faith  towards  God.  For  this  must  evidently  be  the 
first  principle  of  all  religion,  the  beginning  and  comer-stone  even  of  the  founda- 
tion itself  (chap.  xi.  6).  This  is  the  first  principle,  not  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ 
only,  but  also  of  the  law  of  Moses,  of  the  institution  of  the  patriarchs,  of  the  pre- 
cepts of  Noah,  of  the  religion  of  nature  itself,  even  among  those  who  never  had  the 
benefit  of  Divine  revelation.  This  truth  is  found  written  in  the  most  legible 
characters,  not  in  the  inspired  Scriptures  only,  but  in  the  writings  of  the  philoso- 
phers, in  the  discourses  of  the  learned,  in  the  consciences  of  the  unlearned,  in  the 
hearts  of  all  reasonable  men,  in  the  instincts  of  animals,  in  the  motions  and  pro- 
portions even  of  the  inanimate  world  itself.  And  is  it  not  a  shame  that  men,  that 
men  endued  with  reason  and  understanding,  who  enjoy  moreover  the  light  of  the 
gospel  revelation,  should  need  to  have  this  foundation  laid  for  them  any  more  ? 
Which  is  the  same  folly  as  if  a  man  should  deny  there  was  any  light  in  the 
world,  while  he  himself  walked  in  the  brightness  of  the  sun  shining  in  his  strength  ; 
or  like  the  fooUsh  philosopher  of  old,  who  pretended  to  dispute  against  the  being 
of  motion,  while  he  himself  was  on  aJl  sides  surrounded  with  its  visible  and  per- 
petual effects.  2.  The  next  principle  in  order  of  nature,  though  first  mentioned 
by  the  apostle  in  the  text,  is  repentance  from  dead  works.  And  this  is  a  natural 
consequence  of  having  faith  towards  God.  For  he  who  believes  in  God  must  con- 
sequently believe  that  obedience  is  necessary  to  be  paid  to  His  commands.  And 
then  they  who  perform  not  that  obedience  must  be  confessed  to  deserve  the  severest 
punishment.  Which  punishment  there  is  no  possible  means  for  the  offender  to 
avoid,  but  by  a  timely  repentance  ;  and  the  only  satisfactory  evidence  of  the  truth 
of  that  repentance  is  a  departure  from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God.  This, 
therefore,  is  the  second  principle  of  rehgion,  or  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ :  a  prin- 
ciple absolutely  necessary  to  be  laid  as  the  foundation  of  all  virtue,  the  lowest 
degree  whereof  is  the  forsaking  of  vice  ;  and  yet  it  is  su«h  a  foundation  as,  if  it 
always  be  laying,  it  is  evident  men  can  never  go  on  to  any  perfection.  It  is  equally 
necessary,  therefore,  that  Christians  should  repent,  and  yet  that  they  should  not 
stand  in  need  of  being  always  repenting.  Always  repenting  ;  not  of  daily  infirmi- 
ties, which  are  unavoidable,  but  of  new  and  great  crimes  continually  repeated.  Of 
repentance  from  these,  I  say,  the  Scripture  never  supposes  a  Christian  to  stand 
frequently  in  need.  3.  The  next  fandamental  principle  of  Christian  rehgion  here 
mentioned  by  the  apostle  is  the  doctrine  of  baptisms  and  of  laying  on  of  hands. 
Bepentance  is  the  indispensable  duty  of  all  sinners,  and  the  original  mercy  of  Goa 
affords  ground  of  hope,  even  to  natural  reason,  that  such  repentance  will  be 
accepted.  Yet  since  hope,  in  the  nature  of  tbe  thing  itself,  differs  necessarily  from 
the  certainty  of  knowledge,  therefore  it  has  pleased  God  to  confirm  this  natural 
hope  by  the  certainty  of  an  express  revelation  in  Christ  that  He  will  accept  the 
repentance  of  sinners.  And  this  assurance  He  has  commanded  to  be  sensibly  con- 
veyed to  us  by  a  very  significant  rite  in  the  sacrament  of  baptism,  which  sacrament 
is  for  that  reason  styled  in  Scripture  the  baptism  of  repentance  for  the  remission 
of  sins.  To  this  the  apostle  adds  as  a  constant  appendage  the  laying  on  of  hands, 
because  by  that  rite  newly  baptized  persons  were  in  the  apostle's  times  endued  with 
the  Holy  Ghost.  4.  The  last  principle  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ  mentioned  here  by 
the  apostle  as  the  foundation  of  all  rehgion  is  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  and 
eternal  judgment.    I  mention  these  two  together  as  but  one,  because  in  the  nature 

2» 


450  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

of  things  they  are  necessarily  connected  with  each  other.  For  the  resurrection  of 
the  dead  is  only  in  order  to  judgment,  and  eternal  judgment  is  a  certain  and  neces- 
sary consequence  of  the  resurrection  from  the  dead.  (S.  Clarke,  D.D.)  Repent- 
ance : — The  grace  of  evangelical  repentance  does  not  break  the  heart  and  leave 
every  bit  of  the  broken  parts  still  stone,  but  it  melts  the  heart  and  changes  every 
principle  of  it.  If  you  break  a  flint  stone  every  portion  of  the  stone  is  still  flint, 
but  if  you  melt  it  in  the  fire  every  particle  of  it  becomes  changed.  So  it  is  with 
the  heart  of  man  :  the  Lord  does  not  break  it,  but  by  the  fire  of  Divine  love  He 
gloriously  changes  the  heart,  and  it  becomes  entirely  new.  (Rowland  Hill. )  Re- 
pentance : — Repentance  is  neither  base  nor  bitter.  It  is  good  rising  up  out  of  evil. 
It  is  the  resurrection  of  your  thoughts  out  of  graves  of  lust.  Eepentance  is  the 
turning  of  the  soul  from  the  way  of  midnight  to  the  point  of  the  coming  sun. 
Darkness  drops  from  the  face,  and  silver  light  dawns  upon  it.  Do  not  live,  day  by 
day,  trying  to  repent,  but  fearing  the  struggle  and  the  suffering.  Manly  regret  for 
wrong  never  weakens,  but  always  strengthens  the  heart.  As  some  plants  of  the 
bitterest  root  have  the  whitest  and  sweetest  blossoms,  so  the  bitterest  wrong  has 
the  sweetest  repentance,  which,  indeed,  is  only  the  soul  blossoming  back  to  its 
better  nature.  (H,  W.  Beecher.)  Dead  works : — When  anything  is  separated 
from  its  source  there  must  be  death.  Separate  the  stream  from  its  fountain  and 
there  is  death.  Separate  the  branch  from  the  tree  and  there  is  death.  Separate 
the  body  from  the  soul  and  there  is  death.  Separate  the  soul  from  God  and  there 
is  death.  There  may  be  natural  life,  but  there  is  spiritual  death.  The  intellect 
lives,  the  will  lives,  the  heart  lives,  the  conscience  Uves,  the  instrumental  faculties 
of  action  are  all  alive,  but  all  the  works  to  the  production  of  which  they  combine, 
not  being  instinct  with  the  love  of  God,  are  dead  works.  (C  Stanford,  D.D.) 
The  doctrine  of  baptisms. — The  doctrine  of  baptisms  : — If  the  sons  of  Aaron,  before 
they  were  invested  with  the  priestly  garments,  or  entered  upon  the  functions  of 
their  sacred  office,  plunged  in  ceremonial  waters  ;  if  the  proselyte  from  heathenism, 
before  he  took  his  station  amongst  the  Temple  worshippers,  or  was  naturalised 
amongst  the  holy  tribes,  always  did  the  same  ;  if  the  Israelite  who  had  contracted 
legal  impurity  from  the  stroke  of  leprosy,  the  touch  of  death,  or  from  contact  with 
any  other  unhallowed  thing,  always  did  the  same  ;  if  on  the  occasion  for  the  perfor- 
mance of  those  ceremonies  which  sealed  the  recovered  leper's  right  to  be  received  into 
society  again,  the  priest  dipped  the  mystic  dove  in  water,  then  flung  it  up  into  the 
air  to  soar  away  on  glistening  wing  to  the  rocky  covert  or  the  shady  grove,  symbol  of 
the  ransomed  spirit  in  its  flight  to  heaven  ;  if  these  and  other  baptisms  were  admin- 
istered under  the  Mosaic  economy,  all  these  baptisms  held  a  doctrine,  and  the  first 
part  of  the  doctrine  they  taught  was,  that  our  nature,  and  the  whole  of  our  nature, 
needs  cleansing  to  fit  it  for  the  presence  of  God.  (Ibid.)  Mercy  in  cleansing  : — 
"The  doctrine  of  baptisms,"  however,  was  not  merely  that  maji  is  vile,  but  that  God 
is  merciful.  Those  baptisms  told  not  only  of  sin,  but  of  a  fountain  opened  for  sin, 
and  we  know  where  that  precious  fountain  flows.  It  was  opened  on  Calvary,  and 
from  that  hour  to  the  present,  baptism  there — the  baptism  of  the  soul — has  been 
the  only  essential  baptism,  the  only  act  by  which,  through  the  eternal  Spirit,  the 
penalties  of  sin  are  all  remitted,  and  all  its  pollutions  finally  cleansed  away. 
(Ibid.)  Laying   on   of  hands. — Confirmation: — Here  you  see  we  have  some 

truth  or  other — some  first  principle  or  other — respecting  the  "  laying  on  of  hands," 
following  close  upon  some  "  doctrine  of  baptisms."  Now  the  only  laying  on  of  hands 
that  we  read  of  in  the  rest  of  the  New  Testament  is  that  which  took  place  in  the  in- 
stances of  the  Samaritans  and  of  the  twelve  upon  wlsom  St.  Paul  laid  his  hands, 
except  the  laying  on  of  hands  when  ministers  are  ordained  to  their  office.  Now  I 
do  not  think  that  this  latter  is  only  alluded  to  here,  and  for  this  reason  :  the  writer 
of  my  text  is  evidently  speaking  of  six  matters  or  principles,  or  foundations,  as  he 
calls  them,  which  concern  all  men  equally,  so  that  all  men  who  profess  Christ's 
doctrines  should  realise  their  importance,  and  be  grounded  in  all  needful  truth 
respecting  them.  All  men  are  to  repent — all  to  believe  in  God — all  to  be  baptized 
— aU  will  rise  again — all  will  be  judged.  Now,  associated  with  these  five  other 
first  principles,  which  all  men  undeniably  have  to  realise,  we  have  this  "  laying  on 
of  hands."  It  seems  to  me,  then,  that  it  must  allude  primarily  to  (or  at  least  that 
it  caimot  exclude)  that  laying  on  of  hands  by  the  chief  ministers  of  the  Church,  of 
which,  in  those  early  times,  all  the  baptized  partook.  We  now  come  to  consider 
the  question,  Was  it  discontinued  after  the  apostles'  time  ?  So  far  from  this,  we 
have  the  testimony  of  two  very  early  writers  of  the  Christian  Church — one  living 
About  200  years  after  Christ,  the  other  about  260 — ^that  each  baptized  person  living 


CHAP,  vl]  HEBREWS.  461 

in  their  time  was  confirmed.  The  first  of  these,  TertuUian,  after  describing  the 
ceremonies  in  use  at  baptism,  goes  on  to  say,  "  Next  to  this  the  hand  is  laid  upon 
us,  calling  upon  and  inviting  the  Holy  Spirit  through  the  blessing."  Cyprian, 
about  fifty  years  after  a  martyr  for  the  truth  of  Christ's  gospel,  bears  similar  testi- 
mony to  the  practice  throughout  the  Church  in  his  day.  These  are  his  words : 
"  Which  custom  has  also  descended  to  us,  that  they  who  are  baptized  may  be 
brought  by  the  rulers  of  the  Church,  and  by  our  prayer,  and  by  the  laying  on  of 
hands,  may  obtain  the  Holj  Ghost,  and  be  consummated  with  the  Lord's  signa- 
ture." It  is  quite  clear,  from  the  testimony  of  these  writers,  that  in  their  days 
every  baptized  Christian  had  the  hands  of  the  chief  pastor  laid  upon  him,  as  a  sort 
of  supplement  to  his  baptism,  and  as  a  means  whereby  he  might  receive  a  further 
gift  of  God's  Spirit.  It  has,  however,  been  sometimes  said  that  we  cannot  argue 
from  the  example  of  the  apostles  in  favour  of  confirmation  at  the  hands  of  our  pre- 
sent bishops,  because,  when  the  apostles  laid  their  hands  on  the  early  converts,  the 
miraculous  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  were  given ;  and  we  now  lead  those  who  come 
in  prayer  and  faith  to  expect  only  those  ordinary  gifts  of  God's  grace  whereby  they 
may  be  strengthened  to  maintain  the  conflict  common  to  all  sincere  followers  ol 
Christ.  This  reasoning  appears  to  me  both  shallow  and  faithless.  The  Spirit 
which  God  gives  is  one,  though  the  manifestatious  of  His  power  are  various.  In 
order  that  the  heathen  might  know  assuredly  that  the  doctrine  of  the  despised  and 
persecuted  sect  of  the  Christians  was  from  God,  the  early  followers  of  Jesus  were 
empowered  to  work  miracles,  and  to  speak  with  other  tongues  ;  but  when  the  need 
for  the  exercise  of  such  gifts  was  over,  the  gifts  were  withdrawn.  God  intended 
His  Church  to  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight ;  and  if  He  had  kept  np  the  miraculous 
gifts  as  they  were  in  the  first  ages,  it  would  have  walked  by  sight.  But,  though 
God  withdrew  certain  manifestations  of  the  Spirit's  presence.  He  did  not  withdraw 
the  Spirit  Himself.  And  the  rite  of  laying  on  of  hands  was  to  give  the  Spirit,  who 
would  manifest  Himself,  according  to  His  own  will  and  wisdom,  in  the  person  who 
received  Him.  Here,  then,  was  a  rite  ordained  for  the  communication  of  the 
Spirit,  who  would  manifest  His  presence  according  to  the  needs  of  the  individual 
who  received  Him,  and  of  the  Church  of  which  that  individual  was  a  member. 
Because,  then,  we  do  not  expect  in  confirmation  all  His  gifts,  are  we  not,  therefore, 
to  expect  gifts  or  manifestations  suitable  for  us  and  our  times  ?  If  we  really,  and 
without  reserve  or  equivocation,  accept  the  Bible  as  our  guide  ;  and  if  we  believe, 
as  we  must,  that  the  greatest  gift  that  God  can  now  bestow  upon  us  is  that  of  His 
Spirit ;  then  we  must  necessarily  seek  that  Spirit  in  every  way  in  which  God  gives 
us  reason  to  think  that  He  is  communicated.  The  needs  of  our  nature — our  fallen, 
and  weak,  and  corrupt  nature— should  make  us  eagerly  embrace  the  use  of  any 
means,  however  inadequate  they  may  outwardly  appear.  And  then,  too,  we  may 
be  morally  certain,  that  if  the  Holy  Spirit  had  intended  that  after  the  apostles  were 
removed  by  death  this  rite  should  be  discontinued,  He  would  have  strictly  enjoined 
npon  the  Church  its  discontinuance.  You  honour  God  in  this  ordinance  when  you 
believe  that  He  has  ordained  it  as  a  means  in  which  to  bless  you  ;  and  v>hen  you 
believe  that  He  has  not  deserted  His  Church,  but  that  He  is  as  effectually  present 
with  the  Church  now  as  He  was  with  the  Church  in  the  apostles'  time ;  so  that 
such  a  rite  as  this  is  as  profitable  to  the  prayerful  and  believing  soul  now  as  in  the 
times  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  John.  If  God's  Word  is  true,  then  you  have  a  life-long 
fight  before  you — a  fight  with  the  world  and  its  allurements,  and  the  flesh  and  its 
craving  lusts,  and  the  devil  with  his  spiritual  temptations  to  unbehef  in  God'a 
mercy  upon  the  one  hand,  or  else  to  presumption  upon  God's  mercy,  that  Christ 
will  save  you  in  your  sins,  on  the  other.  To  maintain  your  conflict  with  such 
adversaries  you  will  require  all  God's  grace  and  strength.  Add  to  your  other  daily 
prayers,  then,  some  hearty  and  distinct  petition  that  in  the  approaching  Folemn 
rite  you  may  receive  a  particular  strength  suited  to  your  need.  (M.  F.  Sadler, 
M.A.)  Laying  on  of  hands  : — It  was  prescribed  in  the  old  Hebrew  service-book 
that  when  a  person  brought  his  sacrifice  to  the  altar,  he  should  lay  his  hand  upon 
its  head,  and  lean  upon  it  with  all  his  weight.  While  thus  standing,  with  his  hand 
laid  upon  the  victim,  and  his  face  dhected  to  the  Temple,  he  repeated  this  formula : 
"  0  Lord,  I  have  sinned,  I  have  done  perversely ;  I  have  done  thus  and  thus " 
(here  naming,  either  mentally  or  audibly,  the  specific  sins  of  which  he  had  recently 
been  guilty,  and  for  which  he  now  sought  pardon),  "  I  have  done  thus,  and  thus, 
but  I  return  by  repentance  to  Thee,  and  let  this  be  my  expiation."  If  several  per- 
sons united  in  one  presentation,  each  one  in  succession  placed  his  hand  upon  the 
victim,  and  in  turn  offered  this  prayer.     On  the  great  day  of  atonement  the  high 


452  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

priest  did  the  same  thing  in  the  name  of  all  the  people  whom  he  officially  repre- 
sented. He  placed  both  his  hands  upon  the  various  victims  that  were  to  be  offered 
in  sacrifice,  and  more  especially  upon  the  "  Azazel,"  the  mystical  goat,  which,  as 
if  bearing  the  sins  which  had  been  confessed  over  it,  was  then  led  away  from  the 
crowd  of  watchers,  past  the  last  dwelling,  past  the  last  tree,  until  both  goat  and 
leader  disappeared  in  tbe  glow  of  the  great  white  wilderness,  that  lay  like  the  land 
of  the  curse  beyond.  This  laying  on  of  hands  was  not  a  mere  ceremony,  but  a 
sermon.  It  conveyed  a  doctrine,  and  the  doctrine  was  that  he  who  would  be  saved 
must,  by  his  own  personal  act  and  deed,  appropriate  the  work  of  Him  who  is  our 
Saviour  by  being  our  Substitute.     (C.  Stanford,  D.D.) 

Vers.  4^6.  The  powers  of  the  world  to  come. — The  powers  of  the  world  to  come : — 
That  is  to  say,  belonging  to,  and  operating  from,  that  world  which,  as  to  us,  is  "  to 
come,"  though  now  existing.  And  by  "  powers,"  we  easily  understand  forces, 
energies,  agencies,  influences,  virtues,  and  these  in  action  upon  their  proper 
subjects.  Now,  we  are  subjects  to  be  acted  upon.  Our  nature  has  almost  its  whole 
exercise,  we  might  almost  say  the  verification  of  its  existence — in  being  acted  upon, 
by  influences  and  impressions,  from  things  extraneous  to  it.  "  The  powers  of  the 
world  to  come."  There  is  one  pure,  salutary,  beneficent  order  of  influences, 
tending  to  work  the  absolute,  supreme,  eternal  good  of  our  nature.  But  it  con- 
founds the  mind  to  reflect  what  proportion  this  class  of  influences  bears  to  others, 
in  the  actual  operation  on  mankind.  This  world,  too,  has  "  powers, "  which  it 
exerts,  we  do  not  say  in  rivalry  with  the  "  powers  "  of  the  other,  but  with  a  fearful 
preponderance  of  efficacy.  Is  it  not  as  evident  to  our  view  as  the  very  face  and 
colour  of  the  earth,  that  incomparably  a  greater  proportion  of  human  spirit  and 
character  is  conformed  to  this  world  than  to  the  other?  That  "world  to  come" 
comprehends  the  sum,  the  perfection  of  everything,  the  subUmest,  the  best,  the 
happiest.  But  what  is  it  all  to  me  ?  I  feel  no  congeniality  nor  attraction.  But 
is  not  this  a  lamentable  and  fearful  state  for  the  soul  to  be  in  ?  But  what  is  to  be 
done?  What  but  to  implore  that  "the  powers  of  the  world  to  come"  may  be 
brought  upon  us  with  irresistible  force?  and  that  we  should  make  earnest  efforts, 
if  we  may  express  it  so,  to  place  ourselves  exposed  to  them  ?  This  is  to  be  done  in 
the  way  of  directing  the  serious  attention  of  the  mind  to  that  world.  Let  us  fairly 
make  the  trial — what  agency,  what  influences,  that  world  can  convey  upon  us.  The 
proof  of  its  influential  power  has  been  displayed  on  very  many,  in  effects  the  most 
salutary  and  noble.  One  of  these  effects  is,  that  it  causes  the  unseen  to  pre- 
dominate in  our  minds  over  what  is  seen  ;  the  future  over  the  present ;  and  these 
are  great  and  admirable  effects.  From  that  world  come  the  influences  to  fix  and 
keep  us  in  one  great  sovereign  purpose  of  life,  and  that  a  purpose  high  above  all 
the  mere  interests  of  this  world.  Fiom  that  world  comes  the  enlightening  and 
active  principle  which  at  once  exposes  the  nature  of  sin,  and  renders  and 
keeps  it  odious  to  the  soul.  From  that  world  comes  the  supporting,  animating 
power  for  endurance  of  the  ills  of  life,  and  for  overcoming  the  fear  of  death.  They 
are  "  powers  "of  influence  which  all  the  best  beings  cou spire  to  send.  For  even 
the  departed  saints  are  placed,  as  it  were,  in  combination  with  God,  the  Mediator, 
and  the  angels,  in  sending  a  beneficent  influence  on  us  below — by  their  memory — 
by  their  examples — by  their  being  displayed  to  our  faith  as  in  a  blissful  state 
above — and  (we  may  believe)  by  their  kind  regard  and  wishes  for  those  below. 
And  good  and  wise  men  have  thought  it  not  irrational  to  suppose  that  they  may 
sometimes  even  be  employed  in  real,  actual  ministries  here  on  earth.  These 
"  powers  "  of  the  other  world  we  are  regarding  chiefly  under  the  character  of 
influences,  proceeding  at  the  will  of  God,  and  conceived  as  exclusive  of  personal 
agency.  But  far  oftener  than  we  suspect  there  may  be  the  interventions,  though 
invisible,  of  such  an  agency.  All  these  "  powers,"  these  forces  of  influence,  are 
sent,  through  the  medium,  and  in  virtue  of  the  work,  of  the  Mediator,  and  bear  in 
them  a  peculiar  character  derived  from  Him.  (J.  Foster.)  The  powers  of  the 
world  to  come : — One  of  the  popular  names  for  Messiah  among  the  Jews  was,  "  The 
coming  one."  "  He  that  should  come  "  we  have  rendered  it  in  our  version.  In 
like  manner,  the  entire  order  of  things,  here  and  hereafter,  which  the  Messiah  was 
to  introduce,  they  called  "The  world  to  come."  "The  powers  of  the  world  to 
come  "  were  the  Divine  energies,  truths,  and  influences  brought  into  operation  by 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I.  Sinlessness  is  one  of  "  the  poweks  op  the  world  to 
COME."  None  of  the  woe  of  evil  is  there.  Above,  purity  is  unimpeded  and  its  joy 
suffers  no  eclipse.     U.  An  unsttffebino  Am>  deathless  future  is  oke  of  "  th9 


CHAP.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  46a 

POWERS  OF  THE  WORLD  TO  COMB."  Bcfore  we  TOach  that  world,  the  burdens  of  thia 
will  have  been  laid  down.  There  activity  will  no  more  fatigue.  None  shall  sit 
down  and  brood  over  anxious  thought  and  wearing  toil  which  have  left  only 
failure  and  wreck  behind.  III.  Eternits  is  one  of  "  the  powers  of  the  world  to 
COME."  1.  Eternity  is  the  name  for  all  that  is  great.  Eternity  is  the  realm  of  all 
things  vast  and  wonderful.  So,  whatever  a  godly  man  does  for  eternity,  must  be 
great.  Whatever  in  the  Christian  life  pertains  to  eternity,  partakes  of  its  grandeur 
and  sublimity.  The  Son  of  God  filled  earthly  duties  with  heavenly  motives,  and 
linked  the  fleeting  moment  and  the  transitory  deed  to  the  grandeur  of  eternity. 
2.  But  to  the  eternal  world,  as  well,  we  ascribe  stability.  It  is  the  realm  where  all 
things  abide.  No  abandoned  palaces  are  there,  no  prostrate  temples.  No  flower 
weeps  upon  a  grave,  no  verdure  fringes  the  rents  of  gaping  tombs.  3.  Eternity  is 
not  only  inseparable  from  greatness  and  stability,  but  it  is  the  theatre  of  progress. 
There  souls  ever  grow.  Intellect,  heart,  character,  knowledge,  love,  power,  never 
halt.  IV.  God  is  the  great  "  power  of  the  world  to  comb."  What  has  been  the 
most  ardent  aspiration  of  the  righteous  in  every  age?  Has  it  not  always  been,  to 
Bee  God  ?  to  stand  in  His  presence  J  to  reaJise  His  contact  with  the  soul  ? 
Lessons : — 1.  You  must  have  strong  faith  in  "  the  world  to  come,"  if  its  realities  are 
to  be  "powers"  to  your  souls.  It  is  not  an  easy  attainment.  It  demands 
industrious  culture.  2.  One  great  end  of  the  life,  sufferings,  resurrection,  and 
ascension  of  our  blessed  Lord,  was  to  make  the  verities  of  "  the  world  to  come  " 
•'  powers  "  to  the  mind  and  conduct  of  men.  All  the  tender  memories  of  Gethsemane 
and  Calvary  centre  in  His  risen  and  living  person,  to  allure  the  affections  and  upUft 
the  aspirations  of  the  holy  to  the  skies.  3.  Oh,  ye  who  are  heated  in  the  chase  for 
riches  and  honour,  worldly  fame  and  earthly  enjoyment,  walk  out  to  the  hallowed 
lights  of  eternity,  as  men  at  eventide  cool  their  feverish  pulses  beneath  the  heavens 
when  the  hot  sun  has  gone  down  and  the  stars  shine  forth.  Act  with  an  awakened 
consciousness  of  your  immortality,  live  for  eternity,  realise  the  everlasting  years 
which  stretch  beiore  you.  Among  the  ruins  of  Petra  there  are  temples  and 
mansions  excavated  in  the  faces  of  the  rocks.  Some,  massive  in  their  proportions 
and  elaborate  in  embellishment,  are  unfinished.  What  an  exquisite  perfection  the 
artificer  would  have  given  to  his  work,  if  informed  beforehand  that  the  monuments 
of  his  skill  would  survive  all  these  long  centuries,  and  be  numbered  among  the 
wonders  of  the  world  I  Christian  men  and  women,  let  your  souls  be  aglow  with 
the  inspiration  and  ardour  of  working  for  eternity,  and,  when  toil  is  over  and  the 
hour  of  rest  shall  come,  going  home  to  meet  the  approbation  of  your  God. 
{H.  Batchelor,  B.A.)  The  influence  of  futurity  : — There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the 
apostle  here  marks  out  as  a  possible  thing,  the  making  great  apparent  progress  in 
religion,  and  then  of  so  offending,  as  to  be  finally  excluded  from  the  mercies  of  the 
gospel.  The  pai-ties,  of  whom  the  apostle  speaks,  are  such  you  see  as  have  "  tasted 
the  good  Word  of  God,  and  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come."  There  is  no  difficulty 
as  to  the  meaning  of  "  Tasting  the  good  Word  of  God."  You  all  understand  the 
words  to  denote  an  appreciation  of  the  beauty  and  excellence  of  the  gospel,  and, 
therefore,  the  feeling  its  suitableness,  and  receiving  it  with  delight  in  the  soul.  We 
are  very  much  struck  with  this  expression,  and  greatly  wish  to  make  you  conscious 
of  its  energy.  We  desire,  if  it  be  possible,  that  you  should  all  understand  how  the 
invisible  world  comes  out,  as  it  were,  from  its  impenetrable  secrecy,  and  operates 
on  those  who  feel  themselves  strangers  upon  the  earth  ;  and  we  desire  yet  further, 
that  every  one  of  you  should  learn  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  anticipating  the 
future  ;  ay,  and  that  there  may  be  experienced  on  this  side  of  the  grave  so  much  of 
the  wretchedness,  as  well  as  of  the  gladness,  which  shall  enter  into  everlasting 
portions,  as  justifies  the  assertion  that  the  powers  of  eternity  are  already  brought  to 
bear  on  mankind.  Take  two  cases — consider,  in  the  first  place,  how  the  powers  of 
the  world  to  come  are  tasted  by  a  man  in  the  season  of  conversion ;  in  the  second 
place,  how  they  may  be  tasted  in  the  continued  experience  whether  of  the  godly  or 
of  the  wicked.  It  is  surprisiagly  strange,  and  would  be  wholly  inexplicable  if  we 
did  not  know  how  man's  powers  were  disordered  by  the  fall,  that  beings  who  have  a 
thorough  persuasion  of  their  deathhness,  can  go  on,  day  after  day,  and  year  after 
year,  as  though  certain  that  the  soul  would  die  with  the  body.  This  is,  perhaps, 
the  strongest  of  all  demonstrations,  that  our  powers  have  been  shattered  and 
perverted  through  some  great  moral  catastrophe ;  for  in  this  it  is  that  man  offers  a 
direct  insult  to  himself  as  a  rational  being,  acting  with  a  fatuity  and  short-sighted- 
ness that  ooold  only  have  been  expected  from  the  inferior  creation.  And  hence  the 
chief  matter,  in  working  upon  men  as  the  recipients  of  moral  impressions,  is  to 


454  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vx 

rouse  them  to  the  feeling  themselves  immortal.  The  world  which  now  is,  exerts 
incessant  power  over  all  of  us  :  persuading  us,  by  the  objects  which  it  presents,  and 
the  duties  which  it  imposes,  to  give  our  toil  and  our  industry  to  certain  pursuits  and 
occupations.  And  the  world  which  is  to  come  will  exert  the  very  same  kind  of 
power  if  it  can  only  gain  our  belief  and  attention,  so  that  it  may  set  forth  its  objects 
with  the  duties  which  their  attainment  demands.  The  man,  therefore,  who  is  in 
earnest  as  to  the  saving  of  the  soul,  is  not  a  man  within  whom  has  been  implanted 
a  new  principle  of  action ;  he  is  rather  one  in  whom  a  principle  of  action,  vigorous 
from  the  first,  but  contracted  in  its  range,  has  received  a  fresh  direction,  so  that  in 
place  of  limiting  itself  to  the  brief  stage  of  human  existence,  it  expatiates  over  the 
whole,  providing  for  the  distant  as  well  as  for  the  near.  Here,  then,  it  is  that  you  have 
the  general  case  of  the  putting  forth  of  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come.  You  observe 
one  man,  and  you  perceive  that  he  is  giving  his  whole  energy  to  the  things  of  time 
and  sense ;  you  observe  another  man,  and  you  perceive  that,  though  not  neglectful 
of  providing  for  the  present,  his  main  labour  is  employed  on  securing  his  welfare  in 
an  invisible  but  everlasting  state.  The  difference  between  these  men  is,  therefore, 
the  one  has  received  his  impulse  from  the  world  which  is ;  the  other,  from  the 
world  which  is  to  come.  The  one  has  submitted  himself  to  no  powers  but  those 
\7ielded  by  things  which  are  seen  and  temporal,  whereas  the  other  is  obedient  to  the 
powers  put  forth  by  the  things  that  are  unseen  and  eternal ;  the  one  has  no 
consciousness  of  belonging  to  more  than  one  world;  the  other  is  practically 
persuaded  that  he  is  a  citizen  of  two  worlds.  Ay,  there  hath  risen  before  the  man 
who  is  gatbering  eternity  within  range  of  his  anxieties,  the  image  of  himself  as 
inextinguishable  by  death ;  but  thrown  without  a  shred  and  without  a  hope  on  scenes 
whence  he  cannot  escape,  and  for  which  he  cannot  then  provide,  and  this  has  roused 
him.  But  the  force  of  this  expression,  "  tasting  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come," 
will  be  far  more  apparent  if  you  consider  the  men  as  acted  on  by  the  communica- 
tions of  the  gospel.  We  are  sure  of  any  one  of  you  who  has  been  translated  out  of 
darkness  into  marvellous  light,  that  he  must  have  had  at  times  a  sense  of  God's 
wrath,  and  of  the  condemnation  beneath  which  the  human  race  lies,  such  as  has 
almost  overwhelmed  him,  and  made  him  feel  as  though  the  future  were  upon  him 
in  its  terrors.  He  has  risen  as  though  the  avenger  of  blood  were  just  crossing  his 
threshold,  he  has  not  tarried,  he  has  not  turned  either  to  the  right  band  or  to  the 
left,  but  has  gone  straightway  to  the  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  and  cried 
for  mercy  passionately,  as  a  condemned  criminal  would  plead  for  his  life.  And 
whence  this  energy  ?  Why,  when  every  other  beneath  the  same  roof,  or  in  the 
same  neighbourhood,  is  utterly  indifferent,  moved  vdth  no  anxiety  as  to  death  and 
judgment — why  has  this  solitary  individual  who  has  no  greater  stake  than  all  his 
fellows  in  futurity,  started  up  with  irresistible  vehemence  of  purpose,  and  given 
himself  no  rest  till  he  has  sought  and  found  acceptance  with  God  ?  We  reply  at 
once,  that  he  has  been  made  to  "  taste  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come."  The 
world  which  now  is  arraying  before  him  its  fascinations  ;  the  world  which  is  to 
come  arraying  before  him  its  punishments.  The  one  put  forth  its  influence  in  the 
objects  of  sense  ;  the  other  put  forth  its  influence  through  the  objects  of  faith.  The 
one  solicited  him  by  the  wealth  and  the  revel ;  but  the  other  threatened  him  with 
the  fire  and  the  shame.  The  one  used  its  power  of  ministering  to  carnal  passions ; 
the  other  asserted  its  power  of  making  those  passions  our  tormentors ;  and  the 
future  has  carried  it  over  the  present.  Nor  is  this  all.  We  should  convey  a  most 
erroneous  impression  in  regard  to  the  process  of  conversion,  if  we  represented  it  as 
carried  on  exclusively  through  a  terrifying  instrumentality.  If  one  man  is  driven, 
so  to  speak,  to  God,  another  may  be  drawn  ;  the  promises  of  the  gospel  being  more 
prominently  employed  than  the  threatenings.  For  we  may  rather  say,  in  the 
majority  of  cases,  and  perhaps  in  all,  conversion  is  brought  about  through  a 
combination  of  agency ;  the  coming  wrath  being  used  to  produce  fear  and 
repentance,  and  the  provided  mercy  to  allay  anxiety,  encourage  hope,  and  confirm 
in  holiness.  We  carmot  imagine  a  converted  man  who  has  never  dreaded  the 
being  lost ;  neither  can  we  imagine  one  who  has  never  exulted  in  the  prospect  of 
heaven.  And  though  fear  or  joy  may  predominate  according  to  circumstances, 
which  we  need  not  attempt  to  define,  we  may  venture  to  speak  of  conversion  as  a 
process  through  which  man  is  alike  made  to  feel  that  he  is  a  fallen  creature  doomed 
to  destruction,  and  a  redeemed  creature  admissible  into  glory.  He  is  as  much  acted 
on  by  promises  as  by  threatenings ;  he  does  not  take  half  the  Bible,  but  places 
as  much  faith  in  declarations  which  speak  of  honour  and  peace  and  triumph  made 
accessible  to  man,  as  in  others  which  set  forth  the  fact,  "  that  the  wicked  shall  be 


CHAP.  VI.]  HEBBEWS.  455 

turned  into  hell,  and  all  the  p«)ple  that  forget  God."  And  ia  it  not  then  certain 
that  the  world  to  come  brings  to  bear  upon  him  its  instruments  of  happiness  as  well 
as  its  instruments  of  vengeance — that  the  future  in  struggling  into  the  present,  ia 
equally  energetic  and  equally  influential,  if  regarded  as  the  scene  in  which  the  good 
shall  be  rewarded,  or  considered  as  charged  with  the  overthrow  of  the  reprobate  ? 
And  if  therefore  you  can  say  of  the  converted  individual,  surveying  him  merely  as 
one  who  is  moved  by  great  and  impending  destruction,  that  he  manifests  the 
having  imbibed  the  influences  of  another  state  of  being,  will  you  not  make  a  like 
statement  when  you  regard  him  as  animated  by  the  hope  of  pleasures  stored  up  at 
the  rig>it  hand  of  God  ?  And  what  is  this,  inasmuch  as  in  the  invisible  world  are 
the  magazines  of  Divine  retribution,  so  that  the  powers  with  which  it  is  replete, 
ar.'  those  of  exacting  the  penalty  of  crime,  and  rewarding  the  efforts  of  obedience  ? 
what,  I  ask  you,  is  this  but  saying  of  an  individual — "  He  hath  tasted  the  powers  of 
the  world  to  come  "  ?  And  now  let  us  consider  how  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come 
may  be  tasted  in.  the  continued  experience,  whether  of  the  godly  or  of  the  wicked. 
For  we  may  be  persuaded,  that  through  not  endeavouring  to  bring  the  future  into 
close  connection  with  the  present,  or  rather  through  not  regarding  the  future  as  in 
every  sense  the  coaiiuuation  of  the  present,  men  strip  the  realities  of  another  state 
of  much  of  that  influence  which  theymust  otherwise  have.  We  put  it  to  yourselves 
to  decide,  whether  you  are  not  accustomed  to  place,  as  it  were,  a  great  gulf 
between  the  two  states  of  being,  to  regard  the  invisible  as  having  few  or  no 
points  in  common  with  the  visible?  When  heaven  is  mentioned,  there  ia 
oiiiinarily  altogether  an  indefiniteness  in  your  apprehension  of  its  delights; 
and  when  hell  is  mentioned,  there  is  the  like  indefijiiteness  in  your  apprehension 
of  its  torments.  You  consider,  in  short,  that  little  or  nothing  can  be  ascertained  in 
regard  to  the  nature  of  future  joy  and  misery  ;  they  differ  so  widely  from  what  now 
bear  the  names,  that  they  must  be  felt  before  they  can  be  understood.  But  we  hold 
it  of  great  importance  that  men  should  be  reminded  that  whatever  the  changes 
effected  by  death  and  the  resurrection,  they  will  be  identically  the  same  beings,  with 
the  same  organs,  the  same  capacities,  the  same  in  nature,  though,  we  doubt  not, 
marvellously  quickened  and  mightily  enlarged.  And  if  the  grave  shall  give  us  up, 
the  same,  except  in  the  degree  in  which  we  can  admiu  either  happiness  or  misery, 
it  is  quite  evident  that  both  heaven  and  hell  may  begin  on  this  side  eternity.  There 
may  be  the  commencement,  however  vastly  we  come  short  of  the  consummation. 
It  is  in  thorough  consistency  with  this  view  that  the  apostle  speaks  of  men  "  tasting 
the  powers  of  the  world  to  come."  It  is  not  necessary  that  they  should  die,  and 
actually  enter  another  world,  before  they  can  know  anything  of  the  powers  of  that 
world.  In  their  sojourning  upon  earth  ere  there  hath  passed  on  them  aught  of  that 
mysterious  change  through  which  the  corruptible  shall  put  on  iucorruption,  they 
may  have  acquired  a  degree  of  acquaintance  with  those  powers — the  power  of 
making  happy,  the  power  of  making  wretched.  The  evil  man  may  have  the  com- 
mencement of  an  anguish,  which  shall  be  the  same  in  kind,  though  not  to  be 
compared  in  intenseness  to  that  by  which  he  shall  be  racked  if  he  die  in  impenitence. 
The  righteous  man  may  enjoy  a  peace  and  be  elevated  by  a  rapture  which  shall  be 
as  an  introduction  to  the  deep  tranquility  and  lofty  ecstasy  of  the  land  in  which  the 
Lord  God  Almighty  and  the  Lamb  are  the  temple.      (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The 

effect  of  realising  "  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come  " : — I.  There  will  be  a  requlatino 
INFLUENCE  UPON  OUR  PRESENT  LIFE.  1.  The  inward  life  will  become  increasingly 
pure  and  holy.  2.  The  outward  life  will  become  increasingly  human,  just,  unselfish. 

II.  There  will  be  a  sustaining  influence.  In  times  of  despondency,  sadness, 
loss,  and  temptation,  we  shall  bravely  bear  all,  and  wait  for  the  "  eternal  years." 

III.  There  will  be  a  restraining  influence,  1,  Tlioughts,  motives,  professions, 
deeds,  will  be  kept  in  the  right  direction.  2.  There  will  be  no  apostasy  of  heart  or 
life,  (James  Foster,  B. A.)  The  world  to  come: — The  world  to  come.  Is  there 
indeed  such  a  world  ?  Is  man  to  exist  beyond  the  present  life  ?  No  one  comes  back 
from  that  future  to  tell  us  of  it,  and  open  to  us  its  experience.  To  the  natural  eye 
man's  Uf e  goes  as  does  that  of  the  beast ;  neither  his  life  nor  his  death  speaks  anything 
more.  Is  this  all  ?  Is  there  no  more  to  man  and  no  more  for  man  than  there  is  to 
and  for  the  brute  creation  around  him  ?  1.  Our  intuitions  give  us  answer.  The 
Creator  has  given  a  voice  to  our  soul.  It  tells  us  of  immortality.  It  creates  the 
conviction  of  a  "world  to  come."  2,  Also,  man's  attributes  give  answer  to  these 
questions.  Though  in  some  things  he  is  Uke  the  brutes  that  perish,  in  many  things 
he  is  most  unlike  them.  In  the  wonderful  gift  of  speech,  in  the  endowment  of 
reason,  in  the  possession  of  conscience,  in  the  intelligent  and  holy  emotion  of  love. 


456  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vt 

he  belongs  to  another  domain  of  being  from  that  in  which  mere  animals  have  theif 
ejcistence.    He  is  a  moral  being,  and  amenable  to  the  bar  of  right  and  wrong.    Can 
it  be  that  a  being  of  such  capabilities  is  the  mere  creature  of  a  day  ?     My  whole 
being  revolts  at  such  a  conclusion.    3.  But  finally  the  Scriptures  give  answer  to 
these  questions.      4.  This  world  to  come  is  very  near  to  us ;  to  some  of  us  oh  how 
nearl     "  The  world  to  come  " — can  we  to-day  make  this  real  ?     Can  we  open  our 
hearts  and  enfold  the  truth  that  this  "  world  to  come  "  is  a  "  world  to  come  "  to  you 
and  to  me?     Let  us  bring   it   near,  let   us  make  it  personal.     The  Christian 
should  be  glad  to  do  so ;   it  will  strengthen  his  faith,   it  will  confirm  his  hope, 
it  wiU  quicken  his   zeal,    it   will   purify   his  love,   it  will  wean  him  from  this 
world,  it  will  Uft  up  his  life  to  nobler  and  holier  experiences.   {C.  P.  Sheldon,  D.D.) 
It  they  shall  fall  away. — Spiritual  declension  and  recovery : — I.  What  pebsons 
HAS  THE  APOSTLE  HEBE  IN  VIEW  ?     He  enumerates  respecting  them  a  variety  of 
marks,  which  certainly  belong  to  real  Christians.     1.  The  first  of  these  is,  that 
they  have  been  enlightened.    As  there  are  various  kinds  of  enlightening  in  visible 
nature,  as  by  the  sun,  by  the  moon,  and  by  lamps,  so  are  there  various  kinds  of 
enUghtening  relative  to  the  human  soul.     There  are  many  persons  who  certainly 
know  what  is  the  one  thing  needful,  and  what  are  the  several  stages  on  the  road 
to  heaven ;  but  they  know  it  ouly  from  human  instruction,  and  have  their  light  at 
second  or  third  hand.    Theirs  is  a  moonlight,  which  neither  warms  nor  fructifies  ; 
neither  makes  that  which  ia  dead,  alive,  nor  that  which  is  withered,  green.     Such 
enUghtening  we  may  have,  and  yet  be  as  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God  as  the  most 
unenlightened  heathen.    There  are  others  who  show  that  thev  partake  of  a  better 
enlightening,  and  even  of  a  kind  of  warmth  accompanying  it.   But  they  are  excitable 
persons,  who  are  easily  moved  at  hearing  of  Christ,  and  the  experiences  of  His 
saving  grace,  and  become,  perhaps,  irresistibly  convinced  that  such  things  are 
true.    But  should  any  of  their  lamps  have  burned  down,  or  their  oil  have  been 
spent,  so  as  to  yield  a  fainter  light,  or  those  who  carry  brighter  lamps  happen  to 
have  withdrawn,  then  are  those  persons  as  much  in  darkness  again  as  ever ;  and 
this  because  they  have  not  cherished  the  true  light  in  themselves.    Now,  neither 
this,  nor  the  former  class  of  persons,  does  the  Scripture  call  enlightened.    It  gives 
this  name,  not  to  those  who  receive  their  light  at  second  or  third  hand,  but  only 
to  those  who  cherish  within  them  a  hght  which  is  received  immediately  from  Christ 
Himself ;  to  those  of  whom  it  is  written,  "  Awake,  thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise 
from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give  thee  light."    And  this  hght  pervades  the  soul 
and  spirit,  "  piercing  even  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  the  joints  and  marrow,  and 
is  a  discerner  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart " ;  that  is,  it  is  a  Hght  which 
discovers  to  the  sinner  his  misery,  and  makes  him  feel  it.    And  if  we  have  been 
thus  enlightened,  then  doubtless  we  are  children  of  God,  and  born  of  the  Spirit.   2. 
The  apostle  further  says,  they  "  have  tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift " ;  which  is 
another  exclusive  characteristic  of  true  Israelites.     This  heavenly  gift  is  no  other 
than  that  spoken  of  by  our  Saviour  to  the  woman  of  Samaria.    3.  Another  mark 
attributed  to  them  is,  that  they  have  been  "  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost  "  ; 
atid  this  surely  will  not  allow  us  to  remain  uncertain  what  sort  of  persons  the 
apostle  has  in  view.    Who  can  doubt  that  they  are  children  of  God  ?     4.  And 
that  we  might  know  that  they  have  received  the  Spirit  of  God  as  an  earnest  of 
their  salvation,  it  is  added,  that  they  "  have  tasted  the  good  Word  of   God." 
This    expression  clearly  intimates    that  they  have    experienced    the    Word  of 
God  in  themselves   as  a  good   word;    as   a  word  which  takes  the  most  kind 
and   sympathetic    part    in  whatever    happens    to    us,   or    oppresses   us ;    as    a 
word   that  has  upon  all  occasions  counsel  and  deliverance  for  us,   and  stands 
by  us  in  the  most  gracious  manner  with  its  hght  and  healing  balm.     5.  And 
now  for  the  last  mark:  tiiey  "have  tasted  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come." 
Understand  by   this    expression  whatever  you    can :  think   of    it    as    implying 
those  outpouiings  of  grace  which  enable   us  to  overcome  the  world  and  death  ; 
or,   as   implying  a  lively  foretaste  of  eternal   joy,   a  powerful  assurance  of   the 
final  consummation,  and  of  our  being  "  ever  with  the  Lord  " ;  or,  as  signifying 
our  present  triumphant  elev  tion  upon  the  wings  of  faith  above  time,  above  all 
afiliciions  and  crosses,  above    eath,  judgment,  sin,  and  hell ;  or,  understand  what- 
ever as  Vielievers  you  please  by  these  words — this  you  must  allow,  that  St.  Paul 
could  have  had  only  children  of  God  in  his  eye  when  he  declares  of  them,  that 
they  "  have  tasted  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come."     H.  The  spiritdal  declen- 
8I0N  OF  WHICH  THE  cuir.DRKN  OF  GoD  ABE  CAPABLE.     St.  Paul  then.  Speaking    of 
childien  ot  God,  auu  evbu  of  i>uch  a^  iiave  ^oue  ou  for  a  cousideraiik  iime  in  Ui« 


OHAP.  n.]  HEBREWS,  457 

way  of  salvation,  and  have  attained  maturity  of  growth  and  decision  of  character, 
Bays,  "  If  they  shall  fall  away."  In  strict  language,  every  fall  is  a  falling  away ; 
for  it  is  a  temporary  forgetfulness  and  turning  aside  from  Him  who  hath  said, 
"  Abide  in  Me."  But  the  Scripture  evidently  makes  a  distinction  between  falling 
and  faUing  away.  In  the  4th  verse  of  the  5th  chapter  of  his  Epistle  to  the 
Galatians  we  meet  with  persons  who  had  fallen  away.  They  had  lost  the  lively 
sense  of  their  unworthiness  and  inability ;  and,  instead  of  abiding  implicitly  at  the 
foot  of  the  cross,  so  as  to  live  upon  grace  and  forgiveness  alone,  they  had  become 
bewildered  with  the  unhappy  notion  of  being  their  own  saviours  and  intercessors. 
"  Ye  did  run  well ;  who  hath  hindered  you  that  ye  should  no  longer  obey  the 
truth  ?  "  This  was  a  falling  away ;  a  departure  from  grace  ;  it  was  an  erring  from 
the  way  of  God's  children  into  the  way  of  self-righteous,  natural  men ;  a  virtual 
renunciatiou  of  Christ ;  a  tacit  declaration  tbet  tbey  no  lonper  neerlod  Him,  and 
oould  do  witLout  Ilim.  It  was  a  depreciation  of  His  precious  blood;  a  contempt 
of  His  sacrifice,  and  a  rejection  of  His  person  :  so  that  St.  Paul  could  utter  that 
reproach  with  the  utmost  propriety  and  justice,  Christ  is  again  "  crucified  among 
you."  But  there  is  a  falling  away  which  is  mora  Tearful  still.  Not  only  a  falling 
away  from  grace  into  legal  bondage,  but  a  falling  away  into  lawlessness,  or  into  a 
course  without  law  altogether  ;  a  falling  away  from  God  to  idols  ;  from  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  to  the  world ;  from  the  way  of  light  into  the  way  of  the  flesh  and  of 
darkness.  This  would  seem  hardly  credible,  did  not  sad  experience  show  it  to  be 
true.  Look  at  David  at  one  period  of  his  life.  But  no,  on  David's  crime,  dreadful 
as  it  was,  we  will  not  insist ;  it  was  rather  an  awful  fall  than  a  falling  away. 
Think  then  of  Solomon,  that  precious  man  of  God,  that  Jedidiah  from  his  cradle : 
observe  Lim  in  his  career ;  and  how  can  you  help  shuddering  ?  Twice  does  the 
Lord  appear  to  him,  and  give  him  a  commandment  not  to  walk  after  other  gods 
{1  Kiugs  iii.  14  ;  2  Chron.  vii.  12-22) ;  but  he  obeys  it  not ;  he  continues  in  his 
departure  from  Jehovah  the  God  of  Israel ;  so  that  the  Lord  is  obliged,  at  length, 
to  come  against  him  with  the  thunder  and  lightning  of  His  judgments.  And,  oh  I 
how  many  of  the  children  of  God  have  brought  upon  themselves,  in  like  manner. 
His  rebukes  and  visitations  I  How  many,  to  whom  the  world  had  been  already 
crucitied,  have  gone  back  again  to  the  world  i  III.  The  wabning  given.  Hearken 
to  that  awful  thunder  of  the  Divine  oracle,  which  declares  that  '*  it  is  impossible 
lor  those  who  were  once  enlightened,"  &c.  How  terribly  does  this  sound  I  almost 
like,  "  Depart  from  Me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and 
bis  angels."  And,  indeed,  it  is  evident  at  once  how  difficult  must  be  the  restoration 
of  those  who,  having  taken  root  in  a  life  of  holiness,  and  having  been  blessed  with 
sweet  experiences  of  Divine  love,  could,  after  all,  have  fallen  away  1  Whoever  is 
conscious  that  he  ia  guilty  of  this,  may  well  tremble.  The  word  "  impossible  " 
in  our  text  is  enough  to  fill  him  with  horrible  dread.  And  if  so,  "  Let  him  that 
thinketh  he  standeth,  take  heed  lest  he  fall !  "  Let  all  of  us  watch  and  pray ;  let 
our  abiding  station  be  ever  at  the  foot  of  the  cross.  There  let  us  lie  down  and  take 
our  rest ;  there  let  us  arise  in  the  morning  ;  there  perform  every  duty  of  our  daily 
life ;  there  let  us  be  formed,  and  fixed,  and  live;  there  wait  for  the  Bridegroom  ; 
there  breathe  our  last :  so  are  we  safe.  (F.  W.  Kruvimacher,  D.D.)  The 
danger  of  apodasy  from  Christianity : — I.  There  are  three  things  which  dis- 
tinguish    THE   SIN    HERE    SPOEEN   OP     IN   THE     TEXT    FROM   "  THE    SIN    AGAINST    THE 

Holy  Ghosx  "  described  by  our  Saviour.  1.  The  persons  that  are  guilty  of  this 
sin  here  in  the  text  are  evidently  such  as  had  embraced  Christianity,  and  had 
taken  upon  them  the  profession  of  it ;  whereas  those  whom  our  Saviour  chargeth 
with  "  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,"  are  such  as  constantly  opposed  His  doctrine, 
and  resisted  the  evidence  He  offered  for  it.  2.  The  particular  nature  of  *•  the  sin 
against  the  Holy  Ghost "  consisted  in  blaspheming  the  Spirit  whereby  our  Saviour 
wrought  His  miracles,  and  saying  He  did  not  those  things  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  but 
by  the  assistance  of  the  devil,  in  that  malicious  and  unreasonable  imputing  of  the 
plain  effects  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  the  power  of  the  devil,  and  consequently  in  an 
obstinate  refusal  to  be  convinced  by  the  miracles  that  He  wrought ;  but  here  is 
nothing  of  all  this  so  much  as  intimated  by  the  apostle  in  this  place.  3.  "  The  sin 
against  the  Holy  Ghost "  is  declared  to  be  absolutely  "  uupardonable  both  in  this 
world  and  in  that  which  is  to  come."  II.  That  this  sin  here  spoken  of  by  the 
apostle  IS  NOT  said  to  be  absolutely  unpardonable.  It  is  not  "  the  sin  against 
the  Holy  Ghost  "  ;  and,  whatever  else  it  be,  it  is  not  out  of  the  compass  of  G/)d's 
pardon  and  forgiveness.  So  our  Saviour  hath  told  us,  "  that  all  manner  of  sin 
whatsoever  that  men  have  committed  is  capable  of  pardon,  excepting  only  the  sin 


458  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tt 

against  the  Holy  Ghost."  And  though  the  apostle  here  uses  a  very  severe  expres- 
sion, that  "  if  such  persons  fall  away  it  is  impossible  to  renew  them  again  to 
repentance,"  yet  there  is  no  necessity  of  understanding  this  phrase  in  th© 
strictest  sense  of  the  word  impossible,  but  as  it  is  elsewhere  used  for  that 
which  is  extremely  difiBcult.  Nor,  indeed,  will  our  Saviour's  declaration,  which 
I  mentioned  before,  that  all  sins  whatsoever  are  pardonable,  except  "  the  sin  against 
the  Holy  Ghost,"  suffer  us  to  understand  these  words  in  the  most  rigorous  sense. 
III.  The  sin  here  spoken  of  is  not  a  partial  apostasy  fbom  the  Christian 
RELIGION  BY  ANY  PARTICULAR  VICIOUS  PRACTICE.  Whosoever  Uves  in  the  habitual 
practice  of  any  sin  plainly  forbidden  by  the  Christian  law  may  be  said  so  far  to 
have  apostatised  from  Christianity ;  but  this  is  not  the  falling  away  which  the 
apostle  here  speaks  of.  This  may  be  bad  enough ;  and  the  greater  sins  any  man 
who  professeth  himself  a  Christian  lives  in,  the  more  notoriously  he  contradicts 
his  profession,  and  falls  ofif  from  Christianity,  and  the  nearer  he  approaches  to  the 
sin  in  the  text,  and  the  danger  there  threatened;  but  yet,  for  all  that,  this  is  not 
that  which  the  apostle  speaks  of.  IV.  But  it  is  a  total  apostasy  from  thb 
Christian  religion,  more  especially  to  the  heathen  idolatry,  the  renouncing  of  the 
true  God,  and  our  Saviour,  and  the  worship  of  false  gods,  which  the  apostle  here 
speaks  of.  And  I  doubt  not  but  this  is  the  sin  which  St.  John  speaks  of,  and  calls 
"  the  sin  unto  death,"  and  does  not  require  Christians  "  to  pray  for  those  who  fall 
into  it,"  with  any  assurance  that  it  shall  be  forgiven  (1  John  v.  16).  V.  We  will 
consider  the  reason  of  the  dipficulty  of  recovering  such  persons  by  repentance. 
1.  Because  of  the  greatness  and  heinousness  of  the  sin,  both  in  the  nature  and 
circumstances  of  it.  It  is  downright  apostasy  from  God,  a  direct  renounciug  of 
Him,  and  rejecting  of  His  truth,  after  men  have  owned  it,  and  been  inwardly  per- 
suaded and  convinced  of  it.  It  hath  all  the  aggravations  that  a  crime  is  capable 
of,  being  against  the  clearest  light  and  knowledge,  and  the  fullest  conviction  of  a 
man's  mind,  concerning  the  truth  and  goodness  of  that  religion  which  he  re- 
nounceth  ;  against  the  greatest  obligations  laid  upon  him  by  the  grace  and  mercy 
of  the  gospel ;  after  the  free  pardon  of  sins,  and  the  grace  and  assistance  of  God's 
Spirit  received,  and  a  miraculous  power  conferred  for  a  witness  and  testimony  to 
themselves,  of  the  undoubted  truth  of  that  religion  which  they  have  embraced. 
Now  a  sin  of  this  heinous  nature  is  apt  naturally  either  to  plunge  men  into  hardness 
and  Lmpenitency,  or  to  drive  them  to  despair ;  and  either  of  these  conditions  are 
effectual  bars  to  their  recovery.  2.  Those  who  are  guilty  of  this  sin  do  renounce 
and  cast  off  the  means  of  their  recovery,  and  therefore  it  becomes  extremely 
difficult  to  renew  them  again  to  repentance.  They  reject  the  gospel,  which  affords 
the  best  arguments  and  means  to  repentance,  and  renounce  the  only  way  of  pardon 
and  forgiveness.  3.  Those  who  are  guilty  of  this  sin  provoke  God  in  the  highest 
manner  to  withdraw  His  grace  and  Holy  Spirit  from  them,  by  the  power  and  efficacy 
whereof  they  should  be  brought  to  repentance ;  so  that  it  can  hardly  otherwise  be 
expected  but  that  God  should  leave  those  to  themselves  who  have  so  unworthily 
forsaken  Him,  and  wholly  withdraw  His  grace  and  Spirit  from  such  persons  aa 
have  so  notoriously  offered  despite  to  the  Spirit  of  grace.  I  shall  now  draw  some 
useful  inferences  from  hence  by  way  of  application,  that  we  may  see  how  far  this 
doth  concern  ourselves ;  and  they  shall  be  these.  1.  From  the  supposition  here 
in  the  text,  that  such  persons  as  are  there  described  (namely,  tbose  who  have  been 
baptized,  and  by  baptism  have  received  remission  of  sins,  and  did  firmly  believe  the 
gospel,  and  the  promises  of  it,  and  were  endowed  with  miraculous  gifts  of  the  Holy 
Ghost),  that  these  may  fall  away — this  should  caution  us  all  against  confidence  and 
security;  when  those  that  have  gone  thus  far  may  fall,  "  Let  him  that  standeth 
take  heed."  2.  This  shows  us  how  great  an  aggravation  it  is  for  men  to  sin  against 
the  means  of  knowledge  which  the  gospel  affords,  and  the  mercies  which  it  offers 
unto  them.  3.  The  consideration  of  what  hath  been  said  is  matter  of  comfort  to 
those  who,  upon  every  failing  and  infirmity,  are  afraid  they  have  committed  "the 
unpardonable  sin,"  and  that  it  is  impossible  for  them  to  be  restored  by  repentance. 
4.  This  should  make  men  afraid  of  great  and  presumptuous  sins,  which  come 
near  apostasy  from  Christianity  ;  such  as  deUberate  murder,  adultery,  gross  fraud 
and  oppression,  or  notorious  and  habitual  intemperance.  For  what  great  differ- 
ence is  there,  whether  men  renounce  Christianity,  or,  professing  to  believe  it,  do  in 
their  works  deny  it  ?  5.  It  may  be  useful  for  us  upon  this  occasion  to  reflect  a 
little  upon  the  ancient  discipline  of  the  church,  which  in  some  places  was  so  severe, 
as,  in  case  of  some  great  crimes  after  baptism,  as  apostasy  to  the  heathen  idolatry, 
murder,  and  adultery,  never  to  admit  those  that  were  guilty  of  them  to  the  peao« 


•HIP.  VL]  HEBREWS.  459 

and  oomniUDioD  of  the  church.    This,  perhaps,  may  be  thought  too  great  Beverity  ; 
but  I  am  sure  we  are  as  much  too  remiss  now  as  they  were  over-rigorous  then ; 
but  were  the  ancient  discipline  of  the  church  in  any  degree  put  in  practice  now, 
what  case  would  the  generality  of  Christians  be  in  ?    6.  The  consideration  of  what 
hath  been  said  should  confirm  and  establish  us  in  the  profession  of  oar  holy 
religion.    (Abp.   TilloUon.)        The  Palestinian  apostates,  and    the  impossibility 
affirmed  of  renewing  tliem  again  to  repentance : — Under  a  fierce,  though — thanks  to 
Boman  supremacy — a  bloodless  persecution,  the  intensity  of  which  no  one  at  all 
familiar  with  Jewish  hate  will  be  at  a  loss  to  realise,  members  of  the  churches  were 
falling  away,  first  into  backsliding,  then  into  apostasy,  to  the  extent  of  returning 
to  their  temple  service ;  and  the  difdculty  of  reclaiming  them  from  amid  those  en- 
vironments prompts  the  apostle  to  impart  to  his  warnings  special  potency  and 
pungency.     I.  Notice  theib  pbevious  character  and  position.     The   state  that 
preceded  their  apostasy,  if  there  be  meaning  in  words,  was  that  of  actual  conver- 
sion ;  and  but  for  the  exigencies  of  a  vicious  creed  no  other  idea  would  have  been 
entertained.    They  were  "  once  enlightened  "  ;  and  the  same  word  is  used  of  them 
in  the  tenth  chapter  under  the  rendering  "  illuminated. "    No  stronger  expression 
could  be  used  to  denote  conversion.     "  Once  ye  were  darkness,  but  ye  are  now  light 
in  the  Lord."    Again,  they  are  here  affirmed  to  have  "  tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift," 
which,  however  it  may  be  explained,  it  would  be  arbitrary  in  the  extreme  to  under- 
stand as  falling  short  of  salvation.     The  same  remark  applies  to  the  next  thing 
attributed  to  these  apostates,  "  they  were  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 
Full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  we  need  not  suppose  them  to  have  been ;  but  none  the  less 
does  the  expression  denote  the  saving  fruits  of  faith  as  contrasted  with  the  fruits  of 
those  that  continue  in  the  flesh.     (Compare  Gal.  v.  19-25 ;  Rom.  v.  6.)     On  the 
same  principle,  consistency  demands  that  we  explain  the  attribution — "  they  have 
tasted  the  good  Word  of  God,"  in  the  spirit  of  David  in  such  places  as  Psalms  xix. 
and  cxix.,  or  of  Jeremiah  when  he  sweetly  says,  "  Thy  Word  was  found  of  me,  and  I 
did  eat  it,  and  Thy  Word  was  unto  me  the  joy  and  rejoicing  of  my  heart."     *'  To 
the  above  tastings,"  or  spiritual  experiences,  the  apostle  adds  that  those  apostates 
h  id  "  tasted  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come  " ;  or,  as  the  expression  means,  "  the 
age  to  come. "    This  was  the  New  Testament  age,  and  had  long  been  familiarly  so 
denominated.    The  word  "power  "is  the  same  as  that  rendered  "miracles"  in 
chap.  ii.  4 ;  and  it  is  here  intimated,  therefore,  that  the  spiritual  evidences  and 
influences  so  grandly  characteristic  of  that  period  had  previously  operated  their  due 
effects  on  the  minds  and  hearts  of  these  apostates.    II.  We  now  pass  to  their 
PRESENT  STATE — that  of  men  who  have  apostatised.     1.  The  fact  of  their  apostasy 
is  expressly  affirmed.     They  had  "  fallen  away."    Their  fall,  as  we  shall  see, 
would  not  be  precipitate.    The  gradient  of  the  downward  path  is  at  first  exceed- 
ingly imperceptible  ;  it  is  not  till  a  further  stage  down  that  it  becomes  recklessly 
headlong.     2.  Let  us  now  pass  from  the  fact  to  the  nature  of  their  apostasy.    It 
was  a  lapse  from  all  the  Christian  experiences  above  detailed,  and  that  by  a  lapse 
from  the  source  of  these — namely,  faith,  ard  from  all  the  means  by  which  we  are 
enabled  to  '*  stand  fast  in  the  faith."    This  lapse  would  be  stealthy,  and  so  in  fact 
the  word  implies.    It  was  probably  no  sudden  flight,  no  leap,  no  bound,  no  run, 
or  even  deliberate  walk,  but  a  partially  passive  and  insensible  process  of  "  falling 
away."    Like  the  fleecy  envelopment  of  air  which,  from  its  yielding  nature,  falls 
behind  in  the  diurnal  revolution  of  our  globe  (causing  our  trade  and  oblique  winds) 
such  retrogressors  gradually  yield  to  dragging  influences  and  lag  behind.   First,  the 
Bible  is  neglected,  then  prayer,  then  family  duty,  then  Christian  converse,  then 
Christian  zeal  in  every  form,  then  the  Sabbath,  the  sanctuary,  and  all  the  means  of 
grace.    At  whose  bidding  ?  we  need  hardly  ask,  seeing  the  seducers  are  legion. 
It  may  have  been  at  the  prompting  of  Mammon,  or  of  Belial,  of  vanity,  or  of 
pride.    It  may  have  been  in  the  name  of  free  thought,  under  the  license  of  free 
speech,  or  under  the  baser  dictation  still  of  indolence  and  cowardice  that  shrink 
from  encountering  pain,  and  toil,  and  loss.    Any  way,  the  sphere  of  salvation  in 
tLe  soul  contracts  and  grows  dim ;  the  fruits  of  the  new  life  shrivel  up  ;  the  heart, 
now  "  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief,  departs  from  the  living  God,"  and  day  by  day  be- 
comes "  hardened  through  the  deceitfulness  of  sin."    HI.  Let  us  now  endeavour 
to  understand  the  iMPossrBiLiTT  here  affirmed  of  again  renewing  these  recreants 
unto  repentance.    Be  it  noted  in  the  outset,  that  vain  is  the  attempt  of  those  who 
would  substitute  for  the  word  "  impossible "  some  milder  translation,  such  as 
'*  difficult,"  or  the  like.    In  the  original,  just  as  in  our  version,  the  word  incon- 
trovertibly  and  immovably  stands  "  impossible."    But  then  the  question  is  still 


460  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

left  open  to  us — In  what  sense  impossible  ?  First,  and  surely  plainly  enough,  no 
such  thing  as  absolute  impossibility  is  for  a  moment  to  be  thought  of,  for  we  are 
here  in  a  far  other  sphere  than  that  of  strict  omnipotence.  We  are  in  the  moral 
sphere  ;  and  in  the  moral  sense  only  are  we  to  understand  the  word  impossible. 
And  even  in  that  sense  the  impossibility  lies  not  on  the  side  of  God,  but  wholly 
on  the  side  of  man.  How  ?  Only  in  the  moral  sense  ;  and  in  no  such  sense  even 
of  the  moral  kind  as  need  doom  any  apostate  to  despair,  though  certainly  such  aa 
ought  to  make  his  ears  tingle  and  his  knees  tremble,  and  his  frame  shake  and  his 
heart  quake.  It  was  impossible  to  renew  those  men,  merely  in  the  sense  of  Christ's 
impossible,  when  He  said,  "How  can  ye  believe,  who  receive  honour  one  of 
another  ?  " — this  state  of  mind,  while  it  lasted,  being  a  moral  bar  to  their  believing : 
but  then  it  had  no  need  to  last.  It  was  impossible,  in  the  sense  in  which  we  our- 
eelves  freely  use  the  word  every  day ;  as  when  we  say,  It  is  impossible  to  love  this 
man,  or  bate  that  man,  or  to  respect  or  trust  that  other — that  is,  impossible  only 
in  the  sense  of  being  extremely  hard  or  difficult  by  reason  of  moral  dispositions  or 
circumstances;  which  moral  causes,  however,  it  is  all  the  time  understood  by  us, 
it  is  quite  in  the  power  of  the  man  concerned  to  alter  or  surmount,  if  he  choose. 
IV.  These  moral  causes  for  the  impossible,  in  the  case  of  the  apostates  in  my 
text,  it  only  remains  that,  in  the  last  place,  I  now  briefly  explain.  For  very  specisi 
they  were,  and  frightful  in  the  extreme — amply  sufficient,  and  more,  to  account  foi 
the  very  strong  word  "  impossible "  which  the  inspired  writer  here  employs. 
These  singular  causes  are  briefly  but  expressively  set  forth  in  the  appended  reason, 
"  seeing  they  crucify  to  themselves  the  Son  of  God  afresh,  and  put  Him  to  an  open 
shame. "  They  not  only  renounce  Christ,  they  do  it  with  every  circumstance  of 
contumelious  indignation  and  scorn.  They  re-enact  for  "  themselves  "  what  they 
are  now  too  late  literally  to  join  in — the  crime  and  the  jeering  concomitants  of 
the  Saviour's  crucifixion.  This  they  do,  not  only  in  the  arena  of  the  inner 
spirit,  but  in  open  avowal,  by  shamelessly  homologating  and  glorying  in  the 
deed.  They  eay,  *'  though  for  a  time  deceived,  we  now  see  that  the  deed  was 
right."  They  thus  gather  into  themselves  the  combined  virulence  of  both 
Jew  and  Eoman ;  for  while  with  the  Jew  they  cry,  "  Crucify  Him,"  with  the 
Roman  they  do  in  effect  "crucify  Him,"  so  far  as  it  is  in  them  tore-enact  the  deed. 
And  unlike  that  tumultuous  rabble,  who  were  stirred  into  frenzy  by  their  rulers, 
and  borne  many  of  them  they  knew  not  whither,  so  that  Christ  affectingly  said  of 
them,  praying,  "They  know  not  what  they  do,"  these  apostates,  on  the  contrary, 
re-enacted  the  crime  deliberately,  from  amid  the  fuU  flood  of  gospel  light,  and  life, 
and  power,  and  after  they  then;  Ives  had  tasted  the  sweets  of  gospel  love.  This, 
the  terrible  attitude  and  its  implications,  were  explanation  enough  of  the  word  im- 
possible, were  we  to  say  no  more.  But  to  stop  here  would  leave  unexplained  the 
fact,  otherwise  incredible,  how  they  could  ever  have  been  led  to  take  such  an 
attitude  at  all.  This  is  the  only  thing  further  I  have  to  explain,  and  then  the 
shadow  over  the  word  "impossible"  will  have  deepened  into  the  most  hopeless 
gloom.  The  explanation  is  to  be  found  in  the  strongly  marked  peculiarities  of  the 
Jew,  and  in  the  then  conditions  of  social  and  religious  life  in  Palestine.  These 
were  such  as  to  leave  no  neutral  ground.  A  Jew's  wrath,  in  religious  matters, 
easily  intensifies  to  frenzied  rage.  Hence  their  scorn  of  Jesus,  their  vindication  of 
His  death,  their  hate  of  all  who  bear  His  name,  their  practice  by  spitting,  gesticu- 
lation, or  terms  of  execration,  of  blaspheming  and  cursing  the  Holy  One  under  the 
opprobrious  name  of  "the  Nazarene."  In  such  a  state  of  society,  to  renounce 
Christianity  was  not  to  lapse  into  negative  indifference ;  for  indifference  or 
neutrality  there  was  none.  It  meant  positively  a  return  to  Judaism ;  and  to 
Judaism  aroused  and  armed  in  deadly  antagonism  to  Christianity.  The  process 
would  be  this.  Expelled  the  synagogue,  put  under  the  ban,  disowned  by  their 
nearest,  if  they  persisted  in  cUnging  to  the  hated  Nazarene  in  spite  of  the  en- 
treaties, the  tears,  and  ere  long  the  curses  of  their  kin,  the  Palestinian  Christian 
would  at  first  waver,  then  absent  himself  occasionally  from  the  Christian  assemblies. 
Urged  by  his  relatives,  the  occasionally  would  become  frequently,  till,  now  fairly 
on  the  dechue,  he  came  to  abandon  them  entirely.  And  now  the  entreaties,  the 
blandishments,  the  impassioned  warnings  would  be  renewed.  Let  him  only  pass 
through  the  needful  discipline  and  be  welcomed  anew  into  the  synagogue  and  into 
the  bosum  of  his  home.  He  does  so ;  and  the  die  is  cast.  To  quit  the  church  for 
the  synagogue  was  to  pass  from  one  hostile  camp  to  another,  with  no  intermediate 
resting  place  or  ground  even  for  parley.  It  was  to  quit  all  Christian  ordinances 
and  restoring  influences,  and  to  raise  a  brazen  wall  between.    And  it  was  to  enter 


CHAP.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  461 

the  synagogue  to  join  the  anti-Nazarene  crusade.  The  apostates,  and  with  pro- 
verbially apostate  zeal,  now  persecuted  the  faith  they  formerly  preached.  In  con- 
clusion, there  result  two  vitally  important  lessons,  which  we  briefly  state  in 
Scripture  langugage.  1.  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  staudeth  take  heed  lest  he 
fall."  2.  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts." 
T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  The  sin  of  ryecting  the  gospel: — That  we  may  understand 
this  Scripture,  and  make  it  unto  us  a  good  comfort,  which  might  seem  other- 
wise  a  heavy  threatening,  let  us  consider  in  it  these  two  things :  first,  the  purpose 
of  the  apostle  for  which  he  speaketh  it,  then  themselves  what  they  signify.  The 
apostle's  purpose  is  to  stir  us  up,  desirously  to  hear,  diligently  to  learn,  wisely  to 
increase  in  knowledge,  and  obediently  to  practise  that  we  have  learned :  for  this 
purpose  it  was  £rst  spoken,  to  this  end  it  is  now  written.  1.  The  first  mark  of  them 
is  that  they  be  lightened  ;  that  is,  endued  with  the  knowledge  of  God,  not  only  by 
the  heavens,  which  declare  His  glory,  nor  by  the  firmament,  which  showeth  His 
work,  nor  by  any  of  God's  creatures  in  which  His  eternal  power  and  Godhead  doth 
appear  and  shine,  and  of  which  light  all  nations  are  made  partakers,  but  they  are 
also  Ughtened  with  His  holy  Word,  which  is  a  lantern  to  their  feet  and  a  hght 
unto  their  steps,  and  have  heard  His  gospel  preached  unto  them,  unto  the  which 
they  have  agreed  that  it  is  the  Word  of  Life.  2.  The  second  note  of  them  is,  that 
they  have  tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift :  the  heavenly  gift  is  the  life  and  great  salva- 
tion that  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  by  whom  we  are  reconciled,  which  likewise  our  Saviour 
Christ  calleth  the  gift  of  God,  speaking  to  the  woman  of  Samaria  ;  and  this  is  that 
knowledge  mto  which  they  are  lighted  by  the  gospel,  and  this  they  not  only  know, 
but  of  this  gift  they  have  also  tasted :  which  is,  they  have  gladly  some  time  received 
it,  and  rejoiced  in  it ;  like  as  our  Saviour  Christ  describeth  them  by  the  parable  of 
the  stony  ground,  that  incontinently  with  joy  they  receive  the  seed,  and  which 
also  He  noteth  in  the  Pharisees,  speaking  of  John  Baptist,  which  was  a  shining 
lamp  among  them,  and  they  for  a  season  did  rejoice  in  his  light.  3.  The  third  note 
of  these  men  is,  that  they  have  been  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost :  which  is,  that 
many  graces  of  the  Spirit  of  God  have  been  given  unto  them,  as  these  two  above 
named,  that  they  are  ughtened  with  knowledge,  and  rejoice  in  their  understanding, 
which  is  neither  of  fiesh  nor  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
4.  The  fourth  note  is,  that  they  have  tasted  the  good  Word  of  God,  not  much 
differing  from  that  He  first  spake  of,  that  they  were  lightened,  that  is,  that  they 
had  knowledge  of  God,  not  only  by  His  creatures,  but  much  more  by  His  Word. 
But  here  naming  the  good  Word  of  God,  he  noteth  especially  the  gospel,  by  com* 
parison  with  the  law.  6.  The  fifth  note  here  set  forth  is,  that  they  know  and 
confess  that  this  gospel  hath  in  the  end  eternal  Ufe :  and  Christ  is  a  mighty 
Saviour,  who  wiU  keep  for  ever  those  whom  He  hath  purchased.  And  he  nameth 
the  world  to  come,  because  the  Spirit  hath  hghtened  them  to  see  the  latter 
end  of  this  corruptible  world,  and  to  know  assuredly  that  here  they  have  no 
dwelling  city,  but  another  habitation  made  for  God's  chosen,  not  with  mortal 
hands,  but  everlasting  in  heaven,  and  calling  it  the  powers,  because  it  is 
made  so  strong  in  Christ  Jesus,  that  it  can  never  be  assaulted;  for  all  power 
is  given  unto  Him  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  and  He  hath  made  that  heavenly 
city  glorious  for  His  saints  throughout  all  worlds.  And  thus  far  of  the  persons, 
what  gifts  they  have  received ;  wherein  yet  let  us  understand  a  great  difference 
between  these  men  which  fall  away  and  the  gifts  which  are  in  God's  elect 
that  cannot  perish,  nor  ever  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost.  Now  let  us  see  the 
manner  of  rebellion,  how  far  they  fall  away :  first,  we  must  observe  what  points 
the  apostle  hath  before  named.  In  the  beginning  of  the  chapter  he  mentioneth 
repentance  from  dead  works,  faith  towards  God,  the  doctrine  of  baptism,  and 
laying  on  of  hands,  and  resurrection  from  the  dead,  and  eternal  judgment,  which 
here  he  calleth  the  beginning  and  foundation  of  Christian  amity  ;  then  he  speaketh 
of  an  apostasy  or  falhag  away  from  all  these  points  here  named,  even  from  the 
foundation  and  first  beginnings  of  the  Christian  faith,  so  that  all  the  former  hght 
is  quite  put  out,  and  the  first  understanding  is  all  taken  away ;  they  laugh  now 
at  repentance,  and  the  first  faith  they  account  it  foolishness.  {E.  Deering,  B.D.) 
What  relapses  are  inconsistent  with  grace  ? — I.  Foub  falls  op  the  godly.  1.  The 
first  and  lightest  fall  of  the  godly  is  that  in  their  daily  combat  between  flesh  and 
spirit  (Rom.  vii ;  Gal.  v.  17).  Our  duties  are  imperfect,  graces  defective,  our  gold 
and  silver  drossy,  "  our  wine  mixed  with  water."  Sin  deceiveth,  surpriseth,  oapti- 
vateth,  slayeth,  yet  reigneth  not.  These  falls  or  slips  are  unavoidable  and  involuntary. 
There  is  no  saint  but  oomplains  oi  them,  no  duty  but  is  stained  with  them.    In  our 


468  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  yl 

clearest  sunshine  we  see  a  world  of  such  motes,  which  yet  hinder  not  the  light  and 
comfort  of  our  justification,  and  destroy  not  sanctification.  True  grace  consists 
with  these ;  yea,  is  not  separated  from  the  assaults  and  indwelling  of  such  motions. 
•'  Will  we,  nill  we,"  said  Bernard,  "  we  are  pestered  with  swarms  of  these  Egyptian 
flies,  and  have  these  frogs  in  our  inmost  chambers."  This  first  fall  is  but  like  the 
fall  of  a  mist  in  a  winter  morning  :  the  sun  gets  up,  and  it  is  a  fair  day  after.  This 
is  the  first  fall :  the  second  is  worse,  which  is — 2.  An  actual  and  visible  stumble  as 
to  offence  of  others,  yet  occasioned  by  some  surreptitious  surprise  of  temptation,  for 
want  of  that  due  consideration  which  we  should  always  have  :  this  the  apostle  calls 
"a  man's  being  overtaken  with  a  fault,"  who  is  "to  be  restored  with  a  spirit  of 
meekness,  considering  we  also  may  be  tempted  "  (Gal.  vi.  1).  Such  falls  (or  slips 
rather)  all  or  most  are  subject  to  (Jas.  iii.  2).  We  sometimes  trip,  or  sUp,  or 
"  miss  our  hold,"  and  so  down  we  come,  but  not  out  of  choice.  Thus  did  Peter  slip 
or  halt,  when  he  did  Judaise  out  of  too  much  compliance  with  the  Jews ;  whom 
therefore  Paul  did  rebuke  and  restore  (Gal.  ii.  11,  14),  3.  The  third  fall  is  much 
worse,  "  a  fall  from  the  third  loft,"  whence,  like  Eutychus,  they  are  "  taken  up 
dead  "  for  the  present  ;  but  they  come  to  themselves  again.  These  are  falls  into 
grosser  and  more  scandalous  sins  which  do  "  set  the  stacks  or  corn-fields  of  con- 
science on  fire  " ;  whereas  the  other  two  forenamed,  especially  the  former,  are  such 
as  TertuUian  calls  "  of  daily  incursion."  These  are  very  dangerous,  and  befall  not 
all  professors :  (they  had  not  need  !)  but,  now  and  then,  one  falls  into  some  scan- 
dalous sin  ;  but  they  not  usually  again  into  the  same  sin  after  sense  and  repentance 
of  it.  Thus  fell  David  and  Peter  into  foul  flagitiousness,  but  not  deliberately,  nor 
totally,  nor  finally,  nor  reiteratedly.  This  fall  is  like  the  fall  of  the  leaf  iu  autumn. 
Life  remains  safe  ;  a  spring  in  due  time  follows,  though  many  a  cold  blast  first.  4. 
There  is  yet  one  worse  fall  than  the  former,  incident  to  a  child  of  God  too — to  be 
of  the  decaying  kind,  and  to  remit  and  lose  his  former  fervour  and  liveUness.  And 
it  may  be  he  never  comes  (as  the  second  temple)  up  to  the  former  pitch  and  glory 
(Ezra  iii.  12).  Thus  Solomon's  zeal  and  love  were  abated  in  his  old  age.  This  is 
like  the  fall  of  the  hair  in  aged  persons.  Life  yet  remains ;  but  strength,  native 
heat,  and  radical  moistness  decay,  and  the  hair  never  grows  alike  thick  again.  II. 
The  foub  palls  of  the  uneegenerate.  1.  The  first  whereof  is  a  final  fall,  but  not 
a  total  at  first,  but  insensible,  by  degrees,  "  gradually  and  without  perceiving  it," 
grow  worse  and  worse  ;  as  the  thorny  ground,  choked  with  cares,  or  drowned  with 
the  pleasures  of  the  world.  2.  Some  fall  totally  and  finally,  but  not  premeditately 
and  voluntarily  at  first ;  but  are  driven  back  by  the  lion  of  persecution,  aud  tribula- 
tion in  the  way,  and  they  retreat  (Mark  iv.  17  ;  1  Chron.  xxviii.  9).  This  is  like  the 
fall  of  Sisera  at  the  feet  of  Jael  (Judg.  v.  27).  3.  Some,  more  fearfully,  totally, 
finally,  voluntarily,  deliberately,  but  not  yet  maliciously.  Thus  Demas  is  supposed 
to  fall,  who,  of  a  forward  disciple  or  teacher,  is  said  to  have  become  after  an  idol 
priest  at  Thessalonica.  Thus  feU  Saul  (  1  Sam.  xvi.  14).  4.  The  fourth  and  last 
fall  follows,  which  is  like  the  opening  of  the  fourth  seal,  and  the  fourth  horse 
appears  (Eev.  vi.  8) :  when  men  fall  totally,  finally,  voluntarily,  and  maliciously. 
Thus  Simon  Magus,  Julian  the  apostate,  Hymenaeus,  and  Alexander,  whose  names 
are  in  God's  black  book.  Here  the  gulf  is  fixed,  and  there  is  "no  retracing  of 
the  steps  "  hence.  These  are  not  to  be  renewed  by  repentance.  This  fall  is  like 
that  of  Jericho's  walls :  they  fell  down  flat  with  a  curse  annexed  (Josh.  vi.  26) ;  or 
as  Babylon's  walls,  with  a  vengeance  (Jer.  li.  58) ;  both  without  hope  of  repairing  : 
or  like  the  fall  of  Lucifer  the  first  apostate,  without  offer,  or  hope  of  offer,  of  grace 
anymore  forever:  or  like  the  fall  of  Judas,  who,  "  falling  headlong,  burst  asunder 
in  the  midst,  and  all  his  bowels  gushed  out "  (Acts  i.  18).  III.  The  mixed  fall. 
There  is  also  another  kind  of  fall,  of  a  mixed  or  middle  nature ;  and  to  which  side 
of  the  two  (godly  or  reprobate)  I  should  cast  it,  is  not  so  easy  to  determine. 
Relapses  into  sin  are  like  relapses  into  a  disease  after  hopes  and  beginning  of 
recovery.  1.  This  informs  us  that  possible  it  is  for  men  (yea,  too  ordinary)  to  fall 
from  grace  We  wonder  not  to  see  a  house  built  on  the  sand  to  fall,  or  seed  not 
having  root  wither,  or  trees  in  the  parched  wilderness  decay  (Jer.  xvii.  6),  or  meteors 
vanish,  or  blazing  stars  fall,  or  clouds  without  rain  blown  about,  or  wells  without 
springs  dried  up.  So,  for  hypocrites  to  prove  apostates  is  no  strange  thing,  and 
utterly  to  fall  away.  2.  Even  godly  and  gracious  persons  are  subject  to  fall,  and 
therefore  must  not  be  secure  :  they  must  "  work  out  their  salvation  with  fear  and 
trembling"  (Phil.  ii.  12).  They  are  bidden  to  "fear  lest  they  should  fall  short" 
(Heb.  iv.  1) :  "  stand  fast  "  (1  Cor.  xvi.  13) :  "take  heed  lest  they  fall  "  (1  Cor.  x. 
12):  "look  diUgently  lest  any  fail  of,"  or  "fall  from"  (so  is  the  other  reading) 


CHAP.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  463 

"  the  grace  of  God  "  (Heb.  xii.  15) :  "  take  the  whole  armour  of  God,  that  they  may 
be  able  to  stand  "  (Eph.  vL  13).  3.  Yet  a  truly  regenerate  soul,  a  plant  of  God  s 
planting  by  the  waterside,  a  plant  or  graff  grafted  into  Christ,  and  rooted  in  Christ, 
can  never  fall  away  totally  or  finally  :  Peter  could  not,  when  Christ  prayed  for  him : 
the  elect  cannot  (Matt.  xxiv.  24).  1.  This  text  is  thunder  and  hghtning  against 
apostates. —Awake,  you  drowsy  professors  1  There  is  no  sin  hke  apostasy  : 
adulteries,  manslaughter,  theft,  idolatries,  &c.,  nothing  to  this.  2.  This  speaks 
terror  to  professors  fallen,  or  lying  in  scandalous  sins. — You  cannot  sin  at  so  easy 
a  rate  as  others.  You  know  your  Master's  will,  and  do  it  not,  therefore  ye  "  shall 
be  beaten  with  more  stripes  "  (Luke  xii.  47).  You  are  as  a  city  set  on  a  hUl.  Your 
fault  cannot  be  hid,  no  more  than  an  echpse  of  the  sun.  3.  Terror  to  such  as,  after 
conviction  and  engiigements  under  affliction  and  distress,  after  some  prayers,  vows, 
and  a  begun  or  resolved  reformation,  return  to  former  courses. — As  they,  after  what 
they  promised  in  their  distress,  returned  when  delivered,  and  started  aside  like  a 
broken  bow  (Jer.  xxxiv.  15, 16).  The  new  broom  of  affliction  swept  the  house  clean 
for  the  present ;  but  afterwards  the  unclean  spirit  returns,  and  this  washed  sow  is 
wallowing  in  the  mire  again.  4.  Terror  to  such  as  lapse  and  relapse  into  the 
same  siu  again. — As  Pharaoh,  Jeroboam,  and  those  antichristian  brood  which 
repented  not  (Kev.  ix.  20.  21).  Notwithstanding  all  judgments,  convictions,  con- 
fessions, promises,  they  go  from  evil  to  worse,  from  siffliction  to  sin  ;  from  sin  to 
duty,  and  from  duty  to  sin  ;  repent  and  sin,  sin  and  repent  (Jer.  ix.  3)  ;  and  from 
repenting  of  sin  in  distress,  go  to  repent  of  their  repentance  when  delivered. 
Discrimination.  1.  There  are  some  who  have  fallen  into  foul  sins  ;  and  they  think 
their  case  desperate,  because  of  the  greatness  of  their  sins.  But  their  sin  is  not  the 
sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  because  not  committed  after  light,  taste,  partaking  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  cfcc,  but  in  the  days  of  their  ignorance,  as  Paul  once.  Some  fall 
fouUy  after  conversion,  as  Peter,  but  not  deliberately,  maliciously  ;  and  both  these 
may  be  the  spots  of  children  :  they  see  •'  the  plague  "  in  their  heart  (1  Kings  viii.38), 
feel  the  smart.  These  have  foul  scabs  ;  but  they  go  to  Jordan  and  wash,  go  to  "  the 
fountain  opened  for  sin  and  uucleanness  " ;  and  then  "  though  their  sins  be  as 
scarlet,  they  shall  be  £.3  white  as  snow ;  though  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be 
as  white  as  wool "  (Isa.  i.  18).  2.  There  be  some  relapses  through  human 
infirmity,  which  are  truly  bewailed.  This  is  not  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost 
neither.  3.  But  there  are  others  that  make  a  trade  of  sin,  "  drink  up  iniquity  Uke 
water,"  that  "  add  drunkenness  to  thirst,"  and  fall  and  rise,  and  rise  and  fall :  they 
lapse  and  relapse,  and  sUde  away  as  water.  Shall  I  say  such  shall  have  peace  ? 
No  1  What  peace  to  such  so  long  as  their  sins  remain  ?  I  shall,  to  conclude,  give 
a  few  short  directions,  to  prevent  falls  and  relapses,  but  caimot  now  enlarge  upon 
them.  1.  Watch  and  pray,  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation  (Matt.  xxvi.  41). — 
Watch  in  prayer,  watch  after,  watch  when  alone,  watch  when  in  company,  especially 
against  ill  company  and  all  occasions  of  sin.  2.  Keep  conscience  tender,  and  shun 
the  first  motioiiS  and  occasions  of  sin. — "  If  thou  find  thyself  given  to  appetite,  put 
a  knife  to  thy  throat,"  is  the  wise  man's  counsel ;  if  to  wine,  "  look  not  on  the 
glass  "  ;  if  to  wantonness,  "  come  not  near  her  corner."  3.  Take  heed  of  having 
slight  thoughts  of  sin. — As  to  say,  "As  long  as  it  is  no  worse"  ;  "It  is  the  first 
time  "  ;  "  It  is  but  now  and  then,  a  great  chance,  when  I  meet  with  such  company  "  ; 
and  many  have  such  foolish  pleas,  and  so  play  at  the  mouth  of  the  cockatrice's  den 
till  they  are  stung  to  death.  4.  Take  heed  of  having  light  thoughts  of  God's 
mercy. — "  When  sin  abounds,  grace  superabounds,"  &c.  The  Lord  saith.  He  "  will 
not  spare  "  such,  nor  be  merciful  to  them.  5.  Take  heed  of  reasoning  from  God's 
temporal  forbearance,  to  eternal  forgiveness.  6.  Take  heed  of  presuming  of  thy 
own  strength  :  "I  can,  and  I  mean  to  repent ;  I  can  when  I  wiU,  and  I  wiU  when 
time  serves.  I  trust  I  am  not  so  bad,  that  God  hath  not  given  me  over.  Many 
have  gone  further  than  I :  why  may  I  not  repent  at  my  last  hour  ?  "  7.  Take 
heed  of  a  mock  repentance,  saying,  '•  I  cry  God-mercy  1  God  forgive  me  1  I  sin 
daily,  and  repent  daily.  When  I  have  sworn  or  been  drunk,  I  am  heartily  sorry. 
Is  not  this  repentance  ?  "  I  answer.  No  1  Eepentance  is  quite  another  thing. 
••  The  burnt  child,"  we  say,  "  dreads  the  fire."  (John  Sheffield,  M.A.)  The  terrible 
hypothesis ;  or,  the  irrecoverable  fall : — I.  Pebsonal  Chkistianitt  is  a  spikituaIj 
?ARTiciPATioN  OF  DiviNE  BEALiTiES.  1.  It  Is  an  idea.  2.  It  is  a  feeling.  3.  It  is  a 
power,  II.  Apostasy  fbom  peksonal  Cheistianity  is  an  immense  sin.  1.  The 
falling  away  here  mentioned  is  that  of  total  apostasy.  2.  The  apostasy  here  spoken 
of  is  St.  ,  I  purely  as  an  hypothesis.  3.  Although  the  apostasy  is  spoken  of  only 
as  hypothetical,  it  is,  nevertheless,  possible.    The  man  who  parts  with  Christ 


464  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  ti. 

ihi-ougli  the  force  of  old  prejudices,  is  the  Caiaphas  of  the  age ;  he  who  parts  with 
Him  for  money,  is  the  Judas  ;  he  who  parts  with  Him  for  popular  favour,  is  the 
Pilate.  The  tragedy  of  Golgatha  has  many  actors ;  every  generation  every  day 
reiterates  these  multiplied  crucifixions.  HI.  The  sin  of  such  an  apostasy  would 
ENTAIL  THE  MOST  LAMENTABLE  BEBULTS.  1.  The  lamentable  results  of  this  sin  would 
be  irremediable.  (1)  Their  first  repentance  could  only  have  been  produced  by  the 
whole  force  of  the  moral  considerations  contained  in  the  gospel.  (2)  The  supposed 
apostates  have  triumphed  over  the  whole  force  of  the  most  powerful  considerations 
that  can  ever  be  addressed  to  them.  2.  The  lamentable  results  of  this  crime  are 
consonant  with  character.  Their  doom  answers  to  their  state.  3.  The  lamentable 
results  of  this  crime  are  terribly  awfuL  The  conscience  in  flames  I  4.  The  lament- 
able results  of  this  crime  are  ever  just  at  hand.  "  Nigh  unto  cursing."  {Hornilist.) 
Indefinite  renewal  impossible : — The  impossibihty  here  asserted  consists  not  in  a 
single  repentance,  but  in  the  indefinite  renewal  of  the  first  vivid  life  of  the  Spirit  in 
the  case  of  Christians  who  are  meanwhile  continually  crucifying  to  themselves  the 
Son  of  God  afresh  :  the  spiritual  impressions  that  were  wrought  once  for  all  at  their 
conversion  must  of  necessity  be  weakened  by  repetition.  The  passage,  as  it  stands 
in  the  text,  is  in  thorough  harmony  with  the  previous  context,  which  maintains  the 
need  for  progressive  teaching  as  the  child  grows  into  the  man  in  Christ,  and  pro- 
tests agaiust  the  continual  reiteration  of  truths  which  have  lost  their  freshness ; 
and  with  the  subsequent  context,  which  condemns  spiritual  barrenness  under  the 
figure  of  sterile  soil  which,  season  after  season,  in  spite  of  fertilising  rain  and  human 
tillage,  produces  only  thorns  and  thistles.  (F.  Rendall,  M.A.)  Final  perseverance  : — 
If  Christians  can  fall  away,  and  cease  to  be  Christians,  they  cannot  be  renewed 
again  to  repentance.  "But,"  says  one,  "  you  say  they  cannot  fall  away."  What 
is  the  use  of  putting  this  "  if  "  in,  hke  a  bugbear  to  frighten  children.  If  God  has 
put  it  in.  He  has  put  it  in  for  wise  reasons.  Let  me  show  you  why.  1.  First,  it  is 
put  in  to  keep  thee  from  faUing  away.  God  preserves  His  children  from  falUng 
away ;  but  He  keeps  them  by  the  use  of  means ;  and  one  of  these  is,  the  terrors  of 
the  law,  bhowiug  them  what  would  happen  if  they  were  to  fall  away.  There  is  a 
deep  precipice  :  what  is  the  best  way  to  keep  any  one  from  going  down  there  ?  Why, 
to  tell  him  that  if  he  did  he  would  inevitably  be  dashed  to  pieces.  In  some  old 
castle  there  is  a  deep  cellar,  where  there  is  avast  amount  of  fixed  air  and  gas,  which 
would  kill  anybody  who  went  down.  What  does  the  guide  say  ?  "  If  you  go  down 
you  will  never  come  up  alive."  Who  thinks  of  going  down  ?  The  very  fact  of  the 
guide  telling  us  what  the  consequence  would  be  keeps  us  from  it.  It  leads  the 
beUever  to  greater  dependence  on  God,  to  a  holy  caution,  because  he  knows  that  if 
he  were  to  fall  away  he  could  not  be  renewed.  It  is  calculated  to  excite  fear ;  and 
this  holy  fear  keeps  the  Christian  from  falling.  2.  It  is  to  excite  our  gratitude. 
Suppose  you  say  to  your  little  boy,  "  Don't  you  know,  Tommy,  if  I  were  not  to  give 
you  yuur  dinner  and  your  supper  you  would  die  ?  There  is  nobody  else  to  give 
Tommy  dinner  and  supper. "  What  then  ?  The  child  does  not  think  that  you  are 
not  going  to  give  him  his  dinner  and  supper  ;  he  knows  you  will,  and  he  is  grateful 
to  you  for  them.  The  chemist  tells  us  that  if  there  were  no  oxygen  mixed  with  the 
air  animals  would  die.  Do  you  suppose  that  there  will  be  no  oxygen,  and,  therefore, 
we  shall  die?  No,  he  only  teaches  you  the  great  wisdom  of  God,  in  havii  g  mixed 
the  gases  in  their  proper  proportions.  Says  one  of  the  old  astronomers,  "  There  is 
gi-eat  wisdom  in  God,  that  He  has  put  the  sun  exactly  at  a  right  distance — not  so  far 
away  that  we  should  be  frozen  to  death,  and  not  so  near  that  we  should  be  scorched." 
He  says,  •'  If  the  sun  were  a  million  miles  nearer  to  us  we  should  be  scorched  to 
death."  Does  the  man  suppose  that  the  sun  will  he  a  million  miles  nearer,  and, 
therefore,  we  shall  be  scorched  to  death  ?  He  says,  "  If  the  sun  were  a  million 
miles  farther  off  we  should  be  frozen  to  death."  Does  he  mean  that  the  sun  will  be 
a  million  miles  farther  off,  and,  therefore,  we  shall  be  frozen  to  death  ?  Not  at  all. 
Yet  it  is  quite  a  rational  way  of  speaking,  to  show  us  how  grateful  we  should  be  to 
God.  So  says  the  apostle.  Christian  !  if  thou  shouldst  fall  away,  thou  couldst 
never  be  renewed  unto  repentance.  Thank  thy  Lord,  then,  that  He  keeps  thee. 
{G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  moral  condition  in  which  renewal  is  impossible : — When 
anything  is  said  to  be  impossible,  the  natural  question  is.  Impossible  to  whom  ?  for 
it  is  plain  that  what  may  be  possible  to  one  being,  may  be  impossible  to  another 
being.  If  I  were  called  to  attempt  to  lift  a  stone  of  a' ton  weight,  I  would  naturally 
say,  "  No,  I  will  not  attempt  it,  for  it  is  impossible," — meaning,  not  that  it  ia 
impossible  that  the  stone  should  be  lifted,  but  tliat  it  is  impossible  that  I  should 
111  it.    Tlie  impossibility  in  the  case  before  as  may  either  be  considered  as  existing 


CHA».  Ti.]  HEBREWS.  465 

In  reference  to  God,  or  in  reference  to  man.  If  the  restoration  of  these  apostates 
to  the  state  in  which  they  once  were  be  an  impossibility  in  reference  to  God,  it 
must  be  so  either  because  it  is  inconsistent  with  His  nature  and  perfections,  or  with 
His  decree  and  purpose.  In  the  first  sense,  "  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie,"  or  to 
"  olear  the  guilty  "  without  satisfaction.  In  the  second  sense,  it  was  impossible 
that  Saul  and  his  posterity  should  continue  on  the  throne  of  IsraeL  That  the 
restoration  of  an  apostate  to  his  former  state  is  an  impossibility  in  either  of  these 
points  of  view,  is  more  than  we  are  warranted  to  assert.  If  we  carefully  examine 
the  passage,  I  apprehend  we  will  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  impossibility  ia 
considered  as  existing  not  in  reference  to  God,  but  in  reference  to  man — that  the 
apostle's  assertion  is,  that  it  is  impossible,  by  any  renewed  course  of  elementary 
instruction,  to  bring  back  such  apostates  to  the  acknowledgment  of  the  truth.  Be 
had  stated  that  many  of  the  Hebrews  had  unlearned  all  that  they  had  learned,  and 
"  had  need  of  some  one  to  teach  them  again  the  first  principles  of  the  oracles  of 
God. "  Yet  he  declares  his  determination  not  to  enter  anew  on  a  course  of  elementary 
instruction,  but  to  go  on  to  some  of  the  higher  branches  of  Christian  knowledge ; 
for  this  cause,  that  there  was  no  reason  to  expect  that  such  restatements  would  be 
of  any  use  in  reclaiming  those  who,  after  being  instructed  in  the  doctrines  and 
evidences  of  Christianity,  had  apostatised ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  there  was 
every  reason  to  hope  that  illustrations  of  the  higher  branches  of  Christian  truth 
would  be  of  the  greatest  use  to  those  who  "  held  fast "  the  "  first  principles,"  ia 
establishing  them  in  the  faith  and  profession,  in  the  comforts  and  obedience  of  the 
gospel ;  just  as  a  farmer  after  making  a  fair  trial  of  a  piece  of  ground,  and  finding 
that,  though  everything  has  been  done  for  it  in  the  most  favourable  circumstances, 
it  still  continues  barren,  desists,  saying,  "  It  is  impossible  to  make  anything  of  thai 
field,"  and  turns  his  attention  to  rendering  still  more  fertile  those  fields  which  have 
already  given  evidence  of  their  capability  of  improvement.  '•  It  is  not  possible,  by 
a  renewed  statement  of  Christian  principles  and  their  evidence,  to  bring  back  these 
apostates.  Nothing  can  be  stated  but  what  has  been  already  stated,  which  they 
seemed  to  understand,  which  they  professed  to  believe,  but  which  they  now  openly 
and  contemptuously  reject.  No  evidence,  stronger  than  that  which  has  been  brought 
before  their  minds,  and  which  they  once  seemed  to  feel  the  force  of,  can  be  pre- 
sented to  them.  The  meaning  and  evidence  of  Christian  truth  have  been  before 
their  minds  in  as  favourable  circumstances  as  can  be  conceived."  The  apostle'a 
assertion,  then,  appears  to  me  to  be  just  this — "  Statement  and  argument  would  be 
entirely  lost  on  such  persons,  and  therefore  we  do  not  enter  on  them."  {John 
Brown,  D.D.)  Danger  of  falling  away  : — A  Christian  said  to  a  minister  of  hia 
acquaintance,  "  I  am  told  you  are  against  the  perseverance  of  the  saints."  •'  Not  I, 
indeed,"  he  replied ;  "it  is  the  perseverance  of  sinners  that  I  oppose."  "But  do 
you  not  think  that  a  child  of  God  can  fall  very  low,  and  yet  be  restored  ?  "  "I 
think  it  would  be  very  dangerous  to  make  the  experiment."  Nothing  more  can  be 
done : — If  the  mightiest  arguments  have  been  brought  to  bear  on  the  conscience  in 
vain ;  if  after  some  slight  response,  which  gave  hopes  of  better  things,  it  has 
relapsed  into  the  insensibihty  of  its  former  state,  there  remains  nothing  more  to  be 
done.  There  is  nothing  more  potent  than  the  wail  of  Calvary's  broken  heart  and 
the  peal  from  Sinai's  brow,  and  if  these  have  been  tried  in  vain,  no  argument  is  left 
which  can  touch  the  conscience  and  arouse  the  heart.  If  these  people  had  never 
been  exposed  to  these  appeals,  there  would  have  been  some  hope  for  them,  but  what 
hope  can  there  be  now,  since,  in  having  passed  through  them  without  permanent 
effect,  they  have  become  more  hardened  in  the  process  than  they  were  at  first  ? 
Here  is  a  man  dragged  from  an  ice-pond,  and  brought  into  the  infirmary.  Hot 
flannels  are  at  once  applied,  the  limbs  are  chafed,  every  means  known  to  moclern 
science  for  restoring  Ufe  is  employed.  At  first  it  seems  as  if  these  appliances  will 
take  effect,  there  are  twitchings  and  convulsive  movements ;  but,  alas  !  they  soon 
subside,  and  the  surgeon  gravely  shakes  his  head.  •*  Can  you  do  nothing  else  ?  " 
"  Nothing,"  he  replies ;  "  I  have  used  every  method  I  can  devise,  and  if  these  fail, 
it  is  impossible  to  renew  again  to  life."  This  passage  has  nothing  to  do  with  those 
who  fear  lest  it  condemns  them.  The  presence  of  that  anxiety,  like  the  cry  which 
betrayed  the  real  mother  in  the  days  of  Solomon,  establishes  beyond  a  doubt  that 
you  are  not  one  that  has  fallen  away  beyond  the  possibihty  of  renewal  to  repentance. 
If  you  are  still  touched  by  gospel  sermons,  and  are  anxious  to  repent,  and  are  in  godly 
fear  lest  you  should  be  a  castaway,  take  hea  t ;  these  are  signs  Uiat  this  passage 
has  no  bearing  on  you.  Why  make  yourself  ill  with  a  sick  man's  medicine  ?  But  if 
jou  are  growing  callous  and  insensible  under  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  look  into  this 

80 


466  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 


passage,  andsee  your  doom,  unless  you  speedily  arrest  your  steps.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
The  recoil  fr&m  good  influences  .•—Translated  into  a  statement  of  tendency,  the 
doctrine  taught  is  this. — Every  fall  involves  a  risk  of  apostasy,  and  the  higher  the 
experience  fallen  from  the  greater  the  risk.  The  deeper  religion  has  gone  into  a 
man  at  the  commencement  of  his  Christian  course,  the  less  hopeful  his  condition  if 
he  lapse.  The  nearer  the  initial  stage  to  a  thorough  conversion  the  less  likely  is  a 
second  change,  if  the  first  turn  out  abortive ;  and  so  on,  in  ever-increasing  degrees 
of  improbability  as  lapses  increase  in  number.  The  brighter  the  light  in  the  soul, 
the  deeper  the  darkness  when  the  light  is  put  out.  The  sweeter  the  manna  of  God's 
Word  to  the  taste,  the  more  loathsome  it  becomes  when  it  has  lost  its  relish.  The 
fiercer  the  fire  in  the  hearth  while  the  fuel  lasts,  the  more  certain  it  is  that  when 
the  fire  goes  out  there  will  remain  nothing  but  ashes.  The  livelier  the  hope  of 
glory,  the  greater  the  aversion  to  all  thoughts  of  the  world  to  come  when  once  a 
Christian  has,  like  Atheist  in  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  turned  his  back  on  the 
heavenly  Jerusalem.  Action  and  reaction  are  equal.  The  more  forcibly  you  throw 
an  elastic  ball  against  a  wall  the  greater  the  rebound ;  in  like  manner  the  more 
powerfully  the  human  spirit  is  brought  under  celestial  influences,  the  greater  the 
recoil  from  all  good,  if  there  be  a  recoil  at  all.  The  gushing  enthusiasts  of  to- 
day are  the  cynical  sceptics  of  to-morrow.  Have  promoters  of  "  revivals  "  laid 
these  things  duly  to  heart?  {A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D.)  Backsliding  and  apostasy  : — 
The  difference  between  backsliding  and  apostasy  is  that  between  a  body  benumbed, 
stiffened,  and  all  but  deprived  of  life  by  the  cold,  and  the  same  body  petrified  and 
hardened  into  stone.  (J.  Leifchild,  D.D.)  Sinning  against  the  light : — He  who 
sins  against  the  light  is  hurt  beyond  hope  of  cure.  {Old  Greek  Saying.)  Shutting 
out  love  ;— 

"  He  that  shuts  love  out,  in  turn 
Shall  be  shut  out  by  love, 
And  on  her  threshold  lie 
Howling  in  outer  darkness."    {Tennyson.) 

Freezing  after  a  thaw : — I  have  read  that  there  is  no  ice  that  Is  harder  to 
melt  than  ice  that  has  been  once  melted  and  frozen  the  second  time.  So 
the  soul  that  has  begun  to  melt  before  the  heart  of  Christ,  and  then  refuses 
to  lay  its  sins  on  the  Lamb  of  God,  that  heart  is  the  hardest  and  the 
most  difficult  to  break  again.  (Theo.  Moncd.)  Process  of  backsliding : — 
Two  ministers,  walking  along  the  banks  of  a  river,  came  to  a  tree  which  had 
been  blown  down  in  a  recent  gale.  It  was  a  mighty,  noble  tree,  tall  and 
substantial,  with  large  outspreading  roots  and  ample  foliage.  Approaching  to 
examine  it,  they  found  it  had  been  snapped  off  just  above  the  roots ;  and,  on  looking 
stiU  closer,  found  that  there  was  only  an  outer  shell  of  sound  wood,  and  that  the 
heart  was  rotten.  Unnoticed,  decay  had  been  going  on  for  years.  So  is  it  generally 
with  the  fall  of  professing  Christians ;  the  fall  is  but  the  result  of  evil  that  has 
been  allowed  to  steadily  gather  strength  within  the  heart.  The  difficulty  of  the 
passage : — Do  you  ask  me  whether  it  is  possible  for  a  Christian  man  to  commit  a 
crime,  and  to  sink  into  a  doom  like  this  ?  I  dare  not  obhterate  the  tremendous 
force  of  this  passage  by  denying  the  po?sibility.  Far  better  leave  it  as  it  is— an 
awful  hypothesis — to  warn  us  against  the  danger  and  the  guilt,  than  venture  by 
fine-drawn  speculations,  to  diminish  its  practical  power.  If  you  ask  me  how  I  can 
reconcile  the  passage  as  it  stands,  with  the  merciful  promises  which  assure  us  of 
God's  keeping  if  we  trust  in  Him,  I  answer  that  these  promises  are  to  those  who 
trust,  and  continue  to  trust,  in  God,  not  to  those  who  trusted  once,  but  whose  trust 
has  now  perished  ;  and  I  answer  farther,  that  I  would  rather  be  charged  by  a  whole 
council  of  theologians,  with  introducing  scientific  inconsistency  into  a  theological 
Bystem,  than  dare  to  lessen  the  term  of  a  divinely-inspired  warning,  the  undi- 
minished awfulness  of  which  may  be  needed  to  save  some  soul  from  death.  {R.  W. 
Dale,  LL.D.)  What  is  it  to  fall  away  ? — To  fall  away  is  to  go  back  from  the 
outward  profession  of  Christianity — not  temporarily,  but  finally  ;  not  as  the  result 
of  some  sudden  sin,  but  because  the  first  outward  stimulus  is  exhausted,  and  there 
is  no  true  life  beating  at  the  heart,  to  repair  or  reinvigorate  the  wasting  devotion 
of  the  life.  It  is  to  resemble  those  wandering  planets,  which  never  shone  with  their 
own  light,  but  only  in  the  reflected  light  of  some  central  sun ;  but  which,  having 
broken  from  its  guiding  leash,  dash  further  and  further  into  the  blackness  of  darkness, 
without  one  spark  of  life,  or  heat,  or  light.  It  is  to  return  as  a  dog  to  its  vomit,  and  as  a 


CHAP.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  46T 

BOW  to  her  filth ;  because  the  reformation  was  only  outward  and  temporary,  and  the 
dog  or  sow  natures  were  never  changed  through  the  gracious  work  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  It  is  to  be  another  Judas ;  to  commit  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost ;  to 
lose  all  earnestness  of  feeling,  all  desire  for  better  things,  all  power  of  tender  emo- 
tion, and  to  become  utterly  callous  and  dead,  as  the  pavement  on  which  we  walk, 
or  the  rusty  armour  hauging  on  the  old  castle's  walls.  (P.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  A 
backslider  a  sad  sight : — "  It  is  a  miserable  thing  to  be  a  backsMder.  Of  aU  unhappy 
things  that  can  befall  a  man,"  says  Ryle,  "  I  suppose  it  is  the  worst.  A  stranded 
ship,  a  broken-winged  eagle,  a  garden  overrun  with  weeds,  a  harp  without  strings, 
a  church  in  ruins — all  these  are  sad  sights  ;  but  a  backslider  is  a  sadder  sight  still." 
Misery  of  a  backslider : —Tervihle  is  the  falling  away  of  any  who  make  profession 
and  act  quite  contrary  to  conviction.    A  lady  here  (Huddersfield)  thus  relates  her 

own  case.     "  Once  Mr. and  I  were  both  in  the  right  way.    I  drew  him  into  the 

world  again.  I  am  now  the  most  miserable  of  beings.  When  I  lie  down  I  fear  I 
shall  awake  in  hell.  When  I  go  out  full  dressed,  and  seem  to  have  all  the  world 
can  give  me,  I  am  ready  to  sink  under  the  terrors  of  my  own  mind.  What  greatly 
increases  my  misery  is  the  remembrance  of  the  dying  speech  of  my  own  sister,  who 
told  me  she  had  stifled  convictions  and  obstinately  fought  against  light  to  enjoy  the 
company  of  the  world.     "  Sister,"  said  she,  "  I  die  without  hope.     Beware  this  be 

not  your  case!"    "But,  indeed,"  said  Mrs. ,  "I  fear  it  will."    ((7.  Venn.) 

They  crucify  to  themselves  the  Son  of  God  afresh. — Crucify  ivg  the  Son  of  God 
afresh : — Various  as  have  been  God's  dealings  with  the  world,  there  is,  after  all,  a 
terrible  impartiality  in  His  dispensations  to  His  rational  creatures.    Wherever  men 
possess  reason  and  conscience,  they  possess,  in  some  measure,  the  means  of  pleasing 
or  displeasing  Him ;  whenever  they  can,  in  the  lowest  degree,  conceive  His  law, 
they  are  bound  to  obey  it.    The  whole  world  is  under  a  moral  government,  though 
we  alone  are  in  a  written  covenant ;  all  live  to  God,  though  we  alone  have  professed 
"  the  law  of  the  spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus."    The  very  temptations  that  dazzle 
the  unevangelised  world  are,  in  innumerable  instances,  the  same  temptations  that  are 
trying  us — anger,  sensuality,  ambition,  avarice.    We  are  their  brethren  in  all  thinsrs 
except  in  the  revelation  of  the  Divine  mercy  and  the  gift  of  the  Divine  Spirit. 
While  the  human  nature  of  the  Church  is  uniform,  its  trials  must  be  nearly  so.     As 
the  Lord  of  the  Church  is  the  same  "  yesterday  and  to-day  and  for  ever,"  so  the 
probation  He  enforces  is  distributed  pretty  evenly  through  all  ages  and  classes. 
But  of  all  the  equahsations  of  evil  in  successive  ages,  of  all  the  repetitions  of  trial 
from  generation  to  generation,  of  all  the  instances  evincing  that,  in  the  Church  as 
in  the  world,  "  the  thing  that  has  been  will  be  " — unquestionably  that  expressed  in 
the  text  is  the  most  startling  and  fearful.     The  Crucifixion  of  Christ,  in  its  literal 
reality,  stands  alone  in  the  history  of  man.     It  was  the  last  and  darkest  depth  of 
human  criminality.    The  original  fall,  and  the  rejection  of  the  Redeemer,  are  the 
two  saddest  pages  in  the  story  of  our  race.    But  mournful  as  is  the  former,  it  has 
never,  probably,  left  the  impression  upon  the  heart  which  is  at  once  produced  by  all 
ihose  dread  accompaniments  that  prepared  and  embittered  the  last  sufferings  of  the 
meek  and  merciful  Friend  of  man.    Injustice,  cruelty,  false  shame,  unworthy  indo- 
lence, covetousness,  ambition,  hypocrisy,  envy,  all  were  in  different  ways  exhibited 
in  this  tremendous  tragedy  ;  all  contributed  in  different  ways  to  fix  the  catastrophe. 
No,  never,  surely,  is  man,  in  all  the  possibilities  of  futurity,  destined  again  to  con- 
summate a  wickedness  like  this.     It  must  be  for  ever  solitary  in  the  world,  an  event 
placed  beyond  anticipation,  repetition,  or  parallel;  a  lonely  and  terrible  monument 
of  unapproachable  guilt.     Not  thus,  however,  speaks  the   voice  of  inspiration. 
Heaven  has  not  spared  us  this  trial.    When  Christ  was  about  to  die,  He  instituted 
a  memorial  sacrament  of  His  passion,  to  show  forth  His  death  until  He  come.     It 
would  seem  that  there  is,  as  it  were,  a  fearful  and  Satanic  sacrament  too,  of  that 
same  dread  hour,  by  which  it  is  still  in  man's  power  to  reiterate  and  prolong  His 
death  until  He  come  to  judge  the  long  succession  of  His  crucifiers.     St.  Paul 
delivers  to  us  the  tremendous  truth,  that  there  is  in  man  a  continued  capacity  of 
"crucifying  afresh  the  Son  of  God  "  ;  a  power  to  act  over  aprain  all  the  scene  of  His 
torture,  to  league  with  the  malignant  priests  and  the  scofiing  soldiers,  to  buffet  the 
unresisting  cheek,  to  bind  the  crown  of  thorns.    Reflect  on  the  frame  and  temper 
of  mind,  on  the  weakness  and  the  wickedness,  that  made  the  chosen  people  of  God 
the  murderers  of  His  Son,  and  try  if  you  cannot  catch  some  faint  image  of  that 
treachery  in  your  own  hearts.    But  be  true  to  yourselves  if  you  would  indeed  detect 
the  lurking  evil,  and  think  not  that  even  among  the  best  of  us,  in  a  world  of  oft- 
jrecurring  temptation,  it  is  useless  to  prosecute  the  scrutiny.    Doubtless  the  acoaraoy 


468  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  chap,  vfc 

of  the  image  -will  vary  in  degree :  here,  through  the  progressive  sanctification,  all 
but  obliterated ;  here,  through  remaining  worldliness,  vivid  and  undeniable  ;  here, 
through  total  rejection  of  Christ,  all  but  complete.     To  estimate  the  resemblance 
we  must  turn  to  the  original.    When  Christ  was,  in  that  day  of  mingled  horror  and 
glory,  sacrificed  on  Calvary,  few  things  were  more  remarkable  in  the  accessories  of 
the  event  than  the  feelings  and  motives  of  the  people.    Christ  was  unquestionably  a 
favourite  with  the  mass  of  the  people  ;  the  great  obstacle  to  the  schemes  of  the 
priests  was  always  that  "they  feared  the  people."     His  gracious  bearing^  and  the 
mysterious  anticipation  that  surrounded  and   dignified   His    singular    life,  had 
evidently  caught  and  conciliated  the   popular   mind.      Nor  was  it  unqualified 
malignity  that  made  them  His  persecutors.     Christ  Himself  had  found  a  palliation 
for  this  crime  in  their  ignorance,  He  besought  forgiveness  for  them  because  "  they 
knew  not  what  they  did."    Yet,  however  it  came  to  pass,  this  people,  thus  disposed, 
are  found  the  unanimous  destroyers  of  their  Prophet,  the  tumultuous  petitioners 
for  His  crucifixion,  the  fierce  invokers  of  His  blood  on  them  and  on  their  children? 
Strange  as  this  appears,  is  there  indeed  nothing  that  resembles  it  in  our  own 
experience  ?    Is  no  parallel  to  be  found  for  it  in  the  Christian  world  around  us  I 
Can  we  not,  when  we  go  abroad  into  the  highways  of  daily  life,  find  something  in 
the  general  mind  that  reminds  us  of  a  people  honouring  Christ  as  long  as  He  offera 
easy  blessings,  flocking  round  His.  standard  with  enthusiasm  so  long  as  He  is  made 
the  standard-bearer  of  a  party,  professing  boundless  admiration,  devotion,  and  love ; 
yet  when  the  true  hour  of  trial  comes,  and  the  question  can  no  longer  be  escaped, — 
Shall  we  surrender  our  pleasures  or  our  Eedeemer  ? — give  up  the  favour  of  earthly 
superiors  or  the  favour  of  the  King  of  heaven  ? — abandon  our  cherished  sins,  or 
with  our  sins  nail  Jesus  to  the  cross  once  more? — then,  relinquishing  their  short- 
lived discipleship,  following  the  instigation  of  blind  and  guilty  guides,  turning  with 
the  turning  tide,  and  swelling  the  torrent  of  the  persecutors  of  the  body  of  Christ. 
Turn  again  to  the  record.    Among  the  unhappy  instruments  of  Satan,  on  that  dread 
occasion,  was  one  whose  name,  almost  unknown  in  all  else,  his  relation  to  thia 
event    has    miserably  immortalised — the    wretched,    wavering,    timorous  Pilate. 
Willing  to  save,  but  afraid  to  resist,  anxious  to  do  right  as  long  as  virtue  cost  no 
trouble,  —has  this  crucifier  of  Christ  no  image  among  us  ?    Are  there  no  Pilatea 
among  our  grave  and  reputable  men  of  business? — none  who  could  be  models  of 
consummate  piety  if  there  were  no  danger  of  its  disturbing  their  tenure  of  wealth 
and  influence  ? — who  would  gladly  save  the  Son  of  God  from  degradation  if  they 
were  not  a  little  apprehensive  of  degrading  themselves  in  the  task, — and  would 
allow  Him  supreme  authority  as  long  as  their  own  was  warranted  secure  ?     Not  far 
removed  from  this  is  the  case  of  those  rulers  who  struggled  against  their  very  faith 
lest  it  should  hazard  their  popularity  (John  xii.  43).    Alas  1  these  poor  dependenta 
on  human  fame  stand  not  alone  in  the  world ;  this  weapon  of  the  evil  one  has  not 
been  suffered  to  rust  in  disuse  1     It  is  not  with  open  disavowal  that  the  votary  of 
fashionable  worldliness  disclaims  the  Lord  of  glory.    A  peril  such  as  this  might  be 
met  and  warded  off.    But  society  does  its  work  surely  because  slowly.    Religion  ia 
not  proved  to  be  absurd,  but  assumed  to  be  so  ;  the  world  would  not  harshly  ask 
us  to  disbelieve  in  Christ,  but  merely  to  forget  Him.     Principles  are  lost  for  ever 
before  we  have  dreamed  they  were  in  danger,  and  the  poor  victim  of  the  world's 
opinion  has  learned  to  "  crucify  afresh  the  Son  of  God,"  without  rehnquishing  one 
outward  characteristic  of  discipleship  !    But  these,  wretched  and  criminal  as  they 
are,  are  but  the  less  daring  forms  of  crime.    Deeper  guilt  than  this  bore  the  suffer- 
ing Lamb  of  God  to  His  cross,  and  deeper  guilt  than  this  is  not  confined  to  His  first 
crucifiers.    Can  we  witness  nothing  that  recalls  the  rebellious  ambition  of  those 
who  said,  "  This  is  the  heir ;  come,  let  us  kill  Him,  and  the  inheritance  shall  be 
ours  "  ?    The  world  at  large — yea,  the  far  immense  of  worlds — is  the  inalienable 
property  of  God ;  the  inheritance  is  entailed  upon  that  only -begotten  Son,  •'  whom," 
it  is  written,  "  He  appointed  Heir  of  aU  things."    And  when,  refusing  to  hold  as 
His  lessees,  spurning  His  rights  of  lordship,  we  would  explode  His  claims  for 
antiquated  and  fanciful,  that  we  may  enjoy  His  gift  as  though  the  fee  were  ours ; 
in  all  this  is  there  none  of  that  spirit  which  once  raged  in  those  who,  in  angry 
impatience  of  His  claims,  "  took  counsel  against  Him  for  to  put  Him  to  death  "  ? 
And  when  a  paltry  hope  of  gain  or  advancement  can  bribe  us  to  forsake  a  graciouB 
Master,  to  forget  all  He  has  done,  and  all  He  has  borne ;  does  he  remain  then  alone 
in  the  world  who  "  said  unto  the  chief  priests,  What  wiU  ye  give  me,  and  I  will 
deliver  Him  unto  you  "  ?    Nay,  at  such  an  hour  we  are  worse  than  Judas ;  for 
•ven  Judas,  the  miserable  soioide  of  remorse,  we  may  believe,  had  another  option 


CHAS.  Ti.]  HEBREWS.  469 

been  his,  would  not  have  "  crucified  the  Son  of  God  afresh  I  "  Can  we  descend  yet 
deeper  ?  Christ  was  crucified  on  the  imputation  of  blasphemy.  What  was  the 
"blasphemy"?  He  had  called  Himself  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  Son  of  man, 
and  in  right  of  this  transcendent  union,  the  Judge  to  come  "  in  the  clouds  of 
heaven,"  and  "  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  power."  If  this  was  false,  His  crucifiera 
were  justified  ;  if  this  was  false,  in  a  theocratic  government,  He  deserved  His  fate. 
There  are  those  who  pronounce  that  mysterious  title  false  in  any  sense  that  could 
have  ever  made  it  "  blasphemy  "  from  human  lips,  who  deny  the  Sonship  of  the 
Eternal  any  significance  beyond  what  more  or  less  belongs  to  all  the  virtuoua 
revealers  and  interpreters  of  the  will  of  heaven  that  have  ever  instructed  man. 
Surely  we  cannot  in  justice  refuse  to  such  impugners  the  place  they  have  chosen 
for  themselves  in  the  throng  that  circled  the  cross  of  Jesus  1  Still  we  have  not  sunk 
to  the  last  level  of  the  Jewish  persecutors.  Fallen  as  we  are,  we  could  not  have 
borne  to  prefer  Barabbas,  the  thief  and  murderer,  to  our  pure  and  guiltless 
Eedeemer.  And  who,  then,  are  the  darling  idols  of  human  applause  ?  Who  are 
the  chosen  of  our  race  that  poetry  crowns  with  its  halo  of  glory,  and  every  young 
imagination  bows  to  worship  ?  Who,  but  the  laureUed  Barabbases  of  history,  the 
chartered  robbers  and  homicides  that  stain  its  pages  with  blood,  and  that,  after 
eighteen  hundred  years  of  Christian  discipline,  the  world  has  not  yet  risen  to  dis- 
countenancing ?  Eemove  the  conventional  discredit  that  attaches  to  the  weaker 
thief,  exalt  him  to  the  majesty  of  the  mihtary  despot,  and  how  many  would  vote  for 
Barabbas,  how  many  linger  with  the  lowly  Jesus  ?  •'  Be  it  so,  but  our  votes  would 
at  least  be  open  and  undisguised,  we  would  not  stoop  to  the  meanness  of  hypocrisy. 
We  would  not,  with  those  you  are  pleased  to  make  our  prototypes,  •  put  on  Him  the 
Bcarlet  robe  and  the  crown,  and  the  sceptre,'  that  we  might  '  bow  the  knee  and 
mock  Him.'  Of  this,  at  least,  we  are  incapable."  Perhaps  so.  I  pray  God  it  may 
be  so.  And  yet,  recall  but  the  hour  that  has  just  now  floated  past  you  into  eternity, 
when  you  "  bowed  the  knee  "  to  this  same  Jesus  who  was  crucified,  when  your  lipa 
uttered  words  of  piercing  sorrow,  and  besought  His  mercy  and  implored  His  aid,  aa 
erring  and  straying  sheep,  as  miserable  offenders,  miserable  sinners.  Ask  your- 
selves how  many  knees  were  bowed  in  the  repentanco  the  Hps  rehearsed,  how 
many  hearts  were  melted  in  the  agony  the  tongue  so  readily  expressed.  And  if 
conscience  whisper  an  accusation,  bethink  you  how  differs  this  from  the  guilt  of 
those  who  called  Him  King,  and  despised  the  royalty  they  ascribed ;  or  was  it  more 
a  crime  to  uisult  Him  when  He  walked  the  earth  in  poverty  and  pain,  than  when 
He  sits,  as  now,  the  recognised  Monarch  of  the  universe  1  {Prof.  Archer  Butler.) 
The  crucifixion  of  Christ,  an  ever-recurring  crime : — I.  Thk  method  by  which 
HEAVEN  ESTIMATES  THE  CHARACTER  OF  MEN.  The  csseucc  of  a  moral  act  hes,  not 
in  the  muscular  exertion,  but  in  the  mental  volition.  1.  This  method  of  judging 
character  commends  itself  to  our  sense  of  justice  as  obviously  right.  2.  This 
method  of  judging  character  urges  the  most  vigorous  discipline  of  the  heart,  3. 
This  method  of  judging  character  suggests  unexpected  revelations  on  the  day  of 
judgment.  II.  The  enobmities  which  cobrxj^t  men  abb  at  all  times  capable 
OF  PEBPETRATiNG.  1.  The  feehugs  which  effected  the  crucifixion  we  may  find 
everywhere  in  the  hearts  of  depraved  men.  2.  Similar  circumstances  would  prob- 
ably lead  to  a  similar  development.  Learn:  1.  The  propiiety  of  a  trembling 
modesty  in  denouncing  the  great  criminals  of  history.  In  condemning  them,  let 
us  take  care  that  we  do  not  foredoom  ourselves.  2.  The  necessity  of  a  heart- 
renovation  for  the  real  improvement  of  humanity,  3.  The  inestimable  value  of 
the  gospel  to  mankind.  {Homilist.)  The  crucifixion  of  Christ  modernised : — To 
a  nature  morally  sensitive  the  crucifixion  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  crime  of  all  crimes. 
Although  eighteen  hundred  years  have  passed  it  is  still  the  most  reaUstic  scene  in 
all  history.  The  strokes  of  the  crucificial  hammers  are  heard  not  only  on  the 
mountains  of  Palestine  ;  they  ring  throughout  the  universe.  The  vividness  of  the 
cross  comes,  in  part,  from  the  way  the  story  of  Calvary  is  told.  There  is  nothing 
elaborate.  No  attempt  at  fine  writing.  Only  a  few  verses.  The  story  is  allowed 
to  tell  itself.  But  here  is  the  secret :  it  is  scenic  from  beginning  to  end ;  it  speaks 
in  pictures.  God  Himself  emphasised  the  enormity  of  the  crucifixion  of  His  Son 
by  means  of  the  great  wonders  by  which  He  marked  the  event,  and  by  which  He 
proclaimed  that  all  nature  was  in  a  sympathetic  agony  with  the  agonising  Christ. 
But  mark  the  way  God  visits  the  crime  of  Christ's  crucifixion  with  retribution  if 
you  would  grasp  its  enormity.  "  The  Hebrews  had  for  centuries  been  dreaming  of 
a  Messiah,  and  at  last  their  Messiah  came.  But  how  did  they  receive  Him  ?  They 
roceived  Him  with  yells  of  <  Crucify.'    At  the  Crosa  of  Jesaa,  which  oonsommated 


470  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

their  iniquity,  the  story  of  their  nation  ends."  Some  of  those  who  shared  in  the 
scene  of  Christ's  crucifixion,  and  myriads  of  their  children,  shared  also  in  the  long 
horror  of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Eomans — a  siege  which,  for  its  unutter- 
able fearfulness,  stands  unparalleled  in  the  story  of  mankind.  They  had  forced  the 
Eomans  to  crucify  their  Christ,  and  they  themselves  were  crucified  in  myriads  by 
the  Eomans  outside  their  walls,  till  room  failed  for  the  crosses  and  wood  to  make 
them  with.  This  would  be  enough  to  spread  before  us  the  enormity  of  the  crime 
of  the  crucifixion  of  Jesus  Christ ;  but  this  is  not  all ;  retribution  still  follows  the 
nation  of  His  crucifiers.  In  this  year  the  Jews  are  an  ostracised  race  in  the 
midst  of  humanity  the  world  over.  To  see  the  enormity  of  the  crucifixion  of  Christ 
put  by  the  side  of  the  appalling  judgment  which  followed  it  an  analysis  of  the  crime. 
The  crucifixion  of  Christ  was  not  a  single  sin,  it  was  a  multifold  sin ;  it  was  a 
moral  compound.  It  was  a  culmination — a  climax,  A  whole  series  of  motives  and 
a  whole  series  of  actions  were  behind  it.  When  we  remember  this  we  see  that  the 
Cross  stands  for  something  upon  the  part  of  man.  It  is  an  exponent  of  humanity. 
It  is  the  work  of  human  nature  unregenerated.  It  shows  the  extreme  of  sin  to 
which  man  will  dare  to  go  ;  he  will  dare  to  crucify  the  Son  of  God.  Is  there  a 
point  in  moral  depravity  beyond  that  ?  If  so,  what  is  it  ?  Hundreds  and  hundreds 
of  typical  Lands  rear  the  Cross  and  ply  the  crucificial  hammers  and  drive  the  cruel 
naUs  of  death.  I  see  the  hand  of  the  Pharisee ;  he  was  a  formalist  in  religion,  and 
could  not  endure  the  pure  spirituaUty  of  Christ's  religion.  I  see  the  hand  of  the 
Elder ;  be  was  a  traditionalist,  and  he  felt  his  religion  reel  before  the  practical 
common-sense  questions  which  Christ  fired  through  it,  as  the  gun-boat  fires  ita 
cannon-balls  through  a  wooden  ship,  I  see  the  hand  of  the  Sadducee ;  he  was  an 
agnostic,  and  he  hated  Christ  because  He  brought  to  bear  against  the  tenets  of  hia 
agnosticism  the  deadly  paralleUsm  of  the  Scriptures.  The  envy  of  the  Churchmen ; 
the  avarice  of  Judas;  the  vacillation  and  cowardice  of  Pilate;  the  perjury  of  the 
false  witnesses ;  the  false  shame  of  those  who  believed  in  Christ  but  who  refused  to 
confess  Him  for  fear  of  the  Pharisees ;  the  desertion  of  His  long-instructed  fol- 
lowers ;  the  brutality  of  the  mob,  who  mocked  Him  as  He  died — all  these  were 
forces  which  combined  to  erect  the  Cross  and  nail  Christ  to  it.  And  what  had 
Christ  done  that  He  should  thus  be  crucified  and  made  an  open  shame  ?  He  had 
loved  men  ;  He  had  opened  the  massive  prison  doors  of  error  and  had  given  men 
the  liberty  of  the  truth  ;  He  had  smitten  haughty  tyiannies  ard  broken  the  oppres- 
sive grip  which  they  had  upon  humanity ;  He  had  taken  children  into  His  arms 
and  had  blessed  them  ;  He  had  lived  a  holy  life,  in  which  no  one  could  pick  a  single 
flaw ;  He  had  healed  ,the  sick  ;  He  had  uttered  the  Sermon  upon  the  Mount  and 
the  golden  promises  aud  the  explanatory  parables.  That  was  all  He  had  done. 
How  the  enormity  of  the  crime  of  crucifying  Him  grows !  We  congratulate  our- 
selves that  we  wt  re  not  at  Calvary  and  that  we  were  spared  the  trial,  the  experience, 
and  the  doom  of  those  who  crucified  Christ,  My  fellow-men  of  the  nineteenth 
century,  the  text  strikes  us  while  we  are  right  in  the  midst  of  our  mistaken  con- 
gratulations. It  says  in  unmistakable  language  the  crime  of  the  crucifixion  of 
Jesus  Christ,  which  is  so  enormous,  is  a  crime  that  is  continuous.  In  the  realm  of 
human  disposition  and  feeling,  in  the  thought-life  of  the  world,  there  is  a  perpetual 
Calvary  and  a  perpetual  crucifixion,  Christ  is  being  crucified  afresh,  and  the  old 
guilt  of  the  first  century  is  not  only  being  constantly  incurred,  but  it  is  being  con- 
stantly increased.  The  men  of  the  first  century,  when  they  crucified  Christ,  knew 
not  what  they  did — they  sinned  in  darkness ;  but  the  men  of  the  nineteenth  century, 
when  they  crucify  Christ,  know  what  they  are  doing — they  sin  against  light.  What 
has  Christ  done  that  any  man  in  the  nineteenth  century  should  crucify  Him  ?  He 
has  filled  the  world  with  pure  principles  ;  He  has  reproduced  Himself  in  the  magni- 
ficent  men  and  women  of  the  Christian  Church ;  He  has  built  up  the  grand  institu- 
tions of  civil  and  religious  liberty ;  He  has  shaped  and  moulded  the  leading  nations 
of  the  earth ;  He  has  given  the  world  the  progress  and  the  triumphs  of  a  Christian 
civihsation.  Do  these  things  make  Him  worthy  of  crucifixion  ?  The  men  of  the 
first  century  who  crucified  Him  saw  only  the  deeds  of  a  very  few  years ;  the  men  of 
the  nineteenth  century  who  crucify  Him  afresh  see  the  deeds  of  1800  years.  They 
sin  against  all  the  centuries  of  the  Christian  era.  There  is  no  mistaking  the  text. 
It  is  in  the  present  tense,  and  it  speaks  of  a  second  act.  It  was  addressed  to  men 
thirty  years  after  Jesus  had  been  enjoying  the  glories  of  the  throne  of  heaven.  He 
was  beyond  the  reach  of  the  physical  touch  of  man.  Paul  did  not  consider  the 
essence  of  a  moral  act  to  lie  in  the  muscular  exertion,  but  in  the  mental  volition. 
"  As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he."    This  is  heaven's  idea  of  moral  con- 


CHAP.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  471 

duct.     The  heart-life  is  the  true  life.     "  The  Lord  looketh  upon  the  heart."    Our 
life  includes  the  unexpressed  wishes,  the  inarticulate  longings,  and  the  unwrought 
purposes  of  the  heart.    It  includes  our  moral  identifications  with  our  fellow-men, 
and  oar  sympathies  with  their  actions.     You  have  now  before  you  the  answer  of 
the  question,  How  is  it  possible  to  recrucify  Christ  ?    The  answer  is  this:  It  is 
possible  by  means  of  moral  identification  with  the  men  of  Calvary,     There  is  a 
brotherhood  of  soul  with  soul ;  by  continuing  in  the  brotherhood  made  up  of  the 
souls  of  the  Pilates,  and  of  the  Pharisees,  and  of  the  Judases,  and  of  their  kindred, 
we  endorse  their  deeds  and  are  held  by  justice  as  alike  criminal  with  them.    When 
their  spirit  is  incarnated  in  our  acts  we  crucify  Christ  afresh.     I  tell  you  that  not  a 
single  impulse  or  passion  that  played  a  part  in  the  great  tragedy  has  died  out  of 
the  world.     They  are  all  pulsating  to-day  in  tlie  hearts  of  men.     The  nineteenth 
century  is  but  a  moral  echo  of  the  first  century.     If  you  are  not  morally  one  with 
the  friends  of  Christ  you  will  be  classified  with  the  cruoifiers  of  Christ.     That  is  the 
principle  which  the  text  enunciates.     Jesus  Himself  enunciates  the  same  principle 
in  the  woes  which  He  pronounces  against  the  Pharisees.    Moral  identification  I 
That  is  the  criterion  of  character  !     That  is  the  basis  upon  which  God  deals  with 
lis  in  judgment.    Moral  identification  is  also  the  basis  upon  which  man  judges  man. 
We  saw  the  play  of  this  principle  of  judgment  during  the  civil  war  which  tore  and 
distracted  our  land.    The  war  opened  with  the  Confederates  firing  upon  Fort 
Sumter.     That  first  act  was  universally  made  to  test  all  the  North.     The  way  a 
man  looked  upon  that  daring  act  was  made  the  criterion  of  his  standing,  the  index 
of  his  loyalty  or  disloyalty.    The  man  who  deplored  it,  and  who  lifted  his  hands  in 
holy  horror  at  the  thought  of  American  citizens  firing  upon  American  citizens,  was 
identified  with  the  men  within  the  fort  who  stood  by  the  guns  of  the  nation  loyally 
and  courageously ;  but  the  man  who  let  the  joy  of  his  soul  shine  out  in  his  face,  or 
embody  itself  in  utterance,  was  identified  with  the  men  who  aimed  and  fired  the 
guns  of  treason,  and  who  tattered  the  dear  old  Stars  and  Stripes,  and  trampled  them 
in  the  dust.     The  latter  man  was  compelled  to  leave  the  North  and  was  treated  as 
a  traitor,  which  he  was.     The  war  was  closed  with  the  awful  tragedy  of  assassina- 
tion.    The  most  dastardly  act  of  all  that  black  history  was  the  firing  of  the  assassin's 
fatal  ball  by  J.  Wilkes  Booth  through  the  noble  frame  of  Abraham  Lincoln.    That 
act  also  was  made  a  test.     Here  and  there  through  the  North  there  were  men  who 
applauded  the  act ;  but  no  sooner  did  the  words  "  Good,"  "  Served  him  right,"  fall 
from  their  lips  than  instantly  they  were  riddled  by  the  Mini6  balls  of  patriots,  or 
swung  out  into  the  air  from  impromptu  gallows.    Why  ?    Because  everywhere  the 
men  of  the  North  looked  upon  them  as  assassins, kindred  Booths.    Why?    Because 
everywhere  the  men  of  the  North  looked  upon  soul  identification  with  treason  aa 
treason,  and  sympathy  with  a  traitor  as  making  a  man  a  traitor.     Moral  identifi- 
cation 1     That  is  the  criterion  of  character.    Both  God  and  man  declare  it  to 
be  the  true  basis  of  righteous  judgment.     If  this  be  so,  then  the  duty  of  the  hour, 
in  view  of  the  theme  which  occupies  our  minds,  is  to  question  ourselves  with  regard 
to  our  moral  identification.     Where  do  you  stand  with  regard  to  Christ?    That  is 
the  question.     With  whom  are  you  classified?    Do  you  crucify  Christ  afresh  ?     If 
by  your  actions  you  are  classified  with  Pilate  you  crucify  Christ.    The  historical 
man  Pilate  is  dead,  but  his  principles  have  been  modernised.    Pilateism  never  dies. 
It  affects  friendship ;  it  pays  compliments ;  it  shifts  and  transfers  responsibility ; 
it  seeks  to  be  on  both  sides ;  it  makes  an  orthodox  profession,  but  lives  a  heterodox 
life ;  it  virtually  acquits  but  actually  executes.    With  whom  are  you  classified  ? 
With  Judas,  the  man  who  sold  his  Master  ?    Why  did  Judas  sell  Chnst  ?    Because 
he  got  money.    The  sale  of  Christ  by  Judas  was  a  pure  matter  of  cash.    If  you  sell 
conscience  or  principle  for  money  you  are  a  Judas  and  a  crucifier  of  Christ.    If  yon 
are  untruthful  and  dishonest  in  your  business  you  are  a  Judas  and  a  crucifier  of 
Christ.    With  whom  are  you  identified  ?    With  the  soldiers  who  robed  Him  in 
mock  purple,  and  who  platted  a  crown  of  thorns  and  put  it  upon  His  brow,  and 
bowed  the  knee  before  Him  in  hypocrisy  ?     If  when  conscience  tells  you  to  perfoim 
a  certain  duty  you  deliberately  refuse  to  obey,  what  is  that  but  bowing  the  knee  in 
hypocrisy  to  Christ  as  the  King  of  your  life,  and  turning  His  crown  into  a  crown  of 
thorns,  a  thing  to  be  jeered  at?    With  whom  are  you  classified  ?    With  the  disciples 
who  forsook  Him  and  fled  ?    If  so,  you  play  a  part  in  Christ's  crucifixion.    To-day 
the  silence  and  the  backwardness  and  the  desertion  of  Christians  may  be  the  cause 
of  the  reign  of  unbelief ;  the  cause  of  indifference  with  regard  to  Christ;  the  oaase 
also  of  much  of  the  dishonour  that  is  heaped  upon  Christ.     It  is  our  duty  to  assert 
more  and  claim  more  for  Jesua.    With  whom  are  you  classified  ?    With  the  Phari* 


478  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTEATOIL  [chap,  vi 

Bees,  who  kept  men  from  espousing  the  cause  of  Christ?  Do  you  hinder  your 
friends  from  making  a  confession  ?  "With  whom  are  you  classified  ?  With  the 
Sanhedrin  who  passed  the  sentence  of  death  upon  Christ  ?  Why  did  the  members 
of  the  Sanhedrin  sentence  Him  ?  Because  He  claimed  to  be  God ;  because  they 
said  He  was  a  blasphemer ;  because  they  denied  His  deity.  Do  you  deny  the  deity 
of  Jesus  Christ  ?  If  so,  then  there  is  nothing  left  for  you  but  to  crucify  Him. 
With  whom  are  you  identified?  I  hear  a  voice  saying,  "I  am  identified  with  no 
one."  "  I  am  neutral. "  "  I  neither  choose  Christ  nor  Barabbas."  "  I  wash  my 
hands  clear  of  the  whole  business."  That  was  what  Pilate  thought  he  would  do  ; 
but  did  he  ?  No ;  all  such  talk  is  the  merest  moral  stuff.  NeutraUty  I  To  you 
who  have  this  day  heard  the  gospel  of  Christ,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  neutrality. 
The  Master  Himself  says,  "  He  that  is  not  for  Me  is  against  Me."  That  settles  it. 
He  that  is  not  morally  identified  with  Christ  as  a  follower  and  friend  is  morally 
identified  with  His  enemies  and  crucifiers.  Your  attempted  neutrahty  is  a  crime 
against  Mght  and  against  infinite  love  and  against  the  eternity  of  your  own  soul. 
Why  should  you  crucify  the  Son  of  God  afresh  ?  Why  should  you  nail  Him  to  the 
cross  of  iudifi'erence  ?  Is  there  any  difference  between  crucifying  Christ  upon  the 
cross  of  indifference  aud  crucifying  Him  upon  the  cross  of  criticism,  or  upon  the 
cross  of  consent,  or  upon  the  cross  of  unbelief  ?  He  is  crucified  all  the  same.  Do 
you  ask  me  the  way  out  of  your  sin  ?  I  reply,  Seek  a  true  knowledge  of  Christ.  In 
speaking  of  the  first  crucifixion  Paul  tells  the  Corinthians  that  had  the  men  of 
Jerusalem  known  Christ  they  would  not  have  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory.  Do  you 
ask  me  the  way  out  of  your  sin  ?  I  reply,  If  you  would  avoid  the  crucifixion  of 
Christ  join  in  the  coronation  of  Christ.  Crown  Him  with  an  ardent  faith ;  with  a 
loyal  love ;  with  a  fearless,  manly,  constant,  and  open  confession.  {David  Gregg, 
D.D.)  Christ  crucified  afresh  : — Bridaine  was  one  of  the  most  celebrated  of  the 
French  preachers.  Marmontel  relates,  that  in  his  sermons  he  sometimes  had 
recourse  to  the  interesting  method  of  parables,  with  a  view  the  more  forcibly  to 
impress  important  truths  on  the  minds  of  his  hearers.  Preaching  on  the  passion 
of  Jesus  Christ,  he  expressed  himself  thus  : — *'  A  man,  accused  of  a  crime  of  which 
he  was  innocent,  was  condemned  to  death  by  the  iniquity  of  his  judges.  He  was 
led  to  punishment,  but  no  gibbet  was  prepared,  nor  was  there  any  executioner  to 
perform  the  sentence.  The  people,  moved  with  compassion,  hoped  that  this 
Bufferer  would  escape  death.  But  one  man  raised  his  voice,  and  said,  '  I  am  going 
to  prepare  a  gibbet,  and  I  will  be  the  executioner.'  You  groan  with  indignation  1 
Well,  my  brethren,  in  each  of  you  I  behold  this  cruel  man.  Here  are  no  Jews  to- 
day to  crucify  Jesus  Christ ;  but  you  dare  to  rise  up,  and  say,  '  I  will  crucify  Him.'  " 
Marmontel  adds,  that  he  heard  these  words  pronounced  by  the  preacher,  though 
very  young,  with  all  the  dignity  of  an  apostle,  and  with  the  most  powerful  emotion ; 
and  that  such  was  the  effect,  that  nothing  was  heard  but  the  sobs  of  the  auditory, 
{Baxendale's  Dictionary  of  Anecdotes.)  Continuous  crucifixion: — Eather,  "while 
crucifying,"  "  crucifying  as  they  are  doing."  Thus  the  words  imply  not  only  an 
absolute,  but  a  continuous  apostasy,  for  the  participle  is  changed  from  the  past  into 
the  present  tense.  A  drop  of  water  will,  as  the  Babbis  said,  suffice  to  purify  a  man 
who  has  accidentally  touched  a  creeping  thing,  but  an  ocean  will  not  suffice  for 
his  cleansing  so  long  as  he  purposely  keeps  it  held  in  his  hand.  There  is  such 
a  thing  as  "doing  despite  unto  the  Spirit  of  grace"  (x.  29).    (F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D.) 

Vers.  7,  8.  The  earth  which  drlnketh  in  the  rain. — Spiritual  realities  in  material 
emblems : — Nature  is  a  parable.  The  seen  adumbrates  the  unseen.  Here  we  have 
the  soul,  truth,  God,  and  character  in  emblem.  I.  The  soul.  1.  Contains  in 
itself  the  germs  of  all  that  it  will  ever  manifest.  2.  Only  develops  those  germs 
as  it  turns  itself  towards  the  sun.  II.  Truth.  1.  Like  rain  in  variety.  2.  Like 
rain  in  origin.  3.  Like  rain  in  preciousness.  Congenial.  Fertilising.  IH,  God. 
The  great  Husbandman  of  souls.  1.  Prepares  soil.  2.  Deposits  seed.  8.  SuppUes 
cultivating  influences.  IV.  Chabacteb.  The  fruit  of  a  man's  life.  As  gardens, 
landscapes,  forests,  grow  out  of  the  earth,  moral  character  grows  out  of  conduct. 
(Homilist.)        The  dispensation  of  the  gospel  word  : — I.  The  minds  op  all  men  bi 

KATDRE  ARE  UNIVERSALLY  AND  EQUALLY  BARREN  WITH  BE8PECT  TO  FRUITS  OF  RIGHTEOUS- 
NESS MEET  FOR  AND  ACCEPTABLE  UNTO  GoD.  They  are  all  as  the  earth  under  the 
curse.  There  is  a  natural  difference  among  men  as  to  their  intellectual  abilities. 
But  as  to  the  fruits  of  spiritual  holiness,  all  men  by  nature  are  alike.  For  oar 
nature,  as  unto  a  principle  of  living  unto  God  is  equally  corrupted  in  all.  Some- 
thing is  wanting,  something  must  be  done  to  this  barren  earth,  to  make  it  fruitloL 


CHAP.  Ti,]  HEBREff^-  473 

And  this  is  done  by  rain.  And  that  is  described  by — 1.  Its  communication  or 
application  unto  the  earth — it  falls  upon  it.  2.  An  especial  adjunct  thereof  in  ita 
fi-equency— it  falls  often  on  it.  3.  By  that  reception  which  the  earth  is  naturally 
fitted  and  suited  to  give  unto  it — it  drinketh  it  in.  1.  The  thing  itself  is  rain. 
It  is  the  administration  of  the  Word  that  is  intended.  And  in  other  places  the 
doctrine  of  the  Scripture  is  frequently  compared  unto  rain  and  watering  (Deut. 
xxxii.  2 ;  Zech.  xiv.  17).  This  is  that  whereby  God  watereth  the  barren  souls  of 
men,  that  whereby  He  communicates  unto  them  all  things  that  may  enable  them 
to  be  fruitful.  2.  This  rain  is  said  to  fall  often  on  the  earth.  And  this  may  be 
considered  either  with  respect  to  the  especial  concern  of  these  Hebrews  or  unto  the 
ordinary  dispensation  of  the  gospel.  In  the  first  way  it  expresseth  the  frequent 
addresses  made  unto  the  Jews,  in  the  ministry  of  the  Word,  for  their  recovery  from 
those  ways  of  ruin  wherein  they  were  engaged.  And  so  it  may  include  the  ministry 
of  the  prop'  ets,  with  the  close  put  unto  it  by  that  of  Christ  llimself.  Take  it  in 
the  latter  way  for  the  dispensation  of  the  Word  in  general,  and  the  manner  of  it, 
with  frequency  and  urgency,  is  included  in  this  expression.  Where  the  Lord 
Christ  sends  the  gospel  to  be  preached,  it  is  His  will  that  it  should  be  so,  instantly, 
in  season  and  out  of  season,  that  it  may  come  as  abundant  showers  of  rain  on  the 
earth.  3.  This  rain  is  said  to  be  drunk  in — the  earth  drinketh  in  the  rain.  There 
is  no  more  intended  in  this  expression  but  the  outward  hearing  of  the  Word,  a 
naked  assent  to  it.  For  it  is  ascribed  unto  them  who  continue  utterly  barren,  who 
are  therefore  left  unto  destruction.  But  as  it  is  the  natural  property  of  the  earth 
to  receive  in  the  water  that  is  poured  on  it,  so  men  do  in  some  sense  drink  in  the 
doctrine  of  the  gospel  when  the  natural  faculties  of  their  souls  assent  unto  it, 
though  it  works  not  upon  them,  though  it  produces  no  effects  in  them.    II.  Thk 

DISPENSATION  OF  THE  WoRD  OF  THK  GOSPEL  UNTO  MEN  IS  AN  EFFECT  OF  THK  SOVEREIGN 
POWER   AND   PLEASURE    OF   GoD,    A3    IS   THE    GIVING    OF     RAIN     UNTO    THE     EARTH.        He 

sendeth  His  Word  unto  one  people  and  not  to  another,  to  one  city  and  not  to 
another,  at  one  time  and  not  at  another,  and  these  are  those  matters  of  His  whereof 
He  giveth  no  account.  1.  The  principal  end  which  He  desigueth  in  His  disposal 
of  the  dispensation  of  the  gospel  in  that  great  variety  wherein  we  do  behold  it  is 
the  conversion,  edification,  and  salvation  of  His  elect.  This  is  that  wliich  He 
aimeth  to  accomplish  thereby,  and  therefore  His  will  and  purpose  herein  is  that 
which  gives  rule  and  measure  unto  the  actings  of  His  providence  concerning  it. 
2.  He  doth,  according  to  His  sovereign  pleasure,  call  and  send  persons  to  the 
preaching  of  it  to  those  to  whom  He  will  grant  the  privilege  thereof.  (1)  By 
endowing  them  with  spiritual  gifts,  enabling  them  unto  that  work  and  duty.  The 
gospel  is  the  ministration  of  the  Spirit ;  nor  is  it  to  be  administered  but  by  virtue 
of  the  gifts  of  the  Spirit.  (2)  This  communication  of  gifts  unto  men  is  ordinarily 
accompanied  with  a  powerful  inclination  of  the  minds  of  men  to  undertake  the 
work  against  those  discouragements  which  present  themselves  unto  them  in  their 
undertaking.      III.  God    so    ordered    things  in    His  sovereign    unsearchablb 

PROVIDENCE  THAT  THE  GOSPEL  SBCALL  BE  SENT  UNTO,  AND  IN  THE  ADMINISTRATION  OF 
IT   SHAIiL    FIND   ADMITTANCE    INTO,    WHAT     PLACES,    AND    AT     WHAT     TIMES,    SEEMS     GOOD 

UNTO  Himself,  even  as  He  ordee.s  the  rain  to  fall  on  one  place  and  not  on 

ANOTHER.        IV.    It    is    THE    DUTY    OF    THOSE    UNTO    WHOM   THE    DISPENSATION    OF   THB 

Word  is  committed  of  God  to  be  diligent,  watohing,  instant  in  theib  work, 
that  their  doctrine  may,  a3  it  were,  continually  drop  and  distil  upon  theib 

HEARERS   THAT   THE    RAIN   MAY    FALL    OFTEN    ON    THE   EARTH.       So    hath     God   prOVldcd 

that  "  the  ridges  of  it  may  be  watered  abundantly,  to  make  it  soft  (or  dissolve  it) 
with  showers,  and  so  He  blesseth  the  springing  thereof  "  (Psa.  Ixv.  10).  V.  Attend- 
ance UNTO  the  Word  preached,  hearing  of  it  with  some  diligence,  and  giving  of 
IT  some  kind   op  reception,  made  no  great  difference  among  men,  fob  this  is 

COMMON  unto  them  WHO  NEVER  BECOME  FRUITFUL.  VI.  GOD  IS  PLEASED  TO  EXER- 
CISE   MUCH  PATIENCE  TOWARDS  THOSE  TO  WHOM  He    ONCE    GRANTS    THE    MERCY   AND   THB 

PRIVILEGE  OF  His  WoRD.  He  doth  not  presently  proceed  against  them  for  and  on 
account  of  their  barrenness,  but  stays  until  the  rain  hath  often  fallen  on  the  ground. 
But  there  is  an  appointed  season  and  period  of  time,  beyond  which  He  will  not 
wait  for  them  any  more.  VH.  Where  God  grants  means,  there  He  expects 
FRUIT.  Few  men  consider  what  is  the  state  of  things  with  them  whilst  the  gospel 
is  preached  to  them.  Some  utterly  disregard  it  any  further  than  as  it  is  suited  to 
their  carnal  interests  and  advantages.  His  business  by  it  is  to  make  men  holy, 
humble,  self-denying,  righteous,  useful,  upright,  pure  in  heart  and  life,  to  abound 
in  good  works,  or  to  be  hke  Himself  in  all  things.    VIII.  Duiiaa  o»  oospbl 


474  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap,  tl 


OBEDIENCK   ABE   FKDIT8    MEET   FOB   GoD,   THINGS    THAT    HAVE    A  PBOPEB  AND   E8PECU1* 

TENDENCY  UNTO  Hi8  GLOBY.  As  the  precious  fruits  of  the  earth  which  the  husband- 
man waiteth  for  are  meet  for  his  use,  that  is,  such  as  supply  his  wants,  satisfy  hia 
occasions,  answer  his  labour,  nourish  and  enrich  him  ;  so  do  these  duties  of  gospel 
obedience  answer  all  the  ends  of  God's  glory  which  He  hath  designed  unto  it  in  the 
world.  "  Hereby,"  saith  our  Saviour,  "  is  My  Father  glorified,  if  ye  bring  forth  much 
fruit."    IX.  Whebeveb  there  abb  any  bincebe  fbuits  of  faith  and  obedience  found 

IN  THE  HEABTS  AND  LIVES  OF  PBOFESSOBS,  GoD  QBACIOUBLY  ACCEPTS  AND  BLESSETH  THEM. 

Nothing  is  so  small  but  that,  if  it  be  sincere,  He  will  accept ;  and  nothing  so  great 
but  He  hath  an  overflowing  reward  for  it.  (John  Owen,  D.D.)  Moral  tillage  : — 
The  apostle  is  showing  the  effect  of  character  on  our  power  to  understand  truth. 
Neither  soil  is  barren.  Both  lands  drink  in  the  rain  that  often  comes  upon  them. 
But  the  fatness  of  the  one  field  brings  forth  thorns  and  thistles,  and  this  can  only 
mean  that  the  man's  vigour  of  soul  is  itself  an  occasion  of  moral  evil.  The  rich- 
ness  of  the  other  land  produces  plants  fit  for  use  by  men,  who  are  the  sole  reason 
for  its  tillage.  This,  again,  must  mean  that,  in  the  case  of  some  men,  God  blesses 
that  natural  strength  which  itself  is  neither  good  nor  evil,  and  it  becomes  a  source 
of  goodness.  We  come  now  to  the  result  in  each  case.  The  soil  that  brings  forth 
useful  herbs  has  its  share  of  the  Creator's  first  blessing.  What  the  blessing  con- 
sists in  we  are  not  here  told,  and  it  is  not  necessary  to  pursue  this  side  of  the  illus- 
tration further.  But  the  other  soil,  which  gives  its  natural  strength  to  the  production 
of  noxious  weeds,  falls  under  the  Creator's  primal  curse  and  is  nigh  unto  burning. 
The  point  of  the  parable  evidently  is  that  God  blesses  the  one,  that  God  destroys 
the  other.  In  both  cases  the  apostle  recognises  the  Divine  action,  carrying  into 
effect  a  Divine  threat  and  a  Diviue  promise.    L  Drinking  in  the  bain  that  often 

COMES    UPON    THE    LAND    CORRESPONDS    TO    BEING    ONCE    ENLIGHTENED,    tasting    of   the 

heavenly  gift,  being  made  partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  tasting  the  good  Word 
of  God  and  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come.    II.  The  negative  result  of  not 

BRINGING  FORTH  ANY  USEFUL  HERBS  CORRESPONDS  TO  FALLING  AWAY.      God  haS  bestoWed 

His  gift  of  enhghtenment,  but  there  is  no  response  of  heart  and  will.  The  soul 
does  not  lay  hold,  but  drifts  away.     HL  The  positive  result  of  bearing  thorns 

AND  thistles  CORRESPONDS  TO  CBOCLFYINO    TO    THEMSELVES    THE    SON    OF    GOD    AFRESH 

AND  PUTTING  HiM  TO  AN  OPEN  SHAME.  IV.  To  be  nigh  imto  a  curse  and  to  be  given 
in  the  end  to  be  burned  corresponds  to  the  impossibility  of  renewal.  God  renders 
men  incapable  of  repentance,  not  because  they  have  fallen  away  once  or  more  than 
once,  but  because  they  scoff  at  the  Son,  through  whom  God  has  spoken  unto  us. 
The  terrible  impossibility  of  renewal  here  threatened  applies,  not  to  apostasy  (as 
the  early  Church  maintained),  nor  to  the  lapsed  (as  the  Novatianists  held),  but  to 
apostasy  combined  with  a  cynical,  scoffing  temper  that  persists  in  treading  the  Son 
of  God  under  foot.  It  hardens  the  heart,  because  God  is  jealous  of  His  Son's 
honour,  and  punishes  the  scoffer  with  the  utter  destruction  of  the  spiritual  faculty 
and  with  absolute  inability  to  recover  it.  This  is  not  the  mere  force  of  habit.  It 
is  God's  retribution,  and  the  apostle  mentions  it  here  because  the  text  of  the  whole 
Epistle  is  that  God  has  spoken  unto  us  in  His  Son.  (T.  C.  Edioards,  D.D.) 
A  Divine  herbal;  or,  garden  of  graces : — Here  be  two  kinds,  a  good  and  a  bad 
soil ;  the  one  a  garden,  the  other  a  desert :  the  former  au  enclosure  of  sweet  herbs, 
excellent  graces ;  the  latter  a  wild  forest  of  briers  and  thorns.  For  the  better 
ground  we  will  consider — 1.  The  operative  means  or  working  cause  of  the  fertility, 
"  The  rain  that  cometh  often  upon  it."  2.  The  thankful  returning  of  expected 
fruit,  "  It  bringeth  forth  herbs  meet  for  them  by  whom  it  is  dressed."  3.  The 
reward  of  mercy,  "Itreceiveth  blessing  from  God."  All  is  an  allegory.  I.  The 
earth  is  man.  II.  The  rain,  God's  Word.  IH.  The  herbs  are  graces.  And  IV. 
The  blessing  is  a  sweet  retribution  of  mercy.  I.  The  earth  is  the  best  ground 
that  lies  betwixt  heaven  and  earth,  man ;  the  noblest  part  of  this  world ;  the 
worthiest  creature ;  the  Creator's  image.  The  blessed  Deity  (which  hath  in  it  a 
trinity  of  most  equal  and  eternal  Persons)  is  the  first  and  best  of  all  beings  ;  the 
holy  angels  next ;  man  next  them.  Let  not  all  this  make  man  proud.  Even  this 
word  earth,  though  here  used  in  a  spuitual  sense,  puts  him  in  mind  that  this  excel- 
lent man  is  a  mortal  creature.  Therefore  I  will  say  from  the  prophet,  "  0  earth, 
earth,  earth,  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  "  (Jer.  xxii.  29).  Bestow  not  too  much 
pains  in  adorning  this  perishable  earth,  thy  flesh :  the  earth  thou  must  be  careful 
of,  and  which  God  here  waters  from  heaven  with  His  holy  dews,  is  thy  heart,  thy 
conscience.  I  could  wilUngly  step  out  a  Uttle  to  chide  those  that,  neglecting  God's 
earth,  the  soul,  fall  to  trimming  with  a  curious  superstition  the  earth's  earth,  clay 


CHAP.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  475 

and  loam  :  a  body  of  corruptioti  painted  till  it  shine  like  a  lily ;  rottenness  hid  under 
golden  leaves.    But  the  earth  here  meant  is  a  divine,  spiritual,  immortal  nature 
— called  earth  by  a  metaphor — incapable  of  suffering  terrene  fragility.    This  is 
God's  earth,  and  that  in  a  high  and  mystical  sense,  though  proper  enough.    Indeed, 
'*  The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof,"  saith  the  Psalmist.     But  He 
hath  not  such  respect  to  the  earth  He  made,  as  to  this  earth  for  whom  He  made  it. 
This  is  earth  that  He  hath  sealed  and  sanctified  for  Himself,  by  setting  His  stamp 
upon  it.     Now,  the  good  man's  heart  is  compared  to  earth  for  divers  reasons.     1. 
For  humility.     The  earth  is  the  lowest  of  all  elements,  and  the  centre  of  the  world. 
2.  For  patience.    The  earth  is  called  terra,  quia  teritur;  and  this  is  the  natural 
earth.    For  they  distinguish  it  into  three  sorts:  terra  quam  terimits;  terra  quain 
gerimus  ;  terra  quam  queerimtu,  which  is  the  glorious  land  of  promise.     That  earth 
is  cut  and  wounded  with  culters  and  shares,  yet  is  patient  to  suffer  it,  and  returns 
fruits  to  those  that  ploughed  it.     The  good  heart  is  thus  rent  with  vexations  and 
broken  with  sorrows,  yet  endureth  all  with  a  magnanimous  patience,  assured  of 
that  victory  which  comes  by  suffering.     Neither  is  this  all:  it  returns  mercy  for 
injury,  prayers  for  persecutions,  and  blesseth  them  that  cursed  it.    3.  For  faithful 
constancy.     The  earth  is  called  solum,  because  it  stands  alone,  depending  on  nothing 
bat  the  Maker's  hand :  •'  One  generation  passeth  away,  and  another  generation 
Cometh  ;  but  the  earth  abideth  for  ever  "  (Eccles.  i.  4).     She  often  changeth  her 
burden,  without  any  sensible  mutation   of  herself :  "  Thy  faithfulness  is  to  all 
generations ;  Thou  hast  established  the  earth,  and  it  standeth  "  (Psa.  cxix.  90). 
Such  a  constant  solidity  is  in  the  faithful  heart,  that  should  it  thunder  bulls  from 
Rome,  and  bolts  from  Rome,  impavidum  ferient  ruina.     So  the  first  terror  hath 
moved  the  ungodly,  not  removed  them  ;  they  return  to  themselves,  and  rest  in  a 
resolved  peace.    Lord,  do  what  Thou  wilt :  "  if  Thou  kill  me,  I  wiU  trust  in  Thee." 
Let  us  hear  it  from  him  that  had  it  from  the  Lord :  "  Surely  he  shall  not  be 
moved  for  ever :  the  righteous  shall  be  in  everlasting  remembrance.     He  shall  not 
be  afraid  of  evil  tidings :  his  heart  is  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord.    His  heart  is 
estabhshed,"  &o.  (Psa.  cxii.  6-8).     Oh  sweet  description  of  a  constant  soul  I    4.  For 
charity.     The  earth  brings  forth  food  for  till  creatures  that  Hve  on  it.     Green  herb 
for  the  cattle ;  oil  and  wine  for  man.     A  good  man  is  so  full  of  charity,  he  relieves 
all,  witbout  improvidence  to  himself.     He  gives  plentifully,  that  all  may  have 
some  ;  not  indiscreetly,  that  some  have  all.    6.  For  riches.     The  earth  is  but  poor 
without :  the  surface  of  it,  especially  when  squalid  winter  hath  bemired  it,  seems 
poor  and  barren ;  but  within  it  is  full  of  rich  mines,  ores  of  gold,  and  quarries  of 
precious  minerals.     The  sanctified  heart  may  seem  poor  to  the  world's  eye,  which 
only  beholds  the  husk,  and  thinks  there  is  no  treasure  in  the  cabinet,  because  it  is 
covered  with  leather.    But  within  he  is  full  of  golden  mines  and  rich  ores,  the 
invisible  graces  of  faith,  fear,  love,  hope,  patience,  hoHness ;  sweeter  than  the 
spices  of  the  East  Indies,  and  richer  than  the  gold  of  the  West.     6.  Lastly,  for 
fertility.     The  earth  is  fruitful :  when  the  stars  have  given  influence,  the  clouds 
showered   down  seasonable  dews,  and  the  sun  bestowed  his  kindly  heat,  lo,  the 
thankful  earth  returns  fruits,  and  that  in  abundance.    The  Christian  soul,  having 
received  such  holy  operations,  inspirations,  and  sanctifying  motions  from  above,  is 
never  found  without  a  grateful  fertility.     Yea,  as  the  earth  to  man,  so  man  to  God, 
returns  a  blessed  usury :  ten  for  one ;  nay,  sometimes  thirty,  sometimes  sixty, 
sometimes  a  hundred-fold.   II.  The  operative  cause  that  woeketh  the  good  earth 
TO  this  frditfdlness  is  a  heavenly  '♦  rain  that  faUeth  upon  it  "  ;  and  the  earth  doth 
*'  drink  it  up."     Wherein  is  observable  that  the  rain  doth  come,  that  it  is  welcome ; 
God  sends  it  plenteously,  and  man  entertains  it  lovingly.     1.  God's  Word  is  often 
compared  to  rain  or  dew.     (1)  It  is  the  property  of  rain  to  cool  heat.    The  burning 
heat  of  sin  in  us,  and  of  God's  anger  for  sin  against  us,  is  quenched  by  the  gospel. 
It  cools  our  intemperate  heat  of  malice,  anger,  ambition,  avarice,  lust,  which  are 
burning  sins.     (2)  Another  effect  of  rain  is  thirst  quenched.     The  Christian  soul 
"  thirsts  after  righteousness,"  is  dry  at  heart  tiU  he  can  have  the  gospel :  a  shower 
of  this  mercy  from  heaven  quencheth  his  thirst ;  he  is  satisfied  (John  iv.  14).     (3) 
Rain  doth  allay  the  winds.     When  the  potentates  of  the  world  storm  against  us, 
God  quiets  all  our  fears,  secures  us  from  all  their  terrors  by  a  gracious  rain,  drops 
of  mercy  in  the  never-failing  promises  of  the  gospel.     (4)  Rain  hath  a  powerful 
efficacy  to  cleanse  the  air.     We  know  that  too  often  filthy  fumes  of  heresies  surge 
up  in  a  land,  that  the  soul  of  faith  is  almost  stifled,  and  the  uncleanness  of  corrupt 
doctrine  gets  a  predominant  pface :  the  Lord  then  drops  His  Word  from  heaven ; 
the  pure  rain  oi  His  holy  gospel  cleanseth  away  this  putrefaction,  and  gives  new 


476  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tv 

life  to  the  almost-smothered  truth,     (5)  Bain  hath  yet  another  working  :  to  mollify 
a  hard  matter.     The  parched  and  heat-hardened  earth  is  made  soft  by  the  dews 
of  heaven.    Oh,  how  hard  and  obdurate  is  the  heart  of  man  till  this  rain  falls  on  it  1 
(6)  Lastly,  rain  is  one  principal  subordinate  cause  that  all  things  fructify.     This 
holy  dew  is  the  operative  means,  next  to  the  grace  of  God  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
that  the  souls  of  Christians  should  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  faith  and  obedience.    I 
know  God  can  save  without  it :  we  dispute  not  of  His  power,  but  of  His  work  of 
ordinary,   not    extraordinary,    operations.      God    usually  worketh    this    in    our 
hearts    by    His    Word.      2.    Thus    far  the    matter  ;    the    manner  is — (1)    "  It 
Cometh."     (2)  "Often."     (3)  "Upon  it."     (1)  "It  cometh."     It  is  not  forced, 
nor  fetched,  but  comes  of  His  own  mere  mercy  whose  it  is  (Jas.  i.  17).    They 
that  want  it  have  no  merit  of  congruity  to  draw   it  to  them ;   they  that  have 
it  have  no  merit  of  condignity  to  keep  it  with  them.     It  is  the  mercy  and  gratuital 
favour  of  God  that  this  gospel  cometh  to  us.     (2)  "  Often."    God  hath  respect  to 
our  infirmities,  and  sends  us  a  plentiful  rain.     One  shower  will  not  make  us  fi'oit- 
ful;  it  must  come  "oft  upon  us."     The  rain  dints  the  hard  stone,  not  by  violence, 
but  by  oft-falling  drops.     Line  must  be  added  to  line  ;  "  here  a  little,  and  there  a 
little."     God  could  pour  a  whole  flood  on  us  at  once.     If  much  were  poured  at 
once,  a  great  deal  would  fall  besides,  and  be  spilt.    Like  children,  we  must  be 
fed  by  spoonfuls,  according  to  the  capacity  of  our  weak  natures.     It  is  not  an 
abundant  rain  falling  at  once  that  makes  the  plants  grow,  but  kindly  aud  frequent 
showers.    When  Christ  spake  of  the  "  bread  of  Ufe,"  the  transported  disciples 
beseech  Him,  "  Lord,  evermore  give  us  this  bread  "  (John  vi.  34).     So  pray  we : 
Lord,  evermore  shower  down  upon  ns  this  rain  1     (3)  "  Upon  it."    God  so  directs 
this  dew  of  His  word  that  it  shall  fall  on  our  hearts,  not  besides.     A  good  shower 
may  come  on  the  earth,  yet  if  a  man  house  himself,  or  be  shrouded  under  a  thick 
bush,   or  burrowed  in  the  ground,  he  will  be  dry   still.      God  sends  down  His 
rain  :  one  houseth  himself  in  the  darkness  of  security  ;  another  sits  dallying  with 
the  delights  of  lust  under  a  green  bush;  a  third  is  burrowed  in  the  ground,  entrench- 
ing himself  in  the  quest  of  riches.     Alas,  how  should  the  dew  of  grace  fall  upon 
these  1     Thou  wouklest  not  shelter  the  ground  from  the  clouds,  lest  it  grow  barren : 
oh,  then,  keep  not  thy  soul  from  the  rain  of  heaven  1     III.  You  have  heard  how 
the  rain  is  come  ;  now  hear  how  it  is  made  welcome.     The  good  ground  drinks  it ; 
nay,  drinks  it  in.    The  comparison  stands  thus :  the  thirsty  land  drinks  up  the  rain 
greedily  which  the  clouds  pour  upon  it.     You  would  wonder  what  becomes  of  it ; 
you  may  find  it  in  your  fruits.     When  your  vines  hang  full  of  clusters,  your 
gardens  stand  thick  with  flowers,  your  meadows  with  grass,  your  fields  with  corn, 
you  will  say  the  earth  hath  been  beholden  to  the  heaven.     That  hath  rained  mois- 
ture, this  hath  drunk  it  in ;  we  see  it  in  our  fruits.     There  is  a  blessed  sort  of 
drinkers  which  drink  in  this  sweet  rain  of  grace  and  mercy.    They  do  not  only 
taste  it ;  so  do  the  wicked:  "They  have  tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift;  they  have 
tasted  of  the  good  Word  of  God,  and  of  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come"  (ver.  4). 
Kor  drink  it  only  to  their  throats,  as  carnal  politicians  and  formal  professors  do. 
It  shall  never  come  into  their  stomachs,  never  near  their  hearts.     But  these  drink 
it  in,  digest  it  in  their  consciences,  take  hberal  draughts  of  it,  and  do  indeed  drink 
healths  thereof.     This  is  a  hearty  draught  of  the  waters  of  life ;  the  deeper  the 
sweeter.     The  vessel  of  our  heart  being  once  thus  filled  with  grace  shall  hereafter 
be  replenished  with  glory.     (T.  Adams.)        The  gospel  rain : — The  blessing  that 
good  hearers  receive  is  a  further  increase  of  all  graces  in  this  life:  "  To  him  that 
hath  shall  be  given,"  &c.  (Matt.  xiii.  8) ;  and  eternal  blessedness  in  the  life  to 
come.     Blessed  are  they  that  hear  the  Word  of  God  and  keep  it.     1.  All  people  are 
as  frhe  ground  that  stand  in  need  of  the  rain  of  the  Word  of  God.    The  earth  must 
have  rain  all  the  year  long,  more  or  less,  else  it  drieth  and  withereth  away;  so  do 
we  if  we  want  the  rain  of  the  Word.     In  what  a  miserable  case  were  they  in  Israel 
when  there  fell  no  rain  for  the  space  of  three  years  and  six  months  ;  and  in  what 
a  pitiful  taking  are  those  towns  and  countries,  though  they  feel  it  not,  which  want 
the  rain  of  the  Word  of  God  ?    You  that  have  it  be  thankful  to  God  for  it,  and 
learn  to  esteem  more  highly  of  this  blessing  than  ye  do.    If  it  rain  on  your  wheat 
and  barley  in  the  due  time  of  the  year,  ye  praise  God  for  it ;  and  will  ye  not  bless 
Him  for  the  heavenly  rain  that   falleth  on  yourselves  to  make  you  fruitful  to 
eternal  life.    2.  As  this  rain  by  the  goodness  of  God  falls  on  you,  so  let  it  not 
pass  by  you  as  water  running  from  the  rocks  and  stones,  but  drink  it  in,  that 
it  may  cause  yon  to  increase  in  all  virtue.    If  your  hearts  be  as  stone,  hardened  in 
sin.  though  ye  have  never  such  plenty  of  this  rain,  it  wiU  do  you  no  good ;  there- 


OHiF.  Ti.l  HEBREWS.  477 

fore  drink  in  the  rain  of  the  Word  of  God  that  falls  on  you  at  every  sermon ;  let 
not  the  profitable  instructions  pass  from  you.     If  it  be  not  a  ground  rain  that  goes 
into  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  it  is  to  small  purpose ;  and  if  the  rain  of  the  Word 
do  not  sink  into  the  bottom  of  your  hearts,  if  it  go  no  further  than  your  ears,  you 
shall  reap  small  benefit  by  it ;  tberefore  drink  in  this  rain,  that  it  may  be  fruitful 
to  yoa  aU.     3.  None  can  well  drink  but  they  that  thirst  after  drink ;  if  the  ground 
be  not  thirsty  it  wiU  not  drink  in  the  rain.    If  it  be  full  already,  the  rain  lieth 
aloft,  and  makes  ponds  that  are  noisome  to  men.     Therefore  bring  thirsting  soula 
to  every  sermon,  when  this  rain  is  poured  down  on  you,  that  ye  may  drink  it  in  to 
the  salvation  of  you  all.    4.  The  more  rain  the  ground  hath,  the  more  fruit  it  ought 
to  yield;   the  oftener  that  any  people  hath  had  the  rain  of  the  Word  of  God 
falling  on  them,  the  more  plentiful  should  they  be  in  good  works :  '*  To  whom 
mach  is  given,  of  them  much  shall  be  required."    You  in  this  town  have  had 
much  rain,  therefore  much  is  required  of  yoa.    5.  As  it  hath  the  rain  often,  so  it 
mast  bring  forth  frait;  the  more  di-essing,  the  more  fruit.    As  ye  have  this 
heavenly   rain    in    most   plentiful   measure,    so    bring   forth    fruits  answerable 
to  it:    leaves   will   not  serve   the  turn.     (^W.  Jones,  D.D.)         Brlngeth  forth 
herbs. — The  praise  of  fertility : — 1.   "  It  brmgs  forth."     It  is  not  barren,  like 
a  dead  ground  that  yields  neither  herbs  nor  weeds.     This  is  no  idle  heart  that 
doth  neither  good  nor  harm.     Here  is  no  such  stupid  neutrality,  nor  infruc- 
tuous  deadness :   "  It  brings  forth."    2.  They  are  not  weeds  it  produceth,   but 
"herbs."    A  man  had  as  good  do  nothing  as  do  naughty  things.     They  that  for- 
bear idleness  and  fall  to  lewdness,  mend  the  matter,  as  the  devil,  in  the  tale, 
mended  his  dame's  leg :  when  he  should  have  put  it  in  joint,  he  broke  it  quite  in 
pieces.    It  is  not  enough  that  this  ground  bring  forth,  but  that  it  yield  herbs.    Of 
the  two,  the  barren  earth  is  not  so  evil  as  the  wicked  earth ;  that  men  pity,  this 
they  corse.     "  It  brings  forth  herbs."    3.  Neither  is  it  a  paucity  of  herbs  this 
ground  afforded,  but  an  abundance ;  not  one  herb,  but  herbs  ;  a  plural  and  plenti- 
ful namber.    There  is  neither  barrenness  nor  bareness  in  this  ground ;  not  no 
fruits,  not  few  fruits,  but  many  herbs.    4.  Lastly,  they  are  such  herbs  as  are 
"  meet  for  the  dressei  "  ;  such  as  God  expects  of  the  garden,  who  planted  it ;  such 
as  he  will  accept,  not  in  strict  justice  for  their  own  worth,  but  in  great  mercy  for 
Jesus  Christ.     "  Meet  for  them  by  whom  it  is  dressed."     1.  Fertility  :  "  It  brings 
forth."    Barrenness  hath  ever  been  held  a  curse,  a  reproach  (Luke  i.  26).     When 
God  will  bring  the  gospel,  and  with  it  salvation  to  the  Gentiles,  He  is  said  to  take 
away  their  barrenness.    So  was  it  prophesied  (Isa.  liv.  1) ;  so  was  it  accomplished 
(Gal.  iv.  27).     The  primordial  praise  of  this  good  ground  is  that  it  is  not  barren. 
This  fertility  in  the  Christian  heart  doth — (1)  Conclude  thankfulness.     (2)  Exclude 
idleness,     (a)  For  the  former.     God  hath  given  him  rain  for  this  purpose,  that  he 
shoald  bring  forth  fruit ;  if  he  should  take  the  rain,  and  not  answer  the  sender's 
hopes,  he  were  unthankful.    The  good  man  considers  the  end  why  he  received  any 
blessing,  and  examines  what  God  meant  in  conferring  on  him  such  a  benefit.   Hath 
God  given  him  wisdom  ?    Solomon  hath  taught  him  to  "  let  his  fountains  be  dis- 
persed  abroad,  and  his  rivers  of  waters  in  the  streets  "  (Prov.  v.  16).    As  we  must 
not  be  wise  in  ourselves,  so  nor  only  wise  to  ourselves.    He  that  conceals  his 
knowledge,  cancels  it,  and  shall  at  last  turn  fool.    Do  not  enclose  that  for  several 
which  God  hath  meant  common.    The  not  employing  will  be  the  impairing  of 
God's  gifts.     This  is  the  fruit  which  the  good  ground  must  send  forth,  for  all  the 
seeds  of  grace  sown  in  it.    Neither  doth  this  instruction  bound  itself  with  our 
spiritual,  but  extends  also  to  our  temporal  gifts.    Hast  thou  riches  ?    When  God 
scattered  those  blessings  upon  thee,  in  the  seed-time  of  His  bounty,  He  intended 
thou  shouldst  return  Him  a  good  crop  at  the  harvest.    Be  thankful,  then,  in  doing 
that  with  them  for  which  God  gave  them.     God  meant  them  to  promote  and  help 
forward  thy  journey  to  heaven ;  let  them  not  retard  thy  course,  or  put  thee  quite 
out  of  the  way.    Be  merciful,  be  charitable,  be  helpful.    God  did  also  mean  that 
thyself  should  take  comfort  in  these  things.    It  is  a  part  of  that  blessedness  which 
the  Psalmist  promiseth  to  him  that  feareth  the  Lord  :  "  Thou  shalt  eat  the  labour 
of  thine  hands  ;  happy  shalt  thou  be,  and  it  shall  be  well  with  thee  "  (Psa.  cxxviii. 
2).    For  God  gave  wine  for  this  purpose,  "  to  make  glad  the  heart  of  man,  and  oil 
to  make  his  face  shine,  and  bread  to  strengthen  his  heart  "  (Psa.  civ.  15).    How 
doth  man  divert  God's  goodness,  when  he  turns  His  blessing  into  a  curse,  and  puts 
His  good  creatures  from  their  intended  uses  1     (6)  This  good  ground  hes  not  dead 
and  barren,  nor  returns  all  heaven's  rain  with  a  naked  and  neutral  acceptation :  it 
bringR  forth.     Idleness  doth  neither  get  nor  save ;  there  is  nothing  more  empty  of 


478  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ti. 

good  fruits,  nor  more  abundantly  pregnant  with  evil.    That  man  doth  ill  that  doth 
nothing,  and  he  loseth  whilst  he  gains  not.    Many  beholding,  with  cowardly  and 
carnal  eyes,  what  a  long  and  troublesome  journey  it  is  to  heaven,  sit  them  down 
and  fall  fast  asleep.    0  barren  ground  !  will  ye  bring  forth  nothing  ?    Is  difficulty 
made  your  hindrance,  that  should  be  a  spur  to  your  more  eager  contention  ?   Know 
you  not  that  the  violent  shall  get  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ?    If  thy  soul  be  watered 
with  the  dew  of  heaven,  thou  must  needs  bring  forth.    What?    (2)  "Herbs." 
There  is  fertihty  in  goodness.     The  eldest  daughter  of  idleness  is  to  do  nothing ; 
the  next-bom  to  do  something  to  no  purpose.    But  the  good  man  is  not  only 
doing,  but  well-doing  (Matt.  xxiv.  46).    This  so  consists  in  doing  bonum  and 
bene ;  as  the  former  verse  may  seem  to  intimate.     He  "  gives  them  meat,"  there 
He  doth  good;    "in  due  season,"  there  he  doth  it  well.    The  forbearance  of 
wickedness  is  not  enough  to  acquit  the  soul,  but  the  performance  of  righteousness. 
The  rich  glutton  is  tormented  in  hell,  not  because  he  did  hurt,  but  because  he  did 
not  help,  LazaruB.    But  if  that  ground  be  near  unto  cursing  that  brings  not  forth 
herbs,  what  shall  we  say  to  that  which  brings  forth  weeds  ?    (3)  Plenty — many 
herbs.     The  good  ground  is  plentiful  in  fruits.    It  bears  fruit,  good  fruit,  much 
good  fruit.      Multiplicity  of  grace  is  requisite,   though    not  perfection.      What 
garden  is  only  planted  with  one  singular  kind  of  herb  ?    The  Christian  hath  need 
of  many  graces,  because  he  is  to  meet  with  many  defects,  to  answer  many  temp- 
tations, to  fight  with  many  enemies  (2  Pet.  i.  5).    Happy  then  is  that  ground 
which  abounds  with  good  herbs;    the  fruits  of  faith,  patience,  content,  charity! 
Not  our  riches,  but  our  "works  shall  follow  us."      Goodness   shall  only  give 
pulchrum  sepulchrum ;  and  as  we  use  to  stick  dead  bodies  with  herbs,  so  these 
herbs,  our  fruitful  good  works,  shall  adorn  and  beautify  our  memorials,  when  "  the 
name  of  the  wicked  shall  rot."    (4)  "  Meet  for  them  by  whom  he  is  dressed."    The 
word  "  by  whom "  may  as  well  be  translated  "  for  whom."     (a)  By  whom  it  is 
dressed.    God  is  the  Husbandman  that  dressed  this  ground,  and  causeth  in  it 
fertility.    God  begins  the  work ;  He  makes  the  ground  good,  sauctifies  the  person. 
Here  is  gratia  co-operans,  God  that  begins,  performs  the  work ;  He  raineth  upon, 
He  dresseth  the  heart,  and  so  causeth  it  to  produce  herbs.     Here  is  gratia  salvans, 
whereby  He  crowneth  our  wUl  and  work  in  the  day  of  our  Lord  Jesus.     "It 
receiveth  blessing  from  God."    The  sap  of  grace  which  appears  green  and  flourish- 
ing in  the  branches  and  fruit,  comes  from  the  root.     God  induceth  the  good  to 
good  by  alacrity,  not  enforceth  against  their  wills.     God  doth  not  work  upon  us  as 
upon  blocks  and  stones,  in  all  and  every  respect  passive  ;  but  converts  our  wills  to 
will  our  own  conversion,     (b)  Thus  by  whom  ;  now  for  whom.     Meet  for  them  who 
dressed  it.    And  is  it  possible  that  man  should  produce  herbs  meet  for  the  accep- 
tation of  God  ?    Hath  He  not  pure  eyes,  which  see  uncleanness  and  imperfection 
in  all  our  works  ?    Is  there  any  man  so  happy  as  to  be  justified  in  His  sight  ?    No ; 
but  it  pleaseth  Him  to  look  upon  our  works  in  the  crystal  glass,  Christ;  and 
because  they  are  the  effects  of  a  true  faith  in  Him,  to  esteem  them  meet.     (T. 
Adama.)        A  contemplation  of  the  herbs: — I.  That  the  herbs  of  our  graces  may  be 
meet  for  the  dresser — contentful  to  God,  who  hath  planted,  watered,  husbanded  the 
garden  of  our  hearts — we  will  require  in  them  four  virtues  :  1.  Odour.    2.  Taste. 
3.  Ornament.    4.  Medicinal  virtue.     1.  That  they  have  a  good  odour.    God  ia 
delighted  with  the  smell  of  our  graces  (Cant.  vi.  2).    The  virtues  of  Christ  are  thus 
principally  pleasant ;  and  aU  our  herbs  only  smell  sweetly  in  His  garden  (Cant.  i. 
3).     This  savour  is  sweetly  acceptable  in  the  nostrils  of  God  (Psa.  xlv.  8).    It  is 
His  righteousness  that  gives  aU  our  herbs  a  good  odour  ;  and  in  Him  it  pleaseth 
God  to  judge  our  works  sweet.    The  way  to  make  our  herbs  smell  sweetly  is  first 
to  purge  our  garden  of  weeds.    For  if  sin  be  fostered  in  our  hearts,  all  our  works 
will  be  abominated.     God  heareth  not  the  prayers  of  the  wicked  (Lev.  xxvi.  31). 
But  being  adopted  by  grace  in  Christ,  and  sanctified  to  holiness,  our  good  works 
smell  sweetly  (Phil.  iv.  18).    It  seems  God  highly  esteems  the  herb  charity  in  our 
gardens.    He  that  serveth  the  Lord  shall  smeU  as  Lebanon  (Hos.  xiv.  6,  7).     2. 
That  they  taste  well.    Many  a  flower  hath  a  sweet  smell,  but  not  so  wholesome  a 
taste.    Your  Pharisaical  prayers  and  alms  smelt  sweetly  in  the  vulgar  nostrils ; 
taste  them,  and  they  were  but  rue,  or  rather  wormwood.     Herbs  have  not  only 
their  savour,  but  their  nutriment  (Psa.  civ.  14).     Herbs  then  are  food,  and  have 
an  alimental  virtue.     So  we  may  both  with  the  herbs  of  charity  feed  men's  bodies, 
and  with  the  herbs  of  piety  feed  their  souls.     If  thou  wouldest  make  Christ  good 
eheer  in  the  parlour  of  thy  conscience,  bring  Him  the  herbs  of  obedience.     Where- 
goever  His  Church  is,  there  is  He :  exercise  thy  piety.    Wheresoever  His  members 


CHAP.  TL] 


HEBREWS.  479 


are,  there  is  He  :  exercise  thy  charity.  3.  That  they  be  fit  to  adorn.  Herbs  and 
flowers  have  not  only  their  use  in  pleasing  the  nostrils  and  the  palate,  but  the  eye 
also.  They  give  delight  to  all  those  three  senses.  Good  works  are  the  beauty  of  a 
house,  and  a  better  sight  than  fresh  herbs  strewed  in  the  windows.  Good  works 
are  the  best  ornaments,  the  most  lasting  monuments.  They  become  the  hoose 
wherein  thy  soul  dwelleth,  whilst  it  dwells  there ;  and  bless  thy  memory,  when 
those  two  are  parted.  Every  good  heart  that  knew  thee  is  thy  tomb,  and  every 
tongue  writes  happy  epitaphs  on  thy  memorial.  Thus  height  up  your  souls  with  a 
treasure  of  good  works.  4.  That  they  be  medicinable,  and  serve  not  only  as  anti- 
dotes to  prevent,  but  as  medicaments  to  cure  the  soul's  infirmities.  The  poor 
man's  physic  lies  in  his  garden  ;  the  good  soul  can  fetch  an  herb  from  his  heart, 
of  God's  planting  there,  that  can  help  him.  Pliny  writes  of  a  certain  herb,  which 
he  calls  thelygonum ;  we  in  EngUsh,  "  The  grace  of  God."  A  happy  herb,  and 
worthy  to  stand  in  the  first  place  as  chief  of  the  garden.  For  it  is  the  principal, 
and,  as  it  were,  the  genus  of  all  the  rest.  We  may  say  of  it,  as  some  write  of  the 
carduus  benedictus,  or  holy  thistle,  that  it  is  herba  omni  rrwrbo — an  herb  of  such 
virtue  that  it  can  cure  all  diseases.  This  may  heal  a  man  who  is  otherwise  nullis 
medicabilis  herbis.  Wretched  men,  that  are  without  this  herb,  the  grace  of  God, 
in  their  gardens  1  Hyssop  and  humility. — Is  a  man  tempted  to  pride — and  that  is 
a  saucy  sin,  ever  busy  among  good  works,  like  a  Judas  among  the  apostles — let  him 
look  into  his  garden  for  hyssop,  humiUty  of  spirit.  Let  him  be  taught  by  this 
herb  to  annihilate  his  own  worth,  and  to  cleave  to  the  Eock  whereout  he  grows, 
and  whereof  he  is  upholden,  Jesus  Christ.  Or  let  him  produce  the  camomile, 
which  smells  the  sweeter  the  more  it  is  trodden  on.  Humility  is  a  gracious  herb, 
and  allays  the  wrath  of  God ;  whereas  pride  provokes  it.  But  when  dost  and  ashes 
humbles  himself,  and  stands  to  his  mercy,  the  wrath  of  God  is  soon  appeased. 
This  camomile  or  hyssop  grows  very  low.  Humbleness  roots  downward,  yet  no 
herb  hath  so  high  branches.  Bulapathum,  the  herb  patience. — Is  a  man,  through 
multitudes  of  troubles,  almost  wrought  to  impatience,  and  to  repine  at  the  provi- 
dence of  God,  that  disposeth  no  more  ease  ?  Let  him  fetch  an  herb  oat  of  the 
garden  to  cure  this  malady — bulapathum,  the  herb  patience.  The  adamant  serves 
not  for  all  seas  ;  but  patience  is  good  for  ail  estates.  Heart's-ease  and  spiritual 
joy. — Doth  sorrow  and  anguish  cast  down  a  man's  heart,  and  may  he  complain 
that  his  "  soul  is  disquieted  within  him  "  ?  (Psa.  xlii.)  Let  him  fetch  an  herb  out 
of  this  garden,  called  heart's-ease,  an  inward  joy  which  the  Holy  Ghost  worketh  in 
him.  Though  all  "  the  days  of  the  afflicted  be  evil,  yet  a  merry  heart  is  a  con- 
tinual feast "  (Prov.  xv.  6).  This  is  heaven  upon  earth,  "  Peace  of  conscience  and 
joy  of  the  Holy  Ghost  "  (Eom.  xiv.  17).  His  conscience  is  assured  of  peace  with 
God,  of  reconciliation  in  the  blood  of  Jesus,  and  that  his  soul  is  wrapped  up  in  the 
bundle  of  life.  Balsamum,  or  faith. — Hath  the  heart  got  a  green  wound  by  com- 
mitting some  offence  against  God  ?  for  actual  iniquity  makes  a  gash  in  the  soul. 
The  good  man  runs  for  balsamum,  and  stanchL-th  the  blood — faith  in  the  promises 
of  Jesus  Christ.  He  knows  there  is  "  balm  at  Gilead,  and  there  are  physicians 
there,  and  therefore  the  health  of  his  soul  may  easily  be  recovered  "  (Jer.  viii.  22). 
St.  John's-wort,  or  charity. — Doth  the  world,  through  sweetness  of  gain  that  comes 
a  little  too  fast  upon  a  man,  begin  to  carry  away  his  heart  to  covetousness  ?  Let 
him  look  in  this  garden  for  the  herb  called  St.  John's-wort,  charity  and  brotherly 
love.  It  is  called  St.  John's  herb  not  improperly,  for  he  spent  a  wijole  epistle  in 
commending  to  us  this  grace,  and  often  inculcated,  "  Little  children,  love  one 
another."  And  he  further  teacheth  that  this  love  must  be  actual  (1  John  iii.  17). 
Penny -royal  and  content. — Doth  poverty  fasten  her  sharp  teeth  in  a  man's  sides, 
and  cannot  all  his  good  industry  keep  want  from  his  family  ?  Let  him  come 
to  this  garden  for  a  little  penny-royal,  content.  This  will  teach  him  to  think  that 
God  who  feeds  the  ravens,  and  clothes  the  lilies,  will  not  suffer  him  to  lack  food 
and  raiment.  Agnus  castus  and  continence. — Doth  the  rebellious  flesh,  upon  a 
little  indulgence,  grow  wanton,  and  would  concupiscence  etikindle  the  fire  of  lust  ? 
The  good  soul  hath  in  this  garden  an  herb  called  agnvs  castu^,  the  chaste  herb,  and 
good  store  of  lettuce,  which  physicians  say  cool  this  natural  intemperate  heat. 
His  agnug  eastus  and  lettuce  are  prayer  and  fasting.  Barley-water  or  cool-anger. — 
Doth  the  heat  of  anger  boil  in  a  man's  heart,  and  enrageth  him  to  some  violent 
and  precipitate  courses?  Let  him  extract  from  this  garden  the  juice  of  many 
cooling  herbs,  and  among  the  rest  a  drink  of  barley-water — a  tysan  of  meekness  to 
cool  this  fire.  He  that  hath  proceeded  to  anger  is  a  man ;  he  that  hath  not  pro 
ceeded  to  sinful,  harmful  anger  is  a  Christian.     Parsley  or  frugality. — Declines  a 


480  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vt 

man's  estate  in  this  world,  as  if  his  hand  had  scattered  too  lavishly,  there  is  aii 
herb  in  this  garden ;  let  him  for  a  while  feed  on  it — parsley,  parsimony.  Hereon 
he  will  abridge  himself  of  some  superHuities ;  and  remember  that  moderate  fare  ia 
better  than  a  whole  college  of  physicians.  He  will  wear  good  clothes,  and  never 
better,  knowing  there  is  no  degree  beyond  decency.  The  wise  man  knows  it  is 
better  looking  through  a  poor  lattice-window  than  through  an  iron  gate ;  and 
though  he  wUl  lend  what  he  may,  he  will  not  borrow  till  he  must  needs.  Liver, 
wort,  or  peaceable  love. — Is  a  man  sick  in  his  liver  by  accession  of  some  distempera- 
ture  ?  Doth  his  charity  and  love  to  some  neighbours,  for  their  malignancy  against 
him,  fail  and  faint  in  his  heart  ?  Then  let  him  step  to  this  garden  for  some 
jecuraria ;  we  call  it  liver-wort.  He  asks  of  his  heart  for  his  old  love,  his  wonted 
amity.  Lily,  or  pureness  of  heart.  Doth  a  man  perceive  his  heart  a  little  begilded 
with  ostentation,  and  desires  he  to  seem  better  than  he  is  ?  And  how  easily  is  man 
won  to  answer  biS  commenders'  speculation  I  Let  him  fetch  the  lily — pureness  of 
heart — which  is  a  herb  of  grace,  growing  in  the  bumble  valley  of  a  meek  spirit, 
yet  is  white  and  lovely.  Enula  campana,  or  obedience.  Perhaps  evil  example 
hath  suddenly,  and  without  provided,  consideration,  led  a  man  into  evil.  Let  him 
run  to  this  garden  for  enula  campana.  This  herb  is  that  Christ  enjoined  us: 
"  Search  the  Scriptures " ;  add  hereto  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  This  shall  give 
decision  of  all  doubts,  and  teach  thee  what  path  to  fly,  what  way  to  take.  Heart- 
wort,  or  afiSance  in  God's  promises.  It  may  be  sorrow  of  heart  for  sin  hath  cast 
a  man  down,  and  he  is  swallowed  up  of  too  much  heaviness.  There  is  a  herb  to 
comfort  him  called  heart-wort,  aiBance  in  the  merciful  promises  of  God  passed  to 
him  by  word,  oath,  seal,  scriptures,  sacraments,  and  therefore  infallible.  Hya- 
cinth, or  following  Christ.  Say  that  the  Christian  hath  met  with  some  gilded  pUl 
of  corruption,  some  poisonous  doctrine,  yet  plausible  to  flesh  and  blood.  Let  him 
search  his  garden  for  hyacinth,  or  solsequium,  turnsol,  an  herb  that  duly  and 
obediently  follows  the  sun.  Do  thou  follow  the  Sun  of  righteousness  (Mai.  iv.  2), 
and  let  His  bright  beams  guide  thy  course,  who  hath  promised  to  teach  all  those 
that  with  a  humble  heart  and  earnest  prayer  seek  it  at  His  hands.  Care-away. 
If  worldly  troubles  come  too  fast  upon  a  man,  he  hath  an  herb  called  care-away. 
Not  that  he  bequeathes  himself  to  a  supine  negligence,  as  if  God  would  fill  his 
house  with  provision,  while'  he  sits  and  sings  care  away  ;  but  as  he  is  free  from 
idleness,  so  also  from  distrust.  He  considers  the  ravens  and  lilies,  and  knows  that 
the  Lord  ia  the  "  Preserver  of  men  "  as  well  as  of  fowls  ;  that  He  respects  man 
above  those,  and  His  own  above  othci  men.  Therefore  he  throws  all  bis  cares 
upon  God,  as  if  they  were  too  heavy  a  load  for  himself.  Solicitous  thoughtfulness 
can  give  him  no  hurt,  but  this  herb  care-away  shall  easily  cure  it.  Holy  thistle,  or 
good  resolution.  Yield  that  he  is  pressed  with  injuries ;  as  "  who  will  live  godly  in 
Christ,  and  shall  not  suffer  persecution  ?  "  He  is  oppressed  by  force  or  fraud, 
might  or  subtlety,  and  cannot  help  himself.  He  hath  a  good  herb  in  this  garden, 
called  carduus  benedicttcs,  holy  thistle,  a  godly  resolution,  that  through  many 
miseries  he  must  enter  heaven.  He  rests  himself  on  God,  and  rather  wisheth  his 
harmlessness  should  suffer  than  himself  not  to  give  passive  and  patient  obedience 
to  lawful  authority  (Dan.  iii.  17).  There  are  many  other  herbs  in  this  gan'e  i ;  as 
if  he  be  to  deal  with  crafty  adversaries,  let  him  fetch  some  sage — honest  policy — 
and  such  as  m  ly  stand  with  an  untrenched  conscience.  For  Christ  gave  us  this 
allowance,  to  be  "  wise  as  serpents  " ;  though  withal  a  cobibition  that  we  be 
"  harmless  as  doves  "  (Matt.  x.  16).  IL  It  receiveth  blessing  from  God.  The 
reward  gives  a  happy  conclusion  to  this  good  ground.  So  it  pleaseth  the  Lord  to 
ifljept  our  labours  that  He  will  reward  them,  not  after  our  own  merit,  for  that  is 
not  an  atom,  but  after  His  own  meroy,  which  exceeds  heaven  and  earth.  Receive 
this  blessing  with  a  thankful  heart ;  thou  hast  not  earned  it.  "  It  receiveth." 
Such  is  the  immense  goodness  of  God  that  He  will  acid  grace  to  grace,  and  when 
He  hath  shown  mercy  He  will  show  more  mercy.  As  if  He  expected  no  other 
argument  of  future  bounty  but  his  former  bounty.  "  Blessing."  This  word  is  of  a 
great  latitude.  What  good  is  there  which  will  not  be  brought  within  this  compass  ? 
This  blessing  hath  a  double  extent.  There  is  beatitudo  via  and  heatitudo  patrice — 
1.  A  blessing  of  the  way,  and — 2.  A  blessing  of  the  country  ;  one  of  grace,  the 
other  of  glory.  (1)  The  former  is  either  outward  or  inward,  (a)  Outward  (Psa. 
cxxxii  15 ;  Deut.  xxviii.  4).  Which  things  do  often  come  to  the  godly  even  on 
earth,  and  that  in  abundance.  For  as  all  have  not  riches  that  exceedingly  love 
them,  80  many  have  them  that  do  not  much  care  for  them.  (6)  Inward.  The 
godly  on  earth  is,  as  it  weie,  in  the  suburbs  of  heaven,  whose  "  kingdom  consists 


CHAP.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  481 

not  in  meat  and  drink,  but  righteousness,  peace  of  conscience,  and  joy  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  "  (Eom.  xiv,  17).  Could  his  life  be  as  full  of  sorrows  as  ever  Lazarus  was 
full  of  sores,  yet  he  is  blessed.  The  sunshine  of  mercy  is  still  upon  him,  and  the 
blessing  of  God  makes  him  rich.  (2)  This  blessing  hath  yet  a  farther  extent  to 
the  blessedness  of  our  country,  when  we  shall  hear,  '*  Oome,  ye  blessed  of  My 
Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world  " 
(Matt.  XXV.  34).  No  tongue  can  declare  this  blessing ;  happy  heart  that  shall  feel 
it !  Well,  this  is  God's  blessing,  and  He  will  give  it  to  the  good  ground.  Labour 
we  then  to  be  fruitful  gardens,  and  to  abound  with  gracious  herbs,  that  God  may  in 
this  world  shower  upon  us  the  dews  of  Elis  mercy,  and  after  this  life  transplant  ua 
to  His  heavenly  paradise.  {T.  Adams.)  The  diverge  results  of  similar  Chrittian 
privileges  : — When  we  compare  this  parable  with  any  of  our  Lord's  there  is  a  great 
falling  off  in  point  of  felicity  and  instructiveness.  One  pnrpos(5  it  doubtless  sorves, 
to  make  clear  the  matter  of  fact,  that  the  same  Christian  privileges  and  experiences 
may  issue  in  widely  different  ultimate  results.  The  soil  is  supposed  in  either  case 
to  be  well  watered,  not  only  rained  upon,  but  often  saturated  with  water,  having 
drunk  up  the  blessing  of  the  clouds,  and  moreover  to  be  carefully  tilled.  Yet  in 
one  case  it  yields  a  useful  crop,  in  the  other  only  a  useless  crop  of  thorns  and 
thistles.  But  why?  On  this  important  question  the  parable  throws  no  light. 
The  land  which  bears  the  useless  crop  is  not  a  barren  rock ;  for  it  drinks  in  the 
rain,  and  it  is  considered  worth  ploughing.  Nay,  it  is  doubtful  if  the  case  supposed 
in  the  second  alternative  can  occur  in  the  natural  world.  Was  there  ever  a  land 
well  tilled  and  watered  that  produced  nothing  but  thorns  and  thistles?  The  vn:iter 
describes  a  case  in  the  natural  world  which  can  hardly  happen  to  represent  a  case 
which  may  happen  in  the  spiritual  world,  that  viz.,  of  men  whose  hearts  have  been 
sown  with  the  seed  of  truth  and  watered  with  the  rain  of  grace  becoming  so  utterly 
degenerate  and  reprobate,  as  in  the  end  to  produce  nothing  but  the  thorns  and 
thistles  of  unbelief  and  ungodliness.  Mixture  of  metaphor  and  literal  sense  is 
indeed  manifest  throughout,  the  phrases  "  receiveth  blessing,"  "  reprobate  "  "  nigh 
to  a  curse,"  •'  whose  end  is  unto  burning,"  expressing  moral  Ideas  rather  than 
physical  facts.  This  ie  particularly  evident  in  the  case  of  the  last  phrase.  It 
plainly  points  to  a  judicial  visitation  of  the  severest  kind,  the  appointed  penalty  of 
spiritual  unfruitfulness.  But  in  the  natural  sphere  burning  is  remedial  rather  than 
punitive,  to  burn  land  which  has  become  foul  being  a  good  method  of  restoring  it 
to  fertility.  In  yet  another  respect  the  comparison  fails  us.  Supposing  there  were 
such  a  thing  as  burning  unprofitable  land  by  way  of  judicial  visitation,  as  the  land 
of  Sodom  was  destroyed  by  fire  and  brimstone — an  event  which  may  have  been 
present  to  the  writer's  thoughts — the  fact  might  serve  to  symbolise  the  Divine 
judgment  on  apostasy.  But  the  matter  on  which  we  most  of  all  need  light  is  the 
asserted  impossibility  of  renewal  That  the  finally  impenitent  should  be  punished 
we  understand,  but  what  we  want  to  know  is,  how  men  get  into  that  state ;  what  is 
the  psychological  history  of  irreconcilable  apostasy  ?  To  refer  to  Divine  agency  in 
hardening  human  hearts  does  not  help  us,  for  God  hardens  by  means  naturally 
fitted  and  intended  to  soften  and  win.  Neither  can  we  lake  refuge  in  the  supposi- 
tion of  insufficient  initial  grace,  at  least  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  writer  of  our 
Epistle ;  for  he  assumes  that  the  fruitful  and  the  unfruitful  have  been  equally 
favoured.  The  rain  falls  not  less  liberally  on  the  land  that  bears  thorns  and 
thistles  than  on  the  land  that  brings  forth  an  abundant  crop  of  grass  or  grain  ;  and 
the  rain  represents  the  enlightenment,  enjoyment,  and  power  previously  mentioned. 
In  the  parable  of  the  sower  the  diversity  in  the  results  is  traced  to  the  nature  of  the 
soil.  In  each  case  the  issue  is  exactly  such  as  we  should  expect  from  the  character 
of  the  ground.  In  the  parable  before  us  opposite  results  are  supposed  to  be  possible 
in  the  same  soil.  That  is  to  say,  the  effect  is  conceived  to  depend  on  the  will  of 
each  individual,  on  the  use  one  makes  of  his  privileges.  The  Hebrew  Christiana 
might  have  been  teachers  instead  of  childish  learners,  had  they  chosen  to  take  the 
necessary  pains ;  they  might  have  been  full-grown  men,  had  they  only  properly 
exercised  their  spiritual  senses  in  discerning  between  good  and  evil.  (A,  B.  Bruce, 
D.D.)  Ideal  fruitfulnest : — We  know  of  certain  church  members  who  are  so 
completely  under  the  cold  shade  of  the  world  that  the  half-dozen  sour,  dwarfish 
apples  they  yield  are  not  worth  any  man's  gathering.  We  know,  too,  of  others  so 
laden  that  you  cannot  touch  the  outermost  limb  without  shaking  down  a  golden 
pippin  or  a  jargonelle.  Such  trees  make  a  church  or  land  beautifoL  They  are 
a  joy  to  the  pastor  who  walks  through  them.  E  ery  stooping  bough  and  every  purple 
cluster  that  hangs  along  the  walls  bespeaks  he  goodness  of  the  soil,  the  moisture 

81 


\ 


4M  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tL 

of  the  Spirit's  dews,  and  the  abundance  of  God's  sunshine.     (T.  L.  Cuyler,  D.D.) 
That  which  heareth  thorns  and  briers  is  rejected. — The  bad  heart : — 1.  The  thing 
signified  in  general  is  sinful  man,  and  especially  his  heart.    2.  The  second  protasis 
or  proposition  is  concerning  bad  ground,  which — (1)  Appears  to  be  bad  by  bearing 
thorns  and  briers.    (2)  Is  used  as  bad  ground,    (a)  By  being  rejected,    (b)  Nigh 
unto  cursing,     (c)  In  the  end  burned.     This  ground  is  a  bad  heart,  which  is 
manifested  by  the  fruits,  which  are  words  and  deeds,  tending  to  the  dishonour  of 
God,  and  the  hurt  of  man.    And  this  sin  is  so  much  the  greater  because  of  the 
means  of  grace  and  workings  of  the  Spirit  over  and  above  the  light  of  nature,  which 
God  hath  graciously  afforded  them.    The  punishment  of  this  barrenness  in  all 
fruitfulness  in  sin  followeth.     (O.  Lawson.)         The  fcnrest  of  thorns: — 1.  The 
different  word  the  apostle  useth.     For  the  good  earth,  he  says,  it  is  riicTovaa 
l3oravr}v,  bringing  forth  herbs.     For  the  evil  it  is  tK(ptpovaa,  bearing,  not  bringing 
forth.    Our  proverb  says,  An  evil  weed  grows  apace.     Herbs  grow  not  without 
preparing  the  ground,  planting,  and  watering  them  by  seasonable  dews  and  dili- 
gence.   Weeds  are  common ;  it  is  hard  to  set  the  foot  besides  them.    The  basest 
things  are  ever  most  plentiful.    Man,  by  a  proclivity  of  his  own  natural  inclination, 
is  apt  to  produce  thorns  and  briers ;  but  ere  he  can  bring  forth  herbs,  graces,  God 
must  take  pains  with  him.     No  husbandman  so  labours  his  ground  as  God  doth 
our  hearts.     Happy  earth,  that  yields  Him  an  expected  harvest  1    But  that  which 
beareth  thorns  is  near  to  be  cursed  and  burned.     2.  Observe  that  a  wicked  man  is 
compared  to  bad  earth,  and  that  fitly,  in  five  respects  :  (1)  For  baseness.     The  earth 
is  the  heaviest  of  all  elements,  and  doth  naturally  sink  downwards,  as  if  it  had  no 
rest  but  in  the  centre,  which  itself  is.     A  wicked  man  is  base-minded,  and  sinks 
with  a  dull  and  ponderous  declination,  not  regarding  the  things  above,  but  those 
below.     All  his  affections  have  a  low  object,  not  of  humility,  but  base  dejection. 
His  hope,  desire,  love,  joy,  are  set  on  these  inferior  things.     (2)  For  coldness. 
Experience  teacheth  that  the  earth  is  cold,  and  coldness  is  a  natural  quality  per- 
taining to  it,  though  accidentally  there  be  bred  in  it  fiery  vapours.     The  wicked 
man  hath  a  cold  heart,  frozen  up  in  the  dregs  of  iniquity,  though  there  be  an  un- 
natural heat  sometimes  flaming  in  him,  the  fire  of  lust  and  malice  tormenting  his 
bowels  ;  but  this  is  no  kindly  heat  to  warm  his  conscience.     That  is  derived  from 
the  fire  of  the  temple,  that  never  goes  out,  and  only  given  by  Jesus  Christ,  that 
'« bap tizeth  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  fire."    (3)  For  foulness.     (4)  For  ob- 
scurity and  darkness.    The  earth  is  called  a  "  place  of  black  darkness,  the  land  of 
forgetfulness."     (5)  The  main  resemblance  between  an  evil  ground  and  worse  man 
consists  in  the  ill  fruits  that  they  both  produce — briers  and  thorns,  and  such  not 
only  unhelpful,  but  hurtful  vices.     This  is  the  principal  analogy  which  our  apostle 
intends,  the  pith  and  marrow  of   this  comparison.     But  before  we  come  to  » 
particular  survey  of  this  wood,  some  observable  doctrines  fall  profitable  to  our  in- 
struction,    (a)  The  Word  of  God  will  work  some  way.     It  falls  not  upon  any 
ground  in  vain  ;  but  will  produce  herbs  or  weeds.     It  is  such  physic  as  will  either 
cure  or  kill,     {h)  That  thorns  are  produced,  the  fault  is  not  in  the  good  rain,  but 
the  ill  ground.     "  What  could  I,"  saith  God,  "  have  done  more  to  My  vineyard?  " 
(Isa.  V.  4).    Let  not  the  mercy  of  God  be  blamed  for  this  man's  misery.     God  hath 
done  enough  to  save  him.     (c)  The  ground  is  very  unthankful  which  answers  the 
kindness  of  heaven  in  raining  on  it,  with  briers  and  thorns.    Wretched  man,  that 
receives  so  blessed  dews  from  the  fountain  of  mercy,  and  returns  an  ungrateful 
wickedness  1    Unthankful  it  is,  as  failing  in  both  those  essential  parts  of  gratitude, 
acknowledging  and  requiting  a  benefit,  and  so  guilty  both  of  falsehood  and  in- 
justice,    (d)  Wicked  men  prove  commonly  so  much  the  worse  as  they  might  have 
been  better,  and  divert  the  means  of  their  conversion  to  their  confusion.    The  more 
rain  of  the  gospel  they  receive,  the  more  abundantly  they  thrust  forth  the  thorns 
of  iniquities.    The  roots  of  these  briers  are  earthed  in  their  hearts,  and  do  boil  out 
at  the  warm  dews  of  the  Word.    It  fares  with  them  as  with  a  man  of  a  surfeited 
stomach — the  more  good  meat  he  eats  the  more  he  increaseth  his  corruption.    The 
former  crudities  undigested,  unegested,  having  the  greater  force,  turn  the  good 
nutriment  into  themselves.     It  now  remains  to  examine  more  narrowly  the  nature 
of  the  sins  these  ungodly  hearts  produce.    They  are  called  thorns  and  briers. 
Now  let  us  consider  what  resemblances  may  be  found  betwixt  those  natural  and 
these  allegorical  thorns  and  briers.    1.  Where  is  abundance  of  thorns,  there  is 
most  commonly  a  barren  ground.    For  they  hinder  the  happy  influence  of  the 
heavens,  the  kindly  heat  of  the  sun,  the  dews  of  the  clouds,  and  all  those  working 
«aaaes  ol  fertility.    The  very  company  of  the  wieked  is  harmful,  for  they  are  as 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  483 

thorns  to  stifle  any  goodness.     "  The  companion  of  fools  shall  be  aflaicted,"  saith 
Solomon.     2.  Thorns  and  briers  grow  most  commonly  on  heaps,  and  seldom  are 
found  single,  or  destitute  of  company  of  their   own  kind ;  and  though  they  be 
troublesomely  harmful  to  other  trees,  yet  they  fold  and  embrace  one  another  with- 
out hurt.    It  is  so  usually  seen  that  wicked  men  hold  together,  and  sins  grow  in 
united  clusters.    There  is  a  combinabion  of  the  ungodly,  even  so  far  as  to  the  very 
participation  of  their  estates  (Prov.  L  14).    They  are  entangled  in  mutual  amity, 
like  beds  of  eels,  nothing  but  thunder  can  break  their  knots,     3.  Thorns  and  briers, 
by  reason  of  their  thickness  and  sharpness,  are  refuges  for  serpents,  snakes,  addei  s, 
and  such  other  venomous  beasts.    Where  the  ungodly  have  a  strong  part,  oppres- 
sion, rapine,  robbery,  murder,  and  all  those  fatal  serpents,  are  fostered.    4.  Neither 
do  the  wicked,  only  with  their  thorns  and  briers,  hinder  others'  passage,  but  even 
their  own.     No  marvel  if  it  be  so  difficult  for  an  ungodly  man  to  get  to  heaven,  for 
he  hedgeth  up  his  own  way.     5.  Sins  are  fitly  compared  to  thorns  and  briers,  for 
their  wounding,  pricking,  and  such  harmful  offences.     Therefore  they  are  called 
tribuli,  a  tribulando,  from  their  vexing,  oppression,  and  tribulation  they  give  those 
that  touch  them.     These  briers  and  thorns  have  such  pricking  and  wounding 
effects  in  regard  of  three  objects,  whom  they  strike.     For  sins  are  like  thorns — 1. 
To  men.    2.  To  Christ.     3.  To  the  own  consciences  of  the  committers.     (1)  What 
say  you  to  the  usurer  ?    Is  he  not  a  thorn  amongst  you  ?     (2)  What  do  3'ou  think 
of  adultery  ?    Is  it  not  a  thorn  ?    Yes,  a  sharp  thorn,  wounding  the  purse,  en- 
venoming the  body,  condemning   the  soul.      The  ground  that  bears  it  is  lust. 
(3)  There  are  furious  malecontents  among  us,  a  contemptible  generation  of  thorns, 
that,  because  their  hands  are  pinioned,  prick  only  with  their  tongues.    They  are 
ever  whining,  and  upon  the  least  cause  filling  the  world  with  importunate  com- 
plaints.  (4)  There  are  briers,  too,  growing  near  the  Church — too  near  it.    {T.  Ada7ux.) 
Barren  soil : — Some  observe  that  the  most  barren  grounds  are  nearest  to  the 
richest  mines.     It  is  too  often  true  in  a  spiritual  sense  that  those  whom  God  hath 
made  the  most  fruitful  in  estates  are  most  barren  in  good  works.     (T,  Seeker. ) 
Whose  end  Is  to  be  burned  — The  end  of  thorns  : — 1.  That  we  labour  our  hearts 
betimes  to  a  sensiblene'^s  of  these  thorns.    A  thorn  swallowed  into  the  flesh,  if  it 
be  not  looked  to,  rankles.     Sin  without  repentance  wiU  fester  in  the  soul,  and  is  so 
much  more  perilous  as  it  is  less  felt.     2.  After  sense  of  the  smart,  will  foUow 
a  desire  of  remedy.     The  throbbing  conscience  would  be  at  ease,  and  freed  from 
the  thorn  that  vexeth  it.     Take  we  heed  that  we  despise  not  this  medicine.    The 
law  was  so  far  from  drawing  out  these  thorns,  that  it  would  drive  them  in  further, 
and  cause  them  to  rankle  in  the  heart,  without  any  hope  of  ease.    There  is  a  three- 
fold gradation  in  the  penalty:  rejection,  malediction,  combustion — "is  rejected," 
"  is  nigh  unto  cursing,"  "  and  the  end  there  of  is  to  be  burned."    And  it  seems  to 
have  a  relation  to  a  threefold  distinction  of  time.     1.  For  the  present,  "  it  is  re- 
jected."   2.  For  instance,  or  appropinquation,  "  it  is  nigh  unto  cursing."    3.  For 
future  certainty,  "the  end  of  it  is  to  be  burned."    As  men  commonly  deal  with 
thorns  :  first,  they  cut  them  up  with  bills  and  mattocks ;  then  they  lay  them  by  to 
wither  ;  and,  lastly,  burn  them  in  the  furnace.    1.  Rejection.    This  which  we  here 
translate  '*  is  rejected,"  is  in  the  original,  dSoKiftog,  which  may  signify  reprobus,  or, 
reprobatus — so  Beza  hath  it — is  reproved,  or  disallowed  of  God.    This  ground  shall 
have  no  ground  in  heaven,  no  part  in  God's  inheritance.    It  is  reprobate  silver, 
not  curreut  with  the  Lord.     2.  The  second  decree  of  the  punishment  is  curbing ; 
and  this  may  seem  to  exceed  the  former.     The  whole  vial  of  wrath  is  not  poured 
on  at  once;  but  first  there  is  a  despising  or  rejection,  to  let  the  wicked  see  how 
hateful  their  vices  are  in  God's  sight.     If  this  serve  not,  they  are  not  suddenly 
cursed ;  but  there  is  a  merciful  space  between  cursing  and  burning.     So  slowly 
doth   God  proceed  to  judgment.    He  is  speedy  to  deliver,  to  save,  to  give  His 
blessing ;  but  He  hath  leaden  feet  when  He  comes  to  strike,     3.  The  last  and 
sorest  degree  of  the  punishment  is  burning.     I  will  not  discourse  whether  the  fir<^ 
of  that  everlastingly  hot  furnace  be  material  or  spiritual.     Surely  it  is  strangely 
terrible ;  and  we  are  blessed  if  we  neither  understand  it  nor  undergo  it.     (1),  This 
privation  of  blessedness  may  seem  to  be  implied  in  the  first  degree  here  mentioned 
— rejection.     The  reprobate  are  cast  away  of  God.     Much  like  that  form  of  the  last 
sentence  (Matt,  xiv,  41).    (2).  This  is  not  all.    The  privation  of  blessed  joys  is  not 
enough :  there  must  follow  the  position  of  cursed  torments.    They  rejected  God, 
and  He  rejects  them ;  they  adhered  to  wickedness,  and  it  shall  adhere  to  their 
bones  for  ever,  and  bring  them  to  burning.     Their  torments,  which  are  here  ex- 
pressed by  fire,  have  two  fearful  conditions — uuiversaUty  and  eternity.    (1).  They 


484  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tl 

are  universal,  vexing  every  part  of  the  body  and  power  of  the  soul.  (2).  They  are 
eternal.  Let  the  commination  of  hell  instruct  us  to  prevent  it,  as  the  message  of 
Nineveh's  overthrow  effected  their  safety.  1.  Let  us  flee  by  a  true  faith  into  the 
arms  of  our  Redeemer,  that  God  reject  us  not.  2.  Let  us  pour  forth  floods  of 
repentant  tears,  that  we  be  not  nigh  unto  cursing.  3.  And  let  us  bring  forth  no 
more  briers  and  thorns,  that  our  end  may  not  be  to  be  burned.  Faith,  repentance, 
obedience ;  this  same  golden  rule  of  three  will  teach  us  to  work  up  our  own  salvation. 
This  done,  we  shall  not  be  rejected,  but  known  to  be  elected  ;  we  shall  be  so  far 
from  cursing,  that  we  shall  presently  receive  the  blessing  ;  and  our  end  shall  be,  not 
fire,  but  glory  and  peace  (Psa.  xxxvii.  37).  (T.  Adams.)  Are  we  herbs  or  briers  ? — 
What  solemn  admonition  does  this  latter  part  of  the  representation,  and  what 
sweet  encouragement  does  the  former  part  of  it  afford  1  Are  we  bringing  forth  the 
appropriate  "herbs,"  or  are  we  yielding  the  "thorns  and  briers" — we  who  have 
been  so  favourably  tended — we  among  whom  the  seed  has  been  so  liberally  cast, 
ai:d  on  whom  the  rain  has  so  copiously  fallen  ?  Li  answering  this  question,  let  ua 
not  be  deceived  by  mere  superficial  appearances.  Natural  kindliness  and  outward 
decency  are  no  sure  evidences  of  "  a  field  which  the  Lord  hath  blessed,"  and  which 
the  Lord  approves.  A  pret  y  plant  may  spring  beneath  the  shadow  of  the  "  brier." 
A  pleasant  flower  may  even  blossom  on  the  branches  of  the  "  thorn."  Yet  still, 
the  thorn  is  but  a  thorn,  the  brier  is  but  a  brier,  and  the  soil  which  they  cover  has 
run  to  waste,  is  lost  to  its  higher  uses,  and  is  marked  out  for  clearance  and  con- 
flagration by  the  wise  and  cautious  husbandman.    {A.  S.  Patterson.) 

Ver.  9.  We  are  persuaded  better  things  of  you. — Pastoral  solicitude : — I.  The 
BETTER  THINGS.  1.  Better  things  than  to  be  moral  dwarfs.  2.  Better  things  than 
treating  the  Son  disrespectfully.  3,  Better  things  than  to  be  withering  for  the 
flames.  II.  The  saving  things.  1.  Inward  change.  2.  Love  to  God  and  the 
brethren.  3.  Prayer.  4.  Perseverance  in  spite  of  obstacles.  (A.  Griffiths.) 
Judging  in  charity  : — Those  of  us  who  have  read  classic  history  may  remember  an 
incident  in  the  history  of  the  Macedonian  emperor.  A  painter  was  commanded  to 
sketch  the  monarch.  In  one  of  his  great  battles,  he  had  been  struck  with  the 
sword  upon  the  forehead,  and  a  very  large  scar  had  been  left  on  the  right  temple. 
The  painter,  who  was  a  master-hand  in  his  art,  sketched  him  leaning  on  his  elbow, 
with  bis  finger  covering  the  scar  on  his  forehead  ;  and  so  the  likeness  of  the  king 
was  taken,  but  without  the  scar.  Let  us  put  the  finger  of  charity  upon  the  scar  of 
the  Christian  as  we  look  at  him,  whatever  it  may  be — the  finger  of  a  tender  and 
forebearing  charity,  and  see,  in  spite  of  it  and  under  it,  the  image  of  Christ  not- 
withstanding. (J.  Gumming,  D.D.)  A  good  persuasion: — I.  It  is  the  doty  op 
the  dispensees  of  the  gospel  to  satisfy  their  hearers  in  and  of  their  love  in 
Jesds  Christ  to  their  sodls  and  persons.    II.  It  is  our  duty  to  come  unto  the 

BEST  satisfaction  WE  MAY,  IN  THE  SPIRITUAL  CONDITION  OF  THEM  WITH  WHOH  WE  ARE 
TO  HAVE  SPIRITUAL  COMMUNION.  III.  We  MAY,  AS  OCCASIONS  REQUIRE,  PUBLICLY 
TESTIFY  THAT  GOOD  PERSUASION  WHICH  WE  HAVE  CONCERNING  THE  SPIRITUAL  CONDITICN 
OF  OTHERS,  AND  THAT  UNTO  OURSELVES.  IV.  ThB  BEST  PERSUASION  WE  CAN  ABBIVB 
UNTO  CONCERNING  THE  SPIRITUAL  CONDITION  OF  ANY,  LEAVES  YET  ROOM,  YEA,  MAKES  WAT 
FOB    THE     GOSPEL    THREATENINGS,    WARNINGS,     EXHORTATIONS,    AND      ENCOURAGEMENTS. 

V.  Among  professors  of  the  gospel,  some  are  partakers  of  better  things  than 
OTHERS.  1.  Spiritual  gifts  are  of  one  kind.  For  although  there  are  several  sorts  of 
them,  yet  they  have  all  the  same  general  nature,  they  are  all  gifts  and  no  more. 
The  difference  therefore  that  is  amongst  them  being  not  to  be  taken  from  their  own 
especial  nature,  but  their  use  and  tendency  unto  the  common  end  of  them  all, 
I  take  it  only  to  be  gradual.  2.  There  are  spiritual  things  which  differ  in  their 
whole  kind  and  nature  from  other  things,  and  are  better  than  they  as  to  their 
essence  and  being.  Such  is  all  saving  grace,  with  all  the  fruits  of  it.  All  that  eat 
outwardly  in  ordinances  of  the  bread  of  life  do  not  feed  on  the  hidden  manna.  All 
that  have  their  names  enrolled  in  the  Church's  book,  may  not  yet  have  them 
written  in  the  Lamb's  book.  There  are  yet  better  things  than  gifts,  profession, 
participation  of  ordinances,  and  whatever  is  of  the  hke  nature.  And  the  use 
hereof  in  one  word  is  to  warn  all  sorts  of  persons,  that  they  rest  not  in,  that  thvj 
take  not  up  with  an  interest  in,  or  participation  of,  the  privileges  of  the  Church, 
with  a  common  profession,  which  may  give  them  a  name  to  Uve  ;  seeing  they  may 
be  dead  or  in  a  perishing  condition  in  the  meantime.    VI.  There  are,  according  to 

THB  TBNOB  OF  THB  COVENANT  OF  GRACE,  SUCH  THINGS  BESTOWED  ON  SOME  PERSONS,  Afl 
SALVATION   DOTH   INFALLIBI<y  ACCOMPANY  AND  ENSUE  UPON — BETTER    THINGS,  AND   BUCB 


CHAP.  Ti.)  HEBREWS.  485 

AS  HAVE  SALVATION  ACCOMPANYING  OF  THEM.  VII.  It  IS  THE  DUTY  OP  ALL  PK0FESS0K3 
eiRICTLY  TO  EXAMINE  THEMSELVES,  CONCEBNINO  THEIB  PARTICIPATION  OP  THOSE  BETTER 

THINGS  WHICH  ACCOMPANY  SALVATION.  Their  Condition  is  deplorable  who  under  an 
outward  profession  do  satisfy  themselves  with  those  common  gifts,  graces,  and 
duties  which  are  separable  from  salvation.  {John  Owen,  D.D.)  Encouragement 
in  the  midst  of  warnings : — Though  the  Church  be  persuaded  of  thee  that  thou  ar« 
a  wise  man,  witty,  learned,  that  is  to  small  purpose.  So  live,  that  both  the 
preachers  and  all  good  people  may  be  persuaded  you  have  that  in  you,  for  the 
which  they  may  judge  you  to  be  heirs  of  salvation.  Here  he  prevents  an  objection 
that  might  be  made.  What,  Paul,  hast  thou  been  so  bitter  towards  us?  Hast  thou 
called  us  babes  and  novices  in  religion?  Hast  thou  set  before  our  eyes  such 
a  terrible  example  of  backshders,  as  if  we  were  birds  of  the  same  feather,  and  now 
art  thou  well  persuaded  of  us  ?  Thou  dost  but  flatter  us,  we  can  hardly  think  so. 
Oh  yes,  says  St.  Paul,  assure  yourselves,  we  have  a  good  opinion  of  you  ;  though  we 
thus  speak,  these  are  but  trumpets  to  waken  you  out  of  sin,  the  wounds  of  a  lover 
to  cure  you  withal ;  they  be  but  spurs  of  fatherly  admonitions  to  prick  you 
forwards  unto  all  goodness.  We  made  meution  of  these  men,  not  as  if  you  were 
such,  but  to  warn  you  that  you  be  not  such.  Though  the  preacher  be  sometimes 
round  and  vehement,  yet  the  people  must  not  imagine  that  he  is  hardly  conceited 
of  them.  A  father  loves  his  child  when  he  chides  him,  a  physician  his 
patient,  though  he  give  him  bitter  pills ;  and  we  love  you,  though  we 
be  hot  against  the  corruptions  that  reign  among  you.  {W.  Jones,  D.D.) 
Things  that  accompany  salvation. — Things  that  accomjmny  salvation: — Picture 
to  yourselves  the  march  of  some  ancient  monarch  through  his  territory.  We  read 
stories  of  eastern  monarchs  in  the  olden  time,  that  seem  more  like  romance  than 
reality ;  when  they  marched  with  thousands  of  flying  banners,  and  with  all  kinds 
of  riches  borne  with  them.  Now  you  are  to  take  that  as  the  basis  of  my  figure,  and 
suppose  salvation  to  be  the  sacred  treasure  which  is  being  carried  through  the 
world,  with  guards  before  and  guards  behind,  to  accompany  it  on  its  journey. 
I.  First,  then,  in  the  marches  of  troops  and  armies  there  are  some  that  are  out- 
eiders,  AND  go  far  ahead  OF  THE  OTHER  TROOPS.  So  in  the  mavch  of  salvation  there 
is  a  certain  body  of  great  and  mighty  "  things  that  accompany  salvation,"  which 
have  far  preceded  it  to  clear  the  way.  I  will  tell  you  the  names  of  these  stupen- 
dous Titans  who  have  gone  before.  The  first  is  Election  ;  the  second  is  Predesti- 
nation ;  the  third  is  Eedemption ;  and  the  Covenant  is  the  captain  of  them  all. 
Now,  this  advance-guard  is  so  far  ahead  that  you  and  I  cannot  see  them.  These 
are  true  doctrines,  but  very  mysterious ;  they  are  beyond  our  sight ;  and  if  we  wish 
to  see  salvation,  we  must  not  stop  until  we  see  the  vanguard,  because  they  are  so 
far  off  that  only  the  eye  of  faith  can  reach  them.  Then  Election  is  thine.  Dost 
thou  believe  ?  Then  Predestination  is  as  surely  thine  as  thou  art  alive.  Dost  thou 
trust  alone  in  Jesus  ?  Then  fear  not ;  Eedemption  was  meant  for  thee.  II.  But 
mark,  we  are  about  to  review  the  army  that  immediately  precedes  salvation  ; 
and,  first,  in  the  forefront  of  these,  there  marches  one  whose  name  we  must  pro- 
nounce with  sacred  awe.  It  is  God  the  Holy  Spirit.  Before  anything  can  be  done 
in  our  salvation,  there  must  come  that  Third  Person  of  the  Sacred  Trinity.  With- 
out Him,  faith,  repentance,  humiUty,  love,  are  things  quite  impossible.  And  now, 
close  in  the  rear  of  the  adorable  Spirit  follow  the  Thundering  Legion.  No  sooner 
does  God  the  Holy  Ghost  come  into  the  soul,  than  He  brings  with  Him  what  I  have 
called  the  Thundering  Legion ;  and  those  of  you  that  have  been  saved  will  not  be  at 
a  loss  to  understand  what  I  mean.  Some  of  the  men  in  this  Thundering  Legion 
bear  with  them  swords  ;  with  these  swords  they  are  to  slay  the  sinner.  For,  before 
he  can  be  made  whole,  he  must  be  spiritually  killed ;  the  sword  must  pierce  him, 
and  must  slay^  all  his  selfishness  before  he  can  be  brought  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  Then 
another  body  of  them  carry  with  them  axes,  with  which  they  cut  down  the  thick 
trees  of  our  pride  and  abase  the  goodly  cedars  of  our  righteousness.  There  are 
with  them  those  that  fill  up  the  wells  with  stones,  and  break  np  all  the  cisterns  of 
our  carnal  sufficiency,  until  we  are  driven  to  despair,  having  all  our  hopes  despoiled. 
My  friend,  has  this  Thundering  Legion  ever  come  to  your  house  ?  Have  they  ever 
taken  up  their  quarters  in  your  heart  ?  For,  rest  assured,  these  are  some  of  the 
"  things  that  accompany  salvation."  More  or  less  of  terrors  every  man  must  feel 
before  he  is  converted  Oh,  Thundering  Legion,  ye  are  gone;  we  hear  their 
trumpets  and  the  dying  echoes  still  appal  us.  What  see  we  in  the  rear  of  them? 
Close  in  the  rear  there  follows  a  broken  heart.  Are  you  sorrowfnl  at  this  very 
hoar?    Be  of  good  cheer,  salvation  is  not  far  behind.    When  there  is  onoe  a  broken 


486  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ti 

heart,  there  is  mercy  very  near.  God  is  looking  on  thee  with  love,  and  will  have 
mercy  upon  thee.  But  who  are  those  that  follow  in  the  rear  ?  Another  troop ; 
but  these  are  far  different  from  the  rest.  The  Silken  Legion  follow.  No  weapons  of 
war  in  their  hands  ;  no  thunders  do  they  utter ;  but  they  speak  kind  words  of  pity, 
and  their  hands  are  full  of  benedictions.  Shall  I  tell  you  who  this  Silken  Legion 
are  ?  There  is  a  troop  of  them  who  take  the  poor  wounded  heart,  and  wash  it  first 
in  blood ;  they  sprinkle  on  it  the  sacred  blood  of  the  Atonement ;  and  it  is  amazing 
how  the  poor  broken  heart,  though  faint  and  sick,  revives  at  the  first  drop  of  the 
precious  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  oh,  what  a  washing  it  is  ?  The 
heart  that  was  once  black  as  the  coals  of  hell,  seems  white  as  the  snow  of  Lebanon. 
When  it  has  once  been  bathed  in  the  bath  of  the  Saviour's  blood  and  water,  oh, 
how  pure  it  becomes  I  Then  follow  those  who  pour  oil  and  wine  into  the  wounds 
of  this  poor  broken  heart,  so  that  where  it  smarted  before,  the  wounds  begin  to 
sing.  The  sacred  oil  and  wine  of  the  precious  promise  is  poured  into  every  -sound. 
The  whole  heart  sings  for  gladness ;  for  God  hath  restored  its  strength  and  bound 
up  all  its  wounds,  according  to  His  promise :  "  He  healeth  the  broken  in  heart,  and 
bindeth  up  their  wounds."  And  then,  since  the  work  is  not  quite  done,  there 
come  those  who  carry  the  King's  wardrobe ;  and  with  the  things  out  of  this  rich 
storehouse  they  array  the  soul  from  head  to  foot ;  they  clothe  it  with  everything 
that  for  lustre  and  for  glory  could  adorn  it,  and  make  it  bright  as  the  spirits  before 
the  throne.  And  then  the  King's  jewellers  come  in  and  complete  the  whole ;  they 
array  the  soul  with  ornaments,  and  bedeck  it  with  precious  stones.  And  now  we 
have  not  yet  come  to  a  fuU  conviction  of  salvation.  The  silken  legion  are  gone. 
What  cometh  next  ?  Now  come  those  that  are  the  actual  attendants  upon  salva- 
tion— or  rather,  that  march  in  the  rank  immediately  before  it.  There  are  four  o£ 
these,  called  Repentance,  Humility,  Prayer,  and  a  tender  Conscience.  Has 
Humility  ever  come  to  you?  Has  she  ever  abased  your  pride,  and  taught  you  to 
lie  in  the  dust  before  God  ?  Has  Repentance  ever  watered  the  floor  of  your  hearts 
with  tears  ?  Have  you  ever  been  led  to  weep  in  secret  for  your  sins,  and  to  bewail 
your  iniquities?  Has  Prayer  ever  entered  your  spirit?  Remember,  a  prayer  less 
soul  is  a  Christless  soul.  And,  lastly,  are  you  tender  of  Conscience,  for  unless  your 
conscience  is  made  tender,  salvation  has  not  met  you,  for  these  are  the  immediate 
attendants  upon  it.  IH.  And  now  comes  salvation  in  all  its  fulness.  And  now 
comes  the  precious  casket  set  with  gems  and  jewels.  It  is  of  God-like  workman- 
ship ;  no  hammer  was  ever  lifted  on  it ;  it  was  smitten  out  and  fashioned  upon 
the  anvil  of  Eternal  Might,  and  cast  in  the  mould  of  Everlasting  Wisdom  ;  but  no 
human  hand  hath  ever  defiled  it.  And  who  are  those  that  are  close  ai  ound  it  ? 
There  are  three  sweet  sisters  that  always  have  the  custody  of  the  treasure — you 
know  them ;  their  names  are  common  in  Scripture — Faith,  Hope,  and  Love,  the 
three  Divine  sisters ;  these  have  salvation  in  their  bowels  and  do  carry  it  about 
with  them  in  their  loins.  Faith,  who  layeth  hold  on  Christ,  and  trusteth  all  in 
Him  ;  that  ventureth  everything  upon  His  blood  and  sacrifice,  and  hath  no  other 
trust.  Hope,  that  with  beaming  eye  looks  up  to  Jesus  Christ  in  glory,  and  expects 
Him  soon  to  come :  looks  downward,  and  when  she  sees  grim  death  in  her  way, 
expects  that  she  shall  pass  through  with  victory.  And  then  sweet  Love,  the 
sweetest  of  the  three ;  she,  whose  words  are  music  and  whose  eyes  are  stars ;  Love 
also  looks  to  Christ  and  is  enamoured  of  Him  ;  loves  Him  in  all  His  offices,  adores 
His  presence,  reverences  His  words ;  and  is  prepared  to  bind  her  body  to  the  stake 
and  die  for  Him,  who  bound  His  body  to  the  cross  to  die  for  her.  IV.  Now  I  must 
BEING  UP  XHB  KEAB  GUARD.  It  is  impossible  that  with  such  a  vanguard,  grace 
should  be  unattended  from  behind.  Now  see  those  that  follow  salvation .  The 
first  is  Gratitude — always  singing,  "  Bless  the  Lord  0  my  soul,  and  all  that  is 
within  me  bless  His  holy  name."  And  then  Gratitude  lays  hold  upon  its  son's 
hand  ;  the  name  of  that  son  is  Obedience.  In  company  with  this  fair  grace  is  one 
called  Consecration — a  pure  white  spirit  that  hath  no  earthliness  ;  from  its  head  to 
its  foot  it  is  aU  God's,  and  all  gold.  Linked  to  this  bright  one,  is  one  with  a  face 
serene  and  solemn,  called  Knowledge.  •'  Then  shall  ye  know  when  ye  follow  on  to 
know  the  Lord."  Those  that  are  saved  understand  mysteries,  they  know  the  love  of 
Christ ;  they  "  know  Him,  whom  to  know  is  life  eternal."  Now,  have  you  these  four  ? 
They  are  rather  the  successors  of  salvation  than  the  heralds  of  it.  "  Oh  yes,"  the 
believer  can  say, "  I  trust  I  have  Gratitude,  Obedience,  Consecration,  and  Knowledge.** 
I  will  not  weary  you,  but  there  are  three  shining  ones  that  follow  after  these  four, 
and  I  must  not  forget  them,  for  they  are  the  flower  of  them  all.  There  is  Zeal  with 
eyes  of  fire,  and  heart  of  flame,  a  tongue  that  burneth,  a  hand  that  never  wearies, 


CHAP,  n,]  BE  BREWS.  48T 

and  limbs  that  never  tire ;  Zeal,  that  flies  round  the  world  with  wings  swifter  than 
the  lightning's  flash,  and  finds  even  then  her  wings  too  tardy  for  her  wish.  This 
Zeal  always  dwells  near  one  that  is  called  Communion.  This,  sure,  is  the  goodliest 
of  all  the  train ;  an  angel  spiritualised,  an  angel  purified  and  made  yet  more 
angelic,  is  Communion.  Communion  calls  in  secret  on  its  God  ;  its  God  in  secret 
sees.  It  is  conformed  to  the  image  of  Jesus ;  walks  according  to  His  footsteps. 
And  as  a  necessary  consequence,  on  the  other  side  of  Communion — which  with  one 
hand  lava  hold  of  Zeal,  is  Joy — joy  in  the  Spirit.  Joy,  hke  the  nightingale,  sings  in 
the  dark,  and  can  praise  God  in  the  tempest  and  shout  His  high  praises  in  the 
storm,  ihis  is  indeed  a  fitting  cherub  to  be  in  the  rear  of  salvation.  Just  in  the 
rear  is  Perseverance,  final,  certain  and  sure.  Then  there  follows  complete  Sanctifi- 
csition,  whereby  the  soul  is  purged  from  every  sin,  and  made  as  white  and  pure  as 
God  Himself.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Things  that  accompany  aaliHition: — This  ia 
the  only  place  in  this  letter  where  the  readers  are  addressed  as  "  beloved."  The 
especial  tenderness  of  the  appellation  follows  very  beautifully  and  significantly 
upon  one  of  the  sternest  and  solemnest  warnings  which  Scripture  contains  as  to 
the  impossibility  of  those  who  were  first  enlightened,  "  if  they  shall  fall  away," 
being  renewed  again  to  repentance,  and  as  to  the  rejection,  and  cursing,  and  des- 
truction of  the  barren  and  profitless  ground.  It  is  as  if  the  writer  had  felt  that 
after  these  dark  and  terrible  thoughts  he  must  soften  his  voice  still  more,  and  make 
h:iste  not  only  to  show  how  affection  had  dictated  the  warning,  but  also  how  joyful 
conlidence  in  hia  brethren  was  present  throughout  it.  The  writer  assumes,  as 
understood  and  inspired  by  aU  to  whom  he  is  speaking,  that  what  he  calls  "salva- 
tion "  never  comes  into  any  man's  hand  or  heart  alone.  This  great  gift  never 
draws  near  singly.  That  precious  stone  is  always  set  in  a  cluster  of  little  stones 
around  it.  This  angel  of  God  never  enters  unattended  by  the  virgins,  her  com- 
panions following  her.  There  is  ever  a  courtly  dance  of  graces  and  fair  figures  that 
pass  into  the  heart,  and  sweep  in  unison  through  the  life  which  has  received 
salvation.  And  what  are  these  inseparable  accompaniments ;  these  continual  com- 
panions of  this  central  gift?  The  context  distinctly  bears  the  answer.  They  are 
all  the  things  which  the  writer  includes  in  the  "herbs  brought  forfh  meet  for  the 
husbandman."  All  the  things  which  he  includes  under  another  figure,  in  "your 
work  and  labour  of  love."  That  is  to  say,  a  fruitful  Christian  life  of  joyful 
obedience,  of  manifest  issues,  of  a  supreme  love  to  God,  which  flashes  out  into  all 
kinds  of  gentleness  and  amiabilities  towards  others,  and  has  other  regions,  often 
nobler,  in  which  it  manifests  itself.  These  are  the  companions,  '*  the  things  which 
aocompnny  salvation."  All  that  lustrous  beauty  and  radiant  completeness  of 
human  character  is  treated  here  aa  being  a  secondary  and  a  consequent  thing. 
The  queen  is  salvation ;  they  that  follow  her  are  all  these  great  and  beautiful 
things.  Which  is  just  to  say,  if  a  man  wants  to  be  good  let  him  begin  by  taking  for 
his  own  God's  "great  gift  of  forgiveness  and  acceptance  in  Jesus  Christ.  What 
wonld  you  think  of  a  master  who  said  he  had  found  out  a  new  way  of  architecture, 
and  he  was  about  to  begin  building  a  house  at  the  chimneys?  It  would  be  about  as 
wise  as  the  man  that  seeks,  by  painful  effort,  ^hich  effort  I  would  be  the  last  to  say 
a  w.ird  to  despise,  to  make  his  life  full  of  these  beauties  of  conduct  and  character 
without  having  laid  the  foundation  with  Christ,  who  is  the  only  foundation.  If 
you  take  and  plant  some  aromatic  shrubs,  hitherto  unknown,  upon  some  bare  and 
sandy  down,  a  whole  fleet  of  bees  and  butterflies  will  come,  drawn  to  the  blossoms, 
that  never  were  seen  there  before.  And  so  if,  and  only  if,  we  have  in  onr  hearts  by 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  that  tree  of  immortal  life  and  manifold  fragrances,  round  it 
will  buzz  and  hover,  and  from  it  will  draw  honey  and  sustenance,  all  manner  of 
fair  and  flying  things,  else  and  otherwise  strangers  to  onr  spirits.  {A.  Maclaren, 
D.D.)  The  true  order  in  salvation  : — In  those  days  (Cornwall,  1851),  when  I  was 
building  my  new  church,  and  talking  about  the  tower  and  spire  we  were  going  to 
erect,  an  elderly  Christian  lady  who  was  sitting  in  her  wheel-chair,  calmly  listening 
to  our  conversation,  said,  "  Will  you  begin  to  build  your  spire  from  the  top  ?  "  It 
was  a  strange  question,  but  she  evidently  meant  something,  and  looked  for  an 
answer.  I  gave  it,  saying,  "  No,  madam,  not  from  the  top,  but  from  the  founda- 
tion." She  replied,  "  That  is  right — that  is  right,"  and  went  on  with  her  knitting. 
This  question  was  not  asked  in  jest  or  in  ignorance ;  it  was  like  a  riddle.  What 
did  she  mean  ?  In  a  few  years  this  lady  passed  away,  but  her  enigmatic  words  re- 
mained. No  doubt  she  thought  to  herself  that  I  was  beginning  at  the  wrong  end, 
while  I  went  on  talking  of  the  choir,  organ,  happy  worship,  and  all  the  things  we 
were  going  to  attempt  in  the  new  church ;  that  I  was  aiming  at  sanctification, 


438  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  rt 


withont  justification  ;  intending  to  teach  people  to  be  holy  before  they  were  saved 
and  pardoned.  This  is  exactly  what  I  was  di  ing.  I  had  planted  the  boards  of  my 
tabernacle  of  worship,  not  in  silver  sockets  (the  silver  of  which  had  been  paid  for 
redemption),  bat  in  the  sand  of  the  w.ldemess.  In  other  words,  I  was  teaching 
people  to  worship  God,  who  is  a  Spirit,  not  for  love  of  Him  who  gave  His  Son  to 
die  for  them,  but  in  the  fervour  and  envLusiasm  of  human  nature,  (TT.  Hculam, 
MJL.) 

Yer   10.     God  la  not  mulghteoTis  to  forget  yonr  work. — Tlu  guarantee  of  utefuU 
neii  : — I.    God  ksows  op  each  item  op  oue  Cheistia^  sebvicb.      Out  deeds  of  love 
populate  the  Divine  mind  with  immortal  images.     IL  God's  EIGHTEO^:s^^:ss  is  4iJ 
ACTIVE  FOECE  12?  Hts  xAirBE.     It  gives  quality  to  all  that  He  is,  and  thinks,  and 
does.    It  is  the  guarantee  of  right  becoming  victorious ;  the  pledge  of  the  final 
supremacy  of  love;    the  rock  on  which  faithful  service  may    build    its   hopes, 
m.  God's  eigeti:ocs>'ess  BEirDEES  ceetais  the  rrsAL  rszrxrL>"Ess  of  at.t.  Cheisxias 
8EEVICE.     1.  Hig  righteousness  creates  interest  in  our  service.     He  looks  on  our 
rectus  with  pleasure,     2.  His  righteousness  creates  sympathy  with  us  in  what  we 
do.^;  Because  the  holy  feeling  that  prompts  us  to  deeds  of  love  is  akin  to  that  which 
dwells  in  God,  He  feels  towards  our  worii  the  same  as  we  do,  He  enters  into  oar 
longiijg  to  bless  others,  He  shares  in  our  yearning  to  cheer  and  guide  and  save 
men.    3.  His  righteousness  ensures  the  using  up  of  our  deeds  of  love  in  the  line  of 
Pit;  own  purpose.      There  is  not  a  true  prayer  uttered,  not  a  holy  wish  cherishei, 
not  a  kind  word  spoken,  not  a  deed  of  mercy  performed,  not  a  single  Christian  act 
in  the  service  we  daily  seek  to  render  to  otu:  Lord,  in  public  or  in  private,  known  of 
men  or  out  of  sight,  but  that  He  knows  it,  holds  it  before  His  mind,  graciously 
delights  in  it,  enters  into  its  spirit,  and,  as  a  consequence,  actually  lajs  hold  of  it 
as  a  precious  element  of  good,  to  blend  it  with  His  own  volitions,  and  make  it 
harmonise  with,  and  give  impetus  to,  all  that  He  once  did  when,  on  earth  in  the 
person  of  His  dear  Son,  He  laid  the  foundation  that  is  to  be  both  blessed  and  ever- 
lasting.     {C.  Chapman.)         God's  righteousneis  as  an  encouragement  to  Christian 
tertice: — I.  The  itrsisTET  op  the  CnrECH.    The  work  distributed  amongst  us  may 
be  very  differen-  in  quality,  in  interest,  in  popularity,  in  result ;  yet  God  does  not 
overlook  any  of  it.     He  sees  the  mother  tal^ng  of  Jesus  to  her  children  at  home, 
as  well  as  the  preacher  who  expounds  Divine  truth  in  the  great  congregation. 
The  words  which  in  weakness  and  faiigne  are  penned  by  a  writer  for  the  press,  on 
the  side  of  parity  or  national  integrity,  or  peace  among  the  nations,  or  faimesa 
between  the  classes,  are  as  much  thought  of  by  God  as  the  society  organised  for 
the  defence  of  theological  truth.    The  medical  man  who  heals  the  poor  without  re- 
ward, the  employer  who  dares  to  give  unto  his  servants  what  he  knows  to  be  just 
and  equal,  the  merchant  or  tradesman  who  for  the  sake  of  the  Lord  he  ioves  refuses" 
to  receive  an  advantage  which  his  competitor  would  eagerly  seek — all  these,  in  time 
of  disappointment,  may  remember  the  assurance,  "  God  is  not  tmrighteous  to  forget 
your  work.'     And  vhat  of  work  more  directiy  rehgiotis  ?    Is  not  the  Lord  mindful 
of  that  ?     Even  we  think  sometimes  with  sympathy  of  our  brothers  in  distant  lands, 
exposed  to  hostility  from  the  heathen,  and  to  perils  by  land  Mid  by  sea,  perils  from 
malaria,  accident,  and  privation;  but  the  all-seeing  God  knows  them,  and  cares  for 
them  far  mere  than  we,  and  He  will  not  forget  their  work.     And  if  your  service  is 
less  public  than  theirs,  it  is  none  the  less  regarded  by  Him,  whose  wisdom  not  only 
built  the  mountains,  but  clothed  the  lilies  of  the  field.     We  know  but  little  of  each 
other,  but  He  knows  us  alKgether.  and  He  is  as  pleased  with  the  child's  prayer  as 
with  the  martyr  death  of  the  bravest  soldier  in  His  army.     IL  The  ftdeutt  op  tbx 
LoED.     The  idea  seems  to  be  this  ;  God  will  not  overLjok  your  work,  so  as  to  make 
no  use  of  it ;  i:  wHl  not  be  forgotten,  but  wul  find  its  place  iu  the  fulfilment  of  the 
Divine  purpi.se.     Man  is  miiaithful  and  forgetful  in  such  matters.     An  editor  may 
ask  some  one  to  write  a  paper,  and  when  with  toil  and  care  it  is  finished,  he  may 
have  forgotten  all  about  it,  and  may  issue  his  work  without  ringing  any  place  for 
the  author's  labour — men  are  often  f ^rgetfuL     The  other  day,  in  crossing  a  wild 
part  of  Dartmoor,  I  saw  a  magnificent  b.ock  of  stone,  carefully  and  skilfully  cut 
into  a  hexagon,  and  there  it  lay  unheeded  amid  the  heainer,  beaten  by  storm*, 
bleached  by  j-unshine— useless.    Perhaps  the  builder  had  forgotten  to  fetch  it,  oi 
perhaps  he  thought  the  block  too  heavy  to  carry  over  the  rough  roads  ;  but,  what- 
ever the  reason,  some  skilful  stonemason   had  worked  hard,  but  uselessly.     Now, 
looking  down  upon  our  vvork  in  obscure  homes,  in  out-oi-lhe-way  oiiieeo,  in  quiet 
spheres  of  service,  this  ins^iicu.  i^au  sa^s;  "  God  is  not  unfaltiifal  tu  forge;  joax 


CHAP,  Ti.]  HEBREWS.  489 

wsrk."     (A.  Rowland,  LL.B.)        The  present  and  future  reward*  of  charity  : — 

I.  How  ACCEPTABLE  GOOD  WORKS  ABE  TO  GOD,  AND  WHAT  BEWAKD8  HE  HATH  PROMISED 
TO  THOSE  WHO  SHALL  BE  FOUND  ABOUNDING  IN  THEM.  II.  A  PRINCIPLE  01"  CHRISTIAN 
LOVE  AND  CHARITY  IS  OF  *T.T,  OTHER  THE  MOST  PREVALENT  TO  INDUCE  MEN  TO  SUCH  GOOD 
WORKS.       III.    By    the    EXPRESSION    "LABOUR  OF   LOVE  "    IS  PLAINLY   SUGGESTED   THAT 

good  works  abe  often  accompanied  with  much  trouble  and  difficulty.  iv. 
Ministering  to  the  wants  and  necessities  of  our  Christian  brethren  is  showing 

A  BXOABD  TOWARDS  THE  NAME  OF  GOD.  V.  We  HAVE  PERSEVERANCE  IN  THOSE 
DUTIES  RECOMMENDED  TO  US,  BT  THE  EXAMPLE  OF  THOSE  HEBREWS,  WHO  ARE 
NOT  ONLY  MENTIONED  A8  FORMERLY  MINISTEBING  TO  THE  NECESSITIES  OF  THEIR 
INDIGENT     BRETHREN,     BUT    AS    CONTINUING     TO     DO     THE    SAME.      (S.   Knight,   DJ).) 

The  riglUeous  reward  : — I.  God  is  not  unrighteous  to  forget  your  work  and  labour 
of  love ;  i:Af  iiucn  as  His  roixo  so  would  be  unoenfrous,  rNOEAcious,  unkind. 
Were  He  nut  to  acknowledge  it,  He  might  f  ecm  to  be  dimpire;  jtur  z^al.  In  this 
view  the  statement  is  fitted  seasonably  to  encourage  you.  Few  and  faulty  your 
best  services  may  be  ;  unsatisfying  to  yourselves  ;  much  more  to  your  God.  Well 
might  He  reject  them  all.  Eut  would  He  be  justilieJ  in  doing  so?  Would  it  be  in 
harmony  with  what  He  has  revealed  to  you  of  the  riches  of  His  glory,  and  what 
He  has  made  you  to  taste  of  the  fulness  of  His  grace  ?  No.  He  does  not  upbraid 
you  with  the  value  of  His  undeserved  beneiits  to  you.  He  will  not  upbraid  you 
with  the  worthlessness  of  what  you  give  to  Him.  All  that  He  bestows,  He  bestows 
ingoolfiJth.  All  thnt  you  render,  He  will  take  in  good  part.  II.  God  is  not 
unrighteous  to  forget  your  work  and  labour  of  love ;  inasmuch  as  His  doing  so 
WOULD  BE  inconsistent  WITH  HiB  FAITHFULNESS  AND  TRUTH.  He  is  to  be  regarded 
as  hiring  you,  and  assigning  to  you  your  service.  He  does  so  in  the  exercise  of  His 
own  uu questionable  discretion,  according  to  His  own  good  pleasure,  and  the  free- 
dom of  His  own  will.  He  does  not  leave  it  to  you  to  devise  a  way  in  which  you 
may,  at  your  own  discretion,  manifest  your  loyalty.  But  He  enhsts  you  as  His 
soldiers  and  subjects,  under  command.  You  are  to  offer  service  voluntarily.  But 
when  your  offer  is  accepted,  you  are  to  obey  orders.  This  consideration  may  seem, 
in  one  view,  to  detract  from  any  claim  on  your  part  for  any  recompense  of  reward. 
It  divests  your  work  and  labour  of  love,  which  you  show  to  His  name,  of  the 
character  of  a  spontaneous  or  strictly  self-prompted  and  self-directed  offering. 
What  you  do  or  suffer  is  not  at  your  own  hand,  but  by  His  appointment.  But,  in 
another  view,  the  certainty  of  your  being  amply  recompensed  is  thus  placed  on  the 
highest  possible  ground.  I  feel,  indeed,  that  I  have  nothing  which,  as  from  myself, 
I  can  offer  to  my  God.  I  am  myself  His  property.  His  purchased  possession  ;  not 
my  own.  All  the  store  of  talents  and  resources  out  of  which  I  can  offer  comes 
from  Him,  and  is  all  His  own.  And  I,  His  servant,  must  offer  it,  not  as  I  choose, 
but  as  He  desires  and  directs.  But  does  that  thought,  I  ask  again,  detract  in  the 
least  from  my  confident  persuasion  that  what  I  offer  will  be  accepted  and  requited? 
Does  it  not,  on  the  contrary,  enhance  my  assurance  tenfold  ?  Would  it  be  fair  for 
a  master  enlisting  servants  in  such  a  way,  on  such  terms,  under  such  obhgations, 
to  forget  their  work,  to  let  it  pass  into  oblivion  unrequited?  Be  it  that  it  is  work 
or  service  to  which  they  are  indispensably  bound,  and  which  they  have  no  discre- 
tionary liberty  to  accept  or  decline  ;  for  which,  therefore,  they  have  no  title  to 
stipulate  for  payment  beforehand,  or  to  demand  payment  afterwards.  Be  it  even 
that  they  understand  that  condition  of  their  engagement,  and  consent  to  it,  that 
does  not  acquit  the  master,  in  his  own  judgment  at  least,  whatever  they  may  think. 
If  he  is  honest,  high-minded,  he  will  not  suffer  his  servants  to  entertain  a  moment's 
doubt  of  his  intention  to  acknowledge  their  faithfulness,  and  make  all  the  world 
know  that  he  does  so.  And  is  God  unrighteous?  Is  He  who  solemnly  binds  you 
in  so  strict  a  covenant  of  service  to  let  it  be  supposed  that  He  can  act  unfaithfully 
or  unfairly  ?  And  is  He  unrighteous  to  forget  your  work  and  labour  of  love — 
the  work  and  loving  labour  of  His  chosen  and  His  redeemed  ?  Surely  it  is  no 
vain  thing,  but  rather  a  very  blessed  thing,  for  you  thus  to  serve  the  Lord,  having 
such  a  simple,  single-eyed,  meek,  and  honourable  confidence  as  this  in  the  truth 
and  faithfulness  of  Him  whom  you  serve !  HI.  There  are  other  considerations  op 
k  general  sort  that  might  be  brought  forward  to  strengthen  this  quiet  assurance 
For  instance,  here  is  one.  If,  in  one  view,  God  commits  Himself  to  you ;  in 
another  view  He  commits  you  and  binds  you  to  Himself.  In  the  service  of  God,  if 
loyal,  you  mnst  make  up  your  mind  to  relinquish  not  a  few  of  those  sources  of 
pleasure  which  the  world  presents  to  you.  And  for  whatever  you  may  thus  give 
up.  He  whom  you  serve  may  be  expected,  if  He  is  to  act  worthily  of  Himself,  to 


490  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohap.  TV 

provide  some  kind  of  equivalent.  If  you  lose  the  favour  of  men,  you  have  the. 
favour  of  God.  If  you  cease  to  have  the  peace  which  the  world  gives,  when,  with 
its  refuges  of  lies,  it  soothes  your  conscience,  you  have  the  peaco  of  God  which 
passes  understanding.  If  you  have  to  cut  off  a  right  hand,  to  pluck  out  a  right  eye, 
maimed  as  you  are  and  wounded,  you  enter  into  life.  If  the  good  things  of  earth 
are  to  be  your  treasure  no  more,  you  have  better  treasure  in  heaven,  where  no  moth 
corrupts  and  no  thief  breaks  through  to  steal.  Thus  far  I  have  spoken  of  the 
recompense  of  the  reward,  God's  not  forgetting  your  work  and  labour  of  luve,  as 
simply  righteous  on  His  part.  But,  before  leaving  that  topic,  I  must  remind  you 
that  the  righteousness  is  still  always  of  grace.  It  is  the  righteousness,  not  of  law, 
but  of  equity.  It  gives  you  no  such  claim  or  title  as  you  might  enforce  in  a  court 
of  justice  by  proctdure  of  a  legal  sort.  All  your  claim  must  rest  upon  the  good 
faith  or  kind  favour  of  the  other  party.  This  does  not  touch  the  certainty  of  your 
being  rewarded.  But  it  divests  you  of  all  title  to  reckon  upon  it  as  your  due.  How 
blessed  a  thing  is  it  in  this  view,  to  disown  all  right  of  yours,  and  lean  on  the 
righteousness  of  God !  Further,  the  righteousness  in  question  is  not  that  of  express 
compact,  but  rather  that  of  a  fair  and  amiable  understanding.  It  is  not  a  ease,  as 
between  debtor  and  creditor,  to  be  adjusted  upon  a  balance  of  business  account* 
and  books.  Your  remuneration  is  rather  an  honourable  acknowledgment  of  tha 
spirit  in  which  you  work  than  an  exact  and  formal  discharge  of  the  work  itself. 
Hence  this  principle,  while  it  leaves  no  room  for  presumption  on  your  part,  leaves 
abundant  room  for  the  most  liberal  discretion  on  the  part  of  God.  Lessons :  1.  As 
God  is  not  unrighteous  to  forget  your  work  and  labour  of  love,  be  not  ye  unrighteous 
to  forget  your  duty  to  Him.  As  He  is,  so  to  speak,  on  honour  with  you,  be  you 
scrupulously  and  sensitively  on  honour  with  Him.  Many  motives  should  prompt 
this  duty.  Think  on  the  way  in  which  He  receives  you  into  His  favour ;  on  the 
amazing  sacrifice  of  His  Son,  whom  He  gives  to  the  death  of  the  Cross,  that  He 
may  reconcile  you  to  Himself;  receiving  you  graciously,  and  loving  you  freely.  He 
opens  His  heart  to  you.  Will  you  not  give  your  hearts  to  Him  ?  2.  If  God  is  not 
unrighteous  to  forget  your  work  and  labour  of  love  towards  His  name,  you  need  not 
care  to  remember  it.  You  need  not  keep  a  record  of  your  doings.  Your  record 
and  theirs  is  on  high.     (R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  Good  works  not  meritorious : — 

I.  In  what  sense  God  would  not  be  unrighteous,  that  is,  unjust,  though  He 
SHOULD  forget  oub  GOOD  WORKS,  that  is,  Ihough  He  should  not  reward  us  with 
eternal  life  for  them.  1.  Whatsoever  good  action  a  man  can  perform,  that  he  upon 
many  accounts  owes  unto  God,  his  Maker,  his  Preserver,  his  Benefactor.  But  no 
one,  surely,  who  pays  to  another  what  he  strictly  owes  him,  can  thereby  obhge  that 
other  to  bestow  on  him  a  reward,  or  can  make  him  properly  his  debtor.  2.  Even 
amongst  equals  no  one  is  of  right,  and  in  strict  justice,  obliged  to  recompense  the 
labour  and  pains  of  another,  but  he  who  hath  voluntarily  bound  himself  thereunto 
by  some  covenant,  or  who  at  least  is  enforced  thereunto  by  the  law  of  some  superior. 
What  consideration,  therefore,  can  oblige  God  to  bestow  upon  man  eternal  life  but 
His  own  free  and  gracious  promise,  since  He  hath  no  superior  ;  nor  can  any  law  be 
prescribed  to  Him  but  what  He  vouchsafes  to  prescribe  to  Himself,  and  to  guiJe 
His  own  actions  and  dispensations  by?  3.  To  this  it  may  be  farther  added  that  all 
our  good  thoughts,  words,  and  works  proceed  entirely  from  the  grace  of  God,  and 
are  His  free  gifts  bestowed  upon  us,  out  of  His  mere  bounty  and  mercy.  Should 
God,  therefore,  by  bestowitig  on  us  one  grace,  be  thereby  in  justice  obhged,  for  that 
very  reason,  to  bestow  on  us  another  ?  II.  But  now,  lest  to  avoid  one  extreme,  we 
should  foolishly  run  into  another  ;  lest  for  fear  of  carrying  the  value  of  our  good 
actions  too  high,  we  should  on  the  other  side  sink  their  price  too  low  ;  it  will  be 
proper  to  show  that,  notwithstanding  what  has  been  said  hitherto  by  way  of  abate- 
ment of  their  pretended  worth,  they  abe  still  in  mant  respects  highly  valuablb 
BEFORE  God  ;  and  that  though  they  cannot  by  way  of  pui'cbase  procure  for  us,  yet 
upon  othfr  considerations  they  will  secure  to  us  eternal  happiuess.  Now  the  least 
that  can  be  said  concerning  the  value  of  good  works  proceeding  from  the  love  of 
God,  and  designed  to  His  glory,  is  this  :  that  though  we  should  not  be  made  par- 
takers of  Vernal  happiness  merely  because  of  them,  yet  neither  can  we  be  saved 
without  them  ;  though  they  are  not  the  meritorious  causes,  yet  they  are  the  neces- 
sary conditions,  of  our  salvation  ;  though  where  they  are  found,  they  do  not  give  a 
legal  title  to  salvation  ;  yet  where  they  are  not  found,  the  persons  destitute  of 
them  have  not  so  much  as  an  equitable  title  to  eternal  bhss  from  the  mercy  of 
God.  For  virtuous  and  religious  actions  are  the  way  chalked  out  by  God,  by  which 
we  must  arrive  at  the  glories  which  shall  be  revealed ;  they  are  the  means  ordained 


CHAP.  Ti.]  HEBREWS.  491 

by  Him,  by  which  we  may  certainly  and  effectually,  though  not  of  right  acquire, 
yet  in  fact  obtain  everlasting  happiness.     {Bp.  Smalridge.)  God'$  righteoiuness 

as  it  implies  faitlifulness : — By  the  argument  of  the  apostle,  as  righteousness  is  put 
for  faithfulnefcs,  it  is  manifest  that  God's  righteousness  is  a  prop  to  man's  faith 
and  hope.  Man  may  and  must  believe  and  expect  a  reward  of  every  good  thing 
from  the  righteousness  of  God,  even  because  He  is  righteous  and  will  not  fail  to  do 
what  He  hath  promised.  This  righteousness  of  God  assureth  us  of  the  continuance 
of  His  mercy.  What  grace  moved  Him  to  begin,  righteousness  will  move  Him  to 
continue  and  finish.  1.  This  informs  us  in  the  wonderful  great  condescension  of 
God  to  man  ;  even  so  low  as  to  bind  Himself  to  man,  and  that  so  far  as  if  He  failed 
in  what  He  had  promised,  He  is  willing  to  be  accounted  unrighteous  (Psa.  vii.  17). 
2.  This  doth  much  aggravate  the  sin  of  iufidelity,  which  is  not  only  against  the 
grace  and  mercy  of  God,  but  also  against  His  truth  and  righteousness.  3.  This 
teacheth  us  how  to  trust  to  God's  mercy,  even  so  as  God  may  be  just  and  righteous 
in  showing  mercy.  (W.  Gouge.)  Works  of  love  : — These  Christians  gave  them- 
selves to  "  work."  Active  and  practical  exertions,  indeed,  when  the  case  admits  of 
them,  are  essential  to  personal  Christianity.  Their  "  labour  "  is  here  attributed  to 
"love";  and  this  soft  and  sacred  principle  is  well  fitted  alike  to  prompt,  to  sustain, 
to  sweeten,  and  to  sanctify  active  efforts  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  man. 
The  love  specified  had  been  *'  shown  towards  God's  name."  God  Himself  was  one 
special  object  towards  whom  it  had  been  directed ;  and  in  loving  believers,  the 
persons  spoken  of  had  loved  them  for  the  Father's  sake.  Towards  Him,  then,  they 
had  exercised — towards  Him,  also,  they  had  shovra — this  love  ;  for  it  did  not  sleep 
invisible  among  the  secrets  of  their  soul — it  raised  itself  up  for  effort,  it  aimed  at 
practical  results  and  performed  a  practical  work,  and  not,  indeed,  by  ostentatious 
display,  but,  by  its  exertions  and  its  fruits,  it  showed  itself.  And  in  what  did  their 
love  appear  ?  to  what  particular  enterprise  did  it  address  itself  ?  These  Christian 
Hebrews  "had  ministered,"  and  still  continued  to  "minister,"  to  "saints" — to 
pious  persons  who  required  their  pecuniary  or  active  aid.  The  wants  of  other  fol- 
lowers of  Christ  who  were  in  humble  circimistances,  or  by  whom,  in  some  way, 
their  help  was  needed,  secured  their  sympathy  and  received  their  succour.  A  meet 
field  for  Christian  love  to  occupy  I  An  appropriate  work  for  Christian  kindness 
to  perform.     (A.  S.  Patterson.)  Known  unto  God  : — One  evening  a  gentleman 

was  strolling  along  a  street  to  pass  the  time.  His  attention  was  attracted  by  the 
remark  of  a  little  girl  to  a  companion  in  front  of  a  fruit  store,  *'  I  wish  I  had  an 
orange  for  ma."  The  gentleman  saw  that  the  children,  though  poorly  dressed, 
were  clean  and  neat,  and  calling  them  into  the  store,  he  loaded  them  with  fruit  and 
candies.  "What's  your  name?"  asked  one  of  the  girls.  "Why  doyoti  want  to 
know  ?  "  queried  the  gentleman.  "I  want  to  pray  for  you,"  was  the  reply.  TLe 
gentleman  turned  to  leave,  scarcely  daring  to  speak,  when  the  Uttle  one  added, 
"Well,  it  don't  matter,  I  suppose;  God  will  know  you,  anyhow."  (Baxendale'i 
Anecdotes. )  Encouragement  for  the  less  successful  minister : — Though  God  may 

grant  more  of  spiritual  ingathering  to  one  minister  than  to  another,  this  is  no 
proof  that  the  less  successful  minister  is  the  less  valuable  with  Him.  Some  surgical 
instruments  are  used  constantly,  others  but  occasionally ;  yet  the  latter  may  be  as 
valuable  as  the  former.  If  the  falling  of  a  tree  require  fifty  strokes,  and  one  man 
give  three,  another  five  and  forty,  and  onother  finish  the  business  with  two  strokes 
more,  we  do  not  debate  which  of  these  men  did  most  to  fell  the  tree,  which  of  them 
ought  to  have  most  wages,  or  which,  at  least,  know  how  much  he  has  contributed 
to  the  work.  Nor  have  we  any  more  reason  to  be  jealous  about  our  own  private 
importance  in  the  great  work  of  converting  our  fellow-sinners.  (J.  A.  Bengel.)  A 
full  reward  expected : — A  military  gentleman  once  said  to  an  excellent  old  minister  in 
the  north  of  Scotland  who  was  becoming  infirm,  "  Why,  if  I  had  power  over  the 
pension  list,  I  would  actually  have  you  put  on  half-pay  for  your  long  and  faithful 
services."  He  replied,  "Ah,  my  friend,  your  master  may  put  you  off  with  half- 
pay,  but  my  Master  will  not  serve  me  so  meanly ;  He  will  give  me  full  pay.  Through 
grace  I  expect  a  fuU  reward."     (Clerical  Library.)  Certain  reward : — Dionysius 

caused  musicians  to  play  before  him,  and  promised  them  a  great  reward.  When 
they  came  for  their  reward,  he  told  them  they  had  already  had  it  in  their  hopes  of 
it.  God  does  not  disappoint  His  servants.  (New  Encyclopadia  of  Illustrations.) 
Small  efforts  recognised  by  God  : — A  certa-in  king  would  build  a  cathedral ;  and  that 
the  credit  of  it  might  be  all  his  own,  he  forbade  any  from  contributing  to  its  erection 
in  the  least  degree,  A  tablet  was  placed  in  the  side  of  the  building,  and  on  it  hia 
name  was  carved  as  the  builder.    But  that  night  he  saw,  in  a  dream,  an  angel,  who 


493  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vi 

came  down  and  erased  his  name,  and  the  name  of  a  poor  widow  appeared  in  its 
stead.  This  was  three  times  repeated,  when  the  enraged  king  summoned  the 
woman  before  him,  and  demanded,  ''What  have  you  been  Joing,  and  why  have  yea 
broken  my  commandment ?  "  The  trembling  widow  replied,  "I  loved  the  Lord, 
and  longed  to  do  something  for  His  name  and  for  the  building  up  of  His  church.  I 
was  forbidden  to  touch  it  in  any  way ;  so,  in  my  poverty,  I  brought  a  wisp  of  hay 
for  the  horses  that  drew  the  stones."  And  the  king  saw  that  he  had  laboured  for 
his  own  glory,  but  the  widow  for  the  glory  of  God ;  and  he  commanded  that  her 
name  should  be  inscribed  upon  the  tablet.     (Ralph  Wells.)  God  rewards  His 

servants : — When  Calvin  was  banished  from  ungrateful  Geneva,  he  said,  "  Most 
assuredly  if  I  had  merely  served  man,  this  would  have  been  a  poor  recompense;  but 
it  is  my  happiness  that  I  have  served  Him  who  never  fails  to  reward  His  servants 
to  the  fuU  extent  of  His  promise."    (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  11,    12.  Show  the  same  diligence. — The  attainment  of  heaven: — I.  The 

MEANS  BY  WHICH  THE  HAPPINESS  OF  HEAVEN  MAT  BE  ATTAINED.       "  Faith  and  paticnCe." 

Faith  describes  the  sound  state  of  the  undt-rstanding  in  the  perception  and  applica- 
tion of  religious  truth ;  and  patience  denotes  that  calm  fortitude  of  heart  which 
enables  us  to  resist  every  seduction,  and,  at  the  call  of  faith,  to  hold  onward 
undaunted  in  the  path  which  conscience  prescribes.  These  virtues  form,  by  their 
union,  the  perfection  of  the  human  character.  11.  The  encouiugement  to  exertioh 
IN  PUESUiT  of  it.  "Followers  of  them  who  .  .  .  inherit  the  promises."  Faith 
and  patience,  like  all  other  blessings,  descend  from  heaven.  They  are  the  gifts  of 
God  through  Jesus  Christ.  But  the  use  and  improvement  of  them,  from  which 
alone  they  become  blessings  to  us,  are  left  dependent  on  ourselves.  Many  motives 
concur  to  excite  our  diligence  in  improving  them ;  but  there  is  a  peculiar  tender- 
ness and  force  in  that  v.'hich  is  suggested  by  the  text.  Through  them  the  saints  who 
have  gone  before  us  are  now  inheriting  the  promises.  This  argument  addresses  at 
once  our  interest,  our  understanding,  and  the  best  affections  of  our  heart.  It  raises 
our  view  to  the  recompense  of  reward  ;  it  places  before  us  a  visible  proof  that  the 
attainment  of  this  inheritance  is  not  beyond  the  reach  of  men  hke  us ;  it  warms 
within  us  the  sentiment  of  generous  emulation  ;  and  it  attracts  us  onward  by  ties 
that  are  dear  as  life  to  the  virtuous  soul — by  the  love  of  those  whom  death  has 
consecrated  in  our  imagination,  and  by  the  ravishing  prospect  of  rejoining  them 
in  heaven.     {Jas.  Finlayson,  D.D.)  Motives  to  diligence  : — Suppose  every  day 

a  day  of  harvest ;  suppose  it  a  market-day  ;  suppose  it  a  day  wherein  you  are  to 
work  in  a  golden  mine ;  suppose  it  a  ring  which  you  are  to  engrave  and  enamel 
with  your  actions,  to  be  at  night  presented  on  God's  altar.  (N.  Caussin.) 
Spiritual  diligence : — I.  The  chaeacteb  of  the  peesons  whom  the  apostle  was 
at  this  time  addressing.  They  were  converted  characters.  Christianity  consists 
of  three  things — knowledge,  experience,  and  practice.  These  three  things  the 
persons  whom  the  apostle  was  now  addressing  evidently  possessed.  They  were 
acquainted  with  the  principles  of  religion,  and  had  tasted  the  heavenly  gift.  II. 
Those  blessings  which  were  held  out  to  theib  acceptance.  "  Let  us  go  on 
unto  perfection  " — such  a  perfection  as  was  commanded  by  Christ,  and  which 
formed  the  subject  of  the  ministrations  and  preaching  of  the  apostle.  1.  I  con- 
ceive this  implies,  comprehending  as  it  does  all  the  blessings  of  Christianity,  a 
perfect  knowledge  of  Christian  doctrine,  that  we  should  no  longer  be  tossed  to  and 
fro  by  every  wave  of  the  sea,  but  be  settled  in  the  faith  of  the  Bible.  2.  I  con- 
ceive it  implies  also  a  perfect  possession  of  all  Christian  graces,  of  which  one  is 
the  full  assurance  of  hope,  as  in  the  text — "  Resting  in  full  assurance  of  hope  in 
Christ."  I  conceive  it  implies  also  that  perfect  love  that  casteth  out  all  fear.  3. 
It  implies  also  the  perfect  performance  of  Christian  duty.  4.  It  implies  also 
entire  sanctification  to  the  will  of  God.  In  the  Old  Testament  dispensation,  God 
promised  that  the  day  should  come  when  He  would  sprinkle  clean  water  on  His 
inheritance  and  make  it  clean  ;  when  from  all  their  filthiness  and  idols  He  would 
cleanse  them ;  when  He  would  take  from  them  hearts  of  stone  and  give  them 
hearts  of  fleth,  and  write  upon  the  fleshly  tables  of  their  heart  His  law  and  com- 
mandments, that  they  might  do  them.  5.  It  implies  the  entire  dedication  of  our- 
selves to  God,  doing  all  to  the  glory  of  God,  looking  for  the  glorious  appearance  of 
Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life.    III.  The  diligence  which  is  beqcisite  in  obdeb 

10   THE   attainment   OF   THIS   HIGH  AND  HAPPY  STATE  OP  CHRISTIAN  EXPERIENCE.       Aud 

here  we  shall  have  to  answer  a  query :  If  this  be  Christianity,  how  is  it  that  we 
see  BO  little  of  it  in  the  world  ?    The  answer  is  here :  "  Fie  not  slothful,  but  f oi- 


CHAP.  TI.J  HEBREWS.  498 

lowers  of  them  who,  through  faith  and  patience,  inherit  the  promises."  These 
blessings,  of  which  I  have  been  speaking,  are  not  given  to  idlers.  Spiritual  sloth 
is  incompatible  with  Christianity.  Christianity  is  exhibited  to  as  under  the 
character — and  a  strong  figure  it  is — of  a  warfare,  of  a  race  in  which  a  candidate 
for  the  prize  is  to  put  forth  all  his  energies.  And  what  kind  of  diligence,  then,  is  to 
be  put  forth  on  this  occasion  ?  1.  "  That  you  do  show  the  same  diligence  "  as  they 
had  shown  in  the  commencement.  Oh,  let  the  Christian  continue  to  use  the  same 
diligence  in  his  career  which  he  did  when  he  first  became  awakened  I  Oh,  what 
zeal,  what  energy,  is  evinced  in  young  converts  I  Oh,  the  sincerity,  the  loveliness, 
and  the  excellency  of  religious  experience  when  they  have  perceived  their  danger, 
and  fied  from  it  to  Christ,  and  experienced  somewhat  of  the  consolations  of  the 
Divine  regard  I  2.  Thus,  then,  we  are  to  use  the  same  diligence— diligence  pro- 
portioned to  the  end  to  be  obtained.  We  profess  to  be  Christians :  what,  then,  is 
the  object  proposed  to  us  by  a  profession  of  Christianity  ?  Surely  it  is  more  than 
a  name  I  Surely  it  is  eternal  life — it  is  to  save  the  deathless,  immortal  soul  1  3. 
It  is  to  be  proportioned,  not  only  to  the  blessings  to  be  obtained,  but  to  the  evil  to 
be  avoided.  The  evU  to  be  avoided  here  is  the  everlasting  loss  of  the  soul,  the 
punishment  which  awaits  disobedience  to  God  throughout  eternity!  4.  lliere 
must  be  diligence,  again,  proportioned  to  the  time  allotted  to  us.  How  long  have 
you  and  I  to  live  ?  How  long  will  probation  continue  ?  5.  There  must  be  diligence, 
again,  proportionate  to  that  which  our  enemies  are  using  in  seeking  our  destruc- 
tion. Are  you  ignorant  of  Satan's  devices  ?  Does  he  ever  slumber  ?  Are  not  his 
temptations,  as  well  as  his  emissaries,  countless  ?  6.  There  must  be  diligence, 
again,  proportionate  to  the  means  that  God  giveth  us  for  this  important  end. 
God  has  given  grace  to  every  one  of  us ;  a  measure  of  the  Spirit  is  given  to  every 
one  to  profit  withal.  We  have  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  grace  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  instituted  ordinances  of  religion,  and  all  the  opportunities 
of  drawing  near  to  God  to  receive  continual  strength  of  grace.  7.  There  must  be 
diligence  proportioned  to  our  daily  mercies.  Our  whole  life  is  one  continued  mercy. 
Our  creation  is  a  mercy.  Then  ought  we  not  to  be  diligent  in  the  service  of  God, 
seeing  that  the  mercies  cf  God  are  so  inexhaustible  ?  8.  There  must  be  diligence 
proportioned  to  the  price  paid  for  our  redemption.  "  We  are  not  redeemed  with 
silver  and  gold,  and  corruptible  things,  but  we  are  bought  with  a  price."  Ought 
we  not— con&idrring  how  valuable  we  are  in  the  sight  of  God,  considering  at  what 
we  have  been  estimated  by  Jehovah,  who  created  us — to  use  diligence  propor- 
tionate, that  we  rob  not  God  ?  9.  There  must  be  diligence,  finally,  in  proportion 
to  the  relation  in  which  we  stand  to  God,  who  is  our  Master,  our  Father,  and 
our  God ;  and  in  proportion  to  the  accountability  which  we  must  render  up  to 
Him  in  that  awful  and  dreadful  day  to  which  we  are  hastening.  {John  Hawtrey. ) 
Diligence  in  seeking  salvation  : — If  in  thought  we  compare  the  efforts  of  an  excited 
crowd  to  enter  some  building,  or  to  see  some  remarkable  sight,  or  to  get  some  freely 
offered  advantage ;  if  we  compare  their  earnestness  with  what  we  observe  to  be  the 
ordinary  attitude  of  men  concerning  reUgion  I  How  on  the  contrary  we  observe 
apathy  and  delay  I  There  is  no  pressing  forwj»rd  to  enter  in,  but  rather  an  indolent 
lounging  outside  the  gates,  as  though  we  could  pass  in  whenever  we  liked,  and  there 
was  no  need  for  haste  in  the  matter.  Only  a  short  time  ago  there  came  from  America 
a  curious  account  of  the  government  throwing  open  to  settlement  a  tract  of  country 
which  had  before  been  closed  to  white  settlers.  A  certain  day  and  hour  was  fixed 
on  which  emigrants  might  cross  the  boundary.  Meanwhile  "  the  cordon  "  was 
defended  by  a  party  of  miUtary.  A  motley  multitude  gathered  on  the  bank  of  Xhe 
dividing  river.  Bough  "  cow-boys  "  from  the  west,  with  their  swift  ponies,  and 
waggons  with  oxen,  and  poorer  emigrants,  with  their  wives  and  children  trudging 
by  their  side,  hungi-y  and  weary,  waited  till  the  day  and  hour  came,  and  hardly  had 
the  midday  hour  come  when  a  strange  scene  ensued.  Horsemen  spurred  their  steeds 
into  the  river,  heavy  waggons  plunged  into  the  water  at  the  ford,  all  pressed  forward 
with  the  utmost  speed  and  impetuosity  to  seize  upon  some  portion  of  the  new  terri- 
tory, and  ere  darkness  came  hundreds  of  tents  had  been  set  up,  and  even  houses 
had  been  started.  All  this  wild  excitement  and  confusion  ;  all  this  eagerness  and 
energy,  to  gain  a  few  acres  of  earthly  possessions ;  whilst  in  the  matter  of  laying 
hold  of  that  kingdom,  of  which  we  have  been  made  heirs  by  baptism,  how  httle 
interest  is  taken  to  make  sure  on  inheritance  1  But  if  it  be  asked,  why  this  haste 
and  unnecessary  excitement?  Does  not  God  at  all  times  "  wait  to  be  gracious  "? 
— then  we  answer.  True,  "  He  doth  devise  means  whereby  his  banished  ones  may 
be  restored."    True,  "He  willeth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner  " ;  but  yet  remember 


494  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.      "  [chap,  vi 

that  though  he  invites  us  to  enter  His  kingdom,  He  does  not  force  men  to  be  saved. 
He  has  l^d  this  responsibility  on  us.  Tlien,  too,  those  dangerous  tnemies — the 
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil — are  thrusting  back  the  souls  that  seek  to  enter  in. 
Every  one  who  goes  in  must  be  prepared  for  a  struggle,  and  for  the  exertion  of  all 
his  powers — "the  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence."  (J.  W.  Hardman,  LL.D.) 
Full  assurance  of  hope  unto  the  end. — Full  assurance  of  hope : — I.  The  attain  jient 
INDICATED.  "  The  full  assurauce  of  hope."  II.  The  codese  peescbibed.  Being 
diligent  in  every  rehgious  exercise,  as  prayer,  reading  the  Scriptures,  the  woiship 
of  God,  &c.  ni.  The  models  recommended.  "  Those  who  through  faith,"  &c, 
A  long  roll  of  such  worthies  is  given  in  chapter  eleven.  Their  earthly  course  was 
distinguished  by — 1.  Believing  obedience.  "  Faith."  2.  Patient  endurance.  They 
patiently  waited  for  good,  and  meekly  suffered  evil  for  God's  sake.  This  is  (1)  A 
profitable  virtue.  "  It  is  good  that  a  man  should  both  hope  and  quietly  wait  for 
the  salvation  of  the  Lord."  (2)  A  necessary  virtue.  "  Ye  have  need  of  patience." 
(3)  A  rare  virtue.  There  are  few  patient  waiters  for  promised  good,  or  passive 
endurers  of  present  evil.  IV.  The  motive  adduced.  Those  whom  we  are  ur^ed  to 
imitate  now  kiherit  the  promises,  and  this  is  mentioned  as  a  motive  to  stimulate  us 
to  the  same  diligence.  They  now  inherit  the  promises  which  they  embraced  here, 
and  which  sustained  them  in  all  then"  trials.  1.  Eternal  immunity  from  (1)  Physical, 
(2)  Mental,  (3)  Moral  evU.  2.  Eternal  possessions.  (1)  Moral  dignities.  (2)  Social 
festivities.  (3)  Perennial  enjoyments.  (J.  Elstob.)  The  believej-'s  assurance  :^ 
I.  The  parties  addressed.  The  apostle  was  writing  to  converts  from  Judaism  to 
Christianity ;  persons,  who  by  reason  of  the  persecutions  to  which  they  were  ex- 
posed and  the  strong  persuasive  efforts  of  the  followers  of  Jewish  customs  and  laws, 
were  in  danger  of  apostatising  from  the  faith  they  had  embraced.  II.  The  attain- 
ment RECOMMENDED.  "  The  fuU  assuraucc  of  hope."  Paul  has  referred  in  hia 
epistles  to  three  kinds  of  assuiance.  In  writing  to  the  Colossiaus  he  speaks  of  the 
"  riches  of  the  fuU  assurance  of  understanding."  In  the  Epistle  from  which  our  text 
is  taken,  he  exhoits  the  Hebrew  Christians  to  approach  the  throne  of  giace  with 
•'  full  assurance  of  faith."  Whilst  in  thf  passage  before  us  he  recommends  tlie  "  full 
assurance  of  hope."  By  the  first,  he  means  a  clear  lively  knowledge  of  Divine 
truth ;  by  the  second  an  unwavering  belief  of  the  Gospel  promises  ;  and  by  the  third, 
a  film  conviction  of  the  soul's  union  to  Jesus  and  adoption  into  the  family  of  the 
Most  High.  Though  these  three  assurances  are  closely  allied,  yet  each  is  different 
from  the  other.  There  are  two  reasons  why  we  may  speak  of  this  assurance  as  a 
desirable  attainment.  1.  It  will  be  profitable  to  ourselves.  An  old  divine  well  said, 
"  The  greatest  thing  that  we  can  desire,  next  to  the  glory  of  God,  is  our  own  salva- 
tion ;  and  the  sweetest  thing  we  can  desire  is  the  assurance  of  our  salvation.  In 
this  life  we  cannot  get  higher  than  to  be  assured  of  that  which  in  the  next  life  is  to 
be  enjoyed.  All  saints  shall  enjoy  a  heaven  when  they  leave  this  earth  ;  some  saints 
enjoy  a  heaven  while  they  are  here  on  earth."'  The  original  word  here  rendered 
••  full  assurance  "  means  full  lading  or  full  burden.  It  is  a  word  which  may  be 
applied  to  a  ship  and  her  cargo.  If,  then,  we  are  fully  laden  with  the  treasure  of 
assurance,  our  sails  being  well  filled  by  the  gales  of  faith  and  love,  we  shall  steer 
straight  for  the  harbour  of  God.  Full  assurance  shall  keep  us  from  being  all  our 
life,  "  through  fear  of  death,  subject  to  bondage."  We  shall  not  be  like  the  empty 
vessel  tossed  to  and  fro  by  every  wind  and  wave  of  doubt.  Our  full  lading  shall 
keep  us  stable  in  the  sea  of  life,  and  we  shall  at  last  ride  triumphantly  into  the 
regions  of  repose  amid  the  applause  of  the  heavenly  host.  The  original  word  is 
likewise  applied  to  the  plenitude  of  fruit  produced  by  a  tree.  Say,  will  it  not  be 
better  for  him  to  be  fully  laden  with  precious  fruit,  richly  decked  with  luscious 
clusters,  than  to  have  expended  all  his  time  and  strength  in  sending  out  useless 
tendrils  for  his  support,  fearing  lest  the  roots,  though  firmly  grounded,  should  not 
be  able  to  sustain  hrm  ?  Depend  on  it,  we  shall  find  assurance  a  blessing  of  no  mean 
order.  It  will  make  our  devotional  exeroises  doubly  dehghtful,  because  we  shall 
feel  that  the  promises  will  be  fulfilled,  and  the  earnest  prayer  receive  the  attention 
of  our  Father.  Aye,  all  our  engagements  shall  have  a  tenfold  interest  and  we  shall 
have  a  double  amount  of  decision  in  the  discharge  of  our  duties.  Our  peace  shall 
flow  as  a  river — steadily — evenly — uninterruptedly.  2.  This  full  assurance  of  hope 
will  be  pleasurable  to  God.  We  all  know  how  pleasant  it  is  to  discover  that  our 
friends  and  associates  have  firm  faith  in  our  integrity — truthfulness — love.  The 
Eternal  God  is  pleased  with  our  confidence  in  Him.  He  wishes  as  to  believe  His 
Word.  He  is  grieved  by  our  doubts  and  fears.  III.  The  means  of  acqdieing  this 
ASSDRANOB.    "  Show  the  'lame  diligence  unto  the  end."    1.  Watchfulness  against  all 


CHIP.  ▼!.]  HEBREWS.  496 

flin  is  included  in  showing  diligence.    2.  Waiting  at  the  feet  of  God  ia  alao  incladed 
in  •*  diligence."    They  who  have  walked  in  the  light  of  God's  countenance  and  felt 
the  Spirit's  clear  witness  within  them,  have  been  men  of  prayer ;  men,  whose  closets 
were  oft-frequented  spots :  men  who  upon  their  knees  fought  their  way  through 
ranks  of  foes.    So  must  it  be  with  us.    3.  Perseverance  in  all  religious  duties  is 
likewise  necessary.    We  must  "  give  the  same  diligence  unto  the  end."    There  must 
be  "  a  patient  continuance  in  well  doing."     Our  sighing  after  assurance,  to-day,  will 
avail  us  little,  if  to-morrow  all  desires  for  the  blessing  are  foreign  to  our  souls,  and 
our  hearts  are  engrossed  with  earthly   matters.      Our   purpose    must    be    un- 
wavering.     (J.  n.  Hitchens.)         Sure  and  certain  hope  .•—Many  of    us  have 
seen  a  picture  in  which  the  artist  paints  "Hope"  as  a  pale,  fragile  figure, 
fclind  and  bent,  wistfully  listening  to  the  poor  music  which  her  own  fingers 
draws  from  a  broken  one-stringed  lyre.     It  is  a  profoundly  true  and  pathetic 
confession.      So  sad,  languid,   blind,  yearning,   self-beguiled  is   Hope,   as  most 
men  know  her.      Put  side  by  side  with   that  the  figure  which  an   unknown 
sculptor  has  carved  on  one  of  the  capitals  of  the  Ducal  palace  in  Venice,  where 
Hope  lifts  up  praying  hands,  and  a  waiting,  confident  face,  to  a  hand  stretched  out 
towards  her  from  a  glory  of  sunbeams.    Who  does  not  feel  the  contrast  between  the 
two  conceptions  ?    What  makes  the  difference  ?    The  upward  look.     When  Hope  ia 
directed  heaveu  wards  she  is  strong,  assured,  and  glad.     I.  Let  us  look,  first,  at  the 
CERTAINTY  of  Christian  hope.     Universal  experience  tells  us  that  hope  means  an 
anticipation  which  is  less  than  sure.    Hopes  and  fears  are  bracketed  together  in 
common  language,  as  always  united,  like  a  double  star,  one  black  and  the  other 
brilliant,  which  revolve  round  a  common  axis,  and  are  knit  together  by  invisible 
bands.    But  if  we  avail  ourselves  of  the  possibilities  in  reference  to  the  future,  which 
Christianity  puts  into  our  hands,  our  hope  may  be  no  less  certain  than  our  memory ; 
and  even  more  sure  than  it.    For  the  grounds  on  which  Christian  men  may  fore- 
cast their  future  as  infinitely  bright  and  blessed  ;  as  the  possession  of  an  inherit- 
ance incorruptible;  an  absolute  and  entire  conformity  to  the  likeness  of  God,  which 
is  peace  and  joy, — are  triple,  each  of  them  affording  certitude.     1.  It  rests  upon  the 
eternal  God  to  whom  aL'  the  future  is  certain  and  upon  His  faithful  Word,  which 
makes  it  as  certain  to  us.  2.  Our  hope  further  rests  on  a  past  fact  (1  Pet.  L  3).  The 
one  real  proof  that,  when  we  paint  heaven  we  are  not  painting  mist  and  moonshine, 
is  the  fact  that  Jesus  Christ  rose  again  from  the  dead.     There  were  many  reasons  for 
believing  in  America  before  Columbus  came  back  and  said  "  I  have  been  there." 
And  there  are  many  reasons,  no  doubt,  that  may  incline  sanguine  spirits  and  wearied 
spirits,  and  desiring  spirits,  and  even  sin-stricken  and  guilty  spirits  to  anticipate  a 
life  beyond,  which  shall  be  a  hope  or  a  dread ;  but  there  is  only  one  ground  upon 
which  men  can  say,  "  We  know  that  it  is  not  cloud-land,  but  solid  earth  " ;  and  that 
ifl,  that  our  Brother  has  come  back  from  the  bourne  from  which  "  no  traveller 
returns  "  ;  that  He  thereby  has  shown  us  all,  not  by  argumentation  but  by  historical 
fact,  that  to  die  is  not  to  cease  to  be  ;  that  to  die  draws  after  it  the  resurrection  of 
the  body.    We  lift  our  eyes  to  the  heavens,  and  though  "  the  cloud  receive  Him  out 
of  our  sight  "  the  hope,  which  is  better  than  vision,  pierces  the  cloud  and  travels 
straight  on  to  the  throne  whilst  He  bends  from  His  crowned  glory  and  says, 
•'Because  I  live  ye  shall  live  also."    3.  The  Christian  hope  is  based,  not  only  on 
these  two  strong  pillars,  but  on  a  third — namely,  on  present  experience.    You  can 
tell  a  cedar  of  Lebanon,  though  it  is  not  yet  bigger  than  a  dandelion,  and  know 
what  it  is  coming  to.    You  can  teU  the  infant  prince.     And  the  joy  and  peace  of 
faith,  feeble  and  interrupted  as  they  may  be  in  our  present  experience,  have  on  them 
the  stamp  of  supremacy  and  are  manifestly  destined  for  dominion  over  our  whole 
nature.     They  are  indeed  experiences  "  whose  very  sweetness  yieldeth  proof  that 
they  were  born  for  immortahty."    I  have  often  seen  in  rich  men's  greenhouses  some 
exotic  plant  grown  right  up  to  the  roof,  which  had  to  be  raised  in  order  to  let  it  go 
higher.     The  Christian  Ufe  here  is  plainly  an  exotic,  growmg  where  it  cannot  attain 
its  full  height,  and  it  presses  against  the  fragile  over-arching  glass,  yearning  up- 
wards to  the  open  sky  and  the  throne  of  God.     So,  because  we  can  love  so  much  and 
do  love  so  little,  because  we  can  trust  thus  far  and  do  trust  no  more,  because  we 
have  some  spark  of  the  Divine  life  in  us  and  that  spark  so  contradicted  and  thwarted 
and  oppressed,  there  must  be  somewhere  a  region  which  shall  correspond  to  this 
our  deepest  nature,  and  the  time  must  come,  when  the  righteous,  who  here  shone, 
but  so  dimly,  shall  "  blaze  forth  like  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Father."    U, 
Now  as  to  THE  AssuBANCE  of  the  Christian  hope.    Certainty  is  one  thing,  and  assur- 
ance is  another.    A  man  may  have  the  most  firm  conviction  based  upon  the  most 


496  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  tu 

ansubstantial  foundation.  His  expectation  may  have  no  roots  to  it,  and  yet  the 
confidence  with  which  he  cherishes  the  expectation  may  be  perfect.  There  may  be 
entire  assurance  without  any  certainty ;  and  there  may  be  what  people  call  objective 
certainty  with  a  very  tremulous  and  unworthy  subjective  assurance.  But  the  only 
temper  that  corresponds  to  and  is  worthy  of  the  absolute  certainties,  with  which 
the  Christian  man  has  to  deal,  is  the  temper  of  unwavering  and  assured  confidence. 
Do  not  disgrace  the  sure  and  steadfast  anchor,  by  fastening  a  shm  piece  of  pack- 
thread to  it,  that  may  snap  at  any  moment.  Do  not  build  flimsy  structures  upon 
the  rock,  and  put  up  canvas  shanties  that  any  puff  of  wind  may  sweep  away,  upon 
such  a  foundation.  If  you  have  a  staff  to  lean  upon  which  will  neither  give,  nor 
warp,  nor  crack,  whatever  stress  is  put  upon  it,  see  that  you  lean  on  it,  not  with  a 
tremulous  finger,  but  with  your  whole  hand.  Let  me  remind  you  further,  that  this 
assured  hope  is  permanent.  '*  The  full  assurance  unto  the  end,"  my  text  says, 
"  Unto  the  end."  How  many  a  lighthouse  that  you  and  I  once  steered  towards  is 
behind  us  now  I  As  we  get  older,  how  many  of  the  aims  and  hopes  that  drew  ns  on 
have  sunk  below  the  horizon  1  And  how  much  less  there  is  left  for  us  people  with 
grey  hairs  in  our  heads,  and  years  on  our  backs  to  hope  for,  than  we  used  to  think 
there  was  1  But,  dear  brethren,  what  does  it  matter  though  the  sea  be  washing 
away  the  coast  on  one  side  the  channel,  if  it  is  depositing  fertile  land  on  the  other  ? 
What  does  it  matter  though  the  earthly  hopes  are  becoming  fewer  and  those  few 
graver  and  sadder,  if  the  one  great  hope  is  shining  brighter  ?  Winter  nights  are 
made  brilliant  by  keener  stars  than  the  soft  summer  evenings,  and  the  violet  and 
red  and  green  streamers  that  fill  the  northern  heavens  only  come  in  the  late  year. 
So  it  is  well  and  blessed  for  us  if,  when  the  leaves  fall,  we  see  a  wider  sky ;  and  if 
as  hope  dies  for  earth,  it  revives  and  Uves  again  for  heaven.  HI.  Lastly,  note  here 
THE  CDLTOKE  of  this  certitude  of  hope.  My  text  is  an  exhortation  to  all  Christian 
people  "  to  show  the  same  diligence  "  in  order  to  such  an  assurance.  The  same 
diligence  as  what?  The  same  diligence  as  they  had  shown  "  in  their  work  and 
labour  of  love  towards  God's  name."  The  fashionable  type  of  a  Christian  to-day  is 
a  worker.  By  common  consent  theology  seems  put  into  the  background,  and  by 
almost  as  common  consent  there  is  comparatively  little  said  about  what  our  fathers 
used  to  call  "  experimental  religion,"  feelings,  emotions,  inward  experiences,  but 
everything  is  drive,  drive ;  drive  at  getting  people  to  work.  God  forbid  that  I  should 
say  one  word  against  that.  But  "  we  desire  that  ye  should  show  the  same  diligence  " 
as  in  your  mission  halls  and  schools  and  various  other  benevolent  operations,  in 
cultivatiug  the  emotions  and  sentiments — yes,  and  the  doctrinal  beliefs  of  the 
Christian  life,  or  else  you  will  be  lopsided  Christians.  Further,  did  it  ever  occur  to 
you.  Christian  people,  that  your  hope  was  a  thing  to  be  cultivated,  tbat  you  ought 
to  set  yourselves  to  distinct  and  specific  efforts  for  that  purpose  ?  Have  you  ever 
done  so  ?  How  is  it  to  be  done  ?  Get  into  the  habit  of  meditating  upon  the 
objects  towards  which  it  is  directed,  and  the  grounds  on  which  it  is  built. 
If  you  never  lift  your  eyes  to  the  goal,  you  will  never  be  drawn  towards 
it.  If  you  never  think  about  heaven  it  will  have  no  attraction  for  you.  If 
you  never  go  over  the  bases  of  your  hope,  your  hope  will  get  dim,  and  there 
will  be  little  reaUsation  or  lifting  power  in  it.  Let  me  say,  lastly,  in  the  matter  of 
practical  advice,  that  this  cultivation  of  the  assurance  of  hope  is  largely  to  be 
effected  by  pruning  the  wild  luxuriance  and  earthward-stooping  tendrils  of  our  hope. 
If  you  want  the  tree  to  grow  high,  nip  the  side  shoots  and  the  leader  will  gain 
strength.  If  you  desire  that  your  hope  should  ever  be  vigorous  you  must  be  absti- 
nent from,  or  temperate  in  earthly  things.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.I).)  Full  assurance 
of  hope ; — Some  men  may  be  assured  of  their  good  estate.  St.  Paul  is  so  sure  of  it 
that  he  sings  a  triumph  over  all  his  enemies  (Rom.  viii.  33,  34),  &o.  Neither  is  it 
his  song  alone,  but  the  song  of  all  the  faithful  (Job  xix.  25 ;  2  Cor.  v.  1).  How  come 
we  by  this  assurance  ?  not  by  revelation  from  heaven,  but  by  good  works  practised 
by  us  here  on  the  earth  (2  Pet.  i.  10).  When  St.  Paul  was  ready  to  depart  out  of 
the  world,  he  was  sure  of  the  crown  of  life.  How  ?  Not  by  revelation,  but  by  the 
godly  life  which  he  had  led  (2  Tim.  iv.  8  ;  ii.  19).  Depart  from  sin,  be  sure  of  good 
works,  as  Dorcas  was,  and  thou  mayest  have  a  full  assurance  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.  It  is  not  a  bare  and  naked  faith  that  can  assure  thee  of  heaven,  but  such 
as  worketh  by  love.  Men  in  this  age  flatter  themselves  in  a  supposed  faith,  and 
cast  away  the  care  of  good  works.  But  how  long  must  we  be  dihgent  ?  Not  for  a 
time,  but  to  the  end.  It  is  a  folly  to  ran  at  all,  unless  we  run  to  the  end ;  a  folly 
to  fight  at  all,  unless  we  fight  to  the  end.  Remember  Lot's  wife,  she  went  out  of 
Sodom,  but  because  she  looked  back  she  was  turned  into  a  pUlai  of  salt.    Let  not 


CHAP,  vi]  HEBREWS,  497 

ns  be  diligent  for  a  time,  but  to  the  end ;  we  must  be  working  to  our  lives  end,  so 
long  as  any  breath  is  in  our  body ;  it  is  not  enough  to  be  young  disciples,  but  we 
must  be  old  disciples,  as  Mnason  was.  As  we  have  been  diligent  in  prayer,  alms- 
deeds,  in  hearing  of  sermons,  in  crucifying  of  sin,  so  we  must  be  diligent  to  the  end. 
(W.  Jones, D.D.)  False  assurance: — I  would  not  give  one  straw  for  that  assur- 
ance that  sin  will  not  damp.  If  David  had  come  to  me  in  his  adultery,  and  had 
talked  to  me  of  his  assurance,  I  should  have  despised  his  speech.  (John  Newton.) 
Going  onto  full  assurance: — Indeed  nothing  else  seems  interesting  enough — nothing 
to  repay  the  labour,  but  the  telling  of  my  fellow-men  about  the  one  man  who  is  the 
truth,  and  to  know  whom  is  the  life.  Even  if  there  be  no  hereafter,  I  would  live  my 
time  believing  in  a  grand  thing  that  ought  to  be  true  if  it  is  not.  No  facts  can  take 
the  place  of  truths,  and  if  these  be  not  truths,  then  is  the  loftiest  part  of  our  nature 
a  waste.  Let  me  hold  by  the  better  than  the  actual,  and  fall  into  nothingness  off 
the  same  precipice  with  Jesus  and  John  and  Paul  and  a  thousand  more,  who  were 
lovely  in  their  lives,  and  with  their  death  make  even  the  nothingness  into  which  they 
have  passed  like  the  garden  of  the  Lord.  I  will  go  further,  Polwarth,  and  say,  I 
would  rather  die  for  evermore  believing  as  Jesus  believed,  than  live  for  evermore 
believing  as  those  that  deny  Him.  If  there  be  no  God,  I  feel  assured  that  existence 
is  and  could  be  but  a  chaos  of  contradictions,  whence  can  emerge  nothing  worthy  to 
be  called  a  truth,  nothing  worth  living  for. — No,  I  will  not  give  up  my  curacy.  I 
wiU  teach  that  which  is  good,  even  if  there  should  be  no  God  to  make  a  fact  of  it, 
and  I  will  spend  my  life  on  it,  in  the  growing  hope,  which  may  become  assurance, 
and  there  is  indeed  a  perfect  God,  worthy  of  being  the  Father  of  Jesus  Christ,  and 
tix&i  it  was  because  they  are  true,  that  these  things  were  lovely  to  me  and  to  so 
many  men  and  women,  of  whom  some  have  died  for  them,  and  some  would  be  yet 
ready  to  die.  I  thank  my  God  to  hear  you  say  so.  Nor  wiU  you  stand  still  there, 
said  Polwarth.  (G.  Macdonald's  "  Thomas  Wingfold.")  Fitful  assurance : — We 
hear,  sometimes,  a  great  deal  said  about  possessing  a  full  assurance  of  being  a  child 
of  God ;  and  then,  every  now  and  then,  we  hear  of  a  doubt,  a  hope .  As  good  Joseph 
Irons  used  to  say,  "  They  keep  hope,  hope,  hoping — hop,  hop,  hopping — all  their 
lives,  because  they  can't  walk."  Little  faith  is  always  lame.  (^G.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Assurance  of  hope : — The  celebrated  Philip  de  Momey,  pnme  minister  to  Henry  IV. 
of  France,  one  of  the  greatest  statesmen,  and  the  most  exemplary  Christians  of  his 
age,  being  asked,  a  little  before  his  death,  if  he  still  retained  the  same  assured  hope 
of  future  bliss  which  he  had  enjoyed  during  his  illness,  he  made  this  memorable 
reply,  "  I  am  as  confident  of  it,  from  the  incontestable  evidence  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 
as  ever  I  was  of  any  mathematical  truth  from  all  the  demonstrations  of  Euclid." 
(K.  Arvine.)  Inspiration  of  hope  : — Once  on  a  time,  certain  strong  labourers  were 
sent  forth  by  the  great  king  to  level  a  primeval  forest,  to  plough  it,  to  sow  it,  and  to 
bring  to  him  the  harvest.  They  were  stout-hearted  and  strong,  and  willing  enough 
for  labour,  and  much  they  needed  all  their  strength  and  more.  One  stalwart  labourer 
was  named  Industry — consecrated  work  was  his.  His  brother  Patience,  with  thews 
of  steel,  went  with  him,  and  tired  not  in  the  longest  days  under  the  heaviest  labours. 
To  help  them  they  had  Zeal,  clothed  with  ardert  and  indomitable  energy.  Side  by 
side  there  stood  his  kinsman  Self-denial,  and  his  friend  Importunity.  These  went 
forth  to  their  labour,  and  they  took  with  them,  to  cheer  their  toils,  their  well-beloved 
Bister  Hope  ;  and  well  it  was  they  did,  for  they  needed  the  music  of  her  consolation 
ere  the  work  was  done,  for  the  forest  trees  were  huge,  and  demanded  many  sturdy 
blows  of  the  axe  ere  they  would  fall  prone  upon  the  ground.  One  by  one  the  giant 
forest  kings  were  overthrown,  but  the  labour  was  immense  and  incessant.  At  night 
when  they  went  to  their  rest,  the  day's  work  always  seemed  so  light,  for  as  they 
crossed  the  threshold,  Patience,  wiping  the  sweat  from  his  brow,  would  be  encouraged, 
and  Self-denial  would  be  strengthened  by  hearing  the  sweet  voice  of  Hope  within 
singing,  "  God  will  bless  us  ;  God,  even  our  own  God,  will  bless  us."  They  felled 
the  lofty  trees  to  the  music  of  that  strain ;  they  cleared  the  acres  one  by  one,  they 
tore  from  their  sockets  the  huge  roots,  they  delved  the  soil,  they  sowed  the  corn,  and 
waited  for  the  harvest,  often  much  discouraged,  but  stiU  held  to  their  work  as  by 
silver  chains  and  golden  fetters  by  the  sweet  sound  of  the  voice  which  chanted  so 
constantly, "  God,  even  our  own  God,  will  bless  s."  They  never  could  refrain  from 
service,  for  Hope  never  could  refrain  from  song.  They  were  ashamed  to  be  dis- 
couraged, they  were  shocked  to  be  despairing,  for  still  the  voice  rang  clearly  out  at 
noon  and  eventide,  "God  will  bless  us;  God,  even  our  own  God,  will  bless  us." 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Assurance  desirable : — A  man  can  never  be  too  sure  of  hia 
going  to  heaven.    If  we  purchase  an  inheritance  on  earth,  we  make  it  as  sure,  and 

82 


498  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼! 

our  tenure  as  strong  as  the  brain  of  the  law,  or  the  brains  of  the  lawyers,  can  devise. 
We  have  conveyauces,  and  bonds,  and  fines,  no  strength  too  much.  And  shall  we 
not  be  more  curious  in  the  settling  our  eternal  inheritance  in  heaven  ?  [T.  Adams.) 
How  to  realise  full  assurance : — An  old  author  (alas,  they  were  more  familiar  witli 
these  things  long  ago  than  the  moderns  seem  to  be  1)  says  epigrammatically,  truth  - 
fully,  and  scripturally,  that  God  gifts  His  acceptance,  but  He  sells  assurance.  And 
His  people  buy  assurance  by  a  life  of  secret  prayer,  not  prayer-meeting  prayer,  by 
crucifying  the  deepest  lusts,  by  a  sweet  and  holy  life.  The  trafiBc  for  this  great 
blessing  goes  on  between  God  and  the  sinner ;  and  the  reward  for  gospel  obedience 
comes  in  the  shape  of  fuU  assurance  to  his  weak  and  trembling  heart.  {A.  Whyte,  D.D.) 
Hope — an  uncultivated  grace : — A  Christian  without  love  would  be  an  anomaly  ;  a 
Christian  without  faith,  a  self-contradiction  ;  and  yet  Christians  without  hope  ara 
as  common  in  the  Church  as  empty  shells  on  the  sea-shore,  and  unlighted  ga3 
lamps  in  the  city  on  dark  nights  when  the  almanac  says  the  moon  is  shining.  The 
three  graces  are  reduced  to  two ;  and  they  mourn  their  sister  dead  and  buried. 
Even  Christian  ministers  forget  that  the  Bible  is  a  book  of  hope,  and  treat  it  as  a 
book  chiefly  of  warnings.  Children  learn  to  regard  it  as  an  awful  book,  and  never 
quite  recover  from  the  misapprehension.  The  "  God  of  hope  "  is  converted  into  a 
"  God  of  fear,"  and  we  are  driven  to  duty  by  a  rod  instead  of  drawn  to  life  by 
inspiring  hope.  The  Christian  repeats  the  experience  of  his  prototype  in  the  vision 
of  Bunyan,  and  forgets  that  he  has  a  key  in  his  bosom  which  will  let  him  out  of 
Castle  Doubting  and  the  custody  of  Giant  Despair.  Hope  is  one  of  the  threefold 
cords  out  of  which  Christian  experience  is  woven.  If  a  man  has  no  hope,  let  him 
examine  himself  and  see  if  he  have  any  faith  ;  let  him  beware  lest  love,  unfed  by  its 
mother  hope,  die  and  leave  him  without  either  faith,  hope,  or  charity.  Men  scoff 
at  the  optimistic  spirit.  It  is  fashionable  to  be  cynical  and  mildly  despairiug. 
Dean  Swift's  spirit  is  contagious  among  men  of  Dean  Swift's  type  ;  and  his  beatitude 
is  accepted  for  substance  of  doctrine  by  many  men  who  do  not  know  of  its  existence : 
Blessed  are  they  who  do  not  expect  much,  for  they  shall  not  be  disappointed.  But 
what  pessimist  ever  achieved  anything  for  himself  or  for  humanity  ?  Hope  is  the 
inspiration  of  all  noble  activity.  The  world's  leaders  have  all  been  men  of  great 
hope.  {Christian  Union.)  Hope  : — An  assured  hope  is  not  like  a  mountain 
torrent,  but  like  a  stream  flowing  from  a  living  fountain,  and  often  so  quietly  that 
it  is  scarcely  visible  but  for  the  verdure  of  its  banks.  (G.  Spring.)  Development 
of  hope  : — Hope  takes  fast  hold  of  heaven  itself.  A  Christian's  hope  is  not  like 
that  of  Pandora,  which  may  fly  out  of  the  box,  and  bid  the  soul  farewell,  as  the  hope 
of  the  hypocrite  does  ;  no,  it  is  like  the  morning  hght,  the  least  beam  of  it  shall  go 
on  into  a  complete  sunshine ;  it  shall  shine  forth  brighter  and  brighter  till  the 
perfect  day.  (T.  Brooks.)  Hope  an  active  grace : — Hope  is  an  active  grace ;  it  is 
called  a  lively  hope.  Hope  is  like  the  spring  in  the  watch,  it  sets  all  the  wheels  of 
the  soul  in  motion ;  hope  of  a  crop  makes  the  husbandman  sow  his  seed ;  hope  of 
victory  makes  the  soldier  fight ;  and  a  true  hope  of  glory  makes  a  Christian 
vigorously  pursue  glory.  Here  is  a  spiritual  touch-stone  to  try  our  hope  by. 
(T.Watson.)  Not  c"  '.hful. — An  exhortation  to  diligence  : — I.  The  exhortation. 
"Be  not  slothful."  1.  I  should  think  you  woull  not  be  if  you  thought  of  your 
Master.  Good  old  Rutherford,  when  he  lay  in  prison,  said,  «'  I  wish  all  my  brethren 
did  but  know  what  a  Master  I  have  served."  If  you  thought  more  of  your  Master, 
methinks  you  would  be  inclined  to  say  such  a  Master  deserves  your  service.  2. 
Then  your  work :  this  is  a  service  that  may  well  call  forth  all  your  energies.  Don  t 
imagine  that  you  have  done  all  now  you  have  begun  to  make  a  Christian  profei=sion. 
You  have  but  just  put  on  the  sandals ;  you  have  the  pilgrimage  to  go  yet.  There 
is  a  great  work  before  thee  to  do ;  but  He  that  hath  called  thee  to  fight  will  strengthen 
thee.  What  a  presious  thing  when  the  soul  is  iv^tent  upon  noble  objects !  Oh, 
young  people,  to  give  your  youth  to  holy  purposes;  to  take  so  noble  an  object  as 
this  of  glorifying  God  and  blessing  your  fellows  as  the  object  for  which  you  are 
Uving — oh,  what  a  grand  thing  is  this,  the  giving  of  your  youth  to  Himl  it  is  like 
harnessing  a  steed  of  fire  to  some  noble  chariot.  How  much  evil  you  will  prevent, 
how  much  good  you  will  do,  how  many  tears  you  will  wipe  away,  how  many  sad 
hearts  you  will  make  happy  1  May  God  give  you  a  holy  emulation  in  this  matter. 
Think  of  your  work.  It  was  said  of  Dr.  John  Harris,  of  Oxford,  who  lived  soon 
after  the  time  of  Cromwell,  that  when  he  came  to  die  he  called  his  friends  and  said 
this — "  Of  all  the  sins  which  I  have  ever  committed,  the  sin  of  misspent  time 
troubleth  me  most,"  and  yet  he  had  been  a  very  busy  man  ;  but  when  he  came  to 
look  at  the  past  from  his  death-bed,  he  thought  how  little  he  had  done.    When 


CHA».  tl]  HEBREWS.  49ft 

Leigh  Bichmond  was  dying,  a  minister  came  and  sat  by  his  bed-side,  and  he  said  to 
him,  "  Oh,  if  you  could  see  the  value  of  the  golden  moments  now  as  you  will  see 
them  when  you  stand  at  the  rim  of  the  grave,  and  look  back,  how  earnest  would  be 
your  work !  "  It  was  the  prayer  of  Alline  every  morning — "  Lord,  Thou  hast  given 
me  a  naw  day ;  help  me  to  make  my  crown  brighter  and  to  bless  my  fellows." 
What  a  blessed  effect  such  a  prayer  woud  have  on  each  of  oar  lives  I  It  was  said 
of  Boston,  when  he  came  towards  the  close  of  his  Ufe,  that  he  used  to  say — "Hold 
out,  faith  and  patience,  thou  shalt  soon  be  crowned,  the  battle  shall  not  last  much 
longer."  Work  while  thou  canst,  there  are  many  things  thou  canst  not  do  in 
eternity.  Many  a  good  thing  you  can  do  now  that  you  cannot  do  then.  You 
cannot  hold  up  a  sinking  head  in  heaven,  for  there  is  no  sickness  or  sorrow  there. 
Be  not  slothful — think  of  your  Master,  think  of  your  work,  think  of  your  reward. 
Now  I  want  to  tell  you  why  a  great  many  of  you  become  slothful.  There  are  many 
slothful,  because  they  are  not  sufficiently  aware  of  those  crises — times  when  special 
difficulties  come  in  upon  them.  You  may  be  very  busy  for  the  world  and  very 
slothful  for  God.  John  Bunyan  describes  two  sleeping-places  in  his  "  Pilgrim's 
Progress,"  and  he  does  it  exceedingly  wisely.  When  Christian  was  going  up  the 
hill  Difficulty,  and  when  half-way  up  the  hill,  he  fell  asleep  in  the  arbour  and  lost 
his  roll,  and  had  a  sore  journey  back  again  to  recover  it.  The  other  sleeping-place 
waB  on  the  Enchanted  Ground.  The  one  was  in  the  midst  of  difficulties,  and  the 
other  where  the  sky  was  clear  and  the  scenes  were  like  fairyland  ;  clusters  hung 
from  every  tree,  and  the  earth  was  carpeted  with  green  and  flowers.  This  is  true 
religious  experience.  The  tWo  times  of  greatest  danger  to  our  spiritual  vigilance 
are,  special  adversity  and  special  prosperity.  In  times  of  the  world's  adversity,  if 
you  do  not  go  to  Him  who  layetb  on  the  burden,  for  strength  to  bear  it,  you  will  go 
to  sleep  in  spiritual  things — you  will  be  losing  your  roll.  And  if  the  sky  is  clear 
and  everything  go  smoothly,  you  will  be  in  the  same  danger.  Sometimes  when 
things  look  very  smiling  in  this  world  we  get  wrong  for  the  next.  I  have  no  doubt 
Israel  were  quite  willing  to  go  on  when  they  were  at  the  bitter  waters  of  Marah ; 
but  when  they  came  to  Elim,  with  its  fountains  and  palm-trees,  they  would  have 
liked  to  have  stopped  a  little  longer.  Let  us  take  care  that  we  hold  nothing  on 
earth  so  dear  that  we  would  make  our  rest  here.  Be  not  slothful.  In  order  that 
you  may  not  be  so  there  must  be  self-culture,  self-discipline,  self-denial.  Another 
reason  for  your  slothfulness  is,  that  you  have  not  fixed  upon  any  standard  of 
Christian  character.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  the  standard  that  you  should  set  before 
you.  II.  The  example.  "  Followers  of  them,"  &c.  Many  a  man  admires  the 
martyrs  who  does  not  mean  to  follow  them.  The  noble  army  of  martyrs  were 
faithful  to  their  duty  and  to  truth.  They  were  not  fanatics.  They  did  not  seek  after 
suffering  out  of  a  spirit  of  bravado.  When  holy  Bradford  lay  in  prison,  and  Queen 
Mary  sent  offers  of  mercy  to  him  if  he  would  give  up  his  gospelling,  what  said  the 
good  man?  "If  I  might  have  her  Majesty's  favour,  without  losing  that  of  my 
Lord,  gladly  would  I  accept  of  it ;  but  it  is  too  dear  a  price  to  give  God's  favour  for 
that  of  the  Queen."  Give  me  a  man  who  really  fears  God,  and  I  know  he  will  fear 
nobody  else.  It  is  a  grand  thing  for  a  man  to  have  the  presence  of  Jehovah.  Those 
are  striking  words  of  St.  Basil  to  an  empress  who  tempted  him  to  sin,  and  threatened 
punishment,  because  he  would  not  comply  with  her — "  How  can  you  make  me  fear 
confiscation,  who  have  long  since  learned  that  nothing  I  have  is  my  own  ?  or  exile, 
when  I  know  that  the  remotest  province  of  your  empire  is  no  farther  from  heaven 
than  Constantinople?  Or  bow  can  you  make  me  fear  even  death,  when  to  me 
death  wouM  be  the  entrance  to  glory  ?  "  The  martyrs  were  sustained  by  their 
faith.  When  Polvcarp  came  to  the  stake,  they  wanted  to  fasten  him  with  a  chain. 
"  You  need  not  do  that,"  said  he,  "  for  my  Master,  who  brought  me  here,  will  keep 
me  in  the  fire."  Sometimes  their  peace,  on  such  oc  asio.is,  swelled  into  ecstasy,  as 
when  holy  Bradford  said,  "  What  am  I,  and  what  is  my  father's  house,  that  the 
Lord  for  me,  as  for  Elijah,  should  send  a  chariot  of  tire  ?  "  and  so  he  went  up  into 
the  fiery  chariot  to  heaven.  These  were  men  who  through  faith  and  patience  inherit 
the  promises.  They  showed  their  fidelity  to  the  truth  by  sealing  it  with  their 
blood.  Oh,  how  many  of  our  privileges  do  we  owe  to  the  faithfulness  of  such  men  ! 
But  notice  further,  you  must  be  followers  of  those  who  showed  their  fidelity  to  the 
Word,  by  their  diligent  study  of  it.  How  much  you  owe  to  the  translators  of  the 
Scriptures,  who  toiled  at  their  work  night  and  day !  Think  of  the  marvellous  story 
of  the  venerable  Bede,  who  died,  just  as  he  had  finished  the  last  word  of  the  transla- 
tion of  the  Scriptures,  over  which  he  had  toiled  in  faith  and  patience  for  many  years. 
Then  you  must  be  followers  of  those  who  keep  on  with  their  duty  under  all  circum* 


600  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

Btances.  What  a  beantiful  description  that  is  which  John  Bunyan  gives  of  one  Mr. 
By-ends,  and  he  tells  you  he  was  related  to  one,  Mr.  Face-both-ways,  and  to  oue 
Mr.  Fair-speak,  and  to  some  other  people  with  strange  and  significant  names.  He 
tells  you  that  By-ends  had  a  great  love  for  religion  when  she  went  in  silver  sUppera, 
when  the  sun  shone  npon  her  and  the  people  applauded  ;  but  he  had  no  liking  for 
being  with  her  when  the  mob  hooted  and  yelled  ;  no  hking  for  Christ  when  the  mob 
cried,  "  Crucify  Him  I  Crucify  Him  I  "  But  that  won't  do ;  yon  must  follow 
Christ  at  all  times,  if  at  all.  You  must  be  followers  of  those  who  did  their  dutj 
when  duty  was  costly.  You  must  go  where  Christ  would  have  you  go,  and  do  what 
Christ  put  you  to  do,  and  be  willing  to  work  for  God  in  secret,  and  without  the 
applause  of  the  world.  How  blessedly  many  who  have  now  received  the  promises 
showed  their  faith  and  patience  !  Think  of  Abraham  waiting  five-and-twenty  years 
for  the  promise  of  Isaac.  But  though  the  time  was  so  long,  Abraham's  heart  never 
misRave  him.  The  language  of  his  heart  was,  "  My  Lord  has  said  it,  and  I  believe 
my  Isaac  will  come."  And  the  Lord  fulfilled  this  promise.  How  long  Monica, 
the  mother  of  Augustine,  waited  for  her  son's  conversion !  He  indulged  in  all 
manner  of  wickedness,  and  she  went  to  Ambrose  and  told  of  her  prayers  and  teara 
for  her  son.  "  Ah  I  "  said  Ambrose,  "  a  child  of  so  many  tears  and  prayers  shall 
not  perish."  At  length  Augustine  was  converted,  and  became  the  great  luminary  ol 
the  Western  Church.  When  your  prayers  are  long  in  being  answered,  do  not  give 
up.  Sometimes  the  ship  that  is  longest  on  its  voyage  brings  home  the  richest 
freight.  If  the  promise  tarries,  wait  for  it.  A  promise  long  waited  for  is  very 
precious  in  its  fulfilment.  III.  The  encouragement.  Those  who  endured — where 
are  they  now  ?  Inheriting  the  promises.  Those  early  martyrs — early  Christians, 
tkose  who  were  often  in  tears  and  troubles — as  many  of  you  will  be — where  are  they 
now  ?  Inheriting  the  promises.  Oh,  ye  of  little  faith,  look  up  and  take  comfort. 
There  they  stand.  They  used  to  fear  just  as  you  do ;  they  thought,  sometimes, 
they  should  never  get  there,  just  as  you  do.  Now,  if  you  be  not  slothful,  just  as 
they  have  triumphed  you  shall  triumph,  just  as  they  are  crowned  you  shall  be 
crowned.  (S.  Golcy.)  The  warning  agaivst  slothfulness : — Slothf ulness  is  the  same  aa 
idleness.  An  idle  person  is  one  who  neglects  his  duty,  and  who  never  can  succeed  in 
anything.  Solomon  says  that  "  slothfulness" — or  idleness — "  will  clothe  a  man  with 
rags."  We  need  not  wonder  therefore,  to  find  among  the  warnings  of  the  Bible,  one 
against  idleness,  or  slothfulness.  And  God,  who  gives  us  this  warning,  has  set  before 
us  splendid  examples  of  industry.  See  what  an  example  of  this  we  have  in  God  Him- 
self. When  our  Saviour  was  on  earth,  He  said  to  the  Jews — "  My  Father  worketh 
hitherto,  and  I  work,"  And  then  think  of  the  angels  of  heaven.  They  wait  before 
God  continually  to  do  His  bidding.  And  the  moment  He  tells  them  to  go  any- 
where, or  do  anything,  they  fly  away  and  do  it.  There  is  no  slothfulness,  or 
idleness  among  the  angels.  And  then  think  of  the  sun.  God  made  it,  thousands 
of  years  ago,  by  its  shining  to  light  up  our  world,  and  the  worlds  around  it.  Ani 
since  then  it  has  kept  on  shining  day  and  night,  without  ever  stopping  for  a  moment. 
And  so  it  is  with  the  moon,  and  the  stars,  and  tbe  seasons,  and  day  and  night. 
There  is  no  slothfulness  or  idleness  about  any  of  them.  I.  The  first  reason  why 
we  ought  to  mind  this  warning  is— fob  the  sake  op  oue  example.  About  the  year 
1725,  an  American  boy,  nineteen  years  old,  found  himself  in  London,  where  he  had 
to  earn  his  own  bread.  He  went  one  day  to  a  printing  office,  and  asked  for  employ- 
ment. •'  Where  are  you  from  ?  "  asked  the  foreman.  •'  From  America,"  was  the 
answer.  "  Ah  I  "  said  the  foreman,  *'  from  America !  a  lad  from  America  seeking 
employment  as  a  printer !  Well,  do  you  really  understand  the  art  of  printing? 
Can  you  set  type  ?  "  The  young  man  stepped  up  to  one  of  the  type-cases,  and  in  a 
short  time  set  up  the  following  passage,  from  St.  John's  Gospel,  which  he  handed 
to  the  foreman — "  Nathaniel  said  unto  him,  '  Can  there  any  good  thing  come  out  of 
Nazareth  ? '  Philip  saith  unto  him,  '  Come  and  see.'  "  The  foreman  was  so  pleased 
with  the  readiness  and  smartness  of  this  American  youth,  that  he  took  him  into  his 
employ  at  once.  He  was  very  industrious,  and  soon  gained  the  confidence  and 
respect  of  all  connected  with  the  office.  He  was  always  in  his  place,  and  did  his 
work  well.  He  never  would  drink  beer  or  strong  drink.  He  saved  his  money,  and 
after  a  while  returned  to  his  own  country.  Then  he  had  a  printing  estabhshment 
of  his  own.  He  became  an  author,  a  pubhsher,  the  Postmaster-General  of  the 
country — a  member  of  Congress — a  signer  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  and 
an  ambassador  from  his  country  to  some  of  the  royal  courts  of  Europe,  and  finallj 
he  died  in  Philadelphia,  on  the  17th  of  April,  1790,  at  the  age  of  eighty-four,  full  at 
years  and  honours.    Ibis  was  Benjamin  Franklin.    No  one  can  tell  the  iiifinenoe> 


CHAP.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  50i 

which  his  example  for  industry  has  had  upon  thousands  of  the  youth  of  onr 
country.  But  we  may  form  a  pretty  fair  idea  of  this  when  we  bear  in  miud  that 
there  are  more  than  a  hundred  and  fifty  counties,  towns,  and  villages  that  have 
been  called  Franklin,  in  honour  of  this  industrious  printer's  boy.  II.  The  second 
reason  why  we  ought  to  mind  this  warning  is — for  our  success  ih  lite.  A  lady 
once  asked  Mr.  Turner,  the  great  English  painter,  what  the  secret  of  his  succesa 
was?  His  reply  was  :  "I  have  no  secret,  madam,  but  hard  work."  "  The  differ- 
ence between  one  man  and  another,"  says  Dr.  Arnold,  "  is  not  so  much  in  talent,  as 
in  industry."  "  Nothing,"  says  Sir  Joshua  Eeynolds,  "  is  denied  to  well-directed 
labour,  and  nothing  is  to  be  attained  without  it."  "  Success,"  says  Dr.  Johnson, 
"  may  be  won  by  patient  industry,  but  it  is  not  to  be  looked  for  in  any  other  way." 
Solomon  says — "  The  hand  of  the  diligent  maketh  rich."  Again  he  says,  "  Seest 
thou  a  man  diligent  in  his  business ;  he  shall  stand  before  kings,  he  shall  not 
stand  before  mean  men."  Periander,  one  of  the  seven  wise  men  of  Greece, 
wrote  a  motto,  which  was  inscribed  on  the  walls  of  the  celebrated  temple 
of  Delphos,  in  these  words — "  Nothing  is  impossible  to  industry."  III.  The 
tliird  reason  why  we  ought  to  mind  it  is — for  our  reward  in  heaven.  If  we  get 
to  heaven  at  all,  we  shall  owe  it  entirely  to  the  grace  and  love  of  Jesus.  But 
what  our  place  in  heaven  shall  be,  when  we  get  there,  will  be  decided  according 
to  the  way  in  which  we  have  served  Jesus  on  earth.  And  this  is  a  good 
reason  why  we  should  mind  the  warning  against  slothfulness.  {R.  Newton,  D.D.) 
Spiritual  sluggishness : — Almost  everywhere  is  the  fact  recognised  that  novelty  has 
much  to  do  with  enthusiasm.  Very  few  are  prepared  to  judge  of  the  value  of  a 
worker  by  what  he  is  at  the  commencement  of  his  work.  "  Wait  a  while,"  they 
say.  "  He  is  new  to  the  duties  as  yet ;  when  the  charm  of  their  freshness  is  over 
then  we  shall  be  able  better  to  estimate  what  we  may  daily  expect  from  him." 
Splendid  enthusiasm  to  start  with  1  If  it  were  only  kept  up,  the  worker  would  soon 
have  everything  at  his  feet,  but  unfortunately,  it  is  not  kept  up.  Soon  the  inquiry 
has  to  be  raised,  "  Who  did  hinder  you  ?  "  The  fine  gold  has  become  dim.  The 
simple  fact  is  that  the  novelty  of  the  experience  has  gone,  and  taken  the  enthusiasm 
with  it.  Such  was  the  great  danger  of  these  Hebrew  Christians.  Let  us 
consider  the  sluggishness  here  referred  to,  and  how  it  may  be  avoided.  Spiritual 
sluggishness.  The  word  is  one  which  usually  relates  to  a  bodily  condition,  and  we 
must  therefore  first  gain  a  clear  idea  of  it  in  that  sense  before  we  can  understand 
its  use  by  the  writer  in  relation  to  the  soul.  It  is  a  difficult  matter  to  define  health 
in  a  way  that  will  satisfy  a  scientific  mind,  but  generally  speaking,  it  is  that  con- 
dition when  "  all  the  functions  of  the  boHy  are  performed  easily,  naturally,  and 
well."  All  of  us,  however,  have  passed  through  seasons  when  some  one  bodily 
organ  was  not  capable  of  performing  its  function,  and  when,  in  consequence  of 
some  complaint  or  other,  it  caused  us  considerable  pain.  We  had  no  difficulty  in 
localising  the  matter  ;  we  could  lay  our  finger  upon  the  exact  spot,  and  our  ability 
to  do  so  led  to  the  use  of  remc  lies  which,  happily,  soon  restored  us.  All  disorders, 
however,  are  not  of  this  acute  kind.  Although  sharp  pain  is  the  usual  herald  of  a 
deviation  from  the  standard  of  health,  there  are  conditions  in  \^  hich  the  body  is  not 
as  it  should  be,  though  there  is  no  great  suffering.  There  are  other  heralds  besidja 
pain,  and  sluggishness  is  one  of  them.  In  this  case  you  cannot  put  your  finger  upon 
any  one  spot  and  say,  "  The  pain  is  here  I  "  No,  there  is  a  dulness,  a  lethargy 
which  affects  the  whole  body.  Such  was  precisely  the  condition  of  these  Hebrews 
in  relation  to  spiritual  things.  There  was  no  glaring  sin  to  rebuke.  They  went 
to  the  same  places  as  before,  and  performed  the  same  acts  ;  yet  they  were  not  the 
same  men.  The  difference  was  here  :  formerly,  whatever  they  did,  they  did 
zealously ;  now,  whatever  they  did,  they  did  sluggishly.  The  stream  was  confined 
within  the  same  banks ;  but  whereas  once  it  rushed  on,  smiling  in  the  sunlight, 
carrying  away  many  a  poisonous  element,  turning  many  a  water-wheel — musical, 
purifying,  useful — now  it  moved  slowly — the  music  was  gone,  the  poison  was  accu- 
mulating, and  the  wheels  were  still.  The  same  stream  ?  Yes ;  if  you  looked  only 
at  the  old  landmarks,  but  not  the  same  stream  by  any  means,  if  you  looked  at  its 
flow  and  the  purposes  it  served.  To  particularise :  they  still  spoke  of  Christ  as 
their  Saviour,  but  there  was  no  glow  of  affection  on  their  faces  or  in  their  hearts. 
They  prayed  to  Him  still,  but  the  old  fervour  was  not  there.  They  ministered  to 
the  needy,  but  the  poor  felt  that  the  gift  and  the  giver  were  separate.  They  had 
drifted  into  another  zone,  and  they  who  in  the  warmer  climate  had  been  full  of 
activity,  now  were  almost  torpid  in  the  cold.  Two  other  points  in  the  analogy 
demand  oar  attention,  although  I  can  only  touch  upon  them  lightly.    In  its  milder 


508  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ti 

forms  Bluggishness  is  generally  the  result  of  the  neglect  of  healthy  exercise,  and 
further,  although  it  does  not  always  imply  organic  disease,  yet,  if  not  remedied,  it 
is  likely  to  lead  to  it,  and  so  shorten  the  days.  There  were  certain  exercises  of  the 
Christian  life  which  these  Hebrews  had  neglected.  They  had  not  forsaken  their 
teachers,  but  they  did  not  give  them  proper  attention.  The  truth  was  explained, 
but  they  were  not  mentally  on  the  alert,  and  so  it  found  no  lodgment  within  them. 
The  neglect  of  that  duty  was  yielding  its  baneful  fruit.  Disease  was  threatening 
them.  Thorns  and  thistles  spring  up  on  neglected  land,  and  the  apostle  feared  that 
such  growths  would  speedily  appear  in  them.  What  had  been  a  garden  of  the  Lord 
was  likely  to  become  a  fruitless  tract,  bearing  growths  only  fit  to  be  burned.  Ob- 
serve, it  is  not  a  mere  matter  of  slowness  or  swiftness ;  rightly  regarded,  it  is  one 
of  life  or  death.  "  Not  sluggish,"  but  "  imitators  of  them  who  through  faith  and 
patience  inherit  the  promises."  Who  can  tell  how  much  inspiration  men  have 
received  by  considering  a  noble  end  and  noble  human  examples?  Now,  the  writer 
calls  his  readers  to  that  twofold  contemplation.  He  reminds  them  first  of  the 
promises  of  God.  Some  of  them  had  already  been  fulfilled,  but  many  of  them 
were  still  but  promises — i.e.,  they  had  relation  to  the  future.  The  reference,  of 
course,  is  to  the  heavenly  life  which  he  wished  them  to  contemplate,  so  that  they 
might  patiently  endure  their  present  afdictions.  God  had  in  store  for  them  a 
tranquility  such  as  they  had  never  yet  known — a  tranquility  which  should  never 
be  ruffled  by  the  stormy  winds  of  trial,  and  a  service  which  should  never  be 
hindered  by  persecution,  or  in  which  they  should  ever  tire  or  grow  weary.  In  that 
higher  life  work  and  rest  should  sweetly  blend.  In  their  present  circumstances 
they  were  sharply  and  painfully  separated  from  each  other ;  but  then  the  twain,  by 
a  heavenly  wedlock,  should  become  one  for  ever.  Did  any  of  them,  however,  regard 
their  difficulties  and  hindrances  as  insuperable?  If  so,  the  apostle  corrects  the 
error  by  reminding  them  that  many  had  already  inherited  the  promises.  Was  their 
case  while  on  earth  different  in  any  essential  respect  from  that  of  his  readers  ? 
Nay,  they  inherited  the  promises  "  through  faith  and  patience."  (W.  S.  Page.) 
Slothfulness : — "  Slothful  " — a  word  which  has  quite  passed  out  of  common  use.  It 
is  a  strong  old  Saxon  word,  very  little  changed.  The  Saxon  form  is  slewdth,  from 
slaw,  slow ;  and  the  idea  of  the  word  is  tardiness,  disinclination  to  action  or  labour. 
This  slothfulness  was  the  characteristic  sin  of  the  civilised  and  effeminate  times  of 
the  Book  of  Proverbs.  It  is  the  great  sin,  in  respect  of  religious  things,  of  all 
highly  civilised  and  luxurious  ages  and  nations,  and  the  great  peril  of  all  persons 
who  are  not  placed  under  the  stern  necessity  of  working  with  hand  or  brain  for 
their  daily  bread.  But  a  more  precise  idea  can  be  given  to  this  term  as  it  is  used 
in  this  Epistle.  Slothfulness  is  action  which  has  in  it  no  energy ;  nothing  of  that 
essential  characteristic  of  manliness — energy.  I.  The  sin  of  slothfulness  in  thb 
Christian  life.  We  know  the  sin  and  its  ruinous  consequences  well  enough  in 
business  life.  We  have  often  been  wearied  out  with  the  kid -gloved  young  man,  who 
counts  business  a  bore,  dawdles  about,  puts  no  soul  into  anything,  drags  through 
his  day's  work,  and  tries  the  patience  of  everybody  that  has  to  do  with  him.  Can 
it  possibly  be  that  he  represents  the  way  in  which,  by  our  Christian  slothfulness, 
we  are  wearying  God  and  all  good  men  ?  It  must  be  a  sin  to  live  a  listless,  easeful 
Christian  life :  a  sin  like  that  of  the  soldier  who  hides  among  the  stuff  or  feigns  a 
sickness  when  the  trumpet  blast  is  summoning  aU  heroic  souls  to  the  front.  It 
must  be  sin  in  view  of  those  all-absorbing  claims  of  King  Jesus  under  which  we 
come.  He  demands  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  life,  time,  powers,  all.  No  man  can  be 
truly  His  without  being  wholly  His.  It  must  be  sin  in  view  of  the  consecration  vow 
which  we  have  made,  yielding  ourselves  up  as  living  sacrifices,  like  the  whole 
burnt-offering,  given  over,  body,  and  fat,  and  skin,  and  blood,  and  life,  for  a  whole 
consuming  on  the  Lord's  altar.  It  must  be  sin  in  view  of  that  great  work  in  the 
world  which  has  yet  to  be  done  ere  Christ  shall  "  see  of  the  travaU  of  His  soul  and 
be  satisfied."  It  must  be  the  sin  of  the  most  shameful  ingratitude,  when  we  re- 
member how  He  bought  us  with  His  precious  blood,  giving  Himself  unto  the  death 
for  us.  II.  The  temptations  to  the  sin  of  Christian  slothfulness  in  modern  lifb. 
Certainly  there  is  no  temptation  to  slothfulness  in  modern  business  life.  Intensity, 
haste,  keenness,  over-grasping,  are  the  modern  business  sins.  But  this  business 
life  of  ours  in  many  ways  brings  temptation  to  a  weak  Christian  living.  Observe 
how  it  tends  to  exhaust  energy,  expending  all  the  gathered  stores  of  physical  and 
mental  strength,  and  leaving  none  to  be  given  to  Christian  uses.  Then,  too,  it 
brings  wealth  and  the  enervating  infiaence  of  luxury — precisely  the  sin  of  old 
Sodom,  old  Jerusalem,  and  old  Tyre,  against  which  a  prophet's  voice  is  ever  needed. 


CHAP,  vr.]  HEBREWS.  50t 

Other  things  besiies  bnsinefls  are  seriously  telling  on  the  energy  of  religions  life. 
To  what  an  alarming  extent  personal  Christian  effort  is  excused  by  an  arrangement 
for  money  payment ;  as  if  cold  cash  could  ever  do  in  the  world  for  Christ  what 
living  souls  can  I  The  extravagant  pursuit  of  mere  pleasure,  and  interest  in  the 
excitingly  sensational  and  weakly  sentimental  in  literature.  And  then  in  other 
departments  of  life  we  have  the  open  enthronement  of  intellect  as  the  deity  for 
modern  worship.    III.  The  dishonour  which  Chbistian  slothfulness  puts  upon 

THOSE  saints  AND    HEBOE8  WHO  HAVE  OONE  BEFORE  US,  AND  WHO  SEEK  TO  LIVE  AGAIN  IN 

C3.      Oh,  the  glorious  vision  of  the  saints  of  God  1     Sainted   fathers,   mothers, 
pastors,  heroes  I     They  have  inherited  the  promises,  and  now  they  rest.     But  how  T 
Through  "  faith,"  which  is  but  another  name  for  energy — energy  seen  on  another 
side  ;  and  through  "  patience,"  which  enabled  them,  amid  all  their  toils,  and  dis- 
conragements,  and  failures,  to  keep  up  their  energy.     They  live  again  in  us.  What 
dislionour  do  we  put  upon  them,  if  our  Christian  living  is  faithless  and  weak,  self- 
indulgent  and  restless  and  fretful  I    How  we  disgrace  them,  if  we  sink  down  as  low 
as  to  make  our  hves  a  mere  response  to  the  questions,  What  shall  we  eat  f     What 
shall  we  drink?     And  wherewithal  shall  we  be  clothed?    They  live  again  in  us. 
They  were  the  Church  of  Christ  for  their  time,  and  we  are  for  ours.     Would  to  God 
that  in  earnest,  energetic.  Christian  lives  we  could  be  worthy  of  them.     Nay,  would 
to  God  that  we  might  be  worthy  of  Him  whom  they  and  we  alike  should  imitate, 
w!io  hath  called  us  by  His  grace  unto  His  kingdom  and  glory.      (R.  Tuck,  B.A.) 
The  evil  of  sloth  : — Among  the  disciples  of  Hillel,  the  wise  teacher  of  the  sons  of 
Israel,  was  one  named  Saboth,  to  whom  every  work  was  a  great  trouble,  and  who 
gave  himself  up  to  idleness  and  sloth.     Hillel  was  grieved  thereat  for  the  youth, 
and  resolved  to  cure  him  of  his  fault.    To  this  end  he  took  him  out  to  the  valley 
of  Hinnom,  by  Jerusalem,     There  was  a  standing  pool  full  of  snakes  and  vermin, 
and  covered  with  muddy  weeds.    When  they  reached  this  place,  Hillel  put  down 
his  staff,  and  said,  "Let  na  rest  here  from  our  way."     The  youth  was  surprised, 
and   said,   "  How,   master,   near  this  foul  bog  ?    Dost  thou  not  perceive  what 
poisonous  vapours  it  exhales  ?  "    "  Thou  art  right,  my  son,"  answered  the  master : 
"  this  bog  is  like  the  soal  of  a  slothful  man.     Who  would  wish  to  be  near  it  ?  " 
Then  Hillel  took  the  youth  to  a  waste  field,  producing  nothing  but  thistles  and 
thorns,  which  choked  the  com  and  the  salutary  herbs.     Now,  Hillel  leaned  on  hia 
staff,  and  said,  "  Behold  this  field  has  good  soil  to  produce  all  that  is  useful  and 
pleasant,  but  it  is  forgotten  and  neglected,  therefore  it  brings  forth  thistles,  and 
thorns,  and  poisonous  weeds,  beneath  which  lurk  toads  and  serpents.    A  httle 
while  ago  thou  didst  see  the  soul ;  now  behold  the  life  of  an  idle  man."    Then 
Saboth  was  full  of  shame  and  repentance,  and  said,  "  Master,  whyleadest  thou  me 
to  these  lonely  and  dreary  spots  ?    They  are  the  reproachful  picture  of  my  soul  and 
life  1 "    Hillel  answered,  and  said,  "  Thou  wouldst  not  believe  my  words,  therefore 
I  tried  whether  the  voice  of  Nature  would  penetrate  to  thy  heart."    Saboth  pressed 
his  master's  hand,  and  said,  "  Thy  endeavours  shall  not  be  in  vain ;  thou  wilt  see 
that  a  new  life  has  begun  within  me."    And  after  this  day  Saboth  became  an 
active  youth.    Then  Hillel  took  him  to  a  fertile  valley,  by  the  side  of  a  clear  brook, 
which  flowed  meandering  between  fruitful  trees,  flowery  meadows  and  shady  shrub- 
beries.    "  See  here,"  said  the  old  man  to  the  rejoicing  youth,  "  the  picture  of  thy 
new,  industrious  life.     Nature,  which  warned  thee,  will  now  reward  thee.    Her 
beauty  and  grace  can  only  give  joy  to  him  who  sees  in  her  life  a  picture  of  his  own." 
(F.  A.  Krummacher.)        Indolence: — The  soul's  idling  time  is  the  devil's  working 
time.         Followers  of  them  who  .  .  .  Inherit  the  promises. — Departed  saints  our 
examples : — It  must  be  owned,  although  it  is  a  melancholy  confession,  that  few 
comparatively  set  out  in  the  road  to  heaven,  and  fewer  still  persevere  unto  the  end. 
"  Many  of  the  disciples  of  Jesus  turned  back,  and  walked  no  more  with  Him."    I. 
The  caution  against  a  sore  evil  in  the  Church  of  Christ.     "  We  desire  that  ye  be 
not  slothful."    Can  he  be  slothful  who  has  for  long  years  felt  the  bitterness  of 
bondage,  but  having  shaken  off,  through  the  might  of  another,  the  bonds  of  misery, 
is  now  on  his  way  to  the  land  of  liberty  ?      Can  he  be  slothful  who  has  seen  the 
wild  storm  gathering  in  the  heavens,  with  destruction,  and  is  on  the  road  to  the 
refuge  set  before  him  ?   Can  he  be  slothful  who  flees,  while  sin  and  Satan  and  avenging 
justice  are  pursuing  ?    Can  the  Christian  ever  need  such  an  exhortation  when  he 
has  so  mnch  to  excite  him  to  diligence  ?     So  prevalent  is  the  evil,  that  no  Christian 
should  regard  himself  as  not  standing  in  need  of  caution  here.  Such,  too,  is  its  deceit- 
ful  nature  that  it  is  often  overlooked  or  mistaken  for  something  else.    It  is  a  kind  of 
negative  vice ;  not  so  much  the  doing  of  what  is  directly  wrong,  as  the  omitting  to 


504  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Ti.' 

do  what  is  obviously  right.  Depend  upon  it,  if  we  omit  a  duty,  we  are  on  the  high- 
way to  the  perpetration  of  an  actual  crime.  The  great  tempter  knows  this  full  well, 
and  therefore  strives  thus  to  draw  us  aside  rather  than  to  drive  us  into  evil.  The 
citadel  has  come  into  the  possession  of  the  foe,  not  by  the  might,  but  by  the  stratagem 
of  the  enemy ;  it  has  been  brought  low,  not  by  the  strength  of  the  assailants,  but 
through  the  indifference  of  tb  e  defenders.  But  there  is  a  class  of  persons  whose  strength 
seems  paralysed,  and  who  shrink  from  effort,  because  they  see  everything  in  an  un- 
favourable light.  They  behold  difficulties  in  the  way,  and  regard  them  as  unscaleable ; 
they  consider  the  exertions  demanded  as  beyond  their  strength,  and  the  self-denial  re- 
quired as  more  than  they  can  bear.  Such  characters  as  those  to  which  we  have  alluded 
seek,  but  do  not  strive.  They  do  not  set  about  the  matter  with  all  the  heart  and  soul 
and  strength  ;  there  is  none  of  that  combating  with  the  habit  of  evil  which  will  not 
rest  until  it  is  destroyed.  Love  with  its  note  of  tenderness,  peace  with  its  words  of 
sweetness,  joy  by  its  language  of  rapture,  zeal  with  its  burning  syllables,  and  faith 
by  the  accents  of  assurance — all  urge  us  never  to  be  slothfuL  Bemember  the  nature 
of  that  duty  which  is  laid  upon  you.  You  have  a  prize  to  win  and  a  soul  to  save. 
Shall  earthly  competitors  and  worldly  combatants  put  you  to  the  blush  ?  Think, 
again,  of  the  character  you  bear  and  the  profession  you  make.  You  are  children  of 
God,  whose  meat  and  drink  should  be  to  do  their  Father's  will,  to  '•  count  all  things 
but  loss  for  Christ."  Can  you,  then,  bear  the  thought  of  belying  your  character,  of 
regarding  spiritual  things  as  little  worth  when  earthly  interests  come  in  the  way  ? 
II.  A  POWERFUL  ENCOUEAGEMENT  to  diligence,  as  enforced  by  the  example  of  those 
who  have  preceded  us  in  the  road  to  heaven — "  Be  not  slothful,  but  followers  of 
them  who  through  faith  and  patience  inherit  the  promises."  There  is  something 
in  this  mode  of  exciting  the  Hebrew  Christians  to  diligence,  which  by  its  suitable- 
ness recommends  itself  to  us.  It  shows  how  practicable  it  is  to  accomplish  that 
^vhich  sloth  suggests  is  impossible  ;  it  puts  to  flight  every  false  fear  by  giving  in- 
stances of  complete  success,  and  assures  us  of  what  muy  be  done  by  reminding  na 
of  what  has  been  done.  Think  of  the  zeal  of  patriarchs,  prophets,  and  apostles,  the 
trials  they  endured,  and  the  difficulties  they  overcame.  Look  at  Abraham  hoping 
against  hope,  obeying  the  Divine  command  regardless  of  the  consequences.  Look 
at  Moses  "  choosing  affliction  with  the  people  of  God  "  in  preference  to  all  the  riches 
of  an  Egyptian  thi  one.  Look  at  David  waiting  for  the  kingdom  while  year  after 
year  he  was  hunted  for  his  life,  serving  the  Lord  diligently  amid  all  the  cares  of 
royalty,  and  all  the  trials  of  the  most  troublous  times.  Look  at  the  apostles  or 
martyrs  wlio  "  counted  not  their  lives  dear  unto  them  "  for  the  sake  of  Jesus.  But 
how  did  the  saints  of  God  check  every  rising  tendency  to  discouragement  or 
indolence  ?  How  did  they  so  walk  as  to  arrive  safely  at  their  journey's  end  ?  By 
"  faith  and  patience."  These  are  graces  peculiar  to  the  Christian's  state  of  proba- 
tion. He  is  called  to  exercise  faith  in  the  Word  of  God,  and  to  rely  entirely  upon 
Christ.  It  is  by  faith  that  we  become  interested  in  the  promises ;  pardon  and 
salvation  are  promised  to  faith — beheving,  we  become  chUdxen  of  God,  and  heirs 
of  the  promise  of  eternal  life.  But  '•  patience  must  also  have  her  perfect  work  "  ; 
the  promises  will  be  delayed,  that  this  suffering  grace  may  be  called  into  exercise. 
This  is  the  grace  that  checks  the  murmur.  Nature  might  sometimes  suggest, 
"  Why  are  my  conflicts  prolonged?  "  But  patience  maintains  the  calmness  of  a 
heart  not  struck  dumb  by  sullen  desperation,  but  tranquilised  by  resignation  and 
supported  by  hope.  (S.  Bridge,  M.A.)  Christian  examples  : — I.  We  must  endea- 
vour to  ascertain  OUR  MODELS.  Whom  are  we  to  follow?  Them  "who  through 
faith  and  patience  inherit  the  promises."  Passing  over  successive  generations, 
passing  by  princes,  and  heroes,  and  statesmen,  and  scholars,  the  apostle  goes  back 
to  the  very  early  ages  of  the  new  world,  and  points  us  to  a  small  company  of  rustics 
and  shepherds,  distinguished  only  by  their  communion  with  God  and  their  obedience 
to  Him.  The  days  are  coming  when  men  will  be  judged,  not  by  their  adventi- 
tiousness,  but  by  their  real  worth,  by  their  intellectual,  moral,  and  religious 
character,  when  vile  persons,  however  rich,  shall  be  condemned,  and  we  shall 
honour  them  that  fear  the  Lord,  however  poor.  For  the  righteous  are  the  excellent 
of  the  earth.  They  are  called,  observe,  "  repairers  of  the  breach,  restorers  of  places 
to  dwell  in,"  and  though  they  were  destitute,  tormented,  and  afflicted,  the  world 
was  not  worthy  of  them.  II.  Having  ascertained  our  models,  we  must,  in  the  second 
place,  consider  theib  present  condition,  which  is  the  enjoyment  of  the  inheritance. 
They  "  inherit  the  promises."  Many  advantages  are  derived  from  the  promises ; 
some  even  in  time.  Few  of  the  promises  of  God,  indeed,  are  ever  completely  accom- 
plished in  this  world :  they  draw  us,  therefore,  forward  and  upward.     We  are 


«HAP.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  50S 

saved  by  hope  ;  Leaven  will  perfect  everything  that  concerus  us.  Now  yon  will 
observe,  also,  that  this  inheritance  is  a  present  possession.  They  "  inherit,"  rot 
they  '•  shall  inherit."  They  inherit  now  the  promises.  They  have  done  with 
sorrows  and  with  sin :  they  are  freed  from  all  their  infirmities  and  all  their  dis- 
tractions :  they  are  there  for  ever  with  the  Lord,  and  waiting  to  receive  you  into 
everlasting  communion.  III.  Let  us  now  consider,  thirdly,  their  pbevious  dis- 
positions. 1.  Let  us,  then,  observe  their  dependence  and  order.  "  Faith  and 
patience."  Patience  does  not  precede  faith,  but  follows  it :  so  does  everything. 
Faith  is  not  the  superstructure,  but  the  foundation.  2.  The  nature  of  their  service. 
One  word  here  will  explain  this  fully ;  it  is  the  word  "  through  " — "  Through  faith 
and  patience,"  says  the  apostle,  "  they  inherit  the  promises."  What  could  you  do 
■without  either  of  them  ?  What  could  you  do  without  faith  ?  Take  the  most  simple 
principle  in  religion:  the  creation  of  the  world.  The  heathen  philosophers  com- 
monly believed  in  the  eternity  of  the  world,  or  tliat  it  was  produced  by  a  casual 
concourse  of  atoms.  And  the  apostle  expressly  tells  us,  that  "  through  faith  we 
understand  that  the  worlds  were  framed  by  the  Word  of  God ;  so  that  things  which 
are  seen  were  not  made  of  things  which  do  appear."  What  wonder,  therefore,  that 
as  to  other  things  these  should  depend  upon  faith  ?  What  could  you  do  without 
patience  ?  Patience  has  two  offices  to  perform  ;  the  one  regards  waiting  for  good, 
and  the  other  the  bearing  of  evil.  IV.  Oub  doty  in  befebenoe  to  them  ;  which 
is,  to  be  followers  of  them  :  "  Be  ye  followers  of  them  who  through  faith  and  patience 
inherit  the  promises."  The  injunction  implies  three  things:  1.  That  there  is 
nothing  unattainable  or  impracticable  in  the  examples  of  those  who  have  gone 
before  us.  We  may,  we  can,  follow  them.  They  were  exercised  by  the  very  same 
temptations,  and  they  had  the  very  same  passions  with  us.  2.  That  we  should 
acquaint  ourselves  with  them.  You  cannot  follow  what  you  are  ignorant  of.  Imi- 
tation is  something  voluntary,  something  intentional,  something  that  requires 
observation,  and  to  have  the  thing  much  before  the  eye  of  the  mind,  in  order  to 
have  the  mind  impressed.  3.  Axid  you  should  not  be  satisfied  with  anything  short 
of  resemblance  and  conformity.  In  this  conformity  allow  me  just  to  mention  two 
things  which  are  worthy  of  your  regard.  (1)  You  should  distinguish  what  was 
peculiar  in  their  situation  to  themselves,  and  what  was  common  and  general.  (2) 
Then  again,  with  regard  to  such  things,  in  which  they  were  exemplars,  you  should 
attend  to  these  things  chiefly  as  regards  yourselves.  V.  Having  ascertained  our 
models,  and  having  seen  their  present  condition,  and  their  previous  disposition,  and 
observed  our  duty  with  regard  to  them,  let  us  finally  remark,  what  is  necessaby  in 
OEDEB  TO  DiscHABGE  IT ;  namely,  that  you  fling  away  sloth.  A  philosopher  was 
asked,  "  What  is  the  sin  most  universal  to  all  mankind  ?  "  and  his  answer  was,  and 
we  are  persuaded  that  he  answered  justly,  "  Idleness  and  sloth."  See  a  child :  with 
what  difficulty  can  you  obtain  anything  like  continued  serious  attention  to  subjects 
you  are  attempting  to  teach  it.  It  is  like  your  endeavouring  to  tie  it  with  a  ball  of 
mercury  to  the  legs  of  a  table.  Look  at  man  :  in  what  state  should  we  find  the  com- 
munity now,  of  how  many  thousand  things  should  we  remain  ignorant,  if  individuals 
were  not  urged  by  the  most  powerful  considerations  of  want  or  advantage.  But 
mental  sloth  is  much  greater  than  bodily  sloth,  and  spiritual  sloth  is  much 
greater  than  even  mental.  It  seems  very  astonishing  as  well  as  unnatural ;  allow- 
ing that  a  man  is  on  the  bed  of  sloth,  we  should  suppose  that  it  would  be  impos- 
sible for  him  to  remain  there  when  he  opens  his  eyes  and  looks  about  him  in  the 
light  of  revelation.  Can  he  see  such  honours  as  these,  and  not  feel  something 
like  ambition?  Can  he  see  such  riches,  and  not  feel  something  like  avarice? 
Can  he  learn  that  the  Judge  standeth  at  the  door  and  not  be  afraid  ?  Can  he  see 
Buch  a  heaven  and  not  agonise  in  order  to  enter  it  ?  Can  he  see  hell  moving  to 
meet  htm  and  not  tremble,  and  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come  ?  (W.  Jay.) 
In  the  footsteps  of  heroes : — The  principle  of  imitation  which  is  spoken  of  in  our 
text  (for  the  word  "  followers  "  ought  to  have  been  "  imitators  ")  has  an  imperial 
influence  on  man.  It  is  almost  impossible  to  define  its  range.  Imitation  begins 
in  early  childhood,  long  before  either  our  moral  perceptions  or  our  reason  have 
become  developed  ;  and  the  infant  is  often,  though  its  parents  may  be  unconscious 
of  it,  hearing  and  watching  and  making  its  little  efforts  to  imitate  their  doings 
and  sayings.  It  is  imitation  which  is  both  the  creative  principle  and  the  preserving 
bond  of  society.  The  moralists  of  every  age  have  shown  their  deep  insight  into 
human  nature  and  their  just  appreciation  of  the  value  of  the  principle  of  imitation 
by  enforcing  their  precepts  with  suitable  examples.  Aristides  has  been  cited  and 
pressed  upon  the  young  as  an  example  of  justice ;  and  Solon  as  an  example  of 


606  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n, 

wisdom ;  and  Socrates  as  an  example  of  goodness.     Nor  has  the  Word  of  God 
been  less  alive  to  the  importance  of  a  similar  course.      There  is  not  a  book  in  the 
whole  compass  of  hterature  which  has  so  extensively  availed  itself  of  examples  as 
this ;  nor  is  there  one  which  has  such  examples  to  present,  whether  of  vice  or 
virtue.    And  so  our  text  exhorts  us  not  to  be  slothful,  but  followers  of  them  who 
through  faith  and  patience  inherit  the  promises.     I.  What  is  inherited  ?     The 
promises.    What  promises  ?   These  must  be  the  final  promises  which  are  embodied 
in  the  one  word — heaven.    Many  promises  are  fulfilled  to  us  on  our  way  there ;  but 
these  are  promises  whose  fruition  is  postponed  until  death.      What  promises  are 
fulfilled  then  in  heaven  ?     1.  This  is  one  thing — freedom  from  sin.     This  at  least. 
This,  if  there  be  nothing  more ;  and  this  will  be  a  great  and  glorious  heaven  in 
;tseK  ;  for  it  will  be  a  soul  brought  into  harmony  with  itself,  and  with  its  God  and 
Saviour.     2.  Another  promise  assures  us  of  the  end  of  sorrow.    End  of  sorrow  ? 
>  ou  may  say.    Can  that  be  ?     Life  begins  with  a  cry  and  ends  with  a  sigh,  and 
suffering  is  sown  like  seed  from  cradle  to  grave.    Can  sorrow  have  an  end  ?     It 
seems  incredible  to  the  reason  but  not  to  faith,  and  it  is  to  faith  that  these  promises 
are  made.      Oh  1  what  a  gathering  shall  be  there,  when  brother  shall  meet  sister ; 
husband,  wife  ;  parents,  their  children.     They  will  dwell  together  in  love  ;  jealousy 
iiud  envy  will  be  alike  unknown.     Selfishness  will  not  disturb  the  common  interest 
by  seeking  its  own.     Hohness  will  produce  peace,  and  peace  will  fill  every  breast 
with  unutterable  joy.    3.  Knowledge.    II.  The  conditions  upon  which  the  inheri- 
tance is  secured.     "  By  faith  and  patience."    By  faith.     This  is  the  key  which 
opens  the  door  of  salvation  to  every  one  of  us.     "  Without  faith  it  is  impossible  to 
please  God."     We  begin  to  live  when  we  begin  to  believe.     The  first  act  of  faith  ia 
like  the  first  throb  of  the  heart,  or  the  first  heaving  of  the  lungs ;  it  shows  that 
there  is  life.     But  if  faith  unlock  the  door  of  salvation,  it  is  not  to  be  thrown  away 
when  once  the  door  is  opened.    It  is  not  merely  a  key  ;  it  is  a  principle  which  must 
abide  with  us  for  ever.    You  may  have  sharp  lessons  given  to  you  in  Providence — 
lessons  that  may  make  you  speak  sorrowfully  of  the  vanity  of  all  things  here.    But 
you  will  still  be  unweaued  from  the  world,  unless  your  faith  attach  itself  to,  higher 
powers,  and  surreuder  itself  to  more  pure  and  enduring  fascinations.    There  are 
times  when  the  invisible  seems  nearest  to  us ;  when  earthly  interests  sink  back  and 
we  feel  as  if  we  dwelt  amid  the  light  of  eternal  things.     Faith  gets  a  view  of  the 
hills  from  whence  cometh  all  her  help.     She  sees  the  redeemed  walking  in  the 
heavenly  city,  and  then  she  can  bear  all  things  and  endure  all  things.     But  faith 
must  have  as  her  companion  patience.     This  we  must  have,  for  as  yet  the  blessing 
tarries.    But  if  we  have  faith,  we  can  well  afford  to  have  patience;  for  the  end  on 
which  our  heart  is  set  is  sure.      How  patient  the  mariner  can  be  amid  storm  and 
calm,  if  he  knows  that  he  will  reach  the  haven  at  last  1      How  patient  the  sufferer 
on  his  sick-bed,  if  he  knows  that  recovery  will  come  at  the  end  of  all  his  pangs  I 
And  the  Christian  has  a  certainty  before  him.      And  if  he  hopes  for  it,  then  doth 
he  with  patience  wait  for  it.    Be  not  slothful  then,  but  followers.     Let  the  devil's 
servants  sleep,  but  sleep  not,  ye  sons  of  Godl     (E.  Mellor,  D.D.)        Following 
the   holy  dead  : — I.    They   have   beached   a  position  worth  stboogling  after. 
They   "  inherit   the    promises."      1.   A  priceless  possession.      2.   A  permanent 
possession.    II.  They  have  reached  their  position  by  means  available  to  all. 
1.  Faith.     2.  Patience.    3.  Diligence.     {Homilist.)         The  holy  dead: — I.  They 
have  reached    a    very  elevated   position.     1.    Vast  possessions.      2.    Sublime 
fellows-hips.      3.   Perfect   enjoyments.      4.    Celestial    royalties.      II.   They  have 
reached  an  elevated  position   through   a  certain  course  of  spirituaIj  conduct. 
1.  Faith — in  Christ  as  the  All-wise,  All-loving,  Almighty  Saviour,     2.  Patience 
— implying  (1)    Sensibility  ;    (2)    Suffering  ;    (3)   Waiting.      III.    The  course  of 
spiritual  conduct  by  which  they  reached  their  exalted  position  is  binding  on  all 
suRvn'ORS.     1.   We  must  imitate  them.     2.    With  earnestness.      (Ibid.)        The 
footsteps   of  the   beatified  : — I.   The   inheritance.      1.  The   vision   of   God.      2. 
Assimilation  to  God.     3.  To  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God.    4.  To  dwell  for 
ever  with  God.    II.  The  means  by  which  the  esheritancb  is  reached.     1.  The 
way   of  faith.      2.  The  way  of  patience.      (1)  In  the  service  of   God.      (2)  In 
suffering  affliction.      (3)  Patience  is  called  for,  from  the  delay  of  the  anticipated 
rest    and    reward.     3.   The    way    of    diligence.      IIL    The   motives    by    which 
IMITATION    op    the    EXAMPLE    LEFT    US    IS    ENFORCED.      1.   The    glory   of    their 
inheritance.     2.  The  triumphant  issue  of  their  conflict.      3.  The  present  peace 
and  happiness  realised.     (P.  Morrison.)         2'lie  path  to  heaven: — I.  We  are  not 
TO  be  slothful,    a  man  needs  much  spiritual  discrimination  in  deciding  what  ia 


CHAP.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  607 


sloth,  for  men's  physical  powers  are  so  different,  their  mental  powers  also  are  so 
different,  their  temperaments  are  so  different,  their  dispositions  are  so  different, 
their  habits  and  their  circumstances.  Some,  for  instance,  are  all  activity,  arising 
from  physical  causes  :  they  cannot  be  quiet.  Some  need  to  be  urged  to  everything 
in  the  path  of  duty,  they  are  bo  tardy.  Some,  again,  bum  with  eeal,  and  so  work 
far  beyond  their  strength.  Others,  with  much  physical  power,  can  scarcely  be 
goaded  op  to  their  strength,  they  lack  energy  so  much.  Again,  some  who  are 
capable  of  very  much,  do  very  little,  either  for  their  own  souls,  or  in  the  ways  of 
God ;  and  others,  with  very  little  strength,  do  very  much,  they  are  altogether  so 
earnest  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord.  The  great  outward  characteristics  of  a  healthy 
Christifin  are  diligence  and  progress,  and  spiritual  sloth  may  be  said  to  be  that  in 
us  which  we  allow  to  oppose  these  characteristics ;  which  we  consciously  allow  to 
work  within  us  so  as  to  oppose  onr  diligence  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord  and  our 
progress  in  godliness.  Now,  this  spiritual  sloth  shows  itself  in  a  great  variety  of 
ways,  which  it  would  be  impossible  to  particularise  with  anything  like  minuteness. 
I  can  only  bring  before  you  some  broad  features.  For  instance,  it  will  show  itself 
in  coldness  and  formality  in  religion.  Sloth,  again,  will  show  itself  in  making  no 
effort  to  avert  occasions  which,  as  we  think,  justify  the  omission  of  known  duties. 
Let  us  put  this  familiarly.  A  man  is  hurried  by  some  pressure  of  business;  he  has 
to  start,  perhaps,  by  a  very  early  train.  Listead  of  making  arrangements  that  his 
own  soul  be  not  damaged,  family  or  private  prayer  is  postponed,  because  time  is  so 
short.  There  is  no  self-denial  in  rising  earlier,  and  adapting  time  to  the  welfare 
of  the  soul ;  but  the  care  of  the  soul  is  postponed  to  the  urgency  of  temporal 
circumstances.  Again,  a  man  must  be  said  to  be  guilty  of  spiritual  sloth  when  he 
neglects  what  he  conscientiously  believes  to  be  due  time  for  private  prayer  and  for 
the  maintenance  of  spirituality  in  his  own  soul — when  he  neglects  the  study  of  the 
Word  of  God,  with  an  express  intention  to  bring  its  principles  to  bear  upon  his 
daily  life.  Now,  a  man  may  be  extremely  slothful  in  the  study  of  the  Word  of  God, 
who  nevertheless  may  be  intently  occupied  in  the  perusal  of  it  from  morning  till 
night.  A  man  may  be  slothful  with  regard  to  the  improvement  of  his  own  soul, 
not  reading  for  that  pui^ose,  but  reading,  perhaps,  with  a  different  object  altogether : 
to  get  a  grasp  on  a  certain  subject  or  on  a  particular  doctrine.  But  we  are  bound 
to  study  the  Word  of  God  in  order  that  a  certain  effect  may  be  produced  in  our  own 
souls,  the  result  of  which  may  be  seen  in  our  daily  walk  and  conversation.  Again, 
too,  a  man  may  be  said  to  be  a  sluggard  when  he  is  unwilling  to  use  those  oppor- 
tunities by  which  he  might  escape  temptation,  when  he  runs  needlessly  in  the  way 
of  temptation.  Or  again,  when  the  man  sinks  down  lazily  under  difficulties, 
instead  of  endeavouring  by  trust  in  God  to  overcome  them.  Or  again,  when,  in 
conflict  about  duty,  the  scale  is  turned  on  the  side  of  the  flesh  and  unbelief.  I 
may  say  again,  too,  that  the  love  of  personal  ease,  and  the  love  of  money,  and  the 
love  of  pleasure  will  continually  make  a  man  slothful  in  spiritual  matters.  IL  Let 
OB  turn  now  to  what  wb  ought  to  be — "  followers  of  them  who  through  faith 
and  patience  inherit  the  promises."  These  are  no  doubt  the  patriarchs.  By 
"  inheriting  the  promises "  he  means  a  real  participation  of  the  grace  and 
blessedness  which  is  promised,  in  the  gift  of  Christ,  with  eternal  glory.  These 
they  entered  upon  as  fully  as  any  who  have  died  since  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has 
come  in  the  flesh.  Now,  we  are  to  be  "  followers  of  them."  We  are  to  be 
"followers  of  them"  as  they  clung  to  the  promise  of  the  Word  of  God  and 
obeyed  it;  we  are  to  be  "followers  of  them"  as  they  followed  Christ:  not 
otherwise.  Christ  is  alone  our  perfect  Exarople ;  but  these  patriarchs  whom  we 
are  taught  to  follow  so  far  as  faith  and  patience  were  in  real  exercise,  stand 
out,  in  many  points  of  their  character,  as  beacons  which  warn  us  of  the  rocks 
upon  which  we  ourselves  may  spUt.  But  we  are  to  be  followers  of  them  also  in 
their  principles,  and  especially  in  respect  to  the  principles  which  are  laid  down 
in  this  verse — their  "faith  and  patience."  The  faith  which  saves  the  soul  as 
well  as  conducts  a  man  to  the  inheritance,  is  not  that  which  has  respect  merely 
to  the  troth  of  God  in  general,  but  that  which  respects  Christ  in  particular.  The 
word  which  is  translated  "patience,"  perhaps,  means  rather  longsuffering ;  the 
same  idea  which  is  conveyed  in  "  the  longsuffering  of  God,"  the  longsuffering  of 
God  with  provoking  sinners.  So  here;  the  "patience"  used  in  the  text  means 
rather  that  which  is  exercised  under  provocations ;  without  having  our  desire  to 
do  good  entirely  turned  aside  by  the  hindrances  we  encounter,  by  the  outward 
annoyances  to  which  we  are  exposed,  or  by  the  inward  corruptions  which  we 
feel  working  vrithin,  but  patiently  enduring  to  the  end.     Well,  we  shall  never 


^08  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  ?«. 

patiently  endure  to  the  end  if  our  hearts  are  not  warmed  with  love  to  the  person 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  No  abstract  system  of  truth  will  ever  carry  a  man 
through  such  circumstances  as  these.  (J.  W.  Reeve,  M.A.)  The  young  called  to 
follow  departed  saints : — I.  Let  us  attend  to  the  view  which  the  apostle  gives  of  the 
HAPPINESS  OP  DEPABTED  SAINTS.  I.  The  apostle  intimates  his  persuasion  that  they 
were  existing  in  a  state  of  happiness.  The  statement  of  the  text  is  directly 
opposite  to  the  notion  that  the  soul  sleeps  with  the  body  from  death  till  the  resur- 
rection. 2.  This  representation  intimates  that  the  happiness  of  heaven  has  been 
revealed  in  various  promises,  and  that  these  promises  have  been  fulfilled  to  departed 
saints.  Who  can  conceive  the  extent  of  their  knowledge,  the  sweetness  of  their 
pleasures,  the  brightness  of  their  glory,  the  ardour  of  their  love,  and  the  sublimity 
of  their  praise  ?  Not  a  wish  shall  be  left  ungratified,  and  not  a  hope  deferred.  3. 
The  language  of  the  text  intimates  that  this  felicity  belongs  to  them  as  the  children 
of  God.  Among  men,  the  inheritance  is  not  possessed  by  the  child  till  the 
death  of  the  father,  but  the  life  of  our  heavenly  Father  is  the  source  and  the 
security  of  this  happiness ;  and  in  the  world  of  immortality  God  shall  be  all  in  all, 
4.  The  expression  intimates  that  this  felicity  is  entirely  of  grace.  5.  They 
possess  this  felicity  for  ever.  Their  happiness  is  sure  in  itself  and  in  their 
persuasion.     They  feel  that  they  are  safe  for  eternity.     II.  Let  us  now  consider 

THE    MEANS   BY   WHICH    DEPARTED    SAINTS     ATTAINED     THIS     HAPPINESS.        1.    The    SaintS 

may  be  said  to  have  attained  this  felicity  by  faith,  because  by  it  they  believed  the 

various  assurances  of  the  gospel  respecting  the  reality  and  the  blessedness  of  this 

state.     It  is  by  faith,  also,  that  the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  received,  which 

entitles  us  to  the  possession  of  heaven.     Faith  also  animates  good  men  to  the 

cultivation  of  those  graces  and  to  the  performance  of  those  actions  which  prepare 

for  glory.     I  only  add  on  this  topic,  that  it  is  through  faith  that  the  saints  are 

kept   by  Divine  power  to   salvation.     2.  But  these  saints  attained  this  felicity 

through  patience.  It  was  by  this  principle  that  they  endured  the  afflictions  through 

which  they  had  to  pass  in  their  way  to  the  kingdom.     Patience  also  kept  them 

waiting  for  this  felicity  till  the  period  which  God  had  fixed  for  their  admission  to 

heaven.     III.   I  shall  now  recommend,  by  a  few  arguments,   the  imitation  op 

DEPAKTED  SAINTS.      1.  Cousidcr  that  it  is  the  command  of  God  that  you  should 

follow  them  (James  v.  10 ;  Heb.  xii.  1,  2).    2.  Consider,  also,  that  their  excellences 

were  exhibited  before  you  to  awaken  in  your  hearts  admiration  of  holiness  and  to 

excite  you  to  labour  to  resemble  them.     If  you  act  differently  from  these  examples, 

your  guilt  wUl  be  aggravated  by  their  being  set  before  you.     3.  Consider,  too,  that 

this  is  the  only  way  by  which  you  can  be  joined  with  them  in  their  happiness. 

Exhortations :  1.  Let  us  lament  that  this  admirable  precept  has  been  so  much 

abused.      Under  pretence   of   obedience   to  this  precept,  invocation  of  departed 

saints  has  been  practised — the   house   of   silence   has  been   ransacked,  and_  the 

bones  of   martyrs  and  confessors  brought  out  and  placed   on  shrines  as  objects 

of  worship,  or  used  for  the  performance  of   miraculous  cures.      2.  Let  us  leave 

such  an  example  of  faith  and  patience,  that  it  may  be  the  duty  of  the  Church 

to  make  us  the   objects   of   remembrance   and   imitation.     3.    Let   this   felicity 

which  you  have  been  contemplating  cherish   heavenly-mindedness  in  you.      Say 

not  of  this  world,  "  This  is  my  home."      4.  I  would  exhort  the  unconverted   to 

seek  a  title  to  this  happiness,  and  preparation  for  it.     (H.  Belfraije.)        There  is 

light  beyond: — "When  in  Madeira,"  writes  a  traveller,  "I  set  off  one  morning 

to  reach  the  summit  of  a  mountain,  to  gaze  upon  the  distant  scene  and  enjoy 

the  balmy  air.    I  had  a  guide  with  me,  and  we  had  with  difficulty  ascended  some 

two  thousand  feet,  when  a  thick  mist  was  seen  descending  upon  us,  quite  obscuring 

the  whole  face  of  the  heavens.    I  thought  I  had  no  hope  left  but  at  once  to  retrace 

our  steps  or  be  lost ;  but  as  the  cloud  came  nearer,  and  darkness  oversha'lowed  us, 

my  guide  ran  on  before  me,  penetrating  the  mist,  and  calling  to  me,  ever  and  anon, 

saying :  •  Press  on,  master — press  on — there's  light  beyond  I '      I  did  press  on.     In 

a  few  minutes  the  mist  was  passed,  and  I  gazed  upon  a  scene  of  transcendent 

beauty.     All  was  light  and  cloudless  above,  and  beneath  was  the  almost  level  mist, 

concealing  the  world  below  me,  and  glistening  in  the  rays  of  the  sun  like  a  field  of 

untrodden  snow.  There  was  nothing  at  that  moment  between  me  and  the  heavens." 

Oh,  ye  over  whom  the  clouds  are  gathering,  or  who  have  sat  beneath  the  shadows, 

be  not  dismayed  if  they  rise  before  you  I     Press  on — there  is  light  beyond.     {A.  J, 

Symington.)        True  and  false  imitation : — We  are  to  imitate  the  apostles  ;  but  the 

imitation  is  to  be,  not  in  doing  what  they  did,  but  in  doing,  like  them,   that 

which  is  fit  in  every  case.    A  doctor  is  called  to  prescribe  for  a  fever,  and  he  gives 


OHAT.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  509- 

a  cooling  draught.  His  young  Esculapius,  coming  after  him,  is  called  to  prescribe 
for  congestive  chills.  He  says,  "  My  teacher  gave  a  cooling  draught,  and  I  will 
give  a  cooling  draught."  He  imitates  his  teacher  exactly,  like  a  fool.  And 
there  is  no  greater  fool  than  a  man  who  imitates  just  what  the  apostles  did, 
instead  of  imitating  the  principle  on  which  they  did  it.  It  is  the  inside  which 
is  to  be  followed,  and  not  the  outside.  One  of  my  boys  comes  in  crying,  and 
says,  "Father,  I  ran  against  a  lamp-post  and  bruised  my  face."  I  say,  "My 
son,  do  not  run  against  lamp-posts."  The  next  day  he  comes  in  again  with 
another  bruise  on  his  face,  and  says,  "  I  did  not  run  against  a  lamp-post ;  I  ran 
against  a  tree."  "Well,"  I  say,  "do  not  run  against  lamp-posts  nor  trees." 
The  next  day  he  comes  in,  having  had  another  whack,  and  says,  "  I  did  not 
run  against  a  lamp-post  nor  a  tree ;  I  ran  against  an  iron  railing."  He  had 
obeyed  me,  and  yet  he  was  hurt.  But  the  spirit  of  my  order  was  that  he  should 
not  run  against  anything  that  would  hurt  him.  (JEf .  W.  Beecher.)  Good  example  : — 
As  they  who  deck  themselves  have  the  looking-glass  before  their  eyes ;  so  they 
who  go  about  any  worthy  thing  must  have  the  example  of  worthy  men  in  mind, 
and  do  it  in  that  manner  that  others  may  not  scorn  to  make  them  their  example. 
{Cawdray.)  Persistency  needed  : — When  Hannibal  had  defeated  the  Romans 
upon  the  plains  of  Italy,  nothing  was  wanted  but  a  determined  spirit  of  perse- 
verance to  give  him  the  possession  of  Bome  itself.  But,  flushed  with  their 
victory,  the  Carthaginians  spent  the  time  in  rioting  on  the  spoils  which  should 
have  been  employed  in  pushing  their  conquests.  In  the  meantime  the  Romans 
collected  their  whole  strength,  and  soon  proved  more  than  a  match  for  their 
terrible  invaders.  Our  foe  is  wily  and  powerful,  and  we  can  only  maintain  our 
ground  against  him  by  pushing  forward  our  conquests.  (G.  Peck,  D.D.)  Example 
an  educator : — But  what  are  the  great  educators  of  the  world — those  who  insensibly 
mould  us,  or  to  which  we  resort  for  influence  upon  our  own  or  others'  Uves  ?  Are 
they  moral  maxims,  wise  sayings,  proverbs,  and  "  saws "  ?  Is  it  not  rather 
example  ?  These  axioma  and  maxims,  proverbs  and  precepts,  are  bat  the  instru- 
ments by  which  we  clench  the  truths  which  example  has  driven  into  the  mind. 
They  are  the  labels  which  we  affix  to  the  illustrated  lessons — the  pictures  and 
the  models.  At  aU  events,  we  none  of  us  begin  to  live  by  principles.  These 
may  come  afterwards  to  be  oar  sufficient  instructors,  but  I  much  doubt  whether 
one  in  a  hundred  men  has  ever  adopted  a  principle  of  life  until  some  signal 
example  of  it  has  convinced  him  of  its  worth.    (G.  W.  Conder.) 

Ver.  14.  Blessing  I  vrlll  bless  thee. — God'$  abundant  blessing : — The  blessing  is 
amplified  by  doubling  the  phrase,  thus,  '•  blessing  I  will  bless."  1.  The  certainty  of 
a  thing  (Exod.  iii.  7).  2.  Diligence  and  pains  in  a  thing.  3.  Celerity  and  speed  in 
doing  a  thing :  as  where  David  saith,  "  It  is  better  that  escaping  I  Ediould  escape" 
(1  Sam.  xxvii.  1).  4.  Abundance  in  giving  a  thing.*  5.  Success  in  doing  a  thing, 
or  a  thorough  doing  of  it,  or  doing  it  to  purpose :  as  where  Saul  saith  to  David, 
"  Doing  thou  shalt  do,  and  prevailing  thou  shalt  prevail  "  (1  Sam.  xxvi.  25).  6. 
Finishing  and  perfecting  a  thing :  as  where  Solomon  saith  to  God,  "  Building  I  have 
built  Thee  an  house  "  (1  Kings  viii.  13).  His  meaning  is,  that  he  had  perfectly 
finished  it.  7.  A  wonderful  increase  of  a  thing,  as  in  this  phrase,  "  Multiplying  I 
will  multiply."  8.  Long  continuance  as,  '•Waiting,  I  have  waited"  (Psa.  xl.  1),  that 
is,  I  have  long  waited.  This  phrase,  "  Blessing  I  will  bless,"  gives  us  to  understand 
that  blessings  appertaining  to  Abraham  and  to  his  seed  are  abundant  blessings. 
God  is  no  way  scanty  to  the  faithful.  God  proportioneth  His  blessings  according 
to  His  own  greatness.  He  setteth  forth  His  magnificence  in  blessing  children  of  men. 
Who  would  not  depend  upon  such  a  Lord  for  blessing?  How  ought  we  to  enlarge 
oar  hearts,  and  open  our  mouths  in  blessing  God  for  so  blessing  as  1    (W.  Gouge.) 

Ver.  15.  After  he  had  patiently  endured,  he  obtained. — Endurance  and 
reward : — I.  Endurance.  1.  Trials.  2.  The  frailties  of  human  nature.  3.  The 
Christian  contest.  U.  Patibmce.  1.  Gives  calmness.  2.  Bestows  strength.  3. 
Takes  away  the  bitterness  of  the  endurance.  III.  Rewabd.  Not  anything  actually 
tangible — a  promise.  Not  the  thing  itself,  but  the  shadow  of  the  thing.  This  is 
to  try  oar  faith.  Bat  is  not  the  promise  reaUy  as  sure  as  the  reality  ?  It  was  to 
Abraham.  For  there  is  no  uncertainty  with  God.  (Homilist.)  Patience  and  the 
promises : — Good  old  Spurstow  says  that  some  of  the  promises  are  like  the  almond 
tree — they  blossom  hastily  in  the  very  earliest  spring  ;  but,  saith  he,  there  are  others 
that  resemble  the  mulberry — they  are  very  slow  in  putting  forth  their  leaves.  Then 


610  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

what  is  a  man  to  do,  if  he  has  a  mulberry  tree  promise  which  is  late  in  blossoming  ? 
Why,  he  is  to  wait  tiU  it  does.  If  the  vision  tarry,  wait  for  it  till  it  come,  and 
the  appointed  time  shall  surely  bring  it.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Time  necessary 
for  development: — 0  impatient  ones!  Did  the  leaves  say  nothing  to  you  as 
they  murmured  when  you  came  hither  to-day?  They  were  not  created  this 
spring,  but  months  ago ;  and  the  summer,  just  begun,  will  fashion  others  for 
another  year.  At  the  bottom  of  every  leaf-stem  is  a  cradle,  and  in  it  is  an 
infant  germ ;  and  the  winds  will  rock  it,  and  the  birds  will  sing  to  it  aU  summer 
long ;  and  next  season  it  will  unfold.  So  God  is  working  for  you,  and  carrying 
forward  to  the  perfect  development  all  the  processes  of  your  lives.  (H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Patience: — Patience  is  but  lying  to,  and  riding  out  the  gale.  {Ibid.) 
Pray  and  stay : — Pray  and  stay  are  two  blessed  monosyllables.  {J.  Donne.) 
Patience: — The  husbandman  is  fain  to  have  much  patience,  before  he  have  his 
com  into  the  bam :  with  great  toil  he  ploughs  his  ground,  harrows  it,  casts  his  seed 
into  the  earth ;  he  knows  not  whether  he  shall  see  it  any  more,  but  rests  patiently 
in  God's  providence.  The  merchant  is  fain  to  have  much  patience,  before  he  can 
mount  up  to  any  wealth  :  many  a  storm  he  endures  on  the  sea,  often  in  danger  of 
his  life.  The  clothier  must  have  much  patience,  in  buying  of  his  wool,  in  making 
of  it  out,  in  selling  of  his  cloth,  he  is  fain  to  stand  to  many  casualties ;  yet  hope  of 
a  convenient  gain  in  the  end,  makes  him  with  cheerfulness  to  pass  through  them  all. 
They  do  it  for  earthly  things,  that  are  here  to-day  and  gone  to-morrow ;  and  shall 
not  we  be  patient  for  heavenly  treasures,  for  a  kingdom  that  cannot  be  shaken,  but 
is  eternal  in  the  heavens  ?  Be  patient  a  whUe :  pass  through  poverty,  sickness, 
malevolent  tongues,  and  all  other  calamities  in  this  life,  that  we  may  at  length 
be  taken  up  into  that  place,  where  we  shall  have  need  of  patience  no  more ;  for  all 
tears  shall  be  wiped  away  from  our  eyes.    {W.  Jones,  D.D. ) 

Ver.  16.  An  oath  .  .  .  the  end  of  all  strife. — The  lawfulness  and  obligation  of 
oaths  : — I.  Fob  the  natcbe  of  an  oath,  and  the  kinds  op  it.  An  oath  is  an  invoca- 
tion of  God,  or  an  appeal  to  Him  as  a  witness  of  the  truth  of  what  we  say.  So  that 
an  oath  is  a  sacred  thing,  as  being  an  act  of  religion  and  an  invocation  of  the  name 
of  God ;  and  this,  whether  the  name  of  God  be  expressly  mentioned  in  it  or  not. 
There  are  two  sorts  of  oaths,  assertory  and  promissory.  An  assertory  oath  is  when 
a  man  affirms  or  denies,  upon  oath,  a  matter  of  fact,  past  or  present :  when  he 
swears  that  a  thing  was,  or  is  so,  or  not  so.  A  promissory  oath  is  a  promise  con- 
firmed by  an  oath,  which  always  respects  something  that  is  future ;  and  if  the 
promise  be  made  directly  and  immediately  to  God,  then  it  is  called  a  vow ;  if  to 
men,  an  oath.    II.  The  great  use  and  even  necessity  of  oaths,  in  uany  cases, 

WHICH    IS    so    GREAT,   THAT    HUMAN    SOCIETY    CAN   VERY   HARDLY,   IP    AT    ALL,   SUBSIST 

LONG  WITHOUT  THEM.  Government  would  many  times  be  very  insecure,  and  for  the 
faithful  discharge  of  offices  of  great  trust,  in  which  the  welfare  of  the  public  is 
nearly  concerned,  it  is  not  possible  to  fiud  any  security  equal  to  that  of  an  oath ; 
because  the  obligation  of  that  reacheth  to  the  most  hidden  practices  of  men,  and 
takes  hold  of  them,  in  many  cases,  where  the  penalty  of  no  human  law  can  have 
any  awe  or  force  upon  them  ;  and  especially  it  is  the  "  best  means  of  ending  con- 
troversies." And  where  men's  estates  or  lives  are  concerned,  no  evidence,  but  what 
is  assured  by  an  oath,  will  be  thought  sufficient  to  decide  the  matter,  so  as  to  give 
full  and  general  satisfaction  to  mankind.  III.  The  lawfulness  of  oaths,  where 
THEY  ARE  NECESSARY.  1.  I  shall  provc  the  lawfulness  of  oaths  from  the  authority  of 
this  text,  and  the  reasons  plainly  contained,  or  strongly  implied  in  it. — Because  the 
apostle  doth  not  only  speak  of  the  use  of  oaths  among  men,  without  any  manner  of 
reproof,  but  as  a  commendable  custom,  and  in  many  cases  necessary  for  the 
confirmation  of  doubtful  matters,  and  in  order  to  the  final  decision  of  controversies 
and  differences  among  men.  2.  The  insufficiency  of  the  grounds  of  the  contrary 
opinion,  whether  from  reason  or  from  Scripture.  (1)  From  reason.  They  say  the 
necessity  of  an  oath  is  occasioned  by  the  want  of  fidelity  among  men ;  and  that 
every  man  ought  to  demean  himself  with  that  integrity  as  may  give  credit  to  his 
word  ;  and  then  oaths  wUl  be  needless.  This  pretence  will  be  fully  answered,  if  we 
consider  these  two  things,  (a)  That  in  matters  of  great  importance,  no  other 
obligation  besides  that  of  an  oath  hath  been  thought  sufficient  amongst  the  best 
and  wisest  of  men,  to  assert  their  fideUty  to  one  another.  (6)  This  reason,  which 
is  alleged  against  oaths  among  men,  is  much  stronger  against  God's  confirming  His 
promises  to  us  by  an  oath.  For  He,  who  is  truth  itself,  is  surely  of  all  other  most 
to  be  credited  upon  His  bare  word,  and  His  oath  needless  to  give  confiimation  to  it ; 


CHAP,  VI.]  HEBREWS.  611 

and  yet  He  oondes^cends  to  add  His  oath  to  His  word ;  and  therefore  that  reason  is 
evidently  of  no  force.     (2)  From  Scripture.     Our  Saviour  seems  altogether  to  forbiil 
swearing  in  any  case  (Matt.  v.  33,  34).   (a)  That  several  circumstances  of  these  words 
of  our  Saviour  do  manifestly  show  that  they  ought  to  be  interpreted  in  a  limited  sense, 
as  only  forbidding  swearing  in  common  conversation  ;  needless  and  heedless  oaths, 
and  in  geueral  all  voluntary  swearing,  unless  upon  some  weighty  cause,  in  which  the 
glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  the  souls  of  men  is  concerned.    For  that  in  such  cases 
a  voluntary  oath  may  be  lawful,  I  am  induced  to  believe  from  the  example  of  St. 
Paul,  who  useth  it  more  than  once  upon  such  occasions,   (b)  It  is  very  consideraH'! 
to  the  explaining  of  this  prohibition,  that  there  are  like  general  expressions  in  other 
Jewish  authors  concerning  this  very  matter,  which  yet  must  of  necessity  be  thu  • 
limited  : — Maimonides,  from  the  ancient  rabbies,  gives  this  rule,  that  "  it  is  best 
not  to  swear  at  all"  :  and  Philo  useth   almost  the  same  words.    And  Eabbi 
Jonathan  comes  very  near  our  Saviour's  expression  when  he  says,  *'  The  just  man 
will  not  swear  at  all  ;  not  so  much  as  by  the  common  names  of  God,  nor  by 
His  attributes,  nor  by  His  works,  as  by  heaven,  or  the  angels,  or  by  the  law."  Now 
it  is  not  imaginable  that  these  learned  Jews  should  condemn  oaths  in  all  cases, 
when  the  law  of  Moses  did  in  many  cases  expressly  require  them.      And  therefore 
they  are  to  be  understood  of  voluntary  oaths  in  ordinary  conversation,     (c)  This 
prohibition  of  our  Saviour's  cannot  be  understood  to  forbid  all  oaths,  without  a 
plain  contradiction  to  the  undoubted  practice  of  the  primitive  Christians  and  of 
the  apostles,  and  even  of  our  Lord  Himself.     Origen  and  TertuUian  tell  us  that 
the  Christians  refused  to  swear  by  the  emperor's  geuius  ;  not  because  it  was  an 
oath,  but  because  they  thought  it  to  be  idolatrous.     But  the  same  TertuUian  says 
that  the   Christians  were  willing  to   swear  "  by  the  health  and  safety  of    the 
emperor."    Athanasius  being  accused  to  Constantius,  purged  himself  by  oath,  and 
desired  that  Lis  accuser  might  be  put  to  his  oath, "  by  calling  the  truth  to  witness : 
by  which  form,"  says  he,  "  we  Christians  are  wont  to  swear."    But,  which  is  morr' 
than  this,  St.  Paul,  upon  weighty  occasions,  does  several  times  in  his  epistle  call 
God  to  witness  for  the  truth  of  what  he  says ;  which  is  the  very  formfllity  of  an 
oath  (Eom.  i.  9  ;  2  Cor.  i.  18,  23  ;  Gal.  i.  20  ;  Phil.  i.  8 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  5).    These  are 
all  unquestionable  oaths ;   which  we  cannot  imagine  St.  Paul  would  have  used  had 
they  been  directly  contrary  to  our  Saviour's  law.    And  whereas  some  defend  this 
upon  account  of  his   extraordinary  inspiration,  I  cannot  possibly  see  how  this 
mends  the  matter.    For  certainly  it  is  very  inconvenient  to  say  that  they  who 
were  to  teach  the  precepts  of  Christ  to  others,  did  themselves  break  them  by  in- 
spiratfon.    But  I  go  yet  farther,  and  shall  urge  an  example  beyond  all  exception. 
Our  Saviour  Himself  (who  surely  would  not  be  the  first  example  of  breaking  His 
own  laws)  did  not  refuse  to  answer  upon  oath,  being  called  thereto  at  His  trial.    So 
we  find  Matt.  xxvi.  CO.     IV.  The  sacked  obligation  of  an  oath  :  because  it  is  a 

SOLEMN  appeal  TO    GoD  AS  A   WITNESS  OF  THE  TRUTH  OF  WHAT  WE  SAT  ".    tO  God,  I  Say, 

from  whose  piercing  and  all-seeing  eye,  from  whose  perfect  knowledge,  nothing  is 
or  can  be  hid ;  so  that  there  is  not  a  thought  in  our  heart  but  He  sees  it,  nor  a 
word  in  our  tongue,  but  He  discerns  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  it.  Whenever  we 
swear,  we  appeal  to  His  knowledge,  and  refer  ourselves  to  His  just  judgment,  who 
is  the  powerful  patron  and  protector  of  right,  and  the  almighty  judge  and  avenger  of 
all  falsehood  and  unrighteousness.  So  that  it  is  not  possible  for  men  to  lay  a  more 
sacred  and  solemn  obligation  upon  their  consciences  than  by  the  reUgion  of  an  oath. 
(Ahp.  Tillotsun.) 

Vers.  17-20.  Heirs  of  promise. — Heirs  of  promise : — I.  Consider  wherein  the 

PORTION    OF   BELIEVEKS    CONSISTS:     THEY   ARB    "HEIRS   OF    PROMISE."        ThoUgh    they 

have  little  in  possession,  they  have  much  in  prospect ;  if  not  rich  in  enjoyment, 
they  are  rich  in  faith  and  hope.  Amongst  men,  promises  are  often  of  little  worth ; 
but  all  the  promises  of  God  are  yea  and  amen  in  Christ  Jesus,  unto  the  glory  of  God 
by  us.  1.  With  regard  to  their  subject  matter,  they  include  all  things  pertaining 
both  to  hfe  and  godliness  ;  ensuring  support  in  this  world,  and  glory  in  the  world 
to  come.  2.  There  are  promises  made  to  the  church  in  general,  and  others  to 
individual  believers  ;  and  both  are  the  portion  of  the  saints.  Of  the  former  it  is 
said,  "  God  is  in  the  midst  of  her,  she  sh^ll  not  be  moved ;  God  shall  help  her,  and 
that  right  early."  Promises  also  are  made  to  individuals,  for  their  comfort  and 
encouragement,  and  which  are  applicable  to  aU  the  saints.  "  He  hath  said,  I  will 
never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee."  "My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee  ;  My  strength  is 
made  perfect  in  weakness."    "  Fear  not,  for  I  am  with  thee;  be  not  dismayed,  for  I 


5H  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  m 

am  thy  God."  "  As  thy  day  is,  so  shall  thy  strength  be.  •*  3.  The  promises  of  God  ara 
either  absolute  or  conditional.  Some  of  the  promises  are  absolute,  not  suspended 
on  any  act  or  endeavour  of  ours,  or  on  any  previous  qualification ;  and  such  are  all 
those  which  relate  to  the  first  bestovrment  of  grace.  "For  who  make th  thee  ta 
di£fer ;  and  what  hast  thou  that  thou  hast  not  received  ?  It  is  not  of  him  that 
mlleth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth ;  but  of  God  that  showeth  mercy."  But  there  are 
promises  conditional  to  grace  received,  and  which  are  made  only  to  those  wha 
believe.  "  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but  giveth  grace  to  the  humble.  If  any  of  you 
lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,  who  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and  upbraideth 
not ;  and  it  shall  be  given  him. "  4.  The  Divine  promises  have  various  degrees  of 
accomplishment.  Some  have  already  been  fulfilled,  either  in  whole  or  in  part ;  as 
in  the  case  with  those  relating  to  the  coming  of  Christ,  the  establishment  of  Hia 
kingdom,  and  the  universal  spread  of  the  gospeL  Some  are  daily  fulfilling,  and 
others  are  yet  to  be  fulfilled.  II.  Who  are  the  "heiks"  of  promise,  and  what 
CHAEACTEB  DO  THEY  BEAB  ?  1.  They  may  be  known  by  their  perception  of  the 
promises  themselves.  They  view  them  not  only  more  distinctly  and  clearly,  but  in 
a  hgbt  very  different  from  that  in  which  other  persons  either  do  or  can  consider 
them.  They  are  represented  as  seeing  them  afar  off,  and  being  persuaded  of  them. 
Thus  they  see  the  suitableness  and  excellency  of  the  promises,  that  they  are  the 
fruit  of  free  and  unmerited  love,  and  are  adapted  to  all  cases  and  circumstances.  As 
David  saw  the  commandments,  so  they  see  the  promises  to  be  exceeding  broad.  2. 
The  heirs  of  promise  may  be  known  by  the  powerful  application  of  the  promises  to 
their  own  hearts.  3.  They  may  be  known  by  the  regard  they  bear  towards  them, 
and  the  desire  they  feel  for  their  accomplishment.  The  promises  contain  all  their 
salvation,  and  all  their  desire  ;  they  meditate  therein  both  day  and  night,  and  view 
them  with  a  satisfaction  similar  to  that  of  a  man  who  looks  over  the  title-deeds  of  an 
estate  which  secures  to  him  the  possession  of  a  large  inheritance.  4.  The  practical 
effects  which  the  promises  produce  in  us  are  another  means  of  showing  who  are 
the  proper  heirs ;  for  "  every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  Him,  purifieth  himself,  even 
as  Christ  is  pure."  Improvement — 1.  If  not  heirs  of  the  promise,  what  are  we  ?  Heirs 
of  the  curse — of  that  curse  which  cuts  off  on  every  side,  and  will  one  day  enter  into 
our  bowels  like  water,  and  like  oil  into  our  bones.  2.  If  heirs  of  the  promises,  we 
are  interested  in  all  the  blessings  contained  in  them,  relating  both  to  this  world  and 
that  which  is  to  come.  If  the  promises  are  ours,  aU  things  are  ours ;  whether  Paul, 
or  ApoUos,  or  Cephas,  or  the  words,  or  life,  or  death,  or  things  present,  or  things 
to  come ;  all  are  ours,  and  we  are  Christ's  and  Christ  is  God's.  3.  If  heirs  of  the 
promises,  we  are  heirs  of  God ;  all  that  He  is  and  has,  that  is  communicable,  is 
made  over  to  us  in  a  way  of  covenanted  mercy.  4.  Being  heirs  of  God,  we  are  also 
joint  heirs  with  Christ  Jesus,  to  whom  the  birth-right  blessing  properly  belongs. 
{B.  Beddome,  M^.)  God's  faithfulness  to  His  promises: — The  Bible  is  a  book  of 
promises,  as  well  as  of  revelations,  or  Divine  statements.  These  promises  are  our 
heritage.  Faith  in  the  promises  makes  the  future  present,  and  the  heirship 
possession.  It  is  thus  "  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for."  Shall  the  promises 
fail  ?  Is  God  unfaithful  ?  Shall  a  Queen  Elizabeth  value  her  promise,  as  when  she 
gave  the  first  vacancy  to  one  unfit  ?  Shall  a  Chatham  have  a  wall  rebuilt,  rather 
than  seem  to  break  a  promise  to  his  son  ?  Shall  a  Napier  refuse  an  invitation  that 
he  may  keep  a  promise  to  a  poor  girl  ?  And  shall  God  refuse  to  honour  drafts 
made  on  His  promises  in  the  name  of  His  Son  ?  Shall  the  promises  fail  ?  Is  there 
inability  or  unwillingness  to  perform?  (John  Gill.)  Tlie  immutability  of  His 
counsel. — God's  counsel  in  relation  to  His  people : — I.  That  their  salvation  from 

BIN  SHALL  BE  A  COMPLETE  AND    PERFECT  SALVATION.       This  is  the  avOWed  dcsigU  of — 

1.  All  His  purposes  (Eph.  i.  4 ;  2  Tim.  i.  9  ;  1  Cor.  i.  2 ;  Heb.  iii.  1 ;  1  Pet.  i.  2 ; 
Rom.  viii.  29  ;  Eph.  ii.  10).  2.  All  His  promises  (Isa.  i.  18 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  31-34 ; 
Ezek.  xi.  19,  20;  2  Cor.  vii.  1 ;  2  Pet.  i.  4;  1  John  i.  9).  3.  The  earthly  mission 
of  His  Son  (Matt.  i.  21 ;  John  i.  29;  Col.  i.  21-22;  Tit.  ii.  11-14;  1  John  i.7; 
Heb.  ix.  26).  4.  The  constant  operations  of  His  Spirit  (Eph.  v.  9  ;  2  Thess.  il  13). 
6.  The  heaven  which  He  has  prepared  for  their  eternal  residence.  Only  the  pure 
in  heart  shall  see  God.     "  Without  holiness,"  &c.    U.  That  theib  complete  and 

PERFECT     SALVATION     FROM     SIN     SHALL     BE    EFFECTED     BY    THEIR    OWN    PERSEVERANCE. 

1.  What  is  the  perseverance  of  the  saints?  (1)  An  increasing  acquaintance  with 
God's  word,  implying  diligent  examination,  thoughtful  investigation,  careful  com- 
parison of  part  with  part,  and  discriminating  deductions  from  the  whole.  (2)  An 
increasing  confidence  in  God's  promises ;  implying  intelligent  trust  in  Him  for 
pardon  of  sin,  sanctification  of  spirit  for  seasonable  strength  in  temptation,  support. 


«HA».  Ti.]  HEBREWS.  618 

in  trouble,  and  victory  in  death.  (3)  An  increasing  conformity  to  the  image  of 
Christ ;  implying  the  embodiment  of  Christianity  in  our  lives,  making  our  practice 
agree  with  our  profession,  yielding  to  Christian  impulses,  cherishing  Christian 
affections,  displaying  Christian  tempers,  speaking  Christian  words,  practising 
Christian  actions.  2.  The  proposition  that  God  secures  the  complete  salvation  of  His 
people  by  their  own  perseverance,  is  confirmed  by — (1)  The  injunctions  of  Scripture. 
(2)  The  nature  of  tiie  case.  Can  you  teach  a  child  to  walk  without  its  constant 
effort  and  perseverance  1     (3)  The  example  of  saints  (Phil.  iii.  13,  14).     III.  That 

THEIB    PEBSEVERAMCE   SHAIJj   BE   SECDBEO   BY   God'b  OWN   BLESSINO.        1.    It   is    God'S 

counsel  that  the  salvation  of  His  people  shall  be  a  complete  and  perfect  salvation. 
2.  It  is  also  God's  counsel  that  this  shall  be  secured  by  their  own  perseverance.  3. 
It  is  also  God's  counsel  that  their  perseverance  shall  be  secured  by  His  own  blessing. 
{B.  P/eece.)  Conflrmed  it  by  an  oath. — The  oath  of  God : — The  Pivine  oath  is  one  of 
the  mysteries  of  revelation.  To  one  duly  considering  the  majesty  of  God,  and  His 
relation  to  His  creatures,  nothing  can  be  well  more  awful  than  His  swearing  to  us, 
and  swearing  by  Himself.  I.  The  meaninq  op  the  Divinb  oath  an©  its  oraciousness 
FAIL  TO  BB  considered.  1.  The  Divine  oath  is  represented  as  analogous  to  an 
oath  among  men,  and  yet  different  from  it.  The  design  in  both  is  the  same ;  it  is 
for  confirmation,  whether  of  a  fact  or  of  a  promise  ;  and  so  for  the  ending  of  all 
strife  and  doubt  (vers.  16,  17).  There  is  a  difference,  however,  between  the  two 
oaths,  arising  out  of  the  difference  between  the  parties  swearing.  Men  swear  by 
the  greater  (ver.  16).  But  this  God  cannot  do ;  and  therefore  He  swears  by  Him- 
self (ver.  17).  Still  the  appeal  in  both  cases  is  virtually  the  same.  What  are  the 
two  immutable  things  which  the  oath  of  God,  swearing  by  Himself,  brings  upon 
the  field  !  What  can  they  be  but  the  Divine  word  and  the  Divine  name  or  nature  ? 
Take  first  the  Divine  word.  That  is  an  immutable  thing.  The  word  or  promise  of 
God  is  always  sure  and  trustworthy.  But  take  in  now  the  second  of  the  two  immut- 
able things  wherein  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie ;  His  name.  His  character.  His 
nature,  His  being  and  continuing  to  be  such  as  He  is.  What  new  security  is  thus 
given  ?  Is  it  net  in  substance  this  : — That  God  discovers  to  us  a  ground  or  reason 
of  what  He  designs  to  do  farther  back  than  the  mere  sovereign  and  discretionary 
fiat  of  His  absolute  will ;  deeply  fixed  and  rooted  in  the  very  essence  of  His  being  ? 
Is  it  not  that  He  puts  the  certainty  of  that  to  which  He  swears,  not  only  on  the 
ground  of  His  having  intimated  it  beforehand,  but  on  the  ground  of  -a  stronger 
necessity,  in  the  very  nature  of  things,  and  in  His  own  nature ;  lying  far  back  and 
far  down,  in  His  being  God,  and  being  the  God  He  is?  The  thing  is  to  be  so,  not 
merely  because  God  has  s-aid  it  shall  be  so,  but  also  because  it  cannot  but  be  so, 
God  continuing  to  be,  and  to  be  the  God  He  is.  This  is  what,  in  swearing  by  Him- 
self, He  means  to  teU  us.  2.  The  graciousness  of  the  oath  is  as  wonderful  as  its 
meaning.  It  is  indeed  more  so.  Even  among  men ;  if  the  heart  is  true,  and  the 
eye,  even  turned  on  empty  space,  beams  keen  with  honour ;  there  is  a  certain  feel- 
ing of  repugnance  to  being  called  to  swear.  And  undoubtedly  no  one  who  possesses 
right  feeling,  as  regards  the  sacredness  of  a  spoken  word,  will  volunteer  an  oath. 
It  is  on  this  principle  that  our  Lord  gives  forth  His  utterance  against  not  only  false 
but  promiscuous  swearing.  It  is  of  evil  that  this  practice  of  swearing,  even  when 
most  right  and  fitting,  cometh  among  men  on  earth  ;  of  the  evil  of  men's  deceitful- 
ness,  their  pronemess  to  prevaricate  and  lie.  It  is  at  the  best  a  necessary  evil. 
And  is  it  anything  else  when  it  is  God  who  swears  from  heaven  ?  Of  that  oath  also, 
of  that  oath  pre-eminently,  may  it  not  be  said  that  it  cometh  of  evil  ?  Not  indeed 
of  the  evil  of  anything  false  or  suspicious  on  the  part  of  Him  who  swears ;  but  of 
the  evil  heart  of  unbelief  in  those  to  whom  He  swears.  11.  The  uses  to  which  it 
IS  APPLIED  IN  Scripture  mat  serve  still  farther  to  illustrate  the  real  import 
AND  the  graciousness  OF  THE  OATH.  1.  We  have  an  instance  of  the  Divine  oath 
in  connection  with  the  mediatorial  priesthood  of  Christ.  And  what  is  very  season- 
able and  providential,  we  have  an  ample  inspired  explanation  of  it,  as  viewed  in 
that  connection.  I  refer  to  the  oracle  in  Psa.  ex.  4,  as  expounded  in  Heb.  vii. 
The  priesthood  of  Christ  is  no  mere  arbitrary,  discretionary  ordinance,  which,  as 
being  expedient  to-day,  God  may  institute  by  His  sovereign  authority  in  His  word 
or  law,  and  which,  by  the  same  sovereign  authority.  He  may  supersede  to-morrow, 
as  no  longer  needed  and  no  longer  useful.  No  ;  it  is  an  office  having  its  deep  root 
in  the  very  nature,  the  essential  glory  and  perfection,  of  God  Himself.  It  is  there- 
fore  unchangeable,  not  merely  as  God's  word,  but  as  His  very  being,  is  unchange- 
able. The  word  of  God  is  indeed  immutable,  under  the  conditions  attached  to  it 
when  it  is  uttered.    But  it  maj  be,  according  to  these  conditions,  the  basis  of  what 

33 


614  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

is  merely  temporary,  insufficient,  and  provisional.  What  is  based  on  the  absolute 
immutable  nature  of  God  must  necessarily  be  both  permanent  and  perfect.  2. 
Founded  on  tbis  primary  use,  if  I  may  so  speak,  of  the  Divine  oath,  as  bearing  on 
the  constitution  of  the  mediatorial  economy  in  the  person  and  work  of  the  great 
High  Priest,  there  are  other  instances  of  its  use  in  Scripture,  connected  with  the 
carrying  out  of  that  economy,  to  which  it  may  be  interesting  and  useful  to  advert. 
(1)  The  Divine  oath  may  be  viewed  in  its  bearing  on  the  gospel  call.  In  that  con- 
nection it  occurs  often  virtually ;  and  expressly  it  occurs  in  this  at  least  among 
other  passages :  Ezek.  xxxiii.  11.  Thus  viewed,  the  oath  of  God  is  peculiarly  sig- 
nificant. It  places  the  assurance  which  you  may  have,  all  of  you,  any  of  you,  of 
God's  perfect  willingness,  His  earnest  longing,  to  receive  you  back  to  Himself,  on  a 
footing  such  as,  if  you  would  but  consider  it,  must  make  you  feel  that  you  dare  not 
doubt,  and  cannot  withstand,  His  affectionate  importunity,  (2)  The  oath  of  God 
stands  connected  with  the  doom  of  unbelief.  This  is  one  of  the  most  impressive 
and  av?ful  of  aU  its  uses.  It  is  indeed  a  tenible  thought.  For  it  means  that  God 
executes  His  threatened  judgments,  not  because  He  delights  in  the  infliction  of  evil; 
nor  even  because  He  is  determined  to  verify  His  word ;  but  because,  being  such  as 
He  is,  even  He  has  no  alternative  1  3.  The  Divine  oath  is  all-important  in  its 
bearing  on  the  security  of  the  believer's  hope.  That  indeed  is  its  immediate  appli- 
cation here.  The  question  of  your  progress  and  perseverance  to  the  end  has  been 
raised ;  by  the  reproof  and  exhortation  and  warning  contained  in  the  previous 
passage.  Tour  only  safety  against  backsliding  and  apostasy  lies,  as  you  are  told, 
in  getting  out  of  the  mere  elements  of  the  gospel  viewed  as  a  method  of  personal 
reUef ,  and  passing  on  to  the  perfection  of  insight  and  sympathy,  as  regards  the 
higher  aspects  and  bearings  of  it,  in  relation  to  the  glorious  name  of  God.  But, 
alas  !  one  may  say,  what  confidence  can  I  ever  have  in  that  line  ?  The  perfection 
to  which  I  am  to  go  on,  alas !  how  distant.  The  sin  into  which  I  may  relapse, 
alas  !  how  near.  What  is  to  give  me  confidence  ?  Is  it  my  own  diligence  in  follow- 
ing, not  slothfully,  the  saints  that  have  gone  before  ?  Or  is  it  my  own  carefulness 
to  depart  from  the  iniquity  that  dogs  my  steps  behind  ?  No.  Both  of  these  condi- 
tions are  indispensable,  but  neither  of  them  is  to  be  relied  on  as  giving  assurance. 
But  thou  art  in  the  hands  of  a  God  whose  name,  and  nature,  and  character  thou 
knowest.  And,  to  put  an  end  to  all  debate  in  thy  heart.  He  swears  by  Himself  to 
thee.  He  points  to  His  essential  perfection.  He  bids  thee  consider,  not  only  what 
He  says,  but  what  He  is ;  what  thou  in  Christ  hast  seen  and  found  Him  to  be. 
And  He  tells  thee  that,  as  surely  as  He  is  what  He  is,  as  surely  as  He  liveth,  so 
surely  He  pledges  Himself  to  thee,  and  must  keep  faith  with  thee.  4.  One  other 
application  of  the  Divine  oath  I  can  but  touch  upon ;  it  is  the  connection  in  which 
it  stands  with  the  ultimate  triumph  of  the  Lord's  Church  and  cause  in  the  world 
(Isa.  xlv.  22,  23).  The  purpose  of  God  to  fill  the  earth  with  the  knowledge  of  Him- 
self and  of  His  glory  is  a  purpose  founded,  not  upon  His  mere  sovereign  word,  but 
upon  His  essential  nature.  It  is  no  arbitrary  decree,  but  an  absolute  necessity  of 
His  very  being,  which  requires  that  the  light  which  has  come  into  the  world  shall 
ultimattly  dispel  the  world's  darkness,  and  that  the  kingdom  which  the  God  of 
heaven  has  set  up  in  the  earth  shall  in  the  end  make  all  other  kingdoms  its  own. 
The  time  may  seem  long ;  the  struggle  arduous  and  doubtful.  But  as  surely  as 
God  continues  to  be  the  God  He  is ;  as  surely  as  the  Lord  liveth  ;  so  surely  shall 
His  gospel  make  way  among  the  nations,  till  all  the  earth  is  filled  with  His  glory, 
{R.  S.  Candlish,  D.D.)  The  end  of  God's  oath. — God  doth  not  give  it  to  make  His 
word  or  promise  sure  and  steadfast,  but  to  give  assurance  and  security  to  us  of  their 
accomplishment.  Every  word  of  God  is  sure  and  certain  truth  itself,  because  it  is 
His ;  and  He  might  justly  require  of  us  the  belief  of  it,  without  any  further  attesta- 
tion. But  yet,  knowing  what  great  objections  Satan  and  our  own  unbelieving  hearts 
will  raise  against  His  promises,  at  least  as  to  our  own  concern  in  them,  to  confirm 
our  minds,  and  to  take  away  all  pretences  of  unbelief.  He  interposes  His  oath  in 
this  matter.  What  can  remain  of  distrust  in  such  a  case?  If  there  be  a  matter  in 
doubt  between  men,  and  an  oath  be  interposed  in  the  confirmation  of  that  which  is 
called  in  question,  it  is  to  them,  as  the  apostle  tells  us,  an  end  of  all  strife  (Heb. 
vi.  16).  How  much  more  onght  it  to  be  so  on  the  part  of  God,  when  His  oath  is 
engaged  ?  And  the  apostle  declares  this  end  of  His  oath,  it  is  to  show  the  immuta- 
bility of  His  counsel  (Heb.  vi.  17).  His  counsel  was  declared  before  in  the  promise; 
but  now  some  doubt  or  strife  may  arise,  whether,  on  one  occasion  or  other,  God 
may  not  change  His  counsels;  or  whether  He  hath  not  charged  it  with  such  condi- 
tions as  to  render  it  useless  to  us.    In  what  case  soever  it  be,  to  remove  all  doubts 


0H4F.  n.]  HEBREWS.  615 

and  suspicions  of  this  uature,  God  adds  His  oath,  manifesting  the  unquestionable 
immutability  of  His  counsel  and  promises.  What  therefore  is  thus  confirmed,  is 
ascertained  to  the  height  of  what  anything  is  capable  of.  And  not  to  believe  it  is 
the  height  of  impiety.  {John  Owen,  D.D.)  Two  Immutable  things. — Immutable 
things  : — Now  what  are  those  *'  two  immutable  things"  which  cannot  fail?  Some 
have  seen  in  them  the  two  covenants — the  covenant  which  God  made  with  Abra- 
ham ;  and  the  covenant  which  God  made  with  Christ.  Some  have  understood  it  to 
mean,  first,  the  promise  of  the  fact  made  to  the  patriarchs  ;  and  then  the  great  ful- 
filment of  that  promise  revealed  in  the  gospel.  But  it  appears  to  me  far  better,  and 
much  more  accordant  with  the  whole  line  of  thought,  to  take  it  as  meaning,  first, 
the  nature  and  the  character  of  God;  and  then  God's  "  oath,"  or  covenant,  whereby 
He  has  made  over  that  character  to  man,  and  pledged  Himself  to  our  salvation. 
Here,  then,  every  beUever  finds  his  double  rest.  First,  I  have  the  being  of  God — 
all  faithfulness,  all  love.  That  God  is  my  Father.  I  am  dearer  to  Him  than  I  am 
to  myself.  It  is  His  glory  and  His  necessity  to  be  kind  to  me.  In  that  great  "  I 
AM  "  I  find  my  argument.  He  revolves  within  Himself.  And  it  is  for  His  own 
glory  that  His  own  creature  should  be  happy, holy, useful  here;  and  with  Him  and 
like  Him  for  ever.  But,  after  all,  everything  else — the  Bible,  redemption  itself,  is 
only  a  platform  to  exhibit  the  character  of  God.  But  then,  as  if  this  were  not 
enough,  1  have  all  those  attributes,  and  all  that  nature,  made  over  to  me,  as  my 
own,  in  solemn  compact,  sealed  with  blood.  His  justice  is  pledged  to  accept  my 
Substitute,  and  to  release  me.  His  word  is  committed  to  it,  that,  if  I  am  Christ's, 
however  unworthy  I  be,  I  shall  be  "  accepted  in  the  Beloved  "  One.  And  that 
nature  and  that  oath  are  my  "  two  immutable  things."  Can  the  eternal  Jehovah 
change?  Can  God's  truth  fail?  Can  He  deny  Himself?  Has  not  He  "made 
with  me  an  everlasting  covenant,  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure?"  So,  as  the 
"  anchor  "  has  its  two  cables,  my  hidden  "  hope  "  has  its  two  strong  confirmations. 
And  nothing  can  divide  them.  It  lies  in  its  own  adamantine,  in^ssoluble  power. 
And  its  twofold  power  is  one  that  never  can  be  broken.  Therefore,  well  did  St. 
Paul  say,  "  Sure  and  stedfast."  "  Sure,"  in  God's  being ;  "  stedfast,"  in  God's 
covenant ;  and  in  both  it  is  just  what  a  poor,  wretched  sinner  wants,  in  such  a 
world  as  this — "  a  strong  consolation  to  those  who  have  fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold 
upon  the  hope  set  before  them."  They  say  the  ship  "  always  drops  to  her  anchor." 
So,  by  secret  influences,  the  soul,  which  is  held  to  Jesus,  will  continually,  and 
almost  insensibly,  be  getting  nearer  and  nearer  to  Him  every  moment ;  nearer  in 
converse ;  nearer  in  likeness ;  nearer  in  love.  Nor  will  it  rest  till  it  is  as  near 
Him  now  as  the  circumstances  of  this  present  life  allow — looking  for  the  time  when 
there  shall  be  no  hindrances ;  and  we  shall  be  near  Him,  and  one  with  Him  for 
ever.  But,  though  the  "  anchor  "  be  cast — and  though  the  holdings  be  sure — and 
though  the  ship  "  drops  to  her  anchor  " — still  the  winds  beat  on,  the  waves  may 
roll,  and  the  vessel  toss.  Only,  so  long  as  the  chain  holds,  she  can  never  break  off; 
and  she  can  never  become  a  castaway.  There  is  no  warrant,  brethren,  you  are  in 
Christ,  thrtt,  therefore,  you  shall  not  be  buffeted  by  storms;  or  that  you  should 
not  feel  the  roughnesses  of  this  world's  troubles.  Eather  because  you  are  bound 
to  Him,  you  may  strain  the  more,  that  you  may  ride  in  perfect  peace.  No  fear 
thai  that  "  anchor  "  may  slip.  There  may  be  trials,  but  there  is  no  danger ;  dis- 
tress, but  not  despair ;  and  welcome  even  the  tempest,  in  its  fury,  if  it  prove  the 
firmness  of  the  tenure  by  which  yoo  are  held,  and  the  goodness  by  which  you 
are  encouraged.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  immutable  grounds  of  a  believer^ s 
confidence : — I.  God's  single  word  is  an  immutable  ground ;  having  this,  you 
have  enough.  And  so  it  will  appear  if  you  consider  the  power  and  the  certainty 
of  it.  1.  The  power  of  God's  word.  His  word  is  nothing  else  but  the  declara- 
tion of  His  powerful  will ;  the  force  of  it  was  discovered  in  creating  the  world. 
God  created  all  things  by  His  word  (Psa.  xxxiii.  9).  AU  the  works  of  God 
subsist  by  the  force  of  His  word  (Heb.  i.  3).  Therefore  if  you  have  this 
immutable  ground,  if  God  hath  deposited  and  plighted  His  word,  you  have 
enough  to  establish  strong  consolation,  for  it  is  powerful  to  all  purposes  whatso- 
ever. 2.  Consider  the  ceiiainty  of  it.  \\Tien  the  word  is  gone  ont  of  God's  mouth 
it  shall  not  be  recalled.  The  Lord  prizeth  His  faithfulness  above  all  things.  The 
Scripture  must  be  fulfilled  whatever  inconveniences  come  of  it.  Mark  the  whole 
course  of  providence,  and  you  will  find  that  God  is  very  tender  of  His  word ;  He 
valueth  it  above  all  His  works  (Luke  xxi.  33).  II.  The  main  thing  is,  what  ground 
of  consolation  we  have  in  God's  oath.  1.  For  the  reasons  why  God  should  give 
this  oath.     (1)  To  show  us  the  certainty  of  our  privileges  in  Christ.     (2)  God 


616  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  n 

sweareth,  as  for  the  confirmation  of  His  grace  in  Christ,  and  to  show  the  certainty 
of  our  privileges  in  Christ,  so  for  the  commendation  and  excelleucy  of  them.    An 
oath  is  not  lawful  but  in  weighty  mati^jrs ;  it  must  be  taken  in  judgment,  as  well 
as  in  righteousness  and  truth  (Jer.  iv.  2).     2.  The  advantages  we  have  by  God'a 
oath.    What  greater  assurance  can  we  have  ?    (1)  Consider  the  sacredness  of  an 
oath  in  general.     Perjured  persons  are  the  scorn  of  men,  and  they  have  forfeited 
the  privilege  of  humanity.     Well,  then,  if  the  oath  of  man  be  so  sacred  and  valu- 
able, how  much  more  is  the  oath  of  God  ?    It  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie.     He  can 
do  all  things  which  argue  power,  but  nothing  which  argueth  impotency  and  weak- 
ness, for  this  were  to  deny  Himself.     (2)  This  oath  is  so  sacred,  because  the  name 
of  God  is  invoked  in  it.    It  is  the  name  of  God  that  giveth  credit  to  all  other  oaths. 
(3)  This  advantage  faith  hath  by  God's  oath,  it  is  a  pledge  of  His  love  and  good- 
will, that  He  would  condescend  so  far  to  give  us  His  oath  for  our  assurance  and 
satisfaction.     (4)  God's  oath  is  an  argument  that  He  delighteth  in  our  comfort  and 
assurance.    He  would  deliver  us  not  only  from  hurt,  but  from  fear.     (5)  Consider 
the  special  nature  of  God's  oath.    God  appeals  to  the  reverence  and  confidence  we 
put  in  His  holiness,  excellency,  and  power ;  nay,  and  there  is  somewhat  that  answers 
the  imprecation  and  execration,  and  aU  His  excellency  is  laid  at  pawn,  and  exposed, 
as  it  were,  to  forfeiture,  if  He  doth  not  make  good  His  word.    Application : — 1. 
We  see  the  greatness  of  the  condescension  of  God.     2.  What  reason  we  have  to 
bind  ourselves  to  God.     There  was  no  need  on  God's  part  why  God  should  bind 
Himself  to  us,  but  great  need  on  our  part  why  we  should  bind  ourselves  to  God. 
We  start  aside  like  a  deceitful  bow,  and  therefore  we  should  solemnly  bind  ourselves 
to  God  (Psa.  cxix.  106).    3.  You  see  the  great  wrong  you  do  to  God  in  giving  so 
little  credit  to  His  promises.     You  make  God  a  liar  (1  John  v.  10).    4.  To  press  us 
to  improve  these  two  immutable  grounds,  that  we  may  grow  up  into  a  greater  cer- 
tainty.   His  saying  is  as  immutable  as  His  swearing ;  God's  word  is  valuable  enough 
of  itself,  but  only  because  we  count  an  oath  more  sacred.     God  hath  added  it  over 
and  above.     Men  are  sUght  in  speech,  but  serious  in  an  oath.     Well,  then,  since 
you  have  a  double  holdfast  on  God,  make  use  of  it  in  prayer  and  in  meditation ;  in 
prayer,  when  you  speak  to  God ;  in  meditation,  when  you  discourse  with  yourselves. 
(T.  Manton,  D.D.)        Impossible  for  God  to  lie. — Inferences  from  the  impossibility 
of  God  to  lie : — 1.  The  rmpossibihty  of  God  to  lie  is  a  great  aggravation  of  the  hein- 
ousness  of  unbelief.     For  he  that  believeth  not  God,  hath  made  Him  a  Uar  (1  Joha 
V.  10),  which  is  in  effect  to  make  God  no  God.     2.  This  is  a  strong  motive  to 
believe :  a  greater  cannot  be  given  ;  for  as  there  is  no  will,  so  neither  power  in  God 
to  lie.    3.  This  should  make  ministers  who  spe.tk  in  God's  name  to  be  sure  of  the 
truth  of  that  which  they  deliver  for  God's  word,  else  tl;ey  make  God  a  Uar,  for  their 
word  is  taken  for  God's  (Col.  ii.  13).     They  are  God's  ambassadors.     An  ambas- 
sador's failing  is  counted  his  master's  failing.    4.  Though  we  cannot  attain  to  such 
a  high  pitch  of  truth,  yet  every  one  ought  to  endeavour  to  be  like  God  herein, 
namely,  in  avoiding  lying.    Lying  is  a  sin  unbeseeming  any  man  :  but  most  unbe- 
seeming a  professor  of  the  true  religion.     General  arguments  against  lying  &it 
these : — 1.  Lying  is  condemned  by  those  who  were  led  by  no  other  hght  than  the 
light  of  nature  :  as  philosophers,  orators,  poets.     2.  Every  man's  conscience  con- 
demns lying.     If  one  be  not  impudent,  he  will  blush  when  he  tells  a  lie ;  aud 
infinite  shifts  are  ordinarily  made  to  cloak  a  lie,  which  show  that  he  is  asbamed 
thereof,  and  that  his  conscience  checketh  him  for  it.     3.  No  man  can  endure  to  be 
accounted  a  liar.    4.  Lying  ovei  throws  all  society.     5.  A  man  taken   tripping 
herein  will  be  suspected  in  all  his  words  and  actions.     He  that  is  not  true  in  his 
words  can  hardly  be  thought  to  deal  honestly  in  his  deeds.     Arguments  against 
lying  in  professors  of  the  Christian  religion  are  these : — 1.  Lying  is  expressly  for- 
bidden in  God's  word  (Lev.  xix.  11 ;  Eph.  iv.  25  ;  Col.  iii.  9).    2.  It  is  against 
knowledge  and  conscience.    3.  It  is  a  filthy  rag  of  the  old  man,  and  one  of  the 
most  disgraceful ;  and  therefore  first  set  down  in  the  particular  exemplification  of 
those  filthy  rags  (Eph.  iv.  22-25).    4.  It  is  most  directly  opposite  to  God,  who  is 
Truth  itself,  and  concerning  whom  we  heard  that  it  was  impossible  that  He  should 
lie.     5.  Nothing  makes  men  more  Uke  the  devil,  "  for  he  is  a  liar  and  the  father 
thereof  "  (John  viii.  44).    A  lying  spirit  is  a  diabolical  spirit.    6.  As  a  lie  is  hateful 
to  God,  so  it  makes  the  practisers  thereof  abominable  (Prov.  vi.  16,  17  ;  xii.  .22). 
7.  Lying  causeth  heavy  vengeance.     In  general,  it  is  said,  the  Lord  will  destroy 
them  that  speak  lies  (Psa.  v.  6).     Memorable  was  the  judgment  on  Gehazi  (2  Kings 
v.  27).     And  on  Ananias  and  Sapphlra  (Acts  v.  5-10).     {W.  Gouge.)        Strong 
consolation. — Strong  consolation : — L  Who  are  the  FAvouKEa)  people  of  God.    1. 


OHA».  vt]  HEBREWS.  617 

Observe,  then,  that  the  favoured  children  of  God  are  first  described  as  *'  the  heirs 
of  promise,"  by  which  at  once  most  solemnly  are  excluded  all  those  who  are  relying 
npon  their  own  merits.  Dost  thou  confess  that  thou  hast  nothing  of  thine  own 
wherein  to  boast,  and  dost  thou  hope  alone  in  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus? 
Then  let  me  hope  thou  art  one  of  the  heirs  of  promise.  "  Heirs  of  promise," 
again.  Then  this  excludes  those  who  are  heirs  according  to  their  own  will,  who 
Bcoff  at  the  mighty  work  of  grace,  and  believe  that  their  own  free  choice  has  saved 
them.  One  more  thought :  "  Heirs  of  promise,"  then  heirs,  not  according  to  the 
power  of  the  flesh,  but  according  to  the  energy  of  grace.  2.  A  plainer  description 
of  the  favoured  people  follows  in  the  eighteenth  verse.  "  Who  have  fled  for  refuge 
to  lay  hold  upon  the  hope  set  before  us."  Then  all  the  people  of  God  were  once  in 
danger.  II.  Let  us  look  to  the  ways  and  dealings  of  our  condescending  God  to 
these  favoured  people.  Notice  each  word,  "  God  willing."  Whenever  God  does 
anything  in  a  way  of  grace,  He  does  it  as  we  say  con  amore,  He  does  it  in  the  highest 
sense  willingly.  It  is  not  the  will  of  God  that  sinners  should  perish ;  but  when  He 
reveals  Himself  to  His  saints.  He  doeth  it  with  a  sacred  alacrity,  a  Divine  cheerful- 
ness. It  is  an  occupation  divinely  suitable  to  His  generous  nature.  "  Willing  more 
abundantly."  Do  notice  that  expression.  It  has  in  the  Greek  the  sense  of  more 
than  is  necessary,  and  is  secretly  meant  to  answer  the  objection  concerning  the 
Lord's  taking  an  oath.  God  is  willing  to  reveal  Himself  to  His  people,  and  He  is 
willing  to  do  that  "  more  abundantly,"  up  to  the  measure  of  their  reed.  He  would 
let  them  know  that  His  counsel  is  immutable,  and  He  would  not  only  give  them 
enough  evidence  to  prove  it,  He  would  give  them  overwhelming  evidence,  evidence 
more  than  would  be  or  could  be  possibly  required  by  the  case  itself,  so  that  their 
unbelief  may  have  no  chance  to  Uve,  and  their  faith  may  be  of  the  strongest  kind. 
The  word  "  to  show  "  is  remarkable  ;  it  is  the  very  word  used  in  the  Greek  when 
our  Lord  showed  His  disciples  His  hands  and  His  side,  as  if  the  word  would  say 
that  God  would  lay  bare  the  immutability  of  His  nature,  would  as  it  were  strip  His 
eternal  purposes,  and  let  His  people  look  upon  them,  handle  them,  and  see  their 
reality,  their  truth  and  certainty.  "  God  is  willing  more  abundantly  to  show  unto 
the  heirs  of  promise  the  immutability  of  His  counsel."  Oftentimes  a  man  will  not 
give  further  assurance  of  the  truth  of  what  he  states,  when  he  believes  he  has 
already  given  assurance  enough.  Observe  with  wonder  that  our  ever  gracious  God 
never  standeth  on  His  dignity  in  this  style  at  all,  but  He  looketh  not  so  much  at 
the  dignity  of  His  own  person  as  at  the  weakness  of  His  people,  and  therefore  being 
willing  more  abundantly  to  show  unto  His  poor,  feeble,  trembling  people  the  immu- 
tability of  His  counsel.  He  not  only  gives  one  promise,  but  he  adds  another  and 
another  and  another,  till  to  count  the  promises  were  almost  as  difficult  as  to  count 
the  stars  or  number  the  sands  on  the  sea  shore.  Yea,  and  when  He  has  done  all 
this,  He  comes  in  with  a  master  clap  to  crown  it  all,  and  confirms  every  promise  by 
an  oath,  that  by  not  one  immutable  thing,  but  by  two,  the  promise  and  the  oath, 
in  both  of  which  it  is  impossible  for  Jehovah  to  he,  His  people  might  never  dare  to 
doubt  again,  but  might  have  strong  consolation.  1.  The  first  immutable  thing  upon 
which  our  faith  is  to  stay  itself,  is  the  promise.  Oh,  what  consolation  is  this,  then, 
our  refuge  is  secure,  our  confidence  is  firm  I  Look  ye  here,  ye  people  of  God.  This 
promise  of  God  was  not  made  in  a  hurry.  A  man  makes  a  promise  on  a  sudden, 
and  he  cannot  keep  it  afterwards ;  but  through  the  everlasting  ages  the  promise  was 
on  Jehovah's  heart  before  He  spoke  it  with  His  lips.  Men  sometimes  make  pro- 
mises that  they  cannot  fulfil,  they  are  in  circumstances  which  do  not  permit  them. 
But  can  God  ever  be  in  a  difficulty?  Men  sometimes  make  promises  which  it  would 
be  unwise  to  keep,  and  perhaps  it  is  better  to  break  them  ;  but  the  Lord  cannot  be 
unwise.  His  is  infinite  wisdom  as  well  as  infinite  strength.  The  promise,  then, 
because  of  its  wisdom,  will  surely  stand.  Beside,  the  promise  He  has  made  is  to 
His  own  honour.  It  redounds  to  His  glory  to  show  mercy  to  the  unworthy.  More- 
over, His  promise  is  made  to  His  own  Son,  and  His  love  to  Him  is  interwoven  with 
His  promise.  He  could  not  break  His  word  to  one  of  us  without  breaking  it  to  His 
dear  Son,  since  we  are  in  Him,  and  trust  in  Him.  The  Divine  promise  must  stand 
good.  2.  But  it  is  added  that  God,  in  order  to  prevent  our  unbelief  effectually,  has 
taken  an  oath.  God  has  with  an  oath  sworn  by  Himself  that  all  the  heirs  of  pro- 
mise shall  be  blessed  for  ever,  saying,  "  Surely  blessing,  I  wiU  bless  thee."  Now, 
who  among  ns  dare  doubt  this?  Where  is  the  hardy  sinner  who  dares  come 
forward  and  say,  "  I  impugn  the  oath  of  God "  ?  HI.  But  I  must  note  tbb 
BTBONQ  CONSOLATION  WHICH  FLOWS  oiJT  OF  ALL  THIS.  There  is  stroug  consolation, 
■ays  the  text,  for  the  heirs  of  grace,  which  impUes  that  the  children  of  God  must 


518  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n 

expect  to  have  trouble.   All  the  followers  of  the  great  Cross-bearer  are  cross-bearera 
too ;  but  then  there  is  the  strong  consolation  for  the  strong  tribulation.     What  is 
strong  consolation  ?    1.  I  think  strong  consolation  is  that  which  does  not  depend 
upon  bodily  health.     What  a  cowardly  old  enemy  the  devil  is !     When  we  are 
vigorous  in  body,  it  is  very  seldom  that  he  will  tempt  us  to  doubt  and  fear,  but  if 
we  have  been  racked  with  hours  of  pain  and  sleepless  nights,  and  are  getting  to  feel 
faint  and  weary,  then  he  comes  in  with  his  horrible  insinuations  :  "  God  will  for- 
sake you.    His  promise  will  fail  1 "    He  is  vile  enough  to  put  his  black  paws  on 
the  brightest  truth  in  the  Bible,  ay,  upon  even  the  very  existence  of  God  Himself, 
and  turn  the  boldest  believer  into  the  most  terrible  doubter,  so  that  we  seem  to 
have  gone  bodily  over  to  the  army  of  Satan,  and  to  be  doubting  every  good  thing 
that  is  in  the  Word  of  God.     Strong  consolation,  even  at  such  times,  enables  ns 
still  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord  though  every  nerve  should  twinge,  and  every  bone  should 
seem  melted  with  pain.    2.  Strong  consolation  is  that  which  is  not  dependent  upon 
the  excitement  of  public  services  and  Christian  fellowship.    We  feel  very  happy  on 
a  Sunday  here  when  we  almost  sing  ourselves  away  to  everlasting  bliss,  and  when 
the  sweet  name  of  Jesus  is  like  ointment  poured  forth,  so  that  the  virgins  love  it. 
But  when  you  are  in  colder  regions,  Low  is  it  7   Perhaps  you  are  called  to  emigrate, 
or  go  into  the  country  to  a  barren  ministry  where  there  is  nothing  to  feed  the  soul. 
Ah,  then,  if  you  have  not  got  good  ground  for  your  soul  to  gi-ow  in,  what  will  ye 
do  ?    3.  The  strong  consolation  which  God  gives  His  people  is  such  as  no  mere 
reasoning  can  shake.     You  might  as  well  reason  me  out  of  the  toothache,  or  con- 
vince me  that  I  do  not  exist,  as  reason  me  out  of  my  consciousness  that  I  love 
Christ,  and  that  I  am  saved  in  Him.    They  cannot  touch  the  essentials  of  vital 
godliness,  and  this  is  a  strong  consolation  which  reasoning  no  more  woundeth  than 
men  come  at  leviathan  with  spears  and  swords,  for  he  laugheth  at  them,  and 
accounteth  their  spears  as  rotten  wood.     4.  Strong  consolation,  again,  because  it  will 
bear  up  under  conscience,  and  that  is  a  harder  pressure  than  mere  reasoning  can 
ever  bring.    5.  Ay,  and  we  can  deal  with  Satan  with  his  horrible  insinuations  and 
blasphemies,  and  still  can  say,  "  I  will  trust  in  the  Lord  and  not  be  afraid."     To 
rejoice  then,  and  say,  "  Though  these  things  be  not  with  me  as  I  would  have  them, 
yet  hath  He  made  with  me  an  everlasting  covenant  ordered  in  all  things  and 
sure  "  ;  this  is  strong  consolation.     6.  And  it  will  be  proved  to  be  so  by  and  by 
with  some  of  us,  when  we  shaU  be  in  the  solemn  article  of  death.    {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Consolation  the  fruit  of  assurance  : — That  the  fruit  of  this  certainty  and  assurance 
which  we  have  by  God's  Word  and  oath  is  strong  consolation.    I.  What  is  meant 
BT   STRONG    CONSOLATION  ?     Consolatiou.      There   are  three  words  by  which  the 
fruits  of  assurance  are  expressed,  which  imply  so  many  degrees  of  it.     There  is 
peace,  comfort,  and  joy.     1.  Peace.     That  we  have  as  a  fruit  of  justification  (Rom. 
v.  1).     2.  Then  there  is  consolation  which  notes  an  habitual  persuasion  of  God's 
love ;  there  is  an  habitual  serenity  and  cheerfulness  of  mind.    Though  there  be 
not  high  tides  of  comfort,  there  is  support,  though  not  ravishment.     It  is  called 
"  everlasting  consolation  "  (2  Thess.  ii.  16,  17).     3.  Then  there  is  joy,  or  an  high 
and  sensible  comfort  (Rom.  xv.   13).     The  next  term  is  "  strong  consolation." 
Why  is  it  so  called  ?     1.  It  is  called  so  either  in  opposition  to  worldly  comforts, 
which  are  weak  and  vanishing     2.  Or  else  it  is  called  "  strong  consolation  "  in 
comparison  with  itself,  with  respect  to  less  or  more  imperfect  degrees  of  comfort. 
There  is  a  latitude  in  comfort,  some  have  more  and  some  less ;  some  have  only 
weak  glimmerings  and  drops,  others  have  strong  consolation,  "  joy  unspeakable, 
and  full  of  glory  "  (1  Pet.  i.  8).     Now  a  Christian  should  aim  at  the  highest  degree  ; 
the  stronger  your  consolation,  the  better  is  Christ  pleased  with  it  (John  xv.  11). 
3.  It  may  likewise  be  called  strong  in  regard  of  its  effects.     (1)  It  marreth  carnal 
joy,  it  puts  the  soul  quite  out  of  taste  with  other  things.     Men  used  acorns  till 
they  found  out  the  use  of  bread.     (2)  It  is  stronger  than  the  evil  which  it  opposeth; 
it  swalloweth  up  all  our  sorrows,  whatever  they  be.    II.  How  this  strong  consola- 
tion ARisETH  FROM  ASSURANCE  AND  CERTAINTY.     To  establish  joy  and  comfort,  two 
things  are  necessary — excellency  and  propriety.     The  thing  in  which  I  rejoice,  it 
must  be  good,  and  it  must  be  mine.     Suitably  here  in  the  text  there  is  an  assur- 
ance of  excellent  privileges  ;  and  then  there  is  a  qualification  annexed  that  we  may 
understand  our  own  interest.     God  by  His  oath  assures  us  of  excellent  privileges 
in  Christ,  and  that  is  a  ground  of  strong  consolation.     Then  He  requireth  a  duty 
of  us,  that  we  fly  for  refuge  to  take  hold  of  the  hope  set  before  us.     1.  For  the 
excellency  of  our  privileges.     You  know  that  which  will  minister  solid  comfort  to 
the  soul  it  had  need  be  excellent.    A  small  matter,  though  never  so  sure,  will  not 


CHAP.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  619 

occasion  a  strong  consolation  ;  the  joy  is  according  to  the  object.  Now,  whether  a 
Christian  look  backward  or  forward,  there  is  matter  of  rejoicing  to  the  heirs  of 
promise.  Backward,  there  is  the  immutability  of  His  counsel ;  forward,  there  is  a 
hope  set  before  us.  From  one  eternity  to  another  may  a  believer  walk  and  still 
find  cause  of  rejoicing  in  God.  2.  Another  cause  of  strong  comfort  is  interest  and 
propriety.  Besides  the  excellency  of  the  privilege,  there  must  be  the  clearness  of 
our  interest.  The  object  of  joy  is  not  only  good  in  common,  but  our  good.  It  doth 
not  enrich  a  man  to  hear  there  are  pearls  and  diamonds  in  the  world,  and  mines  of 
gold  in  the  Indies,  unless  he  had  them  in  his  own  possession  ;  so  it  doth  not  fill  us 
with  comfort  and  joy  to  hear  there  are  unchangeable  purposes  of  grace,  and  that 
there  was  an  eternal  treaty  between  God  and  Christ  about  the  salvation  of  sinners, 
and  that  there  is  a  possible  salvation,  but  when  we  unJerstaml  this  is  made  over  to 

us.  III.  How  IT  IB  DISPENSED  ON  GoD'S  PAST,  AND  HOW  FAB  IT  18  REQUIBED  ON  OOKS  ; 
BECAUSE   EVERT  HEIB   OF    PROMISE   CANNOT    SPEAK   OF    THESE  LIVELY    COMFORTS,    THOSE 

SWEET  AND  STRONG  CONSOLATIONS  OF  THE  Spirit.  First,  OH  God's  part.  There  is  a 
great  deal  of  difference  between  Christians  in  respect  of  God's  dispensations.  1. 
Consider  Christ,  though  He  loved  all  His  disciples,  vet  He  did  not  use  them  all 
alike  fimiliarly;  some  were  more  intimate  with  Him,  and  were  more  in  His 
bosom.  So  though  all  the  elect  are  dear  to  Christ,  yet  there  are  the  elect 
of  the  elect,  some  chosen  out  above  others,  with  whom  God  will  be  more 
intimate  and  familiar.  2.  Though  God  deals  here  with  great  difference,  yet 
it  is  usual  with  the  Lord  to  give  most  comfort  to  three  sorts  of  persons.  (1)  To 
the  poor  in  spirit.  A  broken  vessel  is  fitter  to  hold  the  oil  of  gladness  than 
a  f;;ll  one,  I  mean  such  who  are  empty  and  broken,  and  possessed  with  a  sense  of 
their  own  wants.  (2)  Though  God  is  at  liberty,  yet  usually  He  fills  those  which 
are  exercised  with  hard  and  long  conflicts  with  their  corruptions.  Comfort  is 
Christ's  entertainment  for  those  that  return  from  victory  over  their  lusts  (Rev.  ii. 
17).  (3)  Those  that  are  called  forth  to  great  employments  and  trials  are  seldom 
without  comfort,  and  this  strong  consolation,  that  they  may  behave  themselves 
worthy  of  their  trial.  Look,  as  men  victual  a  castle  when  it  is  in  danger  to  be 
besieged,  so  God  layeth  in  comfort  aforehand  when  we  are  like  to  be  assaulted. 
This  we  have  in  the  example  of  our  Lord  Himself.  Just  before  Christ  was  tempted 
He  had  a  solemn  testimony  from  heaven  (Matt.  iv.  1).  Secondly,  on  our  part.  It 
is  not  absolutely  required  that  we  should  enjoy  it,  but  only  to  seek  after  it ;  and  if 
we  want  it,  to  submit  to  God's  pleasure.  Comfort  is  seldom  withheld  when  it  is 
long  sought  and  highly  prized.  I  cannot  say  he  is  no  child  of  God  that  hath  not 
a  feeling  of  this  strong  consolation,  but  he  is  none  that  doth  not  seek  after  it,  and 
that  hath  low  and  cheap  thoughts  of  the  consolations  of  God  (Job  xv.  11).  (T. 
Munton,    D.D.)  Strong   consolation  for   the    Lord's    refug^'es  : — I.    We   have 

"  FLED  FOR  REFTjOE."  1.  The  man-sla;^  er,  the  moment  he  had  in  the  heat 
of  passion  killed  a  man,  became  an  apt  » epresentative  of  an  awakened  sinner 
who  discovers  himself  to  be  in  an  evil  case.  It  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  to  convince  men  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment  to  come, 
and  it  is  well  when  the  soul  begins  to  fear,  for  then  it  begins  to  live.  2.  The 
alarmed  mau-alayer  would  next,  if  he  could  calm  himself  at  all,  consider  what 
he  could  lio,  and  he  would  soon  come  to  the  conclusion  that  he  could  neither  defy, 
nor  escape,  nor  endure  the  doom  which  threatened  him.  Thus  in  the  days  of  our 
conviction  no  hope  was  discovered  to  natural  reason,  and  our  dread  increased  till 
fear  took  hold  upon  us  there,  for  we  saw  what  we  had  done,  but  we  knew  not  what 
we  could  do  to  e-cape  from  the  consequences  thereof.  3.  Then  there  came  to  our 
ear  what  perhaps  we  had  heard  before,  but  had  heard  so  indifferently  as  never  to 
have  really  understood  it — we  heard  of  a  divinely  provided  way  of  escape.  When 
under  a  sense  of  sin  men  value  Christ  Jesus.  How  wonderful  is  the  system  of 
grace  !  Here  it  is  :  that  as  in  Adam  we  die  through  Adam's  sin,  so  if  we  be  in 
Christ  we  Uve  through  Christ's  righteuusness.  4.  The  text,  however,  not  only 
implies  that  we  need  the  refuge  and  have  heard  of  it,  but  that  we  have  fled  to  it. 
To  flee  away  from  self  to  the  provided  refuge  is  a  main  act  of  faith.  II.  But  WB 
HAVE  COME  to  "  LAY  HOLD."  Here  we  have  a  chance  of  figure,  unless  we  recall  the 
case  of  Joab,  who  fled  for  refuge  to  the  temple  and  laid  hold  upon  the  horns  of  the 
altar.  Justification  by  faith  in  Jesus  is  set  before  us.  What  are  we  to  do  according 
to  the  text  ?  We  have  to  "  lay  hold  "  upon  it.  You  are  drowning ;  there  is  a  rope 
thrown  to  you  ;  what  have  you  to  do  ?  "  Lay  hold."  You  are  not  to  look  at  yonr 
hands  to  see  whether  they  are  clean  enough.  No,  lay  hold,  dirty  hand  or  clean 
hand.     "But  my  hand  is  weak."    Lay  hold,  brother,  as  best  you  can,  weak  hand 


620  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

or  not,  for  while  you  are  laying  hold  of  Christ  God  is  laying  hold  of  you  ;  you  may 
rest  assured  of  that.     If  you  have  the  faintest  grip  of  Christ,  Christ  has  a  firm  grip 
of  you  such  as  never  shall  be  relaxed.    Your  business  is  at  this  moment  to  lay  hold 
and  keep  hold.     What  is  to  be  done  in  order  to  lay  hold?     1.  Well,  we  must 
believe  the  gospel  to  be  true.    Do  you  believe  it  to  be  true  that  God  was  in  Christ 
reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself,  not   imputing  their  trespasses  unto  them  7 
Yes,  I  know  you  believe  that  God  has  sent  His  Son  to  be  a  propitiation  for  sin. 
So  far,  so  good.    The  next  thing  is  to  apprehend  for  yourselves  this  truth.     Christ 
justifies  believers ;  He  is  worthy  of  trust ;  trust  Him,  and  He  has  justified  you. 
"  I  do  not  feel  it,"  says  one.    You  do  not  need  to  feel  it.    It  is  a  matter  of  believ- 
ing.   Believe  in  Jesus,  and  because  you  are  a  believer  be  assured  that  you  are 
saved.    2.  While  a  man  lays  hold  upon  a  thing  he  goes  no  further,  but  continues  to 
cling  to  it.     We  have  fled  for  refuge,  but  we  flee  no  further  than  the  hope  which 
we  now  lay  hold  upon,  namely,  eternal  life  in  Christ  Jesus.     We  never  wish  to  get 
beyond  God's  promise  in  Christ  Jesus  to  believers,  the  promise  of  salvation  to 
faith.     W^e  are  satisfied  with  that,  and  there  we  rest.     3.  Did  you  notice  that  the 
apostle  speaks  of  laying  hold  upon  a  hope?     This  does  not  mean  that  we  are  to  lay 
hold  by  imagination  upon  something  which  we  hope  to  obtain  in  the  dim  future, 
for  the  next  verse  goes  on  to  say  "  which  hope  we  have."    We  have  our  hope  now, 
it  is  not  a  shadowy  idea  that  possibly  when  we  come  to  die  we  may  be  saved.     We 
know  that  we  at  this  moment  are  safe  in  our  refuge,  and  we  lay  hold  on  our 
confidence  as  a  present  joy.     Yet  that  which  we  lay  hold  upon  is  full  of  hope,  there 
is  more  in  it  than  we  can  now  see  or  enjoy.     What  is  the  hope  ?     The  hope  of 
final  perseverance,  the  hope  of  ultimate  perfection,  the  hope  of  eternal  glory,  the 
ho[)e  of  being  with  our  Lord  where  He  is  that  we  may  behold  His  glory  for  ever — a 
hope  purifying,  elevating,  and  full  of  glory ;  a  hope  which  cheers  and  delights  us 
as  often  as  we  think  of  it.     III.  This  is  our  last  point,  we  enjoy  "  strong  con- 
solation."   We  call  that  liquor  strong  of  which  a  very  few  drops  will  flavour  all 
into  which  it  falls.     How  wonderfully  the  consolation  of  Christ  has  affected  our 
entire  hves  1     There  is  such  potency  in  it  that  it  sweetens  everything  about  us.    It 
is  so  strong  that  it  masters  all  our  fears,  and  slays  all  our  scepticisms.     1.  What  I 
want  you  to  note  is  that  the  consolation  of  the  Christian  lies  wholly  in  his  God, 
because  the  ground  of  it  is  that  God  has  sworn,  and  that  God  has  promised. 
Never  look,  therefore,  to  yourselves  for  any  consolation;  it  would  be  a  vain  search. 
2.  Eemember,  too,  that  your  consolation  must  come  from  what  God  has  spoken 
and  i!ot  from  His  providence.     Outward  providences  change,  but  the  oath  never 
changes,  hold  you  on  to  that.      Your  comfort  must  not  even  depend  upon  sensible 
realisations  of  God's  favour,  nor  on  sweet  communions  anddehghts.     No,  but  upon 
— He  has  said  it  and  He  has  sworn  it — those  are  the  two  strong  pillars  up 'u  which 
your  comfort  must  rest.     3.  Eemember,  however,  that  the  power  of  the  strong 
consolation  derived  fmm  the  oath  of  God  must  in  your  personal  enjoyment  depend 
very  much  upon  your  faith.     What  is  the  consolation  of  a  promise  if  you  do  not 
beUeve  it,  and  what  is  the  comfort  of  an  oath  if  you  doubt  it?     {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Strong   encouragement: — When  stars,   first  created,  start    forth  upon  their  vast 
circuits,  not  knowing  their  way,  if  they  were  conscious  and  sentient,  they  might 
feel  hopeless   of   maintaining   their   revolutions  and   orbits,  and   despair  in  the 
face  of  coming  ages.    But,  without  hands  or  arms,  the  sun  holds  them.     Without 
cords  or  bands  the  solar  king  drives  them,  unharnessed,  on  their  mighty  rounds 
without  a  single  misstep,  and  will  bring  them,  in  the  end,  to  their  bound,  with- 
out a  wanderer.     Now,  if  the  sun   can  do  this,  the  sun,  which  is  but  a  thing 
itself,  driven  and  held,  shall  not  He  who  created  the  heavens,  and  gave  the  sun 
his  power,   be  able  to  hold  us  by  the  attraction   of   His  heart,  the  strength  of 
His  hands,  and  the   omnipotence   of  His  affectionate  will?     (H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Strong  consolation : — It   is  impossible,  wrote  Dr.  Doddridge,  after  an  illness,  to 
express  the   comfort  God   gave   me   on   my   sick   bed.      His  promises  were  my 
continual  feast;    they   seemed,   as   it   were,  to  be  all  united  in   one   stream  of 
glory.      When  I  thought  of  dying,   it   sometimes   made  my  very  heart  to  leap 
within  me,  to   think  that  I  was   going   home  to  my  Father   and  my  Saviour. 
{Tinling's  Illustrations.)         Who  have  fled  for  refuge. — The  city  of  refuge : — I. 
The  view   given   of  the   Savioub   in   the   text.     He  is  called  "  the  hope  set 
before  us."     In  the  Scriptures  we  read  of  hope  that  is  in  us,  hope  that  is  laid  up 
for  us,  and  hope  that  is  set  before  us.     The  happiness  of  heaven — heaven  itself — 
its  light  and  glory,  its  songs,  and  its  blessedness — this  is  the  hope  laid  up  for  ua : 
that  good  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  o^^eration  on  the  heart,  here  and  now,  wher»i)j 


CHAP.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  621 


we  look  for  the  former,  and  for  the  earnest  of  it,  is  the  hope  that  is  in  us  ;  and  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself,  the  only  foundation  and  hope,  for  sinner  or  for 
eaint,  for  pardon  or  for  hohness,  is  the  hope  set  before  us.     II.   The  conduct 

OF   THE   MAN   DESCRIBED   IN   THE   TEXT   IN   REFERENCE    TO   THIS   BLESSED   OBJECT.       He 

is  said  to  "  flee  for  refuge,"  and  to  "  lay  hold  upon  it."  In  this  there  is  an 
allusion  to  the  flight  of  the  man-slayer  to  the  city  of  refuge.  Methinks  I  descry 
the  man-slayer  looking  behind  him ;  he  sees  the  avenger  of  blood ;  he  sees  the 
horrible  burning  frown  upon  his  brow,  he  hears  the  dismal  tramp  of  his  feet, 
and  away  he  flies ;  he  stops  not,  turns  not  out  of  his  course,  but  presses  on 
and  on  with  accelerated  speed,  until  at  length,  all  panting  and  breathless,  he 
enters  the  hallowed  gates  of  the  city  of  refuge,  and  enters  into  peace.  Such  is  the 
flight  of  the  sinner's  soul  to  the  arms  of  Christ  Jesus.  This  representation  sets 
before  us  the.  cnse  of  a  man  struck  with  a  conviction  of  guilt,  smitten  with  an  ap- 
prehension of  (lixnger,  doepairing  of  relieving;  l.imself,  toiQin^;  cut  of  himself,  and 
trusting  to  another.  The  very  name  of  Jesus,  which  was  before  an  insipid  sound, 
is  now  to  him  like  music.  His  soul  leaps  within  him  to  know  that  *'  God  is  in 
Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself,  not  imputing  to  men  their  trespasses  "  ; 
hia  heart  dances  for  joy  when  he  finds  that  "it  is  a  faithful  saying  that  Christ 
Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners."  But  observe :  his  conviction  of  guilt, 
and  danger,  and  ruin,  being  now  no  longer  superficial,  but  pervading,  individual, 
and  thorough,  he  is  not  satisfied  with  this  merely  general  representation  of  the 
matter.  It  ii  not  now  enough  for  him  to  know  in  so  many  general  terms  that  God 
is  merciful,  and  that  Christ  is  a  Saviour ;  he  now  narrowly  pries  into  the  whole 
affair,  into  the  authority  and  commission  of  Christ  to  save,  into  His  ability  and 
His  qualifications  to  save,  into  His  willingness  and  readiness  to  save.    III.  The 

PBIVILEOE    AND   HAPPINESS   OF   THOSE    WHO     HAVE     THUS     FLED     TO    ChEIST    JeSUS   FOB 

REFUGE.  "  By  two  immutable  things,  in  which  it  was  impossible  for  God  to  he," 
they  have  "  a  strong  consolation."  What  is  consolation  ?  It  is  the  relief  of  the 
mind  under  any  trouble  or  pain  ;  or  the  presence  and  enjoyment  of  a  good  which  is 
a>)le  to  prevent  altogether,  or  else  carry  away  and  bear  down  before  it,  as  in  a  full 
tide  or  flowing  stream,  all  evil  felt  or  feared.  Two  thinps  would  occur  to  the  mind 
of  the  man-slayer  in  connection  with  his  flight  to  the  city  of  refuge.  One  would 
b3  :  '•  Is  it  true — is  it  really,  incontrovertibly  true,  that  if  I  get  to  the  city  of  refuge, 
the  avenger  dares  not,  must  not  touch  me?  "  The  other  would  be  :  •'  Suppose  I 
get  to  the  city,  and  am  secure  against  the  stroke  of  the  avenger,  what  kind  of  ac- 
coramodation  and  provision  shall  I  find  within  that  city  ?  "  These  two  things 
would  occur  to  him  on  his  way  to,  or  on  his  arrival  at  the  city  of  refuge  ;  and  if  he 
had  had  any  uncertainty  as  to  the  one  or  the  other,  he  would  have  been  over- 
whelmed with  confusion  and  dismay.  But  he  had  no  doubt ;  he  knew,  he  was 
quite  sure,  that  if  he  got  to  the  city  of  refuge,  the  avenger  could  not  touch  him, 
that  he  would  be  as  safe  in  the  city  as  if  he  were  in  heaven.  He  also  knew  that,  if 
he  got  to  that  city,  and  should  remain  in  it,  all  his  wants  would  be  supplied, 
everything  necessary  for  his  accommodation  and  support  would  be  provided  for 
him.  Thus  he  had  consolation.  Now  apply  tnese  two  things  as  an  illustration  of 
the  nature  of  the  happiness  of  believing  in  Christ.  "  There  is  no  condemnation  to 
them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  "  They  that  believe  enter  into  rest."  "  Who  is 
he  that  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  It  is  God  that  justifieth." 
What  is  it  you  are  afraid  of?  Is  it  the  justice  of  God?  I  know  the  justice  of  God 
has  the  impenitent  sinner  by  the  throat,  and  says,  "  Pay  me  that  thou  owest !  " 
But  I  know  also  that  the  hand  of  the  penitent  sinner  lays  hold  on  the  hope  set 
before  him,  and  justice  takes  his  hand  off.  It  must  be  so;  otherwise  God  were 
unrighteous  in  demanding  two  payments  for  one  debt.  "  He  that  behoves  shall  be 
saved."  "  There  is  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  What 
are  you  afraid  of  ?  Is  it  of  the  fiery  law  ?  The  law  is  not  roaring  after  you  if  you 
have  got  into  the  city  of  refuge  ;  it  is  not  muttering  its  tremendous  maledictions 
against  you  if  you  have  laid  hold  of  the  hope  set  before  you.  If  you  hear  anything 
at  all  of  the  demands  of  the  law,  it  is  the  echoes  of  those  demands  dying  away 
amid  the  battlements  of  the  city  wall ;  for  he  to  whom  you  have  fled,  and  on  whom 
you  have  laid  hold,  has  "  magnified  the  law  and  made  it  honourable."  Then  what 
IB  it  yon  are  afraid  of?  Is  it  of  the  roaring  lion  of  hell?  He  is  indeed  "  going 
about  seeking  whom  he  may  devour  "  ;  but  your  faith  in  Christ  is  a  shield  where- 
with yoQ  may  quench  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked  one.  Then  what  is  it  you  have 
to  fear  ?  Is  it  death  ?  You  may  give  up  that  fear  along  with  all  the  other  fears ; 
for  Jesus,  to  whom  you  have  come,  on  whom  you  have  laid  hold,  has  put  down 


628  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chaj.  n. 

death,  abolished  it,  and  buried  it  in  His  own  grave ;  and  has  brought  life  and  im- 
mortality to  light.  This  is  consolation,  but  that  is  not  the  whole  of  it.  I  said 
that  the  consolation  of  the  man-slayer  on  reaching  the  city  of  refuge  would  also 
include  an  assurance  that  he  should  be  provided  for,  while  there,  with  everything 
necessary  for  his  accommodation  and  support.  This  answers  to  the  other  half — 
the  happiness  of  believing  in  Christ — which  consists  in  the  infinite  assurance  that 
God  has  given  the  believer  that  he  never  shall  want  any  manner  of  thing  that  is 
really  good,  and  that  he  never  shall  be  in  inextricable  danger,  "  The  youug  lions 
do  lack,  and  suffer  hunger  "  ;  and  well  they  may  ;  "  but  they  that  seek  the  Lord 
shall  not  want  any  good  thing."  Can  that  man  want  water  who  lives  on  the  brinks 
of  an  everlasting  spring  ?  Can  that  man  want  light  who  lives  in  the  centre  of  the 
eternal  sun  ?  Now  look  at  the  grounds  on  which  this  consolation  rests.  We  have 
it,  says  the  apostle,  "  by  two  immutable  things  in  which  it  was  impossible  for  God 
to  he."  What  are  these  immutable  things?  Where  are  they  to  be  met  with? 
We  cannot  write  the  word  immutable  on  the  rock  ;  it  is  constantly  wearing  away  : 
nor  on  the  sun  ;  the  sun  himself  shall  grow  old  and  dull.  But  there  are  two  immut- 
able things — the  word  of  promise  and  the  oath  of  God.  These  are  called  the 
"  counsel  of  God,"  to  intimate  that  His  promise  is  the  declaration  of  His  counseL 
Promises  very  often  are  the  result  of  anything  but  counsel ;  but  the  promise  of  God 
is  the  counsel  of  God,  the  manifestation  and  pubUcation  of  His  counsel.  The 
promises  of  God — what  are  they  like  ?  Whereuuto  shall  I  compare  them  ?  They 
are  like  so  many  silver  cords  let  down  from  heaven,  hanging  out  from  the  pavihon 
of  infinite  clemency,  I  had  almost  said,  sent  down  fi'om  the  heart  of  God  itself,  for 
the  hand  of  faith  to  lay  hold  on.  The  promise  of  God  is  an  immutable  thing  ;  and 
by  that  we  have  our  consolation.  But  there  is  another  ground  of  this  happiness. 
God,  knowing  the  million  ills  of  human  life,  the  million  jealousies  of  the  human 
heart,  knowing  the  backwardness  of  your  miod,  and  the  slowness  of  your  heart  to 
believe  His  own  eternal  word  of  promise,  hath  condescended  to  superadd  to  that 
His  solemn  oath.  What  is  that  oath  Uke  ?  Is  it  not  as  if  Jehovah  was  laying  all 
the  perfections  of  His  nature,  staking  the  very  glory  of  the  Godhead,  on  the  truth 
of  His  promise  previously  made  ?  These  are  the  two  immutable  things  by  which 
we  have  our  consolation.  Finally,  let  me  mention  the  quality  of  this  happiness. 
It  is  called  in  the  text  a  "  strong  consolation  ";  a  consolation  amongst  the  most 
substantial,  the  most  abundant  and  efficient  ;  a  consolation  available  for  every 
exigency  of  life,  for  the  solemnity  of  death,  for  the  crisis  of  the  judgment  day. 
How  strong  is  this  consolation  ?  It  is  stronger  than  the  afflictions  of  hfe.  It  turns 
the  dungeon  into  a  gate  of  heaven,  the  place  of  stocks  into  the  vestibule  of  gloiy. 
If,  like  the  Hebrews,  to  whom  the  language  was  originally  addressed,  you  were 
called  to  bear  the  spoiling  of  your  goods  for  Christ's  sake ;  with  this  consolation 
you  would  bear  it  joyfully.  Soaring  on  the  wings  of  grace,  you  may  defy  the  power 
of  affliction,  calamity,  sickness,  and  change.  He,  whose  word  of  promise  and 
solemn  oath  you  have,  has  said  He  v^ill  be  with  you  "  in  six  troubles  ;  yea,  in  seven 
there  shall  no  evil  touch  thee."  Strong  consolation  I  How  strong?  Stronger 
than  the  dread  of  wrath.  Oh,  what  a  mountain  is  gone  when  the  fear  of  hell  is 
gone  !  Oh,  what  a  load  is  removed  from  the  human  spirit  when  the  dread  of  the 
wrath  to  come  is  removed  I  And  it  is  removed  from  the  man  who  has  fled  for 
refuge  to  lay  hold  on  the  hope  set  before  him.  Strong  consolation  I  How  strong  ? 
It  is  not  only  stronger  than  all  the  afflictions  of  life,  and  stronger  than  the  dread 
of  the  wrath  to  come,  but  stronger  than  the  fear  of  death.  "  The  wicked  is  driven 
away  in  his  wickedness ;  but  the  righteous  hath  hope  in  his  death."  Go  and 
see  the  righteous  die.  Death  has  come  in  at  the  window ;  laying  his  hand 
upon  the  heart ;  freezing  up  the  life-blood  of  the  fountain.  Death  is  there ;  but 
Christ  is  there  also.  Death,  the  last  enemy,  is  there ;  but  Christ,  the  Lord  of 
life  and  glory,  is  there  too.  Death  is  there  as  tbe  servant  ;  Christ  as  the 
Master.  "I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying.  Blessed  are  the  dead  that  die 
in  the  Lord."  Strong  consolation  1  How  strong?  Stronger  than  all  the  terrors 
of  the  final  judgment,  than  the  desolations  of  universal  nature.  {J.  Beaumont, 
D.D.)  Flying  for  refuge  : — Tho  true  heirs  of  promise,  with  whom  God  hath 
pawned  His  word  and  oath  to  do  them  good  eternally,  are  such  as  have  fled  for 
refuge  to  lay  hold  upon  the  hope  set  before  them.  In  the  description  there  are 
two  parts,  "flying  for  refuge,"  and  "taking  hold  of  the  hope  set  before  them." 
The  one  relates  to  their  justification,  or  their  first  acceptation  with  God 
in  Christ,  "  Flying  for  refuge " ;  tbe  other  relates  to  their  carriage  after 
justification,    "  To    take    hold    of    the    hope    set    before    them."     jl.    For  the 


mir.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  823 

first  branch — "  Flying  for  refuge."  It  is  an  allusion  to  the  cities  of  refuge 
Bpoken  of  under  the  law.  1.  That  Christ  is  a  behever's  city  of  refuge,  or  the  alone 
sanctuary  for  distressed  souls.  2.  It  is  the  property  of  believers  to  fly  to  Christ  for 
refuge.  This  flying  may  be  explained  with  analogy  to  the  two  terms  of  every 
motion,  which  are  terminus  a  quo  and  ad  quern,  from  what  we  fly,  and  to  what ; 
and  so  we  have  the  perfect  method  which  the  Spiiit  observeth  in  bringing  home 
Bouls  to  God.  In  this  flying  to  Christ  as  a  city  of  refuge  there  is  a  driving  and  a 
drawing  work ;  the  first  belongs  to  the  law,  the  second  to  the  gospel.  The  law 
driveth  us  out  of  ourselves,  and  the  gospel  draweth  us,  and  bringeth  us  home  to 
God.  (1)  Let  us  speak  of  the  terminus  a  quo,  the  term  from  which  we  come,  or 
the  driving  work  ;  it  is  comprised  in  these  two  things — a  sense  of  sin,  and  a  sense 
of  the  wrath  of  God  pursuing  for  sin.  (2)  Let  us  come  to  the  terminus  ad  quern, 
from  what  we  come  to  what ;  they  run  to  Christ  as  their  city  of  refuge,  (a)  It 
implies  earnestness,  as  in  a  case  of  Ufe  and  death.  A  dilatory  trifling  spirit  shows 
we  are  not  touched  at  heart,  (b)  Running  to  the  city  of  refuge  impUeth  avoiding 
all  byways.  A  soul  that  is  rightly  affected  cannot  be  satisfied  vdth  any  other 
thing ;  another  place  would  not  secure  the  man,  nothing  but  the  city  of  refuge. 
(c)  This  running  implies  an  unwearied  dihgence.  The  man  was  running  still  till 
he  was  gotten  into  the  city  of  refuge,  for  it  was  for  his  Ufe  ;  so  we  are  unwearied 
until  we  meet  with  Christ  (Cant.  iii.  2).  (d)  When  they  are  got  into  their  city  of 
refuge,  they  stay  there  ;  having  onco  taken  hold  of  Christ,  they  will  not  quit  their 
holdfast  for  all  the  world.  II.  For  the  second  branch, "  To  lay  hold  upon  the  hope 
that  is  set  before  us,"  and  you  must  repeat  the  word  "  flyiug  "  or  "ruiming  "  again. 
1.  What  is  this  hope  ?  Hope  is  put  for  the  thing  hoped  for,  heaven  with  all  the 
glory  thereof  ;  for  it  is  a  hope  ' '  that  lies  within  the  veil "  f ver.  19) ,  or  a  hope  ' '  laid 
up  for  us  in  heaven  "  (Col.  i.  5).  Mark  the  double  end  of  him  that  cometh  unto 
Christ,  refuge  and  salvation  ;  for  in  Christ  there  is  not  only  dehverance  from  pur- 
suing wrath,  but  eternal  life  to  be  found ;  first  we  fly  from  deserved  wrath,  then 
we  take  hold  of  undeserved  glory.  This  is  more  easy  of  the  two  (Rom.  v.  10, 
11).  2.  Why  is  this  hope  said  to  be  set  before  us?  (1)  To  note  the  divine 
institution  of  this  reward  •  it  is  not  devised  by  ourselves,  but  appointed  by  God. 
(2)  It  is  proposed  and  set  before  us  for  our  encouragement.  As  it  is  said  of 
Christ  (chap.  xii.  2).  (3)  What  is  it  to  ran  to  take  hold  of  the  hope  set  before 
US  ?  Sometimes  it  implieth  a  challenging  it  as  ours ;  as  1  Tim.  vi.  19  :  "  That 
they  may  lay  hold  on  eternal  life."  Here  it  signifies  holding  fast,  never  to  let 
this  hope  go.  It  impUeth  dihgence  of  pursuit,  perseverance  to  the  end,  and  all 
this  upon  Christian  encouragement,  (a)  Diligence  in  pursuit  of  eternal  Ufe  in 
the  heirs  of  promise.  It  is  expressed  by  working  out  our  salvation,  making  it  our 
business  (PhU.  ii.  12).  When  we  will  not  be  put  off  with  anything  else,  but  have 
heaven  or  nothing,  this  is  to  seek  heaven  in  good  earnest,  (b)  This  flying  to  take 
hold  of  the  hope  set  before  us  importeth  perseverance  in  well-doing,  notwithstand- 
ing the  difficulties  in  the  way  to  heaven,  (c)  All  this  upon  Christian  encourage- 
ments,  for  the  hope  that  is  before  them.  A  man  may  know  much  of  his  spirit  by 
what  bears  him  up,  and  what  is  the  comfort  and  solace  of  his  soul  (Titus  ii.  13). 
Application — 1.  Comfort  to  those  that  can  apply  it,  even  to  those  who  are  thus 
qualified,  that  are  driven  and  drawn  to  Christ,  and  then  go  on  cheerfully  with  the 
work  of  obedience,  waiting  for  their  inheritance  in  heaven.  2.  Conviction.  It 
showeth  the  hardness  of  their  hearts  who  have  neither  felt  the  law  work  nor  the 
gospel  work,  but  remain  like  the  smith's  anvil,  softened  neither  with  hammer 
nor  with  oil ;  neither  driven  by  the  threatenings  of  the  law,  nor  drawn  with  the 
glad  tidings  of  salvation;  neither  John  nor  Jesus  woiketh  on  them.  Of  such 
Christ  speaketh  (Matt.  xi.  17).  3.  To  persuade  you  to  this  temper.  Three 
sorts  of  people  usually  we  speak  to^ — (1)  The  carnal  secure.  (2)  Those  that  are 
affected  with  their  condition.  (3)  Those  that  esteem  Christ,  and  embrace 
Him,  that  own  Him  as  ready  and  willing  to  save  sinners.  (T.  Manton,  D.D.) 
Christ  typified  by  the  cities  of  refuge : — I.  Evekt  sinneb  is  justly  exposed  to 
DEATH.  Pursued  by  the  righteous  avenger  of  blood,  who  will  cast  the  wicked  into 
hell,  with  all  the  nations  that  forget  God.  II.  God  hath  appointed  Jesus  as  thb 
REFUGE  FOR  CONDEMNED  SINNERS.  He  camo  that  men  might  not  perish,  but  have 
everlasting  life.  He  came  not  to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save  them.  Now  in 
this  He  was  strikingly  typified  by  the  cities  of  refuge.  1.  In  their  number  we  are 
reminded  of  the  sufficiency  of  Christ.  There  were  six  of  these  cities.  Doubtless 
amply  sufficient  for  the  cases  which  might  require  them.  Jesus  is  the  sufficient 
Saviooi  of  all  men.     In  Him  is  room  for  the  whole  world.     Merit,  mercy,  and  willing* 


624  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap   ti. 

ness,  for  every  child  of  man.  2.  In  their  diversified  localities  we  see  the  accessibility 
of  Christ.  These  cities  were  placed  in  various  parts  of  the  land,  so  as  to  be  near 
to  every  quarter,  and  accessible  to  the  inhabitants  throughout.  Here  we  see  at 
once  pointed  out  to  us  the  nearness  of  Christ  to  every  portion  of  the  family  of 
Adam.  3.  In  the  spacious  well-directed  roads  to  the  cities  of  refuge,  we  are 
reminded  of  the  free,  full,  and  plain  declarations  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  4.  In 
the  signification  of  the  names  of  the  cities  we  also  perceive  the  glorious  excellency 
of  Christ.  One  of  these  cities  was  called  "  Kadesh,"  which  signifies  "Holy." 
Jesus  is  the  Holy  One  of  God.  He  redeems  and  saves  men  to  holiness.  Another 
was  called  "  Shechem,"  which  signifies  "  Shoulder,"  representing  Christ  as  bearing 
the  sins  and  burdens  of  the  sinner.  Another  was  called  "Hebron,"  signifying 
"  Fellowship."  Thus  Christ  is  the  medium  and  ground  of  fellowship  between  God 
and  men,  and  between  the  whole  body  of  believers.  In  Christ  we  become  the  sons 
of  God  and  members  one  of  another.  Another  was  called  "  Bezer,"  which  signifies 
a  "  Stronghold."  Christ  is  often  thus  described.  He  is  our  refuge,  our  fortress, 
and  a  stronghold  in  the  day  of  trouble.  lu  Him  we  are  more  secure  than  if  sur- 
rounded by  a  munition  of  rocks.  Another  of  the  cities  was  oalled  "Ramoth," 
which  signifies  "  Exaltation."  Jesus  is  the  exalted  Son  of  God.  The  Prince  of 
life.  The  Lord  of  glory.  The  name  of  the  last  city  of  refuge  was  "  Golan,"  which 
signifies  "  Exultation,"  or  "Joy."  Christ  is  the  joy  and  rejoicing  of  His  people. 
His  gospel  is  the  message  of  joy.  His  kingdom  is  not  only  righteous- 
ness and  peace,  but  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  5.  In  the  deliverance  of  the 
man-slayer  we  see  typified  the  salvation  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  Within  the 
city  he  was  safe.  Now,  by  believing  repentance,  the  sinner  flees  to  Christ,  and 
becomes  interested  in  His  all-extensive  merit  and  saving  benefits.  But  he  must  be 
in  Christ.  And  he  must  abide  in  Him  (John  xv.  1-7).  Thus  he  shall  be  delivered 
from  present  condemnation,  and  from  eternal  death.  In  Christ  is  ample  provision 
for  his  comfort,  safety-,  and  well-being.  Application :  1.  We  see  the  awfulmisery  and 
peril  of  the  careless  sinner.  2.  The  absolute  necessity  of  repentance  towards  God 
and  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  how  necessary  that  this  should  be  prompt 
and  inmaediate.  3.  How  urgently  should  ministers  make  known  the  terrors  of  the 
Lord  and  persuade  men.  4.  How  happy  are  those  who  are  delivered  from  the  power 
of  Satan,  and  have  been  brought  to  enjoy  the  forgiving  love  of  God.  Within  the 
city  of  refuge  all  their  interests  are  secure  both  for  time  and  eternity.  (J,  Burns, 
D.D.)  Laying  hold  of  the  hope  : — It  is  said  that  a  traveller  by  night  fell  into  a 
dry  well.  His  cry  for  help  attracted  a  neighbour,  who  let  down  a  rope  and  attempted 
to  draw  him  up,  but  did  not  succeed  because  the  rope  kf pt  slipping  through  the  fallen 
man's  hands.  At  length  the  rescuer,  suspecting  that  the  fallen  man's  grip  was 
feeble  because  of  his  having  something  in  his  hand  besides  the  rope,  called  out  to 
him,  "Have  you  something  in  your  hands?"  "Yes,"  replied  the  man  at  the 
bottom,  "I  have  a  few  precious  parcels  which  I  should  like  to  save  as  well  as 
myself."  When  at  last  he  became  willing  to  drop  his  parcels,  there  was  muscular 
power  enough  in  his  arms  to  hold  fast  the  rope  till  he  was  delivered.  Are  yon 
seeking  purity  of  heart,  and  still  finding  yourself,  day  after  day,  in  the  horrible  pit 
of  impurity,  though  the  golden  chain  of  salvation  is  lowered  to  you  from  above ; 
have  you  not  something  in  your  hands  ?  How  about  those  precious  parcels  ?  Have 
you  dropped  them  all?  Then  lay  hold  on  the  hope  that  is  set  before  thee,  and  keep 
hold  till  thy  feet  are  on  the  rock,  and  songs  of  deliverance  burst  forth  from  thy  lips, 
and  thy  goings  are  henceforth  estabhshed  in  the  highway  of  holiness.  Is  that  last 
parcel  too  precious  to  be  dropped?  Well,  say  then,  "  I  will  not  give  up  my  idol," 
and  no  longer  dishonour  God  by  saying,  "  I  cannot  believe."  Can  you  be  safe  too 
soon  f — Can  you  be  safe  too  soon  ?  Can  you  be  happy  too  soon  ?  Certainly,  you 
cannot  be  out  of  danger  of  hell  too  soon  ;  and  therefore  why  should  not  your  closing 
with  Christ  upon  His  own  terms  be  your  very  next  work  ?  If  the  main  business  ol 
every  man's  life  be  to  flee  from  the  v^rath  to  come,  as  indeed  it  is  (Matt.  iii.  9),  and 
io  flee  for  refnge  to  Jesus  Christ,  as  indeed  it  is  (Heb.  vi.  18),  then  all  delays  are 
highly  dangerou?.  The  man-slayer,  when  fleeing  to  the  city  of  refuge  before  the 
avenger  of  blood,  did  not  think  he  could  reach  the  city  too  soon.  Set  your  reason 
to  work  upon  this  matter ;  put  the  case  as  it  really  is :  I  am  fleeing  from  wrath 
to  come ;  the  justice  of  God  and  the  curses  of  the  law  are  closely  pursuing  me ; 
is  it  reasonable  that  I  should  sit  down  in  the  way  to  gather  flowers,  or  play 
with  trifles?  for  such  are  all  other  concerns  in  this  world,  compared  with  our 
soul's  salvation.  (J.  Flavel.)  The  only  refuge: — "I  have  no  hope  in  what  I 
liave  been  or  done,'*  said  Dr.  Doddridge,  on  his  dying  bed,  "yet  I  am  full  of 


«KAP.  n.]  HEBREWS.  125 

ooufidenoe ;  and  this  is  my  confidence :  there  is  a  hope  set  before  me.  I  have 
fled,  I  still  fly,  for  refuge  to  that  hope.  In  Him  I  trust,  in  TTim  I  have  strong 
consolation,  and  shall  assuredly  be  accepted  in  this  beloved  of  my  souL"  WUch 
hope  we  have. — The  Christian  hope: — I.  "Which  hope  wb  hate."  1.  A  living 
hope.  2.  A  blessed  hope.  3.  A  good  hope.  4.  A  sustaining  hope ;  taken  hold  of 
it ;  we  feel  it.  Our  faith  seizes  it.  Our  hearts  experience  it.  II.  What  this  hope 
IS  TO  THOSE  WHO  HATE  TAKEN  HOLD  OF  IT.  1.  It  holds  the  soul,  as  an  anchor 
holds  the  ship,  from  drifting  before  the  wind  and  currents  of  human  opinions, 
personal  doubts,  &o.  2.  It  holds  the  soul  from  sinking  in  despair,  in  the  midst 
of  its  sorrows,  tribulations,  and  conflicts.  3.  It  is,  therefore,  a  comfort  to  the 
Boul  to  have  this  hope  in  times  of  trial  and  sorrow.  4.  It  is  "sure  and  stead- 
fast." Nothing  can  destroy  it.  Ill .  The  object  of  this  hope.  It  is  not  anchored 
in  the  uncertain  and  shifting  things  of  time  and  of  earth,  but  takes  hold  of  the 
eternal  and  heavenly.  1.  Of  the  crown  of  righteousness  which  "  fadeth  not  away." 
2.  Of  the  many  mansions  which  Christ  has  gone  to  prepare  for  us.  3.  Of  the 
inheritance  incorruptible,  undefiled ,  Ac.  4.  And  in  due  time  this  hope  shall  realize  its 
respective  objects.     Conclusion  :  1.  Kejoice  in  this  hope.     2.  Cherish  this  hope.    3. 

Cast  it  not  away  on  any  account.     {Local  Preacher's  Treasury.)       Christian  hope  : 

Hope  is  one  of  the  noblest  of  the  natural  instincts.  It  is,  as  the  poets  say,  the 
sunshiue  of  the  mind.  Like  the  old  sun-dial  of  Saint  Mark's  at  Venice,  it  marks 
only  the  cloudless  hours.  It  has  a  hfting  power  which  raises  and  carries  life  on. 
The  boy  hopes  to  be  a  man,  and  you  see,  in  his  thoughtful  moments,  the  dignity 
and  energy  of  a  man,  so  that  you  say,  "  He  will  be  a  credit  to  his  family.  He  will 
conquer  Silesia."  The  man  looks  through  the  years,  bearing  up  under  their 
burdens,  to  the  honours  and  rest  of  old  age.  Old  age,  stript  of  all  else,  ought  at 
least  not  to  live  on  the  past,  as  is  often  said,  but  to  be  waiting  in  joyful  expectation 
of  something  better  that  is  beyond.  There  is  this  quahty  of  hope  in  us  which  ia 
the  spring  of  our  courage  and  of  the  capacity  of  recovery  from  disappointment  and 
defeat.  Prince  Eugene  was  always  more  terrible  in  defeat  than  in  victory.  Hope, 
*'  the  nerve  of  life,"  as  Thackeray  calls  hope,  without  which  man  would  lose  half 
his  happiness  and  power,  and  power  of  growth,  making  him  "  a  man  of  hope  and 
forward-looking  mind  even  to  the  last,"  is  that  which  gives  life  its  impetus ;  but 
which  native  quality,  strong  though  it  be,  ends  in  human  nature  and  what  it  can 
do  and  compass.  It  is,  like  human  nature  itself,  a  thing  of  earthly  uncertainty 
whose  grounds  are  ever  shifting ;  while  the  hope  which  is  spoken  of  in  the  New 
Testament,  or  that  which  may  be  calleil  Christian  hope — even  if  it  use  the  beautiful 
natural  instinct  while  transforming  it  into  something  spiritual — is  a  more  enduring 
principle,  partaking  of  the  eternal  state  of  being.  If  we  look  at  the  reasons  why 
Christian  hope,  as  distinguished  from  the  naturaJ  or  instinctive  quality,  is  likened 
to  an  anchor  that  enters  into  the  veil  and  is  sure  and  steadfast,  the  chief  reason 
of  it  we  win  find  to  be  that  it  is  a  hope  which  is  fixed  upon  God  and  His  truth, 
where  alone  is  stability.  God's  being  is  that  which  "is,"  not  that  which  "  becomes." 
Nothing  can  add  to  or  take  from  the  perfect  One  in  whom  all  fulness  dwells :  though 
let  us  fairly  understand  that  God  is  not  unchangeable  in  the  sense  that  His  nature 
is  one  of  immovable  hardness  hke  a  rock  ;  for  His  heart  is  touched  by  the  most 
delicate  emotions  that  the  purest  spirit  is  capable  of  feeling ;  but  He  is  unchange- 
able in  the  immutability  of  those  moral  qualities  which  form  His  character  and 
upon  which  the  government  of  the  world  rests  secure.  If  we  see  the  proofs  of 
God's  firmness  in  the  unalterable  operations  of  His  physical  laws — a  principle  on 
which  all  science  is  founded — so  we  may  believe  that  the  blessed  promises  of  God 
will  come  true,  and  that  He  who  brings  forth  the  spring  violets  from  under  the 
snows  of  winter,  rejoices  to  bring  out  from  the  most  rugged  and  unpropitious  cir- 
cumstances the  blossoming  of  every  hidden  seed  of  hope ;  and  the  rugged  circum- 
stances  form  a  factor  in  the  Divine  plan.  In  God's  wisdom  misfortune  is  a 
blessing,  and  compels  men  to  use  their  powers  boldly,  and  to  do  things  that  they 
could  not  possibly  have  done  in  prosperous  times.  And  God  does  not  desert  a  soul 
in  misfortune.  When  we  seem  to  be  entirely  hemmed  in  He  makes  a  way  of  escape 
for  the  souL  In  the  drear  immensity  of  the  Arabian  desert  where  nothing  else 
grows  you  will  find  minute  sand-flowers  too  small  even  for  fragrance,  and  yet  that 
cheer  the  wanderer  and  say,  "Up,  heart,  there  is  hope  for  thee  I  "  Another  reason 
why  Christian  hope  has  in  it  the  principle  of  stability  is  because  it  has  a  source  of 
strength  in  the  perfect  character  of  the  spiritual  work  which  Jesus  Christ  has  done 
for  and  in  the  souL  Not  only  the  Divine,  but  even  the  human  part  of  Christ's 
work,  from  His  birth  to  His  resurrection,  gives  no  signs  of  failure  or  imperfection. 


526  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vj 

Christ  became  true  man  that  He  might  redeem  man,  and  His  human  natnre  was 
that  of  one  "  made  perfect  through  suffering,"  approaching  the  cross  with  slow  and 
steady  step.  Christ  went  through  what  man  goes  through,  or  can  go  through, 
touching  every  human  part,  relation,  and  need,  preserving  His  obedience  to  the 
end,  doing  all  the  will  of  the  Father,  and  righteously  triumphing  for  and  in  weak 
humanity,  and  then,  stretched  on  the  shameful  tree,  as  He  was  about  to  yield  His 
spirit,  could  He  cry  with  a  loud  voice,  "  It  is  finished  !  "  An  offering  for  human 
sin  was  made  by  that  strong  and  tender  love,  and  nothing  was  incomplete.  As  even 
the  clothes  in  the  sepulchre  were  rolled  up  and  laid  by  themselves  when  Christ 
arose,  nothing  was  left  undone.  The  resurrection  of  Jesus  from  the  dead  is  the 
confirmation,  and,  as  it  were,  celestial  touch,  or  crown,  put  on  Christian  hope, 
that  carries  it  across  the  confines  of  death  into  the  worlds  beyond.  Christian  hope 
may  be  seen  to  be  something  sure  and  stable  in  its  nature,  lastly,  because  as  a 
matter  of  experience  there  is  a  strong  and  indestructible  expectation,  the  fruit  ol 
the  spirit  of  Christ,  which  is  awaked  in  the  Christian  soul  and  the  Christian  church, 
and  has  always  been  so  in  every  age  and  every  believing  mind.  There  is  nothing 
more  inspiring  in  the  study  of  history  than  to  trace  the  beginnings  of  this  new 
hope  in  Christian  civilisation,  and  its  ennobling  influence  in  public  morals,  law, 
and  government,  the  treatment  of  oppressed  classes,  the  social  elevation  of  woman, 
the  higher  uses  of  property,  in  art,  science,  literature,  politics,  and  every  phase  of 
human  life,  forming  the  spring  of  progress,  and  having  in  it  a  certain  faculty  of 
prophecy,  in  which,  as  a  German  writer  says,  "  the  longing  heart  goes  forth  to  meet 
beforehand  great  and  new  creations  and  hastens  to  anticijate  the  mighty 
future ";  above  all,  making  the  soul  invincible  to  evil,  come  in  whatever  shape  it 
may,  in  poverty,  old  age,  sickness,  prison,  wreck,  war,  the  contempt  of  the  world 
and  the  violence  of  active  persecution;  or  whether  it  come  in  the  more  hidden 
trials  and  struggles  of  the  spirit.  There  can  be  no  delusion  here.  There  is  a  hi  pe 
which  comes  into  the  mind,  however  inexplicable,  which  was  not  there  before — a 
new  instinct  of  _a  new  nature.  It  is,  as  the  Scriptures  call  it,  "  a  living  hope," — an 
active  principle  forking  by  love  and  purifying  the  heart.  "  He  that  believeth  hath 
the  witness  in  himself ;  "  for  it  is  faith  in  eternal  things  which  is  at  the  bottom  of 
this  hope,  and  it  is  the  outcome  of  a  new  spiritual  life  within.  He  who  has  this 
hope  enjoys  a  communion  with  the  Divine.  He  wins  the  blessed  unity  wluch  is  in 
God.  A  "  new  marvellous  light "  arises  in  him  and  spreads  through  his  being. 
There  is  a  letting  in  of  the  love  of  God  to  the  soul  which  expels  its  gloom  and 
selfishness ;  and  selfishness  must  be  pressed  out  of  true  hope.  Such  pleasure 
experienced  here  in  God,  such  openings  of  the  soul  into  His  love,  must  look  fi^rward 
at  some  time  to  a  blissful  enjoyment  of  Him — to  the  great  vision  of  God  and  His 
eternal  peace.  It  is  this  simple  fact  which  makes  Christianity,  notwithstanding 
its  solemn  truths,  a  cheerful  religion,  and  which  gives  it  a  quality  of  joy  that  fills 
it  with  a  perpetual  sunshine.  In  the  apostolic  church  this  awoke  the  voice  of  song 
and  brought  to  the  world  the  life  of  a  new  blossoming  springtime  rich  in  its  promise 
of  great  things — ^its  true  golden  age,  not  past  but  present  and  to  come.  This  hope 
of  the  Christian,  then,  is  a  great  hope,  a  bright,  clear,  and  steady  hope,  surpassing 
all  the  vague  desires  of  the  natural  heart,  beautiful  as  the  poetry  of  the  heart 
sometimes  makes  these  to  appear — yet  earthly  and  evanescent,  like  the  painted 
clouds  that  pile  up  in  the  western  sky  of  a  summer's  sunset  turning  ashy  and 
deathly  pale  when  the  Ught  fades  out  of  them.  But  the  "  things  hoped  for  "  are 
too  fair,  too  high,  too  pure,  even  to  be  conceived.  The  prayer,  indeed,  of  this 
hope  is  not  for  a  life  without  trials,  but,  with  the  apostle,  the  believer  would  fight 
that  he  might  win  ;  he  would  endure  self-denial  that  he  might  rise  above  the  sensual 
into  the  spiritual ;  and  while  the  hope  sustains  and  cheers,  he  would  also  "  know 
Christ "  and  the  fellowship  of  His  sufferings,  and  sound  the  depths  of  Christ's  holy 
life  and  perfect  victory.  Is  your  hope  thus  well-grounded  ?  When  the  storm  comes, 
does  the  anchor  hold  ?  When  a  strong  and  unexpected  temptation  t&lh  like  a  sudden 
blast  on  you,  does  the  anchor  hold  ?  In  the  face  of  real  affliction— of  death — would  it 
hold  ?  Does  your  hope  take  hold  of  the  unchangeable  love  of  God  ?  If  so,  when 
tempted,  "  rejoice,  and  show  the  same  diligence,  with  the  full  assurance  of  hope  unto 
the  end."  Armed  with  a  hope  which  has  in  it  this  sure  promise,  go  forth  to  a  Ufe  of 
goodness.  Expect  to  achieve  great  things.  (J.  M.  Hoppin.)  Christian  hope  : — 
I.  What  is  its  object  ?  On  what  is  this  hope  supremely  fixed  ?  "  Upon  that 
which  is  within  the  veil."  Yes,  it  is  attracted  by  the  glory  which  is  afterwards  to 
be  revealed  by  the  fulness  of  grace,  which  is  to  come  unto  us  at  the  revelation  of 
Jesus  Christ,  the  "  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory,"  which  eye  hath 


CHAP.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  527 

not  seen,"  but  which  will  burst  upon  our  enraptured  souls  when  we  awake  np  in 
the  Divine  likeness  at  the  resurrection  morn.  0  what  a  sublime  anticipation  1 — 
The  perfection  of  ilie  soul  in  happiness,  which  in  this  world  is  so  limited  and 
interrupted — the  perfection  of  the  soul  in  purity,  which  is  now  only  attained  in 
part,  because  "  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  spirit,  and  we  cannot  do  the  things  that 
we  would  " — the  perfection  of  the  soul  in  knowledge,  which  here  is  so  contracted, 
intercepted,  acquired  with  so  much  difficulty,  and  so  soon  forgotten  by  the  weakness 
of  memory  and  the  infirmities  of  age — the  perfection  of  the  soul  in  holy  love,  which 
on  earth  is  so  faint,  cold,  and  weak — the  unveiled  vision  of  God  and  the  Lamb — 
intimate  and  everlasting  communion  with  the  Great  Jehovah,  Again,  we  say,  what 
a  sublime  anticipation!  How  elevating — how  expanding — how  purifying — how 
cheering — how  attractive  1  Compare  it  with  the  hope  of  the  worldling,  whose 
portion  is  only  in  this  life,  and  consists  of  houses  and  lands,  silver  and  gold,  titles 
and  emoluments — compare  it  with  the  hope  of  the  sensualist,  who  fares  sump- 
tuously every  day,  and  cries,  "  What  shall  we  eat,  what  shall  we  drink,  and  where- 
withal shall  we  be  clothed  ?  "  whilst  his  soul  is  unfed  by  the  bread  of  life,  untaught 
by  the  Spirit  of  God.  Compare  it  with  the  hope  of  the  ambitious,  whose  great 
object  is  to  rise  upon  the  scale  of  popularity.    II.  What  is  todb  authority  for 

CHERISHING  THIS   PLEASINO  ANTICIPATION?      On   WHAT    DOES    YOUR    HOPE    REST?      Not 

upon  your  own  merits,  however  amiable  your  temper,  moral  your  conduct,  chari- 
table your  actions,  and  just  and  uniform  your  dealings ;  nor  is  it  founded  upon  the 
mercy  of  God  unconnected  with  the  doctrine  of  the  Atonement,  and  the  work  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  heart.  The  believer's  hope  rests  exclusively  and  entirely, 
as  you  will  find  in  the  context,  upon  "the  two  immutable  things,"  the  oath  and 
promise  of  God  relating  to  the  sufferings  and  death  of  His  beloved  Son,  as  the  only 
sacrifice  for  sin,  and  the  strong  consolation  which  is  derivable  from  a  humble 
dependence  upon  His  merits  and  love.  1.  The  word  and  covenant  of  God  are  the 
charter  of  our  hopes,  which  we  are  permitted  to  plead,  saying,  "Eemember  Thy 
word  unto  Thy  servant  upon  which  Thou  hast  caused  me  to  hope  "  ;  recollecting 
that  "  whatsoever  thiugs  were  written  aforetime,  were  for  our  instruction,  that  we, 
through  patience  and  comfort  of  the  Scriptures,  might  have  hope."  2.  The  finished 
work  of  Christ  is  the  support  and  security  of  our  hope ;  "  as  the  law  made  nothing 
perfect,  it  was  merely  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come,  but  the  bringing  in  of  a 
better  hope  did,  by  which  we  draw  nigh  unto  God."  3.  Our  union  with  the  Saviour, 
and  the  renewal  of  our  soul  by  the  converting  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  are  the 
evidence  and  the  sanction  of  our  hope,  as  "  Christ  is  in  us  the  hope  of  glory,"  and, 
by  the  witnessing  of  the  Spirit,  "  we  know  what  is  the  hope  of  our  caJling,"  and 
enjoy  "  the  fuU  assurance  of    hope  unto  the  end."    III.  The  benefits  which 

RESULT  FROM  THIS  DESIRABLE  STATE  OP  MIND.   "  It  IS  LIKE  AN  ANCHOR  TO  THE 

SOUL,  BOTH  SURE  AND  STEADFAST."  Hcrc  a  State  of  trial  and  exposure  is  implied. 
The  soul,  by  this  nautical  phraseology,  is  compared  to  a  vessel  floating  upon  the 
uncertain  and  perpetually-changing  surface  of  the  ocean,  where  an  anchor  is  indis- 
pensable to  its  safety.  On  what  does  the  hope  of  a  newly-awakened  sinner  rest  ? 
On  what  is  the  anchor  of  a  believing  penitent  cast  ?  1.  On  the  free  mercy  of  the 
blessed  God  "  who  desireth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  but  ratljer  that  he  may  turn 
from  his  wickedness  and  live. "  2.  It  rests  upon  the  efficacy  of  the  Saviour's  blood, 
which  is  unto  all  and  upon  all  them  that  believe  ;  which  is  the  price  of  our  redemp- 
tion— the  purchase  of  our  acceptance — the  ratification  of  our  pt  ace,  and  the  balm 
of  our  consolation.  3.  The  invitations  of  the  gospel  are  also  the  sanction  of  a 
penitent  sinner's  hope.  These  are  the  warblings  of  mercy's  trumpet,  the  procla- 
mation of  redeeming  love.  4.  Nor  can  we  omit  to  notice  the  encouragement  which 
the  pleasing  change  produced  in  the  sinner's  mind  affords  to  the  energies  of  evan- 
gelical hope.  Thus  assured  of  his  safety,  he  spreads  his  sails — launches  forth  and 
speeds  his  way  towards  the  promised  land,  the  better  country,  favoured  with  the 
Baperintendence  of  the  Saviour  as  his  pUot,  the  Word  of  God  as  his  chart  and  his 
compass,  and  hope  as  his  anchor.  At  length  after  many  a  storm  and  struggle,  the 
believer  reaches  the  peaceful  port  of  everlasting  bliss.  Then,  again,_  his  hope,  as 
an  anchor  to  the  soul,  is  most  valuable.  He  is  now  waiting  for  the  signal  to  dis- 
embark and  to  land  upon  the  better  country.  He  therefore  resembles  Paul,  who, 
having  "  fought  a  good  fight, "  finished  his  course  and  kept  the  faith,  said,  "  I  am  now 
feady  to  be  offered  up,  and  the  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand."  "  I  know  whom  I 
have  believed,  and  am  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep,"  &c.  IV.  The  impobtancb 
or  this  hope.  1.  This  will  appear  if  you  reflect  on  the  insufficiency  of  all  things 
here  below  to  satisfy  the  immortal  soul  and  render  it  happy.    2.  Yonr  peace  and 


628  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

comfort  depend  in  a  great  degree  upon  the  possession  of  an  evangelical  hope.  3.  The 
possession  of  the  blessing  in  question  is  indispensable  from  the  uncertainty  of  life, 
only  during  the  limited  span  of  which  can  the  hope  of  glory  be  obtained.  4.  And,^ 
finally,  the  satisfaction  and  comfort  of  your  friends  who  may  survive  you  are  in- 
volved in  your  possessing  a  good  hope.  {W.  B.  Leach.)  The  hope  of  the  believer — 
"sure  and  stedfast" : — I.  That  the  hope  of  the  Chbistian  man  is  a  spe- 
oiFio  AND  WELL  DEFINED  HOPE — a  hope  about  which  he  can  give  an  answer — a 
hope  which  he  can  trace  to  its  origin,  and  the  operations  of  which  he  is  able, 
in  some  measure,  to  explain.  This  may  be  seen  by  the  use  made  of  the  word 
"  which,"  in  the  passage  before  us.  The  idea  seems  to  be  that  these  men,  when 
awakened  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  a  sense  of  their  personal  danger,  look 
about  them  for  some  place  of  deliverance  to  which  they  may  run  and  be  secure. 
And  the  apostle  says  that  for  men  in  that  condition,  there  is  a  hope  set  before  them 
in  the  gospel,  that  is  accessible  to  them  :  and  there  is  the  voice  of  mercy  bidding 
them  fly  from  the  wrath  to  come ;  and  the  men  here  spoken  of  have  hearkened  to 
that  voice.  They  have  availed  themselves  of  that  provision,  they  have  run  there- 
unto, and  they  are  saved.  II.  That  this  hope,  derived  fbom  Christ,  relates  to  a 
condition  of  blessedness — it  entereth  into  that  which  is  within  the  veil.  Now 
who  can  tell  us  what  there  is  within  the  veil  ?  Who  can  conceive  wbat  it  is  to 
have  Christ  entered  in  amongst  tliese  things  within  the  veil,  as  our  Forerunner  and 
Eepresentative  ?  Jesus  Christ,  as  our  Forerunner,  has  removed  the  obstacles  out 
of  our  way,  and  made  all  the  necessary  preparations  for  our  safe  departure  from 
that  which  is  seen  and  temporal  to  that  which  is  unseen  and  eternal.  "I  go,"  He 
says,  "  to  prepare  a  place  for  you,  but  I  come  again  to  take  you  to  Myseif,  that 
where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also."  All  this  is  going  on  at  this  moment.  His 
heart  is  towards  you,  His  occupation  is  about  you,  and  thus  it  is  from  hour  to  hour. 
In  the  multitude  of  your  thoughts,  then,  you  may  rejoice  that  you  are  raised  up 
together  with  Christ,  made  to  sit  together  in  heavenly  places  with  Christ ;  and  tliat 
because  He  lives  you  Uve  also.  lU.  That  this  hope  acts  as  an  anchor  to  the  soul. 
It  is  not  mere  sentimeutalism,  but,  as  hinted  in  our  text,  a  thing  of  the  most 
powerful  efficacy,  without  which  men,  in  this  world,  could  not  live.  It  is  called  the 
"  anchor  of  the  souL"  This  leads  us  to  think  of  the  sea,  of  storms  and  tempests, 
and  of  some  gallant  vessel  which,  in  order  to  be  saved  from  the  storm,  must  have 
all  the  appUances  of  deUverance,  safety,  and  defence.  Have  you  never  seen  such  a 
vessel  when  suddenly  a  storm  has  come  down  upon  her,  and  she  has  been  unable 
to  get  out  to  sea  ?  They  then  let  go  the  anchor,  as  the  only  hope,  the  sole  remaining 
chance  of  escape.  Suppose  the  anchor  drags,  what  then  ?  Suppose  it  parts  from 
the  cable  which  unites  it  to  the  ship  ?  Suppose  the  anchor  breaks  ?  The  doom  of 
the  ship  is  sealed  ;  for  the  anchor  is  everything ;  and  this  hope,  which  is  so  beauti- 
fully  compared  to  the  anchor,  is  everything  to  the  Christian.  Your  trials  and  per- 
plexities are  not  only  like  a  storm,  but  as  a  storm  from  which  you  cannot  get  away. 
You  cannot  run  before  it.  You  cannot  take  advantage  of  a  wider  berth  by  getting  out 
to  sea.  There  is  no  alternative ;  you  must  "  ride  it  out."  What  would  you  do  under 
such  circumstances  but  for  your  hope  that  you  have  an  interest  in  tho  great  salva- 
tion? What  could  you  do  without  it?  I  do  not  wonder  that  the  Bible  calls  it  a 
'  Uving,"  "  blessed,"  and  "  glorious  hope."  How  often  have  you  and  I  been  saved 
from  making  shipwreck,  thus  far,  of  our  profession  and  consistency  by  reverting 
yet  once  more  to  the  everlasting  covenant  which  "  is  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure  ! " 
IV.  That  this  anchor  to  your  soul  will  never  fail.  It  is  "  sure  .nd  stedfast." 
Look  at  these  two  words:  the  word  "sure"  refers  to  hope  itself,  and  the  word 
"  stedfast"  to  that  which  the  hope  relates  to.  Hence,  then,  we  have  the  anchor, 
and  the  anchorage.  The  hope  of  the  good  man,  in  itself  considered,  is  sure  ;  no 
matter  what  the  strain  upon  it,  it  is  strong  and  infrangible.  It  was  originated 
by  the  "  God  of  Hope  "  ;  it  is  sustained  and  guarded  by  Him  ;  and  therefore  it 
cannot  be  broken.  It  is  a  sure  thing.  We  have  heard  men  say,  "  WTiat  shall  we 
do  in  an  extremity  Uke  this?  "  But  the  answer  is  explicit  enough — "  My  giace  is 
sufficient  for  thee";  and  the  hope  which  is  of  God's  own  implantation,  is  a  hope 
which  will  never  fail.  It  is,  in  itself  considered,  inviolable  and  indestructible.  God 
created  it,  and  He  will  take  care  that  it  shall  never  be  destroyed  ;  we  will  therefore 
rejoice  in  it.  But,  moreover,  it  is  not  only  "sure,"  it  is  also  "stedfast."  The 
former,  as  I  have  said,  referred  to  the  anchor  itself,  this  latter  related  to  the 
anchorage.  "  Steadfast,"  i.e.,  it  has  laid  hold  of  that  which  will  not  let  go.  This 
seems  to  have  been  the  apostle's  thought.  An  anchor,  you  know,  although  it  may 
Dot  break,  may  drag.    Its  material  and  construction  may  be  the  very  best,  stiU 


CHAP.  Ti.)  HEBREWS.  629 

there  may  be  nothing  like  a  tenacious  bottom  in  whioh  to  embed  itselt  There  may 
be  none  of  the  "bars  of  the  earth,"  as  Jonah  calls  them,  npon  whioh  it  may  get 
hold ;  and  therefore  in  the  extremity — at  the  very  crisis— their  doom  is  sealed  ifor 
want  of  anchorage  I  Now  the  anchorage  of  your  hope  will  never  let  the  anchor 
drag.  If  I  were  asked  what  this  anchorage  is  I  should  say  it  has  laid  hold  of  the 
"  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises,  which  are  all  yea  and  amen  in  Christ 
Jesus."  It  has  laid  hold  of  the  everlasting  covenant  which  "is  ordered  in  all 
things  and  sure."  It  has  laid  hold  of  the  Bock  of  Ages.  It  has  laid  hold  of  the 
"  two  immutable  things  by  which  God  sware  and  cannot  lie."  It  has  laid  hold  of 
the  foundation  of  God  which  standeth  "  sure,"  and  against  which  "  the  gates  of  hell 
'shall  not  prevail."  It  has  entered  into  that  which  is  within  the  veil,  and  embedded 
itself  deep  down  into  the  Divine  purposes,  and  enwrapped  itself  around  the  Divine 
all-sufficiency,  and  taken  hold — with  its  firm,  broad,  seven-fold  gigantic  grasp — of 
the  great  high  throne,  which  is  from  everlasting — the  throne  of  God  and  of  the 
Lamb,  and  that  throne  itself  must  drag  ere  your  anchor  will  come  home  I  (W. 
Brock.)  Hope  something  more  than  faith : — Faith  accepts  and  credits  testimony ; 
hope  anticipates.  Faith  says  the  fruit  is  good ;  hope  picks  and  eats.  Faith  is  bud ; 
hope  blossom.  Faith  presents  the  cheque;  hope  lays  out  the  amount  received.  And 
such  hope  is  the  anchor  of  the  soul.  The  comparison  between  hope  and  an  anchor 
is  familiar  even  to  heathen  writerS;  and  it  is  easy  to  see  how  fit  it  is.  It  steadies 
the  soul.  Take  an  illustration  from  common  life  :  A  young  man  pledges  his  trotii 
to  a  poor  but  noble  girl.  He  is  draughted  for  foreign  service,  and  says  farewell  for 
long  years.  Meanwhile  she  is  left  to  do  as  well  as  she  can  to  maintain  herself. 
Work  is  scanty,  wages  low,  she  is  sometimes  severely  tempted  and  tried.  But, 
amidst  all,  she  is  kept  true  to  her  absent  lover,  and  to  her  nobler  self,  by  the  little 
strand  of  hope  which  links  her  to  a  happy  and  united  future.  So,  when  suffering, 
or  tempted,  or  discouraged,  our  hope  goes  forward  into  the  blessed  future,  depicted 
on  the  page  of  Scripture  in  glowing  colours,  and  promised  by  the  word  of  Him  who 
cannot  lie ;  and  the  anticipation  of  it  fills  the  soul  with  courage  and  patience,  so  as 
to  endure  the  trials  of  time,  in  view  of  the  certain  blessedness  of  eternity.  {F.  B. 
Meyer,  B.A.)  An  anchor  of  the  bouL — Our  anchor  within  the  veil : — I.  Our  hope, 
we  are  here  told,  is  "  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul."  To  the  imagination  of  the  writer, 
life  is  a  sea,  the  soul  is  a  ship,  and  hope  is  the  anchor  of  the  soul.  It  was  not  the 
first  time  that  this  emblem  had  been  thus  poetically  applied.  He  had  seen  it  in 
the  Hebrew  writings  which  he  had  read  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel ;  in  the  course  of 
his  Greek  studies,  he  had  possibly  met  with  the  sayings  of  Socrates — "  To  ground 
hope  on  a  false  supposition  is  like  trusting  to  a  weak  anchor."  "  A  ship  ought  not 
to  trust  to  one  anchor,  nor  life  to  one  hope."  He  had  heard  the  Romans,  in  pro- 
verbial phrase,  call  a  man's  last  desperate  hope,  Anchora  sacra.  Finding  this 
metaphor  in  the  service  of  common  Ufe,  he  baptized  it,  quickened  it  with  a  new 
meaning,  and  pressed  it  into  the  service  of  God,  employing  it  to  show  the  superiority 
of  the  Christian's  hope  to  the  hope  of  any  other  man.  II.  Our  hope,  it  is  further 
said,  ENTEBETH  INTO  THAT  WITHIN  THE  VEIL."  Th3  idea  appears  to  be  this : — A  ship 
shattered  with  "  the  battle  and  the  breeze,"  at  length  gets  near  the  port;  but  owing 
to  the  shallow  waters,  or  the  sweeping  tempest,  or  the  temporary  prohibition  of  the 
authorities  on  shore,  she  is  not  permitted  at  once  to  enter  the  harbour.  The  sailors 
then  heave  out  the  sheet-anchor,  and  by  means  of  the  boat  it  is  carried  within  the 
royal  dock ;  and  though  the  ship  cannot  herself  get  in,  she  is  thus  prevented  from 
being  drifted  away  into  the  deep  sea.  To  enter  into  that  within  the  veil,  is  to  enter 
within  the  harbour  of  eternal  repose — this  may  not  at  present  be  permitted,  but 
we  may  cast  our  anchor  there,  and  meanwhile  wait  in  safety  here.  To  convey  the 
whole  of  the  idea  which  the  apostle  has  in  view,  two  images  are  combined.  Let  ua 
forget  the  nautical  allusion,  and  think  only  on  the  image  which  is  borrowed  from 
the  Temple.  "  The  veil  "  is  that  which  divides  earth  and  heaven;  and  our  anchor 
*' entereth  into  that  which  is  within  the  veil."  1.  The  words  "within  the  veil" 
suggest  the  mysteriousness  of  heaven  to  the  inhabitants  of  earth.  It  is  natural 
that  those  who  are  on  their  way  to  the  heavenly  country  should  make  it  the 
frequent  theme  of  conjectural  thought.  But,  after  all,  heaven  will  be  a  secret  to 
us  until  we  die.  "  My  chief  conception  of  heaven,"  said  Robert  Hall  to  Wilber- 
force,  "  is  rest."  "  Mine,"  replied  Wilberforce,  "  is  love."  Perhaps  both  concep- 
tions are  true,  and  union  of  perfect  love  with  perfect  rest  conveys  our  best  idea  of 
heaven,  considered  simply  as  a  state.  But  what  is  the  manner  of  existence  there, 
and  what  is  the  true  physical  theory  of  another  life  ?  How  shall  we  see  without 
tiiese  eves,  hear  without  these  ears,  act  without  this  material  instrument  of  being? 

3i 


530  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

What  are  the  visions,  the  emotions,  the  specific  employments  of  heaven  ?  Where 
and  what  is  the  region  itself  1  Is  it  a  star  ?  Is  it  a  son  ?  These  questions  are 
unanswered  and  unanswerable.  The  gospel  is  sent  to  show  the  way  to  glory,  and 
not  what  that  glory  is.  •'  The  Holy  Spirit  teacheth  how  we  may  reach  heaven,  and 
not  how  heaven  moves."  In  answer  to  all  our  questions  respecting  its  nature,  the 
Saviour  replies,  "  What  is  that  to  thee  ?  follow  thou  Me."  2.  The  nearness  of 
heaven  is  suggested  by  the  epithet  "  veil."  Christians,  there  is  only  a  veil  between 
us  and  heaven  1  A  veil  is  the  thinnest  and  frailest  of  all  conceivable  partitions. 
The  veil  that  conceals  heaven  is  only  our  embodied  existence,  and  though  fearfully 
and  wonderfully  made,  it  is  only  wrought  out  of  our  frail  mr.rtality.  So  slight  is 
it,  that  the  puncture  of  a  thorn,  the  touch  of  an  insect's  sting,  the  breath  of  an 
infected  atmosphere,  may  make  it  shake  and  fall.  3.  The  glory  of  heaven  is  sug- 
gested by  the  expression  "  within  the  veil."  What  was  within  the  veil  of  the 
Hebrew  Temple  ?  Not  the  ark,  not  the  censer,  not  the  rod  that  budded,  not  one  of 
these  things  apart,  nor  all  combined,  made  the  glory  of  the  place,  but  its  true  glory 
was  the  mystic  light  that  shone  above  the  mercy-seat,  and  symbolised  the  presence 
of  "  the  Great  King."  In  like  manner,  the  manifested  presence  of  God,  and  that 
alone,  is  the  true  glory  of  heaven.  4.  The  hoUness  of  heaven  is  here  suggested. 
Within  the  inner  veil  was  the  "  Holiest  of  all."  AU  the  Temple  was  holy,  but  this 
was  "  the  Holy  of  Holies."  It  was  a  perpetual  memorial  of  the  fact  that  heaven  is 
a  place  of  exquisite  and  awful  purity.  III.  Our  hope,  entering  within  the  veil, 
depends  on  the  hfe  of  Jesus  there.  "  Whitheb  the  Fobeeunneb  is  foe  us  entbeed, 
EVEN  Jesus."  The  forerunner  of  the  ancient  ship  was  the  Anchorarius,  the  man 
who  had  charge  of  the  anchor,  and  who  carried  it  within  the  harbour,  when  there 
was  not  yet  water  sufficient  to  float  the  ship  into  it.  In  a  spiritual  sense,  the  fore- 
runner of  the  worshipping  Israelites  was  the  high  priest,  who,  taking  with  him  the 
symbols  of  sacrifice,  entered  within  the  veil  on  their  behalf.  The  forerunner  of  a 
band  of  pilgrims  is  one  who  precedes  them  to  the  place  of  destination,  to  give 
notice  of  their  approach,  to  take  possession  in  their  name,  and  to  prepare  for  their 
arrival.  1.  The  sense  in  which  Christ  sustains  the  office  of  forerunner  in  relation 
to  the  millions  who  are  hastening  to  the  world  of  light  within  the  veil.  He  is  the 
Sovereign  Proprietor  of  heaven  ;  He  is  the  very  glory  of  the  place  ;  yet  He  is  there 
leading  "  not  a  life  of  glory  only,  but  a  life  of  office."'  His  perpetual  presence  there 
is  the  perpetual  argument  for  our  salvation.  He  is  there  to  complete  the  removal 
of  every  impedimeut  to  the  entrance  of  His  followers ;  there  as  the  sublime 
guarantee  that  we  shall  be  there.  2.  You  are  also  taught  by  these  metaphors  to  see 
how  entirely  your  hope  is  identified  with  faith.  Many  a  person  will  tell  you  that 
he  hopes,  only  because  he  does  not  venture  to  say  that  he  believes.  Hope  is  thought 
to  be  something  less  decisive  than  faith;  to  imply  a  lower  grade  of  Christian 
attainment,  a  weaker  tone  of  spiritual  life,  or  perhaps  an  uncertainty  as  to  whether 
we  feel  even  the  first  stirs  and  the  faintest  indications  of  that  life.  But  hope, 
instead  of  involving  less  gra:?e  than  faith,  does,  in  reality,  involve  more.  Faith — 
healthy  faith — faith  with  a  keen  eye,  a  strong  hand,  and  an  unfaltering  voice  ;  faith 
that  can  say,  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  who  has  the  charge  of  my 
anchor  " ;  such  faith  as  this  must  be  in  existence  before  you  can  have  "  a  hope  that 
maketh  not  ashamed. "  IV.  Our  hope  is  an  anchor  of  the  soul  which  has  peculiar 
recommendations.  It  is  "both  sure  and  steadfast."  1.  The  term  *'  sure"  seems 
to  refer  to  the  reliable  nature  of  the  anchor  itself.  It  is  not  constructed  of  doubtful 
materials  ;  its  cable  will  not  snap  in  the  tempest ;  no  stress  or  strain  upon  it,  and 
no  resisting  force  will  drag  it  from  its  anchorage.  The  term  "  steadfast  "  seems  to 
refer  to  the  use  of  the  anchor.  An  anchor  is  that  which  keeps  the  ship  steadfast. 
While  waiting  on  this  fluctuating  sea  of  life,  a  hope  in  Christ  will  keep  you  safe 
amidst  all  peril,  and  fixed  amidst  all  change.  2.  You  will  be  steadfast  in  the  calms 
of  life.  Amidst  all  brightness  here,  hope  for  something  brighter  there ;  amidst  all 
earthly  good,  hope  for  a  better  and  enduring  substance ;  "  set  your  affections  on 
things  above,  where  Christ  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God  " ;  and  through  the 
powers  of  the  world  to  come,  earth  will  be  disenchanted,  the  spirit  will  be  kept 
upon  its  guard,  and  your  faith  will  be  "steadfast"  to  the  end.  3.  You  will  be 
steadfast  amidst  the  storms  of  life.  There  are  storms  of  care,  storms  of  conscience, 
ptorms  of  temptation ;  and  all  thoughtful  natures  know  that  the  wildest  storms  that 
ever  rage  are  those  which  are  felt  within,  to  which  there  are  no  human  witnesses,  and 
which  sometimes  spend  their  fury  when  all  without  seems  placid  and  delightful. 
What  deep  Christian  thinker  has  not  sometime  been  nearly  overwhelmed  in  waves 
ot  m  ntal  perplexity  ?     What  lonely  wrestler  in  prayer  is  there  who  has  not  som&- 


CHAP.  ▼!.]  HEBREWS.  531 

times  cried,  "  Deep  calleth  unto  deep  at  the  noise  of  Thy  waterspouts :  all  Thy 
waves  and  billows  are  gone  over  me  ?  "    But  if  in  such  hours  of  dark  tempest  we 
can  retain  the  conviction,  however  faint,  that  He  who  presides  amidst  the  glories  of 
heaven  is  our  own  Eedeemer,  that  He  still  holds  us  with  His  mighty  power  and  will 
not  let  us  go,  we  shall  survive  the  crisis ;  our  ship,  shattered  though  it  be,  will 
never  founder ;  in  the  very  rush  and  agony  of  waters  we  shall  patiently  hope  on, 
(C.  Stanford,  D.D.)        The  anchor: — I.  First,  let  me  call  your  attention  to  the 
DKSiON  OF  THE  ANCHOB  of  which  our  text  speaks.    The  design  of  an  anchor,  of 
oturse,  is  to  hold  the  vessel  firmly  to  one  place  when  winds  and  currents  would 
otherwise  remove  it.    God  has  given  us  certain  truths,  which  are  intended  to  hold 
our  minds  fast  to  truth,  hohness,  perseverance — in  a  word,  to  hold  us  to  Himself. 
But  why  hold  the  vessel?    1.  The  first  answer  which  would  suggest  itself  would 
be.  To  keep  it  from  being  wrecked.    If  every  wind  of  doctrine  whirled  you  about 
at  its  will  you  would  soon  be  drifted  far  away  from  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  and 
concerning  it  you  would  make  shipwreck  ;  but  you  cost  your  Lord  too  dear  for  Him 
to  lose  you,  to  see  you  broken  to  pieces  on  the  rocks;  therefore  He  has  provided  for 
you  a  glorious  holdfast,  that  when  Satan's  temptations,  your  own  corruptions,  and 
the  trials  of  the  world  assail  you,  hope  may  be  the  anchor  of  your  soul,  both  sure 
and  steadfast.    2.  An  anchor  is  also  wanted  to  keep  a  vessel  from  discomfort,  for 
even  if  it  be  not  wrecked  it  would  be  a  wretched  thing  to  be  driven  hither  and 
thither,  to  the  north  and  then  to  the  south,  as  winds  may  shift.    Thare  are  solid 
and  sure  truths  infallibly  certified  to  us,  which  operate  powerfully  upon  the  mind 
BO  as  to  prevent  its  being  harassed  and  dismayed.     The  text  speaks  of  "  strong  con- 
solation."   Is  not  that  a  glorious  word — we  have  not  merely  consolation  which  will 
hold  us  fast  and  bear  us  up  against  the  tempest  in  times  of  trouble,  but  strong 
consolation  so  that  when  affliction  bursts  forth  with  unusual  strength,  like  a  furious 
tornado,  the  strong  consolation,  like  a  sheet-anchor,  may  be  more  than  a  match  for 
the  strong  temptation,  and  may  enable  us  to  triumph  over  all.    Very  restful  is  that 
man  who  is  very  believing.     3.  An  anchor  is  wanted,  too,  to  preserve  us  from  losing 
the  headway  which  we  have  made.     Those  who  know  anything  experimentally 
about  Divine  things  have  cast  their  anchor  down,  and  as  they  heard  the  chain  run- 
ning out,  they  joyfully  said,  "  This  I  know,  and  have  beUeved.    In  this  truth  I 
stand  fast  and  immovable.    Blow,  winds,  you  will  never  move  me  from  this 
anchorage ;  whatsoever  I  have  attained  by  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit,  I  will  hold 
fast  as  long  as  I  Uve."    4.  Moreover,  the  anchor  is  needed  that  we  may  possess 
constancy  and  usefulness.     The  man  who  is  easily  moved,  and  believeth  this  to-day 
and  that  to-morrow,  is  a  fickle  creature.     Who  knows  where  to  find   him?    II. 
Secondly,  I  invite  you  to  consider  the   make  of  the   anchob — "  That   by   two 
immutable  things,  in  which  it  was  impossible  for  God  to  lie,  we  might  have  a  strong 
oonsoLition."    Anchor-maldng  is  very  important  work.    The  anchor-smith  has  a 
very  responsible  business,  for  if  he  makes  his  anchor  badly,  or  of  weak  material, 
woe  to  the  shipmaster  when  the  storm  comes  on.     If  anything  in  this  world  should 
be  strong  it  should  be  an  anchor,  for  upon  it  safety  and  life  often  depend.    What 
is  our  anchor  ?    It  is  made  of  two  Divine  things.     The  one  is  God's  promise,  a 
sure  and  stable  thing  indeed.    To  this  sure  word  is  added  another  Divine  thing, 
namely,  God's  oath.     Conceive  the  majesty,  the  awe,  the  certainty  of  this  !    Here, 
then,  are  two  Divine  assurances,  which,  like  the  flukes  of  the  anchor,  hold  us  fast. 
We  have  for  our  anchor  two  things,  which,  in  addition  to  their  being  Divine,  are 
expressly  said  to  be  immutable — that  is,  two  things  which  cannot  change.    When 
the  Lord  utters  a  promise  He  never  runs  back  from  it — "  the  gifts  and  calling  of  God 
are  without  repentance."     Notice  next  of   these  two  things   that   it    is   said — 
"  Wherein  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie."     It  is  inconsistent  with  the  very  idea 
and  thought  of  God  that  He  should  be  a  liar.    A  lying  God  would  be  a  so'ecism  in 
language,  a  self-evident  contradiction.    But  now,  what  is  this  promise,  and  what  is 
this  oath?    The  promise  is  the  promise  given  to  Abraham  that  his  seed  should  be 
blessed,  and  in  this  seed  should  all  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed  also.    To  whom 
was  this  promise  made  ?    Who  are  the  •'  seed  "  ?    To  Christ  Himself,  and  to  all 
who  are  in  Christ,  is  the  covenant  made  sure,  that  the  Lord  will  blees  them  for 
ever  and  make  them  blessings.     And  what  is  the  oath  ?     That  may  refer  to  the 
oath  which  the  Lord  sware  to  Abraham  after  the  patriarch  had  offered  up  his  son, 
for  which  see  the  twenty-second  chapter  of  Genesis :  but  I  think  you  will  agree 
with  me  if  I  say  it  more  probably  refers  to  the  oath  recorded  in  the  one  hundred 
and  tenth  Psalm,  which  I  would  have  you  notice  very  carefully — "  The  Lord  hath 
Awom,  and  will  not  repent,  Thou  art  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melohisedec." 


63«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ?l 

I  think  this  is  referred  to,  because  the  twentieth  verse  of  our  text  goes  on  to  say, 
"Whither  the  Forerunner  is  for  us  entered,  even  Jesus,  made  an  High  Priest  for 
ever  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek."  Now  I  want  you  to  see  this  anchor.  Here  ia 
one  of  its  holdfasts — God  has  promised  to  bless  the  faithful.  He  has  declared  that 
the  seed  of  Abraham,  namely,  believers,  shall  be  blessed,  and  made  a  blessing.  Then 
comes  the  other  arm  of  the  anchor,  which  is  equally  strong  to  hold  the  soul,  namely, 
the  oath  of  the  priesthood,  by  which  the  Lord  Jesus  is  declared  to  be  a  priest  for 
ever  on  our  behalf ;  not  an  ordinary  priest  after  the  manner  of  Aaron,  beginning 
and  ending  a  temporary  priesthood,  but  without  beginning  of  days  or  end  of  years, 
living  on  for  ever  ;  a  priest  who  has  finished  his  sacrificial  work,  has  gone  in  within 
the  veil,  and  sits  down  for  ever  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  because  His  work  is  com- 
plete, and  His  priesthood  abides  in  its  eternal  eificacy.  What  better  anchor  could 
the  Comforter  Himself  devise  for  His  people?  What  stronger  consolation  can  the 
heirs  of  promise  desire  ?  IH.  Ouk  hold  of  the  anchor.  It  would  be  of  no  use 
for  us  to  have  an  anchor,  however  good,  unless  we  had  a  hold  of  it.  The  anchor 
may  be  sure,  and  may  have  a  steadfast  grip,  but  there  must  be  a  strong  cable  to 
connect  the  anchor  with  the  ship.  Formerly  it  was  very  general  to  use  a  hempen 
cable,  but  large  vessels  are  not  content  to  run  the  risk  of  breakage,  and  therefore 
they  use  a  chain  cable  for  the  anchor.  It  is  a  grand  thing  to  have  a  solid  sub- 
stantial connection  between  your  soul  and  your  hope  ;  to  have  a  confidence  which 
is  surely  your  own,  from  which  you  can  never  be  separated.  Our  text  speaks 
plainly  about  this  laying  hold  of  the  anchor  in  the  end  of  the  18th  verse — "  That 
we  might  have  a  strong  consolation,  who  have  fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  upon  the 
hope  set  before  us."  We  must  personally  lay  hold  on  the  hope  ;  there  is  the  hope, 
but  we  are  bound  to  grasp  it  and  hold  it  fast.  As  with  an  anchor,  the  cable  must 
pass  through  the  ring,  and  so  be  bound  to  it,  so  must  faith  lay  hold  upon  the  hope 
of  eternal  life.  "  Well,"  saith  one,  "  but  may  we  lay  hold  upon  it  ?  "  My  answer 
is,  the  text  says  it  is  "  set  before  us," — to  "lay  hold  of  the  hope  set  before  us." 
You  may  grasp  it,  for  it  is  set  before  you.  Now,  notice  that  our  hold  on  the  anchor 
should  be  a  present  thing  and  a  conscious  matter,  for  we  read,  "  which  hope  we 
have."  We  are  conscious  that  we  have  it.  No  one  among  us  has  any  right  to  be 
at  peace  if  he  does  not  know  that  he  has  obtained  a  good  hope  through  grace.  May 
you  all  be  able  to  say,  "  which  hope  we  have."  As  it  is  well  to  have  a  cable  made 
of  the  same  metal  as  the  anchor,  so  it  is  a  blessed  thing  when  our  faith  is  of  the 
same  Divine  character  as  the  truth  upon  which  it  lays  hold:  it  needs  a  God-given 
hope  on  our  part  to  seize  the  God-given  promise  of  which  our  hope  is  made.  The 
right  mode  of  procedure  is  to  grasp  God's  promise  with  a  God-created  confidence : 
then  you  see  that  right  away  down  from  the  vessel  to  the  anchor  the  holdfast  is  all 
of  a  piece,  so  that  at  every  point  it  is  equally  adapted  to  bear  the  strain.  IV. 
Fourthly,  let  us  speak  of  the  anchor's  hold  of  us.  A  ship  has  hold  upon  her 
anchor  by  her  chain  cable,  but  at  the  same  time  the  most  important  thing  is  that 
the  anchor  keeps  its  hold  upon  the  ship  ;  and  so,  because  it  has  entered  into  the 
ground  of  the  sea  bottom,  holds  the  vessel  hard  and  fast.  Do  you  know  anything 
about  your  hope  holding  you  ?  It  will  hold  yon  if  it  is  a  good  hope  ;  you  will  not 
be  able  to  get  away  from  it,  but  under  temptation  and  depression  of  spirit,  and 
under  trial  and  affliction,  you  will  not  only  hold  your  hope — that  is  your  duty,  but 
your  hope  wiU  hold  you — that  is  your  privilege.  How  is  it  that  our  Divine  anchor 
holds  so  fast?  It  is  because  it  is  in  its  own  nature  sure — "Which  hope  we  have  as 
an  anchor  of  the  soul,  both  sure  and  steadfast."  It  is  in  itself  sure  as  to  its 
nature.  The  gospel  is  no  cunningly  devised  fable :  God  has  spoken  it,  it  is  a  mass 
of  fact,  it  is  pure,  unalloyed  truth,  with  the  broad  seal  of  God  Himself  set  upon  it. 
Then,  too,  this  anchor  is  "steadfast"  as  to  its  hold,  it  never  moves  from  its  lodg- 
ment.  It  is  sure  in  its  nature,  and  steadfast  when  in  use,  and  thus  it  is  practically 
safe.  The  result  of  the  use  of  this  anchor  will  be  very  comfortable  to  you. 
"Which  hope  ye  have  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul,  both  sure  and  steadfast."  I  may 
say  to  every  believer  in  Jesus,  that  his  condition  is  very  like  that  of  the  landsman 
on  board  ship  when  the  sea  was  rather  rough,  and  he  said,  "  Captain,  we  are  in 
great  danger,  are  we  not  ?  "  As  an  answer  did  not  come,  he  said,  "  Captain,  don't 
you  see  great  fear  ? "  Then  the  old  seaman  gruffly  replied,  "  Yes,  I  see  plenty  of 
fear,  but  not  a  bit  of  danger."  It  is  often  so  with  us ;  when  the  winds  are  out  and 
the  storms  are  raging  there  is  plenty  of  fear,  but  there  is  no  danger.  We  may  be 
much  tossed,  but  we  are  quite  safe,  for  we  have  an  anchor  of  the  soul  both  sure 
and  steadfast,  which  vnll  not  start.  One  blessed  thing  is  that  our  hope  has  such 
ft  grip  ot  us  tiiat  we  know  it     In  a  vessel  you  feel  the  pull  of  the  anchor,  and  tho 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  883 

more  the  wind  rages  the  more  you  feel  that  the  anchor  holds  you.  Like  the  boy 
with  his  kite ;  the  kite  is  op  in  the  clouds,  where  he  cannot  see  it,  but  he  knows  it 
is  there,  for  he  feels  it  puU ;  so  our  good  hope  has  gone  up  to  heaven,  and  it  is 
pulling  and  drawing  us  towards  itself.  V.  And  now,  lastly,  and  best  of  all,  the 
anchob's  unseen  gbip,  "which  entereth  into  that  within  the  veil."  Our  anchor  is 
like  eveiy  other,  when  it  is  of  any  use  it  is  out  of  sight.  When  a  man  sees  the 
anchor  it  is  doing  nothing,  unless  it  happen  to  be  some  small  stream  anchor  or 
grapnel  in  shallow  water.  When  the  anchor  is  of  use  it  is  gone:  there  it  went 
overboard  with  a  splash ;  far  down  there,  all  among  the  fish,  lies  the  iron  holdfast, 
quite  out  of  sight.  Where  is  your  hope,  brother?  Do  you  believe  because  you 
can  see  ?  That  is  not  believing  at  all.  Do  you  believe  because  you  can  feel  ? 
That  is  feeling,  it  is  not  believing.  But  "  Blessed  is  he  that  hath  not  seen  and  yet 
hath  believed."  Albeit  our  anchor  is  gone  out  of  sight,  yet  thank  God  it  has 
taken  a  very  firm  grip,  and  "  entered  into  that  which  is  within  the  veil."  What 
hold  can  be  equal  to  that  which  a  man  hath  upon  his  God  when  he  can  cry,  "Thou 
hast  promised,  therefore  do  as  Thou  hast  said  "  ?  Note  next,  that  when  an  anchor 
has  a  good  grip  down  below,  the  more  the  ship  drags  the  tighter  its  hold  becomes. 
At  first,  when  the  anchor  goes  down,  perhaps,  it  drops  upon  a  hard  rock,  and  there 
it  cannot  bite,  but  by  and  by  it  slips  off  from  the  rock  and  enters  into  the  bottom 
of  the  sea ;  it  digs  into  the  soil,  and,  as  the  cable  draws  it  on,  the  fluke  goes  deeper 
and  deeper  till  the  anchor  almost  buries  itself,  and  the  more  it  is  pulled  upon  the 
deeper  it  descends.  The  anchor  gets  such  a  hold  at  last  that  it  seems  to  say, 
"  Now,  Boreas,  blow  away,  you  must  tear  up  the  floor  of  the  sea  before  the  vessel 
shall  be  let  go."  Times  of  trouble  send  our  hope  deep  down  into  fundamental 
truths.  The  text  concludes  with  this  very  sweet  reflection,  that  though  our  hope 
is  out  of  sight  we  have  a  friend  in  the  unseen  land  where  our  hope  has  found  its 
hold.  In  anxious  moments  a  sailor  might  almost  wish  that  he  could  go  with  his 
anchor  and  fix  it  firmly.  That  he  cannot  do,  but  we  have  a  friend  who  has  gone 
to  see  to  everything  for  us.  Our  anchor  is  within  the  veil,  it  is  where  we  cannot 
see  it,  but  Jesus  is  there,  and  our  hope  is  inseparably  connected  with  His  person 
and  work.  Our  Lord  Jesus  by  His  intercession  is  drawing  us  to  heaven,  and  we 
have  only  to  wait  a  little  while  and  we  shall  be  with  Him  where  He  is.  He  pleads 
for  our  home-bringing,  and  it  will  come  to  pass  ere  long.  No  sailor  likes  his  anchor 
to  come  home,  for  if  it  does  so  in  a  storm  matters  look  very  ugly;  our  anchor 
will  never  come  home,  but  it  is  drawing  us  home;  it  is  drawing  us  to  itself,  not  down- 
wards beneath  devouring  waves,  but  upwards  to  ecstatic  joys.  (C7.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
The  anchor  of  the  soul : — Li  many  respects  the  world,  and  human  life  on  it,  are  like 
the  sea.  Itself  restless,  it  cannot  permit  to  rest  any  of  the  pilgrims  that  tread  its 
heaving,  shifting  surface.  At  some  times,  and  in  some  places,  great  tempests  rise ; 
but  even  in  its  ordinary  condition  it  is  always  and  everywhere  uncertain,  deceptive, 
dangerous.  Currents  of  air  and  currents  of  ocean  intermingle  with  and  cross 
each  other  in  endless  and  unknown  complications,  bringing  even  the  most  skUful 
mariner  to  his  wits'  end — making  him  afraid  ei+her  to  stand  still  or  to  advance. 
On  this  heaving  sea  we  must  all  lie.  The  soul  is  tossed  by  many  temptations ;  but 
the  anchor  of  the  soul  is  sure  and  steadfast  within  the  veil.  Without  are  fight- 
ings, within  are  fears,  all  these  are  agaiust  us ;  but  one  thing  will  overbalance  and 
overcome  them,  "  Our  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  Hope  sometimes  signifies 
the  act  of  a  human  spirit  laying  hold  of  an  unseen  object,  and  sometimes  the 
object  unseen  whereon  the  human  spirit  in  its  need  lays  hold.  These  two  signifi- 
cations may  be  combined  together:  they  are  so  combined  here.  "The  hope  set 
us"  is  Christ  entered  for  us  now  within  the  veil;  and  the  hope  that  "we  have  "  is 
the  exercise  of  a  believing  soul  when  it  trusts  in  the  risen  Eedeemer.  These  two 
cannot  be  separated.  The  one  is  the  grasp  which  a  believing  soul  takes  of  Christ, 
and  the  other  is  the  Christ  whom  a  believing  soul  is  grasping.  The  anchor  must 
not  be  cast  on  anything  that  floats  on  the  water,  however  large  and  solid  it  may 
seem.  The  largest  thing  that  floats  is  an  iceberg.  But  although  an  iceberg  does 
not  shake  like  a  ship,  but  seems  to  receive  the  waves  and  permit  them  to  break  on 
its  sides  as  they  break  on  the  shore,  it  would  be  ruin  to  anchor  the  ship  to  it.  The 
larger  and  the  less  would  drift  the  same  way  and  perish  together.  Ah,  this  stately 
Church,  this  high-seeming  ecclesiastical  organisation,  woe  to  the  human  spirit  that 
is  tempted  in  the  tossing  to  make  fast  to  that  great  imposing  mass !  It  is  not  sure 
and  steadfast.  It  is  floating:  it  moves  with  the  current  of  the  world:  it  moves  to  an 
awful  shore.  Not  there,  not  there  1  Your  hope,  when  you  stretch  it  out  and  up  for 
eternal  lif»,  mast  enter  "  into  that  within  the  veil,  whither  the  Forerunner  is  for  oa 


534  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  v^ 

entered. "    Nor  will  it  avail  a  drifting  ship  to  fix  its  anchor  on  itself.   Hope  must  go 
out  for  a  hold,  even  as  the  ship's  anchor  must  be  flung  away  from  the  ship.     The 
eye  is  made  for  looking  with,  not  for  looking  at.    Away  from  all  in  ourselves,  and 
out  through  all  that  floats  like  ourselves  on  this  shifting  sea,  we  must  throw  the 
anchor  of  the  soul  through  the  shifting  waters  into  Him  who  holds  them  in  the 
hollow  of  His  hand.    Mark,  further,  that  hope  in  Christ  is  specifically  the  anchor 
of  the  soul.    There  is  no  anchor  that  will  make  our  temporal  possessions  fast. 
Wealth  and  friends,  and  even  life,  may  drift  away  any  day  on  the  flood,  and  no 
power  on  earth  can  arrest  the  movement.     These  bodily  things  may  or  may  not 
abide  with  a  Christian,  but  his  anchor  does  not  hold  them.     It  is  only  an  anchor 
of  the  soul,  not  an  anchor  of  the  body.     We  must  not  expect  from  the  Lord  what 
He  never  promised.    There  are  contrivances   not  a  few  in  our  day  for  fixing 
material  property,  so  that  it  shall  not  drift  away  in  the  currents  of  time.    The 
system  of  assurances  both  on  hfe  and  property  has  reached  an  enoi  mous  magni- 
tude.   Taking  up  the  obvious  analogy  employed  in  this  scripture,  one  of  the 
insurance  societies  has  adopted  the  anchor  as  its  name.     But  the  action  of  these 
anchors  is  limited  to  things  seen  and  temporal.    They  cannot  be  constructed  so  as 
to  catch  and  keep  any  spiritual  thing.    They  may  hold  fast  a  wife's  fortune,  when 
the  life  of  the  bread-winner  falls  in,  but  they  cannot  maintain  joy  in  her  heart,  or 
kindle  light  in  her  eye.    Far  less  can  they  insure  against  the  shipwreck  of  the 
soul.     Only  one  anchor  can  grasp  and  hold  the  better  part  of  man — and  that  is  the 
hope  which  enters  into  the  heavens  and  fastens  there  in  Jesus.    The  anchor — in 
so  far  as  it  indicates  the  object  which  hope  grasps — the  anchor  is   "  sure  and 
steadfast."    The  expressions  are  exact  and  full ;  the  words  are  tried  words ;  they 
are   given  in  order  that  we  might  have   strong   consolation  who   have   fled  for 
refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  us.     There  are  two  cases  in  which  one's  hope  may  be 
disappointed :  the  support  you  lean  on  may  be  unwilling  or  unable  to  sustain  you ; 
in  the  one  case  it  is  deception,  in  the  other  weakness.     A  Christian's  hope  is  not 
exposed  to  either  flaw  ;  it  is  both  "  sure  and  steadfast,"  that  is,  the  Redeemer  wiio 
holds  them  is  willing  and  able.    He  will  not  falsely  let  you  go,  nor  feebly  faint 
beneath  your  weight.    He  is  true  and  strong ;  for  these  are  the  words ;  He  both 
will  and  can  keep  that  which  we  commit  to  Him  against  that  day.    Take  now  a 
series  of  practical  lessons  :     1.  The  ship  that  is  kept  by  an  anchor,  although  safe, 
is  not  at  ease.     It  does  not  on  the  one  hand  dread  destruction,  but  neither  on  the 
other  hand  does  it  enjoy  rest.     "  Beloved,  think  it  not  strange  concerning  the  fiery 
trial  which  is  to  try  you  "  ;  "  in  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation,  but  be  of  good 
cheer :  I  have  overcome  the  world."    2.  But  further,  the  ship  that  is  held  by  an 
anchor  is  not  only  tossed  in  the  tempest  hke  other  ships,  it  is  tossed  more  than 
other  ships.    The  ship  that  rides  at  anchor  experiences  rackings  and  heavings 
that  ships  which  drift  with  the  tide  do  not  know.     So,  souls  who  have  no  hold  of 
Christ  seem  to  lie  softer  on  the  surface  of  a  heaving  world  than  souls  that  are 
anchored  on  His  power  and  love.    The  drifting  ship,  before  she  strikes,  is  more 
smooth  and  more  comfortable  than  the  anchored  one  ;  but  when  she  strikes,  the 
smoothness  is  all  over.     The  pleasures  of  sin  are  sweet  to  those  who  taste  them ; 
but  the  sweetness  is  only  for  a  season.     3.  When  the  anchor  has  been  cast  into  a 
good  ground,  the  heavier  the  strain  that  comes  on  it,  the  deeper  and  firmer  grows 
its  hold.     It  is  thus  with   a   trusting  soul:  temptations,  instead  of  driving  him 
away  from  his  Saviour,  only  fix  his  affections  firmer  on  the  Rock  of  Ages.    4.  The 
ship  that  is  anchored  is  sensitive  to  every  change  of  wind  or  tide,  and  ever  turns 
sharply  round  to  meet  and  resist  the  stream,  from  what  direction  soever  it  may 
flow.    A  ship  is  safest  with  her  head  to  the  sea  and  the  tempest.     Watch  from  a 
height  any  group  of  ships  that  may  be  lying  in  an  open  roadstead.     At  night  when 
you  retire  they  all  point  westward  ;  in  the  morning  they  are  all  looking  to  the  east. 
Each  ship  has  infalliably  felt  tbe  first  veering  of  the  wind  or  water,  and  instantly 
veered  in  the  requisite  direction,  so  that  neither  wind  nor  wave  has  ever  been  able 
to  strike  her  on  the  broadside.    Thereby  hangs  the  safety  of  the  ship.     Ships  not 
at  anchor  do  not  turn  and  face  the  foe.    The  ship  that  is  left  loose  will  be  caught 
by  a  gust  on  her  side  and  easily  thrown  over.     As  with  thips,  so  with  souls  :  those 
that  are  anchored  feel  sensitively  the  direction  and  strength  of  the  temptation, 
and  instantly  turn  to  meet  and  to  overcome  it :   whereas   those  that  are  not 
anchored  are  suddenly  overcome,  and  their  iniquities,  hke  the  wind,  carry  them 
away.     "We  are  saved  by  hope" — saved  not  only  from  being  outcast  in  the  end,  but 
from  yielding  to  temptation  now.    6.  When  the  ship  is  anchored,  and  the  sea  is 
rmming  high,  there  is  great  commotion  at  her  bows.    The  ^vaves  in  rapid  succea* 


CHAP,  n.]  HEBREWS.  BSS 

Fion  come  on  and  strike.    When  they  strike  they  are  broken,  and  leap,  white  and 
augry,  high  up  on  the  vessel's  sides.    This  tumult  is  by  no  means  agreeable  in  itseli, 
but  the  mariner  on  board  would  not  like  to  want  it,  for  it  is  the  sign  of  safety.    If, 
while  wind  aud  waves  continue  to  rage,  he  should  obst-rve  that  this  commotion  had 
Buddeuly  ceased,  he  would  not  rejoice.    He  would  look  eagerly  over  the  bulwarks, 
and  seeing  the  water  blue  on  her  bows,  instead  of  the  hissing,  roaring  spray,  he 
would  utter  a  scream  of  terror.    The  smoothness  at  her  bows  indicates  to  him  that 
her  anchor  is  dragging.     The  ship  is  drifting  with  wind  and  water  to  the  shore. 
Such,  too,  is  the  experience  of  a  soul.    If  you  are  fixed,  a  great  flood  is  rushing 
by,  and  it  must  needs  cause  a  commotion  round  you.    An  impetuous  tide  of 
v.oildliuess  will  dash  disagreeably  against  you  from  time  to  time.     Do  not  be  too 
anxious  to  make  all  smooth ;  peace  may  be  bought  too  dear.     When  the  mighty 
stream  of  vanity  on  which  you  float  produces  no  ruffling  at  the  point  of  contact- 
when  it  is  not  disagreeable  to  you,  and  you  not  disagreeable  to  it— suspect  that  your 
anchor  is  dragging,  that  it  bas  lost  its  hold,  and  that  you  are  drifting  into  danger. 
Cast  in  the  anchor  while  the  sea  is  calm ;  you  will  need  it  to  lean  on  when  the  last 
strain  comes  on.     {W.  Arnot.)        The  anchor  of  hope  : — I.  Let  us  first  of  all  note 
THE  ANCHOR.     It  is  uccessary  to  have  a  very  clear  idea  as  to  what  the  Holy  Ghost 
means  by  this  word  "  hope. "    Look  at  the  previous  verse,  and  you  will  see  that  we 
have  the  word  "  hope  "  there,  "  That  by  two  immutable  things,  in  which  it  was  impos- 
sible for  God  to  lie,  we  might  have  a  strong  consolation,  who  have  fled  for  refuge 
to  lay  hold  upon  the  hope  set  before  us  " ;  then  he  adds,  "  Which  hope  wo  have  as 
an  anchor  of  the  soul."    Now,  I  believe  that  the  two  hopes  do  not  mean  precisely 
the  same  thing.     In  the  eighteenth  verse  it  is  a  hope  that  is  set  before  us  ;  in  that 
verse  I  have  God's  promise.     God's  promise  is  the  basis  of  my  hope,  Christ  Him- 
seif  is  the  object  of  my  hope.     But,  then,  having  that  promise,  there  comes  into  my 
heart  the  grace  of  hope.    That  which  the  apostle  means  here  is  something  far 
more  than  the  common  notion  that  we  attach  to  the  word  "hope."    I  don't  think  I 
fchrtll  be  going  too  far  when  I  say  that  nothing  is  more  adverse  to  the  scriptural 
idea  of  the  word  "  hope  "  than  the  meaning  we  generally  intend  by  it     In  our  ordi- 
nary conversation  hope  is  something  less  than  faith,  in  Scripture  it  is  something 
more — it  is  faith  developed  into  a  full  assurance.     So  when  the  apostle  speaks  of 
Lope  it  is  not  of  that  kind  which  says,  "  Well,  I  hope  I  may  get  to  heaven,  but  I 
don't  much  think  I  shall,"  but  it  is  of  the  kind  which  says,  "  I  know  that  I  am 
safe  ;  I  know  that  my  Forerunner  has  entered  within  the  veil  for  me;  I  know  that 
God's  promise  and  God's  oath  together  do  ensure  my  eternal  salvation  ;  and  this 
hope  is  the  anchor  thai  is  hung  at  the  bows  of  my  ship."    Now,  the  anchor  must 
be  made  of  the  right  stuff.     One  writer  has  said  that  "anchor-making  is  very 
important  work."    I  should  imagine  it  was,  and  I  should  say  woe  to  the  auchor- 
smiih  who  tampered  with  the  material  of  the  anchor.     Why  is  it  of  infinite  im- 
portance that  the  anchor  should  be  right  in  its  material  ?    Because  there  are  times 
when  the  lives  of  captain,  mates,  crew,  passengers  will  all  depend  upon  whether 
the  anchor  is  made  of  the  right  stuff  or  not.     Cast-iron  anchors  won't  do  ;  they 
m;ist  be  made  of  the  best  material,  well  wrought  and  welded;  and  I  think  I  am 
correct  in  saying  that  in  all  our  naval  establifchments  there  is  an  arrangement  for 
testing  every  anchor  ;  and  when  it  is  proven  it  receives  the  Government  mark.     I 
know   that  the  anchor  of    which  we   are    speaking    is  true,  because  there    is 
heaven's  own  brand  upon  it — "  sure  and  steadfast."    Better  have  no  hope  at  all 
than  have  a  bad  one  ;  better  be  without  hope  than  place  confidence  in  a  false  one. 
Do  any  of  you  say,  "  What  should  our  anchor  of  hope  be  made  of  ?  "    I  will  tell 
you.     Go  and  get  a  whole  number  of  "Thus  saith  the  Lord"  and  weld  them 
together,  for  the  only  anchor  that  is  worth  anything  is  that  anchor  of  hope,  the 
very  material  of  which  is  "  God  has  said."    I  believe  the  best  smithy  for  making 
an  anchor  is  the  empty  sepulchre  just  outside  Jerusalem.     Go  into  that  sepulchre 
where  once  the  body  of  Christ  lay ;  it  is  empty  now ;  there  fashion  thy  anchor, 
"begotten  unto  a  living  hope  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead." 
Now,  with  the  anchor  goes  the  chain,  and  I  cannot  separate  between  the  two.     I 
know  that  some  have  said  that  hope  is  the  anchor  and  faith  is  the  cable ;  well,  it 
may  be  so,  but  you  cannot  really  separate  between  faith  and  hope.    Faith  culmi- 
nates in  hope,  and  if  faith  does  not  lead  to  hope  it  is  not  worth  anything;  and,  on 
the  other  hand,  I  cannot  imagine  a  hope  that  is  worth  anything  that  does  not  come 
from  faith,  so  I  take  cable  and  anchor  as  one.     And  I  remark  here  that  the  anchor 
most  have  its  cable,  and  the  cable  to  be  worth  anything  must  have  an  anchor.     I 
think  that  in  my  time  I  have  come  acrois  some  who  had  a  chain,  but  there  was  no 


636  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vl 

anchor  at  the  end  of  it.     They  did  believe — at  least  they  said  so ;  and  who  are  we 
that  we  should   dare  to  question   their  veracity?     They  do  believe,  for  if  they 
believe  nothing  else  they  believe  they  have  some  doubts ;  and  I  have  seen  them 
always  paying  out  the  cable,  and  saying,  "  I  believe,  I  believe,"  and  yet  somehow 
they  have  nothing  at  the  end  to  grip.    There  is  the  chain,  but  it  will  drag  over  a 
hundred  promises  without  laying  hold  of  a  solitary  one.     They  have  faith,  so  they 
say,  but  somehow  or  other  it  is  not  the  faith  that  ever  grips  the  Word  of  God 
sufficiently  to  bring  their  vessel  round.     The  Lord  save  us  from  that  sort  of  faith 
which  is  like  a  cable  without  any  anchor  at  the  end.    But,  on  the  other  hand,  I 
don't  think  the  anchor  would  be  very  much  use  unless  there  was  a  cable  attached 
to  it.    What  would  you  think  if  in  time  of  storm  the  captain  said,  "  Overboard  with 
the  anchor,"  and  overboard  it  goes;  there  is  an  end  of  it;  there  is  no  connection 
whatever  between  the  anchor  and  the  ship.     An  anchor  thrown  overboard  without 
a  cable  is  about  as  much  use  as  a  cable  thrown  over  without  an  anchor.      11.  Now 
I  want  you  to  see  the  akchob  let  go.     Our  hope,  like  other  anchors,  is  of  no  use 
as  long  as  we  can  see  it,  as  long  as  the  auchor  is  slung  at  the  bows  it  is  doing 
nothing.     You  would  think  that  man  a  lunatic  who  should  say,  "  I  always  feel  so 
safe  when  I  see  the  anchor."   You  would  think  that  captain  an  imbecile  who  should 
say,  "  I  always  think  my  ship  is  safe  when  I  have  my  anchor  on  deck."     The  real 
worth  of  the  anchor  begins  when  it  is  thrown  overboard.     Tiie  ocean  bed  holds 
the  anchor,  and  the  anchor  holds  you.     Now  you  will  observe,  if  you  look  into  the 
text,  my  anchor  enters  into  that  within  the  veil.     I  wish  I  had  the  power  for  a 
moment  to  give  you  a  glimpse  within  the  veil  and  see  where  the  aiichor  is.    If  you 
were  to  have  passed  through  the  veil  of  the  Tabernacle  you  would  have  seen  an 
oblong  chest — that  was  all ;  and  on  the  top  of  that  oblong  chest  a  slab  of  gold 
exactly  covering  it.     If  you  had  looked  inside  that  chest  you  would  have  found 
two  tables  of  stoue  containing  the  law,  written  by  the  finger  of  God.    That  was 
called  the  mercy-seat.     There,  you  will  see,  was  mercy  based  on  justice ;  peace 
reposing  on  righteousness ;  a  Divine  salvation  resting  on  the  pedestal  of  accom- 
plished law — that  was  all  that  was  within  the  veil;  and,  says  Paul  in  our  text, 
"Which  hope  we  have  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul  which  entereth  " — now,  I  always 
find  that  nine  people  out  of  ten  quote  this  text  wrongly;  they  say,  "  which  entereth 
within  the  veil,"  but  it  is,  "  which  entereth  into  that  within  the  veil  "  ;  in  other 
words,  the  mercy-seat — God's  mercy  based  on  righteousness,  or,  if  you  like  to  put 
it  so,  Christ  Himself.    Now,  for  a  moment  note  this.     Am  I  not  right  in  saying 
that  the  more  the  ship  drags  at  the  cable  the  more  fixed  becomes  the  anchor  ? 
Ah  1  when  first  my  soul  trusted  Christ  and  I  dropped  my  anchor,  I  don't  think  it 
had  a  very  firm  hold,  but  every  strain  on  it  has  driven  it  deeper.    It  is  always  so, 
for  if  you  look  in  Eomans  v.  you  will  see  that  experience  leads  to  hope.    The  more  a 
man  trusts  God  the  better  he  knows  God,  and  the  better  he  knows  God  the  more 
he  trusts  Him.     He  learns  to  sing,  "  My  heart  is  fixed  to  God,  my  heart  is  fixed." 
III.  I  have  tried  to  show  you  the  anchorage;  now  look  at  the  ship  biding  at 
ANCHOK.     One  thing  I  observe  is  that,  though  she  is  anchored,  she  does  not  neces- 
sarily escape  rolling,  nor  her  passengers  avoid  sickness.    There  may  be  consider- 
able discomfort  while  there  is  no  danger.     Many  souls  as  well  as  ships  are 
anchored  in  the   "  downs  "  1    I  notice,  too,  that  when  a  ship  is  at  anchor  she 
always  faces  the  tide.    I  was  travelling  recently  on  the  Chatham  and  Dover 
Eailway,  and  just  as  we  approached  Whitstable  we  obtained  a  glimpse  of  the  sea, 
and  I  said  to  a  fellow-passenger,  "  The  tide  is  coming  in."    "How  can  you  know 
that?  "  he  asked.     "  Why,"  I  replied,  "  it's  the  simplest  thing  in  the  world ;  look 
at  the  boats  that  are  anchored  there,  and  see  which  way  they  face  ;  anchored  craft 
always  face  the  tide."    Ay,  and  so  will  it  be  with  you ;  if  you  know  what  it  is  to 
have  your  anchor  gripping  that  which  is  within  the  veil  you  won't  be  a  man  who 
is  afraid  to  look  the  world  in  the  face.     The  ship  swings  round  with  the  tide  and 
seems  to  say,  "  I  am  not  to  be  caught,  whichever  way  you  come  you  will  meet  my 
bow."    These  are  the  sort  of  Christians  we  want  at  the  present  time — men  who 
are  so  anchored  on  to  God,  who  are  so  filled  with  His  spirit,  and  who  have  so 
bright  a  hope  within  them  that  they  must  face  the  run  of  the  tide  of  this  world. 
A  dying  sailor  was  near  his  end,  and  the  death  sweat  stood  upon  his  brow.    A 
friend  said,  "  Well,  mate,  bow  is  it  with  you  now  ?  "    The  dying  man,  with  a  smile, 
made  answer,  "  The  anchor  holds,  the  anchor  holds."     God  grant  that  ever 
one  of  you  may  be  able  to  say  this,  for  His  name's  sake.      (A.   O.   Brown.) 
Sure  anchoring : — I.  Fibst,  the   stay   ob   anchobage   of   the  soul  dueinq  thh 

VOYAOB   OF   LITE    IS     ChBIST    WITHIN     THE     VEIL,    ChBIST    IN    THE     HOLY     OF    HOLISS, 


CHAP.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  53^ 

Chbisi  in  the  heavenly  haven.  Upon  Him  in  His  exalted  oloby  thb  soul 
STAYS  itseu  and  IS  SECURE.  1.  In  the  first  place,  He  is  the  living  Christ  of 
intercession,  not  the  dead  Christ  of  sacrifice.  2.  Secondly,  although  within  theveil, 
the  living  Christ  has  a  vital  interest  in  us  who  are  yet  without.  His  entrance  into 
the  heavenly  place  has  not  broken  off  His  connection  with  our  earthly  lives  and 
interests.  The  same  redeeming  purposes,  the  same  tender  human  sympathies,  the 
same  great  mediatorial  solicitudes  fill  His  Divine  heart.  3.  The  use  of  the  term 
"  Forerunner"  conveys  to  us  an  additional  idea  not  included  in  that  of  the  priest- 
hood. The  high  priest  was  not  a  forerunner  ;  no  one  was  to  follow  him  into  the 
holy  place ;  but  Christ  is  strictly  a  forerunner.  "  Where  He  is,  there  His  servant  is 
to  be  also  " — where  He  is,  and  as  He  is,  for  we  are  to  be  "  like  Him  when  we  see 
Him  as  He  is."  At  present  He  is  our  interceding  Priest,  but  the  consummation  of 
His  intercession  is  our  reception  into  the  heavenly  place  with  Hira.  As  the 
Forerunner  He  enters  the  holy  place,  not  alone,  but  only  first.  "I  go  to  prepare 
a  place  for  you,  and  if  I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you,  I  will  come  again  and 
receive  you  unto  Myself,  that  where  I  am,  there  shall  My  servant  be  also."  Very 
great  and  very  precious  are  the  assurances  thus  conveyed  to  us.  First,  that  in 
virtue  of  His  entrance  to  the  heavenly  place  we  shall  surely  enter  also.  He  has 
•'  opened  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers  ";  by  His  own  blood  He  appears 
in  the  presence  of  God,  and  secures  our  appearance  also.  "  Whosoever  believeth 
in  Him  shall  not  perish,  bat  have  everlasting  life."  He  prepares  the  place  for  us 
in  the  sense  of  making  a  place  for  us  certain.  But  more  than  this  is  meant.  As 
tbe  Forerunner  He  secures  our  entrance  under  the  same  conditions ;  we  enter  as 
He  has  entered ;  our  humanity  glorified  as  His  is  glorified.  We  shall  enter  as 
He  has  entered,  with  a  proper  resurrection  body ;  with  all  the  marks  of  personal 
identity  that  distinguish  us  here,  that  are  the  means  of  intelUgent  communion  and 
friendship.  H.  In  the  second  place,  the  anchok  which  holds  the  soul  stead- 
fast TO  THE  LIVING  FoBERUNNEB  WHO  IS  WITHIN  THE  VEIL  18  HOPE  ;  HOPE  M00B8 
THE    STORM-TOSSED   SOUL   TO   THAT   WHICH    WILL   SECURE   IT.       OuT   hope    mUSt    be    "  a 

good  hope  through  grace  " ;  our  anchor  must  have  length  of  cable  sufficient,  and 
must  rest  only  upon  Chri"t.  Hope  is  so  far  more  than  faith.  That  which  is  seen 
is  not  hope.  Hope  is  that  trust  in  the  future  and  the  unseen  which  calculates 
probabilities,  which  hits  the  mean  between  possible  failure  and  certain  security. 
We  feel  uncertainty  enough  to  make  it  hope,  and  assurance  enough  to  make  the 
hope  strong  and  animating.  We  "  give  all  diligence  to  make  our  calling  and 
election  sure."  We  cast  out  the  anchor  of  our  hope  with  cable  enough,  so  to  speak, 
to  fasten  it  upon  the  unseen  Christ.  A  great  and  blessed  hope,  the  hope  of  being  with 
Christ,  and  of  realising  the  exceeding  great  and  eternal  weight  of  glory.  A  good 
hope,  warranted  by  accumulated  evidence — by  God's  wonderful  revelation — by  His 
assured  and  unchangeable  promises ;  a  hope  warranted  by  His  words,  by  His 
resurrection,  by  His  entrance  into  the  holy  place  as  our  Forerunner,  who  hath 
"  brought  life  and  immortahty  to  light,"  and  who  is  Himself  •'  the  Eesurrection 
and  the  Life."  We  are  "  begotten  again  to  this  lively  hope  by  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead."  III.  Observe,  in  the  third  place,  how  hope  fixed  upon 
Christ  makes  the  soul  steadfast  and  secure.  Unregenerate  men  are  described 
as  "having  no  hope";  they  are  "without  God  and  without  hope  in  the  world"; 
that  is,  they  have  no  hope  that  is  not  delusive,  that  will  not  fail  them  in  the 
testing  hour,  and  make  them  ashamed.  "  The  God  of  hope  "  is  not  their  hope ; 
they  hope  in  something  else,  they  do  not  know  the  hope  that  comes  "  through  patience 
and  comfort  of  the  Scriptures."  There  can  be  no  hope  for  a  man  who  has  not  fled 
for  refuge  to  Christ,  "  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  our  hope."  To  Christ,  then, 
the  redeemed  man  has  come  ;  he  has  fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  upon  the  hope  set 
before  him,  and  this  hope  is  the  anchor  that  keeps  his  soul  firm.  It  is  a  thing  of 
practical,  powerful  efficacy,  that  secures  both  our  present  steadfastness  and  our 
ultimate  salvation.  It  is  "  an  anchor  of  the  soul,  sure  and  steadfast."  1.  The 
first  suggestion  of  the  metaphor  is  of  a  tempestuous  and  perilous  sea,  which  our 
ship  of  Dfe  has  to  navigate,  and  that  we  are  in  danger  of  "  making  shipwreck  of 
faith  and  a  good  conscience."  What  image  could  give  a  more  vivid  representation 
of  our  spiritual  condition  ? — of  the  rough  sea  upon  which  we  ride  ? — the  hurricane 
above  us,  and  the  sunken  rocks  and  quicksands  around  us.  2.  How  beautifully  in 
this  representation  are  both  worlds  brought  together  I  Our  ship  sails  upon  the 
ocean  of  this  life,  has  to  bear  its  tempests,  navigate  its  perils,  but  she  finds  her  sure 
anchorage  within  the  veil — the  anchor  of  her  hope  is  fixed  in  the  glorified  Christ. 
The  ship  rides  upon  the  sea  of  time ;  its  anchor  is  fixed  in  eternity.    Here  there  ii 


538  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  w 

no  sure  anchorage — hence  the  anchor  is  '•  hope,"  the  expectation  of  things  not 
seen.  The  immortal  soul  can  fix  securely  only  upon  an  immortal  stay ;  and  when 
after  vain  hopes  in  other  things  she  has  fixed  her  anchor  upon  Christ,  it  is 
as  though  she  had  laid  hold  upon  the  bases  of  the  everlasting  hills,  as  though 
with  sevenfold  strength  she  had  grasped  "  the  bars  of  the  earth."  {H.  Allan,  D.D.) 
The  soul's  anchor : — I.  The  soul,  like  a  vessel,  is  in  quest  of  a  desired  haven.  Miud 
is  made  to  look  out  of  itself,  our  desires  not  satisfied  with  temporal  things.  AH 
men  look  into  the  future,  live  by  hope,  and  are  sailing  in  expectation  of  peace.  But 
the  expectation  of  some  reaches  no  further  and  gets  no  higher  than  earth,  while 
the  spiritual  anchor  in  the  calm  depths  of  the  Eternal  Presence,  and  the  solid 
moorings  of  eternity.  IL  Hope  of  heaven,  like  an  auchor,  preserves  the  soul  in  its 
passage.  Some  sail  without  a  ripple  or  a  swell,  under  propitious  gales  which  fill 
their  sails  and  press  them  homeward.  Others,  like  Paul  in  the  Adriatic,  wrestle 
with  the  billows,  "  exceedingly  tossed  with  a  tempest,"  with  neither  sun  nor  stars 
in  sight.  But  the  soul  is  preserved,  and  outrides  the  storm.  ' '  He  bringeth  them 
to  their  desired  haven."  HI.  This  hope  is  sure  and  steadfast.  Sure — will  not  dis- 
appoint us — a  good  hope  through  grace.  Steadfast  in  its  nature,  taking  good  hold, 
unchangeable  in  its  promise  and  purpose,  "  a  lively  (hving)  hope  which  maketh 
not  ashamed."  Lay  hold  upon  this  "  hope  set  before  you  in  the  gospel."  (The 
Study.)  The  voyage  of  life : — I.  The  voyage  of  life  even  to  the  good  is  tumul- 
tuous. Because  of — 1.  Physical  infirmities.  2.  Secular  anxieties.  3.  Social 
afflictions.  4.  Spiritual  conflicts.  II.  The  gospel  provisions  ake  equal  to  thb 
EMERGENCIES  OF  THE  VOYAGE  OF  LIFE.  1.  It  has  an  auchor — Hope.  2.  It  has  a 
refuge.  III.  The  efficacy  op  the  gospel  provisions  fob  the  voyage  of  life  is 
immutably  guaranteed.  1.  God  has  an  "  immutable  counsel  "  concerning  the 
safety  of  His  people.  2.  God  desires  to  demonstrate  to  His  people  the  immutability 
of  His  counsels  in  relation  to  their  safety.  3.  God  furnishes  this  demonstration 
by  some  most  solemn  declarations.  4.  God's  declaration  cannot  but  be  true. 
(Homilist.)  Hope  the  anchor  of  the  soul: — I.  The  nature  of  Christian  hope. 
1.  The  object  of  hope  is  always  really  or  imaginarily  good  enjoyment  of  God — of 
His  favour,  smiles,  and  blessings  to  end  of  life,  and  of  His  presence  for  ever.  2. 
The  object  of  hope  must  be  future  good.  What  God  has  laid  up  for  them  that  love 
Him.  3.  The  object  of  hope  must  be  attainable.  "  God  will  withhold  no  good 
thing  from  them  that  walk  uprightly."  II,  The  characteristics  of  this  hope. 
1.  The  anchor  is  essential  to  secure  the  vessel  in  time  of  storm  and  peril.  2.  The 
anchor  is  only  of  service  when  connected  with  a  good  cable.  3.  The  anchor  must 
be  employed.  4.  The  anchor  must  be  cast  on  good  ground.  III.  The  importance 
OF  this  hope.  1.  It  is  of  importance  to  our  Christian  character.  It  is  as  indis- 
pensable to  the  believing  soul  as  the  anchor  is  to  the  vessel.  2.  It  is  of  importance 
to  our  labours.  All  must  be  done  in  hope.  We  must  sow  in  hope ;  pray  and 
wrestle  in  hope.  3.  It  is  of  importance  to  our  happiness.  IV.  The  certainty  op 
THIS  hope.  "Both  sure  and  steadfast."  The  Christian's  hope  cannot  fail,  unless — 
1.  The  Divine  veracity  fails.  2.  Christ's  precious  blood  should  lose  its  saving  effi- 
cacy. 3.  Christ's  presence  in  heaven  and  intercession  should  be  unavailing. 
Application.  1.  Let  the  believer  increase  in  hope,  rejoice  in  hope,  until  its 
enrapturing  anticipations  shall  terminate  in  glorious  fruition.  2.  Let  the  hopeless 
come  to  the  blessed  Saviour,  who  will,  by  the  gracious  manifestation  of  Himself, 
banish  darkness  from  the  mind,  and  despondency  and  sorrow  from  the  heart. 
There  is,  in  the  gospel,  ample  ground  of  hope  to  all  who  receive  the  record  God  has 
given  of  His  Son.  (J.  Burns,  D.D.)  Our  anchor  : — One  of  the  sights  in  Bome  is 
the  "  Gallery  of  Inscriptions  "  in  the  Vatican.  Inscriptions  from  old  heathen  tombs 
cover  the  one  side,  and  inscriptions  from  the  early  Christian  tombs  cover  the  other. 
There  is  a  heaven-wide  difference  between  the  two.  On  the  heathen  side  there  is 
one  long  wail  of  despair — the  shriek  of  friends  as  the  dying  were  hurried  from  them 
into  the  hateful  abyss.  But  the  Christian  side  breathes  only  peace  and  hope.  The 
names  of  the  departed  are  mixed  up  with  the  name  of  Christ,  and  some  rudely 
carved  symbol  of  the  faith  is  usually  added.  The  ship  and  the  anchor  are  the 
greatest  favourites.  At  the  side  of  the  anchor  the  Christians  often  carved  the  words, 
'*  Hope  in  Christ,"  or  "  Hope  in  God,"  thus  uniting  and  explaining,  as  our  text 
does,  the  word  and  the  image.  I.  Our  anchor.  "  Which  hope  we  have  as  an 
anchor  of  the  soul."  The  hope  of  the  Bible  is  not  like  the  hope  of  the  world.  The 
old  fable  says  that  Pandora  shut  up  all  the  miseries  of  men  along  with  hope  in  a 
box.  The  box  was  offered  to  Prometheus,  or  Forethought,  who  would  not  have  it ; 
and  then  to  Epimetheus,  or  Afterwit,  who  took  it.     Eashly  opening  it,  all  the 


CHAP.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  639 

miseries  flew  abroad,  and  when  he  hastily  closed  the  lid,  only  hope  remained  in  the 
box.  And  so,  they  said,  every  one  has  hope.  You  hope  to  be  rich  some  day,  but 
your  hopes  won't  make  you  rich  unless  you  take  the  right  way.  What  a  poor, 
broken,  hopeless  thing  our  hope  often  is  !  Hugh  Miller  tells  that  when  his  father 
was  drowned  at  sea,  he  was  a  boy  five  years  old.  Long  after  every  one  else  had 
ceased  to  hope,  the  little  fellow  used  to  climb,  day  after  day,  a  grassy  knoll,  and 
look  wistfully  out  over  the  Moray  Firth  for  the  sloop  with  the  two  stripes  of  white 
and  the  two  square  topsails.  But  months  and  years  passed  by,  and  the  white  stripes 
and  square  topsails  he  never  saw.  That  poor  boy  looking  seaward  is  a  true  parable 
of- mankind.  Here  is  a  wicked  man,  who  hopes  to  be  saved  a:  last.  You  hope  so 
and  I  hope  so ;  but  his  hopes,  and  yours,  and  mine  won't  help  him,  unless  he  leave 
of!  his  sins  and  come  to  the  Saviour.  The  hope  of  the  soul  is  often  the  most 
uncertain  thing  in  the  world,  for  many  are  content  with  a  hope  they  dare  not 
examine.  But  the  Christian's  hope  is  sure,  and  never  disappoints ;  for  it  is  just 
saving  faith  with  its  eye  full  upon  a  glorious  future.  The  anchor  here  (including 
cable  and  all)  stands  for  everything  that  links  a  Christian  to  Christ,  everything  that 
gives  heaven  a  hold  on  him,  and  him  a  hold  on  heaven.  Our  anchor  is  "  sure  and 
steadfast."  God  says  and  swears  by  Himself,  that  if  you  trust  in  Christ,  you  shall 
never  perish.  But  remember  you  must  trust  in  the  living  Saviour,  not  in  some  dead 
thing  belonging  to  Him.  Our  Greek  schoolbooks  introduce  us  to  the  simpleton  at 
sea  in  a  storm.  A  sailor  found  him  grasping  the  anchor  on  deck.  The  simpleton 
explained  that  the  anchor  was  the  sign  of  hope,  and  that,  as  he  had  it  in  his  arms, 
there  was  no  fear  of  his  drowning.  You  are  no  wiser  than  he  if  you  trust  in  any 
sign,  or  mere  hope,  or  dead  word.  Hope  was  not  crucified  for  yon,  nor  were  ye 
baptised  in  the  name  of  Hope.  The  hope  of  our  text  means  the  thing  hoped  for, 
just  as  a  •'  will  "  means  not  the  parchment  but  the  bequest.  II.  The  far  end  op 
IHE  ANCHOR  IN  HEAVEN.  The  sailor  casts  out  his  anchor,  which  rushes  through  the 
sea  to  the  bottom,  out  of  sight.  The  source  of  his  safety  is  hidden  from  his  eyes. 
And  so  the  Christian  casts  his  anchor  up  through  the  unseen,  even  to  the  very  heart 
of  heaven,  the  holy  of  holies  in  the  Temple  above.  The  sailor  in  a  storm  seeks  a 
safe  anchorage.  Some  of  our  sheltered  bays,  with  a  stiff  clayey  bottom,  are  crowded 
with  vessels  in  squally  weather.  As  doves  to  their  windows,  the  sailors  '•  flee  for 
refuge  to  lay  hold  upon  the  hope  set  before  "  them  by  their  charts  :  they  cast  anchor 
and  smile  at  the  storm.  It  is  plain  that  your  hope  must  anchor  in  something  out- 
side of  yourself.  Two  fishermen  at  sea  were  once  talking  about  heavenly  things. 
The  one  was  busied  with  his  frames  and  feelings,  always  looking  into  his  own  heart, 
and  not  unto  Christ.  His  comrade  replied,  "  Ah,  John,  you  are  for  anchoring  in 
the  hull ;  you  must  throw  your  anchor  out."  Well  spoken  ;  for  no  refuge  or  safety 
can  we  find  in  self.  And  further,  earth  has  no  safe  anchorage  for  the  souL  Not 
within,  not  around,  but  above  lies  the  firm  ground  in  which  you  must  sink  your 
anchor.  "  Hast  thou  hope  ?  "  they  asked  John  Knox,  as  he  lay  a-dying.  He  spoke 
nothing,  but  raised  his  finger  and  pointed  upwards,  and  so  died.  Yes,  our  anchor 
finds  holding-ground  only  in  heaven.  But  heaven  is  a  large  place,  and  there  are 
many  things  in  it,  you  may  say.  True,  but  oar  hope  is  fixed  not  on  the  things,  but 
on  the  Person  in  heaven.  III.  This  end  of  the  anchok.  "  Which  hope  we  have," 
or  hold,  "  as  an  anchor,"  or  anchor-cable.  The  hope  is  set  before  us  that  we  may 
lay  hold  upon  it.  Think  here  of  a  boat  at  anchor,  and  a  boy  in  it  holding  the 
anchor-rope.  If  he  lets  go  his  hold  he  drifts  out  to  sea.  "  Hold  on,"  you  cry  to 
him,  and  "  hold  on  "  is  the  apostle's  appeal  to  the  Hebrews.  Look  now  at  that  corn- 
ship  of  which  Paul,  though  a  sickly  man  of  books,  and  no  seaman,  is  really  the 
captain  and  the  saviour — showing  us  that  the  Christian  should  always  be  of  men 
the  most  manly,  and  of  heroes  the  most  heroic.  There  he  stands,  calm  and  erect ; 
tossed,  but  not  drowned.  Such  is  the  Christian  soul,  tranquil  amid  the  wild  waves. 
All  the  storms  of  Ufe  come  to  him  as  they  come  to  other  men,  but  his  Christian 
hope  steadies  his  soul.  (James  Wells,  M.A.)  The  anchor  of  the  soul : — There  is  a 
certain  hope  which  Christian  people  have :  a  hope  set  before  ns :  which  is  hke  an 
anchor :  an  anchor  which  has  caught  firm  hold,  and  which  is  holding  on,  some- 
where within  this  veil.  The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  the  cable  from  that  anchor 
reaches  to  us  ;  and  we  hold  on  to  it.  The  soul  "  lays  hold  upon  the  hope  set  before 
us  "  :  and  then  this  hope  does  for  the  soul  what  an  anchor  does  for  the  ship  that 
keeps  an  unbroken  hold  of  its  anchor.  This  is  what  the  imagery,  the  comparison  in 
the  text  means.  Well,  is  it  true  ?  I  do  not  ask  now,  True  to  our  own  experience  7 
Put  that  away  just  at  present.  But  is  it  true  as  a  general  principle  ?  That  is.  If  a 
man  had  "  laid  hold  of  the  hope  set  before  us,"  would  it  be  like  an  anchor  of  the 


640  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vv 

Bonl  ?    Yes,  plainly  it  would  be.    The  hope  of  eternal  life,  of  happiness  with  Christ 
and  all  we  love  in  heaven,  is  well  fitted  to  keep  the  soul  steadfast  amid  the  waves 
and  storms  of  this  world — that  is,  to  do  to  the  soul  the  anchor's  part.     It  will  keep 
the  soul  from  drifting  away,  or  being  driven  away,  by  gales  or  currents,  or  upon 
rocks  and  quicksands  near.     Think  of  sorrow :  sorrow  in  its  widest  sense,  including 
all  that  makes  us  sad  and  unhappy — losses,  privations,  disappointments,  bereave- 
ments, pain,  sickness,  death — the  instinctive  feeling  of  our  race  has  discerned  in  all 
these  the  storms  and  tempests  of  the  world  within.     "  Not  a  wave  of  trouble "  ; 
pleasant  the  prospect,  apt  the  similitude  1     You  remember  good  Juxon's  words,  as 
the  iU-fated  king  knelt  to  the  block :  "  One  last  stage,  somewhat  turbulent  and 
troublesome,  but  still  a  very  short  one":    life's  last  brief  storm  must  be  gone 
through.     We  take  the  good  hope  with  all  that  comes  with  it,  and  from  which 
it  cannot  be  separated.    We  take  it  with  the  conviclion,  amid  all  sorrows,  that  this 
is  the  right  way ;  that  it  was  Christ  that  led  us  into  them  and  will  lead  us  through 
them ;  that  for  all  this  there  is  a  need-be ;  that  it  is  all  for  our  best  good — our 
sanctification,  our  weaning  from  sense  and  time  ;  that  it  is  educating  us  for  higher 
and    better    things  than  we  ever    could  be  fit  for  without  it.     Think  now    of 
temptation:    temptation    in    the    largest    sense:    everything    from    within    and 
without  that  would  lead  us  into  sin — that  would  seek  to  make  us  make  shipwreck 
of  our  souls.    Here,  too,  the  hope  of  heaven,  and  all  that  is  bound  up  along  with 
the  hope  of  heaven,  will  hold  up  against  all  these.     And  here  there  is  something 
especially  fit  in  the  similitude  of  an  anchor.    For  the  special  business  of  the  anchor 
is  to  keep  the  ship  from  drifting  away.     Now  there  are  temptations  which  come 
like  a   sudden  blast  or  squall   upon  the  anchored   ship ;    and   there  are  other 
temptations  which  are  like  an  insensible  current,  drifting  away  and  away.    But 
whether  temptation  addresses  us  as  the  strong  single  impulse,  or  as  the  gently 
and  perpetually  gliding  current,  it  is  plain  that   in  either  case   we   must  have 
something  to  hold  us  up  against  it :  something  which  shall  be  to  the  soul  as  the 
anchor  that  keeps  the  ship  from  driving  or  drifting,  and  makes  it  hold  its  ground. 
There  is  but  one  thing  that  can  be  that :  only  grace  from  above  ;  the  good  hope 
through  grace — and  all  that  is  implied  in  having  that  good  hope;   the  faith, 
resting  simply  on  a  crucified   Saviour ;    the  sight  of  sin,  as   it  is   seen  in  the 
light  from  Gethsemane  and  Calvary :  the  realising  anticipation  of  all  the  rest 
and  joy  and  purity  above,  which  permitted  sin  would  fling  away.    In  discourses 
founded  upon  my  text,  it  is  a  common  thing  to  point  out  that  the  good  hope  which 
comes  of  a  firm  faith  is  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul  in  that  it  is  what  will  hold  up  the 
soul  against  doctrinal  error.     St.  Paul  likens  the  man,  ready  to  catch  up  every  new 
idea  or  crotchet,  if  attractively  put,  to  one  "  tossed  to  and  fro,  and  carried  about 
with  every  wind  of  doctrine  " :  and  the  comparison  is  apt.     Now,  in  these  shifting 
days,  no  doubt  a  real  personal  interest  in  vital  Christian  truth — a  personal  hope 
through  that — is  the  great  anchor  that  shall  keep  us  in  the  good  old  ways,  and  save 
us  from  making  shipwreck  of  our  faith.     Just  a  word  now  of  the  assurance  the  text 
gives  us  that  the  anchored  hope  which  is  to  preserve  us  steadfast  amid  the  storms 
of  life  must  have  its  hold  "  within  the  veil."    That  is,  to  really  do  us  any  good,  our 
great  daily  hope  must  be  of  something  beyond  this  life  and  this  W(  rid.     The  hope 
must  take  hold  "within  the  veU  "  ;  realise,  in  some  measure,  the  substantiality  of 
the  possessions  there  which  seem  so  vague  and  far  away  to  mere  sense.     Only 
thus  can  it  serve  as  an  anchor,  amid  the  failing  of  earthly  stays  and  hopes.     And  a 
further  thought  is  suggested  by  the  text.     The  anchor  is  not  holding  on  where  you 
might  sometimes  have  uneasy  doubts  of  its  holding  securely ;  not  amid  the  waves 
and  storms  of  this  uncertain  world ;  but  in  the  calm  within  the  veil,  where  our 
Redeemer,  our  Forerunner,  He  who  walked  first  the  way  which  it  is  appointed  that 
we  should  walk,  has  entered  in ;  for  us  entered  in ;  entered  in  our  never- failiug 
Intercessor,  and  abides  the  Remembrancer  of  His  one  great  atoning  sacrifice,  our 
High  Priest  upon  the  throne.     If  He  be  not  with  us  here,  visible  King  of  His 
Church,  ready  to  resolve  many  weary  questions  about  it  with  which  we  would  wish 
to  go  to  Him,  it  is  because  it  is  better  for  us  He  should  be  there;  and  meanwhile 
He  has  sent  the  Blessed  Spirit  to  more  than  fill  His  place  ;  and  His  Church  is  left 
to  pray  that  it  may  more  and  more  "  know  Him,  and  the  power  of  His  Resurrec- 
tion "  !     {A.  K.  H.  Boyd,  D.D.)         Hope  the  anchor  of  the  soul: — I.  I  call  your 
attention,  in   the  first   place,  to   that  within  the  veil,  which  is  at  once  the 

GROUND   AND    THE    OBJECT    OF   THE    BELIEVINQ    HOPE    OF   EVERT   TRITE    CHRISTIAN.       1.  A 

manifestation  of  God  under  the  new  and  evangelical  relation  of  God  reconciled  to 
Bis  offending  creatares.     2.  The  priesthood  of  our  Saviour.     3.  "  All  spiritual 


BHAP.  VI.1  HEBREWS.  641 

blessings  in  heavenlj  places  in  Christ."  This  refers  more  particularly  to  the  gift 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  communication  of  spiritual  blessings  through  Hka. 
4.  In  a  verse  which  follows  the  text  there  is  an  expression  of  great  emphasis. 
"Whither,"  says  the  apostle,  "the  Forerunner  is  for  us  entered,  even  Jesus." 
Well,  then,  if  Christ  is  the  Forerunner,  others  have  followed  Him,  and  have  entered 
within  the  veil ;  all  the  apostles  have  passed  within  the  veil ;  all  the  first  disciples, 
who  followed  Him  through  the  reproaches  and  persecutions  of  the  first  ages ;  eJI,  in 
fact,  from  that  time  to  the  present,  who  have  died  in  the  faith,  have  gone  within 
the  veil  of  our  great  Forerunner.  Here,  indeed,  is  a  scene  for  hope  to  fix  her  steady 
gaze  upon ;  and  when  we  thus  behold  the  multitude  which  no  man  can  number, 
who  keep  their  eternal  Sabbath  in  that  sanctuary  above,  shall  we  not  be  cheered 
with  the  songs  sung  there,  and  which  we  hope  ourselves  one  day  to  learn,  and 
encouraged  to  pass  through  the  various  troubles  and  exercises  of  this  present 
state,  seeing  that  the  way  into  the  holiest  of  all  is  indeed  made  manifest,  and 
that  we  may  follow  those  who  have  entered  the  veil,  and  are  now  in  the 
presence  of  God?  U.  There  are  practical  lessons  which  we  may  learn 
from  this  subject.  1.  And  the  first  is,  the  necessity  of  fleeing  for  refuge,  as 
the  apostle  expresses  it,  to  lay  hold  on  the  hope  thus  set  before  yon.  2.  Let 
those  who  have  thus  fled  for  refuge,  to  lay  hold  on  the  hope  set  before  them, 
feel  the  duty  they  owe  to  others  who  are  still  exposed  to  the  danger  which  them- 
selves have  happily  escaped.  S.  Let  those  who  have  entered  into  this  port, 
and  have  cast  their  anchor  there,  be  prepared  for  storms.  (R.  Watson.) 
Hope  the  souVs  anchor : — This  comparison  of  hope  with  an  anchor  is  opposed  to 
common  modes  of  thought  and  expression.  The  more  natural  flgure  to  most  minda 
would  be  that  of  a  buoy.  I  apprehend  that,  where  that  of  the  anchor  is  employed, 
in  nine  cases  out  of  ten  it  is  quoted  from  the  Bible  without  any  definite  meaning. 
Yet  I  do  not  beUeve  that  it  was  used  at  haphazard  in  our  text ;  but  it  seems  to  me 
one  of  the  numerous  cases  in  which  a  profound  wealth  of  spiritual  significance  is 
condensed  into  a  single  word  of  Scripture.  All  hope  is  not  anchor-like ;  or,  if  it  be, 
there  are  many  hopes  which  are  anchors  with  cables  too  short  to  reach  the  bottom, 
and  which  therefore  oiily  expose  the  vessel  to  quicker,  more  irregular,  and  more 
violent  pitches  and  plunges  in  the  storm-lifted  deep.  The  anchor  needs  a  length  of 
cable  sufficient,  but  not  too  great ;  adequate  weight ;  and  the  adjustment  of  stock, 
shank,  and  fiukes,  which  will  most  effectually  hold  the  ship  to  her  moorings. 
These  characteristics  applied  to  spiritual  things  would  give  us  adequate  remoteness, 
vastness,  and  certainty  as  the  requisite  properties  of  a  hope  that  shall  be  an  anchor 
to  the  soul.  I.  Adequate  remoteness.  Remote  in  point  of  time  we  cannot,  in- 
deed, pronounce  the  objects  of  the  Christian  hope ;  for  there  may  be  at  any  moment 
but  a  step  between  us  and  death.  Tet  the  due  effect  of  distance  is  produced  in  part 
by  the  indefiniteness  of  our  term  of  life  here,  and  in  part  by  our  imperfect  know- 
ledge of  the  details  of  our  future  condition.  The  hopeful  Christian  sees  heaven 
near  enough  to  furnish  every  possible  motive  for  virtue,  fidelity,  and  spiritual  affec- 
tions, yet  not  near  enough  to  detach  him  from  the  relations  in  which  God  would 
have  him  conscientiously  faithful — from  the  field  of  duty  of  which  the  Master  says, 
"  Occupy  till  I  come."  11.  Our  Christian  anchor  is  of  sdfeicient  weioht.  Time 
presents  no  attractions  that  can  vie  with  the  promises  of  eternity.  Our  conceptions 
of  heaven  are  enough  to  more  than  fill  the  soul  with  their  fulness,  and  to  outshine 
all  things  else  by  their  Divine  radiance.  The  imagery  of  the  New  Testament 
carries  fancy  on  to  its  utmost  Umits  and  up  till  its  pinions  can  soar  no  higher.  In 
thsse  boundless  and  infinite  prospects  we  have  more  than  a  counterpoise  for  what- 
ever might  beguile  our  souls  from  their  high  calling  and  destiny.  III.  Our  Christian 
anchor  has  its  fibu  hold  of  certain  and  immovable  bvidencb.  Little  as  we  know 
where  or  what  heaven  is,  no  law  of  our  being  is  made  more  sure  to  us  than  our 
immortaUty.  Its  evidence  is  not  intuition,  surmise,  speculation,  or  longing,  but 
fact  which  cannot  be  gainsaid  unless  we  pronounce  the  whole  past  a  dream  and  all 
history  a  fable.  We  have  the  same  proof  that  the  dead  have  risen  which  we  have 
that  countless  multitudes  have  sunk  into  the  death-slumber.  The  resurrection  of 
Christ  is  not  even  an  isolated  fact  of  authentic  history,  but  a  fact  which  has  left 
Burer  traces  of  its  reality,  deeper  channels  of  its  influence,  than  any  other  event 
that  has  occurred  since  the  creation  of  man.  It  was  the  initial  cause,  and  the  only 
possible  cause,  of  a  series  of  events  and  experiences  that  have  been  developing 
themselves  for  eighteen  hondred  years.  In  thus  laying  intense  stress  on  the  histori* 
eal  argument,  I  forget  not  the  intimations  of  immortahty,  the  hopeful  analogies, 
he  onward  pointings,  of  which  nature  and  life  are  full.    The  spring  flowers  that 


54J  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

bloom  around  the  sepulchre  of  Jesus  never  wither.  Again,  there  are  times  when 
our  souls  seem  almost  conscious  of  immortality,  spring  forth  into  a  higher  sphere, 
behold  their  celestial  birthright,  and  read  the  words  of  eternal  life  in  capacities 
which  they  have  no  room  to  develop  here,  in  longings  which  earth  cannot  satisfy, 
in  aspirations  that  transcend  all  created  good.  But  weariness,  care,  or  sorrow 
comes  ;  and  then  the  wings  of  the  spirit  droop,  its  heaven  is  clouded  over,  and  to 
him  who  depends  on  his  own  clear  intuition  all  looks  dark  and  desolate.  But  the 
Christian  thus  bowed  down  stoops  to  look  into  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay,  hears  the 
voice  of  the  resurrection  angel,  and  sees,  through  a  cleft  in  the  clouds,  the  shining 
path  of  the  ascending  Redeemer.  We  have,  then,  a  hope  fitted  to  be  an  anchor  of  the 
soul,  and  we  need  it  to  give  us  stabihty  equally  among  the  temptations,  the  duties, 
and  the  trials  of  life.  1.  Among  its  temptations.  How  close  their  pressure  !  How 
intense  their  disturbing  force  1  Like  the  swell  of  a  storm-lifted  ocean,  they  break 
upon  our  youth,  dash  against  the  strength  of  our  maturer  years,  and  burst  over  the 
hoary  head.  Appetite  and  passion,  pride  and  gain,  ease  and  indolence,  how  do  they 
essay  by  turns  their  single  and  their  combined  power  upon  every  soul  of  man  1  How 
do  they  toss  and  dash  from  breaker  to  breaker,  and  from  shallow  to  shallow,  every 
unanchored  spirit  I  And  their  hold  upon  us  is  as  unanchored  spirits — through  our 
intense  desire  of  immediate  gratification  and  our  detachment  from  the  unseen 
future.  But  let  me  only  behold  in  faith  my  risen  Saviour,  and  hear  from  Him 
those  Divine  words,  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  Uve  also,"  then  I  can  cast  away  the 
withe,  ing  wreath  from  the  earthly  vine  for  the  amaranthine  crown.  I  can  dash 
from  me  the  cup  of  sensual  gratification,  for  the  water  which  I  may  drink  and 
thirst  no  more  for  ever.  I  can  tread  the  rough  and  steep  path,  while  at  every  step 
the  celestial  city  rises  clearer  and  brighter  to  my  view.  2.  But  we  no  less  need 
this  anchor  when  we  have  escaped  the  temptations  which  assail  the  lower  nature, 
and  find  ourselves  on  the  shoreless  sea  of  duty.  Here  again  the  waves  Uft  up  their 
voice.  How  vast  the  extent,  how  complex  the  demands,  how  imperative  the  claims, 
how  earnest  the  calls  of  spiritual  obligation  I  How^Uable  we  are,  even  with  a  quick 
and  tender  conscience,  to  let  some  of  these  voices  drown  others — to  select  our  easy 
or  our  favourite  departments  of  duty  instead  of  aiming  at  entire  fideUty — to  let 
waywardness  modify  principle,  and  convenience  limit  obligation !  How  does  the 
random,  erratic  course  of  many  who  mean  to  do  right  and  well,  resemble  that  of  a 
ship  driven  by  the  wind  and  tossed  on  the  billows  1  And  here  our  anchor  comes 
into  use,  to  keep  us  in  the  moorings  where  God  has  placed  us.  It  is  earthly 
breezes — human  opinion,  fear,  and  favour — that  sway  us  hither  and  thither.  The 
consciousness  of  our  immortaUty  alone  can  make  us  firm  and  resolute,  with  every 
real  demand  of  duty  before  us  in  its  relative  claims  and  just  proportions,  with  the 
work  given  us  to  do  present  to  the  inward  vision,  and  with  the  whole  power  of  the 
world  to  come  making  its  strength  perfect  in  our  weakness.  3.  We  need  our  anchor 
among  the  trials  and  sorrows  which  are  the  lot  of  all.  However  calmly  the  sea  of 
hfe  may  roll  for  a  while  there  are  times  when  the  waves  and  the  billows  go  over  us, 
and  the  floods  lift  up  their  voices  around  us — times  when,  if  in  this  life  only  we  have 
hope,  we  are  ready  to  pronounce  ourselves  of  all  men  the  most  miserable.  When 
the  gains  of  a  hfetime  are  swept  away  in  an  hour,  and  a  prime  spent  in  affluence 
sinks  into  a  needy  old  age  ;  when,  agonised  by  violent  disease,  we  pass  at  once  from 
vigorous  health  into  the  very  jaws  of  death,  or,  crippled  by  chronic  infirmity,  we  drag 
our  limbs  after  us  as  a  prisoner  his  chain ;  when  the  light  of  our  eyes  is  quenched, 
and  the  voices  that  made  sweet  melody  in  our  hearts  are  silent  in  the  grave  ;  when, 
as  with  not  a  few  among  us,  our  dead  outnumber  our  living,  and  the  monuments  in 
the  cemetery  are  more  than  the  olive-plants  around  our  table — we  then  have  en- 
countered griefs  beyond  the  reach  of  human  comforters.  They  set  adrift  the  soul 
that  has  no  hold  on  heaven.  They  abandon  it  to  empty  regrets,  fruitless  complain- 
ings— often  to  a  despondency  which  can  find  relief  only  in  the  self-forgetfulness  of 
sensual  indulgence.  They  are,  in  an  earthly  point  of  view,  intense  and  unmitigated 
evils.  Yet,  with  the  anchor  of  an  immortal  hope,  how  serenely  may  the  Christian 
outride  these  storms,  and  at  the  very  acme  of  their  violence  hear  the  voice  which 
ever  says  to  the  winds  and  to  the  waves,  "  Peace  1  be  still!  "  (A.  P.  Peabody.) 
A  good  anchor  .-—That  the  soul  needs  an  anchor  none  will  deny.  There  is  scarcely 
a  time  in  its  experience  when  it  does  not  feel  its  need  of  a  stay.  Even  in  the  har- 
bour the  ship  is  safe  only  as  she  is  securely  moored  ;  and  at  sea  her  only  chance  of 
safety  frequently  depebds  upon  her  possession  of  these  essential  safeguards.  I.  Wb 
KESD  AN  ANCHOR  IN  PROPOBTioN  TO  THE  SHIP,  A  Small  kedgc  wiU  bold  a  smack,  but 
the  best  bower  is  required  for  others  ;  while  some  can  do  with  nothing  less  than  the 


CHAP.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  54S 

^jreat  sheet  anchor.  Other  things  being  equal,  the  greater  the  ship,  the  larger  must 
be  the  anchor  'vhich  is  to  hold  her.  But  with  the  utmost  possible  precaution  many 
s  ship  has  peribho'L  One  of  Her  Majesty's  ships,  the  Megcera,  was  totally  lost 
through  the  badness  oi  ISer  anchors.  One  by  one,  no  less  than  three  gave  way,  and 
they  were  obliged  to  let  the  yeasel  drive  on  to  the  beach.  But  if  it  be  important 
that  the  ship  should  be  provided  with  proportionate  anchors,  how  much  more  im- 
portant is  it  that  the  soul  should  be  well  supplied  with  that  which  will  be  adequate 
to  its  emergencies  1  And  what  will  suffice  to  meet  these  emergencies  ?  What  is 
there  that  can  meet  the  requirements  of  the  priceless,  never-dying  soul?  Formal- 
ism is  wholly  inadequate  as  an  "  anchor  of  the  soul."  It  may  do  very  well  for 
fine  weather,  but  it  will  not  hold  in  a  gale.  There  is  but  one  good  anchor.  "  A 
good  hope  through  grace  "  alone  can  hold  thee  there,  and,  blessed  be  God,  that  is 
sufficient.  But  there  are  not  a  few  who,  to  make  assurance  doubly  sure,  have  gone 
to  yet  another  quarter,  whence  they  have  hoped  to  obtain  an  anchor  which,  together 
with  the  first,  would  be  more  than  sufficient  to  meet  their  case.  They  are  hoping 
that,  through  their  good  works,  they  will  be  enabled  to  outride  the  dangers  of  death 
and  the  judgment.  The  place  from  whence  this  article  comes  is  kept  by  old 
Legality.  Anxious  sinner,  beUeve  me,  "  It  is  of  faith,  that  it  might  be  by  grace." 
It  is  "  not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should  boast."  But  there  are  some  who,  to  these 
two,  seek  to  add  even  yet  another.  Their  idea  seems  to  be  that  no  one,  nor  even 
two  anchors,  are  sufficient.  They  go  off  to  feeling  in  order  to  strengthen  the  other 
two.  If  legaUty  has  slain  its  thousands,  feeling  has  slain  its  ten  thousands.  People 
are  foolish  to  imagine  that  because  they  can  work  themselves  up  to  a  certain  pitch 
of  rehgious  feeling,  that  therefore  they  are  saved.  It  is  an  anchor  that  will  not 
hold ;  nay,  it  is  an  anchor  that  will  not  even  sink.  II.  We  need  an  anchorage  in 
PROPOHTioN  to  the  ANCHOR.  The  bcst  anchor  in  the  world  will  not  hold  in  a  bad 
ground.  We  can  easily  imagine  that  a  bad  anchorage,  like  a  bad  anchor,  may  do  very 
well  for  fine  weather,  but  will  fail  in  the  storm.  We  had,  I  remember,  an  anchor 
that  had  held  us  well  in  any  weather  whenever  we  had  cast  it.  But  one  day,  being 
near  the  shore,  we  threw  it  over  as  usual,  and  went  below  to  dinner.  We  had  not  been 
there  many  minutes,  ho\>  ever,  when  the  wind  freshened,  and  a  sudden  squaU  with 
heavy  rain  came  whistling  through  the  shrouds.  Of  course,  because  our  anchor  had 
held  us  through  weather  worse  than  that,  we  listened  with  the  greatest  composure  to 
the  music  of  the  storm,  and  were  not  a  little  entertained  by  it  as  we  proceeded  with 
our  meal.  But  while  we  had  not  the  least  apprehension  of  danger,  we  were  suddenly 
aroused  by  the  lurching  of  the  vessel  as,  dragging  her  anchor  with  her,  she  was 
being  driven  from  her  anchorage.  It  was  no  fault  of  the  anchor;  it  was  bad 
ground.  We  found  our  anchor,  good  as  it  was,  could  not  get  a  hold  on  the  indiffer- 
ent anchorage  into  which  we  had  cast  it.  It  was  well  for  us  that  the  wind  came  off 
the  land,  for  had  it  come  the  other  way  nothing  could  have  saved  us  from  being 
driven  on  the  shore.  As  it  was,  we  escaped  with  a  drenching.  I  need  not  say  that 
such  a  contingency  can  never  Lappen  in  true  spiritual  navigation.  The  anchorage 
indicated  in  our  text  is  equal  to  the  anchor.  It  is  "  that  within  the  veil."  1.  The 
blood-sprinkled  mercy-seat.  Mercy  through  Christ  is  the  one  ground  of  the  sinner's 
hope,  and  the  blood-sprinkled  mercy-seat  is  the  only  place  at  which  he  may  draw 
near  to  God.  2.  The  sinner's  Great  Advocate.  What  a  source  of  comfort  to  the 
convinced  sinner  I  Look  at  it,  anxious  heart.  Surely,  when  such  an  Advocate  has 
undertaken  your  cause,  you  can  leave  it  in  His  hands.  Give  it  up  to  Him  now.  3. 
The  ark  of  Jehovah's  covenant.  What  an  anchorage  I  Are  you  conscious  of  daily 
shortcomings  and  oppressed  continually  with  a  sense  of  guilt  ?  You  may  see  here 
how,  always,  the  "sin  is  covered"  over,  and  how  Jehovah  Himself,  as  in  Hia 
Shekinah  glory  He  dwells  between  the  cherubim,  sees  no  spot  upon  you.  As  the 
brok^c  law  was  hidden  in  the  ark  under  the  blood,  so  the  believing  sinner  is  hidden 
in  Christ.  This  is  our  hope  I  Are  you  feeUng  your  weakness  ?  As  you  have  to 
confront  the  dangers  and  difficulties  of  life,  do  you  feel  your  need  of  help  ?  The 
manna  here  reminds  you  of  His  faithfulness,  whose  name  is  still  Jehovah-Jireh. 
You  cannot  look  within  that  sacred  ark,  and  not  remember  that  He  has  said,  "  As 
thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be,"  and  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee."  Are  you 
in  distress  because  of  God's  chastening  hand  ?  In  the  budding  rod  you  may  see  the 
type  of  every  sorrow  that  befalls  the  saint.  It  may  be  a  rod,  but  it  is  a  rod  that 
buds  and  blossoms,  and  brings  forth  fruit.  4.  And  then,  besides  all  this,  we  are 
reminded  of  the  everlasting  covenant.  What  a  world  of  satisfaction  we  find  there  I 
"  A  world,"  did  I  say  ?  What  a  heaven  of  height,  and  depth,  and  breadth,  and 
length  of  infinite  sufficiency  is  discovered  to  us  there  1     III.  Wb  need  ▲  oablb  m 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

PKOPOBTioN  TO  BOTH.  It  is  uot  enough  to  know  that  you  have  a  good  anchorage  and 
a  good  anchor :  you  must  also  be  persuaded  that  you  have  the  God- wrought  cable  of 
living  faith  :  "  By  grace  are  ye  saved  through  faith,  and  that  not  of  yourselves :  it 
is  the  gift  of  God."  But  though  the  anchors  of  feeling,  and  formality,  and  legal- 
ity, and  orthodoxy  may  be,  and  are,  cast  cableless  into  the  sea,  if  you  obtain  the 
anchor  "  good  hope,"  the  cable  of  living  faith  is  always  possessed  with  it.  For — 1. 
These  are  ever  connected.  Faith  is  the  blessed  cable  which  holds  the  ship  here,  and 
the  anchor  there.  As  the  one  strong  chain  ever  vibrates  and  keeps  up  a  communi- 
cation between  the  anchorage  and  the  ship,  so  faith,  while  it  dwells  here  in  the 
heart,  ever  dwells  there  •'  within  the  veil."  2.  These  can  never  fail.  It  is  quite 
possible  for  a  man  to  have  an  anchor  and  a  cable  of  the  most  genuine  quality,  and 
yet,  through  ignorance  of  their  nature,  to  be  aU  the  timo  in  jeopardy ;  and  it  is 
equally  possible,  through  the  same  kind  of  ignorance,  for  a  man  having  an  anchor 
and  a  cable  that  are  bad,  to  repose  in  a  false  confidence  until  he  is  awakened  to  a 
terrible  discovery  of  his  mistake.  Sailors  have  often  ridden  out  a  gale  with  fear 
and  trembhng,  expecting  every  moment  to  find  themselves  adrift,  while  others  have 
been  suddenly  astonished  to  find  that  the  anchor  upon  which  they  coulrl  have 
staked  their  lives  has  actually  given  out.  And  these  represent  two  very  large 
classes  of  people  in  the  religious  world.  There  are  thousands  who  have  a  good 
hope,  but  who  fear  that  it  is  bad  ;  and  there  are  millions  who  have  a  false  hope, 
but  who  believe  that  it  is  good.  To  show  either  class  their  mistake  is  most  dilficult. 
If  you  try  to  remind  the  hypocrite  that  his  hope  "  will  perish,"  the  sincere  seeker 
immediately  appropriates  the  warning  as  intended  for  himself ;  while  if  you  en- 
deavour  to  assure  the  broken-hearted  that  •'  the  Lord  is  nigh  unto  them  "  to  save 
them,  the  hypocrite  will  at  once  claim  the  comfort  as  his  own.  Believe  me,  sor- 
rowing soul,  if  you  are  taking  hold  of  "that  within  the  veil" — if  Christ,  and 
Christ  alone,  is  your  trust — if  His  blood  is  your  plea,  and  His  advocacy  is  your 
daily  joy,  then  you  have  the  almighty  anchor  cast  in  the  all-sufficient  anchorage, 
and  you  are  held  by  the  omnipotent  cable  of  living  faith.  With  these  you  are  safe  ; 
disaster  is  impossible.  You  must  and  will  ride  out  every  possible  change.  3.  These 
ever  remain  unchanged.  It  will  be  a  blessed  thing  if  we  can  always  realise  this. 
Let  our  hope  be  "  sure  and  steadfast."  The  cable  will  sometimes  be  very  much 
shaken  ;  in  all  her  changes  it  will  rise  and  fall  with  the  vessel ;  but,  beloved  friends, 
having  taken,  let  hope  keep  its  hold  on  that  which  is  within  the  veil.  The  strongest 
cable  will  tremble,  and  so  will  the  strongest  faith ;  but  the  trembling  cable  holds  a 
"  sure  and  steadfast "  anchor,  and  that  anchor  moves  not  though  the  chain  may 
shake.  {W.  H.  Burton.)  The  anchor  of  the  soul : — There  are  many  things  which 
a  sailor  holds  to  be  essential  when  he  goes  out  to  sea.  The  captain  who  should  go 
out  to  sea  without  an  anchor  would  be  deemed  a  madman.  Life  is  a  restless, 
unquiet  sea,  full  of  trouble  and  danger.  You  are  the  ships  that  sail  this  sea,  and 
are  exposed  to  its  changes  and  storms.  Many  of  you  are  now  just  leaving  the 
peaceful  harbour  of  home  with  all  its  tender  influences,  and  are  putting  forth 
upon  the  wide  and  open  main.  I  remember  hearing  of  an  infidel  who,  when  laid 
npon  his  last  bed  of  sickness,  was  urged  by  his  godless  companions  not  to  show  the 
white  feather,  but  to  hold  on.  What  do  you  think  was  the  answer  of  the  dying 
man  ?  With  a  face  full  of  hopeless  dismay,  he  looked  at  them  and  said,  "  How  can  I 
hold  on  when  I  have  nothing  to  hold  by?"  Ah  1  he  felt  the  need  of  a  spiritual 
grapnel,  something  "  sure  and  steadfast  "  to  which  he  could  cling.  But  it  is  not 
only  in  the  hour  of  death  we  require  it ;  we  need  it  all  through  lite.  Let  us  then 
have  a  httle  talk  together  about  this  "  anchor  of  the  soul."  I.  What  is  it  made  of? 
You  all  know  what  ordinary  anchors  are  made  of.  In  very  early  times  there  were 
no  such  things  known  ;  but  large  stones  with  a  rope  attache  I  to  them  were  used  for 
the  purpose.  By  and  by  the  Greeks  began  to  make  them  of  iron,  and  their  example 
has  been  followed  by  all  maritime  nations.  If  anything  in  the  world  needs  to  be 
robust  and  reliable  it  is  an  anchor,  for  on  its  strength  hundreds  of  precious  lives 
may  depend.  Well,  what  about  our  spiritual  anchor  ?  Ah  1  of  how  much  more 
importance  it  is  that  it  be  durable,  seeing  the  interests  here  at  stake  are  everlasting. 
You  cannot  afford  to  run  any  risks  with  the  soul,  for  it  is  more  valuable  than  the 
whole  world.  Now,  having  seen  what  the  anchor  of  the  soul  is  made  of,  I  want  you 
to  think  of  this  question.  11.  Why  do  yov  need  it  ?  Why  does  a  ship  need  aa 
anchor  ?  To  keep  it  steady,  you  say,  and  save  it  from  being  carried  away  by  wind 
and  tide.  Oh,  how  many  influences  there  are  around  us  that  put  us  in  danger. 
Then  an  anchor  is  of  great  value  in  preventing  a  ship  from  drifting.  Young  con- 
verts will  soon  find  themselves  in  danger  of  backsliding.    When  you  get  out  intO' 


CHA»   VI.]  HEBREWS.  "         645 

the  world  you  will  find  a  strong  current  running  dead  against  you  ;  the  influence  of 
irreUgious  society,  and  of  a  spurious  charity,  will  tempt  you  to  abate  your  zeal,  and 
to  give  up,  one  by  one,  holy  practices  and  vital  truths  which  once  were  dear  to  you 
as  life,  and  you  will  glide  unconsciously  back  into  an  easy-going  formalism ;  and 
then,  alas  1  for  your  spiritual  and  eternal  interests  I    Therefore,  as  St.  John  says, 
"  Look  to  yourselves,  that  ye  lose  not  those  things  which  ye  have  wrought,  but  that 
ye  receive  a  full  reward."    Keep  fast  hold  of  your  hope  in  Christ,  and  you  will  be 
able  to  maintain  your  ground.     Never  let  go  your  spiritual  anchor  and  you  will 
successfully  resist  the  strong  currents  around  you.     Now  we  come  to  the  last  point. 
m.  Wheee  ABE  voxj  TO  CAST  THIS  ANOHOB  ?    The  Same  apostle  speaks  of  it  "  enter- 
ing into  that  within  the  veil " ;  and,  perhaps,  the  expression  strikes  you  as  a  very 
curious  one.    Undoubtedly  it  is  not  usual  to  cast  anchors  within  curtains  or  veils. 
But  when  you  thlnlc  over  it  the  meaning  is  clear  and  beautiful.    The  meaning  of  the 
word  "  veU "  takes  us  back  to  the  worship  of   the  ancient  Jewish   sanctuary. 
Although  the  pious  Jewish  worshipper  never  entered  within  that  curtain,  never  saw 
behind  it,  yet  he  knew  perfectly  what  was  there ;  he  knew  the  blessed  truth  set 
forth  by  that  mercy-seat,  and  all  his  spiritual  hope  was  based  upon  it.    The  anchor 
of  his  soul  entered  into  that  within  the  veil  and  took  hold  of  the  blood-besprinkled 
mercy-seat  of  God.    Ah !  it  won't  do  to  throw  out  your  soul's  anchor  upon  the 
mere  clemency  or  indulgence  of  an  amiable  God.    The  anchor  must  be  fixed  in  the 
ground  God  has  provided,  and  nowhere  else.    It  must  lay  hold  on  covenant  mercy, 
on  nothing  less  than  the  finished  work  of  Jesus.    Ah  1  perhaps  some  of  you  have 
as  yet  got  no  anchor !    You  are  going  forth  into  the  future,  with  its  unknown 
dangers  and  storms,  and  are  wholly  unprepared  I     Oh  I  it  is  a  sad  thing  to  live 
"  without  God,  and  without  hope  in  the  world."     Sir  Humphrey  Davy,  a  brilliant 
and  successful  man  of  science  of  last  century,  with  almost  everything  that  the 
world  could  give  to  make  a  man  happy,  once  wrote  to  a  friend,  '•  There  is  but  one 
person  I  envy  upon  earth,  and  that  is  the  man  who  has  a  clear  and  fixed  religious 
behef."    Alas !  how  many  all  around  us  who  will  still  lack  this.     Intelligent  and 
amiable  and  with  much  to  make  them  happy,  but  stiU  dark  within.   "  AH  at  sea  "  in 
very  deed  as  regards  spiritual  things,  and  with  no  anchor  to  cUng  to  1  What  are  you 
going  to  do  in  the  coming  storm  ?  To-day  the  air  may  be  cahn  and  the  sky  serene ; 
but  tiie  clouds  are  gathering  for  such  a  tempest  and  riot  of  elements  as  earth  has 
never  seen ;  and  woe  betide  those  who  in  that  hour  have  no  Saviour  they  can  call 
their  own  I      (J.  T.  Davidson,  D.D.)         Importance  of  the  anchor: — During  the 
short  naval  battle  between  the  Merrimae  and  the  Congress  and  Cumberland,  the 
anchor  of  the  former,  being  unprotected,  was  shot  away.     Ever  afterwards  the 
ironclad  battle-ships  were  constructed  so  as  to  include  an  anchor-well,  in  which  the 
anchor,  when  out  of  the  water,  might  be  stowed  away  in  safety.    (H.  0.  Mackey.) 
A  seaside  sermon : — I.  Life  is  a  sba.    Two  sorts  of  peril.     1.  Drift — from  routine, 
custom  of  society,  currents  of  popular  feeling,  habits  of  commerce,  &o,    2.  Storms 
— to  health,  circumstances,  faith,  love.    11.  Thb  sool  is  a  ship.    Not  a  rock,  nor 
a  waif,  but  a  vessel — capable  of  progress,  and  under  proper  guidance  able  to  reach 
a  right  haven.   III.  Hopes  abb  anchobs.     1.  Common.    2.  Manifold.    IV.  Chbistian 
HOPE  18  THE  oNiiT  SUFFICIENT  ANCHOB.  1.  Fixcd  ou  God  through  Christ.  2.  Fastened 
by  chains  of  faith  and  love  vouchsafed  through  Christ.     {U.  R.  Thomas.)        The 
sQuVs  only  sure  refuge : — Professor  Maury,  whose  masterly  work  on  the  "  Physical 
Geography  of  the  Sea,"  and  others  of  like  value,  have  given  him  a  reputation 
wherever  learning  is  valued,  was  a  devout,  humble-minded  Christian.  In  his  youth 
he  had  paced  the  quarter-deck  of  a  man-of-war,  in  the  capacity  of  midshipman, 
and  long  years  after,  in  his  dying  hour,  the  scenes  of  early  days  came  back.    He 
fancied  himself  in  the  midst  of  a  storm,  when  the  goodly  ship,  holding  by  her 
anchors,  seemed  threatened  with  destruction,  even  under  the  shadow  of  the  shore. 
Turning  his  languid  eye  upon  his  son,  who  nursed  him,  he  asked,  in  the  language 
of  the  ruling  passion  of  his  soul,  "  Do  I  seem  to  drag  my  anchors  ?  "    The  answer, 
"  They  are  sure  and  steadfast,"  gave  him  gratifying  assurance.    After  he  had  been 
silent  for  some  time,  and  was  supposed  to  be  speechless,  a  friend  asked  how  he  felt, 
when  he  promptly  said,  "  AU  is  welll"  and  forthwith  left  the  shores  of  time  for 
the  fairer  scenes  of  the  eternal  world.    This  only  refuge  for  the  soul  is  what  we 
should  prize  above  all  things  else  ;  and  the  most  important  question  to  be  settled 
is,  whether,  or  not,  we  have  sought  and  found  it.     {J.  N.  Norton,  D.D.)        The 
anchor  of  the  soul: — The  apostle  had  just  been  speaking  of  "laying  hold  on  the 
hope  set  before  us,"  by  which  he  seems  to  denote  the  appropriation  of  those  various 
blessings  which  have  all  been  procured  for  us  by  Christ.    And  when  the  apostle 

85 


646  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

proceeds,  in  the  words  of  our  text,  to  describe  this  hope  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul* 
we  are  to  understand  him  as  declaring  that  the  expectation  of  God's  favour  and  of 
the  glories  of  heaven,  through  the  atonement  and  intercession  of  Christ,  is  exactly 
calculated  to  keep  us  steadfast  and  unmoved  amid  all  the  tempests  of  our  earthly 
estate.  1.  Now  the  idea  which  is  immediately  suggested  by  this  metaphor  of  the 
anchor  is  that  of  our  being  exposed  to  great  moral  peril,  tossed  on  rough  waters, 
and  in  danger  of  making  shipwreck  of  our  faith.  And  we  must  be  well  aware,  if  at 
all  acquainted  with  ourselves  and  our  circumstances,  that  such  idea  is  in  every 
respect  accurate,  and  that  the  imagery  of  a  tempest-tossed  ship,  girt  about  by  the 
rock  and  the  quicksand,  as  well  as  beaten  by  the  hurricane,  gives  no  exaggerated 
picture  of  the  believer  in  Christ,  as  opposition,  under  various  forms,  labours  at  his 
ruin.  We  first  observe  that  there  is  great  risk  of  our  being  carried  about,  as  an 
apostle  expresses  it, "  with  every  wind  of  doctrine  "  ;  and  whatever,  therefore,  tends 
to  the  keeping  us  in  the  right  faith,  in  spite  of  gusts  of  error,  must  deserve  to  be 
characterised  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul.  But,  we  may  unhesitatingly  declare,  that 
there  is  a  power,  the  very  strongest,  in  the  hope  of  salvation  through  Christ,  of 
enabling  us  to  stand  firm  against  the  incursions  of  heresy.  The  hope  presupposes 
faith  in  the  Saviour  ;  and  faith  has  reasons  for  the  persuasion  that  Jesus  is  God's 
Son,  and  "  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost " ;  and  though  the  individual  is  ready 
enough  to  probe  these  reasons,  and  to  bring  them  to  any  fitting  criterion,  it  ia 
evident,  that  where  faith  has  once  taken  possession,  and  generated  hope,  he  has  so 
direct  and  overwhelming  an  interest  in  holding  fast  truth,  that  it  must  be  more 
than  a  specious  objection  or  a  well-turned  cavil  which  will  prevail  to  the  loosening 
his  grasp.  We  observe,  next,  that  the  believer  in  Christ  is  in  as  much  danger  of 
being  moved  by  the  trials  with  which  he  meets  as  by  attacks  upon  his  faith.  But 
he  has  a  growing  consciousness  that  •'  all  things  work  together  for  good,"  and 
therefore  an  increasing  submissiveness  in  the  season  of  tribulation,  or  an  ever- 
strengthening  adherence  to  God  as  to  a  father.  And  that  which  contributes, 
perhaps  more  than  aught  besides,  to  the  produding  this  adherence,  is  the  hope  on 
which  the  Christian  lays  hold.  If  you  study  the  language  of  David  when  in  trouble 
you  will  find  that  it  was  hope  by  which  he  was  sustained.  He  describes  himself  in 
terms  which  accurately  correspond  to  the  imagery  of  our  text.  "  Deep  calleth  unto 
deep  at  the  noise  of  Thy  waterspouts  ;  all  Thy  waves  and  Thy  billows  are  gone  over 
me."  But  when  the  tempest  was  thus  at  its  height,  and  everything  seemed  to 
conspire  to  overwhelm  and  destroy  him,  he  could  yet  say,  "  Why  art  thou  cast 
down,  0  my  soul !  and  why  art  tbou  disquieted  within  me  ?  Hope  thou  in  God ; 
for  I  shall  yet  praise  Him,  who  is  the  health  of  my  countenance,  and  my  God." 
It  is  hope,  you  observe,  to  which  he  turns,  as  the  principle  through  which  the  soul 
might  best  brave  the  hurricane.  And  can  we  wonder  that  a  hope,  such  as  that  of 
the  believer  in  Christ,  should  so  contribute  to  the  steadfastness  of  its  possessor  that 
the  winds  may  buffet  him,  and  the  floods  beat  against  him,  and  yet  he  remains 
firm,  like  the  well-anchored  vessel  ?  Is  it  the  loss  of  property  with  which  he  is 
visited,  and  which  threatens  to  shake  his  dependence  upon  God  ?  Hope  whispers 
that  he  has  in  heaven  an  enduring  substance  ;  and  he  takes  joyfully  the  spoiling 
of  his  goods.  Is  it  the  loss  of  friends  ?  He  sorrows  not  "  even  as  others  which 
have  no  hope,"  but  is  comforted  by  the  knowledge  that  "  them  also  which  sleep  in 
Jesus  will  God  bring  with  Him."  Is  it  sickness — is  it  the  treachery  of  friends — is 
it  the  failure  of  cherished  plans,  which  hangs  the  firmament  with  blackness,  and 
works  the  waters  into  fury  ?  None  of  these  things  move  him ;  for  hope  assures 
him  that  his  *'  light  affliction,  which  is  but  for  a  moment,  worketh  for  him  a  far 
more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory."  Is  it  death  which,  advancing  in  its 
awfulness,  would  beat  down  his  confidence,  and  snap  his  cordage,  and  send  him 
adrift?  His  hope  is  a  hope  full  of  immortality:  he  knows  "whom  he  hath 
believed,  and  is  persuaded  that  He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  he  hath  committed 
onto  Him  against  that  day."  We  go  on  to  observe  that  the  Christian  is  exposed 
to  great  varieties  of  temptation:  the  passions  of  an  evil  nature,  and  the  enticements 
of  a  "  world  which  lieth  in  wickedness,"  conspire  to  draw  him  aside  from  righteous- 
ness, and  force  him  back  to  the  habits  and  scenes  which  he  has  professedly 
abandoned.  The  danger  of  spiritual  shipwreck  would  be  comparatively  small  if 
the  sea  on  which  he  voyages  were  swept  by  no  storms  but  those  of  sorrow  and  per- 
secution. The  risk  is  far  greater  when  he  is  assaulted  by  the  solicitations  of  his  own 
lusts,  and  the  corrupt  affections  of  his  nature  are  plied  with  their  correspondent 
objects.  And  though  it  too  often  happens  that  he  is  overcome  by  temptation,  we 
.are  sure  that  if  he  kept  hope  in  exercise  he  would  not  be  moved  by  the  pleadings 


CHAP.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  647 

of  tbe  flesh  and  the  wa.id.  Let  hope  be  in  vigour,  and  the  Christian's  mind  is 
fixed  on  a  portion  which  he  can  neither  measure  by  his  imagination  nor  be  deprived 
of  by  his  enemies.  And  now  if,  at  a  time  such  as  this,  when  it  may  ahnost  be  said 
that  he  has  entered  the  haven,  that  he  breathes  the  fragrance,  and  gazes  on  the 
loveliness,  and  shares  tbe  delights  of  the  Paradise  of  God — he  be  solicited  to  the 
indulgsnce  of  a  lust,  the  sacrifice  of  a  principle,  or  the  pursuit  of  a  bauble — can 
you  thiuk  the  likelihood  to  be  great  that  he  will  be  mastered  by  the  temptation, 
that  he  will  return,  at  the  summons  of  some  low  passion,  from  his  splendid  excur- 
sion, and  defile  himself  with  the  impurities  of  earth  ?  We  can  be  confident  that  if 
hope,  the  hope  set  before  ns  in  the  gospel,  be  earnestly  clung  to,  there  will  be  no 
room  in  the  giasp  for  the  ghttering  toys  with  which  Satan  would  bribe  us  to  throw 
away  our  eternity.  And  therefore — to  bring  the  matter  again  under  the  figure  of 
our  text — we  can  declare  of  hope  that  it  ministers  to  Christian  steadfastness,  when 
the  temptations  of  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  combine  to  produce  wavering 
and  inconstancy.  2.  Now,  throughout  these  illustrations  we  have  rather  assumed 
than  proved  that  Christian  hope  is  of  a  nature  widely  different  from  that  of 
any  other.  But  it  will  be  easily  seen  that  we  have  claimed  for  it  nothing 
beyond  the  truth  if  we  examine,  the  apostle's  statement  in  regard  of  a 
Christian's  hope,  that  it  "  entereth  into  that  within  the  veil."  The  allusion  is 
undoubtedly  to  the  veil,  or  curtain,  which  separated  the  holy  place  from  the  holy 
of  holies  in  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem.  By  the  holy  of  holies  was  typified  the  scene 
of  God's  immediate  presence,  into  which  Christ  entered  wheu  the  days  of  His 
humiliation  were  ended.  And  hence  we  understand  by  the  hope,  or  the  anchor, 
entering  within  the  veil,  that,  in  believing  upon  Jesus,  we  fasten  ourselves,  as  it 
were,  to  the  realities  of  the  invisible  world.  This  throws  new  and  great  light  on 
the  simile  of  our  text.  It  appears  that  the  Christian,  whilst  tossing  on  a  tem- 
pestuous sea,  is  fast  bound  to  another  scene  of  being,  and  that,  whilst  the  vessel  is 
on  the  waters  of  time,  the  anchor  is  on  the  rock  of  eternity.  Within  the  veil  are 
laid  up  joys  and  possessions  which  are  more  than  commensurate  with  men's 
capacities  for  happiness  when  stretched  to  the  utmost.  Within  the  veil  is  a  glory 
such  as  was  never  proposed  by  ambition  in  its  most  daring  flight;  and  a  wealth 
such  as  never  passed  before  avarice  in  its  most  golden  dreams  ;  and  delights  such 
as  imagination,  when  employed  in  delineating  the  most  exquisite  pleasures,  hath 
never  been  able  to  array.  And  let  hope  fasten  on  this  glory,  this  wealth,  these 
delights,  and  presently  the  soul,  as  though  she  felt  that  the  objects  of  desire  were 
as  ample  as  herself,  acquires  a  fixedness  of  purpose,  a  steadiness  of  aim,  a  com- 
bination of  energies,  which  contrast  strangely  with  the  inconstancy,  the  vacillation, 
the  distraction,  which  have  made  her  hitherto  the  sport  of  every  wind  and  every 
wave.  The  object  of  hope  being  immeasurable,  inexhaustible,  hope  clings  to  this 
object  with  a  tenacity  which  it  cannot  manifest  when  grasping  only  the  insignificant 
and  unsubstantial;  and  thus  the  soul  is  bound,  we  might  almost  say  indissolubly, 
to  the  unchangeable  realities  of  the  inheritassce  of  the  saints.  And  can  you  marvel 
if,  with  her  anchor  thus  dropped  within  the  veii,  she  is  not  to  be  driven  from  her 
course  by  the  wildest  of  the  storms  which  yet  rage  without  ?  Besides,  within  the 
veil  is  an  Intercessor  whose  pleadings  insure  that  these  objects  of  hope  shall  be 
finally  attained.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  Entereth  into  that  witMn  the  veil. — Hope 
tnieiing  iciihin  the  veil: — I.  Let  us  regabd  the  necessity  fob  this  hope.  We 
have  to  show  here  that  there  are  difiiculties  which  render  Christian  endurance  an 
impossibility,  apart  from  tbe  sustaining  power  of  a  hope  that  enters  within  the 
veil.  1.  There  is  a  veil  over  the  spiritual  world.  By  the  spiritual  world  I  mean  all 
the  un^een  realities  which  surround  us  now.  He  who  is  in  the  highest  sense 
spiritual,  feels  the  world  to  be  a  Divine  temple,  because  he  realises  God  in  it — His 
infinite  presence  shining  from  the  deep  sky  above,  and  His  love  revealed  in  every 
flower.  To  him  Christ  is  everywhere,  hallowing,  as  of  old,  the  relationships  of  life, 
and  colouring  by  His  sympathy  its  struggles  and  its  sorrows.  He  can  reverence 
men,  not  because  they  are  rich,  or  successful,  or  powerful,  but  because  they  are 
hving  and  immortal  spirits ;  and  his  standard  of  life  is  not  the  expedient,  or  the 
pleasurable,  or  the  popular^ — but  the  righteousness,  the  truth,  the  love  of  the 
eternal  world.  StiU,  that  world  is  veiled :  only  the  eye  of  a  strong  faith  can  see  its 
beauty.  We  are  so  encircled  and  enchained  by  the  fleshly  and  material,  that  we 
can  only  clearly  realise  the  eternal  in  moments  of  meditation  or  prayer;  while  the 
transient  presses  incessantly  upon  us,  and  by  its  strong  glare  absorbs  us — while 
passion,  with  its  coloured  light,  blinds  the  vision  of  the  soul.  Is  it  not  evident, 
then,  that  to  be  faithful  to  the  end  demands  a  hope  that  enters  within  the  folded 


548  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAf.  y\ 

veil  which  hides  from  us  the  spiritual  world  ?  2.  There  is  a  veil  over  the  discipline 
of  life.  Indeed,  the  meaning  of  human  life  generally  is  profoundly  veiled.  Here 
we  have  often  to  sow  in  tears  while  the  reaping  is  veiled — just  as  in  the  natural 
world  we  cast  the  seed  into  the  ground  in  utter  ignorance  of  the  manner  in  which 
it  will  be  quickened  into  life.  The  sowing  is  seen,  the  reaping  may  be  beUeved  in, 
but  the  connection  between  the  two  is  concealed.  The  sower  must  trust  to  the 
dark  laws  of  nature.  He  cannot  see  the  marvellous  forces  that  cause  the  seed  to 
germinate;  the  mysterious  influences  of  winter  snows  and  summer  rains;  the  silent 
electric  currents  by  which  the  sowing  is  linked  to  the  harvest  that  will  wave  in 
golden  glory  beneath  the  autumnal  sky.  So  in  spiritual  life.  We  have  to  Uve  for 
eternity.  We  have  to  work  in  faith.  We  feel  the  efiort,  realise  the  duty,  see  the 
thing  to  be  done,  but  the  laws  which  cause  our  toil  to  bear  fruit  are  as  hidden  and 
mysterious  as  the  laws  of  natural  life.  If,  then,  we  could  not  rest  on  a  hope  which 
enters  within  the  veil,  and  in  its  strength  believe  in  the  certainty  of  the  harvest, 
how  could  we  be  steadfast  to  the  end  ?  3.  There  is  a  veil  over  the  heaven  of  the 
future.  I  know  of  course  there  is  a  veil  over  its  employments,  relationships, 
locality — which  how  earnestly  we  long  to  pierce  1  But  here  a  great  problem  meets 
us.  Taking  the  Scripture  teaching  that  this  life  is  the  germ  of  the  future  life;  that 
its  present  discipline  is  but  the  prelude  to  that  "  exceeding  weight  of  glory  "  ;  that 
this  is  but  the  bud  of  which  the  future  life  will  be  the  flower,  how  is  this  earthly 
life  to  develop  into  the  blessed  life  of  heaven  ?  But  here  comes  in  the  hope  which 
"entereth  within  the  veil."  Just  as  in  the  natural  world  the  inscrutable  activities 
which  darken  the  seed-time,  and  create  the  fear  of  the  seed's  failure,  do  yet  mature 
its  fruitage ;  so  in  the  spiritual  life  the  Divine  law  of  growth  is  at  work,  though  it 
may  be  hidden  from  us.  Our  life  here  must  be  imperfect,  because  we  live  for 
eternity,  and  God  is  causing  our  hfe  and  work  to  move  on  an  eternal  scale.  We, 
in  this  *'  time  world  "  see  but  the  minute  commencement  of  that  which  reaches  on 
into  the  everlasting.  Every  true  effort  must  have  its  completion.  II.  But  the 
practical  question  meets  us — How  can  this  hope,  as  a  power  in  lite,  be  attained  ? 
The  words  following  our  text  give  us  the  reply — "  Whither  the  Forerunner  is  for 
us  entered,  even  Jesus,  made  an  High  Priest  for  ever."  They  suggest — 1.  Faith  in 
Christ  our  Priest.  Without  that  we  should  tremble  at  the  drawing  aside  of  the 
veil.  Like  the  high  priest  of  old  we  must  be  sprinkled  with  atoning  blood  before 
our  hope  can  enter  within  it.  2.  We  must  have  fellowship  with  Christ  our  Fore- 
runner. Don't  let  this  become  a  vague  idea,  it  has  a  meaning  for  us  which  is 
intensely  real.  Remember  that  He  is  our  example,  inasmuch  as  He  is  a  "  High 
Priest  who  is  touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  having  been  tempted  in  all 
points  even  as  we  are."  Remember  how  He  struggled  against  temptation — how 
He  met  it  by  instant,  unconquerable  resistance,  and  then  "  angels  came  and  minis- 
tered unto  Him."  So  with  us.  After  Christlike  conflict  we  become  "  more  than 
conquerors  through  Him  that  loved  us,"  and  are  strengthened  with  angeUc  hopes. 
(E.  L.  Hull,  B.A.)  Within  the  veil : — There  in  the  temple,  in  the  day  of  the  old 
Hebrew  service,  there  hung  the  veil,  heavy,  gorgeous,  mysterious  itself,  and  in  its 
fabrication  conceaUng  mystery  ;  made  and  suspended  "  after  the  pattern  given  in 
the  mount."  Very  glorious  was  the  embroidery  of  that  impressive  symbol,  "  the 
purple,  the  blue,  the  scarlet,  inwrought  with  the  fine  twined  linen,"  and  the  forma 
of  the  golden  cherubim  spread  over  the  richly  coloured  vesture  (Exod.  xxvi.  31,  32). 
Thus,  behind  the  veil,  lay  enshrined  all  the  gorgeous  symbols  and  heraldries  of  the 
Jewish  history  and  faiths  ;  the  veil  concealed  their  splendours,  and  defended  their 
beauty — it  was  a  parable  and  a  mystery.    I.  What  was  that  veil,  and  what  did  it 

BAT  TO  those  WHO   BOWED   PEOSTRATE    BEFORE   IT,  AND  WHAT  DOES   IT   SAT  TO   US   NOW  ? 

When  the  Jew  bowed  there,  and  heard  from  behind  the  veil  the  sound  of  the  bells 
upon  the  beautiful  vestments  of  the  priest,  and  heard  the  echo  of  feet  moving  to 
and  fro,  and  saw  the  priest  stepping  in  whither  he  could  not  follow,  lifting  that 
veil,  entering  that  door ;  what  think  you  were  the  feehngs  of  the  ancient  Jew  ? 
what  did  it  all  say  to  him  ?  This  was  what  it  said,  "  Separated,  separated  1  cut 
off  from  holiness  ;  cut  off  from  God."  That  was  what  it  said,  and  the  echo 
within  the  heart  of  the  Jew  said,  "  Separated,  separated."  What  do  you  feel,  and 
what  are  you  able  to  reaUse  now?  What  is  that  veil  to  us?  WTiat  says  the 
apostle?  "The  veil,  that  is  to  say.  His  fiesh."  Behold  that  broken  body,  behold 
that  pierced  side ;  this  is  the  world's  great  wonder,  and  the  church's  too.  That  is 
the  true  veiL  It  is  sinful  hnrnanity  which  hangs  between  our  happiness  and  God. 
It  is  pur  human  nature  which  cannot  go  up  into  the  holy  of  holies.  Christ  took 
•  p  that  Infirm,  sinful  human  nature,  bore  it,  lived  in  it,  died  in  it,  and  resumed 


CHAP.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  649 

it  after  He  had  laid  it  down.  He  took  it  again,  glorified  it,  and  by  it  "  broke  down 
the  middle  wall  of  partition  contained  in  ordinances,  and  by  Himself  made  one 
nsw  man,  so  making  peace."  I  look  down  to  my  nature,  laden  with  sin,  and 
I  despair  ;  I  look  up  to  Christ's  nature,  and  rejoice  with  "  joy  unspeakable,  and  full 
of  glory,  receiving  the  end  of  my  faith,  even  the  salvation  of  my  soul."  I  look 
down  to  my  nature,  and  I  see  my  helplessness ;  I  look  up  to  Christ's  nature,  and 
Bee  my  hope.  I  look  down  to  my  nature,  and  see  my  sin ;  I  look  up  to  His,  and 
see  His  holiness,  and  I  know  it  is  mine.  That  veil  which  separated  me  from  God, 
becomes  now  the  "  fine  linen  which  is  the  righteousness  of  the  saints,"  in  which 
I  approach  him,  and  say,  "  I  will  greatly  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  my  soul  shall  be 
joyful  in  my  God,  for  He  hath  covered  me  with  the  robe  of  righteousness,  and  with 
the  gai-ments  of  salvation. "  II.  And  now,  what  is  within  the  veil,  what  does  my 
TEXT  OB  context  FIND  ?  1.  And  lift  up  thine  heart.  Christian ;  lift  it  up,  for  it 
is  there — the  immutable  and  the  unchangeable  will.  We  need  strong  consolation, 
and  the  apostle  fetches  the  strong  consolation  for  the  heirs  of  promise  from  behind 
the  veil.  Surely  I  need  not  detain  you  by  so  trite  a  remark  as  that  we  stand  in  the 
midst  of  mystery.  •'  The  day  breaks,  and  the  shadows  flee  away,"  where  we  under- 
stand the  body  of  our  Lord,  where  we  pass  through  that  sacred  veil.  There  is  a 
life  not  to  be  accounted  for  by  human  conditions,  and  time,  and  space.  His  will  is 
"  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever,"  immutable  !  Hence,  within  the  veil, 
is  God's  Divine  map  ;  there  is  the  plan  to  Him  all  known,  and  clearly  seen ;  infinite 
consciousness,  and  prescience,  provision,  and  providence — this  is  the  everlasting 
and  unchangeable  God.  2.  Within  the  veil.  Who  is  within  the  veil  ?  He  is  there. 
Do  yon  find  it  difiBcult  to  realise  it  ?  Do  you  find  it  difficult  to  send  your  heart  to 
Him,  and  to  see  Him  ?  But  where  is  He  but  there  ?  Where  should  He  be  but 
there  ?  *'  Yet  a  Uttle  while,"  said  He,  "  and  the  world  seeth  Me  no  more,  but  ye 
see  Me,  and  because  I  live,  ye  shall  live  also."  Dying  saints  have  seen  Him.  Yes, 
He  lived.  He  died,  He  rose  to  be  revived,  and  He  is  there  waiting  till  He  shall 
come  without  sin  unto  salvation.  3.  Within  the  veil.  What  is  there  ?  They  are 
there,  they  are  there.  The  loved  but  not  the  lost ;  why,  then,  their  loss  deplore  ? 
They  are  there,  the  holy,  and  the  immortal,  and  the  pure,  and  the  true.  They  are 
there  I  Beyond  the  flesh.  "Where  should  the  dying  members  rest?"  All 
mystery  supposes  a  solution  of  the  riddle ;  they  are  beyond  the  enigma.  All  is 
plain  now  within  the  veil.  III.  "  Seeing,  then,  it  is  so,  what  manner  of  persons 
ought  we  to  be  ?  "  Such  is  the  plea  of  the  apostle.  All  this  veil  must  be  dis- 
solved. They  can  hear  us  and  see  us,  even  behind  the  curtain.  Therefore  believe, 
and  wait,  and  rejoice,  aud  aspire.  Within  the  veil!  Are  not  these  comfortable 
words  ?  Within  the  veil !  Even  now  has  not  "  the  darkness  passod  "  ?  Is  it  not 
true  that  "  the  true  light  now  shineth  "  beyond  the  veil  ?  Henry  IV.  was  told  of 
the  king  of  Spain  that  he  had  great  acquisitions,  and  was  asked  ^yhat  he  had  to  sa}" 
to  it  ?  He  replied,  "  I  am  king  of  France : "  but  he  is  king  of  Castile ;  "  I  am 
king  of  France  "  :  but  he  is  king  of  Navarre ;  "  I  am  king  of  France  " :  but  he  is  king 
of  Portugal ;  "  but  I  am  king  of  France  :  "  he  is  king  of  the  Sicilies  ;  "  but  I  am 
king  of  France  "  :  he  is  king  of  the  New  Indier  ;  "  but  I  am  king  of  France."  To 
be  king  of  France  answered  all  questions,  and  was  to  him  equal  to  all.  So  thou 
and  I,  oh,  Christian,  have  an  answer  for  all  questions,  and  equal  to  all,  "  within 
the  veil."  Your  church  is  imperfect  and  erring,  and  small  in  the  world's  esteem. 
Ah,  but  "within  the  veil"!  You  are  yourself  dark  and  cloudy,  aud  desponding, 
and  you  cannot  see  the  promised  land  or  the  Saviour.  Yes,  but  "  within  the  veil!  "• 
And  as  with  the  world,  so  with  your  family ;  death  invades  and  breaks  in  on  your 
household,  and  your  household  loves.  True,  but  "within  the  veil."  And  sin 
accuses  you,  and  conscience  stings,  and  beyond  is  the  judgment-seat.  But  "  within 
the  veil."  {E.  P.  Hood. )  Anchored  within  the  veil : — I.  What  is  this  "  soul "  of 
ours?  Always  hke  a  barque,  tossed  about  and  sure  to  drift  and  drift,  on  shoals 
and  on  rocks.  What  a  bitter  picture  is  the  history  of  this  "  soul "  of  ours  1  All 
unstable,  and  never  continuing  long  in  one  strain ;  with  no  power  of  itself  to  help 
itself.  II.  And  where  is  it  ?  In  an  ocean  1  And  aU  the  while  that  soul  is  so  rich 
an  argosy,  laden  with  treasures  which  cannot  be  told  ;  bought  at  the  highest  pos- 
sible price,  carrying  in  it  an  eternity  into  the  very  presence  of  God.  III.  What, 
THEN,  DO  WB  WANT ?  "An  auchor."  "  An  anchor "  which  is  "  sure  "  to  be  "  stead- 
fast." IV.  Now  look  at  some  of  the  consequences  of  this  wonderful  connkotion 
OF  THE  "  BOXJii "  WITH  THAT  "ANCHOR  WITHIN  THE  VEIL."  1.  And  first,  how  perfectly 
safe  that  soul  must  be.  God's  eternal  counsel,  God's  very  being,  smd  God's  oath 
passing  into  Christ.    A  Christ  unseen ;  wearing  a  body  Himself  in  heaven ;  who 


650  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tt* 

secures  and  seals  your  pardon.  Tour  strength,  your  peace,  your  life,  your  glory. 
2.  Then  how  restful  should  your  soul  so  "  anchored  "  be !  What  mean  all  these 
doubts  and  fears  ?  What  though  you  be  tossed  about,  you  are  held  as  by  chains  of 
adamant,  and  your  soul  shall  never  perish  !  You  cannot  be  lost !  There  cannot 
be  any  shipwreck  to  a  soul  that  is  *'  anchored  "  •'  within  the  veil."  3.  And  by  that 
token  that  you  are  •'  anchored,"  you  cannot  be  very  far  from  shore.  You  may 
not  see  the  land  of  promise ;  yon  may  not  yet  hear  the  songs  of  its  inhabitants ; 
but  there  is  no  anchorage  out  in  the  mid-sea,  you  must  be  near  the  coast,  nearer 
perhaps  than  you  guess  now,  in  this  dark  night ;  but  you  wiU  be  surprised  to  find 
how  close  you  are  all  the  while  when  the  morning  breaks.  Therefore  you  must 
make  haste  to  be  ready  to  go  ashore,  for  the  voyage  may  be  nearly  done,  and  you 
only  wait  the  order  to  step  out,  and  be  at  home.  4.  Meanwhile,  remember  this,  a 
ship  always  drops  towards  her  anchor.  And  before  you  land  you  must  be  nearing 
and  nearing  Christ  and  heaven :  your  thoughts  there,  your  focus  there,  your  tastes 
and  your  desires  there;  and  your  "hope  "  must  become  more  real  and  more  perfect 
every  day.  There  must  be  more  realisation  of  the  land  you  are  about  to  touch ; 
more  affections  there  ;  more  appreciation  of  its  loveliness  ;  more  familiarity  with 
its  language,  and  love,  and  praise.  You  must  be  practising  what  you  will  have 
to  do  when  you  arrive.     {J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  The  nearness  of  heaven: — The 

nearness  of  heaven  is  suggested  by  the  epithet  "  veil."  A  veil  is  the  thinnest  and 
frailest  of  all  conceivable  partitions.  It  is  but  a  fine  tissue,  a  delicate  fabric  of 
embroidery.  It  waves  in  the  wind ;  the  touch  of  a  child  may  stir  it ;  an  accident 
may  rend  it ;  the  silent  action  of  time  will  moulder  it  away.  A  mere  cord  breaking, 
a  mere  •'  socket  of  silver  "  starting  from  its  place  would  have  opened  the  veil  of  the 
temple.  It  was  lifted  up  by  the  priest  "  once  in  the  circuit  of  a  year  "  ;  and  at 
the  crucifixion  it  was  parted  by  an  invisible  hand.  The  veil  that  conceals  heaven 
is  only  our  embodied  existence,  and  though  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made,  it  is 
only  wrought  out  of  our  frail  mortality.  So  slight  is  it  that  the  puncture  of 
a  thorn,  the  touch  of  an  insect's  sting,  the  breath  of  an  infected  atmosphere, 
may  make  it  shake  and  fall.  In  a  bound,  in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling 
of  an  eye,  in  the  throb  of  a  pulse,  in  the  flash  of  a  thought,  we  may 
start  into  disembodied  spirits,  glide  unabashed  into  the  company  of  great 
and  mighty  angels,  pass  into  the  light  and  amazement  of  eternity,  know  the 
great  secret,  gaze  upon  splendours  which  flesh  and  blood  could  not  sustain,  and 
which  no  words  lawful  for  man  to  utter  could  describe  1  IC.  Stanford,  D.D.) 
The  Forerunner  is  for  us  entered. — The  Forerunner : — I.  There  is  a  place  referred  to 
here.  "  Within  the  veil  "  is  heaven,  the  shrine  and  dwelling-place  of  Deity.  This 
is  the  goal  of  the  believer's  sanctified  ambition,  the  very  consummation  of  his  best 
and  holiest  desires — to  enter  in  within  the  veil,  to  gaze  on  the  unclouded  glories  of 
Jehovah's  face,  and  dwell  forever  with  Him.  II.  There  is  the  person  who  has  entered 
within  the  veil,  even  Jesus,  by  whom  an  entrance  has  been  effected.  To  tell  one 
of  any  one  of  my  fellow-men,  who  has  passed  from  earth  to  heaven,  does  not  that 
proclaim  that  a  way  has  been  opened  up  into  the  hohest  of  all ;  that  there  is  no 
impassable  gulf,  no  insuperable  barrier  in  the  way,  but  that  an  entrance  may  in 
like  manner  be  ministered  to  a  great  multitude  ?  How  much  more  so,  that  it  is 
Jesus  who  has  entered  in  1  For  none  ever  loved  us  like  Jesus ;  never  heart  glowed 
and  yearned  like  the  heart  of  Jesus ;  and  we  may  well  feel  assured  that  wherever 
He  is,  He  will  never  forget  us ;  and  that  He  will  be  found  just  as  willing  to  help  us 
in  heaven  as  He  showed  Himself  to  be  willing  to  help  us  on  earth.  HI.  There  is 
the  chabacter  He  sustains  in  thus  entering ;  it  is  as  a  Forerunner  for  us.  This 
character  is  not  personal,  but  ofiBcial  and  mediatorial ;  and  therefore  it  exerts  a  preg- 
nant influence  upon  all  His  people.  1.  As  a  Forerunner  He  announces  our  future 
arrival  in  heaven.  He  makes  it  known  that  in  coming  up  from  this  dim  and  dis- 
tant region,  where  for  a  season  He  had  dwelt,  He  comes  as  a  pioneer  on  the  march, 
— that  His  footsteps  will  be  followed  by  myriads  of  the  ransomed,  so  that  from  that 
day  forward  all  heaven  has  been  in  an  attitude  of  expectation.  2.  As  the  Fore- 
runner He  takes  possession  of  heaven  on  our  behalf  ;  for  He  enters  in  our  nature 
and  in  our  name.  3.  As  a  Forerunner  He  bids  His  people  welcome  when  they 
come,  and  presents  them  before  His  Father,  and  assigns  them  their  position  in  the 
new  Jerusalem.  It  is  enough  to  insure  to  us  no  ordinary  place  in  the  affection 
and  regard  of  the  unfallen,  to  find  that  we  are  ushered  in  and  welcomed  there  as 
friends  of  Jesus ;  to  sustain  a  right  relation  to  Jesus  is  to  stand  right  with  all  the 
upper  universe  of  God.  Above  all,  what  a  gracious  reception  will  it  insure  to  00 
from  Gk)d  the  Father  1    None  so  dear  to  God  as  Jesus,  and  next  to  Jesus  none  so 


CHAP.  VI.]  HEBREWS.  551 

dear  to  Him  as  those  who  are  His.     (Thos.  Main,  D.D.)        Christ  our  Forerunner 
within  the  veil : — The  expression,  "  Forerunner,"  here  made  use  of  by  the  apostle,  is  a 
military  one,  and  refers  to  the  custom  which  obtains  in  days  of  warfare,  of  the  victor 
in  a  lia,'  cl-fought  battle  despatching  a  messenger  to  the  seat  of  government  with  the 
news  of  the  successful  valour  which  the  army  had  displayed,  that  at  bead-quarters 
the  welcome  intelligence  might  be  proclaimed,  and  purposes  formed,  and  plans 
executed,  and  honours  awarded,  that  might  be  meet  and  congruous  with  the  happy 
results  which  had  been  achieved.     No  doubt,  on  such  an  occasion,  a  forerunner  is 
generally  inferior  to  those  who  come  after  him,  under  whose  skilful  management 
the  victorious  prowess  has  been  put  forth ;  and  he  is  so  because  he  is  a  forerunner, 
and   nothing  more.     Thus  restricted,  however,  the  term  has  no  meaning  when 
applied  to  Jesus  Christ ;  for  though  He  be  the  Forerunner  of  His  people,  yet  the 
splendour  of  His  character  in  this  respect  is  to  be  traced  to  the  circumstance  that 
He  is  much  more.    Upon  His  shoulders  was  laid  the  conducting  of  that  matter,  on 
account  of  which  He  is  now  entered  as  a  Precursor  within  the  veil.     He  fought  the 
battle ;  He  slew  the  enmity  ;  and  He  was  Himself  the  Forerunner,  because  of  the 
greatness  of  that  which  He  had  accomplished,  and  because  it  was  not  fit  either  that 
the  enunciation,  or  the  following  of  it  up,  should  be  committed  to  another.     I. 
Christ  is   oub  Foberunneb   entebed  in   within   the  veil.      We  have   several 
notices  given  to  us  in  Scripture  that  the  scheme  of  human  redemption  did  ever 
excite  great  interest  among  the  heavenly  inhabitants — that  it  is  a  subject  on  which 
thirir  curiosity  is  awakened,  and  their  emotions  roused,  and  their  inquiries  set  on 
foot — that  its  commencement,  its  progress,  its  consummation,  are  apprehended  aa 
important,  and  felt  as  attractive,  and  worthy  of  the  most  solicitous  investigation. 
Now,  this  desire  was  gratified  on  Christ's  visible  departure  out  of  the  world,  in  the 
form  of  a  literal  ascent — on  His  entrance  within  the  veil  as  the  Forerunner  of  Hia 
people ;  and  this  is  the  first  view  that  we  may  take  of  His  character  in  this  respect, 
lie  went  into  heaven  proclaiming  what  He  had  done  upon  earth — that  He  had  finished 
tiansgression— that  He  had  made  an  end  of  sin — that  He  had  brought  in  an  ever- 
lasting righteousness — that  He  had  sealed  up  the  vision  and  the  prophecy  which 
did  centre  in  Him — that,  having  sustained  the  pressure  of  avenging  justice,  He 
opened  up  a  medium  of  access,  a  door  even  to  the  most  jebellious — that,  by  virtue 
of  His  blood,  He  had  obtained  remission  for  sinners,  paid  the  price  of  redemption 
for  those  who  were  captives,  made  reconciliation  for  enemies — that,  in  harmony 
with  God's  attributes,  and  even  while  He  did  conserve  the  sacredness  of  His  law, 
He  had  redeemed,  from  the  power  of  all  who  did  hate  her,  the  Church  whom  He 
had   eternally  chosen — that  he  had   delivered   her  from   the  dominion  of  sin, 
from   the    final   dominion   of  death,   and   made  that  which  was  the  fruit  and 
p  mishment  of  transgression  the  door  through  which   she  enters  on  the  sanc- 
tuary  of  immortality.      Such    is  the    intelligfnce  with    which   Christ,   as  our 
Forerunner,  has  entered  into  that  within  the  veil.    And  the  very  act  of  His  going 
up  did  presuppose  and  ratify  to  them  the  most  important  truths,  that  He  led 
captivity  captive,  just  because   He  had   ascended  up  on  high.     But  again,  our 
Lord  has  entered  as  a  Forerunner  within  the  v«il,  and  there  He  ever  liveth.     Now, 
there  is  a  threefold  Ufe  which  Christ  lives  above.     There  is  a  life  which  He  has  as 
the  Eternal  Son  of  God,  the  life  which  belongs  to  His  Divine  nature;  for  as  the 
Father  hath  life  in  Himself,  so  hath  He  given  to  the  Son  to  have  hfe  in  Himself — 
given  it  to  Him  by  eternal  generation — given  it  to  Him  by  communicating  all  His 
own  attributes.     There  is  also  a  life  which  belongs  to  Him,  and  which  He  doth  live 
for  Himself,  in  consequeuce  of  His  having  become  man — a  life  of  glory  inconceiv- 
able in  His  nature  as  man.    But,  over  and  above  these  two  different  kinds  of  hfe 
which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  doth  enjoy,  and  which  shall  never  come  to  an  end,  there 
is  a  life  which  He  leads  as  Mediator  in  heaven,  and  in  respect  of  which  it  is  that  He 
is  a  Forerunner  within  the  veil.     Though  removed  beyond  the  cognisance  of  the 
senses,  He  is  still  carrying  on  His  great  work  in  heaven,  and  is  there  the  Prophet, 
Priest,  and  King  of  His  Church  as  really  and  as  effectively  as  when  He  dwelt  upon 
eaith.   He  died  on  our  account,  He  liveth  still  on  our  account,  and  is  entrusted  with 
all  power  for  the  service  of  His  Church ;  and  though  this  life  differs  not  essentially 
from  that  life  of  glory  in  His  human  nature  which  He  liveth  for  Himself,  it  yet  so 
far  differs  from  it  that  it  shall  one  day  have  an  end.     He  will  throughout  eternity 
enjoy  the  life  which  He  possesses  as  a  Divine  Being,  He  will  throughout  eternity 
enjoy  the  life  which  He  possesses  in  His  glorified  human  nature ;  but  His  life  as 
Mediator,  His  life  as  a  Forerunner,  He  shall  cease  to  have  when  the  work  of  Hia 
mediation  shall  have  been  finished,  when  the  elect  shall  all  have  been  gathered  into 


652  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ckap.  vh. 

the  fold  of  the  Good  Shepherd,  and  the  kingdom  delivered  up  to  God,  even  the 
Father.  And  what  is  it  that,  in  this  view  of  His  character  as  a  i'orerunner.  He  ia 
not  fitted  to  procure  ?  Are  we  not  to  trace  to  it  all  the  gifts  which  are  bestowed  on 
the  Church  in  general,  for  common  edification,  and  on  each  member  of  it  singly, 
for  His  particular  benefit  ?  II.  Lessons  in  which  this  great  truth  is  fitted  to  in- 
struct us : — 1.  This  view  of  Christ's  character  is  a  proof  of  the  perfection  of  Hia 
atonement.  Can  it  for  one  moment  be  imagined  that  He  should  in  this  manner  have 
been  taken  up,  had  there  been  any  defect  in  His  redeeming  work,  had  it  come  short 
in  anything  which  the  fitness  of  a  righteous  Goverrmient  could  require.  2.  A 
forerunner,  one  who  goes  before,  suggf-sts  the  idea  of  some  who  are  to  follow  after. 
(John  Paul.)  Tlie  Forerunner  : — The  forerunner  of  the  ancient  ship  was  the 
Anchorarius,  the  man  who  had  charge  of  the  anchor,  and  who  carried  it  within 
the  harbour,  when  there  was  not  yet  water  sufficient  to  float  the  ship  into 
it.      (C7.  Stanford,  D.D.)  Christ  poing  before  to  heaven: — 1.   Is  Christ  gone 

before  to  heaven  ?  Then  let  us  be  willing  to  follow  Him  in  the  way  of  obedience, 
and  in  the  way  of  suffering,  as  weU  as  to  meet  Him  in  the  end.  2.  To  make  haste 
after  Him.  Did  He  fly  as  an  eagle  towards  heaven,  and  shall  we  creep  Uke  a  snail? 
Is  not  the  bosom  of  Christ  more  desirable  than  the  arms  of  our  dearest  friends  ? 
Shall  we  not  enjoy  all  comforts  in  the  enjoyment  of  our  Comforter?  3.  Let  our 
he'irts  at  present  be  with  Him.  Oh  1  where  should  our  hearts  be,  but  where  our 
Head  is?  {W.  Burkitt,  M.A.)  Our  Forerunner: — I.  Though  parted  from  us, 
and  taken  up  into  heaven,  we  contemplate  Jesus  CnrasT  as  the  head  of  the 

GEEAT   SACRIFICIAL    SYSTEM — AS    THE    OEIOINAL    AND    FINAL  PRIEST AND   AS    THE    ALONE 

MEDIATOR    BETWEEN    GoD    AND    MEN.        II.     We    ABE    TO    CONTEMPLATE    JeSDS     IN    HiS 

BEPEESENTATivB  CAPACITY.  He  is  a  public  pcrson.  He  is  a  federal  head  of  all 
mankind.  HI.  Christ's  preparaiive  relation.  A  representative  takes  the  posi- 
tion of  those  who  send  him,  and  thereby  excludes  all  others  from  the  same  place. 
It  ia  not  so  with  Christ ;  for  He  sustains  an  endearing  relation  to  us,  by  virtue  of 
which  we  are  at  the  last  to  be  with  Him.  This  is  indicated  by  the  term  "  fore- 
runner." His  presence  on  high  is  not  to  the  exclusion  of  His  people,  but  as  a 
preparation  and  intimation  of  their  final  reception  there.  He  is  "the  first-born 
among  many  brethren ;  "  and  "  He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren."  (R. 
M.  WiUox,) 


CHAPTER  VIL 

Vers.  1-10.  Melchlsedec,  king  of  Salem. — Melchisedee : — I.  Melchtsedeo  was 
"  Kino  of  Salem."  1.  Salem  was  certainly  in  Canaan — the  land  where  Melchisedee 
and  Abraham  met.  (1)  It  is  not  a  matter  of  course  that  Canaan  was  already  wholly 
given  ap  to  idolatry  and  crime ;  and  therefore  Melchisedee  may  have  been  himself 
a  Canaanite,  and  may  also  have  found  a  body  of  worshippers  of  the  true  God  among 
whom  he  could  discharge  his  functions.  (2)  Even  if  Canaan  was  more  idolatrous 
than  we  have  sufficient  reason  to  believe  that  it  now  was,  Melchisedee,  who  was, 
perhaps,  of  the  Japhetian  stock,  may  have  been  raised  up  by  Heaven  as  "  a  light  in 
a  dark  place,"  and  a  harbinger  and  representative  of  the  future  ingathering  of  the 
Gentiles  to  Christ.  2.  Two  places  of  the  name  of  Salem  are  mentioned  in  the  Old 
Testament.  The  one  is  Salem  in  the  land  of  Shechem  (Gen.  xxxiii.  18) — the  same, 
perhaps,  as  John  iii.  23.  The  other  is  Jerusalem  itself  (Psa.  Ixxvi.  1,  2).  (1)  The 
situation  of  the  great  metropoUs  of  Palestine  was  one  likely  to  be  early  fixed  upon 
for  a  town  in  the  colonisation  of  the  land.  (2)  That  point  lay  near  to  the  route 
which  Abraham  may  be  supposed  to  have  taken  on  his  homeward  way  "  from  the 
slaughter  of  the  kings."  (3)  If  Jerusalem  was  the  place  of  which  Melchisedee 
was  king,  he  was  thus  the  more  strikingly  representative  of  Christ  (Psa.  ii.  6). 
3.  It  is  certainly  in  respect  chiefly  of  the  priesthood  that  Melchisedee  is  compared 
to  Christ.  But,  considering  the  object  and  design  of  the  present  specification 
of  particulars,  it  must  be  understood  that  the  royalty  of  the  former  has  a  typical, 
or  at  least  a  figurative,  application  to  the  latter.  With  Salem,  both  in  the  Uteral 
and  figurative  application  of  the  name,  Christ  as  King  has  especially  to  do. 
It  was  through  Jerusalem  that,  "  in  the  days  of  His  flesh,"  He  rode  in  lowly,  but 
royal  stateliness  "  (Zech.  ix.  9 ;  Matt.  xxi.  1-11).  To  Israel  and  her  great  metropolis 
was  Messiah  promised  as  a  Sov  reign  Prince,  ere  ever  the  Magi  came  to  welcome 


<nup.  vn.]  HEBREWS.  653 

the  regal  yisitor ;  and  as  He  was,  in  His  birth,  saluted  as  Israel's  Eing  (Matt.  ii.  1-6), 
«o,  over  His  cross  on  the  heights  of  Salem,  the  unchangeable  inscription  bore  that 
He  was  "King  of  the  Jews"  (John  xix.  19-22).  And  there  is  another  Zion  on 
which  His  throne  is  set — another  Salem  in  which  He  reigns — the  Zion,  the  Salem, 
of  the  Church.  Amidst  hostile  arms  and  quaking  dynasties,  "  let  the  children  of 
Zion  be  joyful  in  their  King."  II.  Melchisedeo  was  "priest  of  the  most  high 
God."  1.  The  phrase  "of  the  most  high  God"  serves  two  ends.  (1)  It  contra- 
distingaisbes  Melchisedec  and  his  priesthood  from  priests  of  "  the  gods  many  and 
lords  many  "  of  Paganism,  and  from  the  functions,  often  gross  and  cruel,  which 
these  performed.  (2)  It  suggests  the  solemnity  and  importance  of  the  sacerdotal 
work  which  Melchisedec  performed,  and  the  reverence  and  awe  with  which  not  only 
ministers,  but  private  believers,  should  maintain  intercourse  with  that  glorious  One 
into  whose  presence  they  are  called  to  enter,  and  whose  business  tbe^  are  called  to 
do.  2.  Th'j  yiicsthood  of  the  Iving  of  Salem,  iu  a'l  probabHity,  com^i.ehended  the 
two  functions  of  sacrifice  and  intercession.      IIL    Melchisedec  "  met  Abkaham 

BETDRNINQ   FROM   THE   8LAUGHTEB   OF  THE   KINGS   AND  BLESSED  HIM."      To  a  Spiritual 

warfare  we  have  all  been  called  ;  and  while  Christ  is  the  Captain  of  the  host,  the 
better  Abraham  leading  on  His  followers  to  battle  and  to  victory,  He,  as  the  anointed 
Priest,  the  better  Melchizedec,  blesses  His  conquering,  and  even  His  struggling, 
troops.  With  EUs  priestly  hands  extended,  in  generous  benediction,  over  His  first 
disciples,  He  left  the  world.  In  the  same  attitude,  as  it  were.  He  still  is  standing, 
as  He  looks  down  from  His  hcivenly  throne  on  the  earthly  charge  which  He  loves 
80  well.  The  good  which  on  their  behalf  He  seeks,  it  is  His  own  prerogative  and 
office  to  bestow.  Nor  can  it  be  withheld.  What  is  wanted  for  the  fight — wisdom, 
strength,  courage,  hope — He  dehghts,  when  His  soldier  looks  to  Him  in  faith  and 
earnestness,  to  give.  At  length  comes  victory.  Nor  is  that  promise  obsolete  (Kev. 
iii.  21).  IV.  To  Melchisedec  "  Abraham  gave  a  tenth  part  of  all  "  the  spoils. 
The  contribution  of  gold  and  treasures  to  the  cause  of  the  kingdom  of  Messiah  is 
one  of  the  facts  recorded  respecting  Him  in  Hebrew  prophecy  (Psa.  Ixxii.  10,  15). 
Since  the  day  when  the  Magi  cast  their  gold,  and  frankincense,  and  myrrh  at  His 
blessed  feet,  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  have  laid  a  like  tribute  on  His  altar. 
Christ  deserves,  and  Christianity  needs,  it  all.  That,  independently  of  any  money 
of  ours.  He  could  work  successfully  is,  of  course,  in  some  sense  true.  But,  in 
unswerving  wisdom  and  condescending  mercy,  He  chooses  to  work  by  means  ;  and 
among  the  appointed  means  is  money.  By  ministers  and  missionaries,  who  are 
dependent  on  money  for  support — by  Bibles  and  other  practical  and  precious  books, 
which  must  be  printed  and  circulated  at  the  cost  of  money — by  places  of  worship, 
which  it  requires  money  to  erect — and  by  other  ordinances  and  institutions,  which  it 
is  for  money  to  establish  and  maintain — Christ  upholds  His  cause  and  extends  His 
kingdom.  V.  Melchisedec  was  by  interpretation  "  king  of  righteousness  and 
KING  of  peace."  This  statement  refers  to  the  import  of  the  names  Melchisedec  and 
Salem.  Melchi  means,  king ;  Sedec,  righteousness ;  and  Salem,  peace.  It  is 
probable  that  Melchisedec  was  a  righteous  and  picific  king.  At  any  rate,  the  name 
he  bore,  and  that  of  the  city  where  he  dwelt,  involved  the  ideas  of  righteousness  and 
peace.  And  it  is  here  distinctly  intimated  that,  in  this  respect,  he  was  fitted  to 
represent  the  character  and  government  of  Christ.  Christ  in  very  deed  is  "  King  of 
righteousness."  His  soul,  how  pure  1  His  life,  how  undefiled  I  His  laws,  how 
just !  His  administration,  how  upright  I  The  issues  and  outgoings  of  His  sufferings 
and  His  glory,  of  His  humiUation  on  the  earth  and  His  triumphs  in  the  heavens, 
how  suffused  and  fraught  with  righteousness !  Nor  is  He  less  truly  "  King  of 
peace."  His  personal  ministry  was  neither  the  earthquake  nor  the  thunder,  but  the 
"  still,  small  voice."  Peace  He  bequeathed  to  His  disciples  as  a  legacy  of  love 
(John  siv.  27).  He  "made  peace  through  the  blood  of  His  cross"  (Col.  i.  20). 
His  gospel  breathes  of  peace.  They  who  believe  it  enter  into  peace.  Theirs  is 
peace  with  God ;  theirs,  too,  is  peace  with  man ;  and  a  "  peace  which  passeth 
understanding "  keeps  their  "  hearts  and  minds  by  Christ  Jesus."  Under  the 
sceptre  of  Messiah,  the  wars  which  so  long  have  wrought  desolations  in  the  earth 
shall  pass  away.  VI.  Melchisedec  was  "  without  father,  without  mother,  with- 
out descent,"  &c.  By  the  series  of  particulars  it  is  manifestly  meant  to  intimate 
that  the  parents,  the  ancestry,  the  birth,  and  the  death,  of  this  royal  priest  are  all 
unrecorded  in  the  sacred  narrative — that,  in  this  respect,  there  is  a  remarkable 
difference  between  him  and  the  priests  of  the  house  of  Levi — and  that,  in  so  far  as 
the  record  is  concerned,  he  comes  before  us  as  the  priest  of  unlimited  existence,  who 
had  no  predecessor  and  no  successor  in  the  sacred  hue.  He  was  thus,  it  is  still  further 


554  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ytu 

intended  to  suggest,  a  meet  representative  of  that  "  great  high-priest "  who,  aa  God, 
had  no  mother — as  man,  had  no  human  father — as  Divine,  never  began  to  be,  and 
never  died — as  Mediator,  carries  on  His  priesthood  still,  interceding  for  believers  in 
the  heavens,  even  as,  on  earth,  He  made  atonement  for  their  sins,  and  wrought  out 
redemption  for  their  souls.  (A.  S.  Patterson.)  The  parallel  between  Christ  and 
Melchisedec : — I.  The  title  of  Melchisedec,  as  king.  "  For  this  Melchisedec,  king 
of  Salem."  It  were  idle  to  discuss  here  the  various  conjectures  which  have  been 
started  as  to  who  this  Melchisedec  was — considered  as  he  is  by  some  to  have  been 
Enoch,  by  others  to  have  been  Shem,  by  others  to  have  been  an  angel,  by  others  to 
have  been  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  others  to  have  been  the  Eternal  Son  of  God  Himself ; 
it  seems  only  needful  to  remark,  that  the  nature  of  the  apostle's  argument  through- 
oat  the  chapter  positively  requires  that  Melchisedec  should  have  been  a  man,  and  a 
man,  too,  living,  and  performing  the  functions  here  attributed  to  him,  in  the  time 
of  the  patriarch  Abraham.  Melchisedec  becomes  a  remarkable  person,  were  it  only 
from  the  singular  conjunction  of  the  two  offices  of  king  and  priest — a  conjunctiou 
which  of  itself  would  suggest  his  being  a  type  of  Christ.  Thus  he  is  a  type  of 
Christ  even  with  regard  to  his  kingship,  and  that  both  in  his  acts  and  in  the  titles 
by  which  he  is  distinguished.  Even  the  first  act  recorded  of  him  m  Genesis  we  can 
hardly  think  was  without  some  spiritual  significance.  You  will  observe,  he  is  there 
represented  as  coming  out  to  "  the  father  of  the  faithful,"  bringing  him  a  present  of 
bread  and  wine,  in  order  that  his  followers  might  be  refreshed  after  the  toils  of  con- 
quest, and  be  sent  on  their  way  with  lightened  and  rejoiciug  hearts.  What  is  this 
but  a  picture  of  the  way  in  which  Christ,  the  true  Melchisedec,  rewards  and  refreshes 
all  the  followers  of  faithful  Abraham  ?  Are  they  wearied  with  the  toils  of  their 
spiritual  warfare  ?  He  is  wont  to  say  to  them,  "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  are 
weary  and  heavy  laden,  and  I  will "  refresh  you.  Are  they  tired  out  with  the 
world's  disappointing  vanities,  having  "  spent  their  money  for  that  which  is  not 
bread,  and  their  labour  for  that  which  satisfieth  not"?  His  language  is,  "  Ho 
every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the  waters  ;  yea,  come  ye,  buy  wine  and  milk, 
without  money  and  without  price."  Nay,  are  they  desirous  of  realising  nearness  of 
spiritual  communion — of  being  brought  more  closely  into  the  presence  of  their  God 
and  Saviour  ?  Are  they  desiring  to  "  see  the  King  in  His  beauty,"  and  to  receive 
fiom  Him  tokens  of  reconciliation  and  peace  and  love?  He  comes  forth  like 
Melchisedec  bringing  *'  bread  and  wine,"  offering  to  believing  hearts  the  blessed 
sacrament  of  His  passion,  that  in  the  memorials  of  His  body  broken,  and  the  blood 
of  redemption  shed,  believers,  like  the  faithful  followers  of  Abraham,  may  go  down 
to  their  homes  in  peace  1  Still  more  typical  of  the  Eedeemer's  royalty  are  the  titles 
here  given  to  Melchisedec.  You  will  observe  it  is  said  of  him — "  first  being  by 
interpretation,  king  of  righteousness,  and  after  that  also  king  of  Salem,  which  is, 
king  of  peace."  These  are  the  titles  of  the  typical  Melchisedec,  and  as  applied  to 
him  may  probably  mean  no  more  than  that  such  names  were  given  to  him  by  the 
common  consent  of  his  subjects — as  one  who  was  distinguished  for  the  righteousness 
which  characterised  his  regal  administration,  for  the  integrity  and  uprightness  of  his 
judicial  decisions,  for  the  amicable  relations  which  he  maintained  with  all  neighbour- 
ing states,  and  for  the  tranquillity  which  marked  his  government  at  home.  But 
who  sees  not  at  once  the  application  of  these  titles  to  Christ  in  the  exercise  of  Hia 
spiritual  royalty  ?  He  is  a  "  King  of  righteousness."  If  He  cannot  satisfy  every 
demand  of  a  violated  law,  if  He  cannot  meet  all  the  conditions  of  unsulUed  holiness, 
if  He  cannot  cancel  every  claim  which  Heaven  may  have  against  our  souls,  nay,  if 
He  cannot  present  my  soul  as  unblameable — as  pure  from  stain  or  blemish  as  His 
own — the  ground  of  my  confidence  is  gone.  A  mere  king  of  compassions,  a  king  of 
love  and  pity,  will  not  suit  me.  He  must  be  a  "  King  of  righteousness."  "  And 
after  that  also  king  of  Salem,  which  is  king  of  peace."  This,  again,  is  a  beautiful 
type  of  Messiah's  kingship.  "  Therefore  being  justified  by  faith  " — (there  is  the 
righteousness) — "we  have  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  U.  The 
priesthood.  "  For  this  Melchisedec,  king  of  Salem,  priest  of  the  most  high  God." 
Now,  that  to  which  I  would  specially  direct  your  attention  here  is,  that  Melchisedec 
is  the  first  instance  we  have  in  the  sacred  record  of  a  person  specially  set  apart  for 
the  office  of  the  priesthood.  You  will  observe  that  he  is  not  one  of  a  line  succeeding 
to  the  sacerdotal  office  in  a  certain  family  order ;  he  is  not  one  who  has  received 
that  sacred  appointment  by  the  investiture  of  others,  according  to  any  prescribed 
order  of  ecclesiastical  pohty,  but  he  is  one  who,  long  before  the  Levitical  priesthood 
had  been  established,  stands  alone  in  a  strange  country,  challenging  homage  from 
the  greatest  saint  of  antiquity  as  an  ordained  priest  of  the  most  high  God.     Now, 


CHAP.  VII.]  HEBREWS.  fiSS 

we  see  at  once  in  this  certain  resembling  features  to  Christ,  the  true  Melchisedec. 
He  is  not  descended  of  any  line  of  human  priesthood ;  there  was  no  laying  on  of 
hands  to  designate  Him  to  the  sacred  office  ;  yet  there  rested  on  Him  tokens  of  a 
Divine  consecration.    The  opened  heavens  testified  to  the  power  of  the  Lord's 
anointing ;  *'  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  "  was  upon  Him,  and  when  He  had  "  made  His 
soul  an  offering  for  ain,"  when  He  had  "  borne  the  sin  of  many,"  when  He  had 
"  poured  out  His  spirit  unto  death,"  believing  soula  were  drawn  to  His  cross,  and 
exercising  faith  in  the  great  oblation  hailed  Him — "  Thou  art  a  Priest  for  ever,  after 
the  order  of  Melchisedec. "    And  then  observe,  that  special  office  of  the  typical  high 
priest  here  mentioned  by  the  apostle,  namely,  that  of  benediction,  "  who  met  Abraham 
returning  from  the  slaughter  of  the  kings,  and  blessed  him."    Have  we  not  here  a 
close  resemblance  to  Christ  ?    Benediction,  we  know,  seems  never  to  have  been  off 
the  lips  of  the  holy  Saviour.     With  streams  of  blessing  did  He  open  His  first 
sermon  on  the  mount;  with  hands  of  blessing  He  drew  the  little  children  to  His 
embrace  ;  with  the  uplifted  voice  of  blessing  He  went  op  to  the  right  hand  of 
Power ;  blessed  are  the  sleeping  dead  who  die  in  His  faith  and  fear ;  and  when  at 
last  He  shall  separate  the  great  congregation  of  risen  dead,  He  sLaJl  first  call  to  His 
redeemed  ones,  saying,  "  Come,  ye  blessed  children  of  My  Father,  inherit  the  king- 
dom prepared  for  you  from  the  beginning  of  the  world."    Yes,  blessing  was  the  first 
act  of  our  High  Priest,  after  He  had  "  returned  to  the  Majesty  on  high  "  :  "  Unto 
you  first  God  having  raised  up  His  Son  Jesus,  sent  Him  to  bless  you  "  ;  and  never 
will  He  lay  down  that  His  special  prerogative  of  mercy,  until  He  hath  blessed  us 
"  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ."    But  observe,  another 
act  of  the  typical  Melchisedec  noticed  by  the  apostle  is  his  receiving  a  portion  of 
the  spoils.     •'  To  whom  also  Abraham  gave  a  tenth  part  of  all."    There  can  exist 
no  question  but  that  this  act  of  the  patriarch  was  a  separation  of  a  portion  of  his 
newly  acquired  wealth  to  the  service  of  God.    It  was  an  offering  to  God  through 
Melchizedeo  His  appointed  priest     Abraham  had  been  prosperous ;  he  had  been 
honoured  and  eminently  successful  in  the  mission  he  had  undertaken  ;  how  could 
he  do  otherwise  than  dedicate  the  firstfruits  of  his  success  to  God  ?     "What  shall 
I  render  unto  the  Lord  *or  all  His  benefits  ?  "     The  passage  plainly  throws  some 
light  on  the  perpetual  obligation  of  almsgiving,  independently  of  all  dispensations 
whatever ;  and  seems  to  prescribe  to  us  the  minimum  of  our  substance  which  we 
ought  to  set  apart  for  God's  service.     If  you  have  been  prosperous  in  the  work  of 
your  hands,  if  you  are  returning  like  Abraham  with  the  spoils  of  conquered  diffi- 
culties, if  your  spiritual  Melchisedec  has  met  you  with  tokens  of  acceptance,  give 
unto  Him  a  tenth  part  of  aU.    Let  one  strength,  one  help,  one  hope,  one  outstretched 
arm  be  recognised  in  all  your  successes : — showing  that  on  earth  you  will  lay  aJl  your 
prosperity,  even  as  in  heaven  you  will  lay  all  your  crowns,  at  the  feet  of  Him  who 
was  ordained  a  Priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec.    IH.  The  mysteby 
OF  Melchisedec'b  obioin.    He  is  declared  to  be,  in  the  third  verse,  "  without  father, 
without  mother,  without  descent,  having  neither  beginning  of  days,  nor  end  of  life." 
Melshisedeo  is  a  person  of  whose  death  or  birth  no  record  had  been  preserved,  both 
of  which  would  have  been  if  he  had  ever  bad  auy  accredited  place  in  the  Jewish 
pohty.     But  this  man  has  no  record,  has  no  genealogy ;  he  starts  up  on  the  page  of 
sacred  history,  exercising  the  mysterious  functions  of  the  priesthood,  shrouding  in 
a  veil  of  impenetrable  obscurity  all  the  antecedents  of  his  history,  as  well  as  all  that 
relates  to  his  "  end  of  days."    All  this  was  especially  meant  to  perfect  the  typical 
character  of  this  Melchisedec.    It  was,  in  fact,  to  show  to  us  that  Christ  Himself 
was  not  to  succeed  to  His  office  in  the  order  of  any  human  priesthood — that  He 
should  not  claim  office  in  virtue  of  any  transmitted  rights,  but  that  He  should 
receive  consecration  direct  from  the  hands  of  God :  "  a  Priest "  of  the  Most  High 
God,  "  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec."    And  then  see  how  we  are  to  apply  to 
Christ  the  last  remarkable  words  apphed  to  Melchisedec — to  Christ,  the  true,  the 
spiritual  Melchisedec.    He  is  said  to  be  "  without  father  " ;  is  not  this  true  of  our 
Lord's  human  nature  ?    He  is  said  to  be  "  without  mother  "  :  is  not  this  true  of  our 
Lord's  Divine  nature?    He  is  said  to  be  "without  beginning  of  hfe,  or  end  of 
days  " :  must  not  this  be  true  of  Him  whom  prophecy  describes  as  "  the  Ancient  of 
days,"  as  the  Father  of  eternity,  as  One  who  throws  out  the  challenge  to  every 
finite  inteUigence,  "  Who  shall  declare  His  generation  ?  "  nay,  as  One  whom  God 
Himself  had  solemnly  designated  and  set  apart.     "  Thou  art  a  Priest  for  ever  after 
the  order  of  Melchisedec."     IV.  The  intbansmissible  chabacteb  op  Mblchisbdbo's 
PBIESTHOOD.     This  is  declared  in  the  third  verse :  "  He  is  made  like  " — namely,  that 
He  "  abideth  a  Priest  continually."    Then  taming  to  the  twenty-fourth  verse  oi 


658  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  ^CuSt.  m, 

this  chapter  you  read — "But  this  Man,  because  He  continueth  ever,  hath  an 
unchangeable  priesthood  " — a  passage  which,  on  looking  at  the  margin,  you  will  find 
thus  reiide red,  "a  priesthood  which  passeth  not  from  one  to  another."  Now,  to 
understand  this,  you  must  remember  the  stress  of  the  apostle's  argument.  It  was 
a  new  theology  to  the  Jews  to  suppose  that  Messiah  was  to  be  "  a  Priest"  at  all ; 
they  thought  of  Him,  they  expected  Him,  only  as  the  "  Lord  "  Christ,  as  the  King 
of  righteousness  and  peace.  But  suppose  Christ  were  to  be  a  Priest,  then  the  Jew 
would  say,  "  He  must  be  a  Priest  according  to  the  order  of  Aaron."  Then  says  the 
apostle,  •'  Christ  can  have  no  claim  in  this  behalf ;  for  He  sprang  from  the  tribe  of 
Judah,  of  which  tribe  Moses  spake  nothing  concerning  priesthood."  What,  then, 
is  the  conclusion  ?  Why,  that  the  real  type  of  Christ's  priesthood  is  to  be  found, 
not  in  men  having  infirmity  under  the  law,  but  in  tbat  remarkable  personage 
expressly  raised  up  of  God  in  a  particular  age  of  the  Church,  in  order  that  he  might 
be  a  perfect,  or,  at  least  proximately  perfect,  type  of  Christ,  as  one  who  neither 
received  his  priesthood  from  any,  nor  yet  transmitted  his  priesthood  to  any ;  and 
therefore,  in  so  far  as  there  was  no  delegation  of  the  sacred  functions,  he  might  be 
said  to  "  abide  a  priest  continually."  Herein  he  becomes  a  glorious  and  eminent 
type  of  Christ — the  type  of  Him,  who  as  He  received  His  priesthood  from  none,  so 
will  He  delegate  it  to  none,  not  to  human  priesthoods,  not  to  saints  and  angels,  not 
to  the  ten  thousand  mediators  of  a  corrupt  and  apostate  church,  but  rather  will 
continue,  in  all  the  might,  in  all  the  prevalency,  in  all  the  sovereign  sufBciency  of 
an  unchangeable  priesthood,  "  ever  living  to  make  intercession  for  as."  (D.  Moore, 
M.A.)  Our  Melchisedec : — The  Jews  were  very  fond  of  beautiful  mysteries,  which 
awakened  the  sense  of  wonder  and  the  desire  for  deeper  knowledge ;  and,  as  the 
Psalms  and  Proverbs  show,  they  love  to  have  truth  in  pairs  or  in  halves.  Their 
minds  moved,  as  a  railway  engine  moves,  on  parallel  lines  and  with  corresponding 
wheels  ;  their  piety  soared  as  the  lark  soars  on  equal  wings.  As  iu  this  subject  of 
Melchisedec,  they  often  gained  their  idea  of  the  whole  truth,  just  as  in  geography 
you  gain  your  idea  of  the  whole  earth  by  uniting  the  two  half-spheres  that  are 
separated  on  the  map.  The  mystery  of  Melchisedec  is  thus  explained  by  four  pairs 
of  truths.  I.  He  was  a  man  and  more  than  a  man.  Many  things  about  him  are 
"hard  to  be  uttered  "  or  explained  (chap.  v.  11).  Here,  I  think,  is  the  key  that  opens 
the  difficulty : — there  are  two  Melchisedecs  :  the  one  hved  in  Salem,  and  the  other 
lives  in  this  page.  King  Henry  VIH.,  the  queen-killer,  was,  as  most  people  believe, 
a  bad  man ;  but  Froude  makes  him  a  good  man.  There  are  thus  two  Henrys  :  the 
one  lived  at  Windsor,  the  other  lives  in  Froude's  history.  What  Froude  did  for 
Henry  by  hero-worship,  Moses  did  for  Melchisedec  by  omission ;  but  with  this 
difference,  that  Moses  keeps  to  exact  truth.  As  we  have  Froude's  Henry  and  the 
real  Henry,  so  we  have,  as  we  may  say,  the  Melchisedec  of  Abraham  and  the 
Melchisedec  of  Moses.  Melchisedec  was  "  made  like  unto  the  Son  of  God  "  (chap, 
vii.  3).  He  was  not  like  Him,  but  was  made  like  Him.  I  have  watched  an 
apprentice  wood-carver.  Before  him  was  a  tree,  like  any  other  tree.  Beside  him 
stood  a  life-size  statue  of  Christ.  Glancing  now  and  again  at  the  statue,  and 
guided  by  his  teacher,  he  hewed  out  a  piece  here  and  there,  and  soon  the  tree  became 
a  statue.  He  made  it  more  by  making  it  less,  for  he  thus  put  a  grand  idea  into  it. 
As  that  carver  elevated  the  tree  into  an  image  of  Christ,  so  Moses,  guided  by  God, 
fashioned  or  rounded  off  the  Melchisedec  of  his  story  into  an  image  of  Christ. 
It  was  not  an  after-thought,  but  a  fore-thought  to  liken  Christ  to  Melchisedec  ; 
for  Christ  is  the  original  and  Melchisedec  the  copy,  expressly  "  made"  beforehand 
for  New  Testament  teaching.  What  a  man  of  mystery  that  Melchisedec  of  Moses 
is!  He  seems  to  have  dropped  down  from  heaven.  He  seems  to  be  his  own 
ancestor  and  his  own  heir ;  one  sprung  from  himself,  a  cause  uncaused ;  one  ever 
hving  among  the  dead  and  dying.  He  stands  quite  apart,  has  not  his  fellow  in  the 
Bible,  and  is  Uke  himself  only.  Fix  your  eye  upon  this  portrait  drawn  by  the 
Divine  hand,  grasp  it  as  it  lies  there,  and  the  subject  is  delightfully  simple.  "  This 
Melchisedec  "  on  whom  you  and  I  gaze,  not  that  whom  Abraham  gazed  upon  ;  this 
literary  Melchisedec,  not  that  literal  one  ;  "  this  Melchisedec  "  is  an  image  of  Him 
who  was  "without  father"  as  to  His  human  nature,  and  "without  mother"  as  to 
His  Divine  ;  as  God  "  having  neither  beginning  of  days  nor  end  of  life  " ;  who  in 
His  office  was  "  without  descent "  and  without  succession,  and  so  '•  abideth  a  Priest 
continually."  Melchisedec  was  a  man,  and  seems  more:  Jesus  is  a  man,  and 
is  more.  II.  Christ  is  like  Melchisedec,  a  Priest  and  a  Kino.  Pity  belongs  to 
Him  as  Priest,  and  power  belongs  to  Him  as  King.  His  priestly  pity  and  kingly 
power  temper  and  sustain  each  other,  and  as  two  uniting  streams  roU  along  in  ont 


CHAP.  TEL]  HEBREWS.  557 

full  flood  of  oommanicated  joy.  He  saves  with  all  the  power  of  a  king ;  He  rolea 
with  all  the  gentleness  of  a  priest.  His  kingly  power  enables  Him  to  do  His 
priestly  work  right  royally,  with  royal  graciousness  and  munificence.  He  saves 
with  sovereignty,  with  a  sovereign's  generosity.  The  rebel  Themistocles  appealed 
for  pardon  to  the  Persian  king  Xerxes.  The  king  pardoned  him  in  his  sovereignty ; 
not  as  one  who  had  to  study  petty  economics,  whose  grace  was  a  miser's  hoard ; 
for  he  gave  Themistocles  the  country  of  Magnesia  for  bread  (about  £12,000  a  year) ; 
Myus  for  condiments,  and  Lampsacus  for  wine.  That  is  how  a  sovereign  pardons, 
and  illustrates  one  part  of  what  we  mean  by  the  sovereignty  of  God.  Our  great 
High  Priest  has  a  royal  right  and  a  royal  power  to  save,  as  He  makes  one  thing  of 
Priesthood  and  Kinghood.  The  golden  sceptre  of  grace  is  ever  in  His  band ;  and 
whosoever  will  may  touch  it  and  live,  shielded  by  the  whole  power  of  His  kingdom. 
What  can  sin,  death,  and  hell  do  against  those  who  have  Him  as  their  ally?  HI. 
Melchisedeo  is  a  ttpe  of  Christ  because  he  unites  righteousness  and  peace. 
His  name  means  "  king  of  righteousness,"  and  he  was  king  of  Salem,  or  peace.  He 
was,  no  doubt,  a  righteous  man  and  king,  doing  all  he  could  to  right  the  world's 
wrongs.  But  much  more  than  that  is  meant  here.  For  he  was  a  priest,  and  no 
priest  was  he  unless  he  represented  God  to  man  and  man  to  God,  and  so  provided 
righteousness  for  the  unrighteous.  They  for  whom  he  acted  should  hnve  had 
righteousness,  but  had  it  not ;  and  it  was  the  part  of  their  priest  to  gain  for  them 
the  '•  abundance  of  grace  and  of  the  gift  of  righteousness."  To  us,  at  least,  priestly 
righteousness  means  all  that.  The  righteousness  our  High  Priest  has  to  do  with  ia 
held  out  as  a  free  gift  to  the  most  unrighteous  among  us ;  and  it  is  thine  for  the 
taking.  Melchisedec  was  also  king  of  Salem.  A  dense  mass  of  meaning  Ues  for 
us  in  this  title  also.  Salem,  like  the  salaam  given  to-day  in  the  East,  means  peace. 
A  King  of  Peace  I  Earth's  kings  are  war-makers ;  ours  is  a  Peacemaker.  Earth'a 
^reat  cities  have  often  been  Aceldauias,  streaming  fields  of  blood;  our  mother-city 
is  peace.  And  what  a  union  of  contraries  is  here  1  Let  the  bare  idea  of  God's 
righteousness  enter  the  heart  of  a  man  in  sin,  and  lo  I  his  peace  is  gone,  and  he  is 
the  prey  of  remorse.  Bnt  Christ  brings  us  a  peace  founded  upon  eternal  righteous- 
ness. IV.  Melchisedec  is  a  type  of  Christ,  because  he  unites  Jew  and  Gentile. 
Aaron,  the  priest,  was  only  for  the  Jews  ;  but  Melchisedec,  who  was  out  of  Aaron's 
line  and  above  it,  was  a  Gentile,  and  he  was  a  priest  for  Abraham  the  Jew,  and  for 
the  Gentiles  dwelling  in  Salem,  He  was  a  world-wide  priest,  opening  his  arms  to 
all  the  races  of  humankind,  and  his  city  was  meant  to  be  the  mother-city  of  all  the 
earth,  emblem  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  into  which  people  of  all  nations  shall  be 
gathered.  Thus  Christ  is  a  Priest,  not  after  the  order  of  Aaron,  who  was  for  Jews 
only,  but  He  is  "  a  Priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec  "  ;  and  any  sinner 
under  heaven  may  receive  the  blessings  He  brings.  {James  Wells,  M.A.) 
King  of  righteousness. — Righteousness  first,  then  peace : — I.  A  hierogltphio  of 
Christ's  reconciling  work. — First,  King  of  Eighteousness,  afterwards  King  of 
Peace.  There  is  no  peace  with  God  possible,  except  on  the  basis  of  righteousDcss. 
It  is  a  true  gospel,  howsoever  harsh  it  sounds,  which  proclaims  "  Thou  art  not  a 
God  that  hast  pleasure  in  iniquity,  neither  shall  the  wicked  dwell  in  Thy  sight." 
This  is  the  dictate  of  conscience ;  this  is  the  dictate  of  what  people  call ' '  natural 
religion."  This,  the  necessity  of  righteousness  for  friendship  with  God,  is  the 
message  of  the  old  covenant ;  and  this,  the  absolute  need  of  purity  of  life  and  heart 
for  all  true  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  favour,  is  Christ's  message  as  truly.  Nay, 
further,  the  first  thing  which  the  gospel — which  Christ,  who  is  the  gospel — does 
when  He  comes  into  a  man's  heart  is  to  emphasise  two  facts,  the  absolute  need  for 
righteousness  in  order  to  friendship  with  God,  and  the  want  of  it  in  the  heart  to 
which  He  has  come.  And  so  the  conflict  is  intensified,  the  sense  of  discord  is 
kindled,  the  alienation  between  man  and  God  is  made  conscious  on  the  first 
entrance  of  Christ  into  the  spirit.  The  oil  comes  after  the  arrow,  the  bandage  after 
the  wound.  II.  A  summary  of  Christ's  operations  in  the  individuaii  soul. 
There  is  no  inward  harmony,  no  peace  of  heart  and  quietness  of  nature  except  on 
condition  of  being  good  and  righteous  men.  The  real  root  of  all  our  agitations  is  our 
sinfulness ;  and  wherever  there  creeps  over  a  heart  the  love  of  evU,  there  comes, 
hke  some  subtle  sea-born  mist  stealing  up  over  the  country  and  blotting  out  all  its 
features,  a  poisonous  obscuration  which  shrouds  all  the  spirit  in  its  doleful  folds. 
Disturbance  comes  not  so  much  from  outward  causes  as  from  an  inward  alienation 
towards  that  which  is  pure  and  good.  Peace  within  comes  from  righteousness 
within,  and  no  man  is  righteous  unless  he  has  Christ's  righteousness  for  the  very 
spring  and  strength  of  his  life.   lU.  Tbb  programme  of  Christ's  opesations  m  thb 


558  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  Tt^ 

WORLD.  The  herald  angels  sang  "  on  earth  peace."  Nineteen  centuries  have  passed, 
and  Christianity  is  still  a  disturbing  element  wherever  it  comes,  and  the  promise  seems 
to  linger,  and  the  great  words  that  declared  "  Unto  ua  a  Child  "  should  "  be  born," 
.  .  ,  and  His  name  shall  be  ...  "  the  Prince  of  Peace,"  seem  as  far  away  from 
fulfilment  as  ever  they  were.  Yes,  because  He  is  first  of  all  King  of  Righteousness, 
and  must  destroy  the  evil  that  is  in  the  world  before  He  can  manifest  Himself  as 
King  of  Peace.  K  we  are  the  followers  of  the  Prince  of  Peace,  who  is,  first  of  all, 
King  of  Righteousness,  we  are  called  to  be  His  faithful  servants  and  soldiers.  For 
all  the  social  evils  that  swarm  round  about  us  to-day,  intemperance,  impurity, 
commercial  dishonesty,  follies  of  fashionable  and  of  social  life  and  the  like,  for  all 
teachings  that  dim  and  darken  the  face  of  His  great  counsel  and  purpose  of  mercy, 
we  are  to  cherish  an  undying  hatred  and  war  against  them  an  unceasing  warfare. 
IV.  A  PROPHECY  OF  THE  END.  The  true  Salem,  the  city  of  peace,  is  not  here.  One 
more  conflict  every  soldier  of  the  Cross,  ere  he  treads  its  pavement,  has  to  wage 
with  the  last  enemy  who  is  to  be  destroyed  by  Jesus  Christ,  but  only  at  the  end. 
For  us  and  for  the  world  the  assurance  stands  firm — the  King  who  Himself  is 
Righteousness  is  the  King  whose  city  is  peace.  And  that  city  will  come. 
{A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  First  king  of  righteousness,  and  after  that  king  of  peace  : — 
I.  Admire  this  king.  1.  Melrhisedec  is  such  a  king  as  God  is.  He  is  according 
to  Divine  model.  At  the  fall  God  first  set  up  a  Judgment-seat,  and  right  speedily  a 
Mercy-seat.  Righteousness  must  ever  lead  the  van.  All  along  in  the  history  of 
God's  dealings  with  men.  He  kept  to  this  unvarying  rule.  2.  He  was  such  a  kin.o;  as 
Christ  is.  Christ  preached  no  peace  apart  from  purity.  He  never  made  httle  of 
vice  or  error;  He  was  the  deadly  foe  of  all  evil.  He  said,  "I  came  not  to  bring 
peace,  but  a  sword."  3.  Note,  next,  that  He  is  such  a  King  as  right-heartt'd  minds 
desire.  My  heart  rejoices  in  a  sin-killing  King,  and  then  a  peace-bestowing  King, 
sweeping  out  the  buyers  and  the  sellers  from  the  temple,  and  then  manifesting 
Himself  there  in  all  His  majesty  to  His  waiting  people.  4.  Melchisedec  is  such  a 
king  as  Jesus  must  be  to  every  one  of  you  who  have  not  yet  known  Him,  if  you  are 
ever  to  receive  Him  as  your  Saviour.  Righteousness  must  hold  the  sceptre,  or  peace 
will  not  attend  the  court.  5.  This  is  the  kind  of  king  that  God  would  have  every 
one  of  us  to  be.  H.  Enjoy  this  king.  1.  Our  Lord  is  first  King  of  Righteous- 
ness. (1)  He  who  religiously  obeys  Mahomet  may  yet  be  doing  grievous  moral 
wrong  ;  bat  it  is  never  so  with  the  disciples  of  Jesus  :  obedience  to  Jesus  is  holiness. 
(2)  Notice,  next,  that  if  we  trust  this  Kim.'  of  righteousness  we  are  righteous  in  His 
merit.  2.  And  then,  next.  He  is  after  tl.  it  King  of  peace.  I  want  you  to  enjoy  the 
King  of  Salem,  the  King  of  peace.  Do  you  know  that  at  this  moment,  if  you  are  a 
believer,  you  have  peace  with  God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  ?  (G.  H.  Spurge' n.) 
Melchisedec,  king  of  righteousness : — Tlie  word  "Melchisedec"  leads  our  minds  at 
once  to  that  remarkable  passage  in  the  23rd  chapter  of  Jeremiah,  where  it  ia 
declared  of  Christ  that  this  is  His  name,  whereby  He  shall  be  called,  "  Jehovah 
Tsidkenu,  The  Lord  our  Righteousness."  For  Zedek  and  Tsidkenu  being  the  same 
in  their  root,  the  only  difference  between  the  passages  is  that  in  the  prophet  He  is 
the  Lord  of  Righteousness,  while  here  He  is  its  King.  Whether  we  look  therefore 
into  the  pictures  of  Genesis,  or  the  shadows  of  prophecy,  or  the  originals  of  the 
gospel,  righteousness  and  royalty  meet  together  to  make  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Let  us  endeavour  to  cat^'h  the  meaning  of  that  word  "  righteousness."  Before  God 
righteousness  means  justification.  "  There  is  none  righteous,  no  not  one  " — this  is 
literally  true.  No  child  of  man  has  ever  paid  all  his  debt  to  God.  No  child  of  mm 
has  ever  fulfilled  all  his  relationships.  Therefore  no  child  of  man  is  just.  But 
that  was  a  truer  word  than  he  who  spake  it  thought  of,  wItu  the  centurion  said, 
"  Truly  this  was  a  righteous  man.''  Christ  was  perfectly  righteous  ;  because  what 
He  undertook  to  do  He  did.  He  undertook  to  pay,  and  He  fully  paid,  the  whole 
human  debt  to  God.  He  never  swerved  from  His  en^agem^  nt.  He  kept.  He 
beautified,  every  iota  of  the  law.  And  what  relative  duty  did  He  ever  leave  undone? 
But  His  righteousness  being  so  exceeding,  and  being  the  righteousness  of  an  infinite 
being,  it  was  far  above  all  that  He  needed  as  man  for  Himself,  and  left  a  treasury  of 
righteousness  available  for  every  poor  sinner.  Very  happy  it  is  f"r  us  that  of  that 
righteousne!=s — both  the  imparted  and  the  inherent,  both  His  and  ouis — vhich  He 
so  requires.  He  is  also  the  king.  For  He  can  give,  and  He  will  give,  it  royally.  A 
Melchisedec  indeed  He  stands — Righteousness  the  habitation  of  His  throne — His 
sceptre  a  sceptre  of  righteousness — Righteousness  the  girdle  of  His  loins — Ri/hteous- 
ness  His  breastplate — Righteousness  the  signet  of  His  crown — and  a'l  for  the  sake 
of  that  one  highest  prerogative  of  His  power — that  one  climax  of  His  righteousness. 


«BAP.  Tn.]  HEBREWS.  K9 

"  If  we  confess  our  sins,  He  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  ns  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse 
as  from  all  unrighteousness."  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  King  of  peace. — Christ  a 
Prince  of  peace : — Two  things  there  be  which  especially  declare  Him  to  be  a  King  of 
peace.  1.  That  peace  which  He  made  betwixt  the  Creator  and  creatures.  2.  That 
which  He  made  among  creatures  themselves.  God  at  first  made  all  in  perfect 
peace.  There  was  a  sweet  harmony  and  consent.  No  discord,  no  dissension. 
Creatures  by  sin  brought  all  out  of  frame.  But  Christ  being  made  King,  made  up 
all  these  breaches.  For — 1.  He  satisfied  God's  justice,  pacified  His  wrath,  and 
reconciled  man  to  God  (Rom.  iii.  25,  and  v.  8,  9,  10).  2.  Christ  took  men  and 
made  them  members  of  His  mystical  body  :  and  having  so  united  them  to  Himself, 
made  angels  to  be  at  peace  with  them  (Col.  i.  20).  3.  He  communicateth  His  Spirit 
unto  men,  whereby  all  the  powers  of  their  souls  and  parts  of  their  body  are 
lenewed  and  brought  into  a  sweet  harmony.  4.  He  brake  down  the  partition  wall 
betwixt  Jew  and  Gentile  (Eph.  ii.  14),  and  made  all  one  in  Himself  (Gal.  iii.  28), 
and  so  alters  their  disposition  as  they  may  lovingly  live  together  (Isa.  xi.  6,  dkc). 
{W.  Gouge.)  The  King  of  peace: — There  are  many  things  which  the  world  can 
give  you — it  can  give  you  amusement ;  it  can  give  you  excitement ;  it  can  give  you 
pleasure — but  it  can  never  give  you  peace  of  mind — no,  not  for  an  hour.  Peace — 
all  Salem — is  Christ's  exclusively — by  legacy  from  His  cross,  by  deed  of  gift  from 
His  throne.  Need  I  say  how  incomparably  peace  is  better  than  pleasure  f  If  you 
want  peace,  you  must  look  for  it  in  Christ, — not  in  the  evidences  of  your  own  soul 
— not  in  certain  religious  acts  or  feelings — not  in  ordinances — not  in  man — not  in 
doctrines, — but  in  Christ — a  personal,  felt,  loved,  present,  real,  living  Christ, — in 
His  nature,  in  His  attributes,  in  His  work,  in  His  glory,  in  His  return — all  peace 
lives  there — it  is  Salem.  The  more  peace  you  take,  the  better  subject  you  are  of 
that  kingdom,  which  is  called  Salem.  Every  fear  is  a  rebellion  against  its  King. 
Nothing  honours  Christ  like  the  peace  of  His  people — peace  is  Salem's  loyalty. 
The  wars  of  nations  make  a  discord  in  the  works  of  God.  Therefore  never  measure 
war,  or  talk  of  war,  as  the  Ught  world  does ;  for  it  is,  and  it  must  be,  a  grief  in 
Salem.  But  pray  more  earnestly  to  the  Prince  of  Peace  that  prayer,  "  Give  peace 
in  our  time,  0  Lord  I "  There  will  be  no  war  and  '*  no  evil  occurrsnt "  presently 
when  Christ  comes  ;  but  this  earth  will  be  one  holy  Salem,  its  circuit  commensurate 
with  creation,  "  its  walls  salvation,  and  its  gates  praise."  For  that  day  the  Church 
looks  out;  but,  happy  thought  I  Christ  looks  out  for  it  more  than  the  Church, 
and  not  one  of  us  is  as  anxious  for  his  Lord  to  appear,  as  that  Lord  is  now  longing 
to  come.  (J.  Vaughan,  M.A.)  Consider  how  great  this  man  was. — Melchisedec 
a  type  of  greatness: — I.  True  greatness  is  not  hebbditabt,  but  peksonal.  H. 
Tbub  greatness  is  not  external,  but  in  tee  soul.  III.  True  greatness  is 
not  the  cbeatubk  op  circumstances,  but  on  the  contrary  controls  them.  IV. 
True  greatness  exists  and  flourishes  only  in  close  relationship  to  God.  V. 
True  greatness  is  seen  in  the  possession  and  union  op  righteousness  and 
peace.  VI.  True  greatness  manifests  itself  in  ministration  to  the  welfare 
OP  others.     Vn.  True  greatness  will  beoeive  its  due  reverence,  and  incite 

TO  A   KINDRED    CHARACTER.        VUI.   TbUB  GREATNESS   BEACHES   ITS   HIGHEST   BEALISA- 

TiON  IN  Jesus  Christ.  {B.  Dale,  M.A.)  King  and  priest: — I.  The  honours  he 
BECEivED.  One  of  the  highest  marks  of  greatness  is  to  be  had  in  honour  by  the 
good.  We  should  not  attach  so  much  importance  to  a  eulogy,  as  to  the  character 
of  those  by  whom  it  is  uttered.  II.  The  duties  he  discharged.  1.  Those  of  a 
king.  Living  in  peace  ;  striving  to  bless  his  subjects,  and  honour  his  God.  2. 
Those  of  a  patriarch.  3.  Those  of  a  priest.  This  is  true  greatness,  when  the  spiritual 
is  not  neglected  for  the  secular,  nor  the  secular  for  the  spiritual.  lU.  The  traits  of 
CHABACTEB  HE  DISPLAYED.  1.  Stability.  Did  Dot  allow  the  idolatry  around  to 
influence  either  his  heart  or  life.  2.  Peacefulness  and  wisdom.  Did  not  embroil 
■  himself  in  quarrels,  or  resent  fancied  grievances.  3.  Tolerance.  Did  not  go  to  war 
himself,  but  respected  the  valour  of  Abraham,  believing  he  engaged  in  the  conflict 
by  command  of  God.  4.  Cordiality.  No  gloomy  ascetic,  or  lofty  monarch.  IV. 
The  fame  he  secured.  He  was  great,  because  good ;  illustrious,  because  beloved 
of  God.  V.  The  reward  he  enjoys.  Conclusion :  1.  It  is  possible  for  ns  to  be 
great  after  the  manner  of  Melchisedec.  Are  not  Christians  made  like  unto  the  Son  of 
God?  2.  If  we  would  be  thus  great,  we  must  seek  to  be  invested  with  the  righteous- 
ness of  Christ.   {R.  A.  Griffin.)      The  greatness  of  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  : — I.  Lex  mh 

EXHORT   YOU    TO    CONSIDER   HOW   GREAT   THIS    MaN,    THE   LoBD   JeSUS   ChBIST,   18.       1. 

This  subject  claims  your  consideration.     It  is  His  right  that  you  should  consider 
HiB  greatness.    2.  Certainly  the  subject  needs  consideration ;  for  we  shall  never 


560  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vil, 

gain  an  idea  of  how  great  He  is  unless  we  do  consider,  and  consider  much.  Here 
is  a  great  deep,  and  it  cannot  be  fathomed  hy  the  thoughtless.  3.  I  go  a  little 
further,  and  say  that  not  only  does  my  subject  claim  your  consideration  and  need  your 
consideration,  but  it  solemnly  comma  nds  it.  The  text  is  not  a  mere  piece  of  advice ; 
the  apostle  charges  you  to  think  of  Melchisedec,  but  much  more  would  he  have 
you  remember  Melchisedec's  Antitype.  Oh,  do  not  need  to  be  pressed  to  this 
Divine  study  :  love  it,  never  cease  from  it.  4.  Follow  out  this  meditation,  I  pray 
you  because  there  is  an  exceeding  great  reward  for  any  man  who  will  "  consider 
how ,  great  this  man  was."  I  find  for  myself  that  the  only  possibility  of  my  living  is 
living  in  Christ  and  unto  Christ.  11.  Let  me  Assisr  you  to  consideb  how  great 
THIS  MAN  was.  1.  Lcst  the  very  use  of  the  expression,  "  this  man,"  should  leave 
any  body  for  a  moment  in  doubt  as  to  our  faith  in  His  Godhead,  I  bid  you  consider 
how  great  this  man  was  in  His  relationship  to  God.  For  though  He  was  man,  He 
was  not  merely  man.  2.  You  are  not  in  doubt  upon  this  vital  matter ;  let  me, 
therefore,  ask  you  to  consider  *•  how  great  this  man  was  "  as  to  His  relationship  to 
men.  Christ  Jesus  is  the  second  man,  the  Lord  from  heaven.  3.  Come  a  little 
closer,  and  reach  forward  to  that  which  will  delight  your  hearts  far  more ;  consider 
the  relationship  of  Christ  to  His  own  people.  Long  before  the  heavens  and  the 
earth  were  made,  God  with  prescient  eye  beheld  the  person  of  His  Son  as  God  in 
human  nature,  and  He  saw  all  His  elect  lying  in  Him.  The  Church  is  His  body. 
"  Consider  how  great  this  man  was."  He  is  so  great  that  all  the  saints  are  blessed 
iu  Him.  HI.  The  practical  improvement  of  the  whole  subject.  Consider  how 
great  this  man  was,  and  as  you  consider,  believe  in  His  infinite  power  to  bless  men. 
He  is  full  of  blessing  as  the  sun  is  full  of  light,  that  He  may  shiue  upon  His  needy 
creatures.  (C  II.  Spurgeon.)  Human  greatness : — There  are  various  relations  in 
which  human  greatness  is  a  fit  object  of  consideration.  1.  It  is  to  be  considered  in 
relation  to  the  providence  of  God.  All  real  greatness — intellectual,  moral,  and 
circumstantial — is  intimately  associated  with  the  sovereignty  of  Heaven,  In  cert  tin 
recorded  instances,  the  connection  of  God  with  the  attainment  of  such  gi-eatness  ia 
very  distinctly  indicated.  It  is  so  in  the  instances  of  Abraham,  Joseph,  Moses, 
Saul,  David,  and  many  other  Scripture-characters.  In  these,  the  direct  interference 
of  the  Divine  Being  is,  at  certain  points,  definitely  marked ;  and  the  thoughtful 
reader  of  the  narrative  is  thus  prepared  to  acknowledge  His  hand  throughout  the 
whole  tissue  of  the  events  that  led  the  individual  on  to  greatness.  But  the  Scriptural 
doctrine  of  God's  universal  providence  involves  the  fact  that,  even  in  more  ordinary 
cases.  His  superintending  care  and  administrative  wisdom  are  employed  (1  Chron. 
xxix.  11,  12).  Now,  it  is  reasonable,  and  fitted  to  be  practically  useful,  to  trace  the 
Divine  sovereignty  and  the  Divine  wisdom  in  the  production  of  personal  and 
national  greatness,  and,  when  such  greatness  flashes  on  the  eye,  to  see  and  feel  that 
the  hand  of  Jehovah  has  been  there.  2.  Human  greatness  is  to  be  considered  in 
relation  to  the  ravages  of  death  and  time.  "  All  flesh  is  as  grass,  and  all  the  glory 
of  man  as  the  flower  of  grass  "  (1  Pet.  i.  24).  "  Riches  take  to  themselves  wings  and 
fly  away  "  (Prov.  xxiii.  5).  Power  waxes  weak  as  infancy.  Even  Fame's  green 
garland  is  wont  to  wither  on  the  brow  (Eocl.  viii.  8).  How  important,  by  the  con- 
sideration of  earthly  greatness  as,  like  other  earthly  objects,  frail  and  fleeting,  to  be 
disabused  of  vain  ambition,  and  to  learn  the  lesson  (Isa.  ii.  22).  3.  Human  great- 
ness is  to  be  considered  in  relation  to  the  example  and  encouragement  which,  in 
certain  cases,  it  is  fitted  to  afford.  Some  men  have  been  greatly  good.  Their 
moral  aims  have  been  lofty,  their  moral  enterprises  vast,  and  their  moral  attain- 
ments bright.  And  independently  of  their  importance  as  models,  the  consideration 
of  them  is  fitted  to  inspire  the  soul  with  a  moral  enthusiasm  both  honourable  and 
useful.  4.  Human  greatness  is  to  be  considered  in  relation  to  tue  typical  character 
which  certain  great  ones  of  the  world  possessed.  If  God  has  assigned  such  a 
character  to  some  of  the  principle  personages  of  the  Bible,  and  given  us  the  means 
of  tracing  it,  surely  it  would  be  unreasonable  and  sinful  to  neglect  to  do  so.  By 
the  consideration  of  those  elements  of  greatness  wherein  patriarchs,  princes,  priests, 
and  prophets  represented  Christ,  distinct  and  vivid  views  may  be  obtained  of  Christ 
Himself.  Thus,  too,  may  be  clearly  apprehended  the  intimate  relation  subsisting 
among  the  various  moral  economies  of  God,  and  the  anticipative  and  Messianic 
character  of  God's  providence  from  the  very  birth  of  time.  {A.  S.  Patterson.) 
The  greatness  of  character : — Wherein  lay  his  greatness  ?  He  was  not  in  the 
priestly  line.  Neither  do  we  read  that  he  was  appointed  of  God.  Yet  no  man 
taketh  this  honour  nnto  himself.  God  had  made  him  king  and  priest  by 
oonierring  npon  liim  the  gift  of  iimate   spiritual  greatness.    He  was  one  of 


OBAf.  Yu.]  HEBREWS.  561 

nature's  kings,  bom  to  role,  not  because  he  was  his  father's  son,  but 
because  he  had  a  great  soul.  He  became  a  priest  in  virtue  of  what  he  was 
as  man.  His  authority  as  king  sprang  from  character.  Such  men  appear 
on  earth  now  and  again.  But  they  are  never  accounted  for.  All  we  oan  say 
of  them  is  that  they  have  neither  father  nor  mother  nor  genealogy.  They 
resemble  those  who  are  bom  of  the  spirit,  of  whom  we  know  neither  whence  they 
come  nor  whither  they  go.  It  is  only  from  the  greatest  One  among  these  kings 
and  priests  of  men  that  the  veil  is  lifted.  In  Him  we  see  the  Son  of  Qod.  Such 
priests  remain  priests  for  ever.  They  live  on  by  the  vitality  of  their  priesthood. 
They  have  no  beginning  of  days  or  end  of  life.  They  have  never  been  set  apart 
with  outward  ritual  to  an  official  distinction,  marked  by  days  and  years.  Their 
acts  are  not  ceremonial,  and  wait  not  on  the  calendar.  They  bless  men,  and  the 
blessing  abides.  They  pray,  and  the  prayer  dies  not.  If  their  prayer  lives  for  ever, 
can  we  suppose  that  they  themselves  pass  away?  The  king-priest  is  heir  of 
immortality,  whoever  else  may  perish.  He  at  least  has  the  power  of  an  endless  life. 
If  he  dies  in  the  flesh,  he  lives  on  in  the  spirit.  An  eternal  heaven  mast  be  found 
or  made  for  such  men  with  God.    (T.  C.  Edwards,  D.D,) 

Vers.  11-18.  A  change  also  of  the  law. — Change  in  the  law: — It  is  modified  in 
these  circumstances :  1.  In  regard  of  justification  (Acts  xiii.  39).  The  law  was  first 
given  to  justify  the  observers  thereof ;  but  now  in  regard  of  man's  corruption  that 
is  impossible  (Eom.  viiL  3;  Gal.  iii.  11).  Qod  therefore  now  hath  appointed 
another  means  for  that  end,  which  is  Christ  and  faith  in  TTim  (Acts  xiii.  39; 
Bom.  iii.  28).  2.  In  regard  of  the  rigour  thereof.  The  law  accepteth  no  duty  but 
that  which  is  every  way  perfect.  This  much  is  implied  (Eom.  x.  5).  This,  there- 
fore, is  the  doom  of  the  law  (Gal.  iii.  10).  Yet  there  is  a  righteousness  (though  not 
framed  according  to  this  exact  rule)  which  is  accepted  of  God.  This  is  the  righteous- 
ness of  faith,  whereby  laying  hold  on  Christ's  righteousness  to  be  justified  (Acta 
xxiv.  16).  3.  In  regard  of  an  accidental  power  which  the  law,  through  man's 
corruption,  hath  to  increase  sin,  and  to  make  it  out  of  measure  sinful  (Bom.  vii.  13). 
For  the  very  forbidding  of  a  sin  by  the  law  maketh  the  corrupt  heart  of  man  more 
eagerly  pursue  it :  as  a  stubborn  child  will  do  a  thing  the  more,  because  it  is  for- 
bidden. There  is  a  secret  antipathy  in  our  corrupt  nature  to  God's  pure  law.  But 
by  the  Spirit  of  Christ  that  antipathy  is  taken  away,  and  another  disposition 
wrought  in  true  believers :  namely,  a  true  desire  and  faithful  endeavour  to  avoid 
what  the  law  forbiddeth ;  and  to  do  that  which  it  requireth.  In  this  respect,  saith 
the  apostle,  "  I  delight  in  the  law  of  God  concerning  the  inward  man  "  (Bom.  vii.  27). 
4.  In  regard  of  the  curse  of  the  law.  Yet  the  law  peremptorily  denounceth  a 
curse  against  every  transgressor  and  transgression  (Deut.  xxvii.  26 ;  Gal.  iii.  10). 
The  law  admits  no  surety,  nor  accepts  any  repentance.  Thus,  "  all  men  having 
sinned,  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God  "  (Bom.  iii,  23).  Yet  this  curse  doth  not 
light  on  all  (Gal.  iii.  13).  In  this  respect,  "  there  is  no  condemnation  to  them 
that  are  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Bom.  viii.  1).  Though  the  moral  law  be  altered  in  the 
forementioned  respects,  yet  stUl  it  remains  to  be  of  use  for  instruction  and  direction. 
1.  For  instruction,  it  demonstrateth  these  points  following  :  (1)  What  God  Himself 
is  (Exod.  XX.  2).  (2)  What  His  holy  will  is  (Psa.  xl.  8).  (3)  What  our  duty  is  to 
God  and  man  (Matt  xxii.  37-39).  (4)  What  sin  is  (1  John  iii.  4 ;  Bom.  iii.  20). 
(5)  What  are  the  kinds  of  sin  (James  li.  11 ;  Bom.  vii.  7).  (6)  What  the  pravity  of 
our  nature  is  (Bom.  vii.  14).  (7)  What  the  sinfulness  of  our  lives  is  (Eom.  vii.  19). 
(8)  God's  approbation  of  obedience  (Exod.  xx.  6,  12).  (9)  God's  detestation  of 
transgressors  (Exod.  xx.  5,  7).  (10)  The  fearful  doom  of  sinners  (Gal.  iii.  10). 
(11)  Man's  disability  to  keep  the  law  (Bom.  viii.  3).  (12)  The  necessity  of  another 
means  of  salvation  (Eom.  iii.  20,  21).  2.  For  direction.  The  law  is  of  use  to 
these  points  following :  (1)  To  convince  men  of  sin.  (2)  To  humble  them  for  the 
same.  (3)  To  work  an  hatred  of  sin.  (4)  To  restrain  them  from  it.  (5)  To  work 
self-denial.  (6)  To  drive  men  to  Christ.  (7)  To  put  them  on  to  endeavour  after  as 
near  a  conformity  to  the  law  as  they  can.  (8)  To  make  them  fearful  of  pulling 
upon  their  souls  a  more  fearful  doom  than  the  curse  of  the  law :  which  is  by 
despising  the  gospel.  (9)  To  make  impenitents  the  more  inexcusable.  (10)  To 
make  believers  more  thankful  for  Christ's  active  and  passive  obedience ;  whereby  aa 
a  surety  He  hath  done  for  them  what  they  could  not,  and  endured  that  corse  which 
they  deserved,  to  free  them  from  the  same.  (W.  Gouge.)  Divine  institutions 
abrogated : — ^I.  Notwithstandinq  the  qbkat  pkovocations  oy  theu  by  whom  it  was 

EXEBCISED  iSnD  DISCHABOBD,  TET  GoD  TOOK  IT  NOT  AWA7,  TJNTIL  XT  HAD  ACCOUFLISHBD 

36 


562  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

THE  END  WHEEECNTO  IT  WAS  DESIGNED.  1.  Neither  the  wickedness  of  the  people  noi 
of  the  priests  themselves  could  provoke  the  Lord  to  revoke  His  institution  until 
the  appointed  end  of  it  was  come.  2.  God  took  it  not  away  till  He  brought  in  that 
which  was  more  excellent,  and  advantageous  unto  the  Church,  namely,  the  Priest- 
hood of  Christ.  And  if  this  be  not  received  through  their  unbelief,  they  alone  are 
the  cause  of  their  being  losers  by  this  alteration.  3.  In  abundant  patience  and 
condescension,  with  respect  unto  that  interest  which  it  had  in  the  consciences  of 
men  from  His  institution,  God  did  not  utterly  lay  it  aside  in  a  day,  after  which  it 
should  be  absolutely  unlawful  to  comply  with  it.  But  God  took  it  away  by  degrees. 
II.  The  efficact  or  all  ordinances  or  institutions  of  worship  depends  on  the 
WILL  OF  God  alone.  Whilst  it  was  His  wiU  that  the  priesthood  should  abide  in  the 
family  of  Levi,  it  was  useful  and  effectual  unto  all  the  ends  whereunto  it  was 
designed.  But  when  He  would  make  an  alteration  therein,  it  was  in  vain  for  any  to 
look  for  either  benefit  or  advantage  by  it.  And  although  we  are  not  now  to  expect 
any  change  in  the  institutions  of  Divine  worship,  yet  all  our  expectations  from 
them  are  to  be  resolved  into  the  will  of  God.  III.  Divine  institutions  cease  not 
WITHOUT  AN  EXPRESS  DiviNE  ABROGATION.  Where  they  are  once  granted  by  the 
authority  of  God,  they  can  never  cease  without  an  express  act  of  the  same  authority 
taking  of  them  away.  IV.  God  will  never  abrogate  or  take  away  ant  institution 
OR  ordinance  of  worship  unto  the  loss  or  disadvantage  of  the  Church.  He 
would  not  remove  or  abolish  the  priesthood  of  Levi,  until  that  which  was  incom- 
parably more  excellent  was  introduced  and  established.     V.  God  in  His  wisdom  so 

ORDERED   ALL   THINGS,  THAT  THE  TAKING  AWAY  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD  OF  THE  LAW,  GAVE  IT 

ITS  GREATEST  GLORY.  For  it  ceascd  not  before  it  had  fully  accomplished  the  end  where- 
unto it  was  designed,  which  is  the  perfection  of  any  ordinance  :  even  the  mediation 
of  Christ  Himself  shall  cease  when  all  the  ends  of  it  are  fulfilled.  And  this  end 
of  the  priesthood  was  most  glorious  ;  namely,  the  bringing  in  that  of  Christ,  and 
therein  of  the  eternal  salvation  of  the  Church.  VI.  It  is  a  fruit  of  the  manifold 
WISDOM  of  God,  that  it  was  a  great  mercy  to  give  the  law,  and  the  greater  to 
TAKE  IT  AWAY.  VII.  If  Under  the  law  the  whole  worship  of  God  did  so  depend  on 
the  priesthood,  and  that  failing  or  being  taken  away,  the  whole  worship  of  itself 
was  to  cease,  as  being  no  more  acceptable  before  God ;  how  much  more  is  all 
worship  under  the  New  Testament  rejected  by  Him,  if  there  be  not  a  dfe  regard 
therein  unto  the  Lord  Christ,  as  the  only  High  Priest  of  the  Church,  and  to 
the  efficacy  of  His  discharge  of  that  office.  VIII.  It  is  the  highest  vanity  to  pretend 
use  or  continuance  in  the  Church,  from  possession  or  prescription,  or  pretended 
benefit,  beauty,  order,  or  advantage,  when  once  the  mind  of  God  is  declared 
against  it.  The  pleas  of  this  kind  for  the  old  priestliood  and  law  excelled  all  that 
can  be  insisted  on  with  respect  unto  any  other  things  for  which  any  pretend 
a  veneration  in  Divine  worship ;  yet  were  they  of  no  validity  or  efficacy.  (John 
Owen,  D.D.) 

Vers.  14-24.  Our  Lord  sprang  out  of  Jnda. — A  new  priesthood:—!.  Jesus  sprang 
from  the  royal  tribe  of  Judah,  not  from  the  sacerdotal  tribe  of  Levi.  The  apostle 
intentionally  uses  a  term  that  glances  at  Zechariah's  prediction  (chap.  vii.  14) 
concerning  Him  who  shall  arise  as  the  dawn,  and  be  a  Priest  upon  His  throne.  We 
shall  therefore  entitle  Him  "Lord,''  and  say  that  "our  Lord"  has  risen  out  of 
Judah.  He  is  Lord  and  King  by  right  of  birth.  But  this  circumstance,  that  He 
belongs  to  the  tribe  of  Jndah,  hints,  to  say  the  least,  at  a  transference  of  the  priest 
hood.  For  Moses  said  nothing  of  this  tribe  in  reference  to  priests,  howe-er 
great  it  became  in  its  kings.  The  kingship  of  our  Lord  is  foreshadowed  in 
Melchizedec.  2.  It  is  still  more  evident  that  the  Aaronic  priesthood  lias  been  set 
aside  if  we  recall  another  feature  in  the  allegory  of  Melchisedee.  For  Jesus  is  like 
Melchisedeo  as  Priest,  not  as  King  only.  The  priesthood  of  Melchisedee  sprang 
from  the  man's  inherent  greatness.  How  much  more  is  it  true  of  Jesus  Christ  that 
His  greatness  is  personal !  He  became  what  He  is,  not  by  force  of  law,  which 
could  create  only  an  external,  carnal  commandment,  but  by  innate  power,  in  virtue 
of  which  He  will  Uve  on  and  His  life  will  be  indestructible.  The  commandment 
that  constituted  Aaron  priest  has  not  indeed  been  violently  abrogated ;  but  it  was 
thrust  aside  in  consequence  of  its  own  inner  feebleness  and  uselessness.  It  has 
been  lost,  like  the  lipht  of  a  star,  in  the  spreading  "  dawn  "  of  day.  The  sun  of 
that  eternal  day  is  the  infinitely  great  personaUty  of  Jesus  Christ,  bom  a  crownless 
King;  crowned  at  His  death,  but  with  thorns.  Yet  what  mighty  power  He  has 
wielded  1    The  Galilsean  has  conquered.     Since  He  has  passed  through  the  heavens 


CHAP,  vn.]  HEBREWS.  56S 

from  ihe  eyes  of  men,  thousands  in  every  age  have  been  ready  to  die  for  Him- 
Untouched  by  the  downfall  of  kingdoms,  and  the  revolutions  of  thought,  such  a  King 
wUl  sit  upon  His  moral  throne  from  age  to  age,  yesterday  and  to-day  the  same,  and 
for  ever.  3.  The  entire  system  or  covenant  based  on  the  Aaronic  priesthood  has 
passed  away  and  given  place  to  a  better  covenant,  better  in  proportion  to  the  firmer 
foundation  on  which  the  priesthood  of  Jesus  rests.  Beyond  question,  the  promises 
of  God  WS18  steadfast.  But  men  could  not  realise  the  glorious  hope  of  their 
fulfilment,  and  that  for  two  reasons.  First,  difficult  conditions  were  imposed  on 
fallible  men.  The  worshipper  might  transgress  in  many  points  of  ritual.  His 
mediator,  the  priest,  might  err  where  error  would  be  fatal  to  the  result.  Wor- 
shipper and  priest,  if  they  were  thoughtful  and  pious  men,  would  be  haunted  with 
the  tiread  of  having  done  wrong  they  knew  not  how  or  where,  and  be  filled  with 
dark  forebodings.  Confidence,  especially  full  assurance,  was  not  to  be  thought  of. 
Second,  Christ  found  it  necessary  to  urge  His  disciples  to  beheve  in  God.  The 
misery  of  distrusting  God  Himself  exists.  Men  think  that  He  is  such  as  they  are  ; 
and,  as  they  do  not  beUeve  in  themselves,  their  failh  in  God  is  a  reed  shaken  by  the 
wind.  These  wants  were  not  adequately  met  by  the  old  covenant.  The  conditions 
imposed  perplexed  men,  and  the  revelation  of  God's  moral  character  and  Fatherhood 
was  not  sufficiently  clear  to  remove  distrust.  The  apostle  directs  attention  to  the 
strange  abseuce  of  any  swearing  of  an  oath  on  the  part  of  God  when  He  instituted 
the  Aaronic  priesthood,  or  on  the  part  of  the  priest  at  his  consecration.  Yet  the 
kiugship  was  confirmed  by  oath  to  David.  In  the  new  covenant,  on  the  other  hand, 
all  such  fears  may  be  dismissed.  For  the  only  condition  imposed  is  faith.  In 
order  to  make  faith  easy  and  inspire  men  with  courage,  God  appoints  a  surety  for 
Himself.  He  oSers  His  Son  as  Hostage,  and  thus  guarantees  the  fulfilment  of  His 
promise.  {T.  G.  Edwards,  D.D.)  Incentive  to  Christians  to proviote  the  spiritual 
welfare  of  tlie  Jews : — Our  Lord  sprang  not  from  the  tribe  of  Levi,  but  from  the  tribe 
of  Judah.  That  tribe,  originally  one  of  the  twelve,  was  in  an  early  period  of  tha 
history  of  Israel  the  most  distinguished  by  its  numbers,  its  power,  its  talents,  and 
the  many  favours  and  honours  conferred  upon  it  by  God.  Upon  the  unhappy  and 
criminal  apostasy  of  the  ten  tribes  in  the  reign  of  Behoboam,  the  tribe  of  Judah 
remained  faithful  to  the  royal  bouse  of  David,  and  it  was  preserved  and  became  a 
great  nation  after  the  whole  of  the  others  were  swept  away  and  lost  for  ever.  In  the 
fulness  of  time  God  sent  forth  His  Son — the  Lord  of  glory  becoming  incarnate — of 
the  tribe  of  Judah ;  and  among  the  honourable  names  which  He  condescends  to 
wear.  He  is  called,  "  The  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah" — the  Lion  for  His  majesty  and 
power,  but  never  forgetful  of  His  parentage  and  descent.  Does  not  this  contain  a 
fact,  then,  which  appeals  to  the  judgments  and  to  the  hearts  of  serious  Christians 
in  relation  to  the  claims  which  the  descendants  of  Judah,  and  consequently  the 
kinsmen  after  the  flesh  of  our  Lord,  prefer  on  Christian  piety  and  exertion?  I 
would  endeavour  to  place  before  you  two  plain  considerations,  with  the  view  of 
increasing  this  sentiment  in  your  minds.     I.  It  receives  an  increase  from  thb 

NITDBAL  FEELING  WHICH  WE  ALL  HAVE  BY  ASSOCIATION,  FROM   ANY  CIRCUMSTANCES,  WITH 

a  BELOfED  NAME,  AND  BELOVED  PEnsoNS.  Who,  for  example,  Can  go  to  Runnymede, 
who  can  go  through  the  aisles  of  the  Abbey  at  Westminister,  without  having  the 
most  lively  feelings  awakened  in  his  heart,  from  associations  connected  with  our 
national  history  ?  Now,  in  reading  that  our  Lord  sprang  out  of  Judah  have  we  any 
affection,  any  gratitude  of  soul  at  the  thought  of  Him  who  loved  us  and  gave  Himself 
for  us  ?  The  fact  that  our  Saviour,  our  life,  our  hope,  our  righteousness,  sprang  out 
of  Judah — oh  how  it  should  endear  to  us  the  helpless  race  of  Judah  I  We  see  in 
them  the  countrymen  of  our  blessed  Eedeemer,  we  see  in  them  Hia  relations 
according  to  the  flesh,  and  ought  not  this  to  work  in  our  minds  some  strong  senti- 
ment of  concern,  and  pity,  and  desire  that  they  may  be  brought  out  of  the  gulf  of 
darkness  and  ruin  in  which  they  are  placed  ?  II.  This  feeling  of  human  nature 
receives  an  increase  of  power  and  tenderness  when  there  is  a  melancholy  de- 
generacy  IN  ANY   TO   WHOM   SUCH  AN  ASSOCIATION    ENDEARS   US.         Have    nOUe   of    US 

known  the  pain  of  such  a  feeling  ?  When  we  see  the  child  of  an  honoured  friend 
sunk  in  circumstances,  broken  in  character,  cast  down  from  the  station  of  respect- 
ability and  dignity  in  society  in  which  their  honoured  parents  moved — such  facts  aa 
these  are  exceedingly  painful ;  and  in  proportion  as  the  eminent  merits,  the  useful- 
ness, or  the  Christian  godliness  of  the  progenitors  may  be  inscribed  in  our  affection, 
in  that  proportion  should  we  bitterly  lament  when  their  prosperity  have  their 
honours  laid  low  in  the  dust.  This  is  a  feeling  which  applies  in  the  present  case, 
^'Our  Lord  sprang  oat  of  Judah,"  bat  what  has  since  happened  to  Judah?    Th« 


564  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tii. 

Prince  of  life  deigned  to  take  our  nature,  to  be  bom  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  but  that 
tribe  and  the  other  branches  of  the  nation  of  Israel  who  were  connected  with  it  are 
now  in  a  state  of  dispersion.  See  the  tribe  from  which  our  Lord  sprung  trampled 
down  under  foot,  the  spoi-t  of  cruelty  and  oppression.  It  is  no  excuse  for  Christiana 
that  the  descendants  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  have  rejected  the  glory  of  their  tribe;  this 
in  the  sight  of  God  is  infinitely  criminal,  but  this  will  not  be  remedied  by  adding  insult 
and  cruelty  to  their  condition.  And  when,  triumphant  over  death  and  hell,  Christ  rose 
and  sent  forth  BUs  servants  to  go  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  in  His  name  repent- 
ance and  remission  of  sins  to  mankind  universally.  He  said,  "  Begin  at  Jerusalem." 
Are  we  then  the  servants  of  the  Lord  Jesus  ?  Then  we  must  be  animated  with  His 
temper  and  spirit.  The  unbelief  and  opposition  of  the  Jewish  nation,  taken  in 
general,  against  the  Lord  Jesus,  so  far  from  being  a  reason  why  we  should  be 
insensible  to  their  spiritual  condition,  and  leave  them  to  perish  in  unbelief,  affords 
the  highest  of  all  reasons  why  we  should  do  all  that  we  can  to  remove  the  evil  from 
their  eyes.  {Dr.  J.  P.  Smith.)  After  the  power  of  an  endless  life. — The  power 
of  Chrisfs  endless  life  : — This  endless  life  is  not  the  eternity  He  had  with  the  Father 
before  worlds  began  ;  it  is  His  endless  life  as  Mediator.  The  words  mean  an  in- 
dissoluble or  indestructible  life,  safe  against  the  assault  of  all  enemies,  and  secure 
from  all  decay,  or  possibility  of  diminution.  It  may  be  said.  But  is  not  this,  after 
all,  the  same,  for  none  but  the  eternal  Son  of  God  could  become  the  endless 
Mediator  ?  Yet,  granting  this,  it  leads  us  to  a  different  point  of  view  for  contem- 
plating the  work  of  Christ.  Do  we  not  feel  that  in  His  incarnation,  as  God  manifest 
in  the  flesh,  we  can  have  thoughts  about  God  which  we  could  never  have  gained 
from  the  study  of  the  Divine  nature  in  its  absolute  essence?  And  so,  in  considering 
the  endless  life  of  Christ,  we  may  rise  to  conceptions  and  feelings  about  the  world 
to  come,  and  our  share  in  it,  which  we  could  not  receive  from  any  attempt  to  grasp 
the  idea  of  Christ's  original  and  eternal  nature.  I.  The  first  thought  is  the  power 
which  this  endless  life  has  of  communicating  itself.  The  very  idea  of  such  a  life 
brings  with  it  an  inspiration  of  hope.  That  we  should  be  able  to  think  of  a  life 
like  our  own,  but  free  from  all  the  impurity  which  attaches  to  us,  going  forward, 
age  after  age,  without  a  break  and  without  a  check,  rising  and  wiilening,  a 
joy  to  itself  and  a -source  of  joy  to  others:  is  this  not  something  to  make 
us  hopeful  about  the  soul  of  man?  There  is  no  creature  around  us  that  has 
such  a  power,  and  may  we  not  then  cherish  the  expectation  of  something  corre- 
sponding to  it  in  reality  ?  But  if,  moreover,  we  can  come  to  the  reasonable  con- 
clusion that  such  a  life  really  exists ;  that  One  of  the  race  has  risen  above  the 
power  of  death ;  that  He  gave  such  evidence  of  it  to  those  who  were  about  Him  as 
made  them  willing  to  endure  any  extremity,  even  to  death,  for  this  conviction ;  if 
He  has  been  giving  proofs  of  it  since,  by  new  spiritual  lite  in  the  men,  and  new 
moral  life  in  the  nations,  that  have  come  into  contact  with  Him,  must  there  not  be 
power  in  the  faith  of  such  an  endless  life  ?  But  the  power  of  Christ's  endless  Ufa 
does  more  than  communicate  the  hope  of  it  to  others,  it  gives  the  possession.  When 
the  original  well  of  life  had  been  tainted  and  poisoned  by  sin.  He  came  to  open  up 
a  new  and  pure  fountain.  He  secures  for  us  a  pardon  consistent  with  righteousness, 
without  which  it  could  have  brought  no  real  life.  He  begins  a  new  life  in  the  soul, 
which  has  hard  and  manifold  struggles  with  the  fierce  reluctance  of  the  old  nature. 
He  encourages,  strengthens,  renews  it,  and  at  last  makes  it  victorious.  All  this  He 
does,  not  merely  by  presenting  knowledge,  but  by  an  act  of  creation  through  the 
Holy  Spirit.  He  gives,  not  the  perception  or  hope,  bat  the  possession  of  it.  "  I 
give  unto  them  eternal  life,  and  they  shall  never  perish."  Now  we  may  begin  to 
see  what  power  there  is  in  the  endless  life  of  Christ.  It  belongs  to  Him,  not  to 
reserve  it  for  Himself,  but  to  bestow  it  on  all  who  will  take  it  from  His  hand,  who 
do  not  shut  their  eyes  and  steel  their  hearts  against  the  gracious  influences  that  are 
visiting  the  world  through  His  death  on  earth  and  His  life  in  heaven.  But  in 
order  to  this  He  must  have  a  continued  life.  Had  it  been  merely  an  example,  a 
system  of  doctrine,  He  might  have  died  and  left  it  to  itself,  but  for  a  power  He  must 
live,  and  live  onward.  Men  are  being  born  who  need  Him,  and  they  will  be  born 
while  this  world  exists,  men  who  have  sins,  sorrows,  temptations,  death ;  nothing 
can  help  them — none  but  Christ  Himself,  and  so  He  must  have  the  power  of  an 
endless  life.  And  even  when  all  are  gathered  in  from  earth,  when  time  in  its 
present  form  is  closed,  and  another  kind  of  time,  an  eternal  time,  begins.  He  will 
be  needed.  He  will  be  the  Mediator  between  the  unseen  God  and  man  for  ever, 
through  whom  they  see  God,  and  know  Him,  and  have  fellowship  with  TTim. 
n.  This  thought,  which  we  have  been  trying  to  express,  contains  the  germ  of  all 


OBAP.  vn.]  HEBREWS.  065 

we  can  say,  but  we  may  attempt  to  unfold  it  in  some  of  its  applications.  Let  us 
think  then  of  the  power  Christ  has  in  His  endless  life  of  conveying  knowi-edge  and 
BXPEKiENOE.  Death  is  the  one  great  barrier  between  man  and  growth.  What 
secrets  might  the  man  of  science  wring  from  the  bosom  of  nature,  if  he  had 
countless  years  in  which  to  put  his  questions,  and  mark  the  answers  1  What  wisdom 
might  philosophers  gain  if  they  could  watch  for  ages  the  course  of  thought  and  the 
currents  of  emotion  I  But  what  wrecks  lie  scattered  around  us  of  plans  scarcely 
bej^un,  and  what  noble  thoughts  have  passed  away  without  an  utterance  J  We  do 
not  say  that  there  are  no  compeusatioris  for  these  short  earthly  lives,  and  no 
sufficient  reasons  for  this  sad  check  to  our  fallen  nature  in  the  pursuit  of  knowledge. 
Sometimes,  when  we  are  disappointed  and  weary,  we  get  reconciled  to  the  pause, 
and  are  glad  to  think  of  rest.  But  when  the  soul  is  strong  and  wisdom  sweet,  the 
conception  of  endless  progress  in  knowledge  answers  to  something  very  profound  in 
human  nature.  We  recoil  from  death,  not  merely  as  the  animal  recoils,  but  because 
it  cuts  us  off  from  answers  to  the  greatest  questions  the  spirit  can  raise.  How 
fitting  it  would  be  that  beside  the  tree  of  knowledge  there  should  be  the  tree  of  life  I 
And  this  want  is  met  when  we  think  of  One  in  our  nature  with  the  power  of  an 
endless  life,  who  can  be  our  Leader  in  all  the  paths  of  nature  and  providence  and 
grace,  by  which  souls  can  advance  in  the  wisdom  of  God.  All  the  experience  which 
He  gained  in  His  own  earthly  life  is  carried  up  into  the  higher  life,  and  with  it  all 
the  experience  of  all  the  ages  since,  in  His  contact,  through  the  Holy  Spirit,  with 
doubt  and  struggle  and  grief  in  the  lives  of  men.  Thus  Christ  is  full  of  endless, 
fresh  life  in  His  Word,  so  that  we  find  it  deeper  and  higher,  and  need  to  grow  up  to 
it.  And  when  we  pass  in  thought  from  this  side  of  death  to  those  who  have 
entered  into  the  immediate  presence  of  Christ,  we  can  see  that  the  endless  life  of 
Christ  has  its  relations  to  them.  What  we  have  in  the  word  of  God,  they 
have  in  the  living  Christ.  III.  We  may  think,  next,  of  the  sense  of  unity  in 
Christ's  plan,  which  we  may  derive  from  the  "  power  of  His  endless  life." 
There  are  two  things  secured  for  the  unity  of  Christians  by  Christ's  unending  hfe. 
1.  The  first  is  a  oneuess  of  heart  and  sympathy.  He  became  the  centre  of  a 
common  affection,  not  a  dead  abstraction,  but  as  a  living  person  who  draws  them  all 
to  Himself,  and  infuses  into  them  common  feelings,  not  at  one  time  or  in  one  place, 
but  through  all  time  and  in  all  places  ;  and  so  the  apostle,  speaking  of  the  unity  of 
the  Spirit,  puts  first  the  one  Lord,  and  then  the  one  God  and  Father.  They  are 
scattered  through  many  generations  and  many  lands,  but  the  thought  of  an  abiding, 
living  Christ  makes  them  brethren  of  the  same  family,  puts  into  their  heart  the 
same  life-blood,  and  prepares  them  for  dwelling  at  last  in  the  same  house.  2.  The 
other  uuity  secured  by  this  endless  life  of  Christ  is  that  of  action.  The  Christian 
Church  grows  up  under  the  hands  of  innumerable  labourers.  They  come  and  go, 
and  "  are  not  suffered  to  continue  by  reason  of  death  "  ;  they  have  their  own  views 
and  temperaments,  and  portions  of  the  building  bear  the  marks  of  it.  There  are 
chasms  in  the  walls,  raising  and  removing  of  scaffolding  in  dust  and  noise,  to  the 
perplexing  of  our  brief  lives.  In  the  midst  of  all  this  there  are  minds  eager 
for  unity,  and  ready  to  take  whatever  seems  to  promise  it.  It  is  not  to  be  found 
in 'any  ecclesiastical  despotism,  nor  even  in  the  outward  gathering  of  faithful  men 
under  one  discipline,  good  though  this  may  be  in  its  place.  It  is  to  be  sought  in 
the  one  heart  of  which  we  have  spoken,  going  toward  Christ,  and  then  in  the  over- 
ruling plan  which  He  carries  out  through  all  their  work.  IV.  Think,  moreover, 
how  the  power  of  Christ's  endless  life  may  fill  us  with  the  spirit  of  patience.  Many 
of  the  evil  schemes  of  the  world  come  from  the  impatience  that  belongs  to  short 
lives.  Even  good  men  take  ill-advised  ways,  because  they  are  anxious  for  speedy 
results.  They  wish  for  something  they  can  see,  "Let  Thy  work  appear  unto  Thy 
servants."  But  he  who  has  the  power  of  an  endless  life  will  not  only  choose  no 
ways  that  are  unrighteous,  he  will  not  be  hurried  into  any  that  are  premature.  A 
Bubject  that  causes  doubt  with  many  is  the  slow  progress  of  justice  and  mercy  in  the 
world.  See  how  sanguinary  wars,  iniquitous  acts  of  oppression,  great  national 
vices  and  follies,  run  the  weary  round.  There  is  progress ;  yes,  there  is  progress ; 
Christianity  is  slowly  forming  a  moral  opinion  which  compels  men  to  have  some 
pretext  of  right  for  war,  and  it  is  sending  its  messengers  of  heahng  to  help  friend 
and  foe  alike.  But  how  tardy  in  its  approach  is  the  reign  of  righteousness  and 
peace  I  The  endless  life  of  Christ  is  a  source  of  comfort  to  us.  He  could  very  soon 
check  the  symptoms,  but  the  disease  would  remain.  The  great  problem  is  to  put 
down  sin  not  merely  because  it  is  opposed  to  the  will  of  God,  but  because  it  is  also 
opposed  to  the  happiness  of  His  universe ;  it  is  not  simply  a  contention  of  power, 


56«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vu. 

bat  of  goodness,  and  this  needs  time.  The  endless  life  of  Christ  gives  Him  patience 
in  working  for  it,  bringing  His  moral  and  spiritual  motives  to  bear,  and  using  Hia 
power  at  last  for  those  whom  no  motives  could  persuade.  V.  The  last  remark  we 
make  is  that  the  power  of  Christ's  endless  life  opens  the  pbospect  or  abiding  joy. 
There  is  a  philosophy  of  the  present  day  called  Pessimism,  which  holds  that  Ufe  is 
so  entirely  wretched,  and  the  universe  so  tainted  with  misery,  that  the  only  resource 
possible  is  utter  extinction.  It  proposes  in  various  ways  the  question,  Is  life  worth 
living?  and  after  weighing  its  short  pleasures  against  its  long  suffering,  it  concludes 
that  non-existence  for  men,  and,  if  it  could  be,  for  the  universe,  is  the  desirable 
goal.  If  those  who  put  such  questions  would  only  be  led  to  widen  their  inquiry ,^ 
they  might  find  that  there  are  other  balances  than  theirs  in  which  the  pains  and 
pleasures  of  life  are  to  be  weighed.  When  we  come  to  the  emotions  of  the  soul^ 
the  measure  is  not  by  quantity  but  by  quality.  There  are  moments  of  joy  which 
outbalance  years  of  toil  and  pain.  The  first  glimpse  of  the  New  World  to  Columbus, 
the  tremulous  delight  which  seized  Newton  when  he  was  in  sight  of  the  new  law  of 
gravitation,  and  which  made  him  unable  to  finish  the  last  figures  of  the  calculation 
— these  led  them  to  forget  as  nothing  sleepless  nights  and  long  anxieties  and 
depressing  fears.  And  there  are  greater  things  than  these.  The  joy  of  self- 
sacrifice  for  the  cause  of  truth  and  righteousness  has  been  to  some  men  more  to  be 
chosen  than  crowns  and  palaces,  and  has  made  flames  unfelt  as  if  He  who  walked 
in  the  furnace  of  Nebuchadnezzar  were  with  them  in  the  fire.  This  is  the  joy  of 
souls,  and  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Lord  of  that  kingdom  where  its  home  is  fixed. 
{J.  Ker,  D.D.)  The  power  of  an  endless  life : — This  word  "  after  "  is  a  word  of 
correspondence,  and  implies  two  subjects  brought  into  comparison.  That  Christ 
has  the  power  of  an  endless  life  in  His  own  person  is  certainly  true;  but  to  say  that 
He  is  made  a  priest  after  this  power,  subjective  in  Himself,  is  awkward  even  to  a 
degree  that  violates  the  natural  grammar  of  speech.  The  word  translated  power 
La  the  text,  is  the  original  of  our  word  dynamic,  denoting  a  certain  impetus, 
momentum,  or  causative  force,  which  is  cumulative,  growing  stronger  and  more 
impelling  as  it  goes.  And  this  is  the  nature  of  life  or  vital  force  universally — it  is 
a  force  cumulative  as  long  as  it  continues.  It  enters  into  matter  as  a  building, 
organising,  Ufting  power,  and  knows  not  how  to  stop  till  death  stops  it.  We  use 
the  word  "  grow  "  to  describe  its  action,  and  it  does  not  even  know  how  to  subsist 
without  growth.  In  which  growth  it  lays  hold  continually  of  new  material, 
expands  in  volume,  and  fills  a  larger  sphere  of  body  with  its  power.  And  yet  we 
have,  in  the  power  thus  developed,  nothing  more  than  a  mere  hint  or  initial  sign  of 
what  is  to  be  the  real  stature  of  his  personality  in  the  process  of  his  everlasting  de- 
velopment. We  exist  here  only  in  the  small,  that  God  may  have  us  in  a  state  of 
flexibility,  and  bend  or  fashion  us,  at  the  best  advantage,  to  the  model  of  His  own 
great  life  and  character.  What  Christ,  in  His  eternal  priesthood,  has  done ;  or  the 
fitness  and  practical  necessity  of  it,  as  related  to  the  stupendous  exigency  of  oar 
redemption.  The  great  impediment  which  the  gospel  of  Christ  encounters  in  our 
world,  that  which  most  fatally  hinders  its  reception  or  embrace,  is  that  it  is  too 
great  a  work.  It  transcends  our  belief — it  wears  a  look  of  extravagance.  We  are 
beings  too  insignificant  and  low  to  engage  any  such  interest  on  the  part  of  God,  or 
justify  any  such  expenditure.  The  preparations  made,  and  the  parts  acted,  are  not 
in  the  proportions  of  reason,  &ud  the  very  terms  of  the  great  salvation  have,  to  our 
dull  ears,  a  declamatory  sound.  How  can  we  really  think  that  the  eternal 
God  has  set  these  more  than  epic  machineries  at  work  for  such  a  creature 
as  man?  Christ  therefore  comes  not  as  a  problem  given  to  our  reason,  but 
as  a  salvation  offered  to  our  faith.  His  passion  reaches  a  deeper  point 
in  us  than  we  can  definitely  think,  and  His  Eternal  Spirit  is  a  healing 
priesthood  for  us,  in  the  lowest  and  profoundest  roots  of  our  groat  immor- 
tality, those  which  we  have  never  seen  ourselves.  (H.  Bushnell,  D.D.)  Heaven 
— an  endless  life  : — Such  is  the  nature  of  that  life  which  Christ  came  to  secure  for 
the  children  of  men.  It  is  life,  and  life  in  its  noblest  sense — glorious,  divine, 
eternal — in  comparison  with  which  all  we  have  known  of  existence  in  this  world  ia 
but  a  dream.  The  power  of  such  a  life  1  Life  endless,  unchangeable,  save  only 
from  accumulating  glory ;  perpetual  in  its  freshness  and  boundless  in  its  infinitude 
for  ever  and  ever  I  It  is  this  glory  which  is  held  out  for  our  attainment.  We 
who  are  here  even  in  the  death  of  trespasses  and  sins,  are  invited  to  seek  it.  It 
was  to  secure  for  as  such  a  life,  and  to  redeem  us  from  the  cause  of  death,  that 
Christ  came.  He  was  made,  not  after  the  law  of  a  carnal  commandment — that  ii 
to  say,  one  that  had  merely  to  do  with  the  body  and  with  time.     He  was  consti' 


v^ 


OHAP.  vn.]  HEBREWS.  667 

tuted,  not  for  any  temporary  purpose,  but  in  accordance  with  the  plan  of  an  eternal 
salvation.    "  The  power  of  an  endless  life  " — what  is  it?     1.  It  is  a  perfect  life. 
They  who  enter  upon  it  are  without  fault  before  the  throne  of  God.     There  is  no 
sin,  no  defilement,  no  spot,  nor  wrinkle,  nor  fear  of  evil.    2.  This  endless  life  is  a 
social  life.     All  the  communicative  and  companionable  tendencies  of  our  nature 
and  powers  of  our  being  will  be  exercised  in  an  enjoyment  intensified  by  being 
shared  with  the  beatific  experience  of  others.     The  sight  of  others  in  glory  will  be 
infinite  joy,  a  study  of  salvation,  a  rapture  of  delight.     There  will  be  the  good  and 
the  holy  of  all  ages  and  all  worlds  to  love  and  rejoice  with.     There  will  be  com- 
munion with  Christ,  sweeter  than  on  the  way  to  Emmaua,  more  frank  and  more 
loving  than  it  hath  entered  the  heart  of  man  to  imagine.     There  will  be  revealed  to 
all  the  principalities  and  powers  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God  in  the  salvation  of 
man.     There  will  be  mutual  study,  nothing  solitary,  nothing  exclusive,  no  need  of 
guardian  forms  of  courtesies,  nor  any  distant  or  reserved  civilities  —no  sense  either 
of  superiority  or  inferiority — all  pride,  jealousy,  distrust,  and  envy,  can  find  no 
entrance  there.     Divine  love  is  the  atmosphere  of  heaven  ;  its  blessed  inhabitants 
dwell  in  love,  for  they  dwell  in  God,  and  God  is  love  ;  and  in  sweet  forgetfulness  of 
self,  the  happiness  of  others  is  as  dear  and  delightful  to  each  as  their  own.    3.  It 
is  a  progressive  life.    The  power  of  an  endless  life  I     The  idea  is  truly  magnificent. 
The  idea  of  a  life  of  an  antediluvian — a  life  of  a  thousand  years — is  grand  and  im- 
I>osing.     What   an   accumulation  of  impulse  and  of   power  from  generation  to 
generation  1     But  a  thousand  years  are  as  one  day  in  the  arithmetic  of  an  endless 
life.     Our  plans  on  earth  are  contracted,  fragmentary,  broken,  and  incomplete ; 
but  in  the  infinitude  of  eternal  existence  there  will  be  nothing  to  prevent  the  execu- 
tion of  schemes  encompassing  all  ages  and  all  worlds.     The  understanding  will  ba 
divinely  illumined,  the  memory  retentive  and  capacious.     (1)  There  wUl  be  pro- 
gression in  holiness — we  mean  in  the  power  of  holy  habit.    Perfect  in  the  righteous- 
ness of  Christ,  there  can  be  no  improvement  in  the  legal  qualification  for  heaven  ; 
but  as  star  differeth  from  star  in  glory,  so  in  the  reflection  of  that  glory,  which  will 
be  brighter  and  brighter  as  the  soul  knows  more  and  more  of  the  holiness  and 
character  of  God.     (2)  There  will  be  progression  in  knowledge.    For  this  there  will 
be  boundless  room  throughout  eternity.    What  heart  can  conceive,  what  mind  can 
measure,  even  in  imagination,  the  infinite  riches  of  the  Creator's  wisdom  and  love ! 
And  thus  the  power  of  an  endless  life  will  progress  in  delight,  in  joy,  in  happiness 
unutterable,  inconceivable.     For  ever  increasing  with  the  increase  of  the  knowledge 
of  God  in  Christ,  ages  on  ages  shall  witness  an  undiminished  freshness  and  novelty 
in  the  glory  still  to  be  revealed,  a  capacity  of  bliss  for  ever  enlarging,  and  a  volume 
of  pleasure  for  ever  accumulating.    The  joy  arising  from  a  sense  of  the  love  of  God 
can  have  no  limit — nay,  must  be,  in  the  nature  of  things,  positively  and  eternally 
progressive.     The  experience  of  a  dying  servant  of  God,  recorded  not  long  since, 
was  in  these  words:  "  This  is  heaven  begun.     I  have  done  with  darkness  for  ever. 
Satan  is  vanquished.   Nothing  now  remains  but  salvation  with  glory — eternal  glory." 
This  was  of  God.     It  is  His  smile,  His  presence.  His  love,  that  cheers  the  pilgrim 
through  the  valley.     (Gf.  B.  Cheever.)         The  indestructibility  of  Christ : — In  what 
way  had  the  Jewish  priests  been  appointed?    "  According  to  the  law  of  a  carnal 
commandment,"  or  ordinance,  which  was  descent  from  Aaron.     But  this  involved 
no  certainty  of  their  endowment  with  the  true  priestly  helpfulness  ;  they  might  or 
might  not  possess  the  gifts  which  distinguished  their  illustrious  progenitor.    Nay, 
it  was  rather  a  presumption  against  their  endowment  with  these;  for  eminent 
qualities  of  mind  and  soul  are  not  usually  transmitted  thus  from  generation  to 
generation  in  the  same  family.     Well,  now,  the  apostle  claims  for  Jesus  that  He 
was  a  Priest  infinitely  transcending  them,  and  destined  to  set  them  aside,  to  banish 
them  from  the  scene.    And  why?    Because  He  was  "  made  not  after  the  law  of  a 
carnal  ordinance,  but  after  the  power  of  an  endless  life."    He  held  the  position 
undeniably.     Multitudes  of  all  classes  and  in  many  lands  were  looking  up  to  Him 
and  leaning  on  Him  in  spiritual  matters ;  were  turning  confidingly  to  Him  for 
spiritual  guidance  and  succour ;  were  calling  Him,  with  eager  reverence.  Lord  and 
Jlaster.     And  how  had  He  gained  such  position  ?    Not  by  any  appointment  from 
without,  nor  by  any  recognised  social  rank  into  which  He  had  been  born,  but  by 
the  might  of  what  He  was  in  Himself.    He  had  been  raised  to  it  by  no  external 
edict  or  arrangement,  but  by  an  inward  force — the  force  of  the  life  with  which  He 
throbbed  and  overflowed.    But  it  was  the  power  of  "endless  life  "which  made 
Christ  a  Priest,  says  the  apostle,  of  life  indissoluble,  indestructible  ;  by  which  He 
meant,  I  fancy,  the  irresistible  strength  and  energy  of  the  life  in  Him  as  distin* 


668  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  va 

guisbed  from  the  dead  perfunctoriness  of  the  hereditary  priests ;  that  being  life, 
and  not  death,  it  could  not  be  suppressed  or  baffled,  but  was  bound  to  thrust  itself 
out  and  make  itself  felt,  in  spite  of  all  difficulties  and  hindrances.  How  irresistibly 
strong  and  energetic  the  living  spirit  in  Jesus,  the  force  of  His  spiritual  vitality, 
did  prove  itself  1  All  the  hostile  circumstances  and  influences  by  which  He  was 
surrounded  were  unable  to  suppress  it  or  prevent  its  triumph.  They  raged  at  Him, 
and  eventually  trampled  Him  to  death.  Nevertheless,  He  rose,  and  survived,  and 
impressed  Himself  deeply  on  the  world,  became  the  acknowledged  High  Priest  of 
millions,  and  the  hereditary  priesthood  of  Judea  melted  away  before  Him.  But 
this  is  what  I  want  to  ask  you :  Is  there  not  in  Jesus  a  power  of  life  indissoluble, 
indestructible — a  power  of  life  that  withstands  victoriously  the  wear  of  time,  the 
shakings  and  convulsions  wrought  by  the  progress  of  knowledge,  by  the  march  of 
ideas,  and  the  severest  assaults  of  hostile  criticism  ?  Eeiterated  attempts  have 
been  made  to  resolve  Him  into  mist  or  to  reduce  Him  to  clay.  They  have  never 
succeeded ;  He  has  always  reappeared ;  has  always  shoue  out  afresh,  with  lustre 
undimmed,  after  each  attempt ;  has  been  found  looking  down  on  us  from  above 
when  the  smoke  of  the  attack  has  cleared  away,  with  the  same  calm  eyes  and  com- 
manding aspect  as  before,  like  an  angel  in  the  sun.  And,  morally  and  spiritually, 
does  not  He  remain  the  ideal,  unsurpassed  and  unsurpassable — the  ideal  which 
gathers  up  and  collects  within  it  all  the  finest  elements,  all  the  best  features  of  the 
various  ideals  represented  by  religions  or  nursed  in  the  breasts  of  individuals — 
an  ideal  which  we  have  never  yet  improved  upon  or  advanced  beyond  ?  Tea,  and 
after  all  our  experiences  and  experiments  in  society,  after  all  our  projects  and 
panaceas,  who  will  not  admit  that  the  religion  of  Christ,  generally  embraced  and 
practised,  would  be  the  life  of  the  world — that  nothing  could  bring  us  nearer  to 
some  realisation  of  the  dream  of  the  Golden  Age  than  a  general  diffusion  of  His 
ethical  ideas  ?  After  the  lapse  of  nearly  two  thousand  years,  are  we  not  learning 
to  feel  more  than  ever  that  if  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  are  to  be  reached,  it 
must  be  by  our  uniting  to  follow  these  ethical  ideas ;  that  the  way  thither  lies 
enfolded  for  us  in  His  spirit  and  principles ;  that  the  penetration  of  society  with 
Him  would  be  the  redemption  of  society.     (S.  A.  Tipple.)  The  incomparable 

priesthood  : — I.  Christ's  peiesthood  is  not  an  akbitrary  ordinance,  but  a  neces- 
BAEY  FACT.  1.  Christ  is  a  priest  by  the  necessity  of  His  own  nature — God-man. 
2.  Christ  is  a  priest  by  the  necessity  of  depraved  souls.  II.  His  priesthood  is  not 
A  temporary  ordinance,  but  an  endless  power.  1.  His  priesthood  was  not  for 
the  mere  temporal  interests  of  mankind.  2.  His  priesthood  was  not  merely 
for  the  spiritual  interest  of  the  soul  in  time.  (Homilist.)  The  power 
of  an  endless  life : — There  is  a  deep,  mystic  sense  in  which  the  life  that 
Christ  lived  in  this  world — its  infancy,  its  development,  its  temptations,  its 
solitude,  its  conflicts,  its  sufferings,  its  joys,  its  holiness,  its  love,  its  dying, 
its  rising — aU  is  enacted  over  and  over  again  in  the  soul  and  in  the  experience 
of  every  individual  that  lives  in  time,  nay,  beyond  time  into  eternity.  Who 
has  not  sometimes  traced  within  himself  the  antitype  to  the  type  of  Christ's 
life  that  He  lived  upon  this  earth  ?  What  a  view  that  gives  us  of  the  endlessness 
of  that  life  which  Jesus  lived  from  Bethlehem  to  Bethany.  And  what  a  force 
there  is  in  the  fact ;  with  what  a  power  it  must  have  invested,  to  the  mind  of 
Christ,  every  act,  every  deed,  every  word  He  spoke,  as  He  walked  His  path  of 
thirty  years  and  three.  But,  apart  from  this  mystic  sense,  in  which  the  Holy 
Spirit  re-casts  in  every  Christian's  soul  every  feature  of  his  Master's  life,  see  it 
more  simply.  Christ  taught  many  things,  and  when  He  had  taught  them  He 
passed  away ;  but  every  word  He  said,  as  a  precept,  or  a  doctrine,  or  a  promise, 
lives  for  the  Church  always.  It  stands  now,  and  shall  stand  for  ever,  for  evidence 
of  faith  or  comfort  to  every  one  who  is  ever  received  into  the  Church's  pale.  Or 
see  Christ's  prayers — what  were  they  ?  The  first  voices  of  that  eternal  intercession 
which  goes  up  within  the  veil — beginnings  of  petitions  for  His  people's  sake,  that 
will  never  cease — spoken  here,  this  side  the  horizon,  for  this  very  end,  that  we  might 
all  know  and  realise  how  He  is  praying  beyond  it.  And  Christ,  with  His  own  hands, 
laid  the  foundation  of  the  Church.  And  there  it  stood  in  its  safeuess,  its  gather- 
ings, its  order,  its  discipline,  its  unity,  and  its  mission ;  and  it  is  that  same  Church 
which  He  laid  then,  which  is  to  outlive  the  universe,  and  "the  gates  of  hell  shall 
never  prevail  against  it."  And  Christ  offered  up,  once  for  all,  the  sacrifice  of 
Himself,  to  be  the  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world  ;  but  once  though  it 
be  for  all,  do  not  we  know  that  there  is  a  sense — a  sense,  oh !  how  true  to  the  eye 
ol  faith ! — in  which  that  blood  is  always  flowing.    Wherever  there  is  a  stain  of 


tmu.  m.]  HEBREWS.  569 

gailt  felt,  is  it  not  there  ready  to  be  poured  oat  again  to  wash  that  stain  sway  ? 
But  the  efficacy  of  the  "  power  "  of  Christ's  "  endless  life  "  does  not  stop  here.  It 
is  the  marvel  of  His  grace  that  whatever  is  united  to  Christ  by  that  union,  shares 
His  power ;  and  hence  it  is  not  only  His  prerogative,  it  is  yours  and  mine — "  the 
power  of  an  endless  life."  You  say  a  word — the  word  flies,  and  is  lost,  and  never 
can  be  traced.  But  where  is  that  word  ?  It  lives,  and  must  live.  It  will  meet  you 
again.  It,  and  all  its  effects — effects,  it  may  be,  multiplying  themselves  into  thousands 
and  thousands,  on  and  on,  for  ever  and  for  ever.  You  thiuk  a  thought — you  receive  ac 
impression — you  are  conscious  of  a  feeling.  That  thought,  that  feeling,  that  im- 
pression goes  to  make  character,  moral  being ;  and  that  moral  being  is  eternal ; 
and  in  that  eternity  of  being  will  be  found  again  that  thought,  that  impression, 
that  feeling,  which  scarcely  filled  a  space  or  occupied  a  moment.  You  do  an  act. 
It  makes  its  little  way,  and  that  way  gets  marked  ;  and  so  another  way  and  another 
mark,  in  circles  which  have  one  centre,  but  no  shore.  You  said  a  prayer,  and 
there  is  no  answer  to  it.  But  the  prayer  is  recorded,  and  the  record  is  imperish- 
able, at  the  throne  of  God ;  and  that  prayer  will  live  when  you  are  dead.  And  who 
shall  limit  the  answers,  down  to  all  generations  of  people  ?  You  form  habits — you 
are  always  forming  habits — every  separate  thing  goes  to  habit — and  these  are  to  be 
your  habits — your  habits  of  mind  and  being  to  millions  of  ages.  (J.  Vaughan,  31. A.) 
After  the  order  of  MelcMsedec. — The  retemhlance  of  Melchisedec  to  Christ : — There 
is  something  very  solemn  in  the  thought  that  a  man  shall  be  lifted  above  bis  genera- 
tion, moulded  distinct  from  all  his  contemporaries,  and  thus  stand  out,  not  in 
respect  of  bis  own  interest,  but  with  a  reference  to  some  personage  of  a  remote 
futurity — a  pledge  that  he  shall  arise,  a  portraiture  of  his  character  and  a  specimen 
of  his  history.  These  instances  are  but  few,  and  only  appear  in  relation  to  Him 
who  was  to  come,  and  to  the  purposes  of  His  mission.  Prophet  does  not  announce 
and  foreshadow  prophet.  Christ  only  is  thus  predicted  and  prefigured.  It  is  very 
important,  in  all  these  examinations,  to  hold  fast  as  a  first  principle  that  the  cor- 
respondence which  is  supposed  is  not  of  the  Messiah  to  any  earlier  personages,  but 
of  them  to  Him.  He  is  the  Prototype.  Theirs  only  is  the  conformity.  Like  the 
morning  planet  that  announces  and  catches  the  first  light  of  the  sun,  these  herald 
and  reflect  Him  to  whom  they  are  so  mysteriously  bound.     I.  Wb  beb  in  the 

OFFICE  OF  PRIESTHOOD  AN  IDEA  AND  A  PRINCIPLE  WHICH  EXCLUSIVELY  BEAR  UPON  THE 
INCARNATE     MANIFESTATION     AND    REDEEMING     WORK     OF    JeSUS     ChKIST.        From    the 

beginning,  the  function  of  offering  sacrifice  was  known  and  practised.  The  indi- 
vidual might  act  it  for  himself.  It  soon  became  vicarious.  It  grew  into  a  service 
and  a  dignity.  It  widely,  if  not  universally,  obtained.  1.  It  was  religious.  All 
adoration  and  piety  were  founded  upon  it.  2.  It  was  representative.  He  who  was 
invested  with  it  was  "  ordained  for  men  in  things  pertaining  to  God."  But  this 
was  not  all :  he  was  rather  appointed  between  heaven  and  the  people  than  between 
the  people  and  heaven.  3.  It  was  divinely  conferred.  "No  man  taketh  this 
honour  unto  himself  ;  but  he  that  is  called  of  God."  4.  It  was  imparted  by  solemn 
induction.  The  candidate  must  pass  through  many  ceremonials  the  most  solemn 
and  impressive.  It  resolved  itself  into  invariable  duties.  1.  To  offer  sacrifice. 
"Every  high  priest  ia  ordained  to  offer  gifts  and  sacrifices."  "Gifts"  were 
oblations  of  a  votive  and  eucharistic  kind ;  "  sacrifices  "  were  the  inflictions  of 
death  upon  a  victim,  with  confession  of  sin  and  hope  of  expiation.  The  flowers 
which  grew  just  on  the  border  of  Eden  might  sufiSce  for  the  one  ;  the  firstlings  of 
the  earliest  folded  flock  were  demanded  for  the  other.  The  Messiah  is  the  Anti- 
type. "  He  has  come  a  high  priest  of  good  things  to  come."  His  temple  was  His 
own  Body.  His  altar  was  His  own  Divinity.  His  ephod  was  His  own  authority. 
Yet  in  abasement  and  economic  subordination,  "  He  glorified  not  Himself  to  be 
made  a  high  priest."  The  blood  of  His  sacrifice  realises  the  twofold  use  of  the 
emblem ;  it  is  the  blood  of  sprinkling — toward  the  Divine  throne  for  its  honour 
and  vindication,  for  its  exercises  of  justice  and  mercy — toward  the  penitent  sinner 
for  his  reUef  and  hope,  for  his  obedience  of  faith  and  love.  2.  To  present  inter- 
cession. The  priests,  the  ministers  of  the  Lord,  might  weep  between  the  porch 
and  the  altar  ;  but  our  attention  is  turned  to  an  advocacy  more  efificaeious  and 
direct.  The  high  priest  went  alone  into  the  holiest  once  every  year.  "  We  have 
such  a  High  Priest,  who  is  set  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  the  Majesty  in 
the  heavens."  His  sacrifice  is  single  and  complete.  It  cannot  be  repeated.  But 
it  is  continually  presented.  "He  now  appear eth  in  the  presence  of  God  for  ns." 
8.  To  pronounce  benediction.  •'  The  Lord  separated  the  tribe  of  Levi  to  bless  in 
His  name."    "  Aaron  lifted  up  his  hand  toward  the  people,  and  blessed  them." 


670  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  to. 

The  language  is  preserved  (Num.  vi.  23,  &c.).  It  seems  the  outline  of  Christian 
formula.  But  it  was  not  to  be  given  until  the  sacrifice  had  bled  and  until  the 
incense  was  kindled.  The  more  painful  and  anxious  ministrations  were  first  to  be 
accomplished.  Our  Lord,  clothed  in  the  days  of  His  flesh  with  poverty  and 
humiMatiun,  seen  in  the  form  of  a  servant  and  the  fashion  of  a  man,  having  laid 
aside  the  ensigns  of  His  glory,  has  now  gone  into  heaven.  His  array  on  earth  was 
for  abasement,  for  sacrifice.  "  Many  were  astonished  at  Him."  He  is  now  within 
the  veil,  and  the  heaven  has  closed  upon  Him  as  the  curtain  hid  the  most  holy 
place.  His  intercession  there  is  the  cause  and  source  of  all  spiritual  blessings. 
Perfect  analogies  we  cannot  expect  in  relations  hke  these.  The  law  was  the 
"  shadow,"  but  not  the  "  perfect  image."  In  the  priesthood  of  our  Saviour  there 
must  be  peculiarities  which  cannot  be  reflected  nor  transferred.  (1)  It  is  real. 
The  title  is  not  allusively  conferred  upon  Him  because  it  is  common  and  known. 
Whatever  is  common  and  known  in  the  title  is  only  derived  from  His  oflSce.  (2) 
It  is  founded  on  His  actual  death.  He  was  at  the  same  time  Victim  and  Priest. 
He  was  "  made  perfect,"  or  consecrated  to  His  work,  "  by  sufferings."  (3)  It  is 
strictly  meritoiious.  There  could  be  no  congruily  between  the  hecatomb  and  the 
eftacement  of  human  guilt.  But  in  tbe  death  of  Christ  is  a  moral  strength  and 
right  which  the  Scripture  most  emphatically  describes.  (4)  It  is  most  tender  in  its 
design.  "  For  we  have  not  a  high  priest  which  cannot  be  touched  with  the  feeling 
of  our  infirmities ;  but  was  in  aU  points  tempted  like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin. " 
(5)  It  is  associated  with  all  other  necessary  offices.  His  suretyship  of  the  new 
covenant  involves  these  relations.  He  is  Priest,  Prophet,  and  King.  Melcnisedec 
was  a  priest  and  a  king,  but  not  a  prophet ;  Samuel  was  a  prophet  and  a  priest,  but 
not  a  king ;  David  was  a  king  and  a  prophet,  but  not  a  priest.  All  these  iaigh 
trusts  and  duties  unite  in  Him  who  is  the  Prophet  raised  up  unto  us,  the  High 
Priest  of  our  profession,  and  the  King  set  upon  the  holy  hill  of  Zion.  The  eternal 
perpetuity  of  His  priesthood,  which  the  text  afHrms,  must,  as  a  fact,  embrace  cer- 
tain  consequences  which  may  be  readily  defined.  It  is  not  the  exaggeration  or 
poetry  of  truth,  but  a  simple  statement  of  it.  What  does  it  involve  ?  1.  The 
influence  of  the  atonement  and  intercession  of  Jesus  Christ  is  supposed  in  the 
one  idea  of  mediation.  Merit  and  moral  power  are  its  effects.  To  this  we  owe  all 
that  justifles  and  cleanses  the  soul.  We  must  ascribe  to  the  same  source  the  bless- 
ing of  eternal  life.  Such  an  office  can  never  cease  to  operate.  2.  The  union  of 
the  Divine  and  human  natures  in  the  person  of  Immanuel,  as  necessary  to  Hia 
priesthood,  cannot,  if  that  priesthood  be  eternal,  admit  of  termination.  3.  What- 
ever be  the  honours  and  rewards  of  His  priesthood,  they  shall  be  eternal.  Hia 
robe  of  light  shall  not  decay.  His  tiara  shall  not  dim.  We  may  look  deeper  into 
this  truth.  There  shall  be  a  manifestation  of  principles,  arising  out  of  His  incar- 
nate and  mediatorial  work,  which  can  only  gather  strength  aud  clearness  through 
all  duration.  Ho  will  be  glorified  in  their  exhibition  and  influence.  There  haa 
also  been  brought  by  Him  to  His  heavenly  kingdom  a  countless  multitude  of 
redeemed  sinners  of  our  race.  These  were  once  enemies;  all  of  them  were 
alienated  from  the  favour  and  the  service  of  God.  By  His  priesthood  He  haa 
reconciled  them  to  both.  They  have  access  to  the  Divine  presence  and  sympathy 
with  the  Divine  will.  The^-  stand  forth  before  Him.  He  shall  see  His  seed. 
They  have  become  a  holy  nation — a  royal  priesthood,  priests  of  God  and  of 
Christ.  They  offer  themselves  a  living  sacrifice.  They  offer  to  God  the  sacrifice 
of  praise  continually.     II.    We  proceed  to  consider  that  particulab  bolb   ob 

ARRANGEMENT     IN     WHICH      THE      HIGH-PRIESTHOOD    OF     ChRIST     IS    CONSTirOTED    AND 

DECLARED.  It  is  neccssary  to  collect,  if  we  would  form  a  proper  and  consistent 
judgment,  whatever  is  recorded  of  Melchisedec,  from  his  first  appearance  in  sacred 
history,  until  he  is  made  in  far  later  inspired  Scripture  the  subject  of  allusion  and 
illustration.  1.  It  seems  probable,  though  we  would  lay  upon  it  no  undue  stress, 
that  the  fragmentary  history  of  Melchisedec  was  not  destitute  of  design.  A  sort 
of  ambiguity  belongs  to  it,  not  inherent  in  it  as  a  whole,  but  because  it  is  so  sin- 
gularly told.  The  curtain  arises,  there  passes  before  us  the  suddenly  apparelled 
actor ;  but  ere  we  can  discern  his  intent,  it  drops.  The  stranger  crosses  our  path, 
but  as  we  would  inquire  hia  anxious  errand,  he  disappears.  The  star  shoots  along 
the  firmament,  and  all  again  is  dark.  Advantage  seems  taken  of  this  sudden 
emergeace,  this  undeveloped  character,  to  give  greater  depth  of  resemblance  to 
that  Prototype  whom  it  respects.  "  Wherefore  is  it  that  thou  dost  ask  after  My 
name  ? "  "  No  one  knoweth  who  the  Son  is."  "  As  the  Father  knoweth  Me,  even 
BO  know  I  the  Father."    "  He  hath  a  name  written,  that  no  one  knoweth  but  He 


CHAP,  vn.]  HEBREWS.  571 

Himself."  2.  "  The  order  "  of  this  priesthood  was  doubtless  primeval.  There  is 
no  disproof  from  chronology  that  Melchisedec  might  be  Shem,  "  the  father  of  all 
the  children  of  Eber."  He  lived  five  huudred  years  after  the  flood.  We  know 
that  in  him  is  the  direct  genealogy  of  Christ.  But  this  is  unimportant  to  our 
argument.  It  was  assimilated  to  patriarchal  service.  It  was  that  religion.  Long 
before  the  Levitical  ritual  was  given,  the  same  "pattern"  prevailed.  The  Aaronic 
rule  was  defective,  a  temporary  relief,  a  mere  substitute :  Christ  shall  not  be  •'  called 
of  God  a  high  priest "  in  subjection  to  it.  The  Melchisedaican  class  was  unchanging, 
germinant,  comprehensive,  initial ;  it  is  according  to  its  perfect  idea  of  pontificate 
that  Christ  shall  be  iustalled.  3.  The  resemblance  is  much  promoted  when  we 
observe  in  type  and  counterpart  the  union  of  the  regal  and  sacerdotal  dignities. 
Censer  and  sceptre  are  in  his  hand ;  crown  and  mitre  are  on  his  head.  He  passes 
from  temple  to  palace,  from  palace  to  temple ;  from  throne  to  altar,  from  altar  to 
throne.  His  personal  name  and  puissant  style  are  significant.  He  is  king  of 
righteousness  and  king  of  peace.  His  capital,  notwithstanding  a  thousand  revolu- 
tions, still  endures.  He  was  not  "  the  mighty  hunter  before  the  Lord,"  the  bloody 
tyrant,  the  desolating  scourge ;  his  reign  was  that  of  blameless  justice  and  of 
benignant  concord.  The  king  is  not  lost  in  the  priest.  It  is  a  sanctified  alliance. 
Now  our  Lord  is  a  priest  for  ever  after  this  order.  4.  The  priesthood  of  Salem 
knew  no  separating  demarcation.  It  regarded  man  with  perfect  impartiality.  The 
high  altar  of  Calvary  is  covered  with  the  "  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole 
world."  The  breast-plate  of  our  High  Priest  is  inscribed  with  all  peoples.  There 
is  henceforth  no  middle  wall  of  partition.  Rival  distinctions  of  spt  ech,  climate, 
and  complexion  are  abolished.  Nor  is  this  anomalous.  It  is  but  a  reverting  to 
principles  older  than  Judaism.  5.  This  order  of  priesthood  involves  an  entireness 
and  self-indepeudence.  It  is  pronounced  by  the  historian  that  "  he  was  the  priest 
of  the  most  high  God."  The  inspired  commentator  dilates  upon  this  ministry  in 
words  confessedly  remarkable:  "Without  father,  without  mother,  without  descent, 
having  neither  beginning  of  days  nor  end  of  life :  he  abideth  a  priest  continually," 
or  uninterruptedly.  We  may  premise  from  language  so  strong  as  this,  that  his 
office  was  immediately  aonferred,  and  that  it  could  not  possibly  be  alienated.  6. 
The  oath  which  confirms  the  Saviour's  "  order  "  is  calculated  to  give  it  the  deepest 
impression.  "  The  Lord  hath  sworn,  and  will  not  repent."  How  much  of  interest 
must  be  contained  in  this  order  of  priesthood  1  How  should  it  awaken  our  study  ! 
The  Lord  doth  not  lift  up  His  hand  to  heaven  and  swear  by  Himself,  but  for  that 
which  is  great  and  dread  and  glorious  I  He  will  not  afford  this  sanction  to  any 
dispensation  and  its  priesthood  which  is  temporary,  national,  interstitial ;  but 
seizing  the  purest  conception  of  atonement  which  earth  could  afford — the  least 
diverted,  admixed,  corrupted  by  any  taint  of  earth — the  truest  idea,  the  simplest 
abstract,  the  surest  pledge  of  priesthood — as  when  God  pitched  the  awful  tent  at 
the  east  of  Eden  and  wrought  for  the  guilty,  naked  fugitives  garments  from  their 
sacrifices — honouring  all  this  in  the  person  and  vocation  of  His  servant  Melchi- 
sedec— "  the  Lord  said  unto  my  Lord — the  Lord  sware  and  will  not  repent — Thou 
art  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  MelcLisedec  !  "  7.  Nor  is  another  descrip- 
tive feature  of  this  early  priesthood  to  be  depreciated.  That  strangeness  which 
surrounds  it  simply  arises  from  the  broken  and  incomplete  character  of  the  narra- 
tive. It  is  not  in  any  sense  even  the  biogi-aphic  sketch.  It  is  but  a  segment,  a 
single  section,  without  reference  to  the  extremes  of  human  being.  Nothing  is 
guessed.  That  bare  and  abrupt  account  is  made  the  basis  of  every  reasoning.  All 
we  have  to  do  with  him  is  contained  in  that  account.  There  consists  all  his  typio 
importance.  Not  a  single  extraneous  point  is  pressed.  And  this  is  not  without  its 
lesson.  The  everlasting  priesthood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  wholly  a  revelation. 
Any  idea  that  illustrates  it,  in  cypher  and  image,  is  wisdom  from  above.  8.  The 
symbols  which  this  royal  priest  brought  forth  in  meeting  Abraham  are  not  to  be 
overlooked.  They  were  the  signs  of  oblation.  The  bread  was  for  a  perpetual 
offering  in  the  ancient  temple,  and  the  wine  was  a  libation  poured  continually  upon 
the  ancient  altar.  And  when  we  hear  that  Christ  is  after  this  "  order,"  is  it  vain 
imagination  to  think  of  Him  "  who  took  bread  and  brake  it,  who  took  the  cup  and 
gave  it  "  ?  Was  it  but  accident  that  bread  and  wine  were  before  Him  ?  Were  they 
not  Paschal  relics  ?  Is  their  appropriation  arbitrary  ?  Is  it  not  conformable  to  sacri- 
ficial law  ?  Did  not  these  aUments  always  signify  the  flesh  and  blood  of  sacrifice  ? 
And  in  our  Christian  feast,  that  feast  on  sacrifice,  we  behold  them  dedicate  to  one  com- 
memoration— Christ's  offered,  though  sinless,  humanity!  {R.  W.  Hamilton,  D.D.) 
Christ  a  Priest  after  the  similitude  of  Melchisedec : — I.  The  pbiesthood  or  Mel- 


57J  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha».  m 

CmSEDEC  COMBINED  WITH  IT  REGAL  AUTHOKITT.  II.  ThE  PRIESTHOOD  OF  MeLCHISEDEO 
WAS  rOR  MANKIND  BATHER  THAN  TOR  A  CLASS.      III.    ThE   PRIESTHOOD   OF   MeLCHISEDEO 

WAS  MORALLY  INELUENTIAL.  It  touchcd  the  heart  of  Abraham,  so  that  he  "  gave  the 
tenth  of  the  spoils."  1.  Christ's  priestly  blessings,  wherever  truly  received,  will 
awaken  gratitude.  2.  Gratitude  awakened  will  prompt  generous  contributions. 
3.  Such  contributions  are  the  only  legitimate  secular  instrumentality  for  promoting 
the  guspel.  rV.  The  priesthood  of  Melchisedec  had  no  human  ancestry.  V.  The 
parEeTHoiiii  a?  Christ  rekains  fob  ever  without  a  successor.  {Homilist.)  Christ 
— a  Priest  and  Kin§ : — As  a  Priest,  He  relieves  us  from  the  curse  and  the  guilt  of 
sin ;  as  a  King,  He  relieves  us  from  the  power  and  thejiominion  of  sin.  By  Hia 
sacrifice  as  a  Priest  He  restores  us  to  the  Divine  favour ;  by  His  sceptre  as  a  King 
He  creates  within  us  the  Divine  image.  If  Jesus  were  not  our  Priest,  we  should 
lie  under  the  curse  ;  if  Jesus  were  not  our  King,  we  should  lie  under  the  power  and 
dominion  of  sin.  By  His  priestly  office  we  are  pardoned ;  by  His  kingly  office  we 
are  sanctified.  In  the  first  we  have  a  title  to  heaven  ;  in  the  last  we  have  a  fitness 
for  heaven.  It  is  as  necessary  that  we  should  be  made  fit  for  the  enjoyments  of 
the  blessed,  as  that  we  should  have  a  title  and  a  right  to  enter  on  the  privileges  of 
the  blessed.  And  hence  we  believe  in  Christ,  not  only  as  our  great  High  Priest, 
but  also  as  our  great  and  Almighty  King.  {j.  Gumming.)  A  priest  after  the 
order  of  Melchisedec  : — Two  orders  of  priesthood  are  referred  to  in  the  Scriptures — 
that  of  Melchisedec  and  that  of  Aaron.  Certain  functions  were  common  to  both, 
Buch  as  sacrifice,  intercession,  and  blessing.  The  text  imphes  pecuharities  in  the 
order  of  Melchisedec,  and  that  it  was  in  some  respects  superior  to  that  of  Aaron. 
These  were — 1.  That  it  was  a  royal  order.  Melchisedec  was  both  king  and 
priest,  which  was  never  the  case  in  the  Mosaic  economy.  He  was  arrayed 
with  double  honour — a  king  of  righteousness  and  a  priest  of  the  Most  High  God; 
He  received  tribute  from  Abraham,  and  conferred  his  blessing  upon  him.  In 
these  respects  he  typified  Christ,  who  was  the  Head  of  His  Church,  and 
thus  their  King ;  while  He  was  also  Saviour  of  the  Church,  which  is  His  body, 
and  so  their  Priest.  2.  Its  universality.  The  Levitical  order  was  national  and 
limited  in  its  scope,  and  its  honours  and  privileges  were  for  the  Jew  alone.  In 
Melchisedec's  day  there  were  no  Jews.  No  nation  bad  yet  been  chosen  as  the 
pecuUar  people  of  God.  Humanity  was  one,  and  Melchisedec  was  a  priest  of 
humanity.  Tha  shadow  of  his  mitre  extended  as  far  as  the  shadow  of  his  crown, 
and  the  incense  of  his  intercession  covered  all  that  his  sceptre  swayed.  Christ  was 
a  Priest  of  this  higher  order.  He  never  once  called  Himself  the  Son  of  Judah, 
but  on  sixty-three  occasions  the  Son  of  Man.  The  intercession  of  the  high  priest 
was  limited  to  those  for  whom  he  offered  sacrifice,  and  no  sacrifice  was  offered 
for  Gentiles  on  the  Great  Day  of  Atonement.  The  extent  of  Christ's  intercession 
was  evidenced  by  three  httle  words  :  All,  every,  the  whole.  "  Christ  died  for  all." 
"  He  tasted  death  for  every  man  "  ;  "  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world."  3.  It  was 
intransmissible.  Melchisedec's  priesthood  began  and  ended  with  himself,  and  thus 
differed  from  the  Levitical,  which  was  strictly  dependent  on  an  unbroken  pedigree, 
on  both  father's  and  mother's  side.  Melchisedec  was  selected  as  one  specially 
qualified  for  the  office.  The  Levitical  priests  were  officially,  but  not  always 
personally,  holy.  Christ,  too,  fulfilled  this  requirement.  4.  It  was  a  perpetual 
priesthood.  Under  the  Levitical  law  the  priest  could  hold  his  office  only  between 
the  ages  of  thirty  and  fifty.  In  Melchisedec's  day  no  such  law  obtained.  The 
Levitical  priest  died  out  of  his  office,  Christ  in  the  exercise  of  His  office.  In  the 
grave  of  Joseph  He  was  still  a  Priest.  That  was  His  robing-room,  where  He  was 
preparing  for  His  everlasting  work  of  intercession,  putting  off  mortality  that  He 
might  put  on  immortality.  The  golden  bells  on  the  hem  of  the  high  priest's  robe 
rang  when  he  sprinkled  the  blood  of  the  covenant  upon  and  below  the  mercy-seat, 
and  thus  conveyed  the  assurance  to  the  silent  multitude  without  that  their  priest 
Btill  lived,  and  that  their  sacrifice  was  accepted.  These  golden  bells  were  paralleled 
by  the  declarations  of  the  Word  of  God,  such  as  "  He  is  consecrated  a  Priest  for 
evermore "  ;  "I  am  He  that  liveth  and  was  dead,"  &c.  Then  there  was  the  great 
bell  of  God's  oath,  "  The  Lord  hath  sworn  and  will  not  repent ;  Thou  art  a  Priest 
for  ever,"  &c.  {R.  Roberts.)  The  law  made  nothing  perfect. — The  old  and  new 
dispensaticms : — The  text  tells  us  plainly  that  "the  law  made  nothing  perfect." 
Now  what  are  we  to  understand  by  this  ?  It  is  not  said  that  the  law  did  not  perfect 
everything,  but  that  "  the  law  made  nothing  perfect."  Are  we,  then,  to  say  that  it 
was  useless?  The  law  in  this  passage  means  the  dispensation  of  Moses,  and  are 
we  at  liberty  to  say  that,  since  it  "  made  nothing  perfect,"  that  dispensation  was  in 


3HAF.  TIL]  HEBREWS.  Sn 

every  point  of  view  atterly  aseless?  Bat  of  what  is  the  apostle  speaking  when  he 
Bays  that "  the  law  made  nothing  perfect "  ?  Does  he  mean  that  it  did  no  good  to  the 
Jews  ?  Does  he  mean  that  it  made  no  perfect,  consistent,  definite  discoveries  to 
them?  This  were  to  make  it  aseless  indeed.  Bat  the  apostle  means  no  saoh 
thing ;  he  is  speaking  of  the  salvation  of  the  world,  and  when  he  speaks  of  the  law 
fta  •<  making  nothing  perfect,"  he  means  to  say  that,  with  regard  to  the  spiritaal 
salvation  of  the  world,  it  made  nothing  perfect.  It  did  not  toach  that  salvation  at 
all ;  it  did  nothing  for  the  spiritaal  salvation  of  the  Jews ;  it  did  nothing  for  the 
spiritaal  salvation  of  the  Gentiles ;  it  could  do  nothing,  it  was  intended  to  do 
nothing,  for  either.  When  we  speak  of  the  law  as  making  nothing  perfect  with 
regard  to  spiritual  salvation,  it  may  be  asked  whether  the  Jews  then  had  no  salva- 
tion revealed  to  them.  We  answer  that  they  had,  but  not  in  the  law  of  Moses. 
You  are  not  to  take  the  whole  of  the  Old  Testament  as  belonging  to  the  dispensa- 
tion of  Moses  because  it  was  delivered  under  that  dispensation.  Isaiah,  Jeremiah, 
and  many  of  the  prophets  often  discourse  about  the  spiritual  condition  and  cha- 
racter of  the  people,  but  there  is  nothing  of  that  kind  in  the  law  of  Moses.  Here 
are  discoveries  made  while  the  Jewish  dispensation  yet  continued,  but  they  are  no 
part  of  the  ancient  economy.  We  must  not  receive  any  portion  of  the  Old  Testament 
which  does  not  belong  to  the  law  of  Moses  as  a  part  of  that  law.  Looking  at  the 
subject,  then,  as  leading  us  to  a  division  between  the  parts  of  the  Old  Testament — 
the  one  part  including  the  economy  of  Moses,  the  other  the  instmctions  cf  the 
prophets,  of  John  the  Baptist,  and  of  the  Saviour  Himself — we  shall  find  that  the 
Jews  had  spiritual  discoveries  made  to  them  beyond  and  irrespective  of  the  disco- 
veries of  the  law  of  Moses.  The  law  of  Moses  was  not  intended  to  teach  them  this 
spiritaal  department;  it  made  nothing  perfect  there,  though  it  made  everything 
perfect  within  its  own  province.  It  provided  a  perfect  division  of  the  tribes ;  it 
provided  a  perfect  appropriation  of  the  land;  it  provided  a  perfect  arrangement 
for  rites  and  ceremonies;  it  provided  a  perfect  arrangement  for  distinguishing 
between  the  Jews  and  Gentiles ;  it  provided  a  perfect  provision  for  the  prevention 
of  idolatry  and  of  the  practice  of  idolatrous  rites ;  it  provided,  moreover,  a  perfect 
system  of  civil  legislation  for  the  management  of  affairs  between  man  and  man 
amongst  the  Jewish  people.  All  these  arrangements  were  perfect,  and  in  all  these 
respects,  instead  of  making  nothing,  the  law  made  everything  perfect.  If  its  perfect 
commandments  were  not  obeyed,  that  did  not  make  them  the  less  perfect  in  them- 
selves. The  imperfection  rested  in  that  case  with  the  disobedient.  So  far  as  the 
provisions  of  the  law  of  Moses  were  concerned,  they  came  from  a  perfect  God,  and 
they  were  perfect  provisions.  1.  In  the  first  place,  the  Jewish  dispensation  was 
temporal,  while  the  Christian  is  spiritual.  Look  through  the  whole  of  the  law  of 
Moses,  examine  every  precept  which  it  contains,  and  yoa  will  not  find  one  enactment 
connected  with  spiritual  and  eternal  salvation.  Hence  with  regard  to  this  yon  se« 
at  once  that  it  "  made  nothing  perfect."  It  was  intended  to  form  a  nation ;  it  was 
intended  to  preserve  that  nation  from  mixing  with  the  idolatrous  nations  of  the 
earth ;  and  hence  yoa  will  find  that  all  its  rites  and  sacrifices  were  meant  and 
adapted  to  remind  the  people  of  their  transgressions,  and  to  prevent  them  from  going 
after  other  lords  and  other  gods  ;  whilst  other  peculiar  provisions  of  their  economy 
were  intended  to  keep  up  the  middle  wall  of  partition  between  them  and  the 
Gentilea,  lest  the  idolatry  of  the  one  should  overwhelm  the  worship  of  the  true  God 
offered  by  the  other.  The  altar,  however,  was  a  national  altar ;  the  sacrifices  were 
national  sacrifices  ;  they  all  had  reference  to  present  things,  to  the  present  world, 
to  the  state  of  the  Jewish  people  in  the  present  world ;  and  there  is  not,  within 
the  whole  range  cf  them,  one  single  aUusion  to  the  world  to  come.  Hence  you  will 
find  that  the  priests  and  the  Levites  were  instructors  of  the  people,  not  instructors 
of  the  people  in  their  eternal  salvation.  Prophets  were  raised  up  from  time  to 
time  for  this  purpose,  sometimes  from  the  priesthood  and  sometimes  from  the 
sheepfold;  not  official  characters  described  by  the  law  of  Moses,  but  characters 
raised  ap  by  Divine  Providence  to  treat  of  the  spiritual  and  eternal  salvation  of  the 
people.  You  see,  therefore,  how  the  Jews  might  receive  knowledge  of  the  way  of 
salvation,  though  they  did  not  receive  it  through  the  law  of  Moses,  and  yet  the  law 
of  Moses  was  necessary  to  prevent  them  from  being  lost  amidst  the  idolatrous 
nations  around  them.  We  have  said  that  the  New  Testament  dispensation  is 
spiritual  as  contrasted  with  the  old  economy,  which  we  have  shown  yoa  was 
temporal  and  worldly.  Now,  when  we  come  to  look  at  the  New  Testament  dispen- 
sation, we  not  only  find  that  it  was  spiritaal,  but  we  find  that  it  was  nothing  else. 
As  the  economy  of  Moses  was  temporal,  and  temporal  only,  so  iba  economy  of 


574  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ctap.  th 

Christ  is  spiritual,  and  spiritual  only.  It  seta  up  no  class  of  men  clothed  with 
worldly  authority ;  it  gives  to  no  kingdom  on  earth  worldly  power.  It  deals  with 
its  disoiples  as  persons  having  immortal  souls  that  are  to  be  trained  by  holy  con- 
sistency in  time  into  meetness  for  the  glory  of  immortality.  2.  The  Jewish  economy 
was  limited  in  its  extent,  while  the  Christian  economy  is  universal.  The  Jewish 
economy,  as  you  are  aware,  was  to  be  confined  to  the  Jewish  nation.  They  were 
to  have  only  one  place  of  sacrifice,  and  that  a  place  which  God  should  choose.  To 
this  place  they  were  to  go  up  three  times  a  year,  at  least  all  the  males  in  Israel,  to 
celebrate  the  feasts ;  and  as  there  was  a  prohibition  against  carrying  out  the  law 
in  any  place  except  Judasa,  the  one  place  appointed  for  that  purpose,  it  is  quit« 
clear  that  the  Jewish  economy  was  to  be  an  economy  of  limited  range  with  regard 
to  territorial  extent.  It  is  very  true  that  there  might  be  Gentile  proselytes,  prose  • 
lyted  to  the  Jewish  economy,  and  acknowledging  the  one  living  and  true  God,  an;! 
if  they  were  in  Palestine  they  might,  in  that  part  of  it  which  was  appointed  for 
that  purpose,  present  their  offerings ;  but  it  was  only  in  Palestine,  and  in  that  one 
spot  which  God  had  chosen,  that  the  Jewish  economy  could  be  fully  acted  upon. 
Thus  it  is  evident  that  the  Jewish  economy  was  to  be  of  limited  extent  as  to  terri- 
tory. But  this  was  not  the  case  with  the  Christian  dispensation.  The  Christian 
economy,  as  you  are  aware,  was  intended  to  spread  from  the  rivers  to  the  ends  of 
the  earth,  and  from  the  rising  to  the  setting  of  the  sun.  3.  The  Jewish  dispensa- 
tion was  temporary  and  intended  to  be  temporary,  while  the  Christian  is  intended 
to  be  perpetual.  That  a  dispensation  should  be  confined  to  one  country,  and 
yet  be  intended  to  be  perpetual,  would  imply  that  God  had  doomed  all  other 
countries  to  everlasting  darkness  and  everlasting  alienation.  This  was  far  from 
being  His  intention.  It  was  His  intention  to  enlarge  the  range  of  territory  over 
which  His  religion  should  spread  ;  it  was  His  intention  to  remove  and  abolish  the 
temporary  system  by  which  the  territory  of  true  religion  had  long  been  limited. 
The  whole  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  proceeds  upon  this  principle ;  it  shows 
that  the  Jewish  dispensation  was  temporary,  and  the  Christian  perpetual,  in  dura- 
tion; and  it  contrasts  the  one  with  the  other.  It  shows  that  Aaron  and  his 
descendants  were  priests  only  for  a  time,  but  that  Christ  is  a  Priest  for  ever. 
Looking,  then,  at  the  Jewish  dispensation  as  thus  contrasted  with  the  Christian 
economy,  the  perpetuity  of  which  we  need  not  dwell  upon  because  it  is  admitted 
by  all,  I  think  we  may  clearly  see  the  characteristic  distinctions  between  the  two. 
And  if  we  look  at  one  as  worldly  and  the  other  as  spiritual ;  if  we  look  at  one  as 
limited  in  the  range  of  its  observances  and  the  other  as  universal ;  if  we  look  at 
one  as  temporary  in  its  duration  and  the  other  as  perpetual,  we  must  see  that  we 
have  no  right  at  any  time  to  blend  the  two  dispensations  of  the  Word  of  God ;  the 
distinction  between  them  is  clear  if  we  will  but  keep  it ;  and  if  we  lose  sight  of  it, 
away  with  everything  like  sound  principles  of  interpretation  in  reference  to  the  New 
Testament.  We  defy  any  one  to  make  a  correct  interpretation  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment if  there  is  to  be  a  blending  of  the  two  dispensations.  4.  But,  finally,  to 
show  you  that  it  is  of  great  importance  to  distinguish  between  the  Old  Testament 
dispensation  and  the  new,  and  that  a  serious  evil  is  likely  to  result  from  blending 
them,  we  have  now  to  notice  two  steps  in  the  abolition  of  the  ancient  economy. 
The  first  step  is  the  death  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  When  the  Saviour  expired, 
the  vail  of  the  temple  was  rent  in  twain  from  top  to  bottom.  This  was  heaven's 
own  intimation — that  heaven's  own  economy  had  now  passed  away.  It  had  done 
its  work ;  it  was  required  no  more  ;  and  henceforth  any  person  that  would  blend  it 
with  the  new  dispensation  would  be  acting  against  the  intimation  which  God  had 
given  of  its  abolition  when  He  rent  the  vail  of  the  temple.  But  there  was  another 
step  in  the  abolition  of  the  law  of  Moses.  The  Jews  did  not  attend  to  this  intimation. 
They  maintained  the  perpetuity  of  the  law ;  they  refused  to  yield.  The  sacrifices  at 
Jerusalem  were  still  continued.  The  rites  and  ceremonies  of  Moses  were  still  ob- 
served. But  did  this  perseverance  in  keeping  up  the  Jewish  dispensation  succeed  ? 
It  was  under  the  hands  of  God  destined  for  the  powerful  arms  of  Titus  to  do  what  the 
Jews  refused  to  do,  and  those  arms  scattered  their  temple,  and  their  altar,  and 
their  city,  and  themselves  to  the  winds  of  heaven.  There  was  the  abolition  of  the 
Jewish  dispensation  by  an  event  of  Divine  providence.  The  people  refused  to 
abolish  it  themselves,  but  henceforth  it  was  impossible  to  observe  the  law  of  Moses, 
because  the  place  which  God  had  chosen  was  taken  by  the  arms  of  Rome,  and 
belonged  no  more  to  the  ancient  people  of  God.  How  strikingly  does  this  bring 
the  abolition  of  the  Old  Testament  dispensation  before  us !  {John  Burnet.)  The 
impotence  of  the  law : — Man  is  naturally  a  legalist.     He  desires  to  be  justified  by 


tHAT.  vn.J  HEBREWS.  875 

his  own  character  and  his  own  works,  and  dislikes  the  thought  of  heing 
accepted  upon  the  giound  of  another's  merits.  All  confidence  in  personal  virtue, 
all  appeals  to  civil  integrity,  all  attendance  upon  the  ordinances  of  the  Christian 
religiun  without  the  exercise  of  the  Christian's  penitence  and  faith,  is,  in  reality, 
an  exhibition  of  that  same  legal  unevangelic  spirit  which  in  its  extreme  form  inflated 
the  Pharisee,  and  led  him  to  tithe  mint,  anise,  and  cummin.  Still,  think  and  act 
as  men  may,  the  method  of  God  in  the  gospel  is  the  only  method.  God  knows 
that,  however  anxiously  a  transgressor  may  strive  to  pacify  his  conscience  and 
prepare  it  for  the  judgment  day,  its  deep  remorse  can  be  removed  only  by  the  blood 
of  incarnate  Deity ;  that,  however  sedulously  he  may  attempt  to  obey  the  law,  he 
will  utterly  fail,  unless  he  is  inwardly  renewed  and  strengthened  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
He  knows  that  mere  bare  law  can  make  no  sinner  perfect  again,  but  that  only  the 
Dnnging  in  of  a  "  better  hope"  can,  a  hope  by  the  which  we  draw  nigh  to  God. 
The  text  leads  us  to  inquire,  Why  cannot  the  moral  law  make  fallen  man  perfect  ? 
Of,  in  other  words,  "  Why  cannot  the  ten  commandments  save  a  sinner  ?  "  That 
we  may  answer  this  question,  we  must  first  understand  what  is  meant  by  a  perfect 
man.  It  is  one  in  whom  there  is  no  defect  or  fault  of  any  kind — one,  therefore, 
who  has  no  perturbation  in  his  conscience,  and  no  sin  in  his  heart ;  who  is  entirely 
at  peace  with  himself  and  with  God,  and  whose  affections  are  in  perfect  conformity 
with  the  Divine  law.  But  fallen  man,  man  as  we  find  him  universally,  is  character- 
ised by  both  a  remorseful  conscience  and  an  evil  heart.  He  lacks  perfection, 
therefore,  in  two  particulars :  first,  in  respect  to  acquittal  at  the  bar  of  justice ;  and 
secondly,  in  respect  to  inward  purity.  That,  therefore,  which  proposes  to  make 
him  perfect  again  must  quiet  the  sense  of  guilt  upon  valid  grounds,  and  must 
produce  a  holy  character.  If  the  method  fails  in  either  of  these  two  respects,  it 
fails  altogether  in  making  a  perfect  man.  But  how  can  the  moral  law,  or  the 
ceremonial  law,  or  both  united,  produce  within  the  human  soul  the  cheerful, 
liberating  sense  of  acquittal  and  reconciliation  with  God's  justice  ?  Why,  the  very 
function  and  work  of  law,  in  all  its  forms,  is  to  condemn  and  terrify  the  trans- 
gressor ;  how,  then,  can  it  calm  and  soothe  him  ?  Or,  is  there  anything  in  the 
performance  of  duty,  in  the  act  of  obeying  law,  that  i?  adapted  to  produce  this 
result  by  taking  away  guilt?  Plainly  not.  For  there  is  nothing  compenpatory, 
nothing  cancelling,  nothing  of  the  nature  of  a  satisfaction  of  justice,  in  the  best 
obedience  that  was  ever  rendered  to  moral  law  by  saint,  angel,  or  seraph.  Because 
the  creature  owes  the  whole.  Whoever  attempts  the  discharge  of  duties  for  the 
purpose  of  atoning  for  his  sins  takes  a  direct  method  of  increasing  the  pains  and 
perturbations  which  he  seeks  to  remove.  The  more  he  thinks  of  law,  and  the  more 
he  endeavours  to  obey  it  for  the  purpose  of  purchasing  the  pardon  of  past  trans- 
gression, the  more  wretched  does  he  become.  Shall  the  ten  commandments  of 
Siuai,  in  any  of  their  forms  or  uses,  send  a  cooling  and  calming  virtue  through  the 
hot  conscience  ?  Yv'ith  these  kindling  flashes  in  his  guilt-stricken  spirit,  shall  he 
run  into  the  very  identical  fire  that  kindled  them?  Let  us  fix  it,  then,  as  a  fact, 
that  the  feeling  of  culpability  and  unreconciliation  can  never  be  removed  so  long  as 
we  do  not  look  entirely  away  from  our  own  character  and  works  to  the  mere  pure 
mercy  of  God  in  the  blood  of  Christ.  The  other  requisite,  in  order  that  fallen  man 
may  become  perfect  again,  is  a  holy  heart  and  will.  Can  the  moral  law  originate 
this  ?  That  we  may  rightly  answer  the  question,  let  us  remember  that  a  holy  will 
is  one  that  keeps  the  law  of  God  spontaneously,  and  that  a  perfect  heart  is  one  that 
aends  forth  holy  affections  and  pure  thoughts  as  naturally  as  the  sinful  heart  sends 
forth  unholy  affections  and  impure  thoughts.  And  now  we  ask,  Can  the  law  gene- 
rate all  this  excellence  within  the  human  soul  ?  In  order  to  answer  this  question  we 
must  consider  the  nature  of  law  and  the  manner  of  its  operation.  The  law,  as 
antithetic  to  the  gospel,  and  as  the  word  is  employed  in  the  text,  is  in  its  nature 
mandatory  and  minatory.  It  commands,  and  it  threatens.  This  is  the  style  of 
its  operation.  Can  a  perfect  heart  be  originated  in  a  sinner  by  these  two  methods  ? 
Is  he  moulded  by  it  ?  Does  it  congenially  sway  and  incline  him  ?  On  the  contrary, 
is  he  not  excited  to  opposition  by  it?  When  the  commandment  " comes,"  loaded 
down  with  menace  and  damnation,  does  not  sin  "  revive,"  as  the  apostle  affirms  ? 
(Eom.  vii.  9-12).  Arrest  the  transgressor  in  the  very  act  of  disobedience,  and  ring 
ill  his  ears  the  "Thou  shalt  not"  of  the  Decalogue,  and  does  he  find  that  the  law 
has  the  power  to  alter  his  inclination,  to  overcome  his  carnal  mind,  and  make  him 
perfect  in  holiness?  On  the  contrary,  the  more  you  ply  him  with  the  stern  com- 
mand, and  the  more  yoxi  emphasise  the  awful  threatenincr,  the  more  do  you  make 
him  conscious  of  inward  sin  and  awaken  his  depravity.    There  is  no  more  touching 


676  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  jo. 

poem  in  all  literature  than  that  one  in  which  the  pensive  and  moral  Schiller  por- 
trays the  struggle  of  au  ingenious  youth  who  would  find  the  source  of  moral 
ponfioation  in  the  moral  law ;  who  would  seek  the  power  that  can  transform  him 
in  the  mere  imperatives  of  his  conscience  and  the  mere  strugglings  and  spasms  of 
his  own  will.  He  represents  him  as  endeavouring  earnestly  and  long  to  feel  the 
force  of  obligation,  and  as  toiling  sedulously  tos  chool  himself  into  virtue  by  the 
bare  power,  by  the  dead  lift,  of  duty.  But  the  longer  he  tries,  the  more  he  loathes 
the  restraints  of  law.  Virtue,  instead  of  growing  lovely  to  him,  becomes  more  and 
more  severe,  austere,  and  repellent.  His  life,  as  the  Scripture  phrases  it,  is  "  under 
law,"  and  not  under  love.  There  is  nothing  spontaneous,  nothing  willing,  nothing 
genial  in  his  religion.  He  does  not  enjoy  religion,  but  he  endures  religion.  Con- 
science does  not,  in  the  least,  renovate  his  will,  but  merely  checks  it,  or  goads  it. 
He  becomes  wearied  and  worn,  and  conscious  that  after  all  his  self-schooling  he  is 
the  same  creature  at  heart,  in  his  disposition  and  affections,  that  he  was  at  the 
commencement  of  the  effort,  he  cries  out,  "  Oh  1  Virtue,  take  back  thy  crown  and 
let  me  sin."  The  tired  and  disgusted  soul  would  once  more  do  a  spontaneous 
thing.  Was,  then,  that  which  is  good  made  death  unto  this  youth  by  a  Divine 
arrangement?  Is  this  the  original  and  necessary  relation  which  law  sustains  to 
the  will  and  affections  of  an  accountable  creature  ?  Must  the  pure  and  holy  law  of 
God,  from  the  very  nature  of  things,  be  a  weariness  and  a  curse  ?  God  forbid ! 
But. sin  that  it  might  appear  sin,  working  death  in  the  sinner  by  that  which  is  good 
— that  sin  by  the  commandment  might  become,  might  be  seen  to  be,  exceeding 
sinful.  The  law  is  like  a  chemical  test.  It  eats  into  sin  enough  to  show  what  sin 
is,  and  there  it  stops.  Of  what  use,  then,  is  the  law  to  a  fallen  man?  some  one 
will  ask.  Why  is  the  commandment  enunciated  in  the  Scriptures,  and  why  is  the 
Christian  ministry  perpetually  preaching  it  to  men  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  ? 
If  the  law  can  subdue  no  man's  obstinate  will,  and  can  renovate  no  man's  corrupt 
heart — if  it  can  make  nothing  perfect  in  human  character — then, "  wherefore  serveth 
the  law  ?  "  "  It  was  added  because  of  transgressions  "  (Gal.  iii.  19).  It  is  preached 
and  forced  home  in  order  to  detect  sin,  but  not  to  remove  it ;  to  bring  men  to  a 
consciousness  of  the  evil  of  their  hearts,  but  not  to  change  their  hearts.  It  is  easy 
to  see,  by  a  moment's  reflection,  that,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  the  moral  law 
cannot  be  a  source  of  spiritual  life  and  sanctification  to  a  soul  that  has  lost  these. 
For  law  primarily  supposes  life,  supposes  an  obedient  inclination,  and  therefore 
does  not  produce  it.  God  made  man  upright,  and  in  this  state  he  could  and  did 
keep  the  commands  of  God  perfectly.  If,  therefore,  by  any  subsequent  action  upon 
their  part,  mankind  have  gone  out  of  the  primary  relationship  in  which  they  stood 
to  law,  and  have  by  their  apostasy  lost  all  holy  sympathy  with  it,  and  all  affectionate 
disposition  to  obey  it,  it  only  remains  for  the  law,  not  to  change  along  with  them, 
but  to  continue  immutably  the  same  pure  and  righteous  thing,  and  to  say,  "  Obey 
perfectly,  and  thou  shalt  live;  disobey  in  a  single  instance,  and  thou  shalt  die." 
But  the  text  teaches  us  that,  although  the  law  can  make  no  sinful  man  perfect, 
either  upon  the  side  of  justification  or  of  sanctification,  "  the  bringing  in  of  a  better 
hope"  can.  This  hope  is  the  evangelic  hope — the  yearning  desire,  and  the  humble 
trust— to  be  forgiven  through  the  atonement  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  be 
sanctified  by  the  indwelling  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  A  simple,  but  a  most  power- 
ful thing  I  Does  the  law,  in  its  abrupt  and  terrible  operation  in  my  conscianofl, 
start  out  the  feeling  of  guiltiness  until  I  throb  with  anguish  and  moral  fear  ?  I 
hope,  I  trust,  I  ask,  to  be  pardoned  through  the  blood  of  the  Eternal  Son  of  God, 
my  Redeemer.  I  will  answer  all  these  accusations  of  law  and  conscience  by  pleading 
what  my  Lord  has  done.  Again,  does  the  law  search  me,  and  probe  me,  and  elicit 
me,  and  reveal  me,  until  I  would  shrink  out  of  the  sight  of  God  and  of  myself  ?  I 
hope,  I  trust,  I  ask,  to  be  made  pure  as  the  angels,  spotless  as  the  seraphim,  by  the 
transforming  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  1.  The  unfolding  of  this  text  of  Scripture 
shows,  in  the  first  place,  the  importance  of  having  a  distinct  and  discriminating 
conception  of  law,  and  especially  of  its  proper  function  in  reference  to  a  sinful  being. 
2.  In  the  second  place,  the  unfolding  of  this  text  shows  the  importance  of  using  the 
law  faithfully  and  fearlessly  within  its  own  limits,  and  in  accordance  with  its  proper 
function.  It  is  frequently  asked  what  the  sinner  shall  do  in  the  work  of  salvation. 
The  answer  is  nigh  thee,  in  thy  mouth,  and  in  thy  heart.  Be  continually  applying 
the  law  of  God  to  your  personal  character  and  conduct.  Keep  an  active  and  a 
searching  conscience  within  your  sinful  soul.  Use  the  high,  broad,  and  strict 
commandment  of  God  as  an  instrumentality  by  which  aU  ease  and  all  indifference 
ill  %k    shall  be  bauished  from  the  breast.    Employ  all  this  apparatus  of  torture,  as 


CHAT,  rn.)  HEBREWS.  577 

perhaps  it  may  seem  to  you  in  some  sorrowful  hours,  and  break  up  that  moral 
lethargy  which  is  raining  so  many  souls.  And  then  cease  this  work  the  instant 
yoa  have  experimentally  found  out  that  the  law  reaches  a  limit  beyond 
which  it  cannot  go — that  it  forgives  none  of  the  sins  which  it  detects,  produces  no 
change  in  the  heart  whose  vileness  it  reveals,  and  makes  no  lost  sinner  perfect 
again.  Having  used  the  law  legitimately  for  purposes  of  illumination  and  con- 
viction merely,  leave  it  for  ever  as  a  source  of  justification  and  sanctification,  and 
seek  these  in  Christ's  atonement  and  the  Holy  Spirit's  gracious  operation  in  the 
heart.  Then  sin  shall  not  have  dominion  over  you,  for  you  shall  not  be  under  law, 
but  under  grace.  {W.  G.  T.  Shedd,  D.D.)  The  inefficiency  of  law: — 1.  That  the 
law  could  not  justify  or  sanctify  any  person,  or  make  him  perfect,  by  reconciling 
him  to  God  and  procuring  salvation  for  him.  2,  That  believers  of  old,  who  lived 
under  the  law,  did  not  live  upon  the  law,  but  upon  the  hope  of  Christ,  or  Christ 
hoped  for.  Could  justification  and  salvation  have  been  had  any  other  way  or  by 
any  other  means,  Christ's  coming  had  been  needless,  and  His  death  in  vain.  3. 
That  the  introduction  of  a  better  hope  by  the  gospel,  after  a  suflScient  discovery 
made  of  the  weakness  and  insuflSciency  of  the  law,  did  make  all  things  perfect,  or 
bring  the  Church  to  that  state  of  consummation  which  was  designed  unto  it.  4. 
That,  when  all  mankind  were  at  an  inconceivable  distance  from  God,  it  was  infinite 
condescension  of  grace  to  appoint  His  own  Son,  who  was  the  blessed  hope  of  the 
saints  under  the  Old  Testament,  to  be  the  only  way  and  means  of  our  approaching  anto 
Him.  {W.  Burkitt,  M.A.)  The  law  cannot  cleanse : — The  law  is  a  looking-glass, 
which  my  lady  holds  up  to  her  face  that  she  may  see  if  there  be  any  spot  in  it ; 
but  she  cannot  wash  her  face  with  the  looking-glass.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The 
law  cannot  heal: — The  law  forces  out  the  disease  that  is  spreading  under 
the  skin.  Such  is  its  task.  But  healing  it  does  not  bring.  {Harless.)  The 
bringing  In  of  a  better  hope. — The  better  hope  :—I.  Than  what  this  hope  is 
BETTER.  It  is  not  SO  much  the  law  which  it  transcends,  for  the  law  is  holy,  just, 
and  good — both  the  law  and  the  hope  are  from  God,  each  as  He  appoints — but  we 
may  say  that  this  hope  is  far  better  than  all  other  hopes,  whether  for  the  present 
world  or  for  the  world  to  come.  II.  In  what  sense  it  is  betteb.  1.  In  the  sense 
of  theoretical  as  well  as  practical  life,  in  the  sense  of  satisfying  and  exalting  the 
mind,  of  informing  and  sanctifying  human  nature,  in  the  sense  of  development  and 
culture,  in  the  sense  of  current  progress  and  of  final  destiny.  2.  Because  of  its 
animating  principle.  Divine  love  in  the  form  of  mercy,  manifested  grace.  3.  Because 
of  its  foundation,  standing  on  the  great  remedial  system  of  the  one  atonement, 
Christ  offered,  all  claims  satisfied,  all  parties  approving.  4.  In  its  securities,  for  it 
abides  in  the  everlasting  purpose,  above  every  disturbing  element.  It  cannot  be 
hindered  or  thwarted.  5.  In  its  design  and  adaptation,  for  it  secures  in  man  and 
for  him  what  nothing  else  can  secure.  It  makes  him  a  noble  character,  conformed 
to  trath  and  justice,  and  produces  this  assimilation  by  means  at  once  manifold  and 
mysterious,  but  most  effectual  and  most  satisfactory.  6.  In  its  aspirations,  for  it 
looks  up  into  eternity,  unlimited  by  the  narrow  bounds  of  time.  It  takes  hold  upon 
the  existence  which  lies  beyond,  and  counts  the  longest,  brightest,  most  emblazoned 
life  on  earth  as  nothing  to  the  dawning  of  the  day  which  breaks  beyond  the  tomb — 
a  moment  of  fleeting  twilight  before  the  eternal  splendour  flows.  7.  In  its  influence 
and  effect.  He  that  hath  this  hope  in  Him  purifieth  himself.  III.  To  whom  it  is 
better.  1.  For  the  poor.  They  have  little  to  hope  for  here.  Their  crust  is  dry ; 
their  cup  bitter;  their  frieuds  few;  their  days  are  wearisome  and  their  nights 
desolate  ;  Ufe  one  desert ;  experience  one  blank ;  to  them  fortune  is  misfortune  ; 
time  a  burden ;  care  a  mill-stone  about  the  neck ;  distress  everywhere ;  relief  no- 
where. But  when  the  better  hope  comes  to  them,  oh,  how  changed  they  are  !  What 
a  light  springs  up  for  their  feet !  what  a  joy  is  bom  in  their  heart  1  2.  For  those 
who  are  toiling  to  build  up  the  kingdom  of  Christ  in  this  world.  It  has  been  the 
prop  of  God's  ministers  in  all  ages.  The  prophets  had  it,  and  the  apostles,  and  all 
the  heralds  of  the  cross  that  ever  went  forth,  as  they  will  have  it  who  go  forth  to 
the  latest  time.  3.  For  all  the  afflicted.  You  say.  How  is  it?  I  cannot  tell.  It 
is  a  mystery — God's  greatest  mystery  of  love  !  Many  a  mourner  has  tried  it,  and 
many  a  widow  and  many  an  orphan  child,  and  it  never  failed.  4.  For  the  tempted 
in  all  the  walks  of  life.  It  is  better  than  all  the  contingencies,  than  all  the  dreams 
of  earth.  If  you  doubt  this,  try  for  yourself  and  see.  No  man  was  ever  con- 
founded  in  it;  one  hour's  experience  of  its  value  ia  worth  all  abstract  theory  or 
speculation.  5.  For  the  dying.  Sooner  or  later  we  must  each  lie  down.  And 
what  does  a  man  want  then?    The  fri^n^;?,  riches,  honours,  titles  of  this  world, 

37 


578  TRE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  th. 

\rhat  can  they  do  for  him  then  ?  Surely  he  wants  the  better  hope,  the  perfecting, 
saving  hope  of  the  believer ;  the  hope  that  carries  him  bravely  through  the  struggle, 
over  the  river,  on  before  the  throne,  and  plants  him  there  a  king  and  priest  for 
ever  unto  God  I  We  know  this  Christian  hope  can  do  it.  It  is  no  spider's  web,  no 
expectation  of  the  wicked  hypocrite  or  deceiver.  It  springs  from  the  broken  body 
and  the  falling  blood  of  Jesus,  gendered  in  His  wounds — a  river  of  life  shooting 
from  the  decays  of  death  ;  its  garlands  being  abroad  in  heaven,  its  strong  fibres 
take  hold  of  the  beams  of  the  habitation  of  the  Eternal  God  I  (JB.  Sunderland,  D.D.) 
The  better  hope: — I.  A  hope  fob  holiness,  not  salvation.  II.  A  hope  that  la 
CERTAIN,  NOT  ILLUSORY.  Moial  gooduesfl  is  attainable  for  all.  III.  A  hope  that  is 
EXPANDING,  NOT  NARROWING.  Directed  to  a  common  good — a  good  that  cannot  be 
monopolised — a  good  that  is  infinite  as  God.  IV.  A  hope  that  is  opebativb,  not 
INACTIVE.  It  works  benevolently,  devoutly,  unremittingly;  works  to  purify  and  to 
bless.  {Homilist.)  Two  kinds  of  hope : — Hope  may  be  a  flatterer ;  it  may  be  a 
true  friend.  It  may  be  a  light  unto  my  path,  or  it  may  be  an  ignis  fatuus  to  lure 
my  feet  to  death.  Many  have  been  saved  by  hope,  many  have  been  lost  by  hope. 
When  an  Ohio  river  steamboat  was  burned,  a  passenger  was  drowned  by  a  defect 
in  his  hfe-preserver.  The  first  thing  I  do  on  entering  the  state-room  of  a  steamer 
or  ship  is  to  examine  my  life-preserver.  I  once  found  one  with  the  strings  so  in- 
secure that  if  I  had  trusted  to  it,  it  would  have  betrayed  me.  How  dreadful  to 
trust  hope,  to  follow  hope,  to  be  lost  by  hope  !  It  is  not  apt  to  be  so  with  that 
hope  which  comes  of  trial,  which  grows  out  of  discipline,  which  has  its  door  in  the 
"valley  of  Achor."  The  trouble  with  joy-born  hope,  nurtured  in  sunshine  and 
luxury  and  ease — the  trouble  with  such  hope  is  that  it  is  conceited.  It  looks  to 
self  and  not  to  God.  It  is  based  upon  a  continuance  of  prosperity.  These  cannot 
always  continue.  All  of  its  joy  has  come  from  the  quiet  and  comfort  of  its  own 
narrow  life.  Such  hope  is  doomed  to  sure  disaster.  It  is  Uke  the  spider  spinning 
his  silken  web  out  of  his  own  bowels,  and  laying  his  beautiful  geometrical  plans, 
when  oue  sudden  sweep  from  a  counter  plan  brushes  the  graceful  spinner  and  his 
work  into  one  black  ball  of  dirt,  in  which  we  find  his  hopes  have  become  his 
winding-sheet.  {R.  S.  Barrett.)  A  better  hope : — "  The  law  " — given  by  Moses — 
was  a  law  as  complete  and  "  perfect  "  as  was  ever  made.  See  how  St.  Paul  speaks 
of  it :  "  The  law  is  holy,  and  the  commandment  is  holy,  and  just,  and  good."  "  If 
there  had  been  a  law  given  which  could  have  given  life,"  that  is,  if  any  law  could 
have  given  us  life,  "  verily  righteousness  should  have  been  by  the  law."  It  was 
perfect.  Then  why  that  strange  conclusion,  "  The  law  made  nothing  perfect." 
Was  it  for  the  badness  which  is  in  man  ?  a  badness  with  which  no  law  can  cope, 
or  was  it  from  any  necessary,  inherent  insufiBciency  in  that  law,  and  in  all  law  ? 
I  believe  that  we  should  be  right  to  say  both,  but  that  the  truest  answer  lies  in 
the  second.  But  first.  What  is  perfection  ?  What  constitutes  anything  morally 
perfect  ?  I  should  say  a  right  action  with  a  right  motive.  The  motive  will  not  do 
without  the  action,  and  the  action  will  not  do  without  the  motive.  But  "  law  "  can 
never  in  itself  make  a  perfect  motive.  "  Law,"  by  itself,  strictly  speaking,  has 
little  or  nothing  to  do  with  motives.  Now  the  Christian  religion,  on  the  other 
hand,  meets  man  as  a  sinner,  and  immediately  sets  before  him  a  field  of  "  hope." 
It  tells  him,  "  The  debt  you  have  incurred  to  God  has  been  all  paid.  The  punish- 
ment you  deserve  another  has  borne  it  for  you.  Your  past  is  all  cut  off  and 
obliterated.  You  may  make  an  entirely  new  start,  un.shackled  by  anything  that 
lies  behind.  A  new  power  will  enter  into  you,  which  will  enable  you  to  make 
changes  which  of  yourself  you  could  not  make.  You  will  be  able  to  give  up  your 
sin,  and  to  conquer  it.  You  will  have  new  affections,  and  new  happinesses,  and 
new  aims  in  life.  God  loves  you.  He  loves  you  now.  You  will  soon  feel  His  love. 
And  He  will  be  unto  you  a  Father,  a  Guide,  a  Friend ;  and  you  will  lead  a  good, 
happy,  honourable,  useful  life.  You  will  find  what  you  have  never  yet  found  in  the 
world — satisfaction.  You  will  have  peace  of  mind.  Your  friends  will  be  God's 
friends.  And  God  will  use  you  in  His  blessed  service."  Now,  do  not  you  see  that 
just  such  "  a  better  hope  "  as  that  will  immediately  awake  in  that  man's  soul,  if 
he  receives  it,  very  different  feelings  from  any  he  ever  had  before  ?  Will  not  that 
*'  better  hope  "  soften  him,  purify  him,  assimilate  him  ?  Will  it  not  begin  to  make 
love  ?  So  the  true  motive  is  being  introduced  into  that  man's  mind — love.  He 
can  scarcely  help  but  love.  And  "love  makes  perfect."  (J.Vaughan,  M.A,) 
We  draw  nigh  unto  God. — The  banished  restored :  — There  are  two  forms  in  which 
men  need  to  "  draw  nigh,"  and  in  which  believers  do  "  draw  nigh  "  *•  unto  God." 
3y  nature  and  wicked  works,  men  are  "  far  from  God."    They  are  banished  rebels. 


CHAP,  vn.]  HEBREWS.  879 

they  are  prodigal  children  who  have  wandered  to  a  foreign  land.  In  conversion 
and  by  faith  the  banished  is  restored,  the  wanderer  comes  home.  This  is  one  way 
of  "  drawing  nigh  unto  God."  But  another  is  siiecified  (chap.  x.  22).  That  passage 
obviously  relates  to  devotional  intercourse  with  God.  AH  spiritual  worship,  indeed, 
is  a  drawing  nigh  of  the  soul  to  the  Father-Spirit  of  the  universe.  Much  that  is 
called  worship,  it  is  true,  by  no  means  realises  this  description.  A  man  may 
regularly  enter  the  house  of  prayer,  a  man  may,  with  apparent  reverence,  fall  upon 
his  knees,  and  yet  never  "  djaw  nigh  to  God."  But  every  pious  soul,  by  prayer, 
and  thanksgiving,  and  meditation,  engages  in  this  sublime  and  sacred  exercise. 
And  how?  "By  the  better  hope."  As  by  Christ  and  Christianity  the  sinner 
returns  to  God,  so  by  Christ  and  Christianity  the  believer  holds  sweet  and  profitable 
fellowship  with  Heaven.  A  privilege — oh,  how  precious  !  A  duty — oh,  how  urgent  I 
Very  thankful  should  we  be  for  the  Economy  by  which  it  may  be  realised  ;  and 
very  earnestly  should  we  use  that  system  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  high  design. 
{A.  S.  Patterson.)  Not  without  an  oath. — The  priest  ordained  by  the  oath  oj 
God : — I.  Men  should  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  with  their  whole  heart,  and  rely  upon 
TTim  with  unstaggering  confidence  :  first,  because  of  oob  Lobd's  special  obdination 
TO  THE  PBiESTHOOD.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  ordained  to  the  priesthood, 
according  to  the  110th  Psalm,  in  a  manner  distinct  from  all  others.  Hia 
ordination  was  unique,  for  neither  Aaron,  nor  his  sons,  nor  any  of  the  priests 
of  the  tribe  of  Levi  were  ever  ordained  by  an  oath.  But  why  an  oath  for  Jesus  and 
none  for  other  priests  ?  1.  Because  of  the  greater  dignity  of  Christ  above  aU  other 
priests  that  ever  were,  for  He  is  the  Son  of  the  Highest,  as  they  were  not.  They 
were  men  that  had  infirmity,  but  He  is  sinless.  They  lived  and  died,  and  so  were 
changed,  but  "Thy  throne,  0  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever."  2.  Another  reason  is 
found  in  the  eternal  character  of  His  work.  The  priesthood  of  Aaron  and  hia 
successors  was  intended  to  be  temporary.  They  were  candles  for  the  darkness,  but 
the  sun  was  to  rise,  and  then  they  would  not  be  needed ;  they  were  pictorial  re- 
presentations, but  when  the  substance  was  come  they  would  not  be  required.  He 
allowed  their  priesthood  to  be  one  of  imperfect  men,  because  He  intended  by  and 
by  to  supersede  it  by  a  perfect  and  enduring  priesthood ;  hence  no  oath  of  God 
attended  the  ordination  of  the  sons  of  Aaron.  But  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  priest- 
hood, and  all  the  economy  which  He  has  ushered  in,  was  intended  by  God  to  be 
perpetual,  therefore  doth  He  confirm  it  with  an  oath.  3.  By  an  oath  aJso  was  our 
Lord  set  apart,  because  of  the  reality  of  His  priesthood,  and  the  substance  that 
dwelt  in  His  sacrifice.  4.  But  perhaps  to  usward  the  main  reason  of  Christ's  being 
installed  in  the  priesthood  by  an  oath  of  God  is  this,  for  the  strengthening  of  our 
faith,  n.  We  ought  to  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  because  of  the  speciaIi  characteb 
OF  His  priesthood.  This  is  seen  in  the  tenour  of  the  Divine  oath,  which  runs 
thus :  "  Thou  art  a  Priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchisedeo."  1.  Our  Lordia 
of  the  order  of  Melchisedeo  as  surpassing  and  superseding  all  other  priests.  2.  It 
was  a  priesthood  which  imited  with  itself  the  dignity  of  kingship.  We  ought  to 
trust  implicitly  in  one  whose  royal  omnipotence  supports  BQs  sacred  merit.  Double 
faith  should  be  bestowed  on  him  who  exercises  the  double  office  of  the  kingdom 
and  the  priesthood.  3.  Our  faith  should  also  rest  on  the  fact  that  our  Lord  waa, 
like  Melchisedec,  "  without  father,  without  mother."  Of  His  order  there  was  none 
before  Him — He  is  the  only  Priest  of  His  line  :  none  stood  side  by  side  with  Eiim, 
for  He  needed  none,  and  none  can  be  compared  with  Him.  By  His  one  sacrifice 
He  hath  perfected  all  who  accept  His  priesthood,  and  what  more  is  needed  ?  None 
can  follow  our  Lord  in  His  office.  How  can  there  be  any  successor  to  Him,  since 
He  hath  an  endless  Ufe,  and  in  the  power  of  that  endless  life  ever  liveth  to  make 
intercession  for  us  ?  4.  This  great  Priest  of  ours  is  Master  of  all,  for  as  Melchisedeo 
received  homage  from  Abraham  in  the  form  of  tithes,  so  doth  our  blessed  Lord 
receive  the  reverence  of  all  who  believe.  5.  Perhaps  one  of  the  main  points  aboat 
Melchisedec  is  that  he  is  represented  as  bestowing  blessing.  Our  Lord  Jesus  blesses 
all  that  trust  Him ;  blesses  them  with  the  riches  of  heaven  and  earth,  with  the 
eternal  Word  which  sustains  their  souls,  and  with  supplies  for  this  mortal  life  so 
that  they  Uve  and  praise  Him.  6.  Christ  is  never  to  be  changed  or  superseded. 
He  is  a  Priest  for  ever.  As  we  read  nothing  of  Melchisedec's  having  given  up  the 
priesthood,  so  depend  upon  it  Christ  never  will  lay  down  His  office  while  there 
remains  a  single  man  to  be  saved,    lU.   Notice  that  our  text  speaka  of  ths 

8UPEBI0BITT   OF  THE   COVENANT   UNDEB  WHICH   OUB  LoBD   OITICUTES,  In   Whioh,  SlsO, 

we  ahall  find  abundant  argument  for  believing  in  Jesus.     1.  The  first  covenant  was 
conditional,  and  therefore  liable  to  failure.    There  is  no  "  if  "  in  the  covenant  of 


580  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vh 

grace.  2.  The  first  covenant  was  typical  and  shadowy ;  it  was  but  a  school  lesson 
for  children.  Christ  is  no  surety  of  a  mere  model  or  pattern  of  things  in  the 
heavens,  but  of  a  covenant  which  deals  with  the  heavenly  things  themselves,  with 
real  blessings,  with  true  boons  from  God.  3.  The  first  covenant  was  temporary :  it 
was  meant  to  be  so.  It  was  meant  in  part  to  teach  the  coming  covenant,  and  in 
part  to  show  the  weakness  of  man  and  the  necessity  of  Divine  grace,  but  it  was 
never  meant  to  stand.  This  covenant  of  which  Christ  is  the  Surety  standeth  for 
ever  and  ever.  4.  The  old  covenant  was  one  in  which  there  were  imperfections 
(chap.  viii.  7-9).  In  the  economy  of  grace,  of  which  our  Lord  is  the  Surety,  no 
fault  can  be  found,  and  in  it  there  is  no  fuel  for  decay  to  feed  upon.  IV.  Now,  of 
such  a  covenant  or  testament  has  Jesus  Christ  become  the  Priest  and  Surety,  and 
with  that  we  shall  close,  dwelling  upon  the  relationship  in  which  He  stands  to 
THAT  covenant.  Testaments  do  not  need  sureties,  therefore  the  passage  should  be 
read  "  covenant."  But  why  did  He  turn  from  the  idea  of  priesthood  to  that  of 
suretyship?  How  is  our  Lord  Jesus  a  Surety?  1.  He  is  so  because  we  are  abso- 
lutely certain  that  the  covenant  of  grace  will  stand  because  the  Eedeemer  has  come 
into  the  world  and  has  died  for  us.  The  covenant  now  reads  as  a  legacy,  or  a  will, 
the  will  of  God,  the  New  Testament  of  the  Most  High.  Christ  has  made  it  so,  and 
the  very  fact  that  there  is  such  a  person  as  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  Man,  living, 
bleeding,  dying,  risen,  reigning,  is  the  proof  that  this  covenant  stands  secure  though 
earth's  old  columns  bow.  2.  But  next,  Christ  is  a  Surety  on  God's  part.  "  Look," 
says  the  Father,  '•  have  you  ever  doubted  Me  ?  Believe  My  Son.  Have  I  not 
given  Him  to  you  ?  Is  He  not  one  with  you  in  your  nature !  Has  He  not 
died  for  you?  Surely,  if  I  seem  too  great,  and  therefore  too  terrible  for  the 
grip  of  your  faith,  you  may  lay  hold  on  the  Well-beloved,  your  friend  and  kinsman ; 
and  you  may  see  that  I  give  Him  to  be  for  Me  the  pledge  that  I  intend  to  keep  the 
covenant  of  grace."  3.  But  then  mainly  He  is  a  Surety  of  the  new  covenant  on 
our  behalf.  Adam  entered  into  a  covenant  with  God  for  us,  but  that  covenant 
'.vent  to  pieces  in  a  very  short  time.  Then  the  second  Adam  became  our 
covenant  head  and  surety,  and  represented  us  before  God.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
A  surety  of  a  better  testament. — The  surety  of  a  better  testament: — Observe  here — 
1.  The  title  given  the  gospel  covenant,  it  is  here  called  a  better  testament :  better,  not 
for  substance,  but  for  clearness ;  for  substance,  the  old  covenant  dispensation  and  the 
new  are  the  same  :  but  the  latter  is  made  more  clear,  more  free,  more  full,  more 
surely  ratified,  by  the  death  of  Christ,  and  accompanied  with  a  more  weighty 
operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  2.  The  title  here  given  to  Christ — He  is  the  surety 
of  a  better  testament.  Our  surety,  because  our  sacrifice.  The  Soeinians  own 
Christ  to  be  the  surety  of  the  covenant  in  respect  of  His  holy  Ufe  and  exemplary 
death,  sealing  it  as  a  testimony  by  His  blood,  but  deny  Him  to  be  a  surety  in 
respect  of  His  satisfaction,  merit,  and  intercession.  But  alas  1  as  our  sinful  con- 
dition requires  a  mediator  of  redemption,  so  our  changeable  condition  requires  a 
mediator  of  intercession ;  and  blessed  be  God,  He  has  appointed  one  for  both, 
even  His  own  and  only  Son,  who  is  a  surety  of  a  better  testament.  Learn  thence 
that  the  Lord  Jesus  was  not  only  made  a  surety  on  God's  part  to  us,  to  assure  us 
that  the  promise  of  the  covenant  on  His  part  should  be  perform  ed,  but  was  also 
a  surety  on  our  part,  to  furnish  us  with  that  grace  and  assistance  which  shall 
enable  us  to  do,  answer,  and  perform  all  that  is  required  on  our  part,  that  we  may 
enjoy  the  benefit  of  the  covenant,  grace  here,  and  glory  hereafter.  Christ  has 
undertaken,  as  surety  of  the  covenant,  first,  to  satisfy  for  sin,  by  offering  Himself 
a  propitiatory  sacrifice ;  and  next  to  furnish  forth  a  sufficiency  of  grace  to  enable 
for  the  fulfilling  the  conditions  of  the  gospel  covenant.  {W,  Burkitt,  M.A.)  Not 
BUfTered  to  continue,  by  reason  of  death. — Death  terminating  the  pursuits  of  life : — 
Thus  it  still  fares  with  men,  with  ministers,  with  all.  A  simple  lesson,  but  often 
poorly  learned  I  That  ultimately  we  shall  '*  not  be  suffered  to  continue  by  reason 
of  death "  is  oftentimes  forgotten — sometimes,  apparently,  almost  disbelieved. 
And  even,  alas !  when  the  fact  is  remembered  and  acknowledged,  how  frequent  is 
it  to  overlook  what  death  involves — the  separation  of  body  and  soul ;  the  source 
from  which  it  emanates — sin ;  and  the  issues  to  which  it  leads — eternity,  judg- 
ment, heaven,  hell  1  In  the  very  circumstance  that  death  removes  us  from  this 
terrestrial  scene  of  things,  and  brings  the  professional  pursuits  of  life  to  a  termina- 
tion, there  is  what  should  arrest  and  solemnise  the  mind.  What  a  serious  con- 
sideration this  for  worldly-minded  and  wicked  men  1  What  a  pensive  one  even  for 
the  saints  1  "I  must  part  with  my  library,"  writes  Richard  Baxter  in  prospect  of  hii 
death,  "  and  shall  torn  over  the  pages  of  my  pleasant  books  no  more."    With 


CHAP.  Tn.]  HEBREWS.  581 

death  before  them,  well  may  men  be  cautious  as  to  what  temporal  pursuits  they 
choose.  With  death  before  them,  how  reasonable  that  ministers,  and  private 
Christians,  should  diligently  ply  the  work  of  their  sacred  calling  !  A  joyful  thing 
it  is  to  know  that  the  faithful,  in  bidding  the  professional  business  of  life  farewell, 
shall  pass  to  a  nobler  sphere  of  being,  and  a  more  illustrious  kind  of  work.  And 
amidst  the  funerals  of  the  great  and  good,  what  a  ground  of  hope  and  confidence 
is  He  —far  greater  and  better  than  the  best  and  greatest  of  them  all — the  High 
Priest  who  "  continueth  ever,  and  hath  an  unchangeable  priesthood  I  "  (A.  S. 
Patterson.)  An  unchangeable  priesthood. — The  heavenly  priesthood  of  our  Lord : — 
1.  It  is  one  and  unchangeable  (chap.  vii.  23,  24).  It  was  a  weakness  of  the  legal 
priesthood  that,  held  by  mortal  men,  the  office  nad  to  be  continually  surrendered 
at  the  call  of  death.  At  the  moment  when  "old  experience  "  best  fitted  him  for 
the  discharge  of  his  varied  and  often  difficult  duties,  the  priest  of  Aaron's  line 
with  his  long  gathered  fitness  was  borne  to  the  grave.  At  the  moment  when  he 
had  succeeded  mobt  completely  in  inspiring  with  confidence  those  who  received  the 
benefit  of  his  priestly  ministrations,  his  eyes  closed  upon  their  necessities  and  his 
ears  to  their  cry.  But  it  is  not  so  with  the  Heavenly  High  Priest.  In  Him  the 
thought  of  "  many  "  is  fulfilled  in  that  of  one,  the  thought  of  the  changing  in 
that  of  the  unchanging,  the  thought  of  a  past  to  be  cherished  by  the  memory  in 
that  of  the  same  living  and  abiding  presence — "  Jesus  Christ,  the  same  yesterday 
and  to-day,  yea  and  for  ever  "  (chap.  xiiL  7,  8).  The  worshipper  under  the  better 
covenant  might  thus  recall  every  instance  of  consolation  given  to  the  mourner,  or 
guidance  to  the  perplexed,  or  strength  to  the  weak,  known  either  to  himself  or 
learned  from  the  history  of  others,  and  might  feel  that  the  same  fountain  of  grace 
was  open  in  all  the  fulness  of  its  blessings  to  himself.  In  a  spirit  of  unchanging 
trust  he  might  build  upon  an  unchanging  Eock  of  Ages.  2.  It  is  spiritual  On 
this  point  the  Levitical  system  had  failed  to  satisfy  the  conscience  (chap.  ix.  9,  10) 
For  a  time  it  had  served  an  important  purpose.  While  the  Jewish  people  were 
educating  from  the  outward  to  the  inward,  from  the  carnal  to  the  spiritual,  while 
they  were  as  yet  unable  to  comprehend  the  true  nature  of  God  and  of  the  worship 
which  He  required,  it  Lad  inspired  powerful,  though  still  imperfect,  notions  of  the 
disastrous  consequences  of  forsaking,  and  of  the  glorious  results  of  serving.  Him. 
But  the  state  of  things  then  instituted  could  not  continue.  The  education  of  men 
must  advance,  God  must  be  better  known,  and  the  idea  of  sin  be  deepened.  Thus 
the  whole  Judaic  system  would  necessarily  break  down.  "  The  blood  of  bulls  and 
of  goats  cannot  take  away  sin,"  and  a  spiritual  answer  must  be  given  to  a  spiritual 
need.  That  answer  is  given  in  the  priesthood  and  in  the  priestly  office  of 
Christ.  Identified  with  His  spiritual  offering,  the  offering  of  the  will,  believers 
offer  r,p  their  wills  to  the  Father  of  their  spirits,  and  in  His  perfect  offering  they 
are  accepted.  By  His  offering  they  that  are  sanctified,  or  rather  they  that  are 
being  sanctified,  are  perfected  for  ever.  3.  It  is  universal.  The  blessings  of  the 
Levitical  system  were  confined  to  Israel.  No  stranger,  unless  first  naturalised, 
might  be  partaker  of  its  benefits.  Human  feeling  was  kept  in  the  isolation  of  a 
narrow  groove.  In  the  High  Priesthood  of  Christ  all  distinctions  between  man  and 
man  fall  away.  He  is  not  like  Aaron  the  son  of  Israel.  He  is  like  Melchisedec  a 
Son  of  uian.  In  Him  "  there  can  be  neither  Jew  nor  Greek,"  (fee.  (Gal.  iii.  28).  Not, 
indeed,  that  such  distinctions  as  lie  in  nature  and  providence  are  in  themselves 
obliterated.  But  beneath  them  there  is  the  common  bond  of  a  common  love,  in 
which  all  learn  to  feel  for,  to  sympathise  with,  and  to  help,  one  another,  for  all 
are  '•  one  man  in  Christ  Jesus."  4.  It  is  everlasting.  The  priests  of  Aaron's  line 
were  made  "  after  the  law  of  a  carnal  commandment."  The  High  Priest  of  the 
Christian  faith  is  made  *♦  after  the  power  of  an  endless  life  "  (chap.  vii.  16).  God 
Himself  hath  sworn  to  him, "  Thou  art  a  priest  for  ever."  His  Priesthood  endures 
through  all  the  rolling  years  or  ages  of  the  Christian  economy.  Nay,  it  endures 
throughout  eternity.  It  might  be  thought  that,  at  last,  when  the  end  of  life's 
pilgrimage  is  reached  and  the  number  of  the  elect  is  gathered  in  to  the  safe  protection 
of  their  heavenly  home,  there  would  be  no  need  of  a  priesthood  or  a  priest.  But 
such  is  not  the  teaching  of  the  New  Testament.  Rather  are  we  taught  that  in 
Him,  as  Priest,  must  we  always  stand  accepted  before  God.  Throughout  eternity 
the  love  of  the  Father  must  flow  forth  to  us  "  in  His  name."  Therefore  in  the 
visions  of  the  Eevelation  of  St.  John  He  is  clad  in  priestly  robes ;  and,  in  similar 
robes,  in  garments  washed  and  made  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  His  redeemed 
there  either  stand  singing  their  song  of  grateful  thanksgiving,  or  are  guided  by 
fflm  onto  fountains  of  waters  of  hfe  (chap.  vii.).     {W.  MilUgan,  D.D.)      The  ever- 


682  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vtt 

living  priest : — Our  Lord  is  ordained  onto  an  unchanpeable  priesthood ;  or  rather, 
as  the  margin  hath  it,  to  a  priesthood  "  which  passeth  not  from  one  to  another." 
His  office  cannot  be  taken  up  by  a  successor  :  it  is  not  transferaV>le,  but  belongs  to 
Himself  alone,  seeing  He  ever  liveth  to  carry  it  out  in  His  own  person.  We  have 
only  one  Priest,  and  that  one  Priest  we  have  for  ever.  In  this  we  are  not  like 
Israel  of  old.  I  can  conceive  that  to  many  Jewish  believers  the  death  of  a  priest 
was  a  great  affliction.  I  could  imagine  an  Israelite  saying,  "  And  so  he  ia 
dead  :  that  good  man,  that  tender-spirited  minister,  that  gentle  and  affectionate 
shepherd.  I  have  told  him  ail  my  heart,  and  now  he  is  taken  from  me.  I  went 
to  him  in  my  youth  in  deep  distress  of  conscience :  he  offered  a  sacrifice  for  me 
when  I  was  unclean,  and  brought  me  near  to  the  holy  place.  Since  then  I  have 
gone  to  him  when  I  have  needed  guidance ;  he  has  consulted  the  oracle  on  my  behalf, 
and  my  way  has  been  made  plain.  He  knows  the  secrets  of  my  family ;  he  knows 
those  delicate  griefs  which  I  have  never  dared  to  tell  to  anybody  else.  Alas  !  he  is 
dead,  and  half  my  heart  has  perished.  What  a  gap  is  made  in  my  life  by  his 
decease !  "  The  mourner  would  be  told  that  his  son  had  become  his  successor ; 
but  I  think  I  hear  him  say,  "  Yes,  I  am  aware  of  it :  but  the  young  man  does  not 
know  what  his  father  knew  about  me ;  and  I  could  never  again  lay  bare  my  heart. 
The  son  can  never  be  in  entire  sympathy  with  all  my  sorrows  as  his  good  old 
father  was.  No  doubt  he  is  a  good  man,  but  he  is  not  the  same  person :  I  rever- 
enced every  hair  in  the  grey  beard  of  the  old  high  priest.  I  have  grown  up  with 
him,  and  he  has  helped  me  so  many,  many  times  ;  it  is  so  sad  that  I  shall  see  his 
face  no  more."  There  would  always  be  the  feeling  in  some  minds  that  the  next 
high  priest  might  not  be  quite  so  acceptable  with  God,  or  so  tender  towards  the 
congregation,  as  he  who  had  passed  away.  He  might  be  a  man  superior  in  edaca- 
tion,  but  inferior  in  affection  :  he  might  be  more  austere  and  less  tender,  he  might 
have  greater  gifts  and  less  fatherliness.  At  any  rate,  it  would  seem  like  having  to 
begin  again  when  one  went  for  the  first  time  to  the  new  priest :  it  would  be  a  break 
in  the  continuity  of  one's  comfort.  The  quiet  flow  of  life  would  be  marred,  as 
when  a  river  comes  to  its  rapids,  and  an  impassable  fall  causes  a  break  in  the 
navigation,  and  a  necessary  unloading  of  the  vessel  and  a  laborious  portage  instead 
of  au  easy  passage  down  a  gently  flowing  stream.  "  Oh,"  says  one  good  Israelite, 
"  the  venerable  high  priest  who  has  just  fallen  asleep  was  my  friend ;  we  took  sweet 
counsel  together,  and  walked  to  the  house  of  God  in  company."  Beloved,  here  is 
our  comfort :  we  have  only  one  Priest,  and  He  ever  liveth.  He  had  no  predecessor 
and  He  will  have  no  successor,  because  He  ever  liveth  personally  to  exercise  the 
office  of  High  Priest  on  our  behalf.  My  soul  reposes  in  the  faith  of  His  one 
sacrifice,  offered  once  and  no  more.  There  is  but  one  presenter  of  that  one 
sacrifice,  and  never  can  there  be  another,  since  the  One  is  all-sufficient,  and  He 
never  dies.  Jesus  reads  my  heart,  and  has  always  read  it  since  it  began  to  beat : 
He  knows  my  griefs  and  has  carried  my  sorrows  from  of  old,  and  He  will  bear  both 
them  and  me  when  old  age  shall  shrivel  up  my  strength.  When  I  myself  shall 
fall  asleep  in  death  He  will  not  die,  but  will  be  ready  to  receive  me  into  His  own 
undying  blessedness.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  benefits  of  an  unclmnging  priest- 
hood : — A  question  suggests  itself.  Why  is  the  endless  life  of  one  high  priest  more 
effective  than  a  succession,  conceivably  an  endless  succession,  of  high  priests  ? 
The  eternal  priesthood  involves  two  distinct,  but  mutually  dependent,  conceptions 
— power  to  save  and  intercession.  In  the  case  of  any  man,  to  live  for  ever  means 
power.  Even  the  body  of  our  humiliation  will  be  raised  in  power.  Can  the  spirit, 
therefore,  in  the  risen  life,  its  own  native  home,  be  subject  to  weakness  ?  What, 
then,  shall  we  say  of  the  risen  and  glorified  Christ  ?  The  difference  between  Him 
and  the  high  priests  of  earth  is  Uke  the  difference  between  the  body  that  is  raised 
and  the  body  that  dies.  In  Aaron  priesthood  is  sown  in  corruption,  dishonour, 
weakness;  in  Christ  priesthood  is  raised  in  incorruption,  in  glory,  in  power.  In 
Aaron  it  is  sown  a  natural  priesthood ;  in  Christ  it  is  raised  a  spiritual  priesthood. 
It  must  be  that  the  High  Priest  in  heaven  has  power  to  save  continually  and  com- 
pletely. Whenever  help  is  needed.  He  is  living.  But  He  ever  lives  that  He  may 
intercede.  Apart  from  intercession  on  behalf  of  men,  His  power  is  not  moral.  It 
has  no  greatness,  or  joy,  or  meaning.  Intercession  is  the  moral  content  of  His 
powerful  existence.  Whenever  help  is  needed.  He  is  living,  and  is  mighty  to  save 
from  sin,  to  rescue  from  death,  to  deliver  from  its  fear.    (T.  0.  Edwards,  DJ).) 

Ver.  25.  Able  also  to  save  them  to  the  nttermost. — Christ  the  Saviour  of  sinners : 
— L  Thb  abiuxx  oje*  Chbisx  io  savb  to  xhs  uxx££mosx.   That  Christ  is  able  to  bovo. 


CHAP.  VII.]  HEBREWS.  883 

may  be  argued  from  His  appointment  to  that  work  by  the  Father,  whose  infinite 
wisdom  could  employ  no  means  inadequate  to  the  purpose  they  were  designed  to 
aceomphsh.  That  He  is  able  to  save,  may  be  argued  from  the  dignity  of  His  per- 
eon.  and  His  possession  as  God  and  as  man  of  every  qualification  necessary  in  a 
Saviour.  That  He  is  able  to  eave,  may  be  argued  from  the  unequivocal  testimony 
to  that  ability  borne  by  all  the  subjects  of  His  grace,  both  in  earth  and  in  heaven. 
That  He  is  able  to  save,  may  be  argued  from  the  tokens  of  His  Father's  approba- 
tion, by  bringing  Him  forth  from  the  pri'^on  of  the  grave,  to  which  He  was  con- 
signed by  our  sins,  and  investing  Him  with  universal  dominion  for  the  Church's 
weal.  But  we  limit  ourselves  to  the  proof  of  His  power  to  save  to  the  uttermost, 
derived  from  the  fact  mentioned  in  our  text,  *'  that  He  ever  liveth  to  make  inter- 
cession." To  understand  this,  let  us  remember  that  iu  this  (-hapter  the  apostle  ia 
setting  forth,  in  various  points,  the  superiority  of  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession 
to  the  high  priests  of  the  legal  dispensation.  H.  Some  particolar  points  in  which 
xnAT  UNLIMITED  POWER  TO  SAVE  IS  APPARENT.  1.  His  ability  to  savc  reaches  to  the 
uttermost  depths  of  guilt  and  depravity;  the  greatest  sinners  may  be  pardoned, 
sanctified,  and  glorified  through  His  power  and  grace.  2.  He  can  save  to  the  utter- 
most verge  of  life  and  time.  "  Though  late  repentance  is  seldom  true,  true  repent- 
a'-ce  is  never  too  late."  Let  not  the  impenitence  of  sixty  or  seventy  years  tempt  the 
aged  man  to  cast  his  soul  away.  Long  as  the  hardening  process  has  gone  on  in  his 
heart,  a  look  to  Christ  on  the  cross  may  yet  dissolve  it  in  tears  of  deepest  penitence. 
It  is  only  when  unmoved  to  the  last  that  we  can  say,  "  The  sinner,  being  an  hun- 
dred years  old,  shall  be  accursed."  As  Christ  is  thus  able  to  save  to  the  close  of 
life,  80  He  is  not  less  able  to  save  till  time  shall  terminate.  So  long  as  there  shall 
be  guilty  and  perishing  men,  He  can  stretch  forth  His  hand  for  their  deliverance. 
3.  Christ  can  save  to  the  uttermost  extent  of  His  people's  need.  Salvation  consists 
of  innumerable  benefits,  all  of  which  Christ  is  mighty  to  impart ;  but  this  topio 
being  so  extensive,  we  shall  illustrate  our  statement  by  showing  that  He  can  save 
both  body  and  soul,  and  save  to  eternity.  III.  The  persons  on  whom  the  power  of 
Christ  to  save  shall  be  exercised  :  "  all  who  come  unto  God  through  Him."  With- 
out Him  none  can  be  saved  ;  with  Him  none  can  be  lost.  {James  Kirkwood,  M.A.) 
S'alvntion  to  the  uttermost : — I.  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  for  the  purpose 
OP  man's  salvation.  The  pride  of  the  evil  heart  is  hardly  willing  to  confess  that 
it  really  needed  a  Saviour.  The  duty,  then,  of  the  preacher  is  to  insist  that  Christ 
is  the  Saviour,  and  the  only  Saviour,  of  mankind.  Sin  had  cast  you  down  headlong 
to  such  an  infinite  depth  that,  bruised  and  bleeding  by  the  fall,  you  could  not  climb 
np  the  steep  ascents  from  darkness  into  light,  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God. 
You  were  ruined,  and  you  were  helpless  in  your  ruin ;  and  to  save  you,  to  snatch 
you  from  perdition,  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world.  II.  The  character  op  this 
salvation  which  is  by  Christ.  1,  His  salvation  covers  the  whole  race  of  mankind. 
2.  It  is  salvation  to  the  uttermost  as  regards  the  completeness  and  perfection  of  the 
means  provided  for  the  work.  3.  In  respect  to  its  perfect  consummation.  III.  As 
TO  those  who  shall  be  partakers  of  this  salvation.  1.  Christ  can  only  save  in 
one  accepted  way,  and  that  way  is  through  Himself.  2.  The  atonement  of  Christ 
is  made  effectual  for  us  by  the  exercise  of  sincere  and  loving  faith.  3.  If  wisdom 
or  amiability  or  any  natural  morality  could  save  us,  then  Christ's  salvation  would 
not  be  "  salvation  to  the  uttermost."  If  what  we  can  do  is  necessary  to  fill  up  the 
measure  of  demanded  sacrifice,  then  Christ's  sacrifice  is  not  infinite  after  all.  And 
if  Christ's  sacrifice  is  not  infinite,  then  Christ  Himself  is  not  infinite.  But  if,  on 
the  other  hand,  Christ  be  infinite,  if,  therefore,  His  sacrifice  be  infinite,  then  the 
possibility  of  our  coming  acceptably  to  God  in  any  other  way  is  in  the  nature  of 
things  impossible.  4.  Nay,  more,  it  is  an  insult  to  Christ.  Would  it  not  be  a 
grievous  detraction  from  His  glory  who  is  worthy  of  all  honour  and  praise  if,  after 
He  had  opened  a  new  and  living  way  for  us  through  His  flesh,  God  should  accept 
the  sinner  coming  to  Him  in  any  other  way?  IV.  Important  consequences  flow- 
ing FROM  these  truths.  1.  What  a  debt  of  gratitude  is  imposed  upon  us  by  the 
preparation  for  us  and  the  offering  to  us  of  this  perfect  salvation  through  Jesua 
Christ  1  2.  The  perfection  of  Christ's  salvation  is  an  inducement  to  an  immediate 
acceptance  of  it.  3.  A  lesson  of  comfort  and  hope.  In  this  world,  even  the  best  of 
men  are  continually  obliged  to  struggle  with  sin.  What  a  light,  then,  of  consola- 
tion and  hope  is  kindled  for  us  in  the  text.  He  will  save  to  the  uttermost.  The 
weak  shall  yet  be  strong ;  the  impure  shall  yet  be  pure ;  the  struggling,  weary 
heart  shall  yet  rest  in  perfection  and  peace  beneath  the  smUe  of  God.  {W.  Rudder, 
DJD.)      Salvation  to  the  uttermost : — I.  Ths  people  who  are  to  be  saved.  1.  Where 


-Kfr 


.*N 


>v^ 


684  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  mti 

these  people  ccme  to.  "  Unto  God."  2.  How  they  come.  By  Jesus  Christ  3. 
What  they  come  for.  Salvation.  4.  In  what  style  they  come.  Not  with  the 
pompous  pride  of  the  Pharisee,  not  with  the  cant  of  the  good  man  who  thinks  he 
deserves  salvation,  but  with  the  sincere  cry  of  a  penitent,  with  the  earnest  desire  of 
a  thirsty  soul  after  UvLng  water.  As  my  God  who  sits  in  heaven  liveth,  if  you  have 
not  come  to  God  in  this  fashion,  you  have  not  come  to  God  at  all ;  but  if  you  have 
thus  come  to  God,  here  is  the  glorious  word  for  you — "  He  is  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost  them  that  come  unto  God  by  Him."  H.  What  is  the  measdee  of  the 
Saviour's  ability  ?  1,  Sinner  !  Christ  is  "  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost " ;  by  which 
we  understand  that  the  uttermost  extent  of  guilt  is  not  beyond  the  power  of  the 
Saviour.  Can  any  one  tell  what  is  the  uttermost  amount  to  wLich  a  man  might 
sin  ?  2.  To  the  uttermost  of  rejection.  There  are  a  thousand  prayers  on  which 
you  have  trampled,  there  are  a  hundred  sermons  all  wasted  on  you,  there  are  thou- 
sands of  Sabbaths  which  you  have  thrown  away ;  you  have  rejected  Christ,  you 
have  despised  His  Spirit ;  but  still  He  ceases  not  to  cry,  "  Eeturn  1  return  1 "  He 
is  "  able  to  save  thee  to  the  uttermost,"  if  thou  comest  unto  God  by  Him.  3.  There 
is  another  case  which  demands  my  particular  attention  :  it  is  that  oi  the  man  who 
has  gone  to  the  uttermost  of  despair.  Let  me  whisper  to  him  words  of  consolation. 
Despairing  soul  1  hope  yet,  for  Christ  "is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost";  and 
though  thou  art  put  in  the  lowest  dungeon  of  the  castle  of  despair,  though  key  after 
key  hath  been  turned  upon  thee,  and  the  iron  grating  of  thy  window  forbids  all 
iiling,  and  the  height  of  thy  prison  wall  is  so  awful  that  tbou  couldst  not  expect  to 
escape,  yet  let  me  tell  thee,  there  is  one  at  the  gate  who  can  break  every  bolt,  and 
undo  every  lock  ;  there  is  one  who  can  lead  thee  out  to  God's  free  air,  and  save  thee 
yet,  for  though  the  worst  may  come  to  the  worst.  He  "  is  able  to  save  thee  to  the 
uttermost."  4.  And  now  a  word  to  the  saint,  to  comfort  him  ;  for  this  text  is  his 
also.  Cbrist  is  able  to  save  thee  to  the  uttermost.  Art  thou  brought  very  low  by 
distress?  hast  thou  lost  house  and  home,  friend  and  property?  Bemember,  thou 
hast  not  come  "  to  the  uttermost "  yet.  Badly  off  as  thou  art,  thou  mightest  be 
worse.  He  is  able  to  save  thee  ;  and  suppose  it  should  come  to  this,  that  thou  hadst 
not  a  rag  left,  nor  a  crust,  nor  a  drop  of  water,  still  He  would  be  able  to  save  thee, 
for  "  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttennost."  So  with  temptation.  If  thou  shouldst 
have  the  sharpest  temptation  with  which  mortal  was  ever  tried.  He  is  able  to  save 
thee.  If  thou  shouldst  be  brought  into  such  a  predicament  that  the  loot  of  the 
devil  should  be  upon  thy  neck,  and  the  fiend  should  say,  "  Now  I  will  make  an  end 
of  thee,"  God  would  be  able  to  save  thee  then.  Aye,  and  in  the  uttermost  infirmity 
shouldst  thou  live  for  many  a  year,  till  thou  art  leaning  on  thy  stalif ,  and  tottering 
along  thy  weary  life,  if  thou  shouldst  outlive  Methuselah,  thou  couldst  not  live  be- 
yond the  uttermost,  and  He  would  save  thee  then.  Yea,  and  when  thy  little  bark 
is  launched  by  death  upon  the  unknown  sea  of  eternity,  He  will  be  with  thee ;  and 
though  thick  vapours  of  gloomy  darkness  gather  round  thee,  and  thou  canst  not 
see  into  the  dim  future,  though  thy  thoughts  tell  thee  that  thou  wilt  be  destroyed, 
yet  God  will  be  "  able  to  save  thee  to  the  uttennost."    III.  Now,  in  the  last  place, 

WHY  IS  IT  THAT  JeSUS  ChKIST  IS  "  ABLE    TO   SAVE  TO    THE    UTTEBMOST  "  ?       The  aUSWCr 

is,  that  He  "  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them."  This  implies  that  He 
died,  which  is  indeed  the  great  source  of  His  saving  power.  Oh  1  how  sweet  it  is  to 
reflect  upon  the  great  and  wondrous  works  which  Christ  hath  done,  whereby  He 
hath  become  *'  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession,"  able  to  save  us  1  That  Man  who 
once  died  on  the  cross  is  alive  ;  that  Jesus  who  was  buried  in  the  tomb  is  alive.    If 

you  ask  me  what  He  is  doing,  I  bid  you  listen.     ' '  0  My  Father  1  forgive !  " 

Why,  He  mentioned  your  own  name  1  "  0  My  Father,  forgive  him  ;  he  knew  not 
what  he  did.  It  is  true  he  sinned  against  hght,  and  knowledge,  and  warnings ;  sinned 
wilfully  and  woefully ;  but.  Father,  forgive  him  1 "  Penitent,  if  thou  canst  hsten, 
thou  wilt  hear  Him  praying  for  thee.  And  that  is  why  He  is  able  to  save.  A  warn- 
ing and  a  question,  and  I  have  done.  First,  a  warning.  Eemember,  there  is  a  limit 
to  God's  mercy.  I  have  told  you  from  the  Scriptures  that  "  He  is  able  to  save  to 
the  uttermost  "  ;  but  there  is  a  limit  to  His  purpose  to  save.  If  I  read  the  Bible 
rightly,  there  is  one  sin  which  can  never  be  forgiven.  It  is  the  sin  against  the  Holy 
Ghost,  Tremble,  unpardoned  sinners,  lest  ye  should  commit  that.  And  now,  lastly, 
the  question.  Christ  has  done  so  much  for  you  :  what  have  you  ever  done  for  Him  ? 
Oh  1  there  are  some  of  you  that  will  loathe  yourselves  when  you  know  Christ  be- 
cause you  did  not  treat  Him  better.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  A  great  Saviour  : — Jesus 
is  above  all  praise.  As  the  stars  disappear  when  the  sun  rises,  so  all  subjects  fftde 
away  when  we  think  of  Christ.    He  is  spoken  of  elsewhere  as  a  Friend,  Teaoher, 


CHAP.  TO.]  HEBREWS.  685 

Light,  Eedeemer,  Ransom,  Physician,  and  here  as  a  Great  Saviour.  I.  How  Jebus 
SAVES.  1.  Kindly.  It  is  often  said,  "  He  was  moved  with  compassion  "  (John  xi. 
35).  2.  Quickly.  Sometimes  accidents  are  long  before  they  are  healed.  Christ 
heals  and  forgives  "  straightway."  3.  Fully.  "  From  their  sins."  From  pride, 
anger,  hate,  wrong  words,  evil  thoughts.  From  death  and  hell  to  heaven,  II. 
Whom  He  saves.  1.  "  Them  that  come."  Christ  is  a  Spring.  If  we  thirst  we  must 
come.  Bread  of  Life,  Burden-bearer,  Physician.  2.  AU  who  come.  "To  the 
uttermost."  Some  children  are  much  worse  than  others.  They  know  more,  and 
yet  sin  against  God.  But  Christ  can  save  the  worst  among  us.  IH.  A  obeat  en- 
couKAGEMENT.  Jesus  Still  livcB.  The  priests  died.  Our  friends  die.  Jesus  never 
dies.  Let  us  come  to  Him  to-day,  and  receive  His  great  salvation.  {R.  Ercwin.) 
Chriafs  salvation: — I.  Whom  does  Christ  save  ?  "  Them  that  come  unto  God  by 
Him."  n.  Tee  way  in  which  He  saves  Tn"M.  •'  He  ever  liveth  to  make  inter- 
cession for  them."  Christ  stands  for  them,  not  they  for  themsjl/ts.  He  answers 
for  their  sins.  He  gives  virtue  to  their  services,  He  obtains  supply  for  their  wants. 
1.  The  intercession  of  Christ  is  to  us  the  source  of  safety.  2.  The  intercession  of 
Christ  is  to  us  the  source  of  acceptance  for  our  services.  3.  Christ's  intercession 
procures  the  supply  of  all  our  wants.  III.  The  completeness  and  perfection  of 
THE  SALVATION  OFFERED  IN  Chbist.  "  He  is  able  to  savc  to  the  uttermost  those  who 
come  unto  God  through  Him."  1.  He  is  able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  from 
their  guilt.  2.  He  is  able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  from  their  sins.  3.  He  is 
ab'e  to  save  to  the  uttermost  through  every  obstacle.  (G.  Innrs,  M.A.)  Soul 
restoration  : — I.  The  salvation  of  man  is  the  moral  coming  of  the  soul  to  its 
God.  1.  In  love.  2.  In  likeness.  3.  In  fellowship.  II.  The  true  coming  of  the 
soul  to  its  God  is  through  the  medutoeship  of  Jesus  Christ.  By  bringing  man 
back  to  God.  1.  By  demonstrating  God's  love.  2.  By  revealing  God's  character. 
3.  By  manifesting  God's  presence.  III.  The  mediatorsbip  of  Christ  for  the  purpose 
is  permanently  available.  1.  The  saving  virtues  of  EUs  system  are  permanently 
available.  2.  The  saving  agency  of  His  Spirit  is  permanently  available.  IV.  The 
permanent  availableness  of  His  mediation  renders  saltation  possible  to  all. 
(Homilist.)  A  Saviour  to  the  uttermost : — I.  This  comino  to  God  begins  in  repent- 
ance. The  pinch  of  hunger  makes  the  prodigal  cry  out,  "  I  am  perishing  with 
hunger."  This  leads  him  to  reflect  on  the  past,  and  lays  on  his  conscience  the 
sense  of  guilt.  "  I  will  arise  and  go  unto  my  father,  and  will  say  unto  him.  Father, 
I  have  sinned."  That  is  his  errand.  Thus,  want  creates  desire  ;  desire  expresses 
itself  in  prayer;  faith  sustains  prayer;  God's  promises  and  p-^rfections  sustain 
faith.  Hence  the  universal  law,  "  He  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe  that  He  is, 
and  that  He  is  the  rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  Him."  But  though,  in  the 
Word,  and  through  His  works,  God  is  revealed  infinite  in  wisdom  and  in  power, 
"  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask,  or  even  think,"  though  He 
is  here  revealed  as  condescending  to  our  lowhness,  pitying  our  weakness,  merciful 
to  our  transgression ;  yet  He  is  the  Infinite  Spirituality.  Our  senses  cannot  reach 
Him.  No  thought  of  ours  can  grasp  His  greatness.  He  is  ineffably  exalted,  infi- 
nitely glorious,  eternally  true,  inflexibly  jusi,  spotlessly  pure — a  moral  glory,  the 
blaze  of  which  would  entirely  consume  us  if  we  got  directly  confronted  with  it.  The 
rejecting  man  then  asks,  "  How  can  I  think  of  Him,  of  approaching  Him,  of  speak- 
ing to  HiLu  ?  "  You  hope  to  be  accepted.  There  is  an  intercessor — Jesus  Christ, 
the  Eighteous  One.  That  intercessor  has  revealed  His  Father's  love,  inviting  us  to 
go  on.  He  has  met  every  claim ;  He  pleads  our  cause.  Believing  it,  the  mind 
enters  into  rest ;  the  heart  grows  calm  ;  there  is  a  conscious  approach  to  the  Most 
High.  II.  But,  secondly,  we  will  glance  at  the  work  of  Christ.  "  He  ever  liveth 
to  make  intercession."  An  intercessor  is  a  third  person  coming  betwixt  two  others. 
He  stands  related  to  both,  and  is  accepted  by  both.  Thus  it  is  said  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  intercedes.  On  the  other  hand,  and  God-ward,  we  say,  "  He  that  searchetb 
the  heart  knoweth  what  is  the  mind  of  the  spirit,  because  He  maketh  intercession 
for  the  saints  according  to  the  wiU  of  God."  The  Divine  Spirit  dwells  in  the  Divine 
mind,  and  all  His  impulses  must  be  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  Divine  will.  And, 
on  the  other  hand,  and  in  view  of  man,  we  say,  "  We  know  not  what  to  pray  for  as 
we  ought."  "  The  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirmities,  and  maketh  intercession  for  us 
with  groanings  that  cannot  be  uttered."  We  are  sometimes  so  ignorant  or  so 
troubled  that  we  can  only  groan  oat  our  desires ;  but  as  He  prompts  them.  He  fills 
them  with  meaning  and  secures  their  acceptance.  Thus,  too,  the  Divine  Eedeemer 
exalted  in  heaven  is  said  to  intercede,  and  to  intercede  on  behalf  of  all  those  who 
offer  prayer  to  God     HI.  In  the  third  place,  we  glance  at  the  pbaotioaii  eksult  of 


586  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

THIS  ABIDING  INTERCESSION.  By  virtue  thereof  He  saves.  He  is  "  able  to  save.'* 
He  is  "  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost."  Oh,  priceless  words?  Is  there  one  ein- 
burdened,  beclouded  mind,  one  needing  a  Saviour  and  conscious  of  it,  one  who  feela 
that  God  is  supreme  good — that  away  from  Him  happiness  and  rest  will  be  impos- 
sible, yet  conscious  of  much  to  keep  Him  away — afraid?  Oh  I  think  of  the  Inter- 
cessor and  the  result  of  His  intercession.  He  can  save.  "  His  name  shall  be  called 
Jesus,  for  He  shall  save  His  people  from  their  sins."  This  is  the  brief  and  yet  full 
exposition  of  the  message  of  the  great  and  blessed  Saviour,  for  concerning  Him  it 
is,  to  the  end  of  time,  "  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Chiist 
Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,"  even  the  very  chief.  AU  the  divinely 
illuminated  have  seen  that  Saviour.  Their  language  is,  "  Mine  eyes  have  seen  Thy 
salvation."  They  have  welcomed  Jesus,  and  they  have  Him  in  their  hearts,  and 
they  have  heard  the  words,  "  This  day  has  salvation  come  to  this  house."  There 
is  nothing  of  the  kind  anywhere  else.  I  have  read  of  all  the  systems  of  philosophy 
and  religion,  from  the  earhest  days,  and  all  over  the  world  until  now  ;  but  I  know 
ijf  nothing  that  pretends  to  bring  this  salvation  but  the  glorious  gospel.  "  Neither 
is  there  salvation  in  any  other.  There  is  no  other  name  under  heaven  given  among 
men  whereby  we  can  be  saved."  But  this  is  enough.  "  He  is  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost  all  them  that  come  unto  God  by  Him."  Now,  He  not  only  saves,  but  He 
has  power  distinctively,  for  He  is  "  able  to  save."  The  old  predictions  and  invita- 
tions proclaim  this.  "  Look  unto  Me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth, 
for  I  am  God,  and  there  is  none  else."  This,  therefore,  is  the  position  in  which 
the  whole  thing  is  presented  to  our  minds  in  the  New  Testament.  "  Now  unto  Him 
that  is  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think."  This, 
therefore,  is  our  Lord's  special  claim.  Doubting,  troubled  soul,  weary  with  the 
burden  of  thy  sin,  and  anxious  for  rest,  this  is  our  Lord's  special  claim.  What  He 
said  to  the  blind  man  He  says  to  you — "  Believe  ye  that  I  am  able  to  do  this  ?  "  He 
honours  faith,  faith  honours  Him.  "Be  it  unto  you  according  to  your  faith."  One 
of  the  most  familiar  similitudes  to  represent  the  salvation  of  the  soul  is  the  deliver- 
ance of  captives — men  who  have  been  made  prisoners  in  war.  These  are  lost  men 
— lost  to  country,  to  kindred,  to  liberty,  to  honour,  to  hope ;  bound  in  chains,  cast 
into  dungeons,  to  suffer  without  pity,  to  toil  without  recompense,  to  weep,  to  groan, 
to  die — no  friend  but  death,  no  shelter  but  the  grave.  One  comes  to  deUver. 
With  strong  hand  He  smites  down  the  captor,  and  sets  the  captive  free.  la 
doing  that  He  lost  His  life.  He  knew  that  He  should,  but  He  did  it,  notwith- 
standing —  nay,  with  that  very  end  in  view.  As  the  captives  move  away, 
gladly  they  say,  "  He  died  for  me !  He  died  for  me  1  "  "  He  is  able  to  save 
them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  GoJ  by  Him,  seeing  He  ever  liveth  to  make 
intercession  for  them."  "Ever  liveth,"  and  therefore  "able  to  save  to  the  utter- 
most." In  the  margin  the  word  is  "for  evermore."  "To  the  uttermost" — 
perfectly,  in  every  sense,  and  for  every  object.  "  To  the  uttermost."  Oh,  sinking 
soul,  the  hand  is  strong;  the  hand  is  loving.  Take  hold  of  it.  {John  Aldis.) 
Christ  able  to  save : — What  is  salvation  ?  We  cannot  fully  answer  this  question 
unless  we  knew  the  extreme  evil  and  demerit  of  sin ;  unless  we  understood  the 
worth  of  the  soul,  the  duration  of  eternity,  and  the  felicity  of  heaven.  This  we 
know,  salvation  is  deliverance  from  sin  and  all  its  consequences;  freedom  from  the 
curse  of  a  broken  law,  and  from  the  wrath  of  an  offended  God  ;  the  possession  of 
pardon,  peace,  and  growing  purity  in  this  Uf e ;  and  the  full  fruition  of  holiness, 
happiness,  and  glory  in  the  life  which  is  to  come.  Salvation  includes  whatever 
constitutes  the  perfection  of  our  immortal  nature,  its  highest  enjoyment ;  and  this 
enjoyment  perpetuated  to  the  countless  ages  of  eternity.  Christ  is  "  able  to  save." 
We  notice — I.  His  natueal  ABHiiTv.  His  ability  of  nature,  irrespective  of  any 
office  He  fiUs,  or  engagement  He  has  made  :  in  plain  words.  His  ability  as  God. 
II.  His  official  abilitt.  His  abiUty  of  office,  in  virtue  of  which  it  is  His  right, 
His  prerogative,  to  save.  The  Son  of  God  undertook  the  cause  of  ruined  man  :  He 
became  Mediator.  This  was  the  office  He  condescended  to  sustain ;  and  in 
pursuance  of  this  office  He  saves.  IIL  His  moral  ability.  His  ability  of  mind, 
if  it  may  be  so  expressed ;  His  inclination :  in  one  word.  His  wilhngness  to  save. 
And  how  does  this  appear  ?  How  is  it  proved  ?  Consider — 1.  What  He  hath  said. 
He  hath  given  the  strongest  assurances  of  His  ability,  His  resolution,  to  save  ;  and 
shall  we  not  believe  Him  ?  2.  What  He  hath  done.  He  hath  saved  sinners,  tha 
greatest  sinners;  and  facts  are  decisive.  3.  What  He  is  no,v  doing  is  farther  proof 
of  the  ability,  the  willingness,  of  the  Saviour.  I  refer  not  to  His  intercession  in 
Leaven,  though  this  is  decisive ;  bat  to  the  grace  which  He  bestows  on  earth,  th« 


CHAP,  vn.]  HEBREWS.  681 

saving  power  which  He  now  exerts  among  the  sons  of  men.  (T.  Kidd.)  Christ 
taxes  fully  and  evermore  : — The  Greek  term  includes  two  things :  to  save  fully,  and 
to  Bave  evermore — hoth  are  included.  They  are  put  in  the  text,  to  save  to  the 
uttermost ;  they  put  into  the  margin,  very  properly,  the  other  term,  evermore ;  and 
both  are  included.  The  Lord  Jesus  saves  to  the  uttermost  from  all  the  power  of 
sin.  He  will  give  you  power  to  conquer  every  evil — the  yoke  of  iniquity  will  be 
removed — the  chain  by  nature  taken  away,  suapped  asunder — and  your  souls  enter 
into  liberty  through  the  blood  of  the  covenant.  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost 
from  all  past  guilt.  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  from  all  pollution.  To 
cleanse  the  polluted  heart — to  destroy  everything  contrary  to  the  Divine  nature — 
to  raise  the  soul  to  bear  the  stamp  divine  of  the  lovely  image  of  oar  Lord.  The 
marginal  reading  (evermore)  is  also  to  be  included.  "He  is  able  to  save  evermore." 
Oh,  how  common  is  the  fear  with  many  that  if  they  were  to  enter  into  the  heavenly 
way,  and  that  if  they  were  to  connect  themselves  with  the  people  of  God,  that  they 
should  very  soon  fall  from  grace,  and  make  shipwreck  of  faith  and  of  a  good 
conscience.  Cannot  Jesus  keep  you?  Will  not  His  grace  prove  BuflScient 
for  you?  Will  He  not  save  you  in  your  dying  hour?  Is  He  not  an  almighty 
Saviour  ?  We  may  often  reflect  on  that  subject  when  you  and  I  stand 
on  the  verge  of  eternity.  But  whom  will  Jesus  save  ?  "  All  them  that  come 
unto  God  by  Him."  We  can  only  come  to  God  through  His  atoning 
blood;    there    is    no    other    way.      (G.    Marsden.)  Christ's  power    to   save 

tinners : — I.  The  poweb  of  the  Lobd  Jesos  Chbist  to  save  sinners.  1.  The 
perfection  of  His  atoning  sacrifice.  (1)  The  appointment  of  the  Father.  (2) 
Immaculate  purity.  (3)  Voluntary  substitution  of  Himself.  (4)  The  infinite 
majesty  of  His  person.  2.  The  duration  of  His  life,  and  the  perpetuity  of  His 
office.  3.  The  prevalence  of  BUs  never-ceasing  intercession.  II.  The  chabacteb 
OF  THOSE  who  abb  INTERESTED  IN  His  INTERCESSION.  1.  The  expression,  "  to 
come  to  God  by  Him,"  implies  a  practical  conviction  of  the  existence  of  the  one 
true  God,  in  opposition  to  the  polytheism  and  idolatry  of  the  heathen  nations.  2. 
It  implies  a  conviction  of  guilt  and  ruin,  and  a  simple  dependence  on  Him  for 
acceptance  before  God.  3.  It  impUes  an  ardent  attachjnent  to  those  ordinances 
which  God,  through  this  High  Priest,  has  in  mercy  appointed.  It  is  in  His 
ordinances  that  He  has  promised  to  bless.  4.  It  implies  a  consecration  to  Jehovah. 
III.  The  vast  extent  to  which  BLis  bavino  power  reaches.  1.  He  is  able  to 
save  to  the  utmost  limit  of  this  world's  duration.  2.  He  is  able  to  save  from  the 
lowest  gulf  of  guilt  and  ruin.  3.  He  is  able  to  save  from  the  lowest  depths  of 
defection  and  apostacy.  4.  He  is  able  to  save  at  the  last  moment.  Lessons :  1. 
The  vast  importance  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Atonement.  2.  The  vast  importance  of 
the  essential  deity  of  Christ.  3.  The  necessity  of  a  personal  application  of  the 
blood  of  the  Atonement.  4.  The  encouragement  which  this  doctrine  affords  to  the 
weeping,  broken-hearted  penitent.  6.  The  most  astonishing  display  of  the  love  of 
God  to  man.  (W.  Tliorpe.)  The  suitableness  of  Christ  as  a  Saviour  to  all  who 
believe  in  Him : — I.  The  glorious  truth  declared.  ♦'  He  is  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost."  1.  The  extent  of  His  atonement.  (1)  Infinite  in  merit.  (2)  God  has 
promised  to  pardon  the  sins  of  those  who  believe  in  His  only  begotten  Son.  (3) 
The  invitations  of  Scripture  to  believe  in  Christ  are  universal — without  regard  to 
persons.  (4)  All  men  are  directly  or  indirectly  commanded  to  beheve  in  Christ, 
or  encouraged  to  do  so.  (5)  The  Scriptures  evidently  assert  that  unbelief  is  a  sin, 
and  a  sin  which  is  threatened  with  endless  punishment.  2.  He  is  able  to  save  to 
the  uttermost  as  it  regards  the  perfection  of  the  work.  The  work  of  salvation  by 
Christ  will  be  perfect  in  the  highest  degree.  And  this  will  appear  more  glorious 
when  you  consider  the  lengths  to  which  some  have  gone  in  a  sinful  course  towards 
misery  before  they  were  arrested  by  the  power  of  sovereign  grace.  3.  He  saves  to 
the  uttermost  as  it  regards  the  duration  of  the  work.  And  this  may  be  considered 
in  two  respects.  (1)  As  it  regards  the  work  in  this  world.  To  the  progress  of 
Divine  grace  in  the  heart,  there  is  often  much  opposition  made  by  temptations, 
trials,  and  the  remaining  corruptions  of  a  sinful  heart  of  unbelief  :  but  through  all, 
Jesus  Christ,  as  our  faithful  High  Priest,  is  engaged  to  carry  on  the  work  to  perfec- 
tion, even  in  the  weakest  and  the  humblest  of  His  people.  (2)  His  saving  to  the 
uttermost,  with  regard  to  the  duration  of  it,  may  be  considered  in  reference  to  the 
world  that  is  to  come.  This  salvation  will  be  eternal.  II.  The  mankeb  in  which 
this  salvation  is  obtained.  "  Them  that  come  unto  God  by  Him."  1.  Christ  aa 
a  Mediator  is  the  only  way  of  worship.  2.  This  implies  faith  in  Him  as  our  great 
High  Priest,  whereby  we  become  interested  in  His  saving  power     Faith  in  Hin^ 


688  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vn 

enables  the  believer  to  feel  and  say  (Heb.  x.  19-22).    As  He  is  the  Legislator  ol 
the  New  Testament  dispensation,  as  well  as  the  only  Priest,  we  must  worship  God 
in  the  way  of  His  appointment.    We  are  to  come  unto  the  Father  in  His  name, 
seeking  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  help  our  infirmities.     We  must  also 
come  with  affiance  in  His  mediatorial  office,  as  to  the  acceptance  of  every  act  of 
worship  and  obedience.    Without  this  simple  reliance  and  humble  confidence  we 
can  have  no  saving  interest  in  the  blessings  of  redemption  through  Him  (Johnxv.  6). 
3.  This  will  enable  us  to  judge  whether  we  are  among  the  number  of  those  who 
are  saved  through  Him.    If  we  are,  we  know  what  it  is  to  plead  His  all-sufficient 
atonement  before  the  mercy-seat  as  the  only  ground  of  our  acceptance  with  God. 
in.  The  REASON  which  the  apostle  assigns  in  confirmation  of  this  truth  :  •'  Seeing 
He  ever   liveth  to  make  intercession  for   us."      This   shows  us — 1.    That  the 
mediatorial  work  of  Christ,  while  on  earth,  was  accepted  of  God.     2.  He  lives  to 
tarry  on   the  work  of  redemption.     Though  exalted   at  the  right  hand  of  the 
Majesty  on  high,  yet  He  remembers  His  people  below,  and  makes  intercession  for 
them  above.     {N.  M.  Harry.)        The  almighty  Saviour : — I.  First,  let  us  look  at 
THE  OBJECT  OF  THE  KEDEEafER's  WORK.     It  is  "  to  savo."    What  is  it  •' to  save"? 
To  save  implies  much.     It  implies  that  it  was  the  design  of  God  that  poor  fallen 
man  should  be  raised  higher  in  felicity  than  he  had  sunk  low  in  misery :  "  Who 
hath  saved  us,  and  called  us,  not  according  to  our  works,  but  according  to  Hia 
purpose  and  grace,  which  were  in  Christ  Jesus,  before  the  world  began."     Then  it 
implies  that  there  is  a  Saviour;  and  who  is  that  Saviour?    And  what  is  His  name? 
And  where  does  He  dwell?     If  I  turn  to  fallen  man,  he  says,  "Oh!  He  is  not 
among  us ;  I  have  not  even  righteousness  enough  to  save  niybelf ."    If  I  turn  to 
angels,  they  say,  "He  is  not  amongst  us;  we  have  no  righteousness  to  spare."    If 
I  turn  to  the  sea,  it  says,  "  It  is  not  in  me."     If  I  turn  to  the  earth,  it  brings  me 
nothing  but  shame,  and  poverty,  and  want.    And  while  I  am  musing  and  turning 
hither  and  thither,  lo,  a  voice  from  the  heavenly  world  arrests  my  attention,  and 
says,  "Behold  My  servant  whom  I  uphold.  Mine  elect  in  whom  My  soul  delighteth ; 
I  will  put  My  Spirit  upon  Him,  and  He  shall  show  salvation  unto  the  Gentiles,  His 
name  shall  be  called  Jesus,  for  He  sbaU  save  His  people  from  their  sins."    And  it 
includes,  as  well  as  imphes,  mark  you,  what  it  is  to  save.     To  save  is  to  deliver 
an  individual  from  the  curse  and  condemnation  of  sin,  from  the  rule  and  slavery 
of  sin,  from  the  consequences  and  dismal  end  of  sin.    H.  But  you  say  to  me,  "Yes, 
it  is  true  that  this  is  the  salvation  that  I  should  desire  to  enjoy  ;  but  how  can  I  bb 
snEE  THAT  Christ  will  save  me  ?  "    Well,  that  matter  is  quite  settled ;  but,  just 
to  brinfi  it  before  you  a  little,  let  me  illustrate  it.     There  are  three  things  that 
make  ihis  sure  in  the  ability  which  He  has  to  secure  this  object.    First,  it  is  ensured 
by  the  dignity  of  His  person  ;  secondly,  it  is  ensured  by  the  perfectiou  of  His  work ; 
thirdly,  it  is  ensured  by  His  never-failing  success.     III.  Then  here  are  the  people 
WHOM  He  will  save  :  "  them  that  come  unto  God  by  Him."     Mark  the  phrase- 
ology, for  it  is  peculiar.     "  Them  that  come  to  God."     Ah!  here  is  a  change;  all 
the  man's  life  was  going  from  God ;  now  he  is  coming  to  God.    Here  is  the  prodigal 
coming  home ;  here  is  the  criminal  coming  to  God  for  mercy.     But  how  can  a  poor, 
wretched,  lost,  guilty,  undone  criminal  expect  to  fii^d  mercy  of  God  ?     "  Coming  to 
God  by  Him."    Ah!  that  explains  the  difficulty,  and  removes  it  out  of  the  way. 
0  Lord !  I  have  no  name  to  come  in,  but  I  come  in  the  name  of  Thy  Son  ;  I  have 
no  righteousness  to  offer  before  Thee,  but  I  come  in  the  robe  of  Thy  Son  ;  I  have 
no  merit,  but  I  come  in  the  merit  of  Him  who  hung  upon  the  tree.     IV.  Finally, 
here  is  the  reason  why  this  salvation  is  to  be  exercised  upon  these  persons. 
"  Seeing  He  ever  Uveth  to  make  intercession  for  them."    And  an  important  reason 
this  is.     The  comparison  is  drawn  here  between  the  priests  under  i,he  law  and 
Himself.    They  died ;  and  they  had  to  make  atonement  for  themselves,  as  well 
as  for  the  people.    He  had  none  to  make  for  Himself ;  and  He  "  ever  liveth."     Oh ! 
what  a  mercy  for  me  that  I  have  a  living  Saviour  ;  that  He  is  not  dead,  but  that 
He  lives,  and  lives  to  plead  for  me;  that  His  voice  is  heard  in  heaven — "whom 
the  Father  heareth  always  1  " — and  heard  for  me  !    What  an  encouragement  it  is 
to  know  that  you  have  some  one  who  will  introduce  you  into  the  presence  of  the 
King,  who  will  speah  .tell  for  you,  and  is  not  accustomed  to  be  refused  !     And  here 
is  one  that "  ever  lives  to  make  intercession  " !    You  recollect  that  about  the  throne 
of  glory  there  are  certain  vials,  and  these  are  the  "  prayers  of  the  saints."     So 
precious  are  these  prayers,  poor  and  imperfect  as  you  think  them,  that  they  are 
put  into  vials  to  keep  them  ;  and  so  high  is  the  estimation  of  them  that  they  are 
pat  into  golden  vials,  and  God  Himself  says  they  are  used  as  odours  in  the  heavenly 


CHAP,  vn.]  HEBREWS.  58f 

world.  And  if  the  prayers  of  my  father,  and  my  mother,  and  my  sister,  and  my 
brother  are  so  precious  in  God's  estimation,  what  must  my  Saviour's  intercession 
be  t  {James  Sherman.)  The  ability  of  Jesus  Christ  to  save  to  the  uttermost  j — 
In  the  text  two  things  engage  us :  first,  the  character  of  the  persons  to  whom  it 
relates,  "  Those  that  come  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ " ;  and,  secondly,  the  ability  of 
Jesus  Christ  to  save  such,  and  the  extent  of  that  ability,  "  He  is  able  to  save  such 
to  the  uttermost."  I.  The  chabacter  is  thai  of  those  who  coifs  to  God  by  Jesus 
Christ.  The  grand  assumption  of  Christianity  consists  of  two  parts :  first,  that 
we  stand  in  a  natural  relation  to  God ;  and,  secondly,  that  we  have  violated  this 
relation.  The  idea  of  coming  to  God  seems  to  be  taken  from  the  practice  of  the 
IsraeUtes  as  coming  to  the  temple  in  their  local  worship :  it  is  no  longer  now  a 
local  approach,  it  is  a  mental  approach,  a  movement  of  the  mind,  a  turning  of  the 
heart  to  God.  This  coming  may  be  regarded  under  two  aspects :  we  must  come  as 
subjects  to  obey  God,  and  come  as  suppliants  to  enjoy  God.  Whoever  so  comes  is 
the  character  that  has  the  comfort  of  the  text,  has  a  share  in  the  redemption  of 
Jesus  Christ.    But  all  that  come  to  God  must  come  by  Jesus  Christ.     II.  Thb 

ABILITY  Oy  JeSDS   ChRIST   to   save    SnCH,   AND    ITS    EXTENT,    "  TO     THE     UTTERMOST." 

1.  His  ability.  (1)  He  alone  is  appointed  by  God :  "Him  hath  God  the  Father 
sealed  "  to  dispense  the  bread  of  life  to  dying  sinners.  (2)  He  actually  shed  His 
blood  as  an  atonement  for  sin.  (3)  It  is  a  clear  evidence  of  His  ability  to  save 
that  God  has  raised  Him  up  to  sit  at  His  own  right  hand.  (4)  Since  "He  ever 
liveth  in  heaven  to  make  intercession  for  them,"  therefore  He  must  be  able  to  save 
believers.  Whether  His  intercession  is  actual  or  merely  virtual,  literal  or  merely 
figurative,  we  may  not  be  able  to  determine  :  probably  it  is  the  former ;  probably, 
as  He  interceded  on  earth  for  His  followers,  so  He  does  in  heaven ;  He  continues 
the  priesthood  which  commenced  from  His  sacrifice  and  ascension :  this  seems 
implied  in  His  words,  "  I  will  pray  the  Father."  He  stands  as  a  High  Priest  before 
the  throne  of  God.  2.  His  ability  to  save  extends  "  to  the  uttermost."  (1)  Every 
kind  and  degree  of  guilt  is  here  included.  The  sins  of  men  are  very  various ;  every 
man's  conscience  reads  a  different  history  to  him,  peculiar  to  himself  ;  every  one 
that  knows  the  plague  oi  his  heart  is  apt  to  suppose  that  he  must  be  a  greater 
sinner  than  all  beside ;  must  be,  as  the  apostle  considered  himself,  "  the  chief 
of  sinners  " ;  though  this  can  be  strictly  true  of  only  one :  so  many  aggravations 
of  sin  present  themselves  to  his  view,  so  many  checks  and  resolutions  broken,  so 
much  light  and  grace  resisted,  so  many  mercies  despised  ;  surely  no  other  offender 
ever  equalled  himself  1  But  let  these  aggravations  be  what  they  may,  the  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ  is  adequate.  And  Jesus  Christ  saves  "  to  the  uttermost,"  not  only  in 
regard  to  the  first  conversion  of  the  sinner :  there  remains  much  yet  to  be  effected 
after  his  conversion,  and  Jesus  Christ  effects  it.  (2)  The  extent  of  His  ability 
through  all  duration  is  everywhere  asserted.  His  blood,  so  to  speak,  is  just  as 
warm  and  fresh  as  when  it  was  first  shed  ;  it  has  an  undecaying  virtue.  {R.  Hall, 
M.A.)  The  power  of  Christ  to  save  : — I.  As  to  the  ability  of  Christ  to  save— 
this  is  considered  under  two  different  aspects :  as  to  its  extent  or  range,  and  as  to 
its  intrinsic  efficacy.  It  extends  to  all  those  who  comb  to  God  by  Him.  For 
though  the  word  "all"  does  not  occur  in  the  passage,  it  is  of  course  implied.  The 
phrase  is  precisely  analogous  to  our  Lord's  own  words :  "  Him  that  cometh  unto 
Me  I  wiU  in  nowise  cast  out,"  which  is  equivalent  to  saying,  "Every  one  that 
cometh  to  Me  shall  certainly  be  received."  And  this  is  a  source  of  absolute  and 
unqualified  encouragement.  For  if  you  wish  to  come  to  God  at  all,  how  are  you 
to  oome  unless  it  be  by  Christ  ?  His  interposition  as  a  third  person  is  not  the 
introduction  of  a  barrier  that  arrests  or  impedes  your  approach.  On  the  contrary, 
as  it  is  the  aim  of  this  Epistle  to  show,  it  is  the  one  thing  that  makes  that  approach 
possible,  and  prevents  it  from  being  vain.  For  you  cannot  oome  to  God  in  Himself 
just  as  you  are.  He  is  a  remote  impalpable  presence,  who  retires  in  proportion  as 
yon  advance,  and  who  evades  and  eludes  the  embrace  of  the  human  heart.  He 
may  be  a  bright  vision  or  an  awful  presence,  but  He  will  always  remain  above  and 
beyond  you,  a  Being  with  whom  you  can  have  no  fellowship,  and  who  renders  you 
no  conscious  help  in  the  hour  of  temptation  or  the  article  of  death.  Besides,  you 
are  sinful,  and  tho  more  earnestly  you  try  to  reach  Him,  the  clearer  to  your  own 
oonsoiousness  becomes  the  gulf  between  you,  and  the  strength  of  the  power  that 
holds  you  back.  Ton  must  either  renounce  the  hope  of  reaching  God  at  all,  and 
suffer  Him  gradually  to  vanish  from  your  sight ;  or  you  must  become  content  with 
a  vague  sentiment  which  will  never  quicken  or  sustain  the  heart,  though  it  may 
invest  your  life  with  a  certain  measure  of  mystery  and  reverence.     "No  man 


690  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  fcHAP.  vn. 

Cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  Me."  Now  this  definite  knowledge  of  God,  which 
otherwise  we  lack,  and  this  restraint  which  is  exercised  by  the  power  of  our  sin,  is 
precisely  what  the  intervention  of  Christ  on  the  one  hand  provides,  and  on  the 
other  removes.  In  Him  God  becomes  manifest  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  present 
clearly  and  powerfully  to  our  thoughts.  He  is  no  longer  an  assemblage  of  qualities 
such  as  holiness,  justice,  goodness,  and  truth,  which  we  painfully  try  to  group 
together  and  cement  into  some  sort  of  cohesion  in  our  own  mind.  But  in  Christ 
all  these  receive  their  highest  and  purest  conceivable  expression,  and  are  combined 
into  the  unity  of  a  living  Person,  whose  history  lives  before  us  in  the  pages  of  the 
Evangelists,  and  is  impressed  with  an  individuahty  at  once  most  definite,  unique, 
and  indelible.  Indeed,  if  you  choose,  you  can  know  Christ  better  than  those  who 
are  nearest  to  you  on  earth,  and  can  have  a  much  greater  certainty  as  to  His  will. 
Moreover,  in  Him  the  mercy  of  God  towards  sinners,  of  which  we  have  otherwise 
no  assurance,  works  out  for  itself  a  perfectly  free  and  unambiguous  channel.  In 
His  sacrifice  the  claims  of  justice  are  satisfied,  and  satisfied  by  a  love  that  wUlingly 
submits  to  the  last  extremity  to  achieve  its  beneficent  end.  His  atonement  opens 
His  arms  to  the  whole  world,  and  presents  Him  in  the  attitude  of  an  inviting 
and  pitiful  Saviour.  Not  to  strike  is  His  hand  reached  forth,  but  to  help.  Not  to 
avenge  is  His  arm  uplifted,  but  to  bring  salvation,  and  beckon  the  weary  and  heavy 
laden  to  His  rest.  As  One  who  will  without  fail  bring  you  to  God,  as  One  who  can 
forgive  all  your  iniquities,  and  heal  all  your  diseases.  He  calls  you  to  Himself. 
When  He  cries  it  is  God's  mercy  that  cries,  a  mercy  that  is  boundless  because  it 
rests  on  a  propitiation  for  the  whole  world.  And  if  you  wish  to  come  to  God  there 
is  nothing  to  hinder  and  everything  to  help  you.  Christ  does  not  block  the  way, 
but  opens  it.  "  I  am  the  door."  No  one  is  met  with  a  refusal,  for  every  possible 
ground  of  refusal  He  has  Himself  abolished.  None  have  failed  of  salvation  because 
Christ  could  not  save  them.  No  one  has  come  to  Him  and  found  that  while  He 
ci'uld  bring  every  one  else  to  God  there  was  something  in  his  case  tlwt  bafllLd  His 
power,  or  made  him  an  exception  to  the  free  and  universal  offer  of  His  help.  But 
Christ's  ability  to  save  not  only  meets  us  at  the  threshold,  as  it  were,  of  o  .r 
approach  to  God,  and  assures  us  of  its  sufiiciency  to  bring  us  into  His  fellowship, 
it  also  assures  us  of  His  power  to  complete  the  process  which  He  thus  begins.  He 
is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost.  This  does  not  mean  to  the  end  of  hfe,  or  up  to 
the  time  of  the  Second  Advent,  though  that  is  no  doubt  involved  in  the  words. 
Nor  does  it  mean  that  Christ's  power  extends  so  far  as  to  reach  and  include  those 
that  have  gone  even  to  the  farthest  verge  or  extremity  of  wickedness,  for  that  has 
already  been  implied  in  the  words  we  have  just  considered.  The  idea  rather  is 
that  His  power  is  adequate  to  secure  the  perfect  salvation  of  all  who  come  to  Him, 
so  that  nothing  shall  be  required  for  its  completeness  which  He  is  unable  to  supply. 
And  this  is  the  assurance  that  wj  need.  The  smouldering  fires  of  half -extinguished 
passion  flicker  up  on  the  slightest  provocation  and  strive  to  resume  their  old 
ascendancy.  Evil  habits  reassert  themselves  at  times,  and  seem  as  stubborn  and 
unyielding  as  they  ever  were.  Subtle  currents  of  envy  and  malice  betray  theii 
presence  in  the  most  humiliating  ways,  and  a  deep-seated  pride  and  s^  lf-righteousnes3 
refuses  to  acknowledge  the  power  of  the  Cross.  Not  only  so,  winds  of  doctrine 
carry  you  about,  spectres  of  doubt  start  up  to  trouble  you.  A  dull  indifference  to 
Divine  things,  a  sullen  reluctance  to  rise  to  higher  heights  of  holiness  or  consecra- 
tion to  God,  baffles  you  and  holds  you  down  as  with  a  dead  weight.  Indeed,  there 
is  so  much  in  you  that  is  opposed  to  God,  and  that  seems  to  resist  the  influence 
and  supremacy  of  grace,  a  perfect  salvation  seems  to  you  an  almost  impossible 
consummation.  Now  the  successful  issue  of  the  process  of  salvation  depends  on 
what  Christ  is  able  to  provide  and  to  do.  If  there  is  any  limit  to  His  power,  or 
any  defect  attaching  to  it,  there  will  be  a  corresponding  risk.  If  in  any  respect  He 
is  incompetent,  then  you  may  anticipate  disaster.  But  in  Him  dwells  all  the 
fulness  of  Divine  grace.  Everything  that  we  lack  and  require  to  have  we  find  in 
Him  and  in  its  infinite  perfection.  There  is  no  weakness  which  He  cannot  develop 
into  strength,  no  spiritual  emptiness  which  He  cannot  fill,  no  darkness  which  He 
catmot  enlighten.  There  are  no  hindrances  so  determined  that  He  cannot  carry 
you  triumphantly  .^ver  them,  no  temptations  so  insidious  or  strong  but  that  He 
can  make  a  way  of  escape  so  that  you  shall  be  able  to  bear  them.  II.  This  saving 
abihty  of  Christ  rests  upon  the  fact  of  His  ever  living  to  make  intercession.  In 
this  respect  He  presents  a  contrast  to  the  Levitical  priesthood.  It  passed  from  one 
to  another  as  death  removed  the  successive  occupants  of  the  office.  But  Christ  abideth 
for  ever,  and  there  is  no  interruption  to  the  continuity  of  His  mediation.     At  no  point 


■CHAP,  yn.]  HEBREWS.  891 

does  it  cease  even  for  a  moment  so  that  those  He  represents  can  possibly  have 
their  interests  imj^erilled.  Unbroken,  it  prolongs  itself  from  age  to  age,  unchang- 
ing in  its  charactf  r,  and  unintermittent  in  duration.  For  He  is  made  a  priest,  not 
"  after  the  law  of  a  carnal  commandment,  but  after  the  power  of  an  endless  life." 
It  is  not,  then,  on  the  fact  of  a  past  atonement,  but  on  the  power  of  a  living 
Saviour  your  safety  depends.  That  Christ  died  would  be  of  no  use  to  us  if  He 
were  not  alive  now,  sind  alive,  so  to  speak,  more  mightily  than  He  ever  was  before. 
Other  men  death  removes  from  their  intercourse  with  the  world.  It  brings  their 
direct  influence  and  agency  to  an  end.  But  death  did  not  so  affect  Him.  It  pro- 
duced no  change  in  His  activity,  except  to  widen  its  range  and  intensify  its  energy. 
And  now  the  whole  of  His  priestly  functions  are  taken  up  and  absorbed  in  this  one 
attitude  or  act  of  intercession.  How  it  proceeds  it  is  difficult  for  us  to  say,  and 
it  is  not  necessary  that  we  should  know.  But  He  has  left  us  an  illustration  in 
the  prayer  which  He  offered  in  the  days  of  His  flesh  of  how  it  was  accomplished 
then,  "and  translating  this  into  the  modes  of  heavenly  communion  so  far  as  we 
can  imagine  them  we  may  perhaps  form  some  conception  of  its  character."  Of 
this  at  least  we  are  assured — that  it  embraces  and  takes  into  account  the  whole 
sum  of  our  necessities,  and  provides  effectually  for  their  supply.  Our  strongest 
and  most  earnest  prayers,  our  confused  and  importunate  petitions,  our  dumb  and 
mute  appeals,  when  the  weight  and  pressure  of  life  lie  too  heavily  upon  us,  and 
we  groan  being  burdened — all  receive  their  pure,  articulate,  and  prevailing  expres- 
sion in  Him  who  is  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  and  knows  the 
frailty  of  our  frame.  Again,  we  may  gather  that  the  power  of  Christ's  interces- 
sion springs  from  His  atonement.  This  is,  so  to  speak,  the  basis  on  which  it 
proceeds,  the  great  argument  which  makes  it  conclusive.  And  what  can  make  it 
more  so  ?  It  is  true  our  sins  cry  out  for  vengeance,  but  Christ's  blood  cries  still 
louder  for  mercy.  And  its  cry  continues  sustained,  penetrating  through  all  obstruc- 
tions, resistless,  clear,  never  failing  to  enter  into  the  ears  of  God.  (G.  Moinet,  M.A.) 
Christ's  saving  ability : — I.  Chbist's  saving  ability.  1.  The  nature  of  this  ability. 
Jesus  possesses — (1)  M6ritorious  ability.  (2)  Official  ability.  (3)  Efficient  ability. 
(4)  Gracious  ability.  He  is  as  willing  as  able.  2.  The  extent  of  Christ's  saving 
ability.  He  is  able  to  save  "  to  the  uttermost " — (1)  From  all  the  present  and 
future  consequences  of  sin.  (2)  Into  all  the  positive  enjoyments  of  the  Divine 
favour.  (3)  From  the  lowest  depths  of  sin  and  misery.  (4)  At  the  last  extremity 
of  life.  (5)  From  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  our  world's  duration.  (6)  All  and 
every  man  within  our  world's  circumference.  (7)  Into  all  the  inconceivable  glories 
of  eternal  life.  H.  The  characters  whom  this  salvation  embraces.  Those  who 
come  unto  God  by  Christ.  This  implies — 1.  Our  distance  from  God.  And  in 
coming  to  God  we  must  be  sensible  of  it,  feel  it,  deplore  it,  &c.  2.  The  movement 
of  the  heart  towards  Him.  3.  The  reception  of  God's  favour  through  Jesus  Christ. 
Application  :  Here  see — 1.  The  greatness  of  the  salvation  of  the  gospel.  2.  Supreme 
dignity  and  power  of  the  Eedeemer.  3.  The  only  way  to  obtain  eternal  life.  (J. 
Bums,  D.D.)  Why  not  be  saved  J — "Man's  extremity  is  God's  opportunity." 
To  convert  the  youthful  soul  which  has  never  yet  yielded  to  the  fascination  of  sinful 
indulgence  is  a  great  work  of  God  ;  but  to  save  the  man  who  knows  the  pleasures 
of  sin  and  whose  chief  delight  is  to  drink  from  its  cup  so  that  he  shall  loathe  it  as 
an  abominable  thing,  is  a  greater  miracle  than  the  creation  of  the  world.  Now, 
the  gospel  is  specially  addressed  to  those  who  have  given  up  all  hope  of  being  able  to 
save  themselves.  Its  chief  statement  is  very  startling,  namely,  that  God  loves  the 
sinner.  Let  any  man  believe  this  fact,  and  salvation  is  half  done  already.  I.  Alii 
MEN  NEED  SALVATION  FROM  SIN.  You  mav  exclaim,  "  Am  I  not  as  God  made  me  ?  " 
You  are  not.  He  maie  you  in  His  Qwn  image  ;  but  you  have  defaced  that  likeness 
by  your  own  doing.  Men  give  evidence  against  each  other  in  the  witness-box  at 
the  court  of  justice,  but  God  is  in  each  heart  witnessing  there  to  the  sinner  him- 
self. God's  witness  is  true.  We  sometimes  think  it  is  our  own  better  nature 
which  warns  us  to  avoid  sin,  but  it  is  the  voice  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  A 
minister  was  preaching  one  day  about  the  certainty  of  judgment,  and  said,  "  I 
have  warned  you  faithfully  and  earnestly,  but  if  you  do  not  hear  my  words,  there 
is  another  voice  which  shall  summon  you  to  judgment."  At  that  moment  a 
soldier  jumped  up,  crying,  '•  Oh,  sir,  stop  !  do  not  go  any  further."  The  Lord  was 
speaking  in  that  soldier's  soul,  and  showing  him  the  vileness  of  his  sins  until  he 
could  sit  still  no  longer.  He  thought  the  minister  was  speaking  specially  to  him, 
and  he  cried  oat  for  fear  of  his  sins.  If  there  be  sorrow  for  sin  in  your  heart,  let 
me  repeat  that  it  is  caused  by  the  Spirit  of  God-     You  say,  "  But  I  feel  sach  an 


692  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

awful  sinner !  "  I  tell  you  in  reply  that  it  is  the  Lord  who  gives  you  the  knowledge 
which  makes  you  feel  you  are  so  wicked.  Is  it  not  an  evidence  of  His  love  ?  You 
may  be  saved  to-day.  But,  perhaps,  you  may  tell  me  that  you  never  have  done 
anything  wicked  enough  to  send  you  to  hell.  In  reply,  I  ask  you  to  look  at  the 
record  of  your  life.  Does  not  that  show  you  have  done  things  of  which  you  would 
be  utterly  ashamed  if  I  were  to  mention  them  in  your  ear  ?  If  you  have  not  done 
wickedly,  why  try  so  carefully  to  hide  it  from  others  ?  The  Lord,  through  me,  is 
now  reminding  you  of  sins  which  He  saw  you  do.  Likewise,  God  cannot  allow 
you  to  enjoy  any  peace  until  you  have  confessed  your  sins  to  Him.  Why  have  you 
continued  in  sin  so  long  ?  Is  it  not  because  you  think  you  can  continue  to  hide 
it  ?  It  is  often  the  greatest  kindness  God  can  do  us  when  men  discover  and  punish 
us  for  onr  sin.  A  few  weeks  ago,  walking  down  Lower  King  Street,  I  saw  one  of 
our  detectives  place  his  hand  upon  the  shoulder  of  a  man  who  was  looking  into  a 
shop  window.  When  the  thief  turned  bis  face  and  saw  who  had  touched  him,  he 
was  so  startled  as  to  jump  in  fear.  The  thief  knew  that  he  had  broken  the  law, 
and  he  was  afraid  of  the  discovery.  But  you  have  sinned  against  God,  and  His 
Word  is  now  the  spiritual  detective  which  lays  hold  of  you.  You  tremble,  but,  re- 
member, God  lays  bold  of  you  to  save  you.  He  does  not  come  to  punish  you,  but 
to  bless  you.  Instead  of  taking  you  to  the  prison  of  hell.  He  leads  you  to  the  Cross 
of  Jesus  to  receive  a  full  and  everlasting  pardon.  Then  He  gives  you  grace  to  sin 
no  more.  But,  others  may  tell  us  that  they  have  never  done  any  wickedness  either 
in  secret  or  in  public.  You  have  indeed  much  for  which  to  be  thankful.  I  should 
Uke  to  have  you  for  my  master  or  for  my  servant.  But  if  you  have  done  nothing 
that  you  thiik  is  wicked,  have  you  not  forgotten  to  attend  to  the  wants  of  yo  ;r 
suffering  neighbour?  If  you  have  loved  God  with  all  your  heart  and  your  neighbour 
as  yourself,  you  do  not  need  any  Saviour.  But  have  you  not  been  selfish  ?  Let  me 
exhort  you  to  cry  to  God  for  salvation  to-night.  You  do  not  intend  always  to  be 
wicked  and  selfish.  Then,  why  not  seek  for  salvation  at  once?  Why  delay?  Will 
you  not  cry  to  God  for  pardon  and  mercy  at  once?  »We  say  sometimes,  "  It  is  a 
long  lane  that  has  no  turning."  Stop  I  Cry  for  mercy !  A  friend  of  mine  some 
time  ago,  through  the  carelessness  of  one  of  his  men  had  a  serious  accident  at  his 
works  through  the  bursting  of  a  boiler.  I  said  to  him,  •*  I  suppose  you  will  not 
employ  the  same  man  again."  He  replied,  "  Oh  yes,  because  he  will  always  take 
good  care  in  the  future;  and  we  shall  not  have  another  explosion."  No  doubt 
that  man  would  be  careful.  But  in  your  case,  you  have  not  only  sinned  once  and 
twice,  but  your  life  has  been  a  continual  fall.  Ought  not  God  to  give  you  up  ? 
Surely  He  will  be  weary  of  trying  to  save  you.  But  no,  the  Lord  answers,  "  How 
can  I  give  him  up  for  whom  I  died?  "  Confess  your  sins  to  God.  Say  to  Him, 
"  Father,  I  am  an  unsaved  wretch  ;  I  am  Thy  wicked  child  who  begs  for  mercy  !  " 
Behold,  the  Lord  calls  you  to  come  to  Him  for  mercy,  for  pardon,  and  for  peace. 
Come  and  trust  Him.  II.  Chkist  is  able  to  save  all  who  come  unto  God  by  Him. 
1.  The  words  and  teaching  of  Christ  tell  us  the  truth.  If  we  believe  the  word  of 
Christ  concerning  God  to  be  the  truth  we  cannot  help  but  love  God.  He  tells  us 
that  God  is  our  Father.  Christ  tells  us  that  God  has  compassion  on  the 
penitent,  and  this  makes  us  glad  to  come  to  Him.  If  He  really  loves  us, 
why  stay  away?  2.  The  death  of  Jesus  ia  the  way  by  which  God  saves  us 
from  the  penalty  of  sin.  He  is  the  Good  Shepherd  who  layeth  down  His 
Lfe  for  the  sheep.  Behold  Him  bearing  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  Cross ! 
Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  on  the  Cross  and  you  shall  be  saved.  3.  He  ever 
liveth  to  intercede  for  us.  The  body  of  Jesus  Christ  is  somewhere  in  the 
universe  an  evidence  of  God's  willingness  to  save  sinners.  Where  is  He  ?  Is  He 
not  speaking  to  you  and  saying,  "I  died  for  thee"?  Our  Father  needs  no  per- 
Buasion  to  look  upon  us  with  compassion.  But  there  is  one  thing  that  is  necessary 
— it  ia  that  God  should  come  to  you  and  persuade  you  to  be  saved.  To-night,  the 
Lord  is  not  afar  off,  but  near  to  all  of  us,  and  if  you  will  read  the  words  of  Jesus 
you  will  dearly  perceive  that  there  is  salvation  to  the  very  uttermost.  (TF. 
Birch.)  "To  the  uttermost": — I  was  ore;  reading  to  a  blind  and  aged 
Christian  the  verse  in  chap,  vii, :  "Wherefore  He  ia  able  also  to  save  them 
to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  Him,  seeing  He  ever  liveth  to 
make  intercession  for  them,"  and  he  stopped  me  with  the  remark :  "  I  like  that 
word  uttermost ;  it  seems  to  me  to  have  in  it  everything  that  a  poor  sinner  can 
want"  [Sir  E.  Bayley,  B.D.)  Ood  offers  a  whole  salvation  : — He  comes  to  as 
with  a  whole  salvation,  with  healing,  cleansing,  vivifying  grace,  which  will  grow  in 
as,  and  develop  as  into  perf  ectnesa.    It  iK  not  the  finger  of  direction,  bat  the  hand 


CHAP,  vn.]  HEBREWS.  698 

of  help  He  gives  us.  (A.  Raleigh,  D.D.)  God's  illimitable  power  to  save  : — There 
is  no  limit  to  the  power  ol  the  grace  of  God,  save  that  which  is  imposed  by  oxa- 
selves.  (Bp.  Thorold.)  Salvation  to  the  uttermost: — Suppose  I  were  drowning,"* 
and  70U  drew  me  out  of  the  deepest  water,  just  in  time  to  save  my  life,  but  then 
left  me  wet  and  shivering  and  exhausted  on  the  bank,  to  run  the  more  than  risk  of 
wretched  after-effects  of  cold  and  rheumatism,  from  which  I  might  never  entirely 
recover  1  That  would  not  be  saving  "  to  the  uttermost "  in  this  sense  of  the  word. 
But  if  you  did  the  thing  completely, — carrying  me  home,  and  doing  everything 
necessary  to  restore  me  and  avert  evil  effects,  and  that  effectually ;  never  relaxing 
in  care  and  effort,  nor  letting  me  go,  till  you  had  me  safe  and  well,  however  long 
and  difficult  it  might  be,  tiien  you  would  have  saved  me  "to  the  uttermost,"  in  the 
true  meaning  of  it.  This  is  what  Jesus  is  able  to  do  for  you.  Having  saved  yoa 
from  destruction,  His  very  name  is  the  guarantee  that  He  will  not  leave  you  to 
struggle  helplessly  with  your  sins,  much  less  to  "  continue  "  in  them,  but  that  He 
shall  save  you  from  them.  You  will  find  it  a  dally  continual  salvation,  by  which 
He  will  keep  you  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith,  unto  the  consummated  salva- 
tion of  body  and  soul,  "ready  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  time."  (F.  R. 
Havergal.)  Christ's  saving  power: — The  Emperor  Theodosins,  having  on 
a  great  occasion  opened  all  the  prisons,  and  released  his  prisoners,  is  reported 
to  have  said,  "  And  now,  would  to  God  I  could  open  all  the  tombs,  and  give 
life  to  the  dead  I "  But  there  is  no  limit  to  the  mighty  power  and  royal  grace  of 
Jesus.  He  opens  the  prisons  of  justice  and  the  prisons  of  death  with  equal  and 
infinite  ease  :  He  redeems  not  the  soul  only,  but  the  body.  (C.  Stanford.)  Sal- 
vation in  Christ : — Our  salvation  is  in  Christ  and  with  Him,  but  not  apart  from 
Him.  When  a  bank  note  or  a  gold  coin  is  put  into  my  hands,  my  money  is  in 
that,  not  apart  from  it.  When  a  deed  is  signed,  sealed,  recorded,  and  delivered  to 
me,  my  title  is  in  my  deed,  and  not  apart  from  it.  My  bank  note  or  gold  coin  will 
^ay  my  debt  and  pay  my  journeying  expenses.  My  deed  will  ensure  me  my  farm. 
Even  so  in  Christ  I  have  my  debt  cancelled,  my  journeying  support,  and  my 
heavenly  inheritance  all  secure.  (W.  E.  Boardman.)  A  tested  remedy  : — It  \bU 
related  that  Bishop  Kavanagh  was  one  day  walking  when  he  met  a  prominent 
physician,  who  offered  him  a  seat  in  his  carriage.  The  physician  was  an  iufidel, 
and  the  conversation  turned  upon  reUgion.  "  I  am  surprised,,"  said  the  doctor, 
"  that  such  an  intelligent  man  as  you  should  believe  such  an  old  fable  as  that." 
The  Bishop  said,  "  Doctor,  suppose  years  ago  some  one  had  recommended  to  you 
a  prescription  for  pulmonaiy  consumption,  and  you  had  procured  the  prescription 
and  taken  it  according  to  order,  and  had  been  cured  of  that  terrible  disease,  what 
would  you  say  of  the  man  who  would  not  try  your  prescription?  "  " I  should  say 
he  was  a  fool."  "  Twenty-five  years  ago,"  said  Kavanagh,  "I  tried  the  power  of 
God's  grace.  It  made  a  different  man  of  me.  AU  these  years  I  have  preached  sal- 
vation, and  wherever  accepted  have  never  known  it  to  fail."  What  could  a  doctor 
say  to  such  a  testimony  as  that  ?  And  such  testimonies  are  what  men  need  to  turn 
them  from  the  error  of  their  ways,  to  the  personal  experience  of  the  saving  power 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  "  How  would  you  prove  the  Divinity  of  Christ?  "  said 
some  ministers  to  a  young  backwoods  preacher  whom  they  were  examining. 
"  What  ?  "  said  he,  puzzled  by  their  question.  "  How  would  you  prove  the  Divinity 
of  Christ  ?  "  "  Why,  He  saved  my  soul,"  was  the  triumphant  reply.  But  to  give 
this  answer  one  must  be  saved,  and  know  it  in  his  heart,  and  show  it  in  his  life,  and 
he  then  becomes  a  living  epistle  known  and  read  of  all  men.  Salvation  to  the  ^ 
uttermost : — Mr.  Carl  Steinman,  who  in  1846  made  a  trip  to  Iceland,  thus  describes 
a  visit  to  the  crater  of  Mount  Hecla.  On  the  brink  he  was  prostrated  by  an  eruption 
of  the  crater,  and  held  a  prisoner  by  the  lava  surrounding  him.  He  says,  "  Oh,  the 
horrors  of  that  awful  realisation  1  There,  over  the  mouth  of  a  black  and  heated 
abyss,  I  was  held  suspended,  a  helpless  and  conscious  prisoner,  to  be  hurled  down- 
ward by  the  next  great  throe  of  trembling  Nature.  '  Help  1  help !  help  1  for  the 
love  of  God,  help  1 '  I  shrieked  in  the  very  agony  of  my  despair.  I  had  nothing  to 
rely  upon  but  the  mercy  of  Heaven,  and  I  prayed  to  God  as  I  never  prayed  before, 
to  blot  out  my  sins,  and  not  let  them  foUow  me  judgment.  All  at  once  I  heard 
a  shout ;  and  looking  around,  I  beheld,  with  feelings  that  cannot  be  described,  my 
faithful  guide  hastening  down  the  side  of  the  crat  r  to  my  relief.  '  I  Warned  you ! ' 
he  said.  '  You  did  1 '  cried  I, '  but  forgive  and  s  ve  me,  for  I  am  perishing.'  He 
reached  out  his  hand  and  took  me,  and  set  m  feet  on  solid  ground.  I  was 
free,  but  stiU  on  the  very  verge  of  the  awful  pit."  Beader,  is  the  lava  of 
hell  beginning   to  flow  about  yoa?  are  your  feet   already  being   entangled? 

88 


594  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.  yn. 

Oh !  make  haste  to  reach  out  your  hand  to  your  Saviour  and  Guide,  who 
is  able  to  set  your  feet  on  the  soUd  rock,  and  to  stabUsh  your  ways.  Oh  I  that 
you  could  see  your  danger,  and  seek  refuge  before  it  is  too  late.  (C.  W.  Bibh.) 
That  come  unto  God  by  Him. — Coming  to  God : — A  friend  of  one  of  the  Imperial 
Caesars  came  to  him  with  sad  face  and  murmuring  voice  on  account  of  the  mauy 
troubles  that  oppressed  him,  but  the  Emperor  replied,  "  Do  not  complain  of  thy 
misfortune  so  long  as  thou  hast  Caesar  for  thy  friend."  Though  most  of 
us  know  what  it  is  to  suffer  pain  and  grief,  and  often  are  overwhelmed  by  seas 
of  trouble,  yet  we  do  not  complain  so  long  as  we  have  the  great  King  of  kings 
for  our  friend.  His  kindly  eye  beholds  every  movement  of  our  daily  lives,  and  His 
sympathising  mind  numbers  the  very  hairs  of  our  head  ;  His  strong  arm  holds  us 
in  the  narrow  path  of  righteousness,  and  when  we  are  weary  His  loving  heart  seeks 
to  draw  us  to  the  pillow  of  His  breast.  Having  God  for  our  Friend,  none  need 
despair.  I.  The  text  implies  a  sepaeation  from  God.  This  separation  is  not  of 
the  body,  but  rather  of  the  spirit  within  us,  which  duects  our  thoughts  and  actions. 
1.  It  is  a  want  of  sympathy  with  God.  Like  a  Christian  father  who  has  a  wayward 
son.  How  near  the  two  bodies  are  when  the  father  grasps  his  son's  hand  I  Alas, 
what  a  distance  there  is  between  their  souls  I  2.  It  is  a  separation  from  communion 
with  God.  There  has  been  a  time  in  your  Ufe  when,  kneeling  in  your  chamber, 
you  have  communed  with  God  in  prayer ;  you  have  sought  a  blessing  and  have 
obtained  it ;  and  your  daily  Hfe  was  a  continual  walking  with  God.  But  sin,  like  a 
might;,  ocean,  has  separated  you  from  the  companionship  of  your  Heavenly  Father. 
3.  It  is  also  a  rebellion  of  heart.  Ob,  siimer,  remember  that  though  you  have 
seased  to  love  your  God,  He  stiU  yearns  over  you,  and  even  as  a  mother  always 
keeps  the  image  of  her  erring  son  in  her  heart,  so  your  God  neter  forgets  you.  II. 
The  text  speaks  of  coming  to  God.  HI.  The  text  directs  us  how  to  come  to 
God.  1.  We  come  to  God,  by  Christ,  as  our  Saviour.  We,  therefore,  have  full 
liberty  to  come  to  God,  seeing  that  Jesus  has  saved  us  from  the  penalty  due  to  us 
on  account  of  our  transgressions  of  the  law.  2.  Jesus  is  to  us  as  our  Priest  bringing 
■us  nigh  to  God.  He  did  not  seek  the  blood  of  an  angel  to  present  it  to  God  for  us ; 
but  He,  the  Lamb  of  God,  presented  Himself  as  a  sacrifice  for  us.  3.  Christ  also 
is  our  Deliverer  ;  breaking  the  fetters  of  sin  and  opening  the  door,  so  that  we  may 
oome  to  God.  IV.  This  tkxt  comfobts  us  with  a  sweet  fact.  "  He  ever  liveth  to 
intercede  for  us."  Christ's  work  is  not  yet  done.  We  sometimes  say,  "  It  is 
finished."  True,  His  sufferings  for  you  are  finished;  but  His  work  is  not  yet 
completed  until  He  has  saved  you  from  your  sins.  'Tis  a  great  work  to  create  a 
world,  but  'tis  a  greater  to  make  you  a  holy  child  of  God.  Well,  we  are  comforted 
by  the  assurance  that  "He  ever  liveth  for  us."  (W.  Birch.)  All  who  come: — I. 
Unliuited  salvation.  "  All" — whole  human  race,  without  respect  to  nationality, 
attainments,  or  character.  II.  Necessary  action.  "  Come."  Sitting  still  will  not 
save.  HI.  Glorious  anticipation.  Salvation — safety,  satisfaction,  joy.  IV.  Im- 
portant responsibility.  We  may  be  left  behind.  How  needful  to  regard  the 
warning !  (T.  Heath.)  He  ever  liveth  to  make  Intercession  for  them. — A  livinj 
Saviour,  therefore  a  complete  salvation : — The  long  interval  Letwten  tlic  fall  of  man 
and  the  Redeemer's  advent  showed  the  hopelessness  of  men  without  Him.  Through 
those  four  thousand  years  all  they  could  desire  and  do  to  rise  to  a  higher  state  was 
tried  in  vain,  till  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  they  were  fast  settling  into  despair. 
But  when  the  hope  of  saving  themselves  was  dying  out,  there  appeared  One  who 
lived,  and  taught,  and  died,  and  rose  again  to  heaven,  of  whom  it  was  affirmed  with 
utmost  emphasis  in  the  words  before  us,  "He  is  able  to  save."  And  this  His 
abihty  is  because  "  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession."  Our  Lord  liveth.  Wo 
cannot  dwell  too  much  on  the  glorious  truth  that  "  Christ  died  for  our  sins,"  but 
we  can  dwell  too  little  on  the  truth  which  is  even  beyond  that,  "  He  rose  again  for 
our  justification,"  aye,  and  for  our  sanctification  too.  Salvation  will  be  to  us  what 
it  might  be  in  proportion  as  we  look  for  it,  not  to  the  Cross,  but  to  Him  who,  once 
crucified,  is  m^'^  living — Uving  for  evermore,  to  continue  in  heaven  the  work  begun 
on  earth.  I.  Then,  in  the  first  place,  the  text  reveals  oub  Lord  as  living  to  save. 
In  our  jealousy  of  the  truth  of  the  sufficiency  of  His  atonement  we  may  think  of  it 
to  our  great  impoverishment  as  though  there  were  nothing  more  for  Him  to  do. 
But  the  atonement  does  not  include  the  whole  work  of  salvation,  as  Saviour  Christ 
never  rests.  He  ascended  to  carry  on  His  work  to  further  developments,  and  we 
need  for  His  praise  and  our  own  comfort  to  train  ourselves  to  think  of  Him  as  living 
to  make  redemption  complete.  Certainly  this  is  true  of  Him,  for — 1.  Nothing  less 
reaches  the  perfection  of  grace.    A  Saviour  that  died  for  us  were  much,  how  much  1 


CHAP,  vn.]  HEBREWS.  696 

but  a  Safiom-  who  then  goes  on  to  live  for  ns  is  more,  and  we  can  believe  even  that 
possible.  Then  it  is  true.  We  cannot  think  God  greater  than  He  is,  His  grace 
must  be  beyond  our  thought,  and  that  we  can  imagine  grace  like  this  is  in  itself  the 
assurance  that  Christ  Uveth  to  save.  2.  Without  this  His  work  on  earth  were  un- 
availing. His  death  alone  would  not  avail  for  redemption.  Christ  for  us  once  was 
not  enough ;  the  world  were  lost,  the  cross  were  useless,  were  that  all ;  we  need 
Christ  for  us  still — by  His  life  making  it  possible  for  us  to  accept  the  salvation  He 
secured  by  His  death.  3.  Only  this  explains  our  continued  spiritual  enrichment. 
We  have  visible  assurances  of  many  an  unseen  cause.  Behind  the  works  of  nature 
we  see  the  unseen  God  ;  only  God,  we  say,  could  work  thus !  So  the  history  of  the 
chuich  is  an  assurance  of  a  living  Redeemer.  If  she  has  passed  unharmed  through 
ages  of  fiery  trial  it  can  only  be  because  a  Divine  hand,  never  withdrawn,  followed 
her  with  an  encircling  shield.  If  her  light  through  storms  of  opposition  has  not 
been  quenched,  it  can  only  be  because  a  Divine  hand,  with  ceaseless  care,  has 
supplied  the  lamp  with  oil.  And  the  history  of  each  of  her  members  points  to  the 
same  fact ;  notwithstanding  the  corruptions  of  their  nature  and  their  helplessness 
against  the  adversary,  and  their  tendency  to  neglect  what  is  ppiritual,  notwith- 
standing their  slowness  to  learn  and  trust  and  obey,  their  spiriuial  life  has  been 
maintained — maintained  in  spite  of  sin  and  of  Satan,  and  of  the  world,  and  even 
of  themselves.  II.  The  method  ey  which  oub  Lord  carries  on  His  saving  work 
IN  HEAVEN  IS  THAT  OF  CEASELESS  INTERCESSION.  Chiist  HimscIf  IS  the  great  plea ; 
His  presence  in  heaven  is  the  prayer  for  His  people  than  which  none  could  avail 
more.  And  that  is  necessary.  Divine  redemption  must  accord  with  the  require- 
ments of  Divine  law  ;  hence  we  read  of  our  being  "  justified,"  that  is,  acquitted — a 
legal  term;  so  "  Intercession,"  "Mediation,"  "Advocate" — they  are  all  due  to  the 
necessarily  legal  aspect  of  redemption  ;  God  cannot  gratify  His  fatherly  love  but  by 
simultaneously  satisfying  His  kingly  rights ;  He  must  deal  with  ns  as  sinners  though 
He  receive  us  as  sons;  He  can  grant  no  Messing  save  through  the  atonement.  Hence 
our  Lord  intercedes,  presenting  His  atonement  for  us.  1.  This  intercession  is  for 
those  that  come  unto  Goi^  by  Him.  And  what  it  is  to  come  unto  God  is  shown  by 
the  prodigal  son :  "  he  arose  and  came  to  his  father. "  But  there  are  different  ways 
of  coming.  We  may  come  making  light  of  sin,  or  trusting  our  own  righteousness— 
"  God,  I  thank  Thee  that  I  am  not  as  other  men  ! "  to  such  there  is  no  promise  here. 
But  suppose  we  come  relying  on  Christ,  sensible  of  unworthiness,  looking  to  be 
received  only  for  His  sake;  the  promise  is  to  such;  Christ  intercedes  "for  them." 
2.  And  this  secures  for  them  everything  He  asks.  We  know  that  from  the  merit 
of  His  sacrifice.  On  earth  He  said,  "  Father,  Thou  hearest  Me  always  I  "  He,  the 
well-beloved,  cannot  ask  in  vain.  But,  say  you,  that  is  when  He  a' ks  for  Himself. 
It  is  equally  true  ^shen  He  asks  for  His  people,  since  He  presents  the  plea  of  the 
cross.  Do  we  realise  that  we  are  to  re.^eive  all  that  the  Cross  deserves,  and  that  He 
ever  presents  its  claim?  3.  But  let  us  carefully  mark  that  this  intercession  includes 
all  possible  good.  We  are  assured  of  that  by  His  love.  Jesus  never  tires,  never 
forgets,  never  leaves  off.  III.  Then  this  intercession  enables  Him  to  save  to  the 
UTTERMOST.  "  To  the  uttcrmost."  What  "  uttermost " ?  Every  "uttermost."  1. 
To  the  uttermost  depth  of  depravity.  I  am  too  great  a  sinner  to  be  saved,  one 
thinks.  That  cannot  be.  Could  we  stand  at  God's  throne  and  look  on  men  in 
their  varied  distances  from  Him,  some  not  far  off,  others  by  increased  hardness  of 
heart  and  wicke  1  works  further  and  yet  further  and  further  still  away,  somewhere 
in  the  dark,  dark  distance,  we  should  see  one  further  from  the  Father  than  any 
other  oi  Adam's  sons — some  one  at  the  extreme  limit  of  alienation.  Now,  can 
Christ  save  that  one  ?  Well,  the  "  uttermost "  is  the  "  uttermost,"  and  if  "  He  is 
able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  "  He  can  save  that  man.  He  is  able  because  of  the 
sacrifice  of  infinite  merit  which  He  presents  for  the  sinner.  2.  To  tlie  uttermost 
limit  of  time.  I  am  saved  to-day,  hut  what  if  I  be  ultimately  lost!  We  ought  to 
be  ashamed  to  think  that  the  salvation  Christ  purchased  by  His  blood  can  be  so 
poor  as  that.  No  doubt  if  we  must  depend  on  ourselves  we  must  have  that  fear, 
but  have  we  not  learnt  that  we  are  not  saved  partly  by  Christ  and  partly  by  self, 
but  altogether  by  Him,  that  we  are  in  the  keeping  of  One  who,  having  died  for  us, 
lives  for  us,  and  that  from  His  mighty  tender  hands  we  cannot  slip  !  8.  To  the 
uttermost  measure  of  perfection.  And  I  pray  you  not  to  think  of  that  only  in  con- 
nection with  the  other  world.  There  is  a  perfect  Christian  life  for  earth.  He  is 
able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  of  God's  requirements  and  purposes,  the  "  uttermost" 
of  what  He  would  give  to  us  and  do  for  us  on  earth  developing  into  the  *'  utter, 
most "  of  heaven.     Wonderful  salvation  I    The  length,  the  breadth,  the  height  of 


596  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vn 

it  are  equal ;  it  is  "  uttermost "  everywhere.  Then  why  is  the  salvation  of  some  of 
us  so  poor ;  why,  if  He  is  able  to  grant  it,  is  ours  not  of  the  "  uttermost  "  kind  ; 
why  are  some  of  us  Christians  only  partly  saved?  Because  of  our  unbelief,  because 
we  only  trust  Him  partly,  because  our  obedience  and  confidence  do  not  look  to  TTim 
for  it  or  expect  it  of  Hun.  (C  New.)  The  intercession  of  Christ,  a  demonstra- 
tion of  His  capacity  to  save : — I.  What  ake  we  to  understand  by  Cheist  being 
"  able  to  save  to  the  uttebmost  "  ?  1.  The  danger  and  calamity  of  those  to  whom 
He  is  proposed  as  a  Saviour  (2  Cor.  v.  14 ;  Eom.  v.  12).  2.  A  power  working  out 
complete  dehverance  for  His  people.  (1)  From  the  curse  of  the  law  {Isa.  xlii.  21 ; 
Gal.  iii.  13  ;  Acts  xiii.  39).  (2)  From  the  pollution  of  sin  (Eom.  viii.  2).  (3)  From 
all  the  artifice  and  power  of  the  prince  of  darkness  (Col.  i.  13).  (4)  To  support  Hia 
people  in  death,  and  receive  their  spirits  to  a  world  of  glory  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  26 ; 
2  Tim.  i.  12 ;  Psa.  xxiii.  4).  (5)  To  raise  their  bodies  from  the  dissolution  of  the 
grave,  and  conduct  their  complete  persons  to  the  regions  of  eternal  felicity 
(John  xi.  25,  44  ;  Phil.  iii.  21).  (6)  The  efficacy  of  His  saving  grace  continueth  the 
same  throughout  all  succeeding  ages.  His  energy  wrought  from  the  date  of  the 
first  promise  (Gen.  iii.  15).  By  faith  in  Him  the  "  elders  obtained  a  good  report  " 
(chap.  xi.  2).  His  victorious  energy  still  continueth  the  same  (chap.  xiii.  8).  II. 
What  evidence  we  have  that  He  is  eeally  so.  1.  He  was  commissioned  by  the 
Father  for  this  great  work  (1  John  v.  11).  2.  He  appears  in  His  person  and 
character,  eminently  fitted  for  the  work.  3.  He  has  done  and  borne  all  that  we 
can  imagine  necessary  to  effect  it  (2  Cor.  viii.  9 ;  Phil.  ii.  7,  8 ;  chap.  ix.  24).  4. 
He  has  been  approved  by  the  Father,  as  having  completely  answered  this  glorious 
design  (Bom.  i.  4  ;  Matt,  xxviii.  18-20).  5.  He  has  made  such  gracious  promises 
of  salvation,  as  imply  a  full  power  of  accomplishing  it  (Titus  ii.  11 ;  1  Tim.  i.  15, 16, 
iv.  10 ;  Eom.  v.  18).  6.  He  has  already  begun  and  carried  on  the  salvation  of  a 
multitude  of  souls  (1  Cor.  vL  11 ;  Eev.  vii.  13,  14).  III.  The  pabtiodlar  argument 
FOR  it.  "He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them."  1.  The  foundation  of  it. 
His  atonement  (chap.  ix.  12).  2.  The  extent  of  it.  The  intercession  of  Christ  is 
not  merely  His  appearance  before  God  in  the  body  in  which  He  suffered ;  but  it  is 
attended  with  a  constant  and  ardent  desire  that  His  death  may  be  effectual  to  the 
purposes  designed,  in  bringing  many  sons  and  daughters  to  God  (chap.  ii.  10).  3. 
The  perpetuity  of  it :  "  He  ever  liveth."  Even  at  this  moment  Christ  appeareth  in 
heaven  for  us  (Isa.  xl.  28).  IV.  The  chaiucxee  of  the  persons  who  abe  en- 
couraged TO  expect  salvation  in  Him.  Such  as  "  come  unto  God  by  BUm."  1.  A 
sinner  must  come  to  God  through  Christ.  His  coming  to  God  implieth — (1)  A  firm 
persuasion  of  His  being  and  attributes  (chap.  xi.  6).  (2)  An  earnest  desire  to  secure 
His  favour  (Job  x.  12  ;  Psa.  iv.  6,  xxx.  6).  (3)  A  readiness  to  forsake  whatever 
cometh  in  competition  with  Him  (Isa.  xxvi.  13).  (4)  A  willing  subjection  to  His 
service  (Luke  x.  27  ;  Eom.  vi.  13 ;  Psa.  cxix.  16-127).  (5)  A  keeping  up  a  constant 
correspoudence  with  Him  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  23 ;  1  John  i.  3).  2.  His  coming  to  God 
through  Christ  implieth — (1)  A  deep  sense  of  his  need  of  a  Mediator,  in  order  to  a 
comfortable  intercourse  with  God.  Christianity  is  the  religion  of  sinners ;  self 
must  be  humbled,  that  Christ  may  be  exalted  (1  Pet.  v.  6).  Christ  is  our  day's- 
man.  (2)  A  full  persuasion  of  His  saving  power  (Mark  ix.  24 ;  Matt.  viii.  2).  (3) 
A  cheerful  confidence  in  the  grace  of  Christ  (John  vi.  37,  vii.  37 ;  Matt.  ix.  13, 
xii.  20).  (4)  A  cordial  approbation  of  the  method  in  which  He  bestows  salvation 
(Acts  XX.  21 ;  Eom.  i.  17).  (5)  A  constant  care  to  maintain  proper  regards  to 
Christ  in  the  whole  course  of  our  walking  with  God  (Eph.  ii.  18 ;  Gal.  ii.  20 ; 
1  Pet.  ii.  5).  Eefiections :  1.  How  great  is  that  salvation  which  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  hath  wrought  out  for  us  (chap.  ii.  3 ;  Isa.  xliii.  11).  2.  How  important  is  it 
that  we  all  seriously  inquire  after  this  great  salvation  (2  Pet.  i.  10).  3.  How  great 
is  the  danger  and  misery  of  those  who  reject  and  affront  such  an  Almighty  Saviour 
(Eev.  vi.  1^  17).  4.  How  admirable  and  amiable  doth  the  blessed  Jesus  appear, 
when  considered  as  the  great  Intercessor  of  His  people  (Cant.  v.  16).  5.  With  what 
holy  boldness  may  the  sinner  draw  near  to  God,  in  dependence  on  such  an  Inter- 
cessor (chap.  iv.  14-16,  x.  19-22).  6.  Let  us  adore  the  Divine  goodness,  that  such 
a  salvation  is  offered  us  in  so  reasonable,  so  easy,  and  so  gracious  a  way  (Eom.  x.  3 ; 
Luke  xix.  40).  7.  Let  as  seriously  examine  whether  we  come  to  God  by  Christ 
(Acts  xiii.  26].  8.  Let  those  who  have  come  in  this  manner  be  thankful  and  coura- 
geous ;  let  tnem  go  on  till  the  God  of  peace  bruise  Satan  under  their  feet,  give 
them  victory  over  death,  and  finally  crown  them  with  eternal  life.  {J.  Hannam.) 
Of  ChrisVa  malting  intercession : — For  this  intercession  of  Christ  there  if  all  sorts  or 
evidence  in  Scripture,  by  types,  prophecies,  and  plain  assertions.  That  was  typified 


CHAP,  vn.]  HEBREWS.  897 

ander  the  law,  by  what  the  high  priest  is  appointed  to  do  on  the  day  of  expiation 
{Lev.  xvi.  11-15).    It  is  foretold  by  the  prophet  (Isa.  liii.  12).    It  is  plainly  asserted 
in  the  New  Testament  (Bom.  viii.  34  ;  chap.  ix.  24) ;  how,  and  in  what  capacity  he 
appears  for  OS  (iJohn  ii.  1,  2).   1.  For  the  nature  of  it.   In  general,  it  is  Christ's  ap- 
pearance in  heaven  in  behalf  of  His  people,  as  having  on  earth  satisfied  for  them, 
done  and  suffered  all  things  which  were  requisite  on  His  part  to  be  there  accomplished 
for  their  salvation,  both  for  the  removing  of  what  might  hinder  it,  and  purchasing 
what  might  perfect  it,  and  make  it  complete  ;  or  a  presenting  of  Himself,  as  having 
finished  what  was  necessary  on  earth,  for  the  saving  of  them  to  the  utmost.     More 
particularly,  it  includes  these  severals : — (1)  He  appears  in  our  nature,  not  only  as 
God,  but  as  man  (1  Tim.  iL  5).     He  appears  as  one  concerned  for  us,  as  one  who 
is  bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesn  of  our  flesh.     (2)  He  appears  as  our  advocate,  to 
present  us  and  our  cause  unto  God.     (3)  He  presents  His  death  as  suffered  in  our 
stead.  His  blood  as  shed  for  us.     (4)  He  presents  His  will  and  desire  that  His 
people  may  have  all  the  purchase  of  His  blood.   The  will  of  the  Divine  nature  as  He 
is  God,  the  desires  of  His  human  nature  as  He  is  man.   Thus  He  is  said  to  intercede 
for  us,  in  that  the  Father  understands  that  it  is  His  wiU  and  desire,  as  He  is  God 
and  man,  that  His  people  may   be  possessed  of  all   the  effects,   and  receive  all 
the  advantage  of  His  obedience  and  sufferings  for  them ;  so  that  His  intercession 
is  in  effect  His  praying  for  us  in  heaven.     2.  For  the  efficacy  of  it.     (1)  The  in- 
tercession of  Christ  is  grounded  upon  merit,  and  therefore  must  prevail  in  point  of 
justice.     (2)  The  eflScacy  of  it  appears  in  the  acceptableness  of  all  included  in 
Christ's  intercession  unto  God  the  Father,  and  His  readiness  to  comply  with  the 
motions  which  it  imports.      (3)  By  virtue  of  His   intercession  all  that  He  pur- 
chased by  His  obedience  and  sufferings  is  actually  conferred.     (4)  Christ's  inter- 
cession was  effectual  before  He  was  actually  an  intercessor.     By  virtue  of  this  all 
believers  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  were  pardoned  and  saved.     3.  As  to  the 
continuance  of  this  intercession,  it  is  perpetual.    The  text  is  express  for  this,  "  He 
ever  lives,"  &c.    He  intercedes  while  He  lives,  and  He  ever  lives  ;  He  intercedes 
always.     (1)  Without  intermission.    (2)  Without  end.    It  is  represented  as  the 
end  why  He  lives,  and  the  end  of  His  life  He  pursues  every  moment.     Use  1.  This 
leads  us  to  admire  the  loving-kindness  of  Christ  to  lost  sinners,  in  that  He  lives  ever 
to  make  intercession  for  them.    His  affection  to  His  people.  His  condescension  for 
them,  appears  herein  every  way  admirable  and  astonishing.    There  are  four  severals 
held  forth  in  the  text,  which  may  render  this  for  ever  wonderful  in  our  eyes.     (1) 
That  this  should  be  one  end  of  His  life.     That  He  should  live  for  us  ;  Uve,  to  make 
intercession  for  us  ;  hve,  that  this  should  be  an  end  and  design  of  His  life,  to  free 
ns  from  misery,  to  promote  our  happiness  and  secure  it;  that  the  Son  of  God, 
infinitely  happy  and  glorious  without  us,  should  make  the  concerns  of  men,  in- 
conceivably  below  Him,  the  design  of  His  life ;   and  declare  that  He  lives  for 
this  reason,  and  will  live  upon  this  account,   to  appear  on  their  behalf.     (2) 
That  He  should  live  again  for  us ;  live  more  than  once,   more  than  one  life 
for  us.    He  had  already  lived  one  life  for  us,  and  had    already  lost   one  Ufe 
for  us;    and  when   a   new  life  was  restored  to  Him,   He  would  live   that  life 
for  us  too.    As  though  He  had  not  thought  it  enough  to  live  one  life  for  us  on 
earth,  He  Uves  another  for  us  in  heaven.     (3)  That  He   lives  in  oiu:  nature, 
and  appears  for  us,   not  only  as   God,   but  as  man,   as   one  of  us,   as  nearly 
allied  to  us;  as  our  kinsman  (Job  xix.  25),  our  brother  (chap.  ii.  11,  1'2).     It  was 
a  wonderful  condescension,  that  He  would  take  our  nature,  and  unite  it  with  the 
nature  of  God  in  one  person  ;  for  what  is  man  to  Him  but  a  worm  ?    It  is  more 
worthy  of  admiration  than  if  the  greatest  monarch  should  take  upon  him  the  form, 
and  live  in  the  likeness  of  a  worm.     This  was  greater  love  and  honour  than  He 
would  show  the  angels  (chap.  ii.  16).     (4)  That  He  lives  thus  evermore  (Eev.  i. 
18).    And  for  what  end  He  evermore  lives.  He  expresses  here  by  the  apostle.    This 
second  life  He  lives  for  us  is  not  like  the  first,  a  life  of  some  certain  years,  but  an 
endless  life.     He  ever  lives  in  our  nature ;  He  is  never  weary,  never  ashamed  of 
it,  how  mean  and  vile  soever  it  be,  as  it  is  ours.    Use  2.  This  teaches  us  to  live  for 
Christ.    This  highly,  strongly  engages  ns  to  it.     Shall  He  live  for  us  again  and 
again,  and  live  eternally  for  us  ;  and  will  not  we  live  once,  live  a  little  while  for 
TTim  t    But  how  ?    Why,  after  His  example  and  method  He  shows  ua.    His  living 
for  as  in  the  text  succeeded  His  dying  for  us ;  He  was  made  a  sacrifice  before  He 
lived  to  intercede  for  us.    There  is  something  we  must  die  to  before  we  can  live 
for  Him.    We  must  sacrifice  our  worldly,  carnal,  and  selfish  interest ;  carnal  and 
earthly  designs,  and  affections,  and  inclinations,  and  actings,  most  be  cmeified. 


598  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vu 

And  then  positively,  to  live  for  Him  is  to  make  it  the  chief  end  and  constant  design 
of  our  lives,  to  please  Him  and  be  serviceable  to  Him  ;  to  conform  in  all  to  His  will, 
and  employ  all  for  His  honour  and  interest.  Use  3.  Here  is  great  encouragement 
to  faith  and  hope.  Firm  ground  to  believe  and  expect  salvation  to  the  uttermost, 
for  those  that  come  unto  God  by  Christ,  i.e.,  to  those  that  repent  and  believe  ;  those 
that  abandon  sin  in  heart  and  life,  i.e.,  in  sincerity,  resolution,  and  endeavour,  and 
ily  unto  Christ  for  refuge,  betaking  themselves  to  Him,  to  be  ruled  and  saved  by 
Him.  Such  may  have  strong  consolation  from  the  intercession  of  Christ  (chap.  vi. 
18-20).     (D.   Clarkson.)        Christ  interceding  in   heaven  for  His  people  : — I.    In 

OEDEB  TO  UNDERSTAND  WHAT  THE  INTERCESSION  OF  ChRIST  IS,  AND  WHAT  IS  IMPLIED 
IN   IT,  WE    MUST    CONSIDER  AND   COMPARE    THOSE    PASSAGES    OF    ScRIPTURE    WHERE    IT    IS 

SPOKEN  OF.  The  two  principal  passages  of  Scripture  where  it  is  directly  spoken  of 
are  the  text  and  Eom.  viii.  34,  in  which  the  same  word  is  used  as  in  the  text. 
The  word  which  in  these  two  passages  is  tiaoslated  "to  make  intercession,"  just 
means  to  plead  with — to  use  entreaties  and  importunities  (in  order  to  obtain  some- 
thing we  desire)  with  reference  to  another  person.  There  is  another  passage  of 
Scripture  which  refers  to  one  branch  at  least  of  Christ's  intercession,  and  casta 
additional  light  upon  it,  viz.,  1  John  ii.  1.  The  idea  which  this  statement  is  in- 
tended to  bring  before  our  minds  is  substantially  this — that  whenever  a  beUever 
commits  a  sin,  and  that  sin  comes  up  before  the  throne  of  God,  pleading  for 
punishment  against  the  offender,  upon  the  ground  that  "  cursed  is  every  one  that 
continueth  not  in  all  things  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them,"  Christ 
steps  forward  as  his  Advocate  and  Intercessor,  to  avert  the  threatened  danger — 
takes  the  sin  on  His  own  shoulders — and  pleads,  in  order  to  its  remission,  the 
perfect  sacrifice  He  once  offered  up  of  Himself  to  satisfy  Divine  justice,  and  to 
purchase  for  Himself  a  peculiar  people.  That  His  sacrifice  is  the  foundation  of 
His  advocacy  or  intercession  with  reference  to  the  sins  of  believers,  is  implied  in 
the  statement  which  immediately  succeeds,  viz.,  in  the  second  verse.  He  has 
expiated  or  atoned  for  our  sins  by  shedding  His  precious  blood,  and  is  therefore 
well  entitled  to  appear  as  our  Advocate,  when  we  are  accused,  and  to  prevail  on  our 
behaU.  The  apostle  goes  on  to  state  that  this  privilege  of  having  with  the  Father 
an  Advocate  who  had  expiated  their  sins,  was  not  peculiar  to  them,  that  is,  to  those 
of  whom,  and  in  whose  name,  he  was  then  speaking — in  other  words,  to  those  who 
had  already  believed  on  Christ  Jesus ; — but  that  it  extended  to  the  whole  world — 
to  all  who  should  afterwards  beheve  on  Him,  without  distinction  of  period  or 
country.  Finally,  in  illustration  of  the  nature  of  our  Saviour's  intercession,  we 
have  what  is  commonly  called  His  intercessory  prayer,  as  recorded  in  John  xvii. 
We  have  another  instance  of  intercessory  prayer  on  our  Saviour's  part,  in  a  parti- 
citlar  case,  when  He  prayed  for  Peter,  that  his  faith  should  not  fail,  notwithstanding 
the  peculiar  violence  of  Satan's  temptation.  We  are  assured,  then,  that  Chrst 
ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  His  people — that  He  is  continually  employed 
at  the  right  hand  of  God  pleading  on  their  behalf — pleading  what  He  Himself  has 
done  and  suffered  for  them — presenting,  in  their  name  and  for  their  sakes, 
the  punishment  He  has  endured,  that  they  might  be  delivered  from  guilt  and 
danger — the  merit  which  He  has  wrought  out,  that  they  might  be  accepted,  and 
blessed,  and  rewarded.  Christ  is  coutuiually  presenting  before  His  Father  His 
wishes  with  regard  to  what  His  people  should  enjoy  and  suffer  ;  and  their  enjoy- 
ments and  their  sufferings,  their  trials  and  their  supplies  of  grace,  are  just  what 
He  sees  to  be  best  for  them — what  He  in  consequence  wishes  and  pleads  for  in 
their  behalf — and  what  they  therefore  certainly  receive.  This  is  what  is  implied  in 
Christ's  intercession.  We  are  told  that  "  Him  the  Father  heareth  always  "  ;  and 
no  wonder,  when  He  pleads  the  efficacy  of  that  sacrifice  which  has  fully  satisfied 
Divine  justice,  and  which  is  commensurate  in  efficacy  with  the  exceeding  sinfulness 
of  sin  ; — wh^n  He  pleads  the  worth  of  that  meritorious  obedience  which  has  fully 
satisfied  the  Divine  law,  and  which  is  commensurate  in  value  with  an  eternal  and  ex- 
ceeding weight  of  glory.  All  true  believers,  then,  should  have  perfect  confidence  in 
Christ's  willingness  and  abihty  to  work  out  their  complete  salvation — to  finish  the 
good  work  that  He  had  begun  in  them — to  overrule  everything  in  their  temporal 
circumstances  for  their  eternal  welfare — and  at  last  to  maJ^e  them  more  than  con- 
querors.     II.  We  shall  now  endeavour  to  illustbate  the  practical  poeposks  to 

WHICH   this  great  DOCTRINE    WB  HATE  ATTEMPTED  TO    EXPLAIN,  TO  ILLUSTRATE,  AND    TO 

ESTABLISH,  MAY  MOST  oBvioosLT  BE  APPLIED.  1.  Let  US  cousider  the  practical 
application  of  this  doctrine,  with  regard  to  the  sins  of  believers.  The  knowledge  that 
we  have  an  Advooate  or  Intercessor — ready  at  all  times  to  take  the  burden  of  our  guilt 


CHAP,  vn.]  HEBREWS.  599 

upon  Himself,  and  to  free  us  from  its  painful  consequences — while  it  tends  greatly 
to  comfort  and  encourage  us,  and  is  indeed  indispensable  to  our  serving  God 
acceptably — has  no  tendency,  when  rightly  viewed  and  seen  in  its  proper  connec- 
tions, to  encourage  us  in  sin,  or  to  lead  us  to  think  lightly  of  guilt.  Everything 
connected  with  the  history  and  work  of  Christ — with  His  incarnation,  and  humilia- 
tion, and  suffering,  and  death — is  fitted  to  lead  us  to  regard  sin  as  exceeding  sinful. 
'2.  Let  us  consider  the  intercession  of  Christ  with  reference  to  the  outward  circum- 
stances and  worldly  condition  of  believers.  The  truth  which  in  this  view  it 
presents  to  our  mind  is  this,  that  the  outward  circumstances  of  believers,  except  in 
-0  far  as  they  are  the  necessary  results — according  to  the  ordinary  laws  of  nature 
and  providence — of  the  sins  they  have  committed,  are  just,  at  any  one  time,  pre- 
cisely what  their  kind  and  compassionate  Saviour  wishes  them  to  be ; — and  that 
they  are  wholly  the  result  of  His  wishes  and  prayers,  presented  before  the  throne 
of  His  Father — and  because  they  are  His,  carried  into  complete  effect.  3.  Let  us 
consider  the  doctrine  of  our  Saviour's  intercession  with  reference  to  the  believer's 
prayers.  We  are  to  pray  at  all  times  in  Christ's  name — relying  entirely  upon  Him 
and  His  work  for  the  acceptance  of  our  services,  and  the  answering  our  petitions. 
But  His  intercession  implies  something  more  than  this,  or  rather  it  gives  a  distinct 
and  palpable  form  to  this  idea.  It  implies  that  our  prayers  are  heard  and  answered 
only  in  so  far  as  Christ  takes  them  and  presents  them  in  His  own  name,  and  on  the 
ground  of  His  own  merit,  before  the  throne  of  His  Father.  4,  Let  us  consider  the 
intercession  of  Christ  in  its  reference  to  the  believer's  prospects  and  ultimate 
condition.  The  very  object  of  Christ's  intercession  for  His  people,  then,  is  that 
He  may  thereby  secure  their  final  deliverance  from  sin  and  all  its  consequences^ 
their  restoration  to  God's  image — and  their  admission  to  dwell  for  ever  in  His 
presence.  All  this  it  is  admirably  adapted  to  effect ;  and  all  this,  therefore,  it  will 
assuredly  accomplish.  To  have  Christ  interceding  for  us  at  God's  right  hand  is  all 
that  we  can  need,  and  all  that  we  should  desire,  as  appertaining  to  life  or  to  godliness. 
It  secures  deliverance,  full  and  final,  from  every  real  evil — the  possession,  complete 
and  eternal,  of  every  genuine  source  of  happiness.  (W.  Cunningham,  D.D.)  Christ's 
intercession : — Tho  knowledge  of  Christ  as  the  Me  iiator  is  essential  to  the  spiritual 
life.  There  is  no  trutL  within  the  range  of  the  Christian  system  of  richer  interest 
and  of  higher  worth.  Like  the  orb  of  day,  it  is  the  source  of  the  light,  life,  and  joy 
of  religion.  It  is  the  one  foundation  on  which  rest  man's  acceptance  with  the 
Judge,  and  his  dearest  hopes  of  the  future.  It  is  a  treasure  of  mercy  to  the  guilty, 
and  of  consolation  to  the  believer.  It  proves  the  perfection  of  Christianity  as 
the  system  of  salvation,  and  establishes  its  claim  to  be  the  religion  of  the  world, 
f .  Its  natuke.  A  priest  resembles  one  who  seeks  to  reconcile  parties  at  variance, 
and  has  the  probability  of  success  from  being  their  mutual  friend.  In  the  Bible  it 
is  generally  understood  to  denote  a  holy  person,  presenting  sacrifices  to  God,  as  a 
propitiation  for  sin  in  the  behalf  of  others.  The  priestly  dignity  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
is  not  to  be  considered  as  a  mere  figurative  expression.  His  is  a  true  and  real 
priesthood.  He  was  called  of  God,  in  those  ineffably  mysterious  transactions  of 
the  Godhead  in  the  pre-distant  eternity,  when  the  Son  was  designated  and  "  made 
iiD  higli  priest";  by  the  impressive  solemnity  of  an  oath,  when  "the  Lord  sware, 
Thou  art  a  priest  for  ever " ;  and  by  His  sublime  consecration,  when  being 
"  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  Cross  " ;  He  was  baptized  with  blood, 
as  was  Aaron,  and  was  made  "  perfect  through  suffering."  Will  He  not  then  be 
heard  in  your  behalf  ?  Will  the  Father  ever  reject  Him  ?  Should  not  this  banish 
your  fear  and  doubt,  and  minister  "  strong  consolation  "  when  you  flee  to  Him  as 
your  refuge  ?  1.  To  make  oblation  and  satisfaction  for  the  sins  of  the  people  was 
the  first  act  of  the  priesthood.  "  Beneath  our  curse  He  bowed  His  head  "  ;  this 
was  the  true  and  perfect  atonement  making  full  reconciliation  ;  this  was  the  only 
plea  God  conld  accept,  and  it  is  the  basis  of  the  whole  mediation  of  Christ,  giving 
to  it  its  elficacy  and  prevalence.  It  is  the  all-sufficient  reason  and  motive  for  the 
exercise  of  His  mercy  in  restoring  holiness  and  happiness  to  man's  guilty  race ; 
possessing  such  fulness  of  merit  as  to  entitle  the  believer  to  a  salvation  replete  with 
blessings  ;  and  retaining  an  everlasting  efficacy,  amidst  the  changes  of  time,  until 
the  consummation  of  all  things.  2.  Intercession  was  a  necessary  duty  of  the  priest- 
hood. Aaron  fulfilled  it  by  signs  upon  the  annual  day  of  expiation,  passing  through 
the  courts  of  the  sanctuary,  and  appearing  before  the  awful  symbols  of  Jehovah's 
presence,  he  sprinkled  the  mercy-seat  with  the  sacrificial  blood,  and  presented  the 
fragrant  incense.  The  sprinkling  of  the  blood  was  the  perpetuation  and  comple- 
tion ol  its  being  shed  as  a  sacrifice.   There  was  the  same  necessity  that  the  Yictiip 


600  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vu. 

of  Calvary  should  appear  in  the  highest  heavens  for  us.  Had  He  remained  in  the 
sepulchre,  you  could  not  participate  in  the  benefits  of  His  death,  its  everlasting 
efficacy  as  an  atonement  would  cease.  Why  should  He  reappear  in  glory  with 
His  crucified  body,  bearing  the  symbols  of  its  humiUation  unto  death  ?  Might  He 
not  have  left  it  in  the  sepulchre,  and  clothed  Himself  with  a  new  body,  pure  as 
the  firmament  ?  This  would  be  easy,  but  it  would  destroy  His  purposes  of  grace. 
The  Jewish  priest  came  before  the  God  of  Israel  with  the  same  blood  which  the 
victim  had  shed,  thus  appealing  to  it  as  "  the  atonement."  So  likewise  does  the 
Mediator  present  Himself  to  God  in  the  same  nature  which  bore  the  curse,  and 
whose  precious  blood  was  the  ransom  price.  Thus  * '  His  presence  in  heaven  "  is 
virtually  a  continuation  of  His  bodily  passion,  and  a  continued  presentation  of  the 
sacrifice  ;  it  is  a  testimony  to  its  fulness  and  perfection,  to  its  permanent  validity 
and  efficacy.  3.  To  bless  the  people  was  another  prominent  duty  of  the  high  priest. 
This  was  the  sequel  to  the  intercession.  To  give  fuU  exhibition  of  this  glory  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  the  illustrious  Melchisedec  was  chosen  as  a  type,  and  special  notice  is 
taken  of  his  blessing  Abraham,  by  vutue  of  his  authority  as  "  Priest  of  the  Most 
High  God."  This  was  the  "  joy  "  desired  by  Jesus  when  He  endured  His  Cross  :  the 
reward  that  was  set  before  Him.  Even  the  right  to  confer  the  infinite  and  ever- 
lasting blessings  of  redemption  on  a  world  of  sinful  and  lost  beings.    H.  The  tex* 

SUGGESTS    SOME   OF   THE    EMINENT   PECULIAEITIE8    OF   THE    PRIESTHOOD    OF   ChRIST.       1. 

It  is  unchangeable.  This  is  its  excellence,  its  perfection.  It  is  Jesus  still,  and  will 
be  always  so.  The  office  cannot  be  transferred.  He  is  the  great  High  Priest, 
supreme  in  dignity  and  power,  without  an  equal,  rival,  or  successor.  There  needs 
no  change.  "  Death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  Him."  "  I  am  He  that  liveth 
and  was  dead,  and  behold,  I  am  alive  for  evermore."  2.  His  priesthood  is  eternal. 
He  "  is  consecrated  for  evermore."  It  is  not  "  endless  "  absolutely,  but  only  while 
the  mediatorial  dispensation  abides.  The  period  will  come  when  the  Son  shall 
deliver  up  the  kingdom  to  God  ;  no  more  shall  the  cry  of  blood  be  heard,  inter- 
ces'^ion  shall  cease,  and  the  Triune  God  in  His  glory  and  felicity  shall  '*  be  all  in 
all "  to  the  myriads  of  pure  spirits.  Then  the  triumphant  church  can  no  more 
need  a  Mediator.  3.  The  priesthood  of  Jesus  possesses  a  peculiar  perpetuity. 
"He  ever  lives,"  or  He  lives  to  be  ever  interceding.  The  infirmities  of  earth 
cannot  exist  in  glory  to  mar  the  beauty  and  perfection  of  His  mediatorial  work. 
His  love  is  not  subject  to  the  uncertain  fluctuation  of  human  passions.  His  media- 
tion is  not  formal  or  official,  it  is  the  labour  of  His  heart.  His  intercessions  too 
Hre  uninterrupted  by  external  causes.  Though  the  care  of  the  universe  reposes  on 
Him,  yet  His  mind  is  never  absorbed  with  its  anxieties,  nor  withdrawn  from  the 
high  purposes  of  His  intercession.  III.  The  benefits  derived  through  the  in- 
tercessions OF  Christ.  "  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them."  For 
whom  ?  The  angels  need  it  not ;  the  devils  are  "  reserved  in  everlasting  chains 
under  darkness,"  and  no  purgatory  has  received  the  lost  of  mankind,  from  which 
masses  or  intercession  can  release  them  ;  the  shadows  of  eternal  night  settle  over 
their  doom.  Nor,  on  the  other  hand,  are  the  benefits  of  the  intercession  limited  to 
believers  only,  though  they  share  most  largely  His  affections.  He  prays  for  all  who 
believe  in  His  name.  Yea,  He  intercedes  for  the  world,  for  sinners  of  every  age, 
every  country,  every  shade  of  guilt.  A  right  to  the  Tree  of  Life  is  the  boon  of  every 
sinner.  Who  needs  despair  of  mercy  ?  Why  will  ye  perish  ?  The  list  of  blessings  , 
descending  to  you  through  Him  is  infinite.  Thence  come  all  the  mercies  of  "the 
life  that  now  is,"  riches,  honour,  and  length  of  days.  You  httle  consider  how  it  affects 
the  choice  of  your  inheritance,  your  trade,  your  fields,  your  life,  your  health,  your 
family,  your  •'  aU  things  "  1  The  range  of  spiritual  blessings  is  still  more  extensive. 
There  is  yo'''-  preservation  from  a  merited  punishment.  Keview  the  follies  of  youth, 
the  sins  and  backsUdings  of  riper  years,  and  you  will  confess  "  'Tis  just,  the  sentence 
should  take  place."  But  what  an  impressive  consideration,  that  you  are  now  kept 
from  "  the  everlasting  burnings,"  only  through  His  merciful  intercessions  I  Here 
also  is  the  pledge  of  pardon  to  the  penitent.  Would  a  guilty  creature  dare  to  utter 
a  cry  for  mercy  before  a  throne  of  "justice  and  judgment,"  clothed  with  majesty 
and  terror,  and  guarded  by  the  flaming  sword  of  wrath  ?  Trembling  soul  1  that 
flaming  sword  of  the  cherubim  is  gone,  that  throne  is  a  mercy-seat  through  "  the 
blood  of  sprinkling,"  bending  over  it  is  the  covenant  sign  of  peace,  the  radiant  bow 
of  mercy.  The  presence  of  the  Intercessor  there  is  the  testimony  that  "  God  ia 
reconciled,"  and  it  proclaims  to  you  a  free  salvation  through  faith  in  His  name. 
Here  is  your  hope  of  the  universal  spread  of  the  gospel.  It  is  for  this  He  ever 
lives  In  glory,  that  He  may  secure  the  consummation  of  His  own  plans  of  love,  and 


CHAP,  vn.]  HEBREWS.  601 

rejoice  over  a  recovered  world,  prostrate  at  His  feet,  glorifying  Him  in  endless 
praise.  {George  F.  White.)  The  great  Intercessor : — I.  The  necessity  and 
NATURE  OF  THIS  INTERCESSION.  1.  It  was  nccessarj.  As  necessary  as  every  other 
part  of  the  work  of  our  salvation.  His  incarnation  was  necessary  to  His  obedience, 
His  obedience  to  His  death,  and  His  death  to  His  intercession.  His  object  in 
obeying  and  dying  was  to  intercede  on  behalf  of  transgressors,  for  whom  He  made 
an  atonement.  His  atonement  would  be  of  no  avail  without  His  intercession. 
(chap.  ix.  7,  8;  Bom.  viii.  34).  2.  Its  nature.  Appearing  in  the  court  of  heaven 
as  our  Advocate  and  Mediator  (chap.  ix.  24).  Appearing  in  human  nature  to 
represent  us  (Acts  vii.  55,  56).  Presenting  His  wounds  as  a  plea  to  be  heard 
(Rev.  V.  6).  Presenting  our  prayers  perfumed  with  the  incense  of  His  merit 
(Rev.  viii.  3,  4),  Answering  all  accusations  preferred  against  us  (Zech.  iii.  1,  2). 
Pleading  with  God  for  all  covenant  blessings  (John  xvii.  24),  3.  The  manner  of 
Christ's  inlerctssion.  lie  admits  our  guilt,  confirms  and  establishes  the  law,  and 
pleads  His  own  obedience  and  death  for  our  acquittal  (Rom.  iii.  21-23).     II.  Thh 

QDALIFICATION    OF   THE    INTERCESSOR,  AND   THE    DESIGN  OP   HiS   INTERCESSION.       1.    HiS 

qualification  as  Intercessor.  He  is  one  with  God,  and  therefore  can  enter  into  the 
mind  of  God ;  the  anointed  Mediator,  and  therefore  has  authority  in  the  court  of 
heaven.  He  is  perfectly  holy,  and  has  free  access  to  the  throne  ;  He  has  done  aH 
that  was  required  of  us,  and  therefore  has  a  claim,  and  cannot  be  denied  the  privi. 
lege  of  representing  our  cause.  He  is  omniscient,  and  knows  all  our  wants  ;  faith- 
ful, and  will  not  forget  or  deceive  us ;  true  to  His  engagement,  and  will  fulfil  all 
His  promises  ;  full  of  sympathy,  and  can  well  feel  for  us.  'S.  The  end  and  design 
of  His  intercession.  For  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  the  pardon  of  sin, 
reconciliation  with  God,  access  to  God,  and  acceptance  with  Him  ;  our  preservation 
from  sin,  perseverance  in  hoUness ;  our  sanctification  and  glorification,  and  also 
for  the  establishment  of  His  kingdom  in  the  world.  III.  The  PREVAiiENOY  and 
PERPETUITY  OF  His  INTERCESSION.  1.  Its  prcvaleucy.  The  dignity  of  His  person 
secures  it ;  God  will  not  refuse  His  Son.  The  perfection  of  His  work ;  God  ia 
well  pleased  in  Him.  The  wisdom  of  His  request ;  it  is  in  accordance  with  the  will 
of  God.  His  abiUty  to  save  all  who  come  to  Him ;  the  many  instances  in  which 
He  has  already  saved.  He  is  always  ready  to  undertake  our  cause,  and  has  never 
pleaded  in  vain.  Believers  in  every  age  are  receiving  blessings  from  Him.  2.  Ita 
perpetuity.  There  will  be  no  change  in  His  priesthood  as  there  was  in  Aaron'a 
(chap.  vii.  11-25).  He  continues  for  ever.  He  is  always  before  the  throne,  pleading 
our  cause.  This  day,  this  hour,  while  we  are  assembled  to  worsliip,  he  is  repre- 
eenting  our  cause  in  the  court  of  heaven.  Lessons  : — 1.  Learn  not  to  trust  any 
other  intercessor  but  Christ.  2.  There  is  no  case  He  will  refuse.  3.  In  all  our 
approaches  to  God  we  must  look  by  faith  to  Him.  4.  How  great  is  the  privilege 
of  having  an  Advocate  in  heaven.  5.  The  awful  state  of  those  who  do  not  seek 
an  interest  in  His  atonement  and  intercession.  {The  Evangelical  Preacher.) 
The  intercession  oj  Christ : — I.  Its  reality  (chap.  ix.  24 ;  1  John  ii.  1 ;  Rom.  viii.  34). 
II.  Its  nature.  On  earth  He  offered  the  necessary  sacrifice  for  sin,  and  now,  in 
heaven,  He  pleads  it.  HI.  Its  design,  or  e.jd.  To  secure  to  His  disciples  the 
actual  possession  of  all  those  inestimable  privileges  which  it  was  the  object  of  Hia 
obedience  and  sufferings  to  procure  on  their  behalf.  1,  The  pardon  of  their  daily 
sins.  2.  The  acceptance  of  their  worship.  3.  Victory  over  their  enemies,  consola  ■ 
tions  under  their  trials,  a  spirit  of  affectionate  union  among  themselves,  increasing 
sanctification,  and  preservation  from  the  evil  of  the  world.  4.  Grace  to  persevere 
to  the  end.  5.  Final  acceptance,  and  certain  admittance  into  heaven.  IH.  Thh 
PECULIAR  excellencies  OF  Christ  AS  AN  INTERCESSOR.  In  Him  cxists  every  moral 
quality  that  is  suited  to  inspire  the  profoundest  reverence,  to  call  forth  the  warmest 
affection,  and  to  justify  the  most  unbounded  confidence.  1.  He  is  a  wise  Inter- 
cessor. He  knows  what  blessings  to  seek  for  us,  what  pleas  to  offer,  and  how  best 
to  enforce  them  in  order  to  ensure  success.  2.  He  is  a  faithful  Intercessor.  3.  He 
is  a  merciful  and  sympathising  Intercessor.  He  is  capable  of  conducting  the  cause 
of  many  at  once,  and  yet  of  attending  minutely  to  the  case  of  each  individuaL  4. 
He  is  a  successful  Intercessor.  6.  He  is  an  ever-living  Intercessor.  6.  He  is  the 
only  Intercessor,  Lessons: — 1,  The  unchangeable  nature  of  the  Saviour's  love.  2. 
How  great  the  obligations  of  every  Christian  I  3.  How  deplorable  is  the  situation 
of  those  who  have  no  Advocate  in  heaven  !  {Essex  Congreriational  Remembrancer.) 
The  Saviour  interceding : — I.  There  are  three  offices  which  Christ  sustains  in 
reference  to  the  salvation  of  men,  prophetical,  sacerdotal,  and  regal.  These  compre- 
hend all  that  He  has  done,  is  doing,  and  will  do,  in  reference  to  oar  salvation,  until 


608  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vit 

the  mediatorial  kingdom  be  given  op.  Intercession  is  part  of  the  sacerdotal  office^ 
II.  The  purposes  for  which  He  sustains  the  office  of  mediation  and  intercession.. 

1.  For  the  suspension  of  merited  punishment  and  the  extension  of  our  probationary 
existence.  2.  For  the  continuance  of  the  economy  of  grace  in  the  Church,  and  the 
supply  of  spiritual  influence  to  the  minds  of  men.  This  is  necessary  to  help  in 
improving  our  extended  probation.  3.  For  the  pardon  and  salvation  of  the  most 
reprobate  and  guilty.  So  Isaiah  tells  us  in  that  admirable  prophecy  of  the  media- 
torial work  of  Christ  with  which  the  whole  of  his  fifty-third  chapter  is  engrossed. 
"  He  made  intercession  for  the  transgressors."  4.  That  our  persons  and  services 
may  be  acceptable  to  God.  "  Thi-ough  Him  we  have  access  by  one  Spirit  unto  the 
Father."  6.  The  intercession  of  Christ  embraces  in  a  very  special  maimer  the 
interests  of  His  people.   Lessons  : — 1.  The  majesty  and  holiness  of  God  the  Father. 

2.  The  love  of  Christ.  (1)  Its  constancy.  (2)  Its  comprehensiveness.  3.  The 
necessity  of  availing  ourselves  of  the  advocacy  of  Christ.  4.  The  necessity  of 
cultivating  a  continual  sense  of  dependence  on  Christ.  (J.  Summerjield,  M.A.) 
The  two  Intercessors  (with  Kom.  viii.  27) : — One  of  the  ways  in  which  the  enemy  of 
souls  destroys  men  is  by  joining  together  what  God  has  separated.  Hence  the 
alliance  between  the  world  and  religion.  Another  mode  by  which  he  destroys  is  ta 
separate  what  God  has  joined  together  :  such  as  principle  and  practice  ;  doctrine 
and  duty;  pardoning  mercy  and  renewing  grace.  That  man  is  not  yet  truly 
awakened  and  enlightened  from  above  who  does  not  see  and  feel  his  equal  need  of 
— the  Saviour  and  the  Sanctifier — the  Son  of  God  and  the  Spirit  of  God — the  work 
of  the  one /or  him,  and  of  the  other  in  him.  To  such  a  connection  I  am  going  to 
lead  you.  For,  be  it  remembered,  every  Christian  has  two  Advocates,  two  Inter- 
cessors ;  and  they  should  be  viewed  relatively  to  each  other.  "  Jesus  ever  liveth  to 
make  intercession  for  them.  The  Spirit  itself  maketh  intercession  for  us."  (See 
Rom.  viii.  27.)  I.  Let  us  consider  the  inteecession  of  Christ.  Dr.  Owen  long 
ago  complained,  and  there  is  much  truth  in  the  remark,  that  we  do  not  dwell 
enough,  in  our  thoughts,  on  the  present  life  of  Christ :  for  He  is  living,  not  a  Hf e  of 
glory  only — though  even  this  should  delight  those  that  love  Him — but  a  life  of  office. 
When  our  Saviour  left  our  world  He  ascended  up  far  above  all  heavens  ;  and  frailty 
might  have  feared  that  His  concern  for  us  would  have  ceased  with  His  residence 
among  us.  But,  says  Paul,  though  Jesus  the  Son  of  God  be  passed  into  the 
heavens,  "  we  have  not  an  high  priest  who  cannot  be  touched  with  the  feeling  of 
our  infirmities."  The  ligature  which  unites  us  remains,  and  is  all  sensibility  and 
life.  "  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us."  Volumes  might  be 
written  on  the  subject ;  but  we  must  be  brief.  It  has  been  questioned 
whether  this  intercession  be  vocal.  Why  should  it  not  ?  He  is  "  clothed  in  a 
body  like  our  own."  But,  not  to  intrude  into  things  which  we  have  not  seen, 
it  is  enough  for  us  to  know — 1.  That  His  intercession  is  real.  It  consists  in  His 
personal  appearance ;  in  the  presentation  of  His  sacrifice,  and  claiming  the  benefits 
arising  from  it.  ^schylus  was  strongly  accused,  and  likely  to  be  condemned.  His 
brother  Amyntas  engaged  to  be  his  advocate.  Amyntas  had  done  much  for  the 
commonwealth ;  and,  in  a  certain  action,  in  their  service,  had  lost  a  hand.  He 
came  into  the  court.  The  court  was  uncommonly  crowded ;  and  all  were  eager  to 
hear  him  plead  on  so  interesting  an  occasion.  But  he  said  nothing — he  only  held 
up  his  dismembered  arm  1  The  audience  and  the  judges  were  so  moved  as  immedi- 
ately to  order  his  brother's  release.  It  does  not  appear  that  the  high  priest  said 
anything  when  he  entered  the  holy  place :  but  what  he  did  spake  loud  enough.  He 
wore  the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  on  his  breastplate  ;  he  took  the  blood 
of  the  slaughtered  victim  in  a  basin,  and  sprinkled  the  mercy-seat,  and  burned 
incense  before  the  golden  altar,  and  then  came  forth  and  blessed  the  people.  Abel's 
blood  spake  to  God  from  the  ground ;  that  is,  it  demanded  vengeance  :  the  blood  of 
Jesus  is  equally  vocal ;  but  it  speaketh  better  things  than  that  of  Abel — it  calls  for 
mercy.  How  did  John  see  Him  in  the  vision  ?  As  a  lamb  that  had  been  slain  ; 
that  is,  with  the  wound  in  the  neck,  and  the  blood  on  the  wool.  Without  a  figure — 
He  retains  in  His  glorified  body  the  marks  of  His  sufferings  and  death.  2.  It 
extends  to  all  our  important  interests.  We  may  look  upon  His  prayer  for  His 
disciples,  on  the  night  in  which  He  was  betrayed  (John  xvii.),  as  a  specimen  of  Hi  a 
continued  intercession  before  the  throne.  And  for  what  does  He  not  there  plead  ? 
Is  it  their  preservation  (ver.  15)  ?  Is  it  their  renovation  (ver.  17)  ?  Is  it  their 
union  (vers.  21-23)  ?  Is  it  their  glorification  (ver.  24)  ?  8.  It  is  successful.  "  I 
know,"  says  He,  "  that  Thou  hearest  Me  always."  This  conclusion  is  derivable  from 
the  grandeur  of  His  character,  and  His  nearness  to  God.    XL  Let  oa  examine  ZHa 


CHAP,  vn,]  HEBREWS.  603 

iNTEBCESsioN  OF  THE  SpiRiT  '.  for  the  Spirit  '•  itself  maketh  intercession  for  us."  In 
entering  on  this,  it  is  necessary  to  observe,  that,  subjectively  and  instrumentally 
considered,  religion  is  our  own  work :  we  run  the  race  set  before  us ;  and  fight  the 
good  fight  of  faith  :  we  believe,  and  repent,  and  pray ;  but,  owing  to  our  natural 
ignorance,  and  weakness,  depravity,  and  aversion,  it  is  God  that  worketh  in  us  to 
will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure.  To  His  Spirit,  therefore,  all  our  renovation  ia 
ascribed :  we  are  said  to  be  "  born  of  the  Spirit "  ;  to  be  "  led  by  the  Spirit  "  ;  to 
"  Uve  in  the  Spirit "  ;  to  "  walk  in  the  Spirit "  ;  and  to  "  worship  God  in  the  Spirit." 
Let  us  see,  then,  how  this  Divine  agency  brings  the  sinner  upon  his  knees,  and  keeps 
him  there.  1.  The  Spirit  leads  us  to  an  acquaintance  with  ourselves.  He  removes 
the  veil  of  ignorance  and  delusion  that  concealed  our  state,  our  wants,  and  our 
desert ;  and  the  man  who  once  said,  I  am  rich,  and  increased  with  goods,  and  have 
need  of  nothing,  now  sees  that  he  is  wretched,  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind, 
anil  naked.  2.  The  Spirit  fixes  upon  the  mind  a  concern  to  be  delivered  and  relieved, 
too  great  to  be  shaken  oft.  His  sin  is  ever  before  him.  Neither  business,  nor  com- 
pany, nor  amusement,  can  ease  the  anguish  of  his  broken  heart,  or  divert  him  from 
the  inquiry,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  3.  The  Spirit  enables  us  to  appre- 
hend and  believe  the  mercy  and  grace  revealed  in  the  gospel.  Hence  arises  a  hope 
that  maketh  not  ashamed.  This  hope  enters  the  soul,  as  the  sun  does  a  garden  in 
iprii!g,  calling  forth,  by  a  genial  influence,  the  leaves  and  the  buds,  after  the  dreari- 
ness of  winter.  4.  The  Spirit  renews  our  souls,  removes  our  alienation  from  the  life 
of  God,  and  produces  in  us  those  principles  and  dispositions  which  cause  us  to 
delight  in  approaching  Him,  and  even  to  give  thanks  at  the  remembrance  of  His 
holijoess.  Thus  our  duty  is  converted  into  a  privilege ;  and  we  find  it  too  good  to 
draw  near  to  God  ever  again  to  restrain  prayer  before  Him.  HI.  View  them  in 
THEIR  EEiiATiON  TO  EACH  OTHER.  It  is  easy  to  distinguish  these  Intercessors.  The  one 
makes  intercession  above ;  the  other  below :  one  in  the  court  of  heaven  ;  the  other 
in  the  conscience.  The  one  makes  intercession  for  us,  the  other  in  us.  But  there 
is  a  connection  between  them ;  and  it  is  threefold.  1.  A  connection  of  derivation. 
The  one  flows  from  the  other.  2.  A  connection  of  dependence.  The  one  needs  the 
other.  3.  A  connection  of  evidence.  The  one  proves  the  other.  As  to  some  of 
you,  how  long  have  ^vou  been  praying,  *'  Say  unto  my  soul,  I  am  thy  salvation. 
Show  me  a  token  for  good,  that  I  may  rejoice  in  thee  "  ?  What  happy  beings  would 
you  go  away  at  the  end  of  this  exercise,  if  you  could  ascertain  one  thing ;  namely, 
that  the  Eedeemer  thinks  upon  you  for  good — and  appears  in  the  presence  of  God 
for  you !  Well,  the  proof  does  not  lie  far  off — it  is  nigh  thee,  even  in  thy  mouth 
and  in  thy  heart.  It  is  prayer — not  fine  prayer — not  well-arranged  language.  The 
proof  does  not  require  language  at  all.  No — but  a  broken  heart :  a  contrite  spirit ; 
tears ;  sighs ;  groanings — groanings  which  cnnnot  be  uttered.  Of  this  therefore 
rest  assured,  that  if  the  Spirit  itself  is  thus  making  intercession  in  you,  Jesus  is  ever 
living  to  make  intercession  for  you.  (IF.  Jay.)  The  Saviour^s  intercession  : — "  He 
ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us"  is  the  noble  description  of  Christ's  mission 
in  heaven,  and  as  though  to  complete  the  idea  of  unceasing  and  perpetual  vitality 
it  is  added  that  the  work  is  carried  on  according  to  "  the  power  of  an  endless  life." 
In  these  days  of  freedom  and  independence  we  scarcely  realise  the  force  of  a  woid 
like  "  intercession."  How  strange  it  seems  to  us  to  read,  in  the  prefaces  of  their  books, 
the  most  earnest  entreaties  for  patronage  and  aid  from  great  authors  to  persons  now 
utterly  forgotten,  though  once  powerful.  It  is  not  easy  to  conceive  how  dependent 
was  genius  and  worth  upon  the  influence  of  those  in  power.  Or  in  still  worse  days, 
such  as  those  of  war  and  violence,  the  weak  and  helpless  were  utterly  neglected,  and 
even  for  mere  justice  were  dependent  on  the  good  offices  of  the  influential  and 
powerful.  What  a  state  of  society  is  shown  by  the  old  German  proverbs,  supposed 
to  have  originated  amidst  the  terrible  hardships  of  the  peasant  and  the  poor  man 
during  "  the  thirty  years'  war."  Such  sayings  as  "  Favour  is  better  than  right,"  or 
"  A  handful  of  might  is  better  than  a  sackful  of  right,"  tell  of  days  of  bitter  oppres- 
sion and  injustice,  and  in  such  times  the  good  steward  who  would  intercede  for  the 
starving  peasant,  or  the  kind  countess  who  would  plead  for  the  oppressed,  or  the 
benevolent  bishop  who  advocated  the  poor  man's  rights  before  greedy  monarchs  and 
servile  councils,  made  the  office  of  a  mediator  and  an  intercessor  well  understood. 
Let  us  picture  to  ourselves  such  a  scene  as  may  often  have  occurred.  The  father 
of  a  little  family  has  been  compelled  to  follow  his  feudal  lord  to  the  field,  and  fallen 
in  battle.  A  covetous  neighbour  grasps  their  httle  farm,  and  the  unfeeling  over- 
bailiff  pays  no  heed  to  their  complaints.  At  length,  driven  from  their  home,  the 
poor  widow,  with  the  ragged  little  children,  begs  her  way  to  the  palace  of  the  king. 


604  TRE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vn. 

Oh,  if  only  she  could  lay  her  troubles  before  him,  surely  his  kind  heart  would  feel 
for  her ;  doubtless  his  authority  could  redress  her  wrongs.  But  now,  as  she  stands 
before  the  royal  palace,  she  perceives  that  the  gate  is  guarded  by  watchful  sentinels, 
who  forbid  all  entrance.  She  gazes  wistfully  through  the  gilded  railings,  she  sees 
the  splendour  within — the  towers  and  colonnades,  and  ranges  of  windows  glistening 
in  the  sunlight ;  she  beholds  the  smooth  lawns,  and  tbe  parterres  gay  with  bright 
flowers,  and  wonders  if  those  who  enjoy  all  this  magnificence  know  how  hard  and 
miserable  are  the  lives  of  many  others  1  But  at  this  moment  a  lithe  young  figure 
advances  along  the  broad  gravelled  walk.  He  is  richly  clad,  a  white  plume  adorns 
his  cap,  a  noble  hound  gambols  by  his  side,  two  attendants  follow  at  a  respectful 
distance.  It  is  the  king's  only  son.  And  now  his  keen  young  eye  has  caught  sight 
of  the  wretched  group  that  are  peering  through  the  iron  bars.  He  notes  their 
hungry  looks,  and  bare  feet,  sore  and  blood-stained  with  long  travelling,  and  their 
poor  rags  and  emaciated  frames.  His  heart  is  filled  with  pity  for  their  sufferings. 
Drawing  near  he  asks  their  history,  what  they  seek,  what  they  need.  He  listens 
patiently  to  the  mother's  long  narrative,  he  helps  her  to  explain  herself  by  encourag- 
ing questions,  and  at  last,  finding  that  her  great  desire  was  that  she  could  have  her 
cause  brought  before  the  notice  of  the  king,  and  that  she  had  none  to  plead  for  her, 
he  bids  the  sentries  admit  her,  and  taking  the  poor  woman  by  tbe  hand  he  leads 
her  up  to  the  palace  door,  and  then,  entering  within  its  gilded  portals,  he  himself 
lays  tbe  statement  of  her  helplessness  and  misery  before  the  throne,  and  asks  in  his 
own  name  for  her  petition  to  be  pranted !  This  is  what  intercession  means,  and 
the  Christian  rejoices  as  he  kneels  to  utter  the  name  of  Jesus,  to  pour  out  his  heart 
before  Him,  and  realises  with  joy  that  the  cause  of  the  poor  trembling,  sin-stained 
mortal  is  pleaded  on  high  by  the  ascended  Lord — that  wondrous  Mediator,  who  is 
Man  to  feel  with  us,  but  likewise  Divine  in  His  nature,  and  endued  with  "the  power 
of  an  endless  life."      (-/.  W.  Hardman,  LL.D.)  Christ  as  Intercessor : — I  ought 

to  study  Christ  as  an  Intercessor.  He  prayed  most  for  Peter  who  was  to  be  most 
tempted.  I  am  on  His  breastplate.  If  I  could  hear  Christ  praying  for  me  in  the 
next  room,  I  would  not  fear  a  million  of  enemies.  Yet  the  distance  makes  no 
diiJerence  ;  He  is  praying  for  me.  {R.  M.  McClieyne. )  Intercession : — Interces- 
sion is  a  law  term  borrowed  from  courts  of  judicature,  and  signifies  the  action  of  a 
proxy  or  attorney,  either  in  suing  out  the  rights  of  his  client,  or  answering  the 
cavils  and  objections  brought  against  him  by  the  plaintiff.  This  Chist  does  for 
believers.  {Sunday  School  Chronicle.)  GhrisVs  prevailing  intercession : — To  the 
uttermost !  Oh,  my  friends,  these  are  precious  words  to  a  ruined  world.  Where  is 
the  individual  whom  He  cannot  save?  Is  it  the  man  who  to  the  treachery  of  Judas 
adds  the  persecuting  ferocity  of  Saul  ?  He  intercedes,  and  the  lion  in  a  moment  is 
changed  into  a  lamb.  Is  it  the  man  who  is  backsliding  as  Peter,  or  steeped  in 
wickedness  as  Manasseh  ?  He  intercedes,  and  a  conversion  is  accomplished.  Is  it 
the  man  who  with  the  hypocrisy  of  the  Pharisee  combines  the  daring  profanity  of 
the  infidel?  He  intercedes,  and  heaven  is  filled  with  gladness  at  the  man's  salva- 
tion. Is  it,  in  short,  the  man  whose  whole  life  has  been  spent  in  insulting  the  name 
and  breaking  the  law,  and  trampling  on  the  grace  of  God  ?  Even  for  him  there  is 
mercy.  The  High  Priest  intercedes,  and  the  repentant  prodigal  is  saved.  You 
cannot  name  a  sin  which  He  is  unable  to  forgive.  You  cannot  think  of  a  sinner 
whom  He  is  incompetent  to  save.  Tell  us  not  of  limitations.  Talk  not  to  as  of 
exceptions.  An  infinitely  valuable  sacrifice  recognises  not  the  one — mercy  admits 
not  the  idea  of  the  other.  Every  attribute  of  God  disowns — the  whole  covenant  of 
reder^iition  repels  such  an  unworthy  notion  as  ruinous  at  once  to  the  scheme  of 
grace  and  to  the  hopes  of  man.  No  matter  how  deeply  dyed  with  pollution  my 
bygone  history  may  have  been ;  no  matter  what  may  have  been  the  amount  or 
enormity  of  the  transgressions  which  I  have  committed,  if  I  have  come  uuto  God 
through  Christ,  I  am  so  sure  of  the  efficacy  of  Christ's  intercession  in  my  behalf, 
that  I  can  confidently  join  with  the  apostle  in  his  exulting  exclamation  (Rom.  viii. 
33,  34).  (James  Jeffrey.)  Intercessor  and  Mediator : — To  mediate  and  intercede 
are  both  conciliatory  acts  ;  the  intercessor  and  mediator  are  equals  or  even  inferiors ; 
one  intercedes  or  interposes  for  the  removal  of  evil ;  one  mediates  for  the  attain- 
ment of  good.  Christ  is  our  Intercessor,  to  avert  from  ns  the  consequences  of  our 
guilt ;  He  is  oar  Mediator,  to  obtain  for  as  the  blessings  of  grace  and  salvation.  An 
intercessor  only  pleads  ;  a  mediator  guarantees  ;  he  takes  upon  himself  a  responsi- 
bility. Christ  is  our  Intercessor  by  virtue  of  His  relationship  with  the  Father  ;  He 
is  oar  Mediator  by  virtue  of  His  atonement,  by  which  act  He  takes  upon  Himself 
the  sins  of  all  who  are  traly  penitent.    {O,  Crabb.) 


CHAP.  Tn.]  HEBREWS.  605 

Vers.  26-28.  Sncli  an  High  Priest  became  us. — The  priest  whom  we  need : — I. 

Wk  all  need  a  PBIE8T,   AND   WE   HAVE   THE   PBIEST   WB   NEED   IN   JeBUS   ChRIST.      Iq 

fair  weather,  when  the  summer  seas  are  sunny  and  smooth,  and  all  the  winds  are 
sleeping  in  their  caves,  the  life-belts  on  the  deck  of  a  steamer  may  be  thought  to  be 
unnecessary,  but  when  she  strikes  on  the  black-toothed  rocks,  and  all  aboat  is  a 
hell  of  noise  and  despair,  then  the  meaning  of  them  is  understood.  When  you  are 
amongst  the  breakers  you  will  need  a  hfe-buoy.  When  the  flames  are  flickering 
/ound  you,  you  will  understand  the  use  and  worth  of  a  fire-escape,  and  when  you 
have  learned  what  sort  of  a  man  you  are,  and  what  that  involves  in  regard  of  your 
relations  to  God,  then  the  mysteries  which  surround  the  thought  of  the  High 
Priesthood  and  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ  will  be  accepted  as  mysteries,  and  lefi 
where  they  are,  and  the  fact  will  be  grasped  with  all  the  tendrils  of  your  soul  as 
the  one  hope  for  you  in  Ufe  and  in  death.    II.  We  need  fob  a  pbiest  a  perfect 

MAN,   and   we   have    THE    PERFECT    PBIEST    WHOM    WB    NEED  IN   JeSTJS   ChBIST.       The 

writer  goes  on  to  enumerate  a  series  of  qualities  by  which  our  Lord  is  constituted 
the  priest  we  need.  Of  these  five  qualities  which  follow  in  my  text,  the  three 
former  are  those  to  which  I  now  refer.  "  He  is  holy,  harmless,  undefiled."  Taken 
generally,  these  three  characteristics  refer  to  the  priest's  relation  to  God,  to  other 
men,  and  to  the  law  of  purity.  "  He  is  holy  "  ;  that  is  to  say,  not  so  much  morally 
free  from  guilt  as  standing  in  a  certain  relation  to  God.  The  word  here  used  for 
"  holy"  has  a  special  meaning.  It  is  the  representative  of  an  Old  Testament  word, 
which  seems  to  mean  *•  devoted  to  God  in  love."  Such  is  the  first  qualification  for 
a  priest,  that  he  shall  be  knit  to  God  by  loving  devotion,  and  have  a  heart  throbbing 
in  unison  with  the  Divine  heart  in  all  its  tenderness  of  pity,  and  in  all  its  nobleness 
and  loftiness  of  purity.  And,  besides  being  thus  the  earthly  echo  and  representa- 
tive of  the  whole  sweetness  of  the  Divine  nature,  so,  in  the  next  place,  the  priest 
we  need  must,  in  relation  to  men,  be  harmless — without  malice,  guUe,  unkindness ; 
a  Lamb  of  God,  with  neither  horns  to  butt,  nor  teeth  to  tear,  nor  claws  to  wound, 
but  gentle  and  gracious,  sweet  and  compassionate ;  or,  as  we  read  in  another  place 
in  this  same  letter,  •'  a  merciful  High  Priest  in  things  pertaining  to  God."  And  the 
priest  that  we  need,  to  bridge  over  the  gulf  between  us  sinful  and  alienated  men 
and  God,  must  be  one  "  undefiled,"  on  whose  white  garments  there  shall  be  no 
speck,  on  the  virgin  purity  of  whose  nature  there  shall  be  no  stain;  who 
shall  stand  above  us,  though  He  be  one  of  us,  and  whilst  "  it  behoves  Him  to 
be  made  in  all  points  like  unto  His  brethren,"  shall  yet  be  "  without  blemish 
and  without  spot."  I  pass  on  just  to  notice,  in  a  word,  how  this  assemblage  of 
qualifications  which,  taken  together,  make  up  the  idea  of  a  perfect  man,  is  found  in 
Jesus  Christ  for  a  certain  purpose,  and  a  purpose  beyond  that  which  some  of  you,  I 
am  afraid,  are  accustomed  to  regard.  Why  this  innocence  ;  this  God-devotedness ; 
this  blamelessness ;  this  absence  of  all  selfish  antagonism?  Why  this  life,  so 
sweet,  so  pure,  so  gentle,  so  running  over  with  untainted  and  ungrudging  compas- 
sion,  BO  conscious  of  unljroken  and  perfect  communion  and  sympathy  with  God  ? 
Why  ?  That  He  might,  "  through  the  Eternal  Spirit,  offer  Himself  without  spot 
unto  God  "  ;  and  that  by  His  one  offering  He  might  perfect  for  ever  all  them  that 
pat  their  trust  in  Him.  III.  We  need  a  pbiest  in  the  heavens,  and  wb  havb 
IN  Christ  the  heavenlt  pbiest  whom  wb  need.  The  two  last  qualifications  for 
the  priestly  office  included  in  my  text  are,  "  separate  from  sinners ;  made  higher 
than  the  heavens."  Now,  the  '•  separation  "  intended  is  not,  as  I  suppose,  Christ's 
moral  distance  from  evildoers,  but  has  what  I  may  call  a  kind  of  half -local  significa- 
tion, and  is  explained  by  the  next  clause.  He  is  "  separate  from  sinners,"  not  because 
He  is  pure  and  they  foul,  but  because  having  offered  His  sacrifice  He  has  ascended 
up  on  high.  He  is  "  made  higher  than  the  heavens."  Scripture  sometimes  speaks 
of  the  hving  Christ  as  at  present  in  the  heavens,  and  at  others  as  having  "  passed 
through  "  and  being  "  high  above  all  heavens  " ;  in  the  former  case  simply  giving 
the  more  general  idea  of  exaltation,  in  the  latter  the  thought  that  He  is  lifted,  in 
His  manhood  and  as  our  Priest,  above  the  bounds  of  the  material  and  visible 
creation,  and  "  set  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high."  Such  a  priest  we 
need.  His  elevation  and  separation  from  us  upon  earth  is  essential  to  that  great 
and  continual  work  of  His  which  we  call,  for  want  of  any  more  definite  name.  His 
intercession.  The  High  Priest  in  the  heavens  presents  His  sacrifice  there  for  ever. 
We  need  no  other ;  we  do  need  Him.  Oh,  friend  I  are  you  resting  on  that  sacri- 
fice ?  Have  yon  given  your  cause  into  His  hands  to  plead  ?  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.) 
SirUessnes*  o/Jesiu : — He  was  without  sin,  as  a  child,  as  a  youth,  as  a  man.  In 
the  synagogue,  when  they  were  singing  psalms,  with  tears  on  their  cheeks,  I  wonder 


606  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  yn. 


how  He  felt,  and  what  He  did.  He  would  have  liked  to  join  them,  but  He  could 
not.  He  knew  nothing  of  the  remorse  and  misery  of  the  young  men  and  grey 
heads  coming  up  with  the  week's  sin  on  their  heads.  He  knew  the  sin  was  there  : 
He  saw  it  in  every  eye,  saw  it  in  the  workshop  and  in  the  street,  in  the  malice  and 
ill-will  that  made  riots  there ;  but  He  did  not  feel  it  in  Himself.  (A.  Whyte,  D.D.) 
The  unstained  life  of  Jesus : — His  Hf e  resembled  a  polished  mirror,  which  the  foulest 
breath  cannot  stain,  nor  dim,  beyond  a  passing  moment.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.) 
Christ  undefiled  .-—Christ  walked  through  the  midst  of  sinners  undefiled.  Like  a 
beam  of  light  piercing  into  a  foul  dungeon,  or  like  a  river  purifying  and  f  srtilising, 
itself  untainted,  so  did  Christ  pass  through  this  world.  (R.  M.McCheyne.)  The 
sinless  High  Priest : — A  priest  who  could  be  charged  with  the  slightest  infraction  of 
the  law  would  have  been  no  Saviour.  The  hopeless  debtor  can  never  be  a  surety 
for  a  debtor  ;  the  helpless  slave  never  liberates  his  companion  slave ;  nor  the  fallen 
lift  the  fallen  from  the  dust.  So  that  all  our  religion,  with  its  perfection  of 
righteousness  and  infirmity  of  consolation,  depends  upon  the  single  fact  that  Christ 
is  the  Holy  One  of  God.  (C.  Stanford,  D.D.)  The  excellence  of  Jesus  : — Accord- 
ing to  Kenan,  the  excellence  of  Jesus  was  due  to  the  climate  and  soU  of  Palestine  ! 
But  he  forgets  to  ask  how  it  is  that  the  climate  and  soil  of  Palestine  have  never 
produced  such  another  1  {C.  Clemance,  D.D.)  Holy. — The  holiness  of  Christ : — 
I.  The  bealitt  of  our  Lord's  holiness  is  most  clearly  and  strongly  declared  in 
Scripture.  1.  We  are  told  that  He  came  into  our  world  with  a  holy  nature.  2. 
His  life,  too,  was  holy.  H.  The  peculiaeity  of  His  holiness.  1.  It  was  holiness 
amidst  sin  and  temptation,  perfect  holiness  amidst  abounding  sin  and  the  utmost 
possible  temptation.  2.  His  was  holiness  also  amidst  weakness  and  suffering.  HI. 
Let  us  come  now  to  the  impoktance  of  Christ's  holiness.  The  character  He  had  to 
sustain,  and  the  work  He  had  to  perform,  required  it.  1.  It  was  necessary  in  order 
to  constitute  Him  a  real  manifestation  of  God.  2.  It  was  needful  to  make  Him  an 
effectual  sacrifice  for  our  sins.  3.  But  our  Lord's  office  as  our  great  Redeemer  was 
not  to  end  with  His  life  on  earth.  He  was  to  go  into  the  eternal  heavens  in  the  same 
character  that  He  bore  here,  and  to  carry  on  there,  though  in  a  different  manner, 
the  same  work.  We  sometimes  think  of  Him  as  simply  entering  there  into  His 
glory  and  joy,  but  He  is  intent  on  our  salvation  in  the  midst  of  His  glory  and  joy ; 
as  much  engaged  in  it  on  His  throne  as  He  was  on  His  cross.  The  apostle  accord- 
ingly represents  Him  in  this  passage  as  our  High  Priest  in  the  heavens,  "  ever 
living  to  make  intercession  for  us  "  ;  and  tells  us  that  it  became  Him  to  be  holy  in 
order  to  qualify  Him  for  this  heavenly  office  and  work.  4.  As  the  pattern  and 
example  to  which  all  His  people  are  to  be  conformed,  it  was  needful  that  our  Lord 
should  be  holy.  We  want  a  perfection  like  His,  the  perfection  of  holiness,  and 
earthbound  as  our  affections  sometimes  are — nothing  below  this  will  satisfy  us.  But 
now  there  is  this  perfection  in  the  holy  Jesus,  a  sinless  perfection.  We  cannot 
look  higher.  He  is  purity  itself,  the  Divine  purity  embodied.  To  be  made  like 
unto  Him  comprehends  in  it  all  that  is  blissful  and  glorious.  We  feel  that  we 
shall  indeed  be  satisfied  when  we  awake  with  His  likeness.  Lessons  :  1.  Let  us 
rejoice  in  His  holiness,  and  admire  and  adore  Him  for  it.  2.  Let  us  seek  for  our- 
selves a  share  in  this  holiness  of  Christ.  3.  And  let  us  banish  from  our  minds  for 
ever  the  thought,  that  though  living  ungodly  lives,  we  may  yet  be  followers  of  this 
holy  Saviour.  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  The  doctrine  of  the  Incarnation: — While  the 
sacred  writers  inform  us  that  "  Jesus  Christ  the  Righteous  "  came  into  the  world  to 
save  sinners,  and  to  take  upon  Him  our  infirmities,  they  are  most  careful  to  tell  us 
that  He  Himself  was  without  sin.  Ever  since  order  and  beauty  arose  out  of  chaos, 
only  two  who  might  properly  be  termed  perfect  beings  have  appeared  in  our  world. 
The  first  Adam  was  of  the  earth,  earthy.  The  other  the  Lord  from  heaven,  pro- 
duced not  out  of  nothing,  or  of  the  dust,  but  conceived  in  a  supernatural  and 
miraculous  manner  by  the  direct  power  and  overshadowing  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
That  in  every  point  He  might  be  like  us,  with  the  exception  of  sin,  He  was  born  a 
babe,  underwent  all  the  weaknesses  peculiar  to  our  infantine  years,  and  passed  in 
progression  through  the  very  steps  that  we  do  from  youth  to  manhood.  Now,  He 
behoved  to  be  thus  like  us  in  advancing  to  maturity ;  yet  His  whole  thoughts, 
sayings,  and  doings,  through  all  the  progression  to  which  He  submitted,  were  in 
entire  conformity  to  the  Divine  will  and  commands.  Had  the  Lord  our  righteous- 
ness been  man,  of  a  sinful  nature,  that  He  must  have  proved  for  us  an  unsuccessful 
representative  is  but  too  evident,  when  we  reflect  that  the  trial  of  Christ  Jesus  wag 
of  a  severer  nature  than  that  endured  by  Adam  ;  for  whilst  our  first  progenitor  had 
merely  one  object  placed  before  his  eyes  as  a  trial  of  obedience,  the  man  of  sorrow? 


OHAP.  vii.]  HEBREWS.  607 

had  a  continued  conflict  of  sufferings,  from  the  manger  to  His  crowning  act  of 
obedience  in  Gethseraane  and  on  the  cross.  If  sin  had  been  interwoven  in  His 
nature,  it  would  have  manifested  something  of  its  existence ;  and  surely  in  His 
mteresting  history,  there  were  not  wanting  occasions  awfully  trying,  when  betrayed 
by  a  follower,  deserted  by  friends,  assailed  by  the  powers  of  wickedness,  and  suffer- 
ing an  eclipse  by  the  hidings  of  His  Father's  countenance  in  the  hour  and  power  of 
darkness.  But  here  let  us  consider  how  it  became  r.  quisite  for  this  Divine  person- 
age to  assume  the  nature  of  man,  and  to  take  upon  Him  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh. 
As  it  was  man  who  had  transgressed,  it  was  necessary  that  the  penalty  should  be 
paid  by  man — not  that  the  punishment  should  be  endured  by  a  nature  different 
from  that  which  had  fallen.  Accordingly,  that  our  iniquities  might  be  all  put  to 
His  account,  and  expiated  by  Him,  He  took  to  Himself  a  true  body,  and  a  reason- 
able soul,  and  died,  the  just  for  the  unjust.  Probably,  had  He  interposed  on  behalf 
of  intelligences  of  a  higher  order,  instead  of  us  who  had  sunk  so  low  in  the  mire  of 
sin.  He  would  have  assumed  the  nature  of  those  intelligences.  Between  the  person 
of  Christ  and  His  blessed  work,  between  the  inherent  splendour  and  excellency  of 
His  character,  and  the  exalted  dignity  of  His  station,  there  is  therefore  an  intimate 
and  beautiful  connection.  The  being  who  would  redeem  another  from  misery  and 
ruin  by  yielding  a  vicarious  righteousness,  must  be  one  who  is  not  himself  under 
any  obligations  to  obey,  or  to  endure  the  penalty  of  the  law  on  his  own  behalf. 
Apply  this  principle  in  reference  to  Christ  Jesus,  who  undertook  our  ceiuse,  and  yon 
will  see  that  He  could  not  be  chargeable  with  presumption  or  disaffection  to  the 
Divine  government,  by  His  laying  claim  to  the  cLaracter  of  independence  and  self- 
existence  ;  for  He  was  "  in  the  form  of  God,  and  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equ  il 
with  God."  No  exactions  of  a  personal  kind  could  have  been  required  of  Him  who, 
of  His  own  free  choice,  was  made  under  the  law,  and  who  magnified  it  and  made  it 
honourable.  Could  this  perfect  and  unchangeable  law  have  been  fulfilled  if  the 
second  Adam  had  not  been  altogether  independent,  holy,  and  Divine,  and  thus 
placed  in  the  most  favourable  circumstances  to  ensure  our  salvation  ?  But  we  are 
to  remember  that  Christ  not  only  required  to  be  independent  and  self -existent,  to 
make  an  atonement  at  all,  but  also  to  be  a  person  of  the  highest  worth,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  demerit  of  sin  as  an  offence  against  all  the  glorious  perfections  of 
infinite  and  unblemished  purity,  whose  name  is  holy,  and  who  is  altogether  glorious 
in  holiness ;  and  this  being  an  unchangeable  perfection  of  His  nature,  it  would 
seem  that  a  Redeemer  was  required,  equal  in  dignity  and  worth  to  the  Mighty 
Being  offended,  and  to  the  extent  of  the  evil  committed.  But  who  in  heaven  or 
earth  could  be  fit  for  the  undertaking  but  the  incarnate  God,  the  Man  that  was 
Jehovah's  fellow  ?  (G.  Mitchell,  BI.A.)  Separate  from  sinners. — ChrisVs  detach- 
ment from  sinners: — Look  at  Christ's  detachment  from  sinners — I.  As  a  deep 
FEELING  IN  THE  MIND  OF  His  coNTEMPOBABiES.  (Lukc  iv.  14-27  ;  Matt.  viii.  5-13  ; 
xxi.  12  ;  John  viii.  1-11.)  1.  This  feeling  of  distance  which  they  had  in  relation 
to  Him  cannot  be  accounted  for  on  the  ground  of — (1)  Miraculous  manifestations ; 
(2)  His  social  superiority ;  (3)  Hi^  non-sociality.  2.  It  was  purely  moral.  His 
incorruptible  truthfulness,  exquisite  sensibilities,  calm  reverence,  overflowing  bene- 
volence, uuconquerable  love  of  eternal  right,  invested  Him  with  that  Godlike  air 
and  bearing  which  made  them  feel  that  He  stood  at  an  unapproachable  moral 
distance.  II.  As  an  undoubted  fact  realised  by  Himself.  This  is  seen  in — 1. 
His  frequent  personal  withdrawal  from  men  in  order  to  hold  fellowship  with  His 
Father.  2.  Much  of  the  language  He  addressed  to  men,  "Ye  are  from  b  neath  ;  I 
am  from  above."  "  I  and  My  Father  are  one."  III.  As  an  essential  poweb  ix 
His  redemptive  undertaking.  1.  It  was  just  that  power  which  rendered  His 
services  as  a  Redeemer  acceptable  to  God.  2.  It  was  just  that  power  that  rendered 
His  services  as  a  Redeemer  efficacious  to  man.  {Homilist.)  Christ  as  separate 
from  the  world  : — With  us  of  to-day  it  is  the  commendation  of  Jesus  that  He  is  so 
profoundly  humbled,  identified  so  affectingly  with  our  human  state.  But  the  power 
He  had  with  the  men  of  His  time  moved  in  exactly  the  opposite  direction,  being 
the  impression  He  made  of  His  remoteness  and  separateness  from  men,  when  He 
was,  in  fact,  only  a  man,  as  they  supposed,  under  all  human  conditions.  With  us 
it  is  the  wonder  that  He  is  brought  so  low.  With  them  that  He  could  seem  to  rise 
BO  high,  for  they  knew  nothing  as  yet  of  His  person,  considered  as  the  incarnate 
Word  of  the  Father.  What  I  propose,  then,  for  my  present  subject  is — The 
separateness  of  Jesus  from  men ;  the  immense  power  it  had  and  must  ever  have  on 
their  feeling  and  character.  I  do  not  mean  by  this  that  Christ  was  separated  as 
being  at  all  withdrawn,  but  only  that,  in  drawing  Himself  most  closely  to  them.  He 


608  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chip,  vn 

waEi  felt  by  them  never  as  being  on  their  level  of  life  and  character,  but  as  being 
parted  from  them  by  an  immense  chasm  of  distance.  These  impressions  were  not 
dne,  as  I  have  said,  to  any  distinct  conceptions  they  had  of  Him  as  being  a  higher 
nature  incarnate,  for  not  even  His  disciples  took  up  any  such  definite  conceptions 
of  His  nature  till  after  His  death  and  ascension.  It  was  guessed,  indeed,  that  He 
might  be  EUas,  or  some  one  of  the  old  prophets,  but  we  are  only  to  see,  in  such 
struggles  of  conjecture,  how  powerfully  He  has  already  impressed  the  sense  of  Hia 
distinction  or  separateness  of  character,  for  such  guesses  or  conjectures  were  even 
absurd,  unless  they  were  instigated  by  previous  impressions  of  something  very 
peculiar  in  His  unearthly  manner  requiring  to  be  accounted  for.  His  miracles  had 
undoubtedly  something  to  do  with  the  impression  of  His  separateness  from  ordinary 
men,  but  a  great  many  others,  who  were  strictly  human,  have  wrought  miracles 
without  creating  any  such  gulf  between  them  and  mankind  as  we  discover  here.  It 
is  probably  true  also  that  the  rumour  of  His  being  the  Messiah — the  great,  long- 
expected  Prince  and  Deliverer — had  something  to  do  in  raising  the  impressions  of 
men  concerning  Him.  But  their  views  of  the  Messiah  to  come  had  prepared  them 
to  look  only  for  some  great  hero  and  deliverer,  and  a  kind  of  political  millennium 
under  His  kingdom.  There  was  nothing  in  their  expectation  that  should  separate 
Him  specially  from  mankind  as  being  a  more  than  humanly  superlative  character. 
I.  Pursuing,  then,  our  inquiry,  let  us  notice,  in  the  first  place,  how  the  persons 

MOST   KEMOTE  AND   OPPOSITE,   EVEN   THEY   THAT   FDJAIiY   C0N8PIBED   HiS   DEATH,  WEKB 

IMPBESSED  OB  AFFECTED  BY  HiM.  They  deny  His  Messiahship ;  they  charge  that 
only  Beelzebub  could  help  Him  to  do  His  miracles  ;  they  are  scandalised  by  His 
familiarity  with  publicans  and  sinners  and  other  low  people ;  they  arraign  His 
doctrine  as  a  heresy  against  many  of  the  most  sacred  laws  of  their  rehgion ;  they 
charge  Him  with  the  crime  of  breaking  their  Sabbath,  and  even  with  excess  in 
eating  and  drinking  ;  and  yet  we  can  easily  see  that  there  is  growing  up,  in  their 
minds,  a  most  peculiar  awe  of  His  person.  And  it  appears  to  be  excited  more  by 
His  manners  and  doctrine  and  a  certain  indescribable  originality  and  sanctity  in 
both,  than  by  anything  else.     11.  Tuen  now,  secondly,  to  the  disciples,  and 

OBSEBVE   how   THEY   WBBE   IMPRESSED   OB   AFFECTED    BY    THE    MANNEB    AND   SPIRIT    0» 

Jesos.  And  here  the  remarkable  thing  is,  that  they  appear  to  be  more  and  more 
impressed  with  the  distance  between  Him  and  themselves  the  longer  they  know 
Him,  and  the  more  intimate  and  familiar  their  acquaintance  with  Him.  III. 
What  now  is  the  solution  of  this  profound  impression  of  separateness  made 
BY  Christ  on  the  wobld  ?  That  His  miracles  and  the  repute  of  His  Messiahship 
do  not  wholly  account  for  it  we  have  already  observed.  It  may  be  imagined  by 
some  that  He  produced  this  impression  artificially,  by  means  of  certain  scenes  and 
observances  designed  to  widen  out  the  distance  between  Him  and  the  race ;  for  how 
could  He  otherwise  obtain  that  power  over  them  which  He  was  properly  entitled  to 
have  by  His  own  real  eminence,  unless  He  took  some  pains  to  set  them  in  attitudes 
in  which  His  eminence  might  be  felt.  In  other  words,  if  He  is  to  have  more  than 
a  man's  power,  He  must  somehow  be  more  than  a  man.  Thus,  when  He  says  to 
His  mother,  "  Woman,  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee?  My  hour  is  not  yet  come"; 
or  when,  being  notified  that  His  mother  and  brethren  are  standing  without  waitiug 
io  see  Him,  He  asks,  '•  Who,  then,  is  My  mother,  and  who  are  My  brethren  ?  "  it 
wiU  be  imagined  that  He  is  purposely  suggesting  His  higher  derivation  and  His 
more  transcendent  affinities.  But,  even  if  it  were  so,  it  must  be  understood  only 
that  He  is  speaking  out  of  His  spiritual  consciousness,  claiming  thus  affinity  with 
God,  and  with  those  who  shall  embrace  Him  in  the  eternal  brotherhood  of  faith ; 
not  as  boasting  the  height  of  His  natural  Sonship.  The  remarkable  separation, 
therefore,  of  Christ  from  the  sinners  of  mankind,  and  the  impression  He  awakened 
in  them  of  that  separation,  was  made,  not  by  scenes,  nor  by  words  of  assertion,  nor 
by  anything  designed  for  that  purpose,  but  it  grew  out  of  His  hfe  and  character — 
His  unworldliness,  holiness,  purity,  truth,  love ;  the  dignity  of  His  feeling,  the 
transcendent  wisdom  and  grace  of  His  conduct.  He  was  manifestly  one  that  stood 
apart  from  the  world  in  His  profoundest  human  sympathy  with  it.  He  often  spent 
His  nights  in  solitary  prayer,  closeted  with  God  in  the  recesses  of  the  mountains. 
He  was  plainly  not  under  the  world,  or  any  fashions  of  human  opinion.  He  was 
able  to  be  singular,  without  apparently  desiring  it,  and  by  the  simple  force  of  Hi« 
superiority.  1.  How  great  a  thing  now  is  it  that  such  a  Being  has  come  into  our 
world  and  lived  in  it — a  Being  above  mortality  while  in  it — a  Being  separate  from 
sinners,  bringing  unto  sinners  by  a  fellow-nature  what  is  transcendent  and  even 
deifio  in  the  Divine  holiness  and  love.    Yes,  we  have  had  a  visitor  among  us,  living; 


CHAP  Til.]  HEBREWS.  609 

out,  in  the  moulds  of  human  conduct  and  feeling,  the  perfections  of  God  I  What 
an  importation  of  glory  and  truth !  Who  that  lives  a  man  can  ever,  after  this,  think 
it  a  low  and  common  thing  to  fill  these  spheres,  walk  in  these  ranges  of  life,  and  do 
these  works  of  duty  which  have  been  raised  so  high  by  the  life  of  Jesua  in  the  flesh? 
The  world  is  no  more  the  same  that  it  was.  All  its  maia  ideas  and  ideals  are 
raised.  A  kind  of  sacred  glory  invests  even  our  humblest  spheres  and  most  com- 
mon concerns.  2  Consider,  again,  as  one  of  the  points  deducible  from  the  truth 
we  have  been  considering,  how  little  reason  is  given  us,  in  the  mission  of  Christ, 
for  the  hope  that  God,  who  has  such  love  to  man,  will  not  allow  us  to  fail  of  salva- 
tion by  reason  of  any  mere  defect  or  neglect  of  application  to  Christ.  What,  then, 
does  this  peculiar  separateness  of  Christ  signify  ?  Coming  into  the  world  to  save 
it — taking  on  Him  our  nature  that  He  may  draw  EUmself  as  close  to  as  as  possible 
— what  is  growing  all  the  while  to  be  more  and  more  felt  in  men's  bosoms  but  a 
sense  of  ever-widening,  ever-deepening,  and,  in  some  sense,  incommunicable 
separateness  from  Him?  And  this,  you  will  observe,  is  the  separateness,  not  of 
condition,  but  of  character.  Nay,  it  grows  out  of  His  very  love  to  us  in  part  and 
His  profound  oneness  v/ith  ns,  for  it  is  a  love  so  pure  and  gentle — so  patient,  so 
disinterested,  so  self-sacrificing — that  it  parts  Him  from  us  in  the  very  act  of 
embrace,  and  makes  us  think  of  Him  even  with  awe  1  How,  then,  will  it  be  when 
He  is  met  in  the  condition  of  His  glory,  and  the  guise  of  His  humanity  is  laid  off  ? 
There  is  nothing  then  to  put  Him  at  one  with  us  or  us  at  one  with  Him,  but  jast 
that  incommunicable  and  separate  character  which  fills  us  even  here  with  dread. 
If  He  was  separate  before,  how  inevitably,  insupportably  separate  now.  3.  Con- 
sider, also,  and  accurately  distinguish,  as  here  we  may  easily  do,  what  is  meant  by 
holiness,  and  what  especially  is  its  power,  or  the  law  of  its  power.  Holiness  is  not 
what  we  may  do  or  become  in  mere  self-activity  or  self-culture,  but  it  is  the  sense 
of  a  separated  quality  in  one  who  lives  on  a  footing  of  intimacy  and  oneness  with 
God.  4.  But  tiie  great  and  principal  lesson  derivable  from  this  subject  is,  that 
Christianity  is  a  regenerative  power  upon  the  world  only  as  it  comes  into  the  world 
in  a  separated  character — as  a  revelation  or  sacred  importation  of  holiness.  This 
brings  me  to  speak  of  what  is  now  the  great  and  desolating  error  of  our  times.  I 
mean  the  general  conformity  of  the  followers  of  Christ  to  the  manners  and  ways, 
and,  consequently,  in  a  great  degree,  to  the  spirit  of  the  world.  Christ  had  His 
power,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the  fact  that  He  carried  the  impression  of  His  separate- 
ness from  it  and  His  superiority  to  it.  He  was  no  ascetic.  His  separation  no  con- 
trived and  prescribed  separation,  but  was  only  the  more  real  and  radical  that  it  was 
the  very  instinct  or  freest  impulse  of  His  character.  A  true  Christian,  one  who  is 
deep  enough  in  the  godly  hfe  to  have  his  afiQnities  with  God,  will  infallibly  become 
a  separated  being.  The  instinct  of  holiness  will  draw  him  apart  into  a  singular, 
superior,  hidden  life  with  God.  And  this  is  the  true  Christian  power,  besides  which 
there  is  no  other.  And  when  this  fails  everything  goes  with  it.  Neither  let  us  be 
deceived  in  this  matter  by  our  merely  notional  wisdoms,  or  deliberative  judgments, 
for  it  is  not  a  matter  to  be  decided  by  any  consideration  of  results — the  question 
never  is,  what  is  really  harmful,  and  so  wrong,  but  what  will  meet  the  living  and 
free  instinct  of  a  life  of  prayer  and  true  godlmess  ?  There  is  no  greater  mistake, 
as  regards  the  true  manner  of  impression  on  the  world,  than  that  we  impress  it 
being  homogeneous  with  it.  If  in  our  dress  we  show  the  same  extravagance,  if  our 
amusements  are  theirs  without  a  distinction,  if  we  follow  after  their  shows,  copy 
their  manners,  busy  ourselves  in  their  worldly  objects,  emulate  their  fashions,  what 
are  we  different  from  them  ?  It  seems  quite  plausible  to  fancy  the  great  honour  we 
shall  put  on  religion,  when  we  are  able  to  set  it  on  a  footing  with  all  most  worldly 
things,  and  show  that  we  can  be  Christians  in  that  plausible  way.  This  we  call  a 
liberal  piety.  It  is  such  as  can  excel  in  all  high  tastes,  and  make  up  a  figure  of 
beauty  tbat  must  needs  be  a  great  commendation,  we  think,  to  religion.  It  may 
be  a  little  better  than  to  be  openly  apostate ;  but  alas  1  there  is  how  httle  power  in 
such  a  kind  of  life !  If  we  are  to  impress  the  world  we  must  be  separate  from 
sinners,  even  as  Christ  our  Master  was,  or  at  least  according  to  our  human  degree, 
as  being  in  His  Spirit.  Oh,  that  we  could  take  our  lesson  here,  and  plan  our  life, 
order  our  pursuits,  choose  oar  relaxations,  prepare  our  families,  so  as  to  be  truly 
with  Christ,  and  so,  in  fact,  that  we  ourselves  can  say,  each  for  himself,  "The 
prince  of  this  world  oometh,  and  hath  nothing  in  me."  And  this  exactly  is  oar 
communion  with  Jesus ;  we  propose  to  be  one  with  Him  in  it.  In  it  we  connect 
with  a  Power  transcendent,  the  Son  of  Man  i  glory,  whose  image  we  aspire  to,  and 
whose  mission,  as  the  Crucified  on  earth,    as  the  revelation  oi  the  Father's  lova 

8 


610  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  to. 

and  holiness.  We  ask  to  be  separated  with  Him  and  set  apart  to  the  same  great 
life.  (H.  Bushnell,  D.D.)  Christ  separate  from  sinners  : — There  are  certain 
senses  in  which  Jesus  was  not  "  separate  from  sinners."  1.  He  was  not  separate 
from  them  in  respect  of  nature.  It  was  a  true,  though  immaculate,  humanity 
which  He  assumed,  and  in  which  He  tabernacled  in  the  midst  of  men.  2.  He  was 
not  "  separate  from  siimers  "  in  respect  of  residence.  He  lived  on  earth.  He 
laboured  in  Galilee ;  and  Galilee  was  proverbially  bad.  He  preached,  and  suffered, 
and  died  in  Jerusalem  ;  and  the  voice  of  Jerusalem's  crimes  "  entered  into  the  ears 
of  the  Lord  God  of  Sabaoth."  3.  He  was  not  "  separate  from  sinners  "  in  respect 
of  society.  As  one  who  came,  "  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners,  to  repent- 
ance," He  held  intercourse  with  wicked  men.  The  Physician  was  found  beside  the 
sick-bed.  The  Deliverer  of  guilty  and  ruined  souls  •'  ate  and  drank  with  publicans 
and  sinners."  4.  He  was  not  "  separate  from  sinners  "  in  respect  of  His  personal 
experience  at  the  hands  of  men,  or  even  at  the  hands  of  God.  He  shared  in  the 
ordinary  trials  incident  to  sinful  man.  He  was  the  object  of  harsh  reproach  and 
contumelious  scorn.  He  was  judicially  condemned  to  a  tremendous  kind  of  death. 
And  it  was,  literally,  in  the  midst  of  malefactors  that  He  died.  What,  then,  is 
meant  by  the  statement  that  Christ  was  •'  separate  from  sinners"  f  Plainly,  that 
in  respect  of  character  He  was  altogether  different  from  them.  Partaker  of  the 
same  humanity  as  they,  in  Him,  characteristically  and  exclusively,  it  was  immacu- 
late ;  and  thus,  even  while  He  moved  in  the  midst  of  sinners,  and  was  come  to 
"  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost,"  His  Spirit,  in  some  sense,  dwelt  apart. 
Christ  was  morally  perfect  in  all  the  parts  of  His  constitution.  His  intellect  was 
filled  with  pure  and  lofty  thoughts.  His  conscience  was  true  to  the  dictates  of 
eternal  rectitude — quick  to  discern  the  right,  and  bold  and  strong  to  choose  and 
follow  it.  His  heart  was  the  home,  alike  of  the  mild,  and  the  majestic,  forms  of 
feeling.  His  ears  were  ever  wont  to  hearken  to  the  plaint  of  sorrow.  With  a 
simpUcity  to  which  ostentation  and  art  were  strangers,  His  eyes  were  bedewed  with 
tears  for  human  wretchedness  and  sin,  and  anon  lifted  up  in  prayer  to  Heaven.  His 
hands — how  busy  were  they  in  the  cause  of  goodness  and  of  God  1  And  even  as, 
in  the  ark,  the  stony  tablets  of  the  law  were  kept,  so  in  the  soul  of  Jesus  that  good 
and  righteous  law  foimd  a  habitation  and  a  home.  Every  cliass  of  virtues  was 
nobly  realised  in  Christ.  1.  In  Him  the  devotional  virtues  were  perfect  and  com- 
plete. Prayer  was  His  recreation  and  deUght.  Even  when  "it  pleased  the  Lord 
to  bruise  Him,"  He  gave  Jehovah  thanks  (Luke  xxii.  17,  19).  And  "truly,"  His 
"  fellowship  was  with  the  Father."  2.  In  Him.  too,  the  active  virtues  were  gloriously 
displayed.  The  exclamation  of  His  boyhood  might  serve  as  a  general  motto  for 
His  earthly  history : — "  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  My  Father's  business  ?  " 
His  aims  were  high.  His  heart  was  earnest,  and  His  hand  was  busy.  "  The  work 
of  Him  that  sent  Him  "  was  His  regular.  His  uniform  pursuit.  He  •'  went  about 
doing  good"  (Acts  x.  38).  3.  And  in  the  passive  virtues,  how  pre-eminently  great 
was  Jesus  1  How  "  meek  and  lowly  in  heart"  1  How  calmly  did  He  bear  the  abuse 
of  man  1  How  patiently  did  He  submit  to  the  hand  of  God!  "  Abba,  Father,  not 
My  will,  but  Thine  be  done,"  "  The  cup  which  My  Father  giveth  Me,  shall  I  not 
drink  it  ?  "  were  not  only  the  memorable  expressions  of  His  tongue,  but  also  the 
genuine  spirit  of  His  soul.  It  is  indeed  a  glorious  character,  the  character  of 
Christ — fitter  for  a  seraphic  harp  than  for  a  human  pen  to  celebrate.  In  His 
gentleness  He  was  great,  in  His  greatness  He  was  gentle.  Truly,  He  was  "  the 
Lamb  of  God,"  and  yet  "  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  "  (John  i.  29  ;  Rev.  v.  5). 
The  moral  glory  of  Divinity,  and  the  perfect  virtue  of  an  unsullied  human  nature, 
met  in  Him.  (A.  S.  Patterson.)  Made  higher  than  the  heavens. — The  transcen^ 
dent  majesty  of  Christ : — In  what  sense  is  Christ  higher  than  the  heavens  ?  I.  In 
a  MATEKiAL  senso.  Is  not  the  painter  greater  than  his  painting  ;  the  engineer  than 
his  machine;  the  architect  than  his  building;  the  author  than  his  book?  So 
Christ  is  higher  than  the  heavens,  because  He  created  them.  II.  In  a  mobal  sense. 
The  untold  myriads  of  unfallen  and  redeemed  spirits  that  populate  those  heavens 
are  very  good,  very  affluent  in  holy  thoughts  and  Divine  aspirations ;  but  Christ,  in 
goodness,  is  higher  than  them  all.  1.  Their  goodness  is  derived.  Christ's  is 
original — His  is  the  primal  fount  whence  theirs  flows  ;  His  the  sun  whence  their 
radiance  beams.  2.  Their  goodness  is  measurable.  "  The  Spirit  is  not  given  to 
Him  by  measure."  3.  Their  goodness  is  contingent.  Christ's  is  absolute.  III. 
In  a  POSITIONAL  sense.  He  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne.  He  is  to  all  what 
the  sun  is  to  the  planets — the  centre  round  which  they  all  revolve,  and  from 
irhich  they  all  derive  their  life,  strength,  beauty    radiance,  joy.      (Homilist.) 


CHAP,  vu.]  HEBREWS.  611 

He  offered  up  Himself. — The  only  offering  for  sin: — I.  The  offebing  and  the 
OFFEKEE.  "  He  offered  up  Himself."  I  never  knew  any  other  priest  do  that. 
Priests  under  the  law  offer  costly  things ;  but  they  plunder  the  people  for  theia. 
They  do  not  even  offer  their  own  property,  much  less  offer  themselves.  But  here  is 
the  gracious,  glorious  High  Priest  of  our  profession  who,  because  no  other  offering 
could  be  found  suitable,  and  acceptable,  and  sufiBcient,  offered  Himself — "  the  Lamb 
slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world."  Oh,  pause  a  moment  over  this  precious 
offering,  and  note  the  voluntary  manner  in  which  it  was  offered — an  offering  ade- 
quate to  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  intended.  The  other  priests  offered  offerings, 
fii-st  for  their  own  sins  and  then  for  the  sins  of  the  people — this  glorious  Priest 
found  in  the  one  offeriug  of  His  own  precious  body  and  soul  an  adequate  amount  of 
merit  for  all  the  sins  of  all  the  election  of  grace,  and  presented  it  as  such  to  God  the 
Father.  Pass  on  to  mark  that  this  offering,  so  valuable  and  perfect  and  acceptable 
to  God  the  Father,  is  administered  to  the  faith  of  God's  elect  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
It  is  expressly  His  work  to  plant  faith  in  the  heart  of  a  poor,  ruined  sinner  ;  which 
faith  is  to  bring  nothing,  to  find  nothing  in  the  creature,  to  come  empty-handed, 
just  to  receive  the  appUcation  of  blood  Divine,  by  the  Holy  Ghost  administered  to 
personal  experience  ;  so  that  in  the  offering  itself  is  found  all  that  is  adequate  for 
the  sinner's  salvation,  and  redemption  of  the  Church  of  God,  in  the  Father's 
acceptance  of  it,  a  receipt  in  full  of  all  demands  for  the  whole  Church,  and  in  the 
Holy  Spirit's  ministry,  the  application  of  it  to  the  hearts  of  all  the  election  of  grace. 
Now  look  at  the  offerer — "  He  offered  Himself."  It  is  the  business  of  a  priest  to 
offer  a  sacrifice.  He  goes  forth  as  our  Priest,  after  the  order  of  Melchiseclec,  to  offer 
Himself  a  sacrifice  acceptable  unto  God.  1.  Here  is,  first  of  all,  affection.  He  so 
loved  the  Church  that  He  gave  Himself  for  it.  The  Father  sends  the  Son,  and  the 
Son  comes  voluntarily.  2.  Moreover  there  was  affinity.  Christ  loved  His  Church 
as  the  apostle  exhorts  husbands  to  love  their  wives ;  as  Christ  also  loved  the  Church 
and  gave  Himself  for  it,  that  He  might  wash  it,  and  cleanse  it,  and  present  it  to 
Himself  a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing.  3.  For 
one  moment  glance  at  the  agony  which  this  voluntary  act  involved.  The  whole 
amount  of  Divine  wrath  poured  out  like  a  cataract  upon  His  soul — all  the  vengeance 
of  stern  justice  waiting  with  its  sword  to  smite  Jehovah's  fellow  was  felt  when  He 
bowed  His  head  and  died — all  the  curse  of  the  law,  like  barbed  arrows,  penetrated 
His  very  soul.  He  endured  all  this  for  His  CLnrch.  Go  a  little  further,  and  you 
find  Him  typified  under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation,  and  becoming  Himself  the 
fulfilment  of  all  its  types.  Time  would  fail  me  here  to  enter  largely  upon  them, 
but  I  will  just  mention  the  morning  and  evening  lamb.  Ages  of  offerings  of  the 
blood  of  animals  never  blotted  out  one  sin — they  only  pointed  to  Christ — but  the  six 
hours  of  a  precious  Christ  on  the  cross  carried  back  a  flood  of  atoning  blood  to 
Adam's  day,  and  it  rolled  its  tide  forward  to  the  end  of  time,  that  the  whole  election 
of  grace  might  be  for  ever  exonerated  by  that  one  offering.  ''He  hath  obtained 
eternal  redemption  for  us,"  saith  the  apostle.  I  dwell  upon  that  phrase  with 
pecuhar  delight.  "Eternal."  Can  you  put  a  te'-mination  to  it ?  It  runs  backward 
to  the  first  transgressor,  and  it  runs  forward  to  the  end  of  time,  and  then  into 
eternity  with  its  blessings.  "Eternal  redemption."  "Aye,"  say  you,  "that  little 
word  '  us,'  I  dare  not  claim  it."  Why  not  ?  "  Having  obtained  eternal  redemp- 
tion  for  us."  Who  was  it  for?  I  want  the  appropriation  put  forth  by  you  and  me 
upon  simple  principles.  How  do  you  know  that  some  poor  slave,  under  a  foreign 
yoke  of  tyranny,  was  redeemed  ?  How  would  he  know  it  himself  ?  Why,  in  the 
first  place,  he  would  be  thoroughly  sick  and  tired  of  his  chains ;  in  the  next  place, 
he  would  know  that  the  price  has  been  paid  for  his  ransom ;  and,  in  the  third  place, 
he  would  be  set  free ;  and  when  a  man  is  set  free  he  will  not  stay  under  the  yoke  of 
the  tyrant  any  longer,  he  will  be  off  to  his  own  country.  Now  you  and  I  may  know 
it  in  the  same  manner.  "Having  obtained  eternal  redemption  for  us."  Lay  hold 
of  it  by  faith,  if  God  enables  you,  and  go  and  plead  it  at  the  throne,  and  never  fear 
losing  it — it  includes  all  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  for  time,  all  the  fulness  of  the 
covenant  for  eruriching  the  Chureh,  and  all  the  glories  of  heaven  for  everlasting 
possession.  Well,  this  He  did  officially,  relatively,  not  as  a  common-place  sufferer, 
but  under  appointment,  and,  consequently,  under  responsibility.  This  He  did  as 
the  covenant  Head,  m  the  name  and  on  behalf  of  His  whole  Church ;  and  He  did 
it  openly  in  His  life  and  death,  before  all  worlds.  U.  The  illustbious  TBiUMPna 
OF  THIS  ONE  OFFEBING.  The  apostlc,  in  addressing  the  Colossians,  tells  them  con- 
cerning these  illustrious  triumphs,  that  He  spoiled  principalities  and  powers,  and 
made  a  show  of  them  openly  on  His  cross,  triumphing  over  them  in  it.    The 


6ia  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHAP.vn, 

triumphB  are  vast  and  extensive,  and  they  shall  never  be  subdued.  The  first  feature 
of  these  triumphs  we  see  in  new  covenant  terms  of  salvation  met  and  fulfilled. 
Terms  ?  say  you.  Yes,  terms — not  made  with  man,  though,  nor  left  to  man.  11 
they  were,  woe  to  the  whole  race  of  Adam.  Away  with  all  conditions  and  terms  only 
as  they  belong  to  Christ.  Still,  there  are  terms  of  salvation,  and  let  me  mark  what 
they  are.  Why  Jehovah  says  He  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty  ;  then  if  a  man 
be  saved  at  all  his  guilt  must  be  cleared  away,  or  there  is  no  salvation  for  him,  for  God 
says  He  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty.  Jesus  met  the  terms,  allowed  the  whole 
mass  of  guilt  and  transgression  which  pertained  to  His  Church  to  be  laid  upon  Him, 
and  the  Father  Himself  did  it.  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  ua 
all."  Go  on  to  mark  that  in  these  New  Testament  terms  which  are  met  there  ia 
another  condition — "  without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  What  a  mercy 
that  this  is  not  left  to  you  or  me  1  Our  glorious  High  Priest,  who  offered  Himself, 
imparts  His  own  life.  His  own  nature  and  will,  sends  down  His  Holy  Spirit,  to  take 
possession  of  the  souls  of  all  for  whom  He  bled,  that  they  may  stand  complete  in 
the  hoUness  of  God.  Moreover,  if  I  may  mention  a  third  term,  I  would  say  it  is  the 
being  clad  in  a  spotless,  perfect,  sinless  righteousness  for  justification.  Where  ia 
the  man  to  get  it  ?  Hear  what  Jehovah,  by  His  prophet  Isaiah,  says.  The  prophet 
was  directed  to  set  it  down,  that  everything  pertaining  to  the  creature  shoidd  wear 
out  as  a  garment,  and  that  the  moth  should  eat  up  all  creature  excellencies ;  but, 
says  God,  "My  righteousness  shall  be  for  ever,  and  My  salvation  shaU  not  be 
aboUshed."  That  is  an  everlasting  righteousness.  Paul  perfectly  understood  it, 
and  blessedly  appropriated  it,  when  he  said,  "  That  I  might  be  found  in  Him,  not 
having  mine  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  law,  but  the  righteousness  which  ia 
of  God  by  faith."  Again,  His  enemies  are  all  vanquished,  and  an  expiation  accom- 
plished in  behalf  of  all  Hia  Church.  "  0  death,  I  vrill  be  thy  plague ;  0  grave,  I 
will  be  thy  destruction,"  said  He.  "He  must  reign  till  He  hath  put  aU  enemies 
unuer  His  feet."  The  conquest  of  the  heart  is  one  of  Jesu's  triumphs.  Moreover, 
the  expiation  coupled  with  it  includes  the  whole  Church  of  God,  "  He  is  the  pro- 
pitiation for  our  sins,  and  not  for  ours  only,  but  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world." 
Oh,  the  prospect  ia  bright  while  Jesus  is  kept  in  view.  Only  let  the  Sun  of 
Righteousness  shine  upon  us,  and  our  prospects  for  eternity  must  be  brightened. 
Just  paas  on  to  observe  that  this  glorious  High  Priest  of  our  profession  has  opened 
His  new  and  living  way  unto  the  throne  of  God  for  all  that  the  Father  gives  into 
His  hands,  and  vriU  infallibly  bring  them  all  home  to  everlasting  glory.    IH.  The 

SINFULNESS  OF  EITHEB  BEJECTINQ  OB  MOCKING  THIS  ONE  OFFERING  FOB  BIN.  I  can- 
not possibly  look  for  merit  in  the  creature  without  believing  that  the  merit  of  Christ 
is  not  sufl&cient — without  announcing,  in  that  very  act,  that  I  am  not  satisfied  that 
Christ  spoke  the  truth  when  He  said,  "  It  ia  finished."  If  it  is  finished,  an  eternal 
redemption  is  obtaini  d ;  any  pretension  to  add  to  it  is  nothing  less  than  a  blas- 
phemous insult  to  Christ.  Negotiation  with  the  Father  is  not  attainable  by  any 
human  power,  but  in  and  by  this  offering.  "  No  man  cometh  to  the  Father  but  by 
Me."  Go  to  the  footstool  of  Divine  mercy,  guilt-burdened  sinner,  and  name  the 
blood  and  righteousness  of  Christ.  Go  and  point  the  Father  to  His  sufferings  in 
GetLsemane  and  on  Calvary.  Go  and  tell  what  Christ  has  done —perfected  for  ever 
them  that  are  sanctified,  and  dare  assert,  under  all  the  load  of  your  guilt,  "  Lord,  I 
beUeve  in  the  efiQcacy  and  power  of  that  offering  "  ;  and  go  on  till  you  are  enabled  to 
say,  "  I  believe  it  was  offered  for  me."  Then  begins  your  peace  and  happiness.  I 
pray  you  to  mark,  once  more,  that  all  our  negotiations  must  be  successful  when  the 
name,  and  merit,  and  righteousness  of  Jesus  are  pleaded.  This  leads  me  to  the 
last  thought,  that  the  trust  and  confidence  of  all  the  elect  of  God  will  be  found 
placed  there.  (J.  IroTis.)  Our  Lord's  offering : — Our  fundamental  conception  of 
the  offering  of  Him  who  ascended  the  cross  of  Calvary  to  die  must  be,  that  it  was 
an  offering  of  life,  not  of  death.  It  began  with  the  cross,  with  the  moment  when 
He  was  lifted  on  high  out  of  the  earth ;  and  when,  separated  from  all  that  was 
material,  local,  or  limited.  He  was  able  to  enter  upon  a  spiritual,  universal,  and 
everlasting  priesthood.  Then,  as  One  bearing  the  sins  of  all  who  had  committed, 
or  should  afterwards  commit,  themselves  to  Him  in  faith.  He  yielded  up  His  own 
life,  and  theira  in  Hia,  aa  the  penalty  due  to  ain.  For  Himself  and  for  the  members 
of  His  body  He  accepted  the  sentence,  "  The  soul  that  sinneth  shall  die  " ;  while  at 
the  same  time  He  bowed  Himself  in  submission  to  the  law  so  mysteriously  linked 
with  that  sentence,  that,  as  things  are  in  a  present  world,  it  is  only  through  death 
that  we  can  conquer  death  and  find  the  path  to  Ufe.  On  the  cross  He  gave  Him- 
self for  aa,  the  just  for  the  unjust ;  so  tliat  when  we  think  of  Him  as  tiie  Yictim 


CHAP,  vn.]  HEBREWS.  618 

opon  which  our  help  is  laid,  and  identify  onrselves  with  Him  by  faith,  we  may  see 
that  in  Him  our  sins  are  expiated,  and  that  they  no  longer  bar  our  admission  to  the 
Divine  presence  and  favour.  All  this,  however,  was  no  more  than  the  first  stage  of 
the  offering  made  for  us  by  our  heavenly  High  Priest ;  and  the  mistake  of  many  is 
to  think  that,  as  the  offering  was  begun,  so  also  it  was  finished  on  the  cross.  In 
reality,  only  the  initial  step  was  taken  when  Jesns  died.  As  the  blood,  or  in  other 
words  the  Ufe,  of  an  animal  sacrificed  under  the  law  was  liberated  in  death,  not 
merely  that  the  offering  might  be  completed,  but  that  the  true  offering  might  be 
made  by  the  sprinkling ;  so  the  blood,  or  in  other  words  the  life,  of  Christ  was 
liberated  on  the  cross,  that  His  true  offering  might  be  made  by  the  surrender  of 
that  life  to  God  In  a  perpetual  service  of  love,  obedience,  and  praise.  1.  The  con- 
ception of  Christ's  priesthood  as  a  heavenly  priesthood,  and  of  the  life  that  He  now 
leads  in  heaven  as  the  consummation  of  His  offering,  alone  gives  us  the  accomplish- 
ment, and  that  too  in  their  appropriate  order,  of  everything  that  was  involved  in  the 
separate  offerings  of  the  law.  In  the  life  now  offered  to  the  Father  and  before  the 
Father's  throne  we  see,  not  only  the  perfected  Sin  and  Trespass,  but  the  perfected 
Burnt-  and  Peace-offerings.  There  the  life  won  through  death  is  surrendered  into 
the  Father's  hands.  There  it  burns  in  the  never-ceasing  devotion  of  love  and 
praise.  There  it  is  passed  in  the  enjoyment  of  a  fellowship  with  God  undisturbed 
and  glorified.  And  thence  it  descends  to  all  the  members  of  the  body,  so  that  they 
find,  in  Him  who  gave  and  still  gives  Himself  for  them,  reconciliation,  union, 
nourishment  for  a  heavenly  service,  and  the  comfort  and  joy  of  a  heavenly  feast. 
2.  As  an  offering  of  life  Christ's  offering  is  complete,  embracing  in  its  efficacy  the 
whole  life  of  man.  In  this  respect  the  offerings  of  the  law  were  necessarily  incom- 
plete, and  so  also  must  be  the  offering  presented  in  any  single  act  of  the  life  of 
Christ.  But  when,  as  our  High  Priest  ajid  Representative,  Jesus  offers  His  Ufe  to 
God,  that  life  covers  every  stage  or  department  of  our  life.  There  is  no  part  of  our 
life  in  which,  by  the  very  fact  that  He  lived  a  human  life,  the  Redeemer  of  the 
world  did  not  share.  Must  we  labour?  He  laboured.  Must  we  suffer?  He 
Buffered.  Must  we  be  tempted?  He  was  tempted.  Must  we  have  at  one  time 
solitary  hours,  at  another  move  in  social  circles?  He  spent  hours  alone  upon  the 
mountain  top,  and  He  mingled  with  His  disciples  as  companions  and  friends. 
Must  we  die  ?  He  died.  Must  we  rise  from  the  grave  ?  He  rose  from  it  on  the 
third  morning.  Must  we  appear  before  the  Judge  of  all  ?  He  appeared  before  Him 
who  sent  Him  with  the  record  of  all  that  He  had  accomplished.  Must  we  enter  into 
eternity  ?  Eternity  is  now  passing  over  Him.  More  even  than  this  has  to  be  said ; 
for  our  High  Priest  not  only  moved  in  every  one  of  these  scenes,  He  has  also  con- 
secrated them  all,  and  made  them  all  a  part  of  His  offering  in  heaven.  In  each  He 
was  a  conqueror,  and  the  fruits  of  His  conquest  in  each  are  made  ours.  3.  As  an 
offering  of  life  Christ's  offering  is  everlasting.  His  life  is  presented  continually  to 
God  ;  and  in  it  the  children  of  God,  whose  own  it  is  made  by  faith,  are  kept  con- 
secrated for  evermore.  The  efficacy  of  the  legal  offerings  lasted  for  a  time.  This 
offering  never  ceases,  and  its  efficacy  never  fails.  4.  As  an  offering  of  life  Christ's 
offering  is  made  once  for  all,  and  cannot  be  repeated.  It  is  simply  impossible  to 
repeat  it,  for  we  cannot  repeat  what  has  not  been  first  brought  to  an  end ;  and 
since  the  offering  on  the  part  of  the  eternal  Son  is  His  life,  it  follows  that  His  offer- 
ing must  be  as  eternal  as  Himself.  That  offering  of  our  Lord,  then,  which  is  the 
leading  function  of  His  priesthood,  was  only  begun,  and  not  completed,  on  the 
cross.  It  is  going  on  still,  and  it  will  go  on  for  ever,  as  the  Divine  and  perfect 
sacrifice  in  which  our  great  Representative  and  we  in  Him  attain  the  end  of  all 
religion,  whether  natural  or  revealed,  as  that  sacrifice  in  which  we  are  made  one 
with  His  Father  and  our  Father,  with  His  God  and  our  God.  (W.  Milligan,  D.D.) 
The  Son,  who  is  consecrated  for  evermore. — He  giveth  a  special  reason  why  it 
beseemeth  not  us  under  the  gospel  to  have  a  sinful  man  for  our  priest,  because  this 
is  the  very  difference  betwixt  the  law  and  the  gospel.  1.  The  law  maketh  men 
which  have  infirmities  high  priests  ;  but  the  word  of  the  oath,  which  was  since  the 
law,  maketh  the  Son,  and  none  but  the  Son,  who  is  consecrated  for  evermore.  2. 
He  maketh  the  difference  of  the  law  and  the  gospel  to  stand  amongst  other  things 
in  the  difference  of  priests,  so  as  the  gospel  cannot  admit  such  priests  as  the  law 
admitted.  3.  The  differences,  as  the  apostle  setteth  them  down  here,  are — (1)  The 
course  taken  about  priests  under  the  law  was  alterable,  they  were  made  witnoat  an 
oath,  the  lawgiver  declaring  it  to  be  his  will  to  change  that  course  when  he  saw  fit ; 
but  the  course  taken  about  the  priests  of  the  New  Testament  is  with  an  oath,  and 
80  cannot  be  changed.    (2)  The  next  difference  he  maketh  this :  The  law  admitteth 


614  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vm, 

men  in  the  plural  number,  a  plurality  of  priests ;  but  the  gospel  admitteth  no 
plurality  of  priests,  but  the  Son  only  to  be  priest.  Melchisedeo's  order  in  the  type 
hath  no  priest  but  one  in  it,  without  a  suffragan  or  substituted  priest.  Therefore 
Christ,  the  true  Melchisedec,  is  alone  in  His  priesthood,  without  partner  or  deputy 
or  suffragan.  Then,  to  make  plurality  of  priests  in  the  gospel  is  to  alter  the  order 
of  Melchisedec,  and  to  renounce  the  mark  set  betwixt  the  law  and  the  gospel.  3. 
The  third  difference :  The  law  maketh  men  priests ;  but  the  evangelical  oath 
maketh  the  Son  of  God  priest  for  the  gospel.  Then,  to  make  a  man  priest  now  ia 
to  mar  the  Son  of  God's  privilege,  to  whom  the  privilege  only  belongeth.^  4.  The 
fourth  difference :  The  law  maketh  such  priests  as  have  infirmity ;  that  is,  sinful 
men.  But  the  evangelical  oath  maketh  the  Son,  who  is  able  to  save  to  the  utter- 
most all  that  come  to  God,  through  Him.  Then  to  make  a  sinful  and  weak  man  a 
priest  now  is  to  weaken  the  priesthood  of  the  gospel,  and  make  it  like  the  law.  5. 
The  fifth  difference  :  The  law  maketh  men  priests  which  have  infirmities  over  whom 
death  had  power,  that  they  could  not  be  consecrated  but  for  their  short  lifetime. 
But  the  evangelical  oath  maketh  the  Son,  whom  the  sorrows  of  death  could  not  hold, 
and  hath  consecrated  Him  for  evermore.  Then  as  long  as  Christ's  consecration 
lasteth,  none  must  meddle  with  His  office.  6.  The  last  difference:  The  law 
instituting  priests  was  not  God's  last  will,  but  might  suffer  addition.  But  the 
evangelical  oath  is  since  the  law,  and  God's  last  and  unchangeable  will.  Therefore 
to  add  unto  it  and  bring  in  as  many  priests  now  as  did  serve  in  the  temple  of  old, 
is  to  provoke  God  to  add  as  many  plagues  as  are  written  in  God's  book  upon  them* 
selves  and  their  priests  alsow    (D.  Dickton,  M.A.) 


CHAPTER  vm. 


Vbb.  1.  We  have  radi  an  Higli  Priest.  Our  great  High  Priest  t — ^Tou  can  hardly 
fail  to  observe  the  tone  of  triumph  of  St.  Paul  in  giving  his  summary ;  in  announo* 
ing  it  as  an  established  fact,  that  we  have  such  an  High  Priest,  a  High  Priest  such 
as  had  been  described — "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners." 
He  speaks  as  though  nothing  more  could  be  needed,  nothing  more  wishe  1.  Now 
then,  as  a  preliminary  view  of  this  summary  of  the  apostle,  you  will  all  admit  that 
in  speaking  of  our  High  Priest,  St.  Paul  is  evidently  to  be  understood  as  speaking 
of  a  mighty  Friend  or  Supporter.  He  is  manifestly  anxious  to  magnify  this  High 
Priest,  that  he  may  possess  us  with  an  exalted  opinion  of  His  greatness  and  Hia 
goodness.  Yet  we  are  not  for  a  moment  to  think  it  implied  that  salvation  is  not  a 
difficult  thing,  requiring  effort,  exertion,  and  sacrifice.  In  a  preceding  chapter  St. 
Paul  had  said :  "  Seeing  then  that  we  have  a  great  High  Priest,  that  is  passed  into 
the  heavens,  Jesus  the  Son  of  God,  let  us  hold  fast  our  profession."  Though  he 
here  describes  the  same  blessed  truths,  as  in  the  summary  of  our  text,  he  evidently 
indicates  that  we  are  in  danger  of  letting  go  our  profession  through  the  greatness  of 
the  struggle  needed  for  maintaining  it.  Thus  you  should  set  before  yourselves  the 
pri\ilege  of  the  Christian  in  that  his  cause  has  been  undertaken  by  a  Being  "  who 
is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  "  :  and  at  the  same  time  the  duty  of  the  Christian, 
in  that  he  must  labour  with  all  his  might  at  a  task  which  is  both  difficult  and 
dangerous.  And  we  are  to  labour  at  this  difficult  and  dangerous  task  on  the  very 
account  that  "  we  have  such  an  High  Priest,"  that  our  cause,  that  ia,  is  in  handa 
which  are  certain  to  make  it  prevail.  Without  a  Mediator,  repentance,  even  if  it 
might  have  been  genuine,  must  have  been  unavailing ;  whereas,  with  a  Mediator, 
repentance  wrought  in  us  by  God's  Spirit,  may  be  made  the  condition  of  our  admis- 
sion into  God's  kingdom.  Without  a  Mediator  prayer,  even  if  from  the  heart,  could 
have  brought  down  no  blessing  from  above ;  whereas  with  a  Mediator  prayer  has 
only  to  be  the  prayer  of  faith,  and  it  will  prevail  with  our  Father  in  heaven.  With- 
out a  Mediator  the  eCort  to  keep  God's  commandments,  even  if  made  with  all  dili- 
gence  and  sincerity,  could  have  done  nothing  towards  removing  us  from  under  the 
curse ;  whereas  with  a  Mediator,  our  imperfect  obedience,  though  void  of  any  merit 
whatsoever,  can  be  graciously  accepted  as  a  proof  and  token  of  faith,  and  noted  by 
God,  who  out  of  His  exuberant  mercy  designs  to  "reward  every  man  according  to 
his  works."    He  that  in  any  measure  or  sense  trusts  in  his  own  atrengtii,  or  leans 


CHAP.  Tin.]  HEBREWS.  61* 

on  his  o\7n  righteousness,  as  truly  depends  on  a  broken  reed,  now  that  Christ  hath 
died  tor  him,  as  though  no  Mediator  had  risen  to  make  atonement ;  but  Christ,  as 
we  have  already  said,  puts  ns  into  a  new  state  or  condition,  not  a  state  in  which  we 
may  be  saved  without  labour,  but  a  state  in  which  labour  may  end  in  our  being 
saved.  He  "  opened  to  UB  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  that  kingdom  which  without 
Him  would  have  remained  for  ever  closed  against  the  fallen  and  the  feeble  ;  but  to 
open  the  kingdom,  is  not  the  same  thing  as  to  put  us  into  the  kingdom  without  any 
eflort  of  our  own.  It  is  rather  to  encourage  us  to  exertion,  which,  manifestly  of  no 
avail  while  the  everlasting  doors  are  firmly  barred  against  us,  may  be  graciously 
crowned  with  success  when  the  bars  have  been  removed  by  the  Redeemer.  There- 
fore, the  whole  power  of  the  gospel,  so  far  as  motive  is  concerned,  is  against  indo- 
lence and  indifference,  and  on  the  side  of  energy  and  endeavour.  Seeing  that 
Christ  hath  been  crucified,  let  as  crucify  ourselves  ;  it  would  be  of  no  avail  striving 
to  mortify  the  flesh  whilst  hell  yawned  for  ns  and  could  not  be  escaped.  Seeing 
that  Christ  hath  died  for  sin,  let  us  labour  to  die  to  sin.  It  is  not  a  useless  labour 
now,  but  it  was  till  heaven  had  been  opened,  for  which  holiness  makes  fitness. 
Seeing  that  Christ  pleads  for  us,  let  us  be  fervent  in  pleading  for  ourselves.  Prayer 
can  now  be  heard  and  answered,  though  it  could  not  have  been  except  as  presented 
through  an  all-powerful  Intercessor.  Now,  hitherto  we  have  only  treated  the 
apostle's  summary  as  bearing  generally  on  the  fact,  that  the  scheme  of  the  gospel  ia 
so  constructed  as  to  urge  us  to  endeavour,  rather  than  to  encourage  us  in  inactivity. 
We  will  now,  however,  take  a  different  view  of  the  case.  We  will  consider  it  as 
addressed  simply  to  believers,  constructed  for  the  comfort  and  encouragement  of 
those,  who,  in  the  midst  of  a  troubled  and  sinful  world,  may  be  tempted  to  let  go 
tieir  Christian  profession,  despairing  of  being  able  to  persevere  to  the  end.  There 
are  two  great  points,  or  facts,  upon  which  the  apostle  fastens  as  making  up  the  sum 
of  all  that  he  had  advanced.  First,  "  we  have  such  an  High  Priest  " ;  such  an  one 
as  had  been  described  in  the  foregoing  chapter — "  holy,  harmless,  and  undefiled, 
separate  from  sinners,  who  being  made  perfect,  became  the  Author  of  eternal  salva- 
tion to  all  them  that  obey."  The  apostle  speaks  of  Christ  as  still  being  a  High 
Priest.  He  uses  the  prer ent  tense,  and  thus  he  reminds  us  that  the  priestly  office 
was  not  completed  or  laid  aside  when  the  Mediator  had  offered  up  Himself,  but  that 
it  still  continues  to  be  discharged,  and  will  be  so  while  the  church  is  in  any  danger 
of  letting  go  her  profession.  And  this  is  a  truth  which  is  full  of  comfort  to  the 
Christian.  There  is  an  unlimited  difference  to  him  between  "  we  have  had  an  High 
Priest,"  and  "  we  have  an  High  Priest."  What  more  of  encouragement  can  we 
desire,  what  more  of  assurance  of  final  victory,  now  that  we  are  able  to  wind  up  all 
discussion  upon  the  Christian  scheme,  in  the  words  of  our  text — "  Now  of  the  things 
which  we  have  spoken  this  is  the  sum :  We  have,"  not  we  have  had,  but  we  have 
— we  still  "  have  such  an  High  Priest."  Now  we  turn  to  the  second  point  adduced 
by  the  apostle,  and  this  relates  to  the  present  residence  of  the  High  Priest,  who, 
according  to  St.  Paul,  is  "  set  on  the  right  band  of  the  throne  of  the  Majesty  in  the 
heavens."  And  the  tone,  as  we  before  said,  in  which  he  gives  his  summary  would 
seem  to  indicate  that  the  fact  of  Christ  having  passed  into  heaven  is  one  which 
should  fill  us  with  gladness  and  confidence.  If  that  residence  in  the  heavens  prove 
to  me  that  Christ  prevailed  in  the  great  work  which  He  undertook,  and  that  because 
He  thus  prevailed  all  power  has  been  given  unto  Him  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  what 
better  reason  can  I  have  for  adherence  to  Christianity?  It  is  no  "cunningly 
devised  fable  "  which  I  foUow,  if  indeed  the  Redeemer  be  thus  "  on  the  right  hand 
of  the  throne  of  the  Majesty  in  the  heavens."  It  is  on  no  doubtful  aid  that  I  rely, 
it  is  no  uncertain  Advocate  with  whom  I  trust  my  cause,  if  He  who  died  upon  the 
cross  hath  been  exalted  to  the  throne.  What  want  can  there  be  for  which  He  has 
not  a  supply  ?  what  sorrow  for  which  He  has  not  a  solace  ?  what  sin  for  which  He 
has  not  an  expiation  ?  what  temptation  which  He  cannot  enable  me  to  resist  ?  or 
what  enemy  which  He  cannot  strengthen  me  to  overcome  ?  Siiall  we,  then,  let  go 
our  profession ?  Shall  we  shrink  at  tbe  approach  of  danger?  Shall  we  play  the 
coward  and  the  recreant,  because  of  persecution,  distress,  contumely,  and  difficulty? 
Nay,  this  were  to  desert  a  Leader,  of  whom  we  have  every  possible  assurance,  that 
no  friend  can  trust  Him  and  not  be  finally  more  than  a  conqueror — no  foe  resist 
Him,  and  not  be  finally  crushed.  (H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  great  possession : — I. 
The  BEAiiiTT  OF  THE  FACT.  "  We  havc  such  ejx  High  Priest."  It  is  not  a  matter  of 
useless  desire  or  of  future  hope,  but  of  present  accompUshed  possession  The  truth 
exists  indeed  in  the  unseen  world,  and  is  not  at  present  visible  to  sight,  as  it  will  be 
hereafter.    Hereafter  the  very  eyes  shall  take  cognisance  of  the  fact,  when  forth 


616  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap,  ym, 

from  the  holy  of  holies,  the  immediate  presence  of  God,  the  great  High  Priest  shall 
come  to  be  manifested  before  the  eyes  of  an  astonished  world.  But  why  is  that 
time  delayed?  Why  lingers  the  great  High  Priest  within  the  heavenly  sanctuary? 
The  answer  is,  that  He  waits  till  the  number  of  the  elect  shall  be  completed,  and 
the  intercession  which  He  for  ever  lives  to  make  for  His  people  shall  be  no  longer 
necessary,  when,  His  people  being  gathered  safely  in,  the  last  veil  shall  be  for  ever 
removed  from  between  them  and  the  full  sight  of  God.  Our  High  Priest  still 
ministers  for  us  till  then.  H.  The  singleness  op  the  Person,  and  of  the  office  Hb 
FULFILS.  "We  have  such  an  High  Priest" — not  many,  but  one — one,  and  only 
one,  so  absolutely  alone,  that  it  is  blasj^hemy  to  arrogate  any  part  of  His  work.  But 
will  Christ  be  Priest  for  ever  ?  This  the  apostle  notices.  Yes,  for  He  liveth  in 
"  the  power  of  an  endless  life,"  and  needs  no  successor.     III.  The  perfection  of 

THE  PEIKSTHOOD  OF  ChEIST,  AND  THE  PERFECTION  OF  HiM  WHO  FXTLFILS  IT.       "  We  haVB 

such  an  High  Priest."  Turn  back  to  the  preceding  chapter,  and  you  will  find  that 
the  apostle  enumerates  beauty  after  beauty  in  Christ,  as  if  he  were  gathering  to- 
gether a  cluster  of  jewels  to  deck  His  crown  of  glory.  It  is  singular,  when  we  read 
the  passage  carefully,  how  we  find  it  crowded  with  insignia  of  honour.  In  human 
priests,  if  the  most  extravagant  claims  were  admitted,  it  would  yet  be  true  that  the 
dignity  is  only  in  the  office,  and  not  in  the  men.  But  when  we  turn  to  the  true 
High  Priest,  how  different  it  is  1  Here  is  not  only  the  glory  of  the  office,  but  the 
glory  of  the  Person,  infinitely  qualified  in  His  Deity,  to  stand  between  the  justice  of 
God  and  the  whole  human  race.  He  is  no  mere  dying  man  like  an  earthly  priest, 
but  clothed  with  "  the  power  of  an  endless  life."  He  was  not  made  after  the  law 
of  a  carnal  commandment,  but  made  after  the  oath  of  God  Himself,  "  a  High  Priest 
for  ever,  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec."  He  has  not  entered  into  the  "  taber- 
nacle made  with  hands,  with  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats,"  but  with  "  His  own 
blood  He  entered  in  once  into  the  holy  place,  having  obtained  eternal  redemption 
for  us."  He  is  not  one  among  many,  like  earthly  priests,  but  is  alone  in  His  own 
single  and  unequalled  majesty,  *'  the  only-begotten  of  the  Father,  full  of  grace  and 
truth."  He  does  not  fill  a  delegated  office,  like  earthly  priests,  but  fulfils  His  own 
office,  and  that  so  perfectly  that  He  "  is  able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that 
come  unto  God  by  Him."  He  needs  not  daily,  as  earthly  priests,  to  seek  forgive- 
ness for  His  own  sins,  but  is  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from 
sinners."  He  does  not  minister  afar  off  from  God,  like  earthly  priests,  but  ia 
already  "  made  higher  than  the  heavens,"  and  at  the  right  hand  of  His  Father 
pleads  evermore  for  us.  He  needs  not  to  repeat  His  daily  offerings,  as  earthly 
priests,  but  has  made  atonement  once,  "when  He  offered  up  Himself."  And, 
lastly,  He  has  no  infirmity,  like  earthly  priests,  but  is  the  Son  of  God,  Himself  God, 
bkssed  for  evermore — omnipotent,  omniscient,  omnipresent,  infinite  I  Who  perfect 
as  He?  and  what  wonder  that,  thus  perfect.  He  should  govern  as  well  as  atone? — 
not  only  Priest,  but  King, — nay,  bearing  on  His  head  the  triple  crown  of  glory — 
Prophet,  Priest,  King.  {E.  Garbett,  M.A.)  The  enthroned  servant  Christ : — We 
have  here  two  strikingly  different  representations  of  our  Lord's  heavenly  state.  In 
the  one  He  is  regarded  as  seated  "  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  the  Majesty." 
In  the  other  He  is  regarded  as  being,  notwithstanding  that  session,  "  a  minister  of 
the  sanctuary  "  ;  performing  priestly  functions  there.  Reigning  He  serves ;  serving 
He  reigns.  I.  The  seated  Christ.  "  We  have  a  High  Priest  who  " — to  translate  a 
little  more  closely — "  has  taken  His  seat  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  the 
Majesty  in  the  heavens."  If  we  translate  the  symbol  into  colder  words,  it  means 
that  deep  repose,  which,  like  the  Divine  rest  after  creation,  is  not  for  recuperation 
of  exhausted  powers,  but  is  the  sign  of  an  accomplished  purpose  and  achieved  task, 
a  share  in  the  sovereignty  of  heaven,  and  the  wielding  of  the  energies  of  Deity — 
rest,  royalty,  and  power  belong  now  to  the  Man  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
throne  of  God.  II.  The  servant  Christ.  "  A  minister  of  the  sanctuary,"  says  my 
text.  The  glorified  Christ  is  a  ministering  Christ.  In  us,  on  us,  for  us  He  works, 
in  all  the  activities  of  His  exalted  repose,  as  truly  and  more  mightily  than  He  did 
when  here  He  helped  the  weaknesses  and  healed  the  sicknesses,  and  soothed  the 
sorrows  and  suppUed  the  wants,  and  washed  the  feet  of  a  handful  of  poor  men.  He 
has  gone  up  on  high,  but  in  His  rest  He  works.  He  is  on  the  throne,  but  in  Hia 
royalty  He  serves.  III.  The  practical  lessons  op  such  thoughts  as  these.  They 
have  a  bearing  on  the  three  categories  of  past,  present,  future.  1.  For  the  past  a 
seal.  For  what  can  be  greater,  what  can  afford  a  firmer  foundation  for  us  sinful 
men  to  rest  our  confidence  upon  than  the  death  of  which  the  recompense  was  that 
the  Man  who  died  sits  on  the  throne  of  the  universe  ?   2.  A  strength  for  the  present 


CHAP,  vin.]  HEBREWS.  617 

I  know  of  nothing  that  is  mighty  enough  to  draw  men's  desires  and  fix  solid 
reasonable  thought  and  love  upon  that  awful  future,  except  the  belief  that  Christ 
is  there.  But  with  Christ  in  the  heavens  the  heavens  become  the  home  of  our 
hearts.  See  Christ,  and  He  interprets,  dwindles,  and  yet  ennobles  the  world  and 
life.  3.  A  prophecy  for  the  future.  There  is  the  measure  of  the  possibilities  of 
human  nature.  (A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The  crowning  point :  Christ  the  High 
Priest  in  heaven  : — The  Lord  Jesus  is  our  High  Priest  in  heaven.  These  simple  but 
majestic  and  weighty  words  sum  up  the  teaching  of  the  first  eight  chapters  of  our 
epistle.  This  is  the  crowning-point  of  the  apostle's  profound  and  massive  argument, 
Jesus,  who  suffered  and  died,  is  consecrated  the  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of 
Melchisedec,  after  the  power  of  an  endless  life.  He  is  the  minister  of  the  heavenly 
sanctuary  and  the  true  tabernacle.  In  no  other  portion  of  the  new  covenant  Scrip- 
tures is  the  nigh  Priesthood  of  the  Lord  Jesus  expl.iiticd.  Hence  in  this  precious 
and  most  eiSLntial  epistle,  more  than  in  nnj  other  book,  stress  is  laid  upon  the 
ascension  rather  than  the  resurrection,  and  upon  the  fact  that  Jesus  is  in  heaven. 
The  object  of  this  epistle  was  to  comfort  and  also  to  exhort  the  Jews,  whose  faith 
was  sorely  tried  because  they  were  excluded  from  the  services  of  the  temple  in  Jeru- 
salem ;  to  confirm  unto  them  the  great  truth,  that  they  had  the  reality  of  those 
things  which  were  only  temporary  and  signs,  and  that  the  real  sanctuary  was  not 
upon  earth  but  high  in  the  heavens,  and  that  Jesus  had  gone  to  be  the  minister  of 
the  holy  things,  and  of  the  true  and  substantial  tabernacle,  which  the  Lord  pitched, 
and  nt  man.  It  is  because  the  Son  of  man,  who  came  down  from  heaveu,  hath 
ascended  up  into  heaven,  it  is  because  Jesus  is  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  that  He  is 
the  true  and  perfect  mediator  between  God  and  man.  From  His  throne  in  heaven 
He  gives  repentance  and  the  remission  of  sins  ;  from  thence  He  gives  unto  His 
Church  all  needful  gifts,  even  as  He  at  first  sent  forth  the  Holy  Ghost,  because  He 
had  been  exalted  by  the  right  hand  of  God,  From  heaven  He  shall  descend  and 
gather  His  saints,  changing  their  vile  bodies,  that  they  may  be  fashioned  like  unto 
His  glorious  body ;  from  heaven  He  worketh  now,  and  will  work,  until  He  hath 
subdued  all  things  unto  Himself.  If  Christ  is  in  heaven,  we  must  lift  up  our 
eyes  and  hearts  to  heaven.  There  are  things  above.  The  things  above  are  the 
spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places.  "Seek  those  things  which  are  above"; 
faith  and  love,  hope  and  patience,  meekness,  righteousness,  and  strength.  The 
things  above  are  also  the  future  things  for  which  we  wait,  seeing  that  our  inheri- 
tance is  not  here  upon  earth.  All  that  is  pertaining  unto  the  inheritance  "  incor- 
ruptible, and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away,"  belongs  unto  those  things  which 
Christ  has  now  to  minister  in  the  tabernacle  which  God  has  made,  and  not  man. 
Our  transfigured  body,  our  perfectly  enlightened  mind,  our  soul  entirely  filled  with 
the  love  of  God,  all  the  strength  and  gifts  for  government  (for  we  shall  be  called  to 
reign  with  Christ  upon  the  earth),  aU  those  powers  and  blessings  which  we  have 
now  only  by  faith  and  in  germ,  are  in  the  heavenly  places  with  Christ,  who  shall 
bring  them  to  us  when  He  comes  again  at  the  command  of  the  Father.  {A.  Saphir.) 

Ver.  2.  The  true  tabernacle. — The  true  tabtrnacle: — I.  It  has  a  Divine  Resident. 
The  soul  is  in  the  body,  animating  and  controlling  it,  and  revealing  itself  in  it ;  so 
God  is  in  the  good — the  true  Church.  II.  It  has  a  Divine  Architect.  1.  He 
formed  the  plan,  and  a  wonderful  plan  it  is,  stretching  over  ages,  and  involving  the 
agencies  of  heaven,  earth,  and  hell.  2.  He  laid  the  foundations  (Isa.  xxviii.  16).  3. 
He  prepares  the  materials.  Digs  each  stone  out  of  the  quarry  of  depravity,  hews 
it,  polishes,  makes  it  suitable  for  a  place  in  the  building.  4.  He  builds  the  materials 
together.  III.  It  has  a  Divine  Minister.  1.  A  Deliverer.  2.  A  Leader.  3.  An 
Educator.  {Homilist.)  The  true  tabernacle : — Here  the  contrast  is  not  so  much 
that  of  law  and  go?pel,  of  grace  and  works,  as  in  other  epistles ;  the  contrast  is 
between  the  earthly  and  temporary  and  the  heavenly  and  eternal.  While  the 
temple  was  still  in  existence,  it  was  difficult  for  the  Hebrews  to  understand  the 
heavenly  character  of  their  calling  and  worship.  The  apostle  shows  that  Jesus  is 
High  Priest  in  heaven,  and  that  therefore  ours  is  a  heavenly  sanctuary,  where  all 
is  substance,  and  possessed  of  an  eternal  vitality  and  glory.  He  is  the  minister  of 
the  true  tabernacle,  which  the  Lord  pitched,  and  not  man.  This  tabernacle  is  con- 
trasted with  the  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness.  It  is  "true,"  in  the  sense  in  which 
Jesus  says,  "  I  am  the  true  vine  " ;  that  is,  the  real  and  substantial  vine,  of  which 
the  outward  and  visible  vines  are  merely  emblems.  In  the  second  place,  this 
tabernacle  was  made,  not  with  hands,  and  not  through  the  mediation  of  human 
beings,  as  was  the  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness ;  bat  it  was  made  by  Qod  Hims«lfc 


518  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vnj, 

And,  in  the  third  place,  this  tabernacle  is  not  a  tent  in  the  wilderness,  but  it  is  an 
abiding  place  in  the  heavenlies,  there  to  be  for  ever.     The  tabernacle  is  one  of  the 
most  important  and  instructiTe  types.   1.  In  the  first  place,  the  tabernacle  is  a  type, 
a  visible  illustration,  of  that  heavenly  place  in  which  God  has  His  dwelling.    2.  In 
the  second  place,  the  tabernacle  is  a  type  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  meeting-place 
between  God  and  man.    3.  And,  in  the  third  place,  the  tabernacle  is  a  type  of  Christ 
in  the  Church — of  the  communion  of  Jesus  with  all  believers.     The  tabernacle 
presented  wonderful  truths  to  IsraeL     In  the  sacrifices  and  ordinances  of   the 
tabernacle  God  declared  unto  His  people  the  forgiveness  of  their  sins  ;  He  brougut 
them  near  unto  Himself  through  expiation  and  mediation ;  He  healed  their  diseases 
and  comforted  their  hearts.    But  the  ultimate  object  in  all  this  was  to  reveal  Him- 
self, to  manifest  His  Divine  perfection,  to  show  forth  His  glory.    Everywhere  the 
twofold  object  was  accomplished,  the  need  of  sinful,  guilty,  and  failing  man  was 
supplied,  and  in  this  very  giace  the  character  and  glory  of  Jehovah  was  revealed. 
Thus,  as  in  Christ  crucified  we  possess  all  we  need,  and  behold  all  the  thoughts  and 
purposes  of  God,  so  in  the  tabernacle  the  believing  Israelite,  receiving  pardon  and 
help,  was  taught  to  exclaim,  "  Who  is  a  God  like  unto  Thee  ?  "     The  tabernacle 
was  a  symbol  of  God's  dwelling.     There  is  a  sanctuary,  wherein  is  the  especial  resi- 
dence and  manifestation  of  the  glorious  presence  of  God.     The  throne,  from  which 
He  issues  His  royal  law  and  the  declaration  of  His  sovereign  grace,  is  between  the 
cherubim,  a   symbol  of  the  heavenly  throne  of  Divine  majesty.     "  The  temple  of 
Thy  holiness,"  is  the  name  both  of  the  earthly  and  heavenly  sanctuary.     God,  who 
dwells  in  heaven,  and  from  His  heaveirly  throne  dispenses  all  blessings,  manifests 
Himself  on  earth  and  holds  communion  with  His  people,  and  the  place  or  sanctuary 
chosen  for  this  purpose  is  a  symbol  of  heaven,  and  there  subsists  a  real  connection 
between  the  celestial  archetype  and  the  earthly  image.     When  Jacob  awoke  out  of 
his  sleep,  in  which  the  Lord  appeared  unto  him,  he  said,  "  This  is  none  other  than 
the  house  of  God,  and  this  is  the  gate  of  heaven."    In  the  subUme  prayer  of  dedica- 
tion, Solomon  constantly  expresses  the  same  thought.      But  the  tabernacle  is, 
secondly,  a  type  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself.    For  it  is  in  Him  that  God  dwells  with 
us  ;  in  Him  dwells  the  fulness  of  Godhead  bodily,  that  we  dwelling  in  Him  should 
have  communion  with  the  Father.     See  the  fulfilment  of  the  type  in  the  first  place 
in  the  Incarnation.    "  A  body  hast  Thou  prepared  for  Me."  He  dwelt  in  the  midst 
of  us  even  as   the  tabernacle  was  in  the  midst  of  the  people.     And  as  that  tent, 
although  it  was  made  of  materials  which  were  common  and  earthly,  was  irradiated 
and  sanctified  by  the  indwelling  glory  of  the  Lord,  so  although  He  was  born  of  the 
Virgin  Mary,  and  was  in  every  respect  like  unto  His  brethren,  and  was  found  in 
fashion  as  a  man,  yet  is  the  humanity  of  Jesus  called  that  huly  thing,  for  it  is  the 
tabernacle  in  which  was  beheld  the  glory  of  the  Only-begotten.     It  was  by  a  gradual 
development  that  Jesus  became  the  true  tabernacle.    First,  by  His  Incarnation. 
The  tabernacle  was  pitched  of  God,  and  not  of  man.     The  Holy  Ghost  came  upon 
the  Virgin  Mary,  and  the  power  of  the  Highest  overshadowed  her.     Then  Jesus,  in 
His  holy  humanity,  in  His  perfect  walk  of  obedience,  in  His  words  and  works, 
manifested  the  Father  :  God  was  with  Him  :  the  Father  was  in  Him  ;  the  glory  of 
the  Only-begotten  shone  through  His  body  of  humiliation.     Then,  by  His  death  on 
the  cross,  the  holy  place  became,  as  it  were,  the  holy  of  holies ;  the  veil  being  rent, 
all  that  separated  God  from  sinners  was  removed  according   to  righteousness. 
Then,  by  His  resurrection  and  ascension.  He  actually  entered  in — as  oar  represen- 
tative— for  us,  and,  so  to  say,  with  us.     It  is  diflScult  to  combine  all  the  aspects  of 
Christ,  who  is  Sanctuary,  Priest,  Sacrifice  ;  but  the  more  we  dwell  on  Him  as  the 
One  who  is  all,  the  more  fully  are  our  hearts  established.    Behold  Him,  then,  as 
the  tabernacle  where  all  sacred  things  are  laid  up.     All  that  was  in  the  tabernacle 
is  in  Him.     He  is  the  true  Light,  the  true  Bread  of  the  countenance,  the  true 
Incense  of  intercession,  with  which  our  prayers  and  offerings  come  before  God. 
All  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places  are  in  Christ.     But  the  tabernacle  has  yet 
a  third  aspect.     There  God  and  His  people  meet.     God  now  dwells  in  His  saints 
by  His  Spirit,  whereby  they  become  an  holy  temple  unto  Him.     We  are  builded 
together  in  Him  (Christ)  for  an  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit.     We  are,  ac- 
cording to  the  testimony  of  another  apostle,  a  spiritual  house,  in  which  saorificet 
and  offerings  of  thanksgiving  and  obedience  are  continually  brought  unto  God. 
In  this  chosen  Temple  God  has  His  rest  and  His  joy.    This  is  the  glorious  gospel : 
God  in  Christ,  we  in  Christ,  Christ  in  us.     Thus  we  have  seen  that  the  tabernacle 
was  a  picture  of  heaven,  a  type  of  Christ  Jesus,  and  of  Christ  Jesus  in  the  saints. 
And  therefore,  when  Jesus  Christ  comes  again  with  His  saints,  it  will  be  said,  "L<\ 


OHAP.  Tin.]  HEBREWS.  619 


the  tabernacle  of  God  with  men."  True,  there  is  a  locality  where  Christ  and  His 
saints  have  their  abode.  But  the  glory  and  sabstanoe  of  that  heavenly  place  L-  the 
Lord  Jesus,  one  with  the  saints.    (A  Saphir.) 

Vet.  8.  To  offer  gifts  and  sacrifices. — Sacrificet } — I.    God's   obdinatioh   or 

APPOINTMSMT    GIVES    BXTLES,    MEASUBBS,   AND    ENDS    UNTO    ALL     SAOBED    OFFICES    AND 

EMPLOYMENTS.  Whoevcr  undertakes  anything  in  religion  or  divine  worship,  with- 
out it,  besides  it,  beyond  it,  is  a  transgressor,  and  therein  worshippeth  God  in  vain. 
IL  Thbbb  is  no  apfboach  dnto  God  without  continual  bespect  unto  saobificb 
AND  atonement.  The  principal  end  of  sacrifices  was  to  make  atonement  for  sin. 
And  so  necessary  was  this  to  be  done,  that  the  office  of  the  priesthood  was  appointed 
for  it.  III.  Thebe  was  no  salvation  to  bk  had  fob  us,  no  not  bt  Jesus  Chbist 
Himself,  without  His  saobifiob  and  oblation.  It  was  of  necessity  that  He 
should  have  somewhat  to  ofter,  as  well  as  those  priests  had  of  old  according  to  the 

law.  IV,  As  QOD  DESIGNED  UNTO  THE  LOED  ChRIST,  THE  WOBK  WHICH  Hb  HAD  TO 
DO,  80  He  PROVIDED  FOB  HiM,  AND  FURNISHED  HiM  WITH,  WHATEVEB  WAS  NECE8SABT 
THEBBUNTO.  V.  ThE  LoBD  JeSUS  ChBIST  BEING  TO  SAVE  THE  ChUECH  IN  THE  WAY 
OF    OFFICE,   He   was    not    to   BB   SPABBD   IN   ANYTHING    NECESSABY    THEREUNTO.       VI. 

Whatever  state  ob  condition  we  abb  called  unto,  what  is  necessaby  unto 
THAT  STATE  IS  INDISPENSABLY  BEQUiBBD  OF  US.  So  is  holincss  and  obedienco 
required  unto  a  state  of  reconciliation  and  peace  with  God.  (John  Owen,  D.D.) 
Somewhat  to  offer.  The  great  Offering: — "  Somewhat  to  offer  "  is  a  very  happy 
rendering.  What  He  offers  is  not  meantime  of  importance.  He  has  an  offer. 
ing.  Neither  is  there  any  reference  to  the  time  when  He  offers,  though  the  word 
perhaps  impUes  that  the  offering  is  one  that  is  made  once  for  all.  But  of  course  it 
is  implied  by  the  connection  that  the  place  of  the  offering  is  in  the  true  tabernacle, 
for  this  is  just  the  gist  of  the  whole  passage.  The  author's  chief  point  is  that  the 
Melchi^edeo  high  priest  is  a  ministering  high  priest  in  the  heavenly  sanctuary,  and 
to  support  this  point  by  saying  that  this  priest  must  have  an  offering  which  he 
offers  somewhere  else  would  be  peculiar  reasoning.  No  doubt  the  high  priest  is 
described  generally  as  appointed  "  to  offer  gifts  and  sacrifices,"  but  that  "  offering  " 
of  the  high  priest  to  which  Christ's  corresponds  is  expressly  defined  to  be  "  blood 
which  he  offered  for  himself  and  for  the  errors  of  the  people  "  in  the  most  holy 
place  (ix,  7).  The  "  somewhat  to  offer  "  which  Christ  has  is  somewhat  which  He 
offers  in  the  sanctuary  on  high.     (A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.) 

Ver.  3.  If  He  were  on  earth.  He  should  not  be  a  priest.— Jeszw'  limitations,  His 
power  and  glory : — The  fact  which  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  here  cites,  bears  witness 
to  the  truth  that  there  will  be  earthly  aspects  of  limitation  to  the  character  of  Christ, 
and  tells  us  how  they  are  to  be  looked  at,  so  as  to  lead  to  His  ultimate  elevation. 
Jesus  is  always  falling  short  of  men's  ideal.  There  arose  the  ideal  of  the  ascetic : 
that  was  the  holiest,  the  best,  the  noblest  life,  to  men's  minds  ;  and  that  man 
whose  life  was  open  to  all  the  influences  of  His  fellow-men,  that  man  who  was 
reproached  by  the  malicious  distortions  of  enemies  as  a  glutton  and  winebibber, 
could  no  more  fit  that  character  than  He  could  that  of  the  sacrificing  priest  of  the 
ancient  temple.  The  time  of  chivalry  and  of  crusades  exalted  the  warrior ;  and  He 
who  sent  forth  His  disciples  without  sword,  and  healed  the  ear  of  Malchus,  was  no 
figure  to  vie  with  the  bold  knights  in  their  valorous  reputations,  any  more  than  the 
plain  garments  of  the  humble  GalUean  could  shine  beside  the  imposing  vestments 
of  Jewish  priests.  Or,  eome  down  to  modem  days,  and  take  the  standards  of  any 
class  in  life  to-day.  The  scientific  thinker  asks  for  facts,  for  analysis,  for  know- 
ledge of  the  structure  of  earth  and  heaven :  and  those  beautiful  parables  and 
wonderful  miracles  enter  into  no  such  details ;  and  Jesus  in  a  scientific  assembly 
to-day  would  be  as  completely  out  of  place  as  He  would  have  been  beside  the  high 
priest  in  the  holy  of  hohes.  And  the  business,  the  commercial,  ideal  of  life,  does 
not  look  for  its  leader  to  Him  who  said,  "  Lend,  hoping  for  nothing  again,"  and 
"  Take  no  thought  for  the  morrow,"  any  more  than  priest  and  Levite  consulted 
Christ  as  to  the  best  mode  of  offering  sacrifices.  Politics  and  society  would  find  it 
equally  impossible  to  discover  their  ideal  in  Him  who  originated  no  new  system 
of  Government,  and  associated  always  with  the  lowly.  The  words  of  Isaiah's 
prophecy  have  a  real  meaning :  "  And  when  we  shall  see  Him,  there  is  no  beauty 
that  we  should  deske  Him."  All  this  causes  difficulty.  We  need  not  inveigh 
against  the  earnestness  of  pursuits  which  have  erected  such  ideals,  any  more  than 
thi.9  writer  found  it  necessary  to  heap  reproaches  on  the  Jewish  system  ot  priest- 


620  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vin. 

hood  because  it  found  no  place  for  Christ  within  it.  Would  Jesus  lead  the  life  of 
the  modern  clergyman  to-day?  is  the  taunt  which,  from  the  outsider,  may  be  thrown 
at  the  preaching  of  His  gospel.  Better  than  to  answer  it  by  asking  whether  He 
would  find  it  possible  to  lead  the  life  of  the  modern  merchant,  or  statesman,  or 
scholar,  better  is  it  for  all  of  us  to  recognise  that  He  would  lead  the  life  of  no  one 
of  us.  N  0  forms  or  modes  of  action,  which  we  find  it  necessary  to  observe,  could 
hold  the  power  of  Divine  lite,  any  more  than  the  life  of  an  ordinary  Jewish  priest, 
God-ordained  as  he  was,  could  be  the  measure  of  the  life  of  the  Saviour  of  the 
world.  And  as  we  say  that,  we  reach  the  ground  of  the  solution  which  is  given  to 
this  difficulty.  Jesus  was  not  a  priest  of  the  old  covenant,  because  He  was  the 
Mediator  of  a  new  and  better  covenant,  He  was  not  a  priest  in  descent  from  Aaron, 
because  He  was  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec.  The  limitations 
of  Jesus  are  His  glory ;  the  fact  that  He  does  not  claim  any  of  these  ideals  of 
earthly  greatness  is  because  He  sets  up  a  greater  ideal,  to  which  they  all  belong. 
We  can  find  an  illustration  in  our  common  life.  A  king  steps  down  among  his 
people ;  he  mingles  with  them,  and  sees  them  at  their  work.  And  there  is  not  one 
of  those  workmen  that  cannot  do  something  better  than  he  can.  If  they  should 
bring  their  difficulties  of  work  to  him,  he  could  not  answer  one  of  them  ;  he  fulfils 
the  ideal  of  no  one  of  their  pos^itions.  And  yet  all  those  interests  are  his,  and 
are  strong  and  healthy  through  his  power  and  character.  His  kingly  character 
remains  untouched  by  the  superiority  of  any  one  of  those  who  are  eminent 
in  their  departments,  and  the  carelessness  and  scorn  of  some  man  who  thinks  a 
man  no  king  who  does  not  know  his  secrets,  never  moves  his  mien  of  royal  dignity. 
The  lifting-up  of  every  one  of  those  subjects  to  the  higher  conception  of  the  nation 
over  which  he  rules,  is  a  work  truly  his,  as  no  mechanical  knowledge  or  minute 
practice  can  ever  be.  Such  was  Christ's  position  as  king ;  and  so  He  stands  far 
above,  though  never  apart  from,  every  standard  of  human  attainment.  He  helps 
every  one  of  them,  as  He  brings  them  all  into  connection  with  the  very  centre  of 
life.  He  set  forth  for  ever  the  truth,  that  the  life  of  the  lower  is  to  be  found  in  the 
higher.  Low  and  compromised  mortal  life  comes  from  narrow  views ;  from  fixing 
our  minds  on  some  immediate  object,  and  making  that  the  measure  of  all  our 
existence.  He  who  sees  such  an  object  only  as  a  part  of  something  greater  is  the 
man  who  will  cease  sacrificing  nobleness  of  character  and  purity  of  life,  which  are 
treasures  that  will  last  to  eternity,  for  ends  that  must  be  limited  and  transient.  Is 
not  that  precisely  the  kind  of  assistance  which  we  need  ?  We  men  must  be  priests 
in  otir  own  temples,  and  we  are  made  to  aspire  to  the  highest  places  in  the  region 
of  life  where  God  has  placed  us.  That  earnestness,  as  it  limits  our  sight,  may  be 
destroying  our  character  and  hope  of  eternal  life.  We  plead  as  an  excuse  that  we 
are  doing  our  best,  and  cannot  be  expected  to  see  the  full  Divine  meaning  of  all  our 
work.  But  when  that  is  showed  to  us,  when,  through  such  a  life  as  that  of  Jesus, 
we  see  that  our  httle  pursuit  is  not  the  end  of  our  being,  then  with  that  revelation 
goodness  stands  forth  as  a  real  power  in  life,  and  we  hold  to  it  in  spite  of  every 
sacrifice  for  which  it  may  call,  in  the  name  and  spirit  of  Him  who  has  thus 
consecrated  it  for  us.  Our  pursuit  shall  still  be  vigorous  and  successful ;  but,  by 
connection  with  Him,  character,  too,  shall  be  purified  and  elevated  by  it.  That  is 
one  advantage  of  Christ's  position  outside  of  our  special  pursuits.  We  find  another 
in  the  way  ia  which  it  draws  us  all  together.  He  is  for  all,  because  no  special 
pursuit  causes  Him  to  belong  specially  to  any.  Is  not  the  way  that  Christian 
worship  calls  us  together,  men,  women,  aud  children,  without  distinction,  a  part  cf 
Christ's  greatest  blessing  in  telling  us  of  our  manhood  which  is  beneath  all  our 
pursuits  and  greater  than  them  all  ?  We  all  come  from  our  different  pursuits  ;  but 
it  is  the  same  tale  of  mingled  joy  and  sorrow,  success  and  discouragement,  struggle 
and  triumph,  sin  and  holiness,  which  we  bring.  It  is  the  same  word  of  love,  for- 
giveness, hope,  and  strength  that  we  want  to  hear.  The  bauds  of  life  are 
strengthened  in  the  presence  of  Him  who  belongs  to  us  all.  We  feel  the  influ- 
ence in  deepened  friendship,  widened  sympathy,  enriched  family  feeling.  It  will 
be  harder  for  our  variety  of  pursuits  to  separate  us  when  in  truth  we  recognise  our 
relation  to  Him  who  is  the  common  Lord  and  Saviour  of  us  all.     {Arthur  Brooks.) 

Ver.  5.  According  to  the  pattern  shewed  to  thee. — Plan  and  pattern  and 
purpose: — Moses,  when  he  went  down  from  God  on  Sinai,  knew  what  he  was 
going  to  build,  and  how  he  was  going  to  build  it.  The  thought  of^a  thing,  the  con- 
ception of  it,  is  its  first  and  largest  half.  It  is  easier  to  pour  in  the  molten  iron 
than  to  make  in  the  sand  the  mould  into  which  it  is  to  be  poured.    I  want,  first,  to 


CHAP,  vm.]  HEBREWS.  621 

say  something  generally  about  plan  and  pattern  and  purpose.  As  I  look  through 
Scripture  I  discover  that  the  men  who  did  the  best  work  and  the  most  of  it  first 
wrought  out  in  thought  what  they  were  afterwards  going  to  work  out  in  act  and 
word.  The  Creator  Himself  wrought  out  first  His  creative  designs.  In  that  sense 
the  world  is  as  old  as  God.  When  at  the  end  of  the  first  week  He  said  "  All  very 
good,"  He  meant  that  things  had  now  become  in  fact  what  they  had  first  and  for 
ever  been  in  idea.  Nothing,  perhaps,  comes  nearer  God's  workmanship  in  this  respect 
than  art ;  hence  our  habit  of  speaking  of  the  creations  of  art.  The  modem  architect, 
like  the  one  on  Sinai,  sees  the  building  he  is  going  to  construct  before  the  timber 
has  been  cut  or  the  ground  broken.  Gerard  von  Rile,  six  hundred  years  ago,  saw 
tbe  cathedral  which  has  just  been  completed  at  Cologne.  Slowly  since  the  year  1200, 
German  artisans  have  been  copying  into  stone  Von  Eile's  thought,  working  from 
his  plan,  and  the  cathedral  is  perfect  to-day  because  it  was  perfect  then.  All  that 
God  does  is  in  prosecution  of  a  plan,  an  eternal  idea  come  to  utterance.  The  tree 
ripens  to  the  grade  of  a  purpose  that  was  ripe  before  the  tree,  and  before  the  third 
day.  It  is  all  one  whether  we  say  that  the  plan  is  deposited  in  the  seed,  or  that 
God  builds  the  plant  each  moment  against  the  pattern  of  His  thought,  as  the  mason 
lays  bricks  close  to  the  plumb-line.  It  all  sums  up  into  the  same  result.  With 
such  examples  of  pattern  and  purpose  before  us,  I  want  to  go  on  and  say  that  there 
are  at  least  three  advantages  that  come  from  having  a  plan  in  our  life  and  work, 
and  working  and  living  from  that  plan.  1.  One  is,  that  in  an  open  field  and  with  a 
long  prospect  our  purposes  will  lay  themselves  out  in  a  larger  and  wiser  proportion 
than  when  framed  at  close  quarters  and  at  the  dictation  of  momentary  impulse. 
The  captain  brings  his  ship  to  Liverpool  in  less  time  by  having  tbe  whole  course 
settled  at  the  outset  than  by  settling  a  little  of  it  every  day.  A  man's  longest  pur- 
poses will  be  his  best  purposes.  Immediate  results  are  meagre  results.  The  men 
who  are  doing  most  for  their  own  day  are  such  as  are  working  toward  an  aim  that 
is  a  score  or  a  century  of  years  away.  In  the  days  of  American  slavery  the  poor 
fugitive  reached  liberty  ;by  walking  towards  the  stars.  2.  Not  only  shall  we  think 
wiser  and  grander  purposes  when  we  mature  them  in  advance;  there  is  also  a 
solidifying  and  invigorating  power  in  a  long  purpose  clearly  defined.  You  can 
generally  tell  from  a  man's  gait  whether  he  has  a  purpose.  Plan  intensifies. 
Pursuance  of  a  purpose  makes  our  life  solid  and  consecutive.  Plan  concentrates 
energies  as  a  burning-glass  does  sunbeams.  We  cannot  do  to-morrow's  work  to-day, 
but  we  can  have  to-day's  work  shaped  and  buttressed  by  what  we  are  intending  to 
do  to-morrow.  In  a  life  which  has  meaning  in  it,  past  and  future  sustain  each 
other.  3.  Then,  in  the  next  place,  knowing  with  deflniteness  what  we  are  attempting 
to  do  is  a  moral  safeguard.  Purposelessness  is  the  fruitful  mother  of  crime.  When 
men  live  only  in  conference  with  circumstances  lying  next  thpm,  they  lose  their 
bearings.  A  drifting  boat  always  drifts  down-stream.  Young  aimlessness  is  the 
seminary  of  old  iniquity.  Out  of  904  convicts  received  at  the  Michigan  State 
prison  in  the  three  years  ending  1880,  822  (91  per  cent.)  were  unskilled  labourers — 
bad  never  been  taught  how  to  work.  Such  facts  challenge  the  attention  of  the 
Church  as  well  as  of  the  political  economistb.  Character,  purpose,  and  apprentice- 
ship wiU  never  get  far  apart  from  each  other,  whether  among  immigrants  or  native 
population.  But  Moses  not  only  approached  his  work  with  a  purpose  and  a  pattern, 
but  brought  down  his  pattern  from  on  high.  This  teaches  that  there  are  celestial 
ways  of  doing  earthly  things,  and  that  human  success  consists  in  getting  into  the 
secrecies  of  God's  mind  and  working  in  the  direction  of  His  method.  Human 
success  is  a  quotation  from  overhead.  Men  are  enriched  with  presentiments  of  the 
way  God  would  work  if  placed  in  our  stead.  These  presentiments  we  call  ideals. 
We  discover,  not  invent,  them.  "In  the  mount"  we  reach  after  them  and  ascend 
to  them.  They  are  a  continuous  firmament  that  overarches  as,  but  a  clouded 
firmament  that  yields  itself  to  us  only  in  broken  hints.  (C  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D.) 
Character-building  according  to  pattern : — All  of  us  are  builders — ^builders  for  time 
and  for  eternity.  The  building  of  the  sacred  edifice  of  character,  which  is  to  be 
a  holy  temple  for  God  to  dwell  in ;  the  raising  of  the  stately  structure  of  a  life- 
work  which  shall  be  enduring  as  the  years  of  God ;  the  laying  of  secure  founda- 
tions for  that  heavenly  home  in  which  we  all  hope  to  dwell — these  are  the  high  and 
heaven-appointed  employments  of  our  earthly  years.  I.  The  Divine  pattebn  is 
8IVEN  TO  us  ALL.  Not  blindly  nor  ignorantly  do  we  pursue  our  life  vocation.  Up 
into  the  mount  of  privilege  God  calls  each  of  us,  and  there  reveals  the  heavenly 
pattern  of  onr  life-work.  The  yearning  of  all  true  hearts  to  hear  the  voice  of  God 
and  to  know  His  thought  and  will  concerning  us  is  fully  met  in  these  Divina 


622  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  vm, 

revealings.  What  are  these  holy  heights  where  God  reveals  to  you  the  heavenly 
plan  according  to  which  you  are  to  build  ?  1.  The  mount  of  Divine  illumination, 
where  conscience  sits  enthroned,  and  utters  her  authoritative  voice  as  she  summons 
you  to  her  tribimal.  That  voice  of  warning  and  restraint,  of  persuasion  and 
guidance,  is  often  heard  above  the  Babel  of  earthly  voices  that  press  their  urgent 
pleas.  That  voice,  sanctioning  the  right,  condemning  the  wrong,  is  God's  own  call 
to  a  life  of  fidelity  to  Him.  2.  There  is  also  the  mount  of  Divine  revelation  through 
the  inspired  word.  In  the  pages  of  Homer  and  Virgil,  of  Shakespeare  and  Milton, 
yoa  are  invited  to  the  mount  of  communion  with  these  illustrious  men.  Great, 
indeed,  is  that  privilege.  You  live  in  their  immediate  presence ;  you  breathe  ihe 
atmosphere  which  surrounded  them ;  you  listen  to  their  voices ;  you  think  their 
thoughts,  and  learn  the  priceless  lessons  garnered  from  their  Uves.  In  the  Bible 
you  are  permitted  to  commune  with  the  eternal  God,  to  hear  His  voice  as  certainly 
as  Moses  heard  it  on  the  quaking  mount.  And  here  God  reveals  to  each  of  us  His 
own  plan  for  all  our  earthly  building  and  work.  The  plan  revealed  is  set  before 
OS  with  sufficient  distinctness,  completeness,  and  fulness  of  detail.  It  is  given  to 
us  not  only  in  doctrine  and  in  precept,  but  it  is  clearly  illustrated  in  the  his- 
tories and  biographies  with  which  the  sacred  book  abound,  and  which,  as  their 
subjects  follow  or  disregard  the  Divine  direction,  always  secure  or  miss  life's 
highest  good ;  and  thus,  in  a  peculiar  sense,  they  serve  as  "  guides  "  or  "  gu  irds  " 
to  us  who  are  favoured  with  the  inspired  record  of  their  successes  and   failures. 

3.  But  in  a  pre-eminent  sense  is  the  pattern  revealed  to  us  on  the  mount  of  Divine 
manifestation.  Moses  saw  only  in  vision  the  plan  of  the  tabernacle  which  he  was 
to  build,  but  we,  more  privileged  than  was  he,  are  permitted  to  behold  the  glorious 
pattern  which  we  are  to  follow,  clothed  in  concrete  and  tangible  form,  taking  on  our 
own  humanity,  standing  before  our  ravished  eyes  incarnated  in  the  person  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Looking  at  this  incarnation  of  truth,  purity,  duty,  sacrifice,  and  love,  we 
hear  the  heavenly  voice  calling  to  us,  "  See  that  thou  make  all  things  according  to  " 
this  "  pattern  showed  to  thee  "  in  this  most  sacred  mount  of  Divine  manifestation. 

4.  There  are  also  given  to  us  all  seasous  of  special  revelation,  times  when  the 
height  to  which  we  are  lifted  is  greater,  and  earth  with  its  blinding  atmosphere 
seems  farther  removed — its  'strife  and  clamour  more  faint  and  ineffectual — while 
God's  voice  sounds  clearer,  and  the  heavenly  vision  is  brighter.  There  are  times 
when  the  soul  seems  more  susceptible  of  good  influences,  and  the  powers  of  evil 
relax  their  grasp,  and  tender  memories  steal  in  upon  the  mind,  and  the  thoughts 
of  a  mother's  love,  and  a  father's  prayers,  and  a  teacher's  coujjsels,  and  a  Saviour's 
eympathy,  and  the  Spirit's  gentle  wooings,  hold  the  entire  being  for  one  supreme 
hour  under  their  hallowing  spell.  Cherish  these  favoured  seasons.  As  travellers 
in  mountainous  regions,  climbing  to  some  high  eminence  where  the  glories  of  the 
entrancing  view  ravish  the  soul,  carry  the  glorious  vision  with  them,  through  all 
the  future  years  of  life;  so  take  with  you  these  clearest  visions  of  the  heavenly 
pattern,  these  best  thoughts  and  holiest  purposes  and  lofty  ideals,  down  into  the 
lowest  valley  of  temptation  and  strife.  II.  The  Divine  pattern  must  be  fol- 
lowed IN  OKDER  TO  A  TRUE  AND  succESSFOL  LIFE.  1.  Let  it  be  kept  iu  mind  that 
this  is  God's  plan  for  your  life-work—  God's  ideal  life  for  you.  Whether  a  life- 
pattern  coming  to  us  from  such  a  source  is  worth  our  acceptance,  whether  it  can  be 
rejected  or  neglected  without  wreck  of  all  worthy  hopes,  none  but  a  madman  can 
ever  pause  to  question.  Once  let  the  thought  that  God's  ideal  of  your  life  has 
been  really  revealed  to  you  actually  possess  the  mind,  with  all  its  legitimate  force, 
and  nothing  can  prevent  your  yielding  to  its  sway.  Henceforth,  your  life  has  a 
significance  in  it  which  belongs  to  nothing  merely  human  ;  it  is  a  Divine  thing  ;  it 
is  God's  purpose  and  God's  thought  taking  on  a  human  form  incarnated  in  you. 
You  think  God's  thoughts,  you  utter  His  words,  you  crystallize  His  will  into  actual 
deeds;  you  project  into  this  needy  and  sinful  world  of  humanity  a  life  that  is 
heaven-planned  and  heaven-inspired,  the  copy  of  a  Divine  ideal  given  to  you  by 
the  Almighty  World-Builder.  2.  All  the  lessons  from  analogy  teach  us  the  majesty 
of  Divine  law — the  penalty  of  violating,  and  the  profit  of  obeying,  its  behests.  See 
everywhere  in  nature  a  perfect  adjustment  of  part  to  complementary  part,  an 
adaptation  of  means  to  ends.  Everything  shows  purpose  and  plan.  Law  reigns ; 
order  and  harmony  are  the  universal  resultants.  Attempt  to  disregard  one  of  the 
laws  which  God  has  ordained,  and  you  pay  the  penalty.  Despise  or  forget  the  law 
of  gravitation ;  step  from  the  roof  of  a  house  or  the  edge  of  a  precipice  as  though 
the  air  were  hke  the  soUd  pavement  for  your  feet,  and,  quickly  dashed  to  the  ground 
below,  your  mutilated  body  attests  the  foolhardiness  of  your  lawless  act.    What 


OTAP.  vm.  HEBREWS.  623 

have  yon  done  bnt  violated  Gk>d'B  order — set  aside  His  laws  ?  Can  yon,  then,  dis- 
regard no  single  part  of  His  plan,  in  natnre,  without  peril,  and  yet  expect  to  set  at 
naught  His  entire  pi  m  for  the  government  of  your  life  with  immunity  from  evil 
consequences  ?  8.  And  this  Divine  pattern  must  be  followed  in  its  completeness 
and  comprehensiveness,  with  all  its  particularity  of  detail.  Three  perils  lie  in 
ambush,  even  for  those  who,  with  more  or  less  strength  of  purpose,  regard  them- 
selves as  accepting  the  revealed  plan  for  their  life-building.  The  first  is  the  peril 
of  accepting  it  in  part,  but  not  in  its  completeness;  the  second  is  that  of 
accepting  it  theoretically,  but  rejecting  it  practically ;  the  third  is  the  peril  of 
accepting  it  for  a  time,  but  abandoning  it  before  the  life-work  is  completed. 
(C.  H.  Payne,  D.D.)  Our  hours  of  vision: — I.  There  comes  to  us  all  times  of 
exceptionaij  insight,  of  moral  elevation,  yes,  of  inspiration,  when  in  a  special  way 
our  spirits  are  touched  by  the  spirit  of  truth  and  goodness — times  when  we  are,  so 
to  speak,  upon  the  mount,  and  see  heavenly  things  clearly,  and  a  higher  pattern  of 
life  is  shown  to  us.  These  hours  of  vision  may  be  associated  with  the  utmost 
variety  of  circumstances  giving  occasion  to  them.  It  may  be  simply  interruption 
of  our  ordinary  work.  We  have  been  going  on  from  day  to  day  in  the  regular 
customary  routine.  Each  day  has  been  so  filled  with  its  multiplicity  of  engage- 
ments, its  interests,  its  distractions,  its  pleasures,  its  annoyances,  as  to  leave  Uttle 
leisure  and  less  inclination  for  that  quiet  and  serious  thought  in  which  we  seek  to 
see  life  steadily,  and  see  it  whole.  We  need  to  stand  a  little  back  from  it,  as  an 
artist  has  to  do  to  judge  of  the  effect  of  the  picture  he  is  painting.  And  sometimes 
God  compels  a  man  to  stand  aside  and  look  upon  his  life  and  his  work  from  a  little 
distance.  He  takes  him  apart  from  the  multitude  that  He  may  open  his  ears  to 
voices  that  cannot  be  heard  amid  the  bustle  of  the  crowd.  In  the  confinement  of 
his  chamber  his  spirit  chafes  at  first  as  he  thinks  of  the  great  tide  of  men  with 
eager  interests  which  flows  every  morning  citywards  and  ebbs  at  evening,  and  of 
all  the  busy  life  from  which  he  is  excluded ;  by-and-by  a  change  has  come  over  his 
spirit — the  roar  of  that  loud  stunning  tide  sounds  faint  and  far  off ;  his  interest  in 
it  has  become  strangely  weakened  ;  other  visions  are  opening  out  before  his  mind  ; 
he  is  seeing  deeper  than  the  surface  stir  and  bustle  of  life,  its  ambitions  and  its 
rivalries,  into  the  meaning  of  life  itself,  its  possibiUties  and  its  purposes.  He  is 
learning  to  see  things  in  their  true  proportions,  and  is  waking  up  to  the  discovery 
that  he  has  been  exaggerating  terribly  certain  aspects  of  them.  A  diviner  pattern 
of  life  is  being  shown  to  him — an  ideal  higher  in  its  aims,  its  methods,  and  its 
motives  ;  and  when  he  comes  back  to  take  up  again  among  men  his  daily  tasks,  surely 
it  is  with  an  earnest  purpose  to  make  all  things  according  to  the  nobler  pattern 
that  has  been  shown  him.  But  there  are  experiences  tending  towards  similar 
results  that  enter  much  more  frequently  into  life  than  such  as  that.  To  all  men, 
and  most  of  all  to  those  who  have  youth  and  hope  on  their  side,  a  period  of  leisure 
and  recreation  and  contact  with  nature  is  not  more  a  rest  than  an  inspiration,  a 
time  of  sanguine  and  earnest  forecasting  of  the  future,  a  time  of  forming  of  plans 
and  contemplating  ideals,  of  storing  up  impulse  and  stimulus,  of  girding  up  the 
loins  of  the  mind  with  strenuous  self-denying  purpose.  There  are  other  times — 
sadder  times — which  have  worked  to  the  same  effect :  hours,  not  of  elevation,  but 
of  deep  depression,  when  we  saw  things  after  the  pattern  of  the  heavenly.  It  may 
have  been  an  hour  of  stern  self-rebuke,  of  humiliation  and  shame,  when  conscience 
justly  scourged  and  spared  not,  or  when  you  felt  yourself  baffled  and  helpless  in 
the  presence  of  a  great  perplexity ;  or  the  day  yon  came  back  from  standing  beside 
a  new-filled  grave,  and  realised  that  the  world  was  emptier  and  poorer  than  it  had 
been  a  week  before.  Men  looking  up  from  deep  places,  it  is  said,  see  stars  at 
noonday ;  and  sometimes  it  is  when  it  is  sighing  its  De  Profimdis  that  the  soul 
catches  its  vision  of  God.  There  are  countless  hours  of  vision  which  we  need 
not  stay  to  classify.  We  wake  up  one  day  to  feel  as  if  all  our  previous  know- 
ledge of  God  had  been  but  hearsay :  we  feel,  "  I  have  heard  of  Thee  by  the 
hearing  of  the  ears,  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  Thee."  Life  seems  to  begin  anew 
from  times  like  that.  We  have  accepted  truth  apon  the  authority  of  others; 
the  time  comes  when  we  say,  "We  see."  The  entrance  of  God's  Word  gives  light, 
and  so  certifies  itself.  Our  own  hold  of  truth  is  never  satisfactory  until  we  thus 
see.  The  man  who  is  to  influence  others  must  first  himself  see  heavenly  things 
upon  the  mount.  U.  These  times  of  vision  leave  behind  them  eesponsibiuties. 
We  cannot  command  those  higher  moments — at  least  not  directly — not  otherwise 
than  by  habitual  obedience  to  the  laws  of  Christ's  spiritual  kingdom.  "To  him 
that  hath  shall  be  given."    The  seeing  may  be  special  times  ;  the  acting  oat  what 


624  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

we  have  seen  belongs  to  oar  common  life.  That  is  the  only  possible  way  of  keeping 
the  vision  dear — of  retaining  it  as  oar  lasting  possession.    For 

**  'Tis  the  most  difficult  of  tasks  to  keep 
Heights  which  the  soul  is  competent  to  gain.** 

It  in  BO  very  easy  to  be  a  seer  as  well  as  a  hearer,  and  not  a  doer,  to  be  like  the  man 
who  beholdeth  his  natural  face  in  a  glass,  to  whom  there  comes  a  bright  perception 
of  truth,  which  reveals  him  to  himself,  with  all  his  blots  and  stains  and  flaws,  and 
who  assents  to  it,  and  goeth  his  way,  and  forgetteth  what  manner  of  man  he  is. 
It  is  possible  to  do  even  worse :  to  use  that  kind  of  experience— «ven  visions  and 
revelations  of  the  Lord — for  our  own  self-deception.  It  is  one  of  the  great  dangers 
of  what  may  be  called  the  rehgious  temperament,  to  care  a  great  deal  more  about 
what  it  can  see  and  feel  upon  the  mount  than  about  faithfulness  in  commonplace 
duty  on  the  ordinary  levels  of  life.  It  is  a  frequent  tempt  ition  after  we  have  been 
touched  by  admiration  for  some  aspects  of  duty,  and  ma  le  to  thrill  at  the  thought 
of  seeing  ourselves  doing  it — especially  if  we  have  been  led  to  speak  warmly  about 
it — to  indulge  in  a  soft,  self-complacent  feeling,  as  if  we  had  really  done  it  or  were 
doing  it,  although  we  may  not  have  touched  it  with  one  of  our  fingers.  Is  not  this 
the  difference  between  the  man  of  mere  emotion  and  the  man  of  principle — between 
the  man  of  feeling  and  the  man  of  faith — that  the  one  can  be  thrilled  with  high 
ideals,  and  can  proceed  to  work  them  out  while  the  glow  is  upon  him,  and  continue 
only  so  long  as  the  excitement  or  emotion  lasts  ;  while  the  other,  who  has  hid  in 
his  he^rt  that  which  he  has  seen,  will  toil  on  steadily  along  the  dull,  flat  levels, 
keupiiig  to  the  path  of  duty  when  the  brightness  has  faded  from  the  sky?  It  is  a 
great  thing,  an  unspeakable  privilege,  to  have  so  seen  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  thai 
our  heart  and  conscience  have  said  to  Jesus,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God  " ;  and  yet  it 
is  His  word,  "  Not  every  one  that  saith  unto  Me,  Lord,  Lord  I  shall  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  heaven;  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  My  Father  which  is  in 
heaven  " — not  he  that  seeth  and  even  prophesieth  in  My  name,  but  he  that  maketh 
his  life  according  to  the  pattern  that  hiith  been  showed  to  him.  (A.  O.Johnston,  M.A.) 
The  pattern  in  the  mount : — As  the  old  Tabernacle,  before  it  was  built,  existed  in 
the  mind  of  God,  so  all  the  unborn  things  of  life,  the  things  which  are  to  make  tha 
future,  are  already  living  in  their  perfect  ideas  in  Him,  and  when  the  future  comes, 
its  task  will  be  to  match  those  Divine  ideas  with  their  material  realities,  to  trans- 
late into  the  visible  and  tangible  shapes  of  terrestrial  life  the  facts  which  already 
have  existence  in  the  perfect  mind.  Surely  in  the  very  statement  of  such  a  thought 
of  life  there  is  something  which  ennobles  and  dignifies  our  living.  A  child  is  born 
into  the  world  this  morning.  Its  lessons  are  unlearned,  its  tasks  untried,  its  dis- 
coveries unmade,  its  loves  unloved,  its  growth  entirely  ungrown,  as  the  little  new- 
born problem  lies  unsolved  on  this  the  first  day  of  its  Ufe.  Is  that  all  ?  Is  there 
nowhere  in  the  universe  any  picture  of  what  that  child's  life  ought  to  be,  and  may 
be?  Surely  there  ia.  If  God  is  that  child's  Father,  then  in  the  Father's  mind,  in 
God's  mind,  there  must  surely  be  a  picture  of  what  that  child  with  his  peculiar 
faculties  and  nature  may  become  in  the  completeness  of  his  life.  Years  hence, 
when  that  baby  of  to-day  has  grown  to  be  the  man  of  forty,  the  real  question  of  his 
life  will  be,  what?  Not  the  questions  which  his  fellow-citizens  of  that  remote  day 
will  be  asking.  What  reputation  has  he  won  ?  What  money  has  he  earned  ?  Not 
even,  What  learning  has  he  gained  ?  But,  Huw  far  has  he  been  able  to  translate 
into  the  visible  and  tangible  realities  of  a  life  that  idea  which  was  in  God's  mind 
on  that  day  in  the  old  year  when  he  was  born  ?  How  does  the  tabernacle  which  he 
has  built  correspond  with  the  pattern  which  is  in  the  mount  ?  Ail  this  is  true  not 
merely  of  a  whole  life  as  a  whole,  but  of  each  single  act  or  enterprise  of  life.  We 
have  not  thought  richly  or  deeply  enough  about  any  undertaking  unless  we  have 
thought  of  it  as  an  attempt  to  put  into  the  form  of  action  that  which  already 
has  existence  in  the  idea  of  God.  You  start  upon  your  profession,  and  your  pro- 
fessional career  in  its  perfect  conception  shines  already  in  God's  sight.  You  set 
yourself  down  to  some  hard  struggle  with  temptation,  and  already  in  the  fields  of 
God's  knowledge  yoa  are  walking  as  possible  victor,  clothed  in  white  and  with  the 
crown  of  victory  upon  your  head.  You  build  your  house,  and  found  your  home. 
It  is  an  attempt  to  realise  the  picture  of  purity,  domestic  peace,  mutual  inspiration 
and  mutual  comfort,  which  God  sees  already.  The  distinction  between  ideas  and 
forms  is  one  which  all  men  need  to  know,  which  many  men  so  often  seem  to  miss. 
The  idea  takes  shape  in  the  form,  the  form  expresses  the  idea.    The  form,  without 


CBAt.  yra.)  HEBREWS. 


the  idea  behind  it,  is  thin  and  hard.    The  form,  oontinnally  oonsoions  of  its  idea, 
beoomes  rich,  deep,  and  elastic.    If  all  that  I  have  said  be  true,  then  it  would  8e«m 
as  ii  there  ought  to  be  in  the  world  three  kinds  of  men — the  men  of  forms ;  the 
men  of  limited  ideals,  or  of  ideals  which  are  not  the  highest ;  and  the  men  of  on- 
limited  ideals,  or  the  highest  ideals,  which  are  the  ideals  of  God.    And  three  such 
kinds  of  men  there  are,  very  distinct  and  easy  of  discovery.    First,  there  are  the 
men  of  forms,  the  men  who,  in  all  their  self-questionings  about  what  they  ought  to 
do,  and  in  all  their  judgments  about  what  they  have  done,  never  get  beyond  the 
purely  formal  standards  which  proceed  either  from  the  necessity  of  tiieir  conditions 
or  from  the  accepted  precedents  of  other  people.     They  never  get  into  the  regions 
of  ideas  at  all.    How  many  such  men  there  are  I    To  them  the  question  of  their 
business  life  never  comes  up  so  high  as  to  mean,  "  What  is  the  best  and  loftiest 
way  in  which  it  is  possible  for  this  business  of  mine  to  be  done  ?  "     It  never  geta 
higher  than  to  mean,  "  How  can  I  best  support  myself  by  my  business  ?  "  or  else, 
"  What  are  the  ways  and  rules  of  business  which  are  most  accepted  in  the  businesfi 
world  ?  "    To  such  men  the  question  of  religion  never  becomes :  "  What  are  the 
intrinsic  and  eternal  relations  between  the  Father  God  and  msm  the  child  ?  "  but 
only,  "  By  what  religious  observances  can  a  man  get  into  heaven  ?  "  or  else,  "  What 
is  the  most  current  religion  of  my  fellow-men  ?  "    It  would  be  sad,  indeed,  to  think 
that  there  is  any  man  here  to-day  who  has  not  at  least  sometimes  in  his  life  got  a 
glimpse  into  a  richer  and  fuller  and  more  Interesting  sort  of  life  than  this.     There 
is  a  second  sort  of  man  who  does  distinctly  ask  himself  whether  his  deed  is  what  it 
ought  to  be.    He  is  not  satisfied  with  asking  whether  it  works  its  visible  result  or 
not,  whether  other  men  praise  it  or  not.     There  is  another  question  still.  Does  it 
conform  to  what  he  knew  before  he  undertook  it  that  it  ought  to  be  ?    If  it  does 
not,  however  it  may  seem  successful,  however  men  may  praise  it,  the  doer  of  the 
deed  turns  off  from  it  in  discontent.    If  it  does,  no  matter  how  it  seems  to  fail,  no 
matter  how  men  blame  it,  he  thanks  God  for  it  and  is  glad.  Here  is  a  true  idealism ; 
here  is  a  man  with  an  unseen  pattern  and  standard  for  his  work.  He  lives  a  loftier, 
and  likewise  a  more  unquiet  life.    He  goes  his  way  with  his  vision  before  his  eyes. 
"  I  know  something  of  rhat  this  piece  of  work  ought  to  have  been,"  he  says, 
"  therefore  I  cannot  be  satisfied  with  it  as  it  is."     What  is  the  defect  of  such  an 
idealism  as  that  ?    It  is,  that  as  yet  the  idea  comes  only  from  the  man's  own  self. 
Therefore,  although  it  Ues  farther  back  than  the  mere  form,  it  does  not  lie  entirely 
at  the  back  of  everything.    It  is  not  final ;  it  shares  the  incompleteness  of  the  man 
from  whom  it  springs.     Therefore  it  is  that  something  more  is  needed,  and  that 
only  the  third  man's  life  is  whoUy  satisfactory.  Literally  and  truly  he  believes  that 
the  life  he  is  to  live,  the  act  he  is  to  do,  lies  now,  a  true  reality,  already  existent  and 
present,  in  the  mind  of  God ;  and  his  object,  his  privilege,  is  not  simply  to  see  how 
he  can  live  his  life  in  the  way  which  wiU  look  best  or  produce  the  most  brilliant 
visible  result,  not  simply  to  see  how  he  can  best  carry  out  his  own  personal  idea  of 
what  is  highest  and  best,  but  how  he  can  most  truly  reproduce  on  earth  that  image 
of  this  special  life  or  action  which  is  in  the  perfect  mind.    This  is  the  way  in  which 
he  is  to  make  all  things  according  to  the  pattern  which  is  in  the  mount.     What 
quiet  independence,  what  healthy  humility,  what  confident  hope  there  must  be  in 
^is  man  who  thus  goes  up  to  Gcd  to  get  the  pattern  of  his  living.    To-morrow 
morning  to  that  man  there  comes  a  great  overwhelming  sorrow.   What  shall  he  do, 
what  shall  he  be  in  this  new  terrible  life,  terrible  not  least  because  of  its  awful  new- 
ness, which  has  burst  upon  him  ?    Where  shall  he  find  the  pattern  for  his  new 
necessity  ?    Of  course  he  may  look  about  and  copy  the  forms  with  which  the  world 
at  large  greets  and  denotes  its  sorrow,  the  decent  dreadful  conventionahties  of  grief. 
That  does  not  satisfy  him.    The  world  acknowledges  that  he  has  borne  his  grief 
most  properly,  but  he  is  not  satisfied.    Then,  behind  aU  that,  he  may  reason  it 
over  with  himself,  think  out  what  death  means,  make  his  philosophy,  decide  how 
a  man  ought  to  behave  in  the  terrible  shipwreck  of  his  hopes.    That  is  a  better 
thing  by  all  means  than  the  other.    But  this  man  does  something  more.    The 
pattern  of  his  new  Hfe  is  not  in  the  world.    It  is  not  in  himself.  It  is  in  God.    To 
get  up,  then,  into  God,  and  find  that  image  of  his  grieved  and  sorrowing  life,  and 
then  come  back  and  shape  his  life  after  it  patiently  and  cheerfully,  that  is  the 
struggle  of  the  Christian  idealist  in  his  sorrow,  of  the  man  who  tries  to  make  all 
things  according  to  the  pattern  which  is  in  the  mount.     Can  we  not  see  what  quiet 
independence,  what  healthy  humihty,  what  confident  hope  there  must  be  in  that 
man's  struggle  to  Hve  out  through  his  sorrow  the  new  hfe  which  his  sorrow  has 
made  possible  7    But  now  it  is  quite  time  for  us  to  ask  another  questioa   Suppose 

40 


626  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

that  all  which  we  have  said  is  true ;  suppose  that  there  is  such  a  pattern  of  the 
truest  life,  and  of  each  truest  act  of  every  man  lying  in  God's  mind,  how  shall  the 
man  know  what  that  pattern  is  ?  Is  not  Christ  the  mountain  up  into  which  the 
believer  goes,  and  in  which  he  finds  the  Divine  ideal  of  himself  ?  As  a  mountain 
seems  to  be  the  meeting-place  of  earth  and  heaven,  the  place  where  the  bendin.; 
skies  meet  the  aspiring  planet,  the  place  where  the  sunshine  and  the  cloud  keep 
closest  company  with  the  granite  and  the  grass :  bo  Christ  is  the  meeting-place  or 
divinity  and  humanity  ;  He  is  at  once  the  condescension  of  divinity  and  the  exalta- 
tion of  humanity  ;  and  man  wanting  to  know  God's  idea  of  man,  any  man  wanting 
to  know  God's  idea  of  him,  must  go  up  into  Christ,  and  he  will  find  it  there.  All 
kinds  of  men  have  found  their  iJeals  in  Jesus.  Entering  into  Him,  the  timid  soul 
has  seen  a  vision  of  itself  aU  clothed  in  bravery,  and  known  in  an  instant  that  to 
be  brave  and  not  to  be  cowardly  was  its  proper  life.  The  missionary  toiling  in  the 
savage  island,  and  thinking  his  whole  life  a  failure,  has  gone  apart  some  night  into 
his  hut  and  cHmbed  up  into  Christ,  and  seen  with  perfect  sureness,  though  with 
most  complete  amazement,  that  God  counted  his  life  a  great  success,  and  so  has 
gone  out  once  more  singing  to  his  glorious  work.  Martyrs  on  the  night  before  their 
agony  ;  reformers  hesitating  at  their  tasks  ;  scholars  wondering  whether  the  long 
self-denial  would  be  worth  their  while  ;  fathers  and  mothers,  teachers  and  preachers 
whose  work  had  grown  monotonous  and  wearisome,  all  of  these  going  to  Christ  have 
found  themselves  in  Him,  have  seen  the  nobleness  and  privilege  of  their  bard  lives, 
and  have  come  out  from  their  communion  with  Him  to  live  their  lives  as  they  had 
seen  those  lives  in  Him,  glorious  with  the  perpetual  sense  of  the  privilege  of  duty, 
and  worthy  of  the  best  and  most  faithful  work  which  they  could  give.  This,  then, 
is  the  great  truth  of  Christ.  The  treasury  of  life,  your  life  and  mine,  the  life  of 
every  man  and  every  woman,  however  different  they  are  from  one  another,  they 
are  all  in  Him.  In  Him  there  is  the  perfectness  of  every  occupation  :  the  perfect 
trading,  the  perfect  housekeeping,  the  perfect  handicraft,  the  perfect  school  teach- 
ing, they  are  all  in  Him.  To  go  to  Him  and  get  the  perfect  idea  of  life,  and  of 
every  action  of  life,  and  then  to  go  forth,  and  by  His  strength  fulfil  it,  that  is  the 
New  Testament  conception  of  a  strong  successful  life.  How  simple  and  glorious  ic 
is  !  We  are  like  Moses,  then — only  our  privilege  is  so  much  more  than  his.  We 
are  like  a  Moses  who  at  any  moment,  whenever  the  building  of  the  tabernacle  flagged 
and  hesitated,  was  able  to  turn  and  go  up  into  the  mountain  and  look  once  more 
the  pattern  in  the  face,  and  come  down  strong,  ambitious  for  the  best,  and  full  of 
hope.     (jB^'-  Phillips  Brooks.)  Heavenly  visions  : — As  we  read  the  story  with 

which  this  passage  has  to  deal,  we  feel  how  great  are  the  tasks  which  are  com- 
mitted to  great  souls.  None  but  a  great  soul  could  have  moulded  a  horde  of  slaves 
into  a  nation,  could  have  inspired  them  with  national  ideals,  or  could  have  kept 
the  ideal  of  their  future  clear  and  bright  before  his  own  soul.  Never  was  heavier 
task  committed  to  man ;  and  broad  must  have  been  the  heart  and  constant  the 
fidelity  which  sustained  the  load  through  the  greater  part  of  a  hundred  years.  Great 
tasks  like  these  are  either  easy  or  impossible — easy,  v^hile  the  doer  is  sustained  Ly 
the  inspiration  which  pricked  and  goaded  his  heart  to  perform  it ;  impossible,  when 
he  labours  in  his  native  strength,  or  leans  for  support  upon  anything  short  of  thu 
Eternal.  The  Divine  power  which  called  Moses  to  this  work,  and  which  originated 
in  him  the  genius  to  conceive  it,  mnst  sustain  him  in  every  turn  and  juncture  of 
its  execution.  All  great  ideas  like  his  widen  and  expand  with  the  expanding 
visions  of  the  growing  soul.  The  grand  outlines  of  such  a  vision,  indeed, 
come  to  the  soul  in  a  flash  of  inspiration,  but  the  details  are  filled  in  as  the 
soul  broods  over  the  great  revelation.  Hence  the  world's  great  teachers,  its 
prophets  and  seers,  have  been  ever  given  to  solitude,  to  self-communion,  and  to 
prayer,  that  in  silence  they  might  hear  that  Voice  which  speaks  only  to  the  listening 
ear.  "  On  a  certain  day,"  says  Plato,  in  me  of  his  deepest  books,  "  all  the  gods 
mount  to  the  topmost  heaven,  and  gaze  upon  the  realms  of  pure  truth,  and 
all  noble  souls  that  can  do  so  follow  in  their  train  and  gaze  upon  the  fair  outlo  .k  ; 
then  they  sink  to  earth,  and  all  the  worthiest  part  of  their  lives  thenceforward  is  but 
the  endeavour  to  reproduce  what  they  have  seen  :  their  highest  moral  achievements 
are  wrought  by  the  power  of  remembered  truth."  This  wonderful  passage  is  an 
intuition  of  one  of  the  foundational  truths  of  our  highest  life,  and  one  of  the  greatest 
truths  of  revelation.  Once  or  twice  only  does  Moses  gain  an  insight  into  the  "  life 
of  things,"  and  then  only  when  his  eyes  are  purged  of  their  grossness ;  but  these 
rare  occasions  are  sufficient  to  inspire  him,  and  his  noblest  work  is  wrought  oiit  in 
obedience  to  his  vision.    As  he  moved  about  the  camp,  or  when  consulted  by  cap- 


CHAP,  vm.]  HEBREWS.  «27 

tains  and  artificers  as  to  the  manner  of  their  labour,  daily  he  would  hear  the 
Divine  imperative  admonishing  him  to  shape  it  thus  and  thus ;  to  remember  what 
he  had  seen;  to  make  his  vision  take  actual  shape  in  gold,  or  precious  stones,  or 
carved  work.  For  him,  too,  there  would  be  shining  the  "  seven  lamps  of  architec- 
ture"— the  lamp  of  sacrifice  and  the  lamp  of  truth,  of  power,  beauty,  life,  and 
obedience,  and,  not  the  least,  the  lamp  of  memory.  Great  tasks,  we  say,  are  com- 
mitted to  great  souls ;  but  is  it  not  true  that  great  tasks  are  committed  to  as  also, 
whether  we  be  small  or  great ?  Is  not  the  shaping  of  our  scatttred  and  sundered 
life  into  a  habitation  for  God  to  dwell  in  a  task  as  sacred  and  as  imperative  as  that 
which  was  committed  to  Moses  ?  And  do  we  not  see  that  the  first  thing  which  we 
need  for  this  work  is  that  which  Moses  had — a  great  ideal  ?  Do  we  not  know  by 
experience  what  a  difference  there  is  between  living  and  working  with  such  a  pattern 
and  without  one  ?  There  are  no  Mount  Sinais  now,  we  say,  scaling  which  we  might 
gain  such  a  vision  as  Moses  had  to  equip  him  for  his  work.  We  have  no  Mount 
Sinai,  but  there  still  stands  Moimt  Calvary,  from  which  a  brighter  glory  streams 
and  a  rarer  loveliness,  and  from  which,  too,  a  Voice  still  reaches  us,  saying  :  "  See 
that  thou  make  all  things  according  to  the  pattern  showed  to  thee  in  the  mount." 
That  utterly  surrendered  life  gives  us  indeed  the  pattern  which  we  need,  the  ideal  to 
which  our  own  life  should  be  conformed.  We  know  how  flawless  it  was,  and  how 
significant ;  how  He  did  those  things  which  He  had  seen  with  His  Father.  This 
was  the  secret  of  the  perfect  unity  of  His  life,  of  His  patience,  dignity,  and  peace. 
Shall  we  not  confess,  then,  that  we,  too,  have  received  our  heavenly  vision  ?  We 
have,  indeed,  confessed  it  to  be  most  beautiful  and  Divine,  but  we  have  allowed  it 
to  fade  from  our  memory.  Yes,  and  the  finer  our  sensibiUty  and  the  quicker  our 
imagination,  the  greater  will  be  the  temptation  to  allow  it  to  fade  out  into  mist,  for 
all  strong  emotion  avenges  itself  by  exhaustion.  Thus  Moses,  before  he  had  well 
reached  the  camp,  descending  the  rugged  slopes  of  Sinai,  half-blinded  by  the 
splendours  he  had  gazed  upon,  dashed  down  in  anger  the  tables  of  stone  written  by 
the  finger  of  God.  So  a  man  may  cast  away  in  sorrowful  anger  the  very  records 
which  he  has  received  with  fear  and  trembhng.  Sometimes  in  anger  and  sometimes 
in  disgust,  when  surrounded  by  a  herd  of  howling  idolaters  who  do  not  enter  into 
his  thought,  or  through  indolence,  or  the  pressure  of  sordid  care,  a  man  is 
tempted  to  let  his  vision  go,  and  account  it  but  as  such  stuff  as  dreams  are  made 
of.  It  is  a  temptation  especially  besetting  men  who  work  in  the  things  of  the 
imagination  and  the  things  of  the  Spirit.  Many  men  lower  their  ideal — as  they 
will  tell  you  frankly — for  the  sake  of  their  wives  and  children.  How  bitter  it  will 
be  hereafter  if  these  same  children  grow  up  to  be  sweet,  and  pure,  and  unworldly, 
and  despise  the  crooked  means  which  have  been  employed  for  their  elevation,  and 
to  be  filled  with  sad  pity  for  the  founder  of  their  fortune,  who,  like  Lot,  chose  the 
well-watered  country,  and  for  the  sake  of  it  disowned  every  noble  ambition  I  Thus, 
are  we  severally  tempted  to  disobey  thd  admonishing  Voice  which  bids  us  make  all 
things  according  to  the  pattern  which  has  been  revealed  to  us.  But  who  will  be  left 
to  rear  God's  tabernacle  if  they  fail  who  have  had  vision  of  its  ideal  beauty  and  hope 
of  its  foundation  among  men  ?  It  is  in  such  aix  hour  of  temptation  that  we  need 
tc  renew  the  old  impressions,  to  revive  the  faded  tints  of  the  picture,  and  to  trace 
the  bst  meaning  of  the  vauishing  Unes  of  the  pattern  of  heavenly  things,  once  so 
cieai  to  us.  And  do  we  ask.  How  can  our  lost  impressions  be  renewed?  Then 
the  story  before  us  supplies  us  with  the  suggestion.  "  And  the  Lord  said  unto 
Moses,  He.v  thee  two  tables  of  stone  like  unto  the  first,  and  I  will  w.lte  upon  these 
tafclss  the  words  that  were  in  the  first  tables  which  thou  breakest. ''  Yes  ;  He  who 
first  gave  us  the  great  conception  of  noble  life  can  reaew  it  when  it  fades  away  if 
with  all  our  hearts  we  truly  seek  Him  ;  it  may  not  be  with  all  the  early  glow  of  our 
first  inspiration,  nor  with  such  glad  announcements  of  its  coming  to  our  bosoms  : 
but  what  we  gain  the  second  time  more  painfully  may  be  cherished  more  religiously, 
watched  over  more  prayerfully,  and  kept  with  diligence  even  to  the  end.  {G.  Little- 
viore.)  Th'  pattern  in  the  mount : — I  shall  consider,  in  the  first  place,  the  fact  that  all 
men  have  ideals — have  some  kind  of  spiritual  conceptions  ;  and  in  the  second  place, 
I  shall  urge  the  results  of  consistent  action  upon  those  conceptions.  I.  Consider, 
for  a  moment,  and  you  will  see  that  this  is  the  great  characteristic  of  the  man — 

THAT  HE  IS  THE  CONSTBUCTOR  OF  THINGS  FASHIONED  AFTER  AN  INWABD  IDEAL  OB  PATTERN, 

and  thus  he  transforms  the  outward  world  according  to  his  mental  and  spiritual 
conceptions.  Here,  on  one  part,  stands  vast,  unshapen  matter — rock,  wood,  stream, 
fluent  air  :  on  the  other  part  is  the  human  agent  who  is  to  work  upon  this  world  of 
matter.     You  may  say  that  the  beaver  or  the  bee  works  upon  matter.     The  one 


628  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

proceeds  with  the  utmost  accoracy  to  build  its  nest,  and  the  other  to  consti-uct  its 
dam ;  but  there  is  a  point  at  which  each  of  them  stops.  They  do  not  go  a  jot 
beyond  the  line  of  instinct ;  they  do  nothing  more  wonderful,  nothing  different  from 
what  has  been  done  for  six  thousand  years.  But  see,  out  of  this  same  world 
of  matter,  man  makes  houses,  weapons,  ships,  printing  presses,  steam  engines, 
and  telegraphs.  He  makes  implements,  and  produces  combinations  that  did 
not  exist  in  nature,  but  that  stood  first  as  shadows  on  the  horizon  of  his  own 
thought — patterns  that  were  shown  him  in  the  mount  of  intellectual  and  spiritual 
elevation.  But  if  this  power  which  man  has  of  working  from  inward  conceptions 
is  expressed  in  the  ways  in  which  he  pours  his  thought  into  matter,  it  is  still  more 
apparent  in  the  ways  in  which  his  thought,  so  to  speak,  overrides  matter — as  he 
appears  not  merely  in  inventions,  but  in  creations.  The  work  of  art,  for  instance — 
the  great  work  of  genius — whence  comes  that  ?  Something  that  you  do  not  see  in 
nature,  something  that  ean  not  be  interpreted  as  a  mere  combination  of  matter — a 
mere  putting  together  of  the  elements  of  the  physical  world  ;  but  something  that 
has  flowed  out  of  the  ideal  springs  of  a  man's  own  soul,  until  we  have  the  splendours 
of  the  sunset  sky  woven  in  the  fibres  of  the  canvas,  and  the  stones  of  the  quarry 
heaved  up  in  an  architectural  anthem  of  grandeur  and  aspiration.  But  the  main 
conclusion  to  which  I  would  lead  your  thought  is  this :  that  almost  every  man  has 
conceptions  higher  and  better  than  he  realises,  or  than  he  even  endeavours  to  make 
real.  Before  every  man  there  hovers  a  high  conception — or  one  more  or  less  high 
— certainly  above  the  level  of  his  present  conduct — of  virtue,  of  moral  action,  of 
duty,  of  righteousness,  of  truth ;  and  the  more  he  looks  at  that,  the  more  vivid  it 
becomes  to  him.  Although  he  may,  at  the  same  time,  not  move  a  jot  or  a  hair 
toward  it,  nor  even  endeavour,  for  a  single  instant,  to  come  up  to  it,  yet  it  stands 
before  him,  and  he  sees  it  clear  and  bright,  kindhng  upon  his  thought,  and  ready  to 
move  his  heart.  And  you  see  this  fact  revealed  in  this  remarkable  manner  by  every 
man.  If  he  does  ever  so  bad  an  act,  he  tries  to  justify  it  in  some  way — tries  to  recon- 
cile it  to  some  ideal  of  virtue.  So  that  from  his  own  showing,  his  own  confession, 
there  is  an  ideal  standard  in  his  mind  higher  than  that  from  which  he  has  acted. 
What  better  advice,  then,  could  be  given  to  any  man  than  just  this  ?  Work  out  your 
highest  conceptions — the  noblest  standard  of  truth  and  duty  that  comes  to  you.  It 
may  not  be  the  highest  possible,  nor  the  highest  conceivable  by  other  men,  but  that 
which  seems  to  you  the  highest  possible  or  conceivable,  work  up  to,  and  hve  up  to, 
and  endeavour  to  make  it  the  rule.  And  so  especially  it  is  in  regard  to  the  matter 
of  faith  about  which  many  are  much  troubled  and  perplexed.  They  say  they  can- 
not beheve  that  the  Bible  is  divinely  inspired  ;  they  are  not  fully  convinced  about 
the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  they  even  sometimes  incline  to  doubt  the  existence 
of  a  God.  What  then  are  you  to  do,  my  fellow -men  ?  To  throw  aside  all  faith  and 
live  outside  of  its  circle,  merely  as  an  animal,  in  a  coarse,  material  existence  ?.  No 
— no ;  some  shred  of  faith  you  have.  Every  man  has  some.  Some  conceptions  of 
spiritual  things  dawn  upon  every  mind  ;  live  up  to  the  faith  you  have.  Have  you 
a  faith  that  it  is  good  to  do  good  ?  Live  up  to  that.  Have  you  a  faith  that  charity 
is  a  blessed  thing  ?  Live  up  to  that.  Work  out  to  the  extreme  limit  of  your  con- 
ception here,  and  just  so  sure  as  you  do  it,  the  wider  will  your  circle  open  before 
you.     II.  In  the  next  place,  let  us  proceed  to  see  what  will  result  if  a  man 

ACTUALLY  ATTEMPTS  TH08  TO  WOBK  UP  TO  HIS  HIGHEST  AND  BEST  SPIRITUAL  CONCEPTIONS. 

In  the  first  place,  I  think  he  will  acquire  some  comprehension  of  the  worth  and 
certainty  of  spiritual  being,  and  of  the  reality  of  his  own  soul.  Let  a  man  think, 
when  he  endeavours  to  carry  out  the  best  conception  of  duty,  how  much  that  is  aU- 
controlling  and  supreme  in  his  life,  let  him  think  that  the  highest  claim  in  his  life 
is  from  within  ;  let  him  think  how  mind  wiU  after  all  control  and  master  the  body. 
The  moment  you  think  of  this  power  to  control  and  master  material  things,  you  fall 
back  upon  the  consciousness  that  you  have  a  soul,  and  that  there  is  more  evidence 
than  you  have  supposed  of  its  existence.  In  fact,  there  is  more  proof  of  a  soul  than 
of  a  body.  When  a  man  asks  me  what  proof  I  have  of  a  soul,  I  reply  by  asking 
him.  What  proof  have  you  of  a  body  ?  You  have  more  logical  difficulty  to  prove 
an  outward  world  than  a  soul.  Spiritual  consciousness,  mounting  aspiration,  ideal 
influences  have  controlled  you  aU  through  lite.  But  more  than  this ;  not  only  will 
a  man,  as  he  begins  to  work  from  his  best  spiritual  conceptions  upward,  begin  to 
comprehend  the  worth  of  spiritual  things  and  of  the  soul,  but  he  will  begin  to 
acquire  right  standards  of  action.  I  hardly  need  say  that  in  the  calculations  of  men, 
very  generally  they  do  not  start  from  the  ground  of  the  soul.  If  you  look  at  a  great 
many  of  the  socitJ  fallaciea  of  oar  time,  at  a  great  many  of  the  social  faults  an4 


CHAP.  VIII.]  HEBREWS.  «29 

errors  of  men  in  business,  in  politics,  and  in  life  generally,  you  will  find  that  the 
fallacy  or  error  consists  in  the  fact  that  they  do  not  start  from  the  ground  of  the 
Boul  as  a  standard,  but  from  outward  things.  They  estimate  all  outward  things  by 
their  bulk  or  glitter.  Let  a  man  take  up  the  subject  of  immortaHty — of  the  spirit 
of  man  enshrined  in  time,  and  working  through  sense,  as  destined  to  live  beyond 
the  stars,  when  banks  and  warehouses,  cities  and  continents,  shall  have  melted 
with  fervent  heat,  and  crumbled  to  ashes  ;  when  this  world  shall  be  dashed  from  its 
orbit  as  a  speck  of  dust  from  a  flying  wheel — let  him  take  the  grand  calculus  of  the 
immortality  of  the  soul,  and  start  with  that,  and  then  worldly  good  and  gain  will 
take  their  proper  attitude,  temporary  expediency  will  sink  down,  and  right  will  assert 
its  proper  place ;  then  he  will  have  a  true  standard  by  which  to  estimate  all  things. 
In  the  next  place,  if  a  man  really  endeavours  to  work  according  to  his  highest  and 
best  inward  conception,  he  will  come  to  perceive  the  need  of  Christ  and  the  worth 
of  Christianity.  Working  from  his  best  and  highest,  he  gains  a  better  and  a  higher 
still,  until  at  length  he  will  come  to  feel  that  spiritual  aspirations  are  boundless. 
And  when,  from  the  yearnings  of  his  educated  soul,  he  wants  a  perfect  ideal,  he  will 
ask,  Where  is  the  excellence  that  will  answer  my  highest  ideal  ?  where  is  that  which 
will  begin  to  fill  up  this  boundless  thirst  of  the  soul,  which  has  only  been  increased 
by  drinking  from  narrow  cisterns  ?  And  Jesus  Christ  comes  out  upon  the  horizon 
of  history,  and  stands  before  him  in  the  gospel,  and  answers  that  inquiry,  ne  says 
virtually  to  man,  '•  I  am  the  ideal  lOr  which  you  aspire ;  in  Me  behold  a  perfect 
reflection  of  that  which  you  now  must  seek ;  in  Me  behold  that  which  con- 
tinually fills  up  your  yearning  want,  and  makes  that  want  the  deeper,  that  it 
may  fill  it  with  more."  Here  stands  man  on  one  side,  with  a  sense  of  imperfection 
and  sin,  asking,  What  is  there  that  will  help  me  in,  what  is  there  that  will  deliver 
me  from  the  power  of  sin  J  No  mere  man,  no  mere  teacher,  hke  Plato  or  Seneca, 
can  do  it.  Man  needs  some  spirit  of  Divine  goodness  to  enter  into  him,  to  cure 
him  of  bis  sin,  and  Jesus  Christ  embodies  that  Divine  spirit.  He  comes  before 
man  to  assure  him  of  mercy,  with  the  encouragement  that  the  vilest  sin  may  be 
cast  off,  and  that  man  may  throw  himself  upon  the  Divine  mercy  which  He  repre- 
sents, and  be  lightened  of  his  load.  And  here,  on  the  other  hand,  are  limitless 
wants  and  desires ;  and  how  does  Jesus  Christ  gratify  them  ?  By  exhibiting  a 
perfect  Father;  by  showing  an  ideal  to  us  that  we  never  can  compass,  but  can 
always  aspire  to.  (E.  H,  Ghapin,  D.D.)  Of  the  right  manner  of  doing  duty  : — 
1.  The  same  Lord  who  enjoins  the  matter,  prescribes  the  manner.  2.  As  great 
respect  is  manifested  to  God  in  the  manner  of  doing  what  He  requires,  as  in  matter. 
In  this  was  David  commended  (2  Kings  iii.  6).  This  was  it  that  Hezekiah  pleaded 
before  God  (2  Kings  xx.  3).  3.  Herein  lieth  a  main  difference  between  the  upright 
and  the  hypocrite,  instance  the  difference  between  Abel's  and  Cain's  offering  (Gen. 
iv.  4,  5).  4.  That  which  is  good  is  altered  and  perverted  by  failing  in  the  manner. 
Good  is  thereby  turned  into  evil,  and  duty  into  sin.  5.  Failing  in  the  manner 
makes  God  reject  that  which  in  the  matter  He  requireth  (Isa.  i.  11).  6.  God  detests 
things  commanded  by  Himself  when  they  are  done  in  an  ill  manner  (Isa.  Ixvi.  3). 
7.  In  this  case  he  that  doth  the  work  of  the  Lurd  is  accursed  (Jer.  xlviil.  10).  1. 
This  giveth  just  cause  of  examining  ourselves  even  about  the  good  things  that  we 
do.  This  use  is  the  rather  to  be  observed  because  every  one  best  knoweth  his  own 
failings  in  the  manner  of  what  he  doth  (1  Cor.  ii.  11).  2.  Upon  due  examination 
we  cannot  but  be  deeply  humbled  ever  for  our  failings  in  the  manner  of  doing  good 
things.  The  glory  of  our  reading,  hearing,  praying,  singing,  partaking  of  the 
sacrament,  alms-deeds,  and  other  duties,  is  hereby  taken  away,  which  if  profane 
men  knew,  they  would  insult  over  professors.  3.  This  giveth  just  occasion  of 
abnegation,  and  of  renouncing  all  confidence  even  in  our  best  works,  for  we  must 
fail  therein  (1  Sam.  iii.  2).  Did  justiciaries  well  understand  this,  it  would  make 
them  cast  down  their  gay  peacock's  feathers.  They  would  not  be  so  conceited  of 
themselves,  as  the  proud  Pharisee,  but  rather  as  the  humble  publican  (Luke  xviii. 
11-13).  There  is  nothing  of  such  force  to  work  in  na  this  lesson  of  denying  our- 
selves as  a  consideration  of  the  manner  of  doing  the  good  things  we  do.  This  con- 
sideration would  soon  put  an  end  to  all  conceits  of  fulfilling  the  law,  of  meriting, 
of  doing  works  of  supererogation,  and  sundry  other  proud  apprehensions.  4.  Upon  the 
aforesaid  ground  be  exhorted  to  learn  as  well  as  to  do,  what  we  enterprise,  as  what  we 
do,  God  loves  adverbs.  We  were  as  good  be  ignorant  of  the  duty  itself  as  of  the 
manner  of  performing  it.  To  know  what  ought  to  be  done,  and  not  to  know  how  it 
OQght  to  be  done,  wiU  be  a  great  aggravation  of  sin.  6.  For  well-doing  that  which  ia 
good  observe  these  few  rules ; — (1)  Exercise  thyself  in  God's  Word,  diligently  read  1^ 


630  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR  [chap.  vni. 

hear  it,  and  meditate  upon  it.  This  is  an  excellent  help,  and  the  best  that  I  can 
prescribe.  For  God's  Word  doth  expressly  and  distinctly  declare  both  what  is  to  be 
done  and  how  it  is  to  be  done  (Psa.  cxix.  105).  (2)  Think  on  duty  beforehand,  and 
endeavour  to  prepare  thyself  thereto.  Sudden,  rash,  unprepared  enterprising  a 
Bacred  duty  is  one  occasion  of  failing  in  the  manner  of  doing  it  (Eccles.  v.  2).  (3) 
Consider  with  whom  thou  hast  to  do  in  all  things ;  even  with  Him  who  is  the 
searcher  of  the  heart.  This  will  make  thee  circumspect  in  every  circumstance. 
Conceits  that  we  have  to  do  with  man  alone,  make  us  look  only  to  the  outward 
duty  (2  Cor.  ii.  17).  (4)  In  penitent  confessions,  acknowledge  thy  failing  in  the 
manner  of  doing  duty.  (5)  Pray  for  ability  even  about  the  manner  of  doing  duty 
(2  Cor.  iii.  5).  The  work  of  the  Spirit  is  herein  specially  manifested ;  we  know  not 
what  we  should  pray  for  as  we  ought.  But  none  can  do  good  in  a  right  manner 
except  the  regenerating  Spirit  be  in  him  and  help  him.  6.  For  comfort  in  this  case 
we  must  have  oar  eye  upon  oar  Surety  in  whom  was  no  failing  at  all  (Heb.  vi.  26). 
{W.  Gouge.) 

Ver.  6.  Mediator  of  a  better  covenant. — The  covenant  of  grace  opened  and 
explained: — I.  The  gospel-dispenbation  ukdeb  which  we  live  is  properly  a 
COVENANT.  1.  "What  we  are  to  understand  by  a  covenant  in  general.  2.  What  by 
the  covenant  of  grace  in  particular.  3.  Illustrate  two  or  three  particular  points 
which  have  created  some  doubts  and  difficulties  in  this  subject.  4.  Consider  some 
of  the  peculiar  titles  and  distinguishing  properties  of  this  covenant.  II.  Jesub 
Christ  is  the  Mediator  of  this  covenant.  1.  The  proper  office  of  a  mediator. 
2.  Christ's  peculiar  qualification  for  this  high  office  of  Mediator  between  God  and 
man.  3.  His  accomplishment  of  it.  4.  How  admirably  this  constitution  is  founded 
in  the  Divine  grace  and  wisdom.  5.  What  regards  are  due  to  Christ  under  this 
character  of  Mediator.  (1)  Does  He  not  deserve  and  most  justly  claim  all  our  love, 
our  superlative  and  most  ardent  esteem?  (2)  What  exalted  honour,  adoration,  and 
praise  are  due  from  us  to  Him,  who  was  so  wonderfully  qualified  for  this  high 
office  by  the  Lypostatical  or  personal  union  of  tLie  Divine  and  human  natures.  (3) 
As  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant,  let  us  readily  trust  Him  with  all  our  spiritual 
and  everlasting  interests.  (4)  As  our  Mediator,  we  are  humbly  to  seek  to  Him  for 
that  grace,  which  must  make  us  meet  for  His  salvation ;  for  His  awakening  grace, 
to  make  us  more  sensible  of  our  guilt  and  need  of  Him ;  for  His  quickening  grace, 
to  encourage,  direct,  and  strengthen  us  in  the  way  to  eternal  life.  (5)  As  our 
Mediator,  we  are  to  perform  every  part  of  religious  worship  in  His  name.  He  ia 
our  way  to  the  Father.  HI.  The  gospel  dispensation  is  a  better  covenant  than 
that  under  which  the  jews  lived.  1.  Because  it  contains  better  terms.  Be- 
pentance,  faith,  and  sincere  obedience  are  called  the  terms  of  the  covenant,  not 
only  because  they  are  the  requisites  on  which  the  promised  blessings  of  the  cove- 
nant are  suspended,  but  because  they  are  of  themselves  essentially  necessary  to 
qualify  us  to  partake  of  them.     2.  Because  it  affords  better  helps  or  assistances. 

(1)  The  method  of  worship  under  the  gospel  is  more  easy,  rational,  and  spiritual. 

(2)  The  revelation  we  enjoy  is  more  plain,  full,  and  extensive.  (3)  The  Divine  aids 
offered  to  us  are  more  particular,  ample,  and  effectual.  3.  Because  it  is  founded 
on  better  promises.  (1)  Because  they  are  the  promises  of  better  things ;  or  the 
subjects  of  them  are  more  excellent,  sublime,  and  glorious.  (2)  The  promises  of 
the  gospel  are  more  plain,  clear,  and  explicit  than  those  of  the  legal  covenant.  (3) 
The  promises  of  the  gospel  are  not  only  more  clear,  but  more  numerous  and  exten- 
sive than  those  of  the  Jewish  dispensation.  (4)  Another  thing  which  gives  the 
pre-eminence  to  the  promises  of  our  covenant,  is  that  they  are  all  ratified  and  con- 
firmed to  us  in  Christ,  the  Mediator  of  it.  (John  Mason,  M.A.)  The  excellency  of 
the  Christian  dispentation : — I.  The  Christian  dispensation,  or  the  New  Testament, 
though  it  be  a  rich  discovery  of  grace,  yet  it  contains  the  fairest  and  fullest 
REPRESENTATION  OF  THE  MORAL  LAW.  That  law,  which  is  of  eternal  obligation  upon  all 
mankind,  is  more  particularly  explained  here  than  in  any  of  the  former  dispensations. 
II.  In  the  Christian  dispensation  the  gospel  or  covenant  of  grace  is  revealed  more 
PERFECTLY  AND  PLAINLY  THAN  EVER  BEFORE ;  Hot  in  obscurc  expressious,  in  types,  and 
carnal  metaphors,  but  in  ita  own  proper  form  and  language,  i.e.,  as  a  covenant 
relating  to  things  spiritual  and  eternal.  IH.  The  rites  and  ceremonies  which  are 
superadded  to  the  covenant  of  grace,  in  the  Christian  dispensation  of  it,  are  much 
PREFEBABLB  TO  THOSE  IN  FOBMEB  TIMES,  and  that  in  three  respects ;  they  are  fewer, 
they  are  clearer,  and  they  are  much  more  easy.    IV.  The  Son  of  God,  who  WAa 

tHB  SEAL  MeOIATOB  OT  THS  OOVBNANT  OF  GBACB  THROUGH  ALL  FORMEB  DISPENBATIOHB, 


OHAP.  VIII.]  HEBREWS.  6S1 

KA8  CONDESCENDED  TO  BECOME  THE  VISIBLE  MeDIATOB  OF  THIS  DISPENSATION.      V.  ThIS 

LisPENSATioN  OF  THE  GOSPEL  is  not  Confined  to  one  family,  or  to  one  nation,  or  to  a 
lew  ages  of  men,  but  it  spbeads  through  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and 
BEACHES  TO  THE  END  OF  TiMB.  VI.  I  might  add  here  some  other  chabaotebs  of 
the  Christian  dispensation,  which  the  apostle  gives  it  in  2  Cor.  iii. ,  whereby  he 
exalts  it  above  all  the  religion  of  the  Jews,  and  especially  far  above  the  Sinai  cove- 
nant.    VII.  The  encouraqements  and  persuasive  helps  which  Christianity  gives 

us  TO  FULFIL  THE  DUTIES  OF  THE  COVENANT  ARE  MUCH  SUPERIOR  TO  THOSE  WHICH  WERE 

FxjovED  UNDER  ANY  OF  THE  FORMER  DISPENSATIONS.  Now  thcse  consist  chiefly  in 
examples  and  motives.  1.  Do  examples  invite  us  to  our  duty,  and  by  a  soft  and 
secret  influence  encourage  and  lead  us  on  to  the  performance  of  it?  Such  indeed 
were  the  names  of  Abraham  and  David,  each  in  their  day  a  happy  pattern  to  their 
several  ages  ;  but  in  my  opinion  aU  the  praises  which  are  due  to  David  and  Abra- 
i  am  fall  far  short  of  the  labours  and  sufferings,  the  zeal  and  patience,  the  holiness 
and  the  love  of  St.  Paul.  And  not  one  of  them  is  to  be  compared  with  the  more 
excellent  and  perfect  pattern  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Let  us  next  consider  our  various 
motives  to  duty  under  the  New  Testament.  Are  the  motives  of  love  and  gratitude 
powerful  principles  to  encourage  and  persuade  us  to  every  active  service  ?  Such 
indeed  were  the  blessings  and  gifts  which  God  bestowed  on  men  under  former  dis- 
pensations. But  what  were  all  those  gifts  and  blessings  in  comparison  of  the 
unspeakable  gift  of  His  own  Son,  to  die  as  a  sacrifice  in  our  stead,  which  is  one 
of  the  chief  themes  and  glories  of  the  Christian  revelation  ?  Ai-e  the  promises  and 
threatenings  of  God  another  set  of  motives  to  duty?  Do  the  awful  glories  and 
terrors  of  a  future  and  eternal  world  work  upon  all  the  springs  of  our  activity 
and  diligence  by  hope  and  fear?  Yes,  certainly,  in  a  high  degree.  But  the  former 
dispensations  had  but  few  of  these  eternal  terrors  and  glories,  these  threatenings 
and  promises  relating  to  an  invisible  state.  (Isaac  Watts,  D.D.)  The  better 
covenant : — I.  The  general  notion  of  a  covenant  op  God  with  man.  By  a  cove- 
nant among  men  we  understand  an  agreement  or  compact,  by  which  the  parties 
bind  themselves,  and  each  the  other,  to  the  fulfilment  of  certain  conditions.  Now, 
when  we  speak  of  a  covenant  of  God  with  men,  one  important  difference  is  to  be 
i  bserved.  In  this  case  ihere  is  no  natural  equahty  between  the  parties.  God  wills, 
and  man  must  obey.  Bur,  this  revealed  mind  and  purpose  of  God  is  called  a  cove- 
nant, because — 1.  As  respects  God,  He  who  has  no  rule  of  action  but  His  own  will 
is  pleased  hereby  to  bind  Himself,  in  His  dealings  with  men,  to  the  observance  of 
certain  specified  terms.  2,  As  respects  men,  they  are  bound  to  fulfil  the  conditions 
herein  prescribed  to  them,  under  pain  of  forfeiting  the  offered  benefits,  and  incur- 
ring the  attendant  penalties.  The  covenant  under  which  all  men  are  born,  SB 
children  of  Adam,  is  that  of  works.  It  must  be  evident  to  every  one,  that  if  he  be 
tried  according  to  the  letter  of  this  covenant,  there  remains  no  hope  for  him  before 
God,  for  he  is  a  transgressor  of  it  from  the  womb.  And  thus  the  Scriptures  every- 
where testify.  We  are  led  then  to  the  inquiry :  is  there  any  other  covenant  or  dis- 
))ensntion  of  God  for  His  creatures,  whereby  (letting  go  the  first,  and  laying  hold 
on  this)  we  may  have  that  eternal  life  and  blessedness  which  we  have  irrecover- 
ably forfeited  by  the  first  ?  Such  a  covenant  there  is.  The  terms  of  it  are  fully 
made  known  to  us  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  "  glad  tidings  of  great  joy." 
II.  The  particular  features  of  this  "  better  covenant,  which  was  estabhshed  upon 
better  promises."  1.  Whereas  in  the  old  covenant  something  is  required  on  the 
part  of  man,  as  a  title  to  its  privileges,  this  contemplates  in  him  nothing  but  sins 
and  unrighteousness,  and  lays  the  basis  of  all  covenant  good  vouchsafed  to  him  in 
the  sovereign  grace  of  God,  a  promise  as  large  and  unlimited  as  language  can 
express  of  the  free  removal  of  sins,  and  that  for  ever.  Herein  is  summed  up  all 
the  grace  of  the  covenant,  that  it  supposes  guilt  of  every  kind  and  degree,  in  the 
objects  ol  it,  and  meets  them  with  this  cheering  assurance,  I  will  be  merciful  to  it, 
I  will  remember  it  no  more.  But  has  God,  then,  deserted  His  justice,  in  showing 
mercy  to  a  sinner,  and  dishonoured  His  law  by  suffering  the  violation  of  it  with 
impunity  ?  God  forbid  1  The  condition  of  life  under  the  new  covenant  is  precisely 
that  of  the  old — perfect  obedience.  But  under  the  gospel  this  obedience  is  rendered 
for  the  sinner  by  his  surety,  and  the  life  which  is  its  due  becomes  his,  not  by  work- 
ing, but  by  believing.  Christ  has  fulfilled  the  law  for  us.  Mercy,  therefore,  to 
man  is  the  jut  reward  of  merit  in  Christ.  2.  Mark  another  feature,  no  less  dis- 
tinguishing the  gospel  as  a  "  ministration  of  glory."  This  is  the  exceeding  fulness 
of  its  promised  blessings  (Eom.  xv.  29).  (1)  Divine  renewal ;  (2)  Divine  relation- 
ship;  (3)  Divine  Ulumination,    3.  Its  security.     The   effectual  provision  which 


638  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

God  has  made  in  it  for  the  sure  enjoyment  of  its  rich  benefits.  4.  lis  everlasting 
continuance.  Hence  it  is  expressly  called  "  the  everlasting  covenant  "  (Heb.  xiii. 
20).  Lessons :  1.  The  overwhelming  motives  afforded  ua,  by  this  covenant  of 
grace,  to  walk  before  God  in  aU  holiness  and  godliness  of  living.  2.  The  grievous 
sin  of  those  who  carelessly  neglect  this  covenant  of  grace,  or  obstinately  refuse  to 
close  with  it.  3.  The  abundant  encouragement  which  this  covenant  holds  out 
to  the  most  guilty  and  desponding  sinner  to  return  to  God  and  be  at  peace.  4. 
Lastly,  let  the  established  believer  recognise  in  this  covenant  the  charter  of  all 
his  privileges.  Ever  rejoice,  my  Christian  brethren,  in  your  entire  deliverance  from 
the  law  of  works  as  a  means  of  obtaining  life.  Life  is  yours  by  free  gift,  covenant 
gift  of  God,  through  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  Having  the  Son,  you  have  life.  Only 
abide,  then,  in  Him,  your  Covenant  Head,  and  walk  worthy  of  your  exalted  privi- 
leges, in  all  holy  and  happy  obedience.  [Francis  Goode,  M.A.)  Christ  the 
Mediator  of  the  better  covenant : — The  covenant  of  grace  is,  strictly  speaking,  made 
between  God  and  Christ ;  and,  in  tliis  view,  is  part  of  that  great  covenant  of 
redemption,  ordered  from  eternity  between  the  persons  of  the  Godhead.  Man  is 
a  party  to  it  only  in  the  second  instance,  as  he  is  viewed  in  Christ,  coming  in  for 
the  blessings  of  it  by  his  surety's  fulfilment  of  its  terms.  To  Him  we  are  indebted 
for  its  grace ;  and  through  Him  alone  it  has  all  its  efficacy  in  the  experience  of 
redeemed  sinners.  I.  Consider  it  ab  it  began  in  eternity.  As  there  never  was  a 
moment  in  which  God  was  not,  so  never  was  there  a  moment  in  which  this  grace 
to  man  was  not  the  determinate  counsel  and  object  of  delight  of  the  Eternal  mind. 
The  purpose  of  redemption  was  not  (as  many  unworthily  think  of  it)  a  purpose 
conceived  only  when  man  fell,  to  remedy  a  mischief  never  contemplated  tiU  then. 
"  Known  imto  God  are  all  His  works  from  the  beginning  of  the  world."  Rather, 
the  whole  mystery  of  grace  in  the  gospel,  yea,  creation  itself,  with  all  its  conse- 
quences, is  a  resiilt  of  the  purpose  of  God  to  make,  in  the  person  of  Christ,  the 
most  illustrious  display,  before  all  intelligent  creatures,  of  the  glories  of  the  Divine 
nature,  by  man's  redemption.  II.  As  it  was  CAEKrED  on  upon  earth.  With  His 
incarnation  commenced  that  active  ministry  of  which  the  apostle  is  here  speaking 
as  "  more  excellent "  than  that  of  Aaron,  above  which  it  is  one  great  object  of  this 
Epistle  to  exalt  it.  The  main  intention  of  this  earthly  ministry  of  Christ  was  to 
make  atonement.  1.  It  was  the  life  of  a  sinless  Being,  and  so  was  altogether  un- 
forfeit<-d  ;  it  was  that  which  He  had  to  give  to  God,  in  exchange  for  His  people, 
who  are  therefore  called  "the  purchased  possession  "  (Eph.  i.  14) ;  the  law  of  God 
had  no  claim  upon  it,  except  as  He  voluntarily  subjected  Himself  to  its  curse  for 
us.  2.  While  it  was  human  life,  it  was  life  taken  into  union  with  Deity  ;  and  so  it 
was  not  only  of  infinite  value,  but  this  Priest  as  well  as  Victim  possessed  in  Him- 
self infinite  ability  both  to  lay  it  down  and  to  take  it  again.  3.  But  let  us  look  at 
the  effect  of  this  atonement  which  Christ,  as  our  High  Priest,  made  for  the  sins  of 
men,  in  reference  to  the  covenant  of  which  we  are  treating.  The  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ  is  represented  by  BUmself,  and  throughout  this  Epistle,  as  the  ratification  of 
the  covenant.  HI.  As  it  is  completed  in  heaven  (Heb.  vi.  20).  1.  His  interces- 
sion above  gives  efficacy  to  His  offering  of  Himself  on  earth.  2.  His  mediatorial 
dominion.  He  holds  the  reign  of  universal  empire.  Heaven,  earth,  and  hell — all 
things    in    all    worlds  —  obey  His   sovereign   will.      (Ibid.)  Argument  from 

analogy  for  Mediator : — The  whole  analogy  of  nature  removes  all  imagined 
presui:  ption  against  the  notion  of  a  "  Mediator  between  God  and  man."  For 
we  find  all  living  creatures  are  brought  into  the  world,  and  that  life  in  infancy  ia 
preserved,  by  the  instrumentality  of  others,  and  every  satisfaction  of  it,  some  way 
or  other,  is  bestowed  by  the  like  means.  {Bp.  Butler.)  Covenant : — The  general 
meaning  of  the  word  SiaOrjKi],  covenant,  is  a  Divine  institution  for  man ;  it  is  not 
avvQiiKt],  or  compact  between  two  parties.  God  has  the  ordering  of  all,  and  there- 
fore covenant  and  dispensation  are  really  the  same.  (TF.  B.  Pope,  D.D.)  Estab- 
lished upon  better  promises. — Better  promises : — In  the  promises  there  are  these 
two  things,  the  matter  and  the  maimer.  As  for  matter  and  substance,  the  promises 
were  all  one  in  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  that  is  Christ,  and  eternal  salvation 
by  Him.  But  ours  in  respect  of  the  manner  are  better  and  excel  theirs.  1.  Their 
promises  were  included  within  the  narrow  compass  of  Judea ;  our  promises  are 
blazed  all  the  world  over.  2.  Their  promises  were  published  by  men,  by  the 
patriarchs,  prophets,  which  were  but  servants  ;  ours  by  Christ  the  Son  of  Gk)d.  3. 
They  according  to  God's  promise  had  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  as  we  have,  yet  not 
in  such  abundant  measure  as  the/  be  now  poured  out  in  the  time  of  the  gospel.  4. 
Their  promises  were  (iark  and  obscure,  covered  under  the  veil  of  many  ceremonies, 


<MAP.  Tin.]  HEBREWS.  638 

and  shadowed  out  by  temporal  things ;  our  promises  are  more  clear  and  evident. 
5.  Theirs  were  at  the  delivery  of  the  law  with  a  condition,  "  Do  this  and  live.  Cursed 
be  he  that  continueth  not  in  all  things,"  &o.  Ours  "  Believe  and  live."  6.  The  sacra- 
ments, whereby  the  promises  were  confirmed  unto  them,  were  more  hard  and  diflS- 
cult :  the  cutting  off  the  foreskin,  the  preparing  of  a  lamb  for  every  house ;  ours 
are  more  easy  and  familiar  :  the  sprinkling  of  a  little  water,  or  the  dipping  in  the 
water,  the  procuring  of  bread  and  wine.  7.  Their  promises  were  of  things  to  come : 
there  should  come  a  Lamb  that  should  take  away  the  sins  of  the  world ;  ours 
are  of  things  already  come  and  exhibited.  This  Lamb  is  come,  and  hath  offered 
up  Himself  on  the  altar  of  the  cross  for  us.  {W.  Jones,  D.D.)  Stability  of  the 
Divine  promises : — Every  promise  is  built  upon  four  pillars :  God's  justice  and 
holiness,  which  will  not  suffer  Him  to  deceive ;  His  grace  or  goodness,  which 
will  not  suffer  Him  to  forget ;  His  truth,  which  will  not  suffer  Him  to  change ; 
His  power,  which  makes  Hira  able  to  accomplish.  (H.  G.  Salter.)  Fulness 
of  the  Divine  promises  : — The  promises  which  God  hath  made  are  a  full  storehouse 
of  all  kind  of  blessings  ;  they  include  in  them  both  the  upper  and  nether  springs, 
the  mercies  of  this  life  and  of  that  which  is  to  come  :  there  is  no  good  that  can 
present  itself  as  an  object  to  our  desires  or  thoughts,  of  which  the  promises  are 
not  a  ground  for  faith  to  believe  and  hope  to  expect  the  enjoyment  of.  (H. 
Spurstowe.) 

Ver.  7.  If  that  first  covenant  had  been  fatQtless. — The  impnrfeetion  of  the  first 
covenant : — Observe  here — 1.  What  is  charged  on  the  first  covenant,  and  that  is 
faultiness,  by  which  we  are  not  to  understand  any  sinful  faultiness,  but  defective- 
ness and  imperfection  only  ;  for  it  was  not  faulty  in  the  matter  and  substance  of  it, 
as  it  was  instituted  and  ordained  by  God,  but  therefore  called  faulty  because  it 
was  obscure,  was  not  so  surely  ratifipd,  and  not  attended  with  that  virtue,  power, 
and  efficacy  which  the  new  covenant  is  accompanied  with.  2.  Wherein  consisteth 
that  defectiveness  and  imperfection  of  the  first  covenant  which  is  here  complained 
of.  (1)  In  its  ability  to  justify  and  save  us,  because  of  our  inability,  through  the 
wealmess  of  the  flesh,  to  answer  the  demands  of  it  (Rom.  viii.  3).  The  law  was 
not  properly  weak  to  ns,  but  we  were  weak  to  that.  (2)  The  legal  covenant 
required  exact  obedience,  but  afforded  no  spiritual  assistance  for  the  performance 
of  what  is  required :  but  the  covenant  of  grace,  the  new  covenant,  is  called  a 
ministration  of  the  Spirit ;  and  under  the  gospel  we  are  said  not  to  serve  in  the 
oldness  of  the  letter,  but  in  the  newness  of  the  Spirit.  Now,  says  the  apostle 
(ver.  8),  Almighty  God  finding  fault  with  the  Jews  for  the  breach  of  the  former 
covenant,  declared  by  the  prophet  Jeremiah  (chap.  xxxi.  31),  that  the  covenant 
He  would  make  with  all  true  Israelites  for  time  to  come  should  not  be  like  that 
which  He  made  with  their  fathers  in  Egypt,  which  they  continued  not  in  the  6b- 
Bervation  of  (wanting  those  assistances  from  the  Holy  Spirit  to  enable  them  there- 
unto, which  are  procured  for  us  by  Christ) ;  accordingly  "  I  regarded  them  not,  saith 
the  Lord,"  but  gave  them  up  for  their  sins  into  the  hands  of  their  enemies.  3.  How 
Almighty  God  makes  the  imperfection  of  the  old  covenant,  and  the  Israelites' 
instability  therein,  the  reason  of  His  making  a  new  covenant  with  us,  in  which 
grace  and  assistance  is  offered  to  enable  us  to  obey  and  persevere  in  obedience. 
From  the  whole  note — 1.  That  the  grace  and  glory  of  the  new  covenant  are  much 
set  off  and  manifested  by  comparing  it  with  the  old.  2.  That  nothing  but  effec- 
tual grace  from  Christ  will  secure  our  covenant  obedience  one  moment :  what 
greater  motives  or  stronger  outward  obligations  to  obedience  could  any  people 
under  heaven  have  than  the  Israelites  had  ?  But  they  quickly  turned  out  of  the 
way ;  therefore,  in  the  new  covenant,  is  this  grace  promised  in  a  pecuUar  manner. 
[W.  Burkitt,  M.A.)  The  two  covenants: — ^A  covenant  is  properly  an  agreement 
between  two  parties,  who  bind  themselves  by  certain  conditions  with  the  view  of 
attaining  some  object.  A  covenant  may  be  between  equals,  as  that  between 
Abraham  and  Abimelech  (Gen.  xxi.  32),  or  between  parties  of  whom  one  is  superior 
to  the  other,  as  that  between  Joshua  and  the  Gibeonites  (Josh.  ix.).  The  covenant 
relation  between  God  and  men  is  of  the  latter  kind,  for  God  imposes  the  covenant 
(chap.  viii.  8-10).  None  the  less  both  parties  lay  themselves  under  obligations  and 
contemplate  an  object  by  the  covenant.  A  covenant  between  God  and  men  cannot 
possibly  have  any  other  meaning  than  that  He  will  be  their  God  and  they  His 
people  (viii.  10).  The  Epistle  contemplates  religion  or  the  relation  of  God  and  men 
under  this  aspect  of  a  covenant.  It  distinguishes  two  covenants,  that  made  at 
Sinai  (chap.  viii.  9),  and  that  made  through  Christ  (chap.  is.  15).    The  former  is 


634  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [cha».  vm. 

called  the  first  covenant  (chaps,  viii.  7,  ix.  1, 18) ;  it  is  not  named  the  "  old  " 
covenant,  although  it  is  said  that  God,  in  announcing  a  new  covenant,  has  made 
the  first  old  (chap.  viii.  13).  The  latter  is  called  a  second  (chap.  viii.  7),  a  better 
(chaps,  vii.  22,  viii.  6),  a  new  as  having  different  contents  (chaps,  viii.  8,  ix.  15), 
a,nd  also  new  as  being  recent  (chap.  xii.  24),  and  an  eternal  covenant  (chap.  xiii. 
20,  comp.  vii.  22).  The  first  covenant  was  not  faultless — so  mildly  does  the 
author  express  Himself  (chap.  viii.  7) ;  the  second  is  enacted  upon  better  promises 
(chap.  viii.  6,  10-12).  The  Epistle  does  not  speak  of  a  covenant  with  Abraham, 
as  the  Pauline  epistles  do  (Gal.  iii.  15,17);  it  knows  of  promises  to  Abraham 
(chaps,  vi.  13,  vii.  6),  which  the  first  covenant  was  ineffectual  to  realise  (chap.  xi. 
39),  which,  however,  are  realised  through  the  second  (chap.  ix.  15).  The  covenant 
relation  is  not  its  own  end.  It  is  rather  a  relation  within  which  the  people  are 
being  matured  for  that  final  blessedness  which  God  has  destined  for  them.  No 
doubt  this  matm'ing  of  them  always  more  fully  realises  the  covenant  relation,  and 
this  of  itself  is  a  great  and  blessed  end.  But  it  is  chiefly  regarded  as  the  means  to 
that  which  lies  beyond,  which  is  the  bringing  of  the  people  to  a  sphere  of  existence 
that  shall  fully  correspond  to  their  capacities  and  needs.  This  end  is  variously 
described  :  it  is  inheriting  the  promises  (chap.  vi.  12),  or  receiving  the  promise  of 
the  eternal  inheritance  (chap.  ix.  15) ;  reaching  the  heavenly  country  (chap.  xi.  16), 
or  the  city  that  hath  the  foundations  (chap.  xi.  10) ;  or,  receiving  the  kingdom  that 
cannot  be  shaken  (chap.  xii.  28) ;  or  entering  into  the  rest  of  God  (chap.  iii.  4) ; 
or,  having  the  world  to  come  put  into  subjection  to  them  (chap.  ii.  5,  &c.).  The 
covenants  are  means  adopted  for  realising  promises  and  gracious  purposes,  the 
announcement  of  which  was  prior  to  both  of  them.  The  new  covenant  is  only  a 
more  effectual  means  of  accomplishing  the  same  object  pursued  in  the  first.  A 
covenant  between  God  and  men  is  a  state  of  relation  in  which  He  is  tbeh  God  and 
they  His  people.  By  being  His  people  is  meant  that  they  are  dedicated  to  His  ser- 
vice (chap.  ix.  14),  that  they  are  His  worshipping  people.  And  the  means  by  which 
they  are  translated  into  this  relation  of  fit  worshippers  is  important.  The  term 
that  expresses  this  change  is  "  sanctify  "  (chaps,  ii.  11,  x.  10,  29,  xiii.  12).  Having 
a  conscience  defiled  by  sin,  they  felt  debarred  from  free  access  to  God  so  as  to  serve 
Him  (chaps,  ix.  9,  14,  x.  2,  22),  and  for  the  same  reason  of  theh  defilement  God 
.  ould  not  permit  Himself  to  be  approached.  This  defilement  of  sin  is  purified 
away  by  sacrifice,  the  blood  of  which  is  the  blood  of  the  covenant  (chaps,  ix.  14,  18, 
X.  29,  xiii.  20),  and  thus  the  people  are  sanctified  for  the  service  of  God.  As  the 
end  had  in  view  and  the  covenant  itself,  which  is  the  means  towards  it,  are  alike 
due  to  the  grace  of  God  (chap.  ii.  9),  the  sacrifice  which  effects  the  sanctification  of 
the  people  is  no  less  an  institution  of  His  provision.  Though  within  the  covenant, 
the  people  are  not  supposed  to  be  sinless.  They  err  and  are  out  of  the  way  ;  they 
are  compassed  with  infirmity  and  labour  under  various  "  ignorances  "  (chaps,  v.  2, 
vii.  28,  ix.  7 :  comp.  chap.  iv.  15).  Such  errors,  though  sins  and  transgressions 
(chap.  ix.  15),  and  iuterruptions  of  the  covenant  relation,  are  not  absolutely  incom- 
patible with  its  maintenance,  provided  they  are  taken  away.  A  means  of  removing 
such  sins  of  infirmity  was  provided  in  the  sacrificial  system.  This  is  the  mean- 
ing of  this  system.  It  was  appointed  of  God  for  removing  sins  committed 
within  the  covenant.  The  Epistle  does  not  speculate  how  it  is  that  men  in  cove- 
nant still  continue  to  sin  ;  it  accepts  the  fact  without  referring  it  to  any  principle 
such  as  *'  the  flesh  "  of  St.  Paul.  Its  distinction  of  sins  of  infiimity  and  •'  wilful " 
sins  is  unknown  to  the  latter  apostle,  to  whom  all  sins  are  deadly  and  infer  the 
curse  (Gal.  iii.  10).  This  is  involved  in  His  mode  of  regarding  the  law  as  a  com- 
mandment of  works  to  be  obeyed  in  order  to  justification.  Any  transgression  of  it 
is  its  breach  in  principle,  and  makes  an  end  of  all  pretensions  on  man's  part  to  be 
righteous  before  God.  The  condition  of  the  continuance  of  the  covenant  was  the 
keeping  of  the  law.  But  here  a  double  defect  manifested  itself  in  the  first  cove- 
nant. On  the  one  hand,  the  people  abode  not  in  it  (chap.  viii.  9),  and  on  the 
other  hand,  its  institutions  could  not  remove  the  transgressions  done  under  it 
(chaps,  ix.  15,  x.  4).  In  the  new  covenant  God  promises  to  write  His  law  on  the 
people's  heart  (chap.  viii.  10),  as  on  the  other  hand  the  death  of  Christ  redeems 
the  transgressions  under  the  first  covenant  (chap.  ix.  15),  and  God  remembers  them 
no  more  (chap.  x.  17).  Though  in  the  new  covenant  the  law  be  written  on  the 
people's  heart,  their  wills  are  still  practically  regarded  as  mutable ;  they  may  sin 
wilfully  (chap.  x.  26),  and  fall  away  from  the  hving  God  (chap.  iii.  12),  and  they 
need  all  the  safeguards  which  their  own  patient  endurance  (chap.  vi.  12),  the  ex- 
ample of  those  who  have  gone  before  (chaps,  vi.  12,  xii.  1,  xiii.  7),  mutual  exhor- 


SHAP   vin.l  HEBREWS.  635 

tation  (chaps,  iii.  IS,  x.  24),  memory  of  past  attainments  (chap.  x.  32,  &c.),  and  tha 
"  throne  of  grace  "  (chaps,  ii.  18,  iv.  14,  vii.  23-25)  can  afford,  to  enable  them  to 
hold  fast  the  begiunmg  of  their  confidence  firm  unto  the  end.  Thus  the  first  cove- 
nant failed,  and  God  caused  to  arise  upon  the  people  the  light  of  the  promise  of  a 
new  covenant.  The  first  covenant  indeed  was  conscious  of  its  own  imperfection  ; 
hence  it  gave  forth  from  within  itself  the  promise  of  "  another  priest  "  (Psa.  ex.  4; 
chap.  vii.  14),  of  a  "  better  sacrifice  "  (Psa.  xl.  7 ;  chaps,  ix.  23,  x.  9),  and  even  of 
a  "new  covenant  "  (Jer.  xxxi.  31 ;  chap.  viii.  8).  The  structure  of  the  Tabernacle 
was  a  perpetual  witness  to  the  inabiUty  of  its  ministry  to  open  the  way  for  the 
worshippers  into  the  presence  of  God,  a  witness  borne  by  the  Holy  Ghost  (chap.  ix. 
8).  And  the  very  continual  repetition  of  the  sacrifices  year  by  year  was  a  constant 
remembrance  of  sin,  and  proclamation  of  their  ineflicacy  to  take  it  away  (chap.  x. 
3).  The  Epistle  is  a  detailed  contrast  between  the  two  covenants,  showing  that  in 
all  those  points  where  the  first  failed  the  second  realises  the  purpose  of  the  cove- 
nant. That  which  gives  eternal  validity  or  absoluteness  to  the  new  covenant  is 
the  person,  the  Son  of  God,  who  in  all  points  carries  it  through — who  reveals, 
mediates,  and  sustains  it.  As  initiating  the  covenant  through  His  blood  (chaps. 
ix.  20,  X.  29),  He  is  the  mediator  of  a  new  covenant  (chap.  ix.  15) ;  and  as  sitting 
at  the  right  hand  of  God,  before  His  face,  for  ever,  as  high-priestly  representative 
of  the  people.  He  is  the  surety  of  it  (chap.  vii.  22).  The  Old  Testament  holy 
places  and  all  the  vessels  of  the  ministry  were  made  according  to  the  pattern 
showed  in  the  mount  (chap,  viii,  5),  aud  are  thus  the  copies  of  the  things  in  the 
heavens  (chap.  ix.  23).  Again,  the  law  had  a  shadow  of  the  good  things  that  were 
to  come  (chaps,  x.  1,  ix.  11).  Thus  the  first  covenant  lay,  as  a  sphere  of  dim 
representation,  between  two  regions  filled  with  reaUties — heaven,  the  region  of  the 
true  things  themselves,  on  the  one  side,  and  the  new  covenant,  reaUsing  the  very 
image  of  the  good  things  that  were  to  come,  on  the  other.  These  two  regions 
correspond  to  one  another  (chap.  xii.  22).  Yet  the  first  covenant  having  a  shadow 
of  the  good  things  that  were  to  come  was  in  truth  the  introduction  of  the  new 
covenant,  though  in  a  shadowy  form.  Hence  the  second  covenant,  though  called 
new,  is  new  only  in  a  modified  sense.  The  promises  on  which  it  was  enacted  are 
virtually  nothing  more  than  the  promise  truly  to  realise  the  great  objects  aimed  at 
in  the  fii-st  covenant  (see  chap.  viii.  6).  It  contemplates  the  same  end  with  the 
first,  the  bringing  of  men  into  the  rest  of  God  and  the  promised  inheritance  (chaps. 
ix.  15,  iv.  3).  And  it  was  made  with  the  same  persons  as  the  first.  These  are  the 
people  (chaps,  ii.  17,  xiii.  12),  the  people  of  God  (chap.  iv.  9,  comp.  vii.  27),  or,  the 
seed  of  Abraham  (chap.  ii.  16).  It  is  by  no  means  easy  to  understand  what  is  said 
in  the  Epistle  in  regard  to  the  relations  of  the  two  covenants.  Two  points  may  be 
alluded  to.  1.  The  author  speaks  in  a  very  disparaging  way  of  the  Old  Testament 
f^acrifices,  saying  that  they  could  never  take  away  sins  (chap.  x.  11),  nor  perfect 
those  offering  them  as  to  the  conscience  (chaps,  is.  9,  x.  1,  2),  and  that  they  were 
carnal  ordinances  and  useless  (chap.  vii.  18).  His  language  implies  that  Old  Tes- 
tament saints  were  burdened  with  a  conscience  of  sin  (chaps,  ix.  9, 14,  x.  2,  22), 
consequently  that  they  were  oppressed  by  the  sense  of  the  inefficacy  of  their  sacri- 
fices to  remove  sin,  from  which  it  seems  to  follow  that  they  had  no  clear  light  as 
to  any  connection  of  these  sacrifices  with  another  the  virtue  of  which  they  conveyed. 
To  the  same  effect  is  the  view  that  the  transgressions  under  the  first  covenant  were 
left  outstanding  and  only  removed  by  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  (chap.  ix.  15).  All  this, 
however,  bears  directly  only  on  the  question  before  him  of  the  value  of  the  Old 
Testament  sacrifices  in  themselves,  and  whether  they  effected  a  true  objective 
atonement.  Old  Testament  saints  felt  they  could  not  do  so,  and  hence  they  were 
burdened  with  a  sense  of  sin  which,  among  other  things,  manifested  itself  in  a 
bondage  from  the  fear  of  death  (chap.  ii.  15).  2.  Again,  when  the  author  says  that 
Dlood  of  bulls  could  never  take  away  sins  (chap.  x.  4),  and  on  the  other  hand  that 
it  sanctified  in  reference  to  the  purity  of  the  flesh  (chap.  ix.  13),  it  is  certainly  very 
far  from  being  his  intention  to  draw  a  distinction  between  one  class  of  offences 
called  ' '  sins  "  to  which  the  Old  Testament  sacrifices  were  inapplicable,  and  another 
class  that  might  be  named  ceremonial  defilements  which  they  did  remove,  and  so 
to  erect  a  general  theory  of  the  Old  Testament  constitution  to  the  effect  that  it  con- 
sisted of  two  spheres,  one  of  ceremonial  obsers'ances  and  external  government, 
within  which  sacrifices  had  a  real  vahdity,  and  another  the  sphere  of  true  spiritual 
relations  to  God,  within  which  they  had  no  force.  The  sacrifices  were  offered  for 
sins  (chaps,  v,  1,  3,  ix.  7,  x.  8,  11),  and  if  they  could  have  effected  the  purpose  for 
which  they  were  offered,  the  worshipper  would  have  had  no  more  conscience  ai 


63«  TEE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vni. 

sins  (chap.  x.  2),  a  condition  which  the  offering  of  Christ  brings  abont  (chaps,  ix. 
14,  X.  17).  The  Old  Testament  sacrifices  ooald  not  go  further  than  to  purify  the 
flesh.     (A.  B.  Davidson,  LL.D.) 

Yet.  8.    Finding  faiUt  with  them. — Ood  complaining  of  the  Church: — ^L  God 

HATH  OFTTIMES  JUST  CAUSE  TO  COMPLAIN  OF  HiS  PEOPLE  WHEN  TBI  HB  WILL  NOT 
UTTEBLT   CAST    THEM    OFF.      II.   It    IS    THE    DUTY    OF    THE     ChURCH    TO    TAKE     DBBP 

NOTICE  OP  God's  complaints  op  them.  Want  hereof  is  that  which  hath  laid  most 
churches  in  the  world  under  a  fatal  security.  Hence  they  carry  themselves  as 
though  they  were  '•  rich  and  increased  in  goods,  and  had  need  of  nothing,"  when 
indeed  "  they  are  wretched  and  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked."  To 
consider  what  God  blames,  and  to  affect  our  souls  with  a  sense  of  guilt,  is  that 
trembling  at  His  word  which  He  so  approves  of.  And  to  guide  them  herein 
they  ought  carefully  to  consider — 1.  The  times  and  seasons  that  are  passing  over 
them.  For  in  a  due  observance  of  the  times  and  seasons,  and  an  application 
of  ourselves  to  the  duties  of  them,  consists  that  testimony  which  we  are  to  give 
to  God  and  the  pospel  in  our  generation.  That  Church  which  considers  not  its 
especial  duty  in  the  days  wherein  we  live  is  fast  asleep,  and  it  may  be  doubted 
whether,  when  it  is  awaked,  it  will  find  oil  in  its  vessel  or  not.  2.  The  tempta- 
tions which  are  prevalent,  and  which  unavoidably  we  are  exposed  nnto.  Every 
age  and  time  hath  its  especial  temptations.  And  it  is  the  will  of  God  that  the 
Church  s  hould  be  exercised  with  them  and  by  them ;  and  it  were  easy  to  manifest 
that  the  darkness  and  ignorance  of  men,  in  not  discerning  the  especial  temptations 
of  the  age  wherein  they  have  lived,  or  neglecting  of  them,  have  been  always  the 
great  causes  and  means  of  the  apostasy  of  the  Church.  III.  God  often  sorpriseth 
the  Church  with  promises  of  grace  and  mercy  (Isa.  vii.  13,  14,  xliii.  22-25).  And 
this  He  will  do — 1.  That  He  may  glorify  the  riches  and  freedom  of  His  grace.  2. 
That  none  who  have  the  least  remainder  of  sincerity,  and  desire  to  fear  the  name 
of  God,  may  utterly  faint  and  despond  at  any  time,  under  the  greatest  confluence 
of  discouragements.    (John  Owen,  D.D.)      I  will  make  a  new  covenant. — I.  God's 

COVENANT   with   MAN  INSTRUCTETH     US   IN   TWO   ESPECIAL   POINTS.        1.    In    God'S    COU- 

descension  to  man.  2.  In  the  sure  prop  that  man  hath  to  rest  on  God  for  happi- 
ness. 1.  God's  condescension  to  man  is  manifested  four  ways.  (1)  In  that  God 
being  the  most  high  supreme  Sovereign  over  all,  vouchsafeth  to  enter  into  covenant 
with  His  servants.  (2)  In  that  God  being  a  Lord  hath  power  to  command  what 
He  pleaseth,  so  as  He  need  not  covenant  or  capitulate  with  them,  saying,  Do  this 
and  I  will  do  that ;  yet  doth  He  enter  into  covenant.  (3)  In  that  being  most  free, 
and  wholly  depending  upon  Himself,  He  need  not  bind  Himself  to  any  (Job  ix.  12, 
xxxiv.  19 ;  Dan.  iv.  85),  yet  by  covenant  He  binds  Himself  to  man.  (4)  In  that 
God  being  the  Lord  God  of  truth  (Psa.  xxxi.  5)  He  binds  Himself  to  perform  His 
promise,  as  if  there  might  be  some  fear  of  His  failing  therein  (chap.  vi.  17,  18).  2. 
The  sure  prop  that  man  hath  to  rest  on  God  for  happiness  by  reason  of  His  cove- 
nant is  manifested  two  ways.  (1)  In  that  God  who  is  good  and  doeth  good  (Psa. 
cxix.  6S)  doth  covenant  to  make  man  happy.  God  is  as  a  deep,  full,  open,  over- 
flowing, overflowing  fountain,  so  as  that  might  seem  sufficient  to  make  us  go  to 
Him  for  everything  that  may  tend  to  blessedness.  But  the  covenant  which  God 
maketh  to  bring  us  unto  happiness  doth  much  more  embolden  us  to  go  to  Him,  and 
make  us  confident  of  receiving  from  Him  what  He  hath  covenanted  to  give.  (2) 
By  covenant  God  hath  caused  a  special  relation  to  pass  betwixt  Him  and  us.  He 
and  we  are  confederates.  This  is  a  sure  prop.  As  God  is  faithful  in  Himself,  so 
His  covenant  is  most  sure.  It  is  a  covenant  of  salt  for  ever  (Numb,  xviii.  19). 
God's  confederates  may  thereupon  have  strong  consolation  and  confidence  (Deat. 
vii.  9 ;  Heb.  vi.  18).  II.  The  covenant  of  God  with  man  doth  direct  us  nr 
FOUB  special  points.  1.  To  know  what  God  expects  of  us ;  namely,  whatsoever  is 
in  the  covenant  to  be  performed  on  our  part,  which  we  must  be  careful  to  observe 
as  we  do  desire  to  receive  any  benefit  from  the  covenant.  2.  To  understand  what 
we  may  expect  from  God ;  namely,  whatsoever  on  God's  part  is  covenanted.  3. 
To  acquaint  ourselves  with  the  covenant  of  God,  that  thereby  we  may  know  what 
privileges  and  blessings  belong  unto  us.  A  wise  heir  will  search  after  such  evi- 
dences as  give  him  a  right  to  his  lands  and  goods.  4.  To  be  careful  in  observing  ouz 
own  undertakings,  and  as  conscionable  in  performing  the  covenant  on  onr  part,  as 
we  are  desirous  to  partake  of  the  benefit  of  the  covenant  on  God's  part.  This  is 
laid  down  as  a  ground  of  Levi's  blessing,  that  they  kept  God's  covenant  (Deut. 
xxxiii.  9).    This  God  expressly  requireth  (Exod.  xix.  5).     We  cannot  expect  that 


CHAP,  vm.]  HEBREWS.  637 

God  should  keep  covenant  with  us  unless  we  be  careful  to  keep  covenant  with  Him 
(Psa.  XXV.  10).  Great  is  that  loss  which  followeth  upon  breach  of  covenant,  yet 
that  is  not  all,  God's  wrath  and  vengeance  will  also  follow  thereupon.  Sore  ven- 
geance hath  been  executed  on  breach  of  covenant  with  man  (2  Kings  xvii.  4,  <feo. ; 
Ezek.  xvii.  15).  How  much  sorer  vengeance  may  be  feared  on  breach  of  covenant 
with  God  (Jer.  xxii.  6,  9,  xxxiv.  18-20 ;  Hosea  viii.  1 ;  1  Kings  xi.  11).  (W. 
Gouge.)  The  blessings  of  the  new  covenant : — New,  ftS  contrasted  with  old, 
means  in  Scripture  that  which  is  perfect  and  abiding.  The  old  vanishes,  the  new 
remains.  God  gives  us  a  new  heart  that  we  may  love  and  praise  Him  for  ever. 
The  old  covenant  was  temporary  and  imperfect.  God  findeth  fault  with  it ;  for 
although  the  law  was  holy,  just,  and  good,  yet  by  reason  of  Israel's  sin  neither 
righteousness  nor  life  could  come  through  it.  And  as  the  purposes  of  Divine  love 
could  not  be  attained  by  the  old  covenant,  so  the  character  of  God,  as  the  God  of 
grace,  could  not  be  fuUy  revealed  therein.  Hence  the  promise  of  a  new  covenant, 
which  in  itself  proves  the  imperfection  and  insufficiency  of  the  old ;  and  this  new 
covenant  is  represented  as  a  contrast,  unlike  the  old ;  it  is  new,  that  is,  perfect, 
everlasting.  God  is  pleased  with  it  because  it  shows  forth  the  glory  of  Jehovah  aa 
the  God  of  salvation.  How  great  is  the  contrast  between  the  old  and  the  new 
covenant !  In  the  one  God  demands  of  sinful  man :  "  Thou  shalt."  In  the  other 
God  promises :  "  I  will."  The  one  is  conditional ;  the  other  is  the  manifestation 
of  God's  free  grace,  and  of  God's  unlimited  power.  In  the  one  the  promise  is 
neutralised  by  the  disobedience  of  man ;  in  the  other  all  the  promises  of  God  are 
yea  in  Christ,  and  amen  in  Christ.  In  the  new  covenant  Christ  is  all ;  He  is  the 
Alpha  and  Omega ;  all  things  are  of  God,  and  all  things  are  sure  and  steadfast. 
The  blessings  of  the  new  covenant  are  aU  based  upon  the  forgiveness  of  sin.  God 
promises  to  put  His  laws  into  our  minds,  and  write  them  in  our  hearts,  and  to  be 
to  us  a  God,  because  He  is  merciful  to  our  unrighteousness,  and  will  remember  our 
sins  and  iniquities  no  more.  The  forgiveness  of  sin  is  not  merely  the  beginning, 
but  it  is  the  foundation,  the  source;  it  is,  so  to  say,  the  mother  of  all  Divine 
blessings.  For  so  long  as  sin  is  upon  the  conscience,  and  man  is  not  able  to  draw 
near  unto  God,  he  is  separated  from  the  only  source  of  life  and  blessedness.  In  the 
forgiveness  of  sin  God  gives  Himself,  and  all  things  that  pertain  to  life  and  godli- 
ness. To  know  God  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  all  blessings,  both  in  this  life  and 
in  that  which  is  to  come.  Now,  although  the  law  manifests  to  a  certain  extent  the 
holiness  and  truth,  the  justice  and  unchangeableness,  the  goodness  and  bounty  of 
God,  the  law  does  not  reveal  God  Himself,  the  depth  of  His  sovereign  and  eternal 
love,  the  purpose  which  He  purposed  in  Himself  before  the  foundation  of  the  world 
was  laid.  When  in  Christ  we  receive  the  forgiveness  of  sin,  we  behold  God.  H«e 
is  also  the  source  and  the  commencement,  the  root  and  strength  of  our  love  to 
God.  "We  love  Him,  because  He  first  loved  us."  We  love  much,  because  much 
is  forgiven  unto  us.  The  new  obedience,  the  spiritual  worship,  the  fight  and  vic- 
tory of  faith,  the  knowledge  and  fear  and  love  of  God,  have  their  starting-point  in 
the  pardon  of  sin.  And  this  is  the  new  covenant  blessing.  True,  the  servants  of 
God  always  knew  this  blessing.  Of  the  Divine  righteousness  both  the  law  and  the 
prophets  testify.  David  describeth  this  blessedness.  The  sacrifices  typified,  faith 
looked  forward  to  the  great  atonement.  But  now  that  Christ  has  come,  and  that 
He  died  once  for  all,  we  receive  forgiveness  in  a  full  and  perfect  maimer :  there  is 
no  more  remembrance  of  sins;  no  repetition  of  sacrifice  is  needed;  no  yearly 
recurrence  of  the  day  of  atonement ;  in  Christ  we  have  redemption  in  His  blood, 
even  the  forgiveness  of  sins.  It  is  in  giving  this  perfect  pardon  that  God  renews 
the  heart,  and  writes  in  it  His  laws.  We  must  needs  contrast  law  and  gospel.  Yet 
let  us  not  forget  that  the  law  from  the  very  outset  showed  its  temporary  and  nega- 
tive character,  pointed  beyond  and  away  from  itself ;  sighed,  as  it  were,  after  Him, 
who  by  fulfilling  would  take  it  away,  and  by  taking  it  away  would  fulfil  it  in  us, 
raise  us  to  the  still  greater  height  of  the  new  love  1  All  spiritual  life  flows  from 
Jesus  as  our  Saviour.  When  we  beheve  in  Jesus  we  are  not  in  the  flesh  but  in  the 
Spirit.  His  precious  blood  is  not  merely  our  peace,  but  our  strength ;  and  our 
strength  because  it  is  our  peace.  Justification  and  sanctification  emanate  from 
this  one  source.  When  Israel  is  brought  in  repentance  and  faith  to  the  Lord,  then 
shall  be  fulfilled  the  gracious  purpose  of  God,  which  under  the  law  was  frustrated 
Uirough  Israel's  sin  and  disobedience.  Although  God  was  a  husband  unto  them, 
they  brake  His  covenant.  But  now,  forgiven  and  renewed,  Israel  will  be  in  actual 
reality,  and  not  merely  in  position,  God's  people,  and  Jehovah  will  be  their  God. 
And  because  He  is  God  to  tiiem,  source  of  light  and  life,  they  are  His  people.    Not 


638  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

merely  chosen  and  appointed ;  not  merely  called  and  treated  collectively  as  God'g 
people  ;  but  in  reality,  according  to  truth,  according  to  their  individual  character 
and  experience,  the  people  in  whom  God's  name  is  revealed,  who  show  forth  His 
praise,  who  walk  in  His  ways  and  obey  His  will.  For  then  each  one  individually 
shall  know  the  Lord.  "  God  is  known  in  Judah,"  said  the  Psalmist.  In  their 
marvellous  history,  in  the  Divine  messages  sent  by  Moses  and  the  prophets,  in  the 
types  and  ordinances,  in  the  Judges  and  Kings,  God  had  revealed  unto  His  people 
His  name,  His  character  and  will,  and  His  great  desire  was  that  they  should  know 
Him.  How  touching  is  the  complaint  of  Jehovah,  that  after  all  the  signs  which 
they  had  seen,  and  after  all  His  mighty  works  of  redeeming  and  guiding  love,  aud 
after  all  the  words  of  Ught  and  of  grace  which  He  had  sent  them.  His  people  did 
not  know  Him  1  So  long  had  He  been  with  them,  and,  erring  in  their  hearts,  they 
did  not  know  His  ways  I  What  could  be  more  grievous  to  the  fatherly  heart  of 
God,  yearning  to  be  known,  trusted,  and  loved  ?  But  when  the  Holy  Ghost  shall 
be  poured  out  upon  them  they  shall  all  know  Jehovah,  from  the  least  to  the 
greatest ;  though  one  shall  encourage  and  exhort  the  other,  yet  they  shall  not  need 
to  teaih  and  to  say  to  then-  neighbour.  Know  the  Lord.  In  the  Church  this  promise 
is  already  fulfilled.  From  Jesus,  the  anointed,  all  Christians  receive  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  they  have,  according  to  their  name,  the  unction  from  above.  Hence  they 
possess  the  teacher  who  guides  into  all  truth.  Knowledge  is  within  them.  There 
is  within  them  a  well  of  living  water.  They  are  not  dependent  on  external  instruc- 
tion. There  is  given  unto  them  the  Paraclete,  who  always  reveals  the  things  that  are 
freely  given  onto  us  of  God.  The  spiritual  man  knows  all  things — all  the  things  ol 
the  Spirit,  all  that  pertains  to  life  and  godliness.  True,  he  does  not  know  all  things 
actually,  or  in  any  given  moment ;  but  he  knows  them  potentially.  There  is  within 
him  the  light  which  can  see,  the  mind  which  can  receive  all  truth.  {A.  Saphir.) 
The  difference  betwixt  the  two  covenants  of  works  and  grace : — The  covenants  of 
works  and  grace  do  differ  in  the  particulars  following.  1.  In  the  different  con- 
sideration of  the  Author  of  the  one  and  the  other,  which  are  in  the  first  God's 
supreme  sovereignty,  and  in  the  latter  His  rich  mercy.  2.  In  the  procuring  cause 
of  them,  which  was  of  the  former  God's  mere  will  and  pleasure,  of  the  latter  pity 
and  compassion.  3.  In  the  manner  of  making  the  one  and  the  other.  The  former 
was  without  a  mediator ;  the  latter  with  one.  4.  In  the  time :  the  former  was 
made  before  man  had  sinned  ;  the  latter  after  his  transgression.  5.  In  the 
occasion  of  making  the  one  and  the  other.  The  occasion  of  the  former  was  to  try 
man's  faithfulness  in  that  integrity  wherein  God  made  him.  The  occasion  of  the 
latter  was  to  show  the  necessity  of  man's  continual  dependence  on  God.  6.  In  the 
confederates  or  parties  with  whom  the  one  and  the  other  was  made.  The  former 
was  made  with  all  mankind ;  the  latter  with  the  elect  only.  7.  In  the  particular 
good  that  was  promised.  In  the  former  a  reward  was  promised  upon  fulfilling  the 
condition  by  man  himself  (Eom.  x.  15).  In  the  latter  was  afforded — (1)  A  Surety 
for  man  (chap.  vii.  22).  (2)  Ability  to  do  what  God  would  accept  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  27). 
(3)  A  better  reward  in  man's  communion  with  Christ  (John  xiv.  3  ;  xvii.  23,  24). 
8.  In  the  duties  required  by  the  one  and  the  other.  Perfect  obedience  was  required 
by  the  former ;  faith  and  repentance  by  the  latter.  9.  In  the  order  of  God's 
accepting.  In  the  former  God  accepted  the  person  for  the  work ;  which  is  thus 
expressed,  "If  thou  do  well,  shalt  thou  not  be  accepted ?"  (Gen.  iv.  7).  In  the 
latter  the  work  is  accepted  in  reference  to  the  person.  10.  In  the  i  atification.  The 
former  was  ratified  by  word,  promise,  and  seals.  The  latter  was  further  ratified  by 
oath  (chap.  vii.  20)  and  blood  (chap.  ix.  16,  17).  11.  In  the  issue  of  the  one  and 
the  other.  The  former  was  violable.  It  might  be  forfeited,  ajad  was  forfeited.  The 
latter  is  inviolable  and  shall  never  be  broken  (Jer.  xxxiii.  20,  21).  12.  In  the 
matter  of  the  one  and  the  other.  These  two  covenants  do  so  far  differ  in  the  very 
■natter  and  substance  of  them  as  they  can  no  more  stand  together  than  the  ark  of 
God  and  Dagon  (1  Sam.  v.  3,  4).  The  apostle  doth  so  far  oppose  works  and  grace 
in  the  case  of  justificition  and  salvation  as  they  cannot  stand  together  (Kom.  xi.  6). 
This  difference  betwixt  the  covenant  of  works  and  grace  giveth  evidence  of  God  B 
wisdom  in  working  by  contraries  and  bringing  light  out  of  darkness  (2  Cor.  iv.  6) 
and  good  out  of  evU,  as  He  brought  "  meat  out  of  the  eater  "  (Judg.  iv.  14).  For 
man's  sin  and  misery  that  fell  thereupon  caused  this  better  covenant.  This  is  an 
especial  instance  to  prove  that  "  all  things  work  together  for  good  "  (Bom.  viii.  28). 
{W.  Gouge.)  The  agreement     etwixt  the  covenant  of  grace  as  it  is  styhd  old 

and  new  : — The  covenant  of  grace  ath  continued  from  Adam's  fall,  and  shall  con- 
tinae  to  the  end  of  the  world.    In  this  respect  it  is  styled  an  everlasting  covenant. 


CHAP,  vin.)  HEBREWS.  688 

But  it  hath  been  variously  dispensed  in  the  several  ages  of  the  world.   The  greatest 
difference  in  the  dispensation  thereof  hath  been  manifested  in  the  times  that  passed 
before  and  since  Ciuist  was  exhibited.    This  difference  is  so  great,  as  the  covenant 
of  grace,  though  always  one  raid  the  same  in  substance,  hath  been  distinguished 
into  an  old  and  new  covenant  (ver.  13).    The  latitude  of  the  covenant  of  grace  will 
more  clearly  be  discerned  if  we  duly  consider  the  agreement  and  difference,  as  it  is 
called  old  and  new.      The  agreement  is  manifested — 1.  In  their  Author,  and  that 
considered  in  the  same  respect :  namely,  as  He  is  our  Creator  and  Lord,  and  as  He 
is  out  Redeemer  and  Father,  for  so  was  God  of  old  called  and  acknowledged  (Deut. 
xxxii.  6).     2.  In  the  procuring  cause,  which  was  the  free  grace  and  rich  mercy  of 
God  (Luke  i.  54,  55,  72,  78).    3.  In  the  same  ground  and  meritorious  cause  of  both, 
which  is  Jesus  Christ  (Heb.  xiii.  8  ;  Kev.  xiii.  8).     4.  In  the  same  promises,  which 
are  remission  of  sins,  reconcihation  with  God,  and  everlasting  happiness  (Exod. 
xxxiv.  7 ;  Lev.  viii.  15  ;  Psa.  xci.  16).     5.  In  the  same  duties  required,  which  are 
faith  (Gen.  xv.  6)  and  repentance  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  11).     6.  In  the  same  ground  of 
stability,  which  is  the  continual  abode  and  operation  of  the  Spirit  in  God's  con- 
federates (Psa.  li.  11,  12).      7.  In  the  same  general  end,  which  is  the  praise  ol  the 
free  grace  of  God  (Exod.  xxxiii.  18,  19 ;  xxxiv.  6).    8.  In  the  same  persons  with 
whom  the  covenants  are  made,  which  are  sinners  by  nature  but  elect  of  God  (Psa. 
xxxiii.  12 ;  Ixxxix.  8).    9.  In  the  same  word  of  faith,  whereby  the  one  and  other 
covenant  is  revealed  (Gal.  iii.  8 ;  Heb.  iv.  2).     10.  In  the  same  substance  of  sacra- 
ments and  the  same  spiritual  food  (1  Cor.  x.  3,  4).     fJbid.)      The  differencebetween 
the  covenant  of  grace  as  it  is  styled  old  and  new : — The  difference  betwixt  the  old 
and  new  covenant  is — 1.   In  the  time.      The  old  was  before   Christ,   the  new 
since  (chap.  i.  1,  2).     2.  In  the  manner  of  dehvering.    The  old  was  more  obscurely 
deUvered  under  types  and  prophecies,  the  new  more  clearly  (2  Cor.  iii.  13,  14).     3. 
In  the  extent.    The  old  was  restrained  to  a  select  people  (Psa.  cxlvii.  19,  20) ;  the 
new  is  extended  to  all  nations  (Matt,  xxviii.  19).      4.  In  the  mediator.     Moses,  a 
mere  man,  was  made  the  mediator  of  the  old  (Gal.  iiL  19) ;  but  Jesus  Christ,  God- 
man,  the  Mediator  of  the  new  (ver.  6).    5.  In  the  ratification.    The  old  was  ratified 
by  the  blood  of  beasts  (Exod.  xxiv.  8) ;  the  new  by  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God 
(chap.  ix.  12).     6.  In  the  efficacy.     The  old  comparatively  was  a  ministration  oi 
death,  the  new  a  ministration  of  the  Spirit  (2  Oor.  iii.  7,  8).    7.  In  the  kind  o!' 
confederates.     Under  the  old  God's  confederates  were  in  their  non-age,  as  children 
under  tutors  and  governors  (Gal.  iv.  5,  7).      8.  In  the  kind  of  seals  or  sacraments. 
Under  the  old  they  were  more  in  number,  more  various  in  rites,  more  difficult, 
more  obscure,  more  earthly.     By  comparing  the  sacraments  of  the  one  and  the 
other  together,  this  will  evidently  appear.    9.  In  the  manner  of  setting  forth  the 
promise  of  God.     In  the  old  it  was  set  forth  more  meanly  under  temporal  blessingn 
(Deut  xxviii.  2) ;  under  the  new,  more  directly  under  spiritual  and  celestial  blessings 
(Matt.  v.  3,  &c.).      10.  In  the  yoke  that  is  laid  on  the  confederates  by  the  one  and 
the  other.     By  the  old  a  heavy  yoke  was  laid  (Acts  xv.  10) ;  by  the  new,  an  easy 
and  light  yoke  (Matt.  xi.  30).  So  great  a  difference  there  is  betwixt  the  new  covenant 
and  all  other  covenants,  as  it  is  styled  a  better  covenant.     (Ibid.)         The  two  dis- 
pensations are  one: — The  new  covenant  deals  with  the   same   fundamental  con- 
ceptions which  dominated  the  former  one.    These  are  the  moral  law,  knowledge 
of  God,  and  forgiveness  of  sin.     So  far  the  two  dispensations  are  one.     Because 
tliese  great  conceptions  lie  at  the  root  of  aU  human  goodness,  religion  is  essen- 
tially the  same  thing   under   both  covenants.     There   is   a  sense  in  which  St. 
Augustine  was  right  in   speaking   of  the   saints   under   the   Old   Testament   as 
■'  Christians  before  Christ."     Ju<laism  and  Christianity  stand  shoulder  to  shoulder 
over  against  the  religious  ideas  and  practices  of  all  the  heathen  nations  of  the 
world.    But  in  Judaism  these  sublime  conceptions  are  undeveloped.     Nationalism 
dwarfs  their  growth.     They  are  like  seeds  falling  on  the  thorns,  and  the  thorns 
grow  up  and  choke  them.     God,  therefore,  spoke  unto  the  Jews  in  parables,  in 
types  and  shadows.      Seeing,  they  saw  not ;  and  hearing,  they  heard  not,  neithe 
did  they  understand.    Because  the  foimer  covenant  was  a  national  one,  the  con 
ceptions  of  the  moral  law,  of  God,  of  sin  and  its  forgiveness,  would  be  narrow 
and  excernal.     The  moral  law  would  be  embedded  in  the  national  code.     God 
would  be  revealed   in  the  history  of   the   nation.     Sin  would   consist  either  in 
faults  of  ignorance  and  inadvertence  or  in  national  apostasy  from  the  theocratic 
king.      In    these  three  respects  the  new  covenant  excels — in  respect,  that  is,  of 
the  moral  law,  knowledge  of  God,  and  forgiveness  of  sin,  which  yet  may  be  justly 
regarded  as  the  three  sides  of  the  revelation  given  under  the  former  covenani. 
(T.  C.  Edwards,  D.D.) 


&40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

Ver».  10-12.  I  will  put  My  laws  into  their  mind. — Gud's  covenant  with  tJie 
New  Testament  Church : — I.  Whai  is  imported  gknehallt  in  the  words.  1. 
That  a  covenant  shall  be  made,  and  a  covenant-relation  shall  subsist,  between  God 
and  every  member  of  the  New  Testament  Church.  2.  That  both  parties,  so  related 
to  one  another,  shall  behave  in  a  due  and  becoming  manner,  agreeable  to  the  rela- 
tion in  which  they  stand.  3.  That  the  relation  itself  and  the  due  behaviour  of  the 
relatives  on  both  sides  shall  be  wholly  the  work  of  God.      11.  What   is   more 

PABTICULABLY   IMPORTED   IN   God'S   PROMISING   TO   BE   OtJR   GoD.       1.     That    God   wlE 

graciously  bring  us  to  have  a  real  and  saving  interest  in  Him  as  our  God.  Now,  in 
order  to  our  having  such  an  interest  in  God,  two  things  are  necessary  ;  both  which 
are  secured  by  this  promise  and  both  are  accomplished  in  behalf  of  every  one  who 
is  brought  within  the  bond  of  this  covenant.  (1)  That  God  make  a  gracious  grant 
and  oiier  of  Himself  to  us,  declaring  us  welcome  to  claim  an  interest  in  Him,  and 
ic  look  for  the  rest  and  happiness  of  our  souls  in  the  enjoyment  of  Him.  Without 
such  an  offer  it  would  be  impossible  that  ever  we  should  be  interested  in  Him  as 
our  God.  Such  a  happiness  is  incapable  of  being  purchased  by  any  creature.  (2) 
It  is  likewise  necessary  that  He  enable  us  to  accept  this  gracious  offer,  and  really 
to  choose  Him  as  our  God  and  Portion.  There  can  be  no  covenant  without  the 
consent  of  both  parties.  2.  This  part  of  the  promise  imports  that  God  will  do  all 
that  for  us  that  any  people  has  reason  to  expect  or  usually  does  expect  from  their 
God.  He  would  be  ashamed  to  be  called  our  God,  if  He  were  not  to  act  up  to  the 
character.  And  His  allowing  us  to  claim  Him  in  that  character  may  be  viewed  as 
an  engaj-ement  that  He  will  do  for  us  whatever  corresponds  unto  it.  (1)  He  will 
Bet  \ou  free  from  all  spiritual  bondage,  oppression,  and  misery  of  every  kind,  and 
put  you  in  ample  possession  of  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God.  (2)  He  will 
guide  and  conduct  you  through  this  weary  wilderness  in  every  step  of  your  journey 
towards  the  land  of  promise.  (3)  He  will  lead  you  forth  against  all  your  enemies, 
and  make  you  completely  victorious  over  them  in  doe  time.  (4)  In  a  word,  He  will 
bring  you  home  in  the  event  to  the  possession  of  a  plentiful  and  pleasant  inheri- 
tance. HI.  What  is  imported  in  oor  beino  to  God  for  a  people.  1.  That 
God  would  gather  into  one  all  the  members  of  the  New  Testament  Church  ;  so 
that  in  whatever  place  of  the  world  they  should  have  their  residence,  from  whatever 
nation  they  should  spring,  whatever  should  be  their  kindied,  tongue,  or  lan&uage, 
they  should  all  be  closely  united  one  to  another  and  constituted  one  body  mystical. 
2.  That  this  digniLed  people,  and  every  particular  person  among  them,  shall,  in 
due  time,  be  enabled  to  dedicate  themselves  unto  God,  and  cheerfully  to  acknow- 
ledge themselves  to  be  His  property.  3.  That  having  made  such  a  dedication  of 
themselves  to  God,  the  Church  and  her  members  shall  be  preserved  from  ever 
attempting  to  alienate  what  they  have*devoted.  4.  That  God  will  graciously  accept 
the  dedication  that  we  make  of  ourselves  to  Him  and  all  those  evangelical  services 
which  we  perform  in  consequence  thereof.  Lessons  :  1.  From  what  has  been  said, 
we  may  see  one  very  remarkable  difference  between  the  covenant  of  grace  as  it  is 
exhibited  in  the  gospel  and  actually  made  with  every  Christian  in  the  day  of 
believing,  a  difference,  I  say,  between  this  and  all  other  covenants.  In  all  covenants 
there  are  mutual  engagements  entered  into  by  both  parties  respectively  ;  and  some- 
thing which  they  become  bound  to  perform  one  to  another  on  both  sides.  So  far 
this  covenant  agrees  with  all  others.  But  the  amazing  difference  between  this  and 
every  other  covenant  lies  in  this,  that  here  one  party  binds  Himself  for  the  perform- 
ance of  the  engagements  of  both.  2.  We  may  see  that  all  true  Christians  are  really 
covenanters  with  God,  however  little  relish  some  of  them  may  have  for  the  name. 
a.  From  hence  we  may  see  that  neither  faith,  nor  repentance,  nor  sincere  obedience, 
nor  anything  else  wrought  in  us  or  done  by  us,  can  be  the  condition  of  the  covenant 
of  grace.  4.  We  may  see  from  this  subject  that  real  Christians  are  the  only  happy 
persons  in  the  world.  All  the  things  that  men  value  or  esteem,  and  in  which  they 
look  for  happiness,  riches,  honours,  power,  pleasure,  they  possess  in  a  supereminent 
degree.  They  are  the  only  persons  who  deserve  to  be  called  rich,  having  an  interest 
in  God  HimseK,  an  infinite  and  inexhaustible  good  as  their  portion  and  inheritance. 
(John  Young,   D.D.)  The  religious  relations  of  tlie  intellect: — That   thtre  is 

mind,  and  that  it  is  superior  to  matter,  I  assume,  and  I  have  a  right  so  to  do  :  for 
assumption  is  not  ilkgical  where  the  demonstration  of  the  thing  assumed  can  ba 
instantaneous  and  popular — that  is,  within  the  ra  ge  of  ordinary  understand" ings. 
That  our  bodies  are  but  the  organs  of  our  minds,  and  therefore  inferior  to  them, 
and  totally  distinct  from  them,  is  seen  in  this:  that  the  one  can  be  destroyed,  whila 
the  other  remains  intact.    The  surgeon  can  cot  both  legs  of  a  man  off  near  the* 


CHAP,  vra.]  HEBREWS.  641 

trnnk,  and  then  he  can  out  both  arms  ofi  at  the  shoulder,  until  a  full  half  of  his 
body  as  represented  by  bulk  has  been  destroyed,  and  still  the  energies  of  the  man's 
mind  are  in  no  way  affected.  The  symmetry  of  the  body  ifi  gone,  but  the  symmetry 
of  the  undestroyed  and  the  indestructible  mind  remains.  The  mind  and  the  saw  have 
not  touched  it ;  they  cannot.  Now,  holding  that  mind  is  immortal,  I  would  point 
out  to  you  some  of  its  religious  relations,  to  the  end  that  we  may  all  apprehend 
how  natural  to  the  mind  itself  are  those  states,  moods,  and  natures  which  the 
Bible  enjoins.  For  religion  is  only  nature  corrected — nature  perfected.  When 
man  stands  in  his  natural  powers,  with  all  his  adjustments  correct,  with  tUl  his 
instincts  just,  and  with  all  his  aspirations  holy,  he  has  in  him  the  same  mind 
that  was  in  Christ ;  for  in  Him  all  religion  existed  organically.  Beverence, 
obedience,  affection,  humility,  truthfulness,  and  whatever  other  element  piety 
includes,  lived  incarnate  in  Him.  He  embodied  them.  Hence,  imitation  of  Him 
is  piety  in  its  highest  phase.  Hence,  His  life  is  the  light  of  men,  morally. 
Hence,  Christian  studentship  is  a  studentship  of  His  character.  1.  Well,  the 
first  characteristic  of  the  mind,  religiously  considered,  is  activity.  Mind  is  motion, 
mind  is  impulse,  mind  is  vibration,  mind  is  only  God's  thought ;  and  His  thought 
keeps  for  ever  thinking.  Mind,  therefore,  in  its  religious  coimeotions,  must  be  for 
ever  active.  Be  not  afraid,  therefore,  to  think,  young  men.  Let  your  minds  go 
forth  continually  in  search  of  facts.  Enock  at  the  door  of  every  phsnomenon; 
press  against  the  door  until  the  fastenings  of  it  yield  to  your  pressure,  and, 
passing  in,  yon  stand  eye  to  ejre  in  presence  of  its  long-pent  mystery.  Wher- 
ever there  is  darkness,  creep  mto  it;  and  when  you  have  entered  within  its 
gloom,  kindle  the  torch  of  investigation  and  look  around  you,  to  discover  the 
hidden  wonder.  Explorations,  spiritually,  are  for  ever  in  order.  The  proof  of 
God  is  found,  beyond  all  else,  in  your  thinking ;  and  the  thinkers  of  the  world 
are  the  perpetual  evidences  of  the  truth  of  the  Bible  when  it  declares  that  God 
made  man  in  His  own  image.  The  human  intellect  is  the  offspring  of  the  Supreme 
Intelligence.  No  less  cause  than  this  can  be  assigned  as  able  to  produce  such 
a  result.  There  was  but  one  orb  that  could  throw  out  such  a  beam.  The  primal 
relation  of  the  human  mind  to  the  Deity  was  filial.  Of  this  there  can  be  no  doubt. 
Nature  alone  is  sufficient  evidence.  And  what,  pray,  is  the  peculiar  characteristic 
of  filial  connection  ?  What  is  the  initial  attitude  of  the  child's  mind  into  which  it 
grows  continually  as  it  advances  in  years?  2.  There  is  but  one  answer :  the  atti- 
tude is  that  of  reverence.  Well,  what  shall  we  say,  then,  touching  tiie  proper 
attitude  of  the  human  mind  to  its  Creator,  if  not  this,  that  its  attitude  should  be 
reverential  ?  This  conclusion  we  reach,  you  observe,  not  by  following  the  line  of 
any  dogma,  but  by  following  the  line  of  nature.  Nature  alone  constitutes  a  perfect 
bible  from  which  to  read  the  commandment  of  duty.  Your  minds  are  the  offspring 
of  that  Supreme  Intelligence  which  they  resemble.  And  if  your  minds  are  not  in 
a  reverential  attitude  toward  God,  they  are  in  a  state  of  transgression ;  not  as 
touching  any  verbal  statute,  but  as  touching  the  great  ineradicable  principle  of 
natural  relationship.  This  reverence  on  the  part  of  the  human  mind  touching  God 
refers  not  only  to  Him  as  to  His  nature,  but  to  Him  equally  as  to  His  creations  and 
surroundings.  The  mind  that  rightly  apprehends  its  relationship  to  the  Divine 
Being  reverences  not  only  Him,  but  all  that  He  has  made.  It  apprehends  Him  in 
Els  divergence,  in  His  distributiveness,  in  the  varieties  of  His  expression.  Like 
the  Hebrew,  it  apprehends  Him  in  the  beauty  of  the  firmament.  Like  the  Egyptian, 
it  sees  Him  in  the  patience,  the  usefulness,  and  the  cunning  of  animal  life.  Like 
the  Greek,  it  admires  the  divinity  as  seen  in  the  symmetry  of  outline  and  the  love- 
liness of  the  human  figure.  Like  the  historian,  it  beholds  Him  in  the  progress  of 
events  and  in  the  succession  of  forces,  as  they  have  been  evolved  from  the  various 
attempts  at  government.  Nor  does  such  a  mind  fail  to  see  the  evidence  of  its 
Master's  presence  in  little  things.  In  grasses,  in  flowers,  in  shrubs,  in  trees,  in 
whatever  there  is  of  growth  round  about,  the  mind  which  is  properly  constituted 
reverentially  apprehends  Deity.  8.  The  third  characteristic  of  mind  that  has  a 
special  religious  relation  is  humility,  and  the  exceeding  excellence  of  this  trait  will 
be  more  clearly  apprehended  when  it  is  set  in  ontrast  with  its  opposite,  arrogance, 
lliis  arrogance  of  intellect  is  as  old  as  studentship,  and  as  offensive  as  human 
pride.  Its  results  are  beyond  expression  deplorable.  Its  tendency  is  to  make 
men  self-opinionated,  domineering,  and  insult  ng.  It  has  been  the  mother  of  op- 
pression. It  has  dictated  persecutions  beyond  number.  It  has  driven  the  sword 
of  war  even  to  its  hilt  into  the  white  bosom  of  peace,  and  often  made  the  Church, 
which  is  by  nature  a  dispenser  of  the  m^^rcies  of  God,  an  engine  of  the  devil.    Its 

41 


64i  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ym. 

culmination  is  seen  in  the  assertion  of  infallibility.  He  who  lays  claim  to  snch 
powers  of  judgment  advertises  himself  as  the  colossal  arrogance  of  the  world.  The 
worst  phase  met  with  to-day  is  the  arrogance  of  what  is  known  as  Badicalism. 
There  is  a  class  of  men  whose  whole  philosophy  is  that  of  negation.  Their  wisdom 
consists  in  denial.  They  deny  the  existence  of  God,  they  deny  the  exaltation  of 
Christ,  they  deny  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  they  deny  the  intelligence  of  piety,  they 
deny  everything  that  faith  credits  or  the  converted  soul  believes.  Their  sole  object 
seems  to  be  to  undermine  and  pull  down  every  structure  which  Christian  faith  and 
hope  have  builded.  A  more  self-conceited  and  arrogant  set  of  men  never  lived. 
They  fulminate  their  scepticism  as  if  they  spoke  with  the  authority  of  a  god.  A 
scientific  supposition  is  made  to  subserve  the  purpose  of  a  fact.  Their  speculations 
are  announced  as  if  they  were  demonstrations.  They  are  all  kindred  in  the  fashion 
of  their  behaviour.  Their  utterances  are  monotonous.  He  who  has  heard  one  of 
them  lecture  has  heard  all.  He  who  has  read  one  volume  has  mastered  their  entire 
system,  if  such  vagaries  of  thought  can  be  called  a  system.  Bring  them  all  together, 
strip  them  of  their  various  names  and  their  personality,  lump  them  in  one  embodi- 
ment, and  they  represent  a  solid  mass  of  self-conceit.  That  such  men  can  have 
any  lasting  influence  on  the  thought  and  morals  of  the  race  is  preposterous.  They 
are  simply  an  accident  of  the  times.  They  simply  represent  human  eccentricity. 
I  have  now  discussed  the  relations  which  mental  activity,  the  quality  of  reverence, 
and  the  quality  of  humility  hold  to  religious  development.  If  yon  desire  religious 
growth,  you  must  keep  your  bodily  organs  thoroughly  healthy,  your  mind  active, 
reverential,  and  humble.  One  more  thing  alone  remains  to  be  said.  4.  And  this 
ane  thing  which  we  need,  we  need  beyond  everything  else :  it  is  the  love  of  the 
truth.  Truth  is  the  soul  of  form.  It  is  the  spirit  which  lurks  in  all  substance. 
It  is  the  genius  which  lives  in  law.  It  is  the  inspiration  of  love.  It  is  the 
crown  and  glory  of  man's  noblest  effort.  In  seeking  it  men  have  passed  their 
lives.  To  behold  the  brightness  of  its  face,  men  have  walked  bravely  into  the 
darkness  of  death.  In  order  to  know  truth  you  must  first  desire  it— desire  it 
with  your  whole  heart,  desire  it  for  its  own  sweet  sake.  In  order  to  find  it  you 
must  free  your  mind  from  all  prejudice,  from  all  vanity,  from  all  pride.  You  will 
look  for  it  on  a  throne,  and  you  will  find  it  in  a  manger.  You  will  look  for  it  in 
honour,  and  tou  will  find  it  in  shame.  You  will  look  for  it  among  the  wise,  and 
you  will  find  it  among  the  ignorant.  You  will  look  for  it  under  the  royalty  of  a 
crown,  and  you  will  find  it  on  a  cross.  Yon  wUl  search  the  letter,  and  you  will 
find  that  the  letter  does  not  include  it.  You  will  search  for  it  in  creeds,  and  after 
forty  years  of  belief,  you  will  discover  that  your  creed  does  not  contain  it.  You 
cannot  stamp  it  on  the  pages  of  a  pamphlet  any  more  than  you  can  tie  the  wind  to 
the  tree  tops.  But  he  who  searches  for  it  actively,  reverently,  humbly,  and  because 
his  soul  loveth  it,  will,  somewhere,  sometime,  find  it ;  not  all  at  once,  nor  in  the 
way  he  expected,  but  little  by  little,  and  in  the  way  of  surprise.  As  he  finds  it,  so 
shall  he  find  delight.  It  will  be  sweet  to  his  soul.  Peace,  too,  shall  come  with  it 
— the  peace  which  passeth  understanding — the  peace  that  makes  man  a  marvel 
unto  himself.  (W.  H.  H.  Murray.)  The  highest  literature  of  Christianity  : — 
I.  Truth  thus  weittbn  is  most  liEOiBLE.  Those  who  know  not  the  alphabet — 
children  and  heathens — can  read  characters.  These  life-commentaries  on  the  Bible 
we  want.  II.  Truth  thus  written  is  most  incorruptible  Man  may  write  his  inter- 
polations in  connection  with  God's  truth  on  paper  or  parcLinent,  but  not  on  souls.  III. 
Truth  thus  written  is  most  convincing.  The  arguments  of  Butler,  Paley,  4c. ,  are 
powerless  compared  with  the  argument  of  a  true  life.  IV.  Truth  thus  written 
IS  most  lasting.  Paper,  marble,  and  brass  will  decay,  but  not  souls.  {Homiligt.) 
Divine  renewal : — I.  The  proper  character  of  sanctification.  This,  as  it  is  an 
act  of  God  upon  the  human  soul,  consists  in  the  establishment  in  it  of  a  divine 
principle  of  holiness,  expressed,  here,  as  the  putting  God's  laws  into  the  mind  and 
writing  them  in  the  heart.  This  is  begun  in  regeneration.  The  law  of  God,  the 
principle  of  true  holiness,  is  re-established  in  the  inward  parts ;  the  man  is 
Brought  into  habitual  conformity  to  it,  in  all  its  spirituality,  as  the  one  governing 
principle  of  his  life.  This  is  the  proper  character  of  sanctification,  as  it  is  a  graca 
of  the  true  Christian.  II.  The  seat  of  sanctification.  This  is,  in  general,  the 
soul  of  man :  the  mind  and  heart.  In  both  these  this  blessed  principle  has  its 
throne,  and  exerts  its  paramount,  though  not  undisputed,  dominion  over  the  whole 
man.  The  body  of  the  believer,  itself,  experiences  the  benefit  of  the  sanctification 
(Bom.  vi.  13  ;  xii.  1).  Divine  grace,  in  the  renewed  mind,  is  a  pervading  principle, 
ihat,  like  leaven,  to  which  it  is  compared,  never  ceases  its  operation,  till  it  hay« 


CHAP.  Tin.]  HEBREWS.  648 

assimilated  to  itsell  all  with  which  it  comes  in  contact.  It  attacks  not  one  vice, 
and  spares  another  ;  corrects  not  one  evil  habit,  and  tolerates  the  rest.  The  law  ol 
the  new  creation  is  nothing  less  than  God's  law ;  and  whatever  in  thought,  word,  or 
deed,  whatever  in  tempers,  habits,  and  dispositions,  consists  not  with  perfect  love 
to  God  and  man  (which  is  "  the  fulfilling  of  the  law "),  that  the  renewed  man 
instantly  detects,  by  a  kind  of  spiritual  instinct  before  unknown  ;  an  antipathy  of 
nature,  as  true  to  itself,  as  uniform  in  its  actings,  as  that  of  water  to  fire,  or  of 
darkness  to  light.  The  two  cannot  exist  together  in  peace.  The  man  now  hates 
sin ;  strives  against  it  in  all  its  shapes — against  corrupt  reason  and  passion  both. 
Satan  and  his  allies  in  man— the  lusts  of  Uie  flesh  and  of  the  mind— are  driven  into 
corners  ;  they  cannot  tyrannise  as  before  ;  bnt  they  yield  not  easily.  The  words  of 
the  promise  lead  us  to  distinguish  two  parts  in  this  great  work,  the  sanctification  of 
the  human  soul.  1.  The  enUghtening  of  the  understanding,  exprested  by  putting 
God's  laws  into  the  mind.  2.  The  engagement  of  the  affections,  expressed  by 
writing  them  in  the  heart.  Both  these  go  together  when  the  man  is  born  again  of 
the  Spirit.  The  soul  is  sweetly  but  powerfully  drawn  to  choose  what  the  judgment 
has  been  taught  to  approve.  There  is  given,  not  the  rule  only  of  obedience,  but 
the  spirit  of  obedience ;  there  is  a  taking  away  the  stony  heart  out  of  the  ilesh,  and 
giving  a  heart  of  flesh.  III.  Thb  Acthoe  of  sanctification.  "  I  will  put  .  .^ . 
I  will  write."  God,  then,  is  Himself  the  agent  in  the  rstablishment  of  His  law  in 
the  hearts  and  minds  of  His  people.  None  beneath  Himself  is  equal  to  this  great 
work.  The  outward  means  which  He  uses  as  preparatory  and  auxUiary  to  this 
great  work,  are  endlessly  diversified.  1.  The  mercy  which  distinguishes  one  man 
from  another  is  not  the  result  of  hoUness  foreseen  in  the  subjects  of  it.  The  terms 
of  the  covenant  of  grace  run  directly  counter  to  such  a  notion.  Sanctification  i^ 
promised  in  it  to  sinners,  as  a  free  gift.  2.  HoUness  is  connected  with  mercy,  as 
the  effect  with  its  cause.  The  revelation  of  mercy  to  unrighteousness  is  God's  great 
means  for  winning  the  siimer  from  his  enmity,  to  love  and  delight  in  Him.  I  will 
sanctify,  saith  He,  for  I  will  be  merciful.  These  two  can  never  be  disjoined. 
3.  Sanctification  is  never  perfect  while  the  believer  is  in  the  body.  The  conflict 
between  the  flesh  and  the  spirit  continues  to  the  end,  with  various  success ;  but, 
upon  the  whole,  the  actings  of  corruption  get  weaker,  and  the  habit  of  grace 
Btrengthens  in  the  soul.  Still,  the  spark  of  evil  is  not  extinguished.  Satan  lives, 
and,  if  permitted,  can  easily  re-kindle  it  into  a  flame.  4.  The  law  of  the  Ten 
Commandments  is  still  the  rule  of  life  to  the  believer.  From  the  law,  as  a  cove- 
nant, we  are  eternally  delivered,  through  Christ.  As  a  means,  therefore,  of 
meriting  life,  we  have  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  terms  of  it.  Eternal  life  ia 
given  us  in  Christ  (1  John  v.  11).  But  we  are  therefore  "  delivered  from  the  law," 
"  that  the  righteousness  of  the  law  may  be  fulfilled  in  us,  who  walk,  not  after  the 
flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit "  (Eom.  viii.  2,  4,  compare  Eom.  vii.  6).  The  law  of 
Christ  is  indeed  a  law  of  love ;  but  still  this  "  new  commandment "  is  "  the  old 
commandment  which  ye  had  from  the  beginning  "  (1  John  ii.  7).  6.  The  security 
of  the  believer  in  Jesus.  God  has  put  His  hand  to  the  work,  and  who  shall  let  it? 
(Francit  Ooode,  M.A.)  God't  law  written  in  the  heart : — I.  The  things  to  bb 
>RHTEN  ABE  THE  LAWS  OP  GoD.  But  what  laws  these  are  may  be  doubted.  For 
some  will  have  them  to  be  the  Decalogue.  Yet  these  are  said  to  be  written  in  the 
heart  of  the  very  heathens  (Rom.  ii.  15).  let  suppose  they  be  already  in  their 
hearts,  yet  the  writing  of  them  there  is  very  imperfect ;  for  both  the  knowledge  of 
them  and  the  power  to  keep  them  are  very  imperfect,  so  that  the  love  of  God  and 
our  neighbour  may  be  imprinted  there  more  perfectly.  Yet  the  word  termed 
Laws  signifies  in  the  Hebrew,  Doctrines.  And  these  are  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel 
concerning  Christ's  person,  nature,  offices,  and  the  work  of  redemption;  the 
doctrines  of  repentance,  faith,  justification,  and  eternal  life;  and  these  either  pre- 
suppose or  include  the  moral  law.  Further,  they  are  doctrines  concerning  Christ, 
glorified,  reigning,  and  officiating  in  heaven.  H.  The  book  ob  tables  wheeein 
THEv  MUST  be  WRITTEN  ABE  THE  MIND  AND  HEAET  OF  MAN.  There  is  the  spring  and 
original  of  all  rational  and  moral  operations,  of  all  thoughts,  affections,  and  inward 
motions.  There  is  the  directive  counsel  and  imperial  commanding  power.  There 
is  the  prime  mover  of  all  humane  actions  as  such.  This  is  the  subject  fit  to  receive 
not  only  natural  but  supernatural  truths,  and  doctrines,  and  all  laws.  There  divine 
characters  may  be  imprinted,  and  made  legible  to  the  soul  itself.  This  is  the  most 
noble  and  excellent  book  that  any  can  write  in.  IIL  The  Sceibe  ob  pen-man  is 
Odd  ;  roa  it  is  said,  I  will  give  ob  put,  I  will  wbite.  He  that  said  so  was  the 
Lord.    And  it  must  be  He,  because  the  work  is  bo  curious  and  excellent  that  it  ia 


644  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oha^  v™- 

far  above  the  sphere  of  created  activity.    He  alone  can  immediately  work  upon  the 
immortal  soul  to  inform  it,  move  it,  alter  it,  and  mould  it  anew.    IV.  The  act  and 

WORK  OF  THIS   PENMAN   IS    TO   WEITE,  AND   WHITE   THESE   LAWS  AND  WHITE  THEM  IN  THE 

HEABT.  How  He  doth  it  we  know  not.  That  He  doth  it  is  clear  enough.  His 
preparations,  illuminations,  impulsions,  inspirations,  are  strange  and  wonderful,  of 
great  and  mighty  force.  For  in  this  work  He  doth  not  only  represent  divine  objects 
in  a  clearer  light,  and  propose  high  motives  to  incline  and  turn  the  heart,  but  also 
gives  a  divine  perceptive  and  appetitive  power,  whereby  the  soul  more  easily  and 
clearly  apprehends,  and  more  effectually  affects  heavenly  things.  The  effect  of 
this  writing  is  a  divine  knowledge  of  God's  laws,  and  a  ready  and  willing  heart  to 
obey  them,  and  conform  unto  them,  a  power  to  know  and  do  the  word  of  God. 
This  is  that  work  of  the  Spirit  which  is  called  vocation,  renovation,  regeneration, 
conversion  actively  taken,  without  which  man  cannot  repent,  believe,  obey,  and 
turn  to  God.  L  The  laws.  The  laws  of  God  are  written  in  the  heart,  not  the  in- 
ventions, fancies  of  men,  nor  natural,  nor  mathematical,  nor  moral  philosophy ; 
much  less  the  errors  and  blasphemies  of  seducers  and  false  prophets.  2.  The  heart 
of  man  is  by  nature  a  very  untoward  and  indisposed  subject,  and  not  capable  of 
these  heavenly  doctrines.  It  is  blind  and  perverse,  and  there  is  an  antipathy 
between  it  and  these  laws.  As  it  hath  no  true  notions  of  the  greatest  good,  so  it 
hath  no  mind  to  use  the  means,  which  conduce  to  the  attaining  thereof.  This 
defacement  of  so  noble  a  substance  is  the  work  of  the  devil  and  sin.  3.  Concerning 
God's  writing  His  laws  in  the  heart  of  man,  you  must  know — (1)  That  they  are 
not  written  there  by  nature.  If  they  were,  what  need  God  write  that  which  is 
already  written?  (2)  He  writes  nothing  in  this  heart  but  His  laws  and  His  saving 
truths.  Therefore  that  which  is  not  written  without  in  the  Scripture  He  doth  not 
promise  to  write  within  the  heart,  and  whosoever  shall  fancy  any  doctrine  received 
in  his  heart  to  be  written  by  the  hand  of  Heaven,  and  yet  cannot  find  it  in  the 
gospel,  is  deceived  and  deluded.  (3)  Before  these  divine  doctrines  can  be  written 
in  the  heart,  all  errors,  lusts,  false  opinions,  must  be  rased  and  rooted  out  of  the 
soul,  and  it  must  be  made  hke  blank  paper.  (4)  God  doth  not  write  His  laws  in 
our  hearts  by  enthusiasm,  rapture,  and  inspiration,  as  He  wrote  His  word  in  the 
hearts  of  the  prophets  and  apostles ;  but  He  makes  use  of  the  word,  and  the 
ministers  of  the  gospel,  and  the  instructions  of  man,  as  also  of  the  outward  senses, 
as  of  the  eye  and  ear,  and  also  of  the  inward,  and  of  reason,  and  of  all  the  powers 
He  hath  given  man  to  do  anything  in  this  work.  And  whosoever  will  not  use  these 
means  and  exercise  this  power  by  reading,  hearing,  meditation,  conference,  prayer, 
let  him  never  expect  or  think  that  God  will  write  these  things  in  his  heart.  (6) 
The  effect  of  this  writing  of  God  is  not  only  knowledge,  bat  also  a  love  of  the  truth, 
light,  and  integrity,  power  and  dominion  over  sin,  and  the  powerful  sanctificationa 
and  consolations  of  the  Spirit.  And  whosoever  doth  not  find  these  in  his  heart,  let 
him  not  think  that  God  hath  written  His  laws  in  his  heart.  For  He  writes  with 
power,  and  leaves  a  permanent  tincture  of  holiness,  and  a  constant  habitual  inclina- 
tion to  that  which  is  good,  just,  and  right.  (6)  God  doth  not  write  these  laws 
perfectly  and  fully  in  man's  heart  whilst  he  is  in  the  flesh ;  for  He  proceeds  in  this 
work  by  degrees.  Therefore  seeing  God  hath  ordained  means,  and  commanded 
them  to  be  used,  no  man  must  neglect  them  whilst  this  mortal  life  continues,  for 
these  truths  are  not  written  in  any  of  our  hearts  further  than  we  use  these  means, 
which  were  given  not  only  for  the  first  inscription  of  these  laws,  but  for  the 
increase  and  perfection  of  our  Divine  knowledge.  (O.  Lawson).  The  law  in  the 
V  heart : — Itwas  a  choice  tribute  that  was  lately  rendered  to  a  noble  Christian  woman, 
that  "  her  natural  hfe  was  so  completely  Christian,  that  her  Christian  life  became 
completely  natural."  (Sarah  F.  Smiley.)  The  miracle  of  miracles : — The  miracle 
of  miracles  is  this — "  A  new  heart  will  I  give  you,  and  a  new  spirit  will  I  put  within 
yon."  To  put  the  law  in  the  inward  parts,  and  to  write  it  on  the  hearib,  is  more 
tban  to  fill  the  firmament  with  stars.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Commandmentt,  not 
burdensome  : — Cicero  questions  whether  that  can  properly  be  called  a  burden  which 
one  carries  with  delight  and  pleasure.  If  a  man  carries  a  bag  of  money  given  him, 
it  is  heavy  ;  but  the  delight  takes  off  the  burden.  When  God  gives  inward  joy, 
that  makes  the  commandments  deligbtfuL  Joy  is  like  oil  to  the  wheels,  which 
malces  a  Christian  mn  in  the  way  of  God's  commandments,  so  that  it  is  not  burden- 
some. (T,  Watton.)  Obedience  from  love : — The  son  of  a  poor  man,  that  hath 
not  8  penny  to  give  or  leave  him,  yields  his  father  obedience  as  cheerfully  as  the 
son  of  a  rich  man  that  looks  for  a  great  inheritance.  It  is,  indeed,  love  to  the 
father,  not  wages  from  the  father,  that  is  the  ground  of  a  good  child's  obedience. 


tstkP.  vra.]  HEBREWS.  645 

If  there  were  no  heaven,  God's  children  would  obey  Him ;  and  though  there  was  no 
hell,  yet  would  they  do  their  duty ;  so  powerfully  doth  the  love  of  the  Father  con- 
strain them.  (J.  Spencer.)  Two  conversions  needed  ; — We  all  need  two  con- 
versions. First  of  all,  we  need  to  be  converted  from  the  natural  man  to  the 
spiritual  man,  and  in  the  second  place,  we  need  to  be  converted  from  the  spiritual 
man  to  the  natural  man,  until  the  spiritual  man  becomes  a  natural  life,  and  the 
burden  is  opportunity  and  the  bondage  is  delight.  (Theodore  Monod.)  Inter 
dtvotion : — If  those  who  are  in  the  employ  of  others  do  but  meet  the  outward  and 
visible  engagements  into  which  they  have  entered  with  their  masters,  the  latter  are 
satisfied.  Let  but  the  proper  hours  be  kept  and  the  day  fully  and  diligently  filled 
up,  let  but  the  books  be  accurately  posted,  and  the  articles  of  merchandise  which 
are  being  manufactured  be  put  together  in  a  workmanlike  way ;  and  the  wages  are 
cheerfully  and  promptly  paid.  The  majority  of  masters  do  not  concern  themselves 
with  the  motives  of  their  men.  The  latter  might  profess  to  like  other  masters 
better  than  they  do  their  own,  yet  if  they  but  fulfil  their  tasks  their  employers  are 
content.  The  preferences  and  motives  of  their  servants  most  masters  regard  aa 
being  no  concern  of  theirs.  In  this  respect  there  exists  a  striking  contrast  between 
the  claims  of  God  and  those  of  men.  The  Almighty  will  accept  of  no  service  which 
is  not  a  service  of  love.  The  heart  must  first  be  given  before  the  service  is  accepted. 
The  connection  subsisting  between  God  and  those  employed  by  Him  resembles 
rather  the  services  rendered  to  each  other  by  the  members  of  a  loving  and  united 
household.  (T.  Thompson,  M.A.)  The  law  in  the  heart  : — Just  as  each  plant  in  >( 
its  growth  spontaneously  obeys  the  law  put  into  its  inmost  parts  by  God,  so  the 
believer  who  accepts  the  new  covenant  promise  in  its  fulness,  walks  in  the  power  of 
that  inner  law.  The  spirit  within  frees  from  the  law  without.  (Andrew  Murray.) .. 
Attraction: — Just  as  the  water  naturally  follows  the  channels  which  are  con- 
structed to  conduct  it  from  the  mountains  to  the  sea,  so  the  holy  heart  follows  the 
channels  of  Divine  law,  marked  out  by  Divine  law,  not  through  compulsion,  but 
through  the  power  of  attraction.  The  grand  morality : — A  noted  secular  paper 
once  prophesied  concerning  Moody  and  Sankey  that  Professor  Tyndall  would  do 
more  to  purify  London  than  "these  men!  "  Professor  Tyndall  may  help  us  to 
purify  the  atmosphere  of  our  houses  and  streets,  but  what  word  has  he  ever 
dropped  that  would  purify  a  human  heart!  He  may  discourse  eloquently  of 
"duty,"  but  Plato  could  have  done  that;  Aristotle  did  that.  But  who  has  not 
found  out  before  he  has  had  many  years'  experience  in  dealing  with  men,  that  what 
is  needed  is  not  so  much  to  show  men  their  duty  as  to  get  them  to  do  it  ?  To  show 
men  their  duty  you  want  light,  to  get  them  to  do  it  you  want  power,  and  the  only 
adequate  power  is  love.  God's  clearest  light,  God's  mightiest  power  is  in  the  Cross 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  1  (G.  Clemance,  D.D.)  I  will  be  to  them  a  God.— 
Divine  relationship  : — I.  A  mutual  belation  op  God  and  men.  "  I  will  be  to  them 
a  God."  In  other  words,  Whatever  I  am  in  Myself,  that  I  will  be  to  them ;  of  that 
they  shall  have  the  free  use  and  blessed  experience  ;  all  My  perfections  will  I  exert 
for  their  present  and  everlasting  welfare.  How  greatly  do  we  need  the  increase  of 
faith,  to  receive  this  amazing  promise  1  to  embrace  it,  to  the  comfort  and  joy  of  our 
souls.  We  shrink  from  appropriating  it;  we  try  to  live  on  something  less  for 
happiness.  But  He  who  knows  the  souls  that  He  has  made,  knows  that  nothing 
beneath  Himself  can  ever  fill  their  boundless  desires.  No  gifts  of  nature,  no,  nor 
even  the  largest  gifts  of  grace  itself,  can  supply  the  place  of  Him  who  is  the  Author 
of  them  all.  God,  then,  makes  Himself  a  God  to  His  people,  communicates  Him- 
self to  them  by  indwelling.  "  I  will  dwell  in  them,  and  walk  in  them,  and  I  will  be 
their  God."  Two  things  are  necessary  for  your  enjoyment  of  this  promise. 
1.  Eealize  God  as  your  God.  Claim  the  relation  of  a  child ;  live  as  if  you  were 
one ;  and  God  will  so  own  the  relation  that  you  can  hesitate  no  longer.  2.  Live 
on  God  as  a  God  to  you — and  this  in  two  ways.  (1)  Live  on  Him  for  all  your 
need.  (2)  Live  on  Him  for  all  your  happiness.  Under  this  twofold  aspect  God 
revealed  Himself  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xii.  1)  for  the  encouragement  of  His  faith,  in 
the  long-continued  trial  of  it.  (Francis  Goode,  M.A.)  They  shall  be  to  Me  a 
people. — Divine  relationship  : — I,  This  relation  of  redeemed  sinners  to  their  God. 
"  They  shall  be  to  Me  a  people."  1.  His  people  owning  God  as  theirs.  (1)  They 
yield  themselves  to  His  authority.  (2)  They  separate  themselves  from  an  evil 
world.  (3)  They  devote  themselves  to  His  service.  (4)  They  live  on  Him  for 
protection  and  happiness.  2.  God  owning  them  as  His  people.  Oonsider  the 
terms  of  endearment  under  which  He  speaks  of  them.  He  calls  them  Hia 
children ;  the  sheep  of  His  pasture,  for  whom  the  Shepherd  bled.    Soeh  ia  the 


646  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

preciousness  of  His  parchased  people  in  His  eyes.  (1)  How  infatuated  ate  (be 
enemies  of  God's  people  1  How  great  is  the  folly  (to  say  nothing  of  the  wickedness) 
of  hating  those  whom  God  loves  1  (2)  How  glorious  is  the  character,  how  exalted 
the  privileges,  of  the  saints  1  II.  God's  own  engagement  to  establish  this  eelation 
BETWEEN  us  AND  HiM.  "  They  shall  be  to  Me  a  people."  These  words  clearly  ex- 
press a  resolve  of  God  in  this  matter.  He  Has  so  ordered  the  covenant  of  grace, 
that  it  is  a  sure  covenant  to  all  who  have  once  embraced  it.  "  They  shall  be  io  Me 
a  people."  His  word  is  passed  for  the  effectual  accomplishment  of  His  grace  ;  and, 
therefore,  His  own  Divine  character  and  glory  are  involved  in  it.  If  God  be  able  to 
do  what  He  has  resolved  to  do,  this  relation  cannot  fail  to  be  made  good  between 
Him  and  them.  This  doctrine  is  a  precious  cordial  for  the  fainting  soldier  in  the 
day  of  battle.  It  strengthens  his  weak  hands ;  confirms  his  feeble  knees  ;  animates 
him  under  all  the  terribleness  of  conflict.  (Ibid.)  All  shall  know  Me. — Divine 
knowledge: — I.  A  knowledge  of  God  covenanted  under  the  Gospel.  "They  shall 
know  Me."  This  is  a  knowledge  little  thought  of,  or  valued,  by  men  in  general ; 
and,  which  is  stranger  still,  it  is  that  of  which  all  men  in  Christian  countries  think 
they  are  in  possession.  But  to  know  God  indeed,  according  to  the  true  sense  of  the 
term,  is  to  have  such  an  apprehension  of  His  infinite  majesty  and  holiness  as  shall 
lay  us  low  before  Him,  and  to  bow  with  deepest  submission  to  His  will.  It  is  to 
have  such  a  knowledge  of  His  glorious  goodness  as  shall  fill  us  with  holy  delight  in 
Him,  intense  desire  after  communion  with  Him,  and  enjoyment  of  His  favour. 
Further,  it  is  so  to  behold  His  glory,  as  to  be  ourselves  transformed  into  the  same 
image  of  holiness  and  goodness;  to  be  ourselves  "partakers  of  the  Divine  nature " 
(2  I'et.  i.  4).  This  knowledge  of  God,  which  is  matter  of  promise  to  His  covenant 
people,  we  may  consider  under  two  heads.  It  consists  in  saving  acquaintance  with 
God — (1)  As  He  is  in  Himself,  in  His  revealed  nature  and  character.  (2)  As  He 
is  to  us,  in  His  purposes  towards  us,  and  the  interest  which  we  have  in  Him. 
II.  The  universality  of  this  knowledge  of  God  by  His  covenant  people.  "  All  shall 
know  Me,  from  the  least  to  the  greatest."  There  is  not  one  true  child  of  God 
under  the  gospel  but  has  his  measure  of  it.  He  discerns  the  perfections  of  God,  as 
they  are  disi'layed  in  the  work  of  redemption  ;  that  "  mystery  which,  in  other  ages, 
was  not  made  known  to  the  sons  of  men,  as  it  is  now  revealed  unto  His  apostles  and 
prophets  (and  by  them  to  the  Church)  through  the  Spirit."  The  "  least "  of  God'a 
covenant  people,  as  well  as  the  greatest,  has  now  a  satisfying,  soul-quieting  ac- 
quaintance with  God ;  such  an  understanding  of  the  method  of  peace  with  God, 
through  Christ,  as  even  prophets,  and  righteous  men  of  old,  the  most  spiritual  of 
their  day,  desired  in  vain.  Yea,  often  the  poor  and  ignorant  and  weak  in  intellect 
of  this  world  are,  in  the  sovereignty  of  Divine  grace,  pre-eminently  "rich  in  faith, 
and  heirs  of  the  kingdom  which  God  hath  promised  to  them  that  love  Him."  III. 
A  scpeb-homan  source  op  this  knowledge.  "  They  shall  not  teach,"  &c.  This  is 
Certainly  not  said  to  disparage  God's  appointed  ordinance  of  public  preaching,  or 
mutual  exhortation.  It  was  under  this  very  gospel  covenant  that  He  first  gave  the 
command,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature. "  But 
the  believer  does  not  so  learn  of  man  as  that  He  receives  the  truth  in  that  un- 
certainty,  or  sense  of  possible  error,  which  attaches  to  every  mere  word  of  man. 
There  is  a  revelation  of  God  to  His  children,  a  knowledge  of  Himself  by  His  Spirit, 
that  is,  Uke  light,  its  own  witness.  The  man  who  has  it  is  sure  that  he  has  it,  and 
that  it  is  of  God.  Lessons  :  1.  Do  we  possess  such  superior  light  and  knowledge  of 
God  to  any  which  the  saints  of  old  enjoyed  ?  0,  then,  let  the  superior  effects  of 
this  knowledge  be  clearly  discernible  in  our  conduct.  To  see  God  indeed  is  to  be 
like  God.  2.  Be  satisfied  with  no  knowledge  of  God  to  which  you  have  yet  attained. 
Though,  like  Paul,  you  had  been  caught  up  into  the  third  heaven,  yet  should  your 
prayer  be,  with  Paul,  "  That  I  may  know  Him  " ;  yet  should  your  language  be,  as 
his  was,  "  Not  as  though  I  had  already  attained."  Still  have  you  reason  to  say, 
"  Now  I  know  in  part."  3.  Learn  to  live  on  God  in  the  use  of  ordinances.  This  is 
a  very  different  thing  from  that  pernicious  conceit  of  living  above  ordinances. 
That  is  the  privilege  of  heaven  alone.  God  can  indeed  supply  the  place  of  means, 
and,  in  particular  cases,  He  does  so ;  acts  independent  of  them ;  to  teach  us  to 
trust  in  Him,  in  the  dearth  of  them.  But,  ordinarily,  it  is  otherwise.  4.  This 
promise  of  the  covenant,  like  the  preceding,  has  its  complete  fulfilment  only  in  an 
eternal  world.  The  knowledge  of  God  which  the  believer  now  has  is  real  and 
dehghtful ;  all  the  things  that  can  be  desired  are  not  to  be  compared  unto  it.  But 
the  sweetest  part  of  its  enjoyment  is,  that  it  is  an  earnest  of  what  shall  be.  (Ibid.) 
The  knowledge  of  Ood : — L  In  the  first  place,  what  is  intended  n  the  text  by  the 


CHAP,  vm.]  HEBREWS.  647 


KNOWLEDGE  OF  GoD,  "  All  shall  know  Me."  It  cannot  be  a  mere  knowledge  of  the 
existence  of  God,  for  the  devils  believe  that  God  is.  It  cannot  be  a  mere  partial 
acquaintance  with  the  character  of  God  ;  because  we  cannot  for  a  moment  doubt 
that  the  Jews  were  partially  acquainted  with  God's  character,  and  yet  our  Lord  said 
to  them,  "Ye  neither  know  Me  nor  My  Father."  Neither  can  it  be  a  dry,  onin- 
fluential,  notional  knowledge  of  God,  however  accurate  (2  Peter  ii.  20, 21).  To  know 
God  includes  far  more  than  this.  It  implies  a  real,  personal,  experimental,  sancti- 
fying acquaintance  with  God.  1.  It  especially  regards  Him  as  a  reconciled  God  in 
Cnrist.  2.  But  more  than  this ;  the  knowledge  of  God  implies  a  knowledge  of 
Him  as  our  God  in  covenant ;  a  God  who  has  pledged  His  very  perfections  to  bring 
His  people  safe  to  glory  ;  who  will  not  have  them  to  judge  Him  by  their  feelings, 
nor  by  their  providences.  Who  can  unfold  the  knowledge  of  God  which  springs 
from  the  consideration  of  Him  as  a  pitying  Father  ?  "  Heknoweth  our  frame;  He 
remembereth  that  we  are  dust."  To  know  God  implies  a  knowledge  of  Him  as  a 
God  all-sufficient.  My  brethren,  how  long  you  and  I  have  been  learning  this 
lesson,  and  how  little  we  know  of  it  after  all  1  II.  Observe,  in  the  second  place, 
here  is  a  positive  word  of  certainty  that  all  God's  people  shall  know  Him,  "  from 
the  least  to  the  greatest."  This  was  no  small  part  of  the  work  of  our  adorable 
Immanuel.  It  is  sweet  and  pleasant  to  look  at  Him  as  bearing  the  very  name  of 
the  Word  of  God,  because  He  is  the  revealer  of  God.  He  does  indeed  tell  us  the 
secrets  of  God's  heart ;  He  brings  to  light  those  perfections  in  Deity  which  we 
rould  never  conceive  to  have  existed  but  for  His  work.  The  \york  of  Jesus  is 
glorious  throughout,  and  there  is  no  part  of  His  work  which  ought  more  to  endear 
Him  to  our  hearts  than  this,  inasmuch  as  He  disclosed  more  of  the  Father,  and 
brings  us  into  more  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  character  of  God,  than  could 
have  been  devised  by  any  other  means.  But  it  is  not  this  that  secures  the  infallible 
teaching  of  all  God's  Israel ;  it  was  the  covenant  "  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure." 
15ut  there  is  ;i  point  connected  with  this  that  I  would  not  overlook,  and  that  is,  the 
way  by  which  the  Holy  Spirit  (for  it  is  His  especial  work),  brings  the  knowledge  of 
God  into  the  soul.  "  I  will  give  them  a  heart  that  they  may  know  Me,  saith  the 
Lord."  It  is  not,  "  I  will  give  them  knowledge,"  but  "  I  will  give  them  a  heart." 
Now  this  was  communicated  in  regeneration.  Oh  the  wonders  of  redeeming  love, 
flowing  out  from  the  heart  of  God  by  Christ  Jesus  1  Oh  what  a  beam  of  light  is  that 
which  the  Holy  Spirit  brings  into  the  conscience,  developing  God  our  Saviour  in 
Christ  Jesus  I  III.  But  observe,  what  are  the  blessings  of  this  knowledge  oi" 
God.  I  hardly  know  where  to  begin  or  where  to  end.  It  is  true  wisdom  :  "  The 
fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom  ;  and  the  knowledge  of  Him  is  under- 
standing." Here  lies  also  the  secret  of  peace,  "  They  that  know  Thy  name  will 
put  their  trust  in  Thee."  Whence  is  it  that  the  careworn  brow  marks  thy 
countenance  ?  If  thou  wert  only  conversant  with  the  great  secret,  "  Casting  thy 
care  upon  Him  that  careth  for  thee,"  thou  wouldst  find  out  the  blessed  lesson,  of 
living  above  the  region  of  disappointment,  and  finding  peace  in  believing,  '*  Acquaint 
thyself  with  Him,  and  be  at  peace."  In  a  word,  this  true  knowledge  of  God  has  in 
it  the  material  of  all  holiness.  Whatever  there  is  of  love,  whatever  there  is  of 
hope,  whatever  there  is  of  obedience,  whatever  there  is  of  careful  walking,  whatever 
there  is  of  watchfulness  unto  prayer,  whatever  there  is  of  making  a  conscience  of 
one's  deeds,  whatever  there  is  of  walking  secretly  with  God  as  in  the  sight  of  God 
— it  is  all  involved  in  one  truth,  a  true,  real,  personal,  experimental  knowledge  of 
God  in  Christ.  1.  Be  thankful,  then,  for  the  least  measure  you  have  of  the  true 
knowledge  of  God.  2.  Covet  earnestly  the  most.  The  true  secret  for  a  heavenly 
walk  with  God  is  a  real  acquaintance  with  Him.  3.  Do  not  quarrel  with  the  way 
by  which  God  makes  Himself  known  to  thee.  I  remember  the  expression  of  a  child 
of  God  who,  feeliug  her  heart  too  much  attached  to  some  earthly  object,  prayed 
that  God  would  take  away  the  idol,  whatever  the  idol  might  be.  In  the  course  of 
a  week  He  took  away  her  husband.  {J.  H.  Evans,  M.A.)  The  universal  diffusion 
of  Scriptural  knowledge  : — These  words,  quoted  from  Jer.  xxxi.  34,  are  here  applied 
to  New  Testament  times.  They  plainly  teach,  that  these  times  shall  be  greatly 
superior  to  aU  that  preceded  them,  in  the  general  diffusion  of  that  knowledge  which 
is  essentially  necessary  to  the  everlasting  salvation  of  the  soul.  This  blessing, 
which  is  of  infinite  importance,  belongs  to  a  new  economy,  different  from  the 
ancient  covenant  which  God  made  with  Israel,  the  peculiar  privileges  of  which 
were  of  an  earthly  character,  were  shadowy  or  emblematical,  and  were  chiefly  con- 
fined to  one  nation.  But  the  privileges  of  the  new  economy  were  to  be  of  a 
spiritoal  character,  and  were  to  extend  to  men  of  all  ranks,  and  of  all  nations,  on 


648  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  viit 

the  face  of  the  earth.     I.  The  chabaoteb  of  that  knowledge  which  shall  emi- 
NENTLT  DisTiKGtrisH  THIS  PERIOD.     1.  It  is  the  knowledge  of  God,  of  things  divine, 
as  revealed  in  the  Holy  Scriptures.     2.  This  knowledge  is  communicated  to  the 
ignorant  as  the  fulfilment  of  a  gracious  promise  by  the  agency  of  the  Divine  Spiiit 
(Isa.  liv.  13).     3.  This  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  by  which  the  period  referred  to  in 
the  text  shall  be  eminently  distinguished,  shall  be  very  generally  diffused  among 
all  ranks  and  descriptions  of  men.    II.  The  means  which  ought  to  be  used  by  us 
FOB  hastening  THIS  PEBioD.     It  is  Said  in  the  text,  that  when  this  happy  era  is 
come,    they    shall    not    teach,     or,    as    it    is    expressed    in    the    prophecy, 
they    shall    teach  no     more,    every    man    his    neighbour,     and     every    man 
his  brother,  saying,  •*  Know  the  Lord  "  ;  which  seems  plainly  to  intimate,  that 
certain  means,  which  are  now  very  properly  used  for  advancing  this  period,  shall 
then  become   unnecessary.      {Wm.    Schaw.)         Coming  of  the  millenium  : — The 
world  is  preparing  day  by  day  for  the  millenium,  but  you  do  not  see  it.     Every 
season  forms  itself  a  year  in  advance.     The  coming  summer  lays  out  her  work 
during  the  autumn,  and  buds  and  roots  are  forespoken.     Ten  million  roots  are 
pumping  in  the  streets  ;  do  you  hear  them?    Ten  million  buds  are  forming  in  the 
axils  of  the  leaves  ;  do  you  hear  the  sound  of  the  saw  or  the  hammer  ?     All  next 
summer  is  at  work  in  the  world;  but  it  is  unseen  by  us.     And  so  "  the  kingdom  o! 
God  Cometh  not  with  observation."     (H.  W.  Beecher.)        I  will  be  merciful  to 
their  unrighteousness. — Mercy  to  unrighteousness  : — I.  The  peesons  to  whom  this 
GEACE  is  covenanted.    Is  it  I,  will  each  of  us  inquire,  whom  God  means  to  include 
in  a  promise  so  cheering,  so  all-sufficient  ?    II.  The  condition  in  which  it  supposes 
them  to  be.     Throughout  this  covenant  no  mention  is  made  of  anything  in  man 
but  guilt  and  ruin.     The  promise  in  my  text  obviously  assumes  such  to  be  his  con- 
dition.    Man  is  in  himself  all  unrighteousness,  as  it  is  written,  "  there  is  none 
righteous,  no,  not  one"  (Rom.  iii.  10).     Surely  there  is  nothing  more  suited  to 
inspire  hope  in  the  breast  of  an  awakened  sinner  than  the  consideration  of  this 
truth.     My  sins,  such  an  one  may  say,  are  exceeding  great ;  but,  thanks  be  to  God, 
He  who  best  knows  them  speaks  to  me  of  mercy  1    But  it  is  long,  in  general, 
before  an  awakened  sinner,  though  again  and  again  God  discover  to  him  the  vanity 
of  all  attempts  to  bring  any  deservings  of  his  own,  can  be  persuaded  to  go  quite 
without  hope  or  plea  of  any  kind  but  this — Lord,  I  am  a  sinner,  and  Thou  art  a 
free  Saviour.     We  dare  not  believe  that   grace  is  indeed  so  free,  so  unbounded, 
to  those  who  will  go  to  God  in  Christ.     III.  God's  engagements  eelative  to  this 
condition.     "  I  will  be  merciful  ...  I  will  remember  no  more."     In  these  words 
God  promises  the  removal  of  aU  kinds  and  degrees  of  sin.     1.  Freely.     "  I  will  be 
merciful."    This  is  both  the  reason  with  God  for  blessing,  and  the  method  by 
which  He  works  upon  the  souls  of  His  people  ;  winning  them  from  their  natural 
enmity  and  distrust  of  Himself,  by  the  effectual  revelation  of  His  mercy  to  them. 
2.  Eternally.     "  I  will  remember  no  more."     Guilt  makes  the  soul  of  the  sinner 
fearful ;  he  is  ever  recurring  to  the  memory  of  his  past  sins,  and  he  fears  God 
does  the  same.    He  has  had  some  momentary  glimpses  of  mercy ;  but  when  the 
present  sense  of  it  is  gone,  conscience  is  afraid  again  ;  he  is  ready  to  suspect  God 
of  yet  harbouring  some  latent  feeling  of  resentment ;  fears  the  reconciliation  has 
been  partial,  and  that  wrath,  so  deeply  deserved,  is  ready  to  break  out  afresh  on 
fresh  provocation.    But  oh,  blessed  be  God,  this  is  indeed  theway  of  men  ;  but  His 
ways  are  not  our  ways,  nor  His  thoughts  our  thoughts.     Those  whom  He  forgives 
freely,  He  forgives  entirely,  forgives  eternally.     {Francis  Goode,  M.A.)        Forgiv- 
ing mercy: — Many  years  ago  in  Russia  a  regiment  of  troops  mutinied.     They  were 
at  some  distance  from  the  capital,  and  were  so  furious  that  they  murdered  their 
■officers,  and  resolved  never  to  submit  to  discipline  ;  but  the  emperor,  who  was  an  ex- 
ceedingly wise  and  sagacious  man,  no  sooner  heard  of  it  than,  all  alone  and  unattended, 
he  went  into  the  barracks  where  the  men  were   drawn  up,  and  addressing  them 
sternly,  he  said  to  them,  "  Soldiers  1  you  have  committed  such  offences  against  the  law 
that  every  one  of  you  deserves  to  be  put  to  death.    There  is  no  hope  of  any  mercy 
for  one  of  you  unless  you  lay  down  your  arms  immediately,  and  surrender  at 
discretion  to  me,  your  emperor,"    They  did  so,  there  and  then.    The  emperor  said 
at  once,  "  Men,  I  pardon  you ;  you  will  be  the  bravest  troops  I  ever  had."    And  so 
they  were.    Now,  this  is  just  what  God  does  with  the  sinner.    The  sinner  has 
dared  to  rebel  against  God,  and  God  says,  "Now,  sinner,  yoa  have  done  that  which 
deserves  My  wrath.    Ground  you  weapons  of  rebellion.    I  will  not  talk  with  yon 
until  you  submit  at  discretion  to  My  sovereign  authority."    And  then  He  says, 
"Believe  in  My  Son;  accept  Him  as  your  Saviour.     This  done,  you  are  forgiven, 


CBJiP.  Tin.]  HEBREWS.  649 

and  henceforth  yon  will  the  most  loving  sabjeots  that  My  hands  have  made. " 
{W.  R.  Bradlaugh.)  A  glorious  position : — Mr,  Lyford,  a  Puritan  divine,  a  few 
days  previous  to  bis  dissolution,  being  desired  by  his  friends  to  give  them  some 
acooant  of  his  hopes  and  comforts,  he  replied,  "  I  wiU  let  yon  know  how  it  is  with 
me,  and  on  what  ground  I  stand.  Here  is  the  grave,  the  wrath  of  God,  and 
devouring  flames,  the  great  punishment  of  sin  on  the  one  hand ;  and  here  am  I,  a 
poor  sinful  creature,  on  the  other ;  but  this  is  my  comfort,  the  covenant  of  grace, 
established  upon  so  many  sure  promises,  hath  satisfied  all.  The  act  of  oblivion 
passed  in  heaven  is, '  I  will  forgive  their  iniquities,  and  their  sins  will  I  remember 
no  more,  saith  the  Lord.'  This  is  the  blessed  privilege  of  all  within  the  covenant, 
of  whom  I  am  one.  For  I  find  the  Spirit  which  is  promised,  bestowed  upon  me,  in 
the  blessed  effects  of  it  upon  my  soul,  as  the  pledge  of  God's  eternal  love.  By  this 
I  know  my  interest  in  Christ,  who  is  the  fonndation  of  the  covenant,  and  therefore 
my  sins  being  laid  on  Him,  shall  never  be  dmrf^ed  on  me."  {K.  Arvi7ie.)  Justice 
and  mercy  : — The  Jews  have  a  saying  that  Michael,  the  angel  of  God's  justice,  has 
but  one  wing  and  he  comes  slowly ;  but  Gabriel,  the  angel  of  Divine  mercy,  has  two 
wings,  and  is  made  to  fly  swiftly.  {H.  R.  Burton.)  Their  sins  .  .  .  will  I 
remember  no  more. — The  new  covenant — its  promises : — It  will  be  observed  that  the 
last-named  promise  is  pardon.  But  though  the  last  mentioned,  it  is  the  first 
bestowed,  as  indicated  by  the  conjunction  for,  by  which  it  is  introduced.  Pardon 
is  not  only  promised,  but  is  here  represented  as  the  reason  for  the  preceding  bless- 
ings. It  is  evident  that  the  author,  in  his  enumeration  of  these  blessings  of  the 
better  covenant,  presents  them  in  the  inverse  order  of  their  realisation.  In  them 
he  traces  the  Divine  process  of  salvation,  but  starts  at  a  point  where  that  salvation 
has  reached  its  highest  fruition  on  its  moral  side,  that  grand  moral  achievement, 
the  complete  surrender  of  the  soul  to  the  Divine  will,  indicated  by  the  writing  of 
the  law  in  the  heart,  and  descends  by  the  several  steps  of  the  process  to  the  initi- 
atory one,  the  pardoning  of  sins.  It  follows,  then,  that  in  order  to  understand 
duly  these  truths  of  overwhelming  interest,  we  must  deal  with  them  according  to 
their  logical  sequence.  I.  The  pakdom.  1.  Its  source.  This  is  indicated  by  the 
expression,  "  I  will  be  merciful  to  their  unrighteousness."  The  source,  then,  of 
the  promised  pardon  is  the  mercifulness  of  God.  We  mean,  of  course,  its  moral 
source,  for  its  legal  source  is  the  atonement  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  We  have  also  the 
fulness  of  this  act  of  mercy  indicated  in  the  expression,  "  their  sins  and  their 
iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more."  This  oblivion  of  transgression  is  a  feature  of 
the  Divine  pardon  much  emphasised  in  the  Scriptures,  with  a  view,  no  doubt,  of 
duly  impressing  men  with  the  fact  of  its  absolute  entirety.  Nothing  can  be  more 
emphatic  than  the  prophet's  declaration  regarding  God's  dealings  with  the  sins  of 
Israel — "  And  Thou  wilt  cast  all  their  sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea"  (Micah  vii. 
19).  Absolute  obhvion  is  the  prominent  idea  of  this  graphic  figure.  That  which  is 
oast  into  the  depths  of  the  sea  cannot  be  commemorated.  An  incident  in  connec- 
tion with  the  laying  of  the  Atlantic  cable  furnishes  a  striking  illustration  of  the 
insuperable  difiiculty  of  marking  spots  in  mid-ocean.  When  the  first  Atlantic  cable 
was  being  laid  it  broke  in  mid-ocean,  and  the  severed  pieces  dropped  into  the 
bottom,  and  the  vessel  was  compelled  to  return  to  England  to  procure  the  means  of 
recovering  the  broken  end.  Before,  however,  leaving  the  spot,  means  were  adopted 
to  mark  the  place,  so  that  on  their  return  the  lost  end  might  be  found.  So  a  suit- 
able buoy  was  constructed,  and  every  precaution  taken  to  render  its  foundering  or 
drifting  impossible,  as  they  supposed.  But  on  the  vessel's  return  the  buoy  laid 
down  with  such  care  was  found,  but,  as  careful  astronomical  observations  showed, 
it  had  drifted  over  five  hundred  miles  away  from  the  spot  where  it  had  been  origi- 
nally moored.  The  broken  end  of  the  cable  was  never  recovered.  Thus  is  strikingly 
illustrated  the  impossibility  of  erecting  memorials  in  mid-sea.  God,  therefore,  by 
representing  Himself  as  casting  our  sins  there,  would  tell  us  how  completely  He 
forgets  them,  and  how  certain  it  is  that  He  will  never  charge  us  with  them  again. 
n.  The  intuitional  knowledge  of  God  assured  by  the  better  covenant.  The 
knowledge  of  God  forms  a  very  important  part  in  the  Divine  redemption.  It  is,  so 
to  speak,  the  Alpha  of  the  whole  process.  Our  Lord  represents  it  so — "  And  this 
is  eternal  life,  that  they  might  know  Thee  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ, 
whom  Thou  hast  sent "  (John  xvii.  3).  The  knowledge,  however,  referred  to  here, 
is  introdactory  to  the  blessings  of  salvation,  whereas  that  of  the  text  is  the  outcome 
of  the  blessing  realised.  We  come  to  the  blessing  through  the  knowledge  in  the 
one  case,  but  in  the  other  we  come  to  the  knowledge  through  the  blessing.  In  the 
first  instance  the  knowledge  is  our  schoolmaster  to  the  blessing ;  in  the  second  the 


660  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [OEU».  vm. 

blessing  becomes  our  schoolmaster  to  the  knowledge.  The  knowledge  of  God 
obtained  through  experience  of  His  pardon  is  the  grandest  of  all  knowledge  of  Him. 
It  is  also  the  only  infallible  knowledge.  An  eminent  minister,  recently  addressing 
a  number  of  yonng  ministers  starting  for  the  mission-field,  said,  "  You  will  never 
lack  a  theme,  for  your  mission  is  to  tell  of  Him  whom  you  know  better  than  yoa 
know  any  one  else  besides."  Never  was  uttered  profounder  thought  or  one  more 
true.  Those  who  know  God  know  Him  better  than  any  one  beside,  better  than  they 
know  their  most  intimate  friends,  better  than  husband  knows  his  wife,  or  wife  her 
husband,  better  than  children  know  their  parents,  or  parents  their  children.  We 
may  be  deceived  in  our  nearest  and  most  intimate  friends  and  relations,  much  as 
we  may  know  respecting  them.  But  God  cannot  deceive  us.  The  nearest  friend 
may  fail  us,  but  God  cannot  fail  us.  HI.  The  Divine  kinship  assubed  by  the  new 
COVENANT.  The  relation  to  His  people  indicated  by  this  expression  I  take  to  imply 
fatherhood.  When  God  promises  to  be  our  God,  He  promises  to  be  our  Father, 
and  the  pardoned  soul  apprehends  Him  in  this  light.  In  short,  it  is  the  pardoning 
act  that  reveals  God  to  the  soul  first  in  this  light.  In  this  transaction  be  discovers 
God  becomiug  his  God  as  a  father,  for  this  act  of  pardon  is,  above  all,  a  fatherly 
act.  Our  Lord  has  shown  us  this  in  that  inimitable  parable  of  the  prodigal  son. 
In  nothing  is  God  so  intensely  a  father  as  when  He  forgives.  And  the  child  never 
understands  his  own  father,  never  has  the  fatherly  attribute  so  deeply  revealed  to 
his  heart,  as  when  he  has  had  occasion  to  experience  the  joy  of  his  father's  forgive- 
ness. Again,  this  relationship  is  in  itself  a  guarantee  of  the  fullest  and  most 
devoted  service  on  their  behalf.  If  the  statement,  "  I  will  be  to  them  a  God,"  ia 
equivalent  to  the  statement,  "  I  wUl  be  a  Father  unto  them,"  then  we  know  what 
it  must  mean  as  regards  undertaking  and  acting  for  them.  Some  light  is  thrown 
upon  this  by  the  words  already  quuted — "  God  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called  their 
God."  To  this  is  added,  "  for  He  has  prepared  a  city  for  them."  This  preparing 
of  a  city  for  them  is  given  as  a  proof  that  He  is  not  ashamed  to  own  Himself  as 
their  God.  As  if  it  should  be  said,  "  He  is  not  ashamed  to  avow  Himself  their 
God,  for  behold  on  how  grand  a  scale  He  discharges  the  obligations  of  that  relation- 
ship." We  have  no  need  to  be  told  what  the  title  "  father  "  signified  to  the  child : 
care,  love,  guidance,  support,  and  all  without  stint.     IV.  The  assurance  which 

THE  BETTER  COVENANT  GIVES  OF  A  LOVING,  CHILDLIKE  SUBJECTION  TO  THE  DiVINE  WILL. 

Parental  government  is  by  means  of  laws  wrought  in  the  heart ;  magisterial,  by 
laws  without.  The  parental  relationship  of  God,  fully  and  deeply  realised  by  the 
believer,  quickens  the  filial  disposition,  inducing  such  a  humb'e,  yet  cordial, 
assimilation  to  the  Divine  wUl,  comparable  only  to  the  "  putting  of  the  Divine  laws 
into  the  mind  and  writing  them  upon  the  heart."  Let  us  try  and  get  at  the  mean- 
ing of  these  peculiar  expressions  regarding  the  law,  "  the  putting  it  into  the  mind  " 
and  "the  writing  it  in  the  heart."  Now,  the  mind  and  the  heart  represents  two 
sides  of  our  nature,  the  intellectual  and  the  emotional.  Here,  then,  we  have 
guaranteed  to  us  the  fact  that  the  law,  the  sanctifying  principle,  shall 
take  possession  of  these  two  ruling  sides  of  our  moral  nature,  exert- 
ing upon  them  an  influence  both  subduing  and  formative.  (A.  J.  Parry.) 
The  new  covenant — the  superiority  of  its  promises : — I.  The  quality  of  the 
BLESSINGS.  1.  The  greater  excellence  of  the  Christian  pardon.  The  Jewish  religion 
had  its  pardon,  or  something  that  passed  for  pardon  ;  the  superiority,  however,  of 
the  pardon  held  forth  by  the  gospel  is  indicated  by  the  expression,  "  and  their  sins 
and  their  iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more."  Contrast  this  statement  with  what 
is  said  respecting  the  method  of  dealing  with  sins  under  the  old  covenant — "  But  in 
those  sacrifices  there  is  a  remembrance  of  sins  every  year  "  (chap.  x.  3).  In  the  one 
case  we  have  the  forgetting  of  sins,  in  the  other  the  remembrance  of  them.  The 
ancient  pardon,  then,  was  not  really  such,  but  only  a  kind  of  reprieve  annually 
renewed,  a  kind  of  suspension  of  the  sentence,  not  the  removal  or  abrogation  of  it. 
It  was  in  the  nature  of  a  "  ticket-of-leave  "  transaction.  2.  The  greater  excellence 
of  the  knowledge  of  God  assured  by  the  new  covenant.  The  knowledge  of  God 
acquired  under  the  old  covenant  was  preceptive  knowledge,  and,  like  all  such 
knowledge,  it  needed  constant  prompting,  it  needed  that  every  man  should  say  to 
his  neighbour,  and  every  man  to  his  brother,  *•  Know  the  Lord,"  for  they  resembled 
boys  learning  a  lesson,  they  continually  forgot  it.  A  prophet  would  arise,  saying 
to  the  people,  "  Know  the  Lord,"  and  they  would  learn  the  lesson  ;  but  no  sooner 
did  the  prophet's  voice  cease  than  the  people  forgot  the  lesson,  and  wandered  after 
false  gods.  Then  another  prophet  would  arise,  and  repeat  the  oft-taught  lesson, 
**  Enow  the  Lord."     But  the  mors  excellent  knowledge  of  the  better  promise  needs 


CHAP.  Tm.)  HEBREWS.  651 

no  auoh  prompting.  In  the  oase  of  this  knowledge, "  they  shall  not  teach  every 
man  his  neighbour,"  &o.,  it  is  a  knowledge  in  the  heart,  not  in  the  memory,  for  the 
memory  may  fail,  bat  the  heart  never.  3.  The  greater  excellence  of  the  relation- 
ship between  Qod  and  His  people.  It  is  better  in  this,  that  it  is  individaal  and 
spiritual,  whereas  the  oorresponding  promise  of  the  old  covenant  was  national  and 
temporal.  The  promise  as  it  related  to  Israel  is  given  very  graphically  in  Deut. 
xxvi.  17-19.  There  is  something  inexpressibly  grand  in  the  abounding  sweep  of 
this  promise.  If  we  consider  it  in  the  light  of  the  history  of  God's  dealings  with 
the  ancient  people,  we  shall  obtain  some  notion  of  its  meaning.  Bat  rich  and 
abounding  as  its  meaning  may  be,  it  embraces  only  the  nation,  and  that  in  relation 
to  temporal  things.  The  greater  excellence  of  the  corresponding  promise  of  the 
new  covenant  is  that  it  realises  these  blessings  in  a  spiritual  sense,  and  to  every 
individaal  in  the  wide  world  that  comes  within  the  scope  of  its  conditions.  4.  Next, 
we  notice  the  greater  excellence  of  the  formative  principle  of  the  new  covenant. 
The  superiority  claimed  here  consists  in  this — that  the  laws  are  "  pat  into  the 
mind "  and  "  written  in  the  heart."  There  is  an  implied  contrast  with  the 
corresponding  provision  of  the  old  covenant.  The  latter  had  its  laws,  but  they 
were  inscribed,  not  in  hearts,  bat  on  tables  of  stone.  The  other  consists  of  an 
inward  principle  or  motive,  the  subject  of  it  animated  by  love,  yielding  willing 
obedience  from  a  heart  glowing  with  loving,  grateful  enthusiasm.  This  difference 
in  the  spheres  of  their  respective  laws  involves  a  wide  difference  in  their  respective 
effects  upon  the  course  of  the  lives  affected  by  them.  There  is  a  great  difference 
between  the  sailing  vessel  and  the  steam-boat.  The  one  is  propelled  by  influences 
external  to  itself,  and  is,  therefore,  dependent  upon  them  for  the  progress  it  makes ; 
the  other  is  propelled  by  a  principle  working  within,  and  is,  therefore,  independent 
of  external  influences,  moves  without  them,  and  often  against,  yea,  in  spite  of  them. 
The  latter  illustrates  the  method  adopted  in  the  new  covenant.  Hence  its  greater 
excellence.  It  implants  the  principle  of  action,  the  motive  power,  within,  so  pre- 
venting its  subject  from  becoming  a  creature  of  circumstances,  and  his  obedience  a 
mechanical  routine,  making  it  rather  a  thing  of  the  heart  and  of  the  affections. 
The  gospel,  in  this  recpect,  works  according  to  the  analogy  of  nature.  In  nature, 
the  formative  law  of  everything  is  within  it.  IL  The  sdpbbiob  certainty  of  the 
FBOMisEs  ov  THE  NEW  COVENANT.  The  utmost  assuranco  that  these  promises  will 
be  fuUy  realised  in  the  experience  of  every  one  who  accepts  Christ's  salvation  is 
given  us  in  the  fact  that  they  are  called  by  the  term  •'  covenant."  In  verse  6  the 
promises  and  the  covenant  are  referred  to  separately ;  in  verse  10  there  is  but  one 
word  "  covenant."  The  term  promise  is  merged  in  the  term  covenant.  This 
substitution  of  covenant  for  promise  indicates  the  element  of  certainty  belonging  to 
the  latter.  But  it  may  be  asked,  were  not  the  promises  of  the  ancient  religion 
established  upon  a  covenant  ?  Certainly,  they  were,  but  those  of  Christianity  upon 
"a  better  covenant."  The  promises  of  the  ancient  religion  were  ratified  by  the 
blood  of  goats  and  calves,  but  Christ  ratified  the  better  promises  of  the  "  new 
covenant "  by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself.  His  own  declaration  on  this  point  is,  "  This 
cup  is  the  New  Testament  in  my  blood,"  that  is,  the  new  covenant  ratified  by  the 
shedding  of  My  blood.  In  short,  we  have  the  promises  of  the  gospel  resting  upon 
the    atonement    of    Christ.       (Ibid.)  God's    non-remembrance    of  tin : —  I. 

There  is  forgiveness.  1.  This  appears,  first,  in  the  treatment  of  sinners  by  God, 
inasmuch  as  He  spares  their  forfeited  lives.  2.  Why  did  God  institute  the 
ceremonial  law  if  there  were  no  ways  of  pardoning  transgression?  Does  not  a  type 
imply  the  existence  of  that  which  is  typified  ?  3.  If  there  were  no  forgiveness  of 
sin  why  has  the  Lord  given  to  sinful  men  exhortations  to  repent  f  4.  If  you  will 
think  of  it  you  will  see  that  there  must  be  pardons  in  the  hand  of  God,  or  why  the 
institution  of  religious  worship  among  us  to  this  day  ?  5.  Furthermore,  why  did 
Christ  institute  the  Christian  ministry,  and  send  forth  His  servants  to  proclaim 
His  gospel  ?  For  what  is  the  gospel  but  a  declaration  that  Christ  is  exalted  on 
high  to  give  repentance  unto  Israel  and  remission  of  sins  1  6.  Now,  you  do  not 
want  any  more  arguments,  but  if  you  did  I  would  venture  to  offer  this.  Why  are 
we  taught  in  that  blessed  model  of  prayer  which  our  Saviour  has  left  as,  to  say, 
"  Forgive  us  our  debts  as  we  forgive  our  debtors,"  or,  •'  Forgive  us  our  trespasses 
as  we  forgive  them  that  trespass  against  us  "  ?  It  is  evident  that  God  means  us  to 
give  a  real,  true,  and  hearty  absolution  to  all  who  have  offended  as.  If,  then,  our 
forgiveness  is  real,  so  is  His ;  if  oars  be  sincere,  so  is  His ;  if  oars  be  complete,  so 
is  His ;  only  much  more  so,  inasmuch  as  the  great  God  of  all  is  so  much  mora 
gracious  than  we  poor,  fallen  oreatares  ever  can  be.     7.  The  beat  of  all  argument* 


€62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  rut 

is  this :  God  has  actually  forgiven  multitudes  of  sinners.  We  have  read  in  Holy 
Scripture  of  men  who  walked  with  God  and  had  this  testimony,  that  they  pleased 
God ;  but  they  could  not  have  pleased  God  if  their  sins  still  provoked  Him  to 
wrath;  therefore  He  must  hare  put  their  sins  away.  II.  This  fobgiveness  is 
TANTAMOUNT  TO  FOBGETTiNo  SIN.  This  is  a  wonder  to  me,  a  wonder  of  wonders, 
that  God  should  say  that  He  will  do  what  in  some  sense  He  cannot  do ;  and  yet 
that  it  should  be  strictly  true  as  He  intends  it.  God's  pardon  of  sin  is  so  complete 
that  He  Himself  describes  it  as  not  remembering  our  iniquity  and  transgres- 
sion. He  wishes  us  to  know  that  Has  pardon  is  so  true  and  deep  that  it  amounts  to 
an  absolute  oblivion,  a  total  forgetting  of  all  the  wrong-doing  of  the  pardoned  ones. 
1.  You  know  what  we  do  when  we  exercise  memory.  To  speak  popularly,  a  man 
lays  up  a  thing  in  his  mind :  but  when  sin  is  forgiven  it  is  not  laid  up  in  God's 
mind.  2.  In  remembering,  men  also  consider  and  meditate  on  things;  but  the 
Lord  will  not  think  over  the  sins  of  His  people.  The  record  of  our  iniquity  is  taken 
away,  and  the  judge  has  no  judicial  memory  of  it.  3.  Sometimes  you  have  almost 
forgotten  a  thing,  and  it  is  quite  gone  out  of  your  mind ;  but  an  event  happens 
which  recalls  it  so  vividly  that  it  seems  as  if  it  were  perpetrated  but  yesterday. 
God  will  not  recall  the  sin  of  the  pardoned.  "  Their  sins  and  their  iniquities  will 
I  remember  no  more."  "  No  more  I "  Let  those  words  go  echoing  through  the 
chambers  of  despair :  "  No  more !  "  Is  there  not  music  in  the  two  syllables  ?  God 
will  never  have  His  memory  refreshed.  The  transgressions  of  His  people  are  dead 
and  buried  with  Christ,  and  they  shall  never  have  a  resurrection.  4.  Furthermore, 
this  not  remembering,  means  that  God  will  never  seek  any  further  atonement. 
The  apostle  saith  :  "  Now  where  remission  of  these  is,  there  is  no  more  ofEering  for 
sin."  The  one  sacrifice  of  Jesus  has  made  an  end  of  sin.  5.  Again,  when  it  is  said 
that  God  forgets  our  sins  it  signifies  that  He  wiU  never  punish  us  for  them.  How 
can  He  when  He  has  forgotten  them  ?  6.  He  will  never  upbraid  us  with  them — 
"  He  giveth  Uberally  and  upbraideth  not."  How  can  He  upbraid  us  with  what  He 
has  forgotten  ?  He  will  not  even  lay  them  to  our  charge.  7.  Once  more,  when  the 
Lord  says,  "  I  will  not  remember  their  sins,"  what  does  it  mean  but  this — that  He 
will  not  treat  us  any  the  less  generously  on  account  of  our  having  been  great  sinners. 
III.  Forgiveness  is  to  be  had.  1.  Through  the  atoning  blood.  Why  does  God 
forget  our  sin  ?  It  is  not  on  this  wise  ? — He  looks  upon  His  Son  Jesus  bearing  that 
sin.  2.  Next  remember  that  this  forgetfulness  of  God  is  caused  by  overflowing  mercy. 
God  is  love  :  "  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever  "  ;  and  He  desired  vent  for  His  love. 
3.  How  does  God  forget  sin  ?  Well,  it  is  through  His  everlasting  love.  He  loved 
His  people  before  they  feU  ;  and  He  loved  His  people  when  they  fell.  "  I  have  loved 
thee,"  saith  He,  "  with  an  everlasting  love"  ;  and  when  that  great  love  of  His  had 
led  Him  to  give  His  Son  Jesus  for  His  people's  ransom,  it  made  him  also  forget  His 
people's  sins.  4.  Again,  God  forgets  His  people's  sins  because  of  the  complacency 
He  has  in  them  as  renewed  and  sanctified  creatures.  When  He  hears  their  cries  of 
repentance,  when  He  hears  their  declarations  of  faith,  when  He  sees  the  love  which 
His  Spirit  has  wrought  in  them,  when  He  beholds  them  growing  more  and  more 
like  His  dear  Son,  He  delights  in  them.  His  joy  is  fulfilled  in  them.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  Divine  forgiverwss  : — I.  Explain  the  doctrine  of  Divine  forgiveness. 
1.  The  object  of  Divine  forgiveness,  denoted  by  the  following  terms — "  unrighteous- 
ness, sins,  and  iniquities."  2.  Notice  the  manner  in  which  the  forgiveness  of  sins 
is  here  expressed,  or  the  cause  to  which  it  is  ascribed;  and  this  is  said  to  consist  in 
the  Lord's  being  "  merciful  "  to  our  unrighteousness.  Even  our  best  services  and 
most  spiritual  dispositions,  fall  so  short  of  the  Divine  requirements,  that  they  need 
much  mercy  to  cover  their  defects ;  how  much  more  our  unrighteousness,  sins,  and 
iniquities.  (1)  The  mercy  of  God  is  the  origin  of  our  forgiveness,  and  it  is  according 
to  His  abundant  mercy  that  He  saves  us.  (2)  Divine  grace  extends  to  sin  of  every 
description  and  degree,  and  to  all  unrighteousness.  (3)  This  mercy  is  exercised  in 
a  way  perfectly  consistent  with  the  claims  of  justice,  and  the  rights  of  moral 
government.  There  is  a  meritorious  as  well  as  an  efficient  cause  of  forgiveness : 
the  former  is  the  complete  satisfaction  made  for  sin  by  the  death  of  the  Kedeemer, 
the  latter  the  free  grace  of  God  through  Him.  3  Divine  forgiveness  is  farther 
expressed,  by  "  remembering  our  sins  and  iniquities  no  more."  The  pardon  of  sin 
is  not  only  full  and  free,  but  final  and  irreversible.  (1)  God  does  not  remember  our 
sins,  so  as  to  aggravate  or  mark  them  with  severity ;  for  if  Thou,  Lord,  markest 
iniquity,  who  shah  stand  ?  On  the  contrary,  if  there  be  any  extenuating  circum- 
stanoes,  He  kindly  notices  them.  He|knoweth  our  frame,  and  remembereth  that  we 
are  dnst.     (2)  He  does  not  reciember  our  sins,  so  as  to  suffer  His  wrath  to  kindle 


OHAf.  vm.]  HEBREWS,  65t 

against  them.  Anger  there  may  be  and  must  be  towards  sin,  bat  not  against  the 
penitent  believer.  (3)  He  will  not  remember  sin  so  as  to  ponish  for  it,  bat  will 
deal  so  mercifolly  with  as,  that  it  shall  be  as  if  He  had  utterly  forgotten  it.  This 
is  not  a  denial  of  His  omniscience,  bat  an  expression  of  His  anbonuded  goodness. 
n.  Inquibb  who  abb  imtbbesxed  in  tbb  blessino  of  fobqivembss.  1.  Those  and 
those  only  who  have  a  sorrowful  remembrance  of  sin  themselves.  The  more  sin 
grieves  as,  the  less  likely  it  is  to  ruin  us ;  and  that  sorrow  for  sin  which  foUowa 
upon  the  discoveries  of  pardoning  mercy,  is  the  best  evidence  of  a  renewed  state. 
2.  Those  who  so  repent  of  sin  as  not  to  allow  themselves  in  any  koown  evU ;  and 
to  whom  the  remembrance  of  sin  is  so  bitter,  that  it  becomes  their  first  wish  to  be 
delivered  from  it.  {B.  Beddome,  M.A.)  Divine  pardon : — God  neither  looks  to 
anything  in  the  creature  to  wish  Him  to  show  kindness,  nor  yet  anything  in  the 
creature  to  debar  Him ;  it  is  neither  righteousness  in  man  that  persuades  God  to 
pardon  sin,  nor  unrighteousness  in  man  that  hinders  Hun  from  giving  this  pardon, 
and  acquitting  men  from  their  transgressions.  It  is  only  and  simply  for  His  own 
sake  that  He  pardons.  (Bp.  Huntington.)  A  happy  memory : — Of  our  Henry  YI. 
it  is  storied  that  he  was  of  that  happy  memory  that  he  never  forgot  anything  but 
injury.  (J.  Trapp.)  Complete  forgivenest : — God  never  pardons  one  sin  but  He 
pardons  all ;  and  we  dishonour  Him  more  by  not  trusting  in  Him  for  complete 
forgiveness  tiian  we  did  by  sinning  against  Him.  Christ  took  up  all  oar  sins  and 
bore  them  in  His  own  body  on  the  cross  ;  and  God  cannot  punish  twice,  or  demand 
a  second  satisfaction  to  His  justice.  "  Nothing  can  pacify  an  offended  consoienoe 
bat  that  which  satisfied  an  offended  God,"  says  Henry ;  and  well  may  that  whiob 
Htiafied  an  ofluided  Qod  pacify  an  offended  consoienee.    (T.  Adam$,) 


nnceton   Theological   Setmnary-Speer  Lib 


1    1012  01127  8290 


Date  Due 

D    ^  -  ■-"■ 

« — 1 

l!»*SW*f*; 

, 

i 

,iiiA,ri^itf*'*^' 

^tUtl^"^ 

.«.— — 

^i     <.    - 

<i>  2  c    . 

i&r  ^0 

i^y  » r: 

Ij 

MK 

OC  "■'  n 

1 
1 

'     V  t 

i 

1 

Jt  V-  '52 

AG  6-'54 

-'iM^i^ 

1 

1 
1 

f 

